Hakluytus Posthumus, or Purchas His Pilgrimes, Vol. 15 (Samuel Purchas, 1625)
==========================================================
Purchas His Pilgrimes (1625) - the 17th century's great sequel to Hakluyt; the largest voyage collection of its age, preserving dozens of narratives otherwise lost. The 20-volume MacLehose reprint (Glasgow, 1905-07), the standard complete edition. Vol. 15 of 20.

Hakluytus  Posthumus

or
Purchas His Pilgrimes

In Twenty  Volumes

Volume XV

GLASGOW

PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY

ROBERT MACLEHOSE 6"  COMPANY LTD. FOR

JAMES MACLEHOSE AND SONS, PUBLISHERS

TO THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW

MACMILLAN AND CO. LTD.  LONDON

THE MACMILLAN CO.  NEW YORK

THE  MACMILLAN  CO.  OF  CANADA  TORONTO

SIMPKIN, HAMILTON AND CO.  LONDON

MACMILLAN AND BOWES  CAMBRIDGE

DOUGLAS AND FOULIS  EDINBURGH

MCMVI

Hakluytus Posthumus

or

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning a History of  the World

in Sea Voyages and Lande Travells

by Englishmen and others

By
SAMUEL PURCHAS, B.D.

VOLUME XV

Glasgow
James MacLehose and Sons

Publishers  to  the  University

MCMVI

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs  in
the  Fifth  Booke  of  the  second  part  of
Purchas  his  Pilgrims.

CHAP. II.

Observations  gathered  out  of  the  First,  Second,  Third,  and
Fourth  Bookes  of  Josephus  Acosta,  a  learned  Jesuite,
touching  the  naturall  historie  of  the  Heavens,  Ayre,
Water,  and  Earth,  at  the  West  Indies.  Also  of  their
Beasts,  Fishes,  Fowles,  Plants,  and  other  remarkeable
rarities  of  Nature. .......  I

§  I.  Of  the  fashion  and  forme  of  Heaven,  at  the  new-
found World,  and  of  the  Ayre  and  Winds. .  .  i

Indian  Heavens  and  Starres,  cause  of  raines  twixt  the
Tropike.  Strange  effects  in  naturall  causes.  Excep-
tions to  generall  rules.  Causes  of  temperate  habita-
blenesse  betwixt  the  Tropikes.  Vulcans.  Windes.
Differing  windes  cause  one  course  to,  another  from
America.  Course  of  the  Spanish-Indian  Navigations.
Brises  twixt  the  Tropikes.  Winds  Easterly  within
the  Tropikes,  and  Westerly  without  ;  why.  Calmes
rare  under  the  Line.  Strange  effects  of  windes.
Aire  how  operative  in  mens  bodies.  At  Pariacaca
too  subtle.  Strange  effects  of  chilling  killing  cold  in
Chili.

§  2.  Of  the Ocean that invirons the Indies,  and  of  the

North  and South  Seas,  their  ebbing,  flowing,  Fishes,

fishing,  Lakes,  Rivers,  and  Springs.  .  .  .  .  31

v

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Supposed  Streights  to  the  South  Sea.  Ebbing  and  flowing
of  the  Sea.  Manner  of  fishing  at  the  Indies.  Fish
Manati.  Sharkes.  Flying  fishes.  Crocodiles.  Whale
how  taken.  Indian  fishing.  Indian  Lakes,  Fishes,
Rivers  ;  Hot  ;  Mexican  Lakes.  Fountaines  hot,  cold,
of  Salt,  Stone,  Pitch,  Smoake,  Inke  ;  medicinable.
Pongo-fals.  Golden  thirst  :  Silver  river.  Strange
Ferries.

§  3.  Of  the  qualitie  of  the  Land  at  the  Indies  in  generall.
Properties  of  Peru,  and  of  new  Spaine,  and  other
parts  :  Of  Vulcanes  and  Earthquakes, ...  49

Indians  wasted.  Pastures  and  mines  in  hils.  Coast-
commerce  and  wine.  Properties  of  the  Land  of
Peru.  Raine  ever  and  never.  Fruitfull  vallies.
Indian  bread.  Cause  of  raine.  Peru  wine.  Bar-
louent  pastures.  Waste  of  Natives.  Condition  of
Chili.  Day  strangely  gotten  and  lost.  Fiery-hills.
Furious  earthquakes.  Burning  hills :  covetous  hells.
Prodigious  Earthquakes  ;  How  Caused  and  fore-
signified  ;  most  in  the  Sea-coast.

§4.  Of  Metals  in the Indies,  and  especially  of  the  Gold

and  Silver,  and  Quick-silver. .....  68

Metall-plants.  Uses  of  metals.  Metall  mynes  (and
mindes)  barren.  Fruit-money.  Lether-coine.  Gold,
why  the  best  mettall,  how  drawne  Silver.  Different
effects  of  artificiall  and  naturall  winds.  Potozi  des-
cribed. First  discovery  of  the  richest  Silver-Myne
ever  discovered.  Huge  summes  of  silver  from  Potozi:
Mynes  and  mindes  darknesse.  Manner  of  working
in  the  Mynes,  and  of  refining  the  silver.  Acostas
observations  of  the  nature  of  Quick-silver.  Laby-
rinthian  Mines  of  Quick-silver  :  how  they  refine
Silver.  Danger  of  Quick-silver,  and  manner  of
working  it  with  Silver.  Triall  and  Alloy  of  Silver.
Engines and  order  of  working.

§  5.  Of  Emeralds, Pearles, Indian Bread, Trees, Fruits,

Flowers  naturall,  and  carried  thither  from  Spaine. .  97

Acostas  discourse  of  Emeralds, Pearles,  and  Pearle-fishing.
Pearle-divers long-breathed. Mays  described,  divers
uses thereof. Mays, and Cacavi. Why Wheate
vi

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

groweth  not.  Roots,  Herbs,  Pulses,  etc.  Fruits,
Herbs,  Roots.  Pepper,  Cloves,  Cinamon,  Ginger,
etc.  Indian  Pepper,  Plane-trees,  Cacao  (used  for
money)  and  Coca.  Wine,  Vinegre,  Honie,  Needles
of  Maguey  :  Tunal,  Cotten,  &c.  Varietie  of  Fruits
and  fruit-trees  in  India.  Acosta.  Art  learned  by
accident.  Balme,  Ambar,  Gums,  Lignum  vitae.
Strange  thickets.  Cedars  common.  Other  Indian
trees.  Spanish  plants.  Spanish-Indian  herbs  and
fruits.  Strange  fig-tree.  Wines.  Sugars.  Indian
Olives.

§6.  Of  Beasts  and  Fowles  in  the Indies.  .  .  .126

Sheepe,  Kine,  Herds  wilde,  killed  for  the  hides.  Dogs
wild.  Indian  hunting  &  game.  European  beasts
how  known.  How  Men  and  Beasts  and  Fowles
came  first  into  America. Different  beasts.

Of  Fowles  that  are  proper  to  the  Indies,  and  Venison. . 1 34

Indian  fowles  great  and  small.  Feather  pictures.  Dung
Guano  beneficiall.  Beasts  for  the  Chases.  Micos
or  Monkeys.  Rarities  of  Monkeys,  Vicugnes,  and
Tarugues.  Indians  hunting.  Bezars  whence  taken.
Two  kinds  of  Indian  sheepe  admirably  profitable.
Bezars  stones  of  divers  kindes.  Mountaine  Goats,
their  feeding.  Oviedos  industrie  in  the  American
Naturall  historic

CHAP. III.

Extracts  of  Gonzalo  Ferdinando  de  Oviedo  his Summarie

and  the  generall  Historie  of  the  Indies. .  .  .148

Of  the Mynes of  Gold,  and the  manner  of  working  in

them. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .148

Gold  mynes. Manner  of  gathering  Gold  in  Mines,  Rivers,
graines. Graine  great. Golden  thirst.

Of  the  manner  of  fishing  for  Pearles. .  .  .  .154

Pearle-fishing. Long continuance under water. Pearles
of  price.

vii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Of  the  familiaritie  which  certaine  of  the  Indians  have
with  the  Devill,  and  how  they  receive  answere  of
him  of  things  to  come,  and  other  superstitions. . 157

Piaces  silence,  Abstinence  Devill-consultations.  Piaces
deriving.  Other  divellish  opinions,  and  superstitious
rites.

Of  divers particular things,  as  Wormes,  Serpents, Beasts,

Fowles,  Trees,  etc..  .  .  .  .  .  .162

Great  trouble  by  little  Wormes.  Niguas.  Vipers.  Lice
where  lost  and  found.  Adders,  Dragons,  huge
Spiders,  Toades,  Serpents,  etc.  Wonders  of  the
Tomineios.  Armadillos,  Beares,  Antes,  &c.  Greatest
wonders  in  least  Creatures.  Ant-beare.  Light  Dogge.
Slow  beast,  Fight  of  the  Coda  inforcata  and  Alcatraz
for  Pilchards.  Heavy-billed  Birds.  Other  rarities  of
American  Birds.  Pintadellis  prevention  against
Monkeys. Song-birds.

Of  Trees,  Fruits,  and  Plants.  .  .  .  .  .180

Coco-wonders.  Huge  Canoas.  Huger  Trees  :  one  mar-
vellous. Fire  how  kindled.  Fire  without  fire-
kindling. Water-springs  without  earth.

Of  Reedes  or  Canes. .  .  ,  .  .  .  .187

Plants  Bihaos.  Dying  of  Cotton.  Medlers  working
strange  effects.

Of  venemous  Apples,  wherwith  they  poyson  their  Arrowes. 191

Venemous  Apples.  Canibals.  Gulfe  Uraba.  Tree  Xagua.
Hohi  and  Date  trees. Cord-saw-herb. Thistle  tree.

Of  Fishes,  and  of  the  manner  of  fishing. . .  .  . 195

Store  of  fishes.  Tortoises  and  Sharkes  how  taken.  Des-
cription of  them  and  the  Manate.  Manate,  Sword-
fish,  Flying  fishes.  Seas  fish-fertile,  and  barren.  Sea
and  Aire  game.

Of  the  increase  and  decrease  (that  is)  rising  and  falling
of  our  Ocean  Sea,  and  South  Sea,  called  the  Sea  of
Sur.  ........

203

Varietie  of  Tydes  in  Our  and  Indian Seas.

viii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Of  the  straight  or  narrow  passage  of  the  Land,  lying
betweene  the  North  and  South  Sea,  by  the  which
Spices  may  much  sooner  and  easilier  be  brought
from  the  Hands  of  Molucca  into  Spaine  by  the  West
Ocean,  then  by  that  way  wherby  the  Portugals  saile
into  the  East  India. ...... 204

Naturall  bridge-marvell.

How  things  that  are  of  one  kinde,  differ  in  forme  and
qualitie,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  place  where
they  are  engendred  or  grow,  and  of  the  beasts  called
Tigres. ......... 206

Creatures  diversified  with  the  place. Tigres  how  hunted.

Of the manners and customes of the Indians of the

Firme  Land,  and  of  their  Women.  .... 209

Indian  womens  abortions,  great  breasts,  child-birth.
Bloud-letting.  No  Beards.  Painted  Bodies.  Gallan-
trie,  Jewels. Hard  Sculs.

Of  the  chiefe  Hands,  Hispaniola  and  Cuba. .  .  . 213

Rarities  of  Hispaniola,  Beasts,  Foules,  etc.  Pitch-
fountaine.  Reverso,  and  wild-goose-chase.  Indian
Areitos.  Hard-headed  Indians.  Beasts  and  fowles
of  America.  Indian  flies.  Exchange  of  Pockes  with
Europe.  Friars  dissention.  Strange  Huracans,  Spout,
Monster,  Hawk.  Great  hurts  by  least  vermin.
Lot-Ant-intercessor.  Lawyers  perillous.  Crosse
fabulous.  Fowles  flight.  Filthy  holies.  English-
American  Voyage 15 17. Pitch  Spring.

CHAP. IIII.

Mexican Antiquities gathered out of the writings of

Josephus  Acosta,  a  learned  Jesuite. .  .  .  . 233

Nature  and  use  of  Historie. Mexican  beginnings.

§  1.  Of  the  ancient  Inhabitants  of  new  Spaine,  and  of
the  sixe  Linages  of  the  Navatlacas.  Of  the  Mexican
Exodus,  and  adventures  by  the  way  :  the  foundation
of  Mexico, their  first King  and  Tribute.  .  . 234

ix

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Chichimecas.  Ottomies.  Six  Linages  of  Navatalcas.
New  Mexico.  Relations  of  Giants.  Mexican
Exodus,  Tabernacle  and  Arke.  Devils  Oracles,  Apish
emulations,  Murtherous  instructions.  Devils  devo-
tions. Mexicans  Erynnis,  Foundation,  Eagle,  Taber-
nacle. Mexican  Oracle,  Oration,  election  of  their
first  K.  Acamapixtli.  Indian  Orations.  Mexican
Crowne  and  strange  Garden-tribute.  Mexican  suc-
cession by  election.

§  2.  Of  the  second  King  Vitzilovitli  ;  and  of  his  successors
and  their  Acts  untill  the  reigne  of  Motezuma  their
last  King. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .253

Their  Kings  anointing,  &c.  Mexican  poore  beginnings.
Their  King  murthered  by  Tapanecans.  Inauguration
of  Mexican  Kings.  Tlacaellecs  wisdome  and  valour.
Rites  of  defiance.  Tapanecans  conquered.  The
battell  and  spoiles.  Inhospitall  Cuyoacans  conquered.
Suchimilcos  subdued.  Tlacaellecs  victory  by  Children.
Immane  cruelty  in  humane  Sacrifices.  Wilde  forti-
tude. Tlascalla.  Tlacaellecs  great  spirit.  Devils
Temple.  King  poysoned.  Tlaclaellecs  honour.
Mexican  conquest.  Tlatelulco  Frogs,  Autzols  con-
quests. Cuyoacon  cunning  Sorcerer,

§3.  Of  the  election  of  great  Motezuma,  the  last  King  of
Mexico  :  his  pompe  and  manner  of  government,  pro-
digious fore-warnings,  of  his  ruine,  and  the  Spanish
conquest.  ........ 278

Motecumas  Election  :  his  former  disposition.  Elegant
Oration  to  Motecuma.  His  domesticall,  politicall,
polemicall  behaviour.  Motecumas  state  and  manner
of  government.  Prodigious  Foule.  Laborers  vision.
Spaniards  arrival  certified  by  picture.  Idol-Cortes
worshipped.  Idolaters  infidelity  and  mad  supersti-
tions. Cortes  entertained  at  Mexico.  Spaniards
perfidiously  cruell.  Motecumas  usage  by  Spaniards.
Fourth  daies  rest.  Last  king  taken.  Spanish-Indian
policy  and  force.  Nim.  and  Alex,  preferred  to  P.
and  P.  Tyrannie  of  superstition  makes  Christs
yoke  lighter. Devill  dumme.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP.  V.

Of  the  ancient  superstitions  of  the  Mexicans  and  Indians
of  America,  gathered  out  of  the  fifth  booke  of
Josephus  Acosta. ....... 302

Mexican  Theologie  ;  and  Idolatrie  to  the  Sunne,  Starres,
Thunder.  Rites  of  offering.  Causes  of  Canonising.
Dead  Kings  worshipped.  Wily  Portugall  escapes
Indian  cruelty.  Their  Purgatory  and  Funerals.
Funerals.  Noblemen-Idols.  Devil-priest.  Mystical
holies  and  penitentiary.  Indian  Nemesis,  Indulgences,
Mercury,  Adonis ;  Goddesses,  Feasts.  Devils  emula-
tion of  Divine  worship.  Indian  Temples  and
Oracles.  Popes  in  Mexico  :  Skull-spectacle  ;  Temples,
Chappels,  Priests.  Monasteries  and  Vestals  or
Nunnes  of  Peru  and  Mexico.  Indian  shavelings
sanctitie,  povertie,  chastitie,  penance,  fasts.  Indians
sacrifices,  sooth-sayings,  fastings,  shell-offerings,  &c.
Men  killed  to  attend  the  dead  and  for  sacrifices.
Cruel  customes.  Popes  devillish  dexteritie  in  humane
Sacrifices,  of  divers  kinds.  Devils  hungrie  to  devoure
men.  Insupportable  yoke.  Devils  imitation  of  the
Sacrament,  Communion,  Corpus  Christi  feast.  Indian
Transubstantiation,  Communication,  Confession,  &c.
Strict  Peruan  confession,  stricter  in  Japan.  Divina-
tions; Penances.  Wicked  effects  of  devillish  unction;
Divinations,  Sorcerers.  Indian  Divinings,  Baptismes,
Marriages,  Idols,  and  other  devotions.  Indian  Ape-
conceits  of  the  Trinitie.  Feasts  solemne  in  Peru.
Peruan  Drunken  Feast  Situa  ;  Itu-fast  and  procession.
Mexican  Jubilee.  Rogations  for  rain.  Tezcalipuas
Litter-procession.  Manguey  whippings.  Festivall
Procession  :  divine  meat,  inhumane  whippings,
Devillish  Sacrifice.  Sower  sauce  to  sweet  meat.
Temple  and  Drum-bels. Comedies  &  Masks.

CHAP. VI.

Civill  Customes  and  Arts  of  the  Indians  taken  out  of
Acostas  6.  Booke. ......

y

Mexican  Calender; yeare 18. moneths,  weeke 13.  dayes.
Age  52.  yeare. Suns  12.  Pillars. Writing  by  letters,
characters, pictures. Images fooles books. Indian
xi

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Bookes  and  picture-writing.  Spaniards  blind  zeale.
Confession  by  Pictures  and  Characters.  Registers
kepts  by  knots,  &c.  Divers  formes  of  writing  and
government.  Peru  and  Mexico  compared.  Peruan
holies  for  their  Inga.  Justice,  Polity,  Tribute,  Pro-
vinces. Indian  skill  and  stoneworkes.  Strawbridges.
Tributes.  Lands  sacred.  Common  Lands.  Negli-
gence punished.  All  Peruans  were  of  all  Trades.
Indian  Trades,  Tires,  Habit,  Posts,  Marriage,  Lawes,
Incest.  Originall  of  the  Ingas,  continuance,  con-
quests, Quippos-chronicles.  First  Ingas  ordenances.
Viracochas  acts  and  arts.  Chiefe  Idols  name.  Ingas
worshipped.  Guanacapas  300.  sonnes.  Spaniards
esteeme  &c.  Ingas  succession.  Mexican  election  and
feasts.  Royal  Diadem  &  Palace.  Indian  titles  of
honour  and  Knighthood.  Diligence  of  Priests.
Education  of  youth  in  Colledges,  their  exercises.
Military  &  Idol-games.  Indian  Rope-dancers  and
agility.  Picture  story  how  gotten.  Sir  Henry
Spelman.

CHAP. VII.

The  Historie  of  the  Mexican  Nation,  described  in
pictures  by  the  Mexican  Author  explained  in  the
Mexican  language  ;  which  exposition  translated  into
Spanish,  and  thence  into  English,  together  with  the
said  Picture-historie,  are  heere  presented. H.  . 414

§  I.  The  Mexican  Chronicle.  .  .  .  .  .414

Mexicans  originall  ;  The  lake  and  Eagle.  Tenultitlan.
Mexico.  Beginning  of  conquest.  Weeke  of  13.
yeeres.  Mexican  Picture  story  of  Tenuchs  51.  yeares
reigne.  Mexican  historie  in  pictures.  Chronicle
without  writing.  Yzcoatci.  Conquered  Townes.
Gueguemotecumas  reigne  and  life.  Mexican  Pictures,
or  Historie  without  Letters.  Axayacaci.  Motecuma.
Mexican  historie  in  pictures.

§  2.  The  second  part  of  this  Booke  contayning  the  parti-
cular Tributes,  which  every  Towne  subdued  payed
unto  the  Lords  of  Mexico. .  .  .  .  .437

Mexican historie in pictures. Tributes  paid  to Mexico.

xii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§  3.  The  third  part  of  this  Booke,  contayneth  the  private
behaviour  in  Marriages,  education  of  Children,  and
Trades  ;  with  the  Martiall,  Ecclesiasticke,  and  Civill
policie  of  the  Mexican  people.  .... 477

Mexican  child-birth  rites  represented  in  their  pictures.
Washing  and  naming  of  children,  their  bringing  up
and  education.  How  Parents  use  to  exercise  their
children  in  Mexico.  Education  at  8.  9.  and  10.
yeares  of  age  in  Mexico.  Education  of  Boyes  and
Girles  represented  in  Mexican  pictures.  Mexican
education  of  youth.  Marriage  rites  and  solemnities.
Youth  trained  up  for  Priests  ;  their  workes,  punish-
ments, exercises.  Exercises  of  Priests.  Punishments
used  in  Mexico.  Priests  employments.  Captaines
and  valiant  men  of  warre.  Mexican  Priests  military
ensignes  and  degrees  of  honour.  Justice  upon  Male-
factors represented  in  picture.  Mexican  Spies,
Warring,  Captaines  and  Armes  pictured.  Mexican
Messengers,  House-wives,  Justices,  pleading  pictured.
Mexican  Palace,  Councell  chambers  and  Royall
magnificence.  Messengers,  Unthrifts,  Trades.  Good
thriftie  counsell.  Punishments  of  Drunkennesse,
Adultery,  Theft. Pravileges  of  Age.

CHAP. VIII.

Conquest of Mexico and New Spaine, by Hernando

Cortes. ......... 505

Cortes  his  birth,  life,  discoverie  of  New  Spaine  ;  first
entrance.  Teudilli.  Disease  of  the  Spaniards  heart.
Fashion-mongers.  Cortes  his  Mexican  expedition.
Tlaxcallan.  Chololla.  Popocatepec.  Corteses  enter-
tainment. Mutezumas  Religion,  Oration,  death.
Quahutimoc  last  King  of  Mexico.  Spanish  conquest.
Two  Lakes.

CHAP. IX.

Larger  Relations  of things  most  remarkeable  observed  by

the Spaniards at their first comming  : Cholollas

holies ; Popocatepecs ashes. Mutezumas multiforme

Magnificence and Majestic Mexican Citie and

xiii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Temple,  with  other  Antiquities  gathered  out  of  the
Third  part  of  the  Historie  of  Francis  Lopez  de
Gomara.  . . . . . . . .519

Chololla  sanctuary,  inhabitants  and  Idols.  Popocatepecs
Purgatory.

The  Hill  called  Popocatepec.  .  .  .  .  .520

Burning  Hill.  Cacamas  lofty-dustie  pompe.  Mutezumas
Majestic  Spanish  exchange  of  glasse  for  gold.
Mutez.  testimony  of  his  ancestors.  Mutezumas
person,  title,  habit,  diet,  wives,  attendants,  service.
Mutezumas  Jesters,  Players,  Tennis  Court,  Plate,  &c.
Mutezumas  Court,  Women,  Armes,  Fowles,  and
White  men.  Snakes,  Vipers,  Crocodiles ;  Den  of
Devils  ;  Store-houses.  Mutezumas  Court,  tributes  of
body  and  goods,  guard  and  Vassals.

Description  of  Mexico  as  it  flourished  in  those  times. . 541

Indian  Venice  :  or  description  of  Mexico.  Nuchtli  a
strange  Plant.  Mexico  Market  place  described.
Wares,  buyers  sellers  :  Indian  artificers.  Victuals,
Bartering,  Temple,  Altars,  strange  doore,  in  Mexico.
Halls,  walls,  Priests,  Idols,  tires,  hallowings.  Charnels
of  their  Temples.

Other Mexican Antiquities, Letters, Numbers, Yeeres,

Dayes,  Weekes,  etc.  .  .  .  .  .  -553

Mexican  Bookes,  Pronuntiation.

Their  reckoning  by  numbers.  .  .  .  .  -553

Numbers,  Yeere,  Moneths,  Dayes.  Mexican  chronology  and
computation  of  times.  Coronation.  Coronation  and
unction  Ceremonies,  Opinion  of  nine  places  of  Soules.
Funerall  rites  of  the  Kings  of  Mexico  and  Mechuacan.
Bloudy  Funerals.  Mexican  12.  Judges,  Painters,
Prisons,  Punishments.  Disguise  of  sexe,  private  Duells,
wilfull  abortion,  &c. Capitall.

ILLUSTRATIONS

Mexican  History  in  Pictures,  .  .  . 417-504

PAGES

THE FIFTEENTH VOLUME

OF

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning  Observations  touching  the  Naturall  His-
toric of  the  West  Indies  ; Extracts  of  Oviedo
his  generall  Historie  of  the  Indies;  with
Relations  of  Mexico  and  the  Historie
of  the  Mexican  Nation  described

in  pictures  by  the  Mexican
Authour

Chap.  II.  [in.  v.  918.]

Observations  gathered  out  of  the  First,  Second,
Third,  and  Fourth  bookes  of  Josephus  Acosta
a  learned  Jesuite,  touching  the  naturall  historie
of  the  Heavens,  Ayre,  Water,  and  Earth  at  the
west  Indies.  Also  of  their  Beasts,  Fishes,
Fowles,  Plants,  and  other  remarkable  rarities
of  Nature.

§.1.

Of  the  fashion  and  forme  of  Heaven,  at  the  new-
found World,  and  of  the  Ayre  and  Windes.

ilAny  in  Europe  demand,  of  what  forme  Lib.  1 .  cap.  5
and  fashion  Heaven  is  in  the  Southerne
parts,  for  that  there  is  no  certaintie  found
in  ancient  Books,  who  although  they  grant
there  is  a  Heaven  on  this  other  part  of
the  World,  yet  come  they  not  to  any
knowledge  of  the  forme  thereof,  although
in  truth  they  make  mention  of  a  goodly  great  Starre
seene  in  those  parts,  which  they  call  Canopus.  Those  Plin.  lib.  6.
which  of  late  dayes  have  sayled  into  these  parts,  have  c-  22-
accustomed  to  write  strange  things  of  this  Heaven ;  that
it  is  very  bright,  having  many  goodly  Starres :  and  in
effect,  things  which  come  farre,  are  commonly  described
with  encrease.  But  it  seemes  contrarie  unto  me,  holding
it  for  certaine,  that  in  our  Region  of  the  North,  there
is  a  greater  number  and  bigger  starres ;  finding  no  starres
xv  I  a

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

in  these  parts,  which  exceede  the  Fisher  or  the  Chariot

See  Magellan*  in  bignesse. It  is  true,  that  the  Crosse  in  these  parts

Voyage.  \s  verv  faire  ancJ  pleasing  to  behold  : we  call  the  Crosse,

foure  notable  and  apparant  starres,  which  make  the  forme

of a crosse, set equally and with proportion. The

ignorant  suppose  this  crosse  to  be  the  Southerne  Pole,

for  that  they  see  the  Navigators  take  their  heigth  thereby,

as  wee  are  accustomed  to  doe  by  the  North  starre. But

they  are  deceived,  and  the  reason,  why Saylers  doe  it

in  this  sort,  is  for  that  in  the  South  parts  there  is  no

fixed  starre  that  markes  the  Pole,  as  the  North  starre

doth  to  our  Pole. And  therefore  they  take  their  heigth

by  the  starre  at  the  foote  of  the  Crosse,  distant  from  the

true  and  fixed  Pole  Antarticke  thirtie  degrees,  as  the  North

starre  is  distant  from  the  Pole  Articke  three  degrees  or

little  more. And  so  it  is  more  difficult  to  take  the  heigth

in  those  parts,  for  that  the  said  starre  at  the  foote  of  the

Crosse  must  be  right,  the  which  chanceth  but  in  one  houre

of  the  night ;  which  is  in  divers  seasons  of  the  yeere  in

divers  houres, and oftentimes it  appeareth not in the

Height  taken whole  night,  so  as  it  is  very  difficult  to  take  the  height.

by  the  Sunne. And  therefore  the  most  expert  Pilots  regard  not  the  Crosse,

taking  the  height of  the Sunne  by  the  Astrolabe, by

which  they  know  in  what  height  they  are :  wherein  com-

Via  lactea.) monly  the  Portugals  are  more  expert,  as  a  Nation  that

Shewing  the nath  more  discourse  in  the  Arte  of  Navigation  then  any

reason  w  yt  e  ot jjer> There  are  also  other  starres  in  these  Southerne

bunne  without  ....  111  r 1 -kt 1

the  Tropicks,  Par"ts,  which  in  so  me  sort  resemble  those  or  the  North.

causeth  That  which  they  call  the  Milken  way,  is  larger  and  more

greatest  resplendent  in  the  South  parts,  appearing  therein  those

quantity  of  admirable  blacke  spots,  whereof  we  have  made  mention.

%U  CltPTS  ZU/lPIt  it

is  farthest  off ;  Considering  with  my  selfe  oftentimes,  what  should
and  contrari-  cause  the  Equinoctiall  to  bee  so  moist,  as  I  have  said ;
wise,  within  to  refute  the  opinion  of  the  Ancients,  I  finde  no  other
them  it  reason,  but  the  great  force  of  the  Sunne  in  those  parts,

breedeth  most, u u •<. J  •„.  lj  r

when  it  is  whereby  it  drawes  unto  it  a  great  abundance  or  vapours
merest,  I.  2.  from  out  of  the  Ocean,  which  in  those  parts  is  very  great
chap.  7.  and spacious : and having drawne unto it this great

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
abundance  of  vapours,  doth  suddenly  dissolve  them  into
raine,  and  it  is  approved  by  many  tried  experiences,  that
the  raine  and  great  stormes  from  Heaven  proceed  from
the  violent  heate  of  the  Sunne :  first  (as  we  have  said
before)  it  raines  in  those  Countries,  when  as  the  Sunne
casts  his  beames  directly  upon  the  earth,  at  which  time
he  hath  most  force :  but  when  the  Sunne  retires,  the
heate  is  moderate,  and  then  there  falls  no  raine :  whereby
wee  may  conclude,  that  the  force  and  heate  of  the  Sunne
is  the  cause  of  raine  in  those  Countries.  Moreover  we
observe,  both  in  Peru,  new  Spaine,  and  in  all  the  burning
Zone,  that  the  raine  doth  usually  fal  in  the  afternoone,
when  as  the  Sunne  beames  are  in  their  greatest  force,
being  strange  to  see  it  raine  in  the  morning.  And  there-
fore Travellers  foreseeing  it,  begin  their  journeys  early,
that  they  may  end  and  rest  before  noone,  for  they  hold
that  commonly  it  raines  after  noone.  Such  as  have
frequented  and  travelled  those  Countries,  can  sufficiently
speake  thereof.  And  there  are,  that  (having  made  some
abode  there)  say,  that  the  greatest  abundance  of  raine  is,
when  the  Moone  is  at  the  full ;  but  to  say  the  truth,  I
could  never  make  sufficient  proofe  thereof,  although  I
have  observed  it.  Moreover,  the  dayes,  the  yeere,  and
the  moneths,  shew  the  truth  hereof,  that  the  violent  heate
of  the  Sunne  causeth  the  raine  in  the  burning  Zone :
experience  teacheth  us  the  like  in  artificiall  things,  as  in
a  Limbecke,  wherein  they  draw  waters  from  herbs  and
flowers ;  for  the  vehemency  of  the  fire  forceth  and  driveth  [III.  v.  919.]
up  an  abundance  of  vapours,  which  being  pressed,  and
finding  no  issue,  are  converted  into  liquor  and  water.
The  like  wee  see  in  gold  and  silver,  which  we  refine  with
quick-silver,  the  fire  being  small  and  slow,  we  draw  out
almost  nothing  of  the  quick-silver,  but  if  it  be  quick
and  violent,  it  doth  greatly  evaporate  the  quick-silver,
which  encountring  the  head  above,  doth  presently  turne
into  liquor,  and  begins  to  drop  downe :  Even  so  the
violent  heate  of  the  Sunne  produceth  these  two  effects,
when  it  findes  matter  disposed,  that  is,  to  draw  up  the

3

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

vapours  on  high,  and  to  dissolve  them  presently,  and
turne  them  into  raine,  when  there  is  any  obstacle  to
consume  them.  And  although  these  things  seeme  con-
trarie,  that  one  Sunne  within  the  burning  Zone,  being
neere,  should  cause  raine,  and  without  the  Zone  afarre
off  should  breed  the  like  effect ;  so  it  is,  that  all  well
considered,  there  is  no  contrarietie.  A  thousand  effects
in  naturall  causes  proceed  of  contrarie  things  by  divers
meanes :  we  drie  linnen  by  the  fire,  and  in  the  aire,  and
yet  the  one  heats  and  the  other  cooles ;  Pastures  are  dried
and  hardened  by  the  Sunne  and  with  the  Frost ;  moderate
exercise  provokes  sleepe,  being  too  violent,  it  hindereth :
if  you  lay  no  wood  on  the  fire,  it  dyeth ;  if  you  lay  on
too  much,  it  likewise  quencheth :  for  the  onely  proportion
entertaines  and  makes  it  to  continue.  To  well  discerne
a  thing,  it  must  not  be  too  neere  the  eye,  nor  too  farre
off,  but  in  a  reasonable  distance  proportionable ;  being
too  farre  off  from  any  thing  we  lose  the  sight,  and  too
neere  likewise  we  cannot  see  it.  If  the  Sunne  beams  be
weake,  they  draw  up  no  fogge  from  the  Rivers,  if  they
be  violent,  having  drawne  up  the  vapours,  they  presently
dissolve  and  consume  them ;  but  if  the  heat  be  moderate,
it  drawes  up  and  preserves  it :  for  this  reason  the  vapours
rise  not  commonly  in  the  night,  nor  at  noone,  but  in  the
morning,  when  as  the  Sunne  begins  to  enter  into  his  force.
There  are  a  thousand  examples  of  naturall  causes  upon
this  subject,  which  wee  see  doe  often  grow  from  contrarie
things :  whereby  we  must  not  wonder,  if  the  Sunne  being
neere,  engenders  raine,  and  being  farre  off,  works  the
like  effect :  but  being  of  a  moderate  and  proportionable
distance,  causeth  none  at  all.  Yet  there  remaines  one
doubt,  why  the  neernesse  of  the  Sunne  causeth  the  raine
under  the  burning  Zone,  and  without  when  it  is  farthest
off.  In  my  opinion  the  reason  is,  that  in  Winter  without
the  Tropicks,  the  Sunne  hath  not  force  sufficient  to  con-
sume the  vapours  which  rise  from  the  Land  and  Sea ;
for  these  vapours  grow  in  great  abundance  in  the  cold
Region  of  the  aire,  where  they  are  congealed  and  thickned

4

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
by  the  extremitie  of  the  cold ;  and  after  being  pressed,
they  dissolve  and  turne  into  water.  Therefore  in  Winter
when  the  Sunne  is  farthest  off,  the  dayes  short,  and  the
nights  long,  his  heat  hath  small  force :  but  when  the
Sunne  approcheth,  which  is  in  the  Summer  time,  his  force
is  such  as  it  drawes  up  the  vapours,  and  suddenly  con-
sumes and  disperseth  them ;  for  the  heat  and  the  length
of  the  dayes  grow  through  the  neernesse  of  the  Sunne.
But  within  the  Tropicks  under  the  burning  Zone,  the
farre  distance  of  the  Sunne  workes  the  same  effects  that
the  neernesse  doth  without  the  Tropicks ;  by  reason,
whereof,  it  raines  no  more  under  the  burning  Zone  when
the  Sunne  is  farre  off,  then  without  the  Tropicks  when
it  is  neerest,  for  that  in  this  approching  and  retyring,
the  Sunne  remayns  alwayes  in  one  distance  whence  pro-
ceedes  this  effect  of  cleernesse.  But  when  the  Sunne  is
in  the  period  of  his  force  in  the  burning  Zone,  and  that
he  cast  his  beames  directly  upon  the  Inhabitants  heads,
there  is  neither  cleernesse  nor  drynesse,  as  it  seemes  there
should  be,  but  rather  great  and  strange  showers :  for  that
by  this  violent  heat,  he  drawes  up  suddenly  a  great
abundance  of  vapours  from  the  Earth  and  Ocean,  which
are  so  thicke,  as  the  winde,  not  able  easily  to  disperse
them,  they  melt  into  water,  which  breedeth  the  cold  raine
in  so  great  abundance :  for  the  excessive  heat  may  soone
draw  up  many  vapours,  the  which  are  not  so  soone  dis-
solved :  and  being  gathered  together  through  their  great
abundance,  they  melt  and  dissolve  into  water.  The  which
wee  may  easily  discerne  by  this  familiar  example :  roast
a  piece  of  Porke,  Mutton,  or  Veale,  if  the  fire  be  violent,
and  the  meate  neere,  wee  see  the  fat  melts  suddenly  and
drops  away,  the  reason  is,  that  the  violent  heat  drawes
forth  the  humour  and  fat  from  the  meat,  and  being  in
great  abundance  cannot  dissolve  it,  and  so  it  distils  more
away:  But  when  the  fire  is  moderate,  and  the  meat  in
an  equall  distance,  wee  see  that  it  roasts  handsomly,  and
the  fat  drops  not  too  suddenly,  for  that  the  moderate  heat
drawes  out  the  moistnesse  which  it  consumes  suddenly.

5

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

And  therefore  Cookes  make  a  moderate  fire,  and  lay  not
their  meate  too  neere  nor  too  farre  off,  lest  it  melt  away.
The  like  may  bee  seene  in  another  experience  in  candles
of  tallow  or  waxe,  if  the  wike  bee  great,  it  melts  the
tallow  or  the  waxe,  for  that  the  heat  cannot  consume  the
moistnesse  which  riseth,  but  if  the  flame  bee  proportion-
able, the  wax  melts  nor  drops  not,  for  that  the  flame  doth
waste  it  by  little  and  little  as  it  riseth.
Exceptions  to  But  this  is  not  to  hinder  the  exceptions  which  Nature
generall  rules.  jiat]1  gjven  to  this  Rule,  making  some  Regions  of  the
burning  Zone  extremely  drie.  The  which  is  reported  of
Ethiopia,  and  wee  have  seene  it  in  a  great  part  of  Peru,
where  all  that  Land  or  Coast,  which  they  call  Playnes,
wants  raine,  yea,  land  waters,  except  some  Vallies  where
Rivers  fall  from  the  Mountaines ;  the  rest  is  a  sandie  and
barren  soile,  where  you  shall  hardly  finde  any  Springs,
but  some  deepe  Wells.  But  with  the  helpe  of  God,  we
will  shew  the  reason  why  it  rayneth  not  in  these  Playnes
(the  which  many  demand ;)  for  now  I  onely  pretend  to
shew,  that  there  are  many  exceptions  to  naturall  Rules,
whereby  it  may  happen,  that  in  some  part  of  the  burning
[III.  v.  920.]  Zone  it  raines  not  when  the  Sunne  is  neerest,  but  being
farthest  off,  although  unto  this  day  I  have  neither  seene
nor  heard  of  it :  but  if  it  be  so,  we  must  attribute  it  to
the  particular  qualitie  of  the  Earth :  and  also,  if  some-
times the  contrarie  doth  chance,  we  must  have  regard  that
in  naturall  things  there  happens  many  contrarieties  and
lets,  whereby  they  change  and  dissolve  one  another.  For
example,  it  may  be  the  Sunne  will  cause  raine,  and  that
the  windes  will  hinder  it,  or  else  cause  more  abundance
then  hath  beene  usuall.
The  Authors  When  I  passed  to  the  Indies,  I  will  tell  what  chanced
experience.  unto  mee  .  naving  reacj  what  Poets  and  Philosophers  write
of  the  burning  Zone,  I  perswaded  my  selfe,  that  comming
to  the  Equinoctiall,  I  should  not  indure  the  violent  heate,
but  it  fell  out  otherwise ;  for  when  I  passed,  which  was
when  the  Sunne  was  there  for  Zenith,  being  entred  into
Aries,  in  the  moneth  of  March,  I  felt  so  great  cold,  as

6

JOSEPH ACOSTA

1  was  forced  to  goe  into  the  Sunne  to  warme  me :  what
could  I  else  doe  then,  but  laugh  at  Aristotles  Meteors
and  his  philosophic,  seeing  that  in  that  place,  and  at  that
season,  when  as  all  should  be  scortched  with  heat,  according
to  his  rules,  I,  and  all  my  companions  were  a  cold?  In
truth  there  is  no  Region  in  the  world  more  pleasant  and
temperate  then  under  the  Equinoctiall,  although  it  be  not
in  all  parts  of  an  equall  temperature,  but  have  great
diversities.  The  burning  Zone  in  some  parts  is  very
temperate,  as  in  Quitto,  and  on  the  playnes  of  Peru ;  in
some  parts  very  cold,  as  at  Potozi,  and  in  some  very  hot,
as  in  Ethiopia,  Bresil,  and  the  Molucques.  This  diversitie
being  knowne  and  certaine  unto  us,  wee  must  of  force
seeke  out  another  cause  of  cold  and  heat  then  the  Sunne
beames,  seeing  that  in  one  season  of  the  yeere,  and  in
places  of  one  height  and  distance  from  the  Pole  and
Equinoctiall  we  finde  so  great  diversitie,  that  some  are
invironed  with  heat,  some  with  cold,  and  others  tempered
with  a  moderate  heat.

Considering  this  matter  generally,  I  finde  two  generall
causes,  which  maketh  this  Region  temperate :  the  one
is  that  before  mentioned,  for  that  this  Region  is  very
moist  and  subject  to  raine,  and  there  is  no  doubt  but  the
raine  doth  refresh  it,  for  that  the  water  is  by  nature  cold ;
and  although  by  the  force  of  the  fire  it  be  made  hot,  yet
doth  it  temper  this  heat  proceeding  onely  from  the  Sunne
beames.  The  which  wee  see  by  experience  in  the  inner
Arabia,  the  which  is  burnt  with  the  Sunne,  having  no
showres  to  temper  the  violence  thereof.  The  cloudes  and
mists  are  the  cause  that  the  Sunne  offends  not  so  much,
and  the  showres  that  fall  from  them,  refresh  both  the  Aire
and  the  Earth,  and  moisten  likewise  how  hot  soever  it
tie.  They  drinke  raine  water,  and  it  quencheth  the  thirst,
as  our  men  have  well  tried,  having  no  other  to  drinke.
So  as  reason  and  experience  doth  teach  us,  that  raine  of
it  selfe  doth  temper  the  heat ;  and  having  by  this  meanes
shewed,  that  the  burning  Zone  is  much  subject  unto  raine,
it  appeares  that  there  is  matter  in  it,  to  temper  the  violence

7

A.D.

c.  1588.

Various  and
diversified
tempers  of  the
Torrid  Zone.

Causes  of
temperatenesse
under  the  Line
and  within  the
Tropicks.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

Second  cause,  of  the  heat.  To  this  I  will  adde  an  other  reason,  which
deserves  to  be  knowne,  not  onely  for  this  matter,  but
for  many  others ;  for  although  the  Sunne  be  very  hot  and
burning  under  the  Equinoctiall,  yet  is  it  not  long,  so  as
the  heat  of  the  day  being  there  shorter  and  of  lesse  con-
tinuance, it  causeth  not  so  violent  a  heate ;  the  which  it
behooves  to  specifie  more  particularly.  Such  as  are
practised  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Spheare  teach  very
well,  that  the  more  the  Zodiake  is  oblique  and  traversing
our  Hemisphere,  the  more  unequall  are  the  dayes  and
nights ;  and  contrariwise,  where  the  Spheare  is  straight,
and  the  signes  mount  directly,  there  the  dayes  and  nights
are  equall.  And  therefore  in  all  that  Region  which  is
betweene  the  two  Tropicks,  there  is  lesse  inequalitie  then
without  them,  and  the  more  wee  approch  the  Line  the
lesse  inequalitie  we  finde,  the  which  wee  have  tried  in
those  parts.  Those  of  Quitto,  for  that  they  are  under  the
Line,  have  not  throughout  the  whole  yeere  the  dayes  and
nights  more  short  at  one  season  then  at  an  other,  but  are
continually  equall.  Those  of  Lima  being  distant  almost
twelve  degrees,  finde  some  difference  betwixt  the  dayes
and  the  nights,  but  very  little,  for  that  in  December  and
Januarie  the  dayes  increase  an  houre  or  little  lesse.  Those
of  Potozi  finde  much  more  difference  both  in  Winter  and
in  Summer,  being  almost  under  the  Tropicke.  But  those
that  live  without  the  Tropicks  finde  the  dayes  in  Winter
shorter  and  in  Summer  longer :  the  more  remote  they
are  from  the  Equinoctiall  and  come  neere  the  Pole,  as
wee  see  in  Germanie  and  in  England,  the  dayes  are  longer
in  Summer  then  in  Italie  and  in  Spaine.  It  is  a  thing
which  the  Spheare  doth  teach,  and  experience  doth  plainly
shew  us.  Wee  must  adde  an  other  Proposition,  which
is  likewise  true  and  very  considerable  for  all  the  effects
of  Nature  to  understand  the  perseverance  and  continua-
tion of  the  efficient  cause  to  worke  and  moove.  This
presupposed,  if  any  one  demand  of  me,  why  under  the
Equinoctiall  Line  the  heat  is  not  so  violent  in  Summer,
as  in  some  other  Regions  (as  in  Andelousia  in  the  moneths

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.
of  July  and  August)  I  will  answere,  that  in  Andelousia
the  dayes  are  longer  and  the  nights  shorter ;  and  as  the
day  being  hot,  inflames  and  causeth  heat ;  so  the  nights
being  cold  and  moist,  give  a  refreshing. According  to  Tka(  ^. bgg
the  which,  at  Peru,  there  is  no  such  great  heat,  for  that  the  other  reasons
dayes  in  Summer  are  not  long,  nor  the  nights  short ;  so  besides  the
as  the  heat  of  the  day  is  much  tempered  by  the  freshnesse  firmer

r,i ■ 1  .  mentioned,

or  the  night.  which  sh  yw

Being a thing concluded, that the two fore-named  t^at  t^e  ^rn_
properties  are  common  and  universall  to  all  the  Region  ing  zone  is
of  the  burning  Zone  :  and  yet  in  the  same  there  are  found  temperate,
some  places  very  hot,  and  other  exceeding  cold  : Also,  esPmaUy
that  the  temperature  is  not  there  equall  in  all  places,  but  QcfiW
under  one  climate,  one  part  is  hot,  another  cold,  and  the  Chap.  n.
third  temperate,  all  at  one  season ;  wee  are  forced  to  seeke  [III.  v.  921.]
out  other  reasons,  whence  this  great  diversitie  should  pro-
ceede  in  the  burning  Zone. Discoursing  therefore  upon
this question, I doe  finde three apparant and certaine
causes, and a fourth more obscure and darke. The
apparant  and  certaine  causes  bee :  The  first,  is  the  Ocean  :
the  second,  the  situation  of  the  Land :  and  the  third,  the
nature and propertie of many and sundrie windes.
Besides  these  three  which  I  hold  for  manifest,  I  beleeve
there  is  a  fourth  hidden  and  lesse  apparent,  which  is  the
propertie  of  the  same  Land  inhabited,  and  the  particular
influence  of  the  Heavens. Among  the  speciall  causes  and
reasons,  I  have  first  placed  the  Sea,  for  without  doubt,
the  neernesse  thereof  doth  helpe  to  temper  and  coole  the
heat : for  although  the  Water  be  salt,  yet  is  it  alwayes
water,  whose  nature  is  cold.

But  if  wee  shall  yet  search  more  particularly,  wee  shall
not  finde  in  all  this  Land  an  equall  temperature  of  heate,
although  it  bee  in  equall  distance  from  the  Sea,  and  in
the  same  degree,  seeing  that  in  some  parts  there  is  great
heate,  and  in  some  very  little.  Doubtlesse,  the  cause
thereof  is,  that  the  one  is  lower,  and  the  other  higher;
which  causeth  that  the  one  is  hot,  and  the  other  cold.
It  is  most  certaine,  that  the  tops  of  the  Mountaines  are

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

colder  then  in  the  bottome  of  the  Vallies,  the  which  pro-
ceedes,  not  onely  for  that  the  Sunne  beames  have  greater
repercussions  upon  lower  places,  although  it  be  a  great
reason ;  yet  there  is  another,  which  is,  that  the  Region  of
the  aire  is  colder  when  it  is  farthest  from  the  ground.
The  cause  why  the  middle  Region  of  the  aire  is  more
cold,  hath  beene  shewed  before :  for  that  the  Region  of
the  aire  next  to  the  fierie  exhalation,  the  which  (according
to  Aristotle)  is  upon  the  Spheare  of  the  aire,  repells  and
thrusts  backe  all  the  cold,  the  which  retires  it  selfe  into
the  middle  Region  of  the  aire,  by  Antiparistasis,  as  the
Philosophers  speake.  Now,  if  any  one  should  question
with  me  in  this  manner ;  If  it  be  so  that  the  aire  is  hot
and  moist,  as  Aristotle  holds,  and  as  we  commonly  say ;
whence  then  proceedes  the  cold  which  is  congealed  in
the  middle  Region  of  the  aire,  seeing  it  cannot  come  from
Arht.  Me.  the  fierie  Spheare  ?  For  if  it  come  from  the  Water,  or  the
Earth,  by  this  reason  the  lower  Region  of  the  aire  should
be  colder  then  the  middle.

To  answere  truly  what  I  thinke,  I  will  confesse,  that
this  Argument  and  Objection  is  so  difficult,  as  I  am  almost
readie  to  follow  the  opinion  of  such  as  reprove  the
qualities,  agreements  and  disagreements  which  Aristotle
gives  unto  the  Elements,  saying,  they  are  but  imagina-
tions, who  for  this  occasion  hold  the  aire  to  bee  cold  by
nature.  And  to  this  end  they  use  many  arguments  and
reasons,  whereof  we  will  propound  one  very  familiar  and
well  knowne,  leaving  the  rest  apart.  In  the  Canicular
dayes  we  are  accustomed  to  beate  the  aire  with  a  fan,
and  wee  finde  that  it  doth  refresh  us ;  so  as  these  Authors
affirme,  that  heate  is  no  private  propertie  of  any  other
Element,  but  of  fire  onely,  which  is  dispersed  and  mingled
Dionys.c.  15.  with  all  things  (as  the  great  Denis  doth  teach  us.)  But
de  coel.  kerar.  whether  \±  be  so,  or  otherwise  (for  I  will  not  contradict
Aristotle,  but  in  that  which  is  most  certaine)  in  the  end
they  agree  all,  that  the  middle  Region  of  the  aire  is  colder
then  the  lowest  next  to  the  Earth,  as  experience  doth
shew  us ;  seeing  that  in  this  middle  Region  are  congealed,

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.

Snow,  Haile,  Frosts,  and  other  signes  of  extreme  cold.

The  middle  Region  then  which  they  call  the  burning  Zone,

having  on  the  one  side  the  Sea,  and  on  the  other  the

Mountaines,  we  must  hold  them  for  sufficient  causes  to

temper  and  coole  the  heate.

The  temperature  of  this  Region  ought  chiefly  to  be  That  the  cold

attributed  to  the  propertie  of  the  winde  that  blowes  in  windefbeethe
, „  11-1-1  1  r 1 t^i  • principal  cause

that  Country,  the  which  is  pleasant  and  rresh. I  he  provi-  t0  m^e  the

dence  of  the  great  God  Creator  of  all  things  hath  beene  burning  Zone

such,  as  he  hath  ordayned  fresh  and  coole  windes  in  that  temperate.

Region  where  the  Sunne  makes  his  course  (which  seemes j.?'  I3'

should  be  burnt  up)  that  by  their  coolenesse  the  excessive  traveuer$  t^at

heate  of  the  Sunne  might  be  qualified. Wee  see  in  one  there  is  a  hot

climate,  some  Regions  and  Cities  hotter  then  others,  onely  winde  some-

for  that  they  feele  lesse  winde  to  refresh  them. The  like  f^es  neere  j°

is  in  other  Countries  where  no  winde  blowes,  the  which Qrww  wife*

are  all  on  fire  like  unto  a  furnace. If  we  shall  neerly  swalloweth

looke  into  the  consideration  of  the  winde,  whereof  we  mens  breath

have  spoken,  we  may  resolve  many  doubts  which  some  and  suddenly

object,  and  which  seeme  strange  and  wonderfull :  where- /. s  \ e™'

fore  the  Sunne  casting  his  beames  upon  the  burning  Zone,  observes  at

and  particularly  at  Peru,  and  that  more  violently  then  in  Goa  the  wind

Spaine  in  the  Canicular  dayes,  yet  they  defend  the  heat  t0  blow  twelve

with  a  light  covering,  so  as  with  a  slender  covering  of  ho™e*Jrom

mats  or  straw,  they  are  better  preserved  from  the  heate,  otAer  ^eke

then  in  Spaine  under  a  roofe  of  wood,  or  a  vault  of  stone,  constantly

Moreover,  why  are  not  the  nights  in  Summer  at  Peru  from  the  land.

as  hot  and  troublesome  as  in  Spaine? Wherefore  on  the

highest  tops  of  Mountaines,  even  amongst  the  heapes  of

snowe,  you  shall  sometimes  feele  great  and  insupportable

heat? Wherefore  in all the  Province of  Colao, when

yee  come  into  the  shade,  how  little  soever,  you  feele  cold :

But  comming  into  the  Sunne  beames,  you  presently  finde

the heate excessive? Every morning the winde from

the Sea  doth  cease, and the Sunne begins to cast his

beames ;  and  for  this  reason  they  feele  the  greatest  heat

in  the  morning,  untill  the  returne  of  the  same  windes,

which  otherwise  they  call  the  tyde  or  winde  of  the  Sea,

A.D.

c.  1588.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Temper  of  the
Indies.

which  makes  them  first  to  feele  cold.  Wee  have  tried
all  this,  whilest  wee  were  at  the  Hands  of  Barlovante,
where  in  the  mornings  wee  did  sweat  for  heat,  and  at
noone  we  felt  a  fresh  aire ;  for  that  then,  a  North  Easterly
winde  which  is  fresh  and  coole,  doth  commonly  blow.

Considering  with  my  selfe,  the  pleasing  temperature  of
many  Countries  at  the  Indies,  where  they  know  not  what
Winter  is,  which  by  his  cold  doth  freeze  them,  nor  Summer
[III.  v.  922.]  which  doth  trouble  them  with  heat,  but  that  with  a  Mat
they  preserve  themselves  from  the  injuries  of  all  weather,
and  where  they  scarce  have  any  neede  to  change  their
garments  throughout  the  yeere.  I  say,  that  often  con-
sidering of  this,  I  find  that  if  men  at  this  day  would
vanquish  their  passions,  and  free  themselves  from  the
snares  of  covetousnesse,  leaving  many  fruitlesse  and  per-
nicious designes,  without  doubt  they  might  live  at  the
Indies  very  pleasant  and  happily :  for  that  which  other
Poets  sing  of  the  Elisean  fields  &  of  the  famous  Tempe,
or  that  which  Plato  reports  or  feignes  of  his  Atlantike
Hand  ;  men  should  finde  in  these  Lands,  if  with  a  generous
spirit  they  would  choose  rather  to  command  their  silver
and  their  desires,  then  to  remayne  to  it  slaves  as  they
are.

Having  discoursed  in  the  two  former  Bookes  of  that
which  concernes  the  Heavens,  and  the  habitation  of  the
Indies  *  in  generall,  it  behooves  us  now  to  treat  of  the

*  We  have  abbreviated  and  to  prevent  tediousness  cut  off  a  great  part
of  Acostas  observations  in  the  two  former  bookes,  as  having  handled  the
same  in  our  Pilgrimage  1.  8.  where  we  have  shewed  whence  men  and
beasts  might  come  thither,  and  that  the  opinion  of  the  worlds  unhabi-
tablenesse  betwixt  the  Tropicks  is  false  :  for  the  daily  raines  when  the
Sunne  is  neerest,  the  long  nights  &  therein  great  dewes,  the  breezes  and
constant  course  of  the  windes,  the  great  Lakes  &  Rivers,  height  of
Hills,  &c.  make  those  parts  not  onely  habitable,  but  more  temperate
than  others  and  fitter  for  mans  life  :  there  being  more  heat  at,  and  on
this  side  the  Tropicks  then  under  the  Line.  We  here  doe  but  cull  out
choise  things  for  better  understanding  the  naturall  historie  of  those
parts  ;  for  other  things  referring  the  Reader  to  the  Authour  himselfe.
Occasionally  our  notes  shall  elucidate  those  things  also,  which  are  in  the
Text  omitted.

Of  the  windes,
their  differen-
ces, properties,
and  causes  in
generall.
lib.  3.  cap.  2.

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
three  elements,  Aire,  Water,  and  Land,  and  their  com-
pounds, which  be  metals,  plants  and  beasts : for,  as  for
the  fire,  I  see  no  speciall  matter  at  the  Indies  which  is
not  in  other  Regions ; unlesse  some  will  say, that the
manner  to  strike  fire  in  rubbing  two  stones  one  against
another,  as  some  Indians  use,  or  to  boile  any  thing  in
gourds,  casting  a  burning  stone  into  it,  &  other  such  like
things,  are  remarkable,  whereof  I  have  written  what  might
bee  spoken. But  of  those  which  are  in  the  Vulcans  *  *Vukansi  as
and  Mouthes  of  fire  at  the  Indies,  worthy  doubtlesse  to  -&-tna,Heda,
be  observed,  I  will  speake  in  their  order,  treating  of  the  ous'earf^ "
diversitie  of  grounds,  whereas  they  finde  these  fires  or  whence  fire
Vulcans. Therefore  to  begin  with  the  windes,  I  say,  that  issueth.
with  good  reason,  Salomon  in  the  great  judgement  which  Genera^
God  had  given  him,  esteemes  much  the  knowledge  of  the
windes ;  and  their  properties  being  very  admirable ;  for
that  some  are  moist,  others  drie  ;  some  unwholsome,  others
sound ;  some  hot,  others  cold ;  some  calme  and  pleasant,
others  rough  and  tempestuous ;  some  barren,  and  others
fertile,  with  infinite  other  differences. There  are  some  Monsons.
windes  which  blow  in  certaine  Regions,  and  are,  as  it
were,  Lords  thereof,  not  admitting  any  entrie  or  com-
munication of  their  contraries. In  some  parts  they  blow
in  that  sort,  as  sometimes  they  are  Conquerors,  somtimes
conquered ;  often  there  are  divers  and  contrarie  windes,
which  doe  runne  together  at  one  instant,  dividing  the
way  betwixt  them,  somtimes  one  blowing  above  of  one
sort,  and  another  below  of  an  other  sort;  somtimes  they
incounter  violently  one  with  another,  which  puts  them
at  Sea  in  great  danger :  there  are  some  windes  which  helpe
to  the  generation  of  Creatures,  and  others  that  hinder
and  are  opposite. There  is  a  certaine  winde,  of  such  a
qualitie,  as  when  it  blowes  in  some  Countrie,  it  causeth
it  to  raine  Fleas,  and  in  so  great  abundance,  as  they  trouble
and  darken  the  aire,  and  cover  all  the  Sea-shoare : and
in  other  places  it  raines  Frogs. These  diversities  and
others which are sufficiently knowne, are commonly
attributed  to  the  place  by  the  which  these  windes  passe.

13

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

For  they  say,  that  from  these  places  they  take  their
qualities  to  be  cold,  hot,  drie,  or  moist,  sickly  or  sound,
and  so  of  the  rest,  the  which  is  partly  true,  and  cannot
be  denyed ;  for  that  in  a  small  distance  you  shall  see  in
one  winde  many  diversities.  For  example,  the  Solanus
or  Easterne  winde  is  commonly  hot  and  troublesome  in
Spaine ;  and  in  Murria  it  is  the  coolest  and  healthfullest
that  is,  for  that  it  passeth  by  the  Orchards,  and  that  large
champaine  which  wee  see  very  fresh.  In  Carthagene
which  is  not  farre  from  thence,  the  same  winde  is  trouble-
some and  unwholsome.  The  Meridional!  (which  they  of
the  Ocean  call  South,  and  those  of  the  Mediterranean
Sea,  Mezo  giorno)  commonly  is  raynie  and  boysterous,
and  in  the  same  Citie  whereof  I  speake,  it  is  wholesome
and  pleasant.  Plinie  reports  that  in  Africke  it  raines  with
a  Northerne  winde,  and  that  the  Southerne  winde  is  cleere.
He  then  that  shall  well  consider  what  I  have  spoken  of
these  windes,  he  may  conceive,  that  in  a  small  distance  of
Land  or  Sea,  one  winde  hath  many  and  divers  qualities,
yea  sometimes  quite  contrarie ;  whereby  wee  may  inferrer
that  hee  draweth  his  propertie  from  the  place  where  it
passeth,  the  which  is  in  such  sort  true  (although  we  may
not  say  infallibly)  as  it  is  the  onely  and  principall  cause
of  the  diversitie  of  the  windes.  It  is  a  thing  we  easily
find,  that  in  a  River  contayning  fiftie  leagues  in  circuit
(I  put  it  thus  for  an  example)  that  the  winde  which  blowes
of  the  one  part,  is  hot  and  moist ;  and  that  which  blowes
on  the  other,  is  cold  and  drie.  Notwithstanding  this
Windes  diversitie  is  not  found  in  places  by  which  it  passeth,  the

qualities  from  wmcn  makes  me  rather  to  say,  that  the  windes  bring
the  places  by  these  qualities  with  them,  whereby  they  give  unto  them
which  they  the  names  of  these  qualities.  For  example,  we  attribute
passe.  t0 the Northerne winde, otherwise called Cierco, the

propertie  to  be  cold  and  drie,  and  to  dissolve  mists ;  to
the  Southerne  winde  his  contrarie,  called  Levesche,  we
attribute  the  contrarie  qualitie,  which  is  moist  and  hot,
and  ingenders  mists.  But  it  is  needfull  to  seeke  further,
to  know  the  true  and  originall  cause  of  these  so  strange

14

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.
differences  which  we  see  in  the  windes.  I  cannot  conceive
any  other,  but  that  the  same  efficient  cause  which  bringeth
forth  and  maketh  the  winds  to  grow,  doth  withall  give
them  this  originall  qualitie :  for  in  truth,  the  matter
whereon  the  winds  are  made,  which  is  no  other  thing
(according  to  Aristotle)  but  the  exhalation  of  the  interior
Elements,  may  well  cause  in  effect  a  great  part  of  this
diversitie,  being  more  grosse,  more  subtill,  more  drie,
and  more  moist.  But  yet  this  is  no  pertinent  reason,
seeing  that  we  see  in  one  Region,  where  the  vapours  and
exhalations  are  of  one  sort  and  qualitie,  that  there  rise
windes  and  effects  quite  contrarie.  We  must  therefore
referre  the  cause  to  the  higher  and  celestiall  Efficient,  [III.  v.  923.]
which  must  be  the  Sunne,  and  to  the  motion  and  influence
of  the  Heavens,  the  which  by  their  contrarie  motions,
give  and  cause  divers  influences.  But  the  beginnings  of
these  motions  and  influences  are  so  obscure  and  hidden
from  men,  and  on  the  other  part,  so  mightie  and  of  so
great  force,  as  the  holy  Prophet  David  in  his  propheticall
Spirit,  and  the  Prophet  Jeremie  admiring  the  greatnesse
of  the  Lord,  speake  thus,  Qui  profert  ventos  de  thesauris  Psalm  134.
suis.  Hee  that  drawes  the  windes  out  of  his  Treasures.  Jeremie  10,
In  truth  these  principles  and  beginnings  are  rich  and
hidden  treasures :  for  the  Author  of  all  things  holds  them
in  his  hand,  and  in  his  power ;  and  when  it  pleaseth  him,
sendeth  them  forth  for  the  good  or  chastisement  of  men,
and  sends  forth  such  windes  as  he  pleaseth  :  not  as  that
Eolus  whom  the  Poets  doe  foolishly  feigne  to  have  charge
of  the  windes,  keeping  them  in  a  Cave  like  unto  wilde
beasts.  We  see  not  the  beginning  of  these  windes,  neither
doe  we  know  how  long  they  shall  continue,  or  whither
they  shall  goe.  But  wee  see  and  know  well  the  diverse
effects  and  operations  they  have,  even  as  the  supreme
Truth,  the  Author  of  all  things  hath  taught  us,  saying,
Spiritus  ubi  vult  spirat,  &  vocem  ejus  audis,  &  nescis
unde  venit,  aut  quo  vadit.

It  is  true,  that  the  Northerne  winde  is  not  usually  cold
and  cleere  there  as  here. In  some  parts  of  Peru,  as  at

15

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

Lima,  and  on  the  Playnes,  they  finde  the  Northerne  windes

troublesome  and  unwholsome,  and  all  along  the  Coast

which  runnes  above  five  hundred  leagues,  they  hold  the

Southerne  windes  for  healthfull  and  coole,  and  (which  is

more)  most  cleere  and  pleasant ;  yea  it  never  raines,  con-

trarie  to  that  wee  see  in  Europe,  and  of  this  side  the

Herera  hath Line. Yet  that  which  chanceth  upon  the  coast  of  Peru

skewed  the js  no  preneraU  rule,  but  rather  an  exception,  and  a  wonder

height  of  the r xt°  •  1 ■  1

Hills  to  bee  the  °* Nature,  never  to  raine  upon  that  coast,  and  ever  to

cause  of  the  have  one  winde,  without  giving  place  to  his  contrarie,
windes  con-  whereof  we  will  hereafter  speake  our  minde.  It  is  no
stancy  and  generall  rule  there,  that  the  Northerne  winde  is  neither
hot  nor  raynie  there,  as  the  South  winde  is  on  this  side;
but  contrariwise,  it  raines  when  as  the  South  winde  blowes
there,  as  wee  see  in  all  the  Sierre  or  mountaine  of  Peru,
in  Chile,  and  in  the  Countrie  of  Congo,  which  is  on  the
other  side  of  the  Line,  and  farre  advanced  into  the  Sea.
And  in  Potozi  likewise,  the  winde  which  they  call
Tomahani  (which  is  our  North)  if  my  memorie  faile  me
not,  is  extremely  cold,  drie,  and  unpleasant,  as  it  is  here
with  us.  Yet  doth  not  the  Northerne  winde  disperse  the
cloudes  usually  there,  as  it  doth  here :  but  contrariwise,
if  I  be  not  deceived,  it  doth  often  cause  raine.  There
is  no  doubt,  but  the  windes  doe  borrow  this  great  diversitie
of  contrarie  effects,  from  the  places  by  which  they  passe,
and  the  neere  Regions  where  they  are  bred,  as  wee  see
by  daily  experience  in  a  thousand  places.  But  speaking
in  generall  of  the  qualitie  of  the  windes,  we  must  rather
looke  to  the  coasts  or  parts  of  the  World  from  whence
they  proceede,  then  to  observe,  whether  they  be  on  this
side  or  beyond  the  Line,  as  it  seemes  the  Philosopher  held
opinion.  These  capitall  windes,  which  be  the  East  and
West,  have  no  such  universall  qualities,  nor  so  common
in  this  Continent,  nor  in  the  other,  as  the  two  former.
The  Solanus  or  Easterne  winde,  is  commonly  here  trouble-
some and  unwholsome,  and  the  Westerne  or  Zephirus,
is  more  milde  and  healthfull.  At  the  Indies,  and  in  all
the  burning  Zone,  the  Easterne  winde  which  they  call

16

JOSEPH ACOSTA

Brise,  is  contrariwise  very  healthfull  and  pleasant.  Of
the  West,  I  cannot  speake  any  thing  certaine  or  generall,
for  that  it  blowes  not  at  all,  or  very  seldom  in  the  burning
Zone,  for  in  all  the  navigation  betwixt  the  two  Tropicks,
the  Easterne  winde  is  ordinarie.  And  for  that  it  is  one
of  the  admirable  workes  of  Nature,  it  shall  bee  good  to
understand  the  cause  and  the  beginning  thereof.

The  wayes  at  Sea  are  not  as  at  Land,  to  returne  the
same  way  they  passe.  It  is  all  one  way  (saith  the
Philosopher)  from  Athens  to  Thebes,  and  from  Thebes
to  Athens ;  but  it  is  not  so  at  Sea,  for  wee  goe  one  way
and  returne  by  another.  The  first  which  discovered  the
East  and  West  Indies,  laboured  much  with  great  difBcultie
to  finde  out  their  course,  untill  that  Experience  (the
Mistresse  of  these  secrets)  had  taught  them,  that  to  saile
through  the  Ocean,  is  not  like  the  passage  in  Italie,
through  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  where  in  their  returne,
they  observe  the  same  Ports  and  Capes  they  had  sight
of  in  their  passage,  attending  still  the  benefit  of  the
winde,  which  changeth  instantly,  and  when  that  failes,
they  have  recourse  to  their  Oares ;  and  so  the  Gallies  goe
and  come  daily,  coasting  along  the  shoare.  In  some  parts
of  the  Ocean,  they  may  not  looke  for  any  other  winde
then  that  which  blowes,  for  that  commonly  it  continues
long.  To  conclude,  that  which  is  good  to  goe  by,  is  not
fit  to  returne  with :  for  in  the  Sea  beyond  the  Tropicke,
and  within  the  burning  Zone,  the  Easterly  windes  raine
continually,  not  suffering  their  contraries.  In  the  which
Region  there  are  two  strange  things,  the  one  is,  that  in
that  Zone  (being  the  greatest  of  the  five,  into  the  which
the  World  is  divided)  the  Easterly  windes  (which  they
call  Brises)  doe  reigne,  not  suffering  the  Westerne  or
Southerne  (which  they  call  lower  winds)  to  have  their
course  at  any  season  of  the  yeere :  The  other  wonder  is,
that  these  Easterly  windes  never  cease  to  blow,  and  most
commonly  in  places  neerest  to  the  Line  (where  it  seemes
that  Calmes  should  be  more  frequent,  being  a  part  of  the
World,  most  subject  to  the  heat  of  the  Sunne,  but  it  is

XV  17  B

A.D.

c.  1588.

Eastern  winde
ralneth
betwixt  the
Tropicks.
That  the  burn-
ing Zone,  the
Brises,  or
Easterly
windes,  doe
continually
blow,  and
without  the
Z.one  the
Westerne,  and
that  the
Easterly  are
ordinarie
alwayes  there.
Chap.  \
Juan  de  Gacos
in  Decade  1.
lib.  4.  cap.  6.
They  goe  one
way  to  the
Indies  and
return
another,  why.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

contrarie,  for  you  shall  hardly  finde  any  Calmes  there,
and  the  winde  is  cold  and  continues  longer,  which  hath
beene  found  true  in  all  the  Navigations  of  the  Indies.
This  is  the  reason,  why  the  voyage  they  make  from  Spaine
to  the  West  Indies  is  shorter,  more  easie,  and  more
assured,  then  the  returne  to  Spaine.
[III.  v.  924.]  The  Fleetes  parting  from  Sivil,  have  more  difficultie
to  passe  the  Canaries,  for  that  the  gulfe  of  Yegues  or  of
Mares,  is  variable,  being  beaten  with  divers  windes,  but
having  passed  the  Canaries,  they  saile  with  a  Westerne
winde  untill  they  come  to  the  burning  Zone,  where
presently  they  finde  an  Easterly  winde,  and  so  they  saile
on  with  full  windes,  so  as  they  have  scant  any  need  to
touch  their  sailes  in  the  whole  voyage :  for  this  reason
they  called  this  great  gulfe,  the  gulfe  of  Dames,  for  the
calmnesse  and  pleasantnesse  thereof.  Then  following
their  course,  they  come  to  the  Hands  of  Guadelupe
Dominique,  Desired,  Marigualante,  and  the  rest,  which
in  that  place,  be  as  it  were,  the  Suburbs  of  the  Indies.
There  the  Fleetes  separate  and  divide  themselves,  whereof
some  (which  goe  to  new  Spaine)  take  to  the  right  hand
towards  Hispaniola ;  and  having  discovered  Cape  Saint
Anthony,  they  passe  unto  Saint  John  Delua,  alwayes
using  the  same  Easterly  windes.  Those  for  the  mayne
Land,  take  the  left  hand,  discovering  the  high  mountaine
of  Tayrone,  then  having  touched  at  Carthagene,  they
passe  unto  Nombre  de  Dios,  from  whence  they  goe  by
Land  to  Panama,  and  from  thence,  by  the  South  Sea  to
Peru.  But  when  the  fleetes  returne  to  Spaine,  they  make
their  voyage  in  this  sort :  The  fleete  of  Peru  discovers
Cape  Saint  Anthony,  then  they  enter  into  the  Havana,
which  is  a  goodly  Port  in  the  Iland  of  Cuba.  The  fleet
of  new  Spaine  doth  likewise  touch  at  the  Havana,
being  parted  from  Vera  Cruz,  or  from  the  Iland  of  Saint
John  Delua,  the  which  is  not  without  diflicultie,  for  that
commonly  Easterly  windes  blow  there,  which  is  a  contrarie
winde  to  goe  to  the  Havana.  These  fleetes  being  joyned
together  for  Spaine,  they  seeke  their  height  without  the

18

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
Tropicks,  where  presently  they  finde  Westerly  windes,
which  serve  them  untill  they  come  in  view  of  the  Acores,
or  Terceres,  and  from  thence  to  Sivil.  So  as  their  voyage
in  going,  is  of  a  small  height,  not  above  twentie  degrees
from  the  Line,  which  is  within  the  Tropicks.  But  the
returne  is  without  the  Tropicks,  in  eight  and  twentie  or
thirtie  degrees  of  height  at  the  least,  for  that  within  the
Tropicks,  the  Easterne  windes  continually  blow,  the  which
are  fittest  to  goe  from  Spaine  to  the  West  Indies,  for  that
their  course  is  from  East  to  West ;  and  without  the
Tropicks  (which  is  in  three  and  twentie  degrees  of  height)
they  finde  Westerly  windes,  the  which  are  the  more
certaine  and  ordinarie,  the  farther  you  are  from  the  Line,
and  more  fit  to  returne  from  the  Indies ;  for  that  they
are  windes  blowing  from  the  South  and  West,  which  serve
to  runne  into  the  East  and  North.

The like discourse is of the Navigation made into
the  South  Sea,  going  from  new  Spaine  or  Peru,  to  the
Philippines  or  China,  and  returning  from  the  Philippines
or  China  to  new  Spaine,  the  which  is  easie,  for  that  they
saile  alwayes  from  East  to  West,  neere  the  Line,  where
they  finde  the  Easterly  windes  to  blow  in  their  Poope.
In  the  yeere  1584.  there  went  a  ship  from  Calloa  in  Lima
to  the  Philippines,  which  say  led  two  thousand  and  seven  Say  ling  2  700.
hundred  leagues  without  sight  of  Land,  and  the  first  it  leagues  toith-
discovered,  was  the  Hand  of  Lusson,  where  they  tooke  out '  "&*  °l
Port, having performed their  voyage in two moneths,  monet^ Le
without  want  of  winde  or  any  torment,  and  their  course  Candishes
was almost continually  under the  Line ; for  that from  voyage.
Lima  (which  is  twelve  degrees  to the  South) he  came
to  Manilla,  which  is  as  much  to  the  North. The  like
good  fortune  had  Alvaro  de  Mandana,  when  as  he  went
to  discover  the  Hands  of  Solomon,  for  that  he  had  alwayes
a  full  gale,  untill  he  came  within  view  of  these  Hands,
the  which  must  bee  distant  from  that  place  of  Peru,  from
whence hee parted, about a thousand leagues, having
runne  their  course  alwayes  in  one  height  to  the  South.
The  returne  is  like  unto  the  voyage  from  the  Indies  unto

J9

A.D.

c.  1588.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Spaine :  for  those  which  returne  from  the  Philippines  or
China  to  Mexico,  to  the  end  they  may  recover  the  western
windes,  they  mount  a  great  height,  untill  they  come  right
against  the  Hands  of  Japon,  and  discovering  the  Calip-
hornes,  they  returne  by  the  coast  of  new  Spaine  to  the
Port  of  Acapulco,  from  whence  they  parted.  So  as  it  is
proved  likewise  by  this  Navigation,  that  they  saile  easily
from  East  to  West,  within  the  Tropicks,  for  that  their
Easterly  windes  doe  raine :  but  returning  from  West  to
East,  they  must  seeke  the  Westerne  windes  without  the
Tropicks,  in  the  height  of  seven  and  twentie  degrees.
The  Portugals  prove  the  like  in  their  Navigations  to  the
East  Indies,  although  it  be  in  a  contrarie  course.
Cause  of  the  Let  us  now  speake  of  that  which  toucheth  the  Question
propounded,  what  should  be  the  reason  why  under  the
burning  Zone  we  saile  easily  from  East  to  West,  and  not
contrarie :  wherein  we  must  presuppose  two  certaine
grounds.  The  one  is,  that  the  motion  of  the  first  Moover,
which  they  call  Diurnall,  not  onely  drawes  and  mooves
with  him  the  celestiall  Spheares,  which  are  inferiour  unto
him,  as  wee  see  daily  in  the  Sunne,  the  Moone,  and  the
Starres ;  but  also  the  Elements  doe  participate  of  this
motion,  insomuch  as  they  are  not  hindered.  The  Earth
is  not  mooved,  by  reason  of  her  heavinesse,  which  makes
it  immoveable,  being  farre  from  this  first  motor.  The
Element  of  water  mooves  not  likewise  with  this  Diurnall
motion,  for  that  it  is  united  to  the  Earth  and  make  one
spheare,  so  as  the  Earth  keeps  it  from  all  circular  motion.
But  the  other  two  Elements  of  Fire  and  Aire,  are  more
subtill  and  neerer  the  heavenly  Regions,  so  as  they  partici-
pate of  their  motion,  and  are  driven  about  circularly,  as
the  same  celestiall  bodies.  As  for  the  Fire,  without  doubt
it  hath  his  spheare  (as  Aristotle  and  other  Philosophers
have  held)  but  for  the  Aire  (which  is  no  point  of  our
subject)  it  is  most  certaine  that  it  mooves  with  a  motion
Diurnall,  which  is  from  East  to  West,  which  wee  see
plainly  in  Comets  that  moove  from  the  East  unto  the
West,  mounting,  descending,  and  finally  turning  in  the

Brhes.

Motion  of  the
Primum
Mobile
carrieth  the
inferiour  aire
with  it.

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
hemispheare  in  the  same  sort  as  the  Starres  move  in  the  [III.  v.  925.]
firmament ;  for  otherwise  these  Comets  being  in  the  region
and  sphere  of  the  ayre,  whereas  they  ingender,  appeares
consum'd.  It  should  be  impossible  for  them  to  move
circularly,  as  they  doe,  if  the  element  of  the  aire  doth
not  move  with  the  same  motion  that  the  first  motor  doth.
For  these  elements  being  of  a  burning  substance,  by
reason  they  should  be  fixt,  without  moving  circularly,  if
the  sphere  where  they  are  did  not  move ;  if  it  be  not
as  we  faine,  that  some  Angell  or  intellectual!  Spirit  doth
walke  with  the  Comet,  guiding  it  circularly.  In  the  yeare
1 577.  appeared  that  wonderfull  Comet  (in  forme  like  unto  The  Comet
a  feather)  from  the  horizon  almost  to  the  middest  of  l$77- seene
heaven,  and  continued  from  the  first  of  November,  untill  etgJ r  -y0p
the  eight  of  December :  I  say  from  the  first  of  November,  tjien  -tn  spaim>.
for  although  in  Spaine  it  was  noated  but  the  ninth  of
November  (according  to  the  testimonie  of  Writers  of
that  time)  yet  at  Peru,  where  I  was  then,  I  remember
well,  we  did  see  it,  and  observe  it  eight  dayes  before,  and
all  the  time  after.  Touching  the  cause  of  this  diversitie,
some  may  delate  upon  it  particularly :  I  will  onely  shew,
that  during  those  fortie  dayes  which  it  continued,  wee
all  observed  (both  such  as  were  in  Spaine,  and  we  that
lived  then  at  the  Indies)  that  it  moved  daily  with  an
universall  motion,  from  East  to  West,  as  the  Moone  and
other  Planets,  whereby  it  appeares  that  the  sphere  of  the
aire,  being  its  Region,  the  element  it  selfe  must  of
necessitie  move  after  the  same  sort.  We  noted  also,  that
besides  this  universall  motion,  it  had  another  particular,
by  which  it  moved  with  the  planets  from  West  to  East,
for  every  night  it  turned  more  Eastward,  like  unto  the
Moone,  Sunne,  and  Planets  of  Venus.  We  did  also
observe  a  third  particular  motion,  whereby  it  moved  from
the  Zodiacke  towards  the  North ;  for  after  some  nights  it
was  found  neerer  unto  the  Septentrionall  signes.  And  it
may  be  this  was  the  reason  why  the  great  Comet  was
sooner  seene  by  those  that  were  Southerly,  as  at  Peru,
and  later  discovered  by  them  of  Europe :  for  by  this  third

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

motion  (as  I  have  said)  it  approached  neerer  the  Northerne
Regions.  Yet  every  one  may  well  observe  the  differences
of  this  motion,  so  as  we  may  well  perceive,  that  many
and  sundry  celestiall  bodies,  give  their  impressions  to  the
sphere  of  the  ayre.  In  like  sort  it  is  most  certaine,  that
the  ayre  moves  with  the  circular  motion  of  the  heaven,
from  East  to  West,  which  is  the  first  ground  before
mentioned.  The  second  is  no  lesse  certaine,  which  is,
that  the  motion  of  the  ayre  in  those  parts  that  are  under
the  Line,  or  neere  unto  it,  is  very  swift  and  light,  the
more  it  approacheth  to  the  Equinoctiall ;  but  the  farther
off  it  is  from  the  Line,  approaching  neere  the  Poles,  the
more  slow  and  heavie  this  motion  is.  The  reason  hereof
is  manifest,  for  that  the  moving  of  the  celestiall  bodies,
being  the  efficient  cause  of  the  moving  of  the  ayre,  it
must  of  necessitie  be  more  quicke  and  light,  where  the
celestiall  bodies  have  their  swiftest  motion.

Alonso  Sanches  was  of  opinion  that  this  motion  of  the

ayre  was  not  a  winde,  but  the  ayre  moved  by  the  Sunne.

This  is  learnedly  spoken,  yet  can  wee  not  deny  it  to  be

a  winde,  seeing  there  are  vapours  and  exhalations  of  the

TheBrize(or  Sea;  and  that  we  sometimes  see  the  Brise,  or  Easterly

motion  of  the wmc[es  stronger,  sometimes  more  weake,  and  placed  in

heavens)  is  a tnat sort' as  sometimes  they  can  hardly  carry  all  their

winde.  sayles. We  must  then  know  (and  it  is  true)  that  the

ayre  moved,  draweth  unto  it  the  vapours  it  findes,  for

that  the  force  is  great,  and  findes  no  resistance,  by  reason

whereof  the  Easterne  and  Westerne  windes  are  continual,

and  in  a  manner  alwayes  alike,  in  those  parts  which  are

neere  the  Line,  and  almost  under  all  the  burning  Zone,

wmcn  is  the  course  the Sun  followes  betwixt  the  two

frhy  without • 1  r  r>  j /~-

the  Zone  in  a  circ^es  °*  dancer  and  Capricorne.

greater  Who  so  would  neerely  looke  into  what  hath  bin  spoken,

altitude,  we  may  likewise  understand,  that  going  from  the  West  to

finde  alwaies  tne  East,  in  altitude  beyond  the  Tropikes,  we  shall  finde

inds^  Westerne  windes,  for  that  the  motion  of  the  Equinoctiall

Chap.' y.  being  so  swift,  it  is  a  cause  that  the  ayre  moveth  under

Eddy  windes.  it  according  to  this  motion,  which  is  from  the  East  to

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad

c.  1588.
West,  drawing  after  it  the  vapours  and  exhalations  that
rise of either side the Equinoctiall or burning Zone,
incountring  the  course  and  motion  of  the  Zone,  are  forced
by the  repercussion to returne  almost to the  contrary,
whence  grow  the  South-west  windes  so  ordinary  in  those
parts. Even  as  we  see  in  the  course  of  waters,  the  which
(if  they  be  incountred  by  others  of  more  force)  returne
in  a  manner  backe  : So  it  seemes  to  be  like  in  vapours
and  exhalations,  whereby  it  growes  that  the  windes  doe
turne  and  separate  themselves  from  one  part  to  another.
These  Westerly  windes  doe  commonly  raine  in  a  meane
altitude,  which  is  from  twenty  and  seven  to  thirty  and
seven degrees, though they be  not so certaine nor so
regular  as  the  Brises  that  are  in  a  lesse  altitude. The
reason  is,  for  that  the  South-west  winds  are  no  causes  of
this  proper  and  equall  motion  of  the  heaven,  as  the  Brises
are,  being  neere  to  the  Line. But  (as  I  have  said)  they
are more ordinary, and often more furious and tem-
pestuous. But passing into a greater altitude, as of Of  the  excep-
fortie  degrees,  there  is  as  small  assurance  of  windes  at  tions  t0 tne
Sea  as  at  Land ;  for  sometimes  the  East  or  North  winde  fires^Rulesj
blowes,  and  sometimes  the  South,  or  West : whereby  it  and  calmes
happeneth  their  navigations  are  more  uncertaine,  and  more  both  at  Land
dangerous.  and  at  Sea.

That  which  we  have spoken  of  windes,  which  blow  cJ?at'  8'
ordinarily  within  and  without  the  Zone,  must  be  under-  J^L °0f  *
stood  of  the  maine  Sea,  and  in  the  great  gulphes ;  for  windes.
at  land  it  is  otherwise,  where  we  finde  all  sorts  of  windes,
by  reason  of  the  inequalitie  which  is  betwixt  the  Moun-
taines  and  the  vallies ;  the  great  number  of  Rivers  and
Lakes,  and  the  divers  scituations  of  Countries,  whence
the  grosse  and  thick  vapours  arise,  which  are  moved  from
the  one  part  or  the  other,  according  to  the  diversitie  of  [III.  v.  926.]
their beginnings, which cause these divers windes the
motion  of  the  ayre,  caused  by  the  heaven,  having  not
power  enough  to  draw  and  move  them  with  it. And
this  varietie  of  windes  is  not  onely  found  at  land,  but
also  upon  the  Sea  coast,  which  is  under  the  burning  Zone,

23

1588.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

for  that  there  be  forraine  or  land  windes  which  come  from
the  land,  and  many  which  blow  from  the  Sea ;  the  which
windes  from  the  Sea,  are  commonly  more  wholesome  and
more  pleasant  then  those  of  the  land,  which  are  contrari-
wise troublesome  and  unwholesome,  although  it  be  the
difference  of  the  coast  that  causeth  this  diversitie :  com-
monly the  land  windes  blow  from  mid-night  to  the  Sunne
Simile  rising,  and  the  Sea  windes  untill  Sunne  setting.  The
reason  perhaps  may  be,  that  the  earth,  as  a  grosse  substance,
fumes  more  when  as  the  Sunne  shines  not  upon  it,  even
as  greene  wood,  or  scarse  dry,  smoakes  most  when  the
flame  is  quenched.  But  the  Sea,  which  is  compounded
of  more  subtile  parts,  engenders  no  fumes,  but  when  it
is  hot,  even  as  straw  or  haie,  being  moist  and  in  small
quantitie,  breedes  smoake  when  it  is  burnt,  and  when
the  flame  failes,  the  fume  suddenly  ceaseth.  Whatsoever
it  be,  it  is  certaine  that  the  Land  winde  blowes  by  night,
and  that  of  the  Sea  by  day.  So  that  even  as  there  are
often  contrary,  violent,  and  tempestuous  windes  upon  the
Sea  coast,  so  doe  we  see  very  great  calmes.  Some  men
of  great  experience  report,  that  having  sailed  many  great
passages  at  Sea  under  the  Line,  yet  did  they  never  see
any  calmes,  but  that  they  alwayes  make  way  little  or
much,  the  ayre  being  moved  by  the  celestiall  motion,
which  is  sufficient  to  guide  a  Shippe,  blowing  in  poope,
as  it  doth.  I  have  already  said,  that  a  Shippe  of  Lima
going  to  Manilla,  sailed  two  thousand  seven  hundred
leagues,  alwayes  under  the  Line,  or  not  above  twelve
degrees  from  it,  and  that  in  the  moneths  of  February  and
March,  when  as  the  Sunne  is  there  for  Zenith,  and  in
all  this  space  they  found  no  calmes,  but  alwayes  a  fresh
gale,  so  as  in  two  moneths  they  performed  this  great
voyage.  But  in  the  burning  Zone  and  without  it,  you
shall  usually  see  great  calmes  upon  the  coasts,  where  the
vapours  come  from  the  Hands,  or  maine  land.  And  there-
fore stormes  and  tempests,  and  the  sudden  motions  of
the  ayre,  are  more  certaine  and  ordinary  upon  the  coasts,
whereas  the  vapours  come  from  the  Land,  then  in  fult

24

Note,

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
Sea,  I  meane  under  the  burning  Zone,  for  without  it  and
at  Sea,  there  are  both  calmes  and  whirlewindes.  Notwith-
standing, sometimes  betwixt  the  two  Tropickes,  yea,  under
the  Line,  you  shall  have  great  raine  and  sudden  showers,
yea  farre  into  the  Sea ;  for  the  working  whereof,  the
vapours  and  exhalations  of  the  Sea,  are  sufficient,  which
moving  sometimes  hastily  in  the  ayre,  cause  thunder  and
whirlewindes,  but  this  is  more  ordinary  neere  to  the  Land
and  upon  the  Land.  When  I  sailed  from  Peru  to  new
Spaine,  I  observed,  that  all  the  time  we  were  upon  the
coast  of  Peru,  our  voyage  was  (as  it  was  ordinary)  very
calme  and  easie,  by  reason  of  the  Southerne  winde  that
blowes,  having  alwayes  a  fore  winde,  returning  from
Spaine  and  new  Spaine.  As  we  passed  the  gulph,  lanching
farther  into  the  Sea,  almost  under  the  Line,  wee  found
the  season  coole,  quiet,  and  pleasant,  with  a  full  winde,
but  comming  neere  to  Nicaragua,  and  to  all  that  coast,
wee  had  contrary  windes,  with  great  store  of  raine  and
fogges.  All  this  Navigation  was  under  the  burning
Zone :  for  from  twelve  degrees  to  the  South,  which  is
Lima,  we  sailed  to  the  seventeenth,  which  is  Gautulco,  a
port  of  new  Spaine :  and  I  beleeve,  that  such  as  have
observed  their  navigations,  made  under  the  burning  Zone,
shall  finde  what  I  have  said,  which  may  suffice  for  the
windes  which  raigne  at  Sea,  under  the  burning  Zone.

It  were  a  very  difficult  matter, to  report  particularly  of  some
the  admirable  effects  which  some  windes  cause  in  divers  marvellous
regions of the world, and to  give a reason thereof.  effects  °J the.
There  are  windes,  which  naturally  trouble  the  water  of . J'  w
the  Sea,  and  makes  it  greene  and  blacke,  others  cleere  as  parti  0ftjie
Christall, some  comfort  and  make  glad, others trouble  Indies.
and breede heaviness. Such as nourish Silke-wormes,  Chap.  9.
have  great  care  to  shut  their  windows,  when  as  the  South-  \.„j^T

0 . . . «  ,  .  ,  .  kil ted  with

west  windes  doe  blow,  and  to  open  them  to  the  contrary : South-west
having  found  by  certaine  experience,  that  their  wormes  windes.
diminish  and  dye  with  the  one,  and  fatten  and  become
better  with  the  other : and  who  so  will  neerely  observe
it,  shall  finde  in  himselfe,  that  the  diversities  of  windes,

25

A.D.

c.  1588.

Exo.  c.  1  o.  y

14.

Job.  17.
Joan.  4.
Osee.  13.
Dan.  3.
2TS*  //&
Linschoten
observeth  in
the  Terceras.

Sea  sicknesse

Agitation  and
Sea  ayre.

[HI.  v.  927.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

cause  notable  impressions  and  changes  in  the  body,  prin-
cipally in  sicke  parts  and  ill  disposed,  when  they  are  most
tender  and  weake.  The  holy  Scripture  calleth  one  a
burning  winde,  another,  a  winde  full  of  dewe  and
sweetnesse.  And  it  is  no  wonder  if  we  see  such  notable
effects  of  the  winde,  in  Plants,  Beasts,  and  Men,  seeing
that  we  see  it  visibly  in  Iron,  which  is  the  hardest  of  all
mettals.  I  have  seene  Grates  of  Iron  in  some  parts  of
the  Indies,  so  rusted  and  consumed,  that  pressing  it
betwixt  your  fingers,  it  dissolved  into  powder,  as  if  it
had  beene  hay  or  parched  straw,  the  which  proceedes
onely  from  the  winde  which  doth  corrupt  it,  having .  no
meanes  to  withstand  it.  But  leaving  apart  many  other
great  and  notable  effects,  I  will  onely  make  mention  of
two.  The  one,  although  it  causeth  pangs  greater  then
death  it  selfe,  yet  doth  it  not  breede  any  further  incon-
venience. The  other  takes  away  life  without  feeling  of
it.  The  sicknesse  of  the  Sea,  wherewith  such  are
troubled  as  first  begin  to  goe  to  Sea,  is  a  matter  very
ordinary ;  and  yet  if  the  nature  thereof  were  unknowne
to  men,  we  should  take  it  for  the  pangs  of  death,  seeing
how  it  afflicts  and  torments  while  it  doth  last,  but  the
casting  of  the  stomacke,  paine  of  the  head,  and  other
troublesome  accidents.  But  in  truth  this  sicknesse  so
common  and  ordinary  happens  unto  men  by  the  change
of  the  ayre  and  Sea.  For  although  it  be  true  that  the
motion  of  the  Ship  helpes  much,  in  that  it  moves  more  or
lesse  :  and  likewise  the  infections  and  ill  favours  of  things
in  the  Ship  :  yet  the  proper  and  naturall  cause,  is  the
ayre  and  the  vapours  of  the  Sea,  the  which  doth  so  weaken
and  trouble  the  body  and  the  stomacke,  which  are  not
accustomed  thereunto,  that  they  are  wonderfully  moved
and  changed  :  for  the  ayre  is  the  Element,  by  which  we
live  and  breath,  drawing  it  into  our  entrailes,  the  which
we  bathe  therewithall.  And  therefore  there  is  nothing
that  so  suddenly,  and  with  so  great  force  doth  alter  us,
as  the  change  of  the  ayre  we  breathe,  as  we  see  in  those
which  dye  of  the  plague. It  is  approved  by  many  experi-

26

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
ences,  that  the  ayre  of  the  Sea,  is  the  chiefe  cause  of  this
strange  indisposition  ;  the  one  is,  that  when  there  blowes
from  the  Sea  a  strong  breath,  we  see  them  at  the  Land  as
it  were  Sea-sicke,  as  I  my  selfe  have  often  found.
Another  is,  the  farther  wee  goe  into  the  Sea,  and  retyre
from  Land,  the  more  wee  are  touched  and  dazeled  with
this  sicknesse.  Another  is,  that  coasting  along  any  Hand,
and  after  lanching  into  the  maine,  we  shall  there  finde
the  ayre  more  strong.  Yet  will  I  not  deny,  but  the
motion  and  agitation  may  cause  this  sicknesse,  seeing
that  we  see  some  are  taken  therewith  passing  Rivers  in
Barkes :  others  in  like  sort  going  in  Coaches  and
Caroaches,  according  to  the  divers  complexions  of  the
Stomacke  :  as  contrariwise,  there  are  some  how  boisterous
and  troublesome  soever  the  Sea  be,  doe  never  feele  it.
Wherefore  it  is  a  matter  certaine,  and  tried,  that  the  ayre
of  the  Sea,  doth  commonly  cause  this  effect  in  such  as
newly  goe  to  Sea.  I  thought  good  to  speake  this,  to
shew  a  strange  effect,  which  happens  in  some  parts  of  the
Indies,  where  the  ayre  and  the  winde  that  raigns  makes
men  dazle,  not  lesse,  but  more  then  at  Sea.  Some  hold
it  for  a  fable,  others  say  it  is  an  addition  :  for  my  part
I  will  speake  what  I  have  tried.

There  is  in  Peru,  a  high  mountaine  which  they  call  Strange
Pariacaca,  and  having  heard  speake  of  the  alteration  it  P*m°n  at
bred,  I  went  as  well  prepared  as  I  could,  according  to  the  the  ayre  there
instructions  which  was  given  me,  by  such  as  they  call
Vaguianos,  or  expert  men  : but  notwithstanding  all  my
provision,  when  I  came  to  mount  the  degrees,  as  they
called  them,  which  is  the  top  of  this  mountaine,  I  was
suddenly  surprized  with  so  mortall  and  so  strange  a  pang,
that  I  was  ready  to  fall  from  the  top  to  the  ground  :  and
although  we  were  many  in  company,  yet  every  one  made
haste  (without  any  tarrying  for  his  companion,)  to  free
himselfe  speedily  from  this  ill  passage. Being  then  alone
with  one  Indian,  whom  I  intreated  to  helpe  to  stay  me,
I  was  surprized  with  such  pangs  of  straining  and  casting,
as  I  thought  to  cast  up  my  heart  too ;  for  having  cast

27

A.D.

c.  1588.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

up  meate,  flegme,  and  coller,  both  yellow  and  greene ;,
in  the  end  I  cast  up  blood,  with  the  straining  of  my
stomacke.  To  conclude,  if  this  had  continued,  I  should
undoubtedly  have  dyed ;  but  this  lasted  not  above  three
or  foure  houres,  that  wee  were  come  into  a  more  con-
venient and  naturall  temperature,  where  all  our  com-
panions (being  fourteene  or  fifteene)  were  much  wearied.
Some  in  the  passage  demanded  confession,  thinking  verily
to  dye :  others  left  the  Ladders  and  went  to  the  ground,
being  overcome  with  casting,  and  going  to  the  stoole :
and  it  was  told  me,  that  some  have  lost  their  lives  there
with  this  accident.  I  beheld  one  that  did  beate  himselfe
against  the  earth,  crying  out  for  the  rage  and  griefe  which
this  passage  of  Pariacaca  had  caused.  But  commonly  it
doth  no  important  harme,  onely  this  paine  and  trouble-
some distaste  while  it  endures :  and  not  onely  the  passage
of  Pariacaca  hath  this  propertie,  but  also  all  this  ridge
of  the  Mountaine,  which  runnes  above  five  hundred
leagues  long,  and  in  what  place  soever  you  passe,  you
shall  finde  strange  intemperatures,  yet  more  in  some  parts
then  in  others,  and  rather  to  those  which  mount  from
the  Sea,  then  from  the  Plaines.  Besides  Pariacaca,  I
have  passed  it  by  Lucanas  and  Soras :  in  another  place,
by  Colleguas,  and  by  Cavanas.  Finally,  by  foure  different
places,  going  and  comming,  and  alwayes  in  this  passage
I  have  felt  this  alteration,  although  in  no  place  so
strongly,  as  at  the  first  in  Pariacaca,  which  hath  beene
tried  by  all  such  as  have  passed  it.  And  no  doubt  but
the  winde  is  the  cause  of  this  intemperature  and  strange
alteration,  or  the  ayre  that  raignes  there.  For  the  best
remedy  (and  all  they  finde)  is  to  stoppe  their  noses,
their  eares,  and  their  mouthes,  as  much  as  may  be,  and
to  cover  themselves  with  cloathes,  especially  the  stomacke,
for  that  the  ayre  is  subtile  and  piercing,  going  into  the
entrailes,  and  not  onely  men  feele  this  alteration,  but
also  beasts  that  sometimes  stay  there,  so  as  there  is  no
Height  of  spurre  can  make  them  goe  forward.  For  my  part  I  hold
Pariacaca.  this  place  to  be  one  of  the  highest  parts  of  land  in  the

28

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.

world, for  we  mount  a  wonderfull  space. And  in my

opinion,  the  Mountaine  Nevade  of  Spaine,  the  Pirenees,

and  the  Alpes  of  Italie,  are  as  ordinary  houses,  in  regard

of  hie  Towers. I  therefore  perswade  my  selfe,  that  the

element  of  the  ayre  is  there  so  subtile  and  delicate,  as  Aire  too  subtile

it  is  not  proportionable  with  the  breathing  of  man,  which  f?r..mensc

r r  ,  j t  1 i  bodies, bo  we

requires  a  more  grosse  and  temperate  ayre,  and  1  beleeve  see  jjorses  t0

it  is  the  cause  that  doth  so  much  alter  the  stomacke,  and  beate  the  water
trouble  all  the  disposition. The  passages  of  the  moun-  with  their
taines  Nevade,  and  other  of  Europe,  which  I  have  seene,  f?ete  t0  ma
although  the  ayre  be  cold  there,  and  doth  force  men  to  ^J/XST
weare  more  cloathes,  yet  this  colde  doth  not  take  away  more  agreeable
the  appetite  from  meate,  but  contrariwise  it  provokes ;  to  their  bodies.
neither  doth  it  cause  any  casting  of  the  stomacke,  but
onely  some  paine  in  the  feete  and  hands. Finally,  their
operation  is  outward. But  that  of  the  Indies,  whereof
I speake  (without  molesting  of  foote  or  hand, or  any
outward  part)  troubles  all  the  entrailes  within  : and  that
which  is  more  admirable,  when  the  Sunne  is  hot,  which
maketh  me  imagine,  that  the  griefe  wee  feele  comes  from
the qualitie of the ayre which wee breathe : There-
fore that is most subtile and delicate, whose cold is
not  so sensible, as  piercing. All this  ridge  of  moun-  [III.  v.  928.]
taines  is,  for  the  most  part,  desart,  without  any  Villages
or habitations for men, so as you shall scarce finde
any small Cottages to lodge such as doe passe by
night : there are no Beasts, good or bad, but some
Vicunos,  which  are  their  Countrie  Muttons,  and  have  a  Vicmos.
strange  and  wonderfull  property,  as  I  shall  shew  in  his
place. The  Grasse  is  often  burnt,  and  all  blacke  with
the  ayre,  and  this  Desart  runs  five  and  twenty  or  thirty  Great  Desart.
leagues overthwart, and in length above five hundred
leagues.

There  are  other  Desarts  or  places  inhabited,  which  at
Peru  they  call  Punas  (speaking  of  the  second  point  we  Punas  ayre
promised)  where  the  qualitie  of  the  ayre  cutteth  off  mans  killing.
life  without  feeling. In  former  time  the  Spaniards  went
from  Peru,  to  the  Realme  of  Chille  by  this  Mountaine,

29

A.D.

c.  1588.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

but  at  this  day  they  doe  passe  commonly  by  Sea,  and
sometimes  alongst  the  side  of  it.  And  though  that  way
be  laborious  and  troublesome,  yet  is  there  not  so  great
danger  as  by  the  Mountaine,  where  there  are  Plaines,  on
the  which  many  men  have  perished  and  dyed,  and  some-
times have  scaped  by  great  hap,  whereof  some  have
remained  lame.  There  runs  a  small  breath,  which  is
not  very  strong  nor  violent,  but  proceeds  in  such  sort,
that  men  fall  downe  dead,  in  a  manner  without  feeling,
or  at  the  least,  they  loose  their  feete  and  hands :  the
Strange  Story,  which  may  seeme  fabulous,  yet  is  it  most  true.  I  have
knowne  and  frequented  long  the  Generall  Jerome  Costilla,
the  auncient  peopler  of  Cusco,  who  had  lost  three  or
foure  toes,  which  fell  off  in  passing  the  Desart  of  Chille,
being  perished  with  this  ayre,  and  when  he  came  to
looke  on  them,  they  were  dead,  and  fell  off  without
any  paine,  even  as  a  rotten  Apple  falleth  from  the  tree.
This  Captaine  reported,  that  of  a  good  armie  which  he
had  conducted  by  that  place,  in  the  former  yeares,  since
the  discovery  of  this  Kingdome  by  Almagro,  a  great
part  of  the  men  remained  dead  there,  whose  bodies  he
found  lying  in  the  Desart,  without  any  stinke  or  corrup-
tion ;  adding  thereunto  one  thing  very  strange,  that  they
found  a  yong  Boye  alive,  and  being  examined  how  hee
had  lived  in  that  place,  hee  said,  that  he  lay  hidden  in  a
little  Cave,  whence  hee  came  to  cut  the  flesh  of  a  dead
Horse  with  a  little  Knife,  and  thus  had  he  nourished
himselfe  a  long  time,  with  I  know  not  how  many  com-
panions that  lived  in  that  sort,  but  now  they  were  all
dead,  one  dying  this  day,  &  another  to  morrow,  saying
that  he  desired  nothing  more  then  to  dye  there  with  the
rest,  seeing  that  hee  found  not  in  himselfe  any  disposition
to  goe  to  any  other  place,  nor  to  take  any  taste  in  any
thing.  I  have  understood  the  like  of  others,  and  par-
ticularly of  one  that  was  of  our  company,  who  being
then  a  secular  man,  had  passed  by  these  Desarts :  and  it
is  a  strange  thing,  the  quality  of  this  cold  ayre,  which
kils,  and  also  preserves  the  dead  bodies  without  corruption.

3°

Tke  same  con
firmed  by  a
Jesuites
report,  and  a
Dominicans.

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.
I  have  also  understood  it  of  a  reverend  religious  man,
of  the  Order  of  Saint  Dominike,  and  Prelate  thereof,
who  had  seene  it  passing  by  the  Desarts :  and  which  is
strange,  he  reported,  that  travelling  that  way  by  night,
was  forced  to  defend  himselfe  against  that  deadly  winde
which  blowes  there  (having  no  other  meanes)  but  to
gather  together  a  great  number  of  those  dead  bodies
that  lay  there,  and  made  thereof,  as  it  were,  a  rampire
and  a  bolster  for  his  head :  in  this  manner  did  hee  sleepe,
the  dead  bodies  giving  him  life.  Without  doubt  this  Such  effects  of
is  a  kinde  of  colde  so  piercing, that  it  quencheth the  c°M«>ehave

• •  t  « QuSBWBd  ttl

vitall  heate,  cutting  off  his  influence  ;  and  being  so  exceed-  Rmsta  m(i

ing  colde,  yet  doth  not  corrupt  nor  give  any  putrifaction  other

to  the  dead  bodies, for  that  putrifaction  groweth  from  Northern

heate  and  moistnesse. As  for  the  other  kinde  of  ayre  ^frtf.i  ^

which  thunders  under  the  earth,  and  causeth  earthquakes,  j^n-wet  wm

more  at  the  Indies, then  in  any  other  Regions, I  will  tell  us  at  the

speake  thereof  in  treating  the  qualities  of  the  Land  at  Maggekn

the  Indies. We  will  content  our  selves  now  with  what  Stratis-
we  have  spoken  of  the  winde  and  ayre,  and  passe  to  that
which  is  to  be  spoken  of  the  water.

§.n.

Of  the  Ocean  that  invirons  the  Indies,  and  of  the
North  and  South  Seas,  their  ebbing,  flowing,
Fishes,  fishing,  Lakes,  Rivers,  and  Springs.

Mong  all  waters  the  Ocean is the  principall, by
which  the  Indies  have  beene  discovered,  and  are
invironed  therewith ;  for  either  they  be  Hands  of
the  Ocean  Sea,  or  maine  Land, the  which  wheresoever
it  ends,  is  bounded  with  this  Ocean. To  this  day  they  NoMediter-
have not discovered at the Indies any Mediterranean ranean  Sea  of
Sea, as in Europe, Asia, and Affrica, into the which  g7.eat  "ote  in
there  enters some arme of this  great Sea, and makes
distinct  Seas,  taking  their  names  from  the  Provinces  they
wash : and  almost  all  the  Mediterranean  Seas  continue

31

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

and  joyne  together,  and  with  the  Ocean  it  selfe,  by  the
straight  of  Gibraltar,  which  the  Ancients  called,  the
Pillers  of  Hercules,  although  the  Red  Sea  being  separated
from  the  Mediterranean  Seas,  enters  alone  into  the
Indian  Ocean ;  and  the  Caspian  Sea  joynes  not  with  any
other :  so  that  at  the  Indies  we  finde  not  any  other  Sea
then  this  Ocean,  which  they  divide  into  two,  the  one
they  call  the  North  Sea,  and  the  other  the  South ;  for
that  the  Indies  which  were  first  discovered  by  the  Ocean,
and  reacheth  unto  Spaine,  lies  all  to  the  North,  and  by
that  Land  thereafter  discovered  a  Sea  on  the  other  side,
the  which  they  called  the  South  Sea,  for  that  they  decline
untill  they  have  passed  the  Line :  and  having  lost  the
[III.  v.  929.]  North,  or  Pole-articke,  they  called  it  South.  For  this
cause  they  have  called  all  that  Ocean  the  South  Sea,  which
lyeth  on  the  other  side  of  the  East  Indies,  although  a
great  part  of  it  be  seated  to  the  North,  as  all  the  coast  of
new  Spaine,  Nuaragna,  Guatimala  and  Panama.  They
say,  that  he  that  first  discovered  this  Sea,  was  called
Blascowunes  of  Bilbo,  the  which  he  did  by  that  part
Terra  firme.  which  we  now  call  Maine  Land,  where  it  growes  narrow,
and  the  two  Seas  approach  so  neere  the  one  to  the  other,

_____ _  that  there  is  but  seven  leagues  of  distance :  for  although

Straight  of they  make  the  way  eighteene  from  Nombre  de  Dios  to

land  but  eight  panamaj  ye_  _s  ft  wftn  turning  to  seeke  the  commoditie

Norths* °f  tne  way>  but  drawing  a  direct  line,  the  one  Sea  shall

South  Seas. not  be  found  more  distant  from  the  other. Some  have

discoursed  and  propounded  to  cut  through  this  passage

of  seven  leagues,  and  to  joyne  one  Sea  to  the  other,  to

make  the  passage  from  Peru  more  commodious  and  easie,

for  that  these  eighteene  leagues  of  Land  betwixt  Nombre

de  Dios  and  Panama,  is  more  painefull  and  chargeable

then  2300.  by  Sea,  whereupon  some  would  say,  it  were

a  meanes  to  drowne  the  Land,  one  Sea  being  lower  then

Herodotus. another. As  in  times  past  we  finde  it  written,  that  for

the  same  consideration,  they  gave  over  the  enterprize  to

winne  the  red  Sea  into  Nile,  in  the  time  of  King  Sesostris,

Jovius.  and  since,  in  the  Empire  of  the  Othomans. But  for  my

32

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.

part,  I  hold  such  discourses  and  propositions  for  vaine,
although  this  inconvenience  should  not  happen,  the  which
I  will  not  hold  for  assured.  I  beleeve  there  is  no  humaine
power  able  to  beate  and  breake  downe  those  strong  and
impenetrable  Mountaines,  which  God  hath  placed  betwixt
the  two  Seas,  and  hath  made  them  most  hard  Rockes,  to
withstand  the  furie  of  two  Seas.  And  although  it  were
possible  to  men,  yet  in  my  opinion  they  should  feare
punishment  from  heaven,  in  seeking  to  correct  the  workes,
which  the  Creator  by  his  great  providence  hath  ordained
and  disposed  in  the  framing  of  this  universall  world.

Leaving this discourse of opening the Land, and
joyning  both Seas together, there  is yet another  lesse
rash, but very difficult and dangerous to search out.
Whether  these  two  great  gulfes  doe  joyne  in  any  other
part  of  the  world,  which  was  the  enterprize  of  Fernando
Magellan  a  Portugall  Gentleman, whose  great courage
and  constancie  in  the  research  of  this  subject,  and  happy
successe  in  the  finding  thereof,  gave  the  name  of  eternall
memory  to  this  straight,  which  justly  they  call  by  the
name  of  the  discoverer  Magellan,  of  which  straight  we
will  intreate  a  little,  as  of  one  of  the  greatest  wonders
of  the  world. Some  have  beleeved,  that  this  Straight
which  Magellan  had  discovered  in  the  South  Sea,  was
none,  or  that  it  was  straightned,  as  Don  Alonso  d'Arsile
writes  in  his  Auracane : and  at  this  day  there  are  some
that  say,  there  is  no  such  Straight,  but  that  they  are  Hands  Experience  in
betwixt  the  Sea  and  Land,  for  that  the  maine  Land  ends  ®Z."  and
there,  at  the  end  whereof  are  all  Hands,  beyond  the  which  have  JgaJf
the  one  Sea  joynes  fully  with  the  other,  or  to  speake  better,  them  no
it  is  all  one  Sea. But  in  truth  it  is  most  certaine,  there  straights  but
is  a  straight  and  a  long  and  stretched  out  Land  on  either  broken  Hands
side,  although  it  hath  not  yet  beene  knowne  how  farre  t0 f '
it  stretcheth  of  the  one  side  of  the  straight  towards  the  Author  here.
South. After Magellan, a Shippe of the Bishop of
Plaisance passed the straight, Don Guitieres Carvajal
(whose  Maste  they  say  is  yet  at  Lima,  at  the  entrie  of
the Pallace) they went afterwards coasting along the
xv  33  c

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

South,  to  discover  the  Straight,  by  the  commandement

of  Don  Garcia  of  Mendoca, then Governor  of  Chille,

according  to  that  which  Captaine  Ladrillero  found  it  and

passed  it. I  have  read  the  discourse  and  report  he  made,

where  he  saieth,  that  he  did  not  hazard  himselfe  to  land

in  the  Straight,  but  having  discovered  the  North  Sea,  he

returned  backe,  for  the  roughnesse  of  the  time,  winter

being  now  come,  which  caused  the  waves  comming  from

the  North,  to  grow  great  and  swelling,  and  the  Sea  con-

See  of  this  Sir  tinually  foming  with  rage. In  our  time,  Francis  Drake

Francis  an  Englishman,  passed  this  Straight. After  him,  Captaine

Voyage  to  1 Sarmiento  passed  it  on  the  South  side. And  lastly,  in

/.  2.  the yeere 1587. other Englishmen passed it, by the

I  have  omitted  instruction  of  Drake,  which  at  this  time  run  along  all
Sarmientoes the  coast  Qf  peru_

voiage. c  Even  as  Magellan  found  out  this  Straight  upon  the

South, so some have pretended to discover another

The  supposed Straight,  which  they  say  is  in  the  North,  and  suppose  it

Straight  in to  ^e -m  Florida,  whose  coast  runnes  in such  sort, as

they know no end thereof. Peter Melendez the

Adelantade,  a  man  very  expert  at  Sea,  affirmeth  for  cer-

taine, that  there  is  a  Straight,  and  that  the  King  had

Of  th bb' commanded  him  to  discover  it,  where  in  he  shewed  a

and  flowing  of  great  desire : he  prepounded  his  reasons to  prove  his

the  Indian opinion, saying, that  they  have  seene  some  remainders

Ocean.  0f  Ships  in  the  North  Sea,  like  unto  those  the  which

Z,,^}.f' the  Chinois  use,  which  had  beene  impossible, if  there

The  Philoso-  V  „  r,  1 K

phersin search-  were  no  passage  from  one  bea  unto  another. Moreover,

ing  the  cause hee  reported,  that  in  a  certaine  great  Bay  in  Florida  (the

of  ebbing  and which  runs  300.  leagues  within  the  Land)  they  see  Whales

flowing  have jn some seas0n of the yeare, which come from the
easily  erred, ,-. 0  J ■

following  the °ther  Sea;

Greekes  and One  of  the  most  admirable  secrets  of  Nature  is  the

Latines  which  ebbing  and  flowing  of  the  Sea,  not  onely  for  this  strange

knew  not  the property  of  rising  and  falling,  but  much  more  for  the

C£u'  f!z difference  there  is  thereof  in  divers  Seas,  yea  in  divers

could  not  the t-  .  _  > '

fore  know  the coasts  of  one  and  the  same  Sea. 1  here  are  some  Seas

cause.  that  have  no  daily  flowing  nor  ebbing,  as  we  see  in  the

34

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
inner  Mediterranean,  which  is  the  Thyrene  Sea,  and  yet
it  flowes  and  ebbes  every  day  in  the  upper  Mediterranean
Sea,  which  is  that  of  Venice,  and  justly  giveth  cause  of
admiration,  that  these  two  Seas  being  Mediterranean,  and
that  of  Venice  being  no  greater  then  the  other,  yet  hath  it
his  ebbing  and  flowing  as  the  Ocean,  and  that  other  Sea  of
Italie  none  at  all.  There  are  some  Mediterranean  Seas,
that  apparantly  rise  and  fall  every  moneth  ;  and  others  [III.  v.  930.]
that  neither  rise  in  the  day,  nor  in  the  moneth.  There
are  other  Seas,  as  the  Spanish  Ocean,  that  have  their  flux
and  reflux  every  day ;  and  besides  that,  they  have  it
monethly,  which  commeth  twice,  that  is  to  say,  at  the
change,  and  at  the  full  of  every  Moone,  which  they  call
Spring-tides.  To  say  that  any  Sea  hath  this  daily  ebbing
and  flowing,  and  not  monethly,  I  know  not  any.  It  is
strange,  the  difference  we  finde  of  this  subject  at  the
Indies,  for  there  are  some  places  whereas  the  Sea  doth
daily  rise  and  fall  two  leagues,  as  at  Panama,  and  at  a
high  water  it  riseth  much  more.  There  are  other  places
where  it  doth  rise  and  fall  so  little,  that  hardly  can  you
finde  the  difference.  It  is  ordinary  in  the  Ocean  Sea  to
have  a  daily  flowing  and  ebbing,  and  that  was  twice  in  a
naturall  day,  and  ever  it  fals  three  quarters  of  an  houre
sooner  one  day  then  another,  according  to  the  course  of
the  Moone :  so  as  the  tide  fals  not  alwaies  in  one  houre
of  the  day.  Some  would  say,  that  this  flux  and  reflux  pro-
ceeded from  the  locall  motion  of  the  water  of  the  Sea  ;  so  as
the  water  that  riseth  on  the  one  side,  fals  on  the  other  that
is  opposite  unto  it :  so  that  it  is  full  Sea  on  the  one  side
when  it  is  a  low  water  on  the  opposite,  as  we  see  in  a
Kettle  full  of  water,  when  we  moove  it,  when  it  leanes
to  the  one  side  the  water  increaseth,  and  on  the  other  it
diminisheth.  Others  affirme,  that  the  Sea  riseth  in  all
parts  at  one  time,  and  decreaseth  at  one  instant :  as  the
boyling  of  a  Pot,  comming  out  of  the  centre  it  extendeth
it  selfe  on  all  parts,  and  when  it  ceaseth,  it  fals  likewise
on  all  parts.

This  second  opinion  is  true, and  in my  judgement,

35

A.D.

c.  1588.

*Hernando
Alonso  which
with

Sarmiento  had
gone  to  the
Straights  to
seeke  Captaine
Drake.

At  the  Dowries
on  our  coast
two  tides  meet
one  from  the
Westerne  Sea
or  s/ewe,  the
other  from  the
North,  which
there  cause
much  varietie.

Of  sundry
Fishes,  and
their  manner
of  fishing  at
the  Indies.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

certaine  and  tried,  not  so  much  for  the  reasons  which
the  Philosophers  give  in  their  Meteors,  as  for  the  certaine
experience  wee  may  make.  For  to  satisfie  my  selfe
upon  this  point  and  question,  I  demanded  particularly  of
the  said  *  Pilot,  how  he  found  the  tides  in  the  straight,
and  if  the  tides  of  the  South  Sea  did  fall  when  as  those
of  the  North  did  rise.  And  contrariwise  (this  question
being  true)  why  the  increase  of  the  Sea  in  one  place,  is
the  decrease  thereof  in  another,  as  the  first  opinion
holdeth.  He  answered  that  it  was  not  so,  but  they  might
see  plainely,  that  the  tides  of  the  North  and  South  Seas
rise  at  one  instant,  so  as  the  waves  of  one  Sea  incountred
with  the  other,  and  at  one  instant  likewise  they  began  to
retire,  every  one  into  his  Sea,  saying,  that  the  rising  and
falling  was  daily  seene,  and  that  the  incounter  of  the  tides
(as  I  have  said)  was  at  threescore  and  tenne  leagues  to
the  North  Sea,  and  thirtie  to  the  South.  Whereby  we
may  plainely  gather,  that  the  ebbing  and  flowing  of  the
Ocean  is  no  pure  locall  motion,  but  rather  an  alteration :
whereby  all  waters  really  rise  and  increase  at  one  instant,
and  in  others,  they  diminish,  as  the  boyling  of  a  Pot,
whereof  I  have  spoken.  It  were  impossible  to  compre-
hend this  point  by  experience,  if  it  were  not  in  the
Straight,  where  all  the  Ocean,  both  on  th'  one  side,  and
on  th'  other  joynes  together :  for  none  but  Angels  can
see  it,  and  judge  of  the  opposite  parts  :  for  that  man  hath
not  so  long  a  sight,  nor  so  nimble  and  swift  footing  as
were  needefull,  to  transport  his  eyes  from  one  part  to
another,  in  so  short  a  time,  as  a  tide  will  give  him  respite,
which  are  onely  six  houres.

There  are  in  the  Indian  Ocean,  an  infinite  number  of
fishes,  the  kindes  and  properties  whereof  the  Creator  onely
can  declare.  There  are  many  such  as  we  have  in  the  Sea
of  Europe,  as  Shads,  and  Aloses  which  come  from  the
Sea  into  the  Rivers ;  Dorads,  Pilchards,  and  many  other.
There  are  others,  the  like  I  doe  not  thinke  to  have  seene
in  these  parts,  as  those  which  they  doe  call  Cabrillas,
which  doe  somewhat  resemble  the  Trowt,  and  in  new

36

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
Spaine  they  call  them  Bobos,  they  mount  from  the  Sea
into  the  Rivers. I  have  not  seene  any  Besugues  there,
nor Trowts, although some say there are in Chille.
There  are  Tonins  in  some  parts  upon  the  coast  of  Peru,
but  they  are  rare, and  some  are  of  opinion, that  at  a
certaine  time  they  doe  cast  their  spawne  in  the  Straight
of  Magellan,  as  they  doe  in  Spaine  at  the  Straight  of
Gibraltar,  and  for  this  reason  they  finde  more  upon  the
coast  of  Chille,  although  those  I  have  seene  there,  are
not  like  to  them  in  Spaine. At  the  Hands  (which  they
call  Barlovente)  which  are  Cuba,  Saint  Dominicke,  Port
rique, and  Jamaique, they  finde  a  fish  which they  call
Manati,  a  strange  kinde  of  fish,  if  we  may  call  it  fish,  a  TheManatia
creature  which  ingenders  her  yong  ones  alive,  and  hath  %?"*%$,'
teates, and  doth nourish them  with milke, feeding of  alsg  b-
grasse  in  the  fields,  but  in  effect  it  lives  continually  in  forth  their
the  water,  and  therefore  they  eate  it  as  fish ;  yet  when  yong  alive,
I  did  eate  of  it  at  Saint  Dominique  on  a  friday,  I  had  and  nourish
some  scruple,  not  for  that  which  is  spoken,  but  for  that  ^-"brests
in  colour  and  taste  it  was  like  unto  morsels  of  Veale,  so  ^e-ing  -in  t£at
is  it  greene,  and  like  unto  a  Cowe  on  the  hinder  parts,  huge  creature
I  did  wonder  at  the  incredible  ravening  of  the  Tiburons,  scfrce  twlce  so
or  sharkes,  when  as  I  did  see  drawne  from  one  (that  was Jg  as  l  ef
taken  in  the  Port)  out  of  his  gullet,  a  Butchers  great  woman  mi
Knife,  a  great  Iron  hooke,  and  a  piece  of  a  Cowes  head  farre  lesse  then
with  one  whole  home,  neither  doe  I  know  if  both  were  those  of  many
there,  or  no. I  did  see  in  a  creeke  made  with  that  Sea,  women;  Tketr

r ,  r  1  1  ,1 foode  is  also

a  quarter  or  a  horse  for  pleasure  hanging  upon  a  stake,  Sea  zaeejes
whither  presently came  a  company of these  Tiburons,  Sharking
at the smell thereof : and for  the more pleasure, this  sharkes.
Horse-flesh  was  hung  in  the  ayre,  I  know  not  how  many
hand  breadth  from  the  water ;  this  company  of  fish  flocke
about  it,  leaping  up,  and  with  a  strange  nimblenesse  cut
oif  both  flesh  and  bone  off  the  Horse  legge,  as  if  it  had
beene  the  stalke  of  a  lettuce ;  their  teeth  being  as  sharpe
as a  rasour. There are certaine small fishes they call
Rambos, which cleave to these Tiburons, neither can
they  drive  them  away,  and  they  are  fed  with  that  which

37

A.D.

c.  1588.
[III.  v.  931.]

They  have
rough  heads
whereby  they
cleave  and
sticke  fast  to
the  Sharke,
which  thus  are
forced  to  carry
them  with
their  swift
motion,  of
whose  offall
also  they  live.

Crocodiles.

*  Yet  so  as  ever
and  anon  hee
dips  it  in  the
water  his
tongue  being  so
short,  that
otherwise  he
could  not
swallow  it.

Tigre  kils  a
Crocodile.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

falles  from  the  Tiburons.  There  are  other  small  fishes,
which  they  call  flying  fishes,  the  which  are  found  within
the  tropickes,  and  in  no  other  place,  as  I  thinke :  they
are  pursued  by  the  Ducades  ;  and  to  escape  them  they  leape
out  of  the  Sea,  and  goe  a  good  way  in  the  ayre,  and  for
this  reason  they  are  called  flying  Fishes :  they  have  wings
as  it  were  of  linnen  cloath,  or  of  parchment,  which  doe
support  them  some  space  in  the  ayre.  There  did  one
flye  or  leape  into  the  Ship  wherein  I  went,  the  which  I
did  see,  and  observe  the  fashion  of  his  wings.

In  the  Indian  Histories  there  is  often  mention  made
of  Lezards  or  Caymans  (as  they  call  them)  and  they  are
the  very  same  which  Plinie  and  the  Auncients  call
Crocodiles,  they  finde  them  on  the  Sea  side,  and  in  hot
Rivers,  for  in  cold  Rivers  there  are  none  to  be  found.
And  therefore  they  finde  none  upon  all  the  coasts  of
Peru  unto  Payra,  but  forward  they  are  commonly  seene
in  the  Rivers.  It  is  a  most  fierce  and  cruell  beast,
although  it  be  slow  and  heavie.  Hee  goes  hunting  and
seekes  his  prey  on  the  Land,  and  what  he  takes  alive,
he  drownes  it  in  the  water,  yet  doth  he  not  eate  it,  but
out  of  the  water,  *for  that  his  throate  is  of  such  a  fashion,
as  if  there  entred  any  water,  he  should  easily  be  drowned.
It  is  a  wonderfull  thing  to  see  a  combat  betwixt  a  Caymant
and  a  Tigre,  whereof  there  are  most  cruell  at  the  Indies.
A  religious  man  of  our  company  told  me  that  he  had
seene  these  beasts  fight  most  cruelly  one  against  the
other ;  upon  the  Sea  shoare  the  Caymant  with  his  taile
gave  great  blowes  unto  the  Tygre,  striving  with  his  great
force  to  carry  him  into  the  water:  and  the  Tigre
with  his  pawes  resisted  the  Caymant,  drawing  him
to  Land.  In  the  end  the  Tigre  vanquished,  and  opened
the  Lezard,  it  seemes  by  the  belly,  the  which  is  most
tender  and  penetrable,  for  in  every  other  part  he  is
so  hard,  that  no  Lance,  and  scarce  a  harquebuze
can  pierce  it.  The  victory  which  an  Indian  had  of  a
Caymant  was  yet  more  rare :  the  Caymant  had  carried
away his yong childe, and sodainely plunged into

38

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
the Sea, the Indian moved  with choller, cast himselfe
after  him, with a knife in his hand, and as they are
excellent swimmers and divers, and the Caymant
swimmeth  alwayes  on  the  toppe  of  the  water,  hee  hurt
him  in  the  belly, and  in  such  sort, that the  Caymant  Indians
feeling  himselfe  wounded, went to the  shoare, leaving  exploit  on  a
the  little  infant  dead.  Crocodile.

But  the  combat  which  the  Indians  have  with  Whales
is  yet  more  admirable,  wherein  appeares  the  power  and
greatnesse  of  the  Creator,  to  give  so  base  a  Nation  (as
be  the  Indians)  the  industrie  and  courage  to  incounter  the
most  fierce  and  deformed  beast  in  the  world,  and  not
onely  to  fight  with  him,  but  also  to  vanquish  him,  and
not  to  triumph  over  him.  Considering  this,  I  have  often
remembred  that  place  of  the  Psalmes,  speaking  of  the
Whale,  Draco  iste  quern  formasti  ad  illudendum  eum :
What  greater  mockerie  can  there  be,  then  to  see  an  Indian  Whale  killed
leade  a  Whale  as  bigge  as  a  Mountaine,  vanquished  with  h  the
a  cord :  The  manner  the  Indians  of  Florida  use  (as  some  bavaSes-
expert  men  have  told  me)  to  take  these  Whales  (whereof
there  is  great  store)  is,  they  put  themselves  into  a  Canoe,
which  is  like  a  barke  of  a  tree,  and  in  swimming  approach
neere  the  Whales  side,  then  with  great  dexteritie  they
leape  to  his  necke,  and  there  they  ride  as  on  horse-back
expecting  his  time,  then  he  thrusts  a  sharpe  and  strong
stake  (which  he  carries  with  him)  into  the  Whales  nostrill,
for  so  they  call  the  hole  or  vent  by  which  they  breathe,
presently  he  beates  it  in  with  another  stake  as  forcibly  as
he  can ;  in  the  meane  space  the  Whale  doth  furiously
beate  the  Sea,  and  raiseth  Mountaines  of  water,  running
into  the  deepe  with  great  violence,  and  presently  riseth
againe,  not  knowing  what  to  doe  for  paine :  the  Indian
still  sits  firme,  and  to  give  him  full  paiment  for  this
trouble,  he  beates  another  stake  into  the  other  vent  or
nosthrill,  so  as  he  stoppeth  him  quite,  and  takes  away  his
breathing,  then  he  betakes  him  to  his  Canoe,  which  he
holds  tied  with  a  cord  to  the  Whales  side,  and  goes  to
Land,  having  first  tied  his  cord  to  the  Whale,  the  which

39

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

he  lets  run  with  the  Whale,  who  leapes  from  place  to
place,  whilest  he  finds  water  enough :  being  troubled  with
paine,  in  the  end  he  comes  neere  the  Land,  and  remaines
on  ground  by  the  hugenesse  of  his  body,  unable  any
more  to  move ;  then  a  great  number  of  Indians  come
unto  the  Conquerour,  to  gather  his  spoiles,  they  kill  him,
and  cut  his  flesh  in  peeces,  the  which  is  bad  enough :
this  doe  they  dry  and  beate  into  powder,  using  it  for
meate,  it  doth  last  them  long :  wherein  is  fulfilled,  that
which  is  spoken  in  another  Psalme  of  the  Whale,  Dedisti
eum  escam  populis  iEthiopum.  Peter  Mendez  the
Adelantade  did  often  speake  of  this  kinde  of  fishing.
Whereof  Monardes  makes  mention  in  his  Booke.

There  is  another  fishing  which  the  Indians  doe  com-
monly use  in  the  Sea,  the  which,  although  it  be  lesse,
yet  is  it  worthy  the  report.  They  make  as  it  were
faggots  of  bul-rushes  or  dry  sedges  well  bound  together,
which  they  call  Balsas :  having  carried  them  upon  their
shoulders  to  the  Sea,  they  cast  them  in,  and  presently
leape  upon  them :  being  so  set,  they  lanch  out  into  the
deepe,  rowing  up  and  downe  with  small  reedes  of  either
side  :  they  goe  a  league  or  two  into  the  Sea  to  fish,  carrying
with  them  their  cords  and  nets  upon  these  faggots,  and
beare  themselves  thereon.  They  cast  out  their  nets,  and
doe  there  remaine  fishing  the  greatest  part  of  the  day  and
night,  untill  they  have  filled  up  their  measure,  with  the
which  they  returne  well  satisfied.  Truely  it  was  delight-
full  to  see  them  fish  at  Callao  of  Lima,  for  that  they  were
many  in  number,  and  every  one  set  on  horse-backe,
cutting  the  waves  of  the  Sea,  which  in  their  place
of  fishing  are  great  and  furious,  resembling  the  Tritons
or  Neptunes,  which  they  paint  upon  the  water,  and
being  come  to  Land,  they  draw  their  barke  out  of  the
[III.  v.  932.]  water  upon  their  backes,  the  which  they  presently  undoe,
and  lay  abroad  on  the  shoare  to  drie.  There  were  other
Indians  of  the  Vallies  of  Yea,  which  were  accustomed
to  goe  to  fish  in  leather,  or  skins  of  Sea-wolves,  blowne
up  with  winde,  and  from  time  to  time  they  did  blow  them

40

JOSEPH ACOSTA

A.D.

I588.

like  bals  of  winde,  lest  they  should  sinke.  In  the  vale
of  Canete,  which  in  old  time  they  called  Guaroo,  there
were  a  great  number  of  Indian  fishers ;  but  because  they
resisted  the  Ingue,  when  he  came  to  conquer  that  Land,
hee  made  shew  of  peace  with  them,  and  therefore  to
feast  him,  they  appointed  a  solemne  fishing  of  many
thousand  Indians,  which  went  to  Sea  in  their  vessels  of
reeds :  at  whose  returne,  the  Ingua  (who  had  laid  many
Souldiers  in  ambush)  made  a  cruell  butcherie  of  them,
so  as  afterward  this  Land  remained  unpeopled,  although
it  be  aboundant  and  fertile.  I  did  see  another  manner
of  fishing,  whereunto  Don  Francis  of  Toledo  the  Viceroy
did  leade  me,  yet  was  it  not  in  the  Sea,  but  in  a  River
which  they  call  great  in  the  Province  of  Charcas,  where
the  Indians  Chiraquanas  plunged  into  the  water,  and
swimming  with  an  admirable  swiftnesse,  followed  the  fish,
where  with  darts  and  hookes  (which  they  use  to  carry  in
their  right  hand,  onely  swimming  with  the  left)  they
wound  the  fish,  and  so  hurt  they  brought  them  forth,
seeming  in  this  more  like  unto  fishes  then  men  of  the
Land.  But  now  that  we  have  left  the  Sea,  let  us  come  to
other  kinde  of  waters  that  remaine  to  be  spoken  of.

In  place  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  which  is  in  the  old
world,  the  Creator  hath  furnished  this  new  with  many
Lakes,  whereof  there  are  some  so  great,  as  they  may  be
properly  called  Seas,  seeing  the  Scripture  calleth  that  of
Palestina  so,  which  is  not  so  great  as  some  of  these.  The
most  famous  is  that  of  Titicaca,  which  is  at  Peru,  in  the
Province  of  Callao,  the  which  as  I  have  said  in  the  former
booke,  containes  neere  fourescore  leagues  in  compasse,
into  the  which  there  runs  ten  or  twelve  great  Rivers.  A
while  since,  they  began  to  saile  in  it  with  Barkes  and
Ships,  wherein  they  proceeded  so  ill,  that  the  first  Ship
was  split  with  a  tempest  that  did  rise  in  the  Lake.  The
water  is  not  altogether  sower  nor  salt,  as  that  of  the  Sea,
but  it  is  so  thicke,  as  it  cannot  be  drunke.  There  are  Thicke  water,
two  kindes  of  fishes  breede  in  this  Lake  in  great  abund-
ance, the  one  they  call  Suches,  which  is  great  and  savorous,

41

Of  Lakes  and
Pooles  that  be
at  the  Indies.
Chap.  16.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

Fishes  and but  phlegmaticke  and  unwholesome  :  and  the  other  Bogos,
fishing.  which  is  more  healthfully  although  it  be  lesse  and  fuller

of  bones :  there  are  great  numbers  of  wilde-ducks  and
Wigens.  When  as  the  Indians  will  feast  it,  or  shew
delight  to  any  one  that  passeth  along  the  two  bankes,
which  they  call  Chucuyto  and  Omasugo,  they  assemble
a  great  number  of  Canoes,  making  a  circle  and  invironing
the  fowle,  untill  they  take  with  their  hands  what  they
please :  and  they  call  this  manner  of  fishing  Chaco.  On
the  one  and  the  other  banke  of  this  Lake,  are  the  best
habitations  of  Peru.  From  the  issue  thereof  there
growes  a  lesser  Lake,  although  it  be  great,  which  they  call
Paria,  upon  the  bankes  whereof,  there  are  great  numbers
of  cattell,  especially  Swine,  which  grow  exceeding  fat  with
the  grasse  upon  those  bankes.  There  are  many  other
Lakes  in  the  high  Mountaines,  whence  proceede  Brookes
and  Rivers,  which  after  become  great  fiouds.  Upon  the
way  from  Arequippa  to  Callao,  there  are  two  Lakes,  upon
the  Mountaines  of  the  one  and  other  side  the  way,  from
the  one  flowes  a  brooke,  which  growes  to  a  floud,  and
fals  into  the  South  Sea ;  from  the  other,  they  say  the
famous  River  of  Aporima  takes  her  beginning ;  from  the
which  some  hold  that  the  renowned  River  of  Amazons,
otherwise  called  Maragnon  proceedes,  with  so  great  an
assembly  and  abundance  of  waters,  which  joyne  in  these
Originallof  Mountaines.  It  is  a  question  may  be  often  asked,  why
Lakes.  there  is  so  many  Lakes  in  the  tops  of  these  Mountaines,

into  the  which  no  river  enters,  but  contrariwise,  many
great  streames  issue  forth,  and  yet  doe  we  scarce  see  these
Lakes  to  diminish  any  thing  at  any  season  of  the  yeare.
To  imagine  that  these  Lakes  grow  by  the  Snow  that
melts,  or  raine  from  heaven,  that  doth  not  wholly  satisfie
me :  for  there  are  many  that  have  not  this  abundance  of
Snow,  nor  raine,  and  yet  wee  see  no  decrease  in  them,
which  makes  me  to  beleeve  they  are  Springs  which  rise
there  naturally,  although  it  be  not  against  reason,  to
thinke  that  the  Snow  and  raine  helpe  somewhat  in  some
seasons. These  Lakes  are  so  common  in  the  highest  tops

42

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.
of  the  Mountaines,  that  you  shall  hardly  finde  any  famous  Greatest
river  that  takes  not  his  beginning from  one of  them,  rivers  flow
Their  water  is  very  cleere  and  breedes  little  store  of  fish,  ■'ro
and  that  little  is  very  small,  by  reason  of  the  cold  which
is  there  continually.

Notwithstanding,  some  of  these  Lakes  be  very  hot,  Hot  Lake,  and
which  is  another  wonder.  At  the  end  of  the  Vallie  of  ™^™onders
Tarapaya  neere  to  Potozi,  there  is  a  Lake  in  forme  round,
which  seemes  to  have  beene  made  by  compasse,  whose
water  is  extreamely  hot,  and  yet  the  Land  is  very  cold  :
they  are  accustomed  to  bathe  themselves  neere  the  banke,
for  else  they  cannot  endure  the  heate  being  farther  in.
In  the  midst  of  this  Lake,  there  is  a  boiling  of  above
twentie  foote  square,  which  is  the  very  Spring,  and  yet
(notwithstanding  the  greatnesse  of  this  Spring)  it  is  never
seene  to  increase  in  any  sort :  it  seemes  that  it  exhals  of
it  selfe,  or  that  it  hath  some  hidden  and  unknowne  issue,
neither  doe  they  see  it  decrease ;  which  is  another  wonder,
although  they  have  drawne  from  it  a  great  streame,  to
make  certaine  engines  grinde  for  mettall,  considering  the
great  quantitie  of  water  that  issueth  forth,  by  reason
whereof,  it  should  decrease.

But  leaving  Peru,  and  passing  to  new  Spaine,  the  Lakes
there,  are  no  lesse  to  be  observed ;  especially  that  most
famous  of  Mexico,  where  we  finde  two  sorts  of  waters,  Lake  of
one  salt  Lake  like  to  that  of  the  Sea,  and  the  other  cleere  Mexico  salt
and  sweete,  by  reason  of  the  Rivers  that  enter  into  it.  rrry  "  1
In  the  midst  of  this  Lake,  is  a  rocke  very  delightfull  and
pleasant,  where  there  are  bathes  of  hot  water  that  issue
forth,  the  which  they  greatly  esteeme  for  their  health.
There  are  Gardens  in  the  middest  of  this  Lake,  framed
and  fleeting  upon  the  water,  where  you  may  see  plots
full  of  a  thousand  sorts  of  hearbes  and  flowers,  &  they
are  in  such  sort  as  a  man  cannot  well  conceive  them  with-
out sight.  The  Citie  of  Mexico  is  seated  in  the  same
Lake,  although  the  Spaniards  have  filled  up  the  place  of
the  scituation  with  earth,  leaving  onely  some  currents  of
water, great  and small, which enter  into the  Citie, to

43

A.D.

c.  1588.

Rich  Lakes.

Of  many  and
divers  Springs
and  Fountains.
Chap.  17.

Hot  Spring
turning  into
Stone.

Fountaine  of
Pitch.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

carrie  such  things  as  they  have  neede  of,  as  wood,  hearbs,
stone,  fruites  of  the  Countrie,  and  all  other  things.
When  Cortez  conquered  Mexico,  hee  caused  Brigandins
to  be  made,  yet  afterwards  he  thought  it  more  safe  not
to  use  them :  therefore  they  use  Canoes,  whereof  there
is  great  store.  There  is  great  store  of  fish  in  this  Lake,
yet  have  I  not  seene  any  of  price :  notwithstanding,  they
say  the  revenue  of  this  Lake,  is  worth  three-hundred
thousand  Duckets  a  yeere.  There  are  many  other  Lakes,
not  farre  from  this,  whence  they  bring  much  fish  to
Mexico.  The  Province  of  Mechouacan  is  so  called,  for
that  it  aboundeth  greatly  with  fish.  There  are  goodly
and  great  Lakes,  in  the  which  there  is  much  fish,  and
this  Province  is  coole  and  healthfull.  There  are  many
other  Lakes,  whereof  it  is  not  possible  to  make  mention,
nor  to  know  them  in  particular,  onely  wee  may  note  by
that  which  hath  beene  discoursed  in  the  former  Booke,
that  under  the  burning  Zone  there  is  greater  abundance
of  Lakes,  then  in  any  other  part  of  the  world.

There  is  at  the  Indies  as  in  other  parts  of  the  world,
great  diversitie  of  Springs,  Fountaines,  and  Rivers,  and
some  have  strange  properties.  In  Guancauilica  of  Peru
(where  the  Mines  of  Quick-silver  be,)  there  is  a  Fountaine
that  casts  forth  hot  water,  and  in  running,  the  water  turnes
to  rocke,  of  which  rocke  or  stone,  they  build  in  a  manner
all  the  houses  of  the  Village.  This  stone  is  soft,  and
easie  to  cut,  for  they  cut  it  as  easily  with  Iron  as  if  it
were  wood,  it  is  light  and  lasting.  If  men  or  beasts
drinke  thereof,  they  dye,  for  that  it  congeales  in  the  very
entrailes,  and  turnes  into  stone,  and  for  that  cause  some
Horses  have  died.  As  this  water  turnes  into  stone,  the
which  flowes,  stoppes  the  passage  to  the  rest ;  so  as  of
necessitie  it  changeth  the  course,  and  for  this  reason  it
runnes  in  divers  places,  as  the  rocke  increaseth.  At  the
point  of  Cape  Saint  Helaine,  there  is  a  Spring  or  Foun-
taine of  Pitch,  which  at  Peru,  they  call  Coppey.  This
should  be  like  to  that  which  the  Scripture  speakes  of  the
savage  Valley,  where  they  did  finde  pits  of  Pitch. The

44

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
Marriners  use  these  Fountaines  of  Pitch  or  Coppey,  to
pitch  their  ropes  and  tackling,  for  that  it  serves  them  as
Pitch  and  Tarre  in  Spaine.  When  I  sailed  into  new
Spaine  by  the  coast  of  Peru,  the  Pilot  shewed  me  an  Hand,
which  they  call  the  He  of  Wolves,  where  there  is  another
Fountaine  or  Pit  of  Coppey  or  Pitch,  with  the  which  they
anoint  their  tackling.  There  are  other  Fountaines  and
Springs  of  Goultranrozen,  which  the  Pilot  (an  excellent
man  in  his  charge)  told  me  he  had  seene,  and  that  some-
times sailing  that  waies,  being  so  farre  into  the  Sea,  as
he  had  lost  the  sight  of  Land,  yet  did  he  know  by  the
smell  of  the  Coppey,  where  he  was,  as  well  as  if  he  had
knowne  the  Land,  such  is  the  savour  that  issues  con-
tinually from  that  Fountaine.

At  the  Bathes,  which  they  call  the  Bathes  of  Ingua, Cold  and  hot
there  is  a  course  of  water,  which  comes  forth  all  hot  and  Springs
boiling ;  and  joyning  unto  it,  there  is  another  whose  water °se  '"
is  as  cold  as  Ice. The  Ingua  was  accustomed  to  temper
the  one  with  the  other ;  and  it  is  a  wonderfull  thing  to
see  Springs  of  so  contrarie  qualities,  so  neere  one  to  the
other. There  are  an  infinite  number  of  other  hot  Springs,
specially  in  the  Province  of  Charcas,  in  the  water  whereof,
you  cannot  indure  to  hold  your  hand  the  space  of  an
Ave  Maria,  as  I  have  seene  tried  by  wager. In  a  Farme
neere  to  Cusco,  springs  a  Fountaine  of  Salt,  which  as  it  Salt  Spring
runnes  turnes  into  Salt,  very  white  and  exceeding  good,  whuhyeeldes
the  which  (if  it  were  in  another  Countrie)  were  no  small  £jj;™lt  °Ut
riches,  yet  they  make  very  small  account  thereof,  for  the
store they have there. The waters which runne in
Guayaquel, which  is  in  Peru,  almost  under  the  Equi-
noctiall  Line, are  held  to  be  healthfull  for  the  French  Pocke  spring,
disease,  and  other  such  like,  so  as  they  come  from  many
places  farre  off  to  be  cured. And  they  say the  cause
thereof is, for that in that Countrie there is great
aboundance  of  rootes,  which they  call Salepareille, the
vertue  and  operation  whereof  is  so  knowne,  that  it  com-
municates her  propertie  to  the  waters  wherein  it  is  put  to
cure  this  disease. Bilcanota  is  a  Mountaine  the  which

45

A.D.

c.  1588.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

(according  to  common  opinion)  is  in  the  highest  part  of
Peru,  the  top  whereof  is  all  covered  with  Snow,  and  in  some
places  is  blacke  like  coale.  There  issueth  forth  of  it,  two
Springs  in  contrary  places,  which  presently  grow  to  be
very  great  brooks,  and  so  by  little  and  little  become  great
flouds,  the  one  goes  to  Calloa,  into  the  great  Lake  Titicaca,
the  other  goes  to  the  Lands,  and  is  that  which  they  call
Yucay,  which  joyning  with  another  runnes  into  the
North  Sea,  with  a  violent  and  furious  course.  This
Spring,  when  it  comes  out  of  the  rocke  Bilcanota,  as  I
have  said,  is  of  the  colour  of  lie,  having  an  ashie  colour,
Smoak  Spring,  and  casts  a  fume  as  a  thing  burnt,  the  which  runs  far  in
this  sort,  until  the  multitude  of  waters  that  run  into  it,
quench  this  smoak  and  fire  which  it  drawes  from  the
Spring.  In  new  Spain  I  have  seene  a  Spring  as  it  were
Ink,  somewhat  blew,  in  Peru  another,  of  color  red  like
blood,  where  upon  they  cal  it  the  red  River.

Amongst  all  Rivers,  not  onely  at  the  Indies,  but
generally  through  the  world,  the  River  Maragnon,  or  of
Amazons,  is  the  chiefe,  whereof  we  have  spoken  in  the
former  Booke.  The  Spaniards  have  often  sailed  it,  pre-
tending to  discover  the  Lands,  which  by  report  are  very
rich,  especially  those  they  call  Dorado  and  Paytiti,  Jean
de  Salnies,  the  Adelantade,  made  a  memorable  entrie,
though  of  small  effect.  There  is  a  passage  which  they
call  Pongo,  one  of  the  most  dangerous  in  all  the  world ;
for  the  River  being  there  straightned,  and  forced  betwixt
two  high  steepe  Rocks :  the  water  fals  directly  downe
with  so  great  a  violence,  that  comming  steepe  downe,  it
causeth  such  a  boyling,  as  it  seemeth  impossible  to  passe
it  without  drowning :  yet  the  courage  of  men  durst
attempt  to  passe  it,  for  the  desire  of  this  renowmed
Dorado :  they  slipt  downe  from  the  top  to  the  bottome,
thrust  on  with  the  violence  and  currant  of  the  floud,  hold-
ing themselves  in  their  Canoes  or  barkes  :  and  although
in  falling  they  were  turned  topsie  turvie,  and  both  they
and  their  Canoes  plunged  into  the  deepe,  yet  by  their
care  and  industrie  they  recovered  themselves  againe ;  and

46

Inke,  &c.

Of  Rivers.
Chap.  18.
Maragnon  or
Amazons.
[III.  v.  934.]

Waterfall.

JOSEPH ACOSTA

A.D.

c.  1588.

in  this  sort  the  whole  armie  escaped,  except  some  few

that  were  drowned. And  that  which  is  more  admirable, Golden  thirst,

they  carried  themselves  so  cunningly,  that  they  neither

lost  their  Powder  nor  Munition. In  their  returne  (having

suffered  many  troubles  and  dangers)  they  were  forced,  in

the  end,  to  passe  backe  that  same  way  mounting  by  one

of  those  high  Rocks,  sticking  their  Ponyards  in  the  Rocke.

Captaine  Peter  d'Orsua  made  another  entrie  by  the
same  River,  who  being  dead  in  the  same  Voyage,  and  the
Souldiers  mutinied ;  other  Captaines  followed  the  enter-
prise, by  an  arme  that  comes  into  the  North  Sea.  A
religious  man  of  our  company  told  us,  that  being  then  a
secular  man,  he  was  present  in  a  manner  at  all  that  enter-
prise, and  that  the  tides  did  flow  almost  a  hundred  leagues
up  the  River,  and  whereas  it  enters  into  the  Sea  (the
which  is  under  the  Line,  or  very  neere)  it  hath  seventy
leagues  breadth  at  the  mouth  of  it,  a  matter  incredible,
and  which  exceeds  the  breadth  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea,
though  there  be  some  others,  who  in  their  descriptions
give  it  but  twenty  five  or  thirty  leagues  breadth  at  the
mouth.

Next  to  this  River  that  of  Plata,  or  of  Silver  holds
the  second  place,  which  is  otherwise  called  Paraguay,
which  runs  from  the  Mountains  of  Peru,  into  the  Sea,
in  thirty  five  degrees  of  altitude  to  the  South  :  it  riseth  (as
they  say)  like  to  the  River  of  Nile,  but  much  more
without  comparison,  and  makes  the  fields  it  overflowes
like  unto  a  Sea,  for  the  space  of  three  moneths,  and  after
returneth  againe  to  his  course,  in  the  which  Shippes  doe
saile  many  leagues  against  the  streame.  There  are  many
other  Rivers  that  are  not  of  that  greatnesse,  and  yet  are
equall :  yea  they  surpasse  the  greatest  of  Europe,  as  that
of  Magdalaine,  neere  to  Saint  Marthe,  called  the  great
River,  and  that  of  Alvarado  in  new  Spaine,  and  an
infinite  number  of  others.  Of  the  South  side,  on  the
Mountaines  of  Peru,  the  Rivers  are  not  usually  so  great,
for  that  their  current  is  not  long,  and  that  many  waters
cannot  joyne  together,  but  they  are  very  swift,  descending

47

River  of
Plata,  increas-
ing as  Ni/us.

A.D.

c.  1588.

How  they
passe  their
Rivers.

Haire  and

Straw

Bridges.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

from  the  Mountaines,  and  have  sodaine  fals,  by  reason
whereof  they  are  very  dangerous,  and  many  men  have
perished  there.  They  increase  and  overflow  most  in  the
time  of  heate.  I  have  gone  over  twenty  and  seven
Rivers  upon  that  coast,  yet  did  I  never  passe  any  one  by
a  foord.

The  Indians  use  a  thousand  devises  to  passe  their
Rivers.  In  some  places  they  have  a  long  cord  that
runnes  from  one  side  to  th'other,  and  thereon  hangs  a
basket,  into  the  which  he  puts  him  selfe  that  meanes  to
passe ;  and  then  they  draw  it  from  the  banke  with  another
cord,  so  as  he  passeth  in  this  basket.  In  other  places  the
Indian  passeth,  as  it  were  on  Horse-backe,  upon  a  bottle
of  straw,  and  behinde  him  he  that  desires  to  passe ;  and
so  rowing  with  a  peece  of  a  boord,  carries  him  over.  In
other  places  they  make  a  floate  of  gourds  or  pompions,
upon  which  they  set  men  with  their  stuffe  to  carry  over,
and  the  Indians  having  cords  fastned  to  them,  goe
swimming  before,  and  draw  this  floate  of  pompions  after
them,  as  Horses  doe  a  Coach :  others  goe  behinde  thrust-
ing it  forward.  Having  passed,  they  take  their  barke
of  pompions  upon  their  backe,  and  returne  swimming :
this  they  doe  in  the  River  of  Saint  at  Peru.  We  passed
that  of  Alvarado  in  new  Spaine  upon  a  table,  which  the
Indians  carried  upon  their  shoulders,  and  when  they  lost
their  footing,  they  swamme.  These  devises,  with  a
thousand  other  wherewith  they  use  to  passe  their  Rivers,
breede  a  terrour  in  the  beholders,  helping  themselves
with  such  weake  and  unsure  meanes ;  and  yet  they  are
very  confident.  They  doe  use  no  other  bridges  but  of
haire  or  of  straw.  There  are  now  upon  some  Rivers
bridges  of  Stone,  built  by  the  diligence  of  some
Governours,  but  many  fewer  then  were  needefull  in  such
a  Countrie,  where  so  many  men  are  drowned  by  default
thereof,  and  the  which  yeeldes  so  much  Silver,  as  not
onely  Spaine,  but  also  other  strange  Countries  make
sumptuous  buildings  therewith.  The  Indians  doe  draw
from  these  flouds  that  runne  from  the  Mountaines  to  the

48

JOSEPH ACOSTA  AD-

c.  1588.
Vallies  and  Plaines,  many  and  great  Brookes  to  water
their  Land,  which  they  usually  doe  with  such  industrie,
as  there  are  no  better  in  Murcia,  nor  at  Millan  it  selfe,
the  which  is  also  the  greatest  and  onely  wealth  of  the
Plaines  of  Peru,  and  of  many  other  parts  of  the  Indies.

§. III.  [HI- v.  935.]

Of  the  qualitie  of  the  Land  at  the  Indies  in
generall.  Properties  of  Peru,  and  of  new
Spaine,  and  other  parts  :  Of  Vulcanes  and
Earthquakes.

E  may  know  the  qualitie  of  the  Land  at  the  Indies,  L.  3.  C.  19.
for  the  greatest  part  (seeing  it  is  the  last  of  the

J  three  Elements,  whereof  we  have  propounded  to
treate  in  this  Booke)  by  the  discourse  we  have  made  in
the  former  Booke  of  the  burning  Zone,  seeing  that  the
greatest  part  of  the  Indies  doth  lye  under  it.  But  to
make  it  knowne  the  more  particularly,  I  have  observed
three  kindes  of  Lands,  as  I  have  passed  through  those
Regions :  whereof  there  is  one  very  low,  another  very
high,  and  the  third  which  holds  the  middle  of  these  two
extreames.  The  lower  is  that  which  lyeth  by  the  Sea
coasts,  whereof  there  is  in  all  parts  of  the  Indies,  and  it
is  commonly  very  hot  and  moist,  so  as  it  is  not  so  health-
full  ;  and  at  this  day  we  see  it  lesse  peopled,  although  in
former  times  it  hath  beene  greatly  inhabited  with  Indians,
as  it  appeareth  by  the  histories  of  new  Spaine  and  Peru,
and  where  they  kept  and  lived,  for  that  the  soile  was
naturall  unto  them  being  bred  there.  They  lived  of
fishing  at  Sea,  and  of  seeds,  drawing  brooks  from  the
Rivers,  which  they  used  for  want  of  raine,  for  that  it
raines  little  there,  and  in  some  places  not  at  all.  This
low  Countrie  hath  many  places  unhabitable,  as  well  by
reason  of  the  Sands  which  are  dangerous  (for  there  are
whole  Mountaines  of  these  Sands)  as  also  for  the  Marishes
which  grow  by  reason  of  the  waters  that  fall  from  the
xv  49  d

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

Mountaines,  which  finding  no  issue  in  these  flat  and  low
Lands,  drowne  them,  and  make  them  unprofitable.
Decay  of  And  jn  truth  the  greatest  part  of  all  the  Indian  Sea

Indl Y\ *  ^h  coast  ls  °f  ^'1S  sort>  chiefly  upon  the  South  Sea:  the
Spaniards.  habitation  of  which  coasts  is  at  this  present  so  wasted
and  contemned,  that  of  thirty  parts  of  the  people  that
inhabited  it,  there  wants  twenty  nine ;  and  it  is  likely  the
rest  of  the  Indians  will  in  short  time  decay.  Many,
according  to  the  varietie  of  their  opinions,  attribute  this
to  divers  causes :  some  to  the  great  labour  which  hath
beene  imposed  upon  these  Indians ;  others,  unto  the
change  and  varietie  of  meates  and  drinkes  they  use,  since
their  commerce  with  the  Spaniards :  others,  to  their  great
excesse  and  drinking,  and  to  other  vices  they  have :  for
my  part,  I  hold  this  disorder  to  be  the  greatest  cause  of
their  decay,  whereof  it  is  not  now  time  to  discourse  any
more.  In  this  low  Countrie  (which  I  say  generally  is
unhealthfull,  and  unfit  for  mans  habitation)  there  is  excep-
tion in  some  places  which  are  temperate  and  fertile,  as  the
greatest  part  of  the  Plaines  of  Peru,  where  there  are  coole
vallies  and  very  fertile.  The  greatest  part  of  the  habita-
tion of  the  coast  entertains  all  the  traffike  of  Spain  by
Sea :  whereon  all  the  estate  of  the  Indies  dependeth.
Upon  this  coast  there  are  some  Towns  well  peopled,  as
Lima  and  Truxillo  in  Peru,  Panama  and  Carthagena
upon  the  maine  Land,  and  in  the  Hands  Saint  Dominique,
Port  Ricco,  and  Havana,  with  many  other  Towns  which
are  lesse  then  these,  as  the  True  Crosse  in  new  Spaine,
Yea,  Arigua  and  others  in  Peru :  the  Ports  are  commonly
inhabited,  although  but  slenderly.  The  second  sort  of
Land  is  contrary,  very  high,  and  by  consequent,  cold  and
dry,  as  all  the  Mountaines  are  commonly.  This  Land
is  neither  fertile  nor  pleasant,  but  very  healthfull,  which
makes  it  to  be  peopled  and  inhabited.  There  are  Pastures
and  great  store  of  Cattle,  the  which,  for  the  most  part,
entertaines  life,  and  by  their  Cattell,  they  supply  the
want  they  have  of  Corne  and  Graine,  by  trucking  and
exchange. But that which makes these Lands more

5°

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
inhabited  and  peopled,  is  the  riches  of  the  Mines  that  are
found  there,  for  that  all  obeys  to  Gold  and  Silver.  By
reason  of  the  Mines  there  are  some  dwellings  of
Spaniards  and  Indians,  which  are  increased  and  multi-
plied, as  Potozi  and  Gancavelicque  in  Peru,  and  Cacatecas
in  new  Spaine.  There  are  also  through  all  these  Moun-
taines  great  dwellings  of  the  Indians,  which  to  this
day  are  maintained ;  yea  some  will  say  they  increase,  but
that  the  labour  of  the  Mines  doth  consume  many,  and
some  generall  diseases  have  destroyed  a  great  part,  as
the  Cocoliste  in  new  Spaine :  yet  they  flnde  no  great
diminution.  In  this  extremitie  of  high  ground  they  finde
two  commodities,  as  I  have  said,  of  Pastures  and  Mines,
which  doe  well  countervaile  the  two  other  that  are  in  the
lower  grounds  alongst  the  Sea  coast,  that  is,  the  commerce
of  the  Sea,  and  the  abundance  of  Wine  which  groweth
not  but  in  the  hot  Lands.  Betwixt  these  two  extreames  Com  grounds.
there  is  ground  of  a  meane  height,  the  which,  although
it  be  in  some  parts  higher  or  lower  one  then  other,  yet
doth  it  not  approach  neither  to  the  heate  of  the  Sea  coast,
nor  the  intemperature  of  the  Mountaines.  In  this  sort
of  soyle  there  groweth  many  kindes  of  Graine,  as  Wheate,
Barley,  and  Mays,  which  growes  not  at  all  in  the  high
Countries,  but  well  in  the  lower ;  there  is  likewise  store
of  Pasture,  Cattell,  Fruits,  and  greene  Forrests.  This
part  is  the  best  habitation  of  the  three,  for  health  and
recreation ;  and  therefore  it  is  best  peopled  of  any  part  of
the  Indies,  the  which  I  have  curiously  observed  in  many
Voyages  that  I  have  undertaken,  and  have  alwayes  found
it  true,  that  the  Province  best  peopled  at  the  Indies  be
in  this  scituation.  Let  us  looke  neerely  into  new  Spaine
(the  which  without  doubt  is  the  best  Province  the  Sunne
doth  circle)  by  what  part  soever  you  doe  enter,  you
mount  up ;  and  when  you  have  mounted  a  good  height,
you  begin  to  descend,  yet  very  little :  and  that  Land  is  [III.  v.  936.]
alwayes  much  higher  then  that  along  the  Sea  coast.

All  the  Land  about  Mexico  is  of  this  nature  and  scitua-
tion ;  and  that  which  is  about  the  Vulcan,  which  is  the

5i

A.D.

c.  1588.

The  Indies
mountainous,
and  thereby
temperate.

Of  the
properties  of
the  land  of
Peru.
Chap.  20.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

best  soile  of  the  Indies,  as  also  in  Peru,  Arequipa,
Guamangua  and  Cusco,  although  more  in  one  then  in
the  other.  But  in  the  end,  all  is  high  ground,  although
they  descend  into  deepe  Vallies,  and  clime  up  to  high
Mountaines :  the  like  is  spoken  of  Quitto,  Saint  Foy,
and  of  the  best  of  the  New  Kingdome.  To  conclude,
I  doe  beleeve  that  the  wisedome  and  providence  of  the
Creator  would  have  it  so,  that  the  greatest  part  of  this
Countrie  of  the  Indies  should  be  hillie,  that  it  might  be
of  a  better  temperature  :  for  being  low,  it  had  beene  very
hot  under  the  burning  Zone,  especially  being  farre  from
the  Sea.  Also  all  the  Land  I  have  seene  at  the  Indies,
is  neere  to  the  Mountaines  on  the  one  side  or  the  other,
and  sometimes  of  all  parts  :  So  as  I  have  oftentimes  said
there,  that  I  would  gladly  see  any  place,  from  whence
the  horizon  did  fashion  it  selfe  and  end  by  the  heaven,
and  a  Countrie  stretched  out  and  even,  as  we  see  in
Spaine  in  a  thousand  champaine  fields ;  yet  doe  I  not
remember  that  I  have  ever  seene  such  sights  at  the  Indies,
where  it  in  the  Hands,  or  upon  the  maine  Land,  although
I  have  travelled  above  seven  hundred  leagues  in  length.
But  as  I  have  said,  the  neerenesse  of  the  Mountaines  is
very  commodious  in  this  region,  to  temper  the  heate  of
the  Sunne.  To  conclude,  the  best  inhabited  parts  of  the
Indies  are  as  I  have  said :  and  generally,  all  that  Countrie
abounds  in  Grasse,  Pastures,  and  Forrests,  contrary  unto
that  which  Aristotle  and  the  ancients  did  hold.  So  as
when  we  go  out  of  Europe  to  the  Indies  we  wonder  to
see  the  Land  so  pleasant,  greene  and  fresh.  Yet  this  rule
hath  some  exceptions,  and  chiefly  in  the  Land  of  Peru,
which  is  of  a  strange  nature  amongst  all  others,  whereof
we  will  now  proceede  to  speake.

We  meane  by  Peru,  not  that  great  part  of  the  world
which  they  call  America,  seeing  that  therein  is  contained
Bresil,  the  Kingdome  of  Chille,  and  that  of  Grenade,  and
yet  none  of  these  Kingdomes  is  Peru,  but  onely  that  part
which  lies  to  the  South,  beginning  at  the  Kingdome  of
Quitto,  which  is  under  the  Line,  and  runs  in  length  to

52

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
the  Realme  of  Chille,  the  which  is  without  the  Tropickes,
which  were  six  hundred  leagues  in  length,  and  in  breadth
it  containes  no  more  then  the  Mountaines,  which  is  fiftie
common  leagues,  although  in  some  places,  as  at  Chacha-
payas,  it  be  broader.  This  part  of  the  world  which  wee
call  Peru,  is  very  remarkeable,  and  containes  in  it  strange
properties,  which  serveth  as  an  exception  to  the  generall
rule  of  the  Indies.  The  first  is,  that  upon  all  the  coast
it  blowes  continually  with  one  onely  winde,  which  is  One  winde
South  and  South-west,  contrary  to  that  which  doth  usually  onev-
blow  under  the  burning  Zone.  The  second  is,  that  this
winde  being  by  nature  the  most  violent,  tempestuous,
and  unhealthfull  of  all  others,  yet  in  this  Region  it  is
marvellous  pleasing,  healthfull,  and  agreeable  :  so  as  we
may  attribute  the  habitation  of  that  part  thereunto,  with-
out the  which  it  would  be  troublesome  and  inhabitable,
by  reason  of  the  heate,  if  it  were  not  refreshed  with  the
winde.  The  third  propertie  is,  that  it  never  raines,
thunders,  snowes,  nor  hailes  in  all  this  coast,  which  is  a
matter  worthy  of  admiration.  Fourthly,  that  a  little
distance  from  the  coast  it  raines  &  snowes  terribly
Fiftly,  that  there  are  two  ridges  of  Mountaines  which
runne  the  one  as  the  other,  and  in  one  altitude,  notwith-
standing on  the  one  there  are  great  Forrests,  and  it  raines
the  greatest  part  of  the  yeare,  being  very  hot ;  and  the
other  is  all  naked  and  bare,  and  very  cold :  so  as  winter
and  summer  are  divided  on  those  two  Mountaines,  and
raine  and  cleerenesse  it  selfe.  For  the  better  under-
standing hereof,  we  must  consider  that  Peru  is  divided  The  Plaines,
as  it  were  into  three  parts,  long  and  narrow,  which  they  ihe  h*ls>  and
call  Lanos,  Sierras,  and  Andes ;  the  Lanos  runs  alongst  mp  injjgrera
the  Sea  coast ;  the  Sierras  be  all  hils,  with  some  vallies  ;
and  the  Andes  be  steepe  and  craggie  Mountaines.  The
Lanos  or  Sea  coast,  have  some  ten  leagues  in  breadth,
in  some  parts  lesse,  and  in  some  parts  a  little  more.  The
Sierra  containes  some  twenty  leagues  in  breadth :  and
the  Andes  as  much  sometimes  more,  sometimes  lesse.
They  run  in  length  from  North  to  South,  and  in  breadth

53

A.D.

c.  1588.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Raine  almost
ever,  and
almost  never.

from  East  to  West.  It  is  a  strange  thing,  that  in  so
small  a  distance  as  fiftie  leagues,  equally  distant  from  the
Line  and  Pole,  there  should  be  so  great  a  contrarietie,  as
to  raine  almost  continually  in  one  place,  and  never  in
the  other.  It  never  raines  upon  the  coast  or  Lanos,
although  there  fals  sometimes  a  small  dew,  which  they
call  Guarua,  and  in  Castill  Mollina,  the  which  sometimes
thickens,  and  fals  in  certaine  drops  of  water,  yet  it  is
not  troublesome,  nor  such  as  they  neede  any  covering.
Their  coverings  are  of  mats  with  a  little  earth  upon  them
which  is  sufficient.  Upon  the  Andes  it  raines  in  a
manner  continually,  although  it  be  sometimes  more  cleere
then  other.  In  the  Sierra  which  lies  betwixt  both  the
extreames,  it  raineth  in  the  same  season  as  it  doth  in
Spaine,  which  is  from  September  unto  April,  but  in  the
other  season,  the  time  is  more  cleere,  which  is  when  the
Sunne  is  farthest  off,  and  the  contrary  when  it  is  neerest.
That  which  they  call  Andes  and  Sierra,  are  two  ridges  of
most  high  Mountaines,  which  runne  above  a  thousand
leagues,  the  one  in  view  of  the  other,  and  almost  equally.
There  are  an  infinite  number  of  Vicagues,  which  breede
in  the  Sierres,  and  are  properly  like  unto  wilde  Goates,

Divers  Beasts,  very  nimble  and  swift.  There  are  also  of  those  beasts
which  they  call  Guanacos  and  Pacos,  which  are  sheepe,
which  we  may  well  tearme  the  Asses  of  that  Countrie ;
whereof  we  shall  speake  in  their  place.  And  upon  the
Andes  they  finde  Apes,  very  gentle  and  delightfull,  and

[III.  v.  937.]  Parrots  in  great  numbers.  There  also  they  finde  the
herbe  or  tree  which  they  call  Coca,  that  is  so  greatly
esteemed  by  the  Indians,  and  the  trafficke  they  make  of
it,  is  worth  much  mony.

That  which  they  call  Sierre,  causeth  Vallies,  where  as
it  opens,  which  are  the  best  dwellings  of  Peru,  as  is  the
Valley  of  Xauxa  of  Andaguaylas,  and  Yucay.  In  these
Vallies  there  growes  Wheat,  Mays,  and  other  sorts  of
fruits,  but  lesse  in  one  then  in  the  other.  Beyond  the
Citie  of  Cusco  (the  ancient  Court  of  the  Lords  of  those
Realmes)  the  two  ridges  of  Mountaines  separate  them-

54

JOSEPH ACOSTA

selves  one  from  the  other,  and  in  the  midst  leave  a  Playne
and  large  Champaigne,  which  they  call  the  Province  of
Callao,  where  there  are  many  Rivers  and  great  store  of
fertile  Pastures :  there  is  also  that  great  Lake  of  Titicaca.
And  although  it  bee  a  full  soile,  and  in  the  same  height
and  intemperature,  that  the  Sierre,  having  no  more  Trees
nor  Forrests,  yet  the  want  they  have  of  bread  is  counter-
vailed with  the  rootes  they  sow,  the  which  they  call  Papas,
and  they  grow  in  the  earth.  This  roote  is  the  Indians
foode ;  for  drying  it  and  making  it  cleane,  they  make  that
which  they  call  Chugno,  which  is  the  bread  and  nourish-
ment of  those  Provinces.  There  are  other  rootes  and
small  herbes  which  they  eate.  It  is  a  healthfull  soile,  best
peopled,  and  the  richest  of  all  the  Indies,  for  the  abundance
of  Cattell  they  feede,  as  well  of  those  that  are  in  Europe,
as  Sheepe,  Neat,  and  Goates,  as  of  those  of  the  Country,
which  they  call  Guanacos  and  Pacos,  and  there  are  store
of  Partridges.  Next  to  the  Province  of  Callao,  is  that
of  Charcas,  where  there  are  hot  Vallies  very  fertile,  and
very  high  Rocks,  the  which  are  very  rich  in  mynes,  so
as  in  no  part  of  the  World  shall  you  finde  better  nor
fairer.

For  that  it  is  rare  and  extraordinarie  to  see  a  Country
where  it  never  raines  nor  thunders ;  men  desire  naturally
to  know  the  cause  of  this  strangenesse.  The  reason  which
some  give  that  have  neerly  looked  into  it,  is,  that  upon
that  Coast  there  rise  no  vapours,  sufficient  to  engender
raine  for  want  of  matter ;  but  onely  that  there  bee  small
and  light  vapours,  which  cannot  breede  any  other  then
mists  and  deawes,  as  wee  see  in  Europe,  oftentimes  vapours
doe  rise  in  the  morning,  which  are  not  turned  into  raine,
but  into  mists  onely :  the  which  growes  from  the  sub-
stance, which  is  not  grosse  and  sufficient  enough  to  turne
to  raine.  They  say,  the  reason  why  that  which  happens
but  some  times  in  Europe,  falls  out  continually  upon  the
Coast  of  Peru,  is,  for  that  this  Region  is  very  drie,  and
yeelds  no  grosse  vapours.  The  drinesse  is  knowne  by  the
great abundance of Sands, having neither Wells nor

55

A.D.

c.  1588.

Their  bread.

The  reason
why  it  raines
on  the  Lanos,
along  the  Sea
coast.
Chap.  21.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

Fountaines,  but  of  fifteene  Stades  deepe  (which  is  the
height  of  a  man  or  more)  and  that  is  neere  unto  Rivers,
the  water  whereof,  piercing  into  the  Land,  gives  them
meanes  to  make  Wells. So  as  it  hath  beene  found  by
experience,  that  the  course  of  Rivers  being  turned,  the
Wells  have  beene  dried  up,  untill  they  returned  to  their
ordinarie  course  :  and  they  give  this  reason  for  a  materiall
cause  of  this  effect,  but  they  have  another  efficient,  which
is  no  lesse  considerable,  and  that  is  the  great  height  of
the  Sierre,  which  comming  along  the  Coast,  shadowes  the
Lanos ;  so  as  it  suffers  no  winde  to  blow  from  the  Land,
but  above  the  tops  of  these  Mountaines. By  meanes
whereof,  there  reignes  no  winde,  but  that  from  the  Sea,
which  finding  no  opposite,  doth  not  presse  nor  straine
forth  the  vapours  which  rise  to  engender  raine ;  so  as
the  shadow  of  the  Mountaines  keepes  the  vapours  from
thickning,  and  converts  them  all  into  mists. There  are
some  experiences  agree  with  this  discourse ;  for  that  it
raines  upon  some  small  Hills  along  the  Coast,  which  are
least  shadowed,  as  the  Rocks  of  Atico  and  Arequipa. It
hath  rained  in  some  yeeres  when  as  the  Northerne  or
Easterly  windes  have  blowne :  yea,  all  the  time  they  have
continued, as  it  happened  in  seventie eight, upon the
Lanos  of  Trugillo,  where  it  rained  abundantly,  the  which
they  had  not  seene  in  many  ages  before. Moreover,  it
raines  upon  the  same  Coast  in  places,  where  as  the  Easterly
or  Northerne  windes  be  ordinarie,  as  in  Guayaquil,  and
in  places  where  as  the  Land  riseth  much,  and  turnes  from
the  shadow  of  the  Mountaines,  as  in  those  that  are  beyond
Ariqua. Some  discourse  in  this  manner,  but  let  every
one  thinke  as  he  please. It  is  most  certaine,  that  comming
from  the  Mountaines  to  the  Vallies,  they  doe  usually  see
as  it  were  two  Heavens,  one  cleere  and  bright  above,
and  the  other  obscure,  and  as  it  were  a  gray  vaile  spread
underneath,  which  covers  all  the  Coast : and  although  it
raine  not,  yet  this  mist  is  wonderfull  profitable  to  bring
forth  grasse,  and  to  raise  up  and  nourish  the  seed : for
although  they  have  plentie.  of  water,  which  they  draw

56

JOSEPH ACOSTA

from  the  Pooles  and  Lakes,  yet  this  moisture  from  Heaven
hath  such  a  vertue,  that  ceasing  to  fall  upon  the  Earth,
it  breedes  a  great  discommoditie  and  defect  of  graine  and
seedes.  And  that  which  is  more  worthy  of  admiration,
the  drie  and  barren  Sands  are  by  this  deaw  so  beautified
with  grasse  and  flowers,  as  it  is  a  pleasing  and  agreeable
sight,  and  very  profitable  for  the  feeding  of  Cattell,  as
we  see  in  the  Mountaine  called  Sandie,  neere  to  the  Citie
of  Kings.

New  Spaine  passeth  all  other  Provinces  in  pastures,
which  breedes  infinite  troopes  of  Horse,  Kine,  Sheepe,
and  other  Cattell.  It  abounds  in  fruit  and  all  kinde  of
graine.  To  conclude,  it  is  a  Country  the  best  furnished
and  most  accomplished  at  the  Indies.  Yet  Peru  doth
surpasse  it  in  one  thing,  which  is  Wine,  for  that  there
growes  store  and  good ;  and  they  daily  multiply  and
increase,  the  which  doth  grow  in  very  hot  Vallies,  where
there  are  waterings.  And  although  there  be  Vines  in
new  Spaine,  yet  the  grape  comes  not  to  his  maturitie,
fit  to  make  Wine.  The  reason  is,  for  that  it  raines  there
in  July  and  August,  when  as  the  grape  ripens :  and  there-
fore it  comes  not  to  his  perfection.  And  if  any  one
through  curiositie  would  take  the  paines  to  make  wine,
it  should  be  like  to  that  of  Genua  and  Lombardie,  which
is  very  small  and  sharpe,  having  a  taste  like  unto  Verjuyce.
The  Hands  which  they  call  Barlovente,  which  bee  His-
paniola,  Cuba,  Port  Ricco,  and  others  thereabouts,  are
beautified  with  many  greene  pastures,  and  abound  in
Cattell,  as  Neat,  and  Swine,  which  are  become  wilde.
The  wealth  of  these  Hands,  bee  their  Sugar- workes  and
Hides.  There  is  much  Cassia  fistula  and  Ginger.  It  is
a  thing  incredible,  to  see  the  multitude  of  these  merchan-
dizes brought  in  one  fleete,  being  in  a  manner  impossible
that  all  Europe  should  waste  so  much.  They  likewise
bring  wood  of  an  excellent  qualitie  and  colour,  as  Ebone,
and  others,  which  serve  for  buildings  and  Joyners.  There
is  much  of  that  wood  which  they  call  Lignum  sanctum
or  Guage,  fit  to  cure  the  pox. All  these  Hands  and  others

57

A.D.

c.  1588.

Of  the  pro-
pert'ie  of  new
Spaine,  of  the
Hands,  and  of
other  Lands.
Chap.  22.
Peru  wine.

[HI.  v.  938.]

Sugar  workes
and  Hides.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

thereabouts,  which  are  many,  have  a  goodly  and  pleasant
aspect,  for  that  throughout  the  yeere,  they  are  beautified
with  grasse  and  greene  trees,  so  as  they  cannot  discerne
when  it  is  Autumne  or  Summer,  by  reason  of  continuall
moisture  joyned  to  the  heat  of  the  burning  Zone. And
although  this  Land  bee  of  a  great  circuit,  yet  are  there
few dwellings, for that of  it selfe it  engenders  great
Arcabutos,  as  they  call  them,  which  be  Groves  or  very
thicke  Coppises : and on the  Playnes there  are  many
marishes  and  bogs. They  give  yet  another  notable  reason,
why they are so smally peopled, for that there have
Indians  remayned  few  naturall  Indians,  through  the  inconsiderat-
wasttd.  nesse  ancJ  disorder  of  the  first  Conquerors  that  peopled
it : and  therefore,  for  the  most  part,  they  use  Negros,
but  they  cost  deare,  being  very  fit  to  till  the  Land. There
growes  neither  bread  nor  wine  in  these  Hands,  for  that
the  too  great  fertilitie  and  the  vice  of  the  soile,  suffers
them  not  to seede,  but  casts  all  forth  in  grasse,  very
unequally. There  are  no  Olive  trees,  at  the  least,  they
beare  no  Olives,  but  many  greene  leaves  pleasant  to  the
view,  which  beare  no  fruit. The  bread  they  use  is  of
Cacave,  whereof  we  shall  hereafter  speake. There  is  gold
in  the  Rivers  of  these  Hands,  which  some  draw  forth,  but
in  small  quantitie. I  was  little  lesse  then  a  yeere  in  these
Hands,  and  as  it  hath  beene  told  me  of  the  mayne  Land
of  the  Indies,  where  I  have  not  beene,  as  in  Florida,
Nicaragua,  Guatimala,  and  others,  it  is  in  a  manner  of
this  temper,  as  I  have  described  :  yet  have  I  not  set  downe
every  particular  of  Nature  in  these  Provinces  of  the  firme
Land,  having  no  perfect  knowledge  thereof. The  Country
which  doth  most  resemble  Spaine  and  the  Regions  of
Europe,  in  all  the  West  Indies,  is  the  Realme  of  Chille,
which  is  without  the  generall  rule  of  these  other  Provinces,
being  seated  without  the  burning  Zone,  and  the  Tropicke
of  Capricorne. This  Land  of  it  selfe  is  coole  and  fertile,
and  brings  forth  all  kindes  of  fruits  that  bee  in  Spaine ;
it  yeelds  great  abundance  of  bread  and  wine,  and  abounds
in  Pastures  and  Cattell. The  aire  is  wholsome  and  cleere,

58

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.
temperate  betwixt  heat  and  cold,  Winter  and  Summer
are  very  distinct,  and  there  they  finde  great  store  of  very
fine  gold.  Yet  this  Land  is  poore  and  smally  peopled,
by  reason  of  their  continuall  warre  with  the  Auricanos,
and  their  Associates,  being  a  rough  people  and  friends  to
libertie.

There  are  great  conjectures,  that  in  the  temperate  Zone Of  the
at  the  Antartike  Pole,  there  are  great  and  fertile  Lands : tt^kn^oned  ,
but  to  this  day  they  are  not  discovered,  neither  doe  they  fa^fy  0f  a
know  any  other  Land  in  this  Zone,  but  that  of  Chille, whok  day,
and  some  part  of  that  Land  which  runnes  from  Ethiopia  betwixt  them .
to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  as  hath  beene  said  in  the  first  °f  the  East  and
Booke ;  neither  is  it  knowne  if  there  bee  any  habitations Ck '
in  the  other  two  Zones  of  the  Poles,  and  whether  the
Land  continues  and  stretcheth  to  that  which  is  towards
the  Antartike  or  South  Pole. Neither  doe  we  know  the
Land  that  lyes  beyond  the  Straight  of  Magellan,  for  that
the  greatest  height  yet  discovered,  is  in  flftie  sixe  degrees,
as  hath  beene  formerly  said ;  and  toward  the  Artike  or
Northerne  Pole, it is not known how  farre the  Land
extends,  which  runnes  beyond  the  Cape  of  Mendocin  and
the  Caliphornes, nor the bounds  and end  of Florida,
neither  yet  how  farre  it  extends  to  the  West. Of  late
they  have  discovered  a  new  Land,  which  they  call  New
Mexico,  where  they  say  is  much  people  that  speake  the
Mexican tongue. The Philippines and the following
Hands,  as  some  report  that  know  it  by  experience,  ranne
above  nine  hundred  leagues. But  to  intreat  of  China,
Cochinchina,  Siam,  and  other  Regions  which  are  of  the
East  Indies,  were  contrarie  to  my  purpose,  which  is  onely
to  discourse  of  the  West : nay,  they  are  ignorant  of  the
greatest  part  of  America,  which  lyes  betwixt  Peru  and
Bresil,  although  the  bounds  be  knowne  of  all  sides,  wherein
there  is  diversitie  of  opinions ;  some  say  it  is  a  drowned
Land,  full  of  Lakes  and  waterie  places ;  others  affirme
there are great and flourishing Kingdomes, imagining
there  be  the  Paytiti,  the  Dorado,  and  the  Caesars,  where
they  say  are  wonderfull  things. I  have  heard  one  of  our

59

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

companie  say,  a  man  worthy  of  credit,  that  he  had  seene
great  dwellings  there,  and  the  wayes  as  much  beaten  as
those  betwixt  Salamanca  and  Villadillit,  the  which  he  did
see,  when  as  Peter  d'Orsua,  and  after,  those  that  succeeded
him,  made  their  entrie  and  discoverie  by  the  great  River
of  Amazons,  who  beleeving  that  the  Dorado  which  they
sought,  was  farther  off,  cared  not  to  inhabit  there,  and
after  went  both  without  the  Dorado,  which  they  could
not  finde,  and  this  great  Province  which  they  left.  To
speake  the  truth,  the  habitations  of  America  are  to  this
day  unknowne,  except  the  extremities,  which  are  Peru,
Bresil,  and  that  part  where  the  Land  begins  to  straighten,
which  is  the  River  of  Silver,  then  Tucuman,  which  makes
the  round  to  Chille  and  Charcas.  Of  late  we  have  under-
stood by  Letters  from  some  of  ours  which  goe  to  Saint
[III.  v.  939.]  Croix  in  the  Sierre,  that  they  goe  discovering  of  great
Provinces  and  dwellings,  betwixt  Bresil  and  Peru.  Time
will  reveile  them,  for  as  at  this  day  the  care  and  courage
of  men  is  great,  to  compasse  the  World  from  one  part
to  another ;  so  we  may  beleeve,  that  as  they  have  dis-
covered that  which  is  now  knowne,  they  may  likewise
lay  open  that  which  remaynes,  to  the  end  the  Gospell
may  be  preached  to  the  whole  World,  seeing  the  two
Crownes  of  Portugal  and  Castile  have  met  by  the  East
and  West,  joyning  their  discoveries  together,  which  in
truth  is  a  matter  to  be  observed,  that  the  one  is  come  to
China  and  Japan  by  the  East,  and  the  other  to  the  Philip-
pines, which  are  neighbours,  and  almost  joyning  unto
China,  by  the  West :  for  from  the  Hands  of  Lusson,  which
is  the  chiefe  of  the  Philippines,  in  the  which  is  the  Citie
of  Manille,  unto  Macao,  which  is  in  the  He  of  Cauton,
are  but  foure  score  or  a  hundred  leagues,  and  yet  we  finde
it  strange,  that  notwithstanding  this  small  distance  from
the  one  to  the  other,  yet  according  to  their  account,  there
is  a  dayes  difference  betwixt  them ;  so  as  it  is  Sunday  at
Macao,  when  as  it  is  but  Saturday  at  Manille,  and  so  of
the  rest.  Those  of  Macao  and  of  China  have  one  day
advanced  before  the  Philippines. It  happened  to  father

60

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c  1588.
Alonse  Sanches,  of  whom  mention  is  made  before,  that
parting  from  the  Philippines,  hee  arrived  at  Macao  the
second  day  of  May,  according  to  their  computation,  and
going  to  say  the  Masse  of  Saint  Athanasius,  he  found
they  did  celebrate  the  feast  of  the  Invention  of  the  holy
Crosse,  for  that  they  did  then  reckon  the  third  of  May.
The  like  happened  unto  him  in  another  voyage  beyond  it.

Some  have  found  this  alteration  and  diversitie  strange,
supposing  that  the  fault  proceedes  from  the  one  or  the
other,  the  which  is  not  so  :  but  it  is  a  true  and  well
observed  computation,  for  according  to  the  difference  of
wayes  where  they  have  beene,  we  must  necessarily  say,
that  when  they  meet,  there  must  be  difference  of  a  day ;
the  reason  is,  for  that  sayling  from  West  to  East,  they
alwayes  gaine  of  the  day,  finding  the  Sunne  rising  sooner :
and  contrariwise,  those  that  saile  from  East  to  West,  doe
alwayes  lose  of  the  day,  for  that  the  Sunne  riseth  later
unto  them ;  and  as  they  approach  neerer  the  East  or  the
West,  they  have  the  day  longer  or  shorter.  In  Peru,
which  is  Westward  in  respect  of  Spaine,  they  are  above
sixe  houres  behinde ;  so  as  when  it  is  noone  in  Spaine,
it  is  morning  at  Peru ;  and  when  it  is  morning  here,  it  is
mid-night  there.  I  have  made  certaine  proofe  thereof,
by  the  computation  of  Eclipses  of  the  Sunne  and  Moone.
Now  that  the  Portugals  have  made  their  navigations  from
West  to  East,  and  the  Castillans  from  East  to  West,  when
they  came  to  joyne  and  meet  at  the  Philippines  and  Macao,
the  one  have  gayned  twelve  houres,  and  the  other  hath
lost  as  much ;  so  as  at  one  instant,  and  in  one  time,  they
finde  the  difference  of  foure  and  twentie  houres,  which
is  a  whole  day.

Although we finde  vents of  fire in other  places, as OftheVukam
Mount  JEtna  and  Vesuvio,  which  now  they  call  Mount  or  Vents  of
Soma,  yet  is  that  notable  which  is  found  at  the  Indies.  ^re-
Ordinarily  these  Volcans  be  Rocks  or  Pikes  of  most  hi^h °^'  Z^"
Mountaines, which  raise themselves  above the tops  of
all  other  Mountaines ;  upon  their  tops  they  have  a  Playne,
and  in  the  midst  thereof  a  pit  or  great  mouth,  which

61

A.D.

c.  1588.

Terrible
earthquake  at
Guatimala.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

descends  even  unto  the  foote  thereof ;  a  thing  very  terrible
to  behold.  Out  of  these  mouthes  there  issues  smoake,
and  sometimes  fire :  some  cast  little  smoake,  and  have  in
a  manner  no  force  of  Volcans,  as  that  of  Arequipa,  which
is  of  an  unmeasurable  height,  and  almost  all  sand.  It
cannot  be  mounted  up  in  lesse  then  two  dayes,  yet  they
have  not  found  any  shew  of  fire,  but  onely  the  reliques
of  some  sacrifices  which  the  Indians  made  while  they  were
Gentiles,  and  sometimes  it  doth  cause  a  little  smoake.
The  Volcan  of  Mexico  which  is  neere  to  the  Village  of
Angels,  is  likewise  of  an  admirable  height,  whereas  they
mount  thirtie  leagues  in  turning  :  from  this  Volcan  issueth
not  continually,  but  sometimes,  almost  every  day,  a  great
exhalation  or  whirlewinde  of  smoake,  which  ascends
directly  up  like  to  the  shot  of  a  Crosse-bow,  and  growes
after  like  to  a  great  plume  of  feathers,  untill  it  ceasetb
quite,  and  is  presently  converted  into  an  obscure  and  darke
cloude.  Most  commonly  it  riseth  in  the  morning  after
the  Sunne  rising,  and  at  night  when  it  setteth,  although
I  have  seene  it  breake  out  at  other  times.  Sometimes
it  doth  cast  forth  great  store  of  ashes  after  this  smoake.
They  have  not  yet  seene  any  fire  come  from  it ;  yet  they
feare  it  will  issue  forth  and  burne  all  the  Land  round
about,  which  is  the  best  of  all  the  Kingdome :  And  they
hold  it  for  certaine,  that  there  is  some  correspondencie
betwixt  this  Vulcan  and  the  Sierre  of  Tlaxcala,  which  is
neere  unto  it,  that  causeth  the  great  thunders  and  light-
nings they  doe  commonly  heare  and  see  in  those  parts.

Some  Spaniards  have  mounted  up  to  this  Volcan,  and
given  notice  of  the  myne  of  sulphur  to  make  powlder
thereof.  Cortez  reports  the  care  he  had  to  discover  what
was  in  this  Volcan.  The  Volcans  of  Guatimala  are  more
renowmed,  as  well  for  their  greatnesse  and  height :  which
those  that  saile  in  the  South  Sea  discover  afarre  off,  as
for  the  violence  and  terrour  of  the  fire  it  casts.  The  three
and  twentieth  day  of  December,  in  the  yeere  1586.  almost
all  the  Citie  of  Guatimala  fell  with  an  Earthquake,  and
some  people  slaine. This  Volcan  had  then  sixe  moneths

62

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
together,  day  and  night  cast  out  from  the  top,  and  vomited
as  it  were,  a  floud  of  fire,  the  substance  falling  upon  the
sides  of  the  Volcan,  was  turned  into  ashes  like  unto  burnt
earth  (a  thing  passing  mans  judgement,  to  conceive  how
it  could  cast  so  much  matter  from  its  centre  during  sixe
moneths,  being  accustomed  to  cast  smoake  alone,  and
that  sometimes  with  small  flashes.)  This  was  written
unto  me  being  at  Mexico,  by  a  Secretarie  of  the  Audience
of  Guatimala,  a  man  worthy  of  credit,  and  at  that  time  [in.  v.  940.]
it  had  not  ceased  to  cast  out  fire.  This  yeere  past,  being
in  Quitto  in  the  Citie  of  Kings,  the  Volcan  which  is
neere  thereunto,  cast  such  abundance  of  ashes,  that  in
many  leagues  compasse  thereabout  it  darkned  the  light
of  the  day :  and  there  fell  such  store  in  Quitto,  as  they
were  not  able  to  goe  in  the  streets.  There  have  beene
other  Volcans  seene  which  cast  neither  smoake,  flame,  nor
yet  ashes,  but  in  the  bottome  they  are  seene  to  burne  with
a  quicke  fire  without  dying :  such  a  one  was  that  which
in  our  time  a  covetous  and  greedie  Priest  seeing,  per-  Coveteous
swaded  himselfe  that  they  were  heapes  of  gold  he  did  Pr'iest-
see  burning,  imagining  it  could  be  no  other  matter  or
substance,  which  had  burnt  so  many  yeeres,  and  not
consumed.  And  in  this  conceit  he  made  certaine  kettles
with  chaines,  and  an  instrument,  to  gather  and  draw  up
the  gold  out  of  this  Pit  or  Volcan :  but  the  fire  scorned
him,  for  no  sooner  did  his  Iron  chaine  and  Caldron
approach  neere  the  fire,  but  suddenly  they  were  broken
in  pieces.  Yet  some  told  me,  that  this  man  was  still
obstinate,  seeking  other  inventions  for  to  draw  out  this
gold  as  he  imagined.

Some  have  held  opinion,  that  these  Volcans  consume  Causes  of  this
the  inner  substance  they  have  of  Nature ;  and  for  this  burning.
reason  they  beleeve,  that  naturally  they  shall  end,  when
as  they  have  consumed  the  fuell  (as  a  man  may  say)  that
is  within  them.  According  to  which  opinion  wee  see
at  this  day,  some  Mountaines  and  Rocks,  from  whence
they  draw  a  burnt  stone  which  is  light,  but  very  hard,
and  is  excellent  to  build  with,  as  that  which  is  carried  to

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

Mexico.  And  in  effect  there  are  some  shewes  of  that
which  hath  beene  spoken,  that  these  Mountaines  or  Rocks
had  somtimes  a  naturall  fire,  which  hath  died  after  the
matter  was  consumed ;  and  so  these  stones  have  remayned
burnt  and  pierced  with  the  fire  as  wee  see.  For  my  part,
I  will  not  contradict  it,  that  in  those  places  there  hath
not  beene  fire  sometimes,  or  Volcans.  But  there  is  some
difficultie  to  beleeve  it  should  be  so  in  all  Volcans,  con-
sidering the  matter  they  cast  out  is  almost  infinite ;  and
that  being  gathered  together,  it  could  not  bee  contayned
in  the  same  concavitie  from  whence  it  goes.  Moreover,
there  are  some  Volcans,  that  in  hundreds,  yea  thousands
of  yeeres  are  alwayes  of  one  fashion,  casting  out  continu-
ally smoake,  fire,  and  ashes.  Plinie  the  historiographer
of  naturall  things  (as  the  other  Plinie  his  nephew  reports)
searching  out  the  secret  how  this  should  passe :  and
approaching  too  neere  the  exhalation  of  fire  of  one  of
these  Volcans,  died ;  and  thinking  by  his  diligence  to
find  an  end  thereof,  had  an  end  of  his  life.  For  my  part,
upon  this  consideration  I  thinke,  that  as  there  are  places
in  the  earth,  whose  vertue  is  to  draw  vaporous  matter,
and  to  convert  it  into  water,  which  bee  the  Fountaines
that  alwayes  runne,  and  have  alwayes  matter  to  make
them  runne,  for  that  they  draw  unto  them  the  substance
of  water.  In  like  sort  there  are  places  that  have  the
propertie  to  draw  unto  them  hot  exhalations,  and  to  con-
vert them  into  fire  and  smoake  which  by  their  force  and
violence  cast  out  other  thicke  matter  which  dissolves  into
ashes,  into  pumice  stone,  or  such  like  substance :  and  for
a  sufficient  argument  to  prove  it  to  be  so  in  these  Volcans,
they  sometimes  cast  smoake,  and  not  alwayes,  and  some-
times fire,  and  not  alwayes,  which  is  according  to  that  it
can  draw  unto  it,  and  digest,  as  the  Fountaines  which  in
Winter  abound,  and  in  Summer  decrease ;  yea  some  are
quite  dried  up,  according  to  the  force  and  vigour  they
have,  and  the  matter  that  is  presented :  even  so  it  is  of
these  Volcans,  which  cast  fire  more  or  lesse  at  certaine
seasons. Others  say,  that  it  is  Hell  fire,  which  issueth

64

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
there,  to  serve  as  a  warning,  thereby  to  consider  what  is
in  the  other  life :  but  if  Hell  (as  Divines  hold)  bee  in  the
centre  of  the  Earth,  the  which  containes  in  diameter  above
two  thousand  leagues,  we  cannot  judge  that  this  fire  is
from  the  centre ;  for  that  Hell  fire  (as  Saint  Basil  and  BasiL  Psal-
others  teach)  is  very  different  from  this  which  wee  see,  2  ' in
for  that  it  is  without  light,  and  burneth  without  com-
parison much  more  then  ours.

Some  have  held,  that  from  these  Volcans  which  are  at  OfEarth-
the  Indies,  the  Earthquakes  proceede,  being  very  common  q"akes-
there :  but  for  that  they  ordinarily  chance  in  places  farre  a*>'
from  those  Volcans,  it  cannot  be  the  totall  cause.  It  is
true  they  have  a  certaine  simpathy  one  with  another,  for
that  the  hot  exhalations  which  engender  in  the  inner  con-
cavities of  the  Earth,  seeme  to  be  the  materiall  substance
of  fire  in  the  Volcans,  whereby  there  kindleth  another  more
grosse  matter,  and  makes  these  shewes  of  flame  and  smoake
that  come  forth.  And  these  exhalations  (finding  no  easie
issue  in  the  Earth)  move  it,  to  issue  forth  with  great
violence,  whereby  wee  heare  that  horrible  noise  under  the
Earth,  and  likewise  the  shaking  of  the  Earth,  being  stirred
with  this  burning  exhalation  ;  Even  as  Gun-powlder  in
mynes,  having  fire  put  to  it  breaks  Rocks  and  Walls :
and  as  the  Chesnut  laid  into  the  fire,  leapes  and  breakes
with  a  noise,  when  as  it  casts  forth  the  aire  (which  is
contayned  within  the  huske)  by  the  force  of  the  fire :
Even  so  these  Earthquakes  doe  most  commonly  happen
in  places  neere  the  water  or  Sea.  As  wee  see  in  Europe,
and  at  the  Indies,  that  Townes  and  Cities  farthest  from
the  Sea  and  waters  are  least  afflicted  therewith ;  and  con-
trariwise, those  that  are  seated  upon  Ports  of  the  Sea,
upon  Rivers,  the  Sea  coast,  and  places  neere  unto  them,
feele  most  this  calamitie.  There  hath  happened  in  Peru
(the  which  is  wonderfull,  and  worthy  to  be  noted)  Earth-  Great
quakes  which  have  runne  from  Chille  unto  Quitto,  and  earth?mkes'
that  is  above  a  hundred  leagues,  I  say  the  greatest  that
ever  I  heard  speake  of,  for  lesser  be  more  common  there.
Upon  the  coast  of  Chille  (I  remember  not  well  in  what

XV  65  E

A°  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

yeere)  there  was  so  terrible  an  Earthquake,  as  it  over-
turned whole  Mountaines,  and  thereby  stopped  the  course
of  Rivers  which  it  converted  into  Lakes,  it  beat  downe

[III.  v.  941.]  Townes,  and  slue  a  great  number  of  people,  causing  the
Sea  to  leave  her  place  some  leagues,  so  as  the  ships
remayned  on  drie  ground,  farre  from  the  ordinarie  Roade,
with  many  other  heavie  and  horrible  things.  And  as  I
well  remember,  they  say  this  trouble  and  motion,  caused
by  the  Earthquake,  ranne  three  hundred  leagues  alongst
the  Coast.  Soone  after,  which  was  in  the  yeere  eightie
two,  happened  that  earthquake  of  Arequipa,  which  in  a
manner  over-threw  the  whole  Citie.  Since  in  the  yeere
eightie  sixe,  the  ninth  of  July,  fell  another  earthquake
in  the  Citie  of  Kings,  the  which  as  the  Vice-roy  did  write,
had  runne  one  hundred  threescore  and  ten  leagues  alongst
the  Coast,  and  overthwart  in  the  Sierre  fiftie  leagues.  The
mercy  of  the  Lord  was  great  in  this  Earthquake,  to  fore-

Noyse  before warne  the  people  by  a  great  noise  which  they  heard  a

t  e  ean  - little before the Earthquake, who taught by former
quake.  .  . n  :  1  1  .&r./1.

experiences,  presently  put  themselves  in  saretie,  leaving

their  Houses,  Streets,  and  Gardens,  to  goe  into  the  fields ;

so  as  although  it  ruined  a  great  part  of  the  Citie,  and  of

the  chiefest  buildings,  yet  there  died  not  above  fifteene

or  twentie  persons  of  all  the  Inhabitants. It  caused  the

like  trouble  and  motion  at  Sea,  as  it  had  done  at  Chille,

which  happened  presently  after  the  Earthquake,  so  as  they

might  see  the  Sea  furiously  to  flie  out  of  her  bounds,  and  to

runne neere two leagues into the Land, rising  above

fourteene  fathom : it  covered  all  that  Playne,  so  as  the

Ditches  and  pieces  of  wood  that  were  there,  swam  in

the  water. There  was yet another  earthquake in the

Realme  and  Citie  of  Quitto  ;  and  it  seemes  all  these  notable

Earthquakes  upon  that  Coast,  have  succeeded  one  another

by  order,  as  in  truth  it  is  subject  to  these  inconveniences.

And  therefore  although  upon  the  coast  of  Peru,  there  be

no  torments  from  Heaven,  as  thunder  and  lightning,  yet

are  they  not  without  feare  upon  the  Land  :  and  so  every

one  hath  before  his  eyes,  the  Heralds  of  divine  Justice,

66

JOSEPH ACOSTA

A.D.

c.  1588.

Why  the  Sea
coast  is  subject
to  earth-
quakes.

to  moove  him  to  feare  God.  For  as  the  Scripture  saith,
Fecit  haec  ut  timeatur.  Returning  then  to  our  purpose,
I  say  the  Sea  coast  is  most  subject  to  these  earthquakes,
the  reason  is,  in  my  judgement,  for  that  the  water  doth
stop  the  conduits  and  passages  of  the  earth,  by  which
the  hot  exhalations  should  passe,  which  are  engendered
there.  And  also  the  humiditie  thickning  the  superficies
of  the  earth,  doth  cause  the  fumes  and  hot  exhalations  to
goe  close  together  and  encounter  violently  in  the  bowels
of  the  earth,  which  doe  afterwards  breake  foorth.

Some  have  observed,  that  such  Earthquakes  have
usually  hapned,  when  as  a  raynie  season  falls  after  some
drie  yeeres.  Whereupon  they  say,  that  the  Earthquakes
are  most  rare,  where  are  most  Wells,  the  which  is  approved
by  experience.  Those  of  the  Citie  of  Mexico  hold
opinion,  that  the  Lake  whereon  it  is  seated,  is  the  cause
of  the  Earthquakes  that  happen  there,  although  they  be
not  very  violent :  and  it  is  most  certaine,  that  the  Townes
and  Provinces,  farre  within  the  Land,  and  farthest  from
the  Sea,  receive  sometimes  great  losses  by  these  Earth-
quakes, as  the  Citie  of  Chachapoyas  at  the  Indies,  and
in  Italie  that  of  Ferrara,  although  upon  this  subject.  It  Earthquake
seemes  this  latter,  being  neere  to  a  River,  and  not  farre
from  the  Adriaticke  Sea,  should  rather  be  numbred  among
the  Sea-townes.  In  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1581.  in
Cugiano,  a  Citie  of  Peru,  otherwise  called  The  Peace,
there  happened  a  strange  accident  touching  this  subject.
A  Village  called  Angoango  (where  many  Indians  dwelt  At  Angoango
that  were  Sorcerers  and  Idolaters)  fell  suddenly  to  ruine,
so  as  a  great  part  thereof  was  raysed  up  and  carried  away,
and  many  of  the  Indians  smothered,  and  that  which  seemes
incredible  (yet  testified  by  men  of  credit)  the  earth  that
was  ruined  and  so  beaten  downe,  did  runne  and  slide
upon  the  Land  for  the  space  of  a  league  and  a  halfe,  as
it  had  beene  water  or  waxe  molten,  so  as  it  stopt  and
filled  up  a  Lake,  and  remayned  so  spread  over  the  whole
Countrie.

at  Ferrara
terrible.

67

A.D.

c.  1588.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

Metals  grow
as  plants.

§.  mi.

Of  Metals  in  the  Indies  and  especially  of  the  Gold
and  Silver,  and  Quick-silver.

Etals  are  (as  Plants)  hidden  and  buried  in  the
bowels  of  the  Earth,  which  have  some  conformitie
in  themselves,  in  the  forme  and  manner  of  their
production ;  for  that  we  see  and  discover  even  in  them,
branches,  and  as  it  were  a  bodie,  from  whence  they  grow
and  proceede,  which  are  the  greater  veines  and  the  lesse,
so  as  they  have  a  knitting  in  themselves :  and  it  seemes
properly  that  these  Minerals  grow  like  unto  Plants,  not
that  they  have  any  inward  vegetative  life,  being  onely
proper  to  Plants :  but  they  are  engendered  in  the  bowels
of  the  earth,  by  the  vertue  and  force  of  the  Sunne  and
other  Planets,  and  in  long  continuance  of  time,  they
increase  and  multiply  after  the  manner  of  Plants.  And
even  as  metals  bee  plants  hidden  in  the  earth,  so  wee  may
say,  that  plants  bee  living  Creatures  fixed  in  one  place,
whose  life  is  maintayned  by  the  nourishment  which  Nature

Animalia.  furnisheth  from  their  first  beginning.  But  living  Creatures
surpasse  Plants,  in  that  they  have  a  more  perfect  being ;
and  therefore  have  neede  of  a  more  perfect  foode  and
nourishment ;  for  the  search  whereof,  Nature  hath  given
them  a  mooving  and  feeling  to  discover  and  discerne  it.
So  as  the  rough  and  barren  earth  is  as  a  substance  and
nutriment  for  metals ;  and  that  which  is  fertile  and  better
seasoned  a  nourishment  for  Plants.  The  same  plants
serve  as  a  nourishment  for  living  creatures,  and  the  plants

[III.  v.  942.]  and  living  creatures  together  as  a  nourishment  for  men,
the  inferiour  nature  alwayes  serving  for  the  maintenance
and  sustentation  of  the  superiour,  and  the  lesse  perfect
yeelding  unto  the  more  perfect :  whereby  wee  may  see
how  much  it  wants,  that  gold  and  silver  and  other  things
which  men  so  much  esteeme  by  their  covetousnesse,
should  bee  the  happinesse  of  man,  whereunto  hee  should

68

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
tend,  seeing  they  bee  so  many  degrees  in  qualitie  inferior
to  man,  who  hath  beene  created  and  made  onely  to  be  a
subject  to  serve  the  universall  Creator  of  all  things,  as
his  proper  end  and  perfect  rest  and  to  which  man,  all
other  things  in  this  world,  were  not  propounded  or  left,
but  to  gaine  this  last  end.

The  diversitie  of  metals,  which  the  Creator  hath  shut
up  in  the  closets  and  concavities  of  the  earth,  is  such,  and
so  great,  that  man  drawes  profit  and  commoditie  from
every  one  of  them.  Some  serve  for  curing  of  diseases,
others  for  armes  and  for  defence  against  the  enemies,
some  are  for  ornament  and  beautifying  of  our  persons
and  houses,  and  others  are  fit  to  make  vessels  and  Iron-
workes,  with  divers  fashions  of  instruments,  which  the
industrie  of  man  hath  found  out  and  put  in  practice.
But  above  all  the  uses  of  metals,  which  be  simple  and
naturall,  the  communication  and  commerce  of  men  hath
found  out  one,  which  is  the  use  of  money,  the  which  (as
the  Philosopher  saith)  is  the  measure  of  all  things.  And  Arist.  5.
although  naturally,  and  of  it  selfe,  it  bee  but  one  onely  Et^'tc-  caP-  5-
thing,  yet  in  value  and  estimation  we  may  say,  that  it  is
all  things.  Money  is  unto  us  as  it  were,  meate,  clothing,
house,  horse,  and  generally  whatsoever  man  hath  need  of.
By  this  meanes  all  obeyes  to  money,  and  as  the  Wiseman  Eccks.  10.
saith,  to  finde  an  invention  that  one  thing  should  be
all.  Men  guided  or  thrust  forward  by  a  naturall  instinct,
choose  the  thing  most  durable  and  most  maniable,  which
is  metall,  and  amongst  metals,  gave  them  the  prehemi-
nence  in  this  invention  of  money,  which  of  their  nature
were  most  durable  and  incorruptible,  which  is  silver  and
gold.  A  Wiseman  said,  that  what  a  father  doth  to  marry
his  daughter  well,  is  to  give  her  a  great  portion  in
marriage ;  the  like  hath  God  done  for  this  Land  so  rough
and  laboursome,  giving  it  great  riches  in  mynes,  that  by
this  meanes  it  might  be  the  more  sought  after.  At  the
west  Indies  then  there  are  great  store  of  mynes  of  all  sorts
of  metals,  as  Copper,  Iron,  Lead,  Tinne,  Quick-silver,
Silver,  and  Gold :  and  amongst  all  the  Regions  and  Parts

69

A.D.

c.  1588.

Of  the  qualitie
and  nature  of
theearthwhere
the  metals  are
found,  and
that  all  these
metals  are  not
imploded  at  the
Indies,  and
how  the
Indians  used
them.  I.  4.
Chap.  3.
Plin.lib.  $.de
Genes,  mund.
Euseb.  lib.  8.
de  prcepar.
evang.  cap.  9.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  the  Indies,  the  Realmes  of  Peru  abound  most  in  these
metals,  especially  with  Gold,  Silver,  Quick-silver,  or
Mercurie,  whereof  they  have  found  great  store,  and  daily
discover  new  mynes.  And  without  doubt,  according  to
the  qualitie  of  the  earth,  those  which  are  to  discover,  are
without  comparison,  farre  more  in  number  then  those
which  are  yet  discovered :  yea,  it  seemes  that  all  the  Land
is  sowed  with  these  metals,  more  then  any  other  in  the
world  that  is  yet  known  unto  us,  or  that  ancient  Writers
have  made  mention  of.

The  reason  why  there  is  so  great  abundance  of  metals
at  the  Indies  (especially  at  the  west  of  Peru,  as  I  have
said)  is  the  will  of  the  Creator,  who  hath  imparted  his  gifts
as  it  pleased  him.  But  comming  to  a  naturall  and  philo-
sophicall  reason,  it  is  very  true,  which  Philon  a  wise  man
writes,  saying,  that  gold,  silver,  and  metals,  grow
naturally  in  land  that  is  most  barren  and  unfruitfull.  And
wee  see,  that  in  Lands  of  good  temperature,  the  which  are
fertile  with  grasse  and  fruits,  there  are  seldome  found  any
mynes ;  for  that  Nature  is  contented  to  give  them  vigour
to  bring  forth  fruits  more  necessarie  for  the  preservation
and  maintenance  of  the  life  of  beasts  and  men.  And
contrariwise  to  lands  that  are  very  rough,  drie,  and  barren
(as  in  the  highest  Mountaines  and  inaccessible  Rocks  of  a
rough  temper)  they  finde  mynes  of  silver,  of  quick-silver,
and  of  gold,  and  all  those  riches  (which  are  come  into
Spaine  since  the  West  Indies  were  discovered)  have  beene
drawne  out  of  such  places  which  are  rough  and  full,  bare
and  fruitlesse :  yet  the  taste  of  this  money,  makes  these
places  pleasing  and  agreeable,  yea,  well  inhabited  with
numbers  of  people.  And  although  there  be,  as  I  have
said,  many  mynes  of  all  kindes  of  metals  as  at  the  Indies,
yet  they  use  none  but  those  of  gold  and  silver,  and  as
much  quick-silver  as  is  necessarie  to  refine  their  gold  and
silver.  They  carry  Iron  thither  from  Spaine  and  China.
As  for  Copper,  the  Indians  have  drawne  of  it,  and  used  it
for  their  armes,  the  which  were  not  usually  of  Iron,  but  of
Copper. Since  the  Spaniards  possessed  the  Indies,  they

70

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
have  drawne  very  little,  neither  doe  they  take  the  paines
to seeke out these mynes, although there bee many
busying themselves in the search of richer and more
precious  metals,  wherein  they  spend  their  time  and  labour.
They  use  no  other  metals,  as  Copper,  and  Iron,  but  onely
that which is sent them from Spaine, or that which
remaines  of  the  refining  of  gold  and  silver. Wee  finde
not  that  the  Indians  in  former  times  used  gold,  silver,  or
any  other  metall  for  money,  and  for  the  price  of  things,
but onely for ornament, as hath been said, whereof
there  was  great  quantitie  in  their  Temples,  Palaces,  and
Tombes,  with  a  thousand  kindes  of  vessels  of  gold  and
silver,  which  they  had. They  used  no  gold  nor  silver  to  No  money  of
trafficke  or  buy  withall,  but  did  change  and  trucke  one  g°ld->  hut  °f
thing  for  another,  as  Homer  and  Plinie  report  of  the  pvtSjrfc'
Ancients. They had some other things of greater  c '
esteeme,  which  went  currant  amongst  them  for  price,  and
in  stead  of  coine : and  unto  this  day  this  custome  con-
tinues amongst the Indians, as in the Provinces of
Mexico,  in  stead  of  money  they  use  Cacao,  (which  is  a
small  fruit)  and  therewith  buy  what  they  will. In  Peru
they  use  Coca,  to  the  same  end  (the  which  is  a  leafe  the
Indians  esteeme  much)  as  in  Paraguay,  they  have  stamps
of  Iron  for  coine,  and  cotton  woven  in  Saint  Croix,  of  the  [HI.  v.  943/
Sierre. Finally,  the  manner  of  the  Indians  trafficke,  and
their  buying  and  selling,  was  to  exchange,  and  give  things
for  things : and  although there  were  great Marts and
famous  Faires,  yet  had  they  no  neede  of  money,  nor  of
Brokers,  for  that  every  one  had  learned  what  he  was  to
give  in  exchange  for  every  kinde  of  merchandise. Since
the Spaniards entred, the Indians have used gold and
silver  to  buy  withall :  and  in  the  beginning  there  was  no
coine,  but  silver  by  weight  was  their  price  and  money,  as
they  report  of  the  ancient  Romans. Since,  for  a  greater
benefit,  they  have  forged  coine  in  Mexico  and  Peru,  yet  pnn.  lib.  33.
unto  this  day  they  have  not  in  the  West  Indies  coyned  c-  +•
any  money  of  Copper  or  other  metall,  but  onely  of  silver
and  gold  : for  the  richnesse  of  that  Countrie  hath  not

71

A.fi.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

admitted  nor  received  such  money  as  they  call  bullion,  nor

other  kindes  of  alloy,  which  they  use  in  Italie,  and  in  other

Provinces  of  Europe ; Although  in  some  Hands  of  the

Indies,  as  Saint  Dominique,  and  Port  Ricco, they  use

Coine  of coine  of  leather,  which  is  square,  the  which  are  currant

leather.  onely  in  those  Hands,  having  little  silver  or  gold. I  say

little,  although  there  be  much,  for  that  no  man  digges  it

and  refines  it. But  for  that  the  riches  of  the  Indies,  and

their  manner  to  labour  in  the  mynes,  consists  of  gold,

silver,  and  quick-silver,  I  will  speake  something  of  these

three  metals,  leaving  the  rest  for  this  time.

Of  gold  which Gold  amongst  other  metals  hath  beene  alwayes  held

they  digge  and  fo^  most excellent ; and  with  reason, being  the  most

billies* £ durable  and  incorruptible  of  all  others ; for  fire  which

Chap.  4. consumes  and  diminisheth  the  rest,  amends  it,  and  brings

it  to  perfection. Gold  which  hath  often  passed  through

the  fire,  keepes  his  colour,  and  is  most  fine  and  pure ;

which  properly  is  called  (as  Plinie  saith)  Obriso,  whereof

the Scripture  makes so  often  mention  and  use, which

Plin.  lib.  33.  consumeth  all  other  metals  (as  the  same  Plinie  saith)  doth

c-  3-  not  any  thing  waste  gold,  nor  yet  hurt  it,  neither  is  it

eaten,  nor  groweth  old. And  although  his  substance  and

body  bee  firme  and  solid ; yet  doth  it  yeeld  and  bow

wonderfully ; the Beaters  and Drawers of  gold know

well  the  force  it  hath  to  bee  drawne  out  without  breaking.

All  which  things  well  considered,  with other  excellent

properties,  will  give  men  of  judgement  to  understand,

Jpoc  3.  y wherefore  the  holy  Scripture  doth  compare  Charitie  to

2i-  gold. To  conclude, there  is  little  neede  to  relate  the

Cant.  3.  excellencies  thereof  to  make  it  more  desirable. For  the

3  Rex  6 greatest  excellencie  it  hath,  is  to  be  knowne  (as  it  is)

amongst  men,  for  the  supreme  power  and  greatnesse  of

the  World. Comming  therefore  to  our  subject ; at  the

Indies  there  is  great  abundance  of  this  metall,  and  it  is

well  knowne  by  approved  Histories,  that  the  Inguas  of

Peru  did  not  content  themselves  with  great  and  small

vessels  of  gold,  as  Pots,  Cups,  Goblets,  and  Flagons ; yea

with  Kowles  or  great  Vessels,  but  they  had  Chaires  also,

72

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.
and  Litters  of  massie  gold  : and  in  their  Temples  they
had  set  up  mayne  Images  of  pure  gold,  whereof  they  finde
some  yet  at  Mexico,  but  not  such  store  as  when  the  first
Conquerors  came  into  the  one  and  the  other  Kingdome,
who  found  great  treasure,  and  without  doubt  there  was
much  more  hidden  in  the  earth  by  the  Indians. It  would
seeme  ridiculous  to  report  that  they  have  made  their  horse
shooes  of  silver  for  want  of  Iron,  and  that  they  have  paid
three  hundred  crownes  for  a  bottle  of  wine,  and  other
strange  things ;  and  yet  in  truth  this  hath  come  to  passe,
yea  and  greater  matters. They  draw  gold  in  those  parts
after  three  sorts : or  at  the  least ; I  have  seene  all  three  See  before  in
used. For  either  they  finde  gold  in  graines,  in  powlder,  '  ■  dos,  Santos,
or  in  stone.  _  _  Herrera.

The  most  famous  gold  is  that  of  Caranava  in  Peru,
and  of  Valdivia  in  Chille,  for  that  it  riseth  with  his  alloy
and  perfection,  which  is  twentie  three  Carrats  and  a  halfe,
and  sometimes  more.  They  make  account  likewise  of
the  gold  of  Veragua  to  bee  very  fine.  They  bring  much
gold  to  Mexico  from  the  Philippines,  and  China,  but
commonly  it  is  weake  and  of  base  alloy.  Gold  is  com-
monly found  mixt  with  Silver  or  with  Copper ;  but  that
which  is  mixed  with  silver  is  commonly  of  fewer  Carrats
then  that  which  is  mixed  with  copper.  If  there  be  a  fift
part  of  silver,  Plinie  saith,  it  is  then  properly  called  Plin.  lib.  3.
Electrum,  which  hath  the  propertie  to  shine  more  at  the  cap.  4.
light  of  the  fire,  then  fine  gold  or  fine  silver.  That  which
is  incorporate  with  copper,  is  commonly  of  a  higher  value.
They  refine  powldred  gold  in  basons,  washing  it  in  many
waters,  until!  the  Sand  falls  from  it,  and  the  gold  as  most
heavie  remayneth  in  the  bottome.  They  refine  it  like-
wise with  quick-silver  and  strong  water,  for  that  the  allum
whereof  they  make  this  water  hath  the  vertue  to  separate
gold  from  drosse,  or  from  other  metals.  After  it  is  puri-
fied and  molten,  they  make  Bricks  or  small  Barres  to  carry
it  unto  Spaine  ;  for  being  in  powlder,  they  cannot  transport
it  from  the  Indies,  for  they  can  neither  custome  it,  marke
it,  nor  take  say,  untill  it  bee  molten. In  the  fleet  where

73

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

I  came,  which  was  in  the  yeere  1585.  the  declaration  of  the
firme  Land  was  of  twelve  Cassons  or  Chests  of  gold,  every
Casson  at  the  least  weighed  foure  Arobes,  that  is  a
hundred  weight ;  and  a  thousand  fiftie  and  sixe  Mares
from  new  Spaine,  which  was  for  the  King  onely,  besides
that  which  came  for  Merchants  and  private  men  being
registred ;  and  much  that  came  unregistred.  This  may
suffice  touching  the  gold  of  the  Indies,  and  now  wee  will
speake  of  Silver.
Of  the  Silver  Now  we  will  shew  how  they  discover  the  mynes  of
at  the  Indies.  Silver,  their  veines,  rootes,  and  beginnings  whereof  Job
aP'  5"  speakes.  And  first  I  will  say,  that  the  reason  why  they
give  silver  the  second  place  among  all  other  metals,  is,
for  that  it  approcheth  neerer  to  gold  then  any  other,  being
more  durable  and  lesse  indamaged  by  the  fire,  and  more
mailable  then  any  other :  yea  it  passeth  gold  in  bright-
nesse,  beautie,  and  sound,  the  which  is  cleere,  and  agree-
[III.  v.  944.]  able,  for  the  colour  is  more  conformable  and  resembling
the  light,  and  the  sound  more  piercing,  more  lively,  and
more  delicate.  The  mynes  of  silver  are  commonly  found
in  Mountaines  and  high  Rocks  very  desart,  although  they
have  sometimes  beene  found  in  Playnes  and  Champaines.
There  are  two  different  kindes,  the  one  they  call  stragling,
the  other  fixed  and  setled.  The  stragling,  are  pieces  of
metall  found  in  certaine  places,  the  which  drawne  away,
there  is  no  more  found.  But  the  fixed  veines,  are  those
which  have  a  continuance  in  depth  and  length,  like  to
great  branches  and  armes  of  Trees ;  and  when  they  finde
any  one  of  them,  they  commonly  finde  many  in  the  same
place.  The  manner  to  purge  and  refine  silver  which  the
Indians  have  used,  was  by  melting,  in  dissolving  this
masse  of  metall  by  fire,  which  casts  the  earthly  drosse
apart,  and  by  his  force  separates  Silver  from  Lead,  Tin
from  Copper,  and  other  metals  mixt.  To  this  end  they
did  build  small  Furnaces  in  places  where  as  the  winde  did
commonly  blow,  and  with  Wood  and  Cole  made  their
refining,  the  which  Furnaces  in  Peru  they  call  Guayras.
Since  the  Spaniards  entred,  besides  this  manner  of  refining

74

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
which  they  use  to  this  day,  they  likewise  refine  silver  with
quick-silver,  and  draw  more  by  this  meanes  then  in  refining
it  by  fire.  For  there  is  some  kind  of  silver  metall  found
which  can  by  no  meanes  be  purged  and  refined  by  fire,  but
onely  with  quick-silver.  But  this  kinde  of  metall  is  com-
monly poore  and  weake,  the  which  usually  they  finde  in
greatest  abundance.  They  call  that  poore  which  yeelds  least
silver,  and  great  quantitie  of  other  metall,  and  that  rich
which  yeelds  most  silver.  It  is  strange  to  see,  not  onely  Note.
the  difference  betwixt  the  refining  of  metall  by  fire,  and
without  it  by  quick-silver,  but  also  that  some  of  these
metals,  which  are  refined  by  the  fire,  cannot  well  be  molten
with  any  artificiall  winde,  as  with  bellowes,  but  when  it  is
kindled  and  blowne  with  the  naturall  aire,  or  naturall
winde.  The  metall  of  the  mynes  of  Porco  is  easily  refined
with  bellowes,  and  that  of  the  mynes  of  Potozi  cannot
bee  molten  with  bellowes,  but  onely  by  the  breath  of  their
Guayras,  which  are  small  Furnaces  upon  the  sides  of  the
Mountaines,  built  expresly  where  the  winde  lies,  within
the  which  they  melt  this  metall ;  and  though  it  be  hard
to  yeeld  a  reason  for  this  difference,  yet  is  it  most  certaine
and  approved  by  long  experience  :  so  as  the  greedie  desire
of  this  metall  so  much  valued  amongst  men,  hath  made
them  seeke  out  a  thousand  gentle  inventions  and  devices,
whereof  we  will  hereafter  make  mention.  The  chiefe  places
of  the  Indies  from  whence  they  draw  silver,  are  new  Spaine
and  Peru,  but  the  mynes  of  Peru  farre  surpasse  the  rest ;
and  amongst  all  others  of  the  World,  those  of  Potozi.

The  Mountaine  or  Hill  of  Potozi  so  famous,  is  situate  Of  the  Moun-
in  the  Province  of  Charcas,  in  the  Kingdome  of  Peru,  taine  or  Hill
distant  from  the  Equinoctiall  towards  the  South,  or  Pole  0fPoj°zU  <™d
Antartike,  one  and  twentie  degrees  and  two  thirds :  so  as  ^fj/W^
it  falls  under  the  Tropicke,  bordering  upon  the  burning  Chat.  6.
Zone,  and  yet  this  Region  is  extremely  cold,  yea,  more
then  old  Castile  in  the  Kingdome  of  Spaine,  and  more
then  Flanders  it  selfe,  although  by  reason  it  should  be
hot  or  temperate,  in  regard  of  the  height  and  elevation  of
the  Pole  where  it  is  seated. The  reason  of  this  so  cold

75

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

a  temperature,  is  the  height  of  the  Mountaine,  whereas
cold  and  intemperate  winds  continually  blow,  especially
that  which  they  call  Thomahavi,  which  is  boistrous  and
most  cold.  It  raines  most  commonly  in  June,  July,  and
August.  The  ground  and  soile  of  this  Mountaine  is  drie,
cold,  and  very  unpleasant,  yea  altogether  barren,  which
neither  engenders  nor  brings  forth  any  fruit,  grasse,  nor
graine ;  it  is  naturally  unhabitable,  for  the  intemperature
of  the  Heaven,  and  the  barrennesse  of  the  Earth.  But
the  force  of  silver,  which  drawes  unto  it  the  desire  of  all
things,  hath  peopled  this  Mountaine  more  then  any  other
place  in  all  these  Kingdomes,  making  it  so  fruitfull  of  all
kindes  of  meates,  as  there  wants  nothing  that  can  be
desired,  yea,  in  great  abundance ;  and  although  there  be
nothing  but  what  is  brought  by  carriage,  yet  every  place
abounds  so  with  Fruit,  Conserves,  exquisite  Wines,  Silkes,
and  all  other  delicates,  as  it  is  not  inferiour  to  any  other
part.  This  Mountaine  is  of  colour  darke  red,  and  is  in
forme  pleasing  at  the  first  sight,  resembling  perfectly  the
fashion  of  a  Pavilion,  or  of  a  Sugar-loafe.  It  exceeds  all
other  Hills  and  Mountaines  about  it  in  height.  The  way
whereby  they  ascend,  is  very  rough  and  uneven,  and  yet
they  goe  up  on  horse-back.  It  is  round  at  the  top,  and
at  the  foot  it  hath  a  league  in  circuit.  It  containes  from
the  top  to  the  bottom  1680.  common  yards,  the  which
reduced  to  the  measure  of  Spanish  leagues,  makes  a
quarter  of  a  league.  At  the  foot  of  this  Mountaine  there
is  another  small  Hill  that  riseth  out  of  it,  in  the  which
there  hath  beene  somtimes  mynes  of  metall  dispersed,
which  were  found  as  it  were  in  purses,  and  not  in  fixed  or
continued  veines ;  yet  were  they  very  rich,  though  few  in
number.  This  small  Rock  was  called  by  the  Indians,
Guayna  Potozi,  which  is  yong  Potozi ;  at  the  foot  wherof
begins  the  dwellings  of  the  Spaniards  and  Indians,  which
are  come  to  the  riches  and  worke  of  Potozi,  which  dwell-
ing may  containe  some  two  leagues  in  circuit,  and  the
greatest  traffick  and  commerce  of  all  Peru  is  in  this  place.
The  mynes  of  this  Mountaine  were  not  digged  nor  dis-

76

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.
covered  in  the  time  of  the  Itiguas,  which  were  the  Lords
of  Peru,  before  the  Spaniards  entred,  although  they  had
digged  and  opened  the  mynes  of  Porco,  neer  to  Potozi,
distant  only  six  leagues.

An  Indian  called  Gualpa,  of  the  Nation  of  Chumbibilca,
which  is  a  Province  of  Cusco,  going  one  day  to  hunt  for
Venison,  passing  towards  the  West  whither  the  beast  was
fled,  hee  began  to  runne  up  against  the  Rocke,  which  at
that  time  was  covered  and  planted  with  certaine  Trees
they  call  Quinua,  and  with  thicke  bushes,  and  as  he
strived  to  get  up  a  way  which  was  somewhat  rough  and
uneasie,  hee  was  forced  to  lay  hold  upon  a  branch,  which
issued  from  a  veine  of  a  silver  myne  (which  since  they  [HI.  v.  945.]
have  called  Rich)  which  hee  pulled  up,  perceiving  in  the
hole  or  roote  thereof,  metall,  the  which  he  knew  to  be  very
good,  by  the  experience  hee  had  of  the  mynes  of  Porco  :
and  after  finding  upon  the  ground  certaine  pieces  of
metall,  which  lay  broken  and  dispersed  neere  to  this  veine,
being  scarce  well  able  to  judge  thereof,  for  that  the  colour
was  spoyled  and  changed  by  the  Sunne  and  raine ;  he
carried  it  to  Porco  to  trie  by  the  Guayras  (which  is  the
triall  of  metall  by  fire)  and  having  thereby  found  the  great
riches  and  his  happy  fortune,  he  secretly  digged  and  drew
metall  out  of  this  veine,  not  imparting  it  to  any  man,
untill  that  an  Indian  called  Guanca,  of  the  Valley  of
Xaura,  which  is  upon  the  borders  of  the  Citie  of  Kings,
who  remayning  at  Porco  neere  unto  Gualpa  of  Chum-
bibilca, perceived  one  day  that  hee  made  a  refining,  and
that  his  Wedges  and  Bricks  were  greater  then  such  as
were  usually  made  in  those  places :  and  also  increasing  in
his  expence  of  apparell,  having  till  then  lived  but  basely.
For  this  reason,  and  for  that  the  metall  his  Neighbour
refined  was  different  from  that  of  Porco,  hee  thought  to
discover  this  secret,  and  wrought  so,  that  although  the
other  kept  it  as  secret  as  hee  could,  yet  through  impor-
tunitie  hee  was  forced  to  carry  him  unto  the  Rocke  of
Potozi,  having  enjoyed  this  rich  treasure  full  two  moneths.
And  then  Gualpa  the  Indian  willed  Guanca  for  his  part  to

77

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

.1588.

take  a  veine,  which  he  had  discovered  neere  to  the  rich
veine,  which  at  this  day  is  called  the  veine  of  Diego
Centeno,  that  was  not  lesse  rich,  but  more  hard  to  digge
and  to  draw  forth ;  and  so  by  agreement  they  divided
betweene  them  the  richest  Rocke  in  the  world.  It
chanced  after,  the  Indian  Guanca  finding  some  difficultie
to  digge  and  draw  forth  his  metall,  being  most  hard,  and
the  other  Gualpa  refusing  to  impart  any  of  his  myne  unto
him,  they  fell  at  debate ;  so  as  Guanca  of  Xaura  grieved
therewith,  and  with  some  other  discontents,  discovered
this  secret  unto  his  Master  called  Villaroel  a  Spaniard,  who
then  remayned  at  Porco.  This  Villaroel  desirous  to
understand  the  truth,  went  to  Potozi,  and  finding  the
riches  his  Yanacona  or  servant  had  discovered  unto  him,
caused  the  Indian  Guanca  to  be  inrolled,  undertaking
with  him  the  said  veine,  which  was  called  Centeno,  they
call  it  Undertaking,  that  is  as  much  as  to  note  and  marke
the  myne,  and  so  much  ground  in  circuit  for  him,  which
the  Law  graunts  unto  those  that  discover  any  myne,  or
unto  those  that  digge  them :  by  meanes  whereof,  having
discovered  them  to  the  Justice,  they  remayned  Lords  of
the  myne,  to  digge  and  draw  forth  the  silver,  as  being
their  owne,  paying  onely  their  duties  unto  the  King,
which  is  a  fift  part.  So  as  the  first  discoverie  and
inregistring  of  the  mynes  of  Potozi,  was  the  one  and
twentieth  of  Aprill,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1545.  in  the
Territorie  of  Porco,  by  the  said  Villaroel  a  Spaniard,  and
Guanca  an  Indian.  Presently  after  they  discovered
another  veine,  which  they  called  the  Veine  of  Tinne,  the
which  is  very  rich,  although  it  be  rough  and  very  painfull
to  worke  in,  the  metall  being  as  hard  as  flint.  Since  the
thirtie  day  of  August  in  the  same  yeere  1545.  the  veine
called  Mendieta  was  inrolled,  and  these  are  the  foure
principall  veines  of  Potozi.  They  say  of  the  rich  veine,
the  first  that  was  discovered,  that  the  metall  lay  above  the
ground  the  height  of  a  Lance,  like  unto  Rocks,  raysing
the  superficies  of  the  Earth,  like  unto  a  crest  of  three
hundred  foot  long,  and  thirteene  foot  broad,  and  that  this

78

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
remayned  bare  and  uncovered  by  the  deluge,  this  veine
having  resisted  the  violence  and  force  of  the  water,  as  the
hardest  part.  The  metall  was  so  rich  as  it  was  halfe
silver,  and  this  veine  continued  in  his  bountie  fiftie  or
threescore  Stades  (which  is  the  height  of  a  man)  and  then
it  fayled.  Presently  after  that  the  discoverie  of  Potozi
was  knowne  in  Peru ;  many  Spaniards,  and  the  most  part
of  the  Bourgeois  of  the  Silver  Citie,  which  is  eighteene
leagues  from  Potozi,  came  thither  to  take  mynes :  yea,
there  came  many  Indians  from  divers  Provinces,  especially
the  Guayzadores  of  Porco,  so  as  within  a  short  space  it
was  the  best  peopled  habitation  of  all  the  Kingdome.

When  as  the  Licenciate  Polio  governed  that  Province,
the  which  was  many  yeeres  after  the  discoverie  of  this
Mountaine,  they  did  every  Saturday  enter  a  hundred  and
fiftie  and  two  hundred  thousand  pieces,  whereof  the  Kings
fift  amounted  to  thirtie  and  fortie  thousand  pieces ;  and
for  every  yeere  a  million  and  a  halfe,  or  little  lesse.  So
as  according  to  that  computation  they  did  draw  every
day  from  this  myne  thirtie  thousand  pieces,  whereof  there  Every  piece  is
came  to  the  King  for  his  fift,  sixe  thousand  pieces  a  day. w°.

There  is  yet  another  thing  to  bee  spoken  of,  to  shew  the  and  a  rourth
riches  of  Potozi,  that  the  account  which  hath  beene  made,  part.
was  onely  of  silver  that  was  marked  and  customed. And
it  is  well  knowne  in  Peru,  that  they  have  long  used  silver
in these  Realmes, which they  call  Currant, which was
neither marked nor customed. And they hold it for
certaine  which  know  these  mynes,  that  in  these  dayes,  the
greatest  part  of  silver  drawne  at  Potozi,  was  not  customed,
and this had course amongst the Indians, and much
amongst  the  Spaniards,  as  I  have  seene  continued  to  my
time ; so  as  it  may  appeare,  the  third  part  of  the  riches
of  Potozi,  yea  the  one  halfe  came  not  to  light,  neither  was
it  customed. There  is  yet  a  more  notable  consideration,
in  that  which  Plinie saith, they  had digged  a  fifteene  Plin.  lib.  33.
hundred  pases  in  the  myne  of  Bebello  ; and  that  con-  c-  6-
tinually  they  found  water,  which  is  the  greatest  hinderance
they  have  to draw  forth their  metall. But  in this  of

79

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

Potozi,  although  they  have  digged  two  hundred  stades
or  heights  of  a  man  in  depth ;  yet  did  they  never  finde
any  water,  which  is  the  greatest  happinesse  of  this
Mountaine.  But  the  mynes  of  Porco,  whose  metall  is
good  and  very  rich,  are  at  this  day  left  for  the  discom-
[III.  v.  946.]  moditie  of  water,  which  they  have  found  in  their  worke ;
for  they  are  two  insupportable  labours  in  searching  of  the
metall ;  first,  to  digge  and  breake  the  Rocks,  and  then
to  draw  out  the  water  all  together.  The  first  of  them,
that  is,  to  cut  through  the  Rocks,  is  paine  enough ;  yea
very  hard  and  excessive.  Finally,  at  this  day  the  King
receives  for  his  fift  yeerly,  from  the  mynes  of  Potozi,  a
million  of  silver,  besides  the  wealth  that  growes  by  quick-
silver, and  other  Royall  prerogatives,  which  is  a  great
treasure.  Some  men  of  judgement  having  cast  up  the
accounts,  say,  that  what  hath  beene  brought  into  the
custcme  House  of  Potozi,  unto  the  yeere  of  our  Lord
1585.  amounteth  unto  a  hundred  thousand  millions  of
pieces  of  Essay,  whereof  every  piece  is  worth  thirteene
Rials  and  a  fourth  part,  not  reckoning  the  silver  which
hath  beene  carried  away  without  custome,  or  that  hath
beene  entred  in  other  Royall  custome  houses,  or  the  silver
that  hath  beene  wrought  in  the  Countrie,  which  is  not
entred,  the  which  is  innumerable,  although  the  first
Registers  of  Entries  are  not  so  exactly  kept  as  at  this  day ;
for  that  in  the  beginning  and  first  discoveries,  they  made
their  receit  by  Romans,  so  great  was  their  abundance.

But  by  the  instructions  and  remembrances  of  Don  Fran-
cisco de  Toledo  the  Vice-roy,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Saviour
Christ  1574.  they  finde  seventie  and  sixe  millions  to  that
yeere :  and  from  that  yeere  to  eightie  five  inclusive,  it
Huge  summes  appeares  by  the  Royall  Registers,  there  were  thirtie  five
of  silver.  millions  more  entred.  They  sent  this  accompt  to  the
Vice-roy  from  Potozi,  in  the  yeere  I  have  mentioned,
being  then  in  Peru ;  and  since  the  wealth  that  hath  come
from  Peru  by  ship,  hath  amouted  to  much  more.  In  that
fleet  where  I  came  in  the  yeere  1587.  there  were  eleven
millions  transported  in  the  two  fleetes  of  Peru  and  Mexico,

80

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
whereof  two  thirds  were  in  that  of  Peru,  and  almost  the
one  halfe  for  the  King.

This  Rocke  of  Potozi,  containes  as  I  have  said,  foure
principall  veines,  that  is,  the  Rich  veine,  that  of  Centeno,  Estaim.
that  of  Tinne,  and  that  of  Mendieta.  All  these  veines
are  of  the  East  part  of  the  Mountaine,  as  looking  to  the
Sunne  rising,  for  on  the  West  part  there  is  not  any.  The
foresaid  veines  runne  from  North  to  South,  which  is  from
Pole  to  Pole.  In  the  largest  place  they  have  sixe  foot,
and  in  the  narrowest  a  span  breadth.  There  are  others  of
divers  fashions  that  runne  out  of  the  said  veines ;  like  as
out  of  the  great  armes  of  Trees,  there  commonly  sprout
forth  lesse.  Every  veine  hath  divers  mynes  which  are
parts  and  portions  of  the  same,  distinct  and  divided
betwixt  divers  Masters,  by  whose  names  they  are  com-
monly called.  The  great  myne  containes  fourscore  yards,
neither  may  it  be  more  by  the  Law,  and  the  least  containes
foure.  All  these  mynes  are  at  this  day  very  deepe.  In
the  Rich  myne  they  reckon  seventie  eight  mynes,  which
are  eightie  yards  deepe,  or  a  hundred  stades  or  height  of
a  man,  and  in  some  places  two  hundred.  In  the  veine  of
Centeno  are  foure  and  twentie  mynes,  whereof  some  are
seventie  or  eightie  stades  deepe,  and  so  of  the  other
veines  of  this  Mountaine.  For  a  remedie  to  this  great
profunditie,  they  have  invented  mynes,  which  they  call
Soccabones,  which  are  caves  or  vents  made  at  the  foote  of
the  Mountaine,  the  which  goe  crossing  till  they  incounter
with  the  veines  :  for  we  must  understand,  that  although
the  veines  runne  North  to  South,  as  hath  beene  said,  yet  is
it  in  declining  from  the  top  to  the  foote  of  the  Mountaine,
which  may  be  as  they  beleeve  by  conjecture,  above  twelve
hundred  stades.  And  by  this  account,  although  the
mynes  extend  in  such  a  profunditie,  yet  there  remaines
sixe  times  as  much  space  unto  the  bottome  or  roote,  the
which  they  say,  are  most  rich  and  aboundant,  as  the  body
and  spring  of  all  veines.  Although  unto  this  day  we
have  seene  the  contrarie  by  experience,  for  the  higher  the
veine  is  to  the  superficies  of  the  earth,  the  more  rich  they
xv  81  F

A.D.

c.  1588.

Preciosa
pericula,
Speciosa
supplicia.

Intolerable
paines  and
darknesse  in
the  Mynes,
and  if  in  the
Mindes  farre
more

intolerable
remaining.

[III.  v.  947.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

finde  it :  and  the  deeper  it  goes,  the  poorer  it  is,  and  of  the
baser  aloy.  They  then  invented  the  Soccabons,  by  which
they  enter  to  worke  in  the  mynes  very  easily,  with  lesse
charge,  paine,  and  danger.  They  have  eight  foot  in
breadth,  and  a  stade  in  height,  the  which  they  shut  with
doores.  By  them  they  drawe  forth  their  metall  very
easily,  paying  to  the  proprietarie  of  the  Soccabon,  the  fift
part  of  all  the  metall  they  draw  forth.  There  are  nine
alreadie  made,  and  others  are  begun.  They  were  nine
and  twentie  yeeres  in  making  of  one  Soccabon,  as  they
call  it,  of  the  venome  that  flowes  from  the  rich  veine.  It
was  begun  in  the  yeere  1550.  the  eleventh  yeere  of  the
discoverie,  and  was  ended  in  the  yeere  1585.  the  eleventh
of  August.  This  Soccabon  crossed  the  rich  veine  thirtie
five  stades  from  the  roote  or  spring,  and  from  thence  where
it  met  to  the  mouth  of  the  myne,  were  a  hundred  thirtie
five  stades.  So  as  they  must  descend  all  this  depth  to
labour  in  the  myne.  This  Soccabon  containes  from  his
mouth  unto  the  veine  of  Crusero  as  they  call  it,  two
hundred  and  fiftie  yards,  in  which  worke  were  spent  nine
and  twentie  yeeres,  whereby  wee  may  see  what  great  paines
men  take  to  draw  silver  out  of  the  bowels  of  the  earth.
They  labour  in  these  mynes  in  continuall  darknesse  and
obscuritie,  without  knowledge  of  day  or  night.  And
forasmuch  as  those  places  are  never  visited  with  the
Sunne ;  there  is  not  only  continuall  darknesse,  but  also
an  extreme  cold,  with  so  grosse  an  aire  contrarie  to  the
disposition  of  man,  so  as,  such  as  newly  enter,  are  sicke
as  they  at  Sea.  The  which  happened  to  me  in  one  of
these  mynes,  where  I  felt  a  paine  at  the  heart,  and  beating
of  the  stomacke.  Those  that  labour  therein,  use  candles
to  light  them,  dividing  their  worke  in  such  sort,  as  they
that  worke  in  the  day,  rest  by  the  night,  and  so  they
change.  The  metall  is  commonly  hard,  and  therefore
they  breake  it  with  hammers,  splitting  and  hewing  it  by
force,  as  if  they  were  flints.  After  they  carry  up  this
metall  upon  their  shoulders,  by  Ladders  of  three  branches,
made  of  Neats  leather  twisted  like  pieces  of  wood,  which

82

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
are  crossed  with  staves  of  wood ;  so  as  by  every  one  of
these  Ladders  they  mount  and  descend  together.  They
are  ten  stades  long  a  piece  :  and  at  the  end  of  one  beginnes
another  of  the  same  length,  every  Ladder  beginning  and
ending  at  plat-formes  of  wood,  where  there  are  seates  to
rest  them,  like  unto  galleries,  for  that  there  are  many  of
these  Ladders  to  mount  by  one  at  the  end  of  another.  A
man  carries  ordinarily  the  weight  of  two  Arrobes  of  Every  Arobe
metall  upon  his  shoulders,  tied  together  in  a  cloth  in  w  z5* /**'■'■
manner  of  a  skip,  and  so  mount  they  three  and  three.  He
that  goes  before  carries  a  candle  tied  to  his  thumbe :  for
(as  it  is  said)  they  have  no  light  from  Heaven,  and  so  goe
they  up  the  Ladder  holding  it  with  both  their  hands,  to
mount  so  great  a  height,  which  commonly  is  above  a
hundred  and  fiftie  stades :  a  fearfull  thing,  and  which
breedes  an  amazement  to  thinke  upon  it,  so  great  is  the
desire  of  Silver,  that  for  the  gaine  thereof,  men  endure
any  paines.  And  truly,  it  is  not  without  reason,  that
Plinie  treating  of  this  subject,  exclaimes  and  sayes  thus,  Plin.in proem.
Wee  enter  even  into  the  bowels  of  the  Earth,  and  goe  lib.  ^.  cap.  6.
hunting  after  riches,  even  to  the  place  of  the  damned.
And  after  in  the  same  Booke  hee  saith :  Those  that  seeke
for  metals,  performe  workes  more  then  Giants,  making
holes  and  caves  in  the  depth  of  the  Earth,  piercing  Moun-
taines  so  deepe  by  the  light  of  Candles,  whereas  the  day
and  the  night  are  alike,  and  in  many  moneths  they  see  no
day.  So  as  often  the  walls  of  their  mynes  fall,  smothering
many  of  them  that  labour  therein.  And  afterwards  hee
adds,  They  pierce  the  hard  Rocke  with  hammers  of  Iron
waighing  one  hundred  and  fiftie  pounds,  and  draw  out
the  metall  upon  their  shoulders,  labouring  day  and  night,
one  delivering  his  charge  to  another,  and  all  in  darknesse,
onely  the  last  sees  the  light :  with  Wedges  and  Hammers
they  breake  the  Flints,  how  hard  and  strong  soever,  for
the  hunger  of  gold  is  yet  more  sharpe  and  strong.  How  *%

The  veines  as  I have said, where  they  finde silver, ,)/  f
runne  betwixt  two  Rocks,  which  they  call  The  Chase,  nlver.
whereof  the  one  is  commonly  as  hard  as  flint,  and  the  Chap.  9.

83

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

other  soft  and  easie  to  breake.  This  metall  is  not  alwayes
equall,  and  of  the  same  bountie,  for  you  shall  find  in  one
and  the  same  veine,  one  sort  of  metall  very  rich,  which
they  call  Cacilla,  or  Tacana,  from  which  they  draw  much
silver ;  and  another  is  poore,  from  whence  they  draw  little.
The  most  rich  metall  of  this  Mountaine,  is  of  the  colour
of  Amber,  and  the  next  is  that  which  inclines  to  blacke.
There  is  other  somewhat  red,  and  other  of  the  colour  of
ashes  :  finally,  of  divers  and  sundrie  colours,  which  seeme
to  such  as  know  them  not,  to  bee  stones  of  no  value.  But
the  myners  doe  presently  know  his  qualitie  and  perfection,
by  certaine  signes  and  small  veines  they  finde  in  them.
They  carry  all  this  metall  they  draw  out  of  these  mynes,
upon  Indian  sheepe,  which  serve  them  as  Asses  to  carry
it  to  the  Mills ;  the  richest  metall  is  refined  by  melting  in
those  small  Furnaces,  which  they  call  Guayras,  for  that
is  most  leadie ;  by  reason  whereof,  it  is  most  subject  to
melt,  and  for  the  better  melting  thereof,  the  Indians  cast
in  a  matter,  they  call  Soroche,  which  is  a  metall  full  of
Lead.  The  metall  being  in  these  Furnaces,  the  filth  and
earthie  drosse,  through  the  force  of  the  fire,  remaines  in
the  bottome,  and  the  Silver  and  Lead  melt :  so  as  the
Silver  swimmes  upon  the  Lead,  untill  it  be  purified ;  then
after  they  refine  the  silver  many  times,  after  this  manner
of  melting.  They  have  usually  drawne  out  of  one  Quin-
tall  of  metall,  thirtie,  fortie,  and  fiftie  pieces  of  silver,
and  yet  I  have  seene  some  most  excellent  that  have  beene
shewne  me,  where  they  have  drawne  in  the  melting  two
hundred,  yea  two  hundred  and  fiftie  pieces  of  silver  of  a
Quintall  of  metall ;  a  rare  wealth,  and  almost  incredible,
if  we  had  not  seene  the  triall  thereof  by  fire,  but  such
metals  are  very  rare.  The  poorest  metall  is  that  which
yeelds  two,  three,  five,  or  sixe  pieces,  or  little  more.
This  metall  hath  commonly  little  Lead,  but  is  drie,  and
therefore  they  cannot  refine  it  with  fire.  And  for  this
reason  in  Potozi,  there  was  great  store  of  these  poore
metals,  whereof  they  made  no  great  account,  but  were
rejected  like  straw,  and  as  the  skum  of  the  good  metall,

84

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
untill  they  found  meanes  to  refine  it  by  quick-silver,
whereby  the  skum  they  called  Oquiache  was  of  great  profit,
for  the  quick-silver  by  a  strange  and  wonderfull  propertie,
purifies  the  silver,  and  is  apt  for  these  metals  which  are
drie  and  poore,  wherein  they  consume  lesse  quick-silver
then  in  the  richer :  for  the  richer  they  are,  the  more  need
of  quick-silver  they  have.  At  this  day  the  most  usuall
manner  of  refining  in  Potozi,  is  by  quick-silver,  as  also
in  the  mynes  of  Cacatecas,  and  others  of  new  Spaine.
There  were  in  old  time  upon  the  sides  and  tops  of  Potozi,
above  sixe  thousand  Guayras,  which  are  small  Furnaces
where  they  melt  their  metall,  the  which  were  placed  like
lights  (a  pleasant  sight  to  behold  by  night)  casting  a  light
afarre  off  like  a  flame  of  fire.  But  at  this  day  there  are
not  above  two  thousand,  for  that  (as  I  have  said)  they
use  little  melting,  but  refine  it  by  quick-silver,  the  which
is  the  greatest  profit.  And  for  that  the  properties  of
quick-silver  are  admirable ;  and  that  this  manner  of
refining  of  silver  is  remarkable,  I  will  discourse  of  Quick-
silver, of  the  Mynes  and  Worke,  and  what  is  requisite
for  that  subject.

Quick-silver,  so  called  by  the  Latines,  for  that  it  runnes
and  slides  suddenly  from  place  to  place,  amongst  all  other
metals  hath  great  and  wonderfull  vertues.  The  first  is,
although  it  bee  a  true  metall,  yet  is  it  not  hard,  neither
hath  it  any  certaine  forme  nor  subsistance  like  to  other
metals,  but  is  liquid,  not  like  unto  gold  and  silver  molten,
but  of  his  owne  proper  nature ;  and  although  it  be  a
liquor,  yet  is  it  more  heavie  then  any  other  metall :  and
therefore  all  others  swim  above  and  sinke  not  to  the
bottome,  being  more  light.  I  have  seene  two  pounds
of  Iron  put  into  a  barrell  of  quick-silver,  the  which  did  [III.  v.  948.]
swimme  about  like  unto  Wood  or  Corke  upon  the  Water.
Plinie  gives  an  exception  hereunto,  saying,  That  gold  Plin.  I.  33.
alone  doth  sinke  and  not  swimme  above  it.  I  have  not  c-  6-
seene  the  experience ;  but  it  may  bee  this  growes,  by
reason  that  quick-silver  by  nature  doth  inviron  gold,  and
covers  it,  which  is  one  of  the  most  important  properties

85

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

c.  1588.

Sympatkie it  hath ;  for  it  joynes  with  gold  in  a  strange  manner ;  it

with  gold.  Seekes  it  where  it  lyes,  and  invirons  it  in  such  sort,  as
it  doth  distinguish  and  separate  it  from  any  other  body
or  metall  wherewith  it  is  mixt :  for  this  reason  such  take
gold  as  will  preserve  themselves  from  the  dangers  and
discommodities  of  quick-silver.  They  have  used  a
remedie  to  those  (in  whose  eares  they  had  put  quick-
silver, to  cause  them  to  die  secretly)  to  put  little  plates
of  gold  into  their  eares  (for  that  Gold  hath  the  vertue  to
draw  out  Mercurie)  and  after  they  drew  out  these  plates
all  white  with  the  quick-silver,  it  did  sticke  unto  them.
Being  one  day  at  Madril,  I  went  to  see  the  exquisite
workes  which  Jacomo  de  Treco  (a  rare  worke-man  of
Millan)  made  for  Saint  Laurence  the  Royall,  it  was  my
hap  to  be  there  one  day,  when  as  they  gilded  certaine
pieces  of  a  countertable  of  brasse,  which  is  done  with
quick-silver ;  and  for  that  the  fume  of  Mercurie  is  mortall,
he  told  me  that  the  worke-men  preserved  themselves
from  this  venome,  by  swallowing  a  double  Duckat  of
gold  rolled  up ;  the  which  being  in  the  stomacke,  drawes
unto  it  all  the  quick-silver  that  enters  in  fume  by  the
Eares,  Eyes,  Nostrils,  and  Mouth,  and  by  this  meanes
freed  themselves  from  the  danger  of  quick-silver,  which
the  gold  gathered  in  the  stomacke,  and  after  cast  out  by
the  excrements :  a  thing  truly  worthy  of  admiration.
After  the  quick-silver  hath  purified  and  purged  gold  from
all  other  metals  and  mixtures,  hee  is  likewise  separated
from  the  gold  his  friend  by  the  heate  of  the  fire,  the

Plin.  I.  33.  which  purifies  it  from  all  quick-silver.  Plinie  sayes,  that
by  a  certaine  arte  and  invention  they  did  separate  gold
from  quick-silver.  It  seemes  to  me  the  Ancients  had
no  knowledge  to  refine  silver  by  quick-silver,  which  at
this  day  is  the  greatest  use,  and  chiefe  profit  of  quick-
silver ;  for  that  he  sayes  plainly,  that  quick-silver  joynes
with  no  other  metall  but  with  gold ;  and  when  hee  makes
mention  of  refining  of  silver,  hee  speakes  onely  but  of
the  manner  of  melting ;  whereby  wee  may  inferre  that
the  Ancients  had  no  knowledge  of  this  secret. In  truth,

86

c.  6.

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
though  there  be  a  league  and  simpathy  betwixt  gold  and
quick-silver,  yet  where  as  the  Mercurie  findes  no  gold,
it  joynes  with  silver,  though  not  in  the  like  manner  as
with  gold ;  but  in  the  end,  it  doth  clense  and  purge  it
from  Earth,  Copper,  and  Lead,  amongst  the  which  the
silver  growes,  without  any  neede  of  fire  to  melt  it :  yet
must  they  use  fire  to  separate  it  from  the  silver,  as  I
will  shew  hereafter.  Quick-silver  holds  no  account  of
other  metals,  but  of  Gold  and  Silver ;  but  contrariwise,
it  doth  corrupt  them,  force  and  consume  them,  and  flyeth
from  them  as  much  as  may  bee.  The  which  is  likewise
admirable,  and  for  this  cause  they  put  it  in  earthen
vessels,  or  in  beasts  skins.  For  if  it  bee  put  in  vessels
of  Copper,  of  Iron,  or  other  metall,  it  presently  pierceth
and  corrupts  them.  And  therefore  Plinie  calleth  it  the
poyson  of  all  things,  for  that  it  consumes  and  spoiles
all.  Wee  finde  quick-silver  in  the  graves  of  dead  men,
which  after  it  hath  consumed  the  bodies,  comes  forth  pure
and  whole.  There  hath  beene  likewise  found  in  the
bones  and  marrow  of  Men  and  Beasts,  who  having
received  it  in  fume  by  the  mouth  and  nostrils,  congeales
within  them  and  pierceth  even  unto  the  bones.  There-
fore it  is  a  dangerous  thing  to  frequent  so  perillous  and
mortall  a  creature.  It  hath  another  propertie,  which  is,
to  runne  and  make  a  hundred  thousand  small  drops,
whereof  not  one  is  lost,  bee  they  never  so  little,  but
they  returne  every  way  to  their  liquor.  It  is  almost  incor-
ruptible, having  nothing  in  a  manner  that  may  consume
it.  And  therefore  Plinie  calls  it  the  eternall  sweat.  It
hath  yet  another  propertie,  that  although  it  doth  separate
Gold  from  Copper,  and  all  other  metals,  yet  they  that
will  gild  Copper,  Brasse,  or  Silver,  use  quick-silver  as
the  meanes  of  this  union ;  for  with  the  helpe  thereof
they  gild  metals.  Amongst  all  the  wonders  of  this  strange
liquor  that  seemes  to  mee  most  worthy  observation,
that  although  it  bee  the  weightiest  thing  in  the  world,
yet  is  it  converted  into  the  lightest  of  the  world,  which
is  smoake,  and  suddenly  the  same  smoake  which  is  so

87

A.D.

c.  1588.

Of  the  place
where  they
jinde  quick-
silver, and
how  they
discovered
these  rich
mynes  in
Guancavilca.
Chap.  1 1 .

[III.  v.  949.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

light  a  thing,  turnes  againe  into  so  heavie  a  substance,
as  is  the  proper  liquor  of  quick-silver,  whereinto  it  is
dissolved ;  for  this  smoake  encountring  the  metall  on
high,  being  a  solid  body,  or  comming  into  a  cold  Region,
suddenly  it  thickens  and  is  converted  into  quick-silver,
and  if  you  set  him  once  againe  to  the  fire,  he  doth  likewise
returne  into  smoake,  to  be  resolved  againe  into  quick-
silver.

Quick-silver  is  found  in  a  kinde  of  stone,  which  doth
likewise  yeeld  Vermillion,  which  the  Ancients  called
Minium,  and  at  this  day  they  call  the  Images  of  crystall
Miniades,  which  are  painted  with  quick-silver.  The
Ancients  made  great  account  of  this  Minium  or  Ver-
million, holding  it  for  a  sacred  colour,  as  Plinie  reports,
saying,  That  the  Romans  were  accustomed  to  paint  the
face  of  Jupiter,  and  the  bodies  of  those  that  triumphed
in  Ethiopia :  yea,  their  Idols  and  their  Governours  like-
wise had  their  faces  coloured  with  this  Minium.  And
this  Vermillion  was  so  esteemed  at  Rome  (which  they
brought  onely  from  Spaine  where  they  had  many  pits
and  mynes  of  quick-silver,  which  continue  there  to  this
day)  that  the  Romans  suffered  it  not  to  be  refined
in  Spaine,  lest  they  should  steale  some  of  it,  but  they
carried  it  to  Rome,  sealed  up  in  a  masse  as  they  drew  it
out  of  the  myne,  and  after  refined  it.  They  did  yeerly
bring  from  Spaine,  especially  from  Andalusie,  about  ten
thousand  pound  weight,  which  the  Romans  valued  as  an
infinite  treasure.  I  have  reported  all  this  out  of  that
Author,  to  the  end  that  those  which  doe  see  what  passeth
at  this  day  in  Peru,  may  have  the  content  to  know  what
chanced  in  former  ages,  among  the  mightiest  Lords  of
the  world.  I  speake  for  the  Inguas  Kings  of  Peru,  and
for  the  naturall  Indians  thereof,  which  have  laboured  and
digged  long  in  these  Mines  of  Quick-silver,  not  knowing
what  Quick-silver  was,  seeking  onely  for  Cinabrium  or
Vermillion,  which  they  call  Limpi,  the  which  they
esteeme  much,  for  that  same  effect  that  Plinie  reports
of  the  Romans  and  Ethiopians,  that  is,  to  paint  the  face

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
and  bodies  of  themselves  and  their  Idols ;  the  like  hath
beene  much  practised  by  the  Indians,  especially  when
they  went  to  the  warres,  and  use  it  at  this  day  in  their
feasts  and  dancing,  which  they  call  slubbering,  supposing
that  their  faces  and  visages  so  slubbered,  did  much
terrifie,  and  at  this  day  they  hold  it  for  an  ornament  and
beautifying ;  for  this  cause  there  were  strange  workes  of
Mines  in  the  Mountaines  of  Guancavilca,  which  are  in
Peru,  neere  to  the  Citie  of  Guamangua,  out  of  the  which
they  drew  this  Mettall :  it  is  of  such  a  manner,  that  if  Labirinths.
at  this  day  they  enter  by  the  caves  or  Soccabones,  which
the  Indians  made  in  those  dayes,  they  loose  themselves,
finding  no  passage  out :  but  they  regarded  not  Quick-
silver, which  naturally  is  in  the  same  substance  or  mettall
of  Vermillion,  neither  had  they  knowledge  of  any  such
matter.

The  Indians  were  not  alone  for  so  long  a  time  without
the  knowledge  of  this  treasure,  but  likewise  the
Spaniards,  who  untill  the  yeare  1566.  and  1567.  (at  such
time  as  the  licentiate  Castro  governed  in  Peru)  discovered
not  the  Mines  of  Quick-silver,  which  happened  in  this  Mines  of
manner.  A  man  of  judgement  called  Henrique  Guarces,  Quick-silver
a  Portugall  borne,  having  a  piece  of  this  coloured  Mettall,  found-
as  I  have  said,  which  the  Indians  call  Limpi,  with  which
they  paint  their  faces,  as  he  beheld  it  well,  found  it  to
be  the  same  which  they  call  Vermillion  in  Castile :  and
for  that  hee  knew  well  that  Vermillion  was  drawne  out
of  the  same  mettall  that  Quick-silver  was,  he  conjectured
these  Mines  to  be  of  Quick-silver,  went  to  the  place
whence  they  drew  this  Mettall,  to  make  triall  thereof.
The  which  he  found  true,  and  in  this  sort  the  Mines  of
Palcas  in  the  territorie  of  Guamangua,  being  discovered,
great  numbers  of  men  went  thither  to  draw  out  Quick-
silver, and  so  to  carry  it  to  Mexico,  where  they  refine
Silver  by  the  meanes  of  Quick-silver,  wherewith  many
are  inriched.  This  Countrie  of  Mines  which  they  call
Guancavilca,  was  then  peopled  with  Spaniards  and  Indians
that  came  thither,  and  come  still  to  worke  in  these  Mines

89

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

of  Quick-silver,  which  are  in  great  numbers,  and  very
plentifull :  but  of  all  these  Mines,  that  which  they  call
d' Amador  de  Cabrera,  or  of  Saints,  is  goodly  and  notable.
It  is  a  Rocke  of  most  hard  Stone,  interlaced  all  with
Quick-silver,  and  of  that  greatnesse,  that  it  extends  above
fourescore  Vares  or  yards  in  length,  and  fortie  in  breadth  :
in  which  Mine  they  have  many  pits,  and  ditches,  of
threescore  and  tenne  stades  deepe,  so  as  three  hundred
men  may  well  worke  together ;  such  is  the  capacitie
thereof.  This  Mine  was  discovered  by  an  Indian  of
Amador  of  Cabrera,  called  Navincopa  of  the  Village  of
Acoria,  the  which  Amador  of  Cabrera  caused  to  be
registred  in  his  name.  He  was  in  suite  against  the
Procurer  fiscall,  but  the  usufruite  was  adjudged  to  him
by  sentence  as  the  discoverer.  Since  he  sold  his  interest
to  another,  for  two  hundred  and  fiftie  thousand  Ducates ;
and  afterwards  thinking  he  had  bin  deceived  in  the  sale,
he  commenced  an  action  against  the  buyer,  being  worth,
as  they  say,  above  five  hundred  thousand  Ducates ;  yea,
some  hold  it  to  be  worth  a  Million  of  Gold :  a  rare  thing
to  see  a  Mine  of  that  wealth.

When  as  Don  Francisco  of  Toledo  governed  in  Peru,
there  was  one  which  had  bin  in  Mexico,  and  observed
how  they  refined  Silver  with  Mercury,  called  Pero  Fer-
nandes  de  Valesco,  who  offred  to  refine  Silver  at  Potozi,
with  Mercury :  and  having  made  triall  thereof  in  the
yeare  1 57 1.  performed  it  with  credit,  then  began  they
to  refine  Silver  at  Potozi  with  Quick-silver,  which  they
transported  from  Guancavelicqua,  which  was  a  goodly
helpe  for  the  Mines ;  for  by  the  meanes  of  Quick-silver
they  drew  an  infinite  quantitie  of  mettall  from  these
Mines,  whereof  they  made  no  accompt,  the  which  they
called  Scrapings.  For  as  it  hath  beene  said,  the  Quick-
silver purifies  the  Silver,  although  it  be  drie,  poore,  and
of  base  alloy,  which  cannot  be  done  by  melting  in  the
fire.  The  Catholike  King  drawes  from  it  Quick-silver
mines,  without  any  charge  or  hazard,  almost  foure  hundred
thousand  pieces  of  a  Mine,  the  which  are  foureteene  rials

90

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
a  peece,  or  little  lesse,  besides  the  rights  that  rise  in
Potozi,  where  it  is  imployed,  the  which  is  a  great  riches.
They  doe  yearely,  one  with  another,  draw  from  these
Mines  of  Guancavilca,  eight  thousand  quintals  of  Quick-
silver, yea  and  more.

Let  us  now  speake  how  they  draw  out  Quick-silver,  and  The  m^nner
how  they  refine  Silver  therewith. They  take  the  stone  f^gjj"
or  mettall  where  they  finde  the  Quick-silver,  the  which  s^ver  and
they  put  into  the  fire  in  pots  of  earth  well  luted,  being  how  they  refine
well  beaten,  so  as  this  mettall  or  stone  comming  to  melt  Silver.
by the  heate  of  the  fire, the  Quick-silver separates it  c ?'  I2"
selfe,  and  goes  forth  in  exhalation,  and  sometimes  even
with  the  smoake  of  the  fire, untill  it  incounters  some
body  where  it  staies  and  congeales,  and  if  it  passe  up
higher,  without  meeting  of  any  hard  substance,  it  mounts
up  untill  it  be  cold,  and  then  congealed,  it  fals  downe
againe. When  the  melting  is  finished,  they  unstop  the
pots  and  draw  forth  the  mettall,  sometimes  staying  untill  it
be  very  cold,  for  if  there  remained  any  fume  or  vapour,  [III.  v.  950.]
which  should  incounter  them  that  should  unstop  the  pots,
they  were  in  danger  of  death,  or  to  be  benummed  of
their  limbes,  or  at  the  least  to  loose  their  teeth. And  Dangers  by
for  that  they  spend  an  infinite  quantitie  of  wood,  in  the  Quick-silver.
melting  of  these  mettals,  a  Miller  called  Rodrigo  de  Tores
found  out  a  profitable  invention,  which  was, to  gather
certaine  straw  which  growes  throughout  all  those  Moun-
taines  of  Peru,  the  which  they  call  Ycho,  it  is  like  unto
a  hard  reede  wherewith they  make their  fire. It  is  a
strange  thing  to  see  the  force  which  this  straw  hath  to  Force  of  straw.
melt  and  dissolve  these  mettals,  the  which  fals  out,  as
Plinie  saies,  that  there  is  gold  which  melts  more  easily  Plin.  I.  33.
with  the  flame  of  straw,  then  with  hot  burning  coales.  c-  4~
They  put  the  Quick-silver  thus  molten  into  skinnes,  for
that  it  keepes  best  in  leather,  and  in  this  sort  they  lay
it  into  the  Kings  store-house,  from  whence  they  carrie
it  by  Sea  to  Ariqua,  and  so  to  Potozi  by  Land  upon
their  sheepe. There  is  yeerely  spent  in  Potozi  for  the
refining  of  Mettals,  about  six  or  seven  thousand  quintals

91

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

of  Quick-silver,  besides  that  they  draw  from  the  Plates
(which  is  the  earth  or  drosse  of  the  first  washings  of  these
Mettals,  which  are  made  in  caldrons.)  The  which  plates
they  burne  in  their  furnaces,  to  draw  out  the  Quick-
silver which  remaines  in  them :  and  there  are  above
fiftie  of  these  Furnaces  in  the  Citie  of  Potozi,  and  in
Tarpaya.  The  quantitie  of  mettals  which  they  refine,
(as  some  men  of  experience  have  made  the  account)  doth
Abundance  of  amount  yearely  to  above  three  hundred  thousand  quintals,
Mettals.  from  the  earth  and  drosse  whereof  being  molt  and  refined,
they  may  draw  yearely  above  two  thousand  quintals  of
Quick-silver.  We  must  understand  there  are  divers  sorts
of  mettals,  for  some  yeeld  much  Silver,  and  waste  little
Quick-silver :  others  consume  much  Quick-silver,  and
yeelde  little  Silver :  and  there  are  others  which  consume
much  Quick-silver,  and  yeeldes  much  Silver ;  and  others
that  consume  little  Quick-silver,  and  also  yeelde  little
Silver :  and  as  men  incounter  in  these  mettals,  so  they
grow  rich  or  poore  in  their  trafficke.  Although  com-
monly the  rich  mettall  yeeldes  much  Silver,  and  consumes
much  Quick-silver ;  and  likewise  that  which  is  poore,
yeeldes  little  Silver,  and  consumes  as  little  Mercuric
Manner  of  They  first  beate  and  grinde  the  mettall  very  small,  with
working.  hammers  and  other  instruments,  which  beate  this  Stone

like  unto  tanne  Mils,  and  being  well  beaten,  they  searce
it  in  a  copper  searce,  making  the  poulder  as  small  and
fine,  as  if  it  were  horse  haire :  these  searces  being  well
fitted,  doe  sift  thirtie  quintals  in  a  day  and  a  night ;  then
they  put  the  poulder  of  the  mettall  into  the  vessels  upon
furnaces,  whereas  they  anoint  it  and  mortifie  it  with  brine,
putting  to  every  fiftie  quintals  of  poulder,  five  quintals  of
Salt.  And  this  they  doe  for  that  the  Salt  separates  the
earth  and  filth,  to  the  end  the  Quick-silver  may  the  more
easily  draw  the  Silver  unto  it.  After  they  put  Quick-
silver into  a  peece  of  Holland  and  presse  it  out  upon  the
mettall,  which  goes  forth  like  a  dewe,  alwaies  turning
and  stirring  the  mettall,  to  the  end  it  may  be  well
incorporate.

92

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
Before  the  invention  of  these  furnaces  of  fire,  they  did
often  mingle  their  mettall  with  Quick-silver,  in  great
troughes,  letting  it  settle  some  daies,  and  did  then  mixe
it,  and  stir  it  againe,  untill  they  thought  all  the  Quick-
silver were  well  incorporate  with  the  Silver,  the  which
continued  twentie  daies  and  more,  and  at  the  least  nine
daies.  Since  they  discovered  (as  the  desire  to  get  is
diligent,)  that  to  shorten  the  time  fire  did  much  helpe :
to  incorporate  Silver  the  sooner  with  Quick-silver,  they
invented  these  furnaces,  whereon  they  set  vessels  to  put
in  their  mettall,  with  Salt  and  Quick-silver,  and  under-
neath they  put  fire  by  little  and  little,  in  furnaces  made
for  the  nonce  underneath ;  so  as  in  five  or  six  daies  the
Quick-silver  is  incorporate  with  the  Silver.  And  when
they  finde  that  the  Mercurie  hath  done  his  part,  and
assembled  all  the  Silver,  leaving  nothing  behinde,  but  is
well  imbrued  as  a  Spunge  doth  water,  dividing  it  from
the  Earth,  Lead,  and  Copper,  with  the  which  it  is
engendered.  Then  after  they  seperate  it  likewise  from
the  Quick-silver,  the  which  they  doe  in  this  sort ;  they
put  the  Mettall  in  Caldrons,  and  vessels  full  of  water,
where  with  certaine  wheeles  they  turne  the  mettall  round
about,  as  if  they  should  make  Mustard,  and  so  the  earth
and  drosse  goes  from  the  Mettall  with  the  water  that
runnes  away :  The  Silver  and  Quick-silver  as  most
ponderous  remaining  in  the  bottome ;  the  Mettall  which
remaines,  is  like  unto  Sand :  then  they  take  it  out  and
wash  it  againe  in  great  platters  of  wood,  or  keelers  full
of  water,  still  drawing  the  earth  from  it,  untill  they  leave
the  Silver  and  Quick-silver  well  clensed.  There  slippes
away  also  some  small  portion  of  Silver  and  Quick-
silver with  the  earth  and  drosse,  which  they  call  washings,
the  which  they  after  wash  againe  and  draw  out  the
remainder.  When  the  Silver  and  Quick-silver  are  clensed
and  begin  to  shine,  and  that  there  remaines  no  earth,
they  put  all  the  Mettall  into  a  cloth,  which  they  straine
out  very  forcibly,  so  as  all  the  Quick-silver  passeth  out,
being not incorporate with the Silver, and the rest

93

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

remaines  as  a  loafe  of  Silver,  like  to  a  marke  of  Almonds
pressed  to  draw  oyle.  And  being  thus  pressed,  the
remainder  containes  but  the  sixt  part  in  Silver,  and  five
in  Mercurie.  So  as  if  there  remaines  a  marke  of  three-
score pounds,  ten  are  of  Silver,  and  fiftie  of  Mercurie.
Of  these  markes  they  make  pinnes  (as  they  call  them)
like  pine  apples,  or  sugar  loaves,  hollow  within,  the  which
they  commonly  make  of  a  hundred  pound  weight ;  then
to  separate  the  Silver  from  the  Quick-silver,  they  put
it  into  a  violent  fire,  which  they  cover  with  an  earthen
vessell,  like  to  the  mold  of  a  Sugar-loafe,  or  unto  a
capuchon  or  hood,  the  which  they  cover  with  coales,  and
set  fire  unto  it ;  whereby  the  Quick-silver  exhals  in
smoake,  the  which  striking  against  the  capuchon  of
[III.  v.  951.]  earth,  it  thickens  and  distils,  like  unto  the  smoake  of  a
pot  covered ;  and  by  a  pipe  like  unto  a  limbecke,  they
receive  the  Quick-silver  which  distils,  the  Silver  remaining
without  changing  the  forme,  but  in  weight  it  is  diminished
five  parts  of  that  it  was,  and  is  spungious,  the  which  is
worthy  the  observation.  Of  two  of  these  loaves  they
make  one  barre  of  Silver,  in  weight  sixtie  five  or  sixtie
six  markes :  and  in  this  sort  they  carrie  it  to  the  touch,
custome,  and  marke.  Silver  drawne  with  Mercurie,  is
Fine  Silver  for  so  fine,  that  it  never  abates  of  two  thousand  three
W°ll  jUsthe  hundred  and  fourescore  of  alloy,  and  it  is  so  excellent,
that  the  worke-men  are  enforced  to  alay  it,  putting  some
mixture  to  it,  as  they  doe  likewise  in  their  Mints,  whereas
their  monie  is  stampt.  Silver  indures  all  these  martyr-
domes  (if  we  may  so  call  it)  to  be  refined,  the  which  if
we  consider  well,  it  is  a  body  framed  where  they  grinde,
sift,  kneade,  lay  the  leven,  and  bake  the  Silver :  besides
all  this,  they  wash  it  and  wash  it  againe ;  they  bake  it
and  bake  it  againe,  induring  the  pestels,  sives,  troughes,
furnaces,  caldrons,  presses  :  and  finally,  by  the  water  and
fire.  I  speake  this,  for  that  seeing  this  art  in  Potozi,  I
Mat.  3.  did consider what the Scripture speakes of the just,

Eccks.  2. Colabit eos & purgabit quasi argentum : And that
Psal.  11. which  they  speake  in  another  part. Sicut  argentum  pur-

94

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
gatum  terra,  purgatum  septuplum.  So  as  to  purifie
Silver,  to  refine  and  dense  it  from  the  earth  and  stone
where  it  engenders,  they  purge  and  purifie  it  seven  times  :
for  in  effect  it  passeth  their  hands  seven  times,  yea  oftner,
untill  it  remaines  pure  and  fine ;  so  is  it  in  the  word  of
God,  where  the  soules  must  be  purified,  that  shall  injoy
the  heavenly  perfection.

To conclude this subject of Silver and of Mettals, Of  their
there  remaines  yet  two  things  to  speake  of,  the  one  is nPnJ  t0.

j  o  r  '  grinde  the

of  their  Engins  and  Mils, the  other  of  their  essay  or  Mettall  and

triall :  I  have  said  before,  how  they  grinde  their  Mettall : of  their  trial/

for  the  receiving  of  the  Quick-silver,  which  is  done  with  of  Silver.

divers  instruments  and  Engins, some  with  Horses  like  Ohap.  13.

unto  hand-mils, others  like  Water-mils  ; of  which  two

sorts  there  are  great  numbers. But  for  that  the  water

they  doe  use  commonly,  is  but  of  raine,  whereof  they

have not sufficient but three months in the yeare,

December,  January,  and  February : for  this  reason  they

have  made  Lakes  and  standing  Pooles,  which  containe  in

circuite  about  a  thousand  and  six  hundred  rods,  and  in

depth  three  stades ; there  are seven  with  their  sluces :

so  as  when  they  have  neede  of  any  water,  they  raise  up

a  sluce,  from  whence  runnes  a  little  streame  of  water,  the

which  they  stop  upon  holy-dayes. And  when  the  Lakes

and  Pooles  doe  fill,  and  that  the  yeare  abounds  with  raine,

their  grinding  doth  then  continue  six  or  seven  moneths ;

so  as  even  for  Silver  sake  men  desire  a  good  yeare  of

raine  in  Potozi,  as  they  doe  in  other  places  for  bread.

There  are  some  other  Engins  in  Tarapaya,  which  is  a

valley  three  or  foure  leagues  distant  from  Potozi,  whereas

there  runnes  a  River  as  in  other  parts. The  difference

of  these  Engins  is,  that  some  goe  with  six  pestels,  some

with twelve, and others  with fourteene. They  grinde

and  beate the Mettall in Mortars, labouring day  and

night ;  and  from  thence  they  carry  it  to  be  sifted,  upon

the  bankes  of  the  brooke  of  Potozi. There  are  fortie

eight  Water-mils,  of  eight,  ten,  and  twelve  pestels,  and

foure  on  the  other  side,  which  they  call  Tanacognugno  ;

95

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

in  the  Citie  of  Tarapaya,  there  are  two  and  twentie  Engins
all  upon  the  water ;  besides  there  are  thirtie  goe  with
Horses  in  Potozi,  and  many  others  in  divers  parts,  so
great  the  desire  of  man  is  to  get  Silver,  which  is  tried  by
deputies  appointed  by  the  King.

To  give  the  alloy  to  everie  piece,  they  carrie  the  bars
of  Silver  unto  the  Assay  Master,  who  give  to  every  one
his  number,  for  that  they  carrie  many  at  once,  hee  cuts
a  small  peece  of  everie  one,  the  which  he  weighs  justly,
and  puts  them  into  a  Cruset,  which  is  a  small  vessell  made
of  burnt  bones  beaten ;  after  he  placeth  every  crusible  in
his  order  in  the  furnace,  giving  them  a  violent  fire,  then
the  Mettall  melteth,  and  that  which  is  lead,  goes  into
smoake,  and  the  copper  and  tinne  dissolves,  the  Silver
remaining  most  fine,  of  the  colour  of  fire.  It  is  a  strange
thing,  that  being  thus  refined,  although  it  be  liquid
and  molten,  yet  it  never  spils,  were  the  mouth  of  the
crusible  turned  downewards ;  but  it  remaineth  fixed,
without  the  losse  of  a  droppe.  The  Assay  Master
knoweth  by  the  colour  and  other  signes,  when  it  is
refined,  then  doth  he  draw  the  crusibles  from  the  fire,
and  weighes  every  peece  curiously,  observing  what  every
one  wants  of  his  weight ;  for  that  which  is  of  high  alloy,
wastes  but  little,  and  that  which  is  baser,  diminisheth
much ;  and  according  to  the  waste,  he  sees  what  alloy  he
beares,  according  to  the  which  he  markes  every  bar
punctually.  Their  ballance  and  weights  are  so  delicate,
and  their  graines  so  small,  as  they  cannot  take  them  up
with  the  hand,  but  with  a  small  paire  of  pincers :  and
this  triall  they  make  by  candle-light,  that  no  ayre  might
moove  the  ballance.  For  of  this  little  the  price  of  the
whole  barre  dependeth.  In  trueth  it  is  a  very  delicate
thing,  and  requires  a  great  dexteritie.

96

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.

§. V.  [III.  v.  952.]

Of  Emeralds,  Pearles,  Indian  Bread,  Trees,  Fruites,
Flowers  naturall,  and  carried  thither  from
Spaine.

T  shall  not  be  from  the  purpose,  to  speake  some-

thing of  Emeralds,  both  for  that  it  is  a  precious
thing,  as  Gold  and  Silver,  as  also  that  they  take
their  beginning  from  Mines  and  Mettals,  as  Plinie  reports.  PH-  &&•  37-
The  Emerald  hath  bin  in  old  time  in  great  esteeme,  as  ca"  3*
the  same  Author  writes,  giving  it  the  third  place  amongst
all  Jewels  and  precious  stones,  that  is,  next  to  the
Diamond  and  Pearle.  At  this  day  they  doe  not  so  much
esteeme  the  Emerald,  nor  the  Pearle,  for  the  great
abundance  brought  of  these  two  sorts  from  the  Indies  ;
onely  the  Diamond  holds  the  principalitie,  the  which
cannot  be  taken  from  it.  Next,  the  Rubies  come  in
price  and  other  Stones,  which  they  hold  more  precious
then  the  Emerald.  Men  are  so  desirous  of  singularities
and  rare  things,  that  what  they  see  to  be  common,  they
doe  not  esteeme.  They  report  of  a  Spaniard,  who  being  A  pretty
in  Italie  when  the  Indies  were  first  discovered,  shewed  storie-
an  Emerald  to  a  Lapidary,  who  asking  him  the  value
thereof,  after  he  had  well  viewed  it,  being  of  an  excel-
lent lustre  and  forme,  he  prized  it  at  a  hundred
Duckets :  he  then  shewed  him  another  greater  then
it,  which  he  valued  at  three  hundred  Duckats.  The
Spaniard  drunke  with  this  discourse,  carried  him  to
his  lodging,  shewing  him  a  Casket  full.  The  Italian
seeing  so  great  a  number  of  Emeralds,  said  unto  him,
Sir,  these  are  well  worth  a  crowne  a  peece.  The  Kings
of  Mexico  did  much  esteeme  them ;  some  did  use  to
pierce  their  nostrils,  and  hang  therein  an  excellent
Emerald :  they  hung  them  on  the  visages  of  their  Idols.
The  greatest  store  is  found  in  the  new  Kingdome  of
Grenado,  and  Peru,  neere  unto  Manta  and  Port  Vieil.
xv  97  g

A.D.

c.  1588.

HozvEmeralds
grow.

Admirable
Emerald.

Church  of
Corduba.

OfPearles.
Chap.  15.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

There  is  towards  that  place  a  soile  which  they  call,  the
Land  of  Emeralds,  for  the  knowledge  that  they  have  of
abundance  to  be  there :  and  yet  unto  this  day  they  have
not  conquered  that  Land.  The  Emeralds  grow  in  stones
like  unto  Christall ;  I  have  seene  them  in  the  same  stone,
fashioned  like  a  veine,  and  they  seeme  by  little  and
little  to  thicken  and  refine.  I  have  seene  some  that  were
halfe  white,  and  halfe  greene ;  others  all  white,  and  some
greene  and  very  perfit.  I  have  seene  some  of  the  bignesse
of  a  Nut,  and  there  have  bin  some  greater  found  :  but
I  have  not  knowne  that  in  our  time  they  have  found  any
of  the  forme  and  bignesse  of  the  plat  or  Jewell  they  have
at  Genes,  the  which  they  esteeme  (and  with  reason)  to
be  a  Jewell  of  great  price,  and  no  relique ;  yet  without
comparison,  the  Emerald  which  Theophrastus  speakes  of,
which  the  King  of  Babylon  presented  to  the  King  of
iEgypt,  surpasseth  that  of  Genes ;  it  was  foure  cubits
long,  and  three  broad,  and  they  say,  that  in  Jupiters
Temple,  there  was  a  needle  or  pyramide,  made  of  foure
Emeralds  stones  of  fortie  cubits  long,  and  in  some  places
foure  broad,  and  in  others  two :  and  that  in  his  time
there  was  in  Tirus  in  Hercules  Temple,  a  Pillar  of  an
Emerald.  It  may  be  (as  Plinie  saieth)  it  was  of  some
greene  stone,  somewhat  like  the  Emerald,  and  they  called
it  a  false  Emerald.  As  some  will  say,  that  in  the
Cathedrall  Church  of  Cordove  there  are  certaine  Pillars
of  Emeralds  which  remaine  since  it  was  a  Mesquite  for
the  Kings  Miramamolins  Moores,  which  reigned  there.
In  the  fleete,  the  yeare  one  thousand  five  hundred  eightie
and  seven,  in  the  which  I  came  from  the  Indies,  they
brought  two  chests  of  Emeralds,  every  one  weighing  at
the  least  foure  Arobes,  whereby  we  may  see  the  abundance
they  have.

Now  that  we  intreate  of  the  great  riches  that  comes
from  the  Indies,  it  were  no  reason  to  forget  the  Pearle,
which  the  Ancients  called  Marguerites,  and  at  the  first
were  in  so  great  estimation,  as  none  but  royall  persons
were  suffered  to  weare  them : but  at  this  day  there  is

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
such abundance as the Negres themselves doe weare
chaines  thereof ;  they  grow  in  shels  or  Oysters,  in  eating
whereof  I  have  found  Pearles  in  the  middest  of  them.
These  Oysters  within  are  of  the  colour  of  heaven,  very
lively. In  some  places  they  make  Spoones,  the  which  they
call  Mother  of  Pearle. The  Pearles  doe  differ  much  in
forme,  in  bignesse,  figure,  colour  and  polishing : so  like-
wise  in their  price they differ  much. Some they call
Ave Mariaes, being like the small grains of beades :
others are Pater  nosters, being  bigger. Seldome shall
you  finde  two  of  one  greatnesse,  forme,  and  colour. For
this  reason  the  Romans  (as  Plinie  writeth)  called  them  Plin.  lib.  3.
Unions. When  as  they  doe  finde  two  that  are  alike  in  all  ca-  35-
points,  they  raise  the  price  much  (especially  for  eare-rings.)
I  have  seene  some  paires  valued  at  thousands  of  Ducats,
although  they  were  not  like  to  Cleopatraes  two  Pearles,  Ckopatras
whereof  Plinie  reports, either of them being worth a
hundred  thousand  Ducates,  with  the  which  this  foolish
Queene  wonne  a  wager  she  had  made  against  Marc  Antony,
to spend in one Supper above an hundred thousand
Ducates,  so  at  the  last  course  shee  dissolved  one  of  these
Pearles  in  strong  Vinegar,  and  dranke  it  up. They  say
the  other  Pearle  was  cut  in  two,  and  placed  in  the  Pantheon
at  Rome,  at  th'eares  of  the  Image  of  Venus.

They  fish  for  Pearles  in  divers  parts  of  the  Indies,  the  Park
greatest abundance is in the South Seas, neere unto  fishlnSs-
Panama,  where  the  Hands  of  Pearles  be,  as  they  call  them.
But  at  this  day  they  finde  greatest  store,  and  the  best,  in
the  North  Seas,  the  which  is  neere  to  the  River  of  Hache.
I  did  see  them make  their  fishing, the  which is  done  [III.  v.  953.]
with  great  charge  and  labour  of  the  poore  slaves,  which
dive  six,  nine,  yea  twelve  fadomes  into  the  Sea,  to  seeke
for Oysters, the which commonly are fastened to the
rockes  and  gravell  in  the  Sea : they  pull  them  up,  and  Manner
bring  them  above  the  water  to  their  canoes,  where  they  hereof.
open  them,  drawing  forth  the  treasure  they  have  within
them. The  water  of  the  Sea  in  this  part  is  very  cold,
but  yet  the  labour  and  toile  is  greatest  in  holding  of

99

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.
Long  winded their breath, sometimes a quarter, yea halfe an houre
slaves.  together,  being  under  the  water  at  their  fishing. And

to  the  end  these  poore  slaves  may  the  better  continue
and  hold  their  breaths,  they  feede  them  with  drie  meates,
and  that  in  small  quantitie,  so  as  covetousnesse  makes
them  abstaine  and  fast  thus  against  their  wils.  They
imploy  their  Pearles  to  divers  works,  and  they  pierce  them
to  make  chaines  whereof  there  is  great  store  in  every
place.  In  the  yeare  of  our  Lord  158 1.  I  did  see  the  note
of  what  came  from  the  Indies  for  the  King :  there
were  eighteene  Maces  of  Pearle,  besides  three  caskets,
and  for  particulars,  there  were  twelve  hundred  threescore
and  foure  Marks,  and  besides  them,  seven  caskets  not
pierced,  which  heretofore  we  would  have  esteemed  and
held  for  a  lye.
Of  the  Indian  They  have  (as  we  have  here)  a  proper  name,  whereby
Brea<t,  and  of  tney  note  and  signifie  bread,  which  at  Peru,  they  call
Chap  16  Tanta,  and  in  other  places  by  another  name.  But  the
qualitie  and  substance  of  the  bread  the  Indians  use,  differs
much  from  ours :  for  we  finde  not  they  had  any  kinde
of  Wheat  or  Barley,  nor  any  other  kinde  of  graine  which
they  use  in  Europe  to  make  Bread  withall :  instead
whereof  they  used  other  kindes  of  graines  and  rootes,
amongst  the  which  Mays  holds  the  first  place,  and  with
We  call  it  also  reason,  in  Castile  they  call  it  Indian  Wheat,  and  in  Italie
Virginia  j-ney  CR\\  \±  Turkey  graine.  And  even  as  Wheate  is  the
most  common  graine  for  the  use  of  man,  in  the  regions
of  the  old  world,  which  are  Europe,  Asia,  and  Affrica :
So  in  the  new  found  world,  the  most  common  graine  is
Mays,  the  which  is  found  almost  in  all  the  Kingdomes
of  the  West  Indies,  as  at  Peru,  new  Spaine,  in  the  new
Kingdome  of  Granado,  in  Gautimalla,  in  Chille,  and
upon  the  maine  Land.  I  doe  not  finde  that  in  old  time,
in  the  Hands  of  Barlovente,  as  Cuba,  Saint  Dominique,
Jamaique,  and  Saint  Jean,  that  they  used  Mays  :  at  this
day  they  use  much  Yuca  and  Cacavi,  whereof  we  will
presently  intreate.  I  doe  not  thinke  that  this  Mays  is
any  thing  inferiour  to  our  Wheate,  in  strength  nor  sub-

100

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.
stance,  but  it  is  more  hot  and  grosse,  and  engenders  more
bloud,  whereupon  they  that  have  not  beene  accustomed
thereunto,  if  they  eate  too  much,  they  swell  and  become
scabbed.  It  growes  upon  Canes  or  Reedes ;  everie  one  How  it
beares  one  or  two  branches,  to  the  which  the  graine  is  growth.
fastened,  and  although  the  graine  be  bigge,  yet  finde  they
great  store  thereof,  so  as  in  some  clusters  I  have  told
seven  hundred  graines.  They  must  plant  it  with  the
hand  one  by  one,  and  not  verie  thicke ;  it  desires  a  hot
and  a  moist  ground,  and  growes  in  great  abundance  in  /  have  had  it
many  places  of  the  Indies.  It  is  not  strange  in  those  ripen  reason-
Countries  to  gather  three  hundred  Fanegues,  or  measures  a^  ™  V
for  one  sowen.  There  is  difference  of  Mays  as  there  is  £sseXm
of  Wheate,  one  is  great  and  very  nourishing,  another
small  and  drie,  which  they  call  Moroche ;  the  greene
leaves  and  canes  of  Mays,  is  a  good  foode  for  their  Mules
and  Horses,  and  it  serves  them  for  straw  when  it  is  dried ;
the  graine  is  of  more  nourishment  for  Horses  then
Barley ;  and  therefore  in  those  Countries,  they  use  to
water  their  Horses  before  they  eate,  for  if  they  should
drinke  after,  they  would  swell  as  when  they  eate  Wheate.
Mays  is  the  Indians  bread,  the  which  they  commonly
eate  boiled  in  the  graine  hot,  and  they  call  it  Mote,  as
the  Chinois  and  Japonois  eate  their  Rice  sodden  with  the
hot  water  :  sometimes  they  eate  it  baked.  There  is  some
Mays  round  and  bigge,  as  that  of  Lucanas,  which  the
Spaniards  eate  rosted  as  a  delicate  meat,  and  hath  a  better
taste  then  Buarbenses,  or  rosted  peason.  There  is
another  kinde  of  eating  it  more  pleasant,  which  is,  to
grinde  the  Mays,  and  to  make  small  cakes  of  the  flower,
the  which  they  put  in  the  fire,  and  then  bring  them  hot
to  the  Table.  In  some  places  they  call  them  Arepas.
They  make  also  round  bowles  of  this  paste,  and  so
trimme  them  that  they  continue  long,  eating  it  as  a
daintie  dish.

They  have  invented  at  the  Indies  (for  friandise  and
pleasure)  a  certaine  kinde  of  paste,  they  doe  make  of
this flower mixt with Sugar, which they call Biscuits

IOI

A.D.

c.  1588.

Malt  &
strong  drinke
made  of  it.

Chica  good
against  the
Stone.
[III.  v.  954-]

Of  Yucas,
Cacavi,
Papas,  Chunes
and  Ris.
Chap.  17.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  mellinders.  This  Mays  serves  the  Indians,  not  onely
for  bread,  but  also  for  wine :  for  they  doe  make  their
drinke  thereof,  wherewith  they  are  sooner  drunke  then
with  wine  of  Grapes.  They  make  this  wine  of  Mays
in  divers  sorts  and  manner,  calling  it  in  Peru,  Acua,  and
by  the  most  common  name  of  the  Indies,  Chicha.  And
the  strongest  is  made  like  unto  Beere,  steeping  the  graine
untill  it  breake.  After  they  boile  it  in  such  sort,  that
it  growes  so  strong,  as  a  little  overthrowes  a  man.  In
Peru  they  call  this  Sora,  it  is  defended  by  the  Law,  for
the  great  inconveniences  that  grow  thereby,  making  men
drunke.  But  this  Law  is  ill  observed,  for  that  they  use
it  still ;  yea  they  spend  whole  daies  and  nights  in  drinking
carowses.

There  is  another  manner  of  making  this  Acua  or  Chicha,
which  is  to  champe  the  Mays,  and  make  a  leven  thereof,
and  then  boile  it :  yea  the  Indians  hold  opinion,  that  to
make  good  leven,  it  must  be  champed  by  old  withered
women,  which  makes  a  man  sicke  to  heare,  and  yet  they
doe  drinke  it.  The  clenliest  manner,  the  most  wholesome,
and  that  which  least  harmeth,  is  to  roast  the  Mays,  which
the  most  civill.  Indians  doe  use,  and  some  Spaniards,  yea
for  physicke  :  For  in  effect  they  finde  it  a  very  wholesome
drinke  for  the  reines,  so  as  you  shall  hardly  finde  any
one  at  the  Indies  complaine  of  paine  in  the  backe,  for
that  they  doe  drinke  of  this  Chicha.  The  Spaniards  and
Indians  eate  this  Mays  boyled  and  roasted  for  daintinesse,
when  it  is  tender  in  the  grape  like  milke,  they  put  it  into
the  pot,  and  make  sauces  that  are  good  to  eate.  The
buds  of  Mays  are  very  fat,  and  serve  instead  of  Butter
and  oyle :  so  as  this  Mays  at  the  Indies  serves  both  for
men  and  beasts,  for  bread,  wine,  and  oyle.

In  some  parts  of  the  Indies  they  use  a  kinde  of  Bread
they  call  Cacavi,  which  is  made  of  a  certaine  roote  they
call  Yuca.  This  Yuca  is  a  great  and  grosse  roote,  which
they  cut  in  small  morsels,  they  grate  or  scrape  it,  and
then  put  it  in  a  presse  to  straine,  making  a  thinne  and
broad  cake  thereof, almost  like  unto  a  Moores  Target

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.
or  Buckler ;  then  doe  they  drie  it :  and  this  is  the  Bread
they  eate.  It  hath  no  taste,  but  is  healthfull  and  of  good
nourishment.  For  this  reason  we  said,  being  at  Saint
Dominicke,  that  it  was  the  proper  foode  for  great  eaters,
for  that  they  might  eate  much,  without  any  feare  of  sur-
fetting.  They  must  of  necessitie  water  this  Cacavi  before
they  eate  it ;  it  is  sharpe,  and  easely  watered  with  water
or  broath,  wherein  it  is  very  good,  for  that  it  swels  much,
and  so  they  make  Capirotades,  but  it  is  hardly  steeped  in
Milke,  Hony  of  Canes,  or  in  Wine,  for  that  these  liquors
cannot  pierce  it,  as  it  doth  Bread  made  of  Wheate.  Of
this  Cacavi  there  is  one  kinde  more  delicate  then  any  other,
which  is  that  they  make  of  the  flower  called  Xauxau,  which
they  doe  much  esteeme  in  those  parts.  For  my  part,  I
esteeme  more  a  morsell  of  Bread,  how  hard  and  blacke
soever.  It  is  a  strange  thing  that  the  juyce  or  water  that  Juice  of
commeth  from  this  roote  when  they  straine  it,  which  makes  Cacavi  poison.
the  Cacavi,  is  a  deadly  poison,  and  kils  any  that  drinkes
thereof  :  but  the  substance  that  remaineth,  is  a  very  whole-
some Bread  and  nourishment,  as  we  have  said.

There  is  another  kinde  of  Yuca,  which  they  call  Sweet,
and  hath  not  this  poison  in  the  juyce :  this  is  eaten  in
the  roote  boiled  or  roasted,  and  is  good  meate.  Cacavi
will  keepe  long,  and  therefore  they  carrie  it  to  Sea  instead
of  Biscuit.  The  place  where  they  use  most  of  this  Bread,
is  at  the  Hands  of  Barlovente,  which  are  Saint  Dominicke,
Cuba,  Port  Ricco,  Jamaique,  and  some  others  thereabouts  ;
for  that  the  soile  of  these  Hands  will  neither  beare  Wheate,  Wheat,  why  it
nor  Mays :  for  when  as  they  sowe  Wheate,  it  comes  up  groweth  not  in
well,  and  is  presently  greene,  but  so  unequally,  as  they  those  Parts-
cannot  gather  it ;  for  of  the  seede  sowen,  at  one  instant
some  is  spindled,  some  is  in  the  eare,  and  some  doth  but
bud,  one  is  great  and  another  little,  one  is  in  the  grasse
and  another  in  the  graine :  and  although  they  have  carried
labourers  thither,  to  see  if  there  were  any  tillage  or  Art
to  be  used,  yet  could  they  finde  no  remedy  for  the  qualitie
of  the  earth.  They  carry  Meale  from  new  Spaine  or  the
Canaries,  which  is  so  moist,  that  hardly  can  they  make  any

103

A.D.

c.  1588.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

profitable  Bread,  or  of  good  taste.  The  Wafer-cakes
wherewith  they  say  Masse,  did  bend  like  to  wet  paper,
by  reason  of  the  extreame  humiditie  and  heate  which  are
joyntly  in  that  Countrie.  There  is  another  extreame
contrarie  to  this,  which  hinders  the  growing  of  Mays  or
Wheate  in  some  parts  of  the  Indies,  as  on  the  height  of
the  Sierre  of  Peru,  and  the  Provinces  which  they  call  of
Colao,  which  is  the  greatest  part  of  this  Realme,  where
the  climate  is  so  cold  and  dry,  as  it  will  not  suffer  any
of  these  seedes  to  grow  :  instead  thereof  the  Indians  use
another  kinde  of  roote,  which  they  call  Papas  :  these  rootes
are  like  to  ground  Nuts,  they  are  small  rootes,  which  cast
Papas  and  out  many  leaves.  They  gather  this  Papas,  and  dry  it
Chuno.  weH  in  the  Sunne,  then  beating  it,  they  make  that  which
they  call  Chuno,  which  keepes  many  daies,  and  serves  for
bread.  In  this  Realme  there  is  great  trafficke  of  Chuno,
the  which  they  carry  to  the  Mines  of  Potozi :  they  like-
wise eate  of  these  Papas  boiled  or  roasted :  there  is  one
sweete  of  these  kindes,  which  growes  in  hot  places,  whereof
they  doe  make  certaine  sawces  and  minced  meate,  which
they  call  Locro.  To  conclude,  these  rootes  are  the  bread
of  that  Land ;  so  as  when  the  yeare  is  good,  they  rejoyce
much,  for  that  oftentimes  they  freeze  in  the  earth,  so  great
is  the  cold  of  that  Region :  they  carrie  Mays  from  the
Valley  or  Sea-Coast,  and  the  Spaniards  which  are  daintie,
carrie  likewise  from  the  same  places  Wheate-meale,
whereof  they  doe  make  good  Bread,  because  that  the
Land  is  drie.
Of  divers  Besides  Papas,  which  is  the  principal!,  there  is  Ocas,
roots  which  Yanococas,  Camotes,  Vatas,  Xiquimas,  Yuca,  Cochucha,
grow  at  t  e  £av^  Totora,  Mani,  and  an  infinite  number  of  other
Chap.'  1$.  kindes,  as  the  Patattres,  which  they  eate  as  a  delicate  and
toothsome  meate.  They  have  likewise  carried  fruites  to
the  Indies  from  these  parts,  the  which  prosper  better  there,
then  the  Indian  Plants  doe,  brought  into  Europe.  There
are  other  rootes  that  serve  them  for  dainties,  as  the
Cochucho :  it  is  a  small  sweete  roote,  which  some  provide
for  more  delight. There  are  other  rootes  fit  to  coole,  as

104

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
the  Piquima,  which  is  the  qualitie  very  cold  and  moist,
and  in  Summer  it  refresheth  and  quencheth  the  thirst ;  but
the  Papas  and  Ocas,  be  the  chiefe  for  nourishment  and
substance.  The  Indians  esteeme  Garlike  above  all  the
rootes  of  Europe,  and  hold  it  for  a  fruite  of  great  force.

Seeing  we  have  begunne  with  the  lesser  Plants,  I  might
in  few  words,  touch  that  which  concernes  Flowers  and  Pot-  Of dwers  sorts
hearbes,  and  that  which  the  Latines  call  Arbusta,  without  ^nd  Pulses
any  mention  of  Trees. There  are  some  kindes  of  these  and  0j 'those
shrubbes  at  the  Indies,  which  are  of  verie  good  taste. The  they  call
first  Spaniards  named  many  things  at  the  Indies  with  such  Concombres,
Spanish names, as they did most resemble, as Pines,  p™"^ jnies
Concombres,  and  Prunes,  although  they  be  very  different  small  fruits' of
fruites  to  those  which  are  so  called  in  Spaine. The  Pines,  Chille,  and  of
or  Pine-aples,  are  of  the  same  fashion  and  forme  outwardly  Prunes.
to  those  of  Castile,  but  within  they  wholly  differ, for  c r9-
that  they  have  neither  Apples,  nor  scales,  but  are  all  one  [III.  v.  955.]
flesh,  which  may  be  eaten  when  the  skin  is  off. It  is  a
fruite  that  hath  an  excellent  smell,  and  is  very  pleasant
and  delightfull  in  taste,  it  is  full  of  juyce,  and  of  a  sweete
and  sharpe  taste,  they  eate  it  being  cut  in  morsels,  and
steeped  a  while  in  water  and  salt. They  grow  one  by
one  like  a  cane  or stalke,  which  riseth  amongst many
leaves, like to the Lillie, but somewhat bigger. The
Apple  is  on  the  top  of  everie  cane,  it  growes  in  hot  and
moist  grounds,  and  the  best  are  those  of  the  Hands  of
Barlovente. I  have  seene  in  new  Spaine,  conserves  of
these  Pines,  which  was  very  good. Those  which  they  Pines.
call  Concombres,  are  no  trees,  but  shrubbes,  continuing
but  one  yeare. They  give  it  this  name,  for  that  some  of
this  fruite,  and  the  most  part,  is  in  length,  and  roundnesse
like  to  the  Concombres  of  Spaine : but  for  the  rest  they
differ  much,  for  they  are  not  greene,  but  violet,  yellow,
or  white,  neither  are  they  thornie  or  rough,  but  pollished
and  even,  having  a  verie  different  taste,  and  farre  better
then  that  of  Spaine,  for  they  have  a  sharpe  sweete  taste,
very  pleasant  when  it  is  ripe,  yet  is  it  not  so  sharpe  as
the  Pine. They  are  very  coole,  full  of  liquor  and  of  easie

i°5

AD-  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

digestion,  and  in  time  of  heate  fit  to  refresh.  They  take
away  the  rinde  which  is  white,  and  all  that  remaines  is
meate.  They  grow  in  a  temperate  soile,  and  require
watering.  And  although  for  the  resemblance  they  call
them  Concombres,  yet  are  there  many  of  them  round,  and
others  of  a  different  fashion :  so  as  they  have  not  the
figure  of  Concombres.  I  doe  not  remember  to  have  seene
this  kinde  of  fruite  in  new  Spaine,  nor  at  the  Hands,  but
upon  the  Lanos  of  Peru.  That  which  they  call  the  little
fruite  of  Chille,  is  of  the  same  sort,  verie  pleasant  to  eate,
and  comes  neere  the  taste  of  Cherries,  but  in  all  other
things  it  differs  much ;  for  that  it  is  no  tree,  but  an  hearbe,
which  growes  little  and  spreads  upon  the  earth,  casting
forth  this  little  fruite,  the  which  in  colour  and  graines,
resembles  almost  the  Mulberie,  when  it  is  white  and
not  ripe,  yet  is  it  more  rough  and  bigger  then  the  Mul-
berie. They  say  this  little  fruite  is  naturally  found  in
the  fields  of  Chille,  where  I  have  seene  of  them.  They
set  it  upon  Plants  and  branches,  and  it  growes  like  any
other  shrub.  Those  which  they  call  Prunes,  are  verily
the  fruits  of  trees,  and  have  more  resemblance  then  the
rest  to  our  Plumbs.  But  to  returne  to  Pot-hearbs,  I
finde  not  that  the  Indians  had  any  Gardens  of  divers
Hearbes  and  Plants,  but  did  onely  till  the  Land  in  some
parts  for  pulses,  which  they  use,  as  those  which  they  call
Frisolles  and  Palares,  which  serve  them  as  our  Lentils,
Beanes,  or  Tares  :  neither  have  I  knowne  that  these  Pulses,
or  any  other  kindes  that  be  in  Europe,  were  there  before
Pulses,  Melons  the  Spaniards  entred,  who  carried  Plants  and  Pulses  from
and  Pompons  spaine  thither,  where  they  now  grow  and  increase  wonder-
Europe  and  fu%>  and  m  some  places  exceede  greatly  the  fertilitie  of
thriving  better  these  parts.  As  if  we  speak  of  Mellons  which  grow  in  the
there.  Vallie  of  Yuca,  in  Peru, whose  roote  becomes  a stalk

that  continues  many  yeares  carrying  Mellons  yeerely,  and
they  trimme  it  like  unto  a  tree ;  a  thing  which  I  doe
not  know  to  be  in  any  part  of  Spaine.  But  that  is  more
monstrous  of  the  Calibasses  or  Indian  Pompions,  and  the
greatnesse  they  have  as  they  grow,  especially  those  which

106

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
are  proper  to  the  Countrie,  which  they  call  Capallos,  the
which they eate most commonly in Lent, boiled and
trimmed  with  some  other  sawce. There  are  a  thousand
kindes  of  Calibasses,  some  are  so  deformed  in  their  big-  These  Cali-
nesse,  that  of  the  rinde  cut  in  the  middest  and  clensed,  basses  seme
they  make  as  it  were  baskets  to  put  in  all  their  meate  for  ^  G"imy
their  dinner. Of  the  lesser  they  make  Vessels  to  eate  carried>from
and  drinke  in,  and  doe  trimme  them  handsomely  for  manie  the  African
uses.  coast  thither.

They  have  not  found  at  the  West  Indies  anie  kinde  of
Spices,  proper  or  peculiar  to  them,  as  Pepper,  Cloves,  of  Axi  or
Cinamon,  Nutmegs  or  Ginger,  although  one  of  our  com-  Indian
panie,  who  had  travelled  much,  and  in  divers  parts,  told  PePPer-
us,  that  in  the  Desarts  of  the  Hand  of  Jamaique  he  had  a*'  zo'
found  trees  where  Pepper  grew.  But  they  are  not  yet
assured  thereof,  neither  is  there  anie  trade  of  these  spices
at  the  Indies.  The  Ginger  was  carried  from  the  Indies  Ginger.
to  Hispaniola,  and  it  hath  multiplied  so,  as  at  this  day
they  know  not  what  to  doe  with  the  great  abundance  they
have.  In  the  fleete,  the  yeare  1587.  they  brought  22053.
quintals  of  Ginger  to  Seville :  but  the  naturall  spice  that
God  hath  given  to  the  West  Indies,  is  that  we  in  Castill
call  Indian  Pepper,  and  at  the  Indies,  Axi,  as  a  generall
word  taken  from  the  first  Land  of  the  Hands,  which  they
conquered.  In  the  language  of  Cusco,  it  is  called  Uchu,
and  in  that  of  Mexico,  Chili.  This  plant  is  well  knowne,
and  therefore  I  will  speake  a  little,  onely  we  must  under-
stand, that  in  old  time  it  was  much  esteemed  amongst
the  Indians :  that  they  carried  into  places  where  it  grew
not,  as  a  Marchandise  of  consequence.  It  growes  not
upon  cold  grounds,  as  on  the  Sierre  of  Peru,  but  in  hot
Vallies,  where  it  is  often  watered.  There  is  of  this  Axi
of  divers  colours,  some  is  greene,  some  red,  some  yellow,
and  some  of  a  burning  colour,  which  they  call  Caribe,  the
which  is  extreamely  sharpe  and  biting  ;  there  is  another  sort
not  so  sharpe,  but  is  so  sweete,  as  they  may  eate  it  alone
as  any  other  fruit.  There  is  some  of  it  verie  small  and
pleasing  in  the  mouth,  almost  like  to  the  smell  of  Muske,

107

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

and  is  verie  good.  That  which  is  sharpe  and  biting  in
this  Axi,  be  the  veines  and  the  grain  onely ;  the  rest  is
not :  for  that  they  eate  it  greene  &  dry,  whole  and  beaten,
in  the  pot,  and  in  sawces,  being  the  chiefe  sawce,  &  all
the  spice  they  have  at  the  Indies.  When  this  Axi  is  taken
moderately,  it  helps  and  comforts  the  stomack  for  diges-
tion :  but  if  they  take  too  much,  it  hath  bad  effects,  for
of  it  selfe  it  is  verie  hot,  fuming,  &  pierceth  greatly,  so
as  the  use  thereof  is  prejudiciall  to  the  health  of  yong
folkes,  chiefely  to  the  soule,  for  that  it  provokes  to  lust.
[III.  v.  956.]  They  use  Salt  to  temper  this  Axi,  having  great  force  to
correct  it,  and  so  they  moderate  one  with  the  other  by
the  contrarietie  that  is  in  them.  They  use  also  Tomates,
which  are  cold  and  very  wholesome.  It  is  a  kinde  of
graine  great  and  full  of  juyce,  the  which  gives  a  good
taste  to  sawce,  and  they  are  good  to  eate.  They  have
generally  throughout  the  Indies  of  this  Indian  Pepper,  at
the  Hands,  new  Spaine,  Peru,  and  all  the  rest  that  is  dis-
covered. And  as  Mays  is  the  generall  graine  for  Bread,
so  Axi  is  the  most  common  spice  for  sawces.
Of  the  Plane  The  thing  wherein  was  most  resemblance,  in  my
tree.  opinion,  betwixt  the  Planes  at  the  Indies,  and  those  which

Chap.  21.  t£e  Ancients  did  celebrate,  is  the  greatnesse  of  the  leaves,
for  that  these  have  them  very  great  and  coole.  But  in
truth  there  is  no  more  comparison  nor  resemblance  of
the  one  with  the  other,  then  there  is  (as  the  Proverbe  saith)
betwixt  an  Egge  and  a  Chesnut.  For  first,  the  ancient
plane  carries  no  fruite,  at  the  least,  they  made  no  account
thereof,  but  the  chiefest  reason  why  they  esteemed  it,
was,  for  the  shadow,  for  that  there  was  no  more  Sunne
under  a  Plane  than  under  a  roofe.  And  contrariwise,  the
reason  why  they  should  regard  it  at  the  Indies,  yea  make
great  accompt  thereof,  is  by  reason  of  this  fruite,  which
is  very  good ;  for  they  have  little  shade.  Moreover,  the
ancient  Plane  had  the  body  so  bigge,  and  the  boughs  so
Pfin.  lib.  z.  spread,  that  Plinie  reporteth  of  one  Licinius  a  Romane
c-  '•  Captaine,  who  with  eighteene  of  his  companions  dined

at  ease  in  th'  hollow  of  one  of  these  Planes : and  of  the

108

JOSEPH ACOSTA  AD-

c.  1588.
Emperour  Caius  Caligula,  who  with  eleven  of  his  ghests
seated  upon  the  top  of  another  Plane,  where  he  made
them a sumptuous banquet. The Indian Planes have
neither  so  great  nor  hollow  bodies,  not  so  broad  boughs.

The  leaves  of  the  Indian  Plane,  are  of  a  wonderfull  Plin.  lib.  1
bignesse,  and  are,  in  a  manner,  sufficient  to  cover  a  man  ca-  l(>-
from  the  foote  to  the  head.  It  is  a  Plant  that  makes  a
stocke  within  the  earth,  out  of  the  which  springs  many
and  sundry  siens  and  sprigges,  divided,  and  not  joyned
together.  These  sprigges  grow  bigge,  every  one  making
a  small  tree  apart,  and  in  growing  they  cast  forth  these
leaves,  which  are  of  a  fine,  greene,  smooth,  and  great
as  I  have  said.  When  it  is  growne  to  the  height  of  a
stade  and  a  halfe,  or  two,  it  puts  forth  one  onely  bough
of  fruite,  whereon  sometimes  there  are  great  numbers  of
this  fruite,  and  sometimes  lesse.  I  have  told  upon  some
of  these  boughs  three  hundred,  whereof  every  one  was
a  spanne  long  more  or  lesse,  and  two  or  three  fingers
bigge ;  yet  is  there  much  difference  herein,  betwixt  some
and  others,  they  take  away  the  rinde,  and  all  the  rest  is
a  firme  kernell  and  tender,  good  to  eate,  and  nourishing.
This  fruite  inclines  more  to  cold  then  heate.  They  are
accustomed  to  gather  the  boughes  or  clusters,  as  I  have
said,  being  greene,  and  put  them  into  vessels,  where  they
ripen,  being  well  covered,  especially  when  there  is  a
certaine  hearbe  mingled  with  it,  which  serves  for  this
effect.  If  they  suffer  them  to  ripen  on  the  tree,  they
have  a  better  taste,  and  a  very  good  smell,  like  to
Camoisses  or  sweete  Apples.  They  last  almost  all  the
yeare,  for  that  there  are  alwaies  yong  ones  that  grow  out
of  this  stocke ;  so  as  when  one  ends,  another  beginnes
to  yeelde  his  fruite,  the  one  is  halfe  ripe,  and  the  other
begins  to  bud  anew,  so  as  one  succeedes  another,  and  the
fruite  continues  the  whole  yeare.  In  gathering  the  cluster,
they  cut  the  sprigge  or  stalke,  for  that  it  beares  but  one,
and  never  but  once  :  but  as  I  have  said,  the  stalke  remaines,
and  casts  forth  new  sienes  or  stalkes,  untill  it  growes  old
and  dies. This  Plane  continues  many  yeares,  and  requires

109

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

much  moisture,  and  a  very  hot  ground.  They  put  ashes
at  the  foote  of  it,  for  the  better  entertaining  thereof,  and
they  make  small  groves  and  very  thicke :  the  leafe  is  as
broad  as  a  sheete  of  Paper,  or  little  lesse,  and  foure  times
as  long.

Although  the  Plane  be  the  most  profitable,  yet  that

Of  Cacao  and  Cacao  is  most  esteemed  at  Mexico,  and  the  Coca  in  Peru,

Coca.  jn  wnicn  two  trees  they  have  great  superstition. The

a*'  Cacao  is  a  fruite  little  lesse  then  Almonds,  yet  more  fat,

the  which  being  roasted  hath  no  ill  taste.  It  is  so  much
esteemed  amongst  the  Indians  (yea  and  among  the
Spaniards)  that  it  is  one  of  the  richest  and  the  greatest
trafnckes  of  new  Spaine :  for  being  a  drie  fruite,  and  that
keepes  long  without  corruption,  they  carrie  whole  Ships
loaden  from  the  Province  of  Guatimalla.  The  last  yeare
an  English  Pirat  did  burne  in  the  Port  of  Guatulco  in
new  Spaine,  above  a  hundred  thousand  charges  of  Cacao.

Cacao  money.  They  use  it  instead  of  money,  for  with  five  Cacaos  they
buy  one  thing,  with  thirtie  another,  and  with  a  hundred
another,  without  any  contradiction ;  and  they  use  to  give
it  to  the  poore  that  beg  for  almes.  The  chiefe  use  of
this  Cacao,  is  in  a  drinke  which  they  call  Chocholate,
whereof  they  make  great  accompt  in  that  Country,
foolishly,  and  without  reason ;  for  it  is  loathsome  to  such
as  are  not  acquainted  with  it,  having  a  skum  or  froth
that  is  very  unpleasant  to  taste,  if  they  be  not  very  well
conceited  thereof.  Yet  it  is  a  drinke  very  much  esteemed
among  the  Indians,  wherewith  they  feast  Noble  men  as
they  passe  through  their  Countrie.  The  tree  whereon  this
fruite  growes,  is  of  reasonable  bignesse,  and  well  fashioned,
it  is  so  tender,  that  to  keepe  it  from  the  burning  of  the
Sunne,  they  plant  neere  unto  it,  a  great  tree,  which  serves
onely  to  shadow  it,  and  they  call  it  the  mother  of  Cacao.
There  are  places  where  they  are  like  to  the  Vines  and
Olive  trees  of  Spaine.  The  Province  where  there  is
greatest  abundance  for  the  trafficke  of  Marchandise,  is

Coca.  Guatimalla. There growes none in Peru, but Coca,

wherein  they  hold  another  great  superstition,  which  seemes

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
to  be  fabulous.  It  is  a  kinde  of  Marchandise,  by  the
which  all  their  Markets  and  Faires  are  made  with  great
expedition.  This  Coca  whereof  they  make  such  account,
is  a  small  greene  leafe,  which  groweth  upon  small  trees
about  a  fadome  high,  and  in  hot  and  moist  grounds  ;  every  [III.  v.  957.]
foure  moneths  it  casts  forth  this  leafe,  which  they  call
Tresmitas  or  Tremoy ;  it  requires  great  care  in  planting,
being  very  tender,  and  much  more  to  keepe  it,  when  it
is  gathered.  They  lay  it  in  order  in  long  and  narrow
baskets,  and  so  lade  their  sheepe  of  the  Country,  which
goe  in  troopes,  with  one,  two,  or  three  thousand  baskets
of  this  marchandise.

They  bring  it  commonly  from  the  Andes  and  vallies,
where  there  is  an  extreame  heate, and  where  it  raines
continually  the  most  part  of  the  yeare  :  wherein  the  Indians
endure  much  labour  and  paine  to  entertaine  it,  and  often
many  die  ;  for  that  they  goe  from  the  Sierre  and  cold  places
to  till  and  gather  them  in  the  Andes. Their  use  is  to Of  Maguey
carry  it  in  their  mouthes,  chawing  it,  and  sucking  out  Tuna/,
the  juice,  but  they  swallow  it  not. They  say  it  gives CJ°cheml^}
them  great courage, and is very pleasing unto them. QoUo'„t
They  willingly  imploy  their  money  therein,  and  use  it  Chap.  23.
as  money.

Maguey  is  a  tree  of  wonders,  whereof  the  Notaries  or  Maguey.
Chapetons  (as  the  Indians  call  them)  are  wont  to  write
miracles,  in  that  it  yeeldeth  Water,  Wine,  Oyle,  Vinegar,
Honie, Sirrope,  Thred,  Needles, and  a  thousand  other
things. It  is  a  tree  which  the  Indians  esteeme  much  in
new  Spaine,  and  have  commonly  in  their  dwellings  some
one  of  them  for  the  maintenance  of  life ;  it  growes  in
the  fields,  and  hath  great  and  large  leaves,  at  the  end
whereof  is  a  strong  and  sharpe  point,  which  serves  to
fasten  little  pins,  or  to  sew  as  a  needle : and  they  draw
out  of  this  leafe  as  it  were  a  kinde  of  thred  which  they
use. They  cut  the  body  which  is  bigge,  when  it  is  tender,  Manifo/dcom-
wherein  is  a  great  hollownesse,  by  which  the  substance  ™dtttes  °fthe
mounts  from  the  roote,  and  is  a  liquor  which  they  drinke aguey'
like  water,  being  sweete  and  fresh. This  liquor  being

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

sodden, turnes like Wine, which growes to Vinegar,
suffring  it  to  soure,  and  boiling  it  more,  it  becomes  as
honie,  and  boiling  it  halfe,  it  serves  as  sirrope :  which  is
healthfull  enough,  and  of  good  taste ;  in  my  judgement
it  is  better  then  the  sirrope  of  Raisons. Thus  do  they
boile  this  liquor,  and  use  it  in  divers  sorts,  whereof  they
draw  a  good  quantitie,  for  that  in  some  season  they  draw
daily  some  pots  of  this  liquor. There  are  also  of  these
trees  in  Peru,  but  they  are  not  so  profitable  as  in  new
Spaine. The  wood  of  this  tree  is  hollow  and  soft,  and
serves  to  keepe  fire,  like  to  the  match  of  a  harquebuze,
and  preserves  it  long : I  have  seene  the  Indians  use  it
to  that  end.
Tunall  tree. Xhe  Tunall  is  another  famous  tree  in  new  Spaine  : if
wee  may  call  a  tree  a  heape  of  leaves  gathered  together
one  upon  another,  it  is  the  strangest  fashiond  tree  of  all
other :  for  first  there  growes  one  leafe  out  of  the  ground,
then  another  upon  it,  and  so  one  upon  one,  till  it  commeth
to  his  perfection ;  but  as  the  leaves  grow  up,  and  on  the
sides,  those  underneath  doe  become  great,  and  loose  in
a  manner  the  forme  of  leaves,  making  a  body  and  branches,
which  are  sharpe,  pricking,  and  deformed,  so  as  in  some
places  they  doe  call  it  a  Thistle. There  are  Thistles  or
wilde  Tunalls,  the  which  doe  carrie  no  fruite,  or  else  it
is  very  pricking  without  any  profit. There  are  likewise
planted Tunalls which yeelde fruite much esteemed
amongst the Indians, the  which they  call  Tunas, and
they  are  much  greater  then  Plumbes,  and  long. They
open  the  shell  which  is  fat,  and  within  it  is  meate  and
small  graines,  like  to  those  of  figges,  which  be  very  sweete  ;
they  have  a  good  taste,  especially  the  white,  which  have
a  pleasing  smell,  but  the  red  are  not  usually  so  good.
There  is  another  sort  of  Tunalls,  which  they  esteeme  much
more,  although  it  yeeldes  no  fruit,  yet  it  beares  another
commoditie  and  profit,  which  is  of  the  graine,  for  that
certaine  small  wormes  breede  in  the  leaves  of  this  tree,
when it  is  well husbanded, and  are thereunto fastned,
covered  with  a  certaine  small  fine  web,  which  doth  com-

J12

JOSEPH ACOSTA

passe  them  in  daintily ;  and  this  is  that  Indian  Cochenille,
so  famous,  and  wherewith  they  die  in  graine.  They  let
it  drie,  and  being  dried,  carrie  it  into  Spaine,  which  is
a  great  and  rich  marchandise.  The  arobe  of  this  Coche-
nille or  graine  is  worth  many  ducats.  In  the  fleete,  the
yeare  1587.  they  did  bring  five  thousand  six  hundred
seventie  seven  arobes,  which  amounted  to  two  hundred
fourescore  three  thousand  seven  hundred  and  fiftie  peeces,
and  commonly  there  comes  every  yeare  as  great  a  wealth.

These  Tunalls  grow  in  temperate  grounds  inclining  to
cold.  In  Peru  there  growes  none  to  this  day.  I  have
seene  some  Plants  in  Spaine,  but  they  deserve  not  esti-
mation. I  will  speake  something  likewise  of  the  Anir,
although  it  comes  not  from  a  tree,  but  from  an  hearbe,
for  that  it  serveth  for  the  dying  of  cloth,  and  is  a  marchan-
dise which  agrees  with  the  graine ;  it  groweth  in  great
abundance  in  new  Spaine,  from  whence  there  came  in
the  fleete  I  mentioned  5263.  arobes,  or  there  abouts,  which
amounted  to  so  many  peeces.  Cotten  likewise  growes
upon  small  shrubs,  and  great  trees  like  to  little  apples,
which  doe  open  and  yeelde  forth  this  webbe,  which  being
gathered,  they  spinne  to  make  stuff es :  and  the  yeare  that
I  spake  of,  there  came  64000.  arobes.

These  Plants  we  have  spoken  of,  are  the  most  profitable
of  the  Indies,  and  the  most  necessarie  for  the  life  of  man  :
yet  there  are  many  other  that  are  good  to  eate,  among
the  which  the  Mameys  are  esteemed,  being  in  fashion  like
to  great  Peaches,  and  bigger,  they  have  one  or  two  stones
within  them,  and  their  meate  is  somewhat  hard.  There
are  some  sweete,  and  others  somewhat  sowre,  and  have
the  rinde  hard.  They  make  conserves  of  the  meate  of
this  fruite,  which  is  like  to  Marmelade.  The  use  of  this
fruite  is  reasonable  good,  but  the  conserves  they  make
thereof,  are  better.  They  grow  in  Hands.  I  have  not
seene  any  in  Peru.  It  is  a  great  tree,  well  fashioned,  and
a  reasonable  faire  leafe.  The  Guavyavos  be  other  trees
which  commonly  carrie  an  ill  fruite,  full  of  sowre  kernels,
and  are  like  to  little  Apples.  It  is  a  tree  little  esteemed
xv  113  H

A.D.

c.  1588.

/  thinke  hee
meaneth  An'ill
or  Indico :  of
which  see
To.  1 .  /.  4.  in
Fitches
Journall.

Cotten.

Of  Mameys,
Guavyavos,
and  Paltos.
Chap.  24.

[III.  v.  958.]

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

upon  the  firme  Land  and  at  the  Hands,  for  they  say  it
smels  like  to  the  Punaises.  The  taste  and  savour  of  this
fruite  is  verie  grosse,  and  the  substance  unholesome.  In
Saint  Dominique  and  other  Hands,  there  are  whole  Moun-
taines  full  of  these  Guayavos,  and  they  say,  there  was  no
such  kindes  of  trees  before  the  Spaniards  came  there,  but
that  they  brought  them  they  know  not  from  whence.
This  tree  hath  multiplied  infinitely,  for  that  there  is  no
Beast  that  will  eate  the  kernels  or  the  graine,  so  as  being
thus  scattered  on  the  earth,  being  hot  and  moist,  it  multi-
plies in  this  sort.  In  Peru,  the  Guayavos  differs  from
others,  for  that  the  fruite  is  not  red,  but  white,  neither
hath  it  any  ill  smell,  but  is  of  a  very  good  taste ;  and  of
what  sort  of  Guayavos  soever  it  be,  the  fruite  is  as  good
as  the  best  of  Spaine,  especially  of  those  which  they  call
Guayavos  de  Matos,  and  of  other  little  white  Guayvilles.
It  is  a  fruite  reasonably  holesome,  and  agrees  with  the
stomack,  being  of  a  strong  digestion,  and  cold.  The
Paltas  commonly  are  hote  and  delicate.  The  Palto  is  a
great  tree,  and  carries  a  faire  leafe,  which  hath  a  fruit
like  to  great  Peares :  within  it  hath  a  great  stone,  and  all
the  rest  is  soft  meate,  so  as  when  they  are  full  ripe,  they
are  as  it  were  Butter,  and  have  a  delicate  taste.  In  Peru
the  Paltas  are  great,  and  have  a  verie  hard  skale,  which
may  be  taken  off  whole.  This  fruite  is  most  usuall  in
Mexico,  having  a  thinne  skinne,  which  may  be  pilled  like
an  Apple :  they  hold  it  for  a  very  holesome  meate,  and  as
I  have  said,  it  declines  a  little  from  heate.  These
Mamayes,  Guayavos,  and  Paltos,  be  the  Indians  Peaches,
Apples,  and  Peares ;  and  yet  would  I  rather  choose  them
of  Europe.

Chlcopates.  The  Marmalad  is  that  which  they  call  Capotes,  or
Chicocapotes,  which  have  a  sweete  taste,  and  neere  unto
the  colour  of  Marmalade.  Some  Crollos  (for  so  they
called  the  Spaniards  borne  at  the  Indies)  say  that  this
fruite  passeth  all  the  fruites  of  Spaine  in  excellencie :  yet
am  I  not  of  that  opinion.  Those  Chicocapotes  or  Capotes,
wherein  there  is  little  difference,  grow  in  the  hotest  parts

114

JOSEPH ACOSTA

of  new  Spaine,  neither  have  I  knowledge  of  any  such
fruite  in  the  firme  Land  of  Peru.  As  for  the  Blancke-
manger,  it  is  that  Annona  or  Guanavana,  which  growes
in  the  firme  Land,  which  is  fashioned  like  unto  a  Peare,
a  little  sharpe  and  opened,  within  it  is  white,  tender  and
soft  like  Butter,  sweete  and  of  a  pleasing  taste  :  It  is  no
white  meate,  though  they  call  it  Blanckemanger.

There  are  some  grosse  Fruites,  as  those  which  they
call  Lucumes  (of  which  fruite  they  speake  in  a  Proverbe,
that  it  is  a  counterfet  price.)  The  Guanos,  Pacayes,
Hubos,  and  the  Nuts  which  they  call  Imprisoned :  which
fruites  seeme  to  many,  to  be  the  same  kinde  of  Nuts  we
have  in  Spaine.  I  doe  not  thinke  it  good  to  passe  away
under  silence  the  Cocos  or  Indian  Palmes,  by  reason  of
a  verie  notable  propertie  it  hath.  I  call  them  Palmes,  not
properly,  or  that  it  beares  Dates,  but  that  they  are  trees
like  to  other  Palmes.  They  are  high  and  strong,  and  the
higher  they  grow,  the  broader  they  stretch  out  their
branches.  These  Cocos  yeeld  a  fruite  which  they  likewise
call  Cocos,  whereof  they  commonly  make  vessels  to  drinke
in,  and  some  they  say  have  a  vertue  against  poison,  and
to  cure  the  paine  in  the  side.  The  nutte  and  meate  being
dried,  is  good  to  eate,  and  comes  neere  in  take  to  greene
Chesnuts.  When  the  Coco  is  tender  upon  the  tree,  the
substance  within  it,  is  as  it  were  Milke,  which  they  drinke
for  daintinesse,  and  to  refresh  them  in  time  of  heate.  I
have  seene  of  these  trees  in  Saint  Jean  de  Port  Ricco,  and
other  parts  of  the  Indies,  and  they  report  a  wonderfull
thing,  that  every  moneth  or  Moone,  this  tree  casts  forth
a  new  branch  of  this  Cocos ;  so  as  it  yeeldes  fruite  twelve
times  in  the  yeare,  as  it  is  written  in  the  Apocalips :  and
in  truth  this  seemes  like  unto  it,  for  that  all  the  branches
are  of  different  ages,  some  beginning,  others  being  ripe,
and  some  halfe  ripe.  These  Cocos  are  commonly  of  the
forme  and  bignesse  of  a  small  Melon.  There  is  of  another
kinde,  which  they  call  Coquillos,  the  which  is  a  better
fruite,  whereof  there  be  some  in  Chille.  They  are  some-
what lesse  then  Nuts,  but  more  round. There  is  another

A.D.

c.  1588.

Of  many  sorts
of  fruit  Trees,
of  Cocos,
Almonds  of  the
Andes,  and
Almonds  of
Chachapoyas.
Cha.  26.

Cocos.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

kinde  of  Cocos,  which  have  not  the  kernell  so  oylie,  but
within  they  have  a  great  number  of  small  fruits  like
Almonds,  like  unto  the  graines  of  a  Pomgranat.

These  Almonds  are  thrice  as  bigge  as  those  of  Castillo,
and  resemble  them  in  taste,  though  they  be  more  sharpe,
and  likewise  moist  and  oylie. It  is  a  good  meate,  they
use  it  also in feasting, for  lacke  of  Almonds to  make
Marchpanes, and such other things. They call them
Almonds. Almonds  of  the  Andes,  for  that  these  Cocos  grow  abund-
antly upon  the  Andes  of  Peru ;  they  are  so  strong  and
hard,  as  to  open  them,  they  must  beate  them  with  a  great
stone,  when  they  fall  from  the  tree. If  they  chance  to
hit  any  one  on  the  head,  he  hath  no  more  neede  of  any
Surgeon. It  is  an  incredible  thing,  that  within  the  hollow
of  these  Cocos,  which  are  no  bigger  than  the  rest,  or  little
more,  there  are  such  a  multitude  of  these  Almonds. But
as  touching  Almonds  and  other  fruits,  all  trees  must  yeelde
to  the  Almonds  of  Chachapoyas,  which  I  cannot  otherwise
call. It is the most  pleasing, delicate  and  wholesome
fruite  of  all  that  I  have  seene  at  the  Indies.
Of  many  and The  Indians  are  great  lovers  of  flowers,  and  in  new
divers  flowers,  Spajne  m0re  then  in  any  other  part  of  the  world,  and
trees  which therefore  they  are  accustomed  to  make  many  kindes  of
yeelde  onely  a  Nosegaies,  which  there  they  call  Suchilles,  with  such  prettie
flower,  &  how  varietie  and  art,  as  nothing  can  be  more  pleasing. They
the  Indians  doe  have  a  custome  amongst  them,  that  the  chiefest  man  offer
UQh  61' their  Suchillos  or  nosegayes  in  honour  to  Noblemen,  and
to  their  ghests ;  and  they  presented  us  with  such  abund-
ance as  wee  passed  through  that  Countrey,  as  wee  knew
[III.  v.  959.]  not  what  to  doe  with  them;  and  at  this  day  they  use  the
principall  flowers  of  Castile,  to  that  end,  for  that  they
grow better there than here, as Gilli-flowers, Roses,
Jasmins,  Violets,  Orange  flowers,  and  other  sorts  which
they  have transported  out of Spaine. The  Rose tree
groweth  too  fast  in  some  places,  so  as  they  beare  no  Roses.
Accidents  pro-  It  chanced  one  day  that  a  Rose  tree  was  burned,  and  the
duce  most  arts.  sjens  which  sprowted  out,  presently  bare  abundance  of
Roses,  and  thereby  they  learned  to  prune  them,  and  to

116

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
cut  off  the  superfluous  branches,  so  as  at  this  day  they
yeelde  reasonable  store  of  Roses.  But  besides  these
kindes  of  flowers,  which  have  beene  transported  from
hence,  there  are  many  others,  whose  names  I  doe  not
know,  whereof  some  are  red,  blew,  yellow,  violet  and
white,  with  a  thousand  different  colours,  which  the  Indians
did  use  to  carry  on  their  heads,  as  feathers  for  ornament.
True  it  is,  that  many  of  these  flowers  are  onely  pleasing
to  the  sight,  having  no  good  savour,  either  they  are  grosse,
or  else  they  have  none  at  all ;  and  yet  there  be  some  of
an  excellent  sent.  As  those  which  grow  upon  a  tree
tearmed  by  them  Floripondio  or  carry  flower,  which  beares
no  fruite,  but  onely  these  flowers,  which  are  greater  than
the  Lillie,  and  are  like  to  little  Bels,  all  white,  which
have  within  them  small  threds,  as  we  see  in  the
Lillie :  it  leaves  not  all  the  yeare  to  beare  these  flowers,
whose  smell  is  wonderfull  sweete  and  agreeable,  especially
in  the  coole  of  the  morning.  The  Viceroy  Don  Francisco
de  Toledo  sent  of  these  trees  unto  King  Phillip,  as  a
thing  worthy  to  be  planted  in  royall  Gardens.  In  new
Spaine  the  Indians  esteeme  much  of  a  flower,  which  they
call  Volosuchil,  which  signifieth  flower  of  the  heart,  for
that  it  beares  the  forme  of  a  heart,  and  is  not  much  lesse.
The  flower  of  Granadille  is  held  for  an  admirable  thing,
and  they  say,  it  hath  in  it  the  markes  of  the  Passion,  and
that  therein  they  note  the  nailes,  the  piller,  the  whips,  and
crowne  of  thornes,  and  the  wounds,  wherein  they  are  not
altogether  without  reason,  and  yet  to  find  out  and  observe
these  things,  it  requires  some  pietie  to  cause  beleefe :  but
it  is  very  exquisite  and  faire  to  the  eye,  although  it  have
no  smell,  &c.

The  balme  which  comes  from  the  West  Indies,  is  not Of  Balme.
of  the  same  kinde  of  right  Balme  which  they  bring  from
Alexandria  or  Cairo,  and  in  old  time  was  in  Judea,  which
Judea  (as  Plinie  writeth)  did  of  all  the  world  possesse  pnn.  lib.  1
this  greatnesse,  untill  the  Emperour  Vespasian  brought  c.  15.
it  to  Rome  and  into  Italic At  the  Indies  I  have  seene  CJiaP-  2§-
the  Tree  from  whence  they  draw  the  Balme,  which  is  as

T17

A.D.

c.  1588.

Strab.  lib.  1 6.
Geograp.

Of  Amber,
and  other
Oyles,

Gummes,  and
Drugs,  which
they  bring
from  the  Indie s
Chap.  29.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

big  as  a  Pomgranat  tree,  and  something  neere  the  fashion  :
and  if  my  memorie  failes  me  not,  it  hath  nothing  common
with  the  Vine,  although  that  Strabo  writes,  that  the  ancient
tree  of  Balme,  was  of  the  bignesse  of  a  Pomgranat  tree.
But  in  their  accidents  &  operations,  their  liquors  are  alike,
as  likewise  they  be  in  their  admirable  smels,  &  in  the
cure  and  healing  of  wounds  in  colour  and  substance,  seeing
they  report  of  other  Balmes  that  there  is  some  white,
vermillion,  greene  and  blacke,  the  which  is  likewise  seene
in  that  of  the  Indies.  And  as  they  drew  forth  the  ancient
in  cutting  and  making  incisions  in  the  barke,  to  cause
the  liquor  to  distill  out,  so  doe  they  with  that  at  the  Indies,
although  it  distils  in  greater  abundance.  And  as  in  the
ancient  there  is  one  kinde  which  is  pure,  the  which  they
call  Opobalsamum,  which  be  the  verie  teares  that  distill,
so  as  there  is  another  sort  which  is  not  so  exquisite,  the
which  they  draw  from  the  barke  and  leaves  strained  and
boiled  on  the  fire,  the  which  they  call  Xilobalssamum.
The  like  is  also  in  the  Indian  Balmes ;  there  is  one  pure
that  distils  from  the  tree,  and  others  that  the  Indians  draw
out  by  straining  and  boiling  the  leaves  and  wood.  The
Apostolike  Sea  hath  given  libertie  to  give  Creame  of
Balme  at  the  Indies,  and  that  they  should  use  it  in  Confir-
mation and  other  ceremonies  which  they  use.

Next  to  Balme,  Amber  holds  the  second  place :  it  is
another  liquor  which  is  likewise  sweet  and  medicinall,  but
more  thicke,  and  turnes  into  a  paste  of  a  hot  complexion,
and  a  good  perfume.  This  Amber  comes  from  new
Spaine,  which  hath  that  advantage  above  other  Provinces
in  Gummes,  Liquors,  and  juyce  of  Trees,  whereby  they
have  such  abundance  of  matter,  for  perfume  and  physicke,
as  is  the  Anime,  whereof  there  comes  great  store,  Copal
or  Suchicopal,  which  is  another  kinde,  Storax  and  Incense,
which  have  excellent  operations,  and  have  a  very  good
smell  fit  for  fumigations.  Likewise  the  Tacamahaca  and
Caranna,  which  are  also  very  medicinall.  They  bring
likewise  from  this  Province  oile  of  Aspicke,  which  the
Physicians  and  Painters  use  much,  the  one  for  plaisters,

118

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
the  other  to  vernish  their  pictures.  They  bring  also  for
the  Physicians  Cassia  fistula,  the  which  growes  plentifully  Qas.  Fistula.
in  Saint  Dominique.  It  is  a  great  Tree,  which  carries
these  Canes  as  his  fruit.  They  brought  in  the  fleet
wherein  I  came  from  Saint  Dominique  fortie  eight
Quintals  of  Cassia  fistula.  Salcepareille  is  not  lesse  Salceparilla.
knowne,  for  a  thousand  remedies  wherein  it  is  used.
There  came  in  the  same  fleet  fiftie  Quintals  from  the
same  Hand.  There  is  much  of  this  Salcepareille  at  Peru,
and  most  excellent  in  the  Province  of  Guayaquil,  which
is  under  the  Line.  Many  goe  to  be  cured  into  this
Province,  and  it  is  the  opinion  of  some,  that  the  pure
water  onely  which  they  drinke,  gives  them  health,  for
that  it  passeth  by  rootes  as  I  have  said,  from  whence  it
drawes  this  vertue,  so  as  there  needes  no  great  covering
or  garments  to  make  a  man  sweat  in  that  Countrie.  The
wood  of  Guayac,  which  they  call  Lignum  sanctum,  or  Lignum  vita.
Indian  wood,  growes  abundantly  in  the  same  Hands,  and
is  as  heavie  as  Iron,  so  as  it  presently  sinkes  in  the  water :
hereof  they  brought  in  the  same  fleet  three  hundred  and
fiftie  Quintals,  and  they  might  have  brought  twentie,
yea,  a  hundred  thousand  of  this  wood,  if  there  were  use
for  it.  There  came  in  the  same  fleet,  and  from  the  same
Hand,  one  hundred  and  thirtie  Quintals  of  Bresil  wood,
the  which  is  fiery  red,  so  well  knowne,  and  much  used  in  [ni.  v.  960.]
dying  and  other  things.  There  are  at  the  Indies  infinite
numbers  of  other  aromaticall  Woods,  Gummes,  Oiles,  and
Drugs,  so  as  it  is  not  possible  to  name  them  all,  neither
doth  it  now  much  import.  I  say  onely,  that  in  the  time
of  the  Kings  Inguas  of  Cusco,  and  the  Mexicane  Kings,  Auntient
there  were  many  great  personages  expert  in  curing  of  Physicians.
diseases  with  simples,  and  did  goodly  cures,  having  the
.knowledge  of  the  many  vertues  and  properties  of  Herbs,
Rootes,  Woods,  and  Plants,  which  grow  there,  and
whereof  the  Ancients  of  Europe  have  had  no  knowledge.
There  are  a  thousand  of  these  simples  fit  to  purge,  &c.

Woods  are  so  many  and  great,  that  it  hath  beene  need-
full  (passing  through  some  parts  of  the  Indies,  especially

119

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

where  they  newly  entred)  to  make  their  way,  in  cutting
downe  Trees,  and  pulling  up  Bushes,  so  that  (as  some
religious  men  have  written  that  have  tried  it)  they  could
not  sometimes  have  passed  above  a  league  in  a  day.  One
of  our  brothers  (a  man  worthy  of  credit)  reported  unto
us,  that  being  strayed  in  the  Mountaines,  not  knowing
which  way  hee  should  passe,  he  fell  among  such  thicke
Strange  travil.  Bushes,  that  hee  was  forced  to  goe  upon  them,  without
setting  foot  to  the  ground,  by  the  space  of  fifteen  whole
dayes :  and  to  see  the  Sunne,  or  to  marke  some  way  in
this  thicke  Forest  full  of  wood,  hee  was  forced  to  climbe
to  the  top  of  the  highest  Trees  to  discover.  He  that
shall  reade  the  discourse  of  his  travell,  how  often  he  was
lost,  and  the  wayes  hee  passed,  with  the  strange  adventures
that  happened  unto  him,  the  which  I  have  written  briefly,
being  so  worthy  the  knowledge,  and  having  my  selfe
travelled  a  little  over  the  Mountaines  at  the  Indies,  were
it  but  the  eighteene  leagues  betwixt  Nombre  de  Dios  and
Panama,  may  well  judge  what  great  Forests  there  are.
So  as  having  no  winter  in  those  parts,  to  nip  them  with
cold,  and  the  humiditie  of  the  Heavens  and  Earth  being
so  great,  as  the  Mountaines  bring  forth  infinite  Forests,
and  the  Playnes  which  they  call  Savanas,  great  plentie
of  grasse :  there  is  no  want  of  Pasture  for  feeding,  of
Timber  for  building,  nor  of  Wood  for  fuell.  It  is  impos-
sible to  set  downe  the  differences  and  formes  of  so  many
wilde  Trees,  for  that  the  names  of  the  greatest  part  are
unknowne.

Cedars  in  old  time  so  much  esteemed,  are  there  very
common,  both  for  buildings  and  ships,  and  they  are  of
divers  sorts,  some  white,  and  some  red,  very  odoriferant.
There  are  great  store  of  Bay  trees,  very  pleasant  to  behold
upon  the  Andes  of  Peru,  upon  the  Mountaines,  in  the
Hands  of  Nicaragua,  and  in  new  Spaine.  There  are  also
infinite  numbers  of  Palmes  and  Ceivas,  whereof  the
Indians  make  their  Canoes,  which  are  Boates  made  of
one  piece.  They  bring  into  Spaine  from  the  Havana,
excellent  timber. In  the  Hand  of  Cuba,  there  are  infinite

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
numbers  of  like  trees,  as  Ebene,  Caovana,  Grenadille,
Cedars,  and  other  kindes  which  I  doe  not  know.  There
are  great  Pine  trees  in  new  Spaine,  though  they  be  not
so  strong  as  those  in  Spaine :  they  beare  no  pignous  or
kernels,  but  emptie  apples.  The  Oakes  as  they  call  them
of  Guayaquil,  is  an  excellent  wood  and  sweet,  when  they
cut  it ;  yea  there  are  Canes  or  most  high  Reeds,  of  whose
boughs  or  small  reedes  they  doe  make  Bottles  and  Pitchers
to  carry  water,  and  doe  likewise  use  them  in  their  build-
ings. There  is  likewise  the  wood  of  Mansle  or  Firre,
whereof  they  make  masts  for  their  ships,  and  they  hold
them  as  strong  as  Iron.  Molle  is  a  tree  of  many  vertues,
which  casteth  forth  small  boughes,  whereof  the  Indians
make  wine.  In  Mexico  they  call  it  the  tree  of  Peru,  for
that  it  came  from  thence :  but  it  growes  also  in  new
Spaine,  and  better  "then  those  in  Peru.  There  are  a
thousand  other  Trees,  which  were  a  superfluous  labour
to  intreat  of,  whereof  some  are  of  an  exceeding  greatnesse,
I  will  speake  onely  of  one  which  is  in  Tlaco  Chavoya,  Great  Tree.
three  leagues  from  Guayaca  in  new  Spaine  :  this  tree  being
measured  within,  being  hollow,  was  found  to  have  nine
fadome,  and  without,  neere  to  the  roote,  sixteene,  and
somewhat  higher,  twelve.  This  tree  was  strooke  with
lightning  from  the  toppe  to  the  bottome,  through  the
heart,  the  which  caused  this  hollownesse :  they  say  that
before  the  thunder  fell  upon  it,  it  was  able  to  shaddow
a  thousand  men,  and  therefore  they  did  assemble  there
for  their  dances  and  superstitions :  yet  to  this  day  there
doth  remaine  some  boughes  and  verdure,  but  not  much.
They  know  not  what  kinde  of  tree  it  is,  but  they  say
it  is  a  kinde  of  Casdar.  Such  as  shall  finde  this  strange,
let  them  reade  what  Plinie  reporteth  of  the  Plaine  of  pun.  lib.  12.
Lidia,  the  hollow  whereof  contained  fourescore  foot  and  c.  1.
one,  and  seemed  rather  a  Cabbin  or  a  House,  then  the
hollow  of  a  tree,  his  boughes  like  a  whole  wood,  the
shaddow  whereof  covered  a  great  part  of  the  field.  By
that  which  is  written  of  this  Tree,  we  have  no  great  cause
to  wonder  at  the  Weaver,  who  had  his  dwelling  and  Loome

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

in  the  hollow  of  a  Chesnut  tree :  and  of  another  Chesnut

tree,  if  it  were  not  the  very  same,  into  the  hollow  whereof

there  entered  eighteene  men  on  Horsebacke,  and  passed

out  without  disturbing one  another. The Indians  did

commonly  use  their  Idolatries  in  these  Trees,  so  strange

and  deformed,  even  as  did  the  auncient  Gentiles,  as  some

Writers  of  our  time  doe  report.

Of  Plants  and The  Indians  have  received  more  profit,  and  have  bin

frmtes  which better  recompenced  in  Plants  that  have  bin  brought  from

•  T  *  r  Spaine,  then  in  any  other  Merchandise,  for  that  those  few
carried  out  of r  . >  . J  . 5 .

Spain  to  the which  are  carried  from  the  Indies  into  bpaine,  grow  little
Indies.  there,  and  multiply  not,  and  contrariwise  the  great  number

Chap.  31. that  have  beene  carried  from  Spaine  to  the  Indies,  prosper
well  and  multiply  greatly : I  know  not  whether  I  shall
attribute  it  to  the  bountie  of  the  Plants  that  goe  from
hence,  or  to  the  goodnesse  of  the  soyle  that  is  there.
Finally,  there  is  at  the  Indies  any  good  thing  that  Spaine
brings  forth : in  some  places  it  is  better,  in  some  worse,
[III.  v.  961.]  as  Wheate,  Barley,  Hearbes,  and  all  kinds  of  Pulses,  also
Lettuce,  Coleworts,  Radishes,  Onions,  Garlike,  Parsley,
Turneps, Parseneps, Becengenes, or Apples of love,
Siccorie, Beetes, Spinage, Pease, Beanes, Fetches : and
finally,  whatsoever  groweth  here  of  any  profit,  so  as  all
that  have  voyaged  thither,  have  beene  curious  to  carry
Seedes  of  all  sorts,  and  all  have  growne,  although  diversly,
some  more,  some  lesse. As  for  those  trees  that  have  most
abundantly  fructified,  be  Orenge-trees,  Limons,  Citrons,
and  other  of  that  sort. In  some  parts  there  are  at  this
day,  as  it  were  whole  Woods  and  Forrests  of  Orange  trees  :
tha  which  seeming  strange  unto  me, I  asked  who  had
planted  the  fields  with  so  many  Orange  trees?  they  made
Natures  me  answer,  that  it  did  come  by  chance,  for  that  Oranges

husbandrie.  being  fallen  to  the  ground,  and  rotten,  their  seedes  did
spring,  and  of  those  which  the  water  had  carried  away
into  divers  parts,  these  Woods  grew  so  thicke :  which
seemed  to  mee  a  very  good  reason.  I  have  said  that
this  fruite  hath  generally  increased  most  at  the  Indies,
for  that  I  have  not  beene  in  any  place  but  I  finde  Orange

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.
trees,  for  that  all  their  soile  is  hot  and  moist,  which  this
tree  most  desires.  There  growes  not  any  upon  the  Sierre
or  Mountaine,  but  they  carrie  them  from  the  vallies  or
Sea  coast.  The  conserve  of  Oranges  which  they  doe
make  at  the  Hands,  is  the  best  I  have  seene  any  where  :
Peaches,  Presses,  and  Apricockes  have  greatly  multiplied,
especially  in  new  Spaine.  At  Peru  there  growes  few  of
these  kindes  of  fruites,  except  Peaches,  and  much  lesse
in  the  Hands.  There  growes  Apples  and  Peares,  yet  but
scarcely :  there  are  but  few  Plumbs,  but  aboundance  of
Figges,  chiefly  in  Peru.  They  finde  Quinces  in  all  the
Countrie  of  the  Indies,  and  in  new  Spaine,  in  such
aboundance,  as  they  gave  us  fiftie  choice  ones  for  halfe
a  riall.  There  is  great  store  of  Pomegranats,  but  they
are  all  sweete,  for  the  sharpe  are  not  there  esteemed.
There  are  very  good  Melons  in  some  parts  of  Peru.
Cherries  both  wilde  and  tame  have  not  prospered  well
at  the  Indies,  the  which  I  doe  not  impute  to  want  of
temperature,  for  that  there  is  of  all  sorts,  but  to  careles-
nesse,  or  that  they  have  not  well  observed  the  temperature.
To  conclude,  I  doe  not  finde  that  in  those  parts  there
wants  any  daintie  fruite.  As  for  grosse  fruites,  they  have
no  Beillottes  nor  Chesnuts,  neither  doe  I  finde  that  any
have  growne  there  to  this  day.  Almonds  grow  there,
but  rarely.  They  carry  from  Spaine,  for  such  as  are
daintie  mouthed,  both  Almonds,  Nuts,  and  Filberds :  but
I  have  not  knowne  they  had  any  Medlers  or  Services,
which  imports  little.

There  growes  no  Wine  nor  Grapes  in  the  Hands,  nor  of  Grapes,
firme  Land, but in new Spaine, there  are  some  Vines  Vines,  Olives,
which  beare  Grapes,  and  yet  make  no  Wine. The  cause  Mulberries,
is,  for  that  the  Grape  ripens  not  well,  by  reason  of  the  a^d^anesof
raine  that  fals  in  the  Moneths  of  July  and  August,  which  cjL.  „
hinders  their  ripening, so  as they  serve  onely  to eate.
They  carry  Wine  out  of  Spaine,  and  from  the  Canaries,
to  all  parts  of  the  Indies,  except  Peru  and  the  Realme  of
Chille. There  are  some  places  where  the  Vines  are  not
watered, neither from heaven nor earth, and  yet they

123

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

increase  in  great  abundance,  as  in  the  Valley  of  Yea,  and
in  the  ditches  that  they  call  Villacuzi,  in  which  places
they  finde  ditches,  or  th'  earth  sunke  downe  amongst  the
dead  Sands,  which  are  thorowout  the  yeare  of  a  wonderfull
coolenesse,  and  yet  it  raines  not  there  at  any  time,  neither
is  there  any  manner  of  meanes  to  water  it  artificially :
the  reason  is,  because  the  soile  is  spongious,  and  sucks
up  the  water  of  the  rivers  that  fall  from  the  Mountaine,
which  moisten  these  Sands,  or  else  it  is  the  moistnesse
of  the  Sea,  as  others  suppose,  which  passing  over  this
Sand,  is  the  cause  why  it  is  not  barren  nor  unprofitable,
as  the  Philosopher  teaches.  The  Vines  have  so  increased
there,  as  for  this  cause  onely  the  tithes  of  the  Churches
are  multiplied  five  or  six  times  double  within  these  twentie
yeares. And  it  is  strange,  that  in  the  Citie  of  Cusco  you

Grapes  all shall  finde  ripe  Grapes  all  the  yeare  long : the  reason  is

the  yeere.  (as  they  say)  for  that  those  Vallies  bring  forth  fruits  in
divers  moneths  of  the  yeare,  either  for  that  they  cut  their
Vines  in  divers  seasons,  or  that  this  varietie  proceedes
from  the  qualitie  of  the  soile :  but  whatsoever  it  be,  it
is  most  certaine,  there  are  some  Vallies  which  carrie  fruite
all  the  yeare.  If  any  one  wonder  at  this,  it  may  be  he
will  wonder  much  more  at  that  which  I  shall  say,  and
perchance not beleeve it. There are Trees in Peru,

Strange  whereof  the  one  part  yeeldes  fruite  one  sixe  moneths  of
fructifying,  the  yeare,  and  the  other  halfe  part  yeeldes  fruite  the  other
six  moneths.  In  Malla  which  is  thirteene  leagues  from
the  Citie  of  Kings,  there  is  a  Figge  tree,  whereof  the
one  halfe  which  is  towards  the  South,  is  greene,  and
yeeldeth  his  fruite  one  season  of  the  yeare,  that  is,  when
it  is  summer  upon  the  Sierre,  and  the  other  moitie  towards
the  Lanos  or  Sea  coast,  is  greene,  and  yeeldes  his  fruite
in  the  other  contrarie  season,  when  it  is  summer  upon
the  Lanos,  which  groweth  from  the  divers  temperature,
and  the  ayre  which  commeth  from  the  one  part,  and  the
other.  The  revenue  of  Wine  there  is  not  small,  but  it
goeth  not  out  of  the  Countrie.  But  the  Silke  that  is
made  in  new  Spaine  is  transported  into  other  Countries,

124

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
as  to  Peru.  There  were  no  Mulberrie  trees  in  the  Indies,
but  such  as  were  brought  from  Spaine,  and  they  grow
well,  especially  in  the  Province  which  they  call  Mistecqua,
where  there  are  Silke-wormes,  and  they  put  to  worke  the
Silke  they  gather,  whereof  they  make  verie  good  Taffa-
taes :  yet  to  this  day  they  have  made  neither  Damaske,
Sattin,  nor  Velvet.  The  Sugar  yet  is  a  greater  revenue,
for  they  not  onely  spend  it  at  the  Indies,  but  also  they
carrie  much  into  Spaine,  for  the  Canes  grow  exceeding
well  in  manie  parts  of  the  Indies.  They  have  built  their
engins  in  the  Hands,  in  Mexico,  in  Peru,  and  in  other
parts,  which  yeeldeth  them  a  very  great  revenue.

It  was  told  me,  that  the  engine  for  Sugar  in  Nasca,  [III.  v.  962.]
was  worth  yeerly  above  thirtie  thousand  pieces  of  revenue.
That  of  Chicama  joyning  to  Truxillo,  was  likewise  of
great  revenue,  and  those  of  new  Spaine  are  of  no  lesse ;
and  it  is  a  strange  thing  to  see  what  store  they  consume
at  the  Indies.  They  brought  from  the  Hand  of  Saint
Dominique,  in  the  fleet  wherein  I  came,  eight  hundred
ninetie  eight  chests  of  Sugar,  which  being  (as  I  did  see)
shipped  at  Port  Ricco  (every  chest  (in  my  opinion)  weighed
eight  Arobes,  every  Arobe  weighing  five  and  twentie
pounds,  which  are  two  hundred  weight  of  Sugar)  is  the
chiefe  revenue  of  these  Hands,  so  much  are  men  given
to  the  desire  of  sweet  things.  There  are  likewise  Olives  olives  but  no
and  Olive  trees  at  the  Indies,  I  say  in  Mexico  and  in  Oik.
Peru,  yet  hath  there  not  beene  to  this  day  any  Mill  for
Oile,  for  that  they  eate  all  their  Olives,  and  dresse  them
well :  they  finde  the  charge  is  greater  to  make  Oile  then
the  profit,  and  therefore  they  carry  all  the  Oile  they  doe
spend  from  Spaine.  And  here  we  will  end  with  plants,
and  will  passe  to  such  beasts  as  be  at  the  Indies.

[J.  VI.

125

A.D.

c.  1588.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

Of  beasts
bearing  wool
and  of  Kine.
Cap.  33.

§.  VI.

Of  Beasts  and  Fowles  in  the  Indies.

Finde  there  are  three  kindes  of  beasts  at  the  Indies,
whereof  some  have  beene  carried  from  Spaine ;
others  are  of  the  same  kinde  we  have  in  Europe,

European
beasts.

and  yet  not  carried  by  the  Spaniards ;  and  others  are
proper  to  the  Indies,  whereof  there  are  none  in  Spaine.
Of  the  first  kinde  are  Sheepe,  Kine,  Goats,  Swine,  Horses,
Asses,  Dogs,  Cats,  and  other  such  beasts,  for  there  are
of  all  these  kindes  at  the  Indies.  The  smaller  Cattell
have  greatly  multiplyed,  and  if  they  could  make  profit
of  their  woolls  by  sending  them  into  Europe,  it  were
one  of  the  greatest  riches  the  Indies  had,  for  there  the
Store  of  sheep,  flocks  of  sheepe  have  great  pastures,  where  as  their  feeding
failes  not.  In  Peru  there  is  such  store  of  pastures  and
feedings,  as  no  man  hath  any  proper  to  himselfe,  but
every  man  feedes  his  troups  where  he  pleaseth.  For  this
reason  there  is  commonly  great  store  of  flesh,  and  very
good  cheape,  and  all  other  things  that  come  from  sheepe,
as  Milke,  and  Cheese.  For  a  time  they  lost  their  woolls,
untill  that  some  began  to  husband  it,  and  to  make  cloth
and  coverings,  which  hath  beene  a  great  helpe  for  the
poorer  sort  of  the  Countrie,  for  that  the  cloth  of  Castile
is  very  deare  there.  There  are  many  Clothiers  in  Peru,
but  more  in  new  Spaine,  yet  the  cloth  that  comes  from
Spaine  is  farre  better,  whether  the  wooll  bee  more  fine,
or  the  workmen  more  expert.  In  former  times  there
were  men  that  did  possesse  threescore  and  ten,  yea  a
hundred  thousand  sheepe,  and  at  this  day  they  have  not
many  lesse.  If  this  were  in  Europe,  it  were  a  very
great  substance,  but  in  that  Countrie  it  is  but  a  meane
wealth.  In  many  parts  of  the  Indies,  and  I  thinke  in
the  greatest  part,  small  Cattell  doe  not  increase  and  profit
well,  by  reason  that  the  grasse  is  high,  and  the  soile  so
vicious,  that  they  cannot  feede  so  well  as  great  Cattell.

126

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
And therefore there is an infinite number of Kine,  Store  of  Kine.
whereof  there  are  two  kindes. Some  are  tame  and  goe
in  troups,  as  in  the  land  of  Charca,  and  other  Provinces
of  Peru,  as  also  in  all  new  Spaine :  from  these  tame  Kine
they  draw  such  profit  as  they  doe  in  Spaine,  that  is,  the
Flesh,  Butter,  Calves,  and  Oxen  to  till  the  ground. The
other  kinde  is  wilde,  which  live  in  the  Mountains  and
Forests,  and  therefore  they  tame  them  not,  neither  have
they  any  master  to  whom  they  are  proper,  both  for  the
roughnesse  and  thicknesse  of  the  Forest,  as  also  for  the
great  multitude  there  is,  and  he  that  first  kills  them  is
the  master, as  of  any  wilde  beast. These  wilde  Kine  Wilde  herds.
have  so  multiplied  in  Saint  Dominique,  and  thereabouts,
that they troupe together in the fields and woods by
thousands,  having  no  master  to  whom  they  appertaine.
They  hunt  these  beasts  onely  for  their  hides,  they  goe
to  the  field  on  horse-backe  with  their  weapons  to  hough
them,  coursing  the  Kine  : and  when  they  have  strucken
any and stayed them, they are their owne, they flay  Killed  only  for
them  and  carry  the  hides  home,  leaving  the  flesh,  which  tJie  hides.
every  one  neglects  for  the  abundance  there  is,  so  as  some
have  testified  in  this  Hand,  that  in  some  places  the  aire
hath  beene  corrupted  with  the  abundance  of  these  stinking
carkasses. The  hides  they  bring  into  Spaine,  is  one  of
the  best  revenues  of  the  Hands,  and  of  new  Spaine. In
the  fleet  the  yeere  1587.  there  came  from  Saint  Dominique
35444.  hides,  and  from  new  Spaine  64350.  which  they  Almost
value  at  96532.  pieces,  so  as  when  they  discharge  one  of  1 00000  hides
these  fleets,  it  is  admirable  to  behold  the  River  of  Sevile,  transported  at
and  in  the  Arcenall  (where  they  unlade)  so  many  hides,  j^^vht
and  so  much  merchandize. There  are  also  great  numbers  virnnid
of  Goates,  whose  chiefe  profit is  their  tallow,  besides  their  become,  if!
Kid-milke  and  other  commodities,  for  that  both  rich  and
poore  use  this  tallow  for  lights. For  as  there  is  a  great
quantitie,  so  doe  they  make  very  good  account  of  it ;  yea,
more  then  of  oile,  but  all  the  tallow  they  use  is  onely
of  the  Males. They  use  their  skins  for  shooes,  yet  I  hold
them  not  so  good,  as  those  which  are  carried  from  Castile.

127

A.D.

c.  1588.
Horses.

[III.  v.  963.]

Jlsses.
Camels.

multiply ed  to
noysomnesse.

Indian  Dogs.

Of  some  beasts
of  Europe
which  the
Spaniards
found  at  the
Indies,  and
how  they
should  passe
thither.
Cap.  34.
Note.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Horses  have  multiplyed  there,  and  are  very  excellent
in  many  places ;  yea  in  many  parts  there  are  Races  found
as  good  as  the  best  in  Spaine,  as  well  for  passing  of  a
Carrier,  and  for  pompe,  as  also  for  travell :  and  therefore
they  use  Horses  most  commonly,  although  there  bee  no
want  of  Moyles,  whereof  there  are  many,  especially  where
they  make  their  carriages  by  land.  There  is  no  great
number  of  Asses,  having  no  great  use  for  them,  neither
for  travell  nor  service.  There  are  some  few  Camels  ;  I  have
seene  some  in  Peru,  that  were  brought  from  the  Canaries,
and  have  multiplyed  there  a  little.  In  Saint  Dominique,
Dogs  have  so  multiplyed  in  number  and  bignesse,  as  at
this  day  it  is  the  scourge  and  affliction  of  that  Hand :  for
they  eate  the  Sheepe,  and  goe  in  troupes  through  the
fields.  Such  that  kill  them  are  rewarded  like  to  them
that  kill  Wolves  in  Spaine.  At  the  first  there  were  no
Dogs  at  the  Indies  but  some  beasts  like  unto  little  Dogs,
the  which  the  Indians  call  Alco,  and  therefore  they  call
all  Dogs  that  goe  from  Spaine,  by  the  same  name,  by
reason  of  the  resemblance  that  is  betwixt  them.  The
Indians  doe  so  love  these  little  Dogs,  that  they  will  spare
their  meat  to  feed  them,  so  as  when  they  travell  in  the
Country,  they  carry  them  with  them  upon  their  shoulders,
or  in  their  bosoms,  and  when  they  are  sicke,  they  keepe
them  with  them,  without  any  use,  but  onely  for  companie.

It  is  certaine  that  they  have  carried  from  Spaine  all
these  beasts  whereof  I  have  spoken,  of  which  kindes
there  were  none  at  the  Indies,  when  they  were  first
discovered  about  a  hundred  yeeres  since ;  for  besides  that
it  may  be  well  approved  by  witnesses  at  this  day  living ;
It  is  also  a  sufficient  argument  to  see  that  the  Indians  in
their  tongue,  have  no  proper  wordes  to  signifie  these
beasts,  but  they  use  the  same  Spanish  names,  although
they  be  corrupted :  for  being  ignorant  of  the  thing,  they
tooke  the  word  common  to  those  places  from  whence
they  came.  I  have  found  this  a  good  rule,  to  discerne
what  things  the  Indians  had  before  the  Spaniards  came
there,  and  what  they  had  not : for  they  gave  names  to

128

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.
those  they  had  and  knew  before,  and  have  given  new
names  to  these  that  are  newly  come  unto  them,  which
commonly  are  the  same Spanish names, although they
pronounce them after their manner, as for a Horse,
Wine,  and  Wheat. They  found  of  some  sorts  of  beasts
that  are  in  Europe,  and  were  not  carried  thither  by  the
Spaniards. There are Lions, Tigres, Beares, Boares,
Foxes,  and  other  fierce  and  wilde  beasts,  whereof  we  have
treated  in  the  first  Booke,  so  as  it  was  not  likely  they
should  passe  to  the  Indies  by  Sea,  being  impossible  to
swim  the  Ocean  : and  it  were  a  folly  to imagine that
men  had  imbarked  them  with  them. It  followes  there-
fore that  this  world  joynes  with  *  the  new  in  some  part : *But  where?
by  which  these  beasts  might  passe,  and  so  by  little  and  0? r  N£viga-
little  multiplyed  this  world. The  Lions  which  I  have  ^o  Aave
seene,  are  not  red,  neither  have  they  such  haire  as  they  shewed  open
usually  paint them with. They are  grey, and not so  and  wide  Seas
furious  as  they  seeme  in  pictures. The  Indians  assemble  betwixt.
in troupes to hunt the Lion, and make  as it  were a
circle,  which  they  doe  call  Chaco,  wherewith  they  inviron  Circles  are
them,  and  after  they  kill  them  with  stones,  staves,  and  u^dm  hunting
other  weapons. These  Lions  use  to  climbe  trees,  where  Tartars &c
being  mounted,  the  Indians  kill  them  with  Lances  and
Crosse-bowes,  but  more  easily  with  Harquebuzes. The
Tigres  are  more  fierce  and  cruell,  and  are  more  dangerous  Tigres.
to  meet,  because  they  breake  forth  and  assaile  men  in
treason : They are spotted, as the Historiographers
describe them. I have heard some report that these
Tigres  were  very  fierce  against  the  Indians,  yet  would  they
not  adventure  at  all  upon  the  Spaniards,  or  very  little ;
and  that  they  would  choose  an  Indian  in  the  middest  of
many  Spaniards,  and  carry  him  away.

The  Beares  which  in  Cusco  they  call  Otoioncos,  be  of  Beares.
the  same  kinde  that  ours  are,  and  keepe  in  the  ground.
There  are  few  swarmes  of  Bees,  for  that  their  hony-combs  Bees.
are  found  in  Trees,  or  under  the  ground,  and  not
in  Hives  as  in  Castile.  The  hony-combs  which  I  have
seene  in  the  Province  of  Charcas,  which  they  call
xv  129  1

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

Chiguanas,  are  of  a  grey  colour,  having  little  juyce,  and
are  more  like unto sweet straw, then to hony  combs.
They  say  the  Bees  are  little,  like  unto  Flies;  and  that
they  swarme  under  the  earth. The  hony  is  sharpe  and
blacke,  yet  in  some  places  there  is  better,  and  the  combs
better  fashioned,  as  in  the  Province  of  Tucuman  in  Chille,
and  in  Carthagene. I  have  not  seene  nor  heard  speake
Foxes  and of  wilde  Boares,  but  of  Foxes  and  other  wilde  beasts
beasts  of  spoik.  that  eate  their  Cattell  and  Fowle,  there  are  more  then
their Shepherds would willingly have. Besides these
beasts  that  are  furious  and  hurtfull,  there  are  others  that
are  profitable, and  have  not  beene  transported  by the
Spaniards, as  Stags  and  Deere,  whereof  there  is  great
abundance  in  all  the  Forests. But  the  greatest  part  is
Deere  without  a  kinde  of  Deere  without  homes,  at  the  least, I  have
homes.  never  seene  nor  heard  speake  of  other,  and  all  are  without

homes  like  unto  Corcos.  It  seemes  not  hard  to  beleeve,
but  is  almost  certaine,  that  all  these  beasts  for  their
lightnesse,  and  being  naturally  wilde,  have  passed  from
one  World  to  another,  by  some  parts  where  they  joyne,
seeing  that  in  the  great  Ilands  farre  from  the  mayne  land
I  have  not  heard  that  there  are  any,  though  I  have  made
diligent  inquirie.
OfFowks  "We  mav  more  easily  beleeve  the  same  of  birds,  and

which  are  here  tjlat tnere are 0f tne same kindes that wee have, as
Indies  and Partridges,  Turtles,  Pidgeons,  Stock-doves,  Quailes,  and
how  they  could  many  sorts  of  Falcons,  which  they  send  from  new  Spaine
passe  thither, and  Peru, to the  Noblemen  of  Spaine, for  they  make
CaP-  35- great  account  of  them. There  are  also  Herons  and  Eagles
of  divers  kindes ;  and  there  is  no  doubt  but  these  birds
and such like, have sooner  passed thither  then Lions,
Tigres,  and  Stags. There  are  likewise  at  the  Indies  great
numbers  of  Parrots,  especially  upon  the  Andes  of  Peru,
and  in  the  Ilands  of  Port  Ricco,  and  Saint  Dominique,
where  they  flie  by  flocks,  as  Pidgeons  doe  here. To  con-
clude, birds  with  their  wings  may  goe  where  they  will ;
Plin.  lib.  10.  and  truly,  many  kindes  might  well  passe  the  Gulfe,  seeing
c  23.  it is  certaine, as  Plinie  affirmeth, that there are many

130

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.
that  passe  the  Sea,  and  goe  into  strange  Regions,  although  [III.  v.  964.]
I  have  not  read  that  any  Fowle  hath  passed  by  flight
so  great  a  Gulfe,  as  is  the  Indian  Ocean,  yet  hold  I  it
not  altogether  impossible,  seeing  the  common  opinion  of
Mariners,  that  you  shall  finde  them  two  hundred  leagues
and  more  from  the  Land.  And  as  Aristotle  doth  teach,
that  birds  endure  the  water  easily,  having  little  respira-
tion, as  wee  see  in  Sea  fowle,  which  dive  and  remayne
long  under  the  water.  Even  so  wee  may  say,  that  the
Fowle  which  be  at  this  present  upon  the  mayne  land,
and  in  the  Hands  at  the  Indies,  might  passe  the  Sea,
resting  themselves  in  some  small  Hands,  or  upon  some
land  which  they  discovered  by  a  naturall  instinct  (as
Plinie  reporteth  of  some)  or  peradventure  falling  into  the  Plln.  I.  10.
water,  when  they  were  wearie  of  flying,  and  after  began  c-  25-
their  flight  anew  when  they  had  a  little  rested.  As  for
the  Fowles  which  wee  see  in  the  Hands,  where  there  are
no  beasts,  I  beleeve  certainly  that  they  passed  by  one  of
the  foresaid  meanes.  But  for  other  birds  which  we  finde
upon  the  mayne  land,  especially  those  whose  flight  is
short,  it  is  more  credible  that  they  came  thither  as  the
beasts  did,  which  are  of  the  same  kinde  that  we  have  in
Europe.  For  at  the  Indies  there  are  great  birds,  very
heavie,  as  Estridges,  whereof  there  are  many  in  Peru,  Estridges.
which  doe  use  sometimes  to  terrifie  the  Indian  sheepe  as
they  doe  goe  with  their  burthens.

But  leaving  these  birds  that  governe  themselves  with-
out the  care  of  man,  but  onely  for  hawking,  let  us  now
speake  of  tame  Fowle.  I  wondred  at  Hennes,  seeing  Hennes.
there  were  some  at  the  Indies  before  the  Spaniards  came
there,  the  which  is  well  approved,  for  they  have  a  proper
name  of  the  Countrie,  and  they  call  a  Hen  Gualpa,  and
the  Egge  Ponto,  and  they  use  the  same  proverbe  we  doe,
to  call  a  Coward,  a  Hen.  Those  that  were  at  the  dis-
coverie  of  the  Hands  of  Soloman,  doe  report  that  they
have  seene  Hennes  there  like  unto  ours  :  wee  may  conceive
that  the  Hen  being  so  tame  a  Fowle,  and  so  profitable,
men  might  carry  them  with  them  when  they  passed  from

131

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

one  place  to  another,  as  we  see  at  this  day  the  Indians
in  their  travell  carry  their  Hen  with  them,  or  chicken
upon  the  burthen  they  have  on  their  shoulders :  and  like-
wise they  carry  them  easily  in  their  Cages  of  reedes  or
wood. Finally,  there  be  at  the  Indies  many  kindes  of
beasts  and  birds,  such  as  wee  have  in  Europe,  as  I  have
specified, and other sorts which I leave to others to
discourse  of.
How  it  should it  Were  a  matter  more  difficult,  to  shew,  and  prove,
that  at  th wnat  beginning  many  and  sundrie  sorts  of  beasts  had,
Indies  which  are  found  at  the  Indies,  of  whose  kindes  we  have

there  should  be  none  in  this  Continent. For  if  the  Creator  hath  made
any  sorts  of them  there,  we  may  not  then  alleadge  nor  flie  to  Noahs

beasts, whereof  ^rke,  neither  was  it  then  necessarie  to  save  all  sorts  of

the  like  are  no  ,  . ,  3 , .  .  r .  ,  .

where  else. birds  and beasts, it others  were to bee  created  anew.

Chap.  36. Moreover,  we  could  not  affirme,  that  the  creation  of  the

World  was  made  and  finished  in  sixe  dayes,  if  there  were

yet  other  new  kindes  to  make,  and  specially  perfit  beasts,

and  no  lesse  excellent  then  those  that  are  knowne  unto

us : If  we  say  then  that  all  these  kindes  of  Creatures

were  preserved  in  the  Arke  of  Noah,  it  followes,  that

those  beasts,  of  whose  kindes  wee  finde  not  any  but  at

the  Indies,  have  passed  thither  from  this  Continent,  as

wee  have  said  of  other  beasts  that  are  knowne  unto  us.

This  supposed,  I  demand  how  it  is  possible  that  none  of

their kinde should remayne here? and how they are

found  there,  being  as  it  were  Travellers  and  Strangers?

Truly  it  is  a  question  that  hath  long  held  me  in  suspence.

I  say  for  example,  if  the  sheepe  of  Peru,  and  those  which

they  call  Pacos  and  Guanacos,  are  not  found  in  any  other

Regions  of  the  world,  who  hath  carried  them  thither?

or  how  came  they there, seeing there  is  no shew  nor

remaynder  of  them  in  al  this  world  ? If  they  have  not

passed  from  some  other  Region,  how  were  they  formed

and  brought  forth  there? It  may  bee  God  hath  made  a

new  creation  of  beasts! That  which  I  speak  of  these

Pacos  and  Guanacos  may  be  said  of  a  thousand  different

kinds  of  birds  and  beasts  of  the  Forest,  which  have  never

132

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
beene  known,  neither  in  shape  nor  name ;  and  whereof
there  is  no  mention  made,  neither  among  the  Latines,
nor  Greekes,  nor  any  other  Nations  of  the  world.  Wee
must  then  say,  that  though  all  beasts  came  out  of  the
*  Arke,  yet  by  a  naturall  instinct,  and  the  providence  of
Heaven,  divers  kinds  dispersed  themselves  into  divers
Regions,  where  they  found  themselves  so  well,  as  they
would  not  part ;  or  if  they  departed,  they  did  not  pre-
serve themselves,  but  in  processe  of  time  perished  wholly,
as  we  doe  see  it  chance  in  many  things.  For  if  wee
shall  looke  precisely  into  it,  we  shall  finde  that  it  is  not
proper  and  peculiar  alone  to  the  Indies,  but  generall  to
many  other  Nations  and  Provinces  of  Asia,  Europe,  and
Affrike, where they say there are certaine kindes of

*  The  same  providence  which  brought  all  beasts  and  fowles  from  all
their  native  diversified  residences  thorow  all  the  world  to  the  Arke
(which  no  naturall  instinct  in  such  antipathies  and  at  once,  could  doe)
and  kept  them  safe  in  the  Arke,  did  also  dispose  them  to  their  designed
abodes  after.  For  I  hold  it  unchristian  with  Mercator  to  say,  America
was  not  drowned  with  the  Floud.  And  the  same  scruple  might  bee
made  for  beasts,  &c.  in  other  parts  ;  the  temper  of  the  Arke,  or  of  the
place  where  the  Arke  rested,  not  agreeing  naturally  to  the  Zebra,
Elephant,  River-horse,  Crocodile,  and  many  other  hotter  creatures  of
Africa  ;  nor  to  the  other  peculiar  creatures  of  many  other  Regions.  In
things  above  nature  (as  is  both  the  historie  and  mysterie  of  the  Arke)  we
must  flee  necessarily  to  a  supernaturall  cause.  For  except  wee  would
imagine  the  most  part  of  the  Sea  to  have  beene  lands  or  Hands  from
beyond  the  cold  Magellan  to  the  coldest  Purchas  plus  ultra,  that  is  from
57.  South  latitude,  to  above  81.  of  North  latitude,  all  the  Sea  is  known,
and  voyages  many  in  this  work  delivered  which  excludes  al  possibilitie
of  such  passages  of  beasts  especially  such  as  cannot  endure  cold,  as  our
Author  imagineth.  For  men  in  boats,  that  might  happen  accidentally,
which  voluntarily  hath  beene  attempted  by  Ours,  a  little  boat  comming
home  from  Bermuda  to  England  :  and  the  Dutch  open  boats  from  Nova
Zembla  to  Norway  :  further  and  longer  distances  than  is  needfull  from
Hand  to  Hand  for  crossing  from  Europe  to  some  parts  of  America  ;  that
I  mention  not  the  Carthaginian  and  Owen  Gwyneds  voyages,  and  other
casuall  tempests,  &c.  in  which  by  fishing,  fishermen  might  live  long  at
Sea  with  their  wives,  and  be  carried  by  a  higher  coworking  over-ruling
providence  to  people  this  new  World,  which  (it  is  likely)  at  divers  times
and  by  divers  meanes  received  her  inhabitants  ;  God  which  made  all
men  of  one  bloud,  alotting  to  all  Adams  sonnes  their  portions  and  the
severall  bounds  of  their  habitation.  Act.  17.  20.

133

AD-  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.
[III.  v.  965.]  Creatures,  that  are  not  found  in  other  Regions,  at  the
least  if  they  be  any  where  else,  they  are  knowne  to  be
carried  from  thence.  Seeing  then  these  Creatures  came
out  of  the  Arke,  as  for  example,  the  Elephant  which  wee
finde  onely  in  the  East  Indies,  and  from  thence  have
beene  imparted  to  other  Regions,  wee  may  say  as  much
of  these  Creatures  of  Peru,  and  of  others  of  the  Indies,
which  are  not  found  in  any  other  part  of  the  World.

We  may  likewise  consider  well  upon  this  subject,
whether  these  beasts  differ  in  kinde,  and  essentially  from
all  others,  or  if  this  difference  be  accidentall,  which  might
grow  by  divers  accidents,  as  wee  see  in  the  linages  of
men,  some  are  white,  others  blacke,  some  Giants,  others
Dwarfes  :  and  in  Apes,  some  have  no  taile,  others  have  :
and  in  Sheepe,  some  are  bare,  others  have  fleeces ;  some
great  and  strong  with  a  long  necke,  as  those  of  Peru ;
others  weake  and  little,  having  a  short  necke,  as  those
of  Castile.  But  to  speake  directly,  who  so  would  by
this  Discourse  shewing  onely  these  accidentall  differences,
preserve  the  propagation  of  beasts  at  the  Indies,  and
reduce  them  to  those  of  Europe,  hee  shall  undertake  a
charge  hee  will  hardly  discharge  with  his  honour.  For
if  wee  shall  judge  the  kindes  of  beasts  by  their  properties,
those  of  the  Indies  are  so  divers,  as  it  is  to  call  an  Egge
a  Chesnut,  to  seeke  to  reduce  them  to  the  knowne  kindes
of  Europe.

See  Jobson
Tom.  1.  /.  9.
of  such  in
Guinee.

Tomineios.

Of Fowles that are proper to the Indies, and

Venison.

THere  are  many  kindes  of  notable  Fowles  at  the
Indies,  either  of  the  same  sort  that  ours  be,  or  of
different.  They  bring  certaine  birds  from  China,  that
have  no  feete,  and  all  their  bodies  are  almost  feathers.
They  sit  not  upon  the  ground,  but  hang  upon  boughs,
by  strings  or  feathers  which  they  have,  and  so  rest  them-
selves like  Flies  or  ayrie  things.  In  Peru  there  are  birds
which  they  call  Tomineios,  so  small,  that  often-times  I

i34

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
have  doubted  seeing  them  flie,  whether  they  were  Bees
or  Butter-flies ;  but  in  truth  they  are  birds. Contrari-
wise, those  which  they  call  Condores,  be  of  an  exceeding  Condom.
greatnesse,  and  of  such  a  force,  that  not  only  they  will
open  a  sheep  and  eate  it,  but  also  a  whole  calfe. Those
which  they  call  Auras,  and  others  Poullazes  (which  in  my
opinion  are  of  the  kinde  of  Ravens)  are  of  a  strange  Ravens.
lightnesse,  and  have  a  very  quicke  sight,  being  very  fit
to  dense  Cities,  for  that  they  leave  no  Carrion  nor  dead
thing. They  passe  the  night  on  Trees  or  upon  Rocks,
and  in  the  morning  they  come  to  the  Cities  and  Townes,
sitting  on  the  tops  of  the  highest  buildings,  where  they
attend  their  prey. Their  yong  have  white  feathers,  as
they  report  of  Ravens,  and  so  change  into  blacke.

The  Guacamayac  be  birds  bigger  then  Parrets,  and
resemble  them  something ;  they  are  esteemed  for  the
varietie  of  their  feathers,  which  be  very  faire  and  pleasing.
In  new  Spaine  there  are  abundance  of  birds  with  excellent
feathers,  so  as  there  bee  not  any  found  in  Europe  that
comes  neere  them,  as  wee  may  see  by  the  Images  of
feathers  they  bring  from  thence,  the  which  are  (with
great  reason)  much  valued  and  esteemed,  giving  cause  Feather
of  admiration,  that  with  the  feathers  of  birds,  they  should  pictures.
make  so  excellent  a  worke,  and  so  perfectly  equall,  as
they  seeme  properly  to  be  the  true  colours  of  a  Painter,
and  have  so  lively  and  pleasing  a  regard,  as  the  Painter
cannot  exceede  it  with  his  pencill  and  colours.  Some
Indians  which  are  good  and  expert  workmen  in  this  Art,
will  represent  perfectly  in  feathers,  whatsoever  they  see
drawne  with  the  pencill,  so  as  the  Painters  of  Spaine,
have  in  this  point,  no  advantage  over  them.  Don  Philip
the  Prince  of  Spaine  his  Schoole-master,  did  give  unto
him  three  figures  or  portraitures  made  of  feathers,  as  it
were  to  put  in  a  Breviarie.  His  Highnesse  did  shew
them  to  King  Philip  his  father,  the  which  his  Majestie
beholding  attentively,  said,  that  he  had  never  seene  in
so  small  a  worke,  a  thing  of  so  great  excellency  and
perfection. One  day  as  they  presented  to  Pope  Sixtus

i35

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

Quintus,  another  square  bigger  then  it,  wherein  was  the
figure  of  Saint  Francis,  and  that  they  had  told  him  it
was  made  of  feathers  by  the  Indians,  he  desired  to  make
triall  thereof,  touching  the  table  with  his  fingers,  to  see
if  it  were  of  feathers ;  for  that  it  seemed  strange,  to  see
them  so  properly  fitted,  that  the  eye  could  not  judge  nor
discerne  whether  they  were  naturall  colours  of  feathers,
or  artificiall  done  with  the  pencill.  It  is  a  goodly  thing
to  see  the  lustre  which  a  greene,  an  orange  tawnie  like
gold,  and  other  fine  colours  doe  cast,  and  beholding  them
another  way  they  seeme  dead  colours.  They  make  the
best  and  goodliest  figures  of  feathers  in  the  province  of
Mechovacan,  and  in  the  village  of  Pascaro.  The  manner
is  with  small  delicate  Pinsors  they  pull  the  feathers  from
the  dead  fowles,  and  with  a  fine  paste  they  cunningly
joyne  them  together.  They  take  the  small  and  delicate
feathers  of  those  birds,  which  in  Peru  they  call  Tomineyos,
or  others  like  unto  them,  which  have  the  most  perfect
colours  in  their  feathers.  The  Indians  (besides  these
Images)  did  use  feathers  in  many  other  most  excellent
workes,  especially  for  the  ornament  of  Kings  and  Noble-
men, their  Temples  and  Idols.

There  are  also  other  great  birds,  which  have  excellent

and  fine  feathers,  whereof  they  make  plumes  of  sundrie

colours, especially when they goe to warre, inriching

them with gold and silver very  artificially, which was

a  matter  of  great  price. They  have  the  same  birds  still,

but  they  are  not  so  curious,  neither  doe  they  make  so

many  gentill  devices  as  they  were  wont. There  are  other

birds  at  the  Indies,  contrarie  to  these  of  so  rich  feathers,

[III.  v.  966.]  the  which  (besides  that  they  are  ill-favoured)  serve  to  no

other  use  but  for  dung,  and  yet  perchance  they  are  of

no lesse profit. I have considered this, wondering at

the  providence  of  the  Creator,  who  hath  so  appointed,

that  all  Creatures  should  serve  Man. In  some  Hands

„, ,., . . or  Phares,  which  are  joyning  to  the  coast  of  Peru,  we

the  East  see  tne  toPs  °* ™e  Mountaines  all  white,  and  to  sight,

Indies.  you  would  take  it  for  Snow,  or  for  some  white  Land,

136

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
but  they  are  heapes  of  dung  of  Sea  fowle  which  goe
continually  thither :  and  there  is  so  great  abundance,  as
it  riseth  many  Elles,  yea,  many  Lances  in  height,  which
seemes  but  a  fable.  They  goe  with  boates  to  these  Hands,
onely  for  the  dung,  for  there  is  no  other  profit  in  them.
And  this  dung  is  so  commodious  and  profitable,  as  it
makes  the  earth  yeeld  great  abundance  of  fruit.  They
call  this  dung  Guano,  whereof  the  Valley  hath  taken  the
name,  which  they  call  Limaguana,  in  the  valleys  of  Peru,
where  they  use  this  dung,  and  it  is  the  most  fertile  of
all  that  Country.  The  Quinces,  Pomegranets,  and  other
fruits  there,  exceed  all  other  in  bountie  and  greatnesse ;
and  they  say,  the  reason  is,  for  that  the  water  wherewith
they  water  it,  passeth  by  a  Land  compassed  with  this  dung.

Besides  the  Beasts  of  Chase,  whereof  wee  have  spoken,  Of  beasts  for
There  are  beasts  called  Sainos, made  like  small  Hogs,  ^f  C"as*s-
which have this singular to themselves, to have their a*'  3
Navill upon the ridge of their backs : these goe by
troupes  through  the  Woods,  they  are  cruell  and  nothing
fearfull, but contrariwise they assaile, and have their
tallents  sharpe  as  Rasors,  wherewith  they  make  dangerous
wounds and incisions, if such as hunt them put not
themselves  in  safetie. Such  as  hunt  them  (for  the  more
safer  killing  of  them)  climbe  up  into  Trees,  whither  the
Sainos  or Hogs  come  presently  in troupes, biting the
Tree  when they  cannot hurt the man, and then with
their  Lances  they  kill  what  they  will. They  are  very
good  to eate,  but they  must  of  necessitie cut  off  the
round  piece  where  the  Navill  growes  upon  the  backe ;
for otherwise, within a day they corrupt. There is
another  kinde  of  little  beast  like  to  sucking  Pigges,  and
they call them Guadatinaias. I am in doubt whether  com  from  tfo
there  were  any  Swine  at  the  Indies,  before  the  Spaniards  East  parts
came  thither,  like  to  these  in  Spaine,  for  that  in  the  dis-  thither  by
coverie  of  the  Hands  of  Soloman,  it  is  said,  they  found  means  °f those
*  Hennes  and  Swine  of  Spaine. But  howsoever  it  be, an  s  •
it  is  most  certaine,  that  this  Cattell  hath  greatly  multiplyed  Schoutens
at  the  Indies. They  eate  the  flesh  fresh,  and  hold  it  to  voyage.

i37

A.D.

c  1588.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

bee  as  wholesome  and  as  good,  as  if  it  were  of  Mutton ;
as  in  Carthagene  in  some  parts,  they  are  become  wilde
and  cruell,  the  which  they  hunt  like  wilde  Boares,  as
wee  see  in  Saint  Dominique,  and  other  Hands  where
the  beasts  live  in  the  Forests.  In  some  places  they  feede
them  with  the  graine  of  Mays,  and  they  grow  wonderfully
fat,  to  have  the  grease,  which  they  use  for  want  of  Oile ;
in  some  places  they  make  Gamons,  as  in  Tolluca  of  new
Spaine,  and  in  Paria  at  Peru.  Returning  then  to  such
beasts  as  are  peculiar  there,  even  as  the  Sainos  are  like

Dantes.  unto  Swine,  though  somewhat  lesse ;  even  so  the  Dantes
resemble  small  Kine,  but  more  unto  Mules,  having  no
homes.  The  Hides  of  these  beasts  are  much  esteemed
for  jerkins  and  other  coverings,  they  are  so  hard  as  they
resist  any  blow  whatsoever.  And  as  the  Dantes  be
defended  by  the  hardnesse  of  their  Hides,  so  those  which

Armadillos,  they  call  Armadillos  are  by  the  multitude  of  their  scales,
which  open  and  shut  as  they  please  like  to  a  Curasse.
There  bee  little  beasts  which  goe  through  the  Woods,
called  Armadillos,  by  reason  of  the  defence  they  have
hiding  themselves  within  their  scales,  and  opening  when
they  list : I  have  eaten  of  them,  and  doe  not  hold  it  for

Yguanas.  a  meate  of  any  great  worth ;  but  the  flesh  of  the  Yguanas
is  a  better  meate,  but  more  horrible  to  the  eye :  for  they
are  like  to  the  very  Lizardes  of  Spaine,  although  they  bee
of  a  doubtfull  kinde,  for  that  they  goe  to  the  Water,  and
comming  to  Land  they  climbe  the  Trees  upon  the  bankes  ;
and  as  they  cast  themselves  from  the  Trees  into  the
water,  the  Boates  watch  underneath  to  receive  them. The

Chinchilks.  Chinchilles  is  an  other  kinde  of  small  beasts,  like
Squirrels,  they  have  a  wonderfull  smoothe  and  soft  skin,
which  they  weare  as  a  healthfull  thing  to  comfort  the
stomacke,  and  those  parts  that  have  neede  of  a  moderate
heate ;  they  make  Coverings  and  Rugs  of  the  haire  of
these  Chinchilles,  which  are  found  on  the  Sierre  of  Peru,
where  there  is  likewise  a  small  beast  very  common,  which

Cuyes.  they  call  Cuyes,  and  which  the  Indians  hold  for  a  very
good  meate,  and  they  are  accustomed  often  to  offer  these

138

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
Cuyes  in  their  sacrifices.  They  are  like  small  Conies,
and  have  their  borrowes  in  the  ground,  and  in  some
places  they  have  undermined  all  the  Land :  some  are
grey,  some  white,  and  some  speckled.  There  are  other
small  Animals  which  they  call  Viscachas,  and  are  like  to  Viscachas.
Hares,  although  they  bee  bigger,  they  hunt  them  and
eate  the  flesh.  Of  common  Hares  there  are  great  store
in  some  parts.  There  are  also  Conies  in  the  Realme  of
Quitto,  b^t  the  good  are  come  from  Spaine.  There  is
another  strange  beast,  the  which  for  his  great  heavinesse,
and  slowness^  in  mooving,  they  call  Perico-ligero,  or  the
little  light  Dogge,  hee  hath  three  nailes  to  every  hand,  and  Ligkt-Dogge.
mooves  both  hand  and  feete,  as  it  were  by  compasse  and
very  heavily :  it  is  in  face  like  to  a  Monkey,  and  hath  a
shrill  crie ;  it  climeth  Trees,  and  eates  Ants.

Throughout  all  the  Mountaines,  either  of  these  Hands
of  the  firme  Land,  or  of  the  Andes,  there  are  infinite
numbers  of  Micos  or  Monkeys,  which  are  a  kinde  of  Of  Mhos  or
Apes,  but  very  different,  in  that  they  have  a  taile,  yea  -Pfia?
a  very  long  one. And  amongst them there  are some  Chap  ,  '
kindes  which  are  thrice,  yea  foure  times  bigger  then  the
ordinarie ;  some  are  all  blacke,  some  bay,  some  grey,  and
some spotted. Their  agilitie and manner of  doing is
admirable,  for  that  they  seeme  to  have  reason  and  dis-  [III.  v.  967.]
course  to  goe  upon  Trees,  wherein  they  seeme  to  imitate
Birds. Going  from  Nombre  de  Dios  to  Panama,  I  did
see in Capira, one of these Monkeys leape from one  Lustie  leape.
Tree  to  an  other,  which  was  on  the  other  side  of  a  River,  Strange  sight.
making  me  much to  wonder. They  leape  where  they
list,  winding  their  tailes  about  a  branch  to  shake  it :  and
when  they  will  leape  further  then  they  can  at  once,  they
use  a  pretie  device,  tying  themselves  by  the  tailes  one
of  another,  and  by  this  meanes  make  as  it  were  a  chaine
of many : then doe they lanch themselves forth, and
the  first  holpen  by  the  force  of  the  rest,  takes  hold  where
he  list,  and  so  hangs  to  a  bough,  and  helpes  all  the  rest,
till  they  be  gotten  up. It  were  long  to  report  the  fooleries,
tricks,  traverses,  and  pleasant  sports  they  make  when  they

i39

A.D.

c.  1588.

Monkey
learned.

Zealous.

Of  Vicugnes,
and  Tarugnes
of  Peru.
Chap.  40.
Aristot.  lib.  3 .
de  partib.
animal,  c.  2.
lib.  10.  c.  72.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

are  taught,  which  seeme  not  to  come  from  bruit  beasts,  but
from  a  manlike  understanding.  I  saw  one  in  Carthagene
in  the  Governours  house,  so  taught,  as  the  things  he  did
seemed  incredible :  they  sent  him  to  the  Taverne  for
wine,  putting  the  pot  in  one  hand,  and  the  money  in
the  other ;  and  they  could  not  possibly  get  the  money  out
of  his  hand,  before  he  had  his  pot  full  of  wine.  If  any
children  met  him  in  the  street,  and  threw  any  stones  at
him,  hee  would  set  his  pot  downe  on  the  one  side,  and
cast  stones  against  the  children  till  hee  had  assured  his
way,  then  would  hee  returne  to  carry  home  his  pot.  And
which  is  more,  although  he  were  a  good  Bibber  of  wine
(as  I  have  oftentimes  seene  him  drinke,  when  his  Master
hath  given  it  him)  yet  would  hee  never  touch  it  until!
leave  was  given  him.  They  told  me  moreover,  that  if
he  saw  any  women  painted,  he  would  fall  upon  them,  pull
off  their  attire,  and  would  seeke  to  bite  them.

Amongst  the  most  remarkable  things  at  the  Indies  of
Peru,  be  the  Vicugnes,  and  sheepe  of  the  Countrie,  as
they  call  them,  which  are  tractable  beasts  and  of  great
profit ;  the  Vicugnes  are  wilde,  and  the  Sheepe  are  tame.
Some  thinke  that  the  Vicugnes  are  those  which  Aristotle,
Plinie,  and  other  Authors  call  Capreas,  which  are  wilde
Goates,  and  in  truth  they  have  some  resemblance,  for
the  lightnesse  they  have  in  the  Woods  and  Mountaines,
but  yet  they  are  no  Goates,  for  the  Vicugnes  have  no
homes,  as  those  have,  whereof  Aristotle  makes  mention ;
neither  are  they  the  Goates  of  the  East  Indies,  from  whom
they  draw  the  Bezar  stone ;  for  if  they  be  of  that  kinde,
it  were  a  diverse  one,  as  in  the  race  of  Dogs,  the  Mastife
is  diverse  from  the  Grey-hound.  The  Vicugnes  of  Peru
are  not  those  beasts  which  carry  the  Bezar  stone,  in  the
Province  of  new  Spaine,  which  there  they  call  Bezaars,
for  that  they  are  a  kinde  of  Stags  and  Venison ;  yet  doe
I  not  know  in  any  part  of  the  World  there  bee  any  of  these
beasts,  but  in  Peru,  and  in  Chille,  which  are  Countries
joyning  one  to  another.  These  Vicugnes  are  greater  then
Goates,  and  lesse  then  Calves. Their  haire  is  of  the  colour

140

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
of  dried  Roses,  somewhat  cleerer ;  they  have  no  homes
like  Stags  and  Goates. They  feede  upon  the  highest  tops
of  the  Mountaines,  which  they  call  Pugnas. The  Snow
nor  Frost  doth  not  offend  them,  but  contrariwise  they
seeme  to  delight  in  it. They  goe  in  troupes,  and  runne
most  lightly ;  when  they  meete  with  any  Travellers  or
Beasts, they flie away, seeming very fearefull, and in
flying  they  drive  their  yong  ones  before  them. They  doe
not  finde that  they multiply  much : and therefore  the
Kings  Inguas  did  defend  the  hunting  of  Vicugnes ;  if  it
were not for their feasts, or  by their  commandement.
Some  complaine, that  since  the  Spaniards  entred  there,
they  have  given  too  much  libertie  to  hunt  the  Vicugnes,
and by this meanes they are much diminished. The
manner  the  Indians  use  in  their  hunting,  they  assemble  Indian
many  men  together,  to  the  number  of  a  thousand  or  two  hunting.
thousand, yea  more, and  invironing  a  great circuit of
wood,  they  hunt  their  game  untill  they  have  compassed
it  in  on  all  parts,  and  by  this  meanes  they  commonly  take
three  or  foure  hundred,  and  so  choosing  what  they  list,
they  let  goe  the  rest,  especially  the  Females  for  breede.
They  are  accustomed  to  sheere  these  beasts,  and  of  their
fleece  to  make  Coverings  and  Rugges  of  great  value,  for
that  this  wooll  is  like  to  white  silke,  which  lasts  long :
and  as  the  colour  is  naturall  and  not  dyed,  so  is  it  per-
petuall. The  stuffes  that  are  made  of  this  wooll,  are  very
fresh  and  good  in  Summer,  and  they  hold  them  profitable
for  the  inflammation  of  the  reines,  and  other  parts,  temper-
ing the  excessive  heate. This  wooll  hath  the  like  vertue
when  it  is  made  in  Quilts,  and  therefore  some  use  it  to
that  end,  for  the  triall  they  have  made  thereof. They
say  moreover,  that  this  wooll  or  coverings  made  thereof,
is  physicall  for  other  indispositions,  as  for  the  gowt : yet
doe  I  not  know  that  they  have  made  any  certaine  triall
thereof. The flesh of these Vicugnes is not good,
although  the  Indians  eate  it,  and  drie  it. For  the  effects
of  physicke,  I  will  say  what  I  have  seene  upon  the  Sierre
of  Peru,  comming  one  night  into  a  Tambo  or  Inne,  being

141

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

much  afflicted  with  paine  in  mine  eyes,  thinking  they
would  fall  out  (the  which  doth  commonly  happen  in  those
Experiment parts) for  that they  passe  through  places  covered  with
for  the  eyes. sn0Wj  which  is  the  cause  of  this  accident. Being  troubled
with  this  paine,  and  out  of  patience,  there  came  an  Indian
woman  which  said  to  me,  Father,  lay  this  to  thine  eyes,
and  thou  shalt  bee  cured. It  was  a  piece  of  the  flesh  of
Vicugnes newly killed and all bloudie. I used this
medicine,  and  presently  the  paine  ceased,  and  soone  after
went  quite  away. Besides  these  Chacos  which  is  the  most
common  manner  of  hunting  at  the  Indies,  they  have  used
another  more  private  to  take  them,  which  is,  that  comming
neere,  they  doe  cast  certaine  lines  with  plummets  of  lead,
which  intangle  their  legges,  so  as  they  cannot  runne,  and
by  this  meanes  they  take  the  Vicugne. The  chiefe  reason
[III.  v.  968.]  why  this  beast  is  esteemed,  is,  by  reason  of  the  Bezars
Bexar  stone. stone  they  finde  in  them,  whereof  wee  will  intreate  here-
after. There  is  another  kinde  of  beasts,  which  they  call
Tarugues. Tarugues,  which  likewise  are  wilde,  and  more  nimble  then
the  Vicugnes. They  are  greater  of  body,  and  more  hot.
They  have  soft  eares  and  hanging :  they  goe  not  in  troupes
as  the  Vicugnes. I  have  not  seene  them  but  alone,  and
most  commonly  in  high  places. They  also  draw  Bezars
stones  from  these  Tarugues,  which  are  greater,  and  have
more  operation  and  vertue.
OfPacos,  There  is  nothing  at  Peru  of  greater  riches  and  profit

Indian"' ^  then  the  Catte11  °f  the  Countl7>  which  our  men  cal1  Indian
Muttons.  Sheepe,  and  the  Indians  in  their  generall  language  call
Chap.  41.  them  Lama.  For  all  things  well  considered,  it  is  a  beast
of  the  greatest  profit  and  least  charge  of  any  that  I  know :
from  them  they  draw  meate  and  clothing,  as  from  the
sheepe  of  Spaine.  Moreover,  they  have  the  benefit  to
carry  all  things  they  have  need  of,  using  them  to  beare
their  burthens :  and  they  have  no  need  either  of  shooes
or  saddles,  nor  yet  of  oates,  but  he  serveth  his  Master  for
nought,  feeding  on  the  grasse  he  findes  in  the  fields ;  so
as  God  hath  furnished  them  of  Sheepe  and  Mares,  and
all  in  one  beast. And  as  it  is  a  poore  Nation,  so  would

142

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
hee  in  this  point  free  them  from  charge,  for  that  there
is  much  pasture  upon  the  Sierre :  and  this  kinde  of  Cattell
hath  no  need  of  any  other  charge.  There  are  two  kindes  Tw0  ktndes-
of  these  Sheepe  or  Lamas,  the  one  they  call  Pacos,  or
sheepe  bearing  wooll,  and  the  others  are  bare,  and  have
little  wooll,  so  are  they  better  for  burthen  ;  they  are  bigger
then  great  Sheepe,  and  lesse  then  Calves,  they  have  a
very  long  necke,  like  to  a  Camel,  whereof  they  have  good
need :  for  being  high  of  stature,  they  have  need  of  a  long
necke,  else  should  they  be  deformed.  They  are  of  divers
colours,  some  all  white,  others  all  blacke,  some  grey  and
some  spotted,  which  they  call  Moromoro.  The  Indians
had  great  superstitions  in  choosing  the  beasts  for  sacrifices,
of  what  colour  they  should  bee,  according  to  the  diversitie
of  Seasons  and  Sacrifices.  Their  flesh  is  good,  although
it  be  hard,  but  that  of  their  Lambs  is  the  better,  and  the
most  delicate  that  can  be  eaten :  yet  they  eate  not  many,
for  that  the  chiefe  fruit  and  profit  they  yeeld,  is  their
wooll,  to  make  clothes,  and  their  service  to  carry  burdens.
The  Indians  make  stuffes  of  this  wooll  wherewith  they
clothe  themselves :  the  one  is  grosse  and  common,  which
they  call  Hanaca,  and  the  other  fine  and  delicate,  which
they  call  Cumbi,  they  make  Carpets  and  Coverings,  and
other  exquisite  workes,  which  last  long,  and  have  a  very
faire  lustre,  like  halfe  silke :  and  that  which  is  most  rare,
is  their  manner  of  weaving  their  workes,  being  both  sides
alike,  so  as  you  shall  not  finde  any  end  in  a  whole  piece.
The  Ingua  King  of  Peru  had  many  chiefe  workmen,  to
make  this  worke  of  Cumbi :  and  the  which,  for  the  most
part,  were  resident  in  the  Province  of  Capachica,  joyning
to  the  great  Lake  of  Titicaca.  They  die  this  wooll  into
divers  fine  colours,  with  sundrie  kindes  of  herbs,  whereof
they  make  many  sorts  of  workes  both  course  and  fine.  All
the  Indians,  both  men  and  women,  worke  in  the  Sierre,
and  have  their  Loomes  in  their  houses,  having  no  need
to  buy  any  stuffes  for  their  necessarie  uses.  Of  the  flesh
of  these  sheepe  they  make  Cuschargui,  or  dryed  flesh,
the  which  will  last  very  long,  whereof  they  make  great

M3

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRJMES

c.  1588.

account.  They  are  accustomed  to  drive  troupes  of  these
sheepe  with  burthens,  and  to  goe  in  bands,  three  hundred,
five  hundred,  yea  a  thousand  in  a  companie,  with  Wine,
Mays,  Coca,  Chuno,  Quick-silver,  and  all  other  kindes
of  merchandise,  and  of  Silver,  which  is  the  best  of  all.
They  carry  barres  of  Silver  from  Potozi  to  Ariqua,  which
is  three  score  and  ten  leagues.  I  have  often  wondered
to  see  these  troupes  of  sheepe  laden  with  a  thousand  or
two  thousand  barres  of  Silver,  and  much  more,  which  is
above  three  hundred  thousand  ducats,  without  any  other
guard  or  resort  then  some  Indians,  which  serve  onely  to
guide  these  sheepe,  and  to  lade  and  unlade  them,  or  at
the  most,  some  few  Spaniards :  and  they  sleepe  all  night
in  the  middest  of  the  fields,  without  other  guard :  and
yet  in  so  long  a  way  and  so  weake  a  guard,  they  never
finde  want  or  losse  of  any  thing  in  so  great  a  treasure  of
Silver,  so  safe  is  the  way  in  Peru.  The  burthen  which
one  of  these  sheepe  doth  commonly  carry,  is  of  foure  or
Sixe  Arobes  is  sixe  Arrobes :  when  their  voyage  is  long  they  goe  not
a  hundred  and  above  two,  three,  or  foure  leagues  at  the  most  on  a  day.
weight™  S  Those  that  guide  those  troupes,  have  their  ordinarie  lodg-
ings, where  they  are  assured  to  have  water  and  pasture,
and  there  they  unlade  and  set  up  their  Tents,  making
fire,  and  dressing  their  meates,  which  is  not  painfull,
although  it  be  a  flegmatike  and  slow  manner  of  travell.
When  there  is  but  one  dayes  journey,  one  of  these  sheepe
will  beare  eight  Arrobes  in  weight,  or  more,  and  beares
this  burthen  eight  or  ten  leagues  in  a  day,  as  the  poore
Souldiers  were  wont  to  doe,  when  they  marched  through
Peru.  This  kinde  of  Cattell  delights  most  in  a  cold  aire,
and  for  this  cause  they  live  upon  the  Sierre,  and  die  in
the  Lanos,  by  reason  of  the  heate.  Sometimes  these
sheepe  are  all  covered  with  Ice  and  frost,  and  yet  they
continue  sound  and  well.  The  bare  sheepe  are  pleasant
to  behold,  for  they  will  stay  upon  the  way,  raysing  up
their  necks,  and  will  looke  upon  any  one  very  wistly,  and
so  they  remaine  a  long  time,  without  mooving  or  any
shew  of  feare,  which  giveth  occasion  of  laughter,  seeing

144

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
them  thus  to  stand.  And  yet  sometimes  they  doe  grow
amazed  sodainly,  and  runne  away  with  their  burthens,  even
to  the  highest  Rocks,  so  as  not  being  able  to  come  unto
them,  they  are  constrayned  to  kill  them  with  an  Harque-
buze,  lest  they  should  lose  their  barres  of  Silver,  which
they  sometimes  carry.  The  Pacos  will  grow  reastie  under
their  burthens,  lying  down,  and  will  endure  to  be  cut  in
a  thousand  pieces  before  they  will  rise  when  this  humor
takes  them :  wherof  the  proverb  growes  in  Peru,  to  say
that  one  is  reastie,  to  signifie,  he  is  obstinate  ;  for  that  when  [III.  v.  969.]
any  of  these  beasts  is  moodie,  it  is  with  excesse :  the
remedie  they  have  is,  to  stay  and  sit  downe  by  the  Paco,
making  much  on  him,  untill  the  fit  be  past,  and  that  he
rise :  and  sometimes  they  are  forced  to  stay  two  or  three
houres.  They  have  a  disease  like  to  scabs,  which  they
call  Carache,  whereof  they  commonly  die.  The  Ancients
had  a  remedie,  to  burie  them  quicke  that  had  the  Carache,
lest  they  should  infect  the  rest,  being  a  very  contagious
disease,  and  goes  from  one  to  another.  An  Indian  that
hath  one  or  two  of  these  sheepe,  is  not  reputed  poore,  for
one  of  them  is  worth  sixe  or  seven  pieces  of  assay,  and
more,  according  to  the  time  and  places.

The  Bezaars  stone  is  found  in  all  these  beasts  before  Of  the
mentioned,  which  are  proper  to  Peru,  whereof  some  Bezaars  stone.
Authors  of  our  time  have  written  whole  bookes,  which  ChaP-  42-
they  may  reade  that  desire  to  have  a  more  particular
knowledge.  For  the  present  subject  it  shall  be  sufficient
to  say,  that  this  stone  which  they  call  Bezaar,  is  found
in  the  stomacke  and  belly  of  this  beast,  sometimes  one
alone,  sometimes  two,  three,  and  foure.  They  are  very
different  in  forme,  greatnesse  and  colour,  for  that  some
are  small  like  Filberds,  and  lesse ;  others  like  Walnuts ;
some  like  Pidgeons  egges,  and  others  as  bigge  as  a  Hens
eggc :  and  I  have  seene  some  as  bigge  as  an  Orange ;
in  forme  some  are  round,  others  in  fashion  like  to  Lentils,
and  many  other  formes.  For  their  colour,  some  are
blacke,  some  white,  some  grey,  darke  greene,  and  others,
as  if  they  had  beene  gilded. It  is  no  certaine  rule  to  judge

XV  145  K

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

the  best  and  most  fine  by  the  colour  or  forme.  All  these
stones  are  made  and  fashioned  of  divers  films  and  skins
one  upon  another.  In  the  Province  of  Xaura  and  other
Provinces  of  Peru,  they  finde  these  stones  in  divers  kindes
of  beasts,  both  wilde  and  tame,  as  in  the  Guanacos,  Pacos,
Vicugnes,  and  Tarugues,  some  adde  an  other  kinde,  which
they  say  are  wilde  Goates,  which  the  Indians  call  Cypris.
These  other  kindes  of  beasts  are  very  well  known
in  Peru,  whereof  we  have  alreadie  discoursed.  The
Guanacos  or  Countrie  sheepe,  or  Pacos,  have  commonly
the  lesser  stones,  and  blacke,  neither  are  they  so  much
approved  for  the  use  of  physicke.  They  draw  the  greatest
Bezaar  stones  from  the  Vicugnes,  and  they  are  grey,  or
white,  or  of  a  darke  greene,  which  are  held  for  the  better.
They  esteeme  those  of  the  Tarugues  for  the  most  excellent,
whereof  there  are  some  reasonable  bigge :  they  are  com-
monly white,  inclining  to  grey ;  and  they  have  the  filmes
commonly  bigger  and  thicker  then  the  rest.

They  finde  the  Bezaar  stone  equally  both  in  Male  and
Female.  All  beasts  that  ingender  it,  chaw  the  cuid,  and
commonly  feede  upon  the  Snow  and  Rocks.  The  Indians
report  and  teach  by  tradition  from  their  Fathers  and
Ancients,  that  in  the  Province  of  Xaura,  and  in  other
Provinces  of  Peru,  there  are  many  herbs  and  venemous
beasts,  which  poison  the  water  and  the  pastures  where
they  eate  and  drinke,  and  where  they  breathe :  amiddest
which  venemous  herbs  there  is  one  very  well  knowne  of
the  Vicugne,  by  a  naturall  instinct,  and  of  other  beasts
that  ingender  the  Bezaar  stone,  which  eate  this  herbe,
and  by  meanes  thereof  they  preserve  themselves  from  the
poisoned  waters  and  pastures :  and  they  say,  that  of  this
herbe  the  stone  is  compounded  in  the  stomacke,  whence
it  drawes  all  the  vertue  against  poison,  and  other  wonder-
full  effects.  This  is  the  opinion  and  tradition  of  the
Indians,  discovered  by  men  of  great  experience  in  the
Kingdome  of  Peru,  which  agrees  with  reason,  and  with
Plin.  I.  10.  that  which  Plinie  reports  of  the  Mountaines  Goats,  which
c-  7Z-  are  nourished  and  fed  upon  poison  without  suffering  any

146

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
harme.  The  Indians  being  demanded,  why  the  Sheepe,
Kine,  Goats,  and  Calves,  such  as  are  in  Castile,  have  not
the  Bezaar  stone,  seeing  that  they  feede  on  the  same
Rocks  :  their  answere  is,  That  they  beleeve  not,  that  those
beasts  of  Castile  eate  of  that  herbe,  or  that  they  have
found  the  Bezaar  stone  in  Stags  and  fallow  Deere.  This
seemes  to  agree  with  our  knowledge,  for  that  in  new
Spaine  they  finde  the  Bezaar  stone,  although  there  be  no
Vicugnes,  Pacos,  Tarugues,  nor  Guanacos,  but  onely  Stags,
in  some  of  which  they  finde  these  stones.

One  thing  is  worthy  admiration,  that  they  grow  and
are  fashioned  upon  very  strange  things,  as  upon  the  tagge
of  a  Point,  upon  a  Pin,  or  a  piece  of  Wood,  which  they
finde  in  the  centre  of  this  stone,  and  yet  doe  they  not
hold  it  false,  for  that  the  beast  might  swallow  it,  and  the
stone  thicken  upon  it,  and  growes  one  upon  another,  and
so  it  increaseth.  I  did  see  in  Peru,  two  stones  fashioned
upon  Pignons  of  Castile,  which  made  us  to  wonder  much,
for  that  in  all  Peru,  wee  had  not  seene  any  Pines  or
Pignons  of  Castile,  if  they  were  not  brought  from  Spaine,
which  seemes  to  mee  very  extraordinarie.  This  little  may
suffice  touching  the  Bezaars  stone.  They  bring  other
physicall  stones  from  the  Indies,  as  the  stone  of  Hyiada,
or  of  Rate,  the  bloud  stone,  the  stones  of  Milke,  and  of
the  Sea.  Those  which  they  call  Cornerinas,  for  the  Heart,
whereof  there  is  no  neede  to  speake,  having  nothing
common  with  the  subject  of  beasts,  whereof  wee  have
intreated :  which  gives  us  to  understand  how  the  great
Master  and  Author  of  all,  hath  imparted  his  benefits  and
wonderfull  secrets,  to  all  parts  of  the  World  ;  for  the  which
he  is  to  be  glorified  for  ever.

REader,  I  have  here  added  this  worke,  for  the  better
and  more  particular  knowledge  of  the  Naturall
Historie  of  the  West  Indies.  This  Authour  Gonzalo
Ferdinando  de  Oviedo  did  first  write  a  Summarie  to
Charles  the  fifth  (out  of  which  the  most  part  of  this  is
taken)  An.  1525.  and  after  that  writ  his  Generall  Historie,  [III.  v.  970.]

147

A.D.

1525.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

enlarging  what  he  had  written  before  this  Summarie ;  and
in  the  dividing  it  into  three  Parts :  the  first  of  which
contayning  principally  the  Spanish  acts  and  Natural!
observations  in  the  Ilands,  in  twentie  Bookes,  wee  have
in  Ramusios  third  Tome  of  Voyages  :  the  second  (in  which
hee  writ  of  the  Continent  of  New  Spaine,)  and  the  third
of  Peru  and  the  Southerne  America,  with  above  foure
hundred  pictures  of  the  Plants,  Beasts,  and  other  Creatures
of  those  parts,  were  never  published ;  to  the  great  losse
of  naturall  knowledge  of  those  parts.  As  for  the  Spanish
acts  we  have  them  sufficiently  written  by  others.  But
Acosta  and  Oviedo  have  best  deserved  of  the  studious
of  Nature,  that  is,  of  the  knowledge  of  God  in  his  workes.
In  which  respect  I  have  added  many  things  omitted  by
Master  Eden,  and  Master  Willes  in  the  former  publication,
both  examining  this,  and  translating  the  rest  from
Ramusios  Italian  edition.

Chap. III.

Extracts of Gonzalo Ferdinando De  Oviedo his
Summarie  and  Generall  Historie  of  the  Indies.

Of  the  mynes  of  gold,  and  the  manner  of  working

in  them.

His  particular  of  the  mynes  of  Gold,  is
a  thing  greatly  to  be  noted,  and  I  may
much  better  speake  hereof  then  any  other
man,  forasmuch  as  there  are  now  twelve
yeeres  past  since  I  served  in  the  place
of  the  Surveyor  of  the  melting  shops,
a  pertayning  to  the  gold  mynes  of  the  firme
Land,  and  was  the  Governor  of  the  mynes  of  the  Catholike
King  Don  Ferdinando,  after  whose  departure  from  this
life,  I  served  long  in  the  same  roome  in  the  Name  of
your  Majestie.  The  myne  or  veine  which  ought  to  be
followed,  ought  to  be  in  a  place  which  they  stand  to  save

148

GONZALO  DE  OVIEDO  a.d.

1525.

much  of  the  charges  of  the  Labourers,  and  for  the  adminis-
tration of  other  necessarie  things,  that  the  charges  may
bee  recompenced  with  gaynes.  The  greatest  part  of  the
wrought  gold  which  the  Indians  have,  is  base,  and  holdeth  Gold  of
somewhat  of  Copper :  of  this  they  make  Bracelets  and  ln<&ans  base.
Chaines,  and  in  the  same  they  close  their  Jewels  which
their  Women  are  accustomed  to  weare,  and  esteemed  more
then  all  the  riches  of  the  World.  The  manner  how  gold
is  gathered,  is  this,  either  of  such  as  is  found  in  Zavana,
that  is  to  say,  in  the  Plaines  and  Rivers  of  the  Champaine
country  being  without  Trees,  whether  the  Earth  be  with
grasse  or  without,  or  of  such  as  is  sometimes  found  on
the  Land  without  the  Rivers  in  places  where  Trees  grow,
so  that  to  come  by  the  same,  it  shall  be  requisite  to  cut
downe  many  and  great  Trees.  But  after  which  soever
of  these  two  manners  it  be  found,  either  in  the  Rivers  Manner  of
or  Breaches  of  waters,  or  else  in  the  earth,  I  will  shew  myne s  and
how  it  is  found  in  both  these  places,  and  how  it  is  separate  searJhtnSJor
and  purged.  Therefore  when  the  myne  or  veine  is  dis-
covered, this  chanceth  by  searching  and  proving  in  such
places  as  by  certaine  signes  and  tokens  doe  appeare  to
skilfull  men  apt  for  the  generation  of  gold,  and  to  hold
gold :  and  when  they  have  found  it,  they  follow  the  myne,
and  labour  it,  whether  it  be  in  the  River,  or  in  the  Playne,
as  I  have  said.  And  if  it  be  found  on  the  Playne,  first
they  make  the  place  very  cleane  where  they  intend  to
digge,  then  they  digge  eight  or  ten  foot  in  length,  and
as  much  in  breadth :  but  they  goe  ho  deeper  then  a  span
or  two,  or  more,  as  shall  seeme  best  to  the  Master  of  Go/dinmynes.
the  myne,  digging  equally,  then  they  wash  all  the  earth
which  they  have  taken  out  of  the  said  space,  and  if  herein
they  finde  any  gold  they  follow  it,  and  if  not,  they  digge
a  span  deeper,  and  wash  the  earth  as  they  did  before :
and  if  then  also  they  finde  nothing,  they  continue
in  digging  and  washing  the  earth  as  before,  untill
they  come  to  the  hard  rocke  or  stone :  and  if  in
fine  they  finde  no  gold  there,  they  follow  no  further  to
seeke  gold  in  that  place,  but  goe  to  another  part. And

149

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1525.

it  is  to  be  understood,  that  when  they  have  found  the
myne,  they  follow  it  in  digging,  in  the  same  measure  in
levell  and  depth,  untill  they  have  made  an  end  of  all  the
myne  which  that  place  contayneth,  if  it  appeare  to  be  rich.
Spanish  This  myne  ought  to  consist  of  certaine  feet  or  pases  in

customesfor length  or  breadth,  according  to  certaine  orders  determined,
usageofmynes.  ancj  within  that  compasse  of  earth,  it  is  not  lawfull  for
any  other  to  digge  for  gold : And  where  as  endeth  the
myne  of  him  that  first  found  the  gold,  immediatly  it  is
lawfull  for  any  other  man  that  will,  with  a  staff e  to  assigne
himselfe  a  place  by  the  side  of  the  same,  inclosing  it  with
stakes  or  pales  as  his  owne. These  mynes  of  Zavana  (that
is,  such  as  are  found  in  the  Playnes)  ought  ever  to  bee
Water  a  good  sought  neere  to  some  River  or  Brooke,  or  Spring  of  water,
neighbour. or  Dike,  or  standing  Poole,  to  the  end  that  the  gold  may
be  washed,  for  the  which  purpose  they  use  the  labour  of
certaine  Indians,  as  they  doe  other  in  digging  of  the  myne.
And  when  they  have  digged  out  the  myne,  they  fill  certaine
Trayes  with  that earth,  which other  Indians  have the
charge  immediatly  to  receive  at  their  hands,  and  to  carry
those Trayes of  earth to the  water, where  it  may  be
washed  :  Yet  doe  not  they  that  bring  it  wash  it,  but  deliver
it  to  other,  putting  it  out  of  their  owne  Trayes  into  theirs,
which  they  have  readie  in  their  hands  to  receive  it. These
Women  gold- Washers  for  the  most  part  are  the  Indian  women,  because
washers.  ^is  worke  is  of  lesse  paine  and  travell  then  any  other.

These  women  when  they  wash,  are  accustomed  to  sit  by
the  water  side,  with  their  legges  in  the  water  even  up  to
[III.  v.  971.]  the  knees,  or  lesse,  as  the  place  serveth  their  purpose:
and  thus  holding  the  Trayes  with  earth  in  their  hands  by
the  handles  thereof,  and  putting  the  same  into  the  water,
they  moove  them  round  about,  after  the  manner  of  sifting,
with  a  certaine  aptnesse,  in  such  sort  that  there  entreth
no  more  water  into  the  Trayes  then  serveth  their  turne,
and  with  the  selfe  same  apt  moving  of  their  Trayes  in
the  water,  they  ever  avoid  the  foule  water  with  the  earth
out  of  the  one  side  of  the  Vessell,  and  receive  in  cleane
water  on  the  other  side  thereof,  so  that  by  this  means

150

GONZALO DE  OVIEDO  a.d

1525.
by  little  and  little,  the  water  washeth  the  earth  as  the
lighter  substance  of  the  Trayes,  and  the  Gold  as  the  heavier
matter  resteth  in  the  bottome  of  the  same,  being  round
and  hollow  in  the  middest  like  unto  a  Barbars  Basen. And
when  all  the  earth is  avoided, and  the  Gold  gathered
together  in  the  bottome  of  the  Tray,  they  put  it  a  part,
and  returne  to  take  more  earth,  which  they  wash  con-
tinually as  before. Furthermore  it  is  to  be  noted,  that
for  every  two  Indians  that  wash,  it  is  requisite  that  two Qt^er
other  serve  them  to  bring  earth  from  the  Mine,  and  other  Labourers.
two  to  breake  the  same  small,  and  fill  their  Trayes  there-
with. Also  beside  these  Labourers,  it  is  necessarie  that
there  be  other  people  in  the  place  where  they  worke  and
rest  in  the  night :  these  are  such  as  make  their  bread,  and
provide  for  victuals,  and  other  necessaries. So  that  to
conclude,  there  are  in  all,  five  persons  ordinarily  assigned  Five  to  a  tray.
to  every  Tray  of  washers.

There  is  another  manner  of  working the Mines,  in
Rivers  or  Brookes  of  running  waters : and  this  is,  that
in  avoyding  the  water  of  his  course,  after  that  the  beds
of  the  Rivers  are  dry  and  utterly  emptied,  they  find  Gold
among  the  breaches,  clifts,  and  rifts  of  stones,  and  among
all  that  is  in  the  bottome  of  the  Channell, and  where
naturally  the  River  runneth  of  greatest  force : So  that
it  chanceth  sometime,  that  when  the  bed  of  the  River  is  Gold  in  Rivers
good  and  rich,  they  find  in  it  great  quantitie  of  Gold.  orPou^r.
And  therefore  your  Majestie  ought  to  understand  for  a
generall  rule, as  it  appeareth in fact, that  all Gold is  Gold
ingendred  in  the  tops  and  highest  places  of  the  Moun-  engendred  on
taines,  and  in  continuance  of  time  is  by  little  and  little  hl"  t0P5-
brought  downe  to  the  Vales  and  Plaines  by  showres  of
raine,  and  the  fals  of  Springs,  Rivers,  and  Brookes,  having
their  originall  in  the  Mountaines,  and  descending  from
the  same,  notwithstanding  it  is  oftentimes  found  in  the
Plaines  farre  from  the  Mountaines. But  when  it  chanceth
to  be  found  in  great  quantity,  it  is  for  the  most  part  among
the  Mountaines,  and  in  the  Rivers,  or  their  branches,  more
then  in  any  other  part  of  the  Plaine : and  in  these  two

151

A.D.

1525.

His  reason.

Some  may
thinke  that
coles,  shels  15
other  ludibria
natura,
naturally
grow  there.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

manners  it  is  commonly  found  most  abundantly.  And
for  the  better  proofe  that  Gold  is  ingendred  on  high,  and
is  brought  downe  into  the  low  places,  I  have  one  great
token  thereof,  which  causeth  me  to  beleeve  it  for  certaine  :
and  this  is,  to  consider  that  coles  never  putrine  nor  corrupt
under  the  ground,  if  they  be  made  of  strong  wood.
Whereby  it  chanceth,  that  digging  the  earth  by  the  foulds
or  indented  places  of  the  Mountaines,  or  on  the  sides,
and  breaking  a  Mine  in  the  earth,  where  it  had  beene
broken  before,  and  having  now  digged  one  or  two  or
three  Poles  in  measure,  the  Miners  found  certaine  coles  of
wood  under  the  same  levell  where  they  found  Gold,  and
this  I  say  in  the  earth  which  was  taken  for  a  Virgin,  that
is  to  say,  such  as  had  not  before  beene  opened  for  any
Mine :  the  which  coles  could  not  naturally  bee  ingendred
there,  or  enter  in  by  any  meanes,  but  when  the  superficiall
part  of  the  earth  was  equall  with  the  levell  where  the  coles
were  found,  it  is  like  that  the  coles  were  left  there  by  some
occasion  of  fire,  and  that  they  fastened  there  in  time,  and
that  afterward  in  long  continuance  of  time,  they  were
by  little  and  little  covered  with  the  earth,  which  the  often
showres  of  raine  washed  from  the  Mountaines,  so  that  by
the  course  of  yeeres  the  earth  overgrew  the  coles  unto  the
said  levell  and  measure,  which  had  before  time  beene  the
superficiall  part  of  the  earth,  where  the  coles  and  Gold
were  found  together :  whereby  it  may  appeare  that  the
Gold  was  no  more  ingendred  there  then  were  the  coles,
but  brought  thither  from  the  Mountaynes  by  the  falls  of
waters  as  we  have  said,  forasmuch  as  the  Mountaines  are
the  Matrices  and  bowels  of  all  rich  Metals.  Further  and
beside  this,  I  say  that  in  how  much  more  the  Gold  is  gone
farre  from  the  naturall  place  of  his  generation  to  the  place
where  it  is  found,  it  is  so  much  the  more  purified  and
fined,  and  of  a  better  caract,  and  the  neerer  that  it  is  found
to  his  proper  Mine  or  veine  where  it  is  ingendred,  it  is  so
much  the  baser,  fouler,  and  more  crude,  and  of  a  baser
alay  and  caract,  and  doth  waste  so  much  the  more  in  melt-
ing, and  remayneth  more  brickie.

*52

GONZALO DE  OVIEDO

Sometimes  there  are  found  graines  of  Gold  of  great
quantitie,  and  of  great  weight  above  the  earth,  and  some-
times also  under  the  earth  :  And  the  greatest  of  all  other
that  was  found  to  this  day  in  the  Indies,  was  that  which
was  lost  in  the  Sea  about  the  Hand  Beata,  which  weighed
three  thousand  and  two  hundred  of  Castellans  of  Gold,
which  are  in  value  foure  thousand  a  hundred  thirtie  and
eight  Ducats  of  Gold,  which  weigh  one  Arrova  and  seven
pound,  or  thirtie  and  two  pound,  after  twelve  ounces  to
the  pound,  which  make  threescore  and  foure  Markes  of
Gold. And  I  saw  in  the  yeere 151 5.  in  the  hands  of
Michael Passamonte Treasurer to your Majestie, two
graines,  of  the  which  one  weighed  seven  pounds,  which
are  fourteene  Markes,  and  are  in  value  about  three  score
and  five  Ducats  of  Gold  every  Marke  : the  other  was  of
ten  Marks,  which  are  five  pounds  of  like  value,  and  of
very  good  Gold  of  two  and  twentie  caracts,  and  better :
There  are  also  found  many  other  great  graines,  although
not  equall  unto  these  in  bignesse. And  forasmuch  as  I
have  spoken  of  Gold, I  have  thought  good  to  declare
somewhat  how  the  Indians  can  very  excellently  gild  such
Vessels  of  Copper  and  base  Gold  as  they  make :  for  they
can  give  them  so  faire  and  flourishing  a  colour,  that  all
the  masse  which  they  gilt,  appeareth  as  though  it  were
Gold  of  two  and  twentie  caracts,  and  better. This  colour
they  give  with  a  certaine  hearbe,  as  though  it  were  wrought
by  the  art  of  any  Gold-smith  of  Spaine  or  Italie,  and
would  of  them  be  esteemed  as  a  thing  of  great  riches  and
a  secret  manner  of  gilding. For  the  desire  that  our  men
have  to  Gold,  they  nothing  esteeme  the  Copper,  although
there  might  great  commoditie  and  profit  be  had  thereby,
and  also by  other Metals, which they  nothing  regard,
except  Silver,  which  is  found  abundantly  in  that  part  of
the  firme  Land  which  is  called  New  Spaine.

A.D.

1525.

Gold  in
graines.
One  huge  piece
of  gold.

A  Marke  is  a
pound  of&.
ounces  summa,
1 6.  pound
weight  eight
ounces,  after
12.  ounces  to
the  pound.
Indian
gilding.

[III.  v.  972.]

[Of  the

i53

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1525.

Of  the  manner  of  fishing  for  Pearles.

THe  Indians  exercise  this  kind  of  fishing  for  the  most
part  in  the  Coasts  of  the  North  in  Cubagua  and
Cumana,  and  many  of  them  which  dwell  in  the  Houses
of  certaine  particular  Lords  in  the  Hands  of  San  Dominico
and  Sancti  Johannis,  resort  to  the  Hand  of  Cubagua,  for
this  purpose. Their  custome  is  to  goe  five,  sixe,  or  seven,
or  more  in  one  of  their  Canoas  or  Barkes,  earely  in  the
morning  to  some  place  in  the  Sea  thereabout,  where  it
appeareth  unto  them  that  there  should  be  great  plentie
of  those  shell  fishes  (which  some  call  Muscles,  and  some
Oysters)  wherein  Pearles  are  ingendred,  and  there  they
plunge themselves under the water, even unto the
bottome, saving one that  remayneth in the Canoa or
Boat,  which  hee  keepeth  still  in  one  place  as  neere  as  he
can,  looking  for  their  returne  out  of  the  water :  And  when
one  of  them  hath  beene  a  good  while  under  the  water,
he  riseth  up,  and  commeth  swimming  to  the  Boat,  entring
into  the  same,  and  leaving  there  all  the  Oysters  which
he  hath  taken  and  brought  with  him  (for  in  these  are  the
Pearles  found)  and  when  he  hath  there  rested  himselfe  a
while,  and  eaten  part  of  the  Oysters,  he  returneth  againe
to  the  water,  where  hee  remayneth  as  long  as  hee  can
endure,  and  then  riseth  againe,  and  swimmeth  to  the  Boat
with  his  prey,  where  hee  resteth  him  as  before,  and  thus
continueth  course  by  course,  as  doe  all  the  other  in  like
manner,  being  all  most  expert  Swimmers  and  Divers :  and
when  the  night  draweth  neere,  they  returne  to  the  Hand
to  their  houses,  and  present  all  the  Oysters  to  the  Master
or  Steward  of  the  house  of  their  Lord,  who  hath  the
charge  of  the  said  Indians,  and  when  he  hath  given  them
somewhat  to  eate,  he  layeth  up  the  Oysters  in  safe  custodie,
untill  he  have  a  great  quantitie  thereof,  then  he  causeth
the  same  Fishermen  to  open  them,  and  they  find  in  every
of  them  Pearles,  other  great  or  small,  two,  or  three,  or
foure,  and  sometimes  five  or  sixe,  and  many  small  graines,

i54

GONZALO DE  OVIEDO  a.d.

1525.

according  to  the  liberalitie  of  nature.  They  save  the
Pearles  both  small  and  great  which  they  have  found,  and
either  eate  the  Oysters  if  they  will,  or  cast  them  away,
having  so  great  a  quantitie  thereof,  that  they  in  manner
abhorre  them.  These  Oysters  are  of  hard  flesh,  and  not
so  pleasant  in  eating  as  are  ours  of  Spaine.  This  Hand
of  Cubagua,  where  this  manner  of  fishing  is  exercised,
is  in  the  North  Coast,  and  is  no  bigger  then  the  Hand
of  Zeland.  Oftentimes  the  Sea  increaseth  greatly,  and
much  more  then  the  Fishers  for  Pearles  would,  because
whereas  the  place  is  very  deepe,  a  man  cannot  naturally
rest  at  the  bottom,  by  reason  of  the  abundance  of  airie
substance  which  is  in  him,  as  I  have  oftentimes  proved.
For  although  he  may  by  violence  and  force  descend  to  the
bottome,  yet  are  his  feet  lifted  up  againe,  so  that  hee  can
continue  no  time  there :  and  therefore  where  the  Sea  is
very  deepe,  these  Indian  Fishers  use  to  tye  two  great
stones  about  them  with  a  coard,  on  each  side  one,  by  the
weight  whereof  they  descend  to  the  bottome,  and  remayne
there  untill  them  listeth  to  rise  againe,  at  which  time  they
unlose  the  stones,  and  rise  up  at  their  pleasure.  But  this
their  aptnesse  and  agilitie  in  swimming,  is  not  the  thing
that  causeth  men  most  to  marvell :  but  rather  to  consider
how  many  of  them  can  stand  in  the  bottome  of  the  water
for  the  space  of  one  whole  houre,  and  some  more  or  lesse,  Men  continue
according  as  one  is  more  apt  hereunto  then  an  other.  An  an  houre  under
other  thing  there  is  which  seemeth  to  me  very  strange :  water-
and  this  is,  that  whereas  I  have  oftentimes  demanded  of
some  of  these  Lords  of  the  Indians,  if  the  place  where
they  are  accustomed  to  fish  for  Pearles,  being  but  little
and  narrow,  will  not  in  short  time  be  utterly  without
Oysters,  if  they  consume  them  so  fast :  They  all  answered
mee,  that  although  they  be  consumed  in  one  part,  yet  if  Natural/
they  goe  a  fishing  in  an  other  part,  or  an  other  Coast  of  succession.
the  Hand,  or  at  an  other  contrary  wind,  and  continue  fish-
ing there  also  untill  the  Oysters  bee  likewise  consumed,
and  then  returne  againe  to  the  first  place,  or  any  other
place  where  they  fished  before,  and  emptied  the  same  in

*55

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1525.

like  manner,  they  find  them  againe  as  full  of  Oysters  as

Of  this  read though  they  had  never  beene  fished. Whereby  we  may

more  largely  in  judge,  that  these  Oysters  either  remove  from  one  place

the  Decads. tQ  an  ot^er^  as  ^oe  other  fishes,  or  else  that  they  are

ingendred  and  increase  in  certaine  ordinarie  places. This

Hand  of  Cumana  and  Cubagua,  where  they  fish  for  these

Pearles,  is  in  the  twelfth  degree  of  the  part  of  the  said

Coast which inclineth toward the North. Likewise

Pearles  are  found  and  gathered  in  the  South  Sea,  called

Mare  del  Sur,  and  the  Pearles  of  this  Sea  are  very  bigge,

yet  not  so  bigge  as  they  of  the  Hand  of  Pearles,  called  de

las  Perlas,  or  Margarita,  which  the  Indians  call  Terarequi,

lying  in  the  Gulfe  of  Saint  Michael,  where  greater  Pearles

are  found,  and  of  greater  price,  then  in  any  other  Coast

of  the  North  Sea,  in  Cumana,  or  any  other  part. I  speake

this  as  a  true  testimonie  of  sight,  having  beene  long  in

that South Sea, and making curious inquisition to be

certainly  informed  of  all  that  pertayneth  to  the  fishing  of

Pearles. From  this  Hand  of  Terarequi,  there  was  brought

Huge  Pearle. a  Pearle  of  the  fashion  of  a  Peare,  weighing  thirtie  and

[III.  v.  973.]  one  Caracts,  which  Petrus  Arias  had  among  a  thousand

By  the  com- anc[  so  many  pounds  weight  of  other  Pearles,  which  he

PVrnic°e nfoure had  when  CaPtaine  Gaspar  Morales  (before  Petrus  Arias)

grains  make  a  passed  to  the  said  Hand  in  the  yeare  1515.  which  Pearle

Caract.  was  of  great  price. From  the  said  Hand  also,  came  a

great  and  very  round  Pearle,  which  I  brought  out  of  the

Sea,  this  was  as  bigge  as  a  small  pellet  of  a  Stone-bow,

and  of  the  weight  of  twentie  and  sixe  Caracts :  I  bought

it  in  the  Citie  of  Panama,  in  the  Sea  of  Sur,  and  paid  for

it  sixe  hundred  and  fiftie  times  the  weight  thereof  of

good  Gold,  and  had  it  three  yeeres  in  my  custodie,  and

after my returne into Spaine, sold it to the  Earle of

Nansao  Marquesse  of  Zenete,  great  Chamberlaine  to  your

Majestie,  who  gave  it  to  the  Marquesse  his  Wife,  the  Ladie

Mentia  of  Mendoza. I  thinke  verily  that  this  Pearle  was

the  greatest,  fairest,  and  roundest  that  hath  beene  seene  in

those  parts. For  your  Majestie  ought  to  understand,  that

in  the  Coast  of  the  Sea  of  Sur,  there  are  found  a  hundred

156

GONZALO  DE  OVIEDO  a.d.

1525.
great  Pearles  round  after  the  fashion  of  a  Peare,  to  one  Peare-pearks.
that  is  perfectly  round  and  great.

Of  the  familiaritie  which  certayne  of  the  Indians
have  with  the  Devill,  and  how  they  receive
answere  of  him  of  things  to  come,  and  other
Superstitions.

WHen  the  Indians  beginne  their  battaile,  or  goe  to
any  combate,  or  attempt  any  other  great  mater,  they
have  certaine  elect  men,  whom  they  reverently  esteeme,
and  call  them  Tequinas,  which  in  their  tongue  is  as  much
to  say  as  Masters :  notwithstanding  that  they  call  every
man,  that  is  cunning  in  any  Science,  by  the  same  name,
as  Fishers,  Fowlers,  Hunters,  or  makers  of  Nets.  These
Tequinas  therefore,  they  call  the  Masters  of  their
Answeres,  because  they  speake  with  Tuyra,  that  is,  the
Devill,  and  bring  them  answere  what  he  saith,  either  as  Devils
touching  such  things  as  they  have  to  doe,  or  shall  chance  Imposture.
to  them  the  day  following,  or  many  dayes  to  come.  For
the  Devill,  being  so  ancient  an  Astronomer,  knoweth  the
times  of  things,  and  seeth  how  they  are  naturally  directed
and  inclined,  and  maketh  them  beleeve  that  they  come
so  to  passe  by  his  ordinance,  as  though  he  were  the  Lord
and  moover  of  all  that  is  and  shall  be,  and  that  he  giveth
the  day  light,  and  raine,  causeth  tempest,  and  ruleth  the
stations  of  times,  giving  life,  or  taking  away  life,  at  his
pleasure :  By  reason  whereof,  the  Indians  being  deceived
of  him,  and  seeing  also  such  effects  to  come  certainly  to
passe  as  he  hath  told  them  before,  beleeve  him  in  all  other
things,  and  honour  him  in  many  places  with  Sacrifices  of
the  bloud  and  lives  of  men,  and  odoriferous  Spices :  And
when  God  disposeth  the  contrary  to  that  which  the  Devill
hath  spoken  in  Oracle,  whereby  he  is  prooved  a  Lyer,  hee
causeth  the  Tequinas  to  perswade  the  people  that  he  hath
changed  his  mind  and  sentence  for  some  of  their  sins,  or
deviseth  some  such  lye  as  liketh  him  best,  being  a  skilfull
Master  in  such  subtill  and  craftie  devices,  to  deceive  the

i57

A.D.
1525.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Places.

simple  and  ignorant  people,  which  hath  small  defence
against  so  mightie  and  craftie  an  Adversarie.  And  as  they
call  the  Devill  Tuyra,  so  doe  they  in  many  places  call  the
Christians  by  the  same  name,  thinking  that  they  greatly
honour  them  thereby,  as  indeed  it  is  a  name  very  fit  and
agreeable  to  many  of  them,  having  laid  apart  all  honestie
and  vertue,  living  more  like  Dragons  then  men,  among
these  simple  people.

Before  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Hand  of  Hispaniola  had
received  the  Christian  Faith,  there  was  among  them  a  Sect
of  men,  which  lived  solitarily  in  the  Desarts  and  Woods,
and  led  their  life  in  Silence  and  Abstinence,  more  streightly
Pythagorean  then  ever  did  the  Philosophers  of  Pythagoras  Sect,  abstain-
ing in  like  manner  from  the  eating  of  all  things  that  live
by  bloud,  contented  onely  with  such  Fruites,  Herbes,  and
Rootes,  as  the  Deserts  and  Woods  ministred  unto  them
to  eate :  The  Professors  of  this  Sect  were  called  Places.
They  gave  themselves  to  the  knowledge  of  naturall  things,
and  used  certaine  secret  Magicall  Operations  and  Super-
stitions, whereby  they  had  familiaritie  with  Spirits,  which
they  allured  into  their  owne  bodies,  at  such  times  as  they
would  take  upon  them  to  tell  of  things  to  come,  which
they  did  in  manner  as  followeth.  When  any  of  the  Kings
had  occasion  to  call  any  of  them  out  of  the  Desarts  for
this  purpose,  their  custome  was  to  send  them  a  portion  of
their  fine  Bread  of  Cazabi  or  Maiz,  and  with  humble
request  and  suite  to  desire  them  to  tell  them  of  such  things
as  they  would  demand.  After  the  request  granted,  and
the  place  and  day  appointed,  the  Piaces  commeth  with
two  of  his  Disciples  wayting  on  him,  whereof  the  one
bringeth  with  him  a  Vessell  of  a  secret  Water,  and  the
other  a  little  Silver  Bell.  When  hee  commeth  to  the  place,
hee  sitteth  downe  on  a  round  seate  made  for  him  of
purpose,  where  having  his  Disciples  the  one  standing  on
the  one  hand,  and  the  other  on  the  other,  even  in  the
presence  of  the  King  and  certaine  of  his  Nobles  (for  the
common  people  are  not  admitted  to  these  Mysteries)  and
turning his face toward the Desart, he beginneth his

158

Indian
conjurings  or
consultations.

GONZALO DE  OVIEDO  a.d.

1525.
Inchantment,  and  calleth  the  Spirit  with  loude  voyce  by
certaine  names,  which  no  man  understandeth  but  hee  and
his  Disciples.  After  hee  hath  done  thus  a  while,  if  the
Spirit  yet  deferre  his  comming,  hee  drinketh  of  the  said
Water,  and  therewith  waxeth  hot  and  furious,  and
inverteth  and  turneth  his  Inchantment,  and  letteth  him-
selfe  bloud  with  a  thorne,  marvellously  turmoiling
himselfe,  as  we  read  of  the  furious  Sybils,  not  ceasing
untill  the  spirit  be  come :  who  at  his  comming  entreth  [III.  v.  974.]
into  him,  and  overthroweth  him,  as  it  were  a  Greyhound
should  overturne  a  Squerell,  then  for  a  space,  he  seemeth
to  lye  as  though  he  were  in  great  paine,  or  in  a  rapte,
wonderfully  tormenting  himselfe,  during  which  agonie,  the
other  Disciple  shaketh  the  Silver  Bell  continually.  Thus
when  the  agonie  is  past,  and  he  lyeth  quietly  (yet  without
any  sence  or  feeling)  the  King,  or  some  other  in  his  stead,
demandeth  of  him  what  he  desired  to  know :  and  the
spirit  answered  him  by  the  mouth  of  the  rapte  Piaces,
with  a  direct  and  perfect  answere  to  all  points  :  Insomuch
that  on  a  time  certaine  Spaniards  being  present  at  these
mysteries  with  one  of  the  Kings,  and  in  the  Spanish  tongue
demanding  the  Piaces  of  their  Ships  which  they  looked
for  out  of  Spaine,  the  spirit  answered  in  the  Indian  tongue,
and  told  them  what  day  and  houre  the  Ships  departed
from  Spaine,  how  many  they  were,  and  what  they  brought,
without  failing  in  any  point.  If  he  be  also  demanded
of  the  eclipse  of  the  Sunne  or  Moone  (which  they  greatly  Eclipses  and
feare  and  abhorre)  he  giveth  a  perfect  answer,  and  the  like  Prognostka-
of  tempests,  famine,  plentie,  warre  or  peace,  and  such  other
things.  When  all  the  demands  are  finished,  his  Disciples
call  him  aloud,  ringing  the  Silver  Bell  at  his  eare,  and
blowing  a  certaine  powder  into  his  nostrils,  whereby  he
is  raised  as  it  were  from  a  dead  sleepe,  being  yet  somewhat
heavy  headed  and  faint  a  good  while  after :  Thus  being
againe  rewarded  of  the  King  with  more  bread,  he  departeth
againe  to  the  desarts  with  his  Disciples.  But  since  the
Christian  faith  hath  beene  dispersed  throughout  the  Hand,
these  divellish  practises  have  ceased,  and  they  of  the  mem-

i59

tions.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1525-

bers  of  the  Divell,  are  made  the  members  of  Christ  by

Baptisme,  forsaking  the  Divell  and  his  works,  with  the

vaine  curiosity  of  desire  of  knowledge  of  things  to  come,

whereof  for  the  most  part  it  is  better  to  be  ignorant,  then

with  vexation  to  know  that  which  cannot  be  avoided.

Reason  why  Furthermore,  in  manie  places  of  the  firme  Land,  when

men  kill any  Qf  tjie  Kings  dye,  all  his  houshold  servants,  aswell

themselves  to  J  i_  •  i_ i_  11  j  1  * 1  mi

serve  their women  as  men,  which  have  continually  served  him,  kill

Masters  in  the  themselves,  beleeving  as  they  are  taught  by  the  Divell
other  world.  Tuyra,  that  they  that  kill  themselves  when  the  King  dyeth,
goe  with  him  to  heaven,  and  serve  him  in  the  same  place
and  office  as  they  did  before  on  the  earth  while  he  lived :
and  that  all  that  refuse  so  to  doe,  when  after  they  dye
by  their  naturall  death  or  otherwise,  their  soules  to  die
with  their  bodies,  and  to  be  dissolved  into  ayre,  and
become  nothing,  as  doe  the  soules  of  Hogges,  Birds,
Fishes,  or  other  bruite  beasts :  and  that  onely  the  other
may  enjoy  the  priviledge  of  immortalitie  for  ever,  to  serve
the  King  in  heaven.  And  of  this  false  opinion  commeth
it,  that  they  which  sowe  corne,  or  set  rootes  for  the  Kings
bread,  and  gather  the  same,  are  accustomed  to  kill  them-
selves, that  they  may  enjoy  this  priviledge  in  heaven,  and
for  the  same  purpose,  cause  a  portion  of  the  graine  of
Maiz,  and  a  bundle  of  Jucca  (whereof  their  bread  is  made)
to  be  buried  with  them  in  their  graves,  that  the  same  may
serve  them  in  heaven,  if  perhaps  there  should  lacke  seedes
to  sowe,  and  therefore  they  take  this  with  them,  to  begin
withall,  untill  Tuyra  (who  maketh  them  all  these  faire
promises)  provide  them  of  greater  quantitie.  This  have
I  my  selfe  seene  in  the  top  of  the  Mountaines  of  Guaturo,
where  having  in  prison  the  King  of  that  Province  (who
rebelled  from  the  obedience  of  your  Majestie)  and  demand-
ing of  him  to  whom  pertained  those  Sepultures  or  graves
which  I  saw  in  his  house :  he  answered,  that  they  were
of  certaine  Indians  which  slew  themselves  at  the  death  of
his  Father.  And  because  they  are  oftentimes  accustomed
to  bury  great  quantities  of  wrought  gold  with  them,  I
caused  two  graves to  be  opened,  wherein  was  nothing

160

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  ad

1525.

found  but  a  vessell  full  of  the  graine  of  Maiz,  and  a  bundle

of  Jucca, as I have said. And demanding the cause

hereof,  of  the  King  and  the  other  Indians  :  they  answered,

that  they  that  were  buried  there,  were  the  labourers  of

the  ground,  and  men  skilfull  in  sowing  of  seedes,  and

making  of  bread,  and  servants  to  the  Kings  father,  and

to  the  end  that  their  soules  should  not  dye  with  their

bodies,  they  slue  themselves  at  the  death  of  the  King  their

Master,  to  live  with  him  in  heaven,  and  to  the  intent

that  they  might  serve  him  there  in  the  same  office,  they

reserved that Maiz  and Jucca, to so  we it in heaven.

Whereunto I answered them in this manner, Behold

how you Tuyra deceiveth you, and how all that he

teacheth you is false. You see how in so long a

time since they are dead, they have not yet taken

away this Maiz and Jucca, which is now putrified

and  worth  nothing,  and  not  like  to  be  sowen  in  heaven.

To  this  the  King  replied,  saying,  In  that  they  have  not

taken  it  away,  nor  sowen  it  in  heaven,  the  cause  is,  that

they  chanced  to  finde  enough  there,  by  reason  whereof

they  had  no  neede  of  this. To  this  errour  many  things

were  said,  which  seemed  of  little  force  to  remove  him

from his false opinion, and especially any such as at

that  age  are  occupied  of  the  Divell,  whom  they  paint

of the selfe same forme and colour, as he appeared

unto  them  in  divers  shapes  and  formes. They  make  also

Images  of  Gold,  Copper,  and  Wood,  to  the  same  simili-  Images  of  the

tudes,  in  terrible  shapes,  and  so  variable  as  the  Painters  Dwel1-

are accustomed to paint them at the feete of Saint

Michael the  Archangell, or in any other  place, where

they  paint  them  of  most  torrible  portrature. Likewise

when the divell greatly intendeth to feare them, he

threatneth to send them great tempests, which they  Tempests.

call, Furacanas or Haurachanas, and are so vehement,

that they overthrow many houses, and great trees.

And I have seene in Mountaines, full of many and

great trees, that for the space of three quarters of

a league the Mountaine hath beene subverted, and

xv  161  L

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1525.

the  tree  overthrowne,  and  plucked  out  of  the  earth  with
the  rootes.

The  gulfe  of  Uraba  is  distant  from  the  Equinoctial!
line,  from  an  hundred  and  twentie,  to  a  hundred  and
[III.  v.  975.]  thirty  leagues,  and  three  quarters  of  a  league,  after  that
accompt  of  seventeen  leagues  and  a  halfe  for  everie  degree
from  Pole  to  Pole  :  &  thus  for  a  little  more  or  lesse,  goeth
all  the  coast.  By  reason  wherof,  in  the  Citie  of  Sancta
Maria,  Antiqua,  in  Dariena,  and  in  all  that  course  of  the
foresaid  gulfe  of  Uraba,  at  all  times  of  the  yeere  the  daies
and  nights  are  in  manner  of  equall  length :  and  if  there
be  any  difference  betweene  them  by  reason  of  this  small
distance  from  the  Equinoctiall,  it  is  so  little,  that  in  foure
and  twentie  houres,  making  a  naturall  day,  it  cannot  be
perceived  but  by  the  judgement  of  speculative  men,  and
such  as  understand  the  sphere.  From  hence  the  North
Starre  is  seene  verie  low.

Of  divers  particular  things,  as  Wormes,  Serpents,
Beasts,  Foules,  Trees,  &c.

Will  first  speake  of  certaine  little  and  troublesome
Beasts,  which  may  seeme  to  be  engendred  of  nature
to  molest  and  vexe  men,  to  shew  them  and  give  them  to
understand,  how  small  and  vile  a  thing  may  offend  &
disquiet  them,  to  the  end  that  they  may  remember  the
principall  end  for  the  which  they  were  created,  that  is,
to  know  their  maker.  In  manie  parts  of  the  firme  Land,
by  the  which  as  wel  the  Christians  as  the  Indians  do
travaile,  there  are  such  marishes  &  waters  in  the  way,  that
they  are  faine  to  go  without  breeches  among  the  hearbs
Small  Wormes  &  weeds,  by  reason  wherof,  certain  small  beasts  or  wormes
troublesome.  ^which  they  call  Garapates)  much  like  unto  Ticks,  cleave
fast  to  their  legs.  These  worms  are  as  little  as  the  pouder
of  beaten  Salt,  &  cleave  so  fast,  that  they  can  by  no  meanes
be  taken  away,  except  the  place  be  nointed  with  oyle :  &
after  that  the  legs  be  nointed  a  while  with  oyle,  or  the
other  parts  where  these  little  Tickes  are  fastened,  they

162

I

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  ad.

1525.

scrape  the  place  with  a  Knife,  &  so  take  them  away.  But
the  Indians  which  have  no  oyle,  smoake  them,  and  burne
them  with  fire,  and  abide  great  paines  in  taking  them
away  by  this  means.  Of  other  little  Beasts  which  trouble
men,  and  are  engendred  in  their  heads  or  other  parts  of
their  bodies,  I  say  that  the  Christian  men  which  travaile
into  these  parts,  have  them  but  seldome  times,  and  that
not  past  one  or  two,  and  this  also  very  seldome :  For
passing  by  the  line  of  the  Diameter  where  the  compasse
maketh  difference  of  sailing  by  the  winde  called  Greco
(that  is,  North-east)  and  Magistral  (that  is,  South-west)
which  is  in  the  course  of  the  Hands  of  Azori,  they  saile
but  a  little  way  following  our  voiage  by  the  West,  but
that  all  the  Lice  which  the  Christians  carrie  with  them,  Lice  forsake
or  are  engendred  in  their  heads,  or  other  places  of  their  them-
bodies,  die  and  utterly  consume  by  little  and  little,  and
are  not  engendred  in  India,  except  in  the  heads  of  little
children  in  those  parts,  as  well  among  the  children  of  the
Christians  which  are  borne  there,  as  also  among  the
naturall  Indians,  who  have  them  commonly  in  their  heads,
and  sometimes  in  other  parts  of  their  bodies,  and  especially
they  of  the  Province  of  Cueva,  which  is  a  region  con-
taining more  then  a  hundred  leagues  in  length,  and
embraseth  the  one  and  the  other  coast  of  the  North  Sea,
and  of  the  East.  When  these  Indians  are  infected  with
this  filthinesse,  they  dresse  and  cleanse  one  another :  And
they  that  exercise  this,  are  for  the  most  part  women,  who
eate  all  that  they  take,  and  have  herein  such  dexterity
by  reason  of  their  exercise,  that  our  men  cannot  lightly
attaine  thereunto.  There  is  also  another  thing  greatly
to  be  considered  :  and  this  is,  how  the  Christian  men,
being  there  cleane  from  this  filthinesse  of  India,  as  well
in  their  heads  as  the  rest  of  their  bodies,  yet  when  they
returne  to  come  againe  into  Europe,  and  begin  to  arrive
in  that  place  of  the  Ocean  Sea  where  we  said  before  that
these  Lice  died  and  forsooke  them,  sodainely  in  their
repassing  by  the  same  clime  (as  though  these  Lice  had
tarried  for  them  in  that  place)  they  can  by  no  meanes

163

a-d-  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1525-

Licefinde avoide  them  for  the  space  of  certaine  daies,  although  they

them  againe.  change  their  shirts  two  or  three  times  in  a  day.  These
Lice  are  at  the  first  as  little  as  Nits,  and  grow  by  little
and  little,  untill  they  be  of  the  bignesse  that  they  are  in
Spaine.  This  have  I  oftentimes  proved,  having  now  foure
times  passed  the  Ocean  Sea  by  this  voiage.  Beside  these
wormes  and  vermin  wherof  we  have  spoken,  there  is
another  little  mischievous  worm,  which  we  may  number
among  the  kindes  of  Fleas,  this  Pestilence  the  Indians

Nigua.  call  Nigua,  and  is  much  lesse  then  a  Flea :  it  pearceth  the

flesh  of  a  man,  and  so  lancheth  or  cutteth  the  same  (while
in  the  meane  time  it  can  neither  be  seene  nor  taken)  that
from  some  it  hath  cut  off  their  hands,  and  from  other  their
feete,  untill  the  remedy  was  found  to  annoint  the  place
with  Oyle  and  scrape  it  with  a  Rasor. In  the  firme  Land

Vipers.  in  golden  Castile  or  Beragua,  there  are  many  Vipers  like

unto  them  of  Spaine:  they  that  are  bitten  of  them,  dye
in  short  space,  for  few  live  to  the  fourth  day,  except  present
remedy.  Of  these,  some  are  of  lesse  kinde  then  other,
and  have  their  taile  somewhat  round,  and  leape  in  the
aire  to  assaile  men ;  and  for  this  cause,  some  call  this
kinde  of  Vipers  Tyro :  their  biting  is  most  venemous,
and  for  the  most  part  incurable.  One  of  them  chanced
to  bite  an  Indian  Maide  which  served  me  in  my  house,
to  whom  I  caused  the  Surgians  to  minister  their  ordinary
cure,  but  they  could  doe  her  no  good,  nor  yet  get  one
drop  of  blood  out  of  her,  but  onely  a  yellow  water,  so
that  she  died  the  third  day  for  lacke  of  remedie,  as  the
like  hath  chanced  to  divers  others.  This  Maide  was  of
the  age  of  foureteene  yeares,  and  spake  the  Spanish  tongue
as  if  she  had  beene  borne  in  Castile :  she  said  that  the
Viper  which  bit  her,  on  the  foot,  was  two  spans  long,  or
little  lesse :  and  that  to  bite  her,  she  leapt  in  the  aire  for
the  space  of  more  then  six  paces,  as  I  have  heard  the  like
of  other  credible  persons.

[IH;  v-  976.]  I  have  also  seene  in  the1  firme  Land  a  kinde  of  Adders,
very  small,  and  of  seven  or  eight  foot  long ;  these  are  so
red,  that  in  the  night  they  appeare  like  burning  coles,  and

164

Adders.

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  a.d.

1525.

in  the  day  seeme  as  red  as  blood,  these  are  also  venemous,
but  not  so  much  as  the  Vipers.  There  are  other  much
lesse  and  shorter,  and  blacker :  these  come  out  of  the
Rivers,  and  wander  sometimes  farre  on  the  Land,  and  are
likewise  venemous.  There  are  also  other  Adders  of  a
russet  colour :  these  are  somewhat  bigger  then  the  Viper,
and  are  hurtfull  and  venemous.  There  are  likewise
another  sort  of  many  colours,  and  very  long :  of  these
I  saw  one  in  the  yeare  of  Christ  1 5 1 5.  in  the  Hand  of
Hispaniola,  neere  unto  the  Sea  coasts,  at  the  foote  of  the
Mountaines  called  Pedernales.  When  this  Adder  was
slain,  I  measured  her,  &  found  her  to  be  more  then  twenty
foot  long,  and  somewhat  more  then  a  mans  fist  in  bignesse  :
and  although  she  had  three  or  foure  deadly  wounds  with
a  Sword,  yet  dyed  she  not,  nor  stunke  the  same  day,  in
so  much  that  her  blood  continued  warme  all  that  time.
There  are  also  in  the  Marishes  and  desarts  of  the  firme
Land  many  other  kindes  of  Lysarts,  Dragons,  and  divers  Dragons.
other  kindes  of  Serpents,  whereof  I  intend  not  here  to
speak  much,  because  I  have  more  particularly  entreated
of  these  things  in  my  generall  historie  of  the  West  Indies.
There  are  also  Spiders  of  marveilous  bignesse,  and  I  have  Spiders  huge.
seene  some  with  bodie  and  legges  bigger  then  a  mans  hand
extended  every  way,  and  I  once  saw  one  of  such  bignesse,
that  onely  her  body  was  as  bigge  as  a  Sparrow,  and  full
of  that  Laune  whereof  they  make  their  webbes :  this
was  of  a  darke  russet  colour,  with  eyes  greater  then  the
eyes  of  a  Sparrow,  they  are  venemous,  and  of  terrible
shape  to  behold.  There  are  also  Scorpions,  and  divers
other  such  venomous  wormes.  Furthermore  in  the  firme
Land,  there  are  many  Toades,  being  verie  noious  and  Toades.
hurtfull  by  reason  of  their  great  multitude,  they  are  not
venemous,  they  are  seene  in  great  abundance  in  Dareena,
where  they  are  so  big  that  when  they  die  in  the  time  of
drought,  the  bones  of  some  of  them  (and  especially  the
ribs)  are  of  such  greatnesse,  that  they  appeare  to  be  the
bones  of  Cats,  or  of  some  other  beasts  of  the  same  big-
nesse. But as the waters diminish, & the moisture

l65

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1525.

consumeth  in  the  time  of  drought  (as  I  have  said)  they
also  consume  therewith,  untill  the  yeare  next  following
when  the  raine  and  moisture  encrease,  at  which  time  they

Theirrenulng.  are  seene  againe.  Neverthelesse,  at  this  present  there  is
no  such  quantitie  of  them,  as  was  wont  to  be,  by  reason
that  as  the  Land  is  better  cultured  by  the  Christians,  as
well  by  the  felling  of  Woods  and  Shrubs,  as  also  by  the
Pasture  of  Kine,  Horses,  and  other  beasts,  so  is  it  apparant
that  this  poison  diminisheth  daily,  whereby  that  region
becommeth  more  holesome  and  pleasant. These  Toades

Singing.  sing  after  three  or  foure  sort,  for  some  of  them  sing

pleasantly,  other  like  ours  of  Spaine,  some  also  whistle,
and  other  some  make  another  manner  of  noise :  they  are
likewise  of  divers  colours,  as  some  greene,  some  russet
or  gray,  and  some  almost  blacke,  but  of  all  sorts  they  are
great  and  filthie,  and  noious  by  reason  of  their  great  multi-
tude, yet  are  they  not  venemous,  as  I  have  said.

Crabs  or  There  are  also  a  strange  kinde  of  Crabbes,  which  come

rather  forth  of  certaine  holes  of  the  earth,  that  they  themselves

make  :  the  head  and  bodie  of  these  make  one  round  thing,
much  like  to  the  hood  of  a  Faulcon,  having  foure  feete
comming  out  of  the  one  side,  and  as  manie  out  of  the
other :  they  have  also  two  mouthes,  like  unto  a  paire  of
small  Pincers,  the  one  bigger  then  the  other,  wherewith
they  bite,  but  doe  no  great  hurt,  because  they  are  not
venemous :  their  skin  and  bodie  is  smooth,  and  thinne,
as  is  the  skinne  of  a  man,  saving  that  it  is  somewhat
harder  ;  their  colour  is  russet,  or  white,  or  blew,  and  walke
sidelong,  they  are  verie  good  to  be  eaten,  in  so  much  that
the  Christians  travailing  by  the  firme  Land,  have  beene
greatly  nourished  by  them,  because  they  are  found  in
manner  everie  where :  in  shape  and  forme  they  are  much
like  unto  the  Crabbe  which  we  paint  for  the  signe  Cancer,
and  like  unto  those  which  are  found  in  Spaine  in  Andalusia
in  the  River  Guadalchiber,  where  it  entreth  into  the  Sea,
and  in  the  Sea  coasts  there  about,  saving  that  these  are
of  the  water,  and  the  other  of  the  land  :  they  are  sometimes
hurtfull, so  that  they  that  eate  of  them  dye,  but  this

166

Tortoises.

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  a.d.

1525.

chanceth  onely  when  they  have  eaten  any  venomous  thing,
or  of  the  venemous  apples  wherewith  the  Caniball  archers
poison  their  arrowes,  whereof  I  will  speake  hereafter,  and
for  this  cause  the  Christians  take  heede  how  they  eate  of
these  Crabbes,  if  they  finde  them  neere  unto  the  said
apple  trees.  Furthermore  in  these  Indies,  as  well  in  the
firme  land,  as  in  the  Hands,  there  is  found  a  kinde  of
Serpents,  which  they  call  Yuanas,  which  some  call  Juannas,  Serpents  called
these  are  terrible  and  fearefull  to  sight,  and  yet  not  hurtfull,  Juannt-
they  are  verie  delicate  to  be  eaten,  and  it  is  not  yet  knowne
whether  they  be  beasts  of  the  land,  or  fishes,  because  they
live  in  the  water,  and  wander  in  the  woods,  and  on  the
land :  they  have  foure  feet,  and  are  commonly  bigger
then  Connies,  and  in  some  places  bigger  then  Otters,  with
tailes  like  Lysarts  or  Eutes :  their  skinne  is  spotted,  and
of  the  same  kinde  of  smoothnesse  or  barenesse,  although
of  divers  colours :  upon  the  ridge  of  their  backes,  they
have  manie  long  prickes,  their  teeth  are  very  sharpe,  and
especially  their  fangs  or  dogge  teeth,  their  throates  are
long  and  large,  reaching  from  their  beards  to  their  brests,
of  the  like  skinne  to  the  residue  of  their  bodies :  they
are  dumbe,  and  have  no  voice,  or  make  any  noise,  or  crie,
although  they  be  kept  tied  to  the  foote  of  a  chest,  or  any
other  thing,  for  the  space  of  twentie  or  five  and  twentie
daies,  without  any  thing  to  eate  or  drinke,  except  they
give  them  now  and  then  a  little  of  the  bread  of  Cazavi,
or  some  such  other  thing :  they  have  foure  feete,  and  their
fore-feete  as  long  as  a  mans  finger,  with  clawes  like  the
clawes  of  a  bird,  but  weaker,  and  such  as  cannot  grasple
or  take  hold  of  any  thing :  they  are  much  better  to  be  [III.  v.  977.]
eaten  then  to  behold,  for  few  that  see  them,  will  have
desire  to  eate  of  them,  by  reason  of  their  horrible  shape,
except  such  as  have  beene  accustomed  to  the  beasts  of
these  regions,  which  are  more  horrible  and  fearefull,  as
this  is  not,  but  onely  in  apparence :  their  flesh  is  of  much
better  taste  then  the  flesh  of  Connies,  and  more  holesome  Note.
for  it  hurteth  none  but  onely  such  as  have  had  the  French
poxe,  in  so  much,  that  if  they  have  beene  touched  of  that

167

Tominelos.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1525-

infirmitie,  although  they  have  beene  whole  of  long  time,
neverthelesse  they  feele  hurt,  and  complaine  of  the  eating
of  these  Juannas,  as  hath  beene  oftentimes  proved  by
experience.
Small  Birds.  There  are  found  in  the  firme  land  certaine  birds,  so
little,  that  the  whole  bodie  of  one  of  them  is  no  bigger
then  the  top  of  the  biggest  finger  of  a  mans  hand,  and
yet  is  the  bare  body  without  the  feathers  not  halfe  so
bigge :  This  Bird,  beside  her  littlenesse,  is  of  such
velositie  and  swiftnesse  in  flying,  that  who  so  seeth  her
flying  in  the  aire,  cannot  see  her  flap  or  beate  her  wings
after  any  other  sort  then  doe  the  Dorres,  or  humble  Bees,
or  Beetels,  so  that  there  is  no  man  that  seeth  her
flye,  that  would  thinke  her  to  be  any  other  then  a  Dorre :
they  make  their  nests  according  to  the  proportion  of  their
bignesse,  and  I  have  seene  that  one  of  these  Birds  with
her  nest  put  in  a  paire  of  gold  weights  altogether,  hath
waide  no  more  then  2.  Tomini,  which  are  in  poise  24
graines,  with  the  feathers,  without  the  which  she  should
have  waied  somewhat  lesse.  And  doubtlesse,  when  I
consider  the  finenesse  of  the  clawes  and  feete  of  these
Birds,  I  know  not  whereunto  I  may  better  liken  them,
then  to  the  little  birds  which  the  lymners  of  bookes  are
accustomed  to  paint  on  the  margent  of  Church  Bookes,
and  other  Bookes  of  Divine  Service.  Their  Feathers  are
of  manie  faire  colours,  as  golden,  yellow,  and  greene,
beside  other  variable  colours :  their  beake  is  verie
long  for  the  proportion  of  their  bodies,  and  as  fine
and  subtile  as  a  sowing  needle :  they  are  verie
hardy,  so  that  when  they  see  a  man  clime  the  tree
where  they  have  their  nests,  they  flye  at  his  face,  and
strike  him  in  the  eyes,  comming,  going,  and  returning
with  such  swiftnesse,  that  no  man  would  lightly  beleeve
it,  that  hath  not  seene  it :  and  certainly  these  birds  are
so  little,  that  I  durst  not  have  made  mention  hereof,
if  it  were  not  that  divers  others  which  have  seene  them
as  well  as  I,  can  beare  witnesse  of  my  saying :  they  make
their  nests  of  flocks  and  cotten,  whereof  there  is  great

168

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  a.d.

1525.

plentie  in  these  regions,  and  serveth  well  for  their  purpose.
But  as  touching  the  Birds,  Foules,  and  Beasts  of  these
Indies,  because  they  are  innumerable,  both  little  and  great,
I  intend  not  to  speake  much  here,  because  I  have  spoken
more  largely  hereof  in  my  generall  Historie  of  the
Indies.  There  is  another  kinde  of  Beasts  seene  in  the
firme  Land,  which  seemeth  very  strange  and  marveilous
to  the  Christian  men  to  behold,  and  much  differing  from
all  other  Beasts  which  have  beene  seene  in  other  parts
of  the  world :  these  Beasts  are  called  Bardati,  and  are  Bardati  or
foure  footed,  having  their  taile  and  all  the  rest  of  their  Armadillos;  a
bodies  covered  onely  with  a  skin  like  the  coperture  of  a  kinde  of  Mole.
barbed  horse,  or  the  checkered  skin  of  a  Lisart  or  Croco-
dile, of  colour  betweene  white  and  russet,  inclining  some-
what more  to  white.  This  Beast  is  of  forme  and  shape
much  like  to  a  barbed  horse,  with  his  barbes  and  flankets
in  all  points,  and  from  under  that  which  is  the  barbe
and  coperture,  the  taile  commeth  forth,  and  the  feete  in
their  place,  the  necke  also  and  the  eares  in  their  parts,
and  in  fine  all  things  in  like  sort  as  in  a  barbed  courser :
they  are  of  the  bignesse  of  one  of  these  common  Dogges,
they  are  not  hurtfull,  they  are  filthie,  and  have  their
habitation  in  certaine  hillockes  of  the  earth,  where  digging
with  their  feete,  they  make  their  dens  verie  deepe,  and
the  holes  thereof,  in  like  manner  as  doe  Connies  :  they
are  very  excellent  to  be  eaten,  and  are  taken  with  nets,  and
some  also  killed  with  Cros-bowes :  they  are  likewise
taken  oftentimes  when  the  Husbandmen  burne  the  stubble
in  sowing  time,  or  to  renew  the  herbage  for  Kine  and
other  Beasts.  I  have  oftentimes  eaten  of  their  flesh,  which
seemeth  to  me  of  better  taste  then  Kiddes  flesh,  and
holesome  to  be  eaten.  And  if  these  Beasts  had  ever  beene
seene  in  these  parts  of  the  world,  where  the  first  barbed
Horses  had  their  originall,  no  man  would  judge  but  that
the  forme  and  fashion  of  the  coperture  of  Horses  furnished
for  the  warres,  was  first  devised  by  the  sight  of  these
Beasts.

There  is  also  in  the  firme  Land  another  beast,  called  Beans.

169

A.D.
I525-

Antes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Orso  Formigaro,  that  is,  the  Ante-beare.  This  beast  in
haire  and  colour,  is  much  like  to  the  Beare  of  Spaine,
and  in  manner  of  the  same  making,  save  that  he  hath  a
much  longer  snout,  and  is  of  evill  sight :  they  are  often-
times taken  only  with  staves,  without  any  other  weapon,
and  are  not  hurtfull,  they  are  also  taken  with  Dogges,
because  they  are  not  naturally  armed,  although  they  bite
somewhat,  they  are  found  for  the  most  part  about  and
neere  to  the  hillockes  where  are  great  abundance  of  Antes.
For  in  these  Regions  is  ingendred  a  certaine  kind  of
Antes,  very  little  and  blacke,  in  the  Fields  and  Plaines
whereas  grow  no  Trees,  where  by  the  instinct  of  Nature
these  Antes  separate  themselves  to  ingender  farre  from
the  Woods  for  feare  of  these  Beares,  the  which  because
they  are  fearefull,  vile,  and  unarmed  (as  I  have  said)  they
keepe  ever  in  places  full  of  Trees,  untill  very  famine
and  necessitie,  or  the  great  desire  that  they  have  to  feede
on  these  Antes,  cause  them  to  come  out  of  the  Woods
to  hunt  for  them :  these  Antes  make  a  hillocke  of  earth
to  the  height  of  a  man,  or  somewhat  more  or  lesse,  and
as  bigge  as  a  great  Chest,  and  sometimes  as  bigge  as  a
But  or  a  Hogshead,  and  as  hard  as  a  stone,  so  that  they
seeme  as  though  they  were  stones,  set  up  to  limit  the
ends  and  confines  of  certaine  Lands.  Within  these
[III.  v.  978.]  hillockes,  made  of  most  hard  earth,  are  innumerable  and
infinite  little  Ants,  the  which  may  be  gathered  by  bushels
when  the  hillock  is  broken :  the  which  when  it  is  some-
times moysted  by  raine,  and  then  dried  againe  by  the  heat
of  the  Sunne,  it  breaketh,  and  hath  certaine  small  rifts,
as  little  and  subtill  as  the  edge  of  a  Knife,  and  it  seemeth
that  Nature  hath  given  sense  to  these  Antes  to  find  such
a  matter  of  earth,  wherewith  they  may  make  the  said
hillocke  of  such  hardnesse,  that  it  may  seeme  a  strong
pavement  made  of  lime  and  stone :  and  whereas  I  have
prooved  and  caused  some  of  them  to  be  broken,  I  have
found  them  of  such  hardnesse,  as  if  I  had  not  seene,  I
could  not  have  beleeved,  insomuch  that  they  could
scarsly  be  broken  with  Pikes  of  Iron,  so  strong  Fortresses

170

Jobson  men-
tions the  like
neere  Gambia

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  a.d.

1525.

doe these  little beasts make for their safegard against

their  adversarie  the  Beare,  who  is  chiefly  nourished  by

them,  and  given  them  as  an  enemie, according  to the

common Proverbe which saith, Non e alcuna persona

si  libera,  a  chimanchi  il  suo  Bargello,  that  is,  There  is  no

man  so  free,  that  hath  not  his  Persecutor  or  privie  Enemie.

And here when I consider the marvellous providence  Greatwonders

which  Nature  hath  given  to  these  little  bodies,  I  call  to  in  least

remembrance  the  wittie  Sentence  of  Plinie,  where  speaking  creatures.

of  such  little  beasts,  he  saith  thus,  Why  doe  we  marvefl

at the  Towre-bearing  shoulders  of  Elephants, and not

rather  where  Nature  hath  placed  so  many  senses  and  such

industry in such little bodies? Where is Hearing,

Smelling,  Seeing,  and  Feeling,  yea,  where  are  the  Veines

and  Arteries  (without  which  no  beast  can  live  or  move)

in  these  so  little  bodies,  wherof  some  are  so  small  that

their  whole  bodies  can  scarsly  bee  seene  of  our  eyes  :

What  shall  we  then  say  of  the  parts  of  the  same? Yet

even  among  these  there  are  many  of  such  sagacitie  and

industry,  as  the  like  is  not  seene  in  beasts  of  greater

quantitie,  no  nor  yet  in  man,  &c.

But  to  returne  to  the  Historie.  This  Enemy  which
nature  hath  given  to  these  little  Beasts,  useth  this  manner
to  assaile  them  :  When  he  resorteth  to  the  Hillocke  where
the  Antes  lye  hid  as  in  their  fortresse,  he  putteth  his
tongue  to  one  of  the  rifts  whereof  we  have  spoken,
beeing  as  subtill  as  the  edge  of  a  Sword,  and  therewith
continuall  licking,  maketh  the  place  moist,  the  foame
and  froth  of  his  mouth  being  of  such  propertie,  that  by
continuall  licking  the  place,  it  inlargeth  the  rift  in  such
sort  by  little  and  little,  that  at  the  length  he  easily
putteth  in  his  tongue,  which  he  hath  very  long  and
thinne,  and  much  disproportionate  to  his  bodie,  and  when
he  hath  thus  made  free  passage  for  his  tongue  in  the
hillocke,  to  put  it  easily  in  and  out  at  his  pleasure,  then
he  thrusteth  it  into  the  hole  as  farre  as  he  can  reach,  and
so  letteth  it  rest  a  good  space,  untill  a  great  quantitie  of
the  Antes  (whose  nature  rejoyceth  in  heat  and  moysture)

171

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1525.

have  laden  his  tongue,  and  as  many  as  he  can  containe

in  the  hollownesse  thereof,  at  which  time  hee  suddenly
draweth  it  into  his  mouth,  and  eateth  them,  and  returneth
againe  to  the  same  practice  immediatly,  untill  hee  have
eaten  as  many  as  him  listeth,  or  as  long  as  hee  can  reach
any  with  his  tongue.  The  flesh  of  this  Beast,  is  filthy
and  unsavourie,  but  by  reason  of  the  extreame  shifts
and  necessitie  that  the  Christian  men  were  put  to  at  their
first  comming  into  these  parts,  they  were  inforced  to
proove  all  things,  and  so  fell  to  the  eating  of  these  Beasts  :
but  when  they  had  found  more  delicate  meates,  they  fell
into  hatred  with  this.  These  Antes  have  the  appearance
of  the  place  of  their  entrance  into  the  hillocke,  under
the  ground,  and  this  at  so  little  a  hole,  that  it  could
hardly  bee  found,  if  certaine  of  them  were  not  seene  to
passe  in  and  out :  but  by  this  way  the  Beares  could  have
no  such  power  to  hurt  them  as  above  at  the  said  rifts,
as  I  have  said.
A  strame  There  is  another  strange  beast,  which  by  a  name  of

beast  which  contrary  effect,  the  Spaniards  call  Cagnuolo  leggiero,  that
seemeth  a  kind  is,  The  Light  Dogge,  whereas  it  is  one  of  the  slowest
ofCamelion.  beasts  in  the  World,  and  so  heavie  and  dull  in  mooving,
that  it  can  scarsly  goe  fiftie  pases  in  a  whole  day :  these
beasts  are  in  the  firme  Land,  and  are  very  strange  to
behold  for  the  disproportion  that  they  have  to  all  other
beasts  :  they  are  about  two  spans  in  length  when  they
are  growne  to  their  full  bignesse,  but  when  they  are
very  young,  they  are  somewhat  more  grosse,  then  long :
they  have  foure  subtill  feet,  and  in  every  of  them  foure
clawes  like  unto  Birds,  and  joyned  together,  yet  are
neither  their  clawes  or  their  feet  able  to  susteine  their
bodies  from  the  ground,  by  reason  whereof,  and  by  the
heavinesse  of  their  bodies,  they  draw  their  bellies  on
the  ground :  their  neckes  are  high  and  streight,  and  all
equall  like  the  pestle  of  a  Morter,  which  is  altogether
equall  even  unto  the  top,  without  making  any  proportion
or  similitude  of  a  head,  or  any  difference  except  in  the
noddle,  and  in  the  tops  of  their  neckes : they  have  very

172

GONZALO DE OV1EDO  a.d.

1525-

round  faces  much  like  unto  Owles,  and  have  a  marke  of

their owne haire after the manner  of  a  Circle, which

maketh  their  faces  seeme  somewhat  more  long  then  large :

they have small eyes  and  round, & nostrils like unto

Monkeyes : they  have  little  mouthes,  and  moove  their

neckes  from  one  side  to  another,  as  though  they  were

astonished : their  chiefe  desire  and  delight  is  to  cleave

and  sticke  fast  unto  Trees,  or  some  other  thing  whereby

they may climbe aloft, and therefore for the most

part, these beasts are found upon Trees, whereunto

cleaving fast, they mount up by little and little,

staying  themselves  by  their  long  clawes  : the  colour  of

their  haire  is  betweene  russet  and  white,  and  of  the  proper

colour  of  the  haire  of  a  Wesell : they  have  no  tayles,

and  their  voice  is  much  differing  from  other  beasts,  for

they  sing  onely  in  the  night,  and  that  continually  from

time  to  time,  singing  ever  sixe  notes  one  higher  then

another,  so  falling  with  the  same,  that  the  first  note  is

the  highest,  and  the  other  is  a  baser  tune,  as  if  a  man

should  say,  La, sol,  fa,  mi,  re,  ut, so  this  beast  saith,

Ha,  ha,  ha,  ha,  ha,  ha. And  doubtlesse,  it  seemeth  to  [HI.  v.  979.]

me,  that  as  I  have  said  in  the  Chapter  of  the  beast  called

Bardati, that those beasts might be the originall and

document  to  imbarbe  Horses :  even  so,  the  first  invention

of  Musicke  might  seeme  by  the  hearing  of  this  beast,  to

have  the  first  principles  of  that  Science,  rather  then  by

any  other  thing  in  the  World. But  now  to  returne  to

the  Historic I  say  that  in  a  short  space  after  this  Beast

hath  sung,  and  hath  paused  a  while,  shee  returneth  againe

to  the  selfe-same  Song,  and  doth  this  onely  in  the  night,

and  not  in  the  day :  By  reason  whereof,  and  also  because

of  her  evill  sight,  I  thinke  her  to  be  a  night  Beast,  and

the  friend  of  darknesse. Sometimes  the  Christian  men

find  these  Beasts,  and  bring  them  home  to  their  houses,

where  also  they  creepe  all  about  with  their  naturall  slow-

nesse,  insomuch  that  neither  for  threatning  or  pricking

they will moove any faster then their naturall and

accustomed pace. And if  they finde any Trees, they

i73

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1525.

creepe thither immediately, and mount to the top of
the highest branch thereof, where they  remayne con-
tinually for  the  space  of  eight,  or  ten,  or  twentie  dayes,
without  eating  of  any  thing,  as  farre  as  any  man  can
judge. And  whereas  I  my  selfe  have  kept  them  in  my
house,  I  could  never  perceive  other  but  that  they  live
onely  of  Aire : and  of  the  same  opinion,  are  in  manner
all  men  of  those  Regions,  because  they  have  never  seene
them eate any thing, but ever turne their heads and
mouthes  toward  that  part  where  the  wind  bloweth  most,
whereby  may  be  considered  that  they  take  most  pleasure
in  the  Ayre. They  bite  not,  nor  yet  can  bite,  having
very  little  mouthes  : they  are  not  venemous  or  noyous
any  way,  but  altogether  brutish,  and  utterly  unprofitable,
and  without  commoditie  yet  knowne  to  men,  saving  onely
to  moove  their  minds  to  contemplate  the  infinite  power
of God, who delighteth in the varietie of creatures,
whereby appeareth the power of  his incomprehensible
wisdome  and  majestie,  so  farre  to  exceed  the  capacitie  of
mans  understanding.
Fouks  and In  these  Regions  there  are  likewise  found  certaine  Fowles
Birds. or  Birds,  which  the  Indians  call  Alcatraz :  these  are  much
Akairaz. bigger  then  Geese,  the  greatest  part  of  their  feathers  are
of  russet  colour,  and  in  some  parts  yellow,  their  bils  or
beakes  are  of  two  spannes  in  length,  and  very  large  neere
to  the  head,  and  growing  small  toward  the  point,  they
have  great  and  large  throates,  and  are  much  like  to  a
Fowle which I saw  in Flanders, in Brussels in your
Majesties  Palace,  which  the  Flemmings  call  Haina :  And
I  remember  that  when  your  Majestie  dined  one  day  in
your  great  Hall, there  was  brought  to  your  Majesties
presence  a  Caldron  of  water  with  certaine  fishes  alive,
which  the  said  fowle  did  eat  up  whole,  and  I  think  verily
that  that  fowle  was  a  fowle  of  the  Sea,  because  she  had
feet  like  fowles  of  the  water,  as  have  also  these  Alcatrazi,
which  are  likewise  fowles  of  the  Sea,  and  of  such  great-
nesse, that I have  seene  a  whole  coate  of  a  man  put
into  the  throats  of  one  of  them  in  Panama,  in  the  yeere

174

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  a.d.

1525.

1 52 1.  And  forasmuch  as  in  that  Coast  of  Panama,  there
passeth  and  flyeth  a  great  multitude  of  these  Alcatrazi,
being  a  thing  very  notable,  I  will  declare  the  manner
hereof,  as  not  onely  I,  but  also  divers  other  now  present
in  your  Majesties  Court  have  oftentimes  seene.  Your
Majestie  shall  therefore  understand,  that  in  this  place  (as
I  have  said  before)  the  Sea  of  Sur  riseth  and  falleth  two
leagues  and  more  from  sixe  houres  to  sixe  houre :  so
that  when  it  increaseth,  the  water  of  the  Sea  arriveth  so
neere  to  the  houses  of  Panama,  as  doth  our  Sea  (called  Panama.
Mare  Mediterraneum)  in  Barzalona,  or  in  Naples  :  and
when  the  said  increasing  of  the  Sea  commeth,  there
commeth  also  therewith  such  a  multitude  of  small  fishes
called  Sardines,  that  it  is  so  marvellous  a  thing  to  behold,  Pilchards.
that  no  man  would  beleeve  it  that  hath  not  seene  it.
Insomuch  that  the  Cacique  (that  is)  the  King  of  that
Land,  at  such  time  as  I  dwelt  there,  was  bound  daily,
as  he  was  commanded  by  your  Majesties  Governour,  to
bring  ordinarily  three  Canoas  or  Barkes  full  of  the  said
Sardines,  and  to  unlade  the  same  in  the  Market  place,
which  were  afterwards  by  the  Ruler  of  the  Citie  divided
among  the  Christian  men,  without  any  cost  or  charge  to
any  of  them :  Insomuch  that  if  the  people  had  beene  a
much  greater  multitude  then  they  were,  and  as  many  as
are  at  this  present  in  Toledo,  or  more,  and  had  none
other  thing  to  live  by,  they  might  have  beene  sufficiently
susteined  by  these  Sardines,  beside  the  overplus  which
should  have  remayned.  But  to  returne  to  the  fowles,
whereof  wee  have  spoken.  As  the  Sea  commeth,  and
the  Sardines  with  the  same,  even  so  likewise  come  the
said  Alcatrazzi  therewith,  and  flye  continually  over  it  in
such  a  multitude,  that  they  appeare  to  cover  the  upper
part  or  floore  of  the  water,  and  thus  continue  in  mounting
and  falling  from  the  ayre  to  the  water,  and  from  the
water  to  the  ayre,  during  all  the  time  of  their  fishing :
and  assoone  as  they  have  taken  any  of  these  Sardines,
they  flye  above  the  waters,  and  eate  them  incontinently,
and  suddenly  returne  againe  to  the  water  for  more,  con-

i75

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1525.

tinuing  thus  course  by  course  without  ceasing :  in  like
manner  when  the  Sea  falleth,  they  follow  their  fishing
as  I  have  said.  There  goeth  also  in  the  company  of
these  fowles  another  kind  of  fowles,  called  Coda  in-
forcata, (that  is)  the  forked  tayle,  whereof  I  have  made
mention  before,  and  assoone  as  the  Alcatraz  mounteth
from  the  water  with  her  prey  of  the  Sardines,  suddenly
this  Coda  inforcata  giveth  her  so  many  strokes,  and
so  persecuteth  her,  that  shee  causeth  her  to  let  fall  the
Sardines  which  shee  hath  in  her  mouth  :  the  which  assoone
as  they  are  fallen,  and  before  they  yet  touch  the  water,
the  Coda  inforcata  catcheth  them  even  in  the  fall,  in
such  sort,  that  it  is  a  great  pleasure  to  behold  the
combat  betweene  them  all  the  day  long.  The  number  of
these  Alcatrazzi  is  such,  that  the  Christian  men  are
accustomed  to  send  to  certaine  Hands  and  Rockes  which
[III.  v.  980.]  are  neere  about  Panama,  with  their  Boates  or  Barkes  to
take  these  Alcatrazzi,  while  they  are  yet  young,  and
cannot  flie,  and  kill  as  many  of  them  with  staves  as
they  will,  untill  they  have  therewith  laden  their  Barkes
or  Canoas :  these  young  ones  are  so  fat  and  well  fed,
that  they  cannot  bee  eaten,  and  are  taken  for  none  other
intent,  but  onely  to  make  Grease  for  Candles  to  burne
in  the  night,  for  the  which  purpose  it  serveth  very  well,
and  giveth  a  cleere  light,  and  burneth  easily.  After  this
manner,  and  for  this  purpose,  innumerable  of  them  are
killed :  and  yet  it  seemeth  that  the  number  of  them
that  fish  for  Sardines  doe  daily  increase.  There  are  other
Passere  fowles  called  Passere  sempie,  that  is,  simple  Sparowes :

sempie.  these  are  somewhat  lesse  then  Seamewes,  and  have  their

feet  like  unto  great  Malards,  and  stand  in  the  water
sometimes,  and  when  the  ships  saile  fiftie  or  a  hundred
leagues  about  the  Hands,  these  fowles  beholding  the  ships
comming  toward  them,  breake  their  flight,  and  fall  downe
upon  the  Saile  yards,  Masts,  and  Cables  thereof,  and
are  so  simple  and  foolish,  that  they  tarrie  untill  they
may  easily  bee  taken  with  mens  hands,  and  were  there-
fore called  of  the  Mariners  simple  Sparrowes : they  are

176

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  a.d.

1525.

blacke,  and  upon  their  blacke,  have  their  head  and
shoulders  of  feathers  of  a  darke  russet  colour :  they  are
not  good  to  bee  eaten,  although  the  Mariners  have  some-
times beene  inforced  to  eate  them.  There  is  another
kind  of  Birds  in  the  firme  Land,  which  the  Christians
call  Picuti,  because  they  have  very  great  beakes,  in  Picuti,  Birds
respect  of  the  littlenesse  of  their  bodies,  for  their  beakes  &**&?*»
are  very  heavie,  and  weigh  more  then  their  whole  bodies  »  »
beside :  these  Birds  are  no  bigger  then  Quailes,  but  have
a  much  greater  bushment  of  feathers  insomuch  that  their
feathers  are  more  then  their  bodies  :  their  feathers  are
very  faire,  and  of  many  variable  colours ;  their  beakes
are  a  quarter  of  a  yard  in  length  or  more,  and  bending
downe  toward  the  Earth,  and  three  fingers  broad  neere
unto  the  head :  their  tongues  are  very  quils,  wherewith
they  make  a  great  hissing :  they  make  holes  in  Trees
with  their  beakes,  in  the  which  they  make  their  Nests.
And  surely  these  Birds  are  marvellous  to  behold,  for
the  great  difference  which  they  have  from  all  other
Birds  that  I  have  seene,  aswell  for  their  tongues  (which
are  quils  as  I  have  said)  as  also  for  the  strangenesse  of
their  sight  and  disproportion  of  their  great  beakes,  in
respect  of  the  rest  of  their  bodies.  There  are  no  Birds
found  that  provide  better  for  the  safegard  of  their  young
in  the  time  of  their  breeding,  to  be  without  danger  of
wilde  Cats,  that  they  enter  not  into  their  Nests  to  destroy
their  Egges  or  young,  and  this  aswell  by  the  strange
manner  of  building  their  Nests,  as  also  by  their  owne
defence :  and  therefore  when  they  perceive  that  the  Cats
approach  toward  them,  they  enter  into  their  Nests,  and
holding  their  beakes  toward  the  entrance  of  the  same,
stand  at  their  defence,  and  so  vexe  the  Cats,  that  they  cause
them  to  leave  their  enterprize.

There  are  also other  Birds  or  Sparrowes, which the  Foolish
Christians  by  contrary  effect  call  Matti,  that  is  Fooles  :  sParrowes>
Whereas  neverthelesse  there  is  no  Bird  that  sheweth  more  Provident
wit  and  craft  in  defending  her  young  from  perill. These
Birds are little, and in manner  blacke, and somewhat

XV  177  m

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1525.

bigger  then  our  Thrushes :  they  have  certaine  white
feathers  in  their  neckes,  and  the  like  sagacitie  or  sharp-
nesse  of  sense  as  have  the  Birds  or  Pyes  called  Gazzvole :
they  seldome  times  light  upon  the  earth :  they  make
their  Nests  in  Trees  separated  from  other,  because  the
Monkeyes  are  accustomed  to  leape  from  Tree  to  Tree,
not  descending  to  the  ground  for  feare  of  other  beasts,
except  when  they  are  enforced  by  thirst  to  come  downe
to  drinke,  at  such  times  as  they  are  sure  not  to  be
molested,  and  for  this  cause  doe  not  these  Birds  make
their  Nests  but  in  Trees  farre  divided  from  other,  they
make  them  of  a  Cubit  in  length,  or  more,  after  the
manner  of  bagges  or  little  sackes,  large  at  the  bottome,
and  growing  narrower  and  narrower  toward  the  mouth,
whereby  they  are  fastened,  having  the  hole  whereat  they
enter  into  the  sacke,  of  such  bignesse  as  may  onely  suffice
to  receive  them.  And  to  the  end  that  the  Monkeyes  may
not  devoure  their  young,  if  they  chance  to  mount  upon
the  Trees  where  they  have  their  Nests,  they  use  another
craft,  which  is,  to  make  their  Nests  in  thicke  branches
of  Trees,  and  to  defend  the  same  with  sharpe  and  strong
thornes,  implicate  and  set  in  such  order,  that  no  man  is
able  to  make  the  like,  so  that  the  Monkeyes  can  by  no
meanes  put  their  legges  into  the  hole  of  the  Nest  to
take  out  the  young  Birds,  aswell  for  the  sharpnesse  of
the  thornes,  as  also  for  the  depth  of  the  Nests,  in  the
bottome  whereof,  the  young  Birds  rest  without  danger
of  their  enemie :  for  some  of  their  Nests  being  three  or
foure  spans  in  length,  the  leg  of  the  Monkey  cannot
reach  to  the  bottome  thereof.  They  use  also  another
policie,  which  is,  to  make  many  of  their  Nests  in  one
Tree,  the  which  they  doe  for  one  of  these  two  causes :
that  is,  that  either  of  their  owne  naturall  disposition
they  are  accustomed  to  goe  in  great  multitudes,  and
rejoyce  in  the  company  of  their  owne  generation,  as  doe
the  Birds  which  we  call  Stares,  or  else  to  the  intent  that
if  it  should  so  chance  that  the  Monkeyes  should  climbe
the  Trees  where  they  make  their  Nests,  they  might  bee

178

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  a.d.

1525.

a  greater  company  to  resist  and  molest  the  Monkeyes,

at  whose  approach  they  make  a  fearefull  and  terrible  cry,

whereby  the  Monkeyes  are  put  to  flight. Furthermore,

in  the  firme  Land,  and  in  the  Hands,  there  are  certaine

Birds  called  Piche,  or  Gazzvole,  somewhat  like  unto  those  Gazzvok.

which  we  call  Wood-wals,  or  Wood-peckes,  being  lesse

then ours of Spaine : these  are  altogether  blacke, and

goe  hopping  and  leaping, their  beakes  are  also  blacke,

and  of  the  same  fashion  as  are  the  Popingjayes  beakes,

they have long tayles, and are somewhat bigger then

Stares.

There  are  other  Birds  called  Pintadelli,  which  are  like  [III.  v.  981.]
unto  certaine  greene  Birds,  which  the  Italians  call  Frin-  Ptnt^elh.
guelli,  and  are  of  seven  colours :  these  Birds  for  feare  of
the  Monkeyes,  are  ever  wont  to  make  their  Nests  over
the  bankes  of  Rivers,  or  the  Sea,  where  the  branches
of  Trees  so  reach  over  the  water,  that  with  a  little  weight
they  may  bow  downe  to  the  water :  their  Nests  are  made
so  neere  the  tops  of  the  branches,  that  when  the  Monkeyes
come  thereon,  the  branches  bend  toward  the  water,  and  the
Monkeyes  turne  backe  againe  for  feare  of  falling :  For
although  no  beast  in  the  World  be  more  malicious  then
this,  yet  whereas  the  most  part  of  beasts  are  naturally
inclined  to  swimme,  this  Monkey  hath  no  manner  of
aptnesse  thereunto,  and  is  therefore  soone  drowned  or
strangled  in  the  water,  and  by  a  privie  sense  of  Nature
feareth  the  danger  which  he  cannot  escape.  These  Birds
make  their  Nests  in  such  sort,  that  although  they  bee
wet  and  filled  with  water,  yet  doe  they  so  suddenly  rise
up  againe,  that  the  young  Birds  are  not  thereby  hurt
or  drowned.  There  are  also  many  Nightingales,  and
other  Birds  which  sing  marvellously  with  great  melodie
and  difference  in  singing :  these  Birds  are  of  marvellous
divers  colours  the  one  from  the  other,  some  are  altogether
yellow,  and  some  other  of  so  excellent,  delectable,  and
high  a  colour,  as  it  were  a  Rubie,  other  are  also  of
divers  and  variable  colours,  some  of  few  colours,  and
other some all of one colour, being all so faire

179

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

1525.

and  beautifull,  that  in  brightnesse  and  shining
they  excell  all  that  are  in  Spaine,  or  Italie,  or  other
Provinces  of  Europe.  Many  of  these  are  taken  with
Nets,  lime-twigs,  and  Springes  of  divers  sorts.  Divers
Great  Fowks.  other  sorts  of  great  fowles  like  unto  Eagles,  and  such
other  as  live  of  prey,  are  found  in  the  firme  Land,  of  such
diversitie,  that  it  is  in  manner  impossible  to  describe
them  all  particularly :  and  forasmuch  as  I  have  more
largely  intreated  hereof  in  my  generall  Historie  of  the
Indies,  I  thinke  it  not  requisite  heere  to  make  any  further
mention  of  the  same.

Of  Trees,  Fruits,  and  Plants.

THere  is  both  in  the  firme  Land  and  the  Hands  a
certaine  Tree  called  Coco,  being  a  kind  of  Date
Trees,  and  having  their  leaves  of  the  selfesame  great-
nesse,  as  have  the  Date  Trees  which  beare  Dates,  but
differ  much  in  their  growing,  for  the  leaves  of  this  Coco
grow  out  of  the  trunkes  of  the  Tree,  as  doe  the  fingers
out  of  the  hand,  wreathing  themselves  one  within
another,  and  so  spreading  abroad :  these  Trees  are  high,
and  are  found  in  great  plentie  in  the  Coast  of  the  Sea
of  Sur,  in  the  Province  of  Cacique  Chiman.  These
Date  Trees  bring  forth  a  Fruit  after  this  sort :  being
altogether  unite  as  it  groweth  on  the  Tree,  it  is  of  greater
circumference  then  the  head  of  a  man,  and  from  the
superficiall  part  to  the  middest,  which  is  the  fruit,  it  is
involved  and  covered  with  many  Webs  much  like  unto
those  Hirds  of  Towe  which  they  use  in  Andalusia.  Of
this  Towe  or  Web,  the  East  Indians  make  a  certaine  kind
of  Cloth,  of  three  or  foure  sorts,  and  Cordes  for  the
Sayles  of  Ships :  but  in  these  Indies  of  your  Majestie,
they  passe  not  for  these  Coards,  or  this  Cloth  that  may
be  made  of  the  Fruit  of  Coco,  by  reason  of  the  great
plentie  that  they  have  of  the  Bombage  or  Cotton  of
Gossampine  Trees.  The  Fruit  which  is  in  the  middest
of  the  said  Tow,  is  (as  I  have  said)  as  bigge  as  a  mans

180

GONZALO DE OVIEDO

fist,  and  sometimes  twice  as  bigge,  and  more  :  It  is  in  forme
like  unto  a  Walnut,  or  some  other  round  thing,  some-
what more  long  then  large,  and  very  hard,  the  rinde  or
barke  hereof,  is  as  thicke  as  the  circle  of  Letters  of  a
Riall  of  Plate,  and  within,  there  cleaveth  fast  to  the  rinde
of  the  Nut  a  carnositie  or  substance  of  coornell,  of  the
thicknesse  of  halfe  a  finger,  or  of  the  least  finger  of  the
hand,  and  is  very  white,  like  unto  a  faire  Almond,  and
of  better  taste  and  more  pleasant.  When  this  Fruit  is
chewed,  there  remayne  certaine  crummes,  as  doe  the  like
of  Almonds :  Yet  if  it  be  swallowed  downe,  it  is  not
unpleasant.  For  although  that  after  the  juyce  or
moysture  be  gone  downe  the  throat  before  the  said
crummes  be  swallowed,  the  rest  which  is  eaten,  seeme
somewhat  sharpe  or  sowre,  yet  doth  it  not  so  greatly
offend  the  taste,  as  to  be  cast  away.  While  this  Cocus
is  yet  fresh  and  newly  taken  from  the  Tree,  they  use  not
to  eate  of  the  said  carnositie  and  Fruit,  but  first  beating
it  very  much,  and  then  strayning  it,  they  draw  a  Milke
thereof,  much  better  and  sweeter  then  is  the  Milke  of
Beasts,  and  of  much  substance,  the  which  the  Christian
men  of  those  Regions  put  in  the  Tartes  or  Cakes  which
they  make  of  the  grain  of  Maiz  whereof  they  make  their
Bread,  or  in  other  Bread  as  we  put  Bread  in  Pottage :
so  that  by  reason  of  the  said  Milke  of  Cocus,  the  Tartes
are  more  excellent  to  be  eaten  without  offence  to  the
stomacke :  they  are  so  pleasant  to  the  taste,  and  leave
it  aswell  satisfied  as  though  it  had  beene  delighted  with
many  delicate  Dishes.  But  to  proceed  further,  your
Majestie  shall  understand,  that  in  the  place  of  the  stone
or  coornell,  there  is  in  the  middest  of  the  said  carnositie
a  void  place,  which  neverthelesse  is  full  of  a  most  cleere
and  excellent  water,  in  such  quantitie  as  may  fill  a  great
Egge  shell,  or  more,  or  lesse,  according  to  the  bignesse
of  the  Cocos,  the  which  water  surely,  is  the  most  sub-
stantiall,  excellent  and  precious  to  bee  drunke,  that  may
be  found  in  the  World  :  insomuch  that  in  the  moment
when  it  passeth  the  palate  of  the  mouth,  and  beginneth

A.D.
1525.

/  have  seene
one  of  these
Fruits  opened,
the  which
when  it  was
whole,  if  it
were  shaken
the  water  was
hard  shogge
therein  as  it
were  in  a
Bottle,  but  in
time  it  con-
sumed iff  was
partly  con-
gealed into  a
salt  substance.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1525.

to  goe  downe  the  throate,  it  seemeth  that  from  the  sole
of  the  foot,  to  the  crowne  of  the  head,  there  is  no  part
of  the  bodie  but  that  feeleth  great  comfort  thereby :  as
it  is  doubtlesse  one  of  the  most  excellent  things  that
may  bee  tasted  upon  the  earth,  and  such  as  I  am  not  able
by  writing  or  tongue  to  expresse.  And  to  proceed  yet
[III.  v.  982.]  further,  I  say  that  when  the  meate  of  this  fruit  is  taken
from  the  Vessell  thereof,  the  vessell  remayneth  as  faire  and
neate  as  though  it  were  polished,  and  is  without  of  colour
Good  against  inclining  toward  black,  and  shineth  or  glistereth  very
the  wind  and  fairCj  ancj  ]s  within  of  no  lesse  delicatenesse.  Such  as
s  one  0  ic  .  jiave  accustomed  to  drinke  in  these  Vessels,  and  have
beene  troubled  with  the  Disease  called  the  fretting  of
the  guts,  say  that  they  have  by  experience  found  it  a
marvellous  remedie  against  that  Disease,  and  that  it
breaketh  the  stone,  and  provoketh  urine.  This  fruit
was  called  Coca,  for  this  cause,  that  when  it  is  taken  from
the  place  where  it  cleaveth  fast  to  the  Tree,  there  are
seene  two  holes,  and  above  them  two  other  naturall  holes,
which  altogether  doe  represent  the  gesture  and  figure  of
the  Cattes  called  Mammoni,  that  is,  Monkeyes,  when  they
cry,  which  cry  the  Indians  call  Coca,  but  in  very  deed,
this  Tree  is  a  kind  of  Date  Tree,  and  hath  the  same  effect
to  heale  fretting  of  the  guts,  that  Plinie  describeth  all
kinde  of  Date  trees  to  have.  There  are  furthermore  in
Great  Trees,  the  firme  Land,  Trees  of  such  bignesse  that  I  dare  not
speake  thereof,  but  in  place  where  I  have  so  many
witnesses  which  have  seene  the  same  as  well  as  I.  I  say
therefore,  that  a  league  from  Dariena  or  the  Citie  of
Sancta  Maria  Antiqua,  there  passeth  a  River  very  large
and  deepe,  which  is  called  Cuti,  over  the  which  the
Indians  laid  a  great  Tree,  so  traversing  the  same,  that  it
was  in  the  stead  of  a  bridge,  the  which  I  my  selfe  with
divers  others  that  are  at  this  present  in  your  Majesties
Court,  have  oftentimes  passed  over.  And  forasmuch  as
the  said  Tree  had  lyen  long  there,  and  by  the  great
weight  thereof  was  so  shrunke  downeward,  and  partly
covered  with  water,  that  none  could  passe  over  it,  but

182

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  a.d.

1525-
were  wet  to  the  knee,  I  being  then  in  the  yeere  1522.
the  officiall  or  Justice  in  that  Citie  at  your  Majesties
appointment,  caused  another  great  Tree  to  bee  laid  in
that  place,  which  in  like  manner  traversed  the  River,  and
reached  more  then  fiftie  foote  over  the  further  side :
This  Tree  was  exceeding  great,  and  rested  above  the
water  more  then  two  Cubits,  in  the  fall,  it  cast  downe
all  such  other  Trees  as  were  within  the  reach  thereof,
and  discovered  certaine  bynes,  which  were  so  laden  with
blacke  Grapes  of  pleasant  taste,  that  they  satisfied  more
then  fiftie  persons  which  ate  their  fill  thereof.  This  Tree,
in  the  thickest  part  thereof,  was  more  then  sixteene
spannes  thicke,  and  was  neverthelesse  but  little  in  respect
of  many  other  trees  which  are  found  in  this  Province.
For  the  Indians  of  the  Coast  and  Province  of  Cartagenia,
make  Barkes  or  Boates  thereof  (which  they  call  Canoas)  Great  Canons.
of  such  bignesse,  beeing  all  one  whole  Tree,  that  some
containe  a  hundred  men,  some  a  hundred  and  thirtie,
and  some  more,  having  neverthelesse  such  void  space
within  the  same,  that  there  is  left  sufficient  roome  to
passe  to  and  fro  throughout  all  the  Canoas.  Some  of
these  are  so  large,  beside  the  length,  that  they  conteine
more  then  tenne  or  twelve  spannes  in  breadth,  and  saile
with  two  sailes,  as  with  the  Master  saile  and  the  trincket,
which  they  make  of  very  good  Cotton.  The  greatest
Trees  that  I  have  seene  in  these  parts,  or  in  any  other
Regions,  was  in  the  Province  of  Guaturo,  the  King
whereof  rebelling  from  the  obedience  of  your  Majestie,
was  pursued  by  me,  and  taken  Prisoner :  at  which
time  I  with  my  company,  passed  over  a  very  high
Mountaine,  full  of  great  Trees,  in  the  top  whereof,
we  found  one  Tree,  which  had  three  roots,  or  rather  j  marvellous
divisions  of  the  roote  above  the  Earth,  in  forme  of  Tree.
a  Triangle,  or  Trevet,  so  that  betweene  every  foot
of  this  Triangle  or  three  feet,  there  was  a  space  of
twentie  foot  betweene  every  foot,  and  this  of  such  height
above  the  Earth,  that  a  laden  Cart  of  those  wherewith
they  are  accustomed to  bring  home  Corne  in time  of

183

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1525.

Harvest  in  the  Kingdome  of  Toledo  in  Spaine,  might
easily  have  passed  through  every  of  those  partitions  or
windoores  which  were  betweene  the  three  feet  of  the  said
Tree.  From  the  Earth  upward  to  the  trunke  of  the
Tree,  the  open  places  of  the  divisions  betweene  these
three  feete,  were  of  such  height  from  the  ground,  that
a  Footman  with  a  Javelin  was  not  able  to  reach  the  place
where  the  said  feet  joyned  together  in  the  trunke  or  bodie
of  the  Tree,  which  grew  of  great  height  in  one  piece,
and  one  whole  bodie,  or  ever  it  spread  in  branches,  which
it  did  not  before  it  exceeded  in  height  the  Towre  of
Saint  Romane  in  the  Citie  of  Toledo  :  from  which  height
and  upward,  it  spread  very  great  and  strong  branches.
Among  certaine  Spaniards  which  climbed  this  Tree,  I
my  selfe  was  one,  and  when  I  was  ascended  to  the  place
where  it  begunne  to  spread  the  branches,  it  was  a  mar-
vellous thing  to  behold  a  great  Countrey  of  such  Trees
toward  the  Province  of  Abrayme.  This  Tree  was  easie
to  climbe,  by  reason  of  certaine  Besuchi,  (whereof  I  have
spoken  before)  which  grew  wreathed  about  the  Tree,  in
such  sort  that  they  seemed  to  make  a  scaling  Ladder.
Every  of  the  foresaid  three  feet  which  bore  the  bodie  of
the  Tree,  was  twentie  spannes  in  thicknesse,  and  where
they  joyned  altogether  about  the  Trunke  or  bodie  of  the
Tree,  the  principall  Trunke  was  more  then  fortie  and  five
spannes  in  circuite.  I  named  the  Mountaine  where  these
Trees  grow,  the  Mountaine  of  three  footed  Trees.  And
this  which  I  have  now  declared,  was  seene  of  all  the
company  that  was  there  with  mee  when  (as  I  have  said
before)  I  took  King  Guaturo  Prisoner  in  the  yeere  1522.
Many  things  more  might  here  be  spoken  as  touching
this  matter,  as  also  how  there  are  many  other  excellent
Trees  found  of  divers  sorts  and  difference,  as  sweet  Cedar
Trees,  blacke  Date  Trees,  and  many  other,  of  the  which
some  are  so  heavie  that  they  cannot  float  about  the  water,
but  sinke  immediately  to  the  bottome,  and  other  againe
as  light  as  a  Corke.  As  touching  all  which  things  I  have
written  more  largely  in  my  generall  Historie  of  the  Indies.

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  ad.

1525.

And  for  as  much  as  at  this  present  I  have  entred  to
entreate  of  Trees, before I passe  any  further  to  other  [III.  v.  983.]
things,  I  will  declare  the  manner  how  the  Indians  kindle  Kindling  of
fire, onely with Wood and without fire, the manner  fi™ wlthout
whereof  is  this. They  take  a  peece  of  wood, of  two  J116'
spannes  in  length,  as  bigge  as  the  least  finger  of  a  mans
hand, or  as  an  arrow  well  pullished, and of  a strong
kinde  of  wood  which  they  keepe  onely  for  this  purpose :
and  where  they  intend  to  kindle  any  fire,  they  take  two
other  peeces  of  wood,  of  the  driest  and  lightest  that  they
can  finde,  and  binde  them  fast  together  one  with  another,
as  close  as  two  fingers  joyned :  in  the  middest  or  between
these,  they  put  the  point  of  the  first  little  staffe  made  of
hard  and  strong  wood,  which  they  hold  in  their  hands  by
the  top  thereof,  and  turne  or  rubbe  it  round  about  con-
tinually in  one  place  betweene  the  two  peeces  of  wood
which  lye  bound  together  upon  the  earth,  which  by  that
uncessant  rubbing  and  chafing,  are  in  short  space  kindled,
and  take  fire. I  have  also  thought  good  here  to  speake
somewhat  of  such  things  as  come  to  my  remembrance
of  certaine  Trees  which  are  found in this  Land, and
sometime also the like have beene seene in Spaine.
These  are  certaine  putrified  trunkes,  which  have  lien  so
long  rotting  on  the  earth,  that  they  are  very  white,  and
shine in the night like burning firebrands, and when  Putrified  wood
the  Spaniards  finde  any  of  this  wood,  and  intend  privily  shining  in  the
in  the  night  to  make  warre  and  invade  any  Province,  m%
when  case  so  requireth  that  it  shall  be  necessarie  to  goe
in  the  night,  in  such  places  where  they  know  not  the
way,  the  formost  Christian  man  which  guideth  the  way,
associate  with  an  Indian  to  direct  him  therein,  taketh  a
little  starre  of  the  said  wood,  which  he  putteth  in  his
cap, hanging behinde on his shoulders, by the light
whereof he that followeth next to him, directeth his
journey,  who  also  in  like  manner  beareth  another  starre
behinde  him,  by  the  shining  whereof  the  third  followeth
the  same  way,  and  in  like  manner  doe  all  the  rest,  so  that
by  this  meanes  none  are  lost  or  stragle  out  of  the  way.

185

A.D.
I525-

Plinie.

Almost  all
Indian  trees
continue  ever
greene.

Cassia.

Earth  hot
lower  then  a
fadome.  .

A  secret  thing.

Radicall

moisture.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

And  for  as  much  as  this  light  is  not  seene  very  farre,  it  is
the  better  policie  for  the  Christians,  because  they  are  not
thereby  disclosed  before  they  invade  their  enemies.
Furthermore,  as  touching  the  natures  of  Trees,  one
particular  thing  seemeth  worthy  to  be  noted,  whereof
Plinie  maketh  mention  in  his  naturall  Historie,  where
he  saith  that  there  are  certaine  Trees  which  continue  ever
greene,  and  never  loose  their  leaves,  as  the  Bay-tree,  the
Cedar,  the  Orange-tree,  and  the  Olive-tree,  with  such
other,  of  the  which  in  altogether  he  nameth  not  past
five  or  six.  To  this  purpose,  I  say,  that  in  the  Hands
of  these  Indies,  and  also  in  the  firme  land,  it  is  a  thing
of  much  difficultie  to  finde  two  Trees  that  lose  or  cast
their  leaves  at  any  time :  for  although  I  have  diligently
searched  to  know  the  truth  hereof,  yet  have  I  not  seene
any  that  lose  their  leaves,  either  of  them  which  we  have
brought  out  of  Spaine  into  these  regions,  as  Orange-trees,
Limons,  Cedars,  Palmes,  or  Date-trees,  and  Pomegranate-
trees,  or  of  any  other  in  these  regions,  except  onely
Cassia,  which  loseth  his  leaves,  and  hath  a  greater  thing
appropriate  to  it  selfe  onely :  which  is,  that  whereas  all
other  Trees  and  Plants  of  India  spread  their  rootes  no
deeper  in  the  earth  then  the  depth  of  a  mans  height,  or
somewhat  more,  not  descending  any  further  into  the
ground,  by  reason  of  the  great  heate  which  is  found
beneath  that  depth,  yet  doth  Cassia  pearse  further  into  the
ground,  untill  it  finde  water :  which  by  the  Philosophers
opinion  should  be  the  cause  of  a  thinne  and  watery  radicall
moisture  to  such  things  as  draw  their  nourishment  thereof,
as  fat  and  unctuous  grounds  with  temperate  heate,  yeelde
a  fast  and  firme  moisture  to  such  things  as  grow  in  them,
which  is  the  cause  that  such  Trees  lose  not  their  leaves,
as  the  said  thinne  and  waterish  moisture  is  cause  of  the
contrarie,  as  appeareth  by  the  said  effect  which  is  seene
onely  in  Cassia,  and  none  other  Tree  or  Plant  in  all  these
partes.

186

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  a.d.

1525.

Of  Reedes  or  Canes.

IN  the  firme  land  there  are  many  sorts  of  Reedes,  so
that  in  many  places  they  make  their  houses  thereof,
covering  them  with  the  tops  of  the  same,  and  making
their  wals  of  them  in  like  manner,  as  I  have  said  before  :
and  among  these  kindes  of  Reedes,  there  is  one  so  great,
that  the  Canes  thereof  are  as  bigge  as  a  mans  legge  in
the  knee,  and  three  spans  in  length  from  joynt  to  joynt,
or  more,  in  so  much  that  every  of  them  is  of  capacitie  to
containe  a  little  bucket  of  water.  In  this  kinde,  there
are  found  some  greater,  and  some  lesse,  of  the  which
some  they  use  to  make  quivers  for  arrowes.  There  is
found  another  kinde,  which  surely  is  marveilous,  being
little  bigger  then  a  Javelin,  the  Canes  whereof  are  longer
then  two  spannes :  these  Reedes  grow  one  farre  from
another,  as  sometimes  twenty  or  thirty  paces,  and  some-
times also  two  or  three  leagues :  they  grow  in  manner  in
all  Provinces  in  the  Indies,  and  grow  neere  to  very  high
Trees,  whereunto  they  leane,  and  creepe  up  to  the  top
of  their  branches,  which  they  imbrace,  and  descend  againe
downe  to  the  earth.  Their  Canes  are  full  of  most  cleare
water,  without  any  manner  of  taste  or  savour,  either  of
the  Canes,  or  of  any  other  thing,  and  such  as  if  it  were
taken  out  of  the  freshest  Spring  in  the  world,  nor  yet  is  Reed-springs
it  knowne  that  ever  it  hurt  any  that  drunke  thereof,  or fountaines
For  it  hath  oftentimes  so  chanced,  that  as  the  Christian  °fwater-
men  have  travailed  in  these  regions  in  desolate  waies,
where  for  lacke  of  water  they  have  beene  in  great  danger
to  dye  with  thirst,  that  have  escaped  that  perill  by  reason
that  they  found  the  said  Reedes,  of  the  water  of  whose
Canes  they  have  drunke  a  great  quantity,  without  any
hurt  thereof  ensuing.  Therefore  when  they  finde  these
in  any  place,  they  make  water  vessels  of  the  Canes
thereof,  and  carry  as  many  of  them  full  of  water  as  may  [III.  v.  984.]
suffice  for  one  dayes  journey :  and  sometime  they  carrie
so many, that they take for every man two or three

187

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1525-

quarts  of  water,  which  may  serve  them  for  many  daies,
because  it  doth  not  corrupt,  but  remaineth  still  fresh
and  good.

There  are  also  certaine  Plants,  which  the  Christians
P/atatii,  or  call  Platani.  They  are  as  high  as  trees,  and  become  as
Plantans.  bigge  in  the  trunke  as  the  knee  of  a  man,  or  more.  From
the  foote  to  the  top,  they  beare  certaine  long  and  large
leaves,  being  more  then  three  spans  in  largenesse,  and
about  ten  or  twelve  in  length :  the  which  when  they
are  broken  of  the  winde,  the  stalke  remaineth  whole  in
the  middest.  In  the  middest  of  this  Plant,  in  the  highest
part  thereof,  there  groweth  a  cluster  with  fortie  or  fiftie
Plantans  about  it,  every  of  them  being  a  span  and  a  halfe
in  length,  and  as  bigge  as  a  mans  arme  in  the  small,  or
more,  or  lesse,  according  to  the  goodnesse  of  the  soile
where  they  grow :  they  have  a  rinde  not  very  thicke,
and  easie  to  be  broken,  being  within  altogether  full  of
a  substance  like  unto  the  marie  of  the  bone  of  an  Oxe,
as  it  appeareth  when  the  rinde  or  barke  is  taken  from  the
same.  This  cluster  ought  to  be  taken  from  the  Plant,
when  any  one  of  the  Plantans  begin  to  appeare  yellow,
at  which  time  they  take  it,  and  hang  it  in  their  houses,
where  all  the  cluster  waxeth  ripe,  with  all  his  Plantans.
This  cluster  is  a  very  good  fruite,  and  when  it  is  opened,
and  the  rinde  taken  off,  there  are  found  within  it  many
Figges.  good  drie  Figges,  which  being  rosted,  or  stewed  in  an
Oven,  in  a  close  pot,  or  some  such  other  thing,  are  of
pleasant  taste,  much  like  to  the  conserve  of  Hony :  they
putrifie  not  on  the  Sea  so  soone  as  some  other  fruites
doe,  but  continue  fifteene  daies  and  more,  if  they  be
gathered  somewhat  greene :  they  seeme  more  delicate  on
the  Sea  then  on  the  Land,  not  for  that  they  any
thing  encrease  in  goodnes  on  the  Sea,  but  because
that  wheras  on  the  Sea  other  things  are  lacking
whereof  is  plentie  on  the  Land,  those  meates  seeme
of  best  taste,  which  satisfie  present  necessitie.  This
trunke  or  sprig  which  bringeth  forth  the  said  cluster,  is
a  whole  yeare  in  growing  and  bringing  forth  fruite,  in

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  a.d.

1525.

which  time  it  hath  put  forth  round  about  in  ten  or
twelve  sprigges,  as  bigge  as  the  first  or  principal,  and
multiplieth  no  lesse  then  the  principall  in  bringing  forth
of  clusters,  with  fruits  likewise  at  their  time,  and  also  in
bringing  forth  other  and  many  sprigges,  as  is  said  before.
From  the  which  sprigges  or  trunkes,  as  soone  as  the
cluster  of  the  fruite  is  taken  away,  the  Plant  beginneth
to  drie  and  wither,  which  then  they  take  out  of  the
ground,  because  it  doth  none  other  then  occupie  it  in
vaine,  and  without  profit.  They  are  so  many,  and  doe
so  marvellously  encrease  and  multiplie,  that  it  is  a  thing
in  manner  incredible.  They  are  exceeding  moist,  in  so
much  that  when  they  are  plucked  up  from  the  place  where
they  grow,  there  issueth  forth  a  great  quantity  of  water,
as  well  out  of  the  Plant,  as  out  of  the  place  where  it
grew,  in  such  sort,  that  all  the  moisture  of  the  earth  farre
about,  might  seeme  to  be  gathered  together  about  the
trunke  or  blocke  of  the  said  Plant,  with  the  fruites
whereof,  the  Antes  are  so  farre  in  love,  that  they  are
seene  in  great  multitudes  in  the  branches  of  the  Plants :
so  that  for  the  multitude  thereof,  it  sometime  so  chanceth,
that  men  are  enforced  to  take  away  the  Plants  from  their
possession :  these  fruites  are  found  at  all  times  of  the
yeere.  There  is  also  another  kinde  of  wilde  Plants  that
groweth  in  the  fieldes,  which  I  have  not  seene  but  in
the  Hand  of  Hispaniola,  although  they  be  found  in  other
Hands  of  the  Indies :  these  they  call  Tunas.  They  Tunas.
grow  of  a  Thistle  full  of  thornes,  and  bring  forth  a  fruite
much  like  unto  great  Figges,  which  have  a  crowne  like
Medlers,  and  are  within  of  a  high  colour,  with  graines
and  the  rinde  like  unto  a  Figge :  they  are  of  good  taste,
and  grow  abundantly  in  the  fields  in  many  places  :  They
worke  a  strange  effect  in  such  as  eate  them,  for  if  a
man  eate  two,  or  three,  or  more,  they  cause  his  urine  to
be  of  the  very  colour  of  bloud,  which  thing  chanced
once  to  my  selfe.  For  on  a  time  as  I  made  water,  and
saw  the  colour  of  my  Urine,  I  entred  into  a  great  sus-
pition  of  my  life,  being  so  astonished  for  feare,  that  I

189

A.D
1525.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Bikaos.

Havas.

thought  the  same  had  chansed  to  me  upon  some  other
cause,  in  so  much  that  surely  my  imagination  might  have
done  me  hurt,  but  that  they  which  were  with  me  did
comfort  me  immediately,  declaring  the  cause  thereof,  as
they  knew  by  experience,  being  auncient  inhabitours  in
those  regions.  There  groweth  also  another  Plant,  which
the  people  of  the  Countrie  call  Bihaos :  this  putteth  forth
certaine  straight  branches,  and  very  broade  leaves,  which
the  Indians  use  for  divers  purposes :  for  in  some  places
they  cover  their  houses  with  the  leaves  thereof,  couched
and  laid  after  the  manner  of  thatch,  whereunto  it  serveth
very  well :  Sometimes  also  when  it  raineth,  they  cast  these
over  their  heads,  to  defend  them  from  the  water.  They
make  also  certaine  chests,  which  they  call  Havas,  weaved
after  a  strange  sort,  and  intermixt  with  the  leaves  of
this  Bihaos.  These  Chests  are  wrought  in  such  sort,  that
although  it  raine  upon  them,  or  they  chance  to  fall  into
the  water,  yet  are  not  such  things  wet  as  are  within
them :  they  are  made  of  the  branches  of  the  said  Bihaos,
with  the  leaves  weaved  together  therewith.  In  these
they  keepe  salt,  and  other  subtile  things.  They  use
them  also  for  another  purpose,  which  is  this :  that  finding
them  in  the  fields  at  such  time  as  they  have  scarsenesse
of  victuals,  they  digge  up  the  rootes  of  these  Plants  while
they  are  yet  yong,  or  eate  the  Plant  it  selfe,  in  that  part
where  it  is  most  tender,  which  is  from  a  foote  under  the
ground,  where  it  is  as  tender  and  white  as  a  Reede  or
Bulrush.  And  for  as  much  as  we  are  now  come  to  the
end  of  this  narration,  it  commeth  to  my  remembrance
[III.  v.  985.]  to  make  mention  of  another  thing,  which  is  not  farre
from  my  purpose :  and  this  is,  how  the  Indians  doe  staine
or  dye  cloath  of  bombage  cotton,  or  any  other  thing
which  they  intend  to  dye,  of  divers  colours,  as  Blacke,
Tawny,  Greene,  Blew,  Yellow,  and  Red,  which  they  doe
with  the  Barkes,  or  Rindes,  and  Leaves  of  certaine  Trees,
which  they  know  by  experience  to  be  good  for  this
practise  :  and  by  this  art  they  make  colours  in  such  per-
fection  and excellency, that no better can be devised.

190

Dying  of
Cotton.

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  *d.

1525.

But  this  seemeth  a  strange  thing,  that  they  doe  all  this  4  strange

in  one  selfe  same  Vessell :  so  that  when  they  have  caused  thm&-

the  said  Rindes  and  Leaves  to  boile  together,  they  make

in  the  same  Vessell  without  any  change  (as  I  have  said)

as  many  colours  as  them  listeth. Which  thing  I  suppose

to  come  to  passe,  by  the  disposition  of  the  colour  which

they  have  first  given  to the  thing  that  they  intend  to

dye  or  colour,  whether  it  be  Thred,  Web,  or  Cloth,  or

any  thing  that  they  intend  to  colour.

Of  venemous  Apples,  wherewith  they  poyson  their

Arrowes.

THe  Apples  wherewith  the  Indian  Canibals  invenome
their  arrowes,  grow  on  certaine  Trees  covered  with
many Branches and Leaves, being very greene, and
growing thicke. They are laden with abundance of
these  evill  fruites,  and  have  their  Leaves  like  the  Leaves
of  a  Peare-tree,  but  that  they  are  lesse  and  rounder :
the  fruite  is  much  like  the  muscadell  Peares  of  the  Hand
of  Sicilie  or  Naples  in  forme  and  bignesse,  and  are  in
some  parts stained  with  red spots, and of  very sweet
savour : these  trees  for  the  most  part,  grow  ever  by  the
Sea  Coasts,  and  neere  unto  the  water,  and  are  so  faire
and  of  pleasant  savour,  that  there  is  no  man  that  seeth  *//  was  not  a
them,  but  will  desire  to  eate  thereof,  insomuch  that  if  venemous  juce
it  may  bee  spoken  of  any  fruit  yet  growing  on  the  earth,  °{  thefiuit->
I  would  say  that  this  was  the  unhappy  fruit  whereof  our  disobedience  in
first  parents  *  Adam  and  Eve  tasted,  whereby  they  both  eating  con-
lost  their  felicitie,  and  procured  death  to  them  and  their  *forie  to  Gods
posteritie. Of  these  fruits,  and  of  the  great  Ants  whose  commande-
byting  causeth  swelling  (whereof  I  have  spoken  elsewhere)  povso'„ej
and  of  the  Eutes,  or  Lysarts,  and  Vipers,  and  such  other  Adams  souk
venomous things, the Canibals which are the chiefe  with  sinne,  the
Archers  among  the Indians, are  accustomed  to poyson  f  aSes  whereof
their  Arrowes,  wherewith  they  kill  all  that  they  wound : Qmibak
These  venomes  they  mingle  together,  and  make  thereof  invenome  their
a  blacke  Masse  or  composition,  which  appeareth  like  unto  Arrowes.

191

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1525.

very blacke Pitch. Of this Poyson I caused a great
quantitie  to  bee  burnt,  in  Sancta  Maria  Antiqua,  in  a
place  two  leagues  and  more  within  the  Land,  with  a  great
multitude  of  their  invenomed  Arrowes  and  other  muni-
tion, with  also  the  house  wherein  they  were  reserved :
This  was  in  the  yeere  1514.  at  such  time  as  the  Armie
PetrmArrias.  arrived there  with Captaine Pedrarias de  Villa, at the
commaundement  of  the  Catholike  King  Don  Ferdinando.
But  to  returne  to  the  Historic These  Apples  (as  I  have
sayde)  grow  neere  unto  the  Sea : the  Christians  which
serve  your  Majestie  in  these  parties,  suppose  that  there
is  no  remedie  so  profitable  for  such  as  are  wounded  with
The  water  of these  Arrowes,  as  is  the  water  of  the  Sea,  if  the  wound
the  Sea.  bee  much  washed  therewith,  by  which  meanes  some  have

escaped,  although  but  few :  yet  to  say  the  truth,  albeit  the
water  of  the  Sea,  have  a  certaine  caustike  qualitie  against
poyson,  it  is  not  sufficient  remedie  in  this  case,  nor  yet
to  this  day  have  the  Christians  perceived  that  of  fiftie
that  have  beene  wounded,  three  have  recovered.  But
that  your  Majestie  may  the  better  consider  the  force  of
the  venome  of  these  trees,  you  shall  further  understand,
that  if  a  man  doe  but  repose  himselfe  to  sleepe  a  little
while  under  the  shadow  of  the  same,  he  hath  his  head
and  eyes  so  swolne  when  he  riseth,  that  the  eye  lids  are
joyned  with  the  cheekes,  and  if  it  chance  one  drop  or
more  of  the  deaw  of  the  said  tree  to  fall  into  the  eye,
it  utterly  destroyeth  the  sight.  The  pestilent  nature  of
this  tree  is  such,  that  it  cannot  be  declared  in  few  words.
The  gulfe  of  Of  these,  there  groweth  great  plentie  in  the  gulfe  of
Uraba.  Uraba,  toward  the  North  coast,  on  the  West  and  East

side.  The  wood  of  these  trees  when  it  burneth,  maketh
so  great  a  stinke,  that  no  man  is  able  to  abide  it,  by
reason  it  causeth  so  great  a  paine  in  the  head.

Among  other  trees  which  are  in  these  Indies^  as  well

in  the  Hands,  as  in  the  firme  land,  there  is  another  kind

Xagua.  which  they  call  Xagua,  whereof  there  is  great  plentie  :

they  are  very high, and streight,  and faire to behold.

Of  these  they  use  to  make  Pikes,  and  Javelins  of  divers

192

GONZALO DE OVIEDO

lengths  and  bignesse :  they  are  of  a  faire  colour,  betweene
russet  and  white :  this  tree  bringeth  forth  a  great  fruit
as  big  as  Papaver  or  Poppie,  and  much  like  thereunto,  it
is  very  good  to  be  eaten  when  it  is  ripe.  Out  of  this
they  get  a  very  cleare  water,  wherewith  they  wash  their
legs,  and  sometimes  all  their  bodies,  when  they  feele  their
flesh  weary,  faint,  or  loose :  the  which  water,  beside  that
it  hath  a  binding  qualitie,  it  hath  also  this  propertie,  that
whatsoever  it  toucheth,  it  staineth  it  blacke  by  little  and
little,  untill  it  be  as  blacke  as  Jet,  which  colour  cannot
bee  taken  away  in  lesse  space  then  tenne  or  twelve  dayes  :
And  if  the  nayle  bee  but  touched  therewith,  it  is  so
stained,  that  it  can  by  no  meanes  be  taken  away,  untill
it  either  fall  of,  or  grow  out,  and  be  clipped  away  by
little  and  little,  as  I  my  selfe  have  oftentimes  seene  by
experience.

There  is  another  kinde  of  Trees  which  they  call  Hohi :
these  are  very  great  and  faire,  and  cause  wholesome  aire
where  they  grow,  and  a  pleasant  shadow,  and  are  found
in  great  abundance :  their  fruit  is  very  good,  and  of  good
taste  and  savour,  and  much  like  unto  certaine  Damsons
or  Prunes  being  little  and  yellow,  but  their  stone  is  very
great,  by  reason  whereof  they  have  but  little  meate  :  their
Barke  or  Rinde  boyled  in  water,  maketh  a  wholesome
Bathe  for  the  legges,  because  it  bindeth  and  stayeth  the
loosenesse  of  the  flesh,  so  sensibly  that  it  is  a  marvell  to
consider.  It  is  surely  a  wholesome  and  excellent  Bathe
against  such  faintnesse,  and  is  the  best  Tree  that  may
be  found  in  those  parts  to  sleepe  under :  For  it  causeth
no  heavinesse  of  the  head,  as  doe  divers  other  Trees,
which  thing  I  speake,  because  the  Christians  are  much
accustomed  in  those  Regions  to  lie  in  the  fields.  It  is
therefore  a  common  practice  among  them,  that  whereso-
ever they  finde  these  Trees,  there  they  spreade  their
Mattresses  and  Beds  wherein  they  sleepe.

There  are  also  a  kinde  of  high  Date  trees,  and  full  of
thornes  :  the  wood  of  these  is  most  excellent,  being  very
blacke  and  shining,  and  so  heavie  that  no  part  thereof
xv  193  n

A.D.

1525.

Blacke  staines.

[III.  v.  986.]

Hohi.

Some  thinke
these  to  be
mirobalanes.

Date  trees.

A.D.
1525.

The  Inhabi-
tants of  the
Sea  ofSur.

An  herbe  that

beareth

cordes.

Cabvia  and
Henequen.

A  strange
thing.

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

can  swim  above  the  water,  but  sinketh  immediatly  to
the  bottom.  Of  this  wood  they  make  their  Arrowes  and
Darts,  also  Javelins,  Speares,  and  Pikes :  and  I  say  Pikes,
because  that  in  the  coasts  of  the  Sea  of  Sur,  beyond
Esquegua  and  Uracha,  the  Indians  use  great  and  long
Pikes,  made  of  the  wood  of  these  Date  trees.  Of  the
same  likewise  they  make  Clubs,  and  Swords,  and  divers
other  weapons :  Also  vessels  and  houshold  stuffe  of
divers  sorts,  very  faire  and  commodious.  Furthermore,
of  this  wood  the  Christians  use  to  make  divers  musicall
instruments,  as  Claricymbals,  Lutes,  Gitterns,  and  such
other,  the  which  beside  their  faire  shining  colour  like
unto  jeat,  are  also  of  a  good  sound,  and  very  durable,
by  reason  of  the  hardnesse  of  the  wood.

After  that  I  have  said  thus  much  of  Trees  and  Plants,
I  have  thought  good  also  to  speake  somewhat  of  Herbs.
You  shall  therefore  understand,  that  in  these  Indies  there
is  an  herbe  much  like  unto  a  yellow  Lilly,  about  whose
leaves  there  grow  and  creepe  certaine  Cordes  or  Laces,
as  the  like  is  partly  seene  in  the  herbe  which  we  call
Laced  savory,  but  these  of  the  Indies  are  much  bigger,
and  longer,  and  so  strong  that  they  tie  their  hanging
beds  thereby,  which  they  call  Hamacas,  whereof  we  have
spoken  elsewhere :  these  Cordes  they  call  Cabvia,  and
Henequen,  which  are  all  one  thing,  saving  that  Henequen
is  lesse  and  of  a  finer  substance,  as  it  were  Line,  and
the  other  is  grosser,  like  the  wike  or  twist  of  Hempe,
and  is  imperfect  in  comparison  to  the  other :  they  are  of
colour  betweene  white  and  yellow,  like  unto  abarne,  and
some  also  white.  With  Henequen,  which  is  the  most
subtile  and  fine  threed,  the  Indians  saw  in  sunder  Fetters,
Chaines,  or  barres  of  Iron,  in  this  manner :  They  moove
the  threed  of  Henequen  upon  the  Iron  which  they  intend
to  saw  or  cut,  drawing  the  one  hand  after  the  other  as
doe  they  that  saw,  putting  ever  now  and  then  a  portion
of  fine  Sand  upon  the  threed,  or  on  the  place  or  part  of
the  Iron,  where  they  continue  rubbing  the  said  threed,
so  that  if  the  threed  be  worne,  they  take  another,  and

194

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  ad.

1525.

continue  in  their  worke  as  before,  untill  they  have  cut
in  sunder  the  Iron,  although  it  bee  never  so  bigge,  and
cut  it  as  if  it  were  a  tender  thing,  and  easie  to  be  sawen.

And  forasmuch  as  the  leaves  of  Trees  may  be  counted  Leaves.
among  Herbs,  I  will  here  speake  somewhat  of  the  qualitie
of  the  leaves  of  certaine  Trees  which  are  found  in  the
Hand  of  Hispaniola.  These  trees  are  so  full  of  thornes,  Thistle  trees.
that  there  is  no  tree  or  plant  that  seemeth  more  wilde  and
deformed :  so  that  I  cannot  well  determine  whether  they
bee  Trees  or  Plants :  they  have  certaine  branches  full  of
large  and  deformed  leaves,  which  branches  were  first
leaves  like  unto  the  other.  As  the  branches  made  of
these  leaves  grow  forth  in  length,  there  commeth  other
leaves  of  them :  so  that  in  fine  it  is  a  difficult  thing  to
describe  the  forme  of  these  trees,  except  the  same  should
be  done  by  a  Painter,  whereby  the  Eye  might  conceive
that  wherein  the  Tongue  faileth  in  this  behalfe.  The
leaves  of  this  tree  are  of  such  vertue,  that  being  well  ^  ?eafe  °f
beaten  and  spred  upon  a  cloth,  after  the  manner  of  a  &rea  ver  ue-
plaister,  and  so  laid  to  a  legge  or  arme  that  is  broken  in
many  pieces,  it  healeth  it  in  fifteene  dayes,  and  maketh
it  as  whole  as  though  it  had  never  beene  broken :  During
the  time  of  this  operation,  it  cleaveth  so  fast  to  the  flesh,
that  it  cannot  without  much  difficultie  be  taken  away,
but  assoone  as  it  hath  healed  the  sore,  and  wrought  his
operation,  it  looseth  it  selfe  from  the  place  where  it  was
laid,  as  I  my  selfe,  and  divers  other  which  have  proved
it,  know  by  experience.

Of  Fishes,  and  of  the  manner  of  fishing.

IN  the  Sea  coasts  of  the  firme  Land,  there  are  divers
and  sundrie  kindes  of  fishes,  much  differing  in  shape
and  forme.  And  although  it  be  impossible  to  speake  of
all,  yet  will  I  make  mention  of  some.  And  first  to  begin
at  Sardines,  you  shall  understand  that  there  is  found  a
kinde  of  these  fishes  very  large  and  with  red  tailes,  being
a  very  delicate  fish. The  best  kindes  of  other  fishes  are

i95

ad.  PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

1525.

these, Moxarre,  Diahace,  Brettes, Dahaos,  Thornbacks,
and  Salmons : All  these,  and  divers  other  which  I  doe
not  now  remember,  are  taken  in  great  quantitie  in  Rivers.
There  are  likewise  taken  very  good  Crevishes. There
are  also  found  in  the  Sea,  certaine  other  fishes,  as  Soles,
Mackerels, Turbuts, Palamite, Lizze, Polpi, Chieppe,
Xaibas,  Locusts,  Oisters,  exceeding  great  Tortoises,  and
Tiburons. Tiburoni of marvellous bignesse : also Manates, and
Manates. Murene,  and  many  other  fishes,  which  have  no  names
L •  v-  9  /•]  jn  our  langUage)  and  these  of  such  diversitie  and  quantitie,
as  cannot  bee  expressed  without  large  writing  and  long
time. But  to  let  passe to intreate  particularly  of  the
multitude  of  fishes,  I  intend  to  speake  chiefly,  and  some-
what largely,  of  three  sorts  of  most  notable  fishes  :  whereof
Great  the first is, the great Tortoises, the second is called

Tortoises.  Tiburon,  and  the  third  Manate.  And  to  begin  at  the
first,  I  say  that  in  the  Hand  of  Cuba,  are  found  great
Tortoises  (which  are  certaine  shell  fishes)  of  such  bignesse
that  ten  or  fifteene  men  are  scarsly  able  to  lift  one  of  them
out  of  the  water,  as  I  have  beene  informed  of  credible
persons  dwelling  in  the  same  Hand.  But  of  that  which
I  my  selfe  have  seene,  I  can  testifie,  that  in  the  firme  Land,
in  the  village  of  Acla,  there  are  of  this  sort  some  taken  and
killed  of  such  bignesse,  that  sixe  men  with  much  difficultie
could  scarsly  draw  them  out  of  the  water,  and  commonly
the  least  sort  of  them  are  as  much  as  two  men  may
carry  at  a  burden  :  that  which  I  saw  lifted  up  by  sixe  men,
had  her  shell  a  yard  and  a  quarter  in  length,  and  in  breadth
more  then  five  yards.  The  manner  of  taking  them,  is
this :  It  sometimes  chanceth  that  in  their  great  nets  (which
they  call  shoote  nets)  there  are  found  certaine  Tortoises
of  the  common  sort,  in  great  quantities,  and  when  they
come  out  of  the  Sea,  and  bring  forth  their  egges,  and  goe
together  by  companies  from  the  Sea,  to  feede  on  the  Land,
the  Christians  or  Indians  follow  their  steps  which  they
finde  in  the  Sand,  and  soone  overtake  them,  because  they
are  very  heavie  and  slow  in  going,  although  they  make
all  the  haste  they  can  to  returne  to  the  Sea,  assoone  as

196

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  ad.

1525.

they  espy  any  body.  When  they  that  pursue  them  have
overtaken  them,  they  put  a  stake  or  staffe  under  their
legs,  and  overturne  them  on  their  backs  as  they  are  yet
running,  so  that  they  can  goe  no  further,  nor  yet  rise
againe  or  turne,  and  thus  they  suffer  them  to  lye  still
while  they  follow  after  the  rest,  which  they  overturne  in
like  manner :  and  by  this  meanes  take  very  many,  at  such
times  as  they  come  forth  of  the  Sea,  as  I  have  said :  This
fish  is  very  excellent  and  wholesome  to  be  eaten,  and  of
good  taste.

The  second  of  the  three  fishes  whereof  I  have  spoken,
is  the  Tiburon :  this  is  a  very  great  fish,  and  very  quick  Tiburons  or
and  swift  in  the  water,  and  a  cruell  Devourer :  these  are  Skarkes.
oftentimes  taken,  aswell  when  the  ships  are  under  saile  in
the  Ocean,  as  also  when  they  lye  at  anker,  or  at  any  other
time,  and  especially  the  least  kinde  of  these  fishes.  When
the  ships  are  under  saile,  the  biggest  sort  are  taken  after
this  manner.  When  the  Tiburon  seeth  the  ship  sayling,
hee  followeth  it  swimming  behind,  the  which  things  the
Mariners  seeing,  cast  forth  all  the  filth  of  the  ship  into
the  Sea  for  the  fish  to  eate,  who  neverthelesse  followeth
them  with  equall  pase,  although  they  make  never  such
haste  with  full  winde  and  sailes,  and  walloweth  on  every
side  and  about  the  ship,  and  thus  followeth  it  sometime
for  the  space  of  a  hundred  and  fiftie  leagues,  and  more,
and  when  the  Mariners  are  disposed  to  take  them,  they
cast  downe  by  the  sterne  of  the  ship  a  hooke  of  Iron,  as
bigge  as  the  biggest  finger  of  a  mans  hand,  of  three  spans
in  length,  and  crooked  like  a  fish-hooke,  with  beards
according  to  the  bignesse  thereof,  and  fastned  to  an  Iron
chaine  of  five  or  sixe  linkes  neere  unto  the  end,  and  from
thence  tyed  with  a  great  rope,  fastning  also  on  the  hooke
for  a  bait,  a  piece  of  some  fish,  or  hogs  flesh,  or  some
other  flesh,  or  the  bowels  and  intrals  of  another  Tiburon
which  they  have  taken  before,  which  may  easily  be  done,
for  I  have  seene  nine  taken  in  one  day,  and  if  they  would
have  taken  more,  they  might  also.  Thus  when  the
Tiburon  hath  pleasantly  followed  the  ship  a  long  voyage,

197

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1525-

at  the  length  he  swalloweth  the  bait  with  the  hooke,  and
aswell  by  his  striving  to  flee  or  escape,  as  also  by  the
swift  passage  of  the  ship,  the  hooke  overthwarteth  and
catcheth  hold  of  his  chaps :  the  which  fish  when  it  is
taken,  it  is  of  such  huge  bignesse,  that  twelve  or  fifteene
men  are  scarsly  able  to  draw  it  out  of  the  water,  and  lift
it  into  the  ship,  where  one  of  the  Mariners  giveth  it  many
knocks  on  the  head  with  a  club  or  beetle,  untill  he  have
slaine  it :  they  are  sometimes  found  of  ten  or  twelve  foote
long,  and  of  five,  sixe,  or  seven  spans  in  breadth,  where
they  are  broadest :  they  have  very  great  and  wide  mouthes,
to  the  proportion  of  the  rest  of  their  bodies,  and  have
two  rowes  of  teeth,  the  one  somewhat  separate  from  the
other,  of  cruell  shape,  and  standing  very  thicke.  When
they  have  slaine  this  fish,  they  cut  the  body  thereof  in
small  pieces,  and  put  it  to  drie,  hanging  it  three  or  foure
dayes  at  the  Cordes  of  the  saile  clothes  to  drie  in  the
winde,  and  then  eate  it :  It  is  doubtlesse  a  good  fish,  and
of  great  commoditie  to  serve  the  ships  for  victualls  for
many  dayes :  the  least  of  these  fishes  are  most  wholesome
and  tender,  it  hath  a  skin  much  like  to  the  skin  of  a  Sole
whereunto  the  said  Tiburon  is  like  in  shape : Which  I

Plinie.  say,  because  Plinie  hath  made  mention  of  none  of  these
three  fishes,  among  the  number  of  them  wherof  he  writeth
in  his  Naturall  historic  These  Tiburons  come  forth  of
the  Sea,  and  enter  into  the  Rivers,  where  they  are  no

Crocodiles,  lesse  perillous  then  great  Lizards  or  Crocodiles,  whereof
I  have  spoken  largely  before :  For  they  devoure  Men,
Kine,  and  Horses,  even  as  doe  the  Crocodiles :  they  are
very  dangerous  in  certaine  washing  places  or  Pooles  by
the  Rivers  sides,  and  where  they  have  devoured  at  other
times.  Divers  other  fishes  both  great  and  small,  of
sundrie  sorts  and  kindes,  are  accustomed  to  follow  the
ships  going  under  saile,  of  the  which  I  will  speake  some-

Manates.  what  when  I  have  written  of  Manate,  which  is  the  third
of  the  three  whereof  I  have  promised  to  entreat.  Manate
therefore,  is  a  fish  of  the  Sea,  of  the  biggest  sort,  and
much  greater  then  the  Tiburon  in  length  and  breadth,  and

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  ad.

1525.

is  very  brutish  and  vile,  so  that  it  appeareth  in  forme
like  unto  one  of  those  great  vessels  made  of  Goats  skins,
wherein  they  use  to  carry  new  wine  in  Medina  de  Campo,
or  in  Arevalo :  the  head  of  this  beast  is  like  the  head  of
an  Oxe,  with  also  like  eyes,  and  hath  in  the  place  of  armes,  [HI.  v.  988.]
two  great  stumps  wherwith  he  swimmeth  :  It  is  a  very
gentle  and  tame  beast,  and  commeth  oftentimes  out  of
the  water  to  the  next  shoare,  where  if  he  finde  any  herbes
or  grasse,  he  feedeth  thereof.  Our  men  are  accustomed
to  kill  many  of  these,  and  divers  other  good  fishes,  with
their  Crosse-bowes,  pursuing  them  in  Barkes  or  Canoas,
because  they  swim  in  manner  above  the  water :  the  which
thing  when  they  see,  they  draw  them  with  a  hooke  tyed
at  a  small  corde,  but  somewhat  strong :  As  the  fish  fleeth
away,  the  Archer  letteth  goe,  and  prolongeth  the  corde
by  little  and  little,  untill  he  have  let  it  goe  many  fathoms  :
at  the  end  of  the  corde,  there  is  tyed  a  corke,  or  a  piece
of  light  wood,  and  when  the  fish  is  gone  a  little  way,  and
hath  coloured  the  water  with  his  bloud,  and  feeleth  him-
selfe  to  faint  and  draw  toward  the  end  of  his  life,  he
resorteth  to  the  shoare,  and  the  Archer  followeth,  gathering
up  his  corde,  whereof  while  there  yet  remaine  sixe  or
eight  fathoms,  or  somewhat  more  or  lesse,  he  draweth  it
toward  the  Land,  and  draweth  the  fish  therewith  by  little
and  little,  as  the  waves  of  the  Sea  helpe  him  to  doe  it
the  more  easily :  then,  with  the  helpe  of  the  rest  of  his
companie,  he  lifteth  this  great  beast  out  of  the  Water  to
the  Land,  being  of  such  bignesse,  that  to  convey  it  from
thence  to  the  Citie,  it  shall  be  requisite  to  have  a  Cart
with  a  good  yoke  of  Oxen,  and  sometimes  more,  according
as  these  fishes  are  of  bignesse,  some  being  much  greater
then  other  some  in  the  same  kinde,  as  is  seene  of  other
beasts  :  Sometimes  they  lift  these  fishes  into  the  Canoa
or  Barke,  without  drawing  them  to  the  Land  as  before,
for  as  soone  as  they  are  slaine,  they  flote  above  the  water :
And  I  beleeve  verily  that  this  fish  is  one  of  the  best  in
the  world  to  the  taste,  and  the  likest  unto  flesh,  especially
so  like  unto  beefe,  that  who  so  hath  not  seene  it  whole,

199

A.D.
1525.

The  fish
Manate.
A  remedie
against  the
stone.

The  Szvord
fish.

Tunny.

Turbut.

Note.

The  Sea  some-
where fertile,
somewhere
barren.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

can  judge  it  to  be  none  other  when  hee  seeth  it  in  pieces
then  very  Beefe  or  Veale,  and  is  certainly  so  like  unto
flesh,  that  all  the  men  in  the  world  may  herein  be  deceived  :
the  taste  likewise,  is  like  unto  the  taste  of  very  good
Veale,  and  lasteth  long,  if  it  be  powdred  :  so  that  in  fine,
the  Beefe  of  these  parts,  is  by  no  meanes  like  unto  this.
This  Manate  hath  a  certaine  stone,  or  rather  bone  in  his
head  within  the  braine,  which  is  of  qualitie  greatly
appropriate  against  the  disease  of  the  stone,  if  it  be  burnt
and  ground  into  small  powder,  and  taken  fasting  in  the
morning  when  the  paine  is  felt,  in  such  quantitie  as  may
lye  upon  a  peny,  with  a  draught  of  good  white  wine :
For  being  thus  taken  three  or  foure  mornings,  it  acquieteth
the  griefe,  as  divers  have  told  me  which  have  proved  it
true,  and  I  my  selfe  by  testimonie  of  sight,  doe  witnesse
that  I  have  seen  this  stone  sought  of  divers  for  this  effect.
There  are  also  divers  other  fishes  as  bigge  as  this
Manate,  among  the  which  there  is  one  called  Vihuella.
This  fish  beareth  in  the  top  of  his  head  a  sword,  being
on  every  side  full  of  many  sharp  teeth :  this  sword  is
naturally  very  hard  and  strong,  of  foure  or  five  spans  in
length,  and  of  proportion  according  to  the  same  bignesse :
and  for  this  cause  is  this  fish  called  Spada,  that  is,  the
Sword  fish.  Of  this  kinde  some  are  found  as  little  as
Sardines,  and  other  so  great,  that  two  yokes  of  Oxen  are
scar  sly  able  to  draw  them  on  a  Cart.  But  whereas  before
I  have  promised  to  speake  of  other  fishes,  which  are  taken
in  these  Seas  while  the  ships  are  under  saile,  I  will  not
forget  to  speake  of  the  Tunny,  which  is  a  great  and  good
fish,  and  is  oftentimes  taken  and  kild  with  Trout  speares,
and  hookes,  cast  in  the  water,  when  they  play  and  swim
about  the  ships.  In  like  manner  also  are  taken  many
Turbuts,  which  are  very  good  fishes  as  are  lightly  in  all
the  Sea.  And  here  is  to  be  noted,  that  in  the  great  Ocean
Sea,  there  is  a  strange  thing  to  be  considered,  which  all
that  have  beene  in  the  Indies  affirme  to  bee  true  :  And
this  is,  that  like  as  on  the  Land  there  are  some  Provinces
fertile  and  fruitfull,  and  some  barren,  even  so  doth  the

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  ad.

1525.

like  chance  in  the  Sea : So  that  at  some  windes  the  ships

saile  fiftie,  or  a  hundred,  or  two  hundred  leagues  and  more,

without  taking  or  seeing  of  one  fish  : and  againe,  in  the

selfe  same  Ocean  in  some  places,  all  the  water  is  seen

tremble  by  the  mooving  of  the  fishes,  where  they  are  taken

abundantly. It  commeth  further  to  my  remembrance  to

speake  somewhat  of  the  flying  of  fishes,  which  is  doubt- Flying  fishes.

lesse  a  strange  thing  to  behold,  and  is  after  this  manner.

When  the  ships  saile  by  the  great  Ocean,  following  their

viage,  there  riseth  sometimes  on  the  one  side  or  on  the

other, many  companies  of  certaine little  fishes, of  the

which  the  biggest  is  no  greater  then  a  Sardine,  and  so

diminish  lesse  and  lesse  from  that  quantitie,  that  some

of  them  are  very  little :  these  are  called  Volatori,  that  is,

flying  fishes : they  rise  by  great  companies  and  flocks,  in

such  multitudes  that  it  is  an  astonishment  to  behold  them  :

Sometimes  they  rise  but  little  from  the  water,  and  (as  it

chanceth)  continue  one  flight  for  the  space  of  an  hundred

paces,  and  sometimes  more,  or  lesse,  before  they  fall  againe

into  the  Sea,  sometimes  also  they  fall  into  the  ships. And

1  remember,  that  on  an  evening  when  all  the  companie

in  the  ship  were  on  their  knees,  singing  Salve  Regina,

in  the  highest  part  of  the  Castle  of  the  poope,  and  sailed

with  a  full  winde,  there  passed  by  us  a  flocke  of  these  flying

fishes,  and  came  so  neere  us,  that  many  of  them  fell  into

the  ship,  among  the  which,  two  or  three  fell  hard  by  mee,

which  I  tooke  alive  in  my  hand,  so  that  I  might  well

perceive  that  they  were  as  bigge  as  Sardines,  and  of  the

same  quantitie,  having  two  wings  or  quils  growing  out

of  their  finnes,  like  unto  those  wherewith  all  fishes  swim

in  Rivers  :  these  wings  are  as  long  as  the  fishes  themselves.

As  long  as  their  wings  are  moist,  they  beare  them  up

in  the  aire,  but  assoone  as  they  are  drie,  they  can  continue

their  flight  no  further  then  as  I  have  said  before,  but  fall

immediatly  into  the  Sea,  and  so  rise  againe,  and  flie  as

before  from  place  to  place. In  the  yeere  151 5.  when  I

came  first  to  enforme  your  Majestie  of  the  state  of  the  [III.  v.  989.]

things  in  India,  and  was  the  yeere  following  in  Flanders

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1525-

in  the  time  of  your  most  fortunate  successe  in  these  your
Kingdomes  of  Arragon  and  Castile,  whereas  at  that  voyage
The  Hand  of  \  sayled  above  the  Hand  Bermuda,  otherwise  called  Garza,
Bermuda.  being  the  furthest  of  all  the  Hands  that  are  found  at  this
day  in  the  world,  and  arriving  there  at  the  depth  of  eight
yards  of  water,  and  distant  from  the  Land  as  farre  as  the
shot  of  a  piece  of  Ordinance,  I  determined  to  send  some
of  the  ship  to  Land,  aswell  to  make  search  of  such  things
as  were  there,  as  also  to  leave  in  the  Hand  certaine  Hogs
for  increase.  But  the  time  not  serving  my  purpose  by
reason  of  contrarie  winde,  I  could  bring  my  ship  no  neerer
the  Hand,  being  twelve  leagues  in  length,  and  sixe  in
breadth,  and  about  thirtie  in  circuit,  lying  in  the  three
and  thirtieth  degree  of  the  North  side.  While  I  remayned
here,  I  saw  a  strife  and  combat  betweene  these  flying  fishes,
and  the  fishes  named  Gilt  heads,  and  the  fowles  called
Sea-mewes,  and  Cormorants,  which  surely  seemed  unto  me
a  thing  of  as  great  pleasure  and  solace  as  could  be  devised,
while  the  Gilt  heads  swam  on  the  brim  of  the  water,  and
sometimes  lifted  their  shoulders  above  the  same,  to  raise
the  flying  fishes  out  of  the  water  to  drive  them  to  flight,
and  follow  them  swimming  to  the  place  where  they  fall,
to  take  and  eate  them  suddenly.  Againe  on  the  other
side,  the  Sea-mewes  and  Cormorants,  take  many  of  these
Not  too  hie  for  flying  fishes,  so  that  by  this  meanes  they  are  neither  safe
the  Pie,  jn  ^g  Aire,  nor  [n  tne  Water.  In  the  selfe  same  perill
the  Crow  an<^  danger  doe  men  live  in  this  mortall  life,  wherein  is
no  certaine  securitie,  neither  in  high  estate,  nor  in  lowe.
Which  thing  surely  ought  to  put  us  in  remembrance  of
that  blessed  and  safe  resting  place  which  God  hath  pre-
pared for  such  as  love  him,  who  shall  acquiet  and  finish
the  travailes  of  this  troublesome  world,  wherein  are  so
many  dangers,  and  bring  them  to  that  eternall  life  where
they  shall  finde  eternall  securitie  and  rest.

GONZALO DE OVIEDO

A.D.
1525.

Of  the  increase  and  decrease  (that  is)  rising  and
falling  of  our  Ocean  Sea,  and  South  Sea,
called  the Sea  of  Sur.

I  Will  now  speake  of  certaine  things  which  are  seene
in  the  Province,  or  at  the  least  in  the  Citie  of  Golden
Castile,  otherwise  called  Beragua,  and  in  the  coasts  of
the  North  Sea,  and  of  the  South  Sea,  called  the  Sea  of
Sur,  not  omitting  to  note  one  singular  and  marvellous
thing  which  I  have  considered  of  the  Ocean  Sea,  whereof
hitherto  no  Cosmographer,  Pilot,  or  Mariner,  or  any  other,
have  satisfied  me.  I  say  therefore,  as  it  is  well  knowne
to  your  Majestie,  and  all  such  as  have  knowledge  of  the
Ocean  Sea,  that  this  great  Ocean  casteth  from  it  selfe  the
Sea  Mediterraneum  by  the  mouth  of  the  Straight  of
Gibralterra,  in  the  which  the  water,  from  the  end  and
furthest  part  of  that  Sea,  even  unto  the  mouth  of  the  said
Straight,  either  in  the  East  toward  the  coast  commonly
called  Levante,  or  in  any  other  part  of  the  said  Sea  Medi-
terraneum, the  Sea  doth  not  so  fall  nor  increase,  as  reason
would  judge  for  so  great  a  Sea,  but  increaseth  very  little,
and  a  small  space :  Neverthelesse,  without  the  mouth  of
the  Straight  in  the  mayne  Ocean,  it  increaseth  and  falleth
very  much,  and  a  great  space  of  ground,  from  sixe  houres
to  sixe  houres,  as  in  all  the  coasts  of  Spaine,  Britaine,
Flanders,  Germanie,  and  England.  The  selfe  same  Ocean
Sea  in  the  firme  Land  newly  found,  in  the  coasts  of  the
same  lying  toward  the  North,  doth  neither  rise  nor  fall,
nor  likewise  in  the  Hands  of  Hispaniola  and  Cuba,  and
all  the  other  Hands  of  the  same  lying  toward  the  North,
for  the  space  of  three  thousand  leagues,  but  onely  in  like
manner  as  doth  the  Sea  Mediterraneum  in  Italie,  which
is  in  manner  nothing,  in  respect  to  that  increase  and
decrease  which  the  said  Ocean  hath  in  the  coasts  of  Spaine
and  Flanders.  But  this  is  yet  a  greater  thing,  that  also
the  selfe  same  Ocean  in  the  coast  of  the  said  firme  Land
lying  toward  the  South,  in  the  Citie  of  Panama,  and  also

203

Beragua.

The  West
Ocean.

TheSeaMedi-
tarraneum.

Hispaniola.
Cuba.

Ocean  without
ebbing  and
fiowing.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1525-

in  the  coast  of  that  Land  which  lyeth  toward  the  East

and  West  from  that  Citie,  as  in  the  Hand  of  Pearles  or

Margarita,  which  the  Indians  call  Tarrarequi,  and  also  in

Taboga  and  Otoque,  and  in  all  other  Hands  of  the  South

The  ebbe  at Sea  of  Sur,  the  water  riseth  and  falleth  so  much,  that  when

Panama  jt  f^Heth,  it  goeth  in  manner  out  of  sight,  which  thing  I

leagues m° ix m^  se^e  ^ave  seene  oftentimes. And  here  your  Majestie

mi/es:  may  note  another  thing,  that  from  the  North  Sea  to  the

TheSouthSea.  South  Sea,  being  of  such  difference  the  one  from  the  other

in  rising  and  falling,  yet  is  the  Land  that  divideth  them

not  past  eighteene  or  twentie  leagues  in  breadth  from

Coast  to  Coast : So  that  both  the  said  Seas,  being  all  one

Ocean,  this  strange  effect  is  a  thing  worthy  greatly  to  bee

considered  of  all  such  as  have  inclination  and  desire  to

know  the  secret  workes  of  Nature,  wherein  the  infinite

power  and  wisedome  of  God  is  seene  to  be  such,  as  may

allure  all  good  Natures  to  reverence  and  love  so  divine  a

Majestie.

Of  the  straight  or  narrow  passage  of  the  Land
lying  betweene  the  North  and  South  Sea,  by
the  which  Spices  may  much  sooner  and  easilier
be  brought  from  the  Hands  of  Molucca  into
Spaine  by  the  West  Ocean,  then  by  that  way
whereby  the  Portugals  saile  into  the  East
India.

T

'He  firme  Land  in  some  parts  thereof  is  so  straight

and narrow, that the Indians say, that from the

Esquegua  and  Mountaines of the Province of Esquegua or Urraca

Urraca.  (which  are  betweene  the  one  Sea  and  the  other)  if  a  man

ascend  to  the  top  of  the  Mountaines,  and  looke  toward

[III.  v.  990.]  the  North,  he  may  see  the  Water  of  the  North  Sea  of  the

Province  of  Beragua : and  againe  looking  the  contrarie

way,  may  on  the  other  side  (towards  the  South)  see  the  Sea

of  Sur,  and  the  Provinces  which  confine  with  it,  as  doe

the  Territories  of  the  two  Lords  or  Kings  of  the  said

204

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  a.d.

1525.

Provinces  of  Urraca  and  Esquegua.  Some  measure  this
way  in  this  part,  to  bee  from  Sea  to  Sea  eighteene  leagues,
which  I  suppose  to  bee  rather  twentie,  not  for  that  it  is
any  more  by  measure,  but  because  it  is  rough  and  difficult,
as  I  have  said,  and  as  I  have  found  it  by  experience,  having
now  twise  passed  that  way  by  foote,  counting  from  the
Port  and  Village  of  Nombre  de  Dios,  unto  the  Dominion
of  the  Cacique  of  Juanaga,  otherwise  called  Capira,  eight
leagues,  and  from  thence  to  the  River  of  Chagre,  other  The  River  of
eight  leagues.  So  that  at  this  River,  being  sixteene  Chagre.
leagues  from  the  said  Port,  endeth  the  roughnesse  of  the
way :  then  from  hence  to  the  marvellous  Bridge  are  two
leagues,  and  beyond  that,  other  two,  unto  the  Port  of
Panama :  So  that  all  together,  in  my  judgement,  make
twentie  leagues.  It  is  a  marvellous  facilitie  to  bring
Spices  by  this  way  which  I  will  now  declare.  From
Panama  to  the  River  of  Chagre,  are  foure  leagues  of
good  and  faire  way,  by  the  which  Carts  may  passe  at
pleasure,  by  reason  that  the  Mountaines  are  but  few  and
little,  and  that  the  greatest  part  of  these  foure  leagues
is  a  plaine  ground  void  of  Trees :  and  when  the  Carts  are
come  to  the  said  River,  the  Spices  may  be  carried  in  Barkes
and  Pinases.  For  this  River  entreth  into  the  North  Sea
five  or  sixe  leagues  lower  then  the  Port  of  Nomen  Dei,
and  emptieth  it  selfe  in  the  Sea  neere  unto  an  Hand  called
Bastimento,  where  is  a  very  good  and  safe  Port.  Your  The  Hand
Majestie  may  now  therefore  consider,  how  great  a  thing,  Bastimento.
and  what  commoditie  it  may  be  to  convey  Spices  this  way,
forasmuch  as  the  River  of  Chagre,  having  his  original!
onely  two  leagues  from  the  South  Sea,  continueth  his
course,  and  emptieth  it  selfe  into  the  other  North  Sea.
This  River  runneth  fast,  and  is  very  great,  and  so  com-
modious for  this  purpose  as  may  bee  thought  or  desired  :
the  marvellous  Bridge  made  by  the  worke  of  Nature,  being  The  marvel-
two  leagues  beyond  the  said  River,  and  other  two  leagues  lous  Bridge.
on  this  side  the  Port  of  Panama,  so  lying  in  the  mid  way
betweene  them  both,  as  framed  naturally  in  such  sort,  that
none  which  passe  by  this  voyage  doth  see  any  such  Bridge,

205

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1525.

or  thinke  that  there  is  any  such  building  in  that  place,
untill  they  be  in  the  top  thereof,  in  the  way  toward
Panama :  But  assoone  as  they  are  on  the  Bridge,  looking
toward  the  right  hand,  they  see  a  little  River  under  them,
which  hath  his  Channell  distant  from  the  feete  of  them
that  walke  over  it,  the  space  of  two  speares  length  or
more.  The  water  of  this  River  is  very  shallow,  not
passing  the  depth  of  a  mans  legge  to  the  knee,  and  is  in
breadth  betweene  thirtie  and  fortie  paces,  and  falleth  into
the  River  of  Chagre.  Toward  the  right  hand,  standing
on  this  Bridge,  there  is  nothing  seene  but  great  Trees.
Natural!  stone  The  largenesse  of  the  Bridge  contayneth  fifteene  paces,
Bndge.  ancj  tke  i^g^  thereof  about  threescore  or  fourscore  paces  :

The  Arch  is  so  made  of  most  hard  stone,  that  no  man  can
behold  it  without  admiration,  being  made  by  the  High
and  Omnipotent  Creator  of  all  things.

How  things  that  are  of  one  kinde,  differ  in  forme
and  qualitie,  according  to  the  nature  of  the
place  where  they  are  engendred  or  grow,  and
of  the  beasts  called  Tigres.

IN  the  firme  Land  are  found  many  terrible  beasts,  which
some  thinke  to  be  Tigres.  Which  thing  neverthelesse
I  dare  not  affirme,  considering  what  Authors  doe  write
of  the  lightnesse  and  agilitie  of  the  Tigre,  whereas  this
beast,  being  otherwise  in  shape  very  like  unto  a  Tigre,
is  notwithstanding  very  slow.  Yet  true  it  is,  that  accord-
ing to  the  marvailes  of  the  World,  and  differences  which
naturall  things  have  in  divers  Regions  under  Heaven,
and  divers  constellations  of  the  same,  under  the  which  they
Plants  and  are  created,  wee  see  that  some  such  Plants  and  Herbes
herbes.  as  are  hurtfull  in  one  Countrie,  are  harmelesse  and  whole-

Birds.  some  in  other  Regions, And  Birds  which  in  one  Province

are  of  good  taste,  are  in  other  so  unsavourie  that  they
Men-  may not bee eaten. Men likewise which in some

Countries  are  blacke,  are  in  other  places  white :  and  yet
are  both  these  and  they,  men. Even  so  may  it  be,  that

206

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  a.d.

1525.

Tigres  are  light  in  some  Region,  as  they  write,  and  may
neverthelesse  be  slow  and  heavie  in  these  Indies  of  your
Majestie,  whereof  wee  speake.  The  Sheepe  of  Arabie  Sheepe.
draw  their  tailes  long  and  bigge  on  the  ground,  and  the
Bulls  of  Egypt  have  their  haire  growing  toward  their  Bulls.
heads :  yet  are  those  Sheepe,  and  these  Bulls.  Men  in
some  Countries  are  hardie  and  of  good  courage,  and  in
other  naturally  fearfull  and  bruitish.  All  these  things,  and
many  more,  which  may  be  said  to  this  purpose,  are  easie
to  bee  prooved,  and  worthy  to  bee  beleeved,  of  such  as
have  read  of  the  like  in  Authors,  or  travelled  the  World,
whereby  their  owne  sight  may  teach  them  the  experience
of  these  things  whereof  I  speake.  It  is  also  manifest  that
Jucca,  whereof  they  make  their  bread  in  the  Hand  of  Jucca.
Hispaniola,  is  deadly  poison  if  it  be  eaten  greene  with
the  juyce :  and  yet  hath  it  no  such  propertie  in  the  firme
Land,  where  I  have  eaten  it  many  times,  and  found  it  to
be  a  good  fruit.  The  Bats  of  Spaine,  although  they  bite,  Bats.
yet  are  they  not  venemous :  but  in  the  firme  Land,  many
die  that  are  bitten  of  them.  And  in  this  forme  may  so
many  things  be  said,  that  time  shall  not  suffice  to  write,
whereas  my  intent  is  onely  to  proove  that  this  beast
may  be  a  Tigre,  or  of  the  kinde  of  Tigres,  although
it  bee  not  of  such  lightnesse  and  swiftnesse,  as  are  [III.  v.  991.]
they  whereof  Plinie  and  other  authors  speake,  describ-  Plhie.
ing  it  to  bee  one  of  the  swiftest  beasts  of  the  Land,  and
that  the  River  of  Tygris  for  the  swift  course  thereof  was  The  Tigre.
called  by  that  name.  The  first  Spaniards,  which  saw  this
Tyger  in  the  firme  land,  did  so  name  it.  Of  the  kind
of  these,  was  that  which  Don  Diego  Columbo,  the  Admiral
sent  your  Majesty  out  of  New  Spaine  to  Toledo.  Their
heads  are  like  to  the  heads  of  Lions,  or  Lionesses,  but
greater :  the  rest  of  all  their  bodies,  and  their  legs,  are
full  of  black  spots  one  neere  unto  another,  &  divided
with  a  circumference,  or  fringe  of  red  colour,  shewing
(as  it  were)  a  faire  work  and  correspondent  picture,  about
their  croopes  or  hinder  parts,  they  have  these  spots  biggest
and  lesse  &  lesse  toward  their  bellies,  legs,  &  heads. I

207

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1525.

have  seen  some  of  three  spans  in  height,  and  more  then
five  in  length.  They  are  beasts  of  great  force,  with  strong
legs,  and  well  armed  with  nayles  and  fanges,  which  we  call
Dog-teeth :  they  are  so  fierce,  that  in  my  judgement,  no
reall  Lyon  of  the  biggest  sort  is  so  strong  or  fierce.  Of
these,  there  are  many  found  in  the  firme  Land,  which
devoure  many  of  the  Indians,  and  doe  much  hurt  other-
wise :  but  since  the  comming  of  the  Christians,  many
have  beene  killed  with  Crosse-bowes  after  this  manner.
The  hunting  Assoone  as  the  Archer  hath  knowledge  of  the  haunt  of
ofTigres.  any  0f  these  Tygers,  hee  goeth  searching  their  trace,  with
his  Crosse-bow,  and  with  a  little  Hound  or  Begle,  &  not
with  a  grey-hound ;  because  this  Beast  would  soon  kill
any  Dogge  that  would  venter  on  him :  When  the  Hound
hath  found  the  Tigre,  he  runneth  about  him  baying  con-
tinually, and  approacheth  so  neere  him,  snapping  and
grinning,  with  so  quicke  flying  and  returning,  that  he
hereby  so  molesteth  this  fierce  Beast,  that  hee  driveth  him
to  take  the  next  Tree,  at  the  foot  whereof  he  remayneth
still  baying,  and  the  Tigre  grinning  and  shewing  his  teeth,
while  in  the  meane  time  the  Archer  commeth  neere,  and
twelve  or  fourteene  paces  off,  striketh  him  with  the  querell
of  his  Crosse-bow  in  the  brest,  and  flyeth  incontinent,
leaving  the  Tigre  in  his  travell  for  life  and  death,  byting
the  Tree  and  eating  earth  for  fiercenesse :  then  within  the
space  of  two  or  three  houres,  or  the  day  following,  the
Archer  returneth  thither,  and  with  his  Dogge  findeth  the
place  where  hee  lyeth  dead.  The  Indians  (and  especially
they  of  the  firme  Land  in  the  Province  which  the  Catholike
King  Don  Ferdinando  commanded  to  bee  called  Golden
Castile)  call  this  Beast  Ochi.  This  thing  is  strange  that
chanced  of  late :  that  whereas  the  Tigre  whereof  we  have
made  mention  before,  would  have  killed  his  keeper  that
then  kept  him  in  a  Cage,  was  in  few  daies  after  made  so
A  Tigre  made  tame,  that  he  led  her  tyed  only  with  a  small  coard,  and
tame.  plaid  with  her  so  familiarly,  that  I  marvelled  greatly  to

see  it,  yet  not  without  certaine  beliefe  that  this  friendship
will  not  last  long,  without  danger  of  life  to  the  Keeper,

208

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  a.d.

1525.

forasmuch  as  surely  these  Beasts  are  not  meet  to  be  among
men,  for  their  fiercenesse  and  cruell  nature  that  cannot
be  tamed.

Of  the  manners  and  customes  of  the  Indians  of  the
Firme  Land,  and of  their  women.

THe  manners  and  customes  of  these  Indians,  are  divers
in  divers  Provinces. Some  of  them  take  as  many
Wives  as  them  list,  and  other  live  with  one  Wife,  whom
they  forsake  not  without  consent  of  both  parties,  which
chanceth especially when they have no children. The
Nobilitie  aswel  men  as  women,  repute  it  infamous  to  joyne  The  Indian
with  any  of  base  Parentage  or  Strangers,  except  Christians,  women.
whom  they  count  Noblemen,  by  reason  of  their  valiant-
nesse,  although  they  put  a  difference  betweene  the  common
sort  and  the  other  to  whom  they  shew  obedience,  counting
it  for  a  great  matter  and  an  honorable  thing,  if  they  bee
beloved  of  any  of  them :  insomuch  that  if  they  know  any
Christian man  carnally, they  keepe their  faith to him,
so  that  hee  be  not  long  absent  farre  from  them,  for  their
intent is not to be  Widdowes, or to live chaste like
religious  women. Many  of  them  have  this  custome,  that
when  they  perceive  that  they  are  with  childe,  they  take  Unnatural/
an  Hearbe  wherewith  they  destroy  that  is  conceived :  for  abortions.
they  say  that  only  well  aged  women  should  beare  children,
and  that  they  will  not  forbeare  their  pleasures,  and  deforme
their  bodies  with  bearing  of  children,  whereby  their  Teates  Large  breasts.
become  loose  and  hanging,  which  thing  they  greatly  dis-
praise. When  they  are  delivered  of  their  children,  they  Child-birth.
goe  to  the  River  and  wash  them,  which  done,  their  bloud
and  purgation  ceasseth  immediately :  And  when  after  this
they  have  a  few  dayes  absteined  from  the  company  of  men,
they  become  so  streight,  as  they  say  which  have  had  carnal
familiaritie with them, that such as use them, cannot
without  much  difficultie  satisfie  their  appetite  :  They  also
which  never  had  children,  are  ever  as  Virgins. In  some
parts  they  weare  certaine  little  Aprons  round  about  them
xv  209  o

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1525.

before  and  behind,  as  low  as  to  their  knees  and  hammes,
wherewith  they  cover  their  privy  parts,  and  are  naked  all
The  men  of their bodie beside. The principall men beare their
Indta.  Privities  in  a  hollow  Pipe  of  Gold,  but  the  common  sort

have  them  inclosed  in  the  shells  of  certaine  great  Welkes,
and  are  beside  utterly  naked :  For  they  thinke  it  no  more
shame  to  have  their  Cods  seene,  then  any  other  part  of
their  bodies :  and  in  many  Provinces  both  the  men  and
women  goe  utterly  naked,  without  any  such  coverture
at  all.  In  the  Province  of  Cueva  they  call  a  man  Chuy,
and  a  woman  Ira,  which  name  is  not  greatly  disagreeable
to  many  both  of  their  women  and  of  ours.

These  Indians  give  great  honor  and  reverence  to  their

[III.  v.  992.] Caciques  (that  is)  their  Kings  and  Rulers. The  principall

The  King  is Cacique,  hath  twelve  of  his  most  strong  Indians  appointed

bome  on  mens  to  j^^g  fcm^  when  he  removeth  to  any  place,  or  goeth

abroad  for  his  pleasure. Two  of  them  carrie  him  sitting

upon  a  long  peece  of  wood,  which  is  naturally  as  light

as  they  can  finde,  the  other  ten  follow  next  unto  him  as

footemen : they  keepe  continually  a  trotting  pase  with

him  on  their  shoulders. When  the  two  that  carrie  him

are  wearie,  other  two  come  in  their  places,  without  any

disturbance  or  stay. And  thus  if  the  way  be  plaine,  they

carry  him  in  this  manner  for  the  space  of  fifteene  or  twenty

leagues  in  one  day. The  Indians  that  are  assigned  to

this  office,  are  for  the  most  part  slaves,  or  Naboriti,  that

is,  such  as  are  bound  to  continuall  service.

I  have  also  noted  that  when  the  Indians  perceive  them-

Lettingof selves to be troubled with too much bloud, they let

bloud.  themselves  bloud  in  the  calfe  of  their  legges,  and  brawnes

of  their  armes : this  doe  they  with  a  very  sharpe  stone,

and  sometimes  with  the  small  tooth  of  a  Viper,  or  with

a  sharpe  reede  or  thorne. All  the  Indians  are  commonly

They  have  no  without  Beards,  in  so  much  that  it  is  in  a  manner  a  marvell

earns.  to  see  any  Qf  them  either  men  or  women  to  have  any

downe or  haire  on their  faces, or  other  parts of  their

bodies : Albeit I saw the Cacique of  the  Province  of

Catarapa,  who  had  haire  on  his  face  and  other  parts  of

210

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  a.d.

1525.
his  body,  as  had  also  his  wife  in  such  places  as  women  are
accustomed  to  have. This  Cacique  had  a  great  part  of  his
body  painted  with  a  blacke  colour,  which  never  fadeth,  They  paint
and  is  much  like  unto  that  wherewith  the  Moores  paint  their  bodies.
themselves  in  Barbarie  in  token  of  Nobilitie. But  the
Moores  are  painted  specially  on  their  visage  and  throate,
and  certaine  other  parts. Likewise  the  principall  Indians
use  these  paintings  on  their  armes  and  breasts,  but  not
on  their  visages,  because  among  them  the  slaves  are  so
marked. When  the  Indians  of  certaine  Provinces  goe  to
the  battaile  (especially  the  Caniball  Archers)  they  carrie  The  Canibah
certaine  shels  of  great  welkes  of  the  Sea,  which  they  blow,  Trumpets.
and  make  therewith  great  sound,  much  like  the  noise  of
Homes : they  carrie  also  certaine  Timbrels,  which  they
use  in  the  stead  of  Drummes :  also  very  faire  Plumes  of
Feathers,  and  certaine  armour  of  gold,  especially  great  Armor  of  gold.
and  round  peeces  on  their  breasts,  and  splints  on  their
armes. Likewise  other  peeces,  which  they  put  on  their
heads  and  other  parts  of  their  bodies :  For  they  esteeme
nothing  so  much  as  to  appeare  gallant  in  the  warres,  and  Their  gallant-
to  goe  in  most  comely  order  that  they  can  devise,  glistering:  nesse  tn
with  precious  Stones,  Jewels,  Gold,  and  Feathers. Of  the  ^heir  'jewels
least  of  these  welkes  or  perewincles,  they  make  certaine
little  Beades,  of  divers  sorts  and  colours :  they  make  also
little  Bracelets,  which  they  mingle  with  gaudes  of  Gold,
these  they  roule  about  their  armes  from  the  elbow  to  the
wrest  of  the  hand. The  like  also  doe  they  on  their  legges
from  the  knees  to  the  soles  of  their  feete,  in  token  of
Nobilitie,  especially  their  Noble  Women  in  divers  Pro-
vinces are  accustomed  to  weare  such  Jewels,  and  have
their  neckes  in  manner  laden  therewith :  these  Beades  and
Jewels,  and  such  other  trinkets,  they  call  Caquiras. Beside
these  also,  they  weare  certaine  Rings  of  Gold  at  their  eares
and  nostrels,  which  they  bore  full  of  holes  on  both  sides,
so  that  the  Rings  hang  upon  their  lippes. Some  of  these
Indians  are  poulde  and  rounded ;  albeit  commonly  both
the  Men  and  Women  take  it  for  a  decent  thing  to  weare
long  haire,  which  the  women  weare  to  the  middest  of

A.D.
1525.

How  the

women  beare
up  theh  teates
with  bars  of
Gold.

The  stature  &
colour  of  the
Indians.

The  Indians
called
Coronati.
The  Hand  of
Giants.

Jucatos.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRJMES

their  shoulders,  and  cut  it  equally,  especially  above  their
browes :  this  doe  they  with  certaine  hard  Stones,  which
they  keepe  for  the  same  purpose.  The  principall  Women,
when  their  teates  fall,  or  become  loose,  beare  them  up
with  barres  of  Gold,  of  the  length  of  a  spanne  and  a
halfe,  well  wrought,  and  of  such  bignesse  that  some  of
them  weigh  more  then  two  hundred  Castelans  or  Ducades
of  Gold  :  these  barres  have  holes  at  both  the  ends,  whereat
they  tye  two  small  cords  made  of  Cotton  at  every  end
of  the  barres  :  one  of  these  cords  goeth  over  the  shoulder,
and  the  other  under  the  arme  holes,  where  they  tye  both
together,  so  that  by  this  meanes  the  barre  beareth  up  their
teates.  Some  of  these  chiefe  Women  goe  to  the  battaile
with  their  Husbands,  or  when  they  themselves  are  regents
in  any  Provinces,  in  the  which  they  have  all  things  at
commandement,  and  execute  the  office  of  generall  Cap-
taines,  and  cause  themselves  to  be  carried  on  mens  backs,
in  like  manner  as  doe  the  Caciques,  of  whom  I  have  spoken
before.

These  Indians  of  the  firme  Land  are  much  of  the  same
stature  and  colour  as  are  they  of  the  Hands :  they  are
for  the  most  part  of  the  colour  of  an  Olive :  if  there  be
any  other  difference,  it  is  more  in  bignesse  then  otherwise,
and  especially  they  that  are  called  Coronati,  are  stronger
and  bigger  then  any  other  that  I  have  seene  in  these  parts,
except  those  of  the  Hand  of  Giants,  which  are  on  the
South  side  of  the  Hand  of  Hispaniola,  neere  unto  the
coasts  of  the  firme  Land,  and  likewise  certain  other  which
they  call  Jucatos,  which  are  on  the  North  side.  All  which
chiefly,  although  they  be  no  Giants,  yet  are  they  doubt-
lesse  the  biggest  of  the  Indians  that  are  known  to  this
day,  and  commonly  bigger  then  the  Flemings  ;  and  especi-
ally many  of  them,  as  well  women  as  men,  are  of  very
high  stature,  and  are  all  archers  both  men  and  women.
These  Coronati  inhabit  thirtie  leagues  in  length  by  these
coasts,  from  the  point  of  Canoa  to  the  great  river  which
they  call  Guadalchiber,  neere  unto  Sancta  Maria  de  gratia.
As  I  traversed  by  those  coasts, I  filled  a  butt  of  fresh

GONZALO DE OVIEDO

1525.

water  of  that  river,  six  leagues  in  the  Sea  from  the  mouth

thereof  where  it  falleth  into  the  Sea. They  are  called

Coronati  (that  is  Crowned)  because  their  haire  is  cut  round

by  their  eares,  and  poulde  lower  a  great  compasse  about

the  Crowne,  much  like  the  Friers  of  Saint  Augustines

Order. And  because  I  have  spoken  of  their  manner  of

wearing  their  haire,  here  commeth  to  my  remembrance  [III.  v.  993.]

a  thing  which  I  have  oftentimes  noted  in  these  Indians :

and  this  is,  that  they  have  the  bones  of  the  sculs  of  their  The  sails  of

heads  foure  times  thicker,  and  much  stronger  then  ours,  Indians  heads.

so  that  in  comming  to  handstroakes  with  them,  it  shall

be  requisite  not  to  strike  them  on  the  heads  with  swords,

for  so  have  many  swords  beene  broken  on  their  heads,

with  little  hurt  done.

Of  the  chiefe  Hands, Hispaniola  and  Cuba.

THe  Indians  which  at  this  present  inhabit  the  Hand
of Hispaniola, are but few in number, and the
Christians  not  so  many  as  they  ought  to  be,  for  as  much
as  many  of  them  that  were  in  this  Hand,  are  gone  to  other
Hands,  and  to  the  firme  Land. For  being  for  the  most
part  yong  men  unmarried,  and  desirous  daily  to  see  new  Men  are
things,  wherein  mans  nature  delighteth, they  were  not  desirous  of  new
willing  to  continue  long  in  one  place,  especially  seeing  t  in&'
daily  other  new  Lands  discovered,  where  they  thought
they  might  sooner  fill  their  Purses,  by  being  present  at
the  first  spoile  :  Wherein  neverthelesse  their  hope  deceived
many  of  them,  and  especially  such  as  had  houses  and
habitations  in  this  Hand : For  I  certainely  beleeve,  con-
firming my  selfe  herein  with  the  judgement  of  many  other,
that  if  any  one  Prince  had  no  more  seignories  then  onely  T,  ,.

this  Hand,  it  should  in  short  time  be  such,  as  not  to  give  ties  of
place  either  to  Sicilie  or  England,  whereas  even  at  this  Hispaniola,
present  there  is  nothing  wherefore  it  would  malice  their  E"i/^d,  and
prosperity,  not  being  inferiour  to  them  in  any  felicity,  e'

that  in  manner  the  heavens  can  grant  to  any  Land :  being
furthermore  such  as  may  inrich  many  Provinces  and  King-

213

A.D.
1525.

Gold  Mines.

Cotton.

Cassia.

Sheepe  and
Hogs.

Dogs  and  Cats
become  wilde.
The  sciiuation
of  Hispaniola.

A  Cathedrall
Church  and
Monasteries  in
Hispaniola.

An  Hospitall.
The  people.

PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

domes,  by  reason  of  many  rich  Gold  Mines  that  are  in
it,  of  the  best  Gold  that  is  found  to  this  day  in  the  world,
and  in  greatest  quantitie.  In  this  Hand,  nature  of  her
selfe  bringeth  forth  such  abundance  of  Cotton,  that  if  it
were  wrought  and  maintained,  there  should  be  more  and
better  then  in  any  part  of  the  world.  There  is  so  great
plentie  of  excellent  Cassia,  that  a  great  quantitie  is  brought
from  thence  into  Spaine,  from  whence  it  is  carried  to
divers  parts  of  the  world,  &c.

In  this  Hand  furthermore  are  many  Sheepe,  and  a  great
number  of  Hogges,  of  the  which  (as  also  of  the  Kine)
many  are  become  wilde,  and  likewise  many  Dogges  and
Cats,  of  those  which  were  brought  out  of  Spaine :  These
(and  especially  the  Dogs)  doe  much  hurt  among  the
Cattell,  by  reason  of  the  negligence  of  the  Heard-men.
There  are  also  many  Horses,  Mares,  and  Mules,  and  such
other  Beasts  as  serve  the  use  of  men  in  Spaine,  and  are
much  greater  then  they  of  the  first  broode  brought  thither
out  of  Spaine.

Saint  Domingo  was  built  by  line  and  rule :  the  Houses
of  Stone  very  faire.  There  is  also  a  Cathedrall  Church
builded  of  late,  where  as  well  the  Bishop  according  to
his  dignity,  as  also  the  Canons  are  well  endowed.  This
Church  is  well  builded  of  Stone  and  Lime,  and  of  good
workmanship.  There  are  furthermore  three  Monasteries,
bearing  the  name  of  S.  Dominicke,  S.  Francis,  and  S.
Marie  of  Mercedes,  the  which  are  al  wel  builded,  although
not  so  curiously  as  they  of  Spain.  There  is  also  a  very
good  Hospital  for  the  aid  &  succor  of  poore  people,  which
was  found  by  Michael  Passamont,  treasurer  to  your
Majestie.  The  people  of  this  Hand  are  commonly  of
somewhat  lesse  stature  then  are  the  Spaniards,  &  of  a
shining  or  cleare  brown  color :  they  have  Wives  of  their
own,  and  abstaine  from  their  Daughters,  Sisters  &
Mothers :  they  have  large  foreheads,  long  black  haire,
and  no  beards  or  haire  in  any  other  parts  of  their  bodies,
as  well  Men  as  Women,  except  very  few,  as  perhaps
scarsly  one  among  a  thousand. They  goe  as  naked  as

214

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  ad.

1525.
they  were  borne,  except  that  on  the  parts  which  may  not
with  honestie  be  seene,  they  weare  a  certaine  leafe  as  broad
as  a  mans  hand,  which  neverthelesse  is  not  kept  close  with
such  diligence,  but  that  sometimes  a  man  may  see  that
they  thinke  sufficiently  hid. In  this  Hand  are  certaine
Glowormes,  that  shine  in  the  night  as  doe  ours,  but  are
much  bigger,  and  give  a  greater  light : In  so  much  that
when  the  men  of  the  Hand  goe  any  journies  in  the  night,
they  beare  some  of  these  wormes  made  fast  about  their
feete  and  head,  in  such  sort  that  he  that  should  see  them
a farre, and ignorant of the thing, would be greatly
astonished  thereat. By  the  light  of  these  also,  the  women
worke  in  their  houses  in  the  night. These  wormes  they
call  Cievas. Their  light  lasteth  for  the  space  of  three  cievasakinde
dayes,  and  diminisheth  as  they  begin  to  drie  up. There  of  Glowormes.
is  also  a  kinde  of  Crowes,  whose  breath  stinketh  in  the  Crowes  stink-
morning,  and  is  sweete  in  the  afternoone : the  excrement  mg  and  sweet.
which  they  avoide,  is  a  living  worme.

In  Cuba,  is  a  certaine  kinde  of  Partridges,  being  very  Partridges.
little,  with  their  feathers  much  of  the  colour  of  Turtle
Doves,  but  are  of  much  better  taste  to  be  eaten :  they
are  taken  in  great  number,  and  being  brought  wilde  into
the  houses,  they  become  as  tame  within  the  space  of  three
or  foure  dayes  as  though  they  had  beene  hatched  there :
they  become  exceeding  fat  in  short  space,  and  are  doubt-
lesse  the  most  delicate  and  pleasant  meate  that  ever  I
have  eaten.  But  to  let  passe  many  other  things  that
might  be  here  said,  and  to  speake  of  two  marveilous  things
which  are  in  this  Hand  of  Cuba  :  whereof  the  one  is,  that
a  Valley  containing  two  or  three  leagues  in  length
betweene  two  Mountaines,  is  full  of  a  kinde  of  very
hard  Stones,  of  such  perfect  roundnesse,  and  like  unto
Pellets  of  Gunnes,  that  no  art  can  make  better  or  more  A.lf/lLrri-t

1  v  1 j r\c 1  t-»  \juns  wrought

exactly  polished. Or  these,  some  are  as  small  as  Pellets  by  nature.
for Handgunnes, and other so encreasing bigger and  [III.  v.  994.]
bigger  from  that  quantitie,  that  they  may  serve  for  all
sorts  of  Artillerie,  although  they  be  of  bignesse  to  receive
one  or  two  or  more  Quintales  of  powder,  every  Quintale

215

A.D.
1525.

A  Fountaine
of  the  Pitch  of
Bitumen.

Quintus
Curtius.

Bitumen  of
Babylon.

The  Roverso  a
strange  fish  to
hunt  with.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

containing  one  hundred  weight,  or  of  what  other  quantitie
soever  they  be.  These  Pellets  are  found  throughout  all
the  Valley  within  the  earth,  as  in  a  Mine,  which  they
digge,  and  take  out  such  as  they  neede  of  all  sorts.  The
other  marveilous  thing  of  this  Hand  is  this :  That  farre
from  the  Sea,  there  issueth  out  of  a  Mountaine  a  certaine
liquor,  much  like  the  Clay  of  Babylon,  called  Bitumen,
or  like  unto  Pitch,  in  great  quantitie,  and  such  as  is  very
commodious  for  the  calking  of  Shippes :  this  falleth  con-
tinually from  the  Rocke,  and  runneth  into  Sea,  in  such
abundance  that  it  is  seene  floting  above  the  water  on  every
side  of  the  Sea  thereabout,  as  it  is  driven  from  place  to
place  by  the  winde,  or  course  of  the  water.  Quintus
Curtius  writeth  in  his  Historie,  that  great  Alexander  came
to  the  Citie  of  Memi,  where  is  a  great  Cave  or  Denne,
in  the  which  is  a  Spring  or  Fountaine  that  continually
avoideth  a  great  quantitie  of  Bitumen,  in  such  sort,  that
it  is  an  easie  thing  to  beleeve  that  the  stones  of  the  wals
of  Babylon  might  be  laid  therewith,  according  as  the  said
Author  writeth.  I  have  seene  this  Mine  of  Bitumen,
not  onely  in  the  Hand  of  Cuba,  but  also  such  another  in
new  Spaine,  in  the  Province  of  Panuco.

Thus  farre  I  have  given  you  from  Master  Eden  his
Edition,  wherein  because  many  things  necessary  to  the
naturall  History  of  the  Indies  are  in  the  Authors  Sum-
marie,  and  in  his  20.  Books  of  a  larger  Historie,  I  have
added  hither  such  things  as  I  thought  fittest.

The  Utias  are  like  great  Rats,  and  the  Cories  like
Conies,  of  which  the  people  in  Hispaniola  eate,  as  also
of  the  Yuanas.  Chemi  and  Mohui  are  little  creatures
also  in  that  Hand :  which  and  their  little  mute  Dogges
were  all  the  foure  footed  Beasts  they  had,  save  that  of
Rats  there  is  some  question.  The  Indians  of  Jamaica  and
Cuba  use  to  catch  fish  with  the  fish  Roverso,  as  Huntsmen
or  Falconers  use  Hounds  or  Haukes  in  their  game.  The
Indians  take  it  sometimes  in  their  Nets,  of  which  I  have
eaten  :  and  when  they  will  bring  up  one  of  them  they
feede  it  in  the  Sea  and  carrie  it  tied  to  their  Canoa  by  a

2 16

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  a.d.

1525.

strong  line,  which  when  they  see  a  fish  fit  for  pray,  they

loosen  and  use  words  to  excite  courage  and  valour  in  this

fish ;  which  presently  flies  like  an  arrow  at  that  fish  and

fastens  thereon,  and  the  Indian  lets  the  line  runne  out  at

length  (being  oiled,  of  many  fadomes,  and  having  a  peece

of  wood  at  the  end  to  buoy  it,)  till  the  fish  be  wearied  :

this  little  fish  (little  above  a  spanne  long,  unsightly  to  Perhaps  this

looke  on)  still  holding  fast,  till  the  Indian  gathering  in  Roveno  is  the

his  cord,  prepares  to  shoare  to  take  the  greater  fish,  with S/^^

much  commendation  and  words  of  encouragement  to  this  i0  ^  sharke

chase-fish, perswading him to let goe his hold, which  and  is  by  him

otherwise  should  sooner  by  violence  breake  in  peeces  this  carried  in  all

Huntsman, then  force  him  to  unfasten. Thus  will  he  h"  .7 ''  ,

TCBulTlP  Otl  tllC

fasten  on  the  belly  of  a  Tortoise  so  great  that  two  Indians  scraps
and  sometimes  sixe  have  enough  to  doe  to  carrie  the  same
to  their  houses.  This  fish  Roverso  hath  scailes  Staire
fashioned,  or  like  the  roofe  of  a  mans  mouth,  and  on  them
certain  prickles  very  sharpe  and  strong,  whereby  he  fastens
himselfe  to  what  fish  him  pleaseth :  and  these  prickly
scales  he  hath  on  the  most  part  of  his  body.

They  have  likewise  a  cunning  wild-goose-chase,  in  a
great  Lake  casting  in  certaine  great  emptie  Pompons  in
the  season  when  Geese  resort  thither,  wherewith  they  being
accustomed  grow  out  of  feare  and  will  sit  on  them  to  bee
carried.  Being  thus  acquainted,  the  Indian  puts  one  of
these  emptie  Pompons  on  his  head,  and  with  much  dex-
teritie  of  swimming  enters  amongst  the  Geese,  and  when
one  hath  made  him  his  Porter,  no  part  of  his  body  being
seene,  he  swimmes  from  the  rest,  and  then  with  his  hand
pulls  her  in,  and  hangs  her  thus  strangled  at  his  girdle,
and  begins  a  fresh  game.

When  their  Caciques  are  dead  they  lay  them  on  a  piece  Memorials  of
of  wood  or  stone,  and  make  a  fire  about  the  same  which  the  dead.
may  not  burne  them,  but  by  degrees  draw  forth  all  the
moysture  in  sweat,  leaving  onely  the  skin  and  bones,  and
then  in  a  place  separate  repose  the  same  with  the  Ancestors
which  before  had  beene  so  dealt  with :  this  being  their
best  Booke  of  Heraldrie  to  recount  the  Names  and  severall

217

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1525-

Descents  in  that  Pedegree. If  any  die  in  battell,  or  so

that  they  cannot  recover  his  body,  they  compose  Songs

which  the  Children  learne  touching  him,  and  the  manner

of  his  death, to supply  that  memoriall. These Songs

Ignorance  of they  call  Areytos. As  for  Letters  they  were  so  ignorant,

Letters.  that  seeing  the  intercourse  of  Spaniards  by  Letters,  they

thought  that  Letters  could  speake,  and  were  very  cautelous

in  their  carriage  of  them,  lest  the  Letters  might  accuse

Areytos,  songs  them  of  ill  demeanor  by  the  way. When  they  will  disport

and  dances. themselves, the  Men  and  Women  meet  and  take  each

other  by  the  hand,  and  one  goeth  before  which  is  called

Tequina  or  their  Master,  with  certaine  paces  measured  to

his  singing  in  a  low  voice  what  commeth  in  his  minde,

and  after  him  all  the  multitude  answereth  in  a  higher  voice

with like measures proportioned to the tune, and so

continue  they  three  or  foure  houres,  with  Chicha  or  Mayz-

wine  among ;  sometimes  also  changing  the  Tequina  and

Houses  of taking  another  with  a  new  tune  and  song. Their  Houses

three  sorts. are  commonly  round  like  a  Tent,  and  sometimes  with  a

double  water  passage  (which they  call  Buhio) of  good

Timber,  thatched  with  Straw  or  long  Grasse,  the  Walls

of  Reed  pitched  into  the  ground. In  the  Province  of

Abrayne  in  Golden  Castile  and  thereabouts,  there  are  many

Villages  of  Indians  which  dwell  on  the  tops  of  Trees  in

[III.  v.  995.]  Houses  or  Roomes  there  made,  to  which  they  ascend  by

*£esuco certaine  staires  of  Besuco,  which  growes  about  *  Trees,

seemes  to  be  as  ancj  js  usecj  t0  bj[n(je  their  Walls  and  Timbers  in  their

Ivie  but houses  before  mentioned. Beneath,  the  ground  is  fenny

stronger  and and  covered  with  water  not  so  high  as  a  man  :  and  where

more  pliant, it  is  deeper,  they  use  Canoas,  and  therewith  passe  to  drie

Land  to  sow  their  Mays  and  Jucca,  Battatas  and  Aies.

In  those  houses  they  are  secured  from  wild  Beasts,  Enemies

and Fire. They  are not  Archers, and  use  Clubs. In

the  Gulfe  of  Uraba  where  Rio  Grande  enters  the  Sea,  are

many  Palme  trees  in  the  middest  of  the  River  growing

neere  together,  on  the  tops  whereof  are  houses  made  as

the  former  and  much  bigger,  in  which  many  Inhabitants

dwell  together,  and  have  their  beds  tyed  to  the  lower  parts

218

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  a.d.

1525.

of  the  said  Palme  trees.  These  beds  they  call  Hamacas,
being  coverlets  of  Cotten  of  good  threed  and  well  woven,
of  two  or  three  braces  long,  but  narrower,  with  cordes
at  the  ends.  The  cords  are  of  Cotton,  or  of  Henequen
or  Cabuya,  this  the  courser  threed,  that  the  finer  and  able
to  cut  Iron ;  made  of  the  leafe  of  a  certaine  herbe.  These
Indians  fight  also  with  Clubs,  and  did  much  harme  to
Captaine  Vasco  Nunes  di  Balboa  his  men,  which  returned
with  losse  not  able  to  over-come  them.  I  have  also
observed  that  these  Indians  have  the  bones  of  their  skulls
foure  times  as  thicke  as  those  of  the  Christians,  so  that
to  strike  them  with  a  Sword  must  be  warily  done,  the
Swords  being  thereby  often  broken.

Besides  the  Tigre  and  other  beasts  before  mentioned, The  beasts  of
in  the  firme  Land  are  the  Beori  (the  Christians  call  them  those  parts.
Dants,  not  that  they  are  such,  but  for  some  resemblance,  Dants.
as  is  also  said  of  the  Tigre)  of  the  bignesse  of  a  meane
Mule,  without  homes,  ash-coloured : they  know  not  to
dresse  and  tanne  their  hides. They  take  them  with  Dogs,
but  if  they  take  water,  they  are  fierce  and  cruell. The
Gatto  Cerviero  is  as  bigge  as  the  Tigre  and  very  fierce, Gam
more  dreadfull  to  the  Christians, the  swiftest  beast  yet Cerviero.
found  in  those  parts. The  Lions  are  a  little  lesse  then
those  of  Barbarie  and  not  so  full  of  courage,  but  fearfull
and  fugitive,  and  hurt  none  but  such  as  assault  them.
The  Leopards  are  like  those  of  Barbarie,  and  are  swift  Leopards.
and  fierce,  but  neither  these  nor  the  Lions  have  yet  done
Christians  any  harme,  nor  doe  they  eate  the  Indians  as  the
Tigres  doe. The  Foxes  are  like  those  of  Spaine,  but  in  Foxes.
colour  blacker  then  blacke  velvet,  and  somewhat  lesse  then
of  Spaine. The  Red  Deere  are  as  those  of  Spaine,  but Red  and  fat-
not  so  swift. Their  Fallow  Deere  are  like  those  of  Spaine,  low  Deere.
but  both  Red  and  Fallow  exceed  the  Spanish  in  taste.
Their  Conies  or  Hares  are  somewhat  like  ours,  but  liker
Hares  then  Conies,  yet  lesse  then  the  Conies  of  Spaine.
The  Marterns  are  like  to  those  of  Spaine  in  bignesse,  Marterns.
biting  and  otherwise : some  of  them  are  kept  tame  and
are  as  full  of  sport  and  lesse  filthy  then  the  Monkeys.  Monkeys.

219

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1525-

The  Monkeys  are  of  innumerable  sorts  and  shapes  :  some
of  them  so  suttle  as  they  imitate  the  actions  of  men,  as
breaking  of  Pine-apples  and  Almonds  with  stones :  some
will  throw  stones  at  passengers,  or  breake  boughs  to  fall
on  them  as  they  passe  by  to  breake  their  heads,  and  retort
the  arrowes  shot  at  them,  and  doe  other  things  incredible.
Some  are  as  little  or  lesser  then  a  mans  hand,  and  some

Dogs.  as  great  as  a  meane  MastifFe.  The  Indian  Dogs  are  little
and  barke  not,  some  hayrie  and  some  bare,  but  wagge  the
taile  and  leape  on  those  which  feede  them,  and  are  not

Churchla.  so  tame  as  ours.  The  Churchia  is  as  bigge  as  a  small
Conie,  tawnie,  sharpe-snowted,  dog-toothed,  long-tayled
and  eared  like  a  Rat.  They  doe  great  harme  to  their
Hennes,  killing  sometimes  twentie  or  more  at  once  to
sucke  their  bloud :  And  if  they  then  have  young,  shee
carrieth  them  with  her  in  a  bagge  of  skin  under  her  belly,
running  alongst  the  same  like  a  Satchell,  which  shee  opens
and  shuts  at  pleasure  to  let  them  in  and  out :  and  if  any
come  with  light  when  the  Damme  and  young  are  at  their
Hen-bloud  dainties,  shee  receives  them  into  this  bagge,
and  runneth  away  with  them :  and  if  shee  finde  the  way
stopped,  shee  climbeth  up  above  the  Hen-roost,  and  is
sometimes  taken  alive  or  dead  in  this  manner,  as  I  have
seene.  Her  Teats  are  within  her  bagge.  It  is  a  stinking
creature.

Fowks.  Of  Fowles,  they  have  Eagles,  Hawkes,  Buzzards,
Ravens,  &c.  as  in  Spaine.  Other  differing  sorts  they  have
so  many  that  they  need  rather  a  Painter  then  Relator  to

Parrots,  describe  them.  Of  Parrots  I  carried  ten  or  twelve  sorts
at  once  to  King  Ferdinand.  They  flie  by  couples,  a  Male
and  Female  together :  and  doe  much  harme  to  their  Corne

Night- grounds. There  are  Night-sparrowes  which  flie  by  night

sparrows.  Gnely,  and  strike  at  the  Bats,  holding  a  pleasant  pursute
after  them.  They  are  bigger  and  swifter  then  Swallowes,
having  a  row  of  white  feathers  overthwart  the  wing. The

Bats.  Bats  draw  much  bloud  by  their  bitings ;  and  if  they  bite
one  man  amongst  an  hundred  persons,  the  same  Bat  will
in  the  nights  following  still  single  the  same  person. They

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  a.d.

1525-
stanch  the  bloud  with  hot  ashes,  or  water  as  hot  as  may
be endured, and so I have beene cured. There are
Peacocks,  some  yellow,  some  blacke,  with  tailes  like  those
of  Spaine  :  they  are  better  meat :  some  are  wilde,  and  some
tame,  which  are  brought  home  young. Other  Peacocks  Peacocks  and
they  have,  of  which  the  Hens  are  ill  shaped,  the  Males  Turkeys-
have  not  so  great  a  taile  as  ours  :  their  necke  also  is  bare
of  feathers,  but  covered  with  a  skin  which  they  change
after  their  phantasie  into  divers  colours. They  have  a
home  as  it  were  on  their  front,  and  haires  on  the  breast
(the  last  seeme  Turkeys.)

The  Sea-Crowes  are  so  many  which  on  the  coast  of  Sea-crowes.
Panama  follow  the  Pilchards  or  Sardines  (as  is  before  said
of  the  Alcatrazzi)  that  lighting  or  hovering  on  the  Sea,
they  seeme  to  cover  the  same  with  a  blacke  carpet  of
cloth  or  velvet,  going  and  comming  with  the  Sea. There
are  Wilde  Hens  as  great  as  Peacocks,  blacke,  the  head  Wilde Hennes.
part  of  the  necke  gray  skins,  and  not  feathered :  they  eate
Carrion  and  are  of  unsavourie  taste  to  be  eaten ;  smell
like  muske  whiles  they  are  alive,  but  that  sent  dyeth  with  [III.  v.  996.]
them : neither  are  they  good  for  any  thing,  except  their
quills  to  feather  arrowes. They  are  desirous  to  live  about
places  inhabited  to  feede  on  Carrion. The  Partriches  are  Partriches.
gray,  as  savourie  as  those  of  Spaine,  and  as  great  as  the
Spanish  Hens  : they  have  their  brawnes  or  flesh  double,
one  over  the  other. Their  egges  are  as  bigge  as  Hens
egges,  but  rounder, and  coloured  like  a  fine  Turkesse
stone. The Indians making  a  sound like theirs, draw
them  to  their  nets. There  are  also  a  lesse  kinde. The
Pheasants  are  not  in  feathers  like  those  of  Spaine,  nor  so  Pheasants.
goodly,  but  very  savourie  meate  like  the  great  Partriches,
but  are  not  so  great ;  they  are  gray,  have  long  legs  and
tailes,  make  a  loud  whistling  noise,  and  are  easily  shot.

Flies  are  not  there  so  many  as  in  these  parts  of  Europe.  Flies,  and
Their  Waspes  are  greater  and sting  more dangerously. Wasps,  Bees,
Their  Bees  are  almost  as  small  as  flies,  and  sting  not. s>
They  have  great  Hives  and  Combes  which  hold  foure
times as much Honie as ours : their Honie is white.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1525.

Ants  are  great,  many,  and  doe  much  damage  to  the  Trees,
Sugars,  and  other  provisions. There  are  of  many  sorts,
some  little  and  black  (of  which  and  the  Ant-beare  is  spoken
before)  some  called  Conixen  halfe  Ant,  halfe  Worme,  very
hurtfull ;  they  carry  earth  on  their  heads,  and  therewith
on  trees,  walls,  or  where  they  please  build  their  nests,
three  or  foure  spans  large,  and  are  as  hurtfull  to  houses
as  Moths  to  clothes. There  are  others  greater  of  divers
sorts,  some  as  bigge  as  Bees  with  us,  so  poysonfull  that
herewith  the  Indians  infect  their  arrowes  so  remedilesse,
that  not  foure  of  an  hundred  which  are  wounded  escape :
and  if  this  Ant  bite  a  Man  he  presently  falls  into  a  grievous
feaver,  and  the  place  swelleth  much. There  are  others
red,  yellow,  and  some  winged. Of  Hornets  or  Horse-
Hist.G./.i$.  flies  (Tafani)  are  many  sorts,  tedious  to  expresse. There
c  1.  vid.  inf.  are  ajs0  Scorpions  in  the  firme  Land. An.  1519.  and  two
istona en.  yeeres  after  fa^  Ants  destroyed  in  Hispaniola  their  Canna-
' fistola,  Oranges,  and  fruit  Trees,,  neither  in  their  houses
could  they  keepe  victualls  for  their  multitudes,  destroying
all  like  the  African  Grasse-hoppers,  in  so  much  that  Saint
Domingo  was  nigh  dispeopled  by  them.
Beginnings  of They  laugh  in  India  to  heare  the  disease  called  French
the  fouk  fay  t^e  Italians,  and  Neapolitan  by  the  French,  which  may

indeed  be  called  Indian,  where  the  best  remedie  Lignum
Sanctum,  and  Guaiacan  grow ;  God  so  in  judgement
remembring  mercy,  that  where  our  sinnes  produce  a
punishment,  he  also  sends  a  remedie.  I  had  acquaintance
with  divers  which  went  in  the  first  and  second  voyages
of  Columbus :  of  which  was  Peter  Margarite  Commen-
dator  in  the  second  voyage,  of  most  respect  with  the  King
and  Queene,  who  complayned  of  those  paines.  Soone
after,  in  the  yeere  1496.  began  the  disease  to  arrest  some
Courtiers ;  but  in  those  beginnings,  it  was  onely  amongst
baser  persons  of  small  authoritie :  and  it  was  thought  that
they  got  it  with  having  to  doe  with  common  women.
But  afterwards  it  extended  to  principall  Persons,  and  the
Physicians  could  not  tell  what  to  thinke  of  it,  so  that
many dyed. When after this Gonzalo Fernandes di

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  a.d.

1525.

Cordova  was  sent  with  a  great  Armie  by  the  Catholike

Kings,  in  behalfe  of  Ferdinand  the  second  King  of  Naples,

against  Charles  the  French  King,  some  diseased  persons

went  with  that  Armie,  and  by  dealing  with  the  women,

and  by  conversing,  spread  the  disease  to  the  Italians  and

French-men,  which  thence  got  the  names  aforesaid,  but

indeed  came  from  Hispaniola :  where  it  is  ordinarie,  and

the  remedie  also. Our  Author  1.  17.  c.  4.  and  Ramusio

in  his  Preface  to  his  third  Tome  say,  That  the  Souldiers

of  Pamfilo  de  Navaz  having  the  small  pocks  infected  the

Indians,  which  never  before  had  heard  of  that  disease  :  in

so  much  that  of  1600000.  soules  in  that  Hand  there  are

so  few  left,  as  by  and  by  you  shall  heare. The  Niguas  Lib.  3.  c  5.

also,  creatures  lesse  then  Fleas,  which  eate  in  the  flesh

very  dangerously,  are  rife  in  that  Hand. The  people  of

that Hand when first they were divided amongst the

Spanish  Planters,  were  deemed  a  Million  or  more  (some

say  1 600000.)  of  which  and  of  their  posteritie  in  the  yeere

1535.  were  not  above  five  hundred  left,  little  and  great,

the  rest  which  then  were  there  being  Slaves  brought  thither

from other parts. The covetousnesse of the Myne-

workers,  neglect  of  Diet,  change  of  Governours  growing

worse  and  worse,  caused  them  to  poyson,  kill,  and  hang

themselves, besides those which were consumed by

infectious or pestilentiall pocks  * and other diseases : *Those  before

Their  owne  vices,  also  Sodomitrie,  Idolatrie,  &c.  provoked  m^loned_ out

divine  Justice  against  them. No  provision  could  hinder  briars

their consumption. The King sent Religious men of  quarrels.

divers  Orders,  but  this  I  know  that  the  Dominicans  and

Franciscans  contradicted  each  other,  and  what  one  approved

the  other  disallowed, although  after  the  other  had  left

that opinion, the  Contradictors  would embrace it, still

agreeing  in  disagreeing : which  caused  much  danger  not

onely  to  new  Converts,  but  also  to  old  Christians :  whiles

one  Order  would  not  absolve  them  except  they  franchised

the  Indians,  and  the  other  absolved  them  neverthelesse.  Lib.  ±.  c.  2.

Much  disputation  hath  beene  about  the  Indians  service

amongst  the  Thomists,  Canonists,  and  famous  Lawyers

223

A.D.
1525.

Lib.  3.  c.  11.

[III.  v.  997.]

Ovledos  fift
Booke  is  of
their  religion,
fcff.

Lib.  6.  r.  3.

Superstitious
conceit  of  the
Sacrament.
It  was
ordayned
against  the
Huracans  of
the  conscience,
not  of  the
weather.
Lib.  7.  c.  10.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  Divines,  but  their  differences  have  done  little  good
to  the  Indians  or  the  plantation ;  and  in  a  short  time  both
this  Hand  and  the  three  adjoyning,  Saint  John,  Jamaica,
and  Cuba,  remayned  desolate,  being  by  the  Friars  meanes
(which  I  thinke,  meant  well)  dispersed  thorow  the  Hand,
to  lessen  their  labours,  which  the  Gentlemen  imposed  on
them.  I  am  of  opinion  that  if  a  Christian  Prince  had  this
Hand  of  Hispaniola  onely,  hee  might  make  it  as  good  as
either  England  or  Sicily :  such  is  the  store  of  Gold,  the
prosperous  successe  of  things  carried  from  Spaine,  the
Beeves  (which  I  knew  first  carried  thither  from  Spaine)
being  alreadie  so  multiplyed  that  they  kill  them  for  the
Hides,  leaving  the  flesh  in  the  fields  of  five  hundred  at
once :  and  Roderigo  di  Bastidas  Bishop  of  Venesuela  hath
therein  16000.  Beeves,  and  the  Treasurer  Passamonte  as
many ;  others  8000.  or  more,  likewise  in  other  Beasts,
Seeds,  Oranges,  Limons,  Figs,  Pomegranets,  &c.

Of  their  Zemes,  Idols,  Sepulchres,  and  other  things
concerning  their  Religion,  the  Reader  may  see  enough
in  the  ninth  Booke  and  fourteenth  Chapter  of  my  Pil-
grimage ;  and  of  the  Spanish  first  voyages  thither  in  the
beginning  of  this  worke,  which  Oviedo  handleth  in  his
former  Bookes.

Their  Huracans  (so  they  call  tempests  of  winde  and
raine  together)  are  very  excessive.  An.  1508.  on  the
third  of  August,  all  the  thatched  houses  in  Saint  Domingo
were  throwne  to  the  ground,  and  some  also  of  stone ;
all  the  houses  also  in  the  Towne  Bonaventura,  which
might  thence  be  named  Malaventura :  in  the  Haven  were
sunke  twentie  Ships  and  Carvels,  a  North-wind  first  and
after  a  South-wind  playing  their  furious  prizes,  one
carrying  out  the  Vessels  in  despight  of  all  provisions  to
Sea,  and  the  other  as  terribly  forcing  them  againe  to  the
Haven  (if  the  losse  of  ships  and  men  may  permit  that
name)  yea  on  Land  many  men  were  carried  in  the  streets
and  fields  divers  bow-shots  before  they  could  stay  them-
selves. Hell  seemed  to  have  beene  opened,  and  the
Devils  to  have  carried  things  to  and  fro. Yet  in  July

224

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  a.d.

1525.

following  was  a  worse,  which  now  are  allayed  and  not  so
violent  since  the  Blessed  Sacrament  hath  beene  placed  in
Churches.  I  have  seene  the  space  of  a  Crosse-bow  shot
or  two,  all  the  ground  covered  with  Trees  plucked  up  by
the  Windes  from  the  Rootes,  and  ours  have  sometime
by  dangers  of  the  way  beene  forced  to  climbe  from  tree
to  tree  over  such  a  passage,  with  rents  and  perills  enough.

The  Cocks  in  Spaine  crow  at  mid-night  and  towards  Cocks  fcf  Cats
day :  but  here  in  the  shutting  in  of  the  evening,  or  two  differing  from
houres  within  night,  and  two  houres  before  day,  and  not  the  Spanish:
at  all  at  mid-night :  some  crow  in  the  first  watch  and  not  ^w"//  ^
else  all  night. Their  Cats  also use  their  lusts  all  the  war/$  a„ee
yeere  and  without  walling  noise,  which  in  Spaine,  France,  with  the
Sicily,  and  other  places  in  Europe  and  Afrike  which  I  I^ian.
have  seene  goe  on  Catter-walling  onely  about  Februarie.
In  the  He  of  Navaza  Westward  from  Hispaniola  in  the
way  thence  to  Jamaica,  the  Rocks  are  seene  under  the
water :  and  amongst  them  a  fathome  and  five  foote  under
the  salt  water  there  ariseth  a  spring  of  good  fresh  water  Strange  water-
upon  the  Sea,  spowting  up  bigger  then  a  mans  arme,  sPout-
higher  then  the  salt  water  that  it  may  easily  be  taken  in.
I  have  not  seene  it,  but  Stephen  Rocca,  a  person  of  credit
testifieth  this  of  his  owne  sight  and  taste. But  I  have
seene  in  the  Hand  Dominica  at  the  River  Acquata,  twentie
paces  wide,  and  not  deeper  then  the  arme  pits,  there  is  a
hot  spring,  that  if  one  take  up  the  Sands  they  seeme  like
embers  in  his  fist,  and  so  is  the  water  a  span  deepe  above
the  Sands,  which  on  the  top  is  fresh  and  like  other  water.

Oviedos  8.  9. 10.  and  11.  Bookes  are  of  Plants  and
Trees  in  those  parts. The  12.  of  Creatures  before  men-
tioned: the  13.  of  Fishes,  in  which  he  telleth  that  An.  Lib.\i.c.  2.
1529.  going  from  the  Gulfe  of  Orotigua  to  Panama  two
hundred  leagues  Eastward,  neere  the  mouth  of  the  Gulfe,
wee  saw  a  Fish  or  great  Water-monster,  which  at  times  Sea  Monster
lifted  it  selfe  right  up  above  the  Water  so  farre  that  the  stupendious.
head  and  both  the  armes  might  bee  seene,  which  seemed
higher  then  our  Caravell  and  all  her  Masts. Thus  did
shee  rise  and  fall  divers  times  beating  the  water  strongly,
xv  225  p

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1525-

not  casting  any  water  out  of  the  mouth. A  younger  or

lesse  of  the  same  kinde  did  likewise, swimme  a  little

distant  from  the  greater. Some  judged  it  to  bee  a  Whale

with her  young one, which others denyed, saying, a

Whale had no armes. To my  judgement each arme

might  be  five  and  twentie  foote  long,  and  as  bigge  as  a

Butt  or  Pipe : the  head  fourteene  or  fifteene  foote  high

and  much  more  in  breadth ;  and  the  rest  of  the  body

larger. That  of  her  which  appeared  above  water,  was

above five times the height of a meane man, which

*z$.passa, make  five  and  twentie  paces.* Lorenzo  Martino  Canon

which  some- 0f  the  Church  of  Golden  Castile,  Sancio  di  Tudela,  &c.

fathomf  were  with  me : and  we  were  all  afraid  when  shee  came

neere  our  small  Carvell. Shee  seemed  to  disport  her  selfe

at  a  tempest  approching,  which  suddenly  arose  much  to

our  purpose,  from  the  West,  and  brought  us  in  few  dayes

to  Panama.

Lib.  14.  c.  7. In  Hispaniola  and  the  neighbouring  Hands  is  a  strange

An  Italian \fac\  of  prey,  as  bigge  as  a  great  *  Gavia  and  much  like

it : shee  preyeth  on  the  Land  on  birds,  &c.  and  on  fish

in  the  Water,  shee  is  footed  like  water-fowles  and  goeth

Water  like  a  Goose,  but  hath  talons  like  Hawkes,  and  fastens

hawkes.  therewith  on  the  fishes  which  shee  eates  (so  taken)  either

in  the  Water  or  on  the  Rocks,  or  as  shee  flyeth  in  the

Aire  holding  it  betweene  her  feete. The  Christians  call

them  Actori  di  acqua.

L.  15.  c.  1.  What  scath  the  Ants  did  in  Hispaniola,  is  before  men-

Jeatesl  7 tioned,  in  the  veere  iciq.  and  the  next  following,  and

creatures. the  Citie  of  Saint  Domingo,  was  almost  dishabited  by

this  great  Armie  of  little  creatures,  as  in  Spaine  a  Citie

was  dispeopled  by  Conies,  and  which  lately  happened  to

the  He  Porto  Santo  ;  in  Thessalia  (which  almost  fell  out

to  the  English  Colonie  in  Bermuda)  to  another  Citie  by

Rats,  to  the  Atariotae  by  Frogges,  to  the  Minntines  by

Fleas, to  Amicle  in  Italie  by  Serpents,  and  to  another

part  thereof  by  Sparrowes  ;  to  divers  places  of  Africa  often

by  Locusts  :  so  can  the  Great  God  arme  the  least  creatures

to  the  destruction  of  proud  vainglorious  men. And  this

226

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  ad.

1525.

miserie  so  perplexed  the  Spaniards,  that  they  sought  as
strange  a  remedie  as  was  the  disease,  which  was  to  chuse  [III.  v.  998.]
some  Saint  for  their  Patron  against  the  Antes. Alexander
Giraldine,  the  Bishop  having  sung  a  solemne  and  Ponti-  Uncertainty  of
ficall  Masse,  after  the  Consecration  and  Elevation  of  the  Superstition.
Sacrament, and devout Prayers made by him and the
people,  opened  a  Booke  in  which  was  a  Catalogue  of  the
Saints,  by  lot  to  chuse  some  he  or  she  Saint,  whom  God
should please to appoint their Advocate against that
Calamitie. And  the  Lot  fell  upon  Saint  Saturnine  whose
Feast  is  on  the  nine  and  twentieth  of  November : after
which  the  Ant-damage  became  more  tolerable  and  by  little
and  little  diminished, by  Gods  mercie  and  intercession
of  that  Saint : I  note  it  the  rather,  because  the  Bishop
and  that  Saint  were  both  Romanes,  and  as  that  Martyr  had
made  mute the Idols  in  Toledo, (as  is  written in the
Historie  of  his  Martyrdome)  so  now  was  Idolatry  (and
I  pray  what  was  this?)  destroyed  in  Hispaniola? Hee
might  have  said  exchanged !  a  pitifull  case  that  when  God  Gal.  4.
hath  sent  his  owne  Sonne  made  of  a  woman,  made  under
the  Law,  &c.  Who  hath  dyed  for  our  (yea,  that  Martyrs)  Rom.  4.
sinnes,  risen  for  our  Justification,  ascended  on  high  to
give  gifts  to  men  ;  and  is  there,  and  therefore,  set  downe  Eph.  4.
at  Gods  right  hand  to  make  intercession  for  us  sinners,
to  take  possession  for  us  mortals,  to  accomplish,  as  our
Amen,  all  the  promises  of  this  life,  and  that  which  is  to T  L '
come,  whether  against  Ants  or  Devils  ;  and  in  him  it  hath  Im  Tim.  4.
pleased the Father  that  all fulnesse should dwell; yea  Col.  1.
(beyond  and  it  pleased)  in  him  dwelleth  the  fulnesse  of  Gol.  2-
the  Godhead  bodily,  and  we  are  compleate  in  him,  and  jf ,  ^'
he is  all  in  all,  yesterday, to  day, the same  for  ever;  Ep^  .J-
which  hath  loved  us,  and  given  himselfe  for  us,  which  is  1.  Joh.  4.
love, which hath invited  us, Come to me all  ye that  Mat.  11.
labour, which hath incited us by all attractives : that
after  all  this,  men,  Christian  men  should  goe  cast  Lots
for an Intercessor, and neglecting Christ, dreame of
Romane carnall phancies, or runne mad with Romish
superstitious  phrensies ;  wherein  if  the  bodie  be  delivered,

227

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1525.

Num.  11.  as  happened  to  the  lusting  Israelites,  with  their  Quaile-
store,  the  burthen  is  made  double  to  the  soule,  when  God
heareth in his anger. Such Cisternes doe they  digge

Jer.  2.  13.  which  forsake  the  Fountaine  of  living  waters,  even  broken
Cisternes  which  can  hold  no  waters : the  best  of  Saints

Mat.  25.  like  the  wise  Virgins,  having  no  more  Oile  then  will
suffice  their  owne  Lampes,  and  that  also  received  out  of

J  oh.  1.  anothers  fulnesse,  of  whose  fulnesse  wee  all  have  received

grace  for  grace ;  said  a  principall  Saint.

There  are  Caterpillers,  which  shine  in  the  night  fiftie
or  a  hundred  paces  off,  only  from  that  part  of  the  bodie
whence  the  legges  issue :  others  only  have  their  head
shining.  I  have  seene  some  a  spanne  long  very  fearefull,
but  for  any  thing  I  have  heard,  harmelesse.  Flies  are
lesse,  but  more  hurtfull  then  in  Spaine :  but  these  in
kindes  and  colours  are  so  diversified  that  it  is  impossible
to  write  them :  and  so  may  be  said  of  other  small
creatures  in  those  parts.

L.  16.  c.  15.  In  his  sixteenth  Booke  he  declareth  the  Conquest  of
the  He  Borichen,  or  Saint  John  and  the  quarrels  betwixt
the  Spaniards,  the  learning  of  some  breeding  such  dissen-
tions,  that  not  without  cause  (saith  our  Author)  in  Golden

Lawyers  Castile  and  in  other  parts,  the  King  forbad  Law-learned

dangerous^  in men  ancj  pr0ctors  should  passe  thither,  as  men  infectious

Indies  ^y  sowing  strife  where  they  ought  not. In  this  He,  the

people  and  other  things  are  as  before  is  said  of  Hispaniola,
there  are  more  Birds  in  Saint  John,  rich  Mineralls  of
Gold,  certaine  Battes  which  the  people  eate ;  and  Lignum
Sanctum  groweth  there,  more  excellent  then  the  Guaiacan
for  the  French  Disease  and  others.

L.  17.  c  4.  In  his  seventeenth  Booke  he  writeth  of  Cuba.  The
people  and  other  things  are  much  like  to  Hispaniola. In

Filthy  their  Manages,  all  the  guests  of  the  Bridegroomes  ranke

Marriages.  ^as  Caciques,  if  hee  bee  a  Cacique  or  Principall,  or
Plebeians  as  he  is)  lye  with  the  Spouse  before  he  himselfe
may  doe  it :  after  which  she  with  her  fist  bent  comes
crying  with  a  loud  voyce,  Manicato,  Manicato,  that  is
forced  and  full  of  force,  as  glorying  in  her  shame. They

228

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  a.d.

1525.

are  in  vices  like  those  of  Hispaniola,  and  will  be  no  better
Christians  then  other  Indians,  whatsoever  Peter  Martyr
writeth  from  Encises  Relations. For  I  have  seene  more  Oviedos  testi-
Indians then they both, and by experience of those  mony  of  Indian
Nations know, that none or very few of them are  Christianity.
Christians  of  their  owne  will  and  accord : and  when  any  Fablg  that  is
are baptized  being of  age, he  doth  it  more for some  told  of  Crosses
by-purpose  then  for  zeale  of  the  faith :  for  there  remaines  found  in
to  him  nothing  but  the  name,  which  also  soone  after  he  Jucatan.
forgets. Perhaps  there  are  some  faithfull,  but  I  beleeve
they  are  very  rare.

The  Creatures  and  Plants  of  Spaine  prosper  well  there,
as  doe  the  naturall  which  are  the  same  which  are  in
Hispaniola.  The  people  were  exhausted  when  they  first
went  into  New  Spaine,  and  with  the  second  Armie  of
Grigialua,  and  with  the  third  of  Cortese,  and  with  the
fourth  of  Pamphilo  di  Narbaez,  all  by  order  of  Lieutenant
Velasco  :  whereby  Cuba  was  in  manner  dispeopled,  and
by  the  former  causes  mentioned  of  Hispaniola,  and  by
the  contagion  of  the  small  Pockes  which  was  universall
in  all  these  Hands :  So  that  the  Great  God  hath  in  manner
wholly  extinguished  them  for  their  (not  without  others)
sinnes.  They  have  much  Gold  and  Brasse :  use  to  fish
much  with  the  Roverso  before  mentioned,  as  also  that
Wild-goose  chase.  There  are  innumerable  Cranes,  such  Strange
as  are  in  Spaine ;  the  Boyes  take  infinite  Egges  and  passages  of
young  ones.  There  are  Turtles  greater  then  in  Spaine.  Fowles'
Every  yeare  there  passe  from  the  end  of  Cuba  infinite
numbers  of  divers  sorts  of  Birds,  which  come  from  the
North  of  the  firme  Land,  and  crosse  over  the  Alacrain
Hands  and  Cuba,  and  flye  over  the  Gulfe  Southwards.  I
have  seene  them  passe  over  Darien  and  Nombre  de  dios
and  Panama  in  clivers  yeeres,  in  the  Firme  Land ;  so
many  that  they  cover  the  Skie :  and  this  passage  or  [III.  v.  999.]
march  continueth  a  moneth  or  more  about  the  moneth
of  March.  I  thinke  they  flie  round  about  the  World,  L.  17.  c.  15.
for  they  never  are  seene  to  returne  toward  the  West  or
North : and we see them not every yeere one after

229

A.D.
I525-

Z.I7.

Abominable
devotions.

L.  18.  c.  2.

c.  2

Z/.  19

Pitch
Fountaine.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

another ;  from  morning  to  night  the  aire  is  covered,  and
some  flie  so  high  that  they  cannot  bee  seene,  others  lower
yet  higher  then  the  Mountaines  tops.  They  come  from
the  North-west  and  North  to  the  Southwards,  and  then
turne  South-west,  occupying  in  length  more  then  the  eye
can  discerne,  and  a  great  space  in  breadth.  The  lowest
are  Eaglets  and  Eagles,  and  all  seeme  Birds  of  prey  of
many  kinds  and  plumes  :  The  higher  cannot  bee  discerned
in  their  plumes,  but  in  manner  of  flying  and  quantitie
appeare  of  divers  sorts.

There  have  beene  Serpents  killed  in  Cuba,  as  bigge
as  a  mans  thigh,  and  five  and  twentie,  or  thirtie  foot  long
and  more.  They  are  tame,  and  the  Indians  eate  them,
and  find  sometimes  in  their  bellies  sixe  or  seven  creatures
bigger  then  Conies,  which  they  swallow  whole.

I  am  loth  to  lead  you  with  this  Author  along  with
Grigialua,  in  his  long  Expedition  from  hence  to  Jucatan
and  other  parts.  Neere  to  Porto  de  termini,  he  found  two
Trees  seeming  set  by  hand,  standing  alone,  and  fifteene
paces  off  divers  Idols  of  Chalke.  They  saw  two  Images
made  of  the  wood  Copei,  in  manner  of  Sodomiticall
villenie  joyned  together ;  and  another  of  Chalke  with  his
circumcised  member  betwixt  his  hands.

Jamaica  was  in  people,  vices,  creatures  and  other  things
like  the  former :  they  were  the  Inventors  of  the  reverso-
fishing  and  Goose-catching  with  Gourds  or  Pompions
aforesaid,  which  sometimes  they  practised  also  with  leaves
and  greene  boughes  on  their  heads,  and  used  that  Garland,
as  is  before  said  of  the  Pompions.  Of  Cubagua  the
Pearle  Hand  and  of  the  Pearle-fishing  is  spoken  before.
In  Cubagua  is  a  bituminous  Fountayne,  having  otherwise
no  water  to  drinke,  nor  Hearbes,  nor  Trees  but  a  few  of
Guaiacan,  nor  any  living  creatures,  though  at  first  comming
of  the  Christians  there  were  a  few  Conies.  At  the  East
point  is  the  Fountayne  running  into  the  Sea  with  an
Oily  substance  floating  on  it,  profitable  for  Medicine  there
called  Devils  Dung.  They  that  live  there,  fetch  their
water  seven  leagues  off  from  Cumana,  on  the  firme  Land,

230

GONZALO DE OVIEDO  ad.

1525.

and  wood  from  Margarita.  The  Kings  fifth  of  the
Pearle-fishing  hath  yeelded  1 5000.  Duckets  yeerly :  a
thing  not  knowne  that  so  many  Pearles  have  beene  taken
from  so  small  a  space,  the  Hand  of  Cubagua  not  com-
passing above  three  leagues.  In  the  Gulfe  of  Orotigna,  C.  9.
and  the  Hands  therein  in  the  Province  of  Nicaragua  on  Two  shel-
the  South  Sea,  are  many  shel-fishes  of  a  long  forme,  some  *  s  whlch
a  Cubit  long,  some  lesse,  creased,  growing  broader  and
broader  to  the  end  when  they  are  opened :  they  have
a  fishie  substance  within  them,  and  shine  within
as  the  Pearle-oysters  doe,  halfe  their  length,  thence  by
degrees  loosing  that  shining  toward  the  broader  end.  The
Pearles  within  them  are  not  so  fine  as  the  other.  The
Indians  use  the  shels  to  digge  their  loose  ground,  fastning
the  shell  to  a  handle  of  wood,  binding  it  fast  and  making
a  kind  of  Spade  thereof.

In  the  yeare  1517.  An  Englishman*  under  colour  of  English
Discovery  came  with  a  great  ship  towards  Brasill  on  the  v°yaSe  t0 J«e
Firme Land, and thence traversed to Hispaniola, and  j  IrI7 '
came  neere  the  Haven  of  Saint  Domingo,  and  sent  his  l.  19.  c.  13.
Boat  full  of  people  on  shoare,  and  desired  Trade. But  *He  cats  him
the  Captaine  of  the  Fort  shot  from  the  Castle  at  the  a  Ptrate->  but

Boate,  because  shee  came  directly  to  the  Port;  and  there- w rj,  .
'  J  '  . reason  of  that

upon  they  returned  to  their  ship.  I  he  English  seeing  name%
this  entertainment,  tooke  their  course  towards  the  Hand
of  Saint  John,  and  entred  the  Port  of  Saint  German,  and
there  demanded  victuals  and  provisions  for  their  ship,
complaining  of  the  wrong  done  them  at  Saint  Domingo,
comming  thither  for  Trade,  to  buy  with  their  Mony,  and
to  barter  Commodities.  There  they  got  some  victuals
for  which  they  paid  in  wrought  pieces  of  Pewter  and  other  Pewter.
things  :  and  so  returned  towards  Europe,  where  it  is  likely
they  came  not ;  for  there  was  never  any  more  heard  of
them.

The  next  yeare  a  French  Pirat  guided  by  a  Spanish  L.  20.
Pilot, came to trade in the Hand of Pearles and a
Portugall  Caravell  which  he  had  taken  on  the  Coast  of
Brasill,  and  would  have  landed  his  Boats  full  of  men,  but

231

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

1525.

was  resisted,  and  a  Battel  betwixt  both  parts  followed,  in
which  thirteene  Frenchmen  were  slaine,  and  two  of  ours.
Three  or  foure  Navarrois  and  Biskainers  fled  from  them
and  said  the  French  were  Theeves  and  came  to  take  the
Hand :  whereupon  they  went  with  all  their  strength,  and
tooke  her  Boat,  and  the  ship  fled  out  of  sight,  &c.

Oviedos  twentieth  Booke  is  of  shipwrackes  and  dis-
adventures  which  have  happened  to  the  Spaniards  in  those
parts.  One  which  happened  15 14.  is  admirable,  the  ship
sinking  and  five  and  twentie  persons  escaping  in  the
Boat,  hast  forbidding  provision  of  Card,  Compasse  or
victuall,  to  save  their  lives.  Thus  lived  they  twelve
dayes  at  Sea ;  neither  had  they  any  thing  to  eate  or
drinke :  only  a  young  man  had  saved  two  pounds  of
Bisket,  which  beeing  divided  amongst  them,  he  which
had  most  had  not  above  an  ounce  and  halfe.  Urine,  or
the  Sea  was  their  drinke.  In  this  case  they  made  Vowes
to  our  Ladie  of  Antica  in  Sivill :  and  on  the  twelfth  day
having  made  a  Saile  of  their  shirts,  they  came  to  Silver-
port  in  Hispaniola.  Their  Pilot  Anto  Calvo  told  me
the  Storie.  The  same  yeare  in  the  Fleet  of  Pedrarias  de
Avilla  a  Portugal  youth,  being  scoffed  at,  and  flouted  by
the  Spaniards,  leaped  into  the  Sea  in  a  fresh  gale,  and  not
without  the  wonder  of  all  men  was  taken  up  by  another
ship  alive,  whom  after  I  saw  vaunting  of  this  folly,  and
saying  that  no  Castilian  durst  have  done  it ;  which  I
[III.  v.  easily  beleeve,  as  having  more  wit  then  this  Foole. Yet

1000.]  will  I  imitate  a  little  this  foolish  Portugall,  and  leape  out
of Oviedos Spanish ship (for  who will not  feare such
dreadfull  shipwrackes  as  this  Booke,  the  last  which  hath
*Oviedo  writ  come  *  to  our  hands,  is  full  of  ?)  and  swim  ashoare,  or
other  Bookes  of  seeke  other  passage  with  Acosta,  in  a  new  or  rather  an  old

t  efirme Voyage  for  Discoverie  of  the  Mexican  Antiquities.
Land,  which  J °  "

are  not  extant.

232

JOSEPH ACOSTA

A.D.

c.  1588.

Chap.  IIII.

Mexican  Antiquities  gathered  out  of  the  Writings
of  Josephus  Acosta  a  learned  Jesuite.

Very  Historie  well  written  is  profitable  to  L.  7.
the  Reader:  For  as  the  Wiseman  saith,  Eeeks.  1.
That  which  hath  beene,  is,  and  that  which
shall  bee,  is  that  which  hath  beene :
Humane  things  have  much  resemblance
in  themselves,  and  some  grow  wise  by
that  which  happeneth  to  others.  There
is  no  Nation,  how  barbarous  soever,  that  have  not  some-
thing in  them,  good,  and  worthy  of  commendation ;  nor
Common-weale  so  well  ordered,  that  hath  not  something
blame-worthy,  and  to  bee  controlled.  If  therefore  there
were  no  other  fruit  in  the  Historie  and  Narration  of  the
Deeds  and  Gests  of  the  Indians,  but  this  common  utilitie,
to  be  a  Relation  or  Historie  of  things,  the  which  in  the
effect  of  truth  have  happened,  it  deserveth  to  bee  received
as  a  profitable  thing,  neither  ought  it  to  bee  rejected,  for
that  it  concernes  the  Indians.  As  wee  see  that  those
Authors  that  treate  of  naturall  things,  write  not  onely
of  generous  Beasts,  notable  and  rare  Plants,  and  of
Precious  Stones,  but  also  of  wilde  Beasts,  common
Hearbes,  and  base  and  vulgar  Stones,  for  that  there  is
alwayes  in  them  some  properties  worthy  observation.  If
therefore  there  were  nothing  else  in  this  Discourse,  but
that  it  is  a  Historie,  and  no  fables  nor  fictions,  it  were
no  unworthy  Subject  to  be  written,  or  read.  There  is
yet  another  more  particular  reason,  which  is,  that  we
ought  herein  to  esteeme  that  which  is  worthy  of  memorie,
both  for  that  it  is  a  Nation  little  esteemed,  and  also  a
Subject  different  from  that  of  our  Europe,  as  these  Nations
bee,  wherein  wee  should  take  most  pleasure  and  content,
to  understand  the  ground  of  their  beginning,  their
manner  of  life,  with  their  happie  and  unhappie  Adven-
tures. And this subject is not onely pleasant and

233

A.D.

c.  1588.

L.7.

Chichimecas.
Their  savage
course  of  life.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

agreeable,  but  also  profitable,  especially  to  such  as  have
the  charge  to  rule  and  governe  them ;  for  the  knowledge
of  their  Acts  invites  us  to  give  credit,  and  doth  partly
teach  how  they  ought  to  be  intreated :  yea,  it  takes  away
much  of  that  common  and  foolish  contempt  wherein  they
of  Europe  hold  them,  supposing  that  those  Nations  have
no  feeling  of  reason.  For  in  truth  wee  cannot  cleere
this  errour  better,  than  by  the  true  report  of  the  Acts
and  deeds  of  this  people.  I  will  therefore  as  briefly  as
I  can,  intreat  of  the  beginning,  proceedings  and  notable
deeds  of  the  Mexicanes,  whereby  wee  may  know  the
time  and  the  disposition  that  the  high  God  would  choose,
to  send  unto  these  Nations  the  Light  of  the  Gospell  of
Jesus  Christ  his  only  Sonne  our  Lord,  whom  I  beseech
to  second  our  small  labour,  that  it  may  bee  to  the  glorie
of  his  Divine  greatnesse,  and  some  profit  to  these  people,
to  whom  he  hath  imparted  the  Law  of  his  holy  Gospell.

§.  i.

Of  the  ancient  Inhabitants  of  New  Spaine,  and  of
the  sixe  Linages  of  the  Navatlacas.  Of  the
Mexican  Exodus,  and  Adventures  by  the
way :  the  foundation  of  Mexico,  their  first
King  and  Tribute.

He  ancient  and  first  Inhabitants  of  those  Provinces,
which  wee  call  New  Spaine,  were  men  very
barbarous  and  savage,  which  lived  onely  by
hunting,  for  this  reason  they  were  called  Chichimecas.
They  did  neither  sow  nor  till  the  ground,  neither  lived
they  together ;  for  all  their  exercise  was  to  hunt,  wherein
they  were  very  expert.  They  lived  in  the  roughest  parts
of  the  Mountaynes  beast-like,  without  any  policie,  and
they  went  all  naked.  They  hunted  wilde  Beasts,  Hares,
Conies,  Weezels,  Mowles,  wild  Cats,  and  Birds,  yea
uncleane  beasts,  as  Snakes,  Lizards,  Locusts  and  Wormes,
whereon  they  fed,  with  some  hearbs  and  roots. They

234

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
slept  in  the  Mountaynes,  in  caves  and  in  bushes,  and  the
wives  likewise  went  a  hunting  with  their  husbands,
leaving  their  young  children  in  a  little  panier  of  Reeds,
tyed  to  the  boughes  of  a  Tree,  which  desired  not  to  sucke
untill  they  were  returned  from  hunting.  They  had  no
Superiours,  nor  did  acknowledge  or  worship  any  gods,
neither  had  any  manner  of  Ceremonies  or  Religion.

There  is  yet  to  this  day  in  New  Spaine  of  this  kind  of
people, which live by their Bowes and Arrowes, the
which are  very hurtfull, for that they  gather together
in  troopes  to  doe  mischiefe,  and  to  rob  neither  can  the  [III.  v.
Spaniards  by  force  or  cunning  reduce  them  to  any  policie  1001.J

or  obedience :  for  having  no  Townes  nor  places  of
residence,  to  fight  with  them,  were  properly  to  hunt  after
savage  beasts,  which  scatter  and  hide  themselves  in  the
most  rough  and  covered  places  of  the  Mountaynes.  Such
is  their  manner  of  living  even  to  this  day,  in  many
Provinces  of  the  Indies.  Those  in  New  Spaine,  which
they  call  Ottomies,  were  of  this  sort,  beeing  commonly  Ottomies.
poore  Indians,  inhabiting  a  rough  and  barren  Land,  and
yet  they  are  in  good  numbers,  and  live  together  with
some  order,  and  such  as  doe  know  them,  find  them  no
lesse  apt  and  capeable  of  matters  of  Christian  Religion,
then  others  which  are  held  to  be  more  rich  and  better
governed.  Comming  therefore  to  our  subject,  the  Chichi-
mecas  and  Ottomies  which  were  the  first  Inhabitants  of
New  Spaine,  for  that  they  did  neither  till  nor  sowe  the
Land,  left  the  best  and  most  fertile  of  the  Countrey
unpeopled,  which,  Nations  that  came  from  farre  did
possesse,  whom  they  called  Navatalcas,  for  that  it  was  a
more  civill  and  politicke  Nation ;  this  word  signifies  a
people  that  speakes  well,  in  respect  of  other  barbarous
Nations  without  reason.  These  second  peoplers  Nava-
talcas, came  from  other  farre  Countreyes,  which  lye  toward
the  North,  where  now  they  have  discovered  a  Kingdome
they  call  New  Mexico.  New  Mexico.

There  are two  Provinces in this  Countrey, the one
called  Aztlan,  which  is  to  say  a  place  of  Herons : the  Aztkm.

235

A.D.

c.  1588.

Tuculhuacan.

Their
beginnings
900  yeeres
agoe;  A.D.
720.

How  the  six

Linages

of  Navatalcas

peopled  the

Land  of

Mexico.

Chap.  3.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

other  Tuculhuacan,  which  signifies  a  Land  of  such,
whose  Grandfathers  were  divine.  The  Inhabitants  of
these  Provinces  have  their  houses,  their  Lands  tilled,  Gods,
Customes,  and  Ceremonies,  with  like  order  and  govern-
ment to  the  Navatalcas,  and  are  divided  into  seven  Tribes
or  Nations :  and  for  that  they  have  a  custome  in  this
Province,  that  every  one  of  these  Linages  hath  his  place
and  private  Territorie,  the  Navatalcas  paint  their
beginning  and  first  Territorie  in  figure  of  a  Cave,  and
say  that  they  came  forth  of  seven  Caves  to  come  and
people  the  Land  of  Mexico,  whereof  they  make  mention
in  their  Historie,  where  they  paint  seven  Caves  and  men
comming  forth  of  them.  By  the  supputation  of  their
Bookes,  it  is  above  eight  hundred  yeeres  since  these
Navatalcas  came  forth  of  their  Countrey,  reducing  which
to  our  accompt,  was  about  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  720.
When  they  left  their  Countrey  to  come  to  Mexico,  they
stayed  fourescore  yeeres  upon  the  way ;  and  the  cause  of
this  their  long  stay  in  their  Voyage,  was,  that  their  Gods
(which  without  doubt  were  Devils,  and  spake  visibly  unto
them)  had  perswaded  them  to  seeke  new  Lands  that  had
certaine  signes.  And  therefore  they  came  discovering
the  whole  Land,  to  search  for  these  tokens  which  their
Idols  had  given  them ;  and  in  places  where  they  found
any  good  dwellings,  they  peopled  it,  and  laboured  the
Land,  and  as  they  discovered  better  Countreyes,  they  left
those  which  they  had  first  peopled ;  leaving  still  some,
especially  the  aged,  sicke  folkes,  and  the  wearie ;  yea,
they  did  plant  and  build  there,  whereof  wee  see  the
remainders  at  this  day.  In  the  way  where  they  passed,
they  spent  fourescore  yeeres  in  this  manner  of  leisurely
travell,  the  which  they  might  have  done  in  a  moneth.
By  this  meanes  they  entred  the  Land  of  Mexico,  in  the
yeere  902.  after  our  computation.

These  seven  Linages  I  have  spoken  of,  came  not  forth
altogether :  the  first  were  the  Suchimilcos,  which  signifie
a  Nation  of  the  seeds  of  flowres.  Those  peopled  the
bankes  of  the  great  Lake  of  Mexico  towards  the  South,

236

JOSEPH ACOSTA

A.D.

c.  1588.

Suchimilcos.

Chakhas.

Tepanecans.

Tescuco.
Culhua.

Tlalluicans.

and  did  build  a  Citie  of  their  name,  and  many  Villages.

Long  time  after  came  they  of  the  second  Linage  called

Chalcas,  which  signifies  people  of  mouthes,  who  also  built

a  Citie  of  their  name,  dividing  their  limits  and  Territories

with  the  Suchimilcos. The  third  were  the  Tepanecans,

which  signifies  people  of  the  bridge : they  did  inhabite

upon  the  banke  of  the  Lake  towards  the  West,  and  they

increased  so,  as  they  called  the  chiefe  and  Metropolitane

of  their  Province,  Axcapuzalco,  which  is  to  say,  an  Ants  Azcapu%alco.

Nest, and they continued long time mightie. After

them  came  those  that  peopled  Tescuco,  which  be  those  of

Culhua,  which  is  to  say,  a  crooked  people  : for  that  in

their  Countrey  there  was  a Mountaine  much  bending.

And  in  this  sort  this  Lake  was  environed  with  these  foure

Nations,  these  inhabiting  on  the  East,  and  the  Tepanecas

on  the  North. These  of  Tescuco,  were  held  for  great

Courtiers, for their tongue and pronunciation is very

sweet  and  pleasant. Then  arrived  the  Tlalluicans,  which

signifies  men  of  the  Sierre  or  Mountaine. Those  were

the  most  rude  and  grosse  of  all  the  rest,  who  finding  all

the Plaines about the Lake possessed even unto the

Sierre,  they  passed  to  the  other  side  of  the  Mountaine,

where they found a very fertile, spacious and warme

Countrey,  where  they  built  many  great  Villages,  calling

the  Metropolitane  of  their  Province  Quahunachua,  which  Quahunachua.

is  as  much  to  say,  as  a  place  that  sounds  the  voice  of  an

Eagle, which our common people call by corruption,

Qyernavaca,  and  at  this  day  they  call  this  Province,  the

Marquisate. Those  of  the  sixt  Generation,  which  are  the

Tlascaltecans,  which  is  to  say,  Men  of  bread,  passed  the  Tlascaltecam.

Mountaine  towards  the  East,  crossing  all  the  Sierre,  or

Mountaine of Menade, where that famous Vulcan is

betwixt  Mexico  and  the  Citie  of  Angels,  where  they  did

find  a  good  Countrey, making  many  buildings. They

built  many  Townes  and  Cities,  whereof  the  Metropolitane

was  called  by  their  name  Tlascala. This  is  the  Nation

which  favoured  the  Spaniards  at  their  entrie,  by  whose

helpe they did winne this Countrey, and therefore to

237

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

this  day  they  pay  no  Tribute,  but  enjoy  a  generall
exemption.  When  all  these  Nations  peopled  these
Countreyes,  the  Chichimecans  being  the  ancient
Inhabitants,  made  no  resistance,  but  fled,  and  as
people  amazed,  they  hid  themselves  in  the  most
obscure of the Rockes. But those that inhabited on

[III.  v.  the  other  side  of  the  Mountaine  where  the  Tlascaltecans

1002.]  had  planted  themselves,  did  not  suffer  them  in  quiet,  as

the  rest  of  the Chichimecans  had  done, but they  put

themselves in defence to preserve their Country, and

Giants.  being Giants as the Histories report, they sought to

expell  the  last  Commers,  but  they  were  vanquisht  by
the  policy  of  the  Tlascaltecans,  who  counterfeiting  a  peace
with  them,  invited  them  to  a  great  banquet,  and  when
they  were  busiest  in  their  drunkennesse,  there  were  some
laid  in  ambush,  who  secretly  stole  away  their  weapons,
which  were  great  Clubs,  Targets,  Swords  of  wood,  and
other  such  armes.  Then  did  they  suddenly  set  upon
them,  and  the  Chichimecans  seeking  to  defend  them-
selves, they  did  want  their  armes,  so  as  they  fled  to  the
Mountaines  and  Forests  adjoyning,  where  they  pulled
downe  Trees,  as  if  they  had  beene  stalkes  of  Lettuces.
But  in  the  end,  the  Tlascaltecans  being  armed,  and
marching  in  order,  they  defeated  all  the  Giants,  not  leaving

Note  of  one  alive. We  must  not  hold  this  of  the  Giants  to  be

Giants.  strange,  or  a  fable ;  for  at  this  day  we  finde  dead  mens

bones  of  an  incredible  bignesse.

When  I  was  in  Mexico,  in  the  yeere  1586.  they  found
one  of  those  Giants  buried  in  one  of  our  Farmes,  which
we  call  Jesus  du  Mont,  of  whom  they  brought  a  tooth
to  bee  seene,  which  (without  augmenting)  was  as  bigge
as  the  fist  of  a  man,  and  according  to  this,  all  the  rest
was  proportionable,  which  I  saw  and  admired  at  his
deformed  greatnesse.  The  Tlascaltecans  by  this  victorie
remayned  peaceable,  and  so  did  the  rest  of  the  Linages.
These  sixe  Linages  did  alwayes  entertaine  amitie  together,
marrying  their  children  one  with  another,  and  dividing
their  limits  quietly :  then  they  studied  with  an  emulation

238

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
to encrease and beautifie their Commonweale. The
barbarous  Chichimecans,  seeing  what  passed,  began  to  use  Beginnings  of
some government, and to apparell themselves, being  cwtlltie-
ashamed  of  what  had  passed : for  till  then  they  had  no
shame. And  having  abandoned  feare  by  their  communi-
cation with  these  other  people,  they  began  to  learne  many
things  of  them, building  small  Cottages, having some
policy  and  government. They did  also choose  Lords,
whom  they  did  acknowledge  for  their  Superiors,  by  meanes
whereof  they  did  in  a  manner  quite  abandon  this  bruitish
life, yet  did they  alwayes  continue in the Mountaines
divided  from  the  rest.

Three  hundred  and  two  yeeres  after  the  former  two  Of  the
Linages  had  left  their  Country,  to  inhabite  New  Spaine,  yexicans
the  Country  being  now  well  peopled,  and  reduced  to  some  their  journey
forme of  government, Those of the seventh Cave or  and  peopling
Line  arrived,  which  is  the  Mexicane  Nation,  the  which  the  Province  of
like unto the rest, left the Province of Aztlan, and  Mechwaem.
Teuculhuacan,  a  politike,  courtlike,  and  warlike  Nation. u  4"
They  did  worship  the  Idoll  Vitzliputzli,  the  Devill  that
was  in  this  Idoll  spake,  and  governed  this  Nation  easily.
This Idoll commanded them to leave their Country,  Devills  emula-
promising  to  make  them  Princes  and  Lords  over  all  the  tton  f  f!f
Provinces  which  the  other  sixe  Nations  did  possesse,  that  ^n-JL/
he  would  give  them  a  Land  abounding  with  gold,  silver,  Israel  out  of
precious  stones,  feathers,  and  rich  mantels : whereupon  Egypt,  and
they  went  forth,  carrying  their  Idoll  with  them  in  a  Coffer  passing  throw
of  Reedes,  supported  by  foure  of  their  principall  Priests, esert
with  whom  he  did  talke  and  reveale  unto  them  in  secret,
the  successe  of  their  way  and  voyage,  advising  them  of
what should happen. He likewise gave them Lawes,
and  taught  them  the  customes,  ceremonies,  and  sacrifices
they  should  observe. They  did  not  advance  nor  moove
without  commandement  from  this  Idoll. He  gave  them
notice  when  to  march,  and  when  to  stay  in  any  place,
wherein  they  wholly  obeyed  him. The  first  thing  they
did  wheresoever  they  came, was to  build  a House  or
Tabernacle  for  their  false  god,  which  they  set  alwayes  in  Tabernacle.

239

A.D.

c.  1588.

Arke.

Mexi  their
Moses.

Mechovacan.

Pascuaro.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  middest  of  their  Campe,  and  there  placed  the  Arke
upon  an  Altar,  in  the  same  manner  as  they  have  used  in
the  holy  Christian  Church.  This  done,  they  sowed  their
land  for  bread  and  pulses,  which  they  used :  and  they
were  so  addicted  to  the  obedience  of  their  god,  that  if
he  commanded  them  to  gather,  they  gathered,  but  if  he
commanded  them  to  raise  their  Campe,  all  was  left  there
for  the  nourishment  of  the  aged,  sicke,  and  wearie,  which
they  left  purposely  from  place  to  place,  that  they  might
people  it,  pretending  by  this  meanes,  that  all  the  Land
should  remaine  inhabited  by  their  Nation.

We  may  well  judge  what  this  Vitzliputzli  was,  for  that
there  was  never  seene  nor  heard  speake  of  customes  more
superstitious,  nor  sacrifices  more  cruell  and  inhumane,
then  those  which  hee  taught  them.  To  conclude,  they
were  invented  by  the  enemie  of  mankinde.  The  Chiefe
and  Captaine  whom  they  followed,  was  called  Mexi,
whence  came  the  name  of  Mexico,  and  of  the  Mexican
Nation.  This  people  marching  thus  at  leisure,  as  the
other  sixe  Nations  had  done,  peopling  and  tilling  the
Land  in  divers  parts,  whereof  there  is  yet  some  shewes
and  ruines :  and  after  they  had  endured  many  travels  and
dangers,  in  the  end  they  came  to  the  Province  of
Mechovacan,  which  is  as  much  to  say,  as  a  land  of  fish,
for  there  is  great  abundance  in  goodly  great  Lakes,  where
contenting  themselves  with  the  situation  and  temperature
of  the  ground,  they  resolved  to  stay  there.  Yet  having
consulted  with  their  Idoll  upon  this  point,  and  finding
him  unwilling,  they  demanded  license  to  leave  some  of
their  men  to  people  so  good  a  Land,  the  which  he  granted,
teaching  them  the  meanes  how  to  doe  it,  which  was,  that
when  the  Men  and  Women  should  be  entred  into  a  goodly
Lake  called  Pascuaro,  to  bathe  themselves,  those  which
remayned  on  Land,  should  steale  away  all  their  clothes,
and  then  secretly  raise  their  Campe,  and  depart  without
any  bruit,  the  which  was  effected,  and  the  rest  which
dreamt  not  of  this  deceit  (for  the  pleasure  they  tooke  in
bathing)  comming  forth  and  finding  themselves  spoyled

240

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
of  their  garments, and thus mocked  and  left  by their  [HI.  v.
Companions, they remayned discontented and vexed  IO°3-l

therewith :  so  as  to  make  shew  of  the  hatred  they  had
conceived  against  them,  they  say  that  they  changed  their
manner  of  life  and  their  language.  At  the  least  it  is  most
certaine,  that  the  Mechovacans  have  beene  alwayes
enemies  to  the  Mexicans,  and  therefore  they  came  to  con-
gratulate the  Marquesse  De  Valle,  after  his  victorie
obtayned  when  he  had  conquered  Mexico.

From  Mechovacan  to  Mexico,  are  about  fiftie  leagues,  Of  that  which
and  upon  the  way  is  Malinalco,  where  it  happened,  that  happened  in
complayning  to  their  Idoll  of  a  woman  that  was  a  notable  „  , J .
witch,  which  came  in  their  company  carrying  the  name  chapultepec
of  their  sister  to  their  god,  for  that  with  her  wicked  artes  Chap.  5.
shee  did  them  much  harme,  pretending  by  certaine  meanes
to  bee  worshipped  of  them  as  their  goddesse  : the  Idoll
spake  in  a  dreame  to  one  of  those  old  men  that  carried
the  Arke,  commanding  him  to  comfort  the  people,  making
them  new  and  great  promises,  and  that  they  should  leave
this his sister with her family, being cruell and bad,
raysing  their  Campe  at  mid-night  in  great  silence,  leaving
no  shew  what  way  they  passed. So  they  did,  and  the
Witch remayning alone with her family in this sort, Witch
peopled  a  towne  which  they  call  Malinalco,  the  Inhabitants  forsaken-
whereof,  are  held  for  great  Sorcerers,  being  issued  from
such  a  mother. The  Mexicans  for  that  they  were  greatly
diminished  by these divisions, and by the number of
sicke  and  wearied  persons,  which  they  had  left  behinde,
meant  to  repayre  themselves,  and  to  stay  in  a  place  called
Tula,  which  signifies  a  place  of  Reedes. There  their  Idoll
commanded  them  to  stop  a  great  River,  that  it  might
cover  a  great  Playne,  and  by  the  meanes  he  taught  them,
they  did  inviron  a  little  Hill  called  Coatepec,  making  a
great  Lake,  the  which  they  did  plant  round  about  with
Willowes,  Elmes,  Sapines,  and  other  Trees. There  began
to  breede  much  fish,  and  many  birds  came  thither : so  as
it  became  a  very  pleasant  place. The  situation  of  this
place, seeming  pleasant unto them, and  being  wearied
xv  241  Q

A.D.

c.  1588.

Devils  proud

emulation  in

punishing

disobedience,

and  teaching

mu?~therous

sacrifices.

Chapultepec.

Metamor-
phosis.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

with  travell,  many  talked  of  peopling  there,  and  to  passe
no  farther :  wherewith  the  Devill  was  much  displeased,
threatning  the  Priests  with  death,  commanding  them  to
returne  the  River  to  her  course,  saying,  that  hee  would
that  night  chastise  those  which  had  beene  disobedient  as
they  had  deserved.  And  as  to  doe  ill  is  proper  to  the
Devill,  and  that  the  divine  Justice  doth  often  suffer  such  to
be  delivered  into  the  hands  of  such  a  Tormentor,  that
choose  him  for  their  god ;  It  chanced  that  about  mid-
night they  heard  a  great  noyse  in  one  part  of  the  Campe,
and  in  the  morning  going  thither,  they  found  those  dead
that  had  talked  of  staying  there.  The  manner  of  their
death,  was,  that  their  stomacks  were  opened,  and  their
hearts  pulled  out.  And  by  that  meanes,  this  good  god
taught  these  poore  miserable  Creatures,  the  kindes  of
sacrifices  that  pleased  him,  which  was,  in  opening  the
stomacke,  to  pull  out  the  heart,  as  they  have  since
practised  in  their  horrible  sacrifices.  Seeing  this  punish-
ment, and  that  the  Playne  was  dryed,  the  Lake  being
emptied,  they  asked  counsell  of  their  god  what  to  doe,
who  commanded  them  to  passe  on,  the  which  they  did
by  little  and  little,  untill  they  came  to  Chapultepec,  a
league  from  Mexico,  famous  for  the  pleasantnesse  thereof.
They  did  fortifie  themselves  in  these  Mountaines,  fearing
the  Nations  which  inhabited  that  Country,  the  which  were
opposite  unto  them,  especially  for  that  one  named  Copil,
sonne  to  this  Sorceresse,  left  in  Malinalco,  had  blamed
and  spoken  ill  of  the  Mexicans  :  for  this  Copil  by  the
commandement  of  his  mother,  awhile  after  followed  the
Mexicans  course,  labouring  to  incense  the  Tapanecas,  and
other  neighbours  against  them,  even  unto  the  Chalcas :
so  as  they  came  with  a  strong  Armie  to  destroy  the
Mexicans.  Copil  in  the  meane  space  stood  upon  a  little
Hill  in  the  middest  of  a  Lake,  called  Acopilco,  attending
the  destruction  of  his  Enemies,  and  they  by  the  advice
of  their  Idoll,  went  against  him,  tooke  him  suddenly,
and  slue  him,  carrying  his  heart  to  their  god,  who  com-
manded them to cast it into the Lake, fayning that

242

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.
thereof  did  grow  a  plant  called  Tunal,  where  since  Mexico
was  built.  They  came  to  fight  with  the  Chalcas,  and
other  Nations,  having  chosen  for  their  Captaine,  a  valiant
man,  called  Vitzilonilti,  who  in  an  encounter,  was  taken
and  slaine  by  the  Enemies.  But  for  all  this,  they  were
not  discouraged,  but  fought  valiantly ;  and  in  despight
of  their  Enemies  they  brake  the  squadrons,  and  carrying
their  Aged,  their  Women,  and  young  Children  in  the
midst  of  their  battaile,  they  passed  on  to  Atlacuyavaya,  Atlacuyavaya.
a  Towne  of  the  Culhuans,  whom  they  found  solemnising
of  a  Feast,  in  which  place  they  fortified.  The  Chalcas,
nor  the  other  Nations  did  not  follow  them,  but  grieved
to  be  defeated  by  so  small  a  number  of  men ;  they  being
in  so  great  multitudes  retyred  to  their  Townes.

The  Mexicans,  by  the  advice  of  their  Idoll,  sent  their  Of  the  warns
Messengers  to  the  Lord  of  Culhuacan,  to  demand  a  place  the  Mexicans
to  dwell  in,  who  after  hee  had  imparted  it  to  his  people,  tle^s"Jnst
granted  them  the  place  of  Ticaapan,  which  signifies  white  Culhuacan.
waters, to the  end  they should  all  perish there,  being  Chap.  6.
full  of  Vipers,  Snakes,  and  other  venemous  beasts  which  Ticaapan.
bred  in  a  Hill  neere  adjoyning. But  being  perswaded
and  taught  by  their  Devill,  they  accepted  willingly  what
was  offered,  and  by  their  devillish  arte,  tamed  these  beasts,
so  as  they  did  them  no  harme ;  yea,  they  used  them  as
meate,  eating  them  with  delight  and  appetite. The  which
the  Lord  of  Culhuacan  seeing,  and  that  they  had  tilled
and  sowed  the  Land,  he  resolved  to  receive  them  into
the  Citie,  and  to  contract  amitie  with them. But  the
god  whom  the  Mexicans  did  worship  (as  he  is  accustomed
to  do  no  good,  but  ill)  said  unto  his  Priests,  that  this
was  not  the  place  where  hee  would  have  them  stay,  and
that  they  must  go  forth  making  warres. Therefore  they
must  seeke  forth  a  Woman,  and  name  her  the  Goddesse  [HI.  v.
of  Discord. Whereupon they  resolved  to send  to  the  1004.]

King of Culhuacan, to demand his daughter to be  yjfeeni '  °J

r^  r 1 iv  it •  1  1  1 •  11 Discord  made

v^ueene  or  the  Mexicans,  and  mother  to  their  god,  who  u  the  King  of
received  this  ambassage  willingly,  sending  his  daughter  Pride.
presently  gorgeously  attired  and  well  accompanied. The

243

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

same  night  shee  arrived,  by  order  of  the  murtherer  whom
they  worshipped,  they  killed  her  cruelly ;  and  having
flayed  her  artificially  as  they  could  doe,  they  did  clothe
a  young  man  with  her  skin,  and  thereupon  her  apparell,
placing  him  neere  their  Idoll,  dedicating  him  for  a
Goddesse  and  the  mother  of  their  god,  and  ever  after  did
Toccy.  worship  it,  making  an  Idoll  which  they  called  Toccy,
which  is  to  say,  our  grand  mother.  Not  content  with
this  crueltie,  they  did  maliciously  invite  the  King  of
Culhuacan,  the  father  of  the  young  Maid,  to  come  and
worship  his  daughter,  who  was  now  consecrated  a
goddesse,  who  comming  with  great  Presents,  and  well
accompanied  with  his  people,  he  was  led  into  a  very
darke  Chappell  where  their  Idoll  was,  that  he  might  offer
sacrifice  to  his  daughter  that  was  in  that  place.  But  it
chanced  that  the  Incense  that  was  upon  the  harth,  accord-
ing to  their  custome,  kindled  in  such  sort,  as  he  might
discerne  his  daughters  haire,  and  having  by  this  meanes
discovered  the  crueltie  and  deceit,  he  went  forth  crying
aloud,  and  with  all  his  men  he  fell  upon  the  Mexicans,
forcing  them  to  retyre  to  the  Lake,  so  as  they  were  almost
drowned.  The  Mexicans  defended  themselves,  casting
certaine  little  darts,  which  they  used  in  the  warres,  where-
with they  much  galled  their  enemies.  But  in  the  end
they  got  Land,  and  leaving  that  place,  they  coasted  along
the  Lake,  very  weary  and  wet ;  the  Women  and  little
Children  crying  and  making  great  exclamations  against
them  and  their  god  that  had  brought  them  into  this
distresse.  They  were  inforced  to  passe  a  River  that  could
not  bee  waded  thorow,  and  therefore  they  advised  to
make  small  Boates  of  their  Targets  and  of  Reedes,
wherein  they  passed.  Then  afterwards,  having  left
Culhuacan,  they  arrived  at  Iztacalco,  and  finally  to  the
place  where  the  Hermitage  of  Saint  Anthony  now  is,
at  the  entrie  of  Mexico,  and  to  that  quarter  which  they
now  call  Saint  Paul.  During  which  time  their  Idoll  did
comfort  them  in  their  travels,  and  incouraged  them,
promising  great  matters.

244

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.
The  time  being  now  come,  that  the  Father  of  lyes  Of  the
should  accomplish  his  promise  made  to  his  people,  who  foundation  of
could  no  longer  suffer  so  many  turnings,  travels,  and  Ch  '
dangers,  it  happened  that  some  old  Priests  or  Sorcerers,
being  entred  into  a  place  full  of  water-lillies,  they  met
with  a  very  faire  and  cleere  current  of  water,  which  seemed
to  be  silver,  and  looking  about,  they  found  the  Trees,
Meadowes,  Fish,  and  all  that  they  beheld  to  be  very
white :  wondering  hereat,  they  remembred  a  prophesie
of  their  god,  whereby  he  had  given  them  that  for  a  token
of  their  place  of  rest,  and  to  make  them  Lords  of  other
Nations.  Then  weeping  for  joy,  they  returned  to  the
people  with  these  good  newes.  The  night  following,
Vitzliputzli  appeared  in  a  dreame  to  an  ancient  Priest,
saying,  that  they  should  seeke  out  a  Tunal  in  the  Lake,
which  grew  out  of  a  stone  (which  as  hee  told  them,  was
the  same  place  where  by  his  commandement  they  had  cast
the  heart  of  Copil,  sonne  to  the  Sorceresse  their  enemie)
and  upon  this  Tunal  they  should  see  a  goodly  Eagle,
which  fed  on  certaine  small  birds.  When  they  should
see  this,  they  should  beleeve  it  was  the  place  where  their
Citie  should  be  built,  the  which  should  surmount  all
others,  and  be  famous  throughout  the  World.  Morning
being  come,  the  old  man  assembled  the  whole  people,
from  the  greatest  to  the  least,  making  a  long  speech  unto
them,  how  much  they  were  bound  unto  their  god  ;  and
of  the  revelation,  which  (although  unworthy)  he  had
received  that  night,  concluding  that  all  must  seeke  out
that  happy  place  which  was  promised  them ;  which  bred
such  devotion  and  joy  in  them  all,  that  presently  they
undertooke  the  enterprise,  and  dividing  themselves  into
Bands,  they  began  to  search,  following  the  signes  of  the
revelation  of  the  desired  place.  Amiddest  the  thickest
of  these  water-lillies  in  the  Lake,  they  met  with  the  same
course  of  water  they  had  seene  the  day  before,  but  much
differing,  being  not  white,  but  red,  like  bloud,  the  which
divided  it  selfe  into  two  streames,  whereof  the  one  was
of  a  very  obscure  azure,  the  which  bred  admiration  in

245

A.D.

c.  1588.

Eagle  glorious
adored.

Tenoxtiltan.

Tabernacle
for  their
Devils  Arke.

[III.  v.

1005.]

Stone
Chappell.

Oracle.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

them,  noting  some  great  mysterie,  as  they  said.  After
much  search  here  and  there,  the  Tunal  appeared  growing
on  a  stone,  whereon  was  a  Royall  Eagle,  with  the  wings
displayed  towards  the  Sunne,  receiving  his  heat.  About
this  Eagle  were  many  rich  feathers,  white,  red,  yellow,
blue,  and  greene,  of  the  same  sort  as  they  make  their
Images,  which  Eagle  held  in  his  tallants  a  goodly  bird.
Those  which  saw  it  and  knew  it  to  bee  the  place  foretold
by  the  Oracle,  fell  on  their  knees,  doing  great  worship
to  the  Eagle,  which  bowed  the  head  looking  on  every
side.  Then  was  there  great  cryes,  demonstrations,  and
thankes  unto  the  Creator,  and  to  their  great  god
Vitzliputzli,  who  was  their  father,  and  had  alwayes  told
them  truth.  For  this  reason  they  called  the  Citie  which
they  founded  there,  Tenoxtilton,  which  signifies  Tunal
on  a  stone,  and  to  this  day  they  carry  in  their  Armes,  an
Eagle  upon  a  Tunal,  with  a  bird  in  his  tallant,  and
standing  with  the  other  upon  the  Tunal.  The  day
following,  by  common  consent  they  made  an  Hermitage
adjoyning  to  the  Tunal  of  the  Eagle,  that  the  Arke  of
their  god  might  rest  there,  till  they  might  have  meanes
to  build  him  a  sumptuous  Temple :  and  so  they  made
this  Hermitage  of  Flagges  and  Turfes  covered  with
straw.  Then  having  consulted  with  their  god,  they
resolved  to  buy  of  their  Neighbours,  Stone,  Timber,
Lime,  in  exchange  of  Fish,  Frogs,  and  young  Kids,  and
for  Ducks,  Water-hens,  Courlieus,  and  divers  other  kindes
of  Sea  fowles.  All  which  things  they  did  fish  and  hunt
for  in  this  Lake,  whereof  there  is  great  abundance.  They
went  with  these  things  to  the  Markets  of  the  Townes
and  Cities  of  the  Tapenecans,  and  of  them  of  Tescuco
their  neighbours,  and  with  policy  they  gathered  together
by  little  and  little,  what  was  necessarie  for  the  building
of  their  Citie :  so  as  they  built  a  better  Chappell  for  their
Idoll  of  lime  and  stone,  and  laboured  to  fill  up  a  great
part  of  the  Lake  with  rubbish.  This  done,  the  Idoll
spake  one  night  to  one  of  his  Priests,  in  these  termes ;
Say  unto  the  Mexicans,  that  the  Noblemen  divide  them-

246

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c,  1588.
selves  every  one  with  their  Kinsfolks  and  Friends,  and
that  they  divide  themselves  into  foure  principall  quarters,
about  the  house  which  you  have  built  for  my  rest,  and
let  every  quarter  build  in  his  quarter  at  his  pleasure.
The  which  was  put  in  execution :  and  those  be  the  foure
principall  quarters  of  Mexico,  which  are  called  at  this
day  Saint  Jean,  Saint  Mary  the  round,  Saint  Paul,  and
Saint  Sebastian.  After  this,  the  Mexicans  being  thus
divided  into  these  foure  quarters,  their  god  commanded
them  to  divide  amongst  them  the  gods  he  should  name
to  them,  and  that  they  should  give  notice  to  every
quarter,  principall  of  the  other  foure  particall  quarters,
where  their  gods  should  bee  worshipped.  So  as  under
every  one  of  these  foure  principall  quarters,  there  were
many  lesse  comprehended,  according  to  the  number  of
the  Idols  which  their  god  commanded  them  to  worship,
which  they  called  Calpultetco,  which  is  as  much  to  say,
as  God  of  the  quarters.  In  this  manner  the  Citie  of  God  of  the
Mexico  Tenoxtiltan  was  founded,  and  grew  great.  Quarters.

This  division  being  made  as  aforesaid,  some  old  Men  Of  the  sedition
and  Ancients  held  opinion,  that  in  the  division,  they  had  tfOose  of
not  respected  them  as  they  deserved :  for  this  cause,  they  TJ^^r^nd
and their Kinsfolke did mutinie, and went to seeke  %• the
another  residence : and  as  they  went  through  the  Lake,  Mexicans  did
they  found  a  small  piece  of  Ground  or  Terrasse,  which  choose.
they call Tloteloli, where they inhabited, calling it ChaP-  8-
Tlatellulco, which signifies Place of  a Terrasse. This
was  the  third  division  of  the  Mexicans,  since  they  left
their  Country. That  of  Mechovacan  being  the  first,  and
that of  Malinalco the second. Those  which separated
themselves  and  went  to  Tlatellulco,  were  famous  men,
but of bad disposition : and therefore they practised
against  the  Mexicans  their  neighbours,  all  the  ill  neigh-
bourhood they  could. They  had  alwayes  quarrels  against
them, and to this day continues their hatred and old
leagues. They  of  Tenoxtiltan,  seeing  them  of  Tlatellulco
thus opposite unto them, and that they multiplyed,
feared  that  in time  they  might  surmount  them : here-

247

A.D.

c.  1588.

Acamapixtli
first  King  of
the  Mexicans.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

upon  they  assembled  in  counsell,  where  they  thought  it
good  to  choose  a  King,  whom  they  should  obey,  and
strike  terrour  into  their  Enemies,  that  by  this  meanes
they  should  bee  more  united  and  stronger  among  them-
selves, and  their  Enemies  not  presume  too  much  against
them.  Being  thus  resolved  to  choose  a  King,  they  tooke
another  advice  very  profitable  and  assured,  to  choose  none
among  themselves,  for  the  avoyding  of  dissentions,  and
to  gayne  (by  their  new  King)  some  other  neighbour
Nations,  by  whom  they  were  invironed,  being  destitute  of
all  succours.  All  well  considered,  both  to  pacifie  the
King  of  Culhuacan,  whom  they  had  greatly  offended,
having  slaine  and  flayed  the  daughter  of  his  predecessor,
and  done  him  so  great  a  scorne,  as  also  to  have  a  King
of  the  Mexican  bloud,  of  which  generation  there  were
many  in  Culhuacan,  which  continued  there  since  the  time
they  lived  in  peace  amongst  them ;  they  resolved  to  choose
for  their  King,  a  young  man  called  Acamapixtli,  sonne
to  a  great  Mexican  Prince,  and  of  a  Lady,  daughter  to
the  King  of  Culhuacan.  Presently  they  sent  Ambassadors
with  a  great  Present  to  demand  this  man,  who  delivered
their  Ambassage  in  these  termes ;  Great  Lord,  wee  your
Vassals  and  Servants,  placed  and  shut  up  in  the  Weedes
and  Reedes  of  the  Lake,  alone,  and  abandoned  of  all
the  Nations  of  the  World,  led  onely  and  guided  by  our
god  to  the  place  where  wee  are,  which  falls  in  the  juris-
diction of  your  limits  of  Ascapusalco,  and  of  Tescuco :
Although  you  have  suffered  us  to  live  and  remayne  there,
yet  will  wee  not,  neither  is  it  reason  to  live  without  a
Head  and  Lord  to  command,  correct,  and  governe  us,
instructing  us  in  the  course  of  our  life,  and  defending
us  from  our  Enemies :  Therefore  wee  come  to  you,
knowing  that  in  your  Court  and  House,  there  are
Children  of  our  generation,  linckt  and  allied  with  yours,
issued  from  our  entrailes,  and  yours,  of  our  bloud  and
yours,  among  the  which  wee  have  knowledge  of  a  Grand-
child of  your  and  ours,  called  Acamapixtli.  Wee  beseech
you  therefore,  to  give  him  us  for  Lord,  wee  will  esteeme

248

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.
him  as  hee  deserves,  seeing  hee  is  of  the  Linage  of  the
Lords  of  Mexico,  and  the  Kings  of  Culhuacan.

The  King  having  consulted  upon  this  point,  and  finding
it  nothing  inconvenient  to  bee  allied  to  the  Mexicans,
who  were  valiant  men,  made  them  answere,  That  they
should  take  his  grand-child  in  good  time,  adding  there-
unto, that  if  he  had  beene  a  woman,  hee  would  not  have
given  her,  noting  the  foule  fact  before  spoken  of,  ending
his  discourse  with  these  wordes,  Let  my  grand-child  goe
to  serve  your  god,  and  be  his  Lieutenant,  to  rule  and
governe  his  Creatures,  by  whom  we  live,  who  is  the  Lord
of  Night,  Day,  and  Windes :  Let  him  goe  and  be  Lord
of  the  Water  and  Land,  and  possesse  the  Mexican  Nation,
take  him  in  good  time,  and  use  him  as  my  sonne  and
grand-child.  The  Mexicans  gave  him  thankes,  all  joyntly
desiring  him  to  marry  him  with  his  owne  hand,  so  as
hee  gave  him  to  wife,  one  of  the  noblest  Ladies  amongst
them.  They  conducted  the  new  King  and  Queene  with
all  honor  possible,  and  made  him  a  solemne  reception,
going  all  in  generall  forth  to  see  the  King,  whom  they
led  into  Palaces  which  were  then  but  meane ;  and  having
seated  them  in  Royall  Thrones,  presently  one  of  the
Ancients  and  an  Orator  much  esteemed  amongst  them,  [in.  v.
did  rise  up,  speaking  in  this  manner,  My  sonne,  our  Lord  1006.]

and  King,  thou  art  welcome  to  this  poore  House  and
Citie,  amongst  these  weeds  and  mud,  where  thy  poore
fathers,  Grand-fathers,  and  Kinsfolks,  endure  what  it
pleaseth  the  Lord  of  things  created.  Remember  Lord
thou  commest  hither  to  be  the  defence  and  support  of
the  Mexican  Nation,  and  to  be  the  resemblance  of  our
god  Vitzliputzli,  whereupon  the  charge  and  government
is  given  thee.  Thou  knowest  wee  are  not  in  our  Country,
seeing  the  Land  we  possesse  at  this  day  is  anothers,  neither
know  we  what  shall  become  of  us  to  morrow,  or  another
day :  Consider  therefore  that  thou  commest  not  to  rest
or  recreate  thy  selfe,  but  rather  to  indure  a  new  charge
under  so  heavy  a  burden  :  wherein  thou  must  continually
labour,  being  slave  to  this  multitude,  which  is  fallen  to

249

A.D.

c.  1588.

How  Orations
were  kept  in
memorie.

Crowne  and
coronation.

Of  the  strange
tribute  the
Mexicans
payed  to
them  of
Azcapuzalco.
Chap.  9.

Garden  in  the
water.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

thy  lot,  and  to  all  this  neighbour  people,  whom  thou  must
strive  to  gratifie,  and  give  them  contentment,  seeing  thou
knowest  we  live  upon  their  Lands,  and  within  their  limits.
And  ending,  he  repeated  these  wordes  ;  Thou  art  welcome,
Thou  and  the  Queene  our  Mistris,  to  this  your  Realme.
This  was  the  speech  of  the  old  man,  which  with  other
Orations  (which  the  Mexican  Histories  doe  celebrate)  the
Children  did  use  to  learne  by  heart,  and  so  they  were
kept  by  Tradition,  some  of  them  deserve  well  to  bee
reported  in  their  proper  termes.  The  King  answering,
thanked  them,  and  offered  them  his  care  and  diligence  in
their  defence  and  aide  in  all  he  could.  After  they  gave
him  the  Oath,  and  after  their  manner  set  the  Royall
Crowne  upon  his  head,  the  which  is  like  to  the  Crowne
of  the  Dukes  of  Venice :  the  name  of  Acamapixtli  their
first  King,  signifies  a  handfull  of  Reedes,  and  therefore
they  carry  in  their  Armouries  a  hand  holding  many  arrowes
of  Reedes.

The  Mexicans  hapned  so  well  in  the  election  of  their
new  King,  that  in  short  time  they  grew  to  have  some
forme  of  a  Commonweale,  and  to  bee  famous  among
strangers  ;  whereupon  their  neighbours  mooved  with  feare,
practised  to  subdue  them,  especially  the  Tapanecans,  who
had  Azcapuzalco  for  their  Metropolitane  Citie,  to  whom
the  Mexicans  payed  tribute,  as  strangers  dwelling  in  their
Land.  For  the  King  of  Azcapuzalco  fearing  their  power
which  increased,  sought  to  oppresse  the  Mexicans,  and
having  consulted  with  his  subjects,  he  sent  to  tell  King
Acamapixtli,  that  the  ordinarie  tribute  they  payed  was  too
little,  and  that  from  thenceforth  they  should  bring  Firre
trees,  Sapines,  and  Willowes  for  the  building  of  the  Citie ;
and  moreover,  they  should  make  him  a  Garden  in  the
water,  planted  with  divers  kindes  of  Herbes  and  Pulses,
which  they  should  bring  unto  him  yeerly  by  water,  dressed
in  this  manner,  without  fayling ;  which  if  they  did  not,
he  declared  them  his  enemies,  and  would  roote  them  out.
The  Mexicans  were  much  troubled  at  this  commandement,
holding  it  impossible : and  that  this  demand  was  to  no

250

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
other  end,  but  to  seeke  occasion  to  mine  them.  But  their
god  Vitzliputzli  comforted  them,  appearing  that  night  to
an  old  man,  commanding  him  to  say  to  the  King  his  sonne
in  his  name,  that  he  should  make  no  difficultie  to  accept
of  this  tribute,  he  would  helpe  them  and  make  the  meanes
easie,  which  after  happened :  for  the  time  of  tribute  being
come,  the  Mexicans  carried  the  Trees  that  were  required,
and  moreover,  a  Garden  made  and  floating  in  the  water,
and  in  it  much  Mays  (which  is  their  Corne)  alreadie
grayned  and  in  the  eare :  there  was  also  Indian  Pepper,
Beetes,  Tomates,  which  is  a  great  sappy  and  savourie
graine,  French  Pease,  Figs,  Gourds,  and  many  other
things,  all  ripe,  and  in  their  season.  Such  as  have  not
seene  the  Gardens  in  the  Lake  of  Mexico,  in  the  middest
of  the  water,  will  not  beleeve  it,  but  will  say  it  is  an
inchantment  of  the  Devill  whom  they  worship  :  But  in
truth  it  is  a  matter  to  bee  done,  and  there  hath  beene  often  How  made.
seene  of  these  Gardens  floating  in  the  water ;  for  they
cast  earth  upon  Reeds  and  Grasse,  in  such  sort  as  it  never
wastes  in  the  water ;  they  sow  and  plant  this  ground,  so
as  the  graine  growes  and  ripens  very  well,  and  then  they
remove  it  from  place  to  place.  But  it  is  true,  that  to
make  this  great  Garden  easily,  and  to  have  the  fruits
grow  well,  is  a  thing  that  makes  men  judge  there  was  the
worke  of  Vitzliputzli,  whom  otherwise  they  call  Patillas,
specially  having  never  made  nor  seene  the  like.  The  King
of  Azcapuzalco  wondred  much  when  he  saw  that  accom-
plished which  he  held  impossible,  saying  unto  his  subjects,
that  this  people  had  a  great  god  that  made  all  easie  unto
them,  and  he  said  unto  the  Mexicans,  that  seeing  their
god  gave  them  all  things  perfect,  he  would  the  yeere
following,  at  the  time  of  tribute,  they  should  bring  in
their  Garden  a  wilde  Ducke,  and  a  Heron,  sitting  on  their  New  Pharao-
egges,  in  such  sort,  that  they  should  hatch  their  young  nicall  taxes.
ones  as  they  should  arrive,  without  fayling  of  a  minute,
upon  paine  of  his  indignation.  The  Mexicans  were  much
troubled  and  heavie  with  this  proud  and  strict  command :
but  their  god,  as  he  was  accustomed,  comforted  them  in

251

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

the  night,  by  one  of  his  Priests,  saying,  that  he  would
take  all  that  charge  upon  him,  willing  them  not  to  feare,
but  beleeve  that  the  day  would  come,  when  as  the  Azcapu-
zalcos  should  pay  with  their  lives  this  desire  of  new
Tributes.  The  time  being  come,  as  the  Mexicans  carried
all  that  was  demanded  of  their  Gardens,  among  the  Reedes
and  Weedes  of  the  Garden,  they  found  a  Ducke  and  a
Heron  hatching  their  egges,  and  at  the  same  instant  when
they  arrived  at  Azcapuzalco  their  young  ones  were  dis-
closed. Whereat  the  King  of  Azcapuzalco  wondring
beyond  measure,  hee  said  againe  to  his  people,  that  these
were  more  then  humane  things,  and  that  the  Mexicans
began  as  if  they  would  make  themselves  Lords  over  all
those  Provinces.  Yet  did  hee  not  diminish  the  order
of  this  tribute,  and  the  Mexicans  finding  not  themselves
mightie  enough,  endured  this  subjection  and  slaverie  the
Acamapixtli  space  of  fiftie  yeeres.  In  this  time  the  King  Acamapixtli
dyeth.  died,  having  beautified  the  Citie  of  Mexico  with  many

[III.  v.  goodly  buildings,  streets,  Conduits  of  water,  and  great

IO°9-]  abundance  of  munition.  He  raigned  in  peace  and  rest
fortie  yeeres,  having  beene  alwayes  zealous  for  the  good
and  increase  of  the  Commonweale.

As  he  drew  neere  his  end,  he  did  one  memorable  thing,
that  having  lawfull  children  to  whom  he  might  leave  the
succession  of  the  Realme,  yet  would  he  not  doe  it,  but
contrariwise  hee  spake  freely  to  the  Common-weale,  that
as  they  had  made  a  free  Election  of  him,  so  they  should
choose  him  that  should  seeme  fittest  for  their  good  Govern-
ment, advising  them  therein  to  have  a  care  to  the  good
of  the  Common-weale,  and  seeming  grieved  that  he  left
them  not  freed  from  Tribute  and  subjection,  he  dyed,
having  recommended  his  wife  and  children  unto  them,  he
left  all  his  people  sorrowfull  for  his  death.

252

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.

§.  II.

Of  the  second  King  Vitzilovitli  ;  and  of  his
Successours  and  their  Acts  untill  the-  Reigne
of  Motezuma  their  last  King.

He  Obsequies  of  the  dead  King  performed,  the
Ancients,  the  chiefe  of  the  Realme,  and  some  part
of  the  people  assembled  together,  to  choose  a  King,

where  the  Ancients  propounded  the  necessitie  wherein  they
were,  and  that  it  was  needfull  to  choose  for  chiefe  of  their
Citie,  a  man  that  had  pitie  of  age,  of  Widdowes,  and
Orphans,  and  to  be  a  Father  of  the  Common-weale :  for
in  very  deed  they  should  be  the  feathers  of  his  wings,
the  eye-browes  of  his  eyes,  and  the  beard  of  his  face,
that  it  was  necessary  hee  were  valiant,  being  needfull
shortly  to  use  their  forces,  as  their  God  had  prophesied.
Their  resolution  in  the  end  was  to  choose  a  sonne  of  the
Predecessor,  using  the  like  good  office  in  accepting  his
sonne  for  Successor,  as  hee  had  done  to  the  Common-
weale,  relying  thereon.

This  young  man  was  called  Vitzilovitli,  which  signifieth  Vitzilovitli
a  rich  feather.  They  set  the  Royall  Crowne  upon  his  elected  King.
head,  and  anointed  him,  as  they  have  beene  accustomed
to  do  to  all  their  Kings,  with  an  Ointment  they  call  Divine,
being  the  same  unction  wherewith  they  did  anoint  their
Idoll.  Presently  an  Orator  made  an  eloquent  speech,
exhorting  him  to  arme  himselfe  with  courage,  and  free
them  from  the  travels,  slaverie  and  miserie  they  suffered,
being  oppressed  by  the  Azcapuzalcos :  which  done,  all
did  him  homage.  This  King  was  not  married,  and  his
Counsell  held  opinion,  that  it  was  good  to  marry  him
with  the  Daughter  of  the  King  of  Azcapuzalco,  to  have
him  a  friend  by  this  alliance,  and  to  obtaine  some  diminu-
tion of  their  heavie  burthen  of  Tributes  imposed  upon
them,  and  yet  they  feared  lest  he  should  disdaine  to  give
them  his  Daughter,  by  reason  they  were  his  Vassals :  yet
the King of Azcapuzalco yeelded thereunto, having

253

A.D.

c.  1588.

Marriage
ceremonie.

Lots  and
Southsaying.

Kings  death.

Of  Chimal-
popoca  the third
King,  and  his
cruell  death,
y  the  occasion
of warre  which
the  Mexicans
made.
Chap.  1 1 .

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

humbly  required  him,  who  with  courteous  words  gave
them  his  Daughter,  called  Ayanchiguall,  whom  they  led
with  great  pompe  and  joy  to  Mexico,  and  performed  the
Ceremonie  and  Solemnitie  of  Marriage,  which  was  to
tie  a  corner  of  the  mans  Cloake  to  a  part  of  the  womans
Veile,  in  signe  of  the  band  of  Marriage.  This  Qgeene
brought  forth  a  sonne,  of  whose  name  they  demanded
advice  of  the  King  of  Azcapuzalco,  and  casting  Lots  as
they  had  accustomed  (being  greatly  given  to  Southsayings,
especially  upon  the  names  of  their  children)  hee  would
have  his  Grand-childe  called  Chimalpopoca,  which  signifies
A  Target  casting  smoke.  The  Queene  his  Daughter
seeing  the  contentment  the  King  of  Azcapuzalco  had  of
his  Grand-childe,  tooke  occasion  to  intreate  him  to  relieve
the  Mexicans,  of  the  heavie  burthen  of  their  Tributes,
seeing  hee  had  now  a  Grand-childe  Mexican,  the  which
the  King  willingly  yeelded  unto,  by  the  advice  of  his
Counsell,  granting  (for  the  Tribute  which  they  paid)  to
bring  yeerely  a  couple  of  Duckes  and  some  fish,  in  signe
of  subjection,  and  that  they  dwelt  in  his  Land.  The
Mexicans  by  this  meanes  remained  much  eased  and  con-
tent, but  it  lasted  little.  For  the  Queene  their  Protectrix
died  soone  after :  and  the  yeere  following  likewise
Vitzilovitli  the  King  of  Mexico  died,  leaving  his  sonne
Chimalpopoca  tenne  yeeres  old ;  he  reigned  thirteene
yeeres,  and  died  thirtie  yeeres  old,  or  little  more.  He
was  held  for  a  good  King,  and  carefull  in  the  service  of
his  Gods,  whose  Images  hee  held  Kings  to  be ;  and  that
the  honour  done  to  their  God,  was  done  to  the  King  who
was  his  Image.  For  this  cause  the  Kings  have  been  so
affectionate  to  the  service  of  their  Gods.  This  King  was
carefull  to  winne  the  love  of  his  neighbours,  and  to  trafficke
with  them,  whereby  hee  augmented  his  Citie,  exercising
his  men  in  Warrelike  actions  in  the  Lake,  disposing  them
to  that  which  he  pretended,  as  you  shall  see  presently.

The  Mexicans  for  successor  to  their  deceased  King  did
choose  his  sonne  Chimalpopoca,  by  common  consent,
although  he  were  a  child  of  ten  yeeres  old,  being  of

254

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.
opinion  that  it  was  alwayes  necessary  to  keepe  the  favour
of  the  King  of  Azcapuzalco,  making  his  Grand-childe
King.  They  then  set  him  in  his  Throne,  giving  him  the
Ensignes  of  warre,  with  a  Bow  and  Arrowes  in  one  hand,
and  a  Sword  with  Rasors  (which  they  commonly  use)  in
the  right,  signifying  thereby  (as  they  doe  say)  that  they  [IU-  v-
pretended  by  Armes  to  set  themselves  at  libertie. The  ioio.j

Mexicans  had  great  want  of  water,  that  of  the  Lake  being
very  thicke  and  muddie,  and  therefore  ill  to  drinke,  so
as  they  caused  their  infant  King  to  desire  of  his  Grand-
father the  King  of  Azcapuzalco,  the  water  of  the
Mountaine  of  Chapultepec,  which  is  from  Mexico  a
league,  as  is  said  before,  which  they  easily  obtained,  and
by  their  industrie  made  an  Aquaduct  of  faggots,  weeds
and  flagges,  by  the  which  they  brought  water  to  their
Citie.  But  because  the  City  was  built  within  the  Lake,
and  the  Aquaduct  did  crosse  it,  it  did  breake  forth  in
many  places,  so  as  they  could  not  enjoy  the  water,  as  they
desired,  and  had  great  scarcitie :  whereupon,  whether  they
did  expresly  seeke  it,  to  quarrel  with  the  Tapanecans,  or
that  they  were  moved  upon  small  occasion,  in  the  end
they  sent  a  resolute  Ambassage  to  the  King  Azcapuzalco,
saying,  they  could  not  use  the  water  which  he  had
graciously  granted  them,  and  therefore  they  required  him
to  provide  them  wood,  lime,  and  stone,  and  to  send  his
Workmen,  that  by  their  meanes  they  might  make  a  Pipe
of  stone  and  lime  that  should  not  breake.  This  message
nothing  pleased  the  King,  and  much  lesse  his  subjects,
seeming  to  be  too  presumptuous  a  message,  and  purposely
insolent,  for  Vassals  to  their  Lord.  The  chiefe  of  the
Counsell  disdayning  thereat,  said  It  was  too  bold,  that  Ouarrell
not  content  with  permission  to  live  in  anothers  Land,  and  wttfl  tJie
to  have  water  given  them,  but  they  would  have  them  goe  TaPanecam-
to  serve  them :  what  a  matter  was  that  ?  And  whereon
presumed  this  fugitive  Nation,  shut  up  in  the  mud  ?  They
would  let  them  know,  how  fit  they  were  to  worke,  and  to
abate  their  pride,  in  taking  from  them  their  Land  and
their  lives.

255

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRJMES

c.  1588.

In  these  tearmes  and  choller  they  left  the  King,  whom
they  did  somewhat  suspect,  by  reason  of  his  Grand-childe,
and  consulted  againe  anew,  what  they  were  to  doe,  where
they  resolved  to  make  a  generall  Proclamation,  that  no
Tapanecan  should  have  any  commerce  or  trafnque  with
any  Mexican,  that  they  should  not  goe  to  their  Citie,  nor
receive  any  into  theirs,  upon  paine  of  death.  Whereby
we  may  understand  that  the  King  did  not  absolutely  com-
mand over  his  people,  and  that  hee  governed  more  like
a  Consull,  or  a  Duke,  then  a  King ;  although  since  with
their  power,  the  command  of  Kings  increased,  growing
absolute  Tyrants,  as  you  shall  see  in  the  last  Kings.

The  King  of  Azcapuzalco  seeing  the  resolution  of  his
subjects,  which  was  to  kill  the  Mexicans,  intreated  them
first  to  steale  away  the  young  King  his  Grand-childe,  and
afterwards  doe  what  they  pleased  to  the  Mexicans.  All
in  a  manner  yeelded  hereunto,  to  give  the  King  content-
ment, and  for  pittie  they  had  of  the  childe ;  but  two  of
the  chiefest  were  much  opposite,  inferring,  that  it  was  bad
counsell,  for  that  Chimalpopoca,  although  hee  were  of
their  bloud,  yet  was  it  but  by  the  Mothers  side,  and  that
the  Fathers  was  to  be  preferred,  and  therefore  they  con-
cluded that  the  first  they  must  kill  was  Chimalpopoca
King  of  Mexico,  protesting  so  to  doe.  The  King  of
Azcapuzalco  was  so  troubled  with  this  contradiction,  and
the  resolution  they  had  taken,  that  soone  after  for  very
griefe  he  fell  sicke,  and  dyed.  By  whose  death  the
Tapanecans  finishing  their  consultation,  committed  a
notable  Treason  :  for  one  night  the  young  King  of  Mexico
sleeping  without  guard,  or  feare  of  any  thing,  they  of
King  Azcapuzalco  entred  his  Palace,  and  slue  him  suddenly,

murthered.  returning  unseene.  The  morning  being  come,  when  the
Nobles  went  to  salute  the  King,  as  they  were  accustomed,
they  found  him  slaine  with  great  and  cruell  wounds ;  then
they  cryed  out  and  filled  all  their  Citie  with  teares :  and
transported  with  choller,  they  presently  fell  to  Armes,  with
an  intent  to  revenge  their  Kings  death.  As  they  ranne
up  and  downe  full  of  furie  and  disorder,  one  of  their

256

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
chiefest  Knights  stept  forth,  labouring  to  appease  them,
with  a  grave  admonition  :  Whither  goe  yee  (said  he)  O  yee
Mexicans?  quiet  your  selves,  consider  that  things  done
without  consideration  are  not  well  guided,  nor  come  to
good  end  :  suppresse  your  griefe,  considering  that  although
your  King  be  dead,  the  Noble  bloud  of  the  Mexicans  is
not  extinct  in  him.  Wee  have  children  of  our  Kings
deceased,  by  whose  conduct,  succeeding  to  the  Realme,
you  shall  the  better  execute  what  you  pretend,  having
a  Leader  to  guide  your  enterprise :  goe  not  blindly,  sur-
cease, and  choose  a  King  first,  to  guide  and  encourage  you
against  your  enemies :  In  the  meane  time  dissemble
discreetly,  performing  the  Funerals  of  your  deceased  King,
whose  bodie  you  see  heere  present,  for  hereafter  you  shall
find  better  meanes  to  take  revenge.  By  this  meanes  the
Mexicans  passed  no  farther,  but  stayed  to  make  the
Obsequies  of  their  King,  whereunto  they  invited  the
Lords  of  Tescuco,  and  Culhuacan,  reporting  unto  them
this  foule  and  cruell  fact,  which  the  Tapanecans  had  com-
mitted, mooving  them  to  have  pittie  on  them,  and
incensing  them  against  their  enemies,  concluding  that
their  resolution  was  to  die,  or  to  bee  revenged  of  so  great
an  indignitie,  intreating  them  not  to  favour  so  unjust  a
fact  of  their  enemies ;  and  that  for  their  part,  they  desired
not  their  aide  of  armes  or  men,  but  onely  to  be  lookers
on  of  what  should  passe,  and  that  for  their  maintenance,
they  would  not  stop  nor  hinder  the  commerce,  as  the
Tapanecans  had  done.  At  these  speeches  they  of  Tescuco
and  Culhuacan  made  them  great  shewes  of  good  will,  and
that  they  were  well  satisfied,  offering  them  their  Cities,
and  all  the  Commerce  they  desired,  that  they  desired,  that
they  might  provide  victuall  and  Munition  at  their  pleasure,
both  by  land  and  water.  After  this,  the  Mexicans
intreated  them  to  stay  with  them,  and  assist  at  the  election
of  their  King ;  the  which  they  likewise  granted,  to  give
them  contentment.

The  Electors  being  assembled,  an  old  man  that  was  [III.  v.
held  for  a  great  Orator,  rose  up,  who  (as  the  Histories  ion.]

xv  257  R

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.
Of  the  fourth  report)  spake  in  this  manner.  The  light  of  your  eyes,  O
King  called  Mexicans,  is  darkened,  but  not  of  your  hearts :  for
Izcoalt,  and of  though  yOU  have  lost  him  that  was  the  light  and  guide
against  the  °^  tne  Mexican  Common-weale,  yet  that  of  the  heart
Tapanecans.  remaines :  to  consider,  that  although  they  have  slaine  one
Chap.  12.  man,  yet  there  are  others  that  may  supply  with  advantage,
the  want  we  have  of  him :  the  Mexican  Nobilitie  is  not
extinguished  thereby,  nor  the  bloud  Royall  decayed.
Turne  your  eyes  and  looke  about  you,  you  shall  see  the
Nobilitie  of  Mexico  set  in  order,  not  one  or  two,  but
many  and  excellent  Princes,  Sons  to  Acamapixtli,  our  true
and  lawfull  King  and  Lord.  Here  you  may  choose  at
your  pleasure,  saying,  I  will  this  man,  and  not  that.  If
you  have  lost  a  Father,  heere  you  may  find  both  Father
and  Mother :  make  account  O  Mexicans,  that  the  Sunne
is  eclipsed  and  darkened  for  a  time,  and  will  returne
suddenly.  If  Mexico  hath  beene  darkened  by  the  death
of  your  King,  the  Sunne  will  soone  shew,  in  choosing
another  King.  Looke  to  whom,  and  upon  whom  you
shall  cast  your  eyes,  and  towards  whom  your  heart  is
inclined,  and  this  is  he  whom  your  God  Vitzliputzli  hath
chosen.  And  continuing  awhile  this  discourse,  he  ended
to  the  satisfaction  of  all  men.  In  the  end,  by  the  consent
of  this  Counsell,  Izcoalt  was  chosen  King,  which  signifies
a  Snake  of  Rasors,  who  was  Sonne  to  the  first  King
Acamapixtli,  by  a  slave  of  his :  and  although  he  were  not
legitimate,  yet  they  made  choice  of  him,  for  that  hee
exceeded  the  rest  in  behaviour,  valour,  and  magnanimitie
of  courage.  All  seemed  very  well  satisfied,  and  above
all,  these  of  Tescuco,  for  their  King  was  married  to  a  sister
of  Iscoalts.  After  the  King  had  beene  crowned  and  set
in  his  Royall  Seat,  another  Orator  stept  up,  discoursing
how  the  King  was  bound  to  his  Common-weale,  and  of
the  courage  he  ought  to  shew  in  travell,  speaking  thus,
Behold  this  day  we  depend  on  thee,  it  may  be  thou  wilt
let  fall  the  burthen  that  lies  upon  thy  Souldiers,  and  suffer
the  old  man  and  woman,  the  Orphlin  and  the  widdow  to
perish. Take  pittie  of  the  Infants  that  goe  creeping  in

258

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
the  Ayre,  who  must  perish  if  our  enemies  surmount  us :
unfold  then,  and  stretch  forth  thy  Cloake,  my  Lord,  to
beare  these  Infants  upon  thy  shoulders,  which  bee  the
poore  and  the  common  people,  who  live  assured  under
the  shadow  of  thy  wings,  and  of  thy  bountie.  Uttering
many  other  words  upon  this  subject,  the  which,  (as  I  have
said)  they  learne  by  heart,  for  the  exercise  of  their  children,
and  after  did  teach  them  as  a  Lesson  to  those  that  began
to  learne  the  facultie  of  Orators.

In  the  meane  time,  the  Tapanecans  were  resolute  to
destroy  the  Mexicans,  and  to  this  end  they  had  made  great
preparations.  And  therefore  the  new  King  tooke  counsell
for  the  proclaming  of  Warre,  and  to  fight  with  those  that
had  so  much  wronged  them.  But  the  common  people,
seeing  their  Adversaries  to  exceed  them  farre  in  numbers
and  munition  for  the  warre,  they  came  amazed  to  their
King,  pressing  him  not  to  undertake  so  dangerous  a  warre,
which  would  destroy  their  poore  Citie  and  Nation  :  where-
upon being  demanded  what  advice  were  fittest  to  take,
they  made  answere,  that  the  King  of  Azcapuzalco  was  very
pittifull,  that  they  should  demand  peace,  and  offer  to
serve  him,  drawing  them  forth  those  Marshes,  and  that
hee  should  give  them  houses,  and  lands  among  his  sub-
jects, that  by  this  meanes  they  might  depend  all  upon
one  Lord.  And  for  the  obtaining  hereof,  they  should
carrie  their  God  in  his  Litter  for  an  Intercessor.  The
cries  of  the  people  were  of  such  force  (having  some  Nobles
that  approoved  their  opinion)  as  presently  they  called  for
the  Priests,  preparing  the  Litter  and  their  God,  to  performe
the  Voyage.  As  this  was  preparing,  and  every  one  yeelded
to  this  treatie  of  peace,  and  to  subject  themselves  to  the
Tapanecans,  a  gallant  young  man,  and  of  good  sort,  stept
out  among  the  people,  who  with  a  resolute  countenance
spake  thus  unto  them,  What  meanes  this  O  yee  Mexicans,
are  yee  mad?  How  hath  so  great  cowardise  crept  in
among  us?  Shall  wee  goe  and  yeeld  our  selves  thus  to
the  Azcapuzalcans  ?  Then  turning  to  the  King  he  said,
How  now  my  Lord,  will  you  endure  this  ? Speake  to  the

259

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

people,  that  they  may  suffer  us  to  find  out  some  meanes
for  our  honour  and  defence,  and  not  yeeld  our  selves  so
simply  and  shamefully  into  the  hands  of  our  enemies.

Tlacaelkcs  This  young  man  was  called  Tlacaellec,  Nephew  to  the
King,  he  was  the  most  valiant  Captaine  and  greatest  Coun-
sellor that  ever  the  Mexicans  had,  as  you  shall  see
hereafter.  Izcoalt  encouraged  by  that  his  Nephew  had  so
wisely  spoken,  retained  the  people,  saying  they  should
first  suffer  him  to  try  another  better  meanes.  Then
turning  towards  his  Nobilitie,  he  said  unto  them,  You
are  all  heere  my  Kinsmen,  and  the  best  of  Mexico,  he
that  hath  the  courage  to  carrie  a  message  to  the  Tapane-
cans,  let  him  rise  up.  They  looked  one  upon  another,
but  no  man  stirred  nor  offered  himselfe  to  the  word.
Then  this  young  man  Tlacaellec  rising,  offered  himselfe
to  goe,  saying,  that  seeing  hee  must  die,  it  did  import
little  whether  it  were  to  day  or  to  morrow :  for  what  reason
should  hee  so  carefully  preserve  himselfe  ?  he  was  therefore
readie,  let  him  command  what  he  pleased.  And  although
all  held  this  for  a  rash  attempt,  yet  the  King  resolved  to
send  him,  that  he  might  thereon  understand  the  will  and
disposition  of  the  King  of  Azcapuzalco  and  of  his  people  ;
holding  it  better  to  hasten  his  Nephewes  death,  then  to
hazard  the  honour  of  his  Common-weale.  Tlacaellec  being
readie,  tooke  his  way,  and  being  come  to  the  Guards,
who  had  commandement  to  kill  any  Mexicans  that  came
towards  them,  by  cunning  or  otherwise :  hee  perswaded
them  to  suffer  him  to  passe  to  the  King,  who  wondred
to  see  him,  and  hearing  his  Ambassage,  which  was  to
demand  peace  of  him  under  honest  conditions,  answered,
that  he  would  impart  it  to  his  subjects,  willing  him  to
returne  the  next  day  for  his  answere. Then  Tlacaellec

[III.  v.  demanded  a  pasport,  yet  could  he  not  obtaine  any,  but

IOI20  that  he  should  use  his  best  skill:  with  this  he  returned
to  Mexico,  giving  his  words  to  the  guards  to  returne.
And  although  the  King  of  Azcapuzalco  desired  peace,
being  of  a  milde  disposition,  yet  his  Subjects  did  so  incense
him,  as  his  answer  was  open  warre. The  which  being

260

JOSEPH A  COSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
heard  by  the  Messenger,  he  did  all  his  King  commanded
him,  declaring  by  this  ceremony,  to  give  armes,  and
annointing  the  King  with  the  unction  of  the  dead,  that  in
his  Kings  behalfe  he  did  defie  him.  Having  ended  all,
the  King  of  Azcapuzalco  suffering  himselfe  to  be  anointed
and  crowned  with  Feathers,  giving  goodly  armes  in
recompence  to  the  Messenger,  wishing  him  not  to  returne
by  the  Pallace  gate,  whereas  many  attended  to  cut  him  in
peeces,  but  to  goe  out  secretly  by  a  little  false  Posterne
that  was  open  in  one  of  the  Courts  of  the  Pallace.  This
yong  man  did  so,  and  turning  by  secret  waies,  got  away
in  safetie  in  sight  of  the  Guards,  and  there  defied  them,  Ceremonies  of
saying,  Tapanecans  and  Azcapuzalcans,  you  doe  your  ^fiance.
office  ill,  understand  you  shall  all  dye,  and  not  one
Tapanecan  shall  remaine  alive.  In  the  meane  time  the
Guards  fell  upon  him,  where  he  behaved  himselfe  so
valiantly,  that  he  slew  some  of  them :  and  seeing  many
more  of  them  come  running,  he  retired  himselfe  gallantly
to  the  Citie,  where  he  brought  newes,  that  warre  was
proclaimed  with  the  Tapanecans,  and  that  he  had  defied
their  King.

The  defie  being  knowne  to  the  Commons  of  Mexico, Ofthebattalk
they  came to the  King, according  to their  accustomed  the  Mextcans
cowardise,  demanding  leave  to  depart  the  Citie,  holding  s^e  °
their  ruine  certaine. The  King  did  comfort  and  incourage  an£  0ft^e  '
them,  promising  to  give  them  libertie  if  they  vanquished  victorie  they
their  enemies,  willing them  not to feare. The people  obtained.
replied. And  if  we  be  vanquished,  what  shall  wee  doe? Cha^'  *3"
If  wee  be  overcome,  (answered  the  King)  we  will  be  bound
presently  to  yeelde  our  selves  into  your  hands  to  suffer
death,  eate  our  flesh  in  your  dishes  and  be  revenged  of  us.
It  shall  be  so  then  (say  they)  if  you  loose  the  victorie,  and
if  you  obtaine  the  victorie,  we  doe  presently  offer  our
selves  to  be  your  Tributaries,  to  labour  in  your  houses,
to  sowe  your  ground,  to  carrie  your  armes  and  baggage
when you goe to the warres for ever, wee and our
descendants  after  us. These  accords  made  betwixt  the
People  and  the  Nobilitie  (which  they  did  after  fully  per-

261

A.D.

c.  1588.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

forme,  either  willingly  or  by  constraint,  as  they  had
promised)  the  King  named  for  his  Captaine  Generall
Tlacaellec :  the  whole  Campe  was  put  in  order,  and  into
squadrons,  giving  the  places  of  Captaines  to  the  most
valiant  of  his  kinsfolkes  and  friends :  then  did  he  make
them  a  goodly  speech,  whereby  he  did  greatly  incourage
them,  being  now  well  prepared,  charging  all  men  to  obey
the  commandement  of  the  Generall  whom  he  had
appointed :  he  divided  his  men  into  two  parts,  command-
ing the  most  valiant  and  hardie,  to  give  the  first  charge
with  him,  and  that  all  the  rest  should  remaine  with  the
King  Izcoalt,  untill  they  should  see  the  first  assaile  their
enemies.  Marching  then  in  order,  they  were  discovered
by  them  of  Azcapuzalco,  who  presently  came  furiously
forth  the  Citie,  carrying  great  riches  of  Gold,  Silver,  and
Armes  of  great  value,  as  those  which  had  the  Empire  of
The  Battaile.  all  that  Countrie.  Izcoalt  gave  the  signall  to  battaile,
with  a  little  Drumme  he  carried  on  his  shoulders,  and
presently  they  raised  a  generall  showt,  crying,  Mexico,
Mexico,  they  charged  the  Tapanecans,  and  although  they
were  farre  more  in  number,  yet  did  they  defeate  them,  and
force  them  to  retire  into  their  Citie,  then  advanced  they
which  remained  behinde,  crying  Tlacaellec,  Victorie,
Victorie,  all  sodainly  entred  the  Citie,  where  (by  the
Kings  commandement)  they  pardoned  not  any  man,  no
not  old  men,  women,  nor  children,  for  they  slew  them
all,  and  spoiled  the  Citie  being  very  rich.  And  not
content  herewith,  they  followed  them  that  fled,  and  were
retired  into  the  craggie  rockes  of  the  Sierres  or  neere
Mountaines,  striking  and  making  a  great  slaughter  of
them.  The  Tapanecans  being  retired  to  a  Mountaine
cast  downe  their  Armes,  demanding  their  lives,  and
offering  to  serve  the  Mexicans,  to  give  them  Lands  and
Gardens,  Stone,  Lime  and  Timber,  and  to  hold  them
alwayes  for  their  Lords.  Upon  this  condition  Tlacaellec
retired  his  men  and  ceased  the  battaile,  granting  them
their  lives  upon  the  former  conditions,  which  they  did
solemnely  sweare. Then  they  returned  to  Azcapuzalco,

262

Mexicans
conquer.

JOSEPH ACOSTA

and  so  with  their  rich  and  victorious  spoiles  to  the  Citie
of  Mexico.  The  day  following  the  King  assembled  the
Nobilitie  and  the  People,  to  whom  hee  laid  open  the
accord  the  Commons  had  made,  demanding  of  them,  if
they  were  content  to  persist  therein :  the  Commons  made
answer,  that  they  had  promised,  and  they  had  well
deserved  it,  and  therefore  they  were  content  to  serve  them
perpetually.  Whereupon  they  tooke  an  oath,  which  since
they  have  kept  without  contradiction.

This  done,  Izcoalt  returned  to  Azcapuzalco  (by  the
advise  of  his  Counsell)  he  divided  all  the  Lands  and  Goods
of  the  conquered  among  the  conquerors,  the  chiefest  part
fell  to  the  King,  then  to  Tlacaellec,  and  after  to  the  rest
of  the  Nobles,  as  they  best  deserved  in  the  Battaile.  They
also  gave  Land  to  some  Plebeans,  having  behaved  them-
selves valiantly ;  to  others  they  distributed  the  Pillage,
making  small  account  of  them  as  of  cowards.  They
appointed  Lands  in  common  for  the  quarters  of  Mexico,
to  every  one  his  part,  for  the  Service  and  Sacrifices  of  their
Gods.  This  was  the  order  which  afterwards  they  alwayes
kept,  in  the  division  of  the  Lands  and  spoiles  of  those
they  had  vanquished  and  subdued.  By  this  meanes  they
of  Azcapuzalco  remained  so  poore,  as  they  had  no  Lands
left  them  to  labour,  and  (which  was  worse)  they  tooke
their  King  from  them,  and  all  power  to  choose  any  other
then  him  of  Mexico.

Although  the  chiefe  Citie  of  the  Tapanecanes,  was  that
of  Azcapuzalco,  yet  had  they  others  with  their  private
Lords,  as  Tucuba  and  Cuyoacan.  These  seeing  the
storme  passed,  would  gladly  that  they  of  Azcapuzalco  had
renewed  the  warre  against  the  Mexicans,  and  seeing  them
danted,  as  a  Nation  wholly  broken  and  defeated,  they  of
Cuyoacan  resolved  to  make  warre  by  themselves ;  to  the
which  they  laboured  to  draw  the  other  neighbour  Nations,
who  would  not  stirre  nor  quarrell  with  the  Mexicans.  In
the  meane  time  the  hatred  and  malice  increasing,  they  of
Cuyoacan  began  to  ill  intreate  the  women  that  went  to
their  Markets,  mocking  at  them,  and  doing  the  like  to

263

A.D.

c.  1588.

Division  of
spoyles.

[III.  v.

1013.]
Of  the  warre
and  victory  the
Mexicans  had
against  the
Citie  of
Cuyoacan.
Chap.  14.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

the  men  over  whom  they  had  power :  for  which  cause  the
King  of  Mexico  defended,  that  none  of  his  should  goe
to  Cuyoacan,  and  that  they  should  receive  none  of  them
into  Mexico,  the  which  made  them  of  Cuyoacan  resolve
wholly  to  warre :  but  first  they  would  provoke  them  by
some  shamefull  scorne,  which  was,  that  having  invited
them  to  one  of  their  solemne  feasts,  after  they  had  made
them  a  goodly  Banquet,  and  feasted  them  with  a  great
daunce  after  their  manner,  they  sent  them  for  their  fruite,
womens  apparell,  forcing  them  to  put  it  on,  and  so  to
returne  home  like  women  to  their  Citie,  reproaching  them,
that  they  were  cowards  and  effeminate,  and  that  they
durst  not  take  armes  being  sufficiently  provoked.  Those
of  Mexico  say,  that  for  revenge  they  did  unto  them  a
foule  scorne,  laying  at  the  gates  of  their  Citie  of
Cuyoacan  certaine  things  which  smoaked,  by  meanes
whereof  many  women  were  delivered  before  their  time,
and  many  fell  sicke.  In  the  end,  all  came  to  open  war,
and  there  was  a  battaile  fought,  wherein  they  imploied  all
their  forces,  in  the  which  Tlacaellec,  by  his  courage  and
policie  in  warre,  obtained  the  victorie.  For  having  left
King  Izcoalt  in  fight  with  them  of  Cuyoacan,  he  put
himselfe  in  ambush  with  some  of  the  most  valiant
Souldiers,  and  so  turning  about,  charged  them  behinde,
and  forced  them  to  retire  into  their  Citie.  But  seeing
Temple,  their  intent  was  to  flie  into  a  Temple  which  was  very
strong,  he  with  three  other  valiant  Souldiors,  pursued
them  eagerly,  and  got  before  them,  seising  on  the  Temple
and  firing  it,  so  as  he  forced  them  to  flie  to  the  fields,
where  he  made  a  great  slaughter  of  the  vanquished,
pursuing  them  two  leagues  into  the  Countrie,  unto  a  little
hill,  where  the  vanquished  casting  away  their  weapons,
and  their  armes  a  crosse,  yeelded  to  the  Mexicans,  and
with  many  teares  craved  pardon  of  their  overweening
folly,  in  using  them  like  women,  offering  to  be  their
slaves :  so  as  in  the  end  the  Mexicanes  did  pardon  them.
Of  this  victory  the  Mexicans  did  carry  away  very  rich
spoiles  of  Garments,  Armes, Gold, Silver,  Jewels,  and

264

JOSEPH ACOSTA

rich  feathers,  with  a  great  number  of  Captives.  In  this
Battaile  there  were  three  of  the  principals  of  Culhuacan
that  came  to  aide  the  Mexicans,  to  win  honour,  the  which
were  remarkeable  above  all.  And  since  being  knowne  to
Tlacaellec,  and  having  made  proofe  of  their  fidelity,  he
gave  them  Mexican  devises,  and  had  them  alwayes  by
his  side,  where  they  fought  in  all  places  very  valiantly.
It  was  apparant  that  the  whole  victory  was  due  to  the
Generall,  and  to  these  three ;  for  among  so  many
captives  taken,  two  third  parts  were  wonne  by  these  foure,
which  was  easily  knowne  by  a  policie  they  used :  for
taking  a  Captive,  they  presently  cut  off  a  little  of  his
haire,  and  gave  it  to  others,  so  as  it  appeared  that  those
which  had  their  haire  cut,  amounted  to  that  number,
whereby  they  wonne  great  reputation  and  fame  of  valiant
men.  They  were  honoured  as  Conquerours,  giving  them
good  portions  of  the  spoiles  and  Lands,  as  the  Mexicans
have  alwaies  used  to  doe,  which  gave  occasion  to  those
that  did  fight,  to  become  famous,  and  to  win  reputation
by  Armes.

The  Nation  of  the  Tapanecans  being  subdued,  the
Mexicans  had  occasion  to  doe  the  like  to  the  Suchimilcos,
who  (as  it  hath  beene  said)  were  the  first  of  the  seven
Caves  or  linages  that  peopled  this  Land.  The  Mexicans
sought  not  the  occasion,  although  they  might  presume  as
Conquerours  to  extend  their  limits,  but  the  Suchimilcos
did  move  them,  to  their  owne  ruine,  as  it  happens  to
men  of  small  judgement  that  have  no  foresight,  who  not
preventing  the  mischiefe  they  imagined,  fall  into  it.  The
Suchimilcos  held  opinion,  that  the  Mexicans,  by  reason
of  their  victories  past,  should  attempt  to  subdue  them,
and  consulted  hereon  among  themselves.  Some  among
them  thought  it  good  to  acknowledge  them  for  superiours,
and  to  applaud  their  good  fortune,  but  the  contrary  was
allowed,  and  they  went  out  to  give  them  battaile  :  which
Izcoalt  the  King  of  Mexico  understanding,  he  sent  his
Generall  Tlacaellec  against  them,  with  his  armie :  the
battaile  was  fought  in  the  same  field  that  divides  their

265

A.D.

c.  1588.

Of  the  war  re
and  victory
which  the
Mexicans  had
against  the
Suchimilcos.

Ch. Is.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

limits,  which  two  Armies  were  equall  in  men  and  armes,
but  very  divers  in  their  order  and  manner  of  fighting ;
for  that  the  Suchimilcos  charged  all  together  on  a  heape
confusedly,  and  Tlacaellec  divided  his  men  into  squadrons
with  a  goodly  order,  so  as  he  presently  brake  his  enemies,
forcing  them  to  retire  into  their  Citie,  into  the  which  they

Temple  filled,  entred,  following  them  to  the  Temple  whither  they  fled,
which  they  fired,  and  forcing  them  to  flye  to  the  Moun-
taines :  in  the  end  they  brought  them  to  this  point,  that
they  yeelded  with  their  arme  acrosse.  The  Generall
Tlacaellec  returning  in  great  triumph,  the  Priests  went
forth  to  receive  him,  with  their  musicke  of  Flutes,  and
giving  incense.  The  chiefe  Captaines  used  other
Ceremonies  and  shewes  of  joy,  as  they  had  beene
accustomed  to  doe,  and  the  King  with  all  the  troupe  went
to  the  Temple  to  give  thankes  to  their  false  god.

The  day  following, the  King Izcoalt  went  unto the

[III.  v.  Citie  of  Suchimilco,  causing  himselfe  to  be  sworne  King

1014.]  0f  t^  Suchimilcos :  and  for  their  comfort  he  promised  to

doe  them  good. In  token  whereof  he  commanded  them

Causey  made,  to  make  a  great  Cawsey  stretching  from  Mexico  to
Suchimilco,  which  is  foure  leagues,  to  the  end  there  might
be  more  commerce  and  trafficke  among  them.  Which
the  Suchimilcos  performed,  and  in  short  time  the  Mexican
government  seemed  so  good  unto  them,  as  they  held  them-
selves happy  to  have  changed  their  King  and  Common-
weale.  Some  neighbours  pricked  forward  by  envie,  or
feare,  to  their  ruines,  were  not  yet  made  wise  by  others
miseries.

Cuitlavaca.  Cuitlavaca  was  a  Citie  within  the  Lake  :  which  though

the  name  and  dwelling  be  changed,  continueth  yet.  They
were  active  to  swim  in  the  Lake,  and  therefore  they
thought  they  might  much  indomage  and  annoy  the
Mexicans  by  water,  which  the  King  understanding,  he
resolved  to  send  his  Armie  presently  to  fight  against  them.
But  Tlacaellec  little  esteeming  this  warre,  holding  it  dis-
honorable to  lead  an  Armie  against  them,  made  offer  to
conquer  them  with  the  children  onely  :  which  he  performed

266

JOSEPH ACOSTA

A.D.

c.  1588.

Children  in

in  this  manner :  he  went  unto  the  Temple  and  drew  out
of  the  Covent  such  children  as  he  thought  fittest  for  the
action,  from  tenne  to  eighteene  yeares  of  age,  who  knew  the  Covent-
how  to  guide  their  Boates,  or  Canoes,  teaching  them
certaine  pollicies.  The  order  they  held  in  this  warre,  was,
that  he  went  to  Cuitlavaca  with  his  children,  where  by
his  pollicie  he  pressed  the  enemy  in  such  sort,  that  he
made  them  to  flye ;  and  as  he  followed  them,  the  Lord  of
Cuitlavaca  met  him  and  yeelded  unto  him,  himselfe,  his
Citie,  and  his  people,  and  by  this  meanes  he  stayed  the
pursuite.  The  children  returned  with  much  spoyle,  and
many  Captives  for  their  Sacrifices,  being  solemnely  Captives
received  with  a  great  Procession,  Musicke  and  Perfumes,  sacrificed.
and  they  went  to  worship  their  gods,  in  taking  of  the
earth  which  they  did  eate,  and  drawing  bloud  from  the
forepart  of  their  legs  with  the  Priests  Lancets,  with  other
superstitions  which  they  were  accustomed  to  use  in  the
like  solemnities.  The  children  were  much  honored  and
encouraged,  and  the  King  imbraced  and  kissed  them,  and
his  kinsmen  and  allies  accompanied  them.  The  bruite
of  this  victory  ranne  throughout  all  the  Countrie,  how
that  Tlacaellec  had  subdued  the  Citie  of  Cuitlavaca  with
children :  the  news  and  consideration  whereof  opened  the
eyes  of  those  of  Tescuco,  a  chiefe  and  very  cunning
Nation  for  their  manner  of  life :  So  as  the  King  of
Tescuco  was  first  of  opinion,  that  they  should  subject
themselves  to  the  King  of  Mexico,  and  invite  him
thereunto  with  his  Citie.  Therefore  by  the  advise
of  his  Counsell,  they  sent  Ambassadours  good  Orators
with  honorable  presents,  to  offer  themselves  unto  the
Mexicans,  as  their  Subjects,  desiring  peace  and  amity,
which  was  graciously  accepted ;  but  by  the  advise  of
Tlacaellec  he  used  a  Ceremony  for  the  effecting  thereof,
which  was,  that  those  of  Tescuco  should  come  forth  armed
against  the  Mexicans,  where  they  should  fight,  and
presently  yeelde,  which  was  an  act  and  ceremony  of  warre,
without  any  effusion  of  bloud  on  either  side.  Thus  the
King  of  Mexico  became  soveraigne  Lord  of  Tescuco,  but

267

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

he  tooke  not  their  King  from  them,  but  made  him  of  his
Privie  Counsell ;  so  as  they  have  alwaies  maintained
themselves  in  this  manner  untill  the  time  of  Motecuma
the  second,  during  whose  raigne  the  Spaniards  entred.
Having  subdued  the  Land  and  Citie  of  Tescuco,  Mexico
remained  Lady  and  Mistris  of  all  the  Lands  and  Cities
about  the  Lake,  where  it  is  built.  Izcoalt  having  enjoyed
Izcoahs  death,  this  prosperitie,  and  raigned  twelve  yeares,  dyed,  leaving
the  Realme  which  had  beene  given  him,  much  augmented
by  the  valour  and  counsell  of  his  Nephew  Tlacaellec.
Ofthefift  Forasmuch  as  the  election  of  the  new  King,  belonged

*P"*8.°f  to  foure  chiefe  Electors,  and  to  the  King  of  Tescuco,  and

Motecuma  tne  King  of  Tacubu,  by  especiall  priviledge :  Tlacaellec
the  first  of  that  assembled  these  six  personages,  as  he  that  had  the
name.  soveraigne  authority,  and  having  propounded  the  matter

Chap.  16.  unto  them,  they  made  choise  of  Motecuma,  the  first  of
that  name,  Nephew  to  the  same  Tlacaellec.  His  election
was  very  pleasing  unto  them  all,  by  reason  whereof,  they
made  most  solemne  feasts,  and  more  stately  then  the
former.  Presently  after  his  election  they  conducted  him
to  the  Temple  with  a  great  traine,  where  before  the
divine  harth  (as  they  call  it)  where  there  is  continuall  fire,
they  set  him  in  his  royall  throane,  putting  upon  him  his
royall  ornaments.  Being  there,  the  King  drew  bloud
Griffons  from  his  eares  and  legs  with  a  Griffons  talons,  which  was

talons.  the  Sacrifice  wherein  the  divell  delighted  to  be  honoured.

The  Priests,  Ancients,  and  Captaines,  made  their  Orations,
all  congratuling  his  election. They  were  accustomed  in
their  elections  to  make  great  Feasts  and  Dances,  where
B/oudy  and they  wasted  many  lights. In  this  Kings  time  the  custome
divellish  was  brought  in,  that  the  King  should  goe  in  person  to

make  warre  in  some  Province,  and  bring  Captives  to
solemnize  the  feast  of  his  Coronation,  and  for  the  solemne
Sacrifices  of  that  day.  For  this  cause  King  Motecuma
went  into  the  Province  of  Chalco,  who  had  declared  them-
selves his  enemies  :  from  whence  (having  fought  valiantly)
he  brought  a  great  number  of  Captives,  whereof  he  did
make a notable Sacrifice the day of his Coronation,

268

institution.

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
although  at  that  time  he  did  not  subdue  all  the  Province
of  Chalco,  being  a  verie  warlike  Nation. Manie  came
to  this  Coronation  from  divers  Provinces,  as  well  neere
as  farre  off,  to  see  the  feast,  at  the  which  all  commers  were
verie  bountifully  entertained  and  clad,  especially  the  poore,
to  whom  they  gave  new  garments. For  this  cause  they
brought  that  day  into  the  Citie,  the  Kings  tributes,  with  Pompous
a  goodly  order,  which  consisted  in  Stuffes  to  make  Gar-  solemmty-
ments  of  all  sorts,  in  Cacao,  Gold,  Silver,  rich  Feathers,
great  burthens  of  Cotton,  Cucumbers, sundrie  sorts  of
Pulses,  many  kindes  of  Sea  fish,  and  of  the  fresh  water,  [HI.  v.
great  store  of  Fruits,  and  Venison  without  number,  not  IOI5-J

reckoning  an  infinite  number  of  Presents,  which  other
Kings  and  Lords  sent  to  the  new  King.  All  this  Tribute
marched  in  order  according  to  the  Provinces,  and  before
them  the  Stewards  and  receivers  with  divers  markes  and
Ensignes,  in  very  goodly  order :  so  as  it  was  one  of  the
goodliest  things  of  the  feast,  to  see  the  entrie  of  the
Tribute.  The  King  being  crowned,  he  imploied  himselfe
in  the  conquest  of  many  Provinces,  and  for  that  he  was
both  valiant  and  vertuous,  he  still  increased  more  and
more,  using  in  all  his  affaires  the  counsell  and  industrie
of  his  Generall  Tlacaellec,  whom  he  did  alwaies  love  and
esteeme  very  much,  as  he  had  good  reason.  The  warre
wherein  he  was  most  troubled  and  of  greatest  difficultie,
was  that  of  the  Province  of  Chalco,  wherein  there
happened  great  matters,  whereof  one  was  very  remarke-
able ;  which  was,  that  they  of  Chalcas,  had  taken  a
brother  of  Motecumaes  in  the  warres,  whom  they  resolved
to  choose  for  their  King,  asking  him  verie  curteously,  if  he
would  accept  of  this  charge.  He  answered  (after  much
importunitie,  still  persisting  therein)  that  if  they  ment
plainely  to  choose  him  for  their  King,  they  should  plant
in  the  Market-place,  a  Tree  or  very  high  stake,  on  the
top  whereof,  they  should  make  a  little  scaffold,  and
meanes  to  mount  unto  it.  The  Chalcas  supposing  it  had
beene  some  ceremonie  to  make  himselfe  more  apparant,
presently  effected  it : then  assembling  all  his  Mexicans

269

A.D.

c.  1588.

Horrible
courage.

Tlascalla  to
Mexico,  as
Carthage  to
Rome.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

about  the  stake,  he  went  to  the  top  with  a  garland  of
flowers  in  his  hand,  speaking  to  his  men  in  this  manner,
O  valiant  Mexicans,  these  men  will  choose  me  for  their
King,  but  the  gods  will  not  permit,  that  to  be  a  King  I
should  commit  any  treason  against  my  Countrie,  but
contrariwise,  I  will  that  you  learne  by  me,  that  it
behooveth  us  rather,  to  indure  death,  then  to  aide  our
enemies.  Saying  these  words,  he  cast  himselfe  downe,
and  was  broken  in  a  thousand  peeces,  at  which  spectacle,
the  Chalcas  had  so  great  horror  and  despite,  that  presently
they  fell  upon  the  Mexicans  and  slew  them  all  with  their
Lances,  as  men  whom  they  held  too  proud  and  inexorable,
saying,  they  had  divellish  hearts.  It  chanced  the  night
following,  they  heard  two  Owles  making  a  mournfull  cry,
which  they  did  interpret  as  an  unfortunate  signe,  and  a
presage  of  their  neere  destruction,  as  it  succeeded :  for
King  Motecuma  went  against  them  in  person  with  all
his  power,  where  he  vanquished  them,  and  ruined  all  their
kingdome :  and  passing  beyond  the  Mountaine  Menade,
he  conquered  still  even  unto  the  North  Sea.  Then
returning  towards  the  South  Sea,  he  subdued  many  Pro-
vinces ;  so  as  he  became  a  mighty  King :  all  by  the  helpe
and  counsell  of  Tlacaellec,  who  in  a  manner  conquered  all
the  Mexican  Nation.  Yet  he  held  an  opinion  (the  which
was  confirmed)  that  it  was  not  behoovefull  to  conquer
the  Province  of  Tlascalla,  that  the  Mexicans  might  have
a  frontier  enemy,  to  keepe  the  youth  of  Mexico  in  exercise
and  allarme :  and  that  they  might  have  numbers  of
Captives  to  Sacrifice  to  their  Idols,  wherein  they  did  waste
(as  hath  beene  said)  infinite  numbers  of  men,  which  should
be  taken  by  force  in  the  wars.  The  honor  must  be  given
to  Motecuma,  or  to  speak  truly,  to  Tlacaellec  his  Generall,
for  the  good  order  and  pollicy  setled  in  the  Realme  of
Mexico,  as  also  for  the  Counsels  and  goodly  enterprises,
which  they  did  execute :  and  likewise  for  the  number  of
Judges  and  Magistrates,  being  as  well  ordered  there,  as
in  any  Common-weale ;  yea,  were  it  in  the  most  flourish-
ing of  Europe. This  King  did  also  greatly  increase  the

270

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad

c.  1588.
Kings  house,  giving  it  great  authoritie,  and  appointing
many  and  sundry  Officers,  which  served  him  with  great
pompe  and  ceremony.  He  was  no  lesse  remarkable
touching  the  devotion  and  service  of  his  Idols,  increasing
the  number  of  his  Ministers,  and  instituting  new
ceremonies,  whereunto  he  carried  a  great  respect.

He  built that  great  Temple dedicated to their  god  Great  Temple
Vitziliputzli,  whereof  is  spoken  in  the  other  Booke. He Jf :/r  ,
did Sacrifice  at  the  dedication  of  this  Temple,  a  great  j^0^m
number  of  men,  taken  in  sundry  victories :  finally,  injoy-
ing  his  Empire  in  great  prosperitie, he  fell sicke, and
died,  having  raigned  twentie  eight  yeares,  unlike  to  his
successor  Ticocic,  who  did  not  resemble  him,  neither  in
valour  nor  in  good  fortune.

The  foure  Deputies  assembled in  counsell,  with the  Hozv  Tlacael-
Lords of Tescuco and Tacuba, where Tlacaellec was  lec  }Uused  t0
President in the election, where by all their voices  0fthe  e]ect-ton
Tlacaellic  was  chosen,  as  deserving  this  charge  better  then  and  deedes  of
any other. Yet he refused it, perswading them by  Ticocic.
pertinent  reasons,  that  they  should  choose  another,  saying,  ChaP-  1 7-
that  it  was  better,  and  more  expedient  to  have  another
King,  and  he  to  be  his  instrument  and  assistant,  as  he
had  beene  till  then,  and  not  to  lay  the  whole  burthen
upon  him,  for  that  he  held  himselfe  no  lesse  bound  for
the  Common-weale,  then  if  he  were  King ; seeming  to
him,  though  he  were  not  King,  yet  in  a  manner,  that  he
commanded  Kings,  suffering  him  to  carry  certaine  markes,
as  a  Tiara  or  ornament  for  the  head,  which  belonged  onely  Fit  similitude.
to  themselves : as  in  a  Comedie  he  deserves  most  com-
mendation, that represents the personage that imports
most. In  recompence  of  his  modesty,  and  for  the  respect
which  the  Mexican  Electors  bare  him,  they  demanded  of
Tlacaellec  (that  seeing  he  would  not  raigne)  whom  hee
thought  most  fit : Whereupon  he  gave  his  voyce  to  a
Sonne  of  the  deceased  King,  who  was  then  very  young,
called  Ticocic : but  they  replied,  that  his  shoulders  were
very  weake to beare so heavie a  burthen. Tlacaellec
answered,  that  his  was  there  to  helpe  him  to  beare  the

271

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

c.  1588.

burthen,  as  he  had  done  to  the  deceased :  by  meanes
whereof,  they  tooke  their  resolution,  and  Ticocic  was
chosen,  to  whom  were  done  all  the  accustomed  ceremonies.

[III.  v.  They  pierced  his  nosthrils,  and  for  an  ornament  put  an

1016.]  Emerald  therein:  and  for  this  reason,  in  the  Mexican
os  ns  Bookes,  this  King  is  noted  by  his  nosthrils  pierced.  Hee
differed  much  from  his  Father  and  Predecessor,  being
noted  for  a  coward,  and  not  valiant.  He  went  to  make
warre  for  his  Coronation,  in  a  Province  that  had  rebelled,
where  hee  lost  more  of  his  owne  men  then  hee  tooke
captives ;  yet  he  returned  saying,  that  he  brought  the
number  of  captives  required  for  the  Sacrifice  of  his
Coronation,  and  so  hee  was  crowned  with  great
solemnitie.  But  the  Mexicans  discontented  to  have  a
King  so  little  disposed  to  warre,  practised  to  hasten  his

King poysoned.  death  by  poison.  For  this  cause  he  continued  not  above
foure  yeeres  in  the  Kingdome.  But  this  losse  was  well
repaired  by  a  Brother  of  the  deceased,  who  was  also  sonne
to  great  Motecuma,  called  Axayaca,  who  was  likewise
chosen  by  the  advice  of  Tlacaellec,  wherein  hee  happened
better  then  before.

Of  the  death  of Now  was  Tlacaellec  very  old,  who  by  reason  of  his

Tlacaellec,  y  age?  was  carried  in  a  chaire  upon  mens  shoulders,  to  assist

t  e ee  s  of jfl  counsejj  when  businesse  required. In  the  end  he  fell
Axayaca  the .  .  , „.  . , t-  ..

seventh  King sicke,  when  as  the  King  (who  was  not  yet  crowned)  did

of  the  visit  him  often,  shedding  many  teares,  seeming  to  loose

Mexicans. 'm him his Father, and the Father of his Countrey.

Chap.  18. Tlacaellec  did  most  affectionately  recommend  his  children

unto  him,  especially  the  eldest,  who  had  shewed  himselfe

valiant in the former  warres. The King promised to

have  regard  unto  him,  and  the  more  to  comfort  the  old

man,  in  his  presence  hee  gave  him  the  charge  and  ensignes

of  Captaine  Generall,  with  all  the  preheminences  of  his

Father ;  wherewith  the  old  man  remained  so  well  satisfied,

as  with  this  content  he  ended  his  dayes.

The  Mexicans  made  his  Funerall  as  the  Founder  of

that  Empire,  more  sumptuous  and  stately,  then  they  had

done  to  any  of  their  former  Kings. And  presently  after

272

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
Axayaca  (to  appease  the  sorrow  which  all  the  people  of
Mexico  shewed  for  the  death  of  their  Captaine)  resolved
to  make  the  voyage  necessary  for  his  Coronation.  He
therefore  led  his  Armie  with  great  expedition  into  the
Province  of  Tequantepec,  two  hundred  leagues  from
Mexico,  where  he  gave  battell  to  a  mighty  Army,  and  an
infinite  number  of  men  assembled  together,  as  well  out
of  that  Province,  as  from  their  Neighbours,  to  oppose
themselves  against  the  Mexicans.  The  first  of  his  Campe
that  advanced  himselfe,  to  the  combate  was  the  King
himselfe,  defying  his  enemies,  from  whom  he  made  shew
to  flye  when  they  charged  him,  untill  hee  had  drawne
them  into  an  Ambuscadoe,  where  many  Souldiers  lay
hidden  under  straw,  who  suddenly  issued  forth,  and  they
which  fled,  turned  head :  so  as  they  of  Tiquantepec
remayned  in  the  midst  of  them,  whom  they  charged
furiously,  making  a  great  slaughter  of  them :  and  follow-
ing their  victorie,  they  razed  their  Citie  and  Temple,  Tiquantepec
punishing  all  their  Neighbours  rigorously.  Then  went  razed.
they  on  farther,  and  without  any  stay,  conquered  to
Guatulco,  the  which  is  a  Port  at  this  day  well  knowne  in  Gmtulco.
the  South  Sea.  Axayaca  returned  to  Mexico  with  great
and  rich  spoiles,  where  he  was  honourably  crowned,  with
sumptuous  and  stately  preparation  of  Sacrifices,  Tributes,
and  other  things,  whither  many  came  to  see  his  Corona-
tion. The  Kings  of  Mexico  received  the  Crowne  from
the  hands  of  the  King  of  Tescuco,  who  had  the  prehemi-
nence.  Hee  made  many  other  Enterprises,  where  he
obtained  great  victories,  being  alwayes  the  first  to  leade
the  Armie,  and  to  charge  the  enemie ;  by  the  which  he
purchased  the  name  of  a  most  valiant  Captaine :  and  not
content  to  subdue  strangers,  he  also  suppressed  his
Subjects  which  had  rebelled,  which  never  any  of  his
Predecessors  ever  could  doe,  or  durst  attempt.  Wee  have
alreadie  shewed  how  some  seditions  of  Mexico  had
divided  themselves  from  that  Common-weale,  and  built
a  Citie  neere  unto  them,  which  they  called  Tlatelulco,
whereas  now  Saint  Jaques  is.

xv  273  s

A.D.

c.  1588.

Royall
combate.

[III.  v.

1017.]

Tlatelulco
fired.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

These  being  revolted,  held  a  faction  apart,  and  encreased
and  multiplyed  much,  refusing  to  acknowledge  the  Kings
of  Mexico,  nor  to  yeeld  them  obedience.  The  King
Axayaca  sent  to  advise  them,  not  to  live  divided,  but
being  of  one  bloud,  and  one  people,  to  joyne  together,
and  acknowledge  the  King  of  Mexico :  wherupon  the
Lord  of  Tlatelulco  made  an  answer  ful  of  pride  and
disdaine,  defying  the  King  of  Mexico,  to  single  combate
with  himselfe :  and  presently  mustred  his  men,  com-
manding some  of  them  to  hide  themselves  in  the  weeds
of  the  Lake ;  and  the  better  to  deceive  the  Mexicans,  he
commanded  them  to  take  the  shapes  of  Ravens,  Geese,
and  other  Beasts,  as  Frogges,  and  such  like,  supposing
by  this  meanes  to  surprize  the  Mexicans  as  they  should
passe  by  the  wayes  and  cawsies  of  the  Lake.  Having
knowledge  of  this  defie,  and  of  his  Adversaries  policie,
he  divided  his  Armie,  giving  a  part  to  his  Generall,  the
sonne  of  Tlacaellec,  commanding  him  to  charge  this
Ambuscadoe,  in  the  Lake ;  and  hee  with  the  rest  of  his
people,  by  an  unfrequented  way,  went  and  incamped
before  Tlatelulco.  Presently  he  called  him  who  had
defied  him,  to  performe  his  promise,  and  as  the  two  Lords
of  Mexico,  and  Tlatelulco  advanced,  they  commanded
their  subjects  not  to  moove,  untill  they  had  seene  who
should  bee  Conquerour,  which  was  done,  and  presently
the  two  Lords  encountred  valiantly,  where  having  fought
long,  in  the  end  the  Lord  of  Tlatelulco  was  forced  to
turne  his  backe,  being  unable  to  indure  the  furious  charge
of  the  King  of  Mexico.  Those  of  Tlatelulco  seeing  their
Captaine  flye,  fainted,  and  fled  likewise,  but  the  Mexicans
following  them  at  the  heeles,  charged  them  furiously,  yet
the  Lord  of  Tlatelulco  escaped  not  the  hands  of  Axayaca ;
for  thinking  to  save  himselfe,  hee  fled  to  the  top  of  the
Temple,  but  Axayaca  followed  him  so  neere,  as  hee  seized
on  him  with  great  force,  and  threw  him  from  the  top  to
the  bottome,  and  after  set  fire  on  the  Temple,  and  the
Citie.

Whilest  this  passed  at  Tlatelulco,  the  Mexican  Generall

274

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
was  very  hote  in  the  revenge  of  those  that  pretended  to
defeat  him  by  policie ;  and  after  hee  had  forced  them  to
yeeld,  and  to  cry  for  mercy,  the  Generall  said  he  would  not
pardon  them,  untill  they  had  first  performed  the  Offices  of
those  figures  they  represented,  and  therefore  hee  would
have  them  cry  like  Frogges  and  Ravens,  every  one
according  to  the  figure  which  he  had  undertaken,  else
they  had  no  composition :  which  thing  he  did  to  mocke
them  with  their  owne  policie.  Feare  and  Necessitie  bee
perfect  Teachers,  so  as  they  did  sing  and  cry  with  all  the
differences  of  voices  that  were  commanded  them,  to  save
their  lives,  although  they  were  much  grieved  at  the  sport
their  enemies  made  at  them.  They  say  that  unto  this
day,  the  Mexicans  use  to  jeast  at  the  Tlatelulcans,  which
they  beare  impatiently,  when  they  put  them  in  minde  of
this  singing  and  crying  of  beasts.  King  Azayaca  tooke
pleasure  at  this  scorne  and  disgrace,  and  presently  after
they  returned  to  Mexico  with  great  joy.  This  King  was
esteemed  for  one  of  the  best  that  had  commanded  in
Mexico. Hee  reigned  eleven  yeeres.

Among  the  foure  Electors  that  had  power  to  choose  ofthe  deeds
whom  they  pleased  to  be  King,  there  was  one  endued  of  Autzol  the
with  many  perfections, named  Autzol. This  man  was  eight  King  of
chosen  by  the  rest,  and  this  election  was  very  pleasing  Qh '
to  all  the  people  :  for  besides  that  he  was  valiant,  all  held  The  Picture
him  courteous  and  affable  to  every  man,  which  is  one  of  story  cals  him
the  chiefe  qualities  required  in  them  that  command,  to  Tiforicatzi.
purchase  love  and  respect. To  celebrate  the  Feast  of  his
Coronation, hee resolved to make a Voyage, and to
punish  the  pride  of  those  of  Quaxulatlan,  a  very  rich  and Quaxulatlan.
plentifull  Province,  and  at  this  day  the  chiefe  of  New
Spaine. They  had  robbed  his  Officers  and  Stewards,  that
carried the Tribute to Mexico, and therewithall were
rebelled. There  was  great  difficultie  to  reduce  this  Nation
to  obedience,  lying  in  such  sort,  as  an  arme  of  the  Sea
stopt  the  Mexicans  passage : to  passe  the  which  Autzol
(with  a  strange  device  and  industry)  caused  an  Hand  to  be
made  in  the  water,  of  faggots,  earth,  and  other  matter ;

275

A.D.

c.  1588.

Famous
Sorcerer,
Indian
Proteus.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

by  meanes  whereof,  both  hee  and  his  men  might  passe
to  the  enemie,  where  giving  them  battell,  he  conquered
them,  and  punished  them  at  his  pleasure.  Then  returned
he  unto  Mexico  in  triumph,  and  with  great  riches,  to  bee
crowned  King,  according  to  their  custome.  Autzol
extended  the  limits  of  his  Kingdome  farre,  by  many
Conquests,  even  unto  Guatimalia,  which  is  three  hundred
leagues  from  Mexico.  Hee  was  no  lesse  liberall  then
valiant :  for  when  as  the  Tributes  arrived  which  (as  I
have  said)  came  in  great  abundance,  hee  went  forth  of  his
Palace,  gathering  together  all  the  people  into  one  place,
then  commanded  he  to  bring  all  the  Tributes,  which  he
divided  to  those  that  had  need.  To  the  poore  he  gave
Stuffes  to  make  them  apparell,  and  meate,  and  whatsoever
they  had  need  of  in  great  abundance,  and  things  of  value,
as  Gold,  Silver,  Jewels,  and  Feathers,  were  divided
amongst  the  Captaines,  Souldiers,  and  Servants  of  his
House  according  to  every  mans  merit.  This  Autzol  was
likewise  a  great  Politician,  hee  pulled  downe  the  houses
ill  built,  and  built  others  very  sumptuous.

It  seemed  unto  him  that  the  Citie  of  Mexico  had  too
little  water,  and  that  the  Lake  was  very  muddie,  and
therefore  hee  resolved  to  let  in  a  great  course  of  water,
which  they  of  Cuyoacan  used.  For  this  cause  hee  called
the  chiefe  man  of  the  Citie  unto  him,  beeing  a  famous
Sorcerer,  having  propounded  his  meaning  unto  him :  the
Sorcerer  wished  him  to  bee  well  advised  what  he  did,  being
a  matter  of  great  difficultie,  and  that  he  understood,  if
hee  drew  the  River  out  of  her  ordinary  course,  making  it
passe  to  Mexico,  hee  would  drowne  the  Citie.  The  King
supposed  these  excuses  were  but  to  frustrate  the  effect  of
his  Designe,  being  therefore  in  choler,  he  dismissed  him
home,  and  a  few  dayes  after  he  sent  a  Provost  to  Cuyoacan,
to  take  this  Sorcerer :  who  having  understanding  for
what  intent  the  Kings  Officers  came,  he  caused  them  to
enter  his  house,  and  then  he  presented  himselfe  unto  them
in  the  forme  of  a  terrible  Eagle,  wherewith  the  Provost
and  his  companions  being  terrified,  they  returned  without

276

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.
taking  him.  Autzol  incensed  herewith  sent  others,  to
whom  he  presented  himselfe  in  forme  of  a  furious  Tigre,
so  as  they  durst  not  touch  him.  The  third  came,  and  they
found  him  in  the  forme  of  a  horrible  Serpent,  whereat  they
were  much  afraid.  The  King  mooved  the  more  with
these  doings,  sent  to  tell  them  of  Cuyoacan,  that  if  they
brought  not  the  Sorcerer  bound  unto  him,  hee  would
raze  their  Citie.  For  feare  whereof,  or  whether  it  were
of  his  owne  free  will,  or  being  forced  by  the  people,  he
suffered  himselfe  to  be  led  to  the  King,  who  presently
caused  him  to  bee  strangled,  and  then  did  he  put  his
resolution  in  practice,  forcing  a  channell  whereby  the  water
might  passe  to  Mexico,  whereby  he  brought  a  great
current  of  water  into  the  Lake,  which  they  brought  with
great  Ceremonies  and  Superstitions,  having  Priests  casting
Incense  along  the  bankes,  others  sacrificed  Quailes,  and
with  the  bloud  of  them  sprinkled  the  channell  bankes,
others  sounding  of  Cornets,  accompanied  the  water  with
their  Musicke.  One  of  the  chiefe  went  attired  in  a  habit
like  to  their  Goddesse  of  the  water,  and  all  saluted  her,
saying,  that  she  was  welcome.  All  which  things  are
painted  in  the  Annalls  of  Mexico  :  which  Booke  is  now  Mexican
at  Rome  in  the  holy  Library,  or  Vatican,  where  a  Father  Annalls  in  the
of  our  Company,  that  was  come  from  Mexico,  did  see  it,  Vattcan-
and  other  Histories,  the  which  he  did  expound  to  the
Keeper  of  his  Holinesse  Library,  taking  great  delight  to  [III.  v.
understand  this  Booke,  which  before  hee  could  never  com-  1018.]

prehend.  Finally,  the  water  was  brought  to  Mexico,  but
it  came  in  such  abundance,  that  it  had  wel-neere  drowned
the  Citie,  as  was  foretold :  and  in  effect  it  did  ruine  a
great  part  thereof,  but  it  was  presently  prevented  by  the
industry  of  Autzol,  who  caused  an  issue  to  bee  made  to
draw  forth  the  water :  by  meanes  whereof  hee  repayred
the  buildings  that  were  fallen,  with  an  exquisite  worke,
being  before  but  poore  Cottages.  Thus  he  left  the  Citie
invironed  with  water,  like  another  Venice,  and  very  well
built :  he  reigned  eleven  yeeres,  and  ended  with  the  last
and  greatest  Successor  of  all  the  Mexicans.

277

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

§•  III.

Of  the  Election  of  great  Montezuma,  the  last
King  of  Mexico  :  his  pompe  and  manner  of
government,  prodigious  fore-warnings,  of  his
ruine,  and  the  Spanish  Conquest.

Hen  the  Spaniards  entred  New  Spaine,  being  in
the  yeere  of  our  Lord  151 8.  Motecuma  second
of  that  name,  was  the  last  King  of  the  Mexicans,
I  say  the  last,  although  they  of  Mexico,  after  his  death,
chose  another  King,  yea,  in  the  life  of  the  same  Motecuma,
whom  they  declared  an  enemy  to  his  Countrey,  as  wee
shall  see  hereafter.  But  he  that  succeeded  him,  and  he
that  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Marquesse  de  Valle,  had
but  the  names  and  titles  of  Kings,  for  that  the  Kingdome
was  in  a  manner  all  yeelded  to  the  Spaniards :  so  as  with
reason  we  account  Motecuma  for  the  last  King,  and  so
hee  came  to  the  period  of  the  Mexicans  power  and  great-
nesse,  which  is  admirable  beeing  happened  among
Barbarians.  For  this  cause,  and  for  that  this  was  the
season,  that  God  had  chosen  to  reveale  unto  them  the
knowledge  of  his  Gospell,  and  the  Kingdome  of  Jesus
Christ,  I  will  relate  more  at  large  the  Acts  of  Motecuma,
then  of  the  rest.

Before  he  came  to  be  King,  hee  was  by  disposition,  very
grave  and  stayed,  and  spake  little,  so  as  when  he  gave  his
opinion  in  the  privy  Counsell,  whereas  he  assisted,  his
speeches  and  discourses  made  every  one  to  admire  him,
so  as  even  then  he  was  feared  and  respected.  He  retyred
himselfe  usually  into  a  Chappell,  appointed  for  him  in  the
Temple  of  Vitzliputzli,  where  they  said  their  Idoll  spake
unto  him ;  and  for  this  cause  hee  was  held  very  religious
and  devout.  For  these  perfections  then,  being  most
noble  and  of  great  courage,  his  election  was  short  and
easie,  as  a  man  upon  whom  all  mens  eyes  were  fixed,  as
worthy  of  such  a  charge. Having  intelligence  of  this

278

JOSEPH ACOSTA

election,  he  hid  himselfe  in  this  Chappell  of  the  Temple,
whether  it  were  by  judgement  (apprehending  so  heavy
and  hard  a  burthen)  as  to  governe  such  a  people,  or  rather,
as  I  beleeve,  through  hypocrisie,  to  shew  that  hee  desired
not  Empery :  In  the  end  they  found  him,  leading  him  to
the  place  of  Councell,  whither  they  accompanied  him  with
all  possible  joy  :  he  marched  with  such  a  gravity,  as  they
all  said  the  name  of  Motecuma  agreed  very  well  with  his
nature,  which  is  as  much  to  say,  as  an  angry  Lord.  The
Electors  did  him  great  reverence,  giving  him  notice,  that
hee  was  chosen  King :  from  thence  hee  was  led  before  the
hearth  of  their  Gods,  to  give  Incense,  where  he  offered
Sacrifices  in  drawing  bloud  from  his  eares,  and  the  calves
of  his  legs,  according  to  their  custome.  They  attyred
him  with  the  Royall  ornaments,  and  pierced  the  gristle  of
his  nosthrils,  hanging  thereat  a  rich  Emerald,  a  barbarous
and  troublous  custome :  but  the  desire  of  rule,  made  all
paine  light  and  easie.  Being  seated  in  his  Throne,  hee
gave  audience  to  the  Orations  and  Speeches  that  were
made  unto  him,  which  according  unto  their  custome  were
eloquent  and  artificiall.

The  first  was  pronounced  by  the  King  of  Tescuco,
which  being  preserved,  for  that  it  was  lately  delivered,
and  very  worthy  to  bee  heard,  I  will  set  it  downe  word  by
word,  and  thus  hee  said :  The  concordance  and  unitie  of
voyces  upon  thy  election,  is  a  sufficient  testimonie  (most
noble  young  man)  of  the  happinesse  the  Realme  shall
receive,  as  well  deserving  to  be  commanded  by  thee,  as
also  for  the  generall  applause  which  all  doe  shew  by
meanes  thereof.  Wherein  they  have  great  reason,  for  the
Empire  of  Mexico  doth  alreadie  so  farre  extend  it  selfe,
that  to  governe  a  World,  as  it  is,  and  to  beare  so  heavie
a  burthen,  it  requires  no  lesse  dexteritie  and  courage,
then  that  which  is  resident  in  thy  firme  and  valiant  heart,
nor  of  lesse  wisdome  and  judgement  then  thine.  I  see
and  know  plainly,  that  the  mightie  God  loveth  this  Citie,
seeing  hee  hath  given  understanding  to  choose  what  was
fit. For  who  will  not  beleeve  that  a  Prince,  who  before

279

A.D.

c.  1588.

King  of
Tescucos
Oration.

Mexican
greatnesse.

Their  opinions
of  God  and  9.
Heavens.

A.D.

c.  1588.

Elegant
Prosopopoeia.

[III.  v.

1019.]

Elegant
Prosopopoeia.

Kings  Office.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

his  Reigne  had  pierced  the  nine  Vaults  of  Heaven,  should
not  likewise  now  obtaine  those  things  that  are  earthly  to
relieve  his  people,  aiding  himselfe  with  his  best  judgement,
being  thereunto  bound  by  the  dutie  and  charge  of  a  King  ?
Who  will  likewise  beleeve  that  the  great  courage  which
thou  hast  alwayes  valiantly  shewed  in  matters  of  import-
ance, should  now  faile  thee  in  matters  of  greatest  need?
Who  will  not  perswade  himselfe  but  the  Mexican  Empire
is  come  to  the  height  of  their  Sovereigntie,  seeing  the
Lord  of  things  created  hath  imparted  so  great  graces  unto
thee,  that  with  thy  looke  onely  thou  breedest  admiration
in  them  that  behold  thee  ?  Rejoyce  then,  O  happie  Land,
to  whom  the  Creator  hath  given  a  Prince,  as  a  firme  Pillar
to  support  thee,  which  shall  bee  thy  Father  and  thy
defence,  by  whom  thou  shalt  be  succoured  at  need,  who
will  bee  more  then  a  brother  to  his  subjects,  for  his  pietie
and  clemencie.  Thou  hast  a  King,  who  in  regard  of  his
estate  is  not  inclined  to  delights,  or  will  lye  stretched  out
upon  his  bed,  occupied  in  pleasures  and  vices,  but  con-
trariwise in  the  middest  of  his  sweet  and  pleasant  sleep,
he  will  suddenly  wake  for  the  care  he  must  have  over
thee,  and  will  not  feele  the  taste  of  the  most  savourie
meats,  having  his  spirits  transported  with  the  imagination
of  thy  good.  Tell  me  then  (O  happie  Realme)  if  I  have
not  reason  to  say  that  thou  oughtest  rejoyce,  having
found  such  a  King :  And  thou  noble  young  man,  and
our  most  mightie  Lord,  be  confident,  and  of  a  good
courage,  that  seeing  the  Lord  of  things  created  hath  given
thee  this  charge,  hee  will  also  give  thee  force  and  courage
to  manage  it :  and  thou  mayest  well  hope,  that  hee  which
in  times  past  hath  used  so  great  bountie  towards  thee,
will  not  now  deny  thee  his  greater  gifts,  seeing  he  hath
given  thee  so  great  a  charge,  which  I  wish  thee  to  enjoy
many  yeeres.  King  Motecuma  was  very  attentive  to  this
Discourse :  which  being  ended,  they  say  hee  was  so
troubled,  that  endevouring  thrice  to  answere  him,  hee
could  not  speake,  being  overcome  with  teares,  which  joy
and  content  doe  usually  cause,  in  signe  of  great  humility.

280

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.

In  the  end  being  come  to  himselfe,  he  spake  briefly,  I  were  Motezumas

too  blind,  good  King  of  Tescuco,  if  I  did  not  know,  that  answere.

what thou hast spoken unto me, proceeded of meere

favour,  it  pleaseth  you  to  shew  me,  seeing  among  so  many

noble  and  valiant  men  within  this  Realme,  you  have  made

choice  of  the  least  sufficient :  and  in  truth,  I  find  my  selfe

so  incapeable  of  a  charge  of  so  great  importance,  that  I

know  not  what  to  doe,  but  to  beseech  the  Creatour  of  all

created  things,  that  hee  will  favour  mee,  and  I  intreate

you  all  to  pray  unto  him  for  me. These  words  uttered,

hee  beganne  againe  to  weepe.

He  that  in  his  election  made  such  shew  of  humility  and  How  Mote-

mildnesse, seeing himselfe King, began presently to  fuma  °rdered

discover his aspiring thoughts. The first was, hee  {.  sermce  °J
. , . r &  1  1 • ° 1 11  -1-1  hts  house-> and

commanded  that  no  plebeian  should  serve  in  his  house,  0fthewarrehe

nor  beare  any  Royal  Office,  as  his  Predecessors  had  used  made  for  his
til  then ;  blaming  them  that  would  be  served  by  men  of  Coronation.
base  condition,  commanding  that  all  the  noble  and  most  z,  -J}' ?lJ
famous  men  of  his  Realme  should  live  within  his  Palace,  tfefall.
and  exercise  the  Offices  of  his  Court,  and  House.  Where-
unto  an  old  man  of  great  authoritie  (who  had  somtimes
bin  his  Schoolemaster)  opposed  himselfe,  advising  him,
to  be  careful  what  he  did,  and  not  to  thrust  himselfe  into
the  danger  of  a  great  inconvenience,  in  separating  himselfe
from  the  vulgar  and  common  people,  so  as  they  should
not  dare  to  looke  him  in  the  face,  seeing  themselves  so
rejected  by  him.  He  answered,  that  it  was  his  resolution,
and  that  he  would  not  allow  the  Plebeians  thus  to  goe
mingled  among  the  Nobles,  as  they  had  done,  saying,  that
the  service  they  did,  was  according  to  their  condition,  so
as  the  Kings  got  no  reputation,  and  thus  he  continued
firme  in  his  resolution.  Hee  presently  commanded  his
Counsell  to  dismisse  all  the  Plebeians  from  their  charges
and  offices,  as  well  those  of  his  Houshold  as  of  his  Court,
and  to  provide  Knights,  the  which  was  done.  After  hee
went  in  person  to  an  enterprize  necessary  for  his  Corona-
tion. At  that  time  a  Province  lying  farre  off  towards  the
North  Ocean,  was  revolted  from  the  Crown,  whither  he

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

led  the  flower  of  his  people,  well  appointed. There  he
warred  with  such  valour  and  dexteritie,  that  in  the  end
hee  subdued  all  the  Province,  and  punished  the  Rebels
severely,  returning  with  a  great  number  of  Captives  for
the  Sacrifices,  and  many  other  spoyles. All  the  Cities
made him solemne  receptions at his  returne, and the
Lords  thereof  gave  him  water  to  wash,  performing  the
offices  of  servants,  a  thing  not  used  by  any  of  his  Pre-
decessors. Such  was  the  feare  and  respect  they  bare  him.
In  Mexico,  they  made  the  Feasts  of  his  Coronation  with
great  preparations  of  Dances,  Comedies,  Banquets,  Lights,
and  other  inventions  for  many  dayes. And  there  came
so  great  a  wealth  of  Tributes  from  all  his  Countreyes,  that
strangers unknowne came to Mexico, and their very
enemies  resorted  in  great  numbers  disguised  to  see  these
Feasts,  as  those  of  Tlascalla,  and  Mechovacan :  the  which
Motecuma  having  discovered,  he  commanded  they  should
be  lodged  and  gently  intreated,  and  honoured  as  his  owne
person. He  also  made  them  goodly  Galleries  like  unto
his  owne,  where  they  might  see  and  behold  the  Feasts.
So  they  entred  by  night  to  those  Feasts,  as  the  King
himselfe, making their Sports and Maskes. And for
that  I  have  made  mention  of  these  Provinces,  it  shall  not
be  from  the  purpose  to  understand,  that  the  Inhabitants
of Mechovacan, Tlascalla, and Tapeaca,  would never
yeeld  to  the  Mexicans, but  did  alwayes  fight  valiantly
against them : yea, sometimes the Mechovacans did
vanquish  the  Mexicans,  as  also  those  of  Tapeaca  did. In
which  place,  the  Marquesse  Don  Ferrand  Cortes,  after
that  hee  and  the  Spaniards  were  expelled  Mexico,  pre-
tended  to build their  first Citie, the  which hee  called
Segura  de  la  (as I well remember) Segure dela Frontiere : But
Frontiere. this peopling continued little : for having afterwards
reconquered  Mexico,  all  the  Spaniards  went  to  inhabite
there. To conclude, those of  Tapeaca, Tlascalla, and
Mechovacan, have beene alwayes enemies to the
Mexicans ; although Motecuma said unto Cortes, that
hee did purposely forbeare to subdue them ; to have

282

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
occasion  to  exercise  his  men  of  warre,  and  to  take  numbers
of  captives.

This  King  laboured  to  bee  respected,  yea,  to  be  wor-  Of  the
shipped  as  a  God. No  Plebeian  might  looke  him  in  the  be**™™g  a"d
face  :  if  he  did,  he  was  punished  with  death  :  he  did  never  jAaexama.
set  his  foot  on  the  ground,  but  was  alwayes  carried  on  chap.  22.
the  shoulders  of  Noblemen ; and  if  he  lighted,  they  laid  His  proud
rich  Tapistrie  whereon  hee  did  goe. When  hee  made  state-
any  Voyage,  hee  and  the  Noblemen  went  as  it  were  in  [III.  v.
a  Parke  *  compassed  in  for  the  nonce,  and  the  rest  of  the  1020.]

people  went  without  the  Parke,  environing  it  in  on  every  .f  etzotxt
side ;  hee  never  put  on  a  garment  twice,  nor  did  eate  or
drinke  in  one  vessell  or  dish  above  once ;  all  must  be
new,  giving  to  his  attendants  that  which  had  once  served  H'uRberaMe.
him :  so  as  commonly  they  were  rich  and  sumptuous.
Hee  was  very  carefull  to  have  his  Lawes  observed.  And
when  he  returned  victor  from  any  warre,  hee  fained  some-
times to  goe  and  take  his  pleasure,  then  would  hee
disguise  himselfe,  to  see  if  his  people  (supposing  hee  were
absent)  would  omit  any  thing  of  the  feast  or  reception  :
If  there  were  any  excesse  or  defect,  hee  then  did  punish  His  severitie.
it  rigorously.  And  also  to  discover  how  his  Ministers  did
execute  their  Offices,  hee  often  disguised  himselfe,  offering  His  policie  to
gifts  and  presents  to  the  Judges,  provoking  them  to  doe  "ft  mn-
in-justice.  If  they  offended,  they  were  presently  punished
with  death,  without  remission  or  respect,  were  they
Noblemen,  or  his  Kinsmen  ;  yea,  his  owne  Brethren.  Hee
was  little  conversant  with  his  people,  and  seldome  seene,
retyring  himselfe  most  commonly  to  care  for  the  govern-
ment of  his  Realme.  Besides  that,  he  was  a  great
Justicier  and  very  Noble,  he  was  very  valiant  and  happy,
by  meanes  whereof,  hee  obtayned  great  victories,  and
came  to  this  greatnesse,  as  is  written  in  the  Spanish
Histories,  whereon  it  seemes  needlesse  to  write  more.  I
will  onely  have  a  care  hereafter  to  write  what  the  Books
and  Histories  of  the  Indies  make  mention  of ;  the  which
the  Spanish  Writers  have  not  observed,  having  not
sufficiently  understood  the  secrets  of  this  Countrey,  the

283

A.D.

c  1588.

Quetzacoalt.
His  crueltie  a
true  effect  of
the  Devils
foretellings.
Godfore-
warneth  men
to  bring  them
to  repentance:
the  Devi//  to
fill  them  with
feares,  per-
fidious and
cruell
jealousies,
superstitious
shifts,  and  to
maintaine  his
credit,  by  his
divining,  seek-
ing to  proove
his  divinity
(al  which  is
heere  evident)
in  things
which  Gods
justice  lets  him
know  he  will
doe  to  punish
such  impious
pietie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

which  are  things  very  worthy  to  be  knowne,  as  we  shall
see  hereafter.

It  chanced  that  Motecuma  having  reigned  many  yeeres
in  great  prosperitie,  and  so  puft  up  in  his  conceit,  as  he
caused  himselfe  to  be  served  and  feared,  yea  to  be  wor-
shipped as  a  God,  that  the  Almighty  Lord  began  to
chastice  him,  and  also  to  admonish  him,  suffering  even
the  very  Devils  whom  he  worshipped,  to  tell  him  these
heavy  tydings  of  the  ruine  of  his  Kingdome,  and  to
torment  him  by  Visions,  which  had  never  beene  seene ;
wherewith  hee  remayned  so  melancholy  and  troubled,  as
he  was  void  of  judgement.

The  Idoll  of  those  of  Cholola,  which  they  called
Quetzacoalt,  declared,  that  a  strange  people  came  to
possesse  his  Kingdomes.  The  King  of  Tescuco  (who
was  a  great  Magitian,  and  had  conference  with  the  Devill)
came  one  day  at  an  extraordinary  houre  to  visit  Motecuma,
assuring  him  that  his  Gods  had  told  him,  that  there  were
great  losses  preparing  for  him,  and  for  his  whole  Realme :
many  Witches  and  Sorcerers  went  and  declared  as  much,
amongst  which  there  was  one,  did  very  particularly  fore-
tell him  what  should  happen  :  and  as  hee  was  with  him
hee  told  him  that  the  pulses  of  his  feete  and  hands  failed
him.  Motecuma  troubled  with  these  newes,  commanded
all  those  Sorcerers  to  be  apprehended :  but  they  vanished
presently  in  the  Prison,  wherewith  he  grew  into  such  a
rage,  that  he  might  not  kill  them,  as  hee  put  their  wives
and  children  to  death,  destroying  their  Houses  and
Families.  Seeing  himselfe  importuned  and  troubled  with
these  advertisements,  hee  sought  to  appease  the  anger  of
his  Gods  :  and  for  that  cause  hee  laboured  to  bring  a  huge
stone,  thereon  to  make  great  Sacrifices :  For  the  effecting
whereof  hee  sent  a  great  number  of  people  with  Engins
and  Instruments  to  bring  it :  which  they  could  by  no
meanes  moove,  although  (being  obstinate)  they  had
broken  many  Instruments.  But  as  they  strove  still  to
raise  it,  they  heard  a  voyce  joyning  to  the  stone,  which
said they  laboured  in  vaine, and that  they should  not

284

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
raise  it,  for  that  the  Lord  of  things  created  would  no
more  suffer  those  things  to  be  done  there ;  Motecuma
understanding  this,  commanded  the  Sacrifice  to  be  per-
formed in  that  place,  and  they  say  the  voyce  spake  againe  :
Have  I  not  told  you,  that  it  is  not  the  pleasure  of  the  Lord
of  things  created,  that  it  should  bee  done?  and  that  you
may  well  know  that  it  is  so,  I  will  suffer  my  selfe  to  bee
transported  a  little,  then  after  you  shall  not  moove  mee.
Which  happened  so  indeed,  for  presently  they  carried  it
a  small  distance  with  great  facilitie,  then  afterwards  they
could  not  moove  it,  till  that  after  many  Prayers,  it  suffered
it  selfe  to  bee  transported  to  the  entry  of  the  Citie  of
Mexico,  where  suddenly  it  fell  into  the  Lake,  where  seek-
ing for  it,  they  could  not  find  it,  but  it  was  afterwards
found  in  the  same  place  from  whence  they  had  remooved
it,  wherewith  they  remayned  amazed  and  confounded.

At  the  same  time  there  appeared  in  the  Element  a  great  Prodigies  or
flame  of  fire,  very  bright,  in  the  forme  of  a  Pyramide, Devillish
which beganne to appeare  at midnight, and  went still irac  es-
mounting  untill  the  Sunne  rising  in  the  morning,  where
it stayed at the South, and then vanished away. It
shewed  it  selfe  in  this  sort  the  space  of  a  whole  yeere,  and
ever  as  it  appeared  the  people  cast  forth  great  cryes  as
they  were  accustomed,  beleeving  it  was  a  presage  of  great
misfortune. It  happened  also  that  fire  tooke  the  Temple,
when  as  no  body  was  within  it,  nor  neere  unto  it,  neyther
did  there  fall  any  lightning  or  thunder : whereupon  the
Guards  crying  out,  a  number  of  people  ranne  with  water,
but  nothing  could  helpe,  so  as  it  was  all  consumed ; and
they  say  the  fire  seemed  to  come  forth  of  pieces  of  timber,
which  kindled  more  by  the  water  that  was  cast  upon  it.
There  was  a  Comet  seene  in  the  day  time,  running  from  A  Comet  by
the West to the East, casting an infinite number of  day.
sparkles,  and  they  say  the  forme  was  like  to  a  long  tayle,
having  three  heads.

The  great  Lake  betwixt  Mexico  and  Tescuco,  without
any  winde,  earthquake,  or  any  other  apparant  signe,  began
sudainly  to  swell,  and  the  waves  grew  in  such  sort,  as  all

285

A.D.

c.  1588.

[III.  V.

Monsters.

Prodigious
Foule.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  buildings  neere  unto  it  fell  downe  to  the  ground.
They  say  at  that  time  they  heard  many  voices,  as  of  a
woman  in  paine,  which  said  sometimes,  O  my  children,  the
KJ  time  of  your  destruction  is  come  :  and  other  whiles  it  said,
O  my  children,  whither  shall  I  carry  you  that  you  perish
not  utterly?  There  appeared  likewise  many  Monsters
with  two  heads,  which  being  carried  before  the  King,
sudainly  vanished.  There  were  two  that  exceeded  all
other  Monsters,  being  very  strange ;  the  one  was,  the
Fishers  of  the  Lake  tooke  a  Bird  as  Bigge  as  a  Crane,  and
of  the  same  colour,  but  of  a  strange  and  unseene  forme.
They  carried  it  to  Motecuma,  who  at  that  time  was  in
the  pallace  of  teares  and  mourning,  which  was  all  hanged
with  blacke  ;  for  as  he  had  many  Pallaces  for  his  recreation,
so  had  he  also  others  for  times  of  affliction,  wherewith
he  was  then  heavily  charged  and  tormented,  by  reason  of
the  threatnings  his  gods  had  given  him  by  these  sorrow-
full  advertisements.  The  Fishers  came  about  noone
setting  this  Bird  before  him,  which  had  on  the  top  of  his
head  a  thing  bright  and  transparent,  in  forme  of  a
Looking-glasse,  wherein  he  did  behold  a  warlike  Nation
comming  from  the  East,  armed,  fighting,  and  killing.  He
called  his  Divines  and  Astronomers  (whereof  there  was
a  great  number)  who  having  seene  these  things,  and  not
able  to  yeelde  any  reason  of  what  was  demanded  of  them,
the  Bird  vanished  away,  so  as  it  was  never  more  seene :
whereupon  Motecuma  remained  very  heavy  and  sorrow-
full.  The  other  which  happened,  was  a  Laborer,  who
had  the  report  of  a  very  honest  man  ;  he  came  unto  him,
telling  him,  that  being  the  day  before  at  his  worke,  a
great  Eagle  flew  towards  him,  and  tooke  him  up  in  his
talents,  without  hurting  him,  carrying  him  into  a  certaine
Cave,  where  it  left  him ;  The  Eagle  pronouncing  these
words,  Most  mighty  Lord,  I  have  brought  him  whom
thou  hast  commanded  me :  This  Indian  Laborer  looked
about  on  every  side,  to  whom  he  spake,  but  he  saw  no
man.  Then  he  heard  a  voyce  which  said  unto  him,
Doost  thou  not  know  this  man,  whom  thou  seest  lying

286

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
upon  the  ground?  and  looking  thereon,  he  perceived  a
man  to  lye  very  heavy  asleepe,  with  royall  ensignes,  flowers
in  his  hand,  and  a  staffe  of  perfumes  burning,  as  they  are
accustomed  to  use  in  that  Country :  whom  the  Labourer
beholding,  knew  it  was  the  great  King  Motecuma,  and
answered  presently :  Great  Lord,  this  resembles  our  King
Motezuma.  The  voice  said  againe,  Thou  sayest  true,
behold  what  he  is,  and  how  hee  lies  asleepe,  carelesse
of  the  great  miseries  and  afflictions  prepared  for  him.  It
is  now  time  that  he  pay  the  great  number  of  offences
he  hath  done  to  God,  and  that  he  receive  the  punishment
of  his  tyrannies,  and  great  pride,  and  yet  thou  seest  how
carelesse  he  lyes,  blinde  in  his  owne  miseries,  and  without
any  feeling.  But  to  the  end  thou  maiest  the  better
see  him,  take  the  staffe  of  perfumes  he  holds  burning
in  his  hand,  and  put  it  to  his  face,  thou  shalt  then  finde
him  without  feeling.  The  poore  laborer  durst  not
approach  neere  him,  nor  doe  as  he  was  commanded,  for
the  great  feare  they  all  had  of  this  King.  But  the  voice
said,  Have  no  feare,  for  I  am  without  comparison  greater
than  this  King,  I  can  destroy  him,  and  defend  him,  doe
therefore  what  I  command  thee.  Whereupon  the
Laborer  tooke  the  staffe  of  perfumes  out  of  the  Kings
hand,  and  put  it  burning  to  his  nose,  but  he  moved  not,
nor  shewed  any  feeling.  This  done,  the  voice  said  unto
him,  that  seeing  he  had  found  the  King  so  sleepie,  he
should  goe  awake  him,  and  tell  him  what  he  had  seene.
Then  the  Eagle  by  the  same  commandement,  tooke  the
man  in  his  talents,  and  set  him  in  the  same  place  where
he  found  him,  and  for  accomplishment  of  that  which  he
had  spoken  he  came  to  advertise  him.  They  say,  that  3f  newes
Motecuma  looking  on  his  face,  found  that  he  was  burnt,  receive<i  0f  fa
the  which  he  had  not  felt  till  then,  wherewith  he  con-  Spaniards
tinued  exceeding  heavie  and  troubled.  arrival  in  his

In  the  foureteenth  yeare  of  the  raigne  of  Motecuma,  Countrh  and
which  was  in  the  yeare  of  our  Lord  15 17.  there  appeared  jnJassa z
in  the  North  Sea,  Shippes,  and  men  landing,  whereat  the  sent  fam.
Subjects  of  Motecuma  wondred  much,  and  desirous  to  Chap  24.

287

A.D.

c,  1588.

Relation  or
writing  by
Pictures.

Effects  of

superstitious

legends.

[III.  v.

1022.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

learne,  and  to  be  better  satisfied  what  they  were,  they
went  aboord  in  their  Canoes,  carrying  many  refreshings
of  meates  and  stuffes  to  make  apparrell,  upon  colour  to
sell  them.  The  Spaniards  received  them  into  their
Shippes,  and  in  exchange  of  their  victuals  and  stuffes,
which  were  acceptable  unto  them,  they  gave  them  chaines
of  false  Stones,  red,  blew,  greene,  and  yellow,  which
the  Indians  imagined  to  be  precious  stones.  The
Spaniards  informing  themselves,  who  was  their  King,  and
of  his  great  power,  dismissed  them,  willing  them  to
carry  those  Stones  unto  their  Lord,  saying,  that  for  that
time  they  could  not  goe  to  him,  but  they  would  presently
returne  and  visite  him.  Those  of  the  coast  went
presently  to  Mexico  with  this  message,  carrying  the
representation  of  what  they  had  seene,  painted  on  a
cloath,  both  of  the  Shippes,  Men,  and  Stones  which  they
had  given  them.  King  Motecuma  remained  very  pensive
with  this  message,  commanding  them  not  to  reveale  it  to
any  one.  The  day  following,  he  assembled  his  Counsell,
and  having  shewed  them  the  painted  cloathes  and  the
Chaines,  he  consulted  what  was  to  be  done :  where  it
was  resolved  to  set  good  watches  upon  all  the  Sea  coasts,
to  give  present  advertisement  to  the  King  of  what  they
should  discover.  The  yeare  following,  which  was  in  the
beginning  of  the  yeare  151 8.  they  discovered  a  Fleete
at  Sea,  in  the  which  was  the  Marquise  of  Valle  Don
Fernande  Cortes,  with  his  companions,  newes  which
much  troubled  Motecuma,  and  conferring  with  his
Counsell,  they  all  said,  that  without  doubt,  their  great
and  auncient  Lord  Queztzalcoalt  was  come,  who  had  said,
that  he  would  returne  from  the  East,  whither  he  was
gone.  The  Indians  held  opinion,  that  a  great  Prince  had
in  times  past  left  them,  and  promised  to  returne.  Of
the  beginning  and  ground  of  which  opinion  shall  be
spoken  in  another  place.  They  therefore  sent  five  prin-
cipall  Ambassadors  with  rich  presents,  to  congratulate  his
comming,  saying,  they  knew  well  that  their  great  Lord
Queztzalcoalt  was  come,  and  that  his  servant  Motecuma

288

JOSEPH ACOSTA

sent  to  visite  him,  for  so  he  accounted  himselfe.  The
Spaniards  understood  this  message  by  the  meanes  of
Marina,  an  Indian  woman  whom  they  brought  with  them
which  understood  the  Mexican  tongue.  Fernande  de
Cortes  finding  this  a  good  occasion  for  his  entry,  com-
manded to  decke  his  Chamber  richly,  and  being  set  in
great  state  and  pompe,  he  caused  the  Ambassadors  to
enter,  who  omitted  no  shewes  of  humilitie,  but  to  worship
him  as  their  god.

They  delivered  their  charge,  saying,  that  his  servant
Motecuma  sent  to  visit  him,  and  that  he  held  the  Country
in  his  name  as  his  Lieutenant,  that  he  knew  well  it  was
the  Topilcin  which  had  beene  promised  them  many  yeares
since,  who  should  returne  againe  unto  them.  And  there-
fore they  brought  him  such  Garments  as  he  was  wont  to
weare,  when  he  did  converse  amongst  them,  beseeching
him  to  accept  willingly  of  them,  offering  him  many
presents  of  great  value.  Cortes  receiving  the  presents,
answered,  that  he  was  the  same  they  spake  of,  wherewith
they  were  greatly  satisfied,  seeing  themselves  to  be
curteously  received  and  intreated  by  him.  To  conclude,
the  day  after  this  Ambassage,  all  the  Captaines  and  Com-
manders of  the  Fleete,  came  unto  the  Admirall,  where
understanding  the  matter,  and  that  this  Realme  of
Motecuma  was  mighty  and  rich,  it  seemed  fit  to  gaine
the  reputation  of  brave  and  valiant  men  among  this  people,
and  that  by  this  meanes  (although  they  were  few)  they
should  be  feared  and  received  into  Mexico.  To  this
end  they  discharged  all  their  Artillery  from  their  Shippes,
which  being  a  thing  the  Indians  had  never  heard,  they
were  amazed,  as  if  heaven  had  fallen  upon  them.  Then
the  Spaniards  beganne  to  defie  them  to  fight  with  them  :
but  the  Indians  not  daring  to  hazard  themselves,  they
did  beate  them  and  intreate  them  ill,  shewing  their
Swords,  Lances,  Pertuisans,  and  other  armes,  wherewith
they  did  terrifie  them  much.  The  poore  Indians  were
by  reason  hereof  so  fearefull  and  amazed,  as  they  changed
their  opinion,  saying,  that  their  Lord  Topilcin  came  not
xv  280  T

A.D.

c.  1588.

Cortes  admits
divine  worship
agreeing  more
with  his
covetous
designes,  then
Christian
religion,  which
thrived  there
according  to
these
beginnings.

Egregiam  vero
laudem.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

in  this  troupe,  but  they  were  some  gods  (their  enemies)
came  to  destroy  them.  When  as  the  Ambassadors
returned  to  Mexico,  Motecuma  was  in  the  house  of
audience ;  but  before  he  would  heare  them,  this  miserable
Needes  must  man  commanded  a  great  number  of  men  to  be  sacrificed
they  goe  whom  jn  fojg  presence,  and  with  their  bloud  to  sprinkle  the
Ambassadors  (supposing  by  this  ceremony)  which  they
were  accustomed  to  doe  in  solemne  Ambassages)  to
receive  a  good  answer.  But  understanding  the  report
and  information  of  the  manner  of  their  Ships,  Men,  and
Armes,  he  stood  perplexed  and  confounded :  then  taking
counsell  thereon,  he  found  no  better  meanes,  then  to
labor  to  stop  the  entry  of  these  strangers,  by  Conjurations
and  Magicke  Arts.  They  had  accustomed  often  to  use
this  meanes,  having  great  conference  with  the  Devill,  by
whose  helpe  they  sometimes  obtained  strange  effects.  They
therefore  assembled  together  all  the  Sorcerers,  Magitians,
and  Inchanters,  who  being  perswaded  by  Motecuma,  they
tooke  it  in  charge  to  force  this  people  to  returne  unto
Protean  shifts,  their  Country.  For  this  consideration,  they  went  to  a
certaine  place  which  they  thought  fit  for  the  invocation
of  their  Devils,  and  practising  their  Arts  (a  thing  worthy
of  consideration)  They  wrought  all  they  could  ;  but  seeing
nothing  could  prevaile  against  the  Christians,  they  went
to  the  King,  telling  him  that  they  were  more  then  men,
for  that  nothing  might  hurt  them,  notwithstanding,  all
their  Conjurations  and  Inchantments.  Then  Motecuma
advised  him  of  another  policie,  that  faining  to  be  very
well  contented  with  their  comming,  he  commanded  all
his  Countries  to  serve  these  celestial!  gods  that  were  come
into  his  Land.  The  whole  people  was  in  great  heavinesse
and  amazement,  and  often  newes  came  that  the  Spaniards
inquired  for  the  King,  of  his  manner  of  life,  of  his  house
and  meanes.  He  was  exceedingly  vexed  herewith  :  some
of  the  people  and  other  Negromanciers  advised  him  to
hide  himselfe,  offering  to  place  him  whereas  no  creature
should  ever  finde  him.  This  seemed  base  unto  him,  and
therefore  he  resolved  to  attend  them,  although  it  were

290

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
dying. In  the  end  he  left  his  Houses  and  royall  Pallaces
to  lodge  in  others,  leaving  them  for  these  gods  as  he  said.

I  pretend  not  to  intreate  of  the  acts  and  deedes  of  Of  the
the  Spaniards,  who  conquered  New  Spaine,  nor  the  Spaniards
strange  adventures  which  happened  unto  them,  nor  of  e-Mex-iC0
the  courage  and  invincible  valour  of  their  Captaine  Don  chap.  25.
Fernando  Cortes  :  for  that  there  are  many  Histories  and
Relations  thereof,  as  those  which  Fernando  Cortes  him-
selfe  did  write  to  the  Emperour  Charles  the  fift,  although
they  be  in  a  plaine  stile,  and  farre  from  arrogancy,  the
which  doe  give  a  sufficient  testimony  of  what  did  passe,
wherein  he  was  worthy  of  eternall  memory,  but  onely
to  accomplish  my  intention :  I  am  to  relate  what  the
Indians  report  of  this  action,  the  which  hath  not  to  this
day  beene  written  in  our  vulgar  tongue.  Montecuma
therefore,  having  notice  of  this  Captains  victories,  that
he  advanced  for  his  conquest,  that  he  was  confederate
and  joyned  with  them  of  Tlascalla,  his  capitall  enemies,
and  that  he  had  severely  punished  them  of  Cholola  his
friends,  he  studied  how  to  deceive  him,  or  else  to  try
him  in  sending  a  principall  man  unto  him,  attyred  with
the  lake  ornaments  and  royall  ensignes,  the  which  should
take  upon  him  to  be  Motecuma,  which  fiction  being  dis-
covered to  the  Marquise  by  them  of  Tlascalla  (who  did
accompany  him)  he  sent  him  backe,  after  a  milde  and
gentle  reprehension,  in  seeking  so  to  deceive  him :  where-
upon Motecuma  was  so  confounded,  that  for  the  feare
thereof  he  returned  to  his  first  imaginations  and  practises,  [III.  v.
to force the  Christians to  retire,  by  the  invocation of  1023-]

Conjurers  and  Witches.  And  therfore  he  assembled  a
greater  number  then  before,  threatning  them,  that  if  they
returned  without  effecting  what  he  had  given  them  in
charge,  not  any  one  should  escape,  whereunto  they  all
promised  to  obey.  And  for  this  cause,  all  the  Devils
officers  went  to  the  way  of  Chalco,  by  the  which  the
Spaniards  should  passe,  when  mounting  to  the  top  of  a
hill,  Tezcalipuca,  one  of  their  principall  gods,  appeared  Tezcalipuca  a
unto  them,  as  comming  from  the  Spaniards  campe,  in  the  Devill-god.

291

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

habit  of  Chalcas,  who  had  his  paps  bound  about  eight
fold  with  a  cord  of  reedes,  he  came  like  a  man  beside
himselfe,  out  of  his  wits,  and  drunke  with  rage  and
furie.  Being  come  to  this  troupe  of  Witches  and  Con-
jurers, he  stayed,  and  spake  to  them  in  great  choller,
Why  come  you  hither?  what  doth  Motecuma  pretend
to  doe  by  your  meanes?  He  had  advised  himselfe  too
late :  for  it  is  now  determined,  that  his  Kingdome  and
honour  shall  be  taken  from  him,  with  all  that  he  possesseth,
for  punishment  of  the  great  tyrannies  he  hath  committed
against  his  Subjects,  having  governed  not  like  a  Lord,
but  like  a  traitour  and  tyrant.  The  Inchanters  and  Con-
jurers hearing  these  words,  knew  it  was  their  Idoll,  and
humbling  themselves  before  him,  they  presently  built  him
an  Altar  of  Stone  in  the  same  place,  covering  it  with
flowers  which  they  gathered  thereabouts,  but  he  contrari-
wise, making  no  account  of  these  things,  began  againe  to
chide  them,  saying :  What  come  you  hither  to  doe,  O  ye
traitours?  Returne  presently  and  behold  Mexico,  that
you  may  understand  what  shall  become  thereof.  And
they  say,  that  returning  towards  Mexico  to  behold  it,  they
did  see  it  flaming  on  fire.  Then  the  Devill  vanished
away,  and  they  not  daring  to  passe  any  farther,  gave  notice
thereof  to  Motezuma,  whereat  he  remained  long  without
speaking,  looking  heavily  on  the  ground ;  then  he  said,
What  shall  we  doe  if  god  and  our  friends  leave  us,  and
contrariwise,  they  helpe  and  favour  our  enemies?  I  am
now  resolute,  and  we  ought  all  to  resolve  in  this  point,
that  happen  what  may,  wee  must  not  flye  nor  hide  our
selves,  or  shew  any  signe  of  cowardise.  I  onely  pittie
the  aged  and  infants,  who  have  neither  feete  nor  hands  to
defend  themselves.  Having  spoken  this,  he  held  his
peace,  being  transported  into  an  extasie.  In  the  end,  the
Marquesse  approaching  to  Mexico,  Motezuma  resolved
to  make  of  necessity  a  vertue,  going  three  or  foure
leagues  out  of  the  Citie  to  receive  him  with  a  great
majesty,  carried  upon  the  shoulders  of  foure  Noblemen,
under  a  rich  Canapy  of  Gold  and  Feathers. When  they

292

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
met,  Motezuma  descended,  and  they  saluted  one  another
very  curteously.  Don  Fernando  Cortes  said  unto  him,
that  he  should  not  care  for  any  thing,  and  that  he  came
not  to  take  away  his  Realme,  nor  to  diminish  his  authority.
Motezuma  lodged  Cortes,  and  his  companions  in  his
royall  Pallace,  the  which  was  very  stately,  and  he  himselfe
lodged  in  other  private  houses.  This  night  the  Souldiers
for  joy  discharged  their  Artillery,  wherewith  the  Indians
were  much  troubled,  being  unaccustomed  to  heare  such
Musicke.  The  day  following,  Cortes  caused  Motezuma
and  all  the  Nobles  of  his  Court  to  assemble  in  a  great
Hall,  where  being  set  in  a  high  Chaire,  he  said  unto
them,  that  he  was  servant  to  a  great  Prince,  who  had
sent  them  into  these  countries  to  doe  good  workes,  and
that  having  found  them  of  Tlascalla  to  be  his  friends  (who  Good  fishing
complained  of  wrongs  and  greevances  done  unto  them  in  troubled
daily  by  them  of  Mexico)  he  would  understand  which  waters-
of  them  was  in  the  blame,  and  reconcile  them,  that  here-
after they  might  no  more  afflict  and  warre  one  against
another :  and  in  the  meane  time,  he  and  his  brethren
(which  were  the  Spaniards)  would  remaine  still  there
without  hurting  them  :  but  contrariwise,  they  would  helpe
them  all  they  could.  He  laboured  to  make  them  all
understand  this  discourse,  using  his  Interpreters  and
truchmen.  The  which  being  understood  by  the  King
and  the  other  Mexican  Lords,  they  were  wonderfully
well  satisfied,  and  shewed  great  signes  of  love  to  Cortes
and  his  company.  So  it  is,  that  by  some  occasions,  many
complaints,  griefes,  and  jealousies  grew  on  either  side.
The  which  Cortes  finding,  &  that  the  Indians  mindes
began  to  be  distracted  from  them,  he  thought  it  necessary
to  assure  himselfe,  in  laying  hand  upon  King  Motecuma,
who  was  seized  on,  and  his  legges  fettered.  Truely  this
act  was  strange  unto  all  men,  and  like  unto  that  other  of  Cortes  his  two
his,  to  have  burnt  his  Shippes,  and  shut  himselfe  in  the  strange
midst  of  his  enemies,  there  to  vanquish  or  to  dye.  The  attemPu-
mischiefe  was,  that  by  reason  of  the  unexpected  arrivall
of  Pamphilo Narvaes at the true crosse, drawing the

293

A.D.

c.  1588.

Of  the  death  of
Motezuma,
and  the
Spaniards
departure  out
of  Mexico.
Chap.  26.

Indian  armies.

[III.  v.

1024.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Country  into  mutiny,  Cortes  was  forced  to  absent  him-
selfe  from  Mexico,  and  to  leave  poore  Motecuma  in  the
hands  of  his  companions,  who  wanted  discretion  nor  had
not  moderation  like  unto  him :  so  as  they  grew  to  that
dissention,  as  there  was  no  meanes  to  pacifie  it.

When  as  Cortes  was  absent  from  Mexico,  he  that
remayned  his  Lieutenant,  resolved  to  punish  the  Mexicans
severely,  causing  a  great  number  of  the  Nobilitie  to  be
slaine  at  a  maske,  which  they  made  in  the  Palace,  the
which  did  so  farre  exceed,  as  all  the  people  mutined,  and
in  a  furious  rage,  tooke  Armes  to  be  revenged  and  to
kill  the  Spaniards.  They  therefore  besieged  them  in  the
Palace,  pressing  them  so  neere,  that  all  the  hurt  the
Spaniards  could  doe  them  with  their  Artillerie  and  Crosse-
bowes,  might  not  terrifie  them,  not  force  them  to  retyre
from  their  enterprise,  where  they  continued  many  dayes,
stopping  their  victuals,  not  suffering  any  one  to  enter
or  issue  forth.  They  did  fight  with  stones,  and  cast  Darts
after  their  manner,  with  a  kind  of  Lances  like  unto
Arrowes,  in  the  which  there  are  foure  or  sixe  very  sharpe
Rasors,  the  which  are  such  (as  the  Histories  report)  that
in  these  warres,  an  Indian  with  one  blow  of  these  Rasors,
almost  cut  off  the  necke  of  a  Horse,  and  as  they  did  one
day  fight  with  this  resolution  and  furie,  the  Spaniards  to
make  them  cease,  shewed  forth  Motecuma,  with  an  other
of  the  chiefe  Lords  of  Mexico,  upon  the  top  of  a  plat-
forme  of  the  house,  covered  with  the  Targets  of  two
Souldiers  that  were  with  them.  The  Mexicans  seeing
their  Lord  Motecuma,  stayed  with  great  silence.  Then
Motecuma  caused  the  Lord  to  advise  them  to  pacifie
themselves,  and  not  to  warre  against  the  Spaniards,  seeing
that  (he  being  a  prisoner)  it  could  little  profit  him.  The
which  being  understood  by  a  yong  man,  called  Quicux-
temoc,  whom  they  now  resolved  to  make  their  King,  hee
spake  with  a  loud  voyce  to  Motecuma,  willing  him  to
retyre  like  a  Villaine,  that  seeing  he  had  beene  such  a
Coward,  as  to  suffer  himselfe  to  bee  taken,  they  were
no  more  bound  to  obey  him,  but  rather  should  punish

294

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
him  as  he  deserved,  calling  him  Woman  for  the  more
reproach,  and  then  he  began  to  draw  his  Bowe  and  to
shoot  at  him,  and  the  people  began  to  cast  stones  at
him,  and  to  continue  their  combate.  Many  say  that
Motecuma  was  then  hurt  with  a  stone,  whereof  hee  dyed.
The  Indians  of  Mexico  affirme  the  contrarie,  and  that
hee  dyed  as  I  will  shew  hereafter.  Alvaro,  and  the  rest
of  the  Spaniards  seeing  themselves  thus  pressed,  gave
intelligence  to  Captaine  Cortes,  of  the  great  danger  they
were  in  :  who  having  with  an  admirable  dexteritie  and
valour,  given  order  to  Narvaes  affaires,  and  assembled
the  greatest  part  of  his  men,  hee  returned  with  all  speed
to  succour  them  of  Mexico,  where  observing  the  time
the  Indians  rest  (for  it  was  their  custome  in  warre,  to
rest  every  fourth  day)  Hee  one  day  advanced  with  great  Fourth  dayes
policy  and  courage,  so  as  both  he  and  his  men  entred  rest  in  warre.
the  Palace,  where  as  the  Spaniards  had  fortified  them-
selves :  they  then  shewed  great  signes  of  joy,  in  dis-
charging their  Artillerie.  But  as  the  Mexicans  fury
increased  (being  out  of  hope  to  defend  themselves)  Cortes
resolved  to  passe  away  secretly  in  the  night  without
bruit.  Having  therefore  made  Bridges  to  passe  two
great  and  dangerous  passages,  about  mid-night  they  issued
forth  as  secretly  as  they  could,  the  greatest  part  of  his
people  having  passed  the  first  bridge,  they  were  discovered
by  an  Indian  woman  before  they  could  passe  the  second,
who  cryed  out  their  enemies  fled,  at  the  which  voyce  all
the  people  ranne  together  with  a  horrible  furie :  so  as  in
passing  the  second  bridge,  they  were  so  charged  and  pur-
sued, as  there  remayned  above  three  hundred  men  slaine  300.
and  hurt  in  one  place ;  where  at  this  day  there  is  a  small  Spaniards  lost.
Hermitage,  which  they  unproperly  call  of  Martyrs.  Many
Spaniards  (to  preserve  the  gold  and  jewels  which  they  had
gotten)  perished,  and  others  staying  to  carry  it  away,  were
taken  by  the  Mexicans,  and  cruelly  sacrificed  to  their
Idols.  The  Mexicans  found  King  Motecuma  dead,  and
wounded  as  they  say  with  Poniards,  and  they  hold  opinion
that  that  night  the  Spaniards  slue  him  with  other  Noble-

295

A.D.

c.  1588.

And  can  you
blame  him  to
write  the  best
of  himself e?

Succession  of
superstition.

Royall
courage.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

men.  The  Marquesse  in  his  Relation  sent  to  the
Emperor,  writes  the  contrary,  and  that  the  Mexicans
killed  him  that  night  with  a  sonne  of  Motecuma,  which
he  led  with  him  amongst  other  Noblemen,  saying,  that
all  the  treasure  of  gold,  stones,  and  silver,  fell  into  the
Lake,  and  was  never  more  seene.  But  howsoever,  Mote-
cuma dyed  miserably,  and  payed  his  deserts  to  the  just
judgement  of  our  Lord  of  Heaven  for  his  pride  and
tyrannie  :  his  body  falling  into  the  Indians  power,  they
would  make  him  no  Obsequies  of  a  King,  no  not  of  an
ordinarie  person,  but  cast  it  away  in  great  disdaine  and
rage.  A  servant  of  his  having  pitie  of  this  Kings  miserie
(who  before  had  beene  feared  and  worshipped  as  a  God)
made  a  fire  thereof,  and  put  the  ashes  in  a  contemptible
place.  Returning  to  the  Spaniards  that  escaped,  they
were  greatly  tyred  and  turmoyled,  the  Indians  following
them  two  or  three  dayes  very  resolutely,  giving  them  no
time  of  rest,  being  so  distressed  for  victuals,  as  a  few
graines  of  Mays  were  divided  amongst  them  for  their
meate.  The  Relations  both  of  the  Spaniards  and  Indians
agree,  that  God  delivered  them  here  miraculously,  the
Virgin  Mary  defending  them  on  a  little  Hill,  whereat  this
day  three  leagues  from  Mexico,  there  is  a  Church  built  in
remembrance  thereof,  called  our  Lady  of  succour.  They
retyred  to  their  ancient  friends  of  Tlascalla,  whence  (by
their  aide,  and  the  valour  and  policy  of  Cortes)  they
returned  afterwards  to  make  war  against  Mexico,  by
Water  and  Land,  with  an  invention  of  Brigantines,  which
they  put  into  the  Lake,  where  after  many  combats,  and
above  threescore  dangerous  battailes,  they  conquered
Mexico,  on  Saint  Hippolitus  day,  the  13.  of  August,
1 52 1.  The  last  King  of  the  Mexicans  (having  obstinately
maintayned  the  warres)  was  in  the  end  taken  in  a  great
Canoe,  whereinto  hee  fled,  who  being  brought  with  some
other  of  the  chiefest  Noblemen  before  Fernando  Cortes,
this  petie  King  with  a  strange  resolution  and  courage,
drawing  his  dagger,  came  neere  to  Cortes,  and  said  unto
him,  Untill  this  day  I  have  done  my  best  indevour  for

296

JOSEPH ACOSTA

the  defence  of  my  people :  now  am  I  no  farther  bound,
but  to  give  thee  this  dagger  to  kill  me  therewith.  Cortes
answered,  that  he  would  not  kill  him,  neither  was  it  his
intention  to  hurt  them :  but  their  obstinate  folly  was
guiltie  of  all  the  miserie  and  afflictions  they  had  suffered,
neither  were  they  ignorant  how  often  he  had  required
peace  and  amitie  at  their  hands.  Hee  then  commanded
them  to  be  intreated  curteously.  Many  strange  and
admirable  things  chanced  in  this  Conquest  of  Mexico  :
for  I  neither  hold  it  for  an  untruth,  nor  an  addition,  which
many  write,  that  God  favoured  the  Spaniards  by  many
miracles.

It  is  most  certaine  by  the  Relations  of  many,  and  by
the  Histories  which  are  written,  that  in  divers  battailes
which  the  Spaniards  had,  as  well  in  New  Spaine,  as  in
Peru,  the  Indians  their  enemies  did  see  a  Horseman  in
the  ayre,  mounted  on  a  white  horse,  with  a  Sword  in  his
hand,  fighting  for  the  Spaniards,  whence  comes  the  great
reverence  they  beare  at  the  Indies  to  the  glorious  Apostle
Saint  James.  Otherwhiles  they  did  see  in  some  battailes,
the  Image  of  our  Lady,  from  whom  the  Christians  have
received  in  those  parts  incomparable  favours  and  benefits,
&c.  And  therefore  we  ought  not  to  condemne  all  these
things  of  the  first  Conquerors  of  the  Indies,  as  some
religious  and  learned  men  have  done,  doubtlesse  with  a
good  zeale,  but  too  much  affected :  For  although  for  the
most  part  they  were  covetous  men,  cruell,  and  very
ignorant  in  the  course  that  was  to  be  observed  with  the
Infidels,  who  had  never  offended  the  Christians,  yet  can
we  not  denie,  but  on  their  part  there  was  much  malice
against  God  and  our  Men,  which  forced  them  to  use  rigour
and  chastisement.

Every  one  may  understand  by  the  Relation  and  Dis-
course I  have  written  in  these  Bookes,  as  well  at  Peru,  as
in  New  Spaine,  when  as  the  Christians  first  set  footing,
that  these  Kingdomes  and  Monarchies  were  come  to  the
height  and  period  of  their  power.  The  Inguas  of  Peru,
possessing from the Realme of Chille beyond Quitto,

297

A.D.

c.  1588.

You  here  hear
a  Jesuit.
Gold  is  a
miracle-
working  God
in  covetous
hearts. Quid
non  mortalia
pectora  cogit
Auri  sacra
fames?  this
sacerrima
fames  wrought
miracles  in  all
the  Spanish
Indies,  and
still  doth  at
Saints  shrines,
and  in

European  pil-
grimages, and
Purgatorie
visions,  &c.

[III.  v.

1025.]

Great  is
(cryed  the
shrine-makers)
Diana  of  the
Ephesians.

Si  ego  (might
America  say)
digna  sim  hac
contumelia
maxime;  At
tu  (Hispane)
indignus  qui
facerestamen.

A.D.

c.  1588.

What  differ-
ence twixt
Woi'des  and
Swords,  twixt
apostles  and

Souldiers  ?
The  Prince  of
peace  sent  men
not  to  kill,  but
to  be  killed,  &
came  to  bee  a
slaine  Lamb,
that  the  World
might  be
saved;  not  to
slay  a  World
that  himselfe
might  be  a
covetous
worldly  saver
and  conqueror.
Nimrod  or
Alexander
had  been  fitter
Preachers  in
this  kinde  then
Peter  and
Paul:  their
examples  {not
of  these)  did
Cortes  and
Pizarro  fol-
low :  and  the
C  hristianitie
of  those  parts
more  smells  of
the  Sword  then
the  Word,  as

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

which  are  a  thousand  leagues,  being  most  abundant  in
gold,  silver,  sumptuous  services,  and  other  things :  as  also
in  Mexico,  Motecuma  commanded  from  the  North  Ocean
Sea,  unto  the  South,  being  feared  and  worshipped  not  as  a
man,  but  rather  as  a  god.  Then  was  it,  that  the  most
high  Lord  had  determined  that  that  stone  of  Daniel,  which
dissolved  the  Realmes  and  Kingdomes  of  the  World,
should  also  dissolve  those  of  this  new  World.  And  as
the  Law  of  Christ  came  when  as  the  Roman  Monarchie
was  at  her  greatnesse  :  so  did  it  happen  at  the  West  Indies,
wherein  wee  see  the  just  providence  of  our  Lord :  For
being  then  in  the  World,  I  meane  in  Europe,  but  one  head
and  temporall  Lord,  as  the  holy  Doctors  doe  note,  whereby
the  Gospell  might  more  easily  bee  imparted  to  so  many
People  and  Nations :  Even  so  hath  it  happened  at  the
Indies,  where  having  given  the  knowledge  of  Christ  to
the  Monarchs  of  so  many  Kingdomes,  it  was  a  meanes
that  afterwards  the  knowledge  of  the  Gospell  was  imparted
to  all  the  people  :  yea,  there  is  herein  a  speciall  thing  to  be
observed,  that  as  the  Lords  of  Cusco  and  Mexico  con-
quered new  Lands,  so  they  brought  in  their  owne
language :  for  although  there  were  (as  at  this  day)  great
diversitie  of  tongues,  yet  the  Courtly  speech  of  Cusco,
did  and  doth  at  this  day  runne  above  a  thousand  leagues,
and  that  of  Mexico  did  not  extend  farre  lesse,  which  hath
not  beene  of  small  importance,  but  hath  much  profited  in
making  the  preaching  easie,  at  such  a  time,  when  as  the
Preachers  had  not  the  gift  of  many  tongues,  as  in  old
times.  He  that  would  know  what  a  helpe  it  hath  beene
for  the  conversion  of  this  people  in  these  two  great
Empires,  and  the  great  difficultie  they  have  found  to
reduce  those  Indians  to  Christ,  which  acknowledge  no
Soveraigne  Lord,  let  him  goe  to  Florida,  Bresil,  the  Andes,
and  many  other  places,  where  they  have  not  prevayled  so
much  by  their  preaching  in  fiftie  yeeres,  as  they  have  done
in  Peru  and  new  Spaine  in  lesse  then  five.  If  they  will
impute  the  cause  to  the  riches  of  the  Country :  I  will  not
altogether  denie  it. Yet  were  it  impossible  to  have  so

298

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
great  wealth,  and  to  be  able  to  preserve  it,  if  there  had  not  the  Jesuit  in
beene  a  Monarchic This  is  also  a  worke  of  God  in  this  bookes  de
age,  when  as  the  Preachers  of  the  Gospell  are  so  cold  and  J°c/™"i  ahath
without  zeale,  and  Merchants  with  the  heat  of  covetous-  shewed,' as  is
nesse  and  desire  of  command,  search  and  discover  new  shewed  sup.
people  whither  we  passe  with  our  commodities; for  as  To.  1. /.  2.
Saint  Augustine  saith,  the  prophesie  of  Esay  is  fulfilled,  in  c:  l' tn  .
that  the  Church  of  Christ  is  extended,  not  onely  to  the  p0pes  ^ull.
right  hand,  but  also  to  the  left :  which  is  (as  hee  declareth)  August. lib.  2.
by  humane  and  earthly  meanes,  which  they  seeke  more  decom.evang.
commonly  then  Jesus  Christ. It  was  also  a  great  pro-  c'  36-
vidence  of  our  Lord, that  when  as  the  first Spaniards
arrived  there,  they  found  aide  from  the  Indians  them-
selves, by  reason  of  their  partialities  and  great  divisions.

This  is  well  knowne  in  Peru,  that  the  division  betwixt  This  was  the
the  two  brothers  Atahualpa  and  Guasca,  the  great  King  greatest  helpe
Guanacapa  their  father  being  newly  dead,  gave  entrie  to  °{0*est
the  Marquesse  Don  Francis  Pizarre,  and  to  the  Spaniards,  Indian
for  that  either  of  them  desired  his  alliance  being  busied  in  quarrels  made
warre  one  against  the  other. The  like  experience  hath  thateasie
beene  in  new  Spaine,  that  the  aide  of  those  of  the  Pro-  a £  *  ,tr

r  j  sold  made

vince  of  Tlascalla,  by  reason  of  their  continuall  hatred  desirable.

against  the  Mexicans,  gave  the  victorie  and  siegniorie  of

Mexico,  to  the  Marquesse  Fernando  Cortes  and  his  men,

and  without  them  it  had  beene  impossible  to  have  wonne

it, yea, to have maintayned themselves within the

Country.

They  are  much  deceived  that  so  little  esteeme  the
Indians,  and  judge  that  (by  the  advantage  the  Spaniards
have  over  them  in  their  Persons,  Horses,  and  Armes,  both
offensive  and  defensive)  they  might  easily  conquer  any
Land  or  Nation  of  the  Indies.

Chille  stands  yet,  or  to  say  better,  Arauco  and  Tuecapel,  Divers

which  are  two  Cities,  where  our  Spaniards  could  not  yet  Nations  which

win  one  foot  of  ground,  although  they  have  made  warre  '  e  P*7,
.  .  r  j  •  ■  1  •  r  cou'"  never

there  above  nve  and  twentie  yeeres,  without  sparing  or  conquer  to  this
any  cost. For  this  barbarous  Nation,  having  once  lost  the  day.
apprehension  of  horse  and  shot,  and  knowing  that  the

299

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

Spaniards  fall  as  well  as  other  men,  with  the  blow  of  a
stone  or  of  a  dart,  they  hazard  themselves  desperately,
entring  the  Pikes  upon  any  enterprise.  How  many
yeeres  have  they  levied  men  in  new  Spaine,  to  send  against
the  Chychymequos,  which  are  a  small  number  of  naked
Indians,  armed  onely  with  bowes  and  arrowes?  yet  to
this  day  they  could  not  be  vanquished,  but  contrariwise,
from  day  to  day  they  grow  more  desperate  and  resolute.
But  what  shall  we  say  of  the  Chucos,  of  the  Chiraguanas,
of  the  Piscocones,  and  all  the  other  people  of  the  Andes  ?
Hath  not  all  the  flower  of  Peru  beene  there,  bringing  with
them  so  great  provision  of  Armes  and  Men  as  we  have
[III.  v.  seene  ? What  did  they  ? With  what  victories  returned

1026.]  they?  Surely,  they  returned  very  happy  in  saving  of
their  lives,  having  lost  their  baggage  and  almost  all  their
horses.  Let  no  man  thinke  (speaking  of  the  Indians)
that  they  are  men  of  nothing ;  but  if  they  thinke  so,  let
them  goe  and  make  triall.  Wee  must  then  attribute  the
glorie  to  whom  it  appertaynes,  that  is,  principally  to  God,
and  to  his  admirable  disposition  :  for  if  Motecuma  in
Mexico,  and  the  Ingua  in  Peru,  had  beene  resolute  to
resist  the  Spaniards,  and  to  stop  their  entrie,  Cortes  and
Pizarre  had  prevayled  little  in  their  landing,  although
they  were  excellent  Captaines.  It  hath  also  beene  a  great
helpe  to  induce  the  Indians  to  receive  the  Law  of  Christ,
the  subjection  they  were  in  to  their  Kings  and  Lords,  and
also  the  servitude  and  slaverie  they  were  held  in  by  the
Devill  Devils  tyrannies  and  insupportable  yoke. This  was  an

insupportable,  excellent  disposition  of  the  divine  Wisedome,  the  which
drawes  profit  from  ill  to  a  good  end,  and  receives  his  good
from  an  others  ill,  which  it  hath  not  sowen.  It  is  most
certaine  that  no  people  of  the  West  Indies  have  beene
more  apt  to  receive  the  Gospell,  then  those  which  were
most  subject  to  their  Lords,  and  which  have  beene
charged  with  the  heaviest  burthens,  as  well  of  Tributes
and  Services,  as  of  Customes  and  bloudie  Practises.  All
that  which  the  Mexican  Kings  and  those  of  Peru  did
possesse, is at this day most planted with Christian

300

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
Religion,  and  where  there  is  least  difficultie  in  the  Govern-
ment and  Ecclesiasticall  Discipline.  The  Indians  were
so  wearied  with  the  heavy  and  insupportable  yoke  of
Satans  lawes,  his  sacrifices  and  ceremonies,  whereof  wee
have  formerly  spoken,  that  they  consulted  among  them-
selves, to  seeke  out  a  new  Law,  and  an  other  God  to
serve.  And  therefore  the  Law  of  Christ  seemed  unto
them,  and  doth  at  this  day  seeme  just,  sweet,  cleane,  good,
and  full  of  happinesse.

And  that  which  is  difficult  in  our  Law,  to  beleeve  so
high  and  soveraigne  Mysteries,  hath  beene  easie  among
them,  for  that  the  Devill  had  made  them  comprehend
things  of  greater  difficultie,  and  the  selfe-same  things
which  hee  had  stolen  from  our  Evangelicall  Law,  as  their
manner  of  Communion  and  Confession,  their  adoration
of  Three  in  One,  and  such  other  like,  the  which  against
the  will  of  the  Enemie,  have  holpen  for  the  easie  receiving
of  the  Truth  by  those  who  before  had  embraced  Lyes.
God  is  wise  and  admirable  in  all  his  workes,  vanquishing
the  Adversarie  even  with  his  owne  weapon,  hee  takes
him  in  his  owne  snare,  and  kills  him  with  his  owne  sword.
Finally,  our  God  (who  had  created  this  People,  and  who
seemed  to  have  thus  long  forgot  them)  when  the  houre
was  come,  hee  would  have  the  same  Devils,  enemies  to
mankinde,  whom  they  falsly  held  for  gods ;  should  give
a  testimonie  against  their  will,  of  the  true  Law,  the  power
of  Christ,  and  the  triumph  of  the  Crosse,  as  it  plainly
appeares  by  the  presages,  prophesies,  signes,  and  prodigies,
here  before  mentioned,  with  many  others  happened  in
divers  parts,  and  that  the  same  ministers  of  Satan,
Sorcerers,  Magicians,  and  other  Indians  have  confessed  it.
And  wee  cannot  denie  it  (being  most  evident  and  knowne
to  all  the  World)  that  the  Devill  dareth  not  hisse,  and  that
the  Practises,  Oracles,  Answers,  and  visible  Apparitions,
which  were  so  ordinarie  throughout  all  this  Infidelitie,
have  ceased,  whereas  the  Crosse  of  Christ  hath  beene
planted,  where  there  are  Churches,  and  where  the  Name
of  Christ  hath  beene  confessed. And  if  there  be  at  this

301

A.D.

c.  1588.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

day  any  cursed  minister  of  his,  that  doth  participate
thereof,  it  is  in  Caves,  and  on  the  tops  of  Mountaines,
and  in  secret  places,  farre  from  the  name  and  communion
of  Christians.  The  Soveraigne  Lord  be  blessed  for  his
great  mercies,  and  for  the  glorie  of  his  holy  Name :  And
in  truth,  if  they  did  governe  this  people  temporally  and
spiritually,  in  such  sort  as  the  Law  of  Jesus  Christ  hath
set  it  downe,  with  a  milde  yoke  and  light  burthen,  and  that
they  would  impose  no  more  upon  them  then  they  can
well  beare,  as  the  Letters  Patents  of  the  good  Emperour
of  happy  memorie  doe  command,  and  that  they  would
imploy  halfe  the  care  they  have  to  make  profit  of  these
poore  mens  sweats  and  labours,  for  the  health  of  their
soules,  it  were  the  most  peaceable  and  happy  Christian
part  of  all  the  World,  &c.

They

acknowledge
one  supreme
Deitie.

[III.

Chap. V.

Of  the  ancient  superstitions  of  the  Mexicans  and
Indians  of  America,  gathered  out  of  the  fifth
Booke  of  Josephus  Acosta.

Irst,  although  the  darknesse  of  Infidelitie
holdeth  these  Nations  in  blindnesse,  yet
in  many  things  the  light  of  Truth  and
Reason  workes  somewhat  in  them.  And
they  commonly  acknowledge  a  supreme
Lord  and  Author  of  all  things,  which
they  of  Peru  called  Unachocha,  and  gave
him  names  of  great  excellence,  as  Pachacamac,  or
Pachayachachic,  which  is,  the  Creator  of  Heaven  and
Earth :  and  Usapu,  which  is,  admirable,  and  other  like
names.  Him  they  did  worship,  as  the  chiefest  of  all,
whom  they  did  honor  in  beholding  the  Heaven.  The
like  wee  see  amongst  them  of  Mexico,  and  China,  and
all  other  Infidels.  Which  accordeth  well  with  that  which
is  said  of  Saint  Paul,  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  where
1027.] he  did  see  the  Inscription  of  an  Altar ; Ignoto  Deo  : to

302

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.
the unknowne God. Whereupon the Apostle tooke
occasion  to  preach  unto them,  saying, Hee  whom  you  Acts  17.
worship  without  knowing,  him  doe  I  preach  unto  you.
In  like sort, those  which at this day  doe preach the
Gospell  to  the  Indians,  finde  no  great  difficultie  to  per-
swade  them  that  there  is  a  High  God  and  Lord  over  all,
and  that  this  is  the  Christians  God,  and  the  true  God.
And  yet  it  hath  caused  great  admiration in mee, that
although  they  had  this  knowledge,  yet  had  they  no  proper  No  proper
Name  for  God,  if  wee  shall  seeke  into  the  Indian  tongue  name  for  God.
for  a  word  to  answere  to  this  Name  of  God,  as  in  Latin,
Deus ;  in  Greeke,  Theos ;  in  Hebrew,  El ;  in  Arabike,
Alia ;  but  we  shall  not  finde  any  in  the  Cuscan  or  Mexican
tongues. So  as  such  as  preach  or  write  to  the  Indians,
use  our  Spanish  name  Dios,  fitting  it  to  the  accent  or
pronunciation of the Indian tongues, the which differ
much,  whereby  appeares  the  small  knowledge  they  had  of
God,  seeing  they  cannot  so  much  as  name  him,  if  it  bee
not  by  our  very  name :  yet  in  truth  they  had  some  little
knowledge,  and  therefore  in  Peru  they  made  him  a  rich
Temple,  which they  called  Pachacamac, which  was the
principall  Sanctuarie  of  the  Realme. And  as  it  hath  beene
said,  this  word  of  Pachacamac,  is  as  much  to  say,  as  the
Creator,  yet  in  this  Temple  they  used  their  Idolatries,
worshipping  the  Devill  and  Figures. They  likewise  made
Sacrifices  and  Offerings  to  Viracocha,  which  held  the  chiefe
place  amongst  the  worships  which  the  Kings  Inguas  made. .
Hereof  they  called  the  Spaniards  Virocochas,  for  that  they  of  the  first
hold  opinion  they  are  the  sonnes  of  Heaven,  and  divine ;  kinde  of
even  as  others  did  attribute  a  Deitie  to  Paul  and  Barnabas,  Idolatrie,upon
calling  the  one  Jupiter,  and  the  other  Mercurie,  so  would  natjira^ '***
they  offer  sacrifices  unto  them,  as  unto  gods :  and  as  the ., ■ s
Barbarians  of  Melite (which  is Make) seeing  that the  chap.  4.
Viper  did  not  hurt  the  Apostle,  they  called  him  God. Sunne  their

second  God:

NExt  to  Viracocha,  or  their  supreme  God,  that  which  ffJ^J  °ther
most  commonly  they  have  and  doe  adore  amongst  Bodies  in  their
the  Infidels,  is  the  Sunne ; and  after,  those  things  which  order.

3°3

A.D.

c.  1588.

Temples  to  the
Thunder  their
third  God.
Jupiters
fulmen.

Humane
sacrifices.

Earth,  Sea,
Raine-bozv,
Starres
worshipped.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

are  most  remarkeable  in  the  celestiall  or  elementarie  nature,
as  the  Moone,  Starres,  Sea,  and  Land. The  Guacas,  or
Oratories,  which  the  Inguas  Lords  of  Peru  had  in  greatest
reverence, next to Viracocha and the Sunne, was the
Thunder, which they called by three divers names,
Chuquilla,  Catuilla,  and  Intiillapa,  supposing  it  to  be  a
man  in  heaven,  with  a  Sling  and  a  Mace,  and  that  it  is  in
his  power  to  cause  Raine,  Haile,  Thunder,  and  all  the
rest  that  appertaines  to  the  Region  of  the  Aire,  where  the
Cloudes  engender. It  was  a  Guaca  (for  so  they  called
their  Oratories)  generall  to  all  the  Indians  of  Peru,  offering
unto  him  many  sacrifices : and  in  Cusco,  which  is  the
Court  and  Metropolitan  Citie,  they  did  sacrifice  children
unto  him,  as  to  the  Sunne. They  did  worship  these  three,
Viracocha,  the  Sunne,  and  Thunder,  after  another  manner
then  all  the  rest,  as  Polio  writes,  who  had  made  triall
thereof,  they  did  put  as  it  were  a  Gantlet  or  Glove  upon
their  hands,  when  they  did  lift  them  up  to  worship  them.
They  did  worship  the  Earth ; which  they  called  Pacha-
mama,  as  the  Ancients  did  the  goddesse  Tellus :  and  the
Sea  likewise,  which  they  call  Mamacocha,  as  the  Ancients
worshipped Thetis, or  Neptune. Moreover, they  did
worship the Raine-bowe, which were the Armes and
Blazons  of  the  Ingua,  with  two  Snakes  stretched  out  on
either  side. Amongst  the  Starres  they  all  did  commonly
worship that which they called Colca, and wee here
Cabrille. They did attribute divers offices to divers
Starres,  and  those  which  had  neede  of  their  favour  did
worship  them,  as  the  Shepherd  did  sacrifice  to  a  Starre,
which  they  called  Urcuhillay,  which  they  hold  to  be  a
Sheepe  of  divers  colours,  having  the  care  to  preserve  their
Cattell ;  and  they  imagine  it  is  that  which  the  Astronomers
call  Lyra. These  Shepherds  worship  two  other  Starres,
which  walke  neere  unto  them,  they  call  them  Catuchillay,
and  Urcuchillay ; and  they  fayne  them  to  be  an  Ewe  and
a  Lambe. Others  worshipped  a  Starre  which  they  called
Machacuay,  to  which  they  attribute  the  charge  and  power
over  Serpents,  and  Snakes,  to  keepe  them  from  hurting

3°4

JOSEPH ACOSTA

of  them.  They  ascribe  power  to  another  Starre,  which
they  called  Chuguinchinchay  (which  is  as  much  as  Tigre)
over  Tigres,  Beares,  and  Lions,  and  they  have  generally
beleeved,  that  of  all  the  beasts  of  the  earth,  there  is  one
alone  in  heaven  like  unto  them,  the  which  hath  care  of
their  procreation  and  increase.  And  so  they  did  observe
and  worship  divers  Starres,  as  those  which  they  called
Chacana,  Topatarca,  Mamanan,  Mirco,  Miquiquicay,  and
many  other.  So  as  it  seemed  they  approched  somwhat
neere  the  propositions  of  Platoes  Idees.  The  Mexicans
almost  in  the  same  manner  after  the  supreme  God,  wor-
shipped the  Sunne :  And  therefore  they  called  Hernando
Cortez  (as  he  hath  written  in  a  Letter  sent  unto  the
Emperor  Charles  the  fifth)  Sonne  of  the  Sunne,  for  his
care  and  courage  to  compasse  the  Earth.  But  they  made
their  greatest  adoration  to  an  Idoll,  called  Vitzliputzli,
the  which  in  all  this  Region  they  called  the  most  puissant,
and  Lord  of  all  things :  for  this  cause  the  Mexicans  built
him  a  Temple,  the  greatest,  the  fairest,  the  highest,  and
the  most  sumptuous  of  all  other.  The  situation  and
beautie  thereof,  may  well  be  conjectured  by  the  ruines
which  yet  remaine  in  the  midst  of  the  Citie  of  Mexico.
But  here  the  Mexicans  Idolatrie  hath  beene  more  per-
nicious and  hurtfull  then  that  of  the  Inguas,  as  wee  shall
see  playner  hereafter,  for  that  the  greatest  part  of  their
adoration  and  Idolatrie,  was  imployed  to  Idols,  and  not  to
naturall  things,  although  they  did  attribute  naturall  effects
to  these  Idols,  as  Raine,  multiplication  of  Cattell,  Warre,
and  Generation,  even  as  the  Greekes  and  Latines  have
forged  Idols  of  Phcebus,  Mercuric,  Jupiter,  Minerva,  and
of  Mars.  To  conclude,  who  so  shall  neerly  looke  into  it,
shall  finde  this  manner  which  the  Devill  hath  used  to
deceive  the  Indians,  to  be  the  same  wherewith  he  hath
deceived  the  Greekes  and  Romans,  and  other  ancient
Gentiles,  giving  them  to  understand  that  these  notable
creatures,  the  Sunne,  Moone,  Starres,  and  Elements,  had
power  and  authority  to  doe  good  or  harme  to  men.  Their
manner  to  pray  to  Viracocha,  to  the  Sunne,  the  Starres,
xv  305  u

A.D.

c.  1588.

Mexicans
worship  the
Sunne  &c.

Vitzliputzlis
Temple.

[III.  v.

1028.]
Idolatrising
rite  the  same  to
all  their  Idols
with  words
different.

A.D.

c.  1588.

Lares:  as
Potish
mediators  of
intercession.

* Adoration
had  the  name
of  ad  and  os  :
kissing  the
hand  with
bowing  of  the
body,  &c.  See
Min.  Feel
Job.  31.
Of  the
Idolatry  the
Indians  used  to
particular
things.
Chap.  5.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  the  rest  of  their  Idols,  was  to  open  their  hands,  and
to  make  a  certaine  sound  with  their  mouthes  (like  people
that  kissed)  and  to  aske  that  which  every  one  desired  in
offering  his  Sacrifices ;  yet  was  there  great  difference
betwixt  the  words  they  used  in  speaking  to  the  great
Ticiviracocha,  to  whom  they  did  attribute  the  chiefe  power
and  commandement  over  all  things,  and  those  they  used
to  others,  the  which  every  one  did  worshippe  privately
in  his  house,  as  Gods  or  particular  Lords,  saying,  that
they  were  their  Intercessors  to  this  great  Ticciviracocha.
This  manner  of  worship,  opening  the  hands,  and  as  it
were  *  kissing,  hath  something  like  to  that  which  Job
had  in  horrour,  as  fit  for  Idolaters,  saying,  If  I  have  kissed
my  hands  with  my  mouth,  beholding  the  Sunne  when  it
shines,  or  the  Moone  when  it  is  light,  the  which  is  a  great
iniquitie,  and  to  deny  the  most  great  God.

THe  Devill  hath  not  beene  contented  to  make  these
blinde  Indians  to  worshippe  the  Sunne,  Moone,
Starres,  Earth,  and  Sea,  and  many  other  generall  things  in
nature,  but  he  hath  passed  on  further,  giving  them  for
God,  and  making  them  subject  to  base  and  abject  things,
and  for  the  most  part,  filthy  and  infamous:  for  they
worshipped  Rivers,  Fountaines,  the  mouthes  of  Rivers,
entries  of  Mountaines,  Rockes  or  great  Stones,  Hils  and
the  tops  of  Mountaines,  which  they  call  Apachitas,  and
they  hold  them  for  matters  of  great  devotion.  To  con-
clude, they  did  worship  all  things  in  nature,  which  seemed
to  them  remarkable  and  different  from  the  rest,  as
acknowledging  some  particular  deitie.

These  shewed  me  in  Caxamalca  of  Nasca  a  little  hill
or  great  mount  of  Sand,  which  was  the  chiefe  Idoll  or
Guaca  of  the  Ancients.  I  demaunded  of  them  what
divinity  they  found  in  it?  They  answered,  that  they  did
worship  it  for  the  wonder,  being  a  very  high  mount  of
Sand,  in  the  midst  of  very  thicke  Mountaines  of  Stone.
We  had  neede  in  the  Citie  of  Kings,  of  great  store  of
great  wood  ; for  the  melting  of  a  Bell,  and  therefore  they

306

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
cut  downe  a  great  deformed  Tree,  which  for  the  great-
nesse  and  antiquity  thereof  had  beene  a  long  time  the
Oratorie  and  Guaca  of  the  Indians.  And  they  beleeved
there  was  a  certaine  Divinity  in  any  thing  that  was  extra-
ordinary and  strange  in  his  kinde,  attributing  the  like
unto  small  Stones  and  Mettals ;  yea  unto  rootes  and
fruites  of  the  earth,  as  the  rootes  they  call  Papas.  There
is  a  strange  kinde  which  they  call  Lallahuas,  which  they
kissed  and  worshipped.  They  did  likewise  worship
Beares,  Lyons,  Tygres  and  Snakes,  to  the  end  they  should
not  hurt  them :  and  such  as  their  gods  be,  such  are  the
things  they  offer  unto  them  in  their  worship.  They  have
used  as  they  goe  by  the  way,  to  cast  in  the  crosse  wayes,
on  the  hils,  and  toppes  of  Mountaines,  which  they  call
Apachittas,  olde  shooes,  Feathers,  and  Coca  chewed,  being
an  hearbe  they  use  much.  And  when  they  have  nothing  ConciL
left,  they  cast  a  Stone  as  an  offring,  that  they  might  passe  Limensiap.  2.
freely,  and  have  greater  force,  the  which  they  say  caP-  99-
increaseth  by  this  meanes,  as  it  is  reported  in  a  provincial
Counsell  of  Peru.  And  therefore  they  finde  in  the  hie-
waies  great  heapes  of  Stones  offred,  and  such  other  things.
They  used  another  offring  no  lesse  pleasant  and  ridiculous,
pulling  the  haire  from  the  eyebrowes  to  offer  it  to  the
Sunne,  Hils,  Apachittas,  to  the  Windes,  or  to  any  other
thing  they  feare.  Such  is  the  miseries  that  many  Indians
have  lived  in,  and  doe  to  this  day,  whom  the  Devill  doth
abuse  like  very  Babes,  with  any  foolish  illusion  what-
soever.

They  report  of  one  of  the  Kings  Inguis,  a  man  of  a
subtile  spirit,  who  (seeing  that  all  his  predecessours  had
worshipped  the  Sunne)  said,  that  he  did  not  take  the
Sunne  to  be  God,  neither  could  it  be,  for  that  God  was
a  great  Lord,  who  with  great  quiet  and  leasure  performed
his  workes,  and  that  the  Sunne  doth  never  cease  his  Of  another
course,  saying,  that  the  thing  which  laboured  so  much  kine^e  °f
could  not  seeme  to  be  God.  2J*Z*"

They came to the height of Idolatry by the same  Qkap.  6.
meanes  the  Scripture  maketh  mention  of: first  they  had  Wisd.  14.

307

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

a  care  to  keepe  the  bodies  of  their  Kings  and  Noblemen
whole,  from  any  ill  scent  of  corruption  above  two  hundred
yeeres.  In  this  sort  were  their  Kings  Inguas  in  Cusco,
every  one  in  his  Chappell  and  Oratory,  so  as  the  Marquesse
of  Canette  beeing  Viceroy,  to  root  out  Idolatry,  caused
three  or  foure  of  their  Gods  to  be  drawne  out  and  carried
to  the  Citie  of  Kings,  which  bred  a  great  admiration,  to
see  these  bodies  (dead  so  many  yeeres  before)  remayne
so  faire  and  also  whole.  Every  one  of  these  Kings  Inguas
left  all  his  Treasure  and  Revenues,  to  entertayne  the  place
of  worship  where  his  body  was  laid,  and  there  were  many
Ministers  with  all  his  Family  dedicated  to  his  service :
for  no  King  Successor  did  usurpe  the  Treasures  and  Plate
of  his  Predecessor,  but  he  did  gather  all  new  for  himselfe,
and  his  Palace.  They  were  not  content  with  this  Idolatry
to  dead  bodies,  but  also  they  made  their  figures  and  repre-
sentations :  and  every  King  in  his  life  time  caused  a  figure
to  be  made  wherein  he  was  represented,  which  they  called
Guaoigui,  which  signifieth  Brother,  for  that  they  should
doe  to  this  Image,  during  his  life  and  death,  as  much
honour  and  reverence  as  to  himselfe.  They  carried  this
Image  to  the  warres,  and  in  procession  for  raine  or  faire
weather,  making  sundry  Feasts  and  Sacrifices  unto  them.
[III.  v.  There  have  beene  many  of  these  Idols  in  Cusco,  and  in

1 029.]  tjlat  Territory,  but  now  they  say  that  this  Superstition  of
worshipping  of  stones  hath  altogether  ceased,  or  for  the
most  part,  after  they  had  beene  discovered  by  the  diligence
of  the  Licentiate  Polio,  and  the  first  was  that  of  the
Inguas  Rocha,  chiefe  of  the  faction  or  race  of  Hanam
Cusco. And  we  find  that  among  other  Nations  they  had
Uf  bupersti- -n g.reaf. estimation and reverence the bodies of their
to  the  dead. Predecessors,  and  did  likewise  worship  their  Images.
Chap.  7.

Immortality  of  f  I  ^He  Indians  of  Peru  beleeved  commonly  that  the
soules  beleeved  J_  Soules  lived  after  this  life,  and  that  the  good  were
rection  of  the  m  g^orie>  and  the  bad  in  paine,  so  as  there  is  little  difficultie
bodies:  as  to  perswade  them  to  these  Articles.  But  they  are  not
ar.  17.  yet  come  to  the  knowledge  of  that  point,  that  the  bodies

308

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
should  rise  with  the  Soules.  And  therefore  they  did  use
a  wonderfull  care,  as  it  is  said,  to  preserve  the  bodies  which
they  honoured  after  death :  to  this  end  their  Successors
gave  them  Garments,  and  made  Sacrifices  unto  them,
especially  the  Kings  Inguas,  being  accompanied  at  their
Funerals,  with  a  great  number  of  servants  and  women  for
his  service  in  the  other  life :  and  therefore  on  the  day  of
his  decease,  they  did  put  to  death  the  woman  he  had  loved
best,  his  Servants  and  Officers,  that  they  might  serve  him
in  the  other  life.

When as the Guanacapa dyed (who was father to
Atagualpa,  at  what  time  the  Spaniards  entred)  they  put  to
death  above  a  thousand  persons  of  all  ages  and  conditions, 1000.  skim
for  his  service  to  accompany  him  in  the  other  life,  after  t0  attend  one
many  songs  and  drunkennesse  they  slew  them ; and  these
that  were  appointed  to  death,  held  themselves  happy. They
did sacrifice many things unto them, especially yong
children,  and  with  the  bloud  they  made  a  stroake  on  the
dead  mans  face,  from  one  eare  to  the  other. This  super-
stition and  inhumanity,  to  kill  both  men  and  women,  to
accompany and serve the dead in the other  life, hath
beene  followed  by  others,  and  is  at  this  day  used  amongst
some  other  barbarous  Nations. And  as  Polio  writes,  it
hath  beene  in  a  manner  generall  throughout  all  the  Indies.
The  reverent  Beda  reports,  that  before  the  Englishmen  Superstitions  of
were  converted  to  the  Gospell,  they  had  the  same  custome,  the  old
to kill  men to accompany and serve the dead. It is  EnS^-
written of  a Portugal, who being captive among the  Portugal!
Barbarians,  had  beene  hurt  with  a  dart,  so  as  he  lost  one  wlle-
eye,  and  as  they  would  have  sacrificed  him  to  accompany
a  Nobleman  that  was  dead,  he  said  unto  them,  that  those
that  were  in  the  other  life,  would  make  small  account  of
the  dead,  if  they  gave  him  a  blinde  man  for  a  companion ;
and  that  it  were  better  to  give  him  an  attendant  that  had
both  his  eyes. This  reason  being  found  good  by the
Barbarians,  they  let  him  goe. Besides  this  superstition
of  sacrificing  men  to  the  dead,  being  used  but  to  great
Personages, there is another farre more generall and

3°9

A.D.

c.  1588.

Purgatory
fancies  as  in
Popish  legends.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

common  in  all  the  Indies,  which  is,  to  set  meate  and
drinke  upon  the  grave  of  the  dead,  imagining  they  did
feede  thereon :  the  which  hath  likewise  beene  an  errour
amongst  the  Auncients,  as  Saint  Austine  writes,  and
therefore  they  gave  them  meate  and  drinke.  At  this  day
many  Indian  Infidels,  do  secretly  draw  their  dead  out  of
the  Churchyard,  and  bury  them  on  hils,  or  upon  passages
of  Mountaines,  or  else  in  their  owne  houses.  They  have
also  used  to  put  Gold  and  Silver  in  their  mouth,  hands,
and  bosome,  and  to  apparell  them  with  new  Garments
durable,  and  well  lined  under  the  herse.  They  beleeve
that  the  soules  of  the  dead  wandred  up  and  downe  and
indure  cold,  thirst,  hunger  and  travel,  and  for  this  cause
they  make  their  anniversaries,  carrying  them  cloathes,
meate  and  drinke.

Of  the  manner
of  burying  the
dead  among
the  Mexican
and  sundry
other  Nations.
Chap.  8.

Places  of
buriall.

HAving  reported  what  many  Nations  of  Peru  have
done  with  their  dead,  it  shall  not  be  from  the  pur-
pose, to  make  particular  mention  of  the  Mexicans  in  this
point,  whose  mortuaries  were  much  solemnised,  and  full
of  notable  follies.  It  was  the  office  of  the  Priests  and
religious  of  Mexico  (who  lived  there  with  a  strange
observance,  as  shall  be  said  hereafter)  to  interre  the  dead,
and  doe  their  obsequies.  The  places  where  they  buried
them,  was  in  their  Gardens,  and  in  the  Courts  of  their
owne  houses :  others  carried  them  to  the  places  of
sacrifices  which  were  done  in  the  Mountaines :  others
burnt  them,  and  after  buried  the  ashes  in  their  Temples ;
and  they  buried  them  all,  with  whatsoever  they  had,  of
Apparell,  Stones  and  Jewels.  They  did  put  the  ashes  of
such  as  were  burnt  into  pots,  and  with  them,  the  Jewels,
Stones,  and  Eare-rings  of  the  dead,  how  rich  and  precious
soever.  They  did  sing  the  Funerall  offices,  like  to
answeres,  and  did  often  lift  up  the  dead  bodies,  doing
many  ceremonies.  At  these  mortuaries  they  did  eate
and  drinke ;  and  if  it  were  a  person  of  quality,  they  gave
apparell  to  all  such  as  came  to  the  interment.  When  any
one  dyed,  they  laid  him  open  in  a  chamber,  untill  that  all

310

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
his  kinsfolks  and  friends  were  come,  who  brought  presents
unto  the  dead,  and  saluted  him  as  if  he  were  living. And
if  he  were  a  King  or  Lord  of  some  towne,  they  offered
him  slaves  to  be  put  to  death  with  him,  to  the  end  they
might  serve  him  in  the  other  world. They  likewise  put
to  death  his  Priest,  or  Chaplaine  (for  every  Nobleman  Chaplen  and
had  a  Priest  which  administred  these  ceremonies  within  °^er  Officers
his  house)  and  then  they  killed  him,  that  he  might  execute '  e  '
his  office  with  the  dead. They  likewise  killed  his  Cook,
his  Butler,  his  Dwarfes,  and  deformed  men,  by  whom  he
was  most  served  :  neither  did  they  spare  the  very  brothers,
of  the  dead,  who  had  most  served  them  :  for  it  was  a  great-
nesse amongst the Noblemen, to be served by their
brethren  and  the  rest. Finally,  they  put  to  death  all  of  [III.  v.
his  traine,  for  the  entertaining  of  his  house  in  the  other  1030.]

world :  and  lest  poverty  should  oppresse  them,  they
buried  with  them  much  wealth,  as  Gold,  Silver,  Stones,
Curtins  of  exquisite  worke,  Bracelets  of  Gold,  and  other
rich  peeces.  And  if  they  burned  the  dead,  they  used  the
like  with  all  his  Servants,  and  ornaments  they  gave  him
for  the  other  world.  Then  tooke  they  all  the  ashes  they
buried  with  very  great  solemnity.  The  obsequies  con-
tinued tenne  dayes  with  songs  of  plaints  and  lamentations,
and  the  Priests  carried  away  the  dead  with  so  many
ceremonies,  and  in  so  great  number,  as  they  could  scarce
accompt  them.  To  the  Captaines  and  Noblemen  they
gave  trophees  and  markes  of  honour,  according  to  their
enterprises  and  valor  imployed  in  the  wars  and  govern-
ments ;  for  this  effect  they  had  armes  and  particular
blasons.  They  carried  these  markes  or  blazons  to  the
place  where  he  desired  to  be  buried  or  burnt,  marching
before  the  body,  and  accompanying  it,  as  it  were  in
procession,  where  the  Priests  and  officers  of  the  Temple
went  with  divers  furnitures  and  ornaments,  some  casting
incense,  others  singing,  and  some  sounding  of  mournfull
Flutes  and  Drums,  which  did  much  increase  the  sorrow
of  his  kinsfolkes  and  subjects.  The  Priest  who  did  the
office  was  decked  with  the  markes  of  the  Idoll  which  the

311

A.D.

c.  1588.

The  fourth  fcf
last  kinde  of
Idolatry  the
Indians  used,
especially  the
Mexicans  to
Images  and
Idols.
Chap.  9.

Images  the
fourth  kinde  of
Indian
Idolatry.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Nobleman  had  represented ;  for  all  Noblemen  did  repre-
sent Idols,  and  carried  the  name  of  some  one ;  and  for
this  occasion  they  were  esteemed  and  honoured.  The
order  of  Knighthood  did  commonly  carry  these  foresaid
markes.  He  that  should  be  burnt,  being  brought  to  the
place  appointed,  they  invironed  him  with  wood  of  Pine
trees,  and  all  his  baggage,  then  set  they  fire  unto  it,
increasing  it  still  with  goomie  wood,  untill  that  all  were
converted  into  ashes,  then  came  there  forth  a  Priest  attired
like  a  Devil,  having  mouthes  upon  every  joynt  of  him,
and  many  eyes  of  glasse,  holding  a  great  staffe,  with  the
which  he  did  mingle  all  the  ashes  very  boldly,  and  with
so  terrible  a  gesture,  as  he  terrified  all  the  assistants.
Sometimes  this  Minister  had  other  different  habits,
according  to  the  quality  of  the  dead.

There  hath  beene  great  curiosity  at  the  Indies  in  making
of  Idols  and  Pictures  of  divers  formes  and  matters,  which
they  worshipped  for  Gods,  and  in  Peru  they  called  them
Guacas,  being  commonly  of  foule  and  deformed  beasts,
at  the  least,  such  as  I  have  seene,  were  so.  I  beleeve
verily  that  the  Devill,  in  whose  honour  they  made  these
Idols,  was  pleased  to  cause  himselfe  to  be  worshipped  in
these  deformities,  and  in  truth  it  was  found  so,  that  the
Devill  spake  and  answered  many  of  these  Guacas  or  Idols,
and  his  Priests  and  Ministers  came  to  these  Oracles  of  the
father  of  lies,  and  such  as  he  is,  such  were  his  Counsels
and  Prophecies.  In  the  Provinces  of  New  Spaine,
Mexico,  Tescuco,  Tlascalla,  Cholula,  and  in  the  neighbour
Countries  to  this  Realme,  this  kinde  of  Idolatry  hath
beene  more  practised  than  in  any  other  Realme  of  the
world.  And  it  is  a  prodigious  thing  to  heare  the  super-
stitions rehearsed  that  they  have  used  in  that  point,  of
the  which  it  shall  not  be  unpleasant  to  speake  something.
The  chiefest  Idoll  of  Mexico  was,  as  I  have  said,  Vitzili-
putzli.  It  was  an  image  of  wood  like  to  a  man,  set  upon
a  stoole  of  the  color  of  azure,  in  a  brankard  or  litter,  at
every  corner  was  a  piece  of  wood  in  forme  of  a  Serpents
head. The  stoole  signified  that  he  was  set  in  heaven  :

312

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
this  Idoll  had  all  the  forehead  Azure,  and  had  a  band  of
Azure  under  the  nose  from  one  eare  to  another :  upon  his
head  he  had  a  rich  plume  of  Feathers,  like  to  the  beake
of  a  small  Bird,  the  which  was  covered  on  the  top  with
Gold  burnished  very  browne :  he  had  in  his  left  hand  a
white  Target,  with  the  figures  of  five  pine  Apples,  made
of  white  Feathers,  set  in  a  crosse :  and  from  above  issued
forth  a  crest  of  gold,  and  at  his  sides  he  had  foure  darts,
which  (the  Mexicans  say)  had  beene  sent  from  heaven  to
doe  those  acts  and  prowesses  which  shall  be  spoken  of :
In  his  right  hand  he  had  an  Azured  starTe,  cut  in  fashion
of  a  waving  snake.  All  these  ornaments  with  the  rest
he  had,  carried  this  sence  as  the  Mexicans  doe  shew  the
name  of  Vitziliputzli  signifies  the  left  hand  of  a  shining
Feather.

I  will  speake  hereafter  of  the  proud  Temple,  the
Sacrifices,  Feasts  and  Ceremonies  of  this  great  Idoll,  being
very  notable  things.  But  at  this  present  we  will  onely
shew,  that  this  Idoll  thus  richly  apparelled  and  deckt,  was
set  upon  an  high  Altar,  in  a  small  peece  or  boxe,  well
covered  with  linnen  cloathes,  Jewels,  Feathers,  and  orna-
ments of  Gold,  with  many  rundles  of  Feathers,  the  fairest
and  most  exquisite  that  could  be  found  :  he  had  alwaies  a
curtaine  before  him  for  the  greater  veneration.  Joyning
to  the  chamber  or  chappell  of  this  Idoll,  there  was  a  peece
of  lesse  worke,  and  not  so  well  beautified,  where  there  was
another  Idoll  they  called  Tlaloc.  These  two  Idols  were
alwaies  together,  for  that  they  held  them  as  companions,
and  of  equall  power.  There  was  another  Idoll  in  Mexico
much  esteemed,  which  was  the  god  of  repentance,  and  of  The  Devils
Jubilies  and  pardons  for  their  sinnes.  They  called  this  Panitentian-
Idoll  Tezcallipuca,  he  was  made  of  a  blacke  shining  stone
like  to  Jayel,  being  attired  with  some  Gentile  devises  after
their  manner ;  it  had  earerings  of  gold  and  silver,  and
through  the  nether  lip  a  small  canon  of  Christall,  in  length
halfe  a  foote  :  in  the  which  they  sometimes  put  a  greene
feather,  and  sometimes  an  azured,  which  made  it  resemble
sometimes  an  Emerald,  and  sometimes  a  Turquois  :  it  had

3T3

A.D.

c.  1588.

[III.  V.

I03I.]

Their
Nemesis.

Varro  makes
this  difference
betwixt
Religion  and
Superstition.
Qui  Deum  non
verentur  ut
patrem,  time-
bunt  ut  ho  stem.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  haire  broided  and  bound  up  with  a  haire-lace  of  gold
burnished,  at  the  end  whereof  did  hang  an  eare  of  gold,
with  two  firebrands  of  smoake  painted  therein,  which  did
signifie  the  praiers  of  the  afflicted  and  sinners  that  he
heard, when they  recommended themselves unto him.
Betwixt  the  two  eares  hanged  a  number  of  small  herons.
He  had  a  Jewell  hanging  at  his  necke,  so  great  that  it
covered  all  his  stomacke : upon  his  armes  bracelets  of
Gold,  at  his  navill  a  rich  greene  stone : and  in  his  left
hand  a  Fanne  of  precious  Feathers,  of  Greene,  Azure,  and
Yellow,  which  came  forth  of  a  Looking-glasse  of  Gold,
shining  and  well  burnished,  and  that  signified,  that  within
this  Looking-glasse  he  saw  whatsoever  was  done  in  the
world. They called this Glasse or Chaston of gold
Irlacheaya  which  signifies  his  Glasse  for  to  looke  in. In
his  right  hand  he  held  foure  darts,  which  signified  the
chastisement  he  gave  to  the  wicked  for  their  sinnes. And
therefore they feared this Idoll most, least he should
discover  their  faults  and  offences. At  his  feast  they  had
pardon  of  their  sinnes,  which  was  made  every  foure  yeares,
as shall be declared hereafter. They held this Idoll
Tescatlipuca  for  the  god  of  drought,  of  famine,  barren-
nesse  and  pestilence. And  therefore  they  painted  him  in
another  forme,  being  set  in  great  majesty  upon  a  stoole
compassed  in  with  a  red  Curtin,  painted  and  wrought
with  the  heads  and  bones  of  dead  men. In  the  left  hand
it  had  a  Target  with  five  Pines,  like  unto  pine  Apples  of
Cotton : and  in  the  right  a  little  dart  with  a  threatning
countenance,  and  the  arme  stretcht  out,  as  if  he  would
cast  it ; and  from  the  Target  came  foure  darts. It  had
the  countenance  of  an  angry  man,  and  in  choller,  the  body
all  painted  blacke,  and  the  head  full  of  Quailes  feathers.
They  used  great  superstition  to  this  Idoll,  for  the  feare
they  had  of  it. In  Cholula  which  is  a  Commonwealth  of
Mexico,  they  worshipt  a  famous  Idoll  which  was  the  god
of Marchandise, being to this day greatly given to
trafncke. They  called  it  Quetzaalcoalt.

This  Idoll  was  in  a  great  place  in  a  Temple  very  high :

3r4

JOSEPH ACOSTA

A.D.
1588.

it  had  about  it,  Gold,  Silver,  Jewels,  very  rich  Feathers,
and  habits  of  divers  colours.  It  had  the  forme  of  a  man,  Indian
but  the  visage  of  a  little  Bird,  with  a  red  bill ;  and  above  Mercury.
a  combe  full  of  warts,  having  rankes  of  teeth,  and  the
tongue  hanging  out.  It  carried  upon  the  head  a  pointed
myter  of  painted  paper,  a  sithe  in  the  hand,  and  many
toyes  of  gold  on  the  legges  ;  with  a  thousand  other  foolish
inventions,  whereof  all  had  their  significations,  and  they
worshipt  it,  for  that  he  enriched  whom  he  pleased,  as
Memnon  and  Plutus.  In  truth  this  name  which  the
Choluanos  gave  to  their  god,  was  very  fit,  although  they
understood  it  not :  they  called  it  Quetzaalcoalt,  signifying
colour  of  a  rich  Feather,  for  such  is  the  devill  of  covetous-
nesse.  These  barbarous  people  contented  not  themselves
to  have  gods  onely,  but  they  had  goddesses  also,  as  the
Fables  of  Poets  have  brought  in,  and  the  blinde  gentility
of  the  Greekes  and  Romans  worshipt  them.  The  chiefe
goddesse  they  worshipt  was  called  Tozi,  which  is  to  say,  Goddesses
our  Grandmother,  who  as  the  Histories  of  Mexico  report,
was  daughter  to  the  King  of  Culhuacan,  who  was  the
first  they  slayed  by  the  commandement  of  Vitzliputzli,
whom  they  sacrificed  in  this  sort,  being  his  sister ;  and
then  they  began  to  slay  men  in  their  sacrifices,  and  to
clothe  the  living  with  the  skins  of  the  sacrificed,  having
learned  that  their  gods  were  pleased  therwith  as  also  to
pul  the  hearts  out  of  them  they  sacrificed,  which  they
learned  of  their  god,  who  pulled  out  the  hearts  of  such  as
he  punished  in  Tulla,  as  shall  be  said  in  his  place.  One
of  these  goddesses  they  worshipt  had  a  son,  who  was  a
great  hunter,  whom  they  of  Tlascalla  afterwards  tooke
For  a  god,  and  those  were  enemies  to  the  Mexicans,  by
whose  aide  the  Spaniards  won  Mexico.  The  Province  of
Tlascalla  is  very  fit  for  hunting,  and  the  people  are  much
given  therunto.  They  therfore  made  a  great  feast  unto
this  Idoll,  whom  they  painted  of  such  a  forme,  as  it  is  not
now  needfull  to  loose  any  time  in  the  description  thereof.
The  feast  they  made  was  pleasant,  and  in  this  sort :  They
sounded  a  Trumpet  at  the  breake  of  day,  at  the  sound

31S

See  former
Chap.

A.D.

c.  1588.

They  sat  down
to  eate  and
drinke  and
rose  up  to  play.

Of  a  strange
manner  of
Idolatry  prac-
tised amongst
the  Mexicans.
Ch.  10.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

whereof  they  all  assembled  with  their  Bowes,  Arrows,
Nets,  and  other  instruments  for  hunting :  then  they  went
in  procession  with  their  Idoll,  being  followed  by  a  great
number  of  people  to  a  high  Mountaine,  upon  the  top
whereof  they  had  made  a  bower  of  leaves,  and  in  the
middest  thereof  an  Altar  richly  deckt,  where-upon-  they
placed  the  Idoll.  They  marched  with  a  great  bruit  of
Trumpets,  Cornets,  Flutes  &  Drums,  and  being  come  unto
the  place,  they  invironed  this  Mountain  on  all  sides,
putting  fire  to  it  on  all  parts :  by  meanes  whereof  many
beasts  flew  forth,  as  Stags,  Conies,  Hares,  Foxes,  and
Woolves,  which  went  to  the  top  flying  from  the  fire.
These  hunters  followed  after  with  great  cries  and  noise
of  divers  instruments,  hunting  them  to  the  top  before  the
Idoll,  whither  fled  such  a  number  of  beasts,  in  so  great  a
presse,  that  they  leaped  one  upon  another,  upon  the
people,  and  upon  the  Altar,  wherein  they  tooke  great
delight.  Then  tooke  they  a  great  number  of  these  beasts,
and  sacrificed  them  before  the  Idoll,  as  Stagges  and  other
great  beasts,  pulling  out  their  hearts,  as  they  use  in  the
sacrifice  of  men,  and  with  the  like  ceremony :  which  done,
they  tooke  all  their  prey  upon  their  shoulders,  and  retired
with  their  Idoll  in  the  same  manner  as  they  came,  and
entered  the  City  laden  with  all  these  things,  very  joyfull,
with  great  store  of  musick,  Trumpets,  and  Drums,  untill
they  came  to  the  Temple,  where  they  placed  their  Idoll
with  great  reverence  and  solemnity.  They  presently  went
to  prepare  their  venison,  wherewith  they  made  a  banquet
to  all  the  people ;  and  after  dinner  they  made  their  playes,
representations,  and  dances  before  the  Idoll.  They  had  a
great  number  of  other  Idols,  of  gods  and  goddesses  ;  but
the  chiefe  were  of  the  Mexican  Nation,  and  the  neighbour
people  as  is  said.

AS  we  have  said  that  the  Kings  Inguas  of  Peru  caused
Images  to  be  made  to  their  likenesse,  which  they
called  their  Guacos  or  brothers,  causing  them  for  to  be
honored  like  themselves  :  even  so  the  Mexicans  have  done

316

JOSEPH ACOSTA

of  their  gods,  which  was  in  this  sort.  They  tooke  a
captive,  such  as  they  thought  good,  &  afore  they  did
sacrifice  unto  him  their  Idols ;  they  gave  him  the  name  of
the  Idoll,  to  whom  he  should  be  sacrificed,  and  apparelled
him  with  the  same  ornaments  like  their  Idoll,  saying,  that
he  did  represent  the  same  Idoll.  And  during  the  time
that  this  representation  lasted,  which  was  for  a  yeare  in
some  Feasts,  in  others  six  moneths,  and  in  others  lesse :
they  reverenced  and  worshipped  him  in  the  same  manner,
as  the  proper  Idoll ;  and  in  the  meane  time  he  did  eate,
drinke,  and  was  merry.  When  he  went  through  the
streetes,  the  people  came  forth  to  worship  him,  and  every
one  brought  him  an  almes,  with  children  and  sicke  folkes,
that  he  might  cure  them,  and  blesse  them,  suffering  him
to  doe  all  things  at  his  pleasure,  onely  he  was  accompanied
with  ten  or  twelve  men  lest  he  should  flye.  And  he  (to
the  end  he  might  be  reverenced  as  he  passed)  sometimes
sounded  upon  a  small  Flute,  that  the  people  might  prepare
to  worship  him.  The  feast  being  come,  and  he  growne
fat,  they  killed  him,  opened  him,  and  eate  him,  making  a
solemne  sacrifice  of  him.  It  followes  that  we  treate  of
their  Religion,  or  rather  Superstition,  which  they  use  in
their  Sacrifices,  Temples,  Ceremonies,  and  the  rest.

That  which  God  by  his  wisedome  hath  decreed  for  his
honour  and  service,  and  for  the  good  and  health  of  man,
the  Devill  strives  to  imitate  and  to  pervert,  to  be  honored,
and  to  cause  man  to  be  damned :  for  as  we  see  the  great
God  hath  Sacrifices,  Priests,  Sacraments,  Religious
Prophets,  and  Ministers,  dedicated  to  his  divine  Service
and  holy  ceremonies  :  so  the  Devill  hath  his  Sacrifices,
Priests,  his  kindes  of  Sacraments,  his  Ministers  appointed,
his  secluded  and  fained  holinesse,  with  a  thousand  sorts  of
false  Prophets.

A.D.

c.  1588.

[III. V.

1032.]

How  the  Devil
hath  laboured
to  make  him-
selfe  equall
unto  God,  and
to  imitate  him
in  his
Sacrifices,
Religion  and
Sacraments.
Chap.  1 1 .

BEginning  then  with  their  Temples,  even  as  the  great  Of  tie

God  would  have  a  house  dedicated  where  his  holy  l^fl^fai

name  might  be  honoured,  and  that  it  should  be  particularly  \y  Indies.

vowed  to  his  service; even  so  the  Devill,  by  his  wicked  Chap.  12.

317

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

practises,  perswaded  Infidels  to  build  him  proud  Temples,
and  particular  Oratories  and  Sanctuaries.  In  every  Pro-
vince of  Peru,  there  was  one  principall  Guaca,  or  house
of  adoration ;  and  besides  it,  there  was  one  Generall
throughout  all  the  Kingdome  of  the  Inguas ;  among  the
which  there  hath  beene  two  famous  and  notable,  the  one
which  they  called  Pachamana,  is  foure  leagues  from  Lima,
where  at  this  day  they  see  the  ruines  of  a  most  auncient
and  great  building,  out  of  the  which  Francis  Pizarre  and
his  people  drew  infinite  treasure,  of  vessels  and  pots  of
Gold  and  Silver,  which  they  brought  when  they  tooke  the
Ingua  Altagualpa.  There  are  certaine  memories  and  dis-
courses which  say,  that  in  this  Temple  the  Devill  did
speake  visibly,  and  gave  answers  by  his  Oracle,  and  that
sometimes  they  did  see  a  spotted  Snake :  and  it  was  a
thing  very  common  and  approved  at  the  Indies,  that  the
Devill  spake  and  answered  in  these  false  Sanctuaries
deceiving  this  miserable  people.  But  where  the  Gospell
is  entred,  and  the  Crosse  of  Christ  planted,  the  father  of
Flu.  lib.  de  lyes  becomes  mute,  as  Plutarch  writes  of  his  time,  Cur
tract.  Just,  cessaverit  Pithias  fundere  oracula :  and  Justine  Martyr
in  opol.  pro  treates  amply  of  the  silence  which  Christ  imposed  to
Devils,  which  spake  by  Idols,  as  it  had  beene  before  much
prophesied  of  in  the  holy  Scripture.  The  manner  which
the  Infidell  Ministers  and  Inchanters  had  to  consult  with
their  gods,  was  as  the  Devill  had  taught  them.  It  was
commonly  in  the  night,  they  entred  backward  to  their
Idoll,  and  so  went  bending  their  bodies  and  head,  after  an
ugly  manner,  and  so  they  consulted  with  him.  The
answere  he  made,  was  commonly  like  unto  a  fearefull
hissing,  or  to  a  gnashing  which  did  terrifie  them ;  and  all
that  he  did  advertise  or  command  them,  was  but  the  way
to  their  perdition  and  ruine.  There  are  few  of  these
Oracles  found  now,  through  the  mercy  of  God,  and  great
power  of  Jesus  Christ.  There  hath  beene  in  Peru  another
Temple  and  Oratory,  most  esteemed,  which  was  in  the
Citie  of  Cusco,  where  at  this  day  is  the  Monastery  of
Saint  Dominicke. We  may  see  it  hath  beene  a  goodly  and

318

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
a  stately  worke,  by  the  pavement  and  stones  of  the  build-
ing, which  remaine  to  this  day.  This  Temple  was  like  to
the  Pantheon  of  the  Romans,  for  that  it  was  the  house  and
dwelling  of  all  the  gods ;  for  the  Kings  Inguas  did  there
behold  the  gods  of  all  the  Nations  and  Provinces  they
had  conquered,  every  Idoll  having  his  private  place,
whither  they  of  that  Province  came  to  worship  it  with  an
excessive  charge  of  things  which  they  brought  for  his
service.  And  thereby  they  supposed  to  keepe  safely  in
obedience,  those  Provinces  which  they  had  conquered,
holding  their  gods,  as  it  were  in  hostage.  In  this  same
house  was  the  Pinchao,  which  was  an  Idoll  of  the  Sunne,
of  most  fine  Gold,  wrought  with  great  riches  of  Stones,
the  which  was  placed  to  the  East,  with  so  great  Art,  as
the  Sunne  at  his  rising  did  cast  his  beames  thereon  :  and
as  it  was  of  most  fine  mettall,  his  beames  did  reflect  with
such  a  brightnesse,  that  it  seemed  another  Sunne.  The
Inguas  did  worship  this  for  their  god,  and  the  Pachayacha,
which  signifies  the  Creator  of  Heaven.  They  say,  that
at  the  spoile  of  this  so  rich  a  Temple,  a  Souldier  had  for
his  part  this  goodly  plate  of  gold  of  the  Sunne.  And  as
play  was  then  in  request,  he  lost  it  all  in  one  night  at
play,  whence  came  the  proverbe  they  have  in  Peru  for
great  gamesters,  saying,  that  they  play  the  Sunne  before
it  riseth.

THe  Superstitions  of  the  Mexicans,  have  without  com-  Of  the  proud
parison  beene  greater  then  the  rest,  as  well  in  their  Temples  at
ceremonies,  as  in  the  greatnesse  of  their  Temples, the  Mexico.
which  in  old  time  the  Spaniards  called  by  this  word  Cu,
which  word  might  be  taken  from  the  Ilanders  of  Saint
Dominique,  or  of  Cuba,  as  many  other  words  that  are  in
use,  the  which  are  neither  from  Spaine,  nor  from  any  other  [in.  v.
language now  usuall among the Indians, as is Mays,  io33-]

Chico,  Vaquiano,  Chapeton,  and  other  like.  There  was
in  Mexico,  this  Cu,  the  famous  Temple  of  Vitzliputzli,  it
had  a  very  great  circuit,  and  within  a  faire  Court.  It  was
built  of  great  stones,  in  fashion  of  Snakes  tyed  one  to

3*9

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

another,  and  the  circuit  was  called  Coatepantli,  which  is,
a  circuit  of  Snakes :  upon  the  top  of  every  Chamber  and
Oratorie  where  the  Idols  were,  was  a  fine  Pillar  wrought
with  small  stones,  blacke  as  jeat,  set  in  goodly  order,  the
ground  raysed  up  with  white  and  red,  which  below  gave  a
great  light.  Upon  the  top  of  the  Pillar  were  battlements
very  artificially  made,  wrought  like  Snailes,  supported  by
two  Indians  of  stone,  sitting,  holding  Candle-sticks  in
their  hands,  the  which  were  like  Croisants  garnished  and
enriched  at  the  ends,  with  yellow  and  greene  feathers  and
long  fringes  of  the  same.  Within  the  circuit  of  this
Court,  there  were  many  Chambers  of  religious  men,  and
Mexican  others  that  were  appointed  for  the  service  of  the  Priests
Popes.  anc[  Popes,  for  so  they  call  the  soveraigne  Priests  which
serve  the  Idoll.  This  Court  is  so  great  and  spacious,  as
eight  or  ten  thousand  persons  did  dance  easily  in  round,
holding  hands,  the  which  was  an  usuall  custome  in  that
Realme,  although  it  seeme  to  many  incredible.

There  were  foure  Gates  or  Entries,  at  the  East,  West,
North,  and  South ;  at  every  one  of  these  Gates  began  a
faire  Cawsey  of  two  or  three  leagues  long.  There  was  in
the  midst  of  the  Lake  where  the  Citie  of  Mexico  is  built,
foure  large  Cawseys  in  crosse,  which  did  much  beautifie  it ;
upon  every  Portall  or  Entrie,  was  a  God  or  Idoll,  having
the  visage  turned  to  the  Cawsey,  right  against  the  Temple
gate  of  Vitzliputzli.  There  were  thirtie  steps  of  thirtie
fathome  long,  and  they  divided  from  the  circuit  of  the
Court  by  a  street  that  went  betwixt  them ;  upon  the  top
of  these  steps  there  was  a  walke  of  thirtie  foot  broad,  all
playstered  with  chalke,  in  the  midst  of  which  walke  was  a
Pallisado  artificially  made  of  very  high  Trees,  planted  in
order  a  fathome  one  from  another.  These  Trees  were
very  bigge,  and  all  pierced  with  small  holes  from  the  foote
to  the  top,  and  there  were  rods  did  run  from  one  Tree  to
another,  to  the  which  were  chayned  or  tyed  many  dead
mens  heads.  Upon  every  rod  were  twentie  Sculls,  and
these  rankes  of  Sculls  continue  from  the  foot  to  the  top
of  the  Tree. This  Pallisado  was  full  of  dead  mens  Sculls

320

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.

from  one  end  to  the  other,  the  which  was  a  wonderfull
mournfull  sight  and  full  of  horror.  These  were  the  heads
of  such  as  had  beene  sacrificed ;  for  after  they  were  dead,
and  had  eaten  the  flesh,  the  head  was  delivered  to  the
Ministers  of  the  Temple,  which  tyed  them  in  this  sort
untill  they  fell  off  by  morsels ;  and  then  had  they  a  care
to  set  others  in  their  places.  Upon  the  top  of  the  Temple
were  two  Stones  or  Chappels,  and  in  them  were  the  two
Idols,  which  I  have  spoken  of,  Vitziliputzli,  and  his
companion  Tlalot.  These  Chappels  were  carved  and
graven  very  artificially,  and  so  high,  that  to  ascend  up  to
it,  there  was  a  staire  of  stone  of  sixscore  steps.  Before
these  Chambers  or  Chappels,  there  was  a  Court  of  fortie
foot  square,  in  the  midst  whereof,  was  a  high  stone  of  five
hand  breadth,  pointed  in  fashion  of  a  Pyramide,  it  was
placed  there  for  the  sacrificing  of  men ;  for  being  laid  on
their  backs,  it  made  their  bodies  to  bend,  and  so  they  did
open  them  and  pull  out  their  hearts,  as  I  shall  shew  here-
after. There  were  in  the  Citie  of  Mexico,  eight  or  nine
other  Temples,  the  which  were  joyned  one  to  another
within  one  great  circuit,  and  had  their  private  Stayres,
their  Courts,  their  Chambers,  and  their  Dortoires.  The
entries  of  some  were  to  the  East,  some  to  the  West,  others
to  the  South,  and  some  to  the  North.  All  these  Temples
were  curiously  wrought,  and  compassed  in  with  divers
sorts  of  Battlements  and  Pictures,  with  many  figures  of
stones,  being  accompanyed  and  fortified  with  great  and
large  Spurres  or  Plat-formes.  They  were  didicated  to
divers  gods :  but  next  to  the  Temple  of  Vitziliputzli,  was
that  of  Tescalipuca,  which  was  the  god  of  Penance  and  of
Punishments,  very  high  and  well  built.

There  were  four  steps  to  ascend :  on  the  top  was  a  Flat
or  Table  of  sixscore  foot  broad,  and  joyning  unto  it  was
a  Hall  hanged  with  Tapistrie  and  Curtins  of  divers  colours
and  workes.  The  Doore  thereof  being  low  and  large,  was
alwayes  covered  with  a  vaile,  and  none  but  the  Priests
might  enter  in.  All  this  Temple  was  beautified  with
divers  Images  and  Pictures  most  curiously ;  for  that  these
xv  321  x

A.D.

c.  1588.

Of  the  Priests
and  their
offices.
Ch.  14.
The  Devil/
had  his  Popes
or  Vicars  at
Mexico  for  the
new  World,  as
at  Rome  for
the  old,  and
now  for  both.

Mid-night
Mattins.

[III.

i°34~]

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

two  Temples  were  as  the  Cathedrall  Churches ;  and  the
rest  in  respect  of  them  as  Parishes  and  Hermitages :  they
were  so  spacious,  and  had  so  many  Chambers,  that  there
were  in  them  places  for  the  Ministerie,  Colleges,  Schooles,
and  Houses  for  Priests,  whereof  wee  will  intreat  here-
after.

The  Devil  counterfaiting  the  use  of  the  Church  of  God,
hath  placed  in  the  order  of  his  Priests,  some  greater  or
superiors,  and  some  lesse,  the  one  as  Acolites,  the  other
as  Levites,  and  that  which  hath  made  me  most  to  wonder,
was,  that  the  Devill  would  usurpe  to  himselfe  the  service
of  God  ;  yea,  and  use  the  same  name  :  for  the  Mexicans  in
their  ancient  tongue  called  their  high  Priests  Papas,  as
they  should  say  Soveraigne  Bishops,  as  it  appeares  now  by
their  Histories.  The  Priests  of  Vitzliputzli  succeeded
by  Linages  of  certaine  quarters  of  the  Citie,  deputed  for
that  purpose,  and  those  of  other  Idols  came  by  election,  or
being  offered  to  the  Temple  in  their  infancie.  The  daily
exercise  of  the  Priests  was  to  cast  Incense  on  the  Idols,
which  was  done  foure  times  in  the  space  of  a  naturall  day.
The  first  at  breake  of  day,  the  second  at  noone,  the  third
at  Sunne  setting,  and  the  fourth  at  mid-night.  At  mid-
night all  the  chiefe  officers  of  the  Temple  did  rise,  and  in
stead  of  Bells,  they  sounded  a  long  time  upon  Trumpets,
Cornets,  and  Flutes  very  heavily,  which  being  ended,  he
that  did  the  office  that  weeke,  stept  forth,  attyred  in  a  white
Robe  after  the  Dalmatike  manner,  with  a  Censor  in  his
hand  full  of  coales,  which  hee  tooke  from  the  harth
burning  continually  before  the  Altar ;  in  the  other  hand
he  had  a  Purse  full  of  Incense,  which  he  cast  into  the
Censor,  and  as  he  entred  the  place  where  the  Idoll  was,  he
incensed  it  with  great  reverence,  then  tooke  he  a  cloth,
with  the  which  he  wiped  the  Altar  and  the  Curtins.  This
done,  they  went  all  into  a  Chappell,  and  there  did  a
certaine  kinde  of  rigorous  and  austere  penance,  beating
themselves,  and  drawing  of  bloud,  as  I  shall  shew  in  the
Treatise  of  Penance,  which  the  Devill  hath  taught  to  his
Creatures  ; and  hereof  they  never  fayled  at  these  Mattins

322

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
at  mid-night.  None  other  but  the  Priests  might  enter-
meddle  with  their  sacrifices,  and  every  one  did  imploy
himselfe  according  to  his  dignitie  and  degree.  They  did
likewise  preach  to  the  people  at  some  feasts,  as  I  will
shew  when  wee  treat  thereof.  They  had  Revenues,  and
great  Offerings  were  made  unto  them.  I  will  speake
hereafter  of  their  Unction  in  consecrating  their  Priests.
In  Peru  the  Priests  were  entertayned  of  the  Revenues  and
Inheritance  of  their  god,  which  they  called  Chacaras,  which
were  many,  and  also  very  rich.

There  were  in  Peru  many  Monasteries  of  Virgins  (for  Of  the
there  are  no  other  admitted)  at  the  least  one  in  every  Monasterie  of
Province. In  these  Monasteries  there  were  two  sorts  of  tZ^Se^u  **
women,  one  ancient,  which  they  called  Mamacomas,  for  ^  invented
the  instruction  of  the  young ;  and  the  other  was  of  young  for  his  service.
Maidens,  placed  there  for  a  certaine  time,  and  after  they  Chap.  J5-
were  drawne  forth,  either  for  their  gods  or  for  the  Ingua.
They  called  this  House  or  Monasterie  Aclaguagi,  which
is  to  say,  the  House  of  the  Chosen. Every  Monasterie
had  his  Vicar  or  Governour  called  Appopanaca,  who  had
libertie  and  power  to  choose  whom  he  pleased,  of  what
qualitie  soever,  being  under  eight  yeeres  of  age,  if  they
seemed  to  be  of  a  good  stature  and  constitution.

These  Virgins  thus  shut  up  into  these  Monasteries,  were  Vestall
instructed  by  the  Momacomas,  in  divers  things  needfull  Virgins,  or
for  the  life  of  man,  and  in  the  customes  and  ceremonies  of  NunnsofPeru-
their  gods ; and  afterwards  they  tooke  them  from  thence,
being  above  fourteene,  sending  them  to  the  Court  with
sure  guards,  whereof  some  were  appointed  to  serve  the
Guacas  and  Sanctuaries,  keeping  their  Virginities  for  ever  :
some  others  were  for  the ordinarie  sacrifices that  were
made  of  Maidens,  and  other  extraordinarie  sacrifices,  they
made  for  the  health,  death,  or  warres  of  the  Ingua ; and
the  rest  served  for  Wives  and  Concubines  to  the  Ingua,
and  unto  other  his  Kinsfolks  and  Captains,  unto  whom
hee  gave  them,  which  was  a  great  and  honorable  recom-
pence  : This  distribution  was  used  every  yeere. These
Monasteries possessed Rents and Revenues for the

323

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

maintenance  of  these  Virgins,  which  were  in  great
numbers.  It  was  not  lawfull  for  any  father  to  refuse  his
daughters  when  the  Appopanaca  required  them  for  the
service  of  these  Monasteries.  Yea,  many  fathers  did
willingly  offer  their  daughters,  supposing  it  was  a  great
merit  to  be  sacrificed  for  the  Ingua.  If  any  of  these
Momacomas  or  Acllas  were  found  to  have  trespassed
against  their  honor,  it  was  an  inevitable  chastisement  to
burie  them  alive,  or  to  put  them  to  death  by  some  other
kind  of  cruell  torment.

The  Devill  hath  even  in  Mexico  had  some  kinde  of
religious  women,  although  their  possession  was  but  for
one  yeere,  and  it  was  in  this  sort :  Within  this  great
circuit  whereof  wee  have  spoken,  which  was  in  the
principall  Temple,  there  were  two  Houses  like  Cloysters,
the  one  opposite  to  the  other,  one  of  Men,  the  other  of
Women :  In  that  of  women,  they  were  Virgins  onely,  of
twelve  or  thirteene  yeeres  of  age,  which  they  called  the
Maides  of  Penance.  They  were  as  many  as  the  men,  and
lived  chastely  and  regularly,  as  Virgins  dedicated  to  the
service  of  their  god.  Their  charge  was,  to  sweep  and
make  cleane  the  Temple,  and  every  morning  to  prepare
meat  for  the  Idoll  and  his  Ministers,  of  the  Almes  the
religious  gathered.  The  foode  they  prepared  for  the
Idoll  were  small  loaves  in  the  forme  of  hands  and  feet,  as
of  March-pane  :  and  with  this  bread  they  prepared  certaine
sawces  which  they  cast  daily  before  the  Idoll,  and  his
Dan.  14..  Priests  did  eate  it,  as  those  of  Baal,  that  Daniel  speaketh
of.  These  Virgins  had  their  haire  cut,  and  then  they  let
them  grow  for  a  certaine  time :  they  rose  at  mid-night  to
the  Idolls  Mattins,  which  they  daily  celebrated,  performing
the  same  exercises  the  Religious  did.  They  had  their
Abbesses  who  imployed  them  to  make  cloth  of  divers
fashions  for  the  ornament  of  their  Idolls  and  Temples.
Their  ordinarie  habit  was  all  white,  without  any  worke  or
colour.  They  did  their  penance  at  mid-night,  sacrificing
and  wounding  themselves,  and  piercing  the  top  of  their
eares,  they  laid  the  bloud  which  issued  forth  upon  their

324

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
cheekes  :  and  after  (to  wash  off  the  bloud)  they  bathed
themselves  in  a  Poole  which  was  within  their  Monasterie.
They  lived  very  honestly  and  discreetly ;  and  if  any  were
found  to  have  offended,  although  but  lightly,  presently
they  were  put  to  death  without  remission,  saying,  she  had
polluted  the  House  of  their  god.  They  held  it  for  an
augure  and  advertisement,  that  some  one  of  the  Religious,
Man,  or  Woman,  had  committed  a  fault,  when  they  saw  a
Rat  or  a  Mowse  passe,  or  a  Bat  in  the  Chappell  of  their
Idoll,  or  that  they  had  gnawed  any  of  the  vailes,  for  that
they  say,  a  Rat  or  a  Bat  would  not  adventure  to  commit
such  an  indignitie,  if  some  offence  had  not  gone  before,
and  then  they  began  to  make  search  of  the  fact,  and  having
discovered  the  Offendor  or  Offendors,  of  what  qualitie
soever,  they  presently  put  them  to  death.

None were received into this Monasterie, but the
daughters  of  one  of  the  sixe  quarters, named  for  that  [III.  v.
purpose: and  this  profession  continued,  as  I  have  said,  io35-1

the  space  of  one  whole  yeere  :  during  the  which  time,  their
fathers,  and  they  themselves  had  made  a  vow  to  serve
the  Idoll  in  this  manner,  and  from  thence  they  went  to
be  married.

I  doe  not  know  that  in  Peru  there  is  any  proper  houses  Of  the
for  men,  but  for  the  Priests  and  Sorcerers,  whereof  there  Monasteries  of
is  an  infinite  number. But  it  seemeth,  that  in  Mexico  ^'f^zT^Y
the  Devill  hath  set  a  due  observation : for  within  the  ^  invented
circuit  of  the  great  Temple  there  were  two  Monasteries,  for  supersti-
as  before  hath  beene  said,  one  of  Virgins,  whereof  I  have  tlon-
spoken,  the  other  of  young  men  secluded  of  eighteen  or  ChaP-  l6-
twentie  yeeres  of  age,  which  they  called  religious. They
weare  shaved  crownes,  as  the  Friars  in  these  parts,  their  Indian  shaven
haire  a  little  longer,  which  fell  to  the  middest  of  their  Fri?rs>  &
eare,  except  the  hinder  part  of  the  head,  which  they  let  their Jhow  °f
grow  the  breadth  of  foure  fingers  down  to  their  shoulders  poverty'
and  which  they  tyed  up  in  tresses. These  young  men  chastity,  fcfr.
that  served  in  the  Temple  of  Vitzliputzli  lived  poore  and
chastly,  and  did  the  Office  of  Levites,  ministring  to  the
Priests  and  chiefe  of  the  Temple,  their  Incense,  Lights,

325

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

&  garments ;  they  swept  and  made  cleane  the  holy  places,
bringing  Wood  for  a  continuall  fire  to  the  harth  of  their
god,  which  was  like  a  lampe  that  still  burnt  before  the
Altar  of  their  Idoll.  Besides  these  young  men,  there  were
other  little  boyes,  as  novices,  that  served  for  manuall
uses,  as  to  deck  the  Temple  with  boughs,  roses,  &  reeds,
give  the  Priests  water  to  wash  with,  give  them  their  rasors
to  sacrifice,  and  goe  with  such  as  begged  almes  to  carry
it.  All  these  had  their  superiors,  who  had  the  govern-
ment over  them,  they  lived  so  honestly,  as  when  they  came
in  publike,  where  there  were  any  women,  they  carried
their  heads  very  low,  with  their  eyes  to  the  ground,  not
daring  to  behold  them :  they  had  linnen  garments,  and
it  was  lawfull  for  them  to  goe  into  the  Citie  foure  or
sixe  together,  to  aske  Almes  in  all  quarters :  and  when
they  gave  them  none,  it  was  lawfull  to  goe  into  the  Corne
fields,  and  gather  the  eares  of  Corne,  or  clusters  of  Mays,
which  they  most  needed,  the  Master  not  daring  to  speake,
nor  hinder  them.  They  had  this  libertie,  because  they
lived  poorely,  and  had  no  other  revenues,  but  Almes.
There  might  not  be  above  fiftie  live  in  penance,  rising
at  midnight  to  sound  the  Cornets  and  Trumpets  to  awake
the  people.  Every  one  watched  the  Idoll  in  his  turne,
lest  the  fire  before  the  Altar  should  die :  they  gave  the
Censor,  with  the  which  the  Priest  at  midnight  incensed
the  Idoll,  and  also  in  the  morning,  at  noone,  &  at  night.
They  were  very  subject  and  obedient  to  their  superiors,
and  passed  not  any  one  point  that  was  commaunded
them.  And  at  midnight  after  the  Priest  had  ended  his
censing,  they  retired  themselves  into  a  secret  place,  apart,
sacrificing,  and  drawing  blood  from  the  calfes  of  their
legs  with  sharpe  bodkins :  with  this  bloud  they  rubbed
their  temples,  and  under  their  eares :  and  this  sacrifice
finished,  they  presently  washt  themselves  in  a  little  poole
appointed  to  that  end.  These  young  men  did  not
annoint  their  heads  and  bodies  with  any  Petum  as  the
Priests  did :  their  garments  were  of  course  white  linnen
cloth  they  doe  make  there. These  exercises  and  strict-

326

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.
nesse  of  penance  continued  a  whole  yeere,  during  which
time  they  lived  with  great  austeritie  and  solitarinesse.

It  hath  beene  said  that the  Priests  and  religious  of  Of  Penance,
Mexico,  rose  at  midnight,  and  having  cast  Incense  before  &  the
the  Idoll,  they  retired  themselves  into  a  large  place,  where  inj;ans  fape
there  were  many  Lighs ;  and  sitting  downe,  every  one  use^  at  tae
tooke  a  point  of  Manguay,  which  is  like  unto  an  awle  Devils
or  sharpe  bodkin,  with  the  which,  or  with  some  other  perswasion.
kindes  of  Launcets  or  Rasors,  they  pierced  the  calfes  of '  *7'
their  legs  neere  to  the  bone,  drawing  forth  much  bloud,
with  the  which  they  anointed  their  temples,  and  dipt  these
bodkins  or  lancets  in  the  rest  of  the  bloud,  then  set  they
them  upon  the  batelements  of  the  Court,  stickt  in  gloabes
or  bowles of straw, that all might see and  know  the
penance  they  did  for  the  people : they  doe  wash  off  the
bloud  in  a  lake  appointed  for  that  purpose,  which  they
call  Ezapangue,  which  is  to  say,  water  of  bloud.

There  were  in  the  Temple  a  great  number  of  bodkins
or  lancets,  for  that  they  might  not  use  one  twice.  More-
over, these  Priests  and  Religious  men,  used  great  Fast-  Their  severe
ings,  or  five  or  ten  dayes  together,  before  any  of  their  Fasts.
great  Feasts,  and  they  were  unto  them  as  our  foure  Ember
weekes :  they  were  so  strict  in  continence,  that  some
of  them  (not  to  fall  into  any  sensualitie)  slit  their
members  in  the  midst,  and  did  a  thousand  things  to  make  Monsters  of
themselves  unable,  lest  they  should  ofFend  their  gods.  Wit-worship.
They  drunke  no  Wine,  and  slept  little,  for  that  the  greatest
part  of  their  exercises  were  by  night,  committing  great
cruelties  and  martyring  themselves  for  the  Devill,  and
all  to  bee  reputed  great  fasters  and  penitents.  They  did
use  to  discipline  themselves  with  cords  full  of  knots,  and
not  they  onely,  but  the  people  also  used  this  punishment
and  whipping,  in  the  procession  and  feast  they  made  to
the  Idoll  Tezcalipuca,  the  which  (as  I  have  said  before)
is  the  god  of  penance ;  for  then  they  all  carried  in  their
hands  new  cordes  of  the  threed  of  Manguay  a  fadome
long,  with  a  knot  at  the  end,  and  wherewith  they  whipped
themselves,  giving  great  lashes  over  their  shoulders. The

327

A.D.

c.  1588.

[III.

IO36.]

Of  the
Sacrifices  the
Indians  made
to  the  Devill,
£f?  whereof.
Chap.  18.
Sacrifices  of
things
insensible.

Sacrifices  of
beasts.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Priests  did  fast  five  dayes  before  this  Feast,  eating  but
once  a  day,  and  they  lived  apart  from  their  wives,  not
going  out  of  the  Temple  during  those  five  dayes,  they
did  whip  themselves  rigorously  in  the  manner  aforesaid.

In  Peru  to  solemnize  the  feast  of  the  Yta,  which  was
great,  all  the  people  fasted  two  dayes ;  during  the  which,
they  did  not  accompanie  with  their  Wives,  neither  did
they  eate  any  meate  with  Salt  or  Garleeke,  nor  drinke
Chica.  They  did  much  use  this  kinde  of  fasting  for  some
sins,  and  did  penance,  whipping  themselves  with  sharpe
stinging  Nettles,  and  often  they  strooke  themselves  over
the  shoulders  with  certayne  stones.  This  blind  Nation,
by  the  perswasion  of  the  Devill,  did  transport  themselves
into  craggie  Mountaynes,  here  sometimes  they  sacrificed
themselves,  casting  themselves  downe  from  some  high
Rocke.

Wee  may  draw  all  the  Sacrifices  the  Infidels  use  into
three  kindes,  one  of  insensible  things ;  another  of  beasts,
and  the  third  of  men.  They  did  use  in  Peru  to  sacrifice
Coca,  which  is  an  hearbe  they  esteeme  much,  of  Mays,
which  is  their  Wheate,  of  coloured  feathers,  and  of
Chaquira,  which  otherwise  they  call  Mollo,  of  shels  or
Oysters,  and  sometime  Gold  and  Silver,  being  in  figures
of  little  beasts.  Also  of  the  fine  stufFe  of  Cumbi,  of
carved  and  sweet  wood,  and  most  commonly  Tallow  burnt.
They  made  these  Offerings  or  Sacrifices  for  a  prosperous
winde,  and  faire  weather,  or  for  their  health,  and  to  be
delivered  from  some  dangers  and  mishaps.  Of  the
second  kind,  their  ordinary  Sacrifice  was  of  Cuyes,  which
are  small  beasts  like  Rabbets,  the  which  the  Indians  eate
commonly.  And  in  matters  of  importance,  or  when  they
were  rich  men,  they  did  offer  Pacos,  or  Indian  sheepe,
bare,  or  with  Wooll,  observing  curiously  the  numbers,
colours,  and  times.  The  manner  of  killing  their
Sacrifices,  great  or  small,  which  the  Indians  did  use  accord-
ing to  their  ancient  Ceremonies,  is  the  same  the  Moores
use  at  this  day,  the  which  they  call  Alqulble,  hanging  the
beast  by  the  right  fore-legge,  turning  his  eyes  towards

328

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
the  Sunne,  speaking  certayne  words,  according  to  the
qualitie  of  the  Sacrifice  they  slue  :  for  if  it  were  of  colour,
their  words  were  directed  to  Chuquilla,  and  to  the
Thunder,  that  they  might  want  no  water  :  if  it  were  white
and  smoothe,  they  did  offer  it  to  the  Sunne  with  certaine
words  :  if  it  had  a  fleece,  they  did  likewise  offer  it  him
with  some  others,  that  he  might  shine  upon  them,  and
favour  their  generation :  If  it  were  a  Guanaco,  which  is
gray,  they  directed  their  sacrifice  to  Viracocha.  In  Cusco
they  did  every  yeere  kill  and  sacrifice  with  this  Ceremony,
a  shorne  sheepe  to  the  Sunne,  and  did  burne  it,  clad  in  a
red  Waste-coate,  and  when  they  did  burne  it,  they  cast
certayne  small  baskets  of  Coca  into  the  fire,  which
they  call  Vilcaronca ;  for  which  Sacrifice,  they  have  both
men  and  beasts  appointed  which  serve  to  no  other  use.
They  did  likewise  sacrifice  small  Birds,  although  it  were
not  so  usuall  in  Peru  as  in  Mexico,  where  the  sacrificing
of  Quailes  was  very  ordinary.  Those  of  Peru  did  sacrifice
the  Birds  of  Puna,  (for  so  they  call  the  Desart  when  they  Sacrifices  of
should  goe  to  the  Warres,  for  to  weaken  the  forces  of  Birds.
their  adversaries  Guacas.)  They  called  these  Sacrifices
Cuzcovicca,  or  Contevicca,  or  Huallavicca,  or  Sophavicca,
and  they  did  it  in  this  manner :  they  tooke  many  kinds
of  small  Birds  of  the  Desart,  and  gathered  a  great  deale
of  a  thorny  wood,  which  they  call  Yanlli,  the  which
beeing  kindled,  they  gathered  together  these  small  Birds.
This  assembly  they  called  Quico,  then  did  they  cast  them
into  the  fire,  about  the  which  the  Officers  of  the  Sacrifice
went  with  certayne  round  stones  carved,  whereon  were
painted  many  Snakes,  Lions,  Toades,  and  Tygres,  uttering
this  word  Usachum,  which  signifies,  Let  the  victorie  be
given  unto  us,  with  other  words,  whereby  they  sayd  the
forces  of  their  enemies  Guacas  were  confounded.  And
they  drew  forth  certayne  blacke  sheepe,  which  had  beene  Blacke  sheepe.
kept  close  some  dayes  without  meate,  the  which  they
called  Urea,  and  in  killing  them  they  spake  these  words  ;
As  the  hearts  of  these  beasts  bee  weakened,  so  let  our
enemies  be  weakned. And  if  they  found  in  these  sheepe

329

A.D.

.1588.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Extispicia.
Blacke  Dogs

Fasting  till
stars  appeared.

that  a  certayne  piece  of  flesh  behind  the  heart  were  not  con-
sumed by  fasting  and  close  keeping,  they  then  held  it
for  an  ill  Augure. They  brought  certayne  blacke  Dogges,
which  they  call  Appuros,  and  slue  them,  casting  them
into  a  Playne,  with  certayne  Ceremonies,  causing  some
kinde  of  men  to  eate  this  flesh,  the  which  Sacrifices  they
did,  lest  the  Ingua  should  bee  hurt  by  poyson :  and  for
this  cause  they  fasted  from  morning  until!  the  starres  were
up,  and  then  they  did  glut  and  defile  themselves  like  to
the Moores. This Sacrifice  was  most  fit  for  them to
withstand  their  enemies  Gods :  and  although  at  this  day
a  great  part  of  these  customes  have  ceased,  the  warres
being  ended,  yet  remaynes  there  some  Relikes,  by  reason
of  the  private  or  generall  quarrels  of  the  Indians,  or  the
Caciques, or  in their Cities. They  did  likewise offer
Shel-offerings. and sacrifice shels  of  the Sea, which they  call Mollo,
and  they  offered  them  to  the  Fountaynes  and  Springs,
saying,  that  these  shels  were  daughters  of  the  Sea,  the
mother  of  all  waters. They  gave  unto  these  shels  sundry
names,  according  to  the  colour,  and  also  they  use  them
to  divers  ends. They  used  them  in  a  manner  in  all  kinde
of  Sacrifices,  and  yet  to  this  day  they  put  beaten  shels
in  their  Chica,  for  a  superstition. Finally,  they  thought
it  convenient  to  offer  Sacrifices  of  every  thing  they  did
sow  or  raise  up. There  were  Indians  appointed  to  doe
these Sacrifices  to the  Fountayne, Springs,  and  Rivers
which  passed  through  the  Townes,  or  by  their  Charcas,
which  are  their  Farmes,  which  they  did  after  Seed  time,
that they  might  not  cease  running, but  alwayes  water
their  grounds. The  Sorcerers  did  conjure,  to  know  what
time  the  Sacrifices  should  be  made,  which  beeing  ended,
they  did  gather  of  the  contribution  of  the  people,  what
should  be  sacrificed,  and  delivered  them  to  such  as  had
the  charge  of  these  Sacrifices. They  made  them  in  the
beginning  of  Winter,  at  such  time  as  the  Fountaynes,
Springs,  and  Rivers,  did  increase  by  the  moystures  of  the
weather,  which  they  did  attribute  to  their  Sacrifices. They
did  not  sacrifice  to  the  Fountaynes  and  Springs  of  the

33°

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.
Desarts.  To  this  day  continues  the  respect  they  had  to
Fountaynes,  Springs,  Pooles,  Brookes,  or  Rivers,  which
passe  by  their  Cities  or  Charcas,  even  unto  the  Foun-
taynes and  Rivers  of  the  Desarts.  They  have  a  speciall
regard  and  reverence  to  the  meeting  of  two  Rivers,  and
there  they  wash  themselves  for  their  health,  annoynting  [in.  v.
themselves  first  with  the  flower  of  Mays,  or  some  other  io37-]

things,  adding  thereunto  divers  Ceremonies, the  which
they  doe  likewise  in  their  Bathes.

THe  most  pittifull  disaster  of  this  poore  people, is  Of  the
their  slavery  unto  the  Devill,  sacrificing  men  unto  Sacrjficej  tfiey
him,  which  are  the  Images  of  God. In  many  Nations  ^  j_
they  had  used  to  kill  (to  accompany  the  dead,  as  hath
beene  declared)  such  persons  as  had  beene  agreeable  unto
him,  and  whom  they  imagined  might  best  serve  him  in
the  other  World. Besides  this,  they  used  in  Peru,  to
sacrifice  young  children  of  foure  or  sixe  yeeres  olde  unto
ten : and  the  greatest  part  of  these  Sacrifices  were  for
the  affaires  that  did  import  the  Ingua,  as  in  sicknesse
for his health : and when he went to the warres for
victory, or  when they  gave the wreathe to their new
Ingua,  which  is  the  mark  of  a  King,  as  here  the  Scepter
and  the  Crowne  be. In  this  Solemnitie  they  sacrificed
the  number  of  two  hundred  children,  from  foure  to  ten  Two  hundred
yeeres  of  age,  which  was  a  cruell  and  inhumane  spectacle,  children
The  manner  of  the  Sacrifice  was  to  drowne  them  and  surtJlce  •
bury  them  with  certayne  representations  and  ceremonies  :
sometimes  they  cut  off  their  heads  annoynting  themselves
with  the  bloud  from  one  eare  to  another.

They  did  likewise  sacrifice  Virgins,  some  of  them  that
were  brought  to  the  Ingua  from  the  Monasteries,  as  hath
beene  said.  In  this  case  there  was  a  very  great  and
generall  abuse  :  If  any  Indian  qualified,  or  of  the  common
sort,  were  sicke,  and  that  the  Divine  told  him  confidently
that  he  should  dye,  they  did  then  sacrifice  his  owne  sonne  patricide.
to  the  Sunne,  or  to  Virachoca,  desiring  them  to  be  satisfied
with  him,  and  that  they  would  not  deprive  the  father  of

33i

A.D.

c.  1588.

Of  the
horrible
Sacrifices  of
men  which  the
Mexicans
used.
Chap.  20.

Captives  only
sacrificed.
Victima  iff
hostia.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

life.  This  crueltie  is  like  to  that  the  holy  Scripture
speaks  of  which  the  King  of  Moab  used  in  sacrificing
his  first-born  Sonne  upon  the  wall,  in  the  sight  of  all  Israel,
to  whom  this  act  seemed  so  mournfull,  as  they  would  not
presse  him  any  further,  but  returned  to  their  houses.

ALthough  they  of  Peru  have  surpassed  the  Mexicans
in  the  slaughter  and  Sacrifice  of  their  Children  (for
I  have  not  read  nor  understood  that  the  Mexicans  used
any  such  Sacrifices)  yet  they  of  Mexico  have  exceeded
them,  yea  all  the  Nations  of  the  World,  in  the  great
number  of  men  which  they  had  sacrificed,  and  in  the
horrible  manner  thereof.  And  to  the  end  wee  may  see
the  great  misery  wherein  the  Devill  holds  this  blind
Nation,  I  will  relate  particularly  the  custome  and  inhumane
manner  which  they  have  observed  :  First  the  men  they  did
sacrifice  were  taken  in  the  warres,  neyther  did  they  use
these  solemne  Sacrifices  but  of  Captives :  so  as  it  seemes
therein  they  have  followed  the  custome  of  the  Ancients.
For  as  some  Authors  say,  they  called  the  Sacrifice  Victima,
for  this  reason,  because  it  was  of  a  conquered  thing :  they
also  called  it  Hostia  quasi  ab  hoste,  for  that  it  was  an
Offering  made  of  their  enemies,  although  they  have
applyed  this  word  to  all  kinds  of  Sacrifices.  In  truth
the  Mexicans  did  not  sacrifice  any  to  their  Idols,  but
Captives,  and  the  ordinary  warres  they  made,  was  onely
to  have  Captives  for  their  Sacrifices  :  and  therefore  when
they  did  fight,  they  laboured  to  take  their  enemies  alive,
and  not  to  kill  them,  to  enjoy  their  Sacrifices.  And  this
was  the  reason  which  Motecuma  gave  to  the  Marquise
du  Val,  when  he  asked  of  him,  why  being  so  mightie,
and  having  conquered  so  many  Kingdomes,  he  had  not
subdued  the  Province  of  Tlascalla,  which  was  so  neere?
Motecuma  answered  him,  that  for  two  reasons  he  had
not  conquered  that  Province,  although  it  had  bin  easie,  if
he  would  have  undertaken  it :  the  one  was  for  the  exercise
of  the  youth  of  Mexico,  lest  they  should  fall  into  idleness
and  delight : the  other  and  the  chiefe  cause  why  hee  had

332

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.

reserved  this  Province,  was  to  have  Captives  for  the  Sacri-
fices of  their  Gods.  The  manner  they  used  in  these  Manner  of
Sacrifices,  was,  they  assembled  within  the  Palissadoe  of  ammme\
dead  mens  Sculles  (as  hath  beene  said)  such  as  should  be  sacrificing.
sacrificed,  using  a  certayne  Ceremony  at  the  foot  of  the
Palissadoe,  placing  a  great  guard  about  them.  Presently
there  stept  forth  a  Priest,  attyred  with  a  short  Surplice
full  of  tassels  beneath,  who  came  from  the  top  of  the
Temple  with  an  Idoll  made  of  Paste  of  Wheate  and
Mays  mingled  with  Honey,  which  had  the  eyes  made  of
the  graines  of  greene  glasse,  and  the  teeth  of  the  graines
of  Mays,  he  descended  the  steps  of  the  Temple  with  all
the  speed  he  could,  and  mounted  on  a  great  stone  planted
upon  a  high  Terrasse  in  the  midst  of  the  Court.  This
stone  was  called  Quauxicalli,  which  is  to  say,  the  stone
of  Eagle,  whereon  he  mounted  by  a  little  Ladder,  which
was  in  the  fore-part  of  the  Terrasse,  and  descended  by
another  staire  on  the  other  side,  still  imbracing  his  Idoll.
Then  did  he  mount  to  the  place  where  those  were  that
should  be  sacrificed,  shewing  this  Idoll  to  every  one  in
particular,  saying  unto  them ;  this  is  your  God.  And
having  ended  his  shew,  he  descended  by  the  other  side  of
the  staires,  and  all  such  as  should  dye,  went  in  procession
unto  the  place  where  they  should  bee  sacrificed,  where
they  found  the  Ministers  ready  for  that  Office.  The
ordinary  manner  of  sacrificing  was,  to  open  the  stomake  Bloudie  Rites.
of  him  that  was  sacrificed,  and  having  pulled  out  his
heart  halfe  alive,  they  tumbled  the  man  downe  the  staires
of  the  Temple,  which  were  all  imbrewed  and  defiled  with
bloud :  And  to  make  it  the  more  plaine,  sixe  Sacrificers
being  appointed  to  this  dignitie,  came  into  the  place  of
Sacrifice,  foure  to  hold  the  hands  and  feet  of  him  that
should  be  sacrificed,  the  fift  to  hold  his  head,  and  the  sixt
to  open  his  stomake,  and  to  pull  out  the  heart  of  the
sacrificed.  They  called  them  Chachalmua,  which  in  our  [III.  v.
Tongue  is  as  much,  as  the  Ministers  of  holy  things. It  1038.]

was  a  high  dignitie  and  much  esteemed  amongst  them,
wherein  they  did  inherit  and  succeed  as  in  a  Fee-simple.

333

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

The  Minister  who  had  the  Office  to  kill,  which  was  the
sixt  amongst  them,  was  esteemed  and  honoured  as  the
Sovereigne  Priest  and  Bishop,  whose  name  was  different,
according  to  the  difference  of  times  and  Solemnities.
Their  habits  were  likewise  divers  when  they  came  forth
to  the  Sacrifice,  according  to  the  diversitie  of  times.  The
Their  Papa,  name  of  their  chiefe  dignitie  was  Papa  and  Topilzin,  their
Habite  and  Robe  was  a  red  Curtayne  after  the  Dalmatike
fashion,  with  tassels  below,  a  Crowne  of  rich  Feathers,
greene,  white,  and  yellow  upon  his  head,  and  at  his  eares
like  pendants  of  Gold,  wherein  were  set  greene  stones,
and  under  the  lip  upon  the  middest  of  the  beard  he  had
a  Peece  like  unto  a  small  Canon  of  an  azured  stone.
These  Sacrificers  came  with  their  faces  and  hands  coloured
The  other  five  with  a  shining  blacke.  The  other  five  had  their  haire
Priests.  much  curled,  and  tyed  up  with  Laces  of  Leather,  bound

about  the  middest  of  the  head :  upon  their  forehead  they
carried  small  Roundelets  of  Paper  painted  with  divers
colours,  and  they  were  attyred  in  a  Dalmatike  Robe  of
white,  wrought  with  blacke.  With  this  attyre  they  repre-
sented the  very  figure  of  the  Devill,  so  as  it  did  strike
feare  and  terrour  into  all  the  people,  to  see  them  come
forth  with  so  horrible  a  representation.  The  Sovereigne
Priest  carried  a  great  Knife  in  his  hand,  of  a  large  and
sharpe  flint :  another  Priest  carried  a  coller  of  wood
wrought  in  forme  of  a  Snake :  All  six  put  themselves
in  order,  joyning  to  this  Pyramidall  stone,  whereof  I
have  spoken,  being  directly  against  the  doore  of  the
Chappell  of  their  Idoll.  This  stone  was  so  pointed,  as
the  man  which  was  to  be  sacrificed,  being  laid  thereon,
upon  his  backe,  did  bend  in  such  sort,  as  letting  the
Knife  but  fall  upon  his  stomack  it  opened  very  easily  in
the  middest.  When  the  Sacrificers  were  thus  in  order,
they  drew  forth  such  as  had  beene  taken  in  warre,  which
were  to  bee  sacrificed  at  that  Feast,  and  being  accompanied
with  a  guard  of  men  all  naked,  they  caused  them  to
mount  up  these  large  staires  in  ranke,  to  the  place  where
the  Ministers  were  prepared :  and  as  every  one  of  them

334

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.
came  in  their  order,  the  six  Sacrificers  tooke  the  Prisoner,
one  by  one  foote,  another  by  the  other,  and  one  by  one
hand,  another  by  the  other,  casting  on  his  backe  upon
this  pointed  stone,  where  the  fift  of  these  Ministers  put
the  coller  of  wood  about  his  necke,  and  the  High  Priest
opened his stomack with the Knife, with a strange
dexteritie  and nimblenesse, pulling out his heart with  Dev'illish
his  hands,  the  which  hee  shewed  smoking  unto  the  Sunne,  dexteritie.
to  whom  hee  did  offer  this  heate  and  fume  of  the  heart,  £^jgjjjfl
and  presently  he  turned  towards  the  Idoll  and  did  cast  the  Sunne.
the  heart  at  his  face,  then  did  they  cast  away  the  body
of  the  sacrificed, tumbling  it  downe  the  staires  of  the
Temple,  the  stone  being  set  so  neere  the  staires,  as  there
were  not  two  foote  space  betwixt  the  stone  and  the  first
step, so  as  with  one  spurne  with  their  foote,  they  cast
the  bodie  from  the  top  to  the  bottome. In  this  sort  one
after  one  they  did  sacrifice  all  those  that  were  appointed.
Being thus slaine, and their bodies cast downe, their
Masters,  or  such  as  had  taken  them,  went  to  take  them
up,  and  carried  them  away : then  having  divided  them
amongst  them,  they  did  eate  them,  celebrating  their  Feast
and  Solemnitie. There  were  ever  fortie  or  fiftie  at  the
least  thus  sacrified, for  that  they  had  men  very  expert
in  taking  them. The  neighbour  Nations  did  the  like,
imitating  the  Mexicans  in  the  Customes  and  Ceremonies
of  the  Service  of  their  Gods.

THere  was  another  kind  of  Sacrifice  which  they  made  Of  other  kinds

in  divers  feasts,  which  they  call  Racaxipe  Velitzli,  of  Sacrifices  of

which  is  as  much  as  the  flaying  of  men. They  call  it  Zlxtt's ***

so,  for  that  in  some  Feasts  they  tooke  one  or  more  slaves,  use^

as  they  pleased,  and  after  they  had  flayed  him,  they  with  Chap.  21.

that  skinne  apparelled  a  man  appointed  to  that  end. This  ^ay{ni

man  went  dancing  and  leaping  thorow  all  the  houses  and  SacrtJlces-
Market  places  of  the  Citie,  every  one  being  forced  to
offer something  unto  him  : and  if  any  one  fayled, he
would strike him over the face  with a corner of the
skin, defiling him with the congealed bloud. This

335

A.D.

c.  1588.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Challenge
sacrifices.

Idols-ldol-
sacrifice.

[III.  v

invention  continued  untill  the  skinne  did  stinke :  during
which  time,  such  as  went,  gathered  together  much  almes,
which  they  employed  in  necessary  things  for  the  Service  of
their  Gods.  In  many  of  these  Feasts  they  made  a
Challenge,  betwixt  him  that  did  sacrifice,  and  him  that
should  bee  sacrificed  thus :  they  tyed  the  slave  by  one
foote  to  a  Wheele  of  stone,  giving  him  a  Sword  and
Target  in  his  hands  to  defend  himselfe :  then  presently
stept  forth  hee  that  sacrificed  him ;  armed  with  another
Sword  and  Target :  if  hee  that  should  bee  sacrificed
defends  himselfe  valiantly  against  the  other,  and  resisted
him,  hee  then  remayned  freed  from  the  Sacrifice,  winning
the  name  of  a  famous  Captayne,  and  so  was  reputed :  but
if  hee  were  vanquished,  they  then  sacrificed  him  on  the
stone  whereunto  hee  was  tyed.  It  was  another  kinde
of  Sacrifice,  when  as  they  appointed  any  slave  to  bee  the
representation  of  the  Idoll,  saying  that  it  was  his  Picture :
They  every  yeere  gave  one  slave  to  the  Priests,  that  they
might  never  want  the  lively  Image  of  their  Idoll.  At
his  first  entry  into  the  Office,  after  he  had  beene  well
washed,  they  attyred  him  with  all  the  ornaments  of  the
Idoll,  giving  him  the  same  name.  Hee  was  that  whole
yeere  reverenced  and  honoured  as  the  Idoll  it  selfe,  and
had  alwayes  with  him  twelve  men  for  his  Guard,  lest  hee
should  flye,  with  which  Guard  they  suffered  him  to  goe
freely  and  where  he  would :  and  if  by  chance  he  fled,  the
chiefe  of  the  Guard  was  put  in  his  place  to  represent  the
Idoll,  and  after  to  bee  sacrificed.  This  Indian  had  the
io39-J  most  honourable  lodging  in  all  the  Temple,  where  hee
did  eate  and  drinke,  and  whither  all  the  chiefe  Ministers
came  to  serve  and  honour  him,  carrying  him  meate  after
the  manner  of  great  Personages.  When  hee  went  through
the  streets  of  the  Citie,  hee  was  well  accompanied  with
Noblemen,  hee  carried  a  little  Flute  in  his  hand,  which
sometimes  hee  sounded,  to  give  them  knowledge  when  he
passed  :  then  presently  the  women  came  forth  with  their
little  children  in  their  armes,  which  they  presented  unto
him,  saluting  him  as  God. All  the  rest  of  the  people

336

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
did  the  like : at  night  they  put  him  in  a  strong  Prison
or  Cage,  lest  he  should  flye ;  and  when  the  Feast  came,
they  sacrificed  him,  as  hath  beene  said.

By  these  and  many  other  meanes  hath  the  Devill  Incredible
abused  and  entertayned  these  poore  wretches,  and  such  mm^ers
was  the  multitude  of  those  that  had  beene  sacrificed  by  sacnJlce  •
this  infernall  crueltie,  as  it  seemes  a  matter  incredible,  for
they  affirme  there  were  some  dayes  five  thousand  or
more,  and  that  there  were  above  twentie  thousand  sacri-
ficed in  divers  places.  The  Devill  to  entertaine  this
murther  of  men,  used  a  pleasant  and  strange  invention,
which  was,  when  it  pleased  the  Priests  of  Satan  they  went
to  their  Kings,  telling  them  how  their  Gods  dyed  for  Devill  hungry
hunger,  and  that  they  should  remember  them.  Presently  for  mans  flesh.
they  prepared  themselves,  and  advertised  one  another,
that  their  Gods  required  meate,  and  therefore  they  should
command  their  people  to  bee  readie  to  goe  to  the  Warres  ;
and  thus  the  people  assembled,  and  the  companies
appointed  went  to  field,  where  they  mustred  their  forces ;
and  all  their  quarrell  and  fight  was  to  take  one  another  for
sacrifice,  striving  on  either  side  to  take  what  Captives
they  could,  so  as  in  these  battels  they  laboured  more  to
take,  then  to  kill,  for  that  all  their  intention  was  to  take
men  alive,  to  give  them  to  their  Idols  to  eate,  for  after
that  manner  brought  they  their  Sacrifice  unto  their  Gods.
And  wee  must  understand,  that  never  King  was  crowned
untill  he  had  subdued  some  Province,  from  the  which  he
brought  a  great  number  of  Captives  for  the  Sacrifices  of
their  Gods,  so  as  it  was  an  infinite  thing  to  see  what  bloud
was  spilt  in  the  honour  of  the  Devill.

MAny of these Barbarians were now wearied and  How  the
tyred  with  such  an  excessive  crueltie,  in  shedding  Indians  S,rew
so  much  bloud,  and  with  so  tedious  a  Tribute,  to  bee  '^uSm^
alwayes  troubled  to  get  Captives,  for  the  feeding  of  their  endure  fa
Gods, seeming  unto them  a  matter  insupportable ; yet  crueltie  of
left  they  not  to  follow  and  execute  their  rigorous  Lawes,  Satan.
for  the  great  awe  the  Ministers  of  these  Idols  kept  them  Cha^  22-
xv  337  y

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

:.  1588.

in,  and  the  cunning  wherewith  they  abused  this  poore
people.  But  inwardly  they  desired  to  be  freed  from  so
heavie  a  yoke.  And  it  was  a  great  providence  of  God ;
that  the  first  which  gave  them  knowledge  of  the  Law  of
Christ,  found  them  in  this  disposition :  for  without  doubt
it  seemed  to  them  a  good  Law,  and  a  good  God,  to  bee
served  in  this  sort.  Heereupon  a  grave  religious  man
in  New  Spaine  told  me,  that  when  he  was  in  that  Countrey
he  had  demanded  of  an  ancient  Indian,  a  man  of  qualitie,
for  what  reason  the  Indians  had  so  soone  received  the
Law  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  left  their  owne,  without  making
any  other  proofe,  tryall,  or  dispute  thereon,  for  it  seemed
they  had  changed  their  Religon,  without  any  sufficient
reason  to  moove  them.  The  Indian  answered  him,
Beleeve  not  Father,  that  we  have  embraced  the  Law  of
Christ  so  rashly  as  they  say :  for  I  will  tell  you,  that  we
were  alreadie  wearie  and  discontented  with  such  things  as
the  Idols  commanded  us,  and  were  determined  to  leave
it,  and  to  take  another  Law.  But  when  as  wee  found
that  the  Religion  that  you  preached  had  no  cruelties  in  it,
and  that  it  was  fit  for  us,  and  both  just  and  good,  we
understood  and  beleeved  that  it  was  the  true  Law,  and
so  we  received  it  willingly.  Which  answere  of  this
Indian  agrees  well  with  that  we  reade  in  the  first  Dis-
course, that  Fernand  Cortes  sent  to  the  Emperour  Charles
the  fift,  wherein  hee  reports,  that  after  he  had  conquered
the  Citie  of  Mexico,  being  in  Cuyoacan,  there  came
Ambassadours  to  him  from  the  Province  and  Common-
wealth of  Mechoacan  requiring  him  to  send  them  his
Law,  and  that  hee  would  teach  them  to  understand  it,
because  they  intended  to  leave  their  owne,  which  seemed
not  good  unto  them,  which  Cortez  granted,  and  at  this
day  they  are  the  best  Indians,  and  the  truest  Christians
that  are  in  New  Spaine.  The  Spaniards  that  saw  these
cruell  Sacrifices,  resolved  with  all  their  power  to  abolish
so  detestable  and  cursed  a  butchering  of  men,  and  the
Spaniards  rather,  for  that  in  one  night  before  their  eyes  they  saw
sacrificed, threescore or threescore and tenne Spaniards sacrificed,

338

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
which  had  beene  taken  in  a  battaile  given  at  the  Conquest
of  Mexico  :  and  another  time  they  found  written  with  a
Coale  in  a  Chamber  in  Tezcusco  these  wordes ;  Heere
such  a  miserable  man  was  Prisoner  with  his  Companions
whom  they  of  Tezcusco  did  sacrifice.

There  happened  a  very  strange  thing  upon  this  subject
and  yet  true,  beeing  reported  by  men  worthy  of  credit,
which  was,  that  the  Spaniards  beholding  these  Sacrifices,
having  opened  and  drawne  out  the  heart  of  the  lustie
young  man,  and  cast  him  from  the  top  of  the  stayres
(as  their  custome  was)  when  hee  came  at  the  bottome,
hee  said  to  the  Spaniards  in  his  Language,  Knights,  they  Amanspeakes
have  slaine  mee,  the  which  did  greatly  moove  our  men  after  n"  ^eart
to horrour and pitie. It is no incredible thing, that  u  ouL
having  his  heart  pulled  out,  hee  might  speake,  seeing  that
Galen  reports  that  it  hath  often  chanced  in  the  Sacrifice  Galen,  lib.  2.
of  beasts, after  the  heart  hath beene  drawne  out, and  de  HtP-  &
cast  upon  the  Altar,  the  beasts  have  breathed,  yea,  they aon-  P  a
did  bray  and  cry  out  aloude,  and  sometimes  did  runne.

In  the  first  moneth,  which  in  Peru  they  called  Rayme,  [III.  v.
and answereth to our December, they made a most  1040.]

solemne feast, called Capacrayme, wherein they made  yf™?,?  ,
many sacrifices  and  ceremonies, which  continued many  ia},oure(i
dayes :  during  the  which,  no  stranger  was  suffered  to  bee  to  imitate  and
at  the  Court  which  was  in  Cusco. These  dayes  being  counterfait  the
past,  they  then  gave  libertie  to  strangers  to  enter,  that  Sacraments  °f
they might be partakers of the feasts and sacrifices, q\u0,.c\
ministering  to  them  in  this  manner. The  Mamacomas  Chap.  25.
of  the  Sunne,  which  were  a  kinde  of  Nunnes  of  the  Sunne,  Indian
made  little  loaves  of  the  flower  of  Mays,  dyed  and  mingled  Commumon-
with  the  bloud  of  white  Sheepe,  which  they  did  sacrifice
that  day  ;  then  presently  they  commanded  that  all  strangers
should  enter,  who  set  themselves  in  order,  and  the  Priests
which were of a certaine Linage, descending from
Liuquiyupangui,  gave  to  every  one  a  morsell  of  these
small loaves, saying unto them, that they gave these
pieces,  to  the  end  they  should  be  united  and  confederate
with  the  Ingua,  and  that  they  advised  them  not  to  speake

339

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

nor  thinke  any  ill  against  the  Ingua,  but  alwayes  to  beare
him  good  affection,  for  that  this  piece  should  bee  a  wit-
nesse  of  their  intentions  and  will,  and  if  they  did  not  as
they  ought,  hee  would  discover  them  and  bee  against
them.  They  carried  these  small  loaves,  in  great  Platters
of  gold  and  silver  appointed  for  that  use,  and  all  did
receive  and  eate  these  pieces,  thanking  the  Sunne  infinitely
for  so  great  a  favour  which  hee  had  done  them,  speaking
wordes  and  making  signes  of  great  contentment  and
devotion :  protesting  that  during  their  lives,  they  would
neither  doe  nor  thinke  any  thing  against  the  Sunne  nor
the  Ingua :  and  with  this  condition  they  received  this
foode  of  the  Sunne,  the  which  should  remaine  in  their
bodies  for  a  witnesse  of  their  fidelitie  which  they  observed
to  the  Sunne  and  to  the  Ingua  their  King.  This  manner
of  devillish  communicating  they  likewise  used  in  the
tenth  moneth,  called  Coyarayme,  which  was  September,
in  the  solemne  feast  which  they  called  Cytua,  doing  the
like  ceremonies.  And  besides  this  Communion  (if  it  be
lawfull  to  use  this  word  in  so  devillish  a  matter)  which
they  imparted  to  all  strangers  that  came,  they  did  like-
wise send  of  these  loaves  to  all  their  Guacas,  Sanctuaries,
or  Idols  of  the  whole  Realme,  and  at  one  instant  they
found  people  of  all  sides,  which  came  expressly  to  receive
them,  to  whom  they  said  (in  delivering  them)  that  the
Sunne  had  sent  them  that,  in  signe  that  hee  would  have
them  all  to  worship  and  honor  him,  and  likewise  did
send  them  in  honor  of  the  Caciques.  Some  perhaps  will
hold  this  for  a  fable  and  a  fiction :  yet  is  it  most  true,
that  since  the  Ingua  Yupangi  (the  which  is  hee  that  hath
made  most  Lawes,  Customes,  and  Ceremonies,  as  Numa
did  in  Rome)  this  manner  of  Communion  hath  continued,
untill  that  the  Gospell  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  thrust
out  all  these  superstitions,  giving  them  the  right  foode  of
life,  which  unites  their  soules  to  God :  who  so  would
satisfie  himselfe  more  amply,  let  him  reade  the  Relation
which  the  Licenciate  Polio  did  write.

34°

I

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
T  is  a  thing  more  worthy  admiration,  to  heare  speake  In  what  man-
of  the  Feast  and  solemnitie  of  the  Communion  which  ner  the  DemU
the  Devill  himselfe, the  Prince of  Pride, ordained in  Jj^JSUl
Mexico,  the  which  (although  it  be  somewhat  long)  yet  counterfait  the
shall  it  not  be  from  the  purpose  to  relate,  as  it  is  written  feast  of  the
by  men  of  credite. The  Mexicanes  in  the  moneth  of  holy  Sacra-
May,  made  their  principall  Feast  to  their  god  Vitziliputzli,  ^p"s^Atn
and  two  dayes  before  this  Feast  the  Virgins  whereof  I church.
have  spoken  (the  which  were  shut  up  and  secluded  in  Chap.  24.
the  same  Temple,  and  were  as  it  were  Religious  women)
did  mingle  a  quantitie  of  the  seede  of  Beetes  with  roasted
Mays,  and  then  they  did  mould  it  with  honey,  making  an
Idoll  of  that  paste, in  bignesse  like to that  of  wood,
putting  in  stead  of  eyes,  graines  of  greene  glasse,  of  blue,
or  white ;  and  for  teeth,  graines  of  Mays,  set  forth  with
all  the  ornament  and  furniture  that  I  have  said. This
being  finished,  all  the  Noblemen  came  and  brought  it  an
exquisite  and  rich  garment,  like  unto  that  of  the  Idoll,
wherewith  they  did  attyre  it. Being  thus  clad  and  deckt,
they  did  set  it  in  an  azured  Chaire,  and  in  a  Litter  to
carry  it  on  their  shoulders. The  morning  of  this  feast
being  come,  an  houre  before  day,  all  the  Maidens  came
forth  attyred  in  white,  with  new  ornaments,  the  which  that
day  were  called  the  sisters  of  their  god  Vitzliputzli,  they
came  crowned  with  Garlands  of  Mays  roasted  and  parched,
being  like  unto  Azahar  or  the  flower  of  Orange, and
about  their  necks  they  had  great  chaines  of  the  same,
which  went  bauldrickwise  under  their  left  arme. Their
cheekes  were  dyed  with  Vermillion,  their  armes  from  the
elbow  to  the  wrist,  were  covered  with  red  Parrots  feathers.
And  thus  attyred,  they  tooke  the  Idoll  on  their  shoulders,
carrying  it  into  the  Court,  where  all  the  young  men  were,
attyred  in  garments  of  an  artificiall  red,  crowned  after  the
same manner, like unto the women. When as the
Maidens  came  forth  with  the  Idoll,  the  young  men  drew
neere  with much  reverence, taking  the  Litter  wherein
the  Idoll  was,  upon  their  shoulders,  carrying  it  to  the  foote
of  the  staires  of  the  Temple,  where  all  the  people  did

34i

A.D.

c.  1588.

[III.

IO41.]

The  Devi//
liking  that
unchristian,
Antichristian
prodigious
opinion  of
transubstanti-
ation,  and  the
consequents,
elevation,
adoration,
reservation,
Corpus
Christi  mad
solemnities  and
idolatrous  pro-
cessions, with
rites  beyond
any  former
paganisme,  in
disgrace  of  the

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

humble  themselves,  laying  earth  upon  their  heads,  which
was  an  ordinarie  ceremonie  which  they  did  observe  at  the
chiefe  feast  of  their  gods.  This  ceremonie  being  ended,
all  the  people  went  in  Procession  with  all  the  diligence
and  speede  they  could,  going  to  a  Mountayne  which
was  a  league  from  the  Citie  of  Mexico,  called  Chapulteper,
and  there  they  made  sacrifices.  Presently  they  went  from
thence  with  like  diligence,  to  goe  to  a  place  neere  unto  it,
which  they  called  Atlacuyavaya,  where  they  made  their
second  station :  and  from  thence  they  went  to  another
Burgh  or  Village  a  league  beyond  Cuyoacan,  from  whence
they  parted,  returning  to  the  Citie  of  Mexico,  not  making
any  other  station.  They  went  in  this  sort  above  foure
leagues  in  three  or  foure  houres,  calling  this  Procession
Ypayna  Vitzliputzli.  Being  come  to  the  foot  of  the  staires,
they  set  downe  the  Brancard  or  Litter  with  the  Idoll,
tying  great  Cordes  to  the  armes  of  the  Brancard,  then
with  great  observance  and  reverence,  they  did  draw  up
the  Litter  with  the  Idoll  in  it  to  the  top  of  the  Temple,
some  drawing  above,  and  others  helping  below,  in  the
meane  time  there  was  a  great  noyse  of  Flutes,  Trumpets,
Cornets,  and  Drummes.  They  did  mount  it  in  this
manner,  for  that  the  stayres  of  the  Temple  were  very
steepe  and  narrow,  so  as  they  could  not  carry  up  the
Litter  upon  their  shoulders,  while  they  mounted  up  the
Idoll,  all  the  people  stood  in  the  Court  with  much  rever-
ence and  feare.  Being  mounted  to  the  top,  and  that
they  had  placed  it  in  a  little  Lodge  of  Roses,  which  they
held  readie,  presently  came  the  young  men,  which
strewed  many  flowers  of  sundrie  kindes,  wherewith  they
filled  the  Temple  both  within  and  without.  This  done,
all  the  Virgins  came  out  of  their  Covent,  bringing  pieces
of  paste  compounded  of  Beetes,  and  roasted  Mays,  which
was  of  the  same  paste  whereof  their  Idoll  was  made  and
compounded,  and  they  were  of  the  fashion  of  great  bones.
They  delivered  them  to  the  young  men,  who  carried
them  up  and  laid  them  up,  and  laid  them  at  the  Idols
feete,  wherewith  they  filled  the  whole  place,  that  it  could

342

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
receive  no  more. They  called  these  morsels  of  paste,  the  true  Sacra-
flesh  and  bones  of  Vitzliputzli. Having  laid  abroad  these  ment,fahly
bones,  presently  came  all  the  Ancients  of  the  Temple,  ^"5JJ/*»
Priests,  Levites,  and  all  the  rest  of  the  Ministers,  accord-  unbioudy
ing  to  their  Dignities  and  Antiquities,  for  herein  there  sacrifice,
was  a  strict  order  amongst  them,  one  after  another,  with  which  hath  cost
their vailes of divers colours and workes, every one  s°h™u™lds the-lr
according  to  his  Dignitie  and  Office,  having  Garlands  upon  ^kud  infire
their  heads,  and  Chaines  of  flowers  about  their  necks  : and  otherwise
after  them  came  their  gods  and  goddesses  whom  they  {the  Papists  at
worshipt,  of  divers  figures,  attyred  in  the  same  liverie ;  on^e  disputing
then  putting  themselves  in  order  about  those  morsels  and  naturau  fafa
pieces  of  paste,  they  used  certaine  ceremonies  with  sing-  and  despithg
ing  and  dancing. By  meanes  whereof  they  were  blessed  and  renting
and  conscrated  for  the  flesh  and  bones  of  this  Idoll.  his  mysticall

This  ceremonie  and  blessing  (whereby  they  were  taken  ij^  not^n„
for  the  flesh  and  bones  of  the  Idoll)  being  ended,  they  fitter  to  trans-
honored  those  pieces  in  the  same  sort  as  their  god. Then  port  into  the
came  forth  the  Sacrificers,  who  began  the  sacrifice  of  men,  Indies, nothing
in  the  manner  as  hath  beene  spoken,  and  that  day  they
did  sacrifice  a  greater  number  then  at  any  other  time,  for  reason  '
that  it  was  the  most  solemne  feast  they  observed. The  religion,
sacrifices  being  ended,  all  the  young  Men  and  Maides  humanitie,  or
came  out  of  the  Temple  attyred  as  before, and  being  ™here'in  f ore
placed  in  order  and  ranke  one  directly  against  another,  mankinde  in
they  danced  by  Drummes  the  which  sounded  in  praise  all  these,  then
of  the  Feast,  and  of  the  Idoll  which  they  did  celebrate,  this  brutish
To  which  song  all  the  most  ancient  and  greatest  noble-  °P™1™  and
men  did  answere,  dancing  about  them,  making  a  great  SQiemn-ltie
circle  as  their  use  is,  the  young  Men  and  Maides  remayn-  here  described.
ing  alwayes  in  the  middest. All  the  Citie  came  to  this
goodly  spectacle,  and  there  was  a  commandement  very
strictly  observed  throughout  all  the  Land,  that  the  day
of  the  feast  of  the  Idoll  Vitziliputzli,  they  should  eate  no
other  meate,  but  this  paste  with  hony,  whereof  the  Idoll
was  made. And  this should  be  eaten  at  the  point  of
day,  and  they  should  drinke  no  water  nor  any  other  thing
till  after  noone : they  held  it  for  an  ill  signe,  yea  for

343

A.D.

c  1588.

Communicat-
ing.
Idol-sermon.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

sacrilege,  to  doe  the  contrarie :  but  after  the  ceremonies
ended,  it  was  lawfull  for  them  to  eate  any  thing.  During
the  time  of  this  ceremonie,  they  hid  the  water  from  their
little  children,  admonishing  all  such  as  had  the  use  of
reason,  not  to  drinke  any  water ;  which  if  they  did,  the
anger  of  God  would  come  upon  them,  and  they  should
die,  which  they  did  observe  very  carefully  and  strictly.
The  ceremonies,  dancing,  and  sacrifice  ended,  they  went
to  unclothe  themselves,  and  the  Priests  and  Superiors  of
the  Temple  tooke  the  Idoll  of  paste,  which  they  spoyled
of  all  the  ornaments  it  had,  and  made  many  pieces,  as
well  of  the  Idoll  it  selfe  as  of  the  Tronchons  which  were
consecrated,  and  then  they  gave  them  to  the  Communion,
beginning  with  the  greater,  and  continuing  unto  the  rest,
both  Men,  Women,  and  little  Children ;  who  received  it
with  such  teares,  feare,  and  reverence,  as  it  was  an  admir-
able thing,  saying,  that  they  did  eate  the  flesh  and  bones
of  God,  wherewith  they  were  grieved.  Such  as  had  any
sicke  folkes  demanded  thereof  for  them,  and  carried  it
with  great  reverence  and  veneration.

All  such  as  did  communicate,  were  bound  to  give
the  tenth  of  this  seede,  whereof  the  Idoll  was  made.
The  solemnitie  of  the  Idoll  being  ended,  an  old  man  of
great  authoritie  stept  up  into  a  high  place,  and  with  a  loud
voice  preached  their  Law  and  Ceremonies.

Of  Confessors
and  Confession
which  the
Indians  used.
Chap.  25.

Reserved  cases
as  in  Papall
penance.

THe  father  of  lyes  would  likewise  counterfait  the
(Romish)  Sacrament  of  Confession,  and  in  his
Idolatries  seeke  to  be  honored  with  ceremonies  very  like
to  the  manner  of  Christians.  In  Peru  they  held  opinion,
that  all  diseases  and  adversities  came  for  the  sinnes  which
they  had  committed :  for  remedie  whereof  they  used
sacrifices  :  moreover,  they  confessed  themselves  verbally,
almost  in  all  Provinces,  and  had  Confessors  appointed  by
their  Superiors  to  that  end,  there  were  some  sinnes
reserved  for  the  Superiors.  They  received  penance,  yea
somtimes  very  sharply,  especially  when  the  OfTendor  was
a  poore man, and had nothing to  give his  Confessor.

344

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.
This  office  of  Confessor  was  likewise  exercised  by  Women.
The  manner  of  these  Confessors  Sorcerers  whom  they
call  Ychuiri  or  Ychuri,  hath  beene  most  generall  in  the
Provinces  of  Collasuio.  They  hold  opinion,  that  it  is  a
haynous  sinne  to  conceale  any  thing  in  confession.  The
Ychuiri  or  Confessors  discovered  by  lots,  or  by  the  view  [III.  v.
of  some  beast  Hides,  if  any  thing  were  concealed,  and  1042.]

punished  them  with  many  blowes  with  a  stone  upon  the
shoulders,  untill  they  had  revealed  all,  then  after  they  gave
him  penance,  and  did  sacrifice.  They  doe  likewise  use
this  confession,  when  their  children,  wives,  husbands,  or
their  Caciques  be  sicke,  or  in  any  great  exploit.  And
when  their  Ingua  was  sicke,  all  the  Provinces  confessed
themselves,  chiefly  those  of  the  Province  of  Collao.  The
Confessors  were  bound  to  hold  their  Confessions  secret,
but  in  certaine  cases  limited.  The  sinnes  that  they  chiefly
confessed,  was  first  to  kill  one  another  out  of  warre,  then
to  steale,  to  take  another  mans  wife,  to  give  poyson  or
sorcerie  to  doe  any  harme :  and  they  held  it  to  be  a
grievous  sinne,  to  be  forgetfull  in  the  reverence  of  their
Guacas,  or  Oratories,  not  to  observe  the  Feasts,  or  to
speake  ill  of  the  Ingua,  and  to  disobey  him.  They  Sinnes  of
accused  not  themselves  of  any  secret  acts  and  sinnes.  omission.
But  according  to  the  report  of  some  Priests,  after  the
Christians  came  into  that  Country,  they  accused  them-
selves of  their  thoughts.  The  Ingua  confessed  himselfe
to  no  man,  but  onely  to  the  Sunne,  that  hee  might  tell
them  to  Virachoca,  and  that  hee  might  forgive  them.
After  the  Ingua  had  beene  confessed,  he  made  a  certaine
bath  to  cleanse  himselfe  in  a  running  River,  saying  these
wordes  :  I  have  told  my  sinnes  to  the  Sunne,  receive  them,
O  thou  River,  and  carry  them  to  the  Sea,  where  they  may
never  appeare  more.  Others  that  confessed,  used  like-
wise these  baths,  with  certaine  ceremonies  very  like  to
those  the  Moores  use  at  this  day,  which  they  call  Guadoy,
and  the  Indians  call  them  Opacuna.  When  it  chanced
that  any  mans  children  dyed,  hee  was  held  for  a  great
sinner,  saying,  that  it  was  for  his  sinnes  that  the  sonne

345

A.D.

c.  1588.

Wicked  effect
of  devillish
divinations.

Penances.

Japon
confession.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

dyed  before  the  father.  And  therefore  those  to  whom
this  had  chanced,  after  they  were  confessed,  were  bathed
in  this  bath  called  Opacuna,  as  is  said  before.  Then
some  deformed  Indian,  crooke-backt,  and  counterfait  by
nature,  came  to  whip  them  with  certaine  Nettles.  If
the  Sorcerers  or  Inchanters  by  their  lots  and  divinations,
affirmed  that  any  sicke  body  should  die,  the  sicke  man
makes  no  difficultie  to  kill  his  owne  sonne,  though  he
had  no  other,  hoping  by  that  meanes  to  escape  death,
saying,  that  in  his  place  he  offered  his  sonne  in  sacrifice.
And  this  crueltie  hath  beene  practised  in  some  places,  even
since  the  Christians  came  into  that  Country.  In  truth
it  is  strange,  that  this  custome  of  confessing  their  secret
sinnes,  hath  continued  so  long  amongst  them,  and  to  doe
so  strict  penances,  as,  to  fast,  to  give  apparell,  gold  and
silver,  to  remaine  in  the  Mountaynes,  and  to  receive
many  stripes  upon  the  shoulders.  Our  men  say,  that  in
the  Province  of  Chiquito,  even  at  this  day  they  meet  with
this  plague  of  Confessors  or  Ychuris,  where  as  many  sicke
persons  repaire  unto  them :  but  now,  by  the  grace  of
God,  this  people  begins  to  see  cleerly  the  effect  and  great
benefit  of  our  Confession,  whereunto  they  come  with  great
devotion.

I  will  report  the  manner  of  a  strange  confession  the
Devill  hath  invented  at  Japon,  as  appeares  by  a  Letter
that  came  from  thence,  which  saith  thus  :  There  are  in
Ocaca  very  great  and  high  and  steepe  Rocks,  which  have
pricks  or  points  on  them,  above  two  hundred  fathom  high.
Amongst  these  Rocks  there  is  one  of  these  pikes  or
points  so  terribly  high,  that  when  the  Xamabusis  (which
be  Pilgrimes)  doe  but  looke  up  unto  it,  they  tremble,
and  their  haire  stares,  so  fearfull  and  horrible  is  the  place.
Upon  the  top  of  this  point  there  is  a  great  rod  of  Iron
of  three  fathom  long,  placed  there  by  a  strange  device,
at  the  end  of  this  rod  is  a  ballance  tyed,  whereof  the
scales  are  so  bigge,  as  a  man  may  sit  in  one  of  them :  and
the  Goquis  (which  be  Devils  in  humane  shape)  command
these  Pilgrimes  to  enter  therein  one  after  another, not

346

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
leaving  one  of  them :  then  with  an  engine  or  instrument
which  mooveth,  by  meanes  of  a  wheele,  they  make  this
rod  of  Iron  whereon  the  ballance  is  hanged,  to  hang  in
the  aire,  one  of  these  Xamabusis  being  set  in  one  of  the
scales  of  the  ballance.  And  as  that  wherein  the  man  is
set  hath  no  counterpoise  on  the  other  side,  it  presently
hangeth  downe,  and  the  other  riseth  untill  it  meets  with
and  toucheth  the  rod :  then  the  Goquis  telleth  them
from  the  Rocke,  that  they  must  confesse  themselves  of
all  the  sinnes  they  have  committed,  to  their  remembrance,
and  that  with  a  loud  voyce,  to  the  end  that  all  the  rest
may  heare  him.  Then  presently  hee  beginneth  to  con-
fesse, whilest  some  of  the  standers  by  doe  laugh  at  the
sinnes  they  doe  heare ;  and  others  sigh,  and  at  every  sinne
they  confesse,  the  other  scale  of  the  ballance  falls  a  little,
untill  that  having  told  all  his  sinnes,  it  remaines  equall
with  the  other,  wherein  the  sorrowfull  penitent  sits :  then
the  Goquis  turnes  the  wheele,  and  drawes  the  rod  and
ballance  unto  him,  and  the  Pilgrime  comes  forth  ;  then
enters  another,  untill  all  have  passed.  A  Japonois
reported  this  after  he  was  christned,  saying,  that  hee  had
beene  in  this  pilgrimage,  and  entred  the  ballance  seven
times,  where  he  had  confessed  himselfe  publikely.  Hee
said  moreover,  that  if  any  one  did  conceale  any  sinne,
the  emptie  scale  yeelded  not :  and  if  hee  grew  obstinate
after  instance  made  to  confesse  himselfe,  refusing  to  open
all  his  sinnes,  the  Goquis  cast  him  downe  from  the  top,
where  in  an  instant  he  is  broken  into  a  thousand  pieces.
Yet  this  Christian,  who  was  called  John,  told  us,  that
commonly  the  feare  and  terror  of  this  place  is  so  great  to
all  such  as  enter  therein,  and  the  danger  they  see  with  °f*&e
their  eyes,  to  fall  out  of  the  ballance,  and  to  be  broken  a°mna
in  pieces,  that  seldom  there  is  any  one  but  discovers  all  the  Mexican
his  sinnes.  This  place  is  called  by  another  name  Priests  and
Sangenotocoro,  that  is  to  say,  the  place  of  Confession.  other  Naiions

The  Priests  of  the  Idols  in  Mexico  were  anointed  in  jjjj£  and  °f
this  sort ;  they  anointed  the  body  from  the  foote  to  the  w\tchcrafts.
head,  and  all  the  haire  likewise,  which  hung  like  tresses, Chap.  26.

347

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

or  a  Horse  mane, for  that  they  applyed  this  Unction

[III.  v.  wet  and  moist. Their  haire  grew  so,  as  in  time  it  hung

. I043-J  downe  to  their  hammes,  so  heavily,  that  it  was  trouble-

superstition  some  f°r  them  to  beare  it,  for  they  did  never  cut  it,  untill
they  dyed,  or  that  they  were  dispensed  with  for  their
great  age,  or  being  employed  in  governments  or  some
honorable  charge  in  the  Commonwealth.  They  carried
their  haire  in  tresses,  of  sixe  fingers  breadth,  which  they
dyed  blacke  with  the  fume  of  Sapine,  of  Firre  trees,  or
Rosin ;  for  in  all  Antiquitie  it  hath  beene  an  oifering
they  made  unto  their  Idols,  and  for  this  cause  it  was
much  esteemed  and  reverenced.  They  were  alwayes  dyed
with  this  tincture  from  the  foot  to  the  head,  so  as  they
were  like  unto  shining  Negroes,  and  that  was  their
ordinary  Unction :  yet  when  as  they  went  to  sacrifice  and
give  Incense  in  the  Mountaines,  or  on  the  tops  thereof,
or  in  any  darke  and  obscure  Caves,  where  their  Idols
were,  they  used  an  other  kinde  of  unction  very  different,
doing  certaine  ceremonies  to  take  away  feare,  and  to  give
them  courage.  This  unction  was  made  with  divers  little
venemous  beasts,  as  Spiders,  Scorpions,  Palmers,  Sala-
manders and  Vipers,  the  which  the  Boyes  in  the  Colledges
tooke  and  gathered  together,  wherein  they  were  so  expert,
as  they  were  alwayes  furnished  when  the  Priests  called
for  them.  The  chiefe  care  of  these  Boyes  was,  to  hunt
after  these  beasts  ;  if  they  went  any  other  way,  and  by
chance  met  with  any  of  these  beasts,  they  stayed  to  take
them,  with  as  great  paine,  as  if  their  lives  depended
thereon.  By  the  reason  whereof  the  Indians  commonly
feared  not  these  venemous  beasts,  making  no  more  account
then  if  they  were  not  so,  having  beene  all  bred  in  this
exercise.  To  make  an  ointment  of  these  beasts,  they
tooke  them  all  together,  and  burnt  them  upon  the  harth
of  the  Temple,  which  was  before  the  Altar,  untill  they
were  consumed  to  ashes :  then  did  they  put  them  in
Morters  with  much  Tobacco  or  Petum  (being  an  herbe
that  Nation  useth  much,  to  benum  the  flesh,  that  they
may  not  feele  their  travell)  with  the  which  they  mingle

348

JOSEPH ACOSTA

A.D.

c.  1588.

Vision
ointment.

Like  lips,  like
Lettuce.

the  ashes,  making  them  lose  their  force ;  they  did  likewise
mingle  with  these  ashes,  Scorpions,  Spiders,  and  Palmers
alive,  mingling  all  together,  then  did  they  put  to  it  a
certaine  seede  being  grownd,  which  they  call  Ololuchqui,
whereof  the  Indians  make  a  drinke  to  see  visions,  for
that  the  vertue  of  this  herbe  is  to  deprive  man  of  sense.
They  did  likewise  grinde  with  these  ashes  blacke  and
hayrie  wormes,  whose  haire  onely  is  venemous,  all  which
they  mingled  together  with  blacke,  or  the  fume  of  Rosin,
putting  it  in  small  pots,  which  they  set  before  their  god,
saying  it  was  his  meat.  And  therefore  they  called  it  a
divine  meat.  By  meanes  of  this  ointment  they  became
Witches,  and  did  see  and  speake  with  the  Devill.  The
Priests  being  slubbered  with  this  ointment,  lost  all  feare,
putting  on  a  Spirit  of  crueltie.  By  reason  whereof  they
did  very  boldly  kill  men  in  their  sacrifices,  going  all  alone
in  the  night  to  the  Mountaines,  and  into  obscure  Caves,
contemning  all  wilde  beasts,  and  holding  it  for  certaine
and  approved,  that  both  Lions,  Tigres,  Serpents,  and
other  furious  beasts  which  breed  in  the  Mountaines,  and
Forests,  fled  from  them,  by  the  vertue  of  this  Petum  of
their  god.

And  in  truth,  though  this  Petum  had  no  power  to
make  them  flie,  yet  was  the  Devils  picture  sufficient  where-
into  they  were  transformed.  This  Petum  did  also  serve
to  cure  the  sicke,  and  for  children :  and  therefore  all
called  it  the  divine  Physicke  :  and  so  they  came  from  all
parts  to  the  Superiors  and  Priests,  as  to  their  Saviours,
that  they  might  apply  this  divine  physicke,  wherewith
they  anointed  those  parts  that  were  grieved.  They  said
that  they  felt  hereby  a  notable  ease,  which  might  be,  for
that  Tobacco  and  Ololuchqui  have  this  propertie  of  them-  Benumming
selves,  to  benum  the  flesh,  being  applyed  in  manner  of  force  of
an  emplayster,  which  must  bee  by  a  stronger  reason  being  Tobacco.
mingled  with  poysons,  and  for  that  it  did  appease  and
benum  the  paine,  they  held  it  for  an  effect  of  health,  and
a  divine  vertue.  And  therefore  ran  they  to  these  Priests
as  to  holy  men,  who  kept  the  blinde  and  ignorant  in  this

349

A.D.

c.  1588.

Divinations.

Strange
Sorcerers.

[III.  v.

1044.]

PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

error,  perswading  them  what  they  pleased,  and  making
them  runne  after  their  inventions  and  devillish  cere-
monies, their  authoritie  being  such,  as  their  wordes  were
sufficient  to  induce  beliefe  as  an  article  of  their  Faith.
And  thus  made  they  a  thousand  superstitions  among  the
vulgar  people,  in  their  manner  of  offering  Incense,  in
cutting  their  haire,  tying  small  flowers  about  their  necks,
and  strings  with  small  bones  of  Snakes,  commanding
them  to  bathe  at  a  certaine  time ;  and  that  they  should
watch  all  night  at  the  harth,  lest  the  fire  should  die,  that
they  should  eate  no  other  bread  but  that  which  had  beene
offered  to  their  gods,  that  they  should  upon  any  occasion
repayre  unto  their  Witches,  who  with  certaine  graines
told  fortunes,  and  divined,  looking  into  Keelers  and  Pailes
full  of  water.  The  Sorcerers  and  Ministers  of  the  Devill
used  much  to  besmeare  themselves.  There  were  an
infinite  number  of  these  Witches,  Diviners,  Enchanters,
and  other  false  prophets.  There  remaynes  yet  at  this  day
of  this  infection  although  they  bee  secret,  not  daring
publikely  to  exercise  their  sacrileges,  devillish  ceremonies
and  superstitions,  but  their  abuses  and  wickednesse  are
discovered  more  at  large  and  particularly  in  the  confessions
made  by  the  Prelates  of  Peru.

There  is  a  kinde  of  Sorcerers  amongst  the  Indians
allowed  by  the  Kings  Inguas,  which  are  as  it  were  Sooth-
sayers, they  take  upon  them  what  forme  and  figure  they
please,  flying  far  through  the  aire  in  a  short  time,  behold-
ing all  that  was  done.  They  talke  with  the  Devill,  who
answereth  them  in  certaine  stones  or  other  things  which
they  reverence  much.  They  serve  as  Conjurers,  to  tell
what  hath  passed  in  the  farthest  parts,  before  any  newes
can  come.  As  it  hath  chanced  since  the  Spaniards  arrived
there,  that  in  the  distance  of  two  or  three  hundred  leagues,
they  have  knowne  the  Mutinies,  Battailes,  Rebellions,
and  Deaths,  both  of  Tyrants,  and  of  those  of  the  Kings
partie,  and  of  private  men,  the  which  have  beene  knowne
the  same  day  they  chanced,  or  the  day  after,  a  thing
impossible by the course of nature. To worke this

35°

JOSEPH ACOSTA

divination,  they  shut  themselves  into  a  house,  and
became  drunke  untill  they  lost  their  senses,  a  day  after
they  answered  to  that  which  was  demanded.  Some  affirme
they  use  certaine  Unctions.  The  Indians  say,  that  the
old  women  doe  commonly  use  this  office  of  witchcraft,
and  specially  those  of  one  Province,  which  they  call
Coaillo,  and  of  another  Towne  called  Manchey,  and  of
the  Province  of  Guarochiri.  They  likewise  shew  what
is  become  of  things  stollen  and  lost.  There  are  of  these
kindes  of  Sorcerers  in  all  parts,  to  whom  commonly  doe
come  the  Anaconas,  and  Cyva,  which  serve  the  Spaniards,
and  when  they  have  lost  any  thing  of  their  Masters,  or
when  they  desire  to  know  the  successe  of  things  past
or  to  come,  as  when  they  goe  to  the  Spaniards  Cities  for
their  private  affaires,  or  for  the  publike,  they  demand  if
their  voyage  shall  bee  prosperous,  if  they  shall  be  sick,
if  they  shall  die,  or  returne  safe,  if  they  shall  obtaine  that
which  they  pretend  :  and  the  Witches  or  Conjurers  answer,
Yea,  or  No,  having  first  spoken  with  the  Devill,  in  an
obscure  place :  so  as  these  Anaconas  do  well  heare  the
sound  of  the  voyce,  but  they  see  not  to  whom  these  Con-
jurers speake,  neither  doe  they  understand  what  they  say.
They  make  a  thousand  ceremonies  and  sacrifices  to  this
effect,  with  the  which  they  mocke  the  Devill  and  grow
exceeding  drunke,  for  the  doing  whereof,  they  particularly
use  an  herb  called  Villea,  the  juyce  whereof  they  mingle
with  their  Chica,  or  take  it  in  some  other  sort.

THe  Indians  had  an  infinite  number  of  other  cere-
monies and  customes,  which  resembled  to  the  ancient
Law  of  Moses,  and  some  to  those  which  the  Moores
use,  and  some  approched  neere  to  the  Law  of  the  Gospell,
as  their  Bathes  or  Opacuna,  as  they  call  them :  they  did
wash  themselves  in  water,  to  dense  them  from  their
sinnes.  The  Mexicans  had  also  amongst  them  a  kinde
of  Baptisme,  the  which  they  did  with  ceremonie,  cutting
the  eares  and  members  of  young  children  new  borne,
counterfaiting  in  some  sort  the  Circumcision  of  the  Jewes.

3Si

A.D.

c.  1588.

Of  other
Ceremonies
and  Customes
of  the  Indians,
which  are  like
unto  ours.
Chap.  27.

Mexican
Baptisme.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

This  ceremonie  was  done  principally  to  the  sonnes  of
Kings  and  Noblemen :  presently  upon  their  birth  the
Priests  did  wash  them,  and  did  put  a  little  Sword  in  the
right  hand,  and  in  the  left  a  Target.  And  to  the  Children
of  the  vulgar  sort,  they  put  the  markes  of  their  offices,
and  to  their  Daughters  instruments  to  spin,  knit,  and
labour.  This  ceremonie  continued  foure  dayes,  being
Marriage  made  before  some  Idoll.  They  contracted  marriage  after
ceremonies,  tneir  manner,  whereof  the  Licenciate  Polio  hath  written
a  whole  Treatise,  and  I  will  speake  somewhat  thereon
hereafter.  In  other  things  their  customes  and  ceremonies
have  some  shew  of  reason.  The  Mexicans  were  married
by  the  hands  of  their  Priests  in  this  sort.  The  Bride-
groome  and  the  Bride  stood  together  before  the  Priest,
who  tooke  them  by  the  hands,  asking  them  if  they  would
marry ;  then  having  understood  their  wills,  he  tooke  a
corner  of  the  vaile  wherewith  the  woman  had  her  head
covered,  and  a  corner  of  the  mans  gowne  the  which  he
tyed  together  on  a  knot,  and  so  led  them  thus  tyed  to
the  Bridegroomes  house,  where  there  was  a  harth  kindled,
and  then  he  caused  the  wife  to  goe  seven  times  about  the
harth,  and  so  the  married  couple  sate  downe  together,
and  thus  was  the  marriage  contracted.  The  Mexicans
were  very  jealous  of  the  integritie  of  their  wives :  so
as  if  they  found  they  were  not  as  they  ought  to  bee  (the
which  they  knew  either  by  signes  or  dishonest  wordes)
they  presently  gave  notice  thereof  to  their  fathers  and
kinsfolks  of  their  wives,  to  their  great  shame  and  dis-
honour, for  that  they  had  not  kept  good  guard  over
them.  When  they  went  to  the  house  they  made  an
Inventorie  of  all  the  man  and  wife  brought  together,  of
provisions  for  the  house,  of  land,  of  jewels  and  orna-
ments, which  Inventories  every  father  kept,  for  if  it
chanced  they  made  any  divorce  (as  it  was  common  amongst
them  when  they  agree  not)  they  divided  their  goods
according  to  the  portion  that  every  one  brought,  every
one  having  libertie  in  such  a  case,  to  marry  whom  they
pleased  : and  they  gave  the  Daughters  to  the  Wife,  and

352

JOSEPH ACOSTA

the  Sonnes  to  the  Husband.  It  was  defended  upon  paine
of  death,  not  to  marry  againe  together,  the  which  they
observed  very  strictly.  And  although  it  seeme  that  many
of  their  ceremonies  agree  with  ours,  yet  differ  they  much
for  the  great  abomination  they  mingle  therewithall.  It
is  common  and  generall  to  have  usually  one  of  these  three
things,  either  Crueltie,  Filthinesse,  or  Slouth  :  for  all  their
ceremonies  were  cruell  and  hurtfull,  as  to  kill  men  and
to  spill  bloud ;  or  filthy  and  beastly,  as  to  eate  and  drinke
to  the  name  of  their  Idols,  and  also  to  pisse  in  the  honour
of  them,  carrying  them  upon  their  shoulders,  to  anoint
and  besmeare  themselves  filthily,  and  to  doe  a  thousand
sorts  of  villanies,  which  were  at  the  least,  vaine,  ridiculous,
and  idle,  and  more  like  the  actions  of  children  then  of
men.  Whereas  the  temporall  power  was  greatest,  there
superstition  hath  most  increased,  as  we  see  in  the  Realmes
of  Mexico  and  Cusco,  where  it  is  incredible  to  see  the
number  of  Idols  they  had :  for  within  the  Citie  of
Mexico  there  were  above  three  hundred.  Mango  Ingua
Yupangui,  amongst  the  Kings  of  Cusco,  was  he  that  most
augmented  the  service  of  their  Idols,  inventing  a  thousand
kindes  of  sacrifices,  feasts,  and  ceremonies.  The  like  did
King  Iscoalt  in  Mexico,  who  was  the  fourth  King.  There
was  also  a  great  number  of  superstitions  and  sacrifices  in
other  Nations  of  the  Indians,  as  in  the  Province  of
Guatimala,  at  the  Hands  in  the  new  Kingdome,  in  the
Province  of  Chille,  and  others  that  were  like  Common-
wealths and  Comminalties.  But  it  was  nothing  in  respect
of  Mexico  and  Cusco,  where  Satan  was  as  in  Rome,  or
in  his  Jerusalem.

The  Inguas  Lords  of  Peru,  had  two  kindes  of  Feasts.
Some  were  ordinarie,  which  fell  out  in  certayne  moneths
of  the  yeere :  and  others  extraordinarie,  which  were  for
certayne  causes  of  importance,  as  when  they  did  crowne
a  new  King,  when  they  beganne  some  warre  of  import-
ance, when  they  had  any  great  need  of  water  or  drought,
or  other  like  things.  For  the  ordinary  Feasts,  wee  must
understand,  that  every  moneth  of  the  yeere  they  made
xv  353  z

A.D.

c.  1588.

300.  Mexican
Idols.

Mangos
mangled
devotions.

[III.  v.

1045.]
Feasts  cele-
brated by  them
of  Cusco,  and
how  the  Devill
would  imitate
the  mystery  of
the  holy
Trinitie.
Chap.  28.

A.D.

c.  1588.

Ray  me-f east.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Feasts,  and  divers  Sacrifices,  and  although  all  of  them
had  this  alike,  that  they  offered  a  hundred  sheepe : yet
in  colour, and  in forme  they  are  very  divers. In the
first  moneth  which  they  call  Rayme,  which  is  the  moneth
of  December,  they  made  their  first  Feast,  which  was  the
principall  of  all  others,  and  for  that  cause  they  called  it
Capacrayme,  which  is  to  say,  A  rich  and  principall  Feast.
In  this  Feast  they  offered  a  great  number  of  sheepe  and
Lambes in Sacrifice, and they burnt them  with sweet
wood,  then  they  caused  Gold  and  Silver  to  bee  brought
upon  certayne  sheepe,  setting  upon  them  three  Images
of  the  Sunne,  and  three  of  the  Thunder,  the  Father,  the
Sonne,  and  the  Brother. In  these  Feasts  they  dedicated
the  Inguas  children,  putting  Guaras,  or  Ensignes  upon
them,  and  they  pierced  their  eares : then  some  old  man
did  whip  them  with  slings  and  annoynted  their  faces  with
bloud,  all  in  signe  that  they  should  be  true  Knights  to
the  Ingua. No  stranger  might  remayne  in  Cusco  during
this  moneth,  and  this  Feast,  but  at  the  end  thereof  they
entred,  and  they  gave  unto  them  pieces  of  the  paste  of
Mays  with  the  bloud  of  the  Sacrifice,  which  they  did  eate
in  signe  of  confederation  with  the  Ingua,  as  hath  beene
said  before. It  is  strange  that  the  Devill  after  his  manner
hath  brought  a  Trinitie  into  Idolatry,  for  the  three  Images
of  the  Sunne  called  Apomti,  Churunti,  and  Intiquaoqui
which  signifieth  Father  and  Lord  Sunne,  the  Sonne  Sunne,
and  the  Brother  Sunne. In  the  like  manner  they  named
the  three  Images  of  Chuquilla,  which  is  the  God  that
rules  in the  Region  of  the  Ayre, where  it  Thunders,
Raines and Snowes. I remember, that beeing in
Cuquisaca,  an  honourable  Priest  shewed  me  an  informa-
tion, which  I  had  long  in  my  hands,  where  it  was  prooved
that  there  was  a  certayne  Guaca  or  Oratory,  whereas  the
Indians  did  worship  an  Idoll  called  Tangatanga,  which
they  said  was  one  in  three,  and  three  in  one. Comming
then to the Feast of  the second moneth, which they
Carney-feast,  called  Carney,  besides  the  Sacrifices  which  they  made,  they
did  cast  the  ashes  into  the  River,  following  five  or  sixe

354

Indian
Trinity.

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
leagues  after,  praying  it  to  carry  them  into  the  Sea,  for
that  the  Virochoca  should  there  receive  this  present.  In
the  third,  fourth  and  fift  moneth,  they  offered  a  hundred
blacke  sheepe,  speckled,  and  grey,  with  many  other  things,
which  I  omit  for  being  too  tedious.  The  sixt  moneth  is
called  Hatuncuzqui  Aymorey,  which  answereth  to  May,
in  the  which  they  sacrificed  a  hundred  sheepe  more,  of  all
colours :  in  this  Moone  and  moneth,  which  is  when  they
bring  Mays  from  the  fields  into  the  house,  they  made  a
Feast,  which  is  yet  very  usuall  among  the  Indians,  and
they  doe  call  it  Aymorey.  Jymorey-

This  Feast  is  made  comming  from  the  Chacra  or  Farme  feast-
unto  the  house,  saying  certayne  Songs,  and  praying  that
the  Mays  may  long  continue,  the  which  they  call  Mama-
cora.  They  take  a  certayne  portion  of  the  most  fruitfull
of  the  Mays  that  growes  in  their  Farmes,  the  which  they
put  in  a  certayne  Granier  which  they  doe  call  Pirva,  with
certayne  Ceremonies,  watching  three  nights :  they  put
this  Mays  in  the  richest  garments  they  have,  and  being
thus  wrapped  and  dressed,  they  worship  this  Pirva,  and
hold  it  in  great  veneration,  saying  it  is  the  Mother  of
the  Mays  of  their  Inheritances,  and  that  by  this  meanes
the  Mays  augments  and  is  preserved.  In  this  moneth
they  make  a  particular  Sacrifice,  and  the  Witches  demand
of  this  Pirva,  if  it  hath  strength  sufficient  to  continue
untill  the  next  yeere :  and  if  it  answeres  No,  then  they
carry  this  Mays  to  the  Farme  to  burne,  whence  they
brought  it,  according  to  every  mans  power ;  then  make
they  another  Pirva,  with  the  same  Ceremonies,  saying,
that  they  renew  it,  to  the  end  the  Seed  of  Mays  may  not
perish,  and  if  it  answers  that  it  hath  force  sufficient  to
last  longer,  they  leave  it  untill  the  next  yeere.  This
foolish  vanitie  continueth  to  this  day,  and  it  is  very
common  amongst  the  Indians  to  have  these  Pirvas,  and
to  make  the  Feast  of  Aymorey.  The  seventh  moneth
answereth  to  June,  and  is  called  Aucaycuzqui  Intiraymi,
in  it  £hey  made  the  Feast  that  is  called  Intiraymi,  in  the  Intiraymi-
which  they  sacrificed  a  hundred  sheepe  called  Guanacos,  ftast-

355

A.D.

c  1588.

Corpus
Christi  day
resembled.

[III.  v.

1046.]

Situa-feast.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  said  it  was  the  Feast  of  the  Sunne.  In  this  moneth
they  made  many  Images  of  Quinua  wood  carved,  all
attired  with  rich  garments,  and  they  made  their  dancings
which  they  doe  call  Cayo.  At  this  Feast  they  cast  flowers
in  the  high  wayes,  and  thither  the  Indians  came  painted,
and  their  Noblemen  had  small  plates  of  Gold  upon  their
beards,  and  all  did  sing ;  we  must  understand  that  this
Feast  falleth  almost  at  the  same  time,  when  as  the
Christians  observe  the  Solemnitie  of  the  holy  Sacrament,
which  doth  resemble  it  in  some  sort,  as  in  dancing,  singing
and  representations.  And  for  this  cause  there  hath  beene,
and  is  yet  among  the  Indians  (which  celebrated  a  Feast
somewhat  like  to  ours  of  the  holy  Sacrament)  many
Superstitions  in  celebrating  this  ancient  Feast  of  Intiraymi.
The  eight  moneth  is  called  Chahua  Huarqui,  in  the  which
they  did  burne  a  hundred  sheep  more,  all  grey,  of  the
colour  of  Viscacha,  according  to  the  former  order,  which
moneth  doth  answere  to  our  July.  The  ninth  moneth
was  called  Yapaguis,  in  which  they  burnt  an  hundred
sheepe  more,  of  a  Chesnut  colour,  and  they  doe  likewise
kill  and  burne  a  thousand  Cuyes,  to  the  end  that  neither
the  Frost,  the  Ayre,  the  water,  nor  the  Sunne  should
hurt  their  Farmes  :  and  this  moneth  doth  answere  unto
August.  The  tenth  moneth  was  called  Coyarami,  in  the
which  they  burnt  a  hundred  white  sheepe  that  had  fleeces.
In  this  moneth  which  answereth  to  September,  they  made
the  Feast  called  Situa,  in  this  manner.  They  assembled
together  the  first  day  of  the  Moone  before  the  rising
thereof :  and  in  seeing  it  they  cryed  aloude,  carrying
Torches  in  their  hands,  and  saying,  Let  all  harme  goe
away,  striking  one  another  with  their  Torches.  They
that  did  this,  were  called  Panconcos  :  which  being  done,
they  went  to  the  common  Bath,  to  the  Rivers  and  Foun-
taines,  and  every  one  to  his  owne  Bath,  setting  themselves
to  drinke  foure  dayes  together.  In  this  moneth  the
Mamacomas  of  the  Sunne  made  a  great  number  of  small
Loaves  with  the  bloud  of  the  Sacrifices,  and  gave  a  piece
to every stranger ; yea, they sent to every Guaca

356

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
throughout  the  Realme,  and  to  many  Curacas,  in  signe
of  confederation  and  loyaltie  to  the  Sun  and  the  Ingua,
as  hath  beene  said.

The  Bathes,  drunkennesse  and  some  Relickes  of  this
Feast  Situa,  remayne  even  unto  this  day,  in  some  places,
with  the  Ceremonies  a  little  different,  but  yet  very
secretly,  for  that  these  chiefe  and  principall  Feasts  have
ceased.  The  eleventh  moneth  Homaraymi  Punchaiquis,
wherein  they  sacrificed  a  hundred  sheepe  more.  And  if
they  wanted  water,  to  procure  raine,  they  set  a  blacke
sheepe  tyed  in  the  middest  of  a  Plaine,  powring  much
Chica  about  it,  and  giving  it  nothing  to  eate  untill  it
rayned,  which  is  practised  at  this  day  in  many  places,  in
the  time  of  our  October.  The  twelfth  and  last  moneth
was  called  Aymara,  wherein  they  did  likewise  sacrifice  a
hundred  sheepe,  and  made  the  Feast  called  Raymicantara
Raquis.  In  this  moneth  which  answered  to  our  Novem-
ber, they  prepared  what  was  necessary  for  the  Children
that  should  bee  made  Novices,  the  moneth  following,  the
Children  with  the  old  men  made  a  certayne  shew,  with
rounds  and  turnings :  and  this  Feast  was  called  Ituraymi,
which  commonly  they  make  when  it  raines  too  much,  or
too  little,  or  when  there  is  a  plague.

Among  the  extraordinary  Feasts  which  were  very  many,
the  most  famous  was  that  which  they  called  Ytu.  This
Feast  Ytu  hath  no  prefixed  time  nor  season,  but  in  time
of  necessitie.  To  prepare  themselves  thereunto,  all  the
people  fasted  two  dayes,  during  the  which  they  did  neither
company  with  their  wives,  nor  eate  any  meate  with  Salt
or  Garlicke,  nor  drinke  any  Chica.  All  did  assemble
together  in  one  place,  where  no  stranger  was  admitted,
nor  any  beast :  they  had  Garments  and  Ornaments,  which
served  onely  for  this  Feast.  They  marched  very  quietly
in  Procession,  their  heads  covered  with  their  Veiles,
sounding  of  Drummes,  without  speaking  one  to  another.
This  continued  a  day  and  a  night ;  then  the  day  following
they  danced  and  made  good  cheere  for  two  dayes  and  two
nights  together,  saying,  that  their  Prayer  was  accepted.

357

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

And  although  that  this  Feast  is  not  used  at  this  day,  with
all  this  ancient  Ceremony,  yet  commonly  they  make
another  which  is  very  like,  which  they  call  Ayma,  with
Garments  that  serve  onely  to  that  end,  and  they  make
this  kinde  of  Procession  with  their  Drummes,  having
fasted  before,  then  after  they  make  good  cheere,  which
they  usually  doe  in  their  urgent  necessities.  And
although  the  Indians  forbeare  to  sacrifice  beasts,  or  other
things  publikely,  which  cannot  be  hidden  from  the
Spaniards,  yet  doe  they  still  use  many  Ceremonies  that
have  their  beginnings  from  these  Feasts  and  ancient
Superstitions :  for  at  this  day  they  doe  covertly  make  this
Feast  of  Ytu,  at  the  dances  of  the  Feast  of  the  Sacrament,
in  making  the  dances  of  Lyamallama,  and  of  Guacon,  and
of  others,  according  to  their  ancient  Ceremonies.

Of  the  feast  of  f  I  ^He  Mexicans  have  beene  no  lesse  curious  in  their
Jj!  m  W-hich  Feasts  and  Solemnities,  which  were  of  small  charge,

celebrated  ^ut  °^  great  effusion  of  mans  bloud.  We  have  before
Chap.  29.  spoken  of  the  principall  Feast  of  Vitziliputzli,  after  the
which  the  Feast  of  Tezcalipuca  was  most  solemnized.
This  Feast  fell  in  May,  and  in  their  Kalender  they  called
it  Tozcolt :  it  fell  every  foure  yeere  with  the  feast  of
Penance,  where  there  was  given  full  indulgence  and
remission  of  sinnes.  In  this  day  they  did  sacrifice  a
Captive  which  resembled  the  Idoll  Tezcalipuca,  it  was  the
nineteenth  day  of  May  :  upon  the  Even  of  this  Feast,
the  Noblemen  came  to  the  Temple,  bringing  a  new
Garment  like  unto  that  of  the  Idoll,  the  which  the  Priest
put  upon  him,  having  first  taken  off  his  other  Garments,
which  they  kept  with  as  much,  or  more  reverence  then
wee  doe  our  Ornaments.  There  were  in  the  Coffers  of
the  Idoll  many  Ornaments,  Jewels,  Earerings,  and  other
Riches,  as  Bracelets,  and  precious  Feathers  which  served
to  no  other  use,  but  to  be  there,  and  was  worshipped  as
their  God  it  selfe.  Besides  the  Garment  wherewith  they
worshipped  the  Idoll  that  day,  they  put  upon  him  cer-
tayne  ensignes  of  Feathers,  with  fannes, shadowes  and

358

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
other  things,  being  thus  attired  and  furnished,  they  drew
the  Curtayn  or  Veile  from  before  the  doore,  to  the  end  he
might  be  seene  of  all  men :  then  came  forth  one  of  the
chiefe  of  the  Temple,  attyred  like  to  the  Idoll,  carrying
flowres  in  his  hand,  and  a  Flute  of  earth,  having  a  very
sharpe  sound,  and  turning  towards  the  East,  he  sounded  it,
and  then  looking  to  the  West,  North  and  South  he  did  the
like.  And  after  he  had  thus  sounded  towards  the  foure
parts  of  the  World  (shewing  that  both  they  that  were
present  and  absent  did  heare  him)  he  put  his  finger  into
the  Aire,  and  then  gathered  up  earth,  which  hee  put  in
his  mouth,  and  did  eate  it  in  signe  of  adoration.  The
like  did  all  they  that  were  present,  and  weeping,  they
fell  flat  to  the  ground,  invocating  the  darknesse  of  the
night,  and  the  winds,  intreating  them  not  to  leave  them,
nor  to  forget  them,  or  else  to  take  away  their  lives,  and  [III.  v.
free them from the labours they endured therein.  IO+7-]

Theeves,  Adulterers,  and  Murtherers,  and  all  other
offenders  had  great  feare  and  heavinesse,  whilest  this
Flute  sounded ;  so  as  some  could  not  dissemble  nor  hide
their  offences.  By  this  meanes  they  all  demanded  no
other  thing  of  their  God,  but  to  have  their  offences  con-
cealed, powring  forth  many  teares,  with  great  repentance
and  sorrow,  offering  great  store  of  Incense  to  appease
their  Gods.  The  couragious  and  valiant  men,  and  all  the
old  Souldiers,  that  followed  the  art  of  Warre,  hearing  this
Flute  demanded  with  great  devotion  of  God  the  Creator,
of  the  Lord  for  whom  we  live,  of  the  Sun,  and  of  other
their  Gods,  that  they  would  give  them  victory  against
their  enemies,  &  strength  to  take  many  Captives,  there-
with to  honour  their  Sacrifices.  This  Ceremony  was  done
ten  dayes  before  the  Feast :  During  which  ten  dayes  the
Priest  did  sound  this  Flute,  to  the  end  that  all  might
doe  this  worship  in  eating  of  earth,  and  demand  of  their
Idoll  what  they  pleased :  they  every  day  made  their
Prayers,  with  their  eyes  lift  up  to  Heaven,  and  with  sighs
and  groanings,  as  men  that  were  grieved  for  their  sinnes
and offences. Although this contrition was onely for

359

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

feare  of  the  corporall  punishment  that  was  given  them,

and  not  for  any  feare  of  the  eternall,  for  they  certainly

beleeved there  was no such severe punishment  in the

No  feare  but  of  other  life. And  therefore  they  offered  themselves  volun-

temporall tarily  to  death,  holding  opinion  that  it  is  to  all  men  an

pumshmenu assured  rest

The  first  day  of  the  Feast  of  this  Idoll  Tezcalipuca
beeing  come,  all  they  of  the  Citie  assembled  together  in
a  Court,  to  celebrate  likewise  the  Feast  of  the  Kalender,
whereof  we  have  already  spoken,  which  was  called
Toxcoalth,  which  signifies  A  dry  thing :  which  Feast  was
not  made  to  any  other  end,  but  to  demand  raine,  in  the
same  manner  that  wee  solemnize  the  Rogations :  and
this  Feast  was  alwayes  in  May,  which  is  the  time  that
they  have  most  need  of  raine  in  those  Countreyes.  They
beganne  to  celebrate  it  the  ninth  of  May,  ending  the
nineteenth.  The  last  day  of  the  Feast  the  Priests  drew
forth  a  Litter  well  furnished  with  Curtaynes  and  Pendants
of  divers  fashions.  This  Litter  had  so  many  armes  to
hold  by  as  there  were  Ministers  to  carrie  it.  All  which
came  forth  besmeered  with  blacke  and  long  haire,  halfe
in  tresses  with  white  strings,  and  attyred  in  the  livery  of
the  Idoll.  Upon  this  Litter  they  set  the  personage  of
the  Idoll,  appointed  for  this  Feast,  which  they  called  the
resemblance  of  their  God  Tezcalipuca,  and  taking  it  upon
their  shoulders,  they  brought  it  openly  to  the  foot  of  the
staires :  then  came  forth  the  young  men  and  Maydens  of
the  Temple,  carrying  a  great  coard  wreathed  of  chaines
of  roasted  Mays,  with  the  which  they  environed  the  Litter,
and  putting  a  chaine  of  the  same  about  the  Idols  necke,
and  a  Garland  upon  his  head.  They  called  the  coard
Toxcalt,  signifying  the  drought  and  barrennesse  of  the
time.  The  young  men  came  wrapped  in  red  Curtaines,
with  Garlands  and  chaines  of  roasted  Mays.  The  Maydes
were  clothed  in  new  Garments,  wearing  chaines  about
their  neckes  of  roasted  Mays ;  and  upon  their  heads
Mytres  made  of  rods  covered  with  this  Mays,  they  had
their feet covered with feathers, and their armes and

360

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
cheekes  painted.  They  brought  much  of  this  roasted
Mays,  and  the  chiefe  men  put  it  upon  their  heads,  and
about  their  neckes,  taking  flowres  in  their  hands.  The
Idoll  being  placed  in  his  Litter,  they  strewed  round  about
a  great  quantitie  of  the  boughes  of  Manguey,  the  leaves
whereof  are  large  and  pricking.

This  Litter  being  set  upon  the  religious  mens  shoulders,
they  carried  it  in  Procession  within  the  circuit  of  the
Court,  two  Priests  marching  before  with  Censors,  giving
often  Incense  to  the  Idoll ;  and  every  time  they  gave
Incense,  they  lifted  up  their  armes  as  high  as  they  could
to  the  Idoll,  and  to  the  Sunne,  saying,  that  they  lifted
up  their  Prayers  to  Heaven,  even  as  the  smoke  ascended
on  high.  Then  all  the  people  in  the  Court  turned  round
to  the  place  whither  the  Idoll  went,  every  one  carrying
in  his  hand  new  coards  of  the  threed  of  the  Manguey,
a  fadome  long-,  with  a  knot  at  the  end,  and  with  them
they  whipped  themselves  upon  the  shoulders ;  even  as
they  doe  here  upon  holy  Thursday.  All  the  wals  of  the
Court  and  Battlements  were  full  of  boughes  and  flowres,
so  fresh  and  pleasant,  as  it  did  give  a  great  contentment.
This  Procession  being  ended,  they  brought  the  Idoll  to
his  usuall  place  of  abode.  Then  came  a  great  multitude
of  people  with  flowres,  dressed  in  divers  sorts  wherewith
they  filled  the  Temple  and  all  the  Court,  so  as  it  seemed
the  ornament  of  an  Oratory.  All  this  was  put  in  order
by  the  Priests,  the  young  men  administring  these  things
unto  them  from  without.  The  Chappell  or  Chamber
where  the  Idoll  remayned  was  all  this  day  open  without
any  Veile.

This  done,  every  one  came  and  offered  Curtines,  and
pendants  of  Sandally,  precious  Stones,  Jewels,  Incence,
sweet  wood,  Grapes,  or  eares  of  Mays,  Quailes :  and
finally,  all  they  were  accustomed  to  offer  in  such  solemni-
ties. When  as  they  offered  Quailes  (which  was  the
poore  mans  offering)  they  used  this  ceremonie,  they
delivered  them  to  the  Priests,  who  taking  them,  pulled
off  their  heads,  and  cast  them  at  the  foote  of  the  Altar,

361

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

where  they  lost  their  bloud,  and  so  they  did  of  all  other
things  which  were  offered.  Every  one  did  offer  meate
and  fruite  according  to  their  power,  the  which  was  laid
at  the  foote  of  the  Altar,  and  the  Ministers  gathered
them  up,  and  carried  them  to  their  Chambers.  This
solemne  offering  done,  the  people  went  to  dinner,  every
one  to  his  village  or  house,  leaving  the  feast  suspended
untill  after  dinner.  In  the  meane  time,  the  yong  Men
and  Maidens  of  the  Temple,  with  their  ornaments,  were
busied  to  serve  the  Idoll,  with  all  that  was  appointed  for
[III.  v.  him  to  eate :  which  meate  was  prepared  by  other  women,

1048.]  ^q  i^d  macje  a  vow  that  day  to  serve  the  Idoll.  And
therefore  such  as  had  made  this  vow,  came  by  the  point
of  day,  offering  themselves  to  the  Deputies  of  the
Temple,  that  they  might  command  them  what  they  would
have  done,  the  which  they  did  carefully  performe.  They
did  prepare  such  variety  of  meates,  as  it  was  admirable.
This  meate  being  ready,  and  the  houre  of  dinner  come,
all  these  Virgins  went  out  of  the  Temple  in  procession,
every  one  carrying  a  little  basket  of  bread  in  her  hand,
and  in  the  other,  a  dish  of  these  meates ;  before  them
marched  an  old  man,  like  to  a  steward,  with  a  pleasant
habit,  he  was  cloathed  in  a  white  Surples  downe  to  the
calves  of  his  legges,  upon  a  doublet  without  sleeves  of
red  leather,  like  to  a  jacket,  he  carried  wings  instead  of
sleeves,  from  the  which  hung  broad  ribbands,  at  the  which
did  hang  a  small  Calibasse  or  pumpion,  which  was  covered
with  flowers,  by  little  holes  that  were  made  in  it,  and
within  it  were  many  superstitious  things.  This  old  man
thus  attyred,  marched  very  humbly  and  heavily  before  the
preparation,  with  his  head  declining :  and  comming  neere
the  foote  of  the  staires,  he  made  a  great  obeisance  and
reverence.  Then  going  on  the  one  side,  the  Virgins  drew
neere  with  the  meate,  presenting  it  in  order  one  after
another,  with  great  reverence.  This  service  presented,
the  old  man  returned  as  before,  leading  the  Virgins  into
their  convent.  This  done,  the  yong  men  and  ministers
of  the  Temple,  came  forth  and  gathered  up  this  meate,

362

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
the  which  they  carried  to  the  Chambers  of  the  chiefe
Priests  of  the  Temple,  who  had  fasted  five  dayes,  eating
onely  once  a  day,  and  they  had  also  abstained  from  their
wives,  not  once  going  out  of  the  Temple  in  these  five
dayes.  During  the  which  they  did  whip  themselves
rigorously  with  cords ;  they  did  eate  of  this  divine  meate
(for  so  they  called  it)  what  they  could,  nor  was  it  lawfull  for
any  other  to  eate  thereof.  All  the  people  having  dined,
they  assembled  againe  in  the  court  to  see  the  end  of  the
feast,  whither  they  brought  a  captive,  which  by  the  space
of  a  whole  yeare,  had  represented  the  Idoll,  being  attired,
decked,  and  honoured,  as  the  Idoll  it  selfe,  and  doing
all  reverence  unto  him,  they  delivered  him  into  the  hands
of  the  sacrificers,  who  at  that  instant  presented  themselves,
taking  him  by  the  feete  and  hands.  The  Pope  did  open
his  stomacke,  and  pull  out  his  heart,  then  did  he  lift  up
his  hand  as  high  as  he  could,  shewing  it  to  the  Sunne,
and  to  the  Idoll,  as  hath  beene  said.  Having  thus
sacrificed  him  that  represented  the  Idoll,  they  went  into
a  holy  place  appointed  for  this  purpose,  whither  came
the  yong  Men  and  Virgins  of  the  Temple,  with  their
ornaments,  the  which  being  put  in  order,  they  danced  and
sung  with  Drummes  and  other  instruments,  on  the  which
the  chiefe  Priests  did  play  and  sound.  Then  came  all  the
Noblemen  with  ensignes  and  ornaments  like  to  the  yong
men,  who  danced  round  about  them.  They  did  not
usually  kill  any  other  men  that  day,  but  him  that  was
sacrificed,  yet  every  fourth  yeare  they  had  others  with
him,  which  was  in  the  yeare  of  Jubile  and  full  pardons.
After  Sunne  set,  every  one  being  satisfied  with  sounding,
eating,  and  drinking,  the  Virgins  went  all  to  their  convent,
they  tooke  great  dishes  of  earth  full  of  bread  mixt  with
hony,  covered  with  small  panniers,  wrought  and  fashioned
with  dead  mens  heads  and  bones,  and  they  carried  the
collation  to  the  Idoll,  mounting  up  to  the  Court,  which
was  before  the  doore  of  the  Oratorie  :  and  having  set
them  downe,  they  retired  in  the  same  order  as  they  came,
the  steward  going  still  before. Presently  came  forth  all

363

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

the  yong  men  in  order,  with  canes  or  reedes  in  their  hands,
who  began  to  runne  as  fast  as  they  could  to  the  top  of
the  staires  of  the  Temple,  who  should  come  first  to  the
dishes  of  the  collation.  The  Elders  or  chiefe  Priests
observed  him  that  came  first,  second,  third,  and  fourth,
without  regarding  the  rest.  This  collation  was  likewise
all  carried  away  by  the  yong  men,  as  great  Relicks.  This
done,  the  foure  that  arrived  first  were  placed  in  the  midst
of  the  Ancients  of  the  Temple,  bringing  them  to  their
chambers  with  much  honour,  praising  them,  and  giving
them  ornaments ;  and  from  thence  forth  they  were
respected  and  reverenced  as  men  of  marke.  The  taking
of  this  collation  being  ended,  and  the  feast  celebrated
with  much  joy  and  noise,  they  dismissed  all  the  yong
men  and  maides  which  had  served  the  Idoll ;  by  meanes
whereof  they  went  one  after  another,  as  they  came  forth.
All  the  small  children  of  the  Colledges  and  Schooles,  were
at  the  gate  of  the  court,  with  bottomes  of  rushes  and
hearbs  in  their  hands,  which  they  cast  at  them,  mocking
and  laughing,  as  of  them  that  came  from  the  service  of
the  Idoll :  they  had  liberty  then  to  dispose  of  themselves
at  their  pleasure,  and  thus  the  Feast  ended.

Of  the  Feast  of  A  Lthough  I  have  spoken  sufficiently  of  the  service  the
Merchants,  £~\.  Mexicans  did  unto  their  gods ;  yet  will  I  speake
which  those  of  sometkj.ng 0f the feast they called Quetzacoalt, which

Lholutecas  did  . °  .  / .  "*--  . '

celebrate.  was  the  god  or  riches,  the  which  was  solemnised  in  this
Ch.  30.  manner. Fortie dayes before  the Marchants  bought  a

slave  well  proportioned,  without  any  fault  or  blemish,
either  of  sicknesse  or  of  hurt,  which  they  did  attire  with
the  ornaments  of  the  Idoll,  that  he  might  represent  it
forty  dayes.  Before  his  cloathing  they  did  dense  him,
washing  him  twice  in  a  lake,  which  they  called  the  lake
of  the  gods ;  and  being  purified,  they  attired  him  like
the  Idoll.  During  these  forty  dayes,  he  was  much
respected  for  his  sake  whom  he  represented.  By  night
they  did  imprison  him  (as  hath  beene  said)  lest  he  should
flye,  and  in  the  morning  they  tooke  him  out  of  prison,

364

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
setting  him  upon  an  eminent  place,  where  they  served
him,  giving  him  exquisite  meates  to  eate. After  he  had
eaten,  they  put  a  chaine  of  flowers  about  his  necke,  and
many  nosegaies  in  his  hand. He  had  a  well  appointed  [III.  v.
guard,  with  much  people  to  accompany  him. When  he  IC49«]

went  through  the  Citie,  he  went  dancing  and  singing
through  all  the  streetes,  that  he  might  be  knowne  for
the  resemblance  of  their  god,  and  when  he  beganne  to
sing,  the  women  and  little  children  came  forth  of  their
houses  to  salute  him,  and  to  offer  unto  him  as  to  their
god.  Two  old  men  of  the  Ancients  of  the  Temple,
came  unto  him  nine  dayes  before  the  feast,  and  humbling
themselves  before  him,  they  said  with  a  low  and  submisse
voyce,  Sir,  you  must  understand  that  nine  dayes  hence
the  exercise  of  dancing  and  singing  doth  end,  and  thou
must  then  dye ;  and  then  he  must  answer,  in  a  good
houre.  They  call  this  ceremony,  Neyola  Maxiltleztli,
which  is  to  say,  the  advertisement :  and  when  they  did
thus  advertise  him,  they  tooke  very  carefull  heede  whither
he  were  sad,  or  if  he  danced  as  joyfully  as  he  was
accustomed,  the  which  if  he  did  not  as  cheerefully  as
they  desired,  they  made  a  foolish  superstition  in  this
manner.  They  presently  tooke  the  sacrificing  rasors,  the
which  they  washed  and  clensed  from  the  bloud  of  men,
which  remained  of  the  former  sacrifices.  Of  this  washing
they  made  a  drinke  mingled  with  another  liquor  made
of  Cacao,  giving  it  him  to  drinke ;  they  said  that  this
would  make  him  forget  what  had  beene  said  unto  him,
and  would  make  him  in  a  manner  insensible,  returning
to  his  former  dancing  and  mirth.  They  said  moreover,
that  he  would  offer  himselfe  cheerefully  to  death,  being
inchanted  with  this  drinke.  The  cause  why  they  sought
to  take  from  him  this  heavinesse,  was,  for  that  they  held
it  for  an  ill  augure,  and  a  fore-telling  of  some  great
harme.  The  day  of  the  Feast  being  come,  after  they
had  done  him  much  honour,  sung,  and  given  him  incense,
the  sacrificers  tooke  him  about  midnight  and  did  sacrifice
him, as hath beene said, offering his heart unto the

365

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGEIMES

c.  1588.

Moone,  the  which  they  did  afterwards  cast  against  the
Idoll,  letting  the  body  fall  to  the  bottome  of  the  staires
of  the  Temple,  where  such  as  had  offered  him  tooke  him
up,  which  were  the  Marchants,  whose  feast  it  was.  Then
having  carried  him  into  the  chiefest  mans  house  amongst
them,  the  body  was  drest  with  divers  sawces,  to  celebrate
(at  the  breake  of  day)  the  banquet  and  dinner  of  the  feast,
having  first  bid  the  Idoll  good  morrow,  with  a  small
dance,  which  they  made  whilst  the  day  did  breake,  and
that  they  prepared  the  sacrifice.  Then  did  all  the  Mar-
chants  assemble  at  this  banket,  especially  those  which  made
it  a  trafficke  to  buy  and  sell  slaves,  who  were  bound  every
yeere  to  offer  one,  for  the  resemblance  of  their  god.  This
Idoll  was  one  of  the  most  honored  in  all  the  Land :  and
Stately  therefore the Temple where he was, was of a great

Temple.  authoritie. There  were  threescore  staires  to  ascend  up

unto  it,  and  on  the  top  was  a  Court  of  an  indifferent
largenesse,  very  finely  drest  and  plastered,  in  the  midst
whereof,  was  a  great  round  thing  like  unto  an  Oven,
having  the  entrie  low  and  narrow :  so  as  they  must  stoope
very  low  that  should  enter  into  it.  This  Temple  had
Chambers  and  Chappels  as  the  rest,  where  there  were
convents  of  Priests,  yong  Men,  Maides,  and  Children,
as  hath  beene  said :  and  there  was  one  Priest  alone
resident  continually,  the  which  they  changed  weekely :
For  although  there  were  in  every  one  of  these  Temples,
three  or  foure  Curates  or  Ancients,  yet  did  every  one
serve  his  weeke  without  parting.  His  charge  that  weeke
(after  he  had  instructed  the  children)  was  to  strike  up  a
Drums  used  in  Drum  every  day  at  the  Sunne-setting,  to  the  same  end
stead  of  Bels.  (-naf  we  are  accustomed  to  ring  to  Evensong.  This
Drum  was  such  as  they  might  heare  the  house  sound
thereof  throughout  all  the  parts  of  the  Citie,  then  every
man  shut  up  his  merchandise,  and  retired  unto  his  house,
and  there  was  so  great  a  silence,  as  there  seemed  to  be
no  living  creature  in  the  Towne.  In  the  morning  when
as  the  day  began  to  breake,  they  began  to  sound  the
Drum,  which  was  a  signe  of  the  day  beginning,  so  as

366

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
travellers and strangers attended this signall to begin
their  journies,  for  till  that  time  it  was  not  lawful!  to  goe
out  of  the  Citie.

There  was  in  this  Temple  a  Court  of  reasonable  great-
nesse,  in  the  which  they  made  great  dances,  and  pastimes,
with  games  or  comedies  the  day  of  the  Idols  feast ;  for
which  purpose  there  was  in  the  middest  of  this  court  a
Theatre  of  thirty  foote  square  very  finely  decked  and
trimmed,  the  which  they  decked  with  flowers  that  day,
with  all  the  art  and  invention  that  might  be,  being
invironed  round  with  Arches  of  divers  flowers  and
feathers,  and  in  some  places  there  were  tied  many  small
Birds,  Conies,  and  other  tame  beasts.  After  dinner  all
the  people  assembled  in  this  place,  and  the  Players  pre-
sented themselves,  and  plaied  Comedies,  some  counterfeit  Comedies.
the  deafe,  and  the  rheumatike,  others  the  lame,  some  the
blinde,  and  without  hands,  which  came  to  seeke  for
cure  of  the  Idol,  the  deafe  answered  confusedly,  the
rheumaticke  did  cough,  the  lame  halted,  telling  their
miseries  and  griefes,  wherewith  they  made  the  people  to
laugh ;  others  come  forth  in  the  forme  of  little  beasts,
some  were  attired  like  Snailes,  others  like  Toades,  and
some  like  Lizards :  then  meeting  together,  they  told  their
offices,  and  every  one  retyring  to  his  place,  they  sounded
on  small  flutes,  which  was  pleasant  to  heare.  They  like-
wise counterfeited  Butterflies  and  small  Birds  of  divers
colours,  and  the  children  of  the  Temple  represented  these
formes,  then  they  went  into  a  little  Forrest  planted  there
for  the  nonce,  where  the  Priests  of  the  Temple  drew  them
forth  with  instruments  of  musicke.  In  the  meane  time
they  used  many  pleasant  speeches,  some  in  propounding,
others  in  defending,  wherewith  the  assistants  were
pleasantly  intertained.  This  done,  they  made  a  Maske
or  Mummerie  with  all  these  personages,  and  so  the  Feast
ended  :  the  which  were  usually  done  in  their  principall
Feasts.

[Chap. VI.
367

A.D.

c.  1588.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[III.  V.

1050.]

Of  the

supputatlon  of
times  and  the
Kalender  the
Mexicans
used.  Cha.  2.

Chap.  VI.

Civill  Customes  and  Arts  of  the  Indians  taken  out
of  Acostas  6.  Booke.

Mexican
yeare  &  18
moneths.

New  yeares
day.

Their
Kalender.

Will  first  shew  in  what  sort  the  Mexicans
counted  and  divided  their  yeere,  their
moneths,  their  Kalender,  their  computa-
tions, their  worlds  and  ages.  They
divided  the  yeare  into  eighteene  moneths,
to  which  they  gave  twentie  dayes,  wherein
the  three  hundred  and  threescore  dayes
are  accomplished,  not  comprehending  in  any  of  these
Moneths  the  five  daies  that  remaine,  and  make  the  yeare
perfect.  But  they  did  reckon  them  apart,  and  called
them  the  dayes  of  nothing :  during  the  which,  the  people
did  not  any  thing,  neither  went  they  to  their  Temples,
but  occupied  themselves  onely  in  visiting  one  another,
and  so  spent  the  time :  the  sacrificers  of  the  Temple  did
likewise  cease  their  sacrifices.  These  five  dayes  being
past,  they  began  the  computation  of  the  yeare,  whereof
the  first  moneth  and  beginning  was  in  March,  when  the
leaves  began  to  grow  greene,  although  they  tooke  three
dayes  of  the  moneth  of  February ;  for  the  first  day  of
their  yeare  was,  as  it  were,  the  six  and  twentieth  day  of
February,  as  appeareth  by  their  Kalender,  within  the
which  ours  is  likewise  comprehended  and  contained  with
a  very  ingenious  Art,  which  was  made  by  the  ancient
Indians  that  knew  the  first  Spaniards.  I  have  seene  this
Kalender,  and  have  it  yet  in  my  custodie,  which  well
deserveth  the  sight,  to  understand  the  discourse  and
industrie  the  Mexican  Indians  had.  Everie  one  of  these
eighteene  moneths  had  his  proper  name,  and  his  proper
picture,  the  which  was  commonly  taken  of  the  principall
Feast  that  was  made  in  that  moneth,  or  from  the  diversitie
of  times,  which  the  yeare  caused  in  that  moneth.  They
had  in  this  Kalender  certaine  daies  marked  and  distin-

368

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
guished for their feasts. And they accounted their
weekes  by  thirteene  dayes,  marking  the  daies  with  a  Zero  Weeke  of  i$.
or  cipher,  which  they  multiplied  unto  thirteene,  and  then  dam, or  years.
began  to  count,  one,  two,  &c. They  did  likewise  marke  Mexican *  *
the  yeares  of  these  wheeles,  with  foure  signes  or  figures, Chronicle  in
attributing  to  everie  yeare  a  peculiar  signe,  whereof  one  their  owne
was  of  a  House,  another  of  a  Conie,  the  third  of  a  Reede,  figures.
and  the  fourth  of  a  Flint. They  painted  them  in  this
sort,  noting  by  those  figures  the  yeare  that  did  runne,
saying  of  so  many  Houses,  of  so  many  Flints,  of  such
a  Wheele,  happened  such  a  thing. For  we  must  under-
stand  that their wheele, which was an age, contained
foure  weekes  of  yeares,  everie  weeke  containing  thirteene
yeares,  which  in  all  made  fiftie  two  yeares. In  the  midst
of  this  wheele  they  painted  a  Sun,  from  the  which  went
foure  beames  or  lines  in  crosse  to  the  circumference  of
the  wheele,  and  they  made  their  course,  even  as  the  cir-
cumference was  divided into foure equall  parts, everie
one  with  his  line,  having  a  distinct  colour  from  the  rest,
and the foure colours were, Greene, Blew, Red, and
Yellow : every portion of these foure had thirteene
separations  which  had  all  their  signes  or  particular  figures,
of  a  House,  a  Conie,  a  Reede,  or  a  Flint,  noting  by  every
signe  a  yeare,  and  upon  the  head  of  this  signe  they  painted
what  had  happened  that  yeare.

And  therefore  I  did  see  in  the  Kalender  mentioned  the
yeare  when  the  Spaniards  entered  Mexico,  marked  by  the
picture  of  a  man  clad  in  red,  after  our  manner,  for  such
was  the  habit  of  the  first  Spaniard,  whom  Fernando  Cortes
sent,  at  the  end  of  the  two  and  fiftie  yeares,  which  finished
the  wheele.  They  used  a  pleasant  ceremonie,  which  was,
the  last  night  they  did  breake  all  their  vessels  and  stuffe,
and  put  out  their  fire,  and  all  the  lights,  saying,  that  the
world  should  end  at  the  finishing  of  one  of  these  wheeles,
and  it  might  be  at  that  time  :  for  (said  they)  seeing  the
world  must  then  end,  what  neede  is  there  to  provide
meate  to  eate,  and  therefore  they  had  no  further  neede
of  Vessels  nor  fire.  Upon  this  conceit  they  passed  the
xv  369  2  A

A.D.

c.  1588.

New  Age.

How  the  Kings
Inguas
accounted  the
yeares  and
moneths.

Better  compu-
tation of  times
in  Peru.

[III.  v.

1051.]

12.  Pillars  of
the  Sunne.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

night  in  great  feare,  saying,  it  might  happen  there  would
be  no  more  day,  and  they  watched  verie  carefully  for  the
day;  when  they  saw  the  day  begin  to  breake,  they
presently  beat  many  Drums,  and  sounded  Cornets,  Flutes,
and  other  instruments  of  joy  and  gladnesse,  saying,  that
God  did  yet  prolong  the  time  with  another  age,  which
were  fiftie  two  yeares.  And  then  began  another  wheele.
The  first  day  and  beginning  of  this  age  they  tooke  new
fire,  and  bought  new  Vessels  to  dresse  their  meate,  and
all  went  to  the  high  Priest  for  this  new  fire,  having  first
made  a  solemne  Sacrifice,  and  given  thanks  for  the
comming  of  the  day,  and  prolongation  of  another  age.
This  was  their  manner  of  accounting  their  yeares,  moneths,
weekes,  and  ages.

ALthough  this  supputation  of  times  practised  amongst
the  Mexicans,  be  ingenious  enough  and  certaine,
for  men  that  had  no  learning ;  yet  in  my  opinion  they
wanted  discourse  and  consideration,  having  not  grounded
their  computation  according  unto  the  course  of  the
Moone,  nor  distributed  their  months  accordingly,  wherein
those  of  Peru  have  farre  surpassed  them  :  for  they  divided
their  yeare  into  as  manie  daies,  perfectly  accomplished  as
we  doe  here,  and  into  twelve  moneths  or  Moones,  in  the
which  they  imploied  and  consumed  the  eleven  daies  that
remaind  of  the  Moone,  as  Polo  writes.  To  make  the
computation  of  their  yeare  sure  and  certaine,  they  used
this  industrie ;  upon  the  Mountaines  which  are  about  the
Citie  of  Cusco  (where  the  Kings  Inguas  held  their  Court,
being  the  greatest  sanctuarie  of  those  Realms,  and  as  we
should  say  another  Rome)  there  were  twelve  Pillars  set
in  order,  and  in  such  distance  the  one  from  the  other,  as
everie  moneth  one  of  these  Pillars  did  note  the  rising
and  setting  of  the  Sunne.  They  called  them  Succanga,
by  meanes  whereof  they  taught  and  shewed,  the  Feasts,
and  the  seasons  fit  to  sowe  and  reape,  and  to  doe  other
things.  They  did  certaine  sacrifices  to  these  Pillars  of
the Sunne. Every moneth had his  proper name, and

37o

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
peculiar  Feasts.  They  began  the  yeare  by  Januarie  as  we
doe.  But  since,  a  King  Ingua  called  Pachacuto,  which
signifies  a  reformer  of  the  Temple,  began  their  yeare  by
December,  by  reason  (as  I  conjecture)  that  then  the  Sunne
returneth  from  the  last  point  of  Capricorne,  which  is  the
tropike  neerest  unto  them.  I  know  not  whether  the  one
or  the  other  have  observed  any  Bisexte,  although  some
hold  the  contrarie.  The  weekes  which  the  Mexicans  did
reckon,  were  not  properly  weekes,  being  not  of  seven
daies :  the  Inguas  likewise  made  no  mention  thereof
which  is  no  wonder,  seeing  the  count  of  the  weeke  is  not
grounded  upon  the  course  of  the  Sunne,  as  that  of  the
yeare,  nor  of  the  Moone,  as  that  of  the  moneth ;  but
among  the  Hebrewes  it  is  grounded  upon  the  creation  of
the  world,  as  Moyses  reporteth ;  and  amongst  the  Greekes
and  Latins  upon  the  number  of  the  seven  Planets,  of
whose  names  the  daies  of  the  weeke  have  taken  their
denomination ;  yet  was  it  much  for  those  Indians,  being
men  without  bookes  and  learning,  to  have  a  yeare,  seasons,
and  feasts,  so  well  appointed  as  I  have  said.

LEtters  were  invented  to  signifie  properly  the  words  That  no
we  doe  pronounce,  even  as  words  (according  to  the  Nation  of  the
Philosopher)  are  the  signes  and  demonstrations  of  mans  lndies  hath

u££Tl£ lOlLTlct  fO

thoughts  and  conceptions. And  both  the  one  and  the  have  had  the
other  (I  say  the  letters  and  words)  were  ordained  to  make  use  of  Letters.
things  knowne. The  voice  of  such  as  are  present,  and  Chap.  4.
letters  for  the  absent,  and  such  as  are  to  come. Signes
and  markes  which  are  not  properly  to  signifie  words,  but
things,  cannot  be  called,  neither  in  truth  are  they  letters,
although they  be written, for  we cannot say that the
picture  of  the  Sunne  is  a  writing  of  the  Sunne,  but  onely
a  picture ;  and  the  like  may  be  said  of  other  signes  and
characters,  which  have  no  resemblance  to  the  thing,  but
serve  onely  for  memorie  :  for  he  that  invented  them,  did
not  ordaine  them  to  signifie  words,  but  onely  to  noate
the  thing : neither  doe  they  call  those  characters,  letters,
or  writings,  as  indeede  they  are  not,  but  rather  ciphers,

37r

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRJMES

c.  1588.

or  remembrances,  as  those  be  which  the  Spherists  or
Astronomers  doe  use,  to  signifie  divers  signes  or  planets
of  Mars,  Venus,  Jupiter,  &c.

Such  characters  are  ciphers,  and  no  letters  : for  what
name  soever  Mars  may  have  in  Italian,  France,  or  Spanish,
this  character  doth  alwaies  signifie  it,  the  which  is  not
found  in  letters :  for  although  they  signifie  the  thing,  yet
is  it  by  meanes  of  words. So  as  they  which  know  not  the
thing,  understand  them  not :  as  for  example,  the  Greekes
nor  the  Hebrews,  cannot  conceive  what  this  word  Sol
does  signifie,  although  they  see  it  written ;  for  that  they
understand  not  the  Latine  word  :  so  as  writing  and  letters
are  onely  practised  by  them,  which  signifie  words  there-
with. For if they signifie things mediately, they are
no  more  letters  nor  writings,  but  ciphers  and  pictures :
whereby  we  may  observe  two  notable  things. The  one,
that  the  memorie  of  Histories  and  Antiquities  may  be
Three way es of  preserved  by  one  of  these  three  meanes,  either  by  letters
remembrance anc1  writings,  as  hath  beene  used  amongst  the  Latines,
to  posterity; QreekeSj Hebrewes, and manie other  Nations; or  by
have;  pk- painting,  as  hath  beene  used  almost  throughout  all  the
tares,  as  the world,  for  it  is  said  in  the  second  Nicene  Counsell,  Paint-
Mexicans; ing  is  a  Booke  for  fooles  which  cannot  reade : or  by
characters,  as ciphers  and  characters,  as  the  cipher  signifies  the  number
Such  fooles  did  °^  a  hm^cked,  a  thousand  and  others,  without  noting  the
that  wise word  of  a  hundred,  or  a  thousand. The  other  thing  we
counsell  make may  observe  thereby,  is  that  which  is  propounded  in  this
the  Christian Chapter, which is, that no Nation of  the Indies dis-
decr^'n  *" covered  in  our  time, hath  had  the  use  of  letters  and
Images  not writings,  but  of  the  other  two  sorts,  Images,  and  figures.
onely  to  be The  which  I  observe,  not  onely  of  the  Indies  of  Peru,
booke s  for  such  anc[  New  Spaine,  but  also  of  Jappon  and  China.
as  cannot  jt  jg  difficult  to  understand  how  the  Chinois  can  write

reade,  but  , .  • 11  r

objects  of  proper  names  in  their  tongue,  especially  or  strangers,
worship  to  being  things  they  have  never  seene,  and  not  able  to  invent
learned  and  figures  proper  unto  them.  I  have  made  triall  thereof
unlearned.  being  in  Mexico  with  the  Chinois,  willing  them  to  write
this  proposition  in  their  language,  Joseph  Acosta  is  come

372

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
from  Peru,  and  such  like :  whereupon  the  Chinese  was
long  pensive,  but  in  the  end  hee  did  write  it,  the  which
other  Chinois  did  after  reade,  although  they  did  vary  a
little  in  the  pronuntiation  of  the  proper  name.  For  they
use  this  devise  to  write  a  proper  name :  they  seeke  out
some  thing  in  their  tongue,  that  hath  resemblance  to
that  name,  and  set  downe  the  figure  of  this  thing.  And
as  it  is  difficult  among  so  many  proper  names,  to  finde
things  to  resemble  them  in  the  prolation,  so  is  it  very
difficult  and  troublesome  to  write  such  names.  Upon
this  purpose,  Father  Allonso  Sanchez  told  us,  that  when
hee  was  in  China,  being  led  into  divers  Tribunal  Seates,
from  Manderin  to  Manderin,  they  were  long  in  putting
his  name  in  writing  in  their  Caphas,  yet  in  the  end  they
did  write  it  after  their  manner,  and  so  ridiculously,  that
they  scarce  came  neere  to  the  name :  and  this  is  the  fashion
of  Letters  and  Writings  which  the  Chinois  used.  That
of  the  Japponois  approached  very  neere,  although  they
affirme  that  the  Noblemen  of  Jappon  that  came  into
Europe,  did  write  all  things  verie  easily  in  their  Language,  [III.  v.
were  they  of  our  proper  names  : yea,  I  have  had  some  1052.]

of  their  Writing  shewed  me,  whereby  it  seemes  they
should  have  some  kinde  of  Letters,  although  the  greatest
part  of  their  Writings,  be  by  the  Characters  and  figures,
as  hath  beene  said  of  the  Chinois.

An  Indian  of  Peru  or  Mexico,  that  hath  learned  to
read  &  write,  knowes  more  then  the  wisest  Mandarin
that  is  amongst  them :  for  that  the  Indian  with  foure  and
twentie  Letters  which  hee  hath  learned,  will  write  all  the
words  in  the  World :  and  a  Mandarin  with  his  hundred
thousand  Letters,  will  be  troubled  to  write  some  proper
name,  as  of  Martin,  or  Alonso,  and  with  greater  reason  he
shall  bee  lesse  able  to  write  the  names  of  things  hee  knowes
not.  So  as  the  writing  in  China,  is  no  other  thing  but  a
manner  of  painting  or  ciphering.

373

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.
Of  the  fashion  TT  7"E  find  among  the  Nations  of  New  Spaine  a  great
of  Letters  and \\ knowledge  and  memorie  of  antiquitie ;  and  there-
w™tingswhich  £Qre  searchinnr  by  what  meanes  the  Indians  had  preserved

the  1VL  extcdtis

used.  their  Histories,  and  so  many  particularities,  I  learned,  that

Chap.  7. although they were not  so subtill and curious as  the
Chinois,  and those of  Jappon,  yet  had  they  some  kind
of  Letters and Bookes amongst them, whereby they
preserved (after their manner) the deeds  of  their  Pre-
decessors. In the Province of Yucatan, where the
Bishopricke is, which they call de Honduras, there
Bookes  of were  Bookes  of  the  leaves  of  Trees,  folded  and  squared,
leaves  of  trees  after  their  manner  in  the  which  the  wise  Indians  contained
y  liber  or t^ie distribution of  their times,  the knowledge of  the
codex,  from Planets, of  beasts  and  other  naturall  things,  with their
the  rinde  in Antiquities,  a  thing  full  of  great  curiositie  and  diligence.
which  the jt  seemecj  to  some  Pendant  that  all  this  was  an  Inchant-

yf  flflPfltS  IDflt  *

ment  and  Magicke  Arte,  who  did  obstinately  maintayne,
that  they  ought  to  be  burnt,  so  as  they  were  committed
to  the  fire.  Which  since  not  onely  the  Indians  found
to  be  ill  done,  but  also  the  curious  Spaniards,  who
desired  to  know  the  secrets  of  the  Countrey.  The
like  hath  happened  in  other  things :  for  our  men  thinking
that  all  was  but  Superstition,  have  lost  many  memorials
of  ancient  and  holy  things,  which  might  have  profited
Blind  zeale.  much.  This  proceedeth  of  a  foolish  and  ignorant  zeale,
who  not  knowing,  nor  seeking  to  know  what  concerned
the  Indians,  say  prejudicately,  that  they  are  all  but
Witch-crafts,  and  that  all  the  Indians  are  but  Drunkards,
incapable  to  know  or  learne  any  thing.  For  such  as
would  be  curiously  informed  of  them,  have  found  many
things  worthy  of  consideration.  One  of  our  company
of  Jesuits,  a  man  very  wittie  and  well  experienced,  did
assemble  in  the  Province  of  Mexico,  the  Ancients  of
Tescuco,  of  Talla,  and  of  Mexico,  conferring  at  large
with  them,  who  shewed  unto  him  their  Bookes,  Histories
and  Kalenders,  things  very  worthy  the  sight,  because  they
had  their  figures  and  Hierogliphicks,  whereby  they
represented  things  in  this manner: Such  as  had  forme

374

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
or  figure,  were  represented  by  their  proper  Images,  and
such as had not any, were represented by  Characters
that signified them,  and by this meanes they  figured
and  writ  what they would. And  to  observe the time
when any thing did happen, they had those painted
Wheeles, for every one of them contayned an Age,
which  was  two  and  fiftie  yeeres,  as  hath  beene  said  ;  and
of  the  side  of  those  Wheeles,  they  did  paint  with  figures
and  Characters right against  the  yeere, the memorable
things  that  happened  therein. As  they  noted  the  yeere
when  as  the  Spaniards  entred  their  Countrey,  they  painted
a  man  with  a  Hat  and  a  red  Jerkin,  upon  the  signe  of
a  Reed,  which  did  rule  then,  and  so  of  other  accidents.
But for that their Writings and  Characters were not
sufficient  as our Letters  and Writings be, they  could
not  so  plainly  expresse  the  words,  but  onely  the  substance
of  their conceptions. And forasmuch as they were
accustomed to rehearse Discourses and Dialogues by
heart, compounded by their Oratours and ancient
Rhethoricians, and many Caphas made  by their  Poets
(which  were  impossible  to  learne  by  their  Hierogliphickes
and Characters) the Mexicans were very curious to
have  their  Children  learne  those  Dialogues  and  composi-
tions by  heart. For  the  which  cause  they  had  Schooles,
and  as  it  were,  Colledges  or  Seminaries,  where  the  Ancients
taught  Children  these  Orations,  and  many  other  things,
which  they preserved amongst them  by  tradition from
one  to  another,  as  perfectly,  as  if  they  had  beene  written  ;
especially the most  famous  Nations  had  a  care  to  have
their  children (which  had  any  inclination  to  be  Rheto-
ritians,  and to  practise  the  Office  of  Orators)  to  learne
these  Orations  by  heart : So  as  when  the  Spaniards  came
into  their  Countrey,  and  had  taught  them  to  reade  and
write  our  Letters,  many  of  the  Indians  then  wrote  these
Orations,  as  some  grave  men  doe  witnesse  that  had  read
them. Which  I  say,  for  that  some  which  shall  happily
reade  these  long  and  eloquent  Discourses  in  the  Mexican
History, will easily beleeve  they  have beene invented

375

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

by  the  Spaniards,  and  not  really  taken  and  reported
from  the  Indians.  But  having  knowne  the  certaine  truth,
they  will  give  credit  (as  reason  is)  to  their  Histories.
They  did  also  write  these  Discourses  after  their  manner,
by  Characters  and  Images :  and  I  have  seene  for  my
better satisfaction, the Pater noster, Avie Maria, and

Confession  by Symboll, or  generall Confession of  our Faith,  written

picture.  m  this  manner  by  the  Indians.

And  in  truth  whosoever  shall  see  them,  will  wonder
thereat.  For,  to  signifie  these  words,  I  a  Sinner  doe  con-
fesse  my  selfe,  they  painted  an  Indian  upon  his  knees,
at  a  religious  mans  feet,  as  one  that  confesseth  himselfe :
and  for  this,  To  God  most  mightie,  they  painted  three
faces  with  their  Crownes,  like  to  the  Trinitie,  and  To
the glorious Virgin Marie, they painted the face of

[III.  v.  our  Lady,  and  halfe  the  bodie  of  a  little  childe :  and  for

io53-]  Saint  Peter  and  Saint  Paul,  heads  with  crownes,  and  a
Key  with  a  Sword :  and  whereas  Images  failed,  they
did  set  Characters,  as  Wherein  I  have  sinned,  &c.
whereby  we  may  conceive  the  quicknesse  of  spirit  of
these  Indians,  seeing  this  manner  of  writing  of  our
Prayers  and  matters  of  Faith  hath  not  beene  taught
them  by  the  Spaniards,  neither  could  they  have  done
it,  if  they  had  not  had  an  excellent  conception  of  that
was  taught  them.  And  I  have  seene  in  Peru,  a  con-
fession of  sinnes  brought  by  an  Indian,  written  in  the
same  sort  with  Pictures  and  Characters,  painting  every
one  of  the  tenne  Commandements,  after  a  certayne
manner,  where  there  were  certayne  markes  like  Ciphers,
which  were  the  sinnes  hee  had  committed  against  the
Commandements.  I  nothing  doubt  but  if  any  of  the
most  sufficient  Spaniards  were  imployed  to  make
memorials  of  the  like  things  by  their  Images  and  markes,
they  would  not  attayne  unto  it  in  a  whole  yeere,  no
not  in  tenne.

376

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.

BEfore the Spaniards came to the Indies, they of  Of  Registers
Peru  had  no  kind  of  writing,  either  Letters,  Char-  and  the
acters, Ciphers or Figures,  like  to those  of  China  and  rec]i0^ini
Mexico  : yet preserved they the memory of their  whkh  the
Antiquities,  and  mayntaine  an  order  in  all  their  affaires,  Indians  of
of  Peace,  Warre,  and  Policie,  for  that  they  were  carefull  Peru  used-
observers of  Traditions  from one to another,  and  the p'
young  ones  learned,  and  carefully  kept,  as  a  holy  thing,
what  their  Superiors  had  told  them,  and  taught  it  with
the  like  care  to  their  Posteritie. Besides  this  diligence,
they  supplied  the  want  of  Letters  and  Writings,  partly
by painting, as those of Mexico, (although they of
Peru were very grosse and blockish)  and partly, and
most commonly by Quippos. These Quippos are  Quippos.
Memorials  or  Registers,  made  of  Bowes,  in  the  which  there
are  divers  knots  and  colours,  which  doe signifie  divers
things,  and  it  is  strange  to  see  what  they  have  expressed
and  represented  by  this  meanes  : for  their  Quippos  serve
them insteed of  Bookes  of  Histories,  of  Lawes,  Cere-
monies, and accounts of their affaires. There were
Officers appointed to keepe these  Quippos,  the  which
at this day they call Quipocamayos, the which were
bound  to give an  account of  every  thing,  as Notaries
and  Registers  doe  heere. Therefore  they  fully  beleeved
them in all things, for according to the varietie of
businesse,  as  Warres,  Policies,  Tributes,  Ceremonies  and
Lands,  there  were  sundry  Quippos  or  branches,  in  every
one  of  the  which  there  were  so  many  knots  little  and
great, and strings tyed unto them, some Red, some
Greene, some Blue, some White ; and finally, such
diversitie,  that  even  as  wee  derive  an  infinite  number  of
words  from  the  foure  and  twentie  Letters,  applying  them
in  divers  sorts,  so  doe  they  draw  innumerable  words  from
their  knots,  and  diversitie  of  colours. Which  thing  they
doe  in  such  a  manner,  that  if  at  this  day  in  Peru,  any
Commissary  come at  the end of  two or three yeeres,
to take  information  upon  the life of  any Officer, the
Indians  come  with  their  small  reckonings  verified,  saying,

377

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

that  in  such  a  Village  they  hath  given  him  so  many  Egges
which  he  hath  not  payed  for,  in  such  a  house  a  Henne,
in  another,  two  burthens  of  grasse  for  his  Horse,  and
that  he  hath  payed  but  so  much  mony,  and  remaineth
debtor  so  much.  The  proofe  being  presently  made
with  these  numbers  of  knots  and  handfuls  of  coards,  it
remaynes  for  a  certaine  testimonie  and  register.  I  did
see  a  handfull  of  these  strings,  wherein  an  Indian  woman
carried  written  a  generall  confession  of  all  her  life,  and
thereby  confessed  her  selfe,  as  well  as  I  could  have
done  it  in  written  Paper.  I  asked  her  what  those  strings
meant  that  differed  from  the  rest :  she  answered  me,
they  were  certaine  circumstances  which  the  sinne  required
to  be  fully  confessed.  Beside  these  Quippos  of  threed,
Writing  with  they  have  another,  as  it  were  a  kind  of  writing  with
small  stones.  small  stones,  by  meanes  whereof,  they  learne  punctually
the  words  they  desire  to  know  by  heart.  It  is  a  pleasant
thing  to  see  the  old  and  the  impotent  (with  a  Wheele
made  of  small  stones)  learne  the  Pater  noster,  with  another
the  Ave  Maria,  with  another  the  Creed  :  and  to  remember
what  stone  signifies,  Which  was  conceived  by  the  Holy
Ghost,  and  which,  Suffered  under  Pontius  Pilate.

It  is  a  pleasant  thing  to  see  them  correct  themselves
when  they  doe  erre ; for  all  their correction  consisteth
onely  in  beholding  of  their  small  stones. One  of  these
Wheeles  were  sufficient  to  make me  forget  all  that  I
doe  know  by  heart. There  are  a  great  number  of  these
Wheeles  in  the  Church-yards  for  this  purpose. But  it
seemes  a kind of  Witch-craft,  to  see another  kinde  of
Accounts  by  |  Quippos,  which  they  make of  graines  of  Mays,  for  to
graines  of  - cast  Up  a  harc[ account,  wherein a  good  Arithmetician
'  would  bee  troubled  with  his  Penne  to  make  a  division :

to  see  how  much  every  one  must  contribute :  they  doe
draw  so  many  graines  from  one  side,  and  adde  so  many
to  another,  with  a  thousand  other  inventions.  These
Indians  will  take  their  graines,  and  place  five  of  one
side,  three  of  another,  and  eight  of  another,  and  will
change  one  grain  of  one  side,  and  three  of  another : So

378

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
as  they  finish  a  certaine  account,  without  erring  in  any
point :  and  they  sooner  submit  themselves  to  reason
by  these  Quippos,  what  every  one  ought  to  pay,  then
wee  can  doe  with  the  Penne.  Heereby  we  may  judge
if  they  have  any  understanding,  or  bee  brutish :  for
my  part,  I  thinke  they  passe  us  in  those  things,  where-
unto  they  doe  apply  themselves.

IT shall be good to adde hereunto what we have  [III.  v.
observed, touching the Indians Writings : for their  io54-]

manner  was  not  to  write  with  a  continued  line,  but  from /  itJjLJ
the  top  to  the  bottome,  or  in  circle-wise. The  Latines  ^  -tn  tj^r
and  Greekes  doe  write  from  the  left  hand  unto  the  right,  Writings.
which  is  the  vulgar  and  common  manner  wee  doe  use. Ch-  9-
The  Hebrewes  contrariwise  beganne  at  the  right  to  the
left,  and therefore their Bookes  began where  ours  did
end. The  Chinois  write neither  like the Greekes  nor  Divers
like  the Hebrewes,  but from  the  top to the  bottome,  manners  °f
for  as  they  bee  no Letters  but  whole  words,  and  that
every  figure  and  Character  signifieth  a  thing,  they  have
no neede to assemble  the  parts  one with  another,  and
therefore they may  well write from the  toppe  to  the
bottome. Those of Mexico, for the same cause did
not  write  in  line,  from  one  side  to  another,  but  contrary
to  the  Chinois,  beginning  below,  they  mounted  upward.
They used this manner of  writing, in  the  account  of
their  dayes,  and  other  things  which  they  observed : Yet
when  they  did  write  in  their  Wheeles or  Signes,  they
began from the middest  where  the  Sunne  was  figured,
and so mounted by their yeeres unto  the  round and
circumference  of  the  Wheele.

By  words,  Pictures,  and  these  Memorialls,  the  Kings
were  often  advertised  of  that  which  passed.  For  this
cause  there  were  men  of  great  agilitie,  which  served  as
Curriers,  to  goe  and  come,  whom  they  did  nourish  in
this  exercise  of  Running  from  their  youth,  labouring
to  have  them  well  breathed,  that  they  might  runne  to
the  top  of  a  high  Hill  without  wearinesse. And  there-

379

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

fore  in  Mexico  they  gave  the  Prize  to  three  or  foure
that  first  mounted  up  the  stayres  of  the  Temple,  as
hath  beene  said  in  the  former  Booke.  And  in  Cusco,
when  they  made  their  Solemne  Feast  of  Capacrayme,  the
Novices  did  runne  who  could  fastest  up  the  Rocke
of  Ynacauri.  And  the  exercise  of  running  is  generall ;
much  used  among  the  Indians.  When  as  there  chanced
any  matter  of  importance,  they  sent  unto  the  Lords  of
Mexico,  the  thing  painted,  whereof  they  would  advertise
them,  as  they  did  when  the  first  Spanish  ships  appeared
to  their  sight,  and  when  they  tooke  Topanchan.  In
Peru  they  were  very  curious  of  Footmen,  and  the
Ingua  had  them  in  all  parts  of  the  Realme,  as  ordinary
Posts  called  Chasquis,  whereof  shall  bee  spoken  in  his
place.
Divers  formes  Many  Nations  of  the  Indies  have  not  indured  any
of  government.  Kings,  or  absolute  and  sovereigne  Lords,  but  live  in
Comminalties,  creating  and  appointing  Captaynes  and
Princes,  for  certayne  occasions  onely,  to  whom  they
obey  during  the  time  of  their  charge,  then  after  they
returne  to  their  former  estates.  The  greatest  part  of
this  New  World  (where  there  are  no  setled  Kingdomes,
nor  established  Common-weales,  neither  Princes  nor
succeeding  Kings)  they  governe  themselves  in  this
manner,  although  there  bee  some  Lords  and  principall
men  raised  above  the  common  sort.  In  this  sort  the
whole  Countrey  of  Chille  is  governed,  where  the  Aura-
canes,  those  of  Teucapell  and  others,  have  so  many
yeeres  resisted  the  Spaniards.  And  in  like  sort
all  the  new  Kingdome  of  Granado,  that  of  Guatimalla,
the  Hands,  all  Florida,  Bresill,  Luson,  and  other
Countreyes  of  great  circuit :  but  that  in  some  places
they  are  yet  more  barbarous,  scarcely  acknowledging
any  head,  but  all  command  and  governe  in  common,
having  no  other  thing,  but  will,  violence,  industry  and
disorder,  so  as  hee  that  most  may  most  commands.

They have onely found two Kingdomes or setled
Empires, that  of  the Mexicans  in New  Spaine, and  of

380

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.
the  Inguas  in  Peru. It is not  easie  to  be  said,  which
of the two was the mightiest Kingdome, for that  Whether  the
Motecuma, exceeded them of  Peru, in Buildings, and  Mextcan  or
in  the  greatnesse  of  his  Court :  but  the  Inguas,  did  like- f™ °~
wise  exceed  the  Mexicans,  in  treasure,  riches,  and  great-  greater.
nesse of Provinces. In regard of Antiquitie, the
Monarchic  of  the  Inguas,  hath the  advantage,  although
it be not much, and in my opinion, they  have  beene
equall in feats of  Armes and Victories. It is most
certaine,  that  these  two  Kingdomes  have  much  exceeded
all  the  Indian  Provinces,  discovered  in  this  New  World,
as well in good order and government, as in power
and  wealth,  and  much  more  in  Superstition  and  Service
of  their  Idols,  having  many  things  like  one  to  another.
But  in one thing they differed much,  for  among the
Mexicans, the succession of the Kingdome, was by
election, as the Empire of  the Romanes,  and that  of
Peru,  was  hereditary, and they  succeeded in  bloud,  as
the  Kingdomes  of  France  and  Spaine.

THe Ingua which ruled in Peru, being dead, his  ofthegwern-
lawfull Sonne succeeded him, and so they held  ment  of  the
him that was borne of  his chiefe Wife, whom they  ^lnSs  anj
called Coya. The which they have alwayes observed  pfru
since  the  time  of  an  Ingua,  called  Yupangui,  who  married  Chap.  12.
his  sister: for  these  Kings  held  it  an  honour  to  marrie  Incestuous
their  Sisters. And  although  they  had  other  Wives  and  MarriaSes-
Concubines,  yet  the  succession  of  the  Kingdome  apper-
tayned to the Sonne of  Coya. It is true, that  when
the  King  had  a  legitimate  Brother,  he  succeeded  before
the Sonne, and after him his Nephew, and Sonne to
the  first. The Curacas,  and  Noblemen,  held  the  same
order of  succession in their goods and Offices. And
after their manner they made excessive Ceremonies,
and  obsequies  for  the  dead. Being  dead,  they  presently
held  him  for  a  God,  making  Sacrifices  unto  him,  Images,
and such like. By this meanes, there was infinite
Treasure in Peru : for every  one of  the Inguas, had

381

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

laboured  to  have  his  Oratorie  and  Treasure  surpasse  that
of  his  Predecessors. The marke or ensigne,  whereby

Diadem.  they  tooke  possession  of  the  Realme,  was  a  red  roll  of

Wooll, more then fine silke, the which hung in the
middest  of  his  forehead :  and  none  but  the  Ingua  alone

[III.  v.  might  weare  it,  for  that  it  was  as  a  Crowne  and  Royall

io55-]  Diademe :  yet  they  might  lawfully  weare  a  Roll  hanging
on  the  one  side,  neere  unto  the  eare,  as  some  Noblemen
did,  but  onely  the  Ingua  might  carrie  it  in  the  middest
of  his  forehead.  At  such  time  as  they  tooke  this  Roll
or  Wreathe,  they  made  solemne  Feasts,  and  many  Sacri-
fices, with  a  great  quantitie  of  vessell  of  Gold,  and  Silver,
a  great  number  of  small  formes  or  Images  of  sheepe,
made  of  Gold  and  Silver,  great  abundance  of  the  stuffes
of  Cumby,  well  wrought,  both  fine  and  courser,  many
shels  of  the  Sea  of  all  sorts,  many  feathers,  and  a  thousand
sheepe,  which  must  bee  of  divers  colours.  Then  the
chiefe  Priest  tooke  a  young  Childe  in  his  hands,  of  the
age  of  sixe  or  eight  yeeres,  pronouncing  these  words
with  the  other  Ministers  speaking  to  the  Image  of
Viracocha,  Lord  we  offer  this  unto  thee,  that  thou  mayest
mayntayne  us  in  quiet,  and  helpe  us  in  our  warres,
mayntaine  our  Lord  the  Ingua  in  his  greatnesse  and
estate,  that  hee  may  alwayes  increase,  giving  him  much
knowledge  to  governe  us.

There  were  present  at  this  Ceremonie  and  Oath,  men
of  all  parts  of  the  Realme,  and  of  all  Guacas  and
Sanctuaries.  And  without  doubt,  the  affection  and
reverence  which  this  people  bare  to  their  Kings  Inguas,
was  very  great,  for  it  is  never  found  that  any  one  of
his  subjects  committed  Treason  against  him,  for  that
they  proceeded  in  their  governments,  not  only  with  an

Exact  Justice,  absolute  power,  but  also  with  good  order  and  Justice,
suffering  no  man  to  bee  oppressed  :  The  Ingua  placed
Governours  in  divers  Provinces,  amongst  the  which,
some  were  Superiours,  and  did  acknowledge  none  but
himselfe,  others  were  of  lesse  command,  and  others  more
particular,  with  so  goodly an order, and such  gravitie,

382

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
as  no  man  durst  be  drunke,  nor  take  an  eare  of  Mays
from his Neighbour. These Inguas held it for a
Maxime, that it was necessary to keepe the Indians
alwayes  in  action :  and  therefore  we  see  it to  this  day,
long  cawsies  and  workes  of  great  labour,  the  which  they
say  were  made  to  exercise  the  Indians,  lest  they  should  No  idlenesse
remayne  idle. When  hee  conquered  any  new  Province,  permitted.
hee  was  accustomed  presently  to  send  the  greatest  part,
and  the  chiefe  of  that  Countrey  into  other  Provinces,  or  Transmigra-
else  to  his  Court,  and  they  call  them  at  this  day  in  Peru,  tlon'
Mitimas,  and  in  their  places  he  sent  others  of  the  Nation
of  Cusco,  especially  the  Oreiones,  which  were  as  Knights
of  an  ancient  house. They  punished faults rigorously.
And  therefore  such  as  have any understanding hereof,
hold opinion, that  there  can  be no  better  government
for the Indians, nor more assured, than that of  the
Inguas.

TO  relate  more  particularly  what  I  have  spoken  before, Of  the  distri-
you  must  understand, that  the distribution which  button  the
the Inguas made of their vassals, was so exact and  inSua$made
distinct,  as  hee  might  governe  them  all  with  great  facilitie,  yassa/s,
although  his  Realme  were  a  thousand  leagues  long:  for  Chap.  13.
having conquered  a  Province, he  presently  reduced  the
Indians  into Townes  and Comminalties, the which he
divided  into  bands,  he  appointed  one  to  have  the  charge  Govemours.
over every ten Indians, over every hundred another,
over every thousand another, and over ten thousand
another, whom they called  Humo, the  which  was  one
of  the  greatest  charges. Yet  above  all  in  every  Province,
there  was  a  Governour  of  the  house  of  the  Inguas,  whom
all  the  rest  obeyed,  giving  unto  him  every  yeere  particular
account of  what had passed, that is, of  such  as  were
borne,  of  those  that  were  dead and  of  their  troupes  and
graine. The  Governours  went  every  yeere  out  of  Cusco,
where  they  remayned,  and returned  to the  great  Feast  jy^aA?
of  Rayme,  at the which, they  brought the tribute  of  yeerely  paid  at
the  whole  Realme  to  the  Court;  neither  might  they  enter  Cusco.

383

A.D.

c.  1588.

Fourefold

provinciall

partition.

Of  the  Edifices
and  manner  of
building  of  the
Inguas.
Chap.  14.

[III.  v

1056.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

but  with  this  condition.  All  the  Kingdome  was  divided
into  foure  parts,  which  they  called  Tahuantinsuyo,  that
is,  ChinchasuyOj  Collasuyo,  Andesuyo,  and  Condesuyo,
according  to  the  foure  wayes  which  went  from  Cusco,
where  the  Court  was  resident,  and  where  the  generall
assemblies  of  the  Realme  were  made.  These  waies  and
Provinces  being  answerable  unto  them,  were  towards
the  foure  quarters  of  the  world,  Collasuyo  to  the  South,
Chinchasuyo  to  the  North,  Condesuyo  to  the  West,  and
Andesuyo  to  the  East.  In  every  Towne  and  Village,
there  were  two  sorts  of  people,  which  were  of  Hanan-
saya,  and  Urinsaya,  which  is  as  much  to  say,  as  those
above,  and  those  below.  When  they  commanded  any
worke  to  be  done,  or  to  furnish  any  thing  to  the  Ingua,
the  Officers  knew  presently  how  much  every  Province,
Towne,  and  Family,  ought  to  furnish :  so  as  the  division
was  not  made  by  equall  portions,  but  by  Cottization,
according  to  the  qualities  and  wealth  of  the  Countrey.
So  as  for  example,  if  they  were  to  gather  a  hundred
thousand  Fanegues  of  Meys,  they  knew  presently  how
much  every  Province  was  to  contribute,  were  it  a  tenth,
a  seventh,  or  a  fift  part.  The  like  was  of  Townes  and
Villages,  Aillos,  or  Linages.  The  Quipocamayos,  which
were  the  Officers  and  Intendants,  kept  the  account  of
all  with  their  strings  and  knottes,  without  fayling,  setting
downe  what  every  one  had  payed,  even  to  a  Henne,
or  a  burthen  of  wood,  and  in  a  moment  they  did  see
by  divers  Registers  what  every  one  ought  to  pay.

THe  Edifices  and  Buildings  which  the  Inguas  made
in  Temples,  Fortresses,  wayes,  Countrey  houses,
and  such  like,  were  many  in  number,  and  of  an  excessive
labour,  as  doth  appeare  at  this  day  by  their  ruines  and
remaynders,  both  in  Cusco,  Tyaguanaco,  Tambo,  and
other  places,  where  there  are  stones  of  an  unmeasurable
greatnesse :  as  men  cannot  conceive  how  they  were  cut,
brought  and  set  in  their  places.  There  came  great
numbers  of  people  from  all  Provinces,  to  worke  in  these

384

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
Buildings  and  Fortresses,  which  the  Ingua  caused  to  bee
made  in  Cusco,  or  other  parts  of  the  Realme.  As  these
Workes  were  strange,  and  to  amaze  the  beholders,
wherein  they  used  no  Morter  nor  Ciment,  neither  any
Iron,  or  Steele,  to  cut,  and  set  the  stones  in  worke.
They  had  no  Engines  or  other  Instruments  to  carrie
them,  and  yet  were  they  so  artificially  wrought,  that  in
many  places  they  could  not  see  the  joynts :  and  many  Neat  art  in
of  these  stones  are  so  bigge,  that  it  were  an  incredible  joyning  huge
thing,  if  one  should  not  see  them.  At  Tiaguanaco,  I  stmeu
did  measure  a  stone  of  thirtie  eight  foot  long,  of
eighteene  broad,  and  sixe  thicke.  And  in  the  wall  of
the  Fortresse  of  Cusco,  which  is  of  Moallon,  there  are
stones  of  a  greater  bignesse.  And  that  which  is  most
strange,  these  stones  being  not  cut  nor  squared  to  joyne,
but  contrariwise,  very  unequall  one  with  another  in
forme  and  greatnesse,  yet  did  they  joyne  them  together
without  Ciment,  after  an  incredible  manner.  All  this
was  done  by  the  force  of  men,  who  endured  their
labour  with  an  invincible  patience.  For  to  joyne  one
stone  with  another,  they  were  forced  to  handle  and
trie  many  of  them  often,  being  uneven.  The  Ingua
appointed  every  yeere  what  numbers  of  people  should
labour  in  these  stones  and  buildings,  and  the  Indians
made  a  division  amongst  them,  as  of  other  things,  so
as  no  man  was  oppressed.  Although  these  Buildings
were  great,  yet  were  they  commonly  ill  appointed  and
unfit,  almost  like  to  the  Mosquites  or  Buildings  of  the
Barbarians.

They  could  make  no  Arches  in  their  Edifices,  nor  Arches.
Morter  or  Ciment  to  build  them  withall :  when  they
saw  Arches  of  wood  built  upon  the  River  of  Xaura,
the  Bridge  being  finished,  and  the  wood  broken  downe,
they  all  began  to  runne  away,  supposing  that  the
Bridge  which  was  of  stone  should  presently  fall ;  but
when  they  found  it  to  stand  firme,  and  that  the  Spaniards
went  on  it,  the  Cacique  said  to  his  companions :  It  is
reason  we  should  serve  these  men,  who  in  truth  seeme
xv  385  2  B

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

Bridges.  to  be the children of the Sunne. The  Bridges they

made  were  of  Reedes  pleited,  which  they  tyed  to  the
bankes  with  great  stakes,  for  that  they  could  not  make
any  Bridges  of  stone  or  wood.  The  Bridge  which  is
at  this  day  upon  the  current  of  the  great  Lake
Chiquitto  in  Callao  is  admirable ;  for  the  course  of
that  water  is  so  deepe,  as  they  cannot  settle  any
foundation,  and  so  broad,  that  it  is  impossible  to  make
an  Arch  to  passe  it :  so  as  it  was  altogether  impossible
to  make  a  Bridge  either  of  wood  or  stone.  But  the
wit  and  industry  of  the  Indians  invented a meanes  to

Straw  Bridge,  make  a  firme  and  assured  Bridge  being  only  of  straw,
which  seemeth  fabulous,  yet  is  it  very  true :  For  as  we
have  said  before,  they  did  binde  together  certaine  bundles
of  Reeds,  and  Weeds,  which  doe  grow  in  the  Lake
that  they  call  Torora,  and  being  a  light  matter  that  sinkes
not  in  the  water,  they  cast  it  upon  a  great  quantitie
of  Reeds,  then  having  tyed  those  bundles  of  Weedes
to  either  side  of  the  River,  both  men  and  beasts  goe
over  it  with  ease :  passing  over  this  Bridge  I  have
wondred,  that  of  so  common  and  easie  a  thing,  they
had  made  a  Bridge,  better,  and  more  assured  then  the
Bridge  of  Boates  from  Seville  to  Triane.  I  have  measured
the  length  of  this  Bridge,  and  as  I  remember,  it  was
above  three  hundred  foote ;  and  they  say  that  the  depth
of  this  Current  is  very  great :  and  it  seemes  above,  that
the  water  hath  no  motion,  yet  they  say,  that  at  the
bottome  it  hath  a  violent  and  very  furious  course.  And
this  shall  suffice  for  Buildings.

Of  the  Inguas  r  I  \He  Inguas  riches  was  incomparable,  for  although
revenues,  and  X  no  King  did  inherit  the  riches  and  treasure  of  his
the  order  of  predecessor,  yet  had  he  at  command,  all  the  riches  of
imposed  upon  ^s  Realmes,  aswell  Silver  and  Gold,  as  the  stuffe  of
the  Indians.  Cumbi,  and  cattell,  wherein  they  abounded,  and  their
Chap.  15. greatest riches of  all, was  their  innumerable  number  of

vassals, which  were  all  imployed  as  it  pleased  the  King.

They  brought  out  of  every  Province  what  he  had  chosen

386

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
for  tribute.  The  Chicas  sent  him  sweet  and  rich  woods ;
the  Lucanas  sent  Brancars  to  carry  his  Litter ;  The
Chumbilbicas,  Dancers;  and  so  the  other  Provinces  sent
him  what  they  had  of  abundance,  besides  their  generall
Tribute,  whereunto  every  one  contributed.  The  Indians
that  were  noted  to  that  end,  laboured  in  the  Mynes
of  Gold  and  Silver,  which  did  abound  in  Peru,  whom
the  Ingua  entertained  with  all  they  needed  for  their
expences :  and  whatsoever  they  drew  of  Gold  and  Silver,
was  for  him.  By  this  meanes  there  were  so  great
treasures  in  this  Kingdome,  as  it  is  the  opinion  of  many,
that  what  fell  in  the  hands  of  the  Spaniards,  (although
it  were  very  much,  as  wee  know)  was  not  the  tenth
part  of  that  which  they  hid  and  buried  in  the  ground,
the  which  they  could  never  discover,  notwithstanding
all  the  search  covetousnesse  had  taught  them.  But  the
greatest  wealth  of  these  barbarous  people,  was,  that  their
vassals  were  all  slaves,  whose  labour  they  used  at  their
pleasure  :  and  that  which  is  admirable,  they  employed
them  in  such  sort,  as  it  was  no  servitude  unto  them,  All  slaves  and
but  rather  a  pleasing  life.  But  to  understand  the  order  none.
of  Tributes  which  the  Indians  payed  unto  their  Lord,
you  must  know,  that  when  the  Ingua  conquered  any
Cities,  he  divided  all  the  Land  into  three  parts,  the  first
was,  for  Religion  and  Ceremonies,  so  as  the  Pachay-  Lands  sacred.
achaqui,  which  is  the  Creator,  and  the  Sunne,  the
Chuquilla,  which  is  the  Thunder,  the  Pachamana,  and
the  dead,  and  other  Guacas  and  Sanctuaries,  had  every
one  their  proper  Lands,  the  fruits  whereof  were  spoyled
and  consumed  in  Sacrifices,  and  in  the  nourishing  of
Ministers  and  Priests  ;  for  there  were  Indians  appointed
for  every  Guaca,  and  Sanctuarie,  and  the  greatest  part  [III.  v.
of  this revenue was spent in Cusco, where was the  io57-]

universall  and generall  sanctuarie,  and  the rest in that
Citie,  where  it  was  gathered  :  for  that  after  the  imitation
of  Cusco,  there  were  in  every  Citie,  Guacas,  and  Oratories
of  the  same  order,  and  with  the  same  functions,  which  Order  in  their
were  served  after  the  same  manner  and  ceremonies  to  that  Re^Sm-

387

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

of  Cusco,  which  is  an  admirable  thing,  and  they  have
found  it  by  proofe  in  above  a  hundred  Townes,  some
of  them  distant  above  two  hundred  leagues  from  Cusco.
That  which  they  sowed  or  reapt  upon  their  Land,
was  put  into  houses,  as  Granaries  or  storehouses,  built
for  that  effect,  and  this  was  a  great  part  of  the  Tribute
which  the  Indians  paied.  I  cannot  say  how  much  this
part  amounted  unto,  for  that  it  was  greater  in  some  parts
then  in  other,  and  in  some  places  it  was  in  a  manner  all  :
and  this  part  was  the  first  they  put  to  profit.  The  second
Royal  part  of  these  Lands  and  inheritances  was  for  the  Ingua,

demesnes.  wherewith  he  and  his  houshold  were  entertained,  with
his  kinsfolks,  Noblemen,  Garrisons  and  Souldiers.  And
therefore  it  was  the  greatest  portion  of  these  tributes,
as  it  appeareth  by  the  quantity  of  Gold,  Silver,  and  other
Tributes,  which  were  in  houses  appointed  for  that  pur-
pose, being  longer  and  larger  then  those  where  they  keepe
the  revenues  of  the  Guacas.  They  brought  the  Tribute
verie  carefully  to  Cusco,  or  unto  such  places  where  it  was
needefull  for  the  Souldiers,  and  when  there  was  store,  they
kept  it  ten  or  twelve  yeares,  untill  a  time  of  necessitie.
The  Indians  tilled  and  put  to  profit  the  Inguas  Lands,
next  to  those  of  the  Guacas  ;  during  which  time  they
lived  and  were  nourished  at  the  charges  of  the  Ingua,
of  the  Sunne,  or  of  the  Guacas,  according  to  the  Land
they  laboured.  But  the  old  men,  women,  and  sicke
folkes  were  reserved  and  exempt  from  this  Tribute,  and
although  whatsoever  they  gathered  upon  those  Lands
were  for  the  Ingua,  the  Sunne,  or  the  Guacas,  yet  the
propertie  appertained  unto  the  Indians  and  their  suc-
Lands  of  the  cessours.  The  third  part  of  these  Lands  were  given  by
comminaltie  In  the  Ingua  for  the  Comminaltie,  and  they  have  not  yet
discovered,  whither  this  portion  were  greater,  or  lesse,
then  that  of  the  Ingua  or  Guacas.  It  is  most  certaine
they  had  a  care  and  regard,  it  might  be  sufficient  for  the
nourishment  of  the  people.  No  particular  man  possessed
No  proprietie  any  thing  proper  to  himselfe  of  this  third  portion,  neither
of  Lands. did  the  Indians  ever  possesse  any,  if  it  were  not  by  speciall

388

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.
grace  from  the  Ingua  :  and  yet  might  it  not  be  engaged
nor divided amongst his heires. They everie yeare
divided  these Lands of  the  comminaltie, in  giving to
every  one,  that  which  was  needefull  for  the  nourishment
of  their  persons  and  families. And  as  the  familie  increased
or  diminished,  so  did  they  encrease  or  decrease  his  por-
tion, for  there  were  measures  appointed  for  everie  person.
The  Indians  paied  no  tribute  of  that  which  was  appor-  Their
tioned  unto  them  : For  all  their  tribute  was  to  till  and  Tribute,  u/kat.
keepe  in  good*  order  the  Lands  of  the  Ingua,  and  the
Guacas,  and  to  lay  the  fruits  thereof  in  their  store-houses.
When  the  yeare  was  barren,  they  gave  of  these  fruits  thus
reserved  to  the  needie,  for  that  there  is  alwaies  superabun-
dance. The  Ingua  did  likewise  make  distribution  of  the  Cattell
cattell  as  of  the  Lands,  which  was  to  number  and  divide  distributed.
them  ;  then  to  appoint  the  pastures  and  limits,  for  the
cattell  belonging  to  the  Guacas,  and  to  the  Ingua,  and  to
everie  Town :  and  therefore  one  portion  of  their  revenues
was  for  religion,  another  for  the  Ingua,  and  the  third  for
the Indians themselves. The  like order  was  observed
among  the  hunters,  being  forbidden  to  take  or  kill  any  Hunter  laws.
females. The  troupes  of  the  Inguas  and  Guacas,  were  in
great numbers and  verie fruitfull ; for  this  cause  they
called  them  Kapaellama,  but  those  of  the  common  and
publike, were  few in number  and  of  small  value,  and
therefore they called them Bacchallama. The Ingua
tooke  great  care  for  the  preservation  of  Cattell,  for  that  it  Provisions  for
hath  beene,  and  is  yet,  all  the  wealth  of  the  Countrie,  cattel1-
and  as  it  is  said,  they  did  neither  sacrifice  any  females,  nor
kill  them,  neither  did  they  take  them  when  they  hunted.
If  the  mangie  or  the  scurvie  which  they  call  Carache  take
anie  beast,  they  were  presently  commanded  to  burie  it
quicke, lest it  should infect others. They did sheare
their cattell in their  season, and distributed  to everie
one  to  spinne  and  weave  StufFes  for  the  service  of  his
Family. They had searchers to examine if  they did
employ  themselves  in  these  workes,  and  to  punish  the  Negligence
negligent. They  made  StufFes  of  the  wooll  of  the  Inguas  Pumshed-

389

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

cattell,  for  him  and  for  his  family,  one  sort  very  fine,
which  they  called  Cumbi,  and  another  grosser,  which  they
likewise  called  Abasca.  There  was  no  certaine  number  of
these  Stuffes  and  garment,  appointed,  but  what  was
delivered  to  every  one.  The  wooll  that  remained  was
put  into  the  storehouses,  whereof  the  Spaniards  found
them  full,  and  with  all  other  things  necessary  for  the  life
of  man.  There  are  few  men  of  judgement  but  doe  admire
at  so  excellent  &  well  setled  a  government,  seeing  the
Indians  (being  neither  religious,  nor  Christians)  main-
tained after  their  manner,  this  perfection,  nor  to  hold  any
thing  proper,  and  to  provide  for  all  their  necessities,
entertaining  with  such  abundance  matters  of  Religion,  &
that  which  concerned  their  King  &  Lord.

Of  Arts  and r  ■  ^j-Je  Indians  of  Peru  had  one  perfection,  which  was,  to

offices  which J_ teach  their  children  all  arts  and  occupations  necessary
the  radians r . ,.r r  r  ,  ,  r  .  J

did  exercise. *or  tne  *"e °* man » *or tnat  there were  no  particular
Ch.  16.  Trades-men,  as  amongst  us,  Taylers,  Shoomakers,  Weavers,

All  men  of  all  and  the  rest,  but  every  one  learned  what  was  needefull  for
trades.  their  persons  and  houses,  and  provided  for  themselves.

All  could  weave  and  make  their  garments,  and  therefore
the  Ingua  furnishing  them  with  wooll,  gave  them  cloathes.
Every  man  could  till  the  ground,  and  put  it  to  profit,
without  hyring  of  any  labourers.  All  built  their  own
[III.  v.  houses,  and  the  women,  which  understood  most  were  not

1058. J  brought  up  in  delights,  but  served  their  Husbands  care-
fully. Other  Arts  and  Trades  which  were  not  ordinary
and  common  for  the  life  of  man,  had  their  proper  Com-
panies and  workemen,  as  Goldsmiths,  Painters,  Potters,
Watermen,  and  players  of  Instruments.  There  were  also
Weavers  and  workemen  for  exquisite  workes,  which  the
Noblemen  used  :  but  the  common  people,  as  hath  beene
said,  had  in  their  houses  all  things  necessary,  having
no  neede  to  buy.  This  continues  to  this  day,  so  as  they
have  no  neede  one  of  another  for  things  necessary
touching  his  person  and  family,  as  shooes  and  garments,
and  for  their  house,  to  sowe  and  reape,  and  to  make  Iron

39°

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
workes,  and  necessarie  instruments. It  is  worthy  observa-
tion, although  the  Indians  be  simple  in  their  manner  and
habits,  yet  doe  we  see  great  diversitie  amongst  the  Pro-  Diversitie  of
vinces,  especially  in  the  attire  of  their  head,  for  in  some  fiea^-tire-
places  they carried  a  long  peece  of  cloath,  which  went
often  about,  in  some  places  a  large  peece  of  cloath,  which
went but once about, in some parts  as it were little
morters  or  hats,  in  some  others  as  it  were  high  and  round
Bonets,  and  some  like  the  bottome  of  sacks,  with  a  thou-
sand other  differences. They  had  a  straight  and  inviolable
law,  that  no  man  might  change  the  fashion  of  the  gar-  Uniformity  of
ments of  his Province, although he went to live in  ha  tU
another. This  the  Ingua  held  to  be  of  great  importance
for  the  order  and  good  government  of  his  Realme,  and
they  doe  observe  it  to  this  day,  though  not  with  so  great
a  care  as  they  were  accustomed.

THere  were  many  Posts  and  couriers  which  the  Ingua  Of  the  Posts
maintained  throughout  his  Realme,  whom  they  called  and  Chasquis
Chasquis,  and  they  carried  commandements  to  the  theln^nsdid
Governours,  and  returned  their  advises  and  advertise-
ments to  the  Court.  These  Chasquis  were  placed  at
every  course,  which  was  a  league  and  a  halfe  one  from
another  in  two  small  houses,  where  were  foure  Indians  of
every  Country,  and  they  were  changed  monthly.  Having
received  the  packet  or  message,  they  ranne  with  all  their
force  untill  they  had  delivered  it  to  the  other  Chasquis,
such  as  were  to  runne,  being  ready  and  watchfull.  They
ran  fiftie  leagues  in  a  day  and  night,  although  the  greatest
part  of  the  Countrie  be  very  rough.  They  served  also  to
carry  such  things  as  the  Ingua  desired  to  have  with
speede.  Therefore  they  had  alwaies  Sea-fish  in  Cusco,  of
two  daies  old  or  little  more,  although  it  were  above  a
hundred  leagues  off.  Since  the  Spaniards  entred,  they
have  used  of  these  Chasquis,  in  time  of  seditions,  whereof
there  was  great  neede.  Don  Martin  the  Viceroy  appointed
ordinary  Posts  at  every  foure  leagues,  to  carry  and
recarry dispatches, which were very necessary in this

39i

A.D.

c.  1588.

Of  the  Justice,
Lawes,  and
punishments
which  the
Inguas  have
established,
and  of  their
manages.
Chap.  18.

Adultery.

Marriage
solemnitie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Realme,  though  they  run  not  so  swiftly  as  the  ancients
did,  neither  are  there  so  many,  yet  they  are  well
paied,  and  serve  as  the  ordinaries  of  Spaine,  to
whom  they  give  Letters  which  they  carry  foure  or  five
leagues.

EVen  as  such  as  had  done  any  good  service  in  warre,.
or  in  the  government  of  the  Commonweale  were
honoured  and  recompensed  with  publike  charges,  with
Lands  given  them  in  proper,  with  armes  and  titles  of
honour,  and  in  marrying  wives  of  the  Inguas  linage  :
Even  so  they  gave  severe  punishments  to  such  as  were
disobedient  and  offenders.  They  punished  murther,
theft,  and  adultery,  with  death,  and  such  as  committed
incest  with  ascendants  or  descendants  in  direct  line,  were
likewise  punished  with  death.  But  they  held  it  no
adultery  to  have  many  wives  or  concubines,  neither  were
the  women  subject  to  the  punishment  of  death,  being
found  with  any  other,  but  onely  she  that  was  the  true  and
lawfull  wife,  with  whom  they  contracted  marriage  ;  for
they  had  but  one  whom  they  did  wedde  and  receive  with
a  particular  solemnitie  and  ceremonie,  which  was  in  this
manner :  The  Bridegroome  went  to  the  Brides  house,  and
led  her  from  thence  with  him,  having  first  put  an  Ottoya
upon  her  foote.  They  call  the  shooe  which  they  use
in  those  parts  Ottoya,  being  open  like  the  Franciscan
Friars.  If  the  Bride  were  a  maide,  her  Ottoya  was  of
Wooll,  but  if  she  were  not,  it  was  of  Reedes.  All  his
other  wives  and  concubines  did  honour  and  serve  this
as  the  lawfull  wife,  who  alone  after  the  decease  of  her
husband  carried  a  mourning  weede  of  blacke,  for  the
space  of  a  yeare;  neither  did  she  marry  untill  that  time
were  past ;  and  commonly  she  was  yonger  then  her
husband.  The  Ingua  himselfe  with  his  owne  hand  gave
this  woman  to  his  Governours  and  Captaines  :  and  the
Governours  or  Caciques,  assembled  all  the  yong  men
and  maides,  in  one  place  of  the  Citie,  where  they  gave  to
everie one his wife with the aforesaid ceremonie, in

392

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad

c.  1588.
putting  on  the  Ottoya,  and  in  this  manner  they  contracted
their  marriages.  If  this  woman  were  found  with  any
other  then  her  husband,  she  was  punished  with  death,  and
the  adulterer  likewise  :  and  although  the  husband  par-
doned them,  yet  were  they  punished,  although  dispensed
withall  from  death.  They  inflicted  the  like  punishment
on  him  that  did  commit  incest  with  his  Mother,  Grand-  Incest
mother,  Daughter,  or  Grandchilde  :  for  it  was  not  forbidden.
prohibited  for  them  to  marrie  together,  or  to  have  of
their  other  kinsfolke  for  concubines  ;  onely  the  first
degree  was  defended,  neither  did  they  allow  the  brother
to  have  the  company  of  his  sister,  wherein  they  of  Peru
were  very  much  deceived,  beleeving  that  the  Inguas
and  Noblemen  might  lawfully  contract  marriage  with
their  sisters,  yea  by  father  and  mother  :  for  in  truth
it  hath  beene  alwaies  held  unlawfull  among  the  Indians,
and  defended  to  contract  in  the  first  degree  ;  which
continued  untill  the  time  of  Topa  Ingua  Yupangui  father
to  Guaynacapa,  and  grandfather  to  Atahualpa,  at  such
time  as  the  Spaniards  entred  Peru  ;  for  that  Topa  Ingua  mi.  v.
Yupangui,  was  the  first  that  brake  this  custome,  marry-  I°59-]

ing  with  Mamaoello,  his  sister  by  the  fathers  side,
decreeing  that  the  Inguas  might  marrie  with  their  sisters
by  the  fathers  side,  and  no  other.

This  he  did,  and  by  that  marriage  he  had  Guaynacapa,
and  a  daughter  called  Coya  Cussillimay  :  finding  himselfe
at  the  point  of  death,  he  commanded  his  children  by
father  and  mother  to  marrie  together,  and  gave  permis-
sion to  the  Noblemen  of  his  Countrie,  to  marrie  with
their  sisters  by  the  fathers  side.  And  for  that  this  mar-
riage was  unlawfull,  and  against  the  law  of  nature,  God
would  bring  to  an  end  this  Kingdome  of  the  Inguas,
during  the  raigne  of  Guascar  Ingua,  and  Atahualpa  Ingua,
which  was  the  fruite  that  sprang  from  this  marriage.
Who  so  will  more  exactly  understand  the  manner  of
marriages  among  the  Indians  in  Peru,  let  him  reade  the
Treatise  Polo  hath  written  at  the  request  of  Don
Jeronimo Loaisa Archbishop of Kings  : which Polo

393

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

made  a  very  curious  search,  as  he  hath done  of  divers
other  things  at  the  Indies.

Of  the  \X^  ^e  commandement of  Don  Phillip  the  Catholike

thef™  King,  they  have  made the  most  diligent  and  exact

Lords  of  Peru  search  that  could  be,  of  the  beginning,  customes,  and
with  their  priviledges  of  the  Inguas,  the  which  was  not  so  perfectly
Conquests  and  done  as  was  desired  :  for  that  the  Indians  had  no  written
ChV"'  Records  :  yet  they  have  recovered  that  which  I  shall  write,
by  meanes  of  their  Quippos  and  Registers.  First  there
was  not  in  Peru  in  old  time,  any  King  or  Lord  to  whom
all  obeyed,  but  they  were  Comminalties,  as  at  this  day
there  is  in  the  Realme  of  Chille,  and  in  a  manner;  in
all  the  Provinces  which  the  Spaniards  have  conquered  in
those  Westerne  Indies,  except  the  Realme  of  Mexico.
You  must  therefore  understand,  that  they  have,  found
three  manner  of  Governements  at  the  Indies.  The'  first
and  best,  was  a  Monarchic,  as  that  of  the  Inguas,  and
of  Motecuma,  although  for  the  most  part  they  were
tyrannous.  The  second  was  of  Comminalties,  where  they
were  governed  by  the  advise  and  authority  of  many,
which  are  as  it  were  Counsellors.  These  in  time  of  warre,
made  choise  of  a  Captaine,  to  whom  the  whole  Nation
or  Province  did  obey,  and  in  time  of  peace,  every  Towne
or  Comminalty  did  rule  and  governe  themselves,  having
some  chiefs  men  whom  the  vulgar  did  respect,  and  some-
time (though  not  often)  some  of  them  assemble  together
about  matters  of  importance,  to  consult  what  they  should
thinke  necessary.  The  third  kinde  of  Government,  is
altogether  barbarous,  composed  of  Indians  without  Law,
without  King,  and  without  any  certaine  place  of  abode,
but  goe  in  troopes  like  savage  beasts.  As  farre  as  I  can
conceive,  the  first  Inhabitants  of  the  Indies,  were  of  this
kinde,  as  at  this  day  a  great  part  of  the  Bresillians,
Chiraguanas,  Chunchos,  Yscycingas,  Pilcocones,  and  the
greatest  part  of  the  Floridians,  and  all  the  Chichimaquas
in  new  Spaines.  Of  this  kinde  the  other  sort  of  govern-
ment by  Comminalties  was  framed,  by  the  industry  and

394

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.
wisdome  of  some  amongst  them,  in  which  there  is  some
more  order,  holding  a  more  staied  place,  as  at  this  day
those  of  Auracono,  and  of  Teucapell  in  Chille,  and  in  the
new  Kingdome  of  Grenado,  the  Moscas,  and  the  Otto-
mittes  in  new  Spaine  : and in all these there  is  lesse
fiercenesse  and incivilitie, & much more quiet then  in
the  rest. Of  this  kinde,  by  the  valor  &  knowledge  of
some  excellent  men,  grew the other government  more
mighty  and  potent,  which  did  institute  a  Kingdome  and
Monarchy. It appeares by their Registers, that  their
Government  hath  continued  above  three  hundred  yeares, Continuance
but  not  fully  foure,  although  their  Seigniorie  for  a  long  of  their
time,  was  not  above  five  or  six  leagues  compasse  about  Momrchy-
the  .Citie  of  Cusco  :  their  originall  and  beginning  was  in
the  valley. of  Cusco  : where  by  little  and  little  they  con-
quered 'the Lands  which we call Peru, passing  beyond
Quitto,- unto the river of Pasto towards the North,
stretching  even unto Chille, towards the  South, which
is  almost  a  thousand  leagues  in  length. It  extended  in
breadth  unto  the  South Sea  towards  the  West,  and  unto
the  great  champains  which  are  on  the  other  side  of  the
Andes,  where  at  this  day  is  to  be  seene  the  Castell  which
is  called  the  Pucara  of  the  Ingua,  the  which  is  a  fortresse
built  for  the  defence  of  the frontire towards  the  East.
The  Inguas  advanced no  farther on  that side,  for  the
abundance  of  water,  Marshes,  Lakes,  and  Rivers,  which
runne  in  those parts. These Inguas passed all other
Nations in America, in pollicie and government, and
much  more  in  valour  and  armes,  although  the  Canaries
which were their mortall enemies, and favoured the  Strife  twixt
Spaniards,  would  never  confesse  it,  nor  yeelde  them  this  inguas  and
advantage  :  so  as  even  at  this  day,  if  they  fall  into  any  L,ananes-
discourse  or  comparisons,  and  that  they  be  a  little  chased
and  incensed, they  kill one  another  by  thousands  upon
this quarrell, which are the most valiant, as it hath
happened  in  Cusco. The  practise  and  meanes  which  the
Inguas  had  to  make  themselves  Lords  of  all  this  Countrie,
was  in  faining that  since the  generall  deluge  (whereof

395

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

all  the  Indians  have  knowledge)  the  world  had  beene  pre-
served, restored,  and  peopled  by  these  Inguas,  and  that
seven  of  them  came  forth  of  the  Cave  of  Pacaricambo,
by  reason  whereof,  all  other  men  ought  them  tribute
and  vassalage,  as  their  progenitors.  Besides  they  said
and  affirmed,  that  they  alone  held  the  true  religion,  and
knew  how  God  should  be  served  and  honoured  :  and
for  this  cause  they  should  instruct  all  men.  It  is  a
strange  thing,  the  ground  they  give  to  their  customes
4°°-  and ceremonies. There were in Cusco above foure

Oratories  in nunclreci  Oratories,  as  in  a  holy  land,  and  all  places  were
filled  with their misteries. As they continued  in  the
conquests of  Provinces, so they brought in the like
ceremonies  and  customes. In  this  Realme  the  chiefs  Idols
[III.  v.  they  did  worship,  were  Viracocha,  Pachayachachic,  which

1 060.]  signify  the  Creator  of  the  World,  and  after  him,  the
Sunne.  And  therefore  they  said,  that  the  Sunne  received
his  vertue  and  being  from  the  Creator,  as  the  other  Idols
doe,  and  that  they  were  intercessors  to  him.

Of  the  first  rTHHe  first  man  which  the  Indians  report  to  be  the
Ingua  and  his  J[  beginning  and  first  of  the  Inguas,  was  Mangocapa,
buccessors.  whom  they  imagine,  after  the  deluge,  to  have  issued  forth
of  the  Cave  of  Tambo,  which  is  from  Cusco  about  five
or  sixe  leagues.  They  say  that  hee  gave  beginning  to
two  principall  Races  or  families  of  the  Inguas,  the  one
was  called  Hanancusco,  and  the  other  Urincusco  :  of  the
first  came  the  Lords  which  subdued  and  governed  this
Province,  and  the  first  whom  they  make  the  Head  and
Stemme  of  this  Familie,  was  called  Ingaroca,  who  founded
a  Familie  or  Aillo,  as  they  call  them,  named  Vicaqui-
quirao.  This  although  he  were  no  great  Lord,  was
served  notwithstanding  in  vessell  of  gold  and  silver.
And  dying,  he  appointed  that  all  his  treasure  should  be
imployed  for  the  service  of  his  Body,  and  for  the  feeding
of  his  Familie.  His  Successor  did  the  like  :  and  this
grew  to  a  generall  custome,  as  I  have  said,  that  no  Ingua
might  inherit  the  goods  and  house  of  his  Predecessor,,

396

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
but  did  build  a  new  Palace.  In  the  time  of  this  In-
guaroca,  the  Indians  had  Images  of  gold  ;  and  to  him
succeeded  Yaguarguaque,  a  very  old  man  :  they  say,  hee
was  called  by  this  name,  which  signifies  teares  of  bloud,
for  that  being  once  vanquished  and  taken  by  his  Enemies,
for  griefe  and  sorrow  hee  wept  bloud.  Hee  was  buried
in  a  Village  called  Paullo,  which  is  upon  the  way  to
Omasugo  :  he  founded  a  Familie  called  Aocuillipanaca.
To  him  succeeded  his  sonne  Viracocha  Ingua,  who  was
very  rich,  and  made  much  vessell  of  gold  and  silver  :  he
founded  the  Linage  or  Familie  of  Cocopanaca.  Goncales
Picarre  sought  out  his  body,  for  the  report  of  the  great
treasure  buried  with  him,  who  after  hee  had  cruelly  tor-
mented many  Indians,  in  the  end  he  found  it  in
Xaquixaquana,  where  as  they  said  Picarre  was  afterwards
vanquished,  taken,  and  executed  by  the  President  Guasca.
Goncales  Picarre  caused  the  body  of  Viracocha  Ingua
to  be  burnt ;  the  Indians  did  afterwards  take  the  ashes,
the  which  they  preserved  in  a  small  vessell,  making  great
sacrifices  thereunto,  untill  Polio  did  reforme  it,  and  other
Idolatries  which  were  committed  upon  the  bodies  of  their
other  Inguas,  the  which  hee  suppressed  with  an  admirable
diligence  and  dexteritie,  drawing  these  bodies  out  of
their  hands,  being  whole,  and  much  imbalmed,  whereby
hee  extinguished  a  great  number  of  Idolatries  which  they
committed.  The  Indians  tooke  it  ill,  that  the  Ingua
did  intitle  himselfe  Viracocha,  which  is  the  name  of  their
God  :  and  he  to  excuse  himselfe,  gave  them  to  under-
stand, that  the  same  Viracocha  appeared  to  him  in  his
dreame,  commanding  him  to  take  this  name.  To  him
succeeded  Pachacuti  Ingua  Yupangui,  who  raigned  seventie
yeeres,  and  conquered  many  Countries.  The  beginning
of  his  conquests,  was  by  meanes  of  his  eldest  brother,  who
having  held  the  government  in  his  fathers  time,  and
made  warre  by  his  consent,  was  over-throwne  in  a  battaile
against  the  Changuas,  a  Nation  which  inhabites  the  Valley
of  Andaguayllas,  thirtie  or  fortie  leagues  from  Cusco,
upon  the  way  to  Lima. This  elder  brother  thus  defeated,

397

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

retyred  himselfe  with  few  men.  The  which  Ingua
Yupangui,  his  younger  brother  seeing,  devised  and  gave
forth,  that  being  one  day  alone  and  melancholy,  Vira-
cocha  the  Creator  spake  to  him,  complayning,  that  though
hee  were  universall  Lord  and  Creator  of  all  things,  and
that  he  had  made  the  Heaven,  the  Sunne,  the  World,
and  Men,  and  that  all  was  under  his  command,  yet  did
they  not  yeeld  him  the  obedience  they  ought,  but  con-
trariwise did  equally  honour  and  worship  the  Sunne,
Thunder,  Earth,  and  other  things,  which  had  no  vertue
but  what  he  imparted  unto  them  :  giving  him  to  under-
stand, that  in  heaven  where  hee  was,  they  called  him
Viracocha  Pachayachachic,  which  signifieth  universall
Creator  ;  and  to  the  end  the  Indians  might  beleeve  it
to  be  true,  he  doubted  not  although  hee  were  alone,  to
raise  men  under  this  title,  which  should  give  him  victorie
against  the  Changuas,  although  they  were  then  victorious,
and  in  great  numbers  ;  and  make  himselfe  Lord  of  those
Realmes,  for  that  hee  would  send  him  men  to  his  aide  in-
visibly, whereby  he  prevayled  in  such  sort,  that  under  this
colour  and  conceit,  he  began  to  assemble  a  great  number
of  people,  whereof  he  made  a  mightie  Armie,  with  the
which  he  obtayned  the  victorie,  making  himselfe  Lord
of  the  whole  Realme,  taking  the  government  from  his
father  and  brother.  Then  afterwards  he  conquered  and
over-threw  the  Changuas,  and  from  that  time  commanded
that  Viracocha  should  be  held  for  universall  Lord,  and
that  the  Images  of  the  Sunne  and  Thunder,  should  doe
him  reverence  and  honor  :  And  from  that  time  they
began  to  set  the  Image  of  Viracocha  above  that  of  the
Sunne  and  Thunder,  and  the  rest  of  the  Guacas.  And
although  this  Ingua  Yupangui  had  given  Farmes,  Lands,
and  Cattell  to  the  Sunne,  Thunder,  and  other  Guacas,
yet  did  he  not  dedicate  any  thing  to  Viracocha,  saying,
that  he  had  no  neede,  being  universall  Lord  and  Creator
of  all  things.  Hee  informed  his  Souldiers  after  this
absolute  victorie  of  the  Changuas,  that  it  was  not  they
alone  that  had  conquered  them,  but  certaine  bearded  men,

398

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
whom  Viracocha  had  sent  him,  and  that  no  man  might
see  them  but  himselfe,  which  were  since  converted  into
stones  ;  it  was  therefore  necessarie  to  seeke  them  out,
whom  he  would  know  well.  By  this  meanes  he  gathered
together  a  multitude  of  stones  in  the  Mountaines,  whereof
he  made  choice,  placing  them  for  Guacas,  or  Idols,  they
worshipped  and  sacrificed  unto  ;  they  called  them  Puru-
raucas,  and  carried  them  to  the  warre  with  great
devotion,  beleeving  for  certaine,  that  they  had  gotten
the  victorie  by  their  helpe.  The  imagination  and  fiction  [in.  v.
of  this Ingua was of such  force, that by  the meanes  1061.]

thereof  hee  obtayned  goodly  victories :  He  founded  the
Familie  called  Yuacapanaca,  and  made  a  great  Image  of
gold,  which  hee  called  Indiillapa,  which  he  placed  in  a
Brancard  of  gold,  very  rich,  and  of  great  price,  of  the
which  gold  the  Indians  tooke  great  store  to  carry  to
Xaxamalca,  for  the  libertie  and  ransome  of  Atahualpa,
when  the  Marquesse  Francis  Picarre  held  him  prisoner.
The  Licenciate  Polo  found  in  his  house  in  Cusco,  his
servants  and  Mamacomas,  which  did  service  to  his
memorie,  and  found  that  the  body  had  beene  transported
from  Patallacta  to  Totocache,  where  the  Spaniards  have
since  founded  the  Parish  of  Saint  Blaise.  This  body
was  so  whole  and  preserved  with  a  certaine  Rosin,  that
it  seemed  alive,  he  had  his  eyes  made  of  a  fine  cloth  of
gold,  so  artificially  set,  as  they  seemed  very  naturall  eyes,
he  had  a  blow  with  a  stone  on  the  head,  which  he  had
received  in  the  warres,  hee  was  all  grey  and  hayrie,  having
lost  no  more  haire  then  if  he  had  dyed  but  the  same  day,
although  it  were  seventie  and  eight  yeeres  since  his
decease.  The  foresaid  Polo  sent  this  body  with  some
others  of  the  Inguas,  to  the  Citie  of  Lima,  by  the  Vice-
royes  command  which  was  the  Marquesse  of  Canette,
and  the  which  was  very  necessarie  to  roote  out  the
Idolatrie  of  Cusco.  Many  Spaniards  have  seene  this
body  with  others  in  the  Hospitall  of  Saint  Andrew,  which
the  Marquesse  built,  but  they  were  much  decayed.  Don
Philip  Caritopa,  who  was  grand-child  or  great  grand-child

399

A.D.

c.  1588.

Of  the
greatest  and
most  famous
Ingua  called
Guaynacapa,
Ch.  22.

Guaynacapa
worshipped  for
a  god.

His  300.
sonnes  &c.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  this  Ingua,  affirmed  that  the  treasure  hee  left  to  his
Familie  was  great,  which  should  bee  in  the  power  of
the  Yanaconas,  Amaro,  Toto,  and  others.  To  this  Ingua
succeeded  Topaingua  Yupangui,  to  whom  his  sonne  of
the  same  name  succeeded,  who  founded  the  Familie
called  Cupac  Aillo.

TO  this  latter  Ingua  succeeded  Guaynacapa,  which  is
to  say,  A  young  man,  rich  and  valiant,  and  so
was  he  in  truth,  more  then  any  of  his  Predecessors,  or
Successors.  He  was  very  wise,  planting  good  orders
throughout  his  whole  Realme,  he  was  a  bold  and  resolute
man,  valiant,  and  very  happy  in  warre.  He  therefore
obtayned  great  victories,  and  extended  his  Dominions
much  farther  then  all  his  Predecessors  had  done  before
him ;  he  dyed  in  the  Realme  of  Quitto,  the  which  he
had  conquered,  foure  hundred  leagues  distant  from  his
Court.  The  Indians  opened  him  after  his  decease,
leaving  his  heart  and  entrailes  in  Quitto,  the  body  was
carried  to  Cusco,  the  which  was  placed  in  the  renowmed
Temple  of  the  Sunne.  Wee  see  yet  to  this  day  many
Cawseys,  Buildings,  Fortresses,  and  notable  workes  of
this  King  :  hee  founded  the  Familie  of  Teme  Bamba.
This  Guaynacapa  was  worshipped  of  his  subjects  for  a
god,  being  yet  alive,  as  the  old  men  affirme,  which  was
not  done  to  any  of  his  Predecessors.  When  hee  dyed,
they  slue  a  thousand  persons  of  his  houshold,  to  serve
him  in  the  other  life,  all  which  dyed  willingly  for  his
service,  insomuch  that  many  of  them  offered  themselves
to  death,  besides  such  as  were  appointed :  his  riches  and
treasure  was  admirable.  And  forasmuch  as  the  Spaniards
entred  soone  after  his  death,  the  Indians  laboured  much
to  conceale  all,  although  a  great  part  thereof  was  carried
to  Xaxamalca,  for  the  ransome  of  Atahualpa  his  sonne.
Some  worthy  of  credit,  affirme  that  he  had  above  three
hundred  sonnes  and  grand-children  in  Cusco.  His
mother  called  Mamaoella  was  much  esteemed  amongst
them. Polo sent her body  with  that of  Guaynacapa

400

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
very  well  imbalmed  to  Lima,  rooting  out  infinite  Idola-
tries. To  Guaynacapa  succeeded  in  Cusco  a  sonne  of
his  called  Titocussigualpa,  who  since  was  called  Guaspar
Ingua,  his  body  was  burned  by  the  Captaines  of  Ata-
hualpa,  who  was  likewise  sonne  to  Guaynacapa,  and
rebelled  in  Quitto  against  his  brother,  marching  against
him  with  a  mightie  Armie.  It  happened  that  Quisquits
and  Chilicuchi,  Captaines  to  Atahualpa,  tooke  Guaspar
Ingua  in  the  Citie  of  Cusco,  being  received  for  Lord
and  King  (for  that  he  was  the  lawfull  successor)  which
caused  great  sorrow  throughout  all  his  Kingdome,
especially  in  his  Court.  And  as  alwayes  in  their  neces-
sities they  had  recourse  to  sacrifices,  finding  themselves
unable  to  set  their  Lord  at  libertie,  aswell  for  the  great
power  the  Captaines  had  that  tooke  him,  as  also,  for
the  great  Armie  that  came  with  Atahualpa,  they  resolved
(some  say  by  the  commandement  of  this  Ingua)  to  make
a  great  and  solemn e  sacrifice  to  Viracocha  Pachayachachic,
which  signifieth  universal!  Creator,  desiring  him,  that
since  they  could  not  deliver  their  Lord,  he  would  send
men  from  Heaven  to  deliver  him  from  prison.  And
as  they  were  in  this  great  hope,  upon  their  sacrifice,
newes  came  to  them,  that  a  certaine  people  come  by
Sea,  was  landed,  and  had  taken  Atahualpa  prisoner.
Hereupon  they  called  the  Spaniards  Viracochas,  beleeving
they  were  men  sent  from  God,  aswell  for  the  small  Spaniards
number  they  were  to  take  Atahualpa  in  Xaxamalca,  as  esteen[ed  ™n
also,  for  that  it  chanced  after  their  sacrifice  done  to  sen  Jro
Viracocha,  and  thereby  they  began  to  call  the  Spaniards
Viracochas,  as  they  doe  at  this  day.  And  in  truth,  if
we  had  given  them  good  example,  and  such  as  we  ought,
the  Indians  had  well  applyed  it,  in  saying  they  were  men
sent  from  God.  It  is  a  thing  very  well  worthy  of  con-
sideration, how  the  greatnesse  and  providence  of  God,
disposed  of  the  entrie  of  our  men  at  Peru,  which  had  Peru  could  not
beene impossible, were not the dissention of  the two  eenf,

t-.i  j 1 • t» ■  ji  ■ •  i  conquered  but

Brethren  and  their  .Partisans,  and  the  great  opinion  they  ^  division  of
had  of  Christians,  as  of  men sent  from  Heaven,  bound  themselves.
xv  401  2  c

Of  the  last
Successors
Inguas.
Chap.  23.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

(by  the  taking  of  the  Indians  Country)  to  labour  to  win
soules  unto  Almightie  God.

[III.  v.  r  I  \He rest  of  this  subject  is  handled  at  large  by  the

1062.]  \_  Spanish  Writers  in  the  Histories  of  the  Indies,  and
for  that  it  is  not  my  purpose,  I  will  speake  onely  of  the
succession  of  the  Inguas.  Atahualpa  being  dead  in
Xaxamalca,  and  Guascar  in  Cusco,  and  Francis  Picarre
with  his  people  having  seised  on  the  Realme,  Mangocapa
sonne  to  Guaynacapa  besieged  them  in  Cusco  very
straightly :  but  in  the  end  he  abandoned  the  whole
Country,  and  retyred  himselfe  to  Vilca  Bamba,  where
he  kept  himselfe  in  the  Mountaines,  by  reason  of  the
rough  and  difficult  accesse,  and  there  the  Successors
Inguas  remayned,  untill  Amaro,  who  was  taken  and
executed  in  the  market  place  of  Cusco,  to  the  Indians
incredible  griefe  and  sorrow,  seeing  justice  done  upon
him  publiquely  whom  they  held  for  their  Lord.  After
which  time,  they  imprisoned  others  of  the  Linage  of  these
Inguas.  I  have  knowne  Don  Charles,  grand-child  to
Guaynacapa,  and  sonne  to  Polo,  who  was  baptized,  and
alwayes  favoured  the  Spaniards  against  Mangocapa  his
brother,  when  the  Marquesse  of  Canette  governed  in  this
Country  Sarritopaingua,  went  from  Vilcabamba,  and  came
upon  assurance  to  the  Citie  of  Kings,  where  there  was
given  to  him  the  Valley  of  Yucay,  and  other  things,  to
whom  succeeded  a  daughter  of  his.  Behold  the  succession
which  is  knowne  at  this  day  of  that  great  and  rich  Familie
of  the  Inguas,  whose  raigne  continued  above  three  hundred
yeeres,  wherein  they  reckon  eleven  Successors,  untill  it
was  wholly  extinguished.  In  the  other  Linage  of  Urin-
cusco,  which  (as  we  have  said  before)  had  his  beginning
likewise  from  the  first  Mangocapa,  they  reckon  eight
Successors  in  this  sort :  To  Mangocapa  succeeded  Cin-
choraca,  to  him  Capac  Yupangui,  to  him  Lluqui  Yupangui,
to  him  Maytaca  paest  Tarcogumam,  unto  whom  succeeded
his  sonne,  whom  they  name  not,  to  this  sonne  succeeded
Dou  Jean  Tambo,  Maytapanaca. This  sufficeth  for  the

402

Pedegree  of
Ur  in  cusco.

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.
originall  and  succession  of  the  Inguas,  that  governed  the
Land of  Peru, with  that  that I have spoken of  their
Lawes,  Government,  and  manner  of  Life.

ALthough  you  may see by  the Historie  written of  Of  the  manner
the Kingdome, succession, and beginning' of  the  °{J 6.

o  /  '  00  Mexicans

Mexicans,  their  manner  of  Commonweale  and  Govern-  Commonwale.
ment,  yet  will  I  speake  briefly  what  I  shall  thinke  fit  Chap.  z\.
in  generall  to  bee  most  observed  :  whereof  I  will  discourse
more  amply  in  the  Historie.  The  first  point  whereby
wee  may  judge  the  Mexican  government  to  bee  very
politike,  is  the  order  they  had  and  kept  inviolable  in  the
election  of  their  King :  for  since  their  first,  called  Acama-
pach,  unto  their  last,  which  was  Motecuma,  the  second
of  that  name,  there  came  none  to  the  Crowne  by  right
of  succession,  but  by  a  lawfull  Nomination  and  Election.
This  election  in  the  beginning  was  by  the  voice  of  the
Commons,  although  the  chiefe  men  managed  it.  Since
in  the  time  of  Iscoalt  the  fourth  King,  by  the  advise  and
order  of  a  wise  and  valiant  man,  called  Tlacael,  there
were  foure  certaine  Electors  appointed,  which  (with  two
Lords  or  Kings  subject  to  the  Mexican,  the  one  of
Tescuco,  and  the  other  of  Tucuba)  had  power  to  make
this  election.  They  did  commonly  choose  young  men
for  their  Kings,  because  they  went  alwayes  to  the  warres,
and  this  was  in  a  manner  the  chiefe  cause  why  they
desired  them  so.  They  had  a  speciall  regard  that  they
should  be  fit  for  the  warres,  and  take  delight  and  glorie
therein.  After  the  election  they  made  two  kindes  of
feasts,  the  one  in  taking  possession  of  the  Royall  Estate,
for  the  which  they  went  to  the  Temple,  making  great
ceremonies  and  sacrifices  upon  the  Harth,  called  Divine,
where  there  was  a  continuall  fire  before  the  Altar  of  the
Idoll,  and  after  some  Rhetoricians  practised  therein,  made
many  Orations  and  Speeches.  The  other  feast,  and  the
most  solemne,  was  at  his  Coronation,  for  the  which  hee
must  first  overcome  in  battell,  and  bring  a  certaine  number
of  Captives,  which  they  must  sacrifice  to  their  gods;  hee

403

A.D.

c.  1588.

Royall

Diadem. See
the  picture
storie.

House  of

living

Creatures.

His  Palaces.

[III.  v.

1063.]
Of  the  Titles
and  Dignities
the  Indians
used.
Chap.  25.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

entred  in  triumph  with  great  pompe,  making  him  a
solemne  reception,  aswell  they  of  the  Temple,  who  went
all  in  procession,  sounding  on  sundrie  sorts  of  instru-
ments, giving  Incense,  and  singing  like  secular  men,  as
also  the  Courtiers,  who  came  forth  with  their  devises  to
receive  the  victorious  King.  The  Crowne  or  royall
Ensigne  was  before  like  a  Myter,  and  behinde  it  was
cut,  so  as  it  was  not  round,  for  the  forepart  was  higher,
and  did  rise  like  a  point.  The  King  of  Tescuco  had  the
privilege  to  crown  the  King  of  Mexico.  In  the  beginning
when  the  Mexicans  were  but  poore  and  weake,  the  Kings
were  very  moderate  in  their  expenses  and  in  their  Court,
but  as  they  increased  in  power,  they  increased  likewise
in  pompe  and  state,  untill  they  came  to  the  greatnesse
of  Motecuma,  who  if  he  had  had  no  other  thing  but
his  house  of  Beasts  and  Birds,  it  had  beene  a  proud
thing,  the  like  whereof  hath  not  beene  seene :  for  there
was  in  this  house  all  sorts  of  fish,  birds  of  Xacamamas,
and  beasts,  as  in  an  other  Noahs  Arke ;  for  Sea  fish,
there  were  Pooles  of  salt-water ;  and  for  River  fish,
Lakes  of  fresh-water ;  birds  that  doe  prey  were  fed,  and
likewise  wilde  beasts  in  great  abundance  :  there  were  very
many  Indians  imployed  for  the  keeping  of  these  beasts :
and  when  he  found  an  impossibilitie  to  nourish  any  sort
of  fish,  fowle,  or  wilde  beast,  he  caused  the  Image  or
likenesse  to  be  made,  richly  cut  in  precious  stones,  silver,
or  gold,  in  marble,  or  in  stone :  and  for  all  sorts  of
entertainments,  he  had  his  severall  Houses  and  Palaces,
some  of  pleasure,  others  of  sorrow  and  mourning,  and
others  to  treat  of  the  affaires  of  the  Realme.  There  was
in  this  Palace  many  Chambers,  according  to  the  qualitie
of  the  Noble  men  that  served  him,  with  a  strange  order
and  distinction.

THe  Mexicans  have  beene  very  curious,  to  divide  the
degrees  and  dignities  amongst  the  noble  men  and
Lords,  that  they  might  distinguish  them  to  whom  they
were  to  give  the  greatest  honor. The  dignitie  of  these

404

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.
foure Electors was the greatest, and most honorable,  Foure  Electors.
next  to  the  King,  and  they  were  chosen  presently  after
the  Kings  election. They  were  commonly  brothers,  or
very neere Kinsmen to the King, and were called
Tlacohecalcalt,  which  signifies  Prince  of  darts,  the  which
they  cast,  being  a  kinde  of  armes  they  use  much. The
next dignitie to this, were those they doe call
Tlacatecati,  which  is  to  say,  Circumcisers  or  Cutters of  Men-cutters.
men. The  third  dignitie  were  of  those  which  they  called
Ezuahuacalt,  which  signifies, A  shedder  of  bloud. All  Bhud-
the  which  Titles  and  Dignities  were  exercised  by  men  of  seders.
warre. There was another, a fourth intituled,  Tlilan-
calqui, which  is  as  much  to  say,  as,  Lord  of  the  blacke  Lord  of
house, or of darknesse, by reason of certaine Inke  darkenesse.
wherewith  the  Priests  anointed  themselves,  and  did  serve
in their Idolatries. All these foure Dignities  were  of
the  great  Counsell,  without  whose  advise  the  King  might
not  doe  any  thing  of  importance :  and  the  King being
dead, they  were  to  choose  another  in  his place  out of
one  of  those  foure  Dignities. Besides  these,  there  were
other  Counsels  and  Audiences,  and  some  say  there  were  Other
as  many  as  in  Spaine,  and  that  there  were  divers  Seates  Officers.
and  Jurisdictions,  with their  Counsellors  and  Judges  of  ^ethePlcture
the  Court,  and  others  that  were  under  them,  as  Corrigi-
dors, chiefe Judges, Captaines of  Justice, Lieutenants,
and  others,  which  were  yet  inferior  to  these,  with  a  very
goodly order. All  which depended  on the foure  first
Princes  that  assisted  the  King. These  foure  onely  had
authoritie  and  power  to  condemne  to  death,  and  the  rest
sent them  instructions  of  the  Sentences  they  had  given.
By  meanes  whereof  they  gave  the  King to understand
what  had  passed  in  his  Realme.

There  was  a  good  order  and  settled  policie  for  the
Revenues  of  the  Crowne,  for  there  were  Officers  divided
throughout  all  the  Provinces,  as  Receivers  and  Treasurers,
which  received  the  Tributes  and  Royall  Revenues.  And
they  carried  the  Tribute  to  the  Court,  at  the  least  every
moneth ;  which  Tribute  was  of  all  things  that  doe  grow

4°S

A.D.

c.  1588.

Priests  and
Teachers  of
the  Law.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

or  ingender  on  the  Land,  or  in  the  water,  aswell  of  Jewels
and  Apparell,  as  of  Meat.  They  were  very  carefull
for  the  well  ordering  of  that  which  concerned  their
Religion,  Superstition,  and  Idolatries:  and  for  this
occasion  there  were  a  great  number  of  Ministers,  to  whom
charge  was  given  to  teach  the  people  the  custome  and
ceremonies  of  their  Law.  Hereupon  one  day  a  christian
Priest  made  his  complaint  that  the  Indians  were  no  good
Christians,  and  did  not  profit  in  the  Law  of  God ;  an  old
Indian  answered  him  very  well  to  the  purpose  in  these
termes :  Let  the  Priest  (said  he)  imploy  as  much  care  and
diligence  to  make  the  Indians  Christians,  as  the  Ministers
of  Idols  did  to  teach  them  their  ceremonies ;  for  with
halfe  that  care  they  will  make  us  the  best  Christians  in
the  world  for  that  the  Law  of  Jesus  Christ  is  much  better  ;
but  the  Indians  learne  it  not,  for  want  of  men  to  instruct
them.  Wherein  he  spake  the  very  truth,  to  our  great
shame  and  confusion.

How  the
Mexicans
made  zvar,
and  of  the
Orders  of
knighthood.
Chap.  26.

Their  Armes.

THe  Mexicans  gave  the  first  place  of  honour  to  the
profession  of  Armes,  and  therefore  the  Noble-men
are  their  chiefe  Souldiers,  and  others  that  were  not  noble,
by  their  valour  and  reputation  gotten  in  warres,  came  to
Dignities  and  Honors,  so  as  they  were  held  for  Noble-
men. They  gave  goodly  recompences  to  such  as  had
done  valiantly,  who  injoyed  priviledges  that  none  else
might  have,  the  which  did  much  incourage  them.  Their
Armes  were  of  Rasors  of  sharpe  cutting  flints,  which  they
set  on  either  side  of  a  staffe,  which  was  so  furious  a
weapon,  as  they  affirmed  that  with  one  blow,  they  would
cut  off  the  necke  of  a  Horse.  They  had  strange  and
heavy  Clubs,  Lances,  fashioned  like  Pikes,  and  other
manner  of  Darts  to  cast,  wherein  they  were  very  expert :
but  the  greatest  part  of  their  combate  was  performed
with  stones.  For  defensive  armes  they  had  little  Ron-
daches  or  Targats,  and  some  kinde  of  Morions  or  Head-
pieces invironed  with  feathers.  They  were  clad  in  the
skinnes  of  Tigres,  Lions,  and  other  savage  beasts. They

406

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
came presently to hands with the Enemie, and were
greatly practised to runne and wrestle, for thir  chiefe
manner  of  combate,  was  not  so  much  to  kill,  as  to  take
Captives,  the  which  they  used  in  their  sacrifices,  as  hath
beene  said. Motecuma  set Knight-hood in his highest
splendor, ordayning  certaine militarie orders, as Com-
manders, with  certaine  markes  and  ensignes. The  most
honorable  amongst  the  Knights,  were  those  that  carried  Eagle-order.
the  crowne of  their  haire  tied  with  a  little  red  Ribband,
having  a rich plume of  feathers, from the which, did
hang  branches  of  feathers  upon  their  shoulders,  and  rolls
of  the same. They carried so many  of  these  rolls,  as
they  had  done  worthy  deeds  in  warre. The  King  him-
selfe  was  of  this  order,  as  may  be  seene  in Chapultepec,
where  Motecuma  and  his  sonnes  were  attyred  with  those
kindes  of  feathers,  cut  in  the  Rocke,  the  which  is  worthy
the sight. There was another order of Knight-hood,
which  they  called  the  Lions and  the  Tigres,  the  which Order  of
were commonly the most valiant and most noted in  ^lons  and
warre,  they  went  alwayes  with  their  Markes  and  Armories.
There were other Knights, as the Grey Knights,  the  Grey  Knights.
which  were  not  so  much  respected  as  the  rest : they  had
their haire cut  round about the eare. They went to
the warre with markes  like to the  other Knights,  yet
they  were not armed,  but  to the  girdle,  and  the  most
honorable  were  armed  all  over. All  Knights  might  carry Knights
gold  and  silver,  and  weare  rich  Cotton,  use  painted  and  priviledges.
gilt  vessell,  and  carry  shooes  after  their  manner :  but  the
common people might use none but earthen vessell,
neither  might  they  carry  shooes,  nor  attire  themselves  but  [HI.  v.
in  Nequen,  the  which  is  a  grosse  stuffe. Every  order  of  1064.]

these  Knights  had  his  lodging  in  the  Pallace  noted  with
their  markes ;  the  first  was  called  the  Princes  lodging,
the  second  of  Eagles,  the  third  of  Lyons  and  Tigers,
and  the  fourth  of  the  grey  Knights.  The  other  common
officers,  were  lodged  underneath  in  meaner  lodgings ;  if
any  one  lodged  out  of  his  place  he  sufFred  death.

407

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c  1588.
Of  the  great HT^Here  is  nothing  that  gives  me  more  cause  to  admire,
order  and  J^ nor  tnat  \  fincje  m0re  worthy  of  commendations  and

Mexicans  Led  memory>  tnen tne  order  and  care  the  Mexicans  had  to
to' instruct nourish their  youth  : for they  knew well, that  all  the
their  youth. good  hope  of  a  Common-weale,  consisted  in  the  nurture
Chap,  27. anc[ institution of  youth, whereof  Plato treates amply
in his bookes De Legibus : and for this reason they
laboured and tooke paines to sequester their children
from  delights  and liberties  (which are  the two plagues
of  this age) imploying them in honest and profitable
See  the  picture  exercises. For this cause there was in their Temples,
stplf ,  a  private  house for  children,  as  Schooles,  or Colledges,

which  was  seperate  from  that  of  the  yong  men  and
maides  of  the  Temple,  whereof  we  have  discoursed  at
large.  There  were  in  these  Schooles  a  great  number  of
children,  whom  their  fathers  did  willingly  bring  thither,
and  which  had  teachers  and  masters  to  instruct  them  in
all  commendable  exercises,  to  be  of  good  behaviour,
to  respect  their  superiours,  to  serve  and  obey  them,
giving  them  to  this  end,  certaine  precepts  and  instructions.
And  to  the  end  they  might  be  pleasing  to  Noblemen,
they  taught  them  to  sing  and  dance,  and  did  practise
them  in  the  exercise  of  warre ;  some  to  shoote  an  Arrow,
to  cast  a  dart  or  a  stafFe  burnt  at  the  end,  and  to  handle
well  a  Target  and  a  Sword.  They  suffered  them  not
to  sleepe  much,  to  the  end  they  might  accustome  them-
selves to  labour  in  their  youth,  and  not  be  men  given
to  delights.  Besides  the  ordinary  number  of  these
children,  there  were  in  the  same  Colledges,  other  children
of  Lords  and  Noblemen,  the  which  were  instructed  more
privately.  They  brought  them  their  meate  and  ordinary
from  their  houses,  and  were  recommended  to  ancients
and  old  men  to  have  care  over  them,  who  continually
did  advise  them  to  be  vertuous  and  to  live  chastely;
to  be  sober  in  their  diet,  to  fast,  and  to  march  gravely,
Their  employ-  and  with  measure.  They  were  accustomed  to  exercise
ments  and  them  to  travell,  and  in  laborious  exercises :  and  when
trials.  tney see tnem  instructed  in all  these  things,  they  did

408

JOSEPH ACOSTA  a.d.

c.  1588.
carefully  looke  into  their  inclination  :  if  they  found
any  one  addicted  unto  warre,  being  of  sufficient  yeares,
they  sought  all  occasions  to  make  triall  of  them,  sending
them  to  the  warre,  under  colour  to  carrie  victuals  and
munition  to  the  Souldiers,  to  the  end  they  might
there  see  what  passed,  and  the  labour  they  suffered.
And  that  they  might  abandon  all  feare,  they  were
laden  with  heavie  burthens,  that  shewing  their  courage
therein,  they  might  more  easily  be  admitted  into  the
company  of  Souldiers.  By  this  meanes  it  happened,
that  many  went  laden  to  the  Armie,  and  returned
Captaines  with  markes  of  honour.  Some  of  them  were
so  desirous  to  be  noted,  as  they  were  either  taken,  or
slaine :  and  they  held  it  lesse  honourable  to  remaine  a
prisoner.  And  therefore  they  sought  rather  to  be  cut
in  peeces,  then  to  fall  captives  into  their  enemies  hands.
See  how  Noblemens  children  that  were  inclined  to  the
warres  were  imployed.  The  others  that  had  their  in-
clination to  matters  of  the  Temple;  and  to  speake  after
our  manner,  to  be  Ecclesiasticall  men,  having  attained
to  sufficient  yeares,  they  were  drawne  out  of  the  colledge,
and  placed  in  the  Temple,  in  the  lodging  appointed  for
religious  men,  and  then  they  gave  them  the  order  of
Ecclesiasticall  men.  There  had  they  Prelates  and
Masters,  to  teach  them  that  which  concerned  their
profession,  where  they  should  remaine  being  destined
thereunto.  These  Mexicans  tooke  great  care  to  bring  up  The  baine  of
their  children:  if  at  this  day  they  would  follow  this  ^ZaatZlf
order,  in  building  of  houses  &  colledges  for  the  instruc-  p^csent  anci
tion  of  youth,  without  doubt  Christianitie  should  flourish  external! gain.
much  amongst  the  Indians.  Some  godly  persons  have
begunne,  and  the  King  with  his  Counsel!  have  favoured
it :  but  for  that  it  is  a  matter  of  no  profit,  they  advance
little,  and  proceede  coldly.

We  have  not  discovered  any  Nation at the Indians,
that  live  in  comminalties,  which  have  not  their  recreations,  pJates  and
in plaies,  dances,  and exercises of  pleasure. At Peru  Military
1 have seene plaies in  manner  of  combats, where the  games.

409

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

men  of  both  sides  were  sometimes  so  chafed,  that  often

their  Paella (which was  the name of  this  exercise) fell

out  dangerous. I  have  also  seene  divers  sorts  of  dances,

wherein  they  did  counterfait  and  represent  certaine  trades

and  offices,  as  shepheards,  labourers,  fishers,  and  hunters,

and  commonly  they  made  all  those  dances,  with  a  very

grave sound and pase : there were other dances and

maskes,  which  they  called  Guacones,  whose  actions  were

I  doll  games pure  representations  of  the  devill. There  were  also  men

Exo.  32.  a  ^ t^at  ^nce  on  the  shoulders  one  of  another,  as  they  doe  in

Heathens  as Portugall, the which they call Paellas. The greatest

their  parts  of  these  dances,  were  superstitions,  and  kindes  of

Comedies,  \$c.  Idolatries : for  that  they  honoured  their  Idols  and  Guacas

manifest.  m t^at manner. For this reason the Prelates have

laboured  to  take  from  them  these  dances,  all  they  could  :

but  yet  they  suffer  them,  for  that  part  of  them  are  but

sports  of  recreation :  for  alwayes  they dance  after  their

manner. In these dances, they use sundry sorts of

Musicke. instruments, whereof, some are like Flutes, or little

Canons,  others  like  Drums,  and  others  like  Cornets : but

commonly  they  sing  all  with  the  voyce,  and  first  one  or

two  sing  the  song,  then  all  the  rest  answer  them. Some

of  these  songs were  very wittily composed, containing

[III.  v.  Histories,  and  others  were  full  of  superstitions  and  some

1065. J  were  meere  follies. Our  men  that  have  conversed  among

them,  have  laboured  to  reduce  matters  of  our  holy  faith

to their tunes, the which hath profited well : for  that

they employ whole dayes to rehearse and  sing them,

for the great pleasure and content  they  take in their

tunes. They have likewise put our compositions of

Musicke  into  their Language, as Octaves, Songs, and

Rondels, the which they have very aptly  turned, and

in truth  it is a goodly  and very  necessary  meanes  to

instruct  the  people. In  Peru,  they  commonly  call  Dances

Tagui, in other Provinces, Areittos, and in Mexico,

Mittottes. There hath not beene in any  other place

any  such curiositie of Playes and Dances,  as in New

Spaine, where  at  this day we see Indians so  excellent

410

JOSEPH ACOSTA  ad.

c.  1588.
Dancers,  as  it  is  admirable.  Some  dance  upon  a  Cord,  Curious
some  upon  a  long  and  streight  stake,  in  a  thousand  Dmcers-
sundry  sorts  ;  others  with  the  soles  of  their  feet  and
their  hammes,  do  handle,  cast  up  and  receive  againe  a
very  heavy  blocke,  which  seemes  incredible  but  in  seeing
it.  They  doe  make  many  other  shewes  of  their  great
agilitie,  in  leaping,  vaulting,  and  tumbling,  sometimes  Great  agility.
bearing  a  great  and  heavy  burthen,  sometimes  enduring
blowes  able  to  breake  a  barre  of  Iron.  But  the  most
usual  exercise  of  recreation  among  the  Mexicans  is  the
solemne  Mittotte,  and  that  is  a  kind  of  dance  they  held
so  brave  and  so  honourable,  that  the  King  himselfe
danced,  but  not  ordinarily,  as  the  King  Don  Pedro  of
Arragon  with  the  Barber  of  Valencia.  This  Dance  or
Mittotte,  was  commonly  made  in  the  Courts  of  the
Temple,  and  in  those  of  the  Kings  houses,  which  were
more  spacious.  They  did  place  in  the  midst  of  the
Court  two  Instruments,  one  like  to  a  Drumme,  and
the  other  like  a  Barrell  made  of  one  piece,  and  hollow
within,  which  they  set  upon  the  forme  of  a  man,  a
beast,  or  upon  a  Pillar.

These  two  Instruments  were  so  well  accorded  together,
that  they  made  a  good  harmony :  and  with  these
Instruments  they  made  many  kinds  of  Ayres  and  Songs.
They  did  all  sing  and  dance  to  the  sound  and  measure
of  these  Instruments,  with  so  goodly  an  order  and
accord,  both  of  their  feet  and  voyces,  as  it  was  a  pleasant
thing  to  behold.  In  these  Dances  they  made  two  Circles
or  Wheeles,  the  one  was  in  the  middest  neere  to  the
Instruments,  wherein  the  Ancients  and  Noblemen  did
sing  and  dance  with  a  soft  and  slow  motion ;  and  the
other  was  of  the  rest  of  the  people  round  about  them,
but  a  good  distance  from  the  first,  wherein  they  danced
two  and  two  more  lightly,  making  divers  kinds  of  paces,
with  certayne  leaps  to  the  measure.  All  which  together
made  a  very  great  Circle.  They  attyred  themselves  for
these  Dances  with  their  most  precious  apparell  and  Jewels,
every one according to his abilitie, holding it for a

411

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1588.

very  honourable  thing  :  for  this  cause  they  learned  these
Dances  from  their  infancie.  And  although  the  greatest
part  of  them  were  done  in  honour  of  their  Idols,  yet
was  it  not  so  instituted,  as  hath  beene  said,  but  only
as  a  recreation  and  pastime  for  the  people.  Therefore
it  is  not  convenient  to  take  them  quite  from  the  Indians,
but  they  must  take  good  heed  they  mingle  not  their
superstitions  amongst  them.  I  have  seene  this  Mittotte,
in  the  Court  of  the  Church  of  Topetzotlan,  a  Village
seven  leagues  from  Mexico :  and  in  my  opinion,  it  was
a  good  thing  to  busie  the  Indians  upon  Festivall  dayes,
seeing  they  have  need  of  some  recreation  :  and  because
it  is  publike,  and  without  the  prejudice  of  any  other,
there  is  lesse  inconvenience,  then  in  others  which  may  be
done  privately  by  themselves,  if  they  tooke  away  these.

To the  Reader.

REader,  I  here  present  unto  thee  the  choisest  of
my  Jewels.  My  travelling  fancie  hath  invited  many
Readers  to  many  my  labours  in  strange  births  already.
Quae  regio  in  terris  nostri  non  plena  laboris  ?  Japonian
and  China  rarities,  so  remote  from  our  world,  are  neere
to  our  worke,  and  their  characters  communicated  here
to  the  Reader ;  not  their  arts  alone.  Thou  hast  here
also  Indostan,  Arabike,  Persian,  Turkish,  and  other
Letters,  and  not  onely  the  transcript  from  their  languages.
As  for  translations  and  collections,  thou  hast  them  here
also  out  of  the  Hebrew,  Auncient  and  Moderne  Greeke,
Abassine,  Tartarian,  Russian,  Polonian,  ^Egyptian,  and
innumerable  other  Nations  Christian,  Jewish,  Mahumetan,
Ethnike,  Civill,  Barbarian  and  Savage,  innumerable  wayes
diversified.  Yet  all  these  in  letters,  or  characters.  In
hieroglyphicall  mysticall  pictures  the  ancient  Egyptians
and  Ethiopians,  have  by  way  of  Emblemes  obscurely
and  darkly  delivered  their  obscure  mysteries,  uncertaine,
waxenly,  pliant  conceits  to  the  world ;  some  of  which
our  Pilgrimage  hath  mentioned.  But  a  Historie,  yea
a  Politicke,  Ethike,  Ecclesiastike,  Oeconomike History,.

412

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES  ad.

1625.

with  just  distinctions  of  times,  places,  acts  and  arts,
we  have  neither  seene  of  theirs,  nor  of  any  other  Nation,
but  of  this,  which  our  light  and  slight  apprehensions
terme  not  barbarous  alone,  but  wilde  and  savage.  Such
an  one  we  here  present,  a  present  thought  fit  for  him
whom  the  senders  esteemed  the  greatest  of  Princes,  and
yet  now  presented  to  thy  hands  before  it  could  arrive
in  his  presence.  For  the  Spanish  Governour  having
with  some  difficultie  (as  the  Spanish  Preface  imports)
obtained  the  Booke  of  the  Indians,  with  Mexican  inter-
pretations of  the  Pictures  (but  ten  daies  before  the
departure  of  the  Ships)  committed  the  same  to  one
skilfull  in  the  Mexican  language  to  be  interpreted  ;  who
in  a  very  plaine  stile  and  verbatim  performed  the  same,
using  also  some  Morisco  words,  as  Alfaqui  and  Mez-
quitas  (for  Priest  and  Temples)  import.  This  Historie
thus  written,  sent  to  Charles  the  fifth  Emperour,  was
together  with  the  Shippe  that  carried  it  taken  by  French-
men of  war,  from  whom  Andrew  Thevet  the  French
Kings  Geographer,  obtained  the  same:  after  whose  death
Master  Hakluyt  (then  Chaplaine  to  the  English  Embassa-  [III.  v.
dour  in  France)  bought  the  same  for  20.  French  crownes,  1066.

and  procured  Master  Michael  Locke  in  Sir  Walter
Raleighs  name  to  translate  it.  It  seemes  that  none  were
willing  to  be  at  the  cost  of  cutting  the  Pictures,  and
so  it  remained  amongst  his  papers  till  his  death,  whereby
(according  to  his  last  will  in  that  kinde)  I  became
possessor  thereof,  and  have  obtained  with  much  earnest-
nesse  the  cutting  thereof  for  the  Presse.  The  rather
was  I  eagerly  vehement  herein,  as  being  a  thing  desired
by  that  most  industrious  Antiquary,  judicious  Scholler,
Religious  Gentleman,  our  Ecclesiastike  Secular,  the
Churches  champion,  Sir  Henry  Spelman,  Knight ;  whom  Sir  Hen.
for  honors  sake  I  name,  that  his  name  may  honour  Spelman.
our  ruder  lines ;  a  name  so  fitting  to  the  Man,  as  one
which  can,  in  regard  of  his  wise  spell  and  science  in
divine  &  humane  learning,  and  is  ready,  with  maine
courage and alacritie to shew himselfe the Churches

413

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1625.

Man,  and  to  exhibit  himselfe  in  deede  whatsoever  any
man  can  spell,  out  of  Spel-man.  The  commending
from  such  a  friend  (let  the  Muses  impetrate  pardon  for
so  bold  a  name)  was  a  commanding  unto  me,  which  here
I  againe  commend  to  Him  and  thee.

It  is  divided  into  three  parts;  the  first  being  the
Annales  and  Mexican  Chronicle  :  the  second,  their  Ex-
chequer or  the  Accounts  of  their  severall  Tributes  paid
them  from  the  Nations  and  peoples  tributary,  whereby
may  be  seene  the  Naturall  riches  of  those  parts  peculiarly
sorted :  the  third  the  Mexican  Oeconomie  and  Policie
in  warre  and  peace,  religious  and  secular,  their  private
and  publike  rites  from  the  grave  of  the  wombe,  to  the
wombe  of  the  grave.  Obscure  places  I  have  explained
(besides  what  before  in  Acosta  thou  hast  read)  comparing
the  translation  with  the  originall,  adding  many  of  mine
owne :  and  perhaps  there  is  not  any  one  History  of
this  kinde  in  the  world  comparable  to  this,  so  fully
expressing  so  much  without  Letters,  hardly  gotten,  and
easily  lost,  that  thou  maist  here  finde  it.

Chap.  VII.

The  History  of  the  Mexican  Nation,  described
in  pictures  by  the  Mexican  Author  explained
in  the  Mexican  language  ;  which  exposition
translated  into  Spanish,  and  thence  into
English,  together  with  the  said  Picture-
historie,  are  here  presented.

§•  1.

The Mexican  Chronicle.

Ere  beginneth  the  Historie  and  foundation  of  the

Citie  of  Mexico, founded and inhabited by  the

Mexicans,  who  at  that  time  were  called  Meciti  ;

whose  originall  beginning  of  being  Lords,  and  their  acts

414

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES  a.d.

c.  1525.
and  lives  are  declared  briefly  in  this  Historie,  according
as  it  is  signified  and  set  out  successively  by  the  pictures
and  paintings  following.

In  the  yeare  1324.  after  the  comming  of  our  Lord
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  the  Mexican  people  first  arrived
at  the  place  of  the  Citie  of  Mexico,  and  because  they
liked  well  the  greatnesse  and  the  scituation  of  that  place,
after  that  they  had  travailed  in  their  Journies,  and
wandered  many  yeares  from  Country  to  Countrey,  &
in  some  of  them  had  made  their  abode,  for  some  yeares,
being  come  from  far  Countries  in  following  their  Journies,
and  not  being  contented  with  the  other  places  where  they
had  made  their  abode,  they  came  and  setled  themselves
in  the  place  of  Mexico.  The  which  place  at  that  time
was  all  drowned  with  water,  and  was  covered  with  great
bogs  and  bankes  of  moorish  shegs  and  bulrushes,  which
they  called  Tuli,  and  it  had  Carrizales,  and  great  plats
of  dry  ground  covered  with  shrubbes,  bushes,  and  briars
like  woods.  And  through  all  the  space  of  that  place  there
went  a  spring  &  streame  of  fair  cleere  water  which  was
free  from  all  segges  and  bushes,  which  water  streame  went
through  it  crossewise,  in  manner  of  Saint  Andrews  crosse,
as  it  is  shewed  in  the  picture  :  and  about  the  middle  of
that  place  of  that  water-streame,  the  Meciti  found  a  great
rocke  of  stone,  and  growing  thereon  a  great  Tree  or  bush
called  Tunal,  wherein  a  great  Eagle  Candal  had  her  haunt
and  abode  for  her  foode,  so  as  all  about  that  place  was
scattered  full  of  bones  and  feathers  of  divers  Birds  and
Foules  of  divers  colours.  And  they  having  gone
throughout  all  that  place  and  Countrie  thereabout,  and
finding  it  very  fruitfull  and  full  of  wilde  beasts,  wilde
Foules,  Birds,  and  Fishes,  and  things  of  the  water,
wherewith  to  sustaine  themselves  and  to  profit  themselves
in  their  businesse  in  dealing  with  the  Townes  thereabouts,
and  finding  the  water-courses  of  that  place  so  com-
modious, and  that  their  neighbours  could  not  trouble
nor  hurt  them,  and  for  other  things  and  causes  to  their
good  liking  they  determined  to  passe  no  further  on  their

415

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c  1525.

V  a  journeyes  in  travelling,  but  to  settle  themselves  and
''*  dwell  still.  And  according  to  their  determination,  they
did  settle  themselves  there  effectually.  And  made
themselves  a  strong  Citie  of  defence  with  bankes  and
walles  about  the  waters,  and  on  the  plats  of  ground
among  the  Segges  and  Bushes  of  Tulis  and  Carrizales.
And  for  a  beginning  of  that  their  seate  and  habitation,
it  was  determined  by  them,  to  give  name  and  title  to  that
place,  calling  it  Tenultitlan.  By  reason  and  cause  of
the  Tunal  growing  out  of  the  Rocke  (for  Tenuchtitlan
interpreted  in  our  Castilian  Spanish  Tongue  is  Tunal
growing  upon  a  Rocke.)

The  armie  of  the  Mexican  people  had  with  them
for  chiefe  Governours  ten  persons  named,  Ocelopan,
Quapan,  Acacitli,  Ahuexolt,  Tenuch,  Tecineuh,  Xomimitl,
Xocoyol,  Xuihcaqui,  Atototl,  as  it  is  shewed  in  the
Pictures.  And  having  so  setled  themselves,  they  did
chuse  Tenuch  for  their  chiefe  Governour  and  Lord
to  governe  them,  as  a  person  especially  chosen  thereto
and  fit  for  it,  having  in  him  all  parts  and  abilitie  to
exercise  Lordship.  And  they  appointed  the  other
chiefe  Governours,  that  they  should  be  Agents  and
Captaynes,  Governours  under  him.

And  after  some  yeeres  were  passed  of  their  dwelling
in  that  place,  and  the  people  multiplyed,  the  Citie
likewise  was  named  Mexico,  so  named  and  derived  of
the  Mexicans,  calling  it  the  place  of  setling  of  the
Mexican  people.

And when the people were somewhat multiplyed
like bold  and  warlike  people,  they  tooke beginning  of
couragious  mindes  in  prevayling  over  their  Neighbours,
Tenuchtitlan. anj so  shewed  themselves  in force of  armes,  whereby
T ,  they  subdued  and  made  tributarie  to  them  two  Townes

Tenuch  chosen  next  adjoyning  to  Mexico,  named  Colhuacan,  and
chiefe  Lord.  Tenaincan ;  as  likewise  is  set  forth  in  the  pictures :
Mexico.  tne  which  doings passed in the time of  the govern-

mdTenan-  ment  of  the  cmefe  Lord  Tenucn>  which  was  the  space
can  subdued, of fiftie  one yeares,  at the  end whereof he  died.

416

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES

Concerning  the  Pictures  of  blew  in  the  margents  of
this  Historie,  it  is  to  be  understood  that  every  severall
space  or  partition  doth  signifie  one  yeare,  and  they  bee
the  numbring  of  yeares :  it  is  to  be  understood  that
every  severall  space  or  partition  signifie  the  one  severall
yeare,  and  so  they  accounted  &  numbred  every  yeare
severally,  proceeding  by  the  number  of  rundles  or
pricks  therein  contained,  beginning  at  one,  and  pro-
ceeding to  thirteene  rundles.  And  from  thence  they
began  againe  at  the  beginning  in  their  accompt  from
one  point  or  rundle,  and  so  accordingly  they  did
proceede  in  numbering  againe,  till  they  came  to
thirteene. And although that in the partitions or

A.D.

1525.

K

s

©0©I

0

This  is  a  weeke  of  yeares  after  the  Mexican  computation
(all  coloured  blew,  the  Mexican  names  written  over  in  red)
the  first  of  which  they  call  Setuchth,  that  is,  one  Conie  :
the  second  Omeacalt,  or  two  Canes  :  the  third  Yeytecpatl,
three  Flints  :  the  fourth  Macuilituchtli,  which  signifieth
foure  houses  :  the  fifth  Criquacenacatl,  that  is  five  Conies  :
the  sixth,  sixe  Canes  :  the  seventh,  seven  Flints  :  the  eight,
eight  Houses  :  the  ninth,  nine  Conies  :  the  tenth,  ten
Canes  :  the  eleventh,  eleven  Flints  :  the  twelfth,  twelve
Houses  : the  thirteenth,  thirteene  Conies.

spaces  severally  there  be  divers  severall  figures,  yet  the
principall  accompt  of  numbering  is  that  accompt  of  the
pictures  or  rundles  therein  contained.  And  although
the  names  of  the  yeares  that  they  give  to  every
partition  from  the  number  of  the  first  point  till  the
thirteenth  be  to  some  purpose,  yet  for  to  advertise  the
Reader  thereof;  here  is  made  by  it  selfe  a  declaration
of  the  names,  with  their  interpretations.

In  the  order  and  rule  of  the  partitions  which  are
numbred  for  yeares,  that  partition  where  there  is  a
branch  with  a  foote  like  a  flower,  it  doth  signifie  a
bitter  and unfortunate  yeare which the Mexicans had,

XV  417  2D

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c  1525.

and  did  feare,  saying  that  their  predecessours  time  out
of  minde  did  give  them  warning  that  such  yeares
which  befell  every  two  and  fiftieth  yeare  were  danger-
ous, and  unfortunate,  and  bitter  yeares,  because  that  in
such  yeares  there  were  floods  generally,  and  likewise
darkenesse  of  the  eclips  of  the  Sunne,  and  universall
earthquakes.  And  likewise  in  such  yeares  they  made
great  sacrifice  and  ceremonies  to  their  gods,  and  gave
themselves  to  repentance,  and  did  abstaine  from  all
vices  against  the  very  day  and  houre  of  such  a  yeare.
In  the  which  day  generally  they  put  out  all  their
lights  and  fires  till  that  day  were  past ;  and  being
passed  they  kindled  new  lights  being  had  out  of  a
Mountaine  by  a  Priest.

[III.  v.  This  Picture  presents  the  number  of  51.  yeares  :  that  is,  the  time  of

1068.]  Tenuchs  reigne  :  in  this  wheele  or  square  (which,  as  all  the  like  repre-
senting yeares,  are  in  the  originall  picture  coloured  blew.)  the  pictures
of  men  signifie  the  ten  Lords  or  Governours  before  mentioned  ;  their
names  are  inscribed  in  the  originall  pictures,  which  here  we  have  by
the  letters  annexed  directly  to  a  following  glosse.  A.  Acacitli.  B  Quapan.
C  Ocelopan.  D  Aguexotl.  E  Tecineuh.  F  Tenuch.  G  Xominitl.
H  Xocoyol.  I  Xiubcaqui.  K  Atotl.  L  Tenochtitlan,  representing
the  armes  which  they  used  in  the  conquest  of  that  place,  which  they
so  intituled  is  M  the  Tunal  (painted  greene)  growing  out  of  a  Rock.
N  the  Eagle.  O  their  setling  or  habitation.  P  the  people  of  Col-
huacan.  Q  Tenayncan  :  both  which  Nations  R  Tenuch  conquered  by
force  of  armes,  as  appeareth  S  their  subjection  or  bringing  under.  T  is
the  blue  square  and  Saint  Andrewes  crosse.  The  former  relation  doth
more  fully  lay  open  these  things.

418

In  this  figure  is  repre-
sented the  raigne  of  their
second  Lord  or  King
Acamapich.  A  is  the
time  of  his  reigne  21.
yeeres.  B  Acamapichtli
the  successor.  C  His
target  and  arrowes  instru-
ments of  warre,  by  force
whereof  he  subdued  these
foure  townes  or  peoples
figured  D  Quaunahuac.
G  Mizquic.  H  Caitla-
huac.  I  Xochimilco.  E
is  the  same  Acamapichtli  as  a  conqueror.  F  by  foure  faces  and  ensignes
shewing  the  men  of  those  foure  Townes  (to  each  of  which  is  added
like  ensigne)  subdued.  This  picture  therefore  doth  in  figures  signifie,
that  which  we  in  letters  thus  ;

420

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES  a.d.

c.  1525.

IN  the  yeere  1377.  in  the  said  Government  and  Lord-
ship succeeded  Acamapichtli.  And  during  his  Lordship
he  subdued  and  conquered  by  force  of  armes  the  foure
Townes  contayned  and  named  in  the  pictures  here  before,
which  are  these  :  Quauhnahnac,  Misquic,  Cuitlahaac,  and
Xochimilco,  the  which  were  tributaries  to  him,  acknow-
ledging their  subjection.  In  the  yeeres  that  the  said
Acamapich  lived  in  the  said  Lordship  :  his  inclination
and  use  was  to  have  many  wives,  the  which  were  daugh-
ters of  all  the  principall  men  of  Mexico,  by  whom  he
had  many  sons  which  were  the  beginning  and  increase
of  many  Caciques,  and  Captaines,  and  warlike  people,
by  meanes  of  whom  the  Citie  of  Mexico  was  enlarged
and  augmented  in  great  might,  as  is  signified  hereafter
in  the  discourses  by  the  pictures,  with  their  declarations.  [HI.  v-
The  two  pictures  with  their  titles  &  names  of  Acamapich  1070.

be  one  same  thing  to  divers  effects,  for  the  first
sheweth  his  beginning  and  succession  of  the  said  Lord-
ship, and  the  second  sheweth  the  yeere  after  his  succession
in  the  said  Lordship,  when  hee  began  to  conquer  and
subdue  the  said  foure  Townes.  And  in  the  said  Lord-
ship he  had  his  course  one  and  twentie  yeeres,  at  the
end  whereof  the  said  Acamapich  dyed  and  departed  this
present  life,  the  which  said  departure  was  in  the  yeere
1398.

IN  the  yeere  1396.  in  the  said  Lordship  succeeded
Huicilihuitl  sonne  of  Acamapich,  and  during  the  time
of  his  reigne  in  his  Lordship,  he  conquered  by  force  of
armes  eight  Townes,  which  are  contayned  in  the  pictures
here  before,  with  the  names  of  the  same  Townes  intituled,
the  which  were  made  tributarie  to  the  Mexican  Lordship
acknowledging  servitude.  The  said  Huicilihuitl  was
valiant  in  warres,  and  inclined  to  have  many  wives  by
whom  he  had  many  sons,  wherewith  the  power  of
the  Mexicans  was  augmented.  The  time  of  the  Lord-
ship and  life  of  the  said  Huicilihuitl  therein  was
21.  yeeres,  at  the  end  whereof  he  dyed  and  departed

421

A  21.  yeeres.
B  Towne  and
People  of  Toltit-
lan.  CQuauztit-
lan.  D  Chalco.
H  Tulancinco.
I  Xaltocan.  K
Otunpa.  L
Acolma.  M
Tezcuco.  E
The  Cutter  hath
set  letters  to
divers  figures
whereof  I  can
give  no  inter-
pretation :  and
such is this,

except  perhaps  it  signifieth  that  in  his  seventh  yeere  he  began  his  conquests.
For  I  doe  here  interpret  divers  in  which  the  Spanish  is  silent,  if  the  conjecture
seeme  easier. F  is  King  Huicilihuitl. G  the  instruments  of  warre.

422

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES

this present life,  according as by  the pictures of  blue
are  numbred.

A.D.

G. I525.

A  tenne  yeeres.  B  Chimalpupuca.  C  Target  and  Darts,
to  intimate  his  forcible  conquest  of  D  Tequixquiac  and  E
Chalco.  F  sheweth  his  death.  G  the  Towne  of  Chalco
in  rebellion.  H  the  foure  Canoas  and  I  the  five  men
abovesaid  of  Mexico,  which  the  Rebels  slue.  You  see  this
King  and  every  other  both  King  and  Towne  distinguished
by  speciall  Armes  or  Scutchions,  with  other  particulars,
which  here  and  in  all  the  rest  I  leave  to  each  Readers  owne
industrie  and  search.

423

A.D.

c  1525.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

IN the yeere 1470. after the death of  Huicilihuitl
succeeded Chimalpupuca in the said Lordship of
Mexico, sonne  of  the  said Huicilihuitl,  and  during  his

The  explanation  of  the  first  Table.  A  13.  yeeres.
Yzcoatci.  F  by  force  of  Armes  (signified  by  this  Target
and  Darts)  subdued  the  Townes  and  Territories  of  B
Azcapucalco.  C  Coyvacan.  D  Teocalhucyacan.  G  Guagu-
acan.  H  Tlacopan.  I  Atlacuihuayan.  K  Mixcoac.  L
Quauximalpan.  M  Quauhtitlan.  N  Tupan.  O  Acol-
huacan.

time hee subdued by force  of  armes the Townes of
[III.  v.  Tequixquiac,  and  Chalco,  which  Chalco  is  a  great  Towne

1072.]  and  acknowledging  servitude  : they  paid  tribute to  the

424

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES  a.d.

c.  1525.

Lordship  of  Mexico,  according  as  the  pictures  doe  shew.
And  having  the  said  Townes  thus  in  subjection,  at  the
end  of  certaine  yeeres  the  said  Towne  of  Chalco,  being
mightie,  rebelled  against  the  Mexicans,  and  in  the  rebellion
there  grew  danger  to  the  Mexicans,  insomuch  that  they
slue  five  of  them,  and  brake  them  foure  Canoas,  according
as  here  is  signified  by  the  pictures.  The  time  of  the  life
and  Lordship  of  the  said  Chimalpupuca  was  ten  yeeres,  at
the  end  whereof  hee  dyed,  according  as  is  numbred  by
the  blue  pictures  in  the  margent.  And  likewise  the  said
Chimalpupuca,  in  the  time  of  his  life  had  many  wives
and  sons  ;  for  it  was  accounted  a  matter  of  reputation.

IN  the  yeere  1427.  in  the  said  Dominion  of  Mexico,
after  the  death  of  Chimalpopuca,  succeeded  Yzcoatci,
Sonne  of  Acamapich,  which  had  beene  Lord  of  Mexico,
and  during  his  time  hee  conquered  by  force  of  Armes
foure  &  twentie  Townes  which  are  here  pictured,  which
Townes  he  made  subject  to  the  Lordship  of  Mexico,  at
one  invasion  which  he  made  ;  for  he  was  as  valiant
and  warlike  in  Armes  as  the  said  Acamapich,  and  was
a  man  of  good  judgement,  and  wise  in  many  matters,  and
by  his  good  industries  he  subdued  the  said  Townes  which
gave  him  tribute,  and  did  acknowledge  servitude.  The
said  Yzcoatci  had  many  Concubines,  by  whom  he  had
seven  Sonnes  and  Daughters  and  he  reigned  in  the
said  Lordship  thirteene  yeeres  at  the  end  whereof  the
said  Yzcoatci  dyed  and  departed  this  present  life.

IN  the  yeere 1440.  after  the  death  of  Yzcoatci  sue-  [III.  v.
ceeded  Gueguemotecuma  in  the  Lordship  of  Mexico,  I073-I

the  Sunne  of  Guicilihuitl  which  had  beene  Lord  of
Mexico  :  and  during  his  time,  he  conquered  by  force
of  Armes  three  and  thirtie  Townes  according  as  they  are
pictured  in  that  compasse  where  the  Picture  of  Guegue-
mote<;uma  standeth.  And  having  subdued  them  to  the
said  Lordship  of  Mexico,  they  payed  him  tribute,  acknow-
ledging their  subjection.

425

A.D.

c.  1525.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRJMES

[*  This  Gueguemote9uma  was  a  very  severe  and  grave
Lord,  and  given  to  vertue,  and  was  a  man  of  a  good
nature  and  understanding  ; and an enemie to  all  evill

In  the  other  Table  (in  the  originall  being  another  Page)
follow  A  Mizquic.  B  Cuitlahuac.  G  Xochinuilcopu.  D
Chalco.  E  Quauhtlatoa  the  Lord  of  Tlatilulco  ;  the  Towne
also  added.  F  Huicilapan.  G  Quauhnahuac .  H  Cuecalan.
I  Caqualpan.  K  Iztepec.  L  Xiuhtepec.  M  Yoalan.  N
Tepequacnilco.

vices  :  and  beeing  of  a  good  inclination,  set  downe  Orders
and  Lawes  in  his  Common-wealth,  and  to  all  his  Ser-
vants how  they  ought  to  live,  and  also  ordayned  grievous
penalties  for  the  breach  of  them  : which  penalties  were

426

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES  a.d.

c.  1525.
executed  without  any  remission  upon  those  that  brake
the  Lawes.  He  was  not  cruell,  but  rather  gentle,  and
desirous  of  the  welfare  of  his  Subjects,  not  vicious  in
women  ;  hee  had  two  Sonnes,  hee  was  very  temperate  in
drinking,  for  in  all  his  life  time  hee  was  never  seene  to
bee  drunke  as  the  naturall  Indians  which  are  extremely
inclined  to  drunkennesse,  but  rather  he  commanded  him
to  be  corrected  and  punished  that  committed  such  a  fact.
And  by  his  severitie  and  Justice  and  good  example  of
life,  hee  was  feared  and  reverenced  of  all  his  Subjects,
all  his  life  time,  which  was  the  space  of  nine  and  twentie
yeeres.  At  the  end  whereof  he  dyed,  and  passed  out  of
this  present  life.

IN  the  yeere  1479.  after  the  death  of  Gueguemotezuma,  [HI.  v.
succeeded  in  the  Lordship  of  Mexico  Axayacaci  sonne  1076.]

of  Teco9omoetliquieto,  which  was  the  sonne  of  Yzcoalt
Lord  of  Mexico. And  during  the  time  that  the  said
Axayacaci  was  Lord,  he  conquered  and  won  by  force  of
armes  seven  and  thirtie  Townes,  as  hereafter  are  pictured
and  named. Amongst  which  Townes  hee  subdued  under
his  Lordship  by  force  of  armes  the  Towne  of  Tlatilulco,
a  thing  of  great  importance. Moquihuix  was  Lord  of  See  the  storie
Tlatilulco  at  that  time,  who being  a  mightie  person  of  Jore  tn
great strength and of  a  proud nature, began to give
occasion  of  dissention  and  warres  to  the  Lords  of  Mexico,
having  heretofore held  them for friends  : by occasion
whereof  hee  had  great  incounters  and  battailes,  wherein
the  said  Moquihuix  Lord  of  Tlatilulco  dyed  in  throwing  Tlatilulco
himselfe  downe  from  a  Cu  (or  a  high  Mezcita,  or  Temple)  subdued  before
for  he  seeing  himselfe  so  hard  beset  in  the  battaile,  being  asAc^asaith

•  •  .  © the  Mexicdtis

almost  overcome,  entred  into  a  Mizcita  to  save  himselfe,  W£re  subject to
because  hee  would  not  be  taken  prisoner.  And  an  them.
Alfaqui  (or  Priest)  which  was  in  the  Mezquito,  or
Temple,  reproving  him  for  it  and  imputing  cowardise
unto  him,  he  threw  himselfe  downe  as  aforesaid.  At
which  time  the  Mexicans  had  the  victorie.  And  thence-
forth the  Towne  of  Tlatilulco  was  subject  to  the  Lord

427

A  nine  and  twentie  yeeres. C  Huehuemoteccuma. D  by  force  of
Armes  subdued B  Lord  Atonal and his Towne Coayxtlahuacan . E
Mamalhuaztepec. F  Tenanco. G  Tetuchtepec. H  Chiconquianhco.
I  Xiuhtepec. K  Totolapan. L  Chalco. M  Quauhnahuac. N  Atla-
tlanhca. O  Huaxtepec.

In  the  second  Table.  A  Yauhtepec.  B  Tepuztlan.  C  Tepatzcinco.
D  Yacapichtlan.  E  Yoaltepec.  F  Tlachco.  G  Tlalcocauhtitlan.
H  Tepequacuilco.  I  Quiyanteopan.  K  Chontalcoatlan.  L.  Huci-
puchtlan.  M  Atotonilco.  N  Axocopan.  O  Tulan.  P  Xilotepec.
Q  Yzquincuitlapilco.  R  Atotonilco.  S  Tlapacoyan.  T  Chapolixitla.
V  Tlatlauhquitepec. X  Cuetlaxtlan. Y  (Duanhtocheo.

A.D.

c.  1525.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  Mexico,  paying  tribute  and  acknowledging  subjection.
Axayacaci  was  very  valiant  and  warlike  in  armes,  andjwas
viciously  given  to  women,  having  had  many  wives  and
sonnes  :  he  was  also  proud  and  warlike,  whereby  all  his  sub-
jects feared  him  extremely :  hee  did  maintaine  and  hold  for
good  all  the  Lawes  and  Ordinances  that  his  predecessor

A  twelve  yeeres.  B  Axayacaci.  C  by  armed  force  sub-
dued these  Townes  following  (not  as  before  expressed  in
picture)  Tlatilulco,  Atlapulco,  Xalatlanhio,  Tlacotepec,
Motepec,  Capulnac,  Ocoyacac,  Quanhpanoayan,  Xochiacan,
Teotenanco,  Caliymayan,  Cinacantepec,  Tulucan,  Xiquipilco,
Tenancinco,  Tepeyacac,  Tlaximaloyan,  Oztoma,  Xacotitlan,
Ocuilan,  Oztoticpac,  Matlatlan,  Cuezcomatlyacac,  Tecalco,
Cuetlaxtlan,  Puxcauhtlan,  Alcuilizapan,  Tlaolan,  Mixtlan,
Cuecaloztoc,  Tetzapotitlan,  Miquizetlan,  Tamuoc,  Taupatel,
Tuchpan,  Tenexticpac,  Quauhtlan.

Gueguemotezuma  had  made,  according  as  hath  beene  men-
tioned in  his  Historie  ;  and  hee  continued  the  space  of
twelve  yeeres  in  the  said  Lordship  of  Mexico,  at  the  end
whereof  he  dyed  and  departed  out  of  this  present  life.

43°

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES  aj>.

c.  1525

IN  the  yeere  1482.  after  the  end  and  death  of  Axayacaci,
succeeded in the Lordship of  Mexico, Ticocicatzi,  Ticocicatzi
sonne  of  the  said  Axayacaci,  and  during  the  time  of  his
raigne  he  conquered  and  got  by  force  of  armes  fourteene
Townes. The  said  Ticocicatzi  was  very  valiant  and  war-
like in armes, and before that he succeeded in the
Lordship of  Mexico,  he had  done  dangerous  feates of  Great
valiantnesse  in  his  owne  person  in  the  warres,  whereby  Captaine
hee  obtayned  the  title  of  Tlacatecatl,  which  they  esteemed  [In
for  a  Title of  great  honour  and  estate  : and  it  was a

Title  Tlacate-
catl that  is,

1077.]

©OO

COOOQO

A  Five  yeeres.  B  Ticocicatzi  C  by  armes  subdued
these  Townes,  Tonahymoquezayan,  Toxico,  Ecatepec,  Zilan,
Tecaxic,  Tuluca,  Yancuitlan,  Tlapan,  Atezcahuacan,  Mazat-
lan,  Xochiyetla,  Tamapachco,  Ecatlyquapochco,  Miquetlan.

degree  whereby  that  the  Lordship  of  Mexico  being
vacant,  he  which  had  the  same  degree  and  title  succeeded
in  the  place  of  the  same  Dominion  of  Mexico,  which  title
in  like  manner  his  Predecessors,  Brothers,  and  Father,
and  Grand-father  had,  whereby  they  came  to  bee  Lords
of  Mexico.  Also  the  said  Ticocicatzi  by  the  estate  and
authoritie  of  the  said  Lordship  of  Mexico,  had  many
Wives  and  Sonnes  which  hee  had  by  them,  and  he  was  a
grave  and  severe  man  in  commanding  and  was  feared  and
reverenced  of  his  Subjects,  hee  was  likewise  enclined  to

431

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1525.

good  and  vertuous  things,  and  was  good  for  his  Common-
wealth. He  commanded  the  Lawes  and  Statutes  to  bee
kept  and  approoved  for  good,  that  his  Predecessors  had
amplified  and  kept  since  the  time  of  Gueguemotezuma.
And  he  was  zealous  in  punishing  and  chastning  the  evill
vices  and  offences  that  his  Subjects  committed.  And  so
the  Mexican  Commonwealth  was  well  ordered  and
governed  the  time  of  his  life,  which  was  the  space  of
five  yeeres,  at  the  end  whereof  he  dyed  and  departed
this  present  life.

IN  the  yeere  i486,  after  the  death  of  Tizizocatzi,
succeeded  Ahuizozin,  brother  to  his  Predecessor
Tizozicatzi,  in  the  Signorie  of  Mexico.  And  during
the  time  of  his  Lordship,  he  conquered  by  force  of  armes
five  and  fortie  Townes,  according  as  hereafter  are  pictured
and  named.  The  said  Ahuizozin  was  like  to  his  Pre-
decessor and  Brother  Tizizocatzi  in  valiantnesse  and  feates
of  warre,  whereby  he  got  the  title  of  Tlacatecatl,  which
signifieth  a  great  Captaine,  and  from  the  same  title  he
came  to  be  Lord  of  Mexico.  The  said  Ahuizozin  was
by  nature  of  a  good  inclination,  and  given  to  all  vertue,
and  likewise  in  the  course  of  his  life  hee  had  his
Commonwealth  ruled  and  governed  well,  and  he  fulfilled
and  kept  the  Lawes  and  Statutes  that  his  Predecessors  had
maintayned  since  the  time  of  Gueguemotezuma.  And  as
the  state  of  the  Lordship  of  Mexico  was  brought  to  great
Majestie,  and  had  the  greatest  part  of  this  New  Spaine
subject,  acknowledging  their  service,  and  by  the  great
and  rich  tributes  which  they  gave  the  said  Mexican
Lordship,  came  to  much  renowme  and  mightinesse.
And  he  like  a  mightie  and  great  minded  Prince,  gave
great  things  and  preferments  to  his  servants,  and  he  was
temperate  of  condition  and  mercifull,  whereby  his  servants
loved  him  exceedingly,  and  yeelded  him  great  reverence.
And  likewise  hee  had  many  wives,  and  children  by  them,
because  it  was  a  thing  adjoyned  to  the  Lordship,  and  a
point  of  great estate. He  was of  a  merrie condition,

432

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES

whereby  his  servants  did  feast  him  continually  in  his  life
time  with  great  and  divers  kindes  of  feasts,  and  musick,

Score

sa

A

A  sixteene  yeeres.  B  Ahuizozin.  C  conquered  by  armes
the  townes  following,  Tziccoac,  Tlappan,  Molanco,  Amaxtlan,
Zapotlan,  Xaltepec,  Chiapan,  Tototepec,  Xochtlan,  Xoloc-
hiuhylan,  Cozaquanhtenaneo,  Cocohuipilecan,  Coyuacac,
Acatepec,  Huexolotlan,  Acapulco,  Xiuhhuacan,  Apancalecan,
Tecpatepec,  Tepechiapco,  Xicochimalco,  Xiuhteczacatlan,
Tequantepec,  Coyolapan,  Yztactlalocan,  Teocuitlatlan,  Hue-
haetlan,  Quanhxayacatitlan,  Yzhuatlan,  Comitlan,  Nantzintlan,
Huipilan,  Cahualan,  Ystatlan,  Huiztlan,  Xolotlan,  Quan-
huacaztlan,  Macatlan,  Ayanhtochiuitlatla,  Quanhtlan,  Cue-
calcuitlapila,  Mapachtepec,  Ouauhpilolan,  Tlacotepec,
Mizquitlan.

and  songs,  and  instruments,  as  well  in  the  night  as  in

the  day : for in his place the Musicians and Singers

never  ceased with  many  Instruments  of  musicke. The

xv  433  2  e

A.D.

c.  1525.

A.D.

c.  1525.

[III.  V.

1078.

Motezuma.

His  weale  and
greatnesse.

Majestic
Conquests.

Wisdome  and
learning.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

course  of  his  life  in  that  Signiorie  was  sixteene  yeeres„
at  the  end  whereof  he  dyed  and  passed  out  of  this  present
life.

IN  the  yeere  1502.  after  the  end  and  death  of
Ahuicocin,  succeeded  in  the  Lordship  of  Mexico,
Motezuma.  Mexico  was  now  growne  into  great
Majestie,  Renowme,  and  Authoritie :  and  he  by  his
gravitie  and  severitie  enlarged  exceedingly  the  State
and  Dominion  of  Mexico,  yea  a  great  deale  more  then
his  Predecessors.  Motezuma  was  the  sonne  of
Axayacaci,  which  had  beene  Lord  of  Mexico,  and  before
hee  came  to  the  said  Lordship  hee  had  the  deserts  of  a
worthy  Captaine  and  a  valiant  man  in  warres,  whereby
hee  had  the  title  of  Tlacatecatl,  and  so  hee  succeeded
in  the  Lordship  of  Mexico,  as  is  before  rehearsed,  and
being  in  the  said  Lordship  he  did  greatly  increase  the
Mexican  Empire,  bearing  the  rule  over  all  the  Townes
in  this  New  Spaine,  insomuch  that  they  gave  and  payed
him  great  tributes  of  much  riches  and  value :  He  was
feared  very  much  of  all  his  servants,  and  likewise  of
his  Captaines  and  Principals,  insomuch  that  not  one
when  they  had  any  businesse  with  him,  for  the  great
reverence  they  had  him  in,  durst  for  feare  looke  him
in  the  face,  but  that  they  held  downe  their  eyes  and
their  head  low  and  enclined  to  the  ground,  and  many
other  extraordinarie  respects  and  ceremonies  they  did
unto  him  for  the  Majestie  he  represented  unto  them,
not  mentioned  here  for  avoyding  of  tediousnesse.  After
Motezuma  had  succeeded  in  the  said  Lordship,  hee
conquered  foure  and  fortie  Townes  hereafter  named  ;
and  hee  subdued  them  under  his  Lordship  and  Empire,
and  in  their  acknowledging  of  servitude  all  the  con-
tinuance of  his  life,  they  payed  him  many  and  great
tributes,  as  hereafter  by  their  pictures  and  declarations
is  made  manifest.

Motecuma was by  nature wise, and an Astrologer,
and a Philosopher, subtile  and skilled generally in all

434

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES  ad.

c.  1525.
artes,  aswell  of  warres  as  all  other  matters  temporall.
And  for  his  gravitie  and  estate  he  had  of  his  Lordship
the  beginning  of  an  Empire,  according  as  his  servants
did  reverence  him  with  great  honor  and  power,  that  in
comparison  of  him,  not  one  of  his  predecessors  came  to
halfe  so  much  estate  and  Majestic

The  Statutes  and  Lawes  of  his  Predecessors,  since  the  Lawes.
time  of  Gueguemotecuma  untill  his  time,  he  commanded
to  bee  kept  and  wholly  fulfilled  with  great  zeale. And
because  hee  was  a  man  so  wise,  by  his  good  nature  he
ordayned  and  made  other  Statutes  and  Lawes  which  he
thought defective for the  execution  of  the  former,  not
abrogating  any,  all  which  were  for  the  welfare  and  good
government of  his Commonwealth  and Subjects. Hee
was inclined  to  keepe  many  houses  and  women,  which  Many  women,
were daughters of  the Lords his Subjects and Con-  som  mves*
federates  ;  and  by  them  he  had  many  children  ; and  to  Concubines.
have so  many  wives  was  for  to set  forth his Majestie
the  more,  for  they  hold  it  for  a point of  great estate.
Among which the daughters of the Lords of great
authoritie he  held  for  lawfull  wives, according  to  their  [HI-  v-
rights  and ceremonies, and  them hee kept within his  I079-J

Palaces  and  dwelling  houses ;  and  the  children  that  came
of  them  were  had  in  reputation  as  more  lawfull  children
then  the  others  which  hee  had  by  the  other  women. It  See  hefore  in

were  a  large  historie  to  tell  the  order  he  had  in  keeping  of losta.'  an

0  .  r B after  in

them, and conversation with them. And because  this  Gomara

present  historie  is  but  briefe, it  is  left  unrehearsed.  more  large

The  quantitie,  value,  and  number  of  the  tributes  and  relations  of

kindes  of  things  that  his  subiects  did  pay  for  tribute  unto  Mta&f***>**

him,  shall  be  seene  and  understood  hereafter,  as  by  the  0fstate  ana>

pictures and  declarations  is  signified. And he  made a  majestie,

straight  order  that  the tributes  which  they  payed  him,  equalling  in

should  be  fulfilled  according  as  they  were  levied  by  him  ;  man^  thinS,s->

for  the  fulfilling  whereof  he  had  in  all  his  subject-townes  exceedingmost

his Calpixques  and  Factors, which were as  Governors,  Princes  of  the

that  ruled,  commanded,  and  governed  them  ;  and  hee  was  elder  world.
so much  feared  that  none  durst  disobey  nor  transgresse

435

A.D.

c  1525.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

A  The  number  of  19.  yeeres  (18.  yeeres  of  his  raigne,  and  that  other
which  followed  in  his  Successor,  wherin  Mexico  was  conquered,  as  you
may  see  in  the  next  chapter.)  B  the  fourth  yeere  of  his  raigne  in
which  hee  began  his  conquest.  C  Motezuma.  D  the  instruments  of
warre  by  which  hee  conquered  Achiotlan,  Zozolan,  Nochiztlan,  Tecute-
pec,  Zulan,  Tlaniztlan,  Huilotepec,  Yepatepec,  Yztactlalocan,  Chichi-
hualtatacala,  Tecaxic,  Tlachinolticpac,  Xoconochco,  Zinacantlan,  Huizt-
lan,  Piaztlan,  Molanco,  Zaquantepec,  Pipiyoltepec,  Hucyapan,  Tecpatlan,
Amatlan,  Caltepec,  Pantepec,  Teoazinco,  Tecozanhtla,  Teochiapan,
Zacatepec,  Tlachquiyanhco,  Malinaltepec,  Qui-
michtepec,  Yzquintepec,  Zenzontepec,  Quetz-
altepec,  Cuezcomayxtlahuacan,  Huexolotlan,
-a"k  Xalapan,  Xaltianhnizco,  Yoloxonecuila,  Atepec,

X/  §  Mictlan,  Yztitlan,  Tliltepec,  Comaltepec.

These  townes  were  governed  by  the  Casiques

Principals of  Mexico, appointed by the

Lords of  Mexico,  for  the  good  defence  and

government  of
the  naturall
people,  and  for
the  securitie  of
the  Townes,
that  they  should
not  rebell,  as
also  for  the
charge  they  had
to  gather,  and
command  to  be
gathered  the
Rents  and  Tri-
butes, that  they
were  bound  to
give  and  pay  to
the  Dominion
of  Mexico.

Citlaltepec,
Ouanhtochco,

Mixcoatl,  Tlacatectli  a  Govemour,  Zonpaneo,  Xaltocan,  Tlacatectli  a
Governour,  Acalhuacon,  Tlacochtectli  a  Governour,  Huaxac,  Yzte-
yocan,  Coatitlan,  Huixachtitlan,  Tlacatectli  a  Governour,  Tlacochtectli
a  Governour,  Zozolan,  Poetepec,  Coatlayancham,  Acolnahuac,  Puputlan,
Yztacolco,  Chalcoatenco,  Tlacochtectly  a  Governour,  Tlacatecatl  a
Governour,  Oztoma,  Atzacan,  Atlan,  Omequuh,  Tezcacoacatl  a
Governour,  Tlilancalqui  a  Governour,  Xoconochco,  Tecapotitlan.

436

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES  a.d.

c.  1525.
his  will  and  commandement,  but  that  they  were  kept  and
wholly  fulfilled, because  he  punished  and corrected  the
rebels  without  remission.

And  in  the  sixteenth  yeere  of  the  reigne  of  Motezuma,  Ftrst  notue  °f
the  Mexicans  had  knowledge  of  certaine  Spaniards,  which  f  e  Pamar  '•
were  discoverers  of  this  New  Spaine,  that  at  the  end
of  twelve  moneths  there  should  come  a  fleet  of  Spaniards
to  overcome  and  conquer  this  Country ;  and  the  Mexicans
kept  account  thereof,  and  they  found  it  to  bee  true,  for  at
the  end  of  the  said  twelve  moneths  was  the  arrivall  of  the
said  fleet  at  a  Haven  of  this  New  Spaine,  in  the  which
fleet  came  Don  Ferdinando  Cortes,  Marques  del  Valle,
which  was  the  seventeenth  yeere  of  the  reign  of  Mote-
zuma ;  and  in  the  eighteenth  yeere  he  made  an  end  of
the  continuance  of  his  Lordship  and  Raigne :  in  the  which
yeere  he  dyed  and  departed  this  present  life.  At  the  Mutezumas
time  when  Motezuma  came  to  his  government,  he  was  eat  '
five  and  thirtie  yeeres  old  little  more  or  lesse,  so  that
at  his  decease  he  was  three  and  fiftie  yeeres  of  age.  And
straightway  in  the  yeere  after  his  death,  this  Citie  of
Mexico,  and  other  Townes  adjoyning,  were  overcome
and  pacified  by  the  said  Marques  del  Valle,  and  his
Confederates.  And  so  this  New  Spaine  was  conquered
and  pacified.

§.  II.  [IILv.

.  Io8°-]

The  second  part  of  this  Booke  contayning  the  par-
ticular Tributes  which  every  Towne  subdued
paid  unto  the  Lords  of  Mexico.

m

Ere  follow  pictured  and  intituled  the  kinds  of
things,  that  they  of  Tlatilulco  (which  at  this  day
is  called  by  the  Spaniards,  Saint  James)  did  pay
in  tribute  to  the  Lords  of  Mexico,  and  the  said  tribute
summed  here,  is  that  which  followeth.

They  were  charged  for  tribute,  alwayes  to  repaire
the  Church  called  Huiznahuac.  Item,  fortie  great
Baskets (of  the bignesse  of  halfe  a  Bushell) of Cacao

437

A.D.

c  1525.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

V/////////J

Xniitti]
vvvw>w

..;*„"?  r.y.-y.-.,.

A  the  Temple  of  Huiznahuac.  B  20.  baskets  of  Cacao  meale  (the
Eare  and  Meale  figured).  C  20.  more  of  the  same.  C  20.  D  20.
E  20.  baskets  of  Chiaupinoli.  F.  40.  peeces  of  Armes  of  this  device.
G  40.  of  this  device  (like  the  former,  but  that  is  white  with  blacke
streakes,  this  yellow).  H  I  are  each  400.  burthens  (the  eare  signed
400.)  of  Mantles.  K  These  foure  like  unto  flowres  doe  signifie  foure
dayes,  every  flowre  20.  dayes,  as  they  of  Tlatilulco  did  tribute  the
things  pictured  and  intituled  by  taxation  of  the  Lords  of  Mexico.
L  40.  Targets  of  this  device  (to  expresse  the  difference  of  colours
in  each  particular  were  too  tedious.)  N  Tlatilulco.  The  names  of
Quauhtlatoa  and  Moquihuix  Lords  of  Tlatilulco  are  added,  because
in  their  times  it  began  ;  as  also  of  Tenuxtitlan,  Izcoaci  and  Apayacan
to  intimate  that  these  two  Lords  of  Mexico  or  Tenuxtitlan  subdued
them.  The  Pictures  of  them  (as  of  many  Townes  before)  were
omitted :  being  but  such  descriptions  of  men  and  Townes  as  you
have  seene  alreadie.

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES  a.d.

c.  1525.
ground,  with  the  Meale  of  Maiz  (which  they  called
Chianpinoli)  and  every  Basket  had  sixteene  hundred
Almonds  of  Cacao.  Item,  other  fortie  Baskets  of  Chian-
pinoli. Item,  eight  hundred  burthens  of  great  Mantels.
Item,  eightie  pieces  of  Armour,  of  slight  Feathers,  and
as  many  Targets  of  the  same  Feathers,  of  the  devices
&  colours  as  they  are  pictured.  All  the  which  tribute,
except  the  said  armes  and  targets  they  gave  every  24.
dayes,  and  the  said  armes  and  targets  they  gave  for
tribute  but  once  in  the  whole  yeere.  The  said  tribute
had  his  beginning  since  the  time  of  Quauhtlatoa  and
Moquihuix,  which  were  Lords  of  Tlatilulco.  The  Lords
of  Mexico,  which  first  enjoyned  to  those  of  Tlatilulco,
to  pay  tribute,  and  to  acknowledge  their  subjection,
were  Yzcoatc.i  and  Axiacaci.

THe Townes  pictured in  the two Pieces following,  t111- v-
and summed heere by  twentie three Townes as  10  i.j

appeareth  by  the  Titles,  and  they  had  a  chiefe  Gover-
nour  appointed  by  the  Lords  of  Mexico,  called  Petla-
calcatl,  although  neverthelesse,  every  Towne  had  his
Calpixque,  which  is  as  it  were  a  Steward  or  BaylifFe,
whose  charge  was  to  gather  the  Rents  &  tributes  that
the  said  Townes  did  tribute  to  the  Dominion  of
Mexico,  and  all  the  said  Stewards  came  to  the  said
Petlacalcatl  as  their  Governor,  and  the  things  and  kinds
that  the  said  townes  did  tribute,  are  these  which
follow,  2400.  burthens  of  great  Mantels  of  twisted
Yarne.  Eight  hundred  burthens  of  little  Mantles,  rich
attyre,  of  the  colours  as  they  are  pictured.  Foure
hundred  burthens  of  Maxtlac,  which  served  for  little
clothes.  Foure  hundred  burthens  of  Huipiles  and
Naguas,  all  the  which  they  gave  for  tribute  every  sixe
moneths.

Item,  They  gave  five  pieces  of  Armour,  of  rich
Feathers,  and  as  many  Targets  of  the  colours  and
devices  as  they  are  pictured.

Item,  They  did  tribute  seventie  pieces  of  Armour  of

439

tltitl

Petlacalcatl  a  Governour  (the  pictures  of  men  and  townes  are  heere
and  in  the  following  omitted,  being  no  other  then  as  you  have  alreadie
seene).  The  townes  are  Xaxalpan,  Yopico,  Tepetlacalco,  Tecoloapan,
Tepechpan,  Tequemecan,  Huicilo  Pucheo,  Colhuacinco,  Cozotlan,
Tepepulan,  Olac,  Acapan,  Cuitlahuac,  Tezcacoa,  Mezquis,  Aochpanco,
Tzapotitlan,  Xico,  Toyac,  Tecalco,  Tlacoxiuhco,  Nextitlan.

A  400.  burthens  of  Maxtlac  of  this  worke,  which  be  little  clothes.
B  400.  burthens  of  Naguas,  and  Huipiles  of  this  worke.  C  400.
burthens  of  great  Mantels.  D  400.  burthens  of  great  Mantels.  E  400.
burthens  of  great  Mantels.  F  400.  burthens  of  little  Mantels,  of  this
worke  each  division  of  severall  colours,  Red,  Blue,  Yellow,  Greene.
G  400.  burthens  of  little  Mantels  of  this  worke.  H  400.  burthens  of
great  Mantels.  I  400.  burthens  of  great  Mantels.  K  400.  burthens  of
great  Mantels.  L  A  piece  of  Armour  of  this  device  of  rich  Feathers
yeerely.  M  A  Target  of  rich  Feathers  of  this  device.  N  A  piece  of
Armour  of  this  device  of  rich  Feathers  yeerely.  O  A  Target  of  rich
Feathers  of  this  device.  P  A  piece  of  Armour  of  rich  Feathers  of  this
device  yeerely.  Q  A  Target  of  rich  Feathers  of  this  device.  R  A  piece
of  Armour  of  rich  Feathers,  of  this  device  yeerely.  S  A  Target  of  rich
Feathers  of  this  device.

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES

Feathers  of  small  account,  and  as  many  Targets  of  the
colours  and  devices  as  they  are  pictured.

Item, They tributed one Troxes of Frisoles, and
another  Troxe  of  Chian,  and another  Troxe  of  Mayz,

A.D.

c.  1525.

[III.

1082.]

.*&£«*&•.

1

1

ho-4

1

1

u u

.£$&&!;?.

c

i&

4

t

"D U

A  A  piece  of  Armour  of  rich  feathers  of  this  device  yeerely.  B  A
Target  of  rich  feathers  of  this  device.  C  20.  pieces  of  Armour  of  this
device  yeerely,  they  were  of  red  feathers.  D  20.  Targets  of  feathers
of  this  device.  E  20.  pieces  of  Armour  of  feathers  of  this  device
yeerely.  F  20.  Targets  of  feathers.  G  20.  pieces  of  Armour  of  this
device,  blue,  of  light  feathers  yeerely.  H  20.  Targets  of  feathers  of
this  device.  I  A  Troxe  of  Frisoles  and  Chian,  one  of  the  one  kind
and,  and  another  of  the  other  kind.  K  A  Troxe  of  Maiz  and
another  of  Guautli,  which  is  seed  of  Bletlos.

441

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1525.

and  another  of  Guautli,  which  is  the  seed  of  Bletlos.
All  the  which  things  of  the  said  Armour  and  Targets,
and  Troxes  of  Frisoles,  and  the  other  seeds  the  said
Townes  did  pay  for  tribute  once  every  yeere.

[III.  v.  r  I  Vfiese Townes pictured and named, ensuing and

Io83-J  JL  summed  heere,  are  sixe  and  twentie  townes,  wherein
from  the  time  of  their  conquests  by  the  Lords  of  Mexico,
they  had  set  Calpixques,  as  it  were  Bayliffes  in  every
of  them,  and  in  the  principall  Towne  a  Governour  bare
rule  above  all  the  rest,  because  he  should  mayntaine
them  in  peace  and  justice,  and  make  them  performe
their  tributes,  and  that  they  should  not  rebell.  The
tributes  that  all  the  said  townes  hereafter  contayned,  did
pay  together,  are  these  which  follow.

Two  thousand  burthens  of  great  Mantels  twisted.
Item,  1 200.  burthens  of  Canahuac,  which  be  rich  Mantels,
wherewith  the  Lords  and  Casiques  were  clothed  of  the
colours  as  they  are  pictured.  Item,  400.  burthens  of
Maxtlactl,  which  be  little  clothes.  Item,  400.  burthens
of  Huipiles  and  Naguas,  all  the  which  they  paid  for
tribute  twice  a  yeere.  Item,  they  gave  more  tribute
three  pieces  of  Armour  garnished  with  rich  feathers,  and
as  many  Targets  of  the  colours  and  devices  as  they  are
pictured,  the  which  they  gave  in  the  space  of  one  yeere.
Item,  one  hundred  pieces  of  Armour  garnished  with
feathers  of  small  value,  and  as  many  Targets  of  the
devices  and  colours  as  they  are  hereafter  pictured,  the
which  they  tributed  once  a  yeere.  Item,  foure  great
Troxes  of  wood,  full,  the  one  of  Frisoles,  and  another
of  Chian,  and  another  of  Maiz,  and  another  of  Guautli,
which  is  the  seed  of  Blethos.  Every  Troxe  might  con-
tayne  foure  or  five  thousand  Hanegas,  the  which  they
tributed  once  a  yeere.

Acolmecalt,  Calipixque,  Acolhuacan,  Huicilan,  Tolol-
cinco,  Tlachyahnalco,  Tepechpa,  Aztaquemeca,  Teacalco,
Tonanitla,  Zenpoalan,  Tepetlaoztoc,  Achnatepec,  Ticatep,
Contlan,  Yxquenecan, Matixco, Teneazcalapan, Tyzain-

442

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES

can,  Tepetlapan,  Caliahualco,  Tecoyncan,  Tlaquilpan,
Quauhquemecan,  Epacuincan,  Ameyalco,  Quauhyocan,
Ecatepec.

A.D.

c.  1525.

n — u ~n n

A  400.  burthens  of  Mantels  of  this  colour  (red)  and  worke
(edged  Blue,  Greene,  Red,  and  Yellow).  B  400.  bundles  of
Mantels  of  this  worke  (Blacke  and  White).  C  Twentie
pieces  of  Armes  of  rich  feathers  of  this  worke.

A  Following  two  Troxes  of  Frisoles  and  Chian.  B  two
Troxes,  the  one  of  Maiz,  the  other  of  Huautli  (their  corne.)
The  rest  are  omitted  in  Picture,  beeing  resembled  as  the
former,  and  for  the  Historie  you  have  it  before.

THe  townes  pictured  and  named,  and  numbred  here
are  sixteene  townes,  the  which  townes  did  pay  for
tribute  to  the  Lords  of  Mexico,  the  things  pictured  and
intituled.  And  because  they  should  be  well  ruled  and
governed,  the  Lords  of  Mexico  had  set  Calpixques  in
every  town,  and  above  all  them  for  Governour,  a  prin-
cipall  man  of  Mexico  ;  the  Calpixques  also  were  men  of
Mexico  :  which  was  done  by  the  said  Lords  for  the
securitie  of  the  townes,  that  they  should  not  rebell,  and
also  because  they  should  minister  Justice,  and  live  in
policie. And  the  said  Tributes  that  the  said  townes  gave

443

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1525.

as  appeareth  by  the  said  Pictures,  and  summed  heere,  are
those  which  follow.

First,  they  did  tribute  twelve  hundred  burthens  of  great
Mantels  of  twisted  Yarne.

Item,  Eight  hundred  burthens  of  small  white  Mantels,
of  the  apparell  which  they  did  weare.

Item,  Twelve  hundred  burthens  of  small  white  Mantels,
richly  wrought,  which  is  apparell  that  the  Lords  and
Casiques  did  weare.

Item,  Foure  hundred  burthens  of  Maxtlactle,  which  are
small  clothes  that  they  weare.

A  Eight  thousand  sheetes  of  Paper,  of  the  Countrey.
B  Foure  hundred  Xicaras,  or  Cup-dishes  of  this  worke.
C  Foure  hundred  of  this  worke.  D  Foure  hundred  of  this
worke.  E  Foure  hundred  of  this  worke.  F  Foure  hundred
of  this  worke.  The  colours  are  Yellow  and  Red.  The  rest
need  no  presenting  in  Picture,  beeing  but  as  formerly  is
seene.

[III.  v.  Item,  Foure  hundred  burthens  of  Huipiles  and  Naguas,

1084.]  wnicn  is  apparell  for  women,  all  the  which  they  tribute
twice  a  yeere ;  so  that  they  gave  tribute  every  sixe
moneths.

Item,  They  did  tribute  eight  pieces  of  Armour,  and  as
many  Targets  garnished  with  rich  feathers  of  divers
colours  as  they  are  pictured,  the  which  they  paid  for
tribute  once  a  yeere.

Item,  Foure  great  Troxes  of  wood,  full  of  Maiz  and
Frisoles,  and  Chian,  and Huautli,  which  is  the  seed  of

444

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES  a.d.

c.  1525.
Blethos,  every  Troxe  might  contayne  5000.  Hanegas  or
Bushels,  the  which  they  did  tribute  once  a  yeere.

Item,  Eight  Reames  of  Paper,  of  the  Countrey,  which
they  tributed  twice  a  yeere  ;  so  that  in  all  it  was  every
yeere  sixteene  thousand  sheets  of  Paper.

Item,  In  every  tribute  2000.  Xicharas,  or  drinking
Cups,  which  they  gave  twice  a  yeere.

The  Townes  were  Quauhnahuac,  Teocalcinco,  Chim-
alco,  Huiccilapan,  Acatlicpac,  Xochitepec,  Miacatla,
Molotla,  Coatlan,  Xiuhtepec,  Xoxoutla,  Amacoztitlan,
Yztlan,  Ocpayucan,  Yztepec,  Atlicholoayan.

THe  townes  following,  and  numbred  here  are  six  and
twentie,  which  did  pay  tribute  of  the  things  pictured
and  entituled  to  the  Lords  of  Mexico  and  likewise  there
was  resident  a  Governour,  and  Mexican  Calipixque,  as
in  the  other  townes  afore  mentioned,  which  were  ordained
by  the  Lords  of  Mexico.  And  the  tributes  that  they
payed,  appearing  by  the  Pictures  are  these  which  follow.
First,  they  did  tribute  400.  burthens  of  Maxtlactle,
which  are  little  clothes.  Item,  400.  burthens  of  Naguas
&  Huipiles,  apparell  for  women.  Item,  2400.  burthens
of  great  Mantles,  of  twisted  yarne.  Item,  800.  burthens
of  rich  Manties,  that  the  Lords  and  Principals  of  Mexico
were  clothed  with,  of  the  colours  as  they  are  pictured.
Item,  2000.  Xicaras  varnished,  of  the  colours  as  they
be  pictured.  Item,  8000.  Reames  of  Paper  of  the
Countrey,  all  the  which  they  gave  in  every  tribute,
which  was  every  six  moneths.  Item,  They  tributed  40.
pieces  of  Armour,  and  as  many  Targets  garnished  with
slight  feathers  died  of  divers  colours,  as  appeareth  by
the  Pictures.  Item,  Six  pieces  of  Armour,  and  as  many
Targets  garnished  with  rich  feathers  of  the  devices  and
colours  as  they  be  pictured.  Item,  Foure  great  Troxes
of  wood  like  those  aforesaid,  ful  of  Maiz,  and  Frisoles,
and  Chian,  and  Guautli,  all  the  which  they  tributed  once
a  yeere.

The townes names are Huaxtepec, Xoxhimilcacinco,

445

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1525.

Quauhtlan,  Achuehueopan,  Anenequilco,  Olintepec,
Quauhnitlyxco,  Zonpanco,  Huizilapan,  Tlaltitcapan,  Coa-
calco,  Yzamatitla  Tepoztlan,  Yanhtepec,  Yacappichtla,
Tlayacapan,  Xaloztoc,  Tecpazino,  Nepopoalco,  Atlatlauca,
Totolapan,  Amilzinco,  Atlhuelic.

ABCDE  are  each  of  them  foure  hundred  Xicaras  or
Cup-dishes.

F  Eight  thousand  sheets  of  Paper,  the  Pictures  of  the  rest
are  omitted.

[III.  v.  HPHe  Townes  pictured and named here are seven,

Io85-J  JL  which  paid  tribute  to  the  Lords  of  Mexico,  as  in
the  other  parts  aforesaid  have  beene  mentioned,  and
the  things  they  tributed  are  these  that  follow.

First,  Foure  hundred  burdens  of  Mantels  of  rich
workes ;  and  foure  hundred  burdens  of  plaine  Mantels,
of  the  color  as  they  be  pictured.  Item,  Foure  thousand
Petates,  which  are  Mats,  and  other  foure  hundred
backes  with  their  seates  made  of  Segs  and  other  Herbs,
the  which  they  did  tribute  every  six  moneths.  Item,
Two  peeces  of  Armour,  and  as  many  Targets  gar-
nished with  rich  Feathers  of  the  devices  and  colours  as
they  be  pictured.  Item,  Fortie  peeces  of  Armour,  and
as  many  Targets,  garnished  with  sleight  Feathers.
Item,  Foure  great  Troxes  of  wood  of  the  bignesse  of
those  aforesaid,  full  of  Maiz,  Frisoles,  Chian  and
Guantly,  which  they  gave  for  tribute  once  a  yeare.

The  Townes  are  Quauhtitlan,  Tehuiloyocan,  Ahuex-
oyocan,  Xalapan,  Tepoxaco,  Cuezcomo  huacan,  Xilocinco.

446

MEXICAN IISTORY IN PICTURES

A.D.

c.  1525.

A  Foure  hundred  burthens  of  Mantles  of  this  worke
(coloured  with  Red,  Yellow,  etc.)  B  Foure  hundred
burthens  of  Mantles  of  this  worke  (Blacke  and  White.)
C  Foure  hundred  burthens  of  this  worke  (all  White.)
D  Foure  thousand  Mats  &  foure  thousand  Backes :  the
number  is  intimated  by  the  figures  following,  somewhat  like
eares  of  Corne,  each  of  which  signifieth  foure  hundred.

THe Townes pictured and named are tenne,  which
did paie  tribute  to  the  Lords  of  Mexico,  as  afore
said, and  the  things  that  they  did tribute  doe  follow.
First,  eight hundred burdens of  rich Mantles, and

A  Foure  hundred  Pots  of  thicke  Honie  of  Magues  :  this
is,  for  the  novell  figure  pictured,  the  rest  not,  being  as  the
former  in  their  forme.

wrought  as appeareth  by  the  titles  and  pictures. Item,
Foure  hundred burdens of white Mantles, with their

447

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1525.

border  of  blacke  and  white.  Item,  Eight  hundred
burdens  of  white  Mantles.  Item,  Foure  hundred
burdens  of  Naguas  and  Huipiles.  Item,  Foure
hundred  great  Pots  of  thicke  Honie  of  Maques :  all  the
which  they  tributed  every  sixe  moneths.  Item,  They
did  tribute  two  peeces  of  Armour,  garnished  with  rich
Feathers,  and  as  many  Targets  of  rich  Feathers,  of
the  devices  as  they  be  pictured  and  intituled.  Item,
Fortie  peeces  of  Armour,  garnished  with  slight  Feathers,
and  as  many  Targets,  of  the  devices  as  they  are  pic-
tured. Item,  Foure  great  Troxes  of  wood,  of  the
bignesse  of  those  that  are  signified  in  the  parts  before,
the  one  of  Maiz,  and  the  other  of  Frisoles,  another  of
Chian,  and  another  of  Guantli  seede  of  Bledos.  All
the  which  they  tributed  once  a  yeare.  The  Townes
are  Axocopan,  Atenco,  Tetepanco,  Xochichiuca,  Temo-
huayan,  Tezcatepec,  Myzquianhnala,  Yzmyquilpan,
Tlaahnililpan,  Tecpatepec.

THe  number  of  the  Townes  ensuing,  are  seven,  and
they  did  tribute  to  the  Lords  of  Mexico,  after
the  order  declared  in  the  parts  aforesaid;  and  the
things  which  they  did  tribute  are  those  which  follow.

First, Foure hundred burdens of Mantels of  rich
workes,  which  was  apparell  that  the  Lords  and  Caciques
did  put  on. Item, Foure hundred burdens of  white
[III.  v.  Mantels,  with their borders  of  white  and  black. Item,

1086.]  Eight  hundred  burdens  of  great  Mantels  of  twisted
Yarne.  Item,  Foure  hundred  burdens  of  Chalk,  all  the
which  they  did  tribute  every  six  moneths.  Item,  they
did  tribute  two  peeces  of  Armour  garnished  with  rich
Feathers,  and  two  Targets,  as  appeareth  by  the  devices
and  pictures.  Item,  Fortie  peeces  of  Armor,  and  as
many  Targets  garnished  with  slight  Feathers,  as
appeareth  by  the  pictures,  devices  and  titles.  Item,
Foure  great  Troxes  of  wood,  of  the  bignesse  of  those
before,  the  one  full  of  Maiz,  another  of  Frisoles,
another  of  Clian,  and another of  Guautli ; all of the

448

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES

which!  they  did  tribute  once  a  yeare.  The  Townes  are
Atotonilco,  Guapalcalco,  Quecalmacan,  Acocolco,  Tehuch-
nec,  Otlazpan,  Xalac.

A.D.

c.  1525.

A  400.  burthens  of  Chalke  or  Lime :  the  marke  on  the
top  signifieth  400.  the  figure  is  the  forme  of  their  burthen.
Other  figures  neede  not  be  presented.

THe number of the Townes following, are nine,
according  as they be pictured and named. And
they  paid  tribute  as  followeth.

First, foure hundred burdens of Mantels of rich

A  400.  Pots  of  Honie  of  Maguez,  paid  every  six  months.

workes,  which  the  Lords  and  Casiques  did  put  on.
Item,  Foure  hundred  burdens  of  white  Mantels,  with
their  edge  of  white  and  blacke.  Item,  eight  hundred
burdens  of  white  Mantels  of  Enequen.  Item,  Foure
hundred  Pots  of  thicke  Honie  of  Maguez.  All  the
which  they  tributed  every  six  moneths.  Item,  Two
peeces  of  Armour,  and  as  many  Targets,  garnished
xv  449  2  F

A.D.

c.  1525.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

with  rich  Feathers,  of  the  colours  and  devises  as  they
be  pictured  &  intituled.  Item,  threescore  peeces  of
Armor,  and  as  many  Targets,  garnished  with  slight
Feathers,  of  the  colours  and  devises  as  they  be  entituled
and  pictured.  Item,  Foure  great  Troxes  of  wood,  of
the  bignesse  aforesaid  full,  the  one  of  Mays,  and
another  of  Frisoles,  another  of  Chian,  and  another  of
Guautly.  All  the  which  they  tributed  once  a  yeare.
The  Townes  are  Hueypuchtla,  Xalac,  Tequixcuiac,
Tetlapanaloyan,  Xicalhuacan,  Xomeyocan,  Acayocan,
Tezcatepetonco,  Atocpan.

THe number  of  the Townes  following  be  six : and
they  paid  tribute  as  followeth.
First, Eight hundred burdens of rich Mantels
apparel  that  the  Lords  of  Mexico  did  cloath  themselves
with,  as  appeareth  in  the  said  side  by  the  pictures  and

1,  ,i 1=

-o-

utr— U3

A  Foure  hundred  burthens  of  rich  Mantles  of  this  worke.  B  Foure
hundred  burthens  of  rich  Mantels  of  this  worke.  C  Two  troxes,  one
of  Mays,  the  other  of  Chian.  D  Two  troxes,  the  one  of  Frisoles,  the
other  of  Guautli. Other  pictures  are  omitted,  being  like  the  former.

45°

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES

titles.  Item,  One  thousand  six  hundred  burdens  of
white  Mantels  of  Enequen ;  all  the  which  they  did
tribute  to  the  Lords  of  Mexico  every  six  moneths.
Item,  Foure  peeces  of  Armour,  and  as  many  Targets,
garnished  with  rich  Feathers  of  the  colours  and  devises
as  they  are  pictured  and  intituled.  Item,  Foure  great
Troxes  of  wood,  of  the  bignesse  of  the  other,  full  of
Maiz,  Frisoles,  Chian,  and  Guautly.  All  the  which
they  did  tribute  once  a  yeare.  The  Townes  are
Atotonilco,  Acaxochitla,  Xuachquecaloyan,  Hueyapan,
Itzihuinquilocan,  Tulancingo.

THe  number  of  the  Townes  are  seven :  and  they  paid  [III.
tribute  as  followeth.  First,  400.  burthens  of  very
rich  Naguas  and  Huipiles,  which  is  apparell  for  women.
Item,  400.  burthens  of  rich  Mantels,  Lords  apparell.
Item,  400.  burthens  of  Naguas  wrought.  Item,  800.
burthens  of  rich  Mantels.  Item,  400.  burthens  of  rich
small  Mantels. Item,  400.  burthens  of  Mantels  drawne

A.D.

c.  1525.

1087.]

A  400.  burthens  of  very  rich  Naguas  and  Huipiles.  B  400.  burthens
of  rich  Mantels  of  this  worke.  C  400.  burthens  of  Naguas  of  this
worke.  D  400.  burthens  of  rich  Mantels  of  this  worke.  E  400.  burthens
of  rich  Mantels  of  this  worke.  F  A  live  Eagle  that  they  brought  in  every
tribute,  sometimes  three,  other  times  foure,  and  other  times  more  or  lesse.

451

A.D.

c.  1525.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

through the middle with red : all  the  which  they  tri-
buted  every  sixe  moneths.

Item,  A  living  Eagle,  two,  three,  or  more,  according  as
they  could  finde  them.  Item,  two  pieces  of  Armour
and  two  Targets,  garnished  with  rich  feathers,  of  the
device  and  colour  as  they  are  pictured.  Item,  Foure
great  Troxes  of  wood,  full  of  Maiz,  Frisoles,  Chian,  and
Guautli :  all  the  which  they  tributed  once  a  yeere.  The
townes  names  are  Xilotepec,  Tlachco,  Tzayanalquilpa,
Mychnaloyan,  Tepetitlan,  Acaxochytla,  Tecocauhtlan.

THe  number  of  the  Townes  following  are  thirteene.
And  they  payed  tribute  as  followeth.
First, 800. burthens of  rich small Mantles of  this
worke, as they be  pictured. Item, 800. burthens of
small,  of  Enequen :  all  the  which  they  did  tribute  every
sixe  moneths.

kkk

,  .n

--

—

Vtt'y

—

u

A  400.  burthens  of  wood.  A  400.  burthens  of  wood.  A  400.
burthens  of  wood.  B  400.  great  beames,  or  pieces  of  timber.  B  400.
great  beames.  B  400.  great  beames.  C  400.  great  plankes  of  timber.  C
400.  great  plankes  of  timber.  C  400.  great  boards  of  timber.  D  400.
quarters  of  timber.  D  400.  quarters  of  timber.  D  400.  quarters  of
timber.

452

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES  a.d.

c.  1525.

Item,  A  piece  of  Armour  and  a  Target  garnished  with
rich  feathers.  Item,  Fortie  pieces  of  Armour  and  as
many  Targets  garnished  with  slight  feathers :  the  which
Armour they  tributed  once  a  yeere.

Item,  Foure  great  Troxes  of  wood  of  the  bignesse
aforesaid,  full  of  Maiz,  Frisoles,  Chian,  and  Guautly,
which  likewise  they  tributed  once  a  yeere.

Item,  1200.  burthens  of  wood,  which  they  tributed
every  foure  dayes.  Item,  1200.  great  Beames  of  Timber,
which  they  tributed  every  foure  dayes.  Item,  2400.  great
Boards  or  Planks,  which  they  tributed  every  foure  dayes.
The  Townes  are,  Quahneocan,  Tecpa,  Chapolnoloyan,
Tlalatlauco,  Acaxochic,  Ameyalco,  Ocotepec,  Huizquilocan,
Coatepec,  Quauhpanoayan,  Tlalachco,  Chichciquauhtla,
Huitzicilapan.

THe  number  of  the  townes  pictured  are  twelve. And  [***•  v-
they  tributed as followeth. First, 400. burthens  '  '■"

of  Cotton-wooll,  Mantles  white  with  an  edge  of  Greene,

A  400.  burthens  of
Cotton  - wooll  -  mantles
ofthisworke.  B  4.00.
burthens  of  Mantles
of  Enequen,  of  this
worke.

C  Two  Troxes,  the
one  of  Maiz,  and  the
other  of  Chian.  D
Two  Troxes  of  Fri-
soles &  Guautly.  E
Two  Troxes,  the  one
of  Maiz,  and  the
other  of  Chian.

Yellow,  Red,  and  Olive  colour.  Item,  400.  burthens  of
Mantles  of  Enequen,  wrought  and  spotted,  with  Red,
White and Blacke. Item, 1200.  burthens of white

453

A.D.

c  1525-

[III.  v.

1089.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Mantles  of  Enequen :  all  the  which  they  tributed  every
six  moneths.  Item,  two  pieces  of  Armour,  and  as  many
Targets  garnished  with  rich  feathers  of  the  colours  and
devices  as  they  are  pictured.  Item,  twentie  pieces  of
Armour,  with  as  many  Targets,  garnished  with  slight
feathers  of  the  colours  and  devices  as  they  are  pictured.
Item,  six  great  Troxes  of  wood  of  the  bignesse  afore-
said, full  of  Frisoles,  Maiz,  Chian,  and  Guautly:  All
the  which  they  tributed  once  a  yeere.

The  townes  names  are  Tuluca,  Calixtlahnacan,  Xical-
tepec,  Tepetlhuiacan,  Mytepec,  Capulteopan,  Metepec,
Cacalomaca,  Calymayan,  Teoteuanco,  Zepemaxalco,  Zo-
quitzinco.

THe number of  the townes intituled and  pictured,
are  sixe. And  they  paid  tribute  as  followeth.
First,  they  did  tribute  800.  burthens  of  rich  Mantels
of  Enequen,  of  the  workes  as  they  be  pictured  A.

Item,  400.  burthens  of  Cotton-wooll  Mantles  rich,
of  the  worke  as  they  be  pictured. B.

Item,  400.  rich  Mantles  of  Enequen,  of  this  worke
pictured. C.

Item,  2000.  Loaves  of  fine  white  Salt  refined  &  made
in  long  moulds,  as  letter  D  each  of  which  signifie  400.
(as  the  Eare  above  declares.)  It  was  spent  only  for  the
Lords  of  Mexico,  all  the  which  they  tributed  every  sixe
moneths.

Item,  a  piece  of  Armor  with  a  Target  of  rich  feathers,
of  the  colours  and  devices  as  they  be  pictured.  Item,
Twentie  pieces  of  Armour,  and  as  many  Targets  gar-

454

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES

nished  with  slight  feathers  of  the  devices  and  colours
as  they  are  pictured.  Item,  Foure  great  Troxes  of  wood,
of  the bignesse  of  those before full  of  Maiz,  Frisoles,

Chian,  and  Guautly. All  the  which  they  tributed  once
a  yeere.

The  Townes,  Ocuilan,  Tenantinco,  Tequaloyan,  Tena-
tinho,  Coatepec,  Zincozcar.

A.D.

c.  1525.

THe  number  of  the  townes  pictured  are  three. And
they  paid  tribute  as  followeth. First,  1200.  burthens
of  great  white  Mantles  of  Enequen,  ABC.

Item,  400.  burthens  of  wrought  Mantles  of  Enequen,
all  the  which  they  tributed  every  sixe  moneths.

Item,  They  tributed  once  a  yeere  eight  great  Troxes
of  wood,  of  the  bignesse  aforesaid,  two  of  Maiz,  two  of
Frisoles,  two  of  Chian,  and  two  of  Guautly.  The  townes
were  Malynalco,  Zonpahnacan,  Xocotitlan.

455

A.D.

c.  1525.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

THe  number  of  the  Townes  following  are  ten,  [of  a
hot  Countrey,  and  they  paid  tribute  as  followeth.
First,  400.  burthens  of  rich  Mantles  made  of  Cotton-
wooll,  of  the  worke  as  they  be  pictured.  Item,  400.
burthens  of  Naguas  and  Huipiles.  Item,  1200.  burthens
of  white  Mantles  of  smooth  and  safe  Enequen.  All  the
which  they  did  tribute  every  six  moneths.

A  200.  pots  of  Honey,  i  the  marke
over  each  pot  signifieth  the  number
of  twentie.

B  400.  Baskets  of  Copall  refined.

C  8000.  lumps  of  Copall  unrefined,
wrapped  in  the  leaves  of  a  Date  Tree  :
the  upper  Figure  signifieth  the  Copall,
the  later  (like  a  Purse  with  three
Tassells  or  Targets  annexed)  is  the
Character  of  eight  thousand,  as  before
in  the  sheets  of  Paper  is  seene.

[III.  v.  Item,  200.  pots  of  Bees  Honey. Item,  1200.  Xicaras

1090.]  varnished  Yellow.  Item,  400.  Baskets  of  white  Copale
for  perfumes.  Item,  8000.  lumpes  of  unrefined  Copale,
wrapt  in  the  leaves  of  a  Palme  tree.  All  the  which  they
tributed  every  400.  dayes.  Item,  Two  pieces  of  Armour,
and  as  many  Targets  garnished  with  rich  feathers,  of  the
device  and  colour  as  they  are  pictured.  Item,  Two  great
Troxes  of  wood  of  the bignesse  of  those  aforesaid,  full,

456

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES

the  one  of  Maiz,  and  the  other  of  Chian. All  the  which
they  doe  tribute  once  a  yeere.

The  Townes  are,  Tlachco,  Acamylixtlahuacan,  Chon-
talcoatlan,  Teticpac,  Nochtepec,  Teotliztocan,  Tlamacaza-
pan,  Tepexahnalco,  Tzicapucalco,  Tetenanco.

THe number  of  the Townes of the hot  Countrey
pictured, are fourteene Townes. And they  paid
tribute  as  followeth,

First,  400.  burthens  of  quilted  Mantles.  Item,  400.
burthens  of  Mantles  striped  with  blacke  and  white.  Item,
400.  burthens  of  rich  Mantles.  Item,  400.  burthens  of
Naguas and Huipiles. Item, 400. burthens of  white

A.D.

c.  1525.

t=<D0CX)O0O(>=r
*SKZXXTX3000C>=^

fe<^XXDCX30aO=»
feO<X30GOOOQ^

A  The  Hatchets,  the  forme  below,  the  number  above,
each  signifying  20.  B  400.  little  Baskets  of  white  Copall.
C  Five  strings  of  stones.  D  8000.  lumps  of  Copall  unrefined.
E 200.  Pots  of  Honey.

All

Mantles. Item, 1600.  burthens  of  great  Mantles,
the  which  they  did  tribute  every  sixe  moneths.

Item,  They  tributed  100.  Hatchets  of  Copper. Item,
1200. Xicaras of yellow varnish. Item, 200. pots of

457

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1525.

Bees  Honey.  Item,  400.  little  baskets  of  white  Copall
for  Perfumes.  Item,  8000.  lumps  of  Copall  unrefined,
which  was  spent  likewise  for  Perfumes.  All  the  which
they  tributed  every  foure  dayes.

Item,  Two  pieces  of  Armour,  with  their  Targets  gar-
nished with  rich  feathers  of  this  device,  as  they  be
pictured.  Item,  Twentie  pieces  of  Armour  with  their
Targets,  garnished  with  slight  feathers.

Item,  Five  strings  of  rich  Bead-stones,  which  they  call
Chalchihnitl.  Item,  Foure  great  Troxes  of  wood,  of
the  bignesse  of  those  before  full  of  Maiz,  Frisoles,
Chian,  and  Guautly ;  all  the  which  they  tributed  once
a  yeere.

The  Townes  names  are  Tepequacuilco,  Chilapan,
Ohnapan,  Huitzoco,  Tlachimalacac,  Yoallan,  Cocolan,
Atenanco,  Chilacachapan,  Telogoapan,  Oztoma,  Ychcliteo-
pan,  Alahuiztlan,  Cuecalan.

[III.  v.  r  1  \He number  of  the  Townes  of  the hot  Countreies

1 09 1. ] J_ pictured, and intituled in the next division, are
twelve. And  they  paid  tribute  as  folio weth.

First,  sixteene  hundred  burthens  of  great  Mantles,  lifted
with  Orange- tawnie,  as  is  seene  in  the  letters  A  B  C  D
each  marked  400.  Item,  1400  burdens  of  great  Mantles
of  twisted  yarne.  Item,  400.  burthens  of  Cacao,  of
brown  colour  as  in  letter  E.  Item,  400.  packes  of
Cotton-wooll,  marked  Letter  F.  Item,  400.  Conchas,
which  are  red  shels  of  the  Sea,  (marked  G  H.  each
400.)  after  the  fashion  of  Veneras,  all  the  which  they
tributed  every  sixe  moneths.

[III.  v.  The  townes  are  Cihnatlan,  Colima,  Panotlan,  Nochcoc,

1092.J  yztapan)  Petlatlan,  Xihnacan,  Apancalecan,  Cocohnipilecan,
Coyucac,  Zacatulan,  Xolochuthyan.

458

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES

A.D.

c.  1525.

THe  number  of  the  Townes,  of  the  hot  Countreyes
pictured  following  are  14.  and  they  payed  tribute
as  followeth.  First,  400.  burthens  of  Naguas  and  Hui-
piles.  Item,  400.  burthens  of  Mantles  striped  with  red.
Item,  800.  burthens  of  great  Mantles.  Item,  800.
Xicaras,  which  they  call  Tecomates  of  the  best,  wherein
they  drinke  Cacao,  all  the  which  they  tributed  every
sixe  moneths.  Item,  Two  pieces  of  Armour,  with  their
Targets  garnished  with  rich  feathers  of  the  device  and
colour  as  they  are  pictured.

Item,  Twenty  Xicaras  full  of  Gold  in  powder,  and
every  Xicara  might  contayne  two  handfuls,  with  both
hands  letter  D.

Item,  tenne  Plates  of  Gold of  foure fingers broad,

459

A.D.

c.  1525.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  three  quarters  of  a  yard  long,  and  as  thicke  as
Parchment  figured  heere,  ABC,  all  the  which  they
tributed  once  a  yeere.

A

B

0

c

1 »

1

1 "

— ■ —  ■
c

1

1 c

! 0

1

[ 0

1

The  townes  names  Tlapan,  Xocatlan,  Ychcatepecpan,
Amaxac,  Ahuacatla,  Acocozpan,  Yoalan,  Ocoapan,  Huit-
zamela,  Acuitlapan,  Malynaltepec,  Totomixtlahuacan,
Tetenanco,  Chipetlan.

THe  towne  named,  is  called  Tlalcocauhtitlan,  a  hotte
towne with the other seven townes in the first
partition,  did  pay  tribute  as  followeth.
First,  400.  burthens  of  great  Mantles.
Item, 100.  pots  of  Bees  hony.

Item,  Twentie  pannes  of  Tecocahuitl,  which  is  a  yellow
varnish  wherewith  they  painted  themselves  (here  figured,
Letter  A)  which  they  tributed  every  six  moneths.

Item,  A  piece  of  Armour  with  a  Target  garnished  with
rich  feathers,  which  they  tributed  once  a  yeere.

The  Townes  are,  Tlalcocauhtitlan,  Tolymany,  Quauhte-

460

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES  aid.

c.  1525.
coma, Ychcatlan, Tepoztitlan, Achnacjcinco, Mitzinco,
Cacatla.

THe Townes pictured and intituled in the second
partition,  are  sixe,  and  they  being  of  a  hot  Countrey,
tributed  as  followeth.

First,  400.  burthens  of  great  Mantles.  Item,  Fortie
great  Belles  of  Copper.  Item,  Foure  Copper  Hatchets :
both  represented  in  the  Picture,  C  Bels  D  Hatchets.

Item, One hundred Pots of Bees Honie : all the  [III.  v.
which  they  tributed  every  six  moneths. Item,  A  peece  io93-]

of  Armour  with a Target of  rich Feathers. Item,  A
little  Panne  full  of  small  Turkess  Stones : figured  letter  Turkey  stones.
B. All  the  which  they  tributed  once  a  yeare.

The  Townes  names  are  Quianhteopan,  Olynalan,
Quauhtecomatla,  Qualac,  Ychcatla,  Xala.

THe Townes pictured and intituled in the third
partition,  are  six  Townes  of  the  hot  Countrie  ;  and
they  did  tribute  as  followeth.

First,  400.  burdens  of  great  Mantels.  Item,  100.
Pots  of  Bees  Honie,  which  they  tributed  every  sixe
moneths.  Item,  A  peece  of  Armour  with  his  Target
garnished  with  rich  Feathers,  of  the  device  and  colour
as  it  is pictured. Item, Fortie  Plates of  Gold,  of  the  Gold.

461

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1525.

bignesse  of  a  Cake,  and  a  finger  thicke,  figured  letter  E.
Each Cake with his vane intimating twenty. Item,
Turkey  stones.  Tenne  halfe  faces  of  rich  blew  Turkey  Stones.

Item,  A  great  Trusse  full  of  the  said  Turkey  Stones  ;
figured  letter  F.  All  the  which  they  tributed  once  a
yeare.

a,  ft  *  mil

The sixe Townes are Yoaltepec, Xhnacaleo,  Tzila-
caapan,  Patlanalan,  Yxicayan,  Ychcaatoyac.

THe  number  of  the  Townes  following  are  six,  and
they  paid  tribute  as  followeth.  First,  800.  burdens
of  great  Mantels,  which  they  tributed  every  six  moneths.
Item,  they  tributed  two  peeces  of  Armour  with  their
Targets,  garnished  with  rich  Feathers  of  the  colours  as
they  are  pictured.  Item,  Eight  great  Troxes,  of  the
bignesse  of  those  before,  full  of  Maiz,  Frizoles,  Chian,
and  Guautly.  Item,  Foure  great  Troxes  of  wood,  of  the
said  bignesse,  full  of  Maiz,  All  the  which  they  tributed
once  a  yeare.  The  Townes  are  Chalco,  Tecmilco,
Tepuztlan,  Xocoyoltepec,  Malynaltepec,  Quauxumulco.

THe  number  of  the  Townes  of  the  hot  Countries
pictured  in  the  next  partition  are  two  and  twenty  :
and  in  every  Towne  there  was  placed  Mexican  calpixques,
and  the  same  order,  rule,  and  government  as  in  the  other
Townes  and  Provinces  heretofore  declared.  And  so  is  it
to  be  understood  was  the  state  and  government  of  all  the
other  Townes  hereafter  named,  though  for  brevities  sake
it  is  not  rehearsed  any  more.  And  the  things  which
these  Townes  did  pay  for  tribute  to  the  Lords  of  Mexico,
are  these  following.

462

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES

First,  They  tributed  4000.  burdens  of  Lime.  Item,
4000.  burdens  of  Massie  Cane  Staves,  which  they  called
Otlatl.  Item,  8000.  burdens  of  Canes,  whereof  the
Mexicans  made  Darts  for  the  wars. Item, 800.  Deere

A.D.

1525.

F
1

h —

p-B — '■  j

■

—M !

L- w '

— ■  *- 1

A  A  Target  and  Club  which  they  used  for  a  Sword,
garnished  with  Rasors  points.  B  4000.  burthens  of  Lime.
C  800.  Deere  skinnes.  D  4000.  burthens  of  Cane  Staves.
E  8000.  burthens  of  Canes  to  make  Darts.  F  8000.
burthens  of  Acayetl. G  200.  Cacaxtles.

Skins.  Item,  8000.  burdens  of  Acayatl,  which  are
Perfumes  which  the  Indians  use  for  the  mouth.  Item,
200.  Cacaxtles,  which  are  frames  like  to  Pannels,  where-

463

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1525.

with  the  Indians  carry  burdens  on  their  backes  :  all  the
which  they  tributed  every  foure  dayes.  Item,  Foure
great  Troxes  of  wood  of  the  measures  and  greatnesse  of
those  before  declared,  full,  two  with  Maiz  and  two  with
Frisoles,  the  which  they  tributed  once  a  yeare.

The  Townes  names  are  Tepeacan,  Quechulac,  Teca-
machalco,  Acatzinco,  Tecalco,  Yccohinanco,  Quauhtinchan,
Chictlan,  Quatlatlanhcan,  Tepixic,  Ytzucan,  Quauhque-
chulan,  Teonochtitlan,  Huechuetlan,  Tetenanco,  Coat-
Teopantlanzinco,  Xpatlan,  Nacochtlan,  Chiltecpintlan,
Oztotlapechco,  Atczcahuacan.

[III.  v.  r  a  Vf-Je number of the Townes of the warme and

1 094.]  J[  temperate  Countries  pictured  and  intituled  in  the
next  figures  are  eleven  :  and  that  which  they  did  tribute
followeth.

First,  400.  burdens  of  quilted  Mantels  of  rich  worke.
Item,  400.  burdens  of  Mantels  striped  red  and  white.
Item,  400.  burdens  of  Mantels  striped  red  and  blacke.

Item,  400.  burdens  of  Maxtlactl,  which  served  the
Indians  for  little  cloathes,  or  girdles.

Item,  400.  burdens  of  Guipiles,  and  Naguas.  All  the
which  they  tributed  to  the  Lords  of  Mexico  every  six
moneths.

Item,  They  tributed  two  pieces  of  Armour,  and  as
many  Targets,  garnished  with  rich  Feathers,  of  the
colours  and  devises  as  they  are  pictured  ;  letter  A.

Item,  Two  strings  of  the  Bead-stones  of  Chalchihnitl ;
rich  Stones,  greene :  letter  B.  Item,  800.  hands  full  of
large  and  rich  greene  Feathers,  which  they  call  Quecaly,
letter  D.  Item,  A  peece  of  Tlalpilony  of  rich  Feathers,
which  served  for  a  royall  Banner,  of  the  fashion  pictured :
letter  F.

Item,  Fortie  sacks  of  Graine,  which  they  call  the  Graine
Cochimlla.  of  Cochinilla  :  Letter  C.  Item,  Twenty  Xicaras  of  Gold
Gold-  in dust, of  the finest: letter E. All the which they

rill  v  tributed  once  a  yeare.

1095.] The Townes names are Coayxtlahuacan, Texopan,

464

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES

Tama9oladan, Zancuitlan, Tepuzcululan, Nochiztlan,
Xaltepec,  Tamagolan,  Mictlan,  Coaxomalo,  Cuicatla.

A.D.

c  1525.

THe  number  of  the  Townes  of  warme  and  temperate
Countries,  pictured  and  entituled  in  the  next  divi-
sion, are  eleven  Townes :  And  they  tributed  as  followeth.
First,  They  did  tribute  400.  burthen  of  quilted  Mantels
of  rich  worke.  Item,  800.  burthens  of  great  Mantels,
the  which  they  tributed  to  the  Lords  of  Mexico  every
six  moneths.  Item  They  tributed  foure  great  Troxes  of
wood,  of  the  bignesse  of  those  aforesaid,  full,  two  of
them  with  Maiz,  another  with  Frisoles,  and  another  with
Chian.  Item,  Twenty  plates  of  fine  Gold,  of  the  bignesse  Gold.
of  a  middle  dish,  and  an  inch  thicke  :  letter  A.  Item,
Twenty  Sackes  of  Graine  of  Cochinilla  :  letter  B.  All  Cochhilk.
xv  465  2  G

A.D.

c  1525.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  which  they  did  tribute  once  a  yeare.  The  Townes
are  Coyolan,  Etlan,  Quauxilotitlan,  Guauxacac,  Camotlan,
Teocuitlatlan,  Quautzontepec,  Octlan,  Teticpac,  Tlalcue-
chahnayan,  Macuilxochic.

Warme
Countries.

TLachquiarico,  Achiotlan,  and  Capotlan,  are  three
Townes  in  the  warme  Countries.  And  the  things
which  they  did  tribute  to  the  Lords  of  Mexico,  are  those
that  follow.  First,  4.  burdens  of  great  Mantels,  which
they  did  tribute  every  six  moneths. Item,  They  tributed

eoxo

a piece of  Armor with a Target, garnished with rich
Feathers  of  the  colours  pictured. Item,  Twenty  Xicaras
Gold.  full  of  fine  Gold  in  Powder  :  letter  A. Item,  Five  Sacks

Cochinilla.  of  Graine  of  Cochinilla :  letter  D.  Item,  400.  hand  fuls
of  rich  greene  Feathers,  which  they  call  Quecaly :  letter
C  al  the  which  they  tributed  once  a  yeare.

466

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES  a.d.

c.  1525.

THe  number  of  the  Townes  of  warme  and  temperate  [HI.  v.
Countries,  pictured  and  intituled  in  the  next  figure,  1096.]

are  two and twentie. And  the things  which they  did
tribute  to  the  Lords  of  Mexico,  are  these  that  follow.

G-

KT>

^=00303000=^
M

c^OOOOOCOO^1
N

t^OOOCOOOO^3

mm

W EMIP ^^gg

First,  they  did  tribute  1600.  burthens  of  rich  Mantels,
apparell  which  the  Lords  and  Casiques  did  weare.  Item,
800.  burthens  of  Mantels  listed  with  red,  white,  and
greene.  Item,  400.  burthens  of  Naguas  and  Huipiles  :
:ill  the  which  they  tributed  every  sixe  moneths.  Item,
They  tributed  a  piece  of  Armour  with  a  Target  garnished
with  rich  feathers,  with  this  device  of  a  Bird  and  colours
as  are  pictured  letter  A. Item,  a  Target  of  gold,  letter  B.

467

Target  of
gold.

Emerald
stones.

Amber.
Crista//.

AD-  PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

c  1525.

Item,  a  device  for  Armour  like  a  wing  of  rich  yellow
feathers,  letter  O.  Item,  a  Diadem  of  gold  of  the  fashion
as  is  pictured  letter  D.  Item,  a  border  of  gold  for  the
head  of  a  hand  breadth,  and  of  thicknesse  as  parchment,
letter  E.  Item,  two  strings  of  Beades,  and  a  collar  of
gold  F  G.  Item,  three  great  rich  stones  of  Chalchihnitl
H  I  K.  Item,  three  strings  of  round  beades  rich  stones
of  Chalchihnitl  L  M  N.  Item,  foure  strings  of  beades  of
Chalchihnitl,  rich  stones.  Item,  twentie  Be9otes  of  cleere
Amber  garnished  with  gold,  letter  T.  Item,  other
twentie  Becotes  of  Beriles  or  cristall  V.  Item,  80.
handfuls  of  greene  rich  feathers,  which  they  call  Queenly
W.  Item,  foure  pieces  of  greene  rich  feathers  like  hands
full,  garnished  with  yellow  rich  feathers  PQRS.  Item,
8000.  hands  full  of  rich  Turquesed  feathers  a.  Item,
8000.  hands  full  of  rich  red  feathers  b.  Item,  8000.
hands  full  of  rich  greene  feathers  c.  Item,  100.  Pots
or  Cauters  of  fine  liquid  Amber  d.  Item,  200.  burthens
of  Cacao,  letter  Z.  Item,  1600.  round  lumps  like  balls
of  Oly,  which  is  a  gumme  of  trees,  and  casting  the  said
balls  on  the  ground,  they  doe  leape  up  very  high,  letter
X.  all  the  which  they  tributed  once  a  yeere.  The
Townes  are  Tochtepec,  Xayaco,  Otlahtlan,  Co^amaloapan,
Mixtlan,  Michapan,  Ayotzintepec,  Michtlan,  Teotilan,
Oxitlan,  Tzynacanoztoc,  Tototepec,  Chinantlan,  Ayosin-
tepec,  Cuezcomatitlan,  Puetlan,  Teteutlan,  Yxmatlatlan,
Ayotlan,  Toztlan,  Tlacotalpan.

[III.  v.  r  ■  ^|-je  number  of  the  Townes  of  the  warme  Countries,

io97-J  J^  pictured  and  intituled  in  the  next  partition  are
eight.  And  the  things  which  they  tributed  to  the
Lords  of  Mexico,  are  these  that  follow.

First,  two  great  strings  of  Chalchihnitl  rich  stones.
Item,  1400.  handfuls  of  rich  feathers  blue,  red,  greene,
turkesed,  red  and  greene,  as  they  are  pictured  in  six
handfuls,  A  B  C  D  E  F.

Item,  Foure  whole  skinnes  of  birds  of  rich  turkesed
feathers,  with  murry  breasts,  of  the  colours  as  they  are

468

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES

pictured  G. Item,  other  foure  whole  skinnes  of  the  said
birds L. Item, 800. handfuls  of  richf yellow  feathers

H M.  ! H0J3AC

Item,  800.  hands  full  of  large  rich  greene  feathers,  which
they call Quecdy  I  N. Item, Two Bacotes of  cleere

A.D.

c.  1525.

Amber  garnished  with  gold  K  O. Item,  200.  burthens
of  Cacao  P  R.

Item, Fortie  Tigres skinnes Q  S. Item, 800. rich
Tecomates  wherein  they  drinke  Cacao  T  V. Item,  Two
great  pieces  of  cleere  Amber  of  the  bignesse  of  a  bricke  Amber.
W  X. Al  which  they  tributed  every  sixe  moneths.

The  Townes  names  are  Xoconochco,  Oyotlan,  Coyoa-

469

A.D.

c.  1525.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

can, Mapachtepec,
Huehuetlan.

Macatlan, Huiztlan, Acapetlatlan,

[III.  V.
1

Cotton  wooll.

THe  number  of  the  Townes  of  warme  and  temperate
Countryes  in  the  next  picture,  are  seven.  And  the
things  that  they  tributed  to  the  Lords  of  Mexico,  are
these  that  follow.

First,  400.  burthens  of  great  Mantels,  which  they
tributed  every  sixe  moneths.  Item,  Twentie  burthens
of  Cacao.

Item, 1600. Packs of Cotton wooll (represented

•J  ABC  D. each marked  foure hundred) all the  which

they  tributed  once  a  yeere. The Townes  are  Quanh-

tochco,  Teuhcoltzapotlan,  Tototlan,  Tuchconco, Ahnily-

zapan,  Quauhtetelco,  Ytzteyocan.

THe  number  of  the  towns  of  warme  &  temperate
Countries  are  sixe,  in  the  next  figure.  And  the
things  which  they  tributed  to  the  Lords  of  Mexico,
are  these  that  follow.

First,  400.  burthens  of  Guipiles  &  Naguas,  which
is  womens  apparell  A.  Item,  400.  burthens  of  Mantels,
halfe  quilted  C.  Item,  400.  burthens  of  litle  Mantels,
with  a  white  &  black  edge  B.  Item,  400.  burthens
of  Mantels  of  foure  Bracas  every  Mantell,  halfe  listed  I
with black  &  white,  and  halfe  after the  fashion  of  net|

470

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES

work  of  blacke  and  white  D.  Item,  400.  burthens
of  great  white  Mantels,  of  foure  Bracas  every  Mantell.
Item,  160.  burthens  of  very  rich  Mantels  wrought
apparell  for  the  Lords  &  Casiques.  Item,  1002  burthens
of  Mantels  lifted  more  with  white  then  with  blacke :
all  the  which  they  tributed  every  sixe moneths. Item,

A.D.

c.  1525.

Two  rich  pieces  of  Armor  with  their  targets  garnished
with  rich  feathers,  according  as  they  are  pictured.  Item,
A  string  of  Chilchihnitl  rich  stones  K.  Item,  400.
handfull  of  rich  large  greene  feathers,  which  they  call
Quecaly  E.  Item,  Twentie  Becotes  of  Beriles  or  Cristall  Cristall.
shadowed  blue,  and  set  in  gold  F.  Item,  Twentie  Becotes
of  cleere  Amber  garnished  with  gold  G.  Item,  200.  Amber.
burthens  of  Cacao  H.  Item,  Quezalclalpiloni  of  rich
greene  feathers  of  Quezaly,  which  served  to  the  Lords

47i

A.D.

C !525.

[III.  V.

1099.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  Mexico  for  a  Royall  Ensigne,  of  the  making  as  it
is  pictured  I.  All  the  which  they  tributed  once  a
yeere.

The  Townes  are  Cuetlaxtlan,  Mictlanquauhtla,  Tlapa-
nicytlan, Oxichan,  Acozpan,  Teoziocan.

THe  number  of  the  Townes,  contayned,  pictured,  and
intituled  in  the  next  division,  are  seven  Townes.
And  the  things  which  they  tributed  to  the  Lords  of
Mexico,  are  these  that  follow.

First,  400.  burthens  of  Mantels  listed  blacke  and  white
A.  Item,  800.  burthens  of  great  white  Mantels,  the
which  they  tributed  every  sixe  moneths.

Item,  They  tributed  once  a  yeere  two  pieces  of  Armour
with  their  Targets,  garnished  with  rich  feathers  of  the
device  and  sorts  as  they  are  pictured.  B  Armour.  C
Shield.

The  Townes  are  Tlapacoyan,  Xoloxochitlan,  Xochi-
quauhtitlan,  Tuchtlan,  Coapan,  Aztaapan,  Acacacatla.

472

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES

THe  number  of  the  Townes  pictured  next  are  eleven.
And the things  which  they  tributed  to  the  Lords
of  Mexico,  are  these  that  follow.

First,  1600.  burthens  of  Mantels  listed  blacke  and
white  A.  Item,  8000.  loaves  or  lumps  of  liquid  Amber
for  perfumes, which they call  Xochiococotl  (B  is  8000.

A.D.

c.  1525.

C  the  lump  of  Amber)  all  which  they  tributed  every
sixe  moneths.

Item,  They  tributed  two  pieces  of  Armour  with  their
Shields,  garnished  with  rich  feathers,  of  the  fashion  as
they  are  pictured,  which  they  tributed  once  a  yeere.

The  Townes  are  Tlatlauhquitepec,  Atenco,  Tezuitlan,
Ayutuchco,  Yayauquitlalpa,  Xonoctla,  Teotlalpan,  Ytzte-
pec,  Yxcoyamec,  Yaonahuac,  Caltepec.

THe  number  of  the  Townes  pictured  and  entituled
in  the  next  side  are  seven  Townes.  And  the  things
which  they  tributed  to  the  Lords  of  Mexico,  are  these
which  follow.

First,  400.  burdens  of  Mantels  like  nets  of  black
and  white,  B.  Item,  400.  burdens  of  rich  Mantels
wrought  red  and  white,  Lords  apparell  A.  Item,  400.
burdens  of  Maxtlactle,  which  served  for  small  cloathes.
Item,  400. burdens of  great white Mantels of  foure

473

[III.

1 100.]

A.D.

c.  1525.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

bracas  a  peece.  Item,  800.  burdens  of  Mantels  of  eight
bracas  a  peece,  listed  orange  tawnie  and  white.  Item,  400.
burdens  of  great  white  Mantels,  of  eight  bracas  a  Mantell.
Item,  400.  burdens  of  Mantels  listed,  with  greene,  yellow,
and  red,  letter  C. Item, 400. burdens of  Naguas  &

Pepper.

Guipiles.  Item,  240.  burdens  of  rich  Mantels  wrought
with  red,  white  &  blacke  ;  very  curious,  wherewith  the
Lords  and  Casiques  were  cloathed,  all  the  which  apparell
they  tributed  every  six  moneths.  Item,  they  tributed
two  pieces  of  Armour,  with  their  Targets,  garnished
with  rich  Feathers  of  the  fashion  as  they  are  pictured.
Item,  800.  burdens  of  dry  Axi,  or  West  Indian  Pepper.
D.  Item,  20.  sackes  of  small  white  Feathers  wherewith
they  trimmed  Mantels.  E. Item,  Two  strings  of  Chal-

474

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES

chihmitl  rich  Stones.  Item,  One  string  of  Beades  of  rich
Turkey  Stones.  F.  Item,  Two  pieces  like  Platters  decked
or  garnished  with  rich  Turkey  stones.  G.  All  the  which
they  tributed  once  a  yeare.

The  towns names are Tuchpa, Tlatic^pau, Cichnan-
teopan,  Papantla,  09elotepec,  Miachnaapan,  Mictlan.

A.D.

c.  1525.

Precious
stones.

ATlan  and  Tecapotitlan  take  up  next  division,  which
they  did  tribute  to the Lords  of  Mexico. First,
800.  burdens  of  rich Mantels wrought red and  white,

with  an  edge  of  green,  red,  yellow,  and  blew.  A.  Item,
400.  burdens  of  Maztlactl.  Item,  400.  burdens  of  Maxt-
lactl.  Item,  400.  burdens  of  great  white  Mantels,  of
foure  bracas  a  Mantell  :  all  of  which  they  tributed  every
six  moneths.  Item,  They  tributed  once  a  yeare  1200.
packes  of  Cotten  Woll.  lett.  B.

THe Towne of  Oxitipan, did tribute to the  Lords  [III.  v.
of  Mexico. First,  2000.  burdens  of  great  Mantels  hoi.]

of  two  bracas  a Mantell. Item,  800.  burdens  of  great
Mantels, listed with yellow,  blew, red, and  greene, of

475

A.D.

c.  1525.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

Pepper.

foure  bracas  a  Man-
tell.  All  the  which
apparel  they  tributed
every  six  months.
Item,  They  tributed
400.  burdens  of  Axi,
which  is  their  Pepper
A.  Item,  A  live  Eagle,
and  sometimes  two  or
three,  as  they  could
catch  them.  B.  All
the  which  they  tributed
once  a  yeare.

CTzicoac,  Molanco,  Cozcatecutlan,  Yehoatlan  and  Xoco-
gocan,  paid  these  tributes  to  the  Lords  of  Mexico.
First,  400.  burdens  of  white  Mantels  with  their  edge
of  red,  blew,  greene  and  yellow.  Item,  400.  burdens  of
Maxtlactle,  which  are
lesser  cloathes  B.
Item,  800.  burdens  of
great  white  Mantels
of  three  bracas  every
Mantell.  Item,  400.
burdens  of  Naguas
and  Huipiles,  which  is
womans  apparell,  A.
All  the  which  they
tributed  every  six
moneths.  Item,  they
tributed  two  pieces  of
Armour  with  their
Shields  decked  with
rich  Feathers  of  the
fashion  that  they  are
pictured.  Item,  800.
packs  of  Cotten,  D  E.

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES  ad.

c.  1525.
All  the  which they  tributed  once  a yeare. Item,  400
burdens  of  Axi  dried  C.

§•  in.

The  third  part  of  this  Booke  containeth  the
private  behaviour  in  Manages,  education  of
Children,  and  Trades  ;  with  the  Martiall,
Ecclesiastike,  and  Civill  policie  of  the  Mexi-
can people.

Relation  of  the  manner  and  custome  that  the
naturall  Mexicans  had  when  either  a  Boy  or
Girle was borne unto them. The use and

III.  v.

1 102.]

ceremonies  in  giving  names  to  their  children,  and  after-
wards to  dedicate  and  offer  them  either  to  the  Church,
or  else  to  the  warres,  according  as  by  the  pictures  is
signified,  and  briefly  declared.

The  Woman  being  delivered,  they  laid  the  childe  in  a
Cradle, according as is pictured, & foure dayes after
the birth of  the childe the Midwife tooke it in her
armes naked, & brought it forth to the yard of  the
childe wives house ; and in the yard were prepared
Bulrushes or Sedges, which they call  Tule, and they
set  upon them a little pan  of  water,  wherein  the  said
Midwife  washed  the  said  childe  :  after  it  is  washed,  three  d  kinde  of  ^
Boyes,  which  are  set  by  the  said  Bulrushes,  eating  tosted  ^pttsmezotth
Maiz,  mingled with  sodden Frisoles,  which  they  called  {lheir  cfoMren.
Yxicue  foode,  the which foode  made  ready,  was  set  in  [in.  v.
a  little  pan  before  the  said  Boyes,  that  they  might  eate  it.  iio3-]

And  after  the  said  bathing  or  washing,  the  said  Midwife
advertised  the  said  Boyes,  that  they  should  with  a  loud
voice  give  a  new  name  unto  the  childe  that  she  had  so
washed,  and  the  name  that  they  gave  it  was  that  which
the  Midwife  would  impose.

When  the  childe  was  brought  forth  to  wash,  if  it  be
a  man  childe  they  bring  him  forth  with  his  signe  in
his hand, and the signe is the Instrument wherewith

477

A.D.

c.  1525.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

his  Father  did  exercise  himselfe,  as  well  in  the  Military-
art,  as  other  arts,  as  of  a  Goldsmith,  a  Graver,  or  any
other  office  whatsoever  :  And  after  they  had  done  all  the
aforesaid,  the  Midwife  brings  the  childe  to  his  Mother.

A  The  woman  that  is  delivered.  B  These  foure  Roses  signifie
foure  dayes  wherein  the  Midwife  brought  forth  the  childe  that  was
lately  borne  to  wash.  C  The  cradle  with  the  childe.  D  The  Mid-
wife. E  The  signes,  instruments,  and  the  bond  (Shield  and  Darts).
F  G  H  the  three  Boies  which  name  the  childe.  I  The  Bulrushes
with  the  pan  of  water.  K  The  Broome.  L  The  Spindell  and  the
Distaffe.  M  The  Basket.  N  The  high  Priest.  O  The  childe  in  his
cradle  which  his  Parents  offer  in  the  Temple.  P  The  Master  cr
Teacher  of  boyes  and  yong  men.  Q  The  childes  Father.  R  The
childes  Mother.

478

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES  a.d.

c.  1525.
And  if  it  be  a  woman -childe,  the  signe  wherewith  they
bring  her  to  wash,  is  a  Distaffe,  a  Spindel,  a  Basket,  and  a
handfull  of  Broome  ;  which  are  the  things  wherewith  she
should  exercise  herselfe,  being  of  age  thereto.

And  the  bond  of  the  Manchilde  with  a  Shield  and
Darts  for  a  signe  which  he  brings  with  him  when  they
bring  him  for  to  wash  ;  they  offer  it  to  that  part
and  place  where  are  likely  to  happen  warres  with  his
enemies,  where  they  burie  it  under  ground.  And  so
likewise  of  the  Woman-childe,  her  bond  they  buried
under  the  Metate,  which  is  a  stone  to  grinde  Cakes
upon.

And  after  the  aforesaid,  at  the  end  of  twenty  dayes,  Presentation
the  childes  Parents  went  with  the  childe  to  the  Temple  or  m  the  TemPle-
Mixquita,  which  they  called  Calmecac,  and  in  the  presence
of  the  Priests  they  presented  the  childe  with  his  offering  of
Mantels,  and  Mastelles  and  some  meate  :  And  after  the
childe  being  brought  up  by  his  Parents,  and  being  of  age,
they  committed  the  childe  to  the  high  Priest  of  the  said
Temple,  because  there  he  might  be  taught  that  hereafter
he  might  be  a  Priest.

And  if  the  childes  Parents  were  determined  that  he
(being  of  age)  should  serve  in  warlike  affaires,  then
straight  way  they  offered  him  to  the  Master  thereof,
making  him  a  promise  of  him  (the  Master  of  Boyes
and  yong  men  they  called  Teachcauch  or  Telpachtlato)
which  offering  was  made  with  his  present  of  meate  and
other  things  for  the  celebrating  thereof.  And  the  childe
being  of  age,  they  committed  him  to  the  said  Master.

THe  declaration  of  the  pictures  contained  in  the
devision  following,  wherein  is  declared  at  what  age,
and  in  what  manner  the  naturall  Parents  did  give  counsell
to  their  children,  how  they  ought  to  live,  as  successively
is  pictured  in  foure  partitions,  and  so  the  foure  partitions
of  this  side  are  declared  in  order  which  are  these  that
follow.

1 The  first  partition,  wherein  is  declared  how  that  the

479

A.D.

c  1525.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Parents  corrected  their  children,  in  giving  them  good
counsell  when  they  were  three  years  of  age  ;  and  the
portion  of  meate  that  they  gave  them  every  meale  was
halfe  a  cake  of  bread.

2  The  second  partition  wherein  is  pictured  in  what
things  the  Parents  did  instruct  their  children  when  they
were  of  the  age  of  foure  yeares,  and  how  they  began  to
exercise  them  to  serve  in  small  things.  And  the  portion  of
meate  which  they  gave  them  at  a  meale,  was  a  whole  Cake.

A  The  Boy  his  Father.  B  Three  yeares  of  age.  C  The
Boy.  D  Halfe  a  Cake.  E  The  Girle  her  Mother.  F  Halfe
a  Cake.  G  A  Girle  of  three  yeares  of  age.  H  The  Father
of  the  Boy.  I  A  Boy  of  foure  yeares  of  age.  K  A  Cake.
L  The  Mother  of  the  Girle.  M  A  Cake.  N  A  Girle  of
foure  yeare  of  age.  *  A  Spindell  with  a  locke  of  cotten
wooll  lying  on  a  Mat.

[III.  v.  3 The third partition, wherein is shewed that the

1 104.]  Parents  did  exercise  their  children  in  bodily  labour  at
five  yeares  of  age,  in  loding  their  Sonnes  with  Wood
and  other  things  in  small  burdens,  of  small  weight,  and
to  carry  packes  of  small  weight  to  the  Tyangues,  or
Market  place.  And  they  exercised  their  Daughters  of
that  age,  in  shewing  them  how  they  should  handle  the
Spindell  and  DistafFe  for  to  spin.  And  their  allowance  of
meate  was  a  whole  Cake  of  Bread.

4  The  fourth partition, wherein  is  pictured  how  the

480

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES

Parents  instructed  their  children  of  six  yeares  old,  and
exercised  and  occupied  them  in  bodily  service,  that  they
might  profit  their  Parents  in  some  thing,  as  in  the
Tyangues,  which  are  Market-places  that  they  might
gather  from  the  ground,  the  cornes  of  Maiz  and  Frisoles
that  were  spilt  there  by  him,  and  other  small  things  that
the  buyers  and  others  had  left  and  spilt  there.  And  this
was  the  Boies  worke. But  the  Girles  were  put  to  spinne

■aoooo

A.D.

c.  1525.

OOOOOO

©x

O  The  Father  of  the  Boyes.  P  Two  Boyes  of  five  yeares
of  age.  Q  A  Cake.  R  A  Cake.  S  The  Mother  of  the
Girle  holding  the  Spindle  and  Rocke.  T  A  Cake.  V  A
Girle  of  five  yeares  old.  W  The  Father  of  the  two  Boyes.
Two  Boyes  of  six  yeares  old.  X  A  Cake  and  a  halfe.
Y  The  mother  of  the  Girle.  Z  A  Cake  and  a  halfe.  A
Girle  of  six  yeares  old  spinning  Cotten  wooll.

and  to  doe  other  profitable  services,  because  in  time  to
come,  by  meanes  of  the  said  services  and  occupations,
they  should  not  spend  their  time  idelly,  and  should
avoide  evill  vices  that  are  wont  to  grow  through  idle-
nesse.  And  the  allowance  of  meate  that  they  gave  to
their  children  was  a  Cake  and  a  halfe  of  Bread.

A  Declaration  of  the  figure  following,  wherein  is  shewed,
at  what  age  and  in  what  things  the  naturall  people  of
Mexico  did  instruct  their  children,  and  in  what  manner
xv  481  2  H

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1525.

they  corrected  them,  that  they  should  avoide  all  idlenesse,
and  alwayes  should  be  exercised  in  some  profitable  things,
as  successively  is  pictured  in  foure  partitions.

1  The  first  partition,  wherein  is  pictured  how  the
Parents  use  their  children  of  seven  yeares  old  that  is
the  men  children  they  applyed  them  in  giving  them
their  fishing  Nets.  And  the  Mothers  did  exercise  their
Daughters  in  spinning  and  in  giving  them  good  counsell
that  they  should  alwayes  apply  and  occupie  their  time  in
doing  some  thing  for  to  avoide  idlenesse. And  the  allow-

A  The  Father  of  the  Boyes.  B  These  seven  spots  of
blew  signifie  seven  yeares.  C  F  A  Cake  and  a  halfe.  D  A
Boy  of  seven  yeares  old,  whose  Father  sheweth  him  how  he
should  fish  with  the  net  he  hath  in  his  hand.  E  The
mother  of  the  children.  G  A  Girle  of  seven  yeares  old,
whose  mother  is  teaching  her  to  spinne.

ance  of  meate  that  they  gave  to  their  children  at  every
meale  was  a  Cake  and  a  halfe  of  Bread.
[III.  v.  2  The second partition : Wherein is pictured, how

II05-J  the  Parents  did  chasten  their  children  of  the  age  of
eight  yeeres,  in  laying  before  them  with  terrors  and
feares  the  thornes  of  Maguez,  that  in  being  negligent
and  disobedient  to  their  Parents  they  should  bee  chastned
with  the  said  thornes,  and  so  for  very  feare  they  wept,
as  by  the  pictures  of  this  partition  is  signified.  And
their  allowance  for  a  meale,  which  they  gave  them  by
measure,  was  a  Cake  and  a  halfe.

3  The  third  partition  :  Wherein  is  pictured,  how
the  parents  punished  their  children  of  nine  yeeres  of
age, because they were disobedient and rebellious to

482

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES

their  fathers,  they  did  chastise  them  with  the  said  thornes
of  Maguez,  binding  them  naked  hand  and  foot,  they
thrust the said thornes  into their  body  and  shoulders.

,00  00
0000

A.D.

c.  1525.

H  The  father  of  the  children  contayned  in  this  row.  I  These
eight  spots  signifie  eight  yeeres.  K  N  a  cake  and  a  halfe.  L  a  Boy
of  eight  yeeres  old,  whose  father  is  threatning  him  that  he  be  not
unhappy,  because  he  will  chastise  him  in  thrusting  thornes  of  Maguez
into  his  body.  M  The  mother  of  the  children  contayned  in  this
row.  L  O  Thornes  of  Maguez.  P  a  Girle  of  eight  yeeres  old,  whom
her  mother  threatneth  her  with  thornes  of  Maguez,  that  shee  bee  not
unhappy.  Q  The  father  of  the  children  contayned  in  this  side.  R  W
a  Cake  and  a  halfe.  S  These  nine  spots  signifie  nine  yeeres.  T  a  Boy
of  nine  yeeres  old,  because  he  is  incorrectible,  his  father  thrusteth
thornes  of  Maguez  into  his  body.  V  The  mother  of  the  children
contayned  in  this  row.  X  a  Girle  of  nine  yeeres  old,  that  for  her
negligence  and  idlenesse,  her  mother  did  chastise  her  in  pricking  her
hands  with  thornes  of  Maguez.  Y  These  ten  spots  signifie  ten  yeeres.
X  The  father  of  the  children  contayned  in  this  row.  Z  B  a  cake
and  a  halfe.  A  The  mother  of  the  children  contayned  in  this  row.
&  a  Boy  of  ten  yeeres  old,  whom  his  father  is  chastising  with  a  cudgell
staffe.  C  a  Girle  of  ten  yeeres,  whom  her  mother  is  chastising
in  beating  her  with  a  cudgell  staffe.

483

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c  1525.

And  they  pricked  onely  the  wrists  and  hands  of  the
Girles  with  the  said  thornes,  as  in  the  said  partition  is
pictured.  And  their  allowance  every  meale  was  a  Cake
and  a  halfe  of  bread.

4  The  fourth  partition :  Wherein  is  pictured,  how
the  Parents  chastised  their  children  of  ten  yeeres  of
age,  that  is,  being  rebellious  they  did  chastise  them
in  beating  them  with  a  cudgell,  and  threatning  them
otherwise  as  in  the  fourth  partition  is  pictured.  And
the  allowance  which  they  had  given  them  at  a  meale,
was  a  Cake  and  a  halfe.

'A

Declaration  of  the  first  partition  of  the  picture
following.  The  Boy  or  Girle  of  eleven  yeeres
old,  which  would  not  bee  reformed  with  wordes  nor
stripes,  their  parents  did  chastise,  giving  them  into  the
Nose  the  smoke  of  Axi,  which  was  a  grievous  and  cruell
torment,  to  the  intent  they  should  be  reformed  and
not  be  vicious  persons  and  vagabonds,  but  should  employ
and  spend  their  time  in  profitable  things.  And  to  the
children  of  that  age  they  gave  bread,  which  are  cakes,
by  measure,  only  a  cake  &  a  halfe  at  a  meale,  because
they  should  not  be  gluttons.
[HI.  v.  2 In  the  second  partition  ; The  Boy  or  Girle  of  the

110  J  age  of  twelve  yeeres,  which  would  not  receive  quietly
counsell  nor  correction  at  their  Fathers  hands ;  the
Father  tooke  that  Boy  and  tyed  him  hand  and  foot
naked,  and  stretched  him  on  the  ground  in  a  dirtie
wet  place,  where  he  lay  so  a  whole  day,  because  he
should  be  chastised  and  feared  thereby.  And  the  Girle
of  that  age,  her  Mother  made  her  serve,  so  that  in
the  night  before  it  were  day  shee  should  sweepe  all  the
house  and  the  street,  and  that  alwayes  shee  might  be
occupied  in  bodily  service.  And  so  likewise  their  Parents
gave  them  meat  by  measure  a  Cake  and  a  halfe  every
meale.

3  In  the  third  partition,  the  Boy  or  Girle  of  thirteene
yeeres old, their Fathers employed in bringing wood

484

A  These  eleven  spots  of  blue  signifie  eleven  yeeres.  B  The  father  of  the  children.
C  a  Boy  of  eleven  yeeres  old,  whose  father  is  chastising  him,  smoking  him  at  the  Nose
with  Axi  dried.  D  a  Cake  and  a  halfe.  E  a  fume  or  smoke  of  Axi  or  Pepper,
which  the  Cutter  hath  not  so  well  expressed.  F  The  mother  of  the  children.
G  a  Girle  of  eleven  yeeres  old,  whose  mother  is  chastising  her  smoking  her  at
the  Nose  with  Axi.  H  a  Cake  and  a  halfe.  I  a  perfume  of  Axi.  K  The
father  of  the  children.  L  twelve  yeeres.  M  a  Cake  and  a  halfe.  N  a  Boy  of
twelve  yeeres  old,  tyed  hand  and  foot  and  laid  a  whole  day  on  the  wet  and  moist
ground.  O  The  mother  of  the  children.  P  This  picture  signiiieth  the  night.  O  a
Cake  and  a  halfe.  R  a  Girle  of  twelve  yeeres  old  that  is  sweeping  in  the  night
time.  S  The  father  of  the  children.  T  Thirteene  yeeres.  V  a  Boy  of  thirteene
yeeres  old  laden  with  Sedges.  W  a  Boy  of  thirteene  yeeres  which  carrieth  Sedges
in  his  Canoa.  X  a  Canoa  with  burdens  of  Z  Canes  or  Tule.  Y  Two  Cakes.
A  a  The  mother  of  the  children.  B  b  a  Girle  of  thirteene  yeeres,  which  is
grinding  and  making  of  Cakes,  and  dressing  meat.  C  c  Two  Cakes.  D  d  a  Porenger.
E  e  Comaly.  F  f  Two  Cakes.  Gg  a  pot  of  boyled  meat.  H  h  Fourteene  yeeres.
I  i  The  father  of  the  children.  K  k  L 1  a  Boy  of  fourteene  yeeres  which  goeth
a  fishing  with  his  Canoa.  M  m  Two  Cakes.  N  n  The  mother.  O  o  a  Girle
of  fourteene  yeeres  weaving. P  p  Two  Cakes. Q  q  The  cloth  that  shee  weaveth.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1525.

from  the  Mountaine,  and  with  a  Canoa-boat  to  bring
boughs  and  other  herbs  for  the  service  of  the  house.
And  the  Girles  should  grinde  and  make  Cakes  and  other
meates  for  their  Parents.  And  they  gave  their  children
meat  by  measure,  two  Cakes  every  meale.

4  In  the  fourth  partition ;  The  Boy  or  Girle  of
fourteene  yeeres  old,  their  Parents  did  imploy  in  fishing
in  Lakes  and  Rivers  with  his  Canoa.  And  the  Girle
was  set  to  weave  yarne  of  whatsoever  sort  for  apparell.
And  they  gave  them  to  eate  two  Cakes  by  measure.

[HI.  v.  1  Hp\Hat  which is pictured  in  the  first  partition,  doth

1 107.]  J[  signifie  that  the  Father  having  two  sonnes
young  men,  of  yeeres  able  to  serve,  brought  them
to  the  two  houses  that  are  pictured,  either  to  the
Masters  house  that  did  teach  and  instruct  yong  men,
or  else  to  the  Temple,  according  as  the  youths  were
inclined,  and  so  committed  them  either  to  the  high
Priests,  or  else  to  the  Master  of  Boyes  to  the  end
they  might  be  taught ;  the  youths  being  fifteene  yeeres
of  age.

2  In  the  second  partition  is  pictured,  the  manner
and  law  they  had  and  kept  in  their  Marriages  that
they  made  lawfully.  The  celebration  thereof  was,  that
an  Amantesa  (which  is  a  Broker)  carried  the  Bride  on
her  backe  at  the  beginning  of  the  night,  and  there
went  with  them  foure  women  with  Torches  of  Pine-
tree  rosined  burning,  wherewith  they  lighted  her.  And
being  come  to  the  Bridegroomes  house,  the  Parents  of
the  Bridegroome  came  out  to  the  Court  of  the  house
to  receive  her,  and  they  carried  her  into  a  Hall  or
some  place  where  the  Bridegroome  tarried  for  her.
And  the  betrothed  folkes  were  set  on  a  Mat  with
their  seates  neere  a  pan  of  fire,  and  they  tyed  the  one
to  the  other  with  a  corner  of  their  apparell,  and  made
a  perfume  of  Copale  to  their  gods,  and  two  old  men
and  two  old  women  were  present  as  witnesses.  Then
the  married folke  dined,  and  afterwards  the  old  folkes.

486

A  The  father  of  the  two  youths.  B  a  youth  of  fifteene
yeeres  old  committed  to  an  high  Alfaqui  or  Priest.  C  Tla-
macazqui,  which  is  an  high  Priest.  D  a  Temple  or  Mezquita,
which  they  called  Calmecac.  E  a  youth  of  fifteene  yeeres,
whose  father  putteth  him  to  a  Master  to  be  taught.
F  Tacheauh,  a  Master.  G  a  house  where  youths  are  taught
and  brought  up  in.  H  Fifteene  yeeres.  I  An  old  man.
K  The  harth.  Copale.  L  The  woman.  M  The  man.
N  An  old  woman.  *  The  perfume.  O  The  Mat.  P  The
meat.  Q  The  meat.  R  An  old  man.  S  A  Cauter  or  pot
of  pulque.  T  The  Cup.  V  An  old  woman.  W  The
Bride.  X  These  goe  lighting  the  Bride,  whom  they  goe  to
leave  at  the  Bridegroomes  house  in  the  beginning  of  the  night.
Y  Amanteza  which  carrieth  the  Bride  on  her  backe.
Z  These  goe  lighting  of  the  Bride  at  the  beginning  of  the
night.  I  a  torch  of  Pinetree.  2  a  torch.  3  torches  of
Pinetree. 4 torches  of  Pinetree.

A.D.

c.  1525.

[III.  v.

1 108.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

And  when  dinner  was  done,  the  old  men  and  women
separated  the  married  folke  by  themselves,  giving  them  good
counsell  how  they  should  behave  themselves  and  live,  and
how  they  should  maintayne  the  charge  and  calling  they  had
taken  upon  them,  that  they  might  live  with  quietnesse.

1 TT  THen they entred to

bee Priests, the elder
Priests occupied them straightway in bodily
services  for  their  Temples,  that afterwards they  might

A  Tlamacazque,  A  novice  Priest  that  is  charged  to  sweep.  B  A
novice  Priest  that  commeth  from  the  wood  laden  with  boughes  for  to
dresse  the  Temple.  C  A  novice  Priest  laden  with  thornes  of  Maguezr
for  to  draw  bloud  with  all  to  offer  sacrifice  to  the  devill. D  A  novice

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES  ad.

c.  1525.
bee  skilfull  when  they  were  chiefe  Priests,  that  after
the  same  order  as  they  had  served,  they  might  bring
up  the  other  Novices  that  should  be  after  them.  These
Priests  are  all  painted  in  ash-colour:  Other  men  in  an
olive  or  tawny.

2  In  the  second  partition  is  declared  wherein  the
young  men  were  occupied  and  did  serve,  that  thence-
forth when  they  were  of  yeeres,  they  might  bee  skilfull
to  take  charge  and  command  other  youths  like  them-
selves, that  they  should  not  goe  idle  nor  become
vagabonds,  but  that  they  should  alwayes  apply  them-
selves to  things  of  vertue.

3  In  the  third  partition  is  declared  likewise  the
correction  and  chastising,  that  the  chiefe  Priests  did  to
the  Novice-Priests,  which  were  forgetfull  and  negligent
in  their  services,  and  for  other  faults  as  they  com-
mitted, chastising  them  according,  as  is  shewed  by  the
pictures.

4  In  the  fourth  partition,  is  declared  how  the  Cap-
taines  and  warlike  men  exercised  the  young  men  which
were  of  age  thereto  in  warlike  affaires,  according  as
their  fathers  did  recommend  them.

Priest  which  is  laden  with  green  canes  for  the  Temple  for  to  make
Seates  and  Toe.  E  A  youth  which  is  laden  with  a  great  log  to  keepe
fire  in  the  Temple.  F  Youthes  which  are  laden  with  logs  of  wood  for
to  keepe  fire  in  the  Temple.  G  A  youth  laden  with  boughes  for
to  dresse  the  Temple.  H  This  chiefe  Priest  is  punishing  the  novice
Priest  because  he  was  negligent  in  his  office.  I  The  novice  Priest.
K  The  chiefe  Priest.  L  The  novice  Priest.  M  Another  elder  Priest.
They  are  punishing  this  novice  Priest,  pricking  him  with  thornes  of
Magues  throughout  his  body,  because  he  was  a  rebell  and  disobedient
and  negligent  in  that  he  was  commanded  to  doe.  N  This  house
signifieth  that  if  the  novice  Priest  went  to  his  house  to  sleepe  three
dayes  they  punished,  as  is  above  pictured  and  declared.  O  Tequigna,
which  is  a  valiant  Warriour.  P  The  Youth.  Q  The  father  of  the
youth  that  offereth  his  sonne  to  the  valiant  Warriour,  to  exercise  him
in  warlike  affaires,  and  to  carrie  him  to  the  warres.  R  The  youth
who  is  publike  servant  to  the  valiant  man  that  goeth  to  the  warre
with  him,  carrying  his  baggage  on  his  backe  with  his  owne  Armour.
S  Tequina,  a  valiant  man  that  goeth  armed  to  the  warres.

489

A.D.

c.  1525.

[III.  V.

I  109.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Ere  is  declared  how  the  chiefe  Priests  did  exercise
and  occupie  them  selves  in  the  night  time,
whereof  some  occupied  themselves  in  going  to  the  Moun-
taynes,  to  offer  sacrifice  to  their  Gods,  others  in  Musicke,

H

A  chiefe  Priest  which  goeth  in  the  night  with  his  fire  burning,
to  a  Mountaine  to  doe  penance.  And  hee  carrieth  in  his  hand  a
purse  of  Capaly,  which  is  Perfume  to  offer  Sacrifice  to  the  Devill.
And  at  his  backe  Poyson  in  a  vessell  for  the  same  Sacrifice,  and
he  carrieth  his  boughes  to  beset  the  place  of  Sacrifice.  And  hath
after  him  a  novice  Priest,  which  carrieth  other  things  for  the  Sacrifice.
B  A  novice  Priest.  C  A  chiefe  Priest,  which  is  playing  on  the
Teponaztly,  which  is  an  Instrument  of  Musicke,  and  he  exerciseth
himselfe thereon in the night. D This Picture with eyes doth

490

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES  a.d.

c.  1525.

and  others were observers of  time by the Starres of

the Element, and others in other things of their

Temples.

2  In  the  second  partition  is  declared  the  punishment
they  did  use  to  the  young  men,  according  as  the  Pictures
doe  represent.  The  which  was  executed  according  to  the
Lawes  and  Statutes  of  the  Lords  of  Mexico.

4  The  punishment  that  the  Beadles  Telpuchtlatos  did
use  to  the  vicious  young  men,  which  went  about  like
Vagabonds  according  to  their  Lawes,  and  the  rest  pictured
and  declared  in  the  same  partition.

1  r  I  \He  chiefe  Priests  did exercise  warlike  affaires, &  [III.  v.

JL according as  they  proved in valiant  acts,  and  as  nii.J

the  number  of  the  Captives  were  that  they  tooke,  so  the
Lords  of  Mexico  gave  them  titles  of  honour,  and  Blasons
of  Armes  with  devices  of  their  valiantnesse,  as  is  shewed
by  the  Pictures,  and  by  the  Armor  they  have  on. In

signifie  the  night.  E  This  Picture  with  eyes  doth  signifie  the
night.  F  A  chiefe  Priest  which  is  looking  on  the  starres  of  the
Element  by  night,  to  see  what  houre  it  is  in  the  night,  which
is  his  charge  and  office.  G  A  young  man  that  goeth  to  warre,
laden  with  stuffe  and  instruments  of  Armour.  H  Telpuchtlato.  I
The  youth.  K  The  woman.  L  Telpuchtlato.  The  two  Tel-
puchtlato, do  signifie  Beadles  to  rule  youths,  that  when  any  youth
did  fall  in  love  with  any  woman,  they  chastised  the  young  man,
throwing  burning  fire  brands  at  him,  and  parted  their  love.  M  A
chiefe  Priest  whose  office  is  to  sweepe  the  Temples,  or  command
them  to  be  swept.  N  A  chiefe  Priest.  O  The  novice  Priest.  P
The  woman.  Q  A  chiefe  Priest.  The  declaration  of  the  pictures
of  these  two  chiefe  Priests  is  that  if  the  novice  Priest  was  negligent
or  had  accesse  to  any  woman,  or  fell  in  love,  the  chiefe  Priests  did
chastise  him,  thrusting  thornes  of  Pine  tree  made  like  pricks  in  all
his  body.  R  Telpuchtlato,  a  Beadle.  S  The  young  man.  T
Teachcauh,  the  Beadle.  By  these  Pictures  is  declared  that  if  a
young  man  went  about  like  a  Vagabond,  the  two  Beadles  did  correct
him  in  powling  and  sindging  his  head  with  fire.  V  A  young  man
that  is  occupied  in  carrying  stones  with  his  Canoa  to  repaire  the
Temple. X The  Temple.

491

A.D.

c.  1525.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

This  Picture  expresseth  the  Priests  employments.  A  A  novice
Priest  occupied  in  carrying  of  stones  in  his  Canoa,  for  the  repara-
tion of  the  Temple.  B  The  Temple  called  Ayauhcaly.  C  A  novice
Priest  that  goeth  to  the  warre  with  a  chiefe  Priest  carrying  his  package.
D  A  chiefe  Priest  that  goeth  to  warre,  for  to  enforce  and  boulden
the  Warriours,  and  to  doe  other  Ceremonies  in  the  Warres.

Their  Armes,  which  signes  of  Armes  were  made  of  more  authoritie
from  degree  to  degree,  according  as  the  worthinesse  of  the  man  of
warre  was  knowne,  and  the  number  of  the  Captives  that  they  tooke.

49  2

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES  a.d.

c.  1525.
the  third  partition  are  the  titles  of  honour,  which  they
obtayned  by  the  exercise  of  war,  whereby  they  came  to
a  higher  degree,  the  Lord  of  Mexico  making  them
Captains  and  Generals  of  the  Souldiers.  And  those  of
the  one  side  served  for  Messingers  and  Executioners
of  that  which  the  Lords  of  Mexico  determined  and
commanded,  aswel  in  things  touching  the  Common-
wealth of  Mexico,  as  also  in  other  townes  of  their
dominions.

As  is  shewed  sufficiently  in  the  Pictures  with  their  signes  and  Armes,
and  fashions  of  attire,  and  the  degrees  whereby  they  came  to  be
valiant  men  in  Warres. The  first  degree.

E  Tecutlyas,  Constable  and  Justice  of  the  Lords  of  Mexico.  F  An
Officer  that  followeth  the  Tecutly,  as  his  Sergeant.  G  A  Temple
called  Sihnateocaly.  H  The  high  way  or  street  with  a  bridge  of  wood.
I  A  young  man,  who  if  hee  tooke  any  Prisoner  in  the  Warres,  they
gave  him  for  reward  a  Mantle  of  the  fashion,  of  this  quadrant  with
his  followers,  in  a  token  of  his  valiantnesse.  K  The  above  said  Teetli,
in  these  Pictures  signifie,  that  he  is  occupied  in  repayring  the  streets
and  bridges  that  goe  to  the  Temple.  L  A  Captive.  M  This  valiant
man  all  in  red,  because  hee  tooke  two  enemies,  they  rewarded  him  with
the  fashion  of  Armour  he  hath  on,  and  more  (N)  the  square  Mantle
of  Orange-tawnie  with  a  red  twist,  in  token  of  his  valiantnesse.  O  A
Captive.  P  This  valiant  Champion  with  a  reward  of  the  device  he
hath  on,  and  this  (Q)  Mantle  of  rich  worke,  for  a  token  that  he  tooke
three  enemies  in  the  Warres.  R  A  Prisoner.  S  The  valiant  Champion
with  the  device  hee  hath  on,  and  the  square  Mantle.  T  Of  two
colours  (blacke  and  Orange-tawnie)  with  a  list,  in  token  that  hee  had
taken  foure  enemies  in  the  Wars.  V  A  Captive.  W  This  valiant  man
with  the  device  of  Armour  that  he  hath  and  his  second  name  Etonti,
for  his  valiantnesse,  and  because  he  tooke  five  or  sixe  enemies  in  the
Wars,  the  which  valiant  man  is  hee  that  is  above  contayned,  who  had
his  beginning  of  one  enemy  he  tooke  in  the  Wars,  and  so  from  degree
to  degree,  he  hath  come  to  this  degree.  X  A  Captive.  Y  This  valiant
man  called  Quagchil,  with  the  device  of  Armour  that  he  hath  on,
shewing  that  hee  had  taken  five  at  the  Wars  of  Guexo,  besides  that
in  other  Wars  he  tooke  many  of  his  enemies.  Z  A  Captive.  &  And
this  valiant  man  named  Tlacatecatl,  with  the  fashion  of  the  apparell
he  hath  on,  and  his  tassell  and  device  of  rich  feathers,  do  shew
that  he  had  done  all  the  valiant  acts  afore  pictured  and  declared,
and  is  knowne  to  have  more  title  of  valiantnesse  of  person  then  are
pictured.

493

A.D.

c.  1525.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

A  A  Priest  that  captived  one  enemie  in  the  warres.  B  The  same
Priest  aforesaid,  because  he  tooke  two  enemies  in  the  warres,  he  is  re-
warded with  the  device  of  Armour  he  hath  on.  C  The  aforesaid  Priest,
because  through  his  valiantnesse  he  tooke  three  enemies,  he  is  rewarded
with  the  device  of  Armour  he  hath  on.  P  P  P  Captives.  D  The  same
Priest  abovesaid,  because  he  tooke  foure  enemies  in  the  warre,  for  a
token  of  his  valiantnesse,  he  is  rewarded  with  the  device  of  Armour
he  hath  on,  blacke  and  white.  E  The  same  Priest  because  he  tooke
five  of  his  enemies  in  warres,  for  a  token  of  his  valiantnesse,  he  is  re-
warded with  the  device  of  Armour  he  hath  on,  all  red. F  The  same

494

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES  ad.

c.  1525.

THe  Casique (that  is,  a  Lord  of  a  Towne)  because  [III.  v.
hee  rebelled  against  the  Lordship  of  Mexico  by  the  n  12.]

Executioners  afore  contayned,  had  a  rope  cast  about  his
necke  wherewith  for  his  rebellion,  he  was  condemned  by
the  Lords  of  Mexico  to  die,  and  his  wife  and  children
to  be  taken  and  brought  prisoners  to  the  Court  of
Mexico.  And  for  the  accomplishing  of  the  condemnation
the  officers  are  executing  the  penalties  wherein  he  was
condemned,  as  is  signified  by  the  pictures.

2  He  together  with  his  servants  and  towne  are  con-
demned to  be  destroyed.  And  so  the  Executioners,  by
the  commandement  of  the  Lords  of  Mexico,  are  giving
him  to  understand  of  the  said  condemnation,  in  token
whereof  they  marke  him  with  the  signes  that  they  set
on  his  head,  and  the  Target  that  they  present  him  with,
because  he  should  not  be  ignorant  of  his  destruction.
And  the  pictures  of  men  with  mortall  wounds,  doe  signifie
that  they  were  Merchants  and  Occupiers  of  Mexico,
which  came  with  things  to  the  Countrie  and  Towne  of
the  said  Casique  ;  and  the  servants  of  the  Casique  assaulted
them  on  the  high-way,  killing  them  and  taking  away  the
merchandise  they  carried,  which  was  the  occasion  of  the
destruction  of  the  Towne.

3  In  the  third  partition :  The  foure  Officers  or
Ambassadors  of  the  Lords  of  Mexico,  doe  signifie  that
they  have  warned  the  said  Casique  contayned  in  the
second  partition  before  this,  as  is  abovesaid,  at  the  return-
ing of  the  Executioners  towards  Mexico,  there  came  out

Priest  for  that  he  tooke  sixe  enemies  in  the  warres,  for  a  token  of  his
force  and  valour,  the  Lord  of  Mexico  rewarded  him  with  the  device  of
Armour  he  hath  on.  His  person  yellow,  feathers  greene,  target  red,
greene,  yellow.  G  Quauhnochtli,  an  Officer  which  put  Mandats  in
execution.  H  Tlilancalqui,  another  kind.  I  Atenpanecatl,  a  third
sort.  K  Ezguagacatl,  a  fourth  sort.  These  foure  in  this  rowe  did  serve
for  Messingers  and  Executioners  of  that  which  the  Lords  of  Mexico
determined  and  did  command.  L  Tlacochcalcatl.  M  Tezcacoacatl.
N  Tycocyahuacatl.  O  Tequiltecatl.  These  foure  on  this  rowe  are
valiant  men  in  warre,  and  Captaines  of  the  Armies  of  the  Mexicans  and
persons  which  executed  the  charge  of  Generals  over  the  Mexicans  Armies.

495

A.D.

c.  1525.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  the  high-way  certaine  servants  of  the  said  Casique  to
misse-use  them,  shooting  arrowes  at  them  in  token  of  war.

A  Huiznahuatlan,  officer  and  executioner  as  a  Sergeant.  B  Execu-
tioner. C  Casique.  D  Executioner.  E  The  wife  of  the  Casique
imprisoned,  with  a  yoke  of  Iron  about  her  necke.  F  The  sonne  of  the
Casique  taken  prisoner  with  a  yoke  of  Iron.  G  The  servant  of  the
Casique.  H  The  merchant.  I  a  bundell  of  merchandise.  K  The  merchant.
L  The  servant  of  the  Casique.  M  Executioner.  N  Executioner.  O
Casique.  P  An  Executioner  or  Ambassador  of  the  Lord  of  Mexico.
Q  An  Executioner  or  Ambassador  of  the  Lord  of  Mexico.  R  a  servant
of  the  Casique.  S  An  Executioner  or  Ambassador  of  the  Lord  of  Mexico.
T  An  Executioner  or  Ambassador  of  the  Lord  of  Mexico.  V  a  servant
of  the  Casique.  W  a  servant  of  the  Casique  which  shooteth  at  the  Am-
bassadors of  the  Lords  of  Mexico,  for  more  occasion  of  warre.

496

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES  a.d.

c.  1525.
1  HPHe  Tequichna  signifieth  Spies,  sent  to  the  Towne  [III.  v.

X of  the  Casique  by  the  Lord  of Mexico, that in  IJI3-]

the  night  time  they  might  goe  and  walke  it  secretly
unknowne  to  their  enemies,  to  advertise  and  give  warning
unto  the  Souldiers,  where  they  should  enter  with  the
battaile.  And  so  the  Tequichna  goe  round  about  the
Towne,  Houses,  Market  place,  and  Church,  at  the  time
that  they  of  the  Towne  are  asleepe  and  at  rest,  for  to
finde  a  place  where  they  may  give  the  onset  with  the
lesse  trouble  and  resistance.

2  A  declaration  of  the  pictures  in  the  second  partition.
The  Mexican  that  is  pictured  and  at  his  shoulders  a
Target  and  Darts,  doth  signifie  the  Mexicans  being
mooved  to  destroy  a  certaine  Towne  by  warres,  because
they  had  rebelled  against  the  Lordship  of  Mexico.  And
the  other  three  that  are  pictured  and  set  over  against  the
Mexicans  are  servants  of  the  Casique,  which  doe  signifie
that  the  whole  Towne  of  the  Casique  being  afraid  of  the
warres  and  destruction  that  the  Mexicans  would  bring
upon  them,  they  come  to  Mexico  to  entreat  a  peace,
submitting  themselves  for  servants  of  Mexico,  and  pro-
testing to  acknowledge  the  Lordship,  by  meanes  whereof
they  receive  them  in  friendship  and  for  their  servants,
laying  aside  that  which  was  determined  by  their  counsell.

The  foure  valiant  men  pictured  and  intituled,  with
their  Speares  in  their  hands,  and  made  readie  for  the
warres,  and  the  devices  of  Armour  that  they  have  on,
doe  signifie  that  they  are  Captaines  of  the  Mexicans
armies.

'E that is set  and  at his backe a woman  spin-  [HI.  v.
ning, signifieth  that  it  is his  wife new  married,  I!I4-J

and  because  he  had  taken  the  state  of  matrimonie
upon  him,  having  been  a  Messenger  with  the  rest  that
are  pictured  before  him,  which  are  five,  named  Tetpuchdy,
which  are  Messengers  likewise.  The  married  man  giveth
them  a  reason  why  hee  leaveth  the  charge  of  a  Messenger
by  reason  of  his  marriage,  and  that  hee  will  rest  and  leave
xv  497  2 1

A.D.

c.  1525.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

A  Tequihna.  B  Tequihna.  C  Tianguas,  a  Marquet  place.  D
Tequihna.  E  E  houses.  F  Tequihna.  G  a  Temple.  H  Tequihna.
I  Tequihna.  K  Tequihna.  L  Tequihna.  *  This  partition  (al  blue)
is  the  towne  of  the  Casique  aforecontayned.  M  N  O  these  three  are
servants  of  the  Casique.  P  Mexicans.  Q  a  Target  and  Darts.
R  Captaine  Tlacatecatl.  S  Captaine  Tlacochcalcatl.  T  Captaine
Huitznahuatl. V  Captaine  Ticocyahuacatl.

498

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES

A.D.

c.  1525.

A  A  AAA  The  Telpuchtly  or  yong  men  which  are  officers  or
messengers.  B  Two  mantels.  C  a  handful  of  perfumes.  D  Tamales
or  bread.  E  a  copper  hatchet.  F  a  boyled  hen.  G  Xicara  with
Cacao  to  drinke.  H  Telpuchtly  maried.  I  The  wife  of  the  maried
Telpuchtly.  K  The  Lord  of  Mexico.  L  Tequihna.  N  Tequihna.
OOO  Tectly.  P  Tectly  Mixcoatlaylotlac  a  Justice  like  an  Alcalde.
Q  Ezguagacatl  Alcalde.  R  Acatlyacapanecatl  Alcalde.  S  Tequix-
quinahuacatl  Alcalde.  T  These  sixe  pictures  three  of  men  and  three
of  women,  are  pleaders  and  suitors  which  aske  Justice  of  the  Alcaldes.

499

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1525.

off  his  service  past.  And  to  please  them  more,  and  that
they  should  grant  his  request,  hee  maketh  them  a  banquet
in  giving  them  well  to  eate  and  drinke,  and  moreover
the  present  that  hee  giveth  them  is  a  handfull  of  per-
fumes, a  copper  Hatchet  and  two  Mantels,  as  by  the
pictures  of  these  things  are  intituled.  And  by  this
solemnitie  the  married  man  is  free  from  the  said  Office.

2  In  the  second  partition :  Hee  that  is  set  downe
and  intituled,  doth  signifie  the  Lord  of  Mexico,  that
when  any  Messenger  Telpuchtly  pictured  in  the  partition
before  this  had  given  a  good  account  of  his  office,  and
having  taken  upon  them  the  state  of  marriage,  the  Lords
of  Mexico  from  that  they  were  but  Messengers,  did
promote  them  to  a  better  title  and  degree,  in  so  much
that  he  made  them  Tequihna,  which  is  signified  by  the
pictures  and  titles  of  Tequihna,  with  their  Speares  and
Fannes,  giving  them  authoritie  to  bee  his  Ambassadors
and  Officers  in  the  warres,  which  they  held  for  an  office
of  great  honour.

3  The  Alcaldes  doe  signifie  Justices,  appointed  by  the
Lords  of  Mexico,  that  they  should  heare  matters  aswell
Civill  as  Criminall.  And  the  pictures  of  men  and  women
which  are  before  them,  are  Pleaders  and  Suitors  which
doe  aske  justice.  And  the  foure  pictures  that  are  intituled
Teeli,  that  are  behinde  the  Alcaldes,  are  principall  young
men  that  joyne  with  the  Alcaldes  in  their  audience,  to
learne  and  instruct  themselves  in  matters  of  judgement,
and  afterwards  to  succeede  in  the  Offices  of  the  Alcaldes.
From  these  Alcaldes  there  was  an  appellation  before  the
counsell  Chamber  of  Motecuma,  as  hereafter  is  pictured.

[III.  v.  r  1  \He  fashion  of  the  Counsell  Chambers  of  the  Lord

IXI5-]  X  or  King  of  Mexico,  and  of  his  Roy  all  Houses  and
Courts,  and  the  steps  where  they  entred  in,  and  the
Throne  and  Seate  of  Motecuma,  and  in  the  spaces  of
every  thing  is  declared  and  intituled  what  they  signifie,
and  so  in  this  declaration  it  is  not  repeated.  But  that
in  one  Counsell  Chamber,  when  that  by  way  of  offence

500

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES  a.d.

c.  1525.

they  were agrieved,  and  having  a  just  cause  not  being
sentenced and determined by the Alcaldes, then by

A  The  Throne  and  Majestie  of  Motecuma  where  he  sate  on  Court-
dayes,  and  on  judgement.  B  Motecuma.  C  a  house  where  the  Lords
of  Tenaynca,  Chienauhtla,  and  Colhuacan,  were  lodged  that  were  friends
and  confederates  of  Motecuma.  D  a  house  where  the  chiefe  Lords  of
Tezcucoytacuba  were  lodged  that  were  Motecuma  his  friends.  E  F  G
The  Court  of  the  royall  houses  of  Motecuma.  H  K  These  lines  that
goe  upward  are  the  steps  to  the  Courts  of  the  royall  houses  of  Motecuma.
I  The  counsell  chamber  of  warre.  K  The  counsell  chamber  of  Mote-
cuma. L  These  foure  are  as  Auditors  of  the  counsell  of  Motecuma,
wise  men.  M  Pleaders  and  Sutors  that  in  the  degree  and  appellation
from  the  Alcaldes,  doe  present  themselves  and  appeare  before  the
Auditors  of  the  counsell  of  Motecuma.

5°i

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1525.

degrees  of  appellation  they  appealed  from  the  Alcaldes
before  the  Counsell.  And  if  it  were  a  matter  of  import-
ance they  appealed  from  the  Counsell  Chamber  before
Motecuma  the  King  himselfe,  where  the  matter  was
concluded.

In  the  Chamber,  that  is  intituled,  The  Counsell  Cham-
ber of  warre,  were  provided  Captaines  and  Armies  for  the
warres,  as  was  appointed  by  Motecuma.

THe  father  and  the  sonne  that  sit  against  each  other
face  to  face,  signifie  that  the  father  giveth  his  sonne
good  counsell,  that  he  be  not  vicious,  laying  before  him
for  example,  that  those  which  come  to  vertue  come  after-
wards in  credit  with  the  Lords  and  Casiques ;  in  that  they
t11*-  v-  give  them  honest  offices,  and  doe  use  them  to  be  their

"J  Messengers,  and  they  doe  admit  Musicians  and  Singers
unto  their  feasts  and  weddings  for  the  credit  they  beare.

2  The  pictured  in  the  house,  where  they  meane  to
talke  and  provide  for  publike  affaires,  and  the  Steward
that  sitteth  therein,  doth  signifie  that  there  are  before
him  weeping,  because  it  hath  happened  unto  them
to  be  occupied  in  bodily  labour,  that  the  Coas  and
Guacales  doe  represent.  And  the  Steward  is  giving  them
good  counsell,  and  exhorting  them  to  flee  idlenesse,  is  the
cause  that  they  come  to  be  Theeves  and  players  at  the
Ball,  and  players  at  Patol,  after  the  manner  of  Dice,  from
which  Games  doe  spring  theft  for  to  satisfie  and  fulfill
such  vices.

3  The  Carpenter,  Lapidarie,  Painter,  Gold-smith,  and
garnisher  of  feathers,  signifie  that  those  Artificers  teach
their  sonnes  their  occupation  from  their  childhood,  that
when  they  are  men  they  might  follow  their  Trade,  and
spend  their  time  in  things  of  vertue,  giving  them  counsell
that  of  idlenesse  commeth  evill  vices,  and  so  evill  tongues,
tale-bearing,  drunkennesse,  and  theeverie,  and  many  other
evill  vices.

502

MEXICAN HISTORY IN PICTURES

A.D.

c.  1525.

A  a  Messenger.  BCD  The  father  counselleth  his  Sonne  to  apply
himselfe  to  all  vertue.  E  One  having  a  ghest,  entertayneth  a  Musician.
F  G  I  a  house  where  they  meet  for  publike  affaires.  H  The  Petla-
calcatl.  K  M  Coa  and  Guacal.  L  N  Youthes.  O  a  vagabond.  P  a
player  at  the  ball.  Q  a  Thiefe.  R  a  player  at  Patol  or  Dice  after
their  manner.  S  a  Carpenter.  T  The  Carpenters  sonne.  V  a
Lapidarie.  W  The  Lapidaries  sonne.  X  a  Painter.  Y  The  Painters
sonne.  Z  a  Gold-smith.  &  The  Gold-smiths  sonne.  A  a  An
ill  tongued  man  and  tale-bearer.  B  b  An  artificer  that  garnisheth
with  feathers.  C  c  The  artificers  sonne.  D  d  a  drunkard.  E  e  a
drunkard  and  thiefe,  the  last  worke  like  a  halter  seemes  to  signifie  the
■evill  ends  which  such  come  to.  The  particular  punishments  follow
in  the  next  picture.

503

A.D.

c.  1525.

[III.  V.

1117.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

A  These  two  Pictures  signifie  that  the  young  men  that  were
drunke  with  Wine,  dyed  for  that  according  to  the  Law.  B  A  young
man  that  was  drunke.  C  A  young  woman  if  shee  were  drunke  with
Wine  was  killed  heere  according  to  the  Lawes  of  Mexico.  D  A  Thiefe,
they  stoned  him  to  death  according  to  the  Lawes  of  the  Lords  of
Mexico.  E  These  two  Pictures  layed  and  covered  with  clothes,  doe
shew  that  if  any  man  had  carnall  dealing  with  a  married  woman,  they
stoned  them  both  to  death,  according  to  the  Lawes  of  the  Lords  of
Mexico.  F  An  old  man  of  threescore  and  tenne  yeeres,  hath  licence
to  drinke  Wine  and  to  bee  drunke  aswell  publikely  as  secretly  because
he  is  so  old,  and  hath  Sonnes  and  Nephewes,  at  which  yeeres  Wine
and  drunkennesse  was  not  forbidden  them.  G  An  old  woman,  wife
to  the  old  man  above  pictured,  had  priviledge  to  bee  drunke  as  well
as  her  Husband,  because  shee  had  children,  and  childrens  children,  and
to  all  those  of  the  like  age,  drunkennesse  was  not  forbidden  them.

5°4

HERNANDO CORTES

Chap.  VIII.

Conquest  of  Mexico  and New  Spaine  by
Hernando  Cortes.

Ernandoa  Cortes  was  borne  at  Medellin  in
Andulozia,  a  Province  of  Spaine,  Anno
1485.  When  he  was  nineteene  yeeres
old,  he  sayled  to  the  Hand  of  Saint
Domingo,  where  Ovando  the  Governour
kindly  entertayned  him.  He  went  to
the  conquest  of  Cuba  in  the  yeere  151 1.
as  Clerke  to  the  Treasurer,  under  the  conduct  of  James
Velasques,  who  gave  unto  him  the  Indians  of  Manicorao,
where  hee  was  the  first  that  brought  up  Kine,  Sheepe
and  Mares,  and  had  heards  and  flockes  of  them :  and
with  his  Indians  he  gathered  great  quantitie  of  Gold,  so
that  in  short  time  he  was  able  to  put  in  two  thousand
Castlins  for  his  stocke,  with  Andres  de  Duero,  a  Mer-
chant. At  this  time  Christopher  Morante  had  sent
(Anno  151 7.)  Francis  Hernandes  de  Cordova,  who  first
discovered  Xucatan,  whence  he  brought  nothing  (except
the  relation  of  the  Country)  but  stripes :  whereupon
James  Velasques  in  the  yeere  151 8.  sent  his  Kinsman
John  de  Grijalva,  with  two  hundred  Spaniards'3  in  foure
ships :  he  traded  in  the  River  of  Tavasco,  and  for  trifles
returned  much  Gold,  and  curious  workes  of  feathers,
Idols  of  Gold,  a  whole  harnesse  or  furniture  for  an  armed
man  of  Gold  thin  beaten,  Eagles,  Lions,  and  other
pourtratures  found  in  Gold,  &c.  But  while  Grijalva
deferred  his  returne,  Velasques  agreed  with  Cortes  to
bee  his  partner  in  the  Discovery,  which  he  gladly  accepted,
and  procured  licence  from  the  Governours  in  Domingo,
and  prepared  for  the  Voyage.

Velasques  afterward  used  all  meanes  to  breake  off,  in
so  much  that  Cortes  was  forced  to  engage  all  his  owne
stocke,  and  credit,  with  his  friends  in  the  Expedition,  and
with  five  hundred  and  fiftie Spaniards  in eleven  ships,

5°5

A.D.
1519.

[III.  V.

IIl8.]

*Gomara  his

third  part  of
the  Conquest  of
the  West
Indies,  trans-
lated into
English  by
T.  Nicolas.

h  Of  this

voyage.  Reade
P.  Martyrs
fourth

Decade:  and
Gomara  part
I.  y  of  all
which  followes
in  this
Chapter.
P.  Mart.
Dec.  5.  Gom.
ubi  supra,  and
Cortes  his
owne  large
narration  to
the  Emperour,
ap.  Ramus.
Vol.  3.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1519.

set  saile  the  tenth  of  February  1 5 1 9.  and  arrived  at  the
Hand  of  Acusamil.  The  Inhabitants  at  first  fled,  but  by
the  kind  entertainment  of  some  that  were  taken,  they
returned,  and  received  him  and  his  with  all  kind
offices.

They  told  him  of  certayne  bearded  men  in  Yucatan,
whither  Cortes  sent;  and  one  of  them,  Geronimo  de
Aguilar  came  unto  him,  who  told  him,  that  by  shipwracke
at  Jamaica,  their  Carvell  being  lost,  twentie  of  them
wandred  in  the  Boat  without  sayle,  water  or  bread,
thirteene  or  fourteene  dayes,  in  which  space  the  violence
of  the  current  had  cast  them  on  shoare  in  a  Province
called  Maija,  where,  as  they  travelled,  seven  dyed  with
famine ;  and  their  Captaine  Valdinia  and  other  foure
were  sacrificed  to  the  Idols  by  the  Cacike,  or  Lord  of  the
Countrey,  and  eaten  in  a  solemne  Banquet,  and  he  with
sixe  other  were  put  into  a  Coope  or  Cage,  to  bee  fatned
for  another  Sacrifice.  But  breaking  Prison,  they  escaped
to  another  Cacike,  enemy  to  the  former,  where  all  the
rest  dyed,  but  himselfe,  and  Gonzalo  Guerrer  a  Mariner.
Hee  had  transformed  himselfe  into  the  Indian  cut,  boring
his  nose  full  of  holes,  his  eares  jagged,  his  face  and  hands
painted ;  married  a  Wife,  and  became  a  Captaine  of  name
amongst  the  Indians,  and  would  not  returne  with  this
Aguilar.

Cortes  with  this  new  Interpreter  passed  up  the  River
Tavasco,  called  of  the  former  Discoverer,  Grijalva ;
where  the  Towne  that  stood  thereon,  refusing  to  victuall
him,  was  taken  and  sacked.  The  Indians  herewith
inraged,  assembled  an  Armie  of  fortie  thousand,  but
Cortes  by  his  Horse  and  Ordnance  prevayled ;  the
Indian  Indians  thinking  the  Horse  and  Rider  had  beene  but
simplkitie.  one  creature,  whose  gaping  and  swiftnesse  was  terrible
unto  them,  whereupon  they  submitted  themselves.  When
they  heard  the  Horses  ney,  they  had  thought  the  Horses
could  speake,  and  demanded  what  they  said  :  the  Spaniards
answered,  These  Horses  are  sore  offended  with  you,  for
fighting  with  them,  and  would  have  you  corrected :  the

506

HERNANDO CORTES  ad.

1519.

simple  Indians  presented  Roses  and  Hens  to  the  beasts,
desiring  them  to  eate,  and  to  pardon  them.

Cortes  purposed  to  discover  further  Westward,  because
hee  heard  that  there  were  Mines  of  Gold,  having  first
received  their  Vassallage  to  the  King  his  Master,  to  whom
(he  said)  the  Monarchic  of  the  Universall  did  appertayne.
These  were  the  first  Vassals  the  Emperour  had  in  New
Spaine.  They  named  the  towne,  where  these  things  were
done,  Victorie,  before  called  Potonchan,  contayning  neere  Potonchon
five  and  twentie  thousand  houses,  which  are  great,  made  cal'edVtctorh
of  Lime,  and  Stone,  and  Bricke,  and  some  of  mud-wals
and  rafters,  covered  with  straw ;  their  dwelling  is  in  the
upper  part  of  the  house,  for  the  moystnesse  of  the  soyle.
They  did  eate  mans  flesh  sacrificed.

The  Spaniards  sayled  Westward,  and  came  to  Saint
John  de  Ulhua,  where  Teudilli  the  Governour  of  the
Countrey,  came  to  him  with  foure  thousand  Indians.
Hee  did  his  reverence  to  the  Captayne,  burning  Frank-
incense (after  their  custome)  and  little  strawes,  touched
in  the  bloud  of  his  owne  bodie :  and  then  presented  unto
him  victuals  and  Jewels  of  Gold,  and  other  curious
workes  of  feathers;  which  Cortes  requited  with  a  Collar
of  Glasse,  and  other  things  of  small  value.  A  woman-
slave,  given  him  at  Potonchan,  understood  their  language,
and  shee  with  Aguilar,  were  his  Interpreters.  Cortes
professed  himselfe  the  servant  of  a  great  Emperour,
which  had  sent  him  thither,  whose  power  he  so  highly  [III.  v.
extolled,  that  Teudilli  marvelled,  thinking  there  had  beene  xii9-j

no  such  Prince  in  the  World,  as  his  Master  and  Sover-
aigne,  the  King  of  Mexico,  whose  Vassall  he  was,  named,
Mutezuma.  To  him  he  sent  the  representations  of  these
bearded  men,  and  their  Horses,  Apparell,  Weapons,
Ordnance,  and  other  Rarities,  painted  in  Cotton-clothes,
their  ships  and  numbers.  These  painted  Cottons  he  sent
by  Posts,  which  delivered  them  from  one  to  another  with
such  celeritie,  that  in  a  day  and  night  the  message  came  to
Mexico,  which  was  two  hundred  and  ten  miles  distant.
Cortes  had demanded, whether Mutezuma had  Gold?

507

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1519.

Teudilli  affirmed,  and  Cortes  replyed,  That  he  and  his
Spanish fellowes  had  a  disease  of  the  heart,  whereunto  Gold  was

incurable the best remedie.  hwh,

St  CR.  TIP  S  SP

Mutezuma  sent  him  many  Cotton-clothes  of  divers
colours,  many  tuffes  of  Feathers,  two  Wheeles,  the  one  of
Silver,  with  the  signe  of  the  Moone,  and  the  other  of
Gold,  made  like  the  Sunne;  which  they  hold  for  Gods,
and  give  unto  them  the  colours  of  the  Metals  most  like
them.  Each  Wheele  was  two  yards  and  a  halfe  broad.
These  with  other  parts  of  the  Present  were  esteemed
worth  twentie  thousand  Duckets.  Mutezuma  also  pro-
fessed joy,  to  heare  of  so  great  a  Prince,  &  so  strange
people,  &  promised  provision  of  all  necessaries,  but  was
very  unwilling  that  Cortes  should  come  to  see  him,  as  he
pretended.  Yet  Cortes  persisted  in  that  his  desire  of  see-
ing Mutezuma,  that  he  might  further  acquaint  himselfe
with  the  knowledge  of  those  parts.

The  silly  Indians  having  never  seene  such  strange  sights,
came  daily  to  the  Campe  to  see  them  and  when  they
heard  the  Ordnance  discharged,  they  fell  downe  flat,
thinking  the  Heavens  had  falne :  the  ships  they  thought
were  the  God  of  the  Ayre,  called  Quezalcouolt,  which
came  with  the  Temples  on  his  backe,  for  they  daily
looked  for  him.  Amongst  the  rest,  or  rather  aloofe
off  from  the  rest,  were  certayne  Indians  of  differing  habit,
higher  then  the  other,  and  had  the  gristles  of  their
Noses  slit,  hanging  over  their  mouthes,  and  Rings  of  Jet
and  Amber  hanging  thereat :  their  neather  lips  also  bored,
and  in  the  holes,  Rings  of  Gold  and  Turkesse-stones,
which  weighed  so  much,  that  their  lips  hung  over  their
chinnes,  leaving  their  teeth  bare.  This  uglinesse  they
accounted  gallantry,  and  such  uncouth  deformitie  to  be
Note  for  the  only  bravery.  And  thou  Gallant,  that  readest  and
fashion-  deridest  this  madnesse  of  Fashion,  if  thine  eyes  were  not
dazeled  with  lightnesse  (light  I  cannot  call  it)  of  selfe-
reflected  Vanitie,  mightest  see  as  Monster-like  fashions  at
home,  and  a  more  fashionly  Monster  of  thy  selfe ;  thy
clothes  and  oathes,  thy  gestures  and  vestures,  make  thy

508

HERNANDO CORTES  ad.

1519.

naked  Deformitie  worse  then  their  thus  deformed  naked-
nesse :  both  in  deed  seeme  to  have  received  some  hellish
Character  (if  there  may  bee  bodily  representation)  of  that
olde  Serpent  in  these  new  fashions,  striving  who  shall
shape  himselfe,  neerest  to  that  misse-shapen  uglinesse,
wherein  the  Indian  jagges  himselfe  out  of  humane  linea-
ments, the  other  swaggers  himselfe  further  out  of  all
Civill  and  Christian  ornaments.  But  these  Fashion-
mongers  have  made  mee  almost  out  of  my  fashion,  and  to
forget  my  selfe,  in  remembring  their  forgetfulnesse.

These  Indians  of  this  New-cut,  Cortes  caused  to  come
to  him,  and  learned  that  they  were  of  Zempoallan,  a  Citie  Zempoallan.
distant  thence  a  dayes  journey,  whom  their  Lord  had  sent
to  see  what  Gods  were  come  in  those  Teucallis,  that  is
Temples  (so,  it  seemeth,  they  called  the  ships  :)  which  held
no  conversation  with  the  other  Indians,  as  being  not
subject  to  Mutezuma,  but  onely  as  they  were  holden  in
by  force.  He  gave  them  certaine  toyes,  and  was  glad  to
heare  that  the  Indians  of  Zempoallan,  and  other  their
Neighbours  were  not  well  affected  to  Mutezuma,  but
readie,  as  farre  as  they  durst,  to  entertayne  all  occasions  of
warre  with  him.  Hee  sayled  from  thence  to  Panuco,  and  Panuco.
passed  the  River  farther,  till  he  came  to  a  little  Towne,
where  was  a  Temple,  with  a  little  Towre,  and  a  Chappell
on  the  top  ascended  by  twenty  steps,  in  which  they  found
some  Idols,  many  bloudy  Papers,  and  much  mans  bloud,
of  those  which  had  beene  sacrificed,  the  blocke  also
whereon  they  cut  open  those  Sacrifices,  and  the  Razors
made  of  flint,  wherewith  they  opened  their  brests,  which
strucke  the  Spaniards  with  some  horrour  and  feare.  They
passed  a  little  further,  and  there  having  taken  possession,
in  the  Emperours  name,  of  the  whole  Countrey,  they
founded  the  Towne  De  la  vera  Crux,  Cortes  resigning  his  Vera  Crux.
authoritie,  and  Officers  being  elected ;  and  lastly,  all  with
generall  consent  appointing  Cortes  their  Captaine.

Cortes  went  forward  to  Zempoallan,  where  hee  was
solemnely  received  and  lodged  in  a  great  house  of  lime  and
stone,  whited  with  playster,  that  shined  in  the  Sunne,  as

5°9

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1519-

if  it  had  beene  Silver ;  so  did  the  Silver-conceits  of  the
Spaniards  imagine,  the  desire  of  that  Metall  having  made
such  an  impression  in  their  imagination,  that  they  told
Cortes  before  hee  came  at  it,  they  had  seene  a  house  with
wals  of  Silver.  Here,  and  at  Chiauiztlan,  Cortes  incited
them  to  rebell  against  Mutezuma,  and  to  become  servants
to  the  Spaniards,  which  they  did :  and  he  under-hand
so  wrought,  that  Mutezuma  tooke  him  for  his  friend.

All  his  intent  was  to  fish  in  troubled  waters,  and  to  set
them  both  by  the  eares,  that  hee  might  watch  oportunitie
to  benefit  himselfe.  His  owne  people  rebelled,  some  of
whom  he  chastised  with  the  halter  and  the  whip  for
example  to  the  rest :  and  after  caused  all  his  ships  to
bee  sunke  closely,  that  they  should  not  minde  any  returne.
He  left  150.  men  for  the  guard  of  the  new  Towne,  under
Pedro  de  Henrico,  and  with  400.  Spaniards,  fifteene
Horses,  and  sixe  Peeces  of  Artillery,  and  1300  Indians,
they  went  from  Zempoallan,  and  came  to  Zaclotan,  the
Lord  whereof  was  Olintler  the  subject  of  Mutezuma,  who
to  testifie  his  joy,  and  to  honour  Cortes,  commanded
fifty  men  to  be  sacrificed,  whose  bloud  they  saw,  new
and  fresh.
[III.  v.  They  carried  the  Spaniards  on  their  shoulders,  sitting

1 1 20.]  on  geereS5  Such  as  whereon  they  use  to  carry  dead  men.
He  bragged  as  much  of  the  power  of  Mutezuma,  as  their
Spaniards  of  their  Emperour.  He  said  he  had  thirty
Vassals,  each  of  which  was  able  to  bring  into  the  field
an  hundred  thousand  men  of  Warre,  and  sacrificed
Bloudy  20000. men  yearely  to the gods :  in  this  he  somewhat

Sacrifices.  exceeded ;  the  other  was  true,  although  some  yeares,  the
Sacrifices  also  were  thought  to  amount  to  50000.  This
Towne  was  great,  and  had  thirteene  Temples,  in  each  of
which  were  many  Idols  of  stone,  of  divers  fashions,  before
whom  they  sacrificed  Men,  Doves,  Quailes,  &  other
things  with  great  perfumes  and  veneration.  Here  Mute-
zuma had  5000.  Souldiers  in  Garrison.  Cortes  passed  from
thence  to  Mexico  by  the  Frontiers  of  Tlaxcallon,  which
were  enemies  to  Mutezuma,  whom  he  might  easily  have

510

HERNANDO CORTES  a.d.

1519.

overcome,  but  reserved,  partly  for  the  exercise  of  his
Subjects  to  the  Warre,  partly  for  the  Sacrifices  to  his
gods.

These  joyned  an  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  men
against  Cortes,  taking  him  for  Mutezuma's  friend :  and
yet  every  day  sent  him  Guinney-cockes  and  Bread,  partly
to  espie  his  strength,  and  partly  in  a  bravery,  lest  their
glory  should  be  obscured  in  the  conquest  of  men  already
starved.  But  when  in  many  skirmishes  and  fights  they
could  not  prevaile  against  that  handfull  of  Spaniards,  they
thought  they  were  preserved  from  harme  by  incantments  :
and  sent  him  three  presents  with  this  message ;  That
if  he  were  that  rigorous  god  which  eateth  mans  flesh,
he  should  eate  those  five  slaves  which  they  brought  him,
and  they  would  bring  him  more :  if  he  were  the  meeke
and  gentle  god,  behold  Frankinsence,  and  Feathers :  if  he
were  a  mortall  man,  take  here  Fowle,  Bread,  and  Cherries.
At  last  they  made  peace  with  him,  and  submitted  their
City  to  him.  Their  City  Tlaxcallan  was  great,  planted  Tlaxcalkn  a
by  a  Rivers  side,  which  issued  into  the  South-Sea.  It  Sreat  Citte-
had  foure  Streetes,  each  of  which  had  their  Captaine  in  the
time  of  Warre.  The  government  was  an  Aristocraty,
hating  Monarchy  no  lesse  then  tyranny.  It  had  eight
and  twenty  Villages,  and  in  them  an  hundred  and  fifty
thousand  Housholds,  very  poore,  but  good  warriors.
They  had  one  Market-place  so  spacious,  that  thirty
thousand  persons  in  a  day  came  thither  to  buy  and  sell
by  exchange :  for  money  they  had  none.

Mutezuma  had  sent  before  to  Cortes,  and  promised
tribute  to  the  Emperour,  whatsoever  should  be  imposed ;
onely  he  would  not  have  him  come  to  Mexico.  And
now  he  sent  againe,  that  he  should  not  trust  that  new
friendship  with  the  beggerly  Nation  of  Tlaxcallan  ;  and
they  againe  counselled  him  not  to  adventure  himselfe  to
Mutezuma.  Cortes  held  his  determination  for  Mexico,
and  being  accompanied  with  many  of  the  Tlaxcantlexas,
he  went  to  Chololla,  a  little  from  whence  Mutezuma  had  Chololla.
prepared  an  Army  to  intrap  him  in  the  way ;  but  he  find-

511

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1519.

ing  the  trechery,  it  redounded  upon  the  Cholollois,  the
same  day  they  had  thought  to  have  executed  the  same
upon  him.  For  this  end  they  had  sacrificed  ten  children,
five  males,  and  as  many  females,  three  yeares  old,  to
Quezalcovatl  their  god,  which  was  their  custome  when
they  began  their  Wars.  He  out-going  them  in  their
owne  art  of  subtilty,  intrapped  their  Captains  in  Counsell,
and  sent  his  Army  to  spoile  the  City,  where  were  slaine
thousands.  There  were  twenty  Gentlemen,  and  many
Priests  which  ascended  up  to  the  high  towre  of  their
Temple,  which  had  an  hundred  and  twenty  steps,  where
they  were  burned,  together  with  their  gods  and  Sanctuary.
This  Citie  had  twenty  thousand  Housholds  within
the  Wals,  and  as  many  in  the  Suburbs.  It  shewed
outward  very  faire  and  full  of  Towres,  for  there  were
Store  of  as  many  Temples as  dayes  in  the  yeare,  and  every  one

Tempks  and  j^  ^-g  Towre.  The  Spaniards  counted  foure  hundred
Towers.  It  was  the  Citie  of  most  devotion  in  all  India,
whither  they  travelled  from  many  places  farre  distant
in  Pilgrimage.  Their  Cathedrall  Temple  was  the  best
and  highest  in  all  New-Spaine,  with  an  hundred  and
twenty  steps  up  to  it.  Their  chiefe  god  was  Quezalcovatl,
god  of  the  Ayre,  who  was  (they  say)  founder  of  their
Citie  being  a  Virgin,  of  holy  life  and  great  penance.
He  instituted  fasting,  and  drawing  of  bloud  out  of  their
eares  and  tongues,  and  left  precepts  of  Sacrifices.  Hee
never  ware  but  one  garment  of  Cotten,  white,  narrow,
and  long,  and  upon  that  a  Mantle,  beset  with  certaine
red  crosses.  They  have  certaine  greene  stones  which
were  his,  and  are  kept  for  great  relikes :  one  of  them
is  like  an  Apes  head.  Eight  leagues  from  Chololla  is
Popocatepec  a  the  hill  Popocatepec,  or  smoake-hill,  which  the  Earth
seemeth  to  have  erected  as  a  Fort  to  encounter  and
assault  the  Ayre :  now  with  smoky  mists  endevouring
to  choake  his  purer  breath,  another  while  with  violent
flames,  and  naturall  fire-workes  threatning  to  joyne
league  with  his  elder  and  superiour  brother  to  disinherit
him:  sometimes  with showers of  ashes  and  embers,  as

512

HERNANDO CORTES  ad.

1519-

it  were,  putting  out  the  eyes,  and  sometimes  with  terrible
and  dreadfull  thunders,  rending  the  eares  of  that  Airy-
Element  ;  alwayes  (such  is  the  event  of  warre)  hurting
and  wasting  it  selfe,  to  indamage  the  enemy.  The  Indians
thought  it  a  place  of  Purgatory,  whereby  tyrannicall  and
wicked  Officers  were  punished  after  their  death,  and  after
that  purgation  passed  into  glory.  The  Spaniards  adven-
tured to  see  it,  but  two  onely  held  on  their  journey,
and  had  there  beene  consumed,  had  they  not  by  a  Rocke
bin  shadowed  from  the  violent  eruption  of  the  fire  which
then  hapned.  It  chanced  that  the  Earth,  weary  it
seemeth  of  the  warre,  as  having  spent  her  store  and
munition,  agreed  on  a  truce  which  continued  ten  yeares :
but  in  the  yeare  1540.  it  brake  forth  into  more  violent
hostility  then  before,  quaking  and  renting  it  selfe  with
unbridled  passion  :  and  whereas  the  Ayre  had  alwaies  a
snowie  Garrison  about  her  high  tops  and  frontiers,  to  coole
and  quench  her  fiery  showers,  yet  these  did  but  kindle  [III.  v.
a  greater  flame,  the  ashes  whereof  came  to  Huexozinco,  1121.]

Quelaxcopon,  Tepiacac,  Chololla  and  Tlazcallan,  and
other  places,  ten,  or  as  some  say,  fifteene  leagues  distant,
and  burned  their  hearbs  in  their  Gardens,  their  fields
of  Corne,  Trees  and  cloathes  that  they  laid  a  drying.
The  Vulcan,  Crater,  or  mouth  whence  the  fire  issued,
is  about  halfe  a  league  in  compasse.  The  Indians  kissed
their  garments  (an  honour  done  unto  their  gods)  which
had  adventured  themselves  to  this  dreadfull  spectacle.

Cortes  drawing  neere  to  Mexico,  Mutezuma  feared,  Mutezumas
saying,  These  are  the  people  which  our  gods  said  should  religion.
come  and  inherit  this  Land.  He  went  to  his  Oratory,
and  there  shut  up  himselfe  alone,  abiding  eight  daies
in  praier  and  fasting,  with  sacrifice  of  many  men,  to
aslake  the  fury  of  his  offended  deities.  The  Devill  bids
him  not  to  feare,  and  that  he  should  continue  those
bloudy  Rites,  assuring  him  that  he  should  have  the
gods  Vitziliputzli  and  Tescaelipuca  to  preserve  him,
saying,  That  Quezalcovatl  permitted  the  destruction  at
Chololla,  for  want  of  that  bloudy  sacrifice.  Cortes  passed
xv  513  2  K

AD-  PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

1519.

a  Hill  six  miles  in  height,  where,  by  the  difficulty  of
the  passage,  and  of  the  cold  (being  alway  covered  with
Snow)  the  Mexicans  might  easily  have  prevented  his
passing  further.  Hence  he  espied  the  Lake,  whereon
Mexico  and  many  other  great  Townes  did  stand,  Ixtac-
pallapan  a  Towne  of  10000  housholds,  Coyocan  of  six
thousand,  Vizilopuchtli  of  five  thousand.  These  Towns
are  adorned  with  many  Temples  and  Towres,  that
beautifie  the  Lake.  From  Iztacpalapan  to  Mexico  is  two
Leagues,  all  on  a  faire  causey,  with  many  draw-bridges,
thorow  which  the  water  passeth.

Mutezuma  received  Cortes  with  all  solemnity  on  the
eighth  of  November  15 19.  into  this  great  Citie,  excusing
himselfe  of  former  unkindnesses  the  best  he  could.  Of
his  house,  and  Majestie,  and  the  divine  conceit  the
people  had  of  him,  we  shall  speake  after  more  fully,  as
also  of  the  Temples,  Priests,  Sacrifices  and  other  re-
markeable  things  of  Mexico.

Mutezuma provided all things necessary for the
Spaniards and Indians that attended them : even beds
of  flowers  were  made,  in  place  of  litter  for  their  Horses.
But  Cortes disquieted  with those  thoughts  which  com-
monly attend  Ambition  (discontent  in  the  present,  hopes
and feares of  the  future) used the  matter  so, that he
tooke  Mutezuma  prisoner,  and  detained  him  in  the  place
appointed  for  the  Spaniards  lodging,  with  a  Spanish  Guard
about him, permitting him otherwise to deale in all
private  or  publike  affaires,  as  before. Hereupon  Cacama,
a The  like Lord  of  Texcuco, Nephew  to  Mutezuma,  rebelled,  but
speech  he  had by  treachery  of  his  owne  people  was  presented  prisoner
made  at  fir st  to  to  Mutezuma. He,  after  this  summoned  a  Parliament,

Cortes,  who where  hee  made  an Oration unto  his Subjects, saving,
easily  wrought  orT-.i Tt  1 1  • -r» 1  >T  1 r 1

on  that advan- ^nat  -"-e  anc*  his  Jrredecessours  were  not  Naturals  or  the

/age,  applying  Countrey,  but  his  Fore-fathers  came  from  a  farre  Country;

this  Tradition  and  their  King  returned  againe,  and  said,  he  would  send

to  the  ^^  as  snould  rule  them. And  he  hath  now  sent  these

Cortes ' Spaniards, saith  he. Hereupon he  counselled them to

Narrat.  yeelde  themselves  Vassals  to  the  Emperour,  which  they

5i4

HEUNANDO CORTES  ad.

1519.

did  at  his  command,  though  with  many  teares  on  his  part
and  theirs,  at  this  farewell  of  their  liberty.  Mutezuma
presently  gave  to  Cortes,  in  the  name  of  tribute,  a  great
quantity  of  Gold  and  other  Jewels,  which  amounted  to
sixteene  hundred  thousand  Castlins  of  Gold,  besides  Silver.

Cortes  had  hitherto  a  continuall  victory  in  Mexico
without  any  fight :  but  news  was  brought  him  of
Pamphilo  de  Narvaes,  who  was  sent  with  eighty  Horse,
and  some  hundreths  of  Spaniards  by  Velasques,  to
interrupt  the  proceedings  of  Cortes :  who  leaving  two
hundred  men  in  Mexico,  with  two  hundred  and  fifty
other  came  suddenly  in  the  night,  and  tooke  Narvaes
prisoner,  and  returned  to  Mexico  with  Narvaes  his
Company,  now  his  followers  also,  where  he  found  his
men  exceedingly  distressed  by  the  Citizens  for  a  murther
committed  in  the  great  Temple  at  a  solemne  Feast,
wherein  a  religious  dance  they  were  slaine,  for  the  rich
garments  and  Jewels  they  ware,  by  the  Spaniards.  Cortes
came  in  good  time  for  the  reliefe  of  his  men :  and  Mute-
zuma caused  the  Mexicans  to  bridle  their  rage,  which
presently  was  renewed ;  and  when  Mutezuma,  was  againe
by  his  Guardians,  the  Spaniards,  caused  to  speake  to  the
people,  a  blow  of  a  stone  on  his  Temples  wounded  him,
whereof  three  daies  after  he  died.  Mutezumas

Cortes  had  some  thousands  of  the  Tlaxoltocas  to  helpe  death-
him,  but  was  driven  to  flye  from  Mexico  with  all  his
Spaniards  and  Indians,  which  he  did  closely  in  the  night
but  yet  an  alarme  was  raised,  and  the  Bridges  being
broken,  much  slaughter  of  his  people  was  made  by  the
Mexicans,  and  all  his  treasure  in  manner  lost.  They
pursued  after  him  also,  and  had  two  hundred  thousand
in  the  field :  when  it  was  Cortes  his  good  hap  to  slay
the  Standardbearer,  whereupon  the  Indians  forsooke  the
field. This  battell  was  fought  at  Otumpan.

At  Tlazcallan,  he  and  his  were  kindely  entertained ;
they  had  prepared  before  50000.  men  to  goe  to  Mexico
for  his  helpe,  and  now  they  promised  him  all  offices
of  loyalty  and service. With their helpe he subdued

515

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1519.

Tepeacac;  and  built  certaine  Brigandines,  or  Frigats,
which  were  carried  many  leagues  on  the  backes  of  those
Indians,  and  there  fastned  and  finished,  without  which
he  could  never  have  won  Mexico.

In  Tezcuco  certaine  Spaniards  had  beene  taken,
sacrificed  and  eaten,  which  Cortes  now  revenged  on  them.
Eight  thousand  men  had  carried  the  loose  peeces  and
timber  of  this  Navie,  guarded  with  twenty  thousand
Tlaxcallans,  and  a  thousand  Tamemez,  or  Porters  (which
carried  victuals)  attending.  They  calked  them  with
Towe,  and  for  want  of  Tallow  and  Oyle,  they  used
[III.  v.  Mans  Grease,  of  such  as  had  beene  slaine  in  the  Warres.

"22.J  ]7or  so  the  Indians  used,  to  take  out  the  Grease  of  their
Sacrifices.  Cortes  had  here  nine  hundred  Spaniards,  of
which  fourescore  and  six  were  Horse-men,  three  cast  peeces
of  Iron,  fifteene  small  peeces  of  Brasse,  and  a  thousand
weight  of  Powder,  and  1 00000.  Indian  Souldiers  on  his
side.  He  made  a  sluce  or  trench  about  twelve  foot  broad,
and  two  fathome  deepe,  halfe  a  league  long,  in  which
40000.  men  wrought  fifty  dayes.  He  lanched  his  Vessels,
and  soone  overcame  all  the  Canoas  of  the  Lake,  of
which  were  reckoned  in  all  five  thousand.  The  Spaniards
brake  the  Conduits  of  sweet  water,  wherewith  the  City
was  wont  to  be  served.

Quabutimoc,  now  the  new  King  of  Mexico,  receiving
incouragement  from  the  Devillish  Oracle,  caused  to  breake
downe  the  Bridges,  and  to  exercise  whatsoever  wit  or
strength  could  doe  in  defence  of  his  Citie,  sometimes
conquering,  sometimes  (as  is  doubtfull  chance  of  warre)
conquered.  Cortes  had  in  Tezcuco  ordained  a  new  King,
a  Christian  Indian,  of  the  royall  bloud,  who  much
assisted  him  in  this  siege.  The  Spaniards  being  Lords
of  the  Lake,  and  of  the  Causeyes,  by  helpe  of  their
Galliots  and  Ordinance,  they  fired  a  great  part  of  the
Citie.  One  day  the  Mexicans  had  gotten  some  advan-
tage, and  thereupon  celebrated  a  Feast  of  Victory.  The
Priests  went  up  into  the  Towers  of  Tlatelulco,  their
chiefs  Temple,  and  made  there  perfumes  of  sweet  Gums,

516

HERNANDO CORTES  a.d.

1521.

in  token  of  victory,  and  sacrificed  forty  Spaniards  (which
they  had  taken  captives,  opening  their  brests,  and
plucking  out  their  hearts)  sprinkling  their  bloud  in  the
Ayre ;  their  fellowes  looking  on  and  not  able  to  revenge
it.  They  slew  likewise  many  Indians,  &  foure  Spaniards
of  Allvarado's  company,  whom  they  ate  in  the  open
sight  of  the  Army.  The  Mexicans  danced,  drank  them-
selves drunke,  made  bonefires,  strucke  up  their  Drums,
and  made  all  solemne  expressings  of  joy.  Dread,  Dis-
daine,  and  all  the  Furies  that  Passion  or  Compassion
could  conjure  up,  had  now  filled  the  Spaniards  hearts
and  their  Indian  partakers :  and  Cortes,  that  hitherto
had  hoped  to  reserve  some  part  of  the  Citie,  now  did
the  utmost  that  Rage  and  Revenge  could  effect,  helped
no  lesse  within  with  Famine  and  Pestilence,  then  with
Sword  and  Fire  without.  At  last  Mexico  is  razed,  the
Earth  and  Water  sharing  betwixt  them  what  the  Fire
had  left,  and  all  which  had  sometime  challenged  a  lofty
inheritance  in  the  Ayre.  Their  King  also  was  taken ;
all  that  mightie  State  subverted.  And  as  the  Mexicans
before  had  prophesied,  That  the  Tlaxantleca's  should
againe  build  the  Citie,  if  conquered,  for  them ;  if  con-
querors, for  the  Spaniards :  It  was  re-builded  with  a
hundred  thousand  houses,  fairer  and  stronger  then  before.
The  Siege  lasted  three  Moneths,  and  had  therein  two
hundred  thousand  Indians,  nine  hundred  Spaniards,  foure-
score  Horses,  seventeene  Peeces  of  Ordinance,  thirteene
Galliots,  and  sixe  thousand  Canoas.  Fiftie  Spaniards
were  slaine,  and  sixe  Horses :  of  the  Mexicans,  a  hundred
thousand,  besides  those  which  died  of  Hunger  and
Pestilence.

This  was  effected  Anno  1521.  on  the  thirteenth  day  of
August,  which  for  that  cause  is  kept  festivall  every
yeare.  For  the  Description  of  the  Country  wherein
Mexico  is  situate.  Cortes  in  his  second  Narration  to  the
Emperour  saith,  it  is  environed  with  hils :  (He  telleth
of  some  hils  also  in  his  journey,  wherein  divers  of  his
people died with  cold) in the middest is a plaine of

5i7

A.D.
1521.

bN.  di  Gus.
ap.  Ram.
vol.  3.

cLit.  P.

Alvarado  &
Dieg.  Godoy.
ap  Ram.
vol.  3.
ARelat.  del.
Temhtitan  ca.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

70.  leagues  compasse,  and  therein  two  Lakes  which
extend  the  circuit  of  50.  leagues ;  the  one  salt,  which
ebbeth  and  floweth  (an  argument  for  Patritius  his  opinion,
that  saltnesse  is  a  chiefe  cause  of  that  vicissitude  of  ebbing
and  flowing,  in  the  Ocean)  the  other  fresh :  When  the
water  of  the  Salt  Lake  increaseth,  it  runneth  like  a
violent  streame  into  the  fresh  Lake,  which  when  it
decreaseth,  is  repaired  againe  by  the  like  issue  of  this
into  the  former.

Nunno  di  Gusmanb  hath  written  his  expedition  into
Mechoacan  and  other  Countries  of  New-Spaine  1530.
subduing  and  taking  possession  for  the  Emperour:
He  found  some  of  them  Sodomites,  others  Sacrificers
of  mens  flesh,  and  some  closly  practising  this  butchery
after  they  had  professed  themselves  Christians :  none
of  them  which  durst  looke  a  Horse  in  the  face,  but
were  afraid  that  that  Beast  would  eate  them.  The
severall  peoples  by  him  reckoned,  would  here  be  tedious
to  name :  which  we  may  say  of  the  like  made  by  Godoy
and  Alvarado.0  Of  the  Customes  of  the  Auntient
Mexicans,  one  of  Cortes  his  Gentlemen  hath  written  a
Treatised  extant  in  Ramusius,  wherein  are  described  their
Citie,  Temples,  Rites  of  Sacrifice,  and  the  like,  as  after
followeth  out  of  him  and  others.

518

LARGER RELATIONS OF MEXICO  a.d.

c.  1552.

Chap.  IX.  [IILv.

.  I1230

Larger Relations of things most remarkeable

observed  by  the  Spaniards  at  their first  com-

ming : Cholollas holies ; Popocatepecs ashes.

Mutezumas multiforme magnificence and

majestic Mexican Citie and Temple,  with

other  antiquities  gathered out of the Third

part of  the Historie of Francis Lopez* de  *ThuPartof

1  r  Lopez  was

\jromara.  iong  since

tt 1 11 •  /-*'±.'  t«i  11  J 1 i.1 translated  and

Jrlololla is  a  Litie  as 1  laxcallan,  and  hath »,.  ,  d  ,

but  one person  who  is Governour and  t/io.  Nichols.

generall  Captaine,  chosen  by  the  consent  /  have  here  in

of all the Citizens. It is a Citie of  divers  places

twenty thousand housholds within the  a!?en,fr  z/  y
, J . .  the  Italians

wals,  and  in  the  suburbs  as  much  more,  translation  of
It sheweth  outwards  very  beautifull,  and  Agostino  di
full of Towers, for there are as many Temples as  CravaSz: for
dayes in  the  yeare,  and  every  Temple  hath  his  Tower.  tie.  -^/l
Our men counted foure hundred Towers. The men  ^ave  noL
and women  are  of  good  disposition,  well  favoured,  and
very wittie. The women are Goldsmiths and also
Carvers,  the  men  are  warriers, and light fellowes, and
good Maisters for any purpose : they goe better
apparelled then any other Indians yet seene. They
weare for their upper garment, cloakes like unto
Moriscos, but after another sort. All the Countrey
round  about  them is fruitfull  and  errable  ground,  well
watered,  and  so full of  people,  that there  is no  waste
ground, in  respect  whereof,  there  are  some poore  which
begge from doore to doore. The Spaniards  had not
seene  any  beggers in  that Countrey  before they came
thither.

Chololla  is  a  Citie  of  most  devotion  and  religion  in
all  India,  it  is  called  the  Sanctuary,  or  holy  place
among the Indians, and thither they travelled from

5i9

qCS^-S

x«

txillNi

s^p§2P7I

^!=5-

y^aR^  |

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c  1552.

many  places  farre  distant  in  Pilgrimage,  and  for  this
cause  there  were  so  many  Temples.  Their  Cathedrall
Temple  was  the  best  and  highest  of  all  the  New
Spaine,  with  a  hundred  and  twenty  steps  up  unto  it.
The  greatest  Idoll  of  all  their  gods  was  called  Quezal-
covately,  God  of  the  Aire,  who  was  (say  they)  the
founder  of  their  Citie,  being  a  Virgin  of  holy  life,
and  great  penance.  He  instituted  fasting,  and  drawing
of  bloud  out  of  their  eares  and  tongues,  and  left  a
precept,  that  they  should  sacrifice  but  onely  Quailes,
Doves,  and  other  foule.  He  never  ware  but  one
garment  of  Cotten,  which  was  white,  narrow,  and  long,
and  upon  that  a  mande  beset  with  certaine  red  crosses.
They  have  certaine  greene  Stones  which  were  his,  and
those  they  keepe  for  relickes.  One  of  them  is  like  an
Apes  head.  Here  they  abode  twenty  dayes,  and  in
this  meane  while  there  came  so  many  to  buy  and  sell,
that  it  was  a  wonder  to  see.  And  one  of  the  things  that
was  to  be  seene  in  those  faires,  was  the  earthen  vessell,
which  was  exceeding  curious  and  fine.

The  hill  called  Popocatepec.

THere  is  a  hill  eight  leagues  from  Chololla,  called
Popocatepec,  which  is  to  say,  a  hill  of  smoake,  for
many  times  it  casteth  out  smoake  and  fire.  Cortes
sent  thither  ten  Spaniards,  with  many  Indians,  to  carry
their  victuall,  and  to  guide  them  in  the  way.  The
ascending  up  was  very  troublesome,  and  full  of  craggie
rocks.  They  approached  so  nigh  the  top,  that  they
heard  such  a  terrible  noise  which  proceeded  from
thence,  that  they  durst  not  goe  unto  it,  for  the  ground
did  tremble  and  shake,  and  great  quantity  of  ashes
which  disturbed  the  way :  but  yet  two  of  them  who
seemed  to  be  most  hardie,  and  desirous  to  see  strange
things,  went  up  to  the  top,  because  they  would  not
returne  with  a  sleevelesse  answer,  and  that  they  might
not  be  accounted  cowards,  leaving  their  fellowes
behinde them,  proceeding  forwards. The  Indians  said,

520

LARGER RELATIONS OF MEXICO  a.d.

c.  1552.
what  meane  these men  ?  for  as  yet never  mortall  man
tooke  such  a  journey  in  hand.

These  two  valiant  fellowes  passed  through  the  Desart
of  Ashes,  and  at  length  came  under  a  great  smoake
very  thicke,  and  standing  there  a  while,  the  darkenesse
vanished  partly  away,  and  then  appeared  the  vulcan
and  concavity,  which  was  about  halfe  a  league  in  com-
passe,  out  of  the  which  the  ayre  came  abounding,  with
a  great  noise,  very  shrill,  and  whistling,  in  such  sort
that  the  whole  hill  did  tremble.  It  was  to  be  compared
unto  an  Oven  where  Glasse  is  made.  The  smoake
and  heate  was  so  great,  that  they  could  not  abide  it,
and  of  force  were  constrained  to  returne  by  the  way
that  they  had  ascended :  but  they  were  not  gone  farre,
when  the  vulcan  began  to  lash  out  flames  of  fire,  ashes,
and  imbers,  yea  and  at  the  last,  stones  of  burning
fire :  and  if  they  had  not  chansed  to  finde  a  Rocke,
where  under  they  shadowed  themselves,  undoubtedly
they  had  there  beene  burned.  When  with  good  tokens
they  were  returned  where  they  left  their  fellowes,  the
other  Indians  kissed  their  garments  as  an  honour  due
unto  gods.  They  presented  unto  them  such  things  as
they  had,  and  wondred  much  at  their  fact.

The  simple  Indians  thought,  that  that  place  was  an  Purgatory.
infernall  place,  where  all  such  as  governed  not  well,  or
used  tyrannie  in  their  offices,  were  punished  when  they
died,  and  also  beleeved,  that  after  their  purgation,  they
passed  into  glory.  This  Vulcan  is  like  unto  the  Vulcan
of  Sicilia,  it  is  high  and  round,  and  never  wanteth  [HI.  v.
snow  about it,  and  is  seene  afarre off  in the  night,  it  II24~J

lasheth  out  flames  of  fire.  There  is  neere  about  this
Hill  many  Cities,  and  Huexoxinco  is  one  of  the
nighest.  In  tenne  yeeres  space  this  strange  hill  of  work-
ing did  expell  no  vapour  or  smoke :  but  in  the  yeere
1540.  it  began  againe  to  burne,  and  with  the  horrible
noyse  thereof,  the  Neighbours  that  dwelt  foure  leagues
from  thence  were  terrified,  for  the  especiall  strange
smoakes that  then were seene, the  like  to their Pre-

521

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1552.

decessors  had  not  beene  seene.  The  ashes  that  pro-
ceeded from  thence  came  to  Huexozinco,  Quelaxcopan,
Tepiacac,  Quauhquecholla,  Chololla,  and  Tlaxcallan,
which  standeth  ten  leagues  from  thence,  yea  some  say,
it  extended  fifteene  leagues  distant,  and  burned  their
hearbes  in  their  Gardens,  their  Fieldes  of  Corne,  Trees,
and  cloathes  that  lay  a  drying.

He  left  the  way  that  the  Mexicans  had  perswaded
him  to  come,  for  it  was  both  evill  and  dangerous,  as
the  Spaniard  which  went  to  the  Vulcan  had  seene,  he
went  another  plainer  way,  and  neerer.  He  ascended  up
a  Hill  covered  with  snow,  which  was  sixe  miles  of
height,  where  if  the  30000.  Souldiers  had  waited  for
them,  they  might  easily  have  taken  them,  by  reason  of
the  great  cold :  and  from  the  top  of  that  Hill,  they
discovered  the  Land  of  Mexico,  and  the  great  Lake,
with  his  Villages  round  about,  which  is  an  exceeding
goodly  sight.  But  when  Cortes  saw  that  beautifull
thing,  his  joy  was  without  comparison.

There  came  twelve  Lords  from  Mexico,  among  whom
was  Cacama,  Nephew  to  Mutezuma,  who  was  Lord  of
Tezcuco,  a  young  man  of  five  and  twentie  yeeres  of
age,  whom  the  Indians  did  much  honour :  he  was
carried  upon  their  shoulders,  and  when  they  set  him
downe,  one  went  before  with  a  Broome  to  sweepe  the
dust  out  of  his  way.  In  this  order  hee  came  to
Iztacpalapan.  Every  two  houres  came  messengers  be-
twixt Cortes  and  Mutezuma :  then  came  Cuetlavac  Lord
of  that  Towne,  with  the  Lord  Culhuacan  his  Kinsman
to  receive  him,  who  presented  unto  him  slaves,  garments,
and  feathers,  and  to  the  value  of  foure  thousand  Duckets
in  Gold.  Cuetlavac  received  all  the  Spaniards  into  his
owne  house,  which  hath  very  faire  Lodgings  all  of  stone,
and  Carpenters  worke,  exceeding  well  wrought,  with  high
and  low  roomes,  with  all  kind  of  service :  The  chambers
were  hanged  with  cloth  of  Cotton  very  rich,  after  their
manner.  There  were  faire  Gardens  replenished  with
many sweet flowres, and sweet trees garnished with

522

LARGER RELATIONS OF MEXICO  a.d.

c.  1552.
Networke,  made  of  Canes,  and  covered  with  Roses  and
other  fine  hearbes,  with  sundry  ponds  of  sweet  water.
There  was  another  Garden  very  beautifull  of  all  sorts  of
fruits  and  hearbes,  with  a  great  pond  walled  with  lime
and  stone,  and  was  foure  hundred  paces  square,  made
with  faire  steps  to  descend  unto  the  bottome  in  many
places,  and  was  full  of  divers  kinds  of  fishes,  and
many  kind  of  water  Birds,  which  sometimes  covered
the  pond,  as  Guls,  and  Mewes,  and  such  like.  Iztac-
pallapan  is  a  Towne  of  10000.  housholds,  and  is
planted  in  a  Lake  of  Salt-water,  the  one  halfe  of  the
Towne  built on  the  water,  and  the  other  on  the  Land.

From Iztacpallapan to Mexico is two leagues all  The  solemne
upon  a  faire  Calsey, upon the which eight Horsemen  P01?te™ere-
may  passe  on  ranke,  and  so  directly  straight  as  though  was  rece\ved
it  had beene  made  by  line. And  whosoever  hath  good  into  Mexico.
eye-sight might discerne the gates of Mexico from
thence. Coyoacan  is  a  Towne  of  sixe  thousand  dwellers,
Vizilopuchtli is of five thousand. These Towres are
planted in the Lake, and are adorned with many
Temples, which have many faire Towres, that doe
beautifie exceedingly the Lake. There is great con-
tractation  of  Salt,  which  is  made  there,  and  from  thence
is  carried  abroad to Faires  and Markets, which thing
was a  great  rent to  Mutezuma. Upon  this  Calsey  are
many  drawne  Bridges built  upon  faire  arches,  that the
water  passeth  thorow.

Cortes  passed  this  Calsey  with  400.  Spaniards,  and
6000.  Indians  his  friends :  their  passage  was  with  much
adoe,  by  reason  of  the  great  multitude  of  Indians  which
came  to  see  him,  and  comming  neere  the  Citie,  there
adjoyned  another  Calsey  with  a  broader  passage,  where
standeth  a  strong  Bulwarke  of  stone,  of  the  heigth  of
two  fathome  with  two  Towres  on  each  side,  and  two
gates  very  strong.  Here  at  this  Fort  came  three
thousand  Courtiers  and  Citizens  to  receive  him,  and
every  of  them  touched  the  ground  with  his  right  hand
and kissed it,  and  passed  forwards  in  the  order  as  they

523

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c  1552.

came.  These  salutations  endured  an  houre  and  more.
From  the  Bulwarke  the  Calsey  lyeth  directly,  and
before  the  entrance  into  the  street  there  is  another
draw  Bridge  made  of  timber  ten  paces  broad,  under
the  which  the  water  passeth  too  and  fro.  At  this
Mutezumas  Bridge  came  Mutezuma  to  receive  Cortes  under  a
Maiestie  Canopie of greene feathers and gold, with much

Argentery  hanging  thereat,  which  Canopie  foure  Noble-
men did  carrie.  And  the  two  Princes  Cuetlavac  and
Cacama  his  Nephewes,  did  leade  him  by  each  arme :
all  three  were  rich  apparelled  and  all  of  one  fashion,
except  Mutezuma,  which  had  a  paire  of  shooes  of
gold  beset  with  precious  Stones,  and  the  soles  were
tyed  to  the  upper  part  with  latchets,  as  is  painted  of
the  Antikes.  His  Gentlemen  went  by  two  and  two,
laying  downe  and  taking  up  Mantles  and  Coverlets
upon  the  ground,  because  his  feet  should  not  touch
the  same :  then  followed  him  as  in  Procession,  200.
Noblemen  bare-footed,  with  garments  of  a  richer  Livery
then  the  first  three  thousand.  Mutezuma  came  in  the
middest  of  the  street,  and  the  others  came  behind  him
as  nigh  the  wall  as  they  might,  their  faces  towards
the  ground,  for  it  was  a  great  offence  to  looke  him
in  the  face.  Cortes  alighted  from  his  Horse,  and
according  to  our  use  went  to  embrace  him,  but  the
[III.  v.  Princes who led him by the armes,  would not suffer

II25-J  him to come  so  nigh, for  they  held it for sinne to
touch  him,  but  yet  saluted  each  one  the  other.

Cortes  put  about  Mutezuma  his  necke  a  coller  of
Margarites,  Diamonds,  and  other  stones  all  of  glasse.
Mutezuma  received  it  thankfully,  and  went  before  with
one  of  the  Princes  his  Nephewes,  and  commanded  the
other  to  leade  Cortes  by  the  hand,  next  after  him  in
the  midst  of  the  street :  and  proceeding  forward  in  this
order,  then  came  the  Gentlemen  in  the  richest  Livery
to  welcome  him,  one  by  one,  touching  the  ground  with
their  hands,  and  after  returned  to  their  standing.  And
if  the Citizens had come as they requested, all that

524

LARGER  RELATIONS OF MEXICO  ad.

c.  1552.
day  would  not  have  served  for  salutations.  The  coller
of  glasse  pleased  well  Mutezuma,  and  because  hee  would
not  take  without  giving  a  better  thing,  as  a  great  Prince
hee  commanded  to  be  brought  two  collers  of  red  Prawnes,  Spaniards  give
which  are  there  much  esteemed,  and  at  every  one  of  them  &?zv  ^ifasse,
hanged  eight  Shrimps  of  gold,  of  excellent  workmanship,  g/orym
and  of  a  finger  length  every  one,  he  put  these  collers
with  his  owne  hands  about  Cortes  his  necke,  the  which
was  esteemed  a  most  great  favour,  yea  and  the  Indians
marvelled  at  it.  At  this  time  they  were  come  to  the
street  end,  which  was  almost  a  mile  long,  broad,  streight,
and  very  faire,  and  full  of  houses  on  each  side,  in  whose
doores,  windowes  and  tops,  was  such  a  multitude  of
Indians  to  behold  the  strangers,  that  I  know  not  who
wondred  most,  our  men  to  see  such  a  number  of  them,
or  else  they  to  see  our  men,  their  Ordnance  and  Horses,
a  thing  so  strange  unto  them.  They  were  brought  unto
a  great  Court  or  house  of  Idols,  which  was  the  Lodging
Axaiaca,  at  the  doore  whereof,  Mutezuma  tooke  Cortes
by  the  hand,  and  brought  him  into  a  faire  hall,  and  placed
him  upon  a  rich  Carpet,  saying  unto  him,  Sir,  now
are  you  in  your  owne  house,  eate  and  take  your  rest
and  pleasure,  for  I  will  shortly  come  and  visit  you  againe.
Such  (as  you  heare)  was  the  receiving  of  Hernando  Cortes
by  Mutezuma  a  most  mightie  King,  into  his  great  and
famous  Citie  of  Mexico, the eight day of  November,

The  house  where  the  Spaniards  were  lodged  was
great  and  large,  with  many  faire  chambers  sufficient  for
them  all :  it  was  neate,  cleane  matted,  and  hanged  with
Cloth  of  Cotton,  and  Feathers  of  many  colours,  pleasant
to  behold.  When  Mutezuma  was  departed  from  Cortes,
hee  beganne  to  set  his  house  in  order  and  placed  the
Ordnance  at  his  doore,  and  having  all  his  things  in  good
sort,  he  went  to  a  sumptuous  Dinner  that  was  prepared
for  him.  Assoone  as  Mutezuma  had  made  an  end
of  his  Dinner,  hearing  that  the  Strangers  were  risen
from the Table, and reposed a  while, then came hee

525

A.D.

c.  1552.

The  Oration
of  Mutezuma
to  the
Spaniards.

A  strange
opinion.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  Cortes,  saluting  him,  and  sate  downe  by  him.  He
gave  unto  him  divers  Jewels  of  Gold  Plate,  Feathers,
and  many  Garments  of  Cotton,  both  rich,  well  woven,
and  wrought  of  strange  colours,  a  thing  comely,  that
did  manifest  his  greatnesse,  and  also  confirme  their
imagination.  This  gift  was  delivered  honourably,  and
then  beganne  his  talke  as  followeth  :  Lords  and  Gentle-
men, I  doe  much  rejoyce  to  have  in  my  house  such
valiant  men  as  yee  are,  for  to  use  you  with  courtesie,
and  intreate  you  with  honour,  according  to  your  desert
and  my  estate.  And  where  heretofore  I  desired  that
you  should  not  come  hither,  the  onely  cause  was,  my
people  had  a  great  feare  to  see  you,  for  your  gesture
and  grimme  beards  did  terrifie  them,  yea,  they  reported
that  yee  had  such  beasts  as  swallowed  men,  and  that
your  comming  was  from  Heaven,  bringing  with  you
Lightning,  Thunder,  and  Thunder-bolts,  wherewith  you
made  the  Earth  to  tremble  and  to  shake,  and  that  yee
slue  therewith  whom  yee  pleased.  But  now  I  doe  see
and  know  that  you  are  mortall  men,  and  that  yee  are
quiet  and  hurt  no  man  :  also  I  have  seene  your  Horses,
which  are  but  your  Servants,  and  your  Gunnes  like  unto
shooting  Trunkes.  I  doe  now  hold  all  for  Fables  and
Lyes  which  have  beene  reported  of  you,  and  I  doe  also
accept  you  for  my  meere  Kinsmen.  My  Father  told
mee  that  hee  had  heard  his  forefathers  say,  of  whom  I
doe  discend,  that  they  held  opinion  how  they  were
not  Naturals  of  this  Land,  but  come  hither  by  chance,
in  companie  of  a  mightie  Lord,  who  after  awhile  that
hee  had  abode  here,  they  returned  to  their  naturall  soyle :
After  many  yeeres  expired,  they  came  againe  for  those
whom  they  had  left  heere  behind  them,  but  they  would
not  goe  with  them,  because  they  had  here  inhabited,
and  had  Wives  and  Children,  and  great  government
in  the  Land.  Now  these  mightie  Lords  seeing  that
they  were  so  stubborne,  and  would  not  returne  with
them,  departed  from  them  sore  displeased,  saying,  that
hee  would  send  his  Children  that  should  both rule  and

526

LARGER RELATIONS OF MEXICO  a.d.

c.  1552.
governe  them,  in  Justice,  Peace,  and  ancient  Religion.
And  for  this  consideration,  wee  have  alwayes  suspected
and  beleeved  that  such  a  people  should  come  to  rule
and  governe  us,  and  considering  from  whence  you  come,
I  doe  thinke  that  you  are  they  whom  wee  looked  for,
and  the  notice  which  the  great  Emperour  Charles  had
for  us,  who  hath  now  sent  you  hither.  Therefore  Lord
and  Captaine,  bee  well  assured,  that  wee  will  obey  you,
if  there  bee  no  feyned  or  deceitfull  matter  in  your
dealings,  and  will  also  divide  with  you  and  yours  all
that  we  have.  And  although  this  which  I  have  said  were
not  onely  for  your  vertue,  fame,  and  deeds  of  valiant
Gentlemen,  I  would  yet  doe  it  for  your  worthinesse  in
the  battailes  of  Tavasco,  Teocazinco,  and  Chollolla,  being
so  few,  to  overcome  so  many.

Now  againe,  if  yee  imagine  that  I  am  a  God,  and
the  walls  and  rooffes  of  my  houses,  and  all  my  vessell
of  service,  to  be  of  pure  Gold,  as  the  men  of  Zempoallan,
Tlaxcallan,  and  Huexozinco,  have  informed  you,  it  is
not  so,  and  I  judge  you  to  bee  so  wise,  that  you  give
no  credit  to  such  Fables.  You  shall  also  note,  that
through  your  comming  hither,  many  of  my  subjects
have  rebelled,  and  are  become  my  mortall  enemies,  but  [HI.  v.
yet  I  purpose  to  breake  their  wings. Come  feele  you  my  1126.J

bodie,  I  am  of  flesh  and  bone,  a  mortall  man  as  other
are,  and  no  God,  although  as  a  King  I  doe  esteeme  my
selfe,  of  greater  dignitie  and  preheminence  then  others.
My  houses  you  doe  also  see,  which  are  of  timber  and
earth,  and  the  principallest  of  Masons  worke,  therefore
now  you  doe  both  know  and  see  what  odious  lyers  those
Tale-bearers  were.  But  troth  it  is,  that  Gold  Plate,
Feathers,  Armour,  Jewels,  and  other  Riches,  I  have  in
the  Treasury  of  my  Forefathers  a  long  time  preserved,
as  the  use  of  Kings  is,  all  the  which  you  and  yours  shall
enjoy  at  all  times.  And  now  it  may  please  you  to  take
your  rest,  for  I  know  that  you  are  weary  of  your  journey.
Cortes  with  joyfull  countenance  humbled  himselfe,  seeing
some teares fall from  Mutezuma  his  eyes,  saying  unto

527

A.D.

c.  1552.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

A  loving
answere.

him,  upon  the  trust  I  have  had  in  your  clemencie,  I
insisted  to  come  both  to  see,  and  talke  with  your  High-
nesse,  and  now  I  know  that  all  are  lyes  which  hath
beene  told  mee.  The  like  your  Highnesse  has  heard
reported  of  us,  assure  your  selfe,  that  the  Emperour
King  of  Spaine  is  your  naturall  Lord,  whom  yee  have
expected,  hee  is  the  onely  heire  from  whence  your  Linage
doth  proceed,  and  as  touching  the  offer  of  your  High-
nesse treasure,  I  do  most  heartily  thanke  you.

After  all  this  communication,  Mutezuma  demanded
whether  the  bearded  men  which  came  with  him  ;  were
either  his  vassals,  or  his  slaves,  because  hee  would
entertayne  each  one  according  to  his  estate.  Cortes
answered,  that  they  were  all  his  brethren,  friends,  and
fellowes,  except  some  that  were  his  servants.

Then  he  departed,  and  went  home  to  his  Palace,  and
there  informed  himselfe  particularly  who  were  Gentlemen,
and  who  were  not,  and  according  thereunto,  sent  every
one  particular  gift  or  present.  To  the  Gentlemen  he
sent  his  reward  by  his  Comptroller,  and  to  the  Mariners
and  other  Servitors,  by  a  Page  of  his  houshold.

Mutezuma  was  a  man  of  a  small  stature,  and  leane,
his  colour  tawnie  as  all  the  Indians  are.  Hee  had
long  haire  on  his  head,  sixe  little  haires  upon  him,  as
though  they  had  beene  put  in  with  a  Bodkin.  His
thinne  beard  was  blacke.  Hee  was  a  man  of  a  faire
condition,  and  a  doer  of  Justice,  well  spoken,  grave
and  wise,  beloved  and  feared  among  his  subjects.  Mute-
zuma doth  signifie  Sadnesse.

To  the  proper  names  of  Kings  and  Lords,  they  doe
adde  this  syllable  Cin,  which  is  for  courtesie  and  dignitie,
as  we  use  Lord.  The  Turke  useth  Zultan.  The  Moore
or  Barbarian  calleth  his  Lord  Mulley,  and  so  the  Indians
Title  Cin.  say  Mutezumazin.  His  people  had  him  in  such  reverence,
that  hee  permitted  none  to  sit  in  his  sight,  nor  yet  in
his  presence  to  weare  shooes,  nor  looke  him  in  the  face,
except  very  few  Princes.  Hee  was  glad  of  the  con-
versation  of  the Spaniards, and would  not  suffer  them

528

Mutezuma
described.

Cin

LARGER RELATIONS OF MEXICO  ad.

c.  1552.
to stand on  foote,  for  the  great  estimation hee  had  of
them, and  if  hee  liked  any  of  the  Spaniards garments,
hee  would  exchange  his  apparell  for  theirs. He  changed Change  of
his  owne  apparell  foure  times  every  day,  and  hee  never ^are  '
clothed himselfe againe with the Garments  which hee
had  once worne,  but all  such  were  kept  in  his  Guard-
robe, for to give in Presents to his Servants, and
Ambassadours, and unto valiant Souldiers which had
taken any enemy Prisoner, and that was esteemed a
great reward, and a title of priviledge. The costly
Mantles  whereof  had  beene  divers  sent  to  Cortes,  were
of  the  same  Guardrobe.

Mutezuma  went  alwayes  very neate and fine  in his  His
attyre. Hee  bathed  him  in  his  Hot-house  foure  times Wardrobe.
every day. Hee went seldome out of his Chamber,
but when hee went to his meate. Hee  eate  alwayes  His  diet-rites.
alone,  but solemnely, and with great  abundance. His
Table  was  a  Pillow,  or  else  a  couple  of  coloured  Skinnes.
His  chaire  was  a  foure-footed  stoole  made  of  one  piece,
and  hollow  in the middest, well  wrought  and  painted.
His  Table-clothes,  Napkins,  and  Towels,  were  made  of
Cotton-wooll,  very  white  and  new, for hee was never
served  but  once  with  that  Naperie. Foure  hundred  Pages  Magnificent
brought in his  meate, all sonnes of  great Lords,  and  aitendance-
placed it  upon  a  Table  in his great  Hall. The  meate
being  brought  in,  then  came Mutezuma  to  behold  the
Dishes,  and  appointed  those  Dishes  that  liked  him  best,
and Chafing-dishes  were prepared  to  keepe that  meate
warme,  and  seldome  would  he  eate  of  any  other  Dish,
except  the Lord  Steward  or  Comptroller  should  highly
commend  any  other  Dish.

Before  hee  sate  downe,  came  twentie  of  his  Wives  His  wives.
of  the  fairest  and  best  esteemed,  or  else  those  that  served
weekly  by  turne,  brought  in  the  Bason  and  Ewre,  with
great  humblenesse.  This  done,  hee  sate  him  downe,  and
then  came  the  Lord  Steward,  and  drew  a  woodden  Nette
before  him,  because  none  should  come  nigh  his  Table.
And  this  Noble  man  alone  placed  the  Dishes,  and  also
xv  529  2  L

A.D.

c.  1552.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Bare-foot

service.

Musicke.
[III.  v

Jesters

Plate.

Mans  flesh

tooke  them  away,  for  the  Pages  who  brought  in  the
meate,  came  not  neere  the  Table,  nor  yet  spake  any
worde,  nor  no  man  else.

While  the  Lord  Mutezuma  was  at  his  meate,  except
some  Jeaster,  they  all  served  him  bare-footed.  There
assisted  alwayes  somewhat  a  farre  off,  sixe  ancient  and
Noblemen,  unto  whom  he  used  to  give  of  the  Dish
that  best  liked  him,  who  received  the  same  at  his  hand
with  great  reverence,  and  eate  it  incontinent,  without
looking  in  his  face,  which  was  the  greatest  humilitie
that  they  could  use  before  him.  Hee  had  musicke  of
Fiddle,  Flute,  and  of  a  Snaile-shell,  and  a  Cauldron
II27"J  covered  with  a  skinne,  and  such  other  strange  Instru-
ments. They  had  very  evill  voyces  to  sing.  Alwayes
at  dinner  time  he  had  Dwarfes,  crooke-backes,  and  other
deformed  counterfeits,  all  for  majestie  and  to  laugh  at,
who  had  their  meate  in  the  Hall  among  the  Jesters
and  Idiots,  which  were  fed  with  part  of  the  meate  that
came  from  Mutezuma  his  table,  all  the  rest  of  the  meate
was  given  to  three  thousand  of  the  guard,  who  attended
ordinarily  in  the  yard  or  Court,  and  therefore  they  say
that  there  was  brought  for  his  Table  three  thousand
dishes,  and  as  many  pots  of  wine,  such  as  they  use,
and  that  continually  the  Buttrey  and  Pantrey  stood  open,
which  was  a  wonder  to  see  what  was  in  them.  The
platters,  dishes,  and  cups,  were  all  of  earth,  whereof
the  King  was  served  but  once,  and  so  from  meale  to
meale  new.  He  had  likewise  his  service  of  Gold  and
Plate  very  rich,  but  hee  used  not  to  bee  served  with  it
(they  say)  because  hee  would  not  bee  served  twice  there-
with, the  which  hee  thought  a  base  thing.

Some  affirme,  that  young  children  were  slaine  and
dressed  in  divers  kinde  of  dishes  for  Mutezuma  his
table,  but  it  was  not  so,  onely  of  mans  flesh  sacrificed  he
fed  now  and  then.  The  table  being  taken  up,  then  came
againe  the  Gentlewomen  to  bring  water  for  his  hands,
with  the  like  reverence  as  they  used  at  the  first,  and
then  went  they  to  dinner  with  the  other  wives,  so  that

53o

LARGER RELATIONS OF MEXICO  a.d.

c.  1552.
then  the Gentlemen and Pages waited  as their course
fell.

When  his  table  was  taken  up,  and  his  Servitors  gone
to  meate,  Mutezuma  sate  still  :  then  came  in  the  suiters
that  had  any  affaires  to  deale  with  him,  bare-footed,  for
all  the  persons  did  use  that  reverence,  except  some
Princes  his  Kinsmen,  as  the  Lords  of  Tescuco,  and
Tlacopan,  and  a  few  others  :  and  beeing  cold  weather,
they  used  to  weare  olde  ragged  clothes  upon  their  rich
garments.  All  suiters  used  to  make  three  or  foure  State
courtesies,  not  looking  toward  his  face,  and  speaking  unto  ceremonm-
him  their  heads  downwards,  and  in  that  order  retyred
backe  againe.  Mutezuma  answered  his  suiters  very
gravely,  with  low  voyce,  and  in  few  words,  and  not  to
all  suiters,  for  others  his  Secretaries  or  Counsellers  that
stood  by,  answered  for  him,  and  having  their  answere,
they  returned  backwards,  not  turning  their  tailes  to  the
Prince.  After  these  businesses  done,  he  used  some
recreation,  hearing  Jesters  or  Songs,  wherein  he  delighted  Jesters  and
much,  or  else  to  looke  upon  the  Players,  who  play  with  F/ayers-
their  feet,  as  we  doe  with  our  hands.  These  have  a
cudgell  like  unto  a  Pastlers  rowler,  which  they  tosse  high
and  low  as  it  were  a  ball  in  the  Ayre,  strange  to  behold.
They  use  other  Playes  to  passe  the  time,  in  such  an
order,  that  it  seemed  marvellous  to  the  lookers  on.
Cortes  brought  into  Spaine  some  of  these  Players.  Also
they  use  Matachines,  in  such  sort  they  doe  play,  that  Games.
there  stand  each  upon  other  shoulders,  and  hee  that
standeth  highest,  sheweth  many  feates.  Sometime  Mute-
zuma did  behold  the  Players,  who  played  at  a  game
called  Pacoliztli,  which  is  much  like  our  Tables,  and  they
play  with  beanes,  squared  like  Dice,  which  they  call
Patolli,  and  throw  them  out  of  both  their  hands  upon
a  matte,  or  else  upon  the  ground,  where  are  made  cer-
tain strikes,  upon  which  they  set  downe  the  chance
that  is  throwne  :  and  at  this  game  they  play  all  that
they  have,  and  many  times  they  value  their  owne
bodies,  and  play  that into captivitie,  and  to remayne  a

53i

Mexico.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1552.

slave,  I  meane,  such  as  are  common  Gamesters  of  small
estate.

The  Tennis Sometimes Mutezuma went to the Tennis Court.

KV..%?..  Their  ball  is  called  Villamaliztli,  and  is  made  of  the
gumme  which  commeth  from  a  tree  called  Ulli.  This
tree  groweth  in  a  hot  Countrey.  The  gumme  being
kneaded  together,  and  so  made  round,  is  as  blacke  as
pitch,  and  somewhat  heavie,  and  very  hard  for  the  hand,
but  yet  good  and  light  to  rebound,  and  better  then  our
wind-bals.  They  play  not  as  Chases,  but  at  Bandy,  or  at
Check,  that  is,  if  the  ball  touch  the  wall  it  looseth.
They  may  strike  the  ball  with  any  part  of  their  body,
but  there  is  alwayes  a  penaltie  if  they  onely  strike  not
with  the  buttocke  or  side,  which  is  the  finest  play  :
whereof  they  use  a  skinne  upon  each  buttocke.  They
play  so  many  to  so  many  for  a  packe  of  Mantles,  or
according  to  the  abilitie  of  the  Players.  Also  they  play
for  gold  and  feathers,  and  sometime  for  their  owne
bodies,  as  they  use  at  Patolli,  which  is  there  permitted
and  lawfull.  The  Tennis  Court  is  called  Tlachco,  and  is
a  Hall  long  and  narrow,  but  wider  upwards,  then  downe-
wards,  and  higher  on  the  sides  then  at  the  ends,  which  is
an  industry  for  their  play.  The  house  is  alwayes  white
and  smooth,  in  the  side  walles  they  have  certaine  stones
like  unto  Milstones,  with  a  little  hole  in  the  middest
that  passeth  through  the  stone,  the  hole  is  so  small,
that  scarcely  the  ball  may  passe  through,  but  he  that
chanceth  to  strike  the  ball  into  the  hole,  which  seldom
happeneth,  winneth  the  game,  and  by  an  ancient  Law  and
custome  among  Tennis  Players,  he  ought  to  have  the
Cloakes  of  all  those  that  stand  and  behold  the  play
on  that  side  that  the  ball  went  in,  and  in  some  Tennis
Courts,  the  halfe  of  the  garments  of  them  that  stand
looking  on.  The  Winner  is  then  bound  to  make  certaine
Sacrifice  to  the  God  of  the  Tennis  play,  and  to  the  stone
where  the  ball  entred.  The  beholders  of  the  play  would
say,  that  such  a  Winner  should  be  a  Thiefe  and  an
Adulterer,  or  else  that  he  should  die  quickly.

532

LARGER RELATIONS OF MEXICO  a.d.

c.  1552.

They  used in the  Temple of  the  Tennis play,  two
Images  of  the  God  of  the  Ball,  which  stood  upon  the  two  God  of  the
lower  walles. The  Sacrifice  was  celebrated  at  mid-night, a  '
with  many  Ceremonies  and  Witch-crafts,  and  Songs  for
that  purpose. Then  came  a  Priest  from  the  Cathedrall
Church, with other Religious persons to blesse the
Sacrifice,  saying  certain devillish  Prayers,  and throwing  [III.  v.
the ball foure times in the Tennis Court. In this  1128.]

order  was  the  Tennis  play  consecrated,  and  after  this
consecration  it  was  lawfull  to  play,  or  else  not,  for  this
diligence  was  first  to  bee  done  when  any  Tennis  Court
or  play  was  newly  built.  The  owner  of  the  Tennis
Court  also  would  never  suffer  any  to  play,  untill  he  had
first  offered  something  to  the  Idoll,  their  Superstition
was  so  great.

Mutezuma  had many houses as well in Mexico as  His  Palace.
without,  for  his  recreation  and  pleasure,  as also  for  his
ordinary  dwelling. To  write  of  all  it  should  bee  tedious,
but  where  his  continuall  abiding  was,  he  named  Tepac,
that  is  to  say, Palace. And that Palace had twentie  Twentie
doores  or  gates  which  had  their  out-comming  into  the mes'
common  streets. It  hath  three  Courts,  and  in  the  one  Three  Courts.
standeth  a  faire  Fountaine, many  Hals,  and  a  hundred  Hals,
Chambers of  twentie three, and thirtie foot long, an , efj'
hundred Bathes and Hot-houses  : and although the
building  was  without  nayles,  yet  very  good  workmanship.
The  walles  were  made  of  Masons  worke,  and  wrought
of  Marble,  Jaspe,  and  other  blacke  stone,  with  veines  of
red,  like  unto  Rubies  and  other  Stones,  which  glistered
very  faire  : the roofes were wrought of  Timber,  and
curiously  carved  :  the  Timber  was  Cedar,  Cypresse,  and
Pine-tree  : the Chambers  were painted  and hung  with
Cloth  of  Cotton,  and  Cloth made  of  Conies haire  and
feathers. The beds  were poore  and of  no value, for
they were nothing but Mantles laid upon Mats, or
upon  Hay,  or else Mats  alone  : few men lay within
those  Houses.  Multitude  of

There  were  a  thousand  women,  and  some  affirme  that  women.

533

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1552.

there  were  three  thousand,  accounting  Gentlewomen,
Servants  and  Slaves  :  the  most  were  Noblemens  Daugh-
ters, Mutezuma  tooke  of  them  for  his  selfe,  those  that
liked  him  best,  and  the  others  he  gave  in  mariage  to
Gentlemen  his  Servants.  The  saying  was,  that  hee  had
at  one  time  a  hundred  and  fiftie  women  his  wives  with
childe,  who  through  the  perswasion  of  the  Devill,  tooke
Medicines  to  cast  their  creatures,  because  they  knew
that  they  should  not  inherit  the  State  :  these  his  wives,  had
many  old  women  for  their  Guard,  for  no  man  was
permitted  to  looke  upon  them.
His  Armes  hee  The  shield  of  Armes  that  is  set  in  his  Palace,  and
ajtersaith  a Unwise  carried  to  the  Warres,  is  an  Eagle  soaring  upon

LuOuic  w&$  his  u  o  o bi

armes  but  this  a  Tigre  his  tallons,  bent  as  taking prey. Some  thinke

Eagle  was it  is  a  Gryffon  and  not  an  Eagle. The  Griffons  in  time

generall  to  all  past,  say they,  did  cause  the  Vale  of  Avacatlan  to  bee

the  Mexican dispeopled, for  they  were  great devourers  of  men,  and

Griffon-tale *-kat  their  abiding  was in the Mountaines  of  Teoacan  :

they  approve that these Mountaines were  called  Cuit-

lachtepelt,  of  Cuitlachtli,  which  is  a  Gryffon,  bigger  then

a  Lion  :  but  the  Spaniards did  never  see  any  of  them.

The  Indians  by  their  old  Pictures  doe  paint  those  GryfFons

to  have  a  kind  of  haire  and  no  feathers,  and  also  affirme,

that  with  their  tallons  and  teeth  they  breake  mens  bones.

They  have  the  courage  of  a  Lion,  and  the  countenance

of  an  Eagle  :  they  paint  him  with  foure  feet,  and  teeth,

with  a  kinde  of  downe,  more  like  wooll  then  feathers,

with  his  beake,  tallons,  and  wings. There  are  also  other

Lords  that  give  the  Gryffon  in  their  Armes,  flying  with  a

heart  in  his  tallons.

A  house  of  Mutezuma  had  another  house,  with  very  good  lodg-

fowle,  which • an(_j  ^-^  galleries,  built  upon  Pillars  of  Jaspe  which

WCT6  OMIV  •  .

preserved  for  extendeth  toward  a  goodly  Garden,  in  the  which  there
their  feathers,  are  ten  ponds  or  moe,  some  of  salt-water  for  Sea-fowle,
and  other  some  of  fresh  water  for  River-fowle,  and
Lake-fowle,  which  ponds  are  devised  with  sluces  to
emptie  and  to  fill  at  their  pleasure,  for  the  cleannesse  of
the  feathers. There is such  a number of  Fowle  that

534

LARGER RELATIONS OF MEXICO  a.d.

c.  1552.
scarcely  the  ponds  may  hold  them,  and  of  such  divers
kindes  both  in  feathers  and  making,  as  sure  it  was  an
admiration  for  the  Spaniards  to  behold,  for  the  most
of  them  they  knew  not,  nor  yet  had  at  any  time  seene
the  like.  And  to  every  kind  of  Fowle  they  gave  such
bayte  as  they  were  wont  to  feede  of  in  the  Fields  or
Rivers.  There  did  belong  to  that  house  three  hundred
persons  of  service  :  some  were  to  dense  the  ponds  :  other
some  did  fish  for  baite  :  other  some  served  them  with
meate  :  other  did  loose  them  and  trimme  their  feathers  :
others  had  care  to  looke  to  their  Egges  ;  others  to  set
them  abrood  :  others  cured  them  when  they  were  sicke  :
and  the  principallest  Office  was  to  plucke  the  Feathers  :
for  of  them  was  made  rich  Mantles,  Tapissary,  Targets,
tufFes  of  Feathers,  and  many  other  things  wrought  with
Gold  and  Silver  : a  most  perfit  worke.

There is another House with large quarters and  A  house  of
lodgings,  which  is  called  a  House  for  Fowle,  not  because  JowleJor

1DDJ  1 • • 1  111  11  hawking  and

there  are  more  then  in  the  other,  but  because  they  bee  otker  sfran„e
bigger  and  to  hawke  with  all,  and  are  Fowle  of  rapine,  things.
wherefore  they  are  esteemed  as  more  nobler  then  all  the
others.

There  are  in  this  House  many  high  Hals,  in  the  which
are  kept  men,  women  and  children  :  in  some  of  them
are  kept  such  as  are  borne  white  of  colour  :  which  doth  White  men.
very  seldome  happen  :  in  other  some  are  Dwarfes,
Crooked-backes,  Burstenmen,  Counterfeites,  and  mons-
trous Persons,  in  great  number  :  they  say,  that  they  used
to  deforme  them  when  they  were  Children,  to  set  forth
the  Kings  greatnesse  :  every  of  these  persons  were  in
severall  Halles  by  themselves.

In  the  lower  Halles  were  great  Cages  made  of  timber  :  wild  beasts.
in  some  of  them  were  Lions,  in  other  Tigres,  in  other
Ounces,  in  others  Wolves  :  in  conclusion,  there  was  no
foure-footed  beast  that  wanted  there,  onely  to  the  effect
that  the  mightie  Mutezuma  might  say  that  hee  had  such
things  in  his  house.  They  were  fed  with  their  ordinary,  [III.  v.
as  Ginea  cockes,  Deere,  Dogges,  and  such  like.  II29-J

535

A.D.

c.  1552.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

There  was  also  in  other  Hals  great  earthen  vessels,
some with earth, and some  with water, wherein were

Snakes,  i$c  Snakes,  as  grosse  as  a  mans  thigh,  Vipers,  Crocodiles,
which  they  call  Caymanes,  or  Lizarts  of  twenty  foote
long,  with  such  Scales  and  head  as  a  Dragon  hath  :  Also
other  little  Lizarts,  and  other  venemous  Beasts  and
Serpents  as  well  of  the  water  as  of  the  land,  a  terrible
sight  for  the  lookers  on.

Fouksofprey.  There  were  also  other  Cages  for  foule  of  rapine  of
all  sorts,  as  Hawkes,  Kites,  Boyters,  and  at  the  least  nine
or  ten  kinde  of  Haukes.  This  house  of  foule  had  of
daily  allowance  five  hundred  Gynea  cockes,  and  three
hundred  men  of  service,  besides  the  Falconers  and
Hunters,  which  are  infinite.  There  were  many  other
sorts  of  Foules  that  our  men  knew  not,  which  seemed  by
their  beake  and  talents  good  to  Hauke  withall.

To  the  Snakes  and  other  venemous  Beasts  they  gave
the  bloud  of  men  sacrificed,  to  feede  them,  and  some  say,
they  gave  unto  them  mans  flesh,  which  the  great  Lizarts
doe  eate  very  well.  The  Spaniards  saw  the  floore  covered
with  bloud  like  a  jellie  in  a  Slaughter-house,  it  stunke
horribly.  It  was  strange  to  see  the  Officers  in  this
House,  how  every  one  was  occupied.  Our  men  tooke
great  pleasure  in  beholding  such  strange  things,  but  they
could  not  away  with  the  roaring  of  the  Lyons,  the
fearefull  hissing  of  the  Snakes  and  Adders,  the  dolefull
howling  and  barking  of  the  Wolves,  the  sorrowfull
yelling  of  the  Ownzes  and  Tigres,  when  they  would
have  meate. Most  certaine,  in  the  night  season  it  seemed

Devils  den.  a  Dungeon  of  Hell,  and  a  dwelling  place  of  the  Devill,
and  even  so  it  was  indeede,  for  neere  at  hand  was  a
Hall  of  a  hundred  and  fiftie  foote  long,  and  thirty  foote
broad,  where  was  a  Chappell  with  the  Roofe  of  Silver
and  Gold  in  leafe  Wainescotted,  and  decked  with  great
store  of  Pearle  and  Stone,  as  Agattes,  Cornerines,
Emeralds,  Rubies,  and  divers  other  sorts,  and  this  was
the  Oratory  where  Mutezuma  prayed  in  the  night
season, and in that Chappell the Devill did appeare

536

LARGER  RELATIONS  OF  MEXICO ad.

c.  1552.
unto him, and gave him answere according to his
prayers.

He  had  other  houses  like  unto  Barnes,  onely  for  the  Store-houses.
feathers  of  foules,  and  for  mantels  which  proceeded  of
his  rents  and  tributes,  a  thing  much  to  be  seene  :  upon
the  doores  was  set  his  armes,  which  was  a  Conie.  Here
dwelled  the  chiefe  Officers  of  his  house,  as  Treasurer,  Officers.
Controller,  Receivers  and  other  officers  appertaining  to
the  Kings  revenews.  Mutezuma  had  no  house  wherein
was  not  an  Oratorie  for  the  Devill,  whom  they  wor-
shipped for  the  Jewels  there.  And  therefore  those
houses  were  great  and  large.

Mutezuma had some houses of Armor, upon the  The  Armory
doores wherof  stood a Bowe and Arrows. In these  °fMu^zuma-
houses  was  great  store  of  all  kinde  of  Munition  which
they use in their wars  : as Bowes, Arrowes, Slings,
Launces, Darts, Clubbes, Swords and Bucklers, and
gallant  Targets  more  trim  then  strong,  Skuls  and  Splints,
but  not  manie,  and  all  made  of  wood,  gilt  or  covered  with
leather. The wood whereof  they make their  Armour  Wood  for
and  Targets,  is  verie hard  and strong,  for they  use  to  ^■rmes-
toast  it  at  the  fire,  and  at  their  Arrow  ends  they  enclose
a  little  peece  of  Flint  stone,  or  a  peece  of  a  Fish  bone
called  Libisa,  and  that  is  venemous,  for  if  any  be  hurt
therewith and the head remaine in the  wound,  it so
festereth,  that  it  is  almost  incurable.

Their  Swords  are  of  wood,  and  the  edge  thereof  is  Wodden
of  flint  stone,  enclosed  or  joyned  into  a  staffe,  with  a  Szvords Jvlth
certaine  kinde  of  glew  which  is  made  of  a  roote  called
Zacolt,  and  Teuxalli,  which  is  a  kinde  of  strong  sand,
whereof  they  make  a  mixture,  and  after  kneade  it  with
bloud  of  Bats  or  Rearemice,  and  other  Foule,  which
doth  glew  marvellous  strong,  and  lightly  never  un-
cleaveth  :  of  this  stuffe,  they  make  nailes,  pearcers,  and
augers,  wherewith  they  bore  Timber  and  stone  :  with
their  Swords  they  cut  Speares,  yea  and  a  Horse  necke
at  a  blow,  and  made  dents  into  Iron,  which  seemed  a
thing  unpossible  and  incredible. In  the  Citie no  man

537

A.D.

c.  1552.

The  Gardens
ofMutezuma.

Note  of  a

Magnificent

minde.

Houses  of
pleasure.

[III.  v.

1 130.]

The  Court  and
Guard  of
Mutezuma.

Great  Vassals.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

may  weare  weapon, but onely  in warres, hunting,  and
among  the  Kings  Guard.

Besides  the  foresaid  houses,  he  had  manie  others  for
his  onely  recreation  and  pastime,  with  excellent  faire
Gardens  of  medicinall  Hearbes,  sweete  Flowers,  and
Trees  of  delectable  savour.  In  that  Garden  were  a
thousand  personages,  made  and  wrought  artificially  of
leaves  and  flowers.  Mutezuma  would  not  permit  that
in  this  Garden  should  be  any  kinde  of  pot  Hearbes,
or  things  to  be  sold,  saying,  that  it  did  not  appertaine
to  Kings  to  have  things  of  profit,  among  their  delights
and  pleasures,  for  such  things  (said  he)  did  appertaine
to  Merchants.  Yet  notwithstanding  he  had  Orchards
with  manie  and  sundrie  fruites,  but  they  stood  farre
from  the  Citie,  and  whither  seldome  times  he  went :  he
had  likewise  out  of  Mexico  pleasant  houses  in  Woods
and  Forrests,  of  great  compasse,  environed  with  water,
in  the  which  he  had  Fountaines,  Rivers,  Ponds  with  fish,
Warrens  of  Conies,  Rockes  and  covert  where  were  Harts,
Bucks,  Hares,  Foxes,  Wolves,  and  such  like,  with  wilder-
nesse  for  everie  sort.  To  these  places  the  Lords  of
Mexico  used  to  goe  and  sport  themselves,  such  and  so
many  were  the  houses  of  Mutezuma,  wherein  few  Kings
were  equall  with  him.

He  had  daily  attending  upon  him  in  his  private  Guard,
sixe  hundred  Noblemen  and  Gentlemen,  and  each  of
them  three  or  foure  servants,  and  some  had  twentie
servants  or  moe,  according  to  his  estate  :  and  in  this
manner  he  had  three  thousand  men  attendant  in  his
Court,  and  some  affirme  more,  all  the  which  were  fed
in  his  house  of  the  meate  that  came  from  his  table.  The
serving  men  alwaies  abode  below  in  the  Court  all  the
day,  and  went  not  from  thence  till  after  Supper.

It  is  to  be  thought  that  his  Guard  was  the  greater,
because  the  strangers  were  there,  although  in  effect  of
truth  it  is  most  certaine,  that  all  the  Lords  that  are  under
the  Mexicall  Empire  (as  they  say)  are  thirtie  persons  of
high estate, who are able to make each of them a

538

LARGER  RELATIONS  OF  MEXICO a.d.

c.  1552.

hundred thousand men. There are three thousand

Lords of Townes, who have many vassals. These

Noblemen did abide in Mexico certaine  times of  the

yeare,  in  the  Court  of  Mutezuma,  and  could  not  depart  State-caution.

from  thence  without  especiall  licence  of  the Emperour,

leaving  each  of  them  a  sonne  or  brother  behinde  them

for securitie of  rebellion, and for  this cause they had

generally  houses  in the Citie  : such and so great  was

the  Court  of  Mutezuma.

There  is  not  in  all  the  Dominions  of  Mutezuma  any  Tributes  and

subject  that  paieth  not  tribute  unto  him. The  Noblemen  5Uj>Jectl0n  °f

J , . .,r  „  .  mi tt 1 j  the  Indians  to

pay  their  tribute  in  personall  service. 1  he  Husbandmen  /y^r  j^n„

called  Macevaltin,  with  body  and  goods.  In  this  sort
they  are  either  Tenants,  or  else  heires  to  their  possessions.
Those  which  are  heires,  doe  pay  one  third  part  of  all
their  fruite  and  commoditie  that  they  doe  reape  or  bring
up,  as  Dogges,  Hennes,  Foule,  Conies,  Gold,  Silver,
Stones,  Salt,  Waxe,  Honie,  Mantels,  Feathers,  Cotten,
and  a  certaine  fruite  called  Cacao,  that  serveth  for  money,
and  also  to  eate.  Also  all  kinde  of  Graine,  and  Garden
Hearbes,  and  Fruites,  whereof  they  doe  maintaine  them-
selves.

The  Tenants  doe  pay  monethly,  or  yearely,  as  they
can  agree,  and  because  their  tribute  is  great,  they  are
called  slaves,  for  when  they  may  have  licence  to  eate
Egges,  they  thinke  it  a  great  favour.  It  was  reported
that  they  were  taxed  what  they  should  eate,  and  all  the
residue  was  taken  from  them.  They  went  verie  poorely  Poverty  of  the
cloathed,  yea  and  the  most  of  their  treasure  was  an  Tenants.
earthen  Pot,  wherein  they  boiled  their  Hearbes,  a  couple
of  Milstones  to  grinde  their  Corne,  and  a  Mat  to  lye
upon.  They  did  not  onely  paie  this  Rent,  and  Tribute,
but  also  served  with  their  bodies  at  all  times  when  the
great  King  should  command.  They  were  in  such  great
subjection  to  their  Prince,  that  they  durst  not  speake  one
word  although  their  daughters  should  be  taken  from
them  to  be  used  at  pleasure.  All  the  aforesaid  rents  they
brought to Mexico upon their backes, and in Boates,

539

A.D.

c.  1552.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Receivers.

I  meane  so  much  as  was  necessarie  for  the  provision  of
the  House  and  Court  of  Mutezuma,  all  the  rest  was
spent  among  Souldiers,  and  bartred  for  Gold,  Plate,
Precious  stones,  and  other  rich  Jewels,  esteemed  of
Princes,  all  the  which  was  brought  to  the  Treasurie.  In
Mexico  was  large  and  great  Barnes  and  Houses  to  receive
and  keepe  the  Corne  for  provision  of  the  Citie,  with
our  picture  Officers,  and  underofficers,  who  did  receive  the  same,
and  kept  account  thereof  in  Bookes  of  painted  figures.
And  in  every  Towne  was  a  Receiver,  who  bare  in  his
hand  a  rod  or  a  bush  of  Feathers,  and  those  gave  up
their  accounts  in  Mexico.  If  any  such  had  beene  taken
with  deceit  and  falshood,  death  was  his  reward,  yea  and
his  kinred  punished  with  penalties,  as  of  a  linage  of  a
traitour  to  his  Prince.  The  Husbandmen,  if  they  paid
not  well  their  Tribute,  were  apprehended  for  the  same,
and  if  they  were  found  to  be  poore  through  sicknesse  and
infirmitie,  then  they  were  borne  withall,  but  if  they  were
found  to  be  lazie  and  sloathfull,  they  should  be  used
accordingly :  but  in  conclusion,  if  they  paied  it  not  at  a
day  appointed,  then  they  should  be  sold  for  slaves  to  pay
their  debt,  or  else  be  sacrificed.

There  were  many  other  Provinces,  which  paid  a  cer-
taine  portion,  and  reknowledged  service,  but  this  Tribute
was  more  of  honour  then  profit.  In  this  sort  Mutezuma
had  more  then  sufficient  to  provide  his  house  and  wars,
and  to  heape  up  great  store  in  his  Treasury.  Moreover
he  spent  nothing  in  the  building  of  his  houses,  for  of  long
time  he  had  certaine  Townes  that  paid  no  other  Tribute,
but  onely  to  worke  and  repaire  continually  his  Houses  at
their  owne  proper  cost,  and  paid  all  kinde  of  workemen
carrying  upon  their  backes,  or  drawing  in  sleds,  Stone,
Lime,  Timber,  Water,  and  all  other  necessaries  for  the
worke.  Likewise  they  were  bound  to  provide  all  the
firewood  that  should  be  spent  in  the  Court,  which  was  a
great  thing,  and  did  amount  to  two  hundred  and  thirty
weight  a  day,  which  was  five  hundred  mens  burdens,  and
some dayes in the  winter much more. And  for the

54o

Tribute  of
mens  labours

LARGER  RELATIONS  OF  MEXICO a.d.

c.  1552.
Kings  Chimneys  they  brought  the  barke  of  Oake  trees,
which  was  best  esteemed  for  the  light  thereof,  for  they
were  great  Sorcerers.  Mutezuma  had  one  hundred
Cities  with  their  Provinces,  of  whom  he  received  Rents,
Tributes,  and  Vassalage,  where  he  maintained  Garrison
of  Souldiers,  and  had  Treasurers  in  each  of  them.

His  dominion  did  extend  from  the  North  sea  to  the
South  sea,  and  six  hundred  miles  in  longitude  within  the
maine  Land,  although  in  very  deede  there  were  some
Townes,  as  Tlaxcallon,  Mechuacan,  Panuco,  and  Teocan-
tepec,  which  were  his  enemies,  and  paid  him  neither
Tribute  nor  Service  :  but  yet  the  Ransome  was  much,
when  any  of  them  was  taken.  Also  there  were  other
Kings  and  Noblemen,  as  of  Texcuto,  and  Tlacopan,
which  were  not  in  subjection  unto  him,  but  onely  in  [HI-  v-
homage  and  obedience,  for  they  were  of  his  owne  linage,  ll3I-\

unto  whom  Mutezuma  married  his  Daughters.

Description of  Mexico as it flourished in those

times.

MExico  at  the  time  when  Cortes  entred,  was  a  Citie
of  sixtie  thousand  houses.  The  Kings  house,
and  other  Noblemens  houses  were  great,  large,  and
beautifull,  the  other  were  small  and  meane,  without
either  doores  or  windowes  :  and  although  they  were
small,  yet  there  dwelleth  in  some  of  them,  two,  three,
yea  and  ten  persons,  by  reason  whereof,  the  Citie  was
wonderfully  replenished  with  people.

This  Citie  is  built  upon  the  water,  even  in  the  same
order  as  Venice  is.  All  the  body  of  the  Citie  standeth
in  a  great  large  Lake  of  water.  There  are  three  sorts  of  Three  sorts  of
streetes  very  broad  and  faire,  the  one  sort  are  onely  Streetes-
water,  with  many  Bridges :  another  sort  of  onely  earth :
and  the  third  of  earth  and  water :  that  is  to  say,  the
one  halfe  earth  to  walke  upon,  and  the  other  halfe  for
Boates  to  bring  provision  of  all  sorts.  These  streetes
are  kept  alwayes  cleane,  and  the  most  part  of  the  houses
have two doores, the one towards the Cawsey, and

54i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1552.

the  other  towards  the  water,  at  the  which  they  take
Boate  to  goe  where  they  list.  And  although  this
Citie  is  founded  upon  water,  yet  the  same  water  is  not
good  to  drinke,  whereof  there  is  brought  by  conduit
water  from  a  place  called  Capultepec,  three  miles  distant
from  the  Citie,  which  springeth  out  of  a  little  hill,  at
the  foote  whereof  standeth  two  Statues  or  covered
Images  wrought  in  stone,  with  their  Targets  and  Lances,
the  one  is  of  Mutezuma,  and  the  other  of  Axaiaca  his
Father.  The  water  is  brought  from  thence  in  two
Pipes  or  Canals  in  great  quantity,  and  when  the  one
is  foule,  then  all  the  water  is  conveied  into  the  other,
till  the  first  be  made  cleane.  From  this  Fountaine  all
the  whole  Citie  is  provided,  so  that  they  goe  selling  the
same  water  from  streete  to  streete  in  little  Boates,  and
doe  pay  a  certaine  tribute  for  the  same.

This  Citie  is  divided  into  two  streetes,  the  one  was
called  Tlatelulco,  that  is  to  say,  a  little  Hand,  and  the
other  Mexico,  where  Mutezuma  his  dwelling  and  Court
was,  and  is  to  be  interpreted  a  Spring.  This  streete  is
the  fairest  and  most  principall,  and  because  of  the  Kings
Pallace  there,  the  Citie  was  named  Mexico,  although  the
old  and  first  name  of  the  Citie  was  Tenuchtitlan,  which  doth
signifie  Fruite  out  of  stone,  for  the  name  is  compounded
of  Tetl,  which  is,  Stone,  and  Nuchtli,  which  is  a  Fruite
in  Cuba  and  Hispaniola,  called  Tunas;  the  Tree  (or
to  speake  properly,  the  Thistle)  that  beareth  this  fruite,
It groweth  also  is  named  Nopal,  and  is  nothing  almost  but  leaves  of  a
in  Bermuda,  footebroad  and  round,  and  three  inches  thicke,  some
more,  and  some  lesse,  according  to  the  growth,  full  of
thornes  which  are  venemous :  the  leafe  is  greene,  and
the  thorne  or  pricke  russet.  After  that  is  planted,  it
encreaseth,  growing  leafe  unto  leafe,  and  the  foote
thereof  commeth  to  be  as  the  body  of  a  tree,  and  one
leafe  doth  onely  produce  another  at  the  point,  but  at
the  sides  of  the  same  leaves  proceede  other  leaves.  In
some  Provinces  where  water  is  scant,  they  use  to  drinke
the  juice of  these leaves. The fruite thereof called

542

LARGER RELATIONS OF MEXICO  a.d.

c.  1552.
Nuchtli,  is  like  unto  Figges,  and  even  so  hath  his  little
kernels  or  graines  within,  but  they  are  somewhat  larger,
and  crowned  like  unto  a  Medler.  There  are  of  them
of  sundry  colours,  some  are  greene  without,  and
Carnationlike  within,  which  have  a  good  taste.  Others
are  yellow,  and  others  white,  and  some  speckled :  the
best  sort  are  the  white :  it  is  a  fruite  that  will  last  long.
Some  of  them  have  the  taste  of  Peares,  and  othersome
of  Grapes :  it  is  a  cold  and  a  fresh  fruite,  and  best
esteemed  in  the  heate  of  Summer.  The  Spaniards  doe
more  esteeme  them  then  the  Indians.  The  more  the
ground  is  laboured  where  they  grow,  the  fruite  is  so
much  the  better.  There  is  yet  another  kinde  of  this
fruite  red,  and  that  is  nothing  esteemed,  although  his
taste  is  not  evill,  but  because  it  doth  colour  and  dye
the  eaters  mouth,  lippes,  and  apparell,  yea,  and  maketh
his  urine  looke  like  pure  bloud.  Many  Spaniards  at
their  first  comming  into  India,  and  eating  this  Fruite,
were  in  a  maze,  and  at  their  wits  end,  thinking  that
all  the  blood  in  their  bodies  came  out  in  urine  :  yea
and  many  Phisitions  at  their  first  comming  were  of  the
same  beliefe :  for  it  hath  happened,  when  they  have
bin  sent  for  unto  such  as  have  eaten  this  fruite,  they
not  knowing  the  cause,  and  beholding  the  urine,  by
and  by  they  ministred  medicine  to  stanch  the  bloud :
a  thing  ridiculous,  to  see  the  Phisitians  so  deceived.
Of  this  fruite  Nuchtli  and  Tetl,  which  is  a  Stone,  is
compounded  Tenuchtlitan.  When  this  City  was  begun
to  be  founded,  it  was  placed  neere  unto  a  great  Stone
that  stood  in  the  middest  of  the  Lake,  at  the  foote
whereof  grew  one  of  these  Nopal  trees,  and  therefore
Mexico  giveth  for  armes  and  devise  the  foot  of  a
Nopal  tree  springing  from  a  stone,  according  to  the
Cities  name.

Mexico  is  as  much  to  say,  as  a  Spring  or  Fountaine,  The  name  of
according to the property of  the vowell and speech.  Mextco-
Others doe affirme, that Mexico hath his name of  a
more ancient time, whose first Founders were called

543

A.D.

c.  1552.

[III.  V.

1132.]

Two  Lakes,
one  salt  the
other  fresh.

Ebbing  and
flowing  by  the
winde. Some
{as  Patritius)
hence  moved,
derive  the
cause  of  the
Seas  flowing
from  the
saltnesse.

Cause  of  the
saltnesse.

200000.
Canoas.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Mexiti,  for  unto  this  day  the  Indian  dwellers  in  one
streete  of  this  City  are  called  of  Mexico.  The  Mexiti
tooke  name  of  thir  principallest  Idoll  called  Mexitli,
who  was  in  as  great  veneration  as  Vitzilopuchtli,  god
of  the  warre.  Mexico  is  environed  with  sweet  water,
and  hath  three  wayes  to  come  unto  it  by  cawsie,  the
one  is  from  the  West,  and  that  cawsie  is  a  mile  and
a  halfe  long.  Another  from  the  North,  and  containeth
three  miles  in  length.  Eastward  the  Citie  hath  no
entrie.  But  Southward  the  Cawsey  is  sixe  miles  long,
which  was  the  way  that  Cortez  entred  into  the  Citie.
The  Lake  that  Mexico  is  planted  in,  although  it  seemeth
one,  yet  it  is  two,  for  the  one  is  of  water  saltish,  bitter,
and  pestiferous,  and  no  kinde  of  fish  liveth  in  it.  And
the  other  water  is  wholesome,  good,  and  sweet,  and
bringeth  forth  small  fish.  The  salt  water  ebbeth  and
floweth,  according  to  the  winde  that  bloweth.  The
sweet  water  standeth  higher,  so  that  the  good  water
falleth  into  the  evill,  and  reverteth  not  backward,  as
some  hold  opinion.  The  salt  Lake  contayneth  fifteene
miles  in  breadth,  and  fifteene  in  length,  and  more  then
five  and  fortie  in  circuit ;  and  the  Lake  of  sweet  water
contayneth  even  as  much,  in  such  sort,  that  the  whole
Lake  contayneth  more  then  thirtie  leagues,  and  hath
about  fiftie  townes  situated  round  about  it,  many  of
which  townes  doe  contayne  five  thousand  housholds,
and  some  ten  thousand,  yea  and  one  towne  called
Tezcuco,  is  as  bigge  as  Mexico.  All  this  Lake  of
water  springeth  out  of  a  Mountaine  that  standeth
within  sight  of  Mexico.  The  cause  that  the  one  part
of  the  Lake  is  brackish  or  saltish,  is,  that  the  bottome
or  ground  is  all  salt,  and  of  that  water  great  quantitie
of  salt  is  daily  made.

In  this  great  Lake  are  above  two  hundred  thousand
little  boates,  which  the  Indians  call  Acalles,  and  the
Spaniards  call  them  Canoas,  according  to  the  speech  of
Cuba  and  Santo  Domingo,  wrought  like  a  kneading
trough :  some  are  bigger  then  other  some,  according  to

544

LARGER RELATIONS OF MEXICO  a.d.

c.  1552.

the  greatnesse  of  the  body  of  the  tree  whereof  they  are
made.  And  where  I  number  two  hundred  thousand
of  these  boats,  I  speake  of  the  least,  for  Mexico  alone
hath  above  fiftie  thousand  ordinarily  to  carry  and  bring
unto  the  Citie  victuall,  provision,  and  passengers,  so  that
on  the  market  day  all  the  streets  of  water  are  full  of  them.

The  Market  is  called  in  the  Indian  tongue  Tlanquiztli :  Tie  Market
every  Parish  hath  his  Market  place  to  buy  and  sell  in  :  ^ce  ?*
but  Mexico,  and  Tlatelulco  onely,  which  are  the  chiefest
Cities,  have  great  Faires  and  places  fit  for  the  same,  and
especially  Mexico  hath  one  place  where  most  dayes  in  the
yeere  is  buying  and  selling,  but  every  fourth  day  is  the
great  Market  ordinarily :  and  the  like  custome  is  used
throughout  the  Dominions  of  Mutezuma.  This  place
is  wide  and  large,  compassed  round  about  with  doores,
and  is  so  great,  that  a  hundred  thousand  persons  come
thither  to  chop  and  change,  as  a  Citie  most  principall
in  all  that  Region.  Wherefore  the  resort  is  from  farre
parts  unto  that  place.  Every  occupation  and  kinde  of  Order  of
merchandise  hath  his  proper  place  appointed,  which  no  e  ers'
other  may  by  any  meanes  occupy  or  disturbe.  Likewise
pesterous  wares  have  their  place  accordingly  (that  is
to  say)  stone,  timber,  lime,  bricke,  and  all  kinde  of
stuffe  un wrought,  being  necessarie  to  build  withall.
Also  Mats  both  fine  and  course  of  sundrie  workmanship,  Tie  divers
also  Coales,  Wood,  and  all  sorts  of  earthen  vessell,  wares-
glased  and  painted  very  curiously :  Deere  skinnes  both
raw  and  tanned  in  haire  and  without  haire,  of  many
colours,  for  Shoomakers,  Bucklers,  Targets,  Jerkins,
and  lining  of  woodden  Corselets :  also  skinnes  of  other
beasts,  and  fowle  in  feathers  readie  dressed  of  all  sorts,
the  colours  and  strangenesse  thereof  was  a  thing  to
behold.  The  richest  merchandise  was  Salt,  and  Mantels
of  cotton  wooll  of  divers  colours,  both  great  and  smal,
some  for  beds,  others  for  garments  and  clothing,  other
for  tapissarie  to  hang  houses,  other  cotten  cloth  for
lining  breeches,  shirts,  table  clothes,  towels,  napkins,  and
such  like  things.

xv  545  2  M

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1552.

There  were  also  Mantels  made  of  the  leaves  of  the
tree  called  Metl,  and  of  Palme  tree,  and  Cony  haire,
which  are  well  esteemed,  being  very  warme,  but  the
Coverlets  made  of  feathers  are  the  best  :  they  sell
threed  made  of  Cony  haire,  pieces  of  linnen  cloth  made
of  cotton  wooll,  also  skaines  of  threed  of  all  colours  :
also  it  is  strange  to  see  the  great  store  of  fowle,  some
wilde,  some  tame,  some  water  fowle,  and  other  some  of
rapine.  All  the  braverie  of  the  Market,  is  the  place
where  gold  and  feathers  joyntly  wrought  is  sold,  for
any  thing  that  is  in  request  is  there  lively  wrought  in
Indian  gold and feathers, and gallant colours. The Indians

workemanship.  are  SQ  eXpert  ancj  perfect  in  this  science,  that  they  will
worke  or  make  a  Butter-flie,  any  wild  Beast,  Trees,
Roses,  Flowers,  Herbs,  Rootes,  or  any  other  thing,  so
lively,  that  it  is  a  thing  marvellous  to  behold.  It
hapneth  many  times  that  one  of  these  workmen  in  a
whole  day  will  eate  nothing,  onely  to  place  one  feather
in  his  due  perfection,  turning  and  tossing  the  feather
to  the  light  of  the  Sunne,  into  the  shade  or  darke
place,  to  see  where  is  his  most  naturall  perfection,  and
till  his  worke  be  finished  he  will  neither  eate  nor  drinke.
There  are  few  Nations  of  so  much  patience.  The  Art
Goldsmiths  or  Science  of  Gold-smiths,  among  them  is  the  most
artifices.  curious, and very good workmanship engraven with

tooles  made  of  flint,  or  in  mold.  They  will  cast  a
platter  in  mold  with  eight  corners,  and  every  corner
of  severall  metall,  that  is  to  say,  the  one  of  gold,  and
the  other  of  silver,  without  any  kind  of  solder  :  they
will  also  found  or  cast  a  little  caldron  with  loose  handles
hanging  thereat,  as  wee  use  to  cast  a  bell  :  they  will
also  cast  in  mold  a  fish  of  metall  with  one  scale  of
silver  on  his  backe,  and  another  of  gold  :  they  will
make  a  Parret  or  Popinjay  of  metall,  that  his  tongue
shall  shake,  and  his  head  moove,  and  his  wings  flutter :
they  will  cast  an  Ape  in  mold,  that  both  hands  and
feet  shall  stirre,  and  hold  a  spindle  in  his  hand  seeming
to spin, yea and an Apple in his hand,  as  though he

546

LARGER RELATIONS OF MEXICO  a.d.

c.  1552.
would  eate  it.  Our  Spaniards  were  not  a  little  amazed
at  the  sight  of  these  things.  For  our  Gold-smiths  are
not  to  be  compared  unto  them.  They  have  skill  also
of  Amell  worke,  and  to  set  any  precious  stone.  But
now  as  touching  the  Market,  there  is  to  sell  Gold,
Silver,  Copper,  Leade,  Latton,  and  Tin,  although  there
is  but  little  of  the  three  last  metals  mentioned.  There
are  pearles,  precious  stones,  divers  and  sundrie  sorts  of  [in.  v.
shells,  and  bones,  spunges  and  other  Pedlers  ware,  which  ll33-\

certainly  are  many  and  strange  sorts,  yea,  and  a  thing
to  laugh  at  their  Haberdash  toyes  and  triffles.  There  are
also  many  kinde  of  Hearbs,  Roots,  and  Seedes,  as  well
to  bee  eaten,  as  for  medicine,  for  both  men,  women,  and
children,  have  great  knowledge  in  hearbs,  for  through
povertie  and  necessitie,  they  seeke  them  for  their  sus-
tenance and  helpe  of  their  infirmities  and  diseases.  They
spend  little  among  Physicians,  although  there  are  some  of
that  Art,  and  many  Apothecaries,  who  doe  bring  into  the
market  Ointments,  Sirrops,  Waters,  and  other  drugs,  fit
for  sicke  persons  :  they  cure  all  diseases  almost,  with  hearbs,
yea,  as  much  as  for  to  kill  Lice,  they  have  a  proper  hearb
for  the  purpose.

The  severall  kindes  of  meates  to  bee  sold  are  without  Victuallof
number,  as  Snakes  without  head  and  taile,  little  Dogs  rt  sorts'
gelt,  Molls,  Rats,  long  Wormes,  Lice,  yea  and  a  kinde  of
earth,  for  at  one  season  in  the  yeere  they  have  Nets
of  maile,  with  the  which  they  rake  up  a  certaine  dust  that
is  bred  upon  the  water  of  the  Lake  of  Mexico,  and  that  is
kneaded  together  like  unto  Oas  of  the  Sea  :  they  gather
much  of  this  victuall,  and  keepe  it  in  heapes,  and  make
thereof  Cakes  like  unto  brick-bats  :  they  sell  not  onely
this  ware  in  the  Market,  but  also  send  it  abroad  to  other
Faires  and  Markets  afarre  off:  they  eate  this  meate  with
as  good  stomacks  as  wee  eate  cheese,  yea  and  they  hold
opinion  that  this  skum  or  fatnesse  of  the  water,  is  the
cause  that  such  great  number  of  fowle  commeth  to  the
Lake,  which  in  the  winter  season  is  infinite.  All  the
Sellers  pay  a  certaine  summe  for  their  shops  or  standings

547

A.D.

c.  1552.

Bartering.

The  great
Temple  of
Mexico.

ChiefeTemple
described.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  the  King,  as  a  custome,  and  they  to  bee  preserved  and
defended  from  theeves  :  and  for  that  cause  there  goe
certaine  Sergeants  or  Officers  up  and  downe  the  Market
to  espie  out  malefactors.  In  the  middest  of  the  Market
standeth  a  house  which  may  bee  seene  throughout  the
Faire,  and  there  sitteth  twelve  ancient  men  for  Judges
to  dispatch  Law  matters  :  their  buying  and  selling  is  to
change  one  ware  for  another,  as  thus,  one  giveth  a  Hen
for  a  bundell  of  Maiz,  other  give  Mantels  for  Salt,  or
money  which  is  Cacao,  and  this  is  their  order  to  chop  and
change  :  they  have  measure  and  strike  for  all  kinde  of
Corne,  and  other  earthern  measures  for  Hony  and  Wine,
and  if  any  Measure  bee  falsified,  they  punish  the  offenders,
and  breake  their  measures.

The  Temple  is  called  Teucalli,  that  is  to  say,  Gods
House  ;  Teutl,  signifieth  God  ;  and  Calli  is  a  House,
a  name  very  fit,  if  that  house  had  beene  of  the  true
God.  The  Spaniards  that  understand  not  the  language,
doe  pronounce  and  call  those  Temples  Cues,  and  the  God
Vitzilopuchtli,  Uchilobos.  There  are  in  Mexico  many
Churches  with  Towres  for  their  Parishes  and  Streets,
wherein  are  Chappels  and  Altars  where  the  Images  and
Idols  doe  stand,  and  those  Chappels  doe  serve  for  buriall
places  of  their  Founders  ;  for  others  are  buried  in  the
ground  about  them  or  Churchyards.  All  their  Temples
are  of  one  fashion,  therefore  it  shall  bee  now  sufficient  to
speake  of  the  principall  Church.  This  Temple  is  square,
and  doth  contayne  every  way  as  much  ground  as  a  Crosse-
bow  can  reach  levell  :  it  is  made  of  stone,  with  foure
doores  that  abutteth  upon  the  three  Cawseys,  and  upon
another  part  of  the  Citie,  that  hath  no  Cawsey  but  a  faire
street.  In  the  middest  of  this  Quaderne  standeth  a
mount  of  earth  and  stone,  square  likewise,  and  fiftie
fathom  long  every  way,  built  upward  like  unto  a
Pyramide  of  Egypt,  saving  the  top  is  not  sharpe,  but
plaine  and  flat,  and  ten  fathom  square  :  upon  the  West
side,  were  steps  up  to  the  top,  in  number  an  hundreth
and  fourteene, which being so many, high, and made

548

LARGER RELATIONS OF MEXICO  a.d.

c.  1552.

of  good  stone,  did  seeme  a  beautifull  thing.  It  was  a
strange  sight  to  behold  the  Priests,  some  going  up,  and
some  downe  with  ceremonies,  or  with  men  to  be  sacri-
ficed. Upon  the  top  of  this  Temple  are  two  great  Altars,  Two  Altars.
a  good  space  distant  the  one  from  the  other,  and  so  nigh
the  edge  or  brim  of  the  wall,  that  scarsly  a  man  may  goe
behinde  them  at  pleasure.  The  one  Altar  standeth  on  the
right  hand,  and  the  other  on  the  left  :  they  were  but
of  five  foot  high,  each  of  them  had  the  backe  part  made
of  stone,  painted  with  monstrous  and  foule  figures,  the
Chappell  was  faire  and  well  wrought  of  Masons  worke
and  timber,  every  Chappell  had  three  lofts,  one  above
another,  sustayned  upon  pillars,  and  with  the  height
thereof  it  shewed  like  unto  a  faire  Towre,  and  beautified
the  Citie  afarre  off:  from  thence  a  man  may  see  all  the
Citie  and  Townes  round  about  the  Lake,  which  was
undoubtedly  a  goodly  prospect.  And  because  Cortes
and  his  companie  should  see  the  beautie  thereof;  Mute-
zuma  brought  him  thither,  and  shewed  him  all  the  order
of  the  Temple,  even  from  the  foot  to  the  top.  There  was
a  certaine  plot  or  space  for  the  Idoll  Priests  to  celebrate
their  service  without  disturbance  of  any.  Their  generall
prayers  were  made  toward  the  rising  of  the  Sunne.  Upon
each  Altar  standeth  a  great  Idoll.  Beside  this  Towre
that  standeth  upon  the  Pyramide,  there  are  fourtie  Towres  Fortie  tozores.
great  and  small  belonging  to  other  little  Temples  which
stand  in  the  same  circuit,  the  which  although  they  were  of
the  same  making,  yet  their  prospect  was  not  Westward,
but  other  wayes,  because  there  should  be  a  difference
betwixt  the  great  Temple  and  them.  Some  of  these
Temples  were  bigger  then  others,  and  every  one  of  a  Severall
severall  God,  among  the  which  there  was  one  round  Temples  to
Temple,  dedicated  to  the  God  of  the  aire,  called  Quecal-  severa  s°  j
covatl,  for  even  as  the  aire  goeth  round  about  the
Heavens,  even  for  that  consideration  they  made  his
Temple  round.  The  entrance  of  that  Temple  had  a
doore,  made  like  unto  the  mouth  of  a  Serpent,  and  A  strange
was  painted  with  foule  and  devillish  gestures,  with  great  doore-

549

A.D.

c.  1552.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[III.  v.

1 J  34-]

teeth  and  gums  wrought,  which  was  a  thing  to  feare  those
that  should  enter  in  thereat,  and  especially  the  Christians
unto  whom  it  represented  very  Hell,  with  that  ugly  face
and  monstrous  teeth.

There  were  other  Teucalles  in  the  Citie,  that  had  the
ascending  up  by  steps  in  three  places  :  all  these  Temples
had  houses  by  themselves  with  all  service,  and  Priests  and
particular  Gods. At  every doore of  the great  Temple

Tempk-halh.  standeth  a  large  Hall  and  goodly  Lodgings,  both  high
and  low  round  about,  which  houses  were  common
Armories  for  the  Citie,  for  the  force  and  strength  of
every  Towne  is  the  Temple,  and  therefore  they  have
there  placed  their  store-house of  munition. They  had

Idoll-holes.  other  darke  houses  full  of  Idols,  great  and  small,  wrought
of  sundrie  metals,  they  are  all  bathed  and  washed  with
bloud,  and  doe  shew  very  blacke  through  their  daily
sprinkling  and  anointing  them  with  the  same,  when  any

Bloudie  walls,  man  is  sacrificed  :  yea,  and  the  walls  are  an  inch  thicke
with  bloud,  and  the  ground  is  a  foot  thick  of  bloud,  so
that  there  is  a  devillish  stinch.  The  Priests  or  Ministers
goe  daily  into  those  Oratories,  and  suffer  none  others  but
great  personages  to  enter  in.  Yea,  and  when  any  such
goeth  in,  they  are  bound  to  offer  some  man  to  bee
sacrificed,  that  those  bloudie  Hangmen  and  Ministers
of  the  Devill  may  wash  their  hands  in  bloud  of  those
so  sacrificed,  and  to  sprinkle  their  house  therewith.

For  their  service  in  the  Kitchin  they  have  a  Pond
of  water  that  is  filled  once  a  yeere,  which  is  brought
by  conduit  from  the  principall  Fountaine.  All  the  residue
of  the  foresaid  circuit  serveth  for  places  to  breede  fowle,
with  Gardens  of  herbs  and  sweet  trees,  with  Roses  and
flowers  for  the  Altars.  Such,  so  great  and  strange  was
this  Temple  of  Mexico,  for  the  service  of  the  Devill  who
had  deceived  those  simple  Indians.  There  doth  reside  in
the  same  Temple  continually  five  thousand  persons,  and
all  they  are  lodged  and  have  their  living  there,  for  that
Temple  is  marvellous  rich,  and  hath  divers  Townes  onely
for  their  maintenance  and  reparation,  and  are  bound  to

55o

Devillish
Priests.

5000.
residents.

LARGER RELATIONS OF MEXICO  a.d.

c  1552.
sustaine  the  same  alwayes  on  foot.  They  doe  sowe
Corne,  and  maintayne  all  those  five  thousand  persons
with  bread,  fruit,  flesh,  fish,  and  fire-wood,  as  much  as
they  neede,  for  they  spend  more  fire-wood  then  is  spent
in  the  Kings  Court :  these  persons  doe  live  at  their  hearts
ease,  as  servants  and  vassals  unto  the  Gods.

The  Gods  of  Mexico  were  two  thousand  in  number,  as  The  [^ols  °f
the  Indians  reported,  the  chiefest  were  Vitzilopuchtli,  and Mexuo-
Tezcatlipuca,  whose  Images  stood  highest  in  the  Temple
upon  the  Altars  : they  were  made  of  stone  in  full  propor-
tion  as bigge as a Giant. They  were covered with a
lawne, called Nacar. These Images were beset with
pearles, precious stones, and pieces of  gold, wrought
like birds, beasts, fishes, and flowres, adorned with
Emeralds,  Turquies,  Calcedons,  and  other  little  fine  stones,
so that when the lawne Nacar was taken away, the
Images seemed very beautifull to behold. The  Image
had for a  girdle  great Snakes  of  gold,  and  for  Collars  4  wicked
and  Chaines  about  their  necks,  ten  hearts  of  men  made  atiyre-
of  gold,  and  each  of  those  Idols  had  a  counterfait  visard
with  eyes  of  glasse,  and in their  necks  death  painted  :
each  of  these  things  had  their  considerations  and  mean-
ings. These  two  Gods  were  brethren,  for  Tezcatlipuca
was  the  God  of  Providence,  and  Vitzilopuchti  God  of  the
Warres,  who was  worshipped  and  feared more  then  all
the  rest.

There  was  another  God,  who  had  a  great  Image  placed
upon  the  top  of  the  Chappell  of  Idols,  and  he  was
esteemed  for  a  speciall  and  singular  God  above  all  the
rest.  This  God  was  made  of  all  kinde  of  seedes  that
groweth  in  that  Country,  and  being  ground,  they  made  a
certaine  paste,  tempered  with  Childrens  bloud,  and  Virgins
sacrified,  who  were  opened  with  their  Rasors  in  the  breasts,
and  their  hearts  taken  out,  to  offer  as  first  fruits  unto  the
Idoll.  The  Priests  and  Ministers  doe  consecrate  this
Idoll  with  great  pompe  and  many  ceremonies.  All  the
Comarcans  and  Citizens  are  present  at  the  consecration,
with  great  triumph  and  incredible  devotion. After  the

55i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1552.

consecration,  many  devout  persons  came  and  sticked  in
A  mad  the dowie Image precious stones,  wedges  of  gold,  and

offering.  other  jewels. After all this pompe ended, no secular

man  may  touch  that  holy  Image,  no  nor  yet  come  into
his  Chappell, nay  scarsly  religious persons,  except  they
were  Tlamacaztli,  who  are  Priests  of  order. They  doe
renew  this  Image  many  times with new  dough,  taking
away  the  old, but then  blessed  is  he  that  can  get  one
piece of the old raggs for reliques, and chiefly for
Souldiers, who thought themselves sure therewith in
the warres. Also at the consecration of  this Idoll, a
certaine  vessell  of  water  was  blessed  with  many  wordes
and  ceremonies,  and  that  water  was  preserved  very  reli-
giously at the foot of  the  Altar,  for  to  consecrate the
King  when  he  should  be  crowned,  and  also  to  blesse  any
Captaine generall, when he should be elected for the
warres,  with  onely  giving  him  a  draught  of  that  water.
Without  the  Temple,  and over  against  the  principall
The  Chamell  doore  thereof,  a  stones  cast  distant,  standeth  the  Charnell
house,  or  place  nouse  onely  of  dead  mens  heads,  prisoners  in  warres,  and
mens  Sculls sacrificed  with  the  knife. This  monument  was  made  like
unto  a  Theater,  more  larger  than  broad,  wrought  of  lime
and  stone,  with  ascending  steps,  in  the  walls  whereof  was
grafted  betwixt  stone  and  stone  a Scull,  with  the  teeth
outwards. At  the  foot  and  head  of  this  Theater,  were
Terrible  two  Towres,  made  onely  of  lime  and  sculls,  the  teeth  out-

spectacle.  ward, and this wall having no other stuffe, seemed a

strange  sight.  At  and  upon  the  top  of  the  Theater,  were
seventie  Poles,  standing  the  one  from  the  other  foure  or
five  foot  distant,  and  each  of  them  was  full  of  staves  from
the  foot  to  the  top.  Each  of  these  staves  had  others
made  fast  unto  them,  so  that  every  of  them  had  five
sculs  broched  through  the  Temple.  Andrew  de  Tapia
did  certifie  me,  that  he  and  Goncalo  de  Umbria  did
[III.  v.  reckon  them  in  one  day,  and  found  a  hundred  thirtie  and

11 35 -J  sixe  thousand  sculls  on  the  poles,  staves,  and  steps.  The
other  Towres  were  replenished  out  of  number,  a  most
cruell  custome,  being  onely  mens  heads  slaine  in  sacrifice,

552

LARGER RELATIONS OF MEXICO

although  it  hath  a  shew  of  humanitie  for  the  remembrance
there  placed  of  death.  There  are  also  men  appointed,
that  when  one  scull  falleth,  to  set  up  another  in  his  place,
so  that  the  number  may  never  want.

Other Mexican Antiquities, Letters,  Numbers,
Yeeres,  Dayes,  Weekes,  &c.

THere  hath  not  beene  found  Letters  at  any  time  in
the  West  India,  onely  in  new  Spaine  were  used
certaine  figures  which  served  for  letters,  with  the  which
they  kept  in  memorie  and  preserved  their  Antiquities.
The  figures  that  the  Mexicans  used  for  letters  are  great,
by  reason  whereof  they  occupie  great  Volumes  :  they
engrave  them  in  stone  or  timber,  and  paint  them  upon
walls,  and  also  upon  a  paper  made  of  cotton  wooll,  and
leaves  of  the  tree  Metl.  Their  bookes  are  great  and
folded  up  like  unto  our  broad  cloathes,  and  written  upon
both  sides.  There  are  some  bookes  rolled  up  like  a  piece
of  flannell.  They  pronounce  not  v,  g,  r,  s,  y,  therefore
they  use  much  p,  c,  1,  x.  This  is  the  Mexican  speech,
and  Nahual,  which  is  the  best,  playnest,  and  the  most
eloquent,  in  all  new  Spaine.  There  are  some  in  Mexico
that  doe  understand  each  other  by  whistling,  which  is
ordinarily  used  among  Lovers,  and  Theeves,  a  speech
truly  to  wonder  at,  and  none  of  our  men  could  come  to
the  knowledge  thereof.

A.D.

c.  1552.

Their  re

jckoning  by  numbers  was  in

this  sort.

Ce,

One,

Matlactlioce,

Eleven,

Ome,

Two,

Matlactliome,

Twelve,

Ei,

Three

Matlactlomei,

Thirteene,

Naui,

Foure,

Matlactlinaui,

Fourteene,

Macuil,

Five,

Matlactlinacui,

Fifteene,

Chicoace,

Six,

Matlactlichicoace,

Sixteene,

Chicome,

Seven,

Matlactlichicome,

Seventeene,

Chicuei,

Eight,

Matlactlicbicuei,

Eighteene,

Chiconaui,

Nine,

Matlactlichiconau:

i,Nineteene,

Matlac,

Ten,

Cempoalli,
553

Twentie.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c  1552.

Every  number  is  simple  untill  you  come  to  sixe,  and
then  they  count,  sixe  and  one,  sixe  and  two,  sixe  and
three.  Ten  is  a  number  by  himselfe,  then  you  must
count  ten  and  one,  ten  and  two,  ten  and  three,  ten  and
foure,  ten  and  five.  Then  you  count,  ten,  five,  and  one  ;
ten,  five,  and  two  ;  ten,  five,  and  three.  Twentie  goeth
by  himselfe,  and  all  the  greater  numbers.

The  Mexican  yeere  is  three  hundreth  and  sixtie  dayes,
for  they  have  in  their  yeere  eighteene  moneths,  and  every
moneth  contayneth  twentie  dayes.  They  have  other  five
odde  dayes,  which  goeth  by  themselves,  in  the  which  they
used  to  celebrate  great  feasts  of  cruell  and  bloudy  sacrifice,
with  much  devotion.  And  reckoning  after  this  sort,  they
could  not  choose  but  erre,  for  they  could  not  make  equall
the  punctual  course  of  the  Sunne.  Yea  the  Christian
yeere  is  not  perfect,  although  wee  have  learned  Astrono-
mers. But  yet  these  simple  Indians  went  neere  the
marke.

The  names  of  the  moneths.  Tlacaxipeualiztli,  Tozcut-
zli,  Huei  Tozeuztli,  Toxcalt,  Ecalcoaliztli,  Tocuilhuicintli,
Hueitecuilhuitl,  Miccailhuicintli,  Veymiccailhuitl,  Uchpan-
iztli,  Pachtli,  Huei  Pachtli,  Quecholli,  Panquecaliztli,
Hatemuztli,  Tititlh,  Izcalli,  Coa  Vitleuac.

The  names  of  Dayes,  were  Cipactli,  A  Spade ;  Hecatl,
Aire  or  Winde  ;  Calli,  A  House  ;  Cuez  Pali,  A  Lizzart ;
Coualt,  A  Snake  ;  Mizquintli,  Death  ;  Macatl,  A  wilde
Hart ;  Tochtli,  A  Cony ;  Atl,  Water  ;  Izcuyntli,  A
Dogge ;  Ocumatli,  An  Ape ;  Malinalli,  A  Broome ;
Acatlh,  A  Cave  ;  Ocelotl,  A  Tigre  ;  Coautli,  An  Eagle  ;
Cozcaquahutl,  A  Buzzard  ;  Olin,  A  Temple  ;  Tepatlh,  A
Knife  ;  Quiauitl,  Raine  ;  Xuchitl,  A  Rose.

Although  these  twentie  names  serve  for  the  whole
yeere,  and  are  but  the  dayes  of  every  moneth,  yet  there-
fore every  moneth  begin  neth  not  with  Cipactli,  which  is
the  first  name,  but  as  they  follow  in  order,  and  the  five
odde  dayes  is  the  cause  thereof.  And  also  because  their
weeke  is  of  thirteene  dayes,  which  changeth  the  names,  as
by  example, Cecipactli can goe no further then unto

554

LARGER RELATIONS OF MEXICO  a.d.

c.  1552.
Matlactlomeiacatl,  which  is  thirteene,  and  then  beginneth
another  weeke  :  and  we  doe  not  say  Matlactlinaui  Ocelotl,
which  is  the  fourteenth  day,  but  wee  say  Ceocelotl,  which
is  one,  and  then  reckon  the  other  sixe  names  unto  twentie.
And  when  all  the  twentie  dayes  are  ended,  begin  againe
to  reckon  from  the  first  name  of  the  twentie,  but  not
from  one,  but  from  eight.  And  because  yee  may  better
understand  the  matter,  here  is  the  example.

Cecipactli,  Omehecatl,  Ei  Calli,  Naui  Cuezpali,  Macuil-
couatl,  Chicoacen  Mizquinth,  Chicome  Macatl,  Chicuei
Tochtli,  Chiconauiatl,  Matlaciz  Cuintli,  Mailactlioce
Ocumatli,  Matlactliome  Malinalli,  Matlactlomei  Acatlh.
The  next  weeke  following  doth  begin  his  dayes  from  one.
And  that  one  is  the  fourteenth  name  of  the  moneth  and
of  the  dayes,  and  saith  :  Ceotelotl,  Omecoautli,  Eicozca-
quahutli,  Naui  Olui,  Macuil  Tecpatl,  Chicoacen  Quiauitl,
Chicome  Xuchitl,  Chicoei  Cipactli.  In  this  second  weeke,
Cipactli  came  to  fall  on  the  eight  day,  being  in  the  first
weeke  the  first  day.  Cemacatl,  Ometochtli,  Eiatl,  Naui
Izcuintli,  Macuil  Ocumatli.  And  so  proceede  on  to  the
third  weeke,  in  the  which  this  name  Cipactli  entreth  not,
but  Macatl,  which  was  the  seventh  day  in  the  first  weeke,  [HI.  v.
and  had  no  place  in  the  second,  and  is  the  first  in  the  n36-J

third.  The  reckoning  is  no  darker  then  ours,  which  we
have  in  a,  b,  c,  d,  e,  f,  g.  For  they  also  change  with
time,  and  run  in  such  sort,  that  a,  which  was  the  first
letter  of  this  moneth,  commeth  to  be  the  fift  day  of  the
next  moneth,  and  the  third  moneth  he  counteth  to  be  the
third  day,  and  so  orderly  doth  the  other  sixe  letters.

These  Mexicans  had  another  order  to  reckon  their  The  account-
yeeres,  which  exceeded  not  above  foure  in  number,  as  wg  of  yeans.
one,  two,  three,  foure,  wherewith  they  account  a  hundred,
five  hundred,  a  thousand,  and  as  many  moe  as  they  list.
Those  foure  figures  or  names,  are,  Tochtli,  Acatlh,
Tecpatlh,  Calli,  and  doe  signifie  a  Cony,  a  Cave,  a  Knife,
and  a  House,  saying :  Ce  Totchtli,  One  yeere  ;  Ome
Acatlth,  Two  yeeres  ;  Ei  Tecpatlh,  Three  yeeres  ;  Naui
Calli,  Foure  yeeres  ;  Macuil  Tochtli,  Five  yeeres  ;  Chioacen

555

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1552.

Acatlh,  Sixe  yeeres ;  Cicome  Tecpatlh,  Seven  yeeres ;
Chicuei  Calh,  Eight  yeeres  ;  Chiconaui  Tochtli,  Nine
yeeres  ;  Matlactli  Acatlh,  Ten  yeeres  ;  Matlactlioce  Tec-
patlh, Eleven  yeeres  ;  Matlactliome  Calli,  Twelve  yeeres  ;
Matlactliomei  Tochtli,  Thirteene  yeeres.  So  that  the
reckoning  passeth  not  above  thirteene,  which  is  one  weeke
of  the  yeere,  and  endeth  where  he  began.

The  second  weeke.  Ce  Acatlh,  one  yeere  ;  Ome
Tlepatlh,  two  yeeres  ;  Ei  Calli,  three  yeeres ;  Naui
Tochtli,  foure  yeeres ;  Macuil  Acatlh,  five  yeeres ;
Chioacen  Tecpatlh,  sixe  yeeres ;  Chicome  Calli,  seven
yeeres  ;  Chicuei  Tochtli,  eight  yeeres  ;  Chiconaui  Acatlh,
nine  yeeres  ;  Matlactli  Tecpatlh,  ten  yeeres  ;  Matlactlioce
Calli,  eleven  yeeres  ;  Matlactliome  Tochtli,  twelve  yeeres ;
Matlactliomei  Acatlh,  thirteene  yeeres.  The  third  weeke
of  yeeres.  Ce  Tecpatlh,  one  yeere  ;  Ome  Calli,  two
yeeres  ;  Ei  Tochtli,  three  yeeres  ;  Naui  Acatlh,  foure
yeeres  ;  Macuil  Tecpatlh,  five  yeeres  ;  Chioacan  Calli,
sixe  yeeres  ;  Chicome  Tochtli,  seven  yeeres  ;  Chicuei
Acatlh,  eight  yeeres  ;  Chiconaui  Tecpatlh,  nine  yeeres  ;
Matlactli  Calli,  ten  yeeres  ;  Matlactliome  Tochtli,  eleven
yeeres  ;  Matlactliome  Acatlh,  twelve  yeeres ;  Matlact-
liomei Tecpatlh,  thirteene  yeeres.

The  fourth  weeke.  Ce  Calli,  one  yeere,  Ome  Tochtli,
two  yeares  ;  Ei  Acatlh,  three  yeares  :  Naui  Tecpatlh,
foure  yeares ;  Macuil  Calli,  five  yeares ;  Chioacen  Tochtli,
six  yeares  ;  Chicome  Acatch,  seven  yeares  ;  Chieuei  Tec-
patlh, eight  yeares  ;  Chiconaui  Calli,  nine  yeares  ;  Mat-
lactli Tochtli,  ten  yeares ;  Matlactlioce  Acatlh,  eleven
yeares  ;  Matlactliome  Tecpatlh,  twelve  yeares  ;  Matlact-
liomei Calli,  thirteene  yeares.  Each  of  these  weekes,
which  our  men  call  Indition,  doth  containe  thirteene
yeares,  so  that  all  the  foure  weekes  make  two  and  fiftie
yeares,  which  is  a  perfect  number  in  their  reckoning,  and
is  called  the  yeare  of  grace,  for  from  fiftie  two  yeares,  to
fiftie  two  yeares,  they  used  to  make  solemne  feasts,  with
strange  Ceremonies,  as  hereafter  shall  be  declared.  And
when  fiftie  two  yeares  are  ended,  then  they  begin  againe,

55  j.  ■  •  flfisaasssSi

LARGER RELATIONS OF MEXICO  a.d.

c.  1552.
by  the  same  order  before  declared,  untill  they  come  to  as
many  moe,  beginning  at  Ce  Tochtli,  and  so  forward.
But  alwayes  they  begin  at  the  Conie  figure.  So  that  in
the  forme  of  reckoning  they  keepe  and  have  in  memory,
things  of  eight  hundred  and  fiftie  yeares  :  and  by  this
Chronicle  they  know  in  what  yeare  every  thing  hapned,
and  how  long  every  King  reigned  :  how  many  children
they  had,  and  all  things  else  that  importeth  to  the  estate
of  the  government  of  the  Land.

The  Indians  of  Culhua  did  beleeve  that  the  Gods  had  The  Indians
made  the  World,  but  they  knew  not  how,  yet  they  b^evedthat
beleeved  that  since  the  creation  of  the  world  foure  Sunnes  past  %,hich
were  past,  and  that  the  fift  and  last  is  the  Sunne  that  now  they  called
giveth  light  to  the  World.  They  held  opinion  that  the  Sunnes.
first  Sunne  perished  by  water,  and  at  the  same  time  all
living  creatures  perished  likewise.  The  second  Sunne
(say  they)  fell  from  the  heavens,  with  whose  fall  all  living
creatures  were  slaine,  and  then  (said  they)  were  many
Giants  in  that  Countrey,  and  certaine  monstrous  Bones,
which  our  men  found  in  opening  of  graves,  by  proportion
whereof  some  should  seeme  to  be  men  of  twenty  spans
high.  The  third  Sunne  was  consumed  by  fire,  which
burned  day  and  night,  so  that  then  all  living  creatures
were  burned.  The  fourth  Sunne  finished  by  tempest  of
Ayre  or  Winde,  which  blew  downe  Houses,  Trees,  yea
and  the  Mountaines  and  Rockes  were  blowen  a  sunder,
but  the  linage  of  Mankinde  perished  not,  saving  that  they
were  converted  into  Apes.  And  touching  the  fift  Sunne,
which  now  raigneth,  they  know  not  how  it  shall  consume.
But  they  say,  that  when  the  fourth  Sunne  perished,  all
the  world  fell  into  darkenesse,  and  so  remained  for  the
space  of  five  and  twenty  yeares  continually,  and  at  the
fifteenth  yeare  of  that  fearefull  darkenesse,  the  Gods  did
forme  one  man  and  woman,  who  brought  forth  children,
and  at  the  end  of  the  other  ten  yeares,  appeared  the  Sunne
which  was  newly  borne  upon  the  figure  of  the  Conie  day,
and  therefore  they  begin  their  account  of  yeares  at  that
day,  and  reckoning  from  the  yeare  of  our Lord 1552,

557

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRJMES

c.  1552.

their  age  or  Sunne  is  858.  so  that  it  appeareth  that  they
have  used  many  yeares  their  writing  in  figures  :  and  they
had  not  onely  this  use  from  Cetochli,  which  is  the
beginning  of  their  yeare,  moneth,  and  day,  of  their  fifth
Sunne,  but  also  they  had  the  same  order  and  use  in  the
other  foure  Sunnes  which  were  past :  but  they  let  many
things  slip  out  of  memory,  saying,  that  with  the  new
Sunne,  all  other  things  should  be  likewise  new.  They
held  also  opinion,  that  three  dayes  after  this  last  Sun
appeared,  all  the  gods  did  dye,  and  that  in  processe  of
time,  the  gods  which  now  they  have,  and  worship,  were
borne.
The  Corona-  Although  one  brother  was  heire  to  another  among  the
tion  of  the  Mexicans,  and  after  their  decease,  did  inherit  the  Sonne  of
Mexico  tne  eldest  Brother,  yet  they  tooke  no  possession  of  the

state  or  name of  King,  untill they  were  anointed and
crowned  openly.

As  soone  as  any  King  of  Mexico  deceased,  and  his
Funerals  ended,  then  were  called  to  Parliament  the  Lord
of  Tezcuco,  and  the  Lord  of  Tlacopan,  who  were  the
chiefest  estates,  and  then  in  order  all  other  Noblemen,
who  owed  any  service  to  the  Mexican  Empire.  And
[III.  v.  being come together  ; if  any doubt of  the inheritance

ri37-J  of  the  Crowne  happened,  then  the  matter  was  decided
with  all  haste :  then  the  new  King  being  knowne,  he
was  stripped  starke  naked,  except  a  cloath  to  cover  his
privie  parts,  and  in  this  sort  was  carried  among  them,
to  the  great  Temple  of  Vitzilopuchtli  with  great  silence,
and  without  any  joy  or  pleasure  :  Two  Gentlemen  of
the  Citie,  whose  office  it  was,  led  him  up  the  staires
of  the  Temple  by  the  armes,  and  before  him  went  the
Princes  of  Tezcuco  and  Tlacopan,  who  that  day  did  weare
their  roabes  of  Coronation,  whereupon  was  painted  their
armes  and  title.  Verie  few  of  the  Laitie  went  up  into
the  Chappels,  but  onely  those  that  were  appointed  to
attire  the  new  King  and  to  serve  in  other  Ceremonies,
for  all  the  residue  stood  upon  the  steps  and  below,  to
behold  the  Coronation. These  Magistrates  being  above

558

LARGER RELATIONS OF MEXICO  a.d.

c.  1552.

in  the  Chappell,  came  with  great  humility  and  reverence,
kneeling  downe  upon  their  knees  before  the  Idoll  of
Vitzilopuchtli,  and  touched  the  earth  with  one  finger,
and  then  kissed  the  same.  Then  came  the  high  Priest
cloathed  in  his  pontificall  vestments,  with  many  others
in  his  company,  who  did  weare  Surplices :  and  without
speaking  any  word,  they  painted  or  coloured  the  Kings
person,  with  Inke  made  for  the  purpose,  as  blacke  as
any  coale.  After  this  Ceremonie  done,  they  blessed  the  The  ointment.
annointed  King,  and  sprinkled  him  foure  times  with  a
certaine  holy  water,  that  was  made  at  the  time  of  con-
secration of  the  God,  made  of  dowe  or  paste,  with  a
sprinkle  made  of  bowes  of  Cane  leaves,  Cedar,  and
Willow  leaves.  Then  they  put  upon  his  head,  cloth
painted  with  the  bones  and  sculs  of  dead  men,  and
next  they  cloathed  him  with  a  blacke  garment  &  upon
that  another  blew,  and  both  were  painted  with  the  figures
of  dead  mens  sculs  and  bones.  Then  they  put  about  his
necke  certaine  laces,  whereat  did  hang  the  armes  of  the
Crowne.  And  behinde  his  back  they  did  hang  certaine
little  bottels  full  of  powders,  by  virtue  wherof  he  was
delivered  from  pestilence  and  diseases,  according  to  their
opinion :  yea,  and  thereby  Witches,  nor  Witchcrafts  could
not  hurt  him,  nor  yet  evill  men  deceive  him.  In  fine,
with  those  relicks  he  was  sure  from  all  perill  and  danger.
Upon  his  left  arme  they  bound  a  little  bagge  of  Incense,
and  then  brought  unto  him  a  chaffing-dish  of  imbers
made  of  the  barke  of  an  Oke  tree.  Then  the  King
arose,  and  with  his  owne  hand  threw  of  the  same  Incense,
into  the  chaffing-dish,  and  with  great  reverence  brought
the  same  to  the  god  Vitzilopuchtli,  and  after  he  had
smoaked  him  therewith,  he  sat  him  downe,  then  came
the  high  Priest  and  tooke  his  oath  to  maintaine  the
religion  of  the  gods,  to  keepe  also  all  the  lawes  and
customes  of  his  predecessours,  to  maintaine  justice,  and
not  to  aggravate  any  of  his  vassals  or  subjects,  and
that  he  should  be  valiant  in  the  warres,  that  he  should
cause  the  Sunne  to  give  his  light,  the  clouds  to  yeelde

559

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1552.

raine,  the  rivers  to  runne,  and  the  earth  to  bring  forth
all  kinde  of  graine,  fruites,  and  other  needefull  hearbs
and  trees.  These  and  many  other  impossible  things
the  new  King  did  sweare  to  performe  :  and  then  he  gave
thankes  to  the  high  Priest,  and  commended  himselfe  to
the  gods,  and  to  the  lookers  on,  and  they  who  brought
him  up  in  the  same  order,  carrieth  him  downe  againe.
Then  all  the  people  cried,  the  Gods  preserve  the  new
King,  and  that  he  may  raigne  many  yeares  in  health
with  all  his  people.  But  then  some  began  to  dance,
other  to  play  on  their  instruments,  shewing  outwardly
their  inward  joyes  of  heart.  And  before  the  King  came
to  the  foote  of  the  steps,  all  the  Noblemen  came  to
yeelde  their  obedience,  and  in  token  of  loving  and  faith-
full  subjects,  they  presented  unto  him  Feathers,  strings
of  Snaile-shels,  Collers,  and  other  Jewels  of  Gold  and
Silver,  also  Mantels  painted  with  death,  and  bare  him
company  unto  a  great  hall  within  the  compasse  of  the
Temple,  and  there  left  him,  The  King  sitteth  downe  under
his  cloath  of  estate,  called  Tlacatecco,  and  in  foure  dayes
departeth  not  out  of  the  circuit  of  the  Temple,  the
which  hee  spends  in  prayers,  sacrifice,  and  penance ;  he
eates  then  but  once  a  day,  and  every  day  he  bathes
himselfe,  and  againe  in  the  night  in  a  great  pond  of  water,
and  then  lets  himselfe  bloud  in  his  eares,  and  senseth
therewith  the  god  of  water,  called  Tlaloc :  he  likewise
senseth  the  other  Idols,  unto  whom  he  offereth  Bread,
Flowers,  Papers,  and  little  Canes,  died  in  the  bloud  of
his  owne  tongue,  nose,  hands,  and  other  parts  of  his
body.  After  the  foure  dayes  expired,  then  come  all
the  Noblemen  to  beare  him  company  to  his  Palace,  with
great  triumph  and  pleasure  of  all  the  Citie,  but  after
his  consecration  few  or  none  dare  looke  him  in  the  face.
And  now  with  the  declaration  of  the  Acts  and  Cere-
monies that  the  Mexican  Kings  are  crowned,  I  shall
not  neede  to  rehearse  of  other  Kings,  for  generally  they
all  doe  use  the  same  order,  saving  that  other  Princes
goe  not  up  to the  top of  the Temple, but abide at

560

LARGER RELATIONS OF MEXICO  ad.

c.  1552.
the foote  of  the steps to be crowned, and after their
Coronation  they  come  to  Mexico  for  their  confirmation,
and  then at  their  returne  to  their  Countrey,  they  made
many  drunken  feasts  and  banquets.

The  Mexicans  did  beleeve  that  the  Soule  was  immortal], The  opinion  of
and that they received either joy or paine according  f  e exicans

, . , J  it-  •  1  •  Tj  1  •  1 concerning  the

to  their  deserts  and  living  in  this  world,  unto  which  §ouie^
opinion  all  their  religion  did  attaine,  and  chiefly  appeare
at  their  burials.  They  held  for  an  assured  faith,  that
there  were  nine  places  appointed  for  soules,  and  the  Nine  places
chiefest  place  of  glory  to  be  neere  unto  the  Sunne,  where  for  Soules.
the  soules  of  those  which  were  good  men  slaine  in  the
warres,  and  those  which  were  sacrificed  were  placed,  and
that  all  other  sorts  of  evill  persons  their  soules  abode  on
the  earth,  and  were  devided  after  this  sort,  children  that
were  dead  borne  went  to  one  place,  those  which  died
of  age  or  other  disease  went  to  another,  those  which  died
of  sudden  death  to  another,  those  which  died  of  wounds
or  contagious  diseases  went  to  another  place,  those  which
were  drowned  went  to  another,  those  which  were  put  to
death  for  offence  by  order  of  Justice,  as  for  robbery
and  adultery  to  another :  Those  which  slew  their  Fathers,
Mothers,  Wives  or  Children,  to  another  place  by  them-
selves ;  also  those  who  slew  their  Masters  or  any  religious
person  went  to  another  place.  The  common  sort  of  people
were  buried,  but  Lords  and  rich  men  had  their  bodies
burned,  and  their  ashes  buried.  In  their  shrowdes  they
had  a  great  difference,  for  many  dead  bodies  were  buried
better  apparelled  then  when  they  were  on  live.  Women  [III.  v.
were  shrowded  after  another  sort. And  hee  that  suffered  XI38-]

death  for  adultery,  was  shrowded  like  unto  the  God  of
lecherie,  called  Tlazoulteutl ;  he  that  was  drowned  like
unto  the  god  of  water,  named  Tlacoc ;  and  he  that  died
with  drunkenesse  was  shrowded  like  unto  the  god  of
wine,  called  Ometochtli.  But  the  Souldier  had  an  honor-
able shrowde  like  unto  the  attire  of  Vitzilopuchtli,  and
the  like  order  in  all  other  sorts  of  deaths.  Kings  in

When  any King  of Mexico happened to  fall sicke,  Mexico.
xv  561  2  N

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1552.

they  used  forthwith  to  put  a  visor  upon  the  face  of
Tezcatlipuca,  or  Vitzilopuchtli,  or  some  other  Idoll,  which
Visor  was  not  taken  away,  untill  they  saw  whether  the
King  did  amend,  or  else  dye :  But  if  he  chanced  to  dye,
then  word  was  sent  throughout  all  his  Dominions  to
bewaile  his  death,  and  also  other  postes  were  sent  to  call
the  Noblemen  that  were  his  nighest  kinsmen,  and  to
warne  them  within  foure  daies  to  come  unto  his  buriall.

The  dead  body  was  laid  upon  a  faire  Mat,  and  was
watched  foure  nights,  with  great  lamentation  and  mourn-
ing :  then  the  body  was  washed,  and  a  locke  of  haire
cut  from  the  crowne  of  his  head,  which  was  preserved
as  a  great  relicke,  saying,  that  therein  remained  the
remembrance  of  his  soule.  This  done,  a  fine  Emerald
was  put  in  his  mouth,  and  his  body  shrowded  in  seven-
teene  rich  Mantels,  of  colours,  both  rich  and  costly
wrought.  Upon  the  upper  Mantle  was  set  the  devise
or  armes  of  Vitzilopuchtli  or  Tezcalipuca,  or  some  other
Idoll,  in  whom  the  King  had  great  confidence  in  his
life  time,  and  in  his  Temple  should  the  body  be  buried.
Upon  his  face  they  put  a  visor,  painted  with  foule  and
Devillish  jestures,  beset  with  many  Jewels,  Precious
stones,  and  Pearles,  Then  they  killed  his  slave  whose
office  was  to  light  the  lampes,  and  make  fire  unto  the
gods  of  his  Pallace.  These  things  done,  they  carried
the  dead  body  unto  the  Temple :  some  followed  him
with  dolefull  tune,  others  sung  the  death  of  the  King
by  note,  for  so  was  the  custome.

The  Noblemen  and  Gentlemen  of  his  houshold  carried
Targets,  Arrowes,  Mases,  and  Ensignes  to  throw  into
the  fire  where  the  body  should  be  buried  in  the  Temple.
The  high  Priest  and  all  the  Clergie  received  him  at
the  Temple  gate,  with  a  sorrowfull  song,  and  after  he
had  said  certaine  words,  the  body  was  throne  into  a  great
fire  made  for  the  purpose,  with  all  the  Jewels  that  he
had  about  him,  and  all  the  other  things  which  was
brought  to  honour  the  buriall :  also  a  Dogge  newly
strangled with  an  Arrow, which  was to guide him his

562

LARGER  RELATIONS  OF  MEXICO a.d.

c.  1552.
way.  In  the  meane  while  that  the  King  and  Dogge  were
burning,  the  Priests  sacrificed  two  hundred  persons,  how-
beit  in  his  Ceremonie  there  was  no  ordinary  taxe,  for
sometimes  they  sacrificed  many  moe :  they  were  opened
with  a  Rasor  of  flint  in  the  breasts,  and  their  hearts
taken  out  and  throwne  into  the  fire  where  the  Kings
body  was.  These  miserable  persons  being  sacrificed,  and
their  bodies  throwne  into  a  hole ;  they  beleeved  assuredly
that  those  should  serve  for  his  slaves  in  another  world :
some  of  them  were  DwarfFes,  monstrous  and  deformed
persons,  with  some  women.  They  placed  about  the  dead
body  of  the  King  before  his  buriall,  Roses,  Flowers,
and  sundrie  dishes  of  meate  and  drinke,  and  no  creature
durst  touch  the  same,  but  onely  the  Priests,  for  it  seemed
to  be  an  offering.

The  next  day  following,  all  the  ashes  were  gathered
together,  and  the  teeth  with  the  Emerald  that  was  in
his  mouth,  the  which  things  were  put  into  a  Chest,
painted  on  the  inside  with  horrible  figures  of  devils,
and  the  locke  of  haire  which  was  cut  from  his  crowne,
and  another  locke  of  haire  which  was  preserved  from
the  time  of  his  birth.  Then  the  Chest  was  lockt,  and
an  Image  of  wood  made  and  cloathed  like  unto  the
Kings  person,  which  was  set  on  the  top  of  the  Chest.
The  obsequies  endured  foure  dayes,  in  the  which  the
wives  and  daughters  of  the  King  offered  great  offerings
at  the  place  where  his  body  was  buried,  and  before  the
Chest  and  his  Image.

On  the  fourth  day  after  the  buriall,  fifteene  slaves  were
sacrificed  for  his  soule;  and  on  the  twentieth  day,  other
five  persons  were  also  sacrificed ;  likewise  on  the  sixtie
three  and  fourescore,  which  was  like  unto  the  yeares
minde.

The  Kingdome of Michuacan is  almost  as  great as  The  order  of
the Empire of Mexico, and when any King  of  that  buriaUofthe
Countrey happened to be visited with sicknesse, and  j^f,  °*
brought  to  such  extremitie,  that  hope  of  life  were  past,
according  to the opinion of  Phisitions, then would he

563

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1552.

name  and  appoint  which  of  his  Sonnes  should  inherite
the  estate ;  and  being  knowne,  the  new  King  or  heire,
incontinent  sent  for  all  the  Governours,  Captaines,  and
valiant  Souldiors,  who  had  any  office  or  charge  to  come
unto  the  buriall  of  his  Father,  and  he  that  came  not,
from  thenceforth  was  held  for  a  Traitour,  and  so  punished.
When  the  death  of  the  old  King  was  certaine,  then  came
all  degrees  of  Estates  and  brought  presents  to  the  new
King,  for  the  approbation  of  his  Kingdome,  but  if  the
King  were  not  throughly  dead,  but  at  the  point  of
death,  then  the  gates  were  shut  in,  and  none  permitted
to  enter  ;  and  when  his  life  was  departed,  then  began
a  generall  cry  and  mourning,  and  they  were  permitted
to  come  where  their  dead  King  lay,  and  to  touch  him
with  their  hands :  this  being  done,  the  carkasse  was
washed  with  sweete  waters,  and  then  a  fine  shirt  put
upon  him,  and  a  paire  of  shooes  made  of  a  Deere  skinne
put  on  his  feete,  and  about  his  anckles  were  tied  certaine
Bels  of  Gold,  about  his  wristes  of  his  hands  were  put
Manyllias  of  Turkies,  and  other  Bracelets  of  Gold,  like-
wise about  his  necke  they  hung  other  collers  of  precious
stones,  and  gold,  and  rings  in  his  eares,  with  a  great
Turkise  in  his  neather  lippe.  Then  his  body  was  laid
upon  a  large  beere,  whereon  was  placed  a  good  bed
under  him :  on  his  one  side  lay  a  Bowe  with  a  quiver
of  Arrowes,  and  on  his  other  side  lay  an  Image  made
of  fine  Mantels  of  his  owne  stature  or  highnesse,  with
a  great  tuffe  of  fine  feathers,  shooes  upon  his  feete,  with
Bracelets,  and  a  coller  of  gold.  While  his  worke  was
a  doing,  others  were  busied  in  washing  the  men  and
[III.  v.  women which should be slaine for  to  accompany  him

11 39-1  into  Hell  :  these  wretched  folke  that  should  be  slaine
were  banqueted  and  filled  with  drinke,  because  they
should  receive  their  death  with  lesse  paine.  The  new
King  did  appoint  those  who  should  dye  for  to  serve
the  King  his  Father,  but  yet  many  of  them  had  rather
have  beene  without  his  service,  notwithstanding  some
simple soules esteemed that odious death  for  a  thing

564

LARGER  RELATIONS  OF  MEXICO ad.

c.  1552.
of  immortall  glory.  First,  seven  Gentlewomen  of  noble
parentage  were  appointed  to  dye,  the  one  to  have  the
office  of  keeper  of  his  Jewels  which  he  was  wont  to
weare,  another  for  the  office  of  Cup-bearer,  another  to
give  him  water  with  a  Bason  and  Ewer,  another  to
give  him  alwayes  the  Urinall,  another  to  be  his  Cooke,
and  another  to  serve  for  Laundresse.  They  slew  also
many  woman-slaves,  and  free  maidens,  for  to  attend
upon  the  Gentlewomen,  and  moreover,  one  of  every
occupation  within  the  Citie.  When  all  these  that  were
appointed  to  dye  were  washed,  and  their  bellies  full
with  meate  and  drinke,  then  they  painted  their  faces
yellow,  and  put  garlands  of  sweete  flowers  upon  each
of  their  heads.  Then  they  went  in  order  of  procession
before  the  beere  whereon  the  dead  King  was  carried,
some  went  playing  on  Instruments  made  of  Snailes  shels,
others  played  upon  bones  and  shels  of  Sea-turtils,  others
went  whistling,  and  the  most  part  weeping;  the  Sonnes  of
the  dead  King  and  other  Noblemen  carried  upon  their
shoulders  the  Beere  where  the  Course  lay,  and  pro-
ceeded with  an  easie  pace  toward  the  Temple  of  the
god  Curicaueri :  his  kinsmen  went  round  about  the
Beere,  singing  a  sorrowfull  song.  The  officers  and  hous-
hold  servants  of  the  Court  with  other  Magistrates  and
Rulers  of  justice  bare  the  Standarts  and  divers  other
armes.

About  midnight  they  departed  in  the  order  aforesaid,
out  of  the  Kings  pallace,  with  great  light  of  fire  brands,
and  with  a  heavie  noise  of  Trumpets  and  Drummes.
The  Citizens  which  dwelt  where  the  Corse  passed,
attended  to  make  cleane  the  streete.  And  when  they
were  come  to  the  Temple,  they  went  foure  times  round
about  a  great  fire  made  of  the  wood  of  Pine  tree,  which
was  prepared  to  burne  the  dead  body  :  then  the  Beere
was  laid  upon  the  fire,  and  in  the  meane  while  that  the
body  was  burning,  they  mawled  with  a  club  those  which
had  the  Garlands,  and  afterward  buried  them  by  foure
and  foure,  as  they  were  apparelled  behinde  the  Temple.

565

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1552.

The  next  day  in  the  morning,  the  ashes,  bones  and
Jewels,  was  gathered  and  laid  upon  a  rich  Mantle,  the
which  was  carried  to  the  Temple  gate,  where  the  Priests
attended  to  blesse  those  devellish  relickes,  whereof  they
made  a  dough  or  paste,  and  thereof  an  Image  which
was  apparelled  like  a  man,  with  a  visor  on  his  face,
and  all  other  sorts  of  Jewels  that  the  dead  King  was
wont  to  weare,  so  that  it  seemed  a  gallant  Idoll.  At
the  foote  of  the  Temple  staires  they  opened  a  grave
ready  made,  which  was  square,  large,  and  two  fadom
deepe,  it  was  also  hanged  with  new  Mats  round  about,
and  a  faire  bed  therein,  in  the  which  a  religious  man
placed  the  Idol  made  of  ashes,  with  his  eyes  toward
the  East  part,  and  hung  round  about  the  wals,  Targets
of  Gold  and  Silver,  with  Bowe  and  Arrowes,  and  many
gallant  tuffes  of  Feathers,  with  earthen  vessels,  as  Pots,
Dishes,  and  Platters,  so  that  the  grave  was  filled  up
with  houshold  stufFe,  Chests  covered  with  Leather,
Apparell,  Jewels,  Meate,  Drinke,  and  Armor.  This
done,  the  grave  was  shut  up,  and  made  sure  with  beames,
boords,  and  floored  with  earth  on  the  top.

All  those  Gentlemen  which  had  served  or  touched
any  thing  in  the  buriall,  washed  themselves,  and  went
to  dinner  in  the  Court  or  yard  of  the  Kings  house
without  any  table,  and  having  dined,  they  wiped  their
hands  upon  certaine  locks  of  Cotten  woll,  hanging  downe
their  heads,  and  not  speaking  any  word,  except  it  were
to  aske  for  drinke.  This  Ceremonie  endured  five  dayes,
and  in  all  that  time  no  fire  was  permitted  to  be  kindled
in  the  Citie,  except  in  the  Kings  house  and  Temples,
nor  yet  any  Corne  was  ground,  or  Market  kept,  nor
none  durst  goe  out  of  their  houses,  shewing  all  the
sorrow  that  might  be  possible  for  the  death  of  their
King.
Judges.  In  Mexico  were  twelve  Judges,  who  were  all  Noble-
men, grave,  and  well  learned  in  the  Mexican  Lawes.
These  men  lived  onely  by  the  rents  that  properly  apper-
taine  to  the maintenance of  Justice,  and in any  cause

566

LARGER RELATIONS OF MEXICO  a.d.

c.  1552.
judged  by  them,  it  was  lawfull  for  the  parties  to  appeale
unto other twelve Judges, who were of the Princes
bloud,  and  alwayes  abode  in  the  Court,  and  were  main-
tained at  the  Kings  owne  cost  and  charges. The  inferiour
Judges came ordinarily  once every moneth to  consult
with  the  higher. And  in every  fourescore  dayes  came
the Judges of every Province within the Mexican
Empire, to consult with the Judges of Mexico, but
all doubtfull causes were reserved to  the  King,  onely
to  passe  by  his  order  and  determination. The  Painters  Painters.
served  for notaries,  to paint all the cases which  were
to be resolved, but no suite passed above fourescore
dayes  without  finall  end  and  determination. There  were
in  that  Citie  twelve  Sergeants,  whose  office  was  to  arrest, Sergeants.
and  to  call  parties  before the  Judges. Their  garments
were painted Mantels, whereby they were knowne a
farre off. The  Prisons  were under  ground,  moist  and  Prisons.
darke,  the  cause  whereof,  was  to  put  the  people  in  feare
to  offend. If  any  witnesse  were  called  to  take  an  oath, Witnesses  and
the  order  was,  that he should  touch the  ground  with  oat^es-
one  of  his fingers, and  then  to  touch  his  tongue with
the same, which signified that he had sworne and
promised to speake the  troth with his tongue,  taking
witnesse  thereof,  of  the  earth  which  did  maintaine  him.
But some doe interprete the oath,  that if the partie
sware not true, that then he might come to such
extremitie,  as  to  eate earth. Sometime  they  name  and
call  upon  the  God  of  the  crime,  whose  cause  the  matter
touched.

The Judge that taketh bribes or  gifts, is forthwith  Bribery.
put  out  of  his  office,  which  was  accounted  a  most  vile
and shamefull  reproach. The  Indians  did affirme that
Necaualpincinth  did  hang  a  Judge  in  Tezcuco,  for  giving
an unjust sentence, he himselfe  knowing  the  contrary.  Murther.
The Murtherer is executed without exception. The  [m- v-
woman with childe that wilfully casteth her creature,  II+°^

suffereth  death  for  the  same. The  Theefe  for  the  first  Theft.
offence,  was  made  a  slave,  and  hanged  for the  second.

567

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

c.  1552.

The  Traitor  to the  King  and  Common-weale,  was  put
to  death with extreame  torments. The Woman  taken
Disguise  of \n Mans Apparell died for  the  same,  and  likewise  the
sexe.  Man taken in Womans attire. Every one that

Duels  capita//,  challengeth  another  to fight,  except in  the  warres,  was
condemned  to  dye. In  Tezcuco  the  sinne  of  Sodomie
was punished with  death,  and that Law  was  instituted
by  Necaualpincinth,  and  Necaualcoio, who  were  judges,
which  abhorred  that  filthy  sinne,  and  therefore  they
deserved  great  praise,  for  in  other  Provinces  that
abhominable  sinne was not  punished,  al-
though they have in those places
common  Stewes,  as  in  Panuco.

The  end  of  the  fift  Booke.

END OF VOLUME XV.

GLASGOW  : PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY ROBERT MACLEHOSE AND CO. LTD.

BOSTON  PUBLIC  LIBRARY

■ffiiliil

3  9999  06663  990  5
