Hakluytus Posthumus, or Purchas His Pilgrimes, Vol. 4 (Samuel Purchas, 1625)
==========================================================
Purchas His Pilgrimes (1625) - the 17th century's great sequel to Hakluyt; the largest voyage collection of its age, preserving dozens of narratives otherwise lost. The 20-volume MacLehose reprint (Glasgow, 1905-07), the standard complete edition. Vol. 4 of 20.

Hakluytus  Posthumus

or

Purchas  His Pilgrimes

In  Twenty  Volumes

Volume IV

GLASGOW

PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY

ROBERT  MACLEHOSE  &  COMPANY  LTD.  FOR

JAMES MACLEHOSE AND SONS, PUBLISHERS

TO THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW

MACMILLAN AND CO. LTD.  LONDON

THE MACMILLAN CO.  NEW YORK

SIMPKIN, HAMILTON AND CO.  LONDON

MACMILLAN AND BOWES  CAMBRIDGE

DOUGLAS AND FOULIS  EDINBURGH

MCMV

Hakluytus Posthumus

or

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning a History of  the World

in Sea Voyages and Lande Travells

by Englishmen and others

By

SAMUEL PURCHAS, B.D.

VOLUME IV

:-.' «<>.» .

» - r »

'3 . •  ' '

I "-  '-*•.

i '

Glasgow
James MacLehose and Sons

Publishers  to  the  University

MCMV

^04

CCC"

Ifiiu/'z,'^.

THE TABLE

PAGE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs  in
the  fourth  Booke  of  the  First  part  of
Purchas  his  Pilgrimes.

CHAP. IIII.

Observations  of  William  Finch,  Merchant,  taken  out  of  his

large  Journall.  .......  i

§.  i.  Remembrances  touching  Sierra  Leona,  in  August
1607.  the  Bay,  Countrey,  Inhabitants,  Rites,  Fruits
and  Commodities. .......  1

Food,  Fruits  and  Trees,  at  Sierra  Leona.  Plantane,
Palmito,  Oyster-trees  :  A  strange  beast.

§.  2.  Of  Saint  Augustine  and Socotora,  like  observations,

with  other  notes  taken  out  of  his  Journal. .  ,  .  10

The  Men,  Beasts,  Wormes,  in  S.  Laurence  Hand.  The
customes  and  manners  of  the  Arabs.  The  com-
modities and  manners  of  the  Caffers.

§.  3.  Occurrents in India touching  the English, Dutch,

Portugals,  and  the  Mogols  dealing  with  the  English. .  19

The  Portugals  bad  usage  of  the  English.  A  fight  betweene
the  Hollanders  and  Portugals.  Passages  betweene  the
Portugals  and  Hollanders.  A  description  of  Surat.
Strange  great  Bats.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§.  4.  His  Journey  to  Agra  :  Observations  by  the  way,  and

there  ;  and  of  the  Decan  warres  there. .  . .29

Divers  occurrences  in  the  way  to  Agra.  Descriptions  of
divers  parts  of  the  great  Mogols  Countrey.  A  de-
scription of  divers  Cities  and  Townes  of  the  great
Mogols  countrey.  Terrible  fires.  Divers  Pagan
Princes  are  Christned.

§.  5.  Description  of  Fetipore,  Byana  ;  the  way  thither  ;
of  the  Nill  or  Indico,  and  of  divers  Mogoll  affaires,
Cities,  and  Castles. .  .  .  .  .  . . 41

The  Kings  Moholls.  Description  of  Nill  or  Indico.  The
making  of  Indico.  A  Lyon  assaulting  the  King.
The  Mogol  and  his  eldest  sonne  at  variance.

§.  6.  Description  of  Lahor,  and  of  the  Kings  house  there  :
how  the  Mogolls  entred  India :  Of  divers  strong
holds,  strange  Beasts,  and  Plants ;  fond  superstitions  :
Of  the  Wayes,  Theeves,  Out-lawes,  Cities,  Buildings,
adjoyned  and  intermixed  :  Princes  not  subject :  Agra
and  Echebars  Sepulchre  described. .  .  .  .  52

Description  of  the  City  Lahor,  and  of  the  Kings  house
there.  The  large  Mohols  for  the  Mogols  women,
described.  Divers  wayes  and  passages  from  Lahor  to
Agra.  Asmere  described.  Cunning  treachery  of  a
brother.  The  beginning,  and  greatnesse  of  the  river
Ganges.  A  mightie  great  Castle.  A  strange  Tree.
Divers  parts  of  the  Mogolls  countrey  described.  The
Description  of  Agra,  and  the  great  Palace  there.  The
description  of  King  Acabars  stately  Tombe.

Of  divers  wayes  in the  Mogols  Kingdome,  to and  from

Lahor  and  Agra,  and  places  of  note  in  them. . .  58

Lands  lying  Easterly  from  Lahor  with  their  Lords. .  .  69

VI

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP. V.

The  ninth  Voyage  of  the  Indian  Companie  to  the  East
Indies,  in  the  James,  whereof  was  Captaine,  Master
Edmund  Marlowe  of  Bristoll,  and  the  Master,  John
Davy,  which  wrote  this  Journall. .... 77

CHAP.  VI.

A  Ruter,  or  briefe  direction  for  readie  sayling  into  the
East  India,  digested  into  a  plaine  methode  by  Master
John  Davis  of  Lime-house,  upon  experience  of  his
five  voyages  thither,  and  home  againe. .  . .  88

§.  1.  Nauticall observation of  places betwixt the Lizard

and  Saint  Augustine,  in  the  He  of  Saint  Laurence. .  88

Directions  of  M.  John  Davis  for  the  East  Indies.  The  best
course  to  passe  the  Equinoctiall  Line.  Directions  for
Navigators  in  the  Hands.  Sailers  course  about  the
Cape  of  Good  Hope.

§.  2.  A  note  for  rinding  out  of  the  River  of  Saint  Augustine
in  Saint  Laurence,  of  divers  small  lies  in  the  way
thence  to  Achen,  and  of  many  Ports  and  passages
in  and  about  Sumatra. ...... 97

The  River  of  Saint  Augustine  in  Saint  Laurence.  Rutter
or  sea-course  for  the  East  Indies.  Sailers  Course  on
the  Coast  of  Sumatra.  Coasting  betweene  Sumatra
and  Java.

§.  3.  The  way  from  Bantam  to  the  Straight  of  Palimbon,
upon  the  East-side  of  Sumatra,  of  Banca,  Bintam,
Straights  of  Sincapura,  and  Sunda,  with  other  places. . 108

Sea-courses  from  Port  to  Port  in  the  East-Indies.  Linga,
Bintam,  and  other  Hands  described.  Saylers  course
from  Bantam  to  the  Moluccaes.  The  Hand  of  Botun,
and  others  described.

vii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Certaine  principall  Notes,  gathered  by  mine  owne  ex-
perience, in  my  three  voyages  into  these  parts :
wherein  the  true  course,  and  distances,  with  shoalds
and  rocks  is  shewed  :  and  on  which  side  you  may
leave  them  :  as  hereafter  followeth. .  .  .  . 113

Certaine  Notes  from  Bantam  Roade  to  the  Hands  of  the
Maluccaes,  with  the  course  and  distances  :  as  here-
after followeth.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .114

Notes  of  Botun. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .117

CHAP. VII.

A  Journall  of  the  tenth  Voyage  to  the  East  India,  with
two  ships,  the  Dragon,  and  the  Hosiander  (accom-
panied with  the  James  and  Salomon,  but  those  for
other  voyages)  and  in  them  three  hundred  and
eightie  persons,  or  thereabout  :  Written  by  Master
Thomas  Best,  chiefe  Commander  thereof.  .  .  . 119

§.  I.  Observations  in  their  way  to  Surat. .  .  .  . 119

Excellent  refreshing  in  the  Road  of  Saldanha.

§.  2.  Their  Acts  with  the  Mogols  Subjects,  and  fights
against  the  Portugals  :  setling  a  Factorie,  and  depar-
ture to  Achen.  .  .  .  .  . .  .124

Articles  betweene  the  English  and  the  Mogols  subjects.
Fight  of  the  English  with  the  Portugals.  The  Great
Mogoll  granteth  a  Factory  at  Surat.  Captaine  Best  is
entertained  at  Achen,  and  greatly  honored  by  the
King. The  Hollanders  Factory  destroyed  in  Jor.

Captaine  Best  his  entertainement  at  Achen. .  .  . 137

§.  3.  Trade at Tecoo and Passaman  : their going to

Bantam,  and  thence  home. .  .  .  .  .143

The  commodious  Roade,  and  plentie  of  Santa  Helena.

via

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP  VIII.

Certaine  observations  written  by  others  employed  in  the
same  voyage,  Master  Copland  Minister,  Robert  Boner
Master,  Nicholas  Withington  Merchant. .  .  .147

§.  1.  Remembrances  taken  out  of  a  Tractate  written  by
Master  Patrike  Copland,  Minister  in  the  former
voyage.  King  of  Achens  Letter  to  His  Majestie  ;
and  notes  of  N.  Salmons  Journall. .  .  .  .147

The  description  of  Soldania,  and  the  people  there.  The
English  royally  entertained  at  Achen.  The  King  of
Achens  Letter  and  Presents  to  our  King.

§.  2.  Notes  taken  out  of  Master  Robert Boners  Journall,

who  was  then  Master  in  the  Dragon. H.  . .154

At  what  time  most  conveniently  to  passe  the  Line.  The
English  fight  with  the  Portugals  at  Sea.  The  un-
happie  losse  of  the  Trades-increase  mentioned.

§.  3.  Extracts  of  a  Tractate,  written  by  Nicholas  Withing-
ton, which  was  left  in  the  Mogols  Countrey  by
Captaine  Best,  a  Factor,  his  adventures  and  travels
therein.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .162

The  English  fight  with  the  Portugals.  An  English  man
poysoned  by  the  Jesuits  in  India.  Divers  superstitious
customes  of  the  Banians.  The  Jesuites  entertainement
in  the  East  India.

CHAP. IX.

■>

The  eleventh  Voyage  to  the  East  India  in  the  Salomon,
begun  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  161 1.  after  the
accompt  of  the  Church  of  England,  and  ended  in
the  yeere  161 3.  Written  by  Ralph  Wilson,  one  of
the  Mates  in  the  said  ship. H.  .  .  .  .175

Divers  lies  in  the  East  India  described.

IX

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  PAGe

CHAP.  X.

A  Journall  of  all  principall  matters  passed  in  the  twelfth
Voyage  to  the  East  India,  observed  by  mee  Walter
Payton,  in  the  good  ship  the  Expedition  :  the
Captaine  whereof  was  M.  Christopher  Newport,  being
set  out,  Anno 1612. Written  by  Walter  Payton. . 180

§.  I.  Their comming to Saint Augustine, Mohelia, and

divers  parts  of  Arabia. .  .  .  . .  .180

The  English  twelfth  Voyage  to  the  East-Indies.  The
Hand  Mohelia  yeeldeth  very  good  refreshing.  The
English  entertained  on  the  Coast  of  Arabia.

§.  2.  Their  comming  on  the  Persian  Coast :  the  treacherie

of  the  Baluches. .  . . . . . .187

The  English  come  to  the  Persian  Coast.  The  Portugals
great  Authoritie  in  the  Indies.  Horrible  treachery
intended  to  the  English,  and  revealed.  The  Baluches
treachery  to  the  English  prevented.  Certaine  Mahu-
metans  surprise  the  English.

§.  3.  Their  comming  to  Divulginde  landing  the  Embassa-
dour,  seeking  Trade,  and  crossed  by  the  slanderous  Por-
tugals, going  to  Sumatra  and  Bantam  ;  and  returne. 200

Sir  Robert  Sherley  landed.  The  malicious  endeavours  of
the  Portugals  to  hinder  the  English  Trade.  Sir  Robert
Sherleys  love  to  the  English.  Safe  arrivall  in  England
after  a  long  Voyage.

CHAP. XI.

Extracts  of  the  Journall  of  Captaine  Nicholas  Downton,
who  was  employed  chiefe  Commander  in  the  second
Voyage  set  forth  for  the  joyned  Stockes  in  the  East
Indies,  by  the  Governour,  Deputie,  and  Committees
of  that  Societie.  Wherein  is  related  their  happy
successe  against  the  Vice-Roy,  and  all  the  Indian
Sea  forces  of  the  Portugals,  by  force  and  cunning
attempting  their  destruction. .  •  . .  . 214.

x

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§.  i.  Their  comming  to  Soldania,  Socatora,  Swally  :  Dis-
agreements betweene  the  Mogoll  and  Portugals,  and
the  Nabob  and  us. . . . . .  . .214

The  Jesuites  are  great  Enemies  to  the  English.  The
Nabob  of  Surat,  suspicious  of  the  English.

§.  2.  The  Portugals  Forces,  Acts,  Attempts,  Fight  with  the

English,  and  disgracefull  Repulse. . . . . 225

Great  preparations  of  the  Portugals  at  Sea.  Consultation
how  to  prevent  the  Portugals  designes.  Fight
betweene  the  English  and  the  Portugals.

§.  3.  Portugall  supplyes,  Fire-boates  frustrated,  seeke  peace
and  refused,  their  departure  :  Enterview  of  the  Nabob
and  Generall :  departure  of  the  English. .  .  . 236

Supplies  sent  to  the  Portugall  Vice-roy.  Fire-boats  pre-
vented. Peace  sought,  but  refused.  Care  of  the
English  to  prevent  the  Portugals  attempts.  The
death  of  the  worthy  Captaine  Nicholas  Downton.

CHAP.  XII.

Relations of  Master Elkington and Master Dodsworth,

touching  the  former  voyage. .  .  .  . .251

§.  1.  Collections  taken  out  of  the  Journall  of  Thomas
Elkington,  successour  to  Captaine  Nicholas  Downton
in  the  voyage  aforesaid,  written  by  himselfe. .  . 251

Death  of  Capt.  N.  Downton.  Losse  of  the  Thomasine.
The  Hollanders  base  usage  of  the  English.

§.  2.  A  Briefe  of  Memorialls  observed  and  written  by
Master  Edward  Dodsworth,  Merchant  in  the  former
voyage,  which  returned  in  the  Hope.  . . . 257

The  Nabob  of  Surat  unkind  to  the  English.  Fight  of  the
English  with  the  Portugals.

The  examination  of  Domingo  Francisco,  taken  in  Swally

Roade,  aboord  the  Gift. Februarie  20.  1614. . . 263

The  Ship  called  the  Hope,  returneth  for  England.

xi

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP. XIII.

A  Journall  of  the  Journey  of  Richard  Steel,  and  John
Crowther,  from  Azmere  in  India,  the  place  of  the
great  Mogols  residence,  to  Spahan  the  Royall  Seat  of
the  King  of  Persia,  in  the  affaires  of  the  East  Indian
Societie.  .  Anno  1615.  161 6. .  . . .  . 266

The  Countrey  betweene  Agra  and  Lahor  described.  Long
and  dangerous  travell  from  India  to  Persia.  The
borders  of  the  Mogoll,  and  Persian  described.  The
English  after  long  and  tedious  travell  arrive  in
Persia.  The  King  of  Persia  his  Firman  for  the
English.

CHAP. XIIII.

Memorials  of  a  voyage,  wherein  were  employed  three  ships,
the  Samaritan,  Thomas  and  Thomasine,  1614.
written  by  John  Milward  Merchant,  who  went  in
the  Thomas. ........ 280

Description  of  the  Hand  and  Commodities  of  Soldania.
Losse  of  the  Trade  :  Devils  Ambition.  King  of
Achens  Navie.  Quarrell  betwixt  the  Acheners  and
Tecoans. Their  Lent.

CHAP. XV.

The  second  voyage  of  Captaine  Walter  Peyton  into  the
East  Indies,  in  the  Expedition,  which  was  set  forth  by
the  East  India  Companie,  together  with  the  Dragon,
Lion,  and  Peppercorne,  in  Januarie  161 4..  gathered
out  of  his  large  Journall. ...... 289

§.  1.  Occurrents at Soldania, Mohelia, Socotora, Surat,

with  divers  other  Intelligences,  .... 289

The  arrivall  of  the  English  in  Soldania.  Commodities  at
Doman,  and  at  Mohelia.  The  English  Ambassadors
arrivall  at  Surat.  Death  of  Sir  T.  Powell  and  his
Lady,

xii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§.  2.  Prizes  taken,  Factorie  at  Callicut,  Observations  of  divers
places  of  Sumatra  :  the  English  ships  miscarrie.
Dutch  Abuses,  Factories  in  India. .  .  .  298

Factory  at  Callicut.  Sheathing  necessary.  Tecoo  bar-
barous. Passaman  Gold.  Dutch  transportations  and
abuses  :  English  ships  and  Factories.  King  of  Achens
manners.

§.  3.  A  briefe  Declaration  of  the  Ports,  Cities,  and  Townes,
inhabited  and  traded  unto  by  the  Portugall,  betwixt
the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  and  Japan,  as  I  could  learne
by  diligent  enquirie.  ...... 306

Portugall  Trade  in  India.  Many  Townes  and  Ports  where
the  Portugals  trade.

CHAP.  XVI.
Observations  collected  out  of  the  Journall  of  Sir  Thomas
Roe,  Knight,  Lord  Embassadour  from  His  Majestie
of  Great  Britaine,  to  the  Great  Mogol :  Of  matters
occurring  worthy  memorie  in  the  way,  and  in  the
Mogols  Court.  His  Customes,  Cities,  Countries,
Subjects,  and  other  Indian  affaires. . .  .  . 310

§.  I.  Occurrents and observations, in, and touching the

voyage  to  Surat. .  .  .  .  .  .  .310

The  Hand  of  Pengwin,  and  other  Hands  described.  The
manners,  and  commodities  of  Molalia.  Molalia,
Magadoxia,  Abdalacora.  Sir  Thomas  Roe.  The  use
of  Socatra,  and  the  Inhabitants  there. Prester  John.

§.  2. His  journey  to  the  Court,  and  entertainement  there,

and  customes  thereof. .  . .  . .  323

The  English  arrive  at  Brampore.  Sir  T.  Roes  comming
to  the  Mogols  Court  :  Customes  thereof.  The  Great
Mogolls  Court  described.  Newyeeres  festivall  Solem-
nitie.  Sir  Thomas  Roe.  Conference  betwixt  the
King,  Courtiers,  and  Embassador.  The  Princes  dis-
pleasure. Jones  his  lewdnesse.

xiii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§.  3.  Occurrents  happening  in  June,  July,  August  161 6.
and  divers  passages  of  speech  and  action,  whence  the
Nature,  Arts,  and  disposition  of  the  King  and  his
Subjects  may  be  observed.  ..... 340

Sultan  Coroone,  or  Coroone  disaffected.  The  kind  usage  of
the  English  by  the  Great  Mogoll.  Courtesie  of  the
King  and  Gemaldin  Ussin  to  Sir  Tho.  Roe.  The
great  Mogols  great  kindnesse  to  Sir  Thomas  Roe.

§.  4..  The  Kings  birth  day,  and  manner  of  the  observation,

with  other  accidents  in  September. .  .  .  . 352

Great  Solemnities  on  the  Kings  Birth-day.  The  Mogols
curiositie  and  bountie.

§.  5.  The  broiles  about  Abdala  Chan,  and  Chan  Channa  ;
Sultan  Caroones  ambition,  his  policies  to  subvert  his
elder  brother :  fight  with  a  Portugall  Carricke :
distaste  about  the  Prince  :  Persian  Embassage,  Presents
and  entertainment.  .  .  .  .  .  . -35^

Abdala  Chans  manner  of  humiliation.  Samsons  Foxes,  fire
in  their  tailes,  lookes  contrary.  Fight  betweene  the
English  and  the  Portugals.  The  entertainement  of  a
Persian  Embassadour.  Persian  Presents  :  the  Princes
Gallantrie.

§.  6.  The  Princes  braverie ;  the  Persian  Ambassadours
behaviour,  the  manner  and  effects  of  Drinking,  of
the  King  and  his  Nobles ;  the  Kings  remove,  his
super-exceeding  pompe,  wealth,  magnificence  therein  :
Portugall  fray  :  relations  of  Sultan  Corsoroone  :
Persian  newes.  ....... 368

Flattery  flat  lye,  wine,  windy  ;  Base  greatnesse ;  great
basenesse.  An  ancient  custome  concerning  con-
demned Theeves.  The  magnificence  of  the  great
Mogoll.  Magnificence  of  the  Mogolls  Tents  and
Progresse.  Sultan  Corsoroone  acknowledged  :  Turke
and  Persian.

xiv

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§.  7.  Sir  Thomas  Roes  following  the  Court  in  this  Pro-
gresse,  description  of  the  Kings  Lescar,  and  some
places  which  they  passed  :  the  Kings  superstition,
drinke,  and  dealing  about  the  Present. .  .  .384

Mogols  Cities  ruinous,  Lescar  marvellous,  Charitie  super-
stitious. The  Princes  incivility  to  the  English.
Question  about  the  Picture  of  Venus  and  a  Satyre.
Curiositie  :  Horse  and  Dogges  in  request.

§.  8.  The  New-yeeres  Feast  :  Suspicions  of  the  English  :
Trade  of  Dabul,  distaste  of  the  Persian,  English  men
of  warre  in  the  Indian  Seas. ..... 397

The  Great  Mogoll  gracious  to  the  English.  English
bravado  cause  of  suspition  :  Dabull.  Homely  usage
to  the  Persian  Embassador.  Kings  birth-day  rites  :
wealthy  weighing.  Course  for  debts.  Mercators  Maps
given  and  returned.  The  Princes  behaviour  to  Sir
Thomas  Roe.

§.  9.  Asaph  Chan  seeketh  to  further  us  for  hope  of  gaine,
so  also  Normahal :  Master  Steeles  arrivall  :  Danger  to
the  publike,  by  private  trade  :  Stirres  about  a  Fort. . 413

Gaine  is  god  of  the  godlesse.  Effect  of  novelties :  tedious
progresse  ;  projects  questioned.  Severall  advices  to  the
Merchants  of  England.  The  English  suspected  by  the
Great  Mogoll.  Divers  passages  betweene  the  Mogol
and  Sir  Thomas  Roe.  Certaine  English  accused  of
poysoning.

§.  10.  The  Map  and  description  of  the  severall  Kingdomes
and  Provinces  subject  to  the  Great  Mogoll  Sha  Selim
Gehangier,  with  the  principall  Cities  and  Rivers,
the  scituation  and  borders,  and  extent  in  length  and
breadth.  Letters  of  the  Mogoll  to  His  Majestie,
and  of  S.  T.  Roe  to  divers  his  honorable  friends  in
England.  ........ 430

A  description  of  the  Kingdomes  and  Provinces  subject  to
the  Mogoll,  Cities  and  scituation.  The  King  of
Englands  Letter  to  the  Mogoll.  The  large  Terri-
tories of  the  great  Mogoll.  Indus  in  ordinary  Maps
falsely  placed. A  Letter  concerning  the  State  of  the

xv

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  PAGE

Great  Mogoll.  Letters  of  Sir  Thomas  Roe  from
the  Mogolls  Court.  Heathen  Religions  irreligious  :
Christian  Temple,  not  Church.  Mogoll  Author  of  a
new  Sect.  Jesuites  Harvest.  Miracles  disclaymed  by
Jesuites.  Wonder  of  an  Ape.  Affaires  of  the  Turkes
and  Persians.  The  Portugall  overthrowne  :  Fire  their
ship.  Sir  T.  Roes  Letter.  Warre  and  Traffique
incompatible.  Sir  Thomas  Roes  Letter  to  the  East-
India  Companie.

CHAP.  XVII.

A  Letter  of  Master  Thomas  Coryat,  which  travelled  by
Land  from  Jerusalem  to  the  Court  of  the  Great
Mogoll,  written  to  Master  L.  Whitaker.  To  which
are  added  pieces  of  two  other. ..... 469

M.  Thomas  Coryats  letters  from  the  great  Mogols  Court.
Coryats  travell  from  Lahor  to  the  great  Mogols  Court.
Coryats  Relation  of  the  Great  Mogols  Court.  Coryats
thrift,  disaster,  and  magnificall  stile.  Coryats  Letters  to
his  friends  in  England.  Coryats  salutations  to  his
severall  friends.  Master  Thomas  Coryats  Oration  to
the  Great  Mogol.  Master  Thomas  Coryats  Letters  to
England,  from  Agra.  Divers  Observations  of  Master
Thomas  Coryat.  Mogols  severitie,  charitie,  tryall  of
Converts. The  Moores  inconstancie  justly  punished.

Certaine  observations  written  by  Thomas  Coryat. . . 488

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs  in
the  fift  Booke  of  the  First  part  of  Purchas
his  Pilgrimes.

CHAP. I.

Memorialls  taken  out  of  the  Journall  of  Roger  Hawes,
touching  the  proceedings  of  the  Factorie  at  Cran-
ganor  under  the  Great  Samorine. .  .  .  .495

Covenants  betwixt  English  and  the  King  of  Calecut.
Strange  way  to  get  debts :  Nayros  and  Portugalls.

xvi

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP.  II.

Notes  taken  out  of  the  Journall  of  Alexander  Childe,  from
England  to  Surat,  and  thence  to  Jasques  in  Persia,
and  of  the  fight  by  the  way  with  the  Portugals,
in  which  Generall  Joseph  was  slaine.  .  .  . 502

The  Voyage  to  Jasques. .  .  .  .  .  .  .504

Fight  with  a  Portugall  Carricke  :  Her  firing.

CHAP.  III.

A  Letter  of  Master  Thomas  Spurway  Merchant,  touching
the  wrongs  done  at  Banda  to  the  English  by  the
Hollanders. Written  in  a  Letter  to  the  Companie. . 508

Hollanders  saved  by  the  English  at  Moccasor.  The  Hol-
landers bravado's  against  the  English.  The  English
the  first  Christians  in  the  Road  of  Polaroone.  Places
surrendered  to  his  Majestic  The  Swan  basely  taken.
Hollanders  plot  to  fire  the  Defence.  Treacherie
betrayeth  her.  Pledges  sent  to  the  English.  A
parley.  False  accusations.  Heathens  more  kind  then
Hollanders,  to  the  English.  A  counterfeit  Hollander
imprisoned  :  his  escape.  Hollanders  brags  to  the
English.  Description  of  Polaroone.  The  Dutch
quarrell  with  the  English. Polaway  a  Paradise.

CHAP.  IIII.

Relations  and  Remembrances,  taken  out  of  a  large  Journall
of  a  Voyage,  set  forth  by  the  East  Indian  Societie,
wherein  were  employed,  the  James,  the  Anne,  the
New-yeeres  Gift,  the  Bull,  &  the  Bee  ;  written  by
John  Hatch,  Master  of  the  Bee,  and  after  in  the
New-yeeres Gift ; and lastly, came home in the

J*mes 535

Strange  change  of  Water.  A  Portugall  ship  taken.  A  Sea
fight  betwixt  the  English  and  Dutch.  Thomas  sunke.
Blacke  Lion  burnt.  A  Sea  fight.  A  peace  concluded
betwixt  the  English  and  Dutch.

xvii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  PAge

CHAP.  V.

The  Voyage  of  the  Anne  Royall  from  Surat  to  Moha,  in
the  Red  Sea,  for  setling  an  English  Trade  in  those
parts:  Anno  Dom.  1618.  extracted  out  of  Master
Edward  Heynes  his  Journall,  written  thereof.  The
Copies  of  divers  Firmans.  .  .  .  .  .547

English  trade  begunne  to  be  setled  at  Moha.  The  enter-
tainment of  the  English  by  Mahomet  Aga.  Free
Trade  granted  at  Mocha  to  the  English.  Turkish
treacherie  to  Sir  H.  Middleton.  Turkish  Firmans,
and  entertainment  to  the  English.  The  English
entertained  by  the  Captaine  of  Surat.  The  English
well  entertayned  by  the  Surat  Captaine.  Likelihood
of  venting  English  cloth  at  Sinan.

CHAP.  VI.

Briefe  Notes  of  two  Voyages  of  Master  Martin  Pring  into
the  East  Indies ;  the  first  with  Captaine  Nicholas
Downton,  Generall  of  foure  ships,  in  which  he  went
Master  in  the  New-yeeres  Gift  Admirall. .  .  .567

Crosse  lost  at  Soldania. Current  from  Saint  Helena.

xvm

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

Sir  Thomas  Roe,  .  .  . .  . .320

A  Description  of  East  India  conteyning  th'  Empire

of  the  Great  Mogoll, .  .  .  .  .432

The  Description  of  the  Great  Mogols  Seale, . 468

XIX

THE FOURTH  VOLUME

OF

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Continuing  the  Navigations  and  Voyages  of  Eng-
lishmen  to the Arabian, Persian and Indian
Shoares,  Continents  and  Hands ;  with  Obser-
vations of  the  Worthy  Ambassage  of
Sir  Thomas  Roe,  Knight,  and
English  Voyages  to  the
Hands  of  and  beyond
the  Indies.

Chap. IIII.  [I.  iv.  414.]

Observations  of  William  Finch,  Merchant,  taken
out  of  his  large  Journall.

§.  1.

Remembrances  touching  Sierra  Leona,  in  August
1607.  the  Bay,  Countrey,  Inhabitants,  Rites,
Fruits  and  Commodities.

He  Hand  which  we  fell  with,  lyeth  some  T^s^^d
ten  leagues  to  the  South  of  the  Bay,  the  nZt°ft°e7
latitude  is  eight  degrees,  it  hath no  in-  Master  Haw-
habitants,  nor  did  I  learne  the  name. It  kins,  with
hath  some  Plantans,  and  by  report  good  ™homhe  went

Ifli'U lilt-

watering  and  wooding  for  ships. Some

Mogolls

league from the  shoare is a dangerous  Countrey, if  1

breach  of  rocke,  scarcely  at  high  water  to  bee  discerned,  then  had  had

The  Bay  of  Sierra  Leona  is  about  three  leagues  in  breadth.  tL  But  better

On  the  South  is  high  land,  full  of  trees  even  to  the  Sea-  ^f^L  n"ot  \n

side,  having  divers  Coves,  in  which  wee  caught  plentie  duest place  of

and  varietie  of  fish. On  the  further  side  of  the  fourth  service,  then

Cove  is  the  watering  place,  of  excellent  water  continually  n0{  at  ay:

running : at  which  place, on the  rockes,  we  found the . ., V

c a-  t? r  I  u-  u u a u- *u  together  borne

names or divers ilnghsh men which had bin there ;  out  0f  due

amongst  the  rest,  of  Sir  Francis  Drake,  which  had  bin  time,  which

there  seven  and  twentie  yeeres  before,  Thomas  Candish,  coms  tn  due

place  {whiles

we  are  yet  in  India)  and  in  time  also  before  the  Mogoll  affaires  received  any  later  accesse  or

better  maturitie :  and  for  that  circumstance  failing  thou  shalt  find  it  supplied  in  substance,  with

more  accurate  observations  of  Men,  Beasts,  Plants,  Cities,  Deserts,  Castles,  Buildings,  Regions,

Religions,  then  almost  any  other,  as  also  ofWaies,  Wares,  Warres.

IV  I  A

A.D.
1607.

Christianitie
at  Sierra
Leona.

Their
apparell.

They  are  also
Gallants  and
fashion-
mongers.

Townes  and
Houses.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Captaine  Lister,  with  others.  About  the  middest  of  the
Bay,  right  from  the  third  Cove  lyeth  a  sand,  neere  about
which,  is  not  above  two  or  three  fathome ;  in  most  places
else  eight  or  ten  close  to  the  shoare.  It  floweth  East
South-east,  and  higheth  sixe  or  eight  foote,  a  strong
tide  of  ebbe ;  the  latitude  eight  degrees  and  a  halfe
North.

The  King  keepeth  his  residence  in  the  bottome  of  the
Bay,  and  is  called  by  the  Moores,  Borea,  or  Captaine,
Caran,  caran,  caran.  Hee  hath  other  pettie  Kings  under
him,  whereof  one,  called  Captaine  Pinto,  a  wretched  old
man,  dwelleth  at  a  Towne  within  the  second  Cove :  and
on  the  other  side  the  Bay,  Captaine  Boloone.  Boreas
Dominions  stretch  fortie  leagues  into  the  land ;  he  hath
tribute  of  Cotton-cloath,  Elephants  teeth  and  gold:  he
hath  power  to  sell  his  people  for  slaves,  (which  he
proffered  unto  us)  and  some  of  them  are  by  Portugall
Priests  and  Jesuits  made  Christians,  and  have  a  Chappell,
wherein  are  written  in  a  table,  such  dayes  as  they  are  to
observe  holy.  The  King,  with  some  about  him,  are
decently  cloathed  in  Jackets  and  Breeches,  and  some  with
hats,  but  the  common  sort  go  naked,  save  that  with  a
Cotten  girdle  about  their  waste,  they  cover  their  privities ;
the  women  cover  theirs  with  a  Cotton-cloath,  tacked
about  their  middles  and  hanging  to  the  knees,  wrapped
round  about  them  ;  the  children  goe  starke  naked.  They
are  all,  both  men  and  women,  raced  and  pinked  on  all
parts  of  their  bodies  very  curiously,  having  their  teeth
also  filed  betwixt,  and  made  very  sharpe.  They  pull  off
all  the  haire  growing  on  their  eye-lids.  Their  beards  are
short,  crispe,  blacke,  and  the  haire  of  their  heads  they  cut
into  allyes  and  crosse  pathes;  others  weare  it  jagged  in
tufts,  others  in  other  foolish  formes;  but  the  women
shave  all  close  to  the  flesh.

Their  Townes  consist  of  thirtie  or  fortie  houses,  all
clustered  together  (yet  each  hath  his  own)  covered  with
reed  and  enclosed  with  mud-walls,  like  our  hovels  or  hog-
sties  in  ^England,  having  at  the  entrance  a  matte  in  stead

WILLIAM FINCH  ad.

1607.

of  a  doore,  locked  and  bolted,  not  fearing  robbery,  where

the  household holds  correspondence to the house. In

stead  of  a  carved  bed-sted,  they  have  billets  of  wood  laid

overthwart, upon  which,  in  stead  of  a  fether-bed,  they

spread  a  matte  or two. Some  are  so  proud,  that  they  Their  house-

have their (Arras) hangings also of  mattes about the  hM-stuffewd

walles,  yet  most  about  their  beds  betwixt  them  and  the

wall. Their other furniture, is two or  three pots of

earth  to  keepe  water  in,  and  to  boyle  such  meate  as  they

can  get,  a  gourd  or  two  to  fetch  Palme-wine,  and  a  halfe

gourd for his quaffing cup, earthen dishes for their

loblolly,  a basket or two by  the walles for  his  Maria

to  gather  cockles,  with  a  snap-sacke  for  himselfe  made  of

rindes  of  trees  to  carry  his  provant,  with  his  Tobacco  and

Pipe,  and  thus  is  their  house  furnished. When  they  goe

abroad each weareth  one  of  those snap-sackes on  his

shoulder,  wherein  he  carrieth  his  provision  and  Tobacco

(which  in  no  wise  must  be  long  from  his  mouth)  with  his

do-little  sword  by  his  side,  made  by  themselves  of  such  Their  Armes.

iron  as  is  brought  them  ;  having  also  his  bow  and  quiver

full  of  poysoned  arrowes,  pointed  with  iron  in  forme  of  a

Snakes-sting,  or  else  a  case  of  Javelins  or  Darts,  pointed

with  iron  of  a  good  breadth  and  sharpe ;  and  sometime

with  both. They  are  bigge  and  well  set  men,  strong  and  Their  feature

couragious,  of  a  civill-heathen  disposition. They  keepe  andcon  monu

themselves  for  the  most  part  unto  their  owne  wives,  of

whom  they  are  not  a  little  jealous. I  could  not  learne

their Religion  what  it  is : they  have  some Images,  yet

know  there  is  a  God  above :  for  when  wee  asked  them  of

their  woodden  Puppets,  they  would  lift  up  their  hands

to  heaven ;  more  they  knew  not :  but  howsoever  it  comes

to  passe,  their  children  are  all  circumcised. They  are  very  Circumcision.

just  and  true,  and  theft  is  punished  with  present  death.

When  any  dieth,  a  little  thatched  shed  is  set over his

funerall hearse,  under  which  in  earthen  pots  they  con-  [I-  wr«  4I5-1

tinually  keepe fresh water, and in earthen platters set  Funera"-

divers  meates,  sticking  about  them  some  three  or  foure

bones.

3

A.D.
1607.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Their  food.

Oysters  on
trees.

To  the  South  of  the  Bay,  some  fortie  or  fiftie  leagues
distant  within  the  Countrey  inhabiteth  a  very  fierce
people  which  are  man-eaters,  which  sometime  infest
them.  The  Moores  of  Sierra  Leona  feed  on  Rice,  of
which  they  have  no  great  quantitie,  sowing  only  what
is  needfull,  in  places  neare  to  their  houses,  where  they
have  burnt  up  the  wood,  not  having  otherwise  so  much
free  ground  :  they  sow  also  another  little  seed  which
they  call  Pene,  of  which  they  make  bread,  not  much
unlike  to  Winter-savory  seed.  They  have  some  few
hennes  about  their  houses,  but  no  other  flesh,  except
sometime  they  get  a  Fawne  of  the  wilde  Deere,  running  in
the  Mountaines  (not  many)  or  some  fowle.  They  feed
also  upon  Herbs,  Cockles,  Oysters,  whereof  they  have
great  store  growing  on  the  rockes  and  trees  by  the  sea-
side, but  of  a  flash  taste.  They  take  much  good  fish
with  waves  and  other  devices.  They  feed  also  much
on  rootes,  and  plant  about  their  houses  many  Plantan-
trees,  Gourds,  Potatoes,  Pompions,  and  Guinne-Pepper.
But  Tobacco  is  planted  about  every  mans  house,  which
Tobacco-pipes,  seemeth  halfe  their  food  :  the  boll  of  their  Tobacco-pipe
is  very  large,  and  stands  right  upward,  made  of  clay
well  burnt  in  the  fire.  In  the  lower  end  thereof  they
thrust  in  a  small  hollow  cane,  a  foot  and  halfe  long,
thorow  which  they  sucke  it,  both  men  and  women  drink-
ing the  most  part  down,  each  man  carrying  in  his
snap-sack  a  small  purse  (called  Tuffio)  full  of  Tobacco,
and  his  Pipe.  The  women  doe  the  like  in  their  wrappers,
carrying  the  Pipe  in  their  hands.  Unto  their  Tobacco
they  adde  nothing  but  rather  take  from  it :  for  I  have
seene  them  strayning  forth  the  juyce  of  the  leaves,  being
greene  and  fresh,  before  they  cut  and  drie  it  (making
signes  that  otherwise  it  would  make  them  drunke)  then
doe  they  shread  it  small,  and  drie  it  on  a  sherd  upon
the  coles.  We  beheld  in  a  certaine  Hand  neare  (and
no  where  else)  halfe  a  dozen  of  Goats,  but  could  not
get  a  taile  of  one  all  our  time.

They  have innumerable  sorts  of  fruits,  growing  wilde

4

Little  flesh.

Fruits.

WILLIAM FINCH  a.d.

1607.

in  their  woods  ;  whole  woods  of  Limmon  trees,  especially  Woods  of
a  little  on  this  side  the  watering  place  neare  the  Towne,  Lmmons-
and some few Orenge trees. Their  drinke  is for  the
most part water ; yet the men devour  much  Palmito  Palmito  wine.
wine, which they call Moy, giving little or none to
the women. It  is  strange  to behold their manner of
climbing these trees,  which have neither boughes  nor
branches, save only on the top, being also of great
height  and  bignesse  :  with  a  withe  he  graspeth  his  body
and the  tree together, and  so  bearing backe  his  body,
and  lifting  up  his  withe  before  him,  he  foots  it  up  with
such  speed  and certaintie, comming  downe  againe  also
so orderly, bringing his gourd full of wine on his
arme  that  it  was  admirable. They  have  divers  sorts  of
Plummes,  one  like a  wheaten  Plumme,  wholesome  and  Plummes.
savoury  :  a  blacke  one  also,  as  bigge  as  a  Horse-plumme,
much esteemed, having an aromaticke savour  : Man-
samillias like to a wheaten Plumme, very dangerous,
as  are  likewise the  boughes of  the  tree,  full  of  sappe,
perillous to the sight, if it should happely flye in.
They  have Beninganions  about  as  bigge  as  a  Limmon,
reddish  on the  rinde, very wholesome  : another fruit
called Beguill, as bigge as an apple, with a rough
knottie skinne, which being pared, it eateth like a
Strawberry, being  like  it  also  in  colour and  graine,  of
which  wee  did  eate  many  :  there  is  store  of  wilde  grapes
in  the  woods,  of  a  wooddie  and bitterish  taste. They
eat  the  nuts  roasted  which  fall  from  the  Palmito  tree  :
they use small store of  Pepper and graines, this in
Surgerie, that in Cookery. They have certaine  fruits
growing  sixe  or  eight  together  on  a  bunch,  each  as  long
and  bigge  as  a  mans  finger,  of  a  browne  yellowish  colour,
and somewhat downie, containing within the  rinde  a
certaine  pulpie substance  of  pleasant  taste  ;  I  know  not  Beane  trees  of
how  wholesome. There  grow  in the  woods  trees  like  venomous
Beeches,  bearing  fruits  like  Beans,  of  which  I  observed  n^%fere'
three kinds  : one  great  and  tall, bearing  a  cod  like  a  p0yS0„  their
Beane-cod,  which  hath  in  it  foure  or  five  square  Beanes,  arrowes.

5

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1607.

almost  like  the seed  of  a  Tamarinde,  enclosed with a

hard pill  like a  shell, within  which  is  a  yellow  kirnell,

a  dangerous  poison used by the  Negros,  to  envenome

their  arrowes  ; they  call  the  fruit  Ogon. The  second

is  lesse,  his  cod  crooked  byas-wise,  of  a  thicke  rinde,  sixe

or seven inches  in  the  bending,  and  halfe  so much  in

breadth,  containing  five  large  beanes  of  an  inch  long. The

third is  large,  hath short  leaves like the former, the

fruit  much  bigger, on  a  strong  wooddie  stalke,  thicke

and massie, a  little  indented on  the sides, nine inches

long,  and  five  broad  :  within  which  are  five  long  beanes,

larger  then the  other,  called by them Quenda, which

they  affirme  also  to  be  dangerous.

Carob  trees. I saw  Trees  like  Willowes,  bearing  fruits  like  Pease-

Co/a,  afruite  cods. They have  a  fruit  called  Gola,  which  growes  up

ojmuc  further  in  the  Countrey,  inclosed  in  a  shell  ;  it  is  hard,

esteetne.  ..  *  ,  /»

reddish, bitter,  about the  bignesse  of  a  Wal-nut,  with

divers  corners and angles  : this fruit they much set

by,  chewing  it  with  the  rinde  of  a  certaine  Tree,  then

giving  it  to  the next, and he  having  chewed  it  to  the

next, so  keeping  it a  long  while  (but  swallowing none

of  the substance) before  they  cast it away, to which

they  attribute  great  vertue  for  the  teeth  and gummes,

these  Negros  being  usually  as  well  toothed  as  Horses.

This fruit  passeth  also  amongst them for monie,  this

happie-haplesse-people  knowing  none  other. They  plant

Potatoes. also  Potatoes,  and higher  within  Land, Cotton, called

Cotton.  Innumma, whereof  with a Spindle they  make  a  good

Threed,  and  weave  it  artificially,  making  cloth  thereof  a

quarter  broad, to make  coverings for their members,

and  being  sewed  together,  Jackets  and  Breeches. They

Cambe,awood  nave  another  Wood  called  Cambe,  wherewith  they  dye

ri '  6 1  ^eir  Purses  and Mats  red. The Limon Tree  much

Limon  Tree, resembleth  a  Crab-Tree,  and  is  exceeding  full  of  prickles,

carrying  a  slender  leafe  like  a  Willow,  abounding  with

fruit  as  our Crab-trees, beginning  to  ripen in  August,

and  continuing  on  the  Trees  till  October  ;  whither  they

beare  twice  a  yeere  I  know  not.

6

WILLIAM FINCH  a.d.

1607.

The  Tree  which  beareth  Plantans  is  of  a  reasonable  Plantan  Trees
height,  the  bodie  about  the  bignesse  of  a  mans  thigh,  or  Ree«s-
and  seemeth  to  be  an  annuall  Plant,  and  in  my  judgement
might  better  bee  accounted  amongst  Reedes  then  Trees  ;
the  bodie  not  beeing  of  wooddie  substance,  compact  of
many  leaves,  wrapped  close  one  upon  another  in  manner
of  an  Artichoke  stalk,  adorned  with  leaves  in  stead  of
boughes  from  the  very  ground,  which  are  for  the  most
part  about  two  ells  long,  and  some  ell  broad,  having
a  very  large  rib  in  the  middle  thereof.  The  fruit  is
a  bunch  of  ten  or  twelve  Plantans,  each  a  span  long,
and  almost  as  thicke  as  a  mans  wrist,  some-what  crooked
or  bending  inwards,  growing  on  a  leavie  stalke  on  the
mids  of  the  Plant,  at  the  first  greene,  growing  yellow
as  they  ripen,  and  tender  :  the  rinde  being  stripped  off,
the  substance  within  is  also  yellowish,  pleasant  in  taste.
Beneath  the  fruit  on  the  same  stalke  hangs  downe  a
leavie  tuft,  sharpe-pointed,  which  seemeth  to  have  beene
the  flowre,  which  I  know  not  whether  it  hath  any  seed
or  no.  They  call  this  fruit  Bannanas,  and  have  reason-  Bannanas.
able  plentie  :  they  are  ripe  in  September  and  October  :
we  carryed  some  to  Sea  greene,  which  lay  sixe  weekes
in  ripening.

Guinny Pepper is not plentifull,  it groweth in the  Guinny
Woods  wilde,  a  small  plant  like  Privet,  or  Pricke-wood,  PePPer-
adorned  with  little  slender  leaves,  bearing  a  small  fruit
like unto our  Barberie in forme and  colour,  greene  at
first, turning as it  ripeneth, red  ; but not  growing  in
bunches  as  Barberies,  but  heere  and  there  two  or  three
together  about the stalke  : they call it Bangue. Of  Millet  or
their  Pene  whence  they  make  their bread  is  spoken, a  Pa"i*e-
small  slender  herbe  like  grasse,  the  stalke  full  of  Seed,
not  inclosed  with  any  huske  ;  the  same  I  thinke  which
the  Turkes  call  Cuscus,  the  Portugals  Yfunde.

The  Palmito  Tree  is  strait,  high,  knottie  (only  in  the  Palmito  Tree.
rinde) the  wood  of  a soft substance without  boughes,
except  in  the  top,  those  also  seeming  rather  Reeds  then
boughes, being  all  pithie  within, inclosed with  a hard

7

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1607.

rinde  :  the  leafe  long  and  slender  in  manner  of  Sword
grasse,  or  the  flagge  of  Calamus  :  the  boughes  are  from
the  bodie  of  the  Tree  some  yard  or  better  in  length,
beset  on  both  sides  with  sharpe  and  strong  prickles,
standing  like  the  teeth  of  a  Saw,  but  longer.  It  beareth
a  small  fruit  like  to  an  Indian  Nut,  as  bigge  as  a  Chesnut,
inclosed  in  a  hard  shell,  and  streaked  with  threeds  on
the  out-sides,  contayning  a  kernell  of  a  hard  hornie
substance  without  taste.  The  people  eate  them  rosted,
and  call  the  Tree  Tobell,  and  the  fruit  Bell.  The
manner  of  extracting  the  Wine  is  this  :  they  cut  off
one  of  the  branches  within  some  spanne  of  the  head,
a  little  opening  the  place  by  incision,  and  thereto  make
fast  the  mouth  of  a  guord,  which  in  foure  and  twentie
houres  will  be  filled  with  a  cleere  whitish  water,  distilling
from  the  Tree  of  good  rellish  and  strong,  wherewith  the
people  will  be  drunke.

There  grow  likewise  within  the  Bayes  great  store  of

O^ter  Trees.  Oysters  on  Trees,  resembling  Willowes  in  forme,  but
the  leafe  broad  and  of  thicknesse  like  Leather,  bearing
small  knops  like  those  of  the  Cypresse.  From  this
Tree  hang  downe  many  branches,  (each  about  the  bignesse
of  a  good  walking  sticke)  into  the  water,  smooth,  lithe,
pithy  within,  over-flowne  with  the  tyde,  and  hanging
as  thicke  of  Oysters  as  they  can  sticke  together,  being
the  only  fruit  the  Tree  beareth,  begotten  thereof,  as  it
seemeth,  by  the  Salt-water.

Fishes.  Fishes they  have many of  ordinary kind,  and  some

which  seemed  to  us  extraordinarie  :  Mullets,  Raies,
Thorne-backes,  Old-wives  with  beetle  Browes,  Fishes
like  to  Pikes,  Gar-fishes,  Cavallios  (like  Mackerell)  Sword-
fishes  with  snowts  a  yard  long,  toothed  on  both  sides
like  the  teeth  of  a  Saw,  Sharkes,  Dog-fishes  ;  Sharkers,
like  a  Sharke,  but  having  a  snowt  flat  and  broad  like
a  Shovell ;  Shoomakers,  having  on  each  side  the  mouth
pendants  like  Barbels,  and  grunting  like  Hogges,  &c.
We  catched  in  an  houre  sixe  thousand  of  a  kind,  like
Bleakes.

8

WILLIAM FINCH  a.d.

1607.

Of  Fowles  are  Pellicans,  white,  as  bigge  as  Swannes,  Fowles.
with  a  large  and  long  bill ;  Hearnes,  Curlews,  Boobies,
Oxe-eyes,  with  divers  strange  kindes  of  water-fowles.
On  Land  are  great  numbers  of  gray  Parrets,  as  also  store
of  Guinny  Hennes,  which  are  very  hurtfull  to  their  Rice.
This  is  a  beautifull  Fowle,  about  the  bignesse  of  a  Phesant,
with  parti-coloured  feathers.  I  saw  also  among  the
Negros  many  Porcupine  Quils,  with  other  strange  Fowles
in  the  Woods,  whereof  we  knew  not  the  names.
There  are  store  of  Monkeyes  leaping  to  and  fro  the
Trees,  Lions,  Tygres,  Ounces  on  the  Mountaines  ;  heere  Wild  beasts.
are  Elephants  but  no  store  ;  wee  saw  but  three,  for  they
are  further  within  Land.  The  Negros  told  us  of  a
strange  beast  (which  the  Interpreter  called  a  Carbuncle)  Carbuncle,  a
oft  seene,  yet  only  by  night,  having  a  stone  in  his  fore-  -ias  s  mn£e>
head,  incredibly  shining  and  giving  him  light  to  feed,
attentive  to  the  least  noyse,  which  he  no  sooner  heareth,
but  he  presently  covereth  the  same  with  a  filme  or  skinne,
given  him  as  a  naturall  covering,  that  his  splendor  betray
him  not.  The  Commodities  here  are  few,  but  are  further
up,  viz.  Gold  and  Elephants  teeth,  which  at  certaine
times  of  the  yeare,  the  Portugals  get  of  them  for  Rice,
Salt,  Beads,  Bels,  Garlicke,  French  Bottles,  Copper
Kettles ;  low-prized  Knives,  Hats,  Linnen  checkered
like  Barbers  Aprons,  Lattin  Basons,  edge-tooles,  Iron
barres,  and  sundry  specious  trifles,  but  for  your  Toyes
they  will  not  give  Gold  in  this  place  but  Victuals.

This  diligent  Observer  hath  taken  liked  panes  touching
Soldania, but  because  wee touch  there often, and  have  [I-  iv-  41?-]
alreadie  given  many  Relations,  we  will  double  the  Cape,
and  take  a  little  view  with  him  of  Cape  Saint  Augustine.

ft. II.

A.D.
1607.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

S.  Augustine.

§•  it

Of  Saint  Augustine  and  Socotora,  like  Observa-
tions, with  other  notes  taken  out  of  his
Journall.

His  place  is  rather  a  Bay  then  Cape  or  Point,  not
having  any  land,  much  more  bearing  out  then
the  rest,  it  lyeth  in  twentie  three  degrees,  thirtie
eight  minutes  of  South  latitude,  hath  variation  fifteene
degrees  fortie  minutes,  having  on  either  side  breaches,
which  make  it  easie  to  be  discerned,  lying  some  league
from  the  Mayne  West  South-west.  Right  from  the  Bay
is  deepe  water  to  Sea-ward,  but  when you  are entred,

Shehy ground,  the  ground  is  so  shelvie,  that  you  shall  have  one  Anchor
aground  on  the  North  in  twentie  two,  and  your  other
in  above  sixtie  fathomes,  and  in  some  places  more  inward,
not  two  foot  at  a  low  water,  and  over  that,  deepe  againe
neere  the  shore,  yet  all  soft  Ozie  ground.  The  land
within  a  mile  or  two  is  high,  stonie,  barren,  full  of  small

Two  rivers.  Woods.  In  the  bottome  of  the  Bay  runne  two  Rivers,
the  Land  about  them  sunken,  sandie  Land  :  forth  these
Rivers,  came  so  strong  a  fresh,  that  the  floud  never  stils
them,  although  it  floweth  at  least  two  fathomes,  where-
with the  water  is  thicke  and  muddie.  Great  store  of
Canes  come  downe,  of  which  wee  had  seene  some  store,
twentie  or  thirtie  leagues  off  at  Sea. It  lyeth  open  to

The  fishes.  a  North-west  wind,  we  caught  heere  Smelts  of  a  foot
long,  and  Shrimps  of  ten  inches.  The  best  fishing  is  on
the  sandie  shoare  of  the  low  Land,  neere  which  the
Natives  catch  many  with  strong  Nets.  A  ledge  of
Rockes  trending  alongst,  breakes  off  the  force  of  the
Sea.  Within  the  Woods,  we  found  on  the  low  Land,
infinite  numbers  of  water  Melons,  which  yeelded  good
refreshing  :  the  Rivers  nothing,  save  hurt  to  one  by  an
Allegator,  the  water  not  also  very  good,  but  wooding
plentie.

The  place  seemeth  not  very  populous. We  saw  not

10

ness.

WILLIAM FINCH  ad.

1607.
at  any  time  above  twentie  together  :  the  men  are  comely,  The  people.
lustie,  tall  and  wel-set,  of  a  tawnie  colour,  wearing  no  /f  '  *
apparel,  but  a  Girdle  made  of  rindes  of  Trees  to  cover
their  privities  :  the  haire  on  their  beards  blacke,  and
reasonable  long  ;  on  their  heads  likewise,  which  they
pleate  and  frizzle  very  curiously,  neither  have  they  bad
smels  on  their  bodies.  Behind  on  their  Girdles  are  many
Trinkets,  fastned  with  Allegators  teeth,  some  hollow  to
carrie  Tallow  to  keepe  their  Darts  bright,  which  are  their
chiefe  Weapons  (of  which  each  carries  a  small  bundle)  Weapons.
and  a  faire  Lance  artificially  headed  with  Iron,  and  kept
as  bright  as  Silver.  Their  Darts  are  made  dangerously
with  holes  on  each  side  backe-ward.  They  carry  about
them  certaine  Knives,  like  Butchers  Knives,  artificially
made.  They  therefore  regard  no  Iron,  nor  will  barter
for  any  thing  but  Silver,  for  which  we  bought  a  sheepe
for  twelve  pence,  a  Cow  for  three  shillings  and  sixe
pence,  they  asked  Beads  into  the  bargaine,  for  which
yet  alone  they  would  give  nothing,  save  a  little  Milke
brought  downe  in  gourds,  excellent  sweet  and  good.

Their  Cattel  have  great  bunches  on  their  fore  shoulders,  Their  cattell.
like  a  Sugar-loafe  in fashion and quantitie,  which  is  a
grislie  substance,  and  good  meat ;  their  beefe  not  loose,
like  that  of  Soldania,  but  fast  and  good,  little  differing
from  English  ;  as  also  their  sheep,  which  have  tayles  weigh-
ing twenty  eight  pounds  a  piece,  therefore  usually  cut  off
from  the  Ewes,  lest  it  should  hinder  their  breeding. In
the  woods  neere  about  the  River,  is  great  store  of  beasts,  Strange  beasts.
as  big  as  Munkies,  ash-coloured,  with  a  small  head,  long  .{f'i  eein§,
taile  like  a  Fox,  garled  with  white  and  blacke,  the  furre  ca/s  -lt  t^e
very  fine. Wee  killed  some  with  Peeces,  not  being  able  Beautiful
to  take  them  alive. There  are  Bats  as  big  bodied  almost  beast.
as  Conies,  headed like  a  Foxe,  with a  hairie furre  in ; &'
other  things  like Bats. We killed one, whose wings
extended  an  ell  in  length  :  their  cry  is  shrill  and  loud.
Here  are  Hemes  plentie,  white,  blacke,  blew,  and  divers  Fozoles.
mixed  colours  ;  many  bastard  Hawkes  :  birds  of  infinite
varietie  of  colour,  having  for  the most part crests on

11

A.D.

1607.

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

Chamelions,
tkey  eat  flies

Spiders  silke
weavers.

their  heads,  like  Peacocks.  There  are  store  of  Lizards
and  Chamelions,  which  agree  to  Plinies  description  ;  onely
it  is  airie,  that  they  live  of  aire  without  other  meat  :  for
having  kept  one  aboord  but  a  day,  we  might  perceive
him  to  hunt  for  flies,  in  a  very  strange  manner.  Having
espied  her  setting,  he  suddenly  shootes  a  thing  forth
of  his  mouth  (perhaps  his  tongue)  lothsome  to  behold,
the  fashion  almost  like  a  Bird-bolt,  wherewith  he  takes
and  eates  them,  with  such  speed,  that  a  man  can  scarsly
discerne  what  he  doth  ;  even  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eie.
In  the  woods  on  the  hils  are  many  great  Spiders,  which
spin  their  webs  from  tree  to  tree,  it  being  very  excellent
strong  silke  of  a  yellow  colour,  as  if  it  were  died  by
art.  I  found  also  here  great  Wormes,  in  manner  of  our
Grubs,  with  many  legges,  which  are  enclosed  within  a
double  cod  of  white  silke,  hanging  on  the  trees.

There  groweth  great  store  of  herbe  Aloes, and  also
Tamerind  trees  by  the  waters  side. Here  was  also  store

Strange  trees,  of  a  very  strange  Plant,  which  I  deeme  a  wild  Coco-nut
seldome  growing  to  the  height  of  a  tree,  of  a  shrubby
nature,  with  many  long  prickled  stalkes,  of  some  two
yards  long.  At  the  ende  of  each  foot-stalke,  standeth  a
leafe  about  the  bignesse  of  a  great  Cabbage  leafe,  snipt
round  halfe  the  leafe,  like  sword  grasse. From  the  tops

[I.  iv.  418.]  thereof  amongst  the  leaves,  come  forth  many  woodie
branches,  as  thicke  set  commonly  with  fruit  as  they  can
stand,  one  by  another  (I  have  seen  fortie  together  cluster-
ing on  one  branch)  about  the  bignesse  of  a  great
Katherine  peare,  and  like  it  in  colour  being  ripe,  at  the
first  greenish,  fashioned  almost  like  a  sheepes  bell,  with  a
rinde  bearing  forth  neere  the  head,  flat  at  the  top,  and
smooth  ;  within  which  rinde  is  contained  a  hard  sub-
stance, almost  like  the  Coco-nut-shell,  in  which  is  included
a  round  white  kernell  of  a  hard  gristly  substance,  yet  to  be
eaten  :  and  within  that  (for  it  is  hollow)  is  about  a  spoone-
full  of  pleasant  sweet  water  and  coole,  like  milke,  or
that  rather  of  the  Coco-nut.

Here  groweth  also  another as big as a Peare tree

12

WILLIAM FINCH  a.d.

1607.

thicke  set  with  boughes  and  leaves,  like  those  of  the
Bay-tree,  bearing  a  great  foot-ball  fruit  (such  is  the  round
forme)  sticking  to  a  strong  stalke,  divided  by  certaine
seames  into  foure  quarters.  The  rind  of  it  Seeing  cut
greene,  yeelds  a  clammie  substance,  savouring  like  Tur-
pentine. The  rind  is  very  thicke,  with  which  I  found
divers  parcels  packed  together,  almost  like  the  substance
that  groweth  on  trees,  but  harder,  rather  like  a  piece  of
browne  woody  Agarike,  being  thirteene  in  number,
couched  neatly  together,  within  each  of  which  is  con-
tained another  great  kernell  of  a  darkish  white  colour,
hard,  bitter,  and  unpleasant  of  tast.

In Socotora, the Guzerats and English build  them Socotora.
houses  for the time of  their  stay, sleight  with stones
(the whole Hand  seemeth nothing else) and pieces  of
wood laid overthwart, covered with Reed and Date
branches  to  keepe  out  the  Sunne,  for  raine  in  that  time
they  feare  not. About the head of  the River, and  a
mile  further  into  the  land,  is  a  pleasant  Valley  replenished
with  Date-trees. On  the East side is Dibnee,  a  little  Dibnee.
Towne,  little  inhabited,  except  in  their  harvest  of  Dates.
In  this  Valley  the  wind  bloweth with such  violence  in  Strange  winds.
June  and  July,  that  it  is  strange  ;  yet  within  a  flight  shot
off  towards  the  Town  of  Delisha,  over  against  the  road,
you  shal  not  have  a  breath  of  wind. About  an  hundred
yeers  since, this  Hand was  conquered by the King  of  The  KinS  °f
Caixem  (or  Cushem,  as  the  Arabs  pronounce  it)  a  King f! t-m  1"^
of  no  great  force,  able  to  make  two  or  three  thousand  here  foure
souldiors  : he  hath  this,  and  the  two  Irmanas,  and  Abba  lies.
del  curia subject to him. The two Irmanas, or two  Irmanas  two.
Brethren,  are  stonie,  small,  barren, having nothing  but .
Turtles  or  Tortoises,  not inhabited. Abba  de  la  curia  socotora.
is  large,  hath  store  of  Goates,  and  some  fresh  water,  not
above  three or foure inhabitants, as we were  certified.
The  Kings  sonne Amor Benzaid resideth  at Socotora,
which  he  ruleth  during  his  fathers  pleasure. They  have
trade  to  the  lies  of  Comoro,  and  to  Melinde,  for  which
he  hath  heere  two  good  Frigats, wherewith they  fetch

13

A.D.

1607.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  Arabs
there.

Their  armes.

Persons.

Apparell.

Rice  and  Melo  from  the  maine,  which  is  their  chiefe
food.

The  Arabians  here  are  in  manner  slaves  to  the  Snakee
or  Prince,  are  all  souldiours,  and  attend  on  him  when  he
commands  ;  some  of  them  are  shot.  Moreover,  every  of
them  weares  a  kind  of  wood-knife,  or  crooked  dagger
on  their  left  side,  without  which  they  dare  not  bee  seene
abroad.  They  have  also  thin,  broad,  painted  Targets.
Their  dagger  handles  and  chapes,  the  better  sort  set
forth  with  Silver,  the  other  with  Red  Latten.  They  are
tawney,  industrious,  civill  in  gesture  :  the  women  are
some  of  them  reasonable  white,  much  like  to  a  Sun-
burnned  countrey  maid  in  England.  The  men  are  of
stature  like  ours,  well  proportioned  in  their  limmes,  wear-
ing their  haire  most  of  them  long,  binding  a  cloth  or
Turbant  about  the  same  like  the  Turkes,  and  a  cloath
wrapped  about  their  middles,  which  hangeth  downe  to
their  knees  ;  not  wearing  usually  other  apparell,  except
sometimes  a  paire  of  sandals  on  their  feet,  fastened  with
thongs  ;  carrying  their  sword  naked  on  their  shoulders,
or  hanging  from  the  shoulder  in  the  sheath  by  a  strap,
or  else  on  their  arme  ;  and  thus  they  march  up  and
downe.  They  love  Tobacco,  but  are  loth  to  give  any
thing  for  it.

Divers  of  them  fling  a  Pintado  or  other  cloth  in
manner  of  an  Irish  mantle  over  their  shoulders,  and
others  make  them  shirts  and  surplesses  of  white  Calico  :
some  weare  a  paire  of  linnen  breeches  under,  like  the
Their  women.  Guzerates.  But  their  women  goe  altogether  in  these
smockes  hanging  downe  to  the  ground,  of  red,  blew,  or
for  the  most  part  of  a  light  black  colour,  being  died
Calicoes  :  and  over  their  heads  they  put  a  cloth,  with
which  (when  they  lust)  they  hide  their  faces,  making  very
dainty  to  be  seene,  yet  are  scarsly  honest.  And  though
the  men  be  very  poore,  and  have  but  to  defend  necessitie,
yet  their  women  (whereof  some  keepe  foure,  five,  or  sixe,
as  many  as  they  are  able)  are  so  laden  with  Silver,
and  some  also  with  some  Gold,  that  I  have  seene  one

Ga/antry.

WILLIAM FINCH  a.d.

1607.

not  of  the  best,  which hath had  in each eare  at  least
a  dozen  of  great  Silver  rings,  almost  like  Curtaine  rings,
with  as  many  smaller  hanging  in  them  : two  Carkanets
or  chaines  of  silver  about her necke,  and  one  of  Gold
bosses  ;  about  her  wrists,  tenne  or  twelve  Manillias  of
Silver,  each  as  big  as  ones  little  finger,  but  hollow,  one
about  another,  on one  arme  :  almost  every  finger  laden
with  rings,  and  the  small  of  her legs  with  silver  rings
like  horselockes. And  thus  adorned,  they  cannot  stirre,
but  they  make  a  noise  like  Morris-dauncers. They  are
kept  closely  by  their  jealous  husbands. They  delight  in
Christall,  Amber, or Currall beads, but have little  to
buy  them,  but will  either  beg  them,  or  make  a  swap
with  you  in  private. The  young  children  (except  of  a  Their
few  of  better  sort)  go  naked  till  they  come  to  some  age.  cht^ren-
They  are  married  at  tenne,  or  twelve  yeares  olde. They
call  themselves Musselmen,  that  is,  Catholikes,  or  true
beleevers,  according  to  their  false  faithlesse  faith  of  Maho-
met : yea  they alledge this reason  for themselves  (let
Jesuite-Catholikes acknowledge their owne) the great  Popish  argu-
multitude  of  them,  and  the  small  number  of  us,  all  the  ?*nt.  °f  fa'lttl-
world,  say  they,  being  of  our  Religion,  and  but  a  handfull  L  •  1V-  4  9-J
of  yours. They  eate  their meat on a Mat spread  on  Their  diet.
the  ground,  but neither  use  Spoones  nor  Knives  (hands
are  the  elder)  in  unmannerly  manner :  they  drinke  usually
water,  yet  in  secret  can be  content  to be drunke with
wine. They make  in  the  time  of  yeare  some  wine of
Dates,  pleasant  and  strong.

Thus  much  for  the  Conquerours.  They  call  the  con-  The  Native
quered  Caffars  (misbeleevers,  or  if  you  will  heretikes)  and  Socotorans-
subject  them  to  great  slavery,  insomuch  that  some  re-
maine  in  the  Mountaines,  living  in  a  wild  liberty  like
beasts,  the  other  not  suffered  to  have  any  weapons.
They  are  well  shaped,  more  swart  then  the  Arabs,  weare
nothing  on  their  heads,  weare  their  haire  long,  I  suppose
never  cut,  staring  as  if  they  were  frighted.  About  their
middles  they  weare  a  cloath  wrapped  about  them,  made  of
Goats  haire,  or  course  wooll,  woven by  themselves, on

15

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1607.

their  feet  slight  sandals. Their  women  goe  all  in  smocks

of  coloured  Calico,  or  course  cloth  hanging  to  the  ground;

Gallant  on  their  heads  usually  nothing :  in  imitation  of  the  Arabs,

fashions.  have  ]y[aniilias  0f  earth  painted  or  of  yron,  about  their

armes  and  legs,  beads  in  stead  of  Karkanets,  painting  their

faces  with  yellow  and  blacke  spots,  loathsome  to  behold.

Religion  and por  Religion,  they  are  meere  Heathen  all  of  them,  as  the

ije,  most Arabians  certified  us,  observing  no  rites  of  Marriage,  but

the  Arabs use  their  women  in  common. Their  naturall  language  is

their  enemies much  different  from  the  Arabique, which  yet  the  most

be  to  bee learne. They  live  very  miserably,  and  many  of  them  are

credited.  famished  with  hunger. Flesh  they  are  not  permitted  to

kill,  so  that  they  are  forced  to  live  of  fish  which  they  take

at  Sea,  and  by  their  share  of  Dates,  not  having  wherewith

to  buy  Rice,  except  with  the  use  of  their  womens  bodies

to  the  Guzerates,  while  they  remaine  there. Such  as  have

the  keeping  of  the  Cattell, maintaine themselves with

the  milke.

Their  mer-  \  qOV\c\  learne  of  no  Merchandise  the  Hand  yeeldeth,

but  Aloes,  Sanguis  Draconis,  and  Dates,  and  as  they  say,

on  the  shoare  of  Aba  del  curia,  blacke  Ambergreese. Of

Aloes, I suppose they  could  make yearely  more  then

Christendome  can spend, the herbe growing in great

Aloes  or  sem-  abundance, being no other  then  Semper  vivum,  in  all

pe?-vwum,t  e  fam„s  agreeing  to  that  description  of  Dioscorides,  in  seed,

time  and  000  r  *  *

making  stalke,  &c. It  is  yet  all  of  a  red  pricklie  sort,  and  much

thereof.  chamfered  in  the  leaves,  so  full  of  a  rosinrjuyce,  that  it  is

ready  to  breake  with  it. The  chiefe  time  to  make  it,  is

when  the  winds  blowe  Northerly,  that  is,  about  September,

and  that  after  the  fall  of  some  raine,  which  being  then

gathered,  they  cut  in  small  pieces,  and  cast  into  a  pit  made

in  the  ground,  well  cleansed  from  filth  and  paved :  there

it  lieth  to  ferment  in  the  heat  of  the  Sunne,  whereby  it

A  hundred  13  floweth  forth. Thence  they  take  and  put  it  in  skinnes,

three,  or  a which  they  hang  up  in  the  wind  to  dry,  where  it  becom-

^^d^  meth  hard"  They  S°ld  US  f°r  twentie  Rials  a  Quintall>
five  ounces  and  wnicn  *s  an  hundred  and  three  pound  English:  but  we
a  halfe.  were  after  told,  that  they  sold  to  others  for  twelve,  which

16

WILLIAM FINCH  a.d.

1607.
considering the abundance and easie making, may be
credible. Their  Date  trees  beare  fruit  twice  a  yeare  ;  one  Dates  two
harvest  was  in  July  whiles  we  were  there. It  is  a  princi-  harvests-
pall  part  of  their  sustenance,  pleasant  in  tast :  and  when
they  are  through-ripe, are  laid  on  a heap  upon a  skin
lying sloping, whence distilleth a liquor, received in
earthen  pots  placed  in  the  earth,  and  is  their  Date-wine, WineofDates.
reserved  for  drinke,  wherewith  they  will  also  be  drunke.
Those dates beeing thus drained, they take  out their
stones,  and  pack  them  hard  into  a  skinne,  which  will  so
keepe  long. Another meanes  to preserve them,  is  by
cutting  before  they  are  through  ripe,  and  taking  out  their
stone,  to  dry  them  :  these  are  the  best  of  all,  and  eate
as  if  they  were  canded : whole  they  will  not  keepe. In
harvest  time  in  every  Valley  where  these  trees  grow,  the  Harvest  and
King  hath  a  Deputy  which  seeth  all  gathered,  and  brought  division.
to  a  certaine  place  (none  daring  to  touch  a  Date  upon
paine of  death without order, or severe punishment)
where  he  divideth  them  in  three  equall  parts ;  one  for  the
King,  one  for  the  Arabs,  and  the  third  for  the  Caffars :
which  are  after  distributed  severally,  but  not  alike  to  each.

This  Hand  hath  store  of  Civet  cats,  which  the  CafFars  Civit  Cats.
take  in  the  Mountaines  with  traps,  and  sell  them  for
twelve  pence  a  piece  to  such  as  will  buy  them.  Flesh  is
deare,  tenne  Rials  of  eight  a  Cow,  one  Goat,  or  two
sheepe  for  a  Rial  of  eight ;  their  cattell  good  and  fast  flesh,  Cattell  and
like  English  beefe :  their  Goats  large  and  good  flesh,  their  vlctmls-
sheep  small,  like  our  English  sheepe,  bearing  course
wooll :  of  Goats  and  Sheep  they  have  great  abundance.
They  make  very  good  butter,  but  it  is  always  soft  like
Creame,  at  foure  pence  or  sixe  pence  a  pound,  Goats
milke  at  three  pence  a  quart,  store  of  Hennes,  but  five  for
a  Riall  of  eight,  or  twelve  pence  a  piece.  In  the  whole
Hand  are  not  above  one  or  two  Horses,  very  small  of  the
Arabian  breed,  and  some  Camels.  At  Delisha  they  take
much  good  fish,  Lobsters  and  others.  On  the  Strand
groweth  cotton  Plants,  but  few  :  there  groweth  also
amongst  the  stones  a  shrubby  Plant,  with  thicke,  round,
iv  17  B

A.D.

1607.

Eshac  a  kind
of  Capers.

Coho.

Other  notes
and  remem-
brances.

[I.  iv.  420.]
AhugeWhale.

Barrennesse.

A strange tree.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

greene  leaves,  as  big  as  a  shilling,  with  a  fruit  like  Capers
(of  which  it  is  a  kind)  called  Eshac,  eaten  in  Sallets.
Orenges  there  are  few  and  deare,  exceeding  sweet  Basil  :
and  on  the  shoare  many  faire  shels  are  found,  with  cuttle
bones,  and  peerle  Oystershels,  which  the  people  affirme  to
drive  thither  :  for  there  are  none  found,  yet  shels  abundant.

They  are  beggers,  buy  what  they  can,  beg  what  they
may,  yet  give  faire  usage.  Their  best  intertainement  is  a
China  dish  of  Coho,  a  blacke  bitterish  drinke,  made  of  a
berry  like  a  Bay  berry,  brought  from  Mecca,  supped  off
hot,  good  for  the  head  and  stomacke.  And  thus  much
for  his  discourses  of  these  places,  to  which  I  thought  good
to  adde  these  notes  taken  out  of  his  Journall.

November  the  twenty  ninth,  1607.  in  thirty  foure
degrees,  we  saw  a  monstrous  overgrowne  Whale  comming
up  close  under  our  sterne,  and  spouting  water  in  great
quantitie ;  having  much  trash  growne  about  his  head
which  we  judged  to  be  Limpets,  and  other  Shel-fish.  At
his  going  downe  he  turned  up  his  taile,  which  we  deemed
neere  as  broad  as  our  after  Deck,  estimating  him  to  be  at
the  least  one  hundred  tunnes  in  weight.

In  Socotora  at  our  first  landing,  the  people  having
received  before  injurious  dealings  from  the  Portugals,
(which,  they  said,  had  carried  some  of  them  away)  were
all  fledde  from  us  for  feare  to  the  Mountaines.  Their
Towne  which  they  had  left  is  built  of  stone  houses
covered  with  Rafts  and  Palme-branches,  with  artificiall
doores  and  woodden  lockes.  Neere  the  Sea  side  stands
their  Church  enclosed  with  a  wall  in  manner  of  a  Church-
yard ;  within  it  a  couple  of  Crosses  and  an  Altar,  with
Frankinsence,  Wood  and  Gumme.  They  said  (when  we
came  to  speech)  that  this  was  not  Socotora  but  Abba
del  Curia,  which  wee  after  found  false,  wee  walked  up
two  or  three  mile,  not  seeing  so  much  as  a  sprig  of
greene  grasse,  but  many  Date  trees,  and  one  other  tree
very  strange,  about  the  height  of  a  man,  or  little  better,
great  at  the  roote,  and  lesse  and  lesse  toward  the  top
where  it  ended  almost  piked ; the  trunke  smooth,  not

18

WILLIAM FINCH  a.d.

1608.

covered  with  barke,  casting  forth  in  the  top  some  branches

of  a  Cubite  long  void  of  leaves,  bringing  forth  Reddish

flowres,  which  after  change into  a fruit  first  greene,  in

forme  and  bignesse  not  unlike  to  the  Date :  within  which

is  contayned  many  small  whitish  kernels,  bitter,  as  are  also

the  branches,  full  of  raisinous  substance. Whether  this

be  the  Mirrhe  I  leave  to  better  judgements. They  also  *Qft^se

saw  another  *  Church  with  a  Crosse  on  the  top  of  it. churches  and

of  this  whole
&. HI.  Hand, See  John

d?  Castro.  For

Occurents  in  India  touching  the  English,  Dutch,  they  were  in
Portugals,  and the Mogols dealing with the  **?**?'

English.  which  (as  all

He  eight  and  twentieth  of  August,  1608.  Captaine  ^^jL

Hawkins  with  the  Merchants  and  certaine  others  ty  Mahome-

landed  at  Surat,  where  the  Captaine  was  received  tans  call

in  a  Coach,  and carryed  before  the  Dawne. Wee  had  Caffars:  but

poore  lodging  alloted  us,  the  Porters  lodge  of  the  Cus- . J1?  ,

tome house : whither the next morning came the  eas-ier  pray  t0

Customers  who  searched  &  tumbled  our  Trunkes  to  our  these  Arabs.

great  dislike,  which  had  yet  brought  ashore  only  neces-  Surat.

saries. We  were  invited  to  Dinner  to  a  Merchant  where  Hee  never  cats

wee  had  great  cheere  :  but  in  the  midst  of  our  Banquet  ?"  H*™*™**
0 r .  .  111  1 Lord  Lmbas-

sowre sawce, tor  hee  was the  man that had  sustayned  saa>or  ^ut  c.

almost  all the  losse  in  a  ship  that  Sir  Edward  Michel-  Hazvkins.  For

borne  tooke. The  Captaine  also  of  that  ship  dined  with  he->  Master

us. Which  when  it  was there told us, the Captaine  C^^f

answered that  hee  never heard  of  such a matter, and  war^s  ^  no

rather  judged  it  done  by  Flemmings : but  they  said,  that  such  Commis-

they  knew  certainely  that  they  were  English,  deploring  "on,  but  only

their  hard  fortunes,  and  affirming  that  there  were  Theeves  Liters  from

in  all  Countries : nor  would  they impute that fault  to  a^  0^gsn  '

honest  Merchants. This speech somewhat  revived us.  from  the  Com-

The day  after,  Mede  Colee the Captaine  of  that ship  pa«y,  &.

aforesaid  invited  us  to  Supper.  Thf.  dan&er

1  l  which  men  oj

War  occasion  to  their  Countrimen,  honest  Merchants,  especially  amongst  remote  and  Ethnike

people,  I  adde  not  the  scandall  of  their  Religion  and  Countrey.

J9

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1608.

The  second  of  October,  wee  imbarqued  our  goods  and
provision,  gave  Shek  Abdelreheime  a  Present,  and  got
dispatch  to  depart :  the  Customers  denying  leave,  till  they
had  searched  the  ship  whether  she  had  discharged  all  her
goods,  to  ship  any  new;  but  meeting  with  Frigats  they
supposing  them  Malabars,  durst  not  adventure  their  own
Portugall  River.  These  Frigats  were  Portugals,  which  desired  one
XTt'/P  ^  to  come  talke  with  them,  and  Master  Bucke  rashly  doing
it,  they  detayned  him,  and  after  (I  and  Nicholas  Ufflet
being  ashoare)  Master  Marlow  and  the  rest  began ne  to
flee ;  the  Cockson  would  have  fought,  which  he  would
not  permit,  but  running  a  ground  through  ignorance
of  the  Channell,  they  were  taken  going  on  the  sandie
Hand  by  Portugall  treacherie,  and  the  fault  of  some  of
themselves,  nineteene  with  Master  Bucke ;  but  the  Ginne
put  off  the  Pinnace,  and  notwithstanding  the  Portugall
Bullets,  rowed  her  to  Surat.  Foure  escaped  by  swimming
and  got  that  night  to  Surat,  besides  Nicholas  Ufflet  and
my  selfe,  neere  twentie  miles  from  the  place.  Yet  had  we
resisted,  we  wanted  shot,  and  in  number,  &  armour  they
very  much  exceeded  us.  The  fourth,  the  Captaine  of
the  Frigats  sent  a  reviling  Letter  to  the  Governour  of
the  Towne,  calling  us  Lutherans  and  Theeves,  and  said
we  were  Flemmings  and  not  English  ;  charging  him  (on
continuance  of  their  friendship)  to  send  aboord  the  Cap-
taine with  the  rest  of  us  :  which  Abdelreheime  not  only
denied,  but  in  the  Mogols  name  commanded  him  to
render  the  goods  and  men.

The  fifth,  came  a  Captaine  of  one  of  the  Frigats  which
used  peremptorie  words,  and  before  the  Governour  stood
upon  it  that  the  King  of  Spaine  was  Lord  of  those  Seas,
and  that  they  had  in  Commission  from  him  to  take  all
that  came  in  those  parts  without  his  Passe.

The  thirteenth,  the  Governour  called  all  the  chiefe
Merchants  of  the  Towne  upon  their  conscience  to  value
our  cloth  (before  carryed  to  his  house)  which  they  did  at
a  farre  under  rate,  the  Governour  affirming  that  hee  must
and  would  have  it,  the  Captaine  denying  his  consent.

20

WILLIAM FINCH  ad.

1608.

On  the  sixteenth,  we  were  forced  to  accept  for  some  Injustice
of  our cloth in  their hands, promise of  a  little  more,  "°*e«-
and  were  permitted  to  carrie  away  the  rest : causing  us  to
leave  fiftie  pieces,  and  fourteene  Devonshire  Kersies  for  [I.  iv.  421.]
the King, with nine  and twentie other Kersies ; and
fifteen e  clothes  for  Shek  Ferred,  keeping also  the foure
clothes which wee reserved for  Presents  for  the King.
Wee  were  otherwise molested by  a  contention betwixt
Shek  Ferred  and  Mocrow  Bowcan  (or  Mocreb  Can)  about
the Custome-house,  that  wee  could not  get  our goods
from thence. Wee heard  that  the Portugals sold our
goods  for  halfe  that  they  cost : Our  men  were sent  to
Goa.

The  fifteenth  of  December,  came  Mo.  Bowcan  with  a
Jesuite  Padre  Peniero ;  to  this  our  Captaine  shewed  kind-  Peniero  the
nesse  for  hope  of  his  men ;  to  the  other  he  gave  Presents:  JesUi/e_-
both  dealt  treacherously  in  requitall,  the  Jesuite  (as  it  was  jjumanitie
reported  by  Mo.  Bowcan  himselfe)  offering  a  Jewell  which  D'winitie  and
he  said  was  worth  two  hundred  thousand  Rials  to  betray  Preaching.
us. This  day came to  us  R.  Carelesse  an  Englishman,  R-  Carelesse
who  had  long;  lived  amongst  the  Portugals,  from  whom  had  long  lived

with  the  Pof-

hee now fledde for feare of  punishment for carrying  t js
necessaries  to  the  Dutch  at  Muselpatan,  desiring  to  bee
entertayned,  which  we  did  with  much  circumspection.

The  seven and twentieth, Mo. Bowcan  desired  great  M.  Bowcans
abatements  upon  our  cloth,  or  else  hee  would  returne  it,  tnJustlce-
and (will wee nill wee) abated two thousand seven
hundred  and  fiftie  Mamudies,  before  hee  would  give  us
licence  to  fetch  up  the  rest  of  our  goods  to  make  sales.
My  selfe  was  very  ill  of  the  bloudy  Fluxe  (whereof  Master
Dorchester dyed)  of  which that Englishman  Carelesse,
(next  under  God)  recovered  me. I  learned  of  him  many Warn  twixt
matters,  as  namely  of  the  great  spoile  done  the  last  yeere  ^utc'1  a™
to the  Portugals  by  the  Hollanders, who lying before  j^a/fccaS '
Malacca  with sixteene ships, inclosing  the  Towne  with
helpe  of  other  Kings  by  Sea  and  Land ;  newes  was  carryed
to  the  Vice-Roy, (then  before Achen  accompanied  with
all  the  Gallants  of  India)  having with  him  a  very  great

21

A.D.
l6o8.

Andr.
Hurtado.

Port,  defeated

*  At  the  time
when  this  was
written,  which
is  to  be

observed  in  all
this  Journall.
Malabars
annoy  the  Port.
New  Fleet
dispersed.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Fleet  of  Ships,  Gallies  and  Frigats,  and  foure  thou-
sand Souldiers,  being  commanded  by  the  King  to  take
Achen,  and  there  to  build  a  Castle  and  appoint  an  Al-
phandira ;  and  thence  to  goe  and  spoile  Jor  and  chastise
the  Moluccas  for  giving  the  Hollanders  traffique,  being
minded  to  roote  out  the  Holland  name  in  those  parts,
for  which  purpose  came  two  thousand  Castilians  from  the
Manillas.

Andrew  Hurtado  then  governed  within  Malacca,  and
sent  word  of  their  present  distresse,  upon  which  the  Vice-
Roy  weighed  from  Achen  (which  otherwise  had  beene
spoyled)  whereof  the  Dutch  Generall  advertised,  got  his
men  and  Artillery  a-boord,  and  went  forth  to  meete  him ;
where  after  a  long  and  bloudie  fight,  with  much  losse
on  both  sides,  the  Dutch  departed,  enforced  to  stop  the
leakes  of  their  Admirall,  likely  otherwise  to  perish.  The
Portugals  let  slip  this  opportunitie,  and  fell  to  merriments
and  bragges  of  their  Victorie,  not  looking  any  more  for
the  Hollanders,  who  having  stopped  their  leakes  at  Jor,
new  rigged  and  returned  upon  the  Portugals,  whom  they
found  disordered  and  feasting  ashoare,  where  they  sunke
and  burned  the  whole  Fleet,  making  a  cruell  execution :
and  had  not  the  Vice-Roy  before  sent  sixe  shippes  on
some  other  service,  they  had  beene  all  heere  utterly  ex-
tinguished. After  this  fell  such  sicknesse  in  the  City,
that  most  of  them  dyed,  amongst  which  the  Vice-Roy
was  one :  and  shortly  after  the  Governour  of  the  Span-
iards in  the  Moluccas,  so  that  their  strength  was  laid  in
the  dust,  and  the  Archbishoppe  made  and  yet  *  remayneth
Vice-Roy.

This  last  yeere  the  Malabarres  vexed  the  Portugals,
and  tooke  or  sunke  of  them  at  times,  sixtie  saile  or  more.

This  yeere  also  was  expected  a  Vice-Roy  to  come
with  a  strong  Fleet,  "to  drive  the  Hollanders  out  of  India.

This  Fleet  consisted  of  nine  shippes  of  Warre,  and  sixe
for  the  Voyage :  they  were  separated  in  the  calme  of
Guinea,  and  never  met  together  after.  Two  of  them
came to Mosambique, where they were fired of the

22

WILLIAM FINCH  a.d.

i  608.

Hollanders,  who  also  much  distressed  the  Castle,  but
could  not  take  it :  and  the  time  of  the  yeere  requiring
their  departure,  they  set  sayle  for  Goa,  to  the  number  of
fifteene  shippes  and  one  Pinnasse,  where  they  rode  at
the  Barre,  challenging  the  great  Captaine  Andrew
Hurtado,  who  durst  not  visit  them.  Another  of  that
Voyage  having  advise  that  the  Hollanders  rode  at  the
Barre,  put  to  the  Northward,  where  they  presently  landed
their  money  and  goods  and  set  fire  of  their  shippe,  to
save  the  Dutch  a  labour :  and  lastly,  the  Souldiers  fell
together  by  the  eares  for  the  sharing  of  the  money.  This
Fleet  departing  from  Goa  sailed  alongst  the  Coast  of
Malabar,  spoyling  and  burning  all  they  could  meet  with.
There  was  report  of  leave  given  them  by  the  Samorine,
to  build  a  Castle  at  Chaul.

This  moneth  here  was  also  newes  of  an  Ormus  ship  Ormus  ship
taken  by  the  Malabarres,  and  three  Frigats :  and  shortly  ta  ev"
after  of  a  Fleet  of  twentie  five  Frigats  from  Cochen,
whereof  sixteene  were  taken  and  burnt  by  the  Malabars,
which  the  rest  escaped,  if  miserable  spoile  be  an  escape :
also  of  fiftie  Frigats  and  Galiots  of  the  Malabars  spoiling
on  their  Coast.

In  January,  came  other  newes  of  thirtie  Frigats  which
put  for  Diu  richly  laden,  taken  by  the  Malabars,  beeing  at
this  time  Masters  of  these  Seas.  They  are  good  Souldiers,
and  carry  in  each  Frigat  one  hundred  Souldiers,  and  in
their  Galiots,  two  hundred.

The  first  of  February,  the  Captaine  departed  with  fiftie
Peons,  and  certaine  Horsemen.  About  this  time  was  [I.  iv.  422.]
great  stirre  touching  the  Queene  Mothers  ship,  which  was
to  be  laden  for  Mocha :  the  Portugals  then  riding  at  the
Barre  with  two  and  twentie  Frigats,  threatned  to  carry
her  to  Diu :  at  length  they  fell  to  compounding,  the
Portugals  demanding  an  hundred  thousand  Mamudies  for
her  Cartas  or  Passe,  and  after  twentie  thousand,  at  last
taking  one  thousand  Rialls  and  odde  money,  with  divers
Presents,  which  the  Mogolls  were  faine  to  give  them.  Mo.
Bo  wean  gave  me  faire  words,  but  the  Divell  was  in  his

23

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1608.

heart,  he  minded  nothing  lesse  indeed  then  paiment  of  his
debts,  seeking  also  to  deduct  some,  others  imbeselled,
striking  off  by  new  accounts  seventeene  thousand  of  one
and  fortie  thousand.  I  thought  he  meant  to  shift,  if  hee
could,  and  pay  nothing,  secretly  departing  the  Towne,
owing  much  to  certaine  Banians,  who  must  get  it  when
they  can  :  at  last  I  got  his  Cheet  for  some,  though  with
great  abatements,  esteeming  halfe  better  secured,  then  to
endanger  all.
Malacca  The six and twentieth  of  March 1609, it  was here

againe  reported  that  Malacca  was  besieged  with  thirtie  ships  of

Holland,  in  succour  of  which  the  Vice-Roy  assembled  all
these his Northerne  Indian  forces, appointing Andrew
Hurtado  Generall,  being  the  more  cranke,  by  newes  of
a  New  Vice-Roy  with  fourteene  saile  to  winter  at  Mos-
ambique. Meane  while  a  ship of  Cambaya  which had
Portugals  take  been at Queda,  came for  Goga, which  the  Portugalls
prize  a  is  tps  £ndine  without  Cartas,  made  prize  of. The  Customers  at
without  their tnat  ^me  by  new  prices  and  reckonings,  sought  to  make
Pass.  prize  in  great  part  of  us. I  was  also  in  the  beginning  of

Aprill  taken  with  a  burning  Fever,  which  drew  from
me  much  blood,  besides  ten  dayes  fasting  with  a  little
Rice :  and  after  my  Fever,  miserable  stitches  tormented
me.  The  next  moneth  I  was  visited  againe  with  a
burning  Fever.

The  twelfth  of  May  came newes  that  Melik  Amber,

King  of  Decan,  had  besieged  the Citie of  Aurdanagar

(which had been the Metropolitan of that Kingdome,

He  still  cab  the  conquered  by  the  Acabar)  with  two  and  twentie  thousand

Mogolsfather,  horse)  ancj  tnat  after  divers  assaults,  the  Mogolls  made

(others  use  to snew to deliver  up  the  Citie, upon condition  that  hee

have  out  the would  withdraw  his  armie  some  foure  or  five  *  Cose  from

article)  and  so  thence,  that  they  might  passe  with  more  assurance  with

in  others. bagge and baggage :  which being done,  they suddenly

Course  is  a issued forth  with  all  their forces upon the  unprovided

mile  and  halfe  enemie,  and  made  a  great  slaughter,  but  feared  hee  would

English.  bee revenged  on those parts which  were  lesse  able  to

resist. The Canchanna  gathered  great  forces, and de-

24

WILLIAM FINCH  ad.

1609.
manded of Surat  three hundred  thousand  M. towards
the charge,  sending also for the Governour, an  expert
Decan  Souldier.

The  twentieth  of  June,  came  newes  of  the  arrivall  of
five  shippes  at  Goa,  and  of  the  Vice-Royes  Death,  where-
upon Andrew  Hurtado  was  chosen  Vice-Roy,  being  the  Andrew  Hur-
only  stay  left  of  all  those  parts,  and  reported  a  brave  tadoVlce-R°y-
souldier.  He  presently  gave  order  for  shipping  to  be
built,  intending  after  the  breaking  up  of  winter  to  make
a  bolt  or  shaft  with  the  Hollanders,  which  were  now  re-
ported to  lye  before  Malacca  with  eighteene  ships.  The
Portugall  ships  in  the  way  had  met  with  one  of  this
Towne,  and  finding  her  without  Cartas,  brought  her  with
them  as  prize  for  Goa,  where  on  the  Barre  shee  was  cast
away ;  whereupon  the  Governour  for  Chan-Channa,  and
the  Customer  for  Mo.  Bowcan  seised  on  Tappidas  the
owner,  a  Banian,  for  money  owing  to  them,  whereby  also
we  lost  his  debt  to  us,  for  which  we  may  thanke  the
Portugall.

The  twentieth of  July, Sha  Selim commanded Can Great  warns
Channa  and  Manisengo, two  great  Commanders  of  his,  °fandmih
to  invade  all  the  Kingdomes from  hence  to  the  South, °s°  s'
even to Cape Comori ; for  which a huge armie was
assembling. In  resistance  of  whom, three  great Kings
were  combined,  the  King  of  Decan  (whose  chiefe  Citie  is
Genefro)  the  King  of  Visapor,  and  the  King  of  Golcunda
(whose  chiefe  Citie  is  Braganadar)  who  also  gathered  great
forces,  making  head neare  Bramport,  upon  the  Mogolls
Frontiers, expecting the breaking up of  winter, both
armies  lying  abroad  in  Tents.

In  August  I  received  flying  newes  of  an  English  Pin-  Ascension  lost.
nasse  at  Gandove,  which  departing  thence,  was  againe
forced  thither  by  three  Portugal!  Frigats :  I  supposed  that
it  might  belong  to  some  of  our  shipping,  which  standing
for  Socatora,  might  not  be  able  to  fetch  in,  and  so  be
forced  to  fall  on  this  Coast ;  which  proved  accordingly,  it
being  the  Ascensions  Pinnasse,  wanting  water,  wood,  and  The  Hopewell.
victuall,  the  Master,  John  Elmer,  with  five  men  and  two

25

A.D.
1609.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Portugal/
domineering.

boyes.  The  Master  and  foure  of  the  Company  came
hither  on  the  eight  and  twentieth,  but  I  had  no  small  adoe
with  the  Townsmen  of  Surat,  for  bringing  them  into  the
Towne,  they  taking  them  from  me,  pretending  we  were
but  allowed  Trade,  indeed  fearing  the  Portugalls,  till  I
should  send  to  the  Nobob  foure  course  off,  fearing  force :
to  which  evill,  was  added  a  worse  of  the  Portugalls
comming  into  the  River  with  five  Frigats,  and  carrying
away  the  Pinnasse,  weighing  also  the  two  Falcons,  which
they  had  cast  by  the  boord :  and  yet  a  worse  report  came
the  fifth  of  Septemb.  of  the  casting  away  of  the  Ascension,
the  company  about  seventie  persons  being  saved,  which
the  next  day  came  to  Surat,  but  were  forced  by  the
Towne  to  lye  without  amongst  the  trees  and  tombes,  I
being  not  able  to  procure  leave  for  the  Generall  himselfe
(notwithstanding  divers  letters  of  recommendation  which
hee  brought  from  Mocha,  besides  letters  from  the  King
himselfe)  into  the  Towne,  Such  is  their  slavish  awe  of
the  Portugalls,  two  Jesuits  threatning  fire,  faggot,  and
utter  desolation,  if  they  received  any  more  English  thither.
That  which  I  could  doe,  was  to  send  them  refreshing,
and  carry  them  to  the  Tanke,  where  they  were  con-
[I.  iv.  423.]  veniently  lodged,  yet  amongst  tombes,  till  the  Governor
appointed  them  a  more  convenient  place  at  a  small  Aldea
two  Course  off,  and  with  much  adoe  got  leave  for  Master
Rivet,  Master  Jordan  and  the  Surgion,  to  come  hither  to
provide  necessaries  for  the  rest.  I  had  other  trouble  by
the  disorder  and  riot  committed  by  some  of  them,
especially  one  Thomas  Tucker,  which  in  drinke  had
killed  a  Calfe  (a  slaughter  more  then  murther  in  India)
which  made  mee  glad  of  their  departure,  fifteen  staying

devotmofike  behind  sicke!  or unwilHng  to  goe  for  Agra: and  some

Banians.  returned  againe.

This  marriage  The sixt of  October, came Letters from Captaine

ofCaptaine  Hawkins,  importing  his  manage  with the  daughter of

Hawkms,some  an  Armenian  :  and  others  in  the  latter  end  of  the  next

say  was  put  as

a  trick  on  him  by  false  friends  and  the  cause  of  his  disrespect  with  the  Mogoll. He  tells
otherwise  himselfe.

26

Note  what
Gospell  the
Jesuits  preach
for  convert-
ing Infidels

Sacrilegious
Calfe-slaugh-
ter:  Calvish

WILLIAM FINCH  ad.

1609.
moneth,  for my  comming to  Agra. In  December,  we
stood  much  in  feare  of  Badur  his  comming  upon  Surat,  Badur  descen-
he  lying:  within two  dayes iourney,  with sixe  hundred  d*dofthe
horse  and  many  foote  : for  which  cause  the  Governour  Kings  a  ^
cessed  all  men  with  the  entertainment  of  souldiers,  setting  neighbour  to
upon  my  head  ten  men. I  went  to  him,  and  told  him  those  parts.
that  I  had  twentie  English  at  his  command,  for  which  hee
thanked  mee,  and  freed  mee  of  further  charge. During
this  time,  the  Banians  were  forced  to  labour  to  barricado
all  the  streets  of  the  Citie  :  great  watches  were  appointed
at  the  gates,  certaine  peeces  drawne  from  the  Castle,  and
from  Carode  Garrison  fiftie  horse,  which  had  not  sufficed,
had  not  the  Governour  of  Amadavar  sent  one  thousand
horse,  and  two  thousand  foot  to  our  succour :  upon  newes
of  which  forces,  Badur  withdrew to his Holds. Two
yeeres  before  our  comming,  had  this  man  sacked  Cambaya,
whereof  his  Grand-father  had  been  King.

The  eighteenth  of  January,  I  departed  out  of  Surat
towards  Agra,  willing  yet  to  leave  some  notice  thereof
before  I  leave  it.  The  Citie  is  of  good  quantitie,  with  Description  of
many  faire  Merchants  houses  therein,  standing  twentie  Surat-
miles  within  the  land  up  a  faire  River.  Some  three  miles
from  the  mouth  of  the  River  (where  on  the  South-side
lyeth  a  small  low  Hand  over-flowed  in  time  of  Raine)  is
the  Barre,  where  ships  trade  and  unlade,  whereon  at  a
spring  tide  is  three  fathome  water.  Over  this,  the
Channell  is  faire  to  the  Citie  side,  able  to  beare  vessels
of  fiftie  tunnes  laden.  This  River  runneth  to  Bramport ;
and  from  thence,  as  some  say,  to  Musselpatan.  As  you
come  up  the  River,  on  the  right  hand  stands  the  Castle  The  Castle.
well  walled,  ditched,  reasonable  great  and  faire,  with  a
number  of  faire  peeces,  whereof  some  of  exceeding  great-
nesse.  It  hath  one  gate  to  the  Green-ward,  with  a  draw-
bridge and  a  small  Port  on  the  River  side.  The  Captaine
hath  in  command  two  hundred  horse.  Before  this  lyeth
the  Medon,  which  is  a  pleasant  greene,  in  the  middest
whereof  is  a  May-pole  to  hang  a  light  on,  and  for  other
pastimes  on  great  Festivalls. On this side, the  Citie

27

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

lyeth  open  to  the  Greene,  but  on  all  other  parts  is  ditched
and  fenced  with  thicke  hedges, having  three  gates, of
which  one  leadeth  to  Variaw,  a  small  Village,  where  is
the ford to passe over  for  Cambaya  way. Neare this
Village on the left  hand, lieth a small Aldea on the
Indian  Idoll. Rivers  banke  very  pleasant,  where  stands  a  great  Pagod,
much  resorted  to  by  the  Indians. Another  Gate  leadeth
to  Bramport,  the  third  to  Nonsary,  a  Towne  ten  cose  off,
where  is  made  great  store  of  Calico,  having  a  faire  River
comming  to  it. Some  ten  cose  further  lyeth  Gondoree,
and a little  further  Belsaca,  the  frontire  Towne upon
AfaireTanke  Daman. Hard without Nonsary  gate is a faire  Tank
or  Pond. sixteene  square,  inclosed  on  all  sides  with  stone  steppes,
three quarters  of  an English  mile  in compasse,  with  a
small  house  in  the  middest. On  the  further side  are
divers  faire  tombes,  with  a  goodly  paved  court  pleasant
to behold  : behind which groweth a small grove of
Manga  trees,  whither  the  Citizens  goe  forth  to  banquet.
Stocke  wor- Some  halfe  cose  behind  this  place,  is  a  great  Tree  much
shippers  of  a WOrshipped  by  the  Banians,  where  they  affirme  a  Dew  to
keepe,  and  that  it  hath  been  oftentimes  cut  downe  and
stocked  up  by  the  rootes,  at  the  Moores  command,  and
yet  hath  sprung  up  againe. Neare  to  the  Castle  is  the
Custome- Alphandica,  where is a  paire of  staires for  lading  and
house.  unlading  of  goods : within  are  roomes  for  keeping  goods

till  they  be  cleared,  the  custome  being  two  and  an  halfe
for  goods,  three  for  victualls,  and  two  for  money.  With-
out this  gate  is  the  great  Gondoree  or  Bazar.  Right
before  this  gate  stands  a  Tree  with  an  Arbour,  whereon
the  Fokeers  (which  are  Indian  holy  men)  sit  in  state.
Betwixt  this  and  the  Castle,  on  the  entrance  of  the
Greene,  is  the  market  for  horse  and  cattell.  A  little
lower  on  the  right  hand  over  the  river,  is  a  little  pleasant
Naites,nauta.  Towne,  Ranele,  inhabited  by  a  people  called  Naites,
speaking  another  language,  and  for  the  most  part  Sea-
men :  the  houses  are  faire  therein,  with  high  steps  to  each
mans  doore,  the  streets  narrow :  they  are  very  friendly  to
the  English. Heere  are  many  pleasant Gardens,  which

28

WILLIAM FINCH  a.d.

1609.

attract  many  to  passe  there  their  time :  and  on  the  trees
are  infinite  number  of  those  great  Bats,  which  wee  saw  at  Great  Bats,
Saint  Augustines,  hanging  by  the  clawes  on  the  boughes,  thetr  nature>
making  a  shrill  noise. This  fowle the people  say, in-
gendreth  in  the  eare ;  on  each  wing  it  hath  a  hooke,  and
giveth  the  yong  sucke.

The  Winter  heere  beginneth about  the  first  of  June,  Winter.
and  dureth  till  the  twentieth  of  September,  but  not  with
continuall  raines,  as  at Goa,  but  for  some  sixe  or  seven
dayes  every  change and  full,  with  much  wind,  thunder
and  raine. But  at  the  breaking  up,  commeth  alway  a  cruell
storme,  which  they  call  the  Tuffon,  fearefull  even  to  men  Tuffon.
on  land ;  which  is  not  alike  extreame  every  yeare,  but  in
two  or  three  at  the  most. Monsons  heere  for  the  South,  Momons.
serve  in  Aprill  and  September,  and  for  Mocha  in  February
and  March  :  from  the  South,  ships  come  hither  in  Decem-
ber, January  and  February,  and  from  Mocha  about  the
fifth  of  September,  after  the  raines :  from  Ormus  for  the
Coast  of  India  in  November. But  none  may  passe  with-
out the Portugalls Passe, for what, how much, and  [I.  iv.  424.]
whither  they  please  to  give  licence,  erecting  a  Custome  on
the  sea,  with  confiscation  of  shippe  and  goods  not  shewing
it,  in  the  full  quantitie,  to  the  taker  and  examiner.

§.  mi.

His  Journey  to  Agra : Observations  by  the  way,
and  there ;  and  of  the  Decan  warres  there.

jjHe  second  of  January,  I  departed  from  Comuariaw  Comuariaw.

(a  small  village  three  Cose  from  Surat)  to  Mutta  a  Mutta.

great  Aldea  7  c.  21.8  c.  to  Carode,  a  great  countrey  Carode.
Towne, by which on  the North  runneth Surat  River.
It  hath  a  Castle,  with  two hundred  horse  Patans good
souldiers,  twentie  two  to  Curka  12  c.  it  is  a  great  Village  Curca.
with  a  River  on  the  South  side. In  the  way  7  c.  is  Beca,  Beca.
a Castle with  a  great  Tanke,  and  a  pleasant  Grove,  23.
ioc.  to  Nacampore  a  great  Towne  under  the  Pectopshaw.  Necampore.
In  this way  on  the  right  hand beginneth a  great  ridge

29

A.D.

1609.

Badurs  holds.

Wilde

Elephants.

Dayta.

Badur.

Salere  and
Mulere,
Cities  of
Bertopsha.
Castles  im-
pregnable.

Breed  of  horse
rare.

Nonderbar.

Lingull.

Sindkerry.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  mountaines,  which  come  from  Amadavar-wards,  neare
which  Badur  keepeth,  holding  divers  strong  holds  thereon,
that  the  King  with  all  his  force  cannot  hurt  him.  These
Mountaines  runne  to  Bramport:  on  them  are  bred  many
wilde  Elephants,  24.  to  Dayta,  8  c.  a  great  Towne.  In
the  mid-way  you  passe  a  stony  troublesome  River.  This
Towne  hath  a  Castle,  and  is  almost  encompassed  with  a
River,  seated  in  a  fertile  soyle.  25.  to  Badur,  10  c.  a  filthy
towne  and  full  of  theeves :  heere  is  made  much  wine  of  a
sweete  fruit  called  Mewa,  but  I  found  it  not  wholesome,
except  it  be  burnt.  This  Towne  is  the  last  of  note  in
Pectopshaws  Land,  who  is  a  small  King  or  Raj  aw,  a
Gentile,  keeping  on  the  top  of  inaccessible  Mountaines,
which  beginne  at  Curka,  and  extend  many  Courses.  He
holdeth  two  faire  Cities,  Salere,  and  the  other  Muliere,
where  the  Mamudees  are  coyned,  each  having  two
mightie  Castles,  which  have  way  to  them  but  for  two
men  abrest,  or  for  an  Elephant  at  most  to  get  up ;  having
also  in  the  way  eightie  small  Fortresses  dispersed  on  the
Mountaines  to  guard  the  way.  Upon  the  top  of  these
Mountaines  is  good  pasture,  and  abundance  of  graine,
fountaines  running  thence  into  the  Plaines.  The  Acabar
besieged  him  seven  yeeres,  and  in  the  end  was  forced  to
compound  with  him,  giving  him  Narampore,  Dayta,  and
Badur,  with  divers  other  Aldeas,  for  the  safe  conducting
of  his  Merchants  alongst  this  Plaine ;  so  that  he  now  re-
maineth  this  Kings  friend,  sends  Presents  yeerely,  leaves
one  of  his  sonnes  at  Bramport,  for  pledge  of  his  fealtie.
He  is  said  to  have  alway  in  readinesse  foure  thousand
Mares  of  a  strange  breed  and  excellent:  and  one  hundred
Elephants.  26.  7  c.  to  Nonderbar  a  Citie,  short  of  which
are  many  Tombes  and  houses  of  pleasure,  with  a  Castle
and  a  faire  Tanke.  seven  and  twentie  to  Lingull,  10  c.  a
beastly  Towne,  with  theevish  inhabitants,  and  a  dirtie
castle;  a  deepe  sandie  way  neare  the  Towne.  28.  10  c.  to
Sindkerry,  a  great  dirtie  Towne.  In  the  way  the  Gover-
nour  of  Lingull  (with  others  as  honest  as  himselfe)
would have  borrowed  some  money  of  me,  but  seeing  it

3°

WILLIAM FINCH  a.d.

1609.

prove  powder  and  shot,  gave  over,  and  wee  drew  on  our
Carts  without  trouble. On  the  further  side  of  Sindkerry
runneth  a  River  of  brackish  water,  with  drinking  whereof,
I  got  the  bloody  fluxe,  which  accompanied  me  to  Bram-
port.  29.  10  c.  to  Taulneere,  a  theevish  way,  the  Towne  Taulneere.
faire, with a Castle and a  River,  in  time  of  raine not
passable  without  Boat.  30.  15  c.  to  Chupra,  a  great  Towne. Chupra.
I rested two dayes by reason of  raine,  in  which  time
came  the  Governour  of  Nonderbar  with foure  hundred
horse,  without  whose  company  I  could  not  have  proceeded
without  danger,  Can-Canna  having  been  beaten,  and  re-
tired to  Bramport,  after  the  losse  of  the  strong  and  rich
Towne  of  Joulnapore, whereupon  the  Decanes  grew so  Joulnapore.
insolent,  that  they  made  roades  into  this  way,  and  spoyled
many  passengers.

The second  of  February, 6  c.  to  Rawd,  a countrey  Rawd.
Village. The  unseasonable  thunder,  wind  and  raine,  with
my  disease,  almost  made  an  end  of  me :  which  made  us
make  Mukom  the  third  and  fourth, the  fifth  to  Beawle  Mukom,  stay
10  c.  a  great  towne,  with  a  faire  castle,  6.  stayed  by  foule  -^  refreshing.
weather,  7. 16  c.  to  Ravere,  a  great  Towne,  8.  10  c.  to  ^Qvere\
Bramport,  where  I pitched  my  Tent  in  the  Armenians  Bramport.
yard,  not  being  able  for  money  to  get  an  house,  the  Towne
was  so  full  of  souldiers. Some 2  c.  short  of  this  Citie
lyeth  Badurpore,  a  faire  City,  and  betwixt  these  two  Cities, Badurpore.
the  Campe  of  Can-Canna  under Tents, 2 c.  in length
(having  some  fifteene  thousand  Horse,  two  hundred  faire
Elephants,  an  hundred  peeces  of  Ordnance  of  all  sizes)  on
the North side. On the other side, within twentie
or thirtie course, lay Amberchapon, an Abashed, and The  tents  and
Generall of  the  King  of  Decans  Forces,  with  some  ten  Cim£asfj f
thousand  of  his  owne  cost,  all  brave  souldiers,  and  some
forty  thousand  Decanees :  in  so much  that  the Citie  of
Bramport had certainly been lost, had  not the Prince
Sultan Pervis, and Rajaw Manisengo, come instantly
downe  with  great  forces. For  at  this  time  he  had  sent  to
the  Can-Canna  to  yeeld  up  the  Citie  upon  composition,
deeming  him  not  able  to  hold  it  against  him.

31

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

Description  of This  Citie  is  very  great,  but  beastly,  situate  in  a  low,
Bramport. unholesome  aire,  a  very  sickly  place,  caused  especially  by
the bad  water  :  On  the  North-east  is  the  Castle  on  the
[I.  iv.  425.]  Rivers  bank  (comming  from  Surat)  large  and  well  forti-
Artificiall feo\. By  the  Castles  side  in  the  River  lyeth  an  Elephant
ephant. Qf  stonej  so  lively,  that  a  living  Elephant  comming  one  day
to  drinke,  ranne  against it with  all his  force,  and  brake
both his  teeth. The  head is painted  red in  the fore-
head ;  and  many  simple  Indians  worship  it. Some  two
Cose forth  of the Citie, is  Can Cannas  Garden called
Loll  bage ;  the whole way  thereto being  under  shadie
trees  very pleasant. Within it  are divers  faire  walkes,
with  a  stately  small  Tanke  standing  square  betweene  foure
trees,  all  shaded  and  inclosed  with  a  wall ;  at  the  entrance
without, a faire Banketting  house  built aloft betweene
foure  trees.

I  rested  to  the  twelfth,  for  recovery  (which  God  sent)
under  my  Tent.  Two  dayes  after  my  comming  came
Raveresacked.  newes  of  the  sacking  of  Ravere,  by  fifteene  hundred  Decan
Horse  with  other  places  neere  thereto,  we  blessing
God  for  our  safe  arrivall,  the  way  now  not  passable  with
one  thousand  Horse.  I  was  here  certified  also  by  an
Armenians  Letters,  of  a  great  overthrow  given  to  the
Portugal! hsse.  Portugall  Armada  upon  the  Mallabar  Coast,  consisting
of  fiftie  Frigats  and  two  Gallies,  which  being  dispersed
with  foule  weather,  were  sudainly  out  of  divers  creekes
assailed  by  the  Malabars,  which  was  attended  with  spoile,
fire,  taking  the  rest  fleeing.  On  the  twelfth  I  rode  to
visit  the  Prince,  and  on  the  thirteenth,  gave  him  a
Present,  found  him  courteous,  promising  what  I  desired.
The  Prince  had  with  him  twentie  thousand  Horse,  and
three  hundred  faire  Elephants,  and  with  him,  Asaph  Can
with  some  three  thousand,  and  Emersee  Rastein  late  King
of  Candhar,  with  some  thousand  old  Souldiers.  And
during  my  abode  in  the  Campe,  came  also  Raja  Mani-
sengo  with  ten  thousand  Horse,  all  Resboots,  and  neere
a  thousand  Elephants :  so  that  all  the  Plaines  for  a  great
distance  were  covered  with  Tents  very  brave  to  behold :

32

WILLIAM FINCH  a.d.

1609.

with  the  Armie  came  divers  great  Boates  for  the  trans-
portation of  forces  over  waters.  The  Prince  removing
I  returned  to  Bramport :  and  on  the  sixe  and  twentieth,
hee  beeing  advanced  3  c.  towards  the  Enemie,  I  went
to  him  to  take  my  leave,  where  newes  came  of  the  over-
throw of  certaine  of  Manisengos  forces.

The  first  of  March,  the  Governor  of  Bramport  departed
for  Agra,  and I  with  him  12  c.  to  Barre  a  great  Village,  Barree.
stonie & steep  way, being  the passage over  the  great
ridge  of  Mountaines  which  come  from  Amadavarwards.
About  some  4  c. of  this  way  lyeth  the  strong  and  in-
vincible Castle  of  Hassere,  seated  on  the  top  of  a  high  Hassere  a
Mountaine, large and strong, able to receive (as is  strm& and
reported)  fortie  or  fiftie  thousand  Horse. And  on  the  s  ianse
top  are  many  faire Tankes and good  pasture  grounds.
It  hath  had  in  the  dayes  of  Badur  Sha  late  King  thereof,
some sixe hundred Peeces of  Ordnance. The Acabar
besieged  it  a  long  time,  circling  it  on  all  sides,  and  at
length  tooke  it  by  composition. For  it  is  said,  that  there
bred  such  an  innumerable  sort  of  Emmets  or  other  small
Wormes  in all  the  waters,  that  the  people  swelled  and
burst  with  drinking  thereof:  which  mortalitie  caused  him
to  compound  and  deliver  it,  being  by  meere  humane  force
invincible. The  third, 11  c.  to Camla,  a  small  Aldea,  Camla.
stonie, troublesome way. The fourth, to Magergom  Magergom.
4  c.  a  great  Aldea,  bad  way. The  fifth,  10  c.  to  Ker-  Kergom.
gom  a  great  Village, steepe  way. The  sixth, 13 c.  to
Berkul  a  small  Village. The  seventh,  8  c.  to  Taxapore  Berkul.
a  small  Towne. At  2 c.  on  this  way,  you  passe  a  faire
River  called  Nervor  which  comes  from  Baroche : upon
the  Banke  is  a  prettie  Towne  and  faire  Castle,  and  under
it  the  Ferrie  place. To  passe  over  with  Camels  is  a  way
a  C.  lower  on the left hand,  where  is  an  overfall,  and
not  above three  foot  in the  passage,  but  neere a mile
over. The eight, 5 c. to Mandow, 3 c. whereof  is  Mandow  the
up a  steepe stonie Mountaine, having way but for a /fZ5  "^
Coach  at  most.

This  ridge  of  Mountaines  extendeth North-east and
iv  33  c

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

South-west.  On  the  top  at  the  edge  of  the  Mountaine
standeth  the  gate  or  entrance  of  the  Citie,  over  which
is  built  a  faire  Fort  and  House  of  pleasure  ;  the  walls
extending  all  along  the  Mountaines  side  for  many  Coses.
On  the  left  hand  at  the  entrance  some  two  or  three  miles
distant,  on  the  toppe  of  a  picked  Mountaine  standeth  a
strong  Fort,  and  in  other  places  dispersed  some  ten  or
twelve  more.  For  2  c.  or  better  within  this  gate  the
City  is  ruined  all  save  only  Tombes  and  Meskites,  which
remayne  in  great  numbers  to  this  day,  with  some  tottered
walls  of  great  Houses.  The  olde  City  is  from  gate  to
gate  4  c.  long  North  and  South,  but  East  and  West
ten  or  twelve  Coses ;  and  yet  to  the  East-ward  of  all
lyeth  good  pasture  ground  for  many  courses.  Aloft  on
this  Mountaine  are  some  sixteene  faire  Tankes  here  and
there  dispersed  about  the  Citie.  That  which  is  now
The  present  standing  is  very  faire,  but  small  in  comparison  of  the
described.  former,  with  divers  goodly  buildings  all  of  firme  stone,
and  faire,  high  gates,  that  I  suppose  the  like  not  to
be  in  all  Christendome.  At  the  entrance  on  the  South
within  the  gate  of  the  Citie  now  inhabited,  as  you  passe
along  on  the  left  hand,  stands  a  goodly  Meskite,  and
over  against  it  a  faire  Palace,  wherein  are  interred  the
bodies  of  foure  Kings,  with  exceeding  rich  Tombes.  By
the  side  thereof  standeth  a  high  Turret  of  one  hundred
and  seventie  steps  high,  built  round  with  Galleries  and
Windowes  to  every  roome,  all  exceeding  for  goodly
Ports,  Arches,  Pillars;  the  walls  also  all  interlayed  with
a  greene  stone  much  beautifying.  On  the  North-side
where  I  came  forth  lyeth  a  piece  of  a  foot  and  an  halfe
bore  in  the  mouth,  but  the  breech  was  in  the  ground.
The  gate  is  very  strong  with  a  steepe  descent ;  and
without  this  sixe  other,  all  very  strong,  with  great  walled
places  for  Courts  of  Guard  betweene  gate  and  gate.  On
this  side  is  also  a  small  Port,  but  the  way  thereto  is
exceeding  steepe.  All  alongst  on  the  side  also  runneth
the  wall,  with  flankers  ever  here  and  there  among ;  and
[I.  iv.  426.]  yet  is  the  hill  so  steepe  of  it  selfe,  that  it  is  not  almost

34

WILLIAM FINCH  ad.

1609.

possible  for  a  man  to  climbe  up  on  all  foure  to  any  part
of  it. So  that  to  mans  judgement  it  is  altogether  in-  The  first  of
vincible; and  yet was  taken  partly  by  force,  partly  by  "^J^qJ™*
Treason by  Hamawne,  this mans Grandfather, forcing  j0^„  a  Patan
Seic  Sha  Selim  whose  Ancestors  had  conquered  it  from  who  built  the
the  Indians  some  foure  hundred  yeeres  agoe. This  Sha  Turret,  and
Selim  was  a  very  powerfull  King  of  Dely,  and  once  forced  b^th^urtedtn
Hamawne  to flye into Persia for ayde ; from whence  adj0yningwith
returning  with  Persian  forces,  he  put  him  againe  to  the  three  of  Ms
worst ; who  yet  held  out  against him  all  his  life  time,  Successors.
as  also  a  long  time  of  Ecabars  Raigne,  flying  from  one
Mountaine to another. Without  the  wals of  the  City  This Citie was
on  this  side,  the  Suburbs  entred  4  c.  long,  but  all  ruinate,  bmlt.  ^  an
save  certaine  Tombes, Meskits  and  goodly  Seraies, no  t^ousanei
man  remayning  in  them.  yeeres  agoe.

The  way  exceeding  stony  and  bad  at  4  c.  end  lyeth
Luneheira,  a  small  Saray  where  wee  pitched  the  ninth.  Luneheira.
Betweene  this  and  the  ruines  about  3  c.  of  the  way,  is
a  goodly  Tanke  inclosed  with  stone,  and  a  banketting
house  in  the  middest :  On  the  South  whereof  are  faire
houses  of  pleasure  now  ruinated,  from  whence  goeth  an
arched  bridge  to  the  banketting  house  in  the  Tanke.

Some halfe a Cose beyond Luneheira on the right
hand,  are  foure  or  five  faire  Tankes  with  a  great  Pagode,
a  very  pleasant  place. The  tenth,  to  Dupalpore 14  c.  Dupalpore.
good  way,  a  small Towne. The  eleventh, to Ouglue  Ouglue.
a  faire  City  twelve  long  Coses. This  Countrey  is  called
Malva,  a  fertile  soile,  abounding  with  Opium. Here  the
Cose  or  Course  is  two  miles  English. The  twelfth,  wee
made  Mukom. The  thirteenth,  to  Conoscia,  1 1  c.  good  Conoscia.
way,  a  little  Village. I enquired  the  price  of  Opium.  Opium.
They  give  the  head  three  scratches,  from  whence  issue
small  teares,  at  the first  white,  which  with  the  cold  of
the night  turneth reddish,  which they  daily  scrape,  not
without  infinite  trouble,  the  head  beeing  very  small  and
yeelding  little. The fourteenth,  to  Sunenarra  8  c.  way  Sunenarra.
much  stony  and  theevish,  a  people  called  Graciae,  inha-
biting the  nils  on  the  left  hand,  which  often  ungraciously

35

A.D.

1609.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

entertayn  Caravans.  A  hundred  of  them  had  done  the
like  to  a  Caffila  now,  had  not  our  comming  prevented.
It  is  a  small  Towne,  short  of  which  is  a  great  Tanke
Pimpelgom.  full  of  wilde  fowle.  The  fifteenth,  10  c.  to  Pimpelgom
a  ragged  Aldea.  At  4  c.  end  of  this  way  lyeth  Sarampore,
a  great  Towne  with  a  Castle  on  the  South-west  side,  with
a  faire  Towne-house.  Here  are  made  faire  Turbants  and
good  linnen.  Short  of  this  Towne  we  met  Caun  John
a  great  Minion  of  the  Kings  with  ten  thousand  horse,
many  Elephants,  and  Boats  carryed  on  Carts,  going  for
Bramport.  On  the  way  also  we  passed  divers  of  Mani-
sengos  men,  hee  having  in  all  some  twenty  thousand,
so  that  it  was  deemed  there  were  one  hundred  thousand
Horse  assembled.

The  sixteenth,  7  c.  to  Cuckra,  a  great  Countrey  Towne
abounding  with  all  sorts  of  Graine,  Victuall  and  Mewa
Wine :  at  4  c.  lyeth  Berroul  a  great  Aldea.  The  seven-
teenth, 12  c.  to  Delout,  a  great  Aldea,  the  way  for  the
five  last  Coses  theevish,  hilly,  stony,  the  other  pleasant
Plaines.  The  eighteenth,  7  c.  to  Burrow  a  small  Towne,
but  plentifull  of  Victuall,  except  flesh  which  is  scarse  all
this  way  ;  the  way  dangerous.  The  nineteenth,  7  c.  to
Sukesera  a  small  ragged  Towne.  The  twentieth,  to
Syrange  9  c,  a  very  great  Towne,  where  are  many  Betele
Gardens.  The  one  and  twentieth  and  two  and  twentieth,
wee  make  Muckom.  The  three  and  twentieth,  to
Cuchenary  Saray  8  c.  The  foure  and  twentieth,  to
Sadura  5  c.  The  five  and  twentieth,  to  Collebage  7  c.
The  sixe  and  twentieth,  12  c.  to  Qualeres,  a  pretty  small
Towne  encompassed  with  Tamarind  and  Manga  Trees.
The  seven  and  twentieth,  to  Cipry  seven  of  Surat  Couses
a  mile  and  an  halfe  way  theevish,  stony,  full  of  Trees,
a  Desart  passage  :  a  walled  Towne,  faire  Houses,  covered
with  Slate.  Two  nights  before  some  sixtie  or  seventie
Theeves  (mistaking  for  a  late  passed  Caravan)  assayled
in  a  darke  night  one  hundred  and  fiftie  Potan  Souldiers,
and  fell  into  the  pit  they  digged  for  others,  ten  being
slaine  and  as  many  taken,  the  rest  fled. The  eight  and

36

Cuckra.

Berroul.
Delout,

Burrow.

Sukesera
Syrange.

Collebage
Qualeres.

Cipry.

WILLIAM FINCH  a.d.

1610.

twentieth,  to  Norwar  12  c.  a  Desart  rascally  way  full  Norwar.
of  Theeves.  In  the  Woods  sate  divers  Chuckees  to
prevent  robbing,  but  the  Foxe  is  often  made  the  Goose-
heard.  One  pretty  neat  Meskite  and  in  one  place  at
the  foot  of  the  gate,  a  few  poore  Inhabitants  wee  saw
in  this  dayes  journey,  and  nineteene  faire  Saraies
ruinated.

The  Towne  at  the  foot  of  the  hill,  hath  a  Castle  on  the  Strong  Castle.
top  of  a  stony  steep  mountaine,  with  a  narrow  stone
causey  leading  to  the  top  some  mile  or  better  in  ascent.
In  the  way  stand  three  gates  very  strong,  with  places
for  Corps  du  guard.  At  the  top  of  all  is  the  fourth
gate,  which  leads  into  the  Castle,  where  stands  a  guard,
not  permitting  any  stranger  to  enter  without  order  from
the  King.  The  Towne  within  is  faire  and  great,  with
a  descent  thereto ;  being  situate  in  a  Valley  on  the  top
of  a  Mountaine  very  strangely.  As  it  is  reported,  this
cliffe  is  in  circle  some  5.  or  6  c.  and  walled  round  with
Towers  and  Flankers  here  and  there  dispersed,  without
treason  invincible.  This  hath  been  the  gate  or  border
of  the  Kingdome  of  Mandow,  and  hath  been  beautifull,
and  stored  with  Ordnance,  but  now  is  much  gone  to  mine.
The  twenty  ninth  to  Palacha  7  c.  the  thirtieth  to  Antro,  Antra.
a  great  Towne  12  c.  the  thirty  one  to  Gualere  6  c.  a  Gualere.
pleasant  Citie  with  a  Castle.  On  the  East  side  is  on
the  top  of  a  steep  piked  hill,  a  ruinous  building  where
divers  great  men  have  been  interred.  On  the  West  side
is  the  Castle,  which  is  a  steep  craggy  cliffe  of  6  c.  com-  A  strong
passe  at  least  (divers  say  eleven)  all  inclosed  with  a  strong  ^ast/e-
wall.  At  the  going  up  to  the  Castle  adjoyning  to  the  ^  *  1V*  *z ''*
Citie,  is  a  faire  Court,  enclosed  with  high  walls,  and  shut
in  with  strong  gates,  where  keeps  a  strong  guard,  not
permitting  any  to  enter  without  publike  order.  From
hence  to  the  top,  leads  a  stone  narrow  cawsey,  walled  on
both  sides  ;  in  the  way  are  three  gates  to  be  passed,  all
exceeding  strong,  with  Courts  of  guard  to  each.  At  the
top  of  all,  at  the  entrance  of  the  last  gate,  standeth  a
mightie  Elephant  of  stone  very  curiously  wrought. This

37

A.D.
l6lO.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Gate  is  also  exceeding  stately  to  behold,  with  a  goodly
house  adjoyning,  whose  wals  are  all  set  with  greene  and
blue  stone,  with  divers  gilded  Turrets  on  the  top.  This
is  the  Governours  lodging :  where  is  place  to  keepe
Nobles  that  offend  (he  is  said  to  have  three  such  Noble-

Rantimore.  Prisons  or  Castles,  this,  and  Rantimore  40  c.  to  which
are  sent  such  Nobles  as  he  intends  to  put  to  death,
which  commonly  is  some  two  moneths  after  their  arrivall,
the  Governour  then  bringing  them  to  the  top  of  the
wall,  and  giving  them  a  dish  of  milke,  which  having
drunke,  he is  cast down  thence  on the Rockes. The

Rotas.  third  is  Rotas,  a  Castle  in  the  Kingdome  of  Bengala,
whither  are  sent  those  Nobles  which  are  condemned  to
perpetuall  imprisonment)  from  whence  very  few  returne
againe.  On  the  top  of  this  Mountaine  of  Gualere,  is  very
good  ground,  with  three  or  foure  faire  Tankes,  and  many
other  faire  buildings.  On  the  Towne  side  are  many
houses  cut  out  of  the  maine  Rocke,  for  habitation  and
sale  of  goods.  On  the  North-west  side,  at  the  foot  of
the  hill  is  a  spacious  meadow,  inclosed  with  a  stone  wall,
within  which  are  divers  gardens  and  places  of  pleasure,
fit  also  to  keep  horses  in  time  of  warre.  This  Castle  was
the  Gate  or  frontier  of  the  Kingdome  of  Dely,  bordering
on  Mandow,  and  is  neere  a  mile  of  ascent.

Mendaker. The  first  of  Aprill  1610.  to  Mendaker  9  c.  the  second

Doulpore.  io  c.  to  Doulpore.  Within  2  c.  of  the  Towne,  you  passe
a  faire  River  called  Cambere,  as  broad  as  the  Thames,
short  of  which  is  a  narrow  passage,  with  hills  on  both
sides,  very  dangerous.  The  Castle  is  strong,  ditched
round,  and  hath  foure  walls  and  gates  one  within  an
other,  all  very  strong,  with  steep  ascents  to  each,  paved
with  stone  ;  the  Citie  is  inhabited  most-what  with  Gen-
tiles. The  Castle  is  three  quarters  of  a  mile  through,
and  on the further side hath  like  Gates  to  be  passed

Jaiow. againe. The  third  to  Jaiow  9  c.  the  fourth  to  Agra  9  c.

Agra.  jn  the  afternoone,  the  Captaine  carried  me  before  the
King.  I  here  found  at  my  comming,  Captaine  Thomas
Boys,  with  three  French  Souldiours,  a  Dutch  Inginer,  and

38

WILLIAM FINCH  a.d.

1610.

a  Venetian Merchant with his sonne, and a servant,

newly  come  by  land  out  of  Christendome.

In  May  and  part  of  June,  the  Towne  was  much  vexed  Terrible  fires
with  fires  night  and  day,  flaming  in  one  part  or  other,  at  AS.ra-
whereby many thousands of houses were consumed,
besides  Men, Women, Children, and Cattell, that we
feared  the  judgement  of  Sodome  and Gomorrha  upon
the  place. I was  long dangerously  sicke  of  a Fever ;
and  in June  the  heat  so exceeded,  that  we  were halfe
rosted alive. June the twenty eighth, arrived Padre  See  how
Peniero,  an arch-knave (a Jesuite I should say) who  Mercha^s
brought  Letters  from  the  Viceroy,  with  many  rich  Pre-  jesuites  wjien
sents,  tending  only  to  thwart  our  affaires. In  this  time,  Jesuites  play
Mo.  Bowcan  was  complained  of  by  the  Captaine  to  the  theMerchants.
King,  who  commaunded  Abdel  Hassan  the  chiefe  Vizier
to  doe  justice  ;  but  birds  of  a  feather  will  flie  together,
and  Mo.  Bowcan  partly  mis-reckoned,  partly  turned  us
over to a Bankrupt Bannian  ; so that of thirty two
thousand  five hundred one M. and an  halfe  due, he
would  pay  but  eleven thousand  :  neither  would  he  pay
that  present.

In  July,  came  newes  of  the  ill  successe  of  the  Kings
forces  in  Decan, who  beeing  within some foure  dayes
journey  of  Amdananager,  hoping  to  raise  the  siege  thereof,  Amdananager
were  forced  through  famine  and  drought,  to  make  their  ^ t0  the
retrait  for  Bramport, whereupon the  Citie, after  much
miserie  indured,  was  lost. This  armie  consisted  of  one
hundred  thousand  horse  at  the  least,  with  infinite  num-
bers of  Cammels  and  Elephants  : so  that  with  the  whole
baggage,  there  could  not  bee  lesse  then  five  or  sixe  hundred
thousand persons, insomuch that the waters were  not  Perill  of  huge
sufficient  for  them  ;  a  Mussocke  of  water  being  sold  for  armes-
a  Rupia,  and  yet  not  enough  to  be  had,  and  all  victualls
at  an  excessive  rate. For  the  Decan  army  still  spoyled
the  Countrey before them, and cut betwixt them and
supplies  for  victualing  them  out  of  Guzerate  and  Bram-
port, daily  making  light  skirmishes  upon  them,  to  their
great  disadvantage,  that  without  retiring  the  whole  army

39

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

1610.

had  been endangered. At their returne to Bramport,

there  were  not  to  bee  found  thirty  thousand  horse,  with

infinite  number  of  Elephants,  Cammels,  and  other  Cattell

Potana  sacked,  dead. This  Moneth  also  came  newes  of  the  sacking  of

Potana,  a  great  Citie  in Purrop,  and surprising of  the

Castle  where  the  Kings  Treasure  lay,  the  Citizens  flying

without making resistance. But upon this Cavalero,

presently came a great Ombra adjoyning, and tooke

him  in the Castle. The Citizens returning, he sent

twelve  of  the  chiefe of  them  to the  King,  who  caused

Punishment  of  them  to  be  shaven,  and  in  womens  attire,  to  bee  carried

Cowardtze. on  Asses  through  all  the  streets  of  Agra,  and  on.  the  next

day  (as  it  is  said)  cut  ofF  their  Heads.

Christianitie All  this  Moneth  also  was  much  stirre  with  the  King

Se6ffed db  ^h ab°ut  Christianitie,  hee  affirming  before  his  Nobles,  that

Momll.  ^  was  ^e  soundest  faith,  and  that  of  Mahomet  lies  and

fables. He  commanded  also  three  Princes,  his  deceassed

brothers  sonnes, to be instructed by  the Jesuites,  and

Christian  apparell  to  be  made  for  them,  the  whole  City

admiring. And  yet  at  the same  time, Abdel Hassans

judgement  was, that  it  was  not  justice  to  pay  debts  to

Christians,  in  Mo.  Bowcans  case,  whereof  againe  we  had

reference  from  the  King  to  him,  perhaps  on  like  ground,

[I.  iv.  428.]  as  some Europasans thinke  it  lawfull  to make  price  of

the  goods  and  ships  of  Ethnikes, eo nomine, therefore

setting  out  men  of  warre,  so  to  make  the  Christian  Name,

not  as  an  ointment  powred  out,  that the  Virgin  soules

may  be  converted,  and  love  Christ,  but  as  filthy  matter

running out of  rotten hearts and poisoned lips, yea,

with  force  and armes, to exoccupate the  Kingdome  of

Christ  in  those  parts  : at  least,  let  reformed  Professors

reforme  this  Man-of-warre-Profession  against  innocents,

that  the  Name  of  God  through  them  be  not  blasphemed

among  the  Gentiles. But  to  returne  to  this  dissimulation

Three  Princes  (as since it hath to the world appeared) those three

Christened. Princes  were  Christened  solemnly,  conducted  to  Church

by  all  the  Christians  of  the  Citie,  to  the  number  of  some

sixtie  horse,  Captaine  Hawkins  being  in  the  head  of  them,

40

WILLIAM FINCH  a.d.

1610.

with  S.  Georges  colours  carried  before  him,  to  the  honour  English  colours
of  the English Nation, letting them flie in the Court  disP/ayed
before  Sha  Selim  himselfe. The  eldest  was  named  Don  ^^
Philippo,  the  second  Don  Carlo,  the  third  Don  Henrico  :
and  on  the ninth  of  September,  was  christened  another
young  Prince,  the  Acabars  brothers  sonnes  sonne,  by  the
name  Don  Duarte,  the  King  giving  daily  charge  to  the
Fathers for their instruction, that they might become
good  Christians.

October the twelfth,  we  were  certified  by  Letters  of  Portugals
M. Jourdaine from Surat, that thirtie Frigats of  the  afraid  to  come
Portugals  were cast  away  on  the  barre  of  Surat,  hasting
before  the  winter  was  broken  up,  to  catch  more  English
many  of  the  men  escaped,  and  were  glad  to  beg  releefe
at  the  English  doore.

§•  v.

Descriptions  of  Fetipore,  Byana ;  the  way  thither ;
of  the  Nill  or  Indico,  and  of  divers  Mogoll
affaires,  Cities,  and  Castles.

He  first  of  November,  I  was  sent  to  buy  Nill  or
Indico  at  Byana.  I  lodged  that  night  at  Menha-
poore,  a  great  Saray,  7  c.  by  which  is  a  Garden,  Sarayisakind

and  Moholl  or  summer  house  of  the  Queene  Mothers,  °fPubllk^lnn

,  . , ryt,  1 *?  r>  See  Stell  and

very  curiously  contrived. 1  he  second  at  Lannowa,  1 1  c. Qrozoder

at  4  c.  end,  is  a  Moholl  of  the  Kings. And at  every

cose  end  from  Agra,  is  erected  a  stone  pillar  for  130  c.

to  Asmere, where lieth interred the body of  a great  Asmere,  a

Moorish Saint, called Hoghee Mondee, whereto the  Mid-giving

•  • •  Saint

Acabar  wanting  children,  made  a  foot-pilgrimage  to  beg

for  issue,  and  caused  a  pillar  at  each  course  to be  set

up ;  and  a  Moholl  with  lodgings  for  sixteene  great  women

at every eighth course alongst, and after his  returne

obtained  three  sonnes.

At  7  c.  on  this  way,  and  12 c.  from  Agra,  is  seated

the  famous  citie  of  Fetipore, built by the Acubar,  and Fetipore

inclosed with a faire stone wall, which yet standeth  descnbed-

41

A.D.
l6lO.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

fresh,  having  foure  faire  and  strong  Gates,  it  being  some
three  English  miles  betwixt  gate  and  gate.  In  the
middest  it  is  all  ruinate,  lying  like  a  waste  desart,  and

Ruines.  very  dangerous  to  passe  through  in  the  night,  the  build-

ings lying  wast  without  inhabitants  ;  much  of  the  ground
beeing  now  converted  to  Gardens,  and  much  sowed  with
Nill  and  other  graine,  that  a  man  standing  there,  would
little  thinke  he  were  in  the  middest  of  a  citie.

To  the  entrance  of  the  gate  from  Agra,  some  course
in  length  upon  a  stony  ascent,  lie  the  ruines  of  the
Suburbs  ;  as  also  without  the  Southwest  gate  for  two
English  miles  in  length,  many  faire  buildings  being  fallen
to  the  ground  :  and  on  the  left  hand  are  many  faire
enclosed  Gardens,  three  miles  alongst  from  the  citie. At

The  Bazar,  the  entrance  of  the  Northeast  Gate,  is  a  goodly  Bazar
(market  place)  of  stone,  halfe  a  mile  long,  being  a
spacious  straight-paved  street,  with  faire  buildings  on
either  side.  Close  within  the  gate  is  the  Kings  Saray,
with  large  stone  lodgings,  but  much  ruined.  At  the
head  of  this  street  stands  the  Kings  house  and  Moholl,
with  much curious building : and on the  further  side

FaireMeskite.  hereof,  upon  an  ascent,  stands  the  goodliest  Meskite  of
the  East.  It  hath  some  twentie  foure  or  thirty  steps
of  ascent  to  the  Gate,  which  is  one  of  the  highest  and
fairest  (I  suppose)  in  the  whole  world  :  on  the  top  are
a  number  of  clustering  pinnacles,  curiously  disposed.
The  top  of  this  Gate  may  be  plainely  seene  eight  or
tenne  miles  distance.  Within  is  a  goodly  spacious  court,
very  curiously  paved  with  free  stone,  about  sixe  times
the  largenesse  of  Londons  Exchange,  with  faire  large
walkes  alongst  the  side,  more  then  twice  as  broad,  and
double  the  height  of  those  about  the  Burse  of  London,
the  pillars  upholding  them,  beeing  of  one  intire  stone  :
and  round  about  are  entrances  into  many  goodly  roomes,
neatly  contrived.  Opposite  to  the  Gate  toward  the
further  side,  stands  a  faire  and  sumptuous  Tombe,  arti-
ficially inlaied  with  mother  of  Pearle,  and  inclosed  with
a  grating  of  stone  curiously  carved. Over  head  is  rich

42

WILLIAM FINCH  a.d.

1610.

pargetting  and  paynting. Herein lyeth  the body  of  a

great  Kalender,  at  whose cost the whole Meskite  was  Kalender  is  an

builded. Under  the  court yard is  a  goodly  Tanke  of  °Ler.K

excellent  water  ; none other being to be had  through  Votaries.

the  citie,  but  brackish  and  fretting,  by  drinking  whereof  Bad  water.

was  caused  such  mortality,  that  the  Acubar  before  it  was

quite  finished,  left  it,  and  remooved  his  seat  to  Agra,  so

that  this  goodly Citie  was  short  lived,  in  fifty  or  sixty

yeares  space  beeing  built  and  ruinate.

It  was  at  the  first  called  Sykary,  which  signifieth,
seeking  or  hunting  :  but  after  the  Acabar  was  returned
from  his  Asmere  Pilgrimage,  and  was  father  of  this
Sha  Selim,  hee  named  it  Fetipore,  that  is,  a  Towne  of  [I-  1V-  429-]
content,  or  place  of  Hearts  desire  obtained.  The  North  F^fe°dretnter'
North-west  side  of  the  Citie,  without  the  walles,  is  a
goodly  Lough  for  2.  or  3  c.  in  length,  abounding  with
good  fish  and  wilde  fowle ;  all  over  which  groweth  the
herbe  which  beareth  the  Hermodactyle,  and  another  bear-  Hermodacty-
ing  a  fruit  like  a  Goblet,  called  Camolachachery,  both  lus  described'
very  cooling  fruits.  The  herbe  which  beareth  the
Hermodactyle,  is  a  weed  abounding  in  most  Tankes  neare
Agra,  spreading  over  all  the  water ;  the  leafe  I  observed
not,  but  the  fruit  is  inclosed  with  a  three  cornered  shell,
of  a  hard  woodie  substance,  having  at  each  angle  a  sharpe
picked  pricking  point,  and  is  a  little  indented  on  both  the
flat  sides  like  two  posternes.  The  fruit  being  greene,  is
soft  and  tender,  white  and  of  a  mealish  taste,  much  eaten
in  India,  being  exceeding  cold  in  my  judgement :  for
alwayes  after  it,  I  desired  Aqua-vitae.  It  is  called  by  the
people  Singarra.  The  other  beareth  a  fruit  in  maner
of  a  Goblet,  flat  on  the  toppe,  and  of  a  soft  greenish
substance,  within  which  a  little  eminent,  stand  sixe  or  eight
small  fruits  like  Akornes,  divided  from  each  other,  and
inclosed  with  a  whitish  filme,  at  the  first  of  a  russetish
greene,  tasting  like  a  Nut  or  Akorne ;  in  the  middest
is  a  small  greene  sprigge  naught  to  be  eaten.

Cannowa is a small countrey Towne, round about  Cannowa.
which  is  made  very  good  Nill,  by  reason  of  the  fatnesse

43

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

of  the  soile,  and  brackishnesse  of  the  water :  it  maketh
yeerely  some  five  hundred  M.  Ouchen  3  c.  distant  makes
very  good ;  besides  which,  no  Towne  but  Byana  it  selfe,
compares  with  this. I  remained heere  to  the two  and

Candere.  twentieth  and  three  and  twentieth.  6  c.  to  Candere,  a
roughish  dirtie  Aldea. At 2 c.  on  this  way,  is  one  of

The  Kings those  Moholls,  before  mentioned. It  is  a  square  stone

jf  -i \j  building:  within  the  first  gate  is  a  small  court,  with  a
place  for  the  King  to  keepe  his  Darsany,  and  two  or  three
other  retiring  roomes,  but  none  of  note.  Within  the
second  court  is  the  Moholl,  being  a  foure-square  thing,
about twice as bigge, or better, then the Exchange ;

Devoncan  is  having  at  each  corner  a  faire  open  Devoncan,  and  in  the

a  Hall.  middest  of  each  side  another,  which  are  to  bee  spread  with
rich  carpets,  and  to  sit  in  to  passe  the  time:  And  betwixt
each  corner  and  this  middle-most,  are  two  faire  large
chambers  for  his  women  (so  that  each  Moholl  receiveth
sixteene)  in  severall  lodgings,  without  doores  to  any  of
them,  all  keeping  open  house  to  the  Kings  pleasure.
Round  by  the  side  goeth  a  faire  paved  walke,  some  eight
foot  broad  :  and  in  the  middest  of  all  the  court  stands
the  Kings  chamber,  where  he  like  a  Cocke  of  the  game
may  crow  over  all.  At  Candere  I  remained  till  the  eight
and  twentieth,  and  returned  to  Bachuna,  4  c.  backe  in  the
way.

Byana.  The twentieth of  December, I went  to  Byana  8  c.

a  backe  way  thorow  the  fields.  This  citie  hath  beene
great  and  faire,  but  is  now  ruinate,  save  two  Sarayes  and  a

Ruines.  long  Bazar,  with  a  few  stragling  houses,  many  faire  ones
being  fallen,  and  many  others  not  inhabited  (except  by
rogues  or  theeves)  so  that  many  streets  are  quite  desolate.
On  the  North-west  some  three  or  foure  cose  off",  are  the
ruines  of  a  Kings  house,  with  many  other  faire  buildings :
the  like  ruines  are  to  bee  seene  on  the  South-west  side,
over  against  a  Towne  called  Scanderbade,  in  like  distance
upon  the  height  of  the  rocky  mountaines  :  the  way  leading
up  is  a  narrow  steepe  stony  cawsey,  not  to  be  passed
on horse-backe,  some  quarter  of  a  mile  the  ascent :  the

44

WILLIAM FINCH  ad.

1610.
entrance  is  thorow  a  small  wicket,  passing  the  lips  of  the
mountaines  in  a  narrow  gutte.  On  the  right  hand,  upon
the  very  edge,  stands  a  pleasant  building,  where  are  divers
Tombes  :  from  each  side  the  way  may  be  made  good
with  stones  against  millions  of  men.  Passing  a  mile
hence  on  a  faire  cawsey,  you  come  to  the  Kings  house,
sometimes  faire,  now  ruinate,  where  a  few  poore  Googers
remaine  in  the  ruines.  Many  Tombes  and  Monuments
yet  remaine.  At  the  foote  of  the  hill  toward  Scanderbade,  A  strongFort.
is  a  pleasant  Valley  inclosed  with  a  wall,  and  therein
many  gardens  of  pleasure.  This  City  hath  been  in
ancient  times  the  seate  of  a  great  Potane  King,  and  hath
had  the  walles  extending  on  the  cliffes  8  c.  in  length,
in  those  places  where  is  any  possibilitie  of  getting  up,
the  rockes  otherwhere  over-hanging :  the  fortifications  on
the  other  side  I  saw  not.  It  hath  beene  a  goodly  city,
inhabited  now  only  with  Googers,  which  are  keepers  of
cattell,  and  makers  of  Butter  and  Cheese.  From  hence
notwithstanding  all  this  strength,  did  the  Acabar  force
Sha  Selim  the  Tyrant,  and  then  laid  it  waste,  as  he  hath
done  Mandow,  and  most  of  the  strong  holds  which  he
tooke.  The  countrey  which  afFordeth  that  rich  Nill  which
takes  name  of  Byana,  is  not  above  twenty  or  thirtie
cose  long.

The  herbe Nill,  groweth in forme not  much unlike  Description  of
Cives  or  Cich-pease,  having a small leafe  like that of  Niuor  Indico.
Sena,  but  shorter  and  broader,  and  set  on  a  very  short
foot-stalke,  the  branches  hard  and  of  a  woodie  substance
like  unto  broome. It  usually  groweth  not  above  a  yard  Tie  growth
high,  and  with  a  stalke  at  the  biggest  (which  is  at  the  atf^rif.feo^
third  yeare)  not  much  exceeding  a  mans  thumbe. The
seed  is  included  in  a  small  round  codde  about  an  inch
long,  resembling  Fcenigraecum,  save  that  it  is  more  blunt
at  both  ends,  as  if  it  had  been  cut  off  with  a  knife. It
carry eth  a  small  flower  like  that  of  Hearts-ease :  the  seed
is ripe in November, and then gathered. The herbe
once  sowne  dureth  three  yeeres, being  cut every yeere
in  August  and  September  after  the  raines. That  of  one

45

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

yeere  is  tender,  and  thereof  is  made  notee,  which  is  a
weighty  Reddish  nill  sinking  in  water,  not  come  to  his
perfection :  that  of  the  second  yeere  is  rich,  and  called
Cyeree,  very  light  and  of  a  perfect  Violet  colour,  swim-
ming on  the  water :  in  the  third  yeere  the  herbe  is
declining,  and  this  Nill  is  called  Catteld,  being  a  weightie
blackish  Nill,  the  worst  of  the  three.  This  herbe  being
[I.  iv.  430.]  cut  the  moneth  aforesaid,  is  cast  into  a  long  cisterne,
where  it  is  pressed  downe  with  many  stones,  and  then
Their  making  filled  with  water  till  it  be  covered,  which  so  remaineth  for
of  Indico.  certaine  dayes,  till  the  substance  of  the  herbe  be  gone  into
the  water.  Then  they  let  the  water  forth  into  another
round  cisterne,  in  the  middest  of  which  is  another  small
cisterne  or  center :  this  water  being  thus  drawne  forth,
they  labour  with  great  staves,  like  batter  or  white  starch,
and  then  let  it  settle,  scumming  off  the  cleare  water  on
the  toppe :  then  labouring  it  afresh,  and  let  it  settle
againe,  drawing  forth  the  cleare  water,  doing  this  oft,  till
nothing  but  a  thicke  substance  remaine ;  which  they  take
foorth  and  spread  on  cloth,  to  dry  in  the  Sunne :  and
beeing  a  little  hardened,  they  take  it  in  their  hands,  and
making  small  balls,  lay  them  on  the  sand  to  dry  (for
any  other  thing  would  drinke  up  the  colour)  this  is  the
cause  of  the  sandy  foot.  So  if  raine  fall,  it  looseth  his
colour  and  glosse,  and  is  called  Aliad.  Some  deceitfully
will  take  of  the  herbe  of  all  three  crops,  and  steepe  them
To  know  good  altogether,  hard  to  be  discerned,  very  knavishly.  Fowre
lnduo.  things  are  required  in  Nill  : a  pure  graine,  a  violet  colour,

his  glosse  in  the  Sunne,  and  that  it  be  dry  and  light,
so  that  swimming  in  the  water,  or  burning  in the  fire,
is  cast  forth  a  pure  light  violet  vapour,  leaving  a few
ashes.
The  Great  About  the  sixt  of  January,  the  King  being  on  hunting,

,  °s°  tnJ, was  assailed  by  a  Lyon  which  hee  had  wounded  with  his

danger  of  a _^  •  ■> ] \ r  iij  r> •  c

ly0n^  Jreece,  with  such  nercenesse,  that  had  not  a  Laptaine  or

his,  a  Resboot,  Tutor  of  the  late  baptized  Princes  inter-
posed himselfe,  thrusting  his  arme  into  the  Lions  mouth
as  hee  ramped  against  his  Majestie,  he  had  in  all  likelihood

46

WILLIAM FINCH  a.d.

1610.

been  destroyed. In  this  strugling,  Sultan  Corom,  Rajaw

Ranidas,  and  others  came  in,  and  amongst  them  slew  the

Lyon, that Captaine having first received thirty two

wounds :  whom  therfore  the  King  tooke  up  into  his  owne

Palanke,  with  his  owne  hands  also  wiped  and  bound  up

his  wounds,  and  made  him  a  Captaine  of  five  thousand  His  thankful-

horse,  in  recompence  of  that  his  valourous  loyaltie.  nesse'

The  Kings  manner  of  hunting  is  this :  about  the  Kin£s  manner
beginning  of  November,  accompanied  with  many  thou-  °J  huntmS-
sands,  he  goeth  forth  of  his  Castle  of  Agra,  and  hunteth
some  thirty  or  forty  Course  round  about  the  Citie ;  so
continuing  till  the  ende  of  March,  when  the  heat  drives
him  home  againe.  He  causeth,  with  choise  men,  a  cer-
taine  wood  or  desart  place  to  bee  incircled,  so  contracting
themselves  to  a  neerer  compasse,  till  they  meet  againe  ;
and  whatsoever  is  taken  in  this  inclosure,  is  called  the
Kings  Sikar  or  game,  whether  men  or  beasts ;  and  who-
soever lets  ought  escape,  without  the  Kings  mercy,  must
loose  his  life.  The  beasts  taken,  if  mans  meat,  are  sold,
and  the  money  given  to  the  poore :  if  men,  they  remaine
the  Kings  slaves,  which  he  yearely  sends  to  Cabull,  to
barter  for  horse  and  dogs ;  these  beeing  poore  miserable
theevish  people  that  live  in  woods  and  desarts,  little
differing  from  beasts.

This  Moneth,  the  King  was  providing  more  forces  for
Decan,  notwithstanding  the  Decanees  required  his  peace,
offering  to  restore  what  they  had  taken.  Caun  Asom
was  sent  Generall,  and  with  him  twentie  thousand  horse,
accompanied  with  Matrobet  Caun  another  Great  Captaine,
together  with  infinite  treasure.  With  these  forces  went
John  Frenchman,  and  Charles  Charke,  entertained  in  his  This  Ch.
service  for  the  warres.  Charke  I  have

January the ninth, I departed  from Agra  for  Lahor  s-tnce  in  Lon_
to recover debts, and  carried twelve carts laden with  don  after
Nil  in hope  of  a  good  price. The  places  I  passed  were  divers  yeares
Rownocta  twelve  courses,  Badeg Sara 10. Acabarpore  servlce-
12  c.  formerly  a  great  city,  still  famous  for  the  Antiquities  i^or.
of  Indian  Gobins  or  Saints. A  little  short  of  this  place,

47

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

is  a  faire  Deury  inclosed  with  a  stone  wall,  in  which  is  a

Devoncan, and round about  a  little distance  in vaults

Indians  (or  cloisters)  are  to  be  seen  many  Pagods,  which  are  stone

idolatry.  images  of  monstrous  men  feareful  to  behold,  but  adored

by the Indians with flowers and offerings. Houdle

13  c. At  the  entrance  of  the  Saray  is  a  faire  fountaine

three stories,  and one hundred steps. Pulwooll 12  c.

Ferreedabade 12 c. Dely 10  c. On  the left  hand  is

*Dely.  There  seene  the  carkasse  of  old  Dely,*  called  the  nine  castles,

are  said  to  bee  and  fiftie  two  gates,  now  inhabited  onely  by  Googers. A

pure  Delyes little  short  is  a  stone  bridge  of  eleven  arches,  over  a  branch

wtu  11!l-j.l of  Gemini: from  hence  a  broad  way  shaded  with  great

eldest  built  by  J  . 6

Rase,  who  by  trees,  leading  to the  sepulchre  or  Jriamaron this Kings

his  Ponde  or  Grandfather, in  a  large  roome  spread  with  rich carpets,

Magicians ^  the  Tombe  it  selfe  covered  with  a  pure  white  sheet,  a  rich

co?nse  !r!e  Semiane  over  head,  and  a  front,  certaine  bookes  on  small

iron  stake  tressels,  by  which  stand  his  Sword,  Tucke,  and  shooes  :

which  he  at  the  entrance  are other Tombes of  his Wives and

pulled  out  Daughters. Beyond  this, under like shaded way you

flood KfT^  come  to  the  KinSs  house  and  Moholl>  now  vinous. The

Snake  which  City  is  2  c.  betweene  Gate  and  Gate,  begirt  with  a  strong

his  Ponde  said  wall, but much ruinate, as are many  goodly houses :

was  signe  of  within and  about  this Citie are  the  Tombes  of  twenty

ThetTof'his  Potan  Kinss>  a11  ver^ faire  and  stately- The  Kings  of

race  was  Rase  India are here to be crowned, or else they  are  held

Pethory,  who  Usurpers. It is  seated  in a goodly plaine, environed

after  seven  -with  goodly  pleasant  Gardens  and  Monuments.
times  taking  a Nalero  is  hence 14  c.  about  2  c.  without  Dely,  is  the

was  at  last  by  remainder  of  an  auncient  Mole  or  hunting  house,  built  by

him  taken  and  Sultan Berusa a great Indian Monarch, with much

slaine. He  curiositie of  stone-worke :  with and  above the  rest, is

began  the  to  ^Q  seen  a  stone  *  Pillar,  which  passing  through  three

dome Thev  stories>  is  higher  then  all  twenty  foure  foot,  having  at  the

came  from  the  top  a  Globe,  and  a  halfe  Moone  over  it. This  stone  they

mountaines  say,  stands  as  much  under  the  earth,  and  is  placed  in

between  Can-

dahar  and  Cabull.  The  second  built  by  Togall  Sha,  a  Potan  King.  The  third  little  of  note.
The  fourth  by  Shersheselim,  where  is  that  Tombe  of  Hamaron.  *A  stately  Obeliske  with
Greeke  or  Hebrew  inscriptions  as  some  affirme,  supposed  to  be  set  there  by  Alexander.

48

WILLIAM FINCH  a.d.

1610.

the  water,  being  all  one  entire  stone  (some  say  Naserden-  [I.  iv.  431.]
gady  a  Potan  King  would  have  taken  it  up,  and  was
prohibited  by  multitude  of  Scorpions,  and  that  it  hath
inscriptions.)  In  divers  parts  of  India  the  like  are  to  be
seene,  and  of  late  was  found  buried  in  the  ground  about
Fettipore  a  stone  piller  of  an  hundred  cubits  length,  The  stone  of
which  the  King  commanded  to  bring  to  Agra,  but  was  a'
broken  in  the  way,  to  his  great  griefe.  It  is  remarkeable,
that  the  Quarries  of  India,  specially  neere  Fettipore
(whence  they  are  carryed  farre)  are  of  such  nature,  that
they  may  be  cleft  like  logges,  and  sawne  like  plancks  to
seele  chambers,  and  cover  houses  of  a  great  length  and
breadth.  From  this  Monument  is  said  to  bee  a  way
under  ground  to  Dely  Castle.  Now  here  remaine  onely
Googers,  and  there  are  store  of  Deere.  We  saw  in  the
way  the  ruines  of  divers  places,  and  neere  the  same,  the
ruines  of  a  wall  20  c.  in  circuit,  being  a  Parke  for  game.
Some  part  of  this  way  was  theevish,  and  some  report  being
given  out  of  the  Kings  death,  many  Rogues  with  that
false  alarme  were  abroad  :  we  met  the  Fosder  of  Dely
with  some  2.  thousand  horse  and  foot  in  their  pursuit,
who  burnt  their  Townes,  &  tooke  them  and  theirs  what-
soever he  could  get :  and  the  next  day  at  breakfast  we
were  like  to  be  surprized  by  theeves.

Gonowre 14  c.  Panneput 14  c.  at  the entry  whereof
was  placed  a  Manora,  with  the  heads  of  some  hundred
theeves  newly  taken  ;  their  bodies  set  on  stakes  a  mile  in
length. Carmall 14  c.  the  way  theevish,  where  but  for
our peece language we had been assaulted. On the
North-west extend Mountaines neere to Lahor from
hence,  with  snow  on  the  tops. Tanassar  14  c.  here  is  a
Castle,  a  goodly  Tanke,  and  by  it  Pagods,  much  rever-  Pagods.
enced  by  all  the  Gentiles  throughout  India. Neere  it  also  Sal-armoniake
are the  Sal-armoniake pits. Shabad or Goobade 10  c.  pits.
Amballa  12  c. Hollowa  Saray  14  c. Syrinam  7  c.  it  hath  The  Kings
a  faire  Tanke  with  a  Summer-house  in  the  middest, to  iarden-  Some
which  leads  a  Bridge  of  fifteene  stone  arches  very  pleasant.  Jade  jn
From  hence  is  a  small  River  cut  to  the  Kings  Garden  a  Dom.  1580.
iv  49  D

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

corse  distant,  with  a  cawsey  of  forty  foot  broad,  planted
with  trees  on  both  sides  to  it.  The  Garden  is  fowre
square,  each  square  a  cose  in  length,  or  better,  inclosed
with  a  Bricke-wall,  richly  planted  with  all  sorts  of  fruits
and  flowers,  rented  yeerely  (as  I  was  told)  for  fifty
thousand  Rupias :  crossed  with  two  maine  walkes  forty
foot  broad,  and  eight  high,  with  water  running  alongst
stone  channells  in  the  middest,  and  planted  on  both  sides
thicke  with  faire  Cypresses :  one  of  these  cawseys  is  also
paved  with  peble  curiously  inter-wrought.  At  the  cross-
ing stands  an  eight  square  Mohol  with  eight  chambers  for
women,  in  the  midst  thereof  a  faire  Tank ;  over  these
eight  other  roomes,  with  faire  Galleries  round  about :  on
the  top  of  all  a  faire  Jounter;  the  whole  building  curiously
wrought  in  stone,  with  faire  painting,  rich  carving,  and
pargetting :  and  on  two  sides  two  faire  Tankes  in  the
midst  of  a  faire  stone  chounter,  planted  round  with
Cypresse  trees  :  a  little  distant  is  another  Mohol,  but
not  so  curious.

From hence  we  passed to  Dorapy  15  c.  Pulloceque

Saray  13  c.  Nicoder  12  c.  Sultanpoore  1 1  c.  Fetipore  7  c.

a  Saray  built  (if  it  were  finished)  by  Sha  Selim,  in  memo-

riall  of  the  overthrow  given  Sultan  Cusseroom  his  eldest

The  cause  of sonne : the  occasion  whereof  was  this. Sha  Selim  upon

.  iuarrel some  disgust  tooke  armes  in  his  fathers  life  time,  and  fled

tijoixt  ths

Mogoll and 'his  mto  PurroP>  where  he  kept  the  strong  Castle  of  Alobasse
eldest  some,  (but  came  in  some  three  moneths  before  his  fathers
deceasse)  whereupon  Acubar  gave  the  Crowne  to  Sultan
Cusseroom  his  sonne.  But  after  Acabars  death,  Selim  by
his  friends,  seized  on  the  Castle  and  treasure,  and  his
sonne  fled  for  Lahor,  where  hee  gathered  some  twelve
thousand  horse  all  good  souldiours  and  Mogols,  possess-
ing the  Suburbs  twelve  daies,  and  proclaimed  King  in  the
Kasse,  and  his  Father  in  the  Castle.  In  this  place  he  gave
battell  to  Strek  Fereed,  and  disordered  his  three  hundred
horse,  and  put  them  to  the  sword :  to  the  second  of  him
came  Melee  Ale  Cutwall  (the  King  being  some  20  c.
behind)  with  some  two  hundred  horse,  beating  up the

5°

WILLIAM FINCH  a.d.

1610.

Kings  drummes,  and  giving  a  brave  assault,  shouting  God

save King Selim, upon which the Princes souldiours

fainted  and fled, the  Prince himselfe fleeing  only  with

five  horse,  and  got  30  c.  beyond  Lahor  for  Cabull,  which

if  he  had  gotten,  he  would  have  put  his  father  to  further

trouble : but beeing to passe  a River  where hee  gave

Mohors  of  Gold,  the  Boate-man  grew  in  distrust,  and  in

the middest of the Channell leapt over-boord, and

swamme to  the shoare,  where  hee  gave  notice  to the

Governour  of  the  Towne  adjoyning,  who  presently  with

fiftie  horse  came  downe  to  the  River,  where  the  Boat  was

still  floting,  imbarqued  himselfe  in  another,  and  saluted

him  by  the  name  of  King,  dissemblingly  offering  his  aide,

and  inviting  him  to  his  house:  which  the  Prince  accept-  The  prince

ing,  was  locked  up  with  his  Company  and  guarded,  till n'

hee  had  sent  the  King  word,  who  sent  Germaunabeg  to

fetch him fettered on  an Elephant. From hence his

Father  proceeded  to  Cabul,  punishing  such  as  he  found

tardie  in  this  revolt,  carrying  his  sonne  with  him  prisoner,

and  returning  by  this  place  where  the  battell  was  fought  Ofhhenhrge-

(as  some  say)  caused  his  eyes  to  be  burned  out  with  a  mf-nf>&c-y°u

1  1  1 1  i- i r  1  1 i 1  •  -i  1  • shallreadafter

glasse ;  others  say,  onely  blind-rolded  him  with  a  napkin -tn  &>  7^  Rm

tying  it  behind,  and  sealing  it  with  his  owne  seale,  which  Journal!.

yet  remaineth,  and himselfe prisoner in the Castle  of

Agra. All  alongst  on  both  sides  the  way  from  Cabul  to

Agra,  a  reasonable  distance,  the  King  caused  trees  to  be

planted  to  shade  the  way,  in  remembrance  of  this  exploit,

and  called  this  place  Fetipoore,  that  is,  hearts  content,  as  TwoFetipores.

ye before heard of  the Citie, which for his  birth was

named  so  by  his  Father  Accubar : these  as  any  decay,

must  by  the  peoples  toyle  be  supplied.

From  hence  to  Hoghe  Moheede  10  c.  Cancanna  Saray
12  c.  Lahor  7  c.  where  I  arrived  February  the  fourth.
On  the  twentie  eighth,  arrived  here  a  Persian  Embassa-
dor allied  to  Sha  Abash,  with  a  great  Caravan  accom-
panying him.  I  by  them  learned,  that  the  way  to  ..
Candahar  was  now  cleere,  the  warres  being  ended,  which  fray  tor  to
the  Turkish  Gelole  had  caused,  who  the  former  yeare  had  two  Kings.

Si

A.D.
l6lO.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[I.  iv.  432.]  fled  to  the  Persian  with  some  ten  thousand  Turkes,  and
had  obtained  some  Iaggere  neere  thereto,  whereof  he
purposing  to  make  himselfe  King,  was  overthrowne,  and
being  sent  for  by  the  Persian,  refused  to  come,  till
deluded  by  promise  of  a  mariage,  he  was  got  to  the
Court,  and  there  lost  his  head.  We  heard  also  of  the
Persians  taking  from  the  Turke,  the  strong  Castle  of
Curdes,  after  a  yeeres  siege,  with  other  Asian  and  Euro-
paean  newes.

§.  VI.

Description  of  Lahor,  and  of  the  Kings  house
there :  how  the  Mogolls  entred  India  :  Of
divers  strong  holds,  strange  Beasts,  and  Plants ;
fond  Superstitions :  Of  the  Wayes,  Theeves,
Outlawes,  Cities,  Buildings,  adjoyned  and
intermixed :  Princes  not  subject :  Agra  and
Echebars  Sepulchre  described.

Ahor  is  one  of  the  greatest  Cities  of  the  East,
containing  some  24  c.  in  circuit  by  the  ditch
which  is  now  casting  up  about  it,  and  by  the
Kings  command,  now  to  be  inclosed  with  a  strong  wall.
In  the  time  of  the  Potans  it  was  but  a  Village,  Multan
then  flourishing,  till  Hamawn  enlarged  this.  The  Towne
and  Suburb  is  some  6  c.  thorow.  The  castle  or  Towne
is  inclosed  with  a  strong  bricke  wall,  having  thereto  twelve
faire  gates,  nine  by  land,  and  three  openings  to  the  River :
the  streets  faire  and  well  paved,  the  inhabitants  most
Baneans  and  handicrafts  men ;  all  white  men  of  note
lying  in  the  Suburbs.  The  buildings  are  faire  and  high,
with  bricke  and  much  curiositie  of  carved  windowes  and
doores :  most  of  the  Gentiles  doores  of  sixe  or  seven
steps  ascent,  and  very  troublesome  to  get  up,  so  built  for
more  securitie,  and  that  passengers  should  not  see  into
their  houses.  The  castle  is  seated  on  Ravee,  a  goodly
River  which  falleth into Indus,  downe  which go many

52

The  houses.

The  River
Ravee.

WILLIAM FINCH  a.d.

1610.

Boats,  of  sixtie  tunne  or  upwards,  for  Tatta  in  Sind,  after
the  fall  of  the  raine,  being  a  journey  of  some  fortie  dayes
alongst  by  Multan,  Seetpore,  Buchur,  Rauree,  &c.

This River commeth from the East, and runneth
Westerly  by  the  North  side  of  the  Citie : upon  which
within  the  Castle  is  the  Kings  house,  passing  in  at  the  The  Kings
middle  gate  to  the  River-ward. Within  the  Citie  on  the °use .,  ,

^  described.

left-hand,  you  enter  thorow  a  strong  gate ;  and  a  Musket

shot further  another smaller, into a faire  great square

court,  with  Atescanna  for  the  Kings  guard  to  watch  in.

On  the  left-hand,  thorow  another  gate  you  enter  into  an

inner  court,  where  the  King  keepes  his  Darbar,  and  round

about  which  court  are  Atescanna's  also  for  great  men  to

watch  in. In  the  middest  there  stands  a  high pole  to

hang  a  light  on. From  hence  you  go  up  to  a  faire  stone

Jounter  or  small  court,  in  the  middest  whereof  stands  a

faire  Devoncan,  with  two  or  three  other  retiring  rooms,

wherein  the  King  sits  out  all  the  first  part  of  the  night,

commonly  from  eight  to  eleven. On  the  walles is the

Kings  Picture  sitting  cross-legged  on  a  chaire  of  State  :  on  Pictures.

his  right-hand  Sultan  Pervese,  Sultan  Caroone,  and  Sultan

Timoret,  his  sonnes: next  these, Sha  Morat,  and  Don

Sha,  two  of  his  brothers  (the  three  baptized  before  spoken,

were sonnes of  this  later) next them Emersee Sheriff,

eldest  brother  to  Caun  Asom  (of  whom  it  is  reported  his

estate to be such, that of one  hundred chiefe women

which  he  kept,  he  never  suffred  any  of  their  clothing  after

their  first  wearing  to  be  ever  touched  by  any  stranger,  but

caused  them  to  bee  buried  in  the  ground  there  to  rot :  as

also  that  he  alway  had  in  service  five  hundred  Massal-

gees,  in  so  much  that  whensoever  he  went  from  court  to

his  house  in  Agra,  which  was  at  least  a  corse,  no  man

removed  foote  with  his  torch,  but  stood  all  alongst  to  his

house) next this man, Emersee Rostene, late King of  The  Pictures

Candhar,  then  Can  Canna  (which  signifieth  Prince  of  the  0f! th*  wdl  of

7  \  o  i/ig  jrfinces  or

Cannes) then Cuttup Caun, Rajaw  Manisengo, Caun  ~.eai

Asom, Asoph Caun, Sheck Fereed,  Kelish Caun,  and

Rajaw Juggonat (who at his death  had seven of  his

53

men.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

friends  that  burned  themselves  with  him,  besides  one
of  his  sisters,  and  a  brothers  childe.)  On  the  left  hand
of  the  King  stands  Rajaw  Bowsing,  who  beats  away  flyes,
then  Rajaw  Ramdas,  who  holds  his  sword,  ClerifF  Caun,
Caun  John,  Jemana  Lege  or  Mawbet  Caun,  Mocrow
Bowcan,  Rajaw  Bossow,  Rajaw  Ransing,  Majo  Kesso,  and
Lala  Bersing.  Note  also  that  in  this  Gallery,  as  you  enter,
on  the  right-hand  of  the  King,  over  the  doore  is  the
Picture  of  our  Saviour;  opposite  on  this  left-hand  of  the
Virgin  Mary.  This  Devoncan  is  very  pleasantly  seated,
over-looking  the  Ravee.

From  hence  passing  thorow  a  small  entrie  to  the  West,
you  enter  another  small  Court,  where  is  another  open
Chounter  of  stone  to  sit  in,  covered  with  rich  Semianes.
From  hence  you  enter  into  a  small  Gallery,  at  the  end  of
which,  next  the  River,  thorow  a  small  window,  the  King
looks  forth  at  his  Dersanee,  to  behold  the  fights  of  wilde
beasts  on  the  meadow  by  the  River.  On  the  wall  of  this
Gallery  is  drawne  the  Picture  of  the  Acabar  sitting  in
his  State,  and  before  him  Sha  Selim  his  sonne,  standing
with  a  Hawke  on  his  fist,  and  by  him  Sultan  Cusseroom,
Sultan  Pervis,  Sultan  Coroome,  his  three  sonnes :  at  the
end  is  a  small  Devoncan,  where  the  King  useth  to  sit;
behind  which  is  his  lodging  chamber,  and  before  it  all
open  into  a  paved  court,  alongst  the  right-hand  whereof
The  Moholh.  runneth  a  small  Moholl  of  two  stories,  each  containing
[I.  iv.  433.]  eight  faire  lodgings  for  severall  women,  with  Galleries  and
windowes  looking  to  the  River,  and  to  the  court.  All
the  doores  of  these  chambers  are  to  bee  fastened  on  the
out-side,  and  none  within.  In  the  Gallery  where  the
Pictures  of  King  useth  to  sit,  are  drawne  over-head  many  Pictures  of
Angels  and  Angels,  with  Pictures  of  Banian  Dews,  or  rather  Divels,
intermixt  in  most  ugly  shape,  with  long  homes,  staring
eyes,  shagge  haire,  great  fangs,  ugly  pawes,  long  tailes,
with  such  horrible  difTormity  and  deformity,  that  1  wonder
the  poore  women  are  not  frighted  therewith.  Within  this
court  is  a  pleasant  Devoncan  and  lodgings,  and  the  way
to  another  Moholl  for  the  King  to  passe,  but  none  other.

54

WILLIAM FINCH  ad.

1610.

Now  to  returne  to  the  former  court,  where  the  Adees
or  Guard  keepe  their  watch,  there  is  also  on  the  left
hand  the  new  Derbar,  beyond  it  another  small  court
with  Atescanna,  and  passing  thorow  another  gate,  a  faire
large  square  Moholl,  called  the  New  Moholl,  of  that  Larg*  Moho11
largenesse  that  it  may  lodge  two  hundred  women  in  state  *°]  ^  "
all  severall.  Likewise  returning  to  the  great  court,
passing  right  on  you  enter  another  small  paved  court
on  the  left  hand,  and  into  another  Moholl,  the  stateliest
of  the  three,  contrived  into  sixteene  severall  great  lodgings,
each  having  faire  lodgings,  a  Devoncan  (or  Hall)  a  small
paved  court,  each  her  Tanke,  and  enjoying  a  little  world
of  pleasure  and  state  to  her  selfe ;  all  seated  very
pleasantly  upon  the  River.  Before  the  Moholl  of  Sultan
Casserooms  mother,  is  placed  an  high  pole  to  hang  a
light  on,  as  before  the  King,  for  that  shee  brought  forth
his  first  sonne  and  heire.  In  the  midst  stands  a  goodly
Gallery  for  the  King  to  sit  in,  with  such  ugly  Pictures  over-
head as  before.  At  the  end  are  drawne  many  portraitures  Plctures  °fh"
of  the  King  in  state  sitting  amongst  his  women,  one  w°men  <™
holding  a  flaske  of  wine,  another  a  napkin,  a  third  pre-
senting the  Peally,  behind  one  punkawing,  another
holding  his  sword,  another  his  bow,  and  two  or  three
arrowes,  &c.

Before  this  Gallery  is  a  faire  paved  court,  with  stone
gratings,  and  windowes  alongst  the  waters  side ;  at
the  end  a  faire  marble  Jounter,  convexed  over-head,
looking  over  the  River,  beneath  it  a  Garden  of  pleasure  ;
behind,  the  Kings  lodgings  very  sumptuous,  the  walles
and  seelings  all  over-laid  with  pure  gold  ;  and  round
alongst  the  sides,  about  a  mans  height,  some  three  foote
distant  are  placed  faire  Venice  Looking-glasses,  three  and
three  each  above  other  :  and  below  these  alongst  the
walles,  are  drawne  many  pictures  of  this  mans  Ancestors,
as  of  Acabar  his  Father,  Hamowne  his  Grand-father,
Babur  his  great  Grand-father,  who  first  set  foote  into  Babur  first
India,  with  thirtie  of  his  Nobles,  all  clad  like  Kalendars  JSSJi,
or  Fookeers,  which  so  came  to  Dely  to  Secanders  Court

55

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

then  raigning,  where  by  his  very  countenance  he  was
discovered,  yet  found  mercy,  and  returned  upon  his  oath
not  to  attempt  any  thing  during  the  said  Secanders  raigne  ;
which  he  performed  :  but  after  his  death  he  sent  his
sonne  Hamawne  upon  his  Successor  Abram,  from  whom
he  tooke  the  whole  Kingdome.  Yet  at  length  rose  up
a  great  Captaine  of  the  Blood-Royall  in  Bengala,  who
fought  a  great  battel  with  Hamawne  neare  Ganges,  put
him  to  flight,  and  so  closely  followed  him,  that  he  drave
him  forth  of  the  Kingdome  to  the  Persian  Shaw  ;  of
whom  hee  obtained  new  Forces  (with  whom  came  Byram,
Caun  Canna  his  father,  for  Generall)  and  reconquered
all,  living  after  that  in  security.  This  King  dying,  left
Acabar  very  yong,  appointed  Byrame  Caun  Protector,
whom  the  Acabar,  comming  to  yeares,  cast  off,  and  on
a  Roomery  or  Pilgrimage  to  Mecca,  as  is  said,  made
away  with  him.  His  sonne  Can  Canna  or  Caun,  of
the  Caunees,  doth  also  much  curbe  Sha  Selim  the  King,
with  his  friends  and  Allyes,  being  able  to  make  better
then  an  hundred  thousand  horse.  Sha  Selim  affirmeth
himselfe  to  be  the  ninth  lawfully  descended  from  the
Tamerlane,  loynes  of  Tamerlane  the  Great,  being  the  Great-grand-
child of  Babur,  King  of  Cabull.

But  to  returne  to  the  entrance  of  this  Moholl,  passing
forth  of  that  court  thorow  a  strong  gate,  you  enter
into  the  City  againe  ;  this  house  and  appurtenances  of
Mohols  being  at  the  least  two  English  miles  in  circuit.
On  the  East-side  of  the  Castle  hard  without  the  wall,
Asoph  Caun  is  the  Garden  of  Asoph  Caun,  small,  neat,  with  walkes
his  Garden.  (planted  with  Cypresse-trees)  divers  Tankes  and  Jounters  :
as  you  enter,  a  faire  Devoncan  supported  with  stone
pillars,  with  a  faire  Tanke  in  the  midst,  and  in  the
midst  of  that,  on  foure  stone  pillars,  a  Jounter  for
coolenesse.  Beyond  are  other  Galleries  and  walkes,  divers
lodgings  for  his  women  neatly  contrived  ;  and  behind,
a  small  Garden,  and  Garden-house.  In  the  midst  of
the  Garden  is  a  very  stately  Jounter  with  faire  build-
ings  over-head  and a  Tanke in the center with large

56

WILLIAM FINCH  a.d.

1610.

and  goodly  Galleries  alongst  the  foure  sides  thereof,
supported  with  high  stone  pillars.  Adjoyning  to  this
is  a  Garden  of  the  Kings,  in  which  are  very  good  Apples,  apples,  with
but  small,  Toot  white  and  red,  Almonds,  Peaches,  Figges,  fj^ n
Grapes,  Quinces,  Orenges,  Limmons,  Pomgranats,  Roses,
Stock-gellow-flowers,  Marigolds,  Wall-flowers,  Ireos,
Pinkes  white  and  red,  with  divers  sorts  of  Indian
Flowers.

On  the  West-side  of  the  Castle  is  the  Ferry  to  passe
over  to  Cabul  (and  so  to  Tartary  or  Cascar,)  a  very
great  road-way,  and  the  further  side  of  the  River  is  a
goodly  Countrey.  Infinit  numbers  of  Gardens  full  of
rarity  exceeds,  two  or  3  c.  in  length.  Passing  the  Sugar
Gonge  is  a  faire  Meskite  built  by  Shecke  Fereed  ;  beyond
it  (without  the  Towne,  in  the  way  to  the  Gardens)  is
a  faire  monument  for  Don  Sha  his  mother,  one  of  the
Acabar  his  wives,  with  whom  it  is  said  Sha  Selim  had
to  do  (her  name  was  Immacque  Kelle,  or  Pomgranate
kernell)  upon  notice  of  which  the  King  caused  her  to
be  inclosed  quicke  within  a  wall  in  his  Moholl,  where
shee  dyed :  and  the  King  in  token  of  his  love,  commands
a  sumptuous  Tombe  to  be  built  of  stone  in  the  midst
of  a  foure-square  Garden  richly  walled,  with  a  gate,
and  divers  roomes  over  it  :  the  convexity  of  the  Tombe
he  hath  willed  to  be  wrought  in  workes  of  gold,  with
a  large  faire  Jounter  with  roomes  over-head.  Note
that  most  of  these  monuments  which  I  mention,  are  of
such  largenesse,  that  if  they  were  otherwise  contrived,  [I.  iv.  434.]
would  have  roome  to  entertaine  a  very  good  man,  with  his
whole  houshold.  Without  the  Dely  Droware,  where  the
Nolat  or  great  Drum  beats,  is  a  goodly  streight  street,
about  three  quarters  of  a  mile  long,  all  paved  ;  at  the
end  of  which  is  the  Bazar,  by  it  the  great  Saray,  besides
which  are  divers  others,  both  in  the  City  and  Suburbs,
wherein  divers  neate  lodgings  are  to  be  let,  with  doores,
lockes  and  keyes  to  each.  Hence  to  the  North-east
lyeth  Ambere,  the  place  of  hospitality :  from  hence  to
the  South-east  the  habitation  of  divers  loving,  &c.

57

A.D.
l6ll.
Anno  161 1.
Cabull  sacked
by  theeves.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  seventeenth  of  May,  came  news  of  the  sacking
of  Cabul  by  the  Potan  theeves,  which  kept  in  the
Mountains,  being  eleven  thousand  foot,  and  one
thousand  horse,  the  Governour  thereof  being  at  Gelala-
bade  about  other  affaires,  &  the  Garrison  so  weak,  that
they  were  able  only  to  maintaine  the  Castle.  In  six
houres  they  spoiled  the  City  and  retired  with  great
booty.  The  King  for  better  awing  of  these  rebels,  hath
placed  twenty  three  Ombraes  betwixt  Lahor  and  Cabul,
and  yet  all  will  not  serve,  they  often  sallying  from  the
mountaines,  robbing  Caravans  and  ransacking  townes.
The  eighteenth  of  August,  arrived  a  great  Caravan  from
Persia,  by  whom  we  had  newes  from  an  Armenian,
which  had  served  M.  Boys,  of  the  French  Kings  death,
and  of  affaires  betwixt  the  Turk  and  Persian  ;  he  having
Taufu  raced,  destroyed  the  country  about  Tauris,  raced  the  Citie,
and  filled  up  the  wells  to  hinder  the  Turks  armie  :
the  Merchants  by  this  means  (to  our  griefe)  not  daring
to  adventure  beyond  Candhar.

Of  divers  wayes  in  the  Mogols  Kingdome,  to  and
from  Lahor  and  Agra,  and  places  of  note  in
them.

FRom  Lahor  to  Cabull  passing  the  Ravee  at  10  c.
stands  Googes  Seray:  beyond  which  8  c.  Emen-
bade,  a  faire  City :  thence  to  Chumaguckur  1 2  c.  a
great  towne :  to  Guzurat  14  c.  a  faire  Citie  of  great
trade :  at  7  c.  of  this  way  you  passe  the  River  Chantrow,
neare  a  corse  over :  to  Howaspore  12  c.  to  Loure
Rotas  1 5  c.  a  Citie  with  a  strong  Castle  on  a  Mountaine,
the  Frontier  of  the  Potan  kingdome  to  Hattea  15  c.
to  Puckow  4  c.  to  Raulepende  14  c.  to  Collapanne  15  c.
to  Hassanabdall  4  c.  a  pleasant  Towne  with  a  small
River,  and  many  faire  Tanks,  in  which  are  many
fishes  with  gold  rings  in  their  noses  hung  by  Acabar,
the  water  so  cleare,  that  you  may  see  a  penny  in  the
bottome :  to  Attock  1 5  c.  a  Citie  with  a  strong  Castle,
by  which Indus passeth in great  beautie : to Pishore

58

Relation  of  the
way  from
Lahor  to
Cabull,beyond
Cabull  6oc-
runne  moun-
taines, at  the
foote  of  which
lyeth  the  way
to  Cascar.

WILLIAM FINCH  a.d.

1611.

36  c.  to  Alleek  Meskite  10  c.  the  way  dangerous  for
rebels,  which  are  able  to  make  ten  or  twelve  thousand
men :  to  Ducka  12  c.  to  Beshoule  6  c.  to  Abareek
6  c.  to  Aleboga  9  c.  by  which  runneth  Cow,  a  great
River,  which  comes  from  Cabul :  (way  still  theevish)
to  Gelalabade  4  c.  to  Loure-charebage  4  c.  to  Budde-
charbag  6  c.  to  Nimla  8  c.  to  Gondoma  4  c.  to  Surcrood
4  c.  a  Saray,  with  a  small  River  which  lookes  red,  and
makes  to  have  a  good  stomack :  to  Zagdelee  8  c.  to
Abereek  8  c.  to  Dowaba  8  c.  a  great  mountain  in
the  way  4  c.  ascent :  to  Butta  Cauke  8  c.  to  Camree
3  c.  to  Cabul  3  c.  It  is  a  great  and  faire  Citie,  the  Cabull
first  seate  of  this  Kings  great  Grand-father,  with  two
Castles  and  many  Sarayes.  20  c.  beyond  is  Chare-
cullow,  a  pleasant  faire  Citie,  and  20  c.  beyond  Gore-
bond,  a  great  Citie  bordering  upon  Usbeke.  150  c.
beyond  Cabul  is  Taul  Caun,  a  Citie  in  Buddocsha.

From Cabull  to Cascar, with the Caravan, is some  Cascar.
two  or  three  moneths  journey. It  is  a  great  kingdome,
and  under  the  Tartar. A  chiefe Citie  of  trade  in  his
Territorie is Yar Chaun, whence comes much Silke,  Tar  Chaun.
Purslane,  Muske,  and  Rheubarb,  with  other  Merchandize :
all  which  come  from  China,  the  gate  or  entrance  whereof  China.
is some two or three moneths journey from hence.
When  they  come  to  this  entrance, they  are  forced  to
remaine under  their  Tents,  and by license send some
ten  or  fifteen  Merchants  at  once  to  doe  their  businesse,
which  being  returned,  they may send as many  more.
But by no meanes can the whole Caravan enter at
once.

From  Lahor  to  Cassimere  the  way  is  as  in  Cabull  way  Of  this  see  my
to  Guzerat :  from thence  North,  or  somewhat  Easterly g\ ^' c'
withall 16  c. to  Bimbar; to  Joagek Hately 14 c. to  Goes  his'
Chingesque Hately 10 c. to  Peckly 10  c. to  Conowa  travellfrom
12 c. thence 8 c. you  ascend  a  mountaine  called  Hast  Lahor  to
Caunk  Gate,  on the top  of  which  is a goodly plaine,  ^f^**4
from whence to Cassimer is 12 c. thorew a goodly  Cassimere.
Countrey. The City is strong, seated on the River

59

A.D.
l6ll.

Impassible
Mountaines.

Another  way
from  Agra  to
Surat.

Gur-chitto  an

imp?-egnable

Castle.

Rana  Pope  of

the  Resboates

or  Indian

Gentiles.

IV.

435-]

Prigonies  are
Lordships.
Description  of
Asmere  before
the  Mogoll
made  it  his
Roy  all
residence.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Bahat,  the  Countrie  is  a  goodly  Plaine,  lying  on  the
mountaines,  some  150  c.  in  length,  and  50  c.  in  breadth,
abounding  with  fruits,  graine,  Saffron,  faire  and  white
women.  Heere  are  made  the  rich  Pomberies,  which
serve  all  the  Indians.  This  Countrey  is  cold,  subject
to  frosts,  and  great  snowes,  neare  to  Cascar,  but  separated
with  such  mountaines,  that  there  is  no  passage  for
Caravans :  yet  there  commeth  oft-times  Musk,  with  Silke
and  other  merchandize  this  way  by  men,  and  goods
are  faine  to  be  triced  up,  and  let  downe  often  by  engines
and  devices.  Upon  these  mountaines  keepes  a  small
King  called  Tibbot,  who  of  late  sent  one  of  his  daughters
to  Sha  Selim  to  make  affinitie.

Nicholas  Uphet  made  another  way  from  Agra  to  Surat,
by  Fetipore,  Scanderbade,  Hindoine,  Cheningom,  Mogoll
Saray,  Nonnigong  at  the  foot  of  a  Mountaine,  which
with  others  adjoyning,  are  held  by  two  Rajaws  of  no
note.  Opposite  to  these  on  the  left  hand,  beginne  the
mountaines  of  Marwa,  which  extend  neare  Amadaver.
Upon  these  mountaines  stands  an  impregnable  Castle,
called  Gur  Chitto,  the  cheefe  seat  of  Rana,  a  very  power-
full  Raj  aw,  whom  neither  Potan,  or  the  Acabar  himselfe
could  ever  subdue :  which  comes  to  passe  by  reason  that
all  India  hath  been  Gentiles,  and  this  Prince  hath  bin,  and
still  is  esteemed  in  like  reverence  by  them,  as  the  Pope
of  Rome  by  the  Papists.  And  for  this  cause  the  Rajaws,
which  have  been  sent  against  him,  frame  some  excuses
that  they  may  not  indamage  much  his  Territories,  which
extend  hence  alongst  Amadaver  way  an  hundred  and  fifty
great  corses,  and  in  breadth  toward  Ougen  200  c.  inclosed
for  the  most  part  with  inaccessible  mountaines,  and  forti-
fied well  by  art  in  places  accessible.  He  is  able  to  make
twelve  thousand  good  horse  upon  any  occasion,  and  holds
many  faire  Townes  and  goodly  Cities.  The  way  followeth
by  Gamgra,  Charsoot  (chiefe  seat  of  Rajaw  Manisengo  his
Prigonies)  Ladaney,  Mousalde,  Banderamde.

Asmere,  seated  upon  the  top  of  an  inaccessible  Moun-
taine of  3  c.  ascent,  being  a  Fort  invincible :  the  Citie  at

60

WILLIAM FINCH  a.d.

1611.

the  foot  not  great,  inclosed  with  a  stone  wall,  ditched
round,  the  buildings  reasonable  faire ;  without  the  wals
are  many  Antiquities,  amongst  which  some  2  c.  toward
Agra  is  a  very  faire  Tanke.  This  place  is  only  famous
for  the  Sepulchre  of  Hoghee  Mundee,  a  Saint  much
respected  by  the  Mogols,  to  whom  (as  is  said  before)  the
Acabar  made  a  Romery  on  foot  from  Agra  to  obtayne  a
Sonne.  Before  you  come  to  this  Tombe,  you  passe  three
faire  Courts,  of  which  the  first  contayneth  neere  an  acre
of  ground,  paved  all  with  blacke  and  white  Marble,
wherein  are  interred  many  of  Mahomets  cursed  Kindred  :  Esteeme  of  a
on  the  left  hand  is  a  faire  Tanke  inclosed  with  stone.  Mahometans.
The  second  Court  is  paved  like  the  former,  but  richer,  Munde.
twice  as  bigge  as  the  Exchange  in  London ;  in  the  middest
whereof  hangs  a  curious  Candlesticke  with  many  lights.
Into  the  third  you  passe  by  a  Brazen  gate  curiously
wrought ;  it  is  the  fairest  of  the  three,  especially,  neere
the  doore  of  the  Sepulchre,  where  the  pavement  is  curi-
ously interlayed :  the  doore  is  large  and  inlay ed  with
Mother  of  Pearle,  &  the  pavement  about  the  Tombe  of
interlaid  Marble ;  the  Sepulchre  very  curiously  wrought
in  worke  of  Mother  of  Pearle,  and  Gold,  with  an  Epitaph
in  the  Persian  Tongue.  A  little  distant  stands  his  seate
in  a  darke  obscure  place,  where  he  sat  to  fore-tell  of
matters,  and  is  much  reverenced.  On  the  East-side  stand
three  other  Courts,  in  each  a  faire  Tanke ;  on  the  North
and  West  stand  divers  faire  houses,  wherein  keepe  their
Sides  or  Church-men.  Note,  that  you  may  not  enter
any  of  these  places  but  bare-foot.

From hence the way  lyeth to  Cairo, Mearta  (which
hath a stone Castle with many faire Turrets, a faire
Tanke, and three faire Pagodes richly wrought with  Pagodes.
inlayd Workes,  adorned richly  with Jewels,  and  main-
tayned  with  rich  Offerings)  Pipera,  Jouges  gong  Settrange,
Canderupe,  Jeloure,  (this  last  is  a  Castle,  seated  on  the  Jelowre  a
height  of  a  steepe  Mountaine,  3  c.  in  ascent,  by  a  faire  stron&  ^ast^-
stone  cawsey,  broad  enough  for  two  men  to  passe  a-brest.
At  the  first  Cose  end  is  a  gate  and  place  of  Armes :  there

61

A.D.
l6ll.

Cunning
treacherie.

A  Dozoly  or
Dozvle  is  a
Chain  or
Cage  wherein
they  carry
their  Women
on  mens
sholders.

A  huge  Snake.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  cawsey  is  inclosed  with  wals  on  both  sides,  and  at  the
2  c.  end  is  a  double  gate :  at  the  3  c.  stands  the  Castle
where  you  must  enter  three  severall  gates,  the  first  very
strongly  plated  with  Iron,  the  second  not  so  strong,  with
places  over  it  to  throw  downe  scalding  Lead  or  Oyle :  the
third  strongly  plated  with  Pikes,  sticking  forth  like  harp-
ing Irons.  Betwixt  each  of  these  gates  are  spacious
Courts  for  Armes,  and  within  the  further  gate  is  a  faire
Portcullis.  Being  entred  on  the  right  hand  stands  a  faire
Meskite,  with  divers  Devoncans  adjoyning,  both  to  doe
Justice,  and  to  take  the  Aire.  On  the  left  hand  stands
the  Governours  house  on  the  height  of  the  hils  over-
looking all.

A  flight-shot  within  the  Castle  is  a  faire  Pagode  built
by  the  Founders  of  the  Castle,  Ancestors  of  Gidney  Caun
which  were  Indians.  He  turned  Moore,  and  bereaved
his  elder  Brother  of  this  hold  by  this  stratageme.  He
invited  him  and  his  women  to  a  Banket,  which  his  brother
requiting  with  like  invitation  of  him  and  his,  insteed  of
women  he  sends  choice  Souldiers  well  appointed  and  close
covered,  two  and  two  in  a  Dowle;  who  beeing  entred
after  this  manner,  possest  themselves  of  the  Ports,  and
held  it  for  the  Great  Mogoll,  to  whom  it  now  appertayn-
eth,  being  one  of  the  strongest  seated  Forts  in  the  world.
Some  halfe  Cose  within  the  gate  is  a  goodly  Tanke  foure
square,  cut  directly  downe  into  the  Rocke,  affirmed  to
bee  fiftie  fathome  deepe,  of  cleere  and  good  water.  A
little  further  is  a  faire  Plaine  shaded  with  many  goodly
trees,  beyond  which  on  the  top  of  a  little  piqued  Moun-
tayne,  is  the  Sepulchre  of  King  Hassward,  while  he  lived
a  great  Souldier,  since  his  death  a  great  Saint,  honoured  in
these  parts.  Here  lye  also  interred  two  sonnes  of  Gil-
lould  a  Potan  King  of  Dely :  neere  to  which  is  a  wall
which  divides  the  Castle  neere  a  Cose  in  circuit,  (the
whole  Castle  beeing  about  8  c.  in  compasse)  nigh  whereto
is  said  to  keepe  a  huge  Snake  of  five  and  twentie  foot
long,  and  as  bigge  as  a  man  in  the  waste,  which  the  people
will  by  no  meanes  hurt,  holding  it  a  good  fortune ;  for  it

62

WILLIAM FINCH  a.d.

1611.

hurts  no  man,  but  keepes  amongst  the  bushes  and  bryars

of  this  piqued Mountaine. This Castle is called the

Gate  or  Frontire  of  Guzurate. From  hence  you  come

to  Mudre,  Billmall  (the  foundations  of  whose  ancient  wall,  Bittmatt  a

are yet  seene)  they  have beene 24  c.  in  circuit,  many  sreat e'

goodly  Tankes  also  going  to  ruine,  by  one  of  which  is

the Founders Sepulchre,  whither  the  Indians  resort  to

worship : From  hence  to  Amadabade,  is  a  deepe  sandy

Desart Countrey. Rodeapore in this  way  hath many

Sepulchres,  (I  let  passe  it  and  the  rest.)

Amadabade  or  Amadavar  is  a  goodly  City,  and  scituate  Amadavar
on  a  faire  River,  inclosed  with  strong  wals  and  faire  gates,  descnbed'
with  many  beautifull  Turrets. The  Castle  is  large  and
strong,  where  resideth  Caun  Asom  his  Sonne,  the  Vice-
Roy  in  these  parts. The  buildings  comparable  to  any
Citie  in  Asia  or  Africa,  the  streets  large  and  well  paved,
the  Trade  great  (for  almost  every  ten  dayes  goe  from
hence  two  hundred  Coaches  richly  laden  with  Merchan-
dise for Cambaya) the Merchants rich, the Artificers
excellent for Carvings,  Paintings, Inlayd  Workes, im-
broydery  with  Gold  and  Silver :  at  an  houres  warning  it
hath  in  readinesse  sixe  thousand  Horse ; the  gates  per-
petually strong  guarded,  none  suffered  without  license  to
enter,  nor  to  depart  without  Certificate. The  cause of
this  is  Badurs  Neighbour-hood  in  his  strong  hold,  within  Badur,  whose
50  c.  of  this  Citie  to  the  East,  where  Nature  with  some  ProSen^ors
helpe  of  Art  and  Industry  hath  fortified  him  against  all  Quzurat
the  Mogolls  power ;  and  whence  some  foure  yeeres  since  [I.  iv.  436.]
(proclaiming  Liberty  and  Lawes  of  good  fellowship)  hee
sacked  Cambaya  with  a  sudden  power,  combined  by  hope
of  spoile,  of  one  hundred  thousand  men,  which  for  four-
teene dayes continued possessors there and sharkers.
There is also  betwixt  this  and Trage  a  certaine  Rajaw  Two  other
on the Mountaines  able to make  seventeene thousand  RaJ?™es
Horse  and  Foot,  the  people  called  Collees  or  Quullees,  out
keeping  in  a  Desart  Wildernesse  which  secures  him  from
Conquest :  and  on  the  right  hand  is  another  able  to  make
enne  thousand  Horse,  holding  in  a  Desart  Plaine  a  Castle

63

A.D.
l6ll,

An  excellent
race  of  horses.

Cambaya.

Munkeyes.

Port.  Frigats.

Violent  tyde
called  the
Bore.

Boroche.

A  Mine  of
Agats.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

impregnable  ;  whose  Land  is  subject  to  Gidney  Cauns
government,  but  these  seven  yeeres  hee  hath  denyed  him
Tribute,  and  stands  on  his  defence.  This  Raj  aw  is  said
to  have  a  Race  of  Horses  not  equalled  in  all  the  East,
each  valued  at  flfteene  thousand  R.  reported  to  bee  much
swifter  then  the  Arabian,  and  able  to  continue  with
reasonable  speed  a  whole  day  without  once  drawing
bitte ;  of  which  he  is  said  to  have  one  hundred  Mares.
From  Geloure  to  this  Citie  is  all  a  sandy,  woody  Countrey,
full  of  theevish  beastly  men,  and  of  Mankind,  Savage
Beasts,  Lions,  Tygres,  &c.  30  c.  about  this  City  is  made
Nill  called  Cickell,  of  a  Towne  4  c.  from  Amadavar,  not
so  good  as  that  of  Biana.

Cambaya  is  hence  38  c.  sandy,  wooddie,  theevish  way:
it  stands  by  the  Sea,  encompassed  with  a  strong  bricke
wall,  the  houses  high,  and  faire,  the  streets  paved  in  a
direct  Line  with  strong  gates  at  the  end  of  each,  the  Bazar
large :  about  the  Citie  are  such  infinite  numbers  of  Mun-
keyes, leaping  from  house  to  house,  that  they  doe  much
mischiefe,  and  untyling  the  houses,  are  readie  to  braine
men  as  they  passe  in  the  streets  with  the  stones  that  fall.
On  the  South  is  a  goodly  Garden  with  a  Watch-tower
of  an  exceeding  height ;  on  the  North  are  many  faire
Tankes.  It  is  the  Mart  of  Guzurat,  and  so  haunted  by
the  Portugals,  that  you  shall  often  finde  two  hundred
Frigats  at  once  riding  there.  It  aboundeth  with  all  sorts
of  cloth  and  rich  Drugges.  The  Bay  is  8  c.  over,  danger-
ous to  passe  by  reason  of  the  great  Bore  which  drownes
many,  and  therefore  requires  Guides  skilfull  of  the  tydes
in  the  neape  tydes  is  least  perill.  Theeves  also,  when  you
are  over  the  Channell,  are  not  a  little  dangerous,  forcing
you  (if  not  the  better  provided)  to  quit  your  goods,  or
in  long  bickerings,  betraying  you  to  the  tydes  fury,  which
comes  so  swift  that  ten  to  one  you  escape  not.  Foure
Coses  beyond  this  Bay  is  Joumbeser,  now  much  ruined,
and  from  thence  eighteene  to  Boroche,  a  woodie,  danger-
ous passage,  in  which  are  many  wilde  Peacockes.  Within
4  c.  of  Boroche  is  a  great  Mine  of  Agats. It  is  a  faire

64

1

WILLIAM FINCH  a.d,

1611.

Castle  seated  on  a  River  twice  as  broad  as  the  Thames,

to  the  mouth  of  which  is  hence  12  c. Here  are  made  the

rich  Baffatas,  in  finenesse  surpassing  Holland  Cloth,  for

fiftie  Rupias  a  Booke,  which  contayneth  fourteene  English

yards,  and  are  not  three  quarters  broad.

Hence  to  Varjaw  20  c.  a  goodly  Countrey  and  fertile,-

full  of  Villages,  abounding  with  wild  Date  Trees,  which

generally  are  plentifull by  the Sea-side  in most  places,

whence  they  draw  a  liquor  called  Tarrie  or  Sure,  as  also  Tarrie  or

from another wild Coco-tree called Tarrie,  2  c.  hence / tel£.
_  strong  Wine.

is  ourat.

In  a  Towne  betweene  Boroche  and  Amadavar,  lyeth  a
Great  Saint  of  the Moores  called Polle-Medomy  much  PolkMedomy
resorted  to  out  of  all  places  of  India,  for  wealth,  children,  j)evnor$aint
or  what  else  they  desire. Divers in the  way  goe  with  pilgrimage  to
great  chaines  on  their  legges,  and  with  their  hands  chained  him.
together, and their mouthes  locked up, (only  opening
them  for  food)  and  when  they  come  before  him  in  this
manner  of  their  humble  devotion,  they  affirme  that  pre-  Miracles  as
sently  their  chaines  and  lockes  flye  open,  not  one  return-
ing in  vaine,  if  themselves  bee  not  vaine  in  their  hopes,
and  in  these  and  other  like  affections,  which  wayting  on
lying  Vanities,  forsake  their  owne  Judge.

From  Agra  to  Cannowes  is  130  c.  East,  the  Citie  great  c"'taine
and  unwalled,  seated  on  an  ascent,  and  the  Castle  on  the -m  ^  Qoun_
height  well  fortified:  at  the  foot  whereof  anciently  Ganges  treyofPurrop.
tooke  his  course,  but  hath  now  broken  a  passage  thorow  Cannowes.
the  Valley  some  4  c.  distant, notwithstanding  as yet  a
small branch remayneth there. Ganges is within his  Ganges  kis
bounds  three  quarters  of  a  mild  broad, but  with great *f"fre"f'a
raines  swels  over his bankes, covering the whole  Vale
neere 10  c. It  hath  thirtie  Rivers of note  which fall
into  it,  as  doth  he  himselfe  into  the  Gulfe  of  Bengala.
In  it  are  innumerable  Alagaters  or  Crocodiles,  there  called
Murgurmach. It  hath  eighteene  faire  branches. Thence
to Lacanowes is  30  c.  a Towne of  great  trafflque  for  Lacanowes.
Linnen  and  other  Merchandize. To  Oude  from  thence  Oude.
are 50  c.  a  Citie  of  ancient  note,  and  seate  of  a  Potan
iv  65  E

A.D.
l6ll.

Holy,  holy
place  and
Indian  Fables.

Indian-Asse-
horne.

[I. iv.  437.]

The  returne
from  Jounpore
another  way  to
Alahasse  to
Jgra.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

King,  now  much  ruined :  the  Castle  built  foure  hundred
yeeres  agoe.  Heere  are  also  the  ruines  of  Ranichand
Castle  and  Houses  which  the  Indians  acknowledge  for  the
great  God,  saying,  that  he  tooke  flesh  upon  him  to  see
the  Tamasha  of  the  World.  In  these  ruines  remayne
certaine  Bramenes,  who  record  the  names  of  all  such
Indians  as  wash  themselves  in  the  River  running  thereby ;
which  custome  they  say,  hath  continued  foure  lackes  of
yeeres  (which  is  three  hundred  ninetie  foure  thousand,
and  five  hundred  yeeres  before  the  Worlds  Creation.)
Some  two  miles  on  the  further  side  of  the  River  is  a
Cave  of  his,  with  a  narrow  entrance,  but  so  spacious  and
full  of  turnings  within,  that  a  man  may  well  loose  him-
selfe  there,  if  he  take  not  better  heed ;  where  it  is  thought
his  ashes  were  buried.  Hither  resort  many  from  all  parts
of  India,  which  carry  from  hence  in  remembrance  certaine
graines  of  Rice  as  blacke  as  Gun-powder,  which  they  say
have  beene  reserved  ever  since.  Out  of  the  ruines  of
this  Castle  is  yet  much  Gold  tryed :  here  is  great  Trade,
and  such  abundance  of  Indian  Asse-horne,  that  they  make
hereof  Bucklers,  and  divers  sorts  of  Drinking  Cups.
There  are  of  these  Homes,  all  the  Indians  affirme,  some
rare  of  great  price,  no  Jewell  comparable,  some  esteeming
them  the  right  Unicornes  Home.

From  Oudee  to  Acabarpore  30  c.  some  30  c.  from
whence  lyeth  Bonarce  the  principall  Mart  of  Bengala
goods.  From  Acab,  to  Jounpore  30  c.  seated  on  a  small
River,  over  which  is  a  bridge  with  Houses  like  London
Bridge,  but  nothing  so  good.  The  Castle  hath  beene
a  seat  of  the  Potan  Kings,  there  yet  remayning  two
faire  Meskites,  with  many  other  ancient  Monuments
the  houses  are  like  those  of  Amadavar,  the  circuit  some
8.  or  10  c.  Hence  come  excellent  sweete  Oyles,  Carpets,
Hangings  embrodered  with  Silke,  all  sorts  of  fine
Linnen,  &c.

Thus  much  from  Agra  to  Jounpore  this  way :  from
thence  (returning  that  way  to  Agra)  to  Alabasse  is  no  c.
30 c.  all  which  are  thorow  a  continuall Forrest. Thej

66

WILLIAM FINCH  a.d.

1611.

Towne  and  Castle  stand  on  the  further  side  of  Ganges  Alabasse
pleasantly  seated,  called  anciently  Praye,  and  is  held  one  c*  .  '
of  the  Wonders  of  the  East.  Divers  Potan  Kings  have  Qast/f
sought  to  build  here  a  Castle,  but  none  could  doe  it,
till  Acabar  layd  the  foundation  and  proceeded  with  the
Worke.  It  stands  on  a  Point  or  Angle  having  the
River  Gemini  on  the  South-side  falling  into  Ganges.  It
hath  beene  fortie  yeeres  a  building,  and  is  not  yet  finished,
neither  is  like  to  bee  in  a  long  time.  The  Acabar  for
many  yeeres  had  attending  this  worke  by  report  twentie
thousand  persons,  and  as  yet  there  continue  working
thereon  some  five  thousand  of  all  sorts.  It  will  be  one
of  the  most  famous  buildings  of  the  World.  In  this
Castle  Sha  Selim  kept  when  he  rebelled  against  his
Father.  The  outward  wals  are  of  an  admirable  height,
of  a  red  square  stone,  like  Agra  Castle,  within  which
are  two  other  wals  nothing  so  high.  You  enter  thorow
two  faire  gates  into  a  faire  Court,  in  which  stands  a
Piller  of  stone  fiftie  Cubits  above  ground  (so  deeply  Alexanders
placed  within  ground  that  no  end  can  be  found)  which  p^er-
by  circumstances  of  the  Indians,  seemeth  to  have  beene
placed  by  Alexander  or  some  other  great  Conquerour,  who
could  not  passe  further  for  Ganges.  Passing  this  Court
you  enter  a  lesse,  beyond  that  a  larger,  where  the  King
sits  on  high  at  his  Dersane  to  behold  Elephants  and
other  Beasts  to  fight.  Right  under  him  within  a  Vault
are  many  Pagodes,  being  Monuments  of  Baba  Adam,
and  Mama  Havah,  (as  they  call  them)  and  of  their
Progenie,  with  Pictures  of  Noah  and  his  Descent.

The Indians suppose that Man was heere created,  Mon.ofAdam
or kept  here  at  least  for  many  yeeres,  affirming  them-  and  Eve>  and
selves  to  be  of  that  Religion,  whereof  these  Fathers  were.  °j. e
To  this place  resort  many  thousands  from  all  parts to  pilgrimage  y
worship : but before  they  approch  these  Reliques,  they  Holy-water.
wash their bodies in Ganges, shaving their heads and
beards,  thereby  deeming  themselves  clensed  from  all  their
former  sins. Out  of  this  Court  is  another  richly  paved
where  the  King keepes  his  Derbar ;  beyond it another

67

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

whence  you  enter  into  the  Moholl,  large,  divided  into
sixteene  severall  Lodgings  for  sixteene  great  Women  with
their  Slaves  and  Attendants :  in  the  middest  of  all,
the  Kings  Lodgings  of  three  Stories  each  contayning
sixteene  roomes,  in  all  eight  and  fortie  Lodgings,  all
wrought  over-head  with  rich  Pargetting  and  curious
Painting  in  all  kind  of  Colours.  In  the  midst  of  the
lowest  storie  is  a  curious  Tanke.

Strange  Tree.  In  this  Moholl  is  a  Tree  which  the  Indians  call  the
Tree  of  Life  (beeing  a  wilde  Indian  figge  Tree)  for  that
it  could  never  bee  destroyed  by  the  Potan  Kings  and
this  mans  Ancestors,  which  have  sought  to  doe  it  by
all  meanes,  stocking  it  up  and  sifting  the  very  earth  under
it  to  gather  forth  the  sprigs,  it  still  springing  againe,
insomuch  that  this  King  lets  it  alone  seeking  to  cherish  it.
This  Tree  is  of  no  small  esteeme  with  the  Indians.  In
the  waters  side  within  the  Moholl  are  divers  large
Devoncans,  where  the  King  with  his  Women  often
passe  their  times  in  beholding  Gemini,  paying  his  tribute
to  Ganges.  Betweene  them  and  the  waters  side  at  the
foote  of  the  wall  is  a  pleasant  Garden  shaded  with  Cypresse
Trees,  and  abounding  with  excellent  fruits  and  flowres,
having  in  the  midst  a  faire  Banquetting  House,  with
privie  staires  to  take  Boate.  From  hence  in  October  or
November  when  the  great  Frost  is  past  you  may  passe
by  Boats  for  Bengala ;  but  the  passage  is  dangerous :
4  c.  downe  are  two  Castles  opposite  on  the  Bankes,
Harrayle  and  Gussee,  seated  on  two  hils  raysed  by
industry,  built  by  the  Potans.

Menepore.  From  Alabasse  to  Menepore  is  20  c.  alongst  the  River

Ganges.  At  2  c.  on  this  way  is  a  sumptuous  Tombe
for  this  Kings  first  Wife,  Mother  to  Sultan  Casseroon,
and  Sister  to  Raja  Manisengo,  who  upon  the  newes
of  her  Sonnes  revolt  poysoned  her  selfe.  From  hence
passing  Ganges  is  a  more  direct  way  to  Jounpore.

Chappergat. To Chappergat is 12 c. here is one  of  the fairest

JfatreSaray.  Saraies  in  India,  liker  a  goodly  Castle  then  a  Inne
to  lodge  strangers,  the  lodgings  very  faire  of  stone  with

68

WILLIAM FINCH  a.d.

1611.

Lockes  and  Keyes  able  to  lodge  a  thousand  men  :  a
man  can  scarse  shoote  from  side  to  side  with  an  Arrow ;
neere  to  it  is  a  faire  bridge  both  built  by  one  man  :
the  way  perillous  for  Theeves.  Itay  is  thence  12  c.  lfay-  Face
anciently  the  seate  of  a  Potan  King  but  now  ruined.  worshiPPed-
On  the  height  of  the  hill  cut  steep  downe,  is  seated
a  strong  Castle  double  walled,  having  at  the  entrance
the  figure  of  a  mans  face  which  the  Indians  much  worship
powring  abundance  of  Oyle  upon  it.  To  Amedipore
is  43  c.  a  plentifull  Countrey  full  of  good  Saraies  for
Caravans.  Much  Indico  called  Cole  of  a  grosse  sort
is  made  in  this  way,  which  is  spent  in  India,  or  trans-
ported for  Samercand,  Cascat,  and  those  parts,  none
passing  into  Christendome,  except  mixed  with  that  of
Biana.  Hence  to  Agra  is  7  c.  passing  Gemini  close
to  the  Citie.

Lands  lying  Easterly  from  Lahor  with  their

Lords.

ALongst  the  Ravee  Easterly,  lyeth  the  Land  of  Rajaw
Bossow,  whose  chiefe  seate  is  Tem-mery,  50  c.  from Tem-mery.
Lahor. He is a mighty Prince now subject to the
Mogol, a great Minion of Sha Selim. Out of  this,  [I.  iv.  438.]
and the  adjoyning Regions, come most of  the Indian
Drugges,  growing  on  the  Mountaines,  Spikenard,  Turbith,
Miras,  Kebals,  Gunlack,  Turpentine, Costus,  &c. This
Raja  confines the  Kings  Land Easterly. Bordering to
him  is  another  great  Rajaw,  called  Tulluck-Chand,  whose
chiefe  City  is  Negercoat,  80  c.  from  Lahor,  and  as  much  Negenoat.
from  Syrinan,  in  which City  is  a  famous  Pagod,  called
Je  or  Durga,  unto which worlds  of people resort out
of  all  parts  of  India. It  is  a  small  short  Idoll  of  stone,  Idolatrous  pil-
cut  in  forme  of  a  man  ;  much  is  consumed  in  offerings  to  Srm(jSe->  and
him,  in  which  some  also  are  reported  to  cut  off  a  piece  of  ft.
their tongue, and throwing  it  at the Idols feet, have
found  it  whole the next  day  (able  to  lye  I  am  afraid ;
to  serve the father of  lyes and lyers, how ever) yea
some out of  impious piety  heere sacrifice themselves,

69

A.D.
l6ll.

Calsery.

Serenegar.
Dow  Lager.

Extremitie
of  cold.

Camow.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

cutting  their  throats,  and  presently  recovering :  the
holyer  the  man,  the  sooner  forsooth  he  is  healed,  some
(more  grievous  sinners)  remaining  halfe  a  day  in  paine,
before  the  Divell  will  attend  their  cure.  Hither  they
resort  to  crave  children,  to  enquire  of  money  hidden
by  their  parents,  or  lost  by  themselves,  which  having
made  their  offerings,  by  dreames  in  the  night  receive
answere,  not  one  departing  discontented.  They  report
this  Pagan  Deity  to  have  beene  a  woman  (if  a
holy  Virgin  may  have  that  name)  yea  that  shee
still  lives  (the  Divell  shee  doth)  but  will  not  shew
her  selfe.  Divers  Moores  also  resort  to  this  Peer.
This  Raja  is  powerfull,  by  his  Mountaines  situation
secure,  not  once  vouchsafing  to  visite  Sha  Selim.

On  this  Rajaw  Easterly  confineth  another,  called
Decanspergas,  a  mightie  Prince,  his  chiefe  seat  Calsery
about  an  150  c.  from  Agra,  his  Country  held  500  c.  long,
North  and  South  300  c.  broad,  populous,  able  to  raise
upon  occasion  five  hundred  thousand  foot,  but  few  or  no
horse  ;  the  Land  plentifull  in  it  selfe,  but  sends  forth
little.

To  the  Eastward  of  this  Rajaw,  betwixt  Jemini  and
Ganges  lyeth  the  Land  of  Rajaw  Mansa,  a  mighty  Prince
and  very  rich,  reported  to  be  served,  all  in  vessels
of  massie  gold :  his  Countrey  300  c.  long,  and  one
hundred  and  fifty  broad,  his  chiefe  seat  Serenegar :
the  Mountaines  called  Dow  Lager,  upon  which  in
time  of  Winter  falls  such  extreame  Snowes,  that  the
Inhabitants  are  forced  to  remoove  into  the  Valleyes.  Yet
doe  I  not  thinke  that  any  of  these  Lands  extend
Northerly  above  forty  degrees,  but  the  height  of  the
Mountaines  causeth  this  extremity  of  cold.  This  Rajas
Land  extendeth  within  some  200  c.  of  Agra,  part  within
50  c.  of  Syrinan,  very  plentifull.

On  the  further  side  of  Ganges  lyeth  a  very  mighty  Prince,
called  Rajaw  Rodorow,  holding  a  mountainous  Countrey,
his  chiefe  seat  Camow ;  his  territories  extend  400  c.  long,
and  not much  lesse in breadth,  abounding  with  graine,

70

WILLIAM FINCH  a.d.

1611.

have  many  goodly  Cities: thence  cometh  much  Muske,

and heere  is  the  great  breed  of  a  small  kind  of  Horse,

called Gunts,  a true travelling scalecliffe beast. This  Gunts,  a  race

Prince is puissant in foot, but hath few Horse or  °*v  ,*.?,

l  *  climb  hillBS*

Elephants,  the  mountaines  not  requiring  the  one,  and  the
cold  excluding  the  other :  his  Lands  thought  to  reach
neare  China.

To  the  South  of  this  Raja,  thwart  the  streames  of
Ganges,  is  seated  another,  Raja  Mugg,  very  powerfull  in
horse,  foote,  and  Elephants.  In  his  Land  is  the  old
rocke  of  naturall  Diamonds,  which  yeelds  him  no  small  Rocke  °f
benefit.  His  Lands  extend  East,  somewhat  South  700  c.
from  Agra.  Beneath  him  amongst  the  streames  of
Ganges,  keepeth  a  Potan  Prince  of  the  Dely-Kings  race,
whom  the  King  cannot  subdue,  by  reason  of  the  streames
and  Hands  of  Ganges.  He  confineth  upon  Purrop,  and
makes  often  inroades  upon  the  Kings  lands,  enforcing  Sha
Selim  to  maintaine  a  frontire  army.  Hence  to  the  mouth
of  Ganges,  all  is  the  Kings  land  :  only  in  the  mouth,
the  Portugall  Out-lawes  hold  a  small  Fort,  and  doe  much  Port. outlaws.
mischiefs,  living  in  no  forme  of  subjection  to  God  or
man.

On  the  further  side  of  Ganges,  is  the  mightie  King
of  Arracan,  enjoying  a  large  territory,  and  infinite
numbers  of  small  Barkes.  Eastward  from  him  is  the
Kingdome  of  Siam ;  behind  it  Ova  and  Jangoma.  Be-
tweene  Tanassar  and  Arracan  is  the  Kingdome  of  Pegu  ;  See  of  Pegu
the  Land  now  lyeth  waste.  To  the  South  is  the  King-  FJortshls
dome  of  Queda,  Malacca,  &c.  On  the  Sea-coast  of  ^erore
Bengala,  this  King  hath  two  chiefe  ports,  Ougolee
(tyrannized  by  the  Portugals)  and  Pipilee,  passing  which,
and  the  Land  of  Orixa,  you  enter  into  the  Lands  of
Goloconda,  on  whom  Sha  Selim  maketh  warres,  and
hath  forcibly  taken  much  of  his  Land.  His  chiefe  Port
is  Masulipatan,  and  his  Royall  seat  Braganadar  and
Goloconda,  that  late  builded.  Alongst  the  sea  side
toward  the  Cape,  is  the  mightie  King  of  Bezeneger,
under whom the Portugals hold Saint Thome and

71

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

Negapatan,  but  are  not  suffered  to  build  a  Castle. But

I  let  passe  these  neighbouring  Indies,  and  return  to  Agra,

the  Mogols  royall  residence.

Description  of Agra  hath  not  been  in  fame  above  fiftie  yeeres,  being

Agra,  and  the  Defore  Acabars  time  a  Village,  who  removed  (as  you  have
heard)  from  Fetipore  for  want  of  good  water.  It  is
spacious,  large,  populous  beyond  measure,  that  you  can
hardly  passe  in  the  streets,  which  are  for  the  most  part
dirty  and  narrow,  save  only  the  great  Bazar  and  some
few  others,  which  are  large  and  faire.  The  Citie  lyeth  in
manner  of  a  halfe-moone,  bellying  to  the  land-ward
some  5  c.  in  length,  and  as  much  by  the  Rivers  side,
upon  the  bankes  whereof  are  many  goodly  houses  of
the  Nobility,  pleasantly  over-looking  Gemini,  which
runneth  with  a  swift  current  from  the  North  to  the
South,  somewhat  Easterly  into  Ganges. Upon  the  banke

The  Castle,  of  this  River  stands  the  Castle,  one  of  the  fairest  and
admirablest  buildings  of  the  East,  some  three  or  foure  miles
in  compasse,  inclosed  with  a  faire  and  strong  wall  of
squared  stone ;  about  which is  cast a faire  ditch, over

[I.  iv.  439.]  it  draw-bridges. The  walles are built with bulwarkes

somewhat defensible, regalled  with a counter-scarfe or

front  without, some  fifteene yards broad. Within this

are two other strong walls and gates. To the Castle

are  foure  gates,  one  to  the  North,  by  which  you  passe  to

a  Rampire  with  great  peeces,  another  West  to  the  Bazar,

called the Cichery  gate,  within  which,  over  against  the

Seats  of  great  sate,  is  the  Casi  his  seat  of  Chiefe- Justice  in  matters

Justice.

*It  is  said  that  °^  ^aw' anc^ by  it two or three murtherers very  great

they  were  two  (one  three  foot  in  the bore,  and fifteene  long)  of  cast

Brothers  Res-  brasse. Over-against  this  seat  is  the  Cichery  or  Court

boots,  Tutors  Qf  Rq}}^  where  the  Kings  Viseer  sits  every  morning  some

their  Nephew  three  houres,  by  whose  hands  passe  all  matters  of  Rents,

whom  the  King  Grants,  Lands, Firmans,  Debts,  &c.

demaunded  of  Beyond  these  two  gates  you  passe  a  second  gate,  over

them. They which  are  two  Raiaws  in  stone,*  who  were  slaine  in the

refused,  and  J

were  committed,  but  drew  on  the  Officers,  slew  twelve,  and  at  last  by  multitudes  oppressing
were  slain,  and  here  have  Elephants  of  stone,  and  themselves  figured.

72

WILLIAM FINCH  a.d.

1611.

Kings  Derbar  before  the  Kings  eyes,  for  being  over-bold

in  speech,  they  selling  their  lives  bravely,  in  remembrance

of  which  they  are  heere  placed. Passing  this  gate,  you

enter into a faire streete, with houses and munition

all alongst on both sides. At the end of  this street

being  a  quarter  of  a  mile,  you  come  to  the  third  gate,

which leads to the Kings Derbar,  alwayes chained,  all

men, but the King and his children, there alighting.

This  gate  is  to  the  South  called  Acabar  Drowage,  close

within which is the  Whores child, many hundreds of  Singsters  or

which attend there dav  and night, according as their  w  °oreJ

J  o »  &  attending.

severall  turnes come every  seventh day,  that  they  may  §ome  say  ^ey

bee ready  when the King or his women shall please  are  there  as  a

to  call  any  of  them  to  sing  or  dance  in  his  Moholl,  he  Court  of 'guard

giving  to  every  one  of  them  stipends  according  to  their  °*  ™orlien->  °J
& &  J  r  °  which,  are  here

unworthy  worth.  _  two  or  three

The  fourth  Gate  is  to  the  River  called  the  Dersane,  hundred  daily
leading  into  a  faire  Court  extending  alongst  the  River,  h  succession.
in  which  the  King  lookes  forth  every  morning  at  Sun-
rising,  which  hee  salutes,  and  then  his  Nobles  resort  to
their  Tessillam.  Right  under  the  place  where  he  lookes  Tessillam  is  a
out,  is  a  kind  of  scaffold  whereon  his  Nobles  stand,  but  s?stu-f-  °J
the  Addees  with  others  awayt  below  in  the  Court.  Here
also  every  noone  he  looketh  forth  to  behold  Tamashan,
or  fighting  of  Elephants,  Lyons,  Buffles,  killing  of  Deare
with  Leopards ;  which  is  a  custom  on  every  day  of
the  weeke,  Sunday  excepted,  on  which  is  no  fighting ;
but  Tuesday  on  the  contrary  is  a  day  of  blood,  both
of  fighting  beasts,  and  justiced  men,  the  King  judging
and  seeing  execution.  To  returne  to  the  third  Gate,
within  it  you  enter  into  a  spacious  court  with  Atescanna's
round  about  like  shops  or  open  stalls,  wherein  his
Captaines  according  to  their  degrees,  keep  their  seventh
day  Chockees.  A  little  further  you  enter  within  a  rayle
into  a  more  inward  Court,  within  which  none  but  the
Kings  Addees,  and  men  of  sort  are  admitted,  under  paine
of  swacking  by  the  Porters  cudgells,  which  lay  on  load
without  respect  of  persons.

73

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

The  Kings  Being  entred,  you  approach  the  Kings  Derbar  or  Seat,

Derbar.  before  which is  also  a  small  Court  inclosed  with  railes,

covered  over  head  with  rich  Semianes  to  keepe  away
the  Sunne ;  where  aloft  in  a  Gallery,  the  King  sits  in
his  chaire  of  State,  accompanied  with  his  Children  and
chiefe  Vizier  (who  goeth  up  by  a  short  ladder  forth  of
the  Court)  no  other  without  calling  daring  to  goe  up
to  him,  save  onely  two  Punkaw's  to  gather  wind.  And
right  before  him  below  on  a  scaffold  is  a  third,  who
with  a  horse  taile  makes  havocke  of  poore  flies.  On
the  right  hand  of  the  King,  on  the  wall  behind  him,
is  the  picture  of  our  Saviour ;  on  the  left,  of  the  Virgin.
Within  these  railes  none  under  the  degree  of  foure
hundred  horse  are  permitted  to  enter.  On  the  further
side  of  this  Court  of  presence,  are  hanged  golden  bels,
that  if  any  be  oppressed  and  can  get  no  justice  by  the
Kings  Officers,  by  ringing  these  bells  when  the  King
sits,  he  is  called,  and  the  matter  discussed  before  the
King.  But  let  them  be  sure  their  cause  be  good,  least
he  be  punished  for  presumption  to  trouble  the  King.
Here  every  day  betweene  three  and  foure  a  clocke,  the
King  comes  forth  (and  many  thousands  resort  to  doe
their  duties,  each  taking  place  according  to  his  degree)
where  hee  remaines  hearing  of  matters,  receiving  of
newes  by  letters  read  by  his  Vizier,  graunting  of  suites,
&c.  till  shutting  in  of  the  Evening,  the  drumme  meane
while  beating,  and  Instruments  playing  from  a  high
Of  his  Ele-  Gallery  on  the  next  building  opposite  :  his  Elephants  and
phants  yearly  Horses  passing  by  in  brave  fashion,  doing  their  Tessillam,
his* Treasures  an<^  being  perused  by  Officers  to  see  if  they  prosper.
in  this  Castle,  In  the  Castle  are  two  high  turrets,  over-laid  with  pure
l$c  see  Capt.  massie gold,  which may  be seen from farre, one over

Hawkins  for-  fcs  Mohol,  the  other  over  his  Treasury. After  his  going
mer  relations. • r  ^ t\ l • ^1 r? •  u  '

Of  other  in *rom tne -Uerbar  in the  Evening,  some two houres

things,  see  that  after  he  comes  out  againe,  sitting  forth  in  a  small  more

which  followes  inward  Court,  behind  the  other,  close  to  his  Moholl,  into

in  Sir  T.  Roes  which  none  but  the  Grandes,  and  they  also  with  tickets

to  be  renewed  with  every  Moone,  are  permitted  to  enter,

74

WILLIAM FINCH  ad.

1611.

where  he  drinkes  by  number  and  measure,  sometimes
one  and  thirtie,  and  running  over,  mixing  also  among,
severe  judicatures.  From  this  Court  is  his  privy  passage
into  a  curious  Garden,  and  to  his  Barge,  by  which  he
often  passeth  the  River  to  an  other  Garden  opposite.
It  is  remarkeable,  that  both  in  Court,  and  here  in  these
Gardens,  no  Courtiers  or  Gardeners  are  tied  to  attend-
ance, but  by  their  seventh  dayes  turne.

Some  adde,*  that  the  Citie  hath  no  walls,  but  a  ditch  *^  written
round  about,  not  broad,  and  dry  also:  adjoyning  to  the  booke
ditch  without  the  Citie  are  very  large  suburbs. The  City  ^scourse'  0f
and  suburbs  are  one  way  seven  mile  in  length,  three  in Agra,  and  the
breadth. The  Noble  mens  houses  and  Merchants  built  foure  princi-
with bricke  and  stone,  flat  roofed,  the  common  sort  of  Pa"  waies  to
mudde  walls,  covered  with  thatch,  which  cause  often  and /  what
terrible fires. The  Citie  hath  sixe  Gates,  the  adjoyning  Author, except
River  Gemini  being  broader  then  the  Thames  at  London,  it  be  Nic
on  which  are  many  Boats,  some  of  one  hundred  Tunnes, Uphlet.
but  these  cannot  returne  against  the  streame. Most  of  [I.  iv.  440.]
the Noble mens houses  are  by  the  Rivers  side. From
Agra to Lahor sixe hundred miles, the  way is set on
both  sides  with  Mulbery-trees.

King  Acabars  Sepulchre  is  3  c.  distant  from  Agra  in  Description  of
the  way  to  Lahor,  nothing  neere  finished  as  yet,  after  Ja  frs
tenne  yeares  worke.  It  is  placed  in  the  midst  of  a  faire
and  large  Garden,  inclosed  with  bricke  walls,  neere  two
miles  in  circuit ;  is  to  have  foure  Gates  (but  one  of  which
is  yet  in  hand)  each,  if  answerable  to  this  foundation,
able  to  receive  a  great  Prince  with  a  reasonable  traine)
alongst  the  way  side  is  a  spacious  Moholl  for  his  fathers
women  (as  is  said)  to  remayne  and  end  their  dayes  in
deploring  their  deceassed  Lord,  each  enjoying  the  lands
they  before  had  in  the  Kings  time,  by  the  pay  or  rents
of  five  thousand  horse  the  principall,  so  that  this  should
be  to  them  a  perpetuall  Nunnery,  never  to  marry
againe.

In  the  Center  of  this  Garden  stands  the  Tombe  foure
square,  about  three  quarters  of  a  mile  in  compasse. The

75

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

first  inclosure  is  with  a  curious  rayle,  to  which  you  ascend
some  sixe  steps  into  a  small  square  Garden  quartered  in
curious  Tankes,  planted  with  variety  of  sweets  :  adjoyn-
ing  to  which  is  the  Tombe,  rounded  with  this  gardenet,
being  also  foure  square,  all  of  hewne  stone,  with  faire
spacious  Galleries  on  each  side,  having  at  each  corner
a  small  beautifull  Turret,  arched  over  head,  and  covered
with  various  Marble.  Betwixt  corner  and  corner  are
foure  other  Turrets  at  like  distance.  Here  within  a  faire
round  coffin  of  Gold,  lieth  the  body  of  this  Monarch,
who  sometimes  thought  the  World  too  little  for  him.
This  Tombe  is  much  worshipped  both  by  the  Moores
and  Gentiles,  holding  him  for  a  great  Saint.  Some  tenne
or  twelve  foot  higher,  you  ascend  by  staires  to  another
Gallery,  (like,  but  narrower,  to  the  former,  as  are  also  the
rest  that  follow)  containing  onely  three  of  those  Turrets
between  corner  and  corner.  Here  in  the  midst  is  his
Wardrobe  for  a  memoriall.  The  third  story  hath  but
two  of  those  middle  Turrets  on  a  side :  the  fourth  one :
the  fifth  hath  only  the  corner  Turret,  and  a  small  square
Gallery.  The  Tombe  was  not  finished  at  my  departure,
but  lay  in  manner  of  a  coffin,  covered  with  a  white  sheet,
interwrought  with  Gold  flowers.  By  his  head  stands  his
Sword  and  Target,  and  on  a  small  pillow  his  Turbant,
and  thereby  two  or  three  faire  gilded  bookes.  At  his
feet  stand  his  shooes,  and  a  rich  Bason  and  Ewre.
Every  one  approaching  neere  makes  his  reverence,  and
puts  off  his  shooes,  bringing  in  his  hand  some  sweete
smelling  flowers  to  bestrew  the  Carpets,  or  to  adorne
the  Tombe.

At  my  last  sight  thereof,  there  was  onely  over  head  a
rich  Tent,  with  a  Semaine  over  the  Tombe.  But  it  is
to  be  inarched  over  with  the  most  curious  white  and
speckled  Marble,  and  to  be  seeled  all  within,  with  pure
sheet-Gold  richly  inwrought.  These  foure  last  Turrets
also  inclosing  the  Sepulchre,  are  of  most  rich  curious
Marble,  &  the  ground  underfoot  paved  with  the  like.
There  are  in  continuall  worke  about  this  and  other  build-

76

WILLIAM FINCH

ings  about  it,  the  Moholl  and  Gate,  not  so  few  as  three
thousand.  The  stone  is  brought  from  a  rich  Quarrey
neere  Fetipore,  which  (wee  have  said)  may  be  cut  in
length  and  forme,  as  Timber  with  sawes,  and  Plankes
and  seelings  are  made  thereof.

A.D.

1612.

Chap.  V.

The  ninth  Voyage  of  the  Indian  Companie  to
the  East  Indies,  in  the  James,  whereof  was
Captaine  Edmund  Marlowe  of  Bristoll,  and
the  Master  John  Davy,  which  wrote  this
Journall.

He  tenth  of  February,  1 6 1 1 .  we  departed
from  the  Downes  upon  our  Voyage.
The  thirteenth  at  night  we  anchored
within  the  He  of  Wight,  where  we  stayed
till  the  one  and  twentieth  of  the  same
Moneth,  and  then  set  saile  and  turned
out  at  S.  Helens  point.  The  same  day
at  noone  we  had  Dun  nose  North  from  us  three  leagues
off,  the  Dragon  before  us,  and  the  Hosiander  and  the
Salomon  put  in  the  Needles.

The  eleventh  day  of  Aprill,  16 12.  by  observation  wee
were  under  the  Equinoctiall  line :  and  in  longitude  from
the  Meridian  of  the  Lizard,  sixe  degrees  twenty  minutes
West.  This  night  the  variation  was  five  degrees  thirty
seven  minutes  from  North  to  the  East.  The  twenty
seventh,  the  variation  of  the  Needle  was  fourteene
degrees  seven  minutes.  This  day  at  noone  we  were  in
latitude  by  observation,  nineteene  degrees  fortie  minutes :
the  longitude  from  the  meridian  of  the  Lizard,  eleven
degrees  twenty  foure  minutes  West.  These  twenty
foure  houres  we  sailed  two  leagues  South  by  East.  Here
we  saw  an  Hand  South-east  from  us  fourteene  leagues.
This  Hand  I  saw  when  I  was  with  Sir  Edward  Michel-
borne. This  Hand  is  like  Corvo. The  latitude  is  twenty

77

February
1611.

Aprill  1 1 .

1612.

They  crosse  the

Equinoctiall.

This  seemeth
to  be  the  lie  de
Martin  Vax.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

degrees  thirty  minutes :  the  longitude  eleven  degrees
thirty  minutes  West  from  the  Lizard.  The  variation  of
the  Needle  fourteene  degrees  thirty  minutes.  This  Hand
riseth  ragged ;  upon  the  Easter  end  standeth  a  little  pike,
but  the  Hand  is  round  like  Corvo.  East  North-east
from  this  Hand  is  another  Hand  or  two  in  sight,  seven
or  eight  leagues  off.
[I.  iv.  441.]  The  seven  and  twentieth  of  June,  at  nine  of  the
clocke  at  night,  wee  saw  the  Land  of  Saint  Laurence,  in
latitude  by  judgement  foure  and  twentie  degrees  eight
minutes,  and  longitude  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,
five  and  twentie  degrees  no  minutes.  The  variation  was
fifteene  degrees,  and  ten  minutes.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning  the  varia-
tion of  the  needle  was  fifteene  degrees,  no  minutes,  in
foure  leagues  off  the  shoare,  betweene  the  headland
of  the  Bay,  and  the  Hands  before  the  Bay,  is  no  ground
in  seventie  or  eightie  fathomes.
They  anchor  This  night  wee  anchored  in  the  Bay  of  Saint  Augus-
intheBayof^ [n fiye fathomes by the South-land. This day

Saint  Augus-  • i 1  1  • 1 it-.-  •  1 1 1  •

tine.  wee  weighed  and  came  in  by  the  River  with  the  shippe.

The  one  of  our  anchors  lay  in  five  and  thirtie  fathomes,

and the other in ten fathomes. You may ride in

shoalder water off each side, if you will  : for this

channell  of  deepe  water  is  but  narrow. Here no Sea

can  come  to hurt  you, because  the  Shoalds  and  Land

breake it off". It may  well be  called  an harbour, for

the  goodnesse  of  the place. Wee  spent  twentie  dayes

in  this  Bay.

Julie  18.  The  eighteenth  of  Julie,  in  the  morning  we  set  saile

They  depart fQV  Bantam,  and  wee  steered  off  West  by  north  from  the

of  Saint  river to go to the  northward of  the  Hands. And in

Augustine. this  course  you have  no ground  with the  lead  ;  for  it

is  all  steepe  home  to  the  shoare  of  the  other  side  ;  for

when you have twentie fathomes within the Hands,

!  you are hard by the  stones  : but by the  Hands  and

shoalds  is^faire  shoalding  from  seven  to  thirtie  fathoms,

and no  ground,  the  gut  betweene  the hills  being  East

78

JOHN  DAVIS OF LIMEHOUSE  a.d.

1612.

by  South from you, you goe right into the  rode, or

East.

The  eighteenth,  at  noone  wee  were  in  latitude  three
and  twentie  degrees,  five  and  fortie  minutes,  and  longi-
tude from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  two  and  twentie
degrees,  eight  and  fiftie  minutes  East,  and  two  leagues
off  the  next  land.  Heere  the  land  is  all  white  by  the
waters  side.

The nineteenth, in the morning the variation was They  satle
fifteene degrees no minutes and then the ship was  towar^  San~
from  the  neerest  land  twelve  leagues  : and  the  latitude  Quts-t]e  0ft^e
by  judgement three and twentie deg. five and fiftie  ik  of  Saint
minutes. At  noone, the  latitude  by  observation foure  Laurence.
and twentie degrees, one and thirtie minutes  : and
longitude  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  two  and  twentie
degrees, two and twentie minutes East. These foure
and  twentie  houres  we  sailed upon  a  right  line  South-
west by  South  twentie  leagues. This  night  the  variation
was  fourteene  degrees  thirtie  minutes.

The  foure  and  twentieth  of  September,  in  the  morning  September  24.
wee  saw  the  lies  of  Nintam,  which  are  in  latitude,  one  I/es  of  Nintam.
degree,  thirtie  minutes.  The  Sound  betweene  the  two
great  Hands  is  eighteene  leagues  from  Priaman,  and
eleven  leagues  from  the  Shoalds  before  Tecou.  Beware
you  come  not  neere  these  Shoalds  by  night,  but  rather
lie  short  three  or  foure  leagues  till  day-light.  And  then
when  you  see  three  hommockes,  that  will  rise  up  like
three  Hands  ;  have  a  speciall  care,  that  you  have  one
at  your  bolt-spreet  end,  to  give  warning  of  any  spots
in  your  way  :  for  there  are  Corralbods  that  you  may
easily  perceive.  Your  course  from  this  Sound  of  the
two  great  Hands  of  Nintam  to  goe  for  Tecou  or  Priaman,
is  East  North-east  to  the  Shoalds  aforesaid.  But  when
you  come  thorow  the  Sound,  keepe  your  lead  going  :
and  come  no  neerer  the  South  great  Hand  then  sixteene
fathome  :  for  towards  the  Eastside  are  Shoalds  :  and  a
breach  off  the  Norther-Iland  also,  as  you  shall  see  upon
your  Larboord-side  going  in.

79

A.D.

1612.

They  arrive  in
the  Rode  of
Priaman  in
Sumatra.

October  8.

They  arrive  at
Bantam.

November.

December  1 1 .

Januarie  10.
The  Straight
of  Malacca.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

For  your  better  knowing  when  you  draw  neere  the
Shoalds  of  Tecou,  set  the  three  hommocks  which  are
like  three  Hands,  but  are  upon  the  Maine,  for  it  is  low
land  by  them  :  and  when  you  have  them  North-east  and
by  East,  you  shall  begin  to  meet  with  them  :  and  when
the  said  land  is  North  North-east  you  are  past  them.
But  bee  very  carefull  every  where  :  for  it  is  all  bad
ground  hereabout  before  you  passe  the  high  land  of
Manancabo,  which  is  in  latitude  foure  degrees,  thirtie
minutes,  or  thereabout.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  wee  anchored  in  the  rode
of  Priaman ;  where  wee  found  the  Thomas :  and  wee
stayed  there  to  recover  sicke  men  fourteene  dayes.  And
then  the  Hector  and  wee  did  set  saile  for  Bantam.  The
latitude  of  Priaman  is  in  fiftie  minutes  Southerly.  The
variation  foure  degrees  ten  minutes.  The  Rode  is  behind
the  second  Hand  in  sixe  fathomes  :  upon  which  Hand
you  have  fresh  water  and  wood.  The  Barre  of  Priaman
is  fast  by.

The  eight  of  October,  the  ship  came  downe  by  the
Hector,  where  wee  stayed  for  her  to  goe  for  Bantam,
and  in  the  morning  set  saile.

The  three  and  twentieth,  wee  came  into  the  rode  of
Bantam  with  the  James  and  the  Hector.

The  fourth  of  November  1612.  wee  weighed  from
the  rode  of  Bantam,  to  goe  for  Coromandel,  by  the
straight  of  Sunda  :  but  the  wind  and  streames  were  so
much  against  us,  that  we  were  forced  into  the  Straight
of  Sunda  againe,  to  fit  our  ship  being  much  weather-
beaten.

The  eleventh  of  December,  wee  anchored  againe  by
Pulo  Panian,  and  went  to  worke  to  romage  our  ship
to  take  in  ballast.

The  tenth  of  Januarie,  being  ballasted,  watered,  and
fitted,  wee  set  saile  for  the  Straight  of  Malacca  :  but
being  late  in  the  monson,  streames  and  winds  both
against  us,  with  much  toyle  to  ship  and  men  wee  plied
seventie  leagues  from  Bantam,  and  could  get  no  farther

80

JOHN  DAVIS OF LIMEHOUSE  a.d.

1613.

from the  tenth of  this  moneth  to  the  first  of  March :  March.

whereupon our hope was then past for that. And

taking advise amongst ourselves, wee concluded to  They  are  put

water  and  wood,  and  so  to  returne  for  Bantam,  and  to „ '  t0

, .  .  '  _,  Bantam.

proceed  without  oumatra.

The  eleventh,  being  fitted  with wood  and  water,  we  [I.  iv.  442.]
bare  up  for  Bantam  the  second  time.

The fifth of  June 16 13. at noone,  in latitude 12.  June  5. 161 3.
degr.  no  minutes,  and  longitude  from  the  salt  hills,  23.
degrees,  no  minutes  West. Heere  you  shall  see  plainly,
that we have been carryed with the streame foure
degrees, thirty minutes, which is ninty leagues. For
whosoever he be,  that  shall  saile downe  from  Bantam,  A  special  note.
or  up,  he  shall  find  such  uncertaine  sailing,  if  he  looke
not well to the variation of  the needle, that he  may
well misse  his  expectation  for  the  arrivall  at his Port.
For there is neither English nor Hollander, that can
find any way how to deale with those streames,  but
only by the variation  : for that will helpe much in
ten  or  fifteene  leagues,  if  it  be  carefully  observed. Heere
we saw the  land, it  is so low,  that you  cannot  see  it  They  dlscne
before you see the Pagods or Pagan Churches  : and
we  were  when  we  saw  the  land  foure  leagues  off. You
may be bold with your lead in fifteene  fathomes  by
night upon the Coast, and by day in ten  fathomes  :
but take  heed you have a sure man  at the  lead,  for
it  will  shoald  suddenly  ;  for  after  you  come  to  have  thirty
fathoms, you will come presently to  shoald  water,  for
it is like a well,  and the  ground Ozie. Your  course
along the shoare is North and by East  to  Paleacate,
and  so  up  to  Masulipatan. This  land  was  about  Nega-  Negapatan.
patan. Heere we steered North North-east  all  night,
in  three and twenty and seventeene fathoms, three  or
foure leagues  : the variation thirteene degrees, ten
minutes,  you  shall  in twelve  degrees  of  latitude  surely
see  the  land.

The sixth at noone, we anchored in the Road of  They  arrive  at
Paleacate in eight fathoms sand. There is a middle
iv  81  f

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613,

ground,  where  you  have  but  five  fathoms,  and  sixe,
seven,  eight,  within  that  againe.  The  markes  for  the
Roade  are  the  round  Hill  by  the  other  hill  West
Northerly,  and  the  Hollanders  Fort  South-west  and  by
West,  as  wee  road.  The  variation  is  thirteene  degrees,
ten  minutes.  The  latitude  thirteene  degrees,  thirty
minutes.

The  eight  at  noone,  we  were  in  latitude  fourteene
degrees,  forty  minutes  :  we  sailed  since  we  weighed
the  last  night  twenty  three  leagues,  the  depths  five
and  twenty  and  three  and  twenty  fathoms  :  the  course
North  and  by  East ;  but  the  lead  is  our  guide  under
God.

The  ninth  at  noone,  in  latitude  fifteene  degrees,  thirty
minutes.  Heere  you  have  the  land  in  sight,  but  not
the  high  land  of  Petepoli.  These  foure  and  twenty
houres  wee  sailed  seventeene  leagues  North  in  fifteene
and  sixteene  fathoms.  And  this  high  land  is  a  Pagodie
or  Pagan  Church.  You  may,  if  you  will,  hale  in  with
it  into  five  fathoms,  when  the  hill  is  North  North-
west, but  you  must  goe  off  East  for  it,  for  we  did  so.

A  good  note.  But  beware  in  going  off  for  a  lownesse  of  sand,  and
come  no  nearer  it  then  twelve  or  thirteene  fathoms,
till  you  be  surely  past  it.  This  high  land  is  from  the
high  land  of  Petepoli  sixe  leagues.

They  Anchor The  tenth,  we  anchored  in  the  Road  of  Petepoli,  in

Veteepofad°f  five  fathoms  sand-  This  new  high  Iland  North  No^h-
west from us,  and the platforme of Palm-trees upon

the Island East North-east, Easterly, and the Barre

North-west and by  North from us. All  the Sea-cost

is low land. The latitude fifteene degrees, two and

fiftie minutes. The variation thirteene degrees, fifty

minutes,  perfect  and  full.

A  Factory  The  nineteenth,  in  the  after-noone  we  set  saile,  when

TetefaT^  the Factol7 was fitted- The Merchants which wee
Petepoli.  ^ft  there,  were  Master  George  Chansey,  and  our  Purser,

with  seven  men  more  to  keep  our  house  and  goods.
The twentieth  calme, you  goe  East  South-east nine

82

JOHN  DAVIS OF LIMEHOUSE  a.d.

1614.

leagues, in seven or eight fathomes,  and then North

North-west  : feare not in five fathoms or  lesse,  after

you are about the point,  for it is low  land. There

is but one great tree bigger  then any  of  the rest  to  A  great  tree,  a

know  the  Road  by,  that  must  you  brine;  West  and  by  c*uff  ™arke

* .  ^  ^ —  J jot  to  know

North  from  you,  and  you  shal  have  three  fathoms  and  t^e  Roaje,
a  quarter  soft  Ozie,  and  ride  three miles  off  the  land.

The one and twentieth,  we  anchored  in  the  Roade  They  arrive  at
of  Masulipatan, where we found a  ship  of Holland  : MasuliPatan-
heere we were well entertained. Heere we did stay
about  sixe  moneths,  to  wit,  untill  the  sixteenth  of  January  :
and  then  we  weighed  and  went  for  Petipoli,  where  wee
arrived the nineteenth of  the same,  and stayed there
to  take in the goods and Merchants, till  the  seventh
of  February. And  then  wee  set  saile  for  Bantam,  and  They  retume
kept the same courses which wee did  before downe,  f0mn  ete^°  *
all the way  up. We arrived  at  Bantam the  twentieth  They  arrive  at
of  Aprill 1 6 14.  where  we  stayed  till  the  tenth  of  June  Bantam.
1 614.  and  then  set  saile  for  Patane.  They  set  out

The  tenth  of  June  16 14.  at  noone,  we  had  sight  for  Patane-
of  the  Islands  nine  leagues  from  Bantam,  our  going  is  „£,.
from  five,  sixe,  seven,  eight,  twelve,  fourteene,  and
so  to  foure  and  twentie  fathomes :  at  this  time  our  course
was  North  North-east,  after  you  are  cleare  off  the
Road,  the  wind  from  the  East  South-east  :  the  latitude
Southerly  five  degrees,  foure  and  forty  minutes.

The  eleventh,  at  sixe  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,
we  were  by  the  two  Hands  that  lye  North  from  Bantam,
in  five  degrees  of  latitude  by  Sumatra,  in  twentie
fathomes,  which  is  the  surest  course  out  and  home.
Heere  you  must  be  carefull  to  looke  well  out  for  two
sands,  that  lye  even  with  the  water.  From  six  in  the
morning  we  sailed  seven  leagues  North  North-east,  in
sixteen,  fifteene,  fourteene  and  thirteene  fathoms,  and
are  now  from  Bantam  seven  and  twentie  leagues  North
and  by  East  nearest,  the  wind  from  the  East  to  the
South-east.  From  twelve  in  the  night  we  sailed  eleven
leagues North, in ten and eleven fathoms Ozie  : but

83

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

when  you  passe  the  Riffe,  you  have  hard  sand  :  the
latitude  foure  degrees,  twelve  minutes  Southerly.  Be-
[I.  iv.  443.]  ware  by  night,  goe  not  without  ten  fathomes,  nor  within
to  the  Maine  to  lesse  then  sixe  or  seven.  And  so  be
bold  with  a  sure  man  at  the  Lead  :  for  that  must  be
the  best  Pilot.

The  twelfth,  in  the  morning  from  eight  degrees
Easterly,  wee  sailed  seven  leagues  North  North-east  in
eight,  seven,  sixe  and  five  fathomes,  and  are  with  the
second  Riffe.

From  the  second  in  the  morning  to  eleven  in  the
morning ;  wee  sailed  seven  leagues  North  North-east  by
judgement :  but  the  streame  did  set  so  fast  in,  that  wee
were  forced  to  anchor  in  foure  fathome  and  a  quarter
lesse :  the  riffe  land  in  sight,  but  not  Lucapara.  Heere
must  especiall  care  bee  had,  when  you  come  with  the  land
The  Ik  Luca-  off  the  Riffe,  that  is,  twelve  leagues  short  of  Lucapara,  and
para.  fortie eight leagues from Bantam,  that you come not

within  sixe  fathomes  till  you  see  Lucapara,  for  it  is  very
uncertaine  ground,  full  of  pits.  And  for  a  warning  to
avoid  it,  beware  you  bring  not  the  Riffe  land  last  men-
tioned South-west  and  by  South,  but  keepe  off  in  seven
fathomes,  till  you  see  Lucapara,  and  then  you  need  not
feare ;  for  the  Hand  is  bold  two  leagues  off,  but  remember
you  must  leave  it  to  the  Eastward  of  you,  and  when  you
see  it,  feare  not  five  or  foure  fathomes,  for  that  is  the
depth  you  may  be  bold  in  with  the  Maine  of  Sumatra,  but
in  the  best  toward  the  Hand  is  five  and  an  halfe,  and  sixe
fathomes.  The  streame  setteth  North  North-west,  and
South  South-east,  it  hath  sixe  foot  water.  The  floud
commeth  from  the  South-ward,  and  the  ebbe  from  the
North-ward.  The  thirteenth,  we  rid  still  with  very
uncertaine  weather.

The  fourteenth,  we  came  with  the  Hand  and  Maine,  and
put  through  betweene  them  in  five  fathomes  and  an  halfe.
And  at  noone  we  had  the  Hand  East  North-east  a  league
from  us,  for  so  neere  is  the  deepest  water :  then  steere
North  till  the  point  bee  North-west  and  by  West  in  five

84

JOHN  DAVIS OF LIMEHOUSE  ad.

1614.

or  sixe  fathomes.  The  distance  is  foure  leagues,  keepe
the  Hand  South  South-east  from  you,  for  about  it  is  very
uncertaine  ground.

Then  the  next  reach  lyeth  North  North-west  neerest :
but  keepe  Sumatra  side,  and  not  Banca,  although  you
have  deeper  water :  for  Banca  side  is  Rockes,  and  sound-
ing depths,  Sumatra  is  Ozie.  And  you  may  bee  bold
in  this  first  reach :  and  you  shall  have  nine,  ten,  eleven,
twelve,  eighteene  or  twentie  fathomes,  till  you  come  with
the  high  land  of  Banca,  which  at  Lucapara  wil  shew
like  Hands,  then  shal  you  see  Hands,  besides  the  great
Hand  of  Banca  three  leagues  before  you,  and  Sumatra  side  Banca  is  a
fall  in  with  a  bite,  and  all  flat  ground  :  wherefore  come  no  &~eat  Ilan  '
neerer  then  seven,  and  no  farther  off  then  nine  fathomes,
but  rather  for  advantage  hale  neere  unto  the  flats  of
Sumatra  in  sixe  or  five  fathomes.  Here  is  the  Channell
and  narrowest :  here  goes  tydes  strongly  one  way,  aswell
as  the  other.  The  fifteenth,  the  next  reach  lyeth  North-
west by  North  eight  leagues,  and  wee  were  with  it  sixe
degrees  East.

The  sixteenth,  the  next  reach  lyeth  North-west  and  by

West,  and  West  North-west  downe  to  Palimbam  point :  Pallmbam

but  keepe  neere  Sumatra  in  sixe  or  seven  fathomes :  for  Pomt'

Banca  side  is  not  good ;  although  it  bee  deeper  water,  yet

there  are  many  Rockes  toward  the  end  of  the  great  Hand

of  Banca. This  reach  is  seventeene  leagues  long  to  the

Towne  of  Palimbam,  and  the  hill  Monpin  is  North  from  The  hill  Mon-

you, which standeth upon the Norther end  of  Banca.  {{"'  f°" the
*  *  N  ovthevene

Then  is  the  Road  of  Palimbam South  South-west  from  end  0f  Banca.
you : your  depth  ten  fathomes  off  Sumatra side. The
distance  betweene  the  Hand  and  Sumatra  at  this  ende is
sixe  leagues  in  my  judgement.

Keepe  Sumatra  side  by  night  or  day  in  seven  fathomes,
till  you  have  the  Norther  end  of  Banca  East  South-east
for  a  RifFe  that  lyeth  off  the  Norther  end  two  leagues :
and  then  will  your  latitude  bee  one  degree,  one  and
twentie  minutes  Southerly,  and  foure  leagues  off  Banca.
But  you  must  alter  courses  to  bring  it  thus. For  when

85

A.D.

1 6 14.

The  Ik  of
Pulo  Tuio.

Llnga.

Bintam.

Pulo  Timon.

[I.  iv.  444.]
Pulo  Capas.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Banca  is  North-east  and  by  East,  Then  you  must  steere
North  North-east,  and  North,  as  Lead  and  discretion  shall
guide : but  goe  not  with  lesse  then  ten  fathomes  by  night.

The  seventeenth,  at  noone  one  degree  ten  minutes
Southerly :  Here  you  saile  North  in  eight  or  nine
fathomes  Ozie  :  and  here  you  see  that  He  of  Pulo  Tuio
without  you.  Here  by  reason  we  had  it  calme,  we
anchored  in  nine  fathomes.  Heere  the  streame  did  set
West  South-west  and  East  North-east.

The  eighteenth,  heere  your  course  is  North  North-east,
seven,  eight,  nine  and  ten  fathomes.  And  when  you  have
the  two  Northermost  Hands  in  the  Offing  South-east  from
you,  then  is  Pulo  Sio  North-west  and  by  North.  And
being  thus  it  hath  two  hils  with  a  Valley  in  the  midst,  and
two  little  Hands  by  it.  And  when  it  is  South-west,  it
sheweth  round  like  the  Mew-stone.

The  nineteenth,  this  Hand  hath  water  and  wood,  but
none  Inhabitants.  The  latitude  of  this  Hand  is  fortie
minutes  South.

The  twentieth,  now  your  depths  must  bee  from  fifteene
to  twentie  in  and  off,  and  your  course  North  to  Linga,  the
land  is  faire  in  sight,  goe  not  off  by  any  meanes,  rather
anchor. Heere  is  hard  ground.

Now  your  course  to  Bintam  is  North  &  by  West
neerest,  but  go  not  without  foure  and  twentie,  nor  within
twentie.  And  that  will  bring  you  in  sight  of  the  round
hill  of  Bintam,  which  hath  in  latitude  one  deg.  ten
min.  and  is  the  fairest  way.  The  hill  standeth  in  the
middle  of  the  Hand.

The  one  and  twentieth,  now  your  course  for  Pulo
Timon  is  North  North-west,  and  North  by  West  having
alwayes  sight  of  land,  I  meane  Hands;  and  your  depths
are  twentie,  nineteene,  and  eighteene  fathomes,  Ozie.
The  latitude  of  Pulo  Timon  is  two  degrees  fortie  seven
minutes  Northerly,  or  much  thereupon.

The  two  and  twentieth,  from  Pulo  Timon  to  Pulo
Capus  is  thirtie  sixe  leagues  North  by  West  neerest  in
eighteene,  nineteene,  twentie,  and  twentie  two  fathomes.

86

JOHN  DAVIS OF LIMEHOUSE  a.d.

1614.

And  when  you  have  the  Hands  West  off  you,  then  have

you  thirtie  sixe  fathomes  close  by  the  Hand. If  occasion

serve  you  may  goe  betweene  the  Hands  and  the  Maine  in

a  faire Channell. These Hands are in  the  latitude of

foure  degrees  fiftie  two  minutes  Northerly.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  from  Pulo  Capus  to  the  other

Hands,  which are so many that  you  cannot  tell them,

the course is North-west by North fourteene leagues :

and  then  the  Norther  end  of  the  lies  is  distant  from  the

Souther  end  nine  leagues. The  depths  are  twentie  two

and  twentie  foure  fathomes.

The  five  and  twentieth,  now  your  course  to  Patane
is  West  North-west  fortie  eight  leagues :  goe  no  further
off  the  land  then  twentie  leagues,  nor  no  neerer,  then
twelve  or  thirteene  leagues,  unlesse  you  have  occasion  to
anchor.  The  Land  is  bold  and  high.  After  you  passe
sixteene  leagues  West  North-west,  there  are  no  more
Hands  till  you  come  to  Patane,  but  only  one  Rocke :
and  you  may  if  you  will,  goe  betweene  the  Maine  and
it. This  Rocke  is  fourteene  leagues  short  of  Patane.

The thirtieth, we anchored in  the  Roade of  Patane They  arrive
in three  fathomes  and  an  haife,  where  we did  ride  til  at  Patane-
the first  of  August :  and then set saile  for  Sangora to
trimme  our ship. This Sangora  is a  very good place  Sangora.
under  two  Hands,  fast  by  the Maine,  and  from  Patane
fourteene  or  fifteene  leagues.

The third of  August 16 14. we came  to an  Anchor  August,  3,
in  the  Road  of  Sangora  under  the  Eastermost  Hand  of  the l6l+-
two,  and  there  we  trimmed  our  ship  well,  and  came  away
the  ninth  of  September,  arrived  at  Patane  the  next  day
following,  where  we  stayed  till  the  sixt  of  October,  to  take
in  the  goods  of  the  Globe,  to  carrie  them  for  Bantam.

The  ninth  of  October  we  set  saile  from  Patane,  being
bound  for  Bantam ;  holding  the  same  course  backe,  that
we  came  forth;  and  the  ninth  of  November  we  arrived
safe  at  Bantam.  Wee  rid  there  till  the  seven  and  twen-
tieth of  January,  to  lade  our  ships,  and  to  fit  all  things
for  our  Voyage  home  for  England.

87

A.D.
1614.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

They  returne The nine  and twentieth,  wee set  saile  from thence :

^hEnPanhd'f And  within  some  hundred  leagues  from  Bantam  home-

Capt. Edmund  ward  bound  dyed  our  Captaine  Master  Edmund  Marlow,

Marhw.  an excellent  man in  the  Art  of  Navigation,  and  all  the

Mathematicks. The  first  place  at  which  we  anchored  was

the  Bay  of  Saldanha,  where  we  stayed  for  our  Consort

the  Globe :  which  arrived  there  the  next  day  following.

The  nine  and  twentieth  of  Aprill  161 5.  wee  came  to
an  anchor  in  the  Roade,  where  wee  stayed  till  the  seven-
teenth of  May.  And  then  being  well  fitted  in  both  our
ships,  wee  did  set  saile  for  Santa  Helena,  where  wee
safely  arrived  the  third  of  June,  and  rode  there  till
the  seventh  in  the  morning.  Then  wee  set  saile  together
for  England,  where,  God  bee  praysed,  we  safely  arrived
the  third  of  August  161 5.

Chap. VI.

A  Ruter,  or  briefe  direction  for  readie  sayling
into  the  East-India,  digested  into  a  plaine
method  by  Master  John  Davis  of  Lime-house,
upon  experience  of  his  five  Voyages  thither,
and  home  againe.

§. I-

Nauticall  Observation  of  places  betwixt  the
Lizard  and  Saint  Augustine  in  the  He  of
Saint  Laurence.

Irst,  the  Lizard  hath  in  latitude  fiftie
degrees  ten  minutes.  The  Cape  Fini-
sterre  in  Galicia  hath  in  latitude  forty
three  degrees  twentie  minutes,  and  longi-
tude from  the  Meridian  of  the  Lizard,
two  degrees  thirtie  sixe  minutes  West.
The  Hand  of  Lancerota  hath  in  latitude

Lancerota.

twentie  eight  degrees,  forty  minutes,  and  longitude  from
the Lizard five degrees twentie foure minutes West.

88

JOHN DAVIS'S RUTTIER

The  variation  of  the  Compasse  sixe  degrees  sixe  minutes
from  North  to  East.  And  when  you  are  in  the  latitude
of  thirtie  three  degrees  thirtie  minutes,  and  chance  to
have  five  degrees  twentie  minutes  of  variation,  you  may
assure  your  selfe  to  be  North  North-east  from  the  said
Hand,  and  your  course  is  South  South-west  to  goe
with  it.

The Grand Canaria hath in latitude twenty seven  Grand
degrees fortie  minutes, and  longitude  from  the  Lizard  banana.
sixe  degrees  thirtie  minutes  West. The  variation  is  sixe  L  ' ^5"-1
degrees  from  North  to  East. Likewise  in  the  latitude
thirty  degrees  thirty  minutes :  when  you  have  five  degrees
and fiftie minutes variation, you have the said Hand
South  and  by  West  from  you.

The  Hand  of  Saint  Marie,  being  the  Eastermost  of  the
Azores,  hath  in  latitude  thirtie  seven  degrees ;  and  longi-
tude from  the  Lizard  fourteene  degrees  West.  The
variation  of  the  Compasse  one  degree  fortie  minutes
from  North  to  East.  But  when  you  are  in  the  latitude
of  thirtie  degrees  thirtie  minutes  comming  home-ward,
and  finde  five  degrees  variation,  and  would  see  the  Hands
in  your  course,  goe  North-east  for  Saint  Marie :  but  it
is  better  to  goe  more  Northerly,  and  so  you  shall  bee
sure  to  see  some  of  them  :  for  the  variation  is  much  upon
that  rate  in  the  North-east  course,  till  you  come  in  with
the  Hands.

The  latitude  of  Sal,  which  is  one  of  the  Hands  of  Cape  Sal.
Verde,  is  ten  degrees  thirtie  minutes,  and  longitude  from
the  Lizard  twelve  degrees  twelve  minutes. The  variation
three  degrees,  thirtie  minutes  from  North  to  East.

Bonavista  is  from  Sal  sixe  leagues.  The  mid-way  Bonavhta.
betweene  the  Meridian  of  Cape  Verde  and  these  Hands
in  the  latitude  of  nine  degrees,  you  have  two  degrees
fifteene  minutes  of  variation  to  the  East-ward :  and  the
neerer  you  are  to  the  Maine  land,  the  lesse  variation.
But  when  you  come  in  five  degrees  of  latitude,  if  the
Ternados  doe  not  meete  with  you  before,  there  you  shall
beginne  to  have  them,  which  are  winds  blowing  everywhere.

89

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  best  But [f vou w\\\ passe the Equinoctiall, use what

tieEouinoc-*  diligence  you  may,  in  plying  to  get  from  these  un-
tiatt  Line.  healthfull  and  troublesome  windes  :  but  keepe  your  selfe
so,  that  you  may  bee  but  South  and  by  East,  or  South
South-east  from  Maio,  because  it  may  bee  in  your  minde,
that  your  much  going  to  the  East-ward  will  bee  a  helpe
when  you  stand  over  with  the  generall  wind.  But  you
may  there  spend  much  time,  and  get  little  advantage.
Now  assoone  as  you  have  the  wind  at  South  South-east,
and  are  in  two  or  three  degrees  off  the  line,  stand  away
with  it.  For  if  you  may  passe  the  Line  in  ten  degrees
of  longitude  from  the  Lizard,  your  variation  will  be  sixe
degrees  ten  minutes  from  North  to  East,  and  you  shall
feele  neither  the  East  South-east  stream e  to  hurt  you,
nor  the  North-west  and  by  West  streame,  that  setteth
over  to  the  West-Indies.

But  if  the  wind  doe  hinder  you  much,  feare  not  to
passe  the  Line  in  fourteene  degrees  of  longitude  from
the  Lizard,  your  variation  will  bee  in  that  place  sixe
degrees  fortie  five  minutes.  And  beeing  past,  make  your
way  to  the  South-ward  as  speedily  as  you  may :  but  if
the  wind  be  at  East  North-east  or  East,  as  many  times
it  will  bee,  doe  not  goe  to  the  East-ward  of  the  South-
east and  by  East,  although  in  your  minde  it  were  the
best  course :  for  if  you  doe,  you  shall  find  the  wind  at
South-east  and  South  South-east,  and  it  will  bring  you
downe  to  your  South  course  againe,  although  you  have
spent  so  much  time  as  in  your  South  course  would  have
carried  you  without  the  Tropicke  into  the  variable  winds
way,  which  is  in  twentie  sixe  or  twentie  eight  degrees.

For  it  is  great  oddes,  when  a  man  may saile  thirtie

sixe  leagues  in  foure  and  twentie  houres,  and  will  sayle

but  foure  and  twentie  close  upon  a  wind. For  when  you

have  brought  your  selfe  into  the  variable  winds  way,  it

Increase  of cannot be  long before  you have a slent  to get  up to

variation  in ^  cape  0f  Good  Hope,  where  you  shall  note,  that  your

Southward  of variation  will  increase  in  running  South  from  the  Line.

the  Line. For  when you  come in twentie  degrees to the South-

90

JOHN DAVIS'S RUTTIER

ward,  you  shall  have  fifteene  degrees  of  variation,  and
more  to  the  West-ward  fourteene.  Whereby  if  you  note
it  well,  you  shall  perceive,  that  in  these  parts,  betweene
the  Tropickes  I  meane,  it  keepeth  no  method  in  Easting
or  Westing,  as  it  doth  without  them  :  as  you  may  see
at  the  He  De  Fernando  de  Loronha,  the  latitude  whereof  The  He  of
is  foure  degrees  South,  and  longitude  from  the  Lizard  ^_ermndo  de
nineteene  degrees  twentie  minutes  West.  The  variation
is  there  eight  degrees  ten  minutes,  from  North  to  East :
if  you  come  there  to  ride,  the  Roade  is  upon  the  North-
east side,  but  it  is  ill  ground  in  some  place.  The  depth,
nine,  eight  and  seven  fathomes  water,  sandie  grounds,
with  a  stone  or  Rocke  heere  and  there.

This  land  riseth  like  Paules  steeple,  and  that  land  like
the  steeple  will  bee  when  you  are  in  the  Roade  South
South-west  from  you.  There  is  much  broken  ground
and  Hands  by  the  He  it  selfe.  Heere  is  good  refreshing
and  good  water,  but  dangerous  landing  for  the  Sea  to
sinke  your  Boats  and  drowne  your  men.

The  Portugals  of  Fernamburo  have  some  few  Slaves
heere  that  make  Cotton  and  keepe  their  Cattell.  They
have  Guiney  Wheate  there  growing.

The  Hand  of  Santa  Helena  hath  in  South  latitude  The  lie  of
sixteen  degrees,  &  longitude  from  the  Lizard  foure  Santa  Helena-
degrees  thirtie  minutes  East :  and  from  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope  twentie  three  degrees  thirtie  minutes  West.  The
variation  is  seven  degrees  thirtie  minutes  from  North  to
East.  This  Hand  is  one  of  the  best  for  the  bignesse
thereof  for  the  refreshing  of  men,  that  I  know  in  the
Sea :  it  standeth  so  healthy,  and  hath  so  good  a  Roade
for  Shippes,  as  a  man  can  desire.  The  Roade  is  open
to  the  North-west  side :  right  before  the  Chappell  you
may  ride  in  twelve,  tenne,  nine,  eight,  or  seven  fathomes
water,  good  ground  and  no  danger,  but  what  you  see
a  long  the  shoare.

The  Hand  is  little,  but  very  high  land,  a  man  may  see  [I.  iv.  446.]
it  eighteene  leagues  off. Upon it  are  all  things  fitting
for  a  mans  comfort,  comming  with  it  in  distresse. If  you

9*

Saldanha.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

will  see  this  Hand,  you  have  the  wind  alway  at  South-
east or  thereabouts.  Therefore  keepe  your  selfe  in  the
latitude  of  sixteene  degrees  tenne  minutes,  or  fifteene
degrees,  and  runne  West  upon  that  height,  and  you
cannot  misse  it :  whether  it  bee  day  or  night  you  need
not  feare,  but  this  you  may  assure  your  selfe,  that  in
your  course  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  there  is
nothing  that  will  wrong  you.  I  meane  no  streame  nor
Current.  For  I  have  seene  that  my  selfe  three  times
comming  from  the  Cape  the  South-east  wind  will  take
you  in  thirtie  degrees,  and  sometimes  before,  and  will
carrie  you  to  the  North-ward  of  the  Equinoctiall  Line.
The  Bay  of  Saldanha,  which is  the  Bay  where  we  doe commonly

anchor  out-ward  bound,  hath  in  latitude  thirtie  foure
degrees  twentie  five  minutes,  and  longitude  from  the
Lizard  twentie  eight  degrees  East.  The  variation  thirtie
minutes  from  North  to  East.  For  the  knowing  of  the
land  hereabout  Saldanha,  it  is  all  high  land.  But  com-
monly when  you  come  from  the  West-ward  it  is  foggie
and  darke  upon  it,  so  that  you  shall  see  the  breach  of
the  shoare,  before  you  can  come  to  make  it,  or  know  it.
If  you  see  the  land  when  you  are  in  the  Offing  rise  like
a  Table,  and  other  round  hils  by  it,  one  like  a  Sugar-
loafe ;  bring  this  Table  East  by  South,  and  then  stirre
so  see,  till  you  come  close  under  the  land,  for  this  course
will  bring  you  in  with  the  point  of  the  Souther  land  going
into  the  Roade.  Now  when  you  see  the  point  it  selfe,
which  is  low  land,  you  shall  see  the  He  of  Penguin :  but
keepe  your  selfe  neerer  the  point  then  to  Penguin  Hand,
because  there  are  sunken  Rockes  all  toward  the  Hand  :
keepe  your  Lead  going,  for  toward  the  point  you  shall
have  ground  at  fifteene  fathomes,  and  then  you  may  bee
bold  to  goe  by  it  in  ten  fathomes  water.  Then  the
Roade  is  South-east  by  East  from  this  point  in  sixe
fathomes,  or  five  if  you  list.  The  Table  will  bee  South
South-west  the  middle  of  it,  and  the  Sugar-loafe  South-
west halfe  Westerly.  The  worst  winds  for  that  Roade
are  from the  North-west  to  the North-east. Heere  is

92

JOHN DAVIS'S RUTTIER

good  watering  and  fresh  victuals,  when  the  people  come
downe  with  it.

There  is  fresh-fish  in  the  River  to  bee  had  at  some-
time of  the  tyde  with  a  seine :  it  doth  high  sometimes
five  foote  water,  and  sometimes  sixe,  sometimes  more,
and  sometimes  lesse.

Betweene the Coast of Brasil and this Roade the
Compasse hath twentie  degrees  variation, and more or
lesse  as  you  are  to  the  North-ward  or  South. For  the
more  you  are  to  the  South-ward,  the  more  you  have,  and
to  the  North-ward  the  lesse. But  in  thirtie  three  degrees  The  highest
thirty  minutes, you have the  highest variation twenty  v^natton
one  degrees  from  North  to  East,  &  longitude  from  the  brasil  and
Lizard  seven  deg.  thirtie  minutes,  or  from  the  Cape  of  the  Cape  of
Good Hope, thirtie five deg. thirtie minutes West  : Good  Hope.
Now  when  you  come  in eleven  degrees  no  minutes  of
variation, you may  assure your selfe,  if  your  variation
bee  good, you are three hundred and thirtie leagues
short : and  it  will  keepe a  good  method  in  decreasing
after  the  rate  of  thirtie  or  eight  and  twentie  leagues  to
a  degree :  for  when  you  are  in  two  degrees  of  variation,
you shall bee eight and fortie  or  fiftie  leagues short  :
and  when you  have fortie  minutes,  and  cannot  see  the
land,  you  are  but  ten  leagues  off.

Now  if  you  can  see  the  Land  close  by  the  waters  side,
before  you  can  see  the  other  high  land,  the  fogge  hanging
upon  the  shoare,  and  are  in  thirtie  foure  degrees  of
latitude,  you  may  see  white  sandie  wayes  close  by  the
waters  side,  your  course  is  to  the  point,  if  they  beare
East  South-east  from  you,  and  beeing  neere  the  shoare
is  North-east.  For  these  white  sandie  wayes  are  almost
three  leagues  short  of  that  point  going  into  the  Roade,
and  fast  by  the  point  to  the  South-west  from  the  said
point  going  for  the  Roade,  the  two  points  doe  lye  North-
east and  South-west.  And  then  the  land  toward  the  Cape
lyeth  South-east  and  by  East,  and  South  South-east.  So
likewise  the  land  lyeth  to  the  North-ward  off  the  Bay
North  North-west,  and South  South-west.

93

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Chapmans
Chance.

Penguin  Hand  and  this  Point  lye  North  and  by  West,
and  South  and  by  East.

Connie  Hand.  To  the  Northward  of  this  Hand  is  an  Hand  called
Connie  Hand,  and  it  lyeth  in  latitude  thirtie  three  degrees
twentie  seven  minutes,  and  North  North-west  from
Penguine  He.  This  Connie  He  hath  bad  ground  about  it:
but  you  may  goe  betweene  the  Maine  and  that  Hand.  If
you  will  anchor,  this  He  upon  the  Wester-side  hath  a  dan-
gerous ledge  of  Rockes  lying  off  it  to  the  Seaward.  The
Maine  all  along  the  shoare  is  bold,  but  what  you  may  see.
Chapmans  Chance  hath  in  latitude  thirtie  foure  degrees
tenne  minutues,  and  is  an  Harbour,  which  lyeth  within
the  South-west  point  under  a  little  Hill  like  Charing
Crosse,  close  hanging  by  the  Sea-side  of  the  South  South-
west side  of  the  land  like  a  Table,  standing  in  the  very
bottome  of  the  Bay.

This  is  a  very  good  Harbour  for  the  ships  :  for  the
maine  land  of  the  Cape  will  be  shut  in  upon  the  Wester-
side  of  the  land  :  and  there  is  good  ground,  and  a  good
depth  to  ride  in,  as  ten,  nine,  eight,  seven,  sixe,  or  five
fathomes.

This Harbor is not past ten miles over land to

[I.  iv.  447.]  Soldanha  from  it :  and  a  man  may  come  away  with  that
wind  that  you  cannot  come  forth  withall  from  Soldanha.
Wherefore  when  any  shall  have  beene  there  with  a  ship,
they  shall  better  know  it.  Wee  went  not  in  with  our  ship,
because  we  were  all  fit  to  goe  about,  before  wee  did  know
it  to  bee  a  Harbor.  For  wee  did  suspect  it  by  chance
standing  in  with  a  scant  wind,  and  being  toward  night  our
Captaine  Master  Edmund  Marlow  sent  one  of  the
Masters  Mates  in  the  Pinnasse  to  see  whether  it  were
a  Harbor  or  not,  having  little  wind,  and  by  that  time
hee  came  in  with  it,  the  Sunne  was  downe,  so  that  he
could  not  see  and  take  that  notice  he  would  for  quick
returning  to  the  ship.

Cape  Falso.  Cape  Falso  hath  in  latitude  thirty  foure  degrees  thirty

minutes,  and  is  distant  from the Cape  of  Good  Hope,
nine  leagues  East  South-east.

94

JOHN DAVIS'S RUTTIEB

Betweene  these  two  Capes  there  is  a  deepe  Bay,  and
before  it  there  is  a  Rocke  even  with  the  water ;  but  it
lyeth  neere  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  In  this  Bay  is
the  great  River  called  Rio  Dolce,  that  runneth  farre  Rio  Dolce.
up  in  the  Land.  There  is  good  refreshing,  as  the  Hol-
landers report,  for  they  have  beene  there  with  their
ships.

Heere  at  Cape  Falso is no  variation  that  I  can  find  No  variation.
by  observing South  from it. The  Land lyeth to the
Cape das  Aguilhas  East South-east from the Cape of  CaPe_  das
Good Hope, and  is distant sixe and twentie  leagues :  ASmlhas-
no  danger is  to  be seene,  but  a  bould  shoare  along  the
coast. And  so  it  is  bould  sixtie  leagues  to  the  Eastward :
for  so  farre I  have  sailed  to  the  East-ward  of  Cape  Das
Aguilhas  the  land  lyeth  East  Northerly  for  one  hundred
leagues.

The  very  Cape  Das  Aguilhas  hath  in  latitude  thirtie
foure  degrees,  fiftie  minutes  South,  and  is  very  low  land.
But  there  is  high  land  to  the  East-ward  of  the  last  named
Cape.  You  may  have  ground  with  your  Lead  in  seven  or
eight  leagues  off  the  land,  for  one  hundred  leagues  East,
at  seventie,  sixtie,  sixtie  five,  fiftie  five,  fiftie,  fortie  fathomes,
sandie  blacke  ground  upon  your  Leade,  which  will  helpe
you  much  in  comming  home  if  you  cannot  observe  the
variation  nor  latitude.  The  variation  of  Cape  Das  Aguil-
has is  no  degrees  thirtie  minutes  from  North  to  West.
And  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  the  Compasse  is  varied
from  North  to  East  five  and  twentie  minutes.  Assoone
as  you  are  to  the  West-ward  of  Cape  Das  Aguilhas,  you
shall  have  Ozie  and  deepe  water ;  whereby  you  may  see
that  this  will  helpe  you  well  in  darke  weather  to  know
how  the  lands  are  from  you,  and  how  to  hale  in  with  the
Cape  of  Good  Hope.

When  you  saile  into  the  East-India  from  the  Cape  of
Good  Hope,  you  must  bee  very  carefull  in  your  course:
for  till  you  come  up  to  have  seven  or  eight  degrees  of
variation,  you  shall  find  it  sometimes  very  uncertaine,
shouts of  streames  that will  set a  man  sometimes  one

95

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

way,  sometimes  another  as  I  have  often  found  it  to  bee
so,  and  have  had  none  other  meanes  to  helpe  my  selfe,
The  great  but  by  the  variation  which  is  very  sure,  if  you  bee
benefit  of  the  carefu;Q  [n  observing.  But  after  vou  passe  eight  degrees
of  variation,  you  shall  not  need  to  feare  the  streames,  if
you  bee  bound  to  the  East-ward,  for  the  streames  or
tydes  doe  set  betweene  the  variation  aforesaid,  and  the
Cape  Das  Aguilhas.

Now  if  you  find  betweene  the  Cape  and  this  variation
of  seven  or  eight  degrees  that  you  doe  not  alter  it  to  your
ship  running  East ;  for  this  is  your  fittest  course,  if  you
bee  bound  for  Bantam,  or  within  for  any  place  of  the  He
of  Saint  Laurence,  till  you  come  up  to  the  variation  afore-
said, as  you  may  chance  at  five  or  sixe  degrees,  assure  your
selfe  you  are  wrong  with  it.  For  the  variation  will  in-
crease by  the  rate  of  nine  and  twentie  or  thirtie  leagues,  to
the  He  of  Saint  Laurence.  I  meane  these  leagues  in
Easting  from  the  Meridians,  and  not  the  course  you  saile
by,  for  if  you  saile  North-east  and  by  East,  and  you  shall
have  thirtie  sixe  leagues  for  one  degree  and  halfe  Easting,
or  longitude,  which  will  alter  one  degree  of  variation.
Note.  And  the  more  North-ward  your  course  is,  the  lesse

variation  you  have,  as  you  shall  plainly  understand :  for
in  five  and  twentie  of  latitude  in  sight  of  Saint  Laurence,
you  have  sixteene  degrees  no  minutes.  And  running
North  by  the  land  to  the  River  of  Saint  Augustine,  you
shall  have  but  fifteene  degrees  in  the  latitude  of  twentie
three  degrees  and  thirtie  minutes,  which  is  plaine  that
it  is  lesse  to  the  North-ward,  then  to  the  South-ward.
So  likewise  up  to  the  East-ward  in  the  latitude  of  eleven
degrees  no  minutes,  the  highest  variation  is  twentie  three
degrees  forty  minutes.  And  in  the  latitude  of  thirtie
three  degrees  no  minutes,  the  highest  variation  is  twentie
seven  degrees  ten  minutes,  as  I  have  seene  and  observed
my  self,  and  in  my  judgement  in  ten  leagues  Easting  and
Westing  of  the  same  Meridian,  as  hereafter  shall  more
plainely  appeare  in  their  due  places.

96

JOHN  DAVIS'S RUTTIER

§. II.  [I.  iv.  448.]

A  note  for  finding  out  of  the  River  of  Saint
Augustine  in  Saint  Laurence,  of  divers  small
lies  in  the  way  thence  to  Achen,  and  of  many
Ports  and  passages  in  and  about  Sumatra.

His  River  of  S.  Augustine  hath  in  latitude,  twenty
three  degrees  thirtie  five  minutes,  and  longitude
from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  twenty  three  de-

grees twenty  minutes  East.  The  variation  is  fourteene
degrees  fifty  minutes  from  North  to  West.  But  when
you  goe  for  it,  seeke  the  land  in  the  latitude  of  twenty
foure  degrees  twenty  minutes,  because  in  the  latitude
of  twenty  five  degrees  tenne  minutes,  there  is  dangerous
falling  for  Rockes  and  shoalds,  which  I  have  seene.  And
in  this  latitude  twenty  foure  degrees  twenty  minutes,  you
have  the  variation  fifteene  degrees  forty  minutes.  The
shoare  bold,  but  what  you  see  before  you.  And  the
coast  lieth  South  and  North  by  a  meridian  Compasse,
without  counting  the  variation,  or  medling  in  this  place
with  it,  but  steere  North  and  North  and  by  East,  as
discretion  will  guide  you  by  the  land :  then  comming
along  the  shoare  in  twenty  foure  degrees  tenne  minutes,
you  shall  see  a  head-land,  which  hath  upon  it  a  round  hill
of  white  sand,  and  is  like  a  Castle,  with  some  few  trees  by
it.  This  head-land  is  short  of  the  Bay  thirteene  leagues,
and  your  course  is  North  and  by  East  and  North  still,  no
danger  till  you  see  the  lies  and  shoalds  before  the  Bay :
and  in  the  Countrey  you  shall  see  a  land  rise  like  unto
Westminster  Hall,  and  a  gut  betweene  two  high  lands,
like  Dartmouth.  The  River  is  between  these  two  hils :  The  River  of
when  you  come  with  the  lies  and  shoalds,  and  will  goe  .  fkugjS/lnf
into  the  North-ward  of  them,  you  may  be  bold  of  the  5  Laurence.
shoalds  in  seven  fathomes,  if  you  will  loofe  in  by  them,
but  anchor  not  by  them :  for  it  is  bad  ground,  with
Corall  that  will  cut  your  Cable  in  sunder,  if  you  ride  but
little  time  there ;  but  rather  hale  East,  up  for  the  Chan-
iv  97  g

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

nell  comming  from  the  River,  where  you  have  Ozie
by  the  Maine,  in  twelve,  foureteen,  or  twenty  fathomes
water:  and  you  shall  find  deepe  water  in  along  to  the
River,  till  you  come  fast  by  the  two  hills,  and  West-
minster Hall  within  the  point  on  the  West  North-west
side.  There  you  may  choose  your  roade  from  twenty
fathomes  to  twelve,  eleven,  tenne,  nine,  eight,  seven,  sixe,
or  five  fathomes.  But  it  is  Ozie  ground  without  the  two
headlands,  and  sand  within.  This  River  lieth  from  the
lies  without  shoalds  East,  and  is  distant  five  leagues.
Here  is  good  filling  of  water,  and  wooding,  very  good
victuals;  but  you  pay  silver:  for  that  they  desire  most.
The  people  are  of  a  reasonable  disposition;  but  you  need
not  to  trust  them,  nor  none  else  where  you  come,  but
stand  alwayes  upon  your  Guard,  while  your  Boat  goe
into  the  River  to  fill  water.  You  shall  have  a  very  good
Oxe  for  four  shillings,  and  a  Goat  for  one  shilling  English,
and  as  good  as  you  have  in  England.  The  men  of  this
place  are  tall  and  well  made.
The  Cape  of  The  Cape  of  S.  Sebastian  hath  in  latitude  twentie  five
S.  Sebastian.  degrees  fortie  five  minutes,  and  longitude  from  the  Cape  of
Good  Hope,  twentie  five  degrees  no  minutes.  The  varia-
tion of  the  Compasse  sixteene  degrees  fortie  minutes,  from
North  to  West.  Here  upon  the  South-east  side  is  a  very
good  place  for  refreshing,  as  the  Hollanders  report,  much
upon  the  latitude  of  twenty  foure  degrees  no  minutes.
Santa  Lucia,  It  is  named  Santa  Lucia ;  for  as  they  have  reported  to  mee,
a  good  place  of  there  fe  a  race  Qf  the  portUgalls  left  there.  They  say  the
jr  sung.  s^ps  rjje  verie  secure,  and  have  above  nine  or  eight
fathomes  water,  sandie  ground,  and  an  Hand  or  two  before
it.  And  this  must  bee  much  better  for  shipping  bound
up  or  downe,  then  the  River  of  S.  Augustine,  because
it  is  upon  the  head  of  the  Hand.
The  Ik  ofS.  The  lie  of  S.  Marie,  upon  the  East  side  of  S.  Laurence,
Mary.  jiat|1 -m latitude sixteene degrees thirtie minutes, and

longitude  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  thirty  one
degrees  no  minutes.  The  variation  nineteene  degrees
fiftie  minutes  from North  to  West. This  Hand  is  in-

98

JOHN DAVIS'S RUTTIER

habited ;  and  there  we  had  Hennes,  Limons,  and  other
refreshing,  good  water;  but  never  a  Harbour,  all  Roads:
you  may  ride  off  the  West  side,  before  a  Towne  of
twelve  or  sixteene  houses.  The  depth  of  water  is  twenty
fathomes,  more  or  lesse.  The  distance  from  this  Island,
over  to  the  Maine  is  tenne  leagues.  To  the  North
North-west,  from  this  Hand  is  a  great  Bay,  that  lieth
sixteene  leagues  deepe  West  North  West  in  from  the
Souther-side  of  the  Bay,  there  is  good  riding  under  a
little  Hand,  and  in  from  that  upon  the  Maine,  there  is  a
river  of  fresh  water.  And  there  is  likewise  water  and
wood  upon  the  He  by  the  Roade,  you  may  ride  in  twelve,
tenne,  nine,  or  eight  fathomes:  but  you  had  need  to
shue  your  anchors:  for  it  is  so  soft  Ozie,  that  your
anchors  will  come  home.  Here  you  have  Rice  in  abun-
dance, hens,  and  some  cattell.  The  people  have  warre,
one  side  of  the  Bay  with  the  other.  Trust  these  people
not  too  farre  for  treachery.  It  is  a  place  of  very  un-
certaine  and  contagious  weather,  for  raine,  thunder  and
lightning,  as  ever  I  came  in,  and  very  unholsome ;  for  we
lost  many  men  here.  But  if  distresse  urge  a  man  to  it,
you  may  unlade  a  ship,  or  doe  any  businesse  by  the  Hand,
with  standing  upon  your  guard,  and  using  the  people
friendly,  as  the  Hollanders  have  been  driven  unto.  The
latitude  of  this  Bay  is,  fifteene  degrees  fortie  minutes.
But  if  you  go  with  S.  Marie  first,  you  cannot  misse  it :
for  it  is  the  next  Bay  upon  the  Maine  unto  the  Hand.
The  name  of  this  Bay  is  Antongill.  We  did  ride  here  in  [I.  iv.  449.]
the  first  East  Indian  Voyage  for  the  Merchants  of  Lon-  The  bay  of
don,  in  the  yeere  1601,  from  December  to  March,  and  nonSl-
then  we  went  for  the  East  Indies.

The  latitude  of  the  He  de  Roque  Piz  is  eleven  degrees  The  He  de
no  minutes,  and  longitude  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope, Ro(lue  Plz-
forty  one  degrees  no  minutes  of  the  great Circle  East.
Here in the sight of these two Hands, we had the
highest  variation of  the Compasse, which was twenty  The  highest

is

three degrees thirty minutes. Now South from th
place,  as  neere  as  I can  judge  by  sundry  times  going

99

variation.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

up  and  downe,  we  have  likewise  the  most  variation,  that
is  :  if  you  be  in  the  latitude  of  twentie  seven  or  twenty
eight  degrees,  then  you  have  twenty  sixe  degrees  no
minutes  :  if  you  bee  in  thirty  three  degrees  no  minutes
of  latitude,  you  have  twenty  seven  degrees  twenty  minutes
of  variation.  And  this  you  may  see  in  my  Voyage  in
the  James,  begun  in  February,  1611.  and  ended  the  third
of  August,  161 5.
Baixos  das  The  Shoalds,  called  Baixos  das  Chagas,  have  in  latitude

Chagas.  g-xe  degree  no minutes, and longitude from the  Cape

of  Good  Hope,  fiftie  three  degrees  thirty  six  minutes
East.  The  variation  is  nineteen  degr.  fiftie  min.  from
North  to  West.  These  shoalds  are  very  dangerous.
There  are  three  or  foure  Hands  and  other  dry  sands  :
we  were  twenty  foure  houres  upon  and  among  these
Shoalds.  There  is  in  some  places  corall,  in  other  some
sand  ;  sometimes  tenne  fathomes,  and  by  and  by  sixe
fathomes  :  the  best  water  the  ships  had,  was  foure
fathomes  :  but  God  be  thanked,  we  had  no  hurt  to  any
one  of  the  ships.  We  were  cleere  by  keeping  the  lies
South  South-west  from  us  :  for  upon  the  North  North-
east side  it  is,  that  we  found  the  way  out.  If  they
had  been  well  laid  in  our  Charts,  we  had  missed  them.
In  the  Channel  of  Maldina,  the  Compasse  varieth  17.
degrees.  And  at  the  Cape  de  Comori  sixteene  degrees.
The  Hands  of  The Hands of Nicubar, lying off the North end of

J.  T •  7  'JO

mcubar.  Sumatra,  have  in  North  latitude  seven  degrees  tenne
minutes,  and  longitude  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,
seventie  three  degrees  no  minutes  East.  The  variation
is  seven  degrees  five  minutes  from  North  to  West.  If
you  goe  with  these  lies  of  Nicubar,  as  you  come  from
the  West-ward,  when  you  come  within  fiftie  or  fortie
leagues,  you  shall  meete  with  overfals,  or  the  running  of
some  tydes,  which  will  make  you  mistrust  shoald  water  :
but  we  found  none  with  our  Lead  when  we  sounded.
Many  such  you  shall  passe.  I  thinke  they  be  the
streames  comming  from  the  Bay  of  Bengala.  Among
these  Hands  there  is  no  danger,  but  what  you  see  :  you

100

JOHN DAVIS'S RUTTIER

may  bee  bold  to  water  and  fit  your  selves  here.  The
people  will  not  come  aboord  your  ship,  but  will  buy  and
sell  in  their  Canoes.  Farther  into  the  North-ward  are
more  Hands  ;  as  in  eight  degrees  lieth  an  Hand  called
Ilha  de  Sombrero,  because  upon  the  Souther-side  the  Uha  de
land  is  like  a  hat.  Under  this  Hand  is  good  riding  ;  Sombrero-
and  the  people  will  come  to  your  shippe  from  the  other
Hands  to  the  East-ward,  for  there  are  many  Hands.

Achen,  which  is  a  Citie  upon  the  West  North-west  side  -Achat  in
of  Sumatra,  hath  in  latitude  five  degrees  forty  minutes,  oumarra-
and  longitude  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  seventie
foure  degrees  fortie  minutes  East.  And  the  variation  is
sixe  degrees  twentie  five  minutes  from  North  to  West.
You  may  ride  in  seven  or  eight  fathomes,  or  at  low  water
in  five  or  sixe  :  it  hyeth  five  foot  upon  the  Barre.  Your
roade  is  to  the  Eastward  of  the  Castle,  and  a  round
hil  in  the  Countrey  South-east  from  you.  The  ground
is  Ozie  where  you  ride.  There  is  high  land  upon  the
Wester-side  of  the  Towne.  The  hill,  which  is  South-
east of  you,  is  called  the  hil  of  Pedir,  because  there  is
a  Towne  of  that  name  under  it,  twenty  five  leagues  from
Achen.  Before  the  Road  in  the  Offing  are  five  or  sixe
Hands.  The  Pepper  of  this  place  is  better  then  the
Pepper  of  Bantam.  At  Pedir  Pepper  is  to  be  had,  but
little  else.  The  land  lieth  from  the  Road  of  Achen  forty
or  fifty  leagues  East  and  West.

And  if  you  will  goe  for  the  straight  of  Malacca,  there
is  no  danger  till  you  come  to  the  Eastward  of  the  lies  The  lies  das
das  Jarras,  but  a  faire  depth,  at  twenty  five  or  thirtie
fathomes  water.  The  tydes  set  as  much  one  way  as  the
other.  At  these  lies  das  Jarras,  you  may  see  the  high
land  of  Malacca  :  but  here  about  Sumatra,  is  all  low
land.  And  your  variation  here  about  the  Equinoctial  is
all  one,  as  I  said  before,  when  I  spake  of  the  highest,
that  there  is  within  lesse  variation  then  without,  in  the
latitude  of  fourteene  or  fifteene  degrees.  For  when  you
have  seven  degrees  fiftie  minutes  in  the  Offing,  you  are
much  upon  seven  degrees  thirtie  minutes  longitude  from

ior

Jarras.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Bantam.  And  that  distance  you  are  in  for  longitude
from  Bantam,  when  you  are  under  the  Equinoctiall  line,
and  have  sixe  degrees  thirty  five  minutes  of  variation.
So  that  much  upon  that  rate  of  thirty  one  leagues  in  the
Offing  of  Easting  or  Westing,  will  alter  one  degree
of  variation,  or  one  degree  and  an  halfe  of  longitude  ;
and  within  you  runne  fortie  leagues,  or  two  degrees.
This  I  have  found  by  experience  both  within  and  without
going  home  from  Bantam.

If  you  were  at  Achen,  and  would  saile  for  Priaman,
which  is  a  Towne  upon  the  West  side  of  Sumatra,  and
hath  in  latitude  no  degrees  fiftie  minutes  South,  and
longitude  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  seventie  seven
degrees  forty  minutes  East :  The  variation  foure  degrees
forty  minutes  from  North  to  West :  The  surest  way  is
this.  To  the  East-ward  of  Priaman  there  are  Hands,  in
the  South  latitude  of  one  degree  and  thirty  minutes,
The  lies  of  which  are  called  the  lies  of  Nimtam.  Your  course  is  to
Nimtam.  gQe  w-{t^  these  Hands,  and  come  not  betweene  the  maine,
but  keepe  the  Sea,  till  you  see  those  Hands  :  keepe  in
one  degree  twenty  minutes  of  South  latitude,  and  you
shall  surely  fall  with  the  North  end  of  the  biggest.  Now
this  great  Hand  being  the  biggest  of  the  two,  is  twenty
leagues  long  very  neere  :  and  there  are  many  little  Hands
[I.  iv.  450.]  neere  it.  And  when  you  are  with  this  Hand,  go  up  by
it,  for  it  is  the  bolder  of  the  two,  but  have  your  Lead
going  now  and  then  to  prevent  dangers,  yet  I  have
found  the  least  to  be  tenne  fathomes  water.  When  you
are  shut  within  these  Hands,  your  course  is  East  by
North  eighteene  leagues  :  but  saile  not  by  night,  but  hull
rather,  and  saile  by  day.  Now  although  Priaman  and
this  Hand  doe  lie  East  by  North,  and  West  by  South,
yet  your  best  way  is,  to  direct  your  course  East  North-
east, and  North-east  by  East,  among ;  and  then  you
shall  see  three  hummocks  in  the  maine,  before  you  can
see  the  low  land  ;  and  then  having  sight  of  them,  you
may  goe  in  till  you  see  the  low  land  of  the  Maine  :
but  looke  well  about  you  :  for  when  these  hills  come  to

102

JOHN DAVIS'S RUTTIER

the North-east from you, there is shoald water, and  Shoald  water
bankes  of  stone  : but  you may  borrow of  them  with  and  bankes  °f
your  Lead  in  seven  fathomes  :  then  are  you  six  leagues
from  the  roade  of  Priaman,  and  your  course  East  South-
east, or  South-east  by  East  with  your  Lead  going  now
and  then. For  the  knowing  of  the road of  Priaman,
when  you  have  the  hils  North  and  West  from  you,  you
shall  see  many  Hands  to  the  South -ward  ;  but  the  first
will  shew  white, and none  of  the rest. So  that  Hand
lieth West South-west from the roade three leagues.
And  the land  in the Countrey  above Priaman  is  high,
and  like  a  Saddle  in  the  middest. This  high  land  beareth
from  the  road  North-east  and  by  East. I  set  it  downe
with  this  notice, because there are foure Hands  before
the  roade  within  which  you  ride,  and  may  mistrust  to  goe
within these Hands, when you come from the West
North-west,  because  they  will  not  be  open,  but  shew  like
a  paire  of  breeches till you have brought them East
North-east from you  ;  then  will  they  beginne  to  open,
for  there  is  good  going  in  betweene  them,  leaving  two
on  the  one  side,  and  two  on  the  other. But  come  not
neere  that  little  uttermost  lie  by  the  maine  :  for  there  is
all  flat  ground. But  keepe  in nine  or  eight  fathomes,
till  you  come  with  the  other  three  lies  that  lie  in  a  row,
and  then  goe  into  the  South-ward  of  the  Norther  of  these
three  Hands,  and  under  that  Hand  is  the  road. Where-  The  road  of
fore  be  bold  of  it  in  five  or  sixe fathomes, because  it  Pnaman'
is  but  narrow  between  that  He,  and  the  River running
from  the  Towne,  to  wit,  much  upon  the  breadth  of  the
Thames  at  Blackewall. Upon  this  He,  under  which  you
ride,  is  a  Well  made  artificially  by  those  that  have  used
to  water  there. It  is  a  good  road  when  you  are  in,  but
moore  your  ship  sure. The people here are  covetous,
and  still  begging  for  one  thing  or  other  ;  yet  they  used
us  very  well, and brought us  hens and such victualls
as  the  place  affoardeth. Here  is  good  trade  from  Java
with  Junkes,  for  their  Pepper  they  bring  them  salt,  which
is  verie  scant  upon  this  side  of  the  Hand. And  about

103

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

September and October there commeth every  yeare  a

Guserate  with  Cotton  cloth  to  serve  this  side  of  the  Hand,

and  ladeth  away  Pepper,  and  carrieth  away  some  Gold  :

Store  of  Gold for  Gold  is  more  plentie  there,  then  Silver,  as  we  might

m  Sumatra, plainely  see  by  the  Countrie-people  : for  they  are  very

desirous  of  Rials  of  eight. Here  is  some  Benjamin  to

Storax.  be  had,  and  verie  good  Storax,  with  other  Commodities.

Tecou.  Tecou  is  seven  leagues  from  this  road,  but  it  is  shoaldie

water,  and  ill  for  ships,  because  they  must  ride  farre  off.

But  Prawes  and  such  small  vessels  as  the  Countrey  people

use,  are  fittest,  and  will  bring  all  their  Commodities  unto

you  into  Priaman  road,  after  they  know  a  shippe  to  bee

there,  tenne  leagues.

To  the  Northward  of  Priaman  there  are  no  Hands
Many  Hands  three  or  foure  leagues  off :  but  to  the  Southward  the
ale  f?  *  i  coast  is  full  of  Hands  along  till  you  come  into  two  degrees
Priaman.  and  an  halfe  of  latitude.  The  coast  lieth  from  Pria-
man two  degrees  twenty  minutes  of  latitude  South.
Your  course  is  South,  when  you  set  saile  from  Priaman,
you  may  goe  within  those  Hands  by  the  road  :  because
by  the  Souther  Hand  lieth  a  shoald  close  by  the  off  side :
your  depth  is  five  and  sixe  fathomes.  In  going  downe
to  the  Southward,  keepe  the  maine  still,  and  goe  not
without  among  those  Hands :  for  it  is  ill  ground  and
shoalds.  But  saile  not  by  night,  till  you  come  into  the
latitude  of  two  degrees  thirtie  minutes.  For  as  you
passe  by  the  high  land,  that  is  distant  from  the  road
of  Priaman  thirteene  leagues,  it  is  very  dangerous  :  keep
your  selfe  in  twenty  or  thirty  fathomes  water  off  the
maine,  and  looke  well  about  you  when  this  high  land
commeth  toward  the  East.  Between  that  gut  of  high
land  as  you  passe  like  Dartmouth,  is  the  Towne  of
Celledai.  I  have  had  by  going  neere  those  Hands  here,
about  thirteene  leagues  from  the  aforesaid  road,  but  foure
fathomes  water,  and  have  seen  the  stones  under  the  ship,
and  have  gone  but  little  in  againe  toward  the  maine,
and  have  had  sixteene  fathomes,  and  twelve  fathomes
water  :  wherefore  there  is  no  feare  by  the  maine  land,

104

JOHN DAVIS'S RUTTIER

keeping  your  Lead  going  :  then  being  cleare  off  these
Hands,  your  course  is  South  and  by  East  by  the  maine,
till  you  come  to  two  degrees  thirty  minutes  :  and  then
the  land  lieth  to  three  degrees  tenne  minutes  South-east,
and  then  South-east  and  by  South  to  foure  degrees,  and
so  to  five  degrees  no  minutes  by  the  same  course.

The  land  is  very  high  and  bold  heere  in  five  degrees,
no  minutes. In  five  degrees  and thirtie minutes  lyeth
the  Isle  of  Engano,  but  there  is  no  anchoring  by  it ;  for  The  lie  of
I  have sought to anchor, but  it is rockes and deepe  Engano.
water. But  if  you  have  any  occasion,  you  shall  find  in
the  latitude  of  foure  degrees,  ten  minutes,  a  very  good  A  very  good
roade  under  an  Island  fast  by  the  maine,  where  you  may  roade-
ride  in  seven  fathoms,  and  no  danger  but  what  you  see,
but  may  boldly  turne  into  the  Roade,  if  the  wind  be  at
South-east,  Ozie  ground. Heere you  may  have  wood
and  water,  if  you  have  need  : But  beware,  two  leagues
West  South-west  from  this  Island,  it  is  very  dangerous
shoald  in  the  sea, the  water breaketh much upon  it ;
wherefore  keepe  in  by  the  Island,  and  give  the  point  a
birth : but  you  cannot  go  betweene  the  maine  and  this
Isle  with  a  ship,  because  it  is  narrow  and  shoaldy  water.  [I.  iv.  451.]
This  Road  or  Harbour  is  named  by  the  Countrie  people,
Celebar : we did ride  heere with Sir Edward Michel-  Celebar.
borne  thirteene  daies,  to  doe  some  businesse. You  shall
never with a  South-east wind misse some  Junckes of
Java, or  of  some  other place riding there. The  land
to the  Northward  in  the countrie  is  high, but by  the
sea-side reasonable, not very low  neither. This  high
land  in  five  degrees,  twentie  minutes,  is  called  Monancabo,  Manancabo.
and is extraordinary high. The course alongst the
shoare is  South South-east Easterly, till  you come  to
see  a  little  Hand  fast  by the maine, that lieth in sixe
degrees, no  minutes, or much thereupon. Heere you
shall  see  a  round  hill  in  the countrie East from  you,
which will be North, when  you  come  with the three
Isles  by the  point  of  Sumatra,  that  lye  East  one  from
the other. Then shall you have the Salt-hills East  The  salt  hills.

"5

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  by  South  from you,  when this hill  is  North,  and
the  distance  from  the  three  Islands  lying  East  and  West,
to  the  three  salt  hills,  which  are  three  Islands,  that  lye
South  and  North  one  from  another,  to  be  ten  leagues.
The  Land  of  Sumatra,  from  the  little  Island  to  the  other
three  Islands,  lyeth  East  South-east,  and  is  distant  foure
leagues. This  land  is  not  very  high,  but  in  the  countrie
it  is  high  land. The depth  by this  land is  foure  and
fiftie  fathomes ;  and  by  the  three  East  and  West  Islands,
there  is  sixteene  fathoms  water ; and further up, you
have  thirtie  fathomes, when the round hill is North
from  you. Now  you must understand,  that heere as
you  goe  upon  the  Coast  of  Sumatra,  are  more  Islands
then  a  man can  number. But  if  you  will  go  into  the
The  Roade  of  Road of Marrough, you may boldly beare  in  among
Manough. those  lslands  that  lye  North-east  and  by  East,  till  you
come to the  maine  land  of  Sumatra,  where  you shall
have  twentie  or  thirtie  fathomes,  and  no  danger,  but  what
you  see. Now  when  you  come  in  with  the  maine  foure
leagues  West South-west from this Head-land, which
is  called  Marrough,  you  shall  have  all  to  the  Northward
off  you  low  land,  and  many  Islands ;  but  you  must  go
East  South-east  unto  the Head-land of  Sumatra  : for
this  Roade  of  Marrough  is  along  the  shoare  from  the
three little Islands fast by the  maine, till you come
almost  to  the  point  that  maketh  the  Straight  of  Sunda,
you  may  anchor  in twentie or  twelve  fathomes  water,
Ozie  ground,  a  faire  birth  off:  There  is  good  refreshing,
and  Rivers  all  along  the  shoare. The  land  is  very  high
heere  in from  the  Roade. But  if  you  come  with  the
three  Salt hills  or  Islands, that  lye South and North
one  from  the  other,  which are  distant,  as  I  said  before,
from the  three  East  and  West  Islands  by  Sumatra  ten
leagues, and would go for this place of  Marrough,
steere  in  with  the  high  land  North,  when you  are to
the  Eastward  of  the  South  Salt  hill,  and  you  go  right
with  it ;  for  the  land  above  it  is  like  a  barne,  and  none
there-about  like  it :  you  may  be  bold  every  way  here-

106

JOHN  DAVIS'S RUTTIER

about,  for  there  is  no  danger, but what you  see  with

your  eyes,  no  where  without  the  Straights  mouth. In

the  very  straight  or  narrow  betweene  Sumatra  and  Java

side, which you will, if  you  go to  the  Westward of

the  three  South  and  North  Islands,  you  need  not  feare,

although you see  three  rockes  stand  three  miles West  Three  Roches

from  the  Salt  hill ;  for  you  may  come  fast  by  them,  or  ^ee  m^s

put betweene  any  of those  Islands,  the  depth will bee  sa//fcf/°m

much about twentie or thirtie fathoms. The course

from  the  Head-land  of  Sumatra,  where  the  three  East

and  West  Islands  are,  is  East  North-east  with  the  Point

or Head-land of  Sumatra, that maketh the Straights

entrie. The Coast of  Java lyeth from the Point of  The  tying  of

Palimbam  downe to  seven  degrees  almost  of  Southerly  some  part  of

latitude;  where are many Islands on  this  side,  South-  Jj™q

west  and  North-east ; and you  have ground  with  the

lead at thirtie or fortie fathomes, in some place :

But a little without the Point of Palimbam you

may anchor in twelve fathomes, Ozie ground. The

latitude  of  the South-east  salt  hill,  is  sixe  degrees,  ten

minutes :  The  longitude  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  The  Souther

eightie one East, the variation three  degrees, twentie  sa/(  &*tt  is  in

minutes. These  salt  hills  stand  nearer  Tava  then  Sumatra  ei,s  tie  oni

.  degrees  of

by  two  leagues,  you  may  see  both  Maines  at  one  time,  longitude  from
if  it  be  cleare,  and  you  be  in  the  mid-way. The land  the  Cape  of
of  Java  is  high  within  the  countrie,  and  low  by  the  water-  Go°d  HoPe-
side. The  streame  in  the  Straight  setteth  twelve  houres
one  way,  and  twelve  houres  the  other,  but  most  strongly  ;
for  you  cannot beare  a head  with  a hard  gale  at  some
times  : wherefore go off  on  one  side,  and anchor, it
maketh  no  matter  on  which. But  if  you  chance  to  go
in  by Sumatra side, keep nearer Sumatra by  a  good
deale,  then  to  the  Islands,  till  the  Islands  bee  East  and
by South  from you, for  there is a rock under  water, Arockeunder
which  breaketh  at  low  water, that  lyeth West  and by  water-
North from  the Island. Sumatra  is bold,  so  you can
keepe  off  the  land  ;  and  so  is  Java  side  also. The  way
to  Bantam,  when  you  are  about  the  Point  of  Palimbam,  is

107

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

by  the  land  East  South-east,  and  South-east  and  by  East,
with your lead going  till you see  a  flat Island called

Pulo  Panjan.  Pulo  Panjan,  which  is  distant  from  the  Point  of  Palimbam
nine  or  ten  leagues.  When  you  come  to  this  Island,
you  may  go  without  it,  or  within  it  at  your  pleasure:
but  keepe  your  lead  going,  and  come  not  nearer  then
five  or  sixe  fathomes  off"  that  Island.  Then  if  you  looke
in  upon  the  maine,  you  shall  see  a  round  hill  in  the
countrie  bearing  South,  or  betweene  that  and  South
South-west.  This  hill  standeth  right  over  the  Towne
of  Bantam  :  if  you  have  it  South  South-west  from  you,
goe  in  with  that  course,  till  you  come  to  see  five  Islands
together,  right  from  Pulo  Panjan. Your Road  is by

Pulo  Lima.  these  five  Islands  called  Pulo  Lima,  where  you  may  ride
in  what  depth  you  will  under  foure  fathoms,  Ozie  ground.
It  higheth  five  foote  water  in  the  Roade.  Where-
fore when  you  chuse  to  ride,  remember  the  Tide,  for
otherwise  you  may  bee  on  ground  at  low  water. The

The  variation  variation in the Road  is three  degrees  from North to

is ree  egr. West. Heere are many Islands in this  Road  round

in  Bantam  .  J

Roade.  about you.

[I.  iv.  45^.]  §. III.

The  way  from  Bantam  to  the  Straight  of  Pal-
imbon,  upon  the  East-side  of  Sumatra,  of
Banca,  Bintam,  Straights  of  Sincapura,  and
Sunda,  with  other  places.

Hen  you  weigh  from  Bantam  Roade,  you  goe
North-east  by  East  in  foure  or  five  fathoms,  till
you  come  with  the  point  of  the  maine,  where  it

commeth  to  beare  South-east  by  South,  you  have  very
shoald  water  upon  that  spit  of  hard  ground.  Where-
fore keepe  off"  betime :  before  you  come  neare  in  foure
or  five  fathoms,  there  is  a  good  bigge  Island  on  your
North  North-west,  as  you  go  from  Bantam,  which  you
may  leave  on  your  larbord  side  in  going  from  the
aforesaid Towne, and your depthes are five or sixe

108

JOHN DAVIS'S RUTTIER

fathoms. Heere  will  the  land  toward  the  Straight  make

like  an Island, because  you  have  lost  sight  of  the  low

land. Heere in your North North-east course, you

have  a  long  bed  of  small  Islands  in  your  way,  and  low  A  long  bed  of

withall, but bold : for there is eighteene or twentie  mal1  Islands-

fathomes  water  among  them,  Bantam  bearing  South-west

by  South Westerly  from  these Islands. Their  latitude

is  from  five  degrees,  to  five  degrees,  thirtie  minutes.

When  you  are  at  the  Norther  end  of  these  Islands,
go  North  North-east  and  North  over  for  the  Coast  of
Sumatra :  and  in  your  course  your  depthes  will  be
thirteene,  twelve,  ten,  nine,  eight,  seven,  sixe,  five,  foure
and  a  halfe  fathomes  ;  and  then  you  shall  see  the  low
land  of  Sumatra,  the  trees  I  meane,  and  your  ground  Sumatra.
under  your  lead  will  be  Ozie.  The  latitude  about  three
degrees,  thirtie  minutes  South.  Now  when  you  come  in
with  a  riffe  of  hard  sand  here-about,  and  have  in  your
North  and  by  West  course  foure  fathoms  and  an  halfe :
Note  it  well,  and  hale  off  againe  East  North-east  into  Note.
your  old  depthes,  which  are  from  ten  to  seven  fathoms  or
five  off  Sumatra,  your  course  North  by  West,  and  North
North-west,  to  hold  the  coast  from  five  to  ten  fathoms.
But  go  not  without  ten  fathoms  neither  by  night  nor  day ;
for  the  Coast  is  bold  in  sixe  fathoms.  But  if  you  go
from  Bantam  North,  you  must  looke  very  carefully
about  for  a  shoald,  that  lyeth  in  that  course  from  the  A  shoald.
aforesaid  Towne  off  the  Roade,  till  you  have  sight
of  the  two  Islands  upon  the  Coast  of  Sumatra,  that  lye
three  leagues  from  that  maine  land ;  and  then  you  have
no  more  Islands  by  Sumatra,  till  you  come  in  three
degrees  of  South  latitude;  and  there  shall  you  fall  with
Lusapara-falsa,  which  is  the  first  of  those  foure  Hands,  Lusapara-
at  the  South  South-west  end  of  Banca.  And  looke  out  fa"a'
very  well  for  them,  in  going  your  North  by  West  course,
as  the  depths  wil  guide  you  from  five  or  sixe,  to  nine
or  ten  fathoms,  Ozie  ground.  When  you  have  sight
of  these  foure  Islands,  you  shall  see  much  broken  ground
by them,  and among  them very shoald  water. Heere

109

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

likewise  you  shall  see  two  round  homockes  of  a  good
height :  and  though  they  seeme  to  you  to  stand  upon  the
maine  of  Sumatra,  yet  they  doe  not  so,  but  upon  the
The  Isle  of  Island  of  Banca.  The  aforesaid  foure  Islands  have  three
Banca.  degrees,  no  minutes  South  latitude.  When  you  come
to  have  these  Islands  East  from  you,  your  shoalding
will  be  five  and  foure  fathomes,  and  your  course  North,
and  North  by  West,  till  you  have  the  Southermost  Isle
South-east  by  East  from  you.  Then  you  goe  North
North-east  by  Banca,  in  eight  and  seven  fathomes,  for
the  Island  of  Banca  is  steepe.  When  you  come  with
these  Islands,  keepe  Sumatra  side  for  the  bolder  side :
the  channell  is  in  breadth  three  miles.  Now  in  edging  to
the  other  side,  you  shall  go  from  eight  fathoms  into
three  fathoms.  Then  have  you  hard  ground  on  that
side,  and  Ozie  ground  on  Sumatra  side.  This  course
of  North  North-east,  is  but  one  reach  or  three
miles,  before  you  go  North  againe.  Heere  at  the  narrow
the  Tide  setteth  North  and  South,  and  runneth  twelve
houres  one  way,  and  twelve  houres  the  other.  When
you  are  past  the  bankes  or  shoalds  by  these  Islands,  your
depthes  are  ten  and  nine  fathoms :  then  you  saile  three
leagues  North  by  the  land.  The  next  reach  lieth  North
by  West,  and  the  depth  in  the  best  is  fifteene  fathoms.
And  when  you  draw  neare  to  the  high  land  upon  the
North  side  of  the  Island  of  Banca,  your  course  is  North
North-west,  and  the  best  depthes  twentie  fathomes.  It
is  very  flat  and  shoald  heere  upon  Sumatra  side.  This
course  of  North  North-west,  and  North-west  by  North,
continueth  nine  leagues.  Then  you  saile  twentie  leagues
North-west  by  West,  the  depth  will  be  foure  and  twentie
fathoms.  The  latitude  in  this  course,  is  one  degree,
eight  and  thirtie  minutes  South.  When  you  have  the
North- end  of  these  Islands  South-east  by  South  from  you,
it  will  shew  like  broken  Islands.  But  as  you  go,  keepe
off  the  maine,  because  it  is  shoald  still.  Your  next  course
is  North  ten  leagues,  in  ten,  nine,  eight  and  seven
fathoms. Heere  you  have  sight  of  three  or  foure  Islands,

no

JOHN  DAVIS'S RUTTIER

to  the  Northwards  of  the  great  Island,  but  no  sight  of
the  maine  land. The  latitude  heere  is  one  degree,  five
minutes South. Then your course is North-east by
North,  with  a  round  Island,  and  other  little  Islands  by
it. This  round  Island  is  like  the  Monston  of  Dartmouth,
the depthes  ten, nine, eight, and seven fathoms, and
latitude  about  fortie  minutes  South. This  Isle  is  called
by the Countrie people Pulo Sio, but  Linscot  calleth  Pulo  Sio.
it  Pulo  Powe. Heere  you may  have  water  and  wood,
if you need. Then your course is to go without
Linga from hence North  North-west, and the depth  Pulo  Linga.
is fifteene or sixteene fathoms : and the distance
from Pulo Sio to Linga, is thirteene leagues. At
the Souther end of Linga are many Islands; and  [I.  iv.  453.]
there  are at  the Norther end also  many. This Island
of  Linga lyeth under the Equinoctial! line, as wee  LtnSa  betfl
found by observation, where the Charts made it to  a"  *.r  * e.  ,,
lye  almost  a  degree  in  South  latitude. It  is  full  of  Islands  £*»<?.
and  suncken  grounds  hereabout. Heere  we  found  the
tide  to  runne  South  South-east,  and  North  North-west.
The  depth  in  the  offing  is  twentie  fathomes,  Ozie  ground:
your  course  is  North  by  West  fifteene  or  sixteen  leagues,
where  you shall see eight  other  Islands. But  in your  Eight  Islands.
going beware of  the  tide,  and  keepe  in  fifteene  or six-
teene  fathoms  water,  and  Ozie  ground  :  the  latitude  of
these  eight  Islands  is  fiftie  minutes  North. Heere  you
may  likewise  have  wood  and  water  among  these  Islands.
These Islands and suncken grounds continue to one
degree,  ten  minutes  of  North  latitude : the  Tide  runneth
twelve  houres,  the  flood  from  the  Northward,  and  ebbe
from  the  Southward,  the  depth  twentie  fathomes. Heere
along  by  these  Islands  is  fourteene  fathomes,  till  you  come
up to the Isle  of  Bintam,  which hath  in latitude one  The  Isle  of
degree,  ten minutes North, upon the South-east side  Bintam-
of  this  Island  is  bold  shoalding  from  fourteene  to  nine
fathomes,  yet  hath  a  round  hill  in  the  middest  of  it,  and
it  is  a  greater  Island  then  any  that  is  neare  it :  upon  the
Easter  point  I  came  over  in  seven  fathomes :  the  Tide  of

in

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

The  Straight
of  Sincapura.

Pulo  Tinge.

Pulo  Timon.

Jor.

Pulo  Pacca-
doure.

Pulo  Paga-
dure.

Pulo  Calasai.

the  Norther  side  setteth  West  by  North.  And  when  you
are  past  this  Easter  point,  you  are  open  of  the  Straight  of
Sincapura.  Heere  the  Tide  setteth  East  from  the
Straight  of  Sincapura.  Thence  you  go  North-east  and
by  North  seven  leagues,  with  a  strong  streame  against
you,  for  an  Island  called  Pulo  Tinge,  upon  the  Coast  of
Jor,  in  latitude  two  degrees,  twentie  minutes  North,
you  may  see  the  round  hill  of  Bintam  even  with  the
water,  for  their  distance  twentie  leagues,  and  the  course  is
North  by  West.  Heere  wee  saw  an  Island  called  Pulo
Timon  :  and  the  other  Islands  by  it  are  called  Pulo  Lore,
leaving  two  round  hilles  upon  it.  And  Pulo  Tinge,
where  we  roade,  hath  a  piked  hill  upon  it.  Their
latitudes  are  two  degrees,  thirtie  minutes,  and  two  de-
grees fortie  minutes.

The  Coast  of  Jor  is  bold  from  Pulo  Tinge.  When
you  have  made  the  Straight  of  Sincapura,  and  would
goe  for  Jor,  your  course  is  North-west  by  West.  But
beware  of  the  Current,  you  may  bee  bold  in  sixteene,
eighteene,  twentie,  or  five  and  twentie  fathomes,  and  good
ground  to  anchor.

From  Pulo  Sio  steere  South-east  for  an  Hand  called
Pulo  Paccadoure,  distant  from  Pulo  Sio  eleven  leagues,  in
latitude  one  degree  no  minutes  South.  It  is  a  ragged
Hand,  and  hath  by  it  two  little  Hands.  The  depth  is
fifteene  fathomes.  Be  sure  to  keep  in  that  depth,  and
you  shall  goe  without  danger.  From  this  ragged  Hand
your  course  is  South-east  by  East  nine  leagues,  to  an
other  Hand  called  Pulo  Pagadure,  and  your  depths  are
fifteene  or  sixteene  fathomes.  In  that  course  be  very
carefull :  for  Banca  upon  this  side  is  all  Rockes  and
breaches,  in  some  places  eight  or  nine  leagues  off,  and
so  it  is  without  you  againe  all  bad  ground.  Then  from
this  Hand  your  course  is  South-east  by  East,  to  an  Hand
called  Pulo  Calasai,  or  the  Mariners  Hand :  and  their
distance  is  fortie  leagues :  when  you  see  this  Hand  of
Mariners,  lie  short  off  it,  because  you  cannot  anchor  by  it
for  fowle  ground. Your  depth  from  this  Hand  to  the

112

JOHN DAVIS'S RUTTIER

other  is  fifteene fathomes. From  this Mariners Hand,

you  may  see  the  high  land  upon  Banca  beare  West  by  Banca.

North  from  it,  and  is  distant  fifteene  leagues.

The  head  of  Banca  lieth  from  this  He  South-west
by  West  nine  leagues.  Saile  not  by  night  by  any  meanes
when  you  see  this  Hand :  for  if  you  goe  never  so  well
by  your  Compasse,  the  streames  will  deceive  you,  and
put  you  to  the  East-ward  of  an  Hand  called  Chinabata.  Ghlnabata.
Your  course  is  to  goe  betweene  Banca  and  these  Hands ;
because  it  is  all  Rockes  to  the  East-ward  like  steeples.
This  He  of  Chinabata  and  Pulo  Calasai,  lie  South  and
North  one  from  the  other,  and  are  distant  thirteene
leagues,  Your  course  betweene  Banca  and  Chinabata
is  South  South-west :  looke  to  the  streame,  and  borrow
of  Banca  in  this  place  in  twentie  or  twentie  five  fathomes.
The  distance  betweene  them  is  tenne  leagues.  The
Rockes  in  the  Offing  are  called  Pulo  Pelican.  From
which  straight  to  the  coast  of  Sumatra,  the  course  is
South-west  by  South,  till  you  have  shoalding  off  the
maine.  And  goe  as  you  did  outward  from  Bantam,
keeping  the  shoalding  of  Sumatra  in  seven  or  eight
fathomes,  till  you  draw  neere  the  straight  of  Sunda.

I  have  hereunto  added  like  Nauticall  observations,  I
suppose,  written  by  Thomas  Clayborne,  leaving  the
censure  and  use  to  the  more  skilfull.  He  intituleth
them,

Certaine  principall  Notes,  gathered  by  mine  owne
experience,  in  my  three  Voyages  into  these
parts :  wherein  the  true  course,  and  distances,
with  shoalds  and  rockes  is  shewed :  and  on
which  side  you  may  leave  them :  as  hereafter
followeth.

THe Souther-most  Salt  hill  lyeth  in  sixe  degrees  no  Note.
minutes  of  South  latitude ;  and  if  you  bee  bound  for
Bantam,  you  may  goe  betwixt  the  Salt  hils,  or  on  either
side  of  them,  if  neede be  : but  most  men  goe  to  the
iv  113  H

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

South  of  them.  If  you  bee  South  from  the  Southermost
Salt  hill,  about  two  leagues,  or  lesse,  your  best  course
to  Palimbam  point,  is  betweene  the  North-East  by  East,
[I.  iv.  454.]  and  the  East  North-east.  The  distance  betwixt  the  Salt
hills  and  that  point  twenty  leagues.  In  that  course  you
shall  leave  the  Iland  that  maketh  the  straights  of  Sunda  on
the  Lar-boord  side,  and  that  Iland  is  five  leagues  short
of  Palimbam  point.  From  Palimbam  point  your  course
is  East  South-east  about  three  or  foure  leagues  with  Pulo
Pangam  :  then  leaving  that  Iland  on  your  Lar-boord  side,
and  being  cleare  of  it,  you  must  steere  East  South-east,
about  two  leagues  more :  then  South  South-west,  and
South  by  West  about  one  league,  and  that  will  bring
you  into  Bantam  roade,  where  you  may  come  to  an
anchor  in  three  fathomes,  soft  Oze.

Certaine  Notes  from  Bantam  Roade  to  the  Hands
of  the  Maluccaes,  with  the  course  and  distances:
as  hereafter  followeth.

FRom  Bantam  roade  North-east  by  North  two  leagues,
then  East  by  North,  and  East  North-east  two  leagues,
and  that  will  bring  the  low  point  to  the  Eastward  of
Bantam  Bay,  South  from  you  about  one  league :  but  come
no  neerer  that  point  then  three  fathome ;  then  East,  and
East  by  North  foure  leagues,  and  then  you  shall  have
foureteene  fathome,  and  shall  be  neere  five  Hands,  with
white  sand  without  them,  and  a  Ledge  of  Rockes  East
from  them  about  halfe  a  mile ;  these  you  must  leave  to
the  North-wards  of  you.  From  these  Hands  your  course
is  East  South-East,  with  the  Eastermost  Iland  of  Jacatra.
From  the  Eastermost  Iland  of  Jacatra,  which  is  the
Norther- most  from  this  Iland,  your  course  is  North-east
by  East  foure  or  five  leagues,  then  East  thirtie  leagues ;
then  looke  out  for  a  sand  that  lieth  about  three  leagues
from  the  Maine,  and  if  it  be  cleare  weather,  you  shall  see
a  low  Iland  to  the  North  of  you,  but  you  may  goe  either
betweene  the  Iland  and  the  sand,  or  betweene  the  sand  and

114

THOMAS CLAYBORNE

the  Maine :  but  the  best  way  is  to  goe  three  leagues  to
the  Southward  of  the  Hand.  Then  East  by  South  and
East  seventy  leagues,  and  that  wil  bring  you  in  sight
of  Madura.  Note,  if  you  be  foure  or  five  leagues  from
the  West  end  of  Madura,  you  shall  have  thirtie  three
fathome ;  and  being  five  leagues  off  the  Easter  end,  you
shall  have  fortie  one  or  fortie  two  fathomes.  All  alongst
this  coast,  you  shall  have  Ozie  ground.  From  the  West
end  of  Madura,  your  best  course  is  to  steere  East  by
North,  while  you  have  brought  your  selfe  in  the  latitude
of  sixe  degrees  :  and  then  keepe  your  selfe  in  that  latitude
if  it  be  possible,  and  so  (by  Gods  helpe)  you  shall  goe
cleare  betweene  the  shoales  of  Celebes,  and  another  shoale
that  lieth  South  South-west  from  the  shoales  of  Celebes.
The  Southermost  point  of  the  shoales  of  Celebes  lieth  in
six  degrees.  From  the  South  point  of  the  shoales  of
Celebes,  your  course  is  East  North-East  with  the  straights
of  Celebes  :  the  distance  betweene  them  is  thirty  leagues.
From  the  straights  of  Celebes  to  Ternata,  the  principall
Hand  of  the  Maluccas,  upon  a  straight  line,  the  course
is  North-east,  distant  about  two  hundred  leagues.

If  you  be  minded  to  goe  for  the  Moluccas,  then  from
the straights of  Celebes, your course  is  North-east by
East,  and  North-east  thirty  leagues,  and  that  will  bring
you into  a  straight  between  two  lands,  namely,  Celebes  Note.
and  Cambyna :  the  distance  betweene  these  two  lands  is
five  leagues :  in  the  middle  between  them,  you  shall  have
thirtie  eight  fathomes,  sandy  ground. But  this  is  to  be
noted,  when  you  come  betweene  these  two  Hands,  you
cannot  saile  by  night :  for  it  is  dangerous,  while  you  be
cleare of  the straights  of  S.  Thomas,  distant  from  this  The  straights
place  aforenamed  twenty  leagues;  so  that  you  must  goe  °f  S.Thomas.
upon  severall  courses,  as  hereafter  followeth.

First,  North-east  by  North  sixe  leagues,  then  North
North-east  eight  leagues,  then  East  and  East  by  North
tenne  leagues,  and  this  will  bring  you  into  the  straights
of  S.  Thomas,  which  straights  you  shall  hardly  perceive,
untill  you  come  very  neere  them  : for  they  are  narrowe,

115

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  straights
of  Bengaja.

Machian.
[I.  iv.  455.]
Bachian.

and  one  land  shooteth  in  an  other.  The  going  through
is  East  about  one  league,  and  the  least  water  you  shall
have  in  running  of  that  league,  is  eleven  or  twelve
fathomes.  In  running  of  those  twentie  leagues  afore-
named, you  shall  be  land-locked,  and  shall  see  sixe  or
seven  sands  dry  with  the  rimme  of  the  water,  most  of
them  will  be  on  your  Lar-boord  side :  but  this  course
aforenamed  (by  Gods  helpe)  will  carry  you  cleare  of  them
all.  From  the  straights  of  S.  Thomas,  your  course  is
North-east  by  East,  and  East  North-east  foureteene
leagues,  and  that  will  carry  you  into  the  Sea,  but  not  out
of  the  sight  of  land  :  then  North  North-east  thirty  eight
leagues ;  and  then  looke  out  for  a  small  Hand,  and  a
shoale  that  lieth  North  North-west  from  that  small  Hand.
You  must  bring  that  small  Hand  East  from  you  about
two  leagues,  or  seven  miles :  then  steere  North  by  East,
and  North  North-east  five  leagues,  then  West  North-
west, and  North-west  by  North  two  or  three  leagues,  then
North-east  by  North  foure  or  five  leagues,  and  that
North-east  by  North  course  will  carry  you  betweene  two
shoales,  that  lie  in  two  degrees  no  minutes  South  latitude.
The  distance  between  them  is  not  one  mile,  and  they  are
dry  at  low  water :  you  shall  have  foureteene  fathome
betweene  them.  When  you  are  cleare  of  these  shoales,
and  are  within  one  league  of  that  land,  which  that  North-
east by  North  course  doth  carry  you  unto,  then  you  must
steere  East  South-east  about  two  leagues,  then  North-east
by  East  with  the  straights  of  Bengaja,  which  lie  in  one
degree  twenty  minutes  to  the  South  of  the  Equinoctial :
this  straight  lyeth  North-east  by  North,  and  so  you  must
goe  through.

From  the  straights  of  Bangaja  to  Machian,  the  course
is  North-east  by  East  distant  seventie  two  leagues.
Bachian  lieth  in  no  degrees  thirty  minutes  to  the  North
of  the  Equinoctiall,  and  being  neere  this  Hand,  if  it  bee
cleare  weather,  you  shall  see  all  the  Clove  Hands,  which
shew  like  high  piked  hills  in  the  middest  of  them.  You
may steere with any of them at your pleasure, if

116

THOMAS CLAYBORNE

wind and  weather  serve  : for  there is  no  danger  lying
neere  them

Notes  of  Botun.

BOtun  is  a  great  Hand,  and  an  high  land,  the  longest
part  of  it  lieth  North  North-east,  and  South  South-
west. Upon  the  North  North-West  part  or  ende  of  the
Hand,  there  is  a  River  of  fresh  water.  If  a  man  be  at
the  Norther  ende  of  Botun,  and  bee  minded  to  saile  to  the
Kings  Towne,  his  course  is  betweene  the  South  by  West,
and  South  South-West,  and  so  shall  sayle  along  the  land
twenty  leagues,  as  it  were  up  a  River,  betwixt  two  lands,
Botun  to  the  Eastward,  and  Cambyna  to  the  West,  dis-
tance betweene  them  foure  leagues,  in  some  places  but
three,  in  some  places  but  two  leagues,  and  in  some  very
narrow.

In  this  course  afore-named,  nine  leagues  short  of  the  ^  dangerous

•  '  ■  It  Is?

Kings  Towne,  there  is  a  shoale,  not  very  bigge,  yet  mata-
dangerous,  and  dry  at  a  low  water.  Now  to  know  when
you  are  neere  it,  you  shall  see  a  round  hill  upon  Buttoone,
neere  the  water  side :  that  hill  and  the  shoale  lie  East  by
North,  and  West  by  South  one  from  the  other ;  you
must  leave  that  shoale  on  your  Lar-boord  side.  From
this  shoale,  your  course  is  still  betweene  the  South  by
West,  and  South  South-West,  to  goe  with  the  narrow
straights,  foure  miles  short  of  the  Kings  Towne :  this
Straight  is  one  league  through,  and  about  halfe  a  mile
broad,  the  course  is  South  South-West  through,  and  it  is
no  great  matter  for  the  course  in  that  place,  so  you  keepe
the  shippe  in  the  middle,  which  is  best :  for  there  is  no
riding  in  the  narrow,  by  reason  of  the  swift  Tydes  that
runne  there.  Hee  that  goeth  through,  must  take  his
Tyde  with  him  to  drive  him  through,  for  (lightly)  there
is  never  any  wind  there,  the  land  is  so  high  over  the
Masts  on  both  sides.  But  you  may  anchor  two  leagues
short  of  this  narrowe,  and  ride  well  (by  Gods  helpe)  in
thirty  fathome  sand.  So,  when  you  be  through  this
straight,  you  must  steere  South  South-west  one  league,

117

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

to  goe  cleare  of  a  point  of  land  that  you  must  leave  on
your  Lar-boord  side ;  and  beeing  cleare  of  that  point,
you  must  hale  up  South  South-East  about  foure  miles,  if
the  wind  will  give  you  leave,  and  then  you  may  come  to
an  anchor  in  eight  and  twentie  fathome,  hard  sand,  neere
a  flat  Hand.

Then  you  shall  see  the  Towne  of  Botun,  upon  the  side
The  road  of  of  an  hill,  from  you  about  one  league.  The  Roade  of
Botunisinfive  Bcrtim  lieth  in  five  degrees  fifteene  minutes  of  South  lati-
mfnutes  I/6"  tuc^e-  From  Botun  road  West  South-West  foure  leagues,
South  latitude,  then  South- West,  and  South-West  by  South  five  leagues,
then  West  by  South  and  West  thirtie  leagues,  and  that
will  bring  you  to  the  Straights  of  Celebes.

From  the  Straights  of  Celebes  to  the  Hand  of  Banda
upon  severall  courses,  as  followeth :  First,  East  seven  and
thirtie  leagues,  then  East  by  South  fifteene  leagues,  then
North-east  halfe  a  point  to  the  North-ward,  about  seven-
teene  leagues,  and  that  will  bring  you  into  the  latitude  of
five  degrees  tenne  minutes,  and  then  your  best  course  is
East  North-east,  with  Buro,  distance  betweene  that  and
Buro.  Buro  sixtie  three  leagues. From  the  South  part  of  Buro

to  the  South  part  of  Amboyno,  are  eight  and  twenty
Amboyno.  leagues.  From  the  South  part  of  Amboyno  to  Banda,
Banda.  t^e  course  js  ]?ast  South  East  distance  about  thirty  leagues.

Banda  lieth  in  foure  degrees  fortie  minutes.  Your  going
in  is  betweene  the  high  Mountaine  called  Gunappi,  and
the  great  Hand  of  Banda,  the  hill  beeing  on  your  Lar-
boord  side,  and  the  great  Hand  on  your  Star-boord
side.

118

THOMAS BEST

A.D.

1612.

Chap. VII.  [I.  iv.  456.]

A  Journall  of  the  tenth  Voyage  to  the  East-
India,  with  two  shippes,  the  Dragon,  and  the
Hosiander  (accompanied  with  the  James  and
Salomon,  but  those  for  other  Voyages)  and  in
them  three  hundred  and  eightie  persons,  or
there-about :  Written  by  Master  Thomas  Best,
chiefe  Commander  thereof.

§. I-

Observations  in  their  way  to  Surat.

He first of  February, 161 1.  we  set  saile  February  1.
from Gravesend, and anchored in Til-
bury  Hope.

The  two  and  twentieth  of  March,  at  March  22.
noone  latitude  observed  fifteene  degrees,
twentie  minutes.  At  two  of  the  clocke
in  the  after-noone  faire  aboord  Maio.  Maio.
Bonavista  and  Maio  lye  South-west  by  South,  distant
some  twelve  leagues.  Note  that  the  North  North-west,
and  the  North  part  of  Maio  is  all  foule  ground ;  and  due
North  from  the  high  homockes,  there  lyeth  a  great  ledge  -A  Sreat  kdge
of  rockes  from  the  land,  some  five  or  sixe  miles  off :  and  °* Kockes-
a  mile  without  the  rockes  you  shall  have  twentie  fathomes
water.  On  the  West-side  of  the  Hand  you  may  borrow
in  twelve  or  fifteene  fathomes,  till  you  come  into  the
Roade,  where  we  anchored  in  foure  and  twentie  fathomes.
The  eight  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  we  came  close
by  an  Hand,  the  latitude  of  it  is  twentie  degrees,  thirtie
minutes,  and  longitude  from  the  Meridian  of  Maio,  one
degree,  fiftie  minutes  East.  We  did  not  land  upon  it,
but  came  within  two  or  three  miles  of  it.  I  take  it  there
is  hardly  anchoring  to  be  found :  there  may  be  some  re-
freshing in  it ;  wood  there  is,  and  there  may  bee  water :
for  on  the  Souther  part  of  it  there  is  a  faire  plaine  plot,

119

A.D.

1612.

Another
Hand.

Two  or  three
high  white
rockes.
June  28.
They  depart
fromSaldanha.

Note.

July  31.

The  Isle  de

Juan  da  Nova.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  it  was  very  greene :  wee  could  not  finde  ground
comming  within  two  or  three  miles  of  it.  From  this
Hand  East  North-east,  some  seven  or  eight  leagues  lyeth
another  Hand :  and  from  the  first  Hand  East  by  South,  or
East  South-east,  lye  two  or  three  high  white  rockes,  some
foure  or  five  leagues  off.

The  eight  and  twentieth  of  June,  we  all  set  to  sea:
we  stayed  in  Saldanha  Road  one  and  twentie  dayes,  and
bought  for  the  three  shippes  nine  and  thirtie  Beeves,  and
an  hundred  and  fifteene  sheepe,  with  a  little  brasse,  which
we  cut  out  of  two  or  three  old  kettles :  The  sheepe  we
bought  for  small  pieces  of  thinne  brasse,  worth  some  peny
or  three  halfe  pence  a  piece :  the  Beeves  with  the  brasse
cut  off  kettles,  to  the  value  of  twelve  pence  for  a  Beefe.
It  is  a  place  of  great  refreshing :  for  besides  the  Beefe  and
Mutton,  there  is  great  plentie  of  good  fish,  and  fowles  of
many  sorts,  great  store  of  fat  Deere,  but  wee  could  kill
none,  very  excellent  Rivers  of  fresh  water,  and  an  health-
full  and  good  ayre.  I  landed  eightie  or  ninetie  sicke  men,
and  lodged  them  in  Tents  eighteene  dayes,  and  they  all
recovered  their  healthes,  save  one  that  dyed.  From  the
seventh  of  June,  till  the  day  of  our  departure  from  Sal-
danha, being  the  eight  and  twentieth  of  June,  we  had
nothing  but  faire  weather;  the  Sunne  very  warme,  and
the  ayre  very  sweet  and  healthfull.  Wee  were  an
hundred  leagues  East  from  Cabo  das  Aguilhas,  before
wee  found  any  current,  and  then  found  it  strong.

The  one  and  thirtieth  of  July,  Latitude  observed
seventeene  degrees,  eight  minutes,  and  longitude  twentie
degrees,  seven  and  fortie  minutes,  the  wind  at  South,  faire
weather.  At  foure  in  the  after-noone,  we  saw  the  Hand
de  Juan  da  Nova  from  us  East  South-east,  distant  foure
leagues,  in  bignesse,  so  much  as  we  saw,  (and  I  thinke
wee  saw  all  of  it)  for  length  some  three  or  foure  miles,
very  low,  and  riseth  like  rockes ;  off  the  West-end,  a
mile  or  two  from  it,  we  saw  a  breach,  but  we  could  not
get  ground  with  an  hundred  and  thirtie  fathomes,  sound-
ing with our Pinnasse or skifFe : the  latitude of it is

120

THOMAS BEST  a.d.

1612.

seventeene  degrees,  no  minutes,  very  certainly  observed,

and in  our  judgements  well  laid  in  our  plats,  both for

latitude  and  longitude :  it  is  a  most  sure  signe  of  being  Signes  °fthe

neare  this  Hand  de  Juan  da  Nova,  if  you  find  or  see  great  I^JuMia

store of  fowle ; from having the Iland North-east to

South-east,  we  saw  much  fowle,  some  white,  their  wings

topped  or  painted only  with blacke, and some blacke

fowle.

The  first  of  August,  North  North-east  thirtie  leagues,  August  1.
latitude  fifteene  degrees,  one  and  fortie minutes,  longi-
tude one  and  twentie  degrees,  two  and  twentie  minutes.

The  second,  North-east  by  North  one  quarter  North,
sixe  and  twentie  leagues,  latitude  fourteene  degrees,  five
and  thirtie  minutes,  longitude  one  and  twentie  degrees,
eight  and  fiftie  minutes.

The  third,  North-east  by  North,  one  quarter  North  two  [I.  iv.  457.]
and  twenty  leagues  latitude  observed  thirteene  degrees,  five
and  thirtie  minutes,  and  longitude  from  the  Cape  twenty
two  degr.  thirty  minutes,  the  wind  at  South  South-east,
partly  calme. Note  that  comming  this  course  from  the  Note.
Isle  Juan  da  Nova,  we  have  not  met  with  any  Currents :
whereby  it  is evident that  the  Current  which runneth
to  the  South-west,  very  strongly  aboord  the  Maine,  from
the  latitude  of  fourteen  degr.  South,  doth  not  runne  in
the offing twenty  leagues from  land. At  foure  in the
after-noone  we  saw  land  East  North-east,  and  North-east
by  East  from  us,  some  twelve  leagues  off,  having  on  the
Easter-part  of  it  a  very  faire  Sugar-loafe  hill. This  He
is called Mal-Ilha,  and is one of  the lies of  Comoro.  Mal-llha  one
Also  at  the  same  time  we  saw  the  Iland  Comoro  bearing  °f*  e es  °*
off  us North North-west and North by  West  high-
land.

The  fourth,  at  six  in  the  morning,  we  were  faire  aboord
the  South  South-east  end  of  Mal-Ilha,  and  haling  in  with
the  land  to  have  found  some  place  to  anchor  in,  when
we  were  some  eight  or  nine  miles  from  the  shoare,  we
saw  the  ground  under  the  ship ;  but  not  lesse  then  eight  Shoald-watet .
or  ten  fathoms  water : the Hosiander  being  two  miles

121

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

within us, shee finding not lesse then foure or five
fathoms,  but  her  Boat  was  in  three  fathoms. Then  we
sent  off  both  our  Pinnasses,  which  kept  shoalding  on  a
Banke  of  eight,  ten,  and  twelve  fathomes,  being  from  the
Banke  halfe  a  Cables  length,  no  ground  in  an  hundred
fathomes. At  the  North-end  of  this  Mal-Ilha  there  is
a  faire  big  Hand  high  land,  and  may  be  some  five  or  sixe
miles  about ;  and  from  this  little  Iland  to  the  maine  land
A  great  Ledge  Gf  Mal-Ilha,  may  be some  eight or  nine  miles,  full  of
of oc  es. rockes,  two  of  them  of  good  height. Now  the  Banke
or  ledge  of  Rockes,  for  so  it  is,  lyeth  all  along  the  West-
side  of  Mal-Ilha: and  continueth untill the little  high
Iland (before  mentioned)  beare  South-east  of  you, and
then  it  endeth. Heere  I  had  sixteene  fathom,  faire  white
sand,  fishing  ground. And  thus  being  at  the  North-end
of  this  Ledge,  and  the  little  Iland  bearing  South-east,  you
may  steere  in  with  land,  keeping  the  Iland  faire  aboord :
and  within  the  rockes  or  broken  ground  and  Mal-Ilha,
you shall  see  a  Bay,  wherein  there  is  good  anchoring.
Six  or  eight The  Dutch  shipping  hath  been  there  sixe  or  eight  saile
$land  at  Mai-  °^  tnem  together : That  yeare  they  were heere,  when
Ilka.  they  assaulted  Mozambique,  two  of  my  men  now  in  my

ship,  were  then  in  the  shippes.  Now  to  the  Eastward
of  you,  as  you  come  in  from  the  Banke  or  Ledge  of
Rockes,  you  have  likewise  a  great  shoald,  and  the  offer-
most  end  of  it  lyeth  from  the  little  Iland  North-east,
or  North-east  by  East,  but  from  the  Iland  at  least  five
or  sixe  miles,  and  no  ground  betweene,  that  we  could
find,  in  forty  or  fifty  fathomes.  In  fine,  all  the  North-
side  of  Mal-Ilha  is  very  dangerous :  but  the  channell
mentioned,  without  danger :  for  we  stood  in  as  farre  as
the  little  Iland :  but  the  wind  being  faire  Southerly,  we
could  not  lead  it  in.  For  I  would  have  anchored  in  the
Bay,  if  I  could  have  got  in ;  for  a  mile  to  the  West-
ward of  the  Bay  is  a  Towne,  the  people  good,  and  great
refreshing ;  as  Beeves,  Goats,  Hennes,  Limons,  Coco
Nuts,  of  each  great  store ;  and  good  water.  The  afore-
said Fleet of  Hollanders,  in this  place,  recovered  the

122

THOMAS BEST  a.d.

1612.

healthes  of  foure  or  five  hundred  men  in  five  weekes.
In  those  parts  there  is  no  place  of  greater  refreshing  then
this.  Now  the  best  way  to  come  to  this  place,  is  to
come  by  the  South-east  side  of  the  Hand.  Mal-Ilha  hath
latitude  twelve  degrees,  thirty  minutes,  and  longitude
three  and  twenty  degrees,  two  minutes ;  Variation  fifteene
degrees,  twenty  minutes.  This  Hand  is  well  named  Mal-
Ilha,  for  it  is  the  most  dangerous  of  any  place  that  ever
I  saw:  it  is  the  next  to  Comoro,  on  the  South-east  side  Mal-Ilha  next
of  Comoro,  and  is  distant  some  twelve  or  fourteene  t0  Comoro.
leagues.

The  first  of  September,  at  the  breaking  of  the  dawn-  September  1.
ing,  we  saw  the  land  East  from  us,  some  three  or  foure  sight  of  land.
leagues  off.  When  we  saw  the  land,  I  was  short  of  my
reckoning  eightie  or  ninetie  leagues :  which  I  judge  to
proceed  of  some  Current  from  the  Coast  of  Melinde,
setting  to  the  East :  neither  from  the  latitude  of  Socatora
to  Daman  could  we  see  the  Sunne,  to  know  that
variation.

The  third,  at  seven  in  the  morning,  we  commanded
two  Boats  of  the  countrey,  by  shooting  foure  peeces  to
them,  to  come  aboord  of  us  :  and  they  told  us  that  the
Church,  and  Castle,  and  Towne  which  we  saw,  and  now
did  beare  off  us  South-east  by  South,  was  the  Towne
of  Daman.  Out  of  these  two  Boats  I  tooke  two  men,
which  undertooke  to  carry  the  Dragon  to  the  Barre  of
Surat,  with  promise  that  they  would  not  bring  me  into
lesse  than  seven  fathoms  water.

The  fifth,  a  Boat  of  Surat  came  aboord  of  us  with
Jaddow  the  Broker,  which  had  served  Captaine  William
Hawkins  three  yeeres,  and  Sir  Henry  Middleton  the
time  of  his  being  heere  ;  and  the  Customers  brother,
and  three  or  foure  others.  All  which  continued  with
us  till  the  seventh  day.  And  then  at  foure  in  the  after-  They  arrive
noone  we  came  to  an  anchor  at  the  Barre  of  Surat  :  the  atteBane
Barre  hath  latitude  one  and  twenty  degrees,  ten  minutes.
Variation  sixteene  degrees,  twenty  minutes,  or  sixteene
degr.  seven  and  twenty  min. Heere  I  came  to  an  anchor

123

A.D.

1612.

[I.  iv.  458.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

in  eight  fathomes  and  a  quarter  at  high  water,  and  at
low  water  sixe  fathoms  and  an  halfe  nepe  tides  :  but
in  the  spring  tides  it  would  rise  heere  in  the  offing,  for
so  have  I  found,  three  fathoms,  and  three  fathoms  and
a  halfe.

The  eleventh,  Thomas  Kerridge  came  aboord,  and
signified  their  kind  intreaty,  and  much  welcome  to  the
people,  and  brought  with  him  from  the  Justice  and
Governour  of  Surat,  a  Certificate  under  their  Seale  for
our  quiet  and  peaceable  trade  and  entercourse  with  them,
and  also  a  Letter  of  relation  written  by  Sir  Henry
Middleton,  which  hee  left  with  the  Mocadan  of  Swally.
The  same  day  we  returned  him  againe  with  Hugh
Gittins.

§.  11.

Their  Acts  with  the  Mogols  Subjects,  and  fights
against  the  Portugals  :  setling  a  Factorie,  and
departure  to  Achen.

[He thirteenth of September, sixteene Sailes of
Portugall  Frigats  put  into  the  River.

The  two  and  twentieth  it  was  determined  by
counsell,  that  wee  should  send  a  Post  to  Agra  to  the
King,  to  signifie  our  arrival,  and  to  require  his  answere
certaine,  Whether  hee  would  permit  us  trade,  and  to  settle
a  Factorie. Otherwise  to  depart  his  Countrey.

The  thirtieth,  this  morning  I  heard  of  the  taking  of
Master  Canning  the  Purser,  and  William  Chambers :
whereupon  I  caused  the  Guzurat  ship  to  anchor  fast  by
me,  thereby  to  stay  her,  till  I  might  see  and  heare  how
all  stood  on  land.  Also  wee  stayed  a  Barke  of  Rice,
being  informed  that  it  belonged  to  the  Portugals  of
Bassare :  and  from  Bassare  she  came.  In  fine,  I  tooke
out  of  her  twelve  or  fourteene  Quintals  of  Rice,  and  gave
them  thirteene  pence  a  Quintall  for  it.  After  I  had  the
ship,  I  wrote  to  the  chiefe  on  land,  that  they  should  send
me  all  my  men,  with  the  value  of  all  the  goods  which  I

124

THOMAS BEST  a.d.

1612.

had  landed ; which  being  performed,  I  would  then  deliver

their  ship  with  all  their  people,  and  gave  time  till  the

fift  of  October  to  returne  mee  answere  :  by  which  time  if

they  did  not,  then  I  would  dispose  of  ship  and  goods  at

my  pleasure. Some  tenne  of  the  chiefe  men  of  the  ship

I  tooke  into  my  ship :  in  the  ship  there  being  some  foure

hundred  men,  or  foure  hundred  and  fiftie.

The  sixth,  Medi  Joffer  came  aboord  accompanied  with
foure  chiefe  men,  and  many  others.  Hee  brought  me  a
great  Present.  He  came  to  intreate  of  Trade,  and  re-
lease of  the  ship  which  I  held.

The  tenth,  I  left  the  Barre  of  Surat,  and  came  to  the
Roade  of  Swally,  and  anchored  in  eight  fathomes  at  high-
water.  It  is  from  the  Barre  of  Surat  some  ten  or  twelve
miles  North.  The  seventeenth  ;  the  Governour  of  Ama-  Tke  Governor
davar  came  to  the  water-side.  The  nineteenth,  I  landed,  fam™*swalfo
having  aboord  of  my  ship  foure  men  for  pledges.  The
one  and  twentieth,  I  concluded  with  the  Governours  and
Merchants  for  trading  with  them,  and  setling  a  Factorie
in  any  part  of  their  Countrey.

The  Articles  agreed  upon,  and  sealed  by  the
Governour  of  Amadaver,  and  the  Governour
of  Surat,  and  foure  principall  Merchants,  and
to  be  confirmed  by  the  Seale  and  Firme  of
the  Great  Mogoll  within  fortie  dayes  after
the  former  sealing,  or  else  to  be  void;  for
the  setling  of  Trade  and  Factories  in  the
Cities  of  Surat,  Cambaya,  Amadavar,  Goga,
or  in  any  other  part  or  parts  of  this  Countrey
within  the  Great  Mogols  Dominions.  Wit-
nessed under  our  hands  and  Seales,  the  one
and  twentieth  of  October, 161 2.

1. TNprimis, that  all  which  concerneth Sir  Henrie

A  Middleton  be  remitted,  acquited  and  cleered  to

us : that they shall never  make seisure, stoppage, nor

*25

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

stay  of  our  Goods,  Wares  and  Merchandizes  to  satisfie
for  the  same.

2  That  they  shall  procure  from  their  King  the  great
Mogoll  at  their  proper  cost  his  grant  and  confirmation  of
all  the  Articles  of  agreement  under  the  great  Seale  of  his
Land,  and  shall  deliver  the  same  unto  us  for  our  securitie
and  certaintie  of  perpetuall  amitie,  commerce  and  dealing
with  them  within  fortie  dayes  after  the  sealing  hereof.

3  That  it  shall  bee  lawfull  for  the  King  of  England
to  keepe  and  continue  his  Embassadour  at  the  Court  of
the  Great  Mogoll  during  the  time  of  the  said  peace  and
commerce,  there  to  compound  and  end  all  such  great  and
weightie  Questions,  as  may  any  way  tend  to  the  breach  of
the  said  peace.

4  That  at  all  times  upon  the  arrivall  of  our  ships  in
the  Roade  of  Swally  there  shall  bee  Proclamation  in  the
Citie  of  Surat  three  severall  dayes  together,  that  it  shall
bee  free  for  the  Countrey  people  of  all  sorts  to  come
downe  to  the  water  side,  there  to  have  free  trade,  dealing
and  commerce  with  us.

5  That  all  English  Commodities  shall  pay  custome,
according  to  the  value  or  price  that  it  beareth  at  the  time
that  it  is  put  into  the  Custome-house,  after  the  rate  of
three  and  an  halfe  the  hundred.

6  That  all  pettie  and  Pedlerly  ware  be  free  of  Cus-
tome, provided  that  it  exceed  not  in  value  tenne  Rials  of
eight.

7  That  we  shall  have  ten  Manu  for  our  Manuda
carryed  from  the  waters  side  to  Surat :  and  after  the  same
rate  backe  againe :  and  for  Carts  we  are  to  repaire  to  the
Moccadam  of  Swally  to  send  for  Surat,  and  at  Surat  to
repaire  to  the  Broker  for  Carts  downe  againe.

[I.  iv.  459.]  8  That  if  any  of  our  men  dye  in  those  parts,  that  then
neither  the  King,  nor  Governour,  nor  under  Officer  shall
make  title  or  challenge  to  any  thing  that  to  the  dead  be-
longed, nor  demand  fees,  nor  any  kind  of  Taxes,  nor
Customes.

9 That  if  all  our  men  dye  heere  in  these  parts,  be-

126

THOMAS BEST  a.d.

1612.

tween  the  times  of  the  comming  of  our  shippes,  that  then
by  some  Office  thereto  appointed  just  and  true  Inventorie,
notice,  and  knowledge  be  taken,  of  all  such  Monies,
Goods,  Jewels,  Provisions,  Apparell,  and  what  else  to  our
Nation  belongeth :  and  the  same  shall  safely  preserve  and
keepe,  and  deliver  to  the  Generall,  Captaine,  or  Mer-
chants of  the  first  ships  that  shall  after  heere  arrive :  and
to  receive  a  discharge  from  the  Generall,  Captaine,  or
Merchants,  to  whom  such  Goods  and  Monies  shall  be
delivered.

10  That  they  secure  our  men  and  goods  upon  the
Land,  redeeming  all  such  both  goods  and  men  as  shall
happen  to  be  taken  upon  the  Land  by  the  Portugals :  and
shall  deliver  both  men  and  goods  againe  to  us  free  of  all
charges,  or  the  value  of  our  goods  and  men  instantly.

11  That  as  in  all  Kingdomes  there  are  some  Rebels
and  disobedient  Subjects ;  so  in  our  Nation  there  may  be
some  Pirats,  and  Sea-Rovers,  which  may  happen  to  come
into  these  parts,  and  heere  may  rob  and  steale :  if  any
such  shall  happen,  then  will  not  we  by  our  Trade  and
Factorie  heere  bee  lyable  or  answerable  for  such  goods  so
taken,  but  will  ayde  them  with  our  best  meanes  that  are
so  grieved,  by  Justice  to  our  King,  for  redresse  and  restitu-
tion unto  them.

12  That  all  such  provisions  of  victuals  as  shall  bee
spent  during  the  time  that  our  ships  shall  remayne  heere
in  the  Roades  of  Surat  and  Swally,  shalbe  free  of  Cus-
tome :  provided  it  doe  not  amount  unto  above  a  thou-
sand Dollers  in  Money.

13  That  in  all  Questions  of  wrongs  and  injuries  that
shall  be  offered  unto  us,  and  to  our  Nation,  that  we  doe
receive  from  the  Judges  and  those  that  be  in  authoritie,
present  and  speed ie  Justice  according  to  the  qualitie  of
our  complaints  and  wrongs  be  done  us,  and  that  by  delayes
we  be  not  put  off,  and  wearied  either  by  time  or  charges.

The  fourteenth,  I  landed  the  Present  for  the  Great
Mogol,  and  brought  it  to  the  Tent  of  the  Governour  of

127

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

Amadavar,  who  tooke  notice  of  the  particulars :  also  of
our  Kings  Letter  to  their  King  to  advertise  their  King
thereof.  Which  done,  I  returned  the  Present  to  my
shippe  againe,  according  to  agreement  with  the  said
Governour.  For  I  had  told  him,  that  unlesse  their  King
would  confirme  the  Articles  concluded  on,  and  likewise
write  our  King  a  Letter,  I  would  not  deliver  the  Present,
nor  our  Kings  Letter :  for  if  he  refused  so  to  do,  then  was
he  not  a  friend,  but  an  enemie,  and  to  the  enemie  of  my
King,  I  neither  had  Letter  nor  Present.  Also  the  same
day,  the  former  finished,  I  delivered  our  Present  to  the
Governour  of  Amadavar,  and  another  to  his  sonne.

The  fourteenth  of  November,  1612.  the  Cafila  of
Frigats  came  in  sight  of  us,  some  two  hundred  and  fortie
saile.  I  had  thought  they  had  come  to  fight  with  us :
but  they  were  the  Fleet  of  the  Merchant  men  bound  for
Cambaya.  And  every  yeare  there  commeth  the  like
Fleet,  all  Portugals  from  the  South  Coast,  to  wit,  from
Goa,  Chaul,  &c.  to  goe  to  Cambaya :  and  from  thence
they  bring  the  greatest  part  of  the  lading,  which  the
Caracks  and  Gallions  carrie  for  Portugall.  By  which  may
Notice  of foure  appeare  the  great  Trade  that  the  Portugals  have  in  these

rteTht parts-

between foure  The seven and twentieth, I received Letters from

Portugal  Gal-  Master  Canning  and  Edward  Christian : both  signified

lions  and  us.  of  the  comming  of  foure  Gallions  to  fight  with  us,  and

Of  these  fights  fa^  tjiey  were  readie,  riding  at  the  Barre  of  Goa,  the

ZlationfJmy  fourteenth  of  November

Pilgrimage,  The  nine  and  twentieth,  Master  Canning  came  aboord :

lib.  5.  cap.  7.  and  the  Portugall  Fleet  comming  in  sight  of  us  yester-

§  4. The  day5  drew  neere  up  with  the  floud : and  at  two  in  the

oiugasa  after_n00ne  I  did  set  saile,  and  at  foure  I  was  about  two

Gallions  and  Cables  lengths  from  the  Vice-Admirall, fearing  to  goe

some  twentie  neerer  for  want  of  depth,  and  then  I  began  to  play  upon

sixe  Frigats.  him  both  with  great  and  small  shot,  that  by  an  houre  we

T/*ey  iosim  nad  wen  peppered  him  with  some  fiftie  sixe  great  shot.

their  quondam  credit  and  one  hundred  and  six  tie,  or  as  others  five  hundred  men. And  English
Trade  setled  maugre  their  force. Nathaniel  Salmon  of  Leigh,  was  Master  of  the  Hosiander.

128

THOMAS BEST  a.d.

1612.

From  him  wee  received  one  small  shot,  Saker  or  Minion
into  our  Maine  Mast,  and  with  another  he  sunke  our
long  Boate :  now  being  night  we  anchored,  and  saved
our  Boate,  but  lost  many  things  out  of  it.

The  thirtieth,  assoone  as  the  day  gave  light,  I  set  saile
and  steered  betweene  them,  bestirring  our  selves  with  our
best  endevours,  putting  three  of  their  foure  shippes  on
ground  on  the  sands  thwart  of  the  Barre  of  Surat.

At  nine  I  anchored.  This  morning  the  Hosiander  did
good  service,  and  came  through  also  betweene  the  ships,
and  anchored  by  me,  upon  the  floud  the  three  ships  on
ground  came  off :  we  set  saile,  they  at  anchor,  and  came
to  them,  and  spent  upon  three  of  them,  one  hundred
and  fiftie  great  shot :  and  in  the  morning  some  fiftie
shot :  and  at  night  we  giving  the  Admirall  our  foure
Peeces  out  of  the  sterne  for  a  fare-well,  he  gave  us
one  of  his  Prow  Peeces,  either  a  whole  or  Demi-culver-
ing,  which  came  even  with  the  top  of  our  Fore-castle,
shot  thorow  our  Davie,  killed  one  man,  to  wit,  William
Burrell,  and  shot  the  arme  of  another.

This  day  the  Hosiander  spent  wholly  upon  one  of  the
ships,  which  was  on  ground,  and  from  the  enemie  re-
ceived many  shot,  one  of  which  killed  the  Boat-swayne
Richard Barker. Night being come wee birthed our
selves  some  sixe  miles  from  them,  and  anchored :  and  at
nine  of  the  clocke  they  sent  a  Frigat  to  us,  which  being
come  neere,  came  driving  right  on  the  halfe  of  the  Hosi-  \L-  lv-  i6o-J
ander : and  being  discovered  by  their  good  watch,  they  WaS  5Unhwith
made  to  shoote  at  it ; the  first,  caused  it  to  set  saile  ; the  the  shot,  as
second  went  thorow  their  sailes,  and  so  they  tooke  their  Mr.  Salmon
leave. Their  purpose,  doubtlesse,  was  to  have  fired  us,  the  actor  ws
if  they  had  found  us  without  good  watch.  ™e  ande^Me

The  first  of  December,  1612.  we  rode,  they  not  com-  0/ her  men
ming  to  us,  nor  we  to  them  :  they  might  without  danger  were  taken  up
of  the  sands  have  come  to  us,  not  we  to  them. This  day  drown^-
I  called  a  Counsell,  and  concluded  to  go  downe  to  have efem  er'  l'
a  broader  channell,  hoping  also  that  the  Gallions  would
follow  us. The  second,  we  went  downe  some  sixe  or
iv  129  1

A.D.

1612.

TkePortugalls
give  over  the
fight.

Madafelde-
bar.

Moha,  or
Mova,orMea.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

seven  leagues,  but  they  followed  us  not.  The  third,  at
flood  we  plyed  up  againe,  and  anchored  faire  in  sight  of
them.

The  fourth  in  the  morning,  we  weighed,  and  stood  away
before  them.  In  the  after-noone  they  gave  us  over,  and
stood  in  with  the  land  againe :  and  at  night  we  directed
our  course  for  Diu.

The  fifth  at  night,  we  anchored  some  foure  or  five
leagues  to  the  Eastward  of  Diu  in  fourteene  fathoms,
faire  aboord  the  shoare.

The  ninth,  we  came  to  Madafeldebar,  and  anchored
in  eight  fathomes.  It  is  from  Diu  some  ten  or  eleven
leagues,  and  lyeth  nearest  East  and  by  North,  a  faire
Coast,  no  danger  but  that  you  see :  your  depth,  if  neare
Diu,  fifteene,  sixteene,  when  halfe-way,  twelve  fathoms,
then  ten  and  nine,  not  lesse :  it  is  a  faire  sandy  Bay ;  and
on  the  West-side  of  the  Bay  is  a  River  that  goeth  farre
into  the  Countrey :  and  this  place  is  some  five  or  sixe
miles  short  to  the  Westward  of  the  Isles  of  Mortie.  The
fifteenth  in  the  morning,  we  departed  from  Madafeldebar,
to  go  to  Moha,  only  to  discover  the  Bay :  because  some
that  were  there  in  the  Ascension,  reported  it  to  be  a  good
place  to  winter  in.  At  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-
noone,  we  anchored  in  the  Bay  of  Moha ;  which  is  from
Madafeldebar  nine  or  ten  leagues,  East  North-east.  Hav-
ing found  the  Coast  and  channell  very  good,  depth  ten
fathomes ;  no  danger,  but  what  you  see.  I  sent  our
Pinnasse  on  land,  where  presently  we  had  twenty  good
sheepe,  at  three  shillings  a  sheepe,  the  best  we  had  this
Voyage.

The  sixteenth  in  the  morning,  I  sent  our  Pinnasse  on
land,  where  we  found  few  people,  but  the  ruines  of  a  great
Towne.

The  seventeenth  in  the  morning,  the  Generall  of  the
Campe  sent  to  me  foure  men,  to  intreat  me  to  send  unto
him  one  of  my  men,  that  he  might  talke  with  mee.

The  one  and  twentieth  I  landed,  and  had  much  con-
ference with  the  Generall  of  the  Campe :  he  much  desired

130

1

THOMAS BEST

that  I  would  land  two  peeces  of  Ordnance,  making  many
and  great  promises  of  favour  to  our  Nation ;  but  I  re-
fused him.  He  presented  me  with  a  horse  and  furniture,
and  two  Agra  Girdles:  And  I  presented  him  a  Vest
of  Stammell,  two  Peeces,  two  Bottles  of  Aquavitae,  and
a  Knife.  The  two  and  twentieth,  we  saw  the  foure  Gal-
lions  comming  toward  us,  and  at  nine  at  night  they
anchored  within  shot  of  us.

The  three  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  by  Sunne,  we
weighed,  and  began  with  them,  and  continued  fight  till
ten  or  eleven.  Then  they  all  foure  weighed,  and  stood
away  before  the  wind,  and  so  went  from  us  :  for  they
sailed  large,  much  better  then  wee :  wee  followed  them
two  or  three  houres,  and  then  anchored.  This  day  I  spent
upon  them  an  hundred  thirtie  three  great  shot,  and  some
seven  hundred  small  shot.  In  this  fight  John  Hackwel
was  killed  with  a  great  shot.  The  foure  Gallions  an-
chored from  me  some  two  leagues.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  by  Sunne  rising,  I  weighed
and  went  to  the  foure  Gallions,  and  by  eight  began  our
fight,  and  continued  it  till  twelve.  And  this  day  shot
two  hundred  and  fiftie  great  shot,  and  one  thousand  small
shot.  By  this  time  both  sides  were  weary,  and  we  all
stood  into  the  sea,  and  steered  away  South  by  East.  The
foure  ships  following  of  us,  at  two  or  three  of  clocke  they
laid  it  about  and  anchored.  Now  I  began  take  know-
ledge of  our  powder  and  shot,  and  found  more  then  halfe
of  our  shot  spent,  and  of  the  Hosianders,  having  now
spent  on  the  foure  shippes  sixe  hundred,  five  and  twenty
great  shot,  and  three  thousand  small  shot.  Being  from
the  land  some  foure  or  five  leagues,  we  met  with  a  sand,
whereon  there  was  some  two  or  two  fathoms  and  an  halfe,
and  it  lyeth  from  Moso  South-South-east,  or  thereabout,
the  end  of  the  said  sand.  I  went  over  it  in  nine  fathoms  :
and  then  were  the  two  high  hills,  which  are  over  Goga
nearest  North  of  us.  Upon  this  sand  was  the  Ascension
cast  away.  The  shoalding  is  something  fast.  Betweene
the  land  and  this  sand  is  nine  and  ten  fathoms. Wee

131

A.D.
l6l2.

Sixe  hundred
and  five  and
twentie  great
shot  spent  on
the  foure  Gal-
lions, and  three
thousand  small
shot.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

continued  steering  South,  with  an  ebbe.  At  low  water
we  anchored  in  eight  fathoms,  the  tide  setting  at  East
North-east,  and  West  South-west,  by  the  Compasse.  At
twelve  at  mid-night  I  weighed,  wind  at  North  North-
west, and  steered  South  South-east,  depths  twelve  and
fourteene  fathoms.  At  foure  steered  East  South-east.
At  sixe  steered  East  still  twelve  fathoms,  halfe  a  fathome
more  or  lesse.  At  nine  we  met  with  a  banke,  seven
fathomes,  five  or  sixe  casts,  then  presently  ten,  twelve,
fourteene.  Then  the  wind  shortned  on  us :  we  lay
South-east.  And  about  twelve  saw  the  land  of  Daman
East  South-east.  The  high  land  to  the  Southward  of
Daman  South-east  by  East.  And  being  over  this  sand,
we  had  presently  fourteene,  fifteene,  seventeene,  twenty
fathoms.  At  two,  being  high  water,  we  anchored  in
seventeene  fathoms,  faire  in  sight  of  land,  Daman  East
South-east.  The  highest  land  to  the  Southward,  South-
east by  South.  At  eight  at  night,  wee  set  saile  halfe  tide,
calme,  still  fifteene  and  sixteene  fathoms,  anchored  all  the
ebbe.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  at  nine  of  the  clocke  in  the
morning,  we  set  saile,  in  the  afternoone  anchored  off  the
Barre  of  Surat.

[I.  iv.  461.]  The  seven  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  we  were  three
or  foure  miles  short  of  Swally,  and  about  twelve  of  the
clocke  we  anchored  in  the  Road  of  Swally.  In  the  after-
noon Thomas  Kerridge  and  Edward  Christian  came
aboord.

February  6.  The  sixt  of  February,  the  Firma  came  to  Swally,  as  a
private  Letter :  therefore  I  refused  to  receive  it,  being
jealous  it  was  a  counterfeit ; requiring  the  chiefe  men  of

/  received  the  ^urat  to  come  downe  and  deliver  it  to  me,  with  those

great  Mogol rights  that  to  it  belonged.

his  Firma  for The  eleventh,  the  Sabandar,  his  father  in  law  Medi-

conjirmmgof goffer,  and  divers  others  came  to  Swally,  and  delivered

peace,  an ^ tQ me^ ^^  prof*essfon Gf  their  Kings  love to our

Factory  in Nation.

Surat,  i$c.  The  fourteenth,  we  landed  all  our  cloath,  three  hun-

132

THOMAS BEST

dred  and  ten  Elephants  teeth,  and  all  our  Quick-silver.
The  Gallions  came  within  some  three  or  foure  miles
of  us.

The  sixteenth,  I  landed  Anthony  Starkey,  to  traverse
home  over-land  for  England,  with  Letters  and  advertise-
ment of  our  good  successe.

The  seventeenth,  I  received  all  my  goods  from  Surat :
at  night  I  set  saile,  taking  my  leave  of  these  coasts :  it
fell  calme,  and  I  anchored.  Note  that  in  the  Land  of
Cambaya  it  floweth  South-west  and  North-east.

The  eighteenth,  I  set  saile  againe,  came  faire  by  the
Gallions.  They  all  weighed  and  followed  me  some  two  or
three  houres,  and  then  we  departed  without  shooting  a
shot  on  either  side.

The  nineteenth,  thwart  of  Basaim  we  tooke  three  Mala-
bars,  which  had  nothing  in  them :  we  tooke  a  Boat  from
one  of  them.

The  twentieth,  still  we  were  faire  aboord  some  five
leagues  off,  and  came  along  the  shoare  in  fourteene,  eigh-
teene,  twentie  fathomes  water.  At  night  we  were  faire
over-against  Chaul,  seeing  both  Towne  and  Castle.

The  one  and  twentieth  in  the  after-noone,  wee  were
faire  aboord  Dabull,  and  heere  were  aboord  three  Junckes,
all  of  Calicut,  laden  with  Cokers.

The  two  and  twentieth,  the  Hosiander  in  the  morning
sent  her  Boat  unto  two  Junckes.  At  twelve  of  the  clocke
we  were  at  the  rockes,  which  lye  at  the  Northward  of  Goa,
ten  or  eleven  leagues,  and  lye  from  the  Maine  sixe  or
eight  miles.  Two  or  three  of  these  rocks  are  higher
then  the  hull  of  any  ship.  At  sixe  we  were  thwart  of
Goa,  which  is  easily  knowne  by  the  Hand,  which  lyeth  at
the  mouth  of  the  River,  and  upon  the  Hand  a  Castle.
From  Daman  till  you  come  to  Goa,  the  shoare  is  very
faire,  no  danger,  and  faire  shoalding,  not  without  sixteene
or  seventeene,  nor  within  ten  fathoms :  good  anchoring
all  the  Coast.  And  all  this  Coast  from  Daman  to  Goa,
lyeth  nearest  South  and  North,  we  steered  along  the
Land.

A.D.

1612.

Antony
Starkie  sent
over-land  for
England,  he
was  poysoned
and  his  Indian
by  two  Friers
in  the  way.

He  leaveth
these  Coasts,
shaping  his
course  for
Sumatra  and
Java.
Basaim.

Chaul.
Dabul.

Goa.

1 33

A.D.

1612.

A  Fleet  of
Frigats.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  foure  and  twentieth,  we  saw  a  Fleete  of  Frigats,
some  sixtie  or  eightie  saile,  bound  to  the  Southward :
heere  Norther  latitude  thirteene  degrees,  halfe  a  minute.
The  high  land  by  the  waters  side  left  us ;  and  the  land
began  to  be  very  low,  and  faire  shoalding  sixteene  or
seventeene  fathomes,  some  three  or  foure  leagues  off.  In
the  after-noone  we  came  into  a  Bay,  where  all  the  Frigats,
A pri%e  taken,  and  three  or  foure  Gallyes  were,  and  fetched  out  a  ship
laden  with  Rice :  all  the  Portugalls  fled  in  their  two
Boates ;  and  also  there  were  two  Frigats  aboord  of
her,  so  that  all  good  things  they  carryed  away  with
them.

The  five  and  twentieth,  we  romaged  our  prize,  finding
nothing  but  Rice  and  course  Sugar,  of  which  we  stored
our  selves,  and  tooke  out  both  high  masts,  and  what  firing
we  could,  and  at  night  suncke  her,'  taking  out  of  her  all
the  people,  twentie  or  five  and  twentie,  all  Moores.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  wee  met  with  a  little  Boate  of
Maldina,  laden  with  Cokers,  bound  for  Cananor,  into
which  I  put  all  the  people  of  the  prize ;  onely  eight  I
kept  for  labour,  one  of  them  a  Pilot  for  this  Coast.  At
twelve  we  were  thwart  of  Cananor,  latitude  eleven  de-
grees.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  we  were  shot  a  little  past
Calicut,  and  were  thwart  of  Pannaire,  at  noone  latitude
ten  degrees,  thirtie  minutes.

The  eight  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  we  saw
Cochin,  which  maketh  it  selfe  by  the  Towers  and  Castle :
and  in  latitude  nine  degrees,  fortie  minutes,  or  there-
about. Note  that  from  Goa  to  Cochin,  we  never  had
above  twentie  fathomes,  being  sometime  foure  or  five
leagues  from,  land :  and  being  three,  foure  and  sixe  miles
off  ten  or  twelve  fathomes,  from  latitude  eleven  degrees,
thirtie  minutes  to  Cochin,  very  low  land  by  the  waters
side ;  but  up  in  the  Countrie  all  along  high  land.  Note
that  short  of  Cochin  foure  or  five  leagues,  you  shall  see
a  high  land  in  the  Countrie,  somewhat  like  a  table,  but
rounding  aloft. And  to  the  Northward  of  this  round

i34

Cananor.

Calicut.

Cochin.

Shaldings.

Marks  of
land.

THOMAS BEST  a.d.

1612.

hill,  high  long  hills  or  mountaines.  All  this  day  we  ran
within  six  or  eight  miles  of  the  land,  in  nine,  ten,  twelve
fathomes.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  calme,  latitude  eight  degrees,
some  sixe  leagues  off,  no  ground  in  fortie  or  fiftie
fathomes.

The  thirtieth,  we  anchored  in  fifteene  fathomes,  some They  anchored
sixe  and  twentie  leagues  short  of  Cape  Comori,  against  a J^r^  J^'r
little  Village : and  presently  sixe  or  eight  Canoes  came  great  refresh.
aboord,  and  brought  us  all  provisions,  water,  Hennes,  fag.
Cocos,  &c. The  name  of  this  place  is  *  Beringar : the  *Our  Man-
Kings  name  Travancar.  ZllltBrfa

The  one  and  thirtieth,  all  the  day  the  people  came  to  us  John^
with  Hennes,  and  other  victuals.

The  first  of  February,  the  people  came  with  provisions,  February  1.
and  the  King  sent  a  messenger  to  me,  to  know  whether  I  [I.  iv.  462.]
would  trade  with  him : which  if  I  would,  he  offered  to
lade  my  shippe  with  Pepper  and  Cinamom.

The  fourth,  the  people  still  came  to  us  with  provisions.
At  two  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-noone,  we  set  saile  from
Beringar :  all  the  night  I  anchored.

The  fifth  in  the  morning  we  set  saile,  being  faire  aboord
Cape  Comorin :  and  heere  met  with  a  fresh  gale  of  wind
at  East  by  North,  which  split  our  fore-top-saile  and  maine
bonnet,  yet  a  Canoa  with  eight  men  came  aboord  me,
three  or  foure  leagues  from  land  :  in  the  after-noone  came
another  Canoa.  Heere  we  were  troubled  with  calmes
and  great  heate,  many  of  our  men  taken  sicke,  my  selfe
one  of  them.  The  eight,  we  came  againe  into  the  Roade
of  Beringar.

The  Thirteenth,  we  set  saile  from  Beringar.  Note
that  this  place  giveth  good  refreshing,  with  plentie  of
water,  and  the  people  harmelesse,  and  not  friends  with
the  Portugals.  From  this  place  to  the  Cape,  all  the
people  that  dwell  by  the  waters  side  are  Christians,  and
have  a  Portugall  Frier  or  Priest  that  dwelleth  among
them.  All  the  night  we  anchored  some  foure  or  five
miles  from  the  two  rockes,  which  lye  off  the  Cape  in  eigh-

*35

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

teene  fathomes. The  two  rockes  lye  five  or  sixe  miles
from  land.

The  fourteenth  in  the  morning,  I  set  saile,  wind  at  East,

and  plyed  to  windward :  wee  have  a  little  current  to  the

Southward. Note  that  the  Coast  of  Malabar,  even  from

Variation  at Daman  to Cape  Comorin  is  free  of  danger,  and  faire

CapeComorin,  Raiding  on  all  the  Coast  from  Cochin  to  the  Cape :  more

latitude  tven  neale  sixteene,  eighteene,  twentie  fathoms  faire  by  the

degrees, thir tie  land: and  five  or  six  leagues  off  no  ground  after  you

minutes.  And  come  within  five  and  twentie  or  thirtie  leagues  of  the

longitude  from  Cape. The  variation  at  Daman  is  sixteene  degrees,  thirtie

fGoodHo°{ mmutes- And  hjdfe  way  to  the  Cape,  it  is  fifteene  or

fiftie  sixe thereabout :  and  heere  at  the  Cape  it  is  fourteene. And

degrees,thirtie  the Cape hath latitude North seven degrees, thirtie

m'tn-  minutes. In  the  after-noone,  we  ran  off  open  of  the

Cape, and found much wind at East South-east,

which  gave  no  small  hope  of  going  to  the  Eastward,  till

the  end  of  the  Monson,  which  will  bee  the  fifth  of  Aprill,

or  thereabout,  as  the  Indians  report. So  I  bore  up  and

anchored foure or five leagues within the Cape, in

twentie fathomes, faire by the two rockes. Right

A  very  dan- Qff from these two rockes, lyeth a suncken rocke,

gerous  suncken  wnicn js verv dangerous, and is some two miles

without the foresaid two Rockes. If you come

within  twentie  fathomes,  you  shall  be  in  danger  of  them :

but  safe  and  free  of  danger,  is  not  to  come  within  foure

and  twentie  or  five  and  twentie fathomes. Heere  we

stayed  nine  dayes.

The  eight  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  at  sixe  of  the

The  Isle  of clocke,  we  saw  the  Isle  of  Ceylon,  East  South-east,  off

Ceykn.  some  eight  or  nine  leagues :  little  wind  at  South,  latitude

observed  seven  degrees  North. At  foure  of  the  clocke,

we  were  faire  aboord  the  land,  depths  thirteene,  fifteene,

sixteene  fathomes. At  eight  stood  off  till  day  :  little  wind

at South, being  from the  land  five  or six  leagues, no

ground  in  sixtie  or  seventie  fathomes.

March  1.  The  first  of  March,  all  the  morning  becalmed :  in  the

after-noone  a  Sea-turne  at  North-west  and  West. At  sixe

136

THOMAS BEST  a.d.

1613.

of  the  clocke,  we  were  faire  aboord  Columbo,  the  latitude  Columbo  in

whereof  is  six  degrees,  thirtie  minutes,  or  neare  there-  si^i^gre"f

about,  depths  foure  and  twenty,  five  and  twenty  fathoms,  minttteSm

three  leagues  off.

The  twelfth,  we  stood  in  with  the  land,  and  anchored  in
foure  and  twentie  fathomes,  wind  at  South-east  and  South.
I  sent  my  Boat  on  land,  foure  leagues  to  the  North  of
Punta  de  Galle :  and  after  some  stay,  a  woman  came  to
talke  with  an  Indian,  that  went  out  of  our  Boat :  shee
told  him  that  we  should  have  there  no  provisions :  but
said  shee  would  go  and  tell  the  men ;  which  we  desired.
Afterward  two  men  came  to  my  Indian,  and  told  him,  that
we  should  not  have  any  thing  there,  for  that  our  Nation
had  sometimes  taken  a  Boat  of  theirs :  but  it  was  the
Hollanders,  and  not  our  Nation.

The  fourteenth  in  the  morning,  at  sixe  of  the  clocke,
the  Southermost  point  of  Ceylon,  called  Tenadare,  whose
latitude  is  five  degrees,  thirtie  minutes,  and  lyeth  from
Punta  de  Galle,  East  South-east,  some  ten  or  twelve
leagues,  bare  East  North-east  some  five  leagues  off.

The  seventeenth,  we  were  neare  to  one  of  the  sands
that  Linscot  writeth  of :  it  lieth  from  the  land  two
leagues.  We  had  five  and  twenty  fathomes  when  we
staid :  upon  the  land  right  against  this  sand  is  a  high
Rocke  like  a  great  Tower.  The  land  lieth  here  East
North-east.

Captaine  Best  his  entertainement  at  Achen.

THe  twelfth  of  Aprill  at  noone,  we  came  to  an  anchor  Aprill  12.
in  the  Road  of  Achen,  in  twelve  fathomes ; but  you  TAey  anchor
may  ride  in  tenne  or  eight  fathomes. Your  best  road  is, l1\f,e oa  °^
to  the  East-ward  of  the  Castle,  and  Rivers  mouth. The  twelve
thirteenth,  I  landed  the  Merchants,  the  King  not  beeing  fathoms.
in  Towne. The  fifteenth,  the  King  came,  and  sent  his
Chap  to  me  for  my  landing,  brought  by  an  Eunuch,  and
sixe  or  eight  more,  and  also  the  Xabandar. To  whom
we  gave  an  hundred  and  twenty  Mam. With  them  the
same  day  I  landed  :  and  two  houres  after  my  landing,  the

i37

A  sand  lying
some  two
leagues  off  the
shoare.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRJMES

1613.

The  Kings King  sent  me  a  Present  in  victuals : I  having  presently

Present.  upon  my  landing  sent  the  King  two  peeces :  for  the  cus-

tome  is,  at  landing  to  present  the  King  with  some  small
thing,  and  he  requiteth  it  by  severall  dishes  of  meate.

[I.  iv.  463.]  The  seventeenth,  the  King  having  sent  an  Elephant
with  a  bason  of  Gold  for  our  Kings  letters,  I  rode  to  the
Court  accompanied  with  fortie  of  our  men,  all  admitted
into  the  Kings  presence ; and  after  many  complements,

Our  Kings ^g  King  returned  the  Letter  unto  me,  for  to  read  it :  and

*h.  *-••  a  f  so  the  substance  of  it  was  delivered  unto  him  in  his  owne
the  King  of  ill-  11 T'1

Achen.  language. The contents pleased him very well. The

day  wel  spent,  the  King  told  me,  he  would  now  shew  me
some  of  his  pleasures ;  and  caused  his  Elephants  to  fight
before  us :  and  after  sixe  of  them  had  fought,  then  he
caused  foure  Buffles  to  fight  before  him,  which  made  a
very  excellent  and  fierce  fight.  Their  fiercenesse  was  such,
that  hardly  sixtie  or  eightie  men  could  part  them,  fasten-
ing ropes  to  their  hinder  legges,  to  draw  them  asunder.
And  after  them  some  tenne  or  twelve  Rams,  which  like-
wise made  a  very  great  fight,  and  so  continued  till  it  was
so  darke  that  we  could  not  see  any  longer.  The  King
presented  me  with  a  banket  of  at  least  foure  hundred
dishes,  with  such  plentie  of  hot  drinkes,  as  might  have
sufficed  a  drunken  army.  Betweene  nine  and  tenne  at
night,  he  gave  me  leave  to  depart,  sending  me  two  Ele-
phants to  carry  me  home ;  but  I  rode  not  on  them,  they
having  no  coverings  on  them.

The  eighteenth,  I  went  to  the  Court  againe,  the  King
so  appointing ; where  we  beganne  to  treat  of  the  Articles
formerly  made  by  his  Grand- father,  and  M.  James  Lan-
caster. And  comming  to  the  matter  of  having  all  goods
The  Embassa-  ^otn  Drought  m5  and  carried  out  free  of  custome,  wee
dour  of  Siam ended,  without  concluding  any  thing.
came  to  visit The  nineteenth, the  Embassadour  of  Siam  came to
m- .  visit  me,  telling  me  of  the  three  Englishmen  that  came  to

J  "e^U-tn  the  King  of  Siam,  and  of  their  great  entertainment,  and
M.  Floris  his  j°y  °f  their  King  to  receive  a  Letter  from  the  King  of
Joumall. England : and that  it  was  some thirty Moneths  since.

138

THOMAS BEST  ad.

1613.

They  also  told  me  how  joyfull  their  King  would  be,  if
our  shipping  came  to  his  coasts ; telling  me  what  great
quantities  of  cloath  of  Portugall,  which  is  English  cloth,  English  broad
would  sell  in  their  Countreys. The  colours  most  in  re-  c  °* e!  ztLe.

-. , ,  J.  t  1  11  sold  in  Siam.

quest,  stammel  and  reds,  with  some  others,  as  yellowes,
and  other  pleasing  light  colours,  as  at  Surat. They  also
told  me,  that  their  King  had  made  a  Conquest  over  the
whole  Countrey  of  Pegu,  and  so  is  now  the  greatest  King
of  this  Oriental  part,  except  the  King  of  China,  and  hath
under  him  twentie  sixe  petty  Kings ; and  in  the  warres
is  able  to  make  sixe  thousand  Elephants. Their  coyne
is  all  Silver. Their  Gold  is  lesse  esteemed  then  the  valew  Go^  °f^e"e
thereof. In  their  Countrey  is  great  store  of  Pepper,  and *h ^
rawe Silke. He saith, that the  Hollanders  have their  thereof  in
Factories,  whom  they  call  English,  at  Patane,  which  is  an  Siam.
excellent Port : the entrance twelve and foureteene  Hollanders
fathomes. Likewise  Siam  is  a  good  Port,  and  is  neerer  c.a  e  , or  ca,  ~
unto  the  Kings  Court  then  Patane. Those  that  doe  goe  English.
to  the  Citie  of  the  King,  alwaies  come  to  this  Port  of
Siam. And  from  this  Port  of  Siam  to  the  Kings  Court,
is  some  twenty  dayes  journey  by  land. I  mooved  the
Embassadour  for  his  Letter  to  the  King,  which  he  pro-
mised me,  and  also  for  his  Letter  to  the  Governours  of
Ports,  in  favour  of  our  Nation,  when  we  should  come
upon  those  coasts. And  lastly,  changed  coynes  with  him,
giving  of  our  English  coyne,  and  receiving  the  Kings
coine  of  Siam. I  had  after  this,  often  entercourse  with
these  Embassadours.

The  twentieth,  I  went  to  the  Court,  but  spake  not  with
the  King :  whereupon  I  sent  to  the  Kings  Deputie,  and
complained  of  my  dishonour,  and  of  some  abuse  by  the
Xabandar  offered  unto  me.  He  promised  that  I  should
have  present  redresse,  and  that  he  would  enforme  the  King
thereof :  which  accordingly  he  performed  the  same  day.
The  twentie  one,  the  King  sent  two  Officers  unto  me,  to
signifie  that  at  all  times  I  might  repaire  unto  his  Court,
with  free  accesse,  and  passe  all  the  Gates  without  stoppe,
or  attending  for  his  Crest,  and  likewise  remooved the

i39

A.D.

1613.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

A  signe  of
most  honour-
able esteeme

Xabandar,  and  appointed  me  the  Gentleman,  whom  the
King  sent  Vice-Embassadour  into  Holland,  to  attend,  and
accompany  me  at  all  times  to  the  Court,  and  elsewhere  at
my  pleasure.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  I  wrote  unto  the  Court,  and
had  accesse  unto  the  King,  who  gave  me  all  content,  and
promised  the  ratifying  of  all  the  Articles,  formerly  agreed
upon  by  his  Predecessour,  and  M.  James  Lancaster.  So
after  divers  complements,  he  tooke  leave,  and  sent  me
home  presently  after  my  returne  an  Elephant  to  attend
me,  and  to  carrie  me  whither  soever  it  pleased  me  to
travell.  And  this  is  a  signe  of  the  honourablest  esteeme
that  they  hold  of  the  parties  to  whom  they  sent  their
Elephants :  for  none  may  have  an  Elephant,  nor  ride  on
them,  but  those  whom  the  King  doth  honour.
May  z.  1 613.  The  second  of  May,  the  King  invited  me  to  his  foun-
taine  to  swimme,  and  I  was  with  him ;  it  being  some  five
or  sixe  miles  from  the  Citie,  and  he  sent  me  two  Elephants
to  carrie  me  and  my  provision ;  and  having  washed  and
bathed  our  selves  in  the  water,  the  King  presented  me
with  an  exceeding  great  banquet,  with  too  much  Racke,
all  to  be  eaten  and  drunken  as  we  sate  in  the  water ;  all
his  Nobles  and  great  Captaines  being  present.  Our  ban-
quet continued  from  one  of  the  clocke  till  towards  five :
at  which  time  the  King  released  me ;  and  halfe  an
houre  after  all  strangers,  and  presently  after  followed
himselfe.

The  foureteenth,  certaine  Portugalls  came  into  Achen,
which  came  from  Malacca  with  an  Embassage  from  the
Governour  to  this  King.  The  wind  short,  they  landed
three  leagues  to  the  Eastward  of  the  Road  of  Achen.
This  day  I  sent  the  Hosiander  to  seeke  the  Barke  which
came  from  Malacca,  making  Edward  Christian  Captaine
in  her.  The  seventeenth  in  the  morning,  the  Portugall
Barke  was  brought  unto  me  aboord  the  Dragon.  But
before  she  came  aboord,  the  King  sent  two  Messengers
to  me,  to  desire  me  to  release  both  her,  and  that  which
might  bee  in  her : which  I  refused  to  doe : answering,

140

Edward
Christian
Captaine  of
the  Hosiander.
[I. iv.  464.]

THOMAS BEST  a.d.

1613.

that  I  would  not  release  her,  untill  I  had  seen  both  the
Barke  and  that  which  was  in  her :  but  willed  them  to  tell
the  King,  that  in  honour  of  him,  whatsoever  he  required,
I  would  doe  for  him.  Afterward  the  Barke  came,  and  by-
Edward  Christian  I  was  informed,  that  there  were  some
foure  or  five  fardels  in  her,  and  that  nothing  was  medled
withall,  that  was  in  her.  Wherein  being  certified,  I  came
on  land,  and  found  my  Merchants  to  be  at  the  Court,  who
by  and  by  after  came  in,  informing  me  of  the  Kings  great
displeasure,  for  taking  the  Portugall  Barke  in  his  Port,
protesting  by  his  god,  That  he  would  make  them  all
prisoners,  if  the  Barke  were  not  released.  The  King
having  intelligence  of  my  comming  on  land,  presently  sent
for  me.  And  on  the  way  to  the  Court,  as  I  was  going,  I
met  a  Gentleman  that  came  from  the  King,  to  desire  me
to  release  the  Barke.  But  I  told  him,  I  would  first  speake
with  the  King.  In  fine,  I  came  to  the  Court,  and  pre-
sently was  brought  before  the  King :  where  after  much
discourse,  at  the  Kings  request,  I  gave  him  the  Barke,
and  all  that  was  in  her,  with  which  hee  was  much  pleased,
and  gave  me  an  honourable  title,  to  wit,  Arancaja  Puto :  Captaine  Best
which  signifieth,  The  honourable  White  man,  requiring  hon^rff  Wlfh
his  Nobles  to  call  me  by  the  same  name.  And  further,  b  the  Ki
to  acknowledge  his  thankefulnesse  to  me,  he  sold  me  his
Benjamin  at  mine  owne  price ;  namely,  at  twenty  Tayls
the  Bahar,  it  being  worth  thirty  foure  and  thirty  five,
professing  by  generall  tearmes  his  love,  and  much  esteeme
of  mee,  willing  me  to  aske  whatsoever  I  would  of  him.
I  required  onely  his  Letters  of  favour  unto  Priaman,
which  he  most  willingly  promised.  Of  his  Mangoes,
whereof  himselfe  did  eate,  he  gave  me  to  eate,  and  like-
wise to  carry  to  my  lodging,  and  so  I  tooke  leave  and
departed.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  Malim  Gavy  came  to  Achen,  Letters  from
by  whom  I  received  Letters  from  pur  Merchants  at  Surat,  Jf/^'^f '
and  also  a  Copie  of  the  Kings  Firma,  sent  them  from Great  Mogols
Agra,  bearing  date  the  twenty  fifth  of  January,  and  the  Firma.
seventh  yeare  of  the  Great  Mogols  raigne,  confirming  all

141

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

that  was  passed  betweene  the  Governour  of  Amadavar
and  me.

June,  161 3.  The  seventeenth  of  June,  161 3.  came  there  a  Merchant
of  the  Hollanders  into  Achen  from  Masulipatan,  and  had
been  eight  moneths  on  his  journey.  He  told  us  of  the
death  of  Captaine  Anthonie  Hippon,  who  died  in  Patane,
and  of  M.  Browne  Master  of  the  Globe,  who  died  in
Masulipatan,  and  that  they  had  been  evill  dealt  with  at
Masulipatan.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  I  received  of  the  King  his
Present  for  the  King  of  England ;  namely,  his  Letter,  a
Cryse  or  Dagger,  an  Hasega,  foure  pieces  of  fine  Callicut
lawne,  and  eight  Camphire  dishes.

See  this  Letter  transcribed  as  a  raritie  for  the  Reader,
out  of  M.  Copelands  Journall,  which  was  Minister  in  that
Voyage,  and  followeth  in  the  next  Chapter.

July.  161 3.  The  third  of  July,  the  Kings  Armada  arrived,  and  had
been  but  twenty  dayes  from  the  coast  of  Jor  to  Achen.

The  Factorie jn  jor  tney  tooke  the  Factorie  of  the  Hollanders,  and

ders * destro^d  ma<^e a Prey °^ a^ their goods, and brought hither

in  Jor.  prisoners  of  the  Hollanders  some  twenty  or  twenty  foure.

The  seventh,  I  received  the  Kings  Letter  for  Priaman,

He  departeth anc[  tne  Chap  for  my  departure. The  twelfth,  I  tooke

from chen. my  jeave  'm  Achen,  and  came  aboord.

The  thirteenth  in  the  morning,  I  set  saile,  and  com-
ming  neere  the  great  Westermost  Hand,  open  of  the
Northermost  gut ;  in  the  same  He  we  found  faire  shoald-
ing  twenty  fathomes,  cleane  ground,  sand,  a  good  birth
from  the  land.  This  depth  with  cleare  ground  continued
almost  to  the  end  of  the  Hand :  so  that  on  the  East  side
of  this  Hand,  there  is  very  good  anchoring,  and  on  the
Hand  great  store  of  wood.  But  beeing  neere  the  great
Hand,  to  the  East-ward  of  this,  wee  could  get  no  ground :
betweene  these  two  great  Hands  is  the  best  and  safest
course,  going  on  or  out  to  the  road  of  Achen.  Likewise,
to  the  Eastward  of  the  Eastermost  Hand,  but  that  is  out
of  the  way.  Note,  that  from  the  twelfth  of  Aprill  to  the
middest  of  June,  we  had  much  raine,  seldome  two  dayes

142

THOMAS BEST  a.d.

1613.

without  raine, with  gusts  and much  wind. From the

fifteenth  of  June,  to  the  twelfth  of  July,  very  much  wind,

very sore stresses, alwayes at South- West, and West

South- West,  and  West.

§  hi.

Trade  at  Tecoo  and  Passaman  :  their  going  to
Bantam,  and  thence  home.

He  third  of  August,  we  were  in  sight  of  Priaman,  Priaman.
nine or tenne leagues off, it bearing from us
North-east  by  East, it shewing  with two great
high  hils,  making  a  faire  swamp  or  saddle  betweene  them
both. We  sawe  also  Tecoo  the  high  land  on  it : it  is Tecoo.
not  more  then  halfe  so  high  as  Priaman  land,  and  riseth
something  flat. Then  we  saw  also  the  high  land  of  Passa-  Passaman.
man, which lieth some seven or eight leagues to the
North-ward  of  Tecoo,  even  mid  way  betweene  Passaman
and  Priaman,  which  Mountaine  is  very  high,  and  riseth
like  Monte  Gibello  in  Sicilie.

The seventh in the afternoone we came to Tecoo, -*  ^  arrive
and  anchored  on  the  East  side  of  the  three  Hands  in  seven  rj }v '  ^  -1
fathomes. The  Souther-most  He  bore  West  South-west.
The  middlemost  West  North- West. The  Northermost
North,  and  halfe  East  a  mile  from  the  Hands.

The  ninth,  I  landed  my  Merchants ;  and  in  the  after-
noone I  landed  with  the  King  of  Achens  Letter.  The
eleventh,  I  called  a  Counsell  for  sending  the  Hosiander
for  Priaman  with  the  Kings  Letter,  which  departed  the
next  day,  and  returned  the  eighteenth,  and  was  sent  to
Bantam.

The  five  and  twentieth,  there  came  in  a  Juncke  of  Ban-
tam, the  Owners  Chineses. They  confirmed  unto  me  the  Death  °f Str
death  of  Sir  Henrie  Middleton,  with  the  losse  of  most  of  ^f^T"
the  men  of  the  Trades  Increase,  and  Maine  Mast  which  perisheth.
brake  with  forcing  her  downe  to  carine  her,  and  that  now
she  was  gone  from  Pulo  Panian  to  Bantam : that  three
hundred  Chineses  dyed  in  working  on  her.

143

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

1613.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  my  Boat  and  men  returned
from  Passaman,  having  beene  well  intreated,  and  brought
with  them  the  Scrivane  of  the  place  to  deale  with  me :
with  whom  I  dealt  and  went  through.

The  fourteenth,  the  Governour  called  me  on  Land,
being  set  with  all  the  chiefe :  I  came  to  him,  and  after
much  talke  agreed  for  the  price  of  Pepper :  Money,  eigh-
teene  Dollers  the  Barre.  Lastage,  eight  pence  the  Barre.
Canikins,  thirtie  the  Barre.  Seilars,  thirtie  five  the  Barre.
They  indented  for  Presents  to  sixteene  great  men.

The  thirtieth,  Henrie  Long  came  from  Passaman,  and
gave  mee  knowledge  of  the  sicknesse  of  Master  Oliver
and  divers  others  dead,  whereupon  I  sent  my  Shalop  to
fetch  both  him  and  all  other  of  my  men  away,  and  to  sur-
cease my  Factorie  there.

The  one  &  twentieth  of  October,  the  Hosiander  re-
turned. The  Merchants  from  Bantam  wrote  to  me  that
they  had  readie  seventeen  thousand  bags  of  Pepper :  all
which,  if  it  pleased  me  to  come  thither,  I  should  have,  or
as  much  thereof,  as  should  seeme  good  unto  me  at  thir-
teene  Dollers  the  Timbane.  Out  of  these  and  many  other
considerations,  I  presently  called  a  Counsell :  wherein  we
concluded  that  the  Dragon  should  goe  for  Bantam ;  and
the  Hosiander  should  stay  in  the  Road  of  Teco,  upon  the
sale  of  Surat  goods :  all  which  being  put  aboord  of  her,
I  departed  from  the  Roade  of  Teco  the  thirtieth  of
October.

In  this  Roade  I  had  stayed  eleven  weekes,  and  bought

one  hundred  and  fifteene  or  one  hundred  and  twentie

tunnes  of  Pepper,  and  buried  of  our  men  five  and  twentie.

Passaman  is^  a  All  which  either  dyed,  or  contracted  their  deaths  at  Passa-

^Jace^'  man>  anc^  not  at  Teco.  And  certainly,  had  wee  not
attempted  trading  at  Passaman,  they  had  beene  either  all,
or  the  greatest  part  of  them  now  living.  Therefore  I
doe  wish  all  our  Nation  never  to  attempt  the  sending  of
our  men  to  Passaman.  For  the  Ayre  is  so  contagious
there,  and  the  water  so  evill,  that  it  is  impossible  for  our
people  to  live  there.

144

THOMAS BEST

The  thirtieth,  in  the  after-noone  I  set  saile  from
Teco :  at  sixe  at  night  wee  were  thwart  of  the  offer-
most  of  the  three  Hands;  all  night  we  steered  South
South-west.

The  eleventh  of  November,  we  arrived  in  the  Roade  of
Bantam  in  foure  fathomes  one  quarter  lesse.  The  twelfth,
I  called  the  Merchants  aboord,  and  concluded  on  the
price  of  Pepper  at  thirteene  Dollers  the  Bahar :  which  is
sixe  hundred  pound  of  our  weight.

The  fourth  of  March  at  eight  at  night  I  set  saile  from
Saldanha,  having  bought  heere  with  a  little  Copper,  which
at  ten  pence  the  pound  might  be  worth  some  three  pound
tenne  shillings,  foure  hundred  ninetie  foure  Sheepe,  foure
Beeves,  nine  Calves.  On  the  day  of  our  comming  to  Sea
the  people  brought  us  more  then  we  could  buy,  or  knew
what  to  doe  withall.  We  brought  to  Sea  eightie  Sheepe,
two  Beeves,  and  one  Calfe.

The  foure  &  twentieth  North  North-west  halfe  West
till  nine,  ten  leagues  &  an  halfe.  Then  West  till  sixe  in
the  morning  twelve  leagues.  Then  we  saw  Sancta  Helena
from  us  West  North-west  some  eight  or  nine  leagues  off.
I  find  the  latitude  of  it  to  be  sixteene  Southerly.  Also
we  observed  at  noone :  and  it  hath  longitude  from  the
Meridian  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  twentie  two  de-
grees. At  three  of  the  clocke  we  anchored  in  the  Roade
right  against  the  Chappell.

While  I  was  at  Saint  Helena,  I  sent  my  Boates  to  the
West-ward  to  find  a  shorter  way  to  the  Limon  Trees,  and
to  bring  downe  Goates  and  Hogges  with  more  ease.  For
from  the  Chappell  to  the  Limon  Trees  is  a  most  wicked
way :  and  even  a  dayes  worke  to  goe  and  come.  In  fine,
in  seeking  they  found  some  three  or  foure  miles  to  the
South-west  a  faire  Valley,  which  leadeth  directly  up  to
the  Limon  Trees.  It  is  the  greatest  and  fairest  Valley
from  the  Chappell ;  and  either  the  next  or  the  next  save
one  from  the  South-west  point  from  the  Chappell :  Heere
in  this  Valley  is  better  water,  and  more  cleere,  then  at  the
Chappell,  the  Roade  all  one  for  ground  and  depth.  Heere
iv  145  k

A.D.

1614.
He  departeth
from  Teco.

They  arrived
in  the  Road  of
Bantam.

They  saw
Santa  Helena.

Another  Road
at  Santa
Helena,  better
then  the
former.

The  best
water.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

at  this  Valley  it  is  much  better  being  then  at  the  Chap-
pell,  both  for  getting  of  all  provisions,  and  for  watering.
It  is  from  the  Chappell  some  three  or  foure  miles,  and  is
from  it  the  fourth  Valley  or  Swampe :  and  from  the  Point
to  the  West-ward  of  it,  the  second.  So  that  you  cannot
misse  of  it.  It  is  heere  much  better  riding  then  at  any
other  place  on  the  Hand.  From  this  place  you  may
goe  up  to  the  Limon  Trees,  and  downe  againe  in  three
houres.  Heere  we  got  some  thirtie  Hogges  and  Pigges,
and  some  twelve  or  fourteene  hundred  Limons.  In
eight  or  ten  dayes  a  man  may  heere  get  two  hundred
Hogges,  and  many  Goates,  lying  on  land  of  purpose
to  kill  them.  The  variation  is  here  seven  degrees  thirtie
minutes.
[I.  iv.  466.]  The  fourth  of  June  16 14.  we  saw  the  Lizard  North
The  Lixard.  from  us?  some  foure  or  five  leagues  off.  And  now  our
longitude  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  was  twentie
seven  degrees  twentie  minutes,  and  two  degrees  carryed
by  the  Current.  So  that  the  difference  of  longitude
betweene  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  and  the  Lizard  is
twentie  nine  degrees  twentie  minutes,  or  very  neere
thereabout.

Note,  that  this  day  three  moneths  at  night  I  did  set
saile  in  the  roade  of  Saldanha : yet  notwithstanding  our
short  passage,  having  beene  from  Santa  Helena  but  two
monethes  and  nine  dayes,  the  one  halfe  or  more  of  our
Company  are  laid  up  of  the  Scurvie :  and  two  dead  of  it.
Yet  had  we  plentie  of  victuals,  as  Beefe,  Bread,  Wine,
Rice,  Oyle,  Vinegar,  Sugar ; and  all  these  without  allow-
Comming  sud-  ance. Note,  that  all  our  men  that  are  sicke,  have  taken
den/y  out  of their sicknesse since wee fell with Flores and Corvo.
He  cold  ^or  since  tnat  time  wee  nave  had  it  very  cold,  especially

seemeth  to  bee  in  two  great  stormes,  the  one  with  the  wind  at  North  and
a  great  cause North  North-east : The  other  with  the  wind  at  South-
of  the  Scurvie.  wesL From  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  to  the  Hands  of
Flores  and  Corvo,  I  had  not  one  man  sicke. The  varia-
tion foure  or  five  leagues  off  the  Start  is  nine  degrees
thirtie  minutes,  little  more  or  lesse.

146

REV. PATRICK COPLAND  a.d.

1611-14.

The  fifteenth,  wee  came  into  the  River  of  Thames,  it  ^™£/s
being  that  day  sixe  moneths  since  wee  came  from  Bantam
in  Java.

Blessed  bee  God.

Chap.  VIII.

Certaine  Observations  written  by  others  employed
in  the  same  Voyage,  Master  Copland  Minister,
Robert  Boner,  Master,  Nicholas  Withington
Merchant.

i  1.

Remembrances  taken  out  of  a  Tractate  written
by  Master  Patrike  Copland  Minister  in  the
former  Voyage.

N  the  Tropickes  are  seldome  or  no  stormes,
but  a  smooth  Sea  with  soft  gales :  flying
fishes  are  frequent  as  bigge  as  a  small
Whiting :  they  flye  twice  the  length  of
a  ship.  Turnados  (gusts  within  two  de-
grees of  the  Line)  cause  all  things,
specially  cloaths,  to  smell.  They  had
ninetie  or  a  hundred  sicke,  the  rest  weake,  before  they
came  to  Soldania.

The  Bay  of  Soldania  and  all  about  the  Cape  is  so  Commenda-
healthfull  and  fruitfull,  as  might  grow  a  Paradise  of  the  **"?[  °<
World ;  it  well  agrees  with  English  bodies,  for  all  but
one  in  twentie  dayes  recovered,  as  at  the  first  day  they  set
forth.  They  had  then  in  June,  Snow  upon  the  hils,  the
weather  warmish.  The  Countrey  is  mixed,  Mountaines,
Plaines,  Medowes,  Streames,  the  Woods  as  if  they  were
artificially  planted  for  order.  There  is  free  stone  to  build
with,  plentie  of  fish  and  fowle,  wilde  Geese,  Partriches
and  Duckes,  Antilopes,  Deere,  Rivers.  They  had  thirtie
nine  Beeves,  one  hundred  and  fifteene  sheepe  for  a
little  Brasse  cut  out  of  two  or  three  old  Kettles. For

H7

A.D.
16H-I4.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Their  persons
and  their
apparell.

the  sheepe  worth  one  penny,  or  one  penny  halfe  penny
the  piece ;  the  Beeves  twelve  pence.  The  people  are
loving,  afraid  at  first  by  reason  of  the  unkindnesse  of
Dutch  (which  came  there  to  make  traine  Oyle,  who  killed
and  stole  their  Cattell)  and  at  our  returne  more  kind :  of
middle  size,  well  limmed,  very  nimble  and  active.  They
dance  in  true  measure  all  naked,  only  weare  a  short  Cloke
of  sheepe  or  Seale  skinnes  to  their  middle,  the  hairie  side
inward,  a  Cap  of  the  same,  and  a  kind  of  Rats  skinne
about  their  privities ;  some  had  a  Sole  on  their  feet  tyed
about ;  their  neckes  were  adorned  with  greasie  Tripes,
which  sometimes  they  would  pull  off  and  eat  raw.  When
we  threw  away  their  beasts  entrailes,  they  would  eate
them  halfe  raw,  the  bloud  lothsomely  slavering :  Bracelets
about  their  armes  they  had  of  Copper  or  Ivorie,  with
many  Ostrich  feathers  and  shels.

The  Womens  habit  is  as  the  Mens.  They  were
shame-fac't  at  first ;  but  at  our  returne  homewards  they
would  lift  up  their  Rat-skinnes  and  shew  their  privities.
Their  Breasts  hang  to  the  middle,  their  haire  curled.
Copper  with  them  is  Gold ;  Iron,  Silver ;  their  Houses
little  Tents  in  the  field,  of  Skins,  moveable  at  pleasure,
their  Language  with  doubling  the  tongue  in  their  throat.
There  is  a  high  hill,  called  the  Table,  over-covering  all
the  adjoyning  Territories  one  hundred  miles.  Some
went  and  discovered  many  Bayes  and  Rivers.  The
Negroes  behaved  themselves  peaceably  at  Sinon,  yet
seeme  of  little  or  no  Religion  ;  they  cut  their  skinnes  like
Baals  Priests,  one  seemed  (by  making  price)  to  be  Com-
mander.
[I.  iv.  467.]  The  Guzerates  tooke  sea-coale  to  carry  for  a  wonder  to
the  Mogol.  The  Portugall  Fleete  was  two  hundred  fortie
sayle  of  Frigats,  Merchants  bound  for  Cambaya,  which
furnish  the  Carracks,  foure  Gallions,  with  twenty  five  or
twenty  sixe  Frigats.  The  Admirall  was  Numo  de
Ancuna.  When  the  Sabandar  perswaded  him  to  keep
between  us  and  shoare ;  he  answered  proudly,  that  he
scorned  to  spend  a  weekes  provision  on  his  men  in  hinder-

148

The  Table.

Porcupins

Quils.

Portugal
pride.

REV. PATRICK COPLAND  a.d.

1611-14.

ing  us,  being  able  to  force  us  to  yeeld  in  an  houre. They  The  first  fight.
had  all  red  colours  displayed. After  three  fights,  they
manned  a  Frigat,  with  sixe  or  seven  score  best  men  to
fire  us,  which  were  all  sunke.

Medhaphrabads  is  now  ruined  by  the  Mogols  warres,  Medhapra-
which  sometime  hath  beene  a  faire  Citie,  and  walled.
Here  was  a  Castle  kept  by  the  Ratspuches,  in  which  at
that  time  a  strong  Rebell  to  the  Mogoll,  was  besieged  by
the  Nabob,  with  fiftie  or  sixtie  thousand  people  in  his
Campe.  The  Nabob  had  a  stately  and  spacious  Tent,
covered  above  with  Cloth  of  Gold,  beneath  spread  with
Turkie  Carpets.  The  Generall  would  not  stirre  till  he
had  taken  the  Castle.  He  sent  a  horse,  and  two  Vests
wrought  with  Silke  and  Gold  to  our  Generall,  and  foure
Vests  for  foure  other.  They  have  store  of  good  Grapes,
yet  none  but  Rasin  wine.

The  three  and  twentieth  and  foure  and  twentieth  of  The  second
December,  in  view  of  the  whole  Army  we  had  a  second  ^  ace  °* ^
fight,  and  forced  them  first  to  cut  their  Cables,  and  then
flee  from  us,  being  better  of  saile  then  we.

I  rode  to  Surat  in  a  Coach  drawne  with  Oxen  (which  is  ¥'  CoPe^an(is
most  ordinary,  though  they  have  store  of  goodly  horses)  ^^/^
here  in  the  way  was  the  goodliest  Spring  and  Harvest
together  that  ever  I  saw ; the  Fields  joyning,  one  greene
as  a  Meadow,  the  other  yellow  as  Gold,  ready  to  bee  cut :
their  graine  Wheat  and  Rice ; they  have  excellent  bread.
All  along  were  goodly  Villages,  full  of  Trees  yeelding
Taddy, like new sweet  wine, much strengthening  and  Toddy  or
fatting. Surat  hath  stone  and  bricke  houses  faire,  square,
flat-roofed, goodly Gardens, with Pomegranats, Pome-
citrons,  Limons,  Melons,  Figs,  continuing  all  the  yeere,
with  curious  springs  of  fresh  water :  the  people  are  grave,
judicious,  neat,  tall,  goodly  cloathed  in  long  white  Callico
or  Silke  robes.

The  Sabandar  assured  us,  that  we  had  killed  of  the
Portugals  above  three  hundred  and  fiftie :  we  heard  after
that  there  were  spoyled  and  killed  above  five  hundred.
The  Generall  sent  Letters  by  land,  and  the  Messenger

149

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611-14.

with  his  Indian  were  poysoned  by  two  Friers  homewards  :
but  a  second  Letter  was  delivered  to  a  Mariner,  which
came  to  their  hands.
Anno  161 3.  The  twelfth  of  Aprill,  they  anchored  in  the  road  of
Achen,  where  the  King  welcomed  our  men.  The  Aran-
caja  came  riding  in  a  Tent  on  an  Elephants  backe,  with
two  or  three  of  the  Kings  boyes  (for  he  is  attended  with
Boyes  abroad,  Women  within)  holding  a  Bason  of  Gold,
to  receive  the  Kings  letter.  Our  Generall  followed  with
fortie  or  fiftie  men.  After  the  Letter  and  Present  de-
livered, the  King  told  us  we  should  see  some  of  his
Pastime,  and  called  for  his  Cockes,  which  after  they  have
fought  about  once  or  twice,  they  take  them  up,  bath  them,
picke  their  feathers,  and  sow  up  their  wounds.  After  an
houre  thus  spent  in  Cock-fighting :  his  Rammes  fought
very  fiercely ;  then  his  tame  Elephants  more  cruelly :
then  his  Buffles  most  stomackfully.  Finally,  our  Anti-
lopes  wherewith  our  Generall  had  presented  him,  whose
fight  best  pleased  him.  Hee  all  this  while  drinkes
Tobacco  in  a  Silver  Pipe ;  given  by  his  Women  which
are  in  a  close  roome  behind  him.  After  this,  Supper  was
served  in  by  young  Boyes  of  foureteene  or  fifteene  yeeres
in  Swasse  (a  mettall  halfe  Copper  halfe  Gold.)  This
Supper  continued  from  seven  till  almost  twelve,  in  which
we  had  foure  hundred  dishes  with  hot  drinkes.  The  next
day  the  King  sent  the  Generall  an  Elephant  to  ride  on,  and
appointed  one  of  his  chiefe  Arancajas  to  attend  him
alwayes.  They  had  continuall  free  accesse  granted,  with-
out the  Kings  Creese  (which  is  used  as  a  Scepter)  and
promise  to  ratifie  the  Articles  agreed  upon  by  his  Pre-
decessors, and  Sir  James  Lancaster.

The  second  of  May,  all  Strangers  were  invited  to  a
banquet  sixe  miles  off,  for  which  purpose  two  Elephants
were  sent  for  our  Generall.  Here  were  all  the  dishes
brought  by  water,  the  boyes  holding  the  dish  with  one
hand,  and  swimming  with  the  other :  so  did  they  carrie
the  strong  drinke  also,  whereof  when  they  had  tasted
(which they  must  of  all)  they  threw  the  rest  into the

150

REV. PATRICK COPLAND  ad.

1611-14.

River.  It  continued  from  one  till  five.  In  it  were  five
hundred  dishes  well  dressed.  Our  General  (weary  with
sitting  by  the  King  thus  long  in  the  water)  was  dismissed
an  houre  before  the  rest.  The  Captaine  of  the  Dutch
house,  taking  there  his  bane,  either  with  hot  drinke,  or
cold  sitting  so  long  in  the  water,  soone  after  died.

The  second  of  June,  they  were  entertained  with  a  fight
of  foure  Elephants,  with  a  wild  Tygre  tied  at  a  stake,
which  yet  fastening  on  their  Trunks  and  legges,  made
them  to  roare  and  bleed  extreamely.  This  day  we  were
told,  that  one  eye  of  a  Noble  man  was  plucked  out,  for
looking  on  one  of  the  Kings  women  washing  in  a  River.
Another  Gentleman  wearing  a  Shash,  had  his  head  round
cut  so  farre  as  that  was  too  large.  Some  he  is  said  to
boyle  in  scalding  oyle,  some  are  sawne  apeices,  others
their  legges  cut  off,  or  spitted  alive,  or  empaled  on  stakes.

The  twentie  fifth,  was  before  the  King  a  fight  of  wild
Elephants,  which  would  quickly  kill  each  other,  but  that  Elephants.
some  tame  are  made  fast  to  them,  which  draw  them  backe,
sometime  eighty  or  an  hundred  men  helping.  They  set
one  wild  betweene  two  tame  to  tame  them.  He  sent  the
King  a  Letter,  for  painting  and  writing  most  stately,  a
Creese,  &c.  for  a  Present.

The  Letter  is  thus  Englished.  P-  iv-  468.]

PEducka  Sirie  Sultan  King  of  Kings,  renowmed  for
his  Warres,  and  sole  King  of  Sumatra,  and  a  King
more  famous  then  his  Predecessors,  feared  in  his  King-
dome,  and  honoured  of  all  bordering  Nations :  in  Whom
there  is  the  true  Image  of  a  King,  in  whome  raignes  the
true  methode  of  Government,  formed  as  it  were  of  the
most  pure  Mettall,  and  adorned  with  the  most  finest
colours ;  Whose  seat  is  high,  and  most  compleat,  like  to
a  Christall  River,  pure  and  cleare  as  the  Christall  Glasse  :
From  whom  floweth  the  pure  streame  of  Bountie  and  Jus-
tice :  whose  Presence  is  as  the  finest  Gold,  King  of  Pria-
man,  and  of  the  Mountaine  of  Gold,  viz.  Solida,  and
Lord  of  nine  sorts  of  Stones,  King  of  two  Sombrieroes  of

151

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611-14.

beaten  Gold,  having  for  his  Seats  mats  of  Gold,  his  fiif-1
niture  for  his  Horses  and  Armour  for  himselfe,  being
likewise  of  pure  Gold.  His  Elephant  with  teeth  of
Gold,  and  all  Provisions  thereunto  belonging  :  his  Lances
halfe  Gold,  halfe  Silver,  his  small  shot  of  the  same ;  a
Saddle  also  for  an  other  Elephant  of  the  same  Mettall:
a  Tent  of  Silver,  and  all  his  Seales  halfe  Gold  halfe  Silver.
His  Vessels  for  bathing  of  pure  Gold,  his  Sepulchre  of
Gold  (whereas  his  Predecessours  had  all  these  halfe  Gold
halfe  Silver)  his  services  compleat  of  Gold  and  Silver.  A
King  under  whom  there  are  many  Kings,  having  taken
the  King  of  Arrow :  All  the  Countrey  of  Priaman,  Tecoo,
Barouse,  beeing  subdued  by  him,  is  now  under  his  Com-
mand :  Seventie  Elephants,  and  much  Provisions  carried
by  sea,  to  make  his  Warres  at  Arrow,  where  God  gave
me  more  Victory,  then  any  of  my  Predecessors.

This  Great  King  sendeth  this  Letter  of  Salutation  to
James,  King  of  Great  Britaine,  viz.  England,  Scotland,
France,  and  Ireland,  To  signifie  the  great  content  he  hath
received  by  his  Highnesse  Letter,  delivered  by  the  hands
of  Arancaja  Pulo,  Thomas  Best  his  Majesties  Embassa-
dour,  at  the  receipt  whereof,  his  eyes  were  surprised  with
a  Celestiall  brightnesse,  and  his  spirits  ravished  with  a
Divine  joy :  the  opening  thereof  rendred  a  savour  more
fragrant  then  the  most  odoriferous  Flowers,  or  sweetest
perfumes  in  the  World.  For  which  cause,  I  the  great
King  of  Sumatra,  doe  professe  my  Selfe  to  bee  of  one
heart,  of  one  mind,  and  of  one  flesh  with  the  most  Potent
Prince  James  K.  of  England,  and  do  earnestly  desire  that
the  League  begun,  may  be  continued  to  all  Posterities.
And  herein  I  take  my  greatest  Felicitie,  there  being  no-
thing in  the  World  more  pleasant  or  joyfull  to  me.  And
for  a  Testimony  of  my  desire,  that  the  League  and  Amitie
begun  may  be  continued  betwixt  Us,  I  have  returned  this
Letter  unto  your  Majestie,  making  also  my  Prayers  unto
the  Great  God  for  the  continuance  of  the  same.  And  it
shall  be  my  greatest  Honour,  to  receive  Memoriall  from
so  Great  a  Potentate,  and  so  remote  a  Nation. And  for

IS2

REV. PATRICK COPLAND  ad.

1611-14.

a  pledge  of  my  Love,  and  Honour,  and  continuance  of
Our  League,  I  send  your  Majestie  a  Creese  wrought  with
Gold,  the  Hilt  thereof  being  beaten  Gold,  with  a  Ring  of
Stones,  an  Assagaya  of  Swasse,  halfe  Copper  halfe  Gold,
eight  Purslan  Dishes  small  and  great,  of  Camfire  one
piece  of  sowring  stuffe,  three  pieces  of  Calico  Lawne :
Which  your  Majestie  accepting  as  from  a  Brother,  I  shall
rest  satisfied,  and  much  honoured.  And  so  with  my
Prayers  to  the  Great  God,  Creator  of  Heaven  and  Earth
for  your  Majesties  long  life,  with  Victory  over  your
enemies,  and  Prosperitie  in  your  Land.

Given  at  our  Pallace  of  Achen, the 1022.  yeere  of
Mahomet,  by  the  accompt  of  the  Moores.

This  King  of  Achen  is  a  proper  Gallant  man  of  Warre,  Description  of
of  thirty  two  yeares,  of  middle  size,  full  of  spirit,  strong  *J  ms  an
by  sea  and  land,  his  Countrey  populous ;  his  Elephants
many,  whereof  wee  saw  one  hundred  sixtie,  or  one  hun-
dred eightie  at  a  time,  his  Gallies  and  Frigats  carry  in
them  very  good  Brasse  Ordnance,  Demicanon,  Culverin,
Sakar,  Minion,  &c.  his  building  stately  and  spacious,
though  not  strong ;  his  Court  at  Achen  pleasant,  having
a  goodly  branch  of  the  Maine  River  about  and  through
his  Pallace,  which  branch  he  cut  and  brought  sixe  or  eight
miles  off,  in  twenty  dayes,  while  we  continued  at  Achen.
Sumatra  is  very  Mountainous  and  Woodie  :  the  people
courteous :  wept  at  our  departure,  leaving  little  without
his  chop.  Strangers  may  neither  come  at  him,  nor  depart
from  him.  He  desired  the  Generall  to  commend  him  to
the  King  of  England,  and  to  entreat  him  to  send  him  two
white  women.  For  (said  hee)  if  I  beget  one  of  them
with  child,  and  it  proove  a  Sonne,  I  will  make  him  King
of  Priaman,  Passaman,  and  of  the  Coast  from  whence  you
fetch  your  Pepper :  so  that  yee  shall  not  need  to  come
any  more  to  mee,  but  to  your  owne  English  King  for
these  Commodities.  July  the  twelfth  we  tooke  leave  of
Achen.

The  ninth  of  August  they  went  on  shoare  at  Tecoo :

i53

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611-14.

here  they  stayed  eleven  weekes,  bought  one  hundred
twenty  Tunne  of  Pepper,  buried  twenty  five  men,  which

The  aire  and g0t their death at Passaman, for Tecoo is healthfull.

water  at Pepper growes most at Passaman, and the Countrey

Passaman  1

naught.  about.

I  have  thought  good  also  here  to  adde  a  word  or  two
taken  out  of  the  Journall  of  Nathaniel  Salmon,
Master  of  the  Salomon.

The  Sabandar  counselled  the  Admirall  Nunha  del
Cunha,  to  cause  his  Frigats  to  ride  betwixt  the  shoare  and
us,  so  to  keepe  us  from  watering,  which  he  refused :  yea,
M.  Canning  (which  had  been  taken  by  them)  was  delivered
at  our  house  in  scorne,  they  professing  this  their  only
Jan.  3.  feare  and  care,  least  we  should  run  away. The  three  that

were  driven  a  ground  had  there  perished,  but  for  their
Frigats.  Out  of  the  fire-Frigat  were  taken  up  eightie
foure  men  drowned.  The  Dragon  in  these  fights  hath
spent  sixe  hundred  thirtie  nine  great  shot,  and  three  hun-
dred eightie  seven.

[I.  iv.  479.]

Departedfrom
Gravesend.

The  generall
wind  blowed
betwixt  East
South-east,  \£
South-east.

Ternadoes.

§•  n.

Notes  taken out of  M. Robert Boners  Journal],
who  was  then  Master  in  the  Dragon.

He  first  of  February,  having  received  in  all  pro-
visions for  so  long  a  Voyage,  we  set  saile  from
Gravesend,  and  the  same  day  at  ten  of  the  clocke

we  anchored  in  the  Hope.

Aprill  the  thirteenth,  wee  had  the  generall  wind.  Note
that  you  shall  seldome  meete  with  the  generall  wind,  till
you  come  in  two  of  three  degrees  to  the  South-ward  of
the  Line,  and  then,  when  you  come  to  meete  with  the
Ternadoes,  (as  you  shall  be  sure  to  meete  them  in  two
or  three,  and  sometimes  in  foure  degrees  to  the  North-
ward of  the  Line :  you  must  be  very  diligent  to  ply  to
the  South-ward)  for  therein  lyeth  the  mayne  of  your  good
or  bad  passage,  and  likewise  for  the  health  of  your  men,

i54

ROBERT BONER  ad.

1611-14.

or  they  are  very  unhealthfull,  and  for  passing  the  Line,
order  it  so  by  your  course  from  Maio,  that  you  may  passe
the  Line  betwixt  seven  and  ten  degrees  of  longitude  from
the  Lizard. But  covet  not  to  come  within  sixe  degrees,
for  feare  of  the  calmes  upon  the  Coast  of  Guinea,  and  not  Th"JnJ^~
without  ten  degrees  of  longitude  from  the  Lizard,  if  it  S^ch  hindered
be  possible,  for  feare  of  meeting  with  the  West  North-  t/ie  Dragon
west  streame,  that  sets  alongst  the  Coast  of  Brasil,  and  so  and  Hector  in
into  the  West-Indies. And  so  passing  the  Line  in  seven,  *k  third
eight,  or  nine  degrees  to  the  West-ward  of  the  Meridian  J^yfead In"
of  the  Lizard,  you  shall  not  feare  the  flats  of  Brasil. For  t^e  Relations
the  generall  wind  will  blow  at  the  East  South-east,  and  thereof.
at  South-east ; so  that  you  shall  make  a  South  South-
west way  commonly,  and  so  keepe  the  ship  good  full,  that
she  may  goe  through,  for  there  is  losse  of  time,  in  hawk-
ing of  the  ship  crosse  by  the  wind,  therefore  giving  her  a
fathome  of  the  sheete.

Note,  he  that  comes  out  of  the  Sea,  bound  in  for
the  Bay  of  Soldania,  let  him  keep  himselfe  betweene
thirtie  three  degrees  fiftie  minutes,  and  thirtie  foure  de-
grees twentie  minutes  of  latitude,  so  shall  you  be  sure
not  to  come  much  wide  of  the  Bay.  If  seeing  the  land
you  find  it  high,  then  you  are  to  the  South-west-ward  of
the  Bay ;  if  low  sand  nils,  then  know  that  you  are  to  the
North-ward  of  the  Bay  of  Soldania.  But  falling  with  the  Soldania.
high  land  to  the  South-ward  of  the  Bay,  which  is  betwixt
the  Cape  and  the  Bay,  the  land  lyeth  North  North-west,
and  South  South-east  from  the  Cape  seven  leagues,  and
then  it  trents  away  North-east  and  South-west,  towards
the  point  of  the  Sugar-loafe,  some  foure  leagues :  and
from  this  point  of  the  Sugar-loafe  lyeth  Penguin  Hand,
but  keepe  faire  by  the  point :  for  two  miles  from  Penguin
Hand  lyes  a  shoales :  it  is  from  the  point  to  the  Hand
some  seven  or  eight  miles  North  and  South,  and  so  bor-
rowing on  the  said  point,  at  eight  or  nine  fathome,  your
course  South-east,  and  East  South-east,  untill  you  bring
the  Table  South  South-west,  and  the  Sugar-loafe  hill
South-west  and  by  West,  and  so  you  may  anchor  in  sixe

'55

A.D.
161I-I4.

Current  neere
Cape  Das
Aguilhas.

Note.

FoureGallions
fef  30.
Frigats.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  an  halfe  or  sixe  fathome,  as  you  will,  and  then  will
the  point  of  the  land  by  the  Sugar-loafe  beare  from  you
West  North-west,  and  Penguin  Hand  North  North-west
some  three  leagues  off,  and  the  point  some  two  miles  off.
The  latitude  of  the  Bay  of  Soldania,  I  meane  of  the  point
going  in,  is  thirtie  foure  degrees  five  minutes,  the  varia-
tion of  the  Needle  is  fortie  minutes  Easterly :  when  you
come  in  with  the  land  heereabouts  (although  it  be  thicke)
feare  not :  for  the  land  is  bold  within  a  Cables  length.

I  am  of  opinion  that  the  Current  neere  Cape  Das
Aguilhas  sets  Southerly  not  past  fiftie  or  sixtie  leagues  off
the  land,  and  therefore  being  bound  to  the  East-ward
haule  off  the  land  sixtie  leagues,  after  you  are  to  the
East-ward  of  Cape  Das  Aguilhas,  so  shall  you  find  no
Current.  The  land  lyes  from  the  Cape  Das  Aguilhas,
ninetie  or  one  hundred  leagues  East  Northerly,  and  not
as  in  the  Cards  East  North-east.

Ino  de  Nova,  is  a  low  ragged  Hand,  about  foure  miles
in  length,  lying  South  South-east,  and  North  North-west.
This  Hand  hath  latitude  seventeene  degrees  thirtie
minutes,  and  longitude  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,
nineteene  degrees  fortie  minutes,  &c.  Wee  had  no
ground  at  one  hundred  fathome :  we  can  perceive  no
danger  from  it,  only  at  the  South  South-east  end  of  it  lies
a  small  breach  about  a  mile  off :  therefore  feare  not  to
haule  in  sight  of  it,  being  bound  this  waies,  for  if  you
shall  haule  over  for  the  Maine,  you  shall  be  mightily
troubled  with  a  strong  Current  setting  to  the  South-ward,
and  there  are  likewise  many  dangerous  bankes,  whereon
many  Portugals  have  lost  their  ships,  wherefore  be  sure
you  haule  not  much  to  the  West-ward  of  this  He  Ino  de
Nova,  for  you  may  very  boldly  haule  in  sight  of  it  with-
out danger,  and  so  shall  you  not  meete  with  the  Current.

The  eight  &  twentieth  day  of  November,  we  received  a
Letter  from  M.  Canning,  &  our  Purser  concerning  foure
Gallions  of  War,  with  thirty  saile  of  Frigats,  which  were
comming  to  fight  with  us.  And  this  day  we  saw  them
some  two  leagues  to  the  South-ward  of  the  Barre  of  Surat.

156

ROBERT BONER  a.d.

1611-14.

This  day  the  Sabandar  of  Surat  came  aboord  to  view  us  Sabander  a

as  wee  judge  being  a  friend  to  the  Portugals,  but  the  ^e-

more  he  looked  the  worse  he  liked,  we  having  all  things

readie,  &c.

The  nine  and  twentieth  day,  at  two  in  the  after-noone  This  day  wee
wee  set  saile,  and  stood  with  the  foure  Gallions  and  Frigats  h*&*  our
which  were  come  within  some  two  leagues  of  us.  The
first  which  we  met  withall  was  the  Vice-Admirall :  wee
gave  her  such  a  welcome,  as  that  she  was  glad  to  haste
unto  the  rest  with  all  speed :  night  being  neere  and  our
long  Boat  sunke,  at  our  sterne  with  an  unluckey  shot,  we
anchored.

The  thirtieth  day,  early  in  the  moorning  wee  set  saile,  [I-  *v-  48o-l
and  stood  with  them,  and  after  some  houres  fight  put
three  of  the  Gallions  ashoare  on  the  offermost  sand,  and . ^ ,
then  wee  stood  into  deeper  water,  and  anchored : their p
Frigats were straight aboord the ships aground, and
shoared  them  up  with  their  yards,  or  els  I  thinke  they  had
never  come  off. Assoone  as  the  Floud  came  wee  weighed,
but  they  were  afloate  ere  wee  could  get  to  them : wee
fought  with  them  till  it  was  darke,  and  had  one  man  kild,
and  another  hurt.

The  first  day  of  December,  161 2.  we  roade  within  a
league  one  of  the  other,  alwayes  we  had  thought  they
would  have  come  to  us,  we  having  gone  to  them  three
severall  times,  but  they  are  not  so  hastie.  I  thinke  they
have  more  minde  to  goe  for  Goa  againe.

The  nineteenth  day,  there  came  a  second  Messenger
from  a  great  Lord  of  the  great  Mogols  from  a  place  called
the  Castellet,  which  place  this  great  man  lyes  in  Campe
against,  sending  our  Generall  word  that  if  he  will  but
come  thwart  that  place  with  his  ships  to  grace  him,  hee
will  be  a  sworne  friend  unto  the  English  for  ever.  The
Generall  hearing  that  hee  was  a  great  man  in  favour  with
the  King,  resolved  to  goe  spend  a  day  or  two  with  him,
to  see  what  his  desire  was.

The  twentieth  day,  we  anchored  thwart  of  the  Campe
beeing close by the Sea-side, for the Castle besieged

157

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

1611-14.

butted  upon  the  Sea,  they  in  the  Castle  being  a  companie
of  Rebels  and  Rovers  on  the  Sea.

The  one  and  twentieth  day,  upon  the  receipt  of  good
caution  for  his  person,  our  Generall  landed,  and  at  three
returned  to  ship.

The  two  and  twentieth  day,  we  saw  the  foure  Gallions
and  Frigats  againe  in  sight,  having  beene  at  Diu  for
more  fresh  Souldiers,  to  have  a  bout  more  with  us.  At
night  they  anchored  within  a  mile  of  us.

The  three  and  twentieth  day  by  day  light,  we  were

under-saile,  and  stood  with  the  Admirall,  and  so  fought

till  two  of  the  clocke,  at  which  time  they  cut  their  Cable,

and  began  to  runne,  the  Admirall  having  received  a  shot

under  water : but  the  helpe  of  the  Frigats  brought  her

upon  the  Carine  presently,  and  stopped  it,  and  so  for  this

time  fled,  all  the  Campe  standing  by  the  Sea-side  looking

on  us,  within  a  league  or  two  miles  of  us. For  a  great

Commander  did  there  just  by  us  besiege  a  Castle  holden

by  Rebels  and  Pirats,  and  were  willing  Spectators  of  this

Sea-fight.

Portugalsfain The foure and twentieth day, we stood  with them

to  fly  e.  againe,  and  fought  with  them  till  two  or  three  of  the

clocke  in  the  after-noone. They  fled,  and  being  light

ships  and  cleane,  went  from  us : one  man  kild,  and  no

more  hurt,  praysed  be  God  for  all  his  mercies. Note,

The  number  of  that  wee  nave  spent  sixe  hundred  eightie  great  shot,  and

s£en Jlt three  thousand  small  shot  out  of  the  Dragon,  and  some

our  Jive  jignts .  /•  t» 1  • ja  1 < 11  1 i 1  • • •

sixtie  Barrels  or  Powder :  their  Admirall  had  thirtie  eight
Peeces,  and  the  rest  thirtie.  by  ship,  very  good  Ordnance.
This  night  we  steered  for  Surat  South-east,  to  haule  with-
out the  sands.  South  from  Mea  some  sixe  leagues  off
lyes  the  first  spit,  on  which  sand  the  Ascension  was  lost.

The  fourth  day  of  February  1612.  wee  set  saile  and
stood  to  the  South-ward,  wind  at  North  North-west.

The  fifth  day,  being  some  eight  leagues  short  of  Cape
Comorin,  wee  met  with  the  wind  at  East  very  much  wind,
so  that  we  plaine  see  there  is  no  going  to  the  East-wards,
the  Easterly  Monson not  being  done. Heere  we  an-

ROBERT BONER  ad.

1611-14.

chored  at  a  point  of  the  land,  from  which  point  the  land
trents  away  East  South-east  with  the  Cape  of  Comorin,
and  distant  eight  leagues  :  but  beware  how  you  come
neere  this  point,  for  thwart  of  it  foure  miles  off  lyes  two
sunken  Rockes  close  by  the  edge  of  the  water,  and  lyes  in  Sunken  rocks.
the  streame  of  twentie  or  twentie  two  fathomes :  where-
fore keepe  off  in  twentie  eight  or  thirtie  fathome,  and
feare  them  not.  But  bee  sure  that  you  keepe  within
thirtie  five  or  fortie  fathome,  for  the  Current  sets  off
South  with  the  Maldines,  and  being  calme  some  Portugall
ships  have  beene  driven  to  the  Maldines,  and  beene  in
great  danger.  You  shall  know  this  point  from  the  which
these  two  sunken  Rockes  lye,  by  this.  Thwart  of  the
point  lye  two  bigge  Rockes  a  good  heighth  above  the
water :  a  league  right  off  from  the  Eastermost  of  the  dry
Rockes  lye  the  two  sunken  Rockes,  where  we  roade,  the
two  dry  rockes  did  beare  from  us  South-east  and  by  East
foure  miles  of  the  Northermost :  here  the  people  will
come  aboord  of  your  ship  every  day  with  provisions  as
Hens,  and  Hogges  with  linnesse  in  their  little  Canoes.

The  five  and  twentieth  day  at  foure  a  clocke,  the  Cape
of Comorin did beare North North-west some foure
leagues  off. Note, that  the  Cape  it  selfe  is  very  low  Note,  for  the
land  with  two  craeeie  Rockes  lying  a  little  from  it,  but CaPeofCmo;

00  J O  J  V171 TOT  lOttPt-

up  in  die  Countrey,  high  ragged  land;  the  Cape  of  tude,  latitude,
Comorin  hath  latitude  seven  degrees  fiftie  minutes,  and  and  variation.
longitude  from  the  Meridian  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,
fiftie  seven  degrees  twentie  minutes  East.  The  variation
is  fourteene  degrees  thirtie  minutes  Westerly :  we  have
very  faire  shoalding  off  from  it  twentie  foure  fathomes,
foure  leagues  of  sand,  from  the  Cape  the  land  trents  away
East  North-east.

I  doe  thinke  that  the  Gulfe  of  Cambaya  is  the  worst
place  in  all  the  Indies  for  Wormes,  and  therefore  the  ships  Many  wormes
which  goe  for Surat,  must  have  good provision. The  at  Sum.
Barre of Surat hath latitude twentie one degrees ten
minutes,  and  longitude  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  fiftie
three  degrees  thirtie  minutes  Easterly. Variation  sixteene

i59

A.D.
16H-I4.

[I.  iv.  481.]
The  latitude,
longitude  and
variation  of
Achen.

Notes  for  the
Road  of  Tecu,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

degrees  fiftie  minutes  Westerly.  Latitude  of  Swally  is
twentie  one  degrees  twentie  minutes.  Variation  seven-
teene  degrees  no  minutes.

The  Road  of  Achen  hath  latitude  five  degrees  fortie
minutes  South,  and  longitude  from  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope  of  seventie  three  deg.  thirtie  foure  min.  East
and  from  the  Cape  of  Comorin  about  sixeteene  degrees
twentie  minutes  East.  The  variation  is  sixe  degrees
thirtie  minutes  Westerly.  As  you  ride  in  the  Road  one
high  great  Hand  will  beare  North  of  you,  distant  some
sixe  leagues,  and  the  two  other  bigge  Hands  will  beare
from  the  West  South-west  to  the  North-west  and  by
West,  anchor  hold  good :  in  the  Westerly  Monson,  you
shall  have  many  times  very  much  wind,  with  gusts  of
raine,  but  you  shall  ride  very  well :  there  goes  a  small
Current  to  the  East-ward,  and  West-ward  in  manner  of
a  tyde ;  but  not  so  certaine,  and  heights  and  fals  some
five  or  sixe  foot  water.

The  King  loveth  our  Generall  exceeding  well,  in  so
much  that  hee  maketh  no  sport,  but  hee  commands  some
one  of  his  Nobles  to  goe  for  the  Arrankaja  Putee,  for  so
hath  hee  named  him :  so  that  all  the  Citie  through  is  he
called  by  that  name,  and  all  our  men  by  the  common
people  very  kindly  entertayned,  more  then  ever  any
strangers  heretofore  have  beene.

In  steering  North  North-west  from  the  little  Hand,
which  lyes  South-west  and  by  West  seven  leagues  from
Priaman  Hand,  wee  saw  a  shoald  bearing  from  the  said
little  Hand  South-east  and  by  South  five  miles  off.  We
sent  our  Boat  to  it,  who  found  it  but  three  fathome
Rockes.  From  this  shoald  the  Homockes  of  Tecu  beare
North  and  by  West :  wherefore  beeing  bound  for  Tecu,
keepe  off,  so  that  the  Homockes  may  beare  North,  or
North  and  by  East,  and  feare  not.  The  Homockes  are
two  round  hils  standing  upon  the  low-land  close  by  the
Sea-side.  At  two  a  clocke  we  saw  the  three  little  round
Hands  of  Tecu,  which  Hands  you  must  ride  under,  they
beare  of  us,  North  and  by  East  some  foure  leagues  off,

1 60

ROBERT BONER

wee  steere  North,  keeping  the  Hands  open  on  our  star-
boord  bow.

Note,  that  by  good  looking  out  you  shall  perceive  any
danger  by  this :  it  will  shew  it  selfe  in  white  spots.  For
otherwise  the  Sea  is  of  his  perfect  colour,  as  in  the  maine
Ocean.  At  night  wee  anchored  within  two  leagues  of
the  two  outermost  Hands  of  Tecu  in  thirtie  fathomes,  the
Hands  bearing  North  and  by  East,  and  the  Homocks
North  Easterly.

Note,  the  Homockes  doe  stand  some  three  leagues  to  the
Northward  of  the  Hands  of  Tecu,  there  being  in  all  three
of  them,  but  the  Northermost  of  the  three  Homockes
doth  not  shew  it  selfe  so  perfectly,  as  the  other  doe.

The  seventh  of  August  in  the  morning,  weighed  and
plyed  in,  the  wind  at  the  North  North-east  of  the  land
we  see  a  shoale,  bearing  from  the  two  offermost  Hands  of
Tecu  South-west  &  by  South  foure  or  five  miles  off,  right
in  the  faire  way.  We  sent  our  Boat  to  it  and  found  it
but  two  fathome  &  a  halfe,  being  a  Rocke  of  two  Cables
length  long.  This  is  the  unluckey  Rocke  whereon  the
Princely  Trade  received  her  destruction,  as  we  under-
stand by  those  people.  About  eleven  of  the  clocke  we
anchored  on  the  Easter-side  of  the  uttermost  Hand  in  nine
fathome,  soft,  Ozie,  praysed  be  God.  Riding  under  this
outward  Hand  of  the  three  we  saw  a  breach,  bearing  South
halfe  Easterly,  and  another  South  and  by  East  some  three
or  foure  leagues  off,  which  breach  as  you  come  for  this
place,  you  must  leave  betwixt  you  and  the  shoare  :  where-
fore keepe  this  outer  Hand  North  and  by  East,  or  North
North-east,  and  feare  nothing.  But  beware  when  you
come  within  two  leagues  of  this  Hand.  For  South-west
and  by  South  two  leagues  or  five  miles  off  lyes  the  Rocke
whereon  the  unhappie  Trade  grounded.  Wherefore
keepe  this  Hand  North  and  by  East,  and  upon  life  feare
not,  your  depth  as  you  come  neere  the  Hand  will  bee
from  thirtie  to  ten,  nine  and  eight  fathomes  soft,  Ozie,
you  shall  have  nine  fathomes  within  your  ships  length  of
either  side  of  the  Hand.

A.D.

1611-14.

Variation  of
Tecuis  ^..degr.
40.  minutes
Northeasterly.

A  ledge  of
Rockes.
The  Rocke
whereon  the
Trades-
Increase  was
bruised.

IV

161

A.D.
16H-I4.

[I.  iv.  482.]

* Captain
Saris  told  me
that  some  have
two  testicles,
but  those  the
baser,  and  {as
the  one  stoned
gallants
affirmed  to
him)  were
slaves,  the
others  marked
with  this  note
of  Gentrie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  ninth  day,  some  people  came  aboord :  we  find
them  very  base  and  subtle.

The  eleventh  day,  the  Hosiander  departed  for  Pria-
man,  to  shew  them  likewise  that  wee  have  brought  the
Kings  Letter  of  Achen,  without  the  which  you  cannot
trade.  Note,  that  as  wee  ride  here  upon  the  Poope,  we
see  the  foure  Hands  of  Priaman  bearing  South-east  and
by  South  some  seven  leagues  off.

This  day  at  nine  of  the  clocke  wee  sailed  into  the  inner
Roade,  which  is  betwixt  the  Mayne  and  the  innermost
Hand,  halfe  a  mile  from  the  Mayne,  and  a  Cables  length
from  the  Hand,  your  depth  foure  fathome  soft,  Ozie,  our
depth  in  was  twentie  two  foot  beeing  halfe  tyde,  it  highes
and  fals  some  five  or  sixe  foot  water,  the  tyde,  as  I  per-
ceive, runnes  twelve  houres  North  North-west,  and  twelve
houres  contrarie.  To  the  North-ward  of  all  the  Hands
in  comming  in  you  shall  have  foure  fathomes  and  an  halfe  :
but  keepe  neere  the  inner  Hand,  for  from  the  Mayne  on
that  side  lyes  a  shoald.  The  Hands  are  all  of  one  big-
nesse,  being  halfe  a  mile  a  piece  in  circuit,  they  will  beare
from  the  South-west  and  by  South  to  the  North-west :
your  best  water  is  on  the  Hand :  digge  a  Well,  and  pre-
sently water  comes.  Thus  much  out  of  Master  Boner ;
the  rest  you  have  before  in  Captaine  Best.

§.  HI-

Extracts  of  a  Tractate,  written  by  Nicholas
Withington,  which  was  left  in  the  Mogols
Countrey  by  Captaine  Best,  a  Factor,  his
Adventures  and  Travels  therein.

[He  eleventh  of  Aprill,  161 2.  we  crossed  the  Equi-
noctiall :  foule  weather  eight  daies  together,  wind
and  raine.  Soldania  sheep  are  hairy :  the  Beeves
large,  and  most  leane ;  the  people  Negros,  woolly  pates,
flat  nosed,  very  straight  of  body :  the  men  have  but
*  one  stone  a  peece ;  the  other  is  cut  out  when  they  are
yong :  apparelled  with  a  skin  about  their  shoulders,  which

r62

NICHOLAS WITHINGTON  a.d.

1612.

reacheth  downe  to  the  waste,  the  skin  of  a  Ratte  before
their  members,  another  on  their  bumme,  else  naked :
some  cappes  of  leather  close  to  their  pates,  and  shoo-soles
to  their  feet,  much  broader  and  longer  then  their  feet :
their  armes  very  small :  Lances  with  heads  artificially-
made  :  Bowes  and  Arrowes  of  little  or  no  force :  they
are  very  expert  in  throwing  their  Darts,  wherewith  they
kill  many  fish  in  the  Sea :  they  weare  about  their  neckes
guts  of  sheepe  and  oxen,  smelling,  which  being  hungry
they  eate ;  and  would  scramble  for  our  garbage  like
dogges,  and  eate  it  raw  and  foule.

The  six  and  twentieth  of  July,  they  had  sight  of  Saint
Laurence.  The  thirteenth  of  August,  crossed  the  Equi-
noctiall,  temperate  weather :  on  the  thirtieth,  they  saw
Snakes  in  the  Sea  in  eighteene  degrees  and  a  halfe,  one
and  thirtie  min.  white  water  at  nineteene  fathoms.  The
first  of  September,  they  saw  land.  The  second,  anchor
against  Daman  Towne,  inhabited  and  conquered  by
Portugalls.  The  Fluxe  infested  them  all  that  remained
on  land  at  Surat.  Master  Aldworth  was  sicke  forty
dayes.  Strangers  heere  present  any  Inhabitants  of  fashion
whom  he  visits ;  and  they  returne  presents.  Notwith-
standing Sir  Henry  Middleton  taking  their  ships  in  the
Red-sea,  yet  they  promised  us  good  dealing,  considering
else  they  must  burne  their  ships  (said  Mill  JefFed,  one  of
the  chiefe  Merchants  of  Surat)  and  give  over  their  trade
by  Sea.  Impossible  it  was  to  have  any  trade  at  Surat,  by
reason  of  Portugall  Frigats  in  the  Rivers  mouth.  There-
fore the  Generall  repaired  with  his  ships  to  Swally,  whence
he  might  by  land  go  and  come  without  danger.

The  third  of  October,  Sheke  Shuffe,  Governour  of
Amadavar,  chiefe  Citie  of  Guzerat,  came  to  Surat,  and
so  to  Swally,  and  agreed  upon  Articles.  Master  Canning  Pride  &eth
had  been  taken  by  the  Portugals,  but  the  Vice-Roy  com-  beJore  the M>
manded  to  set  him  ashoare  at  Surat,  saying,  Let  him  goe
helpe  his  Country-men  to  fight,  and  then  we  will  take
their  ship,  and  the  rest  of  them  altogether.  But  the
Purser  made  an escape, and  so  came to  us  on  land :

163

A.D.

1612.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Fleet  of
Portugals.
The  first  fight,

The  second.

The  third.

Master  Canning  was  set  on  shoare  at  Surat,  according  to
promise,  and  so  went  aboord.  And  the  same  day,  being
the  twentie  ninth  of  October,  the  foure  Portugall  Gal-
lions,  with  a  whole  Fleet  of  Frigats,  came  in  sight.  The
Generall,  after  words  of  encouragement,  met  them,  and
never  shot  one  shot,  till  hee  came  betweene  their
Admirall  and  Vice-Admirall,  gave  each  a  broad  side,
and  a  volly  of  small  shot,  which  made  them  come
no  more  neare  for  that  day.  The  other  two  ships
were  not  as  yet  come  up ;  and  the  Hosiander  could
not  get  cleare  of  her  anchors,  and  shot  not  one  shot
that  day.  In  the  evening  all  came  to  an  anchor  in  sight
of  other ;  and  the  next  morning  renued  their  fight :  the
Hosiander  bravely  redeemed  the  former  dayes  doing
nothing :  the  Dragon  drove  three  of  them  on  ground,
and  the  Hosiander  daunced  the  Hay  about  them,  so
that  they  durst  not  shew  a  man  upon  the  Hatches.
In  the  afternoone  they  got  aflote  with  the  flood,
and  fought  till  night ;  then  anchored,  and  lay  still  the
next  day.

The  next  day  after,  the  Dragon  drawing  much  water,
and  the  Bay  shallow,  remooved  to  the  other  side  of  the
Bay,  rode  at  Mendafrobay,  where  all  that  time  Sarder
Cham,  a  great  Noble-man  of  the  Mogolls,  with  two  thou-
sand Horse,  was  besieging  a  Castle  of  the  Razbooches
(which  were  before  the  Mogolls  Conquest,  the  Nobles  of
that  countrey  now  living  by  robbery).  He  presented  our
Generall  with  a  horse  and  furniture,  which  he  againe  gave
to  the  Governour  of  Goga,  a  Port  Towne  to  the  West  of
The  last  fight.  Surat.  After  ten  dayes  stay  heere,  the  Portugalls  having
refreshed,  came  thither  to  our  ships.  Sarder  Cham  coun-
celled  to  flee :  but  the  Generall  chased  the  Portugals  in
foure  houres,  driving  them  out  of  sight,  before  thousands
of  the  countrey  people.  Sarder  Cham  relating  this  to  the
King  (after  the  Castle  razed)  to  his  admiration,  which
thought  none  like  the  Portugalls  at  sea.  The  seven  and
twentieth  of  December,  they  returned  to  Swally,  having
lost  three  Saylers,  and  one  mans  arme  shot  off :  Portugals

164

NICHOLAS WITHINGTON

confesse  of  theirs  an  hundred  and  sixtie,  some  report
three  hundred  and  odde.

The  thirteenth  of  January,  I  was  entertained  Factor,
and  bound  to  the  Company  in  foure  hundred  pound.  The
ship  departed  the  eighteenth  of  January,  the  Gallions
never  offering  one  shot.  Anthony  Starkey  was  sent  for
England.  Master  Canning  was  seventie  dayes  on  the
way  betweene  Surat  and  Agra,  with  many  troubles,  set  on
by  the  enemie,  who  shot  him  into  the  belly  with  an
Arrow,  and  another  English  man  thorow  the  arme,  and
killed  and  hurt  many  of  his  Pions.  He  was  cured  before
his  arrivall  at  Agra.  Two  of  his  English  fell  out  with
him  and  returned,  leaving  two  Musicians  onely  to  attend
him.  The  ninth  of  Aprill  he  arrived :  the  tenth  pre-
sented the  King  with  our  Kings  Letter,  and  a  Present  of
little  value.  He  asked  if  our  King  sent  that  present :
who  answered,  it  was  sent  by  the  Merchants.  The  King
graced  him  with  a  cup  of  wine  from  his  owne  hands,  and
referred  him  to  Moracke  Chan.  One  of  the  Musicians
dyed,  and  was  buried  in  the  Portugalls  Church-yard,
whom  they  tooke  up,  and  buried  in  the  high-way :  but
upon  complaint,  were  compelled  by  the  King  to  bury  him
there  againe,  threatning  to  turne  them  all  out  of  his
Countrey,  and  their  buryed  bodies  out  of  their  Church-
yard.

After  this  Master  Canning  wrote  of  the  feare  hee  was
in  to  be  poysoned  by  the  Jesuits,  and  therefore  desired
that  I  might  come  up  to  assist  him ;  which  amongst  us
at  Surat  was  concluded.  The  nine  and  twentieth  of  May,
1 6 1 3 .  he  dyed :  and  so  Master  Keridge  went  the  two  and
twentieth  of  June.  I  should  have  been  sent  by  the  way
of  Mocha  to  England,  but  the  Master  of  the  ship  which
went,  said  it  was  impossible,  except  I  were  circumcised,
to  come  neare  Mecca.

The  thirteenth  of  October,  1613.  the  ship  returned,
and  our  Messenger  taken,  notwithstanding  their  late  passe
at  the  Barre  of  Surat,  by  the  Portugalls  Armada  of
Frigats,  worth  an  hundred  thousand  pound,  with  seven

165

A.D.
1613.

Nicholas

Whithington

Factor.

Master
Canning  sent
to  Agfa.

[I.  iv.  483-]

Master  Can-
ning poysoned
by  the  Jesuits.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

hundred  persons  going  to  Goa.  This  is  like  to  be  their
over-throw  heere,  for  no  Portugall  might  passe  without
a  suretie,  nor  in,  nor  out.  Merchants  of  Surat  are  by
this  meanes  impoverished,  and  our  goods  left  in  our
hands :  with  which  we  went  to  Amadabar.  John  Alkin
which  had  runne  from  Sir  Henry  Middleton  to  the
Portugal  Portugalls,  came  now  to  us,  told  us  of  divers  their  Townes
perils.  besieged  by  the  Decans,  and  other  neighbouring  Moores :

in  so  much  that  they  were  faine  to  send  away  many  hun-
dreths  of  Banians,  and  many  others  that  dwelt  amongst
them,  for  want  of  victuals :  three  Barkes  of  which  came
to  Surat,  and  divers  others  to  Cambaya.  Their  weak-
nesse  in  fight  with  us  caused  all  this.  Robert  Claxon  of
the  Dragon,  fled  to  Portugall  for  feare  of  punishment,
and  came  to  us  with  an  Almayne,  which  had  been  slave
in  Turkic  Robert  Johnson  came  to  the  Portugals,  and
Fugitives  and  thence  intending  to  us,  passing  thorow  the  Decanes  Coun-
Renegado  s.  trey,  was  perswaded  by  another  English  man,  which  was
turned  Moore,  and  lived  there :  and  was  circumcised,  and
received  seven  shillings  six  pence  a  day  of  the  King  and
his  diet  at  the  Kings  table :  But  eight  dayes  after  his
Circumcision  he  died.  Robert  Trully,  the  Musician  in
Agra,  not  agreeing  with  Master  Kerridge,  went  to  the
King  of  Decan,  and  carrying  with  him  a  German  for
interpreter,  offered  both  to  turne  Moores.  Trully  had  in
his  Circumcision  a  new  name  given,  with  great  allowance
from  the  King,  with  whom  he  continues.  But  the  Ger-
man formerly  cut  in  Persia,  now  thought  to  deceive  the
Decan,  but  was  not  entertained  :  he  returned  to  Agra,  and
serveth  a  French  man,  and  goeth  to  Masse  againe.
Robert  Claxon  also  turned  Moore,  at  the  Decan  Court
had  good  allowance :  but  not  content,  came  to  Surat,  and
provoked  pitie  with  seeming  penitence,  but  getting  some
fortie  and  odde  pounds,  under  pretence  of  buying  com-
mons, gave  them  the  slip,  and  returned  whence  he  came.
So  there  are  foure  English  with  the  Decan,  and  divers
Portugal  Moores.

The  seven  and  twentieth  of  October,  1613.  we  received

166

NICHOLAS W1THINGTON  ad.

1613.

letters  from  Mesulopatan  of  Master  Gurney,  written  by  A  description
Captaine  Mario  of  the  James,  of  their  arrivall  and  trade.  "{^JjYhorL
From  Surat  I  went  to  Periano  three  Course :  to  Cosum-  Je  j^ogu//s  w
bay  a  little  Village  ioc.  Barocho  ioc.  a  prettie  Citie  on  a  Countrey,
high  hill,  compassed  with  a  wall,  a  great  River  running  hired  shot  for
by, as  broad  as  Thames ; divers  shippes  of  two  hun-  &uard  aSatnst
dred  tunnes  and  odde  there  riding:  best  Calicoes  in  the
Kingdome,  store  of  Cotton: to  Saringa ioc.  to  Carron
ioc.  to  Boldia  a  lesse  Citie  then  Barocho,  but  faire  built,
a  strong  wall,  and  three  thousand  horse  under  Mussuff
Chan  :  to  Wassach  a  River  ioc.  where  Mussuff  was  ready
to  fight  with  the  Razbooches  or  Radgepoots,  that  lay  on
the  other  side  the  River :  the  chiefe  of  these  of  the  race
of  the  old  Kings  of  Surat :  to  Niriand  14°.  a  great  Towne
where  they  make  Indico. To  Amadabar  ioc.  chiefe  City
of  Guzerat, neare as  great as London, walled with a
strong  wall,  situate  in  the  Plain  by  the  River  side,  store
of  Merchants  Moores,  Christians,  Heathens :  Commodi-
ties are  Indicoes,  Cloath  of  gold,  silver  Tissue,  Velvets
(not  comparable  to  ours)  Taffataes,  Gumbuck,  coloured
Baffataes,  Drugges,  &c. Abdalachon  Governour,  a  man
of  five  thousand  horse  pay. I  went  from  thence  to  Cam-  A t  Course  is  a
baya,  seven  course  to  Barengeo,  where  every  Tuesday  the  ^ean^  halfe
Cafily  of  Cambaya  meete,  and  so  keepe  company  for  feare
of  theeves. Hence  sixteene  course  to  Soquatera,  a  fine
Towne  well  manned  with  souldiers. Departed  at  mid-
night, and  about  eight  of  the  clocke  next  morning  came
ioc.  to  Cambaya.

In  November,  we  rode  to  Serkeffe,  three  course  from
Amadabar,  where  are  the  Sepulchres  of  the  Kings  of
Guzerat,  a  very  delicate  Church  and  faire  Tombes,  which
are  kept  very  comely,  much  resort  to  visite  them  from  all
parts  of  the  Kingdome :  a  course  off  is  a  pleasant  House,
with  a  Garden  a  mile  about,  by  the  Rivers  side,  which
Chon  Chin  Naw,  the  greatest  of  the  Mogoll  Nobilitie,
built  in  memoriall  of  the  great  victory  which  he  got  of
the  last  King  of  Guzerat,  whom  he  tooke  prisoner,  and
subjected  his  Kingdome,  the  battell  being  fought  in  this

167

A.D.
1613.

Tutta.

Master  Ale-

worth  was

Agent.

[I. iv.  48+.]

A  Towne  of

common

women.

Salt  water.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

place.  No  man  dwells  in  this  house,  but  a  few  poore  men
keepe  the  Orchyard.  We  lodged  one  night  in  it,  and
sent  for  six  Fisher-men,  who  in  halfe  an  houre  tooke  us
more  fish  then  all  our  company  could  eat.

The  eight  and  twentieth  of  November,  we  had  newes
at  Amadabar  of  three  English  shippes  arrived  at  Lowri-
bander,  the  Port  Towne  of  Gutu  Negar  Tutta,  chiefe
Citie  of  Sinda.  A  French  Jesuit  at  Amadabar  made
poore,  by  the  Portugals  imbarkement,  begged  of  our
x4.gent,  who  gave  him  ten  Rupias.  I  was  sent  thither,
and  the  thirteenth  of  December  came  to  Cassumparo,
where  I  overtooke  a  Caphilo,  travelling  to  Radenpare,  six
dayes  journey  on  my  way,  fourteene  to  Callitalowny,  a
faire  Castle :  thirteene  7°.  to  Callwalla,  a  pretty  Village,
which  Ecbar  gave  to  a  company  of  women,  and  their  pos-
terity for  ever,  to  bring  up  their  children  in  dancing,  &c.
they  did  this  in  our  Caravan,  every  man  giving  them
somewhat ;  and  then  they  openly  asked  if  any  wanted  a
bed-fellow.  The  sixteenth  8C.  to  Carrya,  where  is  a  well
manned  Fortresse :  and  the  eighteenth  (till  which,  for
feare  of  theeves,  wee  stayed  for  another  Caravan)  to  Dec-
canavra,  our  Camell  stolne,  and  a  man  slaine.  The  nine-
teenth ioc.  to  Bollodo,  a  Fort  kept  by  Newlock  Abram
Cabrate,  for  the  Mogoll,  who  that  day  came  with  an  hun-
dred sixtie  nine  heads  of  the  Coolies  (a  robbing  people.)
The  twentieth  13°.  to  Sariandgo,  a  Fort.  The  one  and
twentieth  ioc.  to  Radempoore,  a  bigge  Towne  with  a
Fort.  Heere  we  stayed  to  provide  us  of  water  and  neces-
saries for  our  desert  journey :  and  the  three  and  twentieth
travelled  Jc.  and  lay  in  the  fields^  met  a  Caravan  robbed
of  all  from  Tutta.  The  foure  and  twentieth  I2C.  dis-
peeded  one  of  my  Pions  to  Lowribander  with  a  Letter,
which  promised  to  doe  it  in  ten  dayes ;  but  I  thinke  was
slaine.  The  five  and  twentieth  i4c.  lodged  by  a  well  of
water  so  salt,  that  our  cattell  could  not  drinke  it.  The
six  and  twentieth  ioc.  to  such  another  well,  there  gave  our
Camells  water,  not  having  drunke  in  three  dayes.

The  seven  and  twentieth, 14°.  lodged  in  fields. The

168

NICHOLAS WITHINGTON  ad.

1613.

eight  and  twentieth,  ioc.  to  a  Village  called  Negar  Parkar.
In  this  desart  we  saw  great  store  of  wild  Asses,  red
Deere,  Foxes,  and  other  wild  beasts.  The  nine  and  twen-
tieth, we  staid  and  met  with  an  other  Caravan,  robbed
within  two  dayes  journey  of  Tutta.  The  thirtieth,  we
departed  from  Parkar,  which  payes  a  yearely  tribute  to  the
Mogol :  all  hence  till  Inno,  halfe  a  dayes  journey  from  Anarchy  worst
Tutta,  acknowledge  no  King,  but  rob  and  spare  at  plea-  Tiranny.
sure.  When  any  army  of  the  Mogols  comes  against
them,  they  fire  their  houses,  and  flee  into  the  Mountaines  :
their  houses  are  made  of  straw  and  morter  like  Bee-hives,
soone  rebuilded.  They  take  for  custome  what  they
please,  and  guard  Passengers,  being  loath  any  but  them-
selves should  have  the  robbing:  of  them.  We  travelled
6C.  and  lay  by  a  Tanke  or  Pond  of  fresh  water.  The
thirty  one  8C.  and  lay  in  the  fields  by  a  brackish  Well.

The  first  of  January,  we  went  ioc.  to  Burdiano,  many
were  sicke  of  this  water,  we  provided  us  yet  of  it  for
foure  dayes,  and  travelled  more  the  second  i8c.  all  night.
The  third  in  the  afternoone  till  midnight  ioc.  the  fourth
I2C.  Here  I  fell  sicke,  and  vomited  by  reason  of  the
water.  The  fifth  Jc.  and  came  to  three  Wells,  two  salt,
one  sweetish.  The  sixth,  to  Nuraquimire  a  pretie  Towne
ioc.  Here  our  Raddingpoore  company  left  us.  We  re-
mained, two  Merchants,  my  selfe,  five  of  their  servants,
foure  of  mine,  with  tenne  Camels,  five  Camel-men.  This
Towne  is  within  three  dayes  of  Tutta,  and  seemed  to  us
after  our  Desart  a  Paradise.  We  agreed  with  one  of  the
Ragies  or  Governours  kinred  for  twenty  Laries  (twenty
shillings)  to  conduct  us,  who  departed  with  us  the  eighth,
and  we  travelled  ioc.  to  Gundaiaw,  where  we  had  beene
robbed  but  for  our  guard.  The  ninth,  we  were  twice  set
on,  and  forced  to  give  each  time  five  Laries  :  wee  came  to
Sarruna,  a  great  Towne  of  the  Razbootches,  with  a  Sarruna
Castle,  whence  it  is  14°.  to  Tutta.  We  visited  the  Gover-  u'ithin  Hc-  °f
nour  Ragee  Bouma,  eldest  sonne  to  Sultan  Bulbul  (who  qJ*?'  th-
lately  captived  by  the  Mogol,  had  his  eyes  pulled  out,  seeM.Peysom
and  two  Moneths  before  this  had  escaped)  now  living  in Voyage.

169

A.D.
1613.

Abuse  of  Sir
Rob.  Sherley.

Treacherous
fobbery.

Nick.  Whith-
ington  robbed
and  sent  a  by-
way.

Robbed  again.

1614.

Large  River.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Mountains,  and  causeth  all  his  kinred  to  revenge.
This  Ragee  was  kind  to  me  as  a  stranger,  asking  many-
questions  of  our  Countrey,  made  me  sup  with  him,  gave
me  Wine  till  he  was  stared.  A  Banian  here  told  me,  how
Sir  Robert  Sherly  had  been  much  abused  by  the  Portugals,
and  Governour  at  Lowribander,  his  house  fired,  men  hurt
in  the  night :  and  arriving  at  Tutta  thirteene  daies  journy
thence,  Mersa  Rusto  used  him  unkindly.  He  advised
to  get  this  Ragee  to  guide  us,  told  of  the  great  trade  of
Tutta,  the  chiefe  that  he  had  seene,  and  that  a  shippe  of
three  hundred  Tunne  might  come  to  Lowribander.

We  hired  the  Ragee  for  fortie  Laries  with  fifty  horse-
men to  the  gates  of  Tutta :  and  on  the  eleventh  departed
from  Sarruna  5°.  and  lay  by  a  Rivers  side.  At  two  in  the
morning  we  departed,  and  he  lead  us  a  contrary  way,  and
came  about  breake  of  day  into  a  Thicket,  where  he  made
us  unlode,  then  caused  us  to  be  bound,  and  tooke  our
weapons  from  us,  sudainly  hanged  the  Merchants  and  their
five  men,  with  their  Camels  ropes  fastened  about  their
neckes  with  a  Truncheon ;  stripped  and  threw  them  into
a  hole  they  made  in  the  earth.  He  tooke  from  me  my
horse,  and  eightie  Rupias,  sent  me  and  my  men  2oc.  up
the  Mountaines  to  his  brothers,  January  the  foureteenth,
where  I  continued  two  and  twentie  dayes  shut  up.
February  the  seventh,  order  came  to  send  me  to  Parkar
to  the  Governour  of  their  kinred,  to  send  me  to  Rading-
poore.  But  I  was  robbed  by  them  in  the  way  of  all  my
clothes,  and  all  I  had.  February  the  twenty  eighth,  we
begged  for  our  victualls,  finding  the  inhabitants  charit-
able :  for  my  horse  (which  not  beeing  worth  the  taking,
they  left  me)  I  could  get  but  foure  Mamoodies,  or  foure
shillings :  but  chancing  on  a  Bannian  of  Amadabar  whom
I  had  knowne,  I  was  releeved  with  my  men.  Wee  were
five  dayes  between  Parkar  and  Radingpoore,  whither  I
came  March  nineteenth.  I  came  to  Amadabar,  April
the  second,  being  absent  one  hundred  and  eleven  dayes.
Thence  I  went  to  Brodia,  Barengeo  thence  i6c.  to  Soqui-
tera, 10. to  Cambaya : then  the  large  River  7.  course

170

NICHOLAS WITHINGTON

A.D.
1614.

broad,  yeerly  swallowing  many  hundreds  to  Saurau.  On
the  other  side  the  River  is  a  Towne  and  Castle  of  the
Razbootches.  The  sixteenth  of  Aprill,  I  travelled  25°.
to  Borocho :  the  seventeenth,  passed  that  River,  and  ioc.
to  Cassimba : the  eighteenth,  13°.  to  Surat.

Concerning  Sinda,  no  Citie  is  by  generall  report  of  [I.  iv.  485.]
greater  trade  in  the  Indies  then  Tutta,  the  chiefe  Port
Lowribander,  three  dayes  journey  from  it ;  a  faire  roade
without  the  Rivers  mouth,  cleare  of  Wormes,  which
about  Surat  especially,  and  in  other  places  of  the  Indies,
after  three  or  foure  moneths  riding  (if  it  were  not  for
sheathing)  would  hinder  returne.  The  Ports  and  Roads
of  Sinda  are  free.  In  two  Moneths  from  hence  by  water
they  goe  to  Lahor,  and  returne  in  one  downe.  There  are
these  Commodities,  Baffitas,  StufFes,  Lawnes,  Indico
course,  not  so  good  as  Biana.  Goods  may  be  conveied
from  Agra  on  Camels  to  Bucker  twenty  dayes,  which  is
on  Sinda  River,  thence  in  fifteene  or  sixteene  dayes  aboord
the  ships.  One  may  goe  as  soone  from  Agra  to  Sinde  as
Surat,  but  there  is  more  theeving,  which  the  Mogoll
seeks  to  prevent.

Inhabitants  of  Sinda  are  most  Razbootches,  Banians,  Razbooteh.
and  Boloches :  in  Cities  and  great  Townes,  the  Gover-
nours  are  Mogols.  The  Countrey  people  are  rude,  naked
from  the  wast  upwards,  with  Turbants  contrary  to  the
Mogoll  fashion.  Their  Armes,  Sword,  Buckler,  and
Launce ;  their  Buckler  great,  in  fashion  of  a  Bee-hive,  in
which  they  will  give  their  Camels  drinke,  and  Horses  pro-
vender, their  horses  good,  swift,  strong,  which  they  ride
unshod,  most  desperately.  They  back  them  at  twelve
Moneths  old.  The  Mogoll  sayes,  the  Razbooteh  knowes
as  well  to  die  as  any  in  the  world.  They  eate  no  Beefe
nor  Buffoll,  but  pray  to  them.

The  Banians  kill  nothing : there  are  thirtie  and  odde Banian.
severall  Casts  of  these  that  differ  something  in  Religion,
and  may  not  eat  with  each  other  ;  but  all  burne  their  dead.
When  the  husband  dies,  the  wife  shaves  her  head,  and  Funerals.
weares her jewels no more, so continuing till death.

171

A.D.
1614.

Burning  of  the
Rasbut  wives.

Boloches.

Banian
marriages.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

When  the  Rasbut  dies,  his  wife  accompanies  his  bodie
going  to  be  burned,  in  her  best  array,  accompanied  with
her  friends  and  kinred,  and  Musique,  and  the  fire  beeing
made  at  the  place  appointed,  compasseth  the  same  twice
or  thrice,  bewailing  first  her  husbands  death,  and  then
rejoycing  that  she  shall  now  live  with  him  againe,  after
which,  embracing  her  friends,  shee  lastly  sits  downe  on
the  top  of  the  pile,  and  dry  sticks,  taking  her  husbands
head  in  her  lap,  and  bids  them  put  fire,  which  done,  her
friends  throw  oile  and  other  sweete  perfumes  on  her,  she
enduring  the  fire  with  admirable  patience,  loose  and  not
bound.  I  have  seene  many,  the  first  in  Surat,  the  woman
but  tenne  yeeres  old,  and  a  Virgin,  he  a  Souldiour  slaine
in  warre,  from  whence  his  cloathes  and  Turbant  were
brought  home.  She  would  needs  burne  with  his  cloathes  ;
the  Governour  forbade  her,  which  she  tooke  grievously,
bidding  them  put  to  fire  presently,  her  husband  was  a
great  way  before  :  which  they  durst  not,  till  her  kinred
intreated,  with  a  Present  given,  the  Governours  licence,
to  her  exceeding  joy.  The  husbands  kinred  never  force
this,  but  the  womans  holding  it  a  disgrace  else  to  their
family.  They  may  choose,  (but  few  doe)  but  then  must
shave  their  haire,  and  breake  their  jewels,  and  henceforth
are  not  suffered  to  eat,  drinke,  sleepe,  or  company  with
any  body,  and  so  continue  till  death.  If  after  purpose  to
burne  they  leape  out  of  the  fire,  her  father  and  mother
will  bind  her,  and  throw  her  in,  and  burne  her  perforce.
But  this  weakenesse  is  seldome.

The  Boloches  are  of  Mahomets  Religion.  They  deale
much  in  Camels ;  most  of  them  robbers  by  land,  and  on
the  River,  murthering  such  as  they  rob.  When  I  was  in
Sinda,  they  tooke  a  boat  with  seven  Italians,  one  Portugall
Friar,  the  rest  slaine  in  fight,  this  was  ripped  by  them  for
Gold.  There  are  very  honest  of  them  in  Guzerate,  and
about  Agra.

Banian  marriages  are  made  at  the  age  of  three  yeares,
and  under ;  sometimes  they  make  mutuall  promise  if  two
pregnant  women  proove  to  have  one  a  male,  the  other  a

172

NICHOLAS WITHINGTON  a.d.

1614.

female.  But  alwayes  one  of  their  owne  cast  and  religion,
and  of  the  same  trade,  as  a  Barbar,  &c.  When  they  be
three  or  foure  yeere  old,  they  make  a  great  Feast,  set  the
two  thus  espoused  on  horsebacke  (a  man  behind  each  to
hold  them)  in  their  best  clothes,  accompanied  with  the
Bramens  or  Priests,  and  many  others  according  to  their
state,  and  so  lead  them  up  and  downe  the  Citie  where
they  dwell,  and  then  to  the  Pagod  or  Church :  and
after  Ceremonies  there  done,  come  home,  continue  cer-
tein  dayes  feasting,  as  they  are  able.  Being  tenne  yeeres
old  they  lie  together,  of  which  they  give  this  reason,  not
to  leave  them  wivelesse,  if  their  Parents  die  and  leave
them  Parentlesse.  Their  Bramens  keepe  their  Pagods,  and
have  Almes  or  Tithes,  esteemed  marvellous  holy,  married
and  follow  occupations,  good  workemen,  apt  to  learne  any
patterne.  They  eate  but  once  a  day,  and  wash  before
and  after  meat  all  their  bodies,  so  also  after  urine  or
stoole.

John  Mildnall  *  an  Englishman  had  beene  employed  *See  before  his
with  three  English  young  men,  which  hee  poisoned  in  Leiters-
Persia,  to  make  himselfe  Master  of  the  goods,  but  he  was
likewise  poysoned,  yet  by  preservatives  lived  many
Moneths  after,  but  swelled  exceedingly,  and  so  came  to
Agra,  with  the  value  of  twenty  thousand  dollers  :  thither
therefore  I  went,  May  the  fourth,  16 14.  from  Surat :  came
to  Bramport,  where  Sultan  Perves  lies,  situate  in  a  plaine,
the  River  of  Surat  running  by  in  a  great  breadth,  having
a  large  Castle.  Hence  to  Agra  twenty  sixe  dayes,
betweene  Surat  and  Agra  are  seven  hundred  courses,
1 010.  English  miles,  which  I  travelled  in  seven  and  thirty
daies  in  Winter,  wherein  it  almost  continually  raineth.
From  Surat  to  Bramport  is  a  pleasant  and  champion  Coun-
trey,  full  of  Rivers,  Brookes,  and  Springs.  Betweene
Bramport  and  Agra,  very  Mountainous,  not  passable  for
a  Coach,  hardly  for  Camels  :  by  Mando  is  the  nearest  way  :
there  are  high  hils  and  strong  Castles  in  the  way  many,
Townes  and  Cities  every  dayes  journey,  well  inhabited,
the  Countrey  peaceable,  and  cleare  of  theeves.

i73

[I-

A.D.
1614.

486.]

IV

Jesuites.

Pilgrimage.

Ganges.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Mildnall  had  given  all  to  a  Frenchman,  to  marry  his
bastard-daughter  in  Persia,  and  bring  up  an  other.

The  Jesuites  have  a  very  faire  Church  built  by  the
King,  and  a  house :  the  King  allowes  the  chiefe  seven
Rupias  a  day,  and  the  rest  three,  with  licence  to  convert
as  many  as  they  can :  which  they  doe,  but  alas,  it  is  for
moneys  sake.  For  when  by  the  fact  of  the  Portugalls,
they  were  debarred  of  their  pay,  their  new  converts
brought  them  their  beads  againe,  saying,  they  had  beene
long  without  their  pay,  and  therefore  would  be  Christians
no  longer.  The  Portugals  not  delivering  the  goods  taken
in  Surat,  the  King  caused  the  Church-doores  to  bee  locked
up,  as  they  have  continued  ever  since :  so  the  Padres
make  a  Church  of  one  of  their  Chambers,  where  they  say
Masse  twice  a  day,  and  preach  every  Sunday  in  Persian,
first  to  the  Armenians  and  Moores,  after  in  Portuguise,
for  themselves,  the  Italians  and  Greeks.  These  told  me
the  particulars  of  Mildnals  goods,  who  gave  all  to  a
French  Protestant,  himselfe  a  Papist,  which  he  denying,
was  put  in  prison.  After  foure  Moneths  all  were
delivered.

The  second  of  March,  i6i4,tenne  Gallions,  two  Gallies,
sixtie  Frigats  fight.

Betweene  Agminere  and  Agra  every  tenne  course  (which
is  an  ordinarie  dayes  journey)  a  Seralia,  or  place  of  lodg-
ing for  man  and  horse,  and  Hostesses  to  dress  your  vic-
tuall,  if  you  please,  paying  a  matter  of  three  pence  for
both  horse  and  meat  dressing.  Betweene  these  places
(i2oc.)  at  every  course  end  is  a  great  pillar  erected,  and
at  every  tenne  course  a  faire  house  built  by  Ecbar,  when
he  went  on  Pilgrimage  from  Agra  to  Aggimere  on  foot,
saying  his  prayers  at  every  course  end.  These  houses
serve  the  King  and  his  women,  none  else.  This  King
lies  in  Agimere,  upon  occasion  of  warres  with  Rabna  a
Razboch,  who  hath  now  done  homage,  and  peace  is
betweene  them.

I  rode  to  the  River  Ganges,  two  dayes  from  Agra.  The
Banians  carry  the  water  of  Ganges  many  hundred  miles

174

NICHOLAS WITHINGTON

A.D.
l6ll.

thence,  and  as  they  affirme,  it  will  never  stinke,  though
kept  never  so  long.  By  Agra  runnes  a  large  river  Geminie.  Agra.
Agra  is  a  huge  Towne,  the  wall  two  course  in  compasse,
fairest  and  highest  that  ever  I  saw,  well  replenished  with
Ordnance :  the  rest  (except  Noble-mens  houses,  faire
seated  by  the  river)  ruinous.  The  auncient  royall  seat
was  Fatipoore  (twelve  course  from  Agra)  now  decayed.
Betweene  these  two,  the  Sepulchre  of  the  Kings  Father,  to
which  is  none  that  ever  I  saw  to  be  compared.  And  yet
the  Church  of  Fatipoore  comes  neere  it,  builded  by  Geo-
metry as  is  the  other.

The  foure  and  twentieth  of  May,  161 6.  we  in  our
returne  entred  the  Bay  of  Soldania,  where  were  divers
English  ships  outward  bound,  the  Charles,  Unicorne,
James,  Globe,  Swan,  the  Generall  was  Benjamin  Joseph.

The  fifteenth  of  September,  we  arrived  at  Dover.

Chap.  IX.

The  eleventh  Voyage  to  the  East-India  in  the
Salomon,  begunne  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord
161 1.  after  the  account  of  the  Church  of
England,  and  ended  in  the  yeere  161 3.
Written  by  Ralph  Wilson,  one  of  the  Mates
in  the  said  ship.

He  first  of  February  161 1.  we  set  saile  February  1.
from  Gravesend,  being  foure  ships,  the
Dragon,  the  James,  the  Salomon,  and  the
Hosiander  ;  being  counted  as  three  seve-
rall  Voyages  :  the  James  the  ninth ;  the
Dragon  and  Hosiander  the  tenth ;  and
wee  in  the  Salomon  the  eleventh. The

reason  was,  because  we  were  directed  to  severall  parts  of

the  East-India.

In  our  course  betweene  the  lies  of  the  Canaries,  and  the

lies  of  Capo  Verde, we must steere  a more  Westerly

course,  then  that  which  the  Plats  lay  downe,  without  they

i75

A.D.

1612.

A  new  Hand
discovered  in
19.  degrees
34.  minutes
Southerly.
Santa  Maria
d'agosta.
The  Isle  of
Martin  Va%.

[I.  iv.  487.]

October  6.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

be  Portugall  Plats,  which  lay  it  a  quarter  of  a  point  more
then  the  truth  is.

The  seven  and  twentieth  of  Aprill,  we  in  Salomon
descried  an  Hand  in  the  South  latitude  of  nineteene  de-
grees, foure  and  thirty  minutes,  and  it  bare  from  us,
South-east  one  third  part  Southerly,  fifteene  leagues  off.
This  He  is  a  place,  which  in  my  opinion  yeeldeth  water,
and  fish  in  great  abundance :  the  Sea-fowle  were  so  many,
that  our  people  in  the  galleries  of  our  ship  might  strike
them  downe,  they  were  so  tame.  To  the  Eastward  of
this  He  lye  two  Hands  more,  the  one  about  the  bignesse
of  the  first,  the  other  a  great  He.  By  these  lies  we  found
a  Current,  which  setteth  to  the  Northward.

The  eight  and  twentieth  of  June,  we  departed  from
Soldanha.  I  would  advise  them  which  go  forth  of  Sol-
danha  Bay,  with  the  wind  at  East,  or  South-east,  to  get
off  some  pretie  distance  from  the  land,  before  they  hale
up  to  the  Southward :  for  if  they  doe  otherwise,  the  high
land  will  take  their  wind  from  them.  And  if  a  man
should  be  becalmed,  he  should  very  much  be  troubled :
for  most  commonly  thereabout  you  shall  meete  a  mightie
Westerne  Sea.  Secondly,  the  streame  setteth  to  the
shoare-ward,  if  the  wind  have  been  at  the  North  North-
west, West  or  South-west.  And  thirdly,  the  shoare  is
neald  to ; so  that  a  man  cannot  anchor.

The  sixt  of  October,  wee  met  a  great  Current  setting
to  the  Northwards,  when  wee  were  within  one  degree  of
the  Equinoctiall.

The  twelfth,  wee  met  with  a  great  deale  of  rubbish,  as
Canes,  Sties,  and  many  other  things,  which  usually  are  on
the  shoare  about  Sumatra.

The  sixteenth,  drave  by  our  ship  rubbish,  as  Rock-
weeds,  Canes,  branches  of  trees,  the  huskes  of  Coco  Nuts,
and  such  like.

The  seventeenth  at  noone,  drave  by  us  a  bed  of  rubbish,
which  was  at  least  two  miles  long :  it  lay  North  North-
west, and  South  South-east,  and  drave  off  West  South-
West.

176

RALPH WILSON  a.d.

1612.

The  eighteenth  in  the  morning,  we  discried  land,  which  They  discrie
lyeth  by  Celeber  in  the  He  of  Sumatra,  which  Towne  of  u™*"'
Celeber  standeth  about  three  degrees  of  Southerly  lati-  Celeber.
tude.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  wee  had  a  Current  setting  to
the  Southward.  The  nine  and  twentieth,  the  salt  hill,  or
He  bare  East  North-east  sixteene  or  eighteene  leagues
from  us.

The  first  of  November,  at  six  of  the  clocke  at  night,  November  1.
we  were  shot  within  the  salt  He.

The  second  at  noone,  comming  betweene  the  Land  of
Java  and  a  ragged  He,  which  lyeth  to  the  Westward  of
the  point  of  Palymbam,  we  met  a  great  tide  running  out
so  fast,  that  we  could  scarce  stemme  it  with  a  stiffe  gale
of  wind.  And  afterward  the  wind  slacked,  so  we  chopped
to  an  anchor,  and  then  I  found  that  tide  to  runne  three
leagues  and  an  halfe  in  a  watch.  Heere  I  have  noted,
that  the  tide  or  streame  keepeth  no  course,  but  in  the  day
time  setteth  out,  and  in  the  night  time  in.  This  day  at
noone,  the  point  of  Palymbam  bare  North-east  by  East
three  leagues  off  us.  From  thence  to  the  Road  of  Ban-
tam is  five  leagues ;  South  South-east  one  third  part
Easterly.  So  the  longitude  of  Bantam  is  an  hundred
fortie  five  degrees,  two  minutes.  The  latitude  six  de-
grees, ten  minutes.  The  variation  three  degrees.  This
longitude  of  an  hundred  fortie  five  degrees,  and  two
minutes,  is  somewhat  to  Easterly  for  the  Road  of  Ban-
tam. But  for  the  first  falling  with  the  land,  for  an  hun-
dred fortie  foure  degrees  is  the  truest  longitude  for
Bantam  from  the  Island  of  Flores.

The  eighteenth,  nine  sailes  of  Hollanders  came  into  the
Road,  and  the  other  two,  which  went  out  the  day  before,
came  with  them  to  Pulo  Panjan  :  they  had  refreshed  them-  Excellent  re-
serves at  the  lies  Mascarenhas,  which  stand  in  one  and  fi "f^TSjt* '**
twentie  degrees  and  an  halfe  of  South  latitude. Of  which  renj,as
place  they  gave  singular  commendations  for  great  plentie
of  refreshing  which  they  found  there.

The  seventh  of  March,  at  five  of  the  clocke  in  the  March  7.
iv  177  M

A.D.

1612.

dn  He  dis-
covered in
twentie
degrees,  foure
and  thirtie
minutes.

The  Hand  of
Diego  Roiz.

The  lie  of
Cyme,  or
Mauritius.

The  lie  Mas-
carenhas.

Aprill  2.
1613.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

afternoone,  in  the  latitude  of  twentie  degrees,  foure  and
thirtie  minutes,  we  descried  land,  which  bare  North-east,
halfe  a  point  Northerly,  nine  leagues  off :  the  South-east
part  is  somewhat  high,  but  falleth  downe  with  a  low
point ;  the  Wester  part  is  not  very  high,  but  flat  and
smoth  towards  the  end  of  it,  and  falleth  right  downe.
This  He  is  very  full  of  shoalds  and  broken  ground,  the
Souther  and  Wester  parts  :  for  we  discovered  neither  of  the
other  sides.  By  all  likelihood  it  seemeth  to  have  good
refreshing  on  it :  the  longitude  of  this  He  is  an  hundred
and  foure  degrees  from  Flores,  but  by  my  computation  an
hundred  and  seven  degrees ;  but  in  these  courses  we  rely
not  altogether  on  our  reckonings,  using  as  much  diligence
for  the  finding  out  the  true  longitude,  as  possibly  wee
may,  it  being  a  maine  point  to  give  us  light  to  other
helpes.

The  tenth,  we  had  sight  of  the  Hand  of  Diego  Roiz.
The  fourteenth  in  the  morning,  wee  discried  land,  which
was  part  of  the  He  Do  Cirne,  which  the  Hollanders  call
the  He  of  Mauritius.  There  is  an  Hand  that  lyeth  from
the  maine.  He  foure  leagues  off;  and  two  other  small  lies
ten  leagues  off.  We  sounded  a  league  and  a  halfe  off,
but  found  no  ground  at  fortie  fathomes.  When  you  are
thwart  of  the  Road,  the  hill  with  three  pikes  will  beare
South-east.

The  sixteenth,  at  six  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  we
discried  the  He  Do  Mascarenhas.  There  is  a  breach
which  lyeth  foure  miles  off,  and  lyeth  three  leagues  long ;
and  heere  is  very  good  refreshing.  The  He  Mauritius
hath  longitude  ninetie  nine  degrees,  latitude  twentie  degr.
fifteene  minutes.  The  He  Do  Mascarenhas  hath  longi-
tude ninetie  seven  degrees,  and  latitude  one  and  twentie
degrees,  no  minutes.

The  second  of  Aprill,  16 13.  about  seven  of  the  clocke
it  began  to  lighten,  continuing  with  such  mightie  great
flashes,  as  I  never  saw  the  like,  untill  eleven,  and  then  it
began  to  raine,  or  powre  downe  mightily,  and  on  a  sudden
became  flat  and  calme :  and  in  lesse  then  a  quarter  of  an

178

RALPH WILSON  ad.

1613.

houre,  a  hard  gale  at  South-west,  blowing  for  the  time,
which  was  not  long,  as  much  as  it  did  before,  at  North-
east. By  these  two  contrary  winds  the  sea  grew  so  exceed-
ing loftie,  that  our  ship  strucke  into  the  sea  abaft,  as  if
the  galleries  would  have  flowne  off.  About  twelve  of
the  clock  the  wind  veered  to  the  South,  and  on  a  sudden
up  at  the  North-east  againe.  Our  sailes  were  split,  so  as
we  huld  till  morning.

The  tenth  of  June,  we  discried  the  He  of  Ascension.  {""e IO-
This  He  hath  shoalds  lying  on  the  Wester  part,  at  least  js*ens;0f
two  miles  off.

The  one  and  twentieth,  we  had  a  great  ripling  of  the
sea,  in  the  seven  and  twentieth  degrees  of  North  latitude,
which  came  out  of  the  Easter-boord  like  a  fresh  out  of  a
River,  like  many  spouts  or  whirlewinds.

The  sixth  of  August  wee  had  great  riplings  or  over-  U--  1V-  488-]
fals  of  the  Sea. L  °  Au^st  6-

The  fourteenth  day,  being  in  thirtie  eight  degrees  fiftie
nine  minutes  North  latitude,  wee  had  great  riplings  of
the  Sea ;  which  made  a  noyse,  as  if  water  had  runne  out
of  a  sluice :  they  came  out  of  the  North-east.

[Chap.  X.
179

A.D.

1612.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Chap.  X.

A  Journall  of  all  principall  matters  passed  in  the
twelfth  Voyage  to  the  East-India,  observed  by
me  Walter  Payton,  in  the  good  ship  the
Expedition  :  the  Captaine  whereof  was  M.
Christopher  Newport,  being  set  out,  Anno
1 612. Written  by  Walter  Payton.

§.  i.

Their  comming  to  Saint  Augustine,  Mohelia,
and  divers  parts  of  Arabia.

He  seventh  of  Januarie  we  set  saile  from
Gravesend  for  the  East-India,  in  the  good
ship,  the  Expedition  of  London,  being
about  the  burthen  of  two  hundred  and
sixtie  tunnes  :  which  carryeth  in  her  fiftie
sixe  persons,  besides  a  Persian  Ambassa-
dour  and  his  followers,  who  are  in  number
fifteene,  which  we  had  order  to  receive  into  our  ship,  to
be  transported  into  the  Kingdome  of  Persia,  at  the  costs
and  charges  of  the  Worshipfull  Company  aforesaid.  The
names  of  the  Ambassadour,  and  his  people,  are  these.
Sir  Robert  Sherley,  the  Ambassadour.  Teresha,  his  Ladie,
a  Circasian.  Sir  Thomas  Powell.  Tomasin  his  Ladie.
Leylye,  a  Persian  Woman.  Morgan  Powell,  Gentleman.
Captaine  John  Ward.  Francis  Bubb,  Secretarie.  John
Barbar,  Apothecarie.  John  Herriot,  Musitioner.  John
Georgson,  Goldsmith  and  Hollander.  Gabriel,  an  olde
Armenian.  Nazerbege,  Scanderbege,  Molhter,  all  Per-
sians.

The  sixe  and  twentieth  of  Aprill,  16 13.  in  the  morning,

wee  fell  with  a  part  of  the  land  of  ^Ethiopia,  whereunto,

close adjoyning, is  an Hand of small compasse, called

Connie  Hand.  Connie Hand, beeing a very low land, and invironed

about  with  many  dangerous  Rockes,  to  Sea-ward : and

180

WALTER PAYTON  ad.

1613.

standeth  in  the  latitude  of  thirtie  three  degrees,  and
thirtie  minutes.  The  wind  taking  us  short,  we  were  in-
forced  to  come  to  an  anchor  betwixt  this  Hand  and  the
Maine  :  where  wee  had  very  good  ground  in  nineteen  or
twentie  fathom  water.  Here  we  sent  our  Schiffe  ashore
to  the  Hand,  where  we  found  Penguins,  wild  Geese,  and
other  Fowles,  &  Seale-fishes  in  great  abundance,  whereof
we  tooke  for  our  refreshing,  as  much  as  we  would.  By
a  carved  boord,  wee  perceived  the  Hollanders  had  beene
there,  who  made  great  store  of  the  traine  Oyle  of  the
Seales,  as  it  should  seeme,  for  their  necessary  spending,
outward  bound.  They  left  their  Implements  wherewith
they  wrought,  and  a  great  Copper  Caldron,  standing  upon
a  Furnace,  full  of  traine  :  all  which  wee  left  as  wee  found.
Thus  having  spent  two  dayes  at  an  anchor,  and  the  wind
favouring  us  to  proceed,  we  set  saile  from  hence  for  Caput
Bonas  Spei.

The  thirtieth  day,  by  Gods  grace,  we  arrived  at  Sal-  P/,5^  °f
danha,  where  wee  found  riding  at  an  anchor  sixe  ships,
whereof  two  English,  namely,  the  Hector  and  the  Thomas,
the  other  foure  were  Hollanders :  all  bound  homeward.
Here  we  watered  and  refreshed  our  selves  very  well,  with
reasonable  store  of  that  Countrey  sheepe,  and  Bullockes,
which  we  bought ;  and  fresh  fish  which  we  caught  with
our  Sayne.

The  tenth  of  May,  1613.  the  Pepper-corne  arrived
heere  at  Saldanha,  also  bound  homewards.  Shee  having
beene  long  out,  was  not  very  well  fitted  with  necessaries,
which  wee  supplyed  out  of  our  small  store,  so  much  as
we  could  spare  :  who  also  dispatched  and  was  readie  to
set  saile  with  the  first  faire  wind,  which  was,  on  the
fifteenth  of  May,  from  whence  we  set  saile  all  together,
out  of  the  Bay,  taking  our  leave  each  of  other,  according
to  the  common  fashion  of  the  Sea,  directing  our  course
for  Saint  Augustine.  And  in  our  way  we  had  sight  of
Cape  do  Arecife,  being  part  of  the  mayne  land  of  Cape  do
^Ethiopia ;  and  standeth  in  the  latitude  of  thirtie  three  Arecife-
degrees  twentie  five  minutes,  the  Compasse  varying  there

181

A.D.

1 6 13.

Variation  sixe
deg.  nine  min.

[I.  iv.  489.]
Port  de  S.
Augustino.

Houses  made
of  Canes.

Fifteen  degr.
40.  minutes
variation.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

sixe  degrees  and  nine  minutes,  which  was  on  the  foure  and
twentieth  of  this  present.

The  fifteenth  of  June,  we  had  sight  of  Saint  Laurence
Hand,  and  on  the  seventeenth  day,  we  came  to  an  anchor,
by  Port  Augustine  of  purpose,  to  search  the  sounding
and  way  into  the  Bay,  before  we  entred ;  because  there
was  none  in  our  ship  well  acquainted  therewith.  Which
being  done,  wee  entred  and  came  to  an  anchor,  on  the
eighteenth  day  in  ten  fathome  water :  but  our  ship  roade
in  fortie  fathomes.  Heere  we  had  wood  and  water,  and
great  abundance  of  fresh  fish,  which  we  tooke  with  our
Sayne,  sufficient  to  have  satisfied  halfe  a  doozen  ships
men,  if  they  had  beene  there.  But  for  flesh,  we  could  get
none  of  the  Countrey  people,  they  being  as  it  seemed,
fearefull  of  us,  who  came  to  us  once,  and  promised  to
bring  us  Cattell,  the  next  day  in  the  morning :  which,  I
thinke,  was  rather  in  policie  to  carrie  away  their  Cattell,
wherein  they  imployed  themselves  in  the  meane  time,  for
they  never  returned  to  us  againe.  We  marched  up  into
the  Woods,  with  about  fortie  shot,  to  see  if  we  would
have  met  with  any  of  them,  to  buy  some  of  their  Cattell :
but  wee  found  none  but  emptie  houses  made  of  Canes,
where  wee  perceived  that  people  had  beene  not  long
before,  by  the  fires  which  were  yet  burning,  and  scales  of
fish  which  had  beene  broyled  thereon.  Also  we  perceived
the  footing,  and  tracing  of  many  Cattell,  which  had  beene
there  not  long  before :  so  wee  returned  emptie  as  wee
came.  This  Port  Augustine,  standeth  in  the  latitude  of
twentie  three  degrees  and  thirtie  minutes.  The  varia-
tion of  the  Compasse  is  fifteene  degrees  fortie  minutes.

The  entrance  into  this  Port  resembleth  Dartmouth,
and  to  goe  in  there,  you  must  bring  that  which  is  called
Westminster-Hall,  being  not  unlike,  North-east  by  East
off"  you,  and  so  steere  in  due  East,  borrowing  a  little  to
the  South-side  of  the  Bay,  where  you  shall  have  sounding
thirteene,  nine,  eight,  and  seven  fathomes  water,  good
ground,  till  you  bee  shut  within  the  shoale :  and  then  you
have  deepe  water,  untill  you  come  to  the  Road,  and  then

182

WALTER PAYTON

you  have  seven,  eight,  and  ten  fathomes  water.  But  if
you  goe  in  too  farre  behind  the  hill  on  your  larboord  side
(which  resembleth  an  old  Barne)  then  you  shall  have
thirtie  five  or  fortie  fathomes.  From  hence  wee  set  saile,
on  the  three  and  twentieth  of  this  present,  directing  our
course  for  the  Hand  of  Mohelia.

The  third  of  July  1613.  we  had  sight  of  an  Hand  called
Juan,  being  to  the  East-ward  of  Mohelia  some  nine  or
ten  leagues,  and  beareth  from  it  East  and  by  South.
Also  this  day  we  came  to  an  anchor  at  Mohelia,  betwixt
broken  land  (which  lyeth  on  the  Souther  side)  and  the
Hand.  Here  we  had  great  store  of  refreshing  and  very
cheape,  for  we  bought  five  Bullockes  in  trucke  of  one
Levant  Sword :  also  we  bought  Goates,  Hennes,  Pines,
Cocker  Nuts,  Plantanes,  Oranges,  Limons,  and  Limes,
for  Trifles  or  little  Money.  One  Riall  of  Plate  we  paid
for  a  Bullocke,  or  else  ten  pieces  of  foure  pence  halfe-
penie,  and  so  we  bought  about  fortie  one  head  of  Cattle,
besides  other  refreshing  aforesaid.

The  fifth,  the  Inhabitants  of  this  Hand,  are  chiefly
Moores :  but  there  are  Arabians,  Turkes  and  other
Nations  amongst  them,  and  are  in  Warre  with  the  people
of  Juan,  and  Comora  Hands  neere  adjoyning.  They  told
us  that  the  King  of  Mohelia  dyed  the  same  day,  that  we
came  into  the  Roade :  and  Phanehomale  his  sonne  suc-
ceeded in  his  place,  being  as  yet  but  of  tender  yeeres,  was
to  raigne  under  protection  of  his  Mother  Queene.  His
Brother-in-law  came  downe  (as  chiefe  man  accompanyed
with  divers  other  men  of  sort)  to  speake  with  us,  who
bad  us  very  kindly  welcome.  Both  he  and  many  other  of
the  same  Hand  do  speake  reasonable  good  Portuguse  Lan-
guage, by  reason  whereof  I  had  great  conference  with
them,  and  was  resolved  in  any  thing  I  demanded.

They  build  Barkes  upon  this  Iland,  and  trade  with
them,  alongst  the  Coast  of  Melinde,  and  Arabia,  with
slaves  and  fruits,  whereby  they  furnish  themselves  with
Royals  of  Plate,  and  other  necessaries.  Also  I  thinke,
they  have  some  Trade  with  the  Portugals,  but  they  will

183

A.D.
1613.

Mohelia  Iland
neere  unto
Comoro.
Great  store  of
refreshing.

The  largenesse
of  the  Portugal

Tongue.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

not  bee  a  knowne  thereof,  because  we  should  not  suspect
any  treacherous  dealings  amongst  them.  They  told  us,
that  we  were  very  welcome,  and  that  the  whole  Hand  was
at  our  command  :  but  if  we  had  beene  Portugals,  they  told
mee,  that  they  would  have  put  us  all  every  man  to  the
Sword.  But  howsoever,  I  hold  it  not  good  to  repose  too
much  confidence  in  them.  The  Kings  Brother  shewed
me  a  Letter  of  commendations  of  the  place,  left  there  by
an  Hollander,  which  was  written  in  Dutch :  and  withall
desired  us  to  leave  another  to  the  same  effect,  thereby  to
specifie  their  honest  and  kind  dealings  towards  us,  and  to
shew  it  unto  others  of  our  Nation,  which  should  come
thither  after  us :  to  which  we  consented,  and  I  made  them
a  Writing  accordingly,  which  was  sealed  by  the  Captaine
of  our  ship,  expressing  therein  our  good  entertainment,
and  the  prices  of  victuals.  But  neverthelesse,  with  such
a  Proviso,  that  our  Nation  should  not  trust  them  any
further  then  in  their  discretions  they  should  thinke  re-
quisite for  their  owne  safeties.  They  speake  a  kind  of
Morisco  Language,  which  is  somewhat  difficult  to  learne,
and  our  continuance  there  short :  so  that  I  only  tooke
notice  of  these  few  words  following,  which  are  sufficient
to  call  for  victuals  and  fruits,  when  Portuguse  Language
is  wanting ;  and  to  speake  to  any  of  the  Countrey  people,
who  understand  not  the  Portuguse.  viz.

Gumbey, a Bullocke. Buze, a Goat. Coquo, an
Henne. Tudah, Oranges. Demon, Limons. Mage,
Water. Surra,  a  kind  of  Drinke. Quename,  a  Pine.
Sejavoye,  Cocker  Nuts. Figo,  Plantans. Cartassa,  Paper.
Sinzano, a Needle. Arembo, Bracelets. Soutan, the
King.
Mohehatmz. This  Hand  standeth  in  the  latitude  of  twelve  degrees
rj£..io.  m"-\  ten  minutes,  and  in  the  Road  is  good  ground  in  forty
■J  fatnomes  water. From  hence  we  set  saile  on  the  tenth
day  (having  watered,  and  refreshed  our  selves  very  suffi-
ciently,  God  be  thanked) directing  our  course  for  the
Hand  of  Socatora.

The  nineteenth,  we  passed  under  the  Equinoctiall  line :

184

WALTER PAYTON  ad.

1613.

and  on  the  twentie  fifth  day,  wee  had  sight  of  land,  which
we  supposed  to  have  been  Cape  Guardafuy,  which  lieth
at  the  entrance  of  the  Red  Sea :  and  so  thinking  to  steere
for  Socotora,  found  it  not.  Whereupon  we  were  inforced
to  bethinke  our  selves,  where  to  goe  that  wee  might
shelter  our  selves  from  the  cruelty  of  the  Winter  in  those
parts,  and  also  to  refresh  us  againe.  So  we  determined
to  saile  for  the  Hands  of  Curia  Muria,  the  bodies  whereof  ^1  Manvf
lie  in  the  latitude  of  about  eighteene  degrees  to  the  North-
ward of  the  Equinoctiall,  over  against  the  wast  of  Arabia
Fcelix.  In  our  way,  we  never  had  other  weather  then
fogges,  which  were  so  thicke,  that  we  could  not  discry
halfe  an  English  mile  before  us  (being  a  thing  usuall  every
yeare  in  July,  August,  and  part  of  September.)  In  all
this  time,  both  the  Sunne  and  the  Starres  were  so  ob-
scured, that  we  could  not  helpe  our  selves  any  way  by
observation :  but  God  being  our  guide,  at  length  we
groaped  out  the  land  by  our  lead,  well  perceiving  the
colour  of  the  water  to  be  changed  white,  and  many
yellow  grassy  weeds  swimming  thereon ;  we  sounding
still  as  we  sailed,  and  our  first  ground  was  fortie  three
fathomes.  So  as  we  neered  the  land,  our  sounding
lessened  to  twenty  two  fathomes,  where  we  anchored  in
very  good  ground,  but  could  see  no  land  (although  we
heard  the  rut  of  the  shoare  not  to  be  farre  off)  untill  the
next  day,  which  was  somewhat  cleare  weather.  And  then
we  sent  our  Skiffe  ashoare,  to  see  if  they  could  discover
a  place  of  more  securitie  for  our  ship  to  ride  in :  but  by
reason  of  the  great  Seas  which  came  rowling  into  the  Bay,
there  went  so  great  a  seidge  that  they  could  not  come
neere  the  shoare,  and  therefore  returned  as  they  went :
onely  they  had  descried  a  situation  of  faire  houses,  built
of  stone,  hard  by  the  Sea  side,  which  prooved  to  be  the
Citie  of  Doffar  in  Arabia  Fcelix.  When  God  had  sent  D°ffar  a
us  a  little  cleare  weather,  we  perceived  an  high  Cape  land,  CJtie  on,the
on  the  Wester  side  of  the  Bay,  the  which  we  discovered  Arabia.
with  our  Skiffe  (at  the  second  time  of  her  going)  to  be  a
very  good  road  for  all  winds,  except  from  East  to  the

185

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

l6is'

South  by  East  (God  make  us  thankfull)  for  thither  we

warped  in  our  ship,  although  with  much  toyle  of  our
men,  beeing  distant  sixe  or  seven  leagues  from  the  place
where  we  were.
August.  3.  The  third  of  August,  we  came  to  an  anchor  in  the  said

Resoit  a  small  roade,  and  went  ashoare  with  our  SkifFe  at  a  little  Village,
1  a&e'  called  Resoit,  standing  close  by  the  Sea  side. The  In-

habitants  thereof  are Arabians, and for the most part
fishermen,  who  gave  us  very  kind  intertainment,  and  told
us  all  concerning  the  Countrey,  that  we  desired. Also
the  chiefe  Governour  of  Doffar  came  downe  to  us  (whose
name  is  Meir  hahamud  Madoffar)  and  bade  us  very  kindly
welcome,  and  presented  us  with  three  Bullocks,  Sheepe,
Goates, Sugarcanes, Hennes, Plantans, and Coco-nuts,
and  such  like. For  requitall  whereof,  we  presented  him
againe,  with  a  fine  piece  of  Damaske  double  lockt,  which
was  greatly  by  him  esteemed :  he  desiring  our  friendship
as  much,  as  we  desired  his,  and  gave  us  licence  forthwith
to  come  ashoare  when  we  would. Also  he  gave  order
to  have  a  Market  kept  at  this  little  Village  of  Resoit,
purposely  for  us  to  buy  any  kind  of  victualls  which  the
Countrey  did  afFoard. Their  cattell  are  both  deare  and
leane,  and  their  fresh  water  is  very  scarce  and  bad,  and
very  hard  to  come  by : so  that  we  were  inforced  to  hire
people  to  bring  it  downe  to  the  sea  side  in  skinnes,  pay-
ing therefore  twenty  foure shillings sterling, for  every
five  pipes  filling. Before  our  departure  from  hence,  Meir
hahamud  Madoffar  desired  us  to  leave  a  writing  of  com-
mendations in  his  behalfe,  specifying  the  good  and  kind
entertainment we had received there ; which was
graunted :  and  I  made  it  in  parchment,  begun  with  great
letters, the  effect  whereof  beeing  correspondent to the
other  writing,  before  left  at  Mohelia,  also  signed  by  the
Captaine. And  the  Governour  sent  us  three  notes,  by
him  signed,  to  the  end  we  might  send  them  in  severall
ships,  if  they  should  happen  to  come  upon  that  coast  (as
we  did  perforce)  whereby  he  might  know  our  ships  from
others,  and  to  give  them  intertainment  accordingly. This

186

WALTER PAYTON  ad.

1613.

Cape  Resoit  standeth  in  the  latitude  of  sixteene  degrees,  sixteene  de-
and  thirty  eight  minutes,  to  the  Northward  of  the  Equi-  grees,  think
noctial  line,  and  is  good  anchorage,  in  five  and  an  halfe  eiSht  min-
or  sixe  fathomes  water.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  we  set  saile  from  hence,
directing  our  course  for  the  coast  of  Persia,  still  coasting
alongst  the  Arabian  shoare :  for  there  were  our  cheifest
hopes  fixed,  in  setting  the  Lord  Embassadour  ashoare.
By  reason  of  the  *  newes,  and  advises  wee  heard  and  re-
ceived at  the  Cape  Bona  Esperanza,  our  expectations  were
frustrated,  both  of  Surat,  Dabull,  and  all  other  parts
thereabouts.

The  second  of  September,  we  sailed  close  by  an  Hand, rT
lying  alongst  the  Arabian  shoare,  called  Macyra,  the  body ZQ  desr.  10.
of  which standeth in twentie degrees thirtie minutes, min. variation.
North  latitude,  the  variation  of  the  Needle  being  twenty
degrees  tenne  minutes.

The  fourth  day,  we  passed  the  Eastermost  part  of  the
Arabian  land,  called  Cape  Rasalgat,  standing  in  the  lati- <la^e/
tude  of  twenty  two  degrees,  and  thirty  foure  minutes,  and asa  sa  '
nineteene  degrees  twenty  minutes  variation.

§. II.  [I.  iv.  491.]

Their comming on the Persian Coast  : the
treacherie  of  the  Baluches.

He  tenth  of  September,  crossing  the  Gulfe,  wee  Septemb.  10.
had  sight  of  the  Coast  of  Persia,  our  ship  being
in  the  latitude  of  twentie  five  degrees  and  tenne
minutes  :  the  variation  of  the  Compasse  eighteene  degrees
thirty  minutes :  and  being  some  seven  leagues  off  from
the  shoare,  we  sent  our  Skiffe  with  Sir  Thomas  Powell,

*For  Captain  Hawkins  comming  away  in  distast,  and  denied  trade,  the
English  wronged  by  the  Mogol  in  often  breaking  promise  (as  before  is
shewed)  forced  trade  at  the  Red  Sea  on  his  Subjects:  which  after  (least
the  Sea  and  Merchandizing  should  be  shut  up  to  them)  procured  the
Priviledges  obtained  by  Captaine  Best,  especially  seeing  the  English  able
to  withstand  the  Portugals,  whose  sea-forces  held  the  Guzerats  in  Marine
subjection,  and  made  them  afraid  of  trading  with  Englishmen.

187

A.D.
1613.

Tesseque  a
small  Village,

Baluches.

Pesseque.

Two  great
Boats  called
Teradas.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

accompanied  with  two  of  the  Embassadors  Persians,  to-
gether with  Albertus  our  linguist,  of  purpose  to  discover
the  Countrey,  and  to  seeke  some  convenient  place  to  land
his  Lordship. Where  when  they  came  to  a  little  Village,
called  Tesseque,  they  spake  with  Camell  men,  and  others
of  the  Countrey  people,  by  whom  they  understood,  that
that  Countrey  was  called  Getche Macquerona,  and  the
inhabitants  Baluches  :  all  living  under  the  government  of
one  King,  named  Melicke  Meirza,  whose  chiefe  residence
was  some  five  or  sixe  dayes  journey  from  hence,  at  a  Port
called  Guader. And  they  further  told  them,  that  all  that
Countrey  of  Macquerona,  paid  yeerely  Tribute  unto  the
King  of  Persia. Also  they  understanding  our  intents  to
land  the  Embassadour,  told  us,  that  by  Melick  Meirza  his
conveiance,  his  Lordship  should  have  safe  conduct  from
Guader  in  nine  dayes  to  Chirman,  and  from  thence  to
Spahaun  in  Persia,  in  eleven  dayes. So  we  sayled  alongst
the Coast, and sent our Skiffe againe ashoare on the
eleventh  of  this  present,  with Sir  Thomas  Powell  and
others,  accompanyed  as  before,  both  to  enquire  further  of
the  Countrey,  and  to  see  if  they  could  hire  a  Pilot  to
direct  us  for  Guader,  because  we  knew  not  how  the  Coast
did  lie. And  they  lighted  on  a  place  called  Pesseque,
about  one  dayes  journey  from the  other  place before ;
where  we  found  the  like  newes  and  reports  of  these  people
to  agree  directly  with  the  former ; all  commending  the
Port  of  Guader  to  be  our  best  place  of  landing. Whereof
we  being  very  glad  to  heare, presently  set  downe  our
determinations,  with  Gods  leave,  to  saile  thither  with  all
the  speed  we  might,  although  we  had  no  Pilot. And  in
our  way,  on  the  thirteenth  of  this  present  in  the  morning,
wee  espied  comming  from  the  East-ward,  two  great  Boates
called  Teradas,  sayling  alongst  the  shoare  towards  Ormus :
whereupon,  to  the  end  we  might  have  a  Pilot  out  of  them,
we  manned  our  Skiffe  sufficiently,  of  purpose  to  bring
them  to  our  ship  (if  intreaty  did  faile)  perforce ; yet  with-
out any  intent  to  have  offered  them  the  least  discourtesie,
or  to  have  sent  them  away  ungratified. But  when  our

188

WALTER PAYTON  a.d.

1613.

Skiffe  came  up  to  them,  in  stead  of  answering  our  mens
hailes,  they  weaved  our  Skiffe  to  Leeward  with  a  naked
Sword. Wherefore  our  men  thinking  to  feare  them,  and
to  make  them  amaine  their  sailes,  shot  off  a  piece  at  ran-
dome  towards  them ;  for  answer  whereof,  they  discharged
another  peece  at  our  Skiffe,  with  halfe  an  hundred  of
arrowes  to  boote : which  our  men  perceiving,  plyed  all
their  Muskets  at  them  againe : but  our  Skiffe  not  able
to  hold  way  with  them  sayling,  was  constrained  to  leave
them,  and  returne  to  our  ship  againe,  with  one  man  very
dangerously  hurt  with  an  arrow  in  his  breast,  although
after  recovered. Now  wee  aboord  perceiving  our  Skiffe
to  be  too  weake,  and  returning  againe  without  them,  pre-
sently hoysed  out  our  long  boat,  and  sent  her  after  them ;
we  following  with  our  ship  so  neare  to  the  shoare  as  con-
veniently wee  might  with  safetie. For  it  imported  us
much  now  to  speake  with  them,  whereby  wee  might  avoid
the  spreading  of  their  scandalous  reports  of  us,  in  that
Countrey ; which  might  have  frustrated  our  chiefe  hopes
in  landing  the  Embassadour  there,  beeing  the  place  where-
on wee  most  depended,  especially  considering  how  desti-
tute we  were  of  any  other  place,  if  this  should  fayle,  by
reason  aforesaid. So  our  long  boat  fetching  the  Teradas
up,  drave  them  into  a  Bay,  from  whence  they  could  not
escape ; which  strooke  such  a  feare  into  them,  that  they
desperately  sayled  so  farre  into  the  Bay,  that  one  of  them  One  of  the
was  cast  away  upon  the  shoare ;  and  the  other  neere  upon  Teradas  cast
following,  had  not  our  men  saved  her  from  the  breach  awa^'
thereof. All  the  Baluches  for  the  most  part  leaped  over
boord,  whereof  some  of  them  narrowly  escaped  drowning  :
and  other  taken  in  againe  by  our  men,  were  brought  with
the  Terada  aboord  our  ship,  beeing  onely  nine  Baluches  Onely  nine
left  of  about  twenty  sixe. Who  when  they  came  aboord,  BaiucJies
perceiving  them  to  be  of  Guader,  wee  told  them,  that  we
were  sory  for  the  losse  of  their  other  Terada,  and  that  we
meant  them  no  harme ; but  only  to  speake  with  them,
whereof  they  were  glad  to  heare  (for  they  thought  we  had
been  as  mercilesse  as  themselves)  imputing  their  losses

189

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

unto  their  owne  follies.  Then  we  told  them,  that  we
were  bound  to  Guader,  to  land  a  Persian  Embassadour
there,  and  that  we  would  intreate  the  Master  of  the  Boat,
whose  name  was  Noradim,  to  pilot  our  ship  thither,  and
we  would  content  him  for  his  paines.  To  which  (know-
ing himselfe  not  to  be  freed  by  deniall)  he  yeelded,  con-
ditionally that  we  would  let  the  Terada  and  his  men  pro-
ceede  in  their  Voyage  for  Muscat,  which  wee  thought  not
fit,  for  feare  of  clamours  and  newes  to  be  spread  about  the
Gulfe,  of  our  beeing  there  amongst  the  Portugals :  but
rather  to  carry  the  Terada  with  us  to  Guader,  thereby  to
make  manifest  our  good  dealings  towards  them.  The
Pilot  perceiving  himselfe  to  be  urged  between  feare  and
friendship,  in  the  end  agreed ;  of  whom  we  made  very
much,  and  in  our  way  to  Guader  had  much  conference
with  him  and  his  men,  both  concerning  the  state  of  the
Countrey  and  King,  and  touching  the  passage  of  the  Em-
bassadour into  Persia,  through  the  same. Their  answers,

[I.  iv.  492.]  reports,  and  speeches  all  concurring  with  the  former,  in  a
manner  confirmed  our  hopefull  intents,  without  any  dislike.
This  Terrada  was  about  the  burden  of  fifteene  Tunnes,
her  lading,  for  the  most  part,  was  victualls  of  those  parts ;
as  Rice,  Dates,  and  Wheat,  and  such  like.  They  had  a
Portugall  passe,  which  they  shewed  us,  thinking  at  the

September  1$.  first  we  had  beene  Portugals.  The  Originall  whereof  I
translated  out  of  the  Portuguise  language,  because  it
might  be  knowne  in  what  subjection  the  Portugals  doe
keepe  all  these  Countrey  people :  without  which  Passe,
they  are  not  suffered  to  saile  to  nor  fro,  upon  paine  both

The  Castle  of  of  losse  of  life,  ship,  and  goods :  the  Copie  whereof  fol-

Mascat.  loweth,  viz.

A  Portugal

Passport  by  Antonio  Pereira  de  Laserda,  Captaine  of  the  Castle  of

how  all  those  Mascat,  and  the  Jurisdiction  of  the  same,  for  his

parts  are  awed  Majestie, &C.

Moore?  Gut-  A  L1  those>  to  whom  these  Presents  sna11  bee  shewed :
arats,  and  '  -^"*-  Know  that  I  have  thought  good,  to  give  secure
others.  licence  unto  this  Terrada,  of  the  burden  of  fiftie  Candies,

190

WALTER PAYTON  a.d.

1613.

the  Master  whereof  is  Norradim  a  Moore,  and  Baluche,  A  Baluche.
and  a  dweller  in  Guader,  of  the  age  of  fiftie  yeeres,  and
carrieth  for  his  defence  foure  Swords,  three  Bucklers,  five
Bowes  with  their  Arrowes,  three  Calivers,  two  Launces,  and
twelve  Oares :  That  in  this  manner  following  declared,
she  may  passe  and  sayle  from  this  said  Fort,  to  Soar,
Dobar,  Mustmacoraon,  Sinde,  Cache,  Naguna,  Diu,
Chaul,  and  Cor.  In  going,  she  carrieth  goods  of  Conga,
as  Raisons,  Dates,  and  such  like :  but  not  without  dis-
patch first  out  of  the  Custome  house  of  this  said  Fort,
which  shall  appeare  by  a  Certificate,  written  on  the  Back-
side hereof.  And  to  performe  well  the  said  Voyage,  she
shall  neither  carry  nor  bring  any  prohibited  goods,  viz.
Steele,  Iron,  Lead,  Tobacco,  Ginger,  Cinamon  of  Seilon,
and  all  other  things  whatsoever  prohibited,  and  not  toller-
ated  by  the  Regiment  of  his  Majestic  And  in  this
manner  shall  the  said  Terrada  make  her  Voyage,  without
let  or  hinderance  of  any  Generalls,  Captaines,  or  other  of
the  said  Signories  Fleete,  or  Ships  whatsoever,  which  she
shall  happen  to  meet  withall.  And  this  shall  be  of  force
and  sufficiency  for  one  whole  yeere,  in  going  and  com-
ming.  If  it  be  expired,  then  to  serve  other  so  long  time,
as  the  making  hereof.

Given  from  the  said  Castle  of  Mascat,  this  sixteenth  of
November,  Ann.  Dom.  161 1.

I  Anthonio  de  Peitas,  Notarie  of  this  said  Factorie,
have  written  this,  &c.

Sealed  and  Signed,
Anthonio  Pereira.

The Certificate  written  on the  backe side  hereof  is

this  :  viz.
Registred  in  the  booke  of  Certificates,  in  Folio  xxxij.

and  so  forwards.

Signed,  Anth.  Peitas.

The seventeenth of September, we sayled by high  September  1 7.

ragged  Cliffes,  whereto  close  adjoyning,  is  a  good  water-  Juane  a

ing  place,  at  a  Village  called  Juane,  (as  Norradim  told  us)  Village.

191

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

beeing  about  fifteene  leagues  distant  from  the  Port  of
Guader,  to  the  Westerside  thereof,  which  beareth  North
of  you.

Also,  upon  this  day  in  the  evening,  wee  arrived  at
Guader.  Guader,  and  anchored  at  the  Ports  mouth  untill  the  next

day  in  the  morning ;  where,  about  thirty  Boates  came  out
of  Guader  to  fish.  Some  of  them  came  to  speake  with
the  Baluches,  which  wee  had  aboord ;  but  what  they  said
was  spoken  in  Baluche  language,  and  therefore  not  by  us
understood.  So  betimes  this  morning,  we  cleared  our
Balucha  Pilot,  with  his  Boat  and  men ;  and  told  him,  that
when  he  would  come  aboord  againe,  hee  should  be  satis-
fied for  his  paines :  and  so  hee  departed,  being  very  well
contented  therewith.

And  presently  after,  the  Ambassadour  sent  one  of  his
Persians,  named  Nazerbeg,  ashoare  in  our  Skiffe,  with  a
message  to  the  chiefe  Governour  concerning  his  landing,
and  passing  thorow  that  Countrey  into  Persia :  who  by
the  way  was  met  with  the  Governours  Boat,  comming
aboord  our  ship,  into  which  Nazerbeg  was  taken  out  of
our  Skiffe,  and  went  with  them  ashoare  to  performe  his
message,  according  to  direction,  being  accompanied  with
many  people  unto  the  Governours  Tent.  Where,  he
having  delivered  his  message  to  the  said  Governour  in  the
Persian  language  (which  is  as  well  understood  there,  as
their  owne)  was  very  much  made  of,  and  kindly  enter-
tained. The  answere  of  which  message  by  the  Gover-
Tke  Countrey  nour,  was,  that  although  that  Countrey  of  Macquerona
ofMacque- was  not  the  King  of  Persias  ; yet  they  did  acknowledge  a

Tin,iSof°it/ie  kind  of  dutifu11  love  unto  his  Majesty,  and  that  they  had
Persia*.  been  Tributaries  unto  him  and  his  Predecessors  for  many

yeeres  past,  as  they  were  now  at  present.  Also,  he  fur-
ther said,  that  the  King  of  Macquerona  was  the  King  of
Persias  Slave,  with  such  like  fained  and  trapping  comple-
ments ;  and  the  Ambassadour  should  be  as  welcome,  as
if  he  were  in  the  Persian  Land  ;  only  tending  by  treachery
to  allure  his  Lordship  ashoare,  as  by  the  event  it  appeared.
This  answere  being  returned  by  Nazerbeg,  hee  had  to

192

WALTER PAYTON  a.d.

1613.

accompany  him  aboord  (and  to  confirme  the  same  with
addition)  about  a  dozen  of  the  ancientest  men  there  of
Baluches :  who,  when  they  came  aboord  our  ship,  saluted
the  Ambassadour  with  great  submission,  both  in  their
Governours  behalfe,  and  in  their  owne :  some  of  them
offering  to  kisse  his  feete,  telling  his  Lordship,  that  he
was  the  happiest  man  alive  in  comming  thither  to  that
place.  For  ,but  one  day  passt,  the  Vice-roy  was  come
downe  with  a  troope  of  men,  to  visite  a  Saint ;  and  there-
fore his  Lordship  should  bee  conducted  with  more  safetie  [-•  lv-  493-]
thorow  his  Countrey  (from  the  danger  of  Rebels  and
Theeves,  which  were  betweene  Guader  and  Persia)  either
to  Chirman  or  Sistan,  and  so  to  Spahaun.  Also  that  the
Vice-roy  would  furnish  his  Lordship  with  Camels  and
Horses,  and  other  necessaries  requisite  :  and  that  he  would
accommodate  him  with  all  the  meanes  he  had  in  his  power.
And  moreover  said,  that  they  much  rejoyced  to  have  such
fit  opportunitie,  to  shew  their  unfained  love  towards  the
King  of  Persia  :  and  withall,  he  should  be  dispatched  from
Guader  (if  hee  would)  in  two  dayes  at  the  furthest :  and  September  1 8.
told  us,  for  our  ship,  we  should  have  both  water,  and
other  necessaries  whatsoever  we  needed :  they  bringing
then  with  them  three  bagges  of  bruised  Dates,  being  about
three  hundred  pound  weight,  with  two  Goats,  and  sent
aboord  the  said  fish-boats,  that  every  one  of  them  should
send  two  fishes  (upon  the  Governours  account)  aboord  our
ship,  who  did  accordingly.  So  that,  what  with  their  ex-
terior shew  of  unfained  love  and  kindnesse  towards  us,
together  with  all  mens  speeches  (of  whom  enquiry  was
made,  as  aforesaid)  agreeing  so  jumpe  one  with  another,
wee  were  throughly  perswaded,  without  any  kinde  of
distrust,  that  they  meant  us  as  well  as  they  said  :  Especi-
ally, the  Lord  Ambassadour  was  exceedingly  well  con-
ceited of  them,  being  joyfull  to  arrive  in  Persia  in  twentie
dayes ;  and  wee  not  sory,  in  bringing  to  perfection  our
long  desired  hopes.  But  God,  from  whose  Divine  know-
ledge the  secrets  of  no  hearts  can  bee  hidden,  knew  their
contrary  meanings  towards  us: for  had  not  his Mercy

IV  193  N

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

exceeded  his  Justice,  we  had  been  consumed,  and  it  never
could  have  been  knowne  what  had  become  of  us,  ship  nor
goods.

For,  hereupon  the  Ambassadour  resolved,  and  fitted  all
things  in  a  readinesse,  and  on  the  nineteenth  of  this  pre-
sent, which  was  the  morning  following,  sent  both  his
money,  treasure,  and  all  his  carriage  ashoare,  with  the
Baluches  Boates,  that  came  aboord  for  that  purpose.  Very-
early  also  they  brought  a  message  from  the  Vice-Roy  and
Governour,  that  they  had  provided  a  Tent  for  his  Lord-
ship, and  all  his  followers,  neere  adjoyning  unto  their
Tent :  and  therefore  he  might  come  ashoare  so  soone  as
he  pleased.  All  things  were  ready ;  into  which  Tent  all
the  Ambassadours  goods  were  carryed,  and  by  his  order,
some  of  his  followers  were  appointed  to  remaine  with
them,  untill  his  Lordship  should  come  ashoare  himselfe.
Intending  to  have  followed  the  same  day  in  the  after-
noone,  at  foure  of  the  clocke,  he  sent  the  Vice-Roy  word,
that  hee  would  then  come.  And  in  the  meane  time  our
Skiffe  went  ashoare  with  emptie  caske,  to  bring  fresh
water  aboord :  wherein  went  the  Ambassadours  Persians,
and  three  or  foure  others  of  his  followers,  to  see  the  land-
ing of  the  goods,  and  carefull  carrying  of  them  into  the
Tents.  And  at  the  landing  thereof,  the  countrey  people
demanded  if  the  Ambassadour  had  no  more  goods  then
those  to  bring  ashoare?  To  which  answere  was  made,
that  there  was  all,  except  Jewels,  and  such  like  things,
which  should  be  brought  when  himselfe  did  come.  Other
Baluches  per-  Baluches  standing  by,  replyed  to  each  other  amongst
J1  te'  themselves,  that  it  was  no  matter ; for  there  was  enough

for  the  souldiers  :  which  Nazerbeg  over-heard,  and  under-
stood, yet  concealed  it  for  that  time,  although  it  possessed
him  with  a  jealous  conceit ;  and  hee  said  afterward,  that
neverthelesse  he  had  no  power  to  continue  in  the  same,
by  reason  of  such  equal  correspondencie  of  all  matters
passed  before  ;  but  was  somewhat  more  attentive  unto
what  should  be  said  afterwards  amongst  them,  and  could
heare nothing contrary unto honest dealing : untill at

194

WALTER PAYTON  a.d.

1613.

length  meeting  with  one  Hoge  Comal  (whom  God  had  Hoge  Comal.
made an instrument to disclose their devillish project
unto  us)  hee  understood  the  particulars  of  their  bloody
intents,  by  him  revealed. At  which  Nazerbeg  was  some-
what amazed,  and  angry  with  the  man,  that  he  did  not
tell  him  of  it  before  the  goods  were  brought  ashoare.
Also,  the  houre  appointed  of  the  Ambassadours  comming
ashoare  drew  neare,  which  made  him  feare,  lest  he  should
have  come  ashoare  before  he  should  get  to  our  shippe,  to
forewarne  him :  but  as  God  would  have  it,  our  SkifFe  was
yet  a  filling  of  water  by  the  sea  side ; where,  when  he
came,  he  told  our  men,  that  there  was  treachery  plotted
against  us  ashoare :  and  withall  wished  them  to  row  him
aboord  our  ship  with  all  the  speed  they  could ; and  so
was  brought  aboord  immediatly,  although  not  one  eighth
part  of  an  houre  too  soone : for  both  the  Ambassadour,
and  all  his  followers,  together  with  the  Captaine  of  our
shippe,  and  all  the  chiefest  of  us  (who  were  willing  to
grace  his  Lordship  all  we  might,  for  the  honour  of  our
Countrey)  stood  in  the  ships  waste,  ready  to  go  ashoare.
But  Nazerbeg  bringing  these  newes,  wee  were  not  halfe  September  1 9.
so  hasty  in  our  proceedings,  he  telling  us  what  had  passed  ;
the  chiefe  effect  whereof  was  this,  That  the  Vice-Roy, The  great
and  Governour,  did  entice  so  many  of  us  as  they  could  treas°n  °J ~the
ashoare,  of  purpose  to  cut  our  throats  :  Which  being  done,  4^ revealed'
they  meant  to  have  set  upon  our  ship,  and  to  have  made
spoile  of  all. And  further,  that  they  were  all  Rebels  to
the  King  of  Persia,  being  present  death  for  any  once  to
name  the  King  of  Persia  in  that  place. Also,  that  they
had  made  enquiry  of  every  particular  man  in  our  ship,
both  of  our  places,  profession  and  estates : for  they  had
consulted  and  concluded  upon the Massacre  of  us  all
(except  the  Chirurgions,  Musitians,  Women  and  Boyes)
with  determination  to  have  put  all  the  rest  to  death  with-
out mercy. Now,  God  be  thanked,  although  we  under-
stood of  their  intended  plots  so  sufficiently,  whereby  we
were  forewarned  to  prevention  thereof,  by  arming  our
selves,  (we  knew,  under  Gods  protection,  wee  were  able

i95

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

to  defend  us  from  receiving  any  injury  aboord,  notwith-
[I.  iv.  494.]  standing  their  great  store  of  Boats  and  men,  they  having
Fifteene  hun- at  that  instant  about  fifteene  hundred  shot,  besides  others)
dredshotof yet  we  were  to  seeke  how  we  might  procure  againe  his
Lordships  goods,  and  his  three  men,  which  were  ashoare
in  their  custodies. For  performance  whereof,  God,  that
had  thus  miraculously  delivered  us  from  their  tyranny,
likewise  opened  our  understandings,  in  so  much  that  wee
obtained  all,  according  to  our  owne  desires,  in  this  manner
following, viz. Whereas they expected the comming
ashoare  of  the  Ambassadour,  his  followers,  and  our  Cap-
taine,  and  us,  accompanyed  together : we  presently  sent
Nazerbeg  ashoare  againe,  with  directions  what  he  was  to
doe,  and  to  tell  the  Vice-Roy,  that  the  Ambassadour  was
not  very  well,  and  therefore  deferred  his  comming  till  the
September  20.  next  morning,  which  was  Munday,  the  twentieth  day  of
Sic  an  dekdi-  September. Also,  to  request  the  Vice-Roy  and  Gover-
nour,  that  they  would  send  two  or  three  of  their  Boats
very  early  for  him,  the  women,  and  the  rest  of  his  com-
pany, because  the  ship-boats  were  too  small. And  with-
all,  that  the  Ambassadour  did  expect  to  bee  received  by
some  men  of  sort  from  the  Vice-Roy,  to  come  in  the  said
Boats,  in  regard  of  the  King  of  Persias  Honor,  whose
person  he  did  represent. This  message  being  well  de-
livered  tooke effect, and willing grant was made for
performance  thereof. Which  businesse  Nazerbeg  having
finished,  he  was  to  go  to  the  Tent,  where  the  goods  were,
and  to  bring  out  of  one  of  the  Trunckes  two  bagges  of
money, containing two hundred pound sterling, with
some  other  things  of  worth, if  conveniently  hee  could
without  being  spied ; because  they  should  not  suspect
that  we  had  discovered  any  of  their  villanies. Also,  wee
gave  him  order  to  returne  instantly,  and  to  wish  the  three
men  to  stay  still  in  the  Tent,  till  the  next  morning,  and
they  should  be  freed. All  which  was  done  accordingly ;
and  not  only  the  said  money  brought  away,  but  also  a
Trunck,  wherein  was  the  Lady  Sherleyes  apparell  (not-
withstanding the  Baluches  demanded  why  that  Truncke

196

WALTER  PAYTON  a.d.

1613.

was  brought  aboord  againe)  answere  being  made,  that
therein  was  the  Ladyes  night-cloathing,  and  that  it  should
bee  brought  againe  the  next  day :  and  so  passed  on  for
currant.  Now  the  Ambassadour  made  account,  that  if
he  could  but  get  one  great  Trunck  more  (wherein  were
things  of  moment  and  charge,  with  his  said  three  men)  to
lose  the  rest  without  care.  And  for  the  better  bringing
to  passe  hereof  without  suspition,  we  fitted  over-night  a
great  Chest,  and  a  close-stoole,  bound  and  maled  up  to-
gether with  cords,  very  fast  and  handsomely :  which  were
filled  with  billets,  rubbish  and  stones,  to  make  them
heavie,  to  bee  left  in  the  place  of  that  Truncke  which
should  be  brought  aboord :  and  the  three  men  should
come  forth  of  the  Tent,  with  each  of  them  their  instru-
ments of  musicke  in  their  hands.  And  for  excuse,  if  the
Baluches  should  demand  why  they  brought  that  Truncke
aboord  againe,  answere  should  bee  made  it  was  one  of  the
Merchants,  and  it  was  mistaken.  Likewise,  if  they  de-
manded why  the  men  came  aboord  againe,  answere  should  .
be  made,  that  his  Lordship  did  send  for  them,  to  accom-
pany him  ashoare  with  their  musicke.  So  all  being  ready,
the  next  morning  very  early,  wee  perceiving  the  three
Boats  comming  aboord  to  fetch  his  Lordship,  according
to  promise,  presently  manned  our  Skiffe,  and  sent  her
ashoare,  to  put  our  plot  in  execution  :  whereby  wee  hoped
to  catch  them  in  the  same  snare  that  they  had  laid  for  us.
And  in  the  meane  time  we  received  the  three  Boats  of
men  into  our  shippe,  with  entertainment  requisite  :  where-
in came  about  fortie  or  fiftie  persons ;  but  not  above
seven  or  eight  of  any  reckoning,  whereof  our  friend  Hoge
Comal  was  one,  the  rest  Slaves  and  Fisher-men.  We  kept
them  in  talke,  and  much  conference  of  by-matters,  to
passe  away  the  time,  because  our  Skiffe  might  returne
before  we  did  meddle  with  them.  Amongst  which  talke,
one  of  them  earnestly  requested  us,  as  from  the  Vice-Roy,
that  we  would  carry  our  Slurbow  ashoare  with  us,  he
being  very  desirous  to  see  it.  So  we  smoothed  them  in
their  desires. And  not  long  after,  we  espied  our  Skiffe

197

A.D.
1613.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Long  knives
worne  by  their
sides.

returning,  with  her  successe ;  which,  God  be  thanked,  fell
out  prosperously :  For  they  did  not  only  bring  the  three
men,  and  the  Truncke,  but  also  one  chiefe  man  of  the
Baluches,  whom  Nazerbeg  inticed  aboord.  And  so  soone
as  hee  was  entred  into  the  ship,  hee,  with  the  rest,  desired
to  see  our  Gun-roome,  wherein,  hee  knew  (by  intelligence)
we  had  all  our  fire-workes,  they  standing  in  much  feare
thereof,  especially  of  our  Slurbow,  with  the  fiery  Arrowes  ;
which  fell  out  fit  for  our  purpose.  For  wee  had  meant
to  have  sent  them  downe  thither,  to  take  away  their
knives  which  they  wore  by  their  sides.  So  all  the  chiefest
of  them  being  gone  downe  into  the  Gun-roome,  and  our
ship  fitted,  with  every  one  of  us  our  weapons  in  our
hands,  we  divided  our  selves,  some  above  the  Deckes,
some  betwixt,  and  others,  as  was  needful,  in  the  Gun-
roome,  to  lay  hold  of  the  Traytors  (so  soone  as  the  word
should  be  given)  to  take  away  from  them  their  long
knives : all  which  was  done  in  an  instant,  without  any

September  20.  disquietnesse  or  resistance.  Then  we  began  to  parle  with
them  upon  plaine  termes,  laying  open  to  them  their
bloodie  intents :  also  telling  them,  that  their  lives  lay  in
our  hands,  and  they  were  now  themselves  caught  in  the
same  snare,  which  they  had  plotted  for  us :  and  that  if
wee  served  them  rightly,  wee  should  cut  them  in  pieces,
as  they  had  determined  to  serve  us.  All  which,  they,  like
stony-faced  Mahumetans  denyed.  So  we  kept  sixe  of
them,  which  were  the  chiefest,  with  two  of  their  Boats,
the  rest  of  the  crew  we  sent  ashoare,  being  all,  for  the
most  part,  naked  Rascalls,  except  one,  to  whom  we  de-
livered a  message  in  particular,  to  tell  the  Vice-Roy  and
Governour,  That  unlesse  he  would  send  us  aboord  all  our
goods,  and  things  wee  had  ashoare,  without  one  peny-
worth  diminished,  wee  would  carry  away  those  men  we
had  aboord  for  satisfaction. This  message  being  delivered

[I.  iv.  495.]  to  the  Vice-Roy  and  Governour,  they  presently  sent
answere  backe  againe,  by  the  same  messenger  we  sent :
that  if  wee  would  release  the  Baluches,  then  they  would
send  us  all  our  goods  againe  ;  and  with  many  lame  excuses,

198

These

Baluches  are
Mahumetans,

WALTER PAYTON  a.d.

1613.

would  make  us  beleeve  they  meant  us  no  hurt.  Where-
upon, presently  in  the  sight  of  the  messengers,  we  clapped
them  all  in  Irons,  and  writ  one  letter  to  the  Vice-Roy,  and
the  Prisoners  wrote  another  (both  tending  to  one  effect)
in  the  Persian  Language :  threatning  the  lives  of  those
Prisoners,  if  they  did  not  send  us  all  our  goods,  as  afore-
said, and  that  without  delay,  within  the  space  of  two
houres  at  the  most :  to  which  purpose  we  set  up  the  run-
ning glasse,  before  the  messenger  departed  out  of  the
shippe,  because  he  should  make  the  more  speed  backe
againe.  By  these  sharpe  meanes,  we  urged  them  forthwith
to  returne  all  our  goods  againe,  in  very  ample  manner,  as
we  desired.  Which  being  received  into  the  ship,  wee  freed
both  the  men  and  Boats,  and  sent  them  away  according  to
promise  :  only  one  named  Malin-Simsadin,  who,  by  Hodge  p?PfaZa,
Comal,  was  discovered  to  be  a  good  Pilot  for  Sinde  and  l0  J01
Cambaya ;  we  kept  with  us  for  the  same  purpose,  con-
ditionally to  reward  him  according  to  his  deserts.

Thus  with  Gods  assistance  (to  whom  bee  alwayes  end-
lesse  praise  for  our  happie  deliverance)  we  had  dispatched
all  this  intricate  businesse,  by  six  of  the  clocke  in  the
evening,  being  the  twentieth  day  of  September :  and  set
saile  from  hence  the  same  night,  with  our  new  Pilot  and
Hodge  Comal  (who  came  aboord  from  amongst  the
cursed  crew,  to  save  his  life)  for  Sinde :  because  wee
would  be  sure  to  avoyd  all  insuing  inconveniences  there,
which  they  might  attempt  by  their  future  circumventions.
And  in  our  way  to  Sinde,  we  had  much  conference  with
Hodge  Comal,  our  good  friend,  of  whose  company  we
did  much  esteeme.  He  was  borne  at  Dabul,  but  his
Father  was  a  Persian  by  his  profession,  he  was  a  Church-
man of  that  Sect,  and  had  some  skill  in  Chirurgerie  and
Physicke,  for  which  use  he  was  resident  in  the  Governours
Tent :  and  by  this  meanes  he  over-heard  all  that  passed.
And  excusing  his  comming  aboord  for  certaine  Oyntments,
which  our  Surgeons  had  promised  him,  hee  told  us  that
when  hee  heard  of  their  intents,  his  heart  was  full  of
bemoning  compassion,  to  thinke  that  we  should  come  like

199

A.D.
l6l*?.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Macquerona.

25.  degrees.

innocent  sheepe,  to  the  slaughter  of  such  butcherly  Bloud-
suckers :  and  therefore  he  perceived  well,  that  God  would
have  him  reveale  it.  And  he  further  told  us,  that  to  his
knowledge,  they  had  betrayed  three  ships  before  in  the
like  manner ;  and  that  they  were  all  rebels  to  the  King  of
Persia,  denying  to  pay  the  Tribute,  which  both  they  and
their  Ancestors  had  formerly  done.  Wherefore,  the  King
of  Persia  had  levyed  a  great  Armie  of  Souldiers,  not  farre
from  Guader  of  purpose,  to  come  upon  that  Countrey
the  next  Winter.

This  Countrey  Macquerona,  is  bordering  close  upon
the.  Persian  Land,  beeing  part  of  the  Maine  Continent  of
Guaderportin  Asia  .  anc[  Quader  Port  standeth  in  about  twentie  five
degrees  of  North  latitude,  and  the  variation  seventeene
degrees  fifteene  minutes ;  good  anchorage  betweene  foure
and  five  fathomes.

The  one  and  twentieth  of  September  at  night,  our
Baluche  Pilot  brought  our  ship  in  danger  of  a  shoale :
where  we  were  inforced  to  chop  to  an  anchor,  till  the  next
morning.

The  foure  and  twentieth  at  night,  as  we  lay  a  hull  (be-
cause we  were  not  farre  from  Cape  Camelo)  there  passed
close  by  us  a  Portugall  Frigat  bound  for  Sinde :  which  at
the  first  wee  supposed  to  have  beene  a  Galley,  and  there-
fore armed  our  selves  for  defence.

§. HI.

Their  comming  to  Divulginde  landing  the  Em-
bassadour,  seeking  Trade,  and  crossed  by  the
slanderous  Portugals,  going  to  Sumatra  and
Bantam ;  and  returne.

The  mouth  of
the  River
Sinde  is  24.
degrees  38.
minutes  in  the
Mogols
Dominions  :

He  six  and  twentieth,  we  came  to  an  anchor  right
before  the  mouth  of  the  River  Sinde,  with  direc-
tions of  a  Pilot,  which  we  had  out  of  one  of  the
Fisher-boats  which  were  fishing  there. We  road  in  a

foot  lesse  then  five  fathome  water  (the  Rivers  mouth  bear-
ing East  &  by  North)  in  very  good  ground : and  is  in

200

WALTER  PAYTON

A.D.
1613.

Variation  16.
degrees  45.
minutes.

Diul.

the  latitude  of  twentie  foure  degrees  and  thirtie  eight
minutes,  to  the  Northward  of  the  Equinoctiall  Line,  the
variation  is  sixteene  degrees  fortie  five  minutes.

Hereupon  the  same  day  the  Ambassadour  sent  two  of
his  people  ashoare,  to  speake  with  the  Governour  con-
cerning his  Lordships  comming  ashoare :  and  to  tell  him
his  intent,  to  have  passage  through  that  Countrey  into
Persia.  Which  Governour,  named  Arah  Manewardus
beeing  of  Diul,  was  very  willing  to  welcome  the  Ambassa-
dour, and  to  shew  him  all  the  kindnesse  hee  could  (for
the  love  he  professed  to  the  King  of  Persia)  both  in  his
Royall  entertainment,  and  passage  through  his  Countrey,
or  Jurisdiction :  and  sent  a  principall  man  aboord  us,
accompanyed  with  five  or  sixe  more  to  welcome  his  Lord-
ship, with  many  Complements,  assuring  him  of  kind
entertainment.

So  presently,  there  were  Boates  sent  for  from  Diul,  to
carrie  him,  his  people,  and  his  goods  ashoare,  which  came
on  the  nine  and  twentieth  of  this  instant :  upon  which  day,
we  were  cleered  both  of  him  and  his  (both  in  number  [I.  iv.  496.]
and  health)  as  when  they  first  entred  into  our  ship :  and
for  his  farewell,  eleven  Peeces  of  Ordnance  were  shot  off
from  our  ship.  Also,  Simsadin,  our  treacherous  Baluche
Pilot,  wee  set  ashoare  at  the  same  time  (beeing  intreated
of  the  Guserats)  notwithstanding  his  desert  to  have  beene
set  in  the  Sea,  in  that  hee  would  have  cast  us  away  twice :
whereof,  once  by  himselfe,  and  another  time  by  his  Devil-
lish  counsell  given  to  another  Pilot,  which  we  had  of  the
Fisher-boates  here.  At  the  Ambassadours  departing  out
of  the  ship  the  Captaine  delivered  him  a  fine  piece  double
locked,  to  present  the  Governour  of  Tata,  a  great  Citie
one  dayes  journey  from  Diul,  both  Cities  standing  in  the
Great  Mogols  Dominions.  Also  we  intreated  his  Lord-
ship, that  hee  would  send  us  word  how  he  found  the
Countrey,  and  whether  we  might  have  trade  there  or  not :
and  withall  delivered  his  Lordship  a  note  in  writing,  what
we  chiefly  desired. The  Copie  whereof  doth  follow.

Inprimis,  that  our  comming  hither  to  this  Port,  as  it

Tatta  a  great
citie  one  dayes
journey  from
Diul.

201

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

is  purposely  to  land  your  Lordship,  so  withall  we  have
brought  certaine  Commodities  and  Money,  to  the  end  if
we  obtaine  safe  protection  for  quiet  and  peaceable  Trade,
we  may  make  sale  of  such  and  so  much  of  our  Commodi-
ties as  shalbe  fitting :  otherwise  we  desire  but  leave  to
refresh,  and  so  depart.  Likewise,  if  the  Governour  please
that  we  may  settle  a  Factorie  heere,  we  also  desire  it :  and
although  now  wee  are  but  slenderly  provided,  yet,  here-
after we  will  bring  such  store,  and  sorts  of  Commodities,
as  shalbe  most  required  and  conveniently  vented  in  this
Port.

E

The  Commodities  we  now  have  brought  are

these,  viz.

Lephants Teeth. Fine Peeces. Lead in Barres.
Morses  Teeth. Tinne in Barres. Some  Rials  of
Plate.

The  thirtieth  of  September,  the  Ambassadour  had
audience  with  the  Governour  of  Diul  concerning  all  his
businesse,  unto  whom  he  shewed  the  King  of  Persians
Firma,  as  also  the  King  of  Spaines  Passe,  thinking  thereby
A  Portugal!  to  satisfie  and  resolve  the  jealous  doubts  of  the  Portugals
jf'.  fer  tn  Liedger  there,  (who  reported,  upon  intelligence  from
Hls  siander  of  Ormus,  that  Don  Roberto  Sherley  was  come  forth  of
ths  English.  England  with  three  shippes  into  the  Indies  of  purpose  to
steale)  but  they  peremptorily  denyed  credence  to  any
Writing  hee  shewed  them,  saying,  it  was  neither  their
Kings  hand,  nor  Seale.  For  if  it  were,  they  could  not  be
ignorant  thereof,  considering  they  knew  it  so  well :  and
further  said,  it  was  counterfeit.  Whereat  the  Ambassa-
dour was  much  moved  to  impatience,  and  replyed  againe
unto  them,  saying,  that  it  was  meere  folly  to  shew  them
any  Kings  hand  or  Seale  :  for  they  had  no  King,  and  there-
fore could  not  know  it.  And  that  they  were  a  waste
Nation  only  subdued,  and  brought  under  subjection  per-
force by  the  King  of  Spaine,  and  were  servile  both  to  him
and  his  subjects.  Notwithstanding  the  Portugals  were
not  danted,  but  stood  stiffely  in  their  former  opinions :

202

WALTER  PAYTON  a.d.

1613
and  said,  that  he  had  two  ships  more  in  the  Indies. Then

Arah  Manewardus  spake  in  the  Ambassadours  behalfe,
rebuking  them  sharply  for  such  unseemely  contradictions
of  the  Persian  Ambassadour  :  and  so  concluded,  absenting
the  Portugals  out  of  the  roome.  Afterward  the  Ambassa-
dour made  a  speech  unto  the  said  Governour  and  assembly,
concerning  the  admittance  of  us  into  his  Port,  to  trade
(according  to  directions,  given  his  Lordship  from  us,  as
aforesaid)  which  was  very  kindly  imbraced  of  the  Gover-
nour :  with  willingnesse  to  do  therein  what  he  might,  all
inconveniences  understood.  For  which  purpose  he  willed
the  Ambassador  to  send  for  one  or  two  Merchants  from
aboord,  to  conferre  with  him  upon  the  same.  Where-
upon the  Ambassadour  wrote  a  Letter  unto  us,  by  two  of
his  people,  who  came  aboord  our  ship  on  the  second  of
October  16 13.  in  the  morning:  by  which  Letter  we  per-
ceived his  Lordships  proceedings  in  our  desired  businesse
with  the  Governour,  with  assurance  for  our  safe  going
and  returne  :  being  in  such  good  sort  and  fashion,  that  our
hopes  were  great  in  establishing  a  trade  there,  if  not  a
Factorie :  especially  to  make  sale  of  the  small  quantitie  of
goods  which  wee  now  brought.  Wherefore  Master  J°sePh
Joseph  Salbancke,  and  my  selfe,  fitted  our  selves  with  the
advice  of  the  Captaine  and  others  in  our  ship,  and  went  payion
ashoare  in  one  of  the  Countrey  Boates  the  same  morning
about  eight  of  the  clocke,  our  ship  riding  about  foure  or
five  miles  from  the  rivers  mouth,  from  whence  we  had
fifteene  miles  to  the  Citie  Diul,  where  the  Ambassadour
was,  so  that  it  was  late  in  the  evening  the  same  day  before
we  landed.

And  in  our  way  we  met  with  a  Portugall  Frigat  bound
for  Ormus,  which  I  saw  went  to  carrie  newes  of  our
ships  being  there :  because  none  of  their  ships  (which
were  daily  expected)  should  come  till  we  were  gone.
This  Frigat  came  close  by  our  shippe,  and  tooke
view  of  her,  and  so  departed.  Now  when  we  were
landed,  there  came  three  or  foure  Portugals  unto  us,  de-
manding if  we  had  brought  any  goods  ashoare,  and  such

203

Salbancke  and
Walter

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGBJMES

1613.

like  questions :  to  whom  wee  made  no  reply,  making
shew  that  we  understood  them  not,  because  we  might
understand  them  for  our  advantage,  if  occasion  served.
Portugal*  Then  there  came  another  Portugall  (who  spake  the  Dutch
slalfc-rous  Tongue  very  perfectly)  telling  me  many  things  concern-
ing the  people  and  Countrey,  all  tending  to  disgrace,  in
an  idle  and  frivolous  manner :  thinking  thereby  to  dis-
swade  us  from  desiring  Trade  there.  Not  long  after,  the
Officers  of  the  Custome-house  came  and  conducted  us  up
to  the  Castle,  where  the  Governour  dwelt,  who  we  thought
would  have  spoken  with  us  that  night,  but  did  not,
[I.  iv.  497.]  because  it  was  so  late  :  yet  the  Officers  (being  for  the  most
part  Banians,  and  spake  good  Portuguse)  searched  every
part  about  us  for  money,  not  leaving  so  much  as  our  shoes
unsearched.  Which  being  done,  and  perceiving  us  to  take
it  strangely,  they  prayed  us  to  be  contented,  for  it  was  the
order  of  that  place.  To  which  I  answered,  that  although
the  Portugals  might  give  them  cause  to  ordaine  so  bad  a
fashion,  yet  English  Merchants  did  not,  Meazle  like,  hide
money  in  their  shooes :  but  notwithstanding,  we  were
therewith  contented.  Then  the  Governours  Servants
came  to  us,  excusing  it  likewise,  saying,  that  he  was  dis-
pleased thereat.  And  so  they  brought  a  great  light,  and
directed  us  from  the  Castle,  unto  the  house  where  Sir
Robert  Sherley,  the  Persian  Ambassadour  did  lodge :  to
whom  wee  found  our  selves  very  welcome,  and  lodged
there  all  the  time  of  our  abode  in  Diul,  expence  free.  The
The  mahce  of  Portugals  seeing  us  landed,  and  hearing  that  wee  were  to
the  Portugals.  treate  with  the  Qovernour  about  t^e  setling  of  Trade

there,  did  nothing  all  this  time  but  (like  envious  and  lying
Malignants)  spread  clamorous  and  scandalous  speeches,  in
disgrace  of  our  King,  Nation,  and  Countrey :  reporting
that  we  were  theeves,  and  not  Merchandizers,  but  lived
chiefly  by  robbing  of  other  Nations  on  the  Seas.
October  3.  The  third  of  October  in  the  morning,  the  Governour

sent  the  Ambassador  word,  that  in  the  afternoone  he  would
have  speach  with  us.  In  the  meane  while,  wee  had
intelligence  that  the  Portugalls  were  labouring  all  they

204

WALTER PAYTON  a.d.

1613.

could  with  him,  and  others,  to  prevent  our  intertainement :
both  by  offering  him  gratifications  if  he  would  refuse  us,
and  by  threatning  to  be  gone,  if  he  did  receive  us,  alledg-
ing  as  before,  that  they  would  not  trade  where  theeves  did
trade.  Neverthelesse,  according  to  our  expectations,  the
Governour  sent  for  us ;  and  withall  commanded  foure
great  horses  gallantly  trapped,  to  be  brought  unto  the
Embassadours  house,  for  his  Lordship,  Sir  Thomas
Powell,  Master  Salbancke,  and  my  selfe ;  also  a  certaine
company  of  his  servants,  to  conduct  us  to  the  Castle:  They  goe  to  the
also  all  the  Embassadours  followers  went  with  him,  each  ,aste.  ^
of  them  carrying  an  Halbert  on  their  shoulders.  fashion.

Thus  we  rode  through  some  part  of  the  Citie,  wherein
the  people  in  every  street  came  flocking  to  see  us,  they
having  of  long  time  heard  talke  of  Englishmen,  but  never
had  seene  any  before  now :  for  we  were  the  first  that  ever
came  into  that  part  of  the  Co un trey.  When  we  came  to  Their  enter-
the  Castle,  we  were  received  very  orderly,  and  directed  ta^ne"ientat
through  some  spacious  roomes,  (where  souldiours  were
standing  on  each  side  as  we  went  in  rankes,  cloathed  all
in  white  linnen  from  head  to  foot)  up  to  an  high  Turret,
wherein  the  Governour,  and  some  other  were  set :  who  at
our  entrance  arose,  and  saluted  us,  bidding  us  kindly  wel-
come. Then  we  all  sate  downe  together  round  upon  the
Carpets,  which  were  spread  upon  the  floare  according  to
their  fashion.  Then  the  Governour  againe  said,  we  were
very  welcome,  and  that  he  was  glad  to  see  Englishmen  in
those  parts ;  and  proceeded  to  further  talke  concerning
our  businesse,  and  told  us  (whereas  wee  desired  trade)  the
Portugals  would  not  consent  that  we  should  drive  any
trade,  or  have  to  doe  where  they  were,  threatning  to  be
gone  if  he  did  entertaine  us.  Notwithstanding,  if  he
could  be  assured  of  a  greater  benefit  to  arise  by  our  trade
then  by  theirs,  he  would  not  care  if  they  did  forsake  him :
for  hee  did  well  affect  our  Nation.  But  in  the  meane
time,  he  having  farmed  the  customes  of  that  Port  from  T,.  K-  ■
the  King,  unto  whom  he  stood  bound  for  the  payment  of  the  Gnat  '
certaine  summes  of  money  yeerly  for  the  same,  whether  Mogol.

205

A.D.
1613.

A  Rupia  is
two  shillings,
or  somewhat
more,  and  a
Leek  is
1 00000.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

it  came  in  or  not :  it  behooved  him  carefully,  to  be  cir-
cumspect in  ordering  those  businesses,  whereby  to  avoid
the  Kings  Highnesse  displeasure  ;  which  unhappily  might
fall  out  to  his  utter  overthrow  and  undoing.

And  then  he  began  to  tell  us  further,  that  the  custome
of  the  Portugalls  trade, together  with  their  meanes  in
letting  out  their  ships  to  Guzerates  and  Banians,  amounted
unto  a  Leek  of  Rupias  yeerely,  which  is  tenne  thousand
pound  sterling. Then  he  demaunded  of  us,  what  sorts
of  Commodities  we  had  now  brought,  and  the  quantities
of each ; also what store of money  ? All which we
answered  him,  a  little  more  or  lesse,  and  withall  told  him,
that  although  now  we  brought  but  small  quantities,  yet
wee  could  furnish  that  Port  at  our  next  returne,  with  any
Commodities  whatsoever  the  Portugalls  did  bring ; and
such  a  quantitie  of  each,  as  we  should  perceive  requisite
and  fitting  to  be  vented  there. Of  this  he  liked  well,  and
asked  in  what  time  we  could  returne  from  our  Countrey
thither  againe? We  answered  him,  in  about  twenty  two
moneths. So  hee  concluded,  saying,  That  in  regard  of
our  small  stocke,  the  Portugals  would  both  laugh  at  him,
and  us,  if  we  should  be  entertained  now. Wherefore,  he
wished  us  to  deferre  it  untill  our  next  comming,  and  in  the
meane  time  he  would  give  us  a  writing  under  his  hand
and  seale,  thereby  to  assure  us  of  entertainement  at  our
next  comming,  conditionally,  that  we  come  provided  as
aforesaid,  and  we  to  leave  him  another  writing,  to  assure
him  that  our  ship  should  not  molest  any  of  the  King  of
Mogors  ships,  goods,  nor  subjects  ;  which  we  agreed  unto  :
withall  requesting  him,  that  although  hee  would  not  re-
ceive us  whereby  to  establish  a  trade  now ; yet  that  he
would  permit  us  to  make  sale  of  those  goods  we  now  had  :
which  in  no  wise  he  would  grant,  for  feare  of  offending
the  Portugalls, alleadging  as  before. Then  we  desired
him  that  wee  might  have  water,  and  other  refreshing  for
our  money,  and  we  would  depart  so  soone  as  we  could.
For  this  he  said,  that  so  soone  as  we  did  send  him  our
writing  aforesaid,  he  would  both  send  us  another,  and  give

206

WALTER PAYTON  a.d.

1613.

order  to  his  Officers  for  the  same :  but  he  would  not  have

the  Portugalls  to  know  thereof. So  we  seeing  no  remedie,

demanded  of  him  what  sorts  of  commodities  he  would

have  us  bring  thither ; also  what  Commodities  that  coun-  [I.  iv.  498.]

trey  did  affoord :  who  answered  these,  viz.

Broad  cloath  of  divers  prices,  and  light  colours,  as
Stammels,  Reds,  Greenes,  and  Sky-colours,  and  Aniles,
Blewes,  and  Azures,  &c.  Elephants  teeth,  Iron,  Tinne,
Lead,  Steele,  Spices,  Mony.  These  Commodities  are  to  be
carried  for  Sinde.

Commodities  to  be  had  there.

INdigo  of  Lahor. Indigo  of  Cherques. Callicoes  all
sorts. Pintadoes  of  all  sorts. Guserat  and  Cambaya.
Commodities  of  all  sorts,  with  many  sorts  of  Drugges.

Then  wee  tooke  our  leaves  of  him  and  parted,  return-
ing to  the  Embassadours  house  againe,  where  I  framed  a
Letter,  and  sent  him  according  to  our  promise,  signed  by
M.  Salbancke,  and  my  selfe ;  and  received  another  from
him  likewise,  which  was  in  the  Persian  language,  much
like  the  Hebrewe  Letter  backward :  the  English  whereof
was  interpreted  to  us  by  the  Ambassadour ;  as  followeth,
viz.

WHereas  here  arrived  at  this  Port  of  Diul,  in  the
Kingdome  of  Mugore,  one  English  ship  called  the
Expedition,  whereof  is  Captaine  Christopher  Newport,
and  Merchants,  Joseph  Salbancke  and  Walter  Peyton,  to
land  Don  Robert  Sherley,  the  King  of  Persians  Embassa-
dour,  who  desired  grant  of  trade  in  this  Port  (being  under
my  government)  which  willingly  I  would  have  graunted,
but  onely  for  prejudiciall  inconveniences  insuing :  for
they  brought  not  merchandize,  fitting  in  quantitie  to
begin  such  trade  :  neither  the  Portugals  by  whose  trade
at  present  I  reape  benefit,  would  consent  thereto,  threat-
ning  to  bee  gone  if  I  did  receive  the  English  Nation.  So
that  thereby,  I  should  have  beene  left  destitute  of  all
trade,  whereof  those  Summes  of  Money  doe  arise  yeerly,

207

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

which  I  am  bound  to  pay  unto  the  Kings  Majestie :  and
in  default  therein,  I  should  put  in  hazard  his  Highnesse
displeasure,  to  my  utter  over-throw  and  undoing.  Yet
notwithstanding,  for  the  love  I  owe  unto  the  King  of
Persia,  by  whose  Embassadour  I  am  requested,  and  the
affection  I  beare  unto  the  English  Nation,  together  with
the  faithfull  performance  of  their  writings,  left  with  me
under  their  hands  and  seales,  of  the  two  Merchants  afore-
said, (which  is  not  to  molest  or  meddle  with  any  of  the
said  Kings  shippes,  goods  nor  subjects,  in  the  time  of
this  their  Voyage,  in  the  shippe  aforesaid)  I  have  given
them  this  writing  under  mine  owne  hand  and  seale  :  hereby
promising  the  English  Nation  (that  if  they  will  come  like
themselves,  so  fitted  that  I  may  advantage  my  selfe  more
by  them,  then  by  the  Portugals)  infallible  assurance  of
intertainement  to  trade,  with  such  reasonable  grant  of
Priviledges  as  we  shall  agree  upon.  Dated  in  Diul  the
third  day  of  October,  Anno  16 13.

Signed,  Arah  Manewardus.

Sealed  with  Incke.

The  fourth  of  October,  we  received  the  writing  from
the  Governour,  together  with  order  to  his  Officers  for  our
watering  and  refreshing  :  and  then  wee  hastened  to  returne
aboord  our  ship  againe.  And  a  little  before  our  departure,
the  Ambassadour  fell  into  discourse  with  us,  about  the
procuring  of  a  Firma  from  the  King  of  Magore :  and
withall,  wished  Master  Salbanck  to  go  along  with  him
for  Agra  (which  is  the  chiefe  place  where  the  great  Mogoll
keepeth  his  Court)  and  he  would  warrant  us,  that  he  would
procure  the  same  in  very  short  time :  especially  now,  at
this  so  fit  an  opportunitie  offered,  both  in  regard  of  his
businesse  with  the  Mogoll,  as  also  the  willingnesse  of
Arah  Manewardus,  to  entertaine  us  at  this  Port :  which
opportunitie  being  let  slip,  we  should  never  obtaine  the
like ;  his  Lordship  protesting  and  vowing  to  doe  his  best
endeavour  therein,  and  shew  himselfe  a  true  hearted
English  man  towards  his  Countrey,  howsoever  the  Com-

208

WALTER PAYTON  a.d.

1613.

pany  of  Merchants  (he  said)  did  conceit  him.  And  fur-
ther, that  Master  Salbanck  should  be  an  eye-witnesse  of
his  constant  and  faithfull  proceeding  therein,  to  doe  the
Merchants  good,  in  obtaining  the  said  Firma :  not  only
for  Diul,  but  also  for  any  other  part  in  the  Mogolls
Dominions :  and  also  should  bring  it  for  England  over-
land himselfe.  All  which  being  grounded  upon  some
reason,  and  Master  Salbanck  having  been  in  those  parts
before,  hee  was  willing  to  undertake  :  Provided,  he  might
have  the  consent  of  the  Captaine,  my  selfe,  and  others  in
the  ship.  To  which  purposes,  the  Ambassadour  writ  a
letter  to  the  Captaine,  perswading  his  consent  thereto,  and
sent  it  aboord  by  us.

So  we  parted  from  Diul  this  day  in  the  after-noone,  and
when  we  came  to  the  Rivers  side  to  take  Boat,  there
flocked  about  us  many  of  the  Countrey  people :  also  there
came  downe  to  us  about  a  dozen  of  the  envious  Portugals,
who  began  to  talke  with  us  in  Dutch,  as  before,  demand-
ing of  us  many  frivolous  questions :  which,  when  I  had
answered,  I  spake  in  their  owne  language,  (because  the
Banians  which  were  there  present,  might  understand)  and
told  them  that  they  were  a  shamelesse  and  lying  people,
in  spreading  of  so  many  devised  scandals,  and  slanderous
reports  of  our  Nation  ;  unto  whom  they  knew  themselves
much  inferiour  in  many  respects ;  and  that  they  did  it
only  in  malitious  policie,  because  they  would  not  have  us
to  trade  in  the  Indies,  as  well  as  they.  Also  I  told  them,
that  if  they  did  not  containe  themselves  within  the  com-
passe  of  better  peace,  reforming  themselves  hereafter,  both
in  their  sayings  and  doings,  they  should  be  all  rooted  out
of  the  Indies,  and  a  more  honest  and  Royall  Nation  placed
in  their  roomes.  Then  one  of  the  chiefest  of  them  singled
out  himselfe,  and  answered  thus  :  That  they  had  enemies
too  many  already,  and  therefore  they  desired  no  more.
And  as  for  scandalous  speeches  they  did  not  deny,  being  [I.  iv.  +99.]
urged  thereunto  :  for  not  long  past,  off  from  Surat,  they
had  a  ship  taken  by  English  men,  as  they  supposed  :  to
which  I  answered  them,  that  it  might  bee  rather  the  Hol-
iv  209  o

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

landers.  So  they  concluded,  in  the  end  very  plyant  and
sociable,  wishing  that  we  might  trade  in  all  parts  of  the
Indies  with  them,  and  they  with  us,  like  neighbours  and
friends  ;  and  that  there  were  some  agreement  made  betwixt
our  King  and  theirs,  for  the  bringing  to  passe  thereof.
Thus  they  taking  their  leaves  of  us  in  very  kind  manner,
we  parted.

The  sixt,  we  arrived  aboord  our  ship  againe,  where  it
was  agreed  upon,  that  Master  Salbanck  should  goe,  as
aforesaid,  with  the  Ambassadour  for  Agra.  Wherefore
he  fitted  himselfe,  thinking  to  have  gone  ashoare  the  next
day ;  and  in  the  meane  time,  the  Captaine  sent  the  Purser
and  his  man  to  buy  fresh  victualls,  and  provision  for  the
Sea :  who,  when  they  came  to  the  Citie,  were  by  the
Governour  presently  turned  backe  againe  as  they  went ;
and  expresse  command  by  Proclamation,  upon  paine  of
death,  the  Country  people  should  bring  no  more  English
men  ashoare.  These  sudden  and  strange  alterations  made
us  much  to  marvell ;  for  wee  could  never  know  the  cer-
taintie  whereupon  it  grew,  or  what  should  be  the  cause.

All  the  time  of  our  being  heere  at  Sinde,  we  could
never  understand  of  any  trade  setled  at  Surat :  for  if  we
had,  we  might  have  taken  other  courses.  The  Ambassa-
dor had  above  seven  moneths  journey,  (from  Sinde  to
Spahaun  in  Persia)  by  Caravan ;  or  if  he  procured  to
travell  otherwise,  then  it  is  one  moneth  lesse.

They  depart The  ninth,  we  set  saile  from  hence,  directing  our  course,

from  Sinde. with  Gods  leave?  for  Sumatra.

November  20.  The  twentieth  of  November,  we  came  to  an  anchor  in
Priaman.  the  Roade  of  Priaman,  where  we  went  in  betwixt  the  two
Northermost  little  Hands,  and  anchored  close  by  the  Nor-
thermost  of  them  both  in  five  fathome  water.  And  in
the  meane  time  wee  beat  the  price  of  Pepper  at  Priaman,
and  brought  it  from  two  and  twentie  Rialls,  to  seventeene
Rialls  a  Bahar,  first  peny :  at  which  price  we  bought  two
Bahars,  which  were  brought  aboord  our  ship.  But  the
Governour,  although  we  had  presented  him  with  a  piece,
would  not  suffer  us  to  take  an  house,  nor  to  buy  any

210

WALTER PAYTON  a.d.

i  6 13.

Pepper  ashoare,  unlesse  wee  would  bestow  some  twentie

Presents  upon  the  Officers  and  Merchants  there.

The  two  and  twentieth,  we  received  a  letter  from  Cap-  -
taine  Christen,  out  of  the  Hosiander  at  Tecoo,  earnestly
wishing  us  to  come  to  Tecoo  with  our  ship,  so  soone  as
we  could,  and  wee  should  not  faile  to  lade  so  much  Pepper
as  we  determined,  and  that  in  short  time.  And  because
we  were  not  well  acquainted  with  this  place ;  Captaine
Christen  sent  one  of  his  Masters  Mates,  named  Richard
Hall,  to  Pilot  us  into  the  Roade,  by  reason  of  many
dangerous  shoalds  that  lye  about  Tecoo.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  we  came  to  an  anchor  in
Tecoo  Road,  in  foure  fathom  water,  where  Richard  Hall  Tecoo.
returned  aboord  the  Hosiander,  and  being  troubled  with
the  Fluxe,  dyed  the  same  night.  Now  we  being  come
to  Tecoo,  found  all  things  contrary  to  our  expectation.
For,  whereas  before  our  comming  hither,  the  Countrey
people  offered  their  Pepper  to  Captaine  Christen  after
twelve  and  thirteene  Rialls  a  Bahar,  in  trucke  of  Surat
commodities ;  they  now  demanded  two  and  twentie  Rials
ready  money,  refusing  to  trucke  with  him  at  all  for  com-
modities. Also,  heere  they  demanded  as  many  presents,
as  they  of  Priaman ;  besides  seventie  two  Rials  of  plate
for  anchorage.  So  that  we  were  now  worse  to  passe  then
before  and  time  not  permitting  us  to  make  delay,  we  grew
into  short  termes  with  them  :  and  told  them,  that  although
wee  did  not  buy  a  Cattee  of  Pepper  there,  wee  would  not
agree,  nor  yeeld  unto  their  unreasonable  demands.  And
withall,  I  framed  a  letter,  as  from  the  Captaine,  by  him
firmed  and  consigned  to  the  chiefe  Governour,  shewing
him  that  they  did  not  use  our  Nation  so  well,  as  we  did
expect  at  their  hands,  both  in  regard  of  their  unjust  de-
manding of  presents ;  (which  we  did  not  usually  give  by
compulsion,  but  either  for  affection  or  deserving)  and  also
their  unreasonable  delaying  the  performance  of  their  pro-
mises, falling  out  to  be  so  uncertaine,  that  wee  could  not
account  them  to  bee  Merchant-like  dealings.  For  our
ships  have  stayed  there  divers  times,  three,  foure  or  five

21T

a.d.
1613.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

December  2.
1613.

moneths,  only  depending  upon  their  posting  promises,  to
have  their  full  lading ;  which  might  have  beene  as  well
dispatched  in  one  moneth,  with  that  small  quantitie  of
Pepper  which  they  had.  This  letter  was  Englished  by
the  Hosianders  Linguist  (named  John,  an  Indian,  who
spake  the  language  very  well)  unto  the  chiefe  Governour  :
who  hereupon  gave  present  order,  that  wee  might  buy
Pepper  of  any  man  that  would  sell.  And  withall  sent  a
messenger  aboord  our  ship,  to  wish  one  of  us  to  come
ashoare,  and  it  should  be  weighed  there.  But  we  doubt-
ing their  delays,  accepted  not  thereof ;  and  therefore  sent
him  word  againe,  that  wee  could  not  stay  so  long,  as  to
weigh  it  ashoare :  if  they  would  bring  it  aboord  and
weight  it,  we  would  give  them  eighteene  Rialls  a  Bahar
for  their  Pepper,  and  two  Rials  upon  each  Bahar,  for  the
custome  and  Governour,  being  just  twentie  Rials,  condi-
tionally they  would  bring  it  aboord ;  otherwise  we  would
not  stay.  So  they  lingring  somewhat  long  before  they
came,  we  set  saile,  making  shew  to  depart :  which  the
Governour  perceiving,  forthwith  sent  another  messenger
(who  spake  the  Portuguise  language  indifferently  well)  to
entreate  us  to  come  to  an  anchor  againe,  and  wee  should
have  as  much  Pepper  brought  aboord  immediately  as  we
would  lade :  which  we  did,  and  they  came  as  fast  with
Prawes  lading  of  Pepper,  as  conveniently  we  could  weigh
[I.  iv.  500.]  it :  and  so  continued  for  the  space  of  three  or  foure  dayes,
till  they  had  brought  about  some  two  hundred  Bahars,  and
then  began  to  slack  their  bringing.  Which  we  perceiv-
ing, and  fearing  to  spend  over-much  time  heere  (lest  we
should  lose  the  seasons  of  the  Monsons)  we  departed  for
Bantam.

The  eight  of  December,  we  set  saile  from  Tecoo,  where
we  left  three  of  our  men  in  the  Hosiander,  their  necessitie
so  requiring.  In  our  course  to  Bantam,  for  the  most
part,  we  sailed  within  sight  of  Sumatra.

The  sixteenth,  at  our  entrance  into  the  Straights  of
Sunda,  being  the  sixteenth  of  this  present,  we  met  with
the  Dragon  bound  homeward,  by  whom  we  writ  home.

December  8.

212

WALTER PAYTON  a.d.

1614.

The  seventeenth,  wee  brought  our  ship  to  an  anchor  They  arrive
in  Bantam  Road :  where  wee  presently  went  ashoare,  to  tfL  B*ntam
provide  her  lading. On  the  nine  and  twentieth,  we  made
an  end  of  lading  our  whole  complement.

The  second  of  January,  we  set  saile  from  Bantam  for  January  2.
England,  not  having  lost  one  man  by  sicknesse  in  all  our
Voyage hitherto ; for which, God make us thankfull.
Also  this  day,  as  we  were  going  out  by  Pulo  Pan  Ian,  wee
met  with  Generall  Saris  in  the  Cloave,  come  from  Japan : Genera// Saris
for  whose  letters,  and  the  delivery  of  foure  chests,  the  tn  the  cloave>

_,  1,  '  .  ai  j  1  ■  c come  from

Captaine  cast  anchor  againe.  Also  we  spared  him  two  or  japa„m
our  men,  namely,  Mortimer  Prittie  Yonker,  and  Thomas
Valens,  one  of  our  Carpenters  Mates  whereof  they  stood
much  in  need ;  for  they  had  not  one  Carpenter  left  alive.
Thus  having  also  dispatched  these  businesses  with  the
Cloave,  we  set  saile  once  againe  for  England,  on  the
fourth  of  this  present.

The  one  and  twentieth,  we  came  to  an  anchor  in  Sal-  March  21.
danha  Bay :  where  wee  had  sheepe  and  Bullocks  reason-  The  Bay  of
able  store,  besides  great  abundance  of  fresh  fish,  which
we  caught  with  our  Sayne  in  the  River.

On  the  ninth  of  Aprill,  we  departed,  and  then  we  had  ApriU^.
prosperous  winds,  which  continued  untill  we  came  in  the
latitude  of  about  three  degrees  to  the  Northward  of  the
Equinoctiall  Line,  which  we  passed  under  on  the  eleventh  May  11.
of  May,  finding  our  ship  then  to  be  in  two  and  twentie
minutes  North  latitude.  Hereabouts  many  of  our  men
began  to  fall  sicke,  some  of  the  Scurvie  and  swelling  in
their  legges.  The  tenth  of  July,  we  came  to  an  anchor
in  the  Downes  in  safetie,  God  be  ever  praised.

After  this  twelfth  Voyage,  the  order  of  that  reckoning
is  altered,  because  the  Voyages  ensuing  were  set  forth  by
a  joynt  stocke,  and  not  by  particular  and  proper  ships,
stockes,  Factories,  (as  before)  but  promiscuous  and  gene-
rally accountable  to  the  whole  societie.  Of  which,  all  are
not  come  to  our  hands :  such  as  I  have  (that  which  thence
is  meete  for  the  publike  view)  give  I  thee.

[Chap. XL
213

A.D.
1613.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Chap.  XI.

Extracts  of  the  Journall  of  Captaine  Nicholas
Downton,  who  was  employed  chiefe  Com-
mander in  the  second  Voyage  set  forth  for
the  joyned  Stockes  in  the  East-Indies,  by  the
Governour,  Deputie,  and  Committees  of  that
Societie.  Wherein  is  related  their  happie
successe  against  the  Vice-Roy,  and  all  the
Indian  sea  forces  of  the  Portugalls,  by  force
and  cunning  attempting  their  destruction.

§.  1.

Their  comming  to  Soldania,  Socatora,  Swally :
Disagreements  betweene  the  Mogoll  and  Por-
tugalls, and  the  Nabob  and  us.

He  Shippes  employed  were  theNew-yeeres-
gift,  Admirall,  of  burthen  sixe  hundred
and  fiftie  tunnes :  The  Hector,  Vice- Ad-
mirall, of  five  hundred  tunnes :  The
Merchants  Hope,  of  three  hundred
tunnes.  Master  William  Edwards  was
tunnes,  and  the  Salomon,  of  two  hundred
Lieutenant  and  Cape  Merchant,  and  Commander  of  the
Hector :  Master  Nicholas  Ensworth  Cape  Merchant  and
Commander  of  the  Merchants  Hope :  Master  Thomas
Elkington  Cape  Merchant,  and  Commander  of  the  Salo-
mon :  Master  Peter  Rogers  Minister,  Martin  Pring,
Arthur  Spaight,  Matthew  Molineux  and  Hugh  Bennet,
Masters  of  the  foure  Shippes,  assisted  with  divers  Mates.
[I.  iv.  501.]  The  first  of  March  16 13.  we  set  saile.  On  Wednes-
day the  fifteenth  of  June  16 14.  we  anchored  in  the  Road
of  Saldania,  and  were  welcommed  with  a  great  storm.
John  Barter  by  a  long  Fever  bereaved  of  his  understanding,
was  suddenly  missing,  and  by  former  speeches  of  his  it

214

NICHOLAS DOWNTON

A.D.
1614.

seemed  that  he  made  himselfe  away,  whiles  every  one  was
busie  in  mooring  the  ship,  and  none  looking  after  him.

The  sixteenth,  wee  got  all  in  readinesse  for  erecting  our
Tents,  which  was  that  day  effected,  and  a  Guard  placed
for  their  reliefe.

On  the  seventeenth,  we  landed  halfe  our  Caske  to  be
trimmed  and  seasoned.  Choree  the  Saldanian  presented
me  with  a  young  Steere.

The  eighteenth,  we  landed  more  of  our  Beere  Caske
to  be  washed,  trimmed  and  seasoned,  and  supplyed  the
wants  of  our  men  labouring  about  our  Boates :  also  this
day  (Choree)  the  Saldanian  departed  from  us,  carrying  Choree  and
with  him  his  Copper  Armour  and  Javelin,  with  all  things  j  °^er
belonging  to  him,  promising  to  come  againe  to  us  the
third  day  after,  but  he  never  came  againe.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  I  sent  George  Downeton  on
land  to  observe  both  the  latitude  and  variation  of  this
place,  in  regard  of  the  great  difference  in  our  variations
wee  had  found  betweene  my  former  Voyage  in  the  Pepper-
Corne,  and  this  present  Voyage :  the  latitude  he  found
was  thirtie  foure  degrees,  and  no  odde  minutes,  and
the  variation  one  degree  and  fortie  five  minutes  by  an
Azimuth,  being  Westerly  variation,  whereas  for  the  most  Note  fir  the
part  all  formerly  have  made  Easterly  variation.  This  %?£?""
night  wee  dissolved  our  Tents  and  brought  all  our  things
aboord,  and  made  readie  our  ship  against  the  next  day
to  depart,  which  we  did  accordingly.

The  sixt  of  August,  we  came  to  an  anchor  in  the  Bay
of  Saint  Augustine,  in  Saint  Laurence  Hand.  But  on
sight  of  our  comming  the  Inhabitants  abandoned  the
place,  that  wee  could  have  no  speech  with  them :  we  cut
straight  Timber  for  divers  uses.  And  afterwards  wee  got
some  refreshing  of  them. On  the  twelfth,  we  set  saile.

The  ninth  of  September,  wee  anchored  in  the  Bay  of
Delisa  in  Socotora.  The  next  day  wee  went  on  shore  to
salute  the  King,  who  was  readie  with  his  troupe  to  give
me  entertainment,  and  told  me  of  the  Warres  at  present  in
India,  the  Mogoll  and  Kings  of  Decanie  joyning  to  roote

215

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

the  Portugals  out  of  the  Countrey.  The  reason  whereof
This  ship  was  waSj  their  taking  of  a  shippe  which  came  from  Jedda  in  the
the  Hassame. Red  g^  wherein  was  three  mmions  of  Treasure. Hee

also  informed  mee  of  Captaine  Bests  two  great  fights  with
the  Portugals,  with  other  newes  of  those  parts.  Heere  I
procured  what  refreshing  wee  could  get,  and  bought  of
the  King  Alloes,  two  thousand  seven  hundred  twentie  two
pounds,  and  on  the  fourteenth  departed.

The  second  of  October,  we  had  sight  of  land  being  on
the  Coast  of  Decany  neere  Dabul.  Wee  found  great
hinderance,  till  by  observation  we  were  taught  to  stay  the
ebbes  and  ply  the  flouds.

The  twelfth,  we  againe  weighed  and  plyed  the  flouds,
and  anchored  the  ebbes  till  the  fourteenth  day  in  the  even-
ing, and  then  anchored  two  miles  and  an  halfe  short  of

Portugall the  Barre,  where  presently  came  a  fleet  of  Frigats  being
ugats.  fourteene  saile  and  anchored  neere  us,  discovering  them-

selves by  their  lights  being  darke :  but  seeing  our  readi-
nesse  by  the  lights  out  of  our  Ports,  durst  come  no  neerer
unto  us,  so  we  rid  quietly  all  night.

The  fifteenth,  early  in  the  morning  we  weighed  with
the  land-turne,  and  approching  somewhat  neere  them,
they  also  weighed  and  stood  to  the  South- wards,  and  wee

South  Swally.  held  on  our  course  by  the  Barre  towards  South  Swally,
where  soone  after  we  arrived  after  much  striving  against
contrary  winds.  Assoone  as  I  anchored  I  sent  Master
Molineux  in  his  Pinnasse,  and  Master  Spooner,  and
Samuell  Squire  in  my  Gellywatte  to  sound  the  depths
within  the  sands.  Master  Molineux  tooke  a  Channel  in
which  in  our  former  Voyage  we  had  but  five  foot  at  low
water,  but  now  found  three  fathomes  water,  and  Master
Spooner  found  that  where  our  Boats  could  not  passe  for-
merly by  reason  of  shoalds,  he  had  now  seven  and  eight
foot  water.  In  the  after-noone,  I  seeing  people  ashoare
sent  my  Pinnasse  to  them,  supposing  some  of  our  Mer-
chants had  beene  come  from  Surat :  but  found  otherwise

Cagenozan.  to  be  some  people  of  Cogenozan  sent  downe  to  discover
what  Nation  we  were ; two  of  which  came  aboord  to  me,

216

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  a.d.

1614.

by  whom  I  understood  further  of  their  Warres  with  the
Portugals;  they  besieged  Damon  and  Diu,  and  that
Mocrib  Can  was  Generall  of  the  Mogols  forces  against
Damon,  and  also  to  my  griefe,  I  understood  that  he  was
Governour,  and  as  Vice-roy  not  onely  over  Surat,  but
also  over  all  the  Countrey  neere  about  it ;  I  esteeming
him  to  bee  the  greatest  Adversary  to  our  Nation,  and  one
that  most  favoured  the  Portugals.  This  was  my  setled
conceit  by  former  experience.  I  understood  of  the  health
of  Master  Aldworth  and  the  rest,  to  whom  I  writ  to
hasten  his  presence,  and  sent  it  away  by  Baly  Ball,  to-
gether with  the  other  Servants  of  Cogenozan.

The  sixteenth,  in  the  morning  early  I  sent  my  Purser
and  Pinnasse  on  land  to  buy  such  Commodities  as  I
supposed  might  be  brought,  who  about  ten  a  clocke  with-
out buying  any  thing  for  our  turne,  returned  with  Master
Aldworth  our  chiefe  Merchant  at  Surat,  and  in  his  com-  M.  Aldworth
pany  one  Richard  Steele  who  came  by  land  from  Aleppo
to  Surat.  Master  Aldworth  strived  to  perswade  me  that
Mocrib  Can  the  Nabob  was  our  friend,  and  that  now  was
the  best  time  by  reason  of  their  Warres  (with  the
Portugals)  for  us  to  obtaine  good  trade  and  all  Priviledges
that  in  reason  wee  could  demand  ;  and  for  that  both  he
and  all  the  Countrey  people  did  so  much  rejoyce  at  our
comming,  therefore  of  necessitie  could  not  but  give  us
Royall  entertainment,  I  liking  all  their  hopefull  words,  [I.  iv.  502.]
yet  ever  wishing  some  other  in  his  place,  and  that  Mocrib
Can  had  beene  further  away,  of  whom  I  rested  still  in
doubt,  that  we  should  have  no  free  trade  but  according
to  his  accustomed  manner ;  and  to  see  and  to  be  privie  to
all  that  ever  past,  and  restraine  all  others,  which  then  I
tooke  to  bee  an  injurie  forced  by  him  to  crosse  us,  and  not
by  the  direction  of  the  King,  which  in  time,  though  too
late,  we  were  better  advised.  And  notwithstanding  the
remembrance  of  his  name  given  him  by  the  King,  Mocrib,  T.he  **£"'&*-
which  is  as  much  as  his  owne  bowels,  and  Chan  which  is  Uq^  oc
as  much  as  great  Lord  :  Yet  I  was  too  much  deluded  by
being  perswaded  that  his  state  in  favour  of  the  King  stood

217

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 6 14.

tottering,  and  might  easily  be  made  subject  to  any  dis-
grace, by  any  complaint  of  things  done  contrary  to  the
will  or  humour  of  the  King,  which  made  us  somewhat  too
bold  and  thereby  prejudice  to  our  businesse  when  we
found  him  opposite  to  our  wils,  and  as  wee  thought  con-
trary to  reason. I  inquiring  of  the  state  of  our  businesse,
and  the  health  of  our  people,  Master  Aldworth  informed
p^u[^anmnS  that  Paul  Canning  and  divers  others  were  long  since  dead,
Kerridz^ anc^  t^iat  Thomas  Kerridge  had  long  since  resided  at  Court
Agents  at  the  m  his  roome,  and  that  there  was  no  more  Factors  but
Mogols  Court,  onely  himselfe  and  William  Bedulph  at  Surat.

The  seventeenth,  in  the  morning  I  called  a  Councell  to
advise  of  all  things  heere  to  bee  ^eff  ected,  and  who  fittest
to  send  to  Agra  to  remayne  as  Liedger  there,  and  then
entring  into  the  sixe  Interrogatory  Articles  included  in
the  second  Article  of  our  Commission,  requiring  Master
Aldworths  direct  answere  to  every  question  should  be
demanded.

The  first,  in  what  favour  Paul  Canning  was  with  the
Emperour  and  his  Councell,  and  how  he  carried  himselfe
in  the  businesse  at  Court  that  was  committed  unto  him.
Hee  answered,  that  at  his  first  comming  to  Court,  hee
was  well  respected  by  the  Emperour,  untill  such  time  as
Jesuits  cour-  fa&  Jesuites  made  knowne  he  was  a  Merchant,  and  not
sent  immediately  from  the  King:  but  afterwards  he  was
neglected  as  himselfe  complained,  and  for  his  carriage
there,  Master  Aldworth  saith  that  for  any  thing  he
knoweth,  it  was  sufficient  and  well.

The  third,  then  demanding  whether  needfull  to  main-
taine  one  as  Liedger  at  Court,  his  answere  was,  not  onely
necessarie,  but  also  by  the  King  required,  that  one  of  our
Nation  doe  reside  there,  and  therefore  fitting  to  be  a  man
of  good  respect  for  preventing  and  righting  any  wrongs
that  may  be  offered  by  the  Jesuites  our  Adversaries,  as
also  by  his  direction  may  stand  in  great  stead  for  the  buy-
ing or  selling  of  Commodities.

The  sixth,  concerning  the  charge  of  him  that  should
reside  at  Court,  hee  saith  to  bee  about  three  hundred

218

NICHOLAS DOWNTON

pounds  per  annum,  by  Paul  Cannings  estimate,  but  some-
while  after  when  his  Writings  came  to  be  searched,  his
estimate  is  found  to  be  five,  sixe  or  seven  hundred  pounds
per  annum.

Question  being  made  whether  it  were  fit  Master
Edwards  should  proceed  under  the  title  of  a  Merchant,
according  to  the  strictnesse  of  the  Companies  Commis-
sion, his  opinion  was  by  Master  Cannings  experience,  that
then  he  would  not  be  respected  by  the  King.

The  foure  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  Cogenozan
came  downe  to  the  water-side  with  a  great  traine  as  their
manner  is,  resting  himselfe  in  my  Tent  till  my  landing :
unto  whom  I  repaired  ashoare  accompanyed  with  all  the
Merchants  and  a  good  guard  of  Halberts,  Shot,  and  Pike  ;
I  having  a  Coach  to  carrie  me  up  from  the  Boat  to  a  place
neere  the  Tent ;  and  at  the  instant  when  I  alighted  from
the  Coach,  he  came  forth  of  the  Tent,  addressing  himselfe
to  meete  mee,  and  after  salutations  returned  into  the  Tent
and  sate  downe.  And  before  any  other  conference  began
he  was  let  to  know,  that  there  was  a  Present  to  be  delivered
him  for  the  Nabob,  which  was  presently  brought  in,  Viz.
One  Case  with  sixe  Knives,  two  paire  of  Knives,
sixe  Sword  Blades,  sixe  Spanish  Pikes,  one  Combe-
case,  one  Looking  Glasse,  one  Picture  of  Mars  and
Venus,  one  Picture  of  Paris  in  judgement,  two  Mus-
covie  Hides,  and  one  great  gilded  Case  of  Bottles
full  of  rich  and  strong  Waters.  Then  for  himselfe
I  caused  a  Present  to  bee  delivered  him,  which  was
six  Knives  in  single  sheathes,  foure  Sword  Blades,  two
Pikes,  one  Combe-case,  one  Looking-glasse,  one  Picture
of  Moses,  one  Case  of  Bottles,  in  regard  of  the  promise
of  the  Nabob  to  our  people  that  what  Cogenozan  should
do,  he  would  performe.  I  therefore  moved  for  the  inlarg-
ing  of  our  Priviledges ;  for  the  lessening  of  our  Custome,
especially  at  Baroch  to  have  a  Bazar  or  Market  by  the
waterside,  that  we  might  buy  Beef  for  the  peoples  eating
(in  regard  that  other  flesh  was  not  good  for  them)  accord-
ing to  the  Kings  Firma  given. His  answere  was,  that  if

219

A.D.
1614.

The  Mogpl
little  respects
Merchants.

Present  for  the
Nabob,  or
Governour.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

I  would  assist  them  against  the  Portugals,  the  Nabob
would  do  us  all  the  favour  that  in  his  power  lyeth ;  but
for  the  Custome  of  Baroch  it  was  out  of  his  power,  for
the  King  had  let  it  to  another  by  rent,  and  could  not  be
holpen.  A  Bazar  we  should  have,  but  for  Bullocks  and
Banian  Super-  Kine,  the  King  had  granted  his  Firma  to  the  Banians  for
stition.  a  mign^e  summe  yeerely  to  save  their  lives. In  summe,

wee  found  nothing  that  he  had  power  to  grant  us :  yet
willing  to  leave  mee  in  content,  wishing  that  I  would  send
some  of  my  Merchants  along  with  him  to  the  Nabob,  that
our  businesse  on  both  sides  might  bee  considered  on,  and
receive  answeres  accordingly  from  each  other.  I  sent
along  with  him  Master  Aldworth,  Master  Ensworth  (who
desired  to  goe  up  because  he  was  not  well)  Master  Dods-
worth,  Master  Mitford  and  others ;  which  when  they
had  accesse  to  the  Nabob,  two  or  three  dayes  after  he
would  know  againe  their  demand,  which  was  as  aforesaid.
Then  he  desired  to  know  if  we  would  goe  with  our  ships
to  fight  against  Damon  for  him,  and  then  he  would  doe
us  any  favour ;  but  that  was  answered,  that  we  could  in
no  wise  avouch  the  doing  thereof,  for  that  there  was  peace
[I.  iv.  503.]  betweene  our  King  and  the  King  of  Spaine.  Then  he
demanded  if  we  would  goe  to  the  Barre  and  ride  there  and
fight  with  them  that  should  come  to  prejudice  them.
That  we  could  neither  covenant  to  doe,  for  it  was  a  breach
of  the  peace  betweene  our  two  Kings  as  aforesaid.  Then
he  answered,  that  if  we  would  doe  nothing  for  him,  he
would  doe  nothing  for  us.  Divers  of  the  principall  Mer-
chants of  the  Towne  came  to  move  our  Merchants  that  I
might  give  way  to  the  Nabob  his  reasonable  request,  and
though  I  did  grant  for  satisfying  his  minde,  yet  I  might
doe  what  I  list :  and  that  they  all  knew  the  Frigats  might
for  all  my  riding  at  the  Barre  come  in  and  out  on  each  side
me.  Answere  was  returned  it  was  unfit  for  me  to  halt,
but  whatsoever  I  promised,  I  must  maintaine,  though  it
were  to  the  losse  of  my  life,  and  all  under  my  command :
and  that  I  would  not  be  hired  to  fight  with  the  Portugals,
which  is  contrary  to  my  Kings  Commission  (unlesse  they

220

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  a.d.

1614.

gave  me  first  cause)  not  for  the  World ;  neither  would  I
bee  withheld  from  fighting  with  them  if  they  provoked
me,  not  for  his  wealth,  which  difference  it  seemes  he  tooke
small  notice  of;  but  that  we  refused  to  fulfill  his  desire,
he  was  much  moved,  and  in  all  things  crost  our  proceed-
ings all  that  he  might :  insomuch  that  he  had  almost  queld
all  former  conceived  hopes  of  happie  Commerce  in  this
place.  Continually  devising  what  to  doe,  or  what  course
to  take,  this  meanes  failing  us,  as  I  see  no  likelihood  to
the  contrary,  I  made  inquision  of  Gengomar  and  Castel-
letta,  also  of  Gogo,  but  could  heare  small  incouragement
for  transportation  to  seeke  better  dealing ;  so  with  doubts
wee  rested  perplexed  a  long  while,  yet  returning  to  our
businesse  at  the  shippes.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning  Nicholas
UfHet  going  ashoare  found  all  the  people  of  Swally  de-
parted thence  in  the  night :  he  demanding  the  reason,
they  told  him  that  the  Nabob  had  expresly  commanded
them  so  to  doe,  as  also  the  people  from  the  Tents.
Whereupon  hee  inquiring  further  thereof,  was  certified
that  our  Merchants  were  stayed  at  Surat,  and  that  at-
tempting to  passe  over  the  bridge,  they  were  perforce
with-held,  and  received  some  store  of  blowes  by  the  guard
thereto  appointed  by  the  Nabob,  with  whom  in  company
to  attend  upon  them,  the  Gunners  Boy  and  his  companion
formerly  supposed  to  have  beene  runne  away,  were  also
well  beaten  and  withheld  as  the  rest.

The  one  and  thirtieth,  we  began  to  take  in  fresh  water,
because  our  stay  heere  was  so  uncertaine,  not  knowing
how  suddenly  our  departure  might  bee.  This  day  Thomas
Smith  the  Masters  Boy  being  swimming  about  the  ship,
had  most  of  the  out-side  of  his  thigh  bitten  away  by  a  Ravenous  fish.
great  Fish  which  pulled  him  under  the  water,  yet  he
comming  up  againe  swamme  to  the  shippe  side,  and  got
up  to  the  bend,  where  as  soone  as  he  was  come  up,  he
presently  sounded.  Then  the  Chirurgion  brought  him
into  the  Gunners  Roome  to  see  what  might  be  done  for
his  recoverie :  but  the  issue  of  bloud  had  beene  so  great

221

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

that  they  could  not  revive  him,  but  presently  dyed,  and
towards  night  was  buried  ashoare.

The  second  of  November  towards  night  Master  Aid-
worth and Master Elkinton came downe from Surat,
where  they  had  left  Master  Ensworth  very  sicke : they
declared  unto  me  their  proceedings  with  the  Nabob  as
formerly,  and  of  their  reconciliation,  with  large  promises
of  future  good  respect,  with  free  Trade  throughout  all
their  Countries. This  hard  measure  hitherto  offered  us
by  the  Nabob,  I  cannot  attribute  unto  any  hatred  or  ill
will  borne  to  our  Nation,  but  his  owne  doubt  and  feare  of
us,  least  I  should  joyne  with  the  Portugals  against  him :
which  feare  was  the  more  increased  in  him,  in  that  I  would
not  agree  to  fight  against  Damon. And  this  suspition
and  doubt  was  the  more  increased  by  a  Knavish  device  in
J esuites  tricks,  the  subtile  and  lying  Jesuites,  who  tooke  occasion  by  my
denyall, voluntarily  without  cause  to  fight  against  the
Portugals  at  Damon,  or  otherwise. They  pretended  a
Letter  from  the  Vice-Roy,  to  give  notice  to  the  Nabob,
that  unlesse  he  made  peace  with  them,  that  both  he  and
the  English  his  friends  should  joyne  together  and  come
against  Surat ;  which  Devilish  device  did  us  much  hinder-
ance  in  our  businesse,  by  the  Nabobs  continuall  doubt,
which  he  made  of  our  friendship  towards  them. And  be-
sides unfortunately  by  their  extreame  unkind  usage  Master
Aldworth  in  the  middest  of  his  haste,  and  thinking  to
qualifie  their  rigorous  courses,  and  yet  altogether  ignorant
of  the  practice  of  the  Jesuites,  in  threatning-wise  wisht
them  to  take  heed,  that  by  their  ill  usage  of  us,  they  doe
not  force  us  to  joyne  with  the  Portugals  against  them ;
which  proved  a  kind  of  confirming  the  Jesuits  former
report  from  the  Vice-Roy,  as  altogether  making  against
us. Likewise, hee  forbade  all  Trade  with our  people
aboord,  which  at  first  wee  likewise  thought  had  proceeded
out  of  his  troublesome  humour  to  crosse  us ; but  after-
wards we  were  advised  the  contrary  by  Thomas  Kerridge
his  Letter,  who  declared  that  he  and  all  Sea-port  Gover-
nours,  had  expresse  Commandement  from  the  Mogoll,  not

222

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  a.d.

1614.

to  suffer  any  Trade  with  us,  till  they  had  made  choise  of

all  strange  things  that  we  bring,  and  they  to  buy  them  for

the  Kings  use,  and  to  send  it  unto  him.

The  third,  I  called  a  Councell  concerning  our  businesse,
viz.  how  farre  wee  might  proceed  in  their  aide  against  the
Portugals,  and  examined  our  Commission  in  that  point ;
also  we  appointed  the  Merchants  for  the  severall  places  of
imployment,  aswell  those  that  were  to  stay  heere,  as  those
also  that  were  to  proceed  on  the  Voyage.  The  goods  that
were  at  Surat  of  the  twelfth  Voyage  came  aboord,  which
was  of  Indico  sixtie  Bales,  and  Cotton  Yarne  eleven
Packes.

The  sixteenth,  whereas  my  desire  was  to  have  beene
ashoare amongst our Merchants, to have borne some  [I-  iv.  504.]
stroke  in  the  ordering  of  our  businesse  at  Surat,  and  the
rather  considering  the  turbulent  head-strong  and  haughtie
spirit  of  (  )  ever  striving  to  sway  all  things

according  to  his  owne  will,  and  distastfull  to  others  which
without  private  respect  aymed  at  the  common  good,
whose  better  discretion  hath  beene  inured  to  more  humi-
litie.  But  the  estate  of  our  businesse  so  uncertaine,  partly
by  the  uncertainty  of  the  Nabob  and  people  here,  and
partly  in  regard  of  the  Portugals  (which  we  daily  doe
heare  are  arming  us)  besides  I  understand  the  Nabob
makes  question  of  restitution  of  the  goods  taken  by  Sir
Henrie  Middleton  in  the  Red  Sea,  at  under  rates  as  they
say,  though  I  know  they  had  goods  for  goods  to  a  halfe
pennie :  yet  not  knowing  what  might  come  of  it,  I
thought  best  to  keepe  my  selfe  neerest  my  charge,  and
referred  all  things  ashoare  to  the  care  of  such  Merchants
in  generall  as  were  of  my  Councell,  and  in  whom  for  most
part  I  had  constant  affiance.

The  two  and  twentieth,  I  finished  my  Letters  for  Persia,
viz.  one  for  the  Company,  one  for  Sir  Robert  Sherley,
and  another  for  advice  to  Richard  Steele.

The  three  and  twentieth,  Lacandas  the  Banian  came
downe  with  newes  of  some  discontent  or  hard  speeches
that  had  past  betweene  the  Nabob  and  the  Merchants,  Rude  dealing.

223

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

but  now  that  they  were  reconciled  and  friends ;  the  cause
was,  for  that  Master  Edwards  would  not  let  him  see  the
Presents,  which  at  last  he  was  driven  to  yeeld  to.  All  the
chiefe  Merchants  wrote  unto  me  severally  that  there  was
a  certaine  report  that  the  Vice-Roy  was  arming  against  us.
It  pleased  God  to  call  to  his  mercie  Master  Ensworth  and
Timothy  Wood,  both  in  an  houre.  John  Orwicke,
Robert  Young,  and  Esay  But  set  forwards  to  provide
such  Clothes  and  Cotton  Yarne,  as  wee  formerly  agreed
on.
Nabobs  gifts.  The  five  and  twentieth,  Master  Edwards  wrote  me  of
the  comming  of  three  great  men  with  seven  Firmanes
from  the  Mogore,  in  whose  presence  the  Nabob  bestowed
on  him  eight  hundred  &  fifty  Mamudies :  ten  fine  Bastas,
thirtie  Topseeles,  and  thirtie  Allizaes :  he  further  gave  to
Master  Elkington  and  Master  Dodsworth  ten  Topseeles,
and  a  Cloke  to  Master  Aid  worth,  &  another  to  Master
Elkington,  Master  Dodsworth  having  had  one  before :  he
promised  free  Trade  in  all  places  under  his  command,  and
good  refreshing  for  our  people  aboord.
Crowtherand  The  seven  and  twentieth,  John  Crowther  came  from
Steele  goe  to  Surat,  who  advised  mee  that  the  chiefe  Merchants  had
chosen  him  to  accompany  Richard  Steele  into  Persia,  and
therefore  came  to  take  his  leave  of  me,  and  to  fetch  his
things  from  aboord.  This  day  Master  Edwards  wrote  to
mee  by  Edmond  Aspinol  for  fiftie  Elephants  teeth,  and
indifferently  chosen  in  their  size  and  bignesse,  for  there
was  a  Banian  Merchant  in  price  for  them  all,  if  they  could
agree,  which  Teeth  the  same  day  were  sent  up  to  him.
Presents  to  the  The  sixth  of  December,  the  Nabob  Mocrib  Chan  seemed
Generall.  now  to  j^  asnamecJ}  for  that  he  had  not  since  my  arrivall
heere  shewed  me  the  least  taste  of  courtesie ;  and  there-
fore beeing  desirous  to  excuse  himselfe,  intreated  Master
Elkington  to  accompany  aboord  the  great  Banian  that
brought  our  Teeth,  and  Lacandas  the  Banian  Merchant
of  the  Juncke  of  the  King  of  Cushan,  whom  he  made
choice  of,  and  entertayned  (by  reason  of  his  former  fami-
liaritie  with  our  people)  to  buy  among  them  such  Com-

224

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  a.d.

1614.

modities  as  they  had  to  sell,  viz.  Sword  Blades,  Knives,

Looking-glasses. By  them  he  sent  me  a  Present  of  two

Gorge  of  course  Bastas,  ten  fine  Bastas,  tenne  Topseeles,

ten  Cuttonies  and  three  Quilts,  certifying  mee  that  the

Nabob  was  minded  to  come  downe  to  see  me  within  two

or  three  dayes  at  the  most. At  their  going  ashoare  I  gave

them  five  great shot. They told me that the Nabob  %™esRfefe

heard  from  Goa,  that  for  certaine,  the  Vice-Roy  was  pre-  J^rJ£

paring  to  come  against  us,  with  all  the  force  hee  could  against  the

make  to  fight  with  us :  likewise  that  the  Nabob  requested  English.

me  that  I  would  waft  a  ship  or  two  of  his  off  the  Coast

for  two  or  three  dayes,  being  bound  for  the  Red  Sea.

But  I  answered,  that  having  once  put  off  from  the  Coast,

the  wind  being  adverse,  I  could  not  recover  it  againe  :  but

if  he  would  further  our  dispatch  that  we  might  be  readie  in

convenient  time,  then  would  I  doe  any  thing  reasonable.

The  ninth,  the  Nabobs  sonne  came  to  the  water-side,

but  would  not  come  aboord ; whereupon  I  went  ashoare

to  him,  who  against  my  landing  sent  a  Horse  to  fetch  mee,

hee  willed  mee  to  sit  downe  upon  the  Mount  with  him,

which  I  did. Then  hee  commanded  part  of  his  Horse-  MilltaH

1  -,  . r  , t  V1 sports  on  horse-

men to  shew  me  some  pleasure  upon  the  sands,  by  warlike  £  %

chasing  each  other,  after  the  manner  of  Decanie,  from
whence  they  were :  then  he  desired  to  heare  some  Ord-
nance goe  off,  and  I  gave  him  eleven  shot.  Hee  at  pre-
sent would  drinke  no  wine,  but  being  departed,  hee  sent
for  it,  and  for  a  Fowling  Peece  which  he  found  in  the
hands  of  one  of  our  people,  both  which  I  sent  him  with  a
Bowie  to  drinke  his  wine.

§. II.  [I.  iv.  505.]

The  Portugals  Forces,  Acts,  Attempts,  Fight  with
the  English,  and  disgracefull  Repulse.

jIHe  sixteenth,  Master  Elkington  wrote  me  that  the
Nabob told  him  that  the  Portugall  Frigats  had
burnt  Gogo  with  many  Gonges  or  Villages  there-  Gogoburni,l3
abouts, and tenne great ships, one whereof was the  dwers  sht^s'
iv  225  p

A.D.

1614.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Twentie  two

Portugal!

Frigats.

Rehemee,  and  one  hundred  and  twentie  small  Vessels :
and  that  he  was  displeased  at  me  for  not  shooting  at  them
when  they  past  by  us ; which  did  renue  his  suspition  of
our  friendship  with  the  Portugals : to  all  which  Master
Elkington  answered  him,  yet  he  could  not  rest  satisfied.

The  three  and  twentieth  came  two  Boates  more  for
Lead.  This  day  wee  saw  twentie  two  Frigats,  who  in  the
night  came  to  anchor  betweene  us  and  the  Rivers  mouth,
where  they  roade  most  part  of  the  next  day.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning  we  saw  foure
Boates  comming  downe  the  River  towards  us,  who  seeing
the  Frigats  returned,  two  Frigats  chasing  them  up  the
River :  but  seeing  they  could  not  fetch  them  up,  went
ashoare  and  fired  two  or  three  poore  houses,  and  tooke
away  two  or  three  head  of  Cattell,  and  so  returned  backe
to  their  Company,  who  in  the  after-noone  went  up  into
the  River  together.

The  five  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning  early  we  saw
five  or  sixe  Frigats  under  saile  an  houre  or  two :  after,  we
perceived  a  small  Boat  under  saile  standing  towards  us,
but  was  presently  chased  by  two  Frigats,  the  men  in  the
small  Boat  runne  her  aground,  and  forsooke  her,  so  that
the  Frigats  could  not  float  where  she  lay,  the  tyde  ebbing
so  fast,  therefore  they  departed  without  doing  any  further
harme  unto  her.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning  I  sent  the  Hope
to  the  Northwards  a  good  way  from  the  rest  of  the  Fleet,
to  see  if  the  Portugals  would  charge  upon  her.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  early  in  the  morning,  the
Frigats  came  and  made  a  bravado  before  our  ship,  and
then  before  the  Salomon,  which  was  next  unto  us,  and
from  her  to  the  Hope  which  roade  a  great  way  from  us,
who  drove  directly  upon  her  with  all  their  men  stowed,
not  a  man  to  be  seene.  The  Master  twice  hailed  them,
but  they  would  not  speake,  whereupon  they  let  flye  at
them  with  their  Bow-pieces,  having  no  other  to  ply  upon
Their  repulse,  them,  which  made  them  with  some  losse  to  depart :  the
Master  doubting,  that  if  hee  had  not  shot,  they  would

226

Portugalt
bravado.

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  a.d.

1614.

have  boorded  him,  or  mischieved  him  by  fire,  they  com-
ming  upon  the  advantage  both  of  winde  and  tyde,  that
none  of  the  rest  of  the  ships  could  come  to  the  rescue ;
and  in  such  sort  right  a  head,  that  hardly  can  he  traverse
any  piece  of  Ordnance  at  them.  In  the  after-noone  I
sent  the  Salomon  to  accompany  the  Hope,  who  went  to
the  North-wards  of  her,  and  made  five  or  sixe  shot  at  the
Frigats,  who  roade  at  anchor  hard  by  the  Hope.  But  we
did  not  perceive  any  hurt  she  did  them :  wherefore  I  com-
manded my  Gunner  to  shoot  a  Peece  to  warne  them  to
give  over,  whereupon  the  Salomon  stood  in  againe  and
came  to  anchor.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning  I  went  in  the
Pinnasse  aboord  the  Hope  and  Salomon,  to  understand
the  occasions  of  their  shooting :  and  the  Portugals  seeing
our  Boates  passe  to  and  againe,  removed  in  the  after-
noone,  and  roade  a  little  without  us  to  cut  off  all  inter-
course. In  the  meane  time,  came  the  former  Boat  which  ther
was  chased  ashoare  aboord  the  Gift,  and  brought  some  '  ^ J
Letters  from  Master  Elkington.  The  Master  sent  the
Bearer  with  the  Letters  to  mee  in  the  Hope,  where  having
answered  Master  Elkingtons  Letter,  I  sent  him  backe
againe  to  the  Gift,  to  goe  thence  in  the  night  to  Surat :
but  as  the  Gelliwat  returned,  the  Frigats  chased  her,  which
I  perceiving,  caused  to  weave  to  the  Gelliwat  to  returne,
which  they  not  seeing  held  on  her  way.  But  the  Frigats
held  her  so  close  that  they  were  within  shot  of  her,  and
made  one  faire  shot  at  her,  and  had  not  the  Gift  let  slip
one  Cable,  and  veered  another,  and  plyed  upon  them  with
her  Ordnance,  it  would  have  gone  hard  with  them  :  which
made  them  give  over  the  chase  not  without  some  damage  :
and  late  in  the  night  upon  the  tyde  of  ebbe,  I  commanded
the  Hope  and  Salomon  to  set  saile  and  fall  neerer  to  the
other  ships,  and  then  I  went  aboord  the  Gift.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  I  perceiving  that  my  riding
was  of  no  availe  to  keepe  the  Frigats  out  of  the  River,
because  they  could  passe  to  and  fro  over  the  sands,  where
wanted  water for my ships to swimme; and that no

227

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

Boates  durst  come  to  us  to  fetch  our  goods  for  feare  of

the  Frigats  ;  neither  could  I  heare  from  our  friends  ashoare

how  all  things  past ; therefore  I  set  saile  for  Swally : but

being  but  little  wind  and  calme,  it  was  the  next  day  before

we  arrived  there.

A  Fleet  of  The  fourteenth  of  Januarie,  we  heard  of  the  approach

Frigats.  Q£  many  Frigats,  which  roade  at  the  Barre  till  next  day

within  night,  and  then  in  the  darke  came  from  thence,

and  roade  within  shot  of  us  all  night  till  the  morning,

when  they  weighed  and  went  to  the  South- wards ; whom

I  thought  were  the  Mallabars,  that  the  Nabob  promised

formerly  to  send  mee  :  and  therefore  put  forth  a  Flagge  of

Truce,  and  sent  Master  Spooner  one  of  the  Masters  Mates

towards  them  with  the  Gelliwat,  and  appointed  him  to

have  an  eye  backe  to  our  signes  that  wee  would  make,  if

[I.  iv.  506.]  we  mistrusted  any  thing. I  seeing  the  Gelliwat  so  neere,

and  no  shew  of  friendship  from  them  in  answer  of  ours,

put  forth  my  flag  which  before  was  taken  in,  and  shot  a

peece  of  Ordnance  for  a  signe  to  my  Boat  to  come  aboord,

which  presently  upon  sight  thereof  shee  did,  who  was  not

scarce  aboord,  when  our  Centinell  from  top-mast  head,

Another  fleet discryed  another  Fleete  of  Frigats,  who  afterwards  met

of  Portugal/ together  at  the  Barre,  and  went  altogether  into  the  River  :

n*>  whereby  I  perceived  they  were  Portugals,  and  was  glad

that  our  men  and  Boat  so  well  escaped  their  hands. I

thinking  these  Frigats  were  forerunners  of  greater  forces,

caused  all  the  decks  to  be  cleered,  and  the  Ordnance  freed,

and  all  things  else  fitting  both  for  the  Ordnance,  Shot,  and

Barracadoes  to  bee  in  a  readinesse.

The  seventeenth  in  the  night,  the  Frigats  came  all  forth
of  the  River,  they  beeing  in  the  morning  at  the  point  of
the  Barre.

The  eighteenth,  there  came  to  the  water  side  Maugie,
the  Banian  Captaine  formerly  named,  with  an  other  great
man,  the  sonne  of  Clych  Caun,  to  whom  I  went  ashoare :
whither  not  long  after  word  was  brought  me  from  aboord,
Afleetofships.  that  they  discryed  a  farre  off  a  Fleete  of  ships  looming
very  bigge,  which  ashoare  we  could  not  see  by  reason  of

228

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  a.d.

1614.

the  lownesse  of  the  place.  And  after  leave  taken  on  both
sides,  he  departed,  and  I  returned  aboord,  causing  all
things  to  be  set  in  a  readinesse,  which  was  speedily  per-
formed. Towards  night,  we  made  them  to  be  sixe  Gal-  The  Portugal/

lions  and  three  lesser  shippes,  besides  the  sixtie  former  „lcf"^"7ie ,
.  ... ,rr  .  7  , .  j of  sixe  Lrai--

Frigats,  the  two  Gaines  beeing  not  yet  come : the  tide  rtons,  and  three
being  spent,  they  anchored  till  the  next  day.  ships, and  sixty

The  nineteenth,  they  plyed  up  to  the  entrance  of  our  Frigats,
new  Channell,  where  they  came  to  an  anchor,  and  the  two  q£  tw°
Gallies  came  up  to  them,  where  one  of  the  great  ships
beeing  too  forward,  came  too  neare  the  sands,  and  touched,
but  soone  got  off  againe. The  Nabob  sent  the  Sabandar,
and  divers  other  principall  men  of  the  Towne  to  the  Vice-
roy, with  a  Present  of  great  provisions,  they  making  some
treaty  of  peace,  but  brake  off,  effecting  nothing,  great
policie  on  both  sides  being  used. On  the  Nabobs  side,  to  Nabobs  Pre-
the  increase  of  my  griefe :  for  he  and  all  the  Countrey  in  s™* t0 1  e

jo  <  j  rice-roy.

generall  despaired  of  my  being  able  to  withstand  so  great

forces, and  began to make  preparative before-hand to

claw  the  Vice-roy  with  Presents :  for  I  once  overthrowne,

his  turne  had  come  next,  to  endure  a  great  assault,  or  to

make  such  peace  as  the  enemy  desired. For,  peace  with  Hisfeareand

them  was  it  that  stood  with  the  Vice-roys  policie  most  to  ^° me'

desire,  for  the  setting-trade  a  foote  between  them. On

the  other  side,  the  Vice-roy  seeing  the  tractablenesse  of  F'tce-royes

the  Nabob,  and  his  seeming:  desire  to  make  peace,  for  the  '»  H  'i

t>  vi r  •  & •  1  r t • •  1 Presumption

.Present  set  light  or  it;  supposing  to  have  made  it  with  before.
great  royalty  and  profit  for  his  owne  part,  after  he  had
over-throwne  us,  which  he  made  no  doubt  easily  to  accom-
plish ;  which  once  performed,  he  expected  greater  Presents  ;
and  great  submission  on  their  parts  to  him  being  the  con-
querour.  But  it  pleased  God,  who  beheld  the  unjustnesse
of  his  attempt,  to  turne  it  contrary  to  both  their  expecta-
tions :  for  the  Vice-roy  failing  of  his  purposes  in  attempt
against  me,  seeing  he  could  not  recover  so  much  as  a  Boats
thoule  from  me  in  all  the  time  he  spent,  with  losses  and
disgrace  about  it ;  afterward  was  forced  to  revive  the  Disgrace
former  neglected  motion  of  peace  with  the  Nabob  ;  which  attendinS-

229

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

Nabob  beeing  strengthened  with  a  Moneths  experience,
notwithstanding  all  their  bragging  threats,  seeing  he  was
not  able  to  remoove  our  small  forces  one  foot  out  of  their
place,  gave  answer :  Since  with  so  great  an  army  he  could
not  prevaile  against  foure  Merchant  ships,  I  wil  make  no
peace  with  you :  and  so  was  the  Vice-roy  frustrated  of
both  his  hopes.  Yet  now  after  some  digression,  return-
ing againe  to  my  daily  businesse.
Care  and  pre- Formerly  hearing  of  the  Vice-royes  forces  to  come,  we

venhon  of  the •  • j -.  1  1 P . 1  .  .  1

Genera//  imagined  it  would  not  bee  so  great  as  now  by  view  it
seemes,  therefore  high  time  to  enter  into  best  considera-
tions, how  by  Gods  help  to  resist  the  same.  The  odds
and  advantages  he  had  over  me,  put  me  to  my  shifts  in
casting  up  all  things  that  made  against  me,  being  over-
topt  by  his  forces,  whom  I  esteemed  furnished  with  the
principall  ships  and  meanes  of  India,  and  people  of  greatest
ranke  and  valour  in  these  parts,  in  likelihood  too  hard  for
us  when  we  should  put  into  the  deepe  water ;  nay,  I
know  not  how  to  put  into  deepe  water,  but  they  alwayes
ready  to  intercept,  over-charge,  or  force  me  a  ground  irre-
coverable on  one  side  or  other  :  my  disadvantages  so  great
in  putting  out,  and  their  smaller  Vessels  I  knew  might
much  with  fire-workes,  or  otherwise  hazard  us  within  at
anchor  where  we  rode,  where  I  had  hope  their  great  ships
through  the  shoaldnesse  of  water,  could  not  or  durst  not
put  in.  The  things  with  me  to  give  me  hope  was,  my
people  (though  much  with  death  and  sickenes  shortned)
all  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest,  seeme  very  couragious
and  comfortable ;  though  (for  the  most)  ignorant,  either
of  the  danger,  or  how  to  prevent  it,  yet  pleasing  to  me  to
see  their  willingnesse.  My  care  is  not  small,  how  to  doe
my  best  in  maintaining  the  Honour  of  my  Country,  nor
negligent  in  the  memory  of  the  estates  and  charge  of  my
friends,  and  employers  in  this  Journey ;  not  onely  for  the
hazard  of  this  at  present  committed  to  my  charge,  but
also  all  hope  of  future  times,  if  I  should  now  be  over-
throwne :  by  reason  the  enemie  in  getting  the  upper  hand
of  me,  would  make  his  peace  with  these  people  upon  what

230

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  ad.

1614.

conditions  he  lust,  to  the  expelling  of  our  Nation  this
Countrey  for  ever.  And  what  my  care  was  for  the  safetie
of  my  people,  I  referre  to  the  consideration  of  such  fathers,
as  are  tender  over  the  safetie  of  their  obedient  children.
All  this  while  my  whole  powers  so  kept  in  action,  that  I
found  little  time  to  converse,  or  almost  shew  myselfe
sensible  of  the  dangers  approaching ;  yea,  ever  as  I  could
be  solitary  or  free  from  others ;  very  earnestly  craving  P-  iv.  507.]
aide  and  assistance  from  the  Lord  of  hosts,  and  from  that  ™eJ0"l£elp
mightie  and  mercifull  God,  who  hath  manifold  wayes
formerly  delivered  me ;  often  I  say  desiring  his  Majestie
so  to  guide  and  direct  me,  that  I  might  omit  nothing  which
might  tend  to  the  safety  of  my  owne  charge,  nor  the
danger  of  the  enemy :  and  that  God  would  grant  my  re-
quest, I  had  a  strong  confidence ;  and  the  same  againe
often  queld  by  the  assembly  of  my  manifold  and  grievous
offences,  and  but  for  Gods  mercie  sufficient  to  drowne  the
world ;  whereby  forced  afresh  by  prayer  to  pierce  the
heavens,  and  flie  unto  God  for  aide  against  both  inward
and  outward  assaults.  I  so  resolved  by  Gods  assistance  .
what  to  doe,  if  my  assistants  the  Masters  of  the  Ships
would  yeeld  thereunto ;  knowing  if  we  should  receive  a
foile  riding  at  our  anchor,  our  disgrace  will  be  greater,  and
our  enemies  little  abashed :  but  in  mooving,  I  might
moove  the  Vice-roy  in  greedinesse  and  pride,  to  doe  him-
selfe  wrong  against  the  sands ;  hoping  that  that  might
bee  an  occasion  whereby  God  might  draw  him  to  shorten
his  owne  forces,  and  so  might  open  the  way  for  our  getting
out  amongst  the  rest :  which  would  rather  have  been  for  a
necessitie,  then  any  way  hopefull :  for  at  present  our  goods
on  the  way,  and  daily  by  some  and  some  expected  to  come
hither,  and  if  once  gotten  out,  unlesse  it  had  pleased  God
to  make  us  conquerours,  and  drive  the  Vice-roy  cleane
away,  I  could  not  returne  into  my  place,  where  onely  (and
no  where  else)  I  could  take  in  my  lading :  I  esteeming  the
Vice-roy  to  hold  his  honour  in  so  high  regard,  that  he
must  have  been  dead  before  he  would  have  given  way.  I
also,  though  helplesse,  remembered  two  great  advantages

231

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

the  enemie  had  of  me  in  this  warre.  Ever  before  my
people  came  to  fight,  they  are  first  tired,  or  halfe  spent  with
the  labour  of  the  ship,  as  heaving  at  Capstaine,  and  getting
up  our  anchors,  setting  of  sailes,  and  other  labours,  which
greatly  quells  their  courages,  making  them  in  hot  Coun-
treys  both  weary  and  faint ;  and  then  of  necessitie  must
become  souldiours :  whereas  the  Vice-roy  his  souldiours
come  fresh  to  fight,  beeing  troubled  with  no  labour,  which
is  done  by  slaves  and  inferiour  sea-people,  which  are  never
accompted  companions  of  Souldiours.  Secondly,  if  the
Vice-roy  loose  many  men  in  his  ships,  he  may  be  supplyed
againe  out  of  his  fresh  supplyes,  to  be  fetcht  from  their
neerest  townes  by  their  Frigats,  whereas  we  could  not  have
one  man  supplyed,  how  many  soever  we  should  have  slaine
or  disabled.

This  present  Thursday  at  night,  I  having  no  Merchants
at  all  aboord,  but  all  employed  in  the  Countrey  (besides
those  with  Master  Elkington  at  the  house  at  Surat)  I  sent
for  all  my  Masters  to  supper,  with  some  mates,  where  (as
Consultatian.  the  time  served)  I  began  speech  of  our  present  businesse,
desiring  every  man  to  speake  freely,  how  he  thought  best
for  us  to  worke,  considering  to  the  present  straight  we
seemed  to  be  in ;  alleadging  my  confidence  to  be  (for  all
the  bragging  of  these  Portugals  abounding  in  force)  that
God  would  not  suffer  their  injurious  attempts  upon  us,
that  have  been  tender  not  to  wrong  them  in  the  East.  I
have  had  also  a  jealous  conceit  carried  over  mee  by  the
Nabob,  and  principals  of  the  Countrey,  as  though  I  had
been  confederate  with  the  Portugals,  for  that  I  did  not
shoot  at  the  saucy-governed  bragging  Frigats.  I  found
all  the  Masters  to  my  hearts  desire,  willing  and  tractable
to  whatsoever  I  should  wish ;  and  had  some  fewe  speeches
about  our  provident  mooring,  as  also  of  the  remooving
somewhat  lower  downe.  But  ere  long,  I  let  them  know
my  conceit,  desiring  their  free  opinion  therein  :  which  was,
that  now  our  ships  were  as  fit  for  fight  as  we  could  make
them,  and  our  danger  by  night  if  we  rode  still  (worke
never  so  providently)  to  prevent  is  not  small ; therefore

232

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  a.d.

1614.

I  thought  fittest  in  the  morning  at  low  water,  to  send
downe  one  ship  to  ride,  as  we  might  have  water  enough
at  low  water  for  all  our  ships :  for  then  none  can  come  to
annoy  her,  which  may  prepare  the  Vice-royes  mind  to
some  attempt  at  high  water,  and  as  the  Flood  comes,  the
other  three  should  beare  downe  against  the  streame  (the
spring  now  neere  the  highest)  to  proove  what  attempt  the
Vice-roy  would  give,  to  attend  it,  and  worke  accordingly
as  we  shall  see  reason,  in  hope  that  God  will  put  designes
into  the  mind  of  the  Vice-roy,  that  he  may  commit  some
error,  to  the  weakening  of  his  owne  forces ;  which  if  he
doe,  then  will  be  fittest  time  in  the  darke  of  the  night
following,  to  put  out  when  it  shall  be  unfit  for  them  to
come  to  saile  to  hinder  us.  Or  if  we  see  reason,  we  may
with  the  wind  worke  every  day  to  and  againe  with  our
sailes  on  the  Flood,  to  be  alwaies  ready  in  action,  when
the  tide  is  aloft,  which  may  somewhat  the  courage  of  the
people  quell  and  dismay,  though  the  Gallants  seeme  to
thinke  otherwise.  This  no  sooner  propounded,  but  liked
for  the  best  way,  and  so  we  agreed  to  proceed,  and  for
that  I  found  M.  Molineux  willing  at  low  water  in  the
morning  to  fall  downe  with  the  Hope,  which  was  accord-
ingly performed.

The  twentieth  in  the  morning,  at  low  water  I  sent
downe  M.  Molineux  with  the  Hope,  to  prepare  the
Enemie  to  some  attempt,  when  the  tide  shall  be  up ;
which  beeing  done,  upon  the  flood  we  also  with  the  other
three  ships  stood  after  her.  The  Vice-roy  and  all  the
worthy  Knights  about  him,  supposed  I  had  been  flying,
hastened  also  as  the  streame  would  permit  them,  towards
the  entrance  to  stop  my  comming  forth ;  but  contrariwise
we  all  anchored  short  of  the  Hope,  not  altogether  of
purpose  to  leave  her  destitute  of  our  helpe,  but  rather
doubting  of  depth  for  our  ships  (so  farre  downe)  to  ride
at  low  water.  I  was  no  sooner  at  anchor,  and  gone  downe
to  my  Cabbin,  and  set  downe  to  write,  to  give  my  friends
and  Merchants  ashoare  notice  of  my  purposes  and  resolu-
tion, howsoever  it  might  please  God  to  dispose  of  me  ;  and

233

A.D.

1614.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  fight  with
the  Hope.

Portugals  losse
by  slaughter,
sea,  and  fire.

that  they  might  know  it  to  be  no  rashnesse,  but  in  good
discretion  to  tend  upon  my  best  advantages  to  prejudice
[I.  iv.  508.]  my  enemies ;  but  presently  I  had  notice,  that  three  ships
with  most  of  the  Frigats  were  before  the  wind,  running
stem-long  aboord  the  Hope,  and  the  Gallions  after  them,
so  farre  as  the  sands  gave  leave.  We  assayed  to  weigh
our  anchor,  but  time  not  permitting,  wee  cut  Cable,  and
set  saile  for  the  Hopes  rescue,  but  the  Enemies  ships  were
aboord  her,  and  entred  their  men  before  we  came  suffici-
ently neere  them  ;  their  men  being  entred  with  great  shew
of  resolution,  but  had  no  quiet  abode  there,  neither  could
rest  in  their  owne  ships,  nor  make  them  loose  from  the
Hope,  for  our  great  and  small  shot ;  so  that  when  the
principall  were  kild,  the  rest  in  great  number,  for  quiet-
nesse  sake,  leapt  into  the  Sea,  where  their  Frigats  tooke
many  of  them  up.  But  first  of  purpose  to  have  burnt
the  Hope  with  them,  they  made  preparation  to  fire  their
owne  ships,  which  was  well  performed  without  harme  to
the  Hope,  (praised  be  the  Lord  of  heaven)  for  so  soone
as  the  fire  was  wel  kinled,  the  ships  of  fire  were  let  loose,
and  drove  a  ground  on  the  sands,  where  they  burnt  till
the  flowing  water  came  and  quench t  them ;  whiles  day
light  lasted,  we  continued  changing  of  shot  in  all  our
ships  with  the  Gallions,  they  being  on  the  out-side  of  a
spit  of  sand,  and  we  on  the  in-side ;  by  which  they  did
little  harme  to  our  Hulles,  but  to  our  ropes  and  sailes
over  head.  In  this  conflict  besides  them  which  were
wounded,  we  lost  five  men,  by  great  mischance  the  Hopes
main  top,  top-saile,  top-mast,  and  shrouds  came  a  fire,  and
burnt  away,  with  a  great  part  of  the  maine  mast,  by  the
fire-works  that  were  in  the  said  top,  the  man  being  slaine
that  had  the  charge  thereof.  This  mishap  kept  us  from
going  forth  into  deepe  water  to  try  our  fortunes  with  the
Vice-roy,  but  were  put  to  our  shifts,  not  knowing  how,  or
by  what  meanes  to  get  the  said  Mast  cured.

The  one  and  twentieth,  I  sent  to  weigh  the  anchor  we
had  cut  the  day  before.  The  two  and  twentieth,  I  under-
stood that  many  great  men,  with  five  or  sixe  hundred

234

A  mischance.

Jesuites
venime.

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  a.d.

1614.

horse,  and  a  Portugall  Father  came  dowhe  to  Swalley,  to
send  on  the  morrow  the  Father  with  three  or  foure  princi-
pall  Moores,  to  conclude  a  peace  betwixt  them :  and  the
Nabob  sent  me  word  that  he  sought  no  such  thing,  and  was
resolved  to  make  none,  but  wherein  we  should  be  in-
cluded. He  "also  granted  me  what  Timber  we  should
want,  which  we  made  use  of.  Likewise  we  were  promised
provisions. The  Portugals  continued  quiet.

The  five  and  twentieth,  the  Muccadam  of  Swally  came
to  me,  and  told  me  that  the  former  Father  had  sent  to
intice  him  to  poison  the  former  Well,  where  hence  we  had
our  water,  which  he  would  not  yeeld  unto,  and  therefore
had  put  into  the  Well  some  live  Tortoises,  who  would  by
their  death  demonstrate  the  poysoning  thereof,  if  it  should
by  them  be  performed.  At  night  came  part  of  the  hun-
dred and  seventie  bales  of  Indico  to  the  water  side,  which
was  presently  fetcht  aboord.  Isaac  Beg  sent  me  a  Present
of  the  fruits  of  his  owne  garden.  This  day  came  downe
the  rest  of  the  Timber  for  the  Hopes  Mast.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  I  sent  all  our  Boats  to  sound
the  Swach  at  low  water ;  chiefly  to  keep  the  Enemie
alwayes  ignorant  of  what  I  intended :  whither  was  sent
by  the  Enemy  to  prevent  them,  one  Gaily  and  five  Frigats,
thinking  to  cut  off  our  Boats,  whereof  they  failed,  as  of
all  other  things  they  attempted.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  the  Nabob  sent  to  the  Vice-
roy great  store  of  provision,  Goats,  Bread,  Plantans,  &c.
with  a  banquet  of  sweet  meates.  Cogenozan  sent  me  a
Present  of  five  Bullocks.  Divers  of  our  men  died  here
of  Fluxe  and  diseases.

The  one  and  thirtieth  in  the  morning,  we  received
aboord  from  Cambaya  fiftie  bales  Indico.  In  the  after-
noone  came  Cogearson  Allee  aboord,  who  presented  me
with  divers  things,  viz.  Goats,  great  store  of  Bread,  Rost-
meat,  Plantans,  and  Sugar,  &c.  With  him  came  an  old
acquaintance  of  mine,  a  Persian,  he  reported  unto  me
that  there  is  newes  come  from  Damon,  that  the  Portugals  Neweso/Por-
carried  thither  three  hundred  and  fiftie  men  to  be  buried,  tu&ak  thine'

235

A.D.
1614.

[I.  iv.  509.]

February  3.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  that  this  newes  is  most  certain :  and  by  our  estimate,
there  cannot  be  lesse  then  an  hundred  more  kild  and  burnt
in  their  ships,  besides  those  drowned,  which  the  tide  did
cast  up  ashoare.  They  also  related  to  me,  that  not  onely
here  in  India  they  found  opposition,  but  also  the  Persians
against  Ormus,  and  the  Malays  at  Malacca,  are  in  armes
against  the  Portugals :  and  whereas  there  had  been  speech
of  a  peace  to  bee  concluded  betweene  the  Viceroy  and
Mocrib  Can,  he  wisht  me  to  assure  my  selfe  it  was  broken
off,  and  would  none  be.  I  found  his  love,  and  tooke  great
content  in  his  long  staying  with  mee,  whose  presence  I
thirsted  to  see,  and  till  now  he  could  never  get  leave  of  the
Nabob  to  come  to  see  mee  (which  without  no  man  dare,
or  will  be  so  bold)  who  proceeds  by  the  great  charge  he
hath  from  the  King,  that  all  things  of  worth,  should  be
procured  by  the  Nabob  for  the  Kings  use ;  which  holds
him  in  such  doubt  and  jealousie,  least  any  thing  should
passe  by  any  other  meanes  to  his  disgrace,  whereby  he  is
inforced  to  use  strange  and  severe  courses  to  restraine  the
same.  The  day  being  farre  spent,  I  returned  him  with  a
Present,  gave  money  to  all  his  people,  let  him  see  the  cast
of  the  Bullets  of  some  of  our  Great  Ordnance  ;  they  tooke
their  leave  and  departed.

§•  in.

Portugall  supplyes,  Fire-boates  frustrated,  seeke
peace  and  refused,  their  departure :  Enterview
of  the  Nabob  and  General! :  departure  of  the
English.

He  third  of  Februarie,  there  came  to  the  water  side
twentie  foure  Bales  Indico,  seven  packs  white
Bastas, seven packs blacke Bastas, sixe packs

Cotton-yarne,  foure  packs  blue  Bastas,  three  packs  Caudi-

kens,  one  pack  Crecany,  al  which  were  presently  fetcht

Supplyes  sent aboord : this  day  also  the  Vice-royes  supplyes  came  in

the  Vke-Roy. sight,  which  were  two  ships  of  burthen,  two  Junkes,  and

eight  or  tenne  of  the  Countrey  Boates. The  Nabob  sent

236

NICHOLAS DOWNTON

A.D.
1614.

Lacandas  to  informe  me,  that  these  supplyes  were  not  for
warre,  but  fild  full  of  combustible  matter  to  fire,  and  so  to
be  let  drive  with  the  tyde  upon  our  ships  in  the  night ;
which  advise  I  was  glad  to  understand,  and  addressed  my
selfe  also  to  prevent  that,  and  all  other  their  attempts
with  smaller  ships.  The  Spring  now  neere  the  highest,
and  fittest  for  their  assaults,  which  every  tide  I  expected :
and  to  shew  that  I  was  in  a  readinesse  to  intertaine  them,
as  also  how  little  I  cared  for  them  (having  all  the  time
formerly  ridden  without  the  like)  I  purposed  and  per-
formed the  setting  and  cleering  our  watch,  Morning  and
Evening,  with  a  Volley  of  shot  from  every  ship,  and  the
best  Peece  in  my  shippe  directed  to  the  Prow  of  the  Vice-
roy, which  I  did  to  daunt  the  courage  of  them  hee  must  The  bravers
employ,  and  to  try  his  temper,  whether  it  would  make
him  angry  or  no :  and  I '  still  thinke  it  prooved  to  good
end.  It  pleased  God  this  day  at  night,  when  I  had  least
leasure  to  mourne,  to  call  to  his  mercie  my  onely  Son  ^eatA  of  the
George  Downton,  who  early  the  next  morning  was  buried
ashoare,  and  the  Volleyes  aforesaid,  appointed  to  try  the
temper  of  the  Vice-roy,  served  also  to  honour  his  buriall.

This  morning  also  came  to  me  on  Mousa  Attale  a
Malabar  Captaine  (with  his  troope  attending)  to  visit  me,
expecting  some  businesse  this  day  by  the  Portugals  to  be
attempted ;  whom  I  intertained  with  all  kind  respect,  and
by  conference  made  the  best  use  of  his  company  that  I
might ;  by  drawing  from  him  the  description  of  the  prin-
cipall  Ports  and  Harbours  in  his  Countrey,  and  manifest-
ing the  desire  I  had  to  be  acquainted  with  him,  and
to  intertaine  love,  league,  and  familiaritie  between  the
English  and  them,  with  a  mutuall  trade  and  traffique  one
with  another :  the  which  with  great  desire  he  seemed  to
imbrace,  willing  me  to  give  him  some  Letters  of  my
hand,  for  their  ships  to  carry  to  shew  to  my  Country-men,
wheresoever  they  should  meet  them :  which  I  delivered,
as  also  a  Letter  for  him  to  moove  their  King  for  the  kind
usage  of  our  Nation,  whensoever  any  of  our  ships  should
arrive  in  any  of  his  Harbours,  and  so  after  leave  taken,  he

237

A.D.
1614.

Reisbutes
assault.

Policie  of  the
Portugalls.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

departed,  I  presenting  him  with  a  Sword  blade,  and  three
or  foure  knives.  The  Master  of  the  Hope  complained,
that  besides  those  presently  kild,  he  had  many  hurt,
bruised,  and  disabled  for  service :  whereupon  I  sent  him
for  supply,  three  men  from  the  Gift,  foure  from  the
Hector,  and  foure  from  the  Solomon.

The  fifth,  I  received  letters  from  M.  Aldworth  from
Baroch,  who  writes  of  their  arrivall  there,  and  that  the  day
before,  nine  Courses  from  Baroch,  they  were  set  upon  by
two  hundred  theeves,  Rashpooses,  with  Pikes,  small  shot,
and  Bowes  and  Arrowes :  and  skirmishing  a  little  while
with  them,  they  fled,  three  of  them  being  killed,  and  more
wounded,  they  having  shot  Humfrey  Elkington  thorow
the  thigh,  and  killed  one  of  the  horses  that  Surder  Canne
sent  to  guard  our  men ;  and  Master  Aldworthes  horse
likewise  received  a  shot.  The  Nabob  sent  me  word  that
the  Vice-Roy  would  assault  this  day,  and  therefore  sent
Gogenozan  to  guard  the  Land ;  who  came  to  the  water-
side and  sent  his  sonne  Mamod  Jehad  aboord  to  see  mee,
with  a  Caveleer,  called  Kemagee,  the  sonne  of  Leckdarsee,
Raspooso  of  Guigomar,  or  Castelletto  (who  maintained
warre  with  the  Mogore  and  Portugall  together  a  long
time)  they  entreated  leave  to  see  and  partake  in  the  fight :
who  seeing  no  attempt  that  day  given,  stayed  aboord  all
night ;  and  the  Raspoose  seeing  the  backwardnesse  of  the
enemy,  went  the  next  day  ashoare :  but  the  other  desirous
to  see  the  issue  thereof,  stayed  two  or  three  dayes  longer
aboord ;  and  then  seeing  nothing  would  bee  done  by  the
enemie,  he  departed.

The  eight  in  the  fore-noone,  we  received  more  Indico
aboord.  In  the  after-noone  all  the  Frigats,  with  the  two
Junckes  and  two  Gallyes,  came  driving  up  with  the  flood,
making  shew  of  some  attempt  at  the  instant,  either  by
fire,  (which  I  most  doubted)  or  otherwise :  whereupon  we
all  weighed  to  goe  nearer  to  them,  who  no  sooner  per-
ceived it,  but  they  altogether  made  away  as  fast  as  they
might,  and  we  came  to  an  anchor  not  farre  from  our  former
place. This  device  was  nothing  but  to  make  us  think

238

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  ad.

1614.

that  those  Fire-boats  should  come  from  the  Northwards,
that  we  might  not  mistrust  their  comming  from  the  North-
wards :  and  therefore  the  next  day  against  night,  they
assembled  both  Junckes,  Frigats,  and  Gallyes  all  together,
a  little  without  the  sands,  to  take  away  all  suspition  of
the  North  from  us :  which  I  well  perceived,  and  did  al-
wayes  resolve,  that  that  way  was  the  place  of  most  danger
for  us  :  And  therefore  gave  a  speciall  charge  of  good  look-
ing out  both  wayes,  but  chiefely  that  way  :  which  accord-
ingly fell  out ;  for  that  a  little  within  night  we  did  discerne  [I.  iv.  510.]
them  (betweene  us  and  a  great  light  to  the  Westward,
upon  the  Hand  of  Gogo)  creeping  to  the  Northwards  upon
the  flood,  and  then  upon  the  last  quarter  ebbe,  about  ten
of  the  clocke  in  the  dark  of  the  night,  before  the  rising  of
the  Moone,  there  came  driving  downe  two  Fire-boats,  Firy
being:  towed  by  Frigats,  whom  we  discovered  before  they  strataSm

D  J  O  J  J 'bVBVBTltCu*

came  neare  us,  and  plyed  at  them  both  with  our  Ordnance
and  small  shot,  whereby  wee  beat  off  the  Frigats  that
towed  them,  who  durst  adventure  no  further  with  them,
but  turned  them  off,  who  came  driving  with  the  tide  a
prettie  distance  from  the  other.  The  first  drove  cleere  of
the  Gift,  Hector  and  Salomon,  and  came  thwart  the  Hopes
Hause,  and  presently  blew  up,  and  with  the  blow  much
of  their  ungratious  stuffe :  but  (blessed  be  God)  to  no
harme  to  the  Hope,  for  that  by  cutting  her  Cable,  shee
cleared  her  selfe.  The  latter  came  likewise  upon  the
quarter  of  the  Hope,  and  then  flamed  up,  but  did  no
harme,  driving  downe  the  ebbe,  and  came  foule  of  us
againe  on  the  flood,  the  abundance  of  fewell  continually
burning,  which  our  people  in  our  Boats  towed  ashoare,
and  the  former  suncke  downe  neare  us  by  day-light.  This
day  I  received  a  letter  from  Master  Aldworth,  who  writes
of  the  receit  of  a  letter  from  Thomas  Kerridge,  specifying
that  Nicholas  Whittington  is  distracted,  and  out  of  his
right  sences,  and  that  he  writeth  somewhat  doubtfully  of
Richard  Steele.

The  tenth  at  night,  neare  about  the  same  time  as  before, Two  Fire-
there  came  two  Fire-boats  together,  towed  by  foure  or  five boaU  mre-

239

boats,

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

Frigats,  which  bore  directly  upon  the  Hector :  but  as
soone  as  we  discovered  them,  the  Gift  and  the  Hector  let
drive  at  them,  both  with  great  and  small  shot,  that  the
Frigats  which  towed  them,  forsooke  them,  and  forced  the
actors  thereof  to  give  fire  sooner  then  they  would,  and  so
turned  them  adrift :  who  comming  burning  directly  to-
wards her  (but  the  wind  being  stiffe,  drove  them  to  lee-
ward of  her)  within  halfe  an  houre  after  wee  perceived  a
Otha  Fire-  great  many  Boats  driving  right  with  the  Hector,  at  whom
they  and  we  discharged,  which  againe  made  the  Frigats
forsake  them,  and  also  those  appointed  for  to  act  it,  sooner
they  they  expected,  whereby  they  gave  fire  only  unto  two
of  them,  being  foure  of  them  chained  together :  but  the
Hector  edging  to  windward  (and  it  pleased  God  to  send  a
stiffe  gale  of  wind  at  present,  which  drove  them  to  Lee-
ward off  her)  our  Gunner  made  a  shot  at  one  of  the  Boats
unfired,  and  struck  her,  whereupon  shee  tooke  fire,  and
the  vehemencie  of  the  flames  reached  unto  the  fourth,  and
set  her  a  fire  also,  and  so  they  drove  ashoare  hard  by  our
landing  place.  My  Pinnasse  took  three  of  the  actors  in
a  small  Cannow,  wherein  they  thought,  the  exploit  being
done,  to  have  escaped.  Two  of  them  were  brought
aboord  me,  and  the  third  was  left  aboord  the  Hector  :  and
the  Gelliwat  returning  aboord,  found  another  which  shee
brought  with  her ;  one  of  them  had  his  shoulder  shot
thorow.  Thus  it  pleased  God  to  disappoint  all  the  mali-
tious  practises  of  our  enemies  against  us.

The  eleventh,  the  Vice-Roy  seeing  God  crossing  him
in  all  his  injurious  attempts,  set  saile  and  fell  downe  into
the  Barre,  where  he  anchored.  The  cause  of  his  anchoring
there,  I  was  desirous  to  understand ;  I  doubting  it  was
for  no  other  purpose,  then  to  attempt  the  spoile  of  Surat :
but  I  resolved,  if  he  should  so  doe,  to  put  out  with  my
ships,  and  so  to  set  upon  his  Fleet  (which  would  make  his
enterprise  against  Surat  to  bee  given  over)  being  desirous
to  assist  the  place  where  wee  had  so  great  a  stocke,  and  so
many  of  our  Merchants.  But  the  Vice-Roy  would  not
trust  mee  so  much,  as  to  unman  his  ships,  lest  I  should

240

NICHOLAS  DOWNTON  a.d.

1614.

come  against  him; and  therefore  sent  all  the  Frigats  at

night  into  the  River,  with  some  to  capitulate  about  a  Vice-Roy

peace,  whereof  he  had  flat  answere  to  the  contrary,  as  seJnJ\s  refund

aforesaid.

The  twelfth,  Lacandas  came  downe,  informing  me  from  The  Jesu'ts
the  Nabob  (he  being  so  assured  by  the  Jesuits,  with  whom  stat^and
he  alwayes  kept  faire  weather  for  his  better  securitie,  if  Merchandise
wee  should  be  put  to  the  worse)  that  there  were  sixe  or  affaires  in  the
eight  Frigats  gone  to  the  Northwards,  with  foure  or  five  East-Indies.
Fire-boats  to  be  let  drive  among  us  in  the  night : and 0tner  Fire~
therefore  wished  carefully  to  looke  out,  for  that  it  should s'
be  when  we  should  least  suspect. I  allowed  of  his  kind-
nesse,  was  glad  of  his  carefull  regard,  although  needing
no  such  admonition,  suspecting  such  practises  as  well  when
they  were  out  of  sight,  and  furthest  from  us,  as  when  they
rode  hard  by  us.

The  thirteenth,  for  as  much  as  Frigats  or  other  vessels
in  the  offing  could  not  so  well  discerne  the  place  of  our
ships,  in  the  darke  night,  for  the  shadow  of  the  shoare,
though  very  low ;  therefore  in  the  times  of  their  hellish
Gun-powder  practises,  they  had  lights  for  ayme  given  them
ashoare,  where  fittest  to  come  in.  Now  night  by  night  we
saw  the  like,  in  the  like  place  as  before  ;  therefore  esteem-
ing some  of  their  creatures  againe  to  give  ayme  for  their
comming  to  like  practises,  though  no  vessels  seene  by
day-light.  And  being  formerly  warned,  as  aforesaid,  to
looke  out  for  like  attempts,  in  hope  to  take  hold  of  this
Fire-man,  at  night  I  sent  William  Gurdin  ashoare  with  Craft  and  sub-
twentie  men,  shot  and  pike,  to  incompasse  and  take  the  tilnes  °f demls

,  ,  /-.i  -jr  • -i  and  men, prove

blaser  or  the  said  fire,  supposing  it  to  be  some  tray  tor  jg„esfatui  y
inhabiting  these  nearest  parts : who  in  his  passage  com-  frustrate.
ming  neare  it,  it  would  seeme  presently  out,  and  againe  at
an  instant  at  another  place  contrary  to  their  pursuit,  and
so  playing  in  and  out  with  them  so  long,  that  in  the  end
they  gave  it  over, esteeming  it  some  delusion  of  the
Devill,  not  knowing  otherwise  how  to  conjecture  thereof.
This  present  night  the  Vice-Roy  set  saile  from  the  Barre, Vice-Roy
leaving  in  the  River  some  twentie  of  his  Frigats,  which  deParteth-
iv  241  Q

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

continued  the  place,  shifting  to  relieve  each  other  some-
[I.  iv.  511.]  times  more,  and  sometimes  lesse,  and  kept  in  the  Malla-
bars  Frigats,  which  were  there  in  service  for  the  defence  of
the  Towne.

The  fourteenth,  the  Nabob  sent  me  a  great  man  and  a
Souldier  (whom  in  amitie  hee  named  his  brother)  to  visit
me,  who  declared  his  opinion,  that  the  Vice-Roy  and  all
his  Fleet  were  gone  for  Goa,  but  some  Frigats  to  attend
this  River,  and  some  to  returne  to  Diu  and  Ormus  :  which
opinion  of  his  I  see  no  reason  for  it,  could  not  allow  of;
esteeming  him  rather  gone  some-whither  to  refresh  his
people,  to  strengthen  them  against  our  putting  forth  to
sea,  when  no  sands  should  hinder  his  greatest  ships  to
encounter  me.  He  also  told  me  that  the  King  had  sent
downe  forces,  both  to  take  Damon,  and  all  the  Country
along  the  Sea-side ;  in  which  I  gave  him  courteous  hear-
ing, beleeving  as  I  saw  reason :  and  that  they  were  more
willing  to  give  our  Nation  entertainment  and  trade,  then
ever  they  did  the  Portugals  ;  the  which  I  thought  he  might
with  very  good  reason  speake,  because  the  Portugall  hath
beene  injurious  alwayes,  and  hath  exercised  many  vile
things  upon  them.  And  yet  unlesse  we  continue  able  to
mate  and  withstand  the  Portugals  forces ;  they  will  unsay
that  speech  againe  for  their  owne  ease.  After  he  had
seene  the  ship,  and  viewed  our  Ordnance,  and  all  our  de-
fencible  preparations,  hee  desired  leave  to  depart  with  his
traine,  which  with  all  courtesie  and  our  Boats,  in  best
fashion  was  performed.

Now  our  daily  endeavour  is,  and  long  since  hath  beene
to  the  clearing  and  beginning  to  lade  the  Hope  for  Eng-
land ;  which  by  the  over-topping  and  threatning  forces  of
the  Vice-Roy  formerly,  with  reason  I  could  not  resolve  to
doe,  though  time  and  libertie  would  for  present  have
allowed  the  same :  but  by  hastie  snatches,  as  it  came,  ever
we  put  it  in  confusedly  (some  into  one  ship,  and  some
into  another)  not  thinking  fit  in  so  casual!  a  time,  to
hazard  all  our  Cargason  in  one  ship.  Besides,  it  was  long
before  the  Hopes  burnt  Mast  was  newly  cured :  and  that

242

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  a.d.

1614.

I  resolved  to  send  home  the  Hope,  it  was  not  altogether
for  that  I  esteemed  her  fittest  of  burthen  for  the  stowing
of  our  goods  presently  provided  ;  but  withall,  by  the  many
impediments  and  disabilitie  in  the  ship,  in  and  by  the
Master  and  Carpenter  daily  complained  of,  as  that  the
poste  within  the  Rudder  was  unsheathed  (a  strange  and
dangerous  neglect,  and  over-sight)  and  therefore  fittest
soonest  to  be  returned,  and  the  losse  of  our  Quick-silver
in  her,  which  lyeth  upon  her  Keele  and  Billages,  another
important  cause.

The  eighteenth,  the  Nabob  sent  Cogearson  Allee,  the
Sabandar,  and  other  Merchants  of  Surat,  to  intreat  my
stay  for  fifteene  dayes,  which  in  no  sort  I  would  grant :
then  they  importuned  me  for  ten  dayes,  which  yet  by  no
meanes  would  I  yeeld  unto,  shewing  how  great  prejudice
to  my  Voyage  my  stay  heere  so  long  might  be.  The
cause  of  their  request,  was  their  feare  lest  the  Vice-Roy  Fearefir
after  my  departure  should  come  against  Surat  with  all  his  uraL
forces.  Wherefore  I  considering  the  weight  of  this  busi-
nesse,  and  the  prejudice  it  might  be  to  our  selves,  and  also
being  unwilling  to  send  them  backe  with  deniall,  seeing
them  much  discontented  thereat  as  a  disgrace  unto  them,
and  being  loath  at  my  departure  to  give  the  Nabob  any
distast  therein,  that  have  done  to  my  uttermost  hitherto
to  give  them  all  content  possible ;  and  knowing  what
future  hindrance  it  might  be  to  our  businesse  ashoare  :  and
last  of  all,  seeing  there  was  six  dayes  worke  of  the  ten  to
be  done  in  the  Hope,  before  we  could  be  possibly  ready ;
I  at  length  (when  they  were  altogether  out  of  hope  thereof,
and  upon  departure)  condescended  to  their  request,
whereat  they  were  exceeding  joyfull,  and  departed.

The  two  and  twentieth  at  night,  I  received  a  Letter
from  Surat,  informing  me  of  the  Nabobs  comming  to  see
me  the  next  day.

The  three  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning,  came  downe
two  Elephants  and  six  Camels,  bringing  his  Tents  and
other  provisions.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  Master  Aldworth  came  downe

243

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

with  the  rest  of  the  Merchants  to  finish  all  businesse  with
me.

The  five  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  the  Nabob  came
downe  with  a  very  great  traine,  and  sixe  Elephants  more,
and  had  beene  two  houres  ashoare  before  I  knew  thereof :
which  when  it  was  told  me,  being  sory  for  my  neglect  of
him,  I  sent  Master  Aid  worth,  Master  Elkington,  and  M.
Dodsworth  ashoare  unto  him,  to  hold  him  in  discourse
^i^TTt j  untill  I  came  unto  him,  which  was  not  long  after ; I  pur-

the  Nabob  and  ,  1  • /  1  ■ /•■  1 \ •

Gen.  posed  to  go  unto  him  (as  a  sonne  unto  his  rather)  in  my

doublet  and  hose,  without  any  armes  or  great  traines,
according  to  custome,  thereby  to  shew  my  trust  and  confid-
ence that  I  reposed  in  him :  but  my  friends  perswaded  me
to  the  contrary,  that  I  should  rather  goe  well  appointed
and  attended  on  with  a  sufficient  guard,  to  continue  the
custome.  Whereunto  I  consented  (though  in  conclusion,
it  repented  me  that  I  had  not  taken  mine  owne  course)
and  went  ashoare  with  about  one  hundred  and  forty  men,
of  pike  and  shot,  who  at  my  entrance  into  the  Nabobs
Tent  gave  me  a  Volly  of  shot.  The  Nabob  entertained
me  very  kindly,  seeming  very  joy  full  of  my  comming
ashoare  to  him  :  we  sitting  a  while  under  a  very  faire  Tent,
open  on  all  sides  round  about,  environed  with  many
people,  as  well  of  mine,  as  of  his  attendants.  At  length
hee  brought  me  into  a  more  private  roome  neare  adjoyn-
ing,  having  on  his  side  onely  Alle  Canne,  a  great  Persian
Captaine,  and  the  Banian  Henie  for  his  Interpreter ;  and
on  my  side,  Master  Aldworth,  Master  Elkington,  and
Master  Dodsworth :  where  hee  conferred  both  of  the
estate  of  this  Countrey  at  present,  and  also  of  our  affaires.
At  length  I  demanded  of  him  if  he  would  go  aboord  with
me  to  see  the  shippe;  whereunto  he  very  willingly  con-
£"!?*'  ^I2^  sente^#  Then  he  presented  me  with  his  owne  sword
Aissifrd^  (accompanyed  with  many  good  words,  telling  mee  that  it
was  the  custome  of  their  Countrey,  to  honour  Captaines
with  armes,  that  had  deserved  well)  which  as  he  told  mee
was  made  in  his  owne  house,  the  hilts  thereof  being  of
massie  gold,  and  in  Hew  thereof  I  returned  him  my  sute,

244

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  a.d.

1614.

being  Sword,  Dagger,  Girdle  and  Hangers,  by  mee  much
esteemed  of,  and  which  made  a  great  deale  better  shew,
though  of  lesse  value. We  came  both  forth  of  the  private
Tent,  and  I  walked  downe  to  the  water-side,  there  staying
his  comming ; whither  he  sent  mee  a  present  of  ten  Cut-
tonee  quilts,  and  twentie  Topseells ; and  not  long  after
came  the  Nabob  himselfe,  and  then  we  tooke  boat  to-
gether and  went  aboord,  where  having  shewed  him  the  a^0fJf
lying  of  our  Ordnance,  and  all  our  war-like  preparation
for  defence,  I  presented  him  with  a  very  faire  standing
guilt  cup  with  a  cover,  and  certaine  very  faire  knives,  and
a  Rundlet  of  Muskadine,  with  some  other  toyes. Then
he  desired  to  see  our  Ordnance  shoote  off,  and  how  farre
they  would  carry  their  shot  upon  the  water,  and  I  gave
him  three. Then  he  would  have  taken  leave,  but  I  ac-
companied him  to  the  shoare,  and  gave  him  at  his  depar-
ture eleven  great  shot. At  our  parting  at  the  water-side,
the  Nabob  gave  me  foure  baskets  of  Grapes ; he  likewise
gave  the  Gunners  and  Trumpeters  between  them  two
hundred  Mamudies,  and  among  the  ships  company  five
hundred Mamudies,  and  one  hundred  books  of  white
Bastas,  of  two  Mamudies  a  peece : and  then  after  some
complements we tooke leave one of the other, and
departed. I  rowed  along  the  shoare  for  my  better  getting
aboord,  the  tide  running  so  swiftly,  and  saw  Lacandas  the
Banian  come  running  towards  the  Boat,  being  sent  of  the
Nabob  to  know  of  me,  if  he  should  erect  a  Tombe  over
my  sonne  :  I  returned  him  many  thanks,  and  willed  Lacan-
das  to  tell  him that I had  alreadie begun it : then I
returned  aboord,  and  he  went  to  Surat ; and  not  long
after  his  Tents  were  taken  downe,  and  went  after  him  with
the  rest  of  his  carriages.

The  six  and  twentieth,  the  Nabobs  sonne  and  sonne  in
law  (a  very  ingenious  yong  man)  came  aboord  to  take
their  leaves  of  me :  upon  whom  I  bestowed  some  knives,
and  other  things  which  I  had  left,  which  could  not  be
much,  having  still  had  one  great  man  or  other  to  visite
me,  who  seldome  or  never  went  away  without  some  one

245

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

present  or  other :  so  they  viewed  the  shippe  and
departed.

The  seventeenth,  there  came  aboord  unto  me  the  three
sonnes  of  Allee  Canne,  the  two  yongest  first,  and  after
them  came  the  eldest,  called  Guger  Canne,  who  as  yet  had

Two  Antelops.  never  been  aboord :  He  presented  me  with  two  Antelops,
male  and  female,  whereat  I  was  glad,  since  I  had  sent  to
enquire  for  some  to  send  home  to  Sir  Thomas  Smith,  but
could  not  procure  any.  I  presented  him  with  foure
Spanish  pikes  with  heads,  and  some  other  things  of  my
owne,  and  shewed  him  all  the  ship,  with  our  warlike
preparation  for  defence,  as  also  all  our  Ordnance ;  and  a
little  while  after  he  tooke  his  leave,  and  at  his  departure  I
gave  him  eleven  shot.

March  3.  The  third  of  March  in  the  after-noone,  upon  the  tide

of  ebbe,  and  a  small  gale  came  up  Northerly,  to  give
steering  way  to  our  ships,  we  seeing  our  friends  the  Malla-
bars  (which  had  desired  to  go  with  us)  not  attempting  to
come  forth,  we  hastened  to  get  up  our  anchors,  and  to  set
saile  to  proceed  on  our  journey :  yet  seeing  comming  in

Their  depar-  fr0m  the  Westward  another  Fleete  of  Portugal!  Frigats,  I
was  willing  to  shew  my  best,  in  the  view  of  the  Countrey
people,  to  hinder  their  comming  into  the  river  of  Surat ;
which  was  nothing,  for  that  there  was  roome  enough  for
them  to  passe  by  us  every  way  out  of  the  reach  of  our
shot ;  yet  we  shot  at  the  nearest  of  them,  without  hope
to  shoote  neare  them,  but  only  to  shew  our  good  willes,
and  for  encouragement  to  our  friends  on  land ;  as  also
for  those  which  went  alongst  the  Coast  (as  I  esteemed)  to
give  knowledge  to  the  Gallions  of  our  comming,  that  they
might  report  also  that  we  shot  at  their  fellowes  going  to
Surat :  that  they  might  also  expect  that  wee  cared  the  lesse
for  their  greater  strength.  In  our  passage  this  night,  we
had  divers  flawes  of  unconstant  winds,  for  which  we  came
to  anchor  for  a  while.  Afterwards  seeing  it  blew  steadie,
though  faint,  wee  set  saile,  continuing  our  course  South
by  East  alongst  the  shoare.  At  that  time  the  day-light
began  to  discover  to  us  all  things  neare  us ; we  descried

246

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  a.d.

1614.

betweene  us  and  the  shoare  our  enemies  forces  of  Gallions, The  enemies
and  two  Gaily es,  all  comming  to  saile  presently  after  they  forcesdescne«-
saw  us,  and  stood  after  us  with  a  faint  gale,  we  standing
somewhat  without  our  course  with all our  sailes,  partly
to  gaine  time  to  make  our  selves  in  perfect  readinesse
to  fight,  partly  to  refresh  my  people  that  had  taken  much
paines  the  night  past ;  as also  the further  I  draw  them
off  the  Coast,  the  further  they  will  be  from  fresh  supplyes
to  be  sent  them. But  ere  long,  the  tide  of  flood  being
come,  and  little  wind  to  hold  our  owne,  we  came  to  an
anchor,  while  the  enemie  resting  his  hopes  in  the  wind,
kept  longer  under  saile  to  his  greater  disadvantage. But
I  not  taking  it  for  an  error  in  them,  but  of  purpose  to
doe  us  more  harme,  it  brought  mee  into  a  new  and  great
doubt, which drew all my powers to devise how to
prevent. This  was,  that  now  we  were  at  sea,  they  meant
to  return  to  Surat with al their  strength,  and  there  to
worke  their  wills  on  our  friends  and  goods,  which  I  had
no  meanes  to  prevent,  but  by  following  them ;  knowing
they  durst  not  unarme,  nor  unfurnish  their  shippes  while
I  was  in  sight  of  them. But  the  time  now  grew  so  late,
that  I doubted  by  the most  hast that  I  could  make,  I
should  hardly  get  off  the  Coast  before  the  foule  weather
came ;  which  put  me  into  some  hope,  that  the  Vice-Roy
being  so  great  a.  Souldier,  and  so  discreet  a  Gentleman,
would  not  expose  himself,  his  people  and  ships  to  such
great  perils  as  the  hastning  winter  did  threaten. While
these things  floted in my mind,  the  tide  of  flood was  [I.  iv.  513.]
spent,  and  time  to  worke  if  we  make  use  of  the  ebbe,
we  (to  my  great content)  saw  the Vice-Roy  his  Fleete
standing  towards  us  with  a  fresh  gale  of  wind. Wee  like-
wise set  saile,  and  stood  away  our owne  course  before
him all that tide, and  so  spent the night to  the best
advantage,  partly  by  sailing,  and  partly  by  stopping.

The  fifth  in  the  morning,  wee  saw  the  enemie  had
gotten  but  little  ground  of  us :  This  day  also  we  spent,
as  before,  in  riding  and  sailing,  as  time  served  to  our  best
advantage : and  for  that  the  Hector  went  best,  and  the

247

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

1614.

Hope  (logloaden)  worst,  I  sent  to  the  Hector  to  take

in  her  Boat,  and  to  prepare  for  the  Hope. I  sent  to  the

Hope  to  give  directions  to  hasten  to  the  Hector,  to  be

towed,  and  to  the  end  she  should  have  nothing  to  hinder

her,  I  had  her  Boat  to  tow  at  my  sterne,  and  so  spent

the  night  working  for  the  best,  the  wind  fresh  wee  had

no cause to anchor. This night  the  Vice-Royes  ships

got  much  ground  of  us : by  this  I  was  gotten  well  off

from  the  shoare,  and also  an  ende  to  the Southwards,

and  by  his  working I recovered  some  assurance  to  my

conceit,  that these forces would  not this yeare  annoy

Surat :  and  for  my  businesse  for  encountring  the  enemie,

I  had  by  good  leasure  well  considered  how  to  contrive

it,  and  withall  I had considered of  the  cases  of  either,

and  the  difference  betweene  the  Vice-roy  and  me,  I  meane

Wiseandsober  "m  Qur  several!  satisfactions  and  contents : My  comming

coutse.  hither  was  by  the  authoritie  of  my  King,  and  to  follow

the  designes  of  my  Imployers,  which  was  in Merchants

ships fitted for defence, and to endeavour by honest

commerce, without striving to injury  any, which God

hath of  his tender mercie and bountifull blessing so

assisted  me,  that  we  have  performed  beyond  my  former

conceit,  and  in  most  things  hitherto  God  hath  graunted

me  my  hearts  desire :  and  am  now  in  a  good  way  upon

my way with the same : with which without further

tempting of God, or presuming of Gods continuing

mercies  in  further  deliverances,  if  I  by  pride  swarve  from

what  is  just,  and  before  him  to  be  allowed,  whose  mercies

have  been free,  and without  any cause  in  mee  for  his

owne Name sake : therefore I hold  it fit to proceede

soberly,  and  attend  upon the  Enemies  attempt,  yet  not

in  base  manner,  but  in  a  warlike  sort.

Thankfullcon- On the  other side, the unhappy Vice-roy  a famous

siderationof YZ\[^nt  man therefore  now  sent  by  his  Master  the  King
Gods  assisting c _ .  '  . _,  .  . .  J .. r  T ,. N .  ,  &

our  equine °* Spaine  with  Ships  (the  pnncipall  or  India;  with  men

and  punishing  (all  the  Gallants  and  principall  Braggards  of  those  neerer

the  Portugall parts  of  India)  what  to  doe  ? Not  onely  to  disturbe  or

pnde.  intercept  the peaceable  and  quiet  trade  of  the  English

248

NICHOLAS DOWNTON  a.d.

1614.

with  the  subjects  of  the  Mogol,  a  great  King  in  his  owne
Countrey,  but  to  take  or  burne  them  :  so  little  regard
is  had  to  the  effusion  of  Christian  blood ;  never  looking
towards  the  judgements  of  God,  nor  remembring  that
as  men  doe  to  others,  they  must  expect  to  be  done  to.
This  Captaine  was  furnished  with  abundance  of  all  things
the  Countrey  might  yeeld,  and  wanted  nothing  but  an
upright  cause,  fit  for  God  to  favour.  He  came  to  the
place  where  he  found  what  he  sought,  foure  poore
Merchants  ships,  a  fewe  men,  and  many  of  them  sicke
and  dead ;  and  those  Braggards  measured  our  minds  by
their  owne,  thought  we  would  never  stand  out  against
so  powerfull  a  force,  as  they  esteemed  they  had;  and
the  conceit  of  that,  set  those  Coxcombs  a  madding  to
be  doing  mischiefe,  to  encrease  their  pride,  which  they
intitle  honour.  I  seeing  the  difference,  and  the  cause
I  had  to  pray  to  God  my  onely  refuge,  whom  it  pleased
to  grant  the  request  of  me  his  poore  and  unworthy
servant :  in  consideration  whereof,  I  put  forward  the
businesse,  and  as  it  were,  baited  my  hooke,  and  the  Fish
presently  ranne  thereat  as  aforesaid.

They  came  three  Ships,  and  thirtie  or  fortie  Frigats,
as  I  imagined ;  with  a  veaze  laid  the  Hope  aboord  with
the  flowre  of  all  their  Gallants,  where  by  the  hand  of
God  in  their  amazed  carriage,  they  received  such  a  blow,
as  few  (and  they  by  their  extraordinary  chance)  escaped
with  safetie,  and  the  three  ships  burnt.  Thus  it  pleased
God  to  crosse  their  first  attempt,  and  never  after,  though
they  beleaguered  us  round  about  by  sea,  with  all  their
sorts  of  shippes  for  many  dayes  together,  our  people  still
in  action,  and  halfe  tired  with  continuall  labour,  some
receiving  in  goods ;  yet,  Blessed  be  God,  they  could
never  get  the  advantage  to  winne  from  us  the  vallewe
of  a  louse,  unlesse  our  Bullets  which  we  lent  them,  his
fire-boats  failing,  and  nothing  prospering;  and  once  in
foure  and  twentie  houres,  I  sent  him  a  defiance  for  many
dayes  together,  to  try  his  temper ;  all  which  must  needs
lie  heavie  on  the  stomacke  of  a  Gentleman  of  so  great

249

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 6 14.

courage.  I  esteeme  now  he  will  hazard  much  to  recover
some  of  his  honour  formerly  lost  (but  craving  pardon
for  this  my  digression,  I  will  now  returne  and  proceed
with  my  former  businesse.)

Wherefore  the  sixt  in  the  morning  betimes,  I  sent  for
my  Master,  and  let  him  know  that  my  purpose  was,  that
when  the  Vice-roy  should  come  up  neere  with  us,  that
we  would  all  at  once  cast  about  with  him,  and  charge
him  first  on  the  sudden,  to  strike  an  unexpected  terror
in  the  hearts  of  his  people,  who  now  are  bragge,  seeing
us  going  away  before  them.  And  to  that  end  I  now
went  aboord  every  ship,  to  give  them  all  directions ;  and
more,  that  I  would  cause  the  Hector,  with  her  Pinnasse
and  mine,  to  take  in  an  hundred  fardels  of  the  Hopes
goods  to  lighten  her,  and  mend  her  going :  which
businesse  (by  reason  of  my  Pinnasse  to  helpe)  I  stayed
to  see  it  done ;  so  that  it  grew  to  be  mid-day,  neere
which  time,  my  ship  which  I  left  farre  asterne  for  my
better  comming  aboord,  strooke  saile,  whereat  (as  wee
imagined)  the  Vice-roy  seeing  the  Admirall  strike  her
sailes  to  fall  a  sterne,  might  take  it  of  purpose  to  stay
for  him  in  contempt,  he  with  his  Consorts  bore  up
with  the  shoare,  and  gave  over  the  hope  of  their  fortunes

[I.  iv.  514.]  by  further  following  of  us :  which  course  I  like  very  well,
since  he  is  so  patient ;  for  there  is  nothing  under  his
foot  that  can  make  amends  for  the  losse  of  the  worst
mans  finger  I  have. Besides,  I  wish  no  occasion  to  fight;

Rash  fighting for  that which I  have alreadie paid for,  I am already

ts  rathe?-  possest  on,  and  I  am  so  farre  from  the  humour  to  fight

humour  then r ,  1  r  1 tt  r  **■•

honour.  *or honour, unlesse for the Honour or my  King or

Countrey,  that  I  had  rather  save  the  life  or  lives  of  one

of  my poorest  people, then kill a thousand Enemies.

Having  now  finished with  the  Vice-roy,  I set  my  selfe

to  write  Letters  for  the  dispatch  of  the  Hope,  yet  still

thinking  to  have  haled  into  the  Bar  of  Goa,  to  proove

if  I  could  have  left  some  Commendations  there  for  the

Vice-roy  at his  returne : this  was  my  great  desire  that

I long  promised,  yet  so  long trifled  in  dispatch  of  the

250

A.D.
1614.

*  Since  this
was  written,  I
have  obtained
M.  Elkingtons
Journall,
wherein  you
may  proceed
with  this
worthy  Cap-
tain to

Bantam,  and
thence  to  his
Grave:  his
History  suc-
ceeding this,  as
himselfe  did  in
the  Generals
place  of  com-
mand.

NICHOLAS DOWNTON

Hope,  that  wee  were  shot  farre  past  it  before  wee  had
finished  the  same.

The  rest  of  this  Journall  is  *  wanting ;  for  hee  is  also
wanting  which  should  have  perfected  it.  But  alas,  this
is  the  imperfection  of  Mans  best  perfections,  Death  lying
in  ambush  to  intrap,  whom  by  open  force  (you  see)  he
could  not  devoure.  He  dying  in  this  Voyage,  and
following  his  sonne,  hath  left  this  glorious  act,  Memoriae
Sacrum,  the  Memorable  Epitaph  of  his  worth,  savouring
of  a  true  Heroike  disposition,  Pietie  and  Valour  being  in
him  seasoned  with  Gravitie  and  Modestie.  We  will  not
with  heathen  Poets  cry  out  of  cruell  immature  Fates :  for
Death  hath  prevented  unto  him  possibilitie  of  disastrous
events  (which  as  shadowes  follow  the  bodies  in  greatest
light)  and  leaving  his  living  Memory  here,  hath  lifted
his  lively  part,  and  vertuous  Spirit,  to  receive  the  applause,
and  praise,  and  reward  of  God  and  with  God,  to  whom
be  glory  for  ever. Amen.

Chap.  XII.

Relations  of  Master  Elkington  and  Master  Dods-
worth,  touching  the  former  Voyage.

§. I-

Collections  taken  out  of  the  Journall  of  Captaine
Thomas  Elkington,  successour  to  Captaine
Nicholas  Downton  in  the  Voyage  aforesaid,
written  by  himselfe.

He  first  of  January  16 13.  the  new  ship
built  at  Detford,  was  lanched  and  called
the  New-Yeares-Gift.  The  third  of
March,  we  came  to  an  anchor  in  the
Downes.  The  thirtieth  of  June,  we  set
saile  from  the  Bay  of  Soldania.  Heere  Soldauia.
at  this  time  which  is  their  dead  of
Winter,  it  was  temperate,  rather  inclining  to  cold  then
heate. We  had  little  refreshing  but  water  and  fish. The

251

-*

A.D.
1614.

The  cry  of
bloud.

S.  Augustine.

*  Of  O  cur-
rents here,
read  the
former  and
next  following
Discourse.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

people  are  wretched,  neither  sow  nor  plant,  dwell  in
small  Cottages  made  of  Hides,  and  so  joyne  many  of
them  in  a  round  Circle,  having  their  Cattle  in  the
middest.  They  are  browne,  but  by  greasing  themselves
become  almost  blacke,  and  in  the  wind  unsavourie  a
doozen  yards  off,  filching,  trecherous,  unworthy  so  good
a  Land,  which  in  likelihood  with  culture  would  be  very
fertile.

The  sixth  of  August  wee  had  sight  of  Saint  Laurence.
This  night  Robert  Waters  departed,  a  man  long  diseased
in  bodie,  disturbed  in  minde  by  torment  of  conscience,
for  a  man  by  him  killed  in  Virginia,  (cowardly  comming
behind  him,  and  knocking  him  on  the  head)  for  which
hee  obtayned  his  pardon  in  the  Court  of  men,  but  in  the
inward and spirituall was thus pursued to his death.
Here in the  Bay of  Saint Augustine  we wooded and
watered : Some  went up the river and came to their
houses  or  sheads,  which  were  small things set  up  with
Canes,  and  covered  with  a  thing  like  a  hurdle,  made  of
the  leaves  of  the  Palme  Tree. The  people  fled  and  left
all,  that  is,  nothing but  a  little  Cotton  spunne, or on
the  Distaves,  with  a  few  necessaries. The  eleventh  and
twelfth,  we  bought  Cattell  in  exchange  of  Silver  Chaines,
they  taking  the  value  of  twentie  pence,  or  two  shillings
in  a  Chaine  for  an  Oxe,  which  in  money  would  cost  five
or  sixe  shillings. They  are  very  good,  fed  (it  seemes)
within  the  land,  for  we  saw  nothing  but  sand  and  wood
without  any  grasse  at  all.

The  ninth  of  September,  we  had  sight  of  Socatora,
and  passing  by  Tamarind  Bay,  came  to  an  anchor  in
Delisha.

The  one  and  twentieth  of  October,  we  came  into  the
Road  of  *  Swally.  After  the  fight  on  the  twentieth  of
January,  in  which  three  Portugal!  ships  were  burnt,  and
two  Frigats  sunke,  and  Timber  procured  for  the  Hopes
maine  Mast,  which  the  Nabob  caused  to  be  done  so
warily,  that  it  seemed  he  was  afraid  lest  the  Portugals
might know it. On the foure and twentieth, came a

252

THOMAS ELKINGTON  a.d.

1615.

Jesuite  with  another  fellow  from  the  Vice-roy  to  intreate
of  peace  with  Magribocan,  who  on  the  seven  and  twentieth,  [I.  iv.  515.]
sent  the  Vice-Roy  one  hundred  and  fiftie  Maunds  Meale,
one  hundred  sheepe,  twentie  five  Maunds  Conserves  with
Hens,  &c.  In  the  after-noone  the  Sabandar  requested
me  to  read  a  Letter  from  the  Vice-Roy,  which  signified
that  whereas  by  the  Padre  hee  was  informed  that  the
Nabob  desired  to  make  peace  in  his  Masters  name,  and
had  appointed  for  treatie  thereof  the  Sabandar,  Isaac  Beg,
and  Abduram,  hee  also  had  hearkened  thereto  and  ap-
pointed three  others  to  that  businesse  binding  himselfe
to  performe  their  agreements.

On  the  one  and  thirtieth.  The  Sabandar  came  unto
mee  and  told  mee,  that  no  peace  could  bee  with  the
Portugals,  they  refusing  to  make  any  restitution  for
damages  or  goods  taken,  but  rather  required  money  of
them :  and  that  the  Vice-roy  had  sent  to  all  parts  there-
abouts for  more  forces.  After  their  fire  devices  frus-
trated, they  all  set  saile,  both  Ships,  Junckes,  Gallies  and
Frigats,  and  roade  at  the  Barre  of  Surat.  The  Hector
had  taken  one  of  their  Frigats  which  was  imployed  to  tow
the  fire-boats  and  in  her  seven  men ;  three  slaine,  foure
living.  Soone  after  they  departed :  and  we  also  weighed
the  second  of  March.

On  the  fourth,  we  descryed  the  Portugall  Fleet,  which
presently  gave  us  chase,  and  the  next  day  also.  On  the
sixth,  the  Generall  came  aboord  us,  to  wish  us  to  make
readie,  he  purposing  to  turne  and  give  the  on-set  on
them  :  but  about  noone  the  Portugals  bore  up  the  Helme,
and  stood  in  for  the  shoare,  and  within  three  houres  after
we  lost  sight  of  them.  The  tenth,  at  night  the  Hope
departed  from  us.  The  fifteenth,  we  saw  three  Spouts  Spouts  of
of  water  not  farre  from  us,  one  whereof  very  bigge  con-  water-
tinuing  halfe  an  houre.  The  nineteenth,  we  doubled
Cape  Comorine.

The  tenth  of  May,  the  wind  and  current  against  us,  A.D.  161 5.
the  Generall  went  to  a  greene  Hand  to  the  North  of  the
Salt-hill,  and  there  came  to  an  anchor  in  twentie  fathome

253

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

good  ground  sandie.  Wee  sought  fresh-water  but  found
none :  wee  saw  Pigges  and  Hogs  on  the  Hand,  and
gathered  good  store  of  Coco  Nuts.  About  this  Hand
is  good  riding,  beeing  twelve  fathomes  within  a  stones
throw  of  the  shoare.  The  Pinnasse  fetched  water  at  an
Hand  foure  leagues  off,  which  was  brackish.  We  found
water  in  the  Hand  beyond  the  burning  one.  The  second
of  June,  wee  came  to  an  anchor  in  Bantam  Road.
The  third  of  July,  we  weighed Mace  and received

Masulipatan.  Silke  for  the  furnishing  of  the  Salomon,  for  Masulipatan,
wherein  we  concluded  to  send  for  Merchants,  George
Chancie,  Ralph  Preston,  Humphery  Elkington,  Timothy
Mallory,  George  Savage,  and  Robert  Savage.

The  eighth  of  July,  we  laded  Porcelane  in  her:  and
then  came  newes  by  a  Juncke  from  the  Moluccas,  of  the
Thomasine  being  there,  and  of  twelve  saile  of  Hollanders
at  Ternate,  which  hindered  all  men  they  could  from
Trade.  The  eleventh,  our  old  house  escaped  great
danger  of  a  fire  neere  it.

On  the  twentieth,  Master  Jordan  received  Letters  from

Hollandabuses  Master  Ball  at  Macassar,  of  the  violent  courses  which  the

of  us  at  Flemmings  used  with  him,  beating  him  from  thence,  as

also  that  they  purposed  with  their  whole  force  to  come  to
take  Bantam,  and  to  place  the  King  of  Motran  in  the
Government.

The  one  and  twentieth,  Master  Bennet  set  saile  in  the
Salomon.  The  five  and  twentieth,  the  Advice  and  Attend-
ance came  into  the  Road,  having  beene  out  of  England
eight  moneths.  At  the  Cape  they  met  with  the  Globe
and  James,  to  whom  they  spared  eighteene  men.  They
departed  towards  England,  July  the  seventeenth,  and  they
hither,  the  eighteenth,  meeting  with  a  shippe  neere  the

Generall Cape,  which  we  judge  to  be  the  Samaritan  or  Hope  from

Downton  his England.

death.  The  fifth  of  August,  I  was  aboord  with  the  Generall

B?  °T?erM  t^len  very  ^  anc*  t^ie  next  ^ay  kac*  word  of  his  departure ;
Elkington  me-  whom  followed  on  the  eighth  Master  Evans  the  Preacher,
ceeded.  and  Master  Hambden,  as  was  supposed,  by  taking  Loda-

254

THOMAS ELKINGTON  ad.

1615.

num, they both being well a little before. On the
eleventh, the Advice was dispeeded for Japan, with  Advice  goeth
twentie  two  persons  brought  out  of  England,  five  Blackes  ,0 a?a
and  Fernando  the  Spaniard.

The  fourteenth,  returned  the  Concord  from  Socodanna,
and  Macassar.  That  night  was  much  Raine,  Thunder  and  Tempest.
Lightning,  the  Church  or  Meskit  of  Bantam  split  in  two
with  a  Thunderbolt,  and  the  chiefe  Priest  almost  slaine,
which  the  King  and  people  tooke  as  an  ill  presage,  and
therefore  determined  to  make  peace  with  Jacatra.

The  sixteenth,  the  Thomasines  Boat  came  into  Bantam,
with  twentie  two  English,  and  five  Blackes,  which  told  of
the  casting  away  of  the  Thomasine  on  certaine  flats,  Thomasine
twentie  two  leagues  from  Macassar  the  night  before,  osL
Wilson  the  Master  being  carelesse,  and  all  the  company
asleepe,  saving  he  which  was  at  the  Helme.  The  money
they  saved  and  brought  with  them.  Master  Baily  signi-
fied also  that  the  wracked  company  there  enforced  him  to
pay  them  their  wages,  which  we  caused  them  to  restore.

The  nineteenth,  the  Flemmings  put  into  the  Bilbowes  Hollanders

three  Blackes,  that  Master  Baily  brought  with  him  from  qu,arrels  and
.  •  t> .  causes.

Celoar,  pretending  they  tooke  them  climbing  over  their

pales,  also  that  they  were  taken  from  a  place  which  they

protected, and therefore would keepe them. We are

many  wayes  most  vily  abused  by  them,  nor  is  any  way  to

right  us  except  wee  should  goe  together  by  the  eares,  this

as  we  conceive  being  wrought  of  purpose,  and  the  Blackes

intised  by  them  and  willing  to  it,  as  being  taken  by  force :

which after that I knew, I was offended with Master  ^;  Bathes

Baily,  being  a  meanes  that  whereas  heretofore  wee  have  inJUS  tce"

beene in all places well intreated, that wee should be  [I.  iv.  516.]

hated  as  Men-robbers,  which  the  Flemmings  to  disgrace

us  will  not  let  to  blaze  abroad.

The  thirteenth  of  September,  the  watch  espyed  a  fire  in
the  thatch  over  Master  Jordans  lodging,  which  was  soone
quenched :  it  was  throwne  there  purposely ;  we  found
the  Cane  wherein  it  was  done,  for  which  we  suspected
Francisco  the  Spaniard turned  Javan. The  same  night

255

A.D.
1615.

Puloway.

*Quis  tulerit
Gracchos  de
seditione  que-
rentes:  Call
whore  first,
Dutch  policie.
Is  it  such  a
crime  to  be
English?

Letter  from
Banda,  with
offer  of  Trade,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  like  happened  in  two  or  three  places  of  the  Towne,
but  all  prevented.

The  second  of  October,  Sophonee  Cossock,  Merchant,
came  in  a  small  Pinnasse  from  Puloway,  one  of  the  Hands
of  Banda,  with  an  Orancaya,  to  conferre  of  trade.

The  two  and  twentieth,  I  with  Master  Pring  and
Master  Boile,  went  ashoare  to  conferre  with  the  Flem-
mish  Generall,  touching  certaine  idle  complaints  made  by
them  of  our  Mariners :  whom  and  the  President  I  found
very  impatient,  calling  us  insolent*  English,  and  with
threats,  telling  us  our  pride  would  have  a  fall,  with  many
other  disgracefull  words ;  this  being  the  entertainment  of
that  borish  Generall,  Garrat  Reynes,  in  his  owne  house ;
shewing  the  like  or  worse  to  Master  Ball,  comming
aboord  him  at  Banda,  and  foure  of  our  men  entreating
passage  with  him  thence  to  Cambello,  upon  no  cause  he
carried  them  thither  in  the  Bilbowes.

The  third  of  November,  I  went  ashoare :  Captaine
Jordan  called  together  the  Merchants,  and  sent  for  the
Orancaya  of  Banda,  having  had  his  Letter  translated,  the
effect  whereof  was,  that  in  regard  of  the  ancient  friendship
betweene  the  English  and  them,  and  especially  with
Captaine  Keeling,  withall  being  provoked  by  the  cruelty
of  the  Hollanders,  their  earnest  desire  was  to  trade  only
with  the  English  for  the  Spices  of  Puloway,  Pulerons  and
Nera:  conditionally  that  the  English  would  furnish  them
with  Victuals,  Munition  and  Ordnance,  and  helpe  them  to
recover  the  Castle  of  Nera,  and  that  some  might  bee  sent
to  Banda,  to  conferre  hereof  with  the  Orancayas.  To
which  was  answered,  that  for  helpe  to  recover  Nera,  we
could  not  doe  it  without  order  from  England ;  for
Ordnance  at  present  we  were  unprovided :  what  we
could,  we  would,  which  was  to  furnish  them  with
Victuals,  and  what  other  provisions  we  could,  till  further
order  out  of  England,  and  to  trade  with  them  for  Spices,
purposing  to  send  a  ship,  and  some  to  conferre  with  the
Orancayas,  how  we  should  be  secured,  and  whether  they
would  permit  us  a  Fort  on  shoare.

256

THOMAS ELKINGTON  a.d.

1614.

The  two  and  twentieth,  were  five  Hollanders  riding
without ;  foure  of  which  came  from  Mauritius  Hand
(having  come  out  of  Holland  nineteene  moneths  past)
where  they  found  Generall  Butt  cast  away  with  three
ships,  two  utterly  lost,  the  third  men  and  goods  saved,
the  fourth  went  home  with  a  Jury  Mast,  in  company  of  a
small  Pinnasse  that  came  thither  by  chance.  One  of
these  shippes  that  was  at  the  Mauritius  came  away  before
the  rest,  whom  they  found  driving  to  and  againe  before
the  Straights  mouth,  having  lost  one  hundred  and  sixty
men,  and  left  in  her  but  eight.

The  five  and  twentieth,  by  a  letter  from  Priaman,
we  had  newes  of  the  death  of  Master  Oxewike  and
Samuel  Negus.

§•  11.

A  Briefe  of  Memorialls  observed  and  written  by
M.  Edward  Dodsworth,  Merchant  in  the
former  Voyage,  which  returned  in  the  Hope.

He  sixteenth  of  October,  in  the  Bay  of  Surat,  came
aboord  us  Master  Aldworth  and  Master  Steele :
and  the  next  day  in  consultation  it  was  demanded

of  Master  Aldworth  according  to  the  Companies  *  Com-  *This  Com-
mission, concerning Paul Canning, of his cariage and  ms5'l°nhadsix
respect  with  the  King :  to  which  he  answered,  That  was  ^hic*™!  take
well,  and  this  good,  till  the  Jesuits  had  made  knowne  that  that  which  is
he  was  a  Merchant,  and  not  immediatly  sent  from our  fit  for  the
King ;  after  that,  neglected,  since  which  he  *  dyed. Also  P*bhke.

he  thought fit that  some one of  our Nation,  of  good ,  ",  i6*

o  .  _,  .  *  . &  you  had  before

respect,  should  remaine  at  Court, to  right us  in those  /»  n.  W.  his
wrongs which might bee offered. To this function  relations  by
Master  Edwards  was  chosen  as  a  man  most  answerable  P°'uoni  as  was
to the Companies Commission to go for Agra, some j°"K  ,-°"
question  being  made  whether  he  should  proceed  in  name  t.  Elk.
and  profession  of  a  Merchant  (according  to  the  strictnesse
of  the Commission)  which Master  Aldworth conceited
would  procure  him  disrespect  with  the  King. After  much
iv  257  R

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

contesting,  some  way  was  given  to  Master  Edwards,  lest
they  should  seeme  contrary  to  each  other  in  their  pro-
ceedings, it  being  before  by  some  given  out,  that  he  was
the  Kings  Messenger.

All  this  while  wee  heard  not  from  the  Cheefe  at  Surat,
nor  had  any  encouragement,  or  so  much  as  refreshing,
whereupon  I  was  sent  with  a  letter  to  the  Nabob,  and
doubting  to  get  into  the  Citie,  was  forced  to  stay  by  the
way,  and  lye  in  a  poore  Gonge,  and  the  next  day  was
courteously  entertained  :  but  having  Nicholas  Uphlet
with  me  for  Interpreter,  a  man  knowne  and  hated  by
the  Nabob,  for  employment  in  Captaine  Hawkins  debts
and  affaires ;  he  departed  discontent,  leaving  Coianozan
with  others,  to  receive  my  letter :  I  refused  to  deliver  it
to  them  ;  in  the  afternoone  I  was  admitted,  and  he
seemed  much  discontent  at  our  want  of  refreshments,
as  not  knowing  it,  promising  reformation  ;  and  the  next
[I.  iv.  517.]  day  went  to  talke  with  the  Generall  at  Swally,  who  had
come  into  that  Road  on  the  one  and  twentieth.  Never-
thelesse,  we  had  found  nothing  but  delayes:  and  the
nine  and  twentieth,  hee  sent  the  Sabander  to  acquaint
us,  that  wee  should  looke  for  no  trade  or  kindnesse,  except
wee  would  assist  them  against  the  Portugall:  Which
the  Generall  refusing,  further  then  his  Commission  gave
leave,  he  also  desired  leave  by  his  letter,  that  his  Mer-
chants might  come  aboord  with  their  goods,  so  to  depart
to  some  other  place,  where  with  safetie  he  might  deliver
his  Majesties  Letters  and  Present  to  the  Mogoll.
Master  Elkington  and  Master  Aldworth  went  with  this
*These  words  Letter.*  But  Magro  Can  would  not  so  much  as  looke
plowing,  an Qn  us^  kut  took.e  j,t  very  SCornefully,  and  went  his  way,

have  heere arjd  sent  tne  Sabandar  with  answere  as  before.

inserted  out  of The second of November, we had sowre enter-

Master  tainment of him, telling us, if we would stay, we

Elkmgtons rnight ;  if  we  would  go, we might  go,  either  in Gods,

or  the  Devills  name;  for  our  other demands referring

us  to  Isaak  Beg  and the Sabandar, who  would yeeld

us  nothing. The  common  people  seemed  well  affected

258

dealing.

EDWARD DODSWORTH  a.d.

1614.

to  us,  the  greater  to  desire  our  roome  rather  then  our
company,  but  so  that  we  thought  none  of  them  durst
gaine-stand  the  Kings  Firma :  whereupon  it  was  con-
cluded that  the  goods  should  bee  landed,  which  accord-
ingly was  done.  But  in  the  Alfandica  wee  could  find
no  reasonable  ratements  on  the  goods,  nor  leave  to  carry
away  any  thing,  till  the  Nabob  had  seene  them,  and  taken
what  he  pleased  (as  hee  had  done  in  opening  mens  chests,  Harsh  and
neither  Mariner  nor  Merchant  escaping  without  trifles  fr / rous
taken  from  them,  no  reason  after  given  for  it)  searching
to  the  very  pillowes  and  pockets,  not  sparing  Master
Edwards  himselfe  ;  Customing  the  Cases,  Bottels,  Ap-
parell,  or  what  we  brought  for  necessary  use,  as  if  they
sought  by  foule  usage  to  weary  us.

The  fifteenth,  Magro  Can  himselfe  came  to  the  Alphan-
dica,  and  sealed  up  the  Kings  Presents,  which  he  was
desirous  to  see,  although  he  had  promised  that  they
should  passe  without  opening.  He  desired  to  have  all
the  Pictures  and  Combe-cases,  which  we  said  were  to  go
for  Agra,  that  the  King  might  have  his  choise.  Where-
upon (notwithstanding  he  was  offered  part  of  them)  he
fell  into  great  choler,  and  objected  Sir  Henry  Middleton
his  proceedings  in  the  Red-sea,  wishing  Master  Aldworth
to  write  to  the  King  for  satisfaction  :  which  was  answered
to  have  beene  already  ended  by  Captaine  Best,  as  the
Articles  manifest.  He  concluded  yet  with  faire  promises,
but  the  effect  was  (defect  and)  delay,  wee  being  not  per-
mitted to  carry  away  the  Kings  Presents.  The  Pictures
by  lying  in  the  Sunne,  were  broken  and  warped  in  vile
manner,  wee  also  in  danger  to  lose  the  Monson,  and  the
Kings  Present,  with  Muskets  and  Fowling-peeces  taken
from  our  men,  were  carried  to  his  house :  and  nothing
permitted  us,  except  he  might  first  see  the  Kings  Present,
which  we  at  last  yeelded  unto,  and  Magro  Can  as  much
as  he  could  disgraced,  boasting  of  his  respect  with  the
King. And  thus  had  we  leave  to  remove  them.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  came  a  Firma  from  the
Mogoll,  which  the  Nabob  (according to  their  custome)

259

A.D.
1614.

A  Mastiffe
dogge  in
request.

Arras  a
Towne  of
Banians.
Amadavas.
Steel  and
Crowther
their  Journall
following.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

met  in  state  two  miles  out  of  the  Citie,  with  sixe  hundred
horse.  And  the  next  day  we  were  kindly  entertained,
and  he  gave  Master  Edwards  eight  hundred  and  fiftie
Mamudies,  thirty  peeces  of  Topseell,  ten  of  fine  Calicoes,
&c.  the  money  to  cary  up  the  Presents,  (the  King  not
willing  to  charge  them  that  bring  them)  the  StufFes  and
Calicoes  for  such  as  should  accompany  them.  To  the
Merchants  also  he  gave  fifteene  peeces  of  Topseels  (five
to  each)  with  his  chop  for  our  departure,  and  kind  pro-
mises; all  in  the  sight  of  him  which  brought  the  Firma.
The  thirtieth,  Master  Edwards  and  we  set  forwards  to-
wards Amadavar.

The  second  of  December,  we  came  to  Baroche :  from
whence  the  Governour  sent  a  guard  of  Souldiers  with  us
to  Demylode,  and  there  had  a  new  convoy  of  fiftie  horse
and  foot  to  Charmondo :  whence  we  departed  on  the
seventh,  with  five  and  twentie  souldiers,  all  notorious
theeves  (as  we  after  found).  With  these  we  went  10  c.
and  pitched  in  a  plaine,  where  wee  baracadoed  our  selves,
as  formerly  we  used,  with  our  carts ;  at  supper  time  wee
had  beene  assaulted  with  fiftie  horse-men,  which  came
close  upon  us,  had  they  not  found  us  well  provided,  the
charge  wee  carried  being  certainly  knowne  thorow  all  the
Countrey  as  we  travelled.

The  eight,  we  came  to  Brodera,  and  gave  the  Gover-
nour a  Present,  which  he  accepted  kindly,  but  requested
a  further  kindnesse  to  see  our  Mastiffe  dogge.  This
Citie  stands  in  a  plaine  which  seemed  fertile,  and  is  well
watered,  a  thing  not  so  common  in  those  parts.  Wee
departed  hence  with  one  hundred  horse  and  foot,  which
voluntarily  offered  that  service  (in  regard  especially  of
the  Kings  Present,  employed  by  the  Governour)  not
without  charge  to  us,  and  came  to  Arras,  a  Towne
inhabited  for  the  most  part  with  Banians,  where  their
superstition  of  not  killing  any  thing,  caused  us  bad  enter-
tainment.

On  the  thirteenth,  we  came  to  Amadavas.  Hence  we
gave  commission  to  Richard  Steele,  and  John  Crowther

260

EDWARD DODSWORTH  ad.

1614.

for their Persian journey. And hence the second of
January,  Master  Edwards  departed  from  us  for  Agra.

All  this  while  finding  the  Merchants  heere,  in  hope  of
Peace  with  the  Portugals,  to  inhaunce  the  prices  of  their
Indico,  we  resolved  to  go  to  Sarques  to  make  triall  with  Sarques.
the  Countrie  people,  who  are  the  makers  of  it :  which  on
the seventh  we did,  and found good employment,  in
foure dayes packing up foure hundred fardles ; and
Master  Aldworth returning to  Amadavas,  found them
now  more  tractable. Sarques  is  thence  3  c.  distant,  the
Towne  not  bigge,  but  counted  the  best  soile  for  Indico  in  [I.  iv.  518.]
those  parts,  the  triall  thereof  chiefly  by  water,  as  at  Ama-
davas Jambrozerch by  fire, all of  them ready  to put
trickes  on  us  by  mingling  or  otherwise. At  Sarques  are
two  of  the  most  auncient  Monuments  in  those  parts ;  one  Monuments^
of  a chiefe Prophet there intombed, to which many tlSrmaS,e-
Pilgrims resort from farre ; the other of  their  ancient
Kings. To  the  North  of  the  Towne  is  the  place,  where
Can  Canna  first  put  the  Guzerates  (the  auncient  inhabit-
ants) to flight,  the  rest  of  the  Kingdome  being  shortly
after  conquered  by  Ecbar  this  Kings  Father. This  place
of  the  victory  is  strongly  walled  with  bricke,  some  mile
and halfe in circuit, planted with fruits and watered  The  fight
pleasantly,  and  a  costly  house  called  Victory  erected,  in jf*^*? '  %
which  he  resided  for  a  time,  but  now  in  Bramport.  Portugals.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  we  went  to  the  Governour  See  of  it  more
for  his  leave  to  depart,  which  he  granted;  but  hearing  of  wmyPtlgrim-
divers  robbed  and  murthered  that  night  close  by  the  Citie,  a/e' \' c:]'

1  •  1  1  1 1  -ii  rr •  1 i.  A.  OUt  Of  Me

order  was  given  that  we  should  stay  till  a  sufficient  guard  reiaflon  0f

were made readie  for us. The next  morning we had  divers  of  the

Letters  from  M.  Elkington  of  the  arrivall  of  the  Portugal  Hopes  com-

Vice-roy, with a strong force to drive us out of  the  ^any  at ,
„  J  °  time:  as  also

Countrey.  _  Captaine

The Generall to procure some weakening of their  Downtons
strength,  caused  the  Hope  to  fall  downe  to  the  Souther-  ozone  Voyage.
most  sand,  thinking  in  eager  pursuit  some  of  them  would  TemPoia

.  o  o r  mutdiitur  cjs

be  driven  aground. Presently  three  of  the  smallest  ships,  nos  mutamur
and  thirtie  sixe  Frigats  were  sent  to  boord  her,  hoping  ///  Mis.

261

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

to  towe  her  away.  Thrice  the  enemie  entred,  and  was
thrice  repulsed,  and  forced  at  last  to  leape  over-boord,
thinking  in  their  Frigats  to  save  themselves,  who  received
such  hot  discourse  from  the  other  ships,  that  they  could
not  releeve  them,  so  that  many  were  swallowed  by  the
Sea,  others  slaine  aboord,  to  the  number,  as  is  reported,
of  three  hundred  at  least.  The  Shippes  which  had
boorded  the  Hope,  were  now  (in  despaire,  and  out  of
all  hope)  cut  from  her,  and  seized  instantly  by  the  two
desperate,  hopelesse,  mercilesse  Elements,  Fire  and  the
Sea,  recommending  some  bones  or  ashes  of  their  burnt
Carkasses  to  the  ground  and  shoare.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  we  departed  with  fortie  cart-
loads of  Indico  and  other  goods,  and  came  the  seven  and
twentieth  to  Mundevas,  where  the  Gates  were  shut  upon
us  by  Sardar  Cans  command,  which  putting  us  in  much
doubt,  we  procured  one  to  speake  with  the  Governour,
who  told  him  of  Letters  that  he  had  received  from
Mocrib  Can,  of  our  Generalls  proceedings  at  Swally,  and
the  safetie  of  Surat  by  the  English,  wishing  him  by  no
meanes  to  suffer  us  to  returne  without  a  sufficient  guard,
which  the  next  day  should  be  ready  for  our  safe  depar-
ture. The  twentie  ninth,  we  departed.  At  Brodera,
Sarder  Cans  men  took  up  more  souldiours  to  assist  them,
many  robberies  and  murthers  beeing  daily  committed,
and  divers  companies  of  Rashbootes  lying  in  the  way  to
intercept.

The  second  of  February,  above  three  hundred  Rash-
boots  assaulted  us  in  a  narrow  lane,  inclosed  on  both  sides
with  thicke  hedges,  where  we  could  not  hurt  them,  as
they  did  our  Caffila,  with  their  arrowes  and  Shot.  We
therefore  made  what  haste  we  could  for  the  Plaine :
meane  while,  they  cut  off  two  of  our  Coaches.  But
having  gotten  the  Plaine,  we  made  a  stand,  where  they
betooke  them  to  their  hedges  againe,  and  left  us  to  looke
to  their  prey,  least  one  thiefe  might  rob  another.  Many
of  our  company  were  hurt,  whereof  Humphrey  Elkinton
for  one. The  next  day  we  got  to  Baroche,  and  on  the

262

EDWARD DODSWORTH  ad.

1614.

fifth  to  Surat,  and  thanked  Mocrib  Can  for  his  care ;  and
hearing  of  an  assault  the  Portugals  would  next  day  give
us,  with  his  professed  love  and  leave  went  the  next  day
to  Swally,  and  came  aboord :  but  the  Portugals  deceived
our  expectation.

The  ninth,  the  poore  inhabitants  of  Swally  brought  us
word  of  two  fire-boats,  to  be  sent  with  the  next  Ebbe  to
fire  our  ships,  which  endangered  more  then  endamaged
the  Hope.  The  night  following,  they  attempted  the
like  with  foure  other  chained  together,  which  with  the
advantage  of  the  Tyde,  and  attendance  of  smaller  boats
came,  but  frustrate  in  their  successe  save  to  themselves,
foure  of  their  Companie  taken,  and  their  Boats  burned
to  the  Keele.  The  Captives  confessed  this  the  last
of  the  Vice-royes  designes  for  this  yeare,  hee  beeing
enforced  for  want  of  water  and  victualls  to  returne
for  Goa.

The  Examination  of  Domingo  Francisco,  taken
in  Swally  Roade,  aboord  the  Gift.  February
20. 1 6 14.

HE saith,  That he  was  borne in  Lisboa, beeing  the
sonne  of  a Marriner, and served Nuna d'Acuna
in the fight  against  Captaine  Best,  in  one of  the  foure
Gallions, and afterwards went for Macao upon the
borders  of  China, and returned  againe to Goa, where
hee hath remained  ten  Moneths,  and  was  two  Moneths
since  commanded  to  come  in  a  Gallion  called  the  S.  An-
thonie,  in  this  Expedition  for the  Port  of  Swally,  where
the  eighth  of  this  Moneth  hee  was  taken. The Vice-roy  The  Vice-roy,
Don Jeronimo de Savedo, came (as this Examinate  andhts forces
further  saith) to  the  destruction  of  the  English  at  Surat  Gallions  sixe.
with  these  forces. His  owne  ship  called  the  All-Saints, Their  Cap-
of  eight hundred Tunnes  burthen, had three hundred  taines,  bur-
men, and  twenty eight pieces of  Ordnance. Michael  tn^,  men,  and
de  Soozo Captaine  of  the  S.  Bennet  of  seven  hundred
Tunnes,  had  one hundred and fiftie men,  and twenty
Peeces. John Cayatho, Captaine of  the S. Laurence

263

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 6 14.

of  sixe  hundred  Tunnes,  had  one  hundred  and  sixtie
men,  eighteene  Peeces. Francisco Henriques Captaine

[I.  iv.  519.]  of  the  S.  Christopher,  so  much  burthen,  had  one  hundred
and  fiftie  nine  men,  and  Ordnance  as  the  former.  Francisco
de  Mirande,  Captaine  of  the  S.  Jeronymo  of  five  hundred
Tunnes,  had  one  hundred  and  eightie  men,  sixteene
Peeces.  Gaspar  de  Meall  Captaine  of  the  S.  Anthonio  of
foure  hundred  Tunnes,  had  an  hundred  and  fortie  men,
foureteene  Peeces.

Three  ships.  The  ships  were  the  S.  Peter  of  two  hundred  Tunnes,

Captaine  Francisco  Cavaco,  men  one  hundred  and  fiftie,
Peeces  eight.  The  S.  Paul  of  two  hundred  Tunnes,
Captaine  Don  John  de  Mescarena,  one  hundred  fiftie  men,
eight  Peeces.  The  Pinnasse  one  hundred  twenty  Tunnes,
Captaine  Andrea  de  Quellio,  eightie  men,  foure  Peeces.

Two  Gallies. Lewes  de  Bruto,  Captaine  of  one  Gaily,  Diego  de  Suro,  of

Frigats.  the  other,  in  each  fiftie men. Of  the  Frigats  there  were

sixtie,  having  twentie  souldiours  a  piece,  and  eighteene
oares  on  a  side.  The  supply  which  came  after,  was  two
ships  of  two  hundred  Tunnes  a  piece,  two  India  Junkes,
and  eight  small  Boates  imployed  to  fire  us.  The  Ad-
mirals Ordnance  were  all  of  Brasse ;  of  the  other  five
Gallions,  halfe  of  Brasse,  halfe  of  Yron  ;  against  all  which,
the  Almightie  (blessed  be  his  Name)  protected  us.

The  five  and  twentieth,  the  Nabob  visited  the  Generall
both  ashoare  and  aboord.  And  the  Generall  thought  fit
with  consent  of  the  rest,  that  I  should  returne  with  the
Hope  for  England.  The  third  of  March,  we  weighed
from  Swally  road,  the  next  day  had  sight  of  the  Portugall
fleete.  The  sixth,  we  expected  they  would  have  fought,
and  prepared  our  fights ;  but  at  noone  they  bare  up  for
Goa.  On  the  eleventh,  we  parted  from  the  Generall,
they  bound  for  Achen  and  Bantam,  we  for  England.  On
the  twelfth,  we  held  our  course  by  the  North  end  of  the
Maldivas,  where  by  experience  we  found  many  shoalds

False  plats.  and  Hands,  laid  in  the  plats  most  falsly,  as  may  seeme  of
purpose,  that  these  Seas  might  seeme  more  dangerous
then  they  are.

264

EDWARD DODSWORTH  ad.

1615.

The  seventeenth  of  June,  161 5.  we  arrived  at  Saldania
Bay,  where  wee  found  a  fleet  of  foure  saile  English
bound  for  Surat,  under  the  command  of  Captaine  Keeling,
which  after  consultation  holden,  and  newes  of  the  state
there,  departed.  On  the  twentieth,  I  met  with  Crosse  Of  Crosse  and
and  his  Companie,  there  left to make  a discovery,  and *J  Lo^any

*  .of  condemned

intreated some of them to acquaint Coree with my  pemns  set  on
comming, which by the way were set upon by the  share  here,
Savages and wounded, and thereupon foure Muskets  see  after  in
delivered  Crosse  at  his request,  who  procured  Coree  to ptons
come  downe  with  his  whole  family,  and  after  that  some
Cattell. He  told of  the  discords  amongst  the  Savages,
whereby  the  Mountainers  sometimes  robbed  them. The
sixe  and  twentieth  wee  departed,  leaving  our  long  Boat  to
Crosse,  with  powder,  shot,  and  provision.

In  twenty  nine  degrees  North,  we  met  with  a  Holland
ship  come  from  the  Mauritius,  set  forth  thither  to  cut
wood,  which  seemed  a  Bastard  Ebony ;  where  contrary
to  their  expectation,  they  found  the  lamentable  wracke
of  foure  ships  come  from  Bantam  and  the  Moluccas,
broken  on  the  rockes,  the  goods  and  men  of  two  of
them  lost;  of  the  third  most  of  the  goods  saved,  and
with  part  thereof  this  ship  laden ;  the  fourth  driven
to  sea  by  a  storme,  returned  with  a  jury  maine  mast.
The  Master  promised  us  company,  but  finding  us  a
hinderance,  after  tenne  dayes  left  us,  without  so  much
kindnesse  as  a  farewell,  or  carriage  of  a  letter,  which
I  imputed  to  their  inbred  boorish  disposition.  Ill  weather
followed,  and  we  were  much  weakened,  yet  I  thank
God  without  the  losse  of  any,  till  my  arrivall  in  Ireland,
thwart  of  the  River  of  Limerike.  The  seven  and
twentieth  of  October,  161 5.  there  also  entertained  with
a  storme,  till  a  Scottish  Barke  crossed  with  contrary
winds,  was  hired  to  pilot  us  into  Harbour :  where  also
a  remainder  of  Captaine  M.  his  ungodly  crue,  which
lately  had  obtained  their  pardon,  put  mee  in  feare,  till
Sir  Henrie  Foliot  secured  us  with  a  supply  of  men ;
and  I  dispeeded  Letters  to  London.

265

A.D.
1614.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

March  17.
1614.

Richard  Still
or  Steele.

A  course  is  a
mile  and  half e,
and  in  some
places  two
miles  English.

Chap.  XIII.

A  Journall  of  the  Journey  of  Richard  Steel  and
John  Crowther,  from  Azmere  in  India,  the
place  of  the  Great  Mogols  residence,  to  Spahan
the  Royall  Seat  of  the  King  of  Persia,  in  the
affaires  of  the  East-Indian  Society.  Ann.  1615.
1 6 16.

He  seventeenth  of  March,  16 14.  after  we
had  been  detained  in  Azmere  from  Feb-
ruary, M.  Edwards  having  received  a
Letter  from  the  Mogol  unto  our  King,
delivered  a  Copy  thereof  together  with
his  Letters  unto  Richard  Steele,  and
tooke  leave,  promising  to  procure  the
Kings  Firman  for  our  safetie  and  speed,  and  to  send  it
after  us  to  Agra,  where  he  willed  us  to  stay  for  it.  Wee
went  that  night  two  courses  to  Mandill;  we  had  foure
servants,  two  horses,  and  a  Camel.  The  eighteenth,  to
Bandersandree  a  small  Aldea  twelve  course.  The  nine-
teenth, ten  course  to  Mosobade.  The  twentieth,  to
Pipelo  13  c.  The  one  and  twentieth,  to  Chadfoole  a
Towne  7  c.  The  two  &  twentieth,  to  Lalscotte,  13  c.
The  three  and  twentieth,  to  Mogol  Serae,  12  c.  The
foure  and  twentieth,  to  Hendowne,  14  c.  The  five  and
twentieth,  to  Bramobad,  12  c.  The  sixe  and  twentieth,  to
[I.  iv.  520.]  Fetipore,  12  c.  This  hath  beene  a  faire  Citie,  built  by
Echabar,  and  hath  within  it  a  goodly  house  belonging  to
the  King.  It  is  walled  round  with  a  faire  wall,  and  both
within  and  round  about,  hath  many  spacious  Gardens  and
places  of  pleasure.  Now  it  goes  to  ruine,  and  much
ground  within  the  walls  is  sowne  with  corne,  the  King
carrying  much  of  the  fairest  stone  to  Agra  his  new
Citie.

The seven and twentieth, to  Agra, 12 c. In the
English  house at  Agra, we  found one  Richard  Barber

266

RICHARD  STEEL  AND  JOHN  CROWTHER a.d.

1615.

an  Apothecary,  which  came  over  with  Sir  Robert  Sherley.
Hee  was  sent  by  M.  Kerridge,  to  looke  to  Nicholas
Withington.

Within  two  dayes  journey  of  Agra,  we  passed  by  the
Country  and  Citie of  Biana,  where  the  finest  Indico  is  Biana,  the
made. The  best  was  then  worth  sixe  and  thirtie  Rupias  Pac'°jfinest
the  Maun  at  Agra ;  but  in  the  Countrey  much  cheaper.
The  third  of  Aprill,  perceiving  the  Firman  came  not,  and''
the  heat  of  the  yeare  comming  on,  we  departed,  leaving
order  with  Richard  Barber  to  send  it  after  us. We  came
that  night  to  a  Serae  called  Boutta,  6  c. The  fourth,  to  a  Divers  Seraes
Towne  called  Multra,  14  c.  and  lay  in  a  faire  Serae :  there utt  Jm&'eai
we received the Firman. The  fifth, to a  Serae  called  buildings  to
Chatta,  12  c. The  sixth  to  a  Serae  built  by  Chan  Azam,  entertaine
9  c. The  seventh  to  a  Sera  built  by  Shec  Ferreede  called  travellers.
Purwell,  lie. The eighth,  to another  goodly  Sera  by
the same  Founder, 10  c. The  ninth,  to Dillee  a  Citie,  DelyorDilke
9  c.  which  is  great  and  ancient,  in  times  past  the  Seat  of  a"a?ncient
the  Kings,  where  many  of  them  lie  buried. At  this  time
many great men have their Gardens, and houses of
pleasure  there,  and  there  are  buried,  whereby  it  is  beauti-
fied with  goodly  buildings ;  the  inhabitants  (for  the  most
part  Banians)  poore  and  beggerly,  by  reason  of  the  Kings
long  absence. The  tenth,  to  Bunira,  10  c. The  eleventh
to Cullvower 12 c. The twelfth, to  Pampette, 12 c.  Pampette.
a  prety  small  Citie,  where  are  made  divers  sorts  of  Girdles,
Shashes,  and  great  store  of  linnen cloth,  and  they  have
store  of  handicrafts. The  thirteenth, to Carnall, 12 c.
The  foureteenth, to  Tanisera, 14 c. The fifteenth,  to
Shavade,  10  c. The sixteenth,  to Mogoll  Sera,  or  Gau-
gur,  15  c. The  seventeenth,  to  Sinan  an  auncient  Citie,
where  is  made  store  of  linnen,  14  c. The  eighteenth,  to
Duratia,  15  c. The  nineteenth,  to  Pullower,  1 1  c. We
passed  this  day  a  great  River  by  Boat,  called  Sietmege,
very  broad,  but  full  of  shoalds,  and runneth  West  into
Sinda. The  twentieth  to  Nicouder  a  small  Towne,  1 1  c.
The  one  and twentieth, to  Sultanpoare  an old  Towne,
having  a  River  running  to  the  North,  and  a  bridge  with

267

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

sixe  arches :  here  is  store  of  linnen  cloath  made :  foure
course  from  it  we  passed  another  small  River.  The  two
and  twentieth,  to  Chiurmul,  1 1  c.  This  day  by  Boat
we  passed  a  River  as  broad  as  the  Thames  at  Gravesend,
called  Vian,  running  Westward  into  Sinda :  upon  the
bankes  whereof  was  pitched  Chan  Allom,  the  Kings
Embassadour  into  Persia,  whose  Campe  seemed  a  little
Citie.  The  three  and  twentieth,  to  Chan  Channa  Sera,
17  c.  The  foure  and  twentieth,  to  Lahoare,  7  c.
Lahor.  AH the  Countrey betwixt  Agra and  Lahore, is  ex-

Fertihtie  of ceeding  well  tilled  and  manured,  being  the  best  of  India,
■^' and plentifull  of  all things. It  yeelds great store of
poudred  Sugar,  the  best  being  worth  betwixt  two  Rupias
three  quarters,  and  two  and  an  halfe,  the  great  Maund  of
fortie. Here  all  the  way  is  set  on  both  sides  with  trees,
the  most of  them  bearing  a kind of  Mulbery. It is
dangerous in the night for Theeves, but in the day
Seraes  what, secure. Every  five  or  sixe  Course,  there  are  Seraes  built
and  wherefore  by  fae  King  or  some  great  men,  very  faire  for  the  beauti-
fying of  the  way,  memory  of  their  names,  and  entertain-
ment of  Travellers. In  these  you  shall  have  a  Chamber
and  place  to  tye  your Horses,  also  store  of  Horsemeat.
But  in  many  of  them  but  little  good  to  be  had  for  men,
by  reason  of  the  Banians. When  a  man  hath  taken  up
his  lodging,  no  other  may  dispossesse  him.

In  the  morning  about  day  breake,  all  men  make  readie
to  depart  together,  and  then  are  the  gates  opened.  Be-
fore, no  man  is  suffered  to  depart  for  feare  of  Theeves.
This  was  a  tedious  travaile :  for  within  two  houres  after
the  Sunne-rising,  wee  were  scarcely  able  to  endure  the
heate.
Lahore.  Lahore  is  a  goodly  great  Citie,  and  one  of  the  fairest

and  ancientest  of  India.  It  stands  on  the  River  Indus  or
Sinda;  and  from  this  place  came  the  Treasure  of  the
Portugals  Trade  when  they  had  peace,  as  being  the
Centre  of  all  Indian  Traffique.  And  here  they  em-
Tatta.  barqued the same downe  the  River for Tatta,  whence

they were transported for Ormus and Persia. The

268

RICHARD  STEEL  AND  JOHN  CROWTHER a.d.

1615.

Merchants  also  passing  that  way  betwixt  Persia  and  India,
payd  them  fraight.  They  did  likewise  drive  a  great
Trade  up  this  River  for  Pepper  and  Spices,  furnishing
these  parts  of  India  therewith.  At  this  present  the
Merchants  of  India  assemble  at  Lahore,  and  invest  a
great  part  of  their  monies  in  Commodities,  and  joyne
themselves  in  Caravans  to  passe  the  Mountaines  of  Can-
dahar  into  Persia,  by  which  way  is  generally  reported  to
passe  twelve  or  fourteene  thousand  Camels  lading,  where-
as heretofore  scarsly  passed  three  thousand,  the  rest
going  by  the  way  of  Ormus.  These  Merchants  are  put  to
great  charges  betwixt  Lahore  and  Spahan,  (besides  great
cold  in  Winter  and  heate  in  Summer,  and  the  badnesse  of
the  way,  spending  six  or  seven  moneths  betwixt  those  two
places)  they  are  said  to  reckon  every  Camels  lading  to
stand  them  in  one  hundred  and  twentie,  or  one  hundred
and  thirtie  Rupias.  Persia  is  that  way  furnished  with
Pepper  and  Spices  from  Masulipatan  over  land.  In
Lahore  wee  stayed  from  the  foure  and  twentieth  of  Aprill,
untill  the  thirteenth  of  May,  to  refresh  our  selves  and  our
tyred  beasts,  and  to  provide  Servants  and  necessaries  for
the  way.  Wee  also  here  procured  Letters  from  an  Em-
bassadour  of  the  Persian  King.

The  thirteenth  of  May,  we  departed  with  intent  to  [I.  iv.  521.]
overtake  a  Caravan  which  was  gone  two  moneths  before,
and  went  that  day  to  Chacksunder  a  small  Towne  1 1  c.
The  fourteenth,  to  Nonserae,  15  c.  The  fifteenth,  to
Mutteray,  8  c.  The  sixteenth,  to  Quemal  Chan,  19  c.
The  seventeenth,  to  Herpae,  16  c.  The  eighteenth,  to
Alicasava,  12  c.  The  nineteenth,  to  Trumba,  12  c.  This
day  we  overtooke  a  small  Caravan  which  went  from  Lahor
eight  dayes  before  us.  The  twentieth,  to  Sedousehall,
14  c.  The  one  and  twentieth,  to  Callixeokebaudi,  15  c.
The  two  and  twentieth,  to  Multan,  12  c.  This  is  a  great
and  ancient  Citie.  Within  three  Course  of  it  Indus
runneth.  It  yeeldeth  white  Linnen  and  Diaper.  All
Caravans  are  constrayned  to  stay  at  this  River  eight,
ten, or twelve dayes before they  can  get  leave of  the

269

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

Governour  to  passe,  to  the  end  that  the  Citie  being  poore
may  get  some-what.  We  were  stayed  five  dayes,  and
then  were  faine  to  make  way  with  a  Present.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  we  passed  the  River  and  went
to  Pettoallee  a  small  Village  20  c.  The  nine  and  twen-
tieth, we  passed  another  great  River  by  Boate,  and  the
same  night  came  to  a  small  River  called  Lacca,  where  we
found  the  Caravan  aforesaid :  we  presented  the  Caravan
Basha  with  a  Looking-glasse  and  Knife,  who  wished  us  to
pitch  our  Tent  neere  to  his,  that  wee  might  have  no
wrong  offered  us.  The  Caravan  had  beene  heere  ten
dayes,  and  stayed  till  the  second  of  June,  to  procure  a
Convoy  of  Horsemen  to  conduct  them  to  Chatcza  a  small
Fort  in  the  Mountaines,  having  heard  of  the  Mountainers
injury  to  a  former  Caravan.

The  second  of  June,  we  dislodged  and  entred  that
night  into  the  Mountaines  12  c.  where  wee  were  dis-
tressed for  want  of  fresh  water,  the  water  being  brackish.
The  third  and  fourth,  we  travelled  all  night  climbing  high
Mountaines,  and  following  water  Courses  with  divers
windings  twelve  Course,  but  in  direct  Line  not  above
sixe.  The  fift,  we  followed  the  Course  of  a  River  ful  of
great  Pebles  8  c.  The  sixth  we  rested.  The  seventh,  we
went  4  c.  still  crossing  the  said  River.  The  eight,  8  c.
The  ninth,  twelve.  The  tenth,  three,  and  came  to
Chatcza.  Chatcza,  which  is  a  little  Fort,  the  wals  built  of  mud,
enclosed  with  a  Ditch,  where  the  Mogoll  maintayneth
eightie,  or  one  hundred  Horsemen  to  secure  the  way
from  Theeves.  But  they  themselves  are  as  very  Theeves
as  any,  where  they  find  opportunitie.

The  Captain  of  the  Castle  exacted  upon  every  Camel
of  the  Caravan  two  Abacees,  although  nothing  be  due  by
reason  he  &  his  have  wages  of  the  King.  In  all  this
way  betwixt  Lacca  &  Chatcza,  we  found  not  any  susten-
ance for  man  or  beast,  except  in  some  places  a  little
grasse :  &  therefore  we  were  constrained  at  Lacca  to
make  provision,  hyring  an  Oxe  for  that  purpose  to  carrie
Barley  for  our  Horses. The  Agwans  (so  they  call  the

270

RICHARD  STEEL  AND  JOHN  CROWTHER a.d.

1615.

Mountaine-people)  came  downe  to  us  every  day  where  we

lodged,  rather  to  espy  what  they  could  steale, then  to

buy,  as  they  pretended.

The  twelth,  in  the  evening  having  made  provision  for
three  dayes,  we  went  thence  14  c.  that  night.  The  thir-
teenth, 10  c.  The  fourteenth,  10  c.  This  day  the  people
came  downe  to  us  and  brought  sheepe,  Goates,  Meale,
Butter  and  Barley  in  great  abundance,  sufficient  for  our
selves  and  our  Cattle,  at  reasonable  prices.  And  from
this  place  forwards  the  people  daily  did  the  like,  some-
times also  bringing  Felts  and  course  Carpets  striped.
The  fifteenth,  we  went  6  c.  The  sixteenth,  4  c.  The
seventeenth,  tenne.  The  eighteenth,  9  c.  The  nine-
teenth, 9  c.  to  a  little  Towne  of  the  Agwans,  called
Duckee,  where  the  Mogore  maintayneth  a  Garrison,
with  a  little  square  Fort,  the  wals  built  of  mud  a  good
height,  distant  a  mile  from  the  Towne.  Heere  wee
stayed  three  dayes,  because  the  Caravan  could  not  agree
with  the  Captaine  of  the  Castle,  who  pretended  a  dutie
on  every  Camell :  which  at  last  they  payd,  one  Abacee
and  a  halfe  on  each.  The  three  and  twentieth,  we  went
6  c.  The  foure  and  twentieth,  wee  past  by  a  place
called  Secota,  or  three  Castles,  because  of  three  Villages
triangle-wise  scituate  on  the  side  of  a  hill  neere  together.
Wee  went  8  c.  The  five  and  twentieth,  wee  rested  by
reason  of  foule  weather.  The  sixe  and  twentieth,  10  c.
The  seven  and  twentieth,  14  c.  This  day  wee  passed  the
Durues,  or  Gates  of  the  Mountaines,  being  narrow  straits,  Durues  or
having  Rockes  on  both  sides  very  high,  whence  with  st['fts  °fthe
stones  a  few  may  stop  the  passage  of  a  multitude :  and
divers  Caravans  have  beene  in  these  places  cut  off".  This
night  where  we  lodged  we  suffered  divers  insolencies  from
the  Agwans,  and  on  the  morrow  they  exacted  of  us  as
wee  passed  by  a  small  Village  called  Coasta,  two  Abacees
and  a  halfe  on  each  Camell.  The  eight  and  twentieth,
5  c.  The  nine  and  twentieth,  by  Abdun  a  Village  8  c.
The  thirtieth, 6  c.

The  first  of  July,  7  c.  to  a  place  called  Pesinga,  a  small  Pesinga.

271

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

Fort  much  like  unto  Duckee,  where  are  store  of  Souldiers
for  securing  the  way.  The  Captaine  exacted  halfe  an
Abacee  upon  a  Camell.  The  third  we  left  the  Caravan
and  went  forwards  6  c.  The  fourth,  wee  past  a  mightie
Mountaine,  and  descended  into  the  Plaines  14  c.  The
fifth,  20  c.  we  were  distressed  for  want  of  graine  for  our
Cattell.  The  sixth,  in  the  like  distresse  for  them  and  our
selves, 12  c. The  seventh,  to  Candahar,  8  c.

Candahar,  the These Mountaines of  Candahar, are  inhabited by  a

Mountaynes.  fierce  people  called  Agwans  or  Potans,  very  strong  of
bodie,  somewhat  whiter  then  the  Indians,  great  Robbers,
accustomed  to  cut  off  whole  Caravans.  But  at  present
partly  for  feare  of  the  Mogoll,  and  partly  through  sweet
found  by  commerce  (in  venting  their  graine,  sheepe  and
Goats,  of  which  they  have  great  store,  and  buying  of
course Linnen  and  other  necessaries) they  are become

[I.  iv.  522.]  more  civill.  Yet  if  they  can  take  any  stragling  by  them-
selves or  staying  behind,  they  will  sell  them  above  in  the
Mountaines,  and  hoxe  them  to  prevent  running  away,
and  put  them  to  grind  graine  with  Hand-mils,  and  other
servile  drudgerie.

The  Citie.  The Citie of Candahar is ancient, the Inhabitants

anciently  Banians  :  there  now  resideth  the  Governour
of  the  Countrey,  and  a  Garrison  maintayned  by  the
Mogoll,  of  twelve  or  fifteene  thousand  Horsemen,  in
regard  of  the  Persians  neighborhood  to  the  North.
And  West-ward  it  is  environed  with  a  mightie  steepe,
craggie  Rocke ;  and  to  the  South  and  to  the  East  with  a
strong  wall.  By  reason  of  frequent  passage  of  Caravans
it  is  much  enlarged  lately,  that  the  Suburbs  are  bigger
then  the  Citie.  For  within  this  two  yeare,  that  the  way
of  Ormus  is  stopped  up  by  the  wars  betwixt  the  Persians
and  Portugals,  all  Caravans  which  passe  betwixt  India  and
Persia,  must  of  necessitie  goe  by  this  place.  And  here
they  doe  hire  Camels  to  go  into  India,  and  at  their
returne  for  Persia.  They  cannot  returne  also  without
the  Governours  leave,  which  causeth  them  to  stay  a
moneth, and when least, sixteene or twentie dayes :

272

RICHARD  STEEL  AND  JOHN  CROWTHER ad.

1615.

whereby  it  is  much  inhabited  with  lewd  people,  as  all
such  places  of  resort  commonly  are.  Provision  of  victuals
is  there  in  great  abundance  for  man  and  beast,  yet  deare
by  so  great  concourse.  Trade  it  yeelds  not  of  it  selfe,
but  accidentally  by  the  meeting  of  Indian,  Persian  and
Turkie  Merchants,  which  are  not  willing  to  travell  further
at  twentie  per  Cento  profit.  At  this  place  the  Caravans
which  goe  to  India,  do  joyne  for  greater  strength  in  pass-
ing the  Mountaines  of  Candahar :  and  those  which  come
from  thence  heere  breake  into  smaller  Companies :  for
in  many  places  greater  would  not  find  provision.

For  all Persia, especially  betwixt this  and  Spahan,  is  Batrennesse  of

barren,  where sometime in two or three dayes travell, ,  1°. *  °* ,
,  1-1  1  the  MogoU  and

there  is  no  greene  thing  to  be  seene ;  only  some  water,  persian%

and  that  also  often  brackish,  stinking  and  naught. Wee

stayed  heere  foureteene  dayes,  partly  to  refresh  our  bodies

weakened  with  heate  and  travaile  (John  Crowther  being

so weake that hee feared hee should not  bee able to

travell  further)  and  partly  for  company.

The  three  and  twentieth  of  July,  wee  departed  Canda-
har in  company  of  three  Armenians,  and  a  doozen  Persian
Merchants,  and  went  10  c.  to  a  Village  called  Seriabe.
The  foure  and  twentieth,  12  c.  to  Deabage  a  small  Dea
or  Village.  The  five  and  twentieth,  8  c.  to  Cushecunna
a  small  Castle,  where  the  Mogor  hath  a  Garison  in  the
utmost  confines  of  his  Dominions.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  17  c.  and  lay  by  a  Rivers  side  The  Persians
in  the  open  fields.  The  seven  and  twentieth,  4  c.  to  a  Counfrey-
Castle  called  Greece  the  first  of  the  King  of  Persias.
Here  we  delivered  the  Embassadours  Letter  received  at
Lahore,  to  the  Governour,  and  presented  him  with  a
Looking-glasse  and  three  Knives.  He  would  take
nothing  of  us  for  our  Camels,  whereas  others  paid  five
Abacees  upon  a  Camell.  He  promised  to  safe-conduct
us,  and  to  send  a  company  of  Horse  to  carrie  us  to  the
next  Government.  But  we  saw  none,  neither  were  we
sorrie  for  it :  for  that  hee  is  little  better  then  a  Rebell,
and  all  his  people  Theeves.  The  eight  and  twentieth,  at
iv  273  s

A.D.
1615.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Farra.

Sun-djyed

Brickes.

night  wee  departed  and  lodged  neere  unto  a  Dea  called
Farsings  Malgee ; two farsings. Every farsing is two Indian

(  atasange  of  courses  ancj  a  halfe.  The  nine  and  twentieth,  ten  fars-
ings, and  lodged  in  the  open  fields,  where  was  nothing  to
be  had  but  water.  The  thirtieth,  five  farsings  to  Gazi-
chan  a  small  Castle.  The  one  and  thirtieth,  five  farsings
to  an  olde  ruined  Fort,  where  was  nothing  to  bee  had  but
water,  and  that  stinking.

The  first  of  August,  five  farsings  to  an  old  Fort,  called
De  Laram,  where  wee  paid  an  Abacee  and  halfe  on  a
Camell,  and  stayed  one  day  to  refresh  our  cattell,  which
is  called  making  of  Mochoane.  The  third,  to  Bacon,  an
old  Castle,  seven  farsings.  The  fourth,  in  the  open  fields,
nothing  but  water,  foure  farsings.  The  fifth,  foure
farsings.  The  sixth  to  Farra  five  farsings :  This  is  a
little  Towne  walled  with  a  high  wall  of  brickes  about,
dried  in  the  Sunne  (as  are  all  the  Castles,  and  most  of
the  buildings  of  those  parts)  foure  square,  a  mile  about ;
having  a  pretty  Bazar  vaulted  over-head  to  keepe  from
raine,  wherein  all  necessaries  are  sold.  It  stands  in  a
good  soile,  and  hath  plenty  of  water,  without  which  in
this  Countrey  nothing  is  be  had :  and  it  is  strange  to  see,
where  there  is  any  good  spot  of  ground  (which  is  heere
but  little)  with  what  labour  and  industry  they  bring  water
to  it,  in  some  places  three  or  foure  miles  together  by
trenches  under  ground.  At  this  Towne  all  Merchants
which  go  into  Persia,  are  forced  to  stay  seven,  or  eight,
or  ten  daies  together,  where  the  Kings  Treasurer  seeth
the  weight  of  all  their  packets,  and  esteemes  them  at  so
much  the  Maune,  as  he  thinkes  fit,  and  takes  three  per
cento  custome.

At  their  comming  into  Persia,  they  are  used  with  great
favour :  for  they  feare  lest  complaints  should  be  made  to
the  King,  which  will  have  Merchants  kindly  entreated.

But  at  their  going  into  India  they  use  all  extremitie,
searching  them  to  the  skinne  for  gold,  which  to  trans-
port, or  any  coyne  of  silver  out  of  Persia,  but  the  Kings,
is  death.

274

Water  how
precious.

RICHARD  STEEL  AND  JOHN  CROWTHER a.d.

1615.

Likewise  they  looke narrowly  for  horses  and  slaves,

which  the  King  will not  have  transported. Heere we

stayed  two  dayes  for  certaine  Armenians,  with  whom  we

went, leaving our former company. The ninth, one

farsing  to  a  River. The  tenth,  in  the  open  fields,  seven

farsings. The  eleventh,  foure  farsings  to  a  small  Village,

where we had store of  provision. The twelfth, foure

farsings, where  we digged for water. The thirteenth,

eight  farsings. The  fourteenth,  to  Draw,  a  Village,  five

farsings,  where  we stayed  a  day,  which is  the  custome

once  in  foure  dayes,  for  such  as  travell  with  laden  Camels,

to  rest. The  sixteenth,  three  farsings. The  seventeenth,

foure farsings. The eighteenth, to Zaidebasha, five  [I.  iv.  523.]

farsings,  where  are  good  store  of  Carpets  to  be  bought.

The nineteenth, to Mude a Village, where are also

Carpets. The  twentieth,  to  Birchen,  five  farsings,  where

are  store  of  fine  Felt,  Carpets  of  Camels  haire,  made,  from

two  to  five  Abacees  the  Maune,  heere  we  stayed  a  day.

The  two  and  twentieth,  to  Deazaide,  where  they  pretend

all  to  be  religious,  and  have  store  of  Carpets  to  sell  at

cheape  rates. The three  and twentieth,  three  farsings.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  five  farsings  to  Choore,  an  old

ruined  towne. The five and twentieth, three farsings.

The  six  and  twentieth,  seven  farsings,  the  water  brackish

and  stinking. The seven and twentieth, to Dehuge,

where  is  a  prettie  streame  of  hot  water,  which  being  put

into  any  vessell, becomes  coole  and health-some. The

eight  and  twentieth,  seven  farsings  to  Dea  Curma. The

nine  and  twentieth, to Tobaz five farsings, we  payed  Tobaz.

halfe  an  Abacee  a  Camell. At  Tobaz  all  Caravans  doe

rest  at  least  foure  or five  dayes,  the  better  to  be  able

to  passe the salt Desert adjoyning, being foure long  Salt  Desert.

dayes  journey,  wherein  many  miscary. We  found  there

a  small  Caravan  of  one  hundred  Camels,  which  went  the

next  day. Heere,  and  in  the  former  Village,  are  store

of  Dates,  and  three  thousand  Maune  yearely  of  the  finest

Silke  in  Persia,  which  is  carried  to  Yades,  a  faire  Citie,  Yades.

where  they have  the like,  and is made into  Taffatas,

275

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

Sattens  and  Damaskes.  The  King  will  not  suffer  it  to
be  transported,  especially  into  Turkie,  but  the  Portugalls
carried  it  into  Portugall.  Yades  is  about  twelve  dayes
journey  from  Spahan,  and  twelve  farsings  out  of  the  way
of  India.  The  thirtieth,  we  went  nine  farsings  over  the
Desert,  lay  in  the  fields,  and  sent  our  beasts  three  miles
out  of  the  way  for  water,  it  being  exceeding  salt.  The
one  and  thirtieth,  ten  farsings,  where  the  water  was  not
all  so  brackish.

The  first  of  September,  five  farsings,  where  we  went
two  miles  for  water.  The  second,  to  a  small  Castle  nine
farsings,  little  provision.  The  third,  five  farsings,  lay  in
the  fields,  sent  farre  for  water.  The  fourth,  to  Seagan
ten  farsings.  The  fifth,  foure  farsings.  The  sixt,  to
Irabad,  a  Castle,  ten  farsings,  where  we  payed  halfe  an
Abacee  on  a  Camell.  The  seventh,  six  farsings.  The
eight,  to  Ardecan  eight  farsings,  where  we  stayed  till  the
tenth.  Then  went  to  Sellef  foure  farsings.  The  eleventh,
to  Agea  Gaurume,  a  small  Castle,  three  farsings.  The
twelfth,  nine  farsings  to  a  spring  in  the  fields.  The
thirteenth,  to  Beavas  three  farsings.  The  fourteenth,  to
Goolabad  foure  farsings,  from  whence  Richard  Steele
rode  before  to  Spahan.  The  fifteenth,  to  Morea  Shavade
five  farsings.  The  sixteenth,  to  Coopa  five  farsings.
The  seventeenth,  to  Dea  Sabs  five  farsings.  The  eigh-
teenth, foure  farsings,  and  lay  in  the  fields.  The
nineteenth,  three  farsings,  and  came  to  Spahan.  Richard
Steele  reached  thither  the  fifteenth  at  noone,  and  found
Sir  Robert  Sherley  dispatched  from  the  Persian  King,  in
Embassage  to  the  King  of  Spaine,  with  him  his  Lady,
and  for  his  Chaplaine,  a  Frier  of  the  Bare-foot  Order,
with  five  and  fiftie  Portugall  prisoners,  and  his  owne
followers,  both  Persians  and  Armenians,  speeding  for
Ormus,  to  imbarke  for  Lisbon.  The  purpose  is,  that
seeing  the  Portugalls  are  not  able  to  stand,  the  Spaniards
may  be  brought  in,  six  Friers  remaining  in  hostage  till
his  returne,  at  Spahan,  whom  otherwise  the  King  hath
vowed  to  cut  in  pieces  ; which he is  likely  enough  to

276

RICHARD  STEEL  AND  JOHN  CROWTHER ad.

i  6 15.

doe,  who  hath  done  to  death  his  owne  sonne,  and  com-
mitted a thousand other severities. Richard Steele
delivered  his  Letters to Sir Robert,  who  durst  scarsely  Of  Sir  Robert
reade  them, but  now  and then by stealth,  fearing  the ,  eiP ls ,
Portugalls  should  know  of  them. Hee  after  said  it  was  pe*tons  first
too  late  to  look  after  that  businesse  for  our  Nation,  and  Voyage:  and
seemed  discontent  with the company, and the  Master  °ffhe  rest  of

and  Merchants  which  landed  him. But  at  last  said  he  h"  Journeh

n t«  ■  1  1  j  rr  i  «w  second.

was  an  Englishman,  and  promised  to  effect  our  desires,

and  (the  Friers  being  absent)  caried  both  on  the  nine-
teenth to  the  Master  of  the  Ceremonies  or  Maimondare,
and  took  us  with  him  to  the  Great  Vizier,  Sarek  Hogea,
who  presently  called  his  Scrivans,  &  made  draughts  of
what  we  desired  :  viz.  three  Firmans,  one  which  John
Crowther  hath  for  Surat,  one  for  Richard  Steele,  to  carry
into  England  ;  the  third  sent  to  Jasques,  to  the  Gover-
nour.  All  are  sealed  with  the  Kings  great  Seale,  and
to  this  effect,  That  all  Governours  of  Sea-ports  within
his  Majesties  Dominions,  shall  kindly  entertaine  the
English  shipping,  &c.  The  same  day  that  these  Firmans
were  ended,  departed  Sir  Robert  Sherley,  being  the  last
of  September,  towards  Siras,  with  great  pompe  and
much  honour,  &c.

Your  Worships  at  Command,

Richard  Steele.
Your  Worships  servant  ever  to  be  Commended

John  Crowther.

The chiefe Commodities of  Persia are Raw-silke,  of  Commodities  of
which  it  yeelds,  according  to  the  Kings  bookes,  yearely  Pema-
seven  thousand  and seven hundred Batmans. Rubarb
growes in Corasan, where Worme-seed growes also  :
Carpets  of  all  sorts,  Silke and Gold,  Silke and Silver,
halfe  Silke  halfe  Cotton,  &c. Their  moneyes  in  Persia  Their
of  Silver,  are  the  Abacee,  the  Mahomedee, Shahee  and  Moneyes-
Biftee  :  the  rest of  Copper, like the  Tangas  and  Pisos
of  India. The Abacee weigheth two Metrkalls  ; the

277

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

Mahomedee is halfe an Abacee ; the Shahee halfe a
[I.  iv.  524.]  Mahomedee  :  in  the  Riall  of  eight  are  thirteene  Shahees.

In  a  Shahee  are  two  Biftees  and  a  halfe,  or  ten  Casbegs.

One  Biftee  is  foure  Casbegs  or  two  Tangs. The  weights

differ  in  divers  places  :  two  Mahans  of  Tauris  make  one
Their  0f  Spahan,  and likewise the  Batman. The  measure  of

Silkes,  &c.  is  the  same  with  the  Pike  of  Aleppo,  which  we

judge  seven  and  twenty  inches.
Richard  John  Crowther  returned into India. Richard Steele

IflandThZZ  to  England  by  the  way  of  Turkic  From  Spahan  the
Persia  and  second  of  December,  five  farsings  to  a  Sarail.  The  third,
Turkie.  eight  farsings  to  another  Sarail. The  fourth,  to  a  Village

sixe  farsings.  The  fifth,  to  Dreag  seven  farsings.  The
sixt,  to  a  Sarail  seven  farsings.  The  seventh,  to  Gol-
pigan  eight  farsings.  The  eight,  to  Curouon  seven
farsings.  The  ninth,  to  Showgot  seven  farsings.  The
tenth,  to  Saro  six  farsings.  The  eleventh,  to  Dissabod
eight  farsings.  The  twelfth,  two  Manfields  to  a  faire
Towne  Tossarkhan,  twelve  farsings,  and  rested  that  day,
because  of  the  deepe  Snow.  The  fifteenth,  to  Kindanor
six  farsings.  The  sixteenth,  to  Sano  eight  farsings.  The
seventeenth,  to  Shar  Nuove,  where  I  was  stayed  by  the
Daiga,  but  shewing  Letters  from  the  Vizier,  hee  bade  me
depart  in  the  name  of  God  and  Alle.  The  eighteenth,
passed  by  a  bridge,  where  all  men  are  to  give  account
what  they  are,  and  pay  two  Shahees  a  Camell.  The
nineteenth,  to  Kassamkhan,  the  last  of  the  Persian
Governments,  and  gave  a  Present  to  the  Governour  for
a  guard  against  the  Turke-men  :  which  hee  not  onely  did,
but  gave  mee  licence  to  feed  on  his  Villages  without
paying,  which  yet  I  would  not.  The  one  and  twentieth,
I  began  my  journey  over  the  high  mountaines,  which
part  the  two  Countries,  being  dangerous,  and  the  two
and  twentieth  arrived  at  a  Village,  eight  farsings.  The
three  and  twentieth,  seven  farsings,  lay  under  a  rocke.
The  foure  and  twentieth,  to  Mando,  a  Towne  under  the
Turkes,  eight  farsings.  The  five  and  twentieth,  to
Emomester  eight farsings. The  sixe  and twentieth,  to

278

RICHARD  STEEL  AND  JOHN  CROWTHER a.d.

1615.

Boroh,  passed  over  a  River  by  Boat,  and  that  night
arrived  at  Bagdat,  eight  farsings,  where  I  was  searched
and  examined  for  letters,  which  I  had  hid  under  my
saddle,  whither  one  also  was  prying,  but  by  a  signe  which
I  made,  gave  over,  and  followed  mee  to  my  lodging  for
his  expected  reward.  I  escaped  better  then  an  old
Spaniard,  which  a  fortnight  before  was  imprisoned  and
chained  in  the  Castle,  his  letters  read  by  a  Malteza
Renegade  I  met  with  a  Portugall  which  arrived  heere
(from  Goa  and  Ormus)  two  daies  before  mee.  The
Basha  made  us  stay  heere  twenty  dayes,  to  stay  for  a
Sabandar  of  his.

The  sixteenth  of  January,  we  passed  Tygris,  and  lay
on  the  Desert  side.  The  seventeenth,  we  went  five
Agatza  (leagues  or  farsings)  the  eighteenth,  met  with
Euphrates  at  Tlulquy,  where  Merchants  disembarcke  for
Bagdat,  or  (after  five  per  Cento  custome  paid)  passe  the
Tigris  for  the  Persian  Gulfe.  And  after  a  tedious  pas-
sage, partly  by  the  River,  partly  by  Deserts,  partly  by
Sea,  the  fifteenth  of  Aprill  16 16.  he  arrived  at  Marsiles,
and  the  tenth  of  May  at  Dover,  &c.

Your  Worships  to  command  in  all  obedience,

Richard  Steele.

a

The  Copie  of  the  King  of  Persias  Firman,  Trans-  Franke

lated  out  of  the  Persian.  name  given  in

F~  ~  ,  „  c 1  •  the  East  to  all

Orman or  Command given unto all our Subjects,  westerne

from  the  greatest,  unto  what  degree  soever,  unto  the  Christians,

Souf-basha  or  Constable  of  our Country, to  kindly  re-  5ince  &f%

ceive  and  entertaine  the  English  Frankes  or  Nation,  at  ExPea[ttl°"

.  .  r 1 • 1  •  1  • •  1 11  •  int0  ("e  "°ly

what  time  any or their ships  or shipping shall arrive  ia„j.  t^e

at  Jasques,  or  any  other  of  the  Ports  in  our  Kingdome  :  French  being

to  conduct them and their Merchandize to  what  place  chiefi  therein,

or  places  they  themselves  desire  :  and  that  you  shall  see  a" F^ench

them  safely  defended  about  our  Coasts,  from  any  other  ciaremont

Frank  or  Franks  whatsoever.  cause  thereof.

279

A.D.
1614.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Thus  I  will  and  command  you  so  to  doe,  as  you
shall  answere  to  the  contrary.  Given  at  our  Royall  Citie,
the  twelfth  of  this  Mon  Ramassan  (October)  in  the  yeare
of  Our  Tareag 1024. A.D. 161 5.

*The  Journal/
had  not  the
Authors  name,
but  I  find  him
thus  named  by
Captaine  Pay-
ton,  as  Chiefe
at  Tecoo.
Soldania  in
thirty  three
degrees,  fiftie
minutes  South.

si

Chap. XIIII.

Memorials  of  a  Voyage,  wherein  were  employed
three  shippes,  the  Samaritan,  Thomas  and
Thomasine  16 14.  written  by  *John  Milward
Merchant,  who  went  in  the  Thomas.

He  tenth  of  May  16 14.  we  anchored  at
Gore-end.  The  third  of  October  in  the
Bay  of  Soldania,  where  we  bought  one
hundred  and  fortie  sheep,  and  ten  Oxen,
and  more  might  have  done.  These  people
are  most  miserable,  destitute  of  Religion
in  any  kind,  so  farre  as  we  can  perceive,
and  of  all  civility  ;  their  speech  a  chattering  rather  then
language  ;  naked,  save  a  short  cloake  of  skinne  on  their
shoulders,  and  a  Fox-skinne  before  their  privities  :  have
but  one  stone,  naturally  or  ceremoniously  I  know  not ;
eate  that  which  dogges  would  hardly  digest.  They  de-
[I.  iv.  525.]  manded  unreasonably  for  their  Cattell,  which  we  thought
proceeded  from  Cories,  who  had  been  in  England,  and
(as  we  suppose)  acquainted  them  with  our  little  esteeme
of  Yron  and  Copper,  asking  peices  as  big  as  their  cloakes,
and  had  for  their  Cattell  Skillets,  Basons,  and  Scummers.
One  seemed  to  be  chiefe,  whom  the  Generall  kindly
entertained  in  his  Tent,  and  wee  after  that  bought  more
freely.  Their  Sheep  like  our  Goats,  with  small  homes,
their  Oxen  larger  then  ours,  the  flesh  white  like  our
Muttons,  the  fat  yellow  as  the  yoalke  of  an  egge,  wilde,  and
of  one  stone  most  of  them  like  themselves.  October  is
with  them,  as  Aprill  with  us,  the  weather  temperate,
but  hot  and  parching  at  noone,  the  aire  wholesome,  our
men presently  recovering, some  desperately  sicke, they

280

JOHN MILWARD  a.d.

1614.

of  the Scurvy using a  red  Berry  as big  as  a  Goose-
berry.

The  twentieth  of  December,  the  Generall caused  the  The  Copie  of
Masters  and Masters-mates  to  come  aboord, supposing:  °^e

1J0CIS  SO  flHt't

that  we were  shot  one  hundred  and  fiftie  leagues  more  w-lth  wet  that
then  reckoning  to the  East,  in  eighteene  degrees  fortie  /  could  not  in
minutes. The  nine  and  twentieth,  we  discryed  land,  but  some  places
knew not  well  in  what  height we were,  resolved that  readt**  and

.  tfl€7'Bt07'C  hdVB

it  was  Java,  but  knew  not  what  part  of  it,  supposed  it  the  ^envereei  -tt
South-side,  and  that  we  were  fallen  on  it  by  keeping  too  more  imper-
Easterly a course. And though the plats  make it to  fectly.
lie  betwixt  eleven  and  twelve  degrees,  and  our  latitude, heJ  fnozo
at  that  time,  was but  eight  degrees  forty  minutes ;  yet  are^
it  is  questionable  whether  it  hath  been  discovered. But
howsoever,  or  wheresoever  we  were,  it  is  certaine  that  we
were  fallen  to  Lee-ward  of  the  straits  of  Sun  da,  by  two  or
three  degrees,  and  into  the  North-west  Monsons,  which
blow  thereabouts  from  September  to  the  last  of  March.
All the Masters were of  opinion, to goe back into
thirteene  or  foureteene  degrees  South-ward,  to  fetch  the
South-east  wind,  which  is  a  trade  wind  betweene  twentie  Trade  wind.
eight and  eleven degrees,  and so to  shape our course
more  Northerly. Others  were  of  opinion,  to  goe  round
about  the  Hand,  and  to  fetch  Bantam,  as  certaine  Dutch-
men had  done  heretofore  on like  occasion, and  accom-
plished it in sixe  weekes  space. But the first opinion
tooke place. The land hereabouts is very high, and
neere the  sea  full  of  great  Trees,  the  aire  noysome  by
stinke  from  the  shoare,  subject  to  much  lightning,  thunder,
and raine, with sudden gusts. The next day noone,
we  had  a  good  observation  in  the  latitude  of  eight  degrees
thirty  five  minutes. The  Generall  was  resolved  to  beat
up  and  downe,  to  see  if  we  could  get  any  thing  to  the
West:  he  charged  M.  Wilson  for  author  of  the  error;  Wilson
betwixt  whom  also  and  the  Captaine,  passed  both  words  aaused,asalso
and  blowes,  which  the  Generall  reduced  into  amitie  the  tjie  Tkomasiite
eleventh  of  January. On  the  eighteenth,  we  had  land  in  afterwards.
seven  degrees  tenne  minutes,  being  by  likelihood  not  farre

281

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

West  from  our  first  land, notwithstanding  that  we  had
runne from  it  by  our  course  neere  one  hundred  leagues
Strong  Cur- to the West, by reason of a violent current  to the
renL  East.

The  Land to  the sea is  low  and  levell,  within high
mountaines :  wee  anchored  at  the  entry  of  the  Bay,  where
we  found  calmes,  the  Current  setting  strong  East  South-
east, that  in  a  calme  it  would  carry  a  ship  foure  leagues  a
watch. There is store  of  Wood  and  Water  from  the
Rocks, but brackish. We found neere to the  shoare
continuall  calme, (the  wind still blowing  two or three
leagues  off  at  Sea)  be  it  never  so  great  a  storme. In  this
Inforced  Bay.  place, which  I  may well  call  Inforced Bay,  we saw  no
people,  the  shoare  very  thicke  of  Wood,  Cocos,  Palmes,
and  a  hundred  other  kinds  of  trees,  some  growing  in  a
*  Indian  jig number  of  rootes,*  which  descend  from  the  toppe  of  the
tree^orArbore  brancneSj where are  fortie  or  fiftie foot  high,  and  take
Goropius  con- root  agame>  so  that  the  Tree  sheweth  like  a  Woodstacke.
ceited  to  be  the  I  suppose  that  never  Christian  had  been  there,  nor  will
tree  of  Adams  againe,  if  he  can  avoide  it :  yet  the  Generall  in  one  of  the
sin. See  my trees  set  up  his  name  and  armes. We  were  not  past  two
M  §  2  leagues  from  our  anchoring  place,  from  whence  we  had

scant  wind  enough  to  bring  us,  but  there  rose  so  great  a
gust  of  wind  and  raine,  that  we  were  forced  to  take  in  all
our  top-sailes,  and  strike  our  maine  saile.

On the three  and  twentieth,  after  much  consultation

and subscription for the Generalls discharge, we bore

in  with  the  land,  and  anchored  in  a  Bay  which  I  may

Voluntary terme  Voluntary,  where  we  found  a  Dutch-man  at  anchor,

Say-  whom  we had  formerly  met  at  Sestos. The  next day

we  went  ashoare,  and  found  a  Towne  and  people,  not

blacke,  but  tawney,  their  houses  built  of  Canes,  cloathed

some from the Waste, other wholly; they respected

nothing that wee had, nor affoarded us  any thing  to

speake  of;  their  weapons  pipes  and  cryses. The  Dutch-

Middleton man  named  this  place  Middleton  Bay : it  is  a  good  Har-

Bay-  bour, hath  a  River  and  an  Hand,  and  lieth  some  fiftie

leagues  to  the  East  of  the  North end  of  Java,  as the

282

JOHN MILWARD  a.d.

i  6 14.

Dutch-man  informed  us,  who  coasted  it  all  along. It  is
in  seven  degrees  thirtie  five  minutes.

The  second  of  February,  we  were  in  tenne  degrees
twelve  minutes.  We  saw  the  next  day  a  small  Hand,  An  Hand.
fortie  leagues  to  the  South  of  Java  major,  in  tenne  degrees,
about  five  leagues  broad,  eight  long.  The  fourth  at
Sun-setting,  we  had  three  degrees  tenne  minutes  to  the
West  variation.  It  is  an  infallible  rule,  that  from  the
Cape  of  Good  Hope  to  Java,  the  variation  increaseth  to  Ruleofvaria-
the  West,  the  further  East  we  runne,  till  it  come  to  tton
about  seventeene  degrees,  and  then  as  we  runne  to  the
East  decreaseth,  till  we  come  to  the  straights  of  Sunda,
where  it  is  three  degrees  and  a  halfe  variation,  and  is
holden  the  best  guide  for  Easting  and  Westing,  though
not  observing  exact  proportion.  On  the  fifth,  we  had
nine  degrees  sixteen  minutes,  and  three  degrees  forty
eight  minutes  variation  West.  The  declination  of  the
Crosiers  is  twenty  eight  degrees  and  a  halfe.  On  the
thirteenth,  we  were  in  the  straights  of  Sunda,  having  on
our  Larboord  Sumatra,  and  Java  on  our  Starboord.  The  [I.  iv.  526.]
foureteenth  at  night,  we  anchored  within  three  leagues
of  Bantam  Road.  The  next  morning  came  to  us,  M.  Bantam.
Baily  Merchant,  and  M.  Samon  Master  of  the  Globe,
who  told  us  that  the  Globe  was  then  laden  for  England,
and  that  the  Trades-increase  beeing  brought  on  ground  Tke  Trades-
on  Pulo  penjohn,  all  her  men  died  in  the  careening  of  her;
and  afterwards  it  stood  them  in  five  hundred  ryalls  of
eight  a  day  to  hire  Javans,  of  whom  five  hundred  died  in
the  worke,  before  they  could  sheath  one  side;  so  that
they  could  hire  no  more  men,  and  therefore  were  inforced
to  leave  her  imperfect,  where  shee  was  sunke  in  the
Sea,  and  after  set  on  fire  by  the  Javans.  The  Chineses
also  reported,  that  the  Devill  appeared  on  Pulo  penjohn
Hand,  signifying  his  offence,  that  the  Chineses  would
undertake  such  a  businesse  on  his  ground,  and  give  him
nothing  (for  they  were  the  workemen)  whereupon  one
of  the  chiefe  Chinese  Carpenters  came  to  Sir  Henry
Middleton,  and  reported  it, desiring  to have  a  BurTolo

283

A.D.
1614.

*  Where  is  the
evidence?

No trade with-
out the  King  of
Achens  Letter
at  Priaman
and  Teco.

Achen.

Smooth  sea  in
great  wind.

The  Kings
Women  and
Pompe.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

for  sacrifice,  who  denyed,  yea  forbad  him  when  hee  would
have  done  it  at  his  owne  charge,  esteming  the  want  thereof
cause  of  their  evills.

The  Globe  departed  from  Bantam  the  one  and  twen-
tieth of  February.  The  foure  and  twentieth,  the
Thomasine  departed  for  the  Molluccas,  M.  Baily  Cape
Merchant,  and  M.  Wilson  Master.  Our  Generall  sent
word  to  the  King  of  Bantam,  that  the  Spaniards  would
invade  him,  and  take  away  his  Towne ;  who  answered,
that  if  all  the  Caffars  (so  they  call  all  not  Mahumetans)  in
the  world  should  come  against  him,  he  had  a  god  *  that
would  defend  him.

The  foureteenth  of  March,  we  departed  in  the  Thomas
for  the  Coast  of  Sumatra.  The  twelfth  of  May,  we
arrived  at  Priaman,  but  were  denied  trade.  The  next
day,  we  rode  to  Tecoo,  along  by  the  Sea-side,  which  I
thinke  in  this  place,  hath  the  greatest  source  of  any  in  the
world,  occasioned  by  the  many  shoales  and  breaches  on
this  coast,  whereby  the  dangers  of  sailing  are  unknowne.
On  the  seventeenth,  we  weighed  for  Achen,  where  the
twentieth  of  June  we  arrived.  On  all  this  coast  when
there  is  no  raine,  although  it  bee  calme,  the  Sea  goeth
very  high ;  and  in  raine  though  the  wind  blow  much,
the  Sea  is  smooth.  The  King  sent  us  his  Chop.  On  the
eight  and  twentieth,  he  sent  an  Elephant  to  carry  the
Kings  Letter  in  State.  We  carried  for  a  Present,  a  great
piece  of  Ordnance,  with  the  carriages,  twenty  Bullets,  a
Ladle,  Skowrer,  and  two  barrels  of  Powder,  twelve  fowling
peeces,  tenne  Swords,  sixe  fine  Baftas,  all  wrapped  in
the  Kings  colours.  He  sate  in  great  Sate  with  the  King
of  Jor,  and  gave  to  my  selfe,  M.  Nicols,  and  M.
Yate  three  Vests  (contrary  to  his  custome)  and  was
very  merry.

The  second  of  July,  he  came  by  the  waters  side  upon
an  Elephant  in  great  state,  with  divers  Elephants  before
him,  and  twelve  other  Elephants  having  Castles  (as  they
tearme  them)  on  their  backs,  full  of  his  Women,  having
multitudes  of  Women  and  Eunuches  attending,  all  other

284

JOHN MILWARD  a.d.

1615.
people being beaten  out of  the  way,  and  not  daring  to
be  seen ;  our  selves  having  our  house  neere  the  Waters
side,  were  commanded  to  shut  our  doores  and  windowes.
The Sabandar by  a Parable  taught us to know him,
telling  us,  That  if  a  man  will  sow  a  piece  of  Cloth,  let  the
Needle  go  through,  and  the  thred  will  follow  of  it  selfe ;
insinuating  that  a  Bribe  must  usher  our  designes. The
King  offered  us  to  settle  a  Factory  here,  paying  custom  e  Factory  at
as  other Nations  did,  which  was  seven  in  the  hundred,  ^cfien-
and  we  accepted  it,  whereat  the  Dutch  were  angry.

The  sixth,  the  Hector  set  saile  for  Teco,  having  lost  Death  by
at Achen twenty sixe men, principally occasioned by  dutemPer-
distemper  in  Aracke  houses. The  eleventh,  the  Captaine
of  the  Dutch  house  protested he  had not a Mase to  Dutch
buy victualls,  and besides was indebted ; whereupon I  relieved-
lent  him seventy  taile  of  Gold, to be  paid  at Bantam.
Perceiving  the  Gold  of  this  place  base,  I  refused  to  sell
but  for  Silver. On  the  sixteenth,  we  went  to  the  Court
(without a Present, presence  is not  tolerated  there) to
see  a  Cock-fighting,  but  the  King  spake  nothing  of  any
businesse, and except he beginne, no man else may.
The  next  day,  I  attended  all  day  in  vaine,  whiles  he  was
solacing  himselfe  with  his  Women. On  the  eighteenth,  his
Gallies  came  from  Malacca. On  the  nineteenth,  he  sent  KingofAchens
them  for  Pedir,  and  so  for  Malacca. Twelve  of  them  were  Ga"ies-
very  faire,  with  twenty  eight  and  thirtie  oares  on  a  side.
The  Admirall  had  a  Turret  built  in  the  Poope,  covered
with  Massie  plate  of  Gold,  and  curiously  wrought. It  is
reported,  that  in  each  of  his  great  Gallies  he  would  carry
one  thousand  men,  and  in  his  fleet  (beeing  three  hundred
great and  little)  one  hundred thousand. He forced a
Guzerate Junke of foure hundred Tunnes, with the
Commander, to goe  with  him  : yet  it  was thought he
meant not  to goe himselfe, but  gave  it  out  to further
his businesse ; and that Orencay Maraga should be
Generall, a  man  whom  he  most  feareth,  as of  auncient
Nobilitie,  a  good  Souldiour,  and  popular,  yet  circumspect.
The  King  beeing  going,  word  was  brought  that  for  the

285

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

rest  of  his  debt,  I  must  take  pepper  at  eight  tayle  the
Bahar,  which  I  refused ;  yet  was  it  weighed,  choose
whether  I  would  take  it,  or  nothing.  Orencay  Laxaman
demanded  for  better  conditions,  a  Cable,  Anchor,  great
piece,  barrell  of  powder,  twentie  shot ;  and  for  himselfe
sixty  tayles  of  Gold,  for  other  Officers  thirtie :  so  should
we  settle  at  Teco,  and  Priaman  for  two  yeares.  At
length,  for  so  much  Gold,  and  twentie  taile  more,  he
undertooke  to  procure  our  dispatch,  but  at  last  the  other
also  were  demaunded.

On the thirtieth, came in two Dutch ships from
Masulipatan,  the  Admirall  the  White  Lyon,  wherein  was
the  Visador  and  the  Ragusa. The  Visador  sent  the  King
Dutch  a  great  peece,  with  other  things  for  a  Present,  which  were

rejected.  rejected  as  of  too  little  value. They  demanded  Sr.  Isaac,

Captaine  of  the  Dutch  house  at  Achen,  as  indebted  to
[I.  iv.  527.]  the  Company,  whom  the  King  had  appointed  for
Malacca,  and  held  as  his  slave,  and  said,  That  if  the
Dutch  tooke  him,  they  should  have  no  trade  in  his
Countrey.  He  demanded  one  of  their  ships  with  him
to  Malacca,  alleadging  an  ancient  promise  of  such  a
kindnesse  by  a  former  Embassadour  some  twentie  yeares
agoe,  but  they  excused,  and  he  said,  They  were  an  unjust
Nation,  and  denied  them  his  Chop,  that  they  might  not
goe  on  shoare  for  seven  or  eight  dayes,  so  much  as  to  fill
water  :  and  three  or  foure  daies  after,  they  turned  their  Ad-
mirall ashoare,  and  gave  her  to  the  King,  willing  to  give
him  content,  and  withall  to  avoid  that  desperate  Voyage.

The  seventeenth  of  August,  the  Thomas  set  saile  from

Achen. The twentie ninth of September, we had a

Spout. At  our  first  comming  from  Achen,  we  stood  off

to the  West, for  avoiding  of  rocks  and  shoales  about

Current  sixtie  leagues,  wherein  being  deceived  in  the  Current,  we

deceweth. were  off"  one hundred and fiftie leagues,  whereby we

brought  our  selves  open  to  the  Bay  of  Bengala,  and  so

into  a  strong  Current,  which  kept  us  very  long  from  our

Port. The  seven  and  twentieth  of  October,  we  anchored

Teco.  in  Teco  road,  and  the  next  day  presented  the  King  of

286

JOHN MILWARD  a.d.

1616.

Achens  letters  for  two  yeeres  Factory. The  thirteenth
of  November,  the  Thomas  departed  for  Bantam,  I,  George
Piborne,  John  Perce,  and  my  man  Peter staying. We
had  much adoe with these rude people, but bare our
selves  stiffely  on  the  King  of  Achens  Letters. The  ninth
of  May, 1 61 6. a man of  Achen being reviled by  a
Woman, did beat her, and thereupon grew a great
uproare ; for  the Tecoans having fined  him at foure  Hatred
Tailes, he denyed to pay  any, and the next day an  b^wixtthe
hundred  men  came  to  take  him,  but  all  the  Acheners  jchenerSt
joyning,  they  were  repulsed,  one  slaine,  and  sixe  hurt :
and they beeing two hundred, fortified the neather
Towne,  intending  to  stand  it  out  to  the  utmost,  affirm-
ing that  if  they  should  suffer  themselves  to  be  over-borne
by  the Country  people,  the King  of  Achen  would  cut
off  their  legs. The  King  by  this  policie (his Officers
being  all  Acheners  which  will  suffer  no  abuse)  holding
them  in  awe. But  the  matter  was  ended,  Lose  Gee  the
Achener  paying  a  summe of Money. Three moneths
before  this  time,  the  small  pockes  were  rife  here,  whereof  Unhoksome-
many  died. This  moneth  also  was  very  unholesome  and  ne"  °fTec00-
faint,  many  dying  with  a  swelling :  our  selves  were  sicke
round  about  the  house.

The  eleventh  of  June,  arrived  the  Expedition  at
Priaman.  The  second  of  July,  there  was  a  Malem  that
lost  both  his  hands  for  stealing,  who  in  the  execution
was  not  seene  once  to  stirre.  The  thirteenth,  Captaine
Payton  sent  me  word,  that  he  feared  his  men  would  Knot  of
mutiny,  and  runne  away  with  the  ship,  as  they  had  Knaves-
formerly  attempted,  at  Bantam,  and  therefore  desired  me
to  receive  some  of  them  ashoare,  so  to  disperse  their
knot.  The  sixe  and  twentieth,  the  Dragon  and  Pepper-
corne  anchored  at  the  Offing,  Captaine  Will.  Keeling
Generall  in  the  Dragon,  and  Captaine  Harris  in  the
other.  They  had  been  with  the  King,  who  had  graunted
them  trade  at  Teco  for  two  yeares,  after  which  time  he
would  have  no  Nation  to  trade  but  at  Achen.  Hee  left
M.  Nichols  principall  at  Achen.

287

A.D.
l6l6.

Ramdam  or
Lent.

Corruption  of
Officers,  by
corruption
onely  to  be
amended.

Hector  sunke.

Spanish  fleet
feared.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  eight  and  twentieth  of  August,  arrived  Addicke
Raja  Pongola  Corcon  from  Achen,  who  had  the  Kings
goods  to  sell,  and  power  to  receive  all  the  Kings  customes
past  and  to  come.  Hee  came  in  nature  of  an  Informer,
and  therefore  all  men  stood  in  feare  of  him.  The  first
of  September  began  their  Randam,  at  the  first  of  sight
of  the  new  Moone :  all  that  Moneth  following,  they  eate
nothing  but  in  the  night,  and  that  temperately.  The
fifteenth,  wee  begunne  to  buy  Pepper,  but  were  forced
to  promise  Addicke  Raja  one  hundred  Royals,  before  we
could  have  any  trade.  The  next  day  I  excepted  against
the  waight,  whereupon  Raja  tooke  it  away  to  examine
it,  whereat  the  Polimo  was  much  afraid,  having  in  that
kind  much  abused  our  Nation.  The  Pongelo  came  to
the  English  house  to  reforme  the  weights,  but  beeing
presently  to  weigh,  gave  us  a  weight  lesse  then  that  we
had.  The  next  day,  I  sent  him  fiftie  Ryals  for  a  Present,
which  he  returned,  saying,  He  scorned  to  be  fed  like  a
Boy.  The  one  and  twentieth,  Captaine  Harris  being
ashoare,  seemed  to  take  so  much  upon  him,  that  Raja
Addick  sent  to  him  to  borrow  three  hundred  Rialls  of
eight  to  buy  him  a  Wench,  and  prest  the  matter  so
instantly,  that  I  was  forced  afterward  to  send  him  an
hundred.

The  third  of  October,  I  spoke  at  his  instance  also  unto
Captaine  Harris,  to  spare  his  Carpenters  two  or  three
daies  to  mend  his  Prow,  which  he  refused  to  doe.  The
sixth,  came  the  Speedwell  sent  by  the  Generall  from
Bantam,  in  the  charge  of  John  Clare,  Boteswaine  of  the
Hector,  sunke  at  Bantam  in  the  Canning.  Newes  of
five  ships  from  England,  foure  for  Surat,  &  the  Swan  for
Bantam.  The  Thomas  gone  for  Japan,  the  Concord  for
Socodania,  the  Attendant  for  Jambo :  from  Maccassar
also,  that  the  Spaniards  are  there  bound  for  the  Moluccas,
twenty  seven  saile  of  Ships,  Gallies,  and  Frigats,  that
we  doubted  much  their  comming  to  Bantam.  On  the
foureteenth,  arrived  a  Java  Junke  with  five  Hollanders,
which had been cast  away in  the iEolus, five  degrees

288

JOHN MILWARD  ad.

i  6 14.

South,  and  desired  our  releefe. We  graunted  them  the  Dutch
Speedwell  to  goe  to  the  Hand  Engano,  where  they  had  releeved-
laid their  goods  and money  ashoare,  whether they  set
saile  on  the  three  and  twentieth.

The  people  complaine,  that  when  they  sell  their  Pepper
to  the  King,  they  loose  a  fourth  part,  by  reason  they
take  so  much  more  then  when  they  dealt  with  the
English. Reliqua  desiderantur.

Chap. XV.  [I.  iv.  528.]

The  second  Voyage  of  Captaine  Walter  Peyton
into  the  East-Indies,  in  the  Expedition,  which
was  set  forth  by  the  East-India  Company,
together  with  the  Dragon,  Lyon,  and  Pepper-
Corne,  in  January  16 14.  gathered  out  of  his
large  Journall.

§•  1.

Occurents at Soldania, Mohelia,  Socotora, Surat,
with divers  other  Intelligences.

Anuary the foure and twentieth, 16 14.
wee set saile from Gravesend. The
second of February, Sir Thomas Roe  Sir  T.  Roc.
Embassadour from his Majestie to the
Great  Mogoll,  repayred  aboord  the  Lyon
with fifteene followers. And Master
Humpherey  Boughton  aboord  the  Pepper-
corne,  (recommended  to  the  Company  by  his  Majestie)
to  passe  into  India. Wee  carryed  with  us  in  the  Fleete
eleven  Japonezas brought into England  by the Clove,  Japotiezes
divided proportionably amongst the shippes : likewise Guzera(s> an(i
fourteene Guzerats brought  by  the  Dragon : also  nine-  person"
teene condemned persons out of Newgate, to be left
for discoverie of unknowne places, the Company
having obtayned the Kings Pardon for them to this
purpose.

iv  289  T

A.D.
1614.

Anno  1 61 5.
Maps  false  in
Cape  Boya-
dore,  and
Marpequena.

Soldania.

Corey  a
Savage  which
had  bin  in
England.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

On  the  twentieth,  some  of  the  Dragons  men,  the
Newgate-Birds  amongst,  attempted  to  run  away  with
their  Pinnasse,  which  then  was  prevented.  But  one  of
those  condemned  with  two  of  the  Pepper-cornes  company
carryed  away  her  Pinnasse  next  night ;  two  of  my  ships
company  having  conspired  to  carrie  away  the  Boate,  but
were  discovered.  The  three  and  twentieth,  wee  set  saile
out  of  the  Downes.

On  the  sixt  of  March,  lost  sight  of  the  Lizard.  And
on  the  sixe  and  twentieth,  had  sight  of  land  which  we
supposed  the  Westermost  part  of  Forteventura,  and
proved  part  of  Barbarie,  one  of  the  land  points  entering
the  River  Marpequena,  beeing  misgraduated  one  whole
degree  more  Northerly  then  it  should  be.  Likewise  Cape
Boyadore  is  misgraded  one  degree  as  we  then  found  by
experience,  escaping  great  danger  caused  by  that  errour
in  our  plats.  The  sixe  and  twentieth,  the  Generall  wind
began.

The  tenth  of  May,  being  by  reckoning  distant  from
the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  bearing  East  a  quarter  South,
sixe  hundred  and  twentie  leagues,  wee  saw  many  Pin-
tados, Mangareludas  and  other  fowles ;  whereof  I  have
not  heard  the  like.

The  fift  of  June,  we  anchored  in  the  Bay  of  Soldania,
having  not  buried  above  three  or  foure  in  the  whole
Fleete,  about  thirtie  being  now  sicke.  Wee  built  five
Tents.  Corey  came  downe  and  welcommed  us  after  his
manner,  by  whose  meanes  the  people  were  nothing  so
fearefull  as  at  other  times,  nor  so  theevish.  They  brought
us  cattell  in  great  abundance,  which  wee  bought  for
Copper  shreds.  Corey  shewed  some  of  our  people  his
house,  wife  and  children,  at  a  Towne  thence  distant  five
English  miles,  contayning  about  one  hundred  houses.
Most  of  them  can  say  Sir  Thomas  Smith,  English  ships,
which  they  often  with  great  glorie  repeat.  Their  wives
and  children  came  often  downe  to  us,  to  whom  we  gave
great  content  with  Bugles  and  the  like.  And  two  or
three  desired  to  goe  for  England,  seeing  Corey  had  sped

290

WALTER  PAYTON  a.d.

1615.

so  well,  and  returned  so  rich  with  his  Copper  Sute,  which

he  yet  keepeth  in  his  house  very  charily. Corey  also

determined  to returne,  and  to  carry  one  of  his  sonnes

when  our  ships  are  thence  bound  home-wards. On  the

East-side  of  the  Table  is  another  Cottage  of  ten  small  Their  houses.

houses,  built  round  like  Bee-hives,  covered  with Mats

made  of  Bents  woven  together.

The  sixteenth,  we  set  on  shoare  by  consultation  tenne  Ten  con-

condemned  persons,  to  remayne  at  the  Cape,  viz.  John  demneciper-

-r '  sons  set  on

Crosse,  Henry  Cocket,  Clerke,  Brand,  Bouth,  Hunnyard,  shoare

Brigs, Pets, Metcalfe, Skilligall. We gave each man

something  for  his  owne  defence  against  wild  beasts  and

men, weapons and victuals. They consented Crosse

should  be  their  head ; The  people  desire  Brasse,  and  set

not  so  much  by  Copper;  they  desire  pieces  of  a  foot  or

more  square. Iron  hoops  they  care  little  for. We  caught

seven  or  eight  hundred  fishes  in  the  River  with  Saynes.

The  Countrey  people  brought  us  downe  of  the  Root  Ningin,  a
Ningin,  whereof  wee  bought one hand  full for  a piece  me^cina^
of  Copper  an  inch  and  halfe  broad,  and  two  inches  and  pr-lze(nn
halfe in length. Our  men  got some,  but  not  so  full,  Japan,  some-
nor ripe, this  being not the  season,  which in the  full  what  like  a
perfection  is  as  tender  and  sweet  as  Annis-seeds. On  skirret-
the  twentieth,  wee  set  saile. On  the  five  and  twentieth,
we had  sight  of  land  in thirtie  foure  degrees twentie  [I.  iv.  529.]
eight  minutes. It  is  the  land  to the  West  of  Cape  de
Arecife,  misgraduated  twentie  seven  minutes  in Daniels
Plats  more  Northerly  then  it  should  be.

Likewise,  on  the  sixt  of  July,  we  should  have  seene
land  of  Saint  Laurence,  by  most  of  our  reckonings  accord-
ing to  the  Plats  of  Daniel,  (of  Mercators  projection)  False  plats.
which  prooved  false  about  seven  tie  leagues  in  distance
of  longitude  betwixt  the  land  of  ^Ethiopia,  Cape  Bona
Speranza,  and  the  He  of  Saint  Laurence,  as  the  same
protracted  into  Piano  of  Tottens  making  doe  manifest.

The  two  and  twentieth, all  foure ships  anchored at  Mohelta.
Mohelia. Wee had  water  out of  Wels,  we digged a  plflff

'  so  retrestiinp.

little  above  the high water  marke  close  by  the  rootes

291

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

of  Trees,  eight  or  nine  foote  deepe.  Doman  is  the
chiefe  Towne  where  the  Sultan  abides,  to  whom  we  gave
a  double  locked  piece  and  a  Sword.  Wee  had  plentifull
provision  for  little  Money,  Hennes,  Goates,  Bullockes,
Limons,  Oranges,  Limes,  Tamera,  Coco-nuts,  Pines,
Sugar-Canes,  with  other  fruits.  There  are  amongst  them
Arabians,  Turkes,  Moores,  many  of  which  speake  reason-

Strange  Cur-  able  Porteguse.  These  told  me  of  a  strange  course  of
the  Current  which  ranne  fifteene  dayes  Westerly,  fifteene
dayes  Easterly,  and  fifteene  dayes  no  way :  of  which
somewhat  I  observed.

For  at  our  first  comming  the  Current  set  Westerly:
and  on  the  eight  and  twentieth,  it  set  Easterly,  and  so
continued  while  we  stayed  (sixe  dayes)  but  we  went  away
before  perfect  triall  could  be  made.  I  learned  of  them
that  the  King  of  Juanni  was  here  King,  and  gave  the
Government  to  this  Sultan.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  a  ship  arrived  at  Doman  from
Gangamora,  in  Saint  Laurence,  and  I  was  wished  by
the  Generall  to  see  their  Commodities,  which  were  Rice

Tree-cloth.  and  a  kind  of  cloth  made  of  Barkes  of  Trees  whence  they
make  coole  garments. I  enquired  of  the  Pilot  who  spake

C.  Rowks  lost  Portuguse well, touching Captaine Rowles and the

out  of  the  Englishmen  betrayed  in  that  Hand,  of  whom  they  could
say  nothing,  but  that  tv/o  or  three  yeares  past,  an  English
Boy  was  at  Gangamora  in  the  custodie  of  Portugals,
whom  they  thought  now  to  be  dead,  neither  knew  how
he  came  thither.  This  Towne  of  Doman  hath  in  it
one  hundred  houses  of  lime  and  stone  strong  built,  the
Inhabitants  orderly  and  civill.  They  have  traffique  on
the  Coast  of  Melinde,  Magadoxo,  Mombassa,  Arabia  and
Saint  Laurence :  they  carrie  Slaves  taken  in  warres,  which
they  sell  for  nine  or  ten  Rials  of  eight,  and  are  sold
againe  in  Portugall  for  one  hundred.  At  Momboza
and  Magadoxo  I  understood  of  great  Trade  for  Elephants
Teeth  and  Drugges,  and  it  was  concluded  to  advise
the  Honourable  Companie  thereof  touching  sending  a
Pinnasse  yearely  thither. Wee  bought  in  Mohelia  two

292

WALTER PAYTON  a.d.

1615.

or  three  Bullockes  for  a  Barre  of  Iron,  weighing  betwixt

twentie  and  five  and  twentie  pound. Wee  bought  there

two hundred head of cattell, fortie Goates, Hennes,

Fruits,  &c.

The  second  of  August,  wee  set  saile  from  Mohelia :
The  seventeenth,  wee  had  sight  of  Cape  Guardafui,  where
the  Countrey  people  were  fearefull  of  us.  The  twentieth,
wee  anchored  in  the  Road  of  Galencia  in  Socotora,  where
the  fiercenesse  of  the  wind  made  the  Sea  in  a  breach  round
about  us,  and  with  the  Sprie  of  the  Sea,  which  the
winde  blew  about  us  like  raine,  our  ship  and  tackling  SAj/>  white
were  all  over  white  like  a  hoarie  Frost  or  white  Salt. w

The  three  and  twentieth,  we  anchored  at  Tamarine
the  Kings  Towne,  and  the  foure  and  twentieth  at  Delisha.
Here,  we  were  demanded  thirtie  Rials  of  eight  the
Kintall  of  Aloes  Socatrina,  which  made  us  buy  the  lesse :  ^loes  Soca-
(for  Captaine  Downton,  the  Faiking  said,  had  bought  trma'
one  hundred  Kintals)  it  was  liquid  by  reason  of  the
newnesse  or  heat  of  the  Sunne,  and  readie  to  run  out
of  the  skinnes.  Each  Kintall  contayned  by  our  Beame
one  hundred,  three  pounds  and  a  halfe.  It  is  made
of  the  leaves  of  Sempervive,  the  tops  and  roots  cut  away,
and  the  juice  of  the  rest  pressed  out  and  boiled  to  a
certain  height,  after  put  up  in  earthen  Pots,  stopped
closed,  so  standing  eight  monethes,  and  lastly,  put  in
small  skinnes  to  sell.

The  North  part  of  Socotora  or  Socatra,  lyeth  in  twelve
degrees  thirtie  five  minutes,  and  the  bodie  is  one  hundred
and  twentie  degrees,  twenty  five  minutes.  It  is  fourteene
leagues  thence  to  Abbadelcuria,  and  as  much  from  thence
to  Cape  Guardafui.  And  I  should  wish  those  that  saile  Caveat  for
to  Socatra  to  touch  at  the  Cape,  thence  to  saile  the  s"llinSt0
next  morning  a  little  before  breake  of  day,  to  lose  no
day-light,  which  is  precious  there  by  reason  of  the  thicke
and  obscure  night,  with  boysterous  winds  (and  fogges)
this  moneth  and  a  part  of  September :  from  thence  to
Abbadelcuria,  and  anchor  on  the  West  side  thereof  in
seven  or  eight  fathome  water  under  the  low  land,  or  if

293

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

they  get  no  anchorage,  to  keepe  close  by  a  winde  to
the  Southward  in  the  night,  lest  the  windes  and  Northerly
current  put  them  too  much  to  lee-ward  before  day-light.
The  winds  blow  not  steddie,  notwithstanding  the  Monson,
sometimes  South  by  West,  and  South  South-west,  but
seldome  to  the  East  of  the  South.  On  the  one  and
thirtieth,  we  set  saile  from  Socatra.

The  tenth  of  September,  we  had  Quailes,  Hemes  and

other  Land-fowles  blowne  from  land,  unable  to  returne.

On  the  fourteenth,  we  had  sight  of  Diu,  and  on  the

sixteenth of Doman, inhabited with Portugals, and

strongly  fortified.

On  the  eighteenth,  we  passed  by  the  Barre  of  Surat,

Arrive  at and  anchored  against  Swally Barre. The next  day  we

Swally.  sent  a messenger  ashoare, and our Boat returned the

L  •  1V-  53°-J same night with  M. William Biddulph. He told us

of  affaires  in  the  Countrey,  and  that  Zulpher  Car  Chan

was  Governour  at  Surat. Here  we  had  sheepe  for  halfe

a  Riall  of  eight  a  piece,  and  twentie  Hennes  for  a  Riall

of  eight.

Vile  prices,  The  two  and  twentieth  day,  Master  Barber  and  other

base  custome  at  Merchants  were sent  to  Surat,  to  provide  furniture  for

Sir Thomas Roe the Lord Embassadours  house,  who

were  there  narrowly  searched,  their pockets and  other

parts according to the base manner  of  the Countrey,

where  a  man  must  pay  custome  for  a  Riall  of  eight  in

his  Purse,  or  a  good  Knife  in  his  pocket : and if  any

raritie  appeare,  the  Governour  under  pretence  of  buying,

takes  it  away.

The  five  and  twentieth,  the  Lord  Embassadour  landed,
accompanied  with  the  Generall,  Captaine  and  Merchants,
and  eightie  men  in  Armes  with  shot  and  Pike  in  order,
fortie  eight  Pieces  of  Ordnance  discharged  from  the
Fleet,  the  shippes  also  fitted  in  their  holy-day  Sutes
of  waste  clothes,  Streamers,  Ensignes,  Flagges,  Pendants.
Embassador  The  chiefe  men  of  Surat  attended  in  their  Tent,  and  there
landed.  welcommed him. Much adoe there was about the

barbarous  search,  which they would have executed  on

294

WALTER PAYTON  a.d.

1615.

his  followers,  which  the  Embassador  wholly  disclaymed,
till  at  the  last  he  and  three  or  foure  of  his  chiefe
Followers  were  exempted,  the  rest  they  would  onely
imbrace  for  fashions  sake.  Much  passed  also  betwixt  the
Governour  and  Him  about  like  barbarous  exactions,  he
justly  challenging  the  honour  and  immunitie  of  an  Em-
bassadour  from  a  free  King ;  they  willing  to  make  no
difference  betwixt  him  and  others  of  that  ranke  in  those
parts,  and  of  our  owne  also  which  had  assumed  that
name.  Once  their  barbarous  usage  not  only  then  per-
plexed him,  and  detayned  him  long  till  from  the  Court
he  had  order,  but  all  his  time  (as  hereafter  out  of
his  owne  Journall  shall  follow)  held  him  busie  more
then  enough.  Neither  did  they  easily  acknowledge
difference  betwixt  this  Embassadour  and  Master  Edwards,
who  was  so  stiled  amongst  them.

The  first  of  October,  Master  Barwickes  man  (which  Fugitives.
beeing  inveigled  by  a  Fugitive  from  Captaine  Best,  and
since  turned  Moore,  had  runne  away)  was  brought  backe
from  Surat.  Others  after  did  the  like,  and  wrote
from  Damon  to  perswade  others.  The  second,  came
aboord  two  Hollanders  which  had  come  thither  by  land
from  Petapoli.  The  tenth,  the  Governours  brother
came  aboord  with  faire  words  and  had  a  Present  given
him :  also  we  had  newes  of  Master  Aldworths  death.
The  Governour  impudently  urgeth  Presents,  having
had  three  alreadie,  but  findeth  fault  with  them,  and
nominates  what  he  would,  begger  and  chooser  both.

The  fifth  of  November,  we  had  newes  from  Brampore
of  the  Lord  Embassadors  falling  sicke  there,  and  of
Master  Boughtons  death.

The  current  Coine  at  Surat  is  Rials  of  eight,  whereof  Coynes  and
the  old  with  the  plaine  crosse  is  esteemed  best,  worth  wares atSuraf-
five  Mamudies  a  piece,  the  new  with  Flower-delices  at
the  ends  of  the  crosse  at  foure  Mamudies  three  quarters,
if  they  be  not  light.  The  Mamudie  is  a  silver  Coyne,
course,  contayning  thirtie  Pice,  which  is  a  Copper  Coyne  ;
twelve  drammes  make  one  Pice. The  English  shilling,

295

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

if  weight,  will  yeeld  thirtie  three  Pice  and  halfe.  Larines
are  much  about  the  worth  of  Mamudies.  Rupies  are
of  sundry  sorts  ;  some  worth  halfe  a  Riall  of  eight,
other  lesse,  by  which  a  man  may  easily  be  deceived.

Their  trading  is  by  Banian  Brokers,  who  are  subtile
and  deceitfull  both  to  the  buyer  and  seller,  if  not
prevented.  In  their  Weights  each  Citie  difFereth
from  other.  The  Commodities  are  infinite  :  the  chiefe,
Indicoes  of  two  sorts,  Checques  the  courser,  and  Lahor
the  finer;  Cloth  made  of  Cotton-wooll,  as  Callicoes  white
and  coloured,  contayning  fourteene  yards  the  Booke,
from  two  to  one  hundred  Mamudies  the  piece,  Pintados,
Chints  and  Chadors,  Shashes  and  Girdles,  Cannakens,
Treckanees,  SerrabafFs,  Aleiaes,  Patollas,  Sellas,  Quilts,
Carpets ;  Greene  Ginger,  Suckets,  Lignum  Aloes,  Opium,
Salarmoniacke  and  abundance  of  other  Drugs.  Com-
modities vendible  are  Knives,  Glasses,  Pictures  and  such
like  toyes ;  English  cloth ;  China  wares,  Silke  and
Porcelane;  all  manner  of  Spices.  The  Guzerats  lade
their  great  ships  of  nine,  twelve  or  fifteene  hundred
tunnes  at  Goga,  and  steale  out  unknowne  to  the
Portugals.
Indus falsly set  Chiefe  Cities  for  Trade  on  the  River  Sinde  or  Indus,
m  Maps.  are  Tatta,  (on  a  River  which  fals  into  it)  Duilsinde,
Multan,  Lahore.  At  Duilsinde  the  Expedition  in  her
former  Voyage  had  delivered  Sir  Robert  Sherley  the
Persian  Ambassadour,  of  whom  I  thought  good  to  adde
this  (which  I  learned  by  inquiry  of  some  of  his  Followers
to  Agra)  as  an  appendix  to  that  relation  in  my  former
Of  Sir  Robert  Journall.  Being  weary  of  Duilsinde  by  the  Governours
Sherley.  e^vill  intreatie  and  suffering  the  Portugals  to  molest  him,

seeking  also to  cut him off, for  which  purpose twelve
Portugals came from Ormus ; He sought libertie to
Tatta.  goe  to  Tatta,  but  the  Governour  not  permitting  (as  was

thought  of  evill  purpose)  he  went  without  leave,  and  was
by  the  way  to  passe  a  River,  where  none  durst  carrie
him  or  his,  being  prohibited  on  paine  of  death  by  the
said  Governour. They  therefore  made  rafts  of  boords

296

WALTER PAYTON  a.d.

1615.

and  Timbers,  on  which  the  Embassadour  shipped  himselfe
with  Nazerbeg  one  of  his  Followers  to  helpe  him  over :
and  were  no  sooner  put  off,  but  twentie  or  thirtie  Horse-
men  came from  the  Governour  in great haste to  stay
them. Thus  were  they  brought  backe,  men  swimming  to
the  raft,  which  Nazerbeg  was  not  able  to  guide  against
the tyde, and they narrowly escaped drowning. His
Followers  disdaining  this  rude  dealing,  one  Master  John  Ward  shine.
Ward shot off his Pistoll in their faces, and was  [I.  iv.  531.]
instantly  slaine  by  another  shot,  and  the  rest  carryed  away
Prisoners  to  Duilsinde,  being  pillaged  by  the  way  of  the
Souldiers. After  some  time  of  imprisonment,  the  Gover-
nour permitted  their  departure  to  Tatta,  where  they  were
friendly  entertained of  the  Governour being  a  Persian.
Sir  Thomas  Powell,  and  Master  Francis  Bub,  were  then  sir  T-  Powe/s
dead  before  in  Duilsinde. He  remayned  at  Tatta  till  fit  d[aJ^nd  Ms
opportunitie  for  Agra,  the  way  long  and  in  danger  of
Theeves :  whither  he  went in company  of  a  great  man
which  had  a  strong  Convoy,  for  whom  he  waited  also  two
moneths.

The  Ladie  Powell  in  this  space  was  delivered  of  a
Sonne,  but  shee  and  it  together  with  Master  Michael
Powell,  Brother  to  Sir  Thomas,  lost  their  lives  in  this
tedious  expectation,  in  Boats,  for  that  great  man  aforesaid.
At  his  comming  to  Agra  the  Mogoll  gave  him  favourable
entertainment,  and  upon  his  complaint  sent  for  the  Banian
Governour  of  Duilsinde,  to  answere  at  the  Court,  promis-
ing him  his  owne  revenge,  if  he  would  stay.  But  hee
hasting  to  the  Persian,  after  many  Presents  from  the
Mogoll,  with  a  Convoy  and  necessaries  for  his  journey,
departed  for  Persia,  not  having  one  Englishman  with  him.
Master  Richard  Barber  his  Apothecarie  returned  to  Surat,
and  John  Heriot  dyed  at  Agra.  There  remayned  with
him  of  his  old  Followers  only  his  Ladie,  and  her  Woman,
two  Persians,  the  old  Armenian  and  the  Chircassian :  His
Dutch  Jeweller  came  from  Agra  to  Surat,  with  Master
Edwards.

[§.  n.

297

A.D.
1615.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Samorine  or
King  of
Calecut.

Crangalor  in
10.  deg.  15.
min.

Offers  of  the
Samorines  to
the  English.

§•  11.

Prizes  taken,  Factorie  at  Callicut,  Observations  of
divers  places  of  Sumatra :  the  English  shippes
miscarrie. Dutch  Abuses,  Factories  in  India.

He  nine  and  twentieth  of  February,  we  tooke  a
Portugall  prize.  The  third  of  March,  we  riding  at
an  anchor  in  the  Road  of  Callicut,  the  Great
Samorines  Deputie  came  aboord  many  Boats  attending
him,  signifying  his  Masters  joy  of  our  comming,  and  his
earnest  desire  to  have  conference  with  our  Nation,  and
therefore  earnestly  perswaded  us  to  stay  a  day  or  two,  till
he  might  send  to  the  Samorine,  then  at  Crangalor,
besieging  a  Castle  of  the  Portugals.  We  had  here  store
of  provision  brought  aboord  at  reasonable  rates.  Callicut
hath  latitude  eleven  degrees  ten  minutes,  variation  fifteene
degrees  fortie  minutes.  The  same  evening  came  a  Pilot
by  order  from  the  Samorine  to  intreate  us  to  ride  two  or
three  dayes  before  Crangalor.

The  fifth,  we  anchored  all  foure  ships  before  Crangalor,
two  leagues  from  the  shoare.  About  noone  the  Samorine
sent  to  the  Generall  to  request  his  company  ashoare,
which  was  not  thought  fit  without  a  pledge,  and  Master
George  Barkley  went.  But  the  Samorine  refused  to  re-
veale  his  minde  to  any  but  the  Generall,  and  seemed
discontent  at  his  stay.

The  eight,  he  went  and  spake  with  the  Samorine,  whose
businesse  was  to  stablish  a  Factorie  in  his  Dominion,
profering  a  faire  house  rent-free,  freedome  from  Customes
or  any  other  Taxations,  for  whatsoever  goods  brought
thither  or  carryed  thence,  with  protestation  of  his  affection
to  our  Nation.  Answere  was  made  of  our  present
disabilitie,  having  left  most  of  our  goods  at  Surat,  and
now  going  to  Bantam.  He  replyed,  that  for  present
leaving  goods  it  was  no  matter,  only  that  we  would  leave
two  or  three  English  there  which  should  want  nothing,
and  the  next  yeere  we  might  make  supply  of  men,  and

298

WALTER PAYTON  a.d.

1615.

goods,  hereby  he  being  assured  of  our  returne :  otherwise
his  care  and  hopes  should  be  frustrated.  He  told  also  of
a  shippes  lading  of  Pepper  there  to  be  had  yearely,  and  of
the  vent  of  our  Commodities.  Whereupon  it  was  con-
cluded to  leave  a  Factorie  there,  which  with  Merchandise  Factory  at
were  sent  ashoare  on  the  ninth.  The  men  were  George  Cra"Sa^r-
Woolman  chiefe,  Peter  Needham  and  Roger  Hares  under-
factors,  Edward  Peake,  a  Boy,  and  Richard  Stamford.
The  Boy  was  to  learne  the  Language.  The  Kings  name
is  Pendre  Quone  Samorine.  A  Minion  and  a  Barrell  of
Powder  was  given  him  for  a  Present.  He  promised  that
if  hee  recovered  the  fort  of  Crangalor  from  the  Portugals,
the  English  should  possesse  it.

The tenth, the King sent his Letter of  agreement
touching  the  said  Priviledges  with  many  protestations  of
love. This  day  we  set  saile. We  came  before  Cochin  Cochin.
and  might  behold  the  forme  of  it. The  next  day  we  had
sight  of  Coulan  Castle,  and  Towne,  and  a  ship  riding  at  Coulan,  a
anchor  under  the  Castle  which  we  boorded  and  brought  sec°na' Prlze
foorth,  the  people being  fled  without  hurt  of  shot  from
the Castle. It was  a Portugall ship of  foure or  five
hundred  Tunnes  lately  arrived  from  Bengala  and  Pegu,
laden  with  Rice,  Graine,  Bengala  clothing,  Butter,  Sugar,
Gummelacke,  hard  Waxe,  Drugges  and  other  provisions.

The  twelfth, we  espyed  another  ship which by mid-  4  third  prize,
night  we  fetched  up  ;  shee  yeelded  at  the  first  shot. I  sent  tn  Pai'f  °f

r 1  1  • r  1  1  i  • /  1  1 •  1  satisfaction  for

tor  her  chiefe  men  aboord  my  ship  (the  rest  being  three  the(r  un:ust
or  foure  miles  off),  and  set  some  of  mine  aboord  charging  vexation  and
them to hurt no person. There were eighteene or  hurt  at  Surat,
twentie  Portugals,  and  about  eightie  slaves,  men,  women ^c'
and children : her chiefe lading Rice, Butter, Sugar,
Gummelacke, Drugges, Bengala StufFe. Wee offered
these  our  first  price  with  victuals  to  carrie  them  ashoare,  [I.  iv.  532.]
which they refused fearing to become a prey to the
Malabars, a Fleete of  whom consisting of fourteene
saile  they  lately  had  with  difficultie  escaped. The  next
day  wee  landed  them  where they desired  and suffered
them to depart unsearched for Plate, Jewels, Money

299

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

and  the  like.  We  had  three  English  ships,  and  three
prices.

Brinion.  The  fourteenth,  we  arrived  at  Brinion  where  we  took

out  of  the  first  prize  what  we  pleased  and  set  her  a  drift.
Brinion  is  in  latitude  eight  degrees  thirtie  minutes,  varia-
tion fifteen.  It  hath  a  small  Town  in  a  little  round
Bay,  is  to  be  known  by  a  long  white  beach  to  the  North,
and  to  the  South  is  all  high  land  :  and  two  leagues  to  the
South,  a  red  ClifFe  neere  the  Sea.  From  thence  to  Cape
Camorine  is  sixteene  leagues :  the  course  South-east  by
South  bold  and  free  Coast.  The  Inhabitants  of  Brinion
are  no  way  subject  to  the  Portugals.

1 61 6.  The  first  of  April],  the  bodie  of  Zeilon  did  beare  East

by  South  seven  leagues  off.

The  tenth,  the  Pike  Adam  bare  North.  I  tooke  my
leave  of  the  Generall,  the  Dragon  and  Pepper-Corne
they  being bound for  Achen,  and  I  in the  Expedition

Note  for  Cape  for Priaman,  Tecoo, and Bantam. It is  good to ride

Comorine. ^  the  enc}  Qf  ]y[arch  in  Brinion,  and  not  to double  the

Cape  by  reason  of  calmes,  the  Southerly  Current  setting
off  to  the  Maldivae :  but  then  the  Easterly  Monson
ends.

I  would  wish  all  that  come  from  the  West  to  Priaman

or  Tecco,  to  dispose  that  they  may  have  day-light  enough

for  the  comming  in  betwixt  Nimptan  and  the  other  Hands

adjacent. The best is on the North-side. On the

The  Advice thirtieth,  I met  the  Advice  going  for  Tecoo,  but  at  my

xs  Hosiander  reqUest  ^qq  returned to Bantam  whence  she  was  sent

at  Japon.  r t

tor  Japon.

The  first  of  May,  I  arrived  at  Bantam,  where  I  found
the  Hosiander  newly  returned  from  Japon,  and  the
Attendance  from  Jambe,  most  of  the  men  sicke  or
dead.  Here  I  heard  of  the  death  of  Captaine  Downton,
and  of  the  arrivall  of  Captaine  Samuel  Castleton  with
the  Clove  and  Defence,  which  with  the  Thomas  and
Concord  were  gone  for  the  Moluccas :  The  Thomas
appointed  to  proceed  from  thence  to  Japon.

The nineteenth,  I set saile for Tecoo. The tenth

300

WALTER PAYTON  ad.

1616.
of  June,  I  put  into  Priaman,  and  the  eighteenth  arrived
at  Tecoo.  The  third  of  July,  I  brought  my  ship  on
Careene  to  sheath  her.  The  double  sheathing  of  ships
which  goe  for  Surat  is  of  great  purpose :  for  though
the  outermost  sheathing  be  eaten  like  a  Honey-combe
with  wormes,  yet  the  inner  is  nothing  perished.  It  were
also  requisite  that  the  Rudders  were  sheathed  with  thinne
Copper,  to  prevent  the  Wormes  eating  off  the  edges  Strange
thereof;  which  causeth  great  defect  in  the  steering,  not  ™orme\ ' ln  tfie
easily  to  bee  remedied  being  so  deepe  under  water.  The
Inhabitants  here  are  barbarous,  deceitfull,  expecting
bribes,  and  sometimes  I  have  beene  in  danger  to  be
murthered,  one  hundred  of  them  drawing  their  Crises
upon  us,  because  they  might  not  have  their  will  to  take
our  goods  upon  trust  or  otherwise  at  their  pleasures.
The  twentieth,  Thomas  Bonner  Master  of  the  Expedition
dyed,  John  Row  succeeded,  the  third  Master  in  this  ship
this  Voyage.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  arrived  the  Dragon  and  Pepper-
Corne  from  Achen.  They  had  bought  there  Pepper
carryed  thither  from  Tecoo  in  great  Junckes  and  Prawes
which  saile  to  and  fro,  but  never  out  of  sight  of  land.

The  King  of  Achen  commands  those  of  Tecoo  to  King  of  'Achen
bring  thither  their  Pepper,  which  none  may  buy  but  he,  h}i^mg  the
who  puts  off  his  Surat  Commodities  in  trucke  at  what
rates  he  pleaseth.  Oft  times  he  sends  his  Commodities
to  Priaman  and  Tecoo,  enforcing  them  to  buy  them
at  his  rates,  none  being  suffered  to  buy  or  sell  with  other
till  his  bee  vented :  This  makes  our  trade  with  them
the  better.

Jambe  is  on  the  East-side  of  Sumatra.  It  yeeldeth  Jamie.
like  great-grained  Pepper  as  Priaman,  but  is  not  subject
to  the  King  of  Achen,  as  are  Baruse,  Passaman,  Tecoo,
Priaman,  Cottatinga,  and  other  places  on  the  West-side.
Baruse  is  to  the  North  of  Passaman,  and  yeelds  store
of  Benjamin,  Cottatinga  Gold,  the  other  places  Pepper.
The  Generall  brought  the  King  of  Achens  Letter  to
them  which  the  great  men  received  with  great  submission,

301

A.D.
l6l6.

Passaman  best
Gold  and
Pepper.
Gold,  and  good
constitution  of
bodie  or  mind,
not  agreeing.

Tecoo  bar-
barous.

[I-  iv.  533.]
Observations
for  going  into
PriamanRoad.
Hee  men-
tioned many
other  shoalds
not  heere
expressed,  but
knowne  to  our
Country  men
by  experience.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

each  kissing  and  laying  it  on  his  head,  promising  us  to
performe  the  contents,  but  failed.  And  it  were  fit  in
these  Letters  of  the  King,  to  procure  him  to  expresse
the  manner  and  particulars  of  our  Trade.  The  eleventh
of  September,  I  set  saile  from  Tecoo  for  Bantam.

The  best  Gold  and  most  plenty  is  had  at  the  great
high  hill  of  Passamam,  where  also  is  greatest  quantitie  of
Pepper,  the  fairest  and  best  cheape :  but  the  evill  con-
stitution of  the  aire  is  so  pestilent  and  infectious,  that
there  is  no  going  thither  for  our  Nation  without  mortalitie
of  men :  neither  needs  for  the  Pepper,  Surat  Commodities
at  Tecoo  being  sufficient  attractive.  Many  of  the  Natives
I  have  observed  full  of  contagious  diseases,  the  limbes
of  some  ready  to  droppe  off  with  rottennesse,  others
having  huge  swellings  (Wennes)  under  their  throat  as
bigge  as  a  two  peny  loafe,  which  they  impute  to  the  bad
water.  They  are  very  ignorant  to  cure  their  diseases.
The  people  of  Tecoo  are  base,  theevish,  subtill,  embracing
gaine  at  any  price  by  fraud,  or  (as  farre  as  they  dare)  by
force,  mis-reckoning,  false  weights,  yea  attempting  to
poison  our  meates  and  drinkes  as  they  are  dressing,
creesing  also  our  horses.  Better  order  may  be  hoped
by  the  King  of  Achens  procurement.  There  were  but
five  left  in  the  Factory.  Our  two  Portugall  prizes  wee
made  away  at  Achen,  sharing  (according  to  the  custome
of  the  sea)  one  sixt  part  to  the  shippes  companies,  the
rest  for  our  employers,  &c.

Betwixt  Priaman  and  Tecoo  there  lyeth  a  dangerous
shoald  North-west  by  West,  from  the  South-west  He  of
Priaman,  a  mile  and  a  quarter  in  length,  and  in  breadth  a
quarter,  of  which  care  is  to  be  had,  lest  the  Current
setting  Southerly  put  you  on  it.  This  and  other  shoalds
hereabouts  being  white  Corall,  are  easily  discerned.
When  the  South-west  He  doth  beare  South  South-east
from  you,  then  are  you  past  danger,  provided  the  Norther-
most  He  of  the  foure  by  Priaman  shoare  beare  East  by
North,  so  may  you  steere  in  for  the  Road,  East,  and
East  by  South,  and  East  South-east,  leaving  two  Hands

302

WALTER  PAYTON  ad.

1616.

on  the  Starboord,  and  two  on  the  Larboord  side.
Latitude  of  Tecoo  is  South  thirtie  minutes,  variation
West  foure  degrees,  thirty  minutes  :  latitude  of  Priaman
is  also  South  betwixt  eight  and  forty  degrees,  fifty
minutes.

Many  of  our  men  were  sicke,  whereof  the  cause
seemeth  their  immoderate  drinking  of  Arack  and  strong
drinkes.  At  Bantam  were  at  my  last  being  there
(October  1616.)  foure  English  ships  there  and  at  Jacka-
tra,  and  five  Flemmish  ships,  which  raised  the  price  of
Pepper,  and  the  rather  by  the  Hollanders  boasts  of  bring-  Huge  summes
ing  this  yeare  sixteene  hundred  thousand  Rialls  of  eight,  t™nsPorted  h
readie  money,  which  it  is  likely  they  reported  to  out-
brave our  Nation.  The  last  Fleet  of  theirs,  sixe  in  Their  pride
number,  tooke  two  or  three  Portugal!  ships,  whereof  they  ar'h  t. \  f-*^
made  great  bravado's.  They  seeke  by  all  abuses  to
depresse  our  Nation,  in  unchristian  manner  through  the
Indies  :  even  in  Bantam  (where  they  acknowledge  our
equall  right)  they  threaten  to  pull  our  people  out  of  the
Factory  by  the  eares  ;  sometime  quarrell  with  them  in
the  streets,  other  times  imprison  them  ;  and  when  them-
selves have  caused  an  uproare,  they  complaine  to  the
King  of  Bantam  of  our  unquietnesse,  and  bribe  him
to  command  us  to  be  quiet,  who  receiveth  their  money,
and  tells  us  of  their  dealing,  himselfe  taking  advantage
to  pole  both  parts,  by  this  disagreement.

Also  at  Puloway,  an  Hand  freely  given  his  Majestie,  Insolencies  at
they  abused  our  people,  putting  halters  about  their  Pulozoay-
neckes,  and  leading  them  thorow  the  Towne  with  an
houre-glasse  before  them,  publishing  that  they  should  be
hanged  so  soone  as  the  glasse  was  runne  :  and  although
they  did  not  effect  that  honorable  designe,  yet  did  they
imprison  them,  and  keepe  them  three  or  foure  dayes  in
irons,  afterwards  sending  them  aboord  the  Concord  and
Thomasine  upon  a  counterfeit  composition  never  to  re-
turne  (these  things  are  reported  to  bee  very  true.)
Likewise  at  the  returne  of  the  Hosiander  from  Japan,
shee  brought  thirtie  tunnes  of  wood,  free  of  fraight  and

3°3

A.D.
l6l6.

Captaine
Castleton  to
the  Moluccas
with  four e
ships.

Decay  or  losse

of  English

ships.

Trades

Increase.

Darling.

Thomasine.

Hector.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

charges,  for  the  Hollanders ;  who  notwithstanding  re-
ported that  shee  had  returned  empty  but  for  their  wood  :
which  they  might  have  said  as  well  of  my  bringing  one
and  thirtie  Churles  of  Indico,  and  a  Chist  of  Pistolls
fraight-free  for  them  from  Surat  to  Bantam.

Captaine  Castleton  went  to  the  Moluccas  with  foure
ships,  the  Cloave,  Defence,  Thomas  and  Concord,  to  be
better  able  to  defend  themselves  against  the  Hollanders  :
but  being  threatned  by  eleven  saile  of  theirs,  they  re-
turned without  doing  any  great  matter,  onely  a  few
Cloaves  laded  in  the  Cloave  :  the  Captaine  himselfe  dying
there  of  the  fluxe,  to  whom  the  fault  is  imputed  with
other  things  laid  to  him.

The  Trades-Increase  was  fired  twice  by  the  Javans,
and  by  our  people  quenched  :  but  the  third  time  fired
in  so  many  places  at  once,  that  industry  could  not  save
her.

The  Darling  (that  I  may  adde  such  ships  as  were  lost
and  laid  up  at  my  departure  from  Bantam)  was  laid  up
at  Patania,  in  June  161 5.  by  Master  Larkine  and  the
Factory,  and  could  not  be  repaired  :  Herrold  the  Master
was  reported  to  have  intended  to  runne  away  with  her
to  the  Portugals,  which  being  prevented,  he  yet  went
himselfe.

The  Thomasine  was  cast  away,  comming  from  the
Moluccas,  upon  a  shoald  in  the  night,  in  September
1 61 5.  they  lost  their  goods,  which  were  not  much,  but
saved  their  money,  two  thousand  Rialls  of  eight,  with
their  provisions,  living  fourteene  dayes  in  a  desolate
Hand,  where  they  fitted  their  Boat,  which  brought  them
and  their  money  to  Bantam,  leaving  the  rest  behind  ;  the
King  of  Macasser  seizing  on  them,  who  would  not  make
restitution.  This  shoald  lyeth  eighteene  leagues  West
from  Macasser.

The  Hector  failed  at  Jacatra  in  careening,  the  upper
workes  not  fitted  (as  is  reported)  and  the  seames  open-
ing, and  receiving  so  much  water,  that  shee  suncke  in
three  fathom,  the  keele  exceedingly  worme-eaten.

3°4

WALTER  PAYTON  a.d.

1616.

The  Concord  is  there  also  laid  up,  rotten  and  leake,  Concord.
that  they  were  forced  to  take  out  her  provisions,  and  let
her  sinke  close  to  the  shoare.

The Hosiander was appointed to set saile for the
Coast  of  Coromandel,  the  fifteenth  of  October, 1616.

The  Factories  which  I  could  heare  of  setled  for  the  English
Company  in  the  East-Indies  are  these  :  Bantam  (wherein  factories.
were  George  Barkley  Chiefe,  John  Jordan,  George  Ball,
Ralph  Copendale,  with  divers  others  both  Factors  and
Attendants)  Jacatra,  Surat,  Amadavas,  Agra  and  Azmiro,
Brampore,  Calecut,  Masulipatan,  Petapoli,  Patania,  Siam,
Beniarmasse,  Socodania,  Macasser,  Achen,  Jambe,  Tecoo,
Ferando  in  Japan,  Japar,  Banda.

The commodity which ariseth from the Factory  at

Achen  is  to  sollicite  for  our  better  proceeding  at  Pria-

man  and  Tecoo,  the  place  is  unholesome,  especially  for

such  as  stuffe  themselves  with  hot  and  fiery  drinkes,  as

Aracke  and  Aracape, which  bring  many  unto  untimely  Arackeawine

ends; whence ariseth an imputation to the Voyage,  dtstilled  out  of
tt  1 -_i  ..  i_ j  \_ l Ricesteepedin

riow  unruly the common sort are  abroad, cannot be  % t^en

imagined  at  home,  many  never  thinking  themselves  well,  out  of  the
longer  then  whiles  their  braines  are  a  crowing  with  drinke. Coco-tree.
The  King of  Achen is said to have a strange straine  \1\  1V-  534-]
of  drinking drunke,  when the English resort  to him, in^
thereby  to  shew  his  love  ;  to  whom  it  seemeth  dishonour,
not  to conforme  in  sitting in the  water  with  him,  and
other  his  rites. He  is  very  cruell  to  his  subjects,  daily
cutting  off  their  hands,  armes or  legges,  upon  small  or
no occasions  ; causing them to bee throwne before
Elephants, himselfe commanding the (understanding)
Elephant  to  tosse  the partie  so  oft  and  so  high,  either
to  bruise  or  kill  him,  as  he  fancieth. He  hath  prohibited
any,  which  arrive  at  his  Port,  without  his  Chop  to  come
on  shoare,  which  a  Dutch Merchant  neglecting,  caused
a  Dutch  General  there  arriving  to  come  on  land,  profess-
ing his  great  favour  with  the King  : who  comming  to
the  Court-gate,  where  they  must  demand  another  Chop  :
the  King  finding  the  chieefe Leeger  cause  of  that  pre-
iv  305  u

A.D.

l6l6.

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

sumption,  sent  for  him,  and  laid  him  before  the  Elephant,
which  tossed  him  three  times  (without  much  bruising)
to  teach  him  how  to  neglect  the  commands  of  Kings
another  time ;  the  Dutch  Generall  standing  by,  and
fearing  his  owne  share,  whom  yet  the  King  cleared  as
Cause  ofdis-  ignorant  of  his  Law.  The  King  after  sent  for  the  Mer-
chant to  prie  into  his  patience,  who  for  feare  of  worse,
soothed  him,  and  acknowledged  it  a  fatherly  chastisement,
yet  closely  fled  at  the  departure  of  the  ships  ;  the  rest
following  were  brought  backe,  and  the  King  hath  placed
us  in  their  house.

gust  betwixt
the  Achener
and  Hollan-
der.

Places  ofPor-
tugall  trade.
Quame  or
Cuamo.

Mosambique.
Mombassa.

Magadoxa.

The  Monsons
course.

§.  in.

A  briefe  Declaration  of  the  Ports,  Cities  and
Townes,  inhabited  and  traded  unto  by  the
Portugall,  betwixt  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope
and  Japan,  as  I  could  learne  by  diligent  en-
quiry.

He  River  Quame  in  South  latitude  one  and  twenty
degrees,  fifty  minutes,  heere  is  reported  to  be  Gold,
Elephants-teeth,  Ambergreese  and  Slaves,  for  which
they  trade  yearely.

Mosambique  is  an  Hand  where  they  trade  for  Gold,
Ambergreese  and  Slaves.

Mombassa  in  South  latitude  three  degrees,  thirty
minutes,  where  they  yearely  trade  for  Gold,  Ambergreese,
Elephants-teeth,  and  Slaves,  in  trucke  of  Iron,  Lead,
Tinne,  and  Cambaya  Commodities.

Magadoxo  hath  two  degrees,  five  and  twenty  minutes,
store  of  Elephants-teeth,  some  Ambergreese,  and  divers
sorts  of  Drugges.  From  these  places  they  drive  their
annuall  trade  into  Cambaya,  the  Red-sea,  and  other
places,  observing  the  Monsons,  which  blow  West  in
Aprill,  May,  June,  July,  August,  and  part  of  September,
and  the  East  Monson  the  rest  of  the  yeare,  the  space
betwixt  both,  being  various  or  calme,  but  in  few  dayes

306

WALTER  PAYTON  ad.

1616.

hold  course,  except  to  the  East  of  Sumatra,  where  they
keepe  five  moneths  East,  and  five  West,  two  variable.

Ormus  in  the  Gulfe  of  Persia,  whence  they  trade  into  Ormus.
Persia,  Arabia,  Diulsinde,  &c.  they  fetch  much  Pearle
from  Balsora,  and  with  Persian  Commodities  lade  a  shippe
or  two  for  Diulsinde,  where  in  the  end  of  August,  or
middle  of  September  they  arrive ;  they  bring  with  them
also  great  store  of  Rialls  of  eight.  Ormus  is  their  best
place,  but  Goa,  which  they  have  in  the  Indies.

Muskat : they  have small  trade  heere,  and  a  Fort,  Muskat.
where  they  awe  the  Natives  by  land  and  sea,  not  suffer-
ing them  to  trade  but  by  their  licence,  what,  and  how
much, under  paine of  confiscation,  which they  practise
thorow  all  the  Indies,  where  they  are  strong.

Sinde  or  Duilsinde,  in  the  Mogolls  Dominion,  in  foure  Sinde.
and  twenty  degrees,  eight  and  thirty  minutes  :  variation
West,  sixe  degrees,  five  and  forty  minutes. Diu,  where  Diu.
they  have  a  strong  Castle.

Damon is a Citie inhabited by them, where they  Damon.
have  a  Castle,  and  by  report  one  hundred  Villages.

Serra  de  Bazien,  is  a  little South  from  Damon,  and &erra  de
bordereth upon the Decans Countrey, betwixt which azten-
and  Chaul  they have three Ports, Gazien,  Banda and  chaul.
Maia. Chaul  is  a  great  Citie  with  a  Castle. Dobul  hath  Dabul.
a  Factory,  but  no  Fort.

Goa  is  their  Metropolitan Citie of  India,  built  on  a  Goa.
small  Hand,  the  anchoring  place  of  their  Carickes,  the
Seat  of  their  Vice-Roy.

Onor  hath  a  small  Fort. Barcolor  hath  a  Castle  and  Onor.
Towne,  it  yeeldeth  Pepper,  Ginger,  and  many  sorts  of  Barcolor-
Drugges.

Mangalor  hath a Towne and Castle. Cananor  is  a  Manga/or.
Citie,  and  hath  a  Castle,  Merchandize  as  before. From  Camnor-
Calicut  they  are  thrust  out  by  the  Samorine,  as  he  seeketh
also  at  Crangalor,  where  they  have  a  Fort.  Crangalor.

Cochin hath a strong City and Castle, pleasantly  Cochin.
situated  by the Sea side  in a  good ayre, with a faire
River  for  ships  to  ride.

307

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.
[I.  iv.  535.] Cowlan,  heere  they  have  a  Towne  and strong  Castle.
Cozolan.  Saint  Laurence  is  a  small  Village,  inhabited  by  Friers  and

Laurence. Jesuits.

Quilaon.  Quilaon,  is  a  small  Citie  with  a  Castle. Tuckatra,  a

Tuckatra. Towne  with  a  Castle,  the  people  most  part  Christians.
Maner.  Maner,  is  on  the  Hand  Zelon,  betwixt  Cape  Comorine

and  Punto  de  Galle,  a  Towne  inhabited  by  Portugals.
Cohmbo. There  also they  have  Columbo,  and  many  other  small

habitations,  having  almost  conquered  the  Hand :  it  yeelds

Sinamom  and  Drugges.
Negapatan.  Negapatan,  is  a  City  of  great  trade:  heere  they  have

Saint  Thomas,  only  a  Factory. Saint  Thomas,  alias  Maliapor,  is  a  walled

City, inhabited with Portugalls, in thirteene degrees,
Ganges.  twenty minutes. Up the River Ganges, they have

many small habitations, some Factories, and a Towne

at  Bengala.

PeStt-  In  Pegu,  they  have  a  Factory,  and  likewise  in  Aracon,

Aracon.  and  jn  the  Riyer  of  jyjartaban.

Junsalao.  At  Junsalao,  they  have  a  great  Factory,  from  whence

they  lade  much  Tinne  for  the  Coast  of  Malabar.

Malacca.  Malacca,  is  a  strong  city  and  castle,  the  Centre  of  a

great  trade  in  those  parts,  whence  the  King  of  Achen
seekes  to  roote  them  out,  having  burnt  and  spoiled  some
of  their  ships  this  yeare.

At  Macao,  an  Hand  upon  the  Coast  of  China,  they  have
a  Citie  with  a  Castle,  reported  to  be  of  great  trade  with
the  Chineses.

Japan.  In  Japan,  they  have  a  Factory,  but  neither  Towne  nor

Fort.  They  trade  also  on  the  Coast  of  China,  in  the  time
of  fitting  Monson  to  and  from  Japan  and  other  parts  :
whereof  the  Hollanders  are  said  to  make  good  pillage,
and  of  all  Heathen  Nations,  Chineses  and  others,  being
all  fish  that  comes  to  net.

The  first  of  November,  we  set  saile.  The  fifth  of
January,  I  was  not  able  to  weigh  the  anchor  (the  wind
over-blowing)  to  follow  the  Dragon  to  Pengwin  Hand.
My  advise  for  ships  comming  about  the  Cape  at  this  time
of  the  yeare,  is,  not  to  anchor  short  of  Soldania  Road,

3°8

WALTER PAYTON  ad.

1617.

but  rather  to  put  romer  for  Pengwin  Hand,  and  there  to
anchor  with  two  at  once  till  the  wind  serve.

In  December,  January  and  February,  the  South  South-  Note.
east  winds  are  there  very  furious,  from  the  new  Moone
to  the  ful.  I  hold  it  dangerous  neverthelesse  to  neglect
this  place  in  hope  of  Saint  Helena  (a  certainty  for  un-
certainty) the  Sunnes  and  Moones  often  obscuritie  and
thicke  mists  at  this  time  of  the  yeare,  may  frustrate  the
best  Artists  to  the  losse  of  shippe  and  men.  Cory  came
downe  with  three  sheepe,  and  promised  more :  but  hasted
away  to  his  wife  and  children,  which  he  said  now  dwelt,
further.  It  seemeth  that  the  Hollanders  have  frighted
them,  by  their  going  up  into  the  Countrey  with  one
hundred  men  at  a  time.  Our  best  refreshing  heere  was
fresh-fish.

The  ninth  of  Aprill  1617.  wee  passed  much  weeds,
called  the  Seragasso,  which  lye  in  long  ridges  or  rankes  a  Seragasso.
pretty  distance  one  from  another  alongst  with  the  wind,
with  which  they  alter  and  shift.  It  hath  a  leafe  like
Samper,  but  not  so  thicke,  and  a  yellow  berry  very  small.
It  reacheth  from  two  and  twenty  degrees,  three  minutes
North  latitude,  unto  two  and  thirty  degrees  North  lati-
tude. The  nine  and  twentieth  of  May  we  anchored  in
the  Downes.

[Chap.  XVI.
3°9

A.D.
1615.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Uncertainty  of
the  Variation.

Chap.  XVI.

Observations  collected  out  of  the  Journall  of  Sir
Thomas  Roe,  Knight,  Lord  Embassadour  from
His  Majestie  of  Great  Britaine,  to  the  Great
Mogol :  Of  matters  occurring  worthy  memory
in  the  way,  and  in  the  Mogols  Court.  His
Customes,  Cities,  Countryes,  Subjects,  and
other Indian  Affaires.

i  1.

Occurrents  and  observations,  in,  and  touching
the  Voyage to  Surat.

He  fifth  of  June,  we  anchored  in  the  roade
of  Soldania.  Though  the  Variation  be
an  excellent  evidence  in  the  whole  course
of  veering  land,  yet  it  delivereth  no  other
certaintie,  but  warning  to  look  out ;  for
it  lessens  not  in  the  same  proportion
neere  land,  but  by  a  much  slower :  for
which  I  could  give  a  perspicuous  reason,  but  too  large
for  this  place,  nor  can  any  judgement  at  all  be  made  to
twenty  leagues  thereby  (that  shall  be  infallible)  the  mag-
neticall  amplitude  beeing  so  difficult  to  observe  truely  by
the  Ships  motion,  and  the  Needles  quicknesse,  that  a
degree  is  scarce  an  error.  This  consideration  made  me
confident,  that  we  should  see  no  land  untill  the  fifth  day
early  in  the  morning.
Soldania.  Soldania,  is  as  I  suppose,  an  Hand  in  the  South  end

[I.  iv.  536.]  whereof  is  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  divided  from  the
maine  by  a  deepe  Bay  on  the  South-East  side,  and  due
East  by  a  River,  which  wee  discerne  upon  the  table.
The  land  is  fruitfull,  bearing  short  thicke  grasse,  the
maine  is  divided  with  most  high  and  steepe  rocky  Moun-
taines  covered  with  snow,  and  unaccessible,  except  it  be

310

SIR  THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1615.

searched  by  the  River  of  Dulce,  which  doubtlesse  is  very-
great,  falling  into  the  Bay  on  the  East  side :  there  is  on
the  Hand  five  or  sixe  hundred  people,  the  most  barbarous
in  the  world,  eating  Carrion,  wearing  the  guts  of  sheepe
about  their  necks  for  health,  and  rubbing  their  heads
(curled  like  Negroes)  with  dung  of  beasts  and  durt :  they
have  no  other  clothing  then  beasts  skinnes  wrapt  on  their
shoulders,  the  skin  next  the  body  in  heat,  in  cold  the
hairy  side ;  their  houses  are  but  one  mat,  concaved  like
an  Oven,  into  which  they  creepe,  and  turne  them  about
as  the  wind  changes :  for  they  have  no  doores  to  keepe  it
out.  They  have  left  their  stealing  by  trading  with  us,
and  by  signes  make  shew  their  heart  is  good :  they  know
no  kind  of  God  or  Religion.  The  aire,  and  water  is  very
good  and  wholesome,  and  both  of  them  subtile  and  search-
ing. There  is  on  the  Hand,  Buls,  Cowes,  Antelops,
Baboones,  Moules  of  great  bignesse,  Feasants,  Partridges,
Larks,  Wild-geese,  Ducks,  Passerflannugos,  and  many
others.  On  Pengwin  there  is  a  fowle  so  called,  that  goes  Pengwin
upright,  his  wings  without  feathers,  hanging  downe  like
sleeves  faced  with  white  :  they  fly  not,  but  walke  in
pathes  and  keep  their  divisions  and  quarters  orderly;
they  are  a  strange  fowle,  or  rather  a  miscellaneous  crea-
ture, of  Beast,  Bird,  and  Fish,  but  most  of  Bird,  con-
futing that  definition  of  man  to  be  Animal  bipes  implume,
which  is  nearer  to  a  description  of  this  creature.  The
commodities  here  are,  first  reasonable  refreshing  with
Cattell  (so  that  a  season  be  chosen  when  they  are  not
leane,  a  Moneth  after  the  Sunne  is  departed  from  them
Northward)  Maugin  rootes,  Arras,  if  our  Merchants  be
not  deceived ;  and  I  doe  strongly  suppose,  that  I  found
out  a  Rocke  yeelding  Quick-silver  and  Vermillion,  the
stone  being  spotted  all  without,  with  a  most  pure  red
colour,  equall  to  any  painting,  and  that  will  come  off"
upon  Paper,  or  other  fit  matter :  by  the  description  of
John  Acosta  it  cannot  faile  to  be  the  same ;  it  is  also  very
heavy,  full  of  Marquisat  and  minerall  appearances.  The  The  height  of
Table, or high Rocke so called, by a straight line  the  Table.

3"

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

from  the  water  side,  is  11853  foot  high:  the  Bay  is  full
of  Whales  and  Seales.  The  Dutch  have  fished  on  Peng-
win  for  them :  the  latitude  is,  thirtie  three  degrees  fortie
five  minutes:  the  longitude  twentie  eight  degrees  thirtie
minutes  from  the  Lisard,  the  variation  doubtfull,  whether
to  the  East  or  West ;  but  my  opinion  is,  that  the  varia-
tion is  West  thirty  minutes  :  the  cause  of  variation
beeing  in  the  maine,  as  appeares  evidently  by  the  many
lines,  and  changes  towards  the  Cape  F.  and  after  Westerly:
if  any  shipping,  having  time  enough,  fall  but  one  hundred
leagues  more  to  the  North  with  the  maine,  which  may  be
done  with  safety,  no  winds  forbidding  it,  I  assure  my  selfe
they  shall  have  good  trade  for  Cattell,  and  other  Com-
modities, and  may  by  leaving  some  men  discover  the
land,  and  perhaps  get  knowledge  of  the  people  that  trade
with  the  Spaniards  on  the  East  side  in  one  and  twenty
degrees  for  Gold,  after  the  manner  of  the  Moores  in
Barbary  to  Gago.  These  left  at  the  Cape  will  goe  no
further,  but  attend  opportunity  of  passage,  and  there  can
doe  no  great  good  being  among  the  basest  banished
people,  that  know  nothing  savouring  of  man,  nor  are
no  other  way  men,  but  as  they  speake  and  walke  like
men.

Molalia.  Molalia  is  one  of  the  foure  Hands  of  Comory,  Anga-

zesia,  Juanny,  and  Mayotta  beeing  the  other  three.
They  lie  East  and  West  neere  in  a  parallel  one  off
another,  except  Angazesia,  which  lieth  somewhat  more
North.  Molalia  is  in  twelve  degrees  twentie  minutes
South  latitude,  in  the  same  Meridian  with  Cape  Augus-
tine, the  variation  being  sixteene  degrees  fortie  minutes.

Angazesia.  Angazesia  beares  from  it  by  the  Compasse  North  by
West,  seven  leagues  off",  the  further-most  end  in  eleven
degrees  fiftie  five  minutes,  extending  it  selfe  North  eleven
degrees  sixe  minutes,  as  I  observed  within  five  leagues
thereof,  bearing  South  from  me ;  it  is  the  highest  land  I
ever  saw,  inhabited  by  Moores  trading  with  the  Maine,
and  the  other  three  Easterne  Hands  with  their  Cattell  and
fruits,  for  Callicoes,  or  other  linnen  to  cover  them. It  is

312

SIR  THOMAS ROE  ad.

1615.
governed  by  tenne  petty  Kings,  and  is  sufficiently  fruit-
full  of  Kine,  faire  Goates,  Cocos,  Orenges  and  Limons :
they  made  us  fires  as  we  passed  by,  being  desirous  of
trade  at  the  first  hand  which  now  they  fetch  by  Canoes  at
Molalia  where  our  ships  ride.  They  are  held  a  false
and  an  unfaithfull  people,  having  betraied  some  of  Sir
James  Lancasters  men  long  since ;  but  now  having  ex-
perience of  us  at  other  Hands,  I  doubt  not  they  would
regaine  their  credits.

Juanny  lies  from  Molalia  East,  and  Mayotta  in  the  Juanny,  and
same  course,  the  coast  betweene  them  is  every  way  bold.  Mayotta-
These  three  Islands  are  very  full  of  very  good  refreshings,
but  principally  Mayotta,  as  I  was  informed  by  the  Arabs
trading  in  Molalia,  and  the  Dutch  stop  there.  The  next
in  goodnesse  is  Juanny,  where  lives  an  old  Woman  Sul-
tannesse  of  them  all,  to  whom  they  repaire  for  Justice,
both  in  Civill  and  Criminall  causes.

Molalia  hath  in  it  three  Sub-Sultans,  children  of  the  The  governe-
old  woman,  two  men  one  daughter,  who  governe  severall  *!!%"/ r
parts  of  the  Hand.  The  Sultan  in  whose  quarter  we
anchored  hath  such  authoritie,  that  his  subjects  dare  not
sell  a  Nut  untill  leave  obtained :  to  which  end,  Captaine
Keeling  sent  foure  boats  to  his  Towne  desiring  libertie  to
trade,  where  they  were  received  by  a  Governour,  or  rather
an  Admirall  or  Commander  of  the  port,  lying  some  foure
leagues  to  the  Eastward  of  our  Road,  where  having
obtained  leave  to  come  ashoare,  we  landed  some  fortie
men  with  Captaine  Newport :  the  Governour  they  found
sitting  upon  a  Mat  of  straw,  under  the  side  of  a  Junke  [I.  iv.  537.]
which  was  a  building,  accompanied  with  about  fiftie  men,
his  apparrell  was  a  Mantle  of  blue  and  red  linnen,  wrapt
about  him  to  his  knees,  his  legges  and  feet  bare,  on  his
head  a  close  Cap  of  checker  worke,  the  Interpreters
were  certaine  Magadoxians,  that  spake  Arabique  and
broken  Portuguise.  Captain  Newport  presenting  him
with  a  Peece  and  a  Sword  blade  from  Capt.  Keeling,
received  a  welcome,  and  commanded  foure  Bullocks  to  be
returned  in  requitall,  and  with  gravitie  enough  intertained

3*3

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

them,  giving  free  libertie  to  buy  and  sell,  and  signifying
so  much  by  a  Messenger  to  the  Inhabitants  round  about,
and  promised  to  send  downe  his  owne  Cattell,  but  pro-
fessed he  had  no  power  to  compell  or  make  price  for
others,  but  left  the  trade  open  to  every  mans  will.  He
sent  for  Coco  Nuts  to  give  the  Company,  himselfe  chew-
ing Bittle,  and  lime  of  Burnt  Oyster-shels  with  a  kernell
of  a  Nut  called  Arracca,  like  an  akorne,  it  bites  in  the
mouth,  avoids  rheume,  cooles  the  head,  strengthens  the
teeth,  and  is  all  their  Phisick :  it  makes  one  unused  to  it
giddie,  and  makes  a  mans  spittle  red,  and  in  time  colours
the  teeth,  which  is  esteemed  a  beautie  :  this  is  used  by  all
men  hourely.  From  the  Governour  they  were  led  to  a
Carpenters  house,  a  chiefe  man  of  that  towne ;  the  house
built  of  lime  and  stone,  plaistered  with  mortar  or  white
lime,  low  and  little  Rooft,  with  Rafters  of  wood  covered
with  leaves,  the  out-sides  walled  with  Canes :  they  are
kept  cleanely,  and  their  poore  houshold-stuffe  still  neate,
their  Gardens  paled  with  Canes,  inclosing  some  Tobacco,
and  Plantan  trees.  For  Dinner,  a  boord  was  set  upon
Tressels  covered  with  a  fine  new  Mat,  benches  of  stone
about  it  likewise  covered,  on  which  they  sat :  first  water
was  brought  to  every  man  in  a  Coco-shell  poured  out  into
a  wooden  platter,  and  instead  of  a  Towell,  the  rinds  of
Cocos.  Then  was  set  boyld  Rice,  and  roasted  Plantans
upon  the  Rice,  quarters  of  Hennes,  and  pieces  of  Goat
broild.  After  grace  said,  they  fell  to  their  meat,  with
bread  made  of  Cuscus  beaten,  and  mingled  with  honey,
and  so  fryed,  and  Palmet  wine,  and  Coco  milke  for
drinke.  I  sent  a  Gentleman  and  my  Chaplin  to  see  the
Sultan  himselfe,  who  lives  three  miles  up  in  the  land  from
Fambone  the  towne  of  the  Governour,  but  they  found
him  by  chance  there  :  he  used  them  courteously  and
made  them  dine  with  him,  differing  little  from  the  former
intertainement,  only  the  Governour  and  all  other  gave
him  much  respect,  kissing  his  hand,  his  name  is  Sultan
Amar-Adel,  a  kinne  to  Mahomet,  not  unlike  to  be  de-
scended  of  such an imposterous race, his  clothes not

3*4

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1615.

unlike  the Governour, but somewhat better  stuffe, his

manners differing  much,  beeing  with  lesse  gravitie  and

State, somewhat a light  foole, and very hastie to be

drunke with wine carried by  the  English. The  other

Vice-Sultan  his  brother,  in  whose  quarter  we  were  not,  I

saw beeing  come  downe  to  our  Road with three  slaves

to  trade :  he  brought  a  Certificate  from  Captaine  Sayers,

that  he  had  used  the  English  well  in  his  Dominions,  he  is

as  well  XerifFe  as  Sultan,  which  is  high  Priest : he  kept  a

kind  of  State  in  place,  but  otherwise a  poore  bare-footed

roague :  he  offered  to  trade  for  Quick-silver,  and  beeing

asked  what quantitie hee would buy,  replyed to foure

or  five  Rialls  of  eight,  when  this  merchandize  failed  him,

hee  fell  to  begging  of  shooes. Then  I  left  him.

All  the  people  are  strict  Mahometans,  observing  much
of  the  old  law,  and  at  this  time  being  the  preparation
to  their  Randam  or  Lent,  unwilling  to  drinke  wine :  they
are  very  jealous  to  let  the  Women  or  Moschees  to  be
seene,  of  which  we  had  experience  by  an  alarme  of  one  of
their  Priests,  who  espied  one  of  ours  comming  to  a
Village,  who  shut  up  all  the  Women,  and  cryed  out  if
we  came  neere  them  or  their  Church,  they  would  kill
us ;  but  by  the  authoritie  of  the  XerifFe,  the  Priest  was
appeased,  and  suffered  it  with  more  patience.  Many  of
them  speake  and  write  the  Arabique  in  a  faire  Character,
and  some  few  Portiguise,  trading  to  Mosambique  in
Junkes  of  fortie  Tunnes  made  of  Cocos  sowed,  in  stead  of
Pinnes  caucked,  tackled,  and  wholly  fitted,  victualed,  and
fraughted  with  that  universall  tree.

Here  our  fleet  refreshed  with  Oxen  and  Cowes,  small
as  two  yeereling,  but  good  flesh,  with  Goats  very  fat  and
large,  Arabian  sheepe,  Hennes,  Cocos,  Orenges,  Limons,
Limes  in  great  abundance,  which  we  bought  for  Callicoes,
Hollands,  or  other  linnens,  Sword-blades,  and  Rialls  of
eight,  and  their  fruits  for  Glasses,  Knives  and  trifles  :
whatsoever  is  bought  for  money  is  bought  dearest.

Here  was  in  trade  a  Junke  of  Madagascar  with  slaves  :
the Pilote  of  the  Junke  called Malim  Abrinme spake

315

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

Portuguise,  and  told  me  on  the  South-side  of  S.  Laurence
there  was  store  of  Amber-greece,  and  Cocos  of  the  Sea ;
hee  was  skilfull  in  the  coast,  and  in  the  lying  and
bearing  of  lands,  both  in  course  and  distance.  He  had  a
great  parchment  Card,  lined  and  graduated  orderly,  which
I  sent  to  see :  he  found  fault  with  many  things  in  my
Card  at  sight,  which  I  mended  by  his  direction,  and  with
reason,  as  the  distance  from  Socatra  from  the  Maine,
and  rasing  quite  out  certaine  Hands  to  the  Southward  of
Melalia,  affirming  there  are  none  such :  his  countrey  lyes
from  one  degree  fiftie  minutes,  to  foure  degrees,  the  Port
in  two  degrees  tenne  minutes  North  latitude,  governed  by
one  King :  he  assured  me  of  trade  enough  at  his  port
to  load  one  ship  with  Marsill,  Amber,  and  Tinta  Roxa :
he  promised  to  bring  me  his  Plot  and  soundings,  and
a  sample  of  Tinta  Roxa,  but  some  other  cause  diverted
him,  that  he  would  come  no  more  at  me,  notwithstanding
I  dealt  liberally  with  him  in  present  and  in  promises.  To
the  South  of  Magadoxa,  all  the  Ports  are  governed  by
Moorish  petty  Kings,  even  to  Mosambique  :  he  perswaded
me  that  wee  might  in  many  places  trade  for  Gold  and
Silver ;  that  in  Magadoxa  the  houses  roofes  were  gilt,  that
[I.  iv.  538.]  they  had  gold  in  sand,  and  mingled  with  earth,  which
they  esteeme  not :  of  the  Inland  hee  knew  little,  onely
naming  some  places  or  Regions  betweene  Magadoxa  and
Prester  John,  as  Odola  Mahesa,  Rohamy  and  Gala,  of
which  Odela  and  Gala,  are  Chaphares  which  signifieth
mis-beleevers  ;  I  know  not  whether  he  meanes  Gentiles  or
Christians,  using  the  same  promiscuously  aswel  to  Prester
John  as  to  other  Gentiles.  Of  Prester  John,  he  knoweth
no  more,  then  that  hee  is  a  great  Prince  and  a  Caphar :
from  Magadoxo  to  Cambaya,  hee  was  expert,  his  brother
who  came  with  him  to  me,  was  in  fight  against  the  Hope
in  a  Portugall  ship,  pressed  from  Damon,  in  which  fortie
five  were  slaine,  more  he  knew  not,  but  that  three  ships
were  burned,  and  the  rest  run  away ;  he  said  the  King  of
Chaul,  Dabul  tooke  courage  on  this  victorie  and  surprised  Chaul,

Damon.  Damon,  &  other  the  Portugals  Port  Townes,  was  march-

316

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1615.

ing  to  Goa,  that  the  Portugall  was  in  great  distresse  of
victuals.  I  hoped  to  have  stored  my  selfe  with  more
discourse  from  him,  but  I  was,  I  know  not  how,  pre-
vented :  it  were  time  well  bestowed  to  see  this  Coast,
and  I  spake  to  some  of  it,  but  it  fared  the  worse  for  the
Father.

The  Road  of  Molalia  lyes  in  twelve  degrees  ten
minutes,  and  for  the  first  sixe  dayes  the  Current  sets
two  leagues  a  watch  South-west,  the  Moone  increasing
at  the  ful,  we  woond  up  North-east  the  other  way  but
very  easily,  for  the  most  part  riding  upon  the  Current.
The  Magadoxians  made  some  absurdly  beleeve,  that  the
Current  set  fifteene  dayes  one  way,  and  fifteene  another,
and  fifteene  dayes  still :  which  because  of  the  first  sixe
dayes  it  set  South-west,  and  after  wee  woond  up  North-
east, it  begot  the  opinion  of  a  wonder,  but  the  Current  sets
constantly  South-west,  and  before  the  full  of  the  Moone,
it  had  such  power  on  the  ebbe  and  floud  that  wee  never
woond,  but  at  the  full  Moone  and  Spring-tydes  we  roade
upon  the  floud  against  the  Current  it  running  under,  and
the  tyde  above,  highing  sixteene  foote  water,  and  the  ebbe
winding  backe  with  the  Current,  so  that  the  supposed
chance  of  the  Current,  was  on  the  strong  tydes,  at  the  full
Moone  overcomming  it  above  :  for  at  Sea  when  the  spring
was  past,  I  found  the  same  Current,  and  though  we  were
set  to  the  Eastward  the  first  day  we  weighed,  unto  the
Westward  the  next,  the  cause  was  the  Eddies  of  Juanny
one  day,  and  Angazesia  the  other,  but  being  cleere  of
them  it  set  his  due  course,  that  I  raised  little,  and  did
West-ward  much.

The  fourteenth  of  August,  in  the  morning  we  saw  the
Coast  of  Magadoxia  in  foure  degrees  of  North  latitude  Magadoxia.
foure  leagues  off"  sounding,  had  eighteene  fathome  of
low  land,  white  sandie  bankes.  Then  wee  stood  off  East
North-east,  the  difference  of  longitude  betweene  the
Maine  and  Molalia  in  Mercators  projection,  agreeing  with
our  account.  And  also  by  course  having  found  the
longitude  of  Cape Saint  Augustine  and  Molalia  to be

317

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

one :  I  conclude  that  Saint  Laurence  ought  to  be  laid
to  the  East  thirtie  nine  or  fortie  leagues  according  to  my
first  opinion,  and  all  the  Coast  of  the  Maine  being  broader
then  it  is  land  in  the  Card,  must  be  also  set  in  proportion
to  the  East-ward,  because  the  distance  of  longitude  is
right  from  one  to  the  other,  though  all  their  longitude
false  in  themselves  :  from  Malalia,  to  fall  with  Cape  de
Bussos,  North  North-east  one  quarter  East  way  is  the
best  course,  it  being  necessary  to  see  the  Mayne  about  the
latitude  in  this  course  since  we  lost  the  Westerly  Current
at  Angazesia,  I  found  none  or  very  little  contrary  to
all  Journals,  our  Mariners  in  this  course  are  of  as  many
opinions  as  points  in  the  Compasse,  both  for  Currents,
distances  and  bearings  according  to  Compasse  or  Varia-
tion :  but  I  observed  the  truth  in  the  latter  end  of  this
South-west  Monson,  which,  I  confesse,  may  alter  in  the
heart  of  a  contrary  Monson,  the  setlednesse  of  the  wind
causing  much  change  in  the  Currents,  of  which  no  rule
can  be  given.
Jbdalacora,or  The  two  and  twentieth,  at  Abdalacora  and  the  high
Mbadelcuria.  jancjs  0f  Socatra,  the  windes  powred  downe  with  such
divers  Cables  impetuousnesse,  and  the  ground  so  rockie,  that  I  advise  all
\3  Anchors,  to  forbeare  to  anchor  under  them,  for  if  they  be  put  from
their  anchors  in  the  night,  they  shall  fall  so  farre  to
leeward,  that  they  cannot  recover  the  Hand,  but  must  lose
company :  but  if  night  or  weather  force  them  to  anchor,
let  them  chuse  to  ride  where  some  lower  land  breakes
the  violence  of  the  wind  from  the  hils.  Wee  rode  in  the
second  quarter  of  the  increasing  Moone,  which  rose  then
above  the  Horizon  about  twelve  at  noone,  and  set  at  mid-
night, at  which  time  these  winds  begun  to  rage  so  long  as
she  is  under  the  earth,  and  rising  againe  it  becomes
temperate,  the  Moone  is  a  great  Ladie  of  weather  in
these  parts  and  requires  much  observation.

The three and twentieth, we  weighed together  and

Tamara. came  to  anchor  afore  Tamara,  the  Kings  Towne,  bringing

the  low  point  to  the  East  of  the  high  sandie  hill  without

it  East  by  North  in  ten  fathome  water  a  mile  from  the

318

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1615.

Towne :  here  the  Sultan  sent  us  word,  the  winds  were
from  the  hils  so  forcible  that  we  should  hardly  ride,  but
advised  us  to  goe  to  Baia  Delicia,  two  leagues  to  the  East  Delkia.
where  he  would  meete  us :  it  is  a  very  good  Road  de-
serving the  name  of  delightfull  for  the  peaceablenesse
thereof  in  respect  of  others :  it  is  a  Valley  of  much  lower
hils  ;  betweene  the  water  and  the  raggie  Mountaines  of
Tamera,  you  may  bring  the  two  little  Homocks  that  lye
on  the  low  point  without  the  high  land  to  the  East-ward
South-east,  and  the  low  land  that  was  East  by  North  in
Tamera  Road  North-west  by  West,  and  ride  in  ten  fathome
within  three  quarters  of  a  mile  of  the  shoare,  latitude  in
thirteene  degrees  five  minutes,  the  variation  eighteene  de-
grees twentie  minutes,  the  ground  is  white  sand,  but
rockie  so  that  you  must  coatch  or  boy  your  Cables.

Socatra  is  an  Hand  in  the  mouth  of  the  Red  Sea,  called  [I.  iv.  539.]
anciently  Dioscuria  or  Dioscorida,  standing  in  twelve  Socatra> or
degrees  fiftie  five  minutes,  governed  by  a  Sultan  called
Amar-Ben-Seid  borne  in  the  Hand,  the  Sonne  of  the
King  Farteque  in  Arabia  Foelix  called  Sultan-Seid-Ben-
Seid,  who  was  Sultan  of  Socatra,  in  the  time  of  his
Grand-father,  as  this  shall  be  King  after  his  Father  of
Fartaque,  and  his  sonne  left  at  Socatra  (the  Kingdome
of  Fartaque  lyes  from  fifteene  degrees  to  eighteene
degrees  along  the  Coast  of  Arabia,  and  to  the  North
to  the  Mountaines,  he  is  at  peace  with  the  Turke,  (who
holds  all  Arabia  in  Tribute,  except  this  Countrey)  on  this
condition  to  send  five  thousand  men  in  ayd  of  the  Turke,
if  he  require  it  to  bee  paid  by  the  Turke,  without  other
acknowledgement.  There  lyes  neere  the  Sea  a  pettie
King  about  Dosar,  with  whom  he  dares  not  meddle,  being
in  the  Grand  Seigniors  protection.  This  is  the  relation
of  Amar-Ben-Seid  of  Socatra.  The  Sultan  of  Socatra
met  our  Fleet  with  three  hundred  or  thereabouts,  having
set  up  a  Tent  at  Baia  Delecia :  he  rode  upon  a  Horse,
and  three  of  his  chiefe  Servants  on  two  Horses  and  one  .
Camell,  the  people  marching  before  and  behind  him,
shouting  after  the  Turkish manner, with two Guards,

' 319

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

one  of  Souldiers,  which  are  his  Countreymen,  and  twelve
of  private  Guard,  hired  Guzerats,  some  with  Turkish
Bowes,  some  with  Pistols,  some  with  Muskets,  all  with
good  Swords,  he  had  a  few  Kettle  Drummes,  and  one
Trumpet.  When  the  Generall  went  ashoare,  he  received
him  with  state  and  courtesie :  he  is  a  subtile  man  of  good
understanding,  as  appeares  by  his  Government  and  divers
Answeres :  hee  raignes  so  absolutely  that  no  man  can  sell
any  thing  but  himselfe,  his  people  sit  about  him  with
great  respect,  his  Officers  standing  by,  who  take  account
of  Trade,  and  receive  and  pay :  his  clothes  are  of  Surat
StufFes,  after  the  Arabs  manner  with  a  Cassock  of  wrought
Velvet  red  and  white,  and  another  the  ground  Gold,  a
very  good  Turbant,  but  bare-footed,  every  night  at  Sun-
set they  stand  or  kneele  all  towards  the  Sunne  and  pray,
the  Xeriff  throwing  water  on  their  heads :  their  Religion
is  Mahometan  :  the  Kings  Towne  of  Tamara,  is  built  of
lime  and  stone  whited  over,  battelled  and  pinnacled,  the
houses  being  flat  at  the  top  it  shewes  faire  in  the  Road,
but  when  one  is  there  is  but  poore;  Master  Boughton
borrowed  the  Kings  horse,  and  obtayned  leave  to  see
his  house,  the  King  sending  a  Sheck  with  him,  he  found
it  not  answerable  to  the  appearances,  yet  such  as  an
ordinary  Gentleman  might  make  a  shift  with  in  England,
his  lower  roomes  were  used  as  Ware-houses,  one  as  a
Wardrope,  where  hung  a  long  the  wals  some  changes
of  Robes,  and  twentie  five  Bookes  of  their  Law,  Religion,
Storie,  and  Saints  lives,  of  which  I  could  obtayne  none,
but  above  no  man  may  come  to  see  his  Wives  which
are  three,  nor  other  women,  but  the  ordinary  are  seene
in  the  Townes,  with  their  eares  full  of  silver  Rings;  in
the  Church  the  Priest  was  at  service,  but  seeing  Master
Boughton  take  out  his  Watch,  hee  soone  finished  and
came  and  wondred.  There  was  provided  three  Hennes
for  their  dinner  with  Rice,  and  for  drinke  water  and
Cohu.  Cohu,  blacke  liquor  taken  as  hot  as  may  be  endured :  at
his  returne,  the  King  in  complement  said,  hee  had  seene
a  poore  place,  but  desired  him  to  accept  it.

320

SIR THOMAS ROE  ad.

1615.

There  is  a  Castle  foure  square  on  a  hill,  a  mile  from
Tamara,  but  he  could  not  get  licence  to  see  it.  The
people  are  of  foure  sorts,  Arabs  his  Countrymen,  who  it
seemes  are  his  strength,  and  such  as  are  not  the  ancient
Inhabitants,  but  come  in  with  the  Conquest  of  his  An-
cestors, and  those  obey  him,  and  dare  not  speake  without
licence,  as  appeared,  when  one  seemed  of  qualitie  to
speake,  he  asked  him  how  hee  durst  open  his  mouth  in
his  presence,  but  approching  kisse  his  hand.  A  second
sort  are  of  Slaves,  who  when  they  come  to  him  kisse
his  foot,  and  these  doe  all  his  worke  and  make  his
Aloes.  A  third  sort,  as  I  suppose,  the  olde  Inhabitants
of  the  Countrey,  but  not  the  eldest,  called  Bedwines,  the  Bedwines.
same  which  other  Historians  have  called  Jacobits  Chris-
tians, that  have  long  dwelt  there,  with  these  he  hath  had
a  warre,  as  the  Arabs  report,  and  dwell  in  the  Mountaines
very  populous  but  are  now  at  peace,  on  condition  to  live
quietly,  and  to  breed  their  children  Mahometans,  which
I  perceive  they  doe  not,  having  no  manner  of  conversa-
tion with  the  Arabs.  The  reason  why  I  take  them  to
be  the  old  Jacobite  Christians,  mentioned  by  Maginas,
Purchas  and  others,  is,  because  Master  Boughton  saw
an  old  Church  of  theirs  in  the  way  to  Tamara,  left
desolate,  the  doore  shut,  but  onely  tyed,  being  desirous
to  enter  it,  the  Sheck  his  guide  told  him  it  was  full
of  Spirits,  yet  he  adventured  in  and  found  an  Altar  with
Images,  and  a  crosse  upon  it,  which  he  brought  out,
then  the  Shecke  told  him  they  were  a  people  of  another
Religion,  but  very  loth  to  have  them  much  enquired
after,  as  I  suspect,  knowing  them  to  be  a  kind  of
Christians,  doubting  we  would  either  wish  them  better,
or  not  suffer  them  to  bee  oppressed.  The  fourth  sort
are  a  savage  people,  poore,  leane,  naked,  with  long  haire,
eating  nothing  but  Roots,  hiding  in  bushes,  conversing
with  none,  afraid  of  all,  without  houses,  and  almost  as
savage  as  beasts,  and  by  conjecture,  the  true  ancient
Naturals  of  this  Hand.

The  Hand is  very mountainous  and barren : having
iv  321  x

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

some  Beeves,  Goates  and  Sheepe,  a  few  Dates  and
Oranges,  a  little  Rice  and  nothing  else  for  sustenance,
of  commoditie  they  have  Aloes,  which  is  the  juyce  of
a  leafe  like  Semperviva,  they  make  a  poore  cloth  of  their
Wooll  for  their  slaves.

The  King  had  Sanguis  Draconis,  and  Indico  of  Lahor,
but  held  it  deare :  many  small  Civit  Cats  and  Civit :  all
is  either  the  Kings,  or  passes  his  hands  and  price.  He
hath  a  handsome  Galley  and  Juncke  of  Surat,  with
Mariners,  that  serve  him  to  transport  his  goods  for  wages
[I.  iv.  540.]  by  the  yeare.  The  King  hath  some  knowledge  of  Prester
John ;  confessing  him  the  greatest  Prince  in  the  World,
above  the  Turke  and  Persian,  giving  faire  reasons  for  his
opinion :  he  hath  among  his  slaves  divers  Abbassines.
Hearing  our  hoy-boyes  in  the  Generals  boat,  hee  asked
if  they  were  the  Psalmes  of  David  ?  and  being  answered
yes :  hee  replyed,  it  was  the  invention  of  the  Devill,  who
did  invent  it :  for  King  David,  who  before  praysed  God
with  his  lips  and  heart  in  devotion,  but  after  it  was  left
to  sencelesse  Instruments.  They  bury  their  dead  all  in
Tombes,  and  have  in  great  reverence  the  Monuments
of  their  Saints,  whereof  there  have  been  many :  But  of
most  account  Serdy  Hachim,  buried  at  Tamara,  who
being  slaine  one  hundred  yeares  since  by  the  Portugalls
once  inhabiting  heere,  appeares  to  them,  and  warnes  them
of  dangers  to  ensue.  They  impute  the  violence  of  winds
to  his  walking,  and  have  him  in  wonderfull  reverence.
I  never  went  ashoare,  not  knowing  what  entertainment
I  should  find,  in  respect  of  the  quality  I  beare,  but  gleane
up  the  most  probable  reports.  If  I  had  gone  my  selfe,
and  conferred  with  the  King,  or  could  have  spoken  with
any  of  his  people  of  understanding,  I  had  enquired
further  to  satisfie  the  curious :  But  all  the  Interpreters
followed  the  Generall,  that  I  had  no  oportunity.
Advice  not  to  I  give  my  advice  that  the  Fleet  stop  not  at  all  out-
stay  outwards  warcjs  bound  at  Socatra :  But  from  Molalia,  having  made
Cape  Guardafui,  and  there  rested  a  convenient  time  for
refreshing,  or  attending  the  latter  end  of  the  Monson,

322

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1615.

if  it  be  soone  in  the  yeare,  shape  their  course  right  for

Surat. If  it  be  objected,  that  they  shall  want  their  usuall

refreshings : I  answere,  at  Socatra  the  victualls  is both

carrion,  and  as  deare  as  in  England,  goodnesse  considered,

the water  farre to fetch and dangerous, so  that  every

Fleet  hath  lost  some  men  in  rowling  it  downe  a  streame

full  of  deepe  holes. At  Cape  Guarda-fui  you  shall  ride

at  ease,  and  without  doubt  trade  plentifully  and  cheape,

and  fish  at  pleasure :  and  though  we  made  no  experience

of  trade,  yet  wee  saw  people  in  Turbants  and  cloathed,

who  assuredly,  if  we  had  stayed,  might  have  been  drawne

to  bring  downe  cattell :  for  not  farre  to  the  West  of  that

place, Sir  Henry  Middleton,  and  some  other  ships  had

excellent  Goats  and  sheepe  for  trifles,  as  both  his  Journall,

and  Master  Barret  of  his  owne  experience  have  enformed

mee.

§.  11.

His journey to the Court, and entertainment
there,  and  Customes  thereof.

He  six  and  twentieth  of  September,  I  landed,  September  26.
accompanied  with  the  Generall  and  principal!  Vlsltatl°"  °f
Merchants :  Captaine  Harris  was  sent  to  make  me
a  Court  of  guard,  with  one  hundred  shot,  and  the  ships
in  their  best  equipage,  giving  mee  their  Ordnance  as
I  passed.  (The  passages  betwixt  the  Embassador  and
those  of  Surat  I  omit ;  their  barbarous  customes  and
actions  holding  so  ill  correspondence  with  his  honorable
condition,  and  civill  conditions,  that  even  heere  also  it
would  be  harsh  to  the  Reader:  we  will  therefore  find
him  removing  from  them  in  his  way  toward  the  Court.)
The  fifteenth  of  November,  I  arrived  at  Brampore,
being  by  my  conjecture  two  hundred  twenty  three  miles
from  Surat,  and  the  course  wholly  East,  a  miserable  and
barren  Countrey,  the  Townes  and  Villages  all  built  of
mudde,  so  that  there  is  not  a  house  for  a  man  to  rest
in. This  day  at Batherport,  a  Village  two mile short

323

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

of  Brampore  is  their  Store-house  of  Ordnance.  I  saw
divers  of  brasse,  but  generally  too  short,  and  too  wide
bored.  Betweene  that  and  Brampore  I  was  met  by  the
Cutwall,  well  accompanied,  and  sixteene  Colours  caried
before  them :  he  brought  mee  to  the  Saralia,  where  I
was  appointed  to  lodge,  where  at  the  gate  hee  tooke  his
leave,  being  a  handsome  front  of  stone :  but  when  I
entered,  I  had  foure  chambers  allotted  me,  like  Ovens,
no  bigger,  round  at  the  top,  made  of  bricke  in  a  wall-
side  ;  this  troubled  mee,  but  my  Tents  were  my  refuge,
and  I  sent  the  Gutwall  word  I  would  depart  the  Towne,
scorning  so  meane  usage :  hee  desired  me  to  be  content
untill  morning.  Heere  lives  Sultan  Pervies,  the  Kings
second  sonne,  holding  the  State  and  custome  of  his
Father;  and  the  Channa  Channa  being  the  greatest
subject  of  the  Mogoll,  Generall  of  his  Armies,  whereof
fortie  thousand  horse  are  with  him :  The  Prince  hath
the  name  and  state,  but  the  Chan  governes  all.

The  eighteenth,  for  many  considerations,  as  well  to
see  the  fashions  of  the  Court,  as  to  content  the  Prince,
who  desired  it,  and  I  was  loath  to  distaste  him,  because
there  was  some  purpose  of  erecting  a  Factory  in  the
Towne ;  and  I  found  by  experience  Sword-blades  were
well  sold  in  the  Armie ;  I  went  to  visite  the  Prince,  and
carryed  him  a  Present.  I  was  brought  in  by  the  Cutwall  r
at  the  outward  Court  were  about  one  hundred  horsemen
armed,  being  Gentlemen  that  attend  the  Princes  setting
out  to  salute  him,  making  a  lane  of  each  side:  in  the
inner  Court  hee  sate  high  in  a  Gallery  that  went  round,
with  a  Canopy  over  him,  and  a  Carpet  before  him,  in
great,  but  barbarous  State.  Comming  toward  him  thorow
a  lane  of  people,  an  Officer  came  and  brought  me  word
I  must  touch  the  ground  with  my  head,  and  my  hat  off:
I  answered,  I  came  in  honour  to  see  the  Prince,  and  was
free  from  the  custome  of  Servants.  So  I  passed  on,  till
I  came  to  a  place  railed  in,  right  under  him,  with  an
[I.  iv.  541  ]  ascent  of  three  steps,  where  I  made  him  reverence,  and
he  bowed  his  body,  and  so  went  within  it,  where  stoodu

324

SIR  THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1615.

round  by  the  sides  all  the  great  men  of  the  Towne,
with  their  hands  before  them  like  Slaves ;  the  place
was  covered  over-head  with  a  rich  Canopie,  and  under-
neath, all  Carpets.  To  describe  it  rightly,  it  was  like
a  great  Stage,  and  the  Prince  sate  above  as  the  Mock-
Kings  doe  there.  When  I  was  entered,  I  knew  not
where  to  be  placed,  but  went  right,  and  stood  before
him,  where  there  is  an  ascent  of  three  steppes,  upon
which  stands  his  Secretary,  to  deliver  what  is  said  or
given  briefely.  I  told  him,  being  an  Embassador  from
the  King  of  England  to  his  father,  and  passing  by,  I
could  not  but  in  honour  visite  him  :  he  replyed  I  was
very  welcome,  and  asked  me  many  questions  of  the
King,  to  which  I  replyed  as  I  thought  fit :  but  standing
in  that  manner  below,  I  demanded  licence  to  come  up
and  stand  by  him.  He  answered,  If  the  King  of
Persia  or  the  Great  Turke  were  there,  it  might  not
be  admitted.  I  replyed  that  I  must  bee  excused,  for  I
doubted  not  hee  would  come  downe  and  meete  them
at  his  gate ;  but  I  desired  no  more  priviledge,  then
the  Embassadors  of  such  Princes  had,  to  whom  I  held
my  selfe  equall :  he  protested  I  had  that,  and  should
in  all  things.  Then  I  demanded  a  Chaire,  but  I  was
answered  no  man  ever  sate  in  that  place :  but  I  was
desired,  as  a  courtesie,  to  ease  my  selfe  against  a  pillar,
covered  above  with  silver,  that  held  up  his  Canopie.
Then  I  moved  him  for  his  favour  for  an  English  Factory
to  be  resident  in  the  Towne,  which  hee  willingly  granted,
and  gave  present  order  to  the  Buxy,  to  draw  a  Firma
both  for  their  comming  up,  and  for  their  residence.
I  also  desired  his  authoritie  for  cariages  for  the  Kings
Presents,  which  he  gave  in  charge  to  the  Cutwall.  Then
I  gave  him  my  Presents,  which  hee  tooke  in  good  part,
and  after  some  other  questions,  he  said  to  give  me
content,  although  I  might  not  come  up  where  he  sate,
he  would  go  into  another  place,  where  I  should  come
unto  him ;  but  one  of  my  Presents  was  a  Case  of
Bottells,  which  tooke  him  up  by  the  way, and  after  I

325

A.D.
1615.

Master

Edwards.

Thomas

Coryat.

Cytor.

Ranna.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

had  stayed  a  while,  I  heard  he  was  drunke,  and  one  of
his  Officers  came  to  mee  in  his  name,  with  an  excuse,
desiring  mee  to  goe  home,  and  to  take  some  other  time
to  returne  to  visite him : this  night  1  tooke  my  feaver.

The  sixt  of  December,  we  lodged  in  a  wood,  not  farre
from  the  Kings  famous  Castle  of  Mandoa  which  stands
on  a  steepe  hill,  walled  round  in  circuit  fourteene  Course :
the  Castle  is  faire,  and  of  wonderfull  greatnesse.

The  two  and  twentieth,  Master  Edwards  met  me,
accompanied  with  Thomas  Coryat,  who  had  passed  into
India  on  foote  five  Course  to  Cytor  an  ancient  Citie
ruined  on  a  hill,  but  so  that  it  appeares  a  Tombe  of
wonderfull  magnificence  :  there  stands  above  one  hundred
Churches,  all  of  carved  stone,  many  faire  Towers  and
Lanthornes  cut  thorow  many  pillars,  and  innumerable
houses,  but  no  one  Inhabitant :  there  is  but  one  ascent
to  the  hill,  it  being  precipitious,  sloaping  up,  cut  out
of  the  Rocke,  having  foure  gates  in  the  ascent,  before
one  arrive  at  the  City  gate,  which  is  magnificent :  the
hill  is  incompassed  at  the  top  about  eight  Course,  and
at  the  South-west  end  a  goodly  old  castle :  I  lodged
by  a  poore  Village  at  the  foot  of  the  hill.  This  Citie
stands  in  the  countrey  of  one  Ranna,  a  Prince  newly
subdued  by  this  King,  or  rather  bought  to  confesse
Tribute.  The  Citie  was  wonne  by  Ecbarsha,  father  to
this  Mogoll.  Ranna  is  rightly  descended  from  Porus,
that  valiant  Indian,  overcome  by  Alexander :  so  that
I  take  this  Citie  to  have  been  one  of  the  ancient
Seats  of  Porus,  though  Dely  much  further  North  be
reported  to  have  been  the  chiefest,  famous  now  only
in  ruines.  Neare  that  stands  a  pillar,  erected  by
Alexander  the  Conqueror,  with  a  great  inscription.  The
present  Mogoll  and  his  Ancestors,  descendants  of  Tam-
berlane,  have  brought  all  the  ancient  Cities  to  ruine,
having  dispeopled  them,  and  forbidden  reparation,  I  know
not  out  of  what  reason,  unlesse  they  would  have  nothing
remembred  of  greatnesse  beyond  their  beginnings,  as
if  their  Family  and  the  world  were  equalls.

326

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1615.

The  three  and  twentieth,  I  arrived  at  Adsmeere,  two
hundred  and  nine  Courses  from  Brampore,  foure  hundred
and  eighteene  English  miles,  the  Courses  being  longer
then  toward  the  Sea. I  kept  my  bed.

The  tenth of  January, I went  to  Court  at  foure  in  January  10.

the  evening to the Durbar,  which is  the place where

the  Mogoll sits out daily, to entertaine strangers, to

receive Petitions and Presents, to give commands,  to

see  and to be seene. To digresse a little from my

reception, and declare  the  customes  of the  Court,  will

enlighten  my  future  discourse. The  King  hath  no  man

but  Eunuches  that  comes  within  the  lodgings  or  retyring  Eunuches  only

roomes of his house  : his women watch within, and  aJ! *°men>
.  .  .  .  ...  his  household

guard  him  with  manly  weapons; they doe  justice one  Courtiers.

upon  another  for  offences.  Hee  comes  every  morning
to  a  window  called  the  Jarrneo,  looking  into  a  Plaine
before  his  gate,  and  shewes  himselfe  to  the  common
people.  At  noone  he  returnes  thither,  and  sits  some
houres  to  see  the  fight  of  Elephants  and  wilde  beasts.
Under  him  within  a  raile  attend  the  men  of  rancke :
from  whence  he  retyres  to  sleep  among  his  women.  At
after-noone  he  returnes  to  the  Durbar  before  mentioned.
At  eight  after  supper  he  comes  downe  to  the  Guzelcan,
a  faire  Court,  wherein  in  the  middest  is  a  Throne  erected
of  free-stone,  wherein  he  sits,  but  sometimes  below  in
a  chaire,  to  which  are  none  admitted  but  of  great
quality,  and  few  of  these  without  leave,  where  hee
discourses  of  all  matters  with  much  affabilitie.  There
is  no  businesse  done  with  him  concerning  the
State,  Government,  disposition  of  War  or  peace,  but  at
one  of  these  two  last  places  where  it  is  publikely  pro-
pounded and  resolved,  and  so  registred,  which  if  it
were  worth  the  curiositie,  might  be  seene  for  two  shillings  :
but  the  common  base  people  knew  as  much  as  the
Councell,  and  the  newes  every  day,  is  the  Kings  new  [I  iv.  542.]
resolutions,  tossed  and  censured  by  every  rascall.  This
course  is  unchangeable,  except  sicknesse  or  drinke  prevent
it,  which must  be  knowne :  for  as  all  his Subjects  are

327

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

slaves,  so  is  hee  in  a  kind  of  reciprocall  bondage,  for
Necessitie  of  nee  js  tyed  to  observe  these  houres  and  customs  so
t  e  mgs  pre-  preciseiv>  that  if  he  were  unseene  one  day,  and  no
sufficient  reason  rendred,  the  people  would  mutinie ;
two  dayes  no  reason  can  excuse,  but  that  he  must  consent
to  open  his  doores,  and  be  seene  by  some,  to  satisfie
others.  On  Tuesday  at  the  Jarrneo  he  sits  in  Judge-
ment, never  refusing  the  poorest  mans  complaint :  where
he  heares  with  patience  both  parts,  and  sometimes
sees,  with  too  much  delight  in  blood,  the  execution  done
by  his  Elephants.  Illi  mervere,  sed  quid  tu  ut  adesses  ?
His  comming  At  the  Durbar  I  was  led  right  before  him:  at  the
*  e  ms'  entrance  of  an  outward  raile,  where  met  mee  two  principall
Noble  Slaves  to  conduct  me  nearer.  I  had  required
before  my  going,  leave  to  use  the  customes  of  my
Countrey,  which  was  freely  granted,  so  that  I  would
performe  them  punctually.  When  I  entered  within  the
first  raile,  I  made  a  reverence ;  entring  in  the  inward
raile,  another ;  and  when  I  came  under  the  King,  a
third.  The  place  is  a  great  Court,  whither  resort  all
sorts  of  people.  The  King  sits  in  a  little  Gallery
over-head  ;  Ambassadors,  the  great  men  and  strangers
of  quality  within  the  inner-most  raile  under  him,  raised
from  the  ground,  covered  with  Canopies  of  Velvet  and
Silke ;  under-foote  laid  with  good  Carpets :  the  meaner
men  representing  Gentry,  within  the  first  raile :  the
people  without,  in  a  base  Court,  but  so  that  all  may
Face  of  the see  the King. This sitting out hath so  much  affinity

TheZeelikea  with  a  Theatre>  the  manner  of  the  King  in  his  Gallery;
the  great  men  lifted  on  a  Stage,  as  Actors ;  the  Vulgar
below  gazing  on,  that  an  easie  description  will  enforme
of  the  place  and  fashion.  The  King  prevented  my  dull
Interpreter,  bidding  me  welcome,  as  to  the  Brother  of
my  Master.  I  delivered  his  Majesties  Letter  trans-
lated ;  and  after,  my  Commission,  whereon  he  looked
curiously ;  after,  my  Presents,  which  were  well  received.
He  asked  some  questions ;  and  with  a  seeming  care  of
my  health,  offered  me  his  Physitions,  and  advising  me

328

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1615.

to  keepe  my  house  till  I had  recovered strength,  and

if  in  the  interim  I  needed  any  thing,  I  should  freely  send

to  him,  and  obtaine  my  desires. He  dismissed  me  with

more  favour  and  outward  grace, if  by  the  Christians I

were not flattered, then ever was showen to any

Ambassador either of  the  Turke or  Persian, or  other

whatsoever.

The  fourteenth,  I  sent  to  the  Prince  Sultan  Coronne,  Sultan
his  third  sonne  by  birth,  but  first  in  favour,  that  I  Cormne-
determined  to  visite  him,  not  doubting  he  would  use
me  with  due  respect :  for  I  was  enformed  he  was  enemie
to  all  Christians,  and  therefore  feared  some  affront.
Hee  answered  I  should  be  welcome,  and  receive  the  same
content  I  had  from  his  father.  He  is  Lord  of  Surat
our  chiefe  residence,  and  his  favour  important  for  us.

The  two  and  twentieth,  I  visited  the  Prince,  who  at  His  conditions.
nine  in  the  morning  sits  out  in  the  same  manner  (as
his  Father)  to  dispatch  his  businesse,  and  to  be  seene
of  his  followers.  He  is  proud  naturally,  and  I  feared
my  entertainment.  But  on  some  occasion  he  not  resolv-
ing to  come  out,  when  he  heard  of  my  arrivall,  sent
a  principall  Officer  to  meete  me,  who  conducted  mee
into  a  good  roome  (never  before  done  to  any)  and
entertaine  mee  with  discourse  of  our  owne  businesse
halfe  an  houre,  untill  the  Prince  was  ready,  who  came
abroad  on  purpose,  and  used  mee  better  then  his  promise.
I  delivered  him  a  Present,  such  as  I  had,  but  not  in
the  name  of  his  Majestie,  it  being  too  meane ;  but
excused  it,  that  the  King  could  not  take  knowledge  of
his  being  Lord  of  Surat  so  lately  conferred  on  him,
but  hereafter  I  doubted  not  his  Majesty  would  send
to  him  according  to  his  worth.  This  was  the  respect
of  the  Merchants,  who  humbly  commended  themselves
to  his  favour  and  protection.  He  received  all  in  very
good  part :  and  after  opening  of  some  grievances  and
injuries  suffered  at  Surat  by  us  from  his  Governours,
of  which  for  respect  to  him  I  had  forborne  to  complaine
to  the  King, hee  promised mee  speedie and  effectuall

329

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

Justice,  and  to  confirme  our  securitie  by  any  propositions
I  should  offer,  professing  to  be  ignorant  of  any  thing
past,  but  what  he  had  received  by  Asaph  Chan,  delivered
by  mee;  especially  of  any  command  to  dismisse  us,  which
the  Governour  had  falsely  coyned,  and  for  which  hee
should  dearely  answere.  So  he  dismissed  me,  full  of
hope  to  rectifie  the  decayed  estate  of  our  reputation,  with
promise  of  a  Firman  for  Surat  effectually.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  I  went  to  the  Durbar  to
visite  the  King,  who  seeing  me  a  farre  off,  beckned  with
his  hand,  giving  signe  I  should  not  stay  the  ceremony
of  asking  leave,  but  come  up  to  him,  where  he  appointed
me  a  place  above  all  other  men,  which  I  after  thought
His  second  fit  to  maintaine  :  I  gave  him  a  small  Present ;  it  being
heating.  ^ custome) when any body hath businesse, to give

somewhat,  and  those  that  cannot  come  neare  to  speake,
send  in,  or  hold  up  their  gift ;  which  he  excepts,  be  it
but  a  Rupie,  and  demands  their  businesse.  The  same
course  he  held  with  mee,  having  looked  curiously,  and
asked  many  questions  of  my  Present,  he  demanded  what
I  required  of  him :  I  answered  Justice ;  that  on  the
assurance  of  his  Majesties  Firman  sent  into  England,
the  King  my  Master  had  not  only  given  leave  to  many
of  his  Subjects  to  come  a  dangerous  Voyage  with  their
goods,  but  had  sent  me  to  congratulate  the  amity  so
happily  begun  betweene  two  so  mighty  Nations,  and
to  confirme  the  same :  but  that  I  found  the  English,
seated  at  Amadavas,  injured  by  the  Governour  in  their
persons  and  goods,  fined,  exacted  upon,  and  kept  as
prisoners,  that  at  every  Towne  new  Customes  were
taken  of  our  goods,  passing  to  the  Port,  contrary  to  all
[I.  iv.  543.]  Justice  and  the  former  Articles  of  Trade.  To  which  he
answered  he  was  sory,  it  should  be  amended,  and  presently
Two  Firmans  gave  order  for  two  Firmans,  very  effectually,  according
&_ant^d  t0  tfie  to  my  desire  to  be  signed,  one  to  the  Governour  of
Amadavas,  to  restore  money  exacted  from  Master
Kerridge,  and  to  use  the  English  with  all  favour  :  the
other  to  release  all  customes  required  on  any  pretence

33°

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1615.

on the  way ;  or  if  any  had  been  taken, to  repay  it  of

his owne  accord:  wishing mee, that if  these  gave not

speedy  remedy, I should renue my complaint  against

the  disobeyer,  and  he  should  be  sent  for  to  answere  there:

and  so  he  dismissed  me.

The  first  of  March,  I  rode  to  see  a  house  of  pleasure  March  1.
of  the  Kings,  given  him  by  Asaph  Chan,  two  miles  from  "  fl0use  °J
Adsmeere,  but  betweene  two  mightie  Rockes,  so  defended  *'
from the Sunne, that  it scarce any way sees it; the
foundation  cut  out  of  them,  and  some  roomes,  the  rest
of  free-stone,  a  handsome  little  Garden  with  fine foun-
taines,  two  great  Tankes,  one  thirty  steps  above  another  ;
the  way  to  it  is  inaccessable,  but  for  one  or  two  in  front,
and  that  very  steepe  and  stony,  a  place  of  much  melan-
choly delight and securitie, onely beeing accompanied
with  wild  Peacocks,  Turtles,  fowle,  and  Munkeyes,  that
inhabite  the  Rockes  hanging  every  way  over  it.

The  second,  the  Norose  began  in  the  evening.  It  The  Nome  a
is  a  custome  of  solemnizing  the  new  yeare,  yet  the  Cere-  ?„  .**'
monie  begins  the  first  new  Moone  after  it,  which  this  t^ereof
yeare  fell  together:  it  is  kept  in  imitation  of  the  Persians
feast,  and  signifies  in  that  language  Nine  dayes,  for
that  anciently  it  endured  no  longer,  but  now  it  is  doubled.
The  manner  is,  there  is  erected  a  throne  foure  foote  from
the  ground,  in  the  Durbar  Court,  from  the  backe  where-
of to  the  place  where  the  King  comes  out  a  square
of  fiftie  sixe  paces  long,  and  fortie  three  broad  was
rayled  in,  and  covered  over  with  faire  Semianes  or
Canopies  of  Cloth  of  Gold,  Silke,  or  Velvet  joyned  to-
gether, and  sustained  with  Canes  so  covered :  at  the
upper  end  West,  were  set  out  the  Pictures  of  the  King  of
England,  the  Queene,  the  Lady  Elizabeth,  the  Countesses
of  Somerset  and  Salisbury,  and  of  a  Citizens  wife  of
London ;  below  them  an  other  of  Sir  Thomas  Smith,
Governour  of  the  East-India  Companie :  under  foot  it
is  laid  with  good  Persian  Carpets  of  great  largenesse,
into  which  place  come  all  the  men  of  qualitie  to  attend
the  King,  except  some  few  that  are  within  a  little  rayle

33*

aj>.  PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

1 615.

right  before  the  Throne,  to  receive  his  Commands,
within  this  square  there  were  set  out  for  shew  many
little  houses,  one  of  Silver,  and  some  other  curiosities
of  price.  The  Prince,  Sultan  Coronne  had  at  the  left
side  a  Pavilion,  the  supporters  whereof  were  covered
with  Silver,  as  were  some  of  those  also  neere  the  Kings
Throne:  the  former  thereof  was  square,  the  matter  wood,
inlayed  with  mother  of  Pearle,  borne  up  with  foure
pillers,  and  covered  with  cloth  of  Gold  about  the  edge
over-head  like  a  valence,  was  a  net  fringe  of  good  Pearle,
upon  which  hung  downe  Pomgranats,  Apples,  Peares,
and  such  fruits  of  Gold,  but  hollow ;  within  that  the
King  sate  on  Cushions,  very  rich  in  Pearles,  in  Jewels
round  about  the  Court  ;  before  the  Throne  the  Principall
men  had  erected  Tents,  which  encompassed  the  Court,
and  lined  them  with  Velvet,  Damaske,  and  TafFatae
ordinarily,  some  few  with  cloth  of  Gold,  wherein  they
retired,  and  set  to  shew  all  their  wealth  :  for  anciently
the  Kings  were  used  to  goe  to  every  Tent,  and  there
take  what  pleased  them  ;  but  now  it  is  changed,  the  King
sitting  to  receive  what  New-yeeres  gifts  are  brought
to  him.  Hee  comes  abroad  at  the  usuall  houre  of  the
Durbar,  and  retires  with  the  same :  here  are  offered  to
him  by  all  sorts  great  gifts,  though  not  equall  to  report,
yet  incredible  enough :  and  at  the  end  of  this  Feast
the  King  in  recompence  of  the  Presents  received,  ad-
vanceth  some,  and  addeth  to  their  entertainment  some
horse  at  his  pleasure.

The  twelfth,  I  went  to  visit  the  King,  and  was  brought
right  before  him,  expecting  a  present  which  I  delivered  to
his  extraordinary  content ;  so  he  appointed  I  should  be
directed  within  the  raile  to  stand  by  him,  but  I  beeing
not  suffered  to  step  up  upon  the  rising,  on  which  the
Throne  stood,  could  see  little,  the  rayle  beeing  high,
and  doubled  with  Carpets,  but  I  had  leisure  to  view
the  inward  roome,  and  the  beauty  thereof,  which  I  con-
fesse  was  rich,  but  of  so  divers  pieces,  and  so  unsutable,
that  it  was  rather  patched  then  glorious,  as  if  it  seemed

332

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1615.

to  strive  to  shewe  all,  like  a Lady  that  with her  Plate,

set on a Cupboord her imbroydered Slippers. This

Evening was the sonne of  Ranna his new Tributary

brought  before  him  with  much  ceremonie,  kneeling  three

times,  and  knocking  his  head on  the ground : he  was

sent by his Father  with a  Present, and was brought

within  the  little  raile,  the  King  embracing him by  the

head ;  his  gift was  an  Indian  voyder  full  of  Silver,  upon

that  a  carved  Silver  dish full  of  Gold  ;  so  he  was  lead

toward  the  Prince. Some  Elephants  were  shewed,  and

some  Whoores did  sing  and dance  : Sic transit gloria

Mundi.

The  thirteenth  at  night,  I went  to the  Gussell  Chan,  Passages

where  is  best  opportunitie  to  doe  businesse,  and  tooke  with  remarliea0le-

me  the Italian,  determining  to  walke  no  longer  in  dark-

nesse,  but  to  proove  the  King,  being  in  all  other  waves

delayed  and refused ; I was sent for in  with my  old

Broaker,  but  my  Interpreter  was  kept  out :  Asaph  Chan

mistrusting  I would  utter more  then  he  was  willing  to

heare. When I came  to the  King,  he  appointed  me  a

place  to  stand  just  before  him,  and  sent  to  aske  mee  many

questions  about  the  King  of  England,  and  of  the  Present

I  gave  the  day  before  : to  some  of  which  I  answered  ;  but

at  last  I  said,  my  Interpretor  was  kept  out,  1  could  speake

no Portugall, and so wanted meanes to satisne his

Majestie, whereat (much against Asaph Chans desire)

he  was  admitted. I  bad  him  tell  the  King,  I  desired  to

speake  to  him ;  he answered,  willingly : whereat  Asaph

Chans  sonne  in  law,  pulled  him by  force  away,  and  that

faction  hedged  the  King  so,  that I  could  scarce  see  him,  [I.  W.  544.]

nor  the  other  approach  him. So  I  commanded  the  Italian

to speake aloud, that I craved  audience of  the King,

whereat  the  King  called me, and they made me way.

Asaph Chan stood on  one  side  of  my Interpreter,  and

I  on  the  other : I  to  enforme  him  in  mine  owne  cause,  he

to  awe  him  with  winking  and  jogging. I bad  him  say,

that I now  had  been  here  two  Moneths,  whereof  more

then  one  was  passed  in  sickenesse,  the  other  in  Comple-

333

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

ments,  and  nothing  effected  toward  the  ende  for  which
my  Master  had  employed  mee,  which  was  to  conclude
a  firme  and  constant  love  and  peace  betweene  their
Majesties,  and  to  establish  a  faire  and  secure  Trade  and
residence  for  my  Countrey-men.  He  answered,  that  was
already  granted.  I  replyed  it  was  true,  but  it  depended
yet  on  so  light  a  thred,  on  so  weake  conditions,  that
being  of  such  importance,  it  required  an  agreement  cleare
in  all  points,  and  a  more  form  all  and  authentique  con-
firmation, then  it  had  by  ordinary  Firmans,  which  were
temporary  commands,  and  respected  accordingly.  He
asked  me  what  Presents  we  would  bring  him.  I  answered,
the  League  was  yet  new,  and  very  weake  :  that  many
Curiosities  were  to  bee  found  in  our  Countrey  of  rare
price  and  estimation,  which  the  King  would  send,  and
the  Merchants  seeke  out  in  all  parts  of  the  world,  if
they  were  once  made  secure  of  a  quiet  trade  and  pro-
tection on  honourable  Conditions,  having  been  heretofore
many  wayes  wronged.

He  asked  what  kind  of  curiosities  those  were  I
mentioned,  whether  I  meant  Jewels  and  rich  stones.  I
answered,  No :  that  we  did  not  thinke  them  fit  Presents
to  send  backe,  which  were  brought  first  from  these  parts,
whereof  he  was  chiefe  Lord ;  that  we  esteemed  them
common  here,  and  of  much  more  price  with  us :  but  that
we  sought  to  finde  such  things  for  his  Majestie,  as  were
rare  here,  and  unseene,  as  excellent  artifices  in  painting,
carving,  cutting,  enamelling,  figures  in  Brasse,  Copper,
or  Stone,  rich  embroyderies,  stuffes  of  Gold  and  Silver.
An  English  He  said  it  was  very  well :  but  that  hee  desired  an  English
none  mucn  j^j-gg .  j  answered,  it  was  impossible  by  Sea,  and  by  Land
the  Turke  would  not  suffer  passage.  He  replyed,  that  hee
thought  it  not  impossible  by  Sea.  I  told  him,  the  dangers
of  storm es,  and  varietie  of  weather  would  proove  it.  Hee
answered,  if  sixe  were  put  into  a  ship,  one  might  live ;  and
though  it  came  leane,  he  would  fat  it.  I  replied,  I  was
confident  it  could  not  be  in  so  long  a  Voyage,  but  that
for  his  Majesties  satisfaction,  I  would  write  to  advise  of

334

SIR  THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1615.

his  request.  So  he  asked,  what  was  it  then  I  demanded  ?
I  said,  that  hee  would  bee  pleased  to  signe  certaine  reason-
able conditions,  which  I  had  conceived  for  the  confirmation
of  the  League,  and  for  the  securitie  of  our  Nation,  and
their  quiet  trade,  for  that  they  had  beene  often  wronged,
and  could  not  continue  on  such  tearmes,  which  I  forbeare
to  complaine  of,  hoping  by  faire  meanes  to  procure  amend-
ment. At  this  word,  Asaph  Chan  offered  to  pull  my
Interpreter ;  but  I  held  him,  suffering  him  onely  to
winke  and  make  unprofitable  signes.

The  King  hereat  grew  suddenly  into  choller,  pressing
to  know  who  had  wronged  us,  with  such  shew  of  fury,
that  I  was  loath  to  follow  it,  and  speaking  in  broken
Spanish  to  my  Interpreter,  to  answer,  That  with  what
was  past  I  would  not  trouble  his  Majestie,  but  would
seeke  Justice  of  his  Sonne,  the  Prince,  of  whose  favour
I  doubted  not.  The  King  not  attending  my  Inter-  The  KinS
preter,  but  hearing  his  Sonnes  name,  conceived  I  had  a?gry  Wlt  u
accused  him,  saying,  Mio  Filio,  Mio  Filio,  and  called
for  him ;  who  came  in  great  feare,  humbling  himselfe :
Asaph  Chan  trembled,  and  all  of  them  were  amazed.
The  King  chid  the  Prince  roundly,  and  he  excused  him-
selfe, but  I  perceiving  the  Kings  error,  made  him  (by
meanes  of  a  Persian  Prince,  offering  himselfe  to  interpret,
because  my  Italian  spake  better  Turkish  then  Persian)  and
the  Prince  both  understand  the  mistaking,  and  so  appeased
him,  saying,  I  did  no  way  accuse  the  Prince,  but  would
in  causes  past  in  his  Governement,  appeale  to  him  for
Justice,  which  the  King  commanded  hee  should  doe
effectually.  The  Prince  for  his  justification,  told  the
King  he  had  offered  me  a  Firman,  and  that  I  had  re-
fused it :  demanding  the  reason :  I  answered,  I  humbly
thanked  him,  but  he  knew  it  contained  a  condition
which  I  would  not  accept  of;  and  that  further  I  did
desire  to  propound  our  owne  demands,  wherein  I  would
containe  all  the  desires  of  my  Master  at  once,  that  I
might  not  daily  trouble  them  with  complaints,  and
wherein I would reciprocally bind my Soveraigne to

335

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

mutuall  offices  of  friendship ;  and  his  Subjects  to  any
such  conditions,  as  his  Majesty  would  reasonably  pro-
pound, whereof  I  would  make  an  offer,  which  beeing
drawne  Tripartite,  his  Majesty  (I  hoped)  would  signe
the  one,  the  Prince  the  other,  and  in  my  Masters  behalfe
I  would  firme  the  third.  ,The  King  pressed  to  know
the  Conditions  I  refused  in  the  Princes  Firman,  which
I  recited,  and  so  we  fell  into  earnest  dispute,  and  some
MochrebChan  heate.  Mocrib  Chan  enterposing,  said,  he  was  the  Por-
btZk~En7i?h  *°  tuga^s  advocate ;  speaking  slightly  of  us,  that  the  King
should  never  signe  any  Article  against  them.  I  answered,
I  propound  none  against  them,  but  in  our  owne  just
defence ;  and  I  did  not  take  him  for  such  a  friend  to
them  :  the  Jesuite  and  all  the  Portugals  side  fell  in,  in
so  much  that  I  explained  my  selfe  fully  concerning  them  ;
and  as  I  offered  a  conditionall  peace,  so  I  set  their  friendship
at  a  mean  rate,  and  their  hatred  or  force  at  lesse.  The
King  answered,  my  demands  were  just,  resolution  noble,
and  bad  me  propound.  Asaph  Chan  that  stood  mute
all  this  discourse,  and  desired  to  end  it,  least  it  breake
out  againe  (for  we  were  very  warme)  enterposed,  that
if  wee  talked  all  night  it  would  come  to  this  issue,  that
I  should  draw  my  demands  in  writing,  and  present  them,
and  if  they  were  found  reasonable,  the  King  would  firme
them ;  to  which  the  King  replyed,  yes ;  and  I  desired
his  Sonne  would  doe  the  like,  who  answered  he  would  :
[I.  iv.  54.5.3  so  the  King  rose.  But  I  calling  to  him,  he  turned  about,
and  I  bad  my  Interpreter  say,  That  I  came  the  day  before
to  see  his  Majestie,  and  his  greatnesse,  and  the  Cere-
monies of  this  Feast,  that  I  was  placed  behind  him,  I
confessed  with  honour,  but  I  could  not  see  abroad ;  and
that  therefore  I  desired  his  Majestie  to  licence  me  to
stand  up  by  his  Throne ;  whereat  he  commanded  Asaph
Chan  to  let  mee  choose  my  owne  place.

The  foureteenth  in  the  morning,  I  sent  a  Messenger
to  Asaph  Chan,  least  hee  or  the  Prince  might  mistake
me  by  the  Kings  mistakings,  that  I  had  complained
against  them,  which  as  I  did  not,  so  it  was  not  yet  in  my

336

SIR  THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1616.

purpose :  onely  I  was  willing  to  let  them  see,  I  did  not  so
depend  on  Asaph  Chan,  by  whose  mouth  I  used  to
doe  my  businesse  ;  but  that  if  he  continued  his  manner  of
never  delivering  what  I  said,  but  what  he  pleased ;  I
would  find  another  way.  My  message  was  to  cleare
any  such  doubt,  if  it  remained ;  or  if  not,  to  entreat  him
that  he  would  soften  the  Prince  in  my  demands  concern-
ing Surat.  He  answered.  Neither  the  Prince  nor  hee  had
any  reason  to  suspect,  my  purpose  was  to  complaine
of  them  :  that  the  error  was  evident  enough,  for  his  part
he  had  ever  had  the  love  of  the  English,  and  would
endeavour  to  continue  it.

The  sixe  and  twentieth  of  Aprill,  I  received  intelligence,
that  the  Prince  caused  one  of  his  Servants  at  the  Durbar,
to  aske  the  King  why  he  used  so  good  countenance  to
the  English,  that  for  their  cause  the  Portugals  were
barred  the  Port  of  Surat,  who  brought  more  profit  to  the
King,  as  many  Ballaces,  Pearles,  and  Jewels,  whereas  the
English  came  onely  to  seeke  profit,  with  Cloth,  Swords,
and  Knives  of  little  estimation.  The  King  answered
onely,  it  was  true,  but  who  could  mend  it.  Hereby  the
Princes  good  affection  was  manifest,  and  1  had  faire
warning  to  bee  watchfull,  and  to  study  to  preserve  our
selves  in  the  Kings  grace,  in  which  onely  wee  were  safe :
but  I  resolved  to  take  notice  of  this,  and  to  make  proofe
if  I  could  settle  a  better  opinion  in  the  Prince  of  our
Nation.

The  two  and  twentieth  of  May,  I  went  to  the  Durbar
to  visit  the  King,  and  to  desire  his  authoritie  to  have  one
Jones  a  youth,  that  was  runne  away  from  mee  to  an
Italian,  and  protected  himselfe  under  the  name  of  the
King  to  the  infamy  of  our  Nation.  The  King  gave  order
for  his  deliverie,  but  the  Prince  who  ever  waited  oppor-
tunitie  to  disgrace  our  Nation  for  the  cause  of  his
Favorite  Zulpheckarcon  with  whom  I  was  newly  broken
off  from  conference,  and  had  sent  the  Prince  word  I  would
no  longer  forbeare  opening  my  cause  to  the  King,  mooved
the  King  in  private  to  send  for  the  youth  first,  which
iv  337  Y

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

at  the  Gusel  Chan  hee  did :  and  the  Prince  giving  him
countenance,  he  railed  to  my  face  with  most  virulent
malice,  desiring  the  King  to  save  his  life,  so  the  King
resolved  not  to  deliver  him  to  me,  but  to  send  him
Prisoner  to  Surat,  but  the  Prince  to  brave  me,  begged
him  for  his  servant,  the  fellow  having  quite  renounced
his  Countrey,  the  King  gave  him  to  the  Prince,  notwith-
standing any  reasons  I  could  alledge :  so  the  Prince
presently  gave  him  one  hundred  and  fiftie  Rupias,  and
the  pay  of  two  Horse,  and  forbade  mee  to  meddle
with  him.

The  three  and  twentieth,  at  night  my  man  came  and
fell  at  my  feet,  asking  pardon  for  his  lying  and  madnesse,
and  offered  to  submit  himselfe  in  any  kind.  I  told  him
I  would  not  now  keepe  him  Prisoner  he  was  the  Princes
servant,  but  that  before  I  could  give  him  any  an s were
he  should  make  me  publike  satisfaction  as  farre  as  he
was  able.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  Jones  made  meanes  to  come
to  the  Gusel  Chan,  and  there  asked  pardon  of  the  King
for  his  lyes,  denying  every  word  hee  had  spoken,  and
to  have  been  done  to  protect  himselfe  from  me,  whom  he
had  offended,  desiring  the  King  to  send  for  me  that
he  might  there  aske  my  pardon :  the  King  was  well
pleased. But  the  Prince  fell  into  a  great  rage.

The  five  and  twentieth,  I  went  to  the  Guzelcan,  where
after  many  protestations  of  the  King,  that  he  never
beleeved  him,  that  he  was  a  Villaine,  yet  that  hee  could
doe  no  lesse  but  protect  him,  having  cast  himselfe  into
his  mercy :  the  youth  was  sent  for,  who  on  his  knees
asked  mee  forgivenesse,  and  on  his  oath  swore  to  the
King,  that  he  had  in  every  particular  belyed  me,  which  he
professed  to  doe  voluntarie,  for  that  he  durst  never
returne  to  his  countrey.  The  King  chid  him  a  little,
and  told  me,  he  nor  any  good  man  ever  beleeved  him :
but  the  Prince  grew  so  angry  that  moving  him  with
many  questions  to  stand  to  his  first  word,  which  he  re-
fusing was  bid  be  gone :  and  the  Prince  publikely  calling

338

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1616.

for  him  againe,  bad  him  most  basely  returne him the

one hundred  and fiftie Rupias, delivered him for  that

he  gave it  to maintayne  him  against me,  which  seeing

he went  from, he would have his  money : which the

fellow  promised  but  he  should  have  it  presently,  and  so

sent  an under  Treasurer  with  him  to  the  house,  where

hee  was  lodged,  for  into  mine,  I  would  not  suffer  him

to  come.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  thus  I  was  enforced  to  seeme
content,  because  I  had  no  way  to  seeke  remedie,  for
Presents  I  had  none,  and  the  King  never  takes  any
request  to  heart,  except  it  come  accompanied,  and  will  in
plaine  tearmes  demand  it,  which  advantage  the  Prince
takes,  urging  the  Portugals  bringing  of  Jewels,  Ballests
and  Pearles  with  much  disgrace  to  our  English  com-
moditie.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  the  Portugals  went  before
the  King  with  a  Present,  and  a  Ballas  Rubie,  to  sell  as
was  reported,  weighing  thirteene  Tole,  two  Tole  and  a
halfe  being  an  ounce :  they  demanded  five  Leckes  of
Rupies,  but  the  King  offered  but  one.  Asaph  Chan  is
also  their  Sollicitor,  to  whom  they  gave  a  Present  of  [I.  iv.  546.]
Stones,  they  had  divers  Rubies  Ballaces,  Emeralds  and
Jewels  set  to  sell,  which  so  much  contented  the  King
and  his  great  men,  that  we  were  for  a  time  eclipsed.

The  Prince  and  the  Jesuite  fell  out  about  presenting
them,  which  the  Prince  desired ;  but  it  was  promised  to
Asaph  Chan  before  concerning  the  Portugals  credit,  here  I
ever  made  my  judgement  by  report,  but  now  experience
shewes  me  the  difference  made  betweene  us  and  them,
for  they  were  sought  after  by  every  bodie,  whereas  they
seeme  to  buy  our  commodities  for  almes,  besides  their
Neigbour-hood  and  advantage  to  hinder  that  Trade  into
the  Red  Sea,  is  ever  more  readier  then  ours  to  doe  harme,
because  they  are  setled,  so  that  onely  for  a  little  feare
wee  were  entertained,  but  for  our  trade  or  any  thing
we  being  not  at  all  respected.

339

A.D.

l6l6.

June  12.
Sultan

Coroone,  to  be
emploiedinthe
Decern  zvarres.

Severe  com-
mand.

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

§. III.

Occurrents  happening  in  June,  July,  August  1616.
and  divers  passages  of  speech  and  action,
whence  the  Nature,  Arts,  and  disposition  of
the  King  and  his  Subjects  may  bee  ob-
served.

He  twelfth  of  June,  there  is  a  resolution  taken  that
Sultan  Coroone  shall  goe  to  the  Decan  warres,
and  the  day  prefixed  having  consulted  all  the
Bramans.  Prince  Parvis  is  called  home,  whom  (it  is
reported)  wrote  to  his  father,  that  if  hee  would  send
his  elder  brother,  he  would  obey,  but  to  dishonour  him
by  imploying  this,  hee  would  first  fall  on  him,  and  after
finish  the  warre.  All  the  Captaines,  as  Channa  Chana,
Mahobet  Chan,  Chan  John,  refuse  to  stay  if  this  Tyrant
come  to  command,  so  well  is  he  beloved :  it  is  true,  all
men  awe  him  more  then  the  King,  now  that  hee  is  to
receive  the  Armie ;  the  King  cannot  bee  remooved  from
his  resolution,  so  that  his  sudden  departure  two  and
twentie  dayes  from  this  present,  must  hasten  me  to  finish
this  businesse,  and  to  know  a  resolution :  for  after  his
departure  with  his  Minion  Zulpheckcarcon,  there  is
no  hope  to  recover  a  penny,  nor  any  Justice  against
him.

The  eighteenth,  the  King  commanded  one  of  his
brothers  sonnes  (who  was  made  a  Christian  in  policie,
to  bring  him  into  hatred  with  the  people)  to  go  strike
a  Lyon  on  the  head,  which  was  brought  before  the  King ;
but  he  being  afraid,  refused  it:  so  the  King  bade  his
youngest  sonne  to  go  touch  the  Lyon,  who  did  so  without
any  harme,  whereat  the  King  tooke  occasion  to  send
his  Nephew  away  to  a  prison,  where  hee  is  never  like
to  see  day-light.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  the  Prince  had  a  sonne  borne,
and  now  being  preparing  for  this  warre,  all  mens  eyes
were  on him, either  for  flattery, gaine, or  envy, none

34°

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1616.

for  love.  He  received  twenty  Leeks  of  Rupies  towards
his  charges,  (two  hundred  thousand  pound  sterling)  and
began  to  deale  money  liberally  :  but  notwithstanding  his
show  of  his  Fathers  affection  and  greatnesse,  a  Chan
perswaded  the  King  that  the  Voyage  would  bee  danger-
ous, in  respect  of  the  Prince  Parvis,  whose  honour  was
so  wounded,  that  he  would  not  returne  without  revenge.
The  King  replyed,  let  them  fight,  I  am  well  contented,
and  he  that  proves  himselfe  the  better  Captaine  shall
pursue  the  war  re.

Abdala  Hassan  is  Captaine  of  all  the  souldiers,  enter-  Abdala
tained at Court,  and  Treasurer  to  all  the Armies : he  Hassan-
entertained me courteously,  with few  complements,  but
much  civility,  wee  sate  to  see  his  souldiers  shoote  in  bowes
and peeces, most of  them with single bullet did hit  Exquhit
the  marke,  being  a  hand-breath  in  a  butt,  wee  had  some  maikmen-
discourse of  our use  of  weapons,  and  so  I  departed.

The  thirteenth  of  July  in  the  morning,  I  sent  Sultan  July  13.
Carronne  three  bottles  of  Alligant,  and  a  Letter  con-
cerning the  Portugalls,  the  differences  betweene  our
Trade  and  theirs,  and  to  procure  all  the  customs  in  and
out  to  farme  for  the  Companies  use  (the  copy  is  registred.)
The  Prince  caused  (as  is  his  barbarous  custome  in  all
businesse  passing  in  publike)  the  Letter  to  be  twice
read  by  his  Secretary,  and  often  interrupted  it  with  speech
to  him :  in  the  end  sent  word,  that  at  night  when  he
came  downe,  he  would  reade  it  himselfe,  and  consider
it,  and  that  I  should  receive  answere  from  Merze
Sorocalla.

At  night  I  went  to  the  Durbar  to  visite  the  King :  Them  KinSs
So  soone  as  I  came  in,  he  sent  Asaph  Chan  to  me,  that  J  *£J  in
he  heard  I  had  in  my  house  an  excellent  Painter,  and
desired  me  he  might  see  some  of  his  worke :  I  replyed,
according  to  truth,  that  there  was  none,  but  a  yong  man,
a  Merchant,  that  for  his  exercise  did  with  a  pen  draw
some  figures,  but  very  meanely,  farre  from  the  arte  of
Painting.  The  King  replyed,  that  I  should  not  feare  that
hee  would  take  any  man  from mee  by force, that he

34i

A.D.
l6l6.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

would  neither  doe  mee  injury,  nor  suffer  any  other ;  and
prayed  that  he  might  see  that  man  and  his  worke,  howso-
ever it  was.  I  replyed,  I  had  no  such  doubt  of  his
Majesty,  and  for  his  satisfaction  I  would  bring  him  to
the  Guzell  Chan  with  such  toyes  as  he  had,  which  perhaps
was  an  Elephant,  or  a  Deare,  or  such  like  in  paper.  At
this  answere  the  King  bowed  himselfe,  and  returned,  that
if  I  desired  an  Elephant,  or  the  figure,  or  any  other  thing
[I.  iv.  547.]  in  his  Countrey,  I  should  not  buy  it,  nor  seeke  any  other
way  but  to  him,  that  whatsoever  I  had  a  mind  to,  he
would  give  me,  and  that  I  should  freely  speake  to  him,  for
he  was  my  friend.  I  made  a  Reverence,  and  answered
that  I  humbly  thanked  his  Majesty,  Elephants  were  of  no
such  use  to  mee,  neither  was  it  the  custome  of  my  Nation,
especially  of  my  place,  to  aske  any  thing,  if  his  Majestie
gave  me  but  the  worth  of  a  Rupie,  I  would  receive  it,
and  esteeme  it  as  a  marke  of  his  favour.  He  replyed,
he  knew  not  what  I  desired,  that  there  were  some  things
in  his  Countrey,  rare  in  mine,  and  that  I  should  not  make
dainty  to  speake  to  him,  for  he  would  give  mee  such
things  as  should  be  most  welcome,  and  that  I  should
bee  cheerefull,  for  that  he  was  a  friend  to  our  Nation
and  to  mee,  and  would  protect  us  from  any  injury,  but
desired  that  I  would  that  night  come  to  the  Guzell  Chan,,
with  the  youth  that  painted,  with  his  Pictures.  So  Asaph
Chan  wished  me  to  send  home  to  fetch  him  to  his  house ;
whither  if  I  would  go  and  stay  with  him  untill  the  King
came  abroad,  I  should  be  very  welcome ;  which  I
promised.  I  never  received  so  much  grace  and  favour
from  the  King,  as  at  this  time,  which  all  men  tooke
notice  of,  and  accordingly  altered  their  fashions  towards
mee ;  specially  it  happened  well  that  the  Jesuit  was
made  Interpreter  of  all  this  by  the  Kings  appointment..
This  day  a  Gentle-woman  of  Normalls  was  taken  in
the  Kings  house  in  some  action  with  an  Eunuch;  another
Capon  that  loved  her,  killed  him  :  the  poore  woman  was
set  up  to  the  arme-pits  in  the  earth,  hard  rammed,  her  feet
tied to  a stake, to  abide three  dayes and two nights.

342

Story  of  an
Eunuch  und-
one of  the
Kings  women

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1616.
without  any  sustenance,  her  head  and  armes  exposed
to  the  Sunnes  violence :  if  shee  dyed  not  in  that  time,
shee  should  be  pardoned  :  the  Eunuch  was  condemned  to
the  Elephants.  This  Damsell  yeelded  in  Pearle,  Jewels,
and  ready  money,  sixteene  hundred  thousand  Rupies.

The  two  and  twentieth,  I  received  Letters  from  Bram-
port : in  answere  of  those to Mahobet Chan,  who at  MahobetChan

first  granted my  desire,  making  his  Firman  to  Barooch ?€*"?■?,-

5  rr  11 J  •  xf  •  j  ,  the  English  for

most  ertectuall,  to  receive  our  JNation,  and  to  give  them  a  Borooch.

house  neare  the  Governour,  strictly  commanding  no  man
to  molest  them  by  sea  or  land,  or  to  take  any  custome  of
them,  or  any  way  trouble  them  under  colour  thereof.
Finally,  that  they  might  buy,  sell,  and  transport  any
commoditie  at  their  pleasures,  without  any  molestation ;
concluding,  that  they  should  expect  to  heare  no  other
from  him,  and  therefore  they  should  be  carefull  in  execu-
tion. 1  received  with  it  a  Letter  from  himselfe  (which  His  Civility
was  more  civility  then  all  the  Indies  yeelded  me)  full  andSPodP^ts.
of  courtesie  and  humanity,  and  great  respect,  protesting
his  desire  to  give  me  content,  and  that  what  I  had  de-
manded, I  should  make  no  doubt  of  performance  :  and  if
I  had  any  other  occasion  to  use  him,  hee  desired  mee
to  write,  and  it  should  be  performed.  The  Copies  are
worthy  the  seeing  for  the  rarenesse  of  the  phrase.  The
Firman  I  caused  to  be  sent  to  Surat :  so  that  Borooch
is  provided  for  a  good  retrait  from  the  Princes  injuries,
and  the  custome  given,  whereby  fifteene  hundred  pound,
per  annum,  will  bee  saved,  besides  all  manner  of  searches
and  extortions.  For  the  performance  of  this  no  man
maketh  any  doubt,  for  that  all  men  confesse,  that  he
neither  careth  for  the  Prince,  and  so  feareth  not,  nor
needeth  any  man,  being  the  only  beloved  man  of  the  King,
and  second  person  in  his  Dominions,  and  in  all  his  life  so
liberall  of  his  purse,  and  honorable  of  his  word,  that
he  hath  ingrossed  good  reports  from  all  others :  and
concerning  Custer**,  the  King  takes  none,  the  Govern-
ours  make  it  their  profit,  which  he  professeth  to  scorne
that  he  should  abuse  the  liberty  of  the  Kings  Ports.

343

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

August  6.  The  sixt  of  August, I  was  sent  for  to  the  Durbar ;

.  .  n&  the  businesse  was  about  a  Picture  I  had  lately  given  to
tainting,  and  t^ie  King,  an(^  was  confident  that  no  man  in  India  could
the  Indian  equall  it.  So  soone  as  I  came,  he  asked  mee  what  I
workmanship,  would  give  the  Painter  that  had  made  a  copy  so  like  it,
for  which  tjlat;  j  should  not  know  my  owne  :  I  answered,  a  Painters
'notice*} the*  reward,  6%"  Rupies.  The  King  replyed,  his  Painter
Kings  disposi-  was  a  Caveleer,  and  that  too  small  a  gift ;  to  which  I
tion  is  heere  answered,  I  gave  my  Picture  with  a  good  heart,  esteeming
added.  *t  rare)  ancj  meant  not  to  make  comparison  or  wagers :

if  his  servant  had  done  as  well,  and  would  not  accept
of  my  gift,  his  Majesty  was  most  fit  to  reward  him.
So  with  many  passages  of  jests,  mirth,  and  bragges  con-
cerning the  Arts  of  his  Countrey,  hee  fell  to  aske  mee
questions,  how  often  I  dranke  a  day,  and  how  much,  and
what  ?  what  in  England  ?  what  Beere  was  ?  how  made  ?
and  whether  I  could  make  it  heere  ?  In  all  which  I
satisfied  his  great  demands  of  State.  He  concluded  that
I  should  come  to  the  Guzel  Chan,  and  then  I  should
see  my  Pictures.  At  night  he  sent  for  me,  being  hasty  to
triumph  in  his  work-man,  and  shewed  me  sixe  Pictures,
five  made  by  his  man,  all  pasted  in  one  table  so  like,
that  I  was  by  candle-light  troubled  to  discerne  which
was  which,  I  confesse,  beyond  all  expectation  :  yet  I
shewed  mine  owne,  and  the  differences,  which  were  in
arte  apparent,  but  not  to  be  judged  by  a  common  eye.
But  for  that  at  first  sight  I  knew  it  not,  he  was  very
merry  and  joyfull,  and  craked  like  a  Northerne  man :
I  gave  him  way  and  content,  praising  his  mans  art.
Now,  saith  he,  what  say  you  ?  I  replyed,  1  saw  his
Majestie  needed  no  picture  from  our  Countrey ;  but  saith
he,  what  will  you  give  the  Painter  ?  I  answered,  seeing
he  had  so  farre  excelled  in  my  opinion  of  him,  I  would
double  my  liberality,  and  that  if  he  came  to  my  house,  I
would  give  him  one  hundred  Rupies  to  buy  a  Nagge,
which  the  King  tooke  kindly,  but  answered,  he  should
accept  no  money,  but  some  other  gift :  which  I  promised  :
the King  asked  what  ? I said  it  was  referrable  to  my

344

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1616.

discretion :  so  he  answered  it  was  true,  yet  desired  I
would  name  it.  I  replyed,  a  good  Sword,  a  Pistoll,  a
Picture ;  whereat  the  King  answered,  You  confesse  hee  is
a  good  work-man :  send  for  him  home,  and  shew  him
such  toyes  as  you  have,  and  let  him  choose  one,  in  [I.  iv.  548.]
requitall  whereof  you  shall  choose  any  of  these  Copies
to  shew  in  England.  We  are  not  so  unskilfull,  as  you
esteeme  us :  so  hee  pressed  me  to  choose  one,  which
I  did ;  the  King  wrapping  it  up  in  a  paper,  and  putting  it
up  in  a  little  booke  of  mine,  delivered  it,  with  much  joy
and  exultation  of  his  mans  supposed  victory,  whereat
I  shewed  him  a  Picture  I  had  of  his  Majesties,  farre
inferiour  to  the  worke  I  now  saw,  which  caused  me  to
judge  of  all  other  by  that  which  he  delivered  me  as  the
best.  He  asked  me  where  I  had  it ;  I  told  him.  Why,
said  he,  doe  you  buy  any  such  things  ?  have  not  I  the
best  ?  and  have  not  I  told  you,  I  would  give  you  whatso-
ever you  desired  ?  I  thanked  his  Majesty,  but  that  I
held  it  not  civility  to  trouble  him  in  such  trifles,  especially
as  a  begger :  he  replyed,  it  was  no  shame  to  aske  of
him,  and  bad  me  speake  at  all  times  freely,  pressing  me  The  courtesie
to  aske  somewhat : I  answered,  I  would  not  choose  my  °f  &'

gift,  whatsoever  came  from  his  Majesties  hands  I  would
receive  as  a  marke  of  honour :  hee  replyed,  if  you  desire
my  Picture,  I  will  give  you  one  for  your  selfe,  or  for
your  King.  I  answered,  if  his  Majestie  would  send  the
King  one,  I  would  gladly  cary  it,  and  knew  his  Majestie
would  take  it  friendly,  and  esteeme  it  much.  But  that
since  his  Majestie  had  emboldened  mee,  I  would  desire
one  for  my  selfe,  which  I  would  keepe  and  leave  to  my
Posteritie,  as  an  ensigne  of  his  Majesties  favour.  He
replyed,  your  King  doth  not  desire  one,  but  you  doe,
therefore  you  shall  have  it,  and  so  he  gave  present  order
for  the  making :  then  he  turned  to  rest,  and  wee  were
blind-fold  dismissed.

The twelfth  of  August, Gemal-din-ussin, a man of  The  courtesie
seventie  yeares, Vice-roy  of  Patan,  and  Lord  of  foure  °{l^'mal"dm'
Cities  in  Bengala,  one  that  hath  beene  often  Ambassadour,

345

us  sin.

A.D.

l6l6.

A  History
written  by
him.

Manner  of
Mogull
Government.

Eleven  Leckes
for  Patan  to
the  King.

Their  opinion
of  Christ.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  of  more  understanding  and  courtesie  then  all  his
Countrimen,  and  to  be  esteemed  hospitable,  and  a  re-
ceiver of  strangers,  not  secretly  ambitious  ;  he  often  made
meanes  that  I  would  come  to  his  house,  which  at  last  1
did,  and  was  received  with  extraordinary  familiaritie  and
kindnesse,  offering  me  a  Lecke  of  Rupias,  and  such  other
curtesies  so  great,  that  they  bespake  their  owne  refusall.
His  favour  with  the  King,  his  credit,  his  counsell,  all  was
offered  that  could  fulfill  complements.  And  this  I  must
confesse,  that  from  a  person  reverent  in  yeares  it  seemed
more  cordiall,  and  for  in  some  Discourse  speaking  so
plainly  of  his  fellowes  in  Court,  truthes  in  mine  owne
experience,  I  resolved  hee  was  a  good  natured  and  right
hearted  old  man.  He  told  me  much  of  the  Customes  of
this  Countrey,  of  their  servitude,  of  their  want  of  Lawes,
of  the  increase  of  this  Empire,  wherein  hee  had  served  three
Princes  in  grace  and  favour,  of  which  times  hee  shewed
me  a  Booke  or  Annall  of  all  memorable  Actions  which  he
had  daily  commited  to  record,  and  had  composed  them
into  a  Historie,  the  Copie  whereof  he  offered  me  if  I
could  procure  it  translated.  Concerning  the  Kings
revenue  and  the  manner  of  raising  it,  besides  confiscations,
gifts,  and  cuttings  upon  great  men  ;  that  the  Government
of  every  Province  did  yearely  pay  a  Rent :  as  for  his
Government  of  Patan  onely,  he  gave  the  King  eleven
Leckes  of  Rupias,  (the  Rupias  sterling  is  two  shillings
two  pence)  all  other  profits  were  his,  wherein  he  had
Regall  authoritie  to  take  what  he  list,  which  was  esteemed
at  five  thousand  horse,  the  pay  of  every  one  at  two
hundred  Rupias  by  the  yeare,  whereof  he  kept  fifteene
hundred,  and  was  allowed  the  Surplusse  as  dead  pay :
besides  the  King  gave  him  a  Pention  of  one  thousand
Rupias  a  day,  and  some  smaller  governments.  Yet  he
assured  me  there  were  divers  had  double  his  entertain-
ment, and  above  twentie  equall.

He  praysed  the  good  Prophet  Jesus  and  his  Lawes,
and  was  full  of  very  delightfull  and  fruitfull  Discourse.
This  Visit  was  past  some  few  dayes,  and  I  thought  that

346

SIR THOMAS ROE  ad

1616.

his  courtesie  had  beene  at  an  end  :  but  this  day  he  had
borrowed  of  the  King  his  house  and  Garden  of  pleasure :
Havar  Gemall,  a  mile  out  of  Towne  to  feast  me  in ;  and
overnight  earnestly  inviting  me,  I  promised  to  come.
At  midnight  he  went  himselfe  and  caryed  his  Tents  Entertaine-
and  all  furniture,  and  fitted  up  a  place  by  the  Tanke  side  m^ntatahouse
very  handsomely.  In  the  morning  I  went.  At  my
comming  he  came  to  meet  mee  and  with  extraordinary
civilitie  carryed  me  into  his  roome  prepared  where  hee
had  some  company  and  one  hundred  servants  attending,
two  of  his  sonnes,  being  a  father  to  thirtie.  He  enter-
tayned  me  with  shewing  me  the  Kings  little  closets  and
retyring  roomes  which  were  painted  with  Antiques,  and  in
some  panes  Copies  of  the  French  Kings  and  other
Christian  Princes  ;  wanting  no  Court-ship.  That  he  was
a  poore  man,  slave  to  the  King,  that  he  desired  I  should
receive  some  content,  and  that  therefore  he  had  drawne
me  to  a  slight  Banquet  to  eate  bread  and  salt  together,
to  seale  a  friendship  which  he  desired  me  to  accept  :
that  there  were  many  great  men  able  to  shew  me  more  Censure  of  Ms
courtesie,  but  they  were  proud  &  false  wishing  me  •>  Nobles-
to  trust  to  none,  for  that  if  I  had  busines  to  the  King  of
any  weight,  either  concerning  the  Portugals  or  any  other,
they  would  never  deliver  truth  who  were  my  Interpreters,
but  only  what  either  please  themselves  or  would  content  in
the  relation.  That  therefore  I  should  never  be  rightly
understood,  nor  effect  my  businesse  without  abuse,  nor
never  cleerely  know  my  estate  untill  I  had  an  Englishman
that  could  speake  Persian,  and  that  might  deliver  my
minde  without  passing  the  tongue  of  another,  which  the
King  would  grant  me  if  I  could  find  any :  for  that  The  Kings
hee  had  conceived  a  good  opinion  of  me,  and  the  last  r/.s^  t0R
night  at  the  Gussel  Chan,  having  brought  before  him
the  Jewels  of  Sheck  Ferid,  Governour  of  Lahor  lately
dead,  he  remembred  me  of  himselfe,  and  seeing  a
Picture  of  his  owne  that  pleased  him,  he  delivered
it  to  Asaph  Chan,  commanding  him  to  send  it  me
to weare for his sake, with many words of favour

347

A.D.
l6l6.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[I.  iv.  549.]
Rites  of  enter-
tainment.

The  provision
Chesse-play.

towards me, which would make all the great men
respect  me.

In  this  time  came  in  Dinner.  So  sitting  on  Carpetting,
a  cloth  was  layd  and  divers  banquetting  set  before  us,  and
the  like  a  little  apart  for  the  Gentlemen  that  companied
him,  to  whom  hee  went  to  eat,  they  holding  it  a  kind  of
uncleanenesse  to  mingle  with  us.  Whereat  I  told  him,
hee  promised  we  should  eate  bread  and  salt  together,
that  without  his  company  I  had  little  appetite  so  he  rose
and  sate  by  me,  and  we  fell  roundly  to  our  victuals.
The  substance  was  made  dishes  of  divers  sorts,  Raisons,
Almonds,  Pistachees  and  Fruit.  Dinner  ended,  he  played
at  Chesse,  and  I  walked,  returning  after  some  discourse
I  offered  to  take  my  leave,  he  answered  he  had  intreated
me  to  come  to  eate,  that  what  was  passed  was  but  a
collation,  that  I  must  not  depart  till  I  had  supped,  which
I  easily  granted  to.

About  an  houre  after  came  to  visit  him  the  Ambassa-
dour  of  one  of  the  Decan  Kings  whom  he  presented  to
me,  using  him  with  civilitie,  but  in  a  much  inferiour
manner,  in  respect  of  his  fashion  toward  me :  he  asked
me  if  his  Majestie  my  Master  would  not  take  in  scorne
the  offer  of  service  from  so  poore  a  man,  and  if  hee  would
vouchsafe,  to  accept  of  a  Present  from  a  stranger,  for
that  he  would  send  a  Gentleman  with  me  to  kisse  his
Majesties  hands,  and  to  see  our  Countrey.  I  answered
him  as  became  civilitie  and  good  manners ;  so  hee  sent
for  one  presently,  and  questioned  him  if  he  would  venture
the  journey,  who  seeming  willing  hee  presented  to  mee,
and  said  he  would  provide  some  Toyes  of  the  Countrey
for  his  Majestie,  and  send  him  in  my  companie.  By
the  manner,  this  seemed  to  me  to  be  earnest.
Supper  served  While  we  thus  spent  time,  our  Supper  came,  two
clothes  being  spread,  as  in  the  morning  and  before  me
and  my  Chaplaine,  and  one  Merchant  were  set  divers
dishes  of  Sallets  and  meate  rost,  fryed,  boyled,  and  divers
Rices  :  he  desired  to  be  excused,  that  it  was  their  manner
to  eate  among  themselves,  his  Countrimen  would  take  it

348

Purposes  to
send  one  into
England.

in.

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1616.

ill,  if  he  eate  not  with  them ;  so  hee  and  his  guests,  1  and
my  Company  solaced  our  selves  with  a  good  refreshing.
The  meate  was  not  amisse,  but  the  attendance  and  order
much  better,  his  servants  being  very  diligent  and  respect-
full.  Hee  gave  mee  for  a  present,  as  is  the  manner,  TAey  give
when  one  is  invited,  five  cases  of  Sugar  Candie  dressed  !e.sen~ht0
with  Muske,  and  one  Loafe  of  most  fine  Sugar  white
as  Snow,  about  fiftie  pound  weight,  desiring  me  to
accept  of  one  hundred  such  against  my  going,  which  said
he,  you  refuse  of  me  thinking  I  am  poore,  but  it  costs
me  nothing,  it  is  made  in  my  Government,  and  comes
gratis  to  me.  I  answered,  hee  had  too  farre  alreadie
obliged  me,  that  I  would  not  refuse  his  courtesie  when
I  was  readie  to  depart.  He  replyed,  he  might  bee  then
unfurnished,  and  therefore  desired  I  would  now  speake,
that  hee  might  not  lose  his  offer  and  labour  too.  Thus
professing  himselfe  my  father  and  I  his  sonne,  with
complements  I  tooke  my  leave.

The  sixteenth,  I  went  to  visit  the  King,  who  assoone  as  The  Kings
1  came  in,  called  to  his  women  and  reached  out  a  Picture  favour-
of  himselfe  set  in  Gold,  hanging  at  a  Wire  Gold  Chaine
with  one  pendant  foule  Pearle,  which  he  delivered  to
Asaph  Chan,  warning  him  not  to  demand  any  reverence
of  me,  other  then  such  as  I  would  willingly  give ;  it
being  the  custome  whensoever  hee  bestowes  any  thing,
the  receiver  kneeles  downe  and  puts  his  head  to  the
ground,  which  hath  beene  exacted  of  the  Ambassadors
of  Persia.  So  Asaph  Chan  came  to  mee,  and  I  offered  to
take  it  in  my  hand,  but  he  made  signe  to  put  off  my
hat,  and  then  put  it  about  my  necke,  leading  me  right
before  the  King.  I  understood  not  his  purpose,  but
doubted  he  would  require  the  custome  of  the  Countrey,
called  Sizeda.  But  I  was  resolved  rather  to  deliver  up  my
Present :  He  made  signe  to  give  the  King  thanke's,  which
I  did  after  my  owne  custome,  whereat  some  Officers
called  mee  to  Sizeda  :  but  the  King  answered  no,  no,  in
Persian ;  so  with  many  gracious  words  sent  me,  I  returned
to  my place,  you may  now  judge  the  Kings  liberalise;

349

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

this  gift  was  not  worth  in  all  thirtie  pounds,  yet  it  was
five  times  as  good  as  any  he  gives  in  that  kind,  and
held  for  an  especiall  favour,  for  that  all  the  great  men
that  weare  the  Kings  Image,  which  none  may  doe  but
to  whom  it  is  given,  receive  no  other  then  a  meddall
of  Gold  as  bigge  as  sixe  pence,  with  a  little  Chaine  of
foure  inches  to  fasten  it  on  their  heads,  which  at  their
owne  proper  charge,  some  set  with  stones,  or  garnish
with  pendant  Pearles.

The  nineteenth, Gemal-din-ussin,  who  invited  me to

Havaz  Gemall,  being  newly  made  Governour  of  Sindu,

came  to  me  to  dinner  with  two  sonnes  and  two  other

Superstitious Gentlemen,  and about one hundred servants :  hee  ate

Cautele.  some  Banqueting  stufFe  made  in  my  house  by  a  Moore

Cooke,  but  would  not  touch  such  meate  as  I  had  provided

of  my owne  fashion,  though  his  appetite  was  very  good,

a  kind  of  superstition  forbidding  him. But  hee  desired

me  that  foure  or  five  dishes  might  be  sent  to  his  house,

such  as  he  would  choose, being all  baked  meates which

hee  had  never  seene,  and  that  he  would  dine  on  them  in

private,  which  was  accordingly  done,  and  so  offering  us

the  Towne  of  Sindu,  and  all  other  courtesies  in  his  power,

he  made haste  to fill his belly. I gave  him  a small

Present  according  to  custome. This  day  suddenly  dyed

to  my  great  griefe,  and  discomfort  my  Minister  Master

Hall,  a  man  of  most  gentle  and  milde  nature,  religious,

and  of  unspotted  life.

Huge  mine  The twentieth day,  and  the night  past  fell  a  storm

ca/Ied  the Qf  raine  called  the  Oliphant,  usuall  at  going  out  of  the

**  raines,  but  for  the  greatnesse  very  extraordinary,  whereby

there  ran  such  streames  into  the  Tanke  whose  head  is

made  of  stone,  in  shew  extremely  strong,  but  the  water

was  so  growne  that  it  brake  over  in  one  place,  and  there

[I.  iv.  550.]  came an alarme and sudden feare,  that  it  would  give

way and drowne all  that  part  of  the  Towne  where  I

dwelt, insomuch that  the Prince  and all his women

forsooke  their  house;  my  next  Neighbour  carried  away

his  goods  and  his  wife  on his  Elephants  and  Camels  to

35o

SIR  THOMAS ROE  ad.

1616.

flye  to  the  hils  side.  All  men  had  their  Horses  ready
at  their  doores  to  save  their  lives,  so  that  we  were  much
frighted  and  sat  up  till  mid-night  for  that  we  had  no
help,  but  to  flye  our  selves  and  loose  all  our  goods,
for  it  was  reported  that  it  would  run  higher  then  the
top  of  my  house  by  three  foot,  and  carry  all  away
being  poore  muddy  buildings,  foureteene  yeeres  past,
a  terrible  experience  having  shewed  the  violence,  the
foot  of  the  Tanke  being  levell  with  our  dwelling,  and
the  water  extreame  great  and  deepe,  so  that  the  top  was
much  higher  then  my  house  which  stood  in  the  bottome
in  the  course  of  the  water,  every  ordinary  rain  making
such  a  Current  at  my  doore,  that  it  runne  not  swifter
in  the  Arches  of  London  Bridge,  and  is  for  some  houres
impassible  by  Horse  or  man.  But  God  otherwise  dis-
posed it  in  his  mercy,  the  King  caused  a  sluice  to  be
cut  in  the  night  to  ease  the  water  another  way,  yet  the
very  raine  had  washed  downe  a  great  part  of  the  wals  of
my  house,  and  so  weakened  it  by  divers  breaches,  in
that  I  feared  the  fall  more  then  the  floud :  and  was  so
moyled  with  dirt  and  water,  that  I  could  scarce  lye
dry  or  safe,  for  that  I  must  be  enforced  to  bee  at  new
charge  in  reparation.  Thus  were  we  every  way  afflicted  ;
fires,  smokes,  flouds,  stormes,  heats,  dust,  flyes,  and  no
temperate  or  quiet  season.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  the  King  went  to  Havaz
Jemal  and  so  to  hunting?  there  was  taken  a  resolution
to  remoove  to  Mandoe,  a  Castle  neere  Bramport  where  Mandoe.
is  no  Towne,  for  that  Sultan  Par  vis  being  come  from  the
warre  in  disgrace,  and  being  with  his  traine  neere  Asmere
the  King  commanded  him  to  Bengala,  excusing  himselfe
to  be  seene,  and  so  having  dispatched  him  without  such
incommoditie  as  was  feared  would  arise  if  the  two
brothers  met,  hee  intended  himselfe  to  settle  Sultan
Caronne  in  the  warres  of  Decan,  to  which  all  the  chiefest
were  so  contrary,  that  the  King  feared  to  send  him  downe
as  was  the  resolution  some  monethes  past,  and  therefore
dissembled  it,  until  the  other  Prince  were  withdrawne  &

35i

A.D.
l6l6.

A  wild  Bore
sent  by  the
King.

Rites  of  the
Kings  Birth-
day.

The  Kings
riches  in
Jewels,  &c.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

he  established  by  his  owne  countenance,  comming  so
neere  as  Mandoa,  which  remove  if  it  proceed  will  put
us  to  extreame  trouble  and  cost,  for  that  we  must  build
a  new  house  both  for  our  selves  and  goods,  the  Castle
standing  on  a  hill  without  any  other  buildings  neere  it.
The  thirtieth,  the  King  returned  in  the  night,  and
about  eleven  a  clocke  sent  mee  a  very  fat  wild  Boare,
and  so  great,  that  he  desired  the  Tusks  backe,  with
this  message,  that  he  kild  it  with  his  owne  hand,  and
that  therefore  I  should  eat  it  merrily,  and  make  good
cheare.  This  occasion  Jaddowe  that  was  sent  for  to  the
King  to  bring  it,  tooke  to  tell  Asaph  Chan,  that  I  desired
to  visit  him  on  the  morrow,  and  hoped  to  receive  from
his  hands  the  Priviledges  granted  by  the  King.  He
answered,  hee  could  not  dispatch  them  so  soone,  but  that
they  should  on  Sunday  bee  sealed,  and  that  he  was
loth  to  see  me,  untill  he  had  given  me  content.

§.  nil.

The  Kings  birthday,  and  manner  of  the  observa-
tion, with  other  accidents  in  September.

He  second  of  September,  was  the  birth  day  ot
the  King,  and  solemnized  as  a  great  Feast,  wherein
the  King  is  weighed  against  some  Jewels,  Gold,
Silver,  stuffes  of  Gold,  Silver,  Silke,  Butter,  Rice,  Fruit,
and  many  other  things  of  every  sort  a  little,  which  is  given
to  the  Bramini.  To  this  solemnitie  the  King  commanded
Asaph  Chan  to  send  for  me,  who  so  doing,  appointed  me
to  come  to  the  place  where  the  King  sits  out  at  Durbar,
and  there  I  should  be  sent  for  in ;  but  the  Messenger
mistaking,  I  went  not  until  Durbar  time,  and  so  missed
the  sight,  but  being  there  before  the  King  came  out,  as
soone  as  he  espyed  me,  hee  sent  to  know  the  reason
why  I  came  not  in,  he  having  given  order  ?  I  answered
according  to  the  error;  but  he  was  extreame  angry,  and
chid  Asaph  Chan  publiquely.  He  was  so  rich  in  Jewels,
that  I  must  confesse  I  never  saw  together  so  unvallewable

352

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1616.
wealth.  The  time  was  spent  in  bringing  of  his  greatest
Elephants  before  him,  some  of  which  being  lord-
Elephants,  had  their  chaines,  bels,  and  furniture  of  Gold
and  Silver,  attended  with  many  gilt  banners  and  flags,
and  eight  or  tenne  Elephants  waiting  on  him,  clothed
in  Gold,  Silke,  and  Silver.  Thus  passed  about  twelve
Companies  most  richly  furnished,  the  first  having  all
the  Plates  on  his  head  and  breast  set  with  Rubies  and
Emeraulds,  being  a  beast  of  a  wonderfull  stature  and
beautie.  They  all  bowed  downe  before  the  King,  making
a  reverence  very  handsomely,  and  was  a  shew  as  worthy
as  ever  I  saw  any  of  beasts  onely.  The  Keepers  of  every
chiefe  Elephant  gave  a  Present.  So  with  some  gracious
complements  to  me,  he  rose  and  went  in.

At  night  about  tenne  of  the  clocke,  he  sent  for  me,  I  was  Another

a  bed. The  Message  was,  hee  heard  I  had  a  picture  which  I  cu1}osiueabout

•  ■  •  Pictures

had not  shewed  him,  desiring  me  to come to  him  and

bring  it,  &  if  I  would  not  give  it  him,  yet  that  he  might

see  it,  and  take  copies  for  his  Wives. I  rose  and  carryed

it  with  me :  when  I  came  in,  I  found  him  sitting  crosse-

leged  on  a  little  Throne,  all  clad  in  Diamonds,  Pearles,  [I.  iv.  551.]

and  Rubies,  before  him  a  table  of  Gold,  in  it  about  fiftie

pieces  of  Gold  plate,  set  all  with  stones,  some  very  great

and  extreamely  rich,  some  of  lesse  value,  but  all  of  them

almost  covered  with  small  stones,  his  Nobilitie  about  him

in their  best  equipage,  whom  he  commanded  to  drinke

froliquely, severall  wines standing  by  in great flagons.

When I came  neere  him,  he  asked  for  the  Picture : I

shewed  him  two;  he  seemed  astonished  at  one  of  them,

and  demanded  whose  it  was. I  answered,  a  friends  of

mine  that  was  dead. He  asked  me  if  I  would  give  it

him. I  replyed,  that  I  esteemed  it  more  then  any  thing

I  possessed,  because  it  was  the  image  of  one  that  I  loved

dearely,  and  could  never  recover ;  but  that  if  his  Majestie

would  pardon  me  my  fancie,  and  accept  of  the  other,

which  was  a  French  Picture,  but  excellent  worke,  I  would

most  willingly  give  it  him. He  sent  me thankes,  but

that  it  was that  onely  Picture  he  desired,  and  loved  as

iv  353  z

a.°.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

well  as  I,  and  that  if  I  would  give  it  him,  he  would  better
esteeme  of  it,  then  the  richest  Jewell  in  his  house.  I
answered,  I  was  not  so  in  love  with  any  thing,  that  I
would  refuse  to  content  his  Majestie ;  I  was  extreame
glad  to  doe  him  service,  and  if  I  could  give  him  a  better
demonstration  of  my  affection,  which  was  my  heart  to
doe  him  service,  I  was  ready  to  present  it  to  him.  At
which  he  bowed  to  me,  and  replyed,  it  was  sufficient  that
I  had  given  it,  that  hee  confessed  hee  never  saw  so  much
Art,  so  much  Beauty;  and  conjured  me  to  tell  him
truely,  whether  ever  such  a  woman  lived.  I  answered,
there  did  one  live  that  this  did  resemble  in  all  things
but  perfection,  and  was  now  dead.  He  returned  me,
that  he  tooke  my  willingnesse  very  kindly ;  but  seeing
I  had  so  freely  given  him  that  that  I  esteemed  so  much,
he  would  not  rob  me  of  it,  onely  he  would  shew  it  his
Ladies,  and  cause  his  Workemen  to  make  him  five  Copies,
and  if  I  knew  my  owne  I  should  have  it.  I  answered,
I  had  freely  and  willingly  given  it,  and  was  extreamely
glad  of  his  Majesties  acceptance.  He  replyed,  that  he
would  not  take  it,  that  he  loved  me  the  better  for  loving
the  remembrance  of  my  friend,  and  knew  what  an  injury
it  was  to  take  it  from  me,  by  no  meanes  hee  would  not
keep  it,  but  onely  take  Copies,  and  with  his  owne  hand
he  would  returne  it,  and  his  Wives  should  weare  them  :
for  indeed  in  that  art  of  limming  his  Painters  worke
miracles,  the  other  beein  in  oyle  he  liked  not.

Then  he  sent  me  word,  it  was  his  birth  day,  and  that
all  men  did  make  merry,  and  to  aske  if  I  would  drinke
with  them.  I  answered,  whatsoever  his  Majestie  com-
manded ;  I  wished  him  many  prosperous  dayes,  and  that
this  Ceremonie  might  be  renewed  an  hundred  yeeres :
he  asked  mee  what  wine,  whether  of  the  Grape,  or  made ;
whether  strong  or  small.  I  replied,  what  he  commanded,
hoping  he  would  not  command  too  much,  nor  too  strong :
so  hee  called  for  a  Cuppe  of  Gold  of  mingled  Wine,  halfe
of  the  Grape,  halfe  artificiall,  and  dranke,  causing  it  to
bee  filled,  and  sent  by  one  of  his  Nobles  to  me  with  this

354

SIR THOMAS ROE  ad.

1616.

Message, That I should  drinke  it, twice, thrice, foure  TheKinggave

or  five  times  off  for  his  sake,  and  accept  of  the  Cup  and  ur T'rRij

appurtenances  as  a  Present. I  dranke  a  little,  but  it  was

more  strong  then  ever  I  tasted,  so  that  it  made  me  sneeze,  Strong  Wine.

whereat  he  laughed,  and  called  for  Raisons,  Almonds,  and

sliced  Limons,  which were  brought  mee  on  a  Plate  of

Gold,  and  he  bad  me  eat  and  drinke  what  I  would,  and

no  more. So then I made reverence for my Present

after  mine  owne  manner,  though  Asaph  Chan  would  have

caused  me  to  kneele,  and  knocke my  head  against  the

ground,  but  his  Majestie  best  accepted  what  I  did. The

cup  was  of  Gold,  set  all  over with  small  Turkies  and

Rubyes,  the  Cover  of  the  same  set  with  great  Turkies,

Rubies, and Emeralds in workes ; and a dish sutable

to  set  the  Cup  upon  :  the  value  I  know  not,  because  the

stones  are  many  of  them  small,  and  the  greater  (which

are  also  many),  are  not  all  cleane,  but  they  are  in  number

about  two  thousand,  and  in  gold  about  twenty  Ounces.

Thus hee made frolicke, and sent me  word,  he more

esteemed me then ever  any Franke : and  demanded  if  Franke  a

I  were  merry  at  eating  the  wild  Boare  sent  me  a  few  daies  nam*  commn

before ;  how  I  drest  it,  what  I  dranke,  and  such  comple-  christians

ments ;  That  I  should  want  nothing  in  his  land :  which

his  publique,  and  many  graces  I  found  presently  in  the

fashion  of  all  his  Nobilitie.

Then  he  threw  about  to  those  that  stood  below,  two
Chardgers  of  new  Rubies,  and  among  us  two  Chardgers
of  hollow  Almonds of  Gold and  Silver mingled  ; but  Scrambling  of
I  could  not  scramble  as  did  his  great  men : for  I  saw  his  tJle  ~°^es,
sonne  take  up  none;  then  he  gave  Shashes  of  Gold,  and  j/mma>s
Girdles  to  all the Musitians  and  Wayters,  and  to  many
others. So  drinking,  and  commanding  others,  his  Majestie  ;
and  all  his  Lords  became  the  finest  men  I  ever  saw,  of
a  thousand  humors;  but  his  sonne  Asaph  Chan,  and  two
old  men,  and  the  late  King  of  Candahar,  and  my  selfe
forbare. When  hee  could  not  hold  up  his  head,  he  lay
downe  to  sleepe,  and we all departed. At  going  out,
I mooved  Asaph Chan  for  dispatch  of  my  priviledges ;

355

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

assuring  him  his  Majesty  could  give  me  no  Present  so
acceptable ;  if  he  pleased  not  to  dispatch  me,  which  I
doubted  not,  if  it  lay  in  his  power,  but  that  some  other
hinderance  was  in  my  way,  I  would  on  the  morrow  moove
the  King,  he  desired  mee  not  to  doe  so :  for  the  King
loved  mee,  and  had  given  order  for  it,  that  the  prepara-
tion of  this  Feast  had  hindered  him,  but  that  now  hee
would  send  it  mee,  and  doe  me  all  service.

The  fourth  of  September,  I  found  it  easie  to  judge
what  vexation  it  is  to  traffique  with  those  faithlesse  people.
Seven  moneths  I  had  promise  from  weeke  to  weeke,  from
day  to  day,  and  no  exception,  but  finding  I  had  so  drawne
them,  that  I  should  not  much  need  the  Prince,  and  if
we  disliked,  we  might  refuse  his  governement.  He
Faithlesse  utterly  renounced  his  word  in  choller  and  rage.  I  durst
people.  not  yet  jeave  himj  nor  take  notice  of  his  falshood. He

[I.  iv.  552.]  that  first  tooke  him  for  our  Solicitor,  engaged  us  into  this
miserie,  knowing  him  to  bee  the  Protector  of  our  enemies,
and  a  Slave  to  bribes,  which  they  multiply  upon  him.
But  now  I  had  a  Wolfe  by  the  eares :  I  seemed  onely  to
apprehend  his  dislike  of  the  length  and  phrase,  and  sent
him  a  Letter  to  interpret  me,  and  a  Briefe  of  the
substance  of  all  required  on  their  parts,  contained  in
generall  words,  touching  onely  such  particulars  as  he
liked,  and  left  out  quite  all  the  Conditions  demanded
formerly  by  him  of  mee,  desiring  him  to  put  it  in  forme,
and  procure  the  Seale,  or  to  give  me  leave  to  receive
mine  owne  deniall  from  the  King,  and  so  to  depart
the  Countrey.  These  I  finished  in  Persian  the  same
day,  and  sent  them  to  him,  they  are  recorded  in  their
order.

The  eighth,  Asaph  Chan  sent  to  me  that  answer,  That
absolutely,  he  would  procure  nothing  sealed,  that  any
way  concerned  the  Princes  governement;  that  I  should
onely  expect  from  him  what  we  desired,  whose  Firmans
were  sufficient.  And  so  revealed  that  purpose  which  he
had  long  in  practice,  to  make  us  wholly  depend  on  the
Prince. Now  I  had  just  cause  to  looke  out,  and  was

356

SIR  THOMAS ROE  ad.

1616.

blamelesse  if  I  sought  new  friends  when  he  had  forsaken
me.  I  resolved  to  trie  the  Prince,  and  to  seeme  to
depend  wholly  on  him,  having  sent  formerly  to  his
Secretary  foure  clauses,  to  which  I  demaunded  his  Firman
for  our  present  use  at  Surat,  for  the  Fleete  expected,
which  his  Highnesse  had  agreed  to.

The  tenth,  I  went  to  the  Prince,  who  cast  downe  to
the  Secretary  his  Firman  by  mee  desired  and  promised ;
so  that  I  hoped  I  had  been  at  rest.  The  eleventh,  I
received  it,  but  when  I  read  it,  it  was  in  two  of  the  foure
clauses  demanded  and  promised,  much  different,  and  one
whole  branch  left  out ;  so  I  returned  it  with  a  round
answer,  I  would  not  accept  it,  nor  suffer  any  goods  to
come  ashoare.  Never  any  man  had  to  doe  with  so  much
Pride,  Covetousnesse,  and  falshood.  At  night,  I  rode  to
Merze  Socorolla,  the  Princes  Secretary,  to  expostulate
the  businesse,  and  to  declare  my  resolution  of  departure,
but  I  found  the  Firman  not  such  as  I  was  enformed,
but  containing  all  the  clauses  required  by  me,  though  in
phrase,  to  my  judgement,  somewhat  restrained,  which  he
expounded  in  the  best  sence,  declaring  that  it  was  the
Princes  intent  to  satisfie  my  desire  fully,  and  that  it  was
sufficient.  I  urged  the  obscurity  of  some  points ;  desiring
him  as  he  had  cleared  his  Highnesse  meaning  to  me,
so  he  would  by  his  Letter  to  the  Governour  of  Surat,
which  hee  graunted,  principally  commanding  that  the
Customer  should  pay  for  fiftie  clothes,  which  hee  had
many  moneths  bought,  and  now  would  returne  them
unto  the  Factors,  to  their  extreame  losse.  In  the  ende,
he  opened  the  old  point  of  the  Princes  desire,  that  I
should  rely  on  him,  and  not  crosse  him  in  businesses
of  his  Government  with  the  King,  and  I  should  find  him
a  better  friend  then  I  expected :  and  finally  gave  me  such
satisfaction  in  all  points,  that  1  was  both  pleased,  and
in  some  hope  of  good  successe,  the  rather  because  he
is  no  briber,  reputed  honest,  and  did  undertake  on  his
credit,  to  whom  the  Prince  had  referred  all  businesses,
that  we  should  not  sustaine  the  losse  of  one  piece,  nor

357

A.D.

l6l6.

October  10.
Abdala  Chan
in  disgrace.

Manner  of
humiliation.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

any  the  least  injury : so I  accepted  the  Firman,  which
upon  translating  I  found  verie  effectual.

The  sixteenth,  I  visited  the  Prince,  purposing  yet  to
runne  on  in  a  way  of  seeming  dependance  on  him,  untill
I  heard  from  our  ships,  and  what  entertainment  they
were  like  to  receive  this  yeare.  I  found  him  sad,  fearing
the  comming  of  Sultan  Parvis  to  Court,  being  within
eight  course,  and  importuned  to  kisse  his  Fathers  hands ;
who  had  graunted  him,  but  by  the  power  of  Normall
was  after  diswaded,  and  a  command  sent,  that  the  Prince
should  take  his  journey  right  to  Benga,  yea  although  the
King  had  fallen  downe,  and  taken  his  Mother  by  the
feet  to  obtaine  her  leave  to  see  his  Sonne.  The  Kings
remoove  continued,  but  whether,  no  man  could  certainely
resolve.

§.  v.

The  broiles  about  Abdala  Chan,  and  Chan  Channa ;
Sultan  Caroones  ambition,  his  policies  to  sub-
vert his  elder  Brother:  fight  with  a  Portugall
Carricke :  distast  about  the  Prince :  Persian
Embassage,  Presents  and  entertainement.

He  tenth  of  October,  Abdala  Chan  the  great  Gover-
nour  of  Amadavas,  beeing  sent  for  to  Court  in
disgrace  for  many  insolencies  and  neglects  of  the

Kings  authority,  and  thought  he  would  stand  on  his
guard,  and  refuse ;  yet  the  Prince  Sultan  Coronne  (whose
ambition  wrought  on  every  advantage)  desirous  to  oblige
so  great  a  man  (beeing  one  of  the  chiefe  Captaines  in
these  Kingdomes)  prevailed  with  him  on  his  word  to
submit ;  so  that  comming  in  Pilgrims  Clothes  with  fortie
servants  on  foote,  about  sixtie  mile  in  counterfeit  humilia-
tion, finished  the  rest  in  his  Palankee,  untill  he  arrived
neere  the  Court,  but  one  dayes  journey  behind  he  had
two  thousand  horse  attending.  This  day  he  was  brought
to  the  Jarruco  (the  publike  sitting  of  the  King  to  see
Games,  and  to  heare  complaints)  chained  by  the  feete,

358

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1616.

barefoot  between  two  Noble  men,  he  puld  his  Turbant
in  his  eyes,  before  hee  had  the  happinesse  to  behold  the
Kings  face.  After  reverence  made,  and  some  fewe  ques-
tions, the  King  forgave  him,  caused  his  yrons  to  be
loosed,  and  clothed  in  a  new  Vest  of  Cloth  of  Gold,
Turbant  and  Girdle  according  to  the  custome.  The  Prince  [I.  iv.  553.]
who  intended  to  build  his  honour  on  the  warres  of  Decan,
which  his  elder  brother  had  left  with  disgrace,  and  the
great  Commander  Chan  Channa  did  not  prosper  in  (which
doubtlesse  was  a  practiser  with  the  Decans,  from  whom
he  received  pension)  caused  his  Father  to  recall  Chan
Channa,  who  refusing  to  come,  desired  the  King  not  to
send  Sultan  Caronne  to  that  warre,  but  one  of  his  yongest  SultanCoroone
sonnes  about  fifteene  yeares  of  age.  This  Coronne  tooke  hu PurPose-
to  heart,  but  prosecuting  his  purpose  of  the  warre,  pro-
mised to  Abdela  Chan  the  Command  of  the  armie  under
him,  by  displacing  Chan  Channa.

The  King  fearing  troubles,  and  knowing  all  the  ambi-
tions and  factions  of  this  sonne,  the  discontent  of  his  two
elder,  the  power  of  Chan  Channa,  was  desirous  to  accom-
modate all  by  accepting  a  peace,  and  confirming  Chan
Channa  in  the  Government  hee  held,  and  closely  to  that
end  wrote  a  letter  of  favour,  and  purposed  to  send  a
Vest,  according  to  the  Ceremony  of  reconciliation,  to
Chan  Channa ;  but  before  he  dispatched  it,  he  acquainted
a  kinswoman  of  his,  living  in  the  Zereglia,  of  his  purpose. Zereglia  or

Shee, whether false to her friend (wrought by Sultan  Saralla> the
^  x  r  r  1  1  place  where

Laronne) or  out  or  greatnesse  or  heart,  to  see  the  top  the  Ki

of her family so dealt with, after so many merits ;  women  are

answered  plainly,  that  she  did  not  beleeve  Chan  Channa  kept.

would  weare  any  thing  sent  from  the  King,  knowing  his  The  Kings

Majesty  hated  him,  and  had  once  or  twice  offered  him chanChanna.

poyson,  which  hee  putting  in  his  bosome  (in  stead  of  his

mouth)  had  made  triall  of. Therefore  shee  was  confident

hee  would  not  dare  to  put  on  his  body  any  thing  that

came  from  his  Majesty. The  King  offered  to  weare  it

himselfe  before  her  an  houre,  and  that  she  should  write  to

testifie  it :  shee  replyed,  hee  would  trust  neither  of  them

359

A.D,
l6l6.

Decans  offer
peace.

Feare  of
future  broiles.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

both  with  his  life,  but  if  he  might  live  quietly  in  his  com-
mand, would  doe  his  Majesty  true  service.  Whereupon
the  King  altered  his  purpose,  and  resolved  to  proceed  in
the  sending  of  Sultan  Caronne,  and  to  countenance  his
reception,  would  follow  after  with  another  armie.

Chan  Channa  that  discovered  the  storme,  practised
with  the  Decans,  who  were  at  his  service,  to  offer  termes
of  peace  for  a  season,  finding  no  other  way  to  dissolve  this
cloud  that  hung  over  them  both,  untill  the  King  and
Prince  were  departed  and  setled  further  off.  To  this  end
came  two  Ambassadors  this  day  from  the  Princes  of
Decan.  They  brought  horses  bar'd,  richly  furnished  for
Presents.  At  first  the  King  refused  to  heare  them  and
their  gift,  but  turned  them  over  to  his  sonne  with  this
answere ;  If  he  would  have  peace  or  warre,  it  was  in  his
brest.  The  Prince  advanced  by  this  favour,  and  swelling
with  pride,  resolved  (though  I  was  informed  the  con-
ditions were  very  honorable,  and  such  as  the  King  would
have  accepted)  to  goe  on  the  journey,  answering  he  would
treat  of  no  peace,  untill  he  were  in  the  field  with  his
Armie ;  Chan  Channa  should  not  so  beguile  him  of  the
honor  of  finishing  that  warre.

The ambitions of this

yong

Prince are

open,

the

common  talke  of  the  people,  yet  his  Father  suffers  all,
but  intends  him  not  the  Kingdome.  For  Sultan  Cor-
soronne,  the  eldest  brother,  is  both  extreamely  beloved,
and  honored  of  all  men  (almost  adored)  and  very  justly  for
his  Noble  parts,  and  this  the  King  knowes  and  loves,  but
thinkes  his  liberty  would  diminish  his  owne  glory,  and  sees
not  that  this  slie  youth  doth  more  darken  him  by  ambi-
tious practises,  then  the  other  could  by  vertuous  actions.

Thus  he  nourisheth  division  and  emulation  betweene
the  brethren,  and  putteth  such  power  in  the  hand  of  the
yonger  (supposing  hee  can  undoe  it  at  his  pleasure)  that
the  wisest  foresee  a  rending  and  tearing  of  these  King-
domes  by  division,  when  the  King  shall  pay  the  debt  to
Nature,  and  that  all  parts  will  be  torne  and  destroyed  by

a  civill  warre.

360

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d

1616.

The  history  of  this  Countrey,  for  the  variety  of  subject,
and  the  many  practises  in  the  time  of  Ecbarsha,  Father  of
this  King,  by  him  then  Prince;  and  these  later  troubles,
were  not  unworthy  committing  to  writing;  but  because
they  are  of  so  remote  parts,  many  will  despise  them :  and
because  the  people  are  esteemed  barbarous,  few  will
beleeve  them.  Therefore  I  content  my  selfe  with  the
contemplation,  but  I  could  deliver  as  many  rare  and
cunning  passages  of  State,  subtill  evasions,  policies,
answers,  and  adages,  as  I  beleeve,  for  one  age  would
not  be  easily  equalled.

Only  one  that  passed  lately  I  cannot  omit,  to  shew
wisdome  and  patience  in  a  father,  faith  in  a  servant,  fals-
hood  in  a  brother,  impudent  boldnesse  in  a  faction  that
dare  attempt  any  thing,  when  the  highest  Majesty  gives
them  liberty,  either  beyond  the  law  of  their  owne  con-
dition, or  the  limits  of  policie  and  reason.

The Prince Sultan Carronne, Narmahel the deare  The  parties  of
Queene,  Aunt to his  wife,  Asaph Chan his father in  the  faction.
law,  brother  to  the  Queene,  and  Etiman  Dowlet,  father
to  them  both  (being  they  that  now  governe  all,  and  dare
attempt  any  thing)  resolved  it  was  not  possible  for  them
to  stand,  if  the  Prince  Sultan  Corseronne  lived,  whom  the
Nobility  loved,  and  whose  delivery  or  life  would  punish
their  ambitions  in  time ;  therefore  practised  how  to  bring
him  into  their  power,  that  poyson  might  end  him. Nar-
mahel attempts  the  King  with  the  false  teares  of  womens  Drifts  to  take
bewitching  flattery,  that  Sultan  Corseronne  was  not  safe,  a™a9  8uitan
nor his aspiring thoughts deposed: the King heares
her say  it, but  would not  understand more than shee
delivered  plainly.

This  failing,  they  tooke  opportunity  of  the  Kings  being
drunke,  the  Prince,  Etiman  Dowlet  and  Asaph  Chan,
moved  the  King,  that  for  the  safety  of  Sultan  Corseronne,
and  for  his  honour,  it  were  fitter  he  were  in  the  company  [I.  iv.  554.]
of  his  brother,  whose  companies  would  be  pleasing  one  to
the  other,  and  his  safetie  more  regarded,  then  in  the  hands
of  a  Rashboote  Gentile,  to  whom  the  King  had  committed

361

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

him.  Therefore  they  humbly  desired  his  Majesty,  that
he  might  be  delivered  into  the  hands  of  his  deare  brother,
which  the  King  granted,  and  so  fell  asleepe.

They  thought  their  owne  greatnesse  such,  as  bringing
the  Kings  authority  no  man  durst  refuse,  and  being  once
in  their  possession,  they  would  dispute  the  redelivery :  so
the  same  night  Asaph  Chan  in  the  name  of  the  King,
sent  by  the  Prince,  came  with  a  guard  to  demand  and
receive  Sultan  Corseronne,  at  the  hand  of  Anna  Rah,  a

*  A  prince.  *  Rajah  Rashboote,  to  whom  the  King  had  intrusted  him.
He  refused  to  deliver  his  charge,  with  this  answere,  That
he  was  Sultan  Caronnes  humble  servant,  but  that  he  had
received  the  Prince  his  brother  from  the  hands  of  the
King,  and  to  no  other  would  deliver  him,  but  he  should
have  patience  till  the  morning,  when  he  would  discharge
himselfe  to  his  Majesty,  and  leave  it  to  his  pleasure  to  dis-

AnnaRah  his  pose. This  answere  cooled  all. In  the  morning  Anna  Rah

fidelity.  came  to  the  King,  and  acquainted  him  with  the  demand

of  the  Prince,  his  refusal!  and  answere,  and  added  his
Majesty  had  given  him  the  charge  of  his  sonne,  and  made
him  the  Commander  of  foure  thousand  horse,  with  all
which  hee  would  dye  at  the  gate,  rather  then  deliver  his
Prince  into  the  hands  of  his  enemes:  If  his  Majesty
required  him,  hee  was  ready  to  obey  his  will,  but  he
would provide for his owne innocency. The King

The  Kings  replyed,  You  have  done  honestly,  faithfully,  you  have
answered  discreetly :  continue  your  purpose,  and  take  no
knowledge  of  any  commands :  I  will  not  seeme  to  know
this,  neither  do  you  stirre  further ;  hold  your  faith,  and
let  us  see  how  farre  they  will  prosecute  it.

The  Prince  and  the  Faction,  the  next  day  finding  the
King  silent,  hoping  hee  might  forget  what  passed  in  wine,
tooke  no  notice  of  the  grant,  nor  of  the  refusall,  but  it
fell  (not  without  suspicion)  on  both  parts.  This  I  insert
to  this  end,  that  you  may  beware  scattering  your  goods  in
divers  parts,  and  engaging  your  stocke  and  servants  farre
into  the  Countrey :  for  the  time  will  come,  when  all  in
these  Kingdomes  will  be  in  combustion,  and  a  few  yeares

362

answere.

SIR THOMAS ROE  ad.

1616.

warre  will  not  decide  the  inveterate  malice  laid  up  on  all

parts  against  a  day  of  vengeance,  wherein  if  Sultan  Cor-  Sultan  Corso-

seronne  prevaile  in  his  right,  this Kingdome  will  be  a  ro°"f:  a  . r
c  r /^i. •  s  l  Li  j i_  of  Christians.

sanctuary tor Christians,  whom  he  loves  and  honours,

favouring  learning, valour, the  discipline of  warre,  and

abhorring  all  covetousnesse,  and  discerning  the  base  cus-

tomes  of  taking,  used  by  his  Ancestors  and  the  Nobility.

If  the  other  winne,  we  shall  be  losers : for  he  is  most

earnest  in  his  Superstition,  a  hater  of  all  Christians,  proud,

subtill,  false,  and  barbarously  tyrannous. There  is  daily

expected an Ambassadour from the Shabas King of

Persia.

The  thirteenth  of  October  at  night,  the  King  returned  October  13.
and sent me  a  wilde Pigge. I  received advice of  the
arrivall  of  foure  shippes  safe  at  the  Port  of  Swally,  with  Foure  English
Letters  from  England,  that  they  departed  the  Coast  the  Mp**™™**
ninth  of  March  161 5.  with  sixe  ships,  losing  company  of
the  Rose  about  the  North Cape  by  foule  weather.

The  twelfth  of  June  16 16.  the  other  five  came  safely  to

the  Bay  of  Soldania,  where  the  Lyon  homeward  bound,

was  ready  for  a  wind ; her  Commanders  and  people  in

health,  staying  dayes  at  the  Road,  without  newes  of

the  small  ship. They  dispeeded  the  Swan  to  Bantam,  for

effecting  the  businesse,  and  set  saile  for  Surat  the  nine  and

twentieth  with  foure  shippes,  and  came  to  anchor  to  their

Port,  the  foure and  twentieth  of  September 161 6. In

their passage the sixt of  August, neare the Hands of

Comora,  about  twelve  degrees,  fiftie  minutes,  they  had

sight  of  a  Carrick  burthen  fifteene  hundred  tunne,  manned

with  sixe  hundred,  being  Admirall  of  the  Fleet  sent  for

Goa, bearing  the Flagge  : the Globe fetcht  her  up  to  Of  this  fight,

wind- ward,  and  after  salutations  of  the  Sea,  the  Carricke  sftmore*?..,
1 1 ,  T  j  ,  j , . .  , r Master  Chilas

commanded  her  to  Lee-ward,  and  seconded  it  with  five  journa//

shot  thorow  her  Hull,  which  shee  requited  with  eighteene,  following.

and  so  fell  off. The  Admirall  and  English  Fleet  com-

ming  up,  demanded  satisfaction  for  the  injury;  which  was

replied  to  with  scorne :  so  began  a  fresh  fight  in  few  shot,

the  Commander  Benjamin  Joseph  was  slaine,  and  the  new

363

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

established  continued  it :  at  the  evening  shee  ranne  her
selfe  ashoare  among  the  rockes  of  Angazesia.  The  Fleet
anchored  short  of  her,  to  attend  the  issue,  and  sent  a  Boat
to  offer  faire  warres :  but  about  midnight  shee  fired  her
After  it  was  selfe,  and  burned  all  the  next  morning.  The  English
knowne  that sen(jinor  their  Boats  could  not  approach,  but  beleeve  that

some  tew  ®  . *  *

escaped  with not  one  man  was  saved,  by  circumstances  very  probable :
life  and  the new  Vice-Roy  for  Goa  was  in this  shippe,  whose

poverty.  resolution  was  the  death  of  all  the  others.

The  next  day,  I  imparted  the  King,  with  his  Majesties
remembred  salutations,  which  were  with  much  courtesie
received :  but  he  began  with  the  Presents. I  first  men-
tioned our  late  fight  and  victory,  which he  seemed  to
rejoyce  in,  and  to  applaud  the  valour  of  our  Nation :  but
fell  off  to  What  hath  the  King  sent  me? I  answered>
Complements Many  tokens  of  his  love  and  affection :  That  my  Master
with  the  King.  knew  ne  was  Lord  of  the  best  part  of  Asia,  the  richest
Prince of  the East. That to send his Majestie rich
Presents,  were  to  cast  Pearles  into  the  Sea,  the  mother
and store-house of them, that therefore his Majesty
thought  it  unnecessary ;  but  had  presented  him  with  his
love,  with  many  curious  toyes,  which  I  hoped  would  give
him  content. He  urged  mee  to  some  particulars,  which
I  named :  he  asked  me  for  French  MufFe  or  Velvet. I
answered,  my  letters  were  not  arrived : some  other  was
come,  which  he  desired. He  enquired  for  Dogges : I
[I.  iv.  555.]  told  him,  some  had  their  fortune  in  the  fight,  some  dyed,
two  were  preserved  for  him,  at  which  hee  rejoyced,  and
His  desire  of continued  if  I  could  procure  him  a  Horse  of  our  great
Dogges  and  a  s\ze  such  as  I  described,  being  a  Rone  or  Dutch  Horse,
he  would  accept  it  better  then  a  Crowne. I  replyed,  I
would  doe  my  endeavour  for  his  Majesties  satisfaction,
but  I  feared  it  could  not  be  effected : he  answered, if
A  Horse \  would  procure  one,  he  would  give  me  a  Leek  of  Rupias.
prized  above j  desired  his  Majesties  Letter  for  the  comming  of  these
pounds '  Presents  without  search,  and  for  the  good  usage  of  our

people :  he  replyed,  the  Port  was  his  Sonnes,  but  sent  for
him  and  publikely  gave  expresse  order  for  what  I  would

364

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1616.

require,  and  take  on  me,  that  it  should  not  be  searched,

nor  pay  custome,  but  be  dispeeded  with  expedition  safe

to  my  hands,  that  I  might  distribute  it  at  my  discretion,

that  he  should  command  the  good  reception  of  our  people,

and finally, that  he should  give me  content  in  all  my

desires. This  generally  extended  not  to  the  grant  of  a

Fort,  for  that  cause  Asaph  Chan  refused  to  deliver. This

charge  was  very  round and hearty  in  the  King,  and  a

grace  to  me. The  Prince  called  Asaph  Chan  to  me,  and

there  professed  and  promised before  his  Father  and  all

the  Court,  to  give  mee  all  reasonable  content. This  is

the  strength  of  new  Presents.

The  fifteenth,  I  received  from  Masulipatan,  that  Cap-
taine  Keeling  had  taken  two  Portugall  Barkes  and  a  ship,
one  on  the  Coast  of  Cochin,  laden  with  Tinne,  the  other
fraighted  from  Bengala,  which  he  carried  to  Bantam :
that  Sir  Robert  Sherley  was.  dismist  with  disgrace  from
Goa,  and  that  he  was  on  his  way  over  land  to  Masuli-
patan to  seeke  passage :  unprobable,  and  I  beleeve
untrue.

The  seventeenth,  the  Prince  pursuing  his  purpose  of
finishing  the  Decan  Warres  by  his  owne  person,  and
undertaking  to  give  answere  to  the  Ambassadors,  gives
none  ;  but  detaines  them  untill  his  approach.  But  being
to  depart,  he  and  his  partie  thought  not  themselves
secure  if  Sultan  Corseronne  remained  in  the  hands  of
Annarah,  that  in  his  absence  the  King  might  bee  recon-
ciled, and  by  his  libertie  all  the  glory  and  hopes  of  their
faction  would  vanish,  and  the  injurie  and  ambition  hardly
be  pardoned.  They  newly  assaile  the  Kings  constancie
to  deliver  up  his  sonne  into  the  hands  of  Asaph  Chan,  as
his  Guard  under  Sultan  Coronne.  They  pretend  that
it  will  fright  Chan  Channa,  and  the  Decans,  when  they
shal  heare  that  this  Prince  is  so  favoured,  who  now  comes
to  make  warre  upon  them,  that  the  King  hath  delivered
up  his  eldest  sonne ;  in  that  as  it  were  his  whole  King-
dome,  and  hope  of  succession,  and  the  present  power
thereof.

365

A.D.
l6l6.

Anna  Rah
discharged  and
S.  Cars,  deli-
vered to  the
faction  to  the
griefe  of  the
Court  and
Comminalty .

Ill  through
goodnesse.

Persian
Embassadour.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

This  day  he  was  delivered  up,  the  Souldiers  of  Anna
Rah  discharged,  and  the  Souldiers  of  Asaph  Chan  planted
about  him  with  assistance  of  two  hundred  of  the  Princes
Horse.  His  Sister  and  divers  women  in  the  Seraglia
mourne,  refuse  their  meate,  cry  out  of  the  Kings  dotage
and  crueltie,  and  professe,  that  if  he  dye,  there  will  an
hundred  of  his  Kindred  burne  for  him  in  memorie  of  the
Kings  bloudinesse  to  his  worthiest  sonne.  The  King
gives  faire  words,  protesteth  no  intent  of  ill  towards  the
Prince,  and  promiseth  his  delivery,  and  sends  Normahell
to  appease  these  enraged  Ladies :  but  they  curse,  threaten,
and  refuse  to  see  her.  The  common  people  all  murmure,
they  say  the  King  hath  not  delivered  his  sonnes,  but
his  owne  life  into  the  hands  of  an  ambitious  Prince,  and
a  treacherous  faction,  that  Corsoronne  cannot  perish
without  scandall  to  the  Father,  or  revenge  from  him;
therefore  he  must  goe  first,  and  after  him  his  Sonne,
and  so  through  their  blouds  this  youth  must  mount
the  Royall  seat.  New  hopes  are  spread  of  his  redeliverie,
and  soone  allaid,  every  man  tels  newes  according  to  his
feares  or  desires.  But  the  poore  Prince  remaynes  in  the
Tygres  power,  refuseth  meate,  and  requires  his  Father
to  take  his  life,  and  not  to  let  it  be  the  triumph  and
delight  of  his  Enemies.  The  whole  Court  is  in  a  whisper,
the  Nobility  sad,  the  multitude  like  it  selfe,  full  of
tumour  and  noyse,  without  head  or  foot ;  onely  it  rages,
but  bends  it  selfe  upon  no  direct  ends.  The  issue  is
very  dangerous,  principally  for  us  :  for  among  them  it
matters  not  who  winnes.  Though  one  have  right  and
much  more  honour,  yet  he  is  still  a  Moore,  and  cannot
be  a  better  Prince  then  his  Father,  who  is  of  so  good
disposition  that  he  suffers  all  men  to  governe,  which  is
worse  then  to  be  ill :  for  wee  were  better  beare  injuries
of  Princes,  then  of  their  Ministers.

The  nineteenth,  the  Persian  Ambassadour  Mahomet
Rosa  Beag  about  noone  came  into  the  Towne  with  a
great  troupe,  which  were  partly  sent  out  by  the  King
to  meete  him  with  one  hundred  Elephants  and  Musique,

366

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1616.

but  no  man  of  greater  qualitie  then  the  ordinary  receivers
of  all  strangers :  his  owne  traine  were  about  fiftie  Horse
well  fitted  in  coats  of  cloth  of  Gold,  their  Bowes,  Quivers
and  Targets  richly  garnished,  fortie  shot,  and  some  two
hundred ordinary  Peons,  and  attenders  on  baggage;  he
was  carried  to  rest  in  a  Roome  within  the  Kings  outward
Court  till  evening. When  he  came  to  the  Durbar  before
the King (to  which Ceremony  I sent  my  Secretary to
observe  the  fashion)  when  hee  approched,  hee  made  at
the  first  raile three  Tessilims  and  one Sizeda,  which  is  H"  submisse-
prostrating himselfe and knocking  his  head  against  the  nesse'
ground :  at  the  entrance  in  the  like,  and  so  presented  the
Shabas  his  Letter : which the King  tooke  with  a  little
motion  of  his  bodie,  asking  onely,  How  doth  my  Brother  ?
without  any  title  of  Majesty. And  after  some  few  words,
he was  placed  in the seventh ranke, against the raile
by  the  doore,  below  so  many  of  the  Kings  Servants,  on
both  sides  ;  which  in  my  judgement  was  almost  inferiour
place for his Masters Ambassadour, but that  he  well
deserved  it  for  doing  that  reverence  which  his  predecessors
refused  to  the  dishonour  of  his  Prince,  and  the  murmure
of  many  of  his  Nation. It  is said  he  had  order  from  [I.  iv.  556.]
the Sophie  to  give  content,  and  thereby  it  is  gathered,
his  Message  is  for  some  aide  in  money  against  the  Turke,  Mogols  assist-
in  which kind he often sends  liberall succour, though  a^ce°ftfie
it  bee  pretended  he  comes  onely  to  treat  a  peace  for  the  aza-lnst  tjie
Decans, whose protection the Shabas taketh to heart, Turke.
envying  the  increase  of  this  Empire. The  King  accord-
ing to  custome  gave him a  handsome  Turbant,  a  Vest
of  Gold  and  a  Girdle, for  which  againe  hee  made  three
Tessilims, and one Sizeda or ground courtesie: he
brought  for  Presents  three  times,  nine  Horses  of  Persia  Persian  Pre-
and Arabia, this  being a ceremonious number among  sents.
them. Nine Mules  very  faire  and  large,  seven  Camels
laden  with  Velvet,  two  Sutes  of  Europe  Arras,  which  I
suppose  was  Venetian,  Hangings  of  Velvet  with  Gold,  and
not  Arras,  two  Chests  of  Persian  Hangings,  one  Cabinet
rich,  foure  Muskets,  five  Clockes,  one  Camell  laden  with

367

A.D.
l6l6.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Persian  cloth  of  Gold,  eight  Carpets  of  Silke,  two  Rubies
balast,  one  and  twentie  Camels  of  Wine  of  the  Grape,
fourteene  Camels  of  distilled  Sweet  Waters,  seven  of
Rose  Waters,  seven  Daggers  set  with  stones,  five  Swords
set  with  stones,  seven  Venetian  Looking  Glasses,  but
those  so  faire,  so  rich,  that  I  was  ashamed  of  the  relation.
These  Presents  were  not  delivered  now ;  onely  a  Bill
of  them.  His  owne  Furniture  was  rich,  leading  nine
spare  Horses,  trapped  in  Gold  and  Silver ;  about  his
Turbant  was  wreathed  a  chaine  of  Pearles,  Rubies,  and
Turquesses,  and  three  Pipes  of  Gold,  answerable  for  three
spridges  of  Feathers.  Yet  I  caused  diligent  observance
to  be  made  of  his  reception,  and  compared  it  with  mine
owne,  and  find  he  had  in  nothing  more  grace,  in  many-
things  not  so  much,  in  ranke  farre  inferiour  to  that
allowed  me,  except  onely  his  meeting  without  the  Towne;
which  by  reason  of  my  sicknesse  was  omitted  to  be
demanded ;  neither  did  the  King  receive  the  Shabas  his
Letter  with  such  respect  as  my  Masters,  whom  he  called
the  King  of  England  his  Brother,  the  Persian  barely
Brother  without  any  addition,  which  was  an  observation
of  the  Jesuite,  that  understood  the  Language.

§•  vi.

The  Princes  braverie ;  the  Persian  Ambassadours
behaviour,  the  manner  and  effects  of  Drinking,
of  the  King  and  his  Nobles ;  the  Kings  re-
move, his  super-exceeding  pompe,  wealth,
magnificence  therein  :  Portugall  fray  :  relations
of  Sultan  Corsoroone : Persian  newes.

He  one  and  twentieth  of  October,  I  went  to  the
Prince  and  opened  my  desire,  to  have  a  certaine  *
clause  in  his  Letter  expounded,  at  which  his
Surat,  ambi-  highnesse  stucke  a  little,  and  I  perceived  his  Highnesse
guous  like  the  b  as  h  u  ag  j  ima„ine(i  Hee  demanded  then
old  oracles, ,,,,,,  ,  • ^  1

£cjc  how  hee  should  have his Presents, or  see such  toyes

368

*J  certaine
clause  in  his
Letter  to

SIR THOMAS HOE  a.d.

1616.

as  came  up,  and  moved  mee  to  goe  with  him. I  replyed,

I  could  not  doe  so  untill  I  had  delivered  my  Masters

Message, and Tokens  to the King, but that finished,

I  would  my  selfe  attend  his  Highnesse  with  his  Presents,

and  all  such  raritie  as  came  to  my  hands,  should  be  sent

after him  : he  prest me  to passe  my word, and  so I

obtayned order for the Firman to my content. His

Highnesse  looking  on  a  white  Feather  in  my  Hat,  de-  Feathers  in

manded  if  I  would  give  it  him,  I  replyed,  I  would  not  reiuesU

offer  that  I  had  worne,  but  if  he  please  to  command  it,

that  or  any  thing  in  my  power  was  to  serve  him. He

asked  if  I had  any  more,  I  answered  three  or  foure  of

other  colours  ;  hee  replyed,  if  I  would  give  them  all,  for

that  hee was to shew  his  Horses  and  Servants  to  the

King  within  two  dayes,  and  that  he  wanted  some,  being

very rare in those parts. I promised to bring  all I

had  on  the  morrow  that  his  Highnesse  might  take his

pleasure.

Abdala  Chan  in  a  gallant  Equipage  both  of  his  person  -A  rich
and Attendants,  in  apparell, strange  and  antike,  but  in  Present-
these  parts  Alia Soldado presented the Prince  a white
Horse,  the  Saddle  and  Furniture  of  Gold  enamelled,  a  Beast
of  delicate  shape, life and courage, who returned him
a Sword plaine with a belt of  Leather. There were
brought before  him many others, the Hilts of  Silver,
Chapes  set  with  small  Stones,  and Targets  covered  with
Gold  Velvets,  some  painted  and  bossed  with  Gold  and
Silver, which he gave to his Servants. Against this
Muster  many  Saddles  and  Furniture  of  Gold,  rich  set  with
stones,  of  his  owne,  were  shewed  for  spare  Horses,  his
Boots  imbrothered,  and  all  other  ingredients  of  bravery.  Pompous
I  confesse,  the  expence  is  wonderfull,  and  the  riches  daily  ^raverte-
seene  invaluable.

This  night  past,  it  is  reported  sixe  of  the  Princes
Servants  came  to  murther  Sultan  Corsoronne,  but  were
refused  the  Key  by  the  Porter ;  that  the  Queene  Mother
is  gone  to  the  King  with  an  overture  of  all  the  practice,
the  truth  is  uncertaine,  and  it  is  dangerous  to  aske.
iv  369  2  A

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

At evening,  I went to  the  Durbar  to  visit  the  King,
where I met the Persian Ambassador with the first
Muster  of  his  Presents,  he  appeared  rather  a  Jester  or
Behaviour  of Jugler, then a  person  of  any  gravity,  running  up and
the  Persian. jowne  ancj acting  all  his  words  like  a Mimicke  Player
(now  indeed  the  Atachikanne  was  become  a  right  Stagge)
hee  delivered the  Presents  with  his  owne  hands ;  which
[I.  iv.  557.]  the King  with smiles and cheerefull countenance,  and
many words of  contentment received ; his  tongue was
a  great  advantage to  deliver his owne  businesse,  which
he did  with  so  much  flattery  and  obsequiousnesse,  that
it  pleased asmuch  as his  gift, ever  calling  his  Majesty
King  and  Commander  of  the  World  (forgetting  his  owne
Master  had  a  share  in  it)  and  on  every  little  occasion
of  good  acceptation  hee  made  his  Tessilims. When  all
was  delivered  for  that  day,  hee  prostrated  himselfe  on  the
ground,  and  knocked  with  his  head,  as  if  hee  would  enter
in. The  gifts  were  a  faire  Quiver  for  Bow  and  Arrowes
delicately imbroydered, all sorts of Europaean Fruits
artificiall in dishes, many other folding Purses and
Knackes of Leather wrought with Needle-worke in
coloured Silkes, Shooes imbroydered and sticht, great
Glasses  in-layed  in  frames,  one square  piece  of  Velvet,
imbroydered  high  with  Gold  in  paynes,  betweene  which
were  Italian  Pictures  wrought  in  the  stufFe,  which  he  said
was  the  King  and  Queene  of  Venice,  (which,  as  I  suppose,
was  the  Hangings  called  Arras)  of  these  sixe  were  given,
one  onely  shewed  ;  many  other  Tricanados  of  small  value.
Nine  a  After,  the  three  Nines  of  Horses  and  Mules,  which  were

remarkable  fa-re  on  the  Worses  either  had  lost  their  flesh  or  beauty,
for  except  one  or  two  I  judged  them  unfit  for  to  bee
sent  or  taken  by  Princes.  So  he  returned  with  many
antike  trickes  to  his  place  farre  inferiour  to  that  allowed
me,  which  was  alone  and  above  all  Subjects  which  at  first
Asaph  Chan  would  have  put  me  by,  but  I  maintayned  it
as  my  due.  This  is  but  the  first  act  of  his  presenting,
the  Play  will  not  be  finished  in  ten  dayes.  At  night  I
sent  to  the  Princes  Secretary  for  my  promised  writing :

37°

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1616.

but  his  Highnesse  was  loth  to  let  the  Presents  passe  with-
out ransacking,  and  had  changed  his  mind  refusing  to
seale  the  Letter.

The  two  and  twentieth,  at  my  comming,  I  delivered
him  two  Pluriaes,  and  two  Birds  of  Paradice ;  he  accepted
them  easily,  and  my  businesse  being  moved,  and  my
resolution  made  knowne  not  to  consent  to  open,  nor  to
send  them  up,  but  by  the  hands  of  my  Servants,  at  last
he  yeelded  and  gave  command  to  the  Secretary  to  dis-
patch me.

At  night  I  went  to  the  Durbar  to  observe  the  Am-
bassadour  of  Persia,  I  found  him  standing  in  his  ranke,
and  often  removed  and  set  lower  as  great  men  came  in.
The  King  once  spake  to  him,  and  he  danced  to  the  tune
thereof,  but  gave  no  present :  onely  the  King  commanded
that  hee  should  be  seated  by  the  Nobles ;  The  time  was
spent  in  seeing  Saddles  and  Furniture  for  the  remove,
of  which  his  Majestie  gave  some  to  his  Followers,  it
beeing  daily  expected  to  rise :  the  Kings  Tents  were  out
foure  dayes  since.  I  sent  to  the  Secretary  for  my  Firma,
but  hee  delayed  it  with  excuses.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  the  King  removed  to  Havaz
Gemall,  and  called  the  Persian  Ambassadour,  where  at
night  hee  ate  and  dranke  before  the  King  with  the
Nobilities,  in  the  same  fashion  that  I  did  the  Birth-day  ;
the  difference  onely  was,  the  King  gave  him  for  expence  The  Kings  gift
twenty  thousand  Rupias,  for  which  he  made  innumerable  i0  the  Persian-
Tessilims  and  Sizedaes,  not  rising  from  the  ground  a
good  space,  which  extreamely  pleased  the  King,  and  was
base,  but  profitable  Idolatry.  The  Prince  attending  his
Father,  I  could  get  no  dispatch  in  my  businesse.

The  five  and  twentieth,  the  King  returned  at  Evening,
having  been  over-night  farre  gone  in  Wine :  some  by
chance  or  malice  spake  of  the  merry  night  past,  and  that
many  of  the  Nobilitie  dranke  wine,  which  none  may  doe
but  by  leave.  The  King  forgetting  his  order,  demaunded
who  gave  it  ?  It  was  answered  the  Buxie  (for  no  man
dares  say  it  was  the  King,  when  he  would  onely  doubt

37i

A.D.
l6l6.

Strange  deal-
ing with
Nobles.

Terrible
whipping.

Drunkennesse
prevented.

Awe  of  the
King.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

it.)  The  Custome  is,  that  when  the  King  drinkes  (which
is  alone)  sometime  he  will  command,  that  the  Nobilitie
shall  drinke  after,  which  if  they  doe  not,  it  is  an  offence
too,  and  so  every  man  that  takes  the  Cup  of  wine  of
the  Officer,  his  name  is  written,  and  he  makes  Teselem,
though  perhaps  the  Kings  eies  are  mystie.  The  King
not  remembring  his  owne  command,  called  the  Buxie ;
and  demanded  if  he  gave  the  order  ?  He  replyed,  No,
(falsly :  for  he  received  it,  and  by  name  called  such  as
did  drinke  with  the  Embassadour)  whereat  the  King
called  for  the  list,  and  the  Persons,  and  fined  some  one,
some  two,  some  three  thousand  Rupias,  some  lesse,  and
some  that  were  neerer  his  person,  he  caused  to  be  whipped
before  him,  receiving  one  hundred  and  thirtie  stripes
with  a  most  terrible  instrument,  having  at  each  end  of
foure  cords,  irons  like  Spur-rowels,  so  that  every  stroke
made  foure  wounds.  When  they  lay  for  dead  on  the
ground,  he  commanded  the  standers  by  to  foot  them,
and  after  the  Porters  to  breake  their  staves  upon  them.
Thus  most  cruelly  mangled  and  bruised,  they  were
carryed  out,  of  which  one  dyed  in  the  place.  Some
would  have  excused  it  on  the  Embassadour;  but  the
King  replyed,  hee  onely  bad  give  him  a  Cup  or  two.
Though  drunkennesse  be  a  common  and  a  glorious  vice,
and  an  exercise  of  the  Kings,  yet  it  is  so  strictly  for-
bidden, that  no  man  can  enter  into  the  Gusel-Chan,  where
the  King  sits,  but  the  Porters  smell  his  breath :  and  if
hee  have  but  tasted  wine,  is  not  suffered  to  come  in ;
and  if  the  reason  be  knowne  of  his  absence,  he  shall  with
difficultie  escape  the  whip :  for  if  the  King  once  take
offence,  the  Father  will  not  speake  for  the  Sonne.  So
the  King  made  the  Company  pay  the  Persian  Em-
bassadors reward.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  I  sent  to  Sorocolla  for  the
Firman.  He  sent  me  a  copy  as  ambiguous  and  fraudu-
lent as  the  former,  which  I  refused,  and  drew  the
misliked  clause  my  selfe,  which  I  sent  backe,  and  was
promised  that  on  the  morrow  it  should  be  sealed.

372

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1616.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  the  Kings  day  of  remoove  at
hand,  I  sent  to  Asaph  Chan  for  a  warrant  for  carriages:  [I.  iv.  558.]
the  Merchants  having  sought  all  the  Towne  to  remoove
their  goods  to  Agra,  could  find  none,  so  I  received  order
being  enrolled  by  his  Majesty  upon  my  offer  for  twenty
Camels,  foure  Carts,  and  two  Coaches  at  the  Kings  price :
whereof  I  disposed  as  many  as  the  Factors  needed  to  their
use.  But  it  were  an  extreame  errour  to  omit  a  passage,
either  of  wonderfull  basenesse  in  this  great  Monarch,  or
a  tryall  of  me.  The  King  had  condemned  divers  Theeves,
among  which  were  some  boyes  :  there  was  no  way  to
save  their  lives,  but  to  sell  them  for  slaves :  his  Majesty
commanded  Asaph  Chan  to  offer  two  of  them  for  money,
which  hee  appointed  the  Cutwall  (that  is  the  Marshall)
to  doe.  My  Interpreter  made  answere  without  my
knowledge,  that  Christians  keepe  no  slaves,  that  those
the  King  had  given  I  had  freed,  and  that  it  was  in  vaine
to  propound  it  to  me.  But  after  I  suspected  it  might
be  a  tryall  of  me,  whether  I  would  give  a  little  money
to  save  the  lives  of  two  children :  or  else  I  supposed,
if  it  were  in  earnest,  it  were  no  great  losse  to  do  a  good
deed.  And  to  try  the  basenesse  or  scope  of  this  offer,
I  commanded  my  Interpreter  to  returne  to  Asaph  Chan,
to  tell  him  that  he  had  acquainted  me  with  the  motion
and  his  answere :  that  I  reprehended  him  for  presuming
in  any  case  to  give  my  resolution,  that  my  owne  reply
was,  if  there  were  any  money  to  save  the  life  of  two
Children,  to  those  whom  they  had  robbed,  or  to  redeeme
them  from  the  Law ;  both  for  respect  of  the  Kings
command,  and  for  charitie  I  was  ready  to  give  it,  but
I  would  not  buy  them  as  slaves,  onely  pay  their  ransome
and  free  them ;  that  if  he  pleased  to  know  the  Kings
pleasure  that  I  might  give  them  libertie  without  offence,
I  was  very  willing  to  doe  it.  Asaph  Chan  replyed,  I
might  at  my  owne  will  dispose  them,  that  it  was  an
extraordinary  goodnesse ;  with  many  prayses  accepted  the
money,  desiring  mee  to  send  it  to  the  Cuttwall,  and  to
use my discretion to the boyes, not once offering to

373

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

1616.

informe  the  King,  which  was  one  end  of  my  liberality.
I  was  loth  to  be  coozened,  and  knew  not  whether  this
might  be  the  profit  of  Officers  or  no,  resolved  to  pay  the
money,  but  so  as  the  King  should  not  be  ignorant  I  had
more  mercy  then  he,  and  that  a  Christian  esteemed  the
life  of  a  Moore  above  money.  So  I  sent  a  Factor  and
my  Interpreter  to  the  Cuttwall,  to  acquaint  him  with  the
communication  with  Asaph  Chan,  and  to  let  him  know,
if  at  night  he  would  enforme  the  King,  that  I  had  offered
to  redeeme  the  Prisoners  for  charities  sake,  if  after  his
Majesty  would  consent  to  their  liberty,  I  was  ready  to
send  him  money ;  but  to  buy  them  as  slaves,  though  for
an  houre,  I  would  not,  they  should  never  come  nor  be
manumised  by  mee,  but  that  I  desired  his  Majesty  to
pardon  them  upon  my  redemption,  so  I  put  them  to  the
test  of  their  base  offer.  This  money  exceeded  not  ten
pound,  a  poore  summe  to  impose  on  a  stranger,  or  to
bee  gained  by  a  King.  The  Cuttwall  returned  answere,
hee  would  know  the  Kings  pleasure,  and  accordingly
An  old  advise  mee. Some  would  perswade  me  this  is  one  of

customs  ^g  M0gc>ls  signall  favours  to  choose  out  such  great  men,

as  he  will  give  occasion  to  doe  good  and  honourable
workes,  to  redeeme  Prisoners,  and  that  the  money  gives
satisfaction  to  the  Plaintiffe  robbed,  and  that  those  so
appointed  by  the  King  to  ran  some  others,  make  Sizeda
as  for  some  benefit  received.  Yet  I  find  not  any  honour
in  a  Prince  to  impose  it  on  a  stranger,  to  whom  hee  gives
neither  maintenance  nor  liberality ;  I  went  to  the  Durbar
to  see  if  his  Majesty  would  of  himselfe  speake  to  me,
that  I  might  deliver  my  owne  offer.  The  Cuttwall  made
many  motions,  brought  in  the  Executioner  who  received
some  command,  but  I  understood  it  not,  but  expected
my  answere.

The  first  of  November,  Sultan  Corronne  tooke  his
Sixe  hundred  leave  and  went  to  his  Tents.  The  King  at  noone  sat
nch  ElePhanti  out  at  the  Durbar,  where  the  Prince  brought  his  Elephants
bravery  of  the  aDout  sixe  hundred  richly  trapped  and  furnished,  and  his
Prince.  fellowes  by  estimation  ten  thousand  Horse,  many  in  cloth

374

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1616.

of  gold,  with  Hearne  top-feathers  in  their  Turbants,  all
in  gallantry;  Himselfe  in  cloth  of  Silver  imbroydered
with  great  Pearle  and  shining  in  Diamonds  like  a  Firma-
ment. The  King  imbraced  him  and  kissed  him,  and
shewed  much  affection :  at  his  departure  he  gave  him  a
Sword,  the  Scabberd  all  of  Gold  set  with  stones,  valued  Rich  Sword.
at  an  hundred  thousand  Rupias :  a  Dagger  at  forty
thousand,  an  Elephant  and  two  Horses  with  all  the
Furniture  of  Gold  set  with  stones,  and  for  a  close  one
of  the  new  Caroches  (made  in  imitation,  of  that  sent  by
his  Majesty  my  Master)  and  commanded  the  English
Coachman  to  drive  him  to  his  Tents,  into  which  he
ascended  and  sate  in  the  middle,  the  sides  open,  his
chiefest  Nobles  a  foot  walking  by  him  to  his  Tents
about  foure  mile.  All  the  way  he  threw  quarters  of
Rupias  being  followed  with  a  multitude  of  people,  he
reached  his  hand  to  the  Coachman,  and  put  into  his
Hat  about  one  hundred  Rupias.

The  second,  the  King  removed  to  his  Tents  with  his  The  Kings
women,  and  all  the  Court  about  three  mile.  I  went  to  remove.
attend  him  comming  to  the  Pallace.  I  found  him  at  the
Farraco  window,  and  went  up  on  the  Scaffold  under  him ;
which  place  not  having  seene  before,  I  was  glad  of  the
occasion.  On  two  Tressels  stood  two  Eunuches  with
long  Poles  headed  with  Feathers,  fanning  him ;  hee  gave
many  favours  and  received  many  Presents,  what  hee
bestowed  hee  let  downe  by  a  Silke,  rould  on  a  turning
Instrument ;  what  was  given  him,  a  venerable  fatte
deformed  olde  Matrone  hung  with  Gymbals  like  an  Image
pluckt  up  at  a  hole  with  such  another  Clue ;  at  one  side
in  a  window  were  his  two  principall  Wives,  whose
curiositie  made  them  breake  little  holes  in  a  grate  of  Reed
that  hung  before  it,  to  gaze  on  me.  I  saw  first  their
fingers,  and  after  laying  their  faces  close,  now  one  eye
now  another  sometime  I  could  discerne  the  full  propor-
tion, they  were  indifferently  white,  blacke  haire  smooth
up,  but  if  I  had  had  no  other  light,  their  Diamonds  and  [I.  iv.  559.]
Pearles  had  sufficed to  shew  them : when I  looked  up

375

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

they  retyred  and  were  so  merry,  that  I  supposed  they
laughed  at  me.  Suddenly  the  King  rose,  and  wee  re-
tyred to  the  Durbar,  and  sate  on  the  Carpets  attending
his  comming  out :  not  long  after  he  came  and  sate  about
halfe  an  houre,  untill  his  Ladies  at  their  doore  were
ascended  their  Elephants,  which  were  about  fifty,  all
most  richly  furnished,  principally  three  with  Turrets  of
Gold,  grates  of  Gold-wyre  every  way  to  looke  out,  and
Canopies  over  the  cloath  of  Silver.  Then  the  King
descended  the  staires  with  such  an  acclamation  of  Health
to  the  King,  as  would  have  out-cryed  Cannons.  At  the
staires  foote,  where  I  met  him,  and  shuffled  to  be  next,
one  brought  a  mighty  Carpe,  another  a  dish  of  white
stuffe  like  Starch,  into  which  he  put  his  finger,  and
Superstitious  touched  the  fish,  and  so  rubbed  it  on  his  fore-head ;  a
nte-  ceremony used  presaging  good  fortune. Then another

came  and  buckled  on  his  sword  and  buckler,  set  all  over
with  great  Diamonds  and  Rubies,  the  belts  of  gold  sutable:
another  hung  on  his  quiver  with  thirty  arrowes,  and  his
bow  in  a  case  (the  same  that  was  presented  by  the  Persian
Ambassadour)  on  his  head  he  wore  a  rich  Turban  t,  with
a  Plumbe  of  home  tops,  not  many,  but  long :  on  one
Huge  Gems,  side  hung  a  Rubie  unset,  as  bigge  as  a  Walnut ;  on  the
other  side  a  Diamond  as  great ;  in  the  middle  an  Emerald
like  a  heart,  much  bigger.  His  Shash  was  wreathed
about  with  a  chaine  of  great  Pearle,  Rubies  and  Diamonds
drild :  about  his  necke  he  caryed  a  chaine  of  most  ex-
cellent Pearle  thrice  double,  so  great  as  I  never  saw :
at  his  elbowes  armelets  set  with  Diamonds ;  and  on  his
wrists  three  rowes  of  Diamonds  of  severall  sorts :  his
hands  bare,  but  almost  on  every  finger  a  Ring ;  his  gloves
were  English,  stucke  under  his  girdle ;  his  coat  of  cloath
of  Gold,  without  sleeves,  upon  a  fine  Semian  as  thinne
as  Lawne :  on  his  feet  a  paire  of  embroydered  buskins
with  Pearle,  the  toes  sharpe  and  turning  up.  Thus
armed  and  accommodated  he  went  to  the  Coach,  which
attended  him  with  his  new  English  servant,  who  was
cloathed as rich  as any Player,  and more  gaudy,  and

376

SIR  THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1616.

had  trained  foure  horses,  which  were  trapped'  and  har-
nished  in  Gold  Velvets.  This  was  the  first  he  ever
sate  in,  and  was  made  by  that  sent  from  England,  so  like,
that  I  knew  it  not  but  by  the  cover,  which  was  a  Gold
Persian  Velvet.  He  got  into  the  end,  on  each  side  went
two  Eunuches,  that  caried  small  Maces  of  Gold,  set  all
over  with  Rubies,  with  a  long  bunch  of  white-horse-taile
to  drive  away  flyes  :  before  him  went  Drummes,  ill
Trumpets,  and  loude  musicke,  and  many  Canopies,
Quittusols  and  other  strange  ensignes  of  Majesty  of
cloath  of  Gold  set  in  many  places  with  great  Rubies :
nine  spare  horses,  the  furniture  some  garnished  with
Rubies,  some  with  Pearles  and  Emeralds,  some  onely
with  studs  enamelled.

The  Persian  Ambassadour  presented  him  a  horse ;  next
behind  him  came  three  Palankees,  the  carriages,  and  feet
of  one  plated  with  Gold,  set  at  the  ends  with  Pearle,
and  a  fringe  of  great  Pearle  hanging  in  ropes  a  foot  deepe:
a  border  about,  set  with  Rubies  and  Emeralds.  A  foot-
man caryed  a  foot-stoole  of  Gold,  set  with  stones,  the
other  two  were  covered  and  lined  with  cloath  of  Gold.
Next  followed  the  English  Coach,  new  covered  and
trimmed  rich,  which  hee  had  given  the  Queene  Normahell,
who  rode  in  it  :  after  them  a  third  of  this  Countrey
fashion,  which  me  thought  was  out  of  countenance :  in
it  sate  his  yonger  sonnes :  after  followed  about  twenty
Elephants  Royall,  spare,  for  his  owne  ascendings,  so
rich,  that  in  stones  and  furniture  they  braved  the  Sunne.
Every  Elephant  had  divers  flagges  of  cloath  of  Silver,  gilt
Satin  and  tafFata.  His  Noble-men  hee  suffered  to  walke
afoote,  which  I  did  to  the  gate,  and  left  him.  His
wives  on  their  Elephants  were  caryed  like  Parakitoes  halfe
a  mile  behind  him.  When  he  came  before  the  doore
where  his  eldest  sonne  is  prisoner,  he  stayed  the  Coach,
and  called  for  him  :  hee  came  and  made  reverence  with  a
sword  and  buckler  in  his  hand,  his  beard  growne  to  „  .
his  middle,  a  signe  of  dis-favour.  The  King  commanded  Qorsoroone
him  to  ascend  one of  the spare  Elephants,  and  so  rode  delivered.

377

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

next  to  him,  to  the  extreame  applause  and  joy  of  all  men,
who  now  are  filled  with  new  hopes.  The  King  gave
him  one  thousand  Rupias  to  cast  to  the  people,  his
Gaoler  Asaph  Chan  and  all  the  Monsters  yet  a  foot.

I  tooke  horse  to  avoyd  presse  and  other  inconvenience,
and  crossed  out  of  the  Leskar  before  him,  and  attended
untill  he  came  neare  his  Tents.  He  passed  all  the  way
betweene  a  guard  of  Elephants,  having  every  one  a
Turret  on  his  backe ;  on  the  foure  corners  foure  banners
of  yellow  TafFaty ;  right  before  a  sling  mounted,  that
carried  a  bullet  as  big  as  a  great  tennis  ball,  the  Gunner

Bravery  of behind  it ;  in  number  about  three  hundred : other  Ele-

Elephants.  phants  of  honor  that  went  before  and  after  about  sixe
hundred,  all  which  were  covered  with  Velvet  or  cloath
of  Gold,  and  had  two  or  three  gilded  banners  carried :
in  the  way  ranne  divers  foot-men  with  skinnes  of  water
that  made  a  continuall  showre  before  him :  no  horse
nor  man  might  be  suffered  to  approach  the  Coach  by
two  furlongs,  except  those  that  walked  a  foot  by,  so
that  I  hasted  to  his  Tents,  to  attend  his  alighting.

Stately  Tents.  They  were  walled  halfe  a  mile  in  compasse,  in  forme
of  a  fort,  with  divers  Coynes  and  Bulwarkes,  with
high  Cannats  of  a  course  stuffe  made  like  Arras,  red
on  the  out-side,  within  which  figures  in  panes  with  a
handsome  gate-house.  Every  post  that  bare  up  these,
was  headed  with  a  top  of  brasse.  The  throng  was  great :
I  desired  to  go  in,  but  no  man  was  suffered,  the  greatest
of  the  Land  sate  at  the  doore ;  but  I  made  an  offer,  and
they  admitted  me,  but  refused  the  Persian  Embassador
and  all  the  Noble  men. Heere  first  the  Persian  Em-

[I.  iv.  560.]  bassador  saluted  mee  with  a  silent  complement  only.  In
the  middest  of  this  Court  was  a  throne  of  mother  of
Pearle,  borne  on  two  pillars  raised  on  earth,  covered
over  with  an  high  Tent,  the  pole  headed  with  a  knob
of  gold,  under  it  Canopies  of  Cloath  of  gold,  under-
foot Carpets.  When  the  King  came  neare  the  doore,
some  Noble-men  came  in,  and  the  Persian  Embassador :
we stood  one  of  the  one  side,  the  other  of  the  other,

378

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1616.

making  a  little  lane :  the  King  entring  cast  his  eye  on
me,  and  I  made  a  reverence ;  he  laid  his  hand  on  his
brest  and  bowed,  and  turning  to  the  other  side,  nodded
to  the  Persian.  I  followed  at  his  heeles  till  he  ascended,
and  every  man  cryed  good,  joy,  and  fortune,  and  so
tooke  our  places.  He  called  for  water,  washed  his  hands
and  departed.  His  women  entred  some  other  Port  to
their  quarter  :  and  his  sonne  I  saw  not.  Within  this
whole  raile  was  about  thirty  divisions  with  Tents.  All
the  Noble-men  retired  to  theirs,  which  were  in  excellent
formes,  some  all  white,  some  greene,  some  mingled,
all  incompassed  as  orderly  as  any  house,  one  of  the
greatest  rarities  and  magnificences  I  ever  saw.  The
whole  vale  shewed  like  a  beautifull  Citie,  for  that  the
ragges  nor  baggage  were  not  mingled.  I  was  unfitted
with  carriage,  and  ashamed  of  my  position,  but  five  yeeres
allowance  could  not  have  furnished  me  with  one  in-
different sute  sortable  to  others;  and  which  addes  to
the  greatnesse,  every  man  hath  a  double,  for  that  one
goes  afore  to  the  next  Remove,  and  is  set  a  day  before
the  King  riseth  from  these.  So  I  returned  to  my
poore  house.

The  fift  of  November,  the  Prince  sate  in  the  same  November  5.
magnificence,  order  and  greatnesse  that  I  mentioned
of  the  King ;  his  throne  being  plated  over  with  silver,
inlaid  with  flowers  of  gold,  and  the  Canopie  over  it
square,  borne  on  foure  pillars  covered  with  silver ;  his
armes,  sword,  buckler,  bowes,  arrowes,  and  launce  on
a  table  before  him.  The  watch  was  set,  for  it  was
evening  when  he  came  abroad.  I  observed  now  he  was
absolute  and  curious  in  his  fashion  and  actions :  he
received  two  letters,  read  them  standing,  before  he
ascended  his  Throne.  I  never  saw  so  setled  a  counten-
ance, nor  any  man  keepe  so  constant  a  gravitie,  never
smiling,  nor  in  face  shewing  any  respect  or  difference
of  men;  but  mingled  with  extreame  pride  and  contempt
of  all,  yet  I  found  some  inward  trouble  now  and  then
assaile  him,  and a  kind  of  brokennesse  and distraction

379

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

in  his  thoughts,  unprovidedly  and  amazedly  answering
sutors,  or  not  hearing  ;  If  I  can  judge  any  thing,  he
hath  left  his  heart  among  his  Fathers  women,  with
whom  hee  hath  liberty  of  conversation.  Normahell  in
the  English  Coach  the  day  before  visited  him,  and  tooke
leave,  shee  gave  him  a  cloak  all  imbroydered  with  Pearle,
Diamonds  and  Rubies,  and  carried  away,  if  I  erre  not,
his  attention  to  all  other  businesse.
Fray  betwixt  The  sixt,  I  received  a  letter  from  Master  Browne,
thefvtUfalh  fr°m  Amadavas,  who  certified  me  of  a  fray  begun  by
the  Portugalls ;  five  of  them  setting  on  a  English  Boy
in  Cambaya,  and  disarming  him,  upon  rumours  whereof
John  Browne  and  James  Bickeford  went  to  his  rescue,
and  were  assailed  by  seven  of  them.  One  shooting  a
Pistoll,  hurt  John  Browne  in  the  hand,  but  his  heart
lay  not  there  :  they  defended  themselves  honestly,  bravely,
like  Englishmen,  killed  one,  hurt  some  others,  and
chased  them  up  and  downe  the  Towne  like  beasts,  to
the  great  shame  of  such  villaines,  and  reputation  of  our
Nation.  To  revenge  this,  the  Portugalls  being  arriven  in
their  Frigats,  divers  came  ashoare,  no  more  English  in
Towne  but  the  three  mentioned.  The  Governour  under-
stood the  occasion,  and  sent  the  Cutwall  with  a  guard
to  our  house,  and  shut  the  water  ports,  expelling  the
Portugalls,  by  commanding  upon  paine  of  chastise-
ment not  to  meddle  with  the  English :  and  so  delivered
them  safe  out  of  Towne,  who  are  returned  to  Amadavas.
Card-play.  The  ninth,  I  found  the  Prince  earnest  at  Cards, but

he  excused  himselfe  of  forgetfulnesse,  and  blamed  the
Officers  formally;  but  in  shew  used  me  with  more
courtesie  then  ordinary,  calling  me  to  see  his  Cards,  and
asking  many  questions.  I  expected  he  would  speake  of
my  going  with  him ;  but  finding  no  such  discourse,  I
told  him  I  was  come  only  to  obey  him,  and  to  take
my  leave,  that  I  desired  his  pardon,  that  I  hasted  away,
for  that  I  was  to  returne  to  Adsmere,  being  unprovided
to  stay  all  night.  He  answered,  he  sent  for  me  to  see
me  before  his  going,  that  I  should  presently  be  dispatched.

380

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1616.

Then  he  sent  in  an  Eunuch,  and  divers  of  his  Captaines

came  smiling,  saying  the  Prince  would  give  me  a  great

Present,  and  if  I feared to  ride  late,  I should  have  ten

horse to  guard me, and  made  such a  businesse, as if

I  should  have  received  his  best  chaine  of  Pearle. By

and  by  came  a  Cloath of  gold  Cloake  of  his  owne,  once

or  twice  worne,  which  hee  caused  to  be  put  on  my  backe,

and I made reverence very unwillingly. When his

Ancestor  Tamerlane was  represented at the Theater,

the  garment would  well  have  become :  but it  is heere

reputed  the  highest  favour  to  give  a  garment  worne  by  a

Prince,  or  being  new,  once  laid  on  his  shoulder.

The  sixteenth,  the  King  gave  order  to  fire  all  the  Order  to  fire
Leskar  at  Adsmere,  to  compell  the  people  to  follow,  t^Leskar  at
which  was  daily  executed.  I  was  left  almost  desolate,
and  the  Persian  Embassadour  (who  had  fought,  chid,
brauld,  complained,  but  could  not  get  remedy)  in  the
same  estate ;  wee  sent  to  bemone  one  another,  and  by
his  example  I  began  to  resolve  to  buy  (for  many  would
sell,  which  at  the  Kings  price  could  not  hire)  and  I  cast  it
at  the  best  hand  I  could,  almost  to  save  the  hire,  though
the  carts  were  deare,  for  in  three  moneths  the  price  was
eaten  ;  necessity  enforced  me,  for  the  Towne  was  burnt
and  desolate.  I  was  in  danger  of  theeves,  that  from
the  armie  came  and  robbed  in  the  night.  I  could  not
find  bread  to  eate,  yet  I  sent  anew  to  Court,  and  resolved
to  abide  all  the  inconveniences  of  a  hard  siege.

The  seventeenth,  I  received  from  Goa  for  truth,  that  [I-  1V-  5^i.]
Don  Emanuell  de  Menesses,  with  about  three  hundred  Nf™esfrm
of  those  saved  ashoare  from  out  the  Admirall,  were
arrived  poore,  robd  and  rifled  by  the  Inhabitants  of
Angazesia,  who  had  slaine  many,  and  forced  some  to
Circumcision.  On  the  foure  and  twentieth  of  October,
not  one  of  the  Fleet  sent  out  from  Lisbon  arrived,  to
their  great  wonder.  The  Gallion  of  Mosambique  was
fought  with  by  the  Hollander  that  lately  departed  from
Surat,  who  lay  off  and  on  before  Goa  as  shee  came  in
to  meet  the  Ships  expected  ;  she  was  rich  in  Gold and

381

Sultan  Corso
roon

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

other  Commodities,  but  she  escaped  by  meanes  of  the
Port.  Observe  the  boldnesse  of  the  Hollanders,  to
attempt  with  one  ship,  and  to  brave  the  head  of  the
Indies. I  received  a  promise  for  Camels  to  remove.

The  eighteenth,  I  could  not  procure  carriages,  but  was
so  daily  delaied,  that  I  feared  to  stay. Two  Carts  I  was
inforced  to  buy,  and  Camels  I  was  constantly  promised.
M. Biddolph remained in the Princes Leskar to  get
mony,  the  King  was  yet  but  twelve  course  from  Adsmere.
The  Jesuite  tooke  his  leave  of  me,  being  forced  to  buy
carriage,  notwithstanding  his  order  for  it  out  of  the  Kings
Relations  of store,  but  scarcitie  punished  all  men. This  emptie  time
offering  no  discourse  of  my  owne  affaires,  I  shall  digresse
conveniently  to  mention  the  state  of  Sultan  Corsoroone,
of  whose new delivery  into  the  hands  of  his enemies,
every  mans  heart  and  mouth  was  full. The  King  not-
withstanding he  had  so  farre  agreed  to  satisfie  his  proud
sonne  at  his  departure,  yet  it  seemes  meant  not  to  winke
at  an  injur ie  offered  to  the  Elder,  and  partly  to  secure
him  in the  hands  of  Asaph  Chan,  partly  to  satisfie  the
people  that  murmured,  and feared  the  practise  of  some
treachery  against  him,  he  tooke  occasion  to  declare  him-
selfe publiquely. Asaph Chan had visited his newe
Prisoner, and  in  his  fashion did  not  acknowledge him
as  his  Prince,  but  rudely  prest  upon  him  against  his  will,
and  with  no  reverence. Some  are  of  opinion,  he  pickt  a
quarrell, and  knowing  the  brave nature  of  the  Prince,
that  would  not  beare  indignitie,  tempted  him  to  draw  his
Sword,  or  to  use  some  violence,  which  the  guard  should
suddenly  revenge ;  or  else  it  should  bee  declared  to  the
King,  as  an  attempt  to  kill  his  Keeper,  and  to  escape  :  but
the  Prince  was  patienter ;  onely  he  got  a  friend  to  acquaint
the  King with  the manners  of  his Jaylor. The  King
called  Asaph  Chan  at  the  Durbar,  and  asked  when  he  saw
his  charge ; he  answered  two  dayes  past ;  his  Majestie
replyed,  what  did  you  with  him  ?  he  sayes,  onely  visit
him :  but  the  King  pressed  to  knowe  what  reverence  and
fashion  he  carried  towards  him  ? Asaph  Chan  found  his

382

Persia.

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1616.

Majestie  knew  what  had  passed,  and  confessed  he  went

to  see  him  in  affection,  and  offer  his  service ;  but  that

the Prince refused him admittance  into his  Chamber ;

which  because  he  had  charge  of  his safetie,  hee  thought

it  both  necessary  for  him  to  doe,  and  discourtesie  for  the

other  to  deny,  therefore  he  prest  in. The  King  returnes

quicke,  When  you  were  in,  what  said  you,  and  what  did

you  ? what  duty  shewed  you toward my  Sonne  ? He

stands  blancke,  and  confesseth  he  did  not  any  reverence :

whereat  the  King  told him, he  would  make  his proud

heart know him to bee his eldest  and  beloved Heire,

his Prince and Lord,  and  if  he  once  heare  of  any  the

least  want  of  reverence,  or  dutie  toward  him,  he  would

command his sonne  to set  his  feet on  his  necke, and

trample on him : that  he loved Sultan Coronne  well,

but  he  would  make  the  world  know,  he  did  not  intrust

his  Sonne  among  them  for  his  ruine.

The  three  and  twentieth,  and  foure  and twentieth, I  N ewes  from

stayed  for  the  Merchants,  and  received  an  answer  from

Spahan  that  my  Letters  were  dispeeded  for  Aleppo,  that

our  comming  into  Persia,  was  expected,  but  on  conditions

to  fit  the  Shabas,  so  that  it  might  advance  his  designe  of

diverting his  Silkes  from the  way  of  Turkie : that  the

Generall  of  the  Grand-signior  lay  with  a  mighty  army  at

Argerone sixe  dayes  march  short  of  Tauris,  uncertaine,

whether  to  assaile  the  Citie,  or  to  enter  Gorgeston  and

Gilan (the  Countreys  of  Silks)  to  win  that  by  conquest

which  he  was  prohibited by  commerce. To  meet  both

attempts,  the  Shabas was  incamped  at  Salmas,  a  Village

indifferently  seated in  the  way  ;  but  if  in  two  moneths

the  armies incounter  not, winter approaching, and the

wants  which  attend  such  multitudes,  will  dissolve  them

both,  without any  honourable  action : or  if  they  meete,

the  Persian  though  by  report one  hundred  and  eightie

thousand,  will  not  adventure  battell,  but  being  light  and

able  to  march  easily,  without  Cannon  and  Baggage,  will

fall  on  and  off  on  every  side  so  on  the  Turkes  armie,  as

he will  breake,  and  wast  him  without  hazard.

383

A.D.
l6l6.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Godah.

§•  VII.

Sir  Thomas  Roes  following  the  Court  in  this
Progresse,  description  of  the  Kings  Leskar,
and  some  places  which  they  passed :  the  Kings
Superstition,  drinke,  and  dealing  about  the
Present.

Decemb.  1. I^JwrSlHe  first  of  December,  I  remooved  foure  course  to

Ramfor  where  the  King  had  left  the  bodies  of  an
hundred  naked  men,  slaine  in  the  fields  for
robbery,  and  the  Caravan  at  midnight  departed  Ads-
mere.

The  fourth five course, I overtooke in the way a

[I.  iv.  562.]  Camell  laden  with  three  hundred  mens  heads,  sent  from
Candahar,  by  the  Governour  in  Present  to  the  King,
that  were  out  in  rebellion.

The  sixth,  foure  course,  where  I  overtooke  the  King  at

Description  of  a  walled  Towne  called  Godah,  in  the  best  Countrey  I
saw  since  my  landing  being  a  faire  Champion,  at  every
course  a  Village,  the  sovle  fruitfull  in  Corne,  Cotton,  and
Cattell.

The  seventh,  the  King  passed  onely  from  one  side
of  the  Towne  to  the  other,  which  was  one  of  the  best
built  I  ever  saw  in  India,  for  that  there  were  some  houses
two  stories  high,  and  most  such  as  a  Pedler  might  not
scorne  to  keepe  shop  in,  all  covered  with  tyle.  It  had
beene  the  seat  of  a  Raza  Rashboote,  before  the  Conquest
of  Ecbarsha,  and  stood  at  the  foot  of  a  great  Rocke
very  strong,  had  many  excellent  workes  of  hewed  stone
about  it,  excellently  cut,  many  Tankes  arched,  vaulted,
and  descents  made  large,  and  of  great  depths.  By  it  stood
a  delicate  Grove  of  two  mile  large,  a  quarter  broad,
planted  by  industry,  with  Manges,  Tamerins,  and  other
fruits,  divided  with  walkes,  and  full  of  little  Temples
and  Altars  of  Pagods,  and  Gentilitial  Idolatry,  many
Fountaines,  Wels,  Tankes,  and  Summer-houses  of  carved
stone  curiously  arched,  so  that  I  must  confesse,  a  banished

384

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1616.

Englishman might have been content to dwell there,  Inconvenience

but  this  observation  is  generall,  that  ruine  and  destruction  ^'nichf°l-
„ y  ° ,  . . - ,. .  loweth  the

eates up all:  for  since  the propnetie  or  all is  come  to  sjaven 0fsub-

the  King, no  man takes care for  particulars ; so that  jects,  and  the

in every place appeares the vastations and spoiles of  Kings  onely

warre,  without  reparation.  propnetie.

The  ninth,  returning, I viewed  the  Lescar,  which  is  The  Kings

one  of  the  wonders  of  my  little  experience,  that  I  had  a^miraj,h

seene  it  finished,  and  set  up  in  foure  houres,  except  some

of  great men  that have  a  double  provision,  the circuit

being  little  lesse  then  twenty  English  miles, the  length

some  waies  three  course,  comprehending  the  skirts,  and

the  middle,  wherein  the  streets  are  orderly,  and  Tents

joyned  ;  there  are  all  sorts  of  shops,  distinguished  so  by

rule,  that  every  man  knowes  readily  where  to  seeke  his

wants, every man of  qualitie, and every trade being

limited  how  farre  from  the  Kings  Tents  he  shall  pitch,

what ground he shall use,  and on what  side  without

alteration,  which  as  it  lies  together,  may  equall  almost  any

Towne  in  Europe  for  greatnesse ;  onely  a  Musket  shot

every  way  no man  approacheth  the  Atasykanha royall,

which  is  now  kept  so  strict,  that  none  are  admitted  but

by  name, and the time  of  the  Durbar  in  the  Evening

is  omitted  and  spent  in  hunting  or  hawking  on  Tanks  by

Boat,  in  which  the  King  takes  wonderfull  delight,  and  his

Barges  are remooved on Carts  with him, and he sits

not  but  on  the  side  of  one,  which  are  many  times  a  mile

or  two  over. At  the  Jarruco  in  the  morning  he  is  seene,

but  businesse  or speech  prohibited :  all  is  concluded  at

night  at  the  Guzelchan,  when  often  the  time  is  prevented

by  the  drowsinesse  which possesseth  the  King  from  the

fumes of  Bacchus. There is  now a  great whisper in

Court, about  a  new  affinitie  of  Sultan  Corsoroone  and

Asaph  Chan,  and  great  hope  of  his  libertie. I  will  finde

occasion  to  discourse  it,  for that the  passages  are  very

worthy, and the wisdome and  goodnesse  of  the King

appeares,  above  the  malice  of  others,  and  Noomahel  fulfill

the observation, that in all  actions of  consequence in

IV  385  2B

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

Court,  a  woman  is  not  onely  alwaies  an  ingredient,  but
commonly  a  principall  drug  of  most  vertue,  and  she
shewes  that  they  are  not  incapable  of  conducting  businesse,
nor  her  selfe  void  of  wit  and  subtilitie.  It  will  discover
a  Noble  Prince,  an  excellent  Wife,  a  faithfull  Counsellour,
a  craftie  Step-mother,  an  ambitious  Sonne,  a  cunning
Favourite,  all  reconciled  by  a  patient  King,  whose  heart
was  not  understood  by  any  of  all  these.  But  this  will
require  a  place  alone,  and  not  to  be  mingled  among
businesse.

The  sixteenth,  I  visited  the  King,  who  having  been  at

his  sports,  and  his  quarry  of  fowle  and  fish  lying  before

him,  he  desired  me  to  take  my  choice,  and  so  distributed

Humilitie  and  the  remainder  to  his  Nobilitie. I  found  him  sitting  on

Chanty  super-  fcs  Throne,  and  a  Begger  at  his  feet,  a  poore  silly  old  man

stitious  and  .  •

therefore a^  asnt>  ragd,  and  patcht,  with  a  young  roague  attending
blind.  on  him. With  these  kind  of  professed  poore  holy  men,

the  Countrey  abounds,  and  are  held  in  great  reverence,
but  for  workes  of  chasticement  of  their  bodies,  and
voluntary  sufferings,  they  exceed  the  brags  of  all  here-
tiques  or  Idolaters.  This  miserable  wretch  cloathed  in
rags,  crowned  with  feathers,  covered  with  ashes,  his
Majestie  talked  with  about  an  houre,  with  such  familiaritie
and  shew  of  kindnesse,  that  it  must  needs  argue  an
humilitie  not  found  easily  among  Kings.  The  Begger
sate,  which  his  sonne  dares  not  doe :  he  gave  the  King  a
Present,  a  Cake,  asht,  burnt  on  the  coales,  made  by  him-
selfe  of  course  graine,  which  the  King  accepted  most
willingly,  and  brake  one  bit  and  eate  it,  which  a  daintie
mouth  could  scarce  have  done.  After  he  tooke  the  clout,
and  wrapt  it  up,  and  put  in  the  poore  mans  bosome,
and  sent  for  one  hundred  Rupias,  and  with  his  owne
hands  powred  them  into  the  poore  mans  lap,  and  what  fell
besides,  gathered  up  for  him ;  when  his  collation  of
banquetting  and  drinke  came,  whatsoever  he  tooke  to
eate,  he  brake  and  gave  the  Begger  halfe,  and  after  many
strange  humiliations  and  charities,  rising,  the  old  Wretch
not  being  nimble,  he  tooke  him  up  in  his  armes,  which  no

386

SIR THOMAS ROE  aj>.

1616.

cleanly body durst have  touched, imbracing  him,  and

three times  laying  his  hand  on his heart,  calling him

father,  he  left  him,  and  all  us  and  me  in  admiration  of

such  a  vertue  in  a  heathen  Prince.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  we  passed  through  Woods,
and  over  Mountaines,  torne  with  bushes,  tired  with  the
incommodiousnesse  of  an  impassible  way,  where  many
Camels  perished,  many  departed  for  Agra,  and  all  com-
plained. I  lost  my  Tents  and  Carts,  but  by  midnight
we  met,  the  King  rested  two  dayes,  for  that  the  Leskar  [I.  iv.  563.]
could  not  in  lesse  time  recover  their  order,  many  of  the
Kings  women,  and  thousands  of  Coaches,  Carts,  and
Camels,  lying  in  the  woody  mountaines,  without  meat  and
water,  himselfe  got  by  on  a  small  Elephant,  which  beast
will  climbe  up  rockes  and  passe  such  straits,  as  no  horse
nor  beast  that  I  know  can  follow  him.

The  twenty  fourth  of  January,  newes  arrived  at  Court,  January  24.
that  the  Decans  would  not  be  frighted  out  of  their  f"^  "n**
Dominion,  which  Asaph  Chan  and  Normahal  had  pre-  power
tended,  to  procure  this  Voyage,  but  that  they  had  sent
their  impediments  into  the  heart,  and  attended  in  the
borders,  with  fiftie  thousand  horse,  resolved  to  fight,  and
that  Sultan  Caronne  was  yet  advanced  no  further  then
Mandoa,  afraid  both  of  the  enemie  and  Chan  Channa.  Mandoa.
These  Counsellers  changed  their  advice,  and  declaring  to
the  King  that  they  conceived  the  Decan,  before  his  pass-
age over  the  last  hills,  would  have  yeelded  by  the  terrour
of  his  approach,  but  finding  the  contrary,  perswaded  him
to  convert  it  to  a  hunting  journey,  and  to  turne  his  face
toward  Agra,  for  that  the  other  was  not  an  enemie  worthy
his  person.  He  replyed  this  consideration  came  too  late,
his  honour  was  ingaged  seeing  he  had  so  farre  past,  hee
would  prosecute  their  first  counsells  and  his  purpose,  and
adventure  the  hazard  of  both.  But  hee  daily  dispeeded
fresh  troopes  towards  his  sonne,  partly  from  his  owne,
the  rest  commanded  from  governments,  according  to
reports,  thirty  thousand  horse,  but  not  by  muster.

The  third  of  February,  departing  out  of  the  Roade  February  3.

387

A.D.
l6l6.

Conference
with  Sultan
Corsoroone.

Sepra.

Mulwa.

Calleada.

King

drunken,

drowned.

Old  Dervis.

Princes  inci-
vilitie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  the  Leskar  for  ease  and  shade,  and  resting  under  a  tree
for  the  same  commodities,  came  upon  me  Sultan  Cor-
soroone, the  Kings  eldest  restrained  sonne,  riding  upon
an  Elephant,  with  no  great  guard  nor  attendance :  his
people  desired  me  to  give  him  roome,  which  I  did,  but
attended  to  see  him,  who  called  for  mee,  and  with  some
gentle  and  familiar  questions,  full  of  courtesie  and  affa-
bilitie  hee  departed :  his  person  is  good,  and  countenance
chearefull,  his  beard  growne  to  his  girdle ;  this  only  I
noted,  that  his  questions  shewed  ignorance  of  all  passages
in  Court,  in  so  much  hee  never  heard  of  any  Ambassadour
nor  English.

The  sixt  at  night,  we  came  to  a  little  Tower  newly
repaired,  where  the  King  pitched  in  a  pleasant  place  upon
the  River  of  Sepra,  short  of  Ugen,  the  chiefe  City  of
Mulwa,  one  Course.  This  place  called  Calleada,  was
anciently  a  Seat  of  the  Gentile  Kings  of  Mandoa,  one
whereof  was  there  drowned  in  his  drinke,  having  once
before  fallen  into  the  River,  and  was  taken  up  by  the
haire  of  the  head,  by  a  slave  that  dived :  and  being  come
to  himselfe  it  was  related  to  him  to  procure  a  reward :  he
called  for  the  instrument  of  his  safety,  and  demanding
how  he  durst  put  his  hands  on  his  Soveraignes  head,
caused  them  to  be  strucke  off.  Not  long  after,  sitting
alone  with  his  wife  in  drunkennesse,  hee  had  the  same
mischance  to  slip  into  the  water,  but  so  that  shee  might
easily  have  saved  him,  which  shee  did  not :  and  being
demanded  why,  shee  replyed,  shee  knew  not  whether  he
would  also  cut  off  her  hands  for  her  recompence.

The  eleventh,  the  King  rode  to  Ugen  to  speake  with  a
Dervis  or  Saint,  living  on  a  hill,  who  is  reported  to  be
three  hundred  yeares  old :  I  thought  this  miracle  not
worth  my  examination.  At  noone  by  a  foot-post  I
received  a  letter,  that  the  Prince,  notwithstanding  all
Firmans  and  Commands  of  his  Father,  had  intercepted
the  Presents  and  goods  sent  up,  to  fulfill  his  base  and
greedie  desire,  and  that  notwithstanding  any  gift  nor
entreaty, or perswasions of Master Terry, to whose

388

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1616.

charge  they  were  committed,  would  not  part  with  them,

but  by  force  compelled  them  to  returne  with  him  toward

Brampore :  yet  did  he  forbeare  to  breake  any  thing  open,

but  pressed  the  English  to  consent,  which  they  refusing

by  my  order,  he  thought  to  winne  them  by  vexations ;

such is the  custome to see  all Merchants goods even

before  the  King,  that  he  may  first  choose,  but  I  resolved

to  breake  that  in  our  behalfe.

The  Prince  to  satisfie  his  desire,  before  I  could  have
knowledge,  he  sent  a  Post  to  the  King  to  certifie  him,
that  such  goods  he  had  stayed  without  mention  of  Pre-
sents, and  prayed  leave  to  open  them,  and  to  buy  what
he  fancied.  So  soone  as  I  heard  of  this  faithlesse  uncivill
usage,  I  resolved  I  was  justifiable  before  all  the  world,  if
I  used  the  extremitie  of  complaints,  that  I  had  practised
all  meanes  to  win  and  purchase  favour,  and  had  suffered
beyond  the  patience  of  a  freeman,  my  former  courses  will
witnesse,  and  leave  me  without  blame  in  ill  successes,
though  I  found  it  in  a  rougher  way,  seeing  I  could  find
no  better  in  the  smoothest.  Briefely  I  resolved  to  appeale
to  Justice  by  complaint,  but  as  calmely  and  warily  as  I
could,  to  expresse  my  whole  griefe,  extreame  injuries,
and  long  patience.  To  go  to  Asaph  Chan  (though  to
neglect  him  would  displease  him)  yet  to  trie  him  I  feared
would  prevent  my  purpose :  to  send  to  him  that  I  desired
to  visite  the  King  at  the  Glutel-chand,  I  doubted  what
I  intended  might  be  suspected,  if  hee  had  heard  of  the
injury:  so  I  practised  first  to  prevent,  and  avoid  pre-
vention.

The  Prophet,  whom  the  King  visited,  offered  me
occasion,  and  my  new  Linguist  was  readie.  I  rode  and
met  his  Majestie  on  his  Elephant,  and  alighted  making
signe  to  speake :  he  turned  his  monster  to  mee,  and  pre-
vented mee.  My  sonne  hath  taken  your  goods  and  my
Presents :  bee  not  sad,  he  shall  not  touch  nor  open  a
seale,  nor  locke ;  at  night  I  will  send  him  a  command  to
free  them,  with  other  very  gracious  speeches,  that  he
knew  I  came  full  of  complaint,  to  ease  mee  he  beganne

389

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

first.  Upon  the  way  I  could  doe  no  more,  but  at  night,
without  further  seeking  to  Asaph  Chan,  I  went  to  the
Guzel  Chan,  resolved  to  prosecute  the  complaint  of
[I.  iv.  564.]  forcing  backe  our  goods,  in  respect  of  the  charge  and
trouble,  of  the  abuses  of  Surat,  and  all  our  other  griev-
ances. So  soone  as  I  came  in,  the  King  called  my
Interpreter,  and  delivered  by  his,  that  he  had  written
and  sent  his  command  very  effectually,  that  not  a  haire
should  be  diminished :  I  replyed,  the  injury  was  such,
and  the  charge  and  abuses  of  our  liberty  by  the  Princes
officers,  that  I  desired  redresse,  for  that  we  could  not
longer  suffer.  It  was  answered,  what  was  past  I  must
remit  to  his  sonne,  but  by  Asaph  Chans  mediation  I  could
procure  nothing  but  very  good  words,  for  he  smoothed
on  both  sides ;  so  that  I  was  forced  to  seeme  content,  and
to  seeke  an  opportunitie  in  the  absence  of  my  false  friend
and  procurator.  The  good  King  fell  to  dispute  of  the
Lawes  of  Moses,  Jesus  and  Mahomet,  and  in  drinke  was
so  kind,  that  he  turned  to  me,  and  said :  I  am  a  King,
you  shall  be  welcome  Christians,  Moores,  Jewes,  he
medled  not  with  their  faith ;  they  came  all  in  love,  and
he  would  protect  them  from  wrong,  they  lived  under  his
TheMogollin  safety,  and  none  should  oppresse  them;  and  this  often
drinke.  repeated,  but  in  extreame  drunkennesse  he  fell  to  weep-

ing,  and to divers  passions,  and  so  kept  us  till  mid-
night.

Judge  all  men  what  travell  I  endured,  by  reason  the
Factors  kept  my  Presents  foure  moneths,  and  sent  them
even  in  the  mouth  of  the  Prince,  arrived  within  two  dayes
of  Brampore,  and  hereby  every  way  our  charge  doubled,
that  I  rested  not  satisfied ;  but  seeing  I  had  begun,  and
that  the  Prince  was,  as  I  feared,  enough  exasperated  with
a  little,  I  thought  as  good  lose  him  to  some  purpose,  as
to  none,  at  least  to  trie  the  King  what  hee  would  doe.
So  I  waited  advantage,  but  sent  backe  the  messenger  to
Master  Terry,  to  stand  out  and  attend  the  Kings  answere,
which  I  would  speedily  send  him.  And  so  resolved  to
dissemble  that  I  hope  to  repay,  when  I  came,  with  base

390

SIR  THOMAS ROE  ad.

1616.

flattery  worse  then  the  theft,  or  at  least  to  give  me  some
satisfaction,  because  trouble  was  in  my  face,  for  otherwise
it  is  no  injury  heere  to  bee  so  used :  he  beganne  to  tell
me  he  had  taken  divers  things,  that  please  him  extreamely
well,  naming  two  Cushions  embroydered,  a  folding  Glasse,
and  the  Dogges,  and  desired  mee  not  to  bee  discontent,
for  whatsoever  I  would  not  give  him,  I  should  receive
backe :  I  answered,  there  were  few  things  that  I  entended
not  to  present  him,  but  that  I  tooke  it  a  great  discourtesie
to  my  Soveraigne,  which  I  could  not  answere,  to  have
that  was  freely  given  seazed,  and  not  delivered  by  my
hands  to  whom  they  were  directed:  and  that  some  of
them  were  entended  for  the  Prince  and  Normahall,  some
to  lye  by  me,  on  occasions,  to  prepare  his  Majesties
favour  to  protect  us  from  injuries  that  strangers  were
daily  offered,  and  some  for  my  friends  or  private  use,  and
some  that  were  the  Merchants,  which  I  had  not  to  doe
withall :  he  answered,  that  I  should  not  be  sad  nor
grieved,  that  hee  had  his  choyce,  for  that  hee  had  not
patience  to  forbeare  seeing  them,  hee  did  mee  no  wrong
in  it,  for  hee  thought  I  wished  him  first  served,  and  to
my  Lord  the  King  of  England  hee  would  make  satis-
faction, and  my  excuse :  the  Prince,  Normahall  and  he
were  all  one ;  and  for  any  to  bring  with  me  to  procure
his  favour,  it  was  a  ceremony,  and  unnecessary,  for  he
would  at  all  times  heare  me;  that  I  should  be  welcome
emptie  handed,  for  that  was  not  my  fault,  and  I  should
receive  right  from  him ;  and  to  go  to  his  sonne,  he  would
returne  me  somewhat  for  him,  and  for  the  Merchants
goods  pay  to  their  content ;  concluding  I  should  not  be
angry  for  this  freedome ;  he  entended  well :  I  made  no
reply.  Then  hee  pressed  me  whether  I  was  pleased  or
no.  I  answered  his  Majesties  content  pleased  me :  so
seeing Master  Terry,  whom  I brought  in  with  me,  he  Master  Terry

called  to him, Padre you  are  very  welcome, and this  the  mnu/ef
,  .  J .  . J  ' , .  welcommed.

house  is  yours,  esteeme  it  so,  whensoever  you  desire  to

come  to  me,  it  shall  bee  free  for  you,  and  whatsoever  you

will  require  of  mee,  I  will  grant  you.

39i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

Then  he  converted  himselfe  with  this  cunning  unto
me,  naming  all  particulars  in  order :  The  Dogges,
Cushions,  Barbers  case,  you  will  not  desire  to  have
backe,  for  that  I  am  delighted  in  them  :  I  answered  no.
Then  said  he  there  were  two  Glasse  chestes,  for  they  were
very  meane  and  ordinary,  for  whom  came  they  ?  I
replyed,  I  en  tended  one  for  his  Majestie,  the  other  to
Normahall.  Why  then,  said  hee,  you  will  not  aske  that
I  have,  being  contented  with  one  ?  I  was  forced  to  yeeld.
Next  he  demanded  whose  the  Hats  were,  for  that  his
women  liked  them.  I  answered,  three  were  sent  to  his
Majesty,  the  fourth  was  mine  to  weare.  Then  said  he,
you  will  not  take  them  from  me,  for  I  like  them,  and
yours  I  will  returne  if  you  need  it,  and  will  not  bestow
that  on  me,  which  I  could  not  refuse.  Then  next  he
demanded  whose  the  Pictures  were.  I  answered,  sent
to  me  to  use  on  occasions,  and  dispose  as  my  businesse
required :  so  hee  called  for  them,  and  caused  them  to  be
opened,  examined  me  of  the  women,  and  other  little
questions,  requiring  many  judgements  of  them,  of  the
Notable  ques-  third  Picture  of  Venus  and  a  Satyre :  he  commanded  my
twn  a  out  Interpreter  not  to  tell  me  what  he  said :  But  asked  his
a  Satyre.  Lords  what  they  conceived  should  be  the  interpretation
or  morall  of  that,  he  shewed  the  Satyres  homes,  his
skinne  which  was  swart,  and  pointed  to  many  particulars :
every  man  replyed  according  to  his  fancie ;  but  in  the  end
hee  concluded  they  were  all  deceived :  and  seeing  they
could  judge  no  better,  hee  would  keepe  his  conceit  to
himselfe,  iterating  his  command  to  conceale  this  passage
from  me :  But  bade  him  aske  me  what  it  meant :  I
answered,  an  Invention  of  the  Painter  to  shew  his  arte,
which  was  Poeticall,  but  the  interpretation  was  new  to
mee  that  had  not  seene  it.  Then  he  called  Master  Terry,
to  give  his  judgement,  who  replying,  hee  knew  not.  The
King  demanded  why  hee  brought  up  to  him  an  invention
wherein  hee  was  ignorant ;  at  which  I  enterposed  that
he  was  a  Preacher,  and  medled  not  with  such  matters,
[I.  iv.  565.]  nor  had  charge  of  them,  onely  comming  in  their  com-

392

SIR  THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1616.

pany, hee was more noted, and so named as their
conductor.

This  I  repeate  for  instruction,  to  warne  the  company
and  him  that  shall  succeed  me  to  be  very  wary  what  they
send,  may  be  subject  to  ill  Interpretation :  for  in  that
point  this  King  and  people  are  very  pregnant  and  scrupu-
lous, full  of  jealousie  and  trickes,  for  that  notwithstanding
the  King  conceited  himselfe,  yet  by  the  passages  I  will
deliver  my  opinion  of  this  conceit,  which  (knowing,  I
had  never  seene  the  Picture,  and  by  Ignorance  was  guilt-
lesse)  hee  would  not  presse  hard  upon  me.  But,  I
suppose,  he  understood  the  Morall  to  be  a  scorne  of
Asiatiques  whom  the  naked  Satyre  represented,  and  was
of  the  same  complexion  and  not  unlike ;  who  being  held
by  Venus  a  white  woman  by  the  Nose,  it  seemed  that  shee
led  him  Captive.  Yet  he  revealed  no  discontent,  but
rould  them  up,  and  told  me  he  would  accept  him  also
as  a  Present.  For  the  Saddle  and  some  other  small
Toyes,  he  would  fit  me  with  a  gift  to  his  Sonne,  to  whom
he  would  write  according  to  promise,  so  effectually  that
I  should  need  no  Sollicitor,  in  many  businesses  with  as
many  complements,  excuses,  professions  &  protestations
as  could  come  from  any  very  Noble,  or  very  base  minde
in  either  extreame.  Yet  he  left  not,  but  enquired  what
meant  the  figures  of  the  beasts,  and  whether  they  were
sent  me  to  give  to  him :  I  had  understood  they  were
very  ridiculous  and  ill  shaped  ordinary  creatures,  the
varnish  off,  and  no  beauty  other  then  a  lumpe  of  wood ;
I  was  really  ashamed  and  answered,  it  was  not  my  fault,
those  that  seized  them  must  beare  the  affront,  but  that
they  were  not  entended  to  him,  but  sent  to  shew  the
formes  of  certaine  beasts  with  us.  He  replyed  quickly,
did  you  thinke  in  England  that  a  Horse  and  a  Bull  was
strange  to  mee  ?  I  replyed,  I  thought  not  of  so  meane
a  matter,  The  sender  was  an  ordinary  man  in  good  will
to  mee  for  Toyes,  and  what  he  thought,  I  knew  not :
well  said  the  King,  I  will  keepe  them,  and  onely  desire
you  to  helpe  me  to  a  horse  of  the  greatest  size. It  is

393

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

The  Kings  all I  will  expect,  and  a  Male  and  Female  of  Mastiffes,

requests. an(j  ^Q  tajj  ir[sh  Grey-hounds,  and  such  other  Dogges

as  hunt  in  your  lands,  and  if  you  will  promise  me  this,

I  will  give  you  the  word  of  a  King,  I  will  fully  recom-

pence  you,  and  grant  you  all  your  desires.

I  answered,  I  would  promise  to  provide  them,  but
could  not  warrant  their  lives,  and  if  they  dyed  by  the
way,  onely  for  my  discharge,  their  skinnes  and  bones
should  bee  preserved,  hee  gave  extraordinary  Bowes,
layd  his  hand  on  his  heart,  and  such  kind  of  gestures  as
all  men  will  witnesse,  he  never  used  to  any  man,  nor
such  familiarity,  nor  freedome,  nor  profession  of  love.
This  was  all  my  recompence,  that  he  often  desired  my
content  to  be  merry,  that  the  wrong  he  had  done  me,
he  would  royally  requite,  and  send  me  home  to  my
Countrey  with  grace  and  reward  like  a  Gentleman.  But
seeing  nothing  returned  of  what  was  seized,  but  words,
I  desired  his  Majesty  to  deliver  backe  the  Velvets  and
Silkes  being  Merchants  goods,  that  they  were  sent  up
among  mine  by  his  Majesties  command,  for  that  by  that
pretence,  they  escaped  the  ravine  of  the  Princes  Officers :
so  hee  gave  order  to  call  Master  Biddolph  to  agree  with
him,  and  to  pay  for  them  to  content.  Then  I  delivered  a
Letter  I  had  ready  written  contayning  my  desire  for
Priviledges  and  Justice  otherwise  I  should  returne  as  a
Fayzneane  and  disgraced  to  my  Soveraigne,  and  desired
some  Justice  for  Sulpheckarkons  Debt  lately  dead :  he
replyed  he  would  take  such  order  with  his  Sonne  for
Surat,  as  I  should  have  no  cause  to  complaine,  and  that
he  should  cleere  it  for  which  he  gave  instant  order.  For
other  places,  he  would  give  me  his  commands,  and  every
way  shew  how  much  he  loved  me,  and  to  the  end  I
might  returne  to  my  Master  with  honour,  Hee  would
send  by  me  a  rich  and  worthy  Present  with  his  Letter
of  my  behaviour  filled  with  many  prayses,  and  com-
manded me  to  name  what  I  thought  would  be  most
acceptable,  I  answered,  I  durst  not  crave,  it  was  not  our
custome,  nor  stood  with  my  Masters  honour,  but  what-

394

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1616.

soever  he  sent,  I  doubted  not,  would  be  acceptable  from
so  potent  a  King,  and  so  much  loved  of  my  Lord.  He
reply ed,  that  I  thought  he  asked  in  jest,  to  please  mee,
and  that  he  saw  I  was  yet  discontent,  but  he  conjured  me
to  beleeve  he  was  my  friend,  and  would  at  conclusion
prove  so,  and  vowed  by  his  head  hee  spake  heartily  con-
cerning Presents,  but  I  must  not  refuse  for  his  instruction
to  name  somewhat.  This  earnestnesse  enforced  mee  to
say,  if  his  Majesty  pleased,  I  thought  large  Persian
Carpets,  would  be  fittest ;  for  gifts  of  cost  and  value  my
Master  expected  not.

He  answered,  he  would  provide  of  all  sorts  and  sizes,
and  added  to  them  what  hee  thought  was  fit,  that  your
King  may  know  I  respect  him  :  next,  having  Venison  of
divers  sorts  before  him,  he  gave  me  halfe  a  Stagge,  with
these  words,  hee  killed  it  himselfe,  and  the  other  halfe
I  should  see  bestowed  on  his  wives,  which  was  presently
cut  out,  in  small  pieces  of  foure  pound  and  sent  in  by
his  third  sonne,  and  two  women  that  were  called  out  to
divers  such  Mammockes,  as  if  it  had  beene  a  dole  to
the  poore,  and  carryed  by  the  Prince  bare  in  his  hands.
Now  I  had  as  much  satisfaction,  and  so  abundant  grace
as  might  have  flattered  me  into  content,  but  the  injury
was  above  words,  though  I  were  glad  of  these  and  of
colour  to  dissemble,  for  hee  sent  as  a  conclusion  to  know
if  I  were  pleased,  and  did  not  depart  discontent.  I
answered  his  Majesties  favour  was  sufficient  to  make  mee
any  amends.  Then,  said  he,  I  have  onely  one  question
to  aske  you ;  which  is,  I  wonder  much  now  I  have  seene
your  Presents  two  yeares,  what  was  the  reason  why  your
King  sent  a  Merchant,  a  meane  man  before  you  with  five
times  as  many,  and  more  curious  Toyes  that  contented
all,  and  after  to  send  you  his  Ambassadour  with  a  Com-
mission and  his  Letter  mentioning  Presents,  and  yet  what
you  brought  was  little,  meane  and  inferiour  to  the  other.
I  acknowledge  you  an  Ambassadour,  I  have  found  you  a  [I.  iv.  566.]
Gentleman  in  your  usage,  and  I  am  amazed  why  you
were  so  slightly  set  out.

395

A.D.
l6l6.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I  would  have  replyed,  but  he  cut  me  off,  I  know  it
is  not  the  Kings  fault,  nor  yours,  but  I  will  let  you  see
I  esteeme  you  better  then  they  employed  you.  At  your
returne,  I  will  send  you  home  with  honour,  with  reward,
and  according  to  your  qualitie ;  and  not  respecting  what
you  brought  me,  will  like  a  King  present  your  Lord  and
Master :  onely  this  I  will  require  from  you,  and  not
expect  it  from  the  Merchants,  to  take  with  you  a  patterne
of  a  Quiver,  and  Case  for  my  Bow,  a  Coat  to  weare,
a  Cushion  to  sleepe  on  of  my  fashion,  which  was  at  his
head,  and  a  paire  of  Boots,  which  you  shall  cause  to  bee
embroydered  in  England,  of  the  richest  manner,  and  I
will  expect  and  receive  them  from  you,  for  I  know  in
your  Countrey  they  can  worke  better  then  any  I  have
seene,  and  if  you  send  them  mee,  I  am  a  King,  you  shall
not  lose  by  it,  which  I  most  thankfully  undertooke,  and
he  commanded  Asaph  Chan  to  send  me  the  patternes.
Then  he  demanded  if  I  had  any  Grape  Wine.  I  could
not  denie  it;  he  desired  a  taste  next  night,  and  if  hee
liked  it  he  would  be  bold,  if  not,  he  desired  me  to  make
merrie  with  it.  So  spending  this  night  onely  on  me,  he
rose.

The  third  of  March,  wee  came  to  Mandoa,  into  which
the  King  entred  in  state,  but  no  man  was  suffered  to
goe  in  before  hee  was  set,  by  the  advice  of  his  Astrologers,
so  that  wee  all  sate  without,  attending  a  good  houre.

Mandoa.  The  sixth,  I came  into Mandoa,  having  sent  before,

and  found  a  faire  Court  well  walled,  and  in  that  a  good
Church,  one  great  Tombe :  it  was  taken  up  by  one  of
the  Kings  Servants,  but  I  got  possession  and  kept  it,
being  the  best  within  all  the  wall,  but  two  mile  from  the
Kings  house,  yet  so  sufficient  that  a  little  charge  would
make  it  defensible  against  raines,  and  save  one  thousand
Rupias,  and  for  Aire  very  pleasant  upon  the  edge  of
the  hill.

lllprofirecast.  The  eleventh,  at  night  I  went  toward  the  Court,  but
the  King  upon  newes  of  a  Lion  that  had  killed  some
Horses,  was  gone  to  hunt,  so  that  I  had  leisure  to  seeke

396

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1616.

some  water :  for  we  were  brought  to  a  hill  with  a  multi-
tude of  people  (so  great  is  the  foresight,  and  so  good
the  Policie)  where  was  no  water,  that  men  and  Castle  were
like  to  perish,  that  little  that  was  in  Pooles  some  great
men  possessed,  and  kept  by  force,  I  could  get  none,  the
poore  forsooke  the  Citie,  and  by  Proclamation  many  were
commanded  away,  all  Horses  and  Cattel  forbid,  and  so
those  who  were  now  in  hope  to  rest,  were  forced  to  seeke
new  Dwellings,  who  departed  some  two,  three  and  foure
Course  off,  to  the  extreame  trouble  of  all  men,  and  the
terrible  rising  of  provisions.  I  knew  not  what  to  doe :
my  Roome  and  House  was  good,  and  though  I  were
farre  from  Markets,  yet  it  was  a  lesse  inconvenience  then
to  sit  in  the  fields  without  house  or  shelter,  onely  I
wanted  water,  so  I  rode  my  selfe  to  seeke  some,  and
found  a  great  Poole  possessed  by  Chan,  which  was  given
by  the  King.  I  sent  to  desire  him  leave  to  draw,  who
granted  me  foure  load  a  day,  which  satisfied  me  in  such
sort,  that  with  selling  away  some  of  those  Jades  that  were
put  upon  me  from  Surat,  and  putting  off  my  Cattell,  I
had  hope  to  live,  to  which  purpose  I  sent  two  with  them
to  lye  out  of  Towne.  There  was  not  a  misery,  nor
punishment,  which  either  the  want  of  Government,  or
the  naturall  disposition  of  the  Clime  gave  us  not.

§.  VIII.

The  New-yeares  Feast :  Suspicions  of  the  English  :
Trade  of  Dabul,  distaste  of  the  Persian,  English-
men of  Warre  in  the  Indian  Seas.

He  twelfth,  I  went  to  the  King,  and  carried  a  New-
yeares  gift,  a  paire  of  very  faire  Knives  of  my  owne,
and  sixe  Glasses  of  yours ;  the  excuse  I  made  was

well  received,  and  the  King  used  mee  with  all  grace,  this
onely  was  my  comfort.  He  said  whatsoever  came  from
my  hands  was  present  sufficient,  he  accepted  my  love,  and
it  was  his  part  now  to  give  me.  I  found  a  gainer  by
him,  who had so farre performed his promise that I

397

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

perceived  the  King  instructed  in  my  desire,  and  gave
present  order  to  an  Officer  to  send  for  Master  Bidolph
to  pay  him  to  his  content  for  such  things  as  he  claymed,
and  all  the  others  were  acknowledged  to  be  received  by
name,  and  that  when  I  went  to  the  Prince,  the  King
would  write;  but  was  loth  to  part  with  any  thing,  of
which  the  best  sweet  bagge  lay  before  him.  I  replyed,
I  was  as  loth  to  goe  emptie  handed :  so  it  rested,  the
King  commanded  I  should  come  up  and  stand  within,
on  the  degrees  of  his  Throne  by  him,  where  I  found
on  one  side  the  Persian  Ambassadour,  on  the  other  the
old  King  Candahar  with  whom  I  ranked,  and  he  presently
fell  to  begge  a  Knife  which  next  day  I  sent.  The  King
called  for  the  Persian  to  come  downe,  to  whom  he  gave
a  Jewell,  and  a  young  Elephant,  for  which  he  kneeled
and  saluted  the  ground  with  his  head.  The  Throne  was
the  same  used  the  last  yeare,  and  all  the  other  furniture  :
English  at the upper end was set the King my Soveraignes

Pictures.  Picture,  the  Queenes,  my  Lady Elizabeths,  Sir  Thomas

[I.  iv.  567.]  Smiths  and  some  others,  two  pieces  of  good  and  fine
Tapistrie  below  them,  that  came  from  Persia,  a  Throne  of
Gold  set  all  over  with  Rubies,  Emeralds  and  Turqueis,
and  the  old  Musicke  of  singing  Whores.  This  day  I
dispatched  to  Surat  my  advice  of  the  Persian  businesse
and  the  new  Ambassadour,  and  some  remembrance  to
Abram  Chan  the  Governour  from  whom  I  received  a
Letter,  that  in  his  absence  our  Nation  had  beene  wronged
against  his  knowledge,  but  that  his  power  being  augmented
by  the  Prince,  he  desired  me  to  be  confident  in  him,
that  while  he  lived  in  authoritie  we  should  never  suffer
any  such  abuses,  but  we  should  live  in  all  freedome.

The  thirteenth,  I  sent  a  Complement  to  Asaph  Chan,
a  faire  wrought  Night-cap  of  mine  owne,  and  a  rich
paire  of  Gloves  which  he  returned  as  uselesse  in  this
Countrey ;  the  Cap  he  received  and  desired  some  Alegant
Wine,  which  I  sent  the  next  day  at  night.  Aganor
(whose  diligence  now  gave  me  great  hope  and  ease)  sent
a  Bannian  his  Secretary  to  tell  mee  hee  had  order  for  the

398

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1616.

dispatch  of  the  Merchants  goods,  and  that  his  man  should

attend  Master Biddolph to finish  it,  that  the  patternes

should  be  sent  me  home,  and  that  the  King  would  give

me  a  Coat  and  money  to  beare  my  charges  to  the  Prince.

I returned answere,  that I  had  no  use  of  a  Babylonish

Garment,  nor  needed  money;  if  his  Majestie  were  pleased

to consider the injuries offered, of  which the Paper

testified  remayned  in  his  hands,  and  to  give  me  his  Letter

to the Prince with some Presents or else  to  write  in

my  excuse,  it  was  all I  would  desire,  but  for  his  gifts

I  expected  none  but  Justice.

The one and twentieth :  I yet  could  not  at  instant  Suspitfom  of

presse  it  further,  only  I  discovered  the  Kings  doubts,  for  the  EnSllsh-

he  suspected  my  stealing  out  of  his  Countrey,  and  breach

with  our  Nation  for  the  Prince,  either  out  of  guiltinesse

or  feare,  or  perhaps  cunning  to  make us  the  pretence  of

his  owne  dessignes,  had  newly  enformed the  King,  that

next  yeare,  the  English  purposed  the  taking  of  Surat,  and

keeping  it,  of  which  our  owne  folly  gave  some  colour;

for  lately  upon  one  of  their  ordinary  brabbles  they  caused

two  hundred  Musketers  to  land  and  march  toward  Surat,

and  being  met  by  divers  the  joyfull Mariners  gave  out

they  went  to  take  it. This  absurde  bravado  for  a  handful

of  men to  passe twelve  mile  to a  walled Towne  able

to  put  out  a thousand  horse  armed,  and  as  many  shot,

a  River  to  passe  which  a  few  men  would  defend  against  a

good  Armie,  gave  just  occasion  of  scorne  and  offence :

and  which  the Prince  apprehended  for  some  other his

owne  ends,  to  refortifie  the  Castle and  Towne,  and to

send  downe  Ordnance  for  the  defence :  a  good  provision

to  keepe  a  doore  open  to  flie  out,  if  his  Brother  live  to

correct his ambition. But this information occurring

with  my  discontents  heere,  and  some  free  language,  my

pressure  to  goe  to  Brampore,  and  flying  newes  that  we

had  taken Goa,  and were preparing a great Fleet  in

England,  did  cause some  suspition  in  the  King,  which

though  he  concealed  it,  yet  hee  thought  to  discover  by

the  former  Discourse,  with  which  hee  rested  fully  satisfied,

399

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1617.

but  I  did  not :  I had  beene  long  fed  with  words,  and

knew  as  well  as  the  heart  that  trembled,  that  feare  of  us

only  preserved  our  residence.

A.D.  1 61 7. The  nine  and  twentieth  of  March  :  this  complaining  of

JLamy  °* Officers is a tune so new,  so  odious  in  Court,  that  it
Officers.  1  1 1 11  • 1 •  1 •  1

troubleth  all  great  men,  it  beeing  their  owne  case,  who

living  upon  farming  Governments  in  which  they  use  all
tyrannie  to  the  Naturals,  are  loth  to  suffer  a  way  open
to  the  Kings  understanding  of  their  practice,  who
ordinarily  hang  men  by  the  heeles,  to  confesse  money,
or  to  ransome  themselves  from  no  fault :  this  made  all
men  envie  my  employment,  and  avoid  me  as  an
Informer.
Letter  from  The  five  and  twentieth  of  April,  I  received  from  Dabull

%attD  b  II  road  from  Cap.  Pepwell,  that  according  to  advise  he
had  stayed  the  Juncke  bound  for  Mocha,  but  weighing
the  caution  given  by  mee  to  consider  well  what  corre-
spondence were  betweene  that  Prince  and  Mozolapatan,
in  whose  Territorie  the  Solomon  was  and  could  not  get
to  Sea,  finding  both  alliance  and  friendship,  he  freed  her
without  spoile,  alleaging  the  refusall  of  Trade  to  Middleton,
which  courtesie  procured  him  so  good  entertainment
as  the  Indies  afFoords  seldome,  free  Trade  and  promise
to  take  three  hundred  Clothes  yearely :  a  good  quantitie
of  Lead  sold  for  money,  and  some  Ordnance  (which  I
like  not  to  arme  the  Indians,  and  the  Portugals  friends,
enemies  to  the  Mogoll)  and  all  other  courtesies,  which
if  this  kindnesse  proceeded  not,  for  that  the  Juncke  was
yet  under  command,  gives  me  good  hope  of  some  Trade
in  sale  yearely  at  the  Port,  however  the  freeing  of  the
Juncke  assures  me  the  Commander  will  doe  nothing
by  catching,  prejudicall  to  the  Company,  and  deliver
himselfe  honestly  from  the  jealousies  cast  upon  him  from
Dabul,  hee  signifies  his  intent  to  proceed  to  Callicute,
and  if  that  Factorie  be  not  worth  supplyes  to  transmit
it  to  Dabul.

The seven  and twentieth, by the Foot-post, I re-
ceived from  Mesolapatan,  that  the  Salomon  was got  to

400

SIR  THOMAS ROE  ad.

1617.
Sea,  and  the  Hosiander  from  Bantam  arrived,  who
brought  the  ill  newes  of  the  losse  of  the  Hector  and
Concord,  careening  in  the  Roade  of  Jacatra,  on  Java,
in  recompence  that  the  Dragon,  Clove  and  Defence,  were
homeward  laden  from  Bantam.  I  tooke  this  occasion
to  convey  a  letter  to  the  Governour  of  Dabul  over-land,
to  apprehend  the  overture  newly  made  by  him  of  the  Overture  of
trade:  though  I  had  little  opinion  of  the  place,  yet  I  TZafejf
would  not  neglect  that,  nor  encourage  the  next  Fleet  to
proceed,  but  upon  better  assurance  then  a  forced  friend-
ship, and  offers  made  while  their  Juncke  was  in  our
power.  The  effect  was  to  signifie  the  causes  of  our
staying  their  goods  for  refusing  trade  to  Sir  Henry
Middleton,  but  now  finding  in  him  a  better  inclination
and  a  desire  to  receive  us,  &  to  establish  a  friendship  [I.  iv.  568.]
and  league,  a  promise  to  take  cloth  in  good  quantitie.  I
required  if  these  motions  were  hearty,  and  such  as
befitted  a  man  of  honour,  that  he  would  write  to  the
King  his  Master,  to  procure  his  Firman  with  such
priviledges  as  were  fit  for  Merchants,  and  his  promise
to  buy  our  goods,  and  to  fulfill  all  the  friendly
offers  made  by  him,  his  Officer,  under  his  Seale,  and
with  expedition  to  send  it  mee  to  the  Court  of  the
great  Mogoll :  whereby  I  might  receive  assurance  and
encouragement  that  they  entended  faith,  and  on  such
reception  I  did  undertake  on  the  behalfe  of  the  King  of
England,  a  good  and  firme  Peace  toward  his  Master,  his
subjects  free  passage  in  the  seas,  from  any  oppression
by  our  Fleets :  and  that  yearely  I  would  either  send  a
ship  to  his  Port  for  trade,  or  if  it  so  required,  leave  &
establish  a  residence  in  his  Government.  I  doubt  not,
but  yearely  for  feare  or  love,  some  good  trade  by  sales
may  bee  made,  but  for  envestments,  it  will  not  be  worth
it :  only  I  proceeded  as  I  would  have  wished  all  men,
not  with  too  seeming  eager  a  desire,  nor  to  swallow  any
offers  and  conditions  hungerly,  for  strict  care  in  the  first
setling  is  the  best  advantage :  and  for  misery  of  ensuing
times,  it  being  a  generall  rule  never  to  mend  your  first
iv  401  2C

Persian
Ambassadour.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

1617.

estate,  often  to  empaire  it,  every  mans  best  houre  is  when
he  is  new,  a  stranger,  and  at  first  seene :  after,  the  naturall
lenitie  of  these  Barbarians,  finds  all  that  brings  not  change,
fastidious.  This  dispatch  I  committed  to  Master  Bang-
ham,  and  desired  him  to  make  diligent  enquiry  of  the
commodities,  advantages,  inconveniences,  humours  and
affections  of  these  Decannies  towards  us.
Distaste  of  the  The  thirtieth,  the  time  that  he  brought  me  the  excuses
of  the  Persian  Ambassadour,  for  failing  in  taking  his
leave  of  me,  which  he  would  not  send  by  a  servant,
but  uttered  the  truth  that  the  Ambassadour  was  not
sicke,  as  he  pretended,  but  receiving  no  content  from
the  King  in  his  businesse  he  suddenly  tooke  leave,  and
having  given  thirty  faire  horses  at  his  departure :  the
King  gave  in  recompence  three  thousand  Rupias  which
he  tooke  in  great  scorne  ;  whereupon  the  King  prized  all
that  the  Ambassadour  had  given  him  at  meane  rates,
and  likewise  all  that  the  King  had  returned  since  his
arrivall,  even  to  slaves,  Drinke,  Mellons,  Pines,  Plantanes,
Hawkes,  Plumes,  the  Eliphant  and  whatsoever  at  ex-
treme high  rates,  and  sending  both  Bils  made  it  up  in
money.  This  base  usage  and  scorne  caused  him  to  excuse
his  not  seeing  Asaph  Chan  and  Etimon  Dowlet  on  a
Fever,  which  having  done  hee  could  not  come  through
the  Towne  to  mee  without  discoverie,  but  desired  him  to
acquaint  me  with  the  truth,  and  to  make  all  excuse  and
profession  that  hee  would  recompence  this  discourtesie
by  double  friendship  to  my  Countrimen  in  Persia :  with
some  bitternesse  against  the  King,  which  Aganor  as  freely
delivered,  and  I  seemed  as  unwilling  to  heare.  I  pre-
sented them  with  some  Aligant  and  Knives  and  we
parted.

The  twelfth  of  May,  I  received  newes  of  a  great  blow
given  the  Persian  by  the  Turkes  Army,  so  that  Tanris
was  rased,  and  the  Shabas not  able  to  keepe  the  field.

The  five  and  twentieth,  a  Lion  and  a  Woolfe  used  my
house,  and  nightly  put  us  in  alarume,  fetching  away
Sheepe  and  Goats  out  of  my  Court,  and  leaping  a  high

402

SIR  THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1617.

wall with them. I sent to  aske  leave  to  kill  it, for

that no man may  meddle  with Lions  but the King,

and  it  was  granted :  I  ranne  out  into  the  Court upon

the  noyse, and the  beast missing his  prey, seized  on

a  little  Island  Dogge  before  me,  that  I  had  long  kept,

but  the  Woolfe  one  of  my  servants  killed,  and  I  sent  it

the  King.

The  fourteenth  of  June,  certaine  goods  of  the  Jesuites
were  sent  from  Cambaya  in  a  Cabinet,  Phisicke  and
necessaries,  and  a  Letter,  which  were  betrayed  by  the
bringer,  and  delivered  the  King:  which  he  opened  and
sent  for  the  Padre  to  reade  the  Letter,  and  to  see  all
in  the  Boxes,  of  which  nothing  liking  him,  he  returned
all ;  which  I  observe  as  a  warning  to  all  that  deale  in
this  Kingdome,  to  bee  wary  of  what  they  write  or  send,
for  such  is  the  custome  and  humour  of  the  King,  that
he  will  seize  and  see  all,  lest  any  Toy  should  escape
his  appetite.

The  eighteenth,  I  received  Letters  from  Amadavar  of
the  Hope  of  the  fall  of  Indico,  by  the  failing  of  the  Goa
Caffila,  and  that  there  was  plentie  to  be  bought  but
deare.  That  the  Unicornes  Home  was  returned  as
without  vertue,  concerning  which  I  gave  him  new  advice ;
many  complaints  against  Surat  and  others,  which  I
meddle  not  with.  I  received  from  Brampoore  two
Letters,  how  doubtfull  the  debt  of  Ralph  stood,  and
newes  of  the  returne  of  Spragge  from  the  Leskar  of
Decan.  The  Generall  Melickamber  with  much  shew
of  honour,  gave  instant  order  for  privie  search  in  all
his  Campe  for  the  Persian  fled,  and  by  me  remanded;
but  finding  him  departed  to  Vizeapoore,  by  testimony
that  businesse  was  pursued  no  further,  but  by  a  Letter  to
a  Dutch  their  resident.  The  Generall  desired  Spragge  to
be  a  meanes  to  bring  him  English  cloth  and  swords  to  his
Campe  for  the  supply  of  his  Souldiers  which  lye  within
sixe  dayes  of  Brampoore.  In  my  opinion,  that  had  beene
a  good  employment  of  some  idle  men,  and  a  way  to  vent
our  dead  commodities.

403

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1617.

The  thirtieth  of  July,  I  received  from  Surat,  of  the
casting  away  of  two  Dutch  ships  on  the  Coast  of  Damon,
that  having  come  from  the  Southward  with  Spices  and
China  Silkes,  were  bound  for  the  Red  Sea,  but  losing
their  season  with  much  extremitie  of  weather  beating
many  weekes  about  the  entrance  for  harbour,  attempted
the  like  at  Socatra,  and  upon  the  Coast  of  Arabia,  but
being  not  able  to  get  in  any  way,  they  resolved  for  Surat,
hoping  by  the  last  yeares  good  successe  to  be  able  to
ride  safely :  but  the  yeares  differ,  and  beeing  forced  to
[I.  iv.  569.]  anchor  in  extremitie  their  greater  ship  cut  her  Masts  by
boord,  and  after  her  Cables  breaking,  shee  went  ashore
upon  the  coast  ozie  ground  within  musket  shot.  The
ship  kept  upright,  but  having  lost  their  long  Boat,  and
their  Skiffe  not  able  to  live  by  rafters,  foure  men  got
ashore,  and  the  Tydes  heaving  her  in  upon  the  Spring,
they  saved  much  goods  and  all  their  people :  her  Pin-
nasse  of  sixtie  Tunne  was  beaten  to  pieces.

The  one  and  twentieth  of  August,  the  King  of
Candahor,  came  to  visit  me,  and  brought  wine  and
fruit,  sate  halfe  an  houre,  and  for  one  jest  of  his  begged
a  bottle  of  wine.

The  Prince  Sultan  Corseroone  had  his  first  day  of
hoped  libertie,  and  came  to  jtake  ayre  and  pleasure  at
the  banquetting  house  by  me.  The  Prince  at  Brampoore
had  made  a  marriage  without  the  Kings  consent,  and
gotten  displeasure  :  besides  some  practice  of  his  was
discovered  against  his  brothers  life,  but  this  as  a  secret :
he  was  called  for  to  Court.  Normahal  and  Asaph  Chan
by  their  fathers  advice,  came  about  to  make  a  peace  with
Corsoroone  and  Alliance,  and  with  infinite  joy  his  libertie
is  expected.

The  two  and  twentieth,  the  King  feasted  at  Asaph
Chans.  I  received  from  Aleppo  and  Persia,  passages  of
the  warre,  the  Turkes  retrait,  but  no  word  of  our  English :
onely,  that  the  Captaine  of  Grinins,  had  written  to
practise  their  disgrace.

The  five  and twentieth,  I  advised  to  Agra  my  pro-

404

SIR  THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1617.

ceeding  in  the  Armenians  businesse  backe  to  Surat,  and

Brampoore of  all occurrents. This day Asaph Chan

feasted Normahal, the  Prince Sultan  Corsoroone,  as  is

reported,  to  make  a  firme  alliance,  and  that  he  will  bring

away  a  wife  by  his  fathers  importunitie,  this  will  beget

his  full  libertie,  and  our  proud  Masters  ruine.

The  first  of  September,  was  the  Kings  birth-day,  and

the  solemnitie  of  his weighing, to which I went, and

was  carried  into  a  very  large  and  beautifull  Garden,  the

square within all  water,  on  the  sides  flowres  and  trees,

in the midst  a  pinacle,  where  was prepared  the  scales,

being  hung  in  large  tressels,  and  a  crosse  beame  plated  on

with  gold  thinne :  the  scales  of  massie  gold,  the  borders

set  with  small  stones,  Rubies  and  Turkey,  the  chaines  of

gold  large  and  massie,  but  strengthened  with  silke  Cords.

Here  attended  the  Nobilitie  all  sitting  about  it  on  Carpets

untill the King came ; who at last appeared clothed,

or  rather loden with Diamonds, Rubies, Pearles, and

other  precious  vanities,  so  great,  so  glorious  !  his  Sword,

Target, Throne to rest on correspondent; his head,

necke,  breast,  armes,  above  the  elbowes  at  the  wrists,  his

fingers every one, with at least two or three rings ;

fettered with chaines, or dialled  Diamonds ; Rubies as

great as Wall-nuts, some greater ; and Pearles, such

as  mine  eyes  were  amazed  at. Suddenly  he  entered  into

the  scales,  sate  like  a  woman  on  his  legs,  and  there  was

put  in  against  him,  many  bagges  to  fit  his  weight  which

were  changed  sixe  times,  and  they  say  was  silver,  and  that

I understood his weight to  be nine thousand  Rupias,

which  was  almost one thousand pound sterling: after

with  gold  and  jewels, and precious  stones,  but  I saw

none,  it  being  in  bagges  might  bee  Pibles ;  then  against

cloth  of  Gold,  Silke,  Stuffes,  Linnen,  Spices,  and  all  sorts

of  goods,  but  I  must  beleeve,  for  they  were  in  fardles.

Lastly,  against  Meale,  Butter,  Corne,  which  is  said  to  be

given  to  the  Beniani,  and  all  the  rest  of  the  Stuffe :  but  I

saw  it  carefully  carryed  in,  and  none  distributed. Onely

the silver is reserved for the poore, and serves the

405

A.D.
1617.

The  Kings
weighing.

Mercators
Atlas  pre-
sented to  the
Mogoll.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ensuing  yeere,  the  King  using  in  the  night  to  call  for
some  before  him,  and  with  his  owne  hands  in  great
familiaritie  and  humilitie  to  distribute  that  money.  The
scale  he  sate  in  by  one  side,  he  gazed  on  me,  and  turned
me  his  stones  and  wealth,  and  smiled,  but  spake  nothing,
for  my  Interpreter  could  not  bee  admitted  in.  After  he
was  weighed,  he  ascended  his  Throne,  and  had  Basons  of
Nuts,  Almonds,  Fruits,  Spices,  of  all  sort  made  in  thin
silver,  which  hee  cast  about,  and  his  great  men  scrambled
prostrate  upon  their  bellies,  which  seeing  I  did  not,  hee
reached  one  bason  almost  full,  and  powred  into  my  Cloke,
his  Noblemen  were  so  bold  as  to  put  in  their  hands,  so
thicke,  that  they  had  left  me  none,  if  I  had  not  put  a
remayner  up.  I  heard  he  threw  gold  till  I  came  in,  but
found  it  silver  so  thinne,  that  all  I  had  at  first  being
thousands  of  severall  pieces  had  not  weighed  sixtie
Rupias.  1  saved  about  twentie  Rupias  weight,  yet  a  good
dishfull,  which  I  keepe  to  shew  the  ostentation,  for  by  my
proportion  he  could  not  that  day  cast  away  above  one
hundred  pound  sterling.  At  night  he  drinketh  with
all  his  Nobilitie  in  rich  plate.  I  was  invited  to  that,
but  told,  I  must  not  refuse  to  drinke,  and  their  waters  are
fire.  I  was  sicke  and  in  a  little  fluxe  of  bloud,  and  durst
not  stay  to  venture  my  health.

The  ninth  of  September,  the  King  rode  to  the  River  of
Darbadath,  five  course  on  pleasure,  and  comming  by  my
house  I  rode  out  to  meete  him.  The  custome  is,  that
all  men  by  whom  hee  passeth  neere  their  gate,  make  him
some  Present,  which  is  taken  as  a  good  signe,  and  is
called  Mombareck,  good  Newes,  or  good  Successe.  I
had  nothing  to  give,  nor  might  fitly  goe  with  nothing,
nor  stay  at  home  without  discourtesie,  which  made  mee
venture  upon  a  faire  Booke  well  bound  filleted  and  gilt,
Mercators  last  Edition  of  the  Maps  of  the  World,  which
I  presented  with  an  excuse  that  I  had  nothing  worthy,
but  to  a  great  King  I  offered  the  World  in  which  he  had
so  great  and  rich  a  part.  The  King  tooke  it  in  great
courtesie,  often  laying  his  hand  on  his  breast,  and  answer-

406

an-
uncivilitie.

SIR  THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1617.

ing  every  thing  that  came  from  mee  was  welcome. He

asked  after  the  ships  arrival!, which  I  told  him  I  daily

expected :  he  told  me  he  had  some  fat  wilde  Hogs  sent

him  from Goa, and  if  I  would  eate  any  at  his  returne

he  would  send  me  some. I  made  him  due  reverence,  and

answered  any  thing  from  his  Majestie  was  a  feast  to  me :  [I.  iv.  570.]

he  rode  on  his  Elephant,  and  the  way  was  stonie,  and

I  offering  to  bring  him toward  the  gate,  hee  bade  God

keepe  mee,  and  returne  to  my  house,  demanding  which  it

was, and praysing it : indeed it was one  of  the best

in the  Leskar,  yet  but  an  old  Church  and  large  Tombe

inclosed : iterating  his fare-well, he  said the way was

ill,  and  desired  me  to  goe  home, and  with  much  shew

of  courtesie  tooke  leave.

The  sixteenth,  I  rode  to  repay  the  visit  of  Marre  Prince  of  C>
Rustam  the  Prince  of  Candahor,  who  at  my  arrivall  sent  chjhan
word  he  durst  not  see  mee,  except  hee  asked  leave  of  the
King  or  acquainted  Etimon  Dowlet  or  Asaph  Chan,  which
at  the  Durbar  he  would.  I  answered  he  should  not  need,
for  I  never  meant  to  trouble  my  selfe  with  a  man  so
uncivill,  nor  to  come  a  second  time.  I  knew  well  it
was  a  shift  out  of  ill  manners ;  that  the  King  would  bee
no  more  angrie  for  his  bidding  mee  welcome  to  his  house,
then  for  his  comming  to  mine,  but  that  I  cared  not  to
see  him,  but  came  in  civilitie  to  requite  that  I  tooke
so  in  him.  His  man  desired  me  to  stay  untill  he  told  his
Master  my  answere,  but  I  would  not,  and  returned :
at  night,  I  rode  to  Court  to  visit  the  King,  who  ques-
tioned about  the  Booke  of  Maps,  but  I  did  forbeare
any  speech  of  my  debts.

The  five  and  twentieth,  1  rode  to  the  Court  very
weake,  to  make  triall  of  the  King  about  our  debts,  for
that  Muckshud  had  also  newly  answered  he  had  mist
his  Priganie,  and  knew  not  how  to  pay,  but  by  his  house.
I  delivered  the  King  the  Merchants  Petition,  which  hee
caused  to  bee  read  aloud,  and  the  names  of  the  debtors,
and  sureties,  and  summes  distinctly,  by  Asaph  Chan :
which  done,  he  called  Araddan  Chan,  the  chiefe  of  his

407

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1617.

officers  of  Household,  and  the  Cutwall,  and  gave  them
order,  but  what  I  understood  not ;  reading  the  names,
hee  questioned  their  abilities  and  qualities,  and  what
goods  they  received,  finding  some  dead,  some  strangers :
concerning  Rulph,  Asaph  Chan  offered  to  speake  to  the
Prince  at  his  arrivall  to  finish  it.  My  Interpreter  was
now  called  in,  and  the  King  converted  to  mee,  giving
this  answere :  That  the  Merchants  had  made  debts  at
their  owne  wills,  and  not  brought  a  note  of  their  goods  to
him,  therefore  if  the  men  were  insufficient,  it  was  at
their  perill,  for  that  it  was  no  reason  to  expect  the  money
from  him,  which,  I  suppose,  hee  spake  of  his  servant
Hergonen,  who  being  dead,  his  goods  were  seazed  for
the  Kings  use :  but  seeing  it  was  the  first  time,  he  would
now  assist  mee,  and  cause  our  money  to  bee  payed :
but  if  hereafter  the  English  would  deliver  their  goods
to  his  servants  without  money  or  acquainting  him,  they
should  stand  to  the  hazard  ;  but  if  when  their  commodities
came  to  the  Court,  they  would  bring  a  Bill  to  him  of
all,  he  would  first  serve  himselfe,  and  after  distribute  the
rest  to  such  as  should  buy  that,  and  if  any  of  them
fayled,  he  would  pay  the  money  himselfe  :  this  is  indeed
the  custome  of  Persia  Merchants,  to  bring  all  to  the
King,  which  I  have  often  seene,  who  takes  his  choice,
and  delivers  the  rest  to  his  Nobilitie,  his  Scrivanoes
writing  to  whom,  and  his  Officer  cutting  price ;  a  Copy  of
which  is  given  the  Merchant,  and  hee  goes  to  their  houses
for  money  ;  if  they  pay  not,  there  is  an  expresse  Officer
that  hath  order  by  currant  course  to  force  them.  Then
was  it  told  my  Interpreter  what  command  the  King  had
given,  that  Arad  Chan  should  call  the  debtors  before  him,
and  cause  them  to  pay :  but  this  pleased  not  our  Mer-
chants, I  thought  it  both  a  just  and  gracious  answere,
better  then  in  such  cases  private  men  can  get  of  great
Princes.

The  King  hearing  I  had  been  sicke,  and  wished  for
wine,  gave  me  five  bottles,  and  commanded  when  I
had  ended  those, to  send for five more,  and so  as  I

408

SIR  THOMAS ROE  ad.

1617.

wanted  ;  and  a  fat  Hogge,  the  fattest  I  ever  saw,  sent  up
by  Mochreb  Chan,  that  came  from  Goa,  which  at  mid-
night was  brought  home  by  a  Haddy  with  this  message  ;
since  it  came  to  the  King  it  had  eaten  nothing  but  Sugar
and  Butter.  I  tooke  this  as  a  signe  of  favour,  and  I
am  sure  in  that  Court  it  is  a  great  one.  Then  hee  sent
for  the  Map-booke,  and  told  me  he  had  shewed  it  his  Mercator
Mulaies,  and  no  man  could  reade  nor  understand  it,  there-  returned.
fore  if  I  would,  I  should  have  it  againe :  I  answered,
at  his  pleasure,  and  so  it  was  returned.

The  sixe'  and  twentieth,  there  being  a  Raja  in  rebellion  A  Raja  with-
in the  Hils,  not  past twentie Course  from  the Laskar,  stood  the  Kings
the King  lately  sent out two Umbras with Horse to  Jones-
fetch  him in,  but  he  defended  his  quarter,  slew  one  of
them,  and  twelve  Maancipdares,  and  in  all  of  both  sides
about five hundred, returning scornefull messages to
the King  to send his  Sonne, for  hee  was  no  prey  for
ordinary  forces.

The  second  of  October,  the  Prince  entred  the  Towne,  October  2.
and  all  the  Great  men  in  wondrous  triumph :  the  King
received  him,  as  if  he  had  no  other,  contrary  to  our
expectation.  Brampore  left  almost  emptie  under  Chan
Channa.  I  had  sent  to  Asaph  Chan,  to  excuse  my  not
meeting  him,  for  I  was  not  able  to  stirre,  nor  had  no
Present.  All  the  great  men,  and  the  Kings  Mother,
received  him  foure  Course  off.  I  sent  also  some  of
my  servants  with  my  just  excuse,  which  his  pride  onely
nodded  at.

The  fifth,  I  received  from  Surat  newes  of  our  Ships
arrivall,  the  Admirall  missing,  and  her  Prize  of
Mosambique  ;  the  rest  well,  who  had  taken  two  English  English  ships
Ships,  who  were  found  in  chase  of  the  Queene  Mothers  **ken  ^  the
ship  returned  from  the  Red-sea,  which  they  fortunately
rescued  and  brought  safe  in ;  if  she  had  been  taken,
we  had  all  beene  in  trouble :  with  these  the  Companies
Letter,  invoyce,  instructions  for  Persia,  and  divers  other
notes  of  advise,  that  by  reason  of  the  Admirals  absence :
they  knew not  what  course to take  with the  men of

409

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1617.

[I.  iv.  571.]  Warre. I  dispeeded  to  Surat  orders,  about  all  businesse,
as  appeares  in  my  Letters.

The  sixt,  I  rode  to  visite  the  Prince,  at  his  usuall  houre,
to  give  him  welcome,  and  to  acquaint  him  with  our  busi-
nesse, determining  to  make  offer  of  all  respect  to  him,
and  to  that  end  not  to  come  emptie  handed,  and  bought
a  fine  Chaine  of  gold,  China  worke.  I  sent  in  word ;  he
returned  that  I  should  come  next  morning  at  Sunne  rise,
when  he  sate  to  be  worshipped,  or  stay  till  his  riding  to
Court,  which  I  must  have  done  at  his  doore.  This  I
The  Princes  tooke  in  extreame  scorne,  his  Father  never  denying  me
pride.  accesse ; and  his  Pride is  such,  as may  teach  Lucifer :

which  made  me  answere  roundly,  I  was  not  his  Slave,  but
a  free  Ambassadour  of  a  King,  and  that  I  would  never
more  visite  him,  nor  attend  him,  hee  had  refused  me
Justice ;  but  at  night  I  would  see  him  with  the  King,  to
whom  only  I  would  addresse  my  selfe,  and  so  departed.

At  night  I  went  to  the  King,  who  received  me
graciously.  I  made  a  reverence  to  the  Prince,  but  he
would  not  once  stirre  his  head.  Then  I  acquainted  the
King,  that  according  to  his  order,  I  had  brought  an
abstract  of  our  ladings,  desiring  his  command:  after  his
manner  he  asked  what  and  what,  and  was  so  wonderfully
satisfied,  especially  with  Arras,  that  he  promised  mee  all
favour,  all  priviledges,  all  that  I  would  desire.  He
enquired  for  Dogges,  which  I  could  not  answere,  and
for  Jewels,  which  I  told  him  they  were  dearer  in  England
then  in  India,  at  which  hee  rested  satisfied.  I  durst  not
name  the  Pearles  for  many  reasons ;  if  I  had,  our  people
had  beene  waylaid  for  by  the  Prince,  and  such  snatching,
as  I  could  not  avoyd  infinite  trouble:  I  knew  I  could
bring  them  ashoare,  and  to  Court  by  stealth,  that  the
lesser  expected,  the  better  welcome ;  but  my  maine  reason
was,  I  would  make  a  friend  by  them.  Therefore  when
Asaph  Chan  pressed  me  to  know,  I  desired  him  to
make  that  answere  of  dearenesse,  and  that  I  would
speake  with  him  alone ;  he  soone  understood  me,  and
made  excuse.

410

SIR THOMAS ROE  ad.

1617.

The  King  being  well  pleased,  I  thought  it  good  time
to  moove  againe  for  the  debts;  and  having  my  Petition
ready,  opened  it,  and  offered  it  up :  the  King  not  mark-
ing, others  discovered  what  it  was,  and  knew  the  King
would  bee  enraged  that  his  order  was  neglected :  whereat
one  stept  to  me,  and  clapt  downe  my  hand  gently,  desir-
ing me  not  to  doe  so.  I  answered,  Aradake  Chan  had
absolutely  refused  me  Justice :  at  which  he  being  by,
came  in,  in  much  feare,  calling  Asaph  Chan,  desiring  him
to  hinder  me  from  complaint.  I  answered,  our  ships
were  arrived,  and  we  could  not  forbeare  nor  endure  such
delayes :  so  they  consulted  together,  and  called  the  Cut-
wall,  giving  order  to  execute  the  Kings  command :  who
that  night  at  midnight  beset  their  Tents,  and  catched
some  of  them,  so  that  now  we  shall  have  reason.

I  had  great  thanks  of  all  the  Umreies  for  protecting
the  Queenes  ship,  and  our  courtesie  to  their  passengers,
which  they  enformed  the  King,  who  tooke  it  kindly,  and
they  all  promised  that  they  were  obliged  to  love  our
Nation,  and  would  doe  them  all  service :  but  they  won-
dered we  could  not  governe  our  people,  but  that  theeves
could  come  out,  without  the  Kings  leave.

At  the  Kings  rising,  Asaph  Chan  carryed  me  with  him
to  his  retyring  place,  and  there  first  we  translated  the
Abstract  into  Persian,  to  shew  the  King  an  houre  after :
in  which  I  inserted  the  money  with  some  addition,  be-
cause the  King  might  perceive  was  brought  profit  to  his
Dominions ;  next  the  cloath  and  sorts,  then  the  fine  wares
in  generall :  lastly  the  grosse  commodities,  desiring  his
Majestie  to  order  what  he  would  buy,  and  to  give  us
liberty  for  the  rest.  This  finished,  Asaph  Chan  renewed
the  reason  why  I  would  speake  alone,  bad  me  be  free,
vowed  and  protested  such  friendship  as  I  never  could
expect.  I  replyed,  The  reason  why  I  desired  it,  was  to
aske  his  counsell :  for  it  was  true  I  had  somewhat,  but
my  usage  last  yeare  was  so  bad,  that  I  durst  not  trust  any,
but  that  he  might  see  how  I  replyed  on  him,  I  was  will-
ing on  his  oath  to  reveale  it,  which  he  presently  gave.

411

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1617.

I  told  him  I  had  a  rich  Pearle,  and  some  other  ropes
faire :  I  knew  not  whether  it  was  fit  to  tell  the  King,  lest
the  Prince  were  displeased ;  I  told  him  how  in  the
morning  I  had  been  to  visite  him,  and  his  discourtesie,
and  my  resolution :  but  that  I  knew  his  favour  was  so
necessary  for  us,  that  I  hoped  I  might  recover  it,  by  this
one  respect  that  I  kept  the  Pearle  for  him.  This  I  said
was  my  purpose  and  reason  I  concealed  it ;  he  was  father
in  law  to  him,  and  favorite  of  the  King ;  I  was  ready  to
please  both,  and  desired  his  advice.  He  embraced  me,
and  began  :  I  had  done  discreetly,  but  I  should  acquaint
neither :  if  I  did,  I  should  never  want  trouble :  the  King
would  use  me  well,  but  keepe  such  a  stirre  to  see  it,  and
get  it  into  his  hand,  according  to  custome,  and  then  I
must  sue  for  mine  owne.  The  Prince  was  ravenous  and
tyrannicall,  and  wearied  all  Nations.  He  bade  mee  steale
all  ashoare,  trust  none,  and  shewed  mee  many  convey-
ances ;  bade  me  observe  the  usage  of  the  Portugalls,  how
they  were  ransacked,  and  desired  to  buy  it,  which  if  I
would  grant  it,  I  should  have  money  in  deposito,  what
I  should  aske,  and  he  would  for  this  trust  of  him,  sollicite
all  my  desires,  that  without  him  I  could  doe  nothing.
Now  was  an  oportunitie  to  make  a  friend.  I  answered,  I
was  willing,  but  I  feared  hee  would  reveale  it ;  which
having  received  his  oath,  and  a  ceremony  of  covenant
by  crossing  thumbes,  we  embraced  :  I  promised  to  be
directed  by  him,  and  he  to  doe  all  that  I  required  for  the
comming  up  of  the  rest ;  he  would  take  order  to  give  me
Firmans,  no  man  should  touch  any  thing,  but  all  come  to
me,  to  dispose  of  at  pleasure.  The  Prince  he  would
reconcile  to  me,  and  the  next  time  he  visited  him,  he
would  take  me,  and  make  him  use  me  with  all  grace,  and
for  other  businesse  it  should  not  be  in  his  power  to  crosse
me,  but  if  he  did,  he  would  assigne  us  a  Syndic,  which
[I.  iv.  572.]  was  in  his  government,  or  procure  any  other  Port  at  my
desire,  and  whatsoever  I  demanded  should  be  performed
faithfully.  He  also  advised  me  to  give  his  sister  Norma-
hall  some  toy ; he  said  he  would  make  the King  give

412

SIR  THOMAS  ROE  a.d.

1617.

me  money :  to  which  I  answered,  I  desire  you  to  convert

it  into  the  well  usage  of  my  countrey-men,  I  asked  no

more.

Thus  we  rose,  and  he  carryed  me  in  to  the  King,  with
the  Note  translated,  who  gave  mee  all  good  usage ;  asked
if  the  Arras  were  a  Present :  I  answered  yes,  lest  it  should
be  seazed,  for  the  Prince  was  by.  In  conclusion,  hee
said  hee  would  buy  all  the  parcell  of  cloath,  and  many
other  things,  appointing  me  to  send  for  it  speedily ;
Asaph  Chan  to  take  order  for  a  Firman  from  the  Prince.

Thus  I  had  a  good  night,  and  I  knew  though  they  are
all  (  )  yet  in  this  he  would  deale  truely,  because  it

was  to  helpe  himselfe,  and  durst  not  betray  me  till  he  had
the  Pearle,  for  feare  to  misse  it,  nor  after,  for  having
himselfe  betrayed  the  Prince.

§.  ix.

Asaph  Chan  seeketh  to  further  us  for  hope  of
gaine,  so  also  Normahal  :  Master  Steeles
arrivall :  Danger  to  the  publike,  by  private
trade : Stirres  about  a  Fort.

He  twelfth,  according  to  promise,  Asaph  Chan  Asaph  Chans
carryed  mee  to  the  Prince,  into  his  private  fr^n^hipfor
roome,  where  I  presented  him  with  a  small  China  "  *  *
Gold-chaine,  in  a  China  Cup,  he  used  me  indifferently :
Asaph  Chan  perswaded  him  to  alter  his  course  towards  us,
telling  him  hee  gained  yearely  by  us  a  Lecke  of  Rupias
at  his  Port:  that  it  appeared  we  yearely  encreased  our
trade,  and  it  would  in  time  bring  profit ;  that  if  the  hard
measure  were  continued,  we  would  quit  both  that  and  the
Countrey,  of  which  inconvenience  would  ensue.  That
we  were  his  Subjects  (such  words  he  must  use)  if  for
desire  of  toyes  he  gave  us  discontent,  we  would  practise
to  conceale  all  from  him ;  but  if  hee  gave  us  that  libertie
which  was  fit,  wee  would  strive  to  bring  all  before  him,
for  that  I  only  studyed  his  content  and  favour  for  my
particular;  that  he  should  receive  mee,  when  I  came  to

413

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1617.

visite  him  with  honour,  and  according  to  my  qualitie,  it
would  encourage  mee  to  doe  him  service,  and  content  my
Nation.  Finally,  hee  moved  him  for  a  Firman  for  our
present  ease,  and  obtained  it,  promising  all  manner  of
content,  and  at  instant  gave  order  to  Asaph  Chan  his
Secretary,  to  draw  it  in  every  point  according  to  my  owne
desires,  and  to  write  a  Letter  to  the  Governour  in  recom-
mendations of  it :  and  that  I  should  at  all  times  have  any
other  Letter,  when  I  called  for  it.  It  is  easily  seene  with
how  base  and  unworthy  men  I  traffique.  Asaph  Chan
for  a  sordid  hope  only  of  buying  some  toyes,  was  so  re-
conciled, as  to  betray  his  sonne,  and  to  me  obsequious,
even  to  flattery :  for  the  ground  of  all  this  friendship  was,
that  he  might  buy  the  Gold  taken  in  the  prize,  and  some
other  knackes :  to  which  end  he  desired  to  send  downe  a
servant,  which  I  could  not  deny  without  losing  him,  I  had
so  long  laboured  to  get :  neither  was  it  ill  for  us,  for  his
payment  is  good,  and  it  will  save  us  much  charge  and
trouble  to  sell  aboord,  especially  wine  and  luggish  that
spoiles  in  cariage ;  and  he  obtained  leave  under  false
colours,  and  wrote  to  the  Governour  in  our  behalfes,
with  all  manner  of  kindnesse.  There  is  a  necessitie  of
his  friendship,  his  word  is  law,  and  therefore  I  durst  not
see  his  unworthinesse,  and  hope  by  this  course  to  winne
him,  at  least  to  make  present  good  use  of  him.  Upon
this  occasion  I  moved  for  a  Firman  for  Bengala,  which  he
promised,  and  would  never  before  hearken  to :  and  this
effect  of  his  greatnesse  I  found,  that  hee  prosecuted  our
debters,  as  if  his  owne :  and  passing  by  the  Cutwalls  on
his  Elephant,  called  to  command  dispatch,  which  was  an
unusuall  favour;  upon  which  Groo  was  imprisoned,  and
Muckshu  had  two  dayes  libertie  only  to  pay  us;  and  I
doubt  not,  but  to  end  that  in  ten  dayes,  the  summe  being
foure  and  forty  thousand  Rupias,  and  the  debters  most
shifting  false  knaves  in  India.

The  one  and  twentieth,  at  this  instant,  came  in  to  me
from  Asaph  Chan,  a  servant,  in  the  name  of  Normahal,
that  shee  had  moved  the  Prince  for  another  Firman,  that

414

SIR THOMAS ROE  ad.

1617.

all  our  goods  might  bee  in  her  protection,  and  that  shee
had  obtained  it,  and  was  readie  to  send  down  her  servant
with  that,  to  see  and  take  order  for  our  good  establish-
ment, that  shee  would  see  that  wee  should  not  bee
wronged.  That  Asaph  Chan  had  done  this  for  feare  of
the  Princes  violence,  and  because  of  his  delayes ;  that  now
hee  was  sure  that  his  sister  had  desired  to  bee  our  Pro-
tectresse,  that  the  Prince  would  not  meddle,  that  upon  his
honour  I  should  receive  all  things  consigned  to  mee ;
that  shee  had  written  such  a  command,  and  charged  her
servant  to  assist  our  Factors,  so  that  we  should  have
never  more  cause  to  complaine  of  Surat.  Therefore  hee
desired  of  mee  two  or  three  words  to  the  Captaine  and
Factors  to  use  him  kindly,  and  to  let  him  buy  for  her
some  toyes,  such  as  I  would  spare.  This  I  durst  not
deny,  though  I  saw  the  greedinesse ;  and  gave  him  a  note
on  condition  to  see  the  Copy  of  the  Firman  which  was
sealed,  and  I  could  not  without  leave,  and  so  he  was
dispeeded :  but  you  may  by  this  judge  this  place,  how
easie  it  were  to  raise  a  stocke  :  last  yeare,  wee  were  not  [I.  iv.  573.]
looked  after.  Now  because  I  translated  the  Cargazon
of  fine  wares  (yet  concealed  the  Pearle)  and  gave  it
the  King;  every  one  is  ready  to  runne  downe  to  buy;
Normahall  and  Asaph  Chan  studying  to  doe  me  good
offices;  many  great  men  desiring  a  letter  to  send  their
servants  downe,  so  that  if  you  had  treble  this  stocke,
it  would  be  bought  up  aboord,  and  save  you  custome,
and  carriage,  and  spoile :  for  which  purpose  out  of  this
I  have  ordered  your  Factory  to  sell  to  the  servants  of
Normahall  and  her  brother,  whatsoever  may  bee  spared,  so
that  I  may  bee  fitted  at  Court  in  any  proportion.  Thus  I
shall  save  trouble  and  you  charge,  the  Prince  prevented,
and  our  friends  confirmed,  and  yet  I  hope  sufficient  for  to
please  the  King  and  his  sonne :  at  the  delivery  of  which
Asaph  Chan  hath  undertaken  the  Firman  for  Bengala,  or
any  Port,  and  a  generall  command  and  grant  of  free
Priviledges  in  all  his  Dominions.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  the  King  departed  Mandoa

415

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1617.

foure  Course,  and  wandering  in  the  hills,  left  us  irresolute
what  way  to  take,  no  man  knowing  his  purpose.  The
six  and  twentieth,  I  got  a  warrant  for  ten  Camels  at
the  Kings  price.  The  nine  and  twentieth,  I  removed
after :  forced  away  by  the  desolations  of  the  place.

The  one  and  thirtieth,  I  arrived  at  the  Kings  Tents,
but  found  him  gone  with  few  company  for  ten  dayes  a
hunting,  no  man  to  follow  without  leave,  the  Leskar
divided  and  scattered  into  many  parts,  ill  water,  deare  pro-
visions, sicknesse  and  all  sorts  of  calamitie  accompanying
so  infinite  a  multitude ;  yet  nothing  remooves  him  from
following  this  monstrous  appetite.  Heere  I  understood
the  Kings  purpose  was  uncertaine,  whether  for  Agra  or
Guzerat ;  the  latter  given  out ;  the  former  more  probable,
because  his  Councell  desired  to  be  at  rest :  but  that  how
ever  for  the  dispatch  of  my  businesse,  seeing  hee  would
linger  heere  about  a  moneth,  I  was  advised,  and  thought
it  as  fit  to  send  for  the  goods  and  Presents,  as  to  deferre
it  upon  uncertainties,  being  that  dispatched,  I  had  hope  of
some  quiet  in  this  course:  I  wore  out  my  body,  being
very  weake,  and  not  like  to  recover  upon  daily  travell  in
the  fields,  with  cold  raw  muddie  water.
November  2.  The  second  of  November,  arrived  Richard  Steele  and
Master Steeles  Master  Jackson,  with  the  Pearle  and  some  other  small
Honed  matters  stollen ashoare,  according  to  my  order,  which  I

received  and  gave  quittance  for:  with  him  I  had  con-
ference about  his  projects,  which  because  I  would  not
rashly  reject  them,  as  he  had  set  them  afoot,  after  having
made  him  see  his  fancies,  and  understand  the  qualitie  of
these  people,  how  for  the  water-worke,  if  to  bee  effected,
it  must  bee  begunne  at  our  charge,  and  after  triall,  we
shall  not  enjoy  the  profit,  but  the  Naturalls  taught,  and
our  people  rejected  ;  neither  our  commoditie  vented  by  it,
for  that  the  Lead  will  treble  his  price  by  portage  over-
land ;  and  cannot  bee  delivered  at  Agra  so  cheape  as  found
there  :  yet  I  was  content  hee  should  make  triall  for
satisfaction  by  carrying  his  work-men  to  Amadavas,  to
meete  mee  there,  where  by  assistance  of  Mocrib  Chan,

416

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1617.

who  only  is  a  friend  to  new  inventions  I  would  make
offer  to  the  King  of  their  industry,  and  make  proofe  what
conditions  may  be  obtained ;  but  in  my  judgement  it  is
all  money  and  labour  cast  away.  The  Company  must
shut  their  eares  against  these  projectors,  who  have  their
owne  employments  more  in  their  ends,  then  their  Masters
profits :  many  things  hold  well  in  discourse,  and  in  the
theorique  satisfie  curious  imaginations,  but  in  practice  and
execution  are  found  difficult  and  ayrie,  especially  to  alter  the
constant  received  customes  of  Kingdomes,  where  some
drinke  only  raine-water,  some  of  a  holy  River,  some  none
but  what  is  fetched  by  their  owne  cost :  his  second  of
reducing  the  Caffilaes  and  Merchants  of  Lahor  and  Agra,
by  the  River  Indus,  that  used  to  passe  by  Candahor  into
Persia,  to  transport  by  sea  in  our  shipping  for  Jasques  or
the  Gulph,  is  a  meere  dreame,  some  man  in  conference
may  wish  it,  but  none  ever  practise  it.  The  River  is
indifferently  navigable  downe,  but  the  mouth  is  the
residence  of  the  Portugalls,  returnes  backe  against  the
streame  very  difficult.  Finally,  wee  must  warrant  their
goods,  which  a  Fleet  will  not  doe,  neither  did  the
Portugall  ever  lade  or  noise  such  goods  but  only  for  those
of  Sindie  and  Tatta,  that  traded  by  their  owne  Junckes,
they  gave  a  Cartas  or  Passe  to  secure  them  from  their
Frigats,  and  traded  with  them,  for  which  they  payed  a
small  matter,  and  that  onely  which  came  to  the  purses  of
the  Grand  of  Diu,  Damon  and  Ormus,  or  if  all  other
difficulties  were  taken  away,  yet  will  the  Lahornes  never
bee  drawne  downe,  being  that  Caffila  consists  most  of
returning  Persians  and  Armenians  that  knew  the  passage
from  Jasques  almost  as  bad,  as  from  Candahor,  and  for
that  little  on  the  Confines  of  Sinde  not  worth  mentioning.
Notwithstanding  for  his  better  satisfaction,  I  was  content
hee  should  by  experience  learne  his  owne  errours,  so  it
were  not  at  the  Companies  charge,  but  I  suppose  hee  will
let  it  fall,  not  knowing  at  which  end  to  beginne.

A  third  project  for  to  joyne  the  Trade  of  the  Red  Sea
with  this,  I  recommended  to  him,  for  that  it  was  alreadie

IV  417  2D

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1617.

in  use,  and  the  perill  for  the  Guzurats  very  apparant,
therefore  I  doubted  not  some  Merchants  might  be  drawne
to  lade  in  our  ships  at  freight,  whereby  wee  should  make
our  selves  necessary  friends  to  these  people,  supply  our
owne  defects,  save  export  of  monies,  and  finally,  for  this
yeare  employ  one  ship  of  the  olde  account  that  should
returne  in  September :  and  receive  the  proceed  of  the
remaynes  of  this  joynt  stocke,  which  will  be  sufficient  to
re-lade  a  great  ship,  otherwise  to  transport  it  over  will  be
extreame  losse.  This  I  opened  and  urged  the  consequence
shewed  which  way  to  effect  it,  and  commended  by  him  to
the  Commander,  the  Cape  Merchant,  and  your  Factors
with  all  earnestnesse,  as by  my  Letters  appeares. The

[I.  iv.  574.]  consequence  I  will  make  evident  in  your  profit,  if  they
follow  it,  for  were  the  goods  and  estate  all  my  owne,  if
I  could  not  procure  somewhat  towards  charge  by  freight
from  the  Guzurats,  yet  having  so  many  emptie  vessels  for
so  small  a  stocke,  and  two  fallen  into  your  hands  of
men  of  warre,  I  had  rather  goe  emptie,  and  for  company
with  them,  then  to  omit  that :  there  are  many  chances  in
that  Sea,  and  in  the  way  her  returne  onely  of  our  owne
remaynes,  shall  requite  all  forbearance ;  and  be  readie
in  time,  for  employed  she  must  be  if  we  intend  to  send
the  rest  upon  this  account,  for  that  here  is  no  harbourage
at  his  arrivall.  I  found  him  high  in  his  conceits,  having
somewhat  forgotten  me,  Master  Kerridge  and  him  at
warres,  which I endeavoured to temper on all parts,

His  Wife.  but  for  his  Wife  I  dealt  with  him  cleerely,  she  could  not
stay  with  our  safety,  nor  his  Masters  content;  that  he
had  ruined  his  fortunes,  if  by  amends  hee  repayred  it  not ;
that  shee  should not  travel!  nor  live  on the  Companies

Danger  by Purse ;  I know  the  charge  of  women,  that  if  he  were

bringing  content  to  live  himselfe  like  a Merchant,  as  others  did

Wives.  n  •

frugally,  and  to  be  ordered  for  the  Companies  service  and
to  send  home  his  Wife,  he  was  welcome:  otherwise,
I  must  take  a  course  with  both,  against  my  nature.
Having  to  this  perswaded  him,  I  likewise  practised  the
discouragement  of  Captaine Towerson  about  his Wife,

418

SIR THOMAS ROE  ad.

1617.

(you  know  not  the  danger,  the  trouble,  the  inconvenience
of  granting  these  liberties)  to  effect  this,  I  perswaded
Abraham  his  Father  in  Law  here  to  hold  fast :  I  wrote  to
them  the  gripings  of  this  Court,  the  small  hope  or  reliefe
from  his  alliance,  who  expected  great  matters  from  him.
Finally  I  perswaded  his  returne  quietly.  To  further  this,
I  wrote  to  your  chiefe  Factor,  that  such  things  as  hee  had
brought  and  were  vendible,  should  bee  brought  to  your  use
by  Bill  of  exchange  to  such  profit  for  him,  as  both  might
save ;  and  this  inconvenience  you  bring  on  your  selves  by
liberties  unreasonable.  But  to  take  tye  of  his  trash  to  lye
upon  your  hands,  upon  any  condition  I  did  prohibit.

I  find  by  your  Letter  your  strict  command  in  private  Publike  losse
Trade,  as  well  for  your  owne  Servants  as  others,  whereby  I  ^  private
collect,  you  meane  not  that  he  shall  have  that  libertie  hee
expects,  for  he  is  furnished  for  above  one  thousand  pound
sterling,  first  penny  here,  and  Steele  at  least  two  hundred
pound,  which  he  presumes  sending  home  his  Wife,  his
credit  and  merit  is  so  good  towards  you,  that  you  will
admit  in  this  case  to  be  rid  of  such  cattell,  I  will  not  buy,
but  order  that  it  be  marked  and  consigned  to  you,  that
you  may  measure  your  owne  hand.  You  discourage
all  your  olde  Servants,  some  may  doe  all  things  for  faire
words,  some  nothing  for  good  actions :  I  could  instance
some  gone  home  two  yeares  since,  that  onely  employed
their  owne  stocke,  did  no  other  businesse,  and  live  now
at  home  in  pleasure,  others  that  raise  their  fortunes  upon
your  monies,  from  Port  to  Port,  and  returne  rich  and
unquestioned.  Last  yeare  a  Mariner  had  sixe  and  The  names  are
twentie  Churles  of  Indico,  others  many  Fardles,  a  third
seven  thousand  Mamudes,  first  pennie  in  Baroach,
Bastaes,  chosen  apart,  for  hee  invested  your  Monies,
and  it  is  probable  hee  chose  not  the  worst  for  himselfe :  a
fourth,  above  one  hundred  and  fiftie  pound  first  pennie.
These  I  mention  not  for  spight,  but  to  move  you  to
equalitie,  neither  by  their  example  these  may  escape,
for  they  swallow  you  up,  but  that  an  indifferent  restraint
be  executed  upon  all.

419

omitted.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1617.

For  the  effecting  of  all  these  purposes,  the  sending
home  the  woman  and  the  prosecution  of  the  Red  Sea,  I
send  backe  Richard  Steele  with  orders  to  Surat,  having
altered  my  purpose  of  the  goods  and  Presents  from  the
Leskar,  it  beeing  declared  that  the  King  will  for  Guzurat,
where  I  have  appointed  Richard  Steele,  after  having  dis-
patched other  matters,  to  meet  with  them  and  his
Ingeniers.  I  also  sent  my  advice  and  directions  to
Inventory  of  Captaine  Pring,  to  take  an  Inventorie  of  all  the  Monies
thegoodsm the  an(J  gOOC^s  [n  the  two  men  0f  Warre,  to  make  it  over  to

your  stocke  and  land  it,  to  sell  or  dispose  of  the  ships,  as
his  occasion  shall  require,  the  monies,  if  sold,  to  be  put  to
stocke,  to  grant  passage  to  some  of  the  Chiefes,  to
entertaine  the  rest  and  to  referre  it  to  you  at  home,  whom
you  will  deale  with  the  Owners  that  set  them  out.  My
opinion  is  peremptory,  that  their  surprize  is  just  and
justifiable,  all  their  goods  forfeited  :  if  you  will  restore  any
thing,  at  your  courtesie ;  but  with  the  more  rigour  you
deale  with  these,  the  better  example  you  will  leave  for
such  barbarous  Piracies:  for  if  this  course  be  practised,
take  your  leave  of  all  Trade  about  Surat,  and  the  Red
Sea,  and  let  the  Company  of  Turkie  stand  cleere  of  the
Grand  Signors  revenge,  and  we  heere  must  expect  cold
Irons.

The  sixth,  I  went  to  Asaph  Chans,  having  received  his
Passe,  unto  whom  I  shewed  the  Pearle  according  to
promise,  though  the  sorts  fit  not  the  Countrey  just  as  I
was  informed  hereafter,  yet  their  performance  with  him
gave  him  such  content,  that  I  am  confident,  I  may  use
Pharaohs  words,  The  Land  is  before  you,  dwell  where  you
will,  you  and  your  Servants :  for  the  price  wee  talked  not,
but  he  vowed  such  secrecie :  and  for  my  sake,  who  have
shewed  this  confidence  in  him,  hee  will  give  more  then
their  worth,  and  not  returne  one,  and  pay  readie  mony,  of
which  hee  professeth  not  to  want,  and  to  lend  mee  what  I
Normaka/ a  want:  his  Sister  I  have  promised  to  visit,  whom  hee  hath
f1veni *°  made  our  protectresse,  and  briefly  whatsoever  content-
ment words  can bring  I  receive,  and  some  good  effects.

420

SIR  THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1617.

When  the  Presents  arrive,  assure  you  I  will  not  be  liberall

to  your  losse,  little  shall  serve. Asaph  Chan  admonisheth

mee  himselfe, so  they  came  with somewhat to induce

them,  as  well  accepted,  bought  as  given : experience  of

others  makes  mee  to  approve  of  this  doctrine.

Finishing  these  complements  with  him  in  his  Bed-
chamber, he  rose  to  Dinner  having  invited  me  and  my  [I.  iv.  575.]
people :  but  me  and  friends  dined  without,  appointing
mee  a  messe  with  him  apart,  for  they  eate  not  willingly
with  us ;  where  I  had  good  cheere  and  well  attended ;  the
reversion  for  my  servants.

After  dinner,  I  moved  Groos  debt,  told  him  the  de-
layes.  Hee  answered,  I  should  not  open  my  lips,  he
had  undertaken  it,  that  Groo  by  his  meanes  was  finishing
accounts  with  a  Jeweller  ;  that  hee  had  ordered,  as  money
was  paid,  it  should  rest  in  the  Cutwalls  hand  for  us ;
which  I  found  true :  and  the  Cutwall  promised  to  finish
it  in  three  dayes,  desiring  mee  to  send  no  more  to
Asaph  Chan.

I  cannot  omit  a  basenesse  or  favour,  according  as  you
will  interprete  it.  The  King  when  his  Prisons  are
full  of  condemned  men,  some  he  commands  to  be
executed,  some  he  sends  to  his  Umraes  to  redeeme  at  a
price :  this  he  esteemes  as  a  courtesie,  to  give  meanes
to  exercise  charitie,  but  he  takes  the  money,  and  so
sels  the  vertue.

About  a moneth  before  our  remove  he  sent  to  mee,  Redeeming  of
to  buy  three  Abassines  (for  fortie  Rupias  a  man)  whom  Prisoners.
they suppose all Christians. I answered, I could not
buy men as  Slaves,  as  others  did, and so had profit
for  their money, but in charity I would give twenty
Rupias  a  piece  to  save  their  lives,  and  give  them  libertie.
The  King  tooke  my  answere  well,  and bade them to
be sent me. They expected money, and I was not  Dixit  iff
hastie ; hearing no more  of  it, I  hoped  it  had  beene  edictumest:
forgotten : but his words are written Decrees. This  fatum
night  the  Officers  seeing  I  sent  not,  delivered  the  Prisoners
into  my  Procuradors  power,  and  tooke  his  Screete  for

421

A.D.
1617.

Causelesse
jealousies
touching  a
Fort.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

sixtie  Rupias,  which  at  my  returne  I  payed,  and  freed
the  Slaves.

The  tenth,  I  visited  Asaph  Chan,  having  received
advise  from  Surat  of  a  new  Firman,  come  downe  to  dis-
arrive  all  the  English,  and  some  other  restrictions  of  their
libertie :  upon  a  complaint  made  to  the  Prince,  that  we
intended  to  build  a  Fort  at  Swally,  and  that  our  shippes
were  laden  with  Bricke  and  Lime  for  that  end  :  which
suspition  arose  only  by  bringing  a  few  on  shoare  to  sound
the  ships  bell ;  yet  the  Alarum  came  to  Court  so  hot,
that  I  was  called  to  answere ;  which  when  I  made  it
appeare  how  absurd  the  feare  was,  how  dishonorable  for
the  King,  how  unfit  the  place  for  us,  without  water  or
harbourage :  yet  the  jealousie  was  so  strongly  imprinted,
because  formerly  I  had  demanded  a  River  by  Goya  for
that  end,  that  I  could  hardly  perswade  the  Prince  we
intended  not  some  surprise.  By  this  you  may  judge,
how  easie  it  were  to  get  a  Port  for  our  selves,  if  you
affected  it,  which  I  can,  neither  so  profitable  for  you,  nor
a  place  tenable.  Notwithstanding  all  remonstrances,  this
furnace  must  be  demolished,  and  a  Haddey  of  horse  sent
downe  to  see  it  effected.  The  disarming  of  our  men,
being  all  that  our  people  stomacked,  though  it  was  only
to  leave  their  weapons  in  the  Custome-house,  and  that  only
of  the  ships  company,  though  it  were  quieter  for  us,
except  they  were  often  more  civill :  yet  I  told  Asaph
Chan  wee  would  not  endure  the  slavery,  nor  I  stay  in  the
Countrey,  that  one  day  the  Prince  sent  a  Firman  for
our  good  usage  and  grant  of  Priviledges,  the  next  day
countermanded  it ;  that  there  was  no  faith  nor  honour  in
such  proceedings,  neither  could  I  answere  my  residence
longer.  He  replyed,  at  night  hee  would  moove  the
King,  before  the  Prince,  and  give  me  answere.

The  thirteenth,  I  revisited  Asaph  Chan :  he  told  me
wondrous  matters  of  the  Kings  affection  to  my  Sover-
eigne,  to  my  Nation,  and  to  mee ;  that  hee  had  ventured
the  Princes  disfavour  for  our  sakes,  and  had  full  promise
for  a  new  reformation :  but  because  he  feared  the  Princes

422

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1617.

dealing,  he  gave  me  this  assurance,  that  he  would  take  the
Prigany  of  Surat,  which  the  Prince  must  leave,  being
made  Governour  of  Amadavas,  Cambaya,  and  that  Terri-
torie :  and  to  give  me  satisfaction  that  he  had  not
dissembled  with  me,  he  desired  me  to  come  at  night  to
Court,  and  bring  the  King  my  Masters  Letter  and  the
translation,  the  oportunitie  was  faire  to  deliver  it :  upon
the  occasion  of  which,  he  bade  me  persist  in  my  com-
plaints, and  offer  to  take  leave ;  I  should  then  see  what  he
would  say  for  us,  and  so  I  should  beleeve  my  selfe.  At
evening  I  went  to  the  King,  it  beeing  a  very  full  Court,
and  presented  my  Letter,  which  (the  King  sitting  on  the
ground)  was  layd  before  him ;  and  he  busie,  tooke  no
great  notice.  Asaph  Chan  whispered  his  Father  in  the
eare,  desiring  him  to  reade  the  Letter,  and  to  assist  us,
for  that  he  might  better  begin  that  then  himselfe,  Etimon  EtimonDowlet
Dowlet  tooke  up  both  Letters,  gave  the  English  to  the  fortheEnS^.
King,  and  read  the  translated ;  to  which  when  the  King
had  answered  many  words  of  complaint,  to  that  point  of
procuring  our  quiet  Trade,  by  his  authoritie  among  the
Portugals,  he  demanded  if  he  would  make  peace.  I
answered,  his  Majestie  knew  long  since,  I  offered  to  be
governed  by  him,  and  referred  it  to  his  wisdome,  and
had  expected  his  pleasure :  he  replyed,  hee  would  under-
take absolutely  to  accord  us,  and  to  make  agreement  in
his  Seas,  which  he  would  by  answere  to  my  Masters
Letters  signifie,  and  therein  give  him  content  in  all  other
his  friendly  desires.  Notwithstanding,  I  demanded  leave
to  goe  before  to  Amadavas  to  meet  the  Kings  Presents,
and  to  prepare  for  my  returne.  Upon  which  motion,
the  question  grew  betweene  the  King  and  the  Prince,  who
complayned  that  he  had  no  profit  by  us,  and  that  he
was  content  to  be  rid  of  us.  Asaph  Chan  tooke  the
turne,  and  very  roundly  told  the  King,  that  we  brought
both  profit  to  the  Port,  to  the  Kingdome,  and  securitie ;
that  we  were  used  very  rudely  by  the  Princes  servants,
and  that  it  was  not  possible  for  us  to  reside  without
amends;  it were  more honourable for his Majestie to

423

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1617.

licence  us,  then  to  intreate  us  so  discourteously,  for  it
would  be  the  end.  The  Prince  replyed  very  cholerickly,
[I.  iv.  576.]  that  he  had  never  done  us  wrong,  and  had  lately  given
mee  a  Firman  at  his  entreatie.  He  replyes,  It  is  true,
you  gave  a  Firman  to  his  content,  and  in  ten  dayes  sent
another,  in  effect,  to  contradict  it,  that  he  stood  surety
between  both,  had  undertaken  from  the  Princes  mouth
our  redresse,  but  now  he  had  the  shame  and  dishonour  of
it :  that  he  ought  me  nothing,  nor  I  him ;  he  spake  for  no
ends,  but  for  the  Kings  Honor  and  Justice,  in  that  which
he  said  that  he  did  us  no  wrong,  he  must  appeale  to
me,  who  complayned  that  our  goods  were  taken  by  force,
that  two  yeeres  past  Rulph  had  begun  it,  would  never  pay
us,  and  his  Officers  continued  every  shipping  ;  that  if
the  Prince  were  weary  of  us,  he  might  turne  us  out,
but  then  he  must  expect  we  would  doe  our  owne  Justice
upon  the  Seas.  He  demanded  if  the  King  or  Prince
gave  mee  meanes  to  eate,  or  who  did  ?  That  I  was  an
Ambassadour  and  a  stranger,  that  lived  and  followed  the
King  at  great  charge  ;  that  if  our  goods  were  forced,
and  after  we  could  get  neither  goods  nor  money,  how
should  I  live  and  maintayne  my  selfe.

This  delivered  with  some  heate,  the  King  catched  the
word,  Force,  Force,  redoubling  it  to  his  sonne,  and  gave
him  sharpe  reprehension  :  the  Prince  promised  to  see  me
paid  all ;  that  he  had  taken  nothing,  but  only  caused
the  Presents  to  be  sealed,  because  his  Officers  had  no
Custome,  and  desired  to  have  them  opened  before  him,  I
absolutely  refused  it :  also  I  told  the  King,  I  would  only
doe  my  dutie  to  my  Master,  in  delivering  his  Presents
free,  after  I  would  give  the  Prince  all  content.

Etimon  Dowlet,  who  is  alway  indifferent,  and  now
by  his  sonne  made  our  friend,  whispered  with  the  King,
and  read  a  clause  or  two  in  my  Masters  Letter  ;  at  which
the  King  made  his  son  rise  and  stand  aside.  Asaph  Chan
joyned  in  this  private  conference  (which  they  told  me
was  for  my  good)  and  in  conclusion,  the  Prince  was
called,  commanded  to  suffer  all  the  goods  to  come  to  my

424

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1617.

hands  quietly,  to give  me  such  priviledges  as  were  fit,

which  Asaph  Chan  should  propound. The  Prince  would

not  yeeld  the  Presents,  except  Asaph  Chan  would stand

surety  that  he  should  have  a  share,  which  he  did;  and

then  we  all  agreed upon  that  point. The  King  giving

mee  many  good  words,  and  two  pieces  of  his  Pawne  out

of  his  dish,  to  eate  of  the  same  he  was  eating. Then

I  tooke  leave  to  goe  to  Amadavas,  to  meet  the  Presents,

and  so  we  parted. At  night  I  set  on  my  journey,  leaving

my  Tents, supposing  the next  day  to reach  the Citie,

but  I  rode  two  nights,  a  day  and  a  halfe  with one  baite

upon straw, and the fifteenth at noone arrived at

Amadavas.

The  eight  of  Januarie,  there  was  some  question  about  Januarie  8.

Presents,  the  Prince  asking  for  them :  I  answered,  they  Yord.$ ,
j. -r 1  1  j  • 1  •  -t-i  1 betwixt  the

were readie,  it nee pleased to receive his. Inen  hee  pr-tnceaneit}ie

demanded,  why  I  brake  his  seales  ? I  told  him,  it  was  Ambassadour

dishonorable for  me  to bring a Kings  gifts in bonds,  aboutP resents.

and  great  discourtesie  to  set  seales  upon  them  :  I  expected

and  attended his licence twentie daies, but seeing no

hope, I  was  enforced  to  doe  it. Some  heate  began : at

which  appeared  a  Gentleman  of  the  Kings,  who  was  sent

to  observe  the  passage,  and  to  stickle,  and  told  us  both,

the  King  commanded  wee  should  come  before him  at

a  Garden,  where  he  sate,  a  Course  out  of  Towne,  upon

the River. So  the  Prince  tooke  his  Palankee,  and  I  a

Coach, well attended by servants both of  father and

son. When I came to the gates the Women were

entring,  and then  no man can but the Prince ; who

made within  a  bitter  complaint  against  mee,  that  I  had

dared to cut his seales, and to take  out what  I list.

Asaph Chan was  called  for,  who  was my suretie, and

the  Prince  laid  it  on  him  :  he,  as  the  custome  is,  denyed  Custome  to

it,  excused  himselfe,  yet  I  had  not  accused  him,  but  tooke "avm e

J  K.WZS  zvord  it

it upon  me, as  knowing  my selfe better  able  to  beare  he  will  not'

it,  and  that  he  would  denie  it. Then  I  was  sent  for  to  acknowledge

the  water-side,  where the  King  sate  privately, where  I  ***  -Ait,  ato;

entered,  with  mee  the  Presents  ;  but  the  King  was  within  Ne&at>  ne&-

425

A.D.

1617.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

amongst  his  Women.  Asaph  Chan  chafed  at  mee,  for
breaking  his  word,  told  mee,  the  Prince  had  shamed
him  :  I  replyed  by  Jaddow,  You  know  I  had  your
consent,  this  man  is  witnesse ;  he  denyed  it  to  us  both :  I
replyed,  Though  I  would  not  cast  it  upon  him,  it  was
true,  for  I  had  witnesse :  Jaddow  would  not  returne
the  answere,  but  told  me  he  might  not  tell  him  he  lyed  to
his  face :  and  this  is  usuall,  if  any  command  come  from
the  King  that  he  forgets,  he  that  brought  the  message
will  disavow  it.  I  bore  up  as  high  as  I  could  ;  the  great
men  told  me  it  was  a  great  affront,  no  man  durst  doe
such  a  thing ;  others  smiled :  I  answered,  Not  so  great  as
the  Prince  had  done  me  often.  Thus  we  spent  the
day,  and  the  King  appeared  not,  but  privately  stole  away,
leaving  us  all  sitting  in  expectance.

At  night  word  came  the  King  was  gone,  and  I  offered
to  goe  home,  but  was  so  well  attended,  I  could  not  but
by  force :  in  the  way  new  messengers  came  to  seeke  mee,
and  I  arrived  backe  at  the  Kings  Court,  not  having
eaten  or  drunke  ;  but  the  King  was  not  come  in,  nor
could  I  get  loose  of  my  attendants,  but  they  used  me
very  respectfully,  we  sate  an  houre.  Suddenly  newes
came  to  put  out  all  lights,  the  King  was  come,  who  entred
on  an  open  Waggon,  with  his  Normahall,  drawn e  by
Bullocks,  himselfe  Carter,  and  no  man  neare.  When
hee  and  his  Women  were  housed,  the  Prince  came  in
a  horse-backe,  and  entring  in,  called  for  me  :  I  found  them
alone  with  two  or  three  *  Capons,  and  about  mid-night
the  King  set  on  it  an  angrie  countenance,  told  mee  I
had  broken  my  word,  that  he  would  trust  me  no  more,
(the  Prince  had  desired  him  to  doe  so:)  I  answered  as
roundly,  I  held  it  fit  to  give  freely,  I  had  done  nothing  of
offence  in  my  owne  judgement ;  if  their  customes  were
other,  it  was  ignorance,  and  I  must  bee  pardoned  ;  wee
had  many  disputes ;  at  last,  the  Prince  interposed,
[I.  iv.  577.]  offered  his  friendship,  and  wee  were  all  reconciled  fully,
and  promises  too  large.  Then  I  opened  the  Chests,  gave
the  King  his  Presents,  the  Prince  his,  and  sent  in  that

426

The  Kings
Chariot
drawn  by
Bullocks.

'  * Eunuchs.

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1617.

for  Normahall : we  were  above  two houres  in  viewing

them. The  Arras  he  tooke  well,  but  said  it  was  course,

desired  to  have  a  Sute  of  such,  as  the  sweet  Bagge :  and

wee  concluded  that  in  the  morning  I  should  come  to  the

Prince,  that  he  should  be  my  Protector  and  Procurator,

the  goods  except. Three  things  more  then  Presents  were

there  returned  mee : for  those  three  the  Prince  told  me

he  would  pay,  seeing  his  father  tooke  them.

The  tenth,  I  went  to  the  Prince,  was  received  with  all
favour,  had  order  for  a  Firman  for  the  man  murthered,
a  declaration  of  his  reconcilement  in  publike,  command
to  all  his  Officers  to  take  knowledge,  and  to  his  chiefe
Raja  to  be  my  Procurator,  and  to  draw  what  Firmans  so
ever  I  desired.  I  presented  Captaine  Towerson  and
some  English,  whom  hee  used  with  grace,  and  for  a
signe  of  this  peace,  gave  me  a  Cloth  of  silver  cloak,  and
promised  to  be  the  Protector  of  our  Nation  in  all  things.
I  told  him  of  Master  Steele  and  his  Work-men:  he
desired  me  to  bring  a  small  Present  to  his  father  at  night,
hee  would  present  them,  which  I  did.  Hee  kept  his
word,  and  spake  for  us  to  him,  who  was  willing  enough.
I  presented  Captaine  Towerson  to  the  King,  who  called
for  him  up,  and  after  a  few  questions  rose.  At  the
Gushel  Choes,  I  presented  Master  Steele  and  his  Work-
men :  the  King  sate  in  a  Hat  I  gave  him  all  night,  called
for  Master  Paynter,  and  after  much  Discourse,  gave  him
ten  pounds,  and  promised  to  entertayne  the  rest.

The  thirteenth,  the  Dutch  came  to  Court  with  a  great  Present  of  the
Present  of  China  ware,  Sanders,  Parrats  and  Cloaves;  Dutck-
but  were  not  suffered  to  come  neere  the  third  degree:
at  last  the  Prince  asked  me  who  they  were :  I  replyed,
The  Hollanders,  resident  in  Surat.  Hee  demanded  if
they  were  our  friends :  I  replyed,  they  were  a  Nation
depending  on  the  King  of  England,  but  not  welcome  in
all  places;  their  businesse  I  knew  not.  He  said,  for
being  our  friends,  I  should  call  them  up,  and  so  I  was
enforced  to  send  for  them  to  deliver  their  Present :  they
were placed by our Merchants,  without any  speech or

427

Howard
accused.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1617.

further  conference.  Finally,  I  had  all  granted  I  desired,
I  attend  the  performance  and  money :  and  thus  I  con-
clude, that  without  this  contestation  I  had  never  gotten
any  thing:  for  I  told  the  Princes  Messenger  in  the
presence  of  all  the  English,  that  if  he  used  force  to  me
or  my  goods,  he  might  doe  his  pleasure,  but  it  should
cost  bloud :  that  I  would  set  my  Chop  upon  his  Masters
ship,  and  send  her  for  England.
Spragge  and  The  eighteenth,  I  received  from  Surat  of  the  imprison-
ment of  Spragge  and  Howard,  at  Brampoore,  their  house
and  goods  seized,  their  lives  in  question,  for  drinking
with  the  Cutwall  in  their  house,  that  one  of  the  Cutwalls
men  dyed  that  night;  upon  which  they  stand  accused  of
Poyson:  and  the  Cutwall  to  free  himselfe  of  comming
into  the  house,  pretended  that  he  came  to  fetch  a  mans
wife  away  from  Thomas  Spragge.  What  the  truth  is
I  know  not :  Information  is  come  to  the  King  against
them :  and  I  went  to  the  Prince,  who  undertooke  all  my
causes :  but  could  not  speake  with  him :  with  the  same
came  complaint  of  a  force  used  to  the  Caffila  upon  the
way,  notwithstanding  the  Firman  sent  by  the  Raja  of  the
Countrey,  in  both  which  to  night  I  will  make  petition  to
the  King.  My  toyle  with  barbarous  unjust  people  is
beyond  patience:  at  the  Princes  I  found  the  Firman
promised,  drawne,  but  halfe  the  conditions  agreed  on
left  out,  upon  which  I  refused  it,  and  desired  nothing
but  leave  to  depart  to  treat  with  these  in  the  Sea.

The  one  and  twentieth,  a  command  to  free  the  English,
and  their  goods,  and  that  if  the  Moore  came  into  their
house  to  drinke,  if  they  killed  him  with  a  Dagger,  hee
had  his  just  reward.  The  second  to  Raja  Partapshaw,
to  repay  us  all  exactions  whatsoever,  not  to  take  here-
after any  dutie  upon  the  way  towards  his  Port ;  and  in
case  of  failing,  that  he  would  deliver  his  sonne  into  my
hands ;  he  further  ordered  the  delivery  of  the  Firman  for
Surat,  the  Articles  by  mee  demanded,  and  to  pay  us  all
our  debts  of  Surat,  and  to  cut  it  off  upon  his  Mancip-
daries,  that  had  taken  that,  without delay,  he  called  to

428

SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1617.

account  his  old  Customers,  charged  the  new  to  use  us
as  his  friends,  shewed  as  much  favour  publikely  as  I
could  require.  I  mooved  expedition;  he  replyed,  To
morrow  by  nine  in  the  morning  all  should  be  delivered
into  my  hands.

The  two  and  twentieth,  I  went  my  selfe  to  receive
them ;  and  carryed  the  Merchants,  with  some  Pearle,
that  the  Prince  had  bin  instant  to  see,  pretended  to  be
Master  Towersons :  but  he  had  received  some  uncertaine
information  of  Pearles,  to  the  value  of  twentie  or  thirtie
thousand  pound,  which  he  hoped  to  draw  from  us.  When
his  Secretarie  saw  the  small  sorts,  he  replyed,  the  Prince
had  Mands  of  these  :  if  we  brought  no  better  commoditie,
wee  might  be  gone,  he  cared  not  for  our  custome :  how
basely  false,  and  covetous  are  those  of  Jewels,  you  may
judge.  1  undertooke  reply,  that  I  had  procured  those
from  a  Gentlewoman  to  satisfie  them ;  if  they  liked  them
not,  they  could  not  be  made  better,  it  was  incivility  to
be  angry  with  Merchants  for  their  good  will,  but  told
him  I  came  for  my  Firmans,  and  expected  them  :  I  was
answered,  wee  had  deceived  their  hopes,  and  the  Prince
would  deceive  ours ;  Firman  I  should  have  none,  I  had
asked  leave  to  depart,  I  might  come  and  take  leave  when
I  pleased.  I  answered,  nothing  contented  mee  more,  but
that  I  would  visit  their  unjustice  in  an  indifferent  place;
that  I  would  speake  with  the  King,  and  depend  no  more
on  them,  for  I  saw  all  was  covetousnesse  and  unworthi-
nesse :  so  I  rose  and  parted ;  but  he  recalled  me  to  come
to  the  King  and  Prince  together  the  next  day,  I  should
have  content.

ANd  now  Reader,  we  are  at  a  stand:  some  more  idle,  [I.  iv.  578.]
or  more  busie  spirits,  willing  either  to  take  their  rest,
or  to  exchange  their  labour;  and  some  perhaps  wishing
they  had  the  whole  Journall,  and  not  thus  contracted  into
Extracts  of  those  things  out  of  it,  which  I  conceived  more
fit  for  the  publike.  And  for  the  whole,  my  selfe  could
have  wished  it,  but  neither  with  the  Honourable  Com-

429

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1617.

pany,  nor  else-where  could  learne  of  it :  the  worthy
Knight  himselfe  being  now  employed  in  like  Honourable
Embassage  from  his  Majestie  to  the  Great  Turke.  Yet
to  supply  the  defect  of  the  Journall,  I  have  given  thee  the
Chorography  of  the  Countrey.  Certaine  Letters  of  his,
written  thence  to  his  Honourable  Lords  and  friends  in
England,  out  of  all  which  well  wrought  on  by  an  under-
standing spirit,  may  bee  hewed  and  framed  a  delightfull
Commentary  of  the  Mogoll  and  his  Subjects.  Take  them
therefore  Reader,  and  use  them  as  a  Prospective  Glasse,
by  which  thou  maist  take  easie  and  neere  view  of  those
remote  Regions,  People,  Rites,  Religions.

And  first  here  followes  a  description  of  the  Countrey
both  by  Map  and  Writing,  and  after  them  the  Letters
passing  mutually  betwixt  his  Majestie  and  the  Mogoll,
and  lastly,  those  of  Sir  Thomas  Roe  afore-said.

§.  x.

The  severall  Kingdomes  and  Provinces  subject  to
the  Great  Mogoll  Sha  Selim  Gehangies,  with
the  Principall  Cities  and  Rivers,  the  scituation
and  borders,  and  extent  in  length  and  breadth,
as  neere  as  by  description  I  could  gather  them.
The  names  I  tooke  out  of  the  Kings  Register :
I  begin  at  the  North-west.

Andahar,  the  chiefe  Citie  so  called,  lyes  from
the  heart  of  all  his  Territorie  North-west,  con-
fines with  the  Shabas,  and  was  a  Province  of
Persia.

2.  Tata,  the  chiefe  Citie  so  called,  is  divided  by  the
River  Indus,  which  fals  into  the  Sea  at  Sindu,  and  lyes
from  Candahar  South,  from  the  middle  of  which,  I  sup-
pose Agra  West,  some-what  Southerly.

3.  Buckar,  the  chiefe  Citie  so  called,  Buckar  Suckar,
lyes  upon  the  River  Sindu  or  Indus,  to  the  North-ward,
some-what  Easterly  of  Tata,  and  West  Confines  upon  the
Baloaches,  a  kind  of  rude  Warlike  people.

43°

THE  EMPIRE  OF  THE  GREAT  MOGOL  ad.

1617.

4.  Multan,  the  chiefe  Citie  so  called  lying  also  upon
Indus,  East  from  Candahar,  North  from  Buckar.  .

5.  Haagickan,  the  Kingdome  of  the  Boloaches,  to
the  West  of  Tata  and  Bachar,  and  confines  West  upon  the
Kingdome  of  Lar,  subject  to  the  Shabas.  Indus  windeth
it  selfe  into  the  Easter-side  of  it,  it  hath  no  renowned
Citie.

6.  Cabull,  the  Citie  so  called,  a  great  Kingdome,  the
Northermost  of  this  Emperours  Dominions,  and  confineth
with  Tartaria.

7.  Kyshmier,  the  chiefe  Citie  is  called  Sirivaker,  the
River  of  Bhat  passeth  through  it,  and  findeth  the  Sea  by
Ganges,  or  some  say  of  it  selfe  in  the  North  part  of  the
Bay  of  Bengala,  it  bordereth  Cabul  to  the  East  Southerly,
it  is  all  Mountaines.

8.  Bankish,  the  chiefe  Citie  is  called  Beishar.

9.  Atack,  the  chiefe  Citie  so  called,  it  lyeth  on  one
side  the  River  Nilab,  which  runneth  the  North-west  into
the  River  Indus.

10.  The  Kingdome  of  the  Kataries,  lyes  at  the  foot  of
the  Mountaines :  it  hath  principall  Cities,  Dankely  and
Purhola,  it  bordereth  North-east  on  Kishimer.

1 1 .  Pen- Jab,  which  signifieth  five  waters,  for  that  it  is
seated  within  five  Rivers.  The  chiefe  Citie  is  called
Lahor,  it  is  a  great  Kingdome  and  most  fruitfull,  the
Citie  is  the  Mart  of  India  for  Traffique,  it  borders  North-
east on  Multan.

12.  Janba,  the  chiefe  Citie  so  called:  it  lyeth  East  on
Pen- Jab,  it  is  very  mountaynous.

13.  Peitan,  the  chiefe  Citie  so  called,  it  lyeth  East  of
Jenba,  and  from  the  North-west  Bengala  it  is  fall  of
Mountaines.

14.  Nakarkut,  the  chiefe  Citie  so  called,  the  North
Eastermost  confine  of  Mogor,  it  lyes  to  the  North-east
of  the  head  of  the  Bay  of  Bengala,  it  is  very  moun-
taynous.

15.  Siba,  the  chiefe  Citie  so  called,  it  borders  with
Nakarkut  Southerly,  it  is  all  Mountainous.

43i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1617.

16.  Jesuall,  the  chiefe  Citie  so  called  Ragepar,  it  bor-
dereth  with  Bengala  South-east  North,  and  with  Siba  and
Nakarkat,  it  is  full  of  Mountaines.

17.  Delly,  the  chiefe  Citie  so  called,  it  lyeth  on  the
iv.  579.]  North-west  side  of  the  River  Jemvie,  which  falleth  into

Ganges,  and  runneth  through  Agra  :  it  is  an  ancient  Citie,
and  the  seat  of  the  Mogols  Ancestors,  it  is  ruined :  some
affirme  it  to  have  beene  the  seat  of  Porus  conquered  by
Alexander,  and  that  there  stands  a  Pillar  with  a  Greeke
Inscription.

18.  Meuat,  the  chiefe  Citie  called  Narnol,  it  lyeth  on
the  East  of  Ganges.

19.  Sanball,  the  chiefe  Citie  so  called :  it  lyeth  between
Ganges  and  Jemvi  to  the  North-west  of  their  meeting.

20.  Bakar,  the  chiefe  Citie  is  called  Bikaneer,  it  bor-
dereth  North-west  on  Ganges.

21.  Agra,  a  principall  and  great  Kingdome,  the  Citie
so  called,  the  heart  of  the  Mogolls  Territorie,  in  North
latitude  about  twentie  eight  degrees  and  an  halfe :  it
lyeth  most  on  the  South-west  side  of  Jemvi,  the  Citie
upon  the  River,  where  one  of  the  Emperours  Treasuries
are  kept.  From  Agra  to  Lahor,  being  three  hundred
and  twentie  Course,  which  is  not  lesse  then  seven  hun-
dred miles,  it  is  all  a  plaine,  and  the  high-way  planted  on
both  sides  with  trees  like  a  delicate  walke :  it  is  one  of
the  great  workes  and  wonders  of  the  World.

22.  Jenupar,  the  Citie  so  called,  upon  the  River  of
Kaul,  which  I  suppose  to  bee  one  of  the  five  Rivers
inclosing  Lahor,  and  the  Countrey  lyeth  betweene  it  and
Agra,  North-west  from  one,  South-east  from  the  other.

23.  Banda,  the  chiefe  Citie  so  called,  it  confineth  Agra
to  the  West.

24.  Patna,  the  chiefe  Citie  so  called,  it  is  inclosed  by
foure  great  Rivers ;  Ganges,  Jemna,  Serseli,  and  Kanda,
so  that  it  lyeth  from  Agra  South-east  towards  the  Bay  of
Bengala,  where  all  these  pay  Tribute.

25.  Gor,  the  chiefe  Citie  so  called,  it  lyeth  toward  the
head  of  Ganges.

432

Jrfe^TAP#  ^^t/^sc^

«

A

TARIA nC^r^/>

Description

"East  ind

K/"V^

"CahidlK  _/f\_

,y>^>^-

rvi

/"*>/>'

jontevmnq

thEi;

Ta  rtaki  a

3Z2I

EL

A ^%

^ABVLL

Mra.na.Kef

JJailk^lec

ur

/°v r^

^-  >

'ME

«A^

EElJEy^

|h£V

r^/n

KA

/V>s*

^BajSt

A.

/^

CJEH^ET,

/*L

CShdtan  r*L

T>i(h

ft

\V

*x*

y^

•*?;

ft

m

liu  ^8&^~'

m

8

\ii

\il

4c

wr

tHard

wave

\m

'N

ft"

/V  '

jor -

fel

*6i

«

KVLTAN

lECiAPORE

./"Si*,

5:

ahch

xqracul

lamaR,

irtuye

.en:

JA-GJELA.CVT.X

/^V\

£ak

Pi/ta^  x s*

)VA^A

/vv

-'i.ca.ha

rZe&uW

itdai.

^/r

-P«^«

•X-

</  1C#  ra  »«  %6«

iftr^-

£

rvvv

f^t*

t:

t)^

lLACan^

^

P^TOT-A

^

^#Attack.

.ba\j&i

enbal

cs>

U

D£LLI

tp-

ittac

k

JDelU

%

/\

A"

Ee5(  ±\arnol

/a

/Vx 'X

v /X

Ie^TVALL

Menvat

Jb

id(

^ando

\jP

rCjK.OB.

Ie<SE]

jr.

ettiyovc^.

A

WM

■s.

r^OAJSTBALL
<fJhfeloh*{s

&

fa

n#r

Band

o

13  idhal^j

£

:#«

'UattCL

w

MEEBE

>cr?ngc '

'.Gu'tilia?

QeUud.

1

xy  ore

jaL

/~^.'

a\

1st

To

U9

1 23

a

o  cc

-"V

.  &r

•  JjTarA. MM.WAY

^arS

Pa.

v^b..

-"V

^n,

:tt.'

[«

llffinada

(el

Pit"

-rfr .

££

"a/iif  <^JtaiAiL'

V&<i^%.

Sjiaph

ur:

B

EILAR.

GrA/ LA

oi^1.

fore

^

/•nffif^1"

Chandi^

Jrairt/?<?r«:

TlU'iXftt^unlcrBe  iv^/.'j)

QunAAWi

?kt<

'itat

VRB

#7

J>

R.TAP>SIIA

k^mp^wrun

l^D?

Of/

jO

/%,/%%.*

fV'

J\^ElJh~a?ke .  fculvjit

7  £  .Z

)rixa

Caniiltpata

to*1

^

«10

Or

JTefuUpatam  m_J

TJaz-fML  Pohnm

Jiinilipahvi
JotZigalatn,
Penacottiuj  "'

o

:^<^

.A^-

D

Vto

OJ7  ^J

Jri

ilmm.

WC:

y

»r

SIR THOMAS ROE'S MAP OF EAST INDIA

THE  EMPIRE  OF  THE  GREAT  MOGOL  a.d.

1617.

26.  Bengala,  A  mightie  Kingdome  inclosing  the  West-
side  of  the  Bay  on  the  North,  and  windeth'  South-
westerly, it  bordereth  on  Cormandell,  and  the  chiefe  Cities
are  Ragmehhell  and  Dekaka,  there  are  many  havens,  as
Port  Grand,  Port  Pequina,  traded  by  the  Portugals,  Phili-
patan,  Satigam,  it  contayneth  divers  Provinces,  as  that  of
Purp  and  Patan.

27.  Roch,  It  hath  no  Citie  of  note,  and  bordereth  on
the  South-west,  East  of  Bengala  and  the  Bay.

28.  Udeza,  the  chiefe  Citie  Jekanat,  it  is  the  utmost
East  of  the  Mogols  Territorie  beyond  the  Bay,  and  con-
fined with  the  Kingdome  of  Maug,  a  savage  people  lying
betweene  Udeza  and  Pegu.

29.  Candwana,  the  chiefe  Citie  is  called  Kerhakatenkah,
it  lyeth  South-west  of  the  South  of  Bengala.

30.  Kualiar,  the  chiefe  Citie  so  called,  it  lyeth  to  the
South-east  of  Kanduana,  and  bordereth  on  Burhampur.

31.  Chandes,  the  chiefe  Citie  called  Burhampur,  a  great
Kingdome,  one  of  the  ancient  seats  of  Decan,  and  con-
quered from  them,  it  lyeth  East  on  Guzarat,  South  of
Chitor,  West  of  Decan,  and  it  is  watered  with  the  River
Tabeti,  which  falleth  West  into  the  Bay  of  Cambaya,  it  is
now  the  seat  of  the  Decan.

32.  Malva,  the  chiefe  Cities  called  Ugen,  Narr,  and
Sering,  it  lyeth  West  of  Chandes,  betweene  that  and  the
Countrey  of  Ranna,  on  the  East  of  the  River  Sapra,  which
fals  into  the  Bay  of  Cambaya,  not  farre  from  Surat.

33.  Berar,  the  chiefe  Citie  is  called  Shahpur,  it  bor-
dereth on  Guzerat,  and  the  hils  of  Ranna.

34.  Guzerat,  A  goodly  Kingdome  inclosing  the  Bay  of
Cambaya,  the  chiefe  Citie  is  Amadavar,  it  containes  the
Citie  and  Government  of  Cambaya,  the  beautie  of  India,
the  Territorie  and  Citie  of  Surat,  and  Baroach :  it  is
watred  with  many  goodly  Rivers,  as  that  of  Cambaya
falsly  supposed  to  be  Indus,  the  River  of  Narbadah,  fall-
ing into  the  Sea  at  Baroach,  that  of  Surat,  and  divers
others,  it  trades  to  the  Red  Sea,  to  Achin,  and  many
places.

IV  433  2  E

A.D.
1617.

*Let  not  the
diversitie  of
names  trouble
any  in  so
remote  tongues
and  differing
pronuncia-
tions:  if  any
other  difficul-
ties happen  in
comparing  this
discourse  with
the  Map  or
Relations  I
confesse,  I
would  have
sought  better
to  satisfie  my
selfe,ifSirT.
Roe  had  bin  at
home. As  for
Courses  they
are  diversly
taken  {as
Southerne  and
Northeme
miles  with  us)
in  some  places
longer,  in
others  shorter,
which  causeth
scruple  in  the
computation.
[I.  iv. 580.]

PURCHAS  HIS PILGRIMES

35.  Soret,  the  chiefe  Citie  called  Ganagar,  it  lyeth  to  the
North-west  of  Guzeret.

36.  Narvar,  the  chiefe  Citie  called  Ghehud,  lyeth  South-
west from  Chitor.

37.  Chitor,  an  ancient  great  Kingdome,  the  Citie  so
called  on  a  mightie  hill,  walled  about  ten  English  miles.
There  stands  yet  above  an  hundred  Churches,  the  Palace
of  the  King,  many  brave  Pillers  of  carved  stone.  There
is  but  one  ascent  cut  out  of  the  Rocke,  passing  foure  mag-
nificent gates,  there  remayne  the  ruines  of  an  hundred
thousand  houses  of  stone.  It  is  un-habited,  it  was  doubt-
lesse  one  of  the  seats  of  Porus,  and  was  wonne  from
Ranna,  his  issue  by  Ecbarshaw  the  last  Mogoll.  Ranna
flying  into  the  strength  of  his  Kingdome  among  the
Mountaines,  seated  himselfe  at  Odepoore,  who  was
brought  to  acknowledge  the  Mogol  for  his  Superiour
Lord,  by  Sultan  Caronne,  third  sonne  of  the  present
Emperour,  in  the  yeare  16 14.  This  Kingdome  lyeth
North-west  from  Chandes,  and  North-east  from  the  North-
west of  Guzerat,  in  the  way  betweene  Agra  and  Surat :
Ranna  himselfe  keeps  the  hils  to  the  West,  neere
Amadavar.

The  length  *  is  North-west  to  South-east.  From  Chan-
dahar  to  Lahor,  three  hundred  and  fiftie  Courses,  about
eight  hundred  miles.

From  Lahor  to  Agra,  three  hundred  and  twentie
Courses,  about  seven  hundred  fiftie  two  miles.

From  Agra  to  Hhagipurpatua  three  hundred  Courses,
about  sixe  hundred  and  eightie  miles.

From  Hhagipurpatua  to  Kirasunder,  three  hundred
Courses,  about  sixe  hundred  and  seventie  miles.

In  all,  Courses  one  thousand  two  hundred  and  seventie.
Miles,  about  two  thousand,  eight  hundred  seventie
two.

The  breadth  in  all  is  North-east  to  South-west  from
Hardvar  to  Duarsa,  sixe  hundred  and  fiftie  Courses,  about
fifteene  hundred  miles.

434

LETTERS FROM KING  JAMES  a.d.

1614.

The  Kings  Letters  sent  to  Selim  Shagh  the.  Great
Mogar,  in  the  yeare  16 14.  by  Sir  Thomas  Roe.

J  Ames,  by  the  Grace  of  Almightie  God,  the  Creator  of
Heaven  and  Earth,  King  of  Great  Britaine,  France  and
Ireland,  Defendor  of  the  Christian  Faith,  &c.

To  the  high  and  mightie  Monarch  the  Great  Mogor,
King  of  the  Orientall  Indies,  of  Chandahar,  of  Chismer
and  Corazon,  &c.  Greeting.

We  having  notice  of  your  great  favour  toward  Us  and
Our  Subjects,  by  Your  Great  Firma  to  all  Your  Cap-
taines  of  Rivers,  and  Officers  of  Your  Customes,  for  the
entertaynment  of  Our  loving  Subjects  the  English  Nation
with  all  kind  respect,  at  what  time  soever  they  shall  arrive
at  any  of  the  Ports  within  Your  Dominions,  and  that  they
may  have  quiet  Trade  and  Commerce  without  any  kind  of
hinderance  or  molestation,  &c.  As  by  the  Articles  con-
cluded by  Sue  Suff  Governour  of  the  Guzerats,  in  Your
Name,  with  Our  loving  Subject  Captaine  Thomas  Best
appeareth  :  Have  thought  it  meete  to  send  unto  You  Our
Ambassadour,  which  may  more  fully  and  at  large  handle
and  treate  of  such  matters  as  are  fit  to  be  considered  of,
concerning  that  good  and  friendly  correspondence,  which
is  so  lately  begunne  betweene  Us  :  and  which  will  without
doubt  redound  to  the  honour  and  utilitie  of  both  Nations.
In  which  consideration,  and  for  the  furthering  of  such
laudable  Commerce,  Wee  have  made  choice  of  Sir  Thomas
Roe  Knight,  one  of  the  principall  Gentlemen  of  Our
Court,  to  whom  Wee  have  given  Commission  under  Our
Great  Seale  of  England,  together  with  directions  and  in-
structions further  to  treate  of  such  matters  as  may  be  for
the  continuance  and  increase  of  the  utilitie  and  profit  of
each  others  Subjects  :  to  whom  We  pray  You  to  give  favour
and  credit  in  whatsoever  Hee  shall  moove  or  propound
toward  the  establishing  and  enlarging  of  the  same.  And
for  confirmation  of  our  good  inclination,  and  wel-wishing
toward  You,  We  pray  You  to  accept  in  good  part  the
Present,  which  our  said  Ambassadour  will  deliver  unto

435

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

You,  And  so  doe  commit  You  to  the  mercifull  protection
of  Almightie  God.

A  Copie  of  the  Grand  Moghor  his  Letter

to  the  King.

UNto  a  King  rightly  descended  from  his  Ancestors,
bred  in  Military  Affaires,  and  clothed  with  Honour
and  Justice,

A  Commander  worthy  of  all  command,  strong  and  con-
stant in  Religion,  which  the  great  Prophet  Christ  did
teach,  King  James,  whose  love  hath  bred  such  impression
in  my  thoughts,  as  shall  never  be  forgotten,  but  as  the
smell  of  Amber,  or  as  a  Garden  of  fragrant  flowers  whose
beautie  and  odour  is  still  increasing,  so  be  assured  my  love
shall  grow  and  increase  with  yours.

YOur  Letter  which  you  sent  me  in  the  behalfe  of  your
Merchants,  I  have  received,  whereby  I  rest  satisfied
in  Your  tender  love  towards  me ;  and  desire  You  not  to
take  it  ill,  for  not  having  writ  unto  You  heretofore :  for
this  my  present  Letter,  I  send  to  renew  Our  loves,  &
herewith  do  certifie  You,  that  I  have  sent  forth  my  Fir-
maunds  thorow  all  my  Countries  to  this  effect,  that  if  any
English  Ships  or  Merchants  shall  arrive  in  any  of  my
Ports,  my  people  shall  permit  and  suffer  them  to  doe  what
they  will  freely  in  their  Merchandizing  causes,  aiding  and
assisting  them  in  all  occasions  of  injuries  that  shall  bee
offered  them,  and  that  the  least  cause  of  discourtesie  be
not  done  unto  them,  as  also  that  they  bee  as  free  and
freer  then  my  owne  people.  And  as  now  and  formerly  I
have  received  from  You  divers  Tokens  of  Your  love  :  so  I
desire  your  mindfulnesse  of  me  by  some  Novelties  from
Your  Countrey,  as  an  Argument  of  frienship  betweene
Us :  for  such  is  the  custome  of  Princes  heere.

As  for  your  Merchants,  I  have  given  expresse  order
through  all  my  Countrey,  to  suffer  them  to  sell,  buy,
transport,  and  carry  away  at  their  pleasures,  without  the
let  or  hinderance  of  any  person  whatsoever,  all  such  Goods

436

LETTERS FROM SIR THOMAS ROE

and  Merchandize,  or  other  things,  as  they  shall  desire  to
buy,  and  let  this  my  Letter  as  fully  satisfie  You  in  the
desired  peace  and  love,  as  if  my  owne  sonne  had  beene
the  Messenger  to  ratifie  the  same.  And  if  any  in  my
Countrey  not  fearing  God,  nor  obeying  their  King,  or
any  other  void  of  Religion,  should  indeavour,  or  be  in
Instrument  to  breake  this  league  of  friendship ;  I  would
send  my  sonne  Sultan  Coronne,  a  Souldier  approved  in
the  Warres,  to  cut  him  off,  that  no  Obstacle  may  hinder
the  continuance,  and  increasing  of  Our  affections.

A.D.

1615.

MY  Lord,  only  for  promise,  which  is  an  honest  debt,
I  send  your  Lordship  a  Journall  till  my  arrivall  at
Brampore,  a  Citie  of  houses  made  of  mudde,  where  one
of  the  Kings  sonnes  keepeth  his  Court.  He  is  called
Perveys.  I  had  need  to  write  an  Apologie  for  it,  there
being  nothing  of  worth,  nothing  memorable,  and  yet  not
my  fault :  but  I  had  rather  trust  your  Noblenesse,  then
trouble  you  with  excuses,  and  so  descend  to  a  more  univer-
sall  description  of  the  state  and  customes  of  the  Land.

They  have  no  written  Law.  The  King  by  his  owne
word  ruleth,  and  his  Governours  of  Provinces  by  that
authoritie.

Once  a  weeke  he  sitteth  in  judgement  patiently,  and
giveth  sentence  for  crimes  Capitall  and  Civill.  He  is
every  mans  heire  when  he  dyeth,  which  maketh  him  rich,
and  the  Countrey  so  evill  builded.  The  great  men  about
him  are  not  borne  Noble,  but  Favourites  raised :  to  whom
hee  giveth  (if  it  be  true)  wonderfull  meanes.  They  are
reckoned  by  Horses :  that  is  to  say,  Coronels  of  twelve
thousand  Horses ;  which  is  the  greatest,  whereof  are
foure,  besides  his  sonnes  and  wife :  so  descending  to
twentie  Horses ;  not  that  any  of  these  are  bound  to  keepe,
or  raise  any  at  all.  But  the  King  assigneth  them  so  much
land,  as  is  bound  to  maintaine  so  many  Horses  as  a  rent,
each  horse  at  five  and  twentie  pounds  sterling  by  the
yeere,  which  is  an  incredible  Revenue  given  away :  so
many,  (that  is,  almost  all,  but  the  Ploughmen,  Artificers,

437

[I.  iv.  581.]
This  Letter  I
found  amongst
Master  Hak.
his  Papers,  as
the  two
former:  the
rest  are  tran-
scribed from
Sir  T  Roes
owne  Booke.
No  law  but  the
Kings  word.
See  of  these
things  Cap-
taine  Hawkins
large  relations.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

and  Tradesmen  in  Townes)  living  upon  it.  But  as  they
die,  and  must  needs  gather,  so  it  returneth  to  the  King
like  Rivers  to  the  sea,  both  of  those  he  gave  to,  and  of
those  that  have  gained  by  their  owne  industry.  But  for
the  most  part  he  leaveth  the  widowes  and  children  their
horses,  stuffe,  and  some  other  stocke :  and  then  putteth
them  into  a  Signiory  (if  the  fathers  were  of  sixe  or  seven
thousand  horses)  perhaps  of  a  thousand  or  five  hundred :
and  so  setteth  them  to  begin  the  world  anew,  and  advan-
ceth  them  as  they  deserve  of  him.  They  all  rise  by  pre-
senting him,  which  they  strive  to  doe  both  richly  and
Presents  of  an  rarely :  some  giving  a  hundred  thousand  pounds  in  jewels

He  hath  one  beloved  wife  among  foure,  that  wholly
governeth  him.  He  received  lately  a  Present  from  the
King  of  Bisampore,  to  obtaine  peace,  (whose  Ambassa-
dour  knocked  his  head  three  times  against  the  ground)  of
six  and  thirtie  Elephants,  of  two  whereof  the  chaines
and  all  tackles  were  of  beaten  Gold,  to  the  weight  of  foure
hundred  pounds,  two  of  silver,  of  the  same  fashion ;  the
rest  of  Copper :  fiftie  Horses  richly  furnished,  and  ten
Leckes  of  Rupias  in  Jewels,  great  Pearles,  and  Balasse
Rubies.  Every  Lecke  is  an  hundred  thousand  Rupias ;
Some  say  two every  Rupia  two  shillings  sixe  pence  sterling ; so  tenne

tfsil/inT  Leckes  is  a  Million  of  Rupias.

threepence.  ^s  Territorie  is  farre  greater  then  the  Persians,  and

The  Mogolls  almost  equall,  if  not  as  great  as  the  Turkes.  His  meanes
greatnesse.  of  money,  by  revenue,  custome  of  Presents,  and  inherit-
ing all  mens  goods,  above  both.  His  Countrey  lyeth
West  to  Sinde,  and  so  stretcheth  to  Candahar,  and  to  the
Mountaines  of  Taurus  North.  To  the  East  as  farre  as
the  utmost  parts  of  Bengala,  and  the  borders  of  Ganges :
and  South  to  Decan,  it  is  two  thousand  miles  square  at  the
least,  but  hath  many  pettie  Kings  within,  that  are  Tribu-
taries.
Heire  of  The  true  descended  heire  of  Porus,  that  was  overcome

by  Alexander,  called  Ranna,  is  lately  conquered,  more  by
composition  then  force : the  King  having  rather  bought

438

LETTERS FROM SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1615.

him  then  wonne  him,  and  hereby  no  way  augmented  his
Revenue,  but  given  a  great  Pension  to  him. His  Coun-
trey  I  crossed,  betweene  this  Towne  of  Asmere  and  Bram-
pore. Cetor  having  beene  anciently  the  chiefe  Towne, Cetor  a  great
and  surely  standing  on  an  hill,  steepe  as  a  Rocke,  some  ruinedCltie-
hfteene  miles  about,  that  is  all  walled : the  Citie  within,
but  with  one  ascent,  and  five  admirable  gates  in  the  ascent,
all  ruined  and  no  person  dwelling. But  there  stand  an
hundred  Muschees,  many  Lanternes,  and  such  reverend  J"  hundred
and  brave  Reliques  of  Imagerie  and  carved  workes,  that  M^ume*}a0J
few  or  hardly  any  where  can  be  equalled. In  generall,  all  Temples.
the  old  Cities  are  beaten  downe ;  by  what  policie  I  under-
stand not :  but  the  King  seeketh  the  ruine  of  any  thing  not
begunne  by  his  Ancestors :  so  that  all  the  Land  hath  not
an  house  fit  for  a  Cottager,  but  in  such  Cities  as  hee
favoureth. Surat is best  builded of  any : and in old
time  they  in  these  parts  made  mightie  workes,  which  every
day  decay. At  Surat  there  is  a  Tanke  for  water  of  free-
stone, in  a  polygon  forme,  of  above  an  hundred  sides,
every  side  eight  and  twenty  yards  :  it  hath  staires  on  every
side  for  men  to  descend,  and  many  stopes  for  horses. It
is  a  wonderous  worke,  both  for  the  hugenesse,  and  for  the
brave  building.

I  have  now  on  the  Court  to  touch,  and  mine  entertain-  His  entertain-
ment. The  King  never  used  any  Ambassadour  with  so  mntatCouri-
much  respect :  without  any  dispute  giving  mee  leave  to
use  mine  owne  customes  ;  not  requiring  that  of  me,  which
he  useth  of  the  Persian. He  presented  me  with  a  wel-
come before  I  spake ; and  said  the  King  and  he  were
brothers, with  many  other  courteous  words. I  having
bin  sicke,  he  offered  me  Physitians. He  tooke  the  Pre-
sents in  good  part,  and  was  so  fond  of  the  Coach,  that  at
night  in  his  Court  he  got  into  it,  and  made  two  or  three
of  my  men  draw  him  a  little  in  it. He  is  very  affable,  and
of  a  cheerefull  countenance,  without  pride. Three  times  a  T^e  Kin&
day  hee  sitteth  out  in  three  places:  Once  to  see  his  Ele-  stfttnSthJee
phants  and  beasts  fight,  about  noone :  After,  from  foure * a
to  five  or  sixe,  to  entertaine  all  that  visit  him. At  night

439

A.D.
1615.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

from  nine  till  mid-night,  with  all  his  great  men,  but  none
else,  where  he  is  below  with  them,  in  all  familiaritie.  I
visited  him  in  the  second  of  these,  where  I  found  him  in  a
Court,  set  above  like  a  King  in  a  Play,  and  all  his  Nobles
and  my  selfe  below  on  a  stage  covered  with  carpets ;  a
just  Theater :  with  no  great  state,  but  the  Canopies  over
his  head,  and  two  standing  on  the  heads  of  two  wooden
Elephants,  to  beat  away  flies.  They  weare  nothing  but
Calicoes,  but  are  ever  attendant.

The  Grandes.  The  great  men  ride  in  Traines,  some  two  hundred,
some  five  hundred  Foot-men  following  them,  and  foure
or  five  Banners  carried  before  them ;  and  an  hundred  or
two  hundred  Horses  after  them.  This  is  all  their  pride.
They  keepe  their  Horses  most  delicately,  fed  with  Butter

[I.  iv.  582.]  and  Sugar :  and  though  they  be  not  very  great,  yet  they  are
of  delicate  shape,  both  of  Persia,  Arabs,  and  of  this  Land.
I  have  one  Observation  more  to  make  of  the  falsenesse
of  our  Maps,  both  of  Mercator,  and  all  others,  and  their
ignorance  in  this  Countrey.  First,  the  famous  River
Indus  doth  not  emptie  himselfe  into  the  Sea  at  Cambaya,
as  his  chiefe  mouth,  but  at  Sinde.  My  reason  is,  Lahor
stands  upon  Indus  :  from  whence  to  Sinde  it  is  navigable ;
to  Cambaya  not  so.  Lahor  in  the  Maps  is  also  falsely  set
downe,  it  lying  North  from  Surat  above  a  thousand  miles  :
the  Citie  where  the  Kings  ordinarie  residence  is,  Agra,  not
described  at  all ;  but  it  standeth  North  North-east  from
Surat  on  a  River,  that  fals  into  Ganges.  But  the  King
now  resideth  in  a  base  old  Citie,  wherein  is  no  house  but
of  mudde,  not  so  great  as  a  Cottage  on  Hownslo-heath :
only  himselfe  hath  one  of  stone.  His  Lords  live  in  Tents  :
and  I  have  suddenly  built  to  my  mudde  wals,  upon  canes,
a  doozen  thatched  roomes.  This  Towne  is  short  of  Agra
ten  daies  journey,  two  hundred  miles,  which  standeth
from  hence  North  North-east.  This  place  is  from  Bram-
port  North  foure  hundred  and  fiftie  miles.  Bramport  from
Surat  East  above  two  hundred  miles.  The  latitude  neere
five  and  twentie  degrees.

Thus,  my  Lord,  I  have  said  some-what,  but  to  little

440

Falshood  of
Maps.

Indus,  chiefe
mouth  at
Sinde.

Asmere.

LETTERS FROM SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1615.

purpose,  I  forget  not  some  Bookes  for  you : but  Load-
stones heere  are  none :  They  are  in  the  farre  East  Coun-
tries :  neither  is  there  any  correspondence  with  China. To  No  correspon-
Persia,  and  so  to  Aleppo  there  goe  Caravans :  to  Cathaya  Q^n^1  '
none.

Heere  is  no  newes  but  of  Persia.  The  King  hath  taken  ^ezvfs  °f
away  water  and  reliefe  from  Ormus,  and  banished  the
Portugals  his  Territories.  He  hath  lately  over-runne  the
poore  Georgians  with  fire  and  sword :  and  being  of  an
unquiet  nature  intendeth  the  conquest  of  the  Usbiques,  a  Us&ec,
Nation  betweene  Samarchand  and  him,  which  he  aymes
at.  He  lately  strucke  off  his  sonnes  head  with  his  owne
hand.  Hee  is  favoured  and  feared  of  the  Mogoll,  as
being  Lord  of  the  more  warlike  Nation :  for  these  are
more  then  halfe  Bramanes,  whose  Religion  is  not  to  kill
a  Louse  byting  them :  and  the  Mogolls  are  an  effeminate
people.  So  that  the  Turke  the  last  yeere  sending  on
Ambassage,  to  entreate  him  not  to  assist  the  Persian,  hee
gave  him  very  harsh  entertainment,  made  him  Salem  to  the
ground,  and  as  soone  as  he  was  dismissed,  sent  the  Per-
sian ten  Leckes  of  Rupias.

I  shall  be  glad  to  doe  your  Lordship  service  in  England  ;
for  this  is  the  dullest,  basest  place,  that  ever  I  saw,  and
maketh  me  weary  of  speaking  of  it.  Therefore  if  you  be
also  weary  of  reading,  I  am  glad.  I  shall  desire  your
lordship  to  let  Master  Hackwell  reade  the  Journall :  for
I  promised  him  one,  but  I  had  not  leasure  to  write  it.

And  so  with  all  respect,  and  little  Ceremonie,  I  hope  to
returne  to  doe  you  better  services :  in  the  meane  time  to
live  a  miserable  life,  though  with  abundance  and  state
enough,  yet  I  want  the  conversation  and  presence  of  those
friends  I  love  and  honour :  in  which  number  your  Lord-
ship hath  made  me  presume  to  esteeme  you,  and  to  account
my  selfe

Your  Lordships  humble  friend,  to  doe  you  service,

Asmere,  the  Court  of  the  Mogoll,

January  17.  161 5.  [A  Letter

441

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

M

A  Letter  of  Sir  Thomas  Roe,  to  &c.

Ay  it  please  your  (  )  places  farre  remote,

having  some-what  of  wonder  in  the  distance,  cause
much  expectation  in  themselves  of  strange  matters  among
the  Vulgar,  such  as  I,  supposing  they  should  have  subject
of  worthy  and  large  discourse.  But  these  are  unlike  the
Starres,  that  seeme  lesse  the  further  off :  heere  the
remotenesse  is  the  greatnesse,  and  to  maintayne  the  an-
cient priviledge  of  Travellers,  they  have  beene  so  farre
Alchimists  as  multiplication ;  some  ground,  some  spirit,
to  quicken  the  bodie  of  their  monstrous  Relations.

Where  I  shall  begin,  what  I  shall  say  worthy  one  of
your  (  )  vacancies  from  great  Affaires,  I  know

not :  to  undertake  a  Cosmographicall  description  were  a
labour  not  unworthy  of  time,  but  not  proportionall  to  a
Letter :  Ortelius,  Mercator,  Atlas,  nor  any  understanding
any  truth  herein.  Yet  for  the  maynnesse  of  the  error,  I
Indus  falsely  wiH  observe,  that  the  famous  River  Indus  doth  not  powre
described  by himselfe  into  £^e  Sea,  by  the  Bay  of  Cambaya,  but  farre

OUT  \jC02VCI-  •  •

phers.  Westward  at  Sinde. For  from  Lahor  standing  a  thou-

sand mile  North,  in  the  Maine  upon  Indus,  it  is  navig-
able to  Sinde,  to  Cambaya  not,  but  certaine  by-streames
begotten  by  the  seasons  of  Raine  make  mightie  inunda-
tions, which  have  cherished  the  error :  all  the  rest  is  as
false  both  in  bearing,  distance  longitude  and  latitude,  as
that,  but  the  correction  heere  incomprehensible ;  the  true
latitude  of  this  place  five  and  twentie  degrees  and  a
halfe.

A  description  of  the  Land,  customes  and  manners,
which  are  incidents,  are  fitter  for  winter-nights ;  they  are
either  ordinarie,  or  mingled  with  much  Barbarisme.

Lawes.  Lawes  they  have  none  written : the  Kings  judgement

binds,  who  sits  and  gives  audience  with  much  patience,
once  weekely,  both  in  capitall  and  criminall  causes,  where

Execution. sometimes  he  sees  the  execution  done  by  his  Elephants,

[I.  iv.  583.I  w^^  to°  much  delight  in  bloud.

Governours.  ' His  Governours  of  Provinces  rule  by  his  Firmans,  which

442

LETTERS FROM SIR  THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1615.

is  a  briefe  Letter  authorizing  them. They  take  life  and
goods  at  pleasure.

Many  religious,  and  in  them  many  Sects ;  Moores  or  Religions  and
Mahumetans  adhering  to  Ally,  such  is  the  King ;  Banians  Sects-
or  Pythagorians,  for  the  transmigration  (and  therefore  will
not  kill  the  Vermine  that  bites  them)  who  often  buy  many
dayes  respite  in  charitie  from  killing  any  flesh  at  all,  in
such  a  Province  or  Citie.  Gentiles  of  sundry  Idolatries,
their  Wives  adorning  the  Pile,  and  entring  the  Funerall
fires  with  great  joy  and  honour.

The  extent  of  his  Territorie  is  West  to  Sinde,  North-  Extent.
west  to  Chandahor,  North  almost  to  Taurus,  East  to  the
borders  of  Ganges,  and  South-east  all  Bengala,  the  Land
bordering  the  Gulph  South  to  Decan,  much  greater  then
the  Persian,  almost  equall  (if  not  fully)  to  the  Turke,  if
his  Land  were  crusht  together  into  a square, as this.
Agra,  the  ordinary  residence  of  the  King,  is  a  thousand
miles  from  any  border, farther  from  some. The  right
issue  of  Porus,  is  heere  a  King  in  the  middest  of  the  P°rus  his
Mogols  Kingdomes,  never  subdued  till  last  yeere : and  usue'
to  say  true,  he  is  rather  bought  then  conquered,  wonne  by
gifts,  not  by  Armes,  to  acknowledge  a  superior  Lord.

The  Pillar  erected  by  Alexander,  is  yet  standing  at  Alexanders
Dely,  the  ancient  seat  of  the  Ancestors  of  Ranna  the  issue  Ptllar-
of  Porus.

The  buildings  are  all  base,  of  mudde,  one  story  high,  Buildings pub-
except  in  Surat,  where  are  some  stone  houses,  but  I  know  .
not  by  what  policie,  the  King  seekes  the  ruine  of  all  the
ancient  Cities  which  were  bravely  built,  and  now  lye
desolate  and  ruined.  His  owne  houses  are  of  stone,  both
in  good  forme  and  faire,  but  his  great  men  build  not  for
want  of  inheritance,  but  as  farre  as  I  have  yet  seene,  live
in  Tents,  or  houses  worse  then  a  Cottager ;  yet  where  the
King  affects,  as  at  Agra,  because  it  is  a  City  erected  by
him,  the  buildings  are  (as  is  reported)  faire  and  of  carved

Stone.  Reasm  of  his

In  Revenue,  doubtlesse,  he  exceeds  either  Turke  or  g-tat  Revenue
Persian,  or  any  Easterne  Prince :  the  summes  I  dare  not  and  Wealth.

443

A.D.
1615.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

name,  but  the  reason ;  all  the  Land  is  his,  no  man  hath  a
foot.  He  maintaynes  by  rents  given  of  Signories,  counted
by  Horses,  all  that  are  not  Mechanique :  and  the  Revenues
given  to  some,  are  a  Germane  Princes  estate.  Secondly,
all  men  rise  to  greater  and  greater  Signiories  as  they  rise
in  favour,  which  is  only  gotten  by  frequent  Presents,  both
rich  and  rare.  Lastly,  he  heires  all  mens  goods  that  dye,
as  well  those  that  gained  by  industry,  as  Merchants,  as
those  that  lived  by  him,  and  takes  all  their  money ;  leaves
the  Widow  and  Daughters  what  he  pleaseth ;  gives  the
sonnes  some  little  Signiorie,  and  puts  them  anew  to  the
World,  whose  Fathers  die  worth  two  or  three  Millions.

But  I  am  fallen  by  my  purpose,  not  to  interrupt  your
(  )  with  these,  presuming  of  your  pardon,  I  will

only  say  a  little  of  the  Court,  and  so  passe  to  that  is  more
necessarie.

The  King  sits  out  in  three  severall  places,  thrice  every
day,  except  some  occasion  prevent  him  :  an  houre  at  noone
to  see  his  Elephants  fight ;  at  foure  till  five  to  entertayne
all  commers,  to  be  seene  and  worshipped ;  nine  till  mid-
night, with  his  principall  men  in  more  familiaritie,  being
below  among  them.

I  went  to  present  my  selfe  at  the  second  of  these  :  I  came
into  a  Court  full  of  base  people,  and  at  a  raile  which  shut
them  out  right  against  the  King,  I  was  stayed  in  his  sight
to  demand  audience  (onely  a  ceremonie)  so  he  sent  his
principall  Officers  to  bring  me  up  :  he  sate  in  a  place  like  a
Theatre  above,  where  the  King  sits  in  a  Play,  and  I  was
conducted  foure  steps  up,  just  under  him,  like  a  stage,  all
on  Carpets ;  my  selfe  and  all  his  great  men  were  Actors,
the  common  people  below  gazing  on.  Hee  prevented  mee
with  speech,  calling  the  King  his  Brother,  and  that  I  must
consequently  be  welcome :  for  the  barbarous  custome  of
kneeling  and  knocking  the  ground  with  the  head  (which
he  never  pardoned,  neither  the  Turkes  nor  Persian  Am-
bassadors) he  required  not,  but  at  my  first  motion  granted
me  all  libertie  of  mine  owne  manner,  and  as  all  say,  he
never  used  such  respect  to  a  living  man.

444

LETTERS FROM SIR THOMAS ROE

A.D.
1615.

Policie  and
Politic

All  the  policy  of  his  state  is  to  keepe  the  greatest  about
him,  or  to  pay  them  afarre  off  liberally.  No  Counsell,
but  every  Officer  answereth  to  the  King  apart,  his  dutie.

He  is  of  countenance  cheerefull, and  not  proud  in  Disposition.
nature,  but  by  habite  and  custome  ;  for  at  night  he  is  very
affable,  and  full  of  gentle  conversation.

I  beleve  your  (  )  is  weary  of  him,  and  would  Persian  newes.

passe  into  Persia,  from  whence  wee  receive  for  truth,  that
the  Sophie  hath  distressed  Ormus,  by  taking  away  the
water  and  provisions  of  the  Maine.  At  Ormus  they  are
in  great  necessitie,  so  that  if  the  Sophie  had  any  helpe  of
shipping  to  take  it,  hee  might  be  perswaded  to  put  it
into  our  hands,  to  turne  his  silkes  from  the  passage  of  his
enemie  the  Turke  ;  a  matter  of  infinite  consequence.  For
if  I  were  to  open  these  Trades,  I  would  shew  important
differences  for  the  Kingdome  of  England,  but  it  would
require  large  Discourse.  He  hath  made  lately  a  Road
with  fire  and  sword  upon  the  poore  Georgian  Christians,
and  subdued  them,  and  being  of  a  spirit  naturally  unpeace-
full,  he  prepares  for  the  conquest  of  Samercand,  as  his  end,
but  pretends  the  punishing  of  a  valiant  Race  of  Tartars,
called  Usbiques,  betweene  him  and  his  desire.  Hee  smote  Usbiques.
off  his  eldest  sonnes  head  with  his  owne  hands,  returning
from  Georgia,  and  hath  by  sharpe  Edict  banished  all
Portugalls  all  his  Dominions.  Never  were  such  opor-
tunities  to  discharge  the  Portugall  from  all  these  Coasts.  Portugalls.
Our  Trade  heere,  and  the  Dutch  Plantation  below  Goa,
hath  so  shortned  their  returnes,  that  halfe  their  Gallions
come  not ;  those  that  doe  come  bring  new  supplies  for  the
Garrisons,  but  returne  so  emptie,  that  the  charge  is  but
defraid.  We  have  now  twice  beaten  a  great  Armado  with
few  ships,  an  Armado  that  was  appointed  por  castigar  los
hereticos  Ingleses  (the  words  of  one  Father  to  another)
and  after  to  punish  the  Mogoll  for  entertayning  us,  so
that  he  hath  lost  more  in  reputation  (which  was  his
strength)  then  in  substance.  But  if  his  Majestie  would  [I.  iv.  584.]
condescend  that  we  should  assault  them,  as  they  doe  us,
it  would  utterly  breake  them,  it  being  both  the  nobler  and

445

Jesuites
termes.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

safer  part  of  a  Warre,  to  which  we  are  subject  at  their
pleasures,  then  to  defend  alwayes :  besides,  they  make
this  use  in  reports  of  us,  that  the  King  of  England  is  so
affraid  of  the  King  of  Portugall,  that  he  dares  not  warrant
Islanders,  an  assault,  but  only  to  defend :  what  they  say  of  the  King
and  our  Nation  is  so  slanderous,  that  perit  sua  mole.

Further  East,  the  Dutch  hath  taken  many  Townes,  and
playes  the  Mole  better  then  he,  and  hath  beaten  him  in
many  Sea-conflicts  ;  he  is  declining  on  all  sides,  and  a  little
weight  on  his  head  now  laid,  would  sinke  him.  It  is  a
matter  of  great  consequence  for  future  times  ;  and  though
I  have  no  hope,  I  propound  it  to  your  (  )  to  make

what  use  seemes  best  to  your  wisdome.  I  have  reward
enough,  if  I  have  pardon  for  my  talkativenesse,  but  it  is
obedience to your (  ) and not presumption,

whose  wisdome  and  sinceritie  I  did  ever  honour,  to  whom
I  shall  be  happy  to  be  tyed

In  all  humble  services,

Thomas  Roe.

Asmere,  the  seven  and  twentieth
of  January  161 5.

Another  Letter  to  the  same  Lord,  dated  the
thirtieth  of  October,  1616.

MAy  it  please  your  (  )  &c. The  frailtie  of

passage  betweene  this  place  and  England,  especi-
ally of  my  last  Letter  that  wandred  over  Land,  and
rather  went  upon  discovery  then  businesse,  adviseth  me
to  send  your  (  )  transcripts  of  them : not  that

there  is  contained  any  matter  worthy  your  Honours  lea-
sure,  but  seeing  you  commanded  mee  to  write,  the  rela-
tion of  one  to  another,  will  somewhat  cleare  the  whole
discourse.  For  broken  and  undependant  pieces  and
fragments,  have  little  light  in  them,  lesse  pleasure  and  no
profit :  so  that  he  that  would  doe  any  thing  in  this  matter
should  write  a  history,  and  take  it  somewhat  high,  to
shew  the  beginning  and  growth  of  this  Empire,  what

446

LETTERS FROM SIR THOMAS ROE

fortunes  and  what  impediments  it  hath  overcome,  what
friendship  it  hath  needed  and  effected,  the  ambitions  and
divisions  in  the  present  state,  that  like  impostumes  lye
now  hid,  but  threaten  to  break  out  into  the  rending  and
ruine  of  the  whole,  by  bloody  war.  The  practises,  sub-
tilties  and  cariages  of  factions  and  Court-secrets,  falsely
called  wisdome,  wherein  I  assure  your  (  )  they

are  pregnant,  and  excell  in  all  that  arte  which  the  Divell
can  teach  them,  and  are  behind  none  in  wicked  Craft,
some  passages  whereof  were  not  unworthy  nor  unpleasant
to  relate.

Their  Religions  suffered  by  the  King,  and  practised  with
out  envie  or  contention  on  any  part ;  how  the  Portugals
have  crept  into  this  Kingdome,  and  by  what  corners  they
got  in ;  the  entrance  of  the  Jesuits  their  intertainment,
priviledges,  practises,  ends,  and  the  growth  of  their
Church,  whereof  they  sing  in  Europe  so  loud  praises  and
glorious  successes.  Lastly,  the  arrivall  of  our  Nation  on
this  Coast,  their  fortunate  or  blessed  victories  over  their
enemies,  that  not  only  sought  how  to  possesse  these
quarters  by  themselves,  and  to  forbid  all  others  that  which
Nature  had  left  free,  as  if  God  had  created  the  world  for
them  onely,  but  also  to  abuse  this  people,  as  if  they  alone
were  the  sonnes  of  warre  ;  they  only  triumph,  and  that  all
other  Europeans  strucke  saile  to  their  fortune  and  valour,
which  now  is  brought  so  low  in  value,  that  it  is  growne
into  a  proverbe  (one  Portugall  to  three  Moores,  one
Englishman  to  three  Portugalls)  so  that  the  best  founda-
tion of  their  greatnesse  is  absolutely  mined  and  blowne
up.  And  our  reception  here  stands  on  the  same  ground
from  which  we  have  cast  them  downe,  which  is  Feare,  an
honorable,  but  uncertaine  Base  of  so  great  a  charge.  For
if  either  the  enemie  once  prevaile,  or  other  misfortune
happen  to  us,  our  welcome  shall  turne  round  with  it,  the
profit  and  fitnesse  of  this  trade  for  England,  while  it  may
stand,  not  only  respecting  the  Company  now  intressed,
but  the  state,  whether  the  Common-wealth  in  general!
lose  or  winne. For  often  in  trafique  private  men  prosper

447

A.D.
l6l6.

Craft.

Jesulticall
beasts.

Proverb  of
English  and
Portugal.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

by  detriment  of  the  Republike,  as  in  all  trades  that  main-
taine  vanitie  and  sinne.

This  worke  or  method  were  worthy  some  paines,  and
as  would  require  a  good  judgement  and  much  time,  both
which  are  wanting  to  me ;  so  it  would  not  be  unprofit-
able to  reade,  nor  without  some  pleasure  to  view  and
meditate  the  divers  operations  and  workes  of  God,  the
variable  constitutions  and  dispositions  of  men,  and  all
things  under  their  government :  but  seeing  nature  and
conveniencie  have  denyed  me  ability  and  leasure,  to  set
upon  so  great  a  labour,  I  have  chosen  one  branch  only  to
treat  of  to  your  (  )  without  other  method,  then

by  way  of  bare  relation,  which  is  the  estate  of  the  Church
heere,  as  well  Christians,  as  of  all  other  diffused  sects  of
Infidels.

But  to  continue,  as  in  a  Parenthesis,  the  advice  I  gave
your  Honour  in  my  last,  of  our  constitution  heere,  and
the  newes  of  Persia  :  Briefely  I  stand  on  very  fickle  termes,
though  in  extraordinary  grace  with  the  King,  who  is
gentle,  soft,  and  good  of  disposition,  yet  on  points  and
disputes  with  an  insolent  and  proud  sonne  of  his,  into
whose  hands  he  hath  remitted  all  power,  which  hee  is
neither  worthy  nor  able  to  manage.  He  is  Lord  of  the
Port,  and  by  his  folly  gives  me  much  travell ;  so  sordidly
The  Princes  ambitious,  that  he  would  not  have  me  acknowledge  his
ambition,  father  King,  nor  make  any  addresses,  nor  deliver  any  Pre-
L  •  5  5 -J  sents  nor  complements  of  honour,  but  to  himselfe  ;  which
I  will  never  yeeld  to,  and  so  I  maintaine  my  credit  by  con-
fidence on  the  priviledges  of  my  quality,  and  the  Kings
goodnesse.  Yet  an  Ambassadour  in  this  Court  that
knowes  himselfe,  and  will  not  wrong  his  Master,  shall
oftner  winne  enemies  then  friends.  Their  pride  endures
no  termes  of  equality,  especially  where  there  is  no  other
honour  nor  title,  but  what  is  measured  by  expence;  so
that  to  maintaine  one  that  shall  in  his  equipage  and  life
hold  proportion  with  his  quality,  in  this  Court,  will  cost
much  more  then  the  profit  of  the  Trade  can  spare ;  and
he  that  lives  under  it  wrongs  his  degree,  and  slides  into

448

LETTERS FROM SIR THOMAS ROE  ad.

1616.

contempt.  I  doe  my  utmost  to  hold  up  with  little  poore
meanes,  but  my  opinion  is,  a  meaner  instrument  would
better  effect  businesse  of  traffique  that  might  creepe,  and
shew,  and  suffer  some  affronts,  which  my  ranke  may  not
endure :  And  I  find  the  King  of  Spaine  would  never  send
any  Ambassadour  hither  out  of  Greatnesse,  knowing  they
are  not  received  with  proportionable  honour,  and  with  my
small  experience  I  could  doe  the  Company  better  service
by  my  returne,  in  advise  how  to  governe  the  whole.

Concerning  Persia,  the  Turke  hath  only  yet  made  a  Persian  and
Bravado,  and  performed  little,  the  passages  are  stopt,  and  Turkish
the  King  drawing  his  armies  into  his  Borders  to  defend  warres-
himselfe,  and  finding  no  great  worke,  tooke  occasion  to
take  in  by  force  a  revolted  Nation  to  the  East  of  Babylon.
The  people  are  called  Coords. How  by  the  Ancients  or
the  true  Geographicall  situation  of  their  Countrey,  I  am
yet  ignorant  in.

Sir  Robert  Sherley  by  an  ill  passage  to  Goa,  lost  the  Sir  Robert
opportunitie  of  the  Fleete  for  Lisbon,  and  is  stayed  there  Sherley.
another  yeare,  so  that  negotiation  will  not  be  so  speedily
advanced,  as  I  feared  ;  we  shall  have  breath  to  worke  upon
it,  according  as  it  shall  be  requisite  in  the  judgement  of
your  Honours  in  England,  or  at  least  of  the  Merchants
whom  it  first  regardeth.

Heere  is  arrived  a  Persian  Ambassadour  with  little
newes,  it  being  nine  moneths  since  his  departure  from
Spahan.  He  brought  many  rich  Presents,  and  did  such
obeysance,  prostrating  himselfe  and  knocking  the  ground
with  his  head,  that  I  beleeve  his  Master  will  not  accept  of
it,  except  (as  is  supposed)  hee  bee  commanded  to  use  all
obsequiousnesse,  and  to  flatter  this  Mon.  of  greatnesse,
his  errand  being  to  procure  money  for  ayde  against  the
Turke :  in  which  kind  he  findes  often  liberall  supplyes
and  succours,  which  is  not  felt  from  this  sea  of  treasure ;
although  to  mediate  a  peace  for  the  Kings  of  Decan  be  the
pretence,  whose  protection  the  Persian  takes  to  heart,
jealous  of  the  encrease  of  this  Empire ;  yet  I  doubt  not
he  will  be  satisfied  with  silver,  and  suffer  his  Allyes  to  be
iv  449  2  F

A.D.
l6l6.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

overcome :  he  is  not  allowed  so  good  ranke  nor  presence
in  Court  as  I,  which  got  it  by  dispute,  and  have  kept  it  by
contention  to  the  displeasure  of  some ;  neither  did  the
King  do  so  much  honour  in  reception  of  his  Masters
Letter,  not  vouchsafing  once  to  give  the  Persian  any  title
of  Majesty,  as  of  my  Soveraigne  Lords,  which  not  a  little
contented  me.  Other  advantages  he  hath  of  language,
neighbour-hood  and  acquaintance,  which  are  defects,  but
no  faults  of  mine.  The  King  is  now  ready  to  march  to-
wards Decan,  whose  Armie  is  commanded  by  his  sonne,
and  wee  with  much  toyle  shall  hang  in  the  skirts.

Our  Fleet  arriving  this  yeere  161 6.  in  the  way  met  the
Admirall  Carrick  of  Lisbon,  bound  for  Goa,  about
Molalia,  an  Hand  in  twelve  degrees  North  latitude,  and
haling  her  after  the  courtesie  of  the  Sea,  was  requited  with
disgracefull  languages,  and  five  great  shot :  which  occa-
sion apprehended,  shee  was  fought  with  three  dayes,  at
last  put  ashoare  and  fired  her  selfe :  shee  was  of  burthen
fifteene  hundred  tunnes,  and  by  pregnant  circumstances,
the  expected  Vice-Roy  sent  for  Goa,  perished  in  her :
which  is  one  of  the  greatest  disgraces  and  losses  that  ever
happened  to  the  Portugals  in  these  parts :  The  reward  of
their  owne  insolencie  in  this  fight.  The  chiefe  Commander
of  the  English  was  slaine,  and  the  new  declared  maimed,
little other losse. Thus your (  ) hath some

touch  of  our  affaires,  and  I  will  fall  upon  my  purpose  of
the  Church,  with  your  favour  and  patience.
Tamerlane.  Before  the  inundation  of  Tamerlane  the  great,  the  ninth

Ancestor  of  this  King,  these  Countries  were  governed  by
divers  petty  Gentile  Princes  not  knowing  any  Religion,
but  worshipped  according  to  their  severall  Idolatries,  all
sorts  of  creatures.  The  Descendants  of  him  brought  in
the  knowledge  of  Mahomet,  but  imposed  it  upon  none,
by  the  Law  of  Conquest  leaving  consciences  at  libertie.
Religions.  So  that  these  Naturals  from  the  Circumcision  (which  came
Mogolls  why  -m  witn  tne  Moores)  called  them  Mogols  or  chiefe  of  the
Circumcised.  Among  the  Moores  there  are  many  strict
Mahometants  that  follow  Ally  his  Sonne-in-law,  and  other

45°

so  called.

LETTERS FROM SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1616.

new  risen  Prophets  which  have  their  Xeriffes,  Mulas  and
Priests,  their  Mosques,  Religious  Votaries,  Washings,
Prayings,  and  Ceremonies  infinite ;  and  for  Penetentiaries,
no  Heresie  in  the  World  can  shew  so  strange  Examples,
nor  bragge  of  such  voluntarie  poverties,  punishments,
sufferings  and  chastisements  as  these ;  all  which  are
esteemed  holy  men,  but  of  a  mingled  Religion,  not  up-
right with  their  great  Prophet.  The  Gentiles  are  of  more
sorts,  some  valiant,  good  Souldiers,  drinking  Wine,  eating
Hogs-flesh,  but  worshipping  the  figure  of  a  Beast :  some
that  will  not  touch  that  flesh  which  is  not  holy  by  imputa-
tion :  others  that  will  not  eate  any  thing  wherein  ever
there  was  any  bloud,  nor  kill  the  Vermine  that  assaulteth
them,  nor  drinke  in  the  Cup  with  those  that  doe ;  Super-
stitious in  Washing,  and  most  earnest  in  their  Profession  ;
but  all  of  them  ascribe  a  kind  of  Divinitie  to  the  River  of
Ganges,  at  which  at  one  Season  of  the  yeare  foure  or  five
hundred  thousand  meete,  and  cast  in  Gold  and  Silver  for
Oblation.

In  like  manner,  to  a  Pigs  head  in  a  Church  neere  this
Citie,  and  to  all  living  Cowes,  and  to  some  other  beasts
and  kinds.  These  have  their  Synagogues,  and  Holy
Men,  Prophets,  Witches,  South-sayers,  and  all  others  the
Devils  Impostures.  The  Molaes  of  Mahomet  know
some-what  in  Philosophy,  and  the  Mathematickes ;  are
great  Astrologers,  and  can  talke  of  Aristotle,  Euclyde,
Averroes,  and  other  Authors.  The  Learned  Tongue  is
Arab.

In  this  Confusion  they  continued  untill  the  time  of  [I.fiv.  586.]
Ecbarsha  Father  of  this  King,  without  any  noyse  of  Ecbarsha.
Christian  profession,  who  being  a  Prince  by  nature  just
and  good,  inquisitive  after  Novelties,  curious  of  new
Opinions,  and  that  excelled  in  many  vertues,  especially  in
pietie  and  reverence  towards  his  Parents,  called  in  three
Jesuites  from  Goa,  whose  chiefe  was  Jeronimo  Xavier  a
Navarrois.  After  their  arrivall  he  heard  them  reason  and
dispute  with  much  content  on  his,  and  hope  on  their  parts,
and  caused  Xavier  to  write  a  Booke  in  defence  of  his  owne

45i

A.D.
l6l6.

Templum  sine
Ecclesia.

*JJnderstand
it  in  generall
sense,  for  one
not  setled  in
any  Religion,
of  all,  and
therefore  of
none.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

profession  against  both  Moores  and  Gentiles :  which
finished  he  read  over  nightly,  causing  some  part  to  be
discussed,  and  finally,  granted  them  his  Letters  Pattents,  to
build,  to  preach,  teach,  convert,  and  to  use  all  their  Rites
and  Ceremonies,  as  freely  and  amply  as  in  Rome,  bestow-
ing on  them  meanes  to  erect  their  Churches  and  places  of
Devotion :  So  that  in  some  few  Cities  they  have  gotten
rather  Templum,  then  Ecclesiam.  In  this  Grant  he  gave
grant  to  all  sorts  of  people  to  become  Christians  that
would,  even  to  his  Court  or  owne  bloud ;  professing  that
it  should  be  no  cause  of  disfavour  from  him.  Heere  was
a  faire  beginning  to  a  forward  Spring  of  a  leane  and  barren
Harvest.

Ecbar-sha  himselfe  continued  a  Mahometan,  yet  he
beganne  to  make  a  breach  into  the  Law,  considering  that
Mahomet  was  but  a  man,  a  King  as  he  was,  and  therefore
reverenced ;  hee  thought  hee  might  prove  as  good  a
Prophet  himselfe.  This  defection  of  the  King  spread  not
farre,  a  certain  outward  reverence  detayned  him,  and  so  he
dyed  in  the  formall  profession  of  his  Sect.

Ghe-hangier-sha,  his  sonne,  the  present  King,  being  the
issue  of  this  new  fancie,  and  never  circumcised,  bred  up
without  any  Religion  at  all,  continues  so  to  this  houre,
and  is  an  *  Atheist :  sometimes  he  will  make  profession
of  Moore,  but  alwayes  observe  the  Holy-dayes,  and  doe
all  Ceremonies  with  the  Gentiles  too.  He  is  content  with
all  Religion,  only  he  loves  none  that  changeth :  But
falling  into  his  Fathers  conceit,  hath  dared  to  enter  farther
therein,  and  to  professe  himselfe  for  the  maine  of  his
religion,  to  be  a  greater  Prophet  then  Mahomet,  and  hath
formed  to  himselfe  a  new  Law,  mingled  of  all :  which
many  have  accepted  with  such  superstition,  that  they  will
not  eate  till  they  have  saluted  him  in  the  morning ;  for
which  purpose  he  comes  at  the  Sunnes  rising  to  a  window
open  to  a  great  plaine  before  his  house,  where  multitudes
attend  him :  and  when  the  Moores  about  him  speake  of
Mahomet,  hee  will  sooth  them,  but  is  glad  when  any  one
will  breake  out  against  him. Of  Christ  he  never  utters

45  2

LETTERS FROM SIR THOMAS ROE  ad.

1616.

any  word  unreverently,  nor  any  of  those  sects,  which  is  a
wonderfull  secret  working  of  Gods  truth  and  worthy
observation.  Concerning  the  new  planted  Christian
Church  he  confirmed,  and  enlarged  all  their  priviledges,
every  night  for  one  yeare  spending  two  houres  in  hearing
disputation,  often  casting  out  doubtfull  words  of  his  con-
version, but  to  wicked  purpose.

And  the  rather  to  give  some  hope,  he  delivered  many  Of  this  see
Youthes  into  the  hands  of  Francisco  Corsie,  now  resident  ^fore  ** the
heere,  to  teach  them  to  reade  and  write  Portugall,  and  to  ™*™*  S/Vrn
mstruct  them  in  humane  learning,  and  in  the  JLaw  or  kinsandFinch.
Christ ;  and  to  that  end  he  kept  a  Schoole  some  yeares,  to
which  the  King  sent  two  Princes,  his  brothers  sonnes,  who
being  brought  up  in  the  knowledge  of  God  and  his  sonne
our  blessed  Saviour,  were  solemnely  Baptised  in  the  Church
of  Agra  with  great  pompe,  being  carryed  first  up  and
downe  all  the  Citie  on  Elephants  in  triumph,  and  this  by
the  Kings  expresse  order,  who  often  would  examine  them
in  their  progression,  and  seemed  much  contented  in  them  :
this  made  many  bend  towards  the  same  way,  doubting  his
Majesties  intention.  Others  that  knew  him  better,  sup-
posed he  suffered  this  in  policie,  to  reduce  these  children
into  hate  among  the  Moores  for  their  conversion,  of  whom
consisted  the  strength  of  his  estate,  but  all  men  failing  of
his  purpose  which  was  thus  discovered.  When  these  and
some  other  children  were  setled,  as  was  thought,  in  Chris-
tian Religion,  and  had  learned  some  principles  thereof,  as
to  marry  but  one  wife,  not  to  be  coupled  with  Infidels,
the  King  sets  the  boyes  to  demand  some  Portugalls  wives
of  the  Jesuits,  who  thinking  it  only  an  idle  motion  of
their  owne  braines,  chid  them,  and  suspected  no  more.
But  that  being  the  end  of  their  conversion,  to  get  a  woman
for  the  King  and  no  care  taken :  the  two  Princes  came  to
the  Jesuits,  and  surrendred  up  their  crosses  and  all  other
rights,  professing  that  they  would  be  no  longer  Christians,
because  the  King  of  Portugall  sent  them  no  Presents  nor
wives,  according  as  they  expected.  The  Padre  seeing  this,
began  to  doubt  there  was  more  in  that  then  the  boyes

453

A.D.
l6l6.

Converts  how
poore.

[I.  iv.  587.]
Miracle.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

revealed,  especially  seeing  their  confidence  that  had  cast
off  the  awe  of  Pupills,  and  examining  the  matter,  had  it
confessed,  the  King  commanded  them.  They  refused  to
accept  the  crosses,  answering  they  had  been  given  by  his
Majesties  order,  and  they  would  not  take  notice  from
boyes  of  any  such  surrender,  but  bade  them  desire  the
King  to  send  some  of  those,  who  by  a  kind  of  order  are  to
deliver  all  his  Majesties  Commands,  whose  mouthes  are  by
priviledges  sufficient  authority,  and  then  they  would
accept  them ;  hoping  and  knowing  the  Kings  nature,  that
he  would  not  discover  himselfe  to  any  of  his  Officers  in
this  poore  plot.  The  boyes  returned  with  this  message,
which  inraged  the  King  ;  but  hee  being  desirous  to  dis-
solve the  Schoole,  and  to  withdraw  the  youthes  without
noise,  he  bade  them  call  the  Jesuits  to  the  womens  doore,
where  by  a  Ladie  he  received  the  order,  and  without  taking
any  notice  since  of  any  thing,  his  kinsmen  recalled,  who
are  now  absolute  Moores,  without  any  taste  of  their  first
faith,  and  so  the  fruit  of  all  these  hopes  are  vanished.
And  I  cannot  find  by  good  search  that  there  is  one  Chris-
tian really  and  orderly  converted,  nor  makes  the  profession,
except  some  few  that  have  been  baptised  for  money,  and
are  maintained  by  the  Jesuits ;  of  which  sort  there  would
be  more,  but  that  they  find  the  deceit,  and  cannot  endure
the  burthen.  This  is  the  truth  of  all  their  bragge  and
labour,  and  the  full  growth  of  their  Church  heere.

But  that  your  (  )  may  a  little  more  understand

the  fashion  of  the  King  and  the  Jesuits  proceedings,  I
will  make  you  one  or  two  merry  and  late  relations,  and
either  say  he  is  the  most  impossible  man  in  the  world  to
be  converted,  or  the  most  easie ;  for  he  loves  to  heare  and
hath  so  little  religion,  yet,  that  he  can  well  abide  to  have
any  decided.

Not  many  daies  since  the  Jesuits  house  and  Church
being  burned,  the  Crucifix  remained  safe,  which  under-
hand was  given  out  for  a  miracle,  and  much  talked  of.  I
that  would  be  content  any  use  might  be  made  of  an  acci-
dent to  enlarge  the  name  of  Christ  held  my  peace  :  but  the

454

LETTERS FROM SIR THOMAS ROE  aj>.

1616.

Jesuit  suspecting  I  would  not  agree  to  the  miracle,  dis-
avowed it  to  me,  and  made  it  a  matter  of  reason,  why  it
was  not  burned ;  insinuating  that  the  Moores  had  caught
up  this  opinion  of  miracle  without  his  consent,  or  sugges-
tion, though  he  confessed  he  was  glad  of  the  occasion.

But  the  King  who  never  let  slippe  any  opportunity  of
new  talke  or  novelty,  calls  the  Jesuit,  and  questioneth  with
him  of  it,  he  answereth  ambiguously ;  whereupon  his
Majesty  demanded,  if  he  did  not  desire  to  convert  him,
and  receiving  full  answere,  replyed :  You  speake  of  your  DisP^tes  °f
great  miracles,  and  of  many  done  by  you,  in  the  name  of  m^/gS
your  Prophet :  if  yee  will  cast  the  Crucifix  and  Picture  of
Christ  into  a  fire  before  me,  if  it  burne  not,  I  will  become
a  Christian :  The  Jesuit  refused  the  triall  as  unjust,
answering,  that  God  was  not  tyed  to  the  call  of  men,  that
it  was  a  sinne  to  tempt  him,  that  he  wrought  miracles
according  to  his  owne  Councell,  but  offered  to  enter  the
fire  himselfe  for  proofe  of  his  faith,  which  the  King  refused.
Heere  arose  a  great  dispute,  begunne  by  the  Prince,  a  most
stiffe  Mahometan,  and  hater  of  all  Christians,  that  it  was
reasonable  to  trie  our  Religion  by  this  offer,  but  withall,
if  the  Crucifix  did  burne,  then  that  the  Jesuit  should  be
obliged  to  render  Moore :  he  urged  examples  of  miracles
professed  to  be  done  for  lesse  purposes  then  the  conver-
sion of  so  mightie  a  King,  and  in  case  of  refusall  of  the
triall,  spake  scornefully  of  Christ  Jesus.  The  King  under-
tooke  the  argument,  and  defended  our  Saviour  to  be  a
Prophet,  by  comparison  of  his  workes  with  those  of  their
absurd  Saints,  instancing  the  raising  of  the  dead,  which
never  any  of  theirs  did.  The  Prince  replyed,  To  give
sight  to  one  naturally  blind,  was  as  great  a  miracle.  This
question  being  pressed  hotly  on  both  sides,  a  third  man,
to  end  the  controversie,  interposed  that  both  the  father
and  the  sonne  had  reason  for  their  opinions :  for  that  to
raise  a  dead  body  to  life,  must  needs  be  confessed  to  be
the  greatest  miracle  ever  done,  but  that  to  give  sight  to
an  eye  naturally  blind,  was  the  same  worke,  for  that  a
blind  eye  was  dead,  sight  being  the  life  thereof :  therefore

455

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

he  that  gave  sight  to  a  blind  eye,  did  as  it  were  raise  it  up
from  death.

Thus  the  discourse  ended,  and  so  in  wisdome  should  I :

But  I  cannot  leave  out  an  apish  miracle  which  was  acted

before  this  King,  which  the  Jesuites  will  not  acknowledge,

nor  owne  as  their  practise ; onely  of  the  truth  de  facto,

A  strange there  is  no  doubt. A  Jugler  of  Bengala  (of  which  craft

story  of  an there  are  many  and  rare)  brought  to  the  King  a  great  Ape,

that  could,  as  he  professed,  divine  and  prophesie  :  and  to

this  beast  by  some  sects  is  much  divinitie  ascribed :  The

King  tooke  from  his  finger  a  Ring,  and  caused  it  to  be  hid

under  the  girdle  of  one  among  a  dozen  other  boyes,  and

bade  the  Ape  divine,  who  went  to  the  right  child,  and

tooke  it  out. But  his  Majestie  (somewhat  more  curious)

caused  in  twelve  severall  papers  in  Persian  letters,  to  be

rewritten  the  names  of  twelve  Lawgivers,  as  Moses,  Christ,

Mahomet, Ally, and  others : and shuffling them in  a

bagge,  bad  the  beast  divine  which  was  the  true  law :  who

putting  in  his  foot  tooke  out  the  inscribed  of  Christ. This

amazed  the  King,  who  suspecting  that  the  Apes  master

could  reade  Persian,  and  might  assist  him,  wrote  them  anew

*Court  m  Court  Caracters,*  and  presented  them  the  second  time :

characters  are  ^ ^ was constant found the right and kissed it.

such  cs  h-6  only  ,  ^

and  his  nearer  Whereat  a  principall  Officer  grew  angry,  telling  the  King

Ministers  used  it  was  some  imposture,  desiring  he  might  have  leave  to

in  Mysteries  of  make  the  lots  anew,  and  offered  himselfe  to  punishment

State  un- }f  ^e  ^pe  cou^  beguile  him  ;  he  wrote  the  names  putting

others  onely  eleven  into  the  bagge,  and  kept  the  other  in  his

hand. The  beast searched, but  refused  all ; the  King

commanded  to  bring  one,  the  beast  tore  them  in  fury,  and

made  signes the  true Law-givers  name  was  not  among

them. The  King  demanded  where  it  was,  and  he  ran  to

the  Noble-man  and  caught  him  by  the  hand,  in  which  was

the  paper  inscribed  with  the  name  of  Christ  Jesus. The

King  was  troubled,  and  keepes  the  Ape  yet. This  was

acted  in  publike  before  thousands :  But  where  the  abuse

was,  or  whether  there  were  any,  I  judge  not ; only  one  of

the  Jesuits  schollers  ran  to  him  with  open  mouth,  profes-

456

LETTERS FROM SIR THOMAS ROE  ad.

1616.

sing  the  King  had  an  Ape  a  good  Christian.  Of  this
accident  the  Jesuits  make  great  account :  to  me  they  slight
it,  except  the  truth  of  the  fact,  which  is  not  unlike  one  of
their  owne  games.

Your  (  )  will  pardon  me  all  this  folly,  to  inter-

rupt you  with  so  much  and  so  uselesse  tattle ;  I  should  be
glad  to  remove  where  I  might  learne  and  practise  better
matter  :  but  I  cannot  repent  my  journey  :  it  hath  made  me
learne  and  know  my  God  and  my  selfe  better  then  ever  I
should  have  learned  either  among  the  pleasures  of  Eng-
land ;  he  hath  wonderfully  shewed  me  his  mercy,  and
taught  me  his  judgement :  his  goodnesse  be  glorified  and
magnified  for  ever. I  humbly  desire  your  (  )  to

present  my  name  (I  dare  not  say  my  service)  before  his
Majestie  my  Lord  and  Master :  it  is  enough  for  me  if  I
be  not  forgotten  ;  I  shall  never  merit  nor  aspire  the  employ-
ments of  his  favour,  but  I  will  pay  my  vowes,  and  pray
for  his  Majesty  that  he  may  live  a  happie  and  glorious
long  life  to  the  comfort  of  his  Church,  and  enjoy  the
Crowne  of  Crownes,  prepared  by  the  King  of  Kings  for
those  that  love  him ;  wherein  I  have  failed  to  your
Honour,  or  by  mine  owne  weaknesse,  your  (  )  will

measure  by  this  rule,  Exigit  &  postulat  amicitia  non  quod
cuique  dabitur,  sed  quod  quisque  efficere  potest,  and  you
will  pardon  the  assuming  so  high  a  word  as  friendship,  with
this  interpretation,  Servus  est  humilis  amicus,  which  as  I
am  bold  to  professe,  I  will  be  ready  to  demonstrate  by
obedience  to  your  command,

Thomas  Roe.

Asmere,  the  thirtieth  of  October,  161 6.

A  Letter  of  Sir  Thomas  Roe,  to  another  Right [I.  iv.  588.]
Honorable  Councellor.

IF  my  last  sent  your  Honour,  by  the  way  of  Aleppo,  be
miscaried,  this  present  discourse  will  be  undependant
and  obscure,  which  causeth  me  to  send  a  transcript  that
you  may  command  from  Sir  Thomas  Smith,  how  farre

457

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

that  designe  of  bringing  in  the  Spaniard  by  Sherley  had
proceeded,  and  my  poore  opinion,  that  will  informe  with
the  present  estate  of  the  warres  there  in  preparation  :  what
hath  succeeded,  your  Honour  shall  receive,  that  Sherley
was  stayed  at  Goa,  by  falling  short  eight  dayes  of  his
passage  this  last  yeare,  where  he  was  entertained  with
honours  and  maintenance,  which  makes  mee  judge  his
offers  and  negotiation  is  gratious.  The  Shabas  yet  so
depends  on  that  hope,  that  he  continues  the  prohibition  of
exportation  of  Silkes  thorow  Turkic

Some  few  dayes  since  I  received  advise  from  Spahan,
that  Sherley  hath  written  to  the  King,  that  with  much  joy
and  ready  embracement  he  hath  so  farre  proceeded  with
the  Vice-Roy  of  Goa,  in  a  conclusion  of  the  league,  as  his
commission  hath  power,  that  he  is  ready  to  embarke  for
Spaine  to  accomplish  it  fully.  If  it  proceed  and  take
effect,  I  can  make  it  evident,  that  it  will  revive  and
strengthen  all  the  ruines  and  decayes  of  the  Portugals  in
the  Indies,  and  make  all  other  wavering  Princes  accept
them ;  only  I  will  not  presse  the  consequence  where  it
will  be  so  fully  understood.
*The Persians  The  *  Shabas  is  in  the  field  at  Salmas,  a  Village  indiffe-
Armie  ts  rent  to  ^  wayes  ^0  Tauris  or  Gordgeston,  attending  the
strong  the  Turkes  Generall,  who  with  a  monstrous  armie  (if  it  be
Turkes double,  not  encreased  by  fame)  is  incamped  at  Argerom,  irresolute
which  of  these  two  attempts  he  shall  begin,  being  not
above  five  dayes  from  the  one,  and  ten  from  the  other.
But  these  great  armies  will  dissolve  of  themselves,  and  I
am  of  opinion  there  will  be  no  great  effect  of  them,  the
winter  approaching :  and  that  they  will  treat  a  peace,
which  the  Turke  will  never  embrace,  but  with  the  opening
of  the  trade,  &  liberty  of  ancient  commerce  :  which  though
the  Persian  yeeld  unto,  yet  if  the  Spaniard  accepts  his
offers,  the  liberty  given  the  Turke  will  be  uselesse,  for
that  the  Silkes  shall  come  downe  to  Ormus ;  but  I  hope
your  Honour  will  prevent  it,  God  hath  provided  you
leasure.

The King  of  Persia  lately  enquired  anew  after the

458

LETTERS FROM SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1616.

English,  for  he  is  indifferent  what  Christian  hath  the
trade,  so  that  the  Grand-Signior  lose  it :  for  his  first  offer
to  the  Spaniard,  will  take  his  truce,  and  after  we  may
have  the  leavings.

We  have  sent  to  Jasques  a  ship  from  our  Port  of  Surat,
with  Cloath  and  English  goods,  to  make  the  first  offer  of
a  residence,  and  to  get  a  kind  of  a  possession :  For  where
it  was  free  to  refuse  or  accept  us,  it  will  be  now  an  injury
to  turne  us  out,  being  come  upon  assurance  of  his  Letter
received  by  me.  But  though  I  did  not  consent  to  the
going  of  this  ship,  because  I  knew  both  the  Port  unfit,  the
goods  unvendible,  and  prejudiciall  to  the  great  expecta-
tion and  promises,  which  makes  me  feare  the  Shabas  will
despise  us,  and  judge  us  by  this  beginning,  and  so  with
the  more  roundnesse  either  conclude  with  the  Spaniard,  or
make  peace  with  the  Turke  (for  his  designe  is  either  wholly
to  divert  the  trade  or  nothing)  yet  I  will  mend  it  as  well
as  I  can,  by  the  helpe  of  an  Ambassador  lately  arrived  at
this  Court ;  who,  as  I  suppose,  is  come  to  get  ayde  of
money,  in  which  kind  he  often  findeth  liberall  reliefes,  and
this  King  of  India  may  better  spare  then  any  Monarch  of
the  East.

The  advantage  to  bee  made  of  it  in  England,  is  (if  I  I  have  sent  the
may  give  my  opinion)  that  when  Sir  Robert  Sherley  shall  CoPtes-
arrive  in  Spaine  and  negotiate  his  imployment,  the  Am-
bassadour  of  his  Majestie  resident  may  crave  audience,
and  produce  the  Letters  granted  to  us,  and  urge  our
possession  of  the  Port ;  and  therefore  require  in  the  name
of  his  Majesty,  that  in  this  new  contract  either  the  English
may  be  comprehended,  or  at  least  that  nothing  passe  on
the  part  of  the  King  of  Spaine,  prejudiciall  to  the  subjects
of  his  Majestie,  nor  contrary  to  the  amity  of  the  two
Nations :  which  if  the  Spaniard  shall  enterprise,  to  the
expulsion  of  us,  it  is  in  my  opinion  (the  trade  being  in  a
free  Kingdome  granted  us)  a  just  cause  of  such  a  breach,
as  may  produce  Letters  of  Mart  and  reprisall  in  all  the
Easterne  parts  to  right  our  selves.  I  will  in  the
meane time amaze the Persian with as many doubts

459

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

as  I  can  infuse  into  him  of  the  (  )  and  hopes

of  us.

In  this  Court  which  is  now  in  the  field  towards  the  con-
quest of  Decan  (with  an  effeminate  armie  fitter  to  be  a
spoile,  then  a  terror  to  enemies)  I  shall  so  farre  effect  my
imployment,  as  to  confirme  our  trade  and  people  on  equall
conditions  to  the  inhabitants  and  borne  subjects,  who
suffer  themselves,  abuses  of  Governours  which  can  never
be  remedied,  but  by  an  whole  change  of  the  regiment  and
forme  of  dominion.  For  the  constancy  I  will  no  farther
give  my  word,  then  our  owne  prosperitie,  and  the  others
feare,  and  the  Portugals  feeblenesse  shall  confirme  to  us.

The  trade  is  profitable  and  fit  for  England,  but  no  way
understood  by  the  Company  how  to  effect  it  at  best  advan-
tage, and  yet  we  have  done  little  but  discover  errors.  I
have  no  power  to  meddle  in  that,  but  if  I  were  at  home
ten  dayes,  I  would  doe  them  better  service  then  heere  in
ten  yeares.  To  proove  and  demonstrate  every  particular
and  circumstance,  were  rather  the  subject  of  a  Booke
then  of  a  Letter,  but  I  will  doe  my  part  every  way,  accord-
ing to  my  ability,  &  judgment  faithfully  and  honestly.
Besides  (though  they  may  think  I  speak  for  mine  own
ends)  I  assure  your  honor  it  is  not  fit  to  keep  an  Am-
bassador in  this  Court.  I  have  shuffled  better  out,  and
escaped  and  avoyded  affronts  and  slavish  customes  clearer
then  ever  any  did.  I  am  allowed  ranke  above  the  Per-
[I.  iv.  589.]  sian,  but  he  out-strips  me  in  rewards :  his  Master  lyes
neere  us,  but  his  Majestie  commanded  me  to  doe  nothing
unworthy  the  honour  of  a  Christian  King,  and  no  reward
can  humble  me  to  any  basenesse.  I  see  what  the  Persian
does  and  suffers.  I  know  one  that  would  creepe  and  sue,
might  effect  more  businesses  then  I,  for  every  little  matter
cannot  trouble  the  King ;  and  his  great  men  are  more
proud,  and  expect  that  from  me  I  cannot  give  them.  The
King  of  Spaine  could  never  be  drawne  to  send  any,  and
their  experience  hath  taught  them,  that  besides  he  should
not  be  received  in  honour  correspondent  to  his  quality,
they  knew  an  easier  way  to  effect  their  ends. I  shall  not

460

LETTERS FROM SIR THOMAS ROE  a.d.

1616.

returne  a  rich  man,  and  then  many  will  condemne.  me  for
want  of  providence  or  wit  to  get  it,  but  they  know  not  the
Indies,  it  growes  heere  in  as  rough  wayes  as  in  Europe.
I  will  trust  to  the  Company,  and  to  my  merit.  I  could
write  your  Honour  many  remarkeable  accidents  in  this
government  and  Kingdome :  all  the  policy  and  wicked
craft  of  the  Divell  is  not  practises  alone  in  Europe,  heere
is  enough  to  be  learned  or  to  be  dispised,  but  you  have
not  leasure  to  entertaine  so  forraigne  discourses  ;  that  part
which  may  be  worth  knowing :  as  the  proceeding  of  the
Jesuits,  the  growth  of  their  Church,  and  the  commixture
of  this  Kingdome  with  Europe  by  trade,  and  the  allyes  it
embraces,  if  I  find  not  leasure  to  put  them  into  method,  I
will  weary  your  Honour  with  them  by  a  fire-side  in  broken
pieces.

The  Portugall  pursues  us  heere  with  virulent  hatred,
but  God  doth  chastise  him,  and  his  pride  sees  it  not.  The
Admirall  Gallion  bound  for  Goa,  a  vessell  of  fifteene  hun-
dred, armed  with  sixe  hundred  men  falling  among  our
Fleet,  a  small  ship  haled  her  after  the  custome  of  the  Sea,
which  shee  requited  with  silence,  except  of  her  Ordnance  :
the  Commander  of  our  Fleet,  Benjamin  Joseph,  came  up  M.  Joseph
with  her,  and  demanded  reason,  but  was  returned  scorne,  $laine-
so  that  he  began  a  fight,  in  which  he  lost  his  life.  A  new
commission  on  being  opened,  Humfrey  Pepwell  suc-
ceeded him,  to  his  place  and  resolution,  with  the  losse  of
his  eye  and  other  hurts,  fought  untill  the  Gallion  having
her  Masts  shot,  ran  ashoare  on  Comara,  an  Hand  inhabited
by  Moores,  in  the  latitude  of  eleven  degrees,  one  and
fiftie  minutes,  where  the  Generall  Don  Emanuel  de
Meneses,  with  three  hundred  escaped,  but  fired  the  ship,
shee  was  very  rich,  and  the  succour  of  India  this  yeere :
her  companions  were  lost  at  sea,  and  on  the  fourteenth  of
Octob.  there  was  no  newes  of  any  of  them  which  were
three  ships,  this  is  the  greatest  disaster  and  disgrace  ever
befell  them,  for  they  never  mist  their  Fleet  in  September,
nor  lost  any  Vessell  as  this,  which  was  reported  invincible,
and  without  supplies  they  perish  utterly. The  Ilanders

461

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

rifled  the  Generall  and  all  his  followers,  and  they  are  since
arrived  at  Goa,  naked  and  bare  in  the  Gallion  of  Mosam-
biques,  which  had  likewise  beene  dangered  by  a  Hollander,
but  the  neernesse  of  the  Port  saved  her.  All  these  con-
sidered, me  thinkes,  the  Heavens  conspire  the  fall  of  the
Portugall  in  this  quarter,  if  his  Majestie  would  be  pleased
to  bend  onely  his  Royall  countenance.  But  I  shall  (I
hope)  returne  and  not  expect  to  see  it  effected  in  my  time.
I  will  intreate  your  Honour  to  preserve  my  name  in  the
Kings  memorie,  not  for  any  worthinesse,  but  an  humble
desire  to  serve  him  :  and  that  you  will  be  pleased  to  accept
of  my  endevours,  and  esteeme  me  such  as  I  am,  one  that
loves  and  honours  you ;  and  that  will  pray  to  God  as  the
best  expression  of  my  affection,  to  increase  you  in  all
worthy  honour,  and  to  blesse  you  with  his  holy  spirit.

Your  Honours  humble,  faithfull  Servant,

Thomas  Roe.

I  humbly  desire  your  Honor  to  do  me
the  favour  to  thanke  Sir  Thomas  Smith,  in
my  behalfe,  that  hee  may  find  my  gratitude
to  my  Friends.

From  the  Campe  of  the  Great  Mogoll,  Emperour

of  India,
November  30.  161 6.

Part  of  a  Letter  to  the  Companie  of  the  East-
India  ;  Dated  the  three  and  twentieth  of
November, 161 6.

MY  Honourable  Friends,  I  received  your  Letter  on
the  twelfth  of  October,  1616.  from  the  Charles,
safely  arrived  with  foure  ships  at  the  barre  of  Surat,  the
six  and  twentieth  of  the  former  moneth.  Of  what  past  at
Sea,  I  doubt  not  you  will  receive  ample  Relation,  onely
a  little  difference  in  the  report  of  our  Fleet,  and  the
Portugals  I  will  mention,  that  we  began  the  fight,  and
that  no  Vice-Roy  being  sent  this  yeere,  an  ancient  Soul-

462

LETTERS FROM SIR THOMAS ROE  ad.

1616.

dier,  Don  Emanuell  de  Meneses,  that  had  twice  beene  Reports  of  the
Generall  of  their  Forces,  was  in  the  Admirall,  who  being  fi&ht-
beaten  ranne  her  selfe  ashore  at  Mosambique,  and  are  now
arrived  at  Goa.  This  Tale  hangs  very  ill  together,  for
that  I  know  they  first  made  five  shot,  and  that  it  is  im-
possible they  could  passe  from  Aguzesia  to  Mosambique
in  a  Canoa,  or  that  the  Inhabitants  having  robbed  them,
durst  carrie  them  into  their  strength,  or  that  all  this  could
be  effected,  and  newes  of  their  arrivall  came  from  Goa  in
so  little  time.  So  that  my  judgement  is,  they  make  their
Relation  as  neere  ours  as  they  can,  and  are  loth  to  confesse
truth,  that  either  all  perished,  or  the  Vice-Roy,  which  were
the  greatest  losse  and  dishonour  ever  happened  to  them  in
India.

I  shall  not  need  to  write  you  any  long  Discourse  of
your  Affaires,  nor  my  opinion,  for  that  in  a  continued
Journall  I  have  set  downe  all  passages,  and  send  you  the  [I.  iv.  590.]
Copies  of  my  Letters  to  your  Factories,  wherein  many
points  are  disputed  and  opened,  from  both  which  you  may
make  best  your  owne  collection  and  judgement :  for  in
them  casually  all  your  businesse  is  handled  and  discussed
at  full,  and  it  may  bee  collected  into  such  a  method  as  you
may  sit  at  home,  and  see  it  at  once.

But  because  some  points  in  my  last  Letters,  I  followed
at  my  first  comming  at  others  reports,  which  since  I  find
vaine  and  frivolous,  and  others  perhaps  are  unresolved  in
my  generall  Discourse,  I  will  runne  over  the  materiall
points  with  brevitie :  for  I  extremely  desire  that  you  once
understood  the  constitution  of  this  Trade,  how  to  governe
and  settle  it,  that  by  varietie  of  fond  opinions  you  bee  not
counselled  to  unnecessary  charge,  nor  fall  into  grosse  errors
and  damage.

Concerning  the  aiding  the  Mogoll  or  coasting  his  sub-
jects into  the  Red  Sea,  it  is  now  uselesse,  yet  I  made  offer
of  your  affections :  but  when  they  need  not  a  courtesie,
they  regard  it  as  a  Dogge  doth  dry  bread  when  his  belly
is  full.  The  King  hath  peace  with  the  Portugals,  and  will
never  make  a  constant  warre,  except  first  we  displant  them.

463

A.D.
l6l6.

*  Understand
this,  so  long  as
they  by  force
and  armes
oppose  the
English  pro-
ceedings and
seeke  to  sup-
plant them;  as
hitherto.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Then  his  greatnesse  will  step  in  for  a  share  of  the  benefit,
that  dares  not  partake  of  the  perill :  when  they  have  peace,
theyscorne  our  assistance,  and  speake  as  loud  as  our  Canon  :
if  Warre  oppresse  them,  they  dare  not  put  out  under  any
protection,  nor  will  pay  for  it.  You  must  remove  from
you  all  thought  of  any  other  then  a  Trade  at  their  Port,
wherein  if  you  can  defend  your  selves  leave  them  to  their
fortune ;  you  can  never  oblige  them  by  any  benefit,  and
they  will  sooner  feare  you  then  love  you.  Your  residence
you  need  not  doubt  so  long  as  you  tame  the  Portugall ;
therefore  avoyde  all  other  charge  as  unnecessary,  that
resists  *  not  him ;  he  onely  can  prejudice  you.  For  a
Fort  at  my  first  arrivall,  I  received  it  as  very  necessary,
but  experience  teacheth  me,  we  are  refused  it  to  our  advan-
tage. If  he  would  offer  me  ten,  I  would  not  accept  one ;
first  where  the  River  is  commodious,  the  Countrey  is
barren  and  untraded,  the  passages  to  parts  better  planted
so  full  of  Theeves,  that  the  Kings  authoritie  availes  not,
and  the  strength  of  the  hils  assures  them  in  that  life,  if  it
had  beene  fit  for  Trade,  the  Naturals  would  have  chosen
it ;  for  they  feele  the  incommoditie  of  a  barren  Haven :
and  it  is  argument  enough  of  some  secret  inconvenience,
that  they  make  not  use  of  it  but  if  it  were  safe  without
the  walls,  yet  is  it  not  an  easie  worke  to  divert  Trades,
and  to  draw  the  resort  of  Merchants  from  their  accustomed
Marts,  especially  for  our  commoditie  which  is  bought  by
parcels,  and  cannot  be  called  staple.  Secondly,  the  charge
is  greater  then  the  Trade  can  leave,  for  to  maintayne  a
Garrison  will  eate  the  profit ;  it  is  not  an  hundred  men
can  keepe  it.  For  the  Portugall  if  he  once  see  you  under-
take that  course,  will  set  his  rest  upon  it  to  supplant  you.
Warre  and  Trafnque  are  incompatible,  by  my  consent,
you  shall  no  way  ingage  your  selves  but  at  Sea,  where  you
are  like  to  gaine  as  often  as  to  lose :  it  is  the  beggering  of
the  Portugall,  notwithstanding  his  many  rich  Residences
and  Territories,  that  hee  keepes  Souldiers  that  spend  it ;
yet  his  Garrisons  are  meane.  He  never  profited  by  the
Indies,  since  he  defended  them. Observe  this  well.

464

LETTERS FROM SIR THOMAS ROE  ad.

1616.

It  hath  beene  also  the  errour  of  the  Dutch,  who  seeke
Plantation  heere  by  the  Sword,  they  turne  a  wonderfull
stocke,  they  prowle  in  all  places,  they  possesse  some  of
the  best,  yet  their  dead  payes  consume  all  the  gaine.  Let
this  be  received  as  a  Rule,  that  if  you  will  profit,  seeke
it  at  Sea,  and  in  quiet  Trade :  for  without  Controversie  it
is  an  errour  to  affect  Garrisons  and  Land  Warres  in  India.
If  you  made  it  onely  against  the  Naturall,  I  would  agree :
to  make  it  for  them  they  are  not  worth  it,  and  you  should
be  very  wary  how  to  ingage  your  reputation  in  it.  You
cannot  so  easily  make  a  faire  retrait  as  an  on-set ;  one
disaster  would  either  discredit  you,  or  interresse  you  in  a
Warre  of  extreme  charge  and  doubtfull  event.  Besides,
an  action  so  subject  to  chance  as  Warre,  is  most  unfitly
undertaken,  and  with  most  hazard,  when  the  remotenesse
of  place  for  supply,  succours  and  counsels,  subject  it  to
irrecoverable  losse,  for  that  where  is  most  uncertaintie,
remedies  should  be  so  much  the  neerer  to  occurre  to  all
occasions.  At  Sea  you  may  take  and  leave,  your  Designes
are  not  published ;  the  Road  of  Swally,  and  the  Port  of
Surat,  are  fittest  for  you  in  all  the  Mogols  Territorie,  1
have  weighed  it  well  and  deliver  you  that  shall  never  bee
disproved,  you  need  no  more,  it  is  not  number  of  Ports,
Factories  and  Residences  that  will  profit  you,  they  will
increase  charge  but  not  recompence  it ;  the  inconveni-
encie  of  one  respectively  to  your  sales,  and  to  the  com-
moditie  of  Investants,  and  the  well  imployment  of  your
Servants  is  all  needfull,  a  Port  to  secure  your  ships,  and  a
fit  place  to  unlade  will  not  be  found  together.  The  Road
at  Swally,  during  the  season,  is  as  safe  as  a  Pond ;  Surat,
Cambaya,  Baroach,  and  Amadavar,  are  better  traded  then
all  India,  and  seated  commodiously.  The  inconveniences
are,  the  Portugals  at  Sea,  and  the  landing  of  goods,  to
meet  with  which  first  you  must  bring  to  passe,  that  your
lading  bee  readie  by  the  end  of  September  at  your  Port ;
which  may  be  effected  by  a  stocke  before-hand,  or  by
taking  up  money  for  three  monethes,  and  so  you  may
discharge  and  lade  in  one,  and  depart  for  excellent  season
iv  465  2  G

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

for  England,  and  the  Enemie  shall  not  have  time  with
force  to  offend  you,  who  will  be  newly  arrived;  and  if
the  preparation  be  ancienter  we  shall  know  it.  For  the
second,  to  land  goods  without  danger  of  Frigats,  and  to
save  the  carriage  over  land,  you  must  send  a  Pinnasse  of
threescore  tunne,  with  ten  Peeces  that  drawes  but  seven  or
eight  foot  water,  to  passe  up  the  River  betweene  Swally
and  Surat,  and  so  your  goods  will  be  safe,  and  in  your  owne
command  to  the  Custome-house-Key ;  and  it  will  a  little
awe  the  Towne ;  shee  may  proceed  after  according  to
your  appointment.

The  Commodities  you  sell  passe  least  in  that  quarter,
the  goods  you  seeke  being  principally  Indico  and  Cloth,
no  one  place  is  so  fit  for  both,  and  the  lesse  inconveniences
are  to  bee  chosen,  of  this  you  shall  gather  more  at  large
my  opinion  and  reasons,  in  my  Journall  and  Discourses  to
your  Factors,  perhaps  some  of  them  will  contradict  it :
but  I  am  not  deceived,  nor  have  private  ends,  to  keepe
[I.  ir.  591.]  Factories  to  imploy  and  advance  friends,  the  places  and
number  of  servants  I  have  delivered  my  judgement  in,
and  could  manifest  the  past  errours,  but  not  mend  them.
Sindu  is  possessed  by  the  Portugals,  or  if  it  were  free,
were  no  fitter  then  Surat,  nor  safer  :  as  it  is,  it  will  be  more
subject  to  perill.  Your  Factors  sent  me  foure  or  five
clauses  out  of  your  Commission,  that  concerned  Persia,  a
Fort,  a  Plantation  in  Bengala,  all  which  they  knew  were
not  of  use :  with  no  other  purpose,  proposition  or  resolu-
tion, they  will  acquaint  me.  They  cannot  abide  I  should
understand  or  direct  them,  if  they  resolve  of  any  thing  in
their  opinion  for  your  profit,  and  send  to  me,  I  will  effect
the  Court  part,  but  you  will  find  in  my  Letters  and  Jour-
nall how  they  use  mee,  which  doubtlesse  at  first  was  sowed
by  some  jealousie  of  yours  which  will  cost  you  dearely.

For  the  setling  your  Traffique  heere,  I  doubt  not  to
effect  any  reasonable  desire,  my  credit  is  sufficient  with  the
King  and  your  force  will  alway  bind  him  to  constancie;
it  will  not  need  so  much  helpe  at  Court,  as  you  suppose,
a  little  countenance  with  the  discretion  of  your  Factors

466

LETTERS FROM SIR THOMAS ROE  ad.

1616.

will  with  easie  charge  returne  you  most  profit,  but  you

must  alter  your  stocke,  let  not  your  servants  deceive  you,

Cloth,  Lead,  Teeth,  Quick-silver,  are  dead  Commodities,

and  will  never  drive  this  Trade,  you  must  succour  it  by

change,  and  you  will  find  my  opinion  discussed  in  Letters.

I  have  this  yeere  past  many  difficulties  by  the  perverse-

nesse  of  Sultan  Caronne,  Lord  of  Surat,  but  by  Gods

direction,  I  have  overcome  them ; Articles  of  treatie  on

equall  termes  I  cannot  effect,  want  of  Presents  disgraced

me :  but  yet  by  Peeces  I  have  gotten  as  much  as  I  desired

at  once. I  have  recovered  all  Bribes,  Extortions,  Debts

made  and  taken  before  my  time  till  this  day,  or  at  least  at

honorable composition. But when I deliver the next

gifts  to  the  Mogoll,  in  the  Princes  absence,  I  will  set  on

a  new  for  a  formall  *  contract,  &c.  *TAat  which

followes,  as
othev  Letters

I  Have  heard  that  Sir  Thomas  Roe  at  his  Returne,  de-  a/SOy  j  have
siring  the  Great  Mogor  or  Mogoll,  his  Letters  of  willingly
Commendation to his Majestie, easily obtayned that  omitted,  as  not
request,  but  found  him  very  scrupulous  where  to  set  his  sofitfirJul-
seale ; lest,  if  under,  hee  should  disparage  himselfe ; if  being  Mys- '
over,  it  might  cause  distast  to  the  King ; his  resolution  teries  of
and  prevention therefore  was  this, to send  the  Letter Commerce.
unsealed,  and  the  great  Seale  it  selfe,  that  so  His  Majestie
might  according  to  his  owne  pleasure  affixe  it. The  Seale
is  Silver; the  type  and  forme  whereof,  contayning  only
the Mogols Genealogie from Tamerlane, in severall
Circles, with the English Translation, I have heere
added.

[The  Description
467

A.D.
l6l6.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  Description  of  the  Great  Mogols  Seale.

[I.  iv*  592.]

/ E&>^\

JM Ebn >

.  Tenatr  Sabeb J
V Quran. ¥

Ebn ^Sk

ml ( Mtran

Y V X*h. .

Abu

AcbarPad J  ^\
Xab. J \

Ebn \/
Mtrx.*  Sott** I
Mahomed J\

AtmaAOfbar

JVitr  dm  Gtbangir

Pad-xab

Ga*,t.

v £*"

I Homdiun  Pad

i f Ebn ^

^S. { Saltan  Ab»

Ebn \ j

Baker  Pad J If

x!^ ^'^

Y Eb» \
Mtr*j»  Amttr J

x*b. ffl

468

LETTERS FROM THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

1615.

Chap.  XVII.

A  Letter  of  Mr-  Thomas  Coryat,  which  travailed
by  Land  from  Jerusalem  to  the  Court  of  the
Great  Mogol,  written  to  Mr-  L.  Whitaker.
To  which  are  added  pieces  of  two  other,  to
entertayne  you  with  a  little  Indian-Odcombian
mirth.

Most  deare  and  beloved  Friend,  Master  L.  W.
Animae dimidium  meae.

From  the  Court  of  the  most  mightie  Monarch,
called  the  Great  Mogol,  resident  in  the  Towne
of  Asmere,  in  the  Orientall  India. Anno  161 5.

Ordiall  salutations  in  the  Authour  of  sal-
vation, Jesus  Christ.  Where  I  writ  unto
you  last,  I  remember  well;  even  from
Zobah,  as  the  Prophet  Samuel  calleth  it
(2.  Booke,  Chap.  8.  vers.  3.)  that  is
Aleppo,  the  principall  Emporium  of  all
Syria, or  rather  of  the  Orient  World ;

but  when,  in  truth  I  have  forgotten,  for  I  keepe  not  Copies
of  my  Letters,  as  I  see  most  of  my  Country-men  doe,  in
whatsoever  place  of  the  World  I  finde  them.  Howbeit,  if
my  conjecture  doe  not  much  faile  mee,  I  may  affirme  that
it  was  about  fifteene  moneths  since,  about  a  moneth  after,
I  returned  unto  Aleppo  from  Jerusalem,  after  which  time,
I  remayned  there  three  moneths  longer,  and  then  departed
therehence  in  a  Caravan  into  Persia,  passing  the  noble
River  Euphrates  (the  chiefest  of  all  that  irrigated  Para-
dise, where-hence,  as  from  their  originall,  the  three  other
Rivers  were  derived)  about  foure  dayes  journey  beyond
Aleppo :  on  the  further  side  of  which,  I  entered  Meso-  Gen.  2.  10.
potamia,  alias  Chaldea,  for  the  Euphrates  in  that  place
disterminateth  Syria  and  Mesopotamia.  There-hence  I
had  two  dayes  journey  to  Ur  of  the  Chaldeans,  where Gen.  11.  28.

469

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

Abraham  was  borne,  a  very  delicate  and  pleasant  Citie.
[I.  iv.  593.]  There  I  remayned  foure  dayes,  but  I  could  see  no  part  of
the  ruines  of  the  house,  where  that  faithfull  servant  of
God  was  borne,  though  I  much  desired  it.  From  thence,
I  had  foure  dayes  journey  to  the  River  Tygris,  which  I
passed  also ;  but  in  the  same  place  where  I  crossed  it,  I
found  it  so  shallow,  that  it  reached  no  higher  then  the
calfe  of  my  legge :  for  I  waded  over  it  afoote.  Now  I
well  perceive  by  my  ocular  experience,  that  Chaldea  is
named  Mosopotamia,  for  that  it  is  inclosed  with  the  fore-
said Rivers.  Trajecto  Tigride,  I  entred  Armenia  the
greater :  After  that,  Media  the  lower,  and  resided  sixe
dayes  in  the  Metropolis  thereof,  heretofore  called  Ecba-
tana,  the  Summer  seate  of  Cyrus  his  Court,  a  Citie
eft-soone  mentioned  in  the  Scripture,  now  called  Tauris,
more  wofull  ruines  of  a  Citie  (saving  that  of  Troy  and
Cyzicum  in  Natolia)  never  did  mine  eyes  behold.  When
I  seriously  contemplated  those  epei7ria,  the  dolefull  testi-
monies of  the  Turkish  devastations,  I  called  to  minde
Ovids  Verse :

Ludit  in  humanis  divina  potentia  rebus.

And  that  of  Hesiod,
Ta  S'  virepTepa  veprepa  Byo-ei  Zevs  vy^ifipe/uLeTfc.

From  that,  I  had  two  dayes  journey  to  a  Citie  that  in
Strabos  time  was  called  Arsacia  in  Media  the  higher,  now
Casbin,  once  the  Royall  seate  of  the  Tartarian  Princes,
foure  dayes  journey  from  the  Caspian  Sea.  From  Casbin,
I  had  three  and  twentie  dayes  to  Spahan  in  Parthia,  the
place  of  residence  of  the  Persian  King.  But  at  my  being
there,  he  was  in  the  Countrey  of  Gurgistan,  ransacking
the  poore  Christians  there  with  great  hostilitie,  with  Fire
and  Sword.  There  I  remayned  two  moneths,  and  so  with
a  Caravan  travelled  into  the  Easterne  India,  passing  foure
moneths  and  odde  dayes,  in  my  travell  betwixt  that
(through  part  of  the  true  Persia,  and  a  large  tract  of  the
noble  and  renowned  India)  and  the  goodly  Citie  of  Lahor

470

LETTERS FROM THOMAS CORYAT  ad

.1615.

in  India,  one  of  the  largest  Cities  of  the  whole  Universe,
for  it  contayneth  at  the  least  sixteene  miles  in  compasse,
and  exceedeth  Constantinople  it  selfe  in  greatnesse.  But
a  dozen  dayes  before  I  came  to  Lahor,  I  passed  the  famous
River  Indus,  which  is  as  broad  againe  as  our  Thames  at
London,  and  hath  his  originall  out  of  the  Mountayne
Caucasus,  so  much  ennobled  by  the  ancient  both  Poets
and  Historiographers,  Greeke  and  Latine ;  which  Plato
for  curiositie  sake,  in  his  travells  of  these  parts  went  to
see.  It  lyeth  not  farre  from  that  upon  the  Confines  of
Scythia,  now  called  Tartaria :  My  selfe  also  conceiving
some  hope  of  seeing  it  before  my  finall  farewell  of  India.
I  had  almost  forgotten  one  memorable  matter  to  impart
unto  you :  About  the  middle  of  the  way,  betwixt  Spahan
and  Lahore,  just  about  the  Frontiers  of  Persia  and  India,
I  met  Sir  Robert  Sherley  and  his  Lady,  travelling  from
the  Court  of  the  Mogol,  (where  they  had  beene  very
graciously  received,  and  enriched  with  Presents  of  great
value)  to  the  King  of  Persia's  Court ;  so  gallantly  fur-
nished with  all  necessaries  for  their  travailes,  that  it  was  a
great  comfort  unto  me,  to  see  them  in  such  a  flourishing
estate.  There  did  hee  shew  mee,  to  my  singular  content-
ment, both  my  Bookes  neatly  kept ;  and  hath  promised
mee  to  shew  them,  especially  mine  Itinerarie,  to  the  Per-
sian King  :  and  to  interpret  unto  him  some  of  theprincipall
matters  in  the  Turkish  Tongue,  to  the  end  I  may  have
the  more  gracious  accesse  unto  him,  after  my  returne
thither.  For  thorow  Persia  I  have  determined  (by  Gods
helpe)  to  returne  to  Aleppo.  Besides  other  rarities  that
they  carried  with  them  out  of  India,  they  had  two  Ele-
phants and  eight  Antlops,  which  were  the  first  that  ever  I
saw :  but  afterwards,  when  I  came  to  the  Mogols  Court,
I  saw  great  store  of  them.  These  they  meant  to  present
to  the  Persian  King.  Both  hee  and  his  Lady  used  mee
with  singular  respect,  especially  his  Lady,  who  bestowed
fortie  shillings  upon  mee  in  Persian  money,  and  they
seemed  to  exult  for  joy  to  see  mee,  having  promised  mee
to  bring  mee  in  good  grace  with  the  Persian  King,  and

47i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

that  they  will  induce  him  to  bestow  some  Princely  benefit
upon  mee :  this  I  hope  will  bee  partly  occasioned  by  my
Booke,  for  hee  is  such  a  jocund  Prince,  that  hee  will  not
bee  meanly  delighted  with  divers  of  my  facetious  hiero-
glyphicks,  if  they  are  truly  and  genuinely  expounded
unto  him.

From  the  famous  Citie  of  Lahor  I  had  twentie  dayes
journey  to  another  goodly  Citie  called  Agra,  through  such
a  delicate  and  even  Tract  of  ground,  as  I  never  saw  before  ;
and  doubt  whether  the  like  be  to  be  found  within  the
whole  circumference  of  the  habitable  World.  Another
thing  also  in  this  way,  being  no  lesse  memorable  then  the
plainnesse  of  the  ground :  a  row  of  Trees  on  each  side
of  this  way  where  people  doe  travell,  extending  it  selfe
from  the  Townes-end  of  Lahor,  to  the  Townes-end  of
Agra  ;  the  most  incomparable  shew  of  that  kind,  that  ever
my  eyes  surveyed.  Likewise,  whereas  there  is  a  Moun-
tayne  some  ten  dayes  journey  betwixt  Lahor  and  Agra,
but  very  neare  ten  miles  out  of  the  way,  on  the  left  hand :
the  people  that  inhabite  that  Mountayne,  observe  a  cus-
tome  very  strange,  that  all  the  brothers  of  any  Family,
have  but  one  and  the  selfe-same  wife ;  so  that  one  woman
sometimes  doth  serve  sixe  or  seven  men  :  the  like  whereof
I  remember  I  have  read  in  Strabo,  concerning  the  Arabians
that  inhabited  Arabia  felix.  Agra  is  a  very  great  Citie,
and  the  place  where  the  Mogoll  did  alwayes  (saving  within
these  two  yeares)  keepe  his  Court ;  but  in  every  respect
much  inferiour  to  Lahor.

From  thence  to  the  Mogols  Court,  I  had  ten  dayes
journey,  at  a  Towne  called  Asmere,  where  I  found  a  Cape
Merchant  of  our  English-men,  with  nine  more  of  my
[I.  iv.  594.]  Countrey-men,  resident  there  upon  termes  of  Negotia-
tions, for  the  right  Worshipful!  Company  of  Merchants
in  London,  that  trade  for  East-India.

I  spent  in  my  journey  betwixt  Jerusalem  and  this
Mogols  Court,  fifteene  monethes  and  odde  dayes :  all
which  way  I  traversed  afoote,  but  with  divers  paires  of
shooes,  having  beene  such  a  Propateticke,  (I  will  not  call

472

LETTERS FROM THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

1615.

my  selfe  Peripateticke,  because  you  know  it  signifieth  one
that  maketh  a  perambulation  about  a  place,  TrepnraToiv,  signi-
fying to  walke  about)  that  is  a  walker  forward  on  foot,  as
I  doubt  whether  you  ever  heard  of  the  like  in  your  life ;
for  the  totall  way  betwixt  Jerusalem  and  the  Mogols  Court,
contayneth  two  thousand  and  seven  hundred  English
miles.  My  whole  perambulation  of  this  Asia  the  greater,
is  like  to  be  a  Passage  of  almost  six  thousand  miles,  by
that  time  that  in  my  returne  backe  thorow  Persia,  after-
ward also  by  Babylon  and  Ninivie,  I  shall  come  to  Cairo
in  Egypt,  and  from  that  downe  the  Nilus  to  Alexandria,
there  to  be  one  day  (by  Gods  helpe)  imbarqued  for  Chris-
tendome ; a  very  immense  dimension  of  ground.

Now  I  am  at  the  Mogols  Court,  I  thinke  you  would
bee  glad  to  receive  some  narration  thereof  from  me,
though  succinctly  handled :  for  I  meane  to  be  very  com-
pendious, lest  I  should  otherwise  preoccupate  that  plea-
sure, which  you  may  hereafter  this  reape  by  my  personal!
relation  thereof.  This  present  Prince  is  a  very  worthy
person,  by  name  Selim,  of  which  name  I  never  read  or
heard  of  any  more  then  one  Mahometan  King,  which  was
Sultan  Selim  of  Constantinople,  that  lived  about  eightie
yeeres  since,  the  same  that  conquered  Jerusalem,  Damas-
cus, Aleppo,  Cairo,  &c.  adding  the  same  to  the  Turkish
Empire.  He  is  fiftie  and  three  yeares  of  age,  his  nativitie
day  having  bin  celebrated  with  wonderfull  pompe  since
my  arrivall  heere :  for  that  day  he  weighed  himselfe  in
a  paire  of  golden  Scales,  which  by  great  chance  I  saw  the
same  day  (a  custome  that  he  observes  most  inviolably  every
yeere)  laying  so  much  Gold  in  the  other  Scale  as  counter-
vailed the  weight  of  his  bodie,  and  the  same  he  after-
ward distributed  to  the  poore.  He  is  of  complexion
neither  white  nor  blacke,  but  of  a  middle  betwixt  them :
I  know  not  how  to  expresse  it  with  a  more  expressive  and
significant  Epitheton  then  Olive :  an  Olive  colour  his
face  presenteth  :  hee  is  of  a  seemely  composition  of  bodie,
of  a  stature  little  unequall  (as  I  guesse  not  without  grounds
of  probabilitie)  to  mine,  but  much  more  corpulent  then  my

473

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

selfe.  The  extent  of  his  Dominion  is  very  spacious,  being
in  circuit  little  lesse  then  foure  thousand  English  miles,
which  very  neere  answereth  the  compasse  of  the  Turkes
Territories :  or  if  any  thing  be  wanting  in  Geometricall
dimension  of  ground,  it  is  with  a  great  pleonasme  sup-
plyed  by  the  fertilitie  of  his  soile :  and  in  these  two  things
he  exceedeth  the  Turkes,  in  the  fatnesse  (as  I  have  said)
of  his  Land,  no  part  of  the  World  yeelding  a  more  fruit-
full  veine  of  ground,  then  all  that  which  lyeth  in  his
Empire,  saving  that  part  of  Babylonia,  where  the  terres-
triall  Paradise  once  stood :  whereas  a  great  part  of  the
Turkes  Land  is  extreame  barren  and  sterrile,  as  I  have
observed  in  my  peregrination  thereof,  especially  in  Syria,
Mesopotamia  and  Armenia ;  many  large  portions  thereof
being  so  wonderfull  fruitlesse,  that  it  beareth  no  good
thing  at  all,  or  if  any  thing,  there  Infelix  lolium  &  steriles
dominantur  avense.

Secondly,  in  the  conjunction  and  union  of  all  his  Terri-
tories, together  in  one  and  the  same  goodly  Continent  of
India,  no  Prince  having  a  foot  of  Land  within  him. But
many  parcels  of  the  Turkes  Countries  are  by  a  large  dis-
tance of  Seas,  and  otherwise,  divided  asunder. Againe,
Of  his  Reve- in  his  Revenue  he  exceedeth  the  Turke  and  the  Persian
nufandofall  kis  Neighbour  by  just  halfe :  for  his  Revenues  are  forty
this  State Millions  of  Crownes  of  six  shillings  value,  by  the  yeere :
reade  Captain  but  the  Turkes  are  no  more  then  fifteene  Millions,  as  I
Hawkins  his was  certainly  informed  in  Constantinople ; and  the  Per-
Relations,  who  sians  five  Millions,  plus  minus,  as  I  heard  in  Spahan. It
meanes  and 1S  sa^  ^at  ^e  1S  uncircumcised,  wherein  hee  differeth
judgement  to from  all  the  Mahometan  Princes  that  ever  were  in  the
know  them. World.

He  speaketh  very  reverently  of  our  Saviour,  calling

him  in  the  Indian  Tongue,  Ifazaret  Eesa,  that  is,  the  great

Prophet,  Jesus :  and  all  Christians,  especially  us  English,

.  he  useth  so  benevolently,  as  no  Mahometan  Prince  the

are^otheT*  like* He  keePetn  abundance  of  wilde  Beasts,  and  that  of

but  the  Rhi- divers  sorts,  as  Lyons,  Elephants,  Leopards,  Beares,  Ant-

noceros.  lopes,  Unicornes  ;  whereof  two  I  have  seene  at  his  Court,

474

LETTERS FROM THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

1615.

the  strangest  beasts  of  the  World:  they  were  brought
hither  out  of  the  Countrey  of  Bengala,  which  is  a  King-
dome  of  most  singular  fertilitie  within  the  compasse  of  his
Dominion,  about  foure  Moneths  journey  from  this,  the
midland  parts  thereof  being  watered  by  divers  Channels
of  the  famous  Ganges,  which  I  have  not  as  yet  seene,  but
(God  willing)  I  meane  to  visit  it  before  my  departure  out
of  this  Countrey,  the  neerest  part  of  it  being  not  above
twelve  dayes  journey  from  this  Court.  The  King  present-
eth  himselfe  thrice  every  day  without  faile  to  his  Nobles,  at
the  rising  of  the  Sunne,  which  he  adoreth  by  the  elevation
of  his  hands ;  at  noone,  and  at  five  of  the  clocke  in  the
evening :  but  he  standeth  in  a  roome  aloft,  alone  by  him-
selfe, and  looketh  upon  them  from  a  window  that  hath  an
embroydered  sumptuous  coverture,  supported  with  two
silver  Pillasters  to  yeeld  shadowes  unto  him.  Twice  every
weeke,  Elephants  fight  before  him,  the  bravest  spectacle
in  the  World  :  many  of  them  are  thirteene  foot  and  a  halfe
high ;  and  they  seeme  to  justle  together  like  two  little
Mountaines,  and  were  they  not  parted  in  the  middest  of
their  fighting  by  certaine  fire-workes,  they  would  exceed-
ingly gore  and  cruentate  one  another  by  their  murdering
teeth.  Of  Elephants  the  King  keepeth  thirtie  thousand
in  his  whole  Kingdome  at  an  unmeasurable  charge ;  in
feeding  of  whom  and  his  Lions,  and  other  Beasts,  he
spendeth  an  incredible  masse  of  Money,  at  the  least  tenne
thousand  pounds  sterling  a  day.  I  have  rid  upon  an  Ele
phant  since  I  came  to  this  Court,  determining  one  day
(by  Gods  leave)  to  have  my  Picture  expressed  in  my  next
Booke,  sitting  upon  an  Elephant.  The  King  keepeth  a
thousand  Women  for  his  owne  body,  whereof  the  chiefest
(which  is  his  Queene)  is  called  Normal.  You  may
remember  to  relate  this  unto  your  Friends,  that  I  will  now
mention  as  a  matter  very  memorable  ;  I  spent  in  my  tenne  [I.  iv.  595.]
Monethes  travell  betwixt  Aleppo  and  the  Mogolls  Court,
but  three  pounds  sterling,  yet  fared  reasonable  well  every
day ;  victuals  being  so  cheape  in  some  Countries  where  I
travelled,  that  I  oftentimes  lived  competently  for  a  penny

475

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

sterling  a  day :  yet  of  that  three  pound  I  was  coozened  of
no  lesse  then  tenne  shillings  sterling,  by  certaine  lewd
Christians  of  the  Armenian  Nation  :  so  that  indeed  I  spent
but  fiftie  shillings  in  my  tenne  Monethes  Travailes.  I
have  bin  in  a  Citie  in  this  Countrey,  called  Detee,  where
Alexander  the  Great  joyned  Battell  with  Porus  King  of
India,  and  conquered  him ;  and  in  token  of  his  victorie,
erected  a  Brasse  Pillar,  which  remayneth  there  to  this  day.
At  this  time  I  have  many  Irons  in  the  fire ;  for  I  learne
the  Persian,  Turkish,  and  Arabian  Tongues,  having
alreadie  gotten  the  Italian  (I  thanke  God)  I  have  beene
at  the  Mogolls  Court  three  Monethes  alreadie,  and  am  to
tarrie  heere  (by  Gods  holy  permission)  five  Monethes
longer,  till  I  have  gotten  the  foresaid  three  Tongues,  and
then  depart  here-hence  to  the  Ganges,  and  after  that,
directly  to  the  Persian  Court.

Your  assured  loving  Friend  till  death,

Thomas  Coryate.

From  the  Court  of  the  Great  Mogoll,  resident  at
the  Towne  of  Asmere  in  the  Easterne  India,
on  Michaelmas  day. Anno  161 5.

I  Doe  enjoy  at  this  time  as  pancraticall  and  athleticall  a
health,  as  ever  I  did  in  my  life :  and  so  have  done  ever
since  I  came  out  of  England,  saving  for  three  dayes  in
Constantinople,  where  I  had  an  Ague,  which  with  a  little
letting  bloud  was  cleane  banished,  the  Lord  bee  humbly
thanked  for  his  gracious  blessing  of  health  that  he  hath
given  unto  mee.  I  was  robbed  of  my  money,  both  gold
and  silver  (but  not  all,  by  reason  of  certaine  clandestine
corners  where  it  was  placed)  in  a  Citie  called  Diarbeck  in
Mesopotamia,  the  Turkes  Countrey,  by  a  Spahein,  as  they
call  him,  that  is,  one  of  the  Horse-men  of  the  Great
Turke :  but  the  occasion  and  circumstance  of  that  mis-
fortune, would  bee  too  tedious  to  relate.  Notwithstand-
ing that  losse,  I  am  not  destitute  of  money  I  thanke  God.
Since  my  arrivall  heere,  there  was  sent  unto  this  King  one

476

LETTERS FROM THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

1615.

of  the  richest  Presents  that  I  have  heard  to  'bee.  sent  to
any  Prince  in  all  my  life  time :  it  consisted  of  divers
parcels ;  one  being  Elphants,  whereof  there  were  one  and
thirtie,  and  of  those,  two  so  gloriously  adorned,  as  I
never  saw  the  like,  nor  shall  see  the  like  againe  while  I
live.  For  they  wore  foure  chaines  about  their  bodies  all
of  beaten  gold :  two  chaines  about  their  legges  of  the
same ;  Furniture  for  their  buttockes  of  pure  gold :  two
Lions  upon  their  heads  of  the  like  gold :  the  ornaments
of  each,  amounting  to  the  value  of  almost  eight  thousand
pound  sterling :  and  the  whole  Present  was  worth  ten  of
their  Leakes,  as  they  call  them ;  a  Leake  being  ten  thou-
sand pound  sterling :  the  whole,  a  hundred  thousand
pounds  sterling.

To  the  High  Seneschall  of  the  Right  Worshipfull
Fraternitie  of  Sireniacall  Gentlemen,  that  meete
the  first  Friday  of  every  moneth,  at  the  signe
of  the  Meremaid  in  Bread-street  in  London,
give  these  :  From  the  Court  of  the  Great
Mogoll,  resident  at  the  Towne  of  Asmere,  in
the  Easterne-India.

Right  Generous,  Joviall,  and  Mercuriall  Sirenaickes:  I  This  Letter  by
have often read this Greeke Proverbe, x€lP XelPa  av  °&erjTas
vnrrei,  that  is,  one  hand  washeth  another,  and  the  Latine,  my  se/fe^
Mulus  Mulum  scabit,  one  Mule  scratcheth  another ; by
which  the  Ancients  signified,  that  courtesies  done  unto
Friends,  ought  to  bee  requited  with  reciprocall  offices  of
friendship. The  serious  consideration  hereof,  doth  make
me  to  call  to  minde  that  incomparable  elegant  safe-con-
duct, which  a  little  before  my  departure  from  England,
your  Fraternitie  with  a  generall  suffrage  gave  me  for  the
securitie  of  my  future  Peregrination,  concinnated  by  the
pleasant  wit  of  that  inimitable  Artizan  of  sweet  Elegan-
cie,  the  moytie  of  my  heart,  and  the  quondam  Seneschall
of  the  Noblest  Societie,  Master  L.  W.

Therefore  since  it  is  requisite  that  I  should  repay  some-

477

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

what  for  the  same,  according  to  the  Lawes  of  humanitie :
Such  a  poore  retribution  as  I  sent  unto  you  from  Aleppo,
the  Metropolitan  Citie  of  Syria,  by  one  Master  Henry
Allare  of  Kent,  my  Fellow-pilgrime  there-hence  to  Jeru-
salem ;  I  meane  a  plaine  Epistle,  which  I  hope  long  since
came  unto  your  hands :  I  have  sent  unto  you  by  a  man  no
lesse  deare  unto  mee  then  the  former,  one  Master  Peter
Rogers,  a  Kentish  man  also,  from  the  most  famigerated
[I.  iv.  596.]  Region  of  all  the  East,  the  ample  and  large  India :  assur-
ing my  selfe,  that  because  I  am  not  able  to  requite  your
love  with  any  essentiall  gratulations,  other  then  verball
and  scriptall,  you  will  as  lovingly  entertaine  my  poore
Letters,  being  the  certaine  manifestation  of  an  ingenuous
minde,  as  if  I  should  send  unto  you  the  minerall  riches  or
Drugges  of  the  Noble  Countrey.

Thinke  it  no  wonder  I  pray  you,  that  I  have  made  no
use  in  all  this  space  since  I  left  my  native  Country,  of  the
superexcellent  Commeate ;  for  I  have  spent  all  my  time
hitherto  in  the  Mahometan  Countries,  and  am  like  to
spend  three  yeeres  more  in  these  Musselman  (as  they  call
them)  Regions  of  Asia,  after  of  Europe,  before  I  shall
arrive  in  Christendome.  For  this  cause  I  left  it  in  Al-
eppo, with  my  Countrimen,  there  to  receive  it  from  them
againe,  after  that  I  shall  have  ended  my  Indian  and  Persian
perambulation :  and  there-hence  to  carrie  it  once  more  to
Constantinople,  and  that  by  the  way  of  Iconium,  Nicaea,
Nicomedia,  and  in  the  Countrey  of  Natolia,  a  journey  of
fortie  dayes.  From  that  finally  thorow  the  heart  of  Greece,
by  the  Cities  of  Athens,  Thebes,  Corinth,  Lacedaemon,
Thessalonica,  and  to  the  Citie  of  Ragouze,  heretofore
Epidaurus,  so  sacred  for  the  Image  of  iEsculapius  in  the
Country  of  Sclavonia,  once  called  Illyricum ;  from  thence
I  have  three  dayes  journey  to  the  inestimable  Diamond
set  in  the  Ring  of  the  Adriatique  Gulfe,  (as  once  I  said  in
the  first  Harangue  that  ever  I  made  to  Prince  Henrie  of
blessed  memorie,  translated  since  my  departure  from
London,  from  the  Terrestriall  Tabernacles,  to  the  Coeles-
tiall  Habitations)  venerous  Venice,  the  Soveraigne  Queene

478

LETTERS FROM THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

1615.

of  the  Mare  superum :  if  the  great  Jehovah  shall  be  so
propitious  unto  me,  as  to  grant  me  a  prosperous  arrivall
in  that  Noble  Citie,  I  will  there  beginne  to  shew  your  safe
conduct,  and  to  decantate,  yea  and  to  blazon  your  prayses
for  the  same  :  and  after  in  every  other  place  of  note,  untill
I  shall  arrive  in  glorious  London,  communicate  it  to  the
most  polite,  with  that  the  Cities  will  yeeld,  thorough
which  my  laborious  feete  shall  carrie  me,  it  would  bee
supervacaneous  to  commemorate  unto  you  the  almost
incredible  extent  of  Land,  I  traversed  from  Jerusalem  to
the  Court  of  the  Great  Mogoll  in  India,  where  I  now
reside ;  with  the  variable  Regions  and  Provinces  inter-
jacent betwixt  them,  and  the  manifold  occurrences  and
observations  of  speciall  worke  in  this  vaste  Tract ;  for  it
would  bee  such  a  fastidious  Discourse,  that  it  could  not  be
well  comprehended  in  a  large  sheete  of  Paper  :  but  Master
Whitaker,  I  hope,  I  will  not  faile  to  import  unto  you  in  a
few  compendious  Relations,  which  I  have  acquainted  him
with,  in  a  particular  Letter  to  himselfe :  of  which,  if  I
should  have  written  againe  to  you,  it  would  have  proved
Crambe  bis  cocta.

The  Gentleman  that  bringeth  this  Letter  unto  you,  was
Pracher  to  the  English  Merchants,  conversant  at  the  Court
of  the  aforesaid  mightie  Monarch,  in  the  Towne  of  Asmere
in  this  Easterne-India :  and  in  divers  loving  offices  hath
beene  so  kind  unto  me,  that  I  intreat  your  Generosities
to  entertaine  him  friendly  for  my  sake,  to  exhilarate  him
with  the  purest  quintessence  of  the  Spanish,  French  and
Rhenish  Grape,,  which  the  Mermaid  yeeldeth ;  and  either
one  in  the  name  of  you  all,  or  else  the  totall  universalitie
of  the  one  after  another,  to  thanke  him  heartily,  according
to  the  qualitie  of  his  merits. Farewell,  Noble  Sirenaickes.

Your  Generosities  most  obliged  Country-man,  ever
to  be  commanded  by  you, the  Hierosolymitan-
Syrian-Mesopotamian- Armenian-Median-Par-
thian-Persian-Indian Legge-stretcher of
Odcomb  in  Somerset,

Thomas  Cory  ate.
479

P1

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

|Ray  remember  the  recommendations  of  my  dutifull
respect ;  to  all  those  whose  names  I  have  heere  ex-
pressed, being  the  lovers  of  Vertue,  and  Literature ;  and
so  consequently  the  wel-willers  (I  hope)  of  a  prosperous
issue  of  my  designements,  in  my  laborious  pedestriall
perambulations  of  Asia,  Africa,  and  Europe.

Written  with  mine  owne  hand,  at  the  Court  of  the
Great  Mogoll,  Shaugh  Selim,  resident  in  the  Towne  of
Asmere,  in  the  umbilicke  of  the  Orientall  India,  the  eight
day  of  November,  being  Wednesday,  Anno  Dom.  161 5.

I

Nprimis,  to  the  two  Ladies  Varney,  the  Mother  and
the Daughter, at Boswell House without Temple-
barre,

2  Item,  to  that  famous  Antiquarie,  Sir  Robert  Cotten,
at  his  House  in  the  Black-Frier  §.v  Pray  tell  him  that  I
have  a  very  curious  white  Marble  head  of  an  ancient
Heros  or  Gyant-like  Champion,  found  out  very  casually
by  my  diligent  pervestigation  amongst  the  ruines  of  the
once  renowmed  Citie  of  Cyzicum,  mentioned  by  Cicero
in  his  second  Oration  (if  my  memory  doth  not  faile  me)
against  Verres,  situate  in  an  Peninsula  of  Bythinia,  in  the
goodly  Countrey  of  Natolia,  neere  the  Sea  Propontis :  to
this  head  will  his  best  Antiquities  whatsoever  veile
bonnet.
[I.  iv.  597.]  3  Item,  to  that  courteous,  sweet,  and  elegant-natured
and  nurtured  Gentleman,  Master  William  Ford,  Preacher
to  our  Nation  at  Constantinople,  if  you  happen  to  meet
him  in  any  part  of  England ;  one  that  deserveth  better  of
me,  then  any  man  in  all  this  Catalogue :  for  of  him  have
I  learned  whatsoever  superficiall  skill  I  have  gotten  in  the
Italian  Tongue :  pray  reduplicate  my  commendations
unto  him.

4  Item,  to  Master  George  Speake,  my  generous  and
ingenuous  Countrey-man,  the  Sonne  and  heire  apparant  of
Sir  George  Speake,  in  Somerset-shire ;  him  you  are  like
to  find  in  any  Terme,  either  at  the  Middle-Temple,  or  in
some  Barbers  house  neere  the  Temple.

480

LETTERS FROM THOMAS CORYAT  a.d

1615.

5  Item,  to  Master  John  Donne,  the  Author  of  two  most
elegant  Latine  Bookes,  Pseudo-martyr,  and  Ignatii  Con-
clave :  of  his  abode  either  in  the  Strand,  or  else-where  in
London,  I  thinke  you  shall  be  easily  informed  by  the
meanes  of  my  friend,  Master  L.  W.

6  Item,  to  Master  Richard  Martin,  Counseller,  at  his
Chamber  in  the  Middle-Temple,  but  in  the  Terme-time,
scarce  else.

7  Item,  to  Master  Christopher  Brooke  of  the  Citie  of
Yorke,  Counseller,  at  his  Chamber  in  Lincolnes  Inne,  or
neere  it.

8  Item,  to  Master  John  Hoskins,  alias  iEquinoctiall
Pasticrust,  of  the  Citie  of  Hereford,  Counseller,  at  his
Chamber  in  the  Middle-Temple.

9  Item,  to  Master  George  Garrat ;  of  whose  beeing
you  shall  understand  by  Master  Donne  aforesaid.

10  Item,  to  Master  William  Hackwell,  at  his  Chamber
in  Lincolnes  Inne.

1 1  Item,  to  Master  Benjamin  Johnson  the  Poet,  at  his
Chamber  at  the  Black-Friers.

12  Item,  to  Master  John  Bond  my  Countrey-man,
chiefe  Secretarie  unto  My  Lord  Chancellour.

13  Item,  to  Master  Doctor  Mocket,  resident  perhaps
in  my  Lord  of  Canterburies  house  at  Lambeth,  where  I
left  him.

14  Item,  to  Master  Samuel  Purchas,  the  great  Collec-
tor of  the  Lucubrations  of  sundry  Classicall  Authors,  for
description  of  Asia,  Africa,  and  America.  Pray  commend
me  unto  him  and  his  irapagdrrjg  Master  Cooke,  by  the  same
token,  that  he  gave  me  a  description  of  Constantinople,
and  the  Thracius  Bosphorus,  written  in  Latine  by  a
French-man,  called  Petrus  Gillius :  which  Booke,  when  I
carried  once  in  an  after-noone  under  mine  arme,  in  walking
betwixt  our  English  Ambassadors  House  in  Pera,  on  the
opposite  side  to  Constantinople,  and  the  Flemish  Ambas-
sadors house,  I  lost  it  very  unfortunately  to  my  great
griefe  and  never  found  it  againe,  &c.

[There  is

IV  481  2H

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

THere  is  another  and  later  Letter  of  his  to  his  Mother,
written  the  last  of  October  161 6.  part  of  which  for
the  Odcombian  stile  and  Coryaticall  straine,  I  have  hither
transcribed.  Great  pitie  it  is  that  his  voluminous  Obser-
vations of  his  foot  Pilgrimage,  longer  then  perhaps  of  any
man  ever  hath  bin  in  that  kind,  are  either  lost,  or  at  least
not  come  to  some  discreet  hand,  which  might,  no  doubt,
distill  good  instructions  thence  for  the  publike,  as  sweet
fresh  water  out  of  the  huge  salt  Ocean.

Some  written  Notes  of  his,  it  pleased  Sir  Thomas
Roe  to  give  me,  whence  (omitting  such  things  as  before
you  have  had  in  Sir  Thomas  Roes  owne  Observations)  I
have  inserted  a  few,  following  this  Letter.

From  Agra,  the  Capitall  Citie  of  the  Dominion  of
the  Great  Mogoll  in  the  Easterne  India,  the
last  of  October 161 6.

Ost  deare  and  wel-beloved  Mother,  though  I  have
superscribed  my  Letter  from  Asmere,  the  Court  of
the  greatest  Monarch  of  the  East,  called  the  Great  Mogoll
in  the  Easterne  India,  which  I  did  to  this  end,  that  those  that
have  the  charge  of  conveyance  thereof,  perceiving  such  a
title,  may  bee  the  more  carefull  and  diligent  to  convey  it
safe  to  your  hands :  yet  in  truth  the  place  from  which  I
wrote  this  Letter,  is  Agra,  a  Citie  in  the  said  Easterne
India,  which  is  the  Metropolitan  of  the  whole  Dominion
of  the  fore-said  King  Mogoll,  and  ten  dayes  journey  from
his  Court  at  the  said  Asmere. From  the  same  Asmere  I
departed  the  twelfth  day  of  September  An. 1616..  after
my  abode  there  twelve  moneths  and  sixtie  dayes ; which
though  I  confesse  it  were  a  too  long  time  to  remaine  in
one  and  the  selfe-same  place,  yet  for  two  principall  causes
it  was  very  requisite  for  me  to  remaine  there  some  reason-
able time :  first,  to  learne  the  Languages  of  those  Coun-
tries, through  which  I  am  to  passe  betwixt  the  bounds  of
the  Territories  of  this  Prince  and  Christendome,  namely,
these  three,  the  Persian,  Turkish,  and  Arab  :  which  I  have
in  some  competent  measure  attayned  unto  by  my  labour

482

M

LETTERS FROM THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

1616.

and  industry  at  the  said  Kings  Court,  matters  as  availeable

unto  me  as  money  in  my  Purse,  as  being  the  chiefest,  or

rather  only  meane  to  get  me  money,  if  I  should  happen  to

be  destitute,  a  matter  very  incidentall  to  a  poore  Foot-man

Pilgrim,  as  my  selfe,  in  these  Heathen  and  Mahometan

Countries,  thorow  which  I  travell. Secondly,  that  by  the

helpe  of  one  of  those  Languages,  I  meane  the  Persian,  I

might  both  procure  unto  my  selfe  accesse  unto  the  King,

and  be  able  to  expresse  my  mind  unto  him  about  the  matter  [I.  iv.  598.]

for  the  which  I  should  have  occasion  to  discourse  with  him.

These  were  the  reasons  that  moved  me  so  long  to  tarry  at

the  Mogols  Court,  during  which  time,  I  abode  in  the

house  of  the  English  Merchants,  my  deare  Countrimen,

not  spending  one  little  piece  of  money  either  for  dyet,

washing,  lodging,  or  any  other  thing. And  as  for  the

Persian  tongue,  which  I  studyed  very  earnestly,  I  attayned

to  that  reasonable  skill,  and  that  in  a  few  moneths,  that  I

made  an  Oration  unto  the  King  before  many  of  his  Nobles,

in  that  language,  and  after  I  had  ended  the  same,  discoursed

with  his  Majestie  also  in  that  tongue  very  readily  and

familiarly ; the  Copie  of  which  speech,  though  the  tongue

it  selfe  will  seeme  to  an  English-man  very  strange  and

uncouth,  as  having  no  kind  of  affinitie  with  any  of  our

Christian  languages,  I  have  for  noveltie  sake  written  out

in  this  Letter,  together  with  the  translation  thereof  in

English,  that  you  may  shew  it  to  some  of  my  learned

friends  of  the  Clergie,  and  also  of  the  Temporaltie,  in

Ewill,  and  elsewhere,  who  belike,  will  take  some  pleasure

in  reading  so  rare  and  unusuall  a  tongue  as  this  is. The

Persian  is  this  that  followeth.

The  Copie  of  an  Oration  that  I  made  in  the  Per-
sian tongue  to  the  Great  Mogol,  before  divers
of  his  Nobles.

HAzaret  Aallum  pennah  salamet,  fooker  Daruces  ve
tehaungeshta  hastam  kemia  emadam  az  wellagets
door,  ganne  az  mulk  Inglizan :  kekessanaion  petheen
mushacas  cardand  ke  wellagets,  mazcoor  der  akers  magrub

483

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

hood,  ke  mader  hamma  nezzaerts  dunmast.  Sabebbe
amadane  mari  mia  boosti  char  cheez  ast  auval  be  dedane
mobarreckdeedars.  Hazaret  ke  seete  caramat  ba  hamma
Trankestan  reeseedast  ooba  tamam  mulk  Musulmanan
der  sheenedan  awsaffe.  Hazaret  daveeda  amadam  be
deedane  astawne  akdas  musharaf  geshtam  duum  bray
deedane  feelhay  Hazaret,  kin  chunm  janooar  der  heech
mulk  ne  dedam  seu  in  bray  deedane  namwer  daryaee
shumma  Gauga,  ke  Serdare  hamma  daryaha  dumiest.
Chaharum  een  ast,  keyee  fermawne  alishaion  amayet  fer-
moyand,  ke  betwanam  der  wellayetts  Uzbeck  raftan  ba
shahre  San  arcand,  bray  Zeerat  cardan  cabbre  mobarreche
Saheb  crawncah  awsaffe  tang  00  mosachere  00  der  tamam
aallum  meshoor  ast  belk  der  wellagette  Uz  bee  eencader
meshoor  neest  chunan  che  der  mule  Inglisan  aft  digr,
bishare  eshteeac  daram  be  deedane  mobarrec  mesare  Saheb
crawnca  bray  een  sabeb,  che  awne  saman  che  focheer  de
shabr  Stambol  boodam,  ye  aiaeb  cohua  amarat  deedam
dermean  yecush  bawg  nasdec  shaht  mascoor  coja  che  ped-
shaw  Eezawiawn  che  namesh  Manuel  bood  che  Saheb
crawnca  cush  mehmannec  aseem  carda  bood,  baad  as
gristane  Sulten  Batasetra  as  jange  aseem  che  shuda  bood
nas  dec  shahre  Bursa,  coima  che  Saheb  crawn  Sultan
Bajasetra  de  Zenicera  tellajo  bestand,  00  der  cafes  naha-
dond  een  char  chees  meera  as  mulche  man  jum  baneed  ta
mia,  as  mule.  Room  00  Arrac  peeada  geshta,  as  door  der
een  mule  reseedam,  che  char  hasar  pharsang  raw  darad,
beshare  derd  00  mohuet  casheedam  che  heech  ches  der  een
dunnia  een  cader  mohuet  ne  casheedast  bray  deedune
mobarrec  dedare  Haseretet  awn  roos  che  be  tactte  shaugh
ne  shaughee  musharaf  fermoodand.

The  English  of  it  is  this.

*Thls  is  the  T  Ord  *  Protector  of  the  World,  all  haile  to  you  :  I  am
ordinarie^  title  J^j  a  p00re  Traveller  and  World-seer,  which  am  come
him  b/all*  hitner  from  a  farre  countrie,  namely  England,  which
strangers.  ancient  Historians  thought  to  have  beene  situated  in  the
farthest  bounds  of  the  West,  and  which  is  the  Queene  of

484

LETTERS FROM THOMAS CORY  AT  ad.

1616.

all  the  Hands  in  the  World.  The  cause  of  my  comming
hither  is  for  foure  respects.  First,  to  see  the  blessed  face
of  your  Majestie,  whose  wonderfull  fame  hath  resounded
over  all  Europe,  and  the  Mahometan  Countries.  When
I  heard  of  the  fame  of  your  Majestie,  I  hastened  hither
with  speed,  and  travelled  very  cheerfully  to  see  your  glori-
ous Court.  Secondly,  to  see  your  Majesties  Elephants,
which  kind  of  beasts  I  have  not  seene  in  any  other  Coun-
trey.  Thirdly,  to  see  your  famous  River  Ganges,  which
is  the  Captayne  of  all  the  Rivers  of  the  World.  The
fourth  is  this,  to  entreate  your  Majestie  that  you  would
vouchsafe  to  grant  me  your  gracious  Passe,  that  I  may
travell  into  the  Countrey  of  Tartaria  to  the  Citie  of
Samarcand,  to  visit  the  blessed  Sepulchre  of  the  Lord  of
the  Corners  (this  is  a  title  that  is  given  to  Tamberlaine  in
this  Countrie,  in  that  Persian  language  :  and  whereas  they
call  him  Lord  of  the  Corners,  by  that  they  meane,  that  he
was  Lord  of  the  corners  of  the  World,  that  is,  the  highest
and  supreme  Monarch  of  the  Universe : )  whose  fame,  by
reason  of  his  Warres  and  Victories,  is  published  over  the
whole  World :  perhaps  hee  is  not  altogether  so  famous  in
his  owne  countrey  of  Tartaria,  as  in  England.  More-
over, I  have  a  great  desire  to  see  the  blessed  Tombe  of  the
Lord  of  the  Corners  for  this  cause ;  for  that  when  I  was
at  Constantinople,  I  saw  a  notable  old  building  in  a  plea-
sant Garden  neare  the  said  Citie,  where  the  Christian
Emperor  that  was  called  Emanuel,  made  a  sumptuous
great  Banquet  to  the  Lord  of  the  Corners,  after  he  had
taken  Sultan  Bajazet,  in  a  great  battell  that  was  fought
neere  the  Citie  of  Brusia,  where  the  Lord  of  the  Corners
bound  Sultan  Bajazet  in  fetters  of  gold,  and  put  him  in  a
Cage  of  yron.  These  foure  causes  moved  me  to  come  out
of  my  native  Countrey  thus  farre,  having  travelled  afoote
thorow  Turkie  and  Persia,  so  farre  have  I  traced  the  World
into  this  Countrey,  that  my  Pilgrimage  hath  accomplished
three  thousand  miles,  wherein  I  have  sustayned  much
labour  and  toyle,  the  like  whereof  no  mortall  man  in  this
World  did  ever  performe,  to  see  the  blessed  face  of  your

485

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

Majestie,  since  the  first  day  that  you  were  inaugurated  in
your  glorious  Monarchall  Throne.
[I.  iv.  599.]  After  I  had  ended  my  Speech,  I  had  some  short  dis-
course with  him  in  the  Persian  Tongue,  who  amongst
other  things  told  me,  that  concerning  my  travell  to  the
Citie  of  Samarcand,  he  was  not  able  to  doe  me  any  good,
because  there  was  no  great  amity  betwixt  the  Tartarian
Princes  and  himselfe,  so  that  his  commendatory  Letters
would  doe  me  no  good.  Also  he  added,  that  the  Tartars
did  so  deadly  hate  all  Christians,  that  they  would  certainly
kill  them  when  they  came  into  their  Country.  So  that
he  earnestly  disswaded  me  from  the  journey,  if  I  loved  my
life  and  well  fare ;  at  last,  he  concluded  his  discourse  with
me,  by  a  summe  of  money,  that  he  threw  downe  from  a
window,  thorow  which  he  looked  out,  into  a  sheet  tied  up
by  the  foure  corners,  and  hanging  very  neere  the  ground,
an  hundred  pieces  of  silver,  each  worth  two  shillings  ster-
ling, which  countervailed  ten  pounds  of  our  English
Money :  this  businesse  I  carried  so  secretly  by  the  helpe
of  my  Persian,  that  neither  our  English  Ambassadour,
nor  any  other  of  my  Countrimen  (saving  one  speciall,
private,  and  intrinsicall  friend)  had  the  least  inckling  of  it,
till  I  had  thoroughly  accomplished  my  designe :  for  I  well
knew  that  our  Ambassador  would  have  stopped  and
barracadoed  all  my  proceeding  therein,  if  he  might  have
had  any  notice  thereof,  as  indeed  hee  signified  unto  me,
after  I  had  effected  my  project,  alleaging  this,  forsooth,
for  his  reason,  why  hee  would  have  hindred  me,  because  it
would  redound  somewhat  to  the  dishonour  of  our  Nation,
that  one  of  our  Countrey  should  present  himselfe  in  that
beggerly  anc|  poore  fashion  to  the  King,  out  of  an  insinuat-
ing humour,  to  crave  Money  of  him :  But  I  answered,
our  Ambassadour  in  that  stout  and  resolute  manner,  after
I  had  ended  my  businesse,  that  he  was  contented  to  cease
nibling  at  me,  never  had  I  more  need  of  Money  in  all  my
life,  then  at  that  time :  for  in  truth  I  had  but  twentie
shillings  sterling  left  in  my  Purse,  by  reason  of  a  mis-
chance I  had  in  one  of  the  Turkes  Cities  called  Emert,  in

486

LETTERS FROM THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

1616.

the  Countrey  of  Mesopotamia,  where  a  Miscreant  Turke
stripped  me  of  almost  all  my  Monies,  according  as  I  wrote
unto  you  in  a  very  large  Letter  the  last  yeare,  which  I
sent  from  the  Court  of  this  mightie  Monarch,  by  one  of
my  Countrimen  that  went  home  by  Sea  in  an  English  ship,
laden  with  the  Commodities  of  this  India,  which  Letter,  I
hope,  came  to  your  hands  long  since.  After  I  had  beene
with  the  King,  I  went  to  a  certaine  Noble  and  Generous
Christian  of  the  Armenian  Race,  two  dayes  journey  from
the  Mogolls  Court,  to  the  end  to  observe  certaine  remarke-
able  matters  in  the  same  place,  to  whom,  by  meanes  of  my
Persian  Tongue,  I  was  so  welcome,  that  he  entertayned
me  with  very  civill  and  courteous  complement ;  and  at
my  departure  gave  mee  very  bountifully  twenty  pieces  of
such  kind  of  Money  as  the  King  had  done  before,  counter-
vailing fortie  shillings  sterling.  About  tenne  dayes  after
that,  I  departed  from  Asmere,  the  Court  of  the  Mogoll
Prince,  to  the  end  to  begin  my  Pilgrimage,  after  my  long
rest  of  fourteene  Moneths,  backe  againe  into  Persia,  at
what  time  our  Ambassadour  gave  mee  a  piece  of  Gold  of
this  Kings  Coyne  worth  foure  and  twentie  shillings,  which
I  will  save  (if  it  bee  possible)  till  my  arrivall  in  England :
so  that  I  have  received  for  benevolences,  since  I  came  into
this  Countrey,  twentie  markes  sterling,  saving  two  shil-
lings eight  pence,  and  by  the  way,  upon  the  confines  of
Persia,  a  little  before  I  came  into  this  Countrey,  three  and
thirtie  shillings  foure  pence  in  Persian  Money,  of  my
Ladie  Sherley  :  at  this  present  I  have  in  the  Citie  of  Agra,
where-hence  I  wrote  this  Letter,  about  twelve  pounds
sterling,  which  according  to  my  manner  of  living  upon
the  way,  at  two  pence  sterling  a  day,  (for  with  that  pro-
portion I  can  live  pretty  well,  such  is  the  cheapnesse  of  all
eatable  things  in  Asia,  drinkable  things  costing  nothing,  for
seldome  doe  I  drinke  in  my  Pilgrimage  any  other  liquour
then  pure  water)  will  maintaine  me  very  competently
three  yeeres  in  my  travell,  with  meate,  drinke  and
cloathes.  In  this  Citie  of  Agra,  where  I  am  now,  I  am  to
remaine  about  sixe  weekes  longer,  to  the  end  to  expect  an

487

A.*.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

i6i&

excellent  opportunity,  which  then  will  offer  it  selfe  unto
me,  to  go  to  the  famous  River  Ganges,  about  five  dayes
journey  from  this  to  see  a  memorable  meeting  of  the  gentle
people  of  this  Countrey,  called  Banians,  whereof  about
foure  hundred  thousand  people  go  thither  of  purpose  to
bathe  and  shave  themselves  in  the  River,  and  to  sacrifice  a
world  of  Gold  to  the  same  River,  partly  in  stamped  Money
and  partly  in  massie  great  lumpes  and  wedges,  throwing
it  into  the  River  as  a  Sacrifice,  and  doing  other  strange
Ceremonies  most  worthy  the  observation.  Such  a  not-
able spectacle  it  is,  that  no  part  of  all  Asia,  neither  this
which  is  called  the  great  Asia,  nor  the  lesser,  which  is  now
called  Natolia,  the  like  is  to  be  seene ;  this  shew  doe  they
make  once  every  yeare,  comming  thither  from  places
almost  a  thousand  miles  off,  and  honour  their  River  as
their  God,  Creator  and  Saviour ;  Superstition  and  Im-
pietie  most  abominable  in  the  highest  degree  of  these
brutish  Ethnicks,  that  are  aliens  from  Christ  and  the
Common-wealth  of  Israel.  After  I  have  seene  this  shew,
I  will  with  all  expedition  repaire  to  the  Citie  of  Lahor,
twentie  dayes  journey  from  this,  and  so  into  Persia,  by  the
helpe  of  my  blessed  Christ,  &c.

Your  dutifull,  loving  and  obedient  Sonne,  now
a  desolate  Pilgrime  in  the  World,

Thomas  Coryate.

[I.  iv.  600.1 Certaine  Observations  written  by  Thomas  Coryat.

Jesuitical! "\T  7~Hereas  the  Beggers  begge  in  this  Countrey  of  a
Marianitie. VV Christian  in  the  name  of  Bibee  Maria,  and  not  of
Hazanet  Eesa,  thereby  we  may  gather  that  the  Jesuits
have  preached  Mary  more  then  Jesus.
Notable  A  great  Raja  a  Gentile,  a  notorious  Atheist,  and  contem-

exampk  of  ner  Gf  all  Dei  tie,  glorying  to  professe  he  knew  no  other  God
then  the  King,  nor  beleeving  nor  fearing  none  :  sitting  dally-
ing with  his  women,  one  of  them  plucked  a  haire  from  his
brest,  which  being  fast  rooted,  plucked  off  a  little  of  the

488

Atheisme.

OBSERVATIONS OF THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

1616.

skinne,  that  bloud  appeared ; this  small  skarre  festered

and  gangrened  incurably,  so  that  in  few  dayes  he  dispaired

of  life,  and  beeing  accompanied  with  all  his  friends  and

divers  Courtiers,  he  brake  out  into  these  excellent  words :

Which  of  you  would  not  have  thought  that  I  being  a  man

of  Warre,  should  have  dyed  by  the  stroke  of  a  Sword,

Speare  or  Bow? but  now  I  am  inforced  to  confesse  the

power  of  that  great  God,  whom  I  have  so  long  dispised,

that  hee  needs  no  other  Lance  then  a  little  haire  to  kill  so

blasphemous  a  wretch,  and  contemner  of  his  Majestie,  as

I  have  beene.

Ecbar  Shaugh  had  learned  all  kind  of  Sorcery,  who  Ecbars
beeing  once  in  a  strange  humour  to  shew  a  spectacle  to  JuS^nS-
his  Nobles,  brought  forth  his  chiefest  Queene,  with  a
Sword  cut  off  her  head,  and  after  the  same  perceiving  the
heavinesse  and  sorrow  of  them,  for  the  death  of  her  (as
they  thought)  caused  the  head,  by  vertue  of  his  Exor-
cismes  and  Conjunctions,  to  be  set  on  againe,  no  signe
appearing  of  any  stroke  with  his  Sword.

Sultan  Cursaroo  hath  but  one  Wife,  for  which  one  Wwely
principall  reason  is,  that  during  his  imprisonment,  the  fidelity.
King  intending  to  make  a  hunting  Progresse  of  foure
moneths,  consulted  how  to  keepe  him  safe  in  his  absence ;
at  last  resolved  to  build  a  Towre,  and  immure  him  within
it,  without  gate,  doore  or  window,  except  some  small  holes
to  let  in  Ayre  higher  then  he  could  come  unto  ;  putting  in
sorts  of  provision  whatsoever,  both  fire,  clothes,  &c.  with
some  servants  to  abide  with  him  for  that  time.  While
this  was  building,  his  Wife  came  and  fell  at  the  Kings
feete,  and  never  would  let  goe  till  shee  had  obtayned  leave
to  bee  shut  up  with  him :  the  King  much  perswading  to
enjoy  her  libertie ;  she  utterly  refused  any  other  comfort,
then  to  be  the  companion  of  her  Husbands  miseries ;
amongst  which  this  was  the  greatest,  that  if  any  of  those
that  were  immured,  beeing  in  number  fiftie,  should  have
dyed  in  the  Kings  absence,  there  was  no  meanes  to  burie
them,  for  that  no  man  was  admitted  to  come  neere  the
Towre.

489

A.D.
l6l6.

Right  and
Rites  about
finding  a
Fountaine.

Charitie  of
Moores.

Ecbars  pietie.

Notable
sentence.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  Fountaine  found  the  first  day  by  one  of  my  Lords
people.  Master  Herbert,  brother  to  Sir  Edward  Herbert,
which  if  he  had  not  done,  he  must  have  sent  ten  Course
every  day  for  water,  to  a  River  called  Narbode,  that  falleth
into  the  Bay  of  Cambaya  at  Buroch ;  the  custome  being
such,  that  whatsoever  Fountaine  or  Tanke  is  found  by  any
great  man  in  time  of  drought  hee  shall  keepe  it  proper
and  peculiar  to  himselfe,  without  the  interruption  of  any
man  whatsoever.  The  day  after  one  of  the  Kings  Haddys
finding  the  same,  and  striving  for  it,  was  taken  by  my
Lords  people,  and  bound  all,  &c.  a  great  controversie  being
about  it,  &c.

Remember  the  Charitie  of  two  great  men,  that  in  the
time  of  this  great  drought,  were  at  the  charge  of  sending
ten  Camels  with  twentie  persons  every  day  to  the  said
River  for  water,  and  did  distribute  the  water  to  the  poore,
which  was  so  deare,  that  they  sold  a  little  skinne  for  eight
Pise.

Ecbar  Shaugh,  a  very  fortunate  Prince  and  pious  to  his
Mother :  his  pietie  appearing  in  this  particular,  that  when
his  Mother  was  carried  once  in  a  Palankeen  betwixt
Lahor  and  Agra,  he  travelling  with  her,  tooke  the  Palan-
keen upon  his  owne  shoulders,  commanding  his  greatest
Nobles  to  doe  the  like,  and  so  carried  her  over  the  River
from  one  side  to  the  other,  and  never  denyed  her  any
thing,  but  this,  that  shee  demanded  of  him,  that  our  Bible
might  be  hanged  about  an  Asses  necke,  and  beaten  about
the  Towne  of  Agra,  for  that  the  Portugals  having  taken
a  ship  of  theirs  at  Sea,  in  which  was  found  the  Alcoran
amongst  the  Moores,  tyed  it  about  the  necke  of  a  Dogge,
and  beat  the  same  Dogge  about  the  Towne  of  Ormuz :
but  hee  denyed  her  request,  saying,  That  if  it  were  ill  in
the  Portugals  to  doe  so  to  the  Alcoran,  being  it  became
not  a  King  to  requite  ill  with  ill,  for  that  the  contempt  of
any  Religion,  was  the  contempt  of  God,  and  he  would  not
be  revenged  upon  an  innocent  Booke :  the  morall  being,
that  God  would  not  suffer  the  sacred  Booke  of  his  Truth
to  be  contemned  amongst  the  Infidels.

490

OBSERVATIONS OF THOMAS CORYAT  a.d.

1616.

One  day  in  the  yeere,  for  the  solace  of  the  Kings  Profligate  lust.
Women,  all  the  Trades-mens  Wives  enter  the  Mohal  with
some-what  to  sell,  in  manner  of  a  Faire,  where  the  King  is
Broker  for  his  Women,  and  with  his  gaines  that  night
makes  his  supper,  no  man  present,  (observe  that  whatso-
ever is  brought  in  of  virill  shape,  as  instance  in  Reddishes,
so  great  is  the  jealousie,  and  so  frequent  the  wickednesse
of  this  people,  that  they  are  cut  and  jagged  for  feare  of
converting  the  same  to  some  unnaturall  abuse)  by  this
meanes  hee  attaines  to  the  sight  of  all  the  prettie  Wenches
of  the  Towne :  at  such  a  kind  of  Faire  he  got  his  beloved
Normahal.

After  Shaof  Freed  had  wonne  the  Battle  of  Lahor  by  a  t1-  iv-  6o1-]
stratagem,  the  Captaines  being  taken  by  the  King,  and  At°Ph~
hanged  upon  Flesh-hookes  and  Stakes,  made  an  entrance
for  the  King  to  Lahor,  his  sonne  Cursaroo  being  then
taken  Prisoner,  and  riding  bare-footed  upon  an  Elephant ;
his  Father  demanded  him  how  hee  liked  that  Spectacle  of
his  valiant  and  faithfull  Captaines  hanging  in  that  manner,
to  the  number  of  two  thousand :  hee  answered  him,  that
hee  was  sorrie  to  see  so  much  Crueltie  and  Injustice  in  his
Father,  in  executing  them  that  had  done  nothing  but  their
dutie ;  for  that  they  lived  upon  his  Bread  and  Salt :  but
hee  should  have  done  right  if  hee  had  saved  them,  and
punished  him  which  was  their  Master,  and  the  Author  of
the  Rebellion.

For  more  cleere  declaration  of  this  excellent  vertue  The  Kings  ex-

upbraiding  the  coldnesse  of  our  Charitie,  you  shall  under-  temal  charity.
T 1  £.1. F.  t 1 ■■ t_  •'/"■•  1 Heehadadded

stand  a  custome  or  this  King,  who  sleeping  in  his  Gusle-  heere  0f  the

can,  often  when  hee  awakes  in  the  night,  his  great  men  Kings  respect

(except  those  that  watch)  being  retired,  cals  for  certaine  to  two-fold

poore  and  olde  men,  making  them  sit  by  him,  with  many  Darmses

questions  and  familiar  speeches  passing;  the  time,  and  at  f  c  i?°? •

1 • J  111  1 •  1  1  •  r tt naVe  beJore  tn

their  departure  cloathes  them,  and  gives  them  bountifull  sir  T.  Roe.
Almes  often,  whatsoever  they  demand,  telling  the  money
into  their  hands.

For  a  close  of  this  Discourse, I  cannot  forget  that
memorable  Pietie,  when  at  Asmere  hee  went  afoot  to  the

491

A.D.
l6l6.

The  King  likes
not  shifters  of
Religion.

PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

Tombe  of  the  Prophet  Hod.  Mundin  there  buried,  and
kindling  a  fire  with  his  owne  hands,  and  his  Normahal,
under  that  immense  and  Heidelbergian-aequipollent  Brasse-
pot,  and  made  Kitcherie  for  five  thousand  poore,  taking
out  the  first  Platter  with  his  owne  hands,  and  serving  one ;
Normahal  the  second,  and  so  his  Ladies  all  the  rest.
Cracke  mee  this  Nut,  all  the  Papall  Charitie  vaunters.

An  Armenian  desirous  to  turne  Moore,  procured  a
Noble-man  to  bring  him  to  the  King,  whom  the  King
asked  why  hee  turned  Moore,  whether  for  preferment?
hee  answered  No.  Some  few  Monethes  after  craving
some  courtesie  of  the  King,  hee  denyed  it  him,  saying,
That  hee  had  done  him  the  greatest  favour  that  could  bee,
to  let  him  save  his  soule,  but  for  his  bodie  hee  himselfe
should  provide  as  well  as  he  could.

The  King  likes  not  those  that  change  their  Religion,
hee  himselfe  beeing  of  none  but  of  his  owne  making,  and
therefore  suffers  all  Religions  in  his  Kingdome.  Which
by  this  notable  example  I  can  make  manifest :  The  King
had  a  Servant  that  was  an  Armenian,  by  name  Scander ;
to  whom  upon  occasion  of  speech  of  Religion,  the  King
asked  if  hee  thought  either  hee  or  the  Padres  had  con-
verted one  Moore  to  bee  a  true  Christian,  and  that  was
so  for  conscience  sake,  and  not  for  money :  who  answered
with  great  confidence,  That  hee  had  one  which  was  a  per-
fect Christian,  and  for  no  worldly  respect  would  bee  other,
whom  the  King  caused  presently  to  bee  sent  for :  and
bidding  his  Master  depart,  demanded  why  hee  was  become
a  Christian,  who  rendred  certaine  feeble,  implicite,  Jesuiti-
call  Reasons,  and  avowed  that  hee  would  never  be  other :
whereupon  the  King  practised  by  faire  speeches  and  large
promises,  to  withdraw  him  to  the  folly  of  Mahomet,  offer-
ing him  Pensions,  meanes,  and  command  of  Horse,  telling
him  hee  had  now  but  fbure  Rupias  a  Moneth  Wages,
which  was  a  poore  Reward  for  quitting  his  praepuced  faith :
but  if  hee  would  recant,  hee  would  heape  upon  him  many
Dignities :  the  Fellow  answering,  it  was  not  for  so  small
Wages  hee  became  Christian,  for  hee  had  limbes,  and

492

OBSERVATIONS OF THOMAS CORY  AT  a.d.

1616.

could  earne  so  much  of  any  Mahometan,  but  that  hee  was
a  Christian  in  his  heart,  and  would  not  alter  it.  This
way  not  taking  effect,  the  King  turned  to  threatnings,
and  menacings  of  Tortures  and  Whippings  ;  but  the  Pro-
selyte manfully  resolving  to  suffer  any  thing,  answered,
hee  was  readie  to  endure  the  Kings  pleasure.  Upon  this
resolution,  when  all  men  expected  present  and  severe
castigation,  the  King  changed  his  tune,  highly  commend-
ing his  constancie  and  honestie,  bidding  him  goe  and
returne  to  his  Master,  and  to  serve  him  faithfully  and
truely,  giving  him  a  Rupia  a  day  Pension  for  his  Integritie.
About  two  Monethes  after,  the  King  having  beene  a
hunting  of  wild  Hogges,  a  beast  odious  to  all  Moores,
and  accustomed  to  distribute  that  sort  of  Venison  among
Christians  and  Razbootes,  sent  for  this  Armenian,  Master
of  this  converted  Catechumen  or  Mahometan,  to  come  and
fetch  part  of  his  Quarrie.  The  Armenian  not  beeing  at
home,  this  his  principall  Servant  came  to  know  the  Kings
pleasure,  who  commanded  him  to  take  up  a  Hogge  for
his  Master,  which  no  Moore  will  touch ;  which  hee  did,
and  being  gone  out  of  the  Court-gate,  was  so  hooted  at  by
the  Mahometans,  that  hee  threw  downe  his  Present  in  a
Ditch,  and  went  home,  concealing  from  his  Master  what
had  passed.  About  foure  dayes  after  the  Armenian  com-
ming  to  his  watch,  the  King  demanded  of  him  whether  the
Hogge  he  sent  him  were  good  meat  or  no ;  who  replyed,
hee  neyther  heard  of,  nor  see  any  Hogge :  whereat  the
King  remembring  to  whom  this  Hogge  was  delivered,
caused  the  fellow  to  be  sent  for,  and  examining  the  matter,
had  it  confessed  how  he  threw  away  the  Hogge,  and  never
carryed  it  home :  the  King  pressing  to  know  the  reason,
the  poore  fellow  answered  how  he  was  mocked  for  touching
it,  and  it  being  a  thing  odious  to  the  Moores,  for  shame
he  threw  it  away :  at  which  he  replyed,  By  your  law  there
is  no  difference  of  meats,  and  are  you  ashamed  of  your
lawes  ?  or  to  flatter  the  Mahumetans,  doe  you  in  outward
things  forsake  it  ?  now  I  see,  thou  art  neither  good  Chris-
tian, nor  good  Mahumetan,  but  a  dissembling  knave  with  [I.  iv.  602.]

493

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

both,  while  I  found  thee  sincere,  I  gave  thee  a  pension,
which  now  I  take  from  thee,  and  for  thy  dissimulation  doe
command  thee  to  have  a  hundred  stripes,  which  were  pre-
sently given  him  in  stead  of  his  money,  and  bade  all  men
by  his  example  take  heed,  that  seeing  hee  gave  libertie  to
all  Religions,  that  which  they  choose  and  professe,  they
may  sticke  unto.

I  had  thought  at  first  to  have  finished  all  these  Indian

Voyages  in  this  fourth  Booke :  but  perceiving  it  to  grow

into  such  greatnesse,  and  withall  such  great  alterations  as

the  Turkish  Trade  at  Moha,  and  especially  the  Persian  at

Jasques, have caused  in the  English Trade, with the

contrary  Attempts  of  the  Portugals,  and  chiefly

the  Dutch,  (before  no  good  Friends,  and

there  the  worst  of  Enemies)  to  the

English-Indian  Trade  ;  I  thought

fit  to  make  thereof  a  fifth

Booke.

494

Navigations,  Voyages,  p.  v.  6o3.j

Traffiques,  Discoveries,  of  the  English  Nation  in
the  Easterne  Parts  of  the  World :

Continuing the English-Indian Occurrents,  and

contayning  the  English  Affaires  with  the  Great

Samorine,  in  the  Persian  and  Arabian  Gulfes,

and  in  other  places  of  the  Continent,  and

Hands  of  and  beyond  the  Indies  :

the  Portugall  Attempts,  and  Dutch  Disasters,

divers  Sea-fights  with  both  ; and  many

other  remarkable  Relations.

THE FIFTH  BOOKE.

Chap. I.

Memorialls  taken  out  of  the  Journall  of  Roger
Hawes,  touching  the  proceedings  of  the  Fac-
tory at  Cranganor  under  the  Great  Samorine.

ilHe  Generall  of  this  Fleet  was  Captaine  William

Keeling  in  the  Dragon ; Robert  Boner  Master :

Captaine  Christopher  Harris  in  the  Peppercorne :

Captaine  William  Payton  *  in  the  Expedition.  *r°u  have

The  fourth  of March 1615.  we  chased  a  Portugall  fj™mal1

Frigat,  which  ranne  into  a  creeke  and  escaped  us :  and  we

495

A.D.
1615.

[I.  v.  604.]
March  4.
1615.
Cranganor
Castle  and
Hand  pro-
mised to  the
English.

Cochin  pro-
mised, and
covenanted  to
be  given  to  the
English.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

making  our  way  on  towards  Cape  Coromine,  there  came
a  Tony  aboord  us  with  Messengers  from  the  Samorine  to
the  Generall.

The  next  day  the  Governour  sent  a  Present,  and  en-
treated the  Generall  to  go  to  Cranganor,  which  the  day
after  we  did,  and  the  chiefe  men  sent  from  the  Samorine :
the  Generall  was  desired  to  come  ashoare  to  speake  with
him,  but  in  the  going,  certaine  Frigats  came  and  anchored
neare  the  shoare,  and  caused  him  to  goe  aboord  the  Ex-
pedition. Some  shots  passed,  but  little  hurt.

On  the  eight,  the  Generall  went  ashoare  with  Master
Barkley,  Cape  Merchant,  and  others,  where  they  received
kind  usage,  and  concluded  to  settle  a  Factory.  The
Articles  agreed  on,  were  these  :

UNderecon  Cheete,  the  Great  Samorine,  &c.  To  James
by  the  Grace  of  God,  King  of  Great  Britaine,  &c.
Whereas  your  Servant  and  Subject  William  Keeling  Es-
quire, arrived  in  my  Kingdome  in  the  moneth  of  March,
Anno  1 61 5.  with  three  English  ships  at  the  Port  of  Cran-
ganor, in  latitude  ten  degrees  fifteene  minutes,  and  at  my
earnest  sollicitation  came  ashoare  to  see  me :  there  was
concluded  by  me  for  my  part,  and  by  him  for  the  English
Nation,  as  followeth.

As  I  have  beene  ever  an  enemie  to  the  Portugals,  so  doe
I  purpose  to  continue  for  ever :  I  doe  hereby  faithfully
promise  to  be  and  continue  a  friend  to  the  English,  and
my  Successors  after  mee :  to  endeavour  the  taking  in  of
the  Fort  of  Cranganor,  and  to  possesse  the  English  thereof,
as  their  owne,  with  the  Hand  thereof,  which  is  in  length
on  the  Sea-coast  nine  miles,  and  in  breadth  three.

Provided,  that  I  purpose  to  build  therein  a  house  for
some  of  my  owne  people,  to  the  number  of  one  hundred
persons.

I  will  also  endeavour,  with  the  ayde  of  the  English,
hereafter  to  take  in  the  Fort  and  Towne  of  Cochin,  be-
longing formerly  to  my  Crowne  and  Kingdome,  and  then
to  deliver  it  into  the  possession  of  the  English,  as  their

496

ROGER  HAWES  a.d.

1615.

owne  proper  lands  and  possessions : Provided,  that  the

charge  of  the  surprize  be  equally  borne,  the  one  halfe  by

my  selfe,  the  other  by  the  English  Nation  :  and  the  benefit

of  the  spoyles  thereof,  in  whatsoever  qualitie,  the  one

halfe  to  belong  to  me,  the  other  halfe  to  the  English

Nation.

The  Samorine  to  have  no  right,  title  or  interest  in  the
aforesaid  Towne,  Precincts,  or  appurtenances  of  Cochin
at  all.

And  the  Samorine  doth  also  covenant  for  himselfe,  his
Heires  and  Successors,  that  the  whole  Trade  of  the
English,  in  whatsoever  commodities  brought  in,  or  carryed
out,  shall  pay,  yeeld  or  allow  no  manner  of  custome,
imposition,  taxe,  toll,  or  any  other  duty  of  whatsoever
qualitie.

And  to  these  Covenants,  which  the  shortnesse  of  time
did  not  permit  to  amplifie  :  I  the  Samorine  have  religiously
sworne  by  the  great  God  I  serve,  to  performe  accordingly,
and  that  not  only  for  my  selfe,  but  for  my  Successours  after
me :  and  in  witnesse  hereof,  have  laid  my  hand  upon  this
writing.

And  the  said  William  Keeling  doth  promise  to  acquaint
the  Kings  Majestie  with  the  premisses,  and  to  endeavour
his  Majesties  undertaking  thereof  accordingly.

A  Stocke  was  made,  as  the  State  present  permitted,  and
three  Factors  appointed,  George  Woolman  chiefe,  Peter
Needham,  one  of  the  Generalls  servants,  second ;  my
selfe  (Roger  Hawes)  third,  Edward  Peake,  a  Youth  atten-
dant, and  to  learne  the  language ;  and  John  Stamford  a
Gunner,  to  assist  the  Samorine,  if  need  required  in  his
warres.  On  the  tenth,  the  ships  departed,  leaving  us  in  a
shrambe  at  the  waters  side,  with  our  goods  and  a  Present
for  the  Samorine,  where  wee  continued  till  the  thirteenth,
at  which  time  the  last  of  our  goods  were  carryed  to  the
Samorines  Castle :  whom  thus  possessed  of  our  goods,  we
much  suspected.

On  the  twentieth,  hee  would  needs  see  Master  Wooll-
iv  497  2 1

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

mans  Trunke,  supposing  wee  had  store  of  money  (Need-
ham  had  told  him  wee  had  five  hundred  Ryalls  of  eight)
and  finding  little  above  fiftie  Ryalls,  he  would  needs
borrow  fifty,  which  wee  could  not  deny  him,  and  offered  a
pawne  not  worth  halfe,  which  we  refused  to  take,  hoping
after  this  money  lent  hee  would  permit  us  to  depart  for
Calicut,  but  found  delayes.  He  also  urged  us  to  give  his
brother  a  Present.

On  the  eight  and  twentieth,  he  came  up  into  the  Cham-
ber where  we  were,  and  gave  Master  Woollman  two  Gold-
rings,  and  to  every  of  the  rest  one : and  the  next  day
called  us  to  the  sight  of  his  tumbling  sports. The  same
Stamford  a night  Stamford  went  out  with  his  sword  in  his  hand,
run  en  jooe,  te^mg  tne  j$0y  nee  would  come  againe  presently,  and  the

knave.  next  newes  we  heard  of  him,  was  that  hee  was  met  with

by  the  King  of  Cochins  Nayros,  having  lost  himselfe
(being  drunke)  they  demanded  whither  he  would  go,  he
said  to  the  Samorines,  whither  they  undertooke  to  bring
him,  and  hee  knew  not  himselfe  betrayed  till  he  came  at
Cochin.  This  put  us  in  great  feare,  but  the  Samorine
gave  us  good  words,  saying,  he  had  rather  now  find  him  a
knave,  then  when  hee  should  have  put  trust  in  him.

In  Aprill,  we  got  liberty  to  depart  with  our  goods  for
Calicut,  where  the  two  and  twentieth  we  arrived,  and  were
kindly  entertained  :  but  were  faine  to  stay  in  the  Custome-
house,  till  wee  might  get  a  more  convenient  house,  which
was  made  ready  for  us  the  sixt  of  May,  with  promise  of  a
better  after  the  Raines.  Faine  would  we,  according  to  the
Generall  his  order,  have  sent  a  messenger  with  his  and  our
Letters  to  Surat,  to  acquaint  our  Countrimen  with  our
being  heere :  but  the  Governour  would  not  consent  till
wee  had  sold  our  goods,  for  their  better  encouragement.
Perfidious  On  the  eighteenth,  one  was  sent. Part  of  the  goods

people.  were  sold  by  the  Governours  procurement,  to  the  Mer-

chants at  Calicut,  soone  after  on  the  six  and  twentieth,
and  faire  promises  of  part  of  payment  shortly ;  but  it  is
not  the  custome  of  best  or  worst  in  this  countrey,  to  be  as
good  as  their  word,  being  certaine  only  in  dissembling.

498

ROGER  HAWES  a.d.

1616.

Master  Woollman  was  desirous  to  go  to  Nassapore  to

make  sale,  but  the  Governour  put  him  off  with  divers

shifts  from  time  to  time.

The  third  of  July,  the  messenger  sent  for  Surat  re-  July  3.
turned  with  reports,  that  being  well  onward  on  his  way,
hee  was  set  upon,  beaten,  his  money  and  Letters  taken
from  him :  amongst  which  was  a  letter  of  Generall  Keel-
ing to  the  next  Generall,  which  grieved  us,  suspecting  yet
he  was  robbed  with  his  owne  consent,  and  of  his  honesty
only.  A  Broker  of  Nassapore  told  Master  Needham  that  Nassapore.
they  were  sold  to  the  Portugalls ;  the  Governour  hearing
of  it,  and  hanging  downe  his  head,  as  guilty  therein.  We
sold  goods  heere  to  Merchants  of  Nassapore.

The  seventeenth  of  August,  Master  Woollman  dyed.  August  17.
Our  promised  money  we  could  not  get,  and  our  Broker
told  us,  that  some  one  of  the  debters  would  goe  to  the
Governour,  and  with  a  bribe  procure  respite, the  rest
refusing  till  they  paid  all.

On  the  foure  and  twentieth,  the  Samorines  sister  sent
us  word,  she  would  both  cause  them  to  pay,  and  lend  us  [I.  v.  605.]
any  money  we  needed :  but  we  found  her  as  the  rest.
The  Queene  Mother  also  made  us  faire  shewes.  Divers
likewise  promised  to  convey  letters  to  Surat  for  us,  but
with  words  as  divers  from  the  event,  and  adverse  to  all
truth.

Master  Needham  thus  wronged,  further  wronged  him-
selfe  by  indiscretion,  threatning  hee  would  be  gone  to  the
King  of  Cochin,  in  preference  of  a  Nayro  appointed  to  at-
tend us,  who  discovered  the  same  ;  and  he  added  yet  further,
to  put  him  in  feare  with  making  shew  of  violent  revenge,
as  he  did  also  to  a  Scrivano  (which  is  a  Justice  with  us)
taking  him  by  the  throate,  and  making  as  though  he
would  have  striken  him  with  his  sword,  for  detaining
money  he  had  received  for  us.  Our  Broker  also  told  him,
it  was  not  Merchant-like  to  go  up  and  downe  the  Towne
with  a  sword  and  buckler :  his  carriage  and  habite  resem-
bling those,  which  here  we  call  Roaring-boyes,  rather  then
Merchants,  notwithstanding,  my  admonition,  which  was

499

ad.  PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

1616.

requited  with  ill  language  to  my  selfe,  and  accompanyed
with  abuses  of  his  owne  selfe  and  the  Companyes  affaires.
September  23.  The  three  and  twentieth  of  September,  a  Holland  ship,
Cafout"  ^  wnicn  had  traded  at  Mecca,  came  to  this  Port,  with  pur-
pose of  setling  a  Factory,  which  were  by  the  Governour
appointed  to  go  to  the  King,  and  promised  to  carry  us  a
letter,  but  went  without  it.  And  heere  dallying  and  delay-
ing continued.  Whereupon  the  fourth  of  November,
Master  Needham  went  to  the  Samorine,  and  returned  the
five  and  twentieth,  having  had  a  Gold-chaine  bestowed  on
him,  a  Jewell  and  a  Gold-ring  to  weare  on  his  arme,  with
orders  also  from  the  King  to  effect  our  designes.  But
the  performance  halted.
December  20.  The  twentieth  of  December,  a  Malabar  Captaine  had
taken  prize  of  the  Portugals,  and  would  have  traded  with
us,  but  we  could  not  get  in  our  monies  due  long  before.
We  heard  also  the  same  day  of  foure  English  ships  at
Surat.  But  the  Governour  and  people  continuing  their
wonted  perfidiousnesse,  the  one  more  carefull  of  taking,
the  other  of  giving,  bribes,  then  paying  our  debts :
Strange  we  used  a  strange  policie  to  get  some  of  them :  for  when

po  tae, ,  strong wee  came  to  demanci  them  at  their  houses,  if  they  would
superstition.  111  1  -n 1

pay  us  none,  we  would  threaten  not  to  depart  till  they

paid  us.  And  we  had  heard  it  reported  that  their  cus-
tome  is,  neither  to  eat  nor  wash,  whiles  we  are  in  their
houses.  By  this  meanes  we  sometimes  got  fiftie  Fanos
of  one,  one  hundred  of  another ;  by  no  meanes  would
they  endure  us  to  lie  at  their  houses,  except  one,  where
we  waited  three  daies  and  nights,  with  three  or  foure
Nayros :  they  had  for  their  watch  of  them,  but  we  could
get  nothing.  The  Nayro,  whom  the  King  had  appointed
to  get  in  our  debts,  came  to  demand  a  gratuitie  of  us,  yet
got  in  nothing :  yea,  he  would  go  to  the  debters  houses,
and  take  three  or  foure  Fanos  of  each,  and  then  depart
without  the  money.
January  9.  The  ninth  of  January,  Master  Needham  going  to  de-

A  dangerous man(j  a  debt,  a  Nayro,  as  he  said,  would  not  suffer  him
Jray'  to  passe,  and  being  put  by  with  his  hand  strucke  him;

500

ROGER HAWES  a.d.

1616.

whereupon  he  gave  the  Nayro  a  dangerous  wound  in  the
head,  which  it  was  thought  he  would  not  recover ;  other
Moores  being  hurt  in  taking  his  part.  And  word  was
presently  brought  to  us,  to  shut  up  our  doores,  lest  the
Nayros  should  assemble  to  doe  us  some  mischiefe  (feuds
or  kindred-quarrels  and  murders  being  rife  amongst  them,
without  other  law  to  right  themselves.)  Our  Nayro  with
his  kindred  did  guard  him  home,  to  the  number  of  thirty,
with  pikes,  and  swords,  and  bucklers,  in  his  defence,
whom  he  could  not  but  gratifie.  Our  house  was  guarded
three  or  foure  nights  and  dayes,  none  of  us  daring  to  go  into
the  Towne  for  money  or  other  businesse  (which  before  we
did  very  safely)  for  a  weeke :  and  then  our  Broker  willed
us  not  to  goe  without  a  Nayro,  for  that  they  had  sworne
the  death  of  one  of  us,  in  revenge  of  him  that  was
killed.

The  twentieth,  the  Portugall  Armada  of  foure  and  Fight  with  the
thirty  saile  passed  by  from  the  South,  whereof  foureteene  ^  u^s  an
ships,  the  rest  Frigats :  they  put  into  the  Harbour,  where
three  Frigats  lay  at  anchor ;  a  hot  fight  followed,  but  the
Portugals  went  away  with  disgrace,  having  onely  cut  one
of  the  Frigats  halfes,  which  drove  ashoare  and  broke  in
pieces,  belonging  to  the  Governour,  who  was  well  served,
keeping  in  the  countrey,  and  keeping  foure  or  five  great
peeces,  which  were  at  his  disposing,  in  the  Towne,  locked
up,  all  save  one :  neither  had  they  powder  and  shot  for
above  two  shot.  Before  the  fight  was  ended,  some  foure
thousand  Nayros  were  come  downe ;  divers  were  slaine
on  both  sides.  Nine  or  ten  Portugals  were  driven  ashoare,
and  two  or  three  of  the  chiefe  presently  hanged  by  the
heeles  two  dayes,  and  then  being  taken  downe,  the  night
following  were  devoured  by  wilde  beasts.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  a  Pattemar  told  that  the
Governour  was  friend  to  us  only  in  shew,  wishing  the
Portugalls  in  our  roome ;  for  we  did  no  good  in  the
Countrey,  but  brought  wares  which  they  were  forced  to
buy,  whereas  they  caused  good  by  trading.

The  eight  of  February,  we  received  Letters  from  Surat.

501

A.D.
l6l6.

[I. V. 606.]

June  13.  14.
15.  1616.

August  1.

Fight  with  the

Portugal*

Carricke.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRJMES

The  fourth  of  March,  wee  received  Letters  from  the  King,
wishing  us,  if  our  ships  came,  to  come  with  them  to
Panean,  and  for  our  moneyes  not  to  trouble  our  selves,  for
he  would  pay  us,  though  he  sold  his  Rings.

Chap.  II.

Notes  taken  out  of  the  Journall  of  Alexander
Childe,  from  England  to  Surat,  and  thence  to
Jasques  in  Persia,  and  of  the  fight  by  the  way
with  the  Portugals,  in  which  Generall  Joseph
was  slaine.

He  thirteenth,  fourteenth,  and  fifteenth  of
June  1 6 16.  after  our  arrivall  at  Soldania,
we  made  merry  one  with  another,  glad  of
our  meeting  there  with  Captaine  New-
port, homewards  bound.  We  found
heere  good  watering,  but  little  refreshing
else,  save  fresh-fish  for  our  sicke  men :
the  Blackes  brought  us  nothing.

The  first  of  August,  we  fell  with  the  maine,  the  place
called  Boobam  in  sixteen  degrees,  five  and  thirty  minutes
South  latitude :  variation  thirteene  degrees,  twelve
minutes.

The  sixt,  we  descried  a  saile,  the  Admirall  of  the  Car-
ricks  that  went  this  yeere  from  Lisbone.  The  Globe  sail-
ing better  then  the  rest  of  the  Fleet,  first  came  up  to  her,
and  the  Carrick  presently  gave  her  a  whole  broad  side,
shot  divers  shoots  thorow  the  ship,  and  hurt  a  man  or
two,  which  caused  her  to  fall  asterne,  and  stand  in  with  the
Generall  and  the  rest  of  the  Fleet,  shewing  us  of  the
Portugals  discourtesie.  When  our  Generall  came  up  with
the  Carrick,  he  sent  his  Shallop  aboord  her  to  know  of  the
Captaine,  why  hee  shot  at  his  friend,  and  to  entreate  him
to  come  aboord  to  make  satisfaction  for  the  wrong  done.
But  he  sent  the  Boatswaine  aboord  the  Generall,  who  told
him  directly  that  he  would  not  come  aboord,  nor  give

502

ALEXANDER CHILDE  a.d.

1616.

satisfaction :  who  thereupon  having  sent  his  man  aboord,

began the fight, which continued  an houre and halfe.

But  within  lesse  then  an  houre,  an  unluckie  shot  came

from  the  Carrick,  and  slew  our  worthy  Generall. Then CaptaineBen-

did  the  Admirall  presently  fall  off,  and  put  abroad  a  flagge  *£j  JosePh

of  Councell,  where  comming  aboord,  wee  found  to  our

griefe  his  body  mangled  with  a  Culverine  shot,  and  him-

selfe  suddenly  departed.

We  kept  company  with  the  Carricke  till  sixe  the  next Captaine  Pep-
morning,  and  it  proved  under  the  Hand  Moyella,  calme, ^ Jacemd
that  we  were  forced  to  anchor  by  meanes  of  a  pretie  strong  jg^
current  setting  to  the  South,  and  passed  the  whole  day  in
making  our  ships  ready  for  fight. I  tooke  out  my  long
Boat  and  Pinnasse  out  of  my  shippe,  and  mounted  the
rest  of  my  Ordnance,  and  kept  the  Carricke  company  all
the  next  night.

The  eight,  about  seven  in  the  morning,  our  Generall,
Captaine  Pepwell,  seeing  hee  could  not  fetch  her  up  so
soone  as  he  desired,  called  to  me,  whose  ship  went  better,
and  gave  mee  leave  to  have  the  first  onset. I  came  up
and  gave  him  three  or  foure  broad-sides  :  and  in  the  meane
time  the  Generall  came  up,  and  I  gave  place ; the  Vice-
Admirall  also  and  the  Globe  one  after  another ; and  thus
we  fought  all  day. Betweene  three  and  foure  in  the  after-
noone,  his  maine  mast  fell  over-boord,  and  presently  his
Foretop-mast  followed :  at  five  we  gave  him  over  within
lesse  then  a  league  of  the  shoare,  being  a  Lee-shoare,  and
a  great  sea. The  Hands  name  is  Comora,  very  steepe  to Comora.
an  hundred  fathome,  within  lesse  then  a  Cables  length  of
the  Rockes,  and  no  ground : so  we  stood  off  and  on  all
that  night. The  Generall  was  sorely  wounded  on  the Captain  Pep-
face  with  splinters  from  a  great  shot  in  his  halfe  deck,  and  we^a"dothers
Richard Hounsell the Master, was hurt in his  arme, Zlvers  slaine.
another  had  his  head  shot  away,  and  divers  others  were
hurt :  I  lost  two  men. The  Generall  in  the  evening  sent
Master  Connock,  Cape  Merchant,  to  the  Captaine  of  the
Carricke,  that  if  hee  would  yeeld,  he  should  have  good
quarter,  and  be  sent  to  Goa  in  safetie  :  his  answere  was,  he

503

A.D.
l6l6.

The  Carricke
fired,  reade
more  hereof  in
Sir  Thomas
Roe.

Refreshing  at
Comora.

September  24.
Tomas  Ker-
ridge,  he  is
now  this  June
1622.  re-
turned home.
[I.  v.  607.]

November  5.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

neither  would  nor  could :  but  if  we  could  winne  him  with
the  sword,  hee  must  be  contented,  and  hoped  to  find
honorable  warres  with  us,  if  wee  tooke  him.  At  twelve
in  the  night  shee  was  aground  betweene  two  rockes  very
steepe,  and  set  on  fire,  whether  accidentally  or  wilfully  wee
cannot  tell.

The  ninth,  in  the  morning  I  sent  Master  Anthony
Fugars,  my  mate,  ashoare  in  my  long  Boat  to  see  if  any
men  were  saved,  and  to  take  in  some  of  them,  to  know
how  shee  came  on  fire  :  but  the  Carricke  was  still  burning,
and  not  a  Man  of  hers  to  bee  seene.  There  were  many
Blackes  of  the  Hand  on  the  land  against  the  Carrick,  and
they  put  out  a  flagge  of  truce  for  my  men  to  come  ashoare,
but  there  was  no  landing  in  that  place,  nor  within  three
leagues  to  the  East  or  West,  the  rockes  being  steepe,  and
as  high  as  our  mayne  Top-mast.

The  tenth,  we  bare  about  the  South-west  part  of  the
Hand,  and  anchored  in  two  and  twenty  fathome  water
with  one,  and  another  I  laid  out  in  fourteene,  against  a
Towne  called  Mattonia,  the  people  promising  Beeves  and
all  that  the  Hand  did  afford ;  but  we  were  frustrate  of  our
hopes,  till  at  last  with  much  adoe  we  bought  nine  Beeves,
some  Goats,  Hennes,  Lemons,  Plantans  and  Coco-nuts >
and  I  perswade  my  selfe  they  are  very  treacherous.

The  foure  and  twentieth  of  September,  wee  plyed  up
to  Swally  Road,  there  anchored,  and  brought  the  Mer-
chants aboord  the  Generall,  the  principall  Factours  name
was  Thomas  Kerridge.

The  Voyage  to  Jasques.

THe  fifth  of  November,  I  went  over  the  Barre  of
Swally,  bound  for  Jasques  in  Persia.  The  tenth,  the
Hand  of  Diu  did  beare  North  from  us  three  leagues  dis-
tant. The  eleventh,  latitude  twentie  degr.  twelve  min.  I
sent  my  long  Boat  and  Pinnasse,  thinking  to  have  spoken
with  a  Fisher-man,  and  they  found  him  a  man  of  warre,
and  seven  or  eight  in  the  Pinnasse  were  hurt  with  their
arrowes,  the  long  Boat  not  able  to  succour  them.

5°4

ALEXANDER CHILDE

A.D.
l6l6.

The  two  and  twentieth,  wee  were  in  latitude  foure  and
twenty  degrees,  ten  minutes,  variation  eighteene  degrees
from  North  to  West.  This  day  wee  saw  the  Land  of
Goudel  North  and  East,  nine  or  ten  leagues  distant.  Goudel.
When  you  are  within  five  leagues  of  the  shoare,  you  shall
see  the  Cliffes  whitish,  like  the  Forland  in  most  places.

The  five  and  twentieth,  in  foure  and  twentie  degrees,
seven  and  fortie  minutes,  we  were  off  a  ragged  mouldy
Land,  called  by  the  Portugals  Sete  Setheayes,  by  us  the
seven  Cities,  shewing  like  seven  Castles,  standing  a  league
from  each  other,  the  highest  like  a  walled  City,  and  lyeth
West  North-west  from  Cape  Goudel  sixe  and  twentie
leagues,  you  may  see  it  fourteene  or  fifteene  leagues  off,
like  Hands,  and  may  runne  within  a  league  of  the  shoare,
in  ten  or  twentie  fathome,  within  a  mile  soft  Ozie  ground
without  danger :  Variation,  eighteene  degrees,  I  found
no  Current  out  or  in.

On  the  seven  and  twentieth,  latitude  five  and  twenty
degrees,  two  minutes :  variation  eighteene  degrees,  thirty
minutes  land,  as  before.

The  first  of  December,  we  stood  off  with  the  Persian  December  1.
shoare,  having  been  put  over  on  the  Coast  of  Arabia,  with
a  North-west  and  North  North-west  wind,  we  had  much
raine  divers  dayes :  and  on  the  second  at  night,  we  an-
chored five  or  sixe  leagues  to  the  West  of  Jasques,  in  two
and  twenty  fathome  Ozie  ground.

The  next  I  rode  still,  and  sent  the  Pinnasse  to  see  if
they  could  speake  with  any  people,  but  they  could  see  no
mention  of  any. At  three  of  the  clocke  I  set  saile,  and
stood  toward  the  Cape  about  a  league,  and  anchored  in Cape  of
eleven  fathome  Ozie  ground.  Jasques.

The  fourth,  I  sent  my  chiefe  Mate  with  the  Frigat  and
Pinnasse,  to  see  if  hee  could  discover  the  Road  of  Jas-
ques ;  but  before  he  came  ashoare,  the  Governour  of  the
place,  seeing  us  lye  off  and  in  with  the  shoare,  sent  a
Fisher-boat  to  them,  and  they  returned  aboord  with  her.
After  some  conference,  wee  sent  Master  Bell  ashoare  to
the Governour, with his man and a Guzerat, to his

5°5

A.D.
I6l6.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

Castle,  a  little  mile  from  the  waters  side,  with  a  Present,
to  sound  what  welcome :  I  kept  two  of  their  men  for  a
pawne.

The  fift,  I  weighed  and  went  two  leagues  neerer  the
shoare,  and  anchored  within  a  league  of  it,  in  five  fathome
at  low  water,  tough  Ozie  ground,  and  a  faire  Bay.  There
runs  no  streame,  but  it  flowes  a  fathome  in  the  spring,  and
three  or  foure  foot  otherwise :  a  South-east  and  by  East
Moone  makes  high  water.  The  Eastermost  low  point
hath  a  Pagod  or  Meskite  on  it,  and  the  Fisher-towne  did
beare  North-east,  in  latitude  five  and  twentie  degrees,
five  and  thirtie  minutes,  and  longitude  from  the  Cape  of
Diu  ten  degrees,  fortie  minutes  West,  and  the  Variation
nineteene  degrees,  twenty  minutes,  from  North  to  West,
M.  Bell  returned  with  two  of  the  Governours  Souldiers,
commending  his  entertaynment,  and  promised  welcome
to  us.

The  eight,  M.  Conock  our  Cape  Merchant  went  ashoare,
with  M.  Barker,  and  two  other  Factors,  and  returned  at
night  with  like  newes.

The  seventh,  the  Purser  bought  us  foure  Beeves  and
Goates,  not  fat  at  that  time  of  the  yeere,  but  such  as  gave
us  content.

The  tenth,  our  Merchants  went  ashoare  with  their  bag-
Mogustan. gage,  for  their  journey  to  Mogustan,  and  on  the  twelfth
tooke  their  way  thither.

The  thirteenth,  I  sent  the  Boat  and  Pinnasse  to  fetch
water :  the  country-people  that  brought  it  downe,  had
after  foure  shillings  English-money  the  tunne :  it  was
Rain  scarce,  raine-water  (for  they  have  no  other)  it  raines  but  little  in
December,  but  in  January  it  will  raine  sixe  or  seven  dayes
together,  that  it  fils  all  their  Cisternes  and  places  of  pro-
vision for  the  whole  yeere  following.  I  take  it  not  whole-
some being  full  of  small  wormes,  that  we  were  faine  to
straine  our  beverage.

The  sixteenth,  I  sent  my  Mate  about  Ballast,  wherein
they  found  them  unreasonable.  I  sent  the  Pinnasse
to  the  Eastermost  low  point,  for  stones  for  Ballast. It  is

506

ALEXANDER CHILDE

the  worthiest  place  for  fish  in  all  the  Indies.  They  laded
eighteene  or  twentie  tunne  of  Ballast.

On  the  nineteenth,  we  received  a  Letter  from  M.  Con-
nock,  halfe  on-ward  of  his  way  to  Mogustan,  of  their
peaceable  travell.

The  first  of  January  I  received  a  Letter  from  Jasques,
which  came  from  our  Merchants,  &  made  us  glad.  On
the  fifth,  M.  Connock  would  have  had  me  gone  with  the
ship  to  a  place  called  Costake  within  seven  leagues  over
against  Ormus,  whereto  I  was  loath  to  yeeld,  being  out
of  season  of  the  yeere.  The  next  day  they  talked  of
Piloting  the  ship  to  Sireck  ;  but  I  was  the  same  man.  The
Merchants  reported  that  they  hoped  it  would  be  a  good
place  of  Trade,  and  in  time,  as  good  as  any  in  India.
The  Pilot  confessed  it  was  dangerous  then  to  carry  the
ship  to  Sireck,  it  was  so  foule,  stormie,  and  a  lee  shoare,
the  sea  high,  anchorage  unsure,  and  Master  Connock  see-
ing the  storme  we  there  abode,  so  extreme,  altered  his
mind,  and  speeded  to  land  the  goods  at  Jasques.

The  twentieth,  I  set  saile  from  the  Road  of  Jasques :
and  the  eight  of  Februarie,  at  ten  of  the  clocke,  wee
anchored  in  Swally  Road.

A.D.

1616.

Fish  fcf
Ballast.

January  1.

Costake.

Sireck.

Persian  Trade
hopefull.

[I.  v.  608.]

[Chap.  III.

507

A.D.
l6l6.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  begimring
of  this  Letter
was  tome,  and
therefore  as
that,  so  this,
a  little  imper-
fect: but  what
is  here  defec-
tive, hereafter
you  shall  find
supplied  in
Master
Nathaniel
Corthops
relation,  with
the  continua-
tion of  these
Bandan
affairs,  and
Dutch  insolen-
cies,  in  him,
Master  Haies
and  others.
This  I  thought
good  to  pre-
mise, as  in
time,  so  in
cause  precede

Chap. III.

A  Letter  of  Master  Thomas  Spurway,  Merchant,
touching  the  wrongs  done  at  Banda  to  the
English  by  the  Hollanders  (the  former  unkind
disgusts  and  brabling  quarrels  breaking  now
out  into  a  furious,  unexpected,  injurious  warre)
Written  in  a  Letter  to  the  Companie.

Laus  Deo  in Bantam,  the  twentieth of  Novem-
ber, 1 61 7.

Honourable  and  Right  Worshipfull,  my  humble  dutie
alwayes  remembred,  And  may  it  please  you  to
understand,  &c.

He  nineteenth  of  November 161 6. wee
arrived  at  Moccasor,  the  Swan  and  the
Defence,  where  we  stayed  to  take  in  one
hundred  quoynes  of  Rice. In  the  time
of  our  being  there,  and  the  fourth  of
December,  we  discried  off  at  sea,  a  great
ship, and comming at an anchor five
leagues  off. The  fift  dicto,  they  sent  their  skiffe  ashoare,
making  directly  to  the  English  house,  having  eight  men
in  her,  which,  as  soone  as  wee  perceived,  wee  ran  to  the
sea  side,  and  before  we  could  come  to  them,  two  of  their
men were  landed ; so wee acquainted them with the
danger  they  were  runne  into ; for  that  the  King  of  Moc-
casor, and  all  the  Kings  there-abouts,  were  their  mortall
enemies,  in  regard  of  the  many  abuses  their  people  the
Hollanders  had  done  unto  them,  and  that  lately  the  Hol-
landers had  carried  away  a  principall  Sabander,  and  others
of  Moccasor  perforce,  and  therefore  would  be  revenged ;
also  acquainted  them,  that  if  the  King  were  not  the  more
mercifull,  they  were  all  dead  men : so  they  would  pre-
sently have  gone  into  their  skiffe. But  the  Moccasors
flocking  about  us,  layed  hands  on  them ; I  presently,  the
Factor, and other English rode post unto the King,

508

THOMAS SPURWAY  a.d.

1616.

acquainting  him  what  had  happened,  wee  having  a  Guard  ing  the  fights

of  English  neere  the  Hollanders  for  our  better  discharge,  ™ the  ensuing

that  the  King  might  not  conceive  amisse  of  us,  and  that  ti°0ynaefs  *

we  were  not  accessarie  to  any  treacherie  that  they  might  The  King  of

pretend. The  King  gave  us  thankes,  and  willed  us  to  Moccasor,  and

take  these  two  men  which  were  come  on  land,  into  the  all  the  Kings

English  house,  and  to  learne  of  them  their  intent  in  com-  ^^^_

ming  thither,  which  we  did. They  said  they  were  of  the  m-tes  t0  the

Fleet  lately  from  Holland,  having  lost  the  rest  of  their  Flemmings.

consorts,  and  fell  with  the  backside  of  Java : The  one  Novemb.  7.

called  John  Stanch  under- Merchant,  as  hee  reported  ;  The  .m  .  °an"

other  an  English  man  a  Sayler :  who  perceiving  the  great  Moccasor.
danger  they  were  in,  desired  us  most  earnestly,  that  wee
would  stand  their  friends,  and  get  them  free  againe,  be-
wayling  their  hard  happe ;  we  promised  to  doe  our  best  for

their  good,  and  so  to  be  gone. Presently  comes  the  King  The  King  of

of  Moccasor,  the  King  of  Tallow,  and  divers  others,  to  Y°"a!or

the  number  of  two  thousand  men  presently  levied,  and  t^gusan^  me„t
came  by  the  sea  side  upon  the  sands,  and  sate  in  counsell
upon  these  men : the  King  of  Tallow  would  have  had
them  all  killed,  but  wee  used  our  best  meanes  for  their

freedome. At  last  command  was  given,  they  should  into  The  English

their  boat  and  be  gone,  the  King  saying,  they  were  too  procure  the  life

small  a  revenge,  he  expecting  a  greater,  so  they  departed  °{  f
into  their  ship. They  had  all  beene  presently  killed,  if
wee  had  not  beene.

The  next  day,  wee  perceived  another  boat  comming  The  Hollan-

towards  land  from  the  same  ship ; the  King  having  notice  ders  attempted

thereof by his people, presently commanded twentie  t0  ft  aSain^

Prawes  and  Corre-corries  to  be  manned,  and  to  goe  forth,  mjum  t^e *

which  was  on  an  instant  effected,  and  made  towards  the  Moccasorians

Hollanders  boat,  the  Hollanders  still  rowing  in  for  the  intercepted,

shoare,  and  directly  to  the  English  house :  the  Prawes  and  sl,e?  them  alli

the  Correcorries  still  edging  neere  the  boat,  betweene  the  etn&sl
shoare  and  them. The  Hollanders  perceiving  their  in-
tent, turned  their  boat,  and  made  toward  their  ship  againe,
being  foure  leagues  off,  but  it  was  too  late,  for  the  Moc-
casors  in  short  time  had  fetcht  them  up,  and  boorded  their

5°9

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

boat  on  each  side,  entred,  and  instantly  killed  every  man

of  the  Hollanders,  being  in  number  sixteene,  and  brought

away  their  boat :  wee  were  that  time  commanded  to  keepe

The  English house. There  were  about  that  time  neere  five  thousand

CHollZeVhe  PeoPle  on  the  sea  side'  This  Holland-ship  called  the
going  towards  Indrought,  imagining  us  bound  for  the  Moluccas,  or
Banda.  Banda,  stayed  off  at  sea.

Wee  set  sayle  out  of  Moccasor  Road  the  eighth  of
December,  161 6.  The  said  Holland-ship  seeing  us  under
sayle,  they  also  weighed  and  kept  us  companie :  wee
would  gladly  have  gone  from  them,  but  could  not,  in
regard  of  the  Defence  her  bad  sayling.  They  sent  their
boat  aboord  of  us,  desiring  two  quoynes  of  Rice,  foure
[I.  v.  609.]  tunnes  of  water  and  hennes,  all  which  wee  spared  them,
paying  onely  fortie  Rials  of  eight  for  two  quoynes  of
Rice :  the  rest  wee  gave  unto  them.  Wee  demanded  of
them  why  they  would  attempt  to  come  to  land  at  Moc-
casor, they  said  that  their  first  boat  was  not  then  returned
unto  their  ship,  so  they  thought  their  factorie  had  still
beene  there :  but  I  verily  beleeve,  it  was  their  obstinate
boldnesse,  and  presuming  that  their  first  boat  was  denied
onely  upon  the  instigation  of  us  the  English,  wherefore
they  would  make  triall  againe,  purposing  to  have  flattered
the  King,  and  to  have  come  there  againe,  and  to  have  setled
a  Factorie,  and  so  to  have  hindered  the  English :  for  it  is
a  manifest  token  of  such  a  project,  both  of  their  boats
comming  by  our  ships,  and  within  Musket  shot,  yet  would
not  come  aboord  to  inquire  what  newes  on  shoare,  as  they
went  on  shoareward,  which  if  they  had,  wee  could  have
fore-warned  them  of  that  danger.  So  now  their  obstin-
acie  and  rash  proceedings  purchased  them  a  just  reward,
&c.  They  kept  us  companie  untill  wee  came  neere
Ambina,  and  so  stood  in  for  that  place,  wee  standing  our
The  Hollan-  course.  Now,  since  wee  understand  that  they  have  re-
ders  slander  ported,  that  wee  were  the  occasion  that  their  men  were
killed  at  Moccasor,  which  is  most  false  :  for,  I  protest,  wee
used  our  best  meanes  to  free  them,  the  first  eight  men  had
else  also  died.

510

THOMAS SPURWAY

The  thirteenth  of  December,  1616.  the  Swan  and  De-
fence arrived  in  the  Road  of  Polaroone.  The  fourteenth
dicto,  the  people  of  the  said  Hand  came  aboord  the  ships
with  whom  we  had  conference  about  the  surrendring  of
their  Hand  of  Polaroone.  Also  our  Nation  had  many
times  beene  at  their  Hand  to  our  great  charges,  and  partly
upon  their  requests,  to  settle  a  Factorie,  and  to  have
friendly  trade  with  them,  in  bringing  them  commodities,
as  Rice,  Cloth,  and  other  provisions  for  their  Spices,  and
that  we  desired  not  to  usurpe,  and  bring  them  in  subjec-
tion, or  bondage,  as  the  Hollanders,  and  other  Nations
have  formerly ;  and  that  wee  now  came  to  settle  a  factorie,
if  they  would  surrender  their  Hands  of  Polaroone,  unto
our  Kings  Majestie  of  England  by  writing :  also  by  de-
livering earth,  with  a  tree  and  fruits  of  the  said  Hand,  as
true  token  of  their  fidelitie,  and  so  every  yeare  a  nut-tree
in  remembrance,  and  in  so  doing,  wee  would  furnish  them
with  Rice,  and  Cloth,  and  other  commodities,  for  present
and  also  yeerly.  And  being  setled  on  the  said  Hand  of
Polaroone,  sufficient  supplies  should  come  every  yeere  in
better  manner  then  now  at  present,  and  that  we  would  to
the  uttermost  of  our  powers,  with  our  men  and  shippes,
defend  them  against  any  their  enemies,  if  they  came  to
doe  us  or  them  wrong.  Wee  also  demanded  of  them,
whether  they  had  made  any  contract  with  the  Hollanders,
and  given  them  any  surrender ;  they  all  replied,  they  had
not,  nor  never  would :  but  held  them  as  mortall  enemies,
confessing  and  averring  unto  us  (both  Polaroone  men  and
divers  of  the  principals,  which  once  lived  upon  Polaway
and  fled  to  Polaroone  upon  the  Hollanders  comming
there,  and  getting  it  by  force  of  Armes.)  They  doe  all
still  averre,  and  doe  maintaine  the  Hand  of  Polaway  to
belong  unto  our  Kings  Majestie  of  England,  by  a  lawfull
surrender  unto  Richard  Hunt,  before  the  Hollanders  came
into  the  Road,  and  caused  the  English  Colours  to  be  set
up  in  the  Castle,  which  the  Hollanders  shot  downe  severall
times,  and  used  many  disgracefull  words  of  his  Majestie.
This  the  Bandaneses  doe  still  confirme,  and  that  they  did

5*1

A.D.
l6l6.

Surrender  of
Polaroone.
For  their  solli-
citation  of  the
English  to  this
trade,  see
Milwards
Journall,  also
Capp.  Reel-
ings, Middle-
tons,  l$c.

The  men  of
Polaroone  and
Polaway
protest
that  they  nor
had,  nor  would
make  contract
with  the  Hol-
lander.
Polaway  was
delivered  over
to  the  English
before  the  Hol-
landers came
into  their  road.
The  Bandane-
ses desire  to
have  the  Eng-
lish Colours
set  up.

A.D.
l6l6.

Hollanders
invade  Pola-
roone  with
bravados  and
bloudie
Ancients.

The  English
fortifie.

Holland  ships
approchtoour
ships  at
Polaroone.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

defend  it,  as  long  as  possibly  they  could,  to  his  Majesties
use,  untill  perforce  they  must  leave  the  said  Hand,  and  so
fled  to  Polaroone,  Lantor,  and  Serran.

This  Councell  continued  all  the  day,  and  so  concluded :
the  writings  being  drawne  and  confirmed  by  the  princi-
pals of  Polaroone  and  Polaway,  and  so  delivered  by  their
owne  hands  unto  us,  viz.  Nathaniel  Cprthop,  Thomas
Spurway,  and  Sophonie  Cozocke,  to  his  Majesties  use.
Also  the  same  instant  delivered  us  a  Nutmeg-tree  with
the  fruits  thereon  in  the  Earth,  with  other  fruits,  and  a
living  Goat :  and  further,  desired  to  have  the  English
Colours  set  up  upon  the  Hand,  and  to  have  Gunnes  shot
off.  All  which  was  presently  effected,  the  Colours  set  up,
and  sixe  and  thirtie  peeces  of  Ordnance  shot  off :  and  so
at  night  they  parted  in  friendly  manner,  repayring  to  the
shoare.

The  five  and  twentieth  of  December  being  Christmas
day,  we  discovered  two  great  Holland  ships  edging  neere
Polaroone.  They  discovering  our  ships  in  the  Road  bore
roome  for  Nero :  and  the  six  and  twentieth  another  did
the  like.  The  eight  and  twentieth,  another  Holland  Pin-
nasse  standing  right  over  for  Polaroone,  came  braving
within  shot  of  our  Fort,  having  the  Flemmish  Colours  on
the  poope,  and  presently  tacked  about,  and  taking  them
downe,  sets  up  in  lieu  thereof  a  bloudie  Ancient,  and
stands  over  for  Nero.  By  this  we  expected  their  com-
ming  daily,  according  to  their  old  custome  of  injuring  us.
On  the  thirtieth,  we  landed  foure  Peeces  of  Ordnance,
besides  two  other  on  Christmas  day,  and  went  to  worke  to
fortifie  for  our  defence.  And  with  the  helpe  of  the  Ban-
daneses  we  made  two  Forts,  one  called  the  Swan-Fort,  the
other  the  Defence-Fort,  and  mounted  on  each  three
Peeces.  The  Swans  Fort  is  within  Caliver  shot  of  the
ships,  commands  the  Road  at  pleasure  to  the  Easterne
side,  where  the  principall  Road  is  for  the  Westerly
Monson.

The  third  of  Januarie  there  came  into  the  Road  three
Holland  ships  from  Nero,  the  Home,  of  eight  hundred

512

THOMAS SPURWAY  ad.

1616.

tunnes ;  the  Starre,  five  hundred ;  the  Yaugar>  one  hun-
dred and  sixtie  :  which  came  to  anchor  close  by  our  ships  ;
the  Home  by  the  Swan,  the  Starre  by  the  Defence,  the
Yaugar  a  head  of  all  to  cut  off  supplie  from  the  shoare  :  all
these  ships  full  of  men,  &c.

Now  our  commission  directed  us  that  having  received  [I-  v-  610.]
the  surrender,  and  setled  at  Polaroone,  we  should  give
notice  unto  the  Hollanders  thereof  by  writing,  that  they
should  not  come  there  to  molest  us,  as  formerly  they  were
accustomed,  pretending  ignorance.  A  Letter  to  the  same
effect  we  had  readie  written,  but  could  not  tell  how  to
convey  it  to  them,  not  daring  to  send  English  or  Ban-
daneses  for  feare  of  detention.  These  ships  therefore
comming  into  the  Road  wee  sent  George  Muschamp
aboord  their  Admirall  the  Starre,  and  hee  delivered  the
Letter  to  the  Commander,  called  Dedall,  advising  The  English

them  to  depart  the  Road  before  sixe  Glasses  were  run,  for  to  tfi  fj0nan_
that  the  Ilanders  would  not  have  them  stay  in  the  Road,  ders  that  the
nor  come  neere  them ; and  would  have  shot  unto  them  Hand  was
from  the shore, had  not  we  caused  them  to  forbeare.  English.
Presently  their  Commander  Dedall  and  their  Predicant,
came  aboord  the  Swan  to  know  the  reason  :  wee  told  them
that  their  comming  was  to  doe  us  injurie,  as  formerly  they
had  done  at  Polaway,  Cambella,  and  other  places ; and
how  they  had  turned  the  Glasse  for  Master  Ball,  having
him  in  their  possession,  and  threatning  to  hang  him  pre-
sently if  hee  caused  not  the  English  to  come  from  Land
forthwith. Also  we  then  shewed  them  the  surrender  of  The  Hollan-
Polaroone, and our  right and possession there for his  derscould
Majestie  of  England,  which  we  would  hold  and  maintayne  c/ayme  t0
to  our  utmost  power :  and  wished  them  to  be  well  advised  Polaroone.
what  they  did,  and  that  they  would  be  shortly  called  to  an
account  for  their  disgracefull  words  and  abuses  done  to
the  English  :  demanding  also  of  them  the  Hand  of  Polaway,
as  in  right  due  to  his  Majestie  by  lawfull  surrender :  fur-
ther, demanding  of  them  if  they  had  any  surrender  of  the
Hand of  Polaroone. But they could not say of  any
they  had ; and  when  wee  shewed  the  surrender  wee  had

IV  513  2K

A.D.
l6l6.

The  English
were  the  first
Christians
that  ever  came
into  the  Road
ofPolaroone.
The  Hollan-
ders came  to
beat  us  out  of
the  Road.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

unto  them,  the  Predicant  having  the  same  in  his  hand
aboord  the  Swan,  perusing  it,  said  with  these  words,  This
is  a  true  Surrender.

All  this  time  the  Glasse  running  in  the  great  Cabin
before  their  faces,  put  them  in  mind  of  being  gone.  We
also  told  them,  that  their  comming  was  onely  to  betray
us,  and  to  put  us  from  the  Hand  by  their  treacherie,  which
our  Nation  hath  divers  times  had  experience  of:  where-
fore we  neither  could  nor  would  trust  them  any  more ;
and  so  put  them  in  mind  of  being  gone,  for  the  Glasse  sixe
times  run,  they  must  expect  shot  from  the  shore :  and  if
in  case  they  did  reply  and  did  shoote  unto  the  Land,  or
shewed  any  discourtesie  or  wrong  unto  the  people  of  Pola-
roone,  we  would  take  it  as  done  to  us,  and  would  defend
them  being  now  becomne  our  Kings  subjects.  They
would  have  stayed  untill  the  next  day,  but  wee  would  not
grant  it,  doubting  that  more  of  their  Ships  might  have
comne  over.  They  then  desired  till  mid-night,  which
wee  granted  if  wee  might  see  them  about  to  way  their
Anchors :  and  that  wee  would  send  unto  the  shore  and
perswade  the  Bandaneses  to  forbeare.  Also  I  demanded
of  Dedall  the  cause  of  their  comming  to  molest  us,  who
answered,  It  had  beene  formerly  a  custome  in  passing  by
the  Hand.  I  told  him  that  was  untruth,  for  that  the  people
of  the  Hand  had  reported  unto  us,  that  there  was  never
any  Christian  ship  in  the  Road  till  wee  came,  and  that
wee  were  the  first.  So  hee  was  silent  and  would  not
mantayne  his  report.  They  came  into  the  Road  about
three  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  and  departed  thence
about  eleven  at  night.  Wee  have  beene  since  informed
that  they  came  purposely  to  betray  us,  and  to  have  beaten
us  out  of  the  Road,  or  to  have  taken  our  ships ;  and  have
given  the  attempt,  but  that  they  perceived  we  were  forti-
fied on  the  Land.  If  they  had  then  begun,  wee  doubted
not  but  to  have  made  our  parties  good  with  them.  For
wee  had  both  Forts  readie,  and  our  Gunners  readie  to  give
fire  upon  our  watchword  or  signe  from  the  ships.

The  tenth  of  Januarie,  a  Holland  Ship  and  Pinnasse

514

THOMAS SPURWAY  a.d.

1616.

came  forth  from  Nero :  the  Pinnasse  came  edging  neere
the  small  Hand  or  high  sand  adjoyning  to  Polaroone,
called  Nylacka, belonging  unto Polaroone, and conse-
quently to  the  English. There  are  no  Inhabitants  upon
the  said  Hand  or  sand,  but  it  is  full  of  Trees  and  Bushes,
and  Polaroone  men  resort  thither  daily  to  fish  about  the
said  small  Hand. Now  the  said  Pinnasse  came  neerer  the ,  e °"n~
said  Hand  and  did  sound  the  depth  as  shee  went,  which  p-innasse  t0
we  perceiving  made  foure  shot  at  her  from  the  Defences  sound  the
Fort,  not  intending  to  strike  her,  but  shot  wide,  giving  depth  by  Pola-
them  notice  to  forbeare  and  be  gone. The  Pinnasse  at  ™one->andt°
every  shot  replyed  with  a  Base,  or  some  such  like  peece,
unto  the  small  Iland  amongst  the  Trees,  where  there  were
some  English  and  some  Bandaneses  of  Polaroone,  which
were  in  danger  of  their  shot. And  seeing  they  braved
us  in  such  manner,  the  Gunner  was  bid  to  doe  his  best,
who  then  made  a  shot,  which  fell  close  over  them  at  the
Sterne  of  their  Pinnasse  or  Frigat,  which  made  them  crie
out  and  presently  get  off. They  were  Hollanders,  and
seemed  men  which  came  to  sound  the  depth  and  where  to
land,  purposing  to  come  with  their  forces,  and  there  to
fortifie  and  so  to  put  us  from  the  great  Iland.

Januarie  the  thirteenth,  Master  Davey  complayning  he  {ohn  Davies
wanted  water,  and  purposing  to  goe  over  for  Wayre  upon  tn f, n

T  'i-ii  &&  • 1  ■  t  1 would  goe  out

.Lantore  side  and  there  to  water,  we  acquainted  the  people  0y^e  Roadto
of  Polaroone  heerewith,  who  would  by  no  meanes  con-  fetch  water.
sent  hee  should  goe  out  of  the  Road :  neither  would  wee,
doubting  some  injurie  from  the  Hollanders.  And  the
people  of  Polaroone  told  us,  that  they  would  rather  fetch
them  water  over  upon  Lantore  with  their  Prawes.  I  went
presently  aboord  and  acquainted  Master  Davey  herewith ;
but  He  and  the  Companie  would  not  yeeld  hereunto,  but
spake  all  in  generall  against  it,  and  said,  that  the  Ban-
daneses would  bring  them  raine  water,  or  such  as  might
bee  unholsome  for  his  men  to  drinke :  saying,  it  was  but
sixe  or  eight  dayes  time.

The  same  time  there  came  over  unto  us  from  Wayre,  a  [I.  v.  611.]
free  Towne  upon  Lantore,  also  from  the  He  of  Rosinging

5*5

A.D.
l6l6.

The  He  of
Rosinging  and
Towne  of
Wayre  desire
to  surrender
themselves,
and  to  have
some  goe  to
take  the  same
surrender.
The  Swan
and  four  Mer-
chants goe  to
Rosing,  and
take  the  sur-
render.

The  people  of
Rosinging  and
Wayre  goe
with  goods  to
the  Swan.

The  Starre
takes  the  Swan,
slaying  five
men,  using
cruellviolence,
and  proud
insultation.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

(an  Hand  of  it  selfe)  the  Principalis  of  both  those  places,
to  have  parley  with  us,  to  surrender  both  the  said  Wayre
and  Rosinging  unto  his  Majestie,  as  the  people  of  Pola-
roone  had  lately  done.  Now,  the  surrender  of  both  those
places  being  drawne,  and  all  concluded  upon  at  Polaroone,
they  desired  that  some  English  might  goe  over  to  receive
the  same  from  all  their  hands,  and  to  see  all  rights  there-
unto performed.  Now,  Master  Daveys  resolution  being
to  goe  over  to  water,  we  concluded  that  Master  Sophonie
Cozock,  George  Muschamp,  Robert  Fuller,  and  Thomas
Hodges,  should  goe  over  for  Wayre  and  Rosinging  in  the
Swan,  to  performe  the  said  businesse,  or  see  it  done,  and
the  Swan  there  to  water ;  after  which  dispatched,  it  was
ordered  that  Master  Sophonie  should  returne  againe  in  the
Swan,  and  the  other  three  should  remayne  upon  the  Hand
of  Rosinging  for  possession,  till  further  order.  All  busi-
nesse being  there  ended  according  to  our  expectation,
divers  men  of  Wayre  and  Rosinging  desired,  to  lade  Nuts
and  Mace  in  the  Swan,  and  passage  for  Polaroone,  there
to  sell  their  Spices  to  us  for  Rice  and  Cloth.  All  being
granted,  they  shipped  twelve  of  themselves  with  Nuts  and
Mace,  a  great  quantitie.

The  Swan  set  saile  and  went  for  Geulegola,  being  but  a
little  way  from  Wayre,  as  I  understand,  and  there  watered  ;
after  which  they  set  saile  and  eight  leagues  off  land,  a
Holland  ship  or  two  gave  them  chase ;  which  they  in  the
Swan  perceiving,  asked  the  Master  what  he  meant  to  doe,
thinking  that  hee  purposed  to  fight  with  them.  Master
Davey  answered ;  they  see  my  Colours  and  I  see  theirs,
I  know  him  to  be  a  Hollander,  they  me  to  be  an  English-
man ;  I  know  no  hurt  I  have  done  them,  and  I  stand  for
my  Port  of  Polaroone.  And  in  short  time,  the  Holland
ship  the  Starre,  being  come  within  shot,  never  haled  the
Swan,  nor  said  word  of  their  intent,  but  let  flie  great  shot
and  small  in  most  violent  manner ;  the  Swan  having
received  two  or  three  great  shot  thorow  and  thorow,  before
shee  ever  replyed,  and  some  of  the  men  killed.  The  fight
continued,  as  Master  Davey  writes,  one  houre  and  halfe,

516

THOMAS SPURWAY

wherein  five  men  of  the  Swan  were  killed,  viz.  Sophonie
Cozock,  Merchant,  beaten  in  pieces  with  a  great  shot ;
Robert  Morten,  quarter-master  and  Drummer  ;  Christoper
Droope,  Edward  Murtkin,  and  a  Bandanese  of  Wayre,  a
passenger.  Three  others  were  mayned,  having  lost  Legs
and  Armes,  and  almost  all  hope  of  life,  if  not  dead
alreadie  :  More,  eight  men  wounded,  most  of  their  wounds
deadly.  And  in  this  their  crueltie,  a  villaine  of  the  Starre
standing  upon  the  Poope  with  a  drawne  Sword,  braved
with  these  words,  English  Villaines  and  Rogues,  we  will
kill  you  all  (thus  he  spake  in  Dutch.)  It  seemeth  that  the
Swans  men  were  much  discouraged,  seeing  many  of  their
men  lye  dead,  wounded,  lamenting ;  insomuch  that  none
would  stand  by  the  sailes  to  trimme  the  ship  for  their  best
advantage  :  so  that  the  Holland  ship  lay  still  in  her  quarter
powring  in  small  shot  and  great,  and  so  tooke  her,  bording
her  both  Souldiers  and  others ;  brake  up  Cabbins  and
pillaged  them,  and  the  men  also  in  most  base  manner,  both
of  clothes  and  all  things  else,  throwing  over  bord  what
they  liked  not.  The  Spaniard  never  used  more  crueltie
in  their  professed  Warre.  The  Starre  had  in  her  one
hundred  and  three  score  men,  most  Souldiers,  taken  from
Nero  and  Polaway  Castle :  the  Swan  having  not  above
thirtie  able  men  to  fight,  the  rest  sicke  and  lame :  and  the
men  somewhat  wearied  out  in  toilsome  labour  at  Pola-
roone,  in  landing  the  Ordnance  and  making  two  Forts.
Ten  also  of  their  companie  were  left  in  Polaroone  to
defend  the  Forts,  two  of  which  were  Gunners,  viz.
Harman  Hammon,  and  John  Day.

The  Swan  being  taken  they  carried  her  presently  under
Nero  Castle  and  all  the  men,  shee  being  much  battered
and  torne ;  they  much  glorying  in  their  victorie,  and
shewing  the  Bandaneses  their  exploit,  in  the  great  dis-
grace of  the  English,  what  they  could,  saying,  that  the
King  of  England  might  not  compare  with  their  great  King
of  Holland,  and  that  one  Holland  ship  would  take  ten  of
the  English  ships,  and  that  Saint  George  is  now  turned
child,  and  that  they  care  not  for  the  King  of  England.

5i7

A.D.
l6l6.

Egregiam  vere
laudent!

The  surrender
of  Polaroone
was  taken  in
the  Swan,  so
we  procured
another  verba-
tim from  the
Polaroone  men,
which  I  have
brought  with
the  Surrender
of  Resinging,
and  delivered
both  at
Bantam, &c.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

The  Swan  being  brought  to  Nero,  they  presently  sent
our  men  on  shore  and  keepe  them  all  prisoners,  many  of
them  in  yrons,  neither  Man  nor  Boy  having  libertie.  The
Swan  set  saile  from  Polaroone  the  sixteenth  of  Januarie,
1 61 6.  wee  expecting  her  returne  in  eight  or  ten  dayes  at
furthest ;  but  never  heard  of  her  till  the  five  and  twen-
tieth of  Februarie  by  Robert  Fuller,  who  being  at  Rosing-
ing  and  Wayre,  heard  of  an  English  ship  under  Nero
Castle,  and  came  over  to  Polaroone  to  acquaint  us  there-
with.

Presently  we  dispeeded  away  Robert  Hayes,  Purser  of
the  Defence,  with  some  principall  men  of  Polaroone,  to
land  upon  Lantore  side  being  our  friends,  so  to  goe  as
neere  as  might  bee  to  the  Holland  ships,  and  to  make
A  Messenger signe  to  them  by  a  white  Flagge  of  Truce. Our  Mes-
r . ™g£  senger  stayd  almost  two  houres. At  last  they  came  with
ourship.Tkeir  their Boat to fetch him, but made him  wade to the
borish  usage  of  middle,  and  so  carried  him  aboord  one  of  the  Holland
him-  ships. The  Principall  and  Assistants  of  Nero  meeting

him  aboord,  our  Messenger  demanded,  why  they  had
taken  the  Swan,  and  what  was  becomne  of  the  men,  the
reason  of  detayning  the  Ship,  men  and  goods.  They
answered,  that  Time  should  bring  to  light.  Our  Mes-
senger still  urging  to  know,  and  therefore  he  was  sent,
they  used  many  disgracefull  words  of  the  English,  and
Their  vaunts  that  they  would  come  over  to  Polaroone  with  their  forces,
ana  tnreats.  an(^  drive  us  from  the  Hand  and  other  places.  Hayes
replyed,  they  had  alreadie  done  more  then  they  could
answere :  and  returned,  without  sight  of  any  man  of  the
[I.  v.  612.]  Swans  companie.  The  poore  ship  there  lay  rent  and  torne
in  view  of  the  Countrey  people.  In  short  time  after,  they
sent  over  unto  us  a  Messenger  with  a  Letter,  which  we
answered,  as  we  did  others  after  sent,  their  Messenger
still  comming  with  a  Flagge  of  Truce,  all  which  said
Letters  and  Surrenders  I  brought  with  me  to  Bantam  and
delivered  to  Captayne  Ball.

Now  we  were  still  threatned  by  their  Letters,  as  also
by  word  of  mouth  from  their  Messenger,  that  as  they  had

518

THOMAS SPURWAY  ad.

1616.

the  Swan,  so  would  they  also  come  to  fetch  the  Defence,
and  drive  us  from  the  Hand. Wee  still  answered,  that
wee  expected  their  comming  in  regard  they  had  so  often
threatned  us,  and  that  we  would  defend  it  as  long  as  life
lasted. Many  bravado's they  made, daily  shooting  at
Nero  and  Polaway,  fortie,  fiftie  and  sixtie  pieces  of  Ord-
nance, thinking  to  affright  us  therewith. Also  the  people  R^°Jjtsnthaj
of  Lantore  brought  us  word  that  they  were  fitting  their  ^.A^IJ"
ships, and shipping Planke and Earth, which wee  ing  skips
imagined  was  for  Land  service,  having  then  seven  Ships,  against  Pola-
foure  Gallies  and  Frigats,  and  many  men :  and  that  they  roon-
pretended  to  come  over  to  fight  with  us. And  that  they
had instigated their Blacks (which  are Slaves) that if
they  could  by  any  meanes  goe  over  to  Polaroone,  and  Hollanders
there  set  on  fire  the  Defence,  they  should  be  Free-men,  as  ^ctilV°
also  some  other  reward  they  should  have. Also  the  Hoi-  j)efe„ce.
landers  reported,  that  wee  should  carry  no  Spices  from  the  Hollanders
Hand,  or  any  the  Hands  of  Banda. Hereupon  wee  con-  threaten  that
sidered,  that  having  made  a  contract  with  the  people  of  wes]loul<lh<!ve
Polaroone,  Wayre  and  Rosinging,  and  had  trusted  our  those  Hands.
goods  unto  them : Also  a  good  quantitie  of  Nuts  and
Mace  being  readie  to  dispatch  away,  lying  readie  upon
Polaroone :  The  Hollanders  threatning  to  come  over  and
force  us  from  the  said  Hand  of  Polaroone,  and  to  take  the
Defence :  Hereupon  we  resolved,  to  maintayne  the  Hon-
our of  our  King,  and  good  of  the  honourable  Companie
our  employers ;  to  land  all  the  gunnes  out  of  the  Defence,
and  all  provisions  else,  and  to  fortifie  upon  the  small  Hand  Our  people
adjoyning  unto  Polaroone,  there  being  no  people  on  the  forttfie  Pola~
small  Hand,  but  full  of  Trees  and  Bushes. And  there  the
Hollanders  purposed  to  have  landed  and  to  have  fortified,
which  had  they  performed  they  would  have  commanded
the  Road  and  done  us  much  injurie ; for  that  the  people
also  of  the  Hand  Polaroone,  could  not  have  fished  as  they
were  accustomed,  neither  could  the  English  have  come
into  the  Road,  but  that  they  on  the  small  Hand  would
have  beaten  them  off. And  to  prevent  all  dangers,  we
landed all the Defences Ordnance (onely foure great

519

Nine  men  went

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

peeces,  and  some  Bread  and  two  Butts  of  Syder,  also  a
Terce  of  wine)  and  were  all  fortifying  upon  the  said  small
Hand,  with  the  helpe  of  the  Bandaneses.

The  Master  of  the  Defence,  Master  Hynsley,  being
also  on  the  small  Hand,  and  all  men  else  at  worke,  and
landing  things,  some  men  being  left  aboord  the  said  De-
fence to  keepe  the  Ship,  a  conspiracy  was  plotted,  and  the
same  night  the  twentieth  of  March,  161 6.  either  they  let
Defence  unto tne  Ship  drive,  or  cut  the  Cables,  and  so  drove  off  in  the
the  Hollan- night,  which  we  perceiving  from  the  small  Hand,  pre-
ders:  John sently  sent  a  Boate  after  them ; advising  them  to  returne
Christmas with  the  said  Ship :  but  those  Villaines  would  not  heare
John  Owers them,  neither  suffer  the  Boate  to  come  neere  them,  but
William  Car-  bent  their  peeces  against  them,  and  discharged  a  Musket
ter,  Richard shot  at  them. They  being  not  able  to  over-come  them,
Taylor,  Ed- forsooke  the  said  Ship  and  came  backe  unto  us  at  the  small
J^ohn  Harris*'  Hanoo  acquainting  us  what  had  passed. The  next  day  we
Will.  Rock- perceived  they  run  into  Nero  Road,  under  saile,  and  under
well,  Hugh the  command  of  Nero  Castle ; some  of  the  men  went
Woodlock. presently,  as  we  understand,  on  shoare,  and  meeting  with
the  Hollanders,  reported  unto  them  of  their  exploit,  and
contending  amongst  themselves  who  should  be  the  best
Pilot  in  conducting  the  Ship  thither ; one  reporting  it
was  I ; and  another,  it  was  I : and  as  the  Hollanders
Messenger  reported  unto  us,  afterwards  comming  over
unto  us,  that  they  brought  a  kan  of  Wine  ashoare  and
dranke  unto  the  Hollanders,  as  soone  as  they  came  on
shoare. Presently the Hollanders tooke possession of
the  said  Ship  the  Defence,  and  had  all  the  Villaines  into
their  Castle,  and  examined  them  of  all  our  proceedings  at
The  Hollan- Polaroone  ;  and  they  discovered  all  how  we  were  fortified,
ers  incout- ancj  wjjat  passec[  amongst  us. These  Villaines  tooke  the

aged  by  the  r  11  &i  -r» 1  r ,

Villaines  that  course  to  cut  all  our  throats  upon  Polaroone ;  for  the
run  away.  going  away  of  the  Ship  bred  a  jealousie  in  the  Bandaneses,
that  it  was  a  pretended  plot  amongst  us  to  joyne  with  the
Hollanders,  and  so  to  betray  them.  Also  their  discover-
ing our  weaknesse  upon  Polaroone  might  have  encouraged
the  Hollanders  to  have  attempted  that  in  which  else  they

520

THOMAS SPURWAY  ad.

1616.

perchance  would  have  doubted  of  victorie.  And  indeed,
many  sharpe  threats  wee  had  after  the  running  away  of
these  fellowes,  and  expected  daily  their  comming  over ;
which  had  they  come  it  would  have  cost  many  mans  life.
For  their  having  taken  the  Swan,  and  killed  our  men,
abusing  them  with  imprisonment  and  fetters,  and  all  the
disgrace  that  might  bee,  hath  much  hardned  the  hearts  of
the  English  against  them.

The  three  and  twentieth  of  March,  161 6.  we  dispeeded
away  a  Letter  unto  the  Hollanders  at  Nero,  by  Robert
Fuller,  who  being  landed  upon  Lantore,  the  people  of
Lantore  being  then  in  parley  with  the  Hollanders,  about
a  Factorie,  that  the  Hollanders  desired  upon  Lantore,  and
also  would  build  a  Fort  there,  but  the  people  of  Lantore  The  people  of
would  not  graunt  it ;  This  time  our  Messenger  could  not  not  acc0^
passe,  but  desired  to  stay  three  or  foure  dayes  with  kind  Wuh  the
words from the Lantore people, so our Messenger  Hollanders.
returned. The  effect,  to  demand  the  Defence,  Men  and
Goods.

The  five  and  twentieth  dicto,  a  Messenger  came  over
unto  us  from  Laurence  Ryall,  principall  Generall,  being
newly  come  to  Nero  from  the  Moluccas,  understanding
what  had  passed,  desiring  to  have  parley  with  us,  and  P-  v-  6l3-]
would  have  Master  Corthop  and  my  selfe  to  come  in  a  QffersoJPa™y
Praw,  and  two  of  his  principall  Merchants  should  doe  the  jj0naneiers
like,  and  so  to  meete  each  other  halfe  way  betwixt  Pola-  Agents  and
way  and Polaroone, to parley. But we refused their  Factors  of
demand,  doubting  the  treacherie,  for  they  might  have  men  Polaroone'
lye  secret,  and  so  carry  us  away  perforce.

Also  the  same  time,  and  by  the  Hollanders  Messenger,  John  Davis  his
we  received  a  Letter  from  Master  Davey  being  prisoner  J?d&emenf  ty

xt  t>i rr  1.11.1  ■  r 1  111  1 information  of

at  JNero.  Ine  eft ect,  disliking  or  what  we  had  done  and  theHollanders.
still  did  maintayne,  in  keeping  the  said  Hand  of  Polaroone,
and  that  our  commission  could  not  warrant  what  we  had
done,  and  advising  us  to  have  parley  with  the  Generall,
Laurence  Ryall,  and  to  come  to  some  agreement  that  no
more  blood  might  be  spilt.  All  which  he  hath  written,  I
conceive,  was  by  the  instigation  of  the  Hollanders,  pos-

521

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

sessing  him  with  many  untruths,  as  hereafter  it  plainly
appeareth :  the  first  and  principall  they  had  so  wrought
him  in  humouring  him,  and  made  him  beleeve  that  they
had  our  Kings  Majesties  Letters  to  take  any  English  ships,
if  they  found  them  to  the  Eastward  of  the  Selebes,  which
newes  made  us  much  to  marvaile :  and  that  if  any  such
things  were,  we  must  obey  it.

Hereupon  we  did  write  a  Letter  unto  Laurence  Ryall
Generall,  by  his  Messenger,  that  if  he  would  send  over
unto  us  two  of  his  principall  Merchants,  viz.  Henrick  de
Watterfoord,  and  Peeter  Younge,  and  to  land  them  upon
the  small  Hand ;  and  having  received  them  into  our
charge,  Master  Corthop,  and  one  more  to  attend  upon  him,
would  presently  goe  over,  so  their  Messenger  departed ;
and  two  dayes  after,  viz.  the  third  of  Aprill,  returned  with
his  answere,  The  two  Merchants,  before  named,  which
we  desired  for  pledges  could  not  come :  the  one  gone  to
Sea  in  the  Home,  the  other  his  businesse  such,  being
principall  Booke-keeper,  could  not  be  spared.  The  said
Laurence  Ryall  propounding  two  others  lately  come  over,
and  principall  Merchants,  called  Cornelius  Neep  and  Hans
Rogers.  Wee  returned  the  said  Messenger,  accepting
them  :  And  the  sixt  of  Aprill  their  Galley  came  over  unto
us  and  brought  these  two  men.  Presently  received  them
into  our  charge,  and  a  Tent  being  set  up  neere  the  place
where  they  landed,  there  lodged  them,  because  they  should
not  come  neere  our  Forts  to  take  any  view  how  we  were
fortified,  and  placed  a  Guard  alwayes  about  the  Tent,
twelve  English  men  with  small  shot,  and  that  they  might
Nath.  Corthop  receive  no  wrong  of  the  Bandaneses.  Presently  Master
upon  pledge  Corthop  went  into  their  Galley  and  went  over  to  Nero,
goeth  ti °  Parfy  and  arrived  there  neere  night  and  was  received  ;  no  words
landers  at  passed  that  night  but  referred  untill  next  day :  so  the  next
Nero.  day  did  discourse,  many  Oppositions  on  both  sides,  which

I  leave  to  relate  because  of  the  Letter  of  Master  Corthop,
which  I  brought  from  Banda,  and  delivered  unto  Captayne
Ball,  will  certifie  your  Worships  at  large.  Onely  a  little  I
will  touch,  Many  threatning  words  they  used,  and  spake

522

• THOMAS SPURWAY  a.d.

1617.

of  many  abuses  they  had  received  by  the  English. Im-

primus,  that  Sir  Henrie  Middleton  did  weare  the  Hoi-  Tke  Hollan-

lands  colours  in  the  Red  Sea,  in  the  Trade,  and  gave  out  pL%™ewr

they  were  Hollanders. Master  Corthop  replyed,  that  was  untruths.

an  untruth,  for  that  hee  came  forth  in  the  said  Ship,  and

continued  in  her  as  long  as  shee  raigned,  and  never  knew

her  to  weare  Hollands  colours ; and  replyed,  That  Sir

Henrie  was  a  Gentleman  that  much  scorned  to  weare  the

Hollands  colours. Also  reported,  That  they  had  the  King  The  Hollan-

of  Englands  Letters  to  take  any  English  to  the  Eastward  ^Jt  the^have

of  the  Selebes. So  Master  Corthop  urged  them  that  he  our  Kings

might  see  the  same,  and  that  if  they  could  shew  him  that  Letters  for

we  would  obey  it  and  begone,  but  they  could  shew  no  taking  of

such  Letter. Divers  other  things  they  alleaged,  but  no  ^Jj^Jj,

truth ; and  many  perswasions  to  leave  the  Hand  of  Pola-

roone,  perswading  him  the  great  error  we  were  run  into

in  holding the same. All this  while, Master Davey,

neither  any  the  English  were  permitted  to  come  neere

Master  Corthop. The  General!,  Laurence  Ryall,  seeing

hee  could  not  prevaile  and  to  have  his  desire,  grew  much

•discontented,  and  threw  his  Hat  on  the  ground,  and  pulled

his  Beard  for  anger :  Master  Corthop  answering  him,  that

hee  could  doe  nothing  of  himselfe,  but  was  joyned  to  a

counsaile  being  Assistants,  and  would  relate  what  had

passed  when  he  came  to  Polaroone,  and  that  we  would

consider  of  it,  and  so  write  our  direct  answere. Thus  I

advised  him  to  say,  that  he  might  get  the  more  freely

away : Also Master Corthop demanded the Defence,  The  Hol/an~

Men  and  Goods  in  their  possession,  but  they  would  deliver er,  eme  t0
•  1 01  •  tv  /r r  •  •  tm restore  our

neither  bhips  nor  Men  except  upon  composition. Ihus  ships,  but  upon

being  Laurence  Ryalls  demand,  that  we  would  permit  him  conditions  to

to  come  with  his  Ships  and  Gallies  unto  the  small  Hand  render  Po/a-

adjoyning  to  Polaroone,  where  our  Castle  is  and  twelve

peeces  of  Ordnance,  and  there  to  land  his  Men  and  his

Ordnance,  and  being  possessed,  would  deliver  unto  us

the  Swan  and  Defence,  and  all  our  Men  ;  and  for  the  goods,

he  would  make  restitution  to  all  to  a  penny. All  this

would  not  doe  ;  then  to  conclude,  Desired  Master  Corthop

523

roone.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

1617.

to  set  his  hand  unto  a  Note  which  hee  had  drawne,  The
effect,  That  the  said  Laurence  Ryall  had  made  these
proffers  unto  us ;  Master  Corthop  likewise  refused  and
would  not  put  his  hand  hereunto.

Now,  they  had  so  wrought  with  Master  Davie,  that
they  were  perswaded  that  hee  would  perswade  somewhat :
he  was  sent  for  by  the  Generall,  and  admitted  into  the
roome  with  Master  Corthop.  So  Master  Corthop  and  he
had  much  discourse,  speaking  of  the  Letter  which  they
should  have,  and  was  perswaded  that  it  was  true,  and  that
we  continued  in  a  great  errour.  Then  Master  Corthop
Laurence  acquainted  him  what  had  passed  in  discourse  with  Laur-
Ly-all.  ence  Ry^  and  what  proffer  we  had  made  him,  if  he  would

[I.  v.  614.]  shew  us  the  said  Letters :  which  Master  Davie  perceiving
so  reasonable  a  proffer,  which  they  could  not,  according  as
they  had  verified  unto  him,  make  good :  Master  Davie
presently  in  great  furie  railed  against  them  all,  saying,
they  had  done  him  great  injurie,  in  telling  him  and  pos-
sessing him  with  so  many  falshoods :  and  further  said,
The  men  of  tnat  they  promised  him  and  his  men  good  quarter,  but  his
the  Swan  did men  COmplained  much  of  want  of  food,  and  clothing:,  and

CQtnt)l(ll7l6  Of  ■*■  .  ^

want  of  food nard  usage  '■> and  that  they  had  sate  in  Judgement  upon

and  clothing, him  and  his  companie,  and  had  given  them  all  condemna-

in  their  impri-  tion,  there  to  remaine  untill  they  heard  out  of  Holland ;

s™ment™  the  and  could  be  content  to  remaine,  so  as  we  could  keepe

hands  and tnem  from  the  Hand  of  Polaroone,  &c. So  Master  Cor-

that  they  had thop  tooke  his  leave  and  was  brought  over  againe  unto

sate  in  Judge-  us,  and  being  landed,  we  presently  released  their  hostage,

mentupon anc[  so  departed  for  Nero. Now  the  easterly  Monson

n;„,Z  ,*„+**,,*  being;  come,  we  fitted  a  Bandan  Praw  to  dispeed  away  from
given  sentence  &  > t  111  ,r T  J

upon  them. .Bantam,  to  give  advise  what  had  passed. It  was  con-

A  Praw  sent eluded,  my  selfe,  Mr  Hynsley  Master  of  the  Defence,  and

toward  Ban- others,  to  the  number  of  foure  English,  and  fourteene

Po/roon  Bandaneses of Polaroone should goe. Wee had the

greater number of men, doubting of the Hollanders

laying  wait  for  us,  whereby  we  might  by  rowing  free  our

selves,  and  indeed  the  Principals  of  Polaroone  desired  it.

These  which  wee  brought,  five  of  them  are  principall  men,

524

THOMAS SPURWAY  a.d.

1617.

one  is  the  Sabandors  sonne,  the  principall  of  the  Hand  his
father  is ;  the  other  foure  are  Orencayas,  and  the  rest  their
servants :  These  also  came  to  deliver  the  Nutmeg  tree
and  earth  of  the  said  Hand,  and  to  manifest  their  loves
unto  the  English.

Wee  set  sayle  from  Polaroone  the  seventeenth  of  Aprill,
1 61 7.  and  as  wee  fell  with  Bottone,  standing  our  course  for
Moccasor,  we  discovered  a  great  ship  and  pinnasse,  they  AHollandship
seeing  us,  gave  us  chase  baring:  a  presse  saile,  so  that  wee  andPtn^asse
had  no  way  to  escape  them,  onely  wee  must  perforce  stand
in  for  Bottone,  and  did.  Halfe  a  day  they  gave  us  chase,
and  had  fetcht  us  up  had  we  not  rowed  hard,  so  we  were
neere  the  Towne  of  Bottone  by  night,  thinking  they  would
not  have  come  so  farre  into  the  river.  Next  morning  wee
perceived  this  ship  and  pinnasse,  almost  within  Musket
shot  of  us,  presently  we  landed  most  of  what  we  had  in
our  Praw,  and  carried  it  into  the  Woods,  and  went  pre-
sently unto  the  King,  and  gave  him  a  Present  (such  things
as  we  had)  to  the  value  of  thirtie  Rials,  desiring  his  pro-
tection, which  he  promised  us  in  all  kind  manner,  and
sent  his  servants  to  put  all  our  things  in  house,  and  put  Heathen
us  into  two  severall  houses  to  lodge,  and  to  keepe  in,  that  k™ier  ^en

11  ° 1  1 x  TTr Hollander!  to

we  were  not  seene  abroad  ;  so  wee  tooke  our  leave. Wee  the  ^w^

were  no  sooner  gone  but  presently  comes  the  Hollanders,
and  gives  a  Present  three  times  the  value  of  what  wee
gave,  enquiring  what  we  were  that  were  landed :  but  the
King  replied,  that  he  did  not  know.  The  King  demand-
ing them  how  long  they  meant  to  stay,  they  said,  sixe
dayes  :  hereupon  the  King  advised  us  to  stay  so  long  time,
to  see  if  they  will  goe  or  not,  that  wee  might  goe  with  the
more  securitie.  The  sixe  dayes  being  expired,  they  would
stay  sixe  dayes  longer  to  mend  their  Mast,  as  they  re-
ported. So,  seeing  their  intent,  and  our  Praw  lying  in  view
of  their  ship  and  Pinnasse,  that  we  could  not  goe  about  to  We  by  the  help
fit  our  Praw,  but  they  would  have  taken  notice  thereof.  °fthe  Ktni  °f
Wherefore  I  bought  a  Praw,  and  the  King  commanded ott™e*  SP*

v'  P  another  pvaw

all  our  things  to  bee  carried  by  his  slaves  into  the  same,  anj  came  t0
lying  out  of  sight  of  the  ship. And  all  things  being  Bantam.

525

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1617.

fitted,  sent  his  men  out  of  the  river,  passing  neere  the
Holland  ship  with  the  praw,  and  to  carrie  her  about  on
the  backside  of  the  Hand,  and  sent  fiftie  men  with  us,
and  conveighed  us  over  land  unto  the  said  Praw,  where
we  went  presently  aboord,  and  kept  under  the  Hand  untill
neere  night,  and  so  stood  our  course  for  Moccasor,  heard
no  more  of  them.  Wee  were  enformed  that  the  Hol-
landers kept  watch  every  night  upon  the  water  neere  our
Bandan  Praw  at  Bottone.

Wee  arrived  at  Mocassor  the  seventh  of  May,  161 7.

and  there  we  found  the  Attendance  pretended  for  Banday

but  could  not  beat  it  up,  the  Easterly  Monson  being  come.

So  we  shipped  in  the  Attendance,  an  hundred  and  eightie

suckets  of  Mace  which  was  bought  at  Moccasor,  and  sent

the  Praw  for  Benjarmasin  and  Suckadania  for  advice,  and

that  a  supplie  of  goods  was  not  yet  come  to  furnish  those

parts,  as  was  pretended,  for  that  the  Salomon  was  not

arrived  yet  at  Bantam,  being  long  expected.

The  mrren- The  third  of  June  wee  arrived  with  the  Attendance  at

«™0f*telk  Bantam,  understanding  of  the  death  of  Captaine  George

broughuo Barkley. And  Master  Ball  succeeding  him  Captaine  of

Bantam,  and the  house : unto  him  I  delivered  all  things,  viz. two

delivered  to Surrenders,  the  Hollanders  Letters,  and  other  Copies  of

Master  Ball. Letters  to  them  written  by  us,  and  all  things  else  of  our

proceedings  in  Banda ; all  which,  I  doubt  not,  but  your

Worships  shall  receive  by  the  first  convayance.

Also,  may  it  please  your  Worships  to  understand,  the
Messenger  that  came  over  first  unto  us  from  the  Hol-
landers, having  beene  with  us  two  severall  times,  with
Letters  from  the  Principals  of  the  Hollanders  at  Banda ;.
This  Fellow  called  Christopher  van  Loare,  as  he  reported,
came  over  unto  us  in  a  Praw,  and  three  Blackes  with  him,
saying,  that  he  was  runne  from  the  Hollanders  upon  dis-
content, the  Captaine  of  Nero  having  abused  him,  and
that  he  loved  the  English,  and  would  serve  us :  also  was
exceeding  earnest  with  us,  presently  upon  his  comming
over,  and  importuned  us  extraordinarily,  that  we  should
goe  that  night  upon  the  Hand  of  Polaway  with  fiftie  men>

526

THOMAS SPURWAY  a.d.

1617.

and  he  would  warrant  us  the  Hand  of  Polaway,  and  would
bring  us  so  that  we  should  take  the  Castle,  discovering
unto  us  his  plots.  I  could  not  beleeve  him,  but  told  him,
that  hee  was  sent  to  betray  us ;  This  fellow  hereupon  pro-
tested, and  swore  most  deeply  to  the  contrarie,  and  that
the  Hollanders  would  presently  hang  him,  if  ever  they
did  take  him.  Wee  told  him,  we  would  not  seeke  it  by  [I.  v.  615.]
force  of  Armes,  for  wee  had  no  commission  so  to  doe :
not  doubting  but  they  would  be  made  to  deliver  the  said
Hand,  by  right  of  Law  and  Justice :  the  English  having  The  He  of
the  first  possession  and  surrender  of  the  said  Hand,  and  P?hway  taken

1 r  r \  r  tt  i •  Jrom  us  ty

were  by  force  or  Armes  put  from  it. Upon  his  pro  testa-  force  0f  jrms.
tions,  Master  Corthop  accepted  of  him,  and  gave  him  a  counterfeit
libertie,  and  went  with  him  wheresoever  he  went  upon  messenger  or
the  Hand,  so  that  he  saw  all  our  fortifications  and  occur-  dtssem^tnS
ranees  of  businesse  (which  much  grieved  me,  for  I  coun-  ■'"

sailed  him  many  times  to  lay  him  fast,  at  the  first  place
where  he  was  received,  which  was  upon  the  Defence-
fort,  and  told  him  often  my  opinion,  that  he  was  a  villaine,
and  was  sent  to  betray  us ; also  it  was  the  opinion  of  the
Bandaneses  : )  yet  all  would  not  perswade  Master  Corthop  :
so  I  thought  good  to  have  him  with  mee  to  Bantam,  and
that  he  might  bee  sent  for  England,  for  that  hee  knew  of
all  wrongs  the  Hollanders  have  done  unto  us. And  he
hath  said  unto  mee  and  others,  that  the  three  ships  that
were  with  us  at  Polaroone,  which  before  I  noted,  came
purposely  to  fight  with  us,  and  to  have  beaten  us  from  the
Hand ; and  that  the  Home  had  plancke,  bricke,  and  lime
and  other  provision  to  fortifie  upon  Polaroone,  or  the  small
Hand,  but  that  wee  were  before  hand. Also  hee  did  mani-  The  Hollan-
fest  unto  us  of  foure  other  great  ships  that  were  sent  from  £*•  !Ui°™e t
Nero,  which  ships  wee  saw  come  forth,  and  plied  for  Pola-  set  fire  upon
roone : but  they  were  by  the  strong  currant  put  to  lee-  the  ship
ward,  and  so  forced  for  Amboyna. Also  he  told  us,  that  defence.
their  condemned  slaves  were set to  worke to  fire the
Defence  at  Polaroone ;  and  if  they  could  performe  it,  they
should  have  their  libertie,  and  bee  free-men. All  this  he
manifested  and  averred  to  be  true. Within  three  dayes

527

A.D.
1617.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

after  our  arrivall  at  Moccasor,  this  Fellow  published  that
the  Swan  was  taken  by  one  of  their  Pinnasses,  and  other
disgracefull  words  tending  to  the  disgrace  of  the  English  :
which  as  soone  as  I  heard  thereof,  I  presently  charged  the
Master  of  the  Attendance  with  him,  and  so  sent  him
aboord :  hereupon  hee  vowed  to  have  my  life.  Shortly
after  we  set  sayle  for  Bantam,  and  comming  neere,  put
him  in  the  Bilboes,  and  searched  him  and  his  Chest  for
Letters  which  he  might  have  of  advice,  to  convay  unto
the  Hollanders,  and  found  a  draught,  which  (hee  said)
was  of  Polaway  Castle ;  also  a  Letter  pretended  unto  the
principall  of  the  Hollanders,  or  English  at  Bantam :  all
CaptaineBall.  which  I  delivered  unto  Captaine  Ball.  This  fellow  re-
ported he  was  a  director  in  the  building  of  the  Forts  at
Polaway,  and  that  he  had  experience  therein :  and  when
hee  came  over  to  us,  brought  two  hundred  Rials  of  eight.
So  at  my  arrivall  at  Bantam,  I  did  acquaint  Captaine  Ball
of  businesses,  and  advised  that  the  fellow  might  be  care-
fully looked  to,  and  kept  prisoner,  that  hee  ranne  not
away,  to  doe  us  hurt.  He  willed  to  have  him  brought
ashoare ;  My  selfe  and  others  went  and  fetched  him  and
delivered  him  prisoner  in  the  house.  Captayne  Ball  had
some  discourse  with  him,  who  it  is  likely  gave  him  good
words,  as  formerly  he  had  done,  with  many  protestations
of  his  loyaltie :  and  had  his  libertie  in  the  house  (never
made  fast  with  yrons,  nor  in  any  roome.)  And  many
times  I  spake  to  Captayne  Ball,  to  make  him  sure,  and  told
him  he  would  watch  his  time  to  run  away :  whose  answere
was,  he  should  run  if  he  would,  little  regarding  it,  it  much
greeving  me  to  harbour  a  Traytor  in  our  bosomes.  Hee
having  beene  two  moneths  in  the  house,  the  second  of
August,  1617.  got  out,  and  ran  into  the  Dutch  house,
whereas  I  had  advised  to  keep  him  sure,  and  send  him  in
the  first  ship  for  England,  so  to  have  witnessed  against
the  Holanders,  as  he  must  have  acknowledged  and  spoken
truth  upon  oath ;  which  would  much  have  advantaged
your  Worships  in  the  prosequution  in  Law,  touching  the
mayne  businesse.

528

The  counter-
feit Hollander
suffered  to
escape  by  the
toleration  of
G.  Ball.

THOMAS SPURWAY  a.d.

1617.

The  foure  and  twentieth  of  August,  16 17.  departed
from  Bantam  an  Holland  ship  of  advice  directly  for  Hol-
land :  and  two  dayes  after  her  departure,  they  reported
here,  that  ten  Englishmen  were  sent  in  the  said  ship  for  Hollanders
Holland.  What  they  are,  we  cannot  learne,  but  imagine  ^«t/S  men
them  the  men  that  ranne  away  in  the  Defence,  the  from  Bantam
Hollanders  thinking  to  make  them  say  any  thing,  by  their  to  Holland.
instigation,  which  may  make  for  them.  And  it  may  be,
they  will  say,  that  the  Defence  was  left  as  a  Wracke,  which
is  not  so.  The  Master  and  Companie  would  have  gone
away  for  Bantam,  but  we  held  it  not  good  :  for  that  the
people  of  Polaway  understanding  thereof  were  discon-
tented, and  said,  that  we  had  built  a  Fort  for  the  Hol-
landers. The  Master  writing  a  note,  that  he  would  set
saile  that  night,  having  no  goods  at  all  in  the  ship,  Master
Corthop  was  going  aboord  to  perswade  the  Master  and
Companie  to  the  contrarie :  which  the  Polaroone  men
understanding,  called  presently  a  Councell,  and  shewed
many  reasons  that  it  was  not  fitting  the  ship  should  goe
away,  and  would  not  let  Master  Corthop  goe  aboord  by
any  meanes,  doubting  of  his  going  away.  It  was  pro-
pounded, that  I  might  goe  aboord  to  perswade  the  Master,
or  to  command  him  and  the  rest  to  stay ;  and  to  charge
them,  that  if  they  went,  if  wee  lost  lives  and  goods,  it
should  be  laid  to  their  charge.  Long  it  was  before  the
Bandaneses  would  permit  mee,  so  jealous  were  they ;  but
at  last,  through  our  earnest  request  granted  it,  and  sent
sixe  men  with  me  of  Polaroone.  I  acquainted  Master
Hinsley  the  Master,  and  the  Companie,  of  the  many
inconveniences  and  dangers,  both  of  losse  of  goods  and
lives,  and  scandall  to  our  Nation,  and  that  if  we  should
have  gone  about  to  have  laden  Spices,  the  Hollanders
would  presently  have  had  notice  thereof,  and  laid  wait
to  have  taken  the  ship,  and  brought  all  into  their  hands :
neither  had  wee  men,  munition,  or  victuall,  to  maintayne  The  Mariners
the  Hand  of  Polaroone,  nor  the  small  Hand  Nelaro  ad-  ™r.e  keP* at

x ,, , ,  . J  .  ...  Polaroone

joyning. All  the  ships  companie  would  have  gone  away,  w-tt^  muc^

being  unruly  and  perverse,  saying,  they  came  not  to  be  difficultie.

IV  529  2L

A.D.
1617.

[I.  V. 616.]

The  run
awaies  in  the
Defence  in
many  respects
worthie  of
death.

1 70.  suckles  of
Mace  shipped
in  a  Junk  with
eight  English,
which  was  lost
by  the  negli-
gence of  one
Stacie,who  had
charge  of  her.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

souldiers,  nor  would  they  stay :  so  that  we  were  faine  to
give  way,  and  intreat  them  by  faire  meanes,  like  children,
so  little  in  their  resolution  regard  they  what  may  ensue,
caring  for  nothing  so  they  may  get  free.  The  people  of
Polaroone  perceiving  a  difference  amongst  us,  did  mur-
mure,  taxing  us  with  our  promises  before  mentioned  :  and
that  if  the  Defence  and  men  went  away,  wee  could  not
resist  the  Hollanders  our  mortall  enemies,  whom  wee
expected  daily.  And  if  they  came  and  had  the  victorie,
wee  that  should  there  remaine,  must  expect  none  other
but  rigour  on  both  sides.  The  People  of  Polaroone  would
have  conceited  that  we  betrayed  them,  and  the  Hollanders
would  have  had  no  remorse,  setting  their  slaves  a  worke
to  murther,  wherein  themselves  would  not  have  beene
seene.  And  should  they  have  gayned  either  the  great
Hand,  or  the  small  (as  they  might  and  would  have  done,
had  not  the  ship  stayed)  we  had  lost  all,  goods,  debts,
credit  of  our  Nation,  without  hope  ever  to  bee  there
respected.  All  things  considered,  we  resolved  the  De-
fence to  stay  and  land  all  things :  and  to  let  her  ride  it
out  untill  further  opportunities.  But  in  the  meane  time,
these  villaines  ranne  away  with  the  said  Defence,  endanger-
ing all,  and  therefore  worthie  of  death.

At  my  comming  from  Polaroone,  it  was  concluded  by
us,  that  another  Praw  should  bee  sent  for  Bantam  for
advice,  twentie  dayes  after  our  departure,  doubting  the
Hollanders  might  have  pursued  and  taken  us  (as  they
did  their  best)  and  so  all  our  proceedings  had  beene
obscure.  Accordingly  a  Praw  was  sent,  and  therein  laden
an  hundred  and  seventie  suckles  Mace  (contayning  three
thousand  three  hundred  sixtie  sixe  Catees,  at  a  Riall  the
Catee,  each  Catee  sixe  English  and  neere  two  ounces
better)  which  if  it  might  have  come  safe,  it  would  have
yeelded  in  England  five  thousand  pound.  In  the  said
Praw  were  eight  English,  and  thirtie  Bandaneses :  the
charge  -committed  to  one  Walter  Stacie,  once  Master
Hinsleys  Mate  in  the  Defence.  But  it  seemeth  his  know-
ledge and  care  answered  not  our  expectation : for  neere;

53°

THOMAS SPURWAY  a.d.

1617.

the  Hand  of  Bottone,  he  ranne  the  Praw  upon  the  sholes,
being  rockie  ground,  and  there  bilged  her,  and  lost  all  the
Mace  ;  the  men  got  ashore.  Stacie  is  put  in  fault  by  the
rest  of  the  companie,  for  that  some  of  them  told  him  they
saw  land  on  the  lee  bowe,  but  he  being  peevish  and  head-
strong, called  them  all  fooles,  not  regarding  it.

Also  may  it  please  your  Worships  to  understand,  that
the  Hollanders  having  beene  by  some  of  our  people,  told
of  their  vile  abuses  done  unto  us,  and  that  it  will  lie ,  °  a"Ar$t
heavie  upon  them  at  home,  being  knowne  ;  the  better  sort  ^ey  can  mafie
of  them  have  replied,  that  they  can  make  as  good  friends  friends  in
in  the  Court  of  England  as  you  (the  Honourable  Com-  Court,  t3c.
panie  our  Employers)  can :  and  that  this  which  they  have
done,  will  cause  you,  the  Honourable  Companie,  and  them
to  joyne,  and  that  a  chaine  of  gold  will  recompence  all,  and
that  they  have  Rials  enough  in  Holland  to  pay  for  a  ship
or two, so as they  may  hinder us  from the trade  at
Banda.

All  being  considered,  we  hope,  you  the  right  Honour-
able and  Worshipfull,  our  Employers,  will  so  prize  the
bloud  of  your  servants,  by  them  murthered, maymed,
and  wounded,  the  rest  all  prisoners : also  all  damages,
interests, and  hinderances  in the  returne  of  ships  and
goods ; also  poore  mens  particular  losses,  as  also  Master
Corthop,  my  selfe,  Sophonie  Cozocke,  and  George  Mus-
champe ; wee  all  presuming  what  we  had  in  the  Swan  to
be  as  sure  as  on  the  shoare,  and  now  have  lost  all :  that
they  may  better  advise  themselves  how  they  attempt  the  J°^  D™ie
like  againe. Likewise  Master  Davie  told  me  many  times,  jya/s  0f'e^
that  if  it  pleased  God  to  send  him  well  home,  he  would  by  him  when
come  forth  no  more,  finding  himselfe  decayed  and  weake  he  was  taken  •'
in  bodie,  and  that  hee  had  sixe  or  seven  hundred  Rials  to  a"dfurther
employ,  with  which  returne,  and  other  his  wages,  hee e'
should  have  a  competent  living :  all  which  money  (as  farre
as  I  can  learne)  he  had  by  him  when  hee  was  taken :  now
these  crosses,  I  am  perswaded,  will  kill  him ; or  else,  I
doubt,  they  will  make  him  away  by  poysoning  him,  that
he  shall  never  see  England  againe.

53i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1617.

Now,  for  advice  as  touching  the  trade  at  Banda,  the
Hand  of  Polaroone  is  reported  to  be  the  worst  Hand,  and
is  about  eight  English  miles  compasse : and  the  small
Hand  adjoyning  called  Neluco,  about  one  English  mile
compasse. There  is  prettie  store  of  Mace  and  Nuts  grow-
ing upon  Polaroone,  and  more  would  be  if  it  were  well
husbanded. Lantore  and  Rosinging  yeeld  great store.
Rosinging  is  a  fine  Hand,  and  yeeldeth  the  largest  Nuts
Description  of  and  Mace. Now,  if  we  hold  Polaroone,  we  cannot  want
Polaroone,  &c.  Spice : for  the  people  of  Lantore,  Rosinging,  and  other
places  there-abouts,  will  come  over  to  us,  and  bring  their
Spices,  if  we  bring  Rice,  Cloth,  Salt,  Pepper,  Mellases,
and  other  necessaries  for  food,  and  some  Moccasor  gold,
which  will  passe  at  Banda,  as  currant  as  Rials  of  eight,  and
at  the  same  rate,  being  worth  at  Bantam  but  two  shillings
foure  pence,  or  two  shillings  six  pence  the  piece,  called
The  profitable  Masse. Our Cargason which we had  was but small,
trade.  having  but  one  hundred  quoynes  of  Rice,  our  Cloth  at

Moccasor  much  decayed,  lying  there  two  or  three  yeeres.
If  we  had  had  three  times  as  much  Cloth  and  Spices,  we
could  have  sold  it  all  for  Nuts  and  Mace  at  Polaroone :
and  were  intreated  for  Rice  and  Cloth  by  Lantore  and
Rosinging  men,  and  others  ;  but  had  it  not  for  them  :  and
some  returned  with  part  of  their  Spices  home  againe.
They  come  over  to  Polaroone  with  Prawes  and  Corre-
corries  in  the  night.  The  Mace  and  Nuts  were  very  good,
but  lying  so  long  must  needs  decay,  by  the  many  molesta-
tions of  the  Hollanders ;  we  having  no  time,  nor  lime  to
make  wherewith  to  preserve  the  Nuts.  The  Trade
will  prove  profitable,  if  we  may  quietly  enjoy  the
Hand,  and  we  must  buy  Rice  at  a  lower  rate  then
at  Moccasor,  it  being  by  report  at  Japan  about  halfe
the  price.
[I.  rv.  617.]  May  it  please  your  Worships  to  understand,  that  after
A  land  my  arrivall  at  Bantam,  the  Steward  of  the  House  being  at

JW*  At  ^e  Market  to  buy  provisions,  the  Hollanders  Steward
with  the  Hoi-  tnere  present  quarrelled  with  him,  whereof  (whiles  they
landers.  contended)  notice  was  given  at  the  Dutch  house : and

532

THOMAS SPURWAY  a.d.

1617.

presently  Tymon  (the  second  Merchant)  ran  forth  with  i*.very
twentie  Japons,  and  Hollanders,  and  Blacks,  to  the  Basar  mm'
or  Market,  running  upon  our  Steward  with  their  drawne
weapons,  he  having  but  two  English  all  disarmed,  enforc-
ing them  to  shift  and  give  way.  Meane  while  Richard
Hunt,  chanced  to  come  by  and  drew  his  sword,  when  pre-
sently they  assaulted  and  gave  him  three  wounds,  whereof
he  dyed  within  fifteene  dayes  after  on  the  foure  and  twen-
tieth of  July,  1 61 7.  Notice  hereof  being  brought  to  the
English  house,  we  with  our  Japons  ran  forth  and  met
with  them,  before  they  could  recover  their  House,  and
wounded  two  Hollanders,  whereof  both  dyed  shortly
after ;  also  one  of  their  Blacks  then  killed  out-right,  and
one  or  two  more  of  them  were  hurt ;  and  so  drave  them
home  to  their  House.  They  gave  after  that  great  words,
that  they  would  put  us  all  to  the  Sword,  and  did
lye  in  wait  for  our  people  with  their  Pistolls  and
Peeces,  whereof  wee  had  notice  by  the  Javans  and
stood  upon  our  Guard  night  and  day  to  receive  them,
if  they  had  given  any  attempt  on  the  House,  or
abroad.

Now  concerning  the  Hands  of  Banda,  and  especially  Our  right  by
Polaway,  Captaine  Castleton  might  have  made  it  sure  Law  and
unto  the  English,  as  I  have  heard  reported  by  divers :  pllazvay.
and  the  English  have  still  more  right  on  that  Hand,  both
by  Law  and  Justice,  then  the  Hollander,  although  by
force  of  Armes  they  put  the  English  from  it.  The  easie
obtayning,  and  Captaine  Castleton  denying  the  right  and
possession  the  English  had  there  (as  it  is  reported)  em-
boldened the  Hollanders  to  use  the  violence  at  Polaroone.
And  except  it  bee  supplied  this  yeere,  and  the  possession
maintayned,  the  name  of  English  is  utterly  disgraced,  and
little  hope  of  being  received  there  againe :  which  if  we
hold  untill  your  Worships  have  resolved  what  to  doe
herein,  wee  shall  in  short  time  procure  as  much  Nuts  and
Mace  as  they ;  which  may  in  time  proove  an  entrance  into
the  Moluccas  for  Cloves.  The  Hollanders  pretend  they
have  right  unto  the  Moluccas  and  Banda  by  the  King  of

533

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1617.

Ternates  *  sonne,  having  him  prisoner.  But  the  Ban-
daneses  denie  any  right  the  King  of  Ternate  hath  in  their
Hands,  every  Hand  being  free  of  it  selfe,  and  governed  by
Sabandars  and  Orencayes,  generally  appointed.  Now  it
is  meet  that  a  supply  be  sent  the  Bandaneses  and  English,
for  Rice,  Victuals  and  Cloth,  and  other  necessaries,  to  hold
the  possession,  and  bring  away  the  Nuts  and  Mace  there
in  readinesse,  in  Godownes.  The  Hollanders  give  out
that  they  will  take  your  ships  that  shall  goe  into  those
parts  and  cut  them  off,  so  to  famish  both  English  and
Bandaneses.  So  your  Worships  may  charge  them  of  all
damage  alreadie  done,  and  may  expect  to  heare  of  further
abuses  from  them.  Wherefore  it  requireth  an  earnest
and  speedie  prosecution,  that  wee  may  quietly  trade  with-
out molestation  unto  those  parts,  that  have  surrendred
and  desired  Trade  with  us :  viz.  Polaway,  a  Paradise  by
report  (the  Hollanders  report  it  to  bee  as  good  unto  them,
as  Scotland  to  his  Majestie)  Polaroone,  Rosinging  and
Wayre,  Wayre  being  a  Towne  upon  Lantore.  And  if  in
case  of  necessitie  your  Worships  cannot  agree  for  Pola-
way, yet  if  you  may  enjoy  the  three  last,  we  shall  procure
Nuts  and  Mace  enough  for  England,  as  also  to  transport
both  thence  and  hence  for  Surat,  and  other  places  in  the
Indies.  Now  is  the  time  or  never  upon  the  vile  abuse
of  bloudshed  and  murther  committed  by  the  Hollanders.
And  for  the  Trade  there,  it  will  prove  very  profitable,  I
make  no  doubt.  What  hath  passed  formerly,  I  doubt  not,
but  Captaine  Jordan  hath  certified  at  large ;  what  since,
my  selfe.  It  is  requisite  that  I  should  relate  the  parti-
culars of  all  Occurrences,  in  respect  the  businesse  is  of  so
great  importance.  Here  is  bound  home  for  England  the
Charles  and  Hope,  I  pray  God  send  them  well  at  London.
I  have  sent  your  Worships  a  briefe  abstract  of  our  Carga-
son  for  Banda,  and  sales  there  made.  If  I  seeme  tedious,  I
humbly  crave  pardon :  with  my  humble  dutie  I  end,  be-

*  In  the  quarrels  first  mooved  betwixt  Capt.  Keeling  and  them,  1609,
they  never  make  such  Title,  but  pretended  agreement,  and  intended  and
extended  force. See  above  pag.  202.  their  own  Articles  of  their  right.

534

THOMAS SPURWAY  ad.

1617.

seeching  the  Almightie  to  prosper  and  give  good  successe
to  all  your  designes :  humbly  taking  leave.

Your  Worships  most  humble  servant  in  all  dutie,

Thomas  Spurway.

Endorsed.  To  the  Honorable  and  Right  Wor-
shipfull  Companie  of  the  Merchants  of  London,
Trading  to  the  East  Indies,  these  be  delivered.

By  Captaine  Henrie  Pepwell,  whom  God  preserve.

Chap. II1I.  [I.  v.  618.]

Relations  and  Remembrances,  taken  out  of  a  large
Journall  of  a  Voyage,  set  forth  by  the  East
Indian  Societie,  wherein  were  employed,  the
James,  the  Anne,  the  New-yeeres  Gift,  the
Bull,  and  the  Bee ;  written  by  John  Hatch,
Master  of  the  Bee,  and  after  in  the  New-yeeres
Gift ; and  lastly,  came  home  in  the  James.

Ium^^  ^0^1  He  fift  of  March,  161 6.  we  set  saile  from
jipM jjppjlf the  Downes. The  seven  and  twentieth

1617.  we  saw  the  Canaries.  Aprill  the  1617.
tenth,  we  met  the  Tornadas  in  sixe  degr.
From  thence  to  the  twentieth,  wee  ob-
served a  Current  setting  to  the  North.
The  thirtieth,  the  Tornadas  left  us,  in
latitude  thirtie  minutes  North,  longitude  three  hundred
and  fiftie  degrees  fifteene  minutes,  that  night  we  crossed
the  Line.  June  the  one  and  twentieth,  we  came  to  anchor
in  Soldania  Bay,  accompanyed  with  the  Gift  and  the  Bull,  SoldaniaBay.
having  lost  our  Admirall  and  Vice-Admirall  the  night
before,  by  fogs  and  hazie  weather.  They  came  in  the
next  day.  There  we  found  riding  the  Hound,  The  Hound.
wherein  was  Master  William  Jourdaine.  Here  we  could
get  no  refreshing  for  our  sicke  men,  wherefore  on  the  first
of  July,  some  were  sent  to  march  up  into  the  Countrey
to  get  provision,  which  they  did  (without  losse  of  any,

535

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1617.

onely  two  hurt)  in  great  abundance. The  thirteenth,  wee

set  saile  from  the  Bay. August  the  thirteenth,  we  an-

Molak  or chored  in  the  Road  of  Molala. The  seventeenth,  we  had

Moheha. both  ouf  Qables  cut  with  the  Rocks. The  eighteenth,  we

set  saile  from  thence.

The  five and twentieth, in  latitude at noone foure
degrees  fortie  foure  minutes,  longitude  fiftie  three  de-
grees five  minutes  by  judgement,  we  found  our  selves
hindred  by  some  Current :  at  sixe  in  the  evening  the  water
Sea  white. was  changed  white,  and  at  seven  as  white  as  any  Whay,
which  made  the  Skie  also  white  and  hazie. This  night
we  sounded  often  and  had  no  ground : thus  the  water
continued  all  night  in  the  strangest  manner  that  ever  I
saw,  untill  the  day  light  did  alter  it. It  so  continued
Current  to  the  together  with  the  Current :  the  sixe  and  seven  and  twen-
South  South tieth  was  but  little  whitish,  and  the  Current  also  forsooke

Socotora  us# ^ne  f°urtn  °f  September,  we  passed  by  Socatra,  but

came  not  within  sight  by  reason  of  the  Monson,  lest  it

should  be  done  before  we  came  to  Surat. Wee  found  in

A  great  Cur-  the  foure  dayes  before  that  by  helpe  of  a  Current,  the  ship

rent  to  the had  passed  three  score  leagues  more  then  otherwise  shee

could  have  run; which  now  left  us. The  seventh,  a

Danger  by leake  sprung  in  the  Admirall  (which  Master  Copeland,  their

kake,  of  ths Minister,  hath  with  much  feeling  related  how  dangerous,

'MartrPrings  either  b7  vmanie  or  negligence  of  the  Shipwrights,  as

ozvne  report, after  appeared,  when  they  came  to  careene  her ; being  a

in  his  relation  great  hole  slightly  stopped, and  much  hazarding  ship,

written  since goods  and  men : they  had  none  other  meane  there  in

\  U-  Wft fl ^eepe  water  to  st0P  i^  but  by  stitching  a  Bonet  or  piece

loweth.  °f  a  sa^e  fall  °f  Ockam  or  calking  stuffe,  which  by  force

of  the  water  running  into  the  ship,  being  haled  downe  to

the  place,  was  sucked  and  forced  in,  and  so  stayed  the

leake  till  it  selfe  decayed  in  time,  then  the  leake  renewing,

and  again  stopped ; which  in  the  careening  was  found

and  remedied.) On  the  eleventh,  it  was  stopped. The

A  prize. twelfth, we tooke a Portugall ship which came from

Mosambeek,  laden  principally  with  Elephants  teeth,  and

bound  for  Diu.

536

JOHN HATCH  a.d.

1618.

In  the  sixteenth,  we  saw  two  Junks,  one  of  them  chased
by  two  Ships,  which  were  the  Francis  and  the  Lion,  Ships  English  men  of
set  forth  by  (  ) The  Junke  they  chased  was  the  marre-

Great  Mogols  Mothers,  of  the  burthen  of  twelve  or  four-
teene  hundred  Tunnes,  having  in  her  above  a  thousand
persons,  and  nine  and  twentie  Tunne  of  silver  (some
report  more  a  great  deale)  wee  chased  the  Chasers,  and  in
the  evening  came  up  unto  them  with  the  Bee  and  the
Gift,  and  so  saved  the  Junke,  with  whom  and  her  two
Chasers,  we  anchored  on  the  twentieth,  betweene  the  River
of  Surat  and  the  Barre  of  Swally.  Surat.

The  thirteenth  of  March,  wee  weighed : the  fifteenth
at  night,  wee  anchored  to  the  South  west  of  Damon.  Damon.
The  seventeenth,  the  Anne  departed  from  us  to  the  *  Red  *Tht*  v0^e
Sea. The  seven  and  twentieth,  161 8.  wee  espyed  many  after^
sailes  and  fetched  them  up  with  the  Bee,  being  five  and 161 8.
twentie  saile  (fourteene  saile  of  Frigats  men  of  Warre,
eleven  of  Merchants,  the  Molucca  fleet)  and  two  great
Gallies  of  Goa,  which  exchanged  some  shot  with  us,  but
assoone  as  they  could  cleare  themselves  from  us,  went
away : and  being  so  farre  off  at  Sea,  they  all  escaped  us,
not  without  great  trouble,  in  three  Vessels,  whence  they
heaved Chists and other things over-boord, to make
roome  for  their  Oares,  and  eight  of  them  got  into  Cochin,
the  rest  to  Goa.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  came  aboord  a  Boat  with  one
Woman  and  foure  Men  from  the  King  of  Calecut. The
Woman was interpreter and spake Portuguise. Aprill
the  first,  we  came  to  anchor  two  miles  to  the  North  of  the
Road  of  Bring  John. About  two  leagues  to  the  North  of  Brinion,Brim
Brim  John  is  a  red  Cliffe,  and  to  the  South  of  it  a  low  Jj°forBring
sandie  shoare,  and  the  next  high  Land  or  Cliffe  is  within  How  to  know
a  mile  of  the  Road  of  Brim  John,  where  on  the  second  it,
wee  anchored. Master  Coytmore  and  I  agreed  the  next
day  with  the  Governour  for  fortie  Rialls  to  water  there,
and seventie men were landed to guard the  watering
place for feare of poysoning ; for they are treacher-
ous people,  which  also  came  armed  the  next  day  very

537

A.D.
I6l8.

PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

Master  Hatch
made  Master
of  the  Nezo-
yeeres  Gift.

Nicobar.

strong,  and  would  not  permit  us  under  twentie  Rialls
more.
[I.  v.  619.]  The  twelfth  of  Aprill,  we  had  much  adoe  (the  Current
setting  us  right  on  the  Hand  of  Zelon,  halfe  a  league  from
Cape  de  Galia)  to  double  it  with  tacking  off  and  on  that
night.  The  thirteenth,  the  Generall  came  aboord  the
Gift,  and  established  mee  Master  of  her.  The  fourteenth,
the  Bee  departed  from  us  for  the  Coast  of  Coromandell.
The  sixe  and  twentieth,  we  were  neere  the  Southerly-
Hand  of  Nicobar.  The  nine  and  twentieth,  wee  anchored
on  the  Mayne  of  Sumatra,  the  high  Hill  Lambre  (by  some
called  Pedire  bearing  South  South  east  halfe  East  from
us,  and  the  East  point  of  Achen  Road  West  by  North
halfe  North,  foure  leagues  and  halfe  off.  The  King  his
Courtiers  with  his  Women  were  there  on  hunting,  who
the  next  day  sent  his  Chop  by  the  Sabander  and  William
Nicholas,  our  chiefe  Factor  there :  at  whose  parting  wee
gave  twentie  pieces  of  Ordnance  to  honour  the  Kings
presence  and  his  Women,  which  was  well  taken,  and  went
the  same  night  neerer  to  Achen :  and  anchored  the  first
of  May,  a  little  to  the  West  of  the  Court.

The  tenth  of  June,  wee  weighed  to  goe  for  Teco,  but
with  foule  weather  were  put  backe  againe.  The  nine-
teenth, we  againe  set  saile.  The  fourth  of  August,  we
came  to  an  anchor  in  the  Road  of  Teco.  The  first  of
September,  we  set  saile  for  Bantam,  where  on  the  two  and
twentieth  we  anchored.  On  the  five  and  twentieth,
arrived  there  the  French  Pinnasse  from  Jambe,  on  the
Coast  of  Sumatra.  On  the  thirtieth,  came  in  the  Uni-
corne  from  Musulpatan.  The  fourth  of  October,  we  set
saile  for  Jaquatra,  and  then  anchored  on  the  sixt ;  and
thence  againe  on  the  twentieth  to  Bantam,  with  the  James,
Unicorne  and  Bee.  The  seven  and  twentieth,  the  James
had  her  leake  brake  out  againe,  which  did  increase  by
report  two  foot  water  in  a  glasse,  and  five  foot  in  hold
before  they  knew  of  it.  The  eight  and  twentieth,  they
stitched  a  Bonnet  with  Ockam,  and  haled  it  under  her,
which  having  beene  there  a  quarter  of  an  houre,  the  leake

538

Leake  againe
in  the  James.

JOHN HATCH  a.d.

1618.

stopped,  so  that  the  water  increased  not  above  halfe  an

inch  in  an  houre. They  resolved  to  careene  her,  and  we

hasted  to  get  out  our  Ordnance  and  Provisions. The

twelfth  of  November,  shee  was  in  like  case,  and  men  were

sent  from  every  ship  to  pump  her  (and  haling  the  Bonnet

againe  to  her  keele,  shee  was  thight  as  before)  at  the  Hand

where  shee  was  to  be  careened.

The  fifteenth,  the  Rose  anchored  at  Palamban  point
from  Teco.  The  nineteenth,  foure  Ships  out  of  England,
the  Moone,  the  Clove,  the  Samson,  and  the  Pepper-corne  ;
Sir  Thomas  Dale  and  Captaine  Jourdaine  being  both  in  Sir  Tho.  Dale.
the  Clove ;  the  Sunne  being  lost  at  the  Hand  of  Inganio,
and  the  Globe  lost  their  companie  betweene  the  Cape  of
Good  Hope  and  Saint  Laurence.  They  had  most  of  their
men  sicke  at  their  arrivall.  The  eight  and  twentieth,  they
anchored  by  us  at  the  Hand,  being  in  all  thirteene  saile,  Eng%sh  ihips,
the  James,  Gift,  Unicorne,  Clove,  Samson,  Moone,  Pepper-  f  ^  salk
corne,  Thomas,  Bee,  Advise,  Rose,  little  Francis,  and  the
Prize.  This  afternoone  the  Sunnes  Skiffe  came  aboord
the  Moone  from  Inganio  with  the  Master  and  Cape  Mer-
chant, the  Minister,  and  twentie  men  more,  the  Ship  Sun?e
being  split  in  pieces,  and  all  her  sicke  men  drowned,  being  ^ens
eightie  or  ninetie  of  them.  The  Inhabitants  of  Inganio
came  downe  on  them  which  were  gotten  on  land,  and  slue
seven  or  eight,  hurt  the  Master  and  others,  with  wooden
Darts.  Then  they  made  them  another  Boat  of  boords
and  broken  pieces  that  came  from  the  ship.  So  there  came
sixtie  or  seventie  men  in  the  Skiffe  and  this  Boat ;  and
nineteene  or  twentie  were  left  on  the  Hand  sicke  and  hurt,
which  were  after  taken  in  by  Iowa  Prawes  and  brought
aboord  the  ships,  being  in  miserable  case,  with  want  of
clothes,  bruses  with  the  Rocks,  and  burning  with  the
Sunne  and  salt  Water.  The  nine  and  twentieth,  the  Globe
arrived.

The  third  of  December,  the  Bee  set  saile  for  Inganio,
to  see  if  they  could  have  any  thing,  but  was  forced  backe
with  crosse  windes. The  fourth,  the  Blacke  Lion  of  the  Blacke  Lion.
Hollanders  arrived  from  the  Coast  of  China,  Palatina,

539

A.D.
l6l8.

Fight  with  the
Hollanders
fleet. See
Capt.  Pring
and  Master
Corthops
Journall.

Hollanders
fled.

Little  James

sunke.

[I.  v.  620.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  other  places ;  her  lading,  Pepper,  Rice,  Sugar,  and
some  China  commodities,  by  report,  to  the  quantitie  of
sixe  hundred  tunnes.  This  night  Sir  Thomas  Dale
caused  men  to  goe  out  of  other  ships  aboord  the  Moone,
the  Clove,  the  Samson,  the  Globe,  being  but  weakly-
manned  :  which  the  next  day  anchored  close  by  the  Blacke
Lion,  which  yeelded  on  composition.  Shee  was,  by  re-
port, of  eight  hundred  tunnes,  had  in  her  eightie  men,  and
two  or  foure  and  twentie  peeces  of  Ordnance.  The  nine-
teenth, Sir  Thomas  Dale  in  the  Moone,  Captaine  Pring  in
the  Gift,  with  the  Unicorne,  Clove,  Samson,  Globe,
Pepper-corne,  Thomas,  Bee,  Rose  and  Blacke  Lion,  set
saile  for  Jaquatra,  where  they  found  riding  seven  saile  of
Hollanders,  readie  to  fight.  The  one  and  twentieth,  came
a  Holland  ship  from  Jambe,  which  sent  their  Boat  for
Jaquatra  with  twelve  men,  two  great  murtherers  and  eight
small  shot,  with  each  man  his  sword :  but  we  way-laid  her
and  tooke  her  with  the  Barge,  and  the  Ship  put  to  Sea
againe.

The  two  and  twentieth,  we  thought  to  have  fought,  and
plyed  to  and  againe  as  occasion  offered.  The  three  and
twentieth,  we  began  the  fight,  and  the  Jambe  ship  got  in
amongst  them.  This  fight  continued  about  three  houres,
in  which  time  wee  received  in  the  Hull  and  Masts  betweene
fiftie  and  sixtie  great  shot,  most  in  the  Hull,  yet  had  but
one  hurt  in  the  fight,  and  hee  died  of  it.  The  Hollanders
and  wee  came  to  an  anchor  all  night  close  by  each  other.
The  next  morning  wee  set  saile  and  plyed  to  windward :
but  the  Hollanders  seeing  wee  would  get  up  to  them,
waighed  and  fled  betweene  halfe  way  Hand  and  the  other
Hand  to  the  East,  and  so  bore  away  to  the  East,  betweene
the  Hands  and  the  Mayne.  And  when  they  came  thwart
of  their  Hand,  they  saw  a  little  English  Pinnasse,  which  in
flight  from  them  had  run  on  a  ledge  of  Rocks,  and  was
there  cast  away.  They  sent  their  Boates,  which  by  our
pursuit  they  were  forced  to  recall ;  and  we  stood  after
them  amayne  and  chased  them  (being  now  by  addition  of
another  from  Jaquatra  nine  ships)  three  or  foure  miles  to

54o

JOHN HATCH

A.D.
l6l8.

Blacke  Lion
bu7ttt.

Rackupee,  or
Aracape  a  hot
Drinke.

the  East  of  Jaquatra,  and  night  comming  on,  anchored.
The  five  and  twentieth,  came  a  China  Juncke  on  fire  driv-
ing thwart  our  halse,  but  we  perceived  it  betime,  let  slip
and  avoided  it,  so  that  it  did  no  harme  at  all.  We  made
after  them,  but  they  were  under  sayle  to  the  East,  and
the  wind  at  South  South-west.  The  same  day  we  tooke
out  the  Thomas  Ordnance,  beeing  an  old  ship,  and  sunke  Thomas sunke
her  neere  the  Hollanders  Hand.  The  eight  and  twentieth,
they  aboord  the  Blacke  Lion,  cryed  out,  fire,  and  shee  was
suddenly  on  a  light  fire,  and  nothing  saved,  but  her  com-
pany, which  went  into  the  Boat  and  Skiffe.  This  hap-
pened by  some  which  had  beene  at  Dice  all  night,  and
went  and  broke  up  a  Scuttle  where  there  was  Rackupee,
which  so  soone  as  they  had  broched,  tooke  fire  with  the
light  they  had,  as  it  is  reported.

The  third  of  January,  Master  Jackson,  the  Land  Cap-
taine  of  the  James,  dyed  of  a  shot  which  had  taken  away
his  legge  at  Jaquatra.  The  seventh,  Shot  and  Powder
were  sent  to  the  King  of  Jaquatra  to  take  the  Hollanders
Castle.  The  ninth,  we  wayed  from  this  place  to  the  West-
ward. The  twentieth,  we  espyed  two  sayles  to  whom  we
gave  chase  in  vaine,  they  sailing  better  then  wee  :  the  next
day  wee  espyed  foure,  which  wee  chased  as  the  wind
would  give  leave  till  night.  The  five  and  twentieth,  the
Bee  was  sent  to  Marough  for  provision ;  The  one  and
thirtieth,  we  anchored  in  the  Road  of  Bantam.

The  three  and  twentieth  of  February,  Sir  Thomas  Dale
weighed  to  go  for  Jaquatra,  with  the  Moone,  Clove,  Globe,
Samson,  Pepper-corne,  Hound,  Bee,  Rose.  The  seven
and  twentieth,  the  Great  James,  the  Gift,  the  Unicorne,
and  the  little  James  weighed  from  Bantam  leaving  in  the
Road  the  Advice  and  the  Mosambeeke  or  Prize.

The  first  of  March,  the  Flemmings  saw  us  and  weighed,
and  we  made  all  the  sayle  we  could  to  get  up  to  them,
and  they  keeping  the  weather  of  us,  their  Admirall  let
flye  two  Peeces  at  the  Great  James  first :  and  then  we  Another  fight.
went  to  it  on  all  hands.  As  wee  fought,  one  of  the  Flem-
mings ranne  aboord  their  Admirall  by  chance,  and  bore

54i

A.D.
l6l8.

Marough.

*The  Blackes
call  the  Salt
hill  so.
Owen
Bodman.

A  new  fleet.

Shoalds.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

over-boord  his  owne  Botspret  and  Beak-head,  and  the
Admirals  Ancient.  The  other  two  Flemmings  seeing
that,  shooting  a  shot  or  two,  ranne  away  and  the  rest
after.  We  tacked  and  chased  them,  but  they  going  better,
went  from  us  exceedingly,  and  wee  gave  over.  The  thir-
teenth, the  Bee  came  to  us  in  Bantam  Road,  from  Sir
Thomas  Dales  Fleet  at  Jaquatra.

The  seven  and  twentieth  of  Aprill,  161 9.  there  came  a
Juncke  amongst  our  Fleet  from  Patania  with  Flemmings
goods  and  a  Flemming  in  her,  which  we  tooke.  The
eight  and  twentieth,  the  Dragons  Clawe  came  to  an  anchor
at  Palambam  from  Surat.

The  twentieth  of  May,  we  set  saile  in  the  Road  of
Marough,  to  goe  for  the  Coast  of  Coromandel,  being
eleven  Sayle  in  company,  the  Great  James,  Moone,  Gift,
Unicorne,  Clove,  Globe,  Pepper-corne,  Bee,  Rose,  Advise,
and  the  Surat  Pinnasse.  At  five  in  the  afternoone  wee
anchored  betwixt  Besse  and  *  Cracatawe.  The  one  and
twentieth,  a  Councell  was  held  aboord  the  Admiral  (the
Moone)  wherein  Owen  Bodman  was  condemned  for  burn-
ing the  Blacke  Lion  and  other  trespasses,  who  was  hanged
the  next  day  aboord  the  Moone  at  the  Yards  arme.

The  thirtieth  of  June,  we  came  to  an  anchor  nine
leagues  East  from  Masulipatan.  We  stayed  in  these  parts
till  the  tenth  of  December.

The  nine  and  twentieth  of  July,  the  Unicornes  Shallop
was  cast  away  at  Penara,  wherein  M.  Rice  and  Harris,
and  foure  men  more  were  drowned.

The  five  and  twentieth,  we  anchored  neere  Teco,  and
saw  three  shippes,  which  the  next  day  came  to  us,  being  a
new  Fleet ;  the  Palsgrave  Admirall,  the  Elizabeth  Vice-
Admirall,  the  Merchants  Hope  Rere-Admirall.  We  all
wayed  and  went  into  the  Road  of  Teco.

The  fourth  of  March,  we  all  set  sayle  in  Teco.  The
fifth,  the  James  met  with  a  shoald,  and  they  had  much  to
doe  to  save  her  from  grounding.  This  shoald  lyeth  from
the  White  Hand,  South-east,  two  thirds  East,  three  leagues
within  two  Glasses,  the  James  and  Unicorne  met  with

542

JOHN HATCH  a.d.

1620.

another  shoald,  and  stayed  upon  it  at  five  fathome  water,

and  within  a  Cables  length  of  fiftie  fathomes,  and  then  the

White  Hand  bore  North-west  by  West  eight  miles  and  an

halfe  off. The  ninth,  we  bore  up  to  goe  to  the  South  of

Nimtan. This  Hand  is  neere  twentie  leagues  long,  and  Nimtan.

lyeth  South  South-east,  and  North  North-west. On  the

Wester-side  is  great  shoalding,  on  the  East  deepe  water

hard  by  the  shoare. The  twentieth,  at  night  wee  had  a

great  storme,  and  had  many  Corpo-Santos,  viz.  at  the  Foure  Corpo-

head  of  the  Maine-top-mast,  and  on  the  Meson  yard,  the antos'

Fore-top-mast, and the Mezon Top-mast. The next

morning,  the  storme  beganne  to  breake  up,  and  we  saw

the  high-land  of  Manning  Cabo.

The  five  and  twentieth  of  March,  1620.  we  anchored
neere  the  point  of  Ballambin  ;  where  on  the  sixe  and  twen-
tieth our  Cable  was  cut  a-sunder  with  a  Rocke,  which  wee
recovered  the  seven  and  twentieth.

At  the  South-west  point  of  Sumatra  lyeth  the  Hand  PoIa  Telhre
Pola  Tellore  in  five  degrees  fiftie  seven  minutes  of  South  a![d  Ballam~
latitude, South South-east from which is Ballambin,
where  is  good  refreshing  and  watering,  thence  to  the  South  [I.  v".  621.]
point  called  Cape  Bublathore,  is  two  leagues  South  South-
east three  quarters  East,  and  from  thence  to  the  next
Easter  point  is  three  leagues,  and  in  the  second  Bay  from
the  said  point  is  a  River  where  we  watered,  but  the  water
not  very  good.

The  sixth  of  Aprill,  1620.  we  weighed  to  goe  for  Ban-
tam, with  a  full  resolution  to  make  an  end  with  the
Hollanders  one  way  or  other,  they  being  eighteene  Sayle,
and  wee  ten,  little  and  great.  The  eight,  betweene  two
and  three  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  beeing  short  of
Sangang  we  met  with  the  Bull  and  two  Hollanders  bound
to  looke  us  to  bring  newes  of  the  peace  betwixt  us  and  Peace  betwixt
them.  The  eleventh,  their  Fleet  being  thirteene  besides  us  a"d  Hol~
the  former  two  came  unto  us  from  Jaquatra :  and  wee
saluted  each  other  with  many  Peeces  of  Ordnance.  The
twelfth  we  went  for  Bantam  where  we  found  two  Hol-
landers more. The  seven  and  twentieth,  the  James  and

543

A.D.

l620.

Leque

Pequena.

Fleet  for
Japan  and
Manillas.

Shoald.

'Crocatow  a
very  sickly
place.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Unicorne  departed  from  us  for  Japan,  to  careene  there.
The  thirtieth,  we  anchored  in  Jaquatra  Road.

The  one  and  twentieth  of  May,  the  Elizabeth,  the  Bull,
and  the  Hope,  set  sayle  with  the  Harlem,  and  the  Dutch
Hope.  The  Elizabeth  and  Harlem  were  bound  for
Leque  Pequena,  there  to  stay  for  the  Bull  and  the  Dutch
Hope  which  were  appointed  to  goe  for  Moccow,  and  the
English  Hope  for  Patania,  and  then  to  meete  with  the
other  foure  at  Leque  Pequena,  thence  to  goe  all  for  Japan,
there  to  meete  the  rest  of  the  Fleet  for  the  Manillas.  The
thirtieth,  peace  was  published  at  Jaquatra  on  shoare  and
aboord  the  ships.

The  fourth  of  June,  the  Moone,  the  Palsgrave,  the
Bantam  and  the  Praw,  set  sayle  from  Jaquatra  for  Japan,
and  the  Manilla's.  The  seventeenth,  wee  set  saile  to  goe
to  Cracatow  to  cut  new  Masts  and  Timber  to  sheath  our
ship,  and  beeing  a  league  and  halfe  from  the  Roade,  met
with  a  shoald  where  we  had  but  two  fathomes  water  (being
suddenly  on  ground)  at  the  shippes  head,  and  five  at  her
sterne :  but  praysed  be  God,  got  off  without  hurt.  It
is  Rockes  and  Corall  and  lyeth  halfe  way  betwixt  Jaquatra
Road,  and  the  Sand  to  the  East  of  Hectors  Hand.  If  you
keepe  the  Flemmish  Castle  and  the  top  of  the  highest  hill
one  right  over  the  other ;  you  shall  goe  cleere  in  or  out.
If  you  cannot  see  the  hill  keepe  the  Castle  South  South-
east, but  if  you  keepe  it  South  by  East,  You  will  be  neere
it,  or  on  it.  On  the  neerest  part  of  the  next  Hand  to  the
East  of  Pola  Lacka  is  a  dangerous  shoald  two  miles  off,
and  seldome  sheweth  it  selfe.  The  one  and  twentieth,
we  anchored  and  moored  our  ship  a  Cables  length  North-
west of  the  little  round  Hand,  and  rode  till  the  one  and
twentieth  of  July,  in  which  time  wee  cut  about  seventie
pieces  of  square  Timber  for  our  decayed  ship,  and  to  pay
the  Hollanders  two  and  twentie  borrowed,  for  their  house
at  Jaquatra  by  our  Merchants.  This  place  is  so  infec-
tious that  most  of  our  men  were  taken  with  swolne  legges,
or  bodies,  some  breaking  out  with  Sores  and  Byles,  others
taken  with  dizzinesse  and  dimnesse  of  sight,  almost  every

544

JOHN HATCH

A.D.
l620.

one  losing  his  stomache,  and  given  to  vomiting  with  a
strange  costivenesse :  sixe  dyed,  and  thirtie  seven  were
sicke  and  lame,  all  weake,  vomiting,  sacke,  racke,  bever-
age ; nothing  stayed.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  we  anchored  in  Morough  Morough
Road  neere  the  shoare,  which  is  no  good  Road,  but  we
were  forced,  so  to  command  the  Towne  with  our  Ord-
nance in  succour  of  our  Boats,  if  the  people  should  have
betrayed  them,  as  they  had  done  the  Hollanders  of  whom
they  slew  eight  men.  We  lost  an  Anchor  there  (they  cut
off  the  Boyes  that  we  could  not  after  finde  it)  and  could
get  little  refreshing,  or  none.

The  nineteenth  of  August,  we  anchored  at  Jaquatra,
having  beene  from  thence  two  moneths,  and  in  one  moneth
which  we  were  returning  from  Cracatow,  we  lost  with  the
former  sixe,  one  and  fortie  men,  besides  fortie  five  sicke
in  the  ship  ;  nor  had  we  above  twentie  of  our  owne  Com-
pany that  could  goe  up  and  downe  the  ship.  The  eight
and  twentieth,  the  Hollanders  surrendred  the  Starre  againe
to  the  English.

The  first  of  September  came  in  a  Flemming  from  Hol-
land, which  told  us  of  the  Lion  arrived  at  the  Cape  from
Surat ;  and  of  sixe  English  ships  with  her  in  Soldania
from  England,  two  bound  for  Bantam,  and  foure  to  Surat,
which  were  to  stay  in  Soldania  for  foure  Flemmings  to  goe
to  Surat  with  them.  The  one  and  twentieth,  the  Dragons
Claw  arrived  from  Achen  with  newes  that  the  Charles,
the  Rubie,  and  the  Diamond,  were  all  at  Sea  comming
for  Jaquatra ;  and  that  the  Bee  saw  a  French-man  of
Warre  on  the  Coast  of  Sumatra,  which  would  by  no
meanes  speake  with  her.  They  were  in  all  foure  ships,
but  she  had  lost  her  consorts.

The  first  of  October,  the  Schedam  arrived  with  newes  of  New  fleet,
three  English  ships  in  the  Straits  of  Sunda,  the  Royall
Exchange,  the  Unitie,  and  the  Beare,  the  Bee  also  with
them,  which  on  the  second,  and  the  tenth  arrived  here.
The  foure  and  twentieth,  the  Dragons  Claw  departed
hence  for  the  Moluccas. The  sixe  and  twentieth,  one  of

545

Starre
rendred.

Newes  of
English  ships.

French  man  of
Warre.

IV

2  M

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1620.

our  men  suspected  for  stealing  Cloves,  was  drowned.
Hee  had  wished  before  mee  a  little  afore,  if  hee  knew  of
the  Cloves,  that  hee  were  so  farre  under  water  that  he
might  never  rise  againe ;  and  going  over  the  ships  side,
a  step  of  the  ladder  broke,  and  he  fell  over-boord,  &  never
rose  againe.  The  thirtieth,  the  Beare  and  Diamond  were
sent  for  Jam  be  in  hope  of  Pepper.  The  eleventh  of
Japara.  November,  the  Globe  departed  from  Jaquatra  for  Japara,

to  fetch  sheathing  boord  and  cattell :  and  the  fifteenth,  the
Unitie  set  saile  for  Achen.

The  second  of  December,  the  Roe-bucke  arrived  from
Teco  with  Pepper.  The  third,  the  Samson  arrived  from
Patania,  and  brought  in  her  the  Purser  and  three  others  of
Unicorne  lost,  the  Unicorne,  which  was  cast  on  the  Coast  of  China.  The
[L  v.  02 2. J  fifteenth,  the  Globe  arrived  with  boords  and  plankes  from
Japara.  The  sixteenth,  arrived  a  Juncke  which  brought
some  of  the  Samsons  men,  some  of  the  Unicornes,  and
those  which  were  left  on  shoare  at  Patania,  when  the
Samson  and  the  Hound  were  taken.  The  one  and  twen-
tieth, the  Rubie  departed  for  the  Moluccas.  The  sixe
and  twentieth,  the  Clove  arrived  from  Jambe  and  Patania.
The  nine  and  twentieth,  the  Royall  Exchange,  the  Starre
and  the  Roe-bucke,  set  sayle  for  Amboino  with  a  Hol-
land ship  in  their  company.

The  second  of  January,  the  Bee  went  to  Hectors  Hand

to  careene. The  same  day  the  Hollanders  had  foure  ships

The  Dragon that  went  for  the  Moluccas,  the  Dragon  being  one,  and  the

SM  serving next  day  the  New  Holland,  and  in  her  John  Peterson

Coen  Generall  of  all  the  Indies,  for  the  Hollanders:  who

carryed  a  float  with  eight  or  ten  Demicanons,  and  fortie

great  Prawes  to  land  men,  and  a  great  company  of  Soul-

Retumeoftke  diers. The eighteenth, the James Royall arrived in

James.  Jaquatra  Road  from  Japan,  where  she  careened  both  sides

to  the  keele. The  one  and  twentieth,  arrived  the  new

Zeland  from  Masulipatan,  and  brought  in  her  Captaine

Ball,  Thomas  Jones,  and  Richard  Thomas. The  thirtieth,

the  James  began  to  take  in  Pepper  to  goe  for  England.

The  one  and  thirtieth,  the  Bee  returned  from  Hectors

546

JOHN HATCH  a.d.

1618.

Hand,  careened  to  the  keele,  and  the  Globe  foure  or  five
strakes  on  a  side.  In  the  James  Royall  bound  for  Eng-
land, the  sixe  and  twentieth  of  February  we  set  saile.

The  nineteenth  of  May,  we  anchored  in  the  Bay  of  Their  return
Soldania : where  we  set  sayle  the  second  of  June. We m6y
found there riding the Anne, wherein was Captaine
Walter  Bennet,  and  the  Fortune  a  Victualler,  and  three
Hollanders  bound  for  Bantam. The  one  and  twentieth
of  June,  wee  saw  the  Hand  of  Saint  Helena,  bearing  West  Saint  Helena.
by  North  sixteene  leagues,  and  on  the  two  and  twentieth
anchored  there. Here  we  tooke  store  of  fresh  fish  by
the  shippes  side. The  nine  and  twentieth,  wee  set  sayle,
and  the  eighteenth  of  September  anchored  in  the  Downes  :

Chap. V.

The  Voyage  of  the  Anne  Royall  from  Surat  to
Moha,  in  the  Red  Sea,  for  setling  an  English
Trade  in  those  parts:  Anno  Dom.  16 18.  ex-
tracted out  of  Master  Edward  Heynes,  his
Journall,  written  thereof.

Ir  Thomas  Roe,  Lord  Embassadour  for  his
Majestie  with  the  Mogoll,  having  given
divers  Articles  of  instructions  unto  Cap-
taine Andrew  Shilling,  Master  of  the
Anne  Royall,  together  with  Joseph  Sal-
banke,  Edward  Heynes,  and  Richard
Barbar,  Merchants ; for  Trade  at  Dabul,

and  after  as  they  saw  occasion  in  the  Red  Sea :  it  was
thought  meet  by  Captaine  Martin  Pring  Generall,  and
Thomas  Kerridge,  and  Thomas  Rastell  (the  twelfth  of
March,  aboord  the  James  Royall,  the  time  being  too  farre
spent  for  Dabul)  that  the  said  ship  should  sayle  directly
for  the  Red  Sea.  Thus  they  sayled  from  the  Road  of
Swally.

The  tenth  of  Aprill,  we  had  sight  of  Aden. The  thir-  J  den.
teenth,  we  past  the  Strait  of  the  Bab  or  Babel  Mandel  (an

547

A.D.
I6l8.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Mocha.

They  goe  on
share.

Hand  in  the  entrance  or  mouth  of  the  Red  Sea,  which
causeth  the  Strait)  about  seven  in  the  morning  :  and  about
five  in  the  evening,  wee  had  sight  of  Mocha  five  leagues
off.  Night  comming  on,  we  anchored,  and  a  Canon  came
aboord  us  from  the  Governour  to  know  what  we  were  and
our  intent,  which  we  answered,  and  they  having  begged  a
few  Biskets  departed.

The  next  morning  wee  anchored  a  league  and  halfe
from  the  shoare,  and  saluted  the  Towne  with  nine  Peeces.
The  Water-Bayly  brought  us  a  Present  from  the  Gover-
nour, a  young  Bullocke,  two  Goates,  Mangoes,  Limes,
Cucumers,  and  Water  Melons,  welcommed  us,  and  desired
to  send  one  on  shoare  to  acquaint  the  Governour  with  the
cause  of  our  comming.  We  answered,  we  were  English-
men, which  came  to  seeke  Trade  there,  but  durst  not
adventure  on  shoare  without  sufficient  pledges.  About
three  in  the  afternoone,  came  a  Jew  aboord  (borne  in
Lisbone)  together  with  an  old  Venetian  turned  Turke  (one
in  good  respect  with  the  Governour)  which  from  the
Governour  assured  us  of  all  content

The  fifteenth,  Allee  Asgee,  the  Chiefe  Scrivano  sent  a
Present  of  Goates  and  Fruites  to  welcome  us,  with  two
old  men  of  good  qualitie :  sent  from  the  Governour  to
remayne  as  pledges  for  such  as  went  on  shoare,  with  many
protestations  of  good  usage.  Hereupon  Master  Salbanke
and  I  went  with  our  two  Linguists  and  one  Attendant,
with  a  Present  for  the  Governour,  viz.  sixe  yards  of  broad-
cloth Stammell,  sixe  yards  of  greene,  a  Fowling  Peece,  and
Looking-glasse.  At  our  landing,  a  thousand  people  ex-
pected, and  divers  Officers  were  readie  to  receive  and
conduct  us  to  the  Governour.  His  house  was  faire  and
large,  built  of  stone  and  bricke.  At  the  entrance  was  a
faire  gate  with  a  Porters  lodge,  and  divers  servants  there
attending.  Within  is  a  great  Court,  whence  arise  winding
staires  about  thirtie  steps  to  a  square  Tarris ;  out  of  which
we  were  brought  into  a  large  roome,  having  at  one  end  a
[I.  v.  623.]  great  bay  window  opening  to  the  Sea,  in  which  the  Gover-
nour sate : on  the  sides  others  of  like  bignesse,  looking

548

The  Gover-
nors house  and
state.

EDWARD HEYNES  a.d.

1618.

unto  the  Wharfe  or  landing  place.  The  flore  was  covered
with  fine  Mats,  and  neere  the  Governour,  with  faire  Turkie
Carpets  and  Persian  Felts.  That  whereon  himselfe  sate
was  a  partie  coloured  Sattin  Quilt,  with  rich  Damaske  and
Velvet  Cushions.  Hee  was  clothed  in  a  Violet  colour
Sattin  Vest,  his  under-coats  fine  India  Linnen,  having  on
a  Sattin  Cap  wreathed  about  with  a  fine  white  Shash.  He
was  accompanied  with  the  Chiefe  Scrivano,  the  Principall
Customers,  some  Turkes  of  better  fashion,  many  Indian
Merchants,  and  one  hundred  servants.  Hee  is  about
fiftie  yeeres  old,  and  named  Mahomet  Aga.

When  we  came  neere,  he  bowed  himselfe  and  wee  did  Thetr  con-
reverence : then  bade  us  sit  downe,  and  demanded  our  J
Nation  and  businesse. Wee  answered,  we  were  English-
men, of  London,  Merchants,  who  by  command  of  the
Ambassadour  of  His  Majestie  of  England,  resident  with
the  Great  Mogoll  (with  whom  we  hold  league  and  amitie) -
are  comne  to  this  Towne  to  treat  for  licence  of  free  Trade  :
That  we  were friends to the Grand Signior, and had
traffique  at  Constantinople,  Aleppo,  and  in  other  places  of
his  Dominion,  and  hoped  the  like  here : that  wee  were
come  to  desire  his,  and  the  Bashas  Firman,  for  like  liberties
heere  as  is  granted  us  by  the  Grand  Signior,  both  for  pre-
sent and  future  times,  as  intending  to  visit  their  Ports
yearely  with  plentie  of  English  and  Indian  goods : that
we  had  likewise  in  command  from  the  said  Embassador
(which  had  heard  of  divers  Pirats,  English,  Dutch,  French,
Portugals,  Malabars,  and  others  which  infested  the  quiet
Trades  of  this  Port,  and  principally  the  Guzerats,  our
friends)  to  take  them,  and  free  those  Seas  of  such  incom-
brances,  protecting-  all  honest  Merchants  ships  and  Tunckes  „,
trom  injurie  :  and  these  were  the  true  causes  or  our  com- Jed  ou}.  shi
ming. Hee  then  rose  up  and  bad  us  welcome  ;  applauded  a  man  of
our  designe,  and  demanded  why  wee  were  so  fearefull  to  Warre,  by
come  on  shoare  without  pledge. We  answered,  that  about  reason  °fsme
sixe  yeers  since,  some  of  our  Countrymen  were  here  with  excess"°f
kind  shewes  and  promises  entised  ashoare,  and  by  the  then  Countrey-men
Governour  betrayed,  emprisoned,  and  many  murthered : in  those  Seas.

549

A.D.
I6l8.

Constantin-
ople.

The  visit  to
the  Scrivano.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

whose  harmes  made  us  cautelous  for  our  owne  safetie.
But  that  we  were  no  otherwise  then  we  professed,  they
should  shortly  know  by  the  testimonie  of  two  Guzerat
Juncks,  one  of  which  had  not  come  this  yeare,  but  for  the
passe  and  promise  of  the  said  Embassador  that  our  ship
should  defend  them  home-ward  bound  from  Men  of
Warre  in  these  Seas ;  having  escaped  rifling  last  yeere  by
men  of  our  Nation,  through  our  opportune  comming  to
their  rescue ;  who  delivered  her  safe  at  her  Port,  and  sent
their  chiefe  Commanders  into  England  to  answere  those
wrongs  to  our  Kings  friends.  Hee  acknowledged  our
Nation  good  and  friendly,  promised  that  we  should  live
on  shoare  and  negotiate  as  secure  as  in  our  owne  Coun-
trey,  that  hee  would  also  procure  the  Basha  to  confirme
the  same,  and  would  give  us  any  content.  That  for  the
ill  usage  formerly,  the  Governour  then  was  an  ill  man,
long  since  removed,  and  now  living  in  disgrace  at  Stam-
bola :  and  sware  by  his  Mahomet  and  by  his  Beard,  that
not  one  haire  of  us  should  be  diminished,  nor  any  wrong
offered :  that  he  would  therefore  proclayme  our  liberties
that  none  might  pretend  ignorance  to  discourtesie.  Hee
wished  us  also  to  looke  out  a  house  in  Towne  fit  for  our
persons  and  goods,  commanded  two  of  his  principall
Chauses  to  attend  us,  and  till  wee  could  fit  our  selves
better,  recommended  us  to  the  Jew-Merchant  his  enter-
tainment, desiring  him  to  assist  us  in  all  things.

Thus  after  our  Present  delivered  as  from  our  Captaine
and  many  kind  thankes,  wee  went  by  the  Jewes  per-
swasion  to  visit  the  Scrivano,  who  is  likewise  chiefe  Cus-
tomer, whose  servants  (himselfe  not  being  then  at  home)
entertayned  us  with  much  civilitie,  and  brought  us  into  a
faire  roome,  not  much  inferiour  in  building,  or  furniture
to  that  of  the  Governour,  where  we  had  left  him,  and
whence  he  soone  returned  and  welcommed  us  with  much
courtesie,  assuring  us  of  whatsoever  the  Governour  had
promised,  and  that  he  himselfe  would  see  all  executed,
who  had  power  also  to  right  us.  We  were  informed  that
this  mans  authoritie  was  no  lesse  in  the  Towne  then  the

55°

EDWARD HEYNES

A.D.
I6l8.

They  view  the
Towne.
The  descrip-
tion thereof.

Governours,  who  was  by  him  directed  in  matters  of
weight :  hee  seemed  a  heartie  old  man.  After  he  had
made  us  drinke  Coho  and  Sherbet,  we  tooke  our  leave  and
rested  that  night  with  our  Jew.

The  next  morning,  wee  spent  an  houre  to  view  the
Towne  and  observe  the  countenances  of  the  people  towards
us,  whom  we  found  gentle  and  courteous,  especially  the
Banians  and  Guzerats,  of  which  here  lives  continually
great  store,  as  Merchants,  Shop-keepers,  and  Mechanike
Trades,  their  shops  neatly  built  and  cleanly  kept.  Their
Market  or  Bazar  appeared  well  furnished  with  all  neces-
saries, besides  fruits  daily  brought  out  of  the  Countrey.
The  Towne  for  the  most  part  built  with  bricke  and  stone
fairely  playstered  over  with  Playster  of  Paris  :  the  building
flat-roofed  some  two  stories  high,  with  Tarrises  on  the
top,  whereon  they  build  Summer  houses  of  Canes  and
Mats,  in  which  they  rest  in  the  nights  and  passe  the  first
quarter  of  the  day,  having  at  that  time  a  fresh  breese  from
the  Sea ;  all  the  rest  of  the  day  so  hot,  that  men  cannot
well  endure  any  clothes,  not  so  much  as  a  shirt.  It  lyeth
levell  alongst  the  Sea-side,  being  about  two  miles  from
North  to  South.  There  are  many  faire  houses  and  three
principall  Moschees ;  the  streets  kept  cleane,  each  mans
doore  every  morning  and  evening  watered  and  swept,
seeming  liker  sandie  bowling  allies  then  streets :  no  filth
suffered  to  be  cast  abroad,  but  carryed  to  a  place  appointed
scowred  by  the  Sea :  In  fine,  I  have  not  lightly  seene,  a
sweeter,  cleaner,  better  governed  Towne  then  this  of  [I.  v.  624.]
Mocha.  Betwixt  the  Governours  and  Scrivanoes  is  the
Wharfe,  about  twelve  score  square,  neere  which  adjoyning
to  the  Governours  house  is  a  platforme  raysed,  built  with
hewen  stones,  with  Battlements  towards  the  Sea,  about
fortie  paces  square,  in  which  are  mounted  thirteene  or
fourteene  small  Peeces  of  little  force.  Against  the  landing-
place  are  two  faire  Brasse  Peeces  about  five  foot  in  length ;
on  the  other  end  is  the  Alsandica,  and  a  Brasse  Peece  of
sixe  foot,  which  carryeth  a  Bullet  as  bigge  as  a  Canon.
This  is  their  strength  for  defence  of  the  Towne. Yet  at

55i

Heat  at

Mocha.
Their  neatnes.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1618.

the  North  end  is  a  stone  house  in  manner  of  a  Fort,  and
in  it  some  few  Peeces,  but  they  put  small  trust  in  their
Ordnance,  relying  most  on  their  Souldiers,  of  which  two
hundred  reside  continually  in  the  Towne,  the  rest  (beeing
in  all  to  the  number  of  five  hundred)  live  within  a  day  or
two  dayes  journey,  and  are  in  readinesse  upon  any
occasion.

Hoja  Nassans  sonne,  the  principall  India  Merchant  of
the  Towne,  professed  and  promised  all  kindnesse  (for  wee
went  to  his  house)  and  after  a  cup  of  Coho  and  Tobacco
(which  is  usually  amongst  these  people)  we  went  againe
to  visit  the  Governour  before  wee  went  aboord,  who  rose
and  met  us,  caused  us  to  sit  by  him,  welcommed  us,  pro-
mised as  free  Trade  heere,  as  in  any  other  place  of  the
Grand  Signiors  Dominion,  nor  would  denie  us  any  thing

Another  reasonable : said  that  another  Governour  should  shortly

°^er"°^r  succeed  him,  but  one  as  his  brother,  honester  then  him-
selfe,  who  should  performe  all  the  promises  which  he  had
now  made  ;  at  our  request,  commanded  the  Water-Bayliffe
to  furnish  us  with  Boats  at  all  times  to  carrie  us,  or  water
from  shoare  for  the  ship  aboord.  After  this  we  visited
the  Scrivano,  and  found  him  very  courteous,  promising  to
come  aboord  to  see  our  ship,  and  bid  our  Captaine  wel-
come, and  after  a  health  of  Coho  dismissed  us  to  returne
to  the  ship,  where  our  two  pledges  approved  their  kind
usages,  whose  departure  was  honoured  with  five  Peeces.

Feast  on  ship-  On  the  seventeenth,  the  Scrivano,  our  pledges,  the  Jew,
and  twentie  persons  attending  came  aboord,  brought  a
Bullocke,  Bread,  Quinces,  and  other  Fruites,  and  a  Cake
of  great  roundnesse  and  thicknesse  like  puffe-past,  wherein
were  baked  Hennes  and  Chickens  very  well  dressed,  and
pleasing  enough  to  a  daintie  palate  ;  we  also  with  a  Quince
Pye,  Crabs,  Sacke  and  Strong-water,  added  our  best  wel-
come. He  would  needs  bee  sworne  brother  to  the
Captaine,  which  was  solemnized  with  a  Cup  of  Sacke,  and
after  much  mirth  and  view  of  our  ship,  hee  departed  with
great  content.

We  had  water  brought  by  poore  people  at  reasonable

552

boord.

EDWARD HEYNES  ad.

1618.

rates.  We  also  had  given  good  reason  to  the  Governour
and  Scrivano  (who  approoved  it)  to  make  every  Juncke
that  should  arrive  to  anchor  by  us,  and  there  to  ride  till
they  had  discharged  their  goods.  The  Governour  was
willing,  we  should  examine  and  compell  them  hereto,
because  some  Junckes  passed  by  their  Towne  to  other
Ports  for  Trade,  to  the  losse  of  this.

The  one  and  twentieth,  sixe  at  nig;ht,  we  had  a  storme  Storme  and
of  wind  off  the  shoare  with  Thunder  and  Lightning  very
vehement,  but  no  raine,  which  continued  halfe  an  houre,
the  rest  of  the  night  extreame  hot.  This  storme  brought
sand  and  dust  aboord  in  abundance,  notwithstanding,  we
roade  a  good  league  from  shoare.  The  five  and  twentieth,
we  had  a  message  from  the  Scrivano,  that  the  Governour
and  himselfe  had  received  Letters  from  the  Basha  of  Sinan,
commanding  them  to  receive  and  entertaine  us  with  all
kindnesse,  to  permit  us  to  live  and  Trade  amongst  them
freely  and  quietly.

Ignorance  of  a  new  Governour  must  excuse  us  of  the  New  Gover-
charge  of  a  new  Present  to  him.  His  arrivall  was  on  the  nour  arnved'
seven  and  twentieth,  the  Ordnance  of  the  Towne,  and
Junkes,  and  of  our  ship  welcomming  him.  Hee  sent  our
former  Pledges  aboord  with  thankes,  and  a  Present  of
Plantans,  Limes,  Mangos,  Melons,  Bread,  and  one  Bul-
locke,  promising  in  the  Bashas  name  like  trade  here,
as  at  Constantinople.  The  two  Pledges  remained  aboord
all  night,  and  went  with  us  on  shoare  the  next  day,  where
we  found  the  new  Governour,  and  the  old  sitting  at  the
end  of  a  large  roome,  adorned  much  what  as  at  our  first
arrivall,  or  better.  He  is  about  foure  yeares  old,  named
Rajab  Aga,  was  accompanied  with  divers  principall  Turkes,
and  all  chiefe  Merchants  now  in  trade  of  Surat,  Diu,
Dabul,  Sindu,  Calicut,  and  Cananor.  At  our  approch  he
onely  moved,  so  did  the  Turkes :  the  Merchants  rose,  and
saluted  us.  He  caused  us  to  sit  downe  by  him,  told  us
that  the  Basha,  the  Vizier  of  the  Province,  informed  of  us,
had  commanded  to  give  us  content :  and  besides  his  Lords
command,  he  knew  us  to  be  friends  of  the  Grand  Signior,

553

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1618.

and  to  have  Trade  at  Constantinople,  Aleppo,  and  other
places  of  his  Dominion,  a  Nation  of  friendly  and  honest
disposition,  and  therefore  we  should  find  him  our  good
friend,  and  readie  to  doe  us  any  courtesie,  and  give  us  as
free  Trade,  as  wee  any  where  had  under  the  Grand  Signior,
or  Great  Mogoll. We  told  him  we  were  Merchants,  and
English  fleet  of  our  ship  Vice-admirall  to  a  Fleet  of  five  ships,  one  of
five  ships. which,  was  departed  from  Surat  homewards,  three  from
Bantam  and  other  places  to  the  South,  and  our  ship  by
his Majesties  Embassador employed hither (with such
circumstances  as  before  are  delivered) that  if  our  just
requests  of  free  Trade  be  granted,  wee  purposed  at  our
Factory  next  comming  to  settle  a  Factorie  here,  and  yeerely  to

m"1****  at  fre({UGnt  this  Port  with  shipping  with  English  and  Indian
goods:  signified  our  intents  against  Rovers,  and  what
alreadie  we  had  done  in  that  case  against  our  owne  Coun-
trymen :  intimating  that  it  was  needlesse  to  presse  with  the
inconveniences  which  might  arise  from  denying  us  Trade,
[I.  v.  625.]  who  were  able  to  force  it,  and  hinder  others  from  com-
ming ;  the  feare  of  which  had  caused  some  alreadie  to
passe  by  this  Towne  to  Gudda,  the  Port  of  Mecca,  one
hundred  and  fifty  leagues  farther  up,  a  Towne  of  great
Trade,  and  others  to  other  places.  He  replied,  we  should
be  as  welcome  as  to  any  place  in  our  owne  Countrey,  and
vowed  by  God,  Mahomet  his  head  and  beard,  we  should
live  as  secure  from  hurt  as  in  our  owne  Land.  We  asked
what  securitie  he  would  give  us ;  besides  his  oath  (he
answered)  his  Firman  under  his  Chop,  and  procure  the
like  from  the  Basha.  With  this  wee  seemed  content,  and
gave  him  thankes  :  nor  did  ever  people  seeme  more  willing
to  give  content  then  they :  which,  I  thinke,  ariseth  not
from  conscience,  or  love,  but  feare,  seeing  us  able  to
intervert  their  Trade.  After  some  questions  of  our  Em-
bassador, now  residing  at  Constantinople,  and  touching
the  Portugals,  and  Spaniards,  (which  he  said  were  proud
and  unfaithfu.ll  Nations)  some  speech  happened  of  Sir  H.
Middleton :  we  demanded  the  cause  of  that  treacherie
towards  him :  hee  answered,  the  Vizier  at  that  time  was  a

554

EDWARD HEYNES  a.d.

1618.

bloudie,  cruell,  and  ill-minded  man  of  himselfe,  and  made  Causeof  Turk-
worse  by  the  instigation  of  others,  Turkes,  and  Arabs  of  lst^^ene
this  Towne,  who  observing  the  uncivill  behaviour  of  our  uiddleton.
people,  as  pissing  at  the  gates  of  their  Churches ; forcing  Let  English
into  mens  houses  to  their  women  ;  and  being  daily  drunke  Christians
in  the  streets,  would  fight  and  quarrell  with  the  people ;  ™*>  b^j
things  hatefull  in  these  parts: these  things  were  in  part,
but  the  Governours  covetousnesse  (hoping  to  get  their
ship  and  goods)  was  the  maine  cause  of  that  ill  dealing,
for  which  and  many  other  bad  actions,  he  was  not  long
after  sent  to  Constantinople  to  answere  it,  and  is  either
dead,  or  lives  in  disgrace  to  this  day. Wee  dined  with
the  Scrivano,  and  hired  a  house  of  Hassana  Ga,  one  of
our  Pledges,  at  seventie  Rials  of  eight  the  Monson,  (which
is  all  one  with  the  yeerely  Rent.) The  Scrivano  would
needs  sweare  himselfe  our  friend  on  his  Alchoran : yet
denied  this  Governour  to  be  the  man  which  captived  Sir
H.  Middleton,  which  was  after  found  Turkish  faith. We
agreed  for  Custome  three  by  the  hundred,  both  inwards
and  outwards  (which  he  vowed  all  others  paid  five)  and
for  silver,  and  gold,  and  money,  to  pay  none. Wee  supped
with  him  also,  and  gave  him  a  Present.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  wee  had  thought  to  have  had
our  Firman  read  before  all  the  Merchants,  and  proclaimed
to  the  people ;  but  the  most  part  of  the  day  was  spent  in
a  ceremonie  by  the  Governour  and  chiefe  at  their  high
Church  for  the  death  of  the  Grand  Signior,  and  the  estab-  ®eath ,°fthe.
Jishing  his  brother  in  his  roome.  They  came  riding  jc^mt
afront  our  house,  we  sitting  in  our  window  open  to  the
street :  they  seeing  us,  bowed  themselves,  and  we  did
reverence :  their  horses  were  accommodated  with  rich
furniture.  At  foure  of  the  clocke,  wee  were  sent  for,  but
our  Linguist  had  got  to  a  Jewes  house  that  sold  Racke,
and  was  drunken,  and  wee  pretending  Master  Salbankes
present  in  disposition,  promised  attendance  the  next  day.
On  the  one  and  thirtieth,  the  Governour  sent  for  us,  and
made  knowne  to  all  the  Merchants  our  welcome,  causing
his  Scrivano  to  draw  a  Firman  as  large  as  we  could  require,

555

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1618.

which  he  would  signe  with  his  Chop,  and  at  his  principall
Scrivanoes,  in  the  afternoone  we  should  have  it.  The
Copie  whereof  is  as  followeth,  translated  out  of  the
Arabicke.

A

Faithfull  and  perfect  Firman  given  by  the  grace  of
God  to  the  worthie  Captaine  of  the  English,  Andrew
Shilling,  to  the  Merchants,  and  to  all  such  as  are  come
with  him  at  this  present ;  and  to  all  the  Nation  of  the
English,  which  shall  come  to  this  Port  hereafter :  For
their  good  usage,  and  friendly  entertainment  by  the  grace
of  God,  and  by  the  Faith  we  have  in  our  holy  Prophet
Mahomet :  with  the  licence  of  our  Great  Lord  and  King,
to  whom  the  great  God  of  the  World  give  long  life :  by
the  fidelitie,  trueth,  and  authoritie  of  the  great  Vizier  of

Mahomet  Sinan,  Mahomet  Basha ;  whom  the  Great  God  give
strength,  and  power  in  his  Kingdome :  and  by  the  faith-

Rajab  Aga.  fulnesse,  and  true  meaning,  and  command  of  me  Rajab
Aga,  now  Governour  of  the  Towne  of  Mocha ;  to  be
given  to  the  Great  Nation  of  the  English,  with  all  faith-
fulnesse.

I  The  Governour  Rajab  Aga,  doe  give  libertie  and  licence
to  the  English  Nation,  to  come  hither  to  this  Port,
to  receive  friendly  entertainment,  to  bring  ashoare  their
goods,  to  buy  and  sell  with  all  freedome ;  to  carrie  such
goods  as  they  buy  aboord,  without  let  or  hindrance  :  and
have  made  contract  with  them,  that  for  all  goods  they  land,
they  shall  pay  three  by  the  hundred,  not  in  readie  money,
but  in  goods ;  and  for  what  they  carrie  away  aboord,  so
it  be  Merchandise,  and  not  provision  for  their  ship,  as
Victuals,  or  such  like,  that  they  shall  pay  readie  money  at
three  by  the  hundred  likewise,  neither  more  nor  lesse,  but
as  it  is  contracted  by  our  agreement.  That  no  Inhabitants
of  this  Towne,  nor  People  of  the  Countrey,  neither  Turke
nor  Arab,  shall  injure  them ;  but  they  shall  have  their
libertie  to  their  contents.  And  that  this  my  Firman  and
Contract  is  given  them  with  a  good  heart,  and  true  mean-

556

EDWARD HEYNES  a.d.

1619.

ing  to  see  it  performed,  I  witnesse  the  trueth  before  the

most  high  God,  and  our  holy  Prophet. Signed  with  my

Chop,  the  fourteenth  *  day  of  May,  in  the  yeare  of  our  *&**"" the

■n 1 1.  a /r  1-  „  «  difference  is

Prophet  Mahomet  1027.  f"om  tMr  dif

I  have  thought  good  to  adde  the  Basha  of  Sinan f'rf  <"*?-

00  .  tation,  or  that

his  Firman,  translated  as  before.  /^  $«&  ^x

IN  the  name  of  God. This  Letter  written  with  the  d$£r£ *
word  of  trueth  of  the  most  high  God  :  To  all  Nations, n  v.  ^^
Governours  and  Officers  over  the  people  under  my  govern-
ment :  God  keepe  you  all.

Know  yee,  that  we  have  given  our  faithfull  Firman  unto
the  hands  of  Signior  Andrew  Shilling  Captaine  of  the
English,  Joseph  Salbanke  his  Companion,  and  to  their
friend  Edward  Heynes  Merchant,  which  are  come  to  the
Port  of  Mocha,  for  them  to  goe  and  come  with  their  ships
to  the  said  Port,  and  there  to  buy  and  sell  all  manner  of
Merchandise  freely,  and  with  all  content.  And  wee  doe
further  give  them  by  vertue  of  this  our  Firman  in  the
Faith  of  the  Great  God,  and  our  holy  Prophet  Mahomet ;
in  the  Faith  of  our  Great  Lord,  whom  God  preserve ;
and  in  the  Faith  of  Our  selfe,  Governour  of  the  Province
and  Citie  of  Sinan ;  free  licence  for  to  sell  and  buy  there,
heere,  and  in  all  other  of  our  Ports,  and  Townes  of  Trade
within  our  Government,  as  freely  and  quietly,  without
injurie,  let,  or  molestation,  as  any  of  the  Traders  and
Merchants  which  come  to  that  Port  of  Mocha,  or  any
other,  of  what  Nation  soever.  And  doe  consent  and  agree
with  them,  to  pay  for  Custome  of  such  goods  as  they
bring,  three  by  the  hundred,  and  for  what  they  buy  and
carrie  forth,  three  by  the  hundred  likewise.  And  doe
promise  and  sweare,  in  the  true  way  of  an  Oath,  to  keepe
our  word  with  them  in  this  Agreement :  and  give  you  all
hereby  to  know  that  they  shall  pay  neither  more  nor  lesse.
And  further,  that  they  shall  receive  neither  injurie,  hurt
nor  danger,  nor  any  discontent  given  them,  either  to  their
persons  or  goods,  but  they  and  their  Nation  shall  have,
as  from  their  first  ship  that  came  to  this  Kingdome,  now

557

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

1619.

this,  so  ever  to  the  last  ship  that  shall  arrive  hereafter,  the
like  friendly  entertainment,  and  good  usage,  as  we  have
commanded  to  be  given  them  at  this  present.  And  that
this  is  my  faithfull  meaning,  This  our  Firman  which  comes
to  your  hands  shall  be  a  witnesse  of  the  trueth.  Written
and  signed  with  my  Royall  Chop,  from  our  Court  of
Sinan  this  eighteenth  day  of  Julie,  in  the  yeere  of  our
Prophet  Mahomet  1027.

The  Copie  of  the  Governour  of  Moha  his  Firman,
given  to  Master  Salbank  for  good  usage  in  his
way  to  Sinan,  is  this.

IN  the  Name  of  the  Great  God.  This  Letter  of  com-
mandment in  the  name  of  our  great  Lord  (whom  God
keep)  to  all  people,  Governors  of  Townes  and  Cities.
Know  yee  that  it  is  our  will  and  commandement,  that
when  the  Bearer  hereof  Joseph  Salbank,  or  any  of  his
people,  or  any  of  the  Nation  of  the  English,  come  to  your
places  of  Government,  you  use  them,  him,  and  all  whom-
soever, friendly  and  with  all  courtesies :  that  you  make
them  pay  for  victuall,  or  other  necessaries,  no  more  then
ordinarie ;  but  rather  make  provision  for  them,  and  assist
them.  And  for  what  goods  they  shall  carrie  away,  or
bring  up  into  the  Citie  of  Sinan,  you  shall  take  no  duties
of  them,  as  is  the  custome  to  other  men,  but  let  them
passe  free,  doing  them  neither  wrong  or  injurie.  Where-
fore, all  you  to  whom  this  Letter  or  Command  shall  come,
which  I  have  given  into  his  hand,  I  command  you  all,  in
the  name  of  the  Basha,  (whom  God  blesse)  to  see  this  per-
formed with  all  diligence.  Given  at  Mocha,  the  twentieth
of  June,  A.  1027.  of  our  Prophet  Mahomet.

It  was  agreed  betwixt  us,  that  Master  Salbanke  and  I
should  follow  the  businesse  on  land,  and  Mr.  Barber  should
remaine  aboord  to  prepare  such  things  as  should  be  sent

wine'orstro  ^or*  ^^e  ^  °^  May,  wee  went  to  tne  Scrivano  to  get
drinke  made  leave  f°r  Racke  to  be  made  for  our  sicke  men :  for  by
of  Rice.  reason  that  our  Linguist,  and  others  of  our  companie  had

558

EDWARD HEYNES  a.d.

1619.

beene  drunke  in  a  Jewes  house,  we  complained  and  desired
the  Jew  might  be  prohibited  to  sell  them  any :  whereupon
the  Governour  forbade  the  Jewes  and  Turkes  the  selling
of  Wine  or  Racke  in  the  Towne.  The  Governour,  at
our  and  the  Scrivano's  request,  gave  leave  onely  that  a
Jew  by  his  appointment,  should  brew  it  in  our  house ;
but  to  prevent  disorders,  would  permit  none  elsewhere.
On  the  eight  in  the  afternoone,  understanding  the  Gover-
nour and  principall  men  were  set  in  the  Custome  house,
expecting  the  Surat  Captaine  then  comming  ashoare,  he
went  also  to  see  the  manner  of  his  entertainment.  At
our  comming,  we  found  the  Governour  sitting  at  the
upper  end  of  a  long  roome  upon  a  Bench  of  stone,  on  a
Carpet :  by  him  in  a  row,  on  the  same  Bench  covered  with
fine  mattes  divers  Merchants,  and  men  of  qualitie  about
twentie ;  on  the  other  side  against  him,  were  about  as
many  set  in  Chaires :  betweene  them  was  made  a  lane
reaching  downe  to  a  square  place,  three  steps  high  from
the  floore  railed  in  and  matted,  in  which  the  Scrivano  and
Officers  of  the  Custome  house  sate  on  Carpets.  The
Governour  bade  us  welcome,  told  us  hee  had  given  the
chiefe  Broker  order  to  come  see  our  goods,  and  procure
their  sale ;  caused  us  to  sit  downe,  two  Merchants  offering
us  their  places,  and  called  for  Cohoh  and  Tobacco.  After  Entertainment
halfe  an  houre  thus  spent,  the  Captaine  came  ashoare,  in  °f  .urat
his  owne  boat  curiously  painted,  rowed  by  twentie  of  his
owne  servants,  all  in  white  linnen,  with  a  Tilt  of  red
silke,  many  silk  Streamers,  his  Saile  of  fine  Callico,  with
divers  Drummes,  Waits,  and  ill  Trumpets,  his  owne
Junke,  and  the  Towne-Chambers  adding  their  reports  to
make  up  the  musicke  (if  such  confused  sounds  may  be  so
called)  Attended  by  a  few  slaves  trimmed  up  with  Silkes,
and  course  Sattins,  hee  entred  the  place  where  we  sate,  [I.  v.  627.]
where  the  Governour  rose  and  saluted  him,  and  placed
him  next  him  :  and  many  complements  of  welcome  passed
from  him,  and  from  the  rest  of  the  Merchants  :  only  he  in
the  height  of  his  pride,  neglected  us,  and  wee  accordingly
him,  though  wee  thought,  the  Captaines  courtesie  to  him,

559

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1619.

sending  his  long-boat  and  men  to  free  his  Junke  (being  foure
or  five  hundred  tunnes,  and  aground)  with  his  kind  enter-
tainment aboord  our  ship,  had  deserved  better  respect.
After  a  little  time  in  complements,  Cohoh  was  againe  brought
to  all  the  company,  and  after  it  six  Vests,  two  given  to
the  Captaine,  and  foure  to  his  foure  Merchants,  which
being  put  on,  and  Salams  given,  they  againe  tooke  their
seats,  sitting  like  so  many  painted  Images,  their  Coats
being  of  course  Gold  and  Silver  Velvet.  One  thing  wee
observed  as  the  usuall  custome  of  this  Towne,  at  the
arrivall  of  any  Junke,  and  the  landing  of  the  Captaine,
there  is  free  libertie  to  all  the  Mariners  and  Passengers  of
the  same  Junke,  to  bring  ashore  as  much  of  their  goods
as  each  man  can  carrie  on  his  backe,  tree  from  paying  any
Custome  :  in  which  manner  passed  by  at  this  present,  three
hundred  persons  of  that  Junke,  with  their  luggage,  to
their  habitation  without  molestation.  On  the  ninth,  our
Landlord  and  the  Scrivano  told  us  of  three  Junkes  of  Diu,
and  foure  Malabars  that  stayed  at  Aden,  hearing  of  our
Feare  of  the  ship,  and  would  not  come  without  our  Passe,  which  they
English.  intreated  us  to  grant.  The  forme  of  our  Passe  sub-
scribed by  the  Captaine  and  three  Merchants,  was  this.

WHereas  the  Governour  of  the  Towne  of  Mocha,
understanding  that  there  are  divers  Junkes  now
riding  before  Aden,  fearing  to  come  to  this  Port,  as  doubt-
ing good  usage  from  us  the  English  ;  hath  intreated  us  to
give  unto  him,  our  Certificate  or  Passe,  for  the  said
Junkes,  or  for  any  other  that  usually  trade  to  this  Port,
to  come  in  freely,  without  any  injurie  done  unto  them,
either  in  bodie  or  goods  by  us,  and  to  have  good  and
friendly  quarter,  as  loving  friends  and  Merchants  amongst
us :  Wee  finding  good  usage  by  the  Governour  himselfe,
and  forwardnesse  by  all  men  to  give  us  free  Trade  and
commerce,  and  as  well  out  of  our  good  disposition,  and
inclination  to  peace,  as  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  Gover-
nour, in  his  request ;  Wee,  by  these  presents,  doe  promise
and  give  them  all  freedome  to  passe  quietly,  and  assure

560

EDWARD HEYNES  ad.

1619.

them  friendly  usage,  to  their  content :  so  as  they  be  not
enemies  to  our  dread  Soveraigne,  the  Kings  Majestie  of
England,  or  his  Subjects.  In  witnesse  whereof,  wee
have  put  to  our  Firmes,  &c.

A  larger  Passe  at  the  Governours  request,  and  more
generall,  for  the  quiet  departure  of  all  Junkes,  &c.  was
after  made,  which  I  forbeare  to  transcribe.

The  tenth,  the  Captaine  of  the  Dabull  Juncke  invited  DabulCap-
us  to  his  house  to  a  Banquet,  where  we  found  the  Gover-  tam  hls  feast-
nour  with  fiftie  principall  persons,  besides  Attendants ;  All
rose  and  bade  us  welcome :  wee  sate  not  long  but  Coho
and  Sherbet  were  brought,  Tobacco,  and  diversitie  of
Fruits,  as  Plummes,  Apricockes  and  Mangos,  we  thinking
these  to  bee  our  Feast,  and  readie  soone  after  to  depart.
But  the  Governour  and  Captaine  desired  us  to  stay,  and
eate  Bread  and  Salt  with  them,  which  we  did ;  at  last,
though  late,  our  greatest  cheere  comming,  being  about
sixtie  Dishes  of  sundry  sorts  of  meats,  baked,  rosted,
boyled,  stewed,  and  sodde,  but  all  mingled  with  Rice,  with
divers  sorts  of  Sallets,  in  manner  as  in  India.

Our  Cargason  was  of  bad  wares  for  the  most  part,  which  Freedome  of
had  lien  in  India,  till  they  were  neere  spoyled,  and  so  hang  e^esse  and
on  our  hands ;  wee  therefore  importuned  the  Governour,
and  hee  charged  the  Broker  to  procure  our  sale  with  great
earnestnesse :  we  obtayned  leave  also,  contrary  to  the
common  custome,  to  come  and  goe  aboord  and  ashoare  at
our  pleasure  without  demanding  any  leave,  and  charged
the  Water-Bayliffe  not  to  molest  us.  On  the  twentieth,
it  was  observed  in  generall  that  the  Monson  changed.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  The  Scrivano  told  me  that  he
understood  that  our  men  of  the  Ship,  at  their  comming
ashoare,  sold  in  the  Bazar,  Bastas  and  Sword  Blades :  he
said,  the  Governour  had  promised  for  the  poore  mens
goods  to  demand  no  custome,  and  therefore  they  should
not  feare  to  bring  it  ashoare,  but  to  sell  it  at  the  house ;
for  at  the  Bazar,  was  a  disgrace  to  us  and  our  Nation.
On  the  one  and  thirtieth,  the  ship  was  in  danger  to  have

S61

regresse.

Pedling  of
some.

IV

2  N

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1619.

Danger  by beene  burnt,  one  taking  Tobacco  in  the  sprit-saile  yard

Tobacco.  arme,  and  the  cole  falling  in  a  fold  of  the  saile,  which  there

burned  two  or  three  breadths,  and  was  long  smelt  before

it  could  be  found  : and  Tobacco  taking  was  prohibited,

except  in  the  Cook-roome  or  Captaines  Cabin. In  regard

of  recovering  our  sicke  men,  discovering  the  cost,  and

procuring  ballast  in  stead  of  Lead,  taken  out  of  the  ship,

The  ship  goes jt  was  concluded,  that  the  ship  should  goe  over  to  Assab

over  to  Assab.  Qn  the  Coast  of  Afri(a  .  and  Master  Baffen  Masters  Mate,

was  sent  to  sound  and  discover  before.

The  tenth  of  June,  we  had  speech  with  the  Governour,
and  in  other  discourse  learned  of  him,  that  hee  was  Gover-
nour of  Aden  when  the  Ascension  came  thither,  where
hee  imprisoned  the  Captaine  and  Jos.  Salbanke  two  dayes  ;
as  he  said,  doubting  they  were  not  Merchants-,  but  a  man
of  Warre  :  that  he  was  Governour  here  at  Sir  H.  Middle-
tons  apprehension,  which  he  excused  by  the  ill  rule  of  our
people,  and  bad  disposition  of  the  Basha ;  that  he  was
blamed  for  the  fact ;  but  the  Basha,  whose  servant  he  then
was,  commanded  that  a  great  deale  more,  God  knew  his
unwillingnesse  to  it,  and  sorrow  for  it :  but  these  things
are  past,  feare  you  nothing.  Here  wee  saw  how  farre  he
and  the  Scrivano  were  to  be  trusted.
[I.  v.  628.]  On  the  thirteenth,  the  Governour  sent  for  us,  told  us
that  he  had  acquainted  the  Basha  with  our  purpose,  to
send  up  one  to  him  for  his  Firman,  who  had  promised  his
welcome  whether  wee  came  or  sent ;  he  thought  it  our
best  course  that  one  should  goe,  and  we  should  have
Horse,  Camels  and  Servants  of  his  to  attend  us ;  and  he
would  write  in  our  behalfe.
Losse  of  a  The  nineteenth,  arrived  a  Junke  expected  from  Gudda,

TnZ'J™  which  brought  Chamlets,  bad  Corall,  Amber  beads,  much
angerous.  Silver  to  invest  in  Spices  and  Indian  Linnen,  many  pas-
sengers from  Mecca.  Shee  brought  newes  of  a  Ship  laden
hence  the  last  yeere  for  Grand  Cairo,  by  losse  of  her
Monson  through  contrarie  windes,  forced  to  stay  a  little
above  Gudda  till  next  yeere.  By  this  Junke  the  Gover-
nour  received letters, that the Gran Signior had sent

562

EDWARD HEYNES  a.d.

1619.

divers  ornaments  of  State  to  the  Basha  of  Synan,  and  had
confirmed  to  him  his  government  for  seven  yeeres  longer,
and  himselfe  in  this  Towne  of  Mocha  under  him  for  the
like  time,  whereof  hee  seemed  not  a  little  proud.  In
regard  of  my  continuall  indisposition,  it  was  thought  fit
Master  Salbank  should  goe,  and  a  Present  for  the  Basha
to  be  prepared,  with  some  merchandise  also  to  carry  with
him.  The  Scrivano  offered  Master  Salbank  his  Mule  to  M.  Salbanks
ride  upon,  which  he  accepted  with  thanks.  He  was  fur-  J^"^
nished  with  two  Camels,  one  Cooke,  one  Horse-keeper,
three  Servants  of  the  Governours,  whose  wages  he  had
compounded  to  pay,  with  Alberto  a  Linguist,  and  taking
leave  and  letters  of  the  Governour.  On  the  three  and
twentieth,  he  departed  about  sixe  in  the  evening,  the
nights  being  the  accustomed  time  of  travell.  That  morn-
ing wee  received  a  Letter  from  our  Captaine  of  his  safe
arrivall  at  Assab  ;  of  their  good  health,  and  finding  ballast
and  other  provisions.

On  the  sixe  and  twentieth,  the  Governour  sent  me  a
Horse  by  one  of  his  Servants,  desiring  mee  to  ride  with
him  in  companie  of  other  Merchants  to  his  banketting
house,  some  halfe  mile  out  of  Towne,  there  to  spend  the
day  in  mirth.  About  halfe  an  houre  after  came  the  chiefe
Scrivano  to  call  me,  with  whom  I  rid  and  met  the  Gover-
nour in  the  way,  whom  we  accompanied  to  the  place.  It
was  in  the  midst  of  a  grove  of  Date  Trees,  in  which  was
a  faire  house,  and  within  it  a  large  Tanke,  and  other  roomes
of  pleasure  to  sit  in.  After  a  little  while,  He  with  divers
others  went  into  the  Tanke,  and  sported  therein  halfe  an
houre.  Then  was  Cohoh  brought  and  given  the  com-  ^  Gover
panie;  after  that,  Grapes,  Peaches,  Muske,  and  water  noursfeast-
Melons,  Almonds  blanched  with  others,  Raisins  in  great
abundance  (for  he  had  at  least  fiftie  or  sixtie  Ghests,  be-
sides attendants)  and  alwayes  betweene  whiles  Coho  and
Tobacco.  Thus  with  Musicke,  indifferent  good,  he  spent
the  forenoone.  After  prayers  he  went  againe  into  the
Tanke  with  others,  wherein  hee  spent  an  houre  in  sport
with  his  companie :  after  which,  the  rest  of  the  time  was

563

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1619.

Cards,ckesses,  Spent,  some  at  Cards,  some  at  Chesse,  himselfe  beholding
jugglers.  juggling tricks untill foure at evening. Then were

brought  in  at  least  a  hundred  dishes  of  divers  sorts,  good
meat,  but  cold  and  ili  dressed.  Every  dish  might  well
have  served  foure  men  with  good  stomacks.  Hee  used
me  well,  and  was  earnest  to  have  me  into  the  Tanke,  which
I  excused  by  my  late  sicknesse.  He  answered,  if  at  any
time  I  had  a  desire  to  wash,  he  would  have  me  come  hither
and  take  my  pleasure,  and  the  Keeper  should  permit  me
and  use  me  well.

The  twelfth  of  July,  at  evening  was  a  great  shew  made

by  the  Surat  Captaine  before  the  Governour,  being  the

Good  fire- time  of  the  New  Moone  : Many  figures  artificially  made

worke, figures.  -^  fire_workSj  rare  anc[  excellent. The  Governour  sent

for  me  to  see  them,  placed  me  in  a  Chaire  by  him,  told
mee  of  Letters  that  day  received  from  Sinan  of  the  Basha's
Firman,  granted  before  Master  Salbanke  came,  who  hear-
ing of  his  comming  staid  it  and  made  another,  as  he  gave
instructions,  and  delivered  it  with  his  owne  hand.

Guddaof great On  the  thirteenth,  passed  by  the  Road  of  Gudda  a  Junke

Z11  ['■  °^  f°ure  or  fiye  hundred  tunnes,  bound  for  Kitchine,  a

dayes  saile  within  the  entrance  of  the  Red  Sea ;  I  suppose
it  not  farre  from  Cape  Guardefui  on  the  Coast  of  Afrike.
Shee  is  reported  to  be  rich  in  gold,  Royalls  of  plate,  and
many  sorts  of  Merchandise :  yeerly  comes  to  Mocha,
brings  Myrrhe,  Trunkes  for  Coho  seeds,  at  the  first
beginning  of  the  westerly  Monson,  and  dispatching  here,

Aliambo.  goes  up  to  Gudda  or  Aliambo,  and  there  sells  her  Coho
and  Indian  goods  which  shee  taketh  in  at  Kitchine,  brought

Portugal/ thither  by  Portugall  Frigats  from  Diu,  and  other  places.

Junk.  jjer  lacjing  outward  is  Indico's, all  manner  of  Indian

Linnen,  Gumme,  Lac  and  Myrrhe ;  shee  is  fraighted  by
the  Portugalls,  and  the  Governour  wished  we  might  meet
with  her,  which  it  is  likely  we  had  done,  had  not  our  ship

Retumeofthe  beene  absent,  which  returned  into  the  Road  on  the  one

skiPm  and  twentieth. I  went  aboord,  and  was  told,  that  the

King  of  Assab  with  his  brother  and  brothers  sonne,
had  beene  aboord  and  received  good  entertainment,  in

564

EDWARD HEYNES  ad.

1619.

requitall  whereof,  the  King  promised  to  send  for  store  of
Beeves  and  Goats :  but  in  the  evening,  by  signe  of  a  light
given,  fled  with  all  his  people  up  into  the  Mountaynes,
pretending  a  pursuit  of  his  enemies,  and  never  returned
so  much  as  thanks.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  before  day,  Master  Salbanke  ^f  •  Sdbanke
returned  in  perfect  health  and  content  with  his  Firmans. "  retuine-
He  related  to  me  of  his  hard  journey,  good  respect  given  Relation  of  his
him  by  the  way  in  all  places ; being  alway  met  before  he  V°^t  hment
entred  any  Towne  of  note,  with  Horse  and  Foot,  to  guard
him  to  the  Governours,  and  of  them  received  with  good
welcome ; his  provisions  provided  by  their  Officers  (but
at  his  owne  charge)  the  Governour  of  Mochas  servant  in
the  name  of  the  Basha,  procuring  his  good  usage. Before
he  came  into  Sinan  he  was  met  a  mile  without  the  Citie
by  fortie  or  fiftie  brave  Turks  well  horsed,  sent  by  the  [I-  v.  629.]
Basha  to  bring  him  in ; which  conveyed  him  to  a  house
readie  and  richly  furnished  against  his  comming. He
received  friendly  entertainment  of  the  principall  Xeriffe
and  the  Basha's  chiefe  Treasurer,  which  were  both  ap-
pointed to  welcome  him. And  two  dayes  after,  the  Basha
himselfe  gave  him  hearing,  of  whom  he  received  courteous
entertainment  and  two  Firmans,  both  of  one  Tenor,  but
one  written  in  a  fairer  Character  then  the  other,  to  shew
to  the  Grand  Signior,  if  occasion  required.

I  find,  by  his  report,  that  the  Citie  of  Sinan  with  the  Sale  of  English
Countrey  adjoyning,  will  vent  yeerly  some  quantitie  of  cot l  ey'
English  cloth,  those  parts  for  three  quarters  of  the  yeere
being  cold ; yea,  in  this  Summer  time  a  man  might  well
have  endured  a  furred  Gowne. Besides,  there  is  a  Court
kept, to  which  belong  fortie  or  fiftie  thousand  gallant
Turks,  most  of  which  wore  garments  of  Venetian  cloth  of
great  prices. Also  not  farre  from  thence  lyeth  a  Leskar
of  Souldiers,  to  the  number  of  thirtie  thousand,  that  con-
tinually are  in  the  field  against  an  Arab  King  not  yet  Arabiai  n0{
conquered,  which  liveth  in  the  Mountaynes  adjoyning,  all  *"  °tJ^UJLCt
which,  he  saith,  are  reported  to  weare  Coats  quilted  of
Cotton  made  of  India  Pintado's,  which  is  deare  and  little

565

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1619.

serviceable,  for  want  of  cloth  to  keepe  them  from  cold,
which  there  is  extreme.  To  this  I  may  adde  the  Citie  of
Tyeis,  and  the  Leskar  of  thirtie  or  fortie  thousand  Soul-
diers,  governed  by  an  Almaine  turned  Moore,  subject  to
the  Basha  of  Sinan,  where  is  much  cloth  worne,  not  above
five  dayes  journey  from  Mocha,  yet  very  cold.
The  Captaine  The  second  of  August,  the  Governour  sent  our  Cap-
vested.  taine  a  vest,  a  rich  one,  by  his  chiefe  Shabander  with

Drummes  and  Trumpets,  his  Boat  bedecked  with  Flags
and  Streamers  in  great  braverie,  which  was  delivered  with
great  reverence,  and  received  accordingly.

The  eleventh,  the  Captaine  of  Dabul  Melic  Marvet,
and  Nakada  Rooswan  the  Chaul  Captaine,  sent  us  their
Letters  of  recommendations  to  their  Kings,  according  to
our  desire,  certifying  of  our  friendly  usage  here,  and  pro-
mise to  defend  them  homewards  bound  from  Pyrates,
and  therefore  beseeching,  in  our  behalfe,  freedome  of
Trade  and  friendly  usage  in  their  Kingdomes.  The  four-
teenth, we  gave  our  Passes  (as  at  other  times  to  others)
unto  two  Captaines  of  the  Malabarres,  Amet  Ben  Maho-
met of  Cannanor  under  Sultan  Ala  Raja,  and  to  Abu
Buker  of  Calicut  under  the  Samorine.

This  day  came  into  the  Road  a  small  Galley  from  Cairo,
with  many  passengers,  Turks  and  Jewes,  rich  in  Royals,
Chekines, Corall, Damaskes, Sattins, Chamlet, Opium,
Velvets  and  Taffata's. Shee  had  beene  in  her  voyage
but  thirtie  dayes. I  had  conference  with  the  Jewes,  one
of  which  had  beene  of  my  acquaintance  in  Barbaric They
report,  that  the  Grand  Signiors  brother,  being  made  Em-
peror, had  imprisoned  his  two  Nephewes,  done  to  death
some  Grandes,  and  otherwise  discontented  the  great  Ones,
and  that  he  was  deposed,  imprisoned,  and  the  eldest  of  his
Nephewes  created. That  there  were  two  hundred  thou-
sand Souldiers  sent  against  the  Persian,  for  the  conquest
Many  passen-  Qf  Gurgistan,  with  other  things ; whereof  some  proved
Merchandize tme'  ot^ers  ^a^se'  according  to  the  fate  of  Merchants  newes.
and  Pilgrim- Some  Jewes  and  Turks  desired  passage  for  them  and  their
age  to  Mecca,  goods  in  our  ship  to  Surat ; and  it  is  likely  when  they

566

EDWARD HEYNES

know  us  better,  much  profit  may  be  made  this  way,  their
Junkes  being  so  pestered  usually  with  uncivill  people.

Thus  having  sold  and  bartered  our  goods  as  well  as
we  might  hope  of  such  a  Cargason,  and  dispatched  our
businesse,  wee  visited  the  Governour  and  desired  his
Letter  testimoniall  to  the  Lord  Embassador,  which  he  gave
us ;  we  tooke  our  leave  the  nineteenth  of  him,  the  Scri-
vano  and  principall  men  of  the  Towne,  from  whom  wee
received  protestations  of  much  kindnesse  alwayes,  came
aboord,  intending  the  next  day  to  set  saile  for  India,  in
companie  of  the  Surat  Junke,  according  to  our  instruc-
tions. -"

A.D.
1614.

Chap.  VI.

Briefe  Notes  of  two  Voyages  of  Master  Martin
Pring  into  the  East  Indies  ;  the  first  with  Cap-
taine  Nicholas  Downton,  Generall  of  foure
ships,  in  which  he  went  Master  in  the  New-
yeeres  Gift  Admirall.

Rom  England  to  the  Canaries,  we  used
our  Chanell  Compasses,  and  from  thence  Compasses.
our  Meridionall.  Whiles  we  used  our
Chanell  Compasses,  we  got  not  any
allowance  for  the  variation ;  which  after-
wards we  did  in  all  our  Courses.  Wed-
nesday, the  fifteenth  of  June, 1614.  we

anchored  in  the  Road  of  Soldania,  the  latitude  whereof  Soldania.
is  foure  and  thirtie  degrees,  the  longitude  from  the  Lizard
eight  and  twentie  degrees,  of  a  great  circle  East,  the  varia-
tion one  degree,  thirtie  minutes,  North  westing.

The  fourth  of  July,  we  had  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope
East  seven  leagues  off.  On  Saturday,  the  sixt  of  August,
we  escried  the  Land  of  Saint  Laurence. The  River  of  Tflf  River  °f

Saint  Augustine  hath  in  latitude  twentie  three  degrees, .  nt  Au&us~

....  0 ' tine.

thirtie  eight  minutes, and  longitude  from  the  Cape  of  pi v.  630.]

Good  Hope  twentie  three  degrees,  of  a  great  Circle. We

567

A.D.
1614.

Westminster
Hall.

Joanna.

Whirlewinds.

Eclipse.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

left  it  on  the  twelfth :  and  the  thirteenth  wee  had  West-
minster Hall  (which  is  a  flat  Hill,  lying  North-east  by
North  from  the  Road  of  Saint  Augustine)  South-east  by
South  nine  leagues  off,  being  in  latitude  three  and  twentie
degrees,  variation  seventeene  degrees  and  twentie  minutes,
North  westing.  On  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth,  we
found  that  the  Current  had  set  us  to  the  North,  of  our
account,  sixe  leagues.

On  the  eighteenth,  by  observation  of  the  Sunne  at
noone,  wee  found  the  elevation  of  the  South  Pole  to  be
seventeene  degrees  and  twentie  sixe  minutes.  The  three
and  twentieth,  wee  descried  the  land  of  Joanna.

The  second  of  September,  we  passed  the  Line :  the
ninth,  wee  anchored  in  Delisha  Road  on  the  North  side  of
Socotora,  in  twelve  degrees  and  thirtie  five  minutes,  varia-
tion eighteene  degrees  and  thirtie  minutes,  longitude
eleven  degrees  and  twentie  minutes,  of  a  great  Circle  to
the  East  of  Saint  Augustine.

Their  anchoring,  and  what  passed  at  Swally,  yee  had
before  in  Captaine  Downton.  The  second  of  March,  we
left  the  Road  of  Swally.  On  the  fourth,  we  were  as  low
as  Damon,  and  saw  the  Vice-roy  with  his  Paderosa
Armada,  which  chased  us  till  the  sixt  at  noone,  and  then
left  us.  The  night  before  wee  came  in  sight  of  Damon,
wee  had  many  Whirlewinds,  the  weather  being  cleere,  as
if  the  two  Monsons  had  beene  striving  for  victorie.  The
sixteenth,  Cochin  bare  three  leagues  off  East  halfe  North
It  stands  in  ten  degrees  close  by  the  waters  side ;  the  Land
so  low  that  we  could  see  nothing  but  Trees :  but  up  in
the  Countrey  are  Mountaynes :  variation  fifteen  degrees
North  North-easting,  this  evening.

The  nineteenth,  at  noone  being  Sunday,  there  was  an
Eclipse  of  the  Sunne,  the  end  whereof  by  my  observa-
tion, continued  till  one  in  the  afternoone  and  fortie  five
minutes.  The  distance  of  the  Sunne  from  the  Zenith,
was  twentie  seven  degrees  and  thirtie  minutes,  just  as  the
Eclipse  was  ended.  Munday,  by  observation  of  the
Crosiers  we  were  in  sixe  degrees,  and  by  the  Starres  of  the

568

MARTIN PRING  ad.

1615.

great  Beare  also.  Tuesday,  at  five  in  the  morning,  we
descried  the  Coast  of  Seyloan  five  leagues  off,  which  neere  Zeilan.
the  water  side  riseth  full  of  small  Hummocks,  and  up  in
the  Countrey  are  Mountaynes,  whereof  one  like  a  Friers
Cowle.  Friday,  Punta  de  Galia  North-east  halfe  North
eight  leagues  off,  wee  perceived  that  the  Current  set  west-
ward. By  observation  of  the  Starre  in  the  great  Beares
backe,  we  were  in  five  degrees  and  thirtie  minutes.

The  fourth  and  fift  of  Aprill,  we  perceived  the  Current  *6l5-
had  set  us  five  leagues  and  two  third  parts  to  the  North,
being  in  one  degree  and  fiftie  minutes,  when  by  our  way
wee  should  have  been  in  one  degree  thirtie  three  minutes.
We  found  a  like  Current  on  the  ninth.  The  two  and
twentieth,  wee  found  that  the  Current  had  carried  us  in
foure  dayes  thirteene  leagues  to  the  South  of  our  compu-
tation. The  third  of  May,  at  noone,  wee  were  in  foure
degrees  and  thirtie  minutes,  and  found  that  since  the
former  noone  the  Current  had  carried  us  foure  leagues
South  of  our  computation.  We  had  sight  of  Sumatra.
The  like  we  found  at  noone  the  next  day.  Wee  saw  the
He  of  Enganio,  the  North  point  bearing  South-west  eight
leagues  off.  The  sixt,  at  noon,  we  were  in  five  degrees
and  thirtie  seven  minutes,  caried  to  the  South  of  our
accounts  five  leagues  by  the  Current.  We  saw  the  South
point  of  Sumatra  East  South-east  low  by  the  water.

On  the  seventh,  we  were  at  noone  in  sixe  degrees  and
ten  minutes,  the  Current  having  set  us  sixe  degrees  and
an  halfe  to  the  South  of  our  accounts.

This  morning  we  saw  the  Salt  He,  which  is  in  the
entrance  of  the  Straights  of  Sunda,  bearing  East,  two  third
parts  North.  The  tenth  of  May,  the  South-east  winds
began  to  blow  fresh,  onely  now  and  then  a  gust  which
would  sometimes  alter  it,  and  that  about  the  change  or
full  of  the  Moone,  or  else  we  had  it  alway  betweene  the
South  South-east  and  the  East  South-east :  but  most  com-
monly at  South-east.  On  the  tenth,  the  Generall(wee  being
able  to  doe  no  good  the  other  way)  thought  best  to  beare
up  to  the  North  of  the  Salt  lies,  where  under  the  North  Salt  Hands.

569

A.D.
1615.

Pumicestone
He.

These  Marine
discourses  are
here  abridged
and  cut  off,
partly  because
I  thinke  few
will  much
affect  that
pa?-t,  and  now
many  Mari-
ners know  them
by  experience;
and  in  the
borrowed
booh  of  the
Campanie,  I
was  forced  to
be  Scribe  my
selfe,  the
tediousnesse  of
which  wearied
me.  Yet  have  I

now  in  one,

and  another
while  in
another,
expressed  the
most  materiall
in  this  kinde.
[I.  v.  631.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

end  of  the  Norther-most,  wee  anchored  in  twentie  fadoms
oaze,  within  three  quarters  of  a  mile  of  the  shoare,  finding
the  like  depth  all  alongst  the  North  end  of  this  Hand  in
that  distance.  Betweene  the  high  Salt-He  and  this,  is
Pumicestone-Ile,  which  alwaies  burneth,  and  casts  forth
Pumicestones  like  to  Fuego.  The  Northermost  we  called
Coco,  of  the  fruit  found  there.  These  Pumicestones  we
cast  into  the  water,  which  swam  like  Corke.  The  twelfth,
the  Pinnasse  was  sent  to  Pulo-Beced  for  water :  it  was
brackish.  On  the  sixteenth,  our  men  found  a  Pond  of
fresh  water,  on  the  North  end  of  the  Salt  He,  in  the  flat
ground  by  the  waters  side,  and  filled  water  there.  We  set
saile  thinking  to  have  gotten  to  the  South  of  the  Salt  He,
the  winde  being  at  North-east,  but  could  not  prevaile
against  the  Currant.  The  nineteenth,  we  were  in  sixe
degrees,  five  minutes  of  South  latitude.

The  twentieth,  the  Current  North  North-west  and
North-west,  whereas  before  for  ten  degrees  it  had  set
directly  West  betweene  those  Hands.

After  much  contending  with  the  weather  and  Current,
having  had  very  good  water  from  Palmeto  He,  halfe  a  mile
within  the  East  point  in  a  sandy  Cove.

The  first  of  June,  we  set  saile  and  stood  to  the  South,
making  a  South-west  way  by  meanes  of  the  Current  that
sets  West  South-west,  alongst  the  shoare.  On  the  three
and  twentieth  of  June,  Master  Jordan  came  aboord :  and
the  next  our  Generall  sent  a  Present  to  the  King  of  Ban-
tam. Note,  that  while  we  rid  in  the  Straits  mouth,  we
found  the  Current  from  twelve  at  noone,  till  foure  in  the
morning  to  runne  very  swift,  and  from  thence  till  noone
very  easie.  Sunday  the  sixth  of  August,  our  Generall
departed  this  life.

The  tenth  of  October,  Captaine  Jordan  came  in  the
Juncke  from  Jacatra,  and  related  his  kind  entertainment,
the  King  being  wholly  devoted  to  us,  and  hating  the
Dutch.

The  seven  and  twentieth  of  November,  the  Flemmings
set  upon  Kewee  his  house  (he  was  our  Merchant  to  buy

S7o

MARTIN PRING

Pepper  for  us)  with  intent  to  keepe  him  Prisoner  in  their
owne  house :  But  Captaine  Jordan  having  notice  thereof
presently  went  and  rescued  him  in  despight  of  the  Flem-
mings,  and  brought  him  to  the  English-house.  The  two
and  twentieth  of  December,  having  received  our  lading,
we  left  the  Road  of  Bantam.

The  seventh  of  January,  we  were  in  seven  degrees  five
minutes  of  South  latitude,  wee  found  that  the  Current
had  set  us  South  South-east  nine  leagues  in  twentie  houres,
the  variation  this  evening  was  three  degrees  fortie  minutes
North-westing.  The  two  and  twentieth,  our  Generall
Master  Thomas  Elkington  departed  this  life.

The  first  of  March,  we  anchored  in  the  Bay  of  Soldania,
our  Company  most  part  in  good  health.  The  next  day
we  set  up  our  Tents  ashoare,  landed  our  sicke  men  and
our  water  caske.  On  Sunday  the  third,  Cory  came  downe
unto  us,  who  told  us  of  one  Captaine  Crosse,  which  lived
upon  Penguin  Hand  with  eight  men  and  a  Boy :  to  whom
Master  Dodsworth  had  given  a  Boat.  I  sent  the  Pin-
nasse  which  brought  three,  and  left  there  other  three.
These  reported,  that  on  Saturday  last,  Captaine  Crosse
with  two  others,  their  Boat  being  split  in  pieces,  made  a
Gingada  of  Timber,  and  had  gotten  halfe  way  betwixt  the
Hand  and  the  ship,  when  two  Whales  rose  up  by  them,
one  of  them  so  neere,  that  they  strooke  him  on  the  backe
with  a  wooden  spit ;  after  which  they  sunke  downe  and
left  them.  Captaine  Crosse  thus  terrified  with  the  Whales,
and  benummed  with  the  water,  returned  to  the  Hand,  and
having  shifted  a  shirt  and  refreshed  himselfe,  adventured
the  second  time,  giving  charge  to  one  of  the  Company,  to
have  an  eye  on  him  so  long  as  he  could  see  him.  This
fellow  saith,  he  saw  him  a  great  way  from  the  Hand,  and
on  the  sudden  lost  sight  of  him ;  which  is  the  last  newes
of  him.

The  eight  of  March,  (all  things  ready)  we  departed,
having  gotten  good  store  of  sheepe  and  some  Bullockes.
From  the  Tropike  till  we  were  in  one  degree  eighteene
minutes  of  South  latitude,  we  met  alway  with  a  Southerly

571

A.D.
1615.

Theit  returne.

Soldania.

Cory.

Crosse  with
other  con-
demned
persons  left  to
inhabit  there.

Crosse  lost.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

Current,  which  set  us  to  the  South  about  seven  or  eight
miles  in  foure  and  twentie  houres.  The  reason  I  guess
to  be,  because  we  were  alway  to  the  Eastwards  of  that
Current,  which  sets  towards  the  North-west  from  Saint
Helena,  so  that  wee  went  in  the  edge  of  the  Eddy  of  the
North-west  Current.  The  five  and  twentieth  of  June,
1 616.  we  arrived  in  the  Downes.

END OF VOLUME IV.

"MiHEHgEBaS-U,

-®m&2$W!®{&S&?i

BOSTON  PUBLIC  LIBRARY

3  9999  06663  970  7
