Hakluytus Posthumus, or Purchas His Pilgrimes, Vol. 16 (Samuel Purchas, 1625)
==========================================================
Purchas His Pilgrimes (1625) - the 17th century's great sequel to Hakluyt; the largest voyage collection of its age, preserving dozens of narratives otherwise lost. The 20-volume MacLehose reprint (Glasgow, 1905-07), the standard complete edition. Vol. 16 of 20.

Hakluytus  Posthumus

or

Purchas  His  Pilgrimes

In  Twenty  Volumes

Volume  XVI

GLASGOW

PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY

ROBERT  MACLEHOSE  &  COMPANY  LTD.  FOR

JAMES MACLEHOSE  AND SONS, PUBLISHERS

TO THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW

MACMILLAN AND CO. LTD.  LONDON

THE MACMILLAN CO.  NEW YORK

THE  MACMILLAN  CO.  OF  CANADA  TORONTO

SIMPKIN, HAMILTON AND CO.  LONDON

MACMILLAN AND BOWES  CAMBRIDGE

DOUGLAS AND FOULIS  EDINBURGH

MCMVI

Hakluytus  Posthumus/

or

Purchas His  Pilgrimes

Contayning a History of  the World

in Sea Voyages and Lande Travells

by Englishmen and others

By
\  /

SAMUEL PURCHAS, B.D,

VOLUME XVI

eX

Glasgow
James MacLehose and Sons

Publishers  to  the  University

MCMVI

THE TABLE

PAGE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs  in
the  Sixth  Booke  of  the  Second  part  of
Purchas  his  Pilgrims.

The  Epistle  Dedicatorie  to  George  Abbot,  Archbishop  of

Canterbury. ........  I

CHAP.  I.
A  Briefe  Relation  of  the  severall  Voyages,  undertaken  and
performed  by  the  Right  Honourable,  George,  Earle
of  Cumberland,  in  his  owne  person,  or  at  his  owne
charge,  and  by  his  direction :  collected  out  of  the
Relations  and  Journals  of  credible  persons  Actors
therein.  .........  5

E.  of  Cumberlands  first,  second,  and  third  Voyages.
Spanish  Defeat.  Prizes  taken.  Cap.  Lysters  valour,
rashnesse,  death.  Cruell  thirst.  E.  of  Cumberlands
4.  and  5.  voyages.  Takers  taken.  Sir  R.  Greenvile.
Sea-sharing  custome.  One  Carrike  burnt,  another
taken.  E.  of  Cumb.  6  and  7  Voyages,  prizes,  sick-
nes.  Sir  Fr.  Slingsby.  '  Cap.  Lancaster  Fights,  Prises.
Eighth  Voyage.  Five  wounds  wounded.  Unchari-
table obstinacy,  rich  Carrike  burnt.  Ninth  and  tenth
voyages.  Earle  of  Cumb.  11.  and  12.  Voyages.  Sea
fight. English  Captaines.

CHAP. II.
The  Voyage  to  Saint  John  de  Porto  Rico,  by  the  Right
Honourable, George, Earle of  Cumberland, written
by  himselfe. H. .  .  .  .  ...  .  29

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Penechia.  Meanes  to  get  intelligence.  Biscainers  good
fighters.  E.  Cumb.  Port  Ricco  voyage.  Rich  Mar-
quesse.  Wines  distemper.  Earles  consultation,  speech,
purposes,  probabilities,  proceeding.  Earle  of  Cumb.
speeches.  Basenesse  of  sharks.  Comming  to  Port
Ricco.  They  land  on  the  Hand.  Qui  cavet,  vix
cavet,  dum  cavet.

CHAP. III.

A  large  Relation  of  Port  Ricco  Voyage ;  written  as  is
reported,  by  that  learned  man  and  reverend  Divine
Doctor  Eglambie,  his  Lordships  Chaplaine  and  Atten-
dant in  that  Expedition  ;  very  much  abbreviated. H.  44

§  1 .  The  Ships  employed  in  the  Voyage  and  accidents  on
the  Coasts  of  Spaine,  in  the  Canaries,  and  the
Navigation  thence  to  Dominica. ....  44

Port  Ricco  voyage.  A  Souldiors  zeale.  Canaries.  Lan-
cerota  taken.  Lancerota  Hand  described :  the  men,
beasts,  &c.  Trayning.  Gusts  and  unwholsome
raines. Black  colour  of  the  Sea. Dominica.

§  2.  Description  of  Dominica  and  the  Virgines.  Their
landing  on  Port  Ricco,  March,  fights  and  taking  the
Towne.  . . . . . . . .  52

Description  of  Dominica ;  hot  bath ;  Towne,  King,  and
wilde  state.  Adulterie.  Maid  and  Wife.  Common
diet-roome.  The  Virgines.  Landing  and  bad  march
in  Puerto  Rico.  Spanish  baricado.  Sir  I.  Barkleys
valor.  The  Earles  danger.  Fight  with  the  Spaniards.
Ship  lost  to  win  the  Forts. Towne  quitted.

§  3.  The  Fort  Mora  besieged  and  taken.  The  Towne
described:  the  Mines.  Purpose  to  hold  the  place;
altered  by  the  death  and  sicknesse  of  manie. .  .  66

Fort  Mora  besieged.  Earle  of  Cumberlands  justice.  Parlie,
Propositions.

A  resolution,  which  they  were  to  trust  to.  . . 69

vi

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Articles.  Towne  and  Fort  taken.  Description  of  Saint
John  de  puerto  rico.  Puerto  Rico  described ;  the
Castle,  Monasterie,  Woods,  Mynes.  Ship  taken  un-
wittingly. Purpose  of  stay  changed  by  mortalitie.
Death  of  many.  Pearles  found  in  a  prize.  Kings
chist  of  pearles.

§4.  Purpose  of  returne.  Treatie  with  the  Spaniards.  His
Lordships  departure.  Description  of  the  Hand,  the
Beasts,  Fruits,  Plants,  &c. .....  80

Treatie  of  composition.  Spoiles  of  port  rico :  returne
hastened.  The  Earles  departure.  Hand  described.
Cherenos  large  lands.  Rivers  and  golden  sands  of
Port  Rico.  Luyandos  wealth.  The  soile.  Wild
heards,  Gingers,  Sugars,  hides.  One  man  hath  12000.
beeves.  Strange  Dogs  and  Crabs,  Beasts,  Fowles,
fruites  of  Portrico.  Severall  kindes  of  Fruits,  Grames
and  Bread  in  Portrico. Plant  having  sense.

§  5.  Accidents  by  Sea  in  their  way  to  the  Azores  and  there.  99

Hot  calme.  High  Seas.  Ignorance  beneficiall.  Terrible
storme.  Description  of  Flores.  Earle  of  Cumber-
lands  returne  and  danger  in  the  way.

CHAP. IIII.

The  first  Voyages  made  to  divers  parts  of  America  by
Englishmen,  Sir  Sebastian  Cabot,  Sir  Thomas  Pert :
also  of  Sir  John  Hawkins,  and  Sir  Francis  Drake,  and
many  others:  collected  briefly  out  of  Master  Camden,
Master  Hakluit,  and  other  Writers.  .  .  .106

Cabot,  Pert,  Tomson,  Bodenham,  Chiltons  Americans
travels.  Vice-royes  trechery:  Miles  Philips  and  Job
Hortop. William,  Sir  John,  Sir  Richard  Hawkinses.

A  briefe  Historie  of  Sir  Francis  Drakes  Voyages. .  . 113

Sir  F.  Drake.  Drakes  gold  and  vow  for  the  South  Sea  :
his  Circumnavigation.  Causes  why  Q.  El.  protected
the  low  Countries.  Saint  Iago  taken.  Domingo
assaulted.  Ambitious  Armes.  Cartagena  taken.  Mor-
talitie. Cales. S.  Philip  the  first  Carike  which  was

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

taken.  Drakes  last  voyage.  Contention  a  bad  be-
ginning. Sir  J.  Hawkinses  his  death.  Sir  T.
Baskerviles  journey  frustrate.  Sir  Fr.  Drakes  death.
Hawkins  and  Drake  compared.

A  briefe  recitall  or  nomination  of  Sea-fights,  other  English-
mens  Voyages  related  at  large  in  the  printed  Workes
of  Master  Hakluit. 133

Many  English-American  Voyages.  Chidleys  Voyage  to
the  Straits.

CHAP. V.

The  Relation  of  Peter  Carder  of  Saint  Verian  in  Corn-
wall, within  seven  miles  of  Falmouth,  which  went
with  Sir  Francis  in  his  Voyage  about  the  World,
begun  1577.  who  with  seven  others  in  an  open
Pinnasse  or  Shallop  of  five  tunnes,  with  eight  Oares,
was  seperated  from  his  Generall  by  foule  weather  in
the  South  Sea,  in  October,  Anno  1578.  who  re-
turning by  the  Straites  of  Magellan  toward  Brasill,
were  all  cast  away,  save  this  one  onely  afore-named,
who  came  into  England  nine  yeeres  after  miraculously,
having  escaped  many  strange  dangers,  aswell  among
divers  Savages  as  Christians. H. .  .  .  . 136

Peter  Carders  strange  fortunes.  Pinnasse  broken.  Hospitall
entertaynment.  Warres.  Man-eating.  Peter  Carders
life  with  the  Savages  and  yeelding  to  the  Portugals.
Carders  life  with  the  Savages  and  return.  Can-
dishes  calme  and  storm.  Captaines  compared  which
have  sailed  about  the  Globe.  True  use  of  tragicall
histories.

CHAP. VI.

Master  Thomas  Candish  his  Discourse  of  his  fatall  and
disastrous  Voyage  towards  the  South  Sea,  with  his
many  disadventures  in  the  Magellan  Straits,  and  other
places ;  written  with  his  owne  hand  to  Sir  Tristram
Gorges  his  Executor. H. .  . .  .  .151

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.

Captaine  Candishes  last  voyage.  Tempests,  Streits,  Ex-
treme winter,  Death,  Miserable  distresse.  Straits  in
the  Straits,  expelling  out,  and  yet  not  out  of  straits.
Many  of  Captaine  Candishes  company  slaine  ;  His
great  spirit.  Portugall  Pilots  ignorance.  Rash  pre-
sumption of  the  English.  Misery  attends  mutinie.
Morgan  and  many  others  slain  by  Portugals.  Can-
dishes misery  by  the  losse  of  the  Roe-bucke.  Mani-
fold wants.  Candishes  speech  neglected  by  his
mutinous  company.  Irishman.  Revenge  frustrated.
Captaine  Candishes  manifold  distresses.  Master  Th.
Candishes  last  Will.

CHAP. VII.

The  admirable  adventures  and  strange  fortunes  of  Master
Anthonie  Knivet,  which  went  with  Master  Thomas
Candish in his second Voyage to the South Sea,

I591- H-p l77

M. Knivets  voyage  with  Master  Th. Candish.

§  i .  What  befell  in  their  Voyage  to  the  Straits,  and  after,

till  hee  was  taken  by  the  Portugals.  .  .  .177

Calmes  and  Scorbute.  Mis-order  a  presage  of  ill  successe.
Brasil  coast.  Santos  taken.  Knivets  purchase  in  the
Jesuits  Colledge.  J.  King.  Port  Famine  in  Straits;
ominous  names.  Knivets  toes  lost  with  cold.  Harris
bloweth  of  his  nose  :  Straits  pursue  them  out  of  the
Straits.  S.  Sebastian.  Spirito  Santo.  Many  slaine.
Knivet  left  for  dead.  Knivets  terrour  and  food,
* captivity,  danger  of  death.

§  2.  Anthonie  Knivet  his  comming  to  the  R.  of  Janero,
and  usage  amongst  the  Portugals,  and  Indians :
his  divers  Travels  thorow  divers  Regions  of  those
P^ts 195

Knivets  slaverie,  drudgerie,  nakednes ;  trade  and  danger
with  Savages.  Savages  hospitalitie.  His  returne.
Hawkins  at  Cape  Frio.  Knivet  condemned,  saved
by Jesuites : his flight, pursute. Savage-senate  and

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

faithles  faith.  Knivets  redeliverie  &  next  travels.
Feathered  nation.  Emulations  of  Savages.  High
hill.  Venemous  Snakes.  M.  Paracova.  R.  Paraeva.
Savages  entertainment,  travell,  spirits.  Fundament-
wormes  ;  famine,  1 80.  lost :  hill  of  blacke  round
stones,  &c.  Fire-Snake  killed;  worse  Snakes  surviving;
Knivets  miseries  by  them.  Knivet  escapes  hanging,
adventures  eating.

§3.  His  strange  travels  with  twelve  Portugals,  whom  the
Savages  did  eate.  His  life  with  the  Canibals:  and
after  that  with  the  Portugals,  from  whom  hee  fleeth
to  Angola,  is  brought  backe,  and  after  manifold
chances,  is  shipped  to  Lisbone.  .  .  .  ,219

Christall  hill,  Gold,  Stones.  Terrible  Cave-passage.
Worse  throat-passage.  Knivets  Savage-life.  Knivet-
Adam.  Reregrivation,  battell,  assault.  Amazons.
Thousands  slaine  and  taken.  Tale  of  S.  Thomas.
Resolute  savage.  Mad  adventure.  Flight  to  Angoal :
he  is  sent  backe.  Heixts  death.  Andrew  Towers.
Dutch  ships  on  Brasill  Coast.  Hollanders  treacherously
taken.  Danger  of  the  night  Aire.  Knivets  Sea-
dangers.  Divers  Rivers  on  the  Coast  of  Brasill.
Antonie  Knivets  returne  from  Brasill  to  Portugale.
Thomas  Turner. Th.  Musgrave.

§4.  The  divers  Nations  of  Savages  in  Brasill,  and  the
adjoyning  Regions :  their  diversities  of  Conditions,
States,  Rites,  Creatures,  and  other  thinges  remarke-
able,  which  the  Author  observed  in  his  many  yeeres
manifold  Peregrinations.  ...... 24.6

Nations  of  Brasilian  Savages.  Man-eaters,  inhumane
feasting.  Huge  Serpents.  Munky-orators.  Divers
savage  Nations.  Women  warriors.  Antonie  Knivet.
Shark-sharkers.  Crab-lice-hils.  Abusangas  valour.
Savage  nations.  Bearded  Savages,  civill,  women
faire.  Weeping-welcome.  Wild  dogs.  Gold  and
good  stones.  Hard  adventure  of  Ant.  Knivet.
Serpent.  Two  moneths  travell  in  a  golden  Countrie.
Pigmeys  of  Tocoman.  Giants  seene  by  Knivet,
described.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

The  Giants  of  Port  Desire,  and  Inhabitants  of  Port
Famine :  also  Angola,  Congo,  and  Massangana,  and
Angica,  Countries  of  Africa. .  .  .  .  .265

Ports  of  Famine  and  Desire.  Extreame  cold.  Angolas
King  and  Kingdome  described.  Moores  of  Angola,
and  their  fashions.  King  of  Congos  intreaty.
Angicans  described. Petewares  language.

§5.  The description of  divers Rivers, Ports, Harbours,

Hands  of  Brasill : for  instruction  of  Navigators.  . 274

Rivers,  Capes,  Townes,  Hands  and  Ports  of  Brasill.
Knivet.  Rivers,  of  Stones,  S.  Antonio,  Crocodiles,
S.  Michael ;  Alaqua.  S.  Vincent,  Santos.  River  of
Plate,  S.  Iago,  Potossi,  Myne-workes.

CHAP. VIII.

Relations  of  Master  Thomas  Turner  who  lived  the  best
part  of  two  yeeres  in  Brasill,  &c.  which  I  received
of  him  in  conference  touching  his  Travels. .  . 290

S.  Michaels  cold  and  heat. Giant  seene  and  Flat-heads.

CHAP. IX.

The  taking  of  Saint  Vincent  and  Puerto  Bello,  by  Cap-
taine  William  Parker  of  Plimouth,  the  seventh  of
February, 1601. ....... 292

Porto  Bello  sacked.  Melendes  the  Governour  taken
prisoner.  Porto  Bello  sacked  and  described.  Captaine
Parkers  arrivall.

CHAP. X.

Certayne  Notes  of  a  Voyage  made  by  David  Middleton
into  the  West  Indies  with  Captaine  Michael  Geare,
Ann.  Dom. 1601. H. .  .  .  .  .  . 298

Middletons  out-bound voyage from England toward the
West  Indies. Martyrs. Florida. Silley.
xi

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP. XI.

The  Description  of  the  He  of  Trinidad,  the  rich  Countrey
of  Guiana,  and  the  mightie  River  of  Orenoco,  written
by  Francis  Sparrey,  left  there  by  Sir  Walter  Raileigh,
1595.  and  in  the  end  taken  by  the  Spaniards  and
sent  Prisoner  into  Spaine,  and  after  long  Captivitie
got  into  England  by  great  sute. H.  .  .301

Guianos  Rivers  and  Hands  described.  Plaines  of  Samia.
Hands  and  Rivers  bordering  on  Guiana.  Water  fall.
Curaa  and  Camalaha  commodities.  Orenoco,  Europa,
Habuc.

CHAP. XII.

Captaine  Charles  Leigh  his  Voyage  to  Guiana,  and  plan-
tation there. H. . '.  .  .  .  .  .309

Captaine  Leaghs  passages  by  Mogador.  River  of  the
Amazones.  The  Jayos  courtesie  to  the  English.
Fishing  with  wood.  Troublesome  wormes.  A
traiterous  Interpreter  apprehended  &  punished.
Captaine  Leighs  Plantation  among  the  Indians.
Commodities  of  the  Indians.  C.  Leighs  directions
to  his  brother.

CHAP. XIII.

A  true  Relation  of  the  traiterous  Massacre  of  the  most
part  of  threescore  and  seven  English  men,  set  on
Land  out  of  a  Ship  of  Sir  Oliph  Leagh,  bound  for
Guiana,  in  Santa  Lucia,  an  Hand  of  the  West  Indie,
the  three  and  twentieth  of  August,  written  by  John
Nicol. H.P. 324

Santa  Luzia  a  fruitfull  Hand,  but  unhappy  Harbour.
Indian  treacherie.  Treacherous  ambush  of  the
Caribes.  Augramert.  Perilous  voyage,  hunger  and
shipwrack.  3.  Spaniards.  Miserable  hunger.  Kind
Spaniards,  treacherous  Indians.  Sennor  Francisco
Lopez  his  favour  to  the  English,
xii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP. XIIII.

The  Relation  of  Master  John  Wilson  of  Wansteed  in
Essex,  one  of  the  last  tenne  that  returned  into  Eng-
land from  Wiapoco  in Guiana, 1606. H. .  . 338

Mutinie  among  the  English  company.  Mount  Howard.
The  Oath  of  the  company  to  Captaine  Leigh
Generall.  Dutchmans  kindnesse.  The  English  aide
Indians  against  Indians.  Wyapocos  inhabitants,
customes,  commodities.  Child-birth,  Funerals.  Com-
modities  of  Wiapoco. Beasts,  Foules,  Fish,  Fruites.

CHAP.  XV.

Part  of  a  Treatise  written  by  Master  William  Turner,
Sonne  to  Doctor  Turner  of  London  a  Physitian,
touching  the  former  Voyage. H. .  .  .  . 352

Boate  betraied  by  the  Indians  at  Saint  Lucia.  Rogues
Bay.  Captaine  Leighs  death.  The  nature  of  the
Climate  of  Comana.

CHAP. XVI.

A  Relation  of  a  Voyage  to  Guiana  performed  by  Robert
Harcourt  of  Stanton  Harcourt,  in  the  Countie  of
Oxford  Esquire. .  .  .  .  .  .  35!

Alegranza  yeelds  nothing  good.  Tenerife  a  good  watering
place.  Gratitude  of  the  Indians  of  Wiapoco.  Village
Caripo.  Carasana.  Sir  W.  Raleighs  exploits  in
Guiana.  Cap.  Leigh  takes  possession.  Indians  desire
the  English  to  cohabit  with  them.  Bounds  of  Guiana.
Cooshebery  a  healthfull  and  delightfull  Province.
Wiapocoory.  Caiane  good  harbour.  The  manner  of
government  there.  The  fight  of  the  English  terrifie
the  Charibes.  Guiana's  seasons,  &c.  Pride  in
Drunkennesse.  The  qualitie  of  the  Land  in  Guiana.
Fowles,  fish,  and  fruits  in  Guinea,  commodities  for
trade  there.  Guiana's  medicinable  Hearbs.  Physicall
xiii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Drugs.  Precious  Wood.  Abundance  of  Tobacco.
Some  Gold  in  Guiana.  Long-eard  Indians,  possession
taken  for  his  Majestie  at  Wiapoco,  &c.  Indians  at
Gomeribo  the  King  of  Englands  tenants.  Sensible
plants  in  Moyemon.  Discovery  of  Marrawini  by
Fisher.  Danger  of  drowning.  Punta  de  Galea.
An  excellent  Bath  at  Meues.  Departure  from  Meues
by  Fayal. Arrivall  at  Crook-haven  in  Ireland.

The  names  of  the  Rivers  falling  into  the  Sea  from
Amazones,  to  Dessequebe,  and  of  the  severall  Nations
inhabiting  those  Rivers. .  .  .  .  .  .401

Fish  good  flesh.

CHAP. XVII.

A Relation of  the habitation and other Observations  of

the  River  of  Marwin,  and  the  adjoyning  Regions. . 403

Marwin  with  the  adjacent  Regions  and  Inhabitants.
Troublesome  Flyes.  Invention  of  a  cruell  death
by  Spaniards.  Wywaypannamyans  enemies  to  the
Spaniards. Monooan.

Rivers  from  Brabisse  to  the  Amazones. .  .  .  .411

Rivers  inhabited  not  inhabited. Divers  Nations.

CHAP. XVIII.

A Description and Discoverie of  the  River of  Amazons,

by  William Davies  Barber  Surgeon  of  London.  . 413

Woods,  Beasts,  Fowles  of  Amazons.  Nature  &  customes
of  the  people.  Their  King,  his  Habit,  and  Orna-
ments.

xiv

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs  in page
the  Seventh  Booke  of  the  second part  of
Purchas  his  Pilgrims.

CHAP. I.

A  Treatise  of  Brasill,  written by  a  Portugall  which  had

long  lived  there. H. .  .  .  .  .  .417

§1.  Of  the  beginning  and  originall  of  the  Indians  of
Brasill,  and  of  their  Customes,  Religions,  and  Cere-
monies. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .418

Their  opinion  of  the  Soule.  Ignorance  of  God.  Mar-
riages. Indians  manner  of  beds,  sleeping,  mourning,
apparell,  houses,  &c.  Indians  custome  in  entertain-
ments, drinking,  husbandry,  &c.  Dancing,  Musicke,
and  singing  Ceremonies  of  burying  the  dead.  Indians
excellent  Archers,  Artists,  Travellers.

§  2.  Of  their manner  of  killing and eating of  Humane

flesh :  and  of  their  creating  Gentlemen. .  .  43 1

Their  fatting,  &c.  Preparations  before,  manner  in,  cere-
monies after  wrestling.  The  instrument  and  manner
of  butchering  men.  Exploits  of  honour.  Titles  of
Gentlemen.

§  3.  Of  the  diversitie  of  Nations and Languages, and of

the  Soyle  and  Climate. .  .  .  .  .  .441

Pitiguaras.  Viataus,  Tupinabas,  Tupinaquins,  Tupiguaes,
&  their  countries.  j6.  Nations  of  the  Tapuyas
with  their  severall  Languages.  Brasils  climate  tem-
perate, Countrie  Mountaines.

§4.  Of  the  Beasts,  Land-serpents,  and  Fowles.  .  . 450

Deere,  Elkes,  Boares,  Acuti,  Pacas,  Ounces,  Carigue,  &c.
Tatu,  Porcupine,  Civet-cats,  Apes  and  Apish  trickes,
wilde  Cats. Beasts.

Of  Land-snakes  and  Serpents.  .  .  .  .  .457

Snakes  and  Serpents  of  divers  kindes.  Snakes,  Scorpions
of  sundry  kindes.

xv

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  p*gb

Of  the Fowles that are in the Land,  and are  thereon

sustained.  ........ 4.60

Beautifull  Birds.  Divers  kindes  of  Parots.  Guaimimbique
a  rare  bird. Fowles.

§  5.  Of  the  Brasilian  Trees  for  Fruit,  Medicine,  and  other

uses ;  and  their  Herbes  of  rare  operations. .  . 466

Fruitfull  Trees  of  sundry  sorts.  Fruit-trees  of  Brasill,
Coco-nuts.  Great  Woods.  Trees  medicinable  for
wounds,  collicke,  fluxe,  looseness,  &c.  Sundry  trees
of  Brasill.

Of  the  Herbes  that  yeeld  Fruit,  and  are  eaten. .  . 474

Fruitfull  and  edible  herbes.  Mandioca,  Nana,  Adams
tree,  Murucuia,  usefull  herbs.  Herbes,  Trees,  Thistles,
medicinable. Sleeping-herbe. Herba  viva. Canes.

§  6.  Of  the  Fishes  that  swimme  in  the  Salt-water :  also
Shel-fishes,  Trees,  and  Fowles  of  the  Sea  :  of  Rivers
and  the  Creatures  which  live  therein  ;  and  the  Beasts
and  Plants  brought  thither  out  of  Portugall. .  . 482

Oxe-fish.  Strange  and  various  fishes.  Beijupira.  Battle
with  Whales.  Fishes  swimming  and  flying,  for  use
good  and  bad.  Mermen,  Cuttles,  Crabs  of  sundry
kinds,  Oysters. Shel-fishes,  Salt-water-trees.

Birds  that  doe  feed,  and  are  found  in  the  Salt-water. . 494
Salt-water-birds. Birds  and  fresh  water  Rivers.

Fresh-water  Snakes  (and  Creatures  of  the  water). .  . 496

Cucurijuba  a  wonderfull  Snake.  Monstrous  Serpent,  water
Hog. Guararici  a  terror  to  the  Indians.

Of  the  Beasts,  Trees  and  Herbes,  that  came  from  Portugall,

and  doe  grow  and  breed  in  Brasill.  .  .  . 499

Brasilian  Horses,  Swine,  Goats,  Hens,  Geese,  Dogges,  &c.
Wheate,  flowres,  vermine  of  Brasill.
xvi

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP.  II.

Articles  touching  the  dutie  of  the  Kings  Majestie  our
Lord,  and  to  the  common  good  of  all  the  estate  of
Brasill.  Written  (as  is  thought)  by  the  Author  of
the  former  Treatise. H.  ..... 503

Court  Royall  expedient  there.  Counsell  of  warre,  Portugals
deceits  and  violence  to  the  Indians.  Faire  pretences
and  foule  performances  of  Portugals  to  Indians.
Brasilian  Catechisme.  Slavish  usage  of  Indians.  Por-
tugals slavish  usage  of  slavish  Indians,  their  injust
justice.

CHAP. III.

Extracts  out  of  the  Historie  of  John  Lerius  a  Frenchman,
who  lived  in  Brasill  with  Monsieur  Villagagnon,
Anno 1557.  and 58. H.P 518

§  1 .  Of  the  Beasts,  and  other  living  Creatures,  and  Plants

of  Brasill 518

The  Tapiroussou  a  beast  of  Brasill,  usefull  for  skin  and
flesh.  Strange  manner  of  keeping  flesh  and  fish
among  the  Americans.  Serpents  eaten.  The  Lizard
prodigious  but  harmlesse.  Jan-ouare.  Dogs  good
Souldiers.  Monkeyes.  The  Sagouin.  Hay,  Coaty.
Brasilian  Birds  delicate  for  food,  for  feathers.  Prating
Parrat.  American  Birds,  Trees,  Scorpions,  Land
Crabs.  No  beasts  of  burden  in  America.  Brasil
wood  good  merchandise.  Brasilian  trees,  their  names,
fruits,  leaves,  and  medicinable  uses.  Brasilian  Cotton-
trees.

§2. Of  the Warre, Battailes, Fortitude, and  Weapons  of

the  Barbarians:  and  of  their  Religion. .  .  . 54.1

The  American  irreconciliable  wars. The  Barbarian  Chief-

taines Oration, the Souldiers weapons. Toupinen-

quins Armies by Sea and Land. Fierce fights.

Tououpinambaultians victorie : Their Religion, &c.

xvii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Americans  the  Devils  captives,  their  Priests,  assem-
blies, &c.  The  Barbarians  manner  of  dansing,
Musicall  instruments,  &c.  The  Barbarians  Songs,
feasting,  grosse  Superstition.  Barbarians  content  to
heare  of, but  not  to  receive  the  true  God.

§  3.  Of  their  Marriages,  Education  of  Children,  Policie,
Hospitalitie,  Diseases,  Physitians,  Funerals  and  Lamen-
tations. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  ,  .562

Savages  abhorre  adulterie.  Child-birth,  Infants  food.  Pur-
gation of  American  women,  their  inconstant  fleeting.
American  houshold-stuffe.  Their  manner  of  enter-
tayning  guests.  The  rites  of  the  Barbarians  in
entertayning  Guests.  Entertainment,  charitie  and
courtesie  of  Barbarians.  Diseases  incident  to  the
Barbarians,  their  Cures,  &c.

xvin

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE

Facsimile  of  the  Title  Page  to  the  Fourth  Part,  16

Bar  of  Music  sung  by  the  Caribs  of  Brazil, . 553
Bars  of  Music  sung  by  the  Caribs  of  Brazil, . 556

THE SIXTEENTH VOLUME

OF

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning  English Voyages  to the  East, West,

and  South  parts  of  America : many  Sea  and

Land Fights  : Plantations in Guiana,

and many strange adventures of

Englishmen  amongst  the

Americans

To  the  Most  Reverend

Father  in God,

GEORGE,

Lord  Archb.  of  Canterburie  His  Grace,

Primate  of  all  England  and Metropolitan,

One  of  His  Majesties  most  Honorable

Privie  Councell,

His  very  good  Lord.

Aving  brought  unto  your  Grace  the  Sheafe
of  my  first  Fruits  to  bee  waved  before
the  Lord,  I  am  bold  now  also  to  offer  (not
after  7.  but  above  77.  weekes)  these  wave
loaves  for  my  harvest,  that  both  may  bee
hallowed  by  the  same  Priestly  hand  :  in
which  respect  your  Graces  Name  which
first  honored  my  Pilgrimage,  hath  the  last  place  in  these
Pilgrime-Volumes,  that  my  All  might  be  blessed  by
your  gracious  embracing  (the  Alpha  and  Omega  of
my  Dedications)  and  might  bee  by  your  Fatherly  bene-
diction commended  to  vulgar  use.  The  sutablenesse  of
the  former  worke  to  your  Graces  Place  and  recreations,
caused  the  former  presumption  :  but  now  the  Author,
by  frequent  Dedications  knowne  and  graciously  acknow-
ledged Yours  (how  unprofitable  a  servant  soever)  is
guiltie  not  of  single  boldnesse  ;  beautifying  the  Frontis-
pice with His Highnesse Name unto your Graces

XVI  I  A

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORIE

entertainment  (especially  in  this  time  so  many  wayes
Festivall)  that  your  Graces  Name  and  entertainment
might  so  much  more  Entitle  and  Endeare  the  same  to
His  Highnesse.  The  authorising  of  Books  in  justest
order  belongeth  to  your  Grace,  as  doth  the  Author
also  :  whose  mistie  conceits  of  ignorance,  or  smokie
vapours  of  ambition,  suffering  the  exhaling  rayes  of
Princely  heat  and  Highnesse,  hope  in  the  Middle
Region  of  your  Gracious  and  vertuous  moderation  to  be
so  mildly  attempered,  that  they  shall  neither  fall  short
in  vanishing  dewes,  nor  be  rejected  after  a  short  blaze
as  falling  Starres,  nor  transcend  into  combustious  Comets,
nor  fall  downe  in  furious  Stormes,  but  gently  descend
as  fresh  and  fruitfull  Showers  on  the  thirstie  Candid
Readers.  Pardon  farre-fetched  similitudes  to  a  Historie
of  farre-fetched  rarities,  and  the  Elements  of  the  world
borrowed  to  patronise  our  world  of  literate  Elements,
not  being  (as  the  commendable  labours  of  Others)  a
Booke  of  Voyages  and  Travels  in  the  world,  but  the
World  historised  in  a  world  of  Voyages  and  Travels.
Wherein  our  Ship  hath  beene  longer  in  her  Circum-
Navigation  then  any  of  the  World-Compassers  here
related  ;  often  in  danger  to  be  overset,  whiles  the
Authors  impotent  and  impatient  Genius  filled  all  her
sailes  to  the  Top  and  Top-gallant  beyond  the  proportion
of  her  balast ;  whereby  some  leakes  of  unwitting  errors,
happening  in  so  new  a  course  thorow  so  various  Seas,
implore  your  Graces  indulgence  to  the  Ship  and  Pilot,
Sir  Francis  Drake  a  Ministers  sonne,  after  a  happy
invironing  of  the  Globe,  feasted  Queene  Elisabeth
aboord  his  Argo,  and  then  laid  her  up  at  Deptford,
devoting  her  Carkasse  to  Time,  Her  (or  rather  his)
exploits  to  Fame  and  Eternitie.  An  English  Minister,
beginneth  and  endeth  his  more  then  Circling  Navigation
with  the  glorious  Name  of  His  Majestie,  in  poore,  but
his  best  entertainment,  and  returning  thus  manned  and
freighted,  humbly  sueth  to  bee  laid  up  in  the  Liberties
and  Libraries  of  Saint  James,  Yorke-house,  Westminster,

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORIE

and  Lambith,  Here  also  the  Pilot  further  petitioneth,  that

his  Body  being  more  leakie  then  his  Ship,  your  Grace  (to

whom  principally  the  promise  was  made)  will  accept  this

Part  of  payment  in  satisfaction  of  the  whole  debt  of  his

Europaean  Peregrination  and  Christian  Visitations. But  a

long  Epistle  were  injurie  to  your  Graces  more  necessarie

imployments  for  the  Church  and  State  : My selfe

am the Epistle, this Worke the Seale, this

Epistle  but  the  Superscription,  these  Pil-

grimes  all  humble  Sutors  for  your

Gracious  favour  to  the

worst  of

Your  Graces

Chap.

Samuel  Purchas.

Chap.  I.

A  briefe  Relation  of  the  severall  Voyages,  under-
taken and  performed  by  the  Right  Honorable,
George,  Earle  of  Cumberland,  in  his  owne
person,  or  at  his  owne  charge,  and  by  his
direction  :  collected  out  of  the  Relations  and
Journals  of  credible  persons  Actors  therein.

He  first  Voyage  of  this  Right  Honorable
Earle  was  intended  to  the  South  Sea:  and
begun  from  Gravesend,  June  26.  1586.
with  three  Ships  and  a  Pinnace ;  the  Red
Dragon  Admirall,  of  260.  Tunnes,  with
130.  men,  commanded  by  Captaine  Robert
Widrington  :  the  Barke  Clifford  Vice-
admirall,  of  130.  Tunnes,  with  70.  men,  commanded  by
Captaine  Christopher  Lister  (he  had  beene  taken  prisoner
in  Barbarie  at  the  battell  of  Alcassar,  in  which  King
Sebastian  was  slaine)  the  Roe  Rere-admirall,  commanded
by  Captaine  Hawes  :  the  Dorothee,  a  small  Pinnace  of
Sir  Walter  Raleighs  (This  voyage  being  published  at  large
in  Master  Hakluyts  printed  voyages,  I  will  here  but
briefly  runne  over)  Septemb.  7.  they  fell  with  the  Coast  of
Barbarie,  haling  in  with  the  Road  of  Santa  Cruce  :  after
that  they  anchored  in  Rio  del  Oro,  and  searched  up  the
River,  finding  it  fourteene  or  fifteene  leagues  upward  as
broad  as  at  the  mouth,  some  two  leagues  over.  The  last
of  September  they  resolved  for  Sierra  Leona,  from  whence
they  departed  the  seventh  of  November. The  fourth  of

5

[IV.  vi.

41

First  voyage
1586.

The  Spanish
King  had
imbargued  all
English  ships
in  his  Ports  of
Spaine  and
Portugall
1585.  whence
warres  were
not  only
expected  at
home,  but
every  where
honorably
sought  and
happily
prevented.
See  Hak.
torn.  3.

Sierra  Leona.

A.D.
1586.

Abraham
Cock.
Andrew
Battell  was
one  of  his
companie.  See
of  this  voyage,
Tom.  1.  /.  7.
c.  3.

John  Drake.
Fenton  and
Wards  expe-
dition. See
Hak.  I.  3. /
had  it  also
written.
[IV.  vi.

1 142.]

Baya.

Bold  courage.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Januarie  they  fell  with  the  American  shoare  in  30.  degrees
and  40.  minutes  South  latitude,  the  weather  temperate.
Jan.  10.  they  tooke  (a  little  short  of  the  River  of  Plate)  a
small  Portugall  ship,  and  in  her  Abraham  Cock  of  Leigh
neere  London,  married  in  that  Country,  who  was  brought
home  by  the  Admirall.  They  learned  that  in  that  River
were  five  Townes  each  of  seventie  housholds  or  more.
Buenos  Aeres,  fiftie  leagues  up  the  River,  the  rest  fortie
or  fiftie  above  each  other  ;  Tuccaman  the  uppermost  230.
leagues  from  the  entrance  :  In  which  was  store  of  Corne,
Cattell,  Fruits,  but  neither  Silver  nor  Gold.  In  this
Barke  were  five  and  fortie  Negroes.  The  next  day  they
tooke  another,  in  which  were  five  and  thirtie  Negro
women,  foure  or  five  Friars,  one  an  Irishman.  Their
Bookes,  Beades,  and  Pictures,  cost  above  1000.  Duckets.
The  Bishop  of  Tuccaman  had  sent  for  them  to  take
possession  of  a  Monasterie.  They  learned  of  Master
John  Drake  who  went  in  consort  with  Captaine  Fenton,
cast  away  neere  the  River  of  Plate,  his  companie  taken  or
slaine  by  the  Salvages  :  of  which  John  Drake  and  Richard
Fairweather  escaped  with  two  or  three  others  in  a  Canoa
to  the  Spaniards  and  lived  in  those  parts.  Here  also  they
tooke  Miles  Philips  left  in  the  Countrey  by  Sir  John
Hawkins.

After  counsell  taken  they  fell  Aprill  3.  with  the  Land
of  Brasil  in  16.  degrees  and  a  Terse,  and  watered  in
the  Road  of  Camana.  They  proceeded  and  anchored
before  the  Towne  of  Baya,  and  found  in  the  Harbour
eight  Ships  and  one  Carvell.  The  next  day  they  forced
the  Portugals  to  abandon  foure  of  the  best  of  those  ships,
and  towed  them  forth  in  despight  of  infinite  store  of  great
and  small  shot  from  the  shoare  and  ships  :  one  Hulke
having  in  her  foure  and  twentie  pieces  of  Ordnance.  The
least  of  these  prizes  was  130.  Tunnes.  After  this  they
haled  the  Hulke  and  commanded  the  Master  to  follow
them,  which  he  did,  together  with  a  Carvell  with  fiftie
Butts  of  wine.  They  fetched  reliefe  from  the  shoare  also
in despite  of  innumerable Indians  and all the  enemies

6

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1588.

forces.  May  24.  they  tooke  a  ship  of  120.  Tunnes  laden
with  Meale  and  Sugar.  But  the  voyage  to  the  South  Sea
was  defeated  by  some  mens  desire  to  returne,  in  which
Captaine  Delamour  tooke  a  small  Pinnace.  The  Flem-
mish  Hulke  taken  into  the  Fleet  in  stead  of  the  George  H,ulks
cast  off,  furnished  with  her  men,  suddenly  tooke  fire  and
perished,  Ship,  Men,  and  Goods.  Septemb.  29.  the
residue  reached  the  Coast  of  England  after  an  unprofit-
able and  unfortunate  voyage.

IN  the  yeare  1587.  when  the  Towne  of  Slewse  was  The  Ear ie  in
beseeged  by  the  Duke  of  Parma,  Sir  Roger  Williams  s/uce.>  88*
being  Governour  there,  the  Earle  put  himselfe  in  per-
son to  make  proofe  of  his  valour  in  that  service,  but
at  his  arrivall  found  the  Towne  surrendred  unto  the
Duke,  the  said  Sir  Roger  being  not  able  to  hold  out
longer.  Anno  1588.  amongst  many  of  the  Nobility  Second  voyage
which  distributed  themselves  into  divers  of  her  Majesties  x*  '
Shippes  upon  the  approach  of  the  Spanish  Armada,  the
Earle  put  himselfe  aboord  the  Bonadventure  commanded
by  Captaine  George  Raymond  ;  when  they  wanne  that
honour  that  no  Sea  can  drowne,  no  age  can  weare  out.
The  Queene  so  accepted  this  Noble  Earles  resolution,  that
she  gave  him  leave  the  same  yeare  to  goe  as  Generall,  and
for  his  greater  honour  and  ability  was  pleased  to  lend  him
the  Golden  Lion,  one  of  the  Shippes  Royall,  to  be  the
Admirall  ;  which  he  victualled  and  furnished  at  his  owne
charge  and  adventure,  having  Commission  to  pursue  his
intended  voyage  towards  the  Spanish  coasts,  under  the
broad  Seale  of  England,  bearing  date  the  fourth  of
October,  1588.  Attended  with  many  brave  Gentlemen
he  set  forth  about  the  end  of  October,  and  in  the  Narrow
Seas  met  with  a  Shippe  of  Dunkerke  called  the  Hare,  Hare  taken.
laden  with  Merchandise  for  Spaine,  which  after  some  fight
he  tooke  and  sent  home.  But  contrary  windes  first  sus-
pended, and  after  that  a  storme  (which  forced  them  to  cut
the  maine  Maste  overboord)  deprived  him  of  further
hopes  and  ability  to  prosecute  his  true  designes.

7

A.D.
1589.

Third  voyage
1589.

The  League
then  was
enemy  to
Queene
Elizabeth.

Jew  of
Lisbone.

The  Azores
foure  Ships
taken.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

HIS  spirit  remaining  neverthelesse  higher  then  the
windes,  and  more  resolutely  by  stormes  compact
and  united  in  it  selfe,  he  procured  anew  of  her  Majestie
the  Victory,  one  of  the  Royal  Navie,  accompanied  with
the  Meg  and  Margaret,  two  small  Ships  and  one  Carvell ;
which  were  set  forth  at  his  charges,  and  manned  with
400.  Mariners  and  Souldiers  :  the  Admirall  commanded
by  his  Lordship,  and  under  him  Captaine  Christopher
Lyster  :  the  Meg  by  Captaine  William  Mounson  Vice-
admirall  :  the  Margaret  by  Captaine  Edward  Careles  alias
Write  Rereadmirall  :  the  Carvell  by  Captaine  Pigeon.
The  eighteenth  of  June  they  set  forth  from  Plimmouth
and  within  three  dayes  met  with  three  French  Ships,
Leaguers  of  New  Haven,  and  Saint  Maloes  laden  with
New-found-land  fish  :  two  of  them  with  the  Margaret
not  able  to  endure  the  Sea,  were  sent  for  England.  The
thirteenth  of  July  his  Lordship  met  with  eleven  Dutch
Ships  which  at  first  made  shew  to  abide  a  fight,  and  after
a  few  shot  yeelded  and  sent  their  Masters  aboord  shewing
their  Pasports  from  Hamborough,  Lubecke,  Bream,
Pomer  land  and  Callice  :  who  confessed  that  they  had
goods  aboord  to  the  value  of  foure  thousand  &  five
hundred  pounds  of  a  Jew  of  Lisbone  ;  which  being
delivered  and  distributed,  his  Lordship  set  saile  for  the
Asores.  The  first  of  August  he  had  sight  of  Saint
Michael,  and  to  disguise  himselfe  put  forth  a  Spanish
Flagge.  Espying  foure  Shippes  in  the  Roade,  he  resolved
that  night  to  cut  their  Cables  and  to  bring  them  away  :
which  he  accordingly  performed  before  he  was  descried.
The  Spaniards  in  three  of  them  leaping  into  the  Sea,  with
much  noise  and  outcry  gave  the  alarme  to  the  Town,
which  made  many  vaine  shots  at  his  Boate  in  the  darke.
The  fourth  was  the  Falcon  of  London,  under  the  name  of
a  Scottish  Ship,  having  a  Scottish  Pilot.  The  three
Spaniards  were  laden  from  Sivill  with  Wine  and  Sallet
Oyle.  The  Pinnace  tooke  a  small  Shippe  wherein  was
thirty  tunnes  of  Madera  wines,  some  Wollen  Cloath,  Silke
and  Taffata. The  Carracks  were  departed  from  Tercera

8

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  ad.

1589.

eight  dayes  before. He  manned  his  Boates  and  obtained
refreshing  at  Flores  professing  himselfe  a  friend  to  their
King  Don  Antonio. From  thence  rowing  a  shipboord,
the  Boate  was  pursued  two  miles  together  by  a  monstrous
Fish,  whose  Finnes  many  times  appeared  about  the  gils  ^  monstrous
above  water  foure  or  five  yards  a  sunder,  and  his  jawes 1S  '
gaping  a  yard  and  a  halfe  wide,  not  without  great  danger
of  overturning  the  Pinnace,  and  devouring  some  of  the
company  : but  at  the  last  they all  escaped. Here  his
Lordshippe met and accepted into consort Captaine
Davies  with his Shippe and Pinnace, a  Shippe of  Sir  [IV.  vi.
Walter  Raleighs,  commanded by  Captaine Markesbury,  II43-.

and  the  Barke  Lime.

Having  intelligence  that  the  Carracks  were  at  Tercera,
he  came  up  to  the  road  of  Fyall  the  seven  and  twentieth
of  August, and descrying certaine Shippes at anchor  $ee  Linschot.
close  aboord  the  shoare,  he  sent  his  Boates  which  boorded  c'  9
a  Ship  of  250.  tunne  armed  with  foureteene  cast  Peeces,
and  continued  fight till a  supply of  Boates  came  from
the  Fleete  to  second  them,  and  then  recovered  the  prize.  A  prize  of
The  Spaniards (except  John de Palma)  leapt  all  over-  Por*  Ricco.
boord to swimme to the shoare, which  was so neere
that  the  Ship was  moored to the  Castle,  from  whence
the great Ordnance  plaied all the time of  the  fight :
onely it  was not a  play to the Master  of  the  Carvell,
whose  calfe  of  his  legge  was  shot away. This Shippe
came  laden from Port-Ricco with Sugar, Ginger, and
Hides. The  Ship-boates  fetched  also  out  of  the  Roade
some  other  small  Ships  laden  from  Guinnee  with  Elephants  Guinnee  Ships
teeth,  Graines,  Coca  nuts,  and  Goate  Skinnes :  most  of  taken-
which  prizes  he  sent  for  England. The  next  day,  eight
Englishmen prisoners stole from Tercera in a small
Boate,  having  no  other  yard for  their maine  saile  then
two Pipe staves. These told his Lordship, that the
Carrackes  were departed  a  weeke  before,  which  moved
him to returne for Fyall with purpose to take that
Towne.

He arrived, September the tenth,  landing his men,  Fyall  taken.

9

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1589.

the  Platforme  shot  at  them  in  their  march,  but  they
comming  up  found  it  and  the  Towne  abandoned,  and
tooke  thereof  possession.  This  Towne  containeth  500.
housholds  well  and  strongly  built  of  Lime  and  Stone,
well  stored  with  fresh  water,  delicate  Fruites  and  Grapes
of  divers  sorts.  He  set  a  guard  to  preserve  the  Churches
and  Religious  Houses,  and  staid  there  foure  dayes  till
The  spoile.  tne  ransome  was  brought  him,  which  was  2000  Duckets,
most  of  Church  Plate.  He  shipped  from  the  Platforme
eight  and  fiftie  Peeces  of  Iron  Ordnance.  The  Governour
of  Graciosa  sent  his  Lordship  sixtie  Butts  of  Wine,  but
excused  his  want  of  fresh  water.  A  ship  of  Weymouth
came  thither  with  a  Spanish  prize  worth  sixteene  thousand
pounds,  and  brought  newes  of  the  West  Indie  Fleete
shortly  to  come ;  which  after  three  or  foure  dayes  playing
to  and  fro  in  rough  weather  (I  let  passe  a  Shippe  of
Ship  of  Saint  Saint  Malo,  which  he  took  laden  with  New-found-land
Malo.  Fish)  he  espied  going  into  the  haven  at  Angra  in  Tercera

to  the  number  of  iifteene  saile,  being  too  farre  to  Lee-
ward to  come  neere  them  :  and  they  being  strong  and
fortified  with  the  Castle  and  Fort,  he  was  forced  to
give  over.  And  although  he  left  a  Pinnace  for  advice,
intending  to  waite  for  them  at  Sea  ;  yet  she  returned
with  newes  that  they  had  taken  off  their  sailes,  and  downe
their  topmasts  with  resolution  of  longer  stay.  Wherefore
he  sailed  to  Saint  Michaels,  and  being  there  repelled
from  watering,  went  to  Saint  Maries,  where  they  found
two  Brasil  Ships  laden  with  Sugar,  which  the  Ilanders
Captaine  sought  to  bring  a  ground  :  but  Captaine  Lyster  hastning
Lysters  t^e  attempt in the face  of  the  enemie and  danger  of

attempt  continuall  shoare-shot,  borded  the  uttermost,  cut  asunder

her Cables and Hawsers and towed  her away,  whiles
Captaine  Davies  entred the other then a ground and
abandoned,  and was  forced to  forsake  her. Two men
were  slaine  and  sixteene  hurt. But  a  greater  losse  followed
His  audacious  whiies  the  ]7ar}  [n  person  sought  to  get  the  other  ship,
Task  endanger-  Captaine  Lyster  rashly  disvaluing  the  enemies  force,  the
ing  of  the  rest.  Barre  also detayning them on  ground  in  the  midst  of

10

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1589.

danger  from  the  enemie,  to  the  losse  and  hurt  of  eightie
men.  His  Lordship  received  three  shot  upon  his  Target,
and  a  fourth  on  the  side,  not  deepe,  his  head  also  broken
with  stones  that  the  bloud  covered  his  face,  both  it
and  his  legs  likewise  burned  with  fire-balls.

The  Meg  being  leakie  was  sent  with  the  prize into
England,  and  his  Lordship held his  course  for  Spaine.
By  the  way  he  tooke  a  Portugal  ship  laden  from  Brasil,  American
and  after  that  another  which  was  one  of  the  fifteene  which  s  &s  ta  en'
had  before  entred  Angra,  being  a  ship  of  400.  Tunnes,
laden  from  Mexico  and  Saint  John  de  Ulhua  with  seven
hundred hides,  sixe chists of  Cochenele,  certaine  chists
of  Sugar  and  some  Silver. The  Captaine  was  an  Italian,
and had in her five and twentie thousand Duckets
adventure. Thus  full  of  joy  they  resolved  homewards,
but Sea-fortunes are variable, having two inconstant
Parents,  Aire  and  Water. His Lordship  sent  Captaine
Lyster  in the Mexican  prize  for  Portsmouth,  which  at
Helcliffe in Cornwall was wracked,  the Captaine and  Captaine
all  his  companie  drowned  except  five or  sixe. Scarsitie  yster
of  drinke  caused  by  contrarie  windes,  caused  his  Lordship
to  seeke  to  recover  some  part  of  Ireland  for  reliefe ;  but
wayting  for  entrance  was  put  off  againe,  their  Beere  and
Water  being  all  spent. Three  spoonfuls  of  vineger  were  Miserable
allowed  to  each  man  at  a  meale  with  some  small  reliefe  distressefor
squeezed  out of  the  lees  of  their  wine  vessels : which
continued fourteene dayes without other supply then
the  drops  of  Haile  and  Raine,  carefully  saved  with  Sheets
and  Napkins. Some  dranke  up  the  soyled  running  water
at  the  Scupper-holes ;  others  saved  by  devise  the  runnings
downe  the Masts  and  tarred Ropes ;  and  many  licked
the  moist  Boards,  Railes,  and  Masts  with  their  tongues
like  Dogs. Yet was that Raine so  intermingled  with
the  sprie  of  the  foaming  Seas in  that extreme  storme,
that it could not be healthfull : yea, some in their  Salt  deadly
extremitie of  thirst dranke themselves to death with  dl™&L
their Cannes of salt-water in their hands. Notwith-  equ\^e  anj
standing  this  extreme scarsitie,  his  noble  charitie  caused  courage.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS FILGRIMES

1589.

equall distribution of the small store  they had  aswell

to all his prisoners as to his owne people. By  this

time the lamentable cryes of  the  sicke  and  hurt  men

for drinke  was  heard in every  corner  of  the  ship :  for

want  whereof  many  perished  (ten  or  twelve  every  night)

[IV.  vi.  more  then  otherwise  had  miscarried  in  the  whole  Voyage.

IT44-J  The  storme continuing added  to their  misery, tearing

the  ship  in  such  sort,  as  his  Lordships  Cabbin,  the  dining

roome, and halfe Decke became all  one,  and he was

forced  to  seeke  a  new  lodging  in  the  hold. His  minde

was  yet  undaunted  and  present,  his  bodily  presence  and

preventions readie. The last ot November hee  spake

with an English ship, which promised him the next

morning  two  or  three  tunnes  of  Wine,  but  soone  after

unfortunately  came  on  ground. The  next  day  hee  had

some  supply  of  Beere,  but  not  sufficient  to  enable  him

to  undertake  for  England. Hee  therefore (the winde

Ventre  Haven  serving)  put  into  Ventre  Haven,  in  the  Westermost  part

in  Ireland. 0f  Ireland,  where having  well refreshed, the twentieth

of  December  he  set sayle  for  England. His  Lordship

in this  Voyage tooke  thirteene Prizes,  but that  which

was worth more then all the rest was lost, yet the

profit redoubled his adventures. At his arrivall in

London, hee met with the unfortunate newes  of  the

death  of  his  eldest  Sonne  Francis  Lord  Clifford,  which

died  the  twelfth  of  December, 1589.  yet  was  comforted

The  Countesse  with the  birth  of  the Ladie  Anne  Clifford  (borne  the

of  Dorset |ast Qf  Januarv following) his Daughter, (and by the

*« a '  death  of  Robert  Lord  Clifford,  who  dyed  the  fourteenth

of  May 1 59 1. his heire), now the vertuous wife of

the  Right  Honourable  Richard  Earle  of  Dorset.

The  fourth  r  l  ^His  Honourable  Sparke  was  further  kindled  and
Voyage  \^\.  ±  enflamed  by  former  disasters,  and  obtayning  of
her  Majestie  a  new  ship  called  the  Garland,  a  ship  of
sixe  hundred  tunnes,  added  the  Samson  Vice-admirall,
a  ship  of  his  Lordships,  of  two  hundred  and  sixtie  tunnes,
the Golden Noble Reare-admirall, and to them the

12

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  ad.

1591.

Allagarta,  and a small Pinnasse called the  Discoverie.

With these he set  forth 1 591.  at  his owne  charge to

the  Coast of Spaine, where hee tooke  good  purchase,  $hlP  °/Saini

a  ship  laden at Saint Thomas with Sugars, which he ome

was  forced  to  cast  or?  by  an  irrecoverable  leake :  another

also  which after  long  contrary  winds  in  her  course  for

England, was driven to put into a Spanish  Harbour

for  want  of  victuals. But  in  two  other  hee  was  more

unfortunate. For  Captayne  Munson  being  sent  to  dis-  Chance  of

patch the  goods, and the  Golden Noble  to  accompany  *™r™:

them  (which  the  nights  calmenesse  prohibited)  the  ships

beeing thus severed, were by the Gallies of  Penecha

set  upon,  his  Lordship  being  within  hearing  of  the  shot,

but by  reason of  the calme  not  able  to  releeve  them  :

so  that  the  two  ships  were  recovered, Captayne  Bayly

slaine,  Captayne  Munson  and  the  rest  carried  Prisoners

to  Penecha,  and  thence  to  Lisbone. His  Lordship  wrote

to the  Archduke  Albert,  then  Vice-roy, for their  good

usage, otherwise  threatning requitall  to  theirs  of  whom

he  presumed  hee  should  take  store. For  feare  whereof

the  common sort  were  returned  a  few  dayes  after  new

clothed,  Captayne  Munson  with  sixe  others  only  detayned.

His Lordship having intelligence of  a great Armada

prepared  in  the  Groyne,  to  bee sent  against  the  Lord

Thomas  Howard  then  Admirall of  her  Majesties  fleet

at the Asores,  attending to surprize  the  West Indian

fleet, sent  the  Mooneshine with  advise ; otherwise the  Advise.

Lord Howard had runne the fortune  of  Sir Richard  Sir  R.

Greenvile,  who  lost  his  ship  and  life,  or  rather  exchanged  Gr^env'lle-

the one for honor, and for the other made the

Spaniards the greatest losers in so deere a purchase.

Thus  weakned  by  disadventure,  he  was  forced  to  returne

for  England.

His Lordship considering  the inconvenience of  her  Fifth  Voyage
Majesties command, not to lay  any  Spanish  ship 1 592-
aboard with her ships, lest both might together be
destroyed by fire, rather chose to  seeke  out amongst

J3

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1592.

the Merchants, then  to  make further use  of  the  ships
Royall. And so hee hired the Tigre a ship of six
hundred tunnes, furnished by the Owners for three
hundred  pounds  a  moneth  wages,  in  which  he  went  in
person,  thereto  adding  his owne  ship  the  Samson,  and
the  Golden  Noble,  with  two  small  ships.
Ill  beginnings. These in the yeere 1592. were set forth, but so
crossed  with  winds,  as  three  moneths  victualls  were  spent
in  Harbours  before  they  could  get  to  the  Westward  of
Plymmouth  :  whereby  also  one  of  his  Lordships  principall
designes was frustrate, which was the taking of the
Carrikes  outward  bound,  as  also  the  meanes  to  performe
his  intended  Voyage  to  the  West  Indies. Whereupon,
not like to satisfie that expectation  which  might  arise
from  a  personall expedition of  his  Lordship,  he  trans-
it retume, ferred the chiefe  command to Captayne Norton, and
Norm**"*11'  returned  to  London,  leaving  instructions  with  the  Admirall
substituted. to goe f°r tne  Asores. Captayne  Norton  neere  Cape
Finisterre, met two of  the King  of  Spaines Gallions,
returning  from Brest  in  Brittanie; in  fight  with  whom
the Golden Noble received a shot in her fore-mast,
which  made  them  doubt  of  her  further  sufficiencie:  but
having fished it aswell as they  could,  Captayne  Cave
Argosie taken,  her  Commander  espied  an Argosie bound for  Lisbone,
and  gave  chase  to  her  within  shot  of  the  Fort  of  Cascaiis
within five fathome water of  a  shoald  called  Catchops,
and  there  in  sight  of  the  men  on  shoare  laid  her  aboard,
and  returned  into  England  with  her.
Flores  The Admirall with the rest of  the fleet  arrived  at

courtesie. the  Asores,  and  having  watered  and  refreshed  at  Flores
(which  that  Hand  permitted  to  all  men  of  warre,  as  not
able  to  withstand  them)  put  to  Sea  and  spreading  them-
SantaCrucea  selves, the Santa Cruce was descried, which made  all
Camke.  tjle  haste  s^e  C0Vi\^  for  Angra  in  Tercera. They  hasted

after, and being within halfe a league of  her, they
&V/.  espied  Sir  John  Burroughs  in  the Ro-bucke,  a  ship  of

Burrough. ^v  Walter  Raieighs  of  two  hundred  tunnes  (which  had
ridden  unseene  on  the  Easterne  side  of  the  Hand)  stand-

14

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1592.

ing  to crosse the Carrickes  way,  so that  now  she  was  [IV.  vi.

forced,  the  wind  being  Westerly  to  luffe  up,  &  recover  II45-J

the Road of  Lagowna on  the South end of Flores.

The  law  and  custom  of  the  Sea,  making  al  ships  of  war  Sea-custome  of

then together (though not formerly consorted) equall  sAarini-

sharers  according  to  their  tunnage  of  the  prizes  gained,

Captayne  Norton  out  of  civil  respect  (and  not  needing

help)  consulted  with  Sir  John  Burroughs,  and  they  agreed

to board her the  next  morning. But  a  storme in  the

night  forced  them  al  from  their  anchors,  which  the  next

day being somwhat allaied  they  recovered the road  &

found the Carrike warped as neer the shore as  they

could,  having  indevored  also  to  put  ashore  such  goods  as

time would permit) and fired, with all her sayles  and  Portugal*  fire

flags  up  and  Ordnance  laden,  which  went  off  on  every  their  Camke.

side  when  the  fire  came  to  them  :  a  sight  more  pleasing  to

the Portugals then  the  English,  whom  those  accounted

now  the  Owners  of  that  consumed  substance. The  surge

also (issue  of  the late storme) scarsly permitted  their

Boates  to land, to  seeke to get  wrackes,  and  what  the

Portugals  had  carried  ashoare :  every man  (for  feare  of

wracking  the  Boates  on  the  Rockes)  being  up  to  the  neck,  Auri  sacra

and  some  over  head  and  eares  before  they  could  obtayne  fames.

the shoare,  where  also  they were  forced  on  hands  and

knees  to  climbe  up  a  steep  hill ;  on  the  top  whereof  stood

many Danders tumbling  downe  great  stones  on them.

But all difficulties were made easie  by resolution  and

hope,  which  brought  them  to  the  Towne  (now  forsaken  Tottme  taken.

by her Inhabitants) and made them Masters of the

wracked  goods,  which  seemed  to flye  thither  for  refuge

from  the  fire  and  water.

Whiles  they  were  thus  employed  about  this  burnt
Carrike,  Sir  Robert  Crosse  Captayne  of  the  Foresight  of
her  Majesties,  Master  Tomson  Captayne  of  the  Daintie
(a  ship  of  Sir  John  Hawkins)  Captayne  Newport  in  the
Golden  Dragon  came  into  this  consort.  They  were  much
grieved  with  this  spectacle,  but  comforted  that  there
had  but  one  of  the  five  Carrickes  passed,  this  had  fallen

*3

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1592.

into  this  terrible  Purgatory,  and  three  were  still  expected.
They  spread  themselves,  &  continued  expecting  from  the
nine  and  twentieth  of  June,  till  the  third  of  August,  at
which  time  Master  Tomson  first  had  sight  of  the  great
MadredeDios  Carricke,  called  Madre  de  Dios,  and  comming  up,  gave
a  great  j^  a  broad-side  of  Ordnance  ;  &  falling  a  sterne  came

(having  laden  his  Ordnance)  again  and  againe  to  deliver
his  peales  to  hinder  her  way,  till  the  rest  of  the  fleet
could  come,  the  Carricke  answering  with  the  like.  Sir
The  fight.  John  Burroughes  and  the  Golden  Dragon  came  in  about
three  a  clocke,  and  Sir  John  received  a  shot  of  a  Canon
Perier  under  water  in  the  Bread-roome,  which  made
him  beare  up  to  stop  his  leake.  Sir  Robert  Crosse  was
the  next,  who  to  give  her  his  broad  side,  came  so  neere,
that  becalming  his  sayles  he  unwillingly  fell  aboard  the
Carricke,  which  having  lashed  her  fast  by  the  Strowdes,
sayled  away  with  her  by  her  side.  The  Earle  of  Cumber-
lands  ships,  worst  of  sayle,  were  the  last  which  came
up,  about  eleven  aclocke  at  night,  not  minding  then
to  boord  her:  But  hearing  the  Foresight,  calling  to
Queenes  ships  Captayne  Norton,  And  you  be  men,  save  the  Queenes
danger.  ^-p .  ^e  gaye orc[er  to  tbe  Samson,  to  lay  her  aboord

on  the  one  side,  and  promising  to  doe  the  like  in  the
Tigre  on  the  other,  which  about  twelve  a  clock  was
performed.  The  Tigre  running  stemling  aboord,  broke
her  beake-head  to  the  huddings ;  the  Samson  laid  the
Can-ike  Foresight  aboord,  and  entred  thorow  her  into  the  Carricke,

entred.  whereby the Foresight without entring any  one  man,

tooke  opportunitie  to  free  her  selfe.

And  now  both  ships  companies  beeing  entred  into  the
Fore-cheynes,  the  Fore-castle  was  so  high,  that  without
any  resistance  the  getting  up  had  beene  difficult.  But
heere  was  strong  resistance,  some  irrecoverably  falling  by
the  boord,  and  the  assault  continued  an  houre  and  an
Fight  and  halfe,  so  brave  a  bootie  making  the  men  fight  like
English  Dragons,  till  the  Fore-castle  being  gained,  the  Portugals

stowed  themselves  in holds. The  English  now  hunted
after  nothing  but  pillage,  and  were  readie  to  goe  to  the

16

<J*>

E

CO

E

1

PL, p.

b5

o
o

CO

O  tat, £  £  r

e« ^

t\*H  ~S

c

*,  ^

rR  ^  \:  fl  "i  2

Ln «  <  o  i  !

u

I  8

5  CO

co ||

SI'S  5

>s  .2  "Ho

§  sw

k  .

^  $°<2

G

a  "s  -s  s  .6

UJHH

•G  •>.  vr

•t;  o  *

3^

<=  e

^  §  a.
Is  2

4J.JH

O £ ^-2
W ^

*  h  s

-«3
Si

« 5

k

S5

§k^-§

SI  g^

3  -tt O

C -

*5  0

CD O

o

o

3

o

2

-*£

§  o

J2  k, « so

o|l-

.fig

•rs

Xk

-a

Mad
agre
Cam

t

zi ^s Sj

!  §  *>*

at
u

c §

5 CO

4*± IP

<£

o 5

S  5Z

I O R

Que  eft
j >

J O R G

'-  c£2  cm

;  (J  ■ «  fc

Carrit  Jt  .g
entretb  *T*

« JS

Fight ,
Englts
Vic  ton.

5  3"

=N G

-2  ^  ?>

s  « '3

a  °  §

^  s

c S

P  -G

S b v>  J2

hi

»» -a

a  J

^  5  o

R  ^ «
•5 R J»

tJ3e
q -

R

fe  5  >.

si  g"

J2  **  ^^

5ST  R <u "*

G  °-« O X

ro  ^»  ,o  H

•  ij  ** «« fi

i-4  ^  *** <

t8  *  a  -

>5  5  _S

'SO
u

H

O^

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1592.

eares  about  it,  each  man  lighting  a  Candle,  the  negligence
of which  fired a Cabbin, in which were  sixe  hundred  banger  by
Cartrages of  Powder. The  rumour  hereof  made  them  *re'
all  readie  to  forsake  the  Carrike,  when  Captayne  Norton
with  some  others  with  buckets  of  water,  adventured  the
quenching  of  that  fire :  Feare  of  leake  by  the  fight  and
neernesse of  the shoare  were great parts of  his care.
All these dangers freed, contention about so rich a  Contention
pillage was wel-nigh kindling in the Commanders,  af>ou* the
beeing so  diversly  commanded and employed :  but Sir
John  Burroughes  pretending  the  Queenes  name,  Captayne
Norton  yeelded  that  hee  should  take  care  of  the  Carricke,
which  he  accordingly  repayred,  lands  about  eight  hundred
Negros  on  Corvo,  detaynes  the  ordinary  Saylers,  commits
the  Gentlemen  to  a  ship  of  the  Earle  of  Cumberlands  In  M-  Hak-
to  goe  whether  they  would,  who  escaped not  a  second  J?  seconth-
rifling  by  other  Englishmen  of  warre,  which  tooke  from Cartikes
them  (thus  negligently  dismissed)  nine  hundred  Diamonds  purchase  is
besides  other  odde  ends. The  Earle  of  Cumberland  had  attributed
notice  by  a  Pinnasse  sent  from  Captayne  Norton  twentie  ^"/"-J  !°h
dayes  before  the  Carricke  came  into England,  and had  there  may  the
Commission  from the Queene for  her  safe  harbouring.  Reader  also
Hardly  she  escaped  the  Rockes  of  Silly  (the  Tigre  also  sef  hei\
participating in that danger) and  came to Dartmouth,  dt™™s??*  f
being so huge  and  unweldie  a  ship,  as  shee  was  never  have  ^er'e
remooved  out  of  that  Harbour,  but there laid up her  followed  that
bones. His Lordships share would have amounted  Relation
according  to  his  employment  of  ships  and  men,  to  two  whtJhI fou*<*>
or three Millions, but because his Commission large  judgement  to
enough  otherwise, had  not  provided  for  the  case  of  his  the  Reader,
returne, and substituting another in his place, some  My  copie  also
adjudged it to depend on the Queenes mercie and  arSuj^  my
bountie. Neyther  yet  by  reason  of  some  mens  imbezell-  n%cfc  /  £ave
ing  had her Majestie  the  account of  the fifth part  of  omitted.
her  value ; and the Earle was faine  to  accept  of  sixe  [IV.  vi.
and thirtie thousand pounds for him and  his,  as  out  1146.]

of  gift.

XVI  17  B

A.D.

!593-

Sixt  voyage.

I593-

Two  French
ships  very  rich
taken.

Scout  taken.

His  sicknesse
and  returne.

The  seventh

Voyage.

I593-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

THe  next  yeere  1593.  his  Lordship  procured  two  ships
Royal],  the  Golden  Lion  Admirall  commanded  by
himselfe,  the  Bonadventure  Vice-admirall,  and  therewith
employed  the  Backe  Chaldon,  the  Pilgrime,  the  Anthonie,
and  the  Discoverie :  which  three  last  when  hee  came  to
the  Coast  of  Spaine  hee  sent  for  the  West  Indies.  Hee
tooke  from  the  protection  of  fourteene  great  Hulkes,  two
French  ships  of  Saint  Malowes  (which  then  held  for
the  league,  and  were  therefore  reputed  in  state  of
Spaniards)  of  great  value,  one  of  which  he  carried  with
him,  and  sent  the  other  into  England.  The  Spaniards
having  intelligence,  set  forth  an  Armada  against  him,
which  waited  for  him  at  the  Hands,  and  the  Earle  hearing
of  their  beeing  at  Flores,  and  within  five  leagues  of  them,
lighted  on  a  ship  which  they  had  sent  to  descry,  which
before  shee  could  recover  her  fleet,  he  tooke.  He  learning
by  these  that  the  Spanish  fleet  trebled  the  force  of  his,
having  kept  company  with  them  one  day,  quitted  them
and  kept  tenne  or  twelve  leagues  distant  from  them
three  weekes.  In  which  space  he  fell  sicke  beyond  hope
of  life,  without  returne  or  refreshing  from  the  shoare.
Captayne  Monson  with  much  hazard,  procured  him  some
refreshing  from  Corvo ;  and  leaving  the  rest  of  the  ships
(which  tooke  one  Prize  after)  hee  returned  for  England,
this  prooving  the  most  gainfull  Voyage  which  he  made
before  or  after.

THe  Anthonie  of  one  hundred  and  twentie  tunnes,
commanded  by  Captayne  James  Langton,  Pilot
Antonio  Martino  a  Spaniard,  which  had  long  lived  in
those  Indies,  and  wel  acquainted  with  those  Ports :  the
Pilgrime  of  one  hundred  tunnes,  commanded  by  Captayne
Francis  Slingsbie,  Diego  Petrus  a  Spanish  Pilot,  and  the
Discoverie  :  these  three  after  farewell  solemnely  taken  and
given  by  shot  on  all  hands,  shaped  their  Course  for  the
Antillas,  and  fell  with  the  Hand  of  Saint  Lucia,  there
and  at  Matinnio,  refreshing  themselves  three  dayes,  they
concluded  to  attempt  the  taking  of  the  Rancherias,  which

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1593-
are  the Pearle-fishings  of  Margarita,  contayning  sixe  or  Pearl-fishings
seven severall small Villages, which for that  purpose
they  inhabit  but  not  above  one  of  them  at  once,  when
their  fishing failes there,  removing to  another  and so
by course,  having emptie  houses  standing  alway  readie
for that purpose. The Pearles for more safetie are
monethly carried to the Towne of Margarita three
leagues from the  waters  side. They  kept  out  of  sight
all  day  for  feare  of  discoverie,  and  at  night  landed  and
visited  two emptie Rancherias : but taking  a  Spaniard
which then came thither  in  a Boate  with  two  Indians,
they  made  him  their  guide  to  the  inhabited  Rancheria,
five  leagues off, commanding the  Boates to row  along
the shoare,  and not to double  the  point till evening.
The  two  Captaynes  with  eight  and  twentie  men,  marched
by land in the heat, which  with  want  of  water  much
annoyed  them. They  came  thither  in  the  beginning  of
the  night,  and  agreed  to  assault  the  place  in  three  places  Rancheria
at  once,  notwithstanding  their  small  numbers,  lest  they  assaulted  and
should  gather  head  any  where. The Spaniards  at first  ta
thought  it  had  beene  some  false  alarme  of  the  Governour,
and  bid  away with this  jesting,  but  finding  it earnest,
hastily fled to the woods. Thus did they take the
Towne, with some two thousand pounds value in
Pearle besides what other pillage the Souldiers  gate.
Their  weapons  they  brake  for  feare  of  pursuite.

In  the  morning  they  went  aboord  the  fishing  Boats,
and  tooke  their  Oysters  gotten  the  night  before:  and
gate  aboord  their  ships  (much  in  suspense  for  them,
not  knowing  of  this  sudden  enterprize)  the  fifth  day
after  they  had  gone  from  them.  The  shippes  now
comming  before  the  Towne  demanded  ransome  for  their
houses  and  Canoas,  to  redeeme  which  from  destruction
they  gave  two  thousand  Duckets  in  Pearle.  But  Carvels
of  advice  having  every-where  given  intelligence  of  them,
at  Cumana  they  found  them  on  their  guard  and  returned,
not  without  losse.  Thence  they  coasted  Terra  Firma,  jmj,a  anj
till they came to the Hands  of  Aruba and Corresao, Corresao.

19

A.D.

J593-
R.  de  Hache.

Strange
watering.

Estanchas  or
Stantias.

Beefe  how
kept  there.

[IV.  vi.

47-]

Ri.  Marra-
cava.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

where  they  landed  and  refreshed  themselves :  Thence
to  Rio  de  Hache,  which  they  thought  to  have  taken,
but  found  the  enemy  ready  for  them,  with  other  intelli-
gence that  they  had  carried  their  goods  into  the  Moun-
taynes.

They  therefore  set  saile  for  Hispaniola,  came  to  Cape
Tuberone,  and  thence  to  the  Bay  of  Saint  Nicholas,  and
thence  to  Fort  Plat,  and  others  on  the  North  side :  thence
to  Mona,  and  so  Savona,  where  they  watered  againe,  in
this  manner.  The  Hand  is  low  destitute  of  any  Spring,
and  to  the  Sea  a  small  fine  Sand.  Not  twenty  paces
from  the  wash  of  the  Sea  digging  a  hole  and  setting
therein  a  Hogshead  (the  head  knocked  out)  water  is
plentifully  taken,  seeming  to  be  no  other  then  the  Sea
water,  losing  the  saltnesse  in  that  passage.  Thence  they
went  to  the  River  of  Socko,  about  5.  1.  Eastward  of
Saint  Domingo,  and  went  in  the  night  4.  1.  up  and
suddenly  surprised  an  Estanca,  that  is,  a  Farme  place,
where  slaves  keepe  the  great  mens  cattle,  make  their
Cassavi  bread,  dresse  their  Ginger  and  Fruites,  and  doe
other  offices  of  Husbandry.  Being  therefore  possessed,
they  came  to  parlie  for  ransome  of  their  Houses,  and
for  their  Negros,  for  which  they  gave  them  the  flesh
of  thirtie  Beeves  with  Cassavi  and  Fruites.  Beefe  will
not  keepe  in  those  parts  above  foure  and  twenty  houres,
unlesse  first  salted,  and  then  dried  in  the  Sunne,  being
first  cut  into  two  sides  like  Bacon,  without  any  bone  left
in  it,  nor  any  peece  of  flesh  thicker  then  a  mans  hand.
It  must  first  be  searched  with  a  Knife,  then  rubbed
over  with  Salt,  and  having  so  remained  twelve  houres
must  be  dried  in  the  Sunne :  and  foure  hot  dayes  drying
will  save  it  sufficiently.

Other  Estancas  being  likewise  taken  yeelded  like  con-
tributions. From  thence  they  went  upon  another  River
called  Marracava,  where  there  was  an  Ingenio  of  Sugars
which  they  tooke  for  their  provisions  and  caused  the
owner  to  ransome  it  from  burning.  Thence  they  went
to  the  mouth  of  the  harbour  of  Saint  Domingo,  and  rid

20

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND

A.D.
1594.

there  at  the  East  side  of  the  same,  at  Point  Torrosilio
to  intercept  any  Shipping  comming  forth.  The  Sergeant
Mayor  came  hither  to  treat  for  ransome  of  some  prisoners,
and  with  him  an  Englishman  of  Captaine  Lancasters
company  of  Captain  Raymunds  fleete,  whose  Ship  was  Cap.  Ray-
newly  cast  away  comming  out  of  the  East  Indies  unto  mund.
those  parts,  a  little  to  the  West  of  Saint  Domingo  at
Acoa.  The  Spaniards  set  forth  two  Carvels  to  intercept
the  Boates,  which  they  did,  but  the  Ships  recovered  the
taken  and  takers  together.  They  brought  foure  brasse
Falcons  of  Captaine  Lancasters  Ship,  ten  others  of  Iron
they  left  for  the  heavinesse  being  somewhat  farre  from
the  water.  They  tooke  also  a  fine  Friggot  hidden  under
the  trees,  which  they  brought  for  England.

Thence they  went  for  Jamaica,  and  there  found  two  Jamaica.
Barkes  laden  with  Hides  and  Cannafistula,  one  of  which
they  manned  and  sent  for  England,  taken  by  a  French
man  of  warre  by  the  way. Thence  they  went  to  Cuba,
to  Cape  Corientes, and Cape Saint  Antonio, to  expect
shipping  comming  for  the  Havana,  but  in  vaine. Thus
after  eight  moneths  spent  in  the  Countrey,  the  Antonie
and the Frigot went to the Bay of  Honduras  ; the  Bay  of
Pilgrime at Havana spent some few dayes, and then  Honduras.
set  saile  for  England,  where  they  arrived  in  Plimmouth,
May 14. 1594.

The  Antonie  and  the  Frigot  within  foure  leagues  of
Porto  cavallo  descried  seven  Shippes  in  the  Road,  the  Porto  Cavallo.
least  of  ninescore  tun.  They  anchored  within  Caliver
shot  of  the  Spanish  Shippes  and  mored  their  Ships  a
head  and  sterne,  and  bent  their  broad  sides  unto  them,
and  there  fought  all  that  day  with  those  seven  Shippes  The  fight.
and  all  night,  now  and  then  a  shot  :  Captaine  Langton
sent  the  Boate  and  Shallop  to  the  shore,  from  whence  they
brought  a  Frigot  of  twenty  tunne.  The  next  morning
they  fired  the  Frigot,  and  with  their  Boates  purposed  to
bring  her  crosse  the  Admirals  halfe.  But  when  they
saw  them  comming,  they  all  ranne  into  the  Boates  and
got  ashore The Admirall let slippe the other

sixe,

21

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1594.

unhanged  their  Rudders,  and  carried  them  ashore  that
none  should  saile  away  with  the  Shippes  if  they  were
taken.  They  laded  the  Admirall  with  the  best  out  of  all
the  Shippes,  and  sent  ashore  to  know  if  they  would
Ships  fired,  ransome  the  rest,  which  they  delaying,  they  fired  one  of
them  laden  with  Hides  and  Logwood,  and  then  another
laden  with  Susaparill.  But  the  King  of  Spaine  had  for-
bidden them  any  ransoming,  and  they  came  not.  All
their  Ordnance  was  heaved  overboord  saving  two  or
three  Brasse  peeces,  in  hope  some  Englishmen  might  be
the  better  for  them  afterward.  One  of  them  was  a
Shippe  of  five  hundred  tunnes.  They  brought  away  the
Admirall  of  250.  and  came  into  Plimmouth  the  fifteenth
of  May,  the  next  day  after  the  Pilgrims  arrivall.

The  eight \  Nno 1 594. The  Earle  of  Cumberland  on  his  owne

Voyages jf"\  charge  with  the  helpe  of  some  adventurers  set  forth

J594- for  the  Tercera  Hands  the  Royall  Exchange,  Admirall  of

250.  tunnes,  commanded  by  Captaine  George  Cave  :  the

May  Floure  Viceadmirall,  of  like  burden,  commanded  by

Captaine William Antonie  : the Samson Rereadmirall,

commanded by  Captaine Nicholas Downton, a  Carvell

and  a  small  Pinnace. They  set  forth  from  Plimmouth,

April  6. In  the  way they tooke a  small  Barke  laden

with  Galicia  wines,  &c. June  the  second,  they  had  sight

of  Saint  Michael  ; After ten dayes they descried the

The  great great  Carricke  of  2000.  tuns,  called  the  Cinque  LLagas

Carrike or  piVe  Wounds. The  May  Floure  first  got  up  to  her

ca  e 1 ancj  rece}vec[  an  unwelcome  salutation. In  the  night  the
wounds.  .  .  P

Samson  came  in  and  continued  the  fight,  and  at  last  the

Admirall. They agreed  that  the Admirall should lay

the Carrake  aboord in the Prow, the Viceadmirall in

the  Waste,  and the Rereadmirall  in  the  Quarter. But

it  fell  out that  the Admirall  laying  her aboord  at  the

loofFe,  recoiled  a  sterne,  the  Viceadmirall  being  so  neere

that  she  was  faine  to  runne  with  her  bolt  sprit  betweene

Borded. the  two  quarters,  which  forced  the  Rereadmirall  to  lay  her

aboord  on  the  Bowe.

22

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1594.

After  many  bickerings,  fire-workes  flew  about  inter-
changeably. At  last  the  Vice-admiral  with  a  Culvering-
shot  at  hand  fired  the  Carrick  in  her  Sterne,  and  the  Oarrah fired.
Reare-admirali  her  Fore-castle  by  a  shot  that  gave  fire  to
the  Mat  on  the  Beake-head,  from  thence  burning  to  the
Mat  on  the  Bolt-sprit,  and  so  ran  up  to  the  Top-saile-
yard  :  they  plying  and  maintayning  their  fires  so  well
with  their  small  shot,  that  many  of  those  which  came
to  quench  them  were  slaine.  These  fires  encreased  so  English  Ships
sore  that  the  Vice-admiralls  fore-saile  and  fore-top-saile  tn  dan&er'
were  both  burnt,  the  Reare-admirall  being  in  like  pre-
dicament, whiles  the  Admirall  with  much  danger  and
difficultie  quenched  the  fires  throwne  into  her  from  the
Carrick.  To  save  themselves  in  this  heat  and  furie,  the
Admirall  and  Vice-admirall  fell  off,  leaving  the  Reare-
admirall  foule  of  the  Carricks  sprit-saile-yard  in  great
danger  to  have  beene  consumed  with  her,  had  they  not
helped  her  off"  with  their  Boats.

In  this  distresse  the  companie  brought  the  Commander  [IV.  vi.
Don  Francisco  de  Melo  to  put  forth  a  flagge  of  truce: -fV)^
but  the  Carricks Carpenter more desperate, comforted  tresseofthe
him with hope of quenching the fire, whereupon he  Carrike.
cryed,  Coragio, I  will  never  yeeld,  notwithstanding  the
protestations, contestations, and obtestations of the
lamenting  out-crying companie. One ran enraged  on
him, charging him with this foule uncharitablenesse,
threatning  vengeance  on him  and  his for  his obstinacy
in  suffering  so many soules to perish, rather then  to
accept the  English assistance. Some of  their  chiefest,
rich  in  chaines  and  jewels,  cast  off  all,  and  naked  as  they
were  borne  cast  themselves into the Sea to adventure
upon  English  mercy  ;  amongst  all  which,  was  taken  up
by  the  Reare-admirals  Boat,  two  men  of  note  and  three
of  inferiour  qualitie. These  three  were  clothed  and  set
on  land  :  the  other  two  were  Don  Nuno  Velio  Periera
(who  had  somtimes  bin  Governour  of  Mozambique  and
Sofala,  and returning for  Spaine in  a Carrick  of  great
value,  lost  neere  Bona  Speranza,  was  now  here  a  passenger)

23

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

1594.

and  Bras  Carero,  Captaine  of  another  Carrick  cast  away
neere  Mozambique,  here  also  a  passenger.  These  two
The  impedi-  were  brought  into  England  and  ransomed.  Three  im-
ThTc{!rifog  Pediments  happened  to  the  Assailants,  the  Reare-admirall
hurt  with  a  shot  and  made  in  person  unserviceable  being
a  valiant  man  ;  the  Vice-admirall  slaine  ;  and  the
Admirall  himselfe  Captaine  Cave  shot  at  the  first  thorow
both  the  legs,  whereof  shortly  after  his  returne  hee  dyed.
The  Carvell  and  Pinnace  were  accidentally  absent  :  one
and  twentie  were  slaine  in  the  fight.  In  the  Carrick
were  many  of  qualitie  ;  and  before  infection  had  fallen
amongst  them  neere  the  Cape,  their  number  of  white  and
blacke  men  exceeded  1100.  all  which  perished  but  those
before  named.  The  burden  of  this  Carrick  and  her
lading  in  wealth  did  farre  exceede  the  Madre  de  Dios,
returning  after  a  long  voyage  fraighted  with  pearles,
jewels,  drugs,  silkes  (her  meanest  lading  pepper)  besides
the  best  of  the  Nacharet  (lately  cast  away)  her  com-
modities, the  Captaine  whereof  had  beene  Bras  Carero
aforesaid.

They  set  saile  after  this  disaster  for  Flores  and  after
some  refreshing, on the nine and twentieth of June
Another  descryed  another  Carrick  of  1500.  Tunnes,  which  they

Carrike.  supposed  to  bee  the  Saint  Philip  one  of  the  King  of
Spaines  men  of  warre.  After  some  more  cautelous  fight
occasioned  by  that  conceit,  they  sent  their  Boat  to
summon  her  to  yeeld  to  the  Queene  of  Englands  ships
under  the  command  of  the  Earle  of  Cumberland,  or  else
to  undergo  the  fortunes  of  the  Five  wounds,  the  sorrow-
full  witnesses  whereof  they  presented  those  two  former
Captaines :  to  whom  the  Generall  Don  Lewys  de  Costynio
answered  ;  As  your  Generall  hath  beene  at  the  burning
of  the  Five  wounds,  so  I  have  beene  at  the  burning  and
taking  of  the  Revenge  of  the  Queene  of  Englands.
Therefore  let  him  doe  what  he  dare  doe  for  his  Queene,
and  I  will  doe  what  I  am  able  for  my  King :  commanding
the  Boat  instantly  to  be  gone.  The  fight  was  renewed,
but intermitted by the calme, and remitted by the

24

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1595.
remisser  companie,  their  Captaines  being  slaine  and
wounded.  Whereupon  they  gave  over  and  arrived  in
England  in  August  and  the  beginning  of  September,
having  done  much  harme  to  the  enemie,  and  little  good
to  themselves.

THe  Earle not  liking his  ill partage in  the  Madre  The  ninth
de  Dios, nor this  un happier  losse  of  two  Carricks  voyage.  i$y$.
for  want  of  sufficient  strength  to  take  them,  builded  a
ship  of  his  owne  of  900.  Tunnes  at  Detford,  which  the
Queene  at  her  lanching  named  The  Scourge  of  Malice,
the best ship that  ever before  had  beene  built  by  any
subject. Shee made his Lordship three voyages, and
after  was sold to the East Indian Companie, whence
shee  made many returnes (before in the  name  of  the
Dragon  related)  and  proved  fortunate  against  the  Portu-  The  Dragon  a
gals  in the  East. His Lordship  had  thought to have  firtunate  ship
gone  in her in person, and prepared the Alcedo his  jnj:an
Vice-admirall, commanded by Captaine Monson, the  Societie:
Antonie  commanded  by  Daniel  Jarret  and  the  old  Frigot.  surprised
But  when he had  gone as farre as Plimmouth on  his  uniuckily  h
intended  voyage,  Her  Majestie  by  Sir  Francis  Drake  and  if *%£***
Sir  John  Hawkins,  sent  for  him  to  returne,  which  com-  t'lon%  Xo.  1.
mandement  his  Lordship  obeyed,  but  the  ships  proceeded  /.  5.
to  seeke  their  adventure,  giving  command  of  the  Admirall  An-  *595-
to  Captaine  Langton  ;  which  Captaine  Monson  misliking tg
went  forth severally  to seeke his  owne fortune in  the
Alcedo. The  Scourge,  the  Antonie,  and  the  Frigot,  went
together  to  the Asores, where first  they  tooke a  Saint
Thome Carvell of 100. Tunnes laden with Sugars.
After which  neere  the  Hand  of  Flores  in  a  fogge  they
espyed  a  great  Ship  lying  by  the  Lee,  which  they  con-
ceived to  be  a  Carrick,  but  found  it  to  be  the  Saint  Thomas,
Vice-admirall  of  the  King  of  Spaines  fleet,  lying  for  the
waftage  of  the  East  and  West  Indian  fleetes :  with  whom
they  fell  in  so  hot  a  fight  that  shee  was  glad  to  beare  up
to  recover  her  selfe  amongst  the rest  of  her  Consorts  ;
which  after  the  cleering  of  the  fogge  they  discerned  not

25

A.D.
1595-

Tenth  voyage.
1596.

[IV.

Eleventh
voyage.

49-]

Godwlne
sands.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

farre  from  them.  Thence  they  went  to  the  Coast  of
Spaine,  where  they  tooke  three  Dutch  ships  of  the  East-
Countries  laden  with  Wheat,  Copper,  and  other  muni-
tions and  provisions  for  the  King  of  Spaine.  Having
spent  their  victuals  they  returned.

AN.  1596.  his  Lordship  set  forth  againe  the  Scourge
of  Malice,  in  which  he  went  in  person  accompanied
with  the  Dread-naught  of  the  Queenes,  and  some  other
small  ships  ;  and  about  thirtie  or  fortie  leagues  from
England  was  incountred  with  a  storme,  wherein  the
Scourge  spent  her  mayne  mast,  and  was  made  unservice-
able for  that  voyage  :  so  that  hee  was  forced  to  returne
for  England  in  the  Dread-naught.

T

Sea  fight.

He  same  yeere  perceiving  that  the  Earle  of  Essex
and  the  Lord  Admirall  were  to  goe  to  the  Coast  of
Spaine  with  a  great  fleet  of  the  Queenes,  together  with  a
squadron  of  Flemmish  men  of  warre,  his  Lordship  thought
good  to  await  some  gleanings  in  so  great  a  Vintage,  and
set  forth  the  Ascension  of  300.  Tunnes  and  foure  and
thirtie  pieces  of  Ordnance,  manned  with  120.  men,  com-
manded by  Captaine  Francis  Slingsby,  chiefly  to  expect
such  ships  as  should  come  from  Lisbone.  The  Ascension
thus  furnished,  met  with  such  a  fret  of  winde  that  with
all  haste  they  handed  in  their  sailes,  and  being  within
the  Hooke  of  Godwine  Sands  drove  with  two  anchors
ahead,  till  they  were  within  two  Cables  length  of  the
Sands.  They  then  let  fall  their  short  anchor,  which  by
Gods  grace  stayed  them  till  the  next  day  noone  (hourely
expecting  their  wrack)  and  at  last  cut  their  Cables.
Having  refurnished  themselves  at  Plimouth  they  set
forwards  and  comming  to  the  Rocke,  lay  off  and  on.
After  some  frustrated  attempts  by  the  Boat  on  a  Carvell
(in  which  the  Captaine  was  sore  wounded)  the  King  of
Spaines  Admirall  Sirago  set  forth  sixe  ships  against  them,
and  himselfe  and  another  ship  laid  the  Ascension  aboard,
the one on the Bow, the other  on the Quarter, and

26

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  ad.

I597-
now the  mouthes of  the great Ordnance (being neere

in  place  to  whisper)  roared  out  their  thunders  and  pierced
thorow  and  thorow  on  all  hands.  Which  ended,  the
Spaniards  leaped  into  the  fore-chaines  and  mayne-chaines,
thinking  to  have  entred  the  ship,  but  were  bravely  repelled.
The  English  seeing  many  Spaniards  together  under  the
Admirals  halfe  decke,  discharged  amongst  them  a  Fowler
laden  with  case  shot  to  their  no  small  harme :  so  that
the  Spaniards  had  enough  and  were  content  to  fall  off.
Of  ours  two  and  twentie  were  slaine  and  hurt,  which
losse  lighted  asmuch  on  them  which  hid  themselves  as
those  which  stood  to  the  fight.  To  prevent  the  like
afterwards,  they  put  safe  in  hold  the  Chirurgeon,  Car-
penter, and  Cooper  for  the  publike  dependance  on  them,
and  made  fast  the  hatches  that  others  should  not  seeke
refuge.  But  the  Spanish  Admirall  making  a  bravado,
and  seeing  them  readie  to  receive  them,  tacked  about
and  went  in  for  Lisbone  without  any  further  leave-
taking.  The  Ascension  continued  on  the  Coast  till
they  had  but  fourteene  dayes  victuals  left,  and  then  re-
turned with  hurts  to  themselves,  and  losse  also  to  his
Lordship.

AN.  1597.  the  undanted  Earle  having  furnished  and  The  twelfth
victualled  his  owne  ship  the  Malice-Scourge,  under-  v^yage.
tooke  a  voyage  in  person. Under  him  in  it  commanded  Names  of  the
Captaine  John  Wats  outward,  and  Captaine  James  Langton  dips  and  thetr
homewards. The Merchant Royall was  Vice-admirall,  wXZdin
commanded  by  Sir  John  Barkley ;  Captaine  Robert  Flicke  the  twelfth
commanded  in  the  Ascension,  Reare-admirall ; Captaine  voyage.
Henrie  Clifford  commanded  the  Samson,  after  whose  death
at  Porto  Rico,  Christopher  Colthurst  was  her  Captaine ;
Master  John  Ley,  and  homewards  Thomas  Cotch  Cap-
taines  of  the  Alcedo ;  Francis  Slingsby  Captaine  of  the
Consent ; Captaine  James  Langton of  the Prosperous,
and  homewards Captaine  John  Wats;  Captaine  Henrie
Palmer  in  the  Centurion,  and  homewards  after  his  death
his  sonne  William  Palmer  ;  Hercules  Folyambe  Captaine  of

27

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*597-

the  Gallion-Constance ;  Captaine  Flemming  in  the  Affec-
tion ;  Captaine  Christopher  Colthurst  in  the  Guiana,
homeward  Gerard  Middleton ;  Captaine  Henrie  Jolliffe
in  the  Scout ;  Captaine  Robert  Careles,  and  after  his
death  Andrew  Andrews  in  the  Antonie  ;  Captaine  Edward
Goodwin  in  the  Pagasus;  Captaine  Henrie  Bromley  in
the  Royall  Defence ;  Captaine  John  Dixon  in  the  Margaret
and  John ;  Master  John  Lea  Captaine  of  the  Barkley
Bay;  William  Harper  Captaine  of  the  old  Frigot.  To
make  up  the  score  we  may  reckon  two  Barges  used  for
landing  of  men,  as  occasion  required.

For  the  land  Souldiers,  Sir  John  Barkley  was  Coronell
Generall :  Captaine  William  Mesey  Lieutenant  Colonell :
Captaine  Hercules  Folyambe  Sergeant  Major :  Captaine
Arthur  Powell  Lieutenant  Colonell  of  the  Earles  Regi-
ment :  Captaines,  Lewis  Orrell,  Thomas  Roberts,  Henrie
Gyll,  Thomas  Coche,  Hugh  Starkie,  Ralph  Rookesby,
Roger  Tirwhit ;  Captaine  Andrew  Andrewes  Leader  of
the  Earles  Companie:  Captaine  James  Tothill  Leader  of
Sir  John  Barkleys  Companie :  Captaines,  James  Evans
and  George  Orrell  Corporals  of  the  field :  Captaine
John  Man  Provost  Marshall :  Captaine  Arthur  Milles
Master  of  the  Artillerie  and  Provant  Master.

The  noble  Earle  thus  attended  and  furnished  (chiefly
at  his  owne  charges)  set  saile  with  this  Fleet  from  Ports-
mouth the  sixt  of  March.  But  you  shall  have  a  better
Relator.

His  Lordship  having  had  the  spoile  of  all  things  at
his  pleasure,  prepared  for  the  sending  aboard  the  Ordnance,
Munitions,  Bels,  Ginger,  Sugar,  &c.  of  brasse  Ordnance
hee  tooke  above  sixtie  peeces :  setting  saile  for  England
July  1 6.  In  which  returne  his  Lordship  lost  a  Barge,
by  his  commandement  sunke  in  the  Haven  to  the  preju-
dice of  the  Enemie.  Another  Barge  cast  away  in  a
storme  at  the  Bermudas.  The  Pegasus  wracked  upon
Goodwin  Sands,  and  the  old  Frigot  upon  Ushent,  with
the  losse  of  about  seven  hundred  men,  whereof  six
hundred  dyed  of  the  bloudie  flix  and  Calenture  at  Porto

28

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1596.

Rico : sixtie  slaine  in fight,  and fortie drowned in the

wracks  of  the  old  Frigot  and  Pegasus.

Chap. II.  [IV.  vi.

The  Voyage  to  Saint  John  de  Porto  Rico,  by  the
Right  Honorable,  George,  Earle  of  Cumber-
land, written  by  himselfe.

Orthiest  of  your  Sexe,  my  chiefe  Com-  1596.
mandresse,  to  give  content  to  your  wish
in  bare  plainnesse.  I  have  set  downe  the
courses  and  fortunes  of  my  late  performed
journey.  The  sixth  day  of  March,  with
my  whole  Fleet  I  set  saile  out  of  the
Sound  of  Plimouth,  the  winde  being
prosperous  though  much.  Wee  kept  altogether  till  the
when  the  faire  passage  put  mee  in  hope  that  God
had  prepared  this  an  unlooked  for  fortune,  if  it  were
well  handled,  in  getting  upon  the  Coast  of  Spaine  sure
intelligence  whether  the  Carricks  were  gone,  and  how
neere  they  were  readie  if  not  gone.  The  doing  of  which  His  purpose
undiscovered,  though  I  knew  was  hard  ;  yet  not  impossible  frustrated.
for  him  that  could  well  worke :  And  considering  the
mightie  importance,  I  tooke  the  course  to  doe  it  my
selfe,  taking  with  me  Guiana  and  the  Skout;  which  two
I  meant  should  onely  be  seene  upon  the  Coast,  and  left
the  rest  of  the  fleet,  appointing  them  where  to  lye  till
I  came  unto  them.  But  God  whose  will  is  beyond  mans
resolutions,  forced  mee  to  alter  this ;  for  my  Masts  not
made  so  sufficiently  as  I  expected,  both  now  began  to
shew  their  weaknesse,  especially  my  mayne  Mast,  which  Defect  in  the
I  continually  looked  would  have  gone  over  board.  My  mayne  MasL
Mariners  were  at  their  wits  end ;  and  I  protest  I  would
have  given  five  thousand  pounds  for  a  new  one ;  the
greatest  part  of  my  strength  both  by  Sea  and  Land  having
beene  lost,  if  that  ship  had  returned  in  this  extremitie.
Hearing  all  that  would,  I  heard  many  opinions  to  little
purpose,  and at  length  resolved  (though many  thought

29

A.D.

1596.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Penechia.

it  dangerous)  lest  the  winde  should  with  a  storme  come
The  Burlhgs.  up  at  West  North-west,  to  goe  to  the  Burlings  and  there
ride,  till  my  Masts  were  fished,  my  selfe  knowing  the
Roade,  though  not  any  else  in  my  ship :  the  windes  they
spake  of,  I  feared  not ;  my  onely  doubt  was  that  I  should
be  discovered,  being  within  three  leagues  of  Penechia ;
Carvels  comming  off  every  day  to  fish  ;  but  this  extremitie
forced  device  how  to  hide  what  I  was.  For  goe  thither
I  must,  hopelesse  otherwise  to  repaire  those  desperate
ruines.  My  ship  was  black  which  well  furthered  my
device,  and  though  shee  were  great,  yet  shewed  not
so  afarre  off.  Wherefore  I  came  in  about  eight  of  the
clocke  at  night  upon  Thursday,  when  I  was  sure  all  the
Fisher-men  were  gone  to  sell  their  fish  at  Lisbone,  and
from  the  mayne  they  could  not  make  moe :  this  was  the
sixteenth  of  March.  Before  the  morning  I  had  downe
my  top-masts,  my  mayne  yard  unrigged,  and  all  things
readie  for  my  Carpenters  to  worke.  The  small  ships
with  mee  I  made  stand  off  to  Sea  all  day,  that  not  having
any  in  my  companie  I  should  be  the  lesse  suspected.
And  thus  with  a  strange  Flagge  and  Ancient  upon  my
poope,  I  rid  without  giving  chase  to  any,  as  though  I
had  beene  some  Merchant,  every  day  divers  ships  com-
ming by  me  that  were  both  good  prize,  and  had  beene
worth  the  taking.  Upon  Sunday  night  the  Fisher-men
return e  to  the  Burlings ;  wherefore  to  goe  away  undis-
covered of  them,  and  also  soone  to  meet  with  my  fleet,
which  I  had  appointed  to  tarry  for  mee  in  that  heigth
betwixt  twentie  and  thirtie  leagues  off,  and  that  they
should  keepe  with  them  what  ships  soever  they  met,  that
were  outward  bowne :  I  ceased  not  working  day  nor
night,  and  by  Saturday  at  night  was  readie  to  set  saile,
when  within  night  I  heard  the  Ordnance  goe  off  betwixt
me  and  the  shoare,  and  well  knew  it  was  a  small  ship
of  Hampton  and  my  little  Pinnace  the  Skout,  that  were
in  fight  with  a  ship  which  they  chased  to  windward  of
mee  before  night,  and  fearing  their  match  too  hard,  as
in truth it proved. I, for losing time let slip mine

30

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1596.

anchor,  and soone  came to helpe  the  poore little ones
much  over-matched. At  my  first  comming  up  shee  shot
at me ;  yet forbare I,  and  went  so  neere  that I  spake
to  them,  and demanding  of  whence  they  were  ?  answere
was  made,  of  Lisbone. Then  assuring  my  self  shee  was
a  Biscaine, and would fight well,  I came  close  to  her,  Biscainen
and  gave  her  my  broad  side,  which  shee  so  answered  as  &°~M  ters-
that  I  had  three  men  killed,  five  or sixe  shot,  and  my
ship  in  sixe  or  seven  places,  some  of  them  very  dangerous.
So  I  laid  her  aboard  and  tooke  her,  shee  proving  a  ship  Ship  of  Han-
oi Hamburgh,  laden with  Corne,  Copper,  Powder,  and  burStaken-
prohibited  commodities. I  made  the  more  haste  to  end
this  fight,  for  that  I  would  be  out  of  the  sight  of  the
Land before  day,  which as  I  desired I was,  and there
met with a French man laden with Salt going into
Lisbone : which  small  Barke was  very  fit to  serve  my
purpose. For  putting  some  of  my  men  into  her,  I  sent
her  into  Cales Road,  commanding  them  to fall  with  it
by day  in  the morning, and  keeping  themselves close
to shew  none  but  the  French,  and  make  a  waft  to  call
some  Portugall  to  them  for  Pilotage  up  the  River. This
device  succeeded  well ;  for  betimes  in  the  morning  they
were  fast  by  a  Carvell  that  was  going  to  fish,  which  (not
suspecting  them)  came close to  them,  so  as  the  men  I
put  in  shot  at  them  with Muskets  so  fast,  as  not  any
of  them  durst  stirre  to  handle  their  sailes  till  their  Boat
went  aboard,  and  so brought them off  to me. These
men came that night from Lisbone, and assured me  Intelligence
that  the  next faire winde  there would come  forth  five  from  Lisbone.
Caracks,  with  more  treasure  then  ever  went  in  one  yeere wf , ..
for the Indies, and five  and twenty  ships for Brasil.  ^ve  s^pSm
This  welcome  newes  was  accompanied  with  the  meeting
againe  of  my  whole  fleet, which  at  that very instant  I
descryed. So  none  being  joyned, I wished  for  nothing
but an happy houre to see those long-looked-after  [IV.  vi.
Monsters,  whose wealth exceedes their  greatnesse,  yet  llc>1-\

bee they  the greatest ships in the world. My fleet
being thus joyned, I called all the Captaines and

31

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

Masters  aboard,  and  gave  directions  where  and  in  what
order  we  should  lye,  and  how  we  would  fight,  not
doubting  to  meete  them  being  undiscovered,  and  well
knowing  the  way  they  would  come.  Being  drawne
from  our  rests  with  our  joy  in  our  hope,  wee  so  long
continued  gasing  for  that  which  came  not,  as  I  began
to  feare  some  unluckie  accident,  and  leaving  my  fleet
alone,  with  a  Carvell  I  went  in  with  the  shoare,  and
New  with  her and  my Boat  got another Carvell, by  whom

intelligence.  j  unc]erstood  that  the  very  same  day  that  I  tooke  the
first  Carvell  at  the  Rock,  there  came  into  Lisbone  a
ship  that  brought  Spaniards  out  of  England,  and  was
in  Plimouth  when  I  came  by,  which  assured  them  that
I  was  comne  forth,  and  they  verily  beleeved  was  look-
ing for  them,  so  as  they  sent  Carvels  of  advice  to
search  everywhere  for  me,  one  of  which  when  I  returned
to  my  fleet,  I  understood  had  comne  by  them  to
windward  and  discovered  them  all.  So  I  feared  it  was
vaine  to  tarry  there  any  longer;  for  either  they  would
Another  shift their  course  or  not  come  at  all. So  knowing  that

attempt.  their  seeing  of  me could not hurt,  I went to see if

they  were  comne  so  low  downe  the  River,  as  that  it
were  possible  to  lay  them  aboard  in  the  night  where
they  rode.  Now  againe  I  left  my  fleet  at  Sea,  and
(the  winde  something  favouring  me)  got  in  betwixt
the  Cat-ships,  from  whence  I  saw  them  riding  in  the
Bay  of  Wiers.  Here  had  I  too  much  of  my  desire,
seeing  what  I  desired  to  see,  but  hopelesse  of  the
good  I  expected  by  seeing  them  :  for  they  were  where
no  good  could  bee  done  upon  them,  riding  within  the
No  hope  that  Castle  of  Saint  Julian,  which  hath  in  it  above  an
hundred  peeces  of  great  Ordnance ;  so  as  though  I
could  have  got  in  (which  I  verily  beleeve  I  could)  it
had  not  beene  possible  to  have  returned,  the  winde
being  ever  very  scant  to  come  forth  withall,  and  hang-
ing for  the  most  part  so  farre  Northerly,  as  that  for
feare  of  the  Cat-ships,  I  must  of  force  have  comne
close by their platformes. With this unpleasing sight

32

way

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  ad.

1596.

I returned to my fleet, and that  night being the fift

of Aprill, wee went altogither for the South Cape.

The  eight  day  I  went  from  thence  towards  the  Canaries,  He  cmes  *?

and the  thirteenth  day  I came  to  Lancerota,  where  by  the  Canartes-

divers both Englishmen and Spaniards I had beene

informed  that  there  dwelt  a  Marquesse,  that  was  worth  Ricn

1 00000.  pounds,  if  he  could be  taken  suddenly:  which  Mar4uesse'

I doubted not, having aboard mee three or foure

which had beene  prisoners  there,  who  assured  me  they

could bring me into the Road by night : and being

on land could guide  me  to  the  Castle  where  he  dwelt,

how  darke  soever  it  were. But  they  fayled  in all : for  Poore

when I  came  to the  land, they knew not where the  Perf°rmame  °f

*  .  rich  promisors.

Road  was,  so  as  I  was  forced  to  anchor  finding  ground,

but  where it was  they knew  not. And in truth,  it

was so  neere a ledge of Rocks, as if  we had gone

any  further, the ships had beene in danger. In the

morning,  though then  I had  no other  hope  left  me  to

catch the Marquesse,  save  onely  that  perhaps  he  would

hold  his Castle; yet I thought it meete  to  set  all  my

Souldiers  on shoare,  for  that  till this  time  I  never  had  He  lands  his

given  them  any  trayning,  and  well  knew  many  of  them  Souldiers.

to  bee very raw and unpractised to service at land.

Wherefore  my  selfe  then  fearing  an  ague,  tooke  physick,

was  let  bloud, and  sent Sir John Barkley with them,  Sir  John

knowing  for certaine that  place  could make no  resist-  Barkley.

ance against such a force. So being landed they

marched to  the  Towne,  which  the  guides  said,  was  but

three miles from the landing place. But it proved

more then three leagues, the most wicked marching

for  loose  stones  and  sand  that  ever  I  saw. That  night

I heard  not  from them, nor the next day till night,

when I had word brought that they had taken the  Towne  and

Towne  and Castle without resistance. Onely as they  Castle  taken.

marched the people of the Countrie (I meane the

Mountayners)  would  watch  if  any  straggled,  and  would

most  desperately  assault them  with their Lances,  being

so swift of foot,  as when once they runne,  not any

xvi  33  c

A.D.
1596.

Poore

purchase  and
yet  too  rich.

The  Earles
honorable  care
and  wise
provision.

Carvell  stollen
forth  by
English
captives.

[IV.

VI.

152.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

could  come  neere  them.  In  the  Castle  was  not  any-
thing but  some  few  peeces  of  Ordnance  dismounted.
In  the  Towne  (whose  nouses  were  most  beggarly)  some
little  wine  onely,  which  little  was  too  much;  for  it  dis-
tempered so  many,  that  if  there  had  beene  a  strong
enemie  to  have  attempted,  they  should  have  found
drunken  resistance ;  the  meaner  sort  being  most  over-
throwne  alreadie,  and  the  Commanders,  some  distem-
pered with  wine,  some  with  pride  of  themselves,  or
scorne  of  others,  so  as  there  were  very  few  of  them  but
that  fell  to  most  disorderly  outrage  one  with  another.
And  Sir  John  Barkley  with  much  griefe  told  me,  if  I
tooke  not  some  severe  course  to  remedie  those  things,
he  assured  himselfe  it  would  be  the  ruine  of  our  voyage.
Whereupon  the  next  day  I  went  on  shoare  to  see  my
men  trayned,  and  calling  all  the  Commanders  before  me,
rebuked  them  for  those  faults,  and  gave  Articles  both
for  their  courses  at  Land  and  Sea,  reading  to  them  my
Commissions,  that  they  might  know  I  had  full  power  to
execute  those  punishments  I  set  downe  for  every  offence;
and  assuring  them  I  would  not  be  slow  in  doing  it  if
they  offended.  The  next  day  being  the  one  and  twentieth
of  Aprill,  I  set  saile,  and  betwixt  the  Grand  Canarie
and  Tenerife  met  with  the  Royall  Defence,  a  ship
which  should  have  comne  with  mee  out  of  England,
but  being  not  readie  followed  me;  and  thwart  the
Rocke,  after  I  was  comne  from  thence  met  with  a
Carvell,  which  by  ten  English  men  that  were  prisoners
in  Lisbone,  was  stollen  forth  in  the  night.  They
assured  me  (word  being  brought  thither  that  I  was
gone  off  the  Coast)  they  resolved  to  send  forth  the
Carracks,  and  that  within  a  few  dayes  they  would  come
forth.  Which  I  making  knowne  to  all  my  Commanders,
they  agreed  with  me  that  it  was  fit  to  spend  some  few
dayes  and  looke  for  their  comming ;  so  did  we :  but
not  seeing  them,  the  yeere  was  so  farre  spent  that  I
assured  my  selfe  they  were  either  gone  by,  or  would
not  goe  this  yeere,  their  time  for  doubling  the Cape  of

34

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1596.

Buona Speranza  being now  past; for they never  went  Danger  of  late
out so late but once, and then were all forced to  f^Ca°L  0f
returne.  _ Good  Hope.

Though  many  would  imagine  the  missing  of  this
faire  fortune  should  much  have  troubled  me ;  I  assure
you  it  did  not:  the  reason  I  will  let  you  know  here-
after. Now  againe,  calling  all  the  Captaines  and
Masters  aboard  me,  I  first  asked  them  whether  they
thought  it  was  fit  to  tarry  any  longer  upon  that  hope,
telling  them  mine  opinion  how  little  reason  there  was
in  it,  and  that  longer  stay  might  much  hurt  our  other
purposes,  to  which  all  agreeing,  we  resolved  to  pro-
ceede.  Then  I  asked  whether  they  thought  the  time
was  not  too  farre  spent  to  get  Farnanbuco  ?  to  which
many  answered ;  No.  And  though  I  well  knew  what
it  was,  I  would  not  reply  till  I  had  called  two  Por-  Old  Pomgah
tugal]  Pilots,  which  I  brought  with  me  out  of  England,  Ptlots-
old  men  that  had  at  the  least  beene  twentie  times
apiece  there  out  of  Portugall :  And  asking  their  opinions,
they  told  us  that  they  had  gone  it  at  that  time  of  the
yeere,  but  divers  times  put  backe,  and  at  their  best
passage  beene  sixe  or  seven  weekes  in  getting  one
degree.  To  which  there  were  that  answered,  though  Rash  advisers.
sometimes  it  happened  so,  yet  it  might  fall  out  other-
wise :  and  if  not,  though  we  should  be  long  in  getting
thither,  yet  there  was  assurance  to  win  that  place  with
ease,  and  getting  it  to  have  wealth  enough.  Till  this  The  Earles
I  kept  secret,  what  now  every  occasion  gave  mee  fit  m?ture  an<t
time  to  utter.  Having  dispatched  from  mee  a  ship  .l^^!
that  was  in  Trade  at  the  Canaries  and  bound  for
England,  and  being  so  farre  shot  to  the  Southwards,
as  I  was  sure  not  to  meet  with  any  going  to  the
Northwards,  so  as  not  any  newes  where  I  was  could
come  into  Spaine,  till  it  came  out  of  the  Indies :  which
winning  of  time  would  give  me  so  good  leisure  to
fortifie  my  selfe  in  the  place  whither  I  meant  to  goe,
as  hardly  I  would  bee  supplanted  till  either  wee
honorably  quitted  the  place, or  had  supply; you may

35

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

see,  too  griedie  desire  is  a  dangerous  enemie,  for  where
I  should  have  but  lightly  touched  this  as  yet,  I  was
almost  entring  into  the  bowels  of  my  intention,  the
time  ripe  I  saw  to  speake  more  freely  then  I  had
His  speech,  done.  I  told  them  I  had  advisedly  considered,  of  all
these  things  now  pleaded,  and  could,  as  I  thought,
before  their  speech  have  given  them  so  sufficient  reasons
for  the  shaping  of  some  other  course  then  Brasil,  as
would  have  stayed  all  these  pleadings.  But  I  thought
it  better  first  to  heare  every  one  speake  his  minde,
and  then  to  utter  my  conceit.  Which  though  I  assured
my  selfe  was  the  best  for  us,  yet  if  any  amongst  them
could  give  reason  against  it,  I  would  not  onely  take
it  well,  but  be  drawne  to  them.  Then  layed  I  before
them  how  our  men  were  alreadie  many  of  them  sicke ;
and  that  undoubtedly  the  crossing  the  Line  would
keepe  those  from  recovering,  although  the  passage  were
as  good  as  man  could  wish.  Besides,  I  remembred
them  of  intelligence  given  us  both  upon  the  Coast  of
Spaine  and  the  Hand,  that  the  King  had  sent  thither
to  defend  the  place  against  me  six  hundred  Souldiers;
and  also  it  was  likely  that  he  had  given  order,  that
if  they  saw  not  themselves  strong  enough  to  resist,
that  with  their  portable  goods  they  should  flee  into
the  Mountaines,  and  set  their  Sugar  and  Brasill  wood
on  fire ;  then  were  we  sure  to  have  nothing :  and
lastly,  if  wee  beat  long  under  the  Line,  undoubtedly
the  most  of  our  men  would  fall  sicke,  and  then  should
we  be  forced  to  returne  without  doing  any  thing ;  for
to  no  other  place  could  we  goe,  once  bearing  up  upon
that  occasion.

With  this I pawsed,  to  heare  if  there  would  be  any

thing  said  by  them : but  not  any  speaking,  I  told  them

I well  perceived  by  their  silence  the  doubts  my  wordes

had  driven into their  mindes : but  not  to  conceale  any

His  purposes  l°nger from them,  that which hitherto I had for all

and  their  goods  done,  the  truth  was I never  had  intention,

probabilities,  after  I  found I  could not get  out of England before

36

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1596.

Christmas, to  goe for Brasil,  but onely for the west

Indies,  where  there  were many possibilities to make  a

voyage by : as first,  the sacking of Margarita,  which

they  knew  was  rich  ; then Porto  Rico,  after  that  Saint

Domingo,  then in  July  the  outward  bound  fleet  would

be in  the  Acoa, where  we  could  not  misse  them :  and

if  these gave us not  content, in  the end of  July or

August, wee should meete the fleet at Cape Saint

Antonio. Many  of  these reasons I uttered, more to

carry my  men with  good liking thither, then for any

thought  I had of divers of them. And my speech

had desired successe,  for they all went with greedie  They  proceed.

desire, and hopefull  expectation, I  appointing them to

make what haste they could to Dominica,  where we

would  stay  one  for  another, thinking  it  better to goe

straggling thither then to goe togither, there being

possibilitie  to  meete some purchase  by  the way,  which

we  were  in  most  likelihood  of  when  we  spred  furthest.

Therefore  we  spred  thus  till  we met  at Dominica,  wee

straggled  all  saving  the  Alcedon,  the  Centurian,  and  two

Flemmings, laden  with  Corne,  which  I  tooke  upon  the

coast  of Spaine,  and still carried alongst  with me, as

chiefe meanes to effect my most desired purpose.

These,  with  all  the  rest  came  safely  to  Dominica,  where  They  arrive

wee carried our sicke people ashoare the three and  at  Dominica.

twentieth  of  May,  and  tarried  till  the  first  of  June.

This  Hand  is  onely  inhabited  by  Indians  that  mightily
hate  the  Spaniard,  but  love  the  English  very  much.
They  brought  us  great  store  of  Potatoes,  Pines,
Plantins,  Tabacco,  Mammyes,  Indies-pepper,  and  other
of  their  Countrie  commodities  to  trade.  They  most
desired  to  have  Swords,  Hatchets,  or  Knives,  and  very
much  Clothes.  But  if  they  could  get  none  of  these,
they  would  sell  their  commodities  for  glasse  beades,
and  such  trifling  things.  From  hence  I  went  to  the
Virgines  Hands  which  are  not  inhabited,  and  there  Las  Virgmes
purposed  againe  to  muster  my  men,  the  Hand  of
Dominica being  so wooddie  as that  there I could not

37

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

doe  it ; and  in  the  evening  the  third day  I  came  there
to  an  anchor. The  next  morning  early  I  had  them  on
[IV.  vi.  shoare, and after mustering them for many respects,

!I53\J  found  it  meete  to  speake  to  them,  which  as  neere  as  I
My  Lords  can  remember,  was  thus :  Kinde  Countrimen  and  fellow
speech.  Souldiers,  I  am  sure  there  is  none  here  but  have  marked,

and  the  wisest  wonder  at  my  light  regarding  the  many
grosse  faults  committed  amongst  you  since  my  comming
to  Sea ;  suffering  every  man  to  doe  what  he  would,
urging  no  man  further  then  he  listed :  Many  courses
drew  me  to  this  patience,  onely  one  I  will  now  utter,
the  rest  being  fitter  to  conceale  to  my  selfe,  then  to
make  so  many  acquainted  with.  The  great  hope  of
meeting  the  Caracks  made  me  hope  for  a  short  journey ;
which  hapning,  I  thought  it  better  to  returne  with  every
mans  good  word,  then  by  just  punishing  of  any  to  have
their  ill  word  at  my  returne.  But  that  hope  as  you
now  see  is  altogither  passed,  and  now  we  are  settled
to  another  course,  which  though  it  may  be  will  not  prove
altogither  so  rich,  and  must  of  force  keepe  us  longer
abroad;  yet  I  assure  you  upon  my  honour  and  conscience,
I  doe  constantly  beleeve  there  will  spring  out  of  it  more
glorie  to  God,  more  service  to  our  Prince  and  Countrie,
and  more  honour  to  our  selves,  then  could  have  done
by  the  Caracks  if  we  had  taken  them  all.  For  the  better
performance  we  must  fall  to  another  course ;  I  in  govern-
ing, you  in  obeying;  I  in  directing  you  what  to  doe,
you  in  following  my  direction.  To  which  end  I  have
already  delivered  you  certaine  Articles,  wherein  you  may
see  how  the  breach  of  them  shall  be  punished.  And
though  these  twentie  dayes  at  the  least  you  have  had
them  amongst  you,  yet  heare  I,  there  are  some  which  wish
they  could  but  light  upon  so  much  as  they  would
conceale  from  me.  Base  conditions  be  hatefull  things  in
men  professing  Armes,  there  is  none  baser  then  theft ;
and  no  theft  so  base  as  for  a  man  to  steale  from  his
Basenesse  of  owne  companion.  And  he  that  concealeth  any  thing
theft.  gotten in this  journey, stealeth from every  man in  it,

33

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1596.

all  going  to  have  their  part  of  whatsoever  is  gotten.
This  I  thought  not  unfit  particularly  to  touch,  because
the  speech  hath  given  great  offence  to  the  whole  Armie,
and  no  doubt  may  encourage  some  men  of  lewd  and
base  humours  amongst  us  to  doe  the  like :  but  let
the  warning  I  now  give  you  drive  those  thoughts  out
of  their  thoughts  that  hold  them :  and  be  also  a  warning
that  they  needfully  observe  the  rest  of  the  Articles.  For
I  assure  you,  my  over-patient  and  forced  sluggish  humour
is  shaken  off,  and  I  will  neither  over-see,  nor  suffer  to
passe  unpunished  ill  deservers.

This  delivered,  I  presently  shipped  my  men  which  were
by muster  and  gave  order to set  saile. Now

having set all things in order, and wanting nothing
but sure knowledge, where might bee our safest and
most commodious landing, there were many of my
Masters  and  Sea  Captaines  that  would  willingly  have  gone
through  the  Virgines, as  Sir  Francis Drake did, when  Sir  Francis
hee was there. But I finding the way through the  Drake.
passages  more  certaine  and  safe  tooke  that  course ;  more
desiring to  be  the  first  that  tooke  Porto  Rico,  then  the
second that passed through the Virgines. And the
fift  day  in  the  morning,  I  sent  for  Captaine  Lanckton,
and Knotsford, who was  Master of  the  Gallion, very
expert in those Countries, and was Pilot with John
Hawkins  when  hee dyed, and putting either of  them
into  a  small  Pinnace,  sent  them  before  that  they  might
make  the  landing  place  before  night,  and  my  selfe  with
the  fleet  did  linger, and so when  it  was  darke,  putting
out  all our  sailes, came to them undiscovered,  which
was about one of the clocke that night. But they  They  arrive
did  mee  no good,  for  the place they  went  to  discover  at  the  lland-
was further from them then they expected, so as it
was  darke  before  they  came  to  it,  and  for  feare  of  carry-
ing me  to leeward  stayed,  and  told  me they  had  done
nothing. Wherefore I stood close upon a  winde off
and on, untill the morning,  when being close by  the
shoare  there  was  to  my  seeming  a  smooth  landing  place,

39

A.D.
1596.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

answere.

Evitl surmises,  which  by  all  them  in  my  fleet  that  were  there  with  Sir
Francis  Drake, I was  told was impossible to get, the

His  search.  winde  over-blowing  all  day  out  of  the  Sea.  Wherefore  I
tooke  my  Boat  and  Sir  John  Barkley  with  me,  rowed
thither,  and  found  it  not  onely  smooth,  but  by  the  view
of  our  eyes  a  most  goodly  sandie  Bay,  to  march  all
alongst  by  the  Sea  side  till  wee  came  to  the  Towne.
Being  well  pleased  with  this  sight  I  returned  aboard,  and
gave  order  to  all  the  Commanders  presently  to  land  there.

Objections.  But  by  divers  of  them  many  objections  were  made  against
landing  there.  First,  that  the  march  seemed  to  be  great :
Then,  that  none  knew  the  way  :  and  lastly,  if  the  Towne
stood  in  an  Hand,  as  they  often  had  heard  it  did,  we
should be forced to returne to our ships, not  having

The  Earles  meanes  to  get  unto  them.  Gentlemen,  said  I,  a  willing
minde  makes  long  steps  with  great  ease :  I  have  beene
sicke  and  am  not  now  strong ;  you  shall  goe  no  further
nor  faster  then  I  will  doe  before  you :  for  guides  wee
need  no  better  then  our  eyes;  the  Towne  standing  by
the  Sea  side,  and  we  landing  from  the  Sea  see  no  other
but  faire  sandie  Bayes  all  the  way  thither :  so  as  much
neerer  we  might  land  if  we  were  sure  there  were  any
where  to  leeward  such  a  head-land  as  this  that  maketh
smooth  landing  within  it.  But  that  being  uncertaine  I
meane  to  take  this,  which  I  doe  assuredly  beleeve  God
hath  directed  us  unto ;  for  I  am  sure,  it  is  better  then
any  ever  told  me  of.  And  for  your  last  argument,  that
if  it  be  an  Hand  we  shall  not  get  into  it,  that  reason
is  nothing ;  for  you  see  our  Boats  may  row  by  us,  and
when  we  shall  come  to  any  water  they  may  set  us  over,
if  it  be  deepe :  in  shallow  places  we  shall  passe  our  selves.
So  all  you  have  or  can  say  being  now  throughly
answered,  let  me  have  no  more  speaking,  but  get  your
men  all  into  your  Boates,  and  follow  in  order  as  I  have
directed  you.  I  will  goe  before  in  my  Boat,  and  when
you  see  my  Colours  displayed,  make  all  the  haste  you
can  to  land.  This  doe  with  good  heart  and  courage,
assuring  your  selves  you  have  the  mayden-head  of  Porto

40

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1596.

Rico,  and  so  possesse  the  keyes  of  all  the  Indies.  And
though  there  bee  not  so  many  millions  in  it  as  there
was  when  a  greater  force  then  we  went  without  it;  yet
assure  your  selfe  the  Towne  is  rich.  The  last  yeere
there  were  eighteene  ships  laden  with  Ginger  and  Sugar
from  it.  I  assure  you  there  are  mynes  of  gold  in  it.
And  though  these  be  motives  to  draw  you  to  fight,  yet  [JV.  vi.
have  I  not  told  you  of  one. You  being  Souldiers,  and  II54-J

carrying  the  mindes  of  Souldiers,  will,  I  doubt  not,  carry
you  beyond  all  profit.  It  is  thought  by  men  of  judge-
ment too  strong  for  this  strength  to  carry,  because  it
hath  alreadie  resisted  a  much  stronger  force :  so  as  we
should  have  just  cause  to  be  proud  of  taking  it,  and
(beleeve  me)  assured  we  are  to  take  it,  now  we  see  where
to  land  quietly,  the  Indian  Souldiers  living  too  pleasantly
to  venter  their  lives  :  for  if  they  live  two  or  three  yeares,
they  get  with  the  labour  of  their  slaves  (without  taking
any  paines  themselves)  whatsoever  they  loose ;  so  as  they
will  make  great  showes,  and  it  maybe  indure  one  brunt  ;
but  if  they  doe  any  more,  teare  me  in  peeces.

This  said,  the  Captaines  that  were  there  went  for  their
men,  telling  all  the  rest  my  resolution.  And  as  soone
as  they  saw  me  rowe  towards  the  shoare  all  followed
as  I  had  directed.  Thus  landed  we  the  sixt  day  in  a  They  land  the
most  fine  place,  where  not  any  wet  his  furniture  nor  saw  slxt  °fJune-
any  enemie.  By  which  meanes  all  our  troopes  were  put
in  good  order,  and  we  made  much  stronger ;  then  a  small
resistance  before  we  were  martialled  would  have  made
us.  This  place  was  leagues  from  the  Towne,  towards
which  we  marched  in  the  extreame  heate  of  the  day,  the
way  being  sandy,  and  would  no  doubt  have  tired  many,
but  that  going  all  alongst  by  the  Sea,  we  at  pleasure
marched  in  it  when  we  listed  ;  and  besides  had  the  place
wee  went  to,  still  in  our  sight,  which  standing  upon  the
top  of  an  hill  shewed  much  nearer  then  it  was.  When
wee  had  gone  some  three  leagues,  we  saw  six  or  seven
Horsemen ;  which  (the  forlorne  hope)  comming  within
sixteene  or  twenty  score  of,  presently  turned  their  Horses

41

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGBJMES

1596.

Negros  and  galloped  away.  Not  long  after  there  came  a  Negro
misleading,  willingly  offering  his  service,  which  I  was  most  glad  of;
assuring  my  selfe  he  would  have  guided  me  to  the  Towne :
but  he  not  speaking  Spanish  nor  understanding  it,  we
were  led  by  him  to  the  entrance  of  the  Sea  that  maketh
the  Hand,  where  I  imagined  with  Boates  to  get  over.
But  of  that  we  were  hindred  by  a  bulwarke  standing
on  the  Hand  side  close  upon  the  mouth  of  the  entrance,
and  having  in  it  five  peeces  of  Brasse.  The  entrance
is  not  above  sixtie  yards  over,  and  a  little  within  it  is
stopped  quite  over  with  piles  driven  in ;  so  as  it  was
not  possible  to  get  in  there  so  long  as  the  enemy
possessed  it.  Then  were  we  at  our  wits  end,  but  I
assured  my  selfe  there  was  some  other  good  way  over
where  those  Horsemen  rid  which  we  saw  before ;  and
with  much  a  doe  made  this  dumbe  guide  understand  that
I  would  have  him  carry  me  to  the  place  where  they
went  over.  When  I  perceived  he  understood  me,  I
followed  him  through  the  most  wickedest  wood  that  ever
I  was  in  in  all  my  life,  &  at  length  he  brought  me  to
the  reare  part  of  all  my  troope.  And  for  that  it  grew
late,  and  I  was  loath  to  loose  any  time,  I  made  them
march,  being  Sir  John  Barkleys  Regiment ;  and  gave
order  mine  owne  should  come  in  the  reare,  not  having
place  nor  time  then  to  shift  them.  We  had  not  gone
farre,  but  we  crossed  the  footing  of  the  Horsemen  we
saw  before,  and  following  them  were  about  Sunset  brought
A  Bridge,  to  a  narrow  Bridge,  whereon  three  might  goe  a  front
about  two  score  over,  and  to  our  seeming  about  the
midst  of  it  a  strong  Gate  of  wood  close  shut ;  and  at
the  further  side  of  the  water  a  Block-house  with  Ordnance,
by  which  there  stood  five  Spaniards.  When  I  and  Sir
John  Barkley  had  viewed  this  place,  we  understood  by
another  Negro,  that  comming  thither,  at  a  low  water
we  might  passe  over  wading  besides  the  Causie.  And  he
telling  us  that  it  was  not  low  water  till  two  of  the  clocke
in  the  morning,  we  returned  to  a  little  plaine  (that  we
passed  by  before)  to  rest  our  men  and  give  them  some

42

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1596.

refreshing, for the  better  inabling  them to  fight  in  the
morning.

THus farre the same honourable hand hath beene
our Actor and Authour: but here when hee
comes to doing,  breaks off speaking,  and  (tarn  Marte
quam Mercurio) exchangeth words for swords, and
Mercuriall arts into Martiall acts  ; of  which we have
another Relator, as of the rest of this Voyage: a
man neere in attendance to his honourable Master.
But I cannot give him that which yet this gives
him,  a  name.* It  is  a  copious  discourse,  which  we  have  *I  have  since
somewhat abridged; both in that former part of the  heard  that  his
Historie,  which  you  already  have  from  Him  which  best  jyoctor
knew  it ;  and  in  the  rest,  in  some  superfluities  or  digres-  Layjield.
sions  (seeming  such  at  least  to  me,  who  having  so  much
worke, make  my  selfe  more  to  make the  Reader  lesse)
providing neverthelesse that not a drop of necessary
bloud  be  lost,  or  strange  injected,  how  often  soever  we
seeme  to open  a  vaine  to  our  redundant  Authors  bleed.
It  was  another  cause  which  made  me  leave  out  a  politi-
call  discourse  and  State-moral  mysterie  of  this  History,
written by  the same Noble Commander,  whose worth
here  we  honour. The  times  are  altered,  and  howsoever
Planets  have  their  peculiar  course,  fixed  Stars  must  move
with their Orbe, and follow the first  Moveable. The
men of  Bethshemesh bought dearely  their  prying  into
the Arke  : and I know not how I may  be  tolerated
to utter now in publike, those State-mysteries which
he  then  in  private  counselled  for  his  Countries  good. I
could also be  willing, as I  know  the  world  would be
greedie of  such  morsels  : but  Aesops  Dogge  snatching
at  the  shadow  of  a  morsell  in  the  water,  lost  that  which
he had in his mouth ; and his Crowe gaping  to sing
to please the Foxe displeased her selfe with losse of
all  her  other  wealth  and  purchase. Every  where  in  this
vaste  worke  we  have  beene  wary, and  yet scarce  wary
enough  of  this  danger,  in  our  wariest  warinesse ;  wherein

43

55-]

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

yet  (if  any  such  fault  be)  it  is  not  an  itching  finger,
busie  in  things  above  us,  but  store  of  businesse  in  so
multiforme  a  taske  perhaps  hath  occasioned  oversight
to  eyes,  otherwise  dimme  enough.  Once ;  whatsoever
the  King  and  State  disclaime,  I  disclaime  also  as  not  mine,
because  I  and  mine  are  theirs,  and  no  farther  desire
to  be  or  see  mine  owne  then  in  the  publike,  of  which,
and  for  which  (under  God)  I  am,  have,  can,  write,  do,
speake,  acknowledge  all  things.  I  will  pry  in  the  East
and  West  Indies  rather  then  state  it  at  home.

[IV.  vi.  Chap.  III.

A  large  Relation  of  the  Port  Ricco  voiage ;
written,  as  is  reported,  by  that  learned  man
and  reverend  Divine  Doctor  Layfield,  his
Lordships  Chaplaine  and  Attendant  in  that
expedition  ;  very  much  abbreviated.

§.1.

The  Shippes  emploied  in  the  Voyage  and  accidents
on  the  Coasts  of  Spaine,  in  the  Canaries,  and
the  Navigation  thence  to  Dominica.

Ann.  1596. |[^a^-xoj)|^^iIs Lordship being  authorised by  Letters
Aug.  f\  (SsJj^l  d Patents  given  at  Westminster  the  four-

teenth of  January,  to  levie  Forces  service-
able by  Sea  and  Land,  came  downe  to
Portesmouth  the  eight  of  February,
wherein  nothing  memorable  happened  till
Munday,  being  the  thirteenth  of  March.
Worthy  act  of  While  we  were  at  Morning  Prayer,  his  Lordship  happened
a  worthy  man.  to  see  a  Gallant  of  the  company  (purposely  I  name  him
not)  reading  of  Orlando  Furioso  ;  to  whom  himselfe  in
person  went  presently  after  Service,  all  the  Company
being  by,  and  having  told  him  that  we  might  looke  that
God  would  serve  us  accordingly,  if  we  served  not  him
better  ;  bad  him  be  sure  that  if  againe  he  tooke  him  in

44

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1596.

the  like  manner,  he  would  cast  his  Booke  over-boord,
and  turne  himselfe  out  of  the  Ship.  The  next  day  by-
observation  it  was  found,  that  towards  the  evening  we
had  runne  within  five  or  sixe  and  twenty  leagues  of  the
North  Cape  :  whereupon  his  Lordship  gave  direction  to
the  Vice-admirall,  that  he  should  carry  his  Flagge  in  the
Maine-top,  and  with  a  peece  of  Ordnance  should  hale  in
the  rest  of  the  Fleete  to  his  Lee,  and  that  they  all  with
him  as  their  Admirall  for  the  time,  should  this  night
winde  South  and  by  West  ;  and  there  they  should  ride
off  and  on  scattering  themselves  to  the  North  and  South,
in  the  height  of  the  Burlings,  till  his  Lordshippe  should
come  to  them.  In  the  meane  season  himselfe  attended
onely  with  the  Guiana,  and  the  Scourges  scout,  run  to  fall
in  with  the  North  Cape,  meaning  by  the  taking  of  some
Carvell  or  some  Fisherman  to  have  some  certaine  intelli-
gence in  what  forwardnesse  the  five  Carracks  were  which
at  this  very  time  his  Lordship  knew  were  outwards  bound,
The  defect  of  his  maine  Maste  caused  him  to  stand  in  for
the  Burlings.

The  Burlings  is  an  Hand  something  longer  then  broad, TheBurlinges
and  by  the  violent  beating  of  the  Sea,  it  selfe  almost  made  or  Berlinga.
two  Ilands,  and  within  few  yeares  it  will  be  so  ;  exceeding
rockie  it is  and  barren  above measure. We  found no
living  thing  in  it,  but  Lysards  and  some  few  Conies.

Upon  thursday,  being  the  thirteenth  of  Aprill,  we  had  The  Canarie
sight  of  the  Ilands.  The  first  that  was  within  kenning,  ^*^«
was  Alegran^a,  the  most  Northerly  of  the  Canaries  :  we
left  it  on  the  star-boord  side,  as  also  three  little  hils  rather
then  the  Islands  having  all  one  name  of  the  Grange.  In
the  afternoone  we  had  Lancerota,  one  of  the  six  great
Canaries,  in  cleere  kenning.  The  next  morning  twixt
five  and  six,  we  were  come  to  an  anchor  in  the  Roade,
which  beareth  East  South-east  of  the  Hand.  His  Lord-
ship had  taken  colde  with  watching  the  last  night,
whereupon  he  found  himselfe  so  ill  the  next  morning
.(being  good  Friday)  that  he  kept  his  Cabbin,  and  was
glad  to  take  some  strong  Physicke : He  sent  therefore

45

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

for  Sir  John  Barkley  his  Lieutenant  generall,  and  gave
him  order  to  land  with  certaine  Companies,  to  the  number
of  betweene  five  and  six  hundred  men.  They  were  in
their  March  by  ten  that  morning,  and  marched  the  next
way  (as  they  thought)  to  the  chiefe  Towne  of  the  Hand,
but  their  foremost  desire  was  if  they  might,  to  have
surprised  the  Marquesse,  who  commandeth  both  that  and
the  next  Hand  called  Forteventura,  as  his  owne  possession.
The  Towne  is  from  the  place  they  landed  at,  as  they
conjecture,  some  ten  miles  at  the  least. By  five  in  the

They  take  the  after noone they  entered the Towne,  which besides  the

c  up  owne  eXpectation  they  found  clearely  quitted  of  the  enemy,  and
nothing  in  a  manner  left,  saving  good  store  of  very
excellent  Wine  and  Cheese.  After  the  Towne  was
assured,  Sir  John  sent  a  troope  to  a  strong  Hold  some

The  Castle  ha\fe  a  mile  of  from  the  Towne,  called  the  Castle  ;  a
place  which  the  Marquesse  had  fortified  with  good  store
of  Munition  and  Ordnance.  When  our  Troopes  were
come  up  the  Hill,  they  found  twixt  80.  and  100.  Danders
and  Spaniards  within  and  about  the  house,  but  without
fight  they  quitted  the  place,  so  that  our  men  entered  it
without  losse  or  danger.  They  found  in  it  a  dozen  or
more  cast  Peeces  of  Brasse,  the  least  Bases,  the  most
whole  Culvering  and  Demiculvering,  and  an  innumerable
company  of  Stones  laid  in  places  of  greatest  advantage.
The  House  it  selfe  built  of  squared  stone,  flanked  very
strongly  and  cunningly,  both  for  defence  and  offence  :  the
entrance  thereunto  not  as  in  our  Forts  of  equall  height
with  the  foundation  and  ground,  but  raised  about  a  Pikes
length  in  height,  so  that  without  the  use  of  a  Ladder,

[IV.  vi.  there  could  be  no  entrance  there. I  have  heard  sundry  of

II56-J  our  wisest  Commanders  say,  that  if  they  had  drawne  in

their Ladder and onely shut the doore, twenty men

victualled  might  have  kept  it  against  five  hundred. The

The  Towne  Towne  consisteth  of  somewhat  more  then  a  hundred
houses,  whose  building  is  rude,  being  commonly  but  of
one  Storie  ;  their  Roofes  flat  and  something  sloping  to
cast of  raine,  covered  onely  with Canes  or  Straw laid

46

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1596.

upon  a  few  rafters,  and  very  dirt  cast  upon  all,  which
being  hardned  by  the  Sunne,  becommeth  of  showre-
proofe.

The  Inhabitants  are  of  very  able  and  active  bodies,  their  Inhabitants.
stature  commonly  tall,  of  swiftnesse  (in  that  Mountainous
Countrie)  not  farre  behinde  their  Horses  and  Cammels  :
their  Armes  are  Pikes  and  Stones  ;  when  a  Peece  is
presented  to  them,  so  soone  as  they  perceive  the  cocke  or
match  to  fall,  they  cast  themselves  flat  to  the  ground,  and
the  report  is  no  sooner  heard,  but  they  are  upon  their
feete,  their  stones  out  of  their  hands,  and  withall  they
charge  with  their  Pikes,  and  this  in  scattered  incounters
or  single  fight  (for  either  they  know  not  or  neglect
orderly  battalion)  oftner  giveth  then  receiveth  hurt.  The
Hand  it  is  not  round,  but  stretched  somewhat  in  length  to  The  Hand  of
the  North-east  and  South-west,  parted  by  a  ridge  of  Hils  Lancerota.
from  end  to  end,  as  Italie  is  by  the  Mountaines-Apennine.
These  hils  are  barren,  otherwise  then  that  in  prettie  store
they  feede  flocks  of  Sheepe  and  Goates.  Their  Vallies
promise  no  fruitfulnesse,  being  very  sandy  and  dry,  some-
thing like  Rye-fields  in  England,  and  yet  they  yeelde
passing  good  Barley,  and  Wheate.  Their  beasts  be  Beasts.
Sheepe  and  Goates,  few  Neate,  many  Asses,  fewer  Camels,
but  fewest  Gennets,  and  these  of  no  great  stature.  The
Hand  is  thought  to  exceede  the  Wight  both  in  breadth
and  length  :  of  the  Temper  a  man  may  judge  (besides
that  it  lyeth  in  28.  degrees,  and  some  minutes)  by  the
complexion  of  the  Inhabitants,  which  is  blackish,  and  by
their  Harvest-time,  which  was  past  before  the  middest  of  One  harvest
Aprill,  and  looke  for  a  second  about  Michaelmas,  their  done  bffi™^
landing  there  was  upon  good  Friday.  The  next  day,  the  j'^jj
fifteenth  of  Aprill,  Sir  John  Barkeley,  being  out  of  hope
to  finde  the  Marquesse,  not  knowing  where  to  seeke  him,
whom  feare  had  taught  to  hide  himselfe  closely,  marched
backe  to  the  Navie,  without  farther  harme  to  the  Towne
or  Castle,  then  borrowing  some  necessaries.  There  is  in
the  Towne  a  Church  of  old,  and  a  Frierie  not  yet  finished.  The  Church.
Their Church hath no windowes, nor admitteth light

47

the  middest  of

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

otherwise  then  by  the  doores  ;  it  hath  no  Chancell,  but  is
one  undevided  roome,  stone  seates  along  the  sides,  and  in
the  one  end  an  Altar  with  the  appurtenants :  for  the
people  seemeth  full  of  ignorant  Superstition,  many  Buls
and  Pardons  being  found  in  divers  houses.  The  Friery
is  a  prettie  square,  with  more  commodities  of  fresh  water
and  Gardens,  then  any  other  place  of  the  Towne,  even  the
Marquesse  his  house.

They  came  that  night  to  the  waters  side,  yet  thought  it
better  to  lodge  abroade  then  aboord,  though  there  were
Boates  to  receive  them.  The  next  day  being  Easter  day,
his  Lordship  having  something  recovered  his  strength,
after  dinner  went  ashore  to  the  Companies,  having  seene
them  trained,  knowing  that  the  enemy  watched  for
advantage  of  scatterers,  saw  all  his  men  shipt  first,  and
then  himselfe  tooke  Boate.  The  next  day,  being  Mun-
day,  all  the  Captaines  dined  aboord  the  Admirall,  and
after  dinner  his  Lordship  caused  his  Commission  (which
was  exceeding  large  in  many  points)  to  be  openly  reade  ;
and  Articles  of  government  were  given  for  Sea-matters  to
the  Captaine  of  every  Ship,  and  for  service  by  Land  to
the  Captaine  of  every  company  ;  besides  which  Articles  to
the  Sea  Captaines,  was  delivered  a  sealed  letter,  which
they  should  open,  if  upon  any  accident  they  lost  the
Fleete,  and  thereby  learne  direction  where  to  seeke  his
Lordship.  But  withall  it  was  expresly  articled,  that  in  no
other  case  they  should  adventure  to  open  it  ;  and  that  if
they  came  into  any  danger  of  being  taken  by  the  enemy,
they  should  not  faile  to  cast  the  Letter  over-boord  sealed,
as  it  was  delivered  ;  for  in  no  sort  would  his  Lordship
have  his  purpose  disclosed,  no  not  by  examination  nor
torture.

While  his  Lordship  was  coasting  neere  Teneriffa,  the
breathes  rather  then  windes  were  so  divers,  that  it  was
doubled  on  every  side  almost  and  came  so  close  aboord
the  shore,  that  we  did  easily  see  into  Santa  Cruz,  and
some  other  coasting  Townes,  and  might  discerne  the  men
upon  the  hils,  the  rather  by  conjecture,  by  reason  of  the

48

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1596.

eminencie  and  height  thereof ;  among  which  there  is  one

above  the  rest  incomparable,  generally  held  to  be  much

higher  then  the  Pyke  of  the  Acores,  being  then  covered  pike  °f

with  Snow, when the  bottome  was as hot  as at Mid-  Teneriffe-

summer  it  is  in  England. The  Hand  though  to  the  Sea  a

very  high  land,  yet  is  full  of  many  very  fruitfull  Plaines,

and  Vineyards,  yeelding  to  the  King  yearely  (by  credible

mens  report)  28000.  Buts  of  Canary-Sacke. Certaine  it

is,  that  in  common  reputation  it  is  held  richer  not  onely  Riches  thereof.

then  the  rest,  but  even  then  the  grand  Canada  it  selfe

(though  it  seeme  not  so  goodly  a  champion  Countrie  (for

we  had  that  also  in  very  neere  kenning.) And  that  the

King  esteemeth  it  more,  no  man can doubt seeing he

keepeth a farre greater Garrison there, then in the

Canaria.

Captaine  Charles  Leigh  which  hitherto  had  commanded  Captain
of  the  Alcedo,  on  the  fourth  of  May  last,  the  Fleete  and  Weighs  ™iage
in  his  owne  Barke,  called  the  Blacke  Lee,  runne  himselfe  t0  Oren0(lue'
alone  for the  River of  Orenoque. His Lordship  after
divers  consultations  determined  that  the  Fleete  should  goe
for Dominico. (His speeches,  Captaine Slingsbies em-
ployment, and other particulars, are here for brevity
omitted.)

An  old  Portugall  Pilot  told  his  Lordship  that  he  had
beene  in  eight  and  twentie  voyages  into  Brasil,  but  at  this  [IV.  vi.
time of  the yeere onely in one; wherein, hee saith,  IIS7-]

the  windes  were  so  contrarie,  and  they  had  so  many
other  difficulties,  that  they  were  forced  to  put  in  againe
and  loose  that  yeeres  voyage ;  so  that  the  windes  being
in  these  parts  at  set  times  of  the  yeere,  themselves  also
constantly  set,  we  might  well  thinke  wee  should  bee
encountred  with  the  same  difficulties.  All  this  while
we  held  on  our  course  for  the  West  Indies,  running
West  and  by  South,  and  West  South-west,  but  bearing
still  to  the  Westward,  both  because  we  are  likelier  to
keepe  the  fresher  gale  that  way  (though  some  were  of
contrarie  opinion)  and  because  the  later  wee  entred  within
the  Tropick,  we  should  bee  the  likelier  to  meet  with
xvi  49  D

A.D.
1596.

Sunne  in  their
Zenith.

The  Crosier.

Gusts.

Unwholsome
raine.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Brasil  fleet,  whose  course  homewards  must  of
necessitie  be  much  to  the  North.  By  Wednesday  the
tenth  of  May  (for  till  then  wee  met  not  with  any  memor-
able accident,  seeing  to  tell  of  the  flocks  of  flying  fishes,
might  justly  seeme  triviall)  we  were  come  so  directly
under  the  Sunne,  that  none  could  see  evidently  the
shadow  of  a  stile  set  perpendicularly,  but  if  there  were  any
it  inclined  rather  to  the  due  South.  For  by  observation
by  the  Astrolabe  (the  use  of  the  staffe  now  fayling)  we
were  found  to  have  passed  our  Tropick  three  degrees
and  a  halfe,  and  the  Sunnes  declination  that  day  was
precisely  twentie  degrees.  This  was  more  cleerly
perceived  at  night  by  taking  the  height  of  the  Crosier
which  of  all  other  distinctly  to  be  perceived
Antartick  Pole,  serveth  for  those
the lesser Beare doth to the

Southerly
Northerly

Indies,

Sunday

lay, if

Upon

had  the  first

days passed

raine  began,  immediately  wee

savour,  it  was  very  sulphurous,

(a starre
neere the
parts, as
countries.)

It  is  a  long  step  from  the  Canaries  to  the  West
which  first  of  all  wee  had  in  our  kenning  upon
being the one and  twentieth of  May. But  to
it  be  but  a  handfull  of  peeble  stones,  in  this  gap.
Saturday  being the  thirteenth  of  May,  we
gust, and  it  had  many followers, for few
without  raine. When  this
all  felt  a  very  noysome

and  lasted  so  long  as  the  raine  did.  Whether  this
proceeded  of  the  nature  of  the  water  that  fell  from  so
neere  the  Sunne,  or  from  the  ship  being  very  drie
(as  on  land  after  a  great  drought  there  will  rise  a  hot
savour)  it  is  not  cleerly  knowne,  nor  yet  determined,
but  that  others  may  the  better,  this  observation  is
expressed.  This  savour  was  not  felt  upon  the  decks,
nor  any  where  else  besides  the  Cabbin,  or  at  least  not
any  where  so  much.  The  reason  whereof  may  happily
bee,  that  the  aire  being  suddenly  beaten  in,  and  that  by
narrow  passages,  came  the  more  violently,  and  by
consequent  the  more  sensibly  into  the  Cabbin,  then  into
other  parts  of  the  ship,  and  therefore  whatsoever  qualitie

5°

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  ad

1596.
it  bore  with  it,  it  was  there  the  strongliest  felt.  In  the
following  of  as  great  gusts  as  that  which  came  first,
there  was  no  such  savour  felt,  the  fleet  going  still  farther
and  farther  from  the  Sunne.  And  which  may  be  most  to
the  purpose,  not  any  of  them  that  felt  it,  found  any
distemper  after  it,  onely  the  sense  was  much  displeased
therewithall ;  his  Lordship  had  at  this  time  taken  much
physick,  but  still  rather  to  prevent  sicknesse,  then  for
to  recover  health  (for  God  be  thanked,  his  body  was
very  able  to  obey  his  minde)  finding  no  difference  in
the  world  in  the  working  of  physick  there  and  in
England.  Navigators  may  helpe  themselves  by  his  Lord-
ships observation  :  That  upon  Friday  being  the  ninteenth
of  May,  the  colour  of  the  Sea  began  sensibly  to  alter,  Colour  of  the
that  whereas  before  it  was  of  a  cleere  azure,  it  then  began  Sea  b
to  incline  to  a  deepe  blacke.  We  were  that  day  a
hundreth  and  sixtie  leagues  (or  thereabouts)  from  the
West  Indies  and  held  ourselves  so  certainly  in  the  height
of  Dominica,  that  wee  runne  a  due  Westerly  course.
It  is  not  unlikely  but  this  colour  will  be  found  in  the
same  place  at  another  time.  And  in  such  a  course,
wherein  (besides  the  great  difference  of  Cardes)  a  man
must  bee  forced  to  trust  to  a  dead  reckoning ;  this  may
bee  some  helpe  to  a  heedfull  man.  Upon  Sunday  in
the  evening  his  Lordship  directed  the  Master  to  runne
that  night  with  an  easie  saile,  because  he  tooke  himselfe
neerer  land  then  most  of  the  Mariners  would  consent
to,  being  himselfe  the  first  that  both  spyed  and  cryed
land ;  they  were  but  few  that  did  assent  at  the  first :
some  desired  it  so  much,  that  they  durst  not  let  them-
selves be  over  credulous ;  others  happily  would  have
had  themselves  the  first  discryers,  but  his  Lordship  still
made  it  land.  Wee  set  saile  for  the  land,  and  within
two  houres  it  was  made  to  bee  Matinino.  Leaving  it  Matinino.
therefore  on  the  larboard  side,  wee  stood  for  Dominica,  Dominica.
and  within  an  houre  or  thereabouts  had  it  in  kenning.

[§■  "•

51

A.D.
1596.

Naked
Indians.

[IV.  vi.

1158.]
Their  Canoas.

The  people
described.

Red  painting.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

§.  II.

Description  of  Dominica  and  the  Virgines.  Their
landing  on  Port  Ricco,  march,  fights,  and
taking  the  Towne.

Y  two  in  the  afternoone  wee  were  come  so  neere
aboard  the  shoare,  that  wee  were  met  with  many
Canoes,  manned  with  men  wholly  naked,  saving

Their  Oares.

that  they  had  chaines  and  bracelets  and  some  bodkins
in  their  eares,  or  some  strap  in  their  nostrils  or  lips  ;
the  cause  of  their  comming  was  to  exchange  their
Tabacco,  Pinos,  Plantins,  Potatoes,  and  Pepper  with  any
trifle  if  it  were  gawdie.  They  were  at  the  first  suspicious
that  wee  were  Spaniards  or  Frenchmen,  but  being  assured
that  wee  were  English  they  came  willingly  aboard.  They
are  men  of  good  proportion,  strong,  and  straight  limmed,
but  few  of  them  tall,  their  wits  able  to  direct  them  to
things  bodily  profitable.  Their  Canoes  are  of  one  Tree
commonly  in  breadth,  but  containing  one  man,  yet  in
some  are  seene  two  yonkers  sit  shoulder  to  shoulder.
They  are  of  divers  length :  some  for  three  or  foure  men
that  sit  in  reasonable  distance,  and  in  some  of  them
eight  or  nine  persons  a  rowe.  Besides  their  Merchandise
for  exchange,  every  one  hath  commonly  his  Bowe  and
Arrowes ;  they  speake  some  Spanish  words:  they  have
Wickers  platted  something  like  a  broad  shield  to  defend
the  raine,  they  that  want  these,  use  a  very  broad  leafe
to  that  purpose,  they  provide  shelter  against  the  raine
because  it  washeth  of  their  red  painting,  laid  so  on
that  if  you  touch  it,  you  shall  finde  it  on  your  fingers.
That  night,  having  with  much  adoe  found  land,  within
a  quarter  of  a  mile  of  the  shore,  we  ankored  for  that
night  onely,  for  though  there  were  a  good  watering
place,  and  a  very  sweete  riveret  fast  by  us,  yet  his
Lordship  ment  to  way  ankor  the  next  morning,  and  to
beare  in  to  another  watering  place,  wherewithall  we
certainly  looked  for  a  hot  Bathe. Their  Oares  wherewith

52

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1596.

they  rowe  are  not  laid  in  bankes  as  Ship-boates  have,
but  are  made  like  a  long  Battledoore,  saving  that  their
palmes  are  much  longer  then  broade,  growing  into  a
sharpe  point,  with  a  rising  in  the  middest  of  them  a  good
way ;  very  like  they  are  to  blades  of  bigge  Westerne
Daggers,  that  are  now  made  with  graving.  The  shankes
of  these  Oares  are  of  equal  bignesse,  and  at  the  top
crosset,  like  a  lame  mans  crutch.  These  they  use
alwayes  with  both  their  hands,  but  indifferently  as  they
finde  cause  to  steere  this  way  or  that  way.  The  next
morning  wee  bore  in  to  the  North-west  end  of  the  Hand,
where  we  found  a  goodly  Bay  able  to  receive  a  greater
Navie  then  hath  beene  together  in  the  memorie  of  this
age.  There  his  Lordship  found  the  hote  Bathe  fast  a  hot  Bathe,
by  the  side  of  a  very  fine  River.  The  Bathe  is  as  hot
as  either  the  Crosse-bathe  or  Kings-bathe  at  the  Citie
of  Bathe  in  England,  and  within  three  or  foure  yards
runneth  into  the  River,  which  within  a  stones  cast
disburdeneth  it  selfe  into  the  Sea.  Here  our  sicke  men
specially  found  good  refreshing.  In  this  place  his  Lord-
ship staid  some  six  dayes  in  watering  the  whole  Fleete,
which  in  that  time  was  all  come  saving  the  Frigat,  one  of
the  blacke  Pinnaces,  and  one  of  the  Flemmings  (which
we  hoped  to  be  before  us,  for  they  have  directions.)
It  was  held  convenient  here  to  take  a  Muster  of  our
companies,  and  something  better  to  acquaint  every  one
with  his  owne  colours  ;  but  the  weather  was  so  extreamely
foule,  that  in  three  or  foure  dayes  spent  to  this  purpose,
there  could  be  nothing  done.  Upon  Wednesday  there-
fore, being  the  last  of  May,  it  was  resolved  to  stay  no
longer  there,  but  to  come  againe  to  ankor  at  the  Virgines,  The  Virgines.
and  there  bestow  one  day  in  training  our  men.  For
that  was  our  way  to  Saint  John  de  Puerto  rico,  whether
his  Lordship  now  declared  it  was  his  purpose  to  goe
first  of  all.  By  this  time  (for  his  Lordship  would  not
have  anything  done  in  that  foule  weather)  the  other  blacke
Pinnace  was  taken  down  for  a  long  Boate  to  serve  for
the  more  convenient  landing  of  our  men.

53

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

That  evening  and  the  next  morning  all  our  men  were
brought  aboord,  and  on  thursday  night  our  sailes  were  cut
Description  of  for  the  Virgines.  To  describe  this  Hand,  it  lieth  North-
west and  South-east,  the  soile  is  very  fat,  even  in  the
most  neglected  places,  matching  the  Garden-plats  in
England  for  a  rich  blacke  molde :  so  Mountainous
(certaine  in  the  places  where  we  came  neere  the  Sea-
coasts)  that  the  Vallies  may  better  be  called  Pits  then
Plaines,  and  withall  so  unpassably  wooddie,  that  it  is
marvailous  how  those  naked  soules  can  be  able  to  pull
themselves  through  them,  without  renting  their  naturall
cloathes.  Some  speake  of  more  easie  passages  in  the
Inland  of  the  Hand,  which  make  it  probable  that  they
leave  those  skirts  and  edges  of  their  Countrie  thus  of
purpose  for  a  wall  of  defence.  These  Hils  are  apparelled
with  very  goodly  greene  Trees,  of  many  sorts.  The
tallnesse  of  these  unrequested  Trees  make  the  hils  seeme
more  hilly  then  of  themselves  happily  they  are  :  for
they  grow  so  like  good  children  of  some  happy  civill
body,  without  envie  or  oppression,  as  that  they  looke
like  a  proud  meddow  about  Oxford,  when  after  some
irruption,  Terns  is  againe  cooched  low  within  his  owne
banks,  leaving  the  earths  Mantle  more  ruggie  and  flakie,
then  otherwise  it  would  have  bin ;  yea  so  much  seeme
these  natural  children  delighted  with  equalitie  and  withall
with  multiplication,  that  having  growne  to  a  definite
stature,  without  desire  of  overtopping  others,  they
willingly  let  down  their  boughes,  which  being  come  to
the  earth  againe  take  roote,  as  it  were  to  continue  the
succession  of  their  decaying  progenitors  :  and  yet  they
doe  continually  maintaine  themselves  in  a  greene-good
liking,  through  the  libertie  partly  of  the  Sunnes  neigh-
bourhood, which  provideth  them  in  that  neerenesse  to
the  Sea,  of  exceeding  showres ;  partly  of  many  fine
Rivers,  which  to  requite  the  shadow  and  coolenesse  they
receive  from  the  Trees,  give  them  backe  againe,  a
continuall  refreshing  of  very  sweete  and  tastie  water.
For the Inhabitants of  this Countrie. A Captaine or

54

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  ad.

1596.

two watering neere the place where  his  Lordship  first

anchored,  found  a  leasure  to  rowe  up  a  River  with  some

guard  of  Pikes  and  Musketers,  till  they  came  to  a  Towne  A  Town  found

of  these poore  Salvages ;  and  a  poore  Towne  it  was  of  in ommca'

some  twenty  cottages  rather  than  Houses,  and  yet  there

was  there  a  King,  whom  they  found  in  a  wide  hanging

garment of  rich  crimson Taffetie,  a Spanish Rapier in

his hand, and  the  modell  of  a  Lyon  in  shining  Brasse,  Wilde

hanging  upon  his  breast. There  they  saw  their  women ajes^'

as naked  as  wee  had  seene  their  men,  and  alike  attired

even  to  the  boring  of  their  lippes  and  eares,  yet  in  that

nakednesse, they perceived some sparkes of  modestie,

not willingly comming in the sight of strange and

apparelled  men :  and  when  they  did  come,  busie  to  cover,

what should have bin better covered. The Queene  [IV.  vi.

they  saw  not, nor  any  of  the Noble  wives,  but  of  the  Ir59«]

vulgar  many ;  and the Maidens  it should seeme they

would  not  have  so  squemish,  for  the  King  commanded

his  Daughters  presence,  with whom our  Gentlemen  did

dance  after  meate was  taken away. This withdrawing

of  their  wives  seemeth  to come  of  the common  jelousie

of  these people ;  for (it is reported) that  though they

admit one man  to  have  many  wives, yet  for  any  man

to  meddle  with  another  mans  wife,  is  punished  with  death,  Adultery

even  among  them. And no  mervaile  if  the  severitie  of  PJms^ed  Wlth

law  be  set  instead of  many  other  wanting  hinderances.

It  seemeth  that  themselves  are  wearie  of  their  nakednesse,

for besides the Kings apparrell, they are exceeding

desirous to  exchange any of  their Commodities  for  an

old Waste-coate,  or  but a  Cap, yea or  but  a paire  of

Gloves.

It  is  pretie  that  they  say  is  the  difference  twixt  the  Difference  of
habit  of  a  Wife  and  a  Maide.  The  Maide  weareth  no  maided mfe.
garter  (and  indeede  she  needeth  none)  but  the  Wife  is
the  first  night  she  is  married  (which  is  not  done  without
asking  at  the  least  the  consent  of  her  parents)  so  straightly
gartered,  that  in  time  the  flesh  will  hang  over  the  list.
The  haire  of  men  and women  are  of  like  length, and

55

A.D.
1596.

Common  diet
roome.

Kings  state.

Desire  to
learn  English.

They  come  to
the  Virgmes.

My  Lords  land
companies
about  one
thousand.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

fashion.  But  of  all  other  things  it  is  most  memorable,
that  whereas  their  Houses  are  private  to  all  other  uses,
yet  they  have  one  common  place,  where  all  their  men  at
least  take  their  diet,  nature  teaching  them  that  Law  which
in  Licurgus  his  mouth  was  thought  strange  and  perhaps
needelesse.  The  King  sitteth  in  the  same  great  roome
with  the  rest,  but  withdrawing  himselfe  into  some  more
lovely  part,  accompanied  onely  with  three  or  foure  of
the  best  esteeme ;  their  meates  are  their  fine  fruites,  yet
have  they  Hennes  and  Pigges,  but  it  should  seeme  rather
for  delight,  then  victuall :  their  drinke  is  commonly
water,  but  they  make  drinke  of  their  Cassain,  better  of
their  Pines  (and  it  should  seeme  that  might  be  made  an
excellent  liquor,)  but  the  best  and  reserved  for  the  Kings
cup  onely  of  Potatoes  :  their  Bread  is  Cassain.  The  last
report  of  them  shall  bee  what  I  have  seene  in  experience,
namely  their  great  desire  to  understand  the  English
tongue ;  for  some  of  them  will  point  to  most  parts  of
his  body,  and  having  told  the  name  of  it  in  the  language
of  Dominica,  he  would  not  rest  till  he  were  told  the
name  of  it  in  English,  which  having  once  told  he  would
repeate  till  he  could  either  name  it  right,  or  at  least  till
he  thought  it  was  right,  and  so  commonly  it  should  be,
saving  that  to  all  words  ending  in  a  consonant  they
alwayes  set  the  second  vowell,  as  for  chinne,  they  say
chin-ne,  so  making  most  of  the  monasillables,  dissillables.
But  it  is  time  to  leave  them  who  are  already  many
leagues  of.

On  thursday  night  his  Lordship  set  saile  for  the
Virgines,  and  on  Saturday  morning  had  them  in  sight :
and  in  the  afternoone  we  were  come  to  an  ankor.  On
Whitsunday  in  the  morning  betimes  (for  there  was  a  fit
place  sought  out  the  evening  before)  our  land  forces  went
on  shore,  and  there  his  Lordshippe  tooke  a  perfect  muster
of  them.  The  Companies  indeede  were  (though  after
much  sicknesse)  goodly,  in  number  one  might  well  say
not  so  fewe  as  a  thousand.  When  the  Companies  had
bin  trained  into  all sorts,  and  faces  of  fights,  at  length

56

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1596.

his Lordshippe commanded the Drummes to beate a

call,  and  the  troopes  being  drawne  in  the  nearest  close-

nesse that  conveniently  they might be, that he might

be  heard  of  all,  his  Lordship  standing  under  a  great  cliffe

of  a  rocke,  his prospect  to  the  Seward,  stept  upon  one

of  the  greater  stones  (which  added  to  his  naturall  stature,

gave  him a  pretty  height  above  the  other  company)  so

commanding  audience,  made  a  speech  to  them.  The  speech  you

After  which,  the  Fleete  then  within  one  dayes  sailing  hfve  before  in

his  ozvn

from Puerto Ricco, his Lordship presently appointed  reiat'wn  an^
Officers  for  the  field. They  all  made up  a  dozen  Com-  therefore  here
panies : whereof  if  any  wanted  the  full number  of  80.  omitted.
they  were plentifully supplied, by  a large overplus of  See for* the
gallant Gentlemen that followed his  Lordships  colours, Captaines  and
borne  by  Captaine  Bromley ;  and  Sir  John  also  had  more  Commanders,
then 80. so that  the  whole Armie  appointed  to Land,  here  omitted.
was neere upon  a  thousand,  specially  seeing  the  Officers
of  severall  Companies  were  not  reckoned  in  these  num-
bers. The  Offices  thus  bestowed,  his  Lordship  forthwith
commanded every  man to  be  shipped  in  Boates,  and  to
goe  aboord,  where  after  dinner  it  was  debated,  whether
it  were  better  to  passe  through  the  Virgines,  a  way  not
clearely unknowne (for divers of our company both
Souldiors and Marriners had gone it before  with  Sir  Sir Fr.  Drake.
Francis Drake,  in  his  last voyage)  or  else to  hold  the
old  course  through  the  Passages. It was  acknowledged
that  the  Virgines was  the neerer  way, but  withall  none
can  denie,  but  that it  was  the  more dangerous ;  for  the
way  is  very  narrow  (about  the  breadth  of  Thames  about
London)  and  we durst not  promise  our  selves  the  con-
tinuance of  a leading winde. The way through the
passages  was  found  to be farther  about,  but  withall  it
was  without  danger,  and  therefore having no  great  haste
choose the safer way by the passages; for (said his
Lordship)  I  choose  rather,  to  be  the  first  that  shall  take
Puerto  rico,  then  the  second  that  shall  passe  the  Virgines.
The  Virgines  are  little  Hands  not  inhabited ;  some  thinke  The  Virgines
for  want  of  water,  some  thinke  that  is  no  cause,  and  that  described.

57

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

there  is  store  of  water.  They  are  very  barren  and
craggie,  somewhat  like  the  Burlings,  but  being  much
more  sandie,  as  it  is  much  more  hot.  Among  these
Bird-Hand,  many  scattered  Hands  there  is  one  called  the  Bird-Hand,
by  reason  of  the  incredible  store  of  Fowle.  So  stored
is  it  with  plenty  of  Fowle,  that  never  was  English  Dove-
coat  more  willing  to  yeelde  her  increase  then  that  hillocke,
[IV.  vi.  for you may  take with your hands  onely,  as  much  as

su you  w*^  to  ^e ^mg °f  Bushels and Quarters. That
store  of  Birds evenmg  we cut sailes, and ranne  through  the  Passages
in  the  night  time.

Upon  Monday  afternoone,  we  made  our  selves  to  be
not  farre  from  Puerto  rico ;  and  our  desire  was  to  beare
in  with  it  in  the  morning  before  day,  that  by  that  meanes
we  might  least  of  all  be  discovered.  For  this  cause
therefore  the  Scout  and  the  Anthony  were  sent  before
to  make  our  landing  place,  and  that  done  to  returne,
which  was  about  midnight.  His  Lordships  greatest  care
was  and  had  bin  some  dayes  to  set  his  men  safely  and
well  on  land,  for  he  doubted  not  to  make  them  a  way,
if  once  they  were  landed  without  impeachment.  Him-
selfe  therefore  having  commanded  that  Sir  John  Barkley
should  come  aboord  with  him,  tooke  a  Boate  and  went
himselfe  no  otherwise  accompanied  then  with  Sir  John
and  the  Cocksons  gyng,  to  discover  a  landing  place.
Without  long  stay  he  returned  againe,  so  wet,  that  he
was  forced  to  change  his  apparell,  but  withall  gave
present  commandement  that  every  Captaine  and  Ship
should  put  their  men  into  Boates,  and  that  they  should
follow  his  bloudy  colours,  which  he  would  have  presently
landed.
They  land  By  eight  of  the  clocke that tuesday, being the sixt

upon  Me j-k  of  Qf  junC) his Lordships  regiment,  and  most  part  of  Sir
Puerto  rico  the  J°^n Barkleys  were  landed, which amounted neere to
sixt  of  June, the  number of  a  thousand men. We  began to  march
as  soone  as  we  could be brought into  any  order,  &  the
forlorne hope drawne out, which was led by  Captaine
Andrewes the Commander of his Lordships private

58

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1596.

Company,  which  that  day  was  brought  up  in  the  Battell

by  Captaine  Powell,  Lieutenant  Colonell  of  his  Lordships

regiment. The  way  we  marched  was  along  the  Sea  side,

commonly on  firme,  sometime on loose sand, but  yet

it  was  a  faire  march,  for  three  leagues  at  the  least,  till

we  met  with  a  blacke-Moore,  who  we  hoped  should  have

bin our Guide (and  so he was willing  to be) but he

neither spake good English, nor good Spanish, and

besides was affrighted, so that a great while he did

mislead  us ;  for  through  most  unpassable  rocks  and  clifts

he  brought us :  for  betwixt the clifts  where  we  stood,

and  the  Hand  wherein  the  Towne  stood,  there  we  saw

an  arme  of  the Sea, in breadth  not  Caliever  shot,  but

on the  other  side  was  a  fort with  five peece  of  great

Ordnance, and some, though not many, Musketeers ;

for both the evening before they  had discovered  our

Navie,  and  this  morning  our  landing,  as  we  were sure

by  divers  Horsemen,  whom  we  saw  come  forth  to  view

our  strength. Here  there was  offer  made  by  some,  so

to  plant  a  number  of  Musketeers  in  these  rockes,  as  that

they  might  beate  them  in  the  fort  from  their  Ordnance :

this  was  thought  possible,  and  afterwards  was  done  but

now  deferred,  because  though  we  had  no  annoyance  of

the  fort,  yet  we  knew  not  how  to  get  over,  for  the  depth

of  the  passage  meerly  unknown,  and  our  Boats  yet  had

not  found  any  landing  place  neere  the  fort. And  while

here  we  were  at  a flat  bay,  even  at  our  wits  end,  what

course  we  might take to  come  to  the  Towne,  there  was

sent  a  Peece  or  two  of  great  Ordnance  (but  without  any

hurt) from another fort, which standeth upon the

narrowest  part of  the  same  arme  of  the  Sea,  and  was

the onely  passage  that  was  used  from  the maine  Hand

where  we  were,  to  the  Hand  where  the  Towne  is. Here

the Nigro was something comforted, and brought to  Negros

the  little wit  he had ;  at  length,  with  much  adoe,  being  misSuMni-

made to understand, we  tooke  our  selves  to  be  out  of

the  way,  because  wee could  not  passe  that  way ;  partly

with  threatning and  partly  with  promises  if  he  brought

59

A.D.

I596.

Bad  March.

Bridge  and
Barricado.

PURCHAS HIS PILGHIMES

us  into  a  better  way  to  the  Town  ;  he  began  againe  to
leade,  and  we  to  follow  with  as  nimble  mindes  as  weary
bodies,  for  we  had  marched  from  morning  till  now  that
it  was  even  in  the  edge  of  the  evening ;  but  we  would
not  be  weary.

At  length  through  many  untroden  pathes,  or  rather
no  pathes,  but  such  wodden  holes,  as  would  have  taught
the  most  proud  body  to  stoope  very  humbly  ;  he  brought
us  into  a  beaten  sandy  way.  But  for  all  this  we  were
not  neere  the  Bridge  which  must  be  passed,  and  divers
even  of  our  leaders  began  after  so  long  and  troublesome
a  march  to  faint,  so  that  order  was  given  to  stay  the
Vantgard,  when  it  pleased  God  to  helpe  by  one  meane
or  other  to  as  many  Horses,  as  kept  us  from  staying
our  march.  There  might  be  seene  a  poore  tyred  Jade,
without  Saddle  or  Bridle,  onely  with  a  match  in  his  mouth
very  welcome  to  them  that  commanded  the  best  Horses
of  England.  But  at  length  we  overcame  the  length  of
the  way,  and  even  to  the  Bridge  were  come,  but  it  was
so  late,  that  that  night  we  were  out  of  hope  to  passe  it,
being  (as  we  had  great  reason  to  thinke)  fortified  against
us.  Onely  the  Companies  were  commanded  to  keepe
their  guard,  till  his  Lordship  in  person  with  Sir  John
Barkley  went  as  quietly  as  they  could  to  take  view  of
the  place ;  which  they  found  to  be  narrow  and  a  long
Cawse-way  leading  to  a  Bridge  reaching  from  the  one
Hand  to  the  other.  The  Bridge  they  perceived  to  be
pulled  up,  and  on  the  other  banke  was  there  a  strong
Barricado,  a  little  beyond  which  was  a  Fort  with  Ord-
nance. But  how  much  or  what  we  could  not  learne,
nor  by  how  many  men  it  was  held,  yet  perceived  they
it  absolutely  not  to  be  passed  but  at  a  low  water.  Our
Mariners  and  Sea-men  could  say  little  to  the  ebbing  and
flowing  in  this  Countrie,  and  therefore  the  onely  way
to  know  the  fit  time  of  assault,  was  to  set  a  continuall
watch  to  give  present  information  of  the  ebbe.  The
meane  time  the  Armie  was  led  backe  to  repose  themselves
a  while.

60

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1596.

In  a  great  Lawne  we  all  sat  or  lay  downe,  and  with
fresh  water, which the  first Negro, and another, that
was  afterwards  taken  in  this  wood,  led  our  men  to,  they
refreshed  themselves ;  some  had  some  Bread, his  Lord-  U-V-  V1-
ship  was  no  niggard  of  that  he  had. His  lodging  that  'J

night  was  his  Target ;  I  lay  at  his  head,  and  to  my
remembrance,  never  slept  better.  In  the  morning  (two
houres  at  least  before  day)  the  allarum  was  given  very
quietly,  and  was  readily  taken,  for  we  needed  not  but
to  shake  our  eares.  The  Companies  were  streight
ranged,  and  every  man  had  forgotten  how  weary  he
had  bin  the  last  night,  so  forward  they  were  to  be  in
service.  Even  betwixt  his  Lordship  and  Sir  John
Barkeley  there  grew  a  little  question ;  whether  of  them
should  have  the  point  that  day.  Sir  Johns  answer  was,  Sir  John
that  his  Lordship  might  command  them  all,  and  there-  Barke/eys
fore  it  was  at  his  pleasure  to  have  or  leave  the  point ;  jJJzSj ,
but  since  it  had  pleased  him  to  divide  the  Armie  into
two  Regiments,  and  his  Lordshippes  Leaders  had  all
the  last  day  had  the  Point,  he  tooke  it  to  be  neerer
the  order  of  the  Warres  if  the  other  Regiment  this
day  were  respected.  This  reason  together  with  request
to  his  honour  to  remember  himselfe  to  be  the  Generall,
and  therefore  his  place  should  not  be  so  full  of  danger,
so  farre  moved  his  Lordship  that  Sir  Johns  Regiment
had  the  Point ;  neverthelesse  his  Lordshippe  would  be  at
the  service  in  person.  Thus  the  manner  of  the  enter-
prize  being  upon  the  present  resolved  on,  his  Lordship
put  himselfe  into  his  Armour,  so  did  all  the  Com-
manders, and  who  else  had  Armours,  for  they  looked
that  the  service  should  be  hot,  as  indeede  it  proved.

By  and  by  the  enemies  Centinell  had  discovered  the  The  fight
approach  of  our  Companies,  and  they  tooke  the  Alarum,  betwixt  the
It  may  be  well  said  it  was  well  fought  by  the  English,  \n^r™d
and  if  it  had  bin  day  that  every  one  might  have  seene
what  he  did,  it  is  to  be  thought  so  many  would  not  have
deserved  so  much  commendation. The  assault  continued
above  two  houres,  during  which  time  the  Spaniards  were

61

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

not  idle.  For  though  the  assalants  left  no  way  in  the
world  unattempted,  yet  no  way  could  they  finde  to  enter
the  Gate.  The  Cawsey,  which  was  the  ordinarie  way  of
passage,  was  purposely  made  so  rugged :  that  our  men  to
keepe  them  on  their  feete,  made  choise  to  wade  in  the
The  Earles  water  besides  it.  Here  his  Lordship  was  (by  the
accidental  stumbling  of  him  that  bore  his  Target)  overthrowne,
even  to  the  danger  of  drowning  ;  for  his  Armour  so
overburdened  him,  that  the  Sergiant  Major  that  by
chance  was  next  had  much  adoe  at  the  first  and  second
time  to  get  him  from  under  the  water  :  when  he  was
up,  he  had  received  so  much  Salt  water,  that  it  drove
him  to  so  great  extremity  of  present  sicknesse,  that  he
was  forced  to  lye  downe  in  the  very  place  upon  the
Cawsey;  till  being  somewhat  recovered,  he  was  able
to  be  led  to  a  place  of  some  more  safetie  and  ease  ;
in  which  place  the  Bullets  made  him  threatning
musicke  on  every  side.  His  Lordshippe  being  brought
to  this  little  safe  place  (whence  yet  he  would  not  be
removed  till  the  fight  was  done)  Sir  John  Barkeley
led  on  his  Regiment,  from  whom  there  were  not  lesse
then  3000.  English  Bullets  sent  among  the  Spaniards,
who  had  not  so  many  hands  as  we,  yet  were  not
much  behinde  us,  in  sending  these  heavy  leaden
messengers  of  death.  For  besides  six  peece  of  great
Ordnance,  which  were  bent  and  played  just  upon  the
Cawsey,  and  some  pretty  store  of  Musketeers ;  at  a
port  fast  by  the  gate  lay  there  a  fowler,  or  a  cast
peece,  that  did  more  skathe,  then  all  the  rest,  for
that  at  once  shot  many  murthering  shot,  whereupon
the  peece  is  also  called  a  murtherer  ;  for  all  this  our
Valiant  Soldiers  came  to  the  very  gate,  and  with  Bils,  some
the  gates.  two  or  tnree  tnat  they  nad,  wanting  other  fitter
instruments,  began  to  hewe  it.  At  their  ports  and
loope  holes  they  were  at  the  push  of  the  Pike,  and
having  broken  their  owne,  with  their  naked  hands
tooke  their  enemies  Pikes,  and  perforce  brake  them.
But  for  all  this  no  entrance  could  be  got. Sir  John

62

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1596.

Barkeley  attempting  to  discover  if  any  passage  might  Sir  J.  Bark-
be  found  of  either  side  of  the  gate,  twice  waded  so  hs  coura&-
farre,  that  if  he  could  not  have  swamme,  he  had  bin
drowned.  They  that  were  come  to  the  gate  called
to  their  owne  Companies,  that  some  Pikes  should  be
drawne  to  them :  this  word  was  given  farther  then
was  intended,  for  by  and  by  all  the  Pikes  were
called  for.  Then  his  Lordships  colours  began  to
march,  and  to  the  Cawsey  came,  where  hee  was  very
exceeding  sicke  lying  upon  the  ground  in  a  place  no  His  Lordships
lesse  dangerous  then  if  he  had  bin  upon  the  Cawsey;  perill
a  place  so  perillous  that  it  had  bin  as  safe  being  at
the  entry  of  a  breach  by  assault :  but  the  end  was,  it
could  not  then  bee  taken ;  the  tyde  came  in  so  fast,  The  tide
that  what  was  at  our  knees  before,  was  now  come  up  hindereth
to  our  middles :  and  besides  the  day  began  to  breake,
which  though  some  thought  would  be  advantagious  for
us,  yet  certainely  it  would  have  bin  the  death  of  many
a  man  ;  their  Ordnance  being  bent  to  scoure  the  Cawsey,
and  the  ruggednesse  which  they  had  made  to  hinder
our  approach,  had  made  us  forsake  it ;  which  if  the  day
had  once  discovered  to  them,  they  might  easily  have
bent  their  Artillery  to  our  much  greater  losse.  But
God  would  not  have  more  bloud  shed,  nor  ours  as
yet  to  have  our  wils.  The  Companies  therefore  were
brought  off  to  the  place  where  we  lodged  all  night,
before  where  the  Chirurgians  were  presently  to  looke
to  the  hurt,  which  were  not  many,  and  the  slaine
much  fewer,  all  under  fiftie  of  both  sorts.  No  Com-
mander slaine  or  hurt  but  two  Lieutenants.  Lieutenant
Cholmley,  that  had  served  excellently  well,  and  Lieu-
tenant Belings.  The  losse  that  the  enemy  had  was
much  like,  saving  that  of  the  assaults  there  were  some
few  more  slaine  :  from  this  place  our  Companies  marched
to  the  Sea-side,  whether  his  Lordship  had  appointed
victuals  to  meete  them.

His  Lordship  having  given  the  Souldiours  some  time  His  Lordship
to  refresh  themselves,  in  the  meane  time  went  himselfe  &eth  aboord-

63

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

aboord  so  sicke  that  in  truth  he  was  to  be  feared,  with

[IV- V1-  purpose to repose himselfe for that night, but his

2"-"  thoughts were so busied and restlesse, that within

His  retume few noures he came ashore  againe, and presently put

Stratagem m  executi°n  a  purpose, which his  Lordshippe  had  this

meane time digested : it was to land men at the

other Fort. For effecting whereof he gave direction

that one of the Ships should beare in close to the

shore, though it were (as indeede it proved) with

apparent danger  of  casting  her away : But the service

was  to  be  done  whatsoever  it  cost : Withall  there  were

in the  rocks on the other side over  against  the Fort

(I  meane that which we first came to  see, but could

not come at) some fifty Musketeers placed, to  beate

the enemy from their Ordnance : meane while there

were shipped in Boates Captaine Coach,  and  Captaine

Orrell with two hundred Pikes and shot to land  on

the other  side the  Fort,  twixt it  and the Town, that

they having made good the place, might  either make

a stand till the rest  of  the forces were landed (if  it

were  thought  needefull)  or  else  might  march  and  charge

the other Fort on that side, when our men should

Good  successe assault it on this side. This plot tooke very good

thereof.  effect ;  for  within  an  houre  that  the  attempt  was  given,

partly the Ship, and partly the Musketeers had so

beaten the Fort, that the Boates  had good leisure to

land ;  whereupon  within short  space  the  enemy  quitted

the place without losse to be spoken of to our

Companies : for of all ours there were not above

Ship  lost. three hurt, and one slain, onely  the Ship was driven

upon  the  rockes,  and  finally  cast  away. Their  direction

was that the Souldiers should make the place good

(for there was no doubt of their sufficient strength)

the Boats were commanded to come backe againe to

his Lordship, who appointed to tarry at a Conduit

which is in the maine Hand but from whence men

called  Mata- mignt De  landed betwixt the  point  or  the Bridge,  and

diabolo.  the  red  fort, called Matadiabolo.

64

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  ad.

1596.

Our men were safely landed some pretty distance
beyond  the  red Fort;  where the  Spaniards  were  ready
to  receive  them,  and  a  while  they  skirmished  gallantly,
but  finding  themselves  overweake,  they  made  an  honor-  Spaniards
able  retreat  till  they were  fallen  into  the  wood,  in  the eaten'
edge  whereof  they  made  their  first  stand. Ours  marched  The  English
directly  to  the  Fort,  which  they  found  quitted,  and  there  take  the  ForL
lodged all that night. By that time that the Boates
were come backe to his Lordship, the Moone was
growne so  light, and the water fallen to so dead an
ebbe, that there  was  no  hope  of  passage till the next
floud. There  was  not  so  much  as  a  candle  or  a  match
to  be  seene  in the Fort,  whereupon  his  Lordship  told
Sir  John Barkeley  that  he tooke  that  Fort  also to be  Another  Fort
quitted, the rather because some were seene passing  1mtte*'
from the Fort to the Frigat. Hereupon himself
accompanied with Sir John Barkeley, went to the
Cawsey to see if they could perceive any more
certaintie,  and  Captaine  Rukesby  was  sent  and  brought
certaine  intelligence,  that  the  enemy  was  gone.

By  this  time  it  was  growne  very  late,  and  our  men
needed  some  refreshing : the  Companies  therefore  were
drawne  up  to  the place  where we had  lodged  the  last
night,  where  having  eaten something  they  were within
a while brought downe to the point, where meeting
with  Captaine  Coach  and  Captaine  Orrell,  all  began  to
march directly towards the Towne. And now our
men made but little doubt of all, having once set  They  enter  the
safe footing in the lesser Hand. It was night  when  lesselland^
we began  to  march,  and  by  breake  of  day  we  were  at  Towne.
the Towne. This day was thursday, Jun. 8. The
passage  is  wooddie  on either  side, and  so narrow  that
not  passing  three  at  the  most  can  march  in  ranke  ;  and
from the  Towne  this Fort  is  a  mile  and a  halfe :  yet  The  Towne
all  this  way  being so fit for  Ambuskadoes,  or  for  the  quitted  of  all

Irish  manner  of  charging  by  sudden comming  on and  teoPle  able  t0

ff1  dt^  ° J , , , ,  9  , beare  armes.

, there  was  not  a  Dogge  that  barked at  us,  so  that  and  entred  ^

in  great  quietnesse  wee  came  to  the  Towne,  and  found  it  the  English.
xvi  65  E

A.D.

1596.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

quitted  of  all  able  to  make  resistance :  for  besides  women
and  men,  whom  either  age  or  wounds  had  disabled
for  the  warres,  all  the  rest  had  quitted  the  Towne,  and
betaken  themselves  as  to  their  last  hope,  to  one  of
their  Forts  to  the  Sea-wards,  called  Mora.

§.  in.

The  Fort  Mora  beseeged  and  taken.  The  Towne
described  :  the  Mines.  Purpose  to  hold  the
place  ;  altered  by  the  death  and  sickenesse
of  many.

Fter  that  the  place  was  assured  with  sufficient
guards,  and  every  Company  quartered :  first  of
all the Spaniards that were left were delivered

The  Fort
summoned.

The  Gover-

Care  to  save
mens  lives.

to  the  Provost,  and  then  his  Lordship  sent  a  Drum  to
summon  the  Fort  to  be  delivered  to  him  for  the  Queene
of  England,  who  had  sent  him  thither  to  take  it.  The
Governour  made  answere  that  the  King  of  Spaine  had  sent
nors  bravado,  him  thither  to  keepe  it,  and  that  so  long  as  he  lived  it  should
not  be  delivered.  After  this  summons  his  Lordship  tooke
exceeding  care  for  the  taking  in  of  this  hold  with  the
least  losse  of  men  that  possibly  might  be ;  for  he  con-
sidered that  he  was  to  leave  a  strong  Garrison  there,  and
that  he  must  himselfe  goe  home  well  guarded.  His  pur-
pose therefore  was  to  take  it  without  fight,  onely  with  a
straight  siedge  to  force  them  to  yeelding :  his  Lordships
speciall  purpose  and  desire  was  by  hunger  to  drive  them
to  a  yeelding  (as  in  the  end  hee  did)  but  withall  he
l63-]  provided  a  batterie,  if  their  victualls  should  last  longer
then  he  wished  and  hoped.  At  one  time  therefore  he
tooke  order  to  cut  off  all  possible  meanes  of  reliefe  of
victualls,  by  sending  Boates,  which  continually  lay  twixt
the  Fort  and  their  Mayne  ;  and  withall  hee  provided
two  plat-formes,  and  severall  Gabions,  that  from  two
places  at  once  their  wall  might  bee  beaten.  To  this
purpose  there  was  brought  from  the  Scourge  two  whole
Culverings, and two Demiculverings, and about the

66

[IV.

VI.

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1596.

Towne  were  found  foure  other  peeces  that  would  serve

for  batterie, among the  which one  was  that  which  had

slain Sir Nicholas Clifford there not long before. By  Sir  Nicholas

Saturday the seventeenth of  June the Ordnance was  Clifford.

readie to batter. But his Lordship would not have

them  begin  on  the  Sabbath  day  ;  so  that  it  was  deferred

till  Monday.

All  this  while  the  noise  of  warre  was  not  so  great  among  ms  Lordships
us,  but  that  the  still  voice  of  Justice  was  well  heard. It  justice.
is  no  newes  that  in  such  companies  there  will  bee  outrages
committed,  and  so  was  it  there : for  his  Lordship  pub-  Souldier
likely  disarmed a very  good Souldier, for over-violent  disarmed  for
spoyling a Gentlewoman of  her  jewels. But because  ^man/y  and

this  was not terrible enough to the rest,  and  he

was

unmannerly

1 •  t  -11  1 • •  r 11 1 usaSe  t0  a

desirous to arme  Justice  with the  authontie  or all  the  woman.

Commanders,  forthwith hee caused a martiall  Court  to

bee  called. Whereupon  the  Article  of  defacing  Churches  Churches  and

or  Houses  of  Religion,  and  of  offering  force  to  Women,  Women

there  were  two  condemned  to  die. Hee  that  had  done  secure  -

violence to a Spaniards wife,  was  a  Souldier,  and  had

given  very  good  proofs  of  his  valour,  so  farre,  that  his

Lordship had taken speciall notice of  him,  but  being

convicted of this crime, there was no place left for

mercy,  but  hanged  hee  was in the market place  ; the  Ravisher

Spaniards  as  many  as  would  come,  being  suffered  to  be  executed-

present  at  the  execution. The  other  fellow  was  a  Sayler

and  an  Officer  in  the  Vice-admirall, for defacing some  Sacriledge

things  in  the  Church,  without  order  from  the  Generall,  terrified-

hee  was  brought  thrice  to  the  Gibbet,  and  at  length  his

Lordship  was  intreated  to  grant  him  mercy. These  few

but  indeed  notable  examples of  justice have  since  held

us  in  much  better  termes  of  ruly  obedience.

Upon  Monday  the  batterie  began  to  speake  very  loud  :
both  the  Gabions  beat  upon  a  Cavalero  which  they  had
made  upon  the  Point  next  to  the  Towne.  The  Ordnance
which  they  had  planted  thereon,  by  dinner  time  was
judged  to  bee  dismounted,  and  though  that  were  the
thing specially respected in the batterie, yet because

67

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

the  Wall  and  the  Cavalero  that  stood  upon  it  began  to
nod,  they  beat  that  place  till  towards  the  evening.  All
this  while  scarce  was  there  a  Spaniard  to  be  seene  upon
any  part  of  their  wall,  whereas  before  the  Ordnance
began  to  play,  there  could  not  within  the  sight  and
reach  of  the  Fort,  foure  or  five  of  the  Souldiers  come
together,  but  there  would  a  shot  of  great  Ordnance  be
sent  to  scatter  them.  In  the  evening  the  Canoneers
found  that  they  had  spent  all  the  Culvering  shot,  and
therefore  shut  up  that  day  with  the  lesser  peeces.
Against  the  morning  there  was  more  provided  ;  but  in
the  meane  season  it  was  perceived,  that  the  Cavalero
was  alreadie  sufficiently  beaten,  and  that  with  the  next
Raines.  raine  (which  in  that  Countrie  and  time  of  the  yeere,  is
neither  seldome  nor  little)  it  would  fall,  being  (as  all
the  Countrie  is)  of  a  sandie  earth,  it  did  but  crumble
into  dust.  The  Canoneers  therefore  were  appointed  in
the  morning  to  beate  the  other  Point  neerer  the  Sea.
For  that  so  flanked  the  Gate,  and  the  breach  alreadie
made,  that  without  great  danger  there  could  not  any
approch  be  made,  and  his  Lordship  was  growne  exceeding
niggardly  of  the  expence  of  any  one  mans  life.
Parley  This wrought so with them  in  the  Fort,  that  about

demanded.  one  a  clocke,  they  sent  forth  a  Drum  to  demand  parley.
His  motion  was,  that  two  of  their  Captaines  might  be
suffered  to  speake  with  two  of  the  English.  It  was
granted  ;  and  they  met  in  a  place  of  the  greatest
indifferency  that  could  be  found,  so  that  neither  partie
Conditions  should  discover  others  strength.  The  demands  were
demanded,  delivered  in  Paper,  written  in  Spanish :  the  summe
whereof  was ;  for  themselves  they  desired  that  with
Colours  flying,  match  in  their  cocks,  and  bullets  in  their
mouth  be  set  beyond  the  Point  at  the  Bridge,  to  goe
whither  they  would.  Further,  they  demanded  all  the
prisoners  to  bee  delivered  without  ransome,  and  that  no
mans  negroes  and  Slaves  should  be  detayned  from  them.
His  Lordship  utterly  refused  any  such  composition,  but  I
told them because hee tooke no pleasure in shedding  1

68

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1596.

Christian  bloud,  hee  would  deliver  them  some  Articles,
v/hich  if  they  liked,  hee  would  without  more  adoe  receive
them  to  mercy.  Which  Articles  were  these,  delivered
under  his  Lordships  owne  hand  to  the  Governour.

A  resolution,  which  you  may trust  to.

I  Am  content  to  give  your  selfe  and  all  your  people  Articles
their  lives,  your  selfe,  with  your  Captaines  and  Officers  °ff^ed.
to  passe  with  your  Armes  :  all  the  rest  of  your  Souldiers
with  their  Rapiers  and  Daggers  onely.

You  shall  all  stay  here  with  me,  till  I  give  you  passage
from  the  Hand,  which  shall  bee  within  thirtie  dayes.

Any  one  of  you,  which  I  shall  choose,  shall  goe  with
me  into  England,  but  shall  not  stay  longer  there  then  one
moneth,  but  being  well  fitted  for  the  purpose,  shall  bee
safely  sent  home  into  Spaine  without  ransome.

It  was  doubted  whether  there  were  any  in  the  Fort  [IV.  vi.
that  spake  English,  and  therefore  some  were  wishing  the  1164.]

Articles  were  translated  into  Spanish.  But  his  Lordship
peremptorily  refused  to  seeke  their  language,  but  would
have  them  to  finde  out  his ;  but  because  it  was  now
growne  late,  he  gave  them  respite  to  thinke  what  they
would  answere  till  eight  a  clocke  the  next  day,  and
promise  was  given  on  either  side,  that  neither  should
practise  to  put  things  out  of  the  state,  they  now  were  in.
The  next  morning  rather  before  then  after  the  time
appointed,  there  returned  to  his  Lordship,  besides  the
two  former  Captaines,  both  hee  that  now  was,  and  hee
that  had  beene  last  Governour,  and  withall  they  brought
with  them  one  of  good  place  in  his  Lordships  service
whom  they  had  taken  prisoner,  while  he  was  viewing  a
peece  of  Ordnance  that  lay  neere  the  Fort.  These  also
required  (as  Captaine  Lansois  and  the  Sergeant  Major
before)  private  audience  who  without  much  difficultie
yeelded  upon  the  foresaid  conditions  ;  and  farther  desired  Spaniards
they  might  have  two  Colours  left  them,  &  in  lieu  hereof  yeeld the  ForL
they  made  promise  that  nothing  should  be  spoyled  in  the

69

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

Fort. That  day  the  Governour  and  his  Companie  dined

with  his  Lordship,  and  after  dinner  the  Governour  went

The  Fort ancj brought  out  his  Companies  out  of  the  Fort  (which

°™7~!imn  °f  a^  sorts  were  neere  foure  hundred)  and  delivered  the'
were  400. ,  .  .  /  . . I

Souldiers, keyes  to his Lordship,  who  immediately  brought in  his  1
delivered  up owne  Colours,  and  Sir  John  Barkleys,  and  placed them
to  the  English.  Upon  the  two  Points  of  the  Fort. The  Spaniards  without
being pillaged (for beside all promises his Lordship  1
suffered  them  to  carry  their  stuffe  away)  conveyed  safely  j
into  a  strong  Castle  in  the  Towne  called  Fortileza. This  i
Fort  was  taken  in  upon  Wednesday  being  the  one  and  j
twentieth of  June, and upon Thursday our fleet was
commanded  to  come  into  the  Harbour,  for  all  this  while  I
it  had  rid  without. This  Fort  is  to  the  Sea-ward  very  1'
strong,  and  fitted  with  goodly  Ordnance,  and  bestowed  j
for  the  most  advantage  to  annoy  an  enemie  that  possibly  ;
could  bee  devised. It  is  held  absolutely  impossible  that  1
any shippe should passe that Point without sinking
instantly,  if  the  Fort  doe  not  graunt  her  passage : And  i
the riding  without the Harbour is very dangerous  as
wee found by the losse  of  many  Anchors  and  Cables,  j
to the extreme danger  of  many of  the Ships,  and the  1
finall  casting  away of  one of  them. The Fort  to  the
landward  is  not  altogether  so  strong  as  towards  the  Sea,
but  yet  being  victualled  able  to  abide  a  long  siege.
The  descrip- The  Towne  consisteth  of  many  large  streets,  the  houses
tionofthecitie  are  built  after  the  Spanish  manner,  of  two  stories  height  '
onely,  but  very  strongly,  and  the  roomes  are  goodly  and
large,  with  great  doores  in  stead  of  windowes  for  receit  of
aire,  which  for  the  most  part  of  the  day  wanteth  never.  I
For  about  eight  in  the  morning  there  riseth  ordinarily  a  j
Fresh  aire. fresh  breeze  (as  they  call  it)  and  bloweth  till  foure  or  five  j
in  the  afternoone,  so  that  their  houses  all  that  while  are
very  coole,  of  all  the  artificiall  day  the  space  from  three  j
in the  morning  till  sixe,  is  the  most  temperate,  so  that  j
then  a  man  may  well  indure  some  light  clothes  upon  him ;  '
Heat,  how from  sixe  till  the  breese  rise  is  very  soultering,  from  five
ordered.  [n the afternoone hottest of  all the rest till midnight,  j

70

of  Saint  John
de  Puerto  Rico.

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  ad.

1596.
which  time  also  is  held  dangerous  to  be  abroad,  by  reason
of  the  Serenaes  (they  call  them)  which  are  raynie  dewes.
And  indeed  in  the  nights  the  Souldiers  which  were  forced
to  lie  abroad  in  the  fields,  when  they  awaked  found  as
much  of  their bodies as lay  upwards  to  bee  very  wet.  Great  dewes.
The  Towne  in  circuit  is  not  so  bigge  as  Oxford,  but  very  Greatnesse.
much  bigger  then  all  Portesmouth  within  the  fortifications,
and  in  sight  much  fayrer. In  all  this  space  there  is  very
little lost ground ; for they have beene still building,
insomuch as that within these three yeeres, it is
augmented one fourth part. The Cathedrall Church  Cathedrall
is  not  so  goodly  as  any  of  the  Cathedrall  Churches  in  Church
England,  and  yet  it  is  faire  and  handsome ;  two  rowes  descnbed-
of  proportionable pillars, make two allies besides the
middle  walke,  and  this  all  along  up  to  the  high  Altar.
It is darker then commonly Countrie Churches in
England. For the windowes are few and little, and  No  g/asse
those indeed without glasse  (whereof  there is none  to  windowes.
be  found  in  all  the  Towne) but covered  with Canvas,
so  that  the  most  of  the  light  is  received  by  the  doores,  The  doores,
the greatest  whereof  is just  in the West end to the &c
Seaward,  so  that  out  of  it  a  man  walking  in  the  Church
may behold the ships riding  in a  very  faire Harbour.
The  other  two  doores  (besides  that  which  is  private  from
the  Bishops  house)  are  on  either  side,  a  little  above  their
Quire. For  that  of  all  other  things  is  the  most  singular
and differing from the fashion in England, that  their
Quire  is  in  the  very  lowest  and  Westermost  part  of  their  Quire  in  the
Church,  wherein  is  the  Bishops  seate  raysed  three  good  lowest  part  of
steps above the  rest,  and pompously  built. On  either  the  Church.
side  of  him  seeme  to  sit  sixe  Prebends,  and  upwards  are
places for singing men and Quiristers. Their Church
wanteth no necessarie implement. On the  North side
a  faire  paire  of  Organs ;  at  either  side-doore  a  poore  mans
boxe : above the Organs  on the same side,  there  is  a
decent Pulpit  very conveniently placed ; on the  other
side  of  the  side-doores,  there  were  two  Lavers  for  holy
water,  to  sprinkle  the  Incommers,  and  in  the  South-west

71

A.D.

I596.

Chappels.

[IV.  vi.

1165/

The  Castle.

Monasterie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

corner  fast  by  the  great  doore  is  there  a  place  seemly
inclosed  with  Joyners  worke,  where  is  a  faire  Font  placed.
This  Church  is  sacred  to  Saint  John  Baptist,  as  is  all  the
Hand  ;  besides  his  Image  there  were  many  other  in
particular  shrines,  which  the  Souldiers  could  not  bee  held
from  defacing  unorderly.  There  are  in  the  Citie  three  or
foure  little  Chappels  to  Saint  Anne,  Saint  Barbara,  and
others.

Besides  the  Fort,  which  held  out  those  few  dayes,
and  is  of  some  twice  twelve  score  removed  from  the
Towne  :  there  is  in  the  West  and  by  South  side  of  the
Towne  a  strong  Castle,  built  of  squared  stone,  commonly
called  the  Kings  house,  named  before  Fortileza,  wherein
was  found  good  store  of  Munition.  Betwixt  this  Castle,
and  the  Fort  Mora,  there  is  another  peece  of  fortification
of  squared  Stone  and  battlemented,  it  also  coasteth  along
the  Sea,  and  may  beate  the  harbour.  So  that  all  things
considered,  it  was  the  mightie  hand  of  God,  which  with
the  losse  of  two  men  onely  at  one  shot  slaine  with  a  peece
of  Ordnance,  delivered  a  place  of  such  strength,  to  so
small  a  troope  of  men,  the  rather  if  it  be  considered,  that
we  came  not  thither  unlooked  for ;  for  they  had  particular
warning  a  moneth  at  least  before,  and  to  the  waterside
where  Boates  use  to  land  out  of  the  harbour,  they  had
cast  up  a  strong  ditch  to  impeach  landing  there,  but  God
brought  us  a  better  way.  There  is  also  a  faire  Frierie
standing  on  the  North  side  of  the  Towne,  but  little
distant  from  it  :  it  is  built  of  Bricke  in  a  good  large
square,  with  a  Church  and  Hall,  and  all  necessary  roomes
for  a  Pryor  and  Covent  of  Fryers,  it  seemeth  not  to  be
perfected  yet,  for  they  are  beginning  of  a  Cloyster  not
yet  covered.  The  Covent  was  fled  all,  saving  one  old
Fryer,  who  in  the  little  broken  Latine  that  he  had  told
me,  that  they  were  Dominicani  ordinis  praedicatorum
mendicantium.  The  scituation  of  this  place  is  exceedingly
delightfull  :  it  standeth  upon  the  easie  hanging  of  a  hill,
inclosed  on  three  parts  well  neere  by  the  Sea.  The  soile
sandie  and  very  light,  like  to  our  Rye-fields  in  England  :

72

unknowne
trees.

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1596

the  temper  as  in  that  height  hot,  and  yet  rather  effectually
and  in  operation,  then  to  the  sense.  There  books  have
their  glewed  backs,  there  melted  and  loosened  ;  Flowers
or  Fruites  candied  in  England,  there  lose  their  crust,  and
English  Comfits  grow  liquid.  But  after  some  little
acquaintance,  it  is  likely  it  would  prove  a  very  healthfull
place  ;  for  though  they  speake  of  some  mortality  (as  what
place  in  the  world  is  alwaies  free  from  that  scourge  of
God  ?)  that  hath  bin  there  of  late,  yet  have  I  bin  told  by
them  that  have  lived  there,  in  seventeene  moneths  there
have  not  above  two  bin  buried,  and  those  of  extreame
age.  And  at  his  Lordships  comming  hither  people  of
80.  and  90.  yeares  old  were  of  good  abilitie  of  body.

The  rest  of  this  little  Hand  (at  the  least  halfe  of  a
league  in  length)  is  for  the  most  Woods  complaining  of  Woods  of
the  want  of  dressing  and  industrie,  yet  are  they  all  youth-
fully greene,  and  none  without  some  fruite  or  other,  but
so  strange  as  would  pose  the  professors  of  that  skill  in
England :  and  in  these  woods  Horses  and  Oxen  grow  fat,
if  they  be  suffered  to  rest.  Therein  be  also  some  large
inclosures  carefully  dressed,  not  unlike  to  our  manner  of
dressing  Hop-yards,  and  every  hillocke  laden  with  the
fruites  of  the  Countrie.  Lemmons  or  rather  Lymes,  and
the  goodliest  Orenges  that  ever  I  saw  are  ordinarily  to  be
found  where  no  man  set  them.  In  and  about  the  Towne
there  is  store  of  Coker-nut-trees,  which,  beside  the  excell-
encie  of  the  Fruite,  give  a  very  delightfull  gracing  to  the
Towne.  There  is  not  in  this  little  Hand  any  knowne
River  or  Spring,  but  hard  beyond  the  point  in  the  other
Hand  there  is  an  excellent  Conduit  of  very  good  fresh
water,  handsomely  overbuilt  with  squared  Stone  ;  and  in
the  Towne  every  house  hath  a  large  Well,  and  some  two,
so  as  they  cannot  want  water  in  such  plentie  of  raine,
which  is  there  both  often  and  abundant.  And  if  men  will
not  lose  themselves  with  overmuch  ease  and  pleasure,
there  will  be  no  necessarie  thing  wanting.  But  the
eminent  and  knowne  profits  of  this  place  are  Ginger,
Sugar  and  Hides,  besides  the  secrets  of  the  Gold  Mines,

73

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

Why  those  howsoever  of  late  yeares  neglected.  Some  reasons  have
mynes  are  Deene  given,  why  the  King  left  working  though  he  knew
negece  .  ^erQ  were  exceecljng  store  of  gold.  The  first  is,  the  very
store  of  Gold  ;  for  say  they  the  sweetenesse  he  found,
made  him  unwilling  to  have  any  copartners,  and  therefore
knowing  this  place  to  bee  the  neerest  to  the  Indies  to
those  Countrimen,  whom  he  most  feared  that  they  would
in  time  become  sharers  with  him,  he  would  not  lay  such
a  baite  to  entice  them  to  set  footing  there,  where  being
once  entered,  they  would  not  onely  guild  their  fingers,
and  pay  their  Souldiers  for  the  present  with  his  Treasure,
but  would  make  this  their  baiting  place  in  the  longer
journey  to  the  other  Hands,  and  continent  of  the  Indies,
which  are  the  very  coffers  whence  he  feedeth  his  warres.
And  if  it  be  objected,  that  the  working  in  these  Mines
was  ceased  before  the  King  had  cause  to  feare  the  English
or  French  invasions  thereinto,  there  being  then  no  warres
twixt  him  and  them  ;  let  them  rest  satisfied,  that  with  the
answer  made  by  a  Spaniard  to  his  Lordship,  objecting  the
same,  that  the  warres  were  then  a  brewing.  Secondly,
they  say  that  the  King  left  working  in  this,  because  he
would  have  all  not  onely  this,  but  the  other  Mines  also  ;
for  he  saw  that  all  men,  as  they  doe  love  wealth,  so  doe
they  also  seeke  after  ease,  And  if  with  lesse  labour  they
may  get  the  same  profit,  none  will  undergoe  needlesse
travell.  From  which  generall,  the  descent  is  very  easie
and  direct  to  this  particular.  That  if  in  a  shorter  voyage
and  lesse  time  his  subjects  were  sure  to  make  themselves
Masters  of  as  much  gold,  as  if  they  went  farther  and
should  come  no  heavier  home  ;  hee  should  finde  but  few
that  would  fetch  gold  from  Peru,  or  the  other  more
inland  parts  of  the  Indies,  when  as  they  might  have  it
with  halfe  the  travell,  and  in  halfe  the  time.  Besides,
the  Spaniards  great  lands  and  povertie  of  men  will  not
suffer  all  workes  goe  forwards  at  once.  There  are  among
the  Spaniards  whom  God  hath  delivered  to  his  Lordships
hands,  the  same  Lansois  of  whom  was  spoken  before.  In
what  reckoning  hee  is  held by  the  Spaniards,  may  bee

74

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1596.

perceived,  by  their imploying  him,  in  time  of  so  great
necessitie. Once  it  is  confessed,  that  hee  almost  onely
was  hee  that  held  the  rest  from  present  yeelding,  and  who
after  yeelding  (which  yet  they  say  was  without  his  con-  [IV-  V1-
sent) taketh the losse  of  the Spaniards most  of  all  to  IJ -J

heart.  He  seemeth  truly  to  be  wise  above  the  common
pitch  of  Souldiers  which  is  his  profession,  yet  hath  he
beene  heard  say  and  protest  by  the  faith  of  a  Souldier,
that  there  is  not  so  rich  and  good  a  myne  in  all  the  Kings
Dominions  to  the  Westward,  as  that  of  Puerto  Rico.
Others  whose  fathers  were  imployed  in  the  workes,  report
what  their  dying  fathers  told  them.  But  that  which
maketh  most  of  all  to  the  purpose,  is  the  present  pre-
paration which  the  King  is  even  now  a  making,  for  the
reviving  of  these  workes  afresh  in  Puerto  Rico,  by
setting  two  hundreth  Negroes  to  worke,  and  for  that
purpose  had  sent  great  store  of  Mattocks  and  Spades
thither,  there  found  in  his  store-house,  and  for  what  other
use  they  should  have  needed,  is  not  well  conceiveable.
Much  time  was  spent  in  taking  order  how  the  Spaniards
might  be  dispatched  to  Carthagena  ;  (for  thither  it  was
resolved  they  should  bee  sent)  being  a  place  so  farre  to
the  leeward  of  Puerto  Rico,  as  that  they  neither  could
in  haste  themselves  make  any  head,  nor  send  newes  to
Spaine,  to  procure  the  levying  of  any  forces  thence  :  and
in  providing  victuals  for  this  place,  and  repayring  ships
that  were  first  to  come  for  England.  Upon  Thursday
being  Saint  Peters  day,  there  was  a  saile  discryed  at  Sea  Saik
in  the  morning,  and  by  noone  shee  was  come  into  the  deserved.
Harbour,  which  with  much  astonishment  shee  found
turned  English.  The  Spaniards  had  some  few  dayes
before  reported  that  they  looked  for  a  ship  to  bring  from
the  Havana  much  of  the  Souldiers  pay  that  was  behinde.
This  held  us  for  the  time  in  great  suspence  of  hope  and
doubt,  whether  this  might  bee  shee  or  no;  the  rather
because  this  seemed  to  bee  of  the  same  bignesse  that  they
had  spoken  of,  but  when  shee  was  fallen  into  the  trap,  it
was  found  indeed  to  bee  a  very  Mouse,  where  we  looked

75

AJ>.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

A  ship  of  for  a  Mountaine.  For  her  lading  was  a  number  of  poore
Negroes.  nakecl  Negroes  from  Angola  to  bee  sold  there.  Yet  was
shee  a  pretie  Boat,  and  of  her  lading  likely  to  bee  made  of
good  use.  Within  few  dayes  after  there  was  another
saile  almost  taken  after  the  same  manner,  yet  perceiving
a  greater  fleete  riding  there,  then  shee  could  hope  to  finde
Spanish  shee  got  her  tack  aboard,  and  went  away  lasking,
so  that  though  the  Affection  was  sent  away  in  chace  after
her,  yet  shee  escaped.

Upon  Friday  being  the  seventh  of  July,  all  things
being  made  readie  for  their  passage,  the  Spaniards  were
imbarked  in  a  Carvell,  and  in  another  ship,  which  during
the  time  the  ships  rode  without  the  Harbour,  for  feare  of
them  whom  shee  could  not  passe,  or  envie  that  they
should  receive  good  by  her,  ranne  her  selfe  desperately
ashoare,  but  shee  and  most  things  in  her  were  saved,  and
here  she  saved  the  sending  away  of  a  better  ship.  With
these  two,  wherein  the  baser  Spaniards  were  put,  there
were  two  other  ships  sent  to  waft  them,  wherein  also  went
the  Governour  and  some  few  others,  who  deserved  some
respect.  And  for  themselves  it  was  permitted  them  to
come  directly  home  for  England.  The  next  day  being
the  eighth  of  July,  there  came  to  his  Lordship  two
Negroes  from  the  mayne  Hand  with  a  flagge  of  truce,
and  a  letter  from  one  Seralta,  an  ancient  Commander  in
that  Hand,  and  who  upon  a  wound  received  in  the  first
fight  at  the  bridge  had  with-drawne  himselfe  into  the
Countrie.  The  effect  of  his  desire  was,  that  being  in
great  distresse  through  feare  of  the  English,  that  daily
marched  up  and  downe  the  Countrie,  he  desired  his
Lordship  to  grant  him  and  his  protection  to  travell
without  danger.  Whereunto  his  Lordship  made  this
answere  to  be  written,  and  sent  him.  That  he  must
absolutely  denie  his  request,  but  yet  if  himselfe,  or  any
of  his  Nation,  or  any  dwelling  with  him  or  them  would
within  eight  dayes  come  unto  him  to  Puerto  Rico,  he
should  by  the  vertue  of  that  his  Letter  bee  protected
from being  taken  or spoyled,  by  any  of  his  Souldiers  :

76

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1596.

and  this  hee  willed  him  to  signifie  to  them  neere  about
him,  that  they  might  give  notice  of  the  same  throughout
the  whole  Hand.  And  further,  his  Lordship  promised
that  to  as  many  as  would  come,  that  they  should  both
come  safely,  and  if  they  so  would  should  bee  imbarked,
and  sent  away  as  the  Governour  with  the  rest  of  the
Spaniards  were  alreadie.

His Lordships honorable resolution and  intendment
was,  not  to  come  so  farre  from  home,  to  take  onely  or
spoile  some  place  in  this  other  world,  and  then  run  home
againe : but  hee  had  determined  (by  the  leave  of  God)  to
keepe  Puerto  Rico,  if  it  pleased  God  to  give  it  into  his
hands. That  was  the  place  he  meant  to  carry,  whatsoever
it  might  cost  him,  being  the  very  key  of  the  West  Indies,
which  locketh  and  shutteth  all  the  gold  and  silver  in  the
Continent  of  America  and  Brasilia. He  knew  that  Saint
Domingo  might  with much  lesse  losse bee taken,  and
would bring much greater profit for the present; in
regard  whereof,  and  of  the  desire  hee  had  his  Adventurers
should become gayners,  his thoughts sometime tooke
that  way,  but  finally  they  stayed  at  Puerto  Rico,  and  there
setled  themselves. As  this  was  his  resolution  before  hee  Purpose  of  stay
had  it,  so  was  it  also  after  he  had  it,  and  then  not  onely  and  h°l(*mg
his,  but  every  man  of  worth  or  spirit  saw  such  reason  in
his  Lordships  designments,  that  some  thought  themselves
not  so  graciously  dealt  withall,  that  they  were  passed  over,
when  others  were  named  to  stay. But  God  had  otherwise
disposed. For within a while that his Lordship had  Alteration  by
beene  in  Puerto  Rico,  many  of  our  men  fell  sicke,  and  at  5^knesseand
the  very  first  not  very  many  dyed. The  Spanish  as  well  mortaitu
as  the  English  were  both  sicke  and  dyed  of  the  sicknesse,
as besides Seralta was seene in divers others. Others
suspected  their  bodily  labours  to  have  procured  it,  and  wtnter  tso
both  seeme  to  have  concurred.  called  of

In  July  and  August  is  their  Winter,  so  called  for  their  U-V-  vi-
great raines at those times, which to bodies alreadie , j1 /
rarified by the  heat  of  the  Sunne  then  over  them,  and  rain\  -tn  Ju~L
yet rather  where  vehement  exercise hath more  opened  and  August.

77

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

the  pores  whereby  inward  heat  is  exhaled,  must  needes  be
The  disease,  very  dangerous.  It  was  an  extreme  loosenesse  of  the
body,  which  within  few  dayes  would  grow  into  a  flux  of
bloud,  sometimes  in  the  beginning  accompanyed  with  a  hot
Ague,  but  alwayes  in  the  end  attended  by  an  extreme
debillitie  and  waste  of  spirits  :  so  that  some  two  dayes
before  death,  the  armes  and  legs  of  the  sicke  would
be  wonderfull  cold.  And  that  was  held  for  a  certaine
signe  of  neere  departure.  This  sicknesse  usually  within
few  dayes  (for  it  was  very  extreme  to  the  number  of
sixtie,  eightie,  and  an  hundred  stooles  in  an  artificiall  day)
brought  a  languishing  weaknesse  over  all  the  body,  so
that  one  mans  sicknesse  (if  hee  were  of  any  note)  com-
monly kept  two  from  doing  duties.  And  this  was  it,
which  rather  then  the  number  alreadie  dead,  made  his
Lordship  first  thinke  of  quitting  the  place.  For  though
towards  the  beginning  of  July,  there  were  not  much
above  two  hundred  dead,  yet  was  there  twice  as  many
sicke,  and  there  was  no  great  hope  to  recover  the  most  of
them.  The  ships  were  left  weakly  manned,  for  when  we
landed  we  landed  about  a  thousand  men,  of  which  the
greater  part  was  dead  or  made  unserviceable  for  the
400.  English  present.  There  were  above  foure  hundred  reported  dead
dead  of  sick-  wjlen  fo'ls  Lordship  left  the  Towne,  and  surely  as  many
Rico  so  sicke,  that  most  of  them  could  not  bring  themselves

aboard,  before  his  Lordship  left  the  place.  After  that
it  was  once  openly  given  out  what  his  Lordship  purposed,
then  was  order  taken  to  make  readie  the  ships,  in  which
time  these  things  happened.  Upon  Friday  the  seventh  of
July,  there  was  a  saile  discryed,  which  being  come  in  was
found  to  bee  one  of  our  owne,  though  made  ours  by
purchace.  Heretofore  it  was  noted,  that  at  our  comming
from  the  Canaries,  wee  wanted  the  Frigat  and  one  of  the
black  Pinnaces,  which  being  sent  upon  a  piece  of  service
with  Captaine  Slingsby  in  the  Consent,  had  left  him,  and
were  gone  after  a  chace,  but  how  farre  or  whither  none
knew  till  this  saile  came  in,  which  told  us  that  they  had
taken that  chace,  whose  lading  was  Muttons  onely  and

78

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1596.

Hennes,  passing  from  one  Hand  to  another,  but  withall
they  had  so  irrecoverably  lost  the  fleet,  that  after  they  had
there  stayed  five  or  sixe  dayes,  beating  up  and  downe
to  finde  us  againe,  but  without  effect.  Captaine  Harper
that  commanded  the  Frigat,  was  forced  to  breake  open  his
Letter,  to  know  his  direction  whither  his  Lordship  had
appointed  him  to  come  to  him.  According  whereunto
they  first  stood  for  Margarita,  where  not  finding  his
Lordship,  nor  hearing  any  newes  of  the  fleet ;  they  put
off  againe  for  Puerto  Rico,  according  to  the  direction  they
had  received.  But  by  reason  of  the  violence  of  the  Cur-
rent there  not  so  well  knowne  to  them,  they  were  driven
to  the  leeward  of  Puerto  Rico,  and  so  had  beene  at
Domingo  before  they  came  to  us.  There  they  heard
newes  of  his  Lordships  being  at  Puerto  Rico,  and  that
he  had  taken  the  Towne,  but  the  Fort  held  out  still.
Making  therefore  all  the  haste  they  could,  bearing  up
as  high  as  the  Passages,  they  got  thither  at  last.  The
men  in  this  ship  were  they  which  had  beene  in  the  black  Black  Pinnace
Pinnace,  but  because  shee  began  to  bee  leakie,  and  not  sunke.
to  brooke  these  Seas,  they  had  sunke  her,  and  put  them-
selves into  the  prize,  which  being  of  better  saile  then  the
Frigat,  had  out-gone  her  some  dayes  sayling,  for  they  told
us  shee  would  also  bee  there  within  few  dayes,  and  so  shee
was  on  Tuesday  next  after,  having  lost  one  man  of  their
companie,  all  the  rest  were  very  strong,  and  in  good
liking.  Upon  Wednesday  the  nineteenth  of  July,  there
came  into  this  Harbour  a  Carvell  :  Shee  was  found  to  bee
of  Margarita,  laded  onely  with  passengers  that  were  bound
for  Spaine.  There  were  also  found  some  rags  and  medi-  A  thousand
cine  pearle,  to  the  value  of  a  thousand  Duckets  ;  the  men  Ducats  ™orth
were  not  many,  and  it  should  seeme  they  had  not  further  found.
furnished  themselves,  then  might  provide  them  necessaries
at  their  arrivall  in  Spaine,  and  to  present  their  friends.
Upon  interrogatories  therefore  he  found  it  very  certaine
by  the  agreeing  confession  of  them  all,  that  they  were  so  The  KmP
farre  from  hearing  of  any  fleet  of  the  English  in  these  ™  r^  -"  °*
Westerne  parts,  that  in  much  securitie  the  Kings  Chist  was  Margarita.

79

A.D.
1596.

[IV.  vi.

68.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

yet  remayning  in  Margarita,  with  no  more  then  the  ordi-
narie  guard.  For  besides  the  old  Garrison  of  about  thirtie
Souldiers,  there  was  not  any  new  supply.  Onely  they  had
received  direction  from  the  King,  that  seeing  the  Chist
was  very  rich,  they  should  not  adventure  to  send  so  great
treasure  without  assured  strength ;  and  therefore  his  plea-
sure was  signified  to  be,  that  it  should  attend  his  sending
of  some  Gallions  or  Frigats  for  the  safe  wafting  of  the
same.  The  Chist  had  not  beene  stirred  some  yeeres,  and
therefore  rich  it  must  needes  be,  in  a  place  which  so
plentifully  yeelded  pearle.  Triall  was  made  by  his  Lord-
ship with  three  ships  ;  but  Margarita  lying  South-east  or
South-east  by  South  from  Puerto  Ricco,  and  the  windes
at  that  time  of  the  yeere  constantly  blowing  East  South-
east or  South-east  by  East,  they  were  forced  backe  frus-
trate of  their  hopes.

§.  mi.

Purpose  of  returne.  Treatie  with  the  Spaniards.
His  Lordships  departure.  Description  of  the
Hand,  the Beasts, Fruits, Plants,  &c.

Is  Lordship  after  he  saw  it  was  not  Gods  pleasure,
that  this  place  should  yet  bee  kept  by  the  English,
had  made  some  offers  afarre  off  to  the  Teniente,  and
other  chiefe  men  that  were  in  the  mayne  Hand,  for  ran-
somming  their  Hand  and  Citie.  To  this  purpose  he  used
one  Antonio  Robles,  a  Licenciate  in  physick,  that  had  beene
taken  in  the  ship  of  Angola,  whereof  I  noted  something
before.  This  Robles  is  a  man,  whom  some  learning  and
much  experience  added  to  his  naturall  wit,  had  made  very
subtile  and  craftie.  Hee  once  returned,  but  soone  after
gave  the  slip,  as  also  did  two  others.  By  reason  of  this
accident,  the  old  Governour  and  the  rest  of  the  Spaniards,
were  restrayned  of  much  libertie  they  had,  and  were  kept
in  closer  durance:  which  wrought  with  them  in  such  sort,
that  at  his  Lordships  returne  into  the  Harbour,  the
Governour  Pedro  Suarez  made  offer  to  his  Lordship,  that

80

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1596.

if  it  would  please  him  to  send  one  Vincent  Lopez  (that
was  in  restraint  with  him)  againe  to  negociate  with  the
Teniente  touching  the  ransome  of  the  Citie  and  Stansies,
he  would  become  suretie  for  his  returne.  His  Lordship
refused  to  write  any  more  to  men  so  unworthy  of  his
curtesie,  which  they  had  much  abused  ;  Marry  if  you,
said  my  Lord,  doe  see  likelihood  that  any  thing  would
bee  effected,  and  would  your  selfe  and  as  from  your  selfe
write  to  them  to  perswade  them  for  their  owne  good,
I  would  upon  your  word  and  suretiship,  be  content
that  the  said  Lopez  should  passe.  Thus  upon  Tuesday  Lopez  sent
the  first  of  August,  was  Lopez  dispatched  with  one  Letter  Wlth  Letters.
to  the  Bishop,  and  another  to  the  Teniente,  both  from
Pedro  Suarez.  Upon  Thursday  the  third  day,  Lopez
returned.  And  brought  his  Lordship  a  Letter  in  shew
from  the  Licenciate  in  physick,  Antonio  Robles,  but
indeed  it  was  an  answere  from  the  Teniente,  Pedro
Garcia,  and  the  rest,  into  whose  hands  the  government
fell,  upon  the  sending  away  of  the  present  Governour
Antonio  Muschere.  In  this  Letter,  besides  many  idle
excuses  for  his  owne  treacherous  breach  of  promise  (the
convenient  doing  whereof  was  in  likelihood  the  cause,
that  he  specially  was  deputed  to  write  for  the  rest)
there  was  offer  made,  that  if  it  would  please  his  Excel-
lencie,  to  set  downe  and  send  them  a  definite  summe,
which  he  would  accept,  they  would  looke  into  their
present  abilitie,  and  accordingly  would  send  his  Lordship
assurance,  that  within  seven  dayes  it  should  be  sent  to
him,  to  be  received  at  the  Point,  where  hee  held  con-
tinuall  guard.  Concluding,  that  in  these  sendings  they
sought  nothing  but  delaies,  his  Lordship  determined  not
to  send  them  any  more,  but  withall  speed  to  make  him-
selfe  and  the  fleet  readie  for  a  happy,  and  by  many  much
desired  returne,  since  it  was  cleere,  that  it  was  not  Gods
pleasure,  that  yet  this  Hand  should  bee  inhabited  by  the
English.  All  the  Hides  therefore,  and  Ginger  and  Sugar,
which  either  was  alreadie  readie  or  in  time  could  be
gotten,  was  forthwith  shipped,  and  so  was  all  the  munition
xvi  81  F

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

in the Towne, all the Ordnance in any place of  that
Hand,  which  amounted  in  all  and  of  all  sorts  very  neere
%o  peeces  of fae  fu\\  number  of  fourscore  cast  peeces,  some  of  them
nance  brought  t^ie  goodliest  that  ever  I  saw. But  when  they  saw  his
from  Puerto Lordship  resolute  to  send  no  more  to  them  for nego-
Rko.  dating  touching  the  ransome of  their  Citie  ; they  now

begin  to  send  againe  and  againe  to  him.  His  Lordship
never  meant  to  deface  their  Citie,  or  to  make  it  unfit  to
be  inhabited.  But  withall  he  tooke  the  likeliest  wayes,  to
conceale  this  from  the  knowledge  of  the  enemie,  whom
hee  could  not  so  well  rule  with  any  other  bit,  our  owne
strength  being  now  growne  so  weake.  His  Lordship
therefore  entertayned  their  offers,  and  so  farre  granted
their  desires,  that  some  in  the  name  of  them  all,  might
with  his  Lordships  Passe  come  to  the  Citie  to  goe  through
with  his  Excellencie.  There  came  two,  Immanuel  Cordero
and  Don  Pedro  de  Pantoia,  who  without  the  Bishops  con-
sent, they  said,  offered  five  hundred  kintals  of  Ginger ;  at
whose  returne  (which  should  bee  within  three  or  foure
dayes)  they  did  thinke  that  thrice  so  much  would  be
given.  The  fleet  was  not  yet  altogether  readie,  and  Sir
John  Barkley  not  yet  so  well  recovered  of  his  the  common
disease,  as  that  it  was  deemed  fit  hee  should  presently
commit  himselfe  to  the  Sea,  being  to  bee  so  long  without
a  bayting  place  ;  and  hee  by  his  Lordships  directions  left
him,  might  dispatch  the  matter.  These  two  therefore
were  licensed  to  returne  to  Luisa  to  their  friends  upon
Saturday  being  the  twelfth  of  August,  with  promise  to  be
againe  with  us  on  the  Tuesday  following.  But  before
their  appointed  day  his  Lordship  set  saile  :  yet  it  is
not  unlikely  his  returne  was  something  hastened,  by  an
accident  that  fell  out.  The  old  man  Pedro  Suarez  had  a
countenance  that  promised  an  honest  minde,  and  in  regard
of  his  age  and  weaknesse,  he  was  not  so  narrowly  looked
to,  as  for  sometime  hee  had  beene.  This  old  sicke  man
found  a  meanes  to  escape  the  Sunday-night  after  they
were  gone  to  Luisa,  certainly  not  without  practice  with
his  Countrimen  ;  and  it  is  thought  with  the  privitie  of  his

82

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1596.

Keeper.  Now  this  mans  departure  onely  therefore  mis-
liked,  because  it  was  traiterous  and  without  leave,  did
more  and  more  confirme  his  Lordship  in  his  opinion  that
the  Spaniards  dealing  with  us  was  traiterous,  and  for  some
other  end,  then  was  pretended.  And  therefore  seeing  his
owne  stay  should  not  be  needfull  (for  he  knew  Sir  John
very  sufficient  to  dispatch  any  thing  that  was  to  bee  done)
he  presently  commanded  that  his  owne  ship  should  weigh,
and  with  her,  of  great  ships  onely  the  Samson  ;  of  the  [IV-  V1-
lesser,  the Royall Defence, the Frigat, the Scout,  the  "69.]

Elizabeth, the Guiana, and two little ones that were
found  in  the  Harbour,  one  a  Frenchman,  and  the  other
a  Spanish Frigat, which were  rigged  during  our  aboad
there. So that his Lordship left with Sir John the  Ships  left  with
strength of  the  Navie, the  Ascention, the  Gallion,  the  SlrJ-Barkley-
Alcedo,  the Consent,  the Pegasus, the  Centurion, two
strong flie-boats,  and the Anthonie. The true  reason
of  his  Lordships desire to  be gone  from  Puerto  Rico
quickly,  was  indeed  a  longing  he  had  to  be  quickly  at
the  Hands. For hee had so plotted the voyage,  that
still  hee  would  have  a  string  left  in  store  for  his  Bow.
And  now  hee  had  intelligence  that  the  fleet  of  Mexico,
which  hee  knew was to goe  this  yeere,  was  even  now
upon  their  dispatch. For  upon  very  good  advertisements  Cause  °fthe
he  was  given to understand, that the fleet meant to /r

o  '  dcpdvtuvc.

disimbogge  the  first  light  Moone  in  their  September,
which  falleth  out  to  bee  the  seven  and  twentieth  of  our
August,  and  his  desire  was  to  be  at  the  Hands  before
them,  which  he  might  well  hope  for  being  in  the  height
of  the  Bermuda  by  that  time  they  should  put  forth  of
the  Bay.  Besides  this  he  had  reason  to  looke  for  the
meeting  of  a  Carack,  if  by  the  middest  of  September
hee  were  at  the  Hands.  For  though  they,  which  are
homewards  bound  having  made  their  voyage  in  the  East
Indies,  ordinarily  have  timelier  passage,  and  are  at  home
by  August,  yet  if  any  of  them,  which  this  yeere  were
to  goe  from  Lisbon,  should  be  put  backe  againe,  Sep-
tember is  the  moneth,  wherein  they  were  to  bee  expected

83

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

at  the  Acores.  And  for  their  more  certaine  meeting
againe  with  his  Lordship,  that  so  all  the  fleet  might  come
home  together,  his  Lordship  left  them  this  direction,
which  was  given  to  every  ship  under  his  hand.  You
shall  steere  in  with  the  Southward  part  of  Flores  :  if
you  finde  me  not  in  that  course,  then  seeke  me  betwixt
ten  and  fourteene  leagues  of  Fayal,  West  South-west.
If  there  you  finde  mee  not,  then  come  through  betwixt
Fayal  and  the  Pike  ;  and  seeke  me  in  the  Road  at
Gratiosa  ;  if  you  finde  me  in  none  of  these  places,  you
may  be  assured  I  am  gone  from  the  Hands  for  England.
And  for  the  Towne,  Sir  John  had  order  given  to  leave  it
undefaced,  saving  that  the  Fort  Mora  should  bee  razed
to  the  landward.  Thus  wee  left  Puerto  Rico,  and  steered
as  directly  to  the  Hands  as  the  windes  would  suffer
us,  which  are  there  continually  Easterly,  yet  served  us
so  favourably,  that  blowing  much  at  East  South-east,  wee
tooke  our  selves  to  hold  a  North  North-east  course,
allowing  our  ships  to  drive  one  point  to  the  leeward  ;
which  course  if  we  could  hold,  we  hoped  to  weather
the  infamous  Hand  of  Bermuda,  notorious  with  un-
mercifull  and  incredible  stormes  of  fearfull  thunder  and
The  Eark  lightning.  It  was  the  sixt  day  after  our  departure  from
departed  from  puerto  Rico,  being  Saturday  the  nineteenth  of  August,
tjT'il  f°  wnen  I  writ  out  tn^s  n°te,  then  were  wee  a  great  way
August.  from  the  height  of  the  Bermuda,  which  lyeth  in  thirtie

three  degrees.

Now  we  are  in  the  way  from  Puerto  Rico  to  the  Hands
of  Acores,  which  must  needes  be  found  a  long  passage,
and  the  way  being  not  much  beaten  with  resort  of  the
Passengers,  puts  me  in  hope  that  this  may  be  a  leisurefull
place,  to  pay  a  piece  of  a  promise  that  I  made  before,
to  say  something  more  of  the  nature  and  qualitie  and
largenesse  of  the  mayne  Hand  of  Puerto  Rico.  The
meanes  which  I  did  most  wish  and  hope  for,  to  enable
mee  the  better  for  the  payment  of  this  debt,  I  could
never  with  conveniency  come  by.  For  I  alwayes  waited
if  his  Lordship  would  passe  over  into  the  Mayne. For

84

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  ad.

1596.

without  him  I  had  no  great  desire,  and  indeed  I  should

have  beene  quickly  missed,  seeing  it  pleased  his  Honor

to  use  mee  in  the  dispatch  of  all  things,  which  were  to  The  Authors

be  done by warrant or direction under his  hand. So -tPtTen

that  whatsoever  I shall  say  here,  I must  be  content  to  Earle.

report  upon  the  report  of  others  ;  and  I  will  not  tell  you

any  thing,  which (mee  thought) my  selfe did  not  first

see  reason  to  beleeve. The  plat  and  figure  of  the  Hand  Of  the  nature,

is  a  square, altera parte longius,  the length exceeding  <luattieian
*■  '  *  ^.  larzenesse  of

the  breadth  neere  the  proportion  of  seven  to  foure  ;  for  the  mayne

it is told me, to be sixe and thirtie leagues long,  Hand  of  Saint

and  twentie  leagues  broad,  bearing  it  selfe  out  from  end  JohndePuerto

to  end  neere  in the  same  distance. It lyeth East  and

West  :  at  the  West  end  the  two  corners  doe  so  jut  out

that  they  make  a  goodly  Bay  betwixt  them,  but  yet  not

so  profitable,  because  a  goodly  River,  which  would  gladly

disburden  it  selfe  into  the  Bay,  is  choaked  with  sands,

which  the  Sea  casteth  up  into  the  mouth  of  the  River,  which

being  navigable  a  good  way  up  into  the  Land,  is  within

a  stones  cast  of  losing  his old  name,  and being  called

the  Sea,  made  shallow  and  unfit  for  the  receit  of  Vessels

of  burthen. There are indeed  in  the same  Bay  other

lesser  Riverets,  whereat  Passengers  use  to  take  in  fresh

water,  as  Sir  Francis  Drake did, after hee was  beaten

from  the Citie of  Puerto Rico, and put forth  thence

to  Nombre  de  Dios. Upon  this  part  of  the  Hand,  which

is  commonly  called  La  Aquada,  in  English,  The  watering

place,  the  greatest  Commander,  and  of  largest  possessions,

is,  or  of  late  hath beene,  one  Chereno  ; whose  proper

land, is thought to containe in compasse and circuit

neere  the  quantitie  of  ten  leagues. The  other  end,  the

Easterly  end is  knowne  by  the name  of  La  cabeca  de

San  Juan, in English Saint  Johns head. The  Citie  of

Puerto  Rico is his  right side  or  arme  :  and  the  South

side  about  the  Countrie  of  Choama  (whither  the  Bishop

at  our  comming  had  carried  himselfe)  will  be  answerable

to  the  left  side  or  left  arme,  as  being  lesse  fit  for  action,

and  his  feet  is  the  watering  place. The  most  famous  Rivers

35

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

of  this  Hand  are  Toa  and  Baiamond,  the  rather  because
they  runne into the Harbour of  the Citie of  Puerto

River  Toa.  Rico  ;  whereof  Toa  is  by  much  the  greater,  and  falleth
more  with  the  West  of  the  Towne  :  This  river  riseth
out  of  a  Mountaine,  called  Guiamo,  being  on  the  South
side  of  the  mayne  Hand,  some  fifteene  or  sixteene  leagues

[IV.  vi.  from  Puerto Rico  to the Eastward  ; from Guiamo it

ll7°-l  runneth  North  in  one  streame,  till  it  come  to  another
Mountaine,  called  Cawas,  and  though  in  this  way  it
receive  many  Riverets  into  it,  yet  it  cannot  bee  said
either  to  lose  or  retaine  his  name,  for  thus  farre  it  is
not  knowne  certainly  what  name  it  had,  as  they  say  ;
but  here  parteth  it  selfe  into  two  streames,  the  one
whereof  runneth  Northerly  to  Luisa,  a  Towne  not  great
but  somewhat  fortified,  standing  some  sixe  leagues  to
the  Eastward  of  Puerto  Rico.  Whether  the  Towne  doe
give  or  take  his  name  of  this  arme  of  the  River,  it  is
unknowne.  But  well  knowne  it  is,  that  they  have  both
one  name.  The  other  streame  being  once  divorced  from
Luisa,  runneth  North  North-west  and  falleth  into  the
Harbour  of  Puerto  Rico,  where  it  is  called  Toa.

Rivfr  Baiamond  riseth  betwixt  the  parting  of  Toa  and  Luisa,

and  runneth  a  Northerly,  but  more  Easterly  course
withall,  till  it  mingleth  it  selfe  with  salt  water  on  the
South-west  side  of  Puerto  Rico.  The  Hand  is  watered
with  very  many  other  Rivers,  and  Riverets  and  Springs
without  number,  or  names,  but  those  that  give  or  take
names  of  the  Villages  and  Townes  which  stand  upon
them,  for  the  most  part  runne  Northerly.  For  besides
Guiamo,  which  riseth  in  the  Countrie  of  Coama,  and
runneth  into  the  Southerly  Sea,  and  the  River  whereon
Saint  German  (which  also  is  called  Salamanca  and
Guadianilla)  is  situate  towards  the  West  end  of  the
Hand  neere  to  Cape  Roxo  ;  all  the  other  of  name  runne
to  the  leeward  of  the  Hand,  and  fall  into  the  Northerly
Sea.  As  first  and  next  to  Puerto  Rico  to  the  Westward,
the  River  and  Towne  of  Sabuco  :  next  to  it  Guiamo,
then  the  Recibo,  twixt  which  and  the  Laguada  is  another,

86

Baiamond.

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  ad.

1596.

whose  name  I  could  not  learne.  The  Laguada,  whereof
I  spake  before,  and  which  giveth  name  to  the  Westerly-
end  of  the  Hand,  where  Sir  Francis  Drake  (as  I  said)
watered,  is  next  unto  the  choaked  Bay  before  mentioned  ;
in  which  Bay  at  the  North-west  Point  is  the  Gawaraba,
which  the  Seas  violence  hath  made  something  unprofit-
able for  navigation,  so  that  the  passage  to  Saint  Domingo,
and  the  other  leeward  parts  of  the  West  Indies,  are
most  ordinarily  from  the  Laguada,  if  they  of  the  Westerly
part  of  the  Hand  have  any  businesse  that  way.  For  as
Saint  Germans  or  Salamanca,  though  I  have  heard  it
to  be  a  Harbour  and  a  Sea-faring  Towne,  yet  I  am
told  so  much  to  the  contrarie,  as  makes  me  doubt  of
the  former  report,  though  I  dare  not  absolutely  assent
to  this  later,  though  a  Spaniard  of  good  understanding
told  it  me. Now,  in  every  one  of  these  Rivers  which  Gold  found  ^

I  have  named is there  gold found ordinarily  before  it  °Ji  tn*™y  in
1  1  a i •t 1 &  1  \ 1  1 the  Rivers  of

be  sought. And (1 know it to bee true) when the  s aim  John  de

Spaniards  perceived  by  his  Lordships  manner  of  leaving  Puerto  Rico.

the  Citie  of  Puerto  Rico,  that  hee  went  not  away  without

purpose to returne, one of them told his Honor in

plaine  termes,  that  he  could  not  thrust  his  spade  into  any

of  these  named Rivers,  and many  other  besides  these,

but  hee  should  finde  gold. This  certainly  is  true,  and  I

have  seene  the  experience,  that  some  of  the  gravell  of

one of these Rivers being brought to his Lordship

because  it  looked  rich,  when triall  was  made,  onely  by

washing away the sand and gravell, there  was  cornes

of  very  good  gold  found  in  it,  and  that  for  the  quantitie

and  proportion  in  great measure. Where, because  we

are  againe  fallen  into  this  argument,  I  will  report  unto

you  a  certaine  truth,  whereby  the  richnesse  of  the  mynes

in Puerto Rico may be esteemed. One Joancho de

Luyando,  a  Mint-master  in  this  Hand,  dwelling  in the

Guadianilla  neere  to  Saint  Germans,  or  at  the  least  having

workes  there,  tooke  a  bullion  or  masse  of  gold  so  pure,

as  it  needed  no further triall, that being sent to the

King it was found worth three thousand and five

87

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

hundredth  Duckets,  and  divers  times  he  found  such
plates,  that  onely  splitting  them,  he  made  himselfe
trenchers  of  gold  to  eate  his  meat  on.  This  man  may
bee  judged  to  have  beene  of  no  great  either  wit  or
care  ;  for  it  is  certainly  reported,  that  oftentimes  meeting
his  owne  slaves  comming  out  of  the  Countrie  to  his
house  in  Puerto  Rico  with  store  of  gold,  hee  did  not
know  them  to  be  his  owne,  till  themselves  told  him
so  ;  and  yet  this  man  dyed  so  very  rich,  that  he  left
every  of  his  three  sonnes  a  hundreth  thousand  Duckets  ;
insomuch  that  the  youngest  of  them  being  in  Spaine
upon  the  dispatch  of  some  businesse,  which  his  father
Vanitie  of  had  left  unsettled,  was  there  thought  of  state  so  good,
riches.  t^Rt  a  Marquesse  thought  his  daughter  well  bestowed
upon  him  in  marriage.  But  see  how  nothing  will  last
where  God  with  his  preserving  blessing  doth  not  keepe
things  together.  For  at  this  day,  scarce  is  there  any
remainder  left  of  all  his  riches,  and  this  now  most  poore
though  great  Lady,  not  being  able  to  proportion  her
selfe  to  the  lownesse  of  her  fortune,  and  besides  vexed
with  her  husbands  ill  conditions,  hath  by  authoritie  left
him,  and  having  entered  religious  profession,  is  at  this
present  in  a  Nunnerie  in  Saint  Domingo.

I  have  beene  very  inquisitive  of  the  best  observers,
and  most  able  to  judge  among  ours,  that  have  upon
occasion  travailed  into  the  inparts  of  the  Hand.  They
The  soile.  doe  agreeingly  tell  me,  first  that  their  wayes  are  very
myrie,  or  rather  dirtie,  as  proceeding  of  mold  rather  then
gravell  or  sand  ;  now,  the  proverbe  in  England  is,  that
that  Countrie  is  best  for  the  Byder,  that  is  most  cumber-
some to  the  Rider.  Secondly,  the  grasse  and  herbage
they  meet  withall  everywhere  is  very  proud  and  high,
though  somewhat  course,  which  argueth  a  lustinesse,  and
strength  of  fatnesse  in  the  soile,  and  which  wanteth  onely
store  of  mouthes  to  over-come  that  luxuriant  pride,  and
to  bring  it  to  the  finenesse  which  we  most  commend  in
England,  which  is  made  most  probable,  by  that,  which
in  the  third  place  they  report  of  their  experience,  that  the

88

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1596.

soile  is  a  black  mold,  underlaid  within  some  two  foot,
with  a  laire  of  reddish  clay,  which  is  one  of  the  most
infallible  marks  by  which  our  English  Grasiers  know
their  battle  and  feeding  grounds.  The  whole  Hand  is
delightfully  and  pleasurably  diversified  with  Hills  and  [IV-  V1-
Vallies. Among  the  Hills  there is  one  eminent  above  II7I-J

the  rest,  called  the  Loquilla,  commended  with  the  M.  Loquilla.
greatest  plentie  and  riches  of  mynes.  And  yet  none  of
the  Rivers  that  I  can  heare  of,  have  their  heads  from
thence,  which  perhaps  may  bee  the  reason,  why  it  above
the  rest  is  lesse  wasted.  For  they  say  that  in  the  other
Hills  also  there  are  veines  found,  of  whose  povertie  no
man  needeth  to  complaine.  This  Hill  which  they  call
Loquilla,  is  placed  Easterly  above  Luisa.  The  Vallies
are  much  wooddy,  but  in  very  many  places  interlaced
with  goodly  large  Playnes  and  spacious  Lawnes.  The
woods  are  not  onely  underlings  (as  in  the  lesser  Hand  Woods  and
for  the  most  part  they  are)  but  timber  trees  of  goodly  Tmber-
talnesse  and  stature,  fit  for  the  building  of  ships,  and
of  every  part  of  them.  For  not  to  speake  of  a  ship
which  wee  our  selves  found  here  a  building  towards  the
burthen  of  a  hundreth ;  the  great  Bougonia,  a  ship  of
a  thousand,  having  lost  her  Masts  at  Sea,  had  them  all
made  here  of  the  timber  of  this  Hand,  her  mayne  Mast
being  of  two  trees  onely,  and  being  there  and  all  other
wayes  fitted  for  Spaine,  was  even  upon  the  point
of  putting  forth  of  this  Harbour,  when  Sir  Francis
Drake  and  Sir  John  Hawkins  came  hither  with  an
honorable  intent  to  take  her  and  the  foure  Millions,
which  shee  brought  hither  from  the  Havana.  For  this
ship  was  the  Admirall  of  the  .fleet,  which  that  yeere
went  from  Terra  firma;  and  being  taken  with  a  storme
at  Sea,  and  having  lost  her  Masts,  with  much  adoe
recovered  this  Harbour,  and  here  was  againe  fitted.  But
the  Queenes  Navie  (upon  advertisement  of  this  accident)  Great  sh}P
came  so  just  in  the  nick,  that  they  were  forced  to  sinke  s*?nke  m.ff.
her  in  the  Harbour,  and  that  with  so  great  haste,  that  Jand  a  hau-e  0j
the  passengers had  not time  to  fetch  their  clothes,  but  treasure.

89

A.D.
I596.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

lading  and  victuals  and  all  was  lost.  Some  of  the  ribs
of  this  great  Beast  we  found  here,  but  the  marrow  and
sweetnesse  of  her  was  gone ;  for  shee  brought  in  her
foure  millions  and  a  halfe  of  treasure,  for  the  wafting
whereof  those  Frigats,  which  Sir  Francis  burned  in  this
Harbour,  were  purposely  sent.  For  while  Sir  Francis
was  watering  at  Guadalupe,  some  of  his  fleet  discovered
the  passage  of  these  Frigats  by  Dominica ;  which  good
newes  (as  truly  they  were  very  good)  assured  Sir  Francis
(as  he  openly  told  the  fleet)  that  the  treasure  was  not
yet  gone  from  Saint  John  de  Puerto  Rico,  for  as  much
as  he  assured  himselfe  that  these  ships  were  going  to
The  playnes.  fetch  it  home.  The  Playnes  and  Lawnes  of  the  mayne
Hand  are  graced  with  much  varietie  of  many  kindes  of
fruit :  for  besides  the  great  Countries  of  ground  where
their  Heards  roame  with  such  uncontrolled  licence,  as
that  they  grow  almost  wilde,  the  champaine  which  they
have  chosen  to  place  their  Stancies  and  Ingenios  upon,
are  richly  laden  with  Ginger  and  Sugar-cane.  Their
Ingenios  are  commonly  upon  some  River,  or  neere  some
moore-marrish  and  waterish  places,  for  in  places  of  that
qualitie  doe  their  Sugar-canes  prosper  best.  And  besides,
there  is  much  use  of  water  for  their  Mills,  and  other
works,  though  most  commonly  their  Mills  goe  with  the
strength  of  men  and  horses,  as  I  understand,  like  our
Horse-mills  in  England,  which  if  I  had  seene  my  selfe
I  should  have  beene  better  able,  and  consequently  more
willing,  to  have  reported  to  you  the  manner  and  cunning
of  the  same.  They  that  have  beene  eye-witnesses,  doe
with  great  wonder  and  commendation  speake  of  them.
Their  Stansias  are  more  inwardly  placed  in  the  Countrie,
and  yet  a  convenient  neerenesse  to  some  River  is  desired,
for  more  convenient  carriage  of  their  Ginger  to  Puerto
Rico,  whence  they  vent  their  commodities  into  other
Countries;  which  I  take  to  bee  some  part  of  the  cause
why  more  follow  Ginger  than  Sugar  workes,  because  their
Stansias  doe  not  need  such  choise  of  place,  and  therefore
the poorer  may  more  easily  come by them,  which yet

90

Herds  almost
wilde.

Ginger  and
Sugar.

Stansias  for
Ginger.

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  ad.

1596.

also more  easily they set upon,  because  much needeth

not to set upon the commoditie of Ginger. I have

heretofore  said  in generall,  that Sugar and Ginger  are  Ginger  and

the  greatest  knowne  commodities  of  this  Hand.  "TV  ^

A  third  commoditie  of  the  Hand besides  Ginger  and  commodities.

Sugar,  I  did  before  note  to  bee  Hides. Whereof  without  Hides.

contradiction there is very  great  store. I have  beene

told by the Spaniard,  that that same Chereno, whose  One  man

Countrie  is  neere  to  the  Laguada  of  the  quite  contrarie  havingnooo.

side to Cape  Roxo, is generally reported to feede to  ^fcfJeeT

the  number  of  twelve  thousand  head  of  Cattle. Where-  are  neater

upon  we  may  easily  conjecture,  how  infinite  the  number  then  the

of  Cattell  in this  Hand is, seeing  in the  Westerly  end  English.

thereof,  which is  held farre  worse for  feeding  then  the

Easterly, neere  Saint  Johns  head,  there  is  so  incredible

abundance. Once,  it is  generally  spoken  and  beleeved,

that by reason of this over-flowing of  Beeves, it is

lawfull  for  any  man  to  kill  what  he  needeth  for  his  use,

if  onely  hee  bee  so  honest  as  to  bring  the  skins  to  the

proper  owners. Now,  these  Hides  must  rise  to  a  huge

summe of  riches,  considering  that  their  Cattell  are  farre

larger,  then  any  Countrie  that  I  know  in  England  doth

yeeld. For  their  Kine that I have seene  here,  are  for

goodlinesse  both  of  heads and bodies comparable with

our English Oxen. And  I  wot  not  how  that  kinde  of  Beevesprosper

beast  hath  specially  a  liking  to  these  Southerly  parts  of  there  better

•  then  horses

the  world,  above  their  Horses,  none  of  which  I  have  Their  hones^
seene  by  much  so  tall  and  goodly  as  ordinarily  they  are
in  England.  They  are  well  made,  and  well  metalled,
and  good  store  there  are  of  them,  but  me  thinks,  there
are  many  things  wanting  in  them,  which  are  ordinarie
in  our  English  light  horses.  They  are  all  Trotters,  nor
doe  I  remember  that  I  have  seene  above  one  Ambler,
and  that  a  very  little  sidling  Nagge.  But  it  may  be,  if
there  were  better  Breeders,  they  would  have  better  and
more  goodly  increase,  yet  these  are  good  enough  for
Hackneys,  to  which  use  onely  almost  they  are  imployed.
For  Sheepe  and Goates  I  cannot  say  that  there  are  any

91

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

great flocks,  and  of  the  two,  fewer  Sheepe  then  Goates.

Goates.  For  I have  seene and tasted  of many Goates,  but to

[IV.  vi.  mv  remembrance, I did not see one Sheepe,  yet (say

IT72-J  they) that  the Hand is not without reasonable flocks:

and  I have beene told so,  by  them  who  have  received

information from their owne eyes. Neither can this

scant  of  sheepe  be  laid  upon  the  nature  of  the  soile,  as

being unfit or unwilling  to feed that sober harmlesse

Why  sheepe creature,  but it  proceedeth rather  of  a  woolvish kinde

a™  scarcf- of  wilde Dogs  which  are  bred in  the  woods,  and  there

Woolvish  .  &  .  .  ,_,.  .  '  .

Dogs.  £oe  in  great  companies  together. 1  his  commeth  to  passe,

by reason  that  these  Dogs  finde  in  the  woods  sufficient
sustenance, and preferre that wilde libertie before
domesticall, and to themselves much more profitable
The  wild  dogs  service. These  Dogs  live  of  Crabs; I  meane  not  fruits
live  of  Crabs.  Qf  trees: but  an  Animal,  a  living  and  sensible  creature,
in  feeding whereupon, even men finde a  delight, not
onely  a  contentednesse. These  woods  are  full  of  these
Crabs, in quantitie bigger then ever I saw any Sea-
Crabs  in  England,  and  in  such  multitudes  that  they  have
Description  of  Berries, like  Conies in  English  Warrens. They  are  in
these  land- shape  not  different  from Sea-Crabs,  for ought I could

crabs,  queere  r  .  ^ T  ,  ,  .  r  \  r

if  they  bee  not  perceive. ror  Y  speake not  this  out or  report, but  or
Tortoises. my  owne  sensible experience. I  have  seene  multitudes
of them both here, and at Dominica. The whitest
whereof  (for some are ugly blacke) some  of  our  men
Their  did catch and eate with good liking,  and  without  any

experiment,  harme,  that  ever  I  heard  complaint  of.  At  our  first
comming  to  Puerto  Rico,  the  Dogs  of  the  Citie  every
night  kept  a  fearfull  howling,  and  in  the  day  time,  you
should  see  them  goe  in  flocks  into  the  woods  along  the
Sea  side.  This  wee  tooke  at  first  a  kinde  bemoaning
of  their  Masters  absence,  and  leaving  of  them :  but
when  within  awhile  they  were  acquainted  with  us,  who
at  first  were  strangers  to  them,  and  so  began  to  leave
the  howling  by  night,  yet  still  continued  their  daily
resort  to  the  woods,  and  that  in  companies.  We  under-
stood  by  asking, that  their  resort  thither  was to  hunt,

92

more

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1596

and  eate  Crabs,  whereof  in  the  woods  they  should  finde

store. This then is the sustenance which the wilde

Dogs  of  Puerto  Rico  finde  in  their  woods ;  which  either

fayling  them  sometimes,  or  out  of  a  woolvish  disposition

they  get  by  living  apart  from  men,  they  fall  upon  the

sheepe,  whereof  they  have  made  great  waste ;  but  which

easily  might be repayred, if  the Spaniards would bee

content, to sweat  a  little,  or to be  a  little wearie in

killing  of  these  Dogs. Their  Goates  live  more  securely,  Goates

because  they  love  clifFes  of  Rocks,  or  the  tops  of  Hils,  safe  then

and therefore they  are out  of the ordinarie haunt of  ^eepe.

these murderous Dogs, by  reason that their ordinarie

foode  the  Crabs  are  most  usually  in  bottoms,  and  along

the  Sea  side. Besides  Sheep  and  Goats  there  is  reasonable

good store of Swine, which in these Westerly and  Swine.

Southerly  Hands yeeld most sweet Porke. I doe not

remember  that  I  have  seene  here  either  Hare  or  Conie,

but here is store  of excellent Poultrie,  as Cocks  and  Fowles.

Hens and Capons, some Turkies and Ginny-hens,

Pidgeons  in  mervailous  abundance ; not  in  Dove-houses  Pidgeons  in

as  with us, but  which breed and build in  Trees,  they  Trees.

are both  of  great  number  and  goodnesse. For  besides

other places, there  are two or  three little Hands  hard

by  Puerto  Rico, neere to the mouth of  Toa,  where a

Boat  may  goe  in an  evening  or  morning,  and  suddenly

take  nine,  ten,  or  a  dozen  dozen ; the  chiefest  of  these

three is  called (as  I  have  heard)  the  Governours  Hand.

I have not  marked  any  store  of  Fowle  upon  this  little

Hand,  nor  have  I  heard  of  more  by  any  that  have  beene

in  the  mayne  Hand. Parrots  and  Parrachetoes  are  here,  Parrots  as

as Crowes and Dawes in England ; I have ordinarily  Crowes.

seene  them  flie  in  flocks,  and  except  it  bee  some  extra-

ordinarie  talkative,  they  are  not  here  much  regarded,  as

it  should  seeme.

Now,  fruits  of  the  Hand  are  abundant  in  number  and  Fruits.
measure,  very  excellent ; Potatoes  are  ordinarie. Their
Pines  are in  shape  like a  Pine-apple,  and  of  this  like-  Pines.
nesse, I thinke, these had their  names, but neither in

93

A.D.
1596.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Mammeis.

feeling  or  taste  are  they  any  thing  like;  for  that  where-
with this  Pine  is  inclosed  is  not  wood,  but  soft,  that
you  may  squease  it  in  your  hand,  and  so  apt  to  bee
mellow,  that  it  will  not  keepe  long,  whereas  a  wooddie
Pine-apple  is  of  an  exceeding  durance  and  lasting.  The
taste  of  this  fruit  is  very  delicious,  so  as  it  quickly
breedeth  a  fulnesse.  For  I  cannot  liken  it  in  the  palate
to  any  (me  thinks)  better  then  to  very  ripe  Straw-
berries and  Creame,  the  rather  if  a  man  have  alreadie
eaten  almost  his  belly  full :  for  then  they  much  resemble
a  Pine ;  I  have  seene  some  a  quarter  of  a  yard  long
at  least,  and  in  proportionate  thicknesse,  to  bee  like  a
Pine-apple ;  it  groweth  upon  an  hearb  like  an  Artichoke.
Their  Mammeis  are  of  the  colour  of  a  very  darke
russitting  apple,  or  a  leather-coat,  of  the  bignesse  of  a
great  Costard,  the  rinde  of  it  as  thicke  or  thicker  then
the  barke  of  a  Sallow,  which  being  easily  pulled  off  dis-
covered a  yellow,  but  well  tasting  meat,  something  like
a  Carrot  roote,  but  much  better.  Within  this  meat,
there  are  two  or  three  great  rugged  ill-shaped  stones,
which  (as  I  remember)  have  kirnels  in  them.  Their
Guiavas  are  a  lesser  fruit,  as  bigge  as  a  Peach,  and
without  not  much  unlike,  but  within  not  solid  as  the
Mammeis,  or  as  an  Apple  is,  but  full  of  such  little
seedes  as  a  Goose-berry  hath,  not  so  greenish,  but
inclining  to  a  sanguine  colour,  the  taste  of  this  is  (me
thought)  like  to  a  very  ripe  great  white  Plum :  this
fruit  is  (which  a  man  would  not  thinke)  a  remedie
against  the  flux,  and  so  are  their  Papaies,  a  fruit  like
an  Apple  of  a  waterish  welsh  taste.  They  have  Plums
blacke  and  white,  their  stones  much  bigger,  and  their
meat  much  lesse  then  in  England,  and  these  also  stay
Wilde  grapes,  the  flux.  And  so  doe  their  wilde  Grapes,  which  are  a
fruit  growing  in  Clusters,  and  therein  onely  (me  thinkes)
like  Grapes,  they  are  round,  and  as  great  as  a  good
Musket-bullet,  and  yet  have  they  very  little  meat  upon
them,  for  their  stone  (if  that  which  is  not  hard  may
bee  called  a  stone)  is  exceeding  great  for  the  proportion

94

Guiavas.

That  and
Papaies  good
against  Jiux.
Plums.

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1596.

of  the fruit, insomuch that  the meat seemeth to bee
but  the  rinde of  this  stone. A stone  I  call  it though
you  may  put  it  together  with  your  finger,  but  it  hath  a  [IV-  vi-
bitterish kirnell in it, and that  which is  without  it  is  n73-J

meat,  and  that  of  a  delightfull  saporous  taste.  Their
Plantines  are  a  fruit  which  grow  on  a  shrub  betwixt  an  Plantlnes.
hearb  and  a  tree,  but  it  is  commonly  called,  a  tree  of
the  height  of  a  man,  the  stem  of  it  as  bigge  as  a  mans
thigh,  the  fruit  it  selfe,  of  the  bignesse  and  shape  of
a  Goates  home,  it  groweth  yellowish  and  mellow  being
ripe  either  upon  the  tree,  or  with  keeping,  and  then
eaten  raw  or  roasted,  it  is  a  good  meat,  comming  neere
to  the  rellish  of  an  Apple-John,  or  a  Duson  that  hath
beene  kept  till  it  is  over-ripe,  saving  that  me  thought
I  still  found  some  taste  of  a  roote  in  it,  the  meat  of  it
is  lapped  up  in  a  thin  skin,  which  being  scored  the  long
way  with  a  knife,  easily  delivereth  what  is  within  it.
Their  Coker-trees  please  the  eye,  as  well  as  their  Nuts  Cocos.
doe  the  taste.  The  body  of  them  is  but  slender,  no
where  so  bigge  as  a  mans  middle,  and  upwards  growing
proportionably  lesse,  till  they  are  risen  some  thirtie  or
fortie  foot  high  without  sprig  or  bough,  then  breake
out  their  boughs  all  at  once,  every  one  whereof  is  just
like  a  goodly  Ostridge  feather ;  their  leaves  are  so
cunningly  set  together,  every  one  whereof  alone  is  some-
thing like  a  Sedge  or  the  leafe  of  a  wilde  Lilly.  Under
this  bush  which  is  the  head  of  the  tree,  do  the  Coker-nuts
grow,  some  fortie  on  a  tree  round  about  the  Bole,  some
yard  downward  from  where  the  branches  breake  out.
These  trees  are  a  very  great  grace  to  the  Citie  of  Puerto
Rico,  and  very  many  there  were  found  in  it :  and  he
that  hath  seene  this  may  somewhat  conceive  of  the  forme
of  a  Palmeto  tree,  for  in  shape  they  are  not  unlike.
This  Palmeto  tree,  while  it  is  young  (and  yet  of  good  Palmetos.
yeeres)  is  much  of  it  selfe  meat,  and  tasted  (me  thought)
like  a  Wall-nut,  but  somewhat  bitterish ;  when  it  is  old
they  say  it  beareth  fruit,  the  Date,  one  of  the  best  fruits
in  my  judgement;  I saw  not  any  fruit  upon  any  of  the

95

A.D.

1596.

Other  fruits.
Huge  Citrons.

Oranges.

Pepper.

Trees  diversi-
fied in  fruits ',
greened  ripe,
and  buds  at

once.

Cassavy
bread.

Cassavie
described.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Palmetoes  that  I  saw,  and  therefore  this  shall  be  said
onely  upon  the  report  of  others.  Besides  these  fruits
the  Hand  yeelded  Figs,  Pomegranates,  Muske-millions,
Pome-citrons  very  faire  (as  my  selfe  saw)  but  it  is
incredible  almost  that  is  reported  of  them  by  men  of
good  credit;  that  their  Pome-citrons  grow  to  so  huge
greatnesse,  as  that  a  very  little  number  three  or  foure
of  them  will  lade  a  horse.  Limons  I  did  not  see  any,
yet  they  say  there  are  some,  but  of  Limes  the  number
is  numberlesse ;  and  as  for  Oranges,  truly  I  thinke  they
are  the  best  tasted,  and  most  goodly  in  the  world.  For
both  their  sweet  and  sowre  Oranges  are  full  of  most
delicate  and  taste-pleasing  juyce,  and  besides  they  are
the  goodliest  both  in  colour  and  greatnesse,  that  ever
I  saw.  They  have  Pepper  also  growing  upon  trees,  the
Pepper  it  selfe  is  a  little  seede  of  colour  twixt  white  and
yellow,  and  inclosed  in  a  bagge  which  sometime  is  round
like  a  Ball,  sometime  it  runneth  out  in  a  picked  length
like  a  fruit,  which  we  gather  in  our  Gardens  in  England,
and  eate  as  a  sallet  with  Mutton.  This  pepper  is  much
hotter  and  stronger  than  the  blacke  pepper  used  with
us  in  our  Countrie.  These  fruits  and  many  more  grow
upon  trees,  and  common  to  them  all  it  is,  and  I  thinke
to  all  the  fruits  of  the  Hand,  that  the  same  tree  at  once
beareth  buds,  greene  fruit,  and  ripe  fruits,  and  often
withall  seedeth.

Now  if  any  man  thinke  that  wee  have  found  meates
in  good  store,  but  yet  want  bread  and  drinke,  it  may  at
one  word  bee  answered,  that  the  industrious  and  painefull
can  want  no  store  of  either.  For  first  of  all  their  Cassavie
specially  new,  and  carefully  dressed  is  good  bread,  and
will  keepe  so  well  that  ships  that  goe  hence  to  Spaine
are  victualled  with  it  to  the  good  liking  of  passengers.
This  Cassavie  is  the  roote  of  a  small  tree,  like,  me
thought,  to  an  over-growne  Hyssope  stalke,  or  a  young
Sallow,  but  that  the  leaves  are  not  so  broad,  but  by  much
thicker  upon  the  branches  of  Cassavie :  this  root  is  very
full of  liquor,  which must be carefully  pressed forth,

96

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1596.

before  the  dryer  part  bee  fit  to  make  bread.  For  the
roote  eaten  with  the  juyce,  or  the  juyce  by  it  selfe,
bringeth  a  painfull  swelling  in  the  belly,  whereof  death
doth  often  follow.  Wherefore  the  Spaniards  generally
hold  it  for  a  kinde  of  poyson.  Yet  our  men  (I  am  told)
meeting  with  the  rootes  unpressed,  and  mistaking  them
for  Potatoes  (whereby  you  may  conjecture  their  shape)
have  eaten  them  without  after  feeling  any  mortall  dis-  The  juyce  not
temper.  And  to  a  body  whose  naturall  heat  is  able  to  poyson.
overcome  their  cruditie  and  rawnesse,  there  is  happily
no  present  danger,  for  they  tell  me  that  of  this  juyce
sodden,  there  is  made  a  prettie  kinde  of  drinke  somewhat
like  small  Ale.  The  bread  which  they  make  of  this
roote  is  very  passing  white,  not  kneaded  into  loaves,  but
rolled  out  in  Cakes  of  a  reasonable  thicknesse,  yet  may
they  be  better  called  thin,  and  of  such  breadth  that  they
lap  them  in  foldes  one  upon  another.  Besides  their
Cassavie,  they  have  Mais,  which  maketh  a  much  finer  Mays.
bread,  and  used  of  the  better  sort.  There  are  two  sorts
of  Maiz,  the  lesser  they  say  not  unlike  to  Rice,  in
proportion  and  bignesse  and  taste;  this  I  never  saw
either  growing  or  raw,  but  I  have  seene  it  in  the  dish,
and  at  first  did  take  it  for  Rice,  saving  that  mee  thought
it  was  something  over-swollen ;  they  that  eate  it  said,
it  tasted  like  Rice.  The  bigger  sort  of  Maiz  I  have
seene  growing,  and  it  is  either  the  same  or  exceeding
like  to  the  graine  which  we  call  Ginny  wheat ;  it  groweth
up  with  a  knotted  stalke  like  a  Reed,  with  large  scattered
leaves ;  it  riseth  to  a  fadome  and  a  halfe  at  least  in
height,  and  at  the  very  top  shooteth  out  the  graine.
Besides  Maiz  and  Cassavie,  there  is  good  store  of  Rice  Rice.
growing  in  the  Hand,  and  where  Rice  will  grow,  who
will  make  a  question  of  Corne.  But  to  put  it  without
contradiction,  that  Corne  will  come  up  with  good  increase,
experience  hath  determined  the  question.  For  that  same
Mulato  Chereno  (whom  I  mentioned  before)  did  make
experience  and  did  sow  Corne,  which  he  reaped  with
good  increase.  But  because  it  was  painefull  to  follow
XVI  97  g

A.D.
1596

[IV.  vi.

Drinkes.

Sensitive
plant.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

husbandrie  and  tillage,  and  (forsooth)  Cassavie  and  Maiz
74"J  would  serve,  the  Spaniards  would  none,  nay  this  Molato
halfe  borne  a  slave,  would  not  bee  at  the  paines  to
continue  tillage.  For  drinks,  the  Spaniard  doth  here,
as  in  Spaine  hee  doth,  use  water  for  most  of  his  drinke,
which  in  so  hot  a  climate,  would  well  agree  with  the
English  after  some  acquaintance;  yet  the  Spaniard  hath
two  other  sorts  of  drinke,  the  one  called  Guacapo,  made
of  Molasses  (that  is,  the  coursest  of  their  Sugar)  and
some  Spices ;  the  other  kinde,  and  used  by  the  better
sort  of  them,  is  called  Alo :  which  is  a  kinde  of  Bragget
made  with  many  hot  spices.  And  if  both  these  fayled,
yet  have  they  good  store  of  wines,  indeed  brought  in
from  other  Countries ;  not  that  this  Hand  will  not  nourish
Vines :  for  I  have  seene  some  grow  here  in  Puerto  Rico
very  flourishingly.  But  I  have  heard  the  King  will  not
suffer  them  to  plant  and  dresse  Vineyards,  as  a  matter
of  policie.

I  might  here,  and  so  would  I  make  an  end  of  speaking
of  the  fruits  of  this  Hand  (for  me  thinks  what  hath  beene
said,  sheweth  it  to  be  selfe  sufficient  to  live  well  and
happily)  but  their  Yerva  viva  will  not  have  me  forget  it.
This  hearbe  is  a  little  contemptible  weed  to  looke  upon,
with  a  long  woodden  stalke  creeping  upon  the  ground,
and  seldome  lifting  it  selfe  above  a  handfull  high  from
the  ground.  But  it  hath  a  propertie,  which  confoundeth
my  understanding,  and  perhaps  will  seeme  strange  in  the
way  of  Philosophers,  who  have  denyed  every  part  of
sense  to  any  plant ;  yet  this  certainly  seemeth  to  have
feeling.  For  if  you  lay  your  ringer  or  a  sticke  upon  the
leaves  of  it,  not  onely  that  very  piece  which  you  touched,
but  that  that  is  neere  to  it,  will  contract  it  selfe,  and  run
together,  as  if  it  were  presently  dead  and  withered,  nor
onely  the  leaves  but  the  very  sprigs,  being  touched,  will
so  disdainfully  withdraw  themselves,  as  if  they  would
slip  themselves  rather  then  be  touched,  in  which  state
both  leafe  and  sprig  will  continue  a  good  while,  before
it returne  to the former  greene and  flourishing  forme.

98

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  ad.

1596.

And  they  say,  that  so  long  as  the  partie  which  touched
it  standeth  by  it,  it  will  not  open,  but  after  his  departure
it  will,  this  last  I  did  not  my  selfe  observe :  and  if  it
be  so,  it  must  be  more  then  sense,  whence  such  a  sullen-
nesse  can  proceed ;  but  for  the  former,  I  have  my  selfe
beene  often  an  eye-witnesse  to  my  great  wonder,  for  it
groweth  in  very  many  places  in  the  little  Hand.  His
Lordship  made  some  of  it  bee  put  in  pots  with  earth,
and  yet  it  liveth,  and  how  farre  it  will  so  continue  is
uncertaine.  There  hath  beene  Cinamon  and  something  Cinamon.
else  given  me  as  fruits  of  the  Hands,  but  I  doe  thinke
they  are  but  rarities  at  the  most,  and  therefore  they  shall
not  come  in  my  bill.  But  now  to  returne  to  the  slow
steps  we  made  towards  the  Hands  of  the  Acores.

§•  v.

Accidents  by  Sea  in  their  way  to  the  Azores
and  there.

N Saint Bartholomewes eve wee had store of
lightning  and  thunder,  which  besides  the  obser-
vation, put  us  more  out  of  doubt  of  our  neerer
approach  to the  Bermuda. The next  day  about  noone
wee  began  to  steere  East  North-east  and  better. Upon
Friday  the  five  and  twentieth,  wee were  melted  with  a
greater  and  more  smothering  calme  then  any  time  before ;
and  yet (which made  it  strangest)  wee  had  out  of  the
North-west  higher  Seas,  then  before  that  time  I  had  ever  High  Seas.
seene, in the  greatest  windes that we had had. The
hugenesse  of  this Sea was  perceived not onely  by  the
view  of  our  sight,  but  rather  by  the  extraordinarie  heeling
of  our  ship, certainly as much  or  more  impatient  of  a
high Sea in a calme, as of  any  other weather. This
calme was  so  extremely hot, that wee  were  in  hope  it  Hot  calme
would  bee  like  other  extreames,  of  no  long  continuance ;  continuhg
but  behold  it  lasted  obstinately  thirteene dayes, saving tr  eene
that  sometimes  there  would  be  some  shew  of  a  gale,  but
it would so instantly  and  frowardly  leave us,  as if  it

99

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGXtlMES

1596.

had  beene  come  onely  to let us  see  wee  needed  not  to

despaire. There  had  beene often  speech  of  a  Current,

that  wee  were  to  have,  and  some  thought  that  they  had

found  it,  the  most  durst  not  be  apprehensive. But  upon

Wednesday the thirtieth, it began to be cleere : for

though  the  winde  was not  worthy  to  be  called  so,  nor

scarce  by  the  name  of  a  breath,  and besides  so  narrow,

that  we  stood upon a bowling, yet we  were  found  in

that  last  passed artificiall day,  to  have  run  above fiftie

leagues at the least. For whereas upon Tuesday  wee

were  by observation found to bee almost precisely  in

An  apparent thirtie two :  upon  Wednesday at noone, wee had the

Current  in sunne  m  thirtie  three,  and  two  terces,  and  eight  minutes.
3  2 decrees .  ^

So  that  in  foure  and  twentie  houres  we  had  raysed  one

degree and  fortie  eight minutes, which if  we had run

due  North  or  South, had risen to  about  foure  or five

and thirtie  leagues. But  seeing our course was three

parts  of  the  time at  East  North-east,  and  East  and  by

North, the  ship  could  not  bee allowed  lesse  way,  then

fiftie  leagues  at  the  least ;  and  this  being  without  winde,

argueth  a  violent  current,  and  the  rather  because  for  the

time  we had a hard Sea. This was made yet more

certaine  by  observation  of  the  Pole-star  upon  Thursday

at  night. This  opinion  for  a  Current,  was  upon  Saturday

Sept.  2.  made  undoubted,  for  the  substance  of  the  thing,

I  meane  that  there was  a  Current,  but  the  circumstance

seemed  to  varie  somthing. For  the  Current  was then

judged  to set rather  to  the  East  &  by South,  though

this would fill the former observations with greater

difficulties. This  was  perceived by many  drags, which

[IV.  vi.  howsoever  the  ship  scaped,  yet  they  still  runne  or  were

11 75-]  carried  to  the East  Southerly. And then many  other

things  purposely  cast  into  the  Sea  to  make  further  triall,

all went the  same way and  that a good pace  though

directly  ahead  the  ship. And  yet  farther  if  there  were

any  breath  at  all,  it  was  at  South-east,  so  that  they  went

against  the  winde  that  was.

And now  I come  to that  the  remembrance whereof

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1596.

rather  then  present  apprehension  yet  maketh  me  quake,
like  the  man  that  dyed  upon  the  fearfull  knowledge
of  how  great  danger  he  had  passed  at  Rochester  bridge.
It  was  a  fearfull  storme,  which  I  truly  not  knowing
how  dangerfull  it  was,  feared  not  much  while  we  were  Ignorance
in  it,  but  since  hearing  old  Sea-men  and  of  long  experi-  beneficiaU-
ence  speake  of  it,  I  perceive  it  is  good  to  be  ignorant
sometime.  Upon  Thursday  the  seventh  of  September,
the  gale  began  to  be  very  fresh  and  to  keepe  the  sailes
stifFe  from  the  Masts,  and  so  continued  all  that  day.
Upon  Friday  it  began  to  speake  yet  lowder,  and  to
whistle  a  good  in  the  shrowdes,  insomuch  that  our
Master  made  the  Drablers  bee  taken  off,  and  before
night  it  had  blowne  the  fore-top-saile  in  pieces  by  the  A  terrible
board;  this  was  taken  for  the  beginning  of  a  storme,  and  storme'
the  storme  it  selfe  was  looked  for :  which  came  indeed
about  the  shutting  in  of  the  day,  with  such  furie  and  rage,
as  none  could  say  it  stole  upon  us  unawares.  For  I  am
out  of  doubt  that  I  had  never  heard  any  winde  so  high.
One  of  our  Bonnets  had  beene  taken  in  in  the  evening,
and  the  other  was  rent  off  with  the  furie  of  the  storme.
And  thus  (for  our  mayne-top-saile  was  taken  in  and  the
top-mast  taken  downe)  bearing  onely  a  bare  corse  of  each,
if  the  ship  had  not  beene  exceeding  strongly  sided,  shee
could  not  have  indured  so  rough  weather.  For  often-
times the  Sea  would  ship  in  waves  into  her  of  three  or
foure  Tunne  of  water,  which  (the  ship  being  leakie  within
board)  falling  often,  was  as  much  as  both  the  pumps  were
able  to  cast  out  againe,  though  they  went  continually  all
night,  and  till  noone  the  next  day  were  never  throughly
suckt,  so  that  if  any  leake  had  sprung  upon  us  under
water,  it  could  not  have  beene  chosen,  but  shee  must  have
foundered,  seeing  the  pumpes  were  hardly  able  to  rid  the
water  that  was  cast  in  above  hatches.  The  Missen-saile
had  beene  in  the  evening  well  furled  (for  the  winde  came
upon  the  starboard  quarter)  and  yet  the  storme  had
caught  it,  and  with  such  violence  and  furie  rent  it,  that
with  much  adoe  the  Missen-yard  was  hailed  downe,  and  so

IOI

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

the  quarter  decke  and  poope  saved  from  danger  of  renting
up. All  this  was  in  the  night,  which  made  it  much  more
hidious,  specially  in  the  fore-end  of  the  night  before  the
Moone  got  up. The  winde  continued  in  this  excesse  of
violence  till  midnight,  and  then  abated  hee  something,  but
then  began  the  effect  of  his  blowing  to  shew  it  selfe,  for
Hlgh-swolne  then  the  Sea  began  to  worke,  and  swell  farre  higher  then
before. His  Lordships  ship  is  a  very  goodly  one,  and  yet
would  shee  bee  as  it  were  in  a  pit,  and  round  about  vast
mountaines  of  water,  so  that  a  man  might  leave  out  the
Undique rest  of  the  verse,  and  say  onely  undique  pontus. For  I
pontus.  protest,  besides  that  which  was  over  our  heads,  our  pro-

spect any  other  way  was  quickly  determined,  with  waves,
in  my  conscience,  higher  then  our  mayne-top.  And  that
(which  is  strangest)  round  about  us :  for  the  Sea  came
upon  every  point  of  the  Compasse,  so  that  the  poore  ship,
nor  they  that  directed  and  cunned  her,  could  not  tell  how
to  cunne  her  to  bee  safe  from  the  breaking  of  these  vast
waves  upon  her.  This  continued  all  night :  and  though
the  winde  fell  by  little  and  little,  yet  the  Sea  was  so  light,
that  all  Saturday  it  was  not  quieted,  so  that  though  out  of
a  storme,  yet  were  wee  still  in  a  stormy  Sea,  insomuch  that
our  mayne-top-mast  was  broken.  By  Sunday  we  were
come  to  have  reasonable  weather,  and  rather  too  little  then
too  much  wind.  And  upon  Monday  being  the  eleventh
of  September,  wee  were  not  much  from  a  new  calme,
which  wee  could  not  with  much  more  patience  have
endured  then  a  good  storme ;  for  then  wee  began  to
looke  out  for  land,  and  now  to  come  so  neere,  what
so  long  wee  had  longed  for.  After  the  storme,  the
Admirall  found  himselfe  all  alone,  and  so  were  we  the
most  part  of  the  next  day,  but  towards  evening,  came
the  new  Frigat  to  us.  And  a  sterne  her  there  was  a  ship
seene,  which  within  a  day  or  two  afterward,  the  Samson
came  and  told  us,  was  her  selfe.  With  day  the  fifteenth
Flores  of  September,  we  had  the  South-west  side  of  it  in  sight,

descried. anc[  bore  jn  therewith  till  noone. His  Lordship  had  no
meaning to make any forcible attempt against it, nor

102

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1596.

to  stay  longer,  then  to  take  in  some  fresh  victuals ;  for
which  purpose,  hee  sent  the  Boat  off  with  an  old  Portu-
gall,  and  an  African  of  Mozambique,  who  bearing  a  flagge
of  truce,  should  give  the  Danders  to  understand  what  his
Lordships  pleasure  was,  that  if  they  would  let  him  have
things  for  his  money,  he  would  not  use  them  worse  then
in  former  times  they  had  had  experience  of  him.  With-
all  he  gave  the  Boat  commandement,  that  shee  should
bring  him  answere  to  the  East  North-east  side  of  the
Hand,  where  he  meant  to  come  to  anchor,  and  tarry
for  the  newes  they  could  learne  either  English  or  Spanish.
This  stay  in  hoysing  the  Boat  out,  gave  the  Samson  time
to  get  a  head  us,  and  within  awhile  shee  was  at  anchor.
When,  behold,  at  the  opening  of  the  Point,  first  there
came  one  saile,  then  two,  and  then  three  sailes,  and  within
a  little  the  fourth  was  seene ;  it  was  not  at  first  knowne
what  these  might  be,  yet  because  the  Samson  being  much
neerer,  made  no  haste  to  weigh,  we  thought  shee  made
them  to  be  friends.  And  within  awhile  we  perceived
them  to  have  pendents  in  their  fore-top-mast  heads :
this  put  us  out  of  doubt,  that  they  were  of  our  owne
fleet.  For  his  Lordship  at  his  departure  from  Puerto
Rico,  had  given  them  direction  that  every  ship  should
so  beare  a  pendent,  for  a  marke  to  be  knowne  of  their
friends,  and  which  would  make  strangers  never  a  whit  the
wiser.  These  foure  were  the  Merchant,  the  Ascension,
the  Consent,  and  the  Pegasus,  which  by  and  by  came  to  [IV.  vi.
an  anchor  with us. Now  were wee growne a prettie  II7^-]

strong  fleet  againe,  either  part  receiving  new  strength
of  other,  each  having  formerly  lost  their  owne.  For  the
storme  had  scattered  Sir  Johns  companie  as  well  as  ours,
though  it  should  seeme  not  to  have  beene  altogether  so
great  with  them,  as  us.  Of  Sir  Johns  we  had  not  yet,
the  Gallion,  the  Alcedo,  the  Centurion,  the  Anthonie,  the
Kesar,  and  the  Dove,  which  were  the  Flemmings.  The
first  newes  that  the  Boat  brought  us,  made  these  though
friends  yet  more  welcome  if  that  might  be.  For  the  Boat
having  told  his  Lordship  that  they  could  not  be  suffered

103

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

to  land,  yet  had  promise  that  his  Lordship  should  have
any  thing  that  the  Hand  would  affoord.  Mary  (said
they)  we  are  ill  provided,  by  reason  of  the  Kings  men
of  warre,  nine  and  twentie  of  them  have  within  these  few
dayes  beene  here,  and  taken  almost  all  our  provisions,  for
they  were  great  ships,  and  full  of  gallants,  five  of  them
being  the  five  Caracks,  that  should  this  yeere  have  gone
for  the  East  Indies,  but  being  by  the  Condes  lying  on
the  Coast  kept  in  till  it  was  too  late  for  them  to  have
any  hopefull  passage,  they  were  of  Merchants  made  men
of  Warre,  and  with  the  rest  or  rather  the  rest  with  them,
were  sent  to  these  Hands  to  waft  the  Caracks  which  were
looked  for  at  home  this  yeere.  But  the  Caracks  (said
they  of  Flores)  were  gone  by,  before  their  comming
hither,  for  the  safetie  whereof,  they  had  commandement
to  stay  if  need  were,  till  the  end  of  this  moneth.
Whither  this  Armada  was  gone  they  said  they  knew
not,  nor  whither  it  would  returne,  but  the  very  last
day  a  great  Gallion  was  within  kenning.  These  newes,
as  they  gave  great  cause  of  circumspection  and  care,  not
to  meet  with  them,  whom  we  could  not  doubt  to  be  too
strong  for  us,  and  therefore  made  us  wish  they  were
finally  gone  from  the  Hands;  so  on  the  other  side,  if
knowing  that  the  Caracks  were  passed,  if  yet  they  staid,
it  made  the  intelligence  of  the  Mexico  fleet  more
probable.  And  therefore  if  this  were  the  cause  of  their
stay,  our  hope  to  make  some  purchace  of  it,  made  us
more  willing,  to  have  their  neighbourhood.  Mary,  it
might  bee,  they  were  sent  to  looke  for  our  comming
home,  which  they  might  thinke  would  bee  straggling
and  weake,  and  yet  on  the  other  side  the  uncertaintie
of  our  comming  either  at  this  time  or  certainly  this  way,
made  this  something  unlikely.  His  Lordship  therefore
commanded  Captaine  Slingsby  (a  fine  Gentleman)  to  goe
ashoare  and  to  learne  more  certaintie  what  was  become  of
the  Kings  fleet,  and  why  they  came.  This  relation  was
from  the  men  of  Santa  Cruz :  but  the  intelligence  which
Captaine  Slingsby  brought  the  same  night  late,  was  from

104

THE EARL OF CUMBERLAND  a.d.

1598.
Villa  de  la  punta  Delgada,  another  Towne  of  the  Hands.
The  summe  of  his  report  (for  I  was  by  when  he  made  it)
was,  that  his  Excellencie  should  have  any  thing  where-
withall  they  could  doe  him  service,  and  if  it  would  please
him  to  come  ashoare,  they  would  take  it  as  a  great
favour.  For  the  Kings  men  of  Warre,  they  said,  that
they  judged  them  certainly  to  bee  gone  home,  for  they
were  gone  hence  upon  a  fortnight  before.  The  cause  of
their  comming  was  to  waft  the  Caracks,  which  all  foure
were  gone  by,  before  the  Kings  fleet  came  hither,  with
purpose  indeed  to  stay  till  the  end  of  this  moneth  for
them.  But  since  the  Caracks  were  come  home,  there
had  beene  sent  a  Carvell  of  Adviso  to  recall  them.  As
for  the  Mexico  fleet,  there  was  not  at  the  Hands  any
newes  of  their  comming  this  yeere.  This  report  made
by  Captaine  Slingsby  over-night,  was  confirmed  early  the
next  morning  by  the  Governour  himselfe  of  the  place  (a
poore  Governour  scarce  so  good  as  an  English  Constable.)
But  this  Captaine  Juan  de  Fraga  de  Mendo^a,  came  him-
selfe and  made  the  same  offer  to  his  Lordship,  and
withall  brought  both  Hennes  and  Muttons  with  him,
which  hee  knew  hee  should  not  give  for  nothing,  though
hee  would  seeme  unwilling  to  receive  any  thing.  He
having  beene  sometime  with  my  Lord,  and  told  all  the
newes  hee  remembred,  was  licensed,  having  first  asked
and  obtayned  a  Passe  for  himselfe,  and  a  Protection
for  the  Ilanders,  to  keepe  them  from  spoile  by  ours.
His  Lordship  granted  his  suit,  and  (which  hee  farther
desired)  that  they  might  bee  conceived  in  the  same
forme  as  those  were  which  the  Earle  of  Essex  had  given  Eark  of  Essex
him,  within  two  dayes  of  the  same  day  twelve  moneth ;  u  uana
and  which  himselfe  had  carefully  kept  ever  since.  1507."

When  this  fellow  was  gone,  the  flagge  of  Counsell  was
hanged out, &c. The  returne of  this fleet  upon  con-
sultation after  the  newes  aforesaid,  I  forbear  to  mention  The  rest  (as
in  regard  of  the  length  of  this  discourse. They  set  forth  needlesse)  l$
from  Flores Septemb. 16. 1598. On Michaelmas  day
they  sounded,  and  the  ground  on  the  tallow  did  still  more

105

A.D.

1598.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

assure  us  of  being  in  the  sleeve :  and  the  Scollop  shells
confirmed  their  opinion  which  held  us  rather  on  the  Coast
of  France,  by  the  Master  and  others  judged  otherwise :
whose  judgement  if  his  Lordship  out  of  his  judgement
and  authoritie  had  not  contradicted  and  caused  them  to
take  a  more  Northerly  course;  all  had  perished  in  all
likelihood  on  the  Ushent  and  rocks.  For  the  next
morning  we  saw  the  land  of  Normandie.

[IV.  vi

177-]

Sir  T.  Pert

set  forth  by
King  Henrie
the  eighth.

Chap. IIII.

The  first  Voyages  made  to  divers  parts  of  America
by  Englishmen,  Sir  Sebastian  Cabot,  Sir  Tho.
Pert :  also  of  Sir  John  Hawkins,  and  Sir
Francis  Drake,  and  many  others  :  collected
briefly  out  of  Master  Camden,  Master  Hak-
luyt,  and  other  Writers.

Ir  Sebastian  Cabota  wee  have  alreadie  men-
tioned in  the  former  Booke,  as  a  great
Discoverer  of  that,  which  most  justly
should  have  beene  called  Columbina,  and
a  great  deale  better  might  have  beene
stiled  Cabotiana  then  America,  neither
Vesputius  nor  Columbus  having  dis-
covered halfe  so  much  of  the  Continent  of  the  new
World  North  and  South  as  he  (yea,  the  Continent  was
discovered  by  him,  when  Columbus  had  yet  but  viewed
the  Hands)  this  Herrera  for  the  South  part  hath  men-
tioned in  his  Relation  of  the  River  of  Plate  before,
naming  him  an  Englishman :  and  for  the  North  is  by
us  in  the  fourth  Booke  delivered.  A  second  time  Sir
Thomas  Pert  and  the  said  Cabota,  were  set  forth  with  a
fleet  to  America,  by  King  Henrie  the  eighth  in  the  eight
yeere  of  his  reigne,  the  same  perhaps  which  Herrera  hath
also  mentioned,  of  an  English  ship  at  Hispaniola,  and
other  American  Hands,  in  the  yeere  15 17.  Master
Hakluyt  hath published  the  Voyages  of  many  English

106

EARLY VOYAGES TO AMERICA  aid.

1568.

into  those  parts  :  as  namely  of  Master  Robert  Tomson  Master
Merchant,  and John Field,  which together  with Ralph  ^omsm,^c.
Sarre  and Leonard  Chilton  in  a  ship  of  John  Sweeting  '  g

dwelling  at  Cadiz,  all  Englishmen  An.  1555.  sayled  to
Hispaniola,  and  thence  to  Mexico  in  New  Spaine,  where
they  found  Thomas  Blake  a  Scottishman,  who  had  dwelt
there  twentie  yeeres.  At  Mexico,  Robert  Tomson  and
Augustine  Boatio  an  Italian,  were  imprisoned  many
moneths  by  the  Inquisition,  and  then  brought  out  in  a  Spanish
Saint  Benito  (or  fooles  coat)  to  doe  penance,  a  thing  Inquisition.
never  seene  there  before  ;  which  caused  much  concourse
of  people,  given  to  understand  of  I  know  not  what
enemies  of  God,  and  expecting  to  see  some  Monsters  Monstrous  lies.
of  uncouth  shape.  They  were  much  pitied  by  the  people
seeing  such  personable  men,  but  sentenced  by  the  Arch-
bishop to  be  sent  back  to  Spaine,  where  Tomson  did  his
three  yeeres  enjoyned  penance  at  Sivil.  Boatio  found  the
meanes  to  escape  and  dyed  after  in  London.  Tomson
after  his  libertie  married  with  a  rich  Spanish  heire.  The
historie  at  large  and  his  description  of  Mexico,  with  the
cause  of  his  imprisonment  about  speaking  freely  of
Images  (his  Master  had  made  an  Image  of  our  Ladie
of  above  7000.  pezos  price,  each  pezo  being  foure  shillings  Apexo\s.%d.
and  eight  pence  of  our  money)  the  Reader  may  see  in
Master  Hakluyt.

Where  also  is  delivered  the  voyage  of  Roger  Boden-  Master
ham  Englishman  1564.  to  Mexico:  also  of  John  Chilton  Bodenham.
1568.  thither  and  from  thence  to  Nueva  Biscaia,  and  to  Q^tm
the Port of  Navidad  on the South Sea  :  to Sansonate  Chiltom
in  Guatimala,  to  Tecoantepec,  to  Soconusco,  to  Nicaragua,  seventeene
to  Nombre  de  Dios  ;  to  Potossi,  Cusco,  Paita  ; to  Vera  y/^es  travels
Paz,  Chiapa,  three  hundred  leagues  from  Mexico. From  ™  ,ew
Chiapa  he  travelled  thorow  Hills  till  he  came  to  Ecatepec,  perUm  '
that  is,  The  Hill  of  winde,  in  the  end  of  that  Province,  Ecantepec  a
supposed  the  highest  Hill  that  ever  was  discovered,  from  hill  supposed
the  top  whereof  are  seene  both  the  North  and  South  Seas;  n™elea&**
deemed nine  leagues  high. They  which travell up it,  pfse' -tt  should
lye at the foot over-night, and about midnight begin  be  nine  miles.

107

A.D.

1568.

Good  out  of
Evill.

Henrie
Hazvkes.

Sir  John
Hawkins  his
third  voyage  to
Guinea,  and
thence  to  the
West  Indies.
Sir  Francis
Drake.

Saint  John  de
Ullua.

The  opinion  of
lawfulnesse  to
doe  any
inhumanitie  to
Savages
punished:  God
used

Christians
unchristian
dealing  to
punish  their
savagenesse  to
Savages.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

their  journey,  that  they  may  travell  to  the  top  before
the  Sunne  rise  the  next  day,  because  the  winde  bloweth
with  such  force  afterwards,  that  it  is  impossible  for  any
man  to  goe  up.  From  the  foot  of  this  Hill  to  Teco-
antepec  the  first  Towne  of  New  Spaine  are  fifteene
leagues.  From  Mexico  he  travelled  againe  to  Panuco,
and  there  fell  sick,  which  sicknesse  in  his  returne
benefited  him  :  for  he  fell  amongst  Caniball  Indian
which  afraid  to  eate  him  for  feare  he  had  the  pox,  let
him  goe.  Hee  went  to  R.  de  las  Palmas,  and  to  the
Mynes  of  Sacatecas,  the  richest  in  all  the  Indies.  After
his  returne  to  Mexico  he  travelled  to  other  parts,
spending  seventeene  yeeres  in  his  American  peregrina-
tions. Henrie  Hawkes  lived  five  yeeres  in  those  parts,
and  his  observations  are  recorded  by  Master  Hakluyt.

AN.  1567.  Master  John  Hawkins  Generall  in  the
Jesus,  departed  from  Plimouth  with  five  other  ships,
the  Minion,  of  which  Master  John  Hampton  was  Cap-
taine  ;  the  William  and  John,  Thomas  Bolton  Captaine  ;
the  Judith,  of  which  Master  Francis  Drake  was  Captaine ;
the  Angel  also  and  the  Swallow.  Having  on  the  Coast
of  Guinea  taken  some  five  hundred  Negroes,  they  sayled
with  them  to  the  Hands  of  the  West  Indies,  to  sell  them
to  the  Spaniards.  By  tempest  they  were  driven  to  the
Port  of  Saint  John  de  Ullua,  where  the  Spanish  ships
with  200000.  pounds  in  treasure  were  at  his  mercy,  but
hee  dismissed  them  ;  which  they  repayed  him  with
treacherous  dealing,  the  Spaniards  perfidiously  setting
on  the  English  contrarie  to  the  Covenants  betwixt  them
concluded.  For  after  that,  when  as  the  whole  fleet  with
their  new  Vice-roy  comming  thither  had  perished,  if
Master  Hawkins  had  not  permitted  them  to  enter  the
Haven,  out  of  which  he  could  easily  have  kept  them  :
they  practised  secretly  and  against  agreement  to  certaine
Articles,  assaulted  the  English  perfidiously  and  treacher-
ously, using  both  fraud  and  scorne,  in  which  fight  two
ships  of  the  Spaniards  were  sunke,  and  one  burnt  ;  Some

108

EARLY VOYAGES TO AMERICA  a.d.

1567.

of ours were slaine, others taken and dispiteously  [IV.  vi.

tortured, all distressed; all  their ships  also sunke  and  JI78-]

burnt,  saving  the  Minion  and  Judith,  which  were  by  a

storme  ensuing  betrayed  to  famine  at  Sea,  which  forced

the Generall to set 114. men on shoare to  the cruell

mercies  of  the  Savages  and  Spaniards. Yea,  one Boat

not  being  able  to  get  to  shoare,  two  were  drowned,  the

rest  getting  a  mile  thorow  the  Sea  thither  as  they  could,

as Miles Philips one of  that forlorne companie hath  Miles  Philips.

recorded. Some  were  dead  in  seeming  two  houres  space

with abundant drinking of  fresh water, others  swolne

exceedingly  with salt water and fruits they  found ; a

shower also leaving them not one drie thread, as if

Heaven had  pursued the  Seas challenge,  without  ; and

partly  hunger,  and partly the water and fruits of  the

Earth,  within their bowels,  had conspired against this

poore  crue.

The  Chichemici  Indian  Savages  added  their  inhumanitie,
killing  eight  of  their  companie  in  the  first  onset,  but  they
yeelding  (having  neither  weapons  nor  hearts  to  resist)  the
Savages  perceiving  them  not  to  be  their  Spanish  enemies
pointed them to  Tampice, saying, Tampice Christiano,  Tampice  the
which  they  understood  not :  but  divided  themselves  into  Port  of
two  companies,  one  going  Westward,  of  which Philips  Panuco-
was one,  the other Northward, and  with them David  David
Ingram,  which  recovered  his  Countrie. After  the  sting-  Ingram.
ings  of  flies,  deaths  by  Indians,  and  manifold miseries,
this  Westerne  companie  got  to  Panuco  where  the  Gover-  Spanish
nour  stripped  them  of  the  little  which  they  had,  and  of  gwernours
their  libertie,  calling  them  English  Dogs  and  Lutheran  crueltie-
heretikes, and when they demanded helpe of their
Surgeons for such as the Indians by the way had
wounded,  hee  said,  they  should  have  none  other  Surgeon
but  the  Hangman  :  and  after  foure  dayes  sent  for  them
out  of  the  Prison,  and  with  many  new  Halters  (where-
with  they  expected hanging) bound and sent  them to
Mexico  ninetie  leagues  distant  West  and  by  South,  with
a  great guard of  Indians, j  At  Mestilan  they  received

109

A.D.

I567.

Nuestra
Sennora  de
Guadalupe.

Devillisk
inquisition.

68.  English-
men sentenced
at  once.  Anno
1 575.  besides.
Three
Martyrs.

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

kind  usage.  One  of  their  keepers  used  them  kindly,
the  other  would  strike  them  to  the  ground,  and  bid
them,  March,  march  English  Dogges,  Lutherans,  enemies
of  God.  Thus  marching  they  came  within  two  leagues
of  Mexico,  where  was  our  Ladies  Church,  and  therein
her  Image  of  Silver  guilt  as  large  as  a  tall  woman,  and
before  it  as  many  Silver  Lampes  as  are  dayes  in  the  yeere,
which  on  high  dayes  are  all  lighted.  Neither  Horseman
nor  Footman  will  passe  by  this  Church  without  entring
and  praying.  After  their  comming  to  Mexico  many
dyed,  the  rest  had  kind  usage  in  the  Hospitall,  Thence
they  were  carried  to  Tescuco,  to  be  used  as  slaves,  but
by  one  Robert  Sweeting  (sonne  of  an  Englishman  by  a
Spanish  woman)  were  holpen  much  from  the  Indians,  or
else  had  all  perished.

After  this  they  were  put  to  Spaniards  as  servants,  and
had  meanes  to  get  somewhat  for  themselves,  till  they
became  a  prey  to  the  Inquisition,  which  seized  their  goods
and  persons,  shutting  them  asunder  in  dungeons  a  yeere
and  a  halfe.  By  frequent  examinations  they  would  have
pumped  somewhat  out  of  them  in  matters  of  faith,
and  not  being  able,  they  yeelding  to  their  Assertions
in  that  kind,  craving  mercie  as  men  which  came  into
that  Countrey  by  distresse  of  foule  weather  :  they
neverthelesse  racked  them  to  extort  confession  that  way,
which  made  some  to  say  that  which  cost  their  lives.
After  solemne  Proclamation  that  all  might  come  to  this
sight,  they  were  brought  in  fooles  Coats,  with  ropes
about  their  neckes  and  candles  in  their  hands  to  the
Scaffold.  George  Rively,  Peter  Momfrie,  and  Cornelius
an  Irishman  were  burnt,  others  condemned  to  200.  or  300.
blowes  on  Horseback  with  long  whips,  and  to  serve  in
the  Gallies,  sixe,  eight,  or  ten  yeeres  :  others  to  serve
in  Monasteries,  in  the  S.  Benito,  fooles-coates,  divers
yeeres,  of  which  Philips  was  one.  The  whipping  was
cruelly  executed  on  Good  Friday,  two  Cryers  going
before  proclaiming,  behold  these  English  Lutherans,
Dogs, enemies  of  God  :  the  Inquisitors  themselves  and

no

EARLY VOYAGES TO AMERICA  a.d.

1582.
their  Familiars,  crying,  Strike,  lay  on  those  English
Hereticks,  Lutherans,  Gods  enemies.  All  bloudie  and
swolne  they  returned  to  prison  to  bee  sent  into  Spaine
to  performe  the  rest  of  their  Martyrdom e.  Philips  and
the  rest  having  served  their  times  (in  which  hee  learned
the  Mexican  tongue)  they  had  their  fooles-coats  hung  up
in  the  chiefe  Church.  The  rest  married  there.  Philips
escaped  a  second  imprisonment  and  after  many  travels
in  the  Countrey  and  dangers  in  Spaine,  returned  to
England 1582.

Job  Hortop  another  of  this  company  hath  related  like  Job  Hortop
adventures. He  saith,  that  he  and  some  others  were  sent  hU  23.  yeeres
Prisoners  into  Spaine,  by  the  Vice-roy  with  Don  Juan  de  msery-
Velasco  de  Varre,  Admirall  and  Generall  of  the  Spanish
fleet,  who  carried  with  him  in  his  ship  to  bee  presented
to  the  King  of  Spaine,  the  Anatomie  of  a  Giant,  sent  Scekton  of  a
from China  *  to  Mexico,  to the  Vice-roy  Don Martin  huge  Giant.

Henriques. The  skull  of  his  head  was  neere  as  big  as Understand

1  o  *g  of  the

halfe a bushell  ; his neck-bones,  shoulder-plates,  arme-  •philitpinee
bones,  and  all  other  lineaments  huge  and  monstrous  ;  the  ships.
shanke  of  his  skull  from  the  ankle  to  the  knee,  was  as
long as from any  mans  ankle  up  to  his  waste,  and  of
bignesse  accordingly. At  this  time  were  also  sent  to  the
King two chists ful of  earth with Ginger growing  in
them  : The Ginger runneth in the ground like to  Ginger  how  it
Liccoras  ;  the blades  grow out of  it in  length  &  pro-  groweth.
portion  like  to  the  blades  of  wild  Garlick,  which  they  cut
every  fifteen  daies,  and  water  them  twice  a  day. They
put  the  blades  in  their  pottage,  and  use  them  in  other
meates,  of  pleasing  taste  and  good  for  appetite.

When  they  came  in  the  height  of  Bermuda,  they  dis-
covered a  Monster  in  the  Sea,  who  shewed  himselfe  three  Sea  Monster
times unto them from the middle  upwards  : in which  like  a  man.
parts  he  was  proportioned  like  a  man,  of  the  complexion
of  a Mullato, or tawny Indian. The Generall com-
manded one of  his Clerkes to put it in writing, to  [IV.  vi.
certifie  the  King  thereof. Presently  after  for  the  space  I!79-]

of  sixteene  dayes,  the  weather  proved  very  foule. Offer-

in

A.D.

1590.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ing  to  make  an  escape  they  were  descried  and  severely-
stocked,  and  imprisoned  a  yeere  in  the  Contractation  house
in  Sivill,  and  breaking  prison  were taken,  and by the
Second  sentence  Inquisition were sentenced. Robert Barret and John
of  Inquisition, q^^ tQ bee y^^ job Hortop) and john Bone tQ

the  Gallies  for  tenne  yeeres,  and  after  that  to  perpetuall
prison.  Others  were  adjudged  to  the  Gallies  some  eight,
some  five  yeeres  :  Hortop  served  twelve  yeeres  in  hunger,
thirst,  cold  and  stripes,  and  after  foure  yeeres  imprison-
ment in  his  Fooles  coat,  was  redeemed  to  the  service
of  Hernando  de  Soria,  from  whom  after  three  yeeres
service  more,  he  stole  away  and  landed  at  Portsmouth
in  December  1590.  after  three  and  twentie  yeeres  miser-
able bondage.

As  for  David  Ingrams  perambulation  to  the  North
parts,  Master  Hakluyt  in  his  first  Edition  published  the
same,  but  it  seemeth  some  incredibilities  of  his  reports
caused  him  to  leave  him  out  in  the  next  Impression,  the
reward  of  lying  being  not  to  be  beleeved  in  truths.  And
for  Sir  John  Hawkins  himselfe,  he  had  made  one  Voyage
with  three  ships  and  three  hundred  Negros  gotten  on  the
Coast  of  Guinea  to  Hispaniola,  1562.  and  other  Ports;
and  returned  with  a  rich  gaine.  This  encouraged  him
to  a  second  Voyage  with  the  Jesus,  Salomon,  Tigre,  and
Swallow,  1564.  And  having  visited  divers  Ports  he
returned  by  Florida.  Anno  1567.  their  unfortunate
Voyage  before  mentioned  was  set  forth,  in  which  his
unjustice  to  Savages  was  chastised  by  unjustice  of  Chris-
tians, in  manner  as  you  have  heard.  Himselfe  with  his
remayning  company  were  first  endangered  with  an
extreame  storme,  after  that  with  famine  his  men  dying
continually,  so  that  the  rest  being  not  able  to  manage
the  ship,  and  the  winds  crossing,  seeking  to  releeve  them-
selves at  Ponte  Vedra,  with  fresh  meate,  they  grew
diseased  and  many  of  them  died,  and  thereby  were  also
in  danger  of  a  second  Spanish  betraying,  which  they
hardly  escaping  arrived  in  England,  January  the  twentieth
1568.

David
Ingram.

Sir  J.  Haw-
kins his  3.
voyages.

112

EARLY  VOYAGES TO AMERICA  a.d.

1567.

The  Spanish  indignities  and  treacheries  were  deeply
lodged  in  the  wronged  minds  both  of  Sir  John  Hawkins,
and  of  Captayne  Drake :  men  borne  for  the  honour  of
the  English  name  and  Nation  in  Marine  affaires.  Sir
John  Hawkins  was  sonne  to  Master  William  Hawkins  M.  Wil.
of  Plimmouth,  a  man  much  esteemed  by  King  Henry  Hawkins.
the  Eighth,  as  a  principall  Sea-captaine.  Hee  had  long
before  armed  a  ship  of  his  owne  of  two  hundred  and  fifty
tunnes,  called  the  Paul  of  Plimmouth,  wherewith  he  made
two  Voyages  to  Brasill,  one  in  the  yeere  1530.  and  the
other  1532.  in  the  first  of  which  he  brought  a  Brasilian
King  (as  they  tearmed  him)  to  present  him  in  his  wilde
accoutrements  to  King  Henry.  It  seemed,  that  Sea
affaires  and  arts  remayned  an  Inheritance,  from  the
Father  to  the  Sonne ;  and  from  him  also  to  the  Nephew,
as  shall  after  be  seene :  neither  did  the  West  of  England
yeeld  such  an  Indian  Neptunian  paire  as  were  these  two  Sir  Richard
Ocean  Peeres,  Hawkins  and  Drake.  Hawkins.

A  briefe  Historie  of  Sir  Francis  Drakes
Voyages.

OF Sir Francis Drake  Master Camden reports  that  Sir  Francis
he hath  heard  him say  of  himselfe, that he  was  D™kes  Birth.
borne  in  the  County  of  Devon,  of  meane  condition :  his
Godfather  was  Francis  Russell  afterwards  Earle  of  Bed-
ford, who  gave  him  his  name  Francis. Whiles  he  was
young,  his  father  (being  called  in  question  for  Religion,  Camdeni
by  reason  of  the  sixe  Articles  set  forth  by  King  Henry  E^Za^f^f
against the  Protestants) was  driven  to  shift,  and  with-
drew himselfe into Kent. After King Henries death,
he obtayned a place in the Navie Royall to reade
Service, and soone after was ordayned Deacon, and
made  Vicar of  the  Church  of  Upnor  on the River of
Medway : where  by  reason of  his  povertie  he  put this
his  sonne  to  serve a  Neighbour Mariner  which traded  His  education.
with  a  small  Barke  into  France  and  Zeland,  who  brought
him  up in  the Mariners  art,  and tooke  such liking  of  His  first
him,  that  at  his  death  he  bequeathed  (being  a  Bachelour)  founders.
xvi  113  h

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1567.

unto  him  his  Barke.  This  Barke,  upon  the  report  of
Sir  John  Hawkins  his  preparations  for  that  disastrous
Voyage  1567.  hee  sold  and  joyned  to  him  in  societie
aforesaid,  and  at  Saint  John  de  Ullua  lost  all,  and
hardly  brought  himselfe  backe.  Hereupon  seeking  by
Ex  opera  ms  Mariners  practice  to  repaire  his  losses,  and  thereby,
nautica  <5 ancj as  a  man  Qf  warre having  gotten  store  of  money

PlVdtlCd.  '  O D  J

Drakes  second  together,  he  made  a  second  Voyage  to  recover  in  the
Indianvoyage.  Spanish  Indies  what  there  he  had  lost  (quod  licere
This  discourse  Theologus  classiarius  facile  persuaserat)  and  with  a  ship

7o7zrTalby  of  warre called the Drag°n> and another ship and a
who  was  taken  Pinnasse,  none  knowing  it  but  his  owne  consorts,  Anno
by  the  Earle 1 572. sayled to Nombre de Dios, which Towne he
of  Cumber- suddenly  surprised and lost. For having landed one
lands  ships hundred  and  fiftie  men,  and  leaving  seventie  of  them  in
Ms  discourse a  Fort,  with  the  rest  he  went  to  the  Market  place,  and
about  him. there  discharged his  Calievers  and  sounded  a  Trumpet,
answered  in  like  manner  from  the  Fort. The  Townes-
men hereby terrified, fled into the Mountaynes. But
fourteene  or  fifteene  would  backe  with  their  Harquebuses
to  see  what  the  matter  was,  and  discovering  the  English-
men, shot  and  by  hap  killed  the  Trumpeter. Hereupon
they  in  the  Fort  not  seeing  their  Trumpet  answered,  after
they  had heard the  Calievers,  supposed  all  those  which
had entred were slaine, and fled to their Pinnasses.
The Captayne comming  and seeing  his men all  gone,
was  surprized  with  a  new  feare,  and  leaving  their  furni-
ture  they  swamme  and  waded to their Pinnasses and
[IV.  vi.  departed the  Port. In the  Sound of  Dariene hee  had

1 1 80.]  intelligence  by  certayne  fugitive  Negros  of  Mules  com-

J%f°  mine:  loden  with treasure  from  Panama to  Nombre  de

fugitives.  o  .  .

Dios ;  and  guided  by  them,  intercepted  two  companies
of  Mules  and  carried  away  the  Gold  only ;  for  they
were  not  able  to  carrie  the  Silver  thorow  the  Mountaynes.
Two  dayes  after  he  came  to  the  house  of  Crosses,  and
burnt  above  200000.  Duckets  in  Merchandize,  and  so
departed.  When  he  travelled  over  those  Mountaynes
hee  beheld  thence  the  South Sea ;  and  thereby  inflamed

114

SIR  FRANCIS DRAKES VOYAGES  a.d.

1575.
with  desire  of  glory  and  wealth,  was  so  rapt  with  desire  Camden,  ubi
of  sayling  therein,  that he  fell  there  on  his  knees,  and  SUP>
begged of God,  and besought the favour  of  God to
assist  him  in  that  exploit,  and  made  a  solemne  vow  to  Drakes  vow
that  purpose,  one  day  to  sayle  on  that  Sea,  which  every  for  the  South
day  and  night  lay  next  his  heart,  pricking  him  forwards
to  the  performance.

Whiles  hee  was  musing  and  hatching  these  haughtie
Designes,  John  Oxenham,  who  in  the  former  Naviga-  John
tions,  had  served  under  Captayne  Drake,  both  Souldier,  Oxenham.
Mariner,  and  Cooke,  became  a  Captayne  also,  and  with
a  ship  of  one  hundred  and  fortie  tunnes,  and  seventie
men  came  to  the  said  Sound  of  Dariene,  Anno  1575.
and  had  conference  with  those  Negroes.  But  hearing
that  the  Mules  were  now  conducted  with  Souldiers,  hee
resolved  on  a  new  Enterprize,  which  never  any  had  His  audacious
attempted,  and  landed  in  that  place  where  Captayne  enterprize.
Drake  had  had  conference  with  the  Negros :  and  having
brought  his  ship  aground,  and  covered  her  with  boughes,
and  hid  his  Ordnance  in  the  ground,  he  tooke  two
small  Peeces  of  Ordnance  and  Calievers,  with  store  of
victuals,  and  went  twelve  leagues  with  sixe  Negros  into
the  mayne  Land,  to  a  River  which  runneth  into  the
South  Sea.  There  he  cut  wood  and  made  a  Pinnasse
fortie  five  foot  by  the  keele,  and  therewith  went  into
the  South  Sea,  to  the  Hand  of  Pearles,  five  and  twentie
leagues  distant  from  Panama,  to  watch  for  shippes  com-
ming  from  Peru  thither:  he  tooke  a  Barke  with  60000.  His  prizes.
Pezos  of  Gold,  comming  from  Quito  :  and  staying  sixe
dayes  longer,  tooke  another  which  came  from  Lima  with
1 00000.  Pezos  of  Silver  in  barres,  and  delaying  some-
what long  sent  away  his  Prizes,  and  went  with  his  Pinnasse
up  the  River.  This  delay  gave  opportunitie  of  intelli-
gence, and  John  de  Ortega  was  sent  to  pursue  him  :  at
a  partition  of  the  River  into  three,  when  he  was  taking
up  the  greatest,  feathers  of  Hennes  which  the  English
had  plucked,  diverted  him  up  the  lesser  streame,  whereby
hee  lighted  on  the  treasure  first,  Oxenham  beeing  gone

"5

A.D.

1575.

Discord
causeth
destruction.
Delay  breeds

Captaine
Barker  of
Bristol!.

Coxes
quarrels.

Drakes  happie
Circumnavi-
gation, see  sup.
Tom.  1.  I.  2.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  get  Negros  to  helpe  him  carrie  his  treasure,  his  owne
men  quarrelling  for  larger  pay.  Some  of  the  English
were  taken,  which  bewrayed  the  ship,  and  the  rest  were
betrayed  by  the  Negros,  whiles  they  were  making
Canoas  for  the  North  Sea,  there  to  take  some  Barke.
They  confessed  that  they  had  no  license  from  the
Queene,  and  were  all  executed,  but  two  Boyes.  Thus
perished  Oxenham  a  man,  if  his  Case  had  beene  just,
worthy  of  lasting  memory  for  an  attempt  so  difficult,
Quern  sinon  tenuit,  magnis  tamen  excidit  ausis.  The
King  of  Spaine  sent  Souldiers  to  take  those  fugitive
Negros,  which  had  assisted  the  English,  and  two  Gallies
to  guard  the  Coast.  This  and  Captayne  Barkers  frus-
trated attempts  give  greater  lustre  to  Drakes  glory.

Andrew  Barker  of  Bristoll,  much  wronged  by  the  In-
quisition, Anno  1576.  sought  to  right  himselfe  in  those
parts,  and  came  with  two  ships  to  Nombre  de  Dios,
and  the  River  of  Chagre,  eighteene  leagues  distant  to
the  North-west,  landed  ten  men  to  seeke  intelligence  of
Negros,  which  they  could  not  find,  and  most  of  the
men  also  died  of  the  Calentura.  Betwixt  that  and
Veragua  he  tooke  a  Prize,  and  another  in  the  Gulfe  of
Honduras.  Mutuall  quarrels  betwixt  Coxe  and  the
Captayne  betrayed  them  to  the  Spaniards,  which  assayling
them,  slue  the  Captayne  and  eight  men  at  the  He
Francisco.  After  this  Coxe  went  with  his  Pinnasse,  and
tooke  the  Towne  of  Truxillo,  but  eight  men  were  (by
reason  of  men  of  warre  chasing  the  ship,  thus  forced  to
shift  for  themselves)  left  there  to  their  fortunes.  Four-
teene  others  and  the  Frigat  with  the  treasure  were
cast  away.  Divers  of  the  rest  after  their  returne  were
long  imprisoned.

These  indeed  are  pettie  things  to  Captayne  Drakes
expedition  in  December  1577.  wherein  he  encompassed
first  of  any  Generall,  and  except  Candish  more  fortu-
nately then  all  of  them  together,  this  whole  Terrestriall
Globe.  He  set  forth  with  Hve  ships,  and  one  hundred
sixtie three Mariners. The whole Voyage you have

116

SIR FRANCIS DRAKES VOYAGES  a.d.

1580.

before  at  large.  The  Carkasse  of  the  shippe ;  or  some
bones  at  least  of  that  glorious  Carkasse,  yet  remayne
at  Deptford,  consecrated  to  Fame  and  Posteritie ;  in
which  Queene  Elizabeth  being  feasted,  Knighted  this  noble
Mariner :  at  which  time  a  bridge  of  boords  made  for
her  Majestie  to  passe,  fell  with  one  hundred  men  thereon,
of  which  none  were  hurt,  as  if  Good  Fortune  had  both
sayled  abroad,  and  feasted  at  home  in  that  ship.  The
goods  taken  were  sequestred  by  her  Majestie,  for  answere
to  the  Spaniard  if  need  should  bee.  Some  principall
Courtiers  are  said  to  have  refused  the  offer  of  some
of  this,  as  Piratically  gotten.  Bernardine  Mendoza  made
demand  for  the  King  of  Spaine,  (whose  Embassadour
hee  was)  and  received  answere  from  the  Oueene,  that  See  Camdeni
the  Spaniards  had  unjustly  prohibited  commerce  to  the  EliZ'Fai'
English,  that  Drake  should  legally  answere  if  any  thing
were  prooved  against  him,  the  goods  being  to  that
purpose  sequestred,  howsoever  the  Spaniard  had  put  her
Majestie  to  greater  charges  against  the  Rebels,  which
the  Spaniard  had  raised  in  England  and  Ireland :  Neither
did  she  know  why  her  subjects  and  others  were  prohibited
the  Indies,  which  she  knew  no  reason  to  thinke  proper
to  the  Spaniards,  by  vertue  of  the  Popes  Bull  (which
could  nothing  oblige  Princes  which  owed  him  no  obedi-
ence) nor  by  reason  that  the  Spaniards  had  arrived  here
and  there,  had  directed  Cottages,  and  given  names  to
Capes  and  Rivers.  Neither  might  these  things  hinder  [IV-  vi-
other  Princes  from  commerce,  or  to  transport  Colonies  "8i._

to  places  not  inhabited  by  the  Spaniards  (the  Law  of
Nations  not  infringed  hereby,  seeing  prescription  without
possession  is  nothing  worth)  the  use  of  the  Sea  and
Aire  being  exposed  to  all.  Nor  might  any  people  or
person  challenge  right  over  the  Ocean,  whereof  neither
nature,  nor  course  of  publike  use  permitted  possession.
Yet  a  great  part  of  the  money  was  repaied  after  to
Peter  Sebura  the  Spanish  Agent,  which  he  repaid  not
to  the  owners,  but  made  use  thereof  against  the  Queene
in  the  affaires  of  the  Spanish  Netherlands,  as  was  after-

117

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1580.

wards  found.  Thus  farre  briefly  collected  out  of  Master
Camden  and  Lopez  Vaz  a  Portugall.  Men  noated  to
have  compassed  the  world  with  Drake,  which  have  come
to  my  hands  are  Thomas  Drake,  brother  to  Sir  Francis;
Thomas  Hood,  Thomas  Blaccoler,  John  Gripe,  George
a  Musician,  Crane,  Fletcher,  Cary,  T.  Moone,  John
Drake,  John  Thomas,  Robert  Winterly,  Oliver  the
Gunner,  &c.

A  little  before  this  the  Prince  of  Orange  had  beene
murdered,  and  Parry  had  undertaken  the  same  on  her
Majestie,  having  the  Cardinall  Comensis  instigation,  and
the  Popes  absolution  to  that  purpose.  The  Spaniards
had  given  great  distaste  in  English  and  Irish  rebellions,
and  had  lately  arrested  the  English  Ships  and  goods  in
Spaine,  with  other  unkindnesses  in  Belgian  businesses.
The  Belgians  had  offered  the  confederate  Provinces  to
her  Majesties  Protection  and  dominion.  This  she
refused,  but  their  Protection  she  accepted,  having  dis-
covered the  Spaniards  hatred  to  her  Religion  and  Nation,
which  how  easie  were  it  to  put  in  extreamest  execution,
if  the  Low-Countries  were  subdued  to  his  full  power
(their  ancient  priviledges  being  all  swallowed  up)  and  so
England  should  be  exposed  to  Spanish  machinations  with
such  opportunities  of  neighbouring  Forts,  Forces,  Har-
bours, and  Shippings.  She  therefore  to  remove  present
warre  and  future  perils  from  her  owne  Countrie,  with
masculine  magnanimitie  adventured,  not  for  vainglory
but  necessitie,  to  undertake  a  businesse  which  made
the  world  to  wonder ;  being  little  lesse  then  denouncing
warre  to  so  mighty  a  Monarke.  She  agreed  with
the  States  to  minister  to  their  aide  5000.  foote,  and
1000.  horse  at  her  owne  charge,  to  be  by  them
after  repayed,  the  first  yeares  charges  in  the  first  yeare
of  peace,  the  rest  in  the  foure  following,  Flushing
and  the  Ramekins  and  Brill  to  remaine  hers  in  caution,
&c.  Her  Majestie  set  forth  a  Booke  also  for  her  justifi-
cation by  the  ancient  leagues  with  the  Belgian  Provinces
for mutuall  defence, the Spanish  crueltie  on  the  poore

118

SIR FRANCIS DRAKES VOYAGES  a.d.

1585.
Belgians,  and  their  nefarious  devises  against  her :  neither
had  she  any  intent  in  administring  these  aides,  but
that  the  Low-Countries  might  enjoy  their  ancient  liberty,
she  and  her  subjects  their  securitie,  and  both  Nations
peaceable  commerce.  And  to  the  end  that  warre  might
not  first  be  brought  home  to  her  owne  doores,  she  set
forth  a  Fleete  to  finde  the  Spaniard  worke  abroad.

Hereupon Anno 1585. Sir Francis Drake with a  SirFr.Drakes
Fleete  of  five  and  twenty  saile,  and  2300.  Souldiers  and  t0  Domng°>
Sailers  was  set  forth  from  Plimmouth  Sep.  12. Christopher
Carlile  his  Lieutenent  Generall,  Anthonie  Powell  Sergeant
Major, Captaine Matthew Morgan and John Samson
Corporall  of  the  field : Land  Captaines Anthonie  Plat,
Edward Winter, John Goring, Robert Pen, George
Barton, John Merchant, William Cevill, Walter Bigs,
John  Haman,  Richard  Stanton,  Captaine  Martin  Frobisher
Viceadmirall  in the  Primrose, Captaine Francis  Knolles
Reread mirall  in  the  Gallion  Leicester,  Captaine  Thomas
Vennor in the Eliz.  Bonadventure  under  the Generall  Names  of  the
Captaine Edward Winter in the Aide; Christopher  Captaines  and
Carlile in the Tigre, Henry White Captain of the  ^ Sea  ^
Sea Dragon, Thomas Drake Captaine  of  the Thomas,  Land.
Thomas  Seely  Captaine  of  the  Minion. Captaine  Bayly
of  the  Barke  Talbot,  Robert  Crosse  of  the  Barke  Bond,
George  Fortescue  of  the  Barke  Boner,  Edward  Carelesse
of  the  Hope,  James  Erizo  of  the  White  Lyon,  Thomas
Moone of  the Francis, John Rivers of  the Vantage,
John  Vaughan  of  the  Drake,  John  Varney  of  the  George,
John  Martin  of  the Benjamin,  Richard  Gilman of  the
Scout,  Richard  Hawkins  of  the  Ducke,  Captaine  Bitfield
of  the  Swallow. They  tooke  a  Shippe  of  Saint  Sebastians  English  Ships
laden with fish, entred the  lies of  Bayon,  and  sent  to  wts^  tie
the Citie to know whether there were  warres  betwixt  ^reakinS  out  of
England and Spaine,  and why  the English  Merchants  Hostility.
and their  goods in Spaine were embarged or  arrested.
The  Governour  professed  his  ignorance  in  both,  and  that
this  later  was the Kings pleasure. After some  spoiles
done  about  Vigo,  they  fell  with Hierro,  but  the  Hand

119

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1585.

being poore, departed without harme. Thence they
went  to  the  lies  of  Cape  Verde,  and  at  Saint  Iago  entred

S.  Iago  taken,  betwixt  the  Towne  called  Playa  or  Praya  and  Saint  Iago,
landed  1000.  men,  and  (the  men  being  fled)  entred  the
Towne  and  shot  off  all  their  Ordnance,  being  50.  peeces,
answered  from  the  Ships  to  honour  the  Queenes  day,
the  17.  of  November.  No  Treasure  was  found  but
Wine,  Oyle,  Meale,  &c.  They  possessed  it  foureteene
dayes.  November  the  foure  and  twentieth,  they  marched
to  Saint  Domingo,  twelve  miles  within  land,  and  found
the  people  fled.

After  foureteene  dayes  they  departed  having  burned
the  Towne  of  Playa,  none  of  the  inhabitants  having
offered  to  intercede,  which  seemed  to  happen  from  their

Voyage  of  old guiltinesse  towards  old  Master  William  Hawkins,  whose

„?.s*?r  men  perfidiously  they  had  murthered  foure  or  five  yeares

fVilham  ir  •  1 •  •  •  rr  1 ttt

Hawkins before,  against their  promise,  putting oft to the West

Indies, they  could not  put  off  the effects of  the aire

of  that  Hand,  which  by  a  Calentura  killed  two  or  three

hundred of  their men. The first Hand which they

Dominica. fell  with  was  Dominica,  the  next  Saint  Christophers,  and

S.Christo- having there spent their Christmas, they  resolved for

^  eu  Hispaniola :  and  having  received  intelligence  by  a  Frigot

which they  tooke  in the  way,  they  landed  nine  or  ten

miles  to  the  Westward  of  Saint  Domingo  on  New  yeares

day. About  noone they  approached  the  Towne  under

[IV.  vi.  the conduct  of  Master  Carlile,  and 1 50.  horsemen  pre-

1 J  senting themselves from the Citie being retired, they

Saint ^  divided  their  forces  to  assault  both  the  Westerne  gates

Domingo at  once> 'p^g  Ordnance  being  discharged  on  them,  they
assaulted  and  ^  ^  *

taken.  ran  m  to  prevent  a  second  charge  and  entred  with  them

pell  mell  into  the Gates,  the  enemy  altering  their  fight

into  flight,  which  they  made  by  the  North  gate. Both

troopes  met  in  the  Market-place and  there  barricadoed

themselves. The  Castle  was  abandoned  the  next  night.

They  held the Towne  a  whole  moneth. They  burned

many  houses before they  could bring the  Spaniards  to

a price  for the ransome  of  the  rest,  for  which  at  last

120

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE'S VOYAGES  a.d.

1586.

they  paid  after  much  spoile 25000.  Duckets. The  pray

was not  much. In the Towne-house were the Kings

armes,  and  in  the  lower  part  of  the  scutchion  was  painted  Ambitious

a  globe  of  the  Sea  and  Land,  a  horse  standing  thereon  Armes.

with  his  hinder  legges, the  forepart  without  the  globe,

with this motto ascribed to his mouth, Non sufficit

Orbis.

From Saint Domingo they set saile  for  Carthagena  Cartagena
on  the  Continent,  landing  some  Companies  with  Captaine  assaulted  and
Carlile  five miles of, which  were  led on  by night,  the **
Generall with this  Fleete presenting themselves before
the chained Port : and having gotten the  Citie,  held
the same six weekes. They tooke Alonso  Bravo the
Governour. After  many  houses  burned  11000.  Duckets
were  paid  for  ransome  of  the  rest  from  burning. The
Calentura continued, killing some (being a pestilent
spotted Fever) and spoyling others of  their strength  Mortality  by
and  memory  for  a  long  time. The  Serena  or  Evening  a  Calentura.
ayre  is  said  to  cause  it  to  them  which  are  then  abroad,  The  Cause.
if  not  of  that  Countrey  :  so  that  by  holding  their  watch,
the  English  were thus infected. This forced them to
give over  their intended voyage to Nombre  de  Dios,
and  Panama,  sailing  therefore  alongst  the  coast  of  Florida,
they tooke and fired two garrison Townes of the  Other  Townes
Spaniards, Saint  Anthonie  *  and  Saint  Helena,  and the  f£Jn'r ,
Fort  of  Saint  John. Then  passing  alongst  the  Virginian  ot^ers  saint '
shore  they  tooke  home  the  English  Colonie  there  remain-  Augustln.
ing with Master Lane their Governour, sent by Sir
Walter  Raleigh. These  are  said  by  Master  Camden  to  First  use  of
have  beene  the  first  bringers  in  of  the  use  of  Tobacco,  Tobacco:  and
since  so  frequently  abused  by  our  Nation. They  arrived  v  ma7\  r  .

-n  11  o  rxi  cs J  thought)  of  the

at Portsmouth the 28. of July 1586. They got  fodish  kcke  at
Ordnance of  Brass above 200. peeces,  and about  40.  the  left  eare
of  Iron. The prey  was valued at 60000  li.  English,  which  the
There  dyed  (most  of  the  Calentura)  700.  persons. The  v*rg™mnssay
industry  of  the  Generall  in  all  places  is  remarkeable,  whose  appearin«  to
vigilance  and  bodily  presence,  and  labour  in  all  businesse  them)  taught
was much, that had he beene in the meanest  he  had  them-

121

A.D.

1586.

*This  voyage
is  printed  in
Master  Hak.
Tom.  2.  part
2.  but  finding
this  written
Relation,  I
thought  good  to
insert  it. It
was  written
by  one  Thos.
Pinner.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

merited  the  highest  place.  To  this  is  fittest  in  next
place  to  adde  his  Cadiz  exploit  Anno  1587.  and  the
taking  of  the  rich  Caracke,  called  Saint  Philip.

HEr  Majestie  being  informed  of  that  invincible
Armadas  preparing  in  Spaine  (which  did  come  and
was  overcome  the  yeare  after)  sent  a  fleete  of  30.  saile
under  the  command  of  Sir  Francis  Drake :  the  Bon-
adventure,  the  Lyon,  the  Dread-naught,  and  the  Rainbow
were  out  of  her  Navy  Royall  chosen  to  this  service.
The  16.  of  Aprill  two  Shippes  of  Midleborough  which
came  from  Cadiz  (with  whom  we  met  in  40.  degrees)
gave  him  to  understand  that  there  was  great  provision
in  Cadiz  and  thereabout  provided  to  come  to  Lisbone,
whereupon  the  Generall  with  all  possible  speede  bending
himselfe  thither  to  cut  of  the  forces  and  provisions,
the  19.  of  Aprill,  one  houre  before  the  Sunne  setting,
entred  the  harbour  of  Cadiz,  and  the  Spanish  Fleete  there
checked  us,  at  the  entring  thereat  with  the  Towne
Galleyes,  but  in  short  time  retired  under  the  Fortresse.

There  were  in  the  Roades  60.  Ships,  and  divers  other
small  shipping  under  the  fortresse.  There  fled  20.
French  Shippes  to  port  Riall,  and  some  Spaniards,  which
could  not  be  hindred  of  the  Fleete  by  reason  of  the
sholdnesse.  There  were  sunke  by  us  at  our  comming
in  with  shot,  one  Orgasey  of  1000.  tun,  furnished  with
thirty  peeces  of  Brasse,  and  richly  laden.  There  were
two  Gallies  more  came  presently  from  Port  Riall,  and
two  other  from  Saint  Mary  port,  but  all  in  vaine  the
expenses  of  powder  and  shot,  the  greatest  gaine  to  them-
selves.

There  were  to  the  number  of  38.  Shippes  taken  before
night,  and  the  English  victours  of  the  Roade :  the
Galleyes  retyring  under  the  Fortresses.  Twenty  Hulcks
Hollanders  confiscated  to  the  King,  and  their  goods  sold
to  the  Kings  use :  foureteene  of  them  were  fired,  the
other  six  were  at  port  Riall  laden  with  Wines  and
Bread, and to be presently full laden for Lishburne

122

SIR FRANCIS DRAKES VOYAGES  a.d.

1587.

one  Carricke  of  foureteene  hundreth  tun  appertaining
to  the  Marquis  of  Saint  Cruce ;  five  great  Biskainers
fired,  foure  of  them  lading  and  taking  in  of  victuals
for  the  Kings  provision  for  Lishburne,  the  Saint  was  a
Ship  of  1000.  tuns,  bound  for  Lishburne  having  in  her  Caricke  of
great  store  of  Pikes,  much  Iron,  Nailes,  Spikes,  Iron  I4"°°' tuns
hoopes,  and  such  like,  fired.  One  Shataya  laden  with
Wines  of  250.  tuns  for  the  Kings  provision,  which  we
brought  to  Sea  with  us,  and  discharged  at  Sea  a  part
of  their  Wines,  for  the  provision  of  the  Fleete,  and
there  fired  her.  Three  Flye-Boates  of  foure  hundreth
tunnes  laden  with  Bisket  whereof  the  one  being  of  two
hundred  tuns  and  upwards,  we  halfe  unladed  and  then
fired  her,  the  other  two  are  yet  with  us  in  company.
Some  tenne  Barkes  more  laden  with  Wines,  Raisons,
Figges,  Oyle,  Wheate,  with  such  like,  fired.  By  supposi-
tion the  eight  and  thirtie  Shippes  and  Barkes  fired,
sunke,  and  brought  away  with  us,  amounted  in  judge-
ment to  thirteene  thousand  tuns  of  shipping.  There
rid  in  sight  of  us  at  port  Riall,  by  estimation,  above
fortie  saile,  besides  those  that  fled  from  Cadiz  roade.

They  gave  us  little  ease  during  our  aboade  there,  which  [IV.
they  shot  from  the  Galleyes,  as  also  from  the  Fortresses
and  from  the  shore,  where  continually  they  planted  new
Ordnance  at  places  convenient  to  offend ;  notwithstanding
their  Ships  we  continually  fired  as  the  floud  came,  thereby
to  bee  cleared  of  them,  which  terrible  fire  was  pleasant
unto  us  to  behold,  and  mittigated  the  continuall  burthen
of  travaile,  which  lay  upon  us  day  and  night  in  dis-
charging, firing,  and  unlading,  such  provisions,  with
observations  for  good  and  gardable  defence  of  the  enemie.
It  pleased  the  Generall,  after  his  great  care  and  paines
day  and  night,  to  finish  this  happy  Action  in  her  Majesties
service,  in  one  day  and  two  nights,  and  hee  came  forth
againe  the  Friday  in  the  morning,  with  very  little  losse,
thankes  be  to  God.

Of  twelve Galleyes,  and those that came from  port
Riall,  and Saint  Mary  port, tenne  of  them  came  forth

123

S3-.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1587.

after  us,  as  it  were  to  make  some  pastime  with  their
great  Ordnance.  At  length,  the  winde  standing,  wee
cast  about  againe  and  strooke  in  for  the  shoare,  and  came
to  an  anker  within  a  league  of  Cales,  where  their  Galleyes
suffered  us  to  ride  quietly.  There  were  also  three  Flye
Boates  more  at  Mallegai  laden  with  Bysket,  bound  for
Calez,  and  so  for  Lishborne.  We  understood  of  their
great  provisions  and  forces  provided  within  the  straights.
We  doubt  not,  but  as  God  hath  begunne  this  worke  in
great  happinesse,  to  the  daunting  of  the  enemie :  so  God
will  blesse  this  Armie  in  cutting  daily  their  forces  shorter,
to  the  great  annoyance  of  the  enemy,  and  to  the  honour
of  our  Prince  and  Countrie.
Gally-fght.  Wee  have  had  the  experience  of  Galley  fights  (wherein
I  can  assure  you)  that  these  onely  foure  of  her  Majesties
Ships  wil  make  none  accompt  of  twenty  Galleyes ;  so
as  they  were  alone,  and  not  driven  to  guard  others.

There  were  Galleys  had  place  fitter  for  their  advantage
in  fight  upon  shot  they  received,  they  had  present  succour
to  ground  under  the  towne,  which  they  sundry  times  did
waye,  riding  in  a  narrow  gutter,  the  place  yeelding  no
better,  in  that  wee  were  driven  to  maintaine  the  same
untill  wee  had  discharged,  and  fired  the  Shippes,  which
could  not  conveniently  be  done  but  upon  the  floud ;  that
thereby  they  may  drive  cleare  of  us.

We  rest  now  victualed  with  Bread  and  Drinke,  for
six  moneths  in  our  Ships,  and  Bread  besides  in  two  flye
Boates  to  maintaine  a  good  Armie  three  moneths.  We
rest  all  in  good  love  with  our  Generall  and  unitie  in
all  the  whole  Fleete.

After  this,  they  came  before  the  haven  of  Lysbon,
where  the  Marquesse  of  Sancta  Cruz  was  with  his  Gallies,
whom  the  Generall  invited  to  some  exchange  of  Bullets,
but  he  refused.  Thence  they  sailed  to  the  Azores,  and
met  with  a  Portugall  Carracke,  called  Saint  Philip,  which
had  in  her  voyage  outward  carried  the  three  Japonian
Princes  into  the  Indies.  This  Carracke  he  tooke,  the
first  of  that  kinde  taken  by  the  English,  ominous  in  the

124

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE'S VOYAGES  ad.

1595.
name :  and  so  it  proved  not  onely  by  the  losse  of  so
great  wealth  to  King  Philip,  both  in  leading  the  daunce
to  others  after  taken,  and  in  opening  the  eyes  of  the
English  to  visite  the  Indian  fountaines,  whence  such
wealth  issued ;  wherein  also  the  Hollanders  quickly
imitated  them.

To omit  other brave exploits neerer home, as that
most  glorious of  88. and the rest: our purpose  is  to
give  you  the  remote  Voyages of  this  worthy  Sea-man  ;
and  now  lastly  that  last  and  fatall  expedition  Anno  1595.  Sir  Francis
with  sixe  of  the  Queenes  Ships  and  one  and  twenty  other  Drakes  last
Ships and Barkes, containing 2500. men and boyes,
intended for some speciall service  in the West  Indies.
Sir  Francis Drake and Sir  John  Hawkins  were  joyned
in Commission. They set saile from Plimmouth the
eight  and  twentieth  or  August. November  the  twelfth,
neere  the  Eastermost  end  of  Saint  Juan  de  Puerto  Rico,  Death  of  Sir
Sir  John  Hawkins  died. The  haven  of  Saint  John  they  John
found  strongly  fortified  against  them,  but  yet  they  fired  s  af  mp
their  five  Shippes  each  of  200. tunnes,  having  in  every  rjco.
of  them  twenty  Peeces  of  Brasse,  and  richly  laden. Much
harme  was  done  on  both  sides. The  five  and  twentieth
they  passed  by  Mona. In  the  beginning  of  December,
they tooke Rio de la Hacha. They tooke also the  R.delaHacha
Rancheria  or  fisher towne  for  Pearles. The Spaniards  taken:  and
offered  to  ransome  their  Towne  at  24000.  Ducates  which urnt'
they  brought  in  Pearle  so  dearely  rated,  that  the  General
sent  them  backe,  and  both  were  burnt. The  seventeenth
they  tooke  Tapia,  and  after  that  Saint  Martha,  and  the  Tapia.
Spanish  Lieutenant  Generall. The  seven  and twentieth  s-  Martha.
Nombre  de  Dios  was  taken,  a Towne  subject  to  raine,  N ombre  de
and  very  unhealthfull : the  roade  faire,  having  on  each  Dios-
side as you come a ledge of  rocks. The nine and
twentieth,  Sir  Thomas  Baskervile  with  750.  Land-soldiors  s.  Th.
went  for  Panama,  a  sore  march  thorow  the  woods,  the  Baskervile.
way cut  out of  the  woods  and rocks, very mirie, the
Spaniards  playing  on  them  out  of  the  woods. After  ten  March  for
leagues  march,  they  came  to  a  fort  on  the  top  of  a  hill :  Panama-

125

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1595.

two  such  more  were  betwixt  that  and  Panama,  that  also
strongly  fortified,  the  enemy  having  knowledge  before
of this designe. Hereby was he forced to returne.

S.  Fr.  Drakes  January  the  eight  and  twentieth,  Sir  Francis  Drake  died

death.  of  a  fluxe. He  made  his  brother  Thomas  Drakes  sonne

his  heire.  Sir  Thomas  Baskervill  succeeded.  The  six
and  twentieth  of  February  the  Spaniards  fleete  of  twenty

Sea-fght.  sailes,  and  the  English  met;  a  fight  followed,  &  con-
tinued two  houres,  and  then  they  parted.  A  great  Ship
of  the  Spaniards  that  night  was  burned.  In  Aprill
following  they  arrived  at  Plimmouth.

[IV.  vi.  In  this  Voyage  I  have  followed  the  printed  Relation :

Il8+0  but because  another hath  comne to  my  hands,  written

(as  it  seemes) by  one offended therein,  I have  to thy

other eare permitted him to speake, that freedome of

judgement  may  remayne  to  every  Reader.

THe seven and twentieth of  August, having our
dispatch from her Majestie, wee brought all our
fleet  into  the  Sound  of  Plimmouth,  and  the  eight  and
twentieth  day  wee  set  sayle  for  our  pretended  Voyage.
In our  course  alongst  the  Coasts  of  Spaine,  was  divers
Quarrel/ meetings  with  our  Generals,  where  passed  many  unkind
betwixt  the speeches,  and  such  as  Sir  John Hawkins  never  put  off
till  death. In  this  tract  was put on a resolution with
Sir Francis  Drake, and  Sir  Thomas  Baskervile  to  take
Reason  fir  and  the  Grand  Canaria,  whereupon  a  counsell  was  held,  and
against  the therein  propounded  by  Sir  Francis,  how  great  a  benefit,
exploit  much  honour,  and  good  refreshing  was  offered  us,  and

therefore  would  stand  on  most  voyces.  Sir  John  Hawkins
to  whom  hee  spake  this  utterly  refused  with  these  reasons
following.  First,  there  could  bee  no  need  considering
our  small  time  out.  Secondly,  not  possible  to  carrie  it
without  hazarding  all,  and  Thirdly,  not  good  to  lose
time,  which  would  never  be  recovered.  To  this  last
reason  Sir  Thomas  Baskervile  answered.  First,  for  time,
hee  would  require  but  foure  dayes  in  this  manner,  In
foure  houres  he  would take  it, and in the rest would

126

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE'S VOYAGES  a.d.

1595.
hee  burne  it  downe,  except  they  would  compound,  thus
the fourth day would he be shipped readie for our
Voyage.

In  this  controversie  Sir  Francis  would  goe  for  the
Canaria  with  such  as  would  follow  him,  and  Sir  John
Hawkins  with  the  rest  for  the  Indies,  yet  after  this  hard
debating,  at  the  earnest  request  of  some  friends,  Sir  John
Hawkins  upon  the  confessing  of  need,  was  content  to
assist  them,  yet  in  his  judgement  labour  lost  with  much
hazard  of  all.  Thus  altogether  standing  alongst,  the  sixe
and  twentieth  of  September  we  came  to  anchor  afore
the  Fort  that  guards  the  landing  place  at  Grand  Canaria,  The  Grand
where  were  put  into  our  Boates  and  Pinnasses,  all  our  Canaria.
land  men  under  the  conduct  of  Sir  Thomas  Baskervile
Colonell  Generall,  who  drew  head  neere  the  middest  of
the  Beatche,  betwixt  the  Fort  and  the  Towne,  as  most
safely  for  our  landing.  To  this  place  even  then  did  the
Spaniards  draw  two  or  three  very  small  Peeces  of
Ordnance,  with  which,  and  with  some  companies  of
Souldiers  made  some  shew  of  resistance,  whereupon
notwithstanding  most  of  our  smaller  shipping,  who
accompanied  our  Boats  with  their  Artillery,  Sir  Thomas
made  his  retraite  without  putting  foot  on  land,  and  then
to  know,  as  it  was  reported,  if  our  Generals  would  put
their  Voyage  thereon  or  no.  With  this  better  considera-
tion were  all  our  men  shipped  againe,  and  stood  alongst
to  the  Westermost  end  thereof.  Here  went  many
ashoare  some  for  water,  some  for  pleasure,  amongst
whom,  the  eight  and  twentieth  day  was  Captayne  Grim-
stone  with  two  more  in  his  company  slaine,  and  by
Peasants  as  was  thought :  with  this  evill  beginning,  this
night  wee  weighed  and  stood  alongst  for  the  Indies.

The  eight  and  twentieth  of  October,  wee  came  faire
by  the  Southermost  end  of  Dominica :  and  the  thirtieth  Dominica.
day  we  came  all  to  safe  anchoring  at  Guardalupa,  onely
the  Delight  and  the  Francis,  two  of  our  smallest  Pin-
nasses, who  being  to  leewards  out  of  sight,  was  there
chased  by  five  Spanish  ships,  in  which  chase  the  Francis

127

A.D.

1595-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Sir  J.  Haw-
kins sickneth

He  dyeth.

was  taken,  the  other  escaped  with  this  newes.  The  last
of  this  moneth  Sir  John  Hawkins  not  able  to  beare  his
griefes  out  longer,  sickned.  Here  we  built  seven  Pin-
nasses.  The  fourth  of  November  were  they  lanched,
and  we  stood  of  for  Porto  rico,  the  eight  day  in  the
way  we  anchored  among  the  Hands  Virgins,  where  all
our  Souldiers  were  appointed  to  their  land  Captaines.
The  twelfth  day  we  came  to  anchor  afore  the  Harbour

At  Porto  rico.  at  Porto  rico,  where  dyed  Sir  Nicholas  Clifford,  by  a
shot  from  a  platforme,  sitting  at  supper  in  the  Defiance,
with  this  shot  was  likewise  Master  Brewt  Browne  hurt,
who  lived  but  few  dayes  after,  and  this  day  also  died
Sir  John  Hawkins,  whose  death  of  many  was  much
lamented.

In  this  Harbour  rid  those  five  Frigats  of  the  Kings,
which  came  for  the  treasure.  This  place  beeing  well
viewed  by  our  Generall,  and  Colonell  Generall,  a  counsell
was  held  and  therein  agreed,  That  first  and  most
necessariest  these  Frigats  should  bee  burned,  and  for
that  service  was  named  out  the  next  night  thirtie  of  our
Boates  and  Pinnasses  with  fire-workes,  and  with  warlike
weapons,  these  Frigats  were  so  well  defended  aboord,  and
with  the  Ordnance  ashore,  that  our  men  returned  with
consuming  onely  one  of  them,  out  of  which  were  saved
some  of  the  Spaniards,  who  reported  certainly,  that  there

Treasure  lost,  the  Treasure  of  two  Millions  was,  and  so  were  our  men
taken  in  the  Francis.

Notwithstanding  all  these  quickning  newes  after  some
few  dayes,  we  weighed  and  stood  alongst  to  the  Wester-
most  end  of  this  Hand,  where  we  contented  us  with  some
refreshing  of  water,  Oranges  and  Plantanes,  here  were
built  foure  Pinnasses  more.  At  this  place  sent  hee
aboord  me  with  his  Warrant  fortie  Souldiers  out  of  the
Defiance.  The  foure  and  twentieth  day  we  weighed  and
stood  alongst  for  one  Hand,  called  Knaw-saw,  with  which
wee  fell  the  nine  and  twentieth  day,  but  stayed  not ;
thus  standing  alongst.  The  first  of  December  we  arrived
at  Cape  de  la  Vela,  the  second  in  the  morning  was  put

128

Knaw-saw.

SIR  FRANCIS  DRAKES  VOYAGES  a.d.

1595.
into  our  Boats  and  Pinnasses,  all  our  Souldiers  for  Rio  Rio  dela
dela  Hatcha. This  was  taken,  the  people  being  all  fled,  HatcAa.
yet  here  with search  in  the  Woods,  and  intelligence  of
some  Negros, was  found great store of  Pearle, Plate,
Jewels,  Rials  of  Plate,  Bolts  of  Silke,  rich  apparell,  with
much  other  luggage. The  sixt  of  this  moneth,  brought
in  Sir  Francis  from  one  other  Towne  called  Rancharia,
great  quantitie of  Pearle and  luggage. The  ninth day
came in some  Spaniards,  with intent to ransome their
houses,  Negros,  and  some  Spaniards  Prisoners,  and  con-
cluded for  24000.  Pezos,  every  Pezo  worth  five  shillings
sixe  pence. The  thirteenth day,  came  in the  same  all
in  Pearle,  and  the  fourteenth  day  came  in  their  Lieutenant
for  the  delivery. But  in  the  valuing,  their  quantity  and  tIV-  vl-
quality  would not be taken, wherefore departed they  ll  S*J

with  foure  houres  respite  for  further  answere  from  their
Governour  Don  Francisco  Manso,  his  answere  was  him-
selfe  would  come  to  conference,  which  hee  did  the
sixteenth  day.  After  dinner  our  Generall  and  Colonell
Generall,  with  the  Spaniards  had  secret  conference  about
this  Ransome,  whereupon  concluding,  they  absolutely
broke  of,  and  therefore  in  all  haste  was  fire  put  in  some
of  the  houses,  and  the  Governour  had  two  houres  time
to  cleere  him  of  our  Army.

Thus  having  burnt  Rio  de  la  Hatcha,  Rancharia,  and
Tapia. The eighteenth day wee weighed and stood
alongst  for  Sancta  Marca,  to  which  we  came  the  twentieth  Santa  Marta.
day,  here  we  onely  tooke  some  fivG  Prisoners,  whereof
one  was  the  Lieutenant  there. The  one  and  twentieth,
it  was put to fire,  and  we set sayle for Nombre de
Dios,  to  which  we  came  the seven  and  twentieth  day,
where  in  like  manner  the  people  had  acquited  the  Towne,
yet  here  was  found  by  intelligence  of  some  Negros,  as
I  heard,  two  and  twentie  Sowes  of  Silver,  Gold  in  Bullion,
some  Jewels, great  store  of  Plate,  and Riall  of  Plate,
with  much  other  luggage. The  nine  and  twentieth  day,  sirT.Basker-
Sir  Thomas Baskervile, Colonell Generall with all his  vils  journey
ablest  Captaines  and Souldiers tooke their  journey  for  for  Panama.
xvi  129  1

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1595.

Panama,  now  the  marke  of  our  Voyage  :  who  neere
the  mid-way  being  empeached  by  some  Spaniards  and
Negros,  made  their  retreite  to  the  Ships  at  Nombre  de
Dios,  at  this  encounter  were  few  of  our  men  slaine,  some
hurt,  some  of  the  which  were  there  left  to  the  mercie
of  the  Spaniards.

The  fifth  day  of  January,  all  our  men  being  shipped,
the  towne  and  Galliots  put  to  fire,  we  set  sayle  then  by
the advice  of  a Spaniard,  for the River Nicorago, in
Escudo.  which  way  we  fell  with  one  Hand  called  Escudo,  a  place

which  afFordeth  nothing  good,  yet  here  wee  stayed  from
the  tenth  day  untill  the  three  and  twentieth,  when  we  set
sayle  and  plied  to  the  Eastward,  which  by  Gods  speciall
favour,  the  eight  and  twentieth  day  we  came  in  with
Sir F.  Drakes  Porta  Jaibella.  This  morning  died  our  Generall  Sir
death.  Francis  Drake. This is  the  place  where  the  people  of

Nombre  de  Dios  meaneth  to  dwell  at.  Here  found  we
a  beginning  of  a  strong  platforme  with  three  Brasse
Peeces  unmounted.  In  my  opinion,  this  was  our  best
remove,  for  if  God  had  not  prevented  our  Generals
purpose  for  the  River  Nicorago,  it  would  have  hazarded
all  her  Majesties  Ships,  farre  with  the  rest.  Here  tooke
we  in  ballast,  water,  mended  our  sayles,  and  calked  our
ships,  such  as  had  need.

The  eight  of  February,  Sir  Thomas  Baskervile  taking
upon  him  Generall,  we  all  set  saile  for  Santa  Marta
homewards,  but  not  able  to  recover  higher  then  Cartha-
gena,  as  wee  ghesse  in  the  Bonaventure,  with  the  splitting
of  all  our  sayles,  put  over  for  Jamaica.  In  this  course
lost  we  the  Fore-sight,  the  Susan  Parnell,  the  Helpe,
and  the  Gregory.  The  five  and  twentieth  day  came
we  faire  by  Canaria  granda,  which  bore  over  us  in  the
morning  East  North-east,  and  this  day  was  all  our  flesh
and  fish  spent.  The  second  of  March,  making  this  our
miserie  like  to  be  known  to  Sir  Thomas  Baskervile,  who
hath  given  mee  his  promise  to  relieve  mee  at  my  need,
his  answere  was  carelesly  for  us,  and  with  all  said  hee
would  goe  in  with the Hand Pinos to water,  which I

130

SIR  FRANCIS  DRAKES  VOYAGES  a.d.

1595-
utterly  misliked, the winde then being good to stand
alongst,  very  ill  to  lose,  and  more  for  that  no  English-
man in our fleete either  knew or ever heard of  any
watering  or  other  good  there.

In  this  reasoning  betwixt  us,  we  descried  twentie  sayle
of  ships  a-head  us,  who  were  the  Kings  men  of  Warre,
wayting  our  home  comming,  it  was  my  fortune  in  the
Bonaventure  to  take  to  taske  the  Vice-admirall,  one  of
the  twelve  Apostles  of  the  Kings,  for  so  I  thought  by
a  great  golden  Saint,  which  manned  her  Poope.  The
manner  of  our  fight  and  my  deserving,  I  leave  even
to  the  report  of  mine  enemies,  yet  thus  much  under-
stand, their  Admirall  with  the  rest,  all  the  next  day
being  in  the  winde,  was  content  we  should  passe  in
peace.  Thus  being  quietly,  and  we  all  disimbogued
some  two  hundred  leagues,  I  made  a  second  demand
of  Sir  Thomas,  his  promise  for  victuals,  which  he
utterly  refused,  wherefore  as  well  in  regard  of  our
Generals  lacke  as  mine  owne  danger,  with  a  shot  in
our  fight,  wherein  it  was  indifferent  with  mee  to  live
or  die,  I  told  him  I  must  make  more  haste  home  then
I  presumed  hee  would,  yet  wee  stayed  with  him  two
dayes  longer,  when  in  a  storme  I  left  him,  and  this
was  the  fourteenth  day  of  March.

Now  for  these  two  English  Sea-worthies,  as  wee  have
begunne  their  American  Adventures,  and  ended  them
together,  so  I  have  thought  good  to  insert  this  follow-
ing censure  of  a  Gentleman  in  a  Letter  of  his,  touching
them  both,  as  an  Epitaph  dedicated  to  their  memory.

Sir,  I  have  according  to  your  request,  and  my  owne
plainnesse  sent  you  here  the  comparison  betweene
those  two  Commanders  Sir  Francis  Drake  and  Sir  John
Hawkins.  They  were  both  much  given  to  travell  in
their  youth  and  age,  attempting  many  honourable  Voyages
alike ;  as  that  of  Sir  John  Hawkins  to  Guiny,  to  the  lies
of  America,  to  Saint  John  de  Ulua.  So  likewise  Sir
Francis  Drake  after  many  Discoveries  of  the  West  Indies,

131

n86.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1595.

and  other  parts,  was  the  first  Englishman  that  did  ever
compasse  the  World ;  wherein,  as  also  in  his  deepe
judgement  in  Sea  causes,  he  did  farre  exceed  not  Sir
John  Hawkins  alone,  but  all  others  whomsoever.  In
their  owne  natures  and  disposition  they  did  as  much
differ;  as  in  the  managing  matters  of  the  Warres,  Sir
Frances  beeing  of  a  lively  spirit,  resolute,  quicke,  and
sufficiently  valiant :  The  other  slow,  jealous,  and  hardly
brought  to  resolution.  In  Councell  Sir  John  Hawkins
did  often  differ  from  the  judgement  of  others,  seeming
thereby  to  know  more  in  doubtfull  things,  then  he  would
utter.  Sir  Francis  was  a  willing  hearer  of  every  mans
opinion,  but  commonly  a  follower  of  his  owne :  he
never  attempted  any  action,  wherein  he  was  an  absolute
[IV.  vi.  Commander, but hee performed the same  with great

'J  reputation,  and  did  easily  dispatch  great  matters  ;
Contrariwise  Sir  John  Hawkins  did  only  give  the
bare  attempt  of  things,  for  the  most  part  without  any
Fortune  or  good  successe  therein.  Sir  John  Hawkins
did  naturally  hate  the  Land-souldier,  and  though  hee
were  very  popular,  yet  he  affected  more  the  common
sort,  then  his  equals ;  Sir  Francis  contrarily  did  much
love  the  Land-souldier,  and  greatly  advanced  good  parts,
wheresoever  he  found  them.  Hee  was  also  affable  to
all  men  and  of  easie  accesse.  They  were  both  of  many
vertues,  and  agreeing  in  some.  As  patience  in  enduring
labours  and  hardnesse,  Observation  and  Memory  of
things  past,  and  great  discretion  in  sudden  dangers,  in
which,  neither  of  them  was  much  distempered,  and  in
some  other  vertues  they  differed.  Sir  John  Hawkins
had  in  him  mercie  and  aptnesse  to  forgive,  and  true
of  word  ;  Sir  Francis  hard  in  reconciliation,  and  con-
stancie  in  friendship  ;  he  was  withall  severe  and  cour-
teous, magnanimous,  and  liberall.  They  were  both
faultie  in  ambition,  but  more  the  one  then  the  other  ;
For  in  Sir  Francis  was  an  insatiable  desire  of  honour
indeed  beyond  reason.  He  was  infinite  in  promises,
and  more  temperate  in  adversity,  then  in  better  Fortune.

132

SIR  FRANCIS  DRAKES  VOYAGES  a.d.

1591.

He  had  also  other  imperfections,  as  aptnesse  to  anger,
and  bitternesse  in  disgracing,  and  too  much  pleased  with
open  flattery  :  Sir  John  Hawkins  had  in  him  malice
with  dissimulation,  rudenesse  in  behaviour,  and  passing
sparing,  indeed  miserable.  They  were  both  happy  alike
in  being  Great  Commanders,  but  not  of  equall  successe,
and  grew  great  and  famous  by  one  meanes,  rising  through
their  owne  Vertues,  and  the  Fortune  of  the  Sea.  Their
was  no  comparison  to  bee  made  betweene  their  wel-
deserving  and  good  parts,  for  therein  Sir  Francis  Drake
did  farre  exceede.  This  is  all  I  have  observed  in  the
Voyages,  wherein  I  have  served  with  them. ^ ^

A  briefe  recitall  or  nomination  of  Souldiers,  other
Englishmens  Voyages  related  at  large  in  the
printed  Works  of  Master  Hakluyt.

OTher Voyages might here be inserted, made by
Englishmen into the Bay  of  Mexico, as that by
Captayne  W.  Michelson,  and  William  Mace  of  Ratcliffe,  Captaine
in the  Dogge 1589.  which there tooke three shippes.  Michelson.
They  held  fight  with  a  Spanish  man  of  Warre,  who  by
fraud sought perfidiously to obtayne that which they
could not by  unspotted Fortitude. They put out a
flagge  of  Truce,  and  after  kinde  entertaynement  aboord
the English, invited them to their shippe,  where they  Treachery  of
assaulted them,  stabbing  Roger  Kingsnold the  Pilot  to  Spaniards.
the  Heart,  staying  others,  and  forcing  the  rest  to  trust
God  and  the  Sea  rather  then  the  Devill  and  the  Spaniards;
thus  swimming  to  their  ship.

The  valiant  fight  of  the  Content,  a  small  ship  of  Sir  Sir  G.
George Careys, (Lord Hundsdon,  Lord  Chamberlaine)  Careys.
1 59 1.  June 13.  with  three  great  Spanish  ships,  each  of
six  or seven hundred,  and one small shippe  and two
Gallies, farre more beeing slaine  of  the enemies then
the  English  had  to  fight : I  leave  to Master  Hakluyts
report  : as also Captayne Christopher Newport his  Captaine
Voyage with three ships and a Pinnasse the same  Newport.

i33

A.D.
1591

Earle  of

Suffolke.
Thirteene
sayles  English
before
Havana.
Sir  R.Dudley.

Captaine

Amias

Preston.

Captaine

Summers.

Sir  Antonie
S  her  ley.
Captaine
Parker.
Sir  W.
Raleigh.
M.  W.
Hawkins.
M.  Reniger.
M.  Pudsey.
M.  Hare.
Sir  J.
Lancaster.
Fenton  and
Ward.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

yeere,  which  tooke  and  spoyled  Yaguana  and  Ocoa  in
Hispaniola,  and  Truxillo,  besides  other  Prizes,  and  in
the  way  homeward,  were  at  the  taking  of  the  Madre
de  Dios.

The  next  yeere  Captayne  Lane  Gen.  of  Master  Wats
his  fleete,  Captayne  Roberts  in  the  Exchange  of  Bristoll,
and  Captayne  Benjamin  Wood  with  foure  shippes  set
forth  by  the  Lord  Thomas  Howard,  Captayne  Kenell  of
Lime-house,  and  Captayne  King  of  Ratcliffe  Road,  with
thirteene  sayles  before  Havana,  wayting  for  purchase.

Anno  1594.  the  Honourable  Sir  Robert  Dudley  set
forth  with  two  ships  and  two  Pinnasses,  and  made  his
Voyage  to  Trinidada,  and  the  Coast  of  Paria,  returning
by  the  lies  of  Granata,  Santa  Cruez,  Santa  Juan  de
Puerto  Rico,  Mona,  Zachco,  and  Bermuda.  In  which
Voyage  he  and  his  company  tooke  or  sunke  nine  Spanish
ships ;  of  which  one  was  a  man  of  Warre  of  sixe  hundred
tuns.  The  particulars  are  related  by  himselfe  in  Master
Hakluyt.

In  him  also  the  Reader  may  find  the  victorious  Voyage
of  Captayne  Amias  Preston,  and  Captayne  George
Summers  (both  since  Knights)  Anno  1595.  in  which
the  lies  of  Puerto  Santo,  and  of  Coche  neere  Margarita,
the  Fort  and  Towne  of  Coro,  the  Citie  of  Saint  Iago
de  Leon,  were  sacked  and  burnt ;  the  Towne  of  Cumana
ransomed,  and  Jamaica  entred.

Sir  Antonie  Sherley.  Anno  1596.  set  forth  from
Hampton,  with  nine  ships  and  a  Galley,  to  Saint  Iago
Dominica,  Margarita,  Jamaica,  Bay  of  Honduras,  and
homewards  by  Newfoundland.  This  and  Captayne
Parkers  Voyage  1596.  to  the  same  parts  and  Ports,
with  his  taking  of  Campeche  the  chiefe  Towne  of
Iacatan,  and  bringing  thence  a  Frigat,  laden  with  the
Kings  Tribute :  Also  the  Voyages  of  Sir  Walter  Raleigh
to  Guiana,  and  other  intelligences  of  that  Nation  :  like-
wise Master  William  Hawkins  his  Voyages  to  Brasill,
and  those  of  Reniger  and  Borey,  Pudsey,  Stephen  Hare,
Sir  James  Lancasters  taking  of  Fernambuc : Fenton  and

i34

EARLY VOYAGES TO AMERICA  a.d.

1589.

Ward,  and  John  Drakes  Voyage  after  his  departure  from  John  Drake.
Fenton  up  the  River  of  Plate,  and  living  fifteene  moneths
with  the  Savages,  Anno 1582.

All these  I referre  to  the  painfull  labours  of  Master  [IV-  vi-
Hakluyt,  who  hath  well  deserved  of  the  English  Nation,  1 7*

and  of  these  Neptunian  Heroes,  that  I  mention  not  the
many  Voyages  of  others  in  those  times  of  difference
betwixt  England  and  Spaine,  which  here  and  there  you
shall  finde  mention  of  in  these  Relations.  Also,  Anno
1589.  three  ships  were  set  forth  by  Master  Chidlie  and
others  for  the  Magellan  Straites,  one  of  which  arrived
there  and  tooke  there  a  Spaniard,  one  of  the  foure
hundred  which  had  beene  sent  thither  to  inhabit,  which
had  long  lived  there  alone,  the  rest  being  famished.
They  spent  sixe  weekes  there  with  contrary  winds,  and
sixe  only  of  their  company  returned,  they  also  being
racked  on  the  Coast  of  Normandie,  as  W.  Magoths
one  of  the  sixe  hath  related.

These  I  doe  but  summarily  mention,  as  an  Index
rather  to  Master  Hakluyts  labours,  then  with  any  intent
to  give  the  discourse  thereof.  But  the  strange  fortunes
of  Peter  Carder  (not  hitherto  published)  compell  me  to
take  speciall  notice  thereof,  which  himselfe  hath  thus
related.

[Chap.  V,
i35

A.D.
1578-86.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Captaine
Winters
returne.
With  this
Cap.  Winter
I  have  had
conference  in
Sept.  1 61 8.  at
Bath:  which
told  me  that
solemne  pos-
session was
actually  taken
of  those  parts,
to  the  use  of
her  Majesty
and  her  succes-
sors :  which  he
desired  also
should  be
published  to
the  World.
The  names
of  his
companions.

Chap. V.

The  Relation  of  Peter  Carder  of  Saint  Verian  in
Cornwall,  within  seven  miles  of  Falmouth,
which  went  with  Sir  Francis  in  his  Voyage
about  the  World,  begun  1577.  who  with
seven  others  in  an  open  Pinnasse  or  Shallop
of  five  tuns,  with  eight  Oares,  was  separated
from  his  Generall  by  foule  weather  in  the
South  Sea,  in  October,  An.  1578.  who  return-
ing by  the  Straites  of  Magellan  toward  Brazill,
were  all  cast  away,  save  this  one  only  afore
named,  who  came  into  England  nine  yeeres
after  miraculously,  having  escaped  many
strange  dangers,  aswell  among  divers  Savages
as  Christians.

Fter  Sir  Francis  Drake  had  passed  the
Straites  of  Magellan,  the  sixt  of  Septem-
ber 1578.  and  was  driven  downe  to  the
Southwards  in  the  South  Sea,  unto  the
latitude  of  fiftie  five  degrees,  and  a  terse,
with  such  accidents  as  are  mentioned  in
his  Voyage,  and  returning  backe  toward
the  Straite  againe.  The  eight  of  October  we  lost  sight
of  the  Elizabeth,  one  of  our  Consorts,  wherein  Master
John  Winter  was,  who  returned  by  the  Straites  againe,
as  wee  understood  afterward  at  our  comming  home  into
England ;  according  to  his  Voyage  extant  in  print.
Shortly  after  his  separation  from  our  company,  our
Generall  commanded  eight  men  to  furnish  our  small
Pinnasse  or  Shallop  with  eight  men,  whose  names  were
these,  my  selfe,  Peter  Carder  aforesaid,  Richard  Burnish
of  London,  John  Cottle  and  another,  both  servants  to
Master  John  Hawkins,  Artyur  a  Dutch  Trumpetor,
Richard  Joyner,  servant  to  Vincent  Scoble  of  Plimmouth,

136

PETER CARDER  ad.

1578-86.

Pasche Gidie of Salt Ashe, and William Pitcher of
London.

This company was commanded to waite upon the
ship  for  all necessary uses, but  having  not passed  one
dayes  victuals  in  us,  nor  any  Card  nor  Compasse,  saving
only  the benefit  of  eight  oares,  in the  night time  by
foule weather  suddenly  arising  we  lost  the  sight  of  our  They  lose  their
ship,  and  though  our ship  sought  us  and  we  them,  for  ship.
a  fortnight together, yet could  we  never  meet  together
againe. Howbeit  within  two  dayes  after  we  lost  them,
we  recovered  the  shoare,  and  releeved our selves  with
Muscels, Oysters, Crabs,  and some sorts of  Roots in
the  Woods, and  within a fortnight after the losse  of
our  consorts, wee returned backe into the Straites of  Their  returne
Magellan,  and  in  two  places  came  on  land  on  the  mayne  *"*  e,htratts:
of  America, to relieve our selves in certaine Bayes,  tjim  t0  t^e
where  wee  found  Oysters,  Muscels  and  Crabs  as  before,  North  Sea.
and  filled our  Barricos  with fresh  water,  and in  one  of
these  places  we  found  Savages,  but  they  fled  from  us.

Afterward  we  came  to  Penguin  Hand  in  the  Straites,  Penguin

O  j  1 j

and there  wee  salted  and  dryed  many  of  the  Penguins a '

for  our  sustenance. Thence  we shaped our  course  for

Port  Saint  Julian, where  Sir Francis  Drake not many  Port  Saint

moneths  before  had  beheaded  Captayne  Doutie : In  this utan'

Port we stayed a day or two, and tooke fish like

Breames  and Mackerils,  with hookes  and  lines. Then

costing the land for some fortnight, some hundred

leagues beyond  the River of  Plate,  wee  found  a  small  River  of  Plate.

Hand three leagues from the mayne full of Seales,  Seales.

whereof  wee  killed good  store to our sustenance, the

young  ones  we  found  best  and  eate  them  roast. Then

passing  over  the River  of  Plate  to  the  North  side,  we

put  into  a small  River,  and went up into  the Woods

sixe  of  us : other  two  remayning  on  the  shore  to  looke

to  the  Boat.

While  we  were  thus  seeking  food  in  the  Woods  the
people  of  the  Countrey,  called  Tapines,  some  sixtie  or
seventie  armed  with  Bowes  and  Arrowes  shot  fiercely  at

i37

A.D.
1578-86.
Foure  English
taken  by
Savages,  the
rest  wounded.

[IV.  vi.

1188.]
Two  dye.

Their
Pinnasse  lost.

Pitcher  iff

Carder

remayne.

No  fresh
water.
They  drinke
urine.

Red  urine.

Passage  to  the
Mayne.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

us,  and  wounded  us  all  very  grievously,  and  foure  of
us  were  taken  by  them,  and  never  recovered :  the  rest
of  us  they  pursued  to  our  Pinnasse,  and  wounded  us
all :  but  in  the  end  we  put  them  to  flight.  Thence  we
went  to  an  Hand  some  three  leagues  of  in  the  Sea,  not
above  a  league  in  compasse.  Where  wee  cured  our
selves  as  well  as  we  might,  yet  so,  that  two  of  us  died
of  our  late  wounds,  and  that,  which  was  worse  for  want
of  helpe.  Through  foule  weather  our  Pinnasse  was
dasht  against  the  Rockie  shoare  and  broken,  and  now
there  remayned  alive  of  us  eight,  no  more  but  my  selfe,
Peter  Carder  and  William  Pitcher.

Here  we  remayned  the  space  of  two  moneths,  in  all
which  time  for  our  victuals,  wee  had  a  fruit  somewhat
like  unto  Oranges,  growing  upon  a  high  Tree,  the  leafe
whereof  was  somewhat  like  the  Aspen  leafe,  and  small  ;
white  Crabs  creeping  upon  the  sand,  and  little  Eeles
which  we  found  under  the  sands,  but  in  all  this  Hand
we  could  not  find  any  fresh  water  in  the  World,  inso-
much, that  we  were  driven  to  drinke  our  owne  urine,
which  we  saved  in  some  sheards  of  certaine  Jarres,  which
we  had  out  of  our  Pinnasse,  and  set  our  urine  all  night
to  coole  therein,  to  drinke  it  the  next  morning,  which
thus  being  drunke  often,  and  often  avoyded,  became  in
a  while  exceeding  red,  in  all  this  time  wee  had  no  raine,
nor  any  good  meanes  to  save  it,  if  it  had  fallen,  where-
upon, seeing  our  selves  in  so  great  extremitie,  wee
devised  how  we  might  get  unto  the  Mayne,  and  by
good  fortune,  found  a  planke  of  some  ten  foot  in
length,  which  of  likelihood  had  driven  from  the  River
of  Plate,  whereunto  with  withes,  wee  bound  some  other
wood,  and  furnishing  our  selves  with  the  foresaid  fruit,
Eeles  and  Crabs,  wee  committed  our  selves  to  God ;
hoping  with  the  setting  in  of  the  tyde,  and  with  the
helpe  of  two  poles,  which  we  used  in  stead  of  Oares
to  attayne  unto  the  Mayne,  which  was  some  three
leagues  off,  but  wee  made  it  three  dayes  and  two  nights
before  we  could  come  to  the  Mayne.
138

PETER CARDER  ad.

1578-86.

At  our  comming  first  on  land,  we  found  a  little
River  of  very  sweet  and  pleasant  water,  where  William
Pitcher  my  onely  comfort  and  companion  (although  I
diswaded  him  to  the  contrary)  over  dranke  himselfe,
being  pinched  before  with  extreame  thirst,  and  to  my
unspeakeable  griefe  and  discomfort,  within  halfe  an  houre  Pitcher
after  dyed  in  my  presence,  whom  I  buried  aswell  as  I  ^eakes  with
could  in  the  sand.  %!£****

The  next  day  following,  as  I  travelled  along  the
shoare  towards  Brasill,  having  mine  Arming  Sword  and
Target  with  me,  I  met  with  some  thirtie  of  the  Savages  Tuppan  basse
of  the  Countrey,  called  Tuppan  Basse,  which  being  armed  Savages.
with  Bowes  and  Arrowes,  and  having  two  or  three  great
Rattles  with  stones  in  them,  and  a  kind  of  Tabrets
that  they  used  in  stead  of  Drummes,  they  went  dancing
before  me  about  a  Musket  shot  off,  and  then  they
stayed  and  hanged  up  a  piece  of  a  white  Net  of  Cotton-
wooll,  upon  a  sticks  end  of  foure  foote  high,  and  went
from  it  about  a  Musket  shot  off:  then  I  comming  unto
it,  tooke  it  in  my  hand,  viewed  it,  and  hung  it  up
againe,  then  many  of  them,  beckning  and  weaving  with
their  hands,  cryed  unto  mee,  Iyorie,  Iyorie,  which  (as
afterward  I  understood,  by  living  long  among  them)  was
as  much  as  Come  hither,  Then  I  came  to  them,  and  Hegoethwith
they  friendly  led  me  a  long  some  halfe  a  mile,  all  the  them-
way  dancing,  as  well  men  as  women,  whereof  there
were  some  eight  in  the  company,  untill  we  came  to
another  River  side,  where  they  hanged  up  their  Beds,
tying  them  fast  to  a  couple  of  Trees,  being  a  kinde  of
white  Cotton  Netting,  which  hanged  two  foot  from  the
ground,  and  kindled  fire  of  two  sticks,  which  they  made
on  both  sides  of  their  Beds,  for  warmth,  and  for  driving
away  of  wilde  beasts,  and  having  fed  me  with  such  as
they had :  we  tooke  our  rest  for  that  night.

The  next  day  earely  in  the  morning  they  tooke  downe
and  trussed  up  their  beds,  crying  tiasso,  tiasso,  which
is  to  say,  away,  away,  and  marched  that  day  towards
Brasill  some twentie miles,  and came to their Towne

139

A.D.

1578-86.

Savage  tozvne
described.

Caiou  their
Lord.

Hospital!

entertainment.

He  learneth
their
language.
Their  warres.

Captives.

Man-eating.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

where  their  chiefe  Governour  was.  The  Towne  was
built  foure  square,  with  foure  houses  onely,  every  house
containing  above  two  Bowe  shot  in  length,  and  the
houses  made  with  small  trees  like  an  Arbour,  being
thatched  over  downe  to  the  ground  with  Palme  tree
leaves :  they  have  no  windowes,  but  some  thirtie  or  fortie
doores  on  every  side  of  this  squadron,  by  which  each
Familie  passeth  in  and  out;  their  chiefe  Lord,  whose
name  was  Caiou,  being  a  man  of  some  forty  yeares  old,
had  nine  wives ;  but  the  rest  have  onely  one  wife,  except
such  as  are  counted  more  valiant  then  the  rest  which
are  permitted  two  wives,  one  to  looke  to  their  children
at  home,  and  the  other  to  goe  to  the  warres  with  them.
This  Towne  contained  very  neere  4000.  persons  of  all
sorts.  The  next  day  the  Governour  sent  divers  of  his
people  abroad  to  bring  in  all  sorts  of  victuall  which  the
Countrie  yeelded,  and  offered  them  unto  me  to  see
which  of  them  I  liked  best,  among  which  there  was  great
store  of  fish,  as  well  Sea-fish  as  freshwater-fishes,  many
sorts  of  Fowles,  many  sorts  of  Rootes,  and  divers  Land-
beasts,  as  Armadillos,  which  afterward  I  found  to  be  very
good  meate.  Of  all  these  at  the  first,  I  onely  tooke
one  Fowle,  and  a  couple  of  fishes,  and  bestowed  the
rest  among  their  children,  which  procured  me  no  small
good  will  among  them.

Here  I  staied  among  them  (being  well  entertained)  for
certaine  moneths,  untill  I  had  learned  most  part  of  their
language,  in  which  meane  space  I  noted  their  manners,
which  were  as  followeth.  They  went  out  to  the  warres
armed  at  my  first  comming,  onely  with  Bowes  and
Arrowes,  some  three  or  foure  hundred  at  a  time,  and
when  they  had  the  victory  of  their  enemies,  they  tied
one  of  their  Captives  to  one  of  their  company  with
Cotten  cords  fast  arme  to  arme,  and  bringing  them  home,
within  two  or  three  daies  after  they  would  tie  them  to
a  poast,  and  with  a  massie  club  of  red  wood  one  of  the
strongest  of  the  company  (after  they  have  drunke  a
certaine  strong  drinke  with  dancing  round  about  him)  at

140

PETER CARDER  ad.

1578-86.

one blow  slits  his  head  a  sunder : this drinke  is  made  [IV.  vi.

by  their  women  of  a certaine  roote  called  I.  P.  which . Il89-]

first  they  seeth,  and afterward chew  in their mouthes,  anYdrunken-

and  then  spit  it  out  againe  into  a  long  trough,  and  mingle  nesse,

it  with  water,  and  there  let  it  worke  two  or  three  daies,

and  gather  yeest  upon  it,  like  to  an  Ale  :  which  done,

they  take  the  liquor  and  put  it  into  broad  mouth  Jarres

of  earth,  and  of this  both their  men and  women  doe

drinke at their feasts, till they be as drunke as

Apes.

I  could  observe  no  religion  amongst  them,  but  onely  Religion.
that  they  reverence  and  worshippe  the  Moone,  especially
the  new  Moone  ; whereat  they  doe  rejoyce  in  leaping,
dancing, and  clapping their  hands. The Merchantable
commodities  of  this  Countrie,  are  Brasill-wood,  Tobacco,
red  Pepper,  and Cotten  Wooll. They  have  also  great
store of  Apes, Monkies, Armadillos, Hogges  without
tailes  as  bigge  as  ours  ; their Birds are Parrats, Par-
raketos,  blacke  Fowles  as  bigge  as  Doves,  and  Ostriches
as  high  as  a  man. After  I  had  lived  about  halfe  a  yeare
amongst them, and learned their language, the King
requested  me to goe to the warres with him  against
his  enemies the  Tapwees, which I granted,  but  before
we  set  out,  I  shewed  them  a  way  for  making  of  certaine  He  teacheth
Targets  of  the  barke  of  a  Tree  some  three  quarters  of  tj^m  t0  make
a  yard long  for defence against  Arrowes, whereof  we  r%fe/
made  some  hundred  ;  and  withall  I  wished  them  to  make
some  two hundred of  Clubs. Which being done we
marched  forward  some  700.  in  number,  which  by  mine
advice  were all marked with a red  kinde  of  Balsome
from  the  knee  downeward  upon  one  legge,  to  be  known
from  our  enemies (by the  way it  is  to be noted  that
there  are  three  sorts  of  Balsamum  in  that  Countrie,  to  Three  kindes
wit,  White,  Red and Blacke very  odoriferous  and  ex-  of  Balsome.
cellent good for a greene wound, and the White I
esteeme  to  be best.) In three dayes march we  came
to  another  Towne  built  foure  square,  as  before  I  have
declared,  but  much  lesser  ;  we  set  upon  the  Towne  about

141

A.D.

1578-86.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Man-eating,
Spoiles.

Notes  of
gentrie.

foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  the  enemy  standing
upon  defence  of  their  Arrowes,  were  much  deceived
by  reason  of  our  Targets,  which  being  seconded  by  our
Clubbes,  wee  immediately  knocked  downe  to  the  number
of  two  hundred,  the  rest,  except  some  twenty  prisoners
escaped  into  the  woods.  Here  the  King  staied  one  day,
and  caused  many  of  thir  carkases  to  be  broyled  upon
the  coals  and  eaten.  The  chiefest  riches  which  we  found
here  was  their  drinke  which  they  used  to  make  them-
selves drunke  withall  ;  their  Cotten  Beddes  and  their
Tobacco.  As  for  Gold  and  Silver  they  neither  seeke,
nor  make  any  accompt  thereof.  This  is  to  be  noted,
that  how  many  men  these  Savages  doe  kill,  so  many
holes  they  will  have  in  their  visage,  beginning  first  in
their  nether  lippe,  then  in  their  cheekes,  thirdly  in  both
their  eye-browes,  and  lastly  in  their  eares.  Those  twenty
prisoners  which  we  brought  home,  were  afterward  killed,
rosted  and  eaten.

While  I  remayned  here  amongst  these  people,  certayn
Portugals  accompanied  with  certayn  Negros  and  Brazil-
ians, came  within  some  ten  leagues  of  our  town,  to  see
whether  they  could  surprise  any  of  our  Savages,  and
to  harken  what  was  become  of  me,  for  that  they  had
heard  by  this  time  that  some  of  Sir  Francis  Drakes
company  were  cast  ashoare  amongst  the  Savage  people,
but  there  comming  was  not  so  secret,  but  that  two  of
the  Portugals  and  certayne  Negros  were  taken,  and  after
their  confession,  of  the  intent  of  their  comming  thither,
they  were  brained  with  clubs,  broyled  and  eaten.  These
things  thus  passing,  I  became  sutor  to  the  King  to  give
mee  leave  to  depart  his  Countrey,  and  to  goe  to  some
River  of  Brasill  not  planted  by  the  Portugals,  to  see
if  I  could  spy  out  any  English  or  French  ship  to  passe
me  into  my  Countrey,  which  hee  in  the  end  favourably
His  departure,  granted  ;  and  sent  foure  of  his  people  with  me  to
furnish  me  with  victuals,  which  they  did  very  plentifully
of  Birds,  Fish,  and  Roots,  for  the  space  of  nine  or  tQn
weeks, all which time they  did accompany  me, and  I

142

Portugals
eaten.

PETER CARDER  a.d.

1578-86.

desiring  to  goe  toward  the  Line,  they  brought  me  into
the  towne  of  Bahia,  Detodos  los  Santos,

But  about  foure  or  five  miles  before  we  came  to  the
towne,  I  yeelded  my  selfe  to  a  Portugall,  called  Michael  He  yeeldeth
Jonas,  declaring  unto  him  that  I  was  an  Englishman,  h*mselfe  j° a
and  enquired  whether  there  were  any  Englishmen
dwelling  in  the  towne,  hee  told  me  that  there  was  one
Antonio  de  Pava  in  the  towne  which  could  speake  good
English,  and  was  a  lover  of  our  Nation,  and  brought
mee  directly  unto  his  house.  This  Antonio  de  Pava,
pittying  my  case,  and  advising  mee  not  to  bee  knowne,
that  I  understood  the  Portugall  Tongue,  brought  mee
to  the  Governour,  whose  name  was  Diego  Vas,  this
Governour  told  me  by  Antonio  de  Pava,  which  became
my  Interpreter,  that  seeing  I  was  found  in  the  Inland
of  their  Countrey  Westward,  being  a  stranger,  contrary
to  their  Lawes,  he  could  doe  no  lesse  then  commit  me
to  Prison,  and  send  me  into  Portugall  to  be  committed
to  the  Gallies  for  tearme  of  life,  to  this  I  answered
by  the  advice  of  my  good  friend  Antonia  de  Pava,  that
I  came  not  willingly  into  those  Dominions,  but  beeing
by  casualtie  once  come  there,  I  was  not  taken  Prisoner,
but  sought  them  out  and  came  and  yeelded  my  selfe
into  their  hands,  laying  downe  my  weapons  at  one  of  his
Nations  feet.

Neverthelesse he  sent me to Prison, where  by  the  His  imprison-
meanes  of  Antonio de Pava,  and other  of  his friends,  menu
I was  sufficiently  relieved,  and  within  one  fortnight  after
brought  againe publikely  to the barre in the Towne-
house  to  mine answere. There  I  answered  the  second
time  by  Antonio  de  Pava,  my  Interpreter,  that  I  thought
it sufficient, that  when I might  have  kept out, yet  of
mine  owne  free  will  I  had  made  a  long  journey,  with
great  hazard  of  my  life  through  the  Countries  of  Savages,
being Man-eaters, which favoured me to seeke the
Portugall  Christians  out,  and  peaceably  to  put  my  selfe  [IV.  vi.
into their hands. Hereupon the Governor and his  II9°-]

assistants  consulted  and  concluded  together,  that  I  should

143

A.D.

1578-86.

Deliverance.

His  employ-
ments.

His  coast
voyages  to
llheos.
Puerto  Seguro.

Spirito  Sancto.
S.  Vincent.
R.  Jenero.

Davide  Leake
an  English
Surgeon.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

be  committed  to  the  house  of  Antonio  de  Payve,  &
there  remaine  untill  they  might  write  into  Portugall  to
know  the  Kings  pleasure  concerning  me.  Within  one
yeare  they  received  answer  from  Lisbon  concerning  me,
that  I  should  be  forth  comming,  and  that  hereafter  the
King  would  send  further  order  for  my  transporting  into
Portugall.  But  above  two  yeares  passed  before  this
order  came  :  In  which  meane  space,  first  I  spent  part
of  my  time  in  going  into  the  fields  as  overseer  of  my
friends  Negros  and  Savages  in  their  planting  and  dressing
of  their  Sugar  Canes,  and  in  planting  of  Gingers,  which
grow  there  exceeding  well,  but  is  a  forbidden  trade  to
be  transported  out  for  hindering  of  other  places,  and  in
cutting  downe  of  Brasil-wood,  and  in  bringing  it  downe
by  Rivers  upon  rafts  unto  the  Port  where  the  Ships  doe
lade  it,  and  in  seeing  them  gather  their  Cotten  wooll,
and  picking  the  seedes  out  of  it,  and  packing  the  same,
and  in  gathering  of  the  long  Pepper  both  white  and
red.

After  I  had  spent,  some  yeare  and  an  halfe  in  this
businesse,  my  friend  Antonio  de  Payve  having  a  small
Barke  of  his  owne,  which  he  employed  in  carrying  of
wares  from  Port  to  Port,  and  for  bringing  of  Sugars
to  places  where  Ships  should  lade,  used  me,  knowing  I
had  bin  brought  up  to  the  Sea,  in  these  his  businesses.
Our  first  Voyage  was  to  llheos,  where  we  left  some  wares,
and  staied  there  some  moneth  ;  then  we  went  to  Puerto
Seguro,  and  there  tooke  in  some  Sugars  for  Linnen
Cloth,  Bayes,  Wine  and  Oyle.  Then  returning  home,
shortly  after  we  were  set  forth  againe  in  the  same  Barke
to  Spirito  Sancto,  and  Saint  Vincent,  and  the  River
Jenero,  where  discharging  our  wares  to  certaine  Factors,
and  receiving  Sugars  and  Cotten  Wooll  aboord,  we
returned  safely  home.  In  my  first  Voyage  one  Master
David  Leake  an  English  Surgeon,  lost  there  out  of  an
English  Shippe  in  the  Countrie,  being  much  sought  for
because  of  his  skill,  had  passage  with  us  from  Bahia
to Spirito Sancto. Upon my returne of my second

144

PETER CARDER  ad.

1578-86.

voyage,  my  good friend Antonio de  Payve advertised  Honest

me,  that  a  Shippe  was  shortly to arrive  there  to  carry  Portu&aL

me  into  Portugall prisoner, telling me  that he should

not  be  able  any  longer  to  helpe  me,  and  therefore  wished

me  to  looke to  my selfe  ; but  kindely  offered  me  his

helpe  to  convay  me  away  :  whereupon  I  tooke  his  Boate

and  foure  of  his  Negros, pretending  to goe  on  fishing

to  the  Sea  ;  and  so  of  purpose  going  much  to  Leeward

of  the  place,  I  put  in  to  Fernambuc  :  where  the  Negros  Femambuc.

being  examined  whence  we came, and for what  cause,

being  utterly  ignorant  of  mine  intent,  answered  that  they

were drawn thither  by  force  of  weather,  and  for  their

Masters  sake  were well intreated, and returned home

with  the  next  winde,  my  selfe  remaining  secretly  behinde

them.

Within  certaine  moneths  there  came  thither  a  Hulke  Hulke  with
with  eight  English  men  and  foureteene  Portugals, who  "&*  En&luh-
after some three moneths had laden the same with
English  and  Portugall  goods  to  come  for  England. The
English  goods  belonged  to  M.  Cordal,  M.  Beecher,  and
M. Sadler,  worshipfull  Merchants  of  the  Citie  of  Lon-
don ; which had bin left in the Countrie before by
the  Merchant  Royall. Thus  passing homeward in  our  Marchant
course  as  far  as  the  lies  of  the  Azores,  within  sight  of  ™ya"'
the  He  of  Pike, being five Portugall Ships in  consort,
we  met  with  Cap.  Raymond,  and  Cap.  George  Drake  of  Cap.
Exeter,  with  two English Ships  of  warre,  who  because  ^aymond-
the  peace  betweene  England  and  Spaine  was  broken  the  QeoreeDrake
yeare before, commanded us to yeelde our selves to
them as their lawfull prises, which we did all five
accordingly without any resistance. But by contrary
weather  we  were  driven  into Baltimore  in  Ireland,  and
within  a  while after  we arrived in the narrow  Seas  in  His  arrivall
the  haven  of  Chichister,  in  the  end  of  November 1586.  '^England.
nine  yeares  and  foureteene  dayes  after  my  departure  out
of  England  with  Sir  Francis  Drake  in  his  Voyage  about
the  World.

My  strange  adventures,  and  long  living  among  cruell
xvi  145  K

rewardeth
him.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1578-86.

Savages  being  known  to  the  right  honorable  the  Lord
Charles  Howard,  Lord  high  Admirall  of  England,  he
certified  the  Queenes  Majesty  thereof  with  speede,  and
brought  me  to  her  presence  at  White-hall,  where  it
pleased  her  to  talke  with  me  a  long  houres  space  of  my
travailes  and  wonderfull  escape,  and  among  other  things
of  the  manner  of  M.  Dowties  execution  ;  and  afterward
The  Q.  bestowed  22.  angels on me, willing my  Lord to  have

consideration  of  me  :  with  many  gracious  words  I  was
dismissed  ;  humbly  thanking  the  Almighty  for  my  mira-
culous preservation,  and  safe  returne  into  my  native
Countrie.

To  the Reader.

See  Tom.  1. T  TEre  maist  thou  read  that dismall  and  fatall  voyage

/.  2.  c.  4.  X  X  of  Master  Thomas  Candish,  in  which  he  consum-
mated his  earthly  peregrination.  In  the  former  voyage
of  his  (v/hich  amongst  our  Circumnavigations  of  the
Globe,  we  have  presented  thee)  thou  findest  a  perpetuall
Sunshine,  no  man  ever  having  in  neere  so  little  time
compassed  that  huge  circumference,  or  taken  his  choice
of  so  much  more  wealth  then  he  could  bring  home,  or
revisited  his  native  soile  with  greater  pompe  and  triumph.
The  clearest  day  hath  a  night,  nor  doth  Summer  last
alway  ;  the  Sea  hath  his  ebbing  as  well  as  flowing  ;  the
Aire  hath  calmes  and  stormes  : the  Moone  hideth  some-

/  have  heard times the Suns lustre from us by her interposition  ;

that  all  his ^ sometimes  is  her  selfe meerely  darkened by  the  Earths

sailes  at  his shacjow. ^nd  \f  tjje Elements, Seasons,  and Heavens

returtie  in  the  . .

river  were two  Eyes  be  subject to such  vicissitudes ; what  is  this

silke.  little  molehill  of  earth,  this  modell  of  clay,  this  moveable

[IV.  vi.  circumference  of  constant  inconstancie,  immutable  muta-

II91-]  bility  ;  this  vanishing  centre  of  diversified  vanitie,  which

we  call  Man  ;  that  herein  also  he  should  not  resemble

this  samplar  of  the  universe,  as  becommeth  a  little  map  to

be  like  that  larger  Prototype. This  we  see  all,  and  feele

daily  in  our  selves  : this  in  Master  Candish  here,  in  Sir

Francis  Drakes  before,  the  Seas  two  darlings,  there  and

146

THOMAS CANDISH  a.d.

1591.

thence  both  living  and  dying  ;  if  dissolution  of  the  body
may  be  called  a  death,  where  the  soule  arriveth  in  heaven,
the  name  fils  the  earth,  the  deedes  are  presidents  to  pos-
teritie,  and  England  their  Countrie  hath  the  glory  alone
that  she  hath  brought  forth  two  illustrious  Captaines  and
Generalls,  which  have  fortunately  embraced  the  round
waste  of  their  vaste  mother,  without  waste  of  life,  reputa-
tion, and  substance  ;  yea  victorious  over  elements  and
enemies,  illustrious  in  wealth  and  honour,  they  have
comne  home  like  the  Sunne  in  a  Summers  day,  seeming
greatest  neerest  his  evening  home,  the  whole  skie  enter-
taining and  welcoming  him  in  festivall  scarlets  and  dis-
played colours  of  triumph.  No  Nation  else  hath  yeelded  See  Osorius  de
one,  which  in  all  these  respects  may  be  matchable.  Maga-  reh'  Eman-
lianes  hath  left  himselfe  odious  to  his  Portugals  for  offered
service  to  the  Spaniard,  and  like  Phaeton  thinking  with
Phebus  his  Chariot  to  compasse  the  World,  perished  mid-
way. Midway  was  Schoutens  Ship  and  men  attached,  and
he  and  his  had  a  servile  returne.  Cano  came  or  rather
fled  home  like  Magalianes  ghost,  hardly  and  with  a  few
escaping.  Noort  scarsly  escaped  taking,  drowning,  firing,
trechery,  and  hostilitie.  Spilbergen  got  blowes  in  the
South  Sea  where  Drake  and  Candish  were  made  rich,  and
returned  an  Indian  Merchant.  Three  Dutch  worthies  :
but  all  lighted  their  candles  at  these  two  English  Torches.
Thus  may  we  magnifie  Drakes  swimming,  and  can  die  the
memorie  of  our  Candish.  But  where  it  is  said  ye  are
Gods,  it  is  added,  ye  shall  dye  like  men.  The  Sea  is
a  waving  wavering  foundation,  the  windes  theatre  both
for  Comedies  and  Tragedies.  You  have  seene  Drake
acting  both  :  and  in  both  you  here  finde  Candish.  Christ
is  yesterday,  to-day,  the  same  for  ever  ;  God  is  without
shadow,  (without  passibilitie  or  possibilitie)  of  change,  a
light  in  whom  is  no  darknesse  :  but  sublunarie  things  are
like  the  Moone  their  neerest  Planet,  which  never  viewes
the  earth  two  dayes  together  with  one  face.  God  hath
made  our  way  to  him  so  full  of  chances  and  changes,  that
our  unstedie,  slippery  way  on  this  earth,  and  calme-storme-

i47

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1591.

voyage  in  these  Seas,  may  make  us  more  to  meditate  and
thirst  after  that  haven  of  instabilitie,  and  heaven  of  eternity.
Some  passionate  speeches  of  Master  Candish  against  some
private  persons  not  employed  in  this  action,  I  have  sup-
Sup.  Tom.  1 .  pressed,  some  others  I  have  let  passe  ;  not  that  I  charge
l-  3-  Captaine  Davis  or  others,  but  that  it  may  appeare  what  the

Generall  thought  of  them.  Master  Hakluyt  hath  pub-
lished Master  Janes  report  of  this  Voyage,  which  makes
more  favourable  on  Captaine  Davis  his  side.  If  hee  did
deale  treacherously,  treacherie  found  him  out,  as  in  his
last  Voyage  before  is  declared.  If  any  thinke  the  Captaine
here  to  conceive  amisse,  I  shall  be  willing  to  have  the
most  charitable  conceit,  and  therefore  remit  the  Reader  to
Master  Hakluyts  Relation  aforesaid,  for  his  apologie  :  the
sum  whereof,  and  of  that  Voyage  is  this.
Cap.  Davis  Master  Jane  there  relateth,  that  Aug.  26.  1 59 1 .  Cap-
his  voyage  into  ta;ne  Candish  set  forth  from  Plimmouth  with  three  tall
e  °\  7  ea'  Shippes,  the  blacke  Pinnace,  and  a  Barke.  Novemb.  29.
M.  Jane,  they  fell  with  the  coast  of  Brasile.  They  tooke  the
Hak.  To.  3.  Towne  of  Santos,  and  burnt  Saint  Vincent.  After  a
cruell  storme  they  arrived  at  Port  Desire,  and  after  fell
with  the  Magellan  straites.  Occasionally  (saith  Jane)
they  lost  Captaine  Candish,  and  went  backe  to  Port
Desire  to  seeke  him  :  and  whiles  Captaine  Davis  further
intended  to  seeke  out  the  Generall,  a  dangerous  con-
spiracie  was  plotted  to  murther  him  by  Parker  and  Smith.
There  is  also  a  testimoniall  subscribed  by  fortie  men.
Thence  they  returned  to  the  Straits,  and  had  sight  of
the  people,  which  were  very  strong,  nimble,  and  naked.
Sep.  13.  they  came  in  sight  of  the  South  Sea,  and  being
forced  backe,  the  next  day  put  forth  againe,  and  being
eight  or  ten  leagues  free  from  land,  were  repelled  into  the
Straits.  Octob.  2.  they  put  into  the  South  Sea  againe,  and
were  free  of  all  land,  and  there  in  a  storme  lost  the  blacke
Pinnace.  The  Shippes  company  were  in  despaire  of  life,
but  by  Gods  grace  recovered  the  Straits,  and  a  third  time
came  to  Port  Desire  ;  and  there  lost  nine  of  their  men  (of
which  Parker  and  Smith  were  two)  being  on  Land  for

148

THOMAS CANDISH  a.d.

1591.

Wood  and  Water  :  they  knew  not  what  became  of  them,
but  guessed  that  the  Salvages  had  devoured  them. For
the  eleventh  of  November,  while  most  of  the  men  were  at
the  He  of  Pengwins,  onely  the  Captaine  and  Master  with
sixe  others  left  in  the  Shippe,  there  came  a  great  multitude
of  Savages  to  the  Shippe  (there  on  ground  on  the  oaze)  Strange
throwing  dust  in  the  ayre,  leaping  and  running  like  bruite  Camh^ls  wlth
Beasts, having  vizors on their  faces  like  Dogges faces,  v^/rSt
or  else  their  faces  are  Dogges  faces  indeede. We  feared
they  would  set  our  Shippes  on  fire,  for  they  would  sud-
denly make  fire,  whereat  wee  marvelled,  setting  the  bushes
on fire,  but scared with Peeces they  fled. Here they
found  much  Scurvie-grasse  which recovered  them  ; and
dried  20000.  Pengwins,  making  some  salt  by  laying  the
salt  water on rockes in holes. The sixt  of  February,
many  reported  to  each  other  their  dreames  of  killing,  and  Dreames
the  like,  and  that  day  they  lost  13.  men  at  Placentia. Their  ^TLt  or
dried  Pengwins,  when  they  came  neerer  the  Sun,  began  to  ta^en  as
corrupt,  and  there  bred  in  them  a  most  loathsome  and  Knfoet  saith.
ugly worme which devoured their victuals, cloathes,  Loathsome
timbers,  and  all  but  Iron,  not  sparing  their  flesh  when  Worm$-
they were asleepe, so that they could scarcely  sleepe.
Their  multitude  was  such  that they could not destroy
them. Another  disease  tooke  them  with  swelling  in  their
anckles,  two  daies  after  which,  shortnesse  of  breath,  then
falling  into  their  cods  and  yards,  so  tormenting  them  that
divers  fell  mad  and  died  :  on  five  onely  did  the  labour  of
the Ship relye ; and June 11. 1593. without victuals,
sailes, or men God guided them to Beare-haven in
Ireland.

But  let  us  heare  Master  Candish himselfe  more  then  [IV.  vi.
acting  his  owne  part. Discite  justitiam  moniti. Let  not  1192.]

prosperitie  poyson the  soule,  with  the  sting  of  the  old
Serpent,  swelling in pride, ingratitude,  or  contempt  of
God,  or  Man  :  let  not  any  magnifie  himselfe  in  whatsoever  The  morall  of
exploits,  or  trust  in  uncertaine  riches,  or  promise  to  him-  **"  an/  other

selfe  the  perpetuall  smiles  of  the  world  ;  and  then  it  shall  h"tonca}1
r r ,  .  c  ,  • -r 1 1  • • Tragedies.

seeme  no  new  thing,  nor  cause  or  despaire,  ir  shee  bites  in

149

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1591.

stead  of  kissing.  Shee  is  a  Witch  which  transformeth  men
into  Swine  with  her  Cyrcaean  cups,  if  the  minde  learne  not
by  Religion  to  fasten  it  selfe  to  God,  to  account  him  her
treasure,  and  make  her  selfe  the  treasurie,  as  a  Pilgrime
pressing  towards  the  prize  of  our  high  calling,  that
inheritance  of  the  Saints  in  light  ;  for  which  Robes,  to
bee  stripped  of  these  Rags  is  a  blessed  purchase  ;  mean-
while knowing  that  nothing  doth,  shall,  can  happen  but
by  his  providence,  which  is  a  Father,  most  wise,  loving,
bountifull,  and  mercifull,  which  alreadie  hath  given  us  his
Sonne,  doth  now  give  his  Spirit,  and  will  give  us  himselfe.
No  Rocks  can  wrack  that  Soule,  no  stormes  oppresse,  no
Seas  can  sinke,  no  fortunes  can  either  puffe  up  with  suc-
cesse,  or  sinke  and  make  to  shrinke  in  it  selfe  by  any
pressures  to  despaire,  which  hath  thus  made  God  her
portion  :  yea  the  worst  of  adversities  by  a  holy  Anti-
peristasis  doe  contract  and  more  unite  the  soules  forces  to
greater  acts  of  fortitude  in  doing  and  suffering  his  Will,
to  whose  ours  ought  alway  to  be  subordinated.  It  is  the
voice  of  a  Pagan,  but  the  vertue  of  a  Christian,  Omnia
mea  mecum  porto,  and  with  Job  to  say,  The  Lord  hath
given,  the  Lord  hath  taken,  blessed  bee  the  Name  of  the
Lord.  I  have  given  Master  Knivets  Relation  after  this
of  Master  Candish,  as  before  Peter  Carder  after  Sir
Francis  Drake  ;  that  as  both  served  under  them  in  their
Discoveries,  so  they  may  in  this  our  Discoverie  of  those
Discoveries,  as  Pages  to  those  Worthies  ;  the  one  a
Mariner  wayting  on  a  Mariner  ;  the  other  a  Gentleman
following  a  Gentleman ;  both  unmatchable  by  any  English
for  the  rare  adventures,  disadventures,  and  manifold  suc-
cessions of  miseries  in  those  wilde  Countries,  and  with
those  wilder  Countrimen  of  Brasilia  ;  especially  Master
Knivet,  who  betwixt  the  Brasilian  and  Portugall,  as
betwixt  two  Mill  stones,  was  almost  ground  to  poulder :
whom  Colds,  Sicknes,  Famine,  Wandrings,  Calumnies,
Desertions,  Solitarines,  Deserts,  Woods,  Mountaines,
Fennes,  Rivers,  Seas,  Flights,  Fights  ;  wilde  Beasts,
wilder Serpents, wildest Men, and straight passages

150

THOMAS CANDISH

beyond  all  names  of  wildnesse  (those  Magellan  Straits
succeeded  by  drowning,  fainting,  freesing,  betraying,
beating,  starving,  hanging  Straits)  have  in  various  suc-
cessions made  the  subject  of  their  working :  whom
God  yet  delivered,  that  out  of  his  manifold  paines,  thou
maist  gather  this  posie  of  pleasures,  and  learne  to  bee
thankefull  for  thy  native  sweets  at  home,  even  delights
in  the  multitude  of  peace.

A.D.
1591

Chap.  VI.

Master  Thomas  Candish  his  discourse  of  his  fatall
and  disastrous  voyage  towards  the  South  Sea,
with  his  many  disadventures  in  the  Magellan
Straits  and  other  places  ;  written  with  his
owne  hand  to  Sir  Tristram  Gorges  his
Executor.

Ost  loving  friend,  there  is  nothing  in  this
world  that  makes  a  truer  triall  of  friend-
ship, then  at  death  to  shew  mindfulnesse
of  love  and  friendship,  which  now  you
shall  make  a  perfect  experience  of:  desir-
ing you  to  hold  my  love  as  deare  dying
poore,  as  if  I  had  beene  most  infinitely
rich.  The  successe  of  this  most  unfortunate  action,  the
bitter  torments  thereof  lye  so  heavie  upon  mee,  as  with
much  paine  am  I  able  to  write  these  few  lines,  much  lesse
to  make  discoverie  unto  you  of  all  the  adverse  haps,  that
have  befallen  me  in  this  voyage,  the  least  whereof  is
my  death  :  but  because  you  shall  not  be  ignorant  of
them,  I  have  appointed  some  of  the  most  sensiblest  men
that  I  left  behinde  me,  to  make  discourse  unto  you
of  all  these  accidents.  I  have  made  a  simple  will,  wherein
I  have  made  you  sole,  and  onely  disposer  of  all  such  little,
as  is  left.

The  Roe-bucke  left  me  in  the  most  desolate  case  that  The  Roe-
ever  man  was  left  in,  what  is  become  of  her  I  cannot  hucke-

151

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1591.

imagine  : if  shee bee returned into England, it is a
most admirable matter  ; but if  shee bee at home, or
any  other  of  my  goods  whatsoever  returne  into  England,
I  have  made  you  onely  Possessor  of  them. And  now  to
come  to  that  villaine  that  hath  beene  the  death  of  me,  and
Captaine the  decay  of  this  whole action, I meane Davis, whose
Davis  blamed.  onely  treacherie  in  running  from  me,  hath  beene  an  utter
ruine  of  all :  if  any  good  returne  by  him,  as  ever  you  love
mee,  make  such friends  as he  of  all  others  may  reape
least  gaine. I  assure  my  selfe  you  will  bee  carefull  in  all
friendship, of  my last requests. My debts which be
owing be not much, &c. But I (most unfortunate
villaine)  was  matched  with  the  most  abject  minded  and
Mutinous mutinous  companie,  that  ever  was  carried  out  of  England
companle. by  any  man  living. For  I  protest  unto  you,  that  in  going
to  the  Streits  of  Magellan,  after  I  was  passed  to  the  South-
ward of  the  River  of  Plate,  and  had  bidden  the  furie  of
stormes,  which  indeed  I thinke to bee such as  worser
might  not  bee  indured  :  I  never  made  my  course  to  the
Straits-ward,  but  I  was  in  continuall  danger  by  my  com-
panie, which  never  ceased  to  practise  and  mutinie  against
Port  Desire, me. And  having  gotten  the  appointed  place  called  Port
Desire, I  met  with  all  my  companie,  which  had  beene
[IV.  vi.  there  twentie  dayes  before  me  : and  had  not  my  most

11 93- J  true  friends  beene  there  (whom  to  name  my  heart  bleedes)
I  meane  my  cousin  Locke,  I  had  been  constrayned  either
to  have  suffered  violence,  or  some  other  most  disordered
misse-hap.  I  came  into  this  Harbour  with  my  Boat,  my
ships  riding  without  at  Sea  :  where  I  found  the  Roe-bucke,
the  Desire,  and  the  Pinnace,  all  which  complayned  unto
mee,  that  the  Tyde  ranne  so  violently,  as  they  were  not
able  to  ride,  but  were  driven  aground,  and  wished  me  in
any  wise  not  to  come  in  with  my  ship,  for  that  if  shee
should  come  on  ground,  shee  would  be  utterly  cast  away :
which  I  knew  to  be  most  true.

And  finding  it  to  bee  no  place  for  so  great  a  ship
without  her  utter  ruine:  1  forthwith  commanded  them,
to  make  themselves  readie  to  depart : they  being  fresh,

152

THOMAS CANDISH  a.d.

1,591.

and  infinitely  well  releeved  with  Seales  and  Birds,  which

in  that  place  did  abound,  and  my  companie  being  growne

weake  and  feeble,  with  continuall  watching,  pumping,  and

bayling. For I must say truly unto you, there were

never men that endured more extremities  of  the  Seas,

then  my  poore  companie  had  done. Such  was  the  furie

of  the  West  South-west,  and  South-west  windes,  as  wee  Tempests.

were  driven  from  the  shoare  foure  hundred  leagues,  and

constrayned  to  beate  from  fiftie  degrees  to  the  Southward

into  fortie to  the Northward againe,  before  wee could

recover neere the shoare. In which time, we had a

new shift of  sailes cleane blowne  away, and our ship

in danger to sinke in the Sea three times : which

with  extremitie  of  mens  labour  wee  recovered. In  this

weaknesse, wee departed for the Straits, being from  The  Stmts.

that Harbour eight leagues, and in eighteene dayes,

wee  got the Straits : in which time, the men in my

ship were growne  extreamly weake. The other ships

companie were in good case, by reason of  their late

reliefe.

And  now  we  had  beene  almost  foure  moneths  betweene
the  coast  of  Brasile,  and  the  Straights ;  being  in  distance
not  above  sixe  hundred  leagues,  which  is  commonly  run
in  twentie  or  thirtie  dayes : but  such  was  the  adversenesse
of  our  fortunes,  that  in  comming  thither  wee  spent  the
Summer,  and found in the  Straits,  the beginning of  a
most  extreame  Winter,  not  durable for  Christians. In  Extreme
despight of  all stormes and tempests, so long as wee  w^ter.
had  ground  to  anchor  in,  and  Tydes  to  helpe  us,  we  beate
into  the  Straits  some  fiftie  leagues,  having  (for  the  most  They  enter
part) the  windes  contrarie. At  length  being  forced  by  fiftie  leagues-
the extremitie of  stormes, and the narrownesse of  the
Straits  (being  not  able  to  turne  windward  no  longer)  we
got  into  an  Harbour,  where  wee  rid  from  the  eighteenth
day  of  Aprill,  till  the  tenth of  May : in  all  which  time,
wee  never  had  other  then  most  furious  contrarie  windes.
And  after  that  the  moneth  of  May  was  come  in,  nothing
but  such  flights  of  Snow,  and  extremities  of  Frosts,  as

i53

A.D.
I59I

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Miserable
distresse.

Consultation.

in  all  the  time  of  my  life,  I  never  saw  any  to  be  compared
with  them.

This  extremitie  caused  the  weake  men  (in  my  ship
onely)  to  decay ;  for  in  seven  or  eight  dayes,  in  this
Death  of  men.  extremitie  there  dyed  fortie  men,  and  sickened  seventie,
so  that  there  were  not  fiftie  men  that  were  able  to  stand
upon  the  hatches.  I  finding  this  miserable  calamitie  to
fall  upon  me,  and  found  that  besides  the  decay  of  my
men,  and  expence  of  my  victuall,  the  snow  and  frost
decayed  our  sailes,  and  tackle,  and  the  contagiousnesse  of
the  place  to  bee  such,  for  extremitie  of  frost  and  snow,  as
there  was  no  long  staying,  without  the  utter  ruine  of  us
all.  What  by  these  extremities,  and  the  daily  decay  of
my  men,  I  was  constrayned  forthwith  to  determine  some
course,  and  not  (for  all  this  extremitie  of  weather)  to
tarrie  there  any  longer.

Upon  this,  I  assembled  my  companie  together,  and
shewed  them  that  my  intention  was  to  goe  for  China,
and  that  there  were  two  wayes  thither,  the  one  through
the  Straits,  the  other  by  the  way  of  Caput  bone  spei ;
which  course  shewed  them,  as  was  well  knowne  to  mee,
as  the  way  I  had  undertaken.  And  although  that  fortune
had  denyed  us  this  passage,  yet  I  doubted  not,  but  soone
to  recover  to  this  Cape,  where  I  shewed  them,  I  made
no  doubt,  but  we  should  releeve  our  selves,  and  performe
to  their  contents  our  intended  voyage.  These  perswasions
with  many  others,  which  I  used,  seemed  to  content  them
for  the  present :  but  they  were  no  sooner  gone  from  me,
but  forthwith  all  manner  of  discontents  were  unripped
amongst  themselves,  so  that  to  goe  that  way,  they  plainly
and  resolutely  determined  never  to  give  their  willing
consents.  Some  of  the  best  and  honestest  sort  hearing
this  their  resolution,  wished  them  rather  to  put  up  a
supplication  to  me,  then  thus  privately  among  themselves
to  mutinie  and  murmur,  which  course  might  cause  an
utter  ruine  to  fall  upon  them  all :  affirming,  that  they
knew  me  to  be  so  reasonable,  as  I  would  not  refuse  to
heare  their  petition. Upon  this,  they  framed  an  humble

i54

THOMAS CANDISH  a.d.

1591.

supplication  unto  me  (as  they  termed  it)  the  effect  whereof
was :  That  first  they  protested,  to  spend  their  lives  most
willingly  for  my  sake,  and  that  their  love  was  such  to
me,  as  their  chiefest  care  was  for  mee,  and  they  grieved
very  much  to  see  mee  put  on  a  resolution,  which
(as  they  supposed)  would  be  the  end  of  my  life,
which  was  their  greatest  griefe.  And  next  their  owne
lives  would  immediately  follow,  both  by  reason  of  the
length  of  the  course,  all  which  they  must  performe
without  reliefe.  And  further,  we  had  not  left  foure
moneths  victuall,  which  might  very  well  be  spent  in
running  a  course  not  halfe  so  long.  But  if  it  would
please  me  to  returne  againe  for  the  Coast  of  Brasile
(where  they  knew,  my  force  being  together,  was  able  to
take  any  place)  there  we  might  both  provide  victuall
to  returne  againe,  and  furnish  our  selves  of  all  other
such  wants,  as  these  extremities  had  brought  upon  us,
and  at  a  seasonable  time  returne  againe,  and  so  performe
our  first  intention.

Now,  I  knowing  their  resolution,  and  finding,  that  in
some things their  reasons were  not  vaine,  began more  [IV.  vi.
seriously  to  looke into all  my wants. First, I found  XI94~]

my  greatest  decay  to  bee  in  ropes,  and  sailes,  wherein
(by  meanes  of  such  mightie  extremities)  I  was  utterly
unfurnished,  for  I  lost  a  new  shift  of  sailes  comming
thither ;  and  further  the  Desire  had  bidden  the  like
extremitie,  which  I  furnished :  so  as  I  had  left  no  store
at  all:  for  no  ships  carry  three  new  shifts  of  sailes,  all
which  had  beene  little  enough  for  me :  and  last  of  all,
our  victuals  to  be  most  short,  I  was  to  fall  into  con-
sideration what  to  doe.  I  knew  well  that  the  windes  Windes  and
were  such,  and  so  continually  against  us,  as  by  no  snom  violent.
meanes  it  was  possible  to  passe  through :  for  the  violent
snowes  were  such,  as  in  two  dayes  together  we  should
not  be  able  to  see  five  houres,  the  place  not  a  league
over  in  breadth,  our  ships  not  to  be  handled  in  such
extremitie  of  winde :  no,  nor  Canvas  to  hold  the  furie
of  the winde, our men so weake, as  of  one hundred

'55

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1591.

and  fiftie  men,  I  had  not  in  my  ship  fiftie  in  health.
And  this  ship  comming  with  all  her  companie,  was  like
three  times  to  have  been  upon  the  shoare,  by  reason
of  her  unyarie  workings.  These  causes  made  mee  utterly
despaire  of  any  passage  at  this  season  :  so  I  resolved  the
companie  I  would  put  out  of  the  Harbour,  and  beat  to
get  through,  so  long  as  the  furious  and  westerly  windes
would  suffer  us :  but  if  they  came  upon  us,  so  as  we
could  not  hold  it  up,  wee  would  then  beare  up  againe,
and  so  (according  to  their  request)  goe  for  the  Coast  of
Brasile,  which  they  so  much  seemed  to  desire,  and  I  so
much  hated.

But  in  truth  I  was  forced  to  take  that  way,  for  that
there  was  no  place,  where  this  ship  could  come  into,  to

Port  S.Julian,  tarry  out  a  winter.  For  Port  Saint  Julian  is  a  barred
Harbour,  over  which  two  of  my  ships  would  not  goe ;

Port  Desire,  and  Port  Desire  had  neither  wood,  nor  water :  and
besides  that,  the  Tyde  runneth  so  extremely,  as  it  is
not  possible  for  anchors  to  hold,  the  ground  being  so
bad.  But  the  last  cause  of  all  to  be  considered,  was  the
sicknesse  of  my  men,  having  no  clothes  to  defend  them
from  the  extreme  cold.  These  causes,  and  their  ardent
desires  of  being  out  of  the  cold,  mooved  me  to  goe
backe  againe  for  that  most  wicked  Coast  of  Brasile,
where  I  incountred  all  manner  of  misfortunes,  which  as
I  have  unripped  these  former,  so  I  will  briefly  declare
the  latter.

His  retume  We were beaten out of the Strait with a most

from  the  monstrous storme at West South-west, from which

place  we  continued  together,  till  we  came  in  the  latitude
of  fortie  seven,  in  which  place  Davis  in  the  Desire,  and
my  Pinnasse  lost  me  in  the  night,  after  which  time  I
never  heard  of  them,  but  (as  I  since  understood)  Davis
his  intention  was  ever  to  run  away.  This  is  Gods  will,
that  I  should  put  him  in  trust,  that  should  be  the  end
of  my  life,  and  the  decay  of  the  whole  action.  For  had
not  these  two  small  ships  parted  from  us,  we  would  not
have  miscarried  on  the  coast  of  Brasile  : for  the  onely

156

THOMAS CANDISH  a.d.

1591.

decay  of  us  was,  that  we  could  not  get  into  their  barred
Harbours.  What  became  of  these  small  ships,  I  am
not  able  to  judge,  but  sure,  it  is  most  like,  they  went
backe  againe  for  Port  Desire,  a  place  of  reliefe  for  two
so  small  ships.  For  they  might  lye  on  ground  there
without  danger,  and  being  so  few  men,  they  might
releeve  themselves  with  Seales,  and  Birds,  and  so  take
a  good  time  of  the  yeere,  and  passe  the  Streits.  The
men  in  these  small  ships  were  all  lustie,  and  in  health :
wherefore  the  likelier  to  hold  out.  The  short  of  all  is
this :  Davis  his  onely  intent  was  utterly  to  overthrow
me,  which  he  hath  well  performed.

These  ships  being  parted  from  us,  wee  little  suspecting
any  treacherie,  the  Roe-bucke  and  my  selfe,  held  our
course  for  Brasile,  and  kept  together,  till  wee  came  in
the  latitude  of  thirtie  sixe,  where  we  incountred  the  most
grievous  storme,  that  ever  any  Christians  indured  upon  Grievous
the  Seas  to  live,  in  which  storme  we  lost  companie.  storme-
Wee  with  most  extreme  labour,  and  great  danger,  got
the  Coast  of  Brasile,  where  we  were  fifteene  dayes,  and
never  heard  of  the  Roe-bucke.  Wee  came  to  an  anchor
in  the  Bay  of  Saint  Vincent,  and  being  at  an  anchor  Saint  Vincent.
there,  the  Gentlemen  desired  mee  to  give  them  leave
to  goe  ashoare,  to  some  of  the  Portugals  Farme-houses,
to  get  some  fresh  victuals,  which  I  granted  :  willing
them  to  make  present  returne,  knowing  very  well,  the
whole  Countrie  was  not  able  to  prejudice  them,  if  they
willingly  would  not  indanger  themselves.  They  went
to  a  Sugar  mill  hard  by  mee  where  I  rode  (for  that  was
my  speciall  charge,  that  they  should  never  goe  a  mile
from  the  ship)  where  they  got  some  victuall,  and  came
aboard  againe  very  well.

The  next  day  in  the  morning  betimes,  an  Indian  came
unto  me  with  Captaine  Barker ;  which  Indian  ran  away
from  his  Master,  at  my  last  being  there :  this  Savage
knew  all  the  Countrie.  He  came  unto  me,  and  said,  that
beyond  a  Point,  not  a  Culvering  shot  off,  there  was  a
very  rich farme-house,  and desired ten or twelve men

*57

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1591.

to  goe  thither.  Captaine  Barker  being  one  whom  I  most
trusted  in  the  conduction  of  men,  and  who  ever  was  the
most  carefull  in  such  matters  of  service,  I  appointed  to
goe,  and  to  take  some  twentie  or  thirtie  men  with  him :
and  willed  him  (as  he  had  any  respect  or  regard  of  my
commandement)  not  to  stay,  but  to  come  presently  away,
finding  any  thing  or  nothing.  He  forthwith  tooke  five
and  twentie  men  of  the  most  principall  men  in  the  ship,
and  then  your  cousin  Stafford  would  by  no  meanes  bee
left  behinde.  They  departed  by  foure  of  the  clocke  in
the  morning,  so  as  I  did  not  see  their  companie.  But
what  should  I  write  more  then  this  unto  you  ?  they  were
all  such,  as  neither  respected  me,  nor  any  thing  that  I
commanded.  Away  they  went,  and  by  one  of  the  clocke,
they  sent  my  Boat  againe  with  Ginny  wheat,  and  sixe
Hennes,  and  a  small  Hogge.  I  seeing  no  returne  againe
of  the  companie  (for  they  had  sent  away  the  Boat  onely
with  men  to  row  her  aboard)  was  very  much  grieved,
[IV.  vi.  and presently returned the Boat  againe  with message :

I195-J  That  I  much  marvailed  they  would  tarry  at  a  place
so  long,  with  so  few  men ;  and  further,  that  it  was
not  a  Hogge,  and  sixe  Hennes  could  releeve  us :  and
seeing  there  was  no  other  reliefs  to  bee  had,  I  charged
them  straightly  to  come  aboard  presently.  Thus  having
dispatched  away  my  Boat  for  them,  I  still  expected  their
present  comming  aboard  :  all  that  night  I  heard  nothing
of  them,  the  next  morning  I  shot  Ordnance,  yet  I  saw
no  Boat  come.  Then  I  waighed  anchor,  and  made
aboard  into  the  Bay,  yet  for  all  this,  I  heard  nothing
of  them :  then  I  doubted  with  my  selfe  very  greatly,
knowing  there  were  no  meanes  left  to  make  any  mani-
fester  signes  to  them  to  hasten  away.  All  that  day  I
heard  nothing  of  them,  in  the  evening  I  set  sailes  againe,
and  ran  into  the  shoare  :  all  that  night  I  heard  no  newes
of  them.

The  next  morning,  I  saw  an  Indian  come  downe  to
the  Sea-side,  and  weaved  unto  the  ship :  we  being  desirous
to  heare  some  newes,  caused  a  raft  to  be  made,  for  Boat

158

THOMAS CANDISH  a.d.

1591.

wee had  none, and  sent  it  ashore, and set the  Indian

aboard. When  we  saw  him,  we found  him  to  bee  our

owne  Indian,  which  had  escaped  away,  being  soare  hurt

in  three  places : who  told  us, that  all  the rest  of  our

men  were  slaine  with  three  hundred  Indians,  and  eightie  Captaine

Portugals,  which  (in  the  evening)  set  upon  them  suddenly. Barker  and

Then I demanded, why they came not aboard  ? the  J0Me  *nd

'j  j  twentie  others

Indian  answered  mee,  that  some  were  unwilling  to  come,  ,^/W.

and the  rest,  did  nothing  but  eate  Hennes  and  Hogs,

which  they  had  there  in  abundance,  and  that  they  minded

nothing  to  come  aboard. I  leave  you  to  judge,  in  what

griefe I was,  to see five  and  twentie of  my principall

men thus basely and wilfully  cast away : but  I leave

you to inquire of  others, the  practices of  these men,

lest  in  writing  unto  you it should  be thought  I  did  it

of  malice, which (I protest) is farre from me, they

being now dead, and my selfe  looking imminently to

follow  them.

Thus  I  was  left  destitute  of  my  principall  men,  and  a

Boat, and had I not (by great hap the day before)

taken an old Boat from the  Portugals, I had beene

utterly  undone. This  Boat I  sent  to  an  Hand  fifteene

leagues  off, to see if  they  could heare any newes of

the  rest  of  my  ships  :  shee  returned  within eight  dayes,

all  which  time  I  remayned  without  a  Boat. Thus  I  was

sixe  dayes  before  I  heard  newes  of  any  of  my  consorts.

The seventeenth day came in the Roe-bucke, having  TheRoe-bucke

spent  all  her  Masts,  but  their  Mison,  their  Sailes  blowne  commeth  in.

cleane  away,  and  in  the  most  miserable  case  that  ever  ship

was  in  : all  which  misse-haps  falling  upon  me,  and  then

missing  my  small  ships  wherein  (upon  that  Coast)  consisted  Brasilian

all  my strength, having no Pinnaces nor great Boats  Coast  fail  of

left  to  land  my  men  in,  for  they  were  all  cast  away  going  $]?oalds  and

to  the  Strait. I  (notwithstanding  the  want  of  Boats  and  Master  Can-

Pinnaces)  determined  rather  then  not  to  bee  revenged  of  dishes  high

so  base  Dogs, to  venture  the ships  to  goe downe the  spirit.

River  afore  their  Towne,  and  to  have  beaten  it  to  the

ground,  which  forthwith  I  put  in  execution. And  having

i59

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1591.

gotten  downe  halfe  the  way,  wee  found  the  River  so
narrow  by  reason  of  a  shoald,  as  all  the  companie  affirmed
plainly,  it  was  both  desperate  and  most  dangerous.  For
the  River  is  all  Ose,  and  if  a  ship  come  aground,  it  is
unpossible  ever  to  get  off,  for  there  riseth  not  above
a  foot  water,  and  no  anchors  will  hold  to  hale  off  any
my  ships,  in  so  narrow  a  place,  as  we  were  almost  aground
in  wending.

Seeing  this  apparent  danger,  I  forthwith  bare  up  out  of
the  River,  where  we  escaped  no  small  danger  to  get
well  out,  for  we  had  not  little  more  water  then  we  drew  :
and  if  shee  had  come  aground,  it  had  beene  unpossible
ever  to  have  gotten  her  off.  By  these  meanes  of  not
passing  the  River,  we  were  constrayned  to  let  our  revenge
passe :  for  our  Boats  were  so  bad  and  small,  as  wee  durst
put  no  men  in  them.  Notwithstanding  wee  landed,
and  did  them  much  spoile  upon  their  Farme-houses,  and
got  some  quantitie  of  fresh  victuals.  This  place  being
not  for  us,  considering  our  ships  were  not  able  to  passe
to  their  Towne ;  and  further  our  great  wants  did  con-
straine  us  to  seeke  some  course  of  reliefe,  which  being
not  to  bee  had  there,  both  for  that  wee  had  spoyled
it  a  little  before,  and  also  for  that  we  could  not  con-
veniently come  to  doe  them  any  prejudice,  without  most

His  intention,  losse  to  our  selves :  I  determined  to  part  from  thence,
and  to  goe  to  a  small  Hand  some  twentie  leagues  off,
and  there  to  have  fitted  all  my  necessaries,  and  to  have
cast  off  the  Roe-bucke,  for  that  by  no  meanes  her  wants
could  by  mee  bee  furnished,  and  so  at  a  seasonable  time,
to  have  gone  for  the  Straits  of  Magellan  againe.

Which  intention  (I  must  cpnfesse)  I  kept  most  secret,
for  feare  of  some  mutinie,  but  shewed  the  whole  Com-

His  presence,  panie,  that  I  would  goe  for  Saint  Helena,  where  wee
should  meet  with  the  Carracks :  which  course  I  well
knew  did  not  much  please  them ;  for  they  desired
nothing  more  then  returning  home  into  England,  and
if  I  had  but  named  the  Straits,  they  would  forthwith
have  fallen  into  a  most  extreme  mutinie;  for  such  were

160

the  Brasilian
coast.

THOMAS CANDISH  a.d.

1591.

the  miseries  and  torments  they  had  indured,  as  all  the

best  sort had  taken  an  oath  upon  a  Bible,  to  die  rather

then  ever  to  yeeld  their  consents  to  goe  backe  that  way

againe. I knowing this,  seemed  to speake nothing  of

that  course, but comforting  their despairing mindes as

well as I might, seeing their greatest griefe was for

the wants of  the small ships, without which, they all

affirmed (and  that  truly)  wee  were  able  to  doe  nothing.

For  the  Ports  where  their  Townes  stand,  were  all  barred  Necessity  of

Harbours, and  that  it  was  not  possible  to get any of  ^nff^nl

these ships  over them, whereby we could  releeve our

selves  of  such  wants,  as  we  were  in. These  things  being

alleaged,  I  seemed  to  passe  over  as  slightly  as  might  be,

but yet comforted  them,  that  we  would  presently  seeke

some  place  of  reliefe  with  all  speede.

There was a  Portugall aboord me,  who  tooke  upon  [IV.  vi.
him  to  be  a  Pilot,  who  came  unto  me,  and  told  me  upon  1196.]

his  life,  that  he  would  take  upon  him  to  carry  both  p°i/0ffunjer_
my  Shippes  over  the  barre  at  Spiritus  Sanctus,  a  place  taking  for
indeede  of  great  reliefe,  and  the  onely  place  in  Brasile  Spirito  Sancto.
for  victuall,  and  ail  other  wants,  that  we  were  in.  I
knowing  very  well,  that  if  I  could  bring  my  Shippes
within  shot  of  the  Towne,  I  should  land  my  men,  and
further,  it  could  not  be  in  them  to  make  resistance.
The  whole  company  desired  this  course,  affirming  that
there  was  no  way  left  to  relieve  all  our  wants  but  this :
and  that  there  they  were  in  hope  to  finde  some  Shippes,
to  repaire  the  Roe-bucke  againe.  I  finding  their  willing-
nesse,  and  charging  the  Portugall  upon  his  life,  to  tell
me  truely,  whither  the  Ships  might  passe  over  the
barre  without  danger  ;  he  willed  me  to  take  his  life,
if  ever  the  Shippes  came  in  lesse  water  then  five
fathome,  with  such  constant  affirmations  as  he  desired
not  to  live,  if  he  should  not  performe  this.  I  considering
the  greatnesse  of  our  wants,  and  knowing  right  well,
the  place  to  be  the  onely  wished  Towne  on  all  the  coast
to  relieve  us,  forthwith  gave  my  consent,  and  thither
we  went,  leaving  all  other  intentions.  We  anchored  before
xvi  161  L

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1591.

the  barre,  and sent  my Boate  to sound  the  barre,  and
found  the  deepest  water  to  be  but  fifteene  and  seventeene

His  ignorance,  foote  (the  Portugall  him  selfe  going  with  them,  all  over
the  bar)  the  most  water  to  be  but  three  fathome.  They
comming  aboord,  brought  me  word  of  the  truth,  I
called  for  the  Portugall,  and  demanded  of  him  why  he
had  so  lied  unto  me  ?  who  affirmed  that  he  never  sounded
the  barre  before,  and  that  he  had  brought  in  Ships  of
100.  tuns,  and  that  he  made  accompt,  there  had  not  bin
lesse  water  then  five  fathome.

This  mis-hap  was  no  small  amazement  to  me,  and
all  the  company,  considering  our  distresse  for  water
and  other  necessaries,  and  that  the  roade  was  so  ill,  as
we  were  scant  able  to  ride  there,  so  as  we  could  neither
take  in  water,  nor  doe  any  other  businesse.  In  this
meane  time  while  wee  were  scanning  of  these  matters,
the  Roe-buckes  Boate  rowing  further  into  the  Baye,  saw

Three  Ships,  where  three  Shippes  were  at  an  anker,  not  farre  from
the  towne,  and  came  aboord,  and  brought  mee  word
thereof:  at  which  newes  the  Companie  seemed  much  to
rejoyce,  and  all  affirmed  that  they  would  goe  with  our
Boates,  and  bring  them  out  of  the  harbour.  I  shewed
them  how  much  the  taking  of  them  imported  us,  and  told
them,  that  although  the  day  was  spent,  yet  I  thought  the
night  not to be altogether  inconvenient,  if  they  would

His  counsel/ put  on  mindes  to  performe  it. Resolutely  my reasons

not  followed.  Were  these :  first  they  were  not  so  sufficiently  pro-
vided to  defend  themselves  at  that  instant,  as  they  would
be  in  the  morning;  and  further  I  told  them,  that  if
they  were  not  able  to  defend  them,  they  would  take  the
principall  and  best  things  out  of  them,  being  so  neere
the  shoare,  and  that  if  they  had  wherewith  to  defend
themselves,  it  would  be  lesse  offensive  to  us  in  the  night,
then  in  the  day,  and  we  in  greatest  securitie,  and  more
offensive  to  the  enemy,  especially  this  exploit  being  to
be  done  on  the  water,  not  landing.

These  perswasions  seemed  a  little  to  move  them,  for
they  all  desired  to  stay  till  morning :  yet  some  of  them

162

THOMAS CANDISH  a.d.

1591.

prepared  themselves. Comming  amongst  them,  I  found

them,  all,  or  for  the  most  part  utterly  unwilling  to  goe

that  night :  upon  which  occasion  (I  confesse)  I  was  much

moved,  and  gave them  some  bitter  words,  and  shewed

them  our  case  was  not  to  make  detractions,  but  to  take

that  opportunitie  which  was  offered  us,  and  not  to  feare  a

night  more  then  a  day,  and  told  them  plainely,  that  in

refusing  of  this, I could  stay  there  no  longer,  for  over

the  barre  we  could  not  goe,  and  the  roade  so  dangerous,

as never Shippes rid  in  a  worse. And  further,  we  saw

all  the  Countrey  to  be  fired  round  about,  and  that  to  land

we  could  not  without  utter  spoile  to  us  all,  for  our  Boates

were  naught;  and  further, we  could by no meanes be

succoured by our Shippes,  so as  I  intended  to depart.

The  next  morning,  there  was  almost  an  uproare  amongst  Their

them, the most  of  them swearing that  if  I would  not  unseasona^

give them leave, they  would  take  the  Boats and  bring s  u

away  those Shippes  of themselves. I comming  among

them, beganne to reprehend them for their  rashnesse,

and  told  them  that  now  all  opportunity  was  past,  and  that

they  must  be  contented,  for  goe  they  should  not. They

much  importuned  me,  and  some  of  the  chiefest  of  them

desired me with teares in their  eyes, that they might

goe, affirming, that there was no danger to be feared

at  all ;  for  if  they  were  not  able  to  take  them,  they  would

returne  againe,  and  that  to  depart  without  attempting  to

doe  this,  was  a  thing  that  most  greatly  grieved  them.

I  knowing  right  well,  that  if  they  landed  not  they
could  receive  no  prejudice  :  for  if  their  Ships  had  beene
able  to  withstood  them,  it  was  in  their  power  to  goe
from  them,  being  starke  calme.  And  further  I  knew
that  no  Shippes  use  Brasile  that  be  able  to  defend  them-
selves from  a  Cock-boate :  much  lesse  that  they  should
be  of  force  to  offend  those  Boates,  wherein  there  were
so  many  Musketteeres  as  could  sit  one  by  another.  I
seeing  their  great  importunitie,  was  contented  to  give
them  leave  to  goe :  and  this  was  my  charge  to  Captaine
Morgaine  (to  whom  at  that  present  I  left  my  directions)

163

A.D.

1591.

His  instruc-
tions to  Cap-
tain Morgan.

[IV.

97-]

The  place
described.

Mad
Mutiners.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

that  first,  upon  paine  of  his  life,  he  should  not  land  at  all
what  opportunitie  soever  was  offered ;  and  that  if  he  saw
any  danger  in  comming  to  these  Shippes,  he  should
attempt  no  further,  but  returne  aboord  againe;  but
contrariwise,  if  he  saw  that  the  place  was  such,  as  we
might  land  without  too  much  disadvantage,  and  if  we
might  land  on  plain  ground,  free  from  woods  or  bushes,
hard  before  the  Towne,  that  then  he  would  presently
repaire  unto  me  againe,  and  I,  and  so  many  as  these
bad  Boates  would  carrie,  would  presently  land  upon
them.

Thus  my  Boates  departed  from  me,  having  some
eightie  men,  as  well  furnished  with  weapons,  as  it  is
possible  to  sort  such  a  number  withall.  Now  you  shall
understand,  that  in  the  night  the  Portugals  had  hailed
the  Shippes  hard  afore  the  Towne :  the  River  where
the  Towne  stood  was  not  above  a  Bird-bolt-shot  over,
and  halfe  a  mile  from  the  Towne  where  the  Shippes
rode :  the  night  wee  came  in,  they  had  new  cast  up  two
small  trenches,  on  each  side  the  River  one,  where  they
had  planted  some  two  small  bases  a  peece  upon  an  hill.
Right  over  them  were  thicke  woods,  and  great  rockes,
so  that  if  any  were  possessed  of  them,  they  might  but
tumble  stones  downe,  and  beate  away  1000.  men.  The
trench  on  the  Wester-side  of  the  River  shot  at  our  Boats,
once  or  twice;  upon  that  they  began  to  thinke  with
themselves  what  to  doe,  Captaine  Morgan  affirming  the
place  to  be  verie  narrow,  and  that  they  could  not  well
passe  it  without  danger,  considering  the  many  men  in
their  Boats,  and  also  the  charge  which  I  had  given,  was
such,  if  they  saw  any  danger,  they  should  presently
repaire  aboord,  and  certifie  me,  and  not  to  passe  any
further,  till  they  had  understood  my  further  determina-
tion :  This  Master  Morgan  made  knowne  amongst  them,
whereupon  some  of  the  harebraine  Sailers  began  to  sweare,
that  they  never  thought  other,  but  that  he  was  a  coward,
and  now  he  will  shew  it,  that  durst  not  land  upon  a
bable  ditch,  as  they  tearmed  it. Upon  this,  the  gentle-

164

THOMAS CANDISH  a.d.

1591.

man  was  very  much moved, and answered  them, that

they  should  finde  him  to  be  none  such  as  they  accounted

him,  and  that,  come  what  could  happen  him,  he  would

land.

Upon  this,  in  they  put  the  Boats  betweene  the  two  They  land.
sconces  (that  on  the  Easter  side  they  had  not  seene)  and
the  Boats  being  hard  upon  it,  were  shot  at,  and  in  the
biggest  Boat  they  hurt  two,  and  killed  one  with  that
shot.  Upon  this,  they  determined,  that  the  smallest
Boate  with  their  company  should  land  on  the  Wester-
side,  and  the  other  to  land  on  the  Easter-side.  The
small  Boate  landed  first,  and  that  place  having  but  few
in  it,  they  being  not  able  to  defend  themselves,  ranne
away,  so  that  our  men  entred  peaceably  without  hurt  of
any.  The  other  Boate  drawing  much  water,  was  aground
before  they  came  neere  the  shore,  so  as  they  that  landed,
were  faine  to  wade  above  knee  high  in  water.  Now
the  place,  or  Sconse,  was  in  height  some  ten  foote,  made
of  stone,  Captaine  Morgan  more  resolutely  then  dis-
creetely  scaled  the  wall,  and  ten  more  with  him,  which
went  out  of  the  Boate  together.  Then  the  Indians  and
Portugals  shewed  themselves,  and  with  great  stones  from
over  the  trench,  killed  Morgan  and  five  more,  and  the  Captaine
rest  of  them  being  sore  hurt,  retired  to  the  Boate,  which  Morgan
by  this  time  was  so  .  filled  with  Indian  arrowes,  as  of
45.  men  being  in  the  Boate,  there  escaped  not  eight  of
them  unhurt,  some  having  three  arrowes  sticking  in  them,  Many  others
some  two,  and  there  was  none  which  escaped  without  slame  or  hurL
wound.  The  furie  of  those  arrowes  comming  so  thicke,
and  so  many  of  them  being  spoiled,  they  put  the  Boat
from  the  shoare,  leaving  the  rest  on  land,  a  spoile  for
the  Indians.

By  this  time,  there  came  two  Boates  full  of  lustie
Portugals,  and  some  Spaniards,  who  knowing  the  sconse
on  the  Wester-side  to  be  weakely  manned,  came  with
their  Boates  to  the  forts  side :  one  of  them  ran  ashoare
which  was  fullest  of  men,  then  our  men  let  flye  their
Muskets  at  them,  and  spoiled and killed  all that  were

165

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1591.

in  that  Boate.  The  others,  seeing  their  fellowes  speede
so  ill,  rowed  backe  againe,  with  all  their  force,  and  got
the  Town  againe.  In  this  meane  time  the  great  Boat
being  gotten  off,  they  called  to  them  in  the  Sconse,  and
willed  them  to  forsake  the  Fort,  and  to  come  and  helpe
them ;  for  they  told  them  that  all  their  men  were  spoiled
&  slaine.  Upon  this  they  strait  came  out  of  the  Sconse
againe,  and  retired  to  their  Boat ;  who  rushing  in  all
together  into  the  Boat,  she  came  on  ground,  so  that  off
they  could  not  get  her,  but  some  must  goe  out  of  her
Ten  brave  againe :  tenne  of  the  lustiest  men  went  out,  and  by  that
men  lost.  ^me  t-ne  Indians  were  come  downe  into  the  Fort  againe,

and  shot  at  our  men.  They  which  were  a  land  (per-
ceiving the  arrowes  flye  among  them)  ranne  againe  to
the  Forts  side,  and  shot  in  at  the  lower  hold  with  their
Muskets.  By  this,  the  Boat  was  got  of,  and  one  that
Cowardly  was  the  Master  of  the  Roe-bucke  (a  most  cowardly
basenesse.  villaine  that  ever  was  borne  of  a  woman)  caused  them
in  the  Boat  to  rowe  away,  and  so  left  those  brave  men
a  spoile  for  the  Portugals,  yet  they  waded  up  to  the
necks  in  the  water  to  them,  but  those  mercilesse  villaines
in  the  Boate,  would  have  no  pitty  on  them.  Their  excuse
was,  that  the  Boat  was  so  full  of  water,  that  had  they
come  in,  she  would  have  sunke  with  all  them  in  her ;
thus  vilely  were  those  poore  men  lost.

By  this  time,  they  which  were  landed  on  the  other
side  (the  great  Boate  not  being  able  to  rowe  neere  the
shoare  to  relieve  them)  were  killed  with  stones  by  the
Indians,  being  thus  wilfully  and  undiscreetely  spoiled,
which  you  may  well  perceive,  if  you  looke  into  their
landing,  especially  in  such  a  place,  as  they  could  not
escape  killing  with  stones.  They  returned  aboord  againe,
25.  men  slaine,  having  lost  five  and  twenty  men,  whereof  tenne  of  them
others  were  left  ashoare, in  such sort  as  I have  shewed  you.

When  the  Boates  came  to  the  Shippes  side,  there  were
not  eight  men  in  the  biggest  Boate,  which  were  not  most
grievously  wounded.  I  demanded  of  them  the  cause
of  their  mishappes,  and  how  they  durst  land,  considering

166

THOMAS CANDISH  a.d.

1591.

my  straight  commandement  to  the  contrarie ;  they
answered  mee,  that  there  was  no  fault  in  Captaine
Morgan,  but  the  greatest  occasion  of  all  this  spoile  to
them,  happened  upon  a  controversie  betweene  the  Cap-
taine and  those  Souldiers  that  landed  with  him,  and  were
killed  at  the  Fort,  for  their  ill  speeches  and  urging  of
Captaine  Morgan,  was  the  cause  that  hee  landed  contrary
to  my  commandement,  and  upon  such  a  place,  as  they  [IV.  vi.
all confessed fortie  men were sufficient to spoile five  n  98.]

hundred.

I  leave  it  to  your  selfe  to  judge,  what  a  sight  it  was
to  mee,  to  see  so  many  of  my  best  men,  thus  wilfully
spoiled,  having  not  left  in  my  Shippe  fiftie  sound  men :
so  as  wee  were  no  more  then  able  to  waye  our  Ankers,
which  (the  next  morning)  wee  did,  and  rinding  it  calme
wee  were  constrained  to  come  to  an  Anker  againe ;  for
my  onely  intention  was,  to  get  out  of  that  bad  roade,
and  to  put  of  into  the  Sea,  and  there  to  determine  what
to  doe,  for  that  place  was  not  for  us  to  tarrie  in,  for  the
roade  was  so  bad,  as  wee  were  not  able  to  helpe  our
selves  with  a  Boates  loading  of  fresh  water,  whereof  wee
stood  in  no  small  want.  In  this  dayes  stay  in  the  Roade,
I  comforted  these  distressed  poore  men,  what  I  might,
and  found  most  of  their  desires,  to  returne  againe  into
England.  I  let  them  understand,  how  wee  would  goe
backe  againe  to  the  Hand  of  Saint  Sebastian,  and  there  Purpose  for  S.
wee  would  water,  and  doe  our  other  necessary  businesses,  Sebastian.
and  there  make  a  resolute  determination  of  the  rest  of
our  proceedings.  This  course  seemed  to  like  them  all
very  well,  but  the  companie  in  the  Roe-bucke,  instantly
desired  nothing  more,  then  to  returne  home,  all  affirming,
that  it  was  pittie  such  a  Shippe  should  be  cast  of.  But
in  truth,  it  was  not  of  any  care  of  the  Shippe,  but  onely
of  a  most  cowardly  minde  of  the  Master,  and  the  chiefest
of  the  company  to  returne  home.

Now  you  shall  understand  that  the  Captaine  was  verie
sicke,  and  since  the  time  that  the  Ship  lost  her  Masts,
she  became the most laboursome Ship that ever did

167

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1591.

swimme  on  the  Sea,  so  as  he  was  not  able  to  indure  in
her,  and  at  that  present  he  lay  aboord  my  Shippe,  so  as
there  was  none  of  any  trust,  or  accompt  left  in  her.  But
such  was  the  case  of  that  Shippe  (being  without  sailes,
masts,  or  any  manner  of  tackle)  as  in  the  sense  &  judge-
ment of  any  man  living,  there  did  not  live  that  desperate
minded  man  in  the  world,  which  (in  that  case  she  was
then  in)  would  have  ventured  to  have  sailed  in  her  halfe
so  farre  as  England:  and  if  she  doe  returne,  it  is  (in
my  opinion)  the  most  admirable  returne  that  ever  Ship
made,  being  so  farre  off,  and  in  her  case.  These  villaines
having  left  in  my  Ship,  all  their  hurt  men,  and  having
aboord  of  them  both  my  Surgeans,  I,  having  not  one
in  mine  owne  Shippe,  which  knew  how  to  lay  a  plaster
to  a  wound,  much  lesse  to  cure  any  by  salves :  and
further,  having  in  their  Shippe  three  times  the  proportion
of  my  victuall  (wherein  consisted  the  onely  reliefe  and
comfort  of  all  my  company)  these  most  hard  harted
Damnable  villaines,  determined  that  night  amongst  themselves,  to
designe.  loose  mee  at  their  next  convenient  time  they  could  espie,
and  in  this  case  to  goe  for  England,  leaving  us  in  the
greatest  distresse  that  ever  one  Christian  left  another
in  :  for  wee  had  all  her  hurt  men  in  us,  and  we  had
taken  out  of  her  the  best  part  of  her  men  not  long
before  :  so  as  in  running  from  us,  they  not  onely  carried
away  our  Surgeans,  and  all  their  provision,  but  also  our
victuall,  wherein  consisted  all  our  reliefe  and  comfort:
having  in  them  at  their  departure  but  six  and  fortie  men,
carrying  away  with  them  the  proportion  for  six  moneths
victuall  of  one  hundred  and  twenty  men  at  large.

I  leave  you  to  consider  of  this  part  of  theirs,  and  the
miserable  case  I  was  left  in,  with  so  many  hurt  men,
so  little  victuall,  and  my  Boate  being  so  bad,  as  sixe  or
seven  men  continually  bailing  water,  were  scant  able  to
keepe  her  from  sinking;  and  mend  her  we  could  not
by  any  meanes,  before  we  recovered  some  shoare:  for
had  not  these  villaines  in  the  Roe-bucke  (that  night  wee
rode  in  this  Baye)  suffered  their Boate  to run ashoare

168

THOMAS CANDISH  a.d.

1591.

with  Irish men (which  went  to  betray  us)  I  had  taken

her Boate,  and  sunke  this  great  naughtie Boate. Such

was  the  greatnesse  of  our  mishaps,  as  we  were  not  left

with the comfort and  hope  of  a  Boate to relieve our

selves  withall;  we  not  having  left  in  the  Ship  scarce  three

tuns  of  water  for  140.  men,  the  most  part  whereof  being

hurt  and sicke. We putting  out  of  the  road  the  next

day,  they, the same  night  in  this  case  left  us,  and  (as  TheRoe-bucke

I  suppose)  they  could  not  accompt  otherwise,  then  that  firsaketh  him.

wee  should  never  againe  be  heard  of.

The  next  morning  looking  for  the  Roe-bucke,  we
could  no  where  be  seene.  I  leave  to  you  to  judge  in
what  plight  my  companie  was,  being  now  destitute  of
Surgeans,  victuals,  and  all  other  reliefe;  which  in  truth
was  so  great  a  discomfort  unto  them,  as  they  held  them-
selves dead  men,  as  well  whole  as  hurt.  The  scantnesse
of  water  made  us  that  we  could  not  seeke  after  them,
but  were  inforced  to  seeke  to  this  Hand,  with  all  possible
speede,  having  to  beate  backe  againe  thither  two  hundred  He  commeth  to
leagues :  which  place,  God  suffered  us  to  get  with  our  5-  Sebastians.
last  caske  water,  the  poore  men  being  most  extreamly
pinched  for  want  thereof.  Where  (after  we  had  a  little
refreshed  our  selves)  we  presently  mended  our  Boat  in
such  sort,  as  with  great  labour  and  danger,  we  brought
fortie  tunnes  of  water  aboord.  And  in  the  meane  time
searching  our  store  of  ropes,  tackle,  and  sailes,  we  found
our  selves  utterly  unfurnished  both  of  ropes  and  sailes :
which  accident  pleased  the  company  not  a  little,  for  by
these  wants,  they  assuredly  accounted  to  goe  home.  Their  mani-
Then  making  a  survay  of  the  victuall,  we  found  to  be  fiM  wants.
remaining  in  the  Shippe  (according  to  the  rate  we  then
lived  at)  fourteene  weekes  victuals  large.

Having  rigged  our  Shippes  in  such  sort,  as  our  small
store  would furnish us, which was most meanely, for
we  had  but  foure  sailes  (our  sprite-saile,  and  foretoppe-
saile  being  wanting)  which  two,  the  Ship  most  principally  [IV.  vi.
loveth,  and  those  which  we  had  (except  her  maine  saile)  JI99-]

were  more  then  halfe  worne. In  this  poore  case  being

169

A.D.
1591.

Mutinous
murmuring.

His

perswasions.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

furnished,  and  our  water  taken  in,  my  company  knowing
my  determination  (which  was  to  haile  my  Boate  a  ground,
and  build  her  a  new)  they  forthwith  openly  began  to
murmure,  and  mutinie :  affirming  plainely,  that  I  neede
not  mend  the  Boate,  for  they  would  goe  home,  and  then,
there  should  be  no  use  of  her.  I,  hearing  these  speeches,
thought  it  was  now  time  to  looke  amongst  them,  calling
them  together,  and  told  them,  that  although  we  had  many
mishaps  fallen  upon  us,  yet  (I  hoped)  that  their  mindes
would  not  in  such  sort  be  overcome  with  any  of  these
misfortunes,  that  they  would  goe  about  to  undertake  any
base,  or  disordered  course  ;  but  that  they  would  cheere-
fully  goe  forward,  to  attempt  either  to  make  themselves
famous,  in  resolutely  dying,  or  in  living,  to  performe
that,  which  would  be  to  their  perpetuall  reputation  :
And  the  more  we  attempted,  being  in  so  weake  a  case
the  more  (if  we  performed)  would  be  to  our  honours.
But  contrariwise,  if  we  dyed  in  attempting,  we  did  but  that
which  we  came  for,  which  was  either  to  performe  or  dye.
And  then  I  shewed  them  my  determination,  to  goe
againe  for  the  Straits  of  Magellanus :  which  words  were
no  sooner  uttered,  but  forthwith  they  all  with  one  consent
affirmed  plainly,  they  would  never  goe  that  way  againe  ;
and  that  they  would  rather  stay  ashoare  in  that  desart
Hand,  then  in  such  case  to  goe  for  the  Straits.  I  sought
by  peaceable  meanes  to  perswade  them,  shewing  them
that  in  going  that  way,  we  should  relieve  our  victuals,
by  salting  of  Seales,  and  Birds  :  which  (they  did  well
know)  we  might  doe  in  greater  quantitie,  then  our  Ship
could  carry.  And  further,  if  we  got  through  the  Strait
(which  we  might  now  easily  performe,  considering  we
had  the  chiefest  part  of  Summer  before  us)  we  could
not  but  make  a  most  rich  Voyage,  and  also  meete
againe  with  the  two  small  Ships  which  were  gone  from
us  :  and  that  it  was  but  six  hundred  leagues  thither  ;
and  to  goe  into  England  they  had  two  thousand.  And
further  that  they  should  be  most  infamous  to  the  world,
that  being  within  six  hundred  leagues  of  the  place,  which

170

THOMAS CANDISH  a.d.

1591,

we so much desired,  to returne  home  againe  so  farre,

being  most  infamous  and beggerly. These  perswasions

tooke no place with them, but  most boldly, they  all

affirmed, that they had sworne,  they  would  never  goe

againe to the Straits ; neither by no meanes would

they.

And  one  of  the  chiefest  of  their  faction,  most  proudly
and  stubbornely  uttered  these  words  to  my  face,  in
presence  of  all  the  rest  :  which  I  seeing,  and  finding
mine  owne  faction  to  be  so  weake  (for  there  were  not
any  that  favoured  my  part,  but  my  poore  cousen  Locke,
and  the  Master  of  the  Ship)  I  tooke  this  bold  companion  Mutlner
by  the  bosome,  and  with  mine  owne  hands  put  a  rope  Pun'tshed.
about  his  necke,  meaning  resolutely  to  strangle  him,
for  weapon  about  me  I  had  none.  His  companions
seeing  one  of  their  chiefe  champions  in  this  case,  &
perceiving  me  to  goe  roundly  to  worke  with  him,  they
all  came  to  the  Master,  and  desired  him  to  speake ;
affirming  they  would  be  ready  to  take  any  course  that
I  should  thinke  good  of.  I,  hearing  this,  stayed  my
selfe,  and  let  the  fellow  goe  :  after  which  time,  I  found
them  something  conformable,  at  least  in  speeches,  though
among  themselves  they  still  murmured  at  my  intentions.
Thus  having  somthing  pacified  them,  and  perswaded
them,  that  by  no  meanes  I  would  take  no  other  course,
then  to  goe  for  the  Straits,  I  took  ashoare  with  me  thirtie
Soldiers,  and  my  Carpenters,  carrying  foureteene  dayes
victuall  with  me  for  them.  Thus  going  ashoare,  I  hailed
up  my  Boate,  to  new  build  her  in  such  sort,  as  she
might  bee  able  to  abide  the  Seas,  leaving  aboord  all
my  sailers,  and  the  rest,  to  rigge  the  Ship,  and  mend
sailes,  and to  doe  other  businesse.

And  now  to  let  you  know,  in  what  case  I  lay  ashoare
among  these  base  men,  you  shall  understand,  that  of  these
thirtie  there  were  verie  few  of  them,  which  had  not
rather  have  gone  to  the  Portugals,  then  to  have  remained
with  me ;  for  there  were  some,  which  at  my  being
ashoare,  were making rafts to goe  over  to  the  maine,

171

A.D.
I59I

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

An  Irish
rascall  and
traitor  to  his
fellowes.

[IV.  vi.

which  was  not  a  mile  over,  where  the  Portugals  had
continuall  watch  of  us,  looking  but  for  a  fit  opportunity
to  set  upon  us :  being  in  this  case,  alwaies  expecting
the  comming  of  the  Portugals,  against  whom  I  could
have  made  no  resistance,  and  further  the  trecherie  of
some  of  my  companie,  which  desired  nothing  more,
then  to  steale  over,  so  to  betray  me,  I  protest  I  lived
hourly,  as  he  that  still  expecteth  death.  In  this  case
I  made  all  the  speed  I  could  to  make  an  end  of  my
Boate,  that  we  might  be  able  to  rowe  her  aboord,  which
in  twelve  daies  we  mainely  finished,  which  being  done,
I  came  aboord,  and  found  all  my  businesse  in  good
forwardnesse :  so  I  determined  with  all  possible  speede
to  dispatch,  and  be  gone  for  the  Straits  of  Magellane.

But  ere  ever  we  could  get  in  all  our  water,  and  timber-
wood,  and  other  necessaries,  an  Irish  man  (a  noble  villaine)
having  made  a  raft,  got  over  to  the  maine,  and  told
the  Portugals  which  were  there  (watching  nothing  but
an  opportunitie)  that  if  they  would  goe  over  in  the
night,  they  should  find  most  of  our  men  ashoare,  without
weapon,  and  that  they  might  doe  with  them  what  they
would :  upon  this,  the  next  night,  they  came  over,  and
having  taken  some  of  our  men,  they  brought  them  where
the  rest  lay,  which  they  most  cruelly  killed,  being  sicke
men,  not  able  to  stirre  to  helpe  themselves.  Those
which  were  ashoare,  more  then  the  sicke  men,  had  stolne
out  of  the  Shippe,  for  it  was  all  my  care  to  keepe  them
aboord,  knowing  well,  that  the  Portugals  sought  to  spoile
us,  the  place  being  so  fit  for  them,  all  overgrowne  with
woods  and  bushes,  as  their  Indians  might  goe  and  spoile
us  with  their  arrowes  at  their  pleasures,  and  we  not  be
2°°«]  able  to  hurt  one  of  them.  In  the  morning  perceiving
their  comming,  I  sent  my  Boate  ashoare,  and  rescued
all  my  healthful!  men,  but  five,  which  they  found  out
in  the  night,  without  weapons  to  defend  them  :  whereof
(besides  the  losse  of  our  men)  we  having  but  foure  sailes,
left  one  ashoare,  which  was  no  small  mishap  among
the  rest.

172

THOMAS CANDISH  a.d.

1591.

The  Portugals  went  presently  againe  over  to  the  maine,
but  left  their  Indians  to  keepe  in  the  bushes.  About  the
watering-place,  our  men  going  ashoare,  were  shot  at,  and
hurt,  and  could  by  no  meanes  come  to  hurt  them  againe,
by  reason  of  the  wood,  and  bushes.  Wherefore  finding  Cap.
my  men  hurt,  and  that  by  no  meanes  I  could  doe  any  Can^tshes
thing  there,  without  more  losse  of  men  (whereof  I  had  no
neede)  for  I  had  not  above  ninetie  men  left,  or  little  over,
notwithstanding  my  wants  for  wood  and  water,  and  my
Boate  (not  being  sufficiently  mended)  was  in  no  possi-
bilitie  to  doe  me  pleasure,  in  this  case  was  I  forced  to
depart ;  fortune  never  ceasing  to  lay  her  greatest  adver-
sities upon  me.

But  now  I  am  growne  so  weake  and  faint,  as  I  am
scarce  able  to  hold  the  penne  in  my  hand :  wherefore
I  must  leave  you  to  inquire  of  the  rest  of  our  most
unhappy  proceedings,  but  know  this,  that  (for  the  Straits)
I  could  by  no  meanes,  get  my  company  to  give  their
consents  to  goe.  For  after  this  misfortune,  and  the  want
of  our  sailes  (which  was  a  chiefe  matter  they  alledged)
and  to  tell  you  truth,  all  the  men  left  in  the  Shippe,
were  no  more  then  able  to  weigh  our  ankers.  But  in
truth  I  desired  nothing  more,  then  to  attempt  that  course,
rather  desiring  to  dye  in  going  forward,  then  basely  in
returning  backe  againe  ;  but  God  would  not  suffer  me
to  dye  so  happy  a  man,  although  I  sought  all  the  wayes
I  could,  still  to  attempt  to  performe  somewhat.  For,
after  that  by  no  meanes  I  saw  they  could  be  brought
to  goe  for  the  Straits,  having  so  many  reasonable  reasons
to  alledge  against  me,  as  they  had  :  first,  having  but
three  sailes,  and  the  place  subject  to  such  furious  stormes,
and  the  losse  of  one  of  these  was  death  :  and  further,
our  Boate  was  not  sufficiently  repaired,  to  abide  the  Seas :
and  last  of  all,  the  fewnesse,  and  feeblenesse  of  our
company  (wherein  we  had  not  left  thirty  sailers)  these
causes  being  alleadged  against  me,  I  could  not  well
answere :  but  resolved  them  plainely,  that  to  England
I would never give my consent to goe,  and  that  (if

i73

A.D.
1591

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

His  purpose

they  would  not  take  such  courses  as  I  intended)  I  was
then  determined,  that  Shippe  and  all  should  sinke  in
the  Seas  together.  Upon  this,  they  began  to  be  more
tractable,  and  then  I  shewed  them,  that  I  would  beate
for  Saint  Hellena,  and  there,  either  to  make  ourselves
for  S.  Helena.  nappy  by  mending,  or  ending.  This  course  (in  truth)
pleased  none  of  them,  and  yet  seeing  my  determination,
and  supposing  it  would  be  more  danger  to  resist  me,  then
in  seeming  to  be  willing,  they  were  at  quiet,  untill  I  had
beaten  from  29.  degrees,  to  the  Southward  of  the
^Equator  to  20.  At  which  time,  finding  that  I  was
too  far  Northerly,  to  have  good  winde,  I  called  them
to  tacke  about  the  Shippe  to  the  Southward  againe.
They  all  plainely  made  answere,  they  would  not,  and
that  they  had  rather  dye  there,  then  be  starved  in  seeking
an  Hand,  which  (they  thought)  that  way  we  should  never
get.

What  meanes  I  used  to  stand  againe  to  the  Southward,
I  leave  you  to  inquire  of  themselves :  but  from  the
latitude  of  20.  I  beate  backe  againe  into  28.  with  such
contrary  windes,  as  (I  suppose)  never  man  was  troubled
with  the  like,  so  long  a  time  together.  Being  in  this
latitude,  I  found  the  winde  favourable,  and  then  I  stood
againe  to  the  Northward,  willing  the  Master  &  his
company  to  saile  East  North-east,  and  they  in  the  night
(I  being  a  sleepe)  steered  North-east,  and  meere
Northerly.  Notwithstanding  all  this  most  vile  usage,  we
got  within  two  leagues  of  the  Hand,  and  had  the  winde
favoured  us  so,  as  that  we  might  have  stemmed  from  18.
degrees  to  16.  East  North-east,  we  had  found  the  Hand:
but  it  was  not  Gods  will  so  great  a  blessing  should  befall
me.  Being  now  in  the  latitude  of  the  Hand,  almost
eighteene  leagues  to  the  Westward  of  it,  the  winde  being
continually  at  East  South-east,  the  most  contrary  winde
that  could  blow  :  I  presently  made  a  survay  of  my  victuall,
and  found,  that  according  to  that  proportion  (which  we
then  lived  at)  there  was  not  left  in  the  Ship  eight  weekes
victuall; which being so farre from  reliefe, was (as  I

i74

Sailors
disobedience.

Scarsity  of
victuall.

THOMAS CANDISH  a.d.

1591.

suppose)  as  small  a  portion,  as  ever  men  were  at  in  the

Seas.

Being  so  uncertaine  of  reliefs,  I  demanded  of  them,
whether  they  would  venture  (like  good  minded  men)
to  beate  to  the  Southward  againe,  to  get  this  Hand,
where  we  should  not  onely  relieve  our  selves,  but  also
to  be  in  full  assurance,  either  to  sinke,  or  take  a
Carracke :  and  that  by  this  meanes,  we  would  have  a
sufficient  revenge  of  the  Portugals,  for  all  their  villanies
done  unto  us :  or  that  they  would  pinch,  and  bate  halfe
the  allowance  they  had  before,  and  so  to  goe  for  England.
They  all  answered  me,  they  would  pinch  to  death,  rather
then  goe  to  the  Southward  againe.  I  knowing  their
dispositions,  and  having  lived  among  them  in  such  con-
tinuall  torment,  and  disquietnesse,  and  now  to  tell  you
of  my  greatest  griefe,  which  was  the  sicknesse  of  my
deare  kinsman  John  Locke,  who  by  this  time  was  growne
in  great  weakenesse,  by  reason  whereof  hee  desired  rather
quietnesse,  and  contentednesse  in  our  course,  then  such
continuall  disquietnesse,  which  never  ceased  mee.  And
now  by  this,  what  with  griefe  for  him,  and  the  continuall  Desperate
trouble  I  indured  among  such  hel-hounds,  my  Spirits  thoughts-
were  cleane  spent  ;  wishing  my  selfe  upon  any  desart
place  in  the  world,  there  to  dye,  rather  then  thus  basely
to  returne  home  againe :  which  course  I  had  put  in
execution,  had  I  found  an  Hand,  which  the  Cardes  make
to  be  in  8.  degrees  to  the  Southward  of  the  line.  I
sweare  to  you,  I  sought  it  with  all  diligence,  meaning  (if  [IV.  vi.
I  had  found  it)  to  have  there  ended  my  unfortunate  life.  1201.]

But  God  suffered  not  such  happinesse  to  light  upon  me,
for  I could by  no meanes  finde  it, so  as  I  was  forced
to  goe  towards  England  :  and  having  gotten  eight  degrees  Master  Lockes
by  North  the  Line,  I  lost  my  most  dearest  cousin.  death.

And  now  consider,  whether  a  heart  made  of  flesh,  be
able  to  indure  so  many  misfortunes,  all  falling  upon  me
without  intermission.  I  thanke  my  God,  that  in  ending
of  me,  he  hath  pleased  to  rid  me  of  all  further  trouble
and  mis-haps. And  now  to  returne  to  our  private  matters,

i75

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Cap.  Can-  I  have  made  my  Will,  wherein  I  have  given  speciall
dishes  Will,  charge,  that  all  goods  (whatsoever  belong  unto  me)  be
delivered  into  your  hands.  For  Gods  sake,  refuse  not
to  doe  this  last  request  for  mee,  I  owe  little,  that  I  know
of,  and  therefore  it  will  be  the  lesse  trouble :  but  if
there  be  any  debt,  that  (of  truth)  is  owing  by  mee,  for
God's  sake,  see  it  paid.  I  have  left  a  space  in  the  Will
for  another  name,  and  (if  you  thinke  it  good)  I  pray
take  in  my  cousin  Henrie  Sackeford,  hee  will  ease  you
much  in  many  businesses.  There  is  a  Bill  of  Adventure
to  my  Cousin  Richard  Locke  (if  it  happen  the  other
ship  returne  home  with  any  thing,  as  it  is  not  impossible)
I  pray  remember  him,  for  he  hath  nothing  to  shew  for
it.  And  likewise  Master  Heton  the  Customer  of  Hamp-
ton, which  is  50.  pounds,  and  one  Eliot  of  Ratcliffe  by
London,  which  is  50.  pounds  more,  the  rest  have  all
Bills  of  adventure,  but  the  ruine  in  the  victuall,  onely
two  excepted,  which  I  have  written  unto  you.  I  have
given  Sir  George  Cary  the  Desire,  if  ever  shee  returne,
for  I  alwayes  promised  him  her,  if  shee  returned,  and
a  little  part  of  her  getting,  if  any  such  thing  happen,
I pray  you  see  it  performed.

To  use  complements  of  love  (now  at  my  last  breath)
were  frivolous,  but  know  :  that  I  left  none  in  England,
whom  I  loved  halfe  so  well  as  your  selfe :  which  you,
in  such  sort  deserved  at  my  hands,  as  I  can  by  no
meanes  requite.  I  have  left  all  (that  little  remayning)
unto  you,  not  to  be  accomptable  for  any  thing.  That
which  you  will  (if  you  finde  any  overplus  of  remayned,
your  selfe  specially  being  satisfied  to  your  owne  desire)
Mistris  Anne  give  unto  my  sister  Anne  Candish.  I  have  written
Candish.  x.o  no  man  living  but  your  selfe,  leaving  all  friends
and  kinsmen,  onely  reputing  you  as  dearest.  Commend
me  to  both  your  brethren,  being  glad,  that  your  brother
Edward  escaped  so  unfortunate  a  voyage.  I  pray  give
this  Copie  of  my  unhappy  proceedings  in  this  Action,  to
none,  but  onely  to  Sir  George  Cary,  and  tell  him,  that
if  I  had  thought,  the  letter  of  a  dead  man  would  have

176

THOMAS CANDISH  a.d.

1591.
beene  acceptable,  I  would  have  written  unto  him.  I
have  taken  order  with  the  Master  of  my  ship,  to  see  his
peeces  of  Ordnance  delivered  unto  him,  for  hee  knoweth
them.  And  if  the  Roe-bucke  bee  not  returned,  then,  I
have  appointed  him  to  deliver  him  two  brasse  peeces,
out  of  this  ship,  which  I  pray  see  performed.  I  have
now  no  more  to  say  but  take  this  last  farewell.  That
you  have  lost  the  lovingest  friend,  that  was  lost  by  any.
Commend  mee  to  your  wife,  no  more,  but  as  you  love
God,  doe  not  refuse  to  undertake  this  last  request  of
mine.  I  pray  forget  not  Master  Carey  of  Cockington,
gratifie  him  with  some  thing  :  for  hee  used  mee  kindly
at  my  departure.  Beare  with  this  scribling :  for  I
protest,  I  am  scant  able  to  hold  a  pen  in  my  hand.

Chap.  VII.

The  admirable  adventures  and  strange  fortunes  of
Master  Antonie  Knivet,  which  went  with
Master  Thomas  Candish  in  his  second  voyage
to  the  South  Sea.  1  59 1 .

§.  1.

What befell  in their voyage to the Straits, and
after,  till  he  was  taken  by  the  Portugals.

E  departed  from  Plimmouth  with  five  saile
of  ships,  determining  to  goe  for  the  South
Sea  (the  names  of  our  Ships  were  these)
the Gallion Leicester, which was our
Admirall ;  the  Roe-bucke,  Vice-admirall ;
the  Desire,  the  Daintie,  and the  Blacke
Pinnasse. Sixe  or  seven  dayes  after  that
wee  were  departed  from  the  Coast  of  England,  we  met
with nineteene saile of  Flemmings in the night. Not
regarding  what  they were, our  Vice-admirall  tooke  one  ^emmish^
of  them,  and  all  the  rest  escaped. In  the  morning  the  wtih  English
Master  of  our  Flemmish prize  was  brought  before  the  price.
xvi  177  m

A.D.
1591.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Generall,  and  of  him  wee  had  newes  of  a  fleet  of  ships,
that  was  departed  out  of  Lisbone  for  Brasile,  the  which

[IV.  vi.  newes  we  were  very  glad  of. The  Flemmish ship  was

1202.]  la(ien  with  Salt,  whereof  the  Generall  tooke  three  Tunne
for  his  provision.  This  Flemming  also  shewed  us  a
licence  that  hee  had  to  passe  the  Seas,  under  her  Majesties
hand  and  seale,  the  which  as  our  Generall  had  seene  he
presently  commanded,  that  every  man  should  returne  all
such  things  as  they  had  taken  from  the  Flemming,  and
hee  himselfe  payed  for  the  Salt  that  he  had  taken,  and
so  we  departed  from  them  with  a  faire  winde,  holding
our  course  from  the  Coast  of  Portugall  to  the  Islands
of  Canarie.  Thus  in  twentie  dayes  we  had  sight  of  the
said  Hands,  which  when  our  Generall  knew  of  troth  to
be  the  same,  he  commanded  his  two  smallest  ships,  the
Daintie  and  the  Blacke  Pinnasse,  to  be  sent  along  the
shoare,  to  see  if  they  could  espie  any  Carvels  fishing,
or  any  ships  betweene  the  Hands,  and  not  discrying  any
thing,  the  next  morning  they  returned  backe  unto  us.
Under  the  Equinoctiall  line,  we  lay  seven  and  twentie
dayes  driving  too  and  fro  without puffe or winde : In

Scorbuto.  which  time  most  of  our  men  fell  sicke  of  the  Scurvie
by  reason  of  the  extreme  heat  of  the  Sunne,  and  the
vapours  of  the  night ;  notwithstanding  our  great  danger
of  sicknesse  did  not  appause  the  hardnesse  of  our  hearts,
being  in  as  great  extremitie  as  ever  men  were,  it hap-

Japanders.  pened  that  two  men  of  Japon  which  the  Generall  had
taken  in  his  first  voyage  (bearing  envie  to  a  poore
Portugall  that  went  with  us  from  Plimmouth,  accused
him  to  the  Generall)  having  before  conspired  his  death
in  this  sort :  The  Generall  being  at  dinner,  these  two
Japoners  came  to  his  Cabbin,  telling  their  tale  so  loud
that  every  one  might  heare  the  report  (which  was  thus)
that  the  Portugall  of  the  ship  was  a  Traytor,  and  that
he  had  often  given  them  counsell  to  run  away  with  him
at  Brasil  :  moreover  (quoth  he)  if  it  so  had  pleased  God
wee  had  taken  the  Towne  of  Santos,  as  our  Generall  had
pretended,  from  thence  that  hee  would  guide  them  to  the

178

ANTHONY KNIVET  ad.

1591.

South Sea,  where  they  should  be  well  rewarded  for  their
intelligence ; upon the which accusations, the poore
Portugall was hanged. And as for his going from  Portugal!
Santos  by  land  through  America,  to  the  South  Sea,  had  hanged*
beene  a  thing  impossible,  for  the  Countrie  is  all  Wilder-
nesse,  and  full  of  Savages.

After  we  had  beene  so  long  becalmed  under  the  Line,
we  had  a  faire  North-west  winde,  and  in  twentie  dayes
saile  we  had  sight  of  Land  on  the  coast  of  Brasile,  but  Brasil.
no  man  knew  certainly  what  part  it  should  be.  At  length
comming  neere  the  shoare,  we  espied  two  small  ships,
the  one  of  them  we  tooke,  the  other  escaped ;  that  wee
tooke  was  laden  with  Blackamores,  and  some  merchandise  ;
they  came  from  Fernambaquo,  and  were  determined  to
have  gone  to  the  River  of  Plate.  By  the  Pilot  of  this
ship  we  knew  we  were  at  Cape  Frio,  that  is,  Cold  Cape.  Cape  Frio.
This  Cape  lyeth  twelve  leagues  from  the  River  of  Jenero,
and  thirtie  leagues  from  Santos,  which  was  the  Towne
we  meant  to  take.  In  this  ship  we  tooke  a  Friar  that
hid  himselfe  in  a  Chist  of  meale ;  the  night  following
by  the  directions  of  our  new  taken  Pilot,  wee  came  to
a  place  called  Ilha  Grande,  twelve  leagues  from  Santos,  llha  Grande.
at  this  place  we  tooke  five  or  six  houses  with  Portugals
and  Savages  of  the  Countrie.  Here  wee  had  good  store
of  Potatoes,  and  Plantons,  divers  kindes  of  good  rootes,
with  some  Hogs  and  Hennes,  which  was  very  good  and
comfortable  for  the  refreshing  of  our  men.  Here  we
had  such  disorder  amongst  our  selves,  that  if  the  Portugals
had  beene  of  any  courage,  they  might  have  killed  many
of  us,  for  our  men  would  fight  for  their  victuals  as  if  Portentuous
they  had  beene  no  Christians  but  Jewes,  and  they  that  Presages  °ftlf
got  the  best,  would  get  them  into  some  hole,  or  into  '??  omsot
the  Wildernesse  under  some  Tree,  and  there  they  would
remaine  as  long  as  they  had  meat.  For  mine  owne  part
(there  was  such  sharking)  I  could  in  that  place  get  neither
meat  nor  mony,  and  pure  hunger  compelled  me  to  goe
into  the  Woods,  to  see  if  wee  could  kill  any  thing  with
our peeces,  or if  we could  finde some  Potatoes. And

179

A.D.
1591

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

as  wee  went,  wee  encountred  with  seven  or  eight  of  our
companie  that  were  together  by  the  eares  about  a  Hogge
they  had  killed,  and  the  strife  was,  who  should  have
the  best  share;  we  comming  in  that  time,  when  every
one  used  their  fists,  stole  away  a  quarter,  and  went  a
good  way  into  the  Wildernesse,  where  we  were  merry
for  that  night ;  the  next  day  wee  came  backe  againe  with
good  store  of  Potato  rootes;  and  going  into  the  house
where  the  Generals  musicians  were,  wee  found  them
dressing  of  eight  yong  Whelpes  for  their  dinner;  wee
giving  them  of  our  rootes  they  were  contented  that  wee
should  dine  with  them.

In  the  afternoone  we  set  fire  on  a  new  ship,  and  burned
all  the  houses,  leaving  the  Merchant  and  all  his  Moores
ashoare,  we departed  from thence, and having a faire
winde  about sixe of  the  clocke  we  came to the Hand
Saint  of  San  Sebastian,  where  wee  anchored,  being  five  leagues

Sebastian.  from  Santos.  As  soone  as  the  ships  were  in  the  Harbour,
every  Master  and  Captaine  came  aboard  of  the  Generall,
to  know  how  hee  pretended  to  take  the  Towne  of  Santos,
and  they  all  resolved  that  our  long  Boat  and  our  Shallop
onely  with  one  hundred  men  was  enough  for  the  taking
of  it.  For  the  Portugall  Pilot  told  us,  that  it  was  of
no  strength.  On  Christmas-eve  about  ten  a  clocke  in
the  night,  when  the  Boats  were  to  goe  ashoare  there  were
so  many  that  would  have  gone,  that  wee  began  to  fight
and  cast  one  another  over-board  into  the  Sea;  but  as
soone  as  our  Generall  heard  the  noise,  he  commanded
every  man  to  come  aboard  the  ship  againe.  I  fearing
the  General,  and  being  desirous  to  goe  ashoare  with  the
first  (for  I  had  seene  before  that  they  which  came  last
got  nothing)  crept  under  the  seate  of  our  Shallop,  where
I  was  for  the  space  of  two  houres,  and  the  Boat  being
full  of  men,  I  could  not  get  out,  but  there  had  beene
[IV.  vi.  smothered, if  it had not beene for  William Waldren

1203.]  that  was  our  Boatsman,  and  steered  the  Boat,  who
hearing  me  crie  under  him,  tore  up  the  boords,  and
saved my  life. About  three  a  clocke in  the morning,

180

Unruly
demeanour.

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1591.

wee  met  with  a  Canoa  (which  is  a  Boat  that  they  make
of  a  whole  Tree)  in  which  wee  tooke  foure  Portugals
and  two  Women ;  the  one  of  them  was  going  to  be
married  that  morning.  After  we  had  taken  this  Boat
we  went  close  to  the  shoare ;  and  having  tarried  for
our  Boat  an  houre,  we  heard  the  Portugals  ring  a  Bell,
presently  Jasper  Jorge  the  Portugall  Pilot  told  us,  that
now  was  the  time  to  land,  for  he  knew  by  that  Bell
that  they  were  in  the  middle  of  their  Masse,  and  at
that  instant  the  Friar  was  holding  up  the  Bread  of
Sacrament  before  the  people  to  worship  it.

He  had  no  sooner  spoke,  but  we  were  all  on  shoare,
and  so  marching  to  the  Church,  we  tooke  every  mans  Santos  taken.
sword  without  resistance,  and  there  we  remayned  till  it
was  seven  of  the  clocke,  for  the  comming  of  our  long
Boat,  and  the  rest  of  our  companie  (for  we  were  but
twentie  three  in  all)  and  we  durst  not  take  sack  of  the
Towne  with  so  few.  By  that  meanes  some  of  the
Portugals  that  were  in  their  houses  escaped  with  their
persons  and  mony.  Here  was  good  store  of  victuall  and
great  store  of  Succats,  Sugars,  and  Cassavie  meale,  of  the
which  wee  made  very  good  bread.  In  the  Church  there
were  three  hundred  men  beside  women  and  children.
Assoone  as  wee  had  taken  the  sack  of  the  Towne,  and
placed  all  our  men  in  order,  word  was  sent  to  our
Generall  of  all  that  had  beene  done.  After  the  Generall
had  sent  answere  againe  to  the  Towne,  all  the  Portugals
were  set  at  libertie,  and  we  fortified  our  selves  in  the
Towne,  keeping  onely  seven  or  eight  of  the  chiefest  and
principall  prisoners,  Master  Cooke  Captaine  of  the  Vice-
admirall,  went  Captaine  of  all  the  companie  that  went
ashoare ;  he  favoured  me  very  much,  and  commanded
mee  to  take  a  Friars  Cell  to  lodge  in,  in  the  Colledge
of  Jesus,  where  hee  himselfe  lodged  with  many  Captaines
and  young  Gentlemen.  It  was  my  chance  going  up  and
downe  from  Cell  to  Cell,  that  I  looked  under  a  bed  HowAnthonie
standing  in  a  dark  hole,  where  I  found  a  little  chist  fast  Knivetfounda
nayled,  and the  seames  thereof  were  white  with wheat  chist  of  silver.

181

A.D.
1591

John  King
English  man.

Jesuites
Colledge.

The  Genera//
by  two  savages
first  scarred,
and  after
instructed.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

flower.  I  drew  it  forth,  and  finding  it  of  great  waight,
broke  it  in  pieces,  wherein  I  found  1700.  Rials  of  eight,
each  whereof  contayneth  foure  shillings  English.  This
hole  I  tooke  for  my  lodging,  and  no  man  knew  of  my
good  purchase;  cloth,  shirts,  blankets,  and  beds,  and
such  stuffe  no  man  regarded.

The  next  day  following,  being  S.  Stevens  day,  the
Portugals  gave  us  a  false  alarum ;  the  Generall  came
also  with  all  the  ships  into  the  Road,  and  presently  landed
with  two  hundred  men,  and  commanded  all  the  outward
part  of  the  Towne  to  bee  burned.  Then  hee  gave  order
for  the  building  of  a  Pinnasse  to  row  with  twentie  Oares,
and  commanded  all  the  ships  that  were  in  the  Harbour
to  be  set  on  fire.  At  this  Towne  we  tooke  an  English
man,  called  John  King,  which  had  beene  there  fifteene
yeeres.  Our  Generall  lay  in  the  Colledge  of  Jesus  all
the  time  that  we  were  at  Santos.  This  Colledge  had
many  back-wayes  to  the  Sea-side,  and  it  happened  one
night,  that  two  Savages  being  abused  by  the  Portugals
ran  away,  and  knowing  the  passages  of  the  Colledge,
came  in  the  night  to  the  Generals  bedside,  and  brought
with  them  Turkies  and  Hennes:  The  Generall  being
awaked  by  them  cryed  out  for  helpe.  One  of  them
that  could  speake  Portugall,  fell  downe  on  his  knees,
and  said,  that  hee  came  to  crave  his  favour,  and  not
to  offend  him.  The  morning  following  the  Generall  had
discourse  with  these  two  Savages,  and  by  them  he  knew
of  what  strength  the  Portugals  campe  was,  and  how
that  at  his  going  out  of  the  Towne  they  were  deter-
mined to  give  battaile  :  likewise  they  told  him  of  three
great  bags  of  mony,  and  a  jarre,  that  was  hid  under
the  roote  of  a  Fig  tree,  and  guided  us  where  we  had
three  hundred  head  of  Cattel,  which  served  us  all  the
time  we  were  there.

The  Daintie  being  a  small  ship  made  a  good  voyage
to  Santos,  for  shee  came  in  before  any  of  our  fleet,  by
the  which  meanes  they  laded  her  with  Sugar,  and  good
commodities of  the Portugals ships that were in the

182

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1591.
Harbour ;  this  ship  went  voluntarily  with  us,  and  having
made a good voyage, the Captaine told the Generall
that he would returne for England, the Generall  The  Daintie
answered, that he was determined to send him into  would  hc\ve
the River of  Plate, and then with all his heart hee  Santos  to
should  returne. We  continued  two  moneths  at  Santos,  England.
which  was  the  overthrow  of  our  voyage. In the time
that  we  were  there  many  Canibals  came  unto  us,  desiring
the General that he would destroy the Portugals,  and
keepe the Countrie to himselfe, protesting to bee all
on  his  side ; the  Generall  thanked  them  for  their  kind-
nesse,  and  told  them  that  at  that  time  he  had  a  farther
pretence. We  found  store  of  gold  in  this  Towne,  that
the Indians had brought from a place, called by the
Indians, Mutinga,  and now  the Portugals have mynes  Mutinga
there. Many  of  our  companie  counselled the Generall  mJnes-
to winter at this Towne, but he would not by  any
meanes.

From  our  first  setting  forth  from  England,  till  we
came  to  Santos,  I  had  great  love  to  Christopher  the
Japon,  because  I  found  his  experience  to  bee  good  in
many  things.  This  Indian  and  I  grew  into  such  friend-
ship one  with  another,  that  wee  had  nothing  betwixt  us
unknowne  together.  I  a  long  time  having  found  him  Japanders
true,  I  told  him  of  the  money  I  had  found  under  the  PerMie-
Friers  bed ;  with  that  hee  told  mee  of  some  money  that
hee  had  got,  and  wee  swore  to  part  halfe  from  thence-
forth whatsoever  God  should  permit  us  to  obtaine  :
some  foure  dayes  after  that,  when  we  were  ready  to
depart,  he  told  me  that  that  time  of  the  yeare  was  past,
wherefore  it  was  best  to  hide  our  money  in  the  ground,
and  remaine  in  the  Countrey.  I  beleeving  his  per-
swasions,  agreed  to  doe  what  he  thought  best ;  thus  we
determined  both,  that  the  same  day  we  were  to  goe  a  [IV.  vi.
shipboord, that  then he should take all the money  in  1204.]

a  Canoa,  and  hide  it  by  a  River  side ;  in  the  morning
I  delivered  all  the  money  into  his  hands,  and  he  swore
that  in lesse  then  two houres he would  returne,  but  I

183,

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1591.

staied  above  five  houres,  and  might  have  tarried  all  my
life,  for  he  was  gone  aboord  the  Ship,  afterward  by
good  meanes  I  got  mine  owne  againe,  and  so  our  former
friendship  was  parted.  Our  men  marched  by  Land  from
S.  Vincent.  Santos,  to  another  Towne  called  San  Vincent,  and  in
the  way  our  men  burned  five  Engenios,  or  Sugar-mils,
the  disorder  of  our  men  was  such  at  their  im  barking,
that  if  the  Portugals  had  beene  of  any  courage,  they
might  easily  have  cut  our  throates,  the  two  Indians,
which  came  at  night  to  the  Generals  chamber  went  with
us  to  the  Straits.

We  departed  from  Santos,  with  a  faire  winde  for  the

Straites of Magellan, fourteene dayes we had faire

weather,  the  fifteenth  day  all  the  Masters  and  Captaines

of  the fleete comming  aboord,  the Admirall wonne a

great summe of money. Two dayes after wee were

becalmed,  and  the  Pilotes  taking  their height,  found  it

to  be  in  the  altitude  with  the  River  of  Plate. And  we

being  farre  from  the  shoare  did  beare  roome  for  Land,

determining to send the Daintie, the Blacke Pinnasse,

At  the  river  of  w\& the  into the  aforesaid River of  Plate,  but

Plate  we  had it  was  not  the  will  of  God  that  we  should  execute  our

agreatstorme.  pretence. For the same day wee thought to have

the  Crow  a descried  Land,  the  winde  began ne to blow  South-west,

smal  Boat  of and the Seas were very darke, swelling in waves so

20.  tun  sunke  high,  that  we  could  not  perceive  any  of  our  accompanied

before  our ships,  although  we  were  very  neere  one  to  another,  the

twelve  men  &  ^eas  ^ra^e  over tne P°°Pe of  our shippe,  and  washed

a  boy. The our men astonisht with feare into the Skippers, the

Roe-bucke  lost  Roe-bucke  in  this storme  ranne  her  against  our

her  boat  with pQope,  and brake downe all our Gallerie : all things

m»  hrtJOlt were  cast  into  the  Sea  that  stood  above  Hatches,  heere

with  three miserable  Fortune  began  to  frowne  on  us  all,  especially

men. Andat  on  mee,  for  all  that  I  had,  both  in  clothes  and  money,

the  Straits  we  were cast into the gea< ajj our g^jp  wjtn the

D  V  Ion  ^eas  tnat  Drake  over  her  sides.  Here  our  Generall
Boat  for  the  shewed  himselfe  to  bee  of  a  noble  courage,  for  hee  did
Admirall. nothing  but  runne  up  and  downe  encouraging  his  men

184

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1591.

which were  all  amazed,  thinking that  to  bee  their  last

houre,  this  storme  continued  three  dayes,  in  which  time

wee lost most of our sayles blowne away from the

yards.

It  was  the  will  of  God,  that  after  we  had  been  three
dayes  in  the  storme,  the  wind  ceased,  but  the  Seas
continued  so  great,  that  wee  were  not  able  to  beare  any
sayle.  We  lying  thus  tost  with  Seas,  without  sight  of
any  of  our  fleet,  the  company  murmured,  and  wished  Murmuring.
themselves  againe  at  Santos,  and  indeed  we  al  thought
that  the  rest  of  our  company  were  driven  back  with
the  storme  to  the  Coast,  thinking  it  best  for  us  to
returne  againe.  The  Generall  hearing  what  speeches
passed  in  the  shippe,  came  forth  upon  the  halfe  decke,
and  commanded  all  the  company  to  come  before  him,
and  after  he  had  heard  them  speake,  he  answered  that
he  had  given  directions  to  all  the  Masters  and  Captaines
of  the  fleete,  that  what  weather  soever  should  part
them,  that  they  should  use  their  indevour  to  take  Port
Desire,  and  that  they  should  tarry  a  fortnight,  so  if
none  of  the  company  came,  they  should  leave  some
marke  on  the  shoare,  and  goe  on  their  Voyage,  with
that  every  man  was  satisfied,  the  Generall  promising
twentie  pounds  to  whomsoever  could  first  spie  a  sayle,
we  made  our  course  to  Port  Desire,  and  in  ten  dayes  port  Desire.
we  safely  arrived  at  our  desired  Port,  where  we  found
all  our  fleet  but  the  Daintie,  which  was  no  little  comfort
to  us  all,  because  the  time  of  our  yeere  was  almost  past,
we  stayed  here  but  two  dayes  taking  a  few  Penguins,
from  an  Hand  right  before  Port  Desire.

When  we  came  to  the  mouth  of  the  Straits  wee  found  Magellan
the  winde  contrary,  and  were  forced  to  lye  beating  before  Straits.
the  Harbour  of  Port  Famine,  three  dayes  ere  wee  could  port  Famine.
double that Cape,  for many  times  we  did cast anchor
without  the Cape  in twentie  fathomes  water,  but  on a
sudden, the current would carrie away the ships with  Current.
Cables  and  Anchors  afloat  in  the night, in this  current
the  Roe-bucke  driven  with  the  current,  fell  crosse  over

185

A.D.
1591.

Barke  like
Sinamon.

Naked
Savages.

Miserable
cold.

Anthonie
Knivet  lost  his
toes  in  the
Straits.
[IV.  vi.

1205.]

Strait  and
deepe  River.

Muscles  with
Pearles.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  haze,  there  wee  had  no  other  remedy,  but  were
forced  to  cut  our  cables,  and  so  lose  our  Anchors.  In
the  end  with  much  adoe  we  doubled  the  Cape,  and  got
into  Port  Famine,  where  wee  lay  a  sevennight  for  want
of  winde  and  weather  to  goe  forward.  In  the  time  that
wee  were  at  Port  Famine,  every  day  our  men  went  on
shoare,  to  get  Muscles  and  Fruits  of  the  Countrey  to
eate,  and  the  barke  of  a  tree  that  was  like  Sinamon.
One  day  the  Boate  being  ashoare,  there  came  to  us
above  a  thousand  Canibals  naked,  with  feathers  in  their
hands,  but  they  would  not  come  so  neere  us,  as  we
could  touch  them.  If  we  offered  them  any  thing,  they
would  reach  to  us  with  a  long  Pole,  and  whatsoever  we
gave  them,  they  would  returne  us  feathers  for  it,  wee
made  our  signes  to  them  for  victuals,  and  they  would
shew  us  by  signes,  that  they  had  none,  but  what  they
could  kill  with  their  Darts.  I  have  told  you  how  my
chist,  and  all  my  clothes  were  cast  over-boord,  now
comming  to  this  cold  Climates,  and  wanting  clothes  my
hope  of  life  was  little,  for  here  men  were  well  at  morn-
ing, and  by  night  frozen  to  death.  It  was  my  fortune
to  goe  ashoare  to  get  some  food,  for  the  allowance  of
our  ship  was  little,  and  comming  aboord  againe  with
my  feete  wette,  and  wanting  shift  of  clothes,  the  next
morning  1  was  nummed,  that  I  could  not  stirre  my  legs,
and  pulling  off  my  stockings,  my  toes  came  with  them,
and  all  my  feete  were  as  blacke  as  soote,  and  I  had  no
feeling  of  them. Then  was  I  not  able  to  stirre.

Thus  I  continued  for  the  space  of  a  fortnight,  till  wee
came  into  a  faire  Bay,  where  there  were  many  faire  Hands,
and  on  the  rockes  of  some  of  these  Hands,  wee  found
Scouts  made  of  the  barkes  of  trees,  and  afterwards  wee
found  many  Indians,  but  none  of  them  would  come  to
us.  On  the  South-west  side  of  the  Mayne  we  found
a  River,  which  wee  thought  had  gone  to  the  South  Sea :
Our  long  Boate  was  sent  up  this  River,  and  found  it  to
be  very  straite  and  deepe.  On  the  sides  thereof  they
found  great  Muscles,  and  in  them  good  store  of  Pearles,

186

ANTHONY KNIVET  ad.

1591.
and  we  named  it  the  River  of  Pearles;  the  Bay  had  the
name  of  the  Master  of  our  Pinnasse,  because  he  first  found
it  and  did  discover  it,  called  it  Tobias  Bay. From  this
place  wee  went  further  into  the  Straites  having  the  winde
against  us,  and  with  the  cold  there  died  every  day  out  of
our  ship  eight  or  nine  men. Here  one  Harris  a  Gold-  Harris  his
smith  lost  his  Nose :  for  going  to  blow  it  with  his  fingers,  hard  haP-
cast  it  into  the  fire. This  John  Chambers,  Caesar  Ricasen,
and  many  that  are  now  in  England can testifie. The
Generall  having  experience,  that  the  wind  would  tarry  at
least  two  moneths,  his  men  died  so  fast,  that  hee  thought
best to returne for the Coast of Brasill,  and there  to
separate  our  fleete  to  the  Havens,  of  Santos  that  lye  on
the  Coast,  River  of  Jenuary,  Spirito  Santo,  determining
by  this  meanes,  to  furnish  himselfe  with Ropes,  Sayles,  How  we
and  Victuals  of  such prices as hee did not doubt  but  re*urneu [fr4f
to  take,  and  likewise  determining  to  take  Santos  againe.  Magellan

The  Generall  came  backe  with  this  pretence  for  Brasill,  GenerallCan-
came  to  Port  Famine,  where  wee  anchored  two  dayes,  and  dish  commeth
there  tooke  a  note  of  all  his  men,  that  were  living,  and  find-  aSatnf  t0  Port
ing  some  of  them  very  sicke,  commanded  them  to  be  set  wherg  ^
on  shoare,  I  was  so  ill  in  the  Straites,  that  no  man  thought  setteth  eight
I  would  have  lived,  and  twice  I  was  brought  upon the  men  on  shoare
Hatches  to  bee  cast  into  the  Sea  ;  but  it  was  the  will  of  God,  and  would
that  when  they  had  said  Prayers,  as  they  accustomed  when ave, se  me-th
any  man  died,  and  that  they  laid  hands  on me  to  cast  tkem  had  it
me over-boord,  I  spake,  desiring  them not  to  cast  me  wtbeenefor
over-boord, till I was dead. At this Port Famine  Captain
comming backe,  the Generall would have set me on e'
shoare, but Captaine Cocke entreated for me ; so I
remayned  in  the  ship. I  had  very  sorie  clothes,  the  toes
of  my  feet  full  of  Lice,  that  (God  is  my  record)  they  lay
in  clusters  within my  flesh,  and of  many  more  besides
my  selfe  ;  I  had  no  Cabbin,  but  lay  upon  a  chist. Now
we  come  out  of  the Straits  with  all  our  fleet,  but  the
Dainty  that  lost  us  in  the  River  of  Plate,  in  the  storme
that  we  had,  and  the  Crow  that  was  sunke. After  that
we came out of the Straits, wee came before Port

187

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1591.

Desire  againe,  and  there  our  Boats  went  to  Penguin
Hand  for  Penguins ;  at  this  place  the  Generall  tooke  a
How  I  got  Chirurgion  who  cured  with  words ;  This  man  comming
feeling  againe  aboord  our  ship,  said  some  words  over  my  feet,  and  I
after wec^ame  ^ad  deling  in  my  legges  and  feete  which  I  had  lost
out  of  the  before,  for  the  space  of  a  fortnight,  many  times  before
straits.  this  man  came,  I  had  hot  Irons  laid  to  my  feet,  but  I  had

no  feeling  were  they  never  so  hot.

That day that we departed from Port Desire, the

Generall sent for all the Masters of the ships, and

commanded  them that  till midnight they  should  keepe

there  course  with him, and that when he  should  shew

them  two  lights,  then  they  should  cast  about  and  beare

in  with the shoare,  but Davis  which  was Captaine of

How  the  the  Desire,  and  Tobie  Master  of  the  Pinnasse  did  deceive

Desire  and  the  us anc[  went  for  the  Straits,  as  I  was enformed after-

p.ce ,  wards  by  some  of  there  men  that  were  taken  at  Brasill,

away  from  us.  a^ter  tnat  I  was  taken. Three  or  foure  dayes  after  this

wee had  a  great storme,  in the which the Roe-bucke

lost  her  mayne  Mast,  and  we  lost  her. Now  were  wee

all alone in  a great ship,  and  we knew  not  what  wee

were best to doe,  but  in  the end  wee determined to

come for Santos,  hoping  there  to  find  the  rest  of  our

Of  a  great company. In this storme I sate  on a chist,  and  was

storme  we not able to stirre,  for  still  as  the  ship seeled on one

fJkcommng side,  the chist  went  from  starboord  to  larboord,  and  it

was the  will of  God,  that it fell betweene  a  piece  of

Ordnance,  and  the  Carpenters Cabbin  on  the  one  side,

and  on  the  other  side  betweene  another  Peece,  and  the

Chirurgions Cabbin. Thus all the night I lay very

cold,  and it  was the  will of God that the  chist  never

turned over,  for  if  it had,  I could not have escaped

death, the next day the storme ceased,  and most of

our young Saylers,  which  we  call  men  of  top a yard,

being  wearied with their nights worke that was past,

were under Hatches asleepe,  and  would not come  up

to doe some businesse that  was to bee done. With

that  the  Generall  came  downe,  with  the  end  of  a  Rope

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1591.

as bigge as mine arme,  and one of the Saylers hid

himselfe  behind  me ; the  Generall spying  him,  strooke  How  the

at  him,  and  hit  me  on  the  side  of  the  head,  and  halfe  Generall

an houre after,  finding: me in the same case that  the  stJ00j e  mee ,

11 1 1 1 r  •  1  j  11 "^"  against

General!  had  left  mee  in,  they  tooke  me,  and  would  fa  wm%
have  cast  me  out  of  one  of  the  parts  of  the  ship,  but
it  was  the  will  of  God  that  I  spake  and  was  saved.
Here  one  of  the  Indians  that  came  to  the  Generall  in
the  night  at  Santos,  fell  over-boord  by  a  mischance  and
was  drowned.

Wee  with  much  adoe  in  the  end  got  to  the  Harbour  They  come  to
of  Santos,  where  wee  found  none  of  our  company,  we  Santos  againe.
anchored  right  before  a  Sugar-mill,  that  stood  hard  by
the  Sea  side,  the  Generall  asked  if  there  were  any  that
would  goe  ashoare,  then  Captaine  Stafford,  Captaine
Southwell,  and  Captaine  Barker  offered  themselves  to
goe  on  shoare,  and  twentie  more  with  them,  the  Boate
that  they  went  in  was  made  of  Sugar  chists  and  barrell
boords,  they  landed  and  tooke  the  Sugar-mill,  at  the
which  they  tooke  a  great  Barke,  and  sent  it  laden  with
victuals,  aboord  our  shippe,  which  was  more  welcome
unto  us  then  if  it  had  beene  gold.  Here  wee  con-
tinued all  that  day,  and  the  next  day  they  sent  the
great  Boate  againe  laden  with  Sugars  and  Guinee
Wheate,  then  the  Generall  sent  them  word  that  they
should  come  away,  but  they  sent  him  word  againe,  that
they  had  more  provision  on  shoare,  and  before  all  was  [IV.  vi.
aboord  they  would  not  come. The  third  day,  that  our  1206.]

men  were  on  shoare,  the  Portugall  set  on  them. They  The  Portugals
had  the  little Boate ashoare,  but  the  wind being from  &M our  men-

shoare,  the  great  Boat  went  not  from  the  ship  side  that ie ,5?*
,  ?  & ,  .  1 • r  i  Candish

day,  the next day  that  our  men  were slaine,  our  long  before.

Boate  went  ashoare,  and  brought  us  newes  how  the  little

Boat  was  broke  and  how  all  our  men  were  gone. One

of  the Indians that I have told you  of  landed here

with our men,  and  having  experience  of  the  Countrey,

when  our  men  were  in  the  hottest  of  their  fight  ranne

away, having one Arrow shot thorow  his necke,  and

189

A.D.
1591.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

S.  Sebastian.

another  in  his  mouth  and  out  at  his  poale,  this  Indian
swamme  aboord  unto  us  upon  a  logge,  and  told  us
that  all  our  men  were  slaine.

The  Generall  thought  good  to  goe  from  hence  to  the
Hand  of  San  Sebastian,  and  there  if  he  did  not  meete
with  some  of  the  ships,  that  then  he  would  returne  for
England,  the  same  day  that  we  were  to  depart  from
The  Roe-bucke  Santos,  the  Roe-bucke  past  by  the  mouth  of  the  River
come  to  us  at  Qf  gert[a .  where  we  were,  and  shot  a  Peece,  and  we
answered  with  another,  then  the  Roe-bucke  came  into
us  with  her  Masts  broken.  After  the  Roe-bucke  came
to  us,  we  went  neerer  the  Towne,  determining  to  have
beaten  downe  the  Towne  with  our  Ordnance,  but  want-
ing water,  the  Gallion  Lecester  toucht  ground,  and  we
had  much  adoe  to  get  her  cleere  againe.  Then  wee
landed  eightie  of  our  men  at  a  small  River  neere  the
Towne,  where  we  had  great  store  of  Mandiora  Roots,
Potatoes,  Plantons,  and  Pine  Apples.  The  Portugals
seeing  our  men  going  into  the  River,  sent  six  Canoes
to  meete  them,  we  seeing  them,  made  a  shot  at  them
with  the  chaine  of  our  Pumpe,  with  that  they  returned,
and  our  Boats  came  safely  aboord  with  good  store  of
the  aforenamed  Roots.  In  our  ship  there  was  a  Portu-
gall  whom  we  tooke  in  the  ship  taken  at  Cape  Frio,
this  Portugall  went  with  us  to  the  Straits  of  Magellanus,
and  seeing  of  our  overthrow,  told  us  of  a  Towne  called
Spirito  Sancto,  this  Portugall  said  that  we  might  goe
before  the  Towne  with  our  ships,  and  that  without
danger,  we  might  take  many  Sugar-mils,  and  good  store
of  cattle.

The  words  of  this  Portugall  made  us  breake  off  our
pretence  that  wee  had  for  San  Sebastian,  and  we  went
Spirito  Santo,  to  Spirito  Sancto,  in  eight  dayes  we  got  before  the  mouth
of  the  Harbour  ;  at  length  we  came  to  an  Anchor  in  the
Roade,  and  presently  we  sent  our  Boats  to  sound  the
Channell,  and  we  found  not  halfe  the  depth  that  the
Portugall  said  we  should  finde,  the  Generall  thinking
that  the  Portugall  would  have  betrayed  us,  without  any

190

Portugals
advice.

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1591.

triall  caused  him  to  bee  hanged,  the  which  was  done  in  Portugal!
a trise. Here all the Gentlemen that were living,  hanged.
desired  that  they  might  go  ashoare  to  take  the  Towne.
The  Generall  was  very  unwilling,  &  told  them  of  divers
inconveniences,  but all would not suffice them, they
were  so  importunate,  that the Generall chose out one
hundred  and  twentie  men,  of  the  best  that  were  in  both
the ships,  and sent Captaine Morgan  a  singular  good
Land-souldier,  and  Lieutenant  Royden,  for  choise  Com-
manders in this action. They  landed before a small
Fort  with  one  of  the Boats,  and  drave the Portugalls
out  of  it,  the  other  Boate  went  higher, when they  had
a very hot skirmish, and their lives were quickly
shortned,  for  they  landed  on  a  Rocke,  that  stood  before
the  Fort,  as  they  leaped  out  of  the  Boate,  they  slid  all
armed  into  the  Sea,  and  so  most  of  them  were  drowned.
To  be  short  wee  lost  eightie  men,  at  this  place,  and  of  80.  men
the  fortie  that  returned,  there  came  not  one  without  an  slaine'-  4°-
Arrow  or  two  in  his  body,  and  some  had  five  or  sixe.
When  we  saw  we  could doe  no  good  at  this place,
wee  determined  to  come againe for the Hand of San
Sebastian, and there we meant to burne one of  our
ships,  and  from  thence  we determined to goe for the
Straits  againe,  the  company  that  was  in  the  Roe-bucke,  Ro-bucke
hearing  of  it,  in  the  night  runne  away  from  us,  and  we  fieet}l-
were  left  alone  againe,  well  we came to San Sebastian  S.  Sebastian.
Hand,  all this  while I lay  under Hatches lame,  sicke,
and almost starved  :  I  was  not  able  to  stirre,  I  was  so
weake. After  we came to this Hand,  the first thing
that  was done,  the sicke men  were set on shoare to
shift  for  themselves,  twentie  of  us  were  set  on  shoare,
all were able to go up and downe although very
weakly,  but  (I  alas ! )  my  toes  were  raw,  my  body  was
blacke,  I  could not speake nor stirre. In  this  case  I Anthony
was layed by  the shoare side,  and thus I remayned  ^mvetleftPr
from five of the clock in the morning, till it  was
betweene eleven and twelve of the clocke,  that the
Sunne  came  to  his highest,  and the extreme heate of

191

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1591.

the  Sunne  pierced  through  my  bodie,  whereby  I  came
to  my  selfe,  as  a  man  awaked  from  sleepe ;  and  I  saw
them  that  were  set  on  shore  with  me,  lye  dead  and  a
dying  round  about  me :  these  men  had  eaten  a  kind  of
Venemous  Pease,  that  did  grow  by  the  Sea  side  which  did  poyson
Pease.  them. When  I saw  all  these  men  dead,  I  praysed  God

that  had  rid  them  out  of  their  miserable  estate,  and
cursed  my  hard  fortune,  that  Death  it  selfe  did  refuse
to  end  my  tormented  and  most  miserable  life.  I  looked
towardes  the  shoare,  and  saw  nothing  but  these  Pease,
and  if  I  did  eate  them,  I  was  sure  of  death,  if  I  did
not  eate  them,  I  saw  no  remedie  but  to  starve.

Seeing  in  this  manner,  I  looked  towards  the  ship,  to

see  if  the Boate came  ashoare,  but (alas) all  my  hopes

were  with  speed  to  end  my  life,  but  that  it  was  the  will

of  God,  I  saw  things  stirre  by  the  Sea  side,  and  it  was

a  great ebbe  ;  then I went creeping on my  hands  and

my feete like a  childe, and  when I had  gotten  to  the

Sea  side,  I  saw  many  Crabs  lye  in  the  holes  of  the  mudde.

I  pulled  off  one  of  my  stockins,  and  filled  it  with  Crabs,

and  as  well  as  I  could,  I  carried  them  to  a  hollow  figge

tree,  where  I  found  a  great  fire  made,  so  casting  them

[IV.  vi.  on  the  coles,  I  did  eat  them,  and  so  I  lay  downe  to  sleepe

I2°7«]  till  the next day; and  then  I  watched  for  the  ebbe  to

get  some  more  meate. Thus  I  lived  eight  or  nine  dayes

without  sight  of  any man, the stinke of  some of  the

dead  men that the Sea  came not  to, was so noysome

that I was faine to remoove from  that  place, and as

I  went along the  shoare to seeke  some place  to  abide

in,  I passed by  a faire  River  that  went into  the Sea;

where I thought it good  to make my abode because

Anthony  of  the fresh water,  I had not  beene there scarce  the

Knivetterri- Space  Qf  halfe  a  quarter  of  an  houre,  but  I  saw  a  great

/ ™bl  b t tnmg come out  of  the  water,  with great  scales  on  the

that  came  out backe,  with  great  ugly  clawes  and  a  long  tayle,  this  beast

of  the  water, came  towards  me,  and  I  had  not  the  power  to  shun  it,

but  as it  came  towards  me,  I went  and  met  it,  when  I

came  neere  it,  I  stood  still  amazed  to  see  so  monstrous  a

192

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1591.

thing  before  me.  Hereupon  this  beast  stood  still  and
opened  his  mouth,  and  thrust  out  a  long  tongue  like
a  Harping-Iron.  I  commended  my  selfe  to  God,  and
thought  there  to  have  bin  torne  in  pieces,  but  this
beast  turned  againe,  and  went  into  the  River,  and  I
followed  to  the  Rivers  side.

The  next  day  I  went  farther  into  the  Hand,  fearing
to  tarrie  in  this  place,  and  I  found  a  great  Whale  Whale.
lying  on  the  shoare  like  a  ship  with  the  keele  upwards,
all  covered  with  a  kinde  of  short  mosse  with  the  long
lying  there.  At  this  place  I  made  a  little  house,  and
fed  on  the  Whale  for  the  space  of  a  fortnight.  In  this
time  the  Generall  set  forty  men  more  ashoare,  at  the
place  where  I  was  set  first  on  land,  likewise  the  Generall
trimmed  his  Boate  at  this  place,  and  had  a  Net  con-
tinually a  fishing,  of  which  John  Chambers  his  Cooke
had  charge,  who  is  this  day  living  in  London.  After
that  these  men  came  ashoare,  I  left  the  place  where
I  was  with  the  Whale,  and  came  to  our  men  and
lived  with  them,  beeing  at  this  time  reasonable  well,
and  able  to  goe  very  well,  for  the  use  of  going  into
the  Sea  did  heale  my  toes.  After  these  men  had  beene
on  shoare  seven  or  eight  dayes,  we  had  taken  wood
and  water  for  the  ship,  the  Portugals  of  the  River  of
January,  landed  on  the  North  point  of  the  Hand  hard
by  the  Whale,  they  took  two  of  our  men  and  one  escaped,
who  came  to  us  in  the  night,  and  told  us  that  the
Portugals  and  the  Savages  were  landed.  That  day  wee
had  taken  a  great  Tortois  ashoare,  and  wee  did  bid  the
Sayler  to  bee  of  good  cheere,  for  if  it  were  true,  it
was  the  better  for  us,  for  wee  were  sure,  that  the
Generall  would  not  take  us  againe  into  the  ship,  with
that  we  all  commended  our  selves  to  God,  and  dranke
to  our  friends  in  faire  water,  and  so  we  determined
to  march  along  the  shoare  with  a  white  shirt  instead
of  a  flagge  of  truce,  but  the  Sea  was  so  high  that  we
could  not,  then  we  determined  to  watch  quarterly,  till
such  times  as  we  could  espie  them,  I  had  the  first
xvi  j 93  n

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1591.

watch,  and  watched  till  I  was  wearie,  so  called  one  of
my  fellowes,  to  watch,  and  he  answered  angerly,  Tut,
tis  a  lye ;  with  that  I  lay  downe  by  the  fire  as  well
as  the  rest.  Before  I  was  asleepe,  the  Portugals  were
at  our  doore,  then  I  started  up,  and  one  of  them  tooke
me  by  the  legge,  presently  wee  were  all  led  to  the
They  are  taken  shoare  side,  there  all  that  were  taken  with  me,  were
and  slawe.  knocked  on  the  heads  with  fire-brands,  the  Indian  that
had  hold  of  me,  strook  twice  or  thrice  at  me  with  a
short  Bill,  but  I  striving,  cryed  out  in  Portugall,  That
if  they  would  save  mee  I  would  tell  them  newes,  with
that  a  Portugall  passed  by,  and  I  caught  hold  of  him,
He  escapetk  so  well  as  I  could  I  told  him  a  Tale  which  saved  my
life  at  that  time,  this  Portugall  gave  me  againe  to  a
Savage,  &  I  cryed  to  him  that  I  would  goe  whersoever
he  went,  then  he  bid  me  not  fear,  for  that  Savage  was
his  slave,  and  that  he  would  carrie  me  to  the  Captayn,  so
I  was  content  perforce  to  goe  I  knew  not  whether,
this  Caniball  carried  me  along  the  shore,  and  when
wee  came  where  any  Rockes  reached  into  the  Sea ;  hee
would  take  mee  on  his  backe,  and  swimme  with  mee
round  about  the  Rockes,  till  wee  were  free  from  the
Rockes,  thus  we  went  almost  all  night,  til  at  length
we  came  by  a  great  Cliffe  that  stood  by  the  shoare.
Then  the  Savage  whistled,  and  another  Savage  answered
him  from  the  Cliffe,  whereupon  five  or  six  Portugals
came  forth,  and  amongst  them  came  the  Captaine
with  a  piece  of  bread  and  Marmallet  in  his  hand,
and  as  soone  as  he  saw  me,  he  asked  me  what
newes,  I  answered  that  I  was  very  hungry,  and  desired
him  that  hee  would  give  mee  some  meate,  and  then  I
would  tell  him  all  the  newes  that  I  could,  with  that
all  the  Portugals  brake  out  in  a  laughter,  and  gave  me
bread  and  fish  to  eate,  after  I  had  eaten  that  which
they  had  given  me,  I  told  them  the  truth  of  all  that  they
asked  me,  heere  they  killed  eight  and  twentie  of  our
men,  and  saved  only  my  selfe,  and  Henrie  Barrawell,
who  was  saved  by  my  meanes.

194

ANTHONY KNIVET  ad.

1591.

§.  II.

Anthony  Knivet  his  comming  to  the  R.  of  Janero,
and  usage  amongst  the  Portugals,  and  Indians :
his  divers  travels  thorow  divers  Regions  of
those  parts.

He  next  day  our  ship  weighed  Anchor,  and  whether
shee  went  I  knew  not,  wee  were  carried  by  the
Portugals  to  the  River  of  Janero,  I  went  with  a
Mestizo,  which  is  halfe  a  Portugall,  and  halfe  a  Savage
that  saved  my  life  in  the  night  when  I  was  taken.  When
we  came  to  the  Citie  of  San  Sebastian  in  the  River  of
Janero,  the  Portugals  in  the  Canoas,  made  such  a  noyse,
with  Pipes  and  Drummes,  that  all  the  people  of  the
Citie  came  to  shoare  to  see  us,  with  that  the  Canoas  [IV.  vi.
going round, as  if  they were in fight, two Portugals  I2°8"

tooke  mee,  and  cast  me  towards  the  shoare,  saying,  here
is  our  prize;  the  tyde  being  strong  carried  mee  to  the
mayne,  where  I  had  beene  drowned  had  it  not  beene  for
a  woman,  who  seeing  the  tyde  carry  me  away,  sent
two  or  three  slaves,  and  they  saved  mee.  When  1  came
ashoare,  all  the  Portugals  were  at  the  Church  of  our
Lady,  and  I  would  have  gone  into  the  Church,  but  the
Portugals  would  not  let  me,  saying,  that  I  was  not  a
Christian.  Then  I  was  brought  before  the  Governour,
and  he  gave  me  to  the  man  that  had  saved  mee,  and
I  was  very  well  contented,  for  hee  used  mee  very  kindly  as
I  came  with  him  from  the  Hand  of  San  Sebastian.  For
the  space  of  three  moneths  that  I  was  with  this  man,
I  kept  a  house,  and  went  to  the  Sea-side  with  his  Hogs,
and  there  I  every  day  brought  him  home  a  basket  of
great  Crabs  that  lie  in  the  holes  of  the  mud,  as  deepe
as  you  can  thrust  in  your  arme.  This  was  a  good  life,
my  Master  called  me  sonne,  and  I  dined  and  supped
with  him  :  also  I  had  a  hanging  Net  to  lie  in,  and  lay
in  the  same  roome  which  hee  lay  in.

!95

A.D.
1591.

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

Henrle
Bar  way.

He  Jieeth.

It  happened  one  day  being  by  the  Sea-side  washing
of  little  Dogs,  there  came  a  Canoa  full  of  Portugals,
and  they  tooke  me  to  the  Towne  with  them,  but  as
soone  as  I  landed  I  remembred  my  Masters  house
and  ran  to  it.  As  I  went  I  met  with  Henrie  Barway :
the  next  day  the  Governour  sent  for  mee  and  examined
me  what  I  was,  I  told  him  that  I  was  a  poore  ship  boy,
with  that  Henrie  Barway  reproved  me,  asking  what  I
meant  to  say  so  to  the  Governour ;  I  replyed,  that
I  was  no  other  but  what  I  had  told  him,  then  the
He  is  sent  to  a  Governour  commanded  mee  to  bee  carried  to  the  Sugar
Sugar-mill.  mii^  where  I  was  three  moneths,  till  all  the  clothes  that
I  had  were  torne  in  peeces,  with  working  in  a  Barke
going  day  and  night  up  and  downe  for  Sugar  canes
and  wood  for  the  Mill;  the  miserable  life  that  I  was
in  made  mee  carelesse  what  I  did.  I  had  neither  meat  nor
clothes,  but  blowes  as  many  as  Gaily  slaves.  Then  I
determined  to  run  away  into  the  Wildernesse,  for  I  was
ashamed  to  be  seene  naked  of  the  Portugals.  I  made
me  a  Cottage  in  a  great  Cave  in  the  Wildernesse,  where  I
was  seven  moneths.  In  the  day  I  fished  for  to  live,
and  in  the  night  I  came  to  some  Indians  houses,  and
for  fish  they  gave  me  Cassavie  meale,  and  many  kindes
of  Rootes,  that  served  me  for  bread.  In  the  end  the
Governour  caused  me  to  be  sought  out  and  gave  mee
a  sute  of  blue  clothes,  and  commanded  me  to  worke
in  a  Garden,  where  I  carried  earth,  and  digged  the  ground
to  plant  Cabidges  and  Turneps.

After  that  I  was  commanded  againe  to  take  charge  of
the  Sugar  boat,  where  I  was  worse  used  then  ever  I
was  before,  for  the  Factor  was  a  man  that  hated  English
men,  and  would  use  me  more  like  a  Dogge  then  a  Man.
When  I  had  continued  foure  moneths  in  the  Barke,  it
happened  that  one  of  the  Governours  sonnes,  called
Martin  de  Saa,  came  from  Spirito  Santo.  This  man
pittying  my  poore  and  miserable  life,  desired  his  father
that  he  would  give  mee  unto  him,  which  his  father
granted,  and I was  very  well used  of  my  new  Master,

196

His  new
Master.

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1591.

two  yeeres  after I had served him. It happened that

hee and his Mother in law fell out, whereupon the

Governour his father sent him to a Towne, called

Wyanasses,  which  were  in  peace  with  the  Portugals,  and  Wyanasses.

for Knives and Hatchets, they sell their Wives and

Children. This  journey  I  went  with  him,  and  we  came

to a Towne called  Jawarapipo (that is  to  say)  Is  this  Jawarapipo.

the  Dogge  ? He  seeing  me  forward  to  doe  him  service,

sent  me  from  this  Towne  with  eight  of  his  slaves  laden

with  Hatchets  and  Knives,  to  another  kinde  of  Canibals,

called  Pories,  which  had  beene  likewise  friends  with  the  Pories.

Portugals,  but  it  was  long  before  any  Portugalls  had  beene

there,  I came to the Towne of Pories,  where I was

saluted  in  this  sort.

As  soone  as  I  came  into  a  great  house,  which  I  thought
was  their  Kings,  which  they  call  Morovichava ;  presently,
they  had  hanged  up  a  faire  Net  betweene  two  postes,
in  the  which  I  was  commanded  to  sit  downe,  and  as  Strange  enter-
soone  as  I  was  set,  there  came  at  the  least  twentie  women,  tainment  °f
and  some  laying  their  heads  on  my  shoulders,  and  others  *
on  my  knees,  they  began  to  crie  out  making  such  a
pitious  noise,  that  I  was  amazed  :  yet  I  determined  to
sit  still  till  they  had  done.  As  soone  as  the  women
were  gone,  an  old  man  came  in,  all  painted  with  red
and  blacke,  and  hee  had  three  great  holes  in  his  face,
one  in  the  under  lip,  and  one  on  either  side  of  his
mouth,  and  in  every  hole  stood  a  faire  greene  stone.
This  Caniball  came  through  the  house  where  I  was,  with
a  woodden  sword  in  his  hand,  and  as  hee  came  hee
spake  very  loud,  and  looked  as  though  hee  had  beene
mad,  striking  his  hand  on  his  breast,  and  on  his  thighs ;
still  crying  out,  he  walked  up  and  downe.  After  this
Savage  had  ended  his  speech,  he  stroke  me  on  the  head,
and  bad  mee  welcome ;  and  commanded  such  things  as
were  in  his  house  to  be  set  before  me  to  eate.  After  I
had  beene  there  two  or  three  houres,  newes  went  through
all  the  Towne  of  my  being  there,  and  from  this  Towne
to  others  that  were  hard  by.

197

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1591.
His  danger  by Whilest I continued in this  Towne a Savage  called
a  lavage. Waynembuth,  who  bare  a  great  grudge  to  the  Portugals,
came  where  I  was,  with  two  women,  and  when  hee  came
into  the house  where I  was,  he  laid  his  hands  on  their
necks,  and  so  came  dancing  before  mee,  thus  after  hee
had danced  some  quarter  of  an  houre,  he  spake  to  me,
saying, Doest thou see those women, by my valour
I got their  loves, and now their desire 1 am sworne
to  fulfill, which is to kill  thee,  as I have done  many
more. I answered  him that I  came  not  as  an  enemie
against  him,  or  any  of  his,  but  as  a  friend  that  brought
him  many  things  that  I  was  assured  hee  wanted,  and  that
[IV.  vi.  if  nothing  would  satisfie  him  but  my  life,  I  assured  him,

1209.J  tjiat  kee  anc|  ajj  j^s  Countrie  WOuld  pay  for  it.  To
this  hee  made  no  answere,  but  went  to  separate  my
things  that  lay  by  mee  to  his  Concubines,  withall  I
started  out  of  my  bed,  and  tooke  my  sword  in  my  hand,
and  thrust  the  Caniball  from  my  things,  that  I  had
almost  overturned  him,  and  he  durst  not  touch  them
nor  me  any  more,  but  stood  rayling,  and  threatning  to
kill  mee,  and  with  the  noise  that  hee  made,  the  old  man
came  into  the  house,  and  seeing  mee  stand  with  my
sword  in  my  hand,  asked  mee  what  was  the  matter,  and
I  told  him  all  that  had  passed  betwixt  mee  and  the  fore-
said Caniball.  After  hee  had  heard  mee,  hee  turned  to
the  Caniball  that  had  offered  me  abuse,  and  asked  him
what  reason  he  had  to  doe  him  so  great  a  discredit,  and
to  meddle  with  any  friend  of  his  in  his  Towne,  and
angerly  commanded  him  to  avoid  his  Town,  if  not  he
would  make  him  repent  that  ever  he  came  thither  ;  with
that,  for  feare  of  afterclaps,  he  went  away  with  his  Con-
cubines :  the  next  morning  newes  came  to  the  Towne,
that  Wanambuth  was  comming  with  three  hundred
Canibals,  and  that  perforce  he  would  have  me  to  his
Towne,  and  that  there  I  should  be  killed  according  to
the  order  of  the  Countrie;  and  how  hee  left  order  with
his  wives  to  prepare  wine  through  all  the  Townes  in
readinesse.

198

ANTHONY KNIVET  ad.

1591.

When  the  old  man  heard  of  this,  hee  presently  com-
manded all  his  people  to  take  their  weapons,  and  desired
them  to  goe  with  him  into  the  field  to  meet  them  that
were  comming  to  wrong  him  ; whereat  they  all  gave  a
great  hoope,  saying,  that  they  would  all  die  rather  then  Hospitall
they  would  bee  disgraced. The  old  man  embraced  mee  fideMe  in
many  times,  and  desired  mee  that  I  would  tarry  in  his  ^ava&es-
house. I  thanked  him  for  his  love,  and  told  him  that  in
any  wise  I  would  not  tarry  behinde  him  ;  so  I  went  with
him  to  meet  the  Caniball  in  the  field  ;  we  being  a  great
many  more  then  they,  they  sent  three  or  foure  unto  us
as  messengers,  that  they  came  to  be  merry,  and  to  buy
and  sell  such  things  as  they  had,  then  the  old  man  gave
leave  for  them  all to  come into his  Town,  except  the
Caniball that  had mis-used him the day before  ; that
night I  gave all my  merchandise  to  the  old  man,  and
desired him  for it, that hee would cause mee to bee
conducted  out  of  his  Countrie : the  next  day  following
the  old  man  gave  me  seventie  slaves,  and  caused  three
hundred Bow  men  to goe  with  me  till I  was  past  the
River  of  Paraeyua ;  from  whence  they  returned  to  their  River
Towne, and in fortie dayes journy  with ease I came  Paraeyua.
againe  to  Ilha  Grande,  where  I  found  my  Master,  Martin
de Saa, who was very glad of  my returne, and for
recompence  of  my  paines,  he  promised  me  one  of  them
to bee my  slave,  but  when hee came  to the River of
Janero,  hee  sold  them,  and  gave  me  nothing.

After  wee  had  beene  at  home  two  moneths,  hee  would
have  sent  mee  againe  into  the  savage  countrie  for  more
slaves,  but  I  knew  that  thereby  I  should  get  nothing
and  refused  to  goe.  Whereupon  hee  returned  me  He  retumeth
againe  to  his  father,  thinking  I  would  rather  choose  t0^m  old
to  goe  then  serve  his  father  in  the  Sugar  boat.  But
I  was  contented  to  goe  againe  to  his  father,  hoping  to
be  better  used  then  I  was  before :  then  his  father  com-
manded me  to  goe  a  fishing  in  a  small  boat,  for  to
make  oile  for  the  Sugar  mill.  One  night  being  upon
a Rocke fishing for  Dog-fish,  which  the Portugals  call

199

A.D.
1591.

Endangered
by  a  Sharke.

Master  Haw-
kins at  Cape
Frio.

Another
double  disaster
of  sense  and
losse.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Tubarones ;  I  tooke  my  line,  laid  it  under  me  and  fell
asleepe :  about  mid-night  with  the  beginning  of  the  floud
a  Dog-fish  tooke  my  hooke,  and  the  line  being  under
mee,  I  awaked,  tooke  the  line  in  my  hand,  and  running
about  the  Rocke  (I  know  not  how)  the  line  tangled
about  my  legge,  and  the  fish  drew  me  into  the  Sea;
and  assoone  as  I  fell  into  the  water  the  Sharke  swam  at
me  as  if  he  would  have  devoured  me,  but  assoone  as  I
saw  him  come  neere  mee,  I  caught  hold  on  the  hooke
that  was  in  his  mouth,  and  striking  downwarke  with  my
hand  the  Sharke  swam  away  againe.  I  now  remembred
a  knife,  that  I  had  about  my  necke  tyed  with  a  string,
as  the  Canibals  use,  and  therewith  cut  the  cord,  or  else
there  had  I  ended  all  my  miseries  ;  all  my  body  was
torne  with  the  Crags  of  the  Rocke,  so  that  for  the
space  of  a  fortnight  I  was  not  able  to  stirre.

After  I  was  healed  the  Governour  commanded  mee
againe  to  goe  a  fishing:  wee  had  newes  in  the  River
of  Janero  that  Master  Hawkins  was  at  Cape  Frio,  which
made  me  the  more  desirous  to  be  on  the  Coast  in  hope
to  get  to  him.  It  happened  that  one  day  being  a  fishing
by  an  Hand  that  lay  two  leagues  from  the  shoare,  Master
Hawkins  passed  by  the  Sea  as  farre  as  well  hee  could
bee  descryed,  but  it  was  a  very  faire  day :  assoone  as  I
saw  the  ships  I  set  the  Indians  that  were  with  me  on
shoare  on  the  Hand,  commanding  them  to  seeke  pro-
vision for  us,  for  that  night  I  did  assure  my  selfe  that
Master  Hawkins  would  refresh  his  men  at  the  Hand
of  San  Sebastian,  and  seeing  the  winde  faire,  and  all
the  Indians  ashoare,  I  hoysted  saile,  and  tooke  my  course
towards  the  Hand  of  San  Sebastian,  but  fortune  was  so
crosse  to  me,  that  being  in  sight  of  the  ships,  a  contrarie
winde  blue  with  such  a  storme,  that  perforce  I  was  driven
upon  an  Hand  so  full  of  Rocks,  that  my  Boat  was
broken  all  in  peeces,  and  my  selfe  all  cut  and  bruised
with  the  Rocks.  Getting  to  the  shoare  upon  this  Hand
I  remayned  three  dayes  without  meat,  or  meanes  to  get
away  from  the  Hand,  the  Indians  that  landed  upon  the

200

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1591.

Hand  where  we  were  a  fishing,  got to  the  Towne  and

told  the  Governour  how  I  had  beguiled  them. Presently

upon that newes the Governour sent two Canoas to

descrie  the ships,  these  Canoas  came  on shoare at  the

Hand where I was, and there they found me almost

starved,  and  all  my  face  hurt  beaten  upon  the  Rocks.

From this place they went to the Hand of San
Sebastian, and Master Hawkins was  gone  ; then they
returned againe to the River of Janero, and I was
brought bound with my hands behind me, all the  [IV.  vi.
Towne rayled at me, calling me Run-away, then I  1210.]

was brought before the Governour, and he looking
very  angerly  upon  me  sent  me  to  prison,  where  I  was  His  imprison-
used  like  a  Dogge  for  the  space  of  a  fortnight  : for  I  menL
lay  on the ground, and had no meat given me,  but
Cassavi meale and water. After I had endured this
miserie, I was condemned to be hanged for a Run-  Condemnation
away and a Lutheran, and as I was going by the  t0  he  hanged.
Colledge  of  Jesus,  all the Friars  of  the  Colledge  came  Jesuites  save
forth  with  a  great  Crucifix,  and falling on  their  knees  him!
before the Governour  they  craved pardon  for  me,  and
I  was  carried  againe  to  prison,  where  I  remayned  three
dayes longer, then I was brought forth on a market
day, with my hands and feet bound, and there in
publike beaten with cordes, that I had not a whole
spot  of  skin  on  all  my  body. After  they  had  punished
mee,  as  you  have  heard,  I  was commanded to be put
againe  in  prison,  where I was  for  the  space  of  a  fort-  Imprisoned
night,  with  no  meate  but  Cassavi  meale  and  water,  my  *&&**-
lodging  was the earth, my body  was all bruised and
full  of  wormes  with  lying  on  the  ground.

After  this  the  Governour  commanded  great  hoopes
of  Iron  to  bee  clinched  to  my  legge,  of  thirtie  pound
weight,  the  which  I  carried  nine  moneths,  continually
working  in  the  Sugar  mill  like  a  bond-slave.  The
Factor  used  me  more  like  a  Dogge  then  a  Man,  for
his  hatred  was  so  much  to  me,  and  to  all  strangers,
that I never  came by  him but I was sure  of  blowes.

201

A.D.
1591,

Dissolute
resolution.

He  flee th
againe.

Danger  oj
taking  in  a
Caravala.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Now  was  my  life  so  intolerable,  that  I  grew  desperate
and  carelesse  what  I  did  to  end  my  life.  Many  times
I  would  tell  the  Governour  how  like  a  Tyrant  the
Factor  used  me,  but  for  all  that  he  saw  my  body
black,  and  bruised  with  blowes,  he  had  no  compassion
on  me.  I  had  no  meanes  nor  hope  of  any  release  of
my  miserable  life,  but  to  kill  the  Factor.  Now  occasion
came  fitly  to  execute  my  pretence,  and  it  happened  thus ;
I  comming  in  the  night  with  a  Barke  laden  with  Sugar
canes,  after  the  Barke  was  unladen,  the  night  being  cold,
I  lay  upon  the  boards  before  the  Furnaces,  and  had  not
rested  halfe  an  houre,  when  the  Factor  came  into  the
Sugar  house,  so  finding  me  asleepe  (as  you  have  heard)
hee  strooke  mee  with  a  withe  on  the  naked  ribs,  with
such  force,  that  I  thought  hee  had  broken  all  the  bones
of  my  body.  I  started  up,  and  seeing  him  before  mee
readie  to  second  his  malice  with  another  blowe,  I
embraced  him  in  mine  armes,  and  with  a  great  knife
that  I  had,  I  hurt  him  in  the  side,  the  backe,  and  the
arme ; hee  cryed  out  I  had  slaine  him.

I  thinking  no  lesse  ran  away  into  the  chiefest  of  the
wood,  and  the  favourable  night  being  darke,  no  man
knew  which  way  to  follow  mee.  When  day  came  I
went  wandring  up  and  downe,  praying  to  God  to  send
some  Leopard,  or  Lion,  to  devoure  mee,  rather  then  to
bee  taken  againe  by  the  Portugals,  for  I  knew  if  the
Governour  once  got  mee  againe,  1  should  endure  the
most  extreame  torture  that  ever  was  invented  for  man.
Wandring  in  the  Wildernesse,  I  did  heare  a  great  noise
of  people,  then  I  was  amazed,  knowing  not  what  to  doe
to  save  my  life,  sometimes  I  run  like  a  mad  man,  then
would  I  sit  downe  and  listen  if  I  could  heare  any  noise,
and  which  way  soever  I  went  I  heard  still  the  noise  of
people  neerer  me.  Thus  seeing  my  selfe  at  the  last  cast,
I  espyed  a  great  Tree,  in  which  grew  a  thing  of  thick
long  leaves,  called  by  the  Indians,  Caravala  ;  as  bigge
as  the  nest  of  an  Eagle,  I  got  me  into  that,  having
not beene there a quarter of  an houre, many Indians

202

ANTHONY KNIVET  ad.

1591.

came  to  seeke  mee,  and  shot  many  times  with  their
arrowes  at  the  thing  where  I  was,  when  they  saw  that
I  did  not  stirre,  they  went  their  wayes,  and  I  remayned
all  that  day  in  the  Tree,  the  night  following,  and  the
next  day  and  night,  I  came  downe  very  weake,  for  in
two  days  I  had  eaten  nothing,  then  the  night  being
darke,  I  came  to  the  Sea  side,  so  going  along  by  the
shoare  side,  I  espyed  a  Canoa  drawne  to  shoare,  and
hard  by  it  on  the  ground  lay  three  Savages  asleepe,  by
them  lay  bowes,  arrowes,  and  rootes,  with  hookes  to  fish
with,  of  those  things  I  tooke  what  I  thought  best,  and
went  along  the  Sea  side  till  I  came  to  a  Point  of  the
Hand,  where  I  found  a  Savage  asleepe  upon  the  sands,
when  I  had  viewed  him  well  I  knew  him  to  be  one  of
my  Masters  slaves,  who  killed  one  of  his  fellowes,  Solamen
wherefore hee durst not goe home, I tooke his bow  miser'ts  •

O  *  7 1%'

and  arrowes  lying  by  him  and  awaked  him,  when  he  fjUi"e
saw  me  he  began  to  lament,  and  desired  that  I  would
not  carry  him  home  to  my  Master,  I  answered  him  that
my  cause  was  ten  times  worse  then  his,  and  desired  him
to  tell  mee  if  he  knew  any  place  whither  wee  might  goe
to  save  both  our  lives,  and  with  that  told  him  what
had  befallen  me.

This  Savage  was  a  great  man  in  his  Countrie,  his
name  was  Quarasips  juca,  that  is,  the  yellow  Sunne.
Never  man  found  truer  friendship  of  any  then  I  did
of  him.  This  Caniball  and  I  after  many  discourses
determined  to  swim  from  the  Hand  to  the  mayne.
When  we  had  escaped  the  danger  of  passing  the  arme
of  the  Sea,  at  least  two  miles  in  breadth,  we  both  landed
very  feeble,  with  the  long  being  of  our  naked  carkasses  in
the  water.  Now  wee  are  at  the  foot  of  the  Mountaine  His
called  Paranapiacano,  a  desart,  where  many  have  beene  wandrings
devoured  with  Leopards,  Lions,  Crocodiles,  and  Suro-
cocous,  and  divers  other  Serpents.  Notwithstanding  all
these  fearfull  inconveniences,  we  chose  rather  to  fall  into
the  pawes  of  a  Lion,  and  the  clawes  of  the  Serpent,
then into the bloudie hands  of the  Portugall. Seven

203

soctos

A.D.
1591.

/  suppose  by
Leopards  he
meaneth  that
spotted  beast,
which  others
call  a  Tigre.
[IV.  vi.

1 21 1."

Pianita.

Hee  commeth
to  his  old  host.

Senate  of
Savages.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  thirtie  dayes  we  two  travelled  through  this  desart,
every  day  we  were  in  danger  of  our  lives,  for  we  met
many  Leopards,  Lions,  and  huge  Serpents,  but  God
delivered  us  from  them.  In  this  journey  we  eate  wilde
Honie  and  Palmetos,  and  a  kinde  of  Snakes,  called  by
the  Canibals,  Boaeyua.  After  we  had  passed  this  desart,
we  came  into  a  champaine  Countrie,  where  we  had  great
store  of  Pine  nuts.  Wandring  up  and  downe  in  this
Countrie,  one  morning  we  espyed  smoke  in  a  wood
not  farre  from  us.  Then  wee  travelled  that  wayes,  and
comming  neere,  I  knew  where  we  were,  and  presently
I  told  Quarisisacupa,  that  the  Towne  was  called  Pianita,
and  that  this  was  the  place  where  Jawaripipo  had  used
mee  so  well,  when  Wanambuth  would  have  killed  me.
Now  come  we  to  the  Towne,  where  we  are  very  kindly
received,  especially  of  mine  old  friend  Jawaripipo.

After  we  had  rested  a  little  while  among  these  Canibals,
I  desired  them  that  they  would  joyne  themselves  together;
for  in  publike  I  would  rehearse  somwhat  unto  them  of
my  comming  into  their  Countrie.  Now  when  they  were
all  together,  I  began  to  rehearse  unto  them,  how  cruelly
the  Portugals  did  use  their  Nation,  in  making  them
bond-slaves,  marking  them  like  Dogs,  whipping  and
tormenting  them,  as  if  they  were  not  of  flesh  and  bloud.
I  rehearsed  unto  them  the  course  of  mine  owne  life,
and  desired  them  to  remember  how  my  Countrimen
had  used  them  in  former  times,  encouraging  them  to
bee  valiant,  and  to  pull  up  their  spirits,  and  perswading
to  defend  themselves  against  such  Tyrants,  who  under
the  colour  of  friendship  used  them  most  villainously.
Then  I  told  them  that  I  had  killed  a  Portugall,  and
that  I  was  determined  to  end  my  life  with  them,  if
they  would  promise  to  defend  mee  and  themselves  from
the  Portugals.  With  that  many  of  them  embraced  me,
all  together  giving  a  great  hoope,  saying,  as  long  as
their  lives  lasted,  and  their  Bowes  brake  not,  that  they
would  defend  themselves  and  me.  Here  I  continued
nine  moneths,  till  it  happened  that  Martin  de  Saa  came

204

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1591.

againe  to  buy  more  slaves. He  came  to  a  Towne  hard

by the Hand of San Sebastian, called Jaquerequere,  Jaquerequere.

where  using  the  Canibals  kindly,  and  giving  them  Knives

and  Hatchets  and  Beades,  hee  won  their  hearts  so  much

unto  him  that  they  gave  him  their  Sonnes  and  Daughters

to bee  his  slaves  ; and  moreover told him,  that I and

Quarisisacupa  was  at  a  Towne  hard  by. Then  Martin

de  Saa  sent  foure  Portugals  and  twentie  Savages  for  me

to the Towne. When the Savages of Jaquerequere  Savage  faith.

came to Pianita, they gave such report in all the  ^tonte ^

Towne  of  the  liberalise  of  Martin  de  Saa,  that  without  homd  > the

any deliberation they bound my hands,  and brought  Canibals  and

me  backe  againe  to  my  Masters  sonne.  brought  to  his

When  the  Canibals  brought  mee  before  Martin  de  Master-
Saa,  all  those  that  protested  before  most  friendship  unto
mee,  are  now  become  my  greatest  and  most  mortall
enemies,  and  with  hooping  and  hollowing  deride  mee,
striking  mee  on  the  head,  and  declaring  to  the  Por-
tugals, how  I  used  great  perswasions  to  have  them
become  their  enemies.  Martin  de  Saa  made  no  answere
to  all  their  exclamations,  but  commanded  certaine  Por-
tugals and  Indians  to  see  that  I  runne  not  away.
Being  brought  the  next  morning  before  him,  hee  told
mee  that  hee  did  pittie  my  hard  fortune  to  come  to
so  bad  an  end  as  I  was  like  to  come  to,  making  mee
beleeve  that  the  Factor  was  dead,  and  therefore  hee
thought  that  the  Law  would  condemne  mee.  When
hee  had  spoken,  I  desired  him  to  bee  favourable  unto
mee,  and  that  hee  would  consider  what  service  I  had
done  him  and  his  father,  and  to  thinke  how  unreason-
ably the  Factor  had  used  mee  a  long  time.  Then  hee
promised  mee,  that  wherein  hee  might  hee  would  stand
my  friend  ;  then  I  entreated  him  to  give  mee  leave  in
that  desart  to  end  my  life  amongst  the  Canibals,  where
hee  might  well  bee  assured  I  could  never  hurt  him
nor  any  of  his  Nation  :  hee  would  not  condescend
thereunto,  but  promised  hee  would  save  my  life,  if  I
would but goe to a place in that Countrie, called

205

A.D.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1591

Paraeyua
Wereob.

His  next
adventure
thorow  the
desarts.

Paraeyua  Wereob,  and  there  to  trafficke  with  the  Cani-
bals  for  Women,  Boyes,  and  Girles.

Although  the  danger  of  going  into  the  Countrie  of
wild  Man-eaters  where  I  never  had  beene,  was  no  lesse
then  the  value  of  my  life,  yet  considering  with  my
selfe  that  my  offence  deserved  death  among  the  Por-
tugals,  I  chose  once  againe  rather  to  stand  to  the
Heathen  mercy  of  savage  Man-eaters,  then  at  the
bloudie  crueltie  of  Christian  Portugals.  And  seeing  my
selfe  in  such  extremitie,  I  shewed  my  selfe  very  willing
and  diligent  to  doe  the  Captaine  service;  but  God
knowes,  my  hope  was  never  to  have  seene  him  againe.
Now  goe  I  alongst  in  the  Wildernesse,  with  twelve
Savages,  I  know  not  whither,  but  as  they  guide  mee
over  huge  Mountaines,  and  many  great  Rivers,  passing
many  dangers  of  our  lives  by  land  of  Lions,  Leopards,
divers  great  Snakes  :  in  the  Rivers,  Crocodiles,  Jarara-
quas,  and  Capucaras,  with  many  other  Serpents  that
use  the  water. After  wee  had  travelled  five  and  twentie

AfaireRiver.  dayes  in  the  Wildernesse,  wee  came  to  a  faire  River
as  broad  as  the  Thames,  and  the  Canibals  that  went
with  mee  said  that  the  Towne  stood  by  that  River
side,  where  wee  were  to  trafficke,  but  certaintie  they
knew  not  where  about.  Then  wee  made  us  a  Boat  of
the  barke  of  a  Cedar  Tree,  going  downe  the  streame
in  it.  Wee  had  not  beene  there  long  a  going  with
the swiftnesse of the Current, before wee espyed a

Two  Savages.  Boate  of  the  same  fashion  that  ours  was,  with  two
Canibals  in  it,  who  as  soone  as  they  had  espyed  us
would  have  runne  away,  but  wee  beeing  better  manned
then  they  overtooke  them  before  they  got  to  the
shoare.  With  mee  there  went  one  of  their  owne  Nation,
by  name  Morosoeii,  who  had  beene  taken  by  the
Wayanasses,  and  they  sold  him  to  the  Portugals.  This
Morosoeii  spake  the  language  of  the  Taymayas,  which
I  understood  very  well.  The  two  Canibals  that  wee
tooke  in  the  Boate,  were  amazed  to  see  men  apparelled,
insomuch that they  knew not their owne Countriman

206

Apparell
strange.

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1591.

that  was  with  mee,  when they  saw  him  apparelled  like

a  Portugall ; if  they  were  amazed  at  us,  I  was  no  lesse

at them, for in  all my travell I never saw the like  Their  strange

fashion of Canibals. For when I saw them first I  hahtte-

thought  they had beene borne with feathers on their  [IV.  vi.

heads and bodies, like fowles of the aire, they had  1212.]

anointed  their bodies  with  gumme  of  the  oiletusees  of 1^nfr
t»  1  j  111  -r  •  -i nakednesse.

Balsome, and covered themselves so artificially with

feathers  of  divers  colours,  in  such  order,  that  you  could
not  have  seene  a  spot  of  their  skins  but  their  legs  :
after  wee  had  beholden  them  well  and  they  us,  I  com-
manded Morosoeii,  their  Countriman  to  disclose  him-
selfe  to  his  Countrimen,  and  to  tell  them  the  cause  of
our  comming,  desiring  them  to  goe  to  their  Towne,
and  tell  of  our  being  there,  lest  our  sudden  comming
should  raise  an  uprore  among  them,  the  which  they
were  very  willing  to  doe  ;  so  giving  either  of  them  a
knife,  and  a  few  beades,  they  departed  very  joyfully.

Two  houres  after  that  they  were  departed  from  us,  His  entertain-
there  came  at  the  least  five  hundred  of  them  singing  menL
and  rejoycing,  shewing  themselves  very  glad  of  our
comming  to  trafhck  with  them,  entreating  us  to  goe
to  their  Towne,  the  which  we  did,  where  wee  were
received  with  dancing  and  singing  of  great  and  small,
and  in  every  house  I  was  received  with  great  cere-
monies, and  long  speeches  of  the  chiefest  that  were  in
the  Towne.  The  next  day  I  began  to  traffick  with
them  for  slaves,  and  I  bought  ninetie ;  all  which  I
brought  to  Martin  de  Saa,  who  remayned  at  Ilha  Grande
till  I  returned  againe.  Assoone  as  I  came  unto  him,  I  His  retume.
delivered  all  unto  him,  desiring  him  to  stand  my  friend,
and  to  give  mee  leave  to  tarrie  among  the  Canibals,
till  such  time  as  hee  had  spoken  with  his  father  in  my
behalfe.  Laughing,  hee  answered  that  I  neede  to  feare
to  goe  home,  for  the  man  was  recovered,  and  gone  to
the  River  of  Plate,  and  that  his  father  was  very  sorry,
thinking  I  had  beene  eaten  by  some  Serpent,  Leopard,
or Lion. When I came before the Governour ; he

207

A.D.

x597-

Ambitious
malice  in
savages.

Expedition
against  the
Taymayas.

Danger  of
drowning.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

blessed  himselfe  to  see  mee,  mervailing  where  I  had
beene  so  long,  and  sent  me  againe  to  his  Sugar  mill,
where  I  continued  a  twelve-moneth,  and  I  had  the
charge  to  chist  all  the  Sugar,  in  which  time  I  got  two
hundred  crownes.  I  determined  to  goe  to  Angola  in
^Ethiopia ;  and  the  Governour  gave  me  his  word  that
I  should,  and  that  what  favour  he  could  shew  me,  I
should  bee  sure  to  have,  but  when  the  ship  was  readie
to  depart,  the  Governour  sent  mee  out  of  Towne  on
a  sleevelesse  errand,  and  I  remayned  ashoare,  and  lost
all  that  I  had  scraped  together  for  my  voyage.

A  moneth  or  two  after  this,  it  happened  that  the
Wayanasses  were  set  on  by  a  kind  of  Canibals,  called
Taymayas,  the  Wayanasses  have  traffick  and  friendship
with  the  Portugals,  and  the  most  mortall  enemies  that
the  Portugals  have  in  all  America,  are  the  Taymayas.
The  Wayanasses  having  lost  a  great  many  men  in  a
battell,  not  being  able  to  make  any  head  againe  of
themselves,  craved  succour  againe  of  the  Portugals.  My
Master  being  Governour  of  the  Towne,  sent  his  sonne
Martin  de  Saa  with  seven  hundred  Portugals,  and  two
thousand  Indians.  The  Wayanasses  certified  unto  us
that  the  most  that  wee  should  bee,  before  wee  come  to
the  Taymayas,  would  bee  a  moneth.

Thus  the  fourteenth  day  of  October  1597.  we  departed
on  our  way  with  sixe  Canoas  by  Sea,  some  thirtie  miles
from  the  River  of  Januarie,  for  a  Port  called  Paratee.
The  first  day  that  we  departed,  we  had  a  great  storme,
where  we  thought  we  should  all  have  beene  drowned,
but  it  was  the  will  of  God  to  save  our  lives,  with  the
generall  losse  of  all  we  had,  the  Canoas  turned  upside
downe  with  the  storme,  wee  holding  fast  on  the  bottom
of  them,  were  driven  on  shoare  with  great  hazard  of
our  lives.  From  the  place  where  we  drove  on  shoare
to  the  River  of  Wareteena  it  was  three  miles,  which  we
went  by  land,  and  sent  the  Canoas  to  the  River  of
Januarie  for  victuals.  We  tarried  two  dayes  at  Wareteena
till the  aforesaid Canoas returned,  the third day wee

208

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1597-
went  to  a  place  of  Great  Hand,  called  Ippoa,  where  there  llha  Grande.
dwelt  two  or  three  Portugals. Here  we  had  great  store
of  Potatoes  &  Plantons  to  eat. At  this  place  we  remayned
five  dayes  for  five  hundred  Canibals,  that  were  to  come
from  an  Hand called Jawaripipo. When these  Indians
were  come  we departed in  our  Canoas for  our  desired
Port  called  Paratee. As  we  went  in  the  night  wee  cut
a  great  Bay  of  the Sea,  where  a  Whale did  overturne  Whale  over-
one  of  our  Canoas,  notwithstanding  wee  tooke  the  men  turneth  a
that  were in the Sea,  and  went  on for the Harbour anoa'
aforesaid. The  next day the Captaine commanded all
the Canoas  to  be  pulled  out  of  the  water,  and  to  cover
them well with boughes, determining immediately to
depart  by  land.

That  night  that  we  came to Paratee, there came a
Caniball to us, called Alecio, from a Towne called  A  Caniball
Jequerequere, this Town lyeth by the Sea-side right  **?***** mih
over  against  the  Hand of  San Sebastian. This Indian  ffuQweru
brought eightie Bow-men with him, offering himselfe
with  all his  companie  to  goe  with  our Captaine. The
next day we departed on our voyage, through the
Mountaines,  at night the Captaine seeing Alecio the
Caniball  lying  on  the  ground,  tooke  away  the  Net  that
I had  to  sleepe  in,  and  gave  it  to  the  Caniball,  I  being
faine to lie  upon  the  earth. I complayned to  some  of
the  Portugals  of  the  wrong  that the Captaine did use
unto mee : they  answered,  that  his father sent me in
that  voyage onely to  be made  away; I replyed, Gods
will  be  done. After  wee  had  gone  on  our  journey  three
dayes, we  came to the bottom  of  a great Mountaine,
called by  the Indians, Paranapeacano, that is in our
language,  The  sight  of  the  Sea ; this Mountaine  is so
high,  that  wee  were  three dayes going up, and three  Three  dayes
dayes  also going downe. Two dayes after wee  were  ascending  a
descended we came into a faire champaine Countrie ounta^e.
like meadow  ground  with long  grasse,  and great  store
of  Pine  trees, where  we  lodged  that  night  in  a  bottom,  Smkes
in which  we killed  about sixe  hundred Snakes ; it  was  venemous.
xvi  209  o

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

lS97-

the  will  of  God that  one  Indian,  called  Jeronimo,  was
[IV.  vi.  bit  by  them,  and  not  any  more. This  Indian  presently

121 3-j  swelled,  and his bloud  sprung out  of  his  eyes  and  his
nailes,  and  so  he  died.

After that we came to travell againe through the

Mountaynes some forty dayes, then wee came to a

R.  Paracuova  great  River  called Paracuova; which river wee passed

how  passed. with things made of  Canes tyed together  with  withes,

which the Portugals call Jangathas. We were foure

dayes  before  we  passed  over  this  River  it  was  so  great,

and  ranne  so  swift. After  that,  wee  travelled  againe  some

20. dayes till we came to a great  Mountayne called

Mountayne  of  Panace  yuawe  apacone,  we  were foure dayes going up

foure  dayes ^s  Mountayne  by  reason  of  the  great  showres  of  raine

that  we  had,  besides  wee  were  very  weake, and  all  our

victuals  were done. But hoping to find our enemies

very  soone,  we  did  our best  to  hold  out  comming  up

this  hill,  from sixe  of the clocke in the morning, till

it  was  two  of  the  clocke in  the  afternoone  on  a  rainie

day, the  Captaine  commanded every  man to make his

abode  for  that  night;  whereupon  I  set  downe  my  burthen,

and  went  into  the  Mountaynes  to  cut  some  boughes  of

a  Tree  called  Sammambaya,  to  cover  us  from  the  raine,

the  weather  was  so  cold,  and  I  having  travelled  all  day

without  meate  was  so  feeble,  that  going  to  cut  a  bough,

His  danger  of  my sword fell out of  my hand, and I sate under  a

death.  Tree,  where  I had  made mine end, if  it had not bin

for  my  deere  friend Henry  Barrawell,  who  seeing  that

I tarried long came to seeke me, and found me in

such case, that I was not able  neither  to speake  nor

stand. After he had brought me to the Campe, he

layed  me  by  the  fire,  I  recovered  and  was  very  well.

After  we  had  passed  this  Mountayne  of  Pareeva,  wee
travelled  in  a  kind  of  low  wash  ground ;  there  were  great
store  of  Canibals  called  Pories.  Upon  a  sudden  there
would  come  one  100  of  them  out  of  the  Wood,  and  as-
soone  as  they  had  gotten  anything  from  us,  would  be  gone,
wee  knew  not  whether  :  and  presently  there  would  come

210

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

J597-
as  many  more.  There  we  kept  very  good  order,  and
had  alway  very  good  watch,  for  feare  they  should  worke
us  any  Treason,  for  all  our  men  were  very  weake;  within
foure  dayes  journey  from  the  aforesaid  Mountayne,  we
came  to  the  River  of  Paraeva,  where  we  had  great  store  R.  Paraeva.
of  fish,  but  nothing  else  to  eate  withall.  At  this  River,
one  day  I  going  a  fishing,  being  a  very  rainie  day,
three  Indians  that  went  with  mee  returned  againe,  and
left  me  alone.  As  I  would  have  come  backe,  I  lost  my  He  loseth  his
way  that  I  had  gone  with  the  Indians  through  the  way-
Wildernesse,  then  I  returned  againe  to  the  River  side,
knowing  thereby  I  could  not  misse  my  way,  still  going
by  the  River  side  homewards  where  the  Captaine  was,
being  somewhat  late,  suddenly  I  came  to  a  place  where
there  were  at  least  a  roo.  men  and  women  of  those
Pories.  I  thought  I  should  have  died  no  other  death,
but  these  Canibals  did  mee  no  harme,  but  only  tooke
away  my  Knife  and  my  fish-hooke,  and  gave  me  of
their  meat  they  were  eating,  which  was  rosted  Monkeyes.
After  I  had  eaten  as  much  as  I  would,  they  made  mee
a  thing  of  dry  Canes  that  they  had  to  svvimme  upon
the  water,  which  in  a  meane  space  carried  me  where
the  Campe  lay  by  the  River  side.  These  Canibals  told
us  of  a  towne  within  two  dayes  journey,  where  we  might
get  Pease  and  Ginnie  Wheate,  and  some  Roots  of
Cassam.

In  one  day  we  passed  Paryeva,  and  the  next  day
wee  came  to  travell  towards  the  Towne  that  the  Pories
had  told  us  of.  We  were  seven  dayes  betweene  the
River  and  the  Towne,  and  when  we  came  there,  we
found  almost  nothing  but  women,  and  asking  for  their
Husbands,  they  told  us  that  they  had  gone  to  warre
against  the  Taymoyes,  and  that  they  had  killed  them
all  at  this  Towne.  We  found  a  little  Ginnie  Wheate,
but  it  was  not  ripe,  of  the  which  we  fed  a  weeke  being
there,  these  Canibals  are  called  Tapuyas.  Wee  went  Tapuyas.
forward  to  other  Townes  of  a  kinde  of  Canibals,  called  waanawa-
Waanawasons,  that  were  hard by the Tapuyas. Com-  sons.

211

A.D.

*597<

Poysonous
fruit.

Fortie  dayes
journey  up  a
River.

Of  Spirits  that
possessed  the
Indians,  and
killed  them.

[IV.

VI.

1214.]

Master
Knivet  told
mee  that  he
heard  one
Indian  upon

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ming  to  one  of  their  Townes,  there  came  twentie  old
men  with  woodden  Swords  in  their  hands,  whooping  and
rejoycing,  which  is  (as  I  have  said)  their  manner  of
bidding  welcome.  After  they  had  done,  they  asked
what  was  our  determination ;  wee  told  them  that  wee
came  to  warre  against  the  Tamoyes,  then  there  came
an  old  man  unto  us  all  painted  with  red  and  blue,
with  Bow  and  Arrowes  in  his  hand,  and  a  paire  of  slippers
on  his  feete,  and  with  one  of  his  Daughters  that  had
beene  captive  to  a  Portugall  of  Santumsence,  which  had
runne  away  from  her  Master,  with  other  Captives,  and
so  came  againe  to  her  father.  This  old  man,  by  name
Carywason,  came  before  our  Captaine,  and  at  this  Towne,
all  our  men  both  Indians  and  Portugals  fell  sicke  by
eating  of  a  kinde  of  sweet  pleasant  fruit  that  was  poyson,
and  had  it  not  beene  for  a  Gentleman  called  Enefrio  de
say  my  Masters  Kinsman,  who  had  a  piece  of  Unicornes
home,  we  had  all  died.  At  this  Towne  we  had  nothing
to  eate  but  a  few  Potatoes.  As  we  came  through  this
Towne,  all  the  Canibals  Waanassees  ranne  away  from
us,  with  all  our  clothes.  Now  the  old  man  with  tenne
lustie  young  men  went  with  us,  and  guided  us  betweene
two  Mountayns  continually  up  a  River  from  morning
till  night  for  the  space  of  forty  dayes,  we  were  never
out  of  the  water  from  morning  till  night  that  we  should
make  our  abode,  and  entred  in  the  morning  againe.

Our  men  were  very  weake,  and  almost  starved  with
hunger.  The  Indians  died,  amazed  (as  some  of  them
said)  with  a  Spirit  which  they  call  Coropio,  which  did
kill  them,  many  would  complaine  that  they  were
possessed  with  Spirits  called  Avasaly.  Those  that  were
tormented  with  this  Spirit,  would  command  themselves
to  be  bound  hand  &  foot  with  their  Bow  strings,  and
then  desire  their  friends  to  beat  them  with  the  cords,
that  they  hang  their  beds  withall,  but  for  all  their
Ceremony,  I  saw  not  one  of  them  escape  after  they
came  to  that  estate.  The  most  of  our  Indians  died  with
a  kind  of  sicknesse,  that  is  common  in  all  hot  Countreyes,

212

ANTHONY KNIVET  ad.

1597-
that  is,  with  a  sweate  and  wearinesse  of  the  body ;  with  occasion  of  such
Wormes  in  their fundament,  that  consume their  guts,  Possess™n>
and  they  so  consume away, knowing  not  what hurteth  Zithlhe  Spirit
them. Against  this  the  Indians  do  take  slices  of  Lemons,  and  threat-
and  greene  Pepper,  and  put  it  in  their  fundament,  like-  ning,  if  the
wise  Salt-water  is  good,  questionlesse  all  our  Englishmen  $Pmts  used
that  died  on the  Coast  of  Guinee  and  Brasill perished ems°% ey

r i  • t^-  -i  ii-iiii  ii  ■  would  turne  t0

or  this  Disease :  it  breedeth  with  head-ache  and  burning  t^e  chris-

Fevers,  then  wee  presently  let  bloud,  and  that  killeth  us. Hans:  and

After  we  had  done  travelling  up  the  aforesaid  River,  thereupon  the

wee  came  into  a  faire  Champion  Countrey,  all  full  of  Pine ^u
t>  i  iai  j  ii  Person  so

lrees, but the Apples were not ripe, and we could  possessed.

find  nothing  to  eate, but here  and  there  a  little wilde  Strange

Honey ;  wee  travelled  at  least  a  moneth  ;  the  Portugals  disease.

beganne  to  dispaire,  and  threw  away  their  Peeces,  being

not  able  to  carrie  their  clothes. In  all  this  misery,  the

Captayne made me carry two Muskets (as  I hope to  Hard

be  saved) and  I  was  faine  to  waite  upon  him  every  day  servitude.

to  helpe to make his lodging, and my friend Henry

Baraway,  was  so  ill,  that  I  was  many  times  faine  to  carry

him  on  my  backe,  and  continually  to  leade  him  by  the

hand. In  this  march wee  were  forced to  eate  all  our  Miserable

Targets,  which  were  made  of  raw  Hides  of  Buffe  ;  like-  fi^ine,

wise  we  did  eate  a  Cowes  skinne,  which  the  Frier  carried

with  him  (as  he  went  with  us)  to  cover  his  things  which

hee  said Masse withall  from  the  raine,  happie  was hee

who  could  get  a  Toade  or  Snake  to  eate. After  wee  had

passed  those  Champion  Countreyes,  where  wee  lost  180. 180.  men  lost.

of  our  men,  we  came  againe  into  the  Mountaynes,  and

travelled  a  great Hill called Etapuca; that is to say,

the  Mountaine  of  long  stones,  for  there  we  found  blacke  Mountaine  of

stones  of  a  yard  long,  as  round  as  if  they  were  made  ^ac^e  round

of  wood. When  we  came  to  the  top  of  this  Mountayne,

wee  were  not  able  to  goe  downe,  but  as  you  shall  heare

In  those Mountaynes  there are great store of  withes

that  hang  from  the  sides  and  the  Jaquetyva  Trees,  wee

tooke  of  those  withes,  and  making  them  fast  to  a  great

Tree,  wee  were  faine  to  slide  by  them  at  the  least  one

213

J597-

Steep  descent.

M.  of  greene
stones.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

hundred  fathomes.  In  those  Mountaynes,  we  had  great
store  of  Palmitos  and  wilde  Honey,  and  many  kinde
of  Fruites.

The  Canibals  that  guided  us  told  us,  within  foure
dayes  wee  should  bee  with  our  enemies  the  Tamoyes,
but  wee  were  above  twentie  dayes,  wee  came  into  a
dry  blacke  Champion  Countrey,  not  having  in  it  almost

Ground Hony.  any  grasse,  there  we  found  good  store  of  Honey
that  the  Bees  made  in the  ground, likewise  we found

Antbeare.  a  kind  of  great  Beast  as  bigge  as  a  Beare,  and  like  a
Beare  in  the  bodie,  but  it  hath  a  nose  of  a  yard  long,
and  a  faire  great  tayle  all  blacke  and  gray,  this  beast
putteth  his  tongue  through  Ant-hils,  and  when  the  Antes
are  all  upon  his  tongue,  hee  swalloweth  them  up.  After
we  had  passed  this  place,  we  came  to  a  Mountayne  called
Etaowbo,  that  is  to  say,  the  Mountayne  of  greene  stones ;
we  were  in  as  great  misery  as  ever  we  were.  Then
the  Portugals  assembled  together,  and  told  the  Captayne
that  they  thought  that  the  Canibals  did  leade  them  up
and  downe  of  purpose  to  destroy  them.  The  Captayne
called  the  old  Caniball,  and  told  him  how  long  we
had  followed  him,  and  how  he  told  us  before,  that  in
twenty  dayes  we  might  easily  goe  from  his  Towne
to  the  Towne  of  our  enemies  the  Tamoyes.  The  old
man  answered,  that  within  two  dayes  he  would  bring
us  to  the  Towne  of  our  enemies,  if  not  he  would  lose
his  head,  and  that  all  his  company  should  be  our  slaves.

Within  two  dayes  according  as  the  old  man  said,  wee
came  before  the  Towne  by  a  River  side,  which  River
is  called  Jawary,  it  taketh  the  head  from  the  Mountayne
Potosin  in  Peru,  the  Towne  was  on  the  farther  side
from  us,  and  on  the  side  that  we  were  on,  they  had
good  store  of  Mandioqua  and  Peasen.  Wee  came  before
the  Towne  in  the  Evening,  and  lay  all  night  in  ambush,
thinking  to  take  some  of  them  the  next  morning  com-
ming  for their meate. That night our men eate so

Vomits  and much  Mandioco,  that  when  we  thought  we  should  have

death.  had  some  skirmish,  they  lay  all  vomiting  that  they  were

214

R.  Jawary
which  Jioweth
from  Potossi.

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

J597-
not  able  to  stand,  and  thirteene  of  them  died.  The  next
morning,  when  we  saw  no  bodie  stir,  we  marvelled,  think-
ing that  they  were  in  ambush  for  us,  the  Portugals
durst  not  goe  over  the  River,  for  feare  thereof.  Then
the  Captayne  commanded  me  to  passe  over  the  River,
the  which  I  did  upon  a  woodden  Target,  when  I  came
into  the  Towne,  there  was  nothing  but  a  few  great  pots  The  enemies
that  the  Canibals  had  left  full  of  greene  Wheate,  great  town  forsaken.
store  of  Pumpions,  and  two  great  Estridges,  I  took  most
of  the  provision  that  I  found,  and  layed  it  altogether  for
the  Captayne,  then  I  called  for  the  company  that  they
might  not  feare,  for  there  was  no  body.  At  this  place
wee  remayned  two  moneths,  here  the  Captayne  reaped
the  grounds,  that  the  Indians  had  planted  with  Man-
dioque,  commanding  every  man  to  make  meale  for  his
provision  homewardes,  for  hee  said  that  from  thence  hee
would  returne.  Wee  had  nothing  to  eate  at  this  place
but  Potatoes  and  Casavi  Meale  that  wee  made  our  selves,
and  of  that  very  little.

By  this  Towne  there  was  a  bogge,  and  when  it  rained,
there  would  bee  great  store  of  Frogges,  of  them  wee
would  take  in  the  night  with  Torches  of  Waxe  to  light
us,  It  fell  out  one  night  that  I  should  have  beene
Sentinell  at  midnight,  and  about  eleven  of  the  clocke
it  rained,  then  I  sayd  to  my  friend  Henry  Barrawell,
I  would  to  God  that  one  night  you  would  goe  and  take
some  Frogges,  for  you  know  presently  I  shall  bee  called  [IV.  vi.
to  watch, with that hee  went and presently returned  I2I5-]

againe without any thing, and told us, that a great
Snake  was  by  the bogges, and that it leaped up  and
downe  after  him. Then the Indians said,  that it  was
a  kinde  of  Snake  that  flyeth  at  the  fire, I  asked  Henry  Snake  which
Barraway  where I might  finde  the  Snake,  hee  told  me  leaPes  at  the
at  such a  place, then I tooke the handle of  an Axe  *re'
beeing  of  a  heavie  blacke  wood,  and  little  Waxe  Candle
in  a  guard,  because  the  Snake  should  not  spie  mee,  and
made  it  very  readie. When  I  came  to  the place  where
my  friend  had  told  mee, I  lighted  my  Torch,  and  was

215

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

J597-

so  neere  the  Snake,  that  if  I  would,  I  could  not  shunne
her,  this  Snake  had  a  great  Frogge  in  her  mouth,  and
assoone  as  shee  saw  the  fire,  shee  put  the  Frogge  out
of  her  mouth,  and  raising  up  her  skinne  like  the  scales
of  a  great  fish  with  her  mouth  open,  shee  offered  to  flye
at  mee,  as  soone  as  her  mouth  was  open,  I  strooke  at
her,  and  hit  her  on  the  head  and  the  teeth,  that  I
crushed  her  braines.  Assoone  as  I  had  strooke  her,
I  threw  my  Torch  one  way,  and  ranne  halfe  a  dozen
steps  another  way,  the  Snake  made  a  great  noyse  in  the
water,  but  I  looked  still  towards  my  Torch,  to  proove
if  it  were  true  that  they  would  flye  in  the  fire,  but
when  I  saw  no  such  thing,  I  went  and  tooke  my  Torch
againe,  and  very  warily  went  to  the  place,  where  I  had
strooke  the  Snake,  where  I  saw  all  her  head  bloudie,
The  Snake  and  her  eyes  broken,  and  so  I  killed  her.  When  I  had
killed.  done,  I  tooke  a  withe  and  bound  it  to  her  forequarters,

and  dragged  her  home  to  the  house  where  I  lay,  when
I  came  home  I  asked  if  I  had  beene  called  to  watch,
the  Portugall  and  Henry  Barraway  said  that  no  man
had  asked  for  me,  then  I  tooke  a  Knife,  and  beganne
to  cut  a  piece  of  the  Snake  for  the  Captayne,  and  would
have  parted  the  rest  among  the  rest.  As  I  was  parting
the  Ensigne  of  our  company  came  to  the  doore,  I  went
and  opened  the  doore,  and  assoone  as  hee  came  to  mee,
hee  strooke  mee  with  a  cudgell.  I  not  knowing  why
Worse  Snakes  hee  should  use  mee  so,  came  and  closed  with  him,  so
alive.  both  0f  us  went  to  the  ground,  with  that  the  Portugals

that  were  in  the  house  came  and  parted  us,  and  asked
him  wherefore  hee  strooke  mee,  then  the  ensigne
answered  that  the  Captaine  had  risen  and  found  no  body
in  the  watch,  to  that  they  all  answered,  that  no  man
had  called  mee,  then  hee  commanded  mee  to  goe  before
the  Captaine ;  hee  without  hearing  me  speake,  com-
manded two  Indians  to  binde  mee  to  a  poste,  and
commanded  them  to  take  the  cords  of  their  beds  and
whip  me,  I  desired  that  the  Captaine  would  heare  the
truth, and if hee found any fault in mee, I would

216

ANTHONY KN1VET  a.d.

1597-
according  to  Marshall  Law  bee  hanged.  Before  the
Indians  had  untyed  their  beds,  there  came  in  an  ancient
old  man,  by  name  John  de  Soso,  Captaine  of  our  Rere-
guard,  and  with  him  some  twentie  Portugals,  that  lay
in  the  same  house  where  I  lay.  When  they  saw  mee
bound  they  told  the  Captaine  that  I  was  not  in  fault,
for  no  man  had  called  mee.  Then  the  Captaine  com-
manded mee  to  bee  untyed,  and  bade  mee  goe  to  my
Watch,  I  went  home  and  fetched  my  Sword,  and  pre-
sently came  againe  where  I  should  have  watched,  and
when  I  came  there,  I  found  him  that  had  gone  his
way  before,  and  said  to  the  Captaine  before  my  face,
that  hee  had  called  mee,  and  that  I  made  him  no  answere,
when  I  saw  him  there,  I  asked  him  if  hee  was  not
ashamed  to  avouch  that  which  was  a  Lye  ?  with  that
he  beganne  to  abuse  mee  in  vile  words,  calling  mee
English  Dogge  and  Heretique,  when  I  saw  my  selfe
disgraced  by  a  paultry  Mestizo,  I  tooke  my  Sword  with
both  my  hands,  and  strooke  him  on  the  head  with  the
Hilts,  that  I  made  a  great  wound.

Then  the  Captaine  commanded  mee  to  bee  set  in  the  He  is  set  in  the
Stockes,  and  bound  my  hands,  where  I  lay  all  that  Stocks,
night,  and  the  next  day  in  the  afternoone  there  came
two  Portugals  and  read  certaine  Articles  against  mee,
which  the  Captaine  had  caused  to  bee  made,  saying,
that  I  had  killed  many  sicke  Indians  when  I  had  found
them  alone,  and  that  I  had  deserved  death  by  making
a  mutinie  in  the  Court  of  Guard  by  striking,  that  was
sufficient  to  make  an  uprore.  After  they  had  read  all
this,  they  bid  mee  prepare  my  selfe  for  death,  and  so
went  their  wayes.  Within  halfe  an  houre  after  the  Frier
came  to  mee,  and  asked  mee  whether  I  would  confesse
or  no,  I  told  him  that  I  had  stolne  nothing  from  no
man,  and  as  for  my  sinnes  God  knew  the  secrets  of  all
hearts,  wherefore  I  had  nothing  to  confesse  to  him.
With  that  after  many  Orations  that  hee  made  to  mee,
hee  went  his  way.  All  the  Portugals  went  to  the
Captaine  entreating him to pardon  me, but  hee  would

217

ad.  PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

J597-

not  heare  them,  desiring  God  that  he  might  never  come
into  Christian  Countrey  if  hee  did  not  hang  mee.  I
lay  all  day  and  night  in  the  Stocks,  till  it  was  foure
of  the  clocke  the  next  morning.  Then  the  Frier  came
to  me  againe,  and  told  mee  that  my  houre  was  very
neere,  and  desired  mee  to  prepare  my  selfe  to  dye  like
a  Christian,  I  told  him  I  hoped  the  Lord  would  have
mercie  upon  me.

Betwixt  six  and seven of  the  clock,  there came  the
ensigne,  and  a  Scrivener,  and  two  or  three  Portugals  with
them,  and  an  Indian  with  a  cord  in  his  hand,  and  by  the
command  of  the  Portugals  put  it  about  my  necke,  then
He  is  brought  I  was  carried  to  the  place  of  execution  : all  the  Portugals
to  execution, being  about  me,  I  said,  Gentlemen,  the  Captaine  putteth
me  not  to  death  for  the  offence  that  lately  I  have  done,
but  a grudge he holdeth against me falsely rumered
by  his  Cosen,  who  is  now  present,  because  I  would  not
save  him  ;  and  for  that,  and  no  other  matter  I  am  con-
demned at  this  present. As  I  was  speaking,  the  Indian
that  should  have  beene  my  executioner,  came  from  the
top  of  the house, where I should have bin executed,
[IV.  vi.  and  thrusting me on the side  of  the  head said,  What

1 216.]  doest  thou  prate,  knowest  thou  not  that  the  Captaines
Father  sent  thee  hither,  that  thou  mightest  never  re-
Honest  Portu-  turne  ?  with  that  the  Portugals  checkt  the  Indian,  and
gals  intercede.  John  de  Soso  standing  with  Graned  del  Galbo,  and
Fostino  Abanos,  yea,  a  great  many  Portugals  said,  what
authoritie  hath  the  Captaine  to  hang  this  man,  we  come
not  in  the  Kings  service,  but  for  our  owne  profits,  and
he  is  but  the  Governours  bastard  Sonne  ;  so  they  com-
manded the  execution  to  be  staied,  then  John  de  Soso
went  to  the  Captaine,  and  told  him,  Sir,  we  know  not
where  we  are,  and  many  of  our  men  are  dead,  wherefore
it  is  not  convenient  at  this  time,  that  we  should  weaken
our  selves  for  we  know  not  if  any  of  us  shall  returne
againe  or  not,  wherefore  wee  desire  you  to  pardon  this
Englishman,  for  he  is  as  good  a  Souldier  as  any  of  us,
and  the  man  that  is  hurt  is  not  in  danger, The  Captaine

218

ANTHONY KNIVET  ad.

I597-
swore  a  great  oath,  that  I  should  dye  ;  then  John  de
Soso,  and  the  rest  of  the  Portugals,  bid  him  shew  what
authoritie  he  had  to  put  me  to  death,  and  if  he  shew
not  authoritie  from  the  King,  I  should  not  dye  at  that
time,  for  they  were  to  answere  for  me  as  well  as  he.
The  Captaine  came  out  very  angerly,  and  made  great
protestations  against  John  de  Soso,  that  hee  was  an
upholder  of  mutinies.  John  de  Soso  said,  that  he  would
answere  to  all  that  he  alleadged,  and  so  I  was  released
from  death.

After  we  had  beene  at  this  place,  two  moneths  making
our  provision,  we  went  forward  to  another  Towne,  we
found  great  store  of  Ginnie  Wheate  newly  planted  ;  here
we  remained  three  moneths,  till  the  Wheate  was  ripe,
from  thence  all  the  Company  returned  home  but  my
selfe,  and  twelve  yong  men  ;  we  asked  leave  of  the
Captaine  to  goe  to  seeke  our  adventure,  the  Captaine  A  new
gave  us  leave  to  doe  what  we  would  ;  for  mine  owne  adventure.
part,  I  asked  leave  onely  for  feare  to  goe  homewards,
lest  the  Captaine  should  worke  me  some  mischiefs  ;  like-
wise wee  did  all  thinke  we  should  hardly  get  home,  for
we  knew  not  where  we  were,  and  the  way  that  we  did
come,  we  durst  not  returne  againe,  for  feare  of  the  Pories,
and  Lepos  Tominenos,  and  other  Canibals,  lest  they
seeing  us  weake,  should  betraie  us.

§•  in.

His  strange  travailes  with  twelve  Portugals,  whom
the  Savages  did  eate.  His  life  with  the  Cani-
bals :  and  after  that  with  the  Portugals,  from
whom  hee  fleeth  to  Angola,  is  brought  backe,
and  after  manifold  chances,  is  shipped  to
Lisbone.

And  the  twelve  aforesaid,  tooke  our  leave  of  the
Captaine,  determining  to  goe  to  the  South  Sea,
rather then  returne againe without any thing.

The names of the Portugals were these, Francisco

219

A.D.

I597-

Fishing  zvith
golden  hooks.

Faire  Stones.

Golden  Rivers

Glittering
Mountaine.

Tamandros
are  the  Ant-
beares.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Tavares,  Lewes  de  Pino,  Gonsalo  Fernandes,  Tomas
Delvare,  Lewis  Loello,  Matheas  del  Galo,  John  de
Silvesa,  Petro  de  Casta,  Antonio  fernandes  Gorgedias,
Manuell  Caldera,  and  my  selfe  Anthony  Knivet.  After
we  had  departed  from  our  Captaine,  we  made  a  great
Canoa  of  a  barke  of  a  tree,  and  went  downe  the  River
called  Janary  for  the  space  of  a  weeke,  that  we  came
where  we  found  a  little  Village  of  sixe  houses,  and  it
seemed  it  had  beene  a  long  time  sithence  any  inhabitants
were  there  ;  when  we  came  to  this  Village  we  left  our
Canoa,  and  determined  to  goe  by  land.  In  this  Towne
we  found  great  store  of  earthen  Pots,  and  in  some  of
them  peeces  of  Gold  tied  at  lines  that  the  Indians  fish
withall ;  likewise  we  found  Stones  as  greene  as  grasse,
and  great  store  of  white  glistering  Stones  like  Christall,
but  many  of  them  were  blew  and  greene,  red  and  white
wonderfull  faire  to  behold  :  when  we  saw  the  peeces
of  Gold  and  those  Stones,  we  made  accompt  that  we
were  very  neere  Potasin,  then  we  tooke  our  way  South-
west, and  went  up  a  great  Mountaine  of  Wildernesse.
After  that,  we  came  to  a  place  of  dry  Browne  earth,
full  of  hils,  rocks,  and  many  small  Rivers  at  the  head  ;
by  many  of  these  Rivers  we  found  little  peeces  of  Gold,
as  bigge  as  an  Hasell  nut,  and  great  store  in  dust
like  sand.  After  which,  we  came  into  a  faire  Countrie,
and  we  saw  a  great  glistering  Mountaine  before  us,  ten
daies  before  we  could  come  to  it,  for  when  we  came
into  the  plaine  Countrie,  and  were  out  of  the  Mountaines,
the  Sunne  began  to  come  to  his  height,  wee  were  not
able  to  travaile  against  it,  by  the  reason  of  the  glistering
that  dazeled  our  eyes.  At  the  last,  by  little  and  little
we  came  to  the  foote  of  this  Mountaine,  where  we  found
great  store  of  Tamandros.

We  went  along  by  this  Mountaine  at  the  least  twenty
daies,  before  we  could  finde  any  way  to  passe  over  it  ;
at  last  we  came  to  a  River  that  passed  under  it,  here
we  determined  to  make  some  shift  to  get  through,  some
of  our  company said that  they thought it  best  to  goe

220

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

J597-
still  along  by  the foote of  the Mountaine,  rather  then
to  venture  to  goe  through  ;  for  they  said,  if  this  water
goe  not  through,  we  are  all  cast  away,  for  it  is  impossible
to  returne  againe  against  this  current. Then  I  answered
friends, we may as well adventure our lives now as  Hideous
we  have  done  heretofore  in  many  places,  if  not  we  must  ^venture.
make  accompt  to  live  here  like  wilde  Beasts,  where  we
shall  have  life  as  long  as  pleaseth  God,  without  credit,
name,  or Religion  ; wherefore I thinke that our best
way  is  to  goe  through  if  we  can,  for  no  doubt  but  God
that hath hitherto delivered us from dangers infinite,  [IV.  vi.
at  this  time  will  not  forsake  us,  and  questionlesse  if  it  be  I2I7'

our  fortunes  to  passe  on  the  other  side,  we  shall  finde
either  Spaniards  or  Indians,  for  I  am  sure,  that  each  of
you  have  heard,  that  on  a  faire  day  it  is  to  be  discerned
from  the  top  of  Potasin  to  this  Mountaine.  After  I  had
thus  spoken,  the  Portugals  determined  to  venture  to  goe
through  ;  we  made  a  great  thing  of  great  Canes,  three
yards  and  a  halfe  broad,  and  six  yards  long,  that  we  might
lye  downe  and  sleepe  upon  it:  we  killed  good  store  of
Tamandroes,  and  rosted  them  very  dry  for  our  provision,
for  we  knew  not  how  long  we  should  be  in  the  vaute.

After  we  had  made  all  ready,  taking  good  store  of  wood
with  us,  commending  our  selves  to  God,  we  put  our  selves
into  the  vaut,  which  made  such  a  noise  with  the  running  Charons
of  the  water,  that  we  thought  it  had  beene  some  inchant-  Ferry.
ment.  We  went  in  on  munday  morning,  and  we  came
out  on  a  morning  (whether  we  were  two  dayes  or  one  in
the  vault  I  know  not.)  As  soone  as  we  perceived  light
we  were  very  glad,  but  when  we  came  out,  we  saw  on
every  side  houses,  then  we  tooke  counsell  what  was  the
best  for  us  to  doe,  to  hide  our  selves,  and  see  if  we  could
passe  the  Townes  in  the  night,  or  to  goe  and  submit  our
selves  to  the  Indians :  we  all  agreed,  that  the  best  was  to
goe  to  them  ;  then  I  said,  well  friends,  sithence  we  have
agreed,  let  us  fully  determine  here  what  we  shall  doe  and
say,  for  questionlesse,  they  will  examine  us  what  we  are,
and  from  whence  we  came  ;  then  the  Portugals  said,  we

221

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

lS97-

will  tell  them  that  we  are  Portugals  ;  then  I  answered,  I
will  tell  them  that  I  am  a  French  man.  We  went  towards
their  houses,  who  as  soone  as  they  had  perceived  us  came
out  hooping  and  hollowing  with  their  Bowes  and  Arrows ;
and  when  they  came  unto  us  they  bound  our  hands,  and
tied  cords  about  our  middles,  and  so  led  us  to  their
houses  :  presently  there  came  two  or  three  old  men,
and  asked  what  we  were,  then  the  Portugals  answered,
that  they  were  Portugals,  and  I,  that  I  was  a  French
man.
The  Indians  Within  two  houres  after  they  had  examined  us,  they
kits  the  Portu-  tooke  one  of  the  Portugals,  and  tied  a  new  roape  about
^eateThem  n*s  middle,  and  carried  him  into  a  yard,  with  three  Indians
holding  a  cord  on  the  one  side,  and  three  on  the  other
side,  and  the  Portugall  in  the  middest,  there  came  an  old
man,  and  bid  him  looke  on  all  things,  that  he  liked,  and
told  him  that  he  should  bid  them  farewell,  for  hee  should
see  them  no  more :  then  there  came  a  lustie  yong  man,
with  his  armes  and  face  died  red,  and  said  unto  him,  doest
thou  see  me,  I  am  he  that  hath  killed  many  of  thy
Nation,  and  will  kill  thee.  After  he  had  spake  all  this,
Dwelluh  he  came  behinde  the  Portugall,  and  strooke  him  on  the
Butchers.  nape  0f  the  necke,  that  he  felled  him  to  the  ground,  and
after  hee  was  downe  gave  him  another  that  hee  killed
him  ;  then  they  tooke  the  tooth  of  a  Conie  and  opened
all  the  upper  skinne,  so  they  tooke  him  by  the  head  and
the  feete,  and  held  him  in  the  flame  of  the  fire :  after
that,  rubbing  him  with  their  hands,  all  the  upper  skin
came  of,  and  the  flesh  remained  white,  then  they  cut  off
his  head,  and  gave  it  to  him :  they  tooke  the  guts,  and
gave  them  to  the  women,  after  which  they  jointed  him
joint  by  joint,  first  hands,  then  elbowes,  and  so  all  the
body.  After  which,  they  sent  to  every  house  a  peece,
then  they  fell  a  dancing,  and  all  the  women  made  great
store  of  Wine :  the  next  day  they  boiled  every  joint  in  a
great  pot  of  water,  because  their  wives  and  children  might
eate  of  the  broth  ;  for  the  space  of  three  dayes  they  did
nothing  but  dance  and  drinke  day  and  night :  after  that

222

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1597-
they  killed  another  in  the  same  manner  as  you  have  heard,
and  so  served  all  but  my  selfe.

When  I  saw  all  the  Portugals  dead,  I  looked  for  the  Hatred  of  the
same,  but  after  the  Indians  had  done  with  the  Feasts,  Tamoyes  to  the
they  came  unto  me  and  said,  Feare  not,  for  your  ancestors,
have  beene  our  friends,  and  we  theirs,  but  the  Portugals
are  our  enemies,  and  make  us  slaves,  wherefore  we  have
done  with  them  as  you  have  seene.  After  I  had  heard
what  they  said,  I  told  them  I  had  no  reason  to  feare,  for
I  knew  they  were  my  friends,  and  not  mine  enemies,  and
that  I  had  bin  a  long  time  prisoner  to  the  Portugals.

When  I  had  bin  two  moneths  with  these  Indians  called
the  Tamoyes,  they  went  to  warre  against  Tomominos,  and  Tamomlnos.
comming  to  fight,  we  had  almost  lost  the  field,  for  the
Tomominos  were  a  great  many  more,  so  that  we  were
faine  to  take  the  Mountaine:  when  I  saw  the  rusticall
manner  of  their  fight,  that  without  any  order  they  would
set  upon  their  enemies  like  Buls,  I  taught  them  how  to  He  teacheth
set  themselves  in  Battaile,  and  to  lye  in  ambush,  and  how  them  tofi&ht'
to  retire  and  draw  their  enemies  into  a  snare :  by  this
meanes,  we  had  alwayes  the  upper  hand  of  our  enemies,
and  I  was  held  in  great  accompt  amongst  them,  for  they
would  never  goe  to  the  field,  except  I  went  with  them  :
in  a  short  time  we  gave  so  many  battailes  to  the
Tomominos,  that  we  made  them  leave  their  Countrey,
and  flye  further  from  us :  so  wee  lived  in  peace.  The
Tamoyes  offered  mee  many  wives,  but  I  refused,  saying
it  was  not  our  custome  to  take  wives  out  of  our  Countrey.
After  wee  had  conquered  the  Tomominos,  wee  lived  in
peace  for  the  space  of  foure  moneths,  and  then  there  came
another  kinde  of  Canibals,  called  Topinaques.  These  Topinaques.
made  their  Towne  very  neere  us,  at  a  Mountaine  called  by
the  Indians  Tamiuva  (that  is)  the  Mountaine  of  Gold.  Mountaine  of

When  we  heard  of  them,  we  prepared  to  make  warre  Gold.
against  them,  wee  went  five  thousand  strong,  in  five  dayes
journey  we  came  before  the  Towne ;  but  we  being  espied,
they  left  their  Towne  and  fled,  we  followed  them  tenne
daies,  taking many  old men and  women,  which as  we

223

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1597-

tooke  them  we  killed :  we  followed  them  till  we  came  to
[IV.  vi.  a  great  River  side,  where  we  durst  not  passe  for  feare  lest

121 8 J  the enemy  should  overcome us  at the  landing, so we
returned  home  againe,  from  the  River  called  Morgege,
where  we  remayned  still  in  peace,  for  the  space  of  eight
moneths  till  we  removed  our  selves.
His  rich  At  this  place  I  went  all  naked  with  out  any  thing,  onely

apparell.  a  few  ]eaves  i  tiec[  before  mee  for  shame. One  day  going

all  alone  a  fishing  for  pleasures  sake,  I  sat  downe  remem-
bring  my  selfe  in  what  state  I  was,  and  thinking  what  I
had  beene,  I  began  to  curse  the  time  that  ever  I  heard  the
name  of  the  Sea,  and  grieved  to  thinke  how  fond  I  was  to
forsake  my  naturall  Countrey  where  I  wanted  nothing  :
then  was  I  out  of  all  hope  either  to  see  Countrey  or
Christian  againe  ;  sitting  by  the  River  in  these  passionate
thoughts,  there  came  an  old  Indian  one  of  the  chiefest  of
them,  and  beganne  to  talke  with  me  saying.  It  was  a
good  time  with  them  when  they  dwelt  at  Cape  Frio,
for  then  they  had  trade  with  the  Frenchmen,  and  wanted
nothing,  but  now  they  had  neyther  Knives  nor  Hatchets,
nor  nothing  else,  but  lived  in  great  necessitie,  with  that  I
He  perswades  answered  I  did  heartily  wish,  that  he  and  his  company
them  to  seeke  WOuld  goe  and  dwell  by  the  Sea-coast,  without  danger  of
tions  Portugals,  whereupon  hee  and  I  went  home  together,  and

the  Indian  reported  in  the  Towne  what  I  had  said  unto
him :  the  next  morning  there  came  (at  the  least)  twenty
of  the  chiefest  of  them  into  the  house  where  I  lay,  and
asked  me  if  I  knew  my  Plate  certaine,  where  they  might
finde  any  French  Ships :  I  told  them  that  I  was  sure
betwixt  the  River  of  Plate,  and  a  River  called  by  the
Portugals  Dos  Patos,  we  should  finde  French  men,  and  if
we  did  not,  that  here  the  Portugals  could  not  hurt  us.
Moreover,  it  were  better  to  dwell  by  the  Sea  side,  where
we  should  have  plenty  of  al  things,  then  where  we  did,
where  we  had  nothing  to  live  upon  but  roots.  These  old
men  went  and  told  the  people,  which  all  desired  to  see
the  coast,  so  they  resolved,  and  making  provision,  we
departed  from  our  abode,  being  thirty  thousand  of  us.

224

women.

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1597-

After  we  had  passed  many  a  Hill,  all  Wildernesse  and  New  dis-
Rivers,  where  wee  found  many  precious  stones,  we  came  ^veneioftlm
to  a  faire  sandie  Countrie,  through  which  we  travelled  ^tion^
some  twentie  dayes,  and  we  went  Northward  for  feare  of
comming  into  the  Countrie  where  there  are  great  store  of
Spaniards,  and  this  Countrie  is  it  selfe  very  populous,  and
are  friends  with  the  Spaniards.  Therefore  we  changed
our  course  and  travelled  all  Northward,  till  we  came  into
the  Countrie  of  the  Amazons,  which  the  Indians  call
Mandiocusyanas,  then  we  tooke  our  course  Southward
againe.  I  would  have  perswaded  the  Tamoyes  to  have
warred  against  the  Amazons,  but  they  durst  not,  for  they  Amazons,  not
said,  we  know  that  their  Countrie  is  very  populous,  and  a  one-breasted
we  shall  be  all  killed.  After  wee  came  to  the  head  of  the  war°^e
River,  called  Patos,  there  we  found  Canoas  of  barkes
of  trees  that  came  downe  the  River  some  eight  dayes,
then  wee  found  the  River  very  broad,  and  many  trees
cut  by  the  Rivers  side,  whereby  we  suspected  that  we
were  neere  the  Sea  side,  or  some  Town  of  the  Waanasses,
for  the  Waanasses  never  inhabit  far  from  the  coast.
When  the  Indians  saw  these  tokens  of  abidance ;  they
asked  me  what  I  thought  was  best  to  doe  :  I  answerd,
I  thought  it  best  to  hide  our  selves,  and  to  send  some
nine  or  ten  yong  men  to  see  if  they  could  spie  any
Towne,  so  we  to  circle  them  in  their  houses  in  the  night :
to  that  they  all  agreed,  and  ten  of  them  were  sent,  they
returned  again  at  night  without  sight  of  any  Towne,  but
they  said  there  went  a  great  path  by  the  River  side,  and
brought  peeces  of  Cords  that  they  found  in  the  way  with
them.  Hence  we  judged  that  we  should  finde  some
Towne  by  the  River  side,  and  determined  to  goe  downe
the  River  in  the  night  with  our  Canoas,  to  see  if  we
could  finde  the  Towne.

About  foure  of  the  clocke  we  came  to  a  faire  Bay,  and
saw  the  Sea  ;  and  doubling  a  point  of  the  shoare  we
espied  a  Towne,  then  as  fast  as  we  could  we  landed  our
men,  and  the  day  began  to  be  cleare,  and  one  of  the
Town  comming  out  to  the  Sea  side,  espied  us,  whereupon
xvi  225  p

A.D.

Battell  of

Cariios.

They  are
assailed  by  the
Portugals.

[IV.  vi.

1219.]

He  returneth
to  his  Master.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

all  the  Town  rose  up  in  armes,  and  we  had  a  great
skirmish.  We  were  many  more  in  number,  and  had
farre  better  order,  so  we  put  them  to  flight  killing  a  great
many  of  them :  wee  tooke  three  hundred  prisoners  men
and  women,  which  the  Tamoyes  killed  and  did  eate
afterwards.  These  Indians  are  called  Cariios.  After  we
had  put  them  to  flight  they  went  to  Saint  Vincents  by
land,  and  craved  succour  of  the  Portugals.  At  this
Towne  of  the  Cariios  we  found  great  store  of  provision,
Cassavi,  Ginnie  Wheate,  Potatoes,  Plantons,  Pumpions,
and  all  other  such  like  that  the  Countrie  yeeldeth,  and
in  great  plenty :  there  likewise  we  found  great  store  of
Ryals  of  eight,  for  there  had  beene  a  Carvell  cast  away
in  that  place  not  long  before,  and  the  Spaniards  were
gone  before  by  land  to  Bonas  Ayres  in  the  River  of
Plate  :  with  these  Indians  the  Portugals  had  peace,  but
now  they  are  in  warre  with  them  againe.

Some  of  the  Cariios  went  to  the  River  of  Plate  to  crave
succour,  others,  as  I  said  before,  came  to  the  Town  of
Saint  Vincents :  from  Saint  Vincents,  newes  was  sent  to
the  River  of  Janero,  from  thence  the  Portugals  made  a
Navie  of  Canoas  and  Carvels,  of  the  which  the  Governours
sonne  Marten  de  Sasa  (which  was  come  home  from  the
River  of  Janary,  where  I  departed  from  him)  was  come
againe  as  Captaine  of  all  the  Portugals,  and  comming
upon  us  in  the  night,  they  seized  our  Towne :  about
three  of  the  clocke,  an  Indian  that  came  with  the  Portugals
beganne  to  speake  very  loud  to  the  men  of  the  Towne,
that  they  should  not  stirre,  for  if  they  stirred  they  should
be  all  put  to  the  sword.  When  the  Tamoyes  heard  the
Indian  speake,  they  began  to  russell  with  their  Bowes  and
Arrowes,  making  a  great  noise,  with  that  the  Portugals
shot  of  a  Peece,  then  they  all  lay  downe  in  their  beds,  like
men  without  lives  or  soules  ;  when  the  day  was  cleare,
and  my  Masters  Sonne  saw  me  alive,  he  blest  himselfe,
and  asked  me  what  was  become  of  my  companions,  I  told
him  that  the  Indians  had  killed  them,  and  eaten  them.
After  that,  about  ten  of  the  clocke,  all  the  Indians  were

226

ANTHONY KNIVET  ad.

*597-
brought  out  of  their  houses,  and  being  examined,  some  of
them  said  that  I  bid  them  kill  them,  &  if  many  of  them
had  not  been,  I  had  died  for  it,  but  it  was  Gods  will
to  discover  the  truth  by  their  own  mouthes  :  then  the
Portugals  killed  all  the  old  men  and  women,  and  all  those  The  Portugal;
that  had  beene  particuler  actors  in  the  Portugals  deaths,  kl11  IOO°°-

which  were  in  all  ioooo.  and  20000.  were  parted  amongst  an caPtwe
. r . . .  r  & 20000.

them  tor  their  slaves.  Indians.

I  came  againe  to  my  old  Master,  and  was  sent  with  the
Tamoyes to a  Sugar Mill that my Master had newly
made. There  I  went  still  to  the  woods  with  the  slaves  to
draw  out  great  peeces  of  Timber  for  the  space  of  three
moneths  :  then  was  newes  brought  from  Cape  could,  that
the  Canibals,  called  Vaytacasses,  were  come  to  make  their  Faytacasses.
abidance  a  little  Southward  of  the  Cape,  in  certaine  places,
where  before  the  Tamoyes  had  inhabited.  The  Salvador  Coria
de  Sasa  sent  his  Sonne  Gonsalo  Corea  de  Sasa,  with  whom
I  went  against  my  will. We  travelled  eight  dayes  by  the
Sea  side,  where  we  had  alwayes  great  store  of  Fish. After
that  we  came  to  a  place,  called  Etaoca,  that  is  to  say,  the
Stone  house,  as  strong  a  thing  as  ever  I  saw,  for  it  was  a
great  huge  rocke,  and  it  hath  an  entrance  like  a  great
doore  within  it,  as  any  Hall  in  England  :  the  Indians  say
that  there  Saint  Thomas  did  Preach  to  their  forefathers  Tale  of  Saint
there  :  hard  by  standeth  a  Stone  as  bigge  as  foure  great  Thoma^
Canons, and it standeth upon the ground upon foure  ™v.ourm8  l  e
stones  little  bigger  then  a  mans  finger,  like  stickes  ;  the  Francises
Indians  say  that  was  a  miracle  which  the  Saint  shewed  Legend.
them,  and  that  that  Stone  had  beene  Wood  :  likewise  by
the  Sea  side  there  are  great  Rockes,  upon them I saw
great  store  of  prints  of  the  footing  of  bare  feete  ;  all  which
prints  were  of  one bignesse. They  say that the  Saint
called  the  Fishes  of  the  Sea,  and  they  heard  him.

From  thence  we  went  through  the  Wildernesse,  foure
dayes  till  we  came  to  a  great  Mountaine,  called  Abou-
sanga  retam ;  by  the  Sea  side  of  that  Mountaine,  we  found
a  small  Towne  of  Tamoyes,  that  had  escaped  in  the  time
of  the  first  conquest,  that  Salvador  Corea  de  Sasa  made

227

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I597-

against  that  kinde  of  people,  and  never ^were^heardj  of  till
OUCaptahe.  now  that  wee  found  them  by  chance.  The  Captaine
of  them  was  (as  they  shewed  by  signes)  one  hundred  land
twenty  yeares  old,  and  yet  was  very  lustie  :  he  had  in  his
lippe  a  great  hole,  and  on  either  side  of  his  cheekes  a  great
hole,  and  in  either  of  them  a  faire  greene  Stone.  After
we  had  taken  this  small  Towne,  wherein  there  were  five
hundred  soules,  we  asked  if  they  knew  where  the  Wayta-
casses  were,  they  told  us  all  that  they  knew  very  well,  so
in  three  dayes  they  guided  us  into  a  low  seggie  Countrie,
where  the  Waytacasses  were  :  when  we  came  to  their
habitation,  this  Abousanga  come  among  the  thickest  of
the  Portugals,  and  said  these  words  ;  He  that  never  saw
Abousanga  let  him  looke  on  me  now,  and  they  that  dare
follow  me  shall  see  my  valour  :  and  so  with  his  Bowe  and
Arrowes,  he  ran  amongst  the  thickest  of  the  enemy,  where
he  was  shot  with  one  and  twenty  Arrowes.  In  that  enter-
prise we  all  saw  him  kill  three  of  the  Waytacasses.  When
we  came  to  the  fight,  all  the  Waytacasses  ranne  away,  &
we  tooke  but  one  of  them  :  for  all  that  Abousanga  was  so
hurt,  he  lived  foure  houres  :  the  Portugals  asked  him  why
he  had  beene  so  desperate  :  he  told  them  that  he  had  lived
all  his  life  a  free  man,  and  that  he  had  beene  a  great
warrier,  and  would  rather  dye  then  be  their  Captive.
High  spirit  of  Then  he  asked  Baptisme,  and  desired  them  that  they
a  Savage.  would  tell  him  somewhat  of  God,  for  he  said  whatsoever
they  told  him  he  would  beleeve  ;  the  Portugall  Frier
told  him  that  God  was  the  saver  of  soules  and  the  giver  of
life,  and  that  if  he  truely  repented  and  would  be  Baptised
he  should  be  saved  ;  he  answered,  that  all  that  was  told
him  he  truely  beleeved,  and  desired  that  with  speede
he  might  be  Baptised,  and  so  died,  calling  to  God  for
mercy  till  his  last  houre  :  from  this  place  we  returned
home.

After  we  came  home  again,  his  son  Gonsalo  Corea
de  Sasa,  reported  so  well  of  me,  that  his  father  com-
manded me  to  waite  on  him  whither  soever  he  went  :
newes  came  at  that  time  from Portugall  of  a  Navie  of

228

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

*597-
Shippes out of England, that were come to Brasil ;
whereupon  the  Governour  commanded  a  Fort  to  be  made
of  his  owne  cost  upon  a  rocke  that  standeth  on  the  mouth
of  the  haven,  so  neere  the  River  side,  that  three  moneths
after  it  was  done,  the  Sea  carried  it  away,  with  all  the
Ordnance in it. I have told you before that three  What  became
moneths  after I was taken, the  Desire came  from  the  of  the  \^.  men
Straits  to  a  great  Hand,  where  sixteene  of  her  men  were  ^  j  %
slaine, and one taken,  by name  Andrew  Towers  : this  reckoned)  lost
man  was  a  Phisitian,  and  did  many  cures,  the  Portugals  out  of  Cap.
tooke him for  a Sorcerer, for he would prognosticate  ®*?u  hts
many  things  ;  he  had  but  one  eye,  and  the  Portugals  said **'
that  in  his  eye  which  was  out,  he  had  a  familier :  this  man
tooke upon him to make  a  devise to take the peeces
of  Ordnance  out  of  the  Sea,  which  was  this  ;  he  caused  to  Andrew
be  made  a  suite  of  Leather  all  greased  and  pitched,  that  Towers  devise.
no  water  could  enter  into  it,  then  he  caused  a  great  head
to  be  made  all  pitched,  with  a  great  nose,  &  at  the  nose
were  three  bladders,  and  at  the  mouth  two ;  he  intised  me
to  undertake  to  goe  down  into  the  Sea  in  that,  saying  it
was  very  easie  to  be  done. I  told  him,  that  if  I  might  be
well  recompensed,  I  would  venture  my  life  to  doe  it  ;
then he made it  knowne to the Governor, that if  I
were well paid, I would venture my life, then the
Governour called me and said, I will give you ten
thousand Crownes, and a Pasport to goe for your
Countrie,  or  whether  you  will,  if  you  put  a  Ring  into
the eare of  one of  the Peeces. I told him, I would
doe  my  best  by  Gods  helpe.

After  the devise of  Leather  was made,  most  of  the  [IV.  vi.
Portugals  went  to  the  place,  where  the  pieces  were  lost  1220.]

with  great  solemnitie,  praying  to  God  to  send  me  good
lucke.  Putting  on  the  sute  of  Lether,  I  was  cast  into  the  His  mad
Sea  in  eighteene  fathome  deepe,  with  a  mightie  great  adventure.
stone  tyed  about  me.  The  head  was  so  bigge,  all  pitched
and  tarred,  that  the  weight  of  the  stone  (for  it  was  great
only)  carried  me  downe,  and  it  was  a  great  paine  unto  me,
for  the  weight  of  the  stone  carried  me  downeward,  and

229

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

J597-

the  water  by  reason  of  the  head  bare  mee  upward,  that  I
thought  the  cord  I  was  tied  withall,  would  have  cut  me  in
pieces.  When  I  felt  my  selfe  so  tormented,  I  tooke  a
Knife  that  was  tyed  in  my  hand,  and  cut  the  cord,  and
assoone  as  I  came  above  water,  I  tore  the  bladders  from
my  face,  and  cut  my  sute  before,  for  I  was  almost  stifled,
and  for  the  space  of  a  moneth,  I  knew  not  what  I  did.
Continually  I  desired  my  Master,  to  give  me  leave
to  get  my  living,  intending  to  come  into  my  Countrey,
but  the  Governour,  would  not  let  me  goe  from  him.
When  I  saw  no  meanes  to  get  leave  of  my  Master,  I
determined  to  runne  away  to  Angola  ;  for  to  serve  the
Massangano  a  King  as  a Souldier  in Massangano, till such time  that

^Tlfitc/Tee  l  might  paSSe  my  Selfe  t0  the  Kin£  °f  An7eca'  which
And.  Battel! .  warretn  against  the  Portugals,  and  so  have  come  through
Prester  Johns  Countrey  into  Turkic  On  the  seven  and
twentieth  day  of  June  1597.  I  embarked  my  selfe
His  escape  to  unknowne  to  my  Master  in  a  small  ship  of  one
Angola.  Emanuell Andrea, for to come for Angola. In this

Voyage  wee  were  driven  so  neere  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope,  that  we  thought  all  of  us  should  have  beene
cast  away,  the  Seas  are  there  so  great ;  and  by  reason
of  the  current  they  brake  in  such  sort,  that  no  shippe
is  able  to  endure.  Then  we  brake  both  our  mayne  mast
and  our  Mesen.  It  pleased  God  to  send  us  the  wind
Eastward,  which  brought  us  to  our  desired  Harbour
Angola.  Wee  had  beene  five  monethes  in  our  Voyage,
and  by  that  meanes  other  shippes  that  departed  two
monethes  after  us  were  there  before  us,  when  I  heard
that  there  were  ships  of  the  River  of  Jenero,  I  durst
not  goe  ashoare  for  feare  of  being  knowne  of  some  of
the  Portugals,  the  next  day  after  that  wee  came  into
the  Harbour  ;  there  came  a  great  Boate  aboord  us,  to
aske  if  wee  would  sell  any  Cassavi  meale,  wee  told  them
we  would,  and  asked  them  whether  they  went  with  their
Boate,  they  answered,  that  they  tarried  for  the  tyde  to
goe  up  to  the  River  of  Guansa  Tomasongano,  then  I
thought  it  a  fit  time  for  my  purpose,  and  so  embarked

230

ANTHONY KNIVET  ad.

1597-

my  selfe  in  the  Barke,  the  Portugals  marvelled  to  see
mee  goe  willingly  to  Masangono  ;  for  there  men  dye
like  Chickens,  and  no  man  will  goe  thither  if  he  can
choose.

Nine  dayes  we  were  going  up  the  River  of  Guansa,
in  which  time  two  Portugall  Souldiers  dyed,  the  Countrey
is  so  hot  that  it  pierceth  their  hearts,  three  dayes  after  I
had  beene in Masangano,  Don Francisco de Mendosa
Fortado,  the  Governour of  the  Citie  of  Congo,  having
received  a  Letter  from  Salvador  Coria  de  Sasa,  who  was
his  great  friend,  sent  a  Pursuivant  for  me,  who  brought  me
by  Land  through  the  King  of  Congos  Countrey,  and  in  sixe
dayes  we  came  to  a  Towne  called  Saint  Francis,  (where
the  Governour  was)  hard  by  the  Kingdome  of  Manicongo,
when  I  came  before  the  Governour  hee  used  mee  very
kindly  in  wordes,  and  asked  mee,  what  I  meant  to  cast  my
selfe  away  wilfully  in  Masangano,  then  I  told  him,  how
long  I  had  served  Salvador  Coria  de  Sasa  ;  and  in  how
many  dangers  I  had  beene  for  him  and  his  Sonne,  without
ever  having  any  recompence  of  any  of  them,  and  therefore
I  thought  it  better  to  venture  my  life  in  the  Kings  service,
then  to  live  his  Bond-slave. The  Governour  commanded
me  to  be  carried  to  Angola,  and  charged  a  paire  of  bolts
to  bee  put  upon  my  legges,  because  I  should  not  runne
away. About  a  fortnight  after  I  was  sent  backe  againe  in  He  is  taken  fcf
a Carvell of  Francis Lewes, and in two moneths we  sent  t>acke  to
arrived  in  the  River  of  Jenero,  and  I  was  carried  with  my  BrastU-
bolts  on  my  legges  before  the  Governour  ;  when  he  saw  Nil  habet
me,  hee  beganne  to  laugh  and  to  jeast  with  mee,  saying,  infalix
that  I  was  welcome  out  of  England. So  after  many  jeasts  P"uPeri?s
he  spake,  hee  bade  pull  off  my bolts from  my  legges,  qJ^  J^
and  gave  mee  cloth,  and  used  mee  verie  well.  ridiculos

After  I  had  beene  with  the  Governour  againe  some  two  homines  facit.
monethes, then came a small man of  Warre to  great
Hand,  the  Captaines  name  was  Abram  Cocke,  he  lay  in  Captain
waite  for  the  ships  of  the  River  of  Plate,  and  had  taken  Cocke.
them  if  it  had  not  beene  for  five  of  his  men  that  ranne
away  with  his  Boate,  that  discovered  his  beeing  there,  for

231

A.D.

J597-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

within  a  sevennight  after  hee  was  gone,  three  Carvels
came  into  the  same  Road  where  he  was.  These  five  men
were  taken  by  a  Frier  that  came  from  San  Vincents,  and
were  brought  to  the  River  of  Jenero,  I  being  at  this  time
in  some  account  with  the  Governour,  favoured  them
aswell  as  I  could,  especially  one  of  them,  by  name
Richard  Heixt,  because  that  they  all  said,  that  hee  was  a
Gentleman,  after  that  wee  had  beene  in  the  Towne
together  about  some  three  moneths,  one  of  them  called
Thomas  Cooper,  being  married,  had  his  house  by  the
Sea  side,  where  he  used  his  Trade,  we  were  then  nine
Englishmen,  and  three  Dutchmen,  and  wee  determined
when  the  shipping  came  from  the  River  of  Plate,  that  wee
would  take  one  of  them  comming  into  the  Harbour,  this
Heixt  alwayes  went  with  me  to  a  Portugals  house  where
I  was  very  well  beloved.  One  night  hee  comes  into  the
perfidiousnesse  nouse)  anc[  steales  away  a  boxe  that  had  sixtie  Rialls  of
eight  in  it,  and  two  or  three  pieces  of  Holland,  I  desired
him  to  restore  the  same,  but  this  Heixt  being  a  swagger-
ing companion  used  me  most  vilely  in  words,  and  went
and  told  the  Governour,  what  wee  all  had  determined,
and  said  that  wee  were  Heretickes,  and  that  he  him-
]  selfe  was  a  Catholicke ;  that  day  at  night  I  should  have
stolne  the  Key  of  the  Kings  Store-house  to  have  taken
Muskets  and  Powder,  and  have  carried  it  to  Thomas
Coopers  house,  but  it  was  Gods  will  that  he  had  accused
us  before  I  had  done  it,  or  else  we  had  beene  all  hanged
for  it.  We  being  all  before  the  Governour,  and  denying
that  we  had  ever  meant  any  such  matter,  Heixt  said,
Sir,  send  to  Thomas  Coopers  house,  and  you  shall  find
20.  Muskets  and  powder,  that  Anthony  had  stolne  out
of  the  Kings  Store-house  for  that  purpose,  if  your
Worship  find  it  not  so,  say  that  I  am  a  lier,  and  a
false  dealer.  Then  the  Governour  sent  us  all  to  Prison,
&  himselfe  and  Heixt,  went  to  T.  Coopers  house,  where
they  found  no  such  matter.  He  went  to  the  Kings
Store-house  and  saw  that  nothing  was  stirred :  where-
upon hee  was  somewhat  angry  with Heixt,  because  he

232

Heixts

men.

[IV  vi.

122

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1598.
had  taken  him  with  an  untruth,  and  said,  that  he  never
saw  men  of  so  perverse  and  vile  condition  as  we  were
to  seeke  the  destruction  of  each  other.  Upon  occasion
of  this  Heixt  his  ill  demeanure  not  long  after,  the  Gover-
nour  sent  him  to  Angola,  and  from  thence  Don  Francisco
sent  him  to  Masangano,  where  he  dyed  in  a  miserable  Heixts  mher-
estate.  Presently  after  that  Andrew  Towres,  was  accused  ahle  death-
for  eating  flesh  on  the  Friday,  and  for  that  was  put
in  prison,  and  paid  100.  Rials  of  eight,  and  was  set  at
libertie,  within  a  moneth  after  he  had  bin  out  of  prison,
he  ran  away  to  Fernambucke,  the  Governour  being
informed  of  it  sent  two  small  Carvels  after  him  to  bring
him  back  againe :  in  one  of  the  small  Carvels  went  his
sonne  Gonsalo  Corea  de  Sasa,  and  the  High  Priests
Nephew,  and  a  great  many  more  young  Gentlemen.
After  they  were  out  on  the  Mayne,  and  almost  aboord
of  the  ship  that  Andrew  Towers  was  in,  on  a  sudden,
there  came  a  great  storme,  that  the  small  Carvell  that
the  Governours  sonne  was  in,  could  not  endure  the
Sea,  but  was  fain  to  run  on  shore  on  the  Coast,  where
three  of  their  company  were  cast  away,  one  of  them
beeing  the  High  Priests  Nephew,  and  I  thinke  that  they
had  bin  all  drowned,  if  it  had  not  bin  for  Martin  de  Sasa,
that  was  at  that  place  with  100.  slaves  making  Brasill
ready  for  a  ship  of  his  Fathers,  the  other  Carvell  followed
him  to  Fernambuquo,  and  brought  him  backe  againe  to
the  River  of  Jenero,  where  hee  was  put  in  prison  and
should  have  bin  hanged,  but  that  all  the  Towne  begged
him,  he  was  sent  to  Masongona  where  he  dyed.

Anno  Dom.  1598.  there  came  two  Dutch  ships  being  Two  Dutch
Captaine  of  them,  Jasper  Fernandes  a  Dutchman,  and  shlPs-
leave  of  the  Governour  after  he  had  shewed  his  Licence
out  of  Portugall,  set  all  his  goods  on  shore,  and  had
bought  and  sold  for  the  space  of  three  monethes  in  the
Towne,  and  made  great  store  of  money.  At  the  time
of  his  going  away,  the  Kings  Officers  said  that  his  Licence
was  not  good,  and  would  have  stopped  his  ships,  then
the  Governour  said,  why  looked  you  not  to  that  before,

233

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1598.

seeing  I  gave  them  leave  to  come  in  upon  your  words,
saying,  that  his  dispatch  was  good,  answere  it  how  you
can,  for  seeing  he  came  in  with  leave  and  upon  my  word
he  shall  goe  out  without  any  hearing,  and  so  he  departed
for  Angola.

After  that,  the  Governor  General  of  all  the  Coast  of
Brasil,  Don  Francisco  de  Sasa,  came  to  the  River  of
Jenero,  with  two  Hulkes,  and  being  enformed  that  Jasper
Fernandes  was  at  Angola,  hee  sent  a  Carvell  thither,
that  his  ships  should  bee  kept  for  the  King,  hee  hearing
of  it  went  aboord  his  ships,  and  went  away  in  spight  of
the  Portugals;  the  same  yeere  there  came  Francisco  de
mondunsa  de  vesconsales  for  Governour  to  my  Masters
place,  that  day  the  Hulke  which  the  new  Governour  was
in,  came  to  the  mouth  of  the  Haven,  the  Governour
Salvador  Corea  de  Sasa  was  at  a  Sugar-mil  that  he
had  newly  finished.  The  aforesaid,  when  she  came  to
the  mouth  of  the  Haven  beganne  to  shoot  off  her
Ordnance,  the  Governour  not  knowing  what  it  should
bee,  presently  caused  a  great  Canoa  to  bee  made  readie,
for  immediately,  hee  would  goe  to  the  Towne  to  see
what  was  the  matter,  within  halfe  an  houre  after  we  had
bin  out  at  Sea,  to  come  to  the  Towne,  a  great  tempest
rose  and  overturned  the  Canoa,  there  my  Master  had
He  saveth  his  bin  cast  away,  if  God  first,  and  I  had  not  laid  hands
Master.  on  \i\m^  for  all  his slaves swamme  away to the shore,

and  Henry  Barraway  with  them,  only  I,  and  Domingos
Gomes  a  Molato  slave  that  my  Master  carried  with  him
in  the  Sea,  and  betweene  us,  we  got  him  to  the  Canoa,
where  he  held  fast,  till  wee  drew  neere  the  shore,  where
the  Sea  brake  like  Mountaynes,  there  we  had  like  to  have
bin  all  cast  away,  for  the  Sea  would  cast  us  against  the
Hils  of  sand,  and  carrie  us  backe  againe  to  the  Sea  ;  after
I  had  got  my  selfe  ashore,  I  looked  towards  the  Sea,
and  saw  my  Master  come  in  a  great  wave,  and  as  the
wave  brake,  I  and  my  deere  friend  Domingos  Gomes
tooke  hold  of  him  and  dragged  him  out  of  the  Sea ;  but
we both thought that hee would have dyed, for hee

234

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1598.
could  not  speake,  then  wee  tooke  him  betweene  us  by
the  legges  upon  our  shoulders,  and  made  him  vomit  a
great  deale  of  water,  and  so  recovered  him,  when  I  saw
him  well,  I  told  him  that  the  Sea  knew  no  Governours
better  then  other  men,  the  next  day  the  Governour  went
home  by  land,  and  found  the  other  Governour  in  the
Towne,  for  whose  comming  I  did  not  a  little  rejoyce,
for  then  I  thought  the  time  was  come  that  I  long  had
desired,  hoping  shortly  to  come  into  my  Countrey.

In  the  same  yeere there  came  foure  Hollanders,  and  Foure  Holland
anchored  before  the  Citie  in  the  mouth  of  the  Haven,  shtPs-
then  all  the  Towne  rose  up  in  Armes,  my  Master  was  at
his  Sugar-mill,  and  I  remayned  in  the  Towne  to  wayte
on my Mistris. When shee saw the  Portugals runne
up and  downe  with their Armes,  she commanded me
to  take  a  Musket,  and  bade  mee  goe  to  one  of  the  Forts,
the  which I did according to her command : the new
Governour  came to  the  Fort  where  I  was,  and  viewed
the  men  that  were  in  the  Fort,  and  commanded  one  of
his men to give us Powder and shot. After I had  [IV.  vi.
spoken  with the  new  Governour (who liked mee very  1222.]

well,  because  he  said  I  was  ready  with  my  Peece,  and
praysed  the  English  Nation  to  be  very  good  Souldiers.)
One  John  de  Selvera  told  him,  that  he  were  best  take
heed  of  me,  that  I  ranne  not  away  to  the  Hollanders,
for  I  had  done  greater  matters  then  that,  and  that  he
knew  I  made  no  account  to  swim  aboord  of  them  in  the
night  upon  any  piece  of  wood,  and  rehearsed  many  things
that  I  had  adventured  in  the  time  that  my  Master  was
Governour.  The  new  Governour  came  and  tooke  me
by  the  hand,  and  carried  mee  to  Prison,  where  I  lay  27.
dayes,  till  the  Hulkes  were  departed  from  the  mouth  of
the  Haven,  and  went  to  Great  Hand,  then  I  was  set  at
libertie.  After  that  the  Governour  Generall  had  beene
at  San  Vincents  some  two  moneths,  there  came  a  great
Hulke  of  Amsterdam,  called  the  Golden  World,  and
a  Captaine  that  was  called  Lawrence  Bitter,  the  Hulke
had  beene  at Saint Thomas  Hand, and  an Hand  called

235

A.D.
1598.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Perfidiousnes
of  Portugals.

the  Prince,  and  from  thence  to  the  Straits  of  Magellan,
where  many  of  her  men  dyed,  and  by  contrary  wind  they
were  compelled  to  returne  to  the  Coast  of  Brasill,  this
Hulke  comming  to  San  Vincent,  sent  her  Boate  to  tell
the  Governour  that  they  were  Merchants,  and  that  if
they  would  give  them  leave,  they  would  traffique  with
them,  the  Governour  Generall  made  them  a  Certificate
under  his  hand  and  Seale,  that  they  should  have  no
wrong,  but  pay  the  Kings  Custome  and  goe  their  wayes
when  they  would,  and  whether  they  would :  with  that
the  Captaine  of  the  Hulke  put  into  the  Harbour ;  &
commanded  his  goods  to  be  set  on  shore.  Every  day
he  was  visited  by  the  Governour  Generall  aboord  his
ship,  and  promised  him  great  courtesie.  After  that  the
Captayne  had  landed  all  his  goods,  and  most  of  all  the
Hollanders  were  ashore,  a  great  many  Portugals  went
aboord  the  Hulke  with  Gitternes  singing  and  playing.
When  the  Flemmings  saw  them  come  in  that  sort  they
mistrusted  nothing,  the  Portugals  danced  in  the  ship  and
dranke  with  the  Flemmings,  and  upon  a  sudden  when
the  Flemmings  thought  least  of  them,  they  drew  their
Swords  and  killed  two  of  them,  and  possest  themselves
of  the  Hulke  for  the  King.

In  the  beginning  of  the  yeere  of  the  Lord  1 599.  there
came  nine  Hulkes  before  the  Citie  of  Bacia,  but  they
could  do  no  good.  After  the  Governour  Generall  had
been  some  foure  monethes  at  San  Vincents,  my  Master
had  some  businesse  thither,  and  I  went  with  him,  when
we  came  to  San  Vincents  the  Governour  Generall  was
departed  fiftie  leagues  within  the  land,  at  a  place  where
he  was  enformed  of  some  Mynes  of  Gold,  but  when  he
came  thither,  he  found  that  they  were  not  worth  the
working,  then  he  determined  to  send  farther  into  the
Land  to  a  place  called  Etapusick,  I  being  there,  and
knowing  the  place  was  commanded  by  the  Governour
Generall  to  goe  thither,  when  we  came  to  the  aforesaid
Mynes  of  gold,  place,  we  found  very  singular  good  Mynes,  and  wee
brought  of  the soyle to the Governour  Generall, and

236

F lemming

taken

treacherously.

ANTHONY KNIVET  ad.

1601.

many small  peeces of Gold that we found in many

places where the water washed away the Earth, the

Governour  Generall  tooke  it,  paying  us  for  it  more  then

it  was  worth,  and  sent it to  the King  with  a  Sey,  for

to consider  whether it should be  wrought  or not,  the

Governour  Generall  sent  likewise  40000.  pounds  worth

of Plate,  that he had  wrought out of  the Myne  of  Silver  Myne

Saint  Paul,  which  is  twelve  leagues  from  San  Vincents.

In  the  time  that  I  went  to  Etapusicke,  my  Master  was

gone  home,  then  I  served  as  a  Souldier  for  the  space  of

three  moneths,  that  shipping  went  to  the  River  of  Jenero  :

then the  Governour  Generall requited my  paines very

honourably,  and sent me  backe againe  to my  Master.

After  that  my  Master  sent  to  a  place  called  the  Organs,  The  Organs.

which Hill is  to  bee  seene  from  the River  of  Jenero,

where  we  found  a  little  Myne  of  Gold,  and  many  good

stones. There  came  a  Hulke  out  of  Spaine  that  brought

a  Bishop,  and a  Spanish  Governor  to  goe  from  thence

in small shipping to the River of Plate, and from

thence to Somma. A little after that, this Hulke

arrived  at  the River  of  Jenero,  where  fell  a  disease in  Mortalitie.

the  Countrey  like  the  meazels,  but  as  bad  as  the  plague,  Divers  frayes,

for  in  three  moneths  their  dyed  in  the  River  of  Jenero,  jjgj£  -j^*j

above  three  thousand  Indians  and  Portugals :  this  disease  ^ere  followed,

was generally  in all parts of  the  Countrey. At this  as  in  other

time  going  up  and downe from the  Sugar-mill to the  Places  °fthe

ship, in the night  with a Barke  lading  of  Brasill  for  fst0™ifi\

.  ®  ^  brevities  sake

the Hulke,  with the  Ay  re  one  of my  legges swelled,  are  omitted.

that  I  could  not  stirre : it  is  common  and  very  danger-  Legge  swolne

ous  in  those  Countries  when  a  man  is  hot,  to  come  in  w'lth  the  a'ire-

the Ayre, especially in the night, for being a hot

Countrey,  it  hath  a  piercing  ayre,  and  suddenly  striketh

in  any  part  of  the  bodie. I  was  very  ill  for  the  space

of  a  moneth.

The fourteenth of  August 1601.  Salvador  Corea de

Sasa ; Governour  of  the River of January, embarked

himselfe  in  the  aforesaid  Hulke  with  his  Wife  Donenes

de  Sosa,  determining to  make his  Voyage to Fernam-

237

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

buquo,  we  sayled  East  to  Seaward.  The  fifteenth  day
wee  kept  still  Eastward  to  the  Sea.  The  sixteenth  day
we  kept  North-east,  and  about  tenne  of  the  clocke  we
had  sight  of  the  Cape.

The  seventeenth,  eighteenth,  and  nineteenth,  having
the  wind  North-west,  we  kept  stil  Eastward  for  feare
of  the  sands  and  clifFes  called  Aborollas,  they  lye  betweene
the  Cape  and  Spirito  Santo.  The  twentieth  day  having
the  winde  South,  wee  sayled  our  course  North-east.
This  course  we  kept  till  the  five  and  twentieth  of  the
moneth,  then  the  winde  turned  Northward,  we  made
East  to  Sea;  this  course  we  were  faine  to  keepe  till  the
last  day  of  the  moneth,  the  first  of  February,  the  winde
being  at  South-west  wee  sayled  North-east  along  the
Coast,  till  the  seventh  day  of  the  moneth.  The  eight
day the  Master  and  the  Pilot tooke  the  height  of  the

[IV.  vi.  Sun,  and  were  ten  degrees  and  an  halfe  Southward  of  the

1223.]  Lme<  As  the  Master  and  the  Pilot  were  talking  together
concerning  the  Voyage,  there  came  a  Sea-foule,  and  sitting
upon  the  backe  stay,  cast  out  two  or  three  little  fishes,
with  that  a  Spaniard  called  Jasper  Conquero,  who  had
some  experience  of  the  Coast,  said  to  the  Master  take
heed,  for  I  am  afraid  you  are  neerer  the  shoare,  then  you
take  your  selfe  to  bee,  for  you  know  not  how  the  current
driveth  you  Westward  upon  the  Coast,  the  Flemmings
bade  him  meddle  with  his  owne  businesse,  and  that  they
knew  what  to  do  without  his  counsell,  the  Pilot  made
himselfe  forty  leagues  from  the  shore,  &  directed  his
course  North.  The  ninth  day  at  midnight  wee  descried
Land,  the  Pilot  presently  cast  his  Lead,  and  found  but
eight  fathomes  water,  then  he  commanded  the  Saylers
to  cast  about,  the  which  they  did,  the  wind  being  at
North-east, and wee being neere the  shore,  could not

Danger  at  Sea.  beare  up  to  Sea  ;  for  wee  saw  Clifts  both  on  the  star-
boord  and  larboord  side  of  us,  and  before  wee  could  get
out  our  Anchor,  we  were  driven  so  neere  the  Clifts  on
the  lee  side  of  us,  that  wee  had  no  other  remedie,  but
to runne upon the Rockes, where we had beene all

238

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1601.

cast  away,  but  that  it  was  the  pleasure  of  God  to  deliver
us,  for  wee  lay  with  the  Prow  of  our  ship  upon  one  of  the
Rockes  for  the  space  of  halfe  an  houre,  and  we  were  faine
to  cut  off  both  our  Masts,  and  to  cast  many  chists  over-
boord,  thinking  it  had  beene  impossible  to  save  any  thing,
but  it  was  the  will  of  God  when  wee  least  thought  of  it,
that  a  great  Sea  brake  over  the  Rocke,  and  put  us  into
eight  fathomes  water,  betweene  the  Rockes  and  the  Cliffes,
so  by  the  providence  of  God,  wee  were  delivered  out  of
the  aforesaid  danger.

The  next  day  we  saw  Canibals  along  the  shore,  then  the
Governour  commanded  mee  to  be  set  on  shore  to  talke
with  the  wilde  people,  and  to  know  of  them  upon  what
Coast  wee  were,  or  if  we  might  goe  to  Fernambuquo  by
land,  the  Captaine  commanded  a  Mamaluke,  called  Antonio  Mamaluke,  or
Fernandes  to  goe  with  me  ashore,  but  when  we  came  to  Mestizos.
land,  this  Mamaluke  durst  not  goe  on  shore,  for  feare  of
the  wilde  Canibals,  so  I  went  alone,  and  saluted  them
according  to  the  fashion  of  the  Countrey,  then  I
enquired  of  them,  how  they  called  the  place  where
they  were,  they  told  me  that  it  was  called  Cororeyespe,
which  is  the  River  of  Toades,  likewise  they  said  that  we  River  of  toads.
were  very  neere  the  River  of  Saint  Francis,  and  North-
ward, we  had  the  River  called  Saint  Michell,  and  that
they  were  slaves  to  the  Portugals  of  Fernambucke,  having
driven  cattle  to  Baya ;  and  now  they  returned  home
againe.  One  of  these  bond-slaves  went  aboord  the  shippe
with  mee,  and  talked  with  the  Governour,  the  next  day,
the  Governours  Wife  entreated  her  husband,  that  hee
would  leave  the  Hulke,  and  goe  by  land,  the  which  he
did  at  his  wifes  request,  so  commanding  all  his  Treasure
to  be  set  on  shore,  we  left  our  ship,  the  Governour  com-
manded the  Master  to  take  Fernambuquo  if  it  were
possible,  if  not  that  he  should  goe  to  Baya,  and  from
thence  into  Portugall,  with  any  ships  that  should  depart
from  thence,  this  Hulke  had  nine  tunnes  of  Silver  in  her,  Nine  tuns  of
the  which  incharged  to  Diego  de  Guadro,  by  the  Gover-  5llver-
nour  Generall  Don  Francisco  de  Sasa  ; and  at  Fernam-

239

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

buquo,  the  charge  of  it  was  given  to  my  Master  Salvador
Corea  de  Sasa ;  from  the  place  where  we  were  driven
on  shore  to  Fernambucke,  is  fortie  leagues.  In  this
journey  from  the  River  of  Toades,  or  from  the  Clifts
called  Bayshas  Deamrobrio  did  I  and  Domingos  Gomes
alway  carrie  a  Boxe  of  pure  Gold  of  my  Masters,  some
twelve  leagues ;  from  the  aforesaid  River  of  Toades  to
Places  on  the  a  place  called  by  the  Indians  Upavasou  are  three
Coast.  leagues, this Upavasou, is  a  very singular good place

to  take  fresh  water ;  from  Upavasou  to  another  River
called  Casuays,  is  one  league  from  the  Casuayes,  to  the
River  of  Saint  Michell  are  foure  leagues,  at  this  River
dwelleth  a  very  rich  Mamalucke,  John  de  Recho,  at  this
River  we  rested  three  dayes.  The  Governour  Generall
fraughted  a  small  fisher  Boate  at  this  place,  and  deter-
mined to  goe  to  Fernambuquo  in  it.

The  same  day  that  wee  made  sayle  in  the  smal  Barke
from  the  River  of  Saint  Michell,  there  arose  a  great
A  storme.  storme  from  that  North-east,  and  we  were  faine  to  take
the  River  of  Saint  Michels  againe  with  great  hazard  of
our  lives,  for  the  winde  being  very  great,  wee  were  driven
upon  a  Rocke  that  lyeth  South-west  from  the  mouth  of
the  River  very  neere  the  shore,  all  those  that  could
swimme  leaped  into  the  Sea ;  and  so  the  Barke  was
lighter,  and  swamme  off  the  Cliffe,  then  the  Governour
and  his  Wife  said  that  they  would  goe  by  Land,  so
the  day  after  we  departed  from  the  River  of  Saint
Michels  to  another  great  River  called  Uno,  this  River
is  three  leagues  from  Saint  Michel,  heere  my  small  ship
may  enter  and  take  fresh  water,  and  kill  great  store  of
fresh  fish,  from  thence  we  went  to  another  River  called
Jaquareasicke,  from  this  place  the  Governour  sent  me  and
Antonio  Fernandes  before  to  a  small  Village  to  provide
some  provision  against  his  comming,  there  was  in  our
company  a  Portugall  called  Rafiel  Penera,  that  perforce
would  go  with  us,  we  told  him  that  we  had  many  great
Rivers  to  passe,  and  that  it  were  better  for  him  to  tarrie
with  the  Governour  and  his  Wife,  he  not  regarding  our

240

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1601.

words  went  with us, so we departed all three of  us,

the  next  day  after  wee  had  departed  from  the  Governour,

wee  came  to  a  very  faire  River  called  Saint  Antonio,  that

which  we  passed  upon  a  Jangarie  made  of  Canes,  from

thence  we  went  to  a  place  called  by  the  Indians  Amrecuva

Prisema,  this  is  the  Harbour  of  Frenchmen,  from  thence

wee  came  to  a  great  faire  River  called  Camarijiuva,  wee

went on to the River of  Stones. We departed from

thence  up  the  River  on  a  Mangada,  made  of  three  dry

posts  pinde  together,  the  next  morning  we  landed  in  a

faire Champaine Countrey, where we saw great store

of  Cattle,  and  a  Sugar-mill  grinding  of  Canes,  to  which

wee  went,  the  Owner  of  the  Mill  was  a  high  Dutchman,  [IV.  vi.

to  whom  we  delivered  the  Governours  Letter,  the  which  1224-J

as  soone  as  hee  had  read,  presently  he  commanded  two

Beeves  to  be  killed,  and  sent  away  with  tenne  bushels  of

Cassavi  meale,  and  many  Hens  and  Turkeyes,  and  wee

two  were  very  honourably  used  for  the  space  of  a  weeke

that  we  were  there,  from  thence  wee  departed  to  a  place

called  Porto  do  Calva,  three  leagues  from  the  Areseeve,

this  is  an  excellent  Haven  for  all  weathers,  and  all  the

yeere  long,  there  is  at  the  least  two  thousand  chists  of

Sugar. At this place Manuell Masquerennas met us

with,  two  hundred  Horse,  and  then  after  two  dayes  rest

we  came  to  Fernambuquo.

Twentie  dayes  after  we  had  beene  in  the  Towne
Jelisiano  Cuello  sent  word  to  Manuell  Masquerennas,
how  that  he  was  beseeched  in  Rio  Grande,  by  the  Pute-
waras,  and  that  if  he  were  not  presently  ayded  by  him,  he
should  be  forced  to  lose  the  Kings  Towne,  with  the  losse
of  all  their  lives,  Masquerennas  presently  determined  to
goe  himselfe,  and  left  the  Towne  of  Fernambuquo  in
charge  to  my  Master  Salvador  Corea  de  Saa  ;  and  thus
we  departed  from  Fernambuquo  with  foure  hundred
Portugalls,  and  three  thousand  Indians,  and  in  seven
dayes  journey  we  came  to  Rio  Grande,  having  many  a
brave  skirmish,  with  divers  Canibals  in  the  way.  As
soone  as  wee  were  come  before  the  Towne  our  Captaine
xvi  241  Q

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

made  a  long speech  to all the  Portugals  and Indians,
Army  of incouraging  them  against  those  Infidels  whose  Armie  was
wages.  a^  ^  jeast  fortie  thousand  strong,  and  desired  them  all  to

confesse  to  their  Ghostly  Fathers  and  to  take  the  Com-
munion, for  the  next  morning  he  was  resolved  to  give  the
onset  on  his  enemies,  the  which  was  very  bravely  per-
formed, for  the  Canibals  the  day  before  in  a  skirmish  that
they  had,  did  take  two  hundred  prisoners,  and  having
killed  many  of  them  to  eate,  not  expecting  our  comming
in  the  chiefest  of  their  feast,  and  their  drinking  we  set
upon  them,  the  people  of  the  Towne  on  the  other  side,
hearing  the  rumour,  issued  forth,  thus  taking  them  on  the
sudden,  wee  made  such  slaughter  among  them,  that  they
were  forced  to  remoove  their  siege,  with  the  losse  of  three
thousand  prisoners,  and  five  thousand  that  were  slaine.
The  King  of  these  Canibals  was  called  Piraiuwath  that
is  to  say,  the  finne  of  a  fish,  when  this  Heathen  Prince
saw  himselfe  overthrowne  with  so  small  a  number  as  wee
were,  in  comparison  of  his  multitudes,  he  sent  certayne  of
his  men  to  Manuell  Masquarennas  to  treate  of  peace,
upon  these  conditions,  that  if  he  would  release  all  those
prisoners,  and  admit  him  and  all  his  Nation  to  live  as  free
men,  that  then  hee  and  all  his  would  submit  themselves  as
subjects  unto  him  and  be  baptized,  which  offer  indeed  was
accepted  of  by  Masquarennas,  and  thus  one  of  the  greatest
Provinces  of  all  the  North  part  of  Brasilia,  became  subject
to  the  King  of  Spaine.  This  conquest  beeing  ended,
our  Captaine  Generall  Masquarennas  presently  built
two  strong  Forts  hard  by  the  Towne,  on  the  River
side,  and  sent  to  Fernambuquo  for  forty  cast  Peeces
of  Iron,  placing  twentie  in  either  Fort,  many  Souldiers
got  at  this  conquest  very  rich  stones,  both  Dia-
monds, Rubies,  and  great  store  of  blue  Saphires,
in  some  small  Villages  that  stood  by  the  Sea  side.
Ambergreece.  We  found  great  store  of  Ambergreece,  which  the  Indians
call  Pirapoun  Arepoty,  here  fortune  was  somewhat  favour-
able unto  me,  for  I  got  above  five  hundred  Crownes  in
this  journey.

242

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1601.

After  this  conquest  was  ended,  Manuell  Masquarennas
returned  againe  to  Fernambuquo,  where  I  found  my  Master
Salvador  Corea  de  Saa,  readie  to  ship  himselfe  for  Portu-
gall,  in  the  same  ship  that  brought  him  from  the  River
Janero,  which  by  this  time  was  come  from  Bayeya,  after
wee  were  set  ashore  at  the  place,  called  Ous  Busshos  de
don  Rodrigo,  where  we  had  all  like  to  have  beene  cast
away,  at  my  returne  from  Rio  Grande  to  Fernambuquo,  I
met  with  two  Englishmen,  the  one  of  them  a  Gentleman
called  Thomas  Turner,  the other Musgrave,  Pilot  of  a  This  Thomas
Fly-boate  of  Master  Newtons a Merchant of  London,  ^™[Jjas
Master Turner by my advice, went to the River of  wjt^  anj
Janero,  and  from  thence  to  Angola,  where  he  made  great  received  of
profit  of  his  Merchandize,  for  which  hee  thanked  me  after  him  some ^
we  met  in  England. Now  to  my  storie. The  thirteenth  n°tes->  w/l*ch
of  August 1596. Salvador  Corea de Saa,  Lord Gover-  ^'^ive't
nour  of  the  River  of  Janero,  Captaine  Generall  of  Spirito
Santo,  Porta  Segura,  Santos,  and  San  Vincent,  departed
from  Fernambuquo,  with  fifteene  Hulkes  of  Hamborough,
seven  Fly-boates  of  Omden  and  Hamborough,  and  at  the
least  twentie  Carvels,  all  of  them  being  laden  with  Sugars.
The  old  Mary  of  Hamborough  wherein  the  Governour
came  was  Admirall,  a  ship  of  seven  hundred  tunnes,  the
Owner  whereof  was  called  Hans  Burgo,  the  new  Mary
Vice-admirall  a  ship  of  five  hundred  tunnes,  the  Owner
called  Adrian  Cornelias,  Rere-admirall  a  ship  of  five  hun-
dred tunnes,  the  Owner  called  Conrado,  likewise  another
great  ship  came  with  us,  called  the  George  of  one  Hans
Duke,  the  David  and  others,  with  this  fleete  we  departed
from  Fernambuquo,  the  fifteenth  of  August  1599.  and  in
two  monethes  sayle  wee  arrived  at  Lisbone,  where  I  con-  A.  Knivet
tinued  with  the  Governour  in  his  house  for  the  space  of  ^riveth  at
nine moneths, after which time I fell very sicke, and ts  one'
by  this time having spent  all  that  I  brought  with me
from Brasill, my misery great, and had beene a  great
deale  greater,  had it not beene for  a  vertuous  English
woman,  which  I  met  withall  in  a  Nunnery,  and  in  that
time  that  I  was  there,  shee  made  her  approbation. By

243

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

1601.

God  first,  and  by  her  meanes  I  was  saved  from  dying
a  most  miserable  death.

His  sicknesse.  After  my  comming  to  Lisbone,  I  fell  very  sicke  in  my
Masters  house,  where  I  lay  in  a  backe  roome  having
only  a  piece  of  an  old  mat  for  my  bed,  thus  I  lay  for  the
space  of  sixe  weekes,  in  the  greatest  misery  that  could
be,  for  first  I  was  sicke  of  a  burning  Fever,  none  came  at
mee  but  a  poore  slave  of  my  Masters,  for  before  this  time

[IV.  vi.  my  deare  friend  Domingos  Gomes  was  dead,  this  slave

122 5-J  in  love  to  me,  sometimes  would  bring  me  meate  and
water,  sometimes  I  was  two  daies  without  either  meate
or  drinke :  in  the  end  of  this  sixe  weekes,  Thomas  Mus-
grave  and  Master  Thomas  Turner  came  to  me  with  some
Dutchmen,  and  they  amongst  them  gave  me  twelve
shillings :  I  had  received  so  many  bountifull  gifts  before
of  my  vertuous  friend  Mistris  Foster,  that  I  would  have
chosen  rather  to  have  died,  then  she  should  have  knowne
my  want ;  but  Thomas  Musgrave  of  Ratcliffe,  knowing
how  much  she  favoured  me,  did  perswade  me  to  write
unto  her,  the  which  (although  unwillingly)  I  did  ;  pre-
sently upon  the  receit  of  my  letter,  I  received  from  her
fiftie  Crownes,  and  every  day  was  visited  from  her,  yet
for  all  this  my  sicknesse  grew  to  be  such,  that  those
that  saw  me  thought  that  I  could  not  escape,  except  I
had  the  helpe  of  some  Doctor,  then  by  her  meanes,
reporting  that  I  was  her  kinsman,  I  was  carried  to  the
Kings  Hospitall,  where  in  two  moneths  I  recovered,
being  one  and  twentie  times  let  bloud,  and  shortly  after
that  I  was  past  all  danger,  I  was  very  kindely  discharged
out  of  the  Hospitall,  with ten  shillings  in  my  purse.

After  I  came  forth  of  the  Hospitall,  I  thought  with
my  selfe,  that  the  best  way  was  to  leave  my  Masters
house,  and  determine  how  to  get  my  living  by  some
other  meanes :  with  this  determination  I  went  to  the
Kings  Custome  house,  where  I  met  with  many  men  of
all  Countries,  there  I  met  with  some  Scotchmen,  seeking
of  one  that  could  speake  the  language :  I  hearing  them,
offered  my  service,  &  after  that,  I  had  as  many  customers

244

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1601,

as  I  could  turne  my  hands  unto,  and  got  by  them  for
interpreting  verie  good  maintenance :  many  Dutch  Mer-
chants would  have  had  me  gone  backe  againe  in  their
affaires  for  Brasil,  and  the  Indies,  but  I  still  had  a  desire
first  to  come  to  England,  thinking  that  there  I  should
finde  some  meanes  to  set  forth  my  selfe  in  some  good
fashion,  but  alas  I  finde  that  want  hath  no  preferment :
now  for  my  comming  into  England,  my  determination
was  to  have  tarried  somewhat  longer  then  I  did,  but  that
my  fortunes  were  and  are  ever  like  to  be  crost,  for  living
as  I  have  told  you  in  verie  good  fashion,  maintaining
my  selfe  verie  well  by  foraine  Merchants,  that  could  not
speake  the  Spanish  tongue:  one  day  amongst  the  rest
in  the  Kings  Custome  house  I  met  with  one  who  told
me  that  my  Master  Salvador  Corea  de  Saa,  did  command
me  to  come  to  him  againe,  if  not,  that  he  would  make
me  be  brought  whither  I  would  or  no  :  in  briefe,  I  made
little  account  of  his  message,  and  held  on  my  course
with  them  by  whom  I  lived,  but  now  my  old  friend,
imprisonment,  and  miserie  comes  againe,  and  I  am  as
farre  from  my  long  desired  home  as  ever  I  was,  for
Salvador  Corea  de  saa,  seeing  I  would  not  come  at  him,
incenst  the  Viceroy  Christopher  de  Mouco  against  me,
telling  him  what  harme  I  might  doe  if  I  got  into  my
Countrie,  I  presently  upon  this  was  taken  in  the  streete
as  if  I  had  beene  some  notorious  villaine,  carried  to  prison,
cast  in  a  dungeon,  where  I  lay  (God  be  my  witnesse)
three  daies  without  meate,  or  sight  of  light;  in  the  end
I  espied  a  little  glimpse  of  the  light,  and  clambering  up
the  wall,  in  despaire  and  halfe  madde,  I  broke  downe  a
peece  of  a  boord  that  stood  before  an  Iron  grate,  there
I  cried  out  in  such  sort  that  a  great  many  came  to  the
window,  where  many  pittied  me,  but  none  could  helpe
me,  &c

[§.  mi.

245

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

§.  IIII-

The  divers  Nations  of  Savages  in  Brasil,  and  the
adjoyning  Regions :  their  diversities  of  Con-
ditions, States,  Rites,  Creatures,  and  other
things  remarkeable,  which  the  Author  observed
in  his  many  yeares  manifold  peregrinations.

He  Petivares  are  not  of  so  wilde  and  barbarous
conditions  as  many  other  Provinces  are  in  Brasil ;
for  if  you  come  as  a  Merchant  unto  them,  they

The  Petivares
described.

will  trafficke  with  you,  if  as a  Warrier,  they  will  fight
very valiantly. They are men of  good stature, their
bodies  are  all  carved  with  very  fine  workes,  and  in  their
lips they make a hole with a Roe-bucks home, and
when they  come to mans  estate, they  cut the hole  of
their  lippes  with  a  Cane,  and  then  the  hole  being  bigge
they weare a  greene  Stone therein, and he that hath
not this  fashion is counted a pesant. These  Canibals
No  set  forme  of  have  no  religion,  they  may  take  as  many  wives  as  they
Religion. wjn^  or  as  ^ey  can  get : the  women  can  take  no  more
husbands  but one, except her husband give her  leave
in  publike  before  them all,  then  she make  take  whom
Wanes.  she will. When these Indians  goe to the wars, their

wives  carry  all  their  provision  in  Baskets  on  their  backes :
these  Canibals  goe  all  naked,  and  inhabit  on  the  Northerne
Region.  parts  of  Brasil  from  Baya  to  Rio  Grande : they  have  no

Diet.  certainty  of  meate  but  rootes,  and  if  they  kill  any  wilde

Beaste  or  Foule  in  the  Mountaines,  when  he  comes
home,  looke  to  which  of  his  wives  he  giveth  that  which
he  bringeth,  with  her  he  will  lye  that  night ;  then  she
presently  goeth  to  the  water,  and  washeth  her  selfe,  and
lying  downe  in  a  net,  commandeth  all  the  rest  of  her
Rites  of chi/de-  husbands  wives  to  serve  her;  which  they  doe  very  obedi-
birth.  ently  for  that  day. When  the  time  commeth  that  any

[IV.  vi.  woman  is  to  be  delivered  of  Childe  birth,  she  will  goe

1226.]  to  the  doore,  and  as  soone  as  the  Infant  is  borne,  pre-
sently  the Father  lyeth downe in the net (as women

246

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1601.

doe  with us in childe bed) and is visited of  all his

neighbours, and his  wives serves him diligently. No

Indian,  when  his  wife  is  great  with  childe,  will  kill  any  Superstition.

thing,  fish nor flesh if  it be  female  ;  for  he  beleeveth

that if  he should kill  any thing  breeding, that for it

his  child  should  dye. These  Indians  when  they  travaile

through the Wildernesse, doe carry great store of

Tobacco with them,  and continually  they have  a  leafe  Tobacco.

laid  along  their  mouth  betweene  the  lip  and  the  teeth,

and  as  they  goe  the  rume  runneth  out  of  the  hole,  that

they  have  in  their  lippes.

These  Canibals  warre  against  the  Portugals,  and  against  Man-eaters.
all  other  Provinces  of  Canibals,  and  eate  all  kinde  of
people  that  are  their  enemies,  when  they  take  any  man,
and  if  they  take  any  prisoner  they  kill  him  not,  but  he
that  tooke  him  giveth  him  to  his  brother  or  his  friend
to  kill :  and  as  many  men  as  any  Indian  killeth,  so  many
names  he  taketh.  When  they  kill  a  man,  they  take  Manner  of
a  new  cord  made  of  Cotten  wooll,  and  binde  him  that  their
shall  dye  about  the  middle,  they  bring  him  forth  of  Butchery-
the  prison,  and  three  men  holding  one  end  of  the  Cord,
and  three  the  other,  he  that  must  dye  remaineth  fast
tied  in  the  middle.  Then  he  that  must  kill  him  commeth
forth  with  all  his  wives  dancing,  being  painted  all  in  red,
and  gallantly  attired  with  Feathers  of  divers  colours  on
his  head,  knees,  and  armes,  with  a  great  Sword  made
of  wood  in  his  hands.  Comming  before  him  that  must
dye,  he  maketh  him  a  long  oration,  telling  him  that  he
must  dye,  with  these  words,  You  must  behold  the
Sunne,  and  all  things  that  like  you,  and  so  bid  them
farewell,  for  you  shall  see  them  no  more.  After  he  hath
said  these  words,  he  goeth  away  dancing  with  his  wives,
and  presently  commeth  backe  againe  hooping  and  crying,
saying,  I  am  he  that  commeth  to  kill  thee,  defend  thy
selfe :  and  thus  comming  behinde  him  that  is  to  dye,
he  striketh  him  in  the  pole  of  the  necke ;  and  when
with  that  blow  he  is  fallen  downe,  he  breaketh  the  scull
of  his  head,  then they  beleeve  that  he  is dead. After

247

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

that  they  have  killed  him,  they  take  the  tooth  of  a  Conie

that  is  set  in  a  peece  of  wood,  and  with  that  they  scratch

all his  body  raising  the upper  skin, holding the dead

man  in  the  flame  of  the  fire,  all  the  upper  skin  commeth

off,  and  the  flesh  remaineth  very  faire  and  white. Then

they roast  and boile it, and feede  of  it, thinking  that

mans  flesh  maketh  them  strong  and  valiant.

Townes  and These Canibals have great  Townes, their  houses  are

houses.  two  hundred  and  twenty  yards  long,  covered  with  Palmita

boughes without  any partition. They  hang their nets

upon  beams  that  they  lye  in,  and  make  their  fire  in  the

ground :  every  morning  men,  women,  and  children,  doe

wash  themselves  :  they  have  good  store  of  Ginnie  Wheat,

and Mandioca, whereof  they  make Bread. They part

their  grounds,  and  are  setled,  keeping  good  orders  among

themselves. In this Countrey there are many good

Fruites, and  Hearbes  of  great vertue,  and  many  wilde

Serpents, the which as neere as I can I will describe

unto  you. In this  Countrie  I  saw  Serpents both  dead

Serpents  called  ancj  alive, or  Snakes,  that the Indians call  Jebya, you

e  ya'  shall finde these Serpents in the Mountaines of Rio

grande,  lying  on  the  ground  like  the  body  of  a  Tree  :  when

anie  wilde beast commeth neere him, he striketh out

two  finnes  out  of  his  forequarters  with  such  force,  that

whatsoever  he  hitteth  he  killeth. This  Jaboya  hath  foure

legges  like  a  Crocadile,  or  an  Aligator,  and  a  great  taile,

the  which hee hideth  under  him when he  lieth in  the

s  woods  for  his  pray  for  the  wilde  beasts,  because  that  they

Munkk  sna^ not know him. Likewise in this part of the

Orators.  Countrie,  I  saw  a  kinde  of  Munkies,  called  by  the  Indians

The  Man- Wariva,  they  are  as  bigge  as  a  water  Dogge,  all  blacke,

qmtes  Tapoyes  ^^  faces  are  j^  a  mans ^ ^ave  jQ broad  Beards,

is  a  name  (as  *  .

in  the  Portug.  vou  sna^  see  twentie  of  them  together  in  a  Tree,  and

Friers  treatise  one  of  them  will  walke  up  and  downe  alwaies  with  his

which  hand  on  his  Beard  making  a  great  noise,  and  all  the  rest

followcth, sitting  still  and  harkening  for  the  space  of  an  houre.

riven  to  76.  On  tne  coast  betweene  Fernambuquo,  and  Baya  inhabite

Nations.  a kinde of  Canibals,  called Mariquites,  which all  other

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1601.

Indians  call  Tapoyes. Tapoyes  in their  language is a

Wilde  Man :  among  all  the  Canibals  that  name  is  held

in  great  disgrace, except  among themselves,  or  another

kinde  of  Canibals,  called  Vaanasses,  like  the  Mariquites

in  their  behaviour. The  Mariquites  are  men  of  a  good

stature,  the  women  are  very  proper  of  person,  and  fight  Amaxones.

with their  Bowes  as  well  as the  men. They  have no

dwelling,  but  runne  up  and  downe  the  Wildernesse  like

wilde  Beasts: they  have no Religion,  nor  friendshippe

with  any  Nation,  but  warre,  wheresoever  they  come  (but

now  they  are  in  peace  with  the  Portugals.) They  have

holes  in  their  lippes,  as  the  other  Canibals  have,  but  they

are not carved in  their bodies as the Petiwares are :

they  take  wives  as  the  other  Canibals  doe,  as  many  as  they

will. Their  language  differs  from  all  other  Indians;  they

take  a  kinde  of  Gumme  to  rubbe  their  bodies  with,  and

then  they  take  the  young  Feathers  of  Parats,  and  other

Birds,  and  paint  their  bodies. These  Canibals  are  verie

tawnie of  complexion,  verie swift ; will  never come to

the  field  to  fight  as  other  Canibals  will,  but  alwaies  keepe

in  the  Mountaines,  lying  in  holes,  and  hiding  themselves

behinde Trees ; and when they see that they have

advantage  of  their  enemies,  they  will  start  out,  and  hurt,

and  kill  as  manie  as  they  can  have  advantage  of. Thus

when  these  Caniballes  have  done  what  mischiefe  they  can,

they  will  runne  away,  and  hee  that  can  runne  fastest  is

accounted  most  valiant. You  shall  have  of  these  Canibals

at  the  River  of  San  Francisco,  San  Miguell,  Saint  Antonio,  [iv.  vi.

These  Caniballes  likewise  eate  mans  flesh,  but  they  use  1227.]

not those Ceremonies  which the Petewares, and other

Caniballes  doe.

From  the  River  of  Saint  Francisco  to  Baya  de  Todos
Santos,  inhabit  Topinanbazes  ;  like  the  Petiwares  in  their  Topinam-
behaviour :  all  their  bodies  are  carved  from  the  face  to  the  bazes.
feete  :  the  women  are  of  better  complexion  then  the
Petiwares  :  they  goe  all  naked  as  the  other  Canibals
doe ;  they  let  their  Beards  grow  long,  and  so  doe  no
other  kinde  of  Canibals,  but  still  as  their  haire  groweth

249

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

they  pull  it  away  with  a  likewise  they  pull  away

all  the  haire  of  the  eye-browes,  and  of  their  privie  parts  :
they  doe  sing  and  dance  like  the  Petiwares,  and  doe
speake  the  same  language.

From  Baya  to  the  Elews  inhabite  a  kinde  of  barbarous
JVaymores,  people,  called  Waymores  :  these  are  men  of  great  stature  :
strong,  tall,  ^ey  are  verie  resolute  and  desperate ;  as  swift  of  foote  as
any  Horse.  These  Canibals  have  driven  the  Portugals
from  the  Hands,  and  are  so  desperate,  that  five  or  sixe  of
them  will  set  upon  a  Sugar  house,  where  there  are  at
least  one  hundred  persons  ;  and  I  have  seene  one  of
them,  take  a  man  a  live,  and  defend  himselfe  with  his
prisoner,  as  if  one  of  us  would  defend  our  selves  with
a  Target.  They  have  long  blacke  haire  like  wilde  Irish :
have  no  Townes  nor  Houses,  but  runne  up  and  downe
the  Wildernesse  like  wilde  Beasts  :  care  not  what  Pro-
vince they  come  into,  for  they  are  so  swift  of  foote,  that
no  people  can  hurt  them.  These  feede  verie  greedily  on
mans  flesh,  and  are  verie  filthie  people,  for  their  bodies
are  alwayes  foule  with  dust  and  durt,  lying  on  the  ground
and  in  the  ashes.

At Spirito Santo inhabite  a  kinde  of  Caniball,  called

The  Tomo- Tomomynos  ;  these  are  men  of  good  stature,  I  have  gone

mynos.  tQ  warre  against  them,  many  times  with  the  Portugals,  at

a  place  called  Morogege  ;  they  had  many  Townes  in  the

Hands  that  stand  in  the  River  of  Paraeva  ;  their  Townes

Their  Townes  were  all  setled  with  great  stones  set  together  like  pales,  of

walled.  a  g00d  height,  &  within  that  there  are  walls  made  of  clay

and  stone,  their  houses  are  long  all  covered  with  the  barks

of  trees,  and  the  side  of  their  houses  are  like  hurdles  made

of  Canes,  in  such  sort  that  they  may  shoot  out  of  them.

We  were  at  least  five  hundred  Portugals,  and  three  thou-

Morogege. sand  Indians,  in  the  siege  against  the  City  of  Morogege,

and  many  times  the  Tomomynos  did  set  upon  us  with

such  violent  force,  that  wee  thought  we  should  all  have

beene  slaine  there,  we  were forced to settle  our  selves

under  a  walke  made  with  stone,  clay,  and  logs,  sending  for

succour  to  Spirito  Santo. The  Indians  Tomomynos  would

250

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1601.

stand  upon  the  wall  of  their  Citie,  all  decked  with  feathers,
and  their  bodies  all  painted  with  black  and  red,  most  ugly
to  be  seene,  with  things  in  their  hands  like  a  wheele,  all
done  with  feathers,  the  which  they  would  set  on  fire,  and
wave  it  about  their  heads,  crying  out  to  the  Portugals,
Lovas  eyave  pomombana,  that  is  to  say,  Even  as  this  you
shall  be  consumed.  After  the  fresh  men  came  from  Spirito
Santo,  they  began  to  feare,  and  to  steale  out  of  the  Towne.
But  when  we  saw  that,  we  made  things  that  the  Portugals
call  Panesses  (they  are  made  of  Canes,  of  seven  or  eight
yards  long,  that  no  arrow  can  passe  them)  and  those  the
Portugals  and  Indians  that  were  on  our  side  did  carrie
before  them  like  a  wall,  and  so  came  to  the  wall  of  their
Citie  and  brake  it  downe,  with  hurt  and  death  of  many  on
our  side.

Here  our  Captaine  Martin  de  Sasa  was  cast  into  the  Valiant
River  by  a  Caniball,  that  tooke  him  in  his  armes,  and  Savage.
in  despight  of  us  all  carried  him  a  stones  cast,  and  threw
him  into  the  River,  where  he  had  beene  drowned  if  it  had
not  beene  for  a  very  famous  Indian,  called  Patammycu,
which  was  the  same  Martin  de  Sasa  his  slave.  This
Patammycu  (that  is  to  say,  Long  Tobacco,  for  the  Indians
take  such  names)  killed  the  Caniball  that  would  have
drowned  his  Master,  and  so  saved  him.  That  day  wee
had  the  victorie,  and  tooke  16000.  of  them,  of  the  16000.  taken.
which  wee  put  to  the  sword  1600.  and  all  the  rest  we
parted  among  the  Portugals.  After  that,  we  tooke  many
small  Townes,  killing  all  the  old  men  and  old  women,
likewise  we  parted  the  rest  that  were  serviceable,  and
so  wee  returned  home  ;  after  we  had  destroyed  the
Countrie,  comming  for  the  space  of  a  weeke  downe
the  River  of  Paraeyva.  Then  we  came  to  a  Towne
of  Canibals  which  was  called  Morou,  and  from  thence  Morou.
to  the  Hill,  called  by  the  Indians,  Paranapiaqueva,  that  is
to  say,  the  sight  of  the  Sea  ;  and  from  thence  to  a  place,
called  by  the  Canibals,  Tupanboyera,  that  is,  the  Beades
of  God  ;  the  Portugals  call  this  place  the  Organes  :  it
hath  certaine  Hills  that  lie  over  the  River  of  Jenero,  then

251

A.D.

l60I.

JVaytaquazes.

Women
warriors.

[IV.

1228.

Sharkes
devoured  by
Sharkes.

Crocodiles,
how  and  why
taken.

Crab-lice.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

wee  came  downe  a  River  called  Macuiv,  and  from  thence
to  the  Citie  of  San  Sebastian  in  the  River  of  Januarie,
from  whence  every  man  went  with  his  slave  to  his  owne
house.

The  Waytaquazes  inhabite  at  Cape  Frio,  called  by  the
Indians,  Jocoex,  they  dwell  both  on  the  North  and  on  the
South  side  of  the  Cape,  in  low  marish  grounds  :  they  are
men  of  bigger  stature  then  the  Waymores.  I  went  with
Gonsala  Corea  de  Sasa  to  warre  against  these  Canibals,
and  at  one  time  we  tooke  thirteene  of  them  and  laid  them
bound  hand  and  foot  in  a  house,  going  forward  to  take
more  of  them,  and  when  wee  returned  they  were  all  gone,
wee  left  them  fire,  and  they  burned  the  Cordes  from  their
hands,  and  so  got  away.  They  weare  their  haire  long
like  wilde  Irish  ;  the  women  doe  warre  with  their  bowes
and  arrowes  as  well  as  the  men,  their  houses  are  very  low
and  little,  they  doe  not  lie  in  Nets  as  the  Tamoyes  and
other  Canibals  doe,  but  on  the  ground  like  Hogs,  making
a  fire  in  the  middle  of  their  houses.  These  Canibals  have
no  peace  with  any  kinde  of  Nation,  but  doe  eate  all  kinde
of  people,  Frenchmen,  Portugals,  and  Blackamoores.
Many  times  whilest  I  was  at  the  River  of  Januarie,  some
ships  were  cast  away  at  this  Cape,  and  all  the  Portugals
and  Blackamoores  were  eaten.  I  have  seene  them  take
great  dog-fishes  by  the  taile,  and  dragge  them  ashoare.
In  this  place  I  have  seene  very  great  water  Aligators
(which  we  call  in  English  Crocodiles)  seven  yards  long.
This  Crocodile  hath  great  scales,  and  long  clawes  very
ugly  to  be  seene.  The  Portugals,  when  they  know  where
any  of  these  great  ones  are,  doe  fish  for  them  with  a
chaine,  and  a  great  Iron  hooke,  and  for  bait  they  tie  a
Cock  or  a  Hen  to  the  hooke,  they  take  this  paines  to
take  him  because  his  Cods  are  very  great,  and  better  then
any  muske.  At  this  place,  the  Mountaines  are  so  full  of
Crab-lice,  that  wee  knew  not  what  to  doe,  they  would  stick
in  our  skins  that  we  could  not  get  them  off,  but  were  faine
to  take  drie  straw  and  singe  our  selves,  as  you  would
singe  Hogs,  and  so  rid  our  selves  of  them. Here  also

252

ANTHONY KNIVET  ad.

1601.

wee  had  great  store  of  wilde  Hogs,  and  a  kinde  of  wilde
Fowle  as  bigge  as  Turkies,  called  Mutas.

Abausanga,  is  the  name  of  a  valiant  Caniball,  that  is  Abausanga
adjoyning  hard  by  the  Wataquazes,  these  Canibals  are  iam-
a  kinde  of  the  Tamoyes.  Some  twentie  yeeres  agone
there  was  a  Governour  among  them,  called  Mendesaa,
in  the  River  of  Januarie,  who  made  warre  against  the
Tamoyes,  and  in  the  end  over-run  all  their  Countrie
or  Province  ;  onely  this  Abausanga  remayned  hidden
in  Dungeons  and  great  Holes  with  some  fortie  or  fiftie
of  his  Countrimen.  It  was  our  chance  going  to  warre
with  the  Wataquazes  to  come  through  this  Towne,  and
there  we  had  newes  by  Abausangas  people,  that  he  was  at
warre  against  the  Wataquazes ;  whereupon  we  made  Spies
to  see  if  we  could  take  him,  before  that  we  would  set
upon  the  Wataquazes.  One  evening,  we  heard  a  great
noise  of  Canibals,  then  the  Captaine  sending  out  some
Spies,  my  selfe  being  one,  wee  saw  that  it  was  Abausanga,
and  his  companie,  that  had  taken  five  Wataquazes,  and
with  great  stirre  were  killing  of  them  to  eate.  Assoone
as  we  had  espyed  all  that  we  could,  wee  returned  againe
to  the  Captaine,  and  told  him  what  we  had  seene,  and
that  night  circled  Abausanga,  and  tooke  him  prisoner,
with  sixtie  young  men  of  his  companie  ;  wee  asked  of
him  our  best  course,  to  warre  against  the  Wataquazes,  he
told  us,  that  he  was  rather  to  take  our  advice,  then  we  to
aske  his,  that  he  used  no  policie  but  to  fight  in  open  field,
and  if  we  would,  we  should  see  how  he  made  warre  See  the
against  his  enemies  :  the  next  day,  we  being  hard  by  the  firmer  §.
Inhabitants  of  the  Wataquazes  ;  Abausanga  came  forth,
and  joyned  all  his  companie  together  with  leave  of  our
Captaine,  and  assoone  as  they  were  all  readie  with  their
bowes  and  arrowes,  hee  ran  into  the  thickest  of  his
enemies,  with  all  his  companie,  where  eighteene  of  his
companie  were  presently  killed,  and  most  of  them  sore
hurt,  he  himselfe  being  shot  in  one  and  twentie  parts.  In
our  sight  he  killed  three  Wataquazes  before  hee  fell ;  the
Portugals kept  still  by  the  woods side, and with their

253

A.D.

l60I.

The  Waya-
nasses.

Painting.

Tabacca.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

peeces  killed  one  hundred  and  thirtie  Wataquazes,  the
wilde  people  were  so  amazed  when  they  heard  our  peeces
goe  off,  that  they  thought  the  Devill  had  beene  amongst
them,  and  every  one  began  to  flie  as  fast  as  he  could,  the
Portugals  following  them,  found  Abausanga  in  the  field
hurt,  as  you  have  heard.  This  Abausanga  assoone  as  he
perceived  the  Portugals  to  stand  amazed  at  him,  desired
them  to  tell  him  somewhat  of  God,  for  he  said,  that
Frenchmen  had  told  him  that  there  was  a  God,  and  that
he  which  beleeved  in  him  should  be  saved.  The  Por-
tugals telling  him  of  their  faith,  hee  said  that  hee  beleeved
in  that  God,  and  desired  to  bee  baptised,  and  had  his
name  given  him  John.  For  the  space  of  two  houres  that
this  Indian  lived,  hee  did  nothing  but  call  upon  God,  and
so  ended  his  life,  being  one  hundred  and  twentie  yeeres  of
age,  as  he  shewed  us  by  signes.

The  Wayanasses,  inhabite  eighteene  leagues  Southward
of  the  River  of  Januarie,  at  a  place  called  by  the  Portugals,
Ilha  Grande,  that  is  to  say,  The  great  Hand.  These  Cani-
bals  are  of  low  stature,  grqat  bellies,  and  broad  feet,  very
Cowards,  of  a  reasonable  good  complexion.  They  doe
not  carve  their  bodies,  neither  doe  they  glorie  so  much  to
eate  mans  flesh,  as  the  Tamoyes,  the  Tomymenos,  and
other  Canibals  doe.  The  Women  are  bigge  in  the  body,
and  very  ugly,  but  they  have  very  good  faces.  The
Women  of  this  Countrie  doe  paint  their  bodies  and  faces
with  a  thing  called  in  their  language  Urucu  ;  it  groweth
in  a  round  Cod  like  a  beane,  and  that  maketh  a  red  inke
like  Oker ;  which  maketh  them  seeme  most  ugly.  The
haire  both  of  men  and  women  groweth  long  by  the  sides,
and  on  the  crowne  all  shaven  like  Franciscan  Friars.
These  Canibals  lye  in  Nets  made  of  barkes  of  trees,
and  likewise  when  they  travell  through  the  Wildernesse,
such  provision  as  they  have,  they  carrie  in  little  Nets
at  their  backs  ;  they  are  never  without  Tabacco,  they
esteeme  it  more  then  any  thing  that  they  have  in  their
Countrie,  and  with  it  do  heale  their  wounds,  when
they  are  hurt. When  the  Portugals  doe stand  in need

254

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1601.

of  slaves,  they  doe  come  to  Ilha  Grande,  and  there
they  shall  be  sure  to  meet  with  some  of  the  Wayanasses
a  fishing,  then  they  shew  them  Knives,  Beades,  and
Glasses,  telling  them  what  they  would  have  for  mer-
chandise, and  presently  they  will  goe  to  a  place  called
in  their  language  Jawarapipo,  which  is  their  chiefest
Towne,  and  from  thence  bring  all  such  as  they  meane
to  sell  to  the  Sea  side,  and  as  good  cheape  as  you  can
you  may  buy  of  them.

The  Topinaques  inhabite at  Saint Vincents,  they  are  The
men  of  good  stature,  and  of  reasonable  good  complexion  ;  ioPina(lues'
their  women  are  all  painted  with  divers  colours,  and  on
their heads, they weare a thin barqe of  a tree like a
Ribband  : the  Canibals  eate  mans  flesh  as  other  Canibals
doe, they adore no  Idoll,  neither  have  they  any  kinde
of  Religion,  onely  when  they  kill  any  man,  they  all  paint  [IV.  vi.
their  bodies  with a  kinde  of  fruit,  called  Janipavo,  and  1229.]

all  their  heads  are  set  with  feathers,  and  great  stones
in  their  under-lips,  with  Rattles  in  their  hands,  and  thus
they  will  dance  for  three  dayes  together.  I  was  amased
to  see  how  they  would  drinke  a  filthy  drinke  without
breaking  of  their  bellies,  and  asked  them  how  they  were
able  to  stand  so  long  and  drinke  so  much  of  that  filthy
drinke :  they  answered  me,  that  Tabacco  did  make  them
as  fresh  as  if  they  had  done  nothing.  Among  these
Canibals  there  is  great  store  of  gold  in  many  Hills  hard
by  the  Sea  side,  and  now  the  Portugals  have  some  of
those  places,  I  would  wee  had  the  rest.  Here  I  end
to  discourse  any  farther  of  the  Canibals  that  dwell  by
the  Sea  side,  till  I  have  told  you  of  such  Nations  as  I
met  withall  when  I  went  through  the  Countrie,  and  how
I  came  againe  to  the  Sea ;  I  have  told  you  in  the  first
booke  of  my  travell,  how  that  five  or  sixe  yeeres  after  I
had  beene  taken  by  the  Portugals,  1  went  to  warre  against
the  Canibals  with  the  Portugals.  Now  by  the  grace  of
God,  as  neere  as  I  can  I  have  told  you  of  all  the  Nations,
that  I  saw,  and  converst  with  in  nine  moneths,  that  I
travelled through the Wildernesse with the Portugals,

255

A.D.

l60I.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  a  yeere  and  eleven  moneths  that  I  passed  with  the
Canibals  themselves.

Canibah
called  Pories.

Small  Cocos.

The  Molopa-
ques,  bearded
Savages,  and
chiller  then
others.

Houses
several.

Gold.

THe  Canibals  called  Pories,  inhabite  at  the  least  one
hundred  miles  within  the  land,  they  are  most  like
unto  the  Wayanasses,  men  of  low  stature,  they  live  onely
on  Pine  nuts,  and  small  Cocos  that  are  as  bigge  as  Apples,
but  they  have  shells  like  Wall-nuts,  somewhat  harder,
the  Indians  call  them  Eyrires.  They  are  of  good  com-
plexion, and  esteeme  very  much  of  clothes  if  they  can
get  them ;  the  women  are  all  painted  with  divers  colours,
as  red,  blue,  and  yellow ;  they  are  in  peace  with  the
Portugals,  and  warre  with  no  Nation,  neither  will  they
eate  mans  flesh,  if  they  have  any  other  meate ;  they  lie
in  little  Nets  made  of  barkes  of  trees,  they  have  no
houses  but  two  or  three  boughs  tyed  together,  covered
with  Palme  leaves  if  it  happen  to  raine.  In  this  part
of  the  Countrie  I  saw  great  store  of  Leopards,  and  Lions ;
the  Indians  call  the  Leopard,  Jawaryle,  and  the  Lions,
Jawarosou ;  and  many  great  Cats  of  mountaine,  which
the  Indians  call  Marcayahite,  here  you  may  have  of  the
Indians  for  a  Knife  or  a  Combe,  five  or  sixe  Gallons
of  Balsome  oile.

After  you  have  passed  the  famous  River  of  Paraeyva,
you  shall  come  into  a  Countrie  of  Canibals,  called
Molopaques ;  they  are  much  like  unto  Dutchmen  in
bignesse,  very  faire  of  complexion,  they  have  all  beards
like  other  men ;  so  hath  not  any  other  kinde  of  Cani-
bals, except  it  bee  here  and  there  one.  Most  of  them
doe  cover  their  privie  parts,  they  are  very  civill  in  their
behaviour :  their  Townes  are  very  strong,  all  circled  with
walls  made  of  earth  and  great  logs,  they  have  houses
severall  every  man  with  his  familie.  They  have  one
amongst  them  whom  they  call  Morovishava,  which  is
their  King,  but  we  saw  no  difference  betweene  him  and
the  rest,  but  only  the  name,  and  he  had  (as  I  remember)
thirteene  wives,  and  no  other  had  so  many.  Amongst
these  Canibals  we  found  good  store  of  gold,  the  which

256

ANTHONY KNIVET  ad.

1601.
they  doe  not  esteeme,  neither  doe  they  use  it  for  any
thing,  but  to  tie  on  their  fishing  lines,  when  they  goe
a  fishing  in  the  River  of  Para,  where  they  take  great  River  Para.
store  of  good  fish.  Para  is  beyond  Paraeyva  eightie
leagues :  these  Indians  doe  not  worke  in  the  mynes  for  Mynes.
gold,  as  the  Spaniards  doe,  but  onely  take  such  peeces
as  they  finde  when  the  raine  hath  washt  away  the  earth :
for  where  the  mynes  of  gold  are  there  are  no  trees,
but  are  drie  Mountaines  of  black  earth,  which  the
Indians  call  Taiuquara;  and  the  Mountaine  where  the
Molopaques  doe  finde  this  great  store  of  gold,  is  called
Etepararange :  if  these  Canibals  had  the  knowledge  of
God,  I  might  boldly  say,  that  there  are  not  any  in  the
world  like  them.  The  women  are  goodly  of  person,  Faire  women.
faire  of  complexion,  as  our  English  women  are,  they  are
very  modest  and  civill  in  their  behaviour,  you  shall
never  see  them  laugh,  they  are  people  very  capable  to
conceive  any  thing,  they  have  their  haire  so  long,  that
they  tie  it  about  their  middles  with  the  barke  of  a  tree,
wherewithall  they  cover  their  nakednesse,  they  esteeme
very  much  of  it.  Their  haire  is  of  colours  like  our
English  women,  some  yellow,  some  white,  some  browne :
the  women  that  have  not  long  haire,  to  cover  their  naked-
nesse, doe  weare  a  kinde  of  Furre,  which  they  call
Sawyathwasou.  These  Canibals  doe  eate  mans  flesh,  I
was  not  past  nine  or  ten  dayes  among  them,  therefore
I  cannot  resolve  you  further  of  their  customes.  In  that
time  I  was  with  them  I  saw  no  manner  of  Religion
among  them,  they  doe  keepe  very  good  order,  observing
times  to  eate  their  meate,  at  noone,  and  at  night,  and  Meales.
that  doth  not  any  other  Nation  amongst  them,  they  are
very  cleanly  in  whatsoever  they  doe.

Then  wee  came  to  a  faire  champaine  Countrie,  where
wee  found  a  kinde  of  Canibals,  called  Motayas.  Assoone  The  Motayas.
as  these  Canibals  heard  of  our  being  in  their  Countrie,
they  all  left  their  houses,  and  came  to  meet  us  dancing
and  singing,  telling  us  that  they  were  very  glad  of  our
comming  into  their  Countrie ;  they  brought  Ginny
xvi  257  R

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

Wheat,  Pepper,  and  divers  kinde  of  rootes  to  present
us,  and  craved  our  friendship,  desiring  us,  that  we  would
aide  them  against  the  Tamoyes.  We  desiring  nothing
more,  told  them  that  to  that  purpose  we  were  come.
Assoone  as  wee  came  to  the  houses  of  these  Canibals,
all the women would sit about us, and laying their

Weeping  hands  on  our  bodies,  they  would  weepe  most  bitterly.
After  that,  every  one  of  them  would  bring  such
victuals  as  they  had ;  some  brought  boyled  Frogs,
others  brought  Serpents,  and Snakes,  which  wee  found

Wilde  Dogs, very  good ; other  some brought Munkeis,  and  a  kind

[IV.  vi.  of  wilde  Dogge  that  they  kill  in  the  Mountaines. The

I23°-J  men  brought  us  mans  flesh  rosted,  drie,  as  black  as  a
coale,  and  told  us  that  it  was  of  a  Tamoya  that  they  had
killed,  and  desired  us  that  we  would  eate  of  it,  thinking
they  had  presented  us  a  great  and  daintie  dish.  When
they  saw  that  wee  refused  to  eate  mans  flesh,  they  fell
a  laughing,  and  some  of  them  said  that  we  knew  not
what  was  good  meat.  These  Canibals  are  men  of  small
stature,  browne  of  complexion,  they  goe  all  naked,  they
weare  their  haire  (as  now  we  doe  in  England)  below
their  eares,  and  so  doe  the  women.  As  their  haire
groweth  long,  they  burne  it  with  fire,  making  it  equall  so
artificially,  that  you  cannot  perceive  but  that  it  was  cut
with  Sizors.  They  will  not  have  any  haire  grow  on
their  eye-browes,  nor  on  their  chin,  but  still  as  it  groweth
they  pull  it  away  with  a  shell :  their  food  is  Ginny  wheat,
and  Roots,  Frogs,  Snakes,  Serpents,  Crocodiles,  Monkeis,
Dogs  that  they  kill  in  the  Wildernesse,  Leopards,  and
Cats  of  Mountaine;  all  this  is  good  meat  amongst  them,
and  we  found  them  very  good,  and  were  very  glad  when
we  could  get  them  to  eate.

The  Lopos.  Then  we  came  to  a  kinde  of  Caniball,  called  Lopos,

the  Portugals  call  them  Bilreros,  these  Canibals  are
alwayes  in  the  Mountaines  of  Pine  trees,  and  have  not
any  other  thing  to  live  on :  I  never  saw  any  houses  that
they  dwell  in,  but  boughs  tyed  together  with  rines  of
trees,  these  Canibals  would  come  to  us,  and tell  us  of

258

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1601.

many  things,  and  would  goe  with  us  two  or  three  dayes,
and  then  would  run  away  from  us,  and  many  times
when  they  did  meet  with  any  of  our  Indians,  or  our
Portugals,  they  would  take  away  such  things  as  they  had
about  them,  and  send  them  away  without  any  hurt  to
their  persons.  As  wee  went  through  this  Countrie  we
found  many  mynes  of  gold,  and  amongst  these  Indians  Gold  in
our  Captaine  got  good  store  of  it,  and  many  good  Plentie'
stones.  In  all  America,  there  is  not  a  richer  part  then
this,  but  it  is  so  farre  within  the  Land,  and  that  Countrie
is  so  populous  that  as  yet  neither  Portugall  nor  Spaniard
can  inhabite  there.  They  are  men  of  small  stature,  and
very  browne  of  complexion,  their  bodies  are  all  painted
as  the  other  Canibals  before  named.  The  women  are
as  browne  of  complexion  as  the  men,  and  very  rude
and  shamelesse,  for  in  their  behaviour  they  differ  not
from  wilde  beasts,  but  in  all  things  live  like  them.

After  we  had  passed  this  Province,  we  came  into  the
Province  of  the Wayanawasons, where  we  found them  The  Wayana-
in  small  Townes  built  by  a  Rivers  side,  and  found  these  wason!>  simple
the simplest Nation of  all other; for these Canibals  savaSes-
would stand and gaze upon us  like herds  of  Deere,
and  never  say  any  thing  unto  us. Here  we  found  great
store  of  Ginny  wheat,  and  pompions  that  wee  did  eate.
In many Bogs hard by their Towne we killed good
store  of  Crocodiles,  and did eate of  them,  for in this
journey  we  were  almost  starved. These  Canibals  are  of
a  good  stature,  bigge,  and  tall  of  bodie,  and  very  cleane
made  of  their  lims,  very  sufficient  to  behold ;  but  they
are  a  kinde  of  lasie  people,  that  care  not  for  any  thing,
but  will  lie  all  day  lasing  in  their  houses,  and  never  goe
abroad  but  for  their  victuals. The  women  are  of  good
stature,  they  are  of  a  dunne  pale  complexion,  and  they
doe  provide Pompions  and Rootes  for their  husbands.
Here  we  were  all,  or  most  of  us  very  sicke  with  eating  of  Venemous
a  kinde  of  fruit,  which  the  Indians  call  Madiopuera,  this  Plum-
fruit  is  as  bigge  as  a Horse  plum,  as yellow  as  gold,
the kirnell of it is as sweet as any Almond, of  this

259

A.D.
l60I.

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

fruit  did  most  of  our  companie  eate,  and  of  them  dyed
sixteene,  and  many  others  sicke  for  a  fortnight  after.

Assoone  as  our  companie  had  recovered  we  went  on
our  way  to  seeke  out  the  Tamoyes,  having  for  our
guides  sixe  of  the  Motayes,  who  carried  us  at  the  least
two  moneths  up  and  downe  the  Wildernesse,  every  day
making  us  beleeve,  that  we  should  come  unto  our
enemies  Countrie.  They  brought  us  at  last  to  the  sight
of  two  Townes  along  by  a  River  side.  The  Portugals
after  they  had  seene  how  great  the  Townes  of  the  Cani-
bals  were,  durst  not  adventure  to  passe  over  the  River,
for  feare  lest  the  Indians  had  espied  us,  and  were
layne  in  ambush.  There  was  not  any  of  all  the  com-
panie, Portugall  nor  Indian,  that  durst  to  goe  over  the
River ;  the  Captaine  and  chiefest  of  the  Portugals  agreed
together  and  made  me  goe  to  the  Towne,  whether  I
would  or  no.  When  I  saw  that  there  was  no  remedie,
I  tooke  my  leave  of  them  all :  for  I  thought  verily  that
Many  straits.  I  went  to  the  slaughter  house,  or  at  least  to  have  lived
a  Caniball  with  them  during  my  life.  With  these  two
extremities  in  my  thought,  commending  my  soule  and
bodie  to  Almightie  God :  I  swam  over  the  River  upon
a  little  Target  made  of  Corke,  and  assoone  as  I  had
landed  I  went  straight  to  the  Towne,  where  I  found
nothing  but  two  tame  Estridges  the  people  had  espyed
us,  and  were  run  away.  When  the  Portugals  had  newes
from  me  that  there  was  no  body,  then  they  were  so
valiant  as  Lions,  striving  who  should  get  first  into  the
Towne,  this  was  the  River  of  Jawarie,  the  Towne  is
called  Menuare.  Here  it  was  that  I  should  have  beene
hanged,  for  striking  of  Antonio  Martines  in  the  Court
of  guard,  after  I  had  killed  the  great  Serpent,  called
Sorocuev.  In  this  Towne  we  found  great  store  of
Ginny  wheat,  and  Pompions  dried  in  the  smoke.  In
this  Towne  likewise  we  had  great  store  of  drie  Tabacco,
and  Potato  rootes :  wee  found  great  store  of  gold  in
peeces,  and  also  store  of  Cristall,  and  many  other  good
stones : some  found  Diamonds,  and  a  kind  of  blue  stones

260

Tame
Estridges

River

Jawary.

Menuare

Gold,  Cristall
and  Jemmes.

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1601.

that  the  Portugals  did  esteeme  of  very  much,  and  called

them  Pedras  de  Sangua,  bloud-stones.  The  SerPent

The  Serpent  that  I  killed  was  thirteene  span  long,  it  fobbed  his
had  foure  and  twentie  teeth,  as  sharpe  as  any  naile,  about  strange  forme
the  necke it had  greater  shels  then the  other parts  of  and  qualities.
her body  ; the shels were blacke and russet like a  [IV- vl-
coller, and on her body they  were russet and darke  IZ3I-1

greene  ;  under  her  belly  all  speckled  with  black  and
white.  It  had  foure  sharpe  feet,  no  longer  then  a  mans
finger,  it  had  a  tongue  like  a  harping  Iron,  her  taile  was
like  a  straight  Bull  home,  all  black  and  white  listed.
From  one  of  these  did  the  Lord  defend  me,  and  permitted
me  to  kill  one  of  them  with  the  helve  of  an  axe  in  the
night.  The  Indians  dare  not  goe  to  kill  one  of  them
except  they  goe  five  or  sixe  of  them  with  bowes  and
arrowes.  All  kinde  of  wilde  Beasts,  Lions,  or  Leopards,
all  kinde  of  Snakes,  but  only  this,  doe  feare  the  fire,  and
if  they  come  where  the  Indians  leave  any  fire  travelling
through  the  Wildernesse,  if  any  of  these  Serpents  doe
finde  it,  they  never  leave  beating  themselves  in  it,  till  they
either  kill  themselves  or  put  out  the  fire.  These  Serpents
when  they  seeke  their  prey  will  stand  about  a  small  tree
or  a  bough,  and  when  any  wilde  beast  passeth,  hee  falleth
upon  him,  thrusting  his  taile  into  the  fundament  of
whatsoever  it  seizeth  on.

After  we  had  remayned  at  this  place  a  fortnight,  or
three  weekes,  the  Portugals  did  resolve  to  come  back
againe  without  any  purchase,  there  the  Captaine  gave  up
his  authoritie,  and  joyned  himselfe  with  his  friends  to
seeke  the  neerest  way  home,  then  did  I  and  twelve  young
men  of  the  Portugals  determine  to  goe  to  the  South  Sea
by  land,  for  we  knew  by  the  Notes  of  the  Motayes,  that
we  were  not  farre  from  Peru,  and  Cusco,  and  we  knowing
how  poore  our  estates  were,  and  the  great  famine  we  had
passed  comming  to  the  Towne  of  Menvare,  made  us
afraid  to  goe  back  againe,  that  way  which  we  had  come,
and  for  mine  owne  part,  I  encouraged  the  twelve  young
Portugals  all  that  I  could  to  goe  forward,  for  I  had  surely

261

A.D.
l60I.

Two  moneths

travell  in  a

golden

Countrie.

Cristall

mountaine.

Vault- straits.

Tamoyes
proper  men.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

beene  knocked  on  the  head  if  I  had  gone  back  in  my
Captaines  companie.  With  much  adoe,  wee  thereon
resolved  to  seeke  our  fortunes  in  the  Wildernesse.  After
we  were  departed  from  our  companie,  wee  came  to  many
Mountaines,  where  we  found  good  store  of  gold,  and
many  precious  stones  ;  when  wee  came  into  this  Countrie,
wee  thought  wee  had  beene  in  the  Province  of  Peru,  wee
had  such  plentie  of  mynes,  and  there  was  not  one  of  us
but  had  store  of  stones,  that  those  which  we  tooke  as
to  day,  wee  would  throw  away  to  morrow  to  take  other
better  then  them  which  we  had  before.  Thus  wee
travelled  some  two  moneths  in  the  golden  Countrie,  till
at  the  last  wee  came  to  that  great  and  most  strange
Mountaine  of  Cristall.  This  Mountaine  is  of  a  huge
height,  that  it  seemeth  to  be  within  the  cloudes,  and  so
steepe  that  it  is  impossible  to  goe  over  the  top.  Here  it
was  that  wee  passed  through  the  Vault,  and  in  truth  it
was  one  of  the  greatest  dangers,  and  the  most  desperate
that  ever  I  was  in.

Assoone  as  we  had  passed  this  danger,  it  was  the
pleasure  of  God  to  deliver  us  into  the  hands  of  our
mortall  enemies  the  Tamoyes,  where  my  twelve  com-
panions were  killed  and  eaten,  onely  my  selfe  remayned
among  these  Canibals  a  yeere  and  eleven  moneths,  in  the
which  time  I  went  many  times  to  warre  against  other
Provinces  that  were  joyning  upon  the  Countrie  of  Tamo-
yes, and  (I  thanke  God)  prospered  so  well  that  I  was
very  much  esteemed  of  them,  and  had  a  great  command
over  them  when  they  went  to  the  field.  These  Tamoyes
be  as  proper  men  as  any  bee  in  all  Europe ;  they  use  to
make  holes  in  their  upper-lips  like  the  Petewares ;  most  of
them  are  of  a  very  faire  complexion.  The  men  have
their  heads  alwayes  set  with  feathers  of  divers  colours
which  sheweth  very  pretily,  they  goe  starke  naked.  The
women  are  as  proper  as  any  Nation  can  be,  tall,  comly,
well  legd,  cleane  made  of  body,  very  small  in  the  waste,
very  faire  of  complexion,  fine  handed,  and  very  comly
faces. They use  a  kinde  of  carving  over  their  breasts,

262

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1601.

which  becommeth  them  very  well. Here  the Canibals

esteeme  not  any  more  of  gold,  or  precious  stones,  then  Store  of  gold.

wee  doe  of  any  stones  in  the  streets : if  the  Spaniards  had

knowne  of  this  Countrie,  they  needed  not  to  have  gone  to

Peru, there  is not  like  unto this  for  all kinde  of  rich

metals,  and  many  kinde  of  precious  stones. In  this  place

I  lived  eighteene  moneths,  and  went  naked  as  the  Canibals

did. After  I  had  lived  with  these  Canibals  the  time  that

you have heard,  I  was  in  great  favour  and  credit  with

them,  insomuch  that  they  would  not  doe  any  thing  before

they  had  made  me  acquainted  withall :  I  have  told  them

many  times  of  the  comming  and  going  of  our  English

ships  to  the  Straits  of  Magellan,  and  how  well  we  did  use

all  kinde  of  Nations,  and  what  kinde  of  all  things  neces-

sarie  wee had for their  use. These  wordes made the

Canibals  desire  to  come  to  the  Sea  coast,  and  asked  of

mee how  it  were  possible  for them to  come to dwell

by the  Sea  without  being  slaves to the Portugals : I

told  them  that  I  knew  many  places  where  English  men

and French men did use to come, but that neither

Portugall, nor  Spaniard  was  never  there. After  I had

told  them what  I  thought  best,  we  all  agreed  to  come  His  journey

through  the  Province  of  Tocoman,  and  so  to the Sea,  wlth  the

betweene  the  River  of  Plate  and  Saint  Vincents. This  £va&es*
r*  r  t-<  «ii  t  • •  locoman.

Countrie  or  Tocoman  is  all  sandie,  and  in  it  inhabite  the

Pigmeys ; I have seene many of them amongst the  Pigmeys

Spaniards  at  the  River  of  Plate. They  are  not  altogether  dwelling  in

so  little  as  wee  speake  of  them  here  in  England :  their

inhabitation  in  Tocoman  is  in  Caves  of  the  ground. In

this  Countrie  the  Inhabitants in  many  places  have  such

Wheat  as  we  finde  in  England,  and  Cassavi  meale.

This  Tocoman  is  judged  by  the  Spaniard  to  be  the  end

of  Brasill, and the  entring  into Peru  ;  for  in  Tocoma

there  are  all  kinde  of  Brasila  Rootes, and  all  kinde  of

Corne,  aswell  as  Peru ;  this  Countrie  yeeldeth  nothing  to

the Spaniards, but wilde Horses, and the Indians of

Tocoman are mortall  enemies to  all  the  Inhabitants  of

Peru  ;  therefore  the  Spaniards  doe  keepe this  Countrie

263

Caves.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

because  they  keepe  the  Provinces  of  Peru  in  feare,  or  else
[IV.  vi.  they  would  rise  up  against  the  Spaniards. After  we  had

River  running  Passe<^  tms  Countrie,  we  came  to  a  River  that  runneth
to  Chile.  from  Tocoman  to  Chile,  where  we  tarried  foure  daies
making  Canoas  to  passe  the  River,  for  there  were  so
manie  Crocodiles,  that  we  durst  not  passe  it  for  feare  of
them  :  after  we  had  passed  this  River,  we  came  to  the
Mountaines  of  Mountaine  Detodas  Metalas,  that  is,  of  all  Mettals.  At
a  etta  s.  tj^s  place  divers  Spaniards  and  Portugals  have  beene,  and
certain  lawlesse  men  were  set  on  shoare  on  this  coast  by
one  Pedro  de  Charamento,  which  came  to  this  place,  and
set  up  a  great  Crosse,  and  on  it  writ,  that  the  Countrie
was  the  King  of  Spaines ;  the  which  I  put  out,  and  writ
that  it  was  the  Queene  of  Englands.  This  hill  is  of
divers  kinde  of  Mettals,  Copper  and  Iron,  some  Gold,  and
great  store  of  Quicke-silver.  It  is  verie  high,  and  all  bare
without  any  Trees.  Here  likewise  was  a  little  Church
made,  where  we  found  two  Images,  one  of  our  Lady,  and
another  of  Christ  crucified.  When  the  Tamoyes  saw
those  signes,  they  thought  that  I  had  betraied  them,  and
(indeede)  I  was  amazed,  thinking  that  we  had  beene  in
some  part  of  the  River  of  Plate,  and  because  the  Indians
should  not  be  discouraged,  I  shewed  my  selfe  to  be  very
glad,  and  told  them  that  I  knew  those  were  signes  that  my
Countrie  men  used  to  make  when  they  came  into  strange
Countries :  with  these  perswasions  I  made  the  Tamoyes
to  come  on  their  journey  to  the  Sea ;  where  otherwise
if  I  had  told  them  it  had  bin  set  up  by  the  Spaniards,  the
feare  that  the  poore  Canibals  stood  in  of  them  had  bin
enough  to  have  made  them  all  returne  againe  from  whence
they  came.  At  the  last  we  came  to  the  Sea,  as  I  have
told  you,  to  the  Towne  of  the  Cariyohs :  this  Towne
standeth  in  a  fine  pleasant  place,  hard  by  the  coast  in  a
faire  Bay,  where  one  hundred  Ships  may  anker  without
any  danger.  And  in  this  place  you  shall  alwaies  have
great  store  of  fish.  In  this  Countrie,  for  a  Knife  or  a
fish  hooke,  you  may  buy  a  dozen  of  skinnes  of  very  good
Furre ;  and  if  you  will,  these  Indians  will  goe  (for  any

264

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1601.

trifle)  and  fetch  two  or  three  baskets  of  Mettals,  and  some
have  had  such  good  lucke,  that  for  two  or  three  Glasses,
and  a  Combe  or  two,  with  some  Knives,  they  have  got  the
value  of  foure  or  five  thousand  Crownes  in  Gold  and
Stones.  The  Towne  stood  upon  a  hill,  but  we  puld  it
down.  But  when  we  were  taken  by  the  Portugals,  and
that  the  Cariyohs  were  restored  againe  to  their  Countrie,
they  did  scituate  againe  with  in  the  same  place  where  they
were  when  we  drave  them  out  of  their  Countrie.  Here
the  Portugals  did  binde  mee,  and  would  have  hanged  mee
for  the  twelve  Portugals  that  the  Canibals  had  killed  and
eaten.

The  Caryiohs  are  men  of  good  stature,  and  very  TheCaryiohs.
valiant  :  they  make  holes  in  their  under  lippe  as  the  other
Canibals  doe.  These  Canibals  likewise  eate  mans  flesh,
and  speake  the  same  language  that  the  Tamoyes  doe :  the
women  are  very  comely,  the  most  of  them  are  of  a  faire
complexion ;  they  weare  their  haire  loose  about  their
eares,  and  all  their  bodies  are  died  with  blacke,  and  their
faces  withered,  and  yellow,  their  brests  are  all  carved  with
divers  colours,  which  beseemeth  verie  well.  Here  is  the
end  of  my  travell  through  America,  with  the  Canibals,
from  whence  I  returned  againe  to  my  Master  Salvador
Corea  de  Sasa ;  where  I  was  worse  then  ever  I  was
before.

The  Giants  of  Port  Desire,  and  inhabitants  of  Port
Famine:  also  Angola,  Congo,  and  Massangana,
and  Angica,  Countries  of  Africa.

AT  Port  Desire,  which  is  the  next  haven  to  the  straits
of  Magelan,  inhabited  Giants  of  fifteene  or  sixteene
spans  of  height.  I  affirme,  that  at  Port  Desire  I  saw  the
footing  of  them,  by  the  shoare  side,  that  was  above  foure
foote  of  one  of  our  mens  in  length;  and  I  saw  two  of
them  that  were  buried  newly,  the  one  of  them  was
foureteene  spannes  long.  After  I  was  taken  with  the
Spaniards,  the  Desire,  one  of  our  Shippes  that  had  beene
all  alone  at  Port  Desire,  lost  nine  men  and  a  boy,  and  two

265

A.D.

l6oi

A  youth  13.
spans  high.

Chile.

Giants  habit-
lesse  habit.

Port  Famine
in  the  Straits
of  Mage  Ian.

Wide  mouthed
men.

[IV.  vi.

1233.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

or  three  of  them  that  had  beene  taken  on  the  coast  of
Brasil,  said  that  these  Giants  did  throw  stones  of  such
bignesse  at  them  out  of  strings,  that  they  were  faine  to
weigh  anker,  and  to  lye  further  from  the  shoare.  I  saw
another  of  these  in  Brasil,  that  was  taken  by  Alonso  Dias
a  Spaniard,  that  with  foule  weather  was  driven  out  of
Saint  Julians ;  this  was  but  a  young  man,  yet  above
thirteene  spannes  long.  This  Port  Desire  is  a  faire
pleasant  Countrie,  it  hath  many  fine  Rivers,  and  the
Spaniards  doe  affirme,  that  from  this  place  it  is  easie  to
goe  to  the  Indians  Chele,  which  is  a  very  rich  Countrie.
In  Port  Desire,  in  many  small  Rivers  there  is  a  great  store
of  Pearle,  and  Currall.  Here  you  may  have  great  store
of  Penguins  and  Seales  at  an  Hand  that  lieth  a  mile
Southward  of  the  mouth  of  the  haven.  These  Giants
whereof  I  have  spoken,  goe  all  naked ;  they  weare  their
haire  long  to  the  shoulders.  He  whom  I  saw  at  Brasil,
was  a  man  of  faire  complexion,  and  very  well  proportioned
according  to  his  long  stature :  and  this  is  all  that  I  can
report  of  them,  for  I  know  not  their  behaviour,  but  as  the
Portugals  and  Spaniards  judge,  they  are  no  better  then
the  Man-eaters  of  Brasil.

At  Port  Famine  the  Generall  would  have  left  mee.
Here  inhabit  a  kinde  of  strange  Canibals,  short  of  body,
not  above  five  or  six  spans  high,  and  very  strong  and
thicke  made :  their  mouthes  are  verie  bigge,  and  reach
almost  to  their  eares ;  they  eate  their  meate  in  a  manner
raw,  for  they  doe  nothing  but  scorch  it  a  little  in  the  fire,
and  so  eate  it,  and  with  the  bloud  that  runneth  from  their
mouthes,  they  smeare  all  their  faces,  and  their  breasts,  and
lay  yong  feathers  on  their  bodies  to  the  bloud  that
clingeth  to  their  skinnes  like  Glue.  When  we  were  at
the  straits  in  this  place,  there  came  above  foure  or  five
thousand  unto  us  of  them,  but  they  never  brought  unto
us  any  thing  but  Feathers  and  Pearle  as  much  as  we
would  (for  there  is  great  store  in  this  Port  Famine)  all
the  while  that  we  were  at  it.  These  Canibals  would  never
let us come  so  neere them,  as  to touch  any  of  them,

266

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1601.

for  feare  we  should  take  them ;  when  they  would  give  us
any  thing,  they  would  tie  it  at  the  end  of  a  longe  staffe,
and  so  likewise  we  did  to  them.  Here  our  Generall  left
seven  sicke  men  ashore :  the  Snow  lyeth  all  the  yeare
on  the  Mountaines,  and  it  is  so  cold  in  June,  and  July,  Extreamecold

•/'  W*  J  J  Mm  J*  J

that  our  men  did  freeze,  and  many  of  them  lost  their  toes,  ^  Ja

as  I  my  selfe  for  one,  for  in  one  night  that  I  lay  moist  of

my  feete,  I  lost  three  of  my  toes  on  one  of  my  feete,  and

foure  of  the  toppes  of  the  other  foote;  some  had  their

feete  frozen, some  their  noses,  as  Harris  a  Gold-smith,  Harris  the

Henry  Barrawell,  that  was  taken  with  me,  lost  his  haire  ^"hmith.

from  his  head,  and  was  all  bald  for  a  yeare  or two in

Brasil: yet for all this cold,  all the Inhabitants goe

naked, except here and there  one  weare  seale  skinnes,

or  the  skins  of  some  wilde  Beasts,  of  the  which  there  are

many,  as  Leopards,  Lions,  and  a  kinde  of  Beasts  bigger  Beasts  bigger

then  Horses,  they  have  great  eares  above  a  spanne  long,  ^j^0"^

and  their  tailes  are  like  the  tailes  of  a  Cowe ;  these  are  stra-lts  canea>

very  good,  the  Indians  of  Brasil  call  them  Tapetywason :  Tapetywason,

of  these Beasts  I saw  in  Ethiopia,  in  the  Kingdome  of  'tn  Ethiopia:

Manicongo,  the  Portugals  call  them  Gombe  :  farther  within  v^^iya

the  Straits  at  Tolisbay,  we  found  many  barkes  of  trees,  or  j)anteca

that  the  Indians  of  the  Straits  doe  fish  in,  these  Indians  see  Tom.  1.

would  not  come  neere us, but still  as  they  espied  our  p-  1002.

Boates  they  would  runne  away,  but  we  plainely  saw  that

they  were  men  of  good  stature,  and  of  white  skinnes ;

they goe all naked both  men  and  women. And  thus

I  end  my  travell  of  America.

Angola  is  a  Kingdome  of  it  selfe  in  Ethiopia,  where  Of  Angola  to
first the  Portugals  did begin to inhabit: the Countrie  ^Z%r{jj[f
of  Angola  commeth  along the  coast,  as  Portugall  doth  as  if  before  '
upon  Spaine,  so  doth  Angola  runne  upon  the  Kingdome  delivered.
of  Longa  and  Manicongo. In  Angola  the  Portugals  have
a  Citie,  called  the  Holy  Ghost, where  they  have  great
store  of  Merchandise,  and  the  Moore  doe  come  thither
with  all  kinde  of  such  things  as  the  Countrie  yeeldeth,
some bring Elephants teeth,  some bring  Negro  slaves
to sell,  that they  take from other Kingdomes which

267

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I  60 1.

joyne  hard  by  them :  thus  doe  they  use  once  a  weeke,
as  we  keepe  Markets,  so  doe  all  the  Blackamoores  bring
Hens  and  Hogs,  which  they  call  Gula,  and  Hennes  they
call  Sange,  and  a  kinde  of  Beast  that  they  take  in  the
Wildernesse  like  a  Dogge,  which  they  call  Ambroa :  then
they  have  that  Beast  which  before  I  have  told  you  of,
called  Gumbe,  which  is  bigger  then  a  Horse.  The
Blackamoores  doe  keepe  good  Lawes,  and  feare  their
The  Kings  King  verie  much :  the  King  is  alwaies  attended  with  the
pompe.  Nobles  of  his  Realme,  and  whensoever  he  goeth  abroad,

he  hath  alwaies  at  the  least  two  hundred  archers  in  his
guard,  and  ten  or  twelve  more  going  before  him  sing-
ing and  playing  with  Pipes  made  of  great  Canes,  and
foure  or  five  yong  Moores  comming  after  him  as  his
Pages,  after  them  follow  all  his  Noblemen.  When  there
falleth  out  anie  controversie  among  them,  they  crave
battell  of  the  King,  and  then  they  fight  it  out  before  him.
Rites  of  the  They  come  before  the  King  and  fall  flat  on  their  breasts,
peope.  tjlen tjiey r-se  Up  anj  k-neeie  on  their  knees  stretching

out  their  armes,  crying  Mahobeque  benge,  benge;  then
the  King  striketh  them  on  the  shoulders  with  a  Horse-
taile,  then  they  goe  to  the  Campe,  and  with  their  Bowes
they  fight  it  out,  till  they  kill  one  another.  After  the
battell  is  done,  if  any  liveth,  he  that  liveth  falleth  downe
before  the  King  in  the  same  manner  as  he  did  when
he  went  to  the  field,  and  after  a  long  oration  made,
he  taketh  the  Horse-taile  from  the  Kings  shoulder,  and
waveth  it  about  the  Kings  head,  and  then  laieth  it  on
his  shoulder  againe,  and  goeth  away  with  great  honour,
being  accompanied  with  all  the  Nobles  of  the  Court  :
the  Moores  of  Angola  doe  know  that  there  is  a  God,
and  doe  call  God  Cari  pongoa,  but  they  worship  the
Sunne  and  the  Moone.
The  Countrie.  The  Countrie  is  Champain  plaine,  and  drie  blacke
earth,  and  yeeldeth  verie  little  Corne,  the  most  of  any
thing  that  it  yeeldeth  is  Plantons,  which  the  Portugals
call  Baynonas,  and  the  Moores  call  them  Mahonge,  and
their  Wheate  they  call  Tumba, and the Bread Anov ;

268

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1601.

and  if  you  will  buy  any  Bread  of  them,  you must  say
Tala Cuna  aven  tumbola  gimbo,  that  is,  give  me  some
bread,  here  is  money. Their  money  is  called  Gull  ginbo,
a  shell  of  a  fish  that  they  flnde  by  the  shoare  side,  and
from  Brasil  the  Portugals  doe  carrie  great  store  of  them
to Angola. These  Moores  doe  esteeme  verie  much  of
red, blew, and yellow  cloathes, they will  give  a  slave
for  a  span  of  cloath  in  breadth I  meane,  and  the  length
of  it  of  the  breadth  of  the  peece,  those  peeces  of  cloth
they  weare  about  their  middles,  and  under  it  they  hang
the skin of  a  great  Weasell  before  them,  and  another  Wezels  skin
behinde them, and this is all  the  garments  that  they  affected.
weare. A Weazell in their language is  called  Puccu.
You can doe  a  Blackamoore no greater  disgrace,  then
to  take  away  his  Skinne  from  before  him,  for  he  will  dye
with  griefe  if  he  cannot  be  revenged :  the  Portugals  doe  Branded
marke them  as  we doe  Sheepe  with  a  hot  Iron,  which  heguikd
the Moores call Crimbo,  the  poore  slaves  stand  all  in es'
a row one  by  another,  and  sing  Mundele  que  sumbela
he  Carey  ha  belelelle, and thus the poore rogues are
beguiled,  for  the  Portugals  make  them  beleeve  that  they
that  have  not  the  marke  is  not  accounted  a  man  of  any
account  in  Brasil  or  in Portugall,  and thus they  bring
the  poore  Moores  to  be  in a most damnable  bondage
under  the colour of  love. The Countrey of  Angola
yeeldeth  no  stone,  and  very  little  wood :  the  Moores  doe
make  their  houses  all  covered  with  earth ;  these houses
are  no  bigger  then  a  reasonable  Chamber,  and  within  are
many  partitions,  like  the  Cabbins  of  a  ship,  in  such  sort  [IV-  vi.
that  a  man  cannot  stand  upright  in  them. There  beds  I234-J

are  made  of  great  Bulrushes  sowed  together  with  the
rindes  of  a  Tree.  They  doe  make  cloth  like  Sparke
of  Velvet  (but  it  is  thinner)  of  the  barke  of  a  Tree,
and  that  cloth  they  doe  call  Mollelleo.  The  Elephants  Taking  of
doe  feed  in  the  Evening  and  in  the  Morning  in  low  Ebphants.
marishes  as  there  bee  many.  The  Moores  doe  watch
which  way  they  come,  and  assoone  as  the  Elephants  are
at meat, they digge great holes in the ground, and

269

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

cover  them  with  sticks,  and  then  they  cover  the  pits
with  earth,  and  when  they  have  made  all  readie  they
goe  to  the  Elephants,  and  shoote  at  them  with  their
Arrowes,  and  assoone  as  the  Elephants  feele  themselves
hurt,  they  runne  at  whatsoever  they  see  before  them,
following  after  the  Blackamores  that  chase  them,  then
they  fall  into  the  deepe  pits  where  after  they  are  once
in,  they  cannot  get  out.  The  Moores  of  Angolo  are  as
blacke  as  Jet ;  they  are  men  of  good  stature,  they  never
take  but  one  Wife,  whom  they  call  Mocasha.  These
Moores  doe  cut  long  streakes  in  their  faces,  that  reach
from  the  top  of  their  eares  to  their  chinnes.  The  women
doe  weare  shels  of  fishes  on  their  armes,  and  on  the
small  of  their  legges.  The  Law  amongst  them,  is,  that
if  any  More  doe  lie  with  an  others  wife,  hee  shall  lose

Circumcision,  his  eares  for  his  offence.  These  Moores  doe  circumcize
their  children,  and  give  them  their  names,  as  wee  doe
when  we  baptize.  Angola  may  very  easily  be  taken :
for  the  Portugals  have  no  Forts  to  defend  it  of  any
strength.

Of  Congo.  The King of  Congo is the greatest King in all

^Ethiopia;  and  doth  keepe  in  the  field  continually  sixtie
thousand  Souldiers,  that  doe  warre  against  the  King  of
Vangala,  and  the  King  of  Angola;  this  King  is  a
Christian,  and  is  brother  in  Law  of  Armes  with  the
King  of  Spaine,  his  servants  of  his  house  are  most  of
them  all  Portugals,  and  hee  doth  favour  them  very  much.

The  King.  The  King  is  of  a  verie  liberall  condition,  and  verie  favour-
able to  all  Travellers,  and  doth  delight  verie  much  to
heare  of  forreigne  Countries.  He  was  in  a  manner  amazed
to  heare  how  it  was  possible  her  Majestie  had  lived  a
Maiden  Queene  so  long,  and  alwaies  reigned  in  peace
with  her  subjects.  When  I  was  brought  before  the  King,
and  told  him  of  my  Countrie ;  what  plentie  of  things  we
had,  if  the  Portugals  had  not  liked  of  it,  they  would
interrupt  my  speech,  and  the  King  would  shew  himselfe
verie  angrie,  and  tell  them  that  everie  man  was  best  able
to  speake  of  his  Countrie,  and  that  I  had  no  reason  but

270

ANTHONY KNIVET  ad.

1601,
to  tell  him  that  which  was  true.  The  King  of  Congo,
when  hee  goeth  to  the  Campe  to  see  his  Armie,  rideth
upon  an  Elephant  in  great  pompe  and  majestie,  on  either
side  of  the  Elephant  he  hath  six  slaves  two  of  them
were  Kings,  that  he  himselfe  had  taken  in  the  field;  all
the  rest  were  of  noble  birth ;  some  of  them  were  brothers
to  the  King  of  Ancica,  and  some  of  them  were  of  the
chiefest  bloud  of  the  great  King  of  Bengala.  These
noble  slaves  at  everie  command  of  the  King  of  Congo ;
doe  fall  flat  on  the  ground  on  their  brests.  When  the
King  doth  ride  as  you  have  heard,  they  carrie  a  Canopie
as  it  were  a  cloth  of  State  over  his  head.  His  two
Secretaries,  the  one  a  Nobleman  of  Spaine,  the  other
a  More,  doe  ride  next  after  him.  Before  him  goeth  at
the  least  five  hundred  Archers,  which  are  his  Guard,
then  there  followeth  a  More,  which  doth  nothing  but
talke  aloud  in  praise  of  the  King,  telling  what  a  great
Warriour  he  hath  beene,  and  praising  his  wisdome  for
all  things  that  hee  hath  accomplished  verie  honourably
to  his  great  fame  of  such  as  knew  him.  When  this
King  of  Congo  commeth  to  his  Host,  all  the  Souldiers
as  he  passeth,  fall  flat  on  their  faces  to  the  ground.  He
never  commeth  into  his  Host  after  any  battell,  but  hee
dubbeth  at  the  least  twentie  Knights  Portugals,  and  as
many  Moores,  giving  them  verie  great  living  according  to
their  callings,  and  the  service  that  they  have  done.  The
brother  of  this  King  was  in  Spaine,  at  my  comming  from
thence  for  Ambassadour  from  his  brother.

Here  the  Portugall  Captaine  would  have  taken  mee
perforce,  to  have  beene  a  common  Souldier,  but  the
King  commanded  that  they  should  let  mee  goe  whether  I
would,  and  my  determination  at  that  time  was  to  have
gone  for  the  Countrie  of  Prester  John,  for  I  had  a
great  desire  to  see  the  River  of  Nilo  and  Jerusalem
(for  I  accounted  my  selfe  as  a  lost  man,  not  caring  into
what  Countrie  or  Kingdome  I  came)  but  it  was  not
the  will  of  God,  that  I  should  at  that  time  obtaine  my
desire. For  travelling  through  the  Kingdome  of  Congo,

271

A.D.

l60I,

Mosangana.
See  Tom.  1.
/.  7.  c.  3.
And.  Battell
lived  here  sixe
yeeres.

Sickly

disposition  of
the  place.

[IV.  vi.

37-]

Gold.
Paul  Dias.

Angica.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  have  gone  to  the  Kingdome  of  Angila.  It  was
my  fortune  to  meete  a  companie  of  Portugall  Souldiers
that  went  to  a  Conquest,  that  the  King  of  Spain  had
newly  taken,  called  Masangana ;  which  place  is  on  the
borders  of  Anguca.  Here  they  made  me  serve  like  a
Drudge,  for  both  day  and  night  I  carried  some  stone
and  lime  to  make  a  Fort.  It  lieth  right  under  the  Line,
and  standeth  in  a  bottome  in  the  middle  of  foure  hils,  and
about  are  many  fogges,  but  not  one  River.  It  is  the
unfirmest  Countrie  under  the  Sunne.  Here  the  Portugals
die  like  Chickens ;  you  shall  see  men  in  the  morning
verie  lustie,  and  within  two  houres  dead.  Others,  that  if
they  but  weat  their  legges,  presently  they  swell  bigger
then  their  middle;  others  brake  in  the  sides  with  a
draught  of  water.  O,  if  you  did  know  the  intolerable
heate  of  the  Countrie,  you  would  thinke  your  selfe  better
a  thousand  times  dead,  then  to  live  there  a  weeke.  There
you  shall  see  poore  Souldiers  lie  in  troupes,  gaping  like
Camelians  for  a  pufFe  of  winde.  Here  lived  I  three
moneths,  not  as  the  Portugals  did,  taking  of  Physicke,
and  everie  weeke  letting  of  bloud  and  keeping  close
in  their  houses  when  they  had  any  raine,  observing  houres,
and  times  to  goe  abroad  morning  and  Evening,  and  never
to  eate  but  at  such  and  such  times.  I  was  glad  when  I
had  got  any  thing  at  morning,  noone  or  night,  I  thanke
God  I  did  worke  all  day,  from  morning  till  night,  had  it
beene  raine  or  never  so  great  heate.  I  had  alwaies  my
health  as  well  as  I  have  in  England.  This  Countrie  is
verie  rich,  the  King  had  great  store  of  Gold  sent  him  from
this  place :  the  time  that  I  was  there,  the  King  of  Angica
had  a  great  Citie  at  Masangana ;  which  Citie  Paulas  Dias,
governour  of  Angola,  tooke  and  scituated  there,  and  find-
ing hard  by  it  great  store  of  Gold,  fortified  it  with  foure
Forts,  and  walled  a  great  circuit  of  ground  round  about
it,  and  within  that  wall,  now  the  Portugals  doe  build  a
Citie,  and  from  this  Citie  everie  day  they  doe  warre
against  the  King  of  Angica,  and  have  burnt  a  great  part
of  his  Kingdome.

272

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1601.
The  Angicas  are  men  of  goodly  stature,  they  file  their  dnzicans
teeth  before  on  their  upper  Jawe  and  on  their  under  Jawe,  va  mnt'
making  a  distance betweene  them like the teeth of  a
Dogge ;  they  doe  eate  mans  flesh,  they  are  the  stubbornest
Nation  that  lives  under  the  Sunne,  and  the  resolutest  in  the
field  that  ever  man  saw ;  for  they  will  rather  kill  them-
selves then yeelde  to the  Portugals :  they  inhabit  right
under  the  line,  and  of  all  kinde  of  Moores  these  are  the
blackest ;  they  doe  live  in  the  Law  of  the  Turkes,  and
honour Mahomet,  they  keepe  manie  Concubines  as  the  OfMahume-
Turkes  doe,  they  wash  themselves  everie  morning  upwards,  ^/J^'r
falling  flat  on  their  faces  towards  the  East. They  weare  were  not
their  haire  all  made  in  plaits  on  their  heads,  as  well  men  deceived  by
as  women : they  have  good  store  of  Wheate,  and  a  kinde  occasion  of
of  graine  like  Fetches,  of  the  which  thev  make  Bread  : .e!r  ctrcu1?~

, 0  '  TT  ,  J  .  cision; which

they have great store or riennes like Cartridges, and -m  Africa  is

Turkies, and all their feathers curie  on their backes :  common  to

their  houses  are  like  the  other  houses  of  the  Kingdomes  Christians  and

aforenamed. And  thus  I  end,  shewing  you  as  briefe  as  I  Ethn"ks>™tth
„ . XT .  1  XT- j  i-i  1  Mahumetans.

can,  all  the  Nations  and  Kingdomes  that  with  great  danger

of  my  life  I  travelled  through  in  twelve  yeares  of  my  best

age  getting  no  more  then  my  travell  for  my  paine. From

this  Kingdome  Angica,  was  I  brought  in  Irons  againe  to

my  Master  Salvador  Corea  de  Sasa,  to  the  Citie  of  Saint

Sebastian  in  Brasil,  as  you  have  heard. Now  you  have

seene  the  discourse  of  my  travels,  and  the  fashions  of  all

the  Countries  and  Nations  where  I  have  beene,  I  will  by

the  helpe of  God, make you a short discourse  in the

language of the Petiwares, which language all the

Inhabitants of Brasil doe understand, especially all

the coast from Fernambucquo to the River of  Plate,

the which I hope will be profitable to all travellers,

and of them I trust my  paines shall  be  well  accepted

of.

First,  you  must  tell  them  of  what  Nation  you  are,  and

that  you  come  not  as  the  Portugals  doe,  for  their  wives

and  children  to  make  them  bondslaves.

[We

xvi  273  s

A.D.

l60I.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

We  are  Englishmen,  as
you  all  know  that  in  times
past  had  peace  with  you.

Now  knowing  the  neede
and  want  that  you  have  of
all  such  things  as  before
your  Fathers  had,  for  the
love  that  both  your  ance-
stours  and  ours  did  beare
one  to  another,  and  for  the
love  and  pittie  that  we  have
of  your  want,  we  are  come
to  renew  our  ancient  amity.

Ore  aqureiuva  que  se
neering  per  amoya  werisco
Catadoro  warevy  orenysbe
beresoy.

Coev  pecoteve  Cowavere
pipope  pewseva  baresey  opa-
catubaye  berva  oweryco  coen
pecoteve  sou  se.  Core  man-
doare  peramoya  waysouba,
ore  ranoya  waysonua  reseii
etegueva  reseii  pecoteve  par-
arava,  ore  iu  ibewith  ore
ramoya pereri socatumoyn

go  pacum.

Rio  Grande.

§.  v.

The  description  of  divers  Rivers,  Ports,  Harbours,
Hands  of  Brasil :  for  instruction  of  Navigators.

Io  Grande,  is  called  by  us  the  great  River,  lately
was  conquered  by  a  Portugall,  called  Manuell
Masquarenhas.  It  is  above  two  leagues  broad
in  the  mouth,  and  on  the  South-east  side  standeth  a  great
Fort  made  by  the  foresaid  Manuell  Masquarenhas :  that
Countrie  is  plaine  and  sandy  in  many  places,  especially
neere  the  Sea,  and  yeeldeth  Sugar  Canes  in  abundance.
On  the  coast  are  many  great  Bayes,  where  the  Indians
Ambergreese.  doe  oftentimes  finde  great  store  of  Ambergreese :  within
this  place,  there  is  also  store  of  Wood,  Pepper,  Ginger,
and  Waxe.  Here  inhabit  a  kinde  of  Canibals,  called
Petywares :  these  Canibals  have  had  trafficke  a  long  time
with  France,  and  amongst  them  there  are  many  that  can
speake  French,  which  are  Bastards,  begotten  of  French-
men.

On  the  coast  of  Brasil  there  are  three  Rivers  of  Parae-
yva :  one  is  this  that  lieth  next  to  Rio  Grande,  the  other
is  a  great  River  that  runneth  through  the  Countrie  almost
as  farre  as  Lymo,  and  commeth  out  betweene  Cape  Frio

274

Paraeyva
three  Rivers.

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1601.

and  Spirito  Sancto :  the  third  is  a  faire  River  that  lieth
betweene  the  River  of  Plate  and  Saint  Vincents.  This
Pareyva  whereof  we  speake,  is  a  faire  great  Bay,  where
shipping  being  never  so  great  may  enter,  within  this  Bay
upon  a  hill,  you  shall  see  a  faire  Citie,  and  on  the  Sea  side
standeth  two  small  Forts.  You  may  anker  neere  the
shoare,  at  the  entrie  of  this  Bay,  you  shall  see  three  hils  of
red  earth  on  either  side  of  the  harbour,  which  the  Portu-
gals  call  Bareras  Mermethaes.

Guyana, is a small River that lieth by  Paracua, it  [IV- vi-
belongeth  to  Jasper Desiquerd,  who  was chiefe  Justice . IZ,/\
of  all  Brasil. In  the  mouth  of  this  River  standeth  a  great  Guyana  I
rocke, which is continually covered with Sea Foules. mean  not  that
This River hath two fadome water in the mouth, a  of  Sir  Walter
quarter  of  a  mile  within this  River,  on  the  South-west Rawh-
side,  you  may  take  fresh  water,  and  great  store  of  Cattell :
upon  this  River  there  are  great  store  of  Sugar  Mils,  and
continually  you  shall  have  in  this  River  small  Carvels  that
fish,  and  carry  Sugar  from  thence  to  Fernambuquo :  like-
wise here  is  great  store  of  Brasil,  Pepper,  Ginger,  and
Cotten, Cocos, Indian Nuts, here likewise inhabit
Petywares.

Etamariqua in the  Indian language  is a  bed,  it  is  a  The  descrlp-

point  of  the  land  like  a  Cape: the  point  runneth  halfe  tiol°fAplTy
r .. .  10  1  • 1 -n»  ii  i-i called  by  the

a  mile  into  the  Sea,  and  upon  it  the  Portugals  have  built  jn(aans

a  Towne,  you  may  anker  very  neere  the  shoare,  both  on  Etamariqua.

the  South-west  and  on  the  North-east  side  of  the  Towne,

in  seven  and  eight  fadome  water. All  the  Countrie  till

you  come  to  Cape  Augustin,  is  low  land,  and  to  saile  from

thence  to  Fernambuquo  is  no  danger,  but  the  clifts  which

lye  along  the  coast,  as  farre  as  the  River  Saint  Francis,

which  are alwayes  seene, the  Seas  when  there are any

Spring  tides, doe  overflow the  land  behinde : moreover

if  any winde blow from the East, it beateth the Sea

into hils of  the Clifts, that it maketh a  great  noise.

Wherefore the Indians call it the Land of  the Bell.

Here are reasonable store of  Sugars, and great  store

of  Coco  Nuts.

275

A.D.

l60I.

Fernambuquo
and  the  Citie
of  Olindo.

Cape  of  Saint
Augustine.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

On  the  North  side  of  Fernambuquo,  you  shall  see
white  Downes,  and  when  you  are  past  all  the  Downes
on  the  South,  you  are  by  Capignramirinii,  which  is  a
place  where  alwaies  you  shall  see  Fisher-men  in  small
Boates  or  Jangades ;  and  from  thence  to  Fernambuquo,
are  five  or  six  miles,  and  so  if  you  be  under  8.  degrees,
you  shall  see  a  flat  land  even  and  bare,  called  Capituya ;
then  you  must  take  heede  you  runne  not  Southward,
for  then  you  runne  upon  a  point  of  the  land,  called  by
the  Portugals  Punto  de  Olynda,  which  is  foure  leagues
from  the  Cape,  and  stretcheth  into  the  Sea  as  farre  as
Cape  Augustin.  As  soone  as  you  have  doubled  this  point,
you  must  take  heede  you  put  not  in  with  the  Towne
of  Olynda,  which  you  shall  see ;  for  if  you  doe,  you
will  runne  upon  the  Sands,  called  by  the  Portugals
Bayhos  de  S.  Antonio,  which  lye  at  least  foure  or  five
miles  into  the  Sea,  being  neere  the  shoare,  you  shall  see  the
Shippes  that  lye  at  anker  over  the  Clifts  called  by  the
Portugals  Arecias :  this  place  is  a  league  from  Fernambu-
quo, being  the  harbour  where  all  the  Shipping  that  goes
from  Fernambuquo  doe  arrive :  from  this  place  to  the
Cape  you  shall  see  the  Clifts,  as  if  it  were  a  wall  made
by  Bricklayers,  no  higher  in  one  place  then  in  another,
but  all  even.  The  Towne  of  Fernambuquo  is  scituated
upon  a  hill,  and  very  strongly  entrenched  round  about,
on  the  Sea  side  every  twelve  score,  standeth  a  small
Fort  or  defence  for  Soldiers,  with  foure  cast  Peeces,
and  so  they  scowre  all  the  shoare  from  the  Arecias,  where
the  Shippes  lye  to  the  point  of  Olynda,  which  is  the
farthest  part  of  the  Towne  Northwards,  from  the  Arecias
where  the  Ships  lye  commeth  a  River  through  the  land,
a  Harquebusse  shot  from  the  Sea  coast,  and  runneth
right  behinde  the  Towne  from  the  South  to  the  West
and  East,  which  maketh  the  Towne  almost  an  Hand,
all  but  a  little  part  of  the  North  side.

The  Cape  of 'Saint  Augustin  is  a  Point  of  land  that
runneth  into  the  Sea  two  or  three  miles :  from  the  Sea
you  shall  see  three  hils,  called  by  the  Petiwares,  Aquare

276

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1601.
Wason  Remitum,  they  will  seeme  unto  you  like  the
backe  of  a  Camell,  and  now  you  may  easily  know  it,
for  you  may  see  a  Church  that  the  Portugals  have  built ;
and  halfe  a  league  towards  the  South,  you  shall  see  the
Hand  of  Saint  Aleyxo.

The Hand of  Saint  Aleyxo is  long  and narrow : it  M  °/S.
lieth  within  a  league  of  the  shore,  and  stretcheth  North-  Ak^xo-
east  and  South-west,  you  may  anker  betweene  the  shoare
and  it  all  weathers,  for  the  Hand  hath  very  faire  Baies,
where  you  may  lye  in  ten  or  twelve  fadome  water. Upon
this  Hand  you  may  take  wood  or  fresh  water.

Porto  Docalno  lyeth  Southward  of  the  Hand  of  Saint  Porto  Docakn.
Aleyxo,  it  is  a  flat  land,  you  neede  not  feare  the  comming
in  by  the  rockes,  for  hard  by  them  you  shall  have  foure-
teene  fathome  water.  Here  you  shall  have  great  store
of  Cattell,  and  Sugars.  This  Countrie  is  plaine  low
land,  and  all  planted  with  Sugar  Canes :  you  shall  know
this  harbor  very  easily  from  the  Southerne  point  of  the
Hand  Saint  Aleyxo,  for  when  it  ebbeth,  you  shall  see
a  faire  Bay,  and  all  the  shore  bare  almost  to  the  Cape,
being  blacke  ground.

Eight  leagues  Southward  from  the  Porto  de  calno,  is
the  River  of  stones.  Southward  of  it  you  shall  see  three  River  of
great  red  Hills,  which  stand  over  the  River  of  Camary-  ^ones.
juva,  which  is  a  league  from  this  River,  you  shall  see
from  Sea  a  great  Bay  run  within  the  Land,  and  before
the  mouth  of  it  many  great  Rocks,  to  come  to  this
Bay  you  must  come  close  to  the  shoare  on  the  South-
west side,  and  after  you  bee  in  the  Bay  keepe  full  West,
and  it  will  bring  you  to  a  River  that  runneth  into
the  Land  at  the  least  twentie  leagues.  In  the  mouth
of  this  River  dwell  sixe  or  seven  Portugals,  that  keepe
Cattell  for  John  Pays,  but  they  are  of  no  strength.
Here  you  may  take  water  at  pleasure,  and  alwayes  in
those  houses,  that  stand  in  the  mouth  of  the  River,
you  shall  have  good  store  of  Cassavi  meale.  If  you
be  of  any  strength,  that  you  dare  goe  ten  or  twelve
miles  up  the  River  you  shall  take  good  store  of  Sugars,

277

A.D.
l60I.

[IV.  vi.

1239.

Camaryjuva.

The  River  of
Saint  Antonio.

Salt.

Fish  Varava.

A  place  called
the  Harbour  of
Frenchmen.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

for  there  standeth  three  or  foure  Sugar  mills  onely,
an  other  on  the  River  side;  likewise  here  is  good
store  of  Brasill,  and  Pepper,  Cotton,  and  many  other
merchandise.

Camaryjuva  (as  I  have  said)  lyeth  a  league  Southward
from  the  River  of  stones,  to  know  it  you  shall  see  three
Hills  of  red  ground,  called  by  the  Portugals,  Bareos
Vernellios,  this  place  is  not  inhabited:  the  mouth  of  this
place  is  narrow,  and  hath  not  above  five  foot  water,
but  you  may  anchor  in  the  Bay  hard  by  the  River,  and
send  your  Boat  safely  for  fresh  water  without  danger,
or  to  fish  with  your  Net,  for  there  is  great  store  of  fresh
fish  of  all  kindes.

The  River  of  Saint  Antonio  lyeth  seven  leagues  from
Camaryjuva,  it  is  a  faire  great  River,  lyeth  some  fiftie
leagues  within  the  Land,  hath  foure  fathom  water  at  the
comming  in,  but  is  so  narrow  that  no  ship  can  come  in.
It  is  a  very  good  place  for  you  if  you  stand  in  neede
(having  salt)  to  make  your  provision,  for  there  you  shall
have  great  store  of  all  kinde  of  fish,  especially  of  a  kinde
of  fish,  called  by  the  Indians,  Varava,  which  is  as  bigge  as
an  Oxe.  After  you  are  within  this  River,  you  shall  have
high  land  on  both  sides,  and  you  must  be  carefull  and
keep  good  watch,  for  up  this  River  dwelleth  a  kinde
of  people,  called  Carayas,  these  people  if  they  see  you
unprovided  will  fight  with  you,  but  if  they  see  you  able
to  defend  your  selves,  then  will  they  bring  such  things  as
they  have  to  traffick.

The  Harbour  of  French-men,  called  by  the  Indians,
Ajurema  piasave,  lyeth  two  leagues  Southward  from  the
River  of  Saint  Antonio.  It  is  a  small  Bay,  that  may
be  knowne  by  a  high  Hill  that  standeth  over  it,  which
is  all  full  of  Brasiil  trees.  To  enter  into  this  Harbour,
you  must  marke  the  ClifFes,  and  when  you  are  to  the
North  of  them  all  but  one,  you  may  safely  come  within  a
stones  cast  to  the  shoare.  When  you  have  landed  if  you
want  fresh  water,  you  must  seeke  on  the  South  side
of  the  Hill,  and  you  shall  finde  a  streame  that  runneth

278

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1601.

out  of  the  Hill  into  a  great  Cisterne  of  stone,  which
is  made  out  of  a  rocke,  you  cannot  misse  of  this  place  if
you  seeke  for  it,  for  all  the  way  you  shall  see  small  Rocks,
and  mens  names  written  in  them.

This  river  in  our  language  is  called  the  River  of  River  ca^
Crocodiles,  for  in  it  there  are  many,  which  the  Indians  Ja4uareasuke'
call  Jaquares ;  it  is  narrow,  and  in  the  mouth  of  it
standeth  a  white  Rocke.  To  enter  it  you  must  take
heed  you  keepe  on  the  North  side  of  this  Rocke,  and
you  shall  finde  nine  and  ten  foot  water  ;  after  you  be
within  it  you  shall  come  to  a  great  Bay,  and  on  the
North-east  side  you  shall  finde  a  small  River,  where  you
may  take  fresh  water,  but  let  every  man  take  heed
how  hee  leapeth  into  the  water,  for  the  Crocodiles  lie
by  the  banke-side  hidden,  and  if  anything  fall  into  the
water  presently  they  kill  it.  Here  is  nothing  to  bee  had
unlesse  you  will  fish  for  the  Crocodiles,  and  take  the
Bladders  or  Cods  of  muske  from  them :  here  you
need  not  feare  any  Inhabitants,  except  you  be  espyed
by  some  passengers  that  goe  to  Fernambuquo.

Alaqua  is  a  very  faire  River,  that  lyeth  foure  leagues  Alaqua.
Northward  from  the  River  of  Saint  Michael,  and  three
leagues  Southward  from  the  aforesaid  River  of  Crocodiles.
On  either  side  of  it  you  shall  see  a  great  Hill,  called  by
the  Portugals,  Os  Caivas.  You  shall  finde  but  seven
or  eight  foot  water  at  the  comming,  and  very  cleere  from
any  Rocks,  but  after  you  bee  within,  you  shall  finde
many  bankes  of  sand,  where  you  shall  kill  good  store
of  fish,  and  alwayes  you  shall  bee  sure  to  have  Carvells
fishing  in  this  place,  at  the  comming  in  on  both  sides
you  may  take  fresh  water.

Before  the  River  of  Saint  Michael  you  shall  see  River  of  Saint
the  Cliffes  like  Arecines  of  Fernambuquo ;  you  must  Michael.
enter  at  the  end  of  the  Cliffe,  hard  by  the  shoare
on  the  South-west :  and  you  must  marke  a  small  Cliffe
that  lyeth  betweene  the  mouth  of  the  River  and  the
shoare,  this  Cliffe  you  leave  betweene  you  and  the  shoare,
and  betwixt this Cliffe and the great Rocks  you  may

279

A.D.

l60I.

The  Harbour,
called  the
River  of
Toades.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

enter  it ;  three  fathom  water.  But  take  heed  when  you
enter,  that  you  saile  not  towards  the  North-east,  although
you  see  the  Bay  great,  for  you  shall  run  upon  many  great
bankes  of  sand,  therefore  you  must  keepe  West  still
within  a  stones  cast  of  the  shoare,  so  shall  you  be  sure
to  keep  in  the  Channell.  Thus  you  must  saile  till  you
discover  a  house,  that  you  shall  see  doubling  a  Point
full  South  from  you,  then  your  best  is  to  anchor,  for
if  you  goe  farther,  you  are  in  danger  except  you  know
the  Channell  very  well.  In  this  place  dwels  a  Portugall,
called  John  de  Rocho :  and  up  a  River  that  you  shall  see
runne  into  the  Land  dwell  many  Portugals,  where  they
have  a  Church  with  Friars  to  say  Masse.  Here  you
shall  have  good  store  of  Cattell  if  you  need,  and  Brasill
wood,  Cassavi  meale :  and  in  this  River  you  shall  have
good  store  of  Oisters,  and  in  them  you  shall  find  many
great  Pearles :  likewise  here  is  good  store  of  Balsom  oile,
and  trees  of  All  Nesico,  which  is  a  very  precious  and  rich
wood,  singular  good  for  bruises,  or  old  hurts:  also  here
is  good  store  of  Tabacco.  This  place  is  eight  leagues
from  the  River  of  Toades,  where  we  were  driven  on
the  Rocks,  because  we  knew  not  where  wee  were,  for
it  is  a  singular  good  Harbour  to  enter,  if  a  man  know
the^  comming  in  betweene  the  Rocks,  called,  Os  Bayos  de
Don  Rodrigo.

Because  the  Indians  indeed  doe  kill  many  Toades,
therefore  they  call  it  Cororoen,  that  is  to  say,  the  River,
or  water  of  Toades,  I  tell  you  the  name  in  the  Indian
language.  Because  in  all  places  you  shall  have  of  them,
and  so  you  may  know  when  they  tell  you  where  you  are.
When  you  are  in  ten  degrees  and  an  halfe  Southwards
of  the  Equinoctiall  Line,  you  shall  see  five  hils  and  the
three  that  standeth  on  the  North  side  of  this  place  whereof
wee  speake  are  round  and  high,  the  other  two  that  stand
on  the  South,  not  farre  in  distance  one  from  another,
are  long  and  lower  then  the  other,  if  you  come  neere
the  shoare,  you  shall  see  a  great  many  of  small  Rockes,
and  a  great Bay  which  is the  place  I  speake  of, right

280

ANTHONY KNIVET  ad.

1601.
before  this  Bay  you  shall  see  two  great  Rockes,  to  goe  tIV-  V1-
into this Harbour, you must passe betweene these  iH°-J

Rockes  which  are  called  Bayos  de  don  Rodrigo,  when
you  are  entred  you  may  anchor  hard  by  the  Rockes,
and  sound  the  Channell,  which  will  lye  North-east  from
you.  Here  you  may  have  fresh  water  up  the  River,
but  it  will  be  hard  for  you  to  find,  therefore  your  best  is
to  goe  a  quarter  of  a  mile  by  the  Sea  side,  and  you
shall  see  a  faire  River,  where  you  may  take  water  at
pleasure,  and  kill  good  store  of  fish.  At  this  place
comming  from  the  River  of  Jenero,  in  the  night  we
were  driven  upon  the  Rockes  for  want  of  a  Pilot  that
knew  the  Coast.

I  doe  not  set  downe  the  places  betweene  this  and  the
Cape  Frio,  because  I  know  them  not,  but  by  report
of  other  Travellers,  and  therefore  I  leave  it  to  them,
for  I  will  write  no  more  but  what  I  have  seene,  and
am  able  to  prove  when  time  shall  serve,  and  thus  I
end  shewing  you  all  that  I  have  seene  on  the  Coast
Northward  of  Cape  Frio,  which  is  in  our  Language
Cape  Cold.

Cape  Frio  is  a  point  of  the  Land  that  runneth  into
the  Sea  at  least  twelve  mile,  it  lyeth  under  22.  degrees.
At  this  Cape  you  may  have  sight  of  a  great  Mountaine,
that  you  may  see  over  it  called  Abausango  Retambuera,
here  you  may  anchor  on  the  East-side  of  this  Cape
in  a  Harbour  called  Abayia  formozo.  Here  you  may
have  great  store  of  Brassell-wood,  and  in  this  Bay  you
shall  find  oftentimes  good  store  of  Amber-greece,  and
on  the  North  side  of  this  Bay  you  shall  see  a  great  River
called  Uparasou,  where  you  may  kill  good  store  of
many  kinde  of  fishes,  and  in  the  mouth  of  this  River
you  shall  have  great  store  of  Corall,  if  you  will  dragge
for  it.

Saquarema is a River, where the Frenchmen did  R.Saquarema.
traffique  with  the  Canibals  called Tamoyes  ; it floweth
foure  leagues  Southward  from  the  Cape. This  River  is
narrow  at  the  comming  in,  you  shall find  twelve  foote

281

A.D.

l6oi.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Etioca.

water,  till  you  be  three  or  foure  leagues  up  the  River.
You  shall  find  fresh  water  on  either  side  of  the  River,
and  great  store  of  Brassell-wood,  all  along  the  River
side.  On  the  South  side  of  this  river  you  shall  see  a
great  hill  which  the  Indians  call  Boypeva,  that  is,  The
rotten  Whale,  for  you  shall  see  the  top  of  it  like  a
dead  Whale.  If  you  want  refreshing,  you  may  have  good
store  of  Potato  Roots  there,  Plantons,  Lemons,  Orenges,
and  many  other  good  Roots  as  bigge  as  great  Turnips,
which  the  Indians  call  Caravasou.

Etioca  is  a  league  Southward  of  the  River  of  Saquarema.
It  is  (as  I  have  said  in  the  description  of  my  travell)
a  great  and  huge  Rocke,  hollow  within,  where  the  Indians
say  that  the  servant  of  God  did  preach  unto  them,  which
they  call  Topanvayapera,  before  the  mouth  of  this  Rocke
towards  the  Sea  standeth  another  flat  Rocke,  that  reacheth
somewhat  into  the  Sea ;  upon  it  you  shall  see  the  prints
of  bare  feet,  here  if  you  fish  with  Lines,  you  may  quickly
lade  your  shippe.  A  little  behind  this  stone  house,  you
shall  see  a  fine  River  of  water,  where  you  shall  finde
many  pretie  greene  stones  that  Indians  doe  use  to  weare
in  their  lips.  You  may  anchor  within  a  Musket  shot
of  the  shore,  but  it  is  verie  dangerous  if  the  wind  be
in  the  East.

Pirateninga.  Pirateninga  is  five  leagues  to  the  Southward  of  Etioca,
right  before  it  standeth  a  small  Hand,  it  is  inhabited
by  the  Portugals.  It  is  a  Bay  that  runneth  betweene
two  Mountaines  a  mile  and  more  within  the  Land. There

Mermaydseen  I  have  seene  a  Mermaid  and  many  other  strange  fishes.

by  the  Author.  y0u  may  lie  with  your  shipping  at  the  Hand,  and  send
your  Boates  ashore,  where  you  shall  find  great  store
of  Cattle ;  and  you  may  take  good  store  of  all  kind
of  fishes  if  you  will,  either  with  Hook  or  Net.  Here
you  may  have  Oranges,  Lemmons,  and  Cassavi  Meale,
and  all  other  such  things  that  the  Countrey  yeeldeth,  but
you  must  be  alwaies  sure  to  keepe  good  watch,  for  feare
of  the  Portugals  of  the  River  of  January,  which  are  hard
by  you.

2S2

ANTHONY KNIVET  ad.

1601.

The  River  of  January  lieth  three  leagues  from  Pirate-  Tfie  Rwer  °f

ninga, it  is  a  great  Arme  of  the  Sea,  that  runneth  into J?f.r0f/e  .  .
1 &t i  V 1  r  -i  1  1 Citie  of  Saint

the Land  at the  least rourteene miles; on the  mouth  Sebastian.

of  this  place,  stand  foure  Hands,  and  now  the  best  marke

that  it  hath to  be  knowne, is  a  Fort  that  standeth  on

the  North  side  of  the  comming  in  of  the  Harbour,  upon

a  Rock. On  the  South  side  standeth  a  Hill  that  reacheth

into the Sea, which the  Portugals  call Camo,  that  is,

The top of  a  ship,  for  it seemeth like  the  maine  top-

saile of  a  ship from Sea. Hard by the Sea side on

the foote  of  this Hill  on the  North side  of  the  Hill

as you saile into the Harbour standeth a Rocke of

great height made like  a  Sugar-loafe,  and is  called by

the  Portugals  the  Sugar-loafe. In  the  midst  of  the  going

in, in the  mouth of  this River lieth a Rocke plainly

to  bee seene, to goe  in  you must  keepe  betweene  the

Rocke  and  the  Fort, that  standeth  on the North side

of  you. When  you  are  entred  the  mouth  of  the  River

and  are  past  the  Fort,  you  shall  see  an Hand  lie  right

before  you,  and  even  with  a  Church  called  Santa  Lucia,  this

Hand  is  called  the  Hand  of  Brigalion. You  must  be  sure

to  passe  on  the  North  side of  this  Hand,  and assoone

as  you  have  passed  it, you  shall  see  all  the  Citie  both

on the Hill,  and on the Sea side. Then you must

take  heed that  you  goe not right to the Towne, for

you  shall  run  upon  certaine  shelves  of  sand,  that  lie  right

before  the  Towne  all  along  to  a  small  Hand  called the

Hand of  Saint Bent, this Hand lieth a quarter of  a

mile  from  the  Hand  of  Bragalion,  and  Eastward  of  this  Hand  of

Hand  of  Saint  Bent, standeth  a  great  Rocke,  you may  Brigalion.

saile  betweene  the  Rocke  and  the  Hand,  and  assoone  as

you  have  entred,  betweene  them  you  may  anchor  hard  by

the  Hand,  and  then  you  shall  see  a  Church  standing  upon

a Hill  which is  called  Saint Bent,  then you need  not  Hand  of  Saint

feare  to  goe  right  before  the  Towne,  within  a  Caleever  BenL

shot of  the  shore from the  Towne,  you shal see on

the North-east shore  a towne  of  Canibals,  called Saint

Lorenzo,  which  is  in  peace  with  the  Portugals,  and  within

283

A.D.
l60I.

[IV.  vi.

I241.]

The  River

called

Warativa.

Certaine
Hands  called
by  the  Ilia
grande;
Great  Hand.

PURCHAS HIS PIJLGRIMES

the  Bay  you  shall  finde  many  Rivers  and  Sugar-mils,
where  there  is  great  profit  to  be  made.

Warativa  lieth  three  leagues  from  the  River  of  January,
you  may  know  it  by  two  Hands  that  lie  right  before  the
mouth  of  the  aforesaid  River.  At  the  mouth  of  the
River  likewise  standeth  a  high  Hill,  and  on  either  side
both  on  the  South-west  and  North-east  is  low  Land,  in
this  place  you  cannot  enter  with  any  ship ;  but  you  may
anchor  betweene  the  Hands,  and  send  your  Boats  ashore.
If  you  goe  up,  you  shall  find  good  store  of  Potatoe
Roots,  Plantons,  great  store  of  Oranges  and  Lemmons,
and  many  other  kind  of  fruits,  which  are  very  good  to
releeve  sicke  men.  If  you  will  fish  with  your  Net,  heere
you  shall  kill  all  kinde  of  good  fishes,  but  alwayes  bee
sure  to  keepe  good  watch,  for  the  Portugals  are  very
neere  you.

From  the  River  of  Warativa  for  the  space  of  foure
leagues  is  all  sandy  low  Land,  you  shall  see  a  high  Hill
which  the  Indians  call  Marambayapuam,  that  is  in  our
Language,  the  end  of  Warre  ;  right  over  against  this
point  you  shall  see  a  great  Hand  at  the  comming  in
of  this  Harbour,  you  need  not  feare,  for  hard  by  the
shore,  you  shall  have  twentie  fathome  water.  When
you  are  in  the  mouth  of  this  Harbour  right  before,
you  shall  see  a  white  Rocke,  which  will  lie  full  West
from  you :  you  must  leave  the  Hand  Southward  from
you,  then  shall  you  descrie  another  great  Hand  called
Epeoya ;  at  a  point  of  this  Hand  that  lieth  full  West,
towards  the  firme  Land,  you  shall  see  two  small  Hands,
and  when  you  are  right  against  those  two  Hands  you
shall  see  a  faire  Bay,  where  you  may  anchor  at  pleasure
to  come  into  this  Bay,  you  must  enter  between  those
two  Hands  that  I  have  spoken  of.  I  doe  describe  this
Harbour  unto  you  above  many  good  Harbours  that  you
may  find,  because  you  may  depart  from  hence  with  any
wind,  for  the  mouth  of  Marambaya  lieth  South-east
from  you,  when  you  are  in  this  Harbour,  then  you
have  another  going  out  that  lieth  North-east  from  you,

284

ANTHONY KNIVET  ad.

1601.
from  this  Port  where  you  shall  anchor  called  Epeoya.
If  you  want  victuals  for  your  ships,  you  may  take  your
Boat  or  your  Pinnasse,  and  goe  out  betweene  the  two
Hands  that  you  entred,  and  when  you  are  betweene
those  Hands  you  shall  see  a  flat  broad  Hand,  which  will
lye  flat  South-west  from  you  ;  this  Hand  the  Indians
called  Sapeawera  ;  that  is,  the  morning,  and  this  is  the
Hand  that  I  was  driven  upon,  when  I  runne  away  to
Master  Hawkins,  as  I  have  told  you  in  the  discourse
of  my  troubles,  you  must  come  with  your  Boat  to  this
Hand,  and  you  must  be  sure  to  passe  betweene  the  West
shore  and  the  Hand  ;  and  assoone  as  you  have  passed
the  point  of  this  Hand,  you  shall  see  three  Hils  of  red
Earth  one  hard  by  another.  You  must  leave  one  of
them  West  from  you,  then  may  you  land  your  men
at  pleasure,  when  you  have  landed,  you  must  goe
through  a  little  Copps,  for  the  space  of  a  Harquebusse
shot,  then  shall  you  come  into  a  faire  Lawne,  where  you
shall  find  great  store  of  Cattle,  and  a  house  or  two  that
standeth  upon  a  Hill  where  you  shall  have  alwayes  good
store  of  Cassavi  meale,  if  you  will  have  Rootes  and
Plantons  upon  the  Hand  where  you  anchor  there  are
good  store,  but  there  is  an  Hand  called  the  Long  Hand,
where  you  shall  have  of  all  these  things  in  abundance.
To  know  this  Hand,  row  with  your  Boate  to  the  Hand
of  Epeoya  that  lieth  full  South  from  your  ship,  and  then
you  shall  see  a  long  Hand  hard  by  the  firme  Land,  which
is  this  whereof  wee  speake,  and  because  you  shall  bee
sure  not  to  misse  it,  be  attentive.  When  you  come
neere  the  shore,  beholding  a  Rocke  that  lieth  a  quarter
of  a  mile  from  the  shore,  upon  which  Rocke  standeth
a  Crosse,  this  is  the  place  where  a  Portugall  called
Manuell  Antones  dwelleth,  but  now  there  is  no  bodie,
but  a  kinde  of  Canibals  that  come  and  goe,  therefore
be  sure  alwaies  in  those  parts  to  keepe  good  watch  and
be  carefull  ;  if  you  can  speake  their  language  you  may
have  many  things.  From  this  Hand  Southwards  you
shall  see  two  small  Hands  halfe  a  league  from  you,  these

285

S.  Sebastian.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

Hands  are  called  Amambuquavo,  right  against  them  lieth
a  faire  River,  where  you  shall  have  alwaies  great  store
of  fish,  and  by  the  River  side  you  shall  see  the  Mandioca
plainly,  and  many  other  Roots  very  good  to  refresh  your
companie.  Southward  from  this  place  some  two  leagues
you  shall  see  a  faire  Bay  called  Parateey  there  dwelleth  a
kind  of  Canibals  called  Vaunasses,  of  them  you  may  buy
skins  of  divers  wilde  beasts,  and  sometimes  they  have  good
store  of  Amber,  which  they  call  Pira  ponia  ergaty.
The  Hand  of  Saint  Sebastian  lieth  some  three  leagues  from  Great
Hand,  It  is  a  long  and  a  faire  Hand,  you  may  anchor
betweene  it  and  the  shore.  After  you  have  entred  at
the  North  point  of  this  Hand,  you  shall  see  a  great
white  Rocke,  right  over  against  this  Rocke,  you  shall
see  a  point  of  the  firme  Land  runne  into  the  Sea,  and
right  before  this  point  lie  three  Rockes,  where  commonly
you  shall  see  Indians  shooting  fishes  with  their  Bowes
and  Arrowes,  if  you  goe  with  your  Boate  to  that  point,
you  shall  see  a  great  Bay  called  by  the  Indians  Jequere-
quere.  There  likewise  standeth  a  great  Towne  of
Canibals,  such  as  those  that  dwell  at  Great  Hand,  halfe
a  league  from  Saint  Sebastians  standeth  a  small  Hand
right  into  the  Sea,  called  by  the  Indians  Uraritan,  and
by  the  Portugals  Alquatrasses,  heere  you  shall  finde
great  store  of  Sea-foules  and  Seales,  Alegators  that  live
on  the  Land  called  by  the  Indians  Fisewasou.  Right
over  against  the  South  point  of  the  Hand  of  Saint
Sebastian  standeth  a  great  white  Rocke  called  by  the
Portugals  Paidemilio,  that  is,  the  life  of  Ginnie  Wheate ;
then  shall  you  see  an  Hand  hard  by  the  shoare  called
by  the  Indians  Boysouconga,  that  is,  the  Whales  head,
this  Hand  standeth  in  the  mouth  of  Pertioqua,  which
is,  the  River  that  goeth  to  Saint  Vincents,  as  you  goe
to  this  place  after  you  have  passed  the  Hand,  you  shall
see  North-east  from  you  certaine  houses  where  there
dwell  a  kind  of  Canibals  called  Caiioses,  there  you  may
have  good  store  of  Cattle,  Orenges,  Lemmons,  and
many  kinds  of  Roots  and Fruits.

286

ANTHONY KNIVET  a.d.

1601.

Right  against  this  Towne  of  Canibals  called  Cariihos,  [IV-  V1-
standeth the Towne of Saint Vincents called by the  T,  ^I2t
Indians  Warapiumama  ;  as  you  goe  farther  up  the  River  t-ton  0f
you  shall  see  a  small  Hand  Southward,  where  you  shall  S.  Vincents  fcf
see a Sugar-mill of the Captaines of Santos called  Santos.
Jeronimo Letou, where our Gentlemen were slaine.
Farther up the  River,  you shall see  a  Castle stand  at
the  foote  of  the Hill  ; then you  come  to the  Towne
of  Santos,  which  standeth  hard  by  the  water  side. Right
behind the Towne of Santos standeth a Hill wher
Brascubas  had  a  house,  from the  top  of  this  Hill did
John  Davies  make  a  Plate  of  the  Countrey. Now  the
Portugals  have  found  Mynes  of  silver  in  this  place.

The  third Parieva is  a good Harbor  for ships,  and  The  descrip-
here  are  great  store  of  Canibals called Cariihos,  which  ^  fthe.
very  lately  are inleagued with the  Portugals,  you  may  ^  ^aby
buy  of  them great store of  Pepper  and  Ginger,  very  the  Portugals
rich Furres, and Cotton-wooll, and  Waxe,  this is the Os  patos,  and
place  that  I  came  unto  after  I  had  beene  taken  by  the  h  the  ^ndlans
Tamoyes within the Land. Here the Tamoyes were wason-
taken by  the  Portugals,  and I  was  given  againe  to  be
my  Masters slave,  when 10000.  of  the Tamoyes  were
slaine,  and  20000.  of  them  parted  among  the  Portugals
for  slaves.

The  mouth  of  the  River  of  Plate  is  wide,  and  within The  descrip-
it  there  are  many  Downes  of  sand,  you  must  bee  sure  Aon  of  the
to keepe very  neere the North shoare, till you shall  Rwerofplate-
see a high Mountayne white at the top  ; then must
you  saile  Southward  at  least  foure  leagues,  and  shall  you
see  another  small  Hill  on  the  Northside,  you  must  saile
right with it  ; then shall you come into a faire Bay,
where  you  must  be  sure  to  keepe  still  along  the  shoare,
and after you  have  passed the  Westerne  point  of  this
Bay,  you  shall  have  the  River  Maroer  ; then  you  need
not  feare  any  shallowes  till  you  come  before  the  Towne  of
Bonos  Ayres. There  the  River  runneth  full  Southward,
and  along  the  River  side  from  Bonos  Ayres  is  a  small
Village built by  the  Spaniards  of  Lime  and stone  that

287

A.D.

l60I,

Note.

Beasts  of
Brasll.

Travell  by
Compasse
on  sands.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

they  brought  from  Brasill,  for  all  the  Countrey  is  sandie :
the  Indians  doe  make  their  houses  all  covered  with  earth.
Here  are  great  store  of  wilde  Horses  and  Cattle,  sheepe
and  Goats,  but  for  silver  and  gold,  there  is  none  but
that  which  commeth  from  Cordiva  and  Potasin.  Here
likewise  the  Indians  have  great  store  of  Wheate,  twentie
leagues  within  Land  lyeth  a  Province  called  Tocoman,
now  it  is  a  Bishopricke,  this  Countrey  is  the  division
of  Brasill,  and  all  the  Provinces  of  Nova  Hispania.
Here  the  Indians  have  Wheate  and  Cassavi,  Apples,
Peares,  Nuts,  and  all  other  fruites  of  Spaine,  likewise
they  have  all  the  fruites  of  Brasill.  But  after  you  travell
Southward  of  this  Countrey,  you  shall  not  find  any  thing
that  groweth  in  Brasill,  nor  any  wild  beasts,  as  Leopards,
or  Capivaras,  Jawasenings,  Cat  of  Mountaines,  Aque-
ques,  Warivas,  Moroquies,  Joboyas,  Surucuons,  Jararcas,
Boyaeva,  Boyseninga,  Boybeva.  Brasill  is  full  of  all
these  wilde  and  dangerous  beasts,  and  divers  others ;
But  the  Provinces  of  Peru  are  cleere  of  them,  except
it  bee  some  chance.  From  Tocoman  to  Saint  Iago  is
eightie  leagues,  and  you  shall  travell  it  as  you  doe  by
Sea  with  a  Compasse,  for  the  Countrey  is  all  sand,  and
as  the  wind  bloweth,  so  shall  you  have  the  Mountaynes
of  sand,  to  day  on  one  side  of  you,  to  morrow  on  the
other,  in  this  passage  you  shall  passe  through  many
Rivers,  which  to  your  thinking  are  not  above  a  foote
deepe,  but  if  you  have  not  good  guides  and  great
experience,  your  waggons  and  horses  will  quickly  be
cast  away  in  them,  and  at  an  instant  be  covered  with
quicke  sand.  After  you  have  passed  this  Countrey,
you  shall  come  to  Saint  Iago,  then  till  you  come  to
Potosin,  you  shall  travell  through  great  Mountaines  and
Valleyes,  and  all  the  way  as  you  goe,  you  shall  have
great  Townes  of  Indians,  who  are  all  in  peace  with  the
Spaniards,  you  shall  have  five  hundred  of  these  Indians
by  the  way  as  you  travell  readie  with  Nets  to  carrie  you,
tyed  on  a  Cane  from  Towne  to  Towne,  for  a  fish-hooke
or  a  few  beads  of  glasse,  or  any  such  trifle  ;  and there

288

ANTHONY KN1VET  a.d.

1601.

is  no  travelling  in  the  World  so  easie  as  this,  for  you
may  lye,  or  sit,  and  play  on  a  Gitterne  all  the  way  if
you  will,  for  so  the  Spaniards  doe  ;  you  shall  passe
by  many  Mynes  of  Gold  and  traffique  with  the  Indians
for  Gold,  and  divers  kinds  of  precious  Stones,  but  not
in  that  plentie  as  you  shall  at  Potasin,  by  reason  that
there  the  Mynes  are  open  and  wrought  on,  and  those
betweene  Santiago  and  Potossin  are  not.  At  Potossin
there  is  no  want  of  any  thing,  although  the  Countrey  of  it
selfe  bee  very  barren,  but  by  reason  of  the  great  traffique
that  they  have  from  Lyma,  and  all  the  Townes  of  the
South  Sea  ;  they  have  alwayes  provision  enough,  for
from  those  Townes,  they  bring  Oyle  and  Wine  in  great
Jarres  of  earth  upon  great  sheepe,  which  are  called  sheepe
of  five  quarters,  for  their  tailes  have  almost  as  much  as
a  quarter.  To  tell  the  particulars  of  the  Mynes,  would
bee  a  new  Storie,  only  this  :  they  find  the  Oare  like
blacke  Lead,  then  they  grinde  it  in  Ingines,  then  they
wash  it  through  fine  Sieves  in  paved  Cisternes  that  are
made  for  the  purpose  ;  the  Moores  are  all  naked  as  long
as  they  worke,  because  he  shall  not  hide  any  precious
stone.  The  Spaniards  here  are  all  very  rich,  and  in
truth  as  gallant  fellowes  as  can  be.  The  Francisco
Friers  carrie  a  great  sway  in  this  Countrey,  by  reason
that  they  were  the  first  that  preached  in  this  part
of  India.

[Chap.  VIII,

XVI  289  T

A.D.

l6lO.

[IV.  vi.

H3-]

Saint
Michaels.

BrasilL

Jesuits
Savages
friends.

Giants.

Flat  heads.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Chap.  VIII.

Relations  of  Master  Thomas  Turner,  who  lived
the  best  part  of  two  yeeres  in  Brasill,  &c.
which  I  received  of  him  in  conference  touching
his  Travels.

N  Saint  Michael  one  of  the  Acores,  they
ascend  up  in  a  forenoones  journey  unto
a  hill  into  a  Chappell,  wherein  they  need
a  fire  in  Summer  for  the  cold :  there
being  a  little  off  three  Springs,  the  one
whereof  casteth  up  waters  in  a  continual
boyling  with  a  terrible  noise,  and  of  great
heate,  the  second  of  heate  intolerable,  which  in  short  time
scaldeth  any  living  thing  to  death,  the  ground  also  hote
to  stand  on :  but  the  water  calme.  The  third  is  warme,
and  a  fit  Bathe.  In  these  Hands  in  Caves  bee  found  men
buried  before  the  Conquest,  whole,  &c.  Brasilian  Indians
are  Canibals,  and  not  for  revenge  only,  but  for  food  also
devoure  mans  flesh.  The  Portugals  make  not  slaves  of
them,  nor  can  enjoyne  them  worke,  by  reason  of  a  com-
mission to  the  contrarie  obtained  by  the  Jesuites :  neither
doe  they  winne  of  them  ought  but  by  faire  meanes.  They
are  most  excellent  Archers,  goe  starke  naked,  the  womens
haire  long  and  blacke,  harsh  as  a  Horse-taile.  He  did
see  up  the  River  of  Plate,  one  twelve  foot  high,  and
report  was  of  higher  in  that  Countrey.  Their  Weapons
are  two  massie  bowles  at  the  two  ends  of  a  string  cast,
&c.  He  saw  also  men  there  with  the  hinder  parts  of
their  heads,  not  round  but  flat,  (and  a  little  before  this
Relation,  about  Anno  16 10.  he  said  that  at  London  he
had  seene  carried  to  the  Court  a  thigh  bone  of  a  man  a
yard  and  a  halfe  in  length.)

Their  beasts  in  Brasill  are  great  Apes  with  beards  and
Strange  Kine. Mustachioes. Kine like  unto ours of  both sexes, but
living  in  the  waters  and  resorting  to  land  to  feed. Hav-
ing  no Udders, nor  homes,  long  legs,  harmelesse,  lesse

290

THOMAS TURNER  a.d.

1610.

somewhat  then  ours, their  flesh  like  beefe,  but  eaten  in

the  name  of  fish.

Tigres  like  Grey-hounds  spotted  like  Ounces  exceeding

swift,  the  force  of  whose  paw  at  a  blow  killeth  his  prey.

Their  beast by  some  called Hay, which yet he  saith,  See  before  in

eateth leaves of  trees  and  not Aire only : the lovely  Ovtedo'

prettie  Segouin. The  Serpent  Cobrus:  whereof  he  saw  SfranSe

one  almost  as  bigge  as  himselfe,  twentie  foot  long,  killed erPent-

by  their  Indian  boy,  of  colour  like  an  Adder. Of  whom

they  report  (and  a  Father  gave  him  instance  of  the  proofe)

that  watching  his  prey,  that  is  whatsoever  commeth  by,

it  windeth  about  and  getteth  the  taile  into  the  fundament

drawing  the  guts  after  it :  and  so  preyeth  on  the  same,

devouring  all,  till  that  it  be  not  able  for  fulnesse  to  stirre,

but  rotteth  as  it  lyeth,  the  flesh  quite  away,  the  head  and

bones  remaining,  in  which  the  life  continuing  recovereth

at last  his  former state. One was thus found  in  the

rottennesse,  and  being  bound  for  proofe  by  the  Portugals,

with  a withe  to  a  Tree,  at  their  returne  was  so  found

repaired. The beast that  baggeth up  her  young  ones, *i*TVr
o /  1  -r> t •  1  1 r J • 1  \ may  perhaps

otc.  (as  in  others  Relations,  heere  therefore  omitted.) seme  -incre_

The Indian is  a fish  in  the  Sea,  and  a  Foxe  in the  dible  and
Woods, and without them a Christian is neither for  Jus^ly :  yet  hee
pleasure  or  profit  fit  for  life  or  living.  tels  the  report,

r~  r  \  i • -i  1  it-  i • 1  i which  in  some

(Jut  or  Angola  is  said  to  bee  yeerely  shipped  eight  and  one  pere  after

twenty thousand* slaves  and there  was  a Rebellion  of  some  great
slaves  against  their  Masters,  tenne thousand  making  a  battle*  may
head  and  barracadoing  themselves,  but  by  the  Portugals  a£°bte.  *™~  h
and  Indians  chased,  and  one  or  two  thousand  reduced.  geneml  report
One  thousand  belonged  to  one  man,  who  is  said  to  have  is  of  divers
tenne  thousand  slaves,  Eighteene  Ingenios,  &c.  his  name  thousands
is John de Paus, exiled out of  Portugall, and heere  s^f\^ce
prospering  to  this  incredibilitie  of  wealth.  Portugals

There  are  Apples  called  Ananas,  pleasant  in  colour  and  making  their
exceedingly  in  taste,  and  holesome,  but  eating  Iron  as  gain*  ty  the
Aqua fortis.  Negroes  foolish

Brasill  is full of  Mines,  if  the  King  would  suffer  the  ZarTifpon
digging  them.  each  other.

291

A.D.

l60I.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[IV.  vi.

244.]

Pinnasses  lost
in  a  Ternado.

lies  of  Cape
Verde.

The  lie  and

Towne  ofS.
Vincent  taken.

The  Rancher  a
in  Cubagua,
with  divers
prisoners  taken
and  ransomed.

Chap.  IX.

The  taking  of  Saint  Vincent  and  Puerto  Bello,  by
Captaine  William  Parker  of  Plimmouth,  the
seventh  of  February 1601.

N  the  beginning  of  November  1601.  I
departed  from  Plymmouth  with  two  ships,
one  Pinnasse  and  two  shallops  in  quarters
toward  the  West  Indies.  My  chiefe  ship
wherein  I  went  my  selfe  as  Admirall  was
named  the  Prudence,  of  an  hundred  tuns,
wherein  I  had  an  hundred  and  thirtie  tall
men,  the  second  was  the  Pearle,  a  small  ship  of  sixtie
tunnes,  wherein  went  as  my  Vice-admirall  Master  Robert
Rawlin,  accompanied  with  sixtie  lustie  fellowes,  my  Pin-
nasse of  twentie  tuns  was  manned  with  eighteene  men.
In  this  Consort  were  Master  Edward  Giles,  and  Philip
Ward  Gentlemen  Captaines  by  Land,  with  Captaine
Antonie  Fugars,  Captaine  Loriman,  Captaine  Ashley,
and  divers  other  Gentlemen  of  much  towardlinesse  and
valour  as  they  made  good  proofe  in  the  successe  of  this
Voyage.  In  our  passing  by  the  Cape  of  Saint  Vincent
in  Spaine,  commonly  called  the  South  Cape,  I  was
encountred  with  such  a  terrible  Ternado  or  gust  of  winde
that  my  Pinnasse  with  fifteene  of  our  men,  to  our  great
griefe  was  utterly  cast  away,  wee  being  not  able  with  the
uttermost  of  our  endeavours  to  save  above  three  of  the
rest.  From  thence  I  shaped  my  course  to  the  lies  of
Cape  Verde,  and  immediately  upon  my  arrivall  there,  I
set  upon  one  of  them  called  Saint  Vincent,  with  an
hundred  men,  and  tooke  the  Hand  and  the  Towne
thereof,  which  was  a  prettie  place,  the  spoile  whereof
I  gave  to  my  Souldiers,  which  after  they  had  pillaged
it,  set  the  same  on  fire.

Hence  we  haled  over  to  the  Coast  of  Tierra  firma,  and
arrived  first  at  the  He  of  Margarita,  and  comming  to  the
Rancheria or fishing of  Pearles  in the  small Hand of

292

WILLIAM PARKER  a.d.

1601.

Cubagua,  we  found  the  Governour  of  Cumana  there  with

a  company  of  Souldiers :  neverthelesse  we  made  bold  to

land,  and  in  our  landing  we  received  a  great  fight  wherein

divers  of  our  men  on both  sides  were  wounded;  but  in

the  end  I  tooke  the  place  with  divers  of  the  stoutest  of

our Enemies Prisoners, and thirteene Periaguaes and

Canoes,  which are Barkes  and Boats  of  the  Countrey :

for  ransome  of  all  which  I  received  five  hundred  pounds

in  Pearle. This  done  I  proceeded  on  my  journey,  sayling

directly  for  Cape  de  la  Vela,  and  there  meeting  with  a

Portugall  shippe  of  two hundred and fiftie  tuns  laden  A  great  ship

with  three  hundred  and  seventie  Negros,  brought  from  Z(!l ^°\

Congo or  Angola, and going to Cartagena  with little

resistance  I  tooke  the  same. And  sayling  along  with  my

prize  Westward, not  able  to  double  the  lies,  called  Las  Las  Cabizas.

Cabecas,  I  was  driven  farre  downe  to  the  Southward  into

the  Gulfe  of  Acle,  in  Spanish  called  Eusenada  de  Acle,

where  we  landed  all  our  Portugals  and  Negros,  keeping

only  the  Captaine  which  afterward  paid  me  five  hundred

pounds  for  his  owne  and  their  ransomes. Within  a  while

after  we  stood  Westward  with  our  shippes,  and  went  into

the  lies  called  the  Cabecas,  where  I  embarked  an  hundred

and  fiftie  of  my  men  in  two  small  Pinnasses  and  two  fine

shallops,  and  went  for  the  lies  de  Bastimentos,  and  landing  They  take  sixe

there  upon  the  said  Hands  which  are  peopled  and  very  or  seJenPeoP  e

fruitfull,  I  tooke  sixe  or  seven Negroes  for  guides,  and  Bastimentos.

so  presently  with  our  Pinnasses and  Boates entred  the

mouth  of  the  River  of  Porto  bello,  the  seventh  of  Feb-  R-  of  Puerto

ruarie  about  two  of  the  clocke  after  midnight,  the  Moone

shining  very  brightly.

At  our  first  entrance  into  the  Haven,  which  is  above
twelve  score  over,  and  very  deepe  at  the  mouth  and  farre
upward,  we  were  hailed  by  the  strong  and  stately  Castle  The  great
of  Saint  Philip,  having  thirtie  five  great  pieces  of  Brazen  £?.*,. °fS'.,
Ordnance  and  fiftie  Souldiers  in  the  same,  to  know  whence  2-  pfece^r
we  were :  wee  having  a  boor  d us  such  as could speake  brasse,  and
Spanish excellent  well, answered  that  we  were  of  Carta-  5°-  Souldiers.
gena :  then  they  commanded  us  to  anchor,  which  we  did

293

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

accordingly.  About  one  houre  afterwards  with  my  two
shallops  which  lay  close  by  my  Pinnasses,  and  some  thirtie
of  my  principall  men,  I  went  up  the  River  having  some
of  the  smaller  Fort,  called  the  Fort  of  Saint  Iago,  which
is  directly  over  against  the  great  Castle  of  Saint  Philip,
running  still  on  the  shoare,  and  crying  out  on  me  to
stay :  but  neglecting  their  out-cryes,  I  landed  at  the  first
The  Towne  Towne  called  Triana,  where  the  alarme  was  presently
Tnana.  g{ven  :  which  neverthelesse  I  set  on  fire,  and  marched  over
Porto  bello.  a  little  Brooke  into  the  great  rich  Towne  of  Porto  bello  ;
and  comming  directly  up  to  the  Kings  Treasure-house,
which  is  very  faire  and  large,  we  found  a  squadron  of
souldiers  (whereof  there  are  two  hundred  and  fiftie
alwayes  belonging  to  the  Towne  and  another  company
of  the  Inhabitants)  with  two  brasse  Pieces  of  field  Ord-
nance well  mounted  on  their  carriages,  which  we  presently
possessed,  and  fiercely  set  upon  the  Souldiers.

At  which  alarme  Captaine  Antonie  Fugars,  and  Cap-
taine  George  Lawriman  of  Ratcliffe,  came  up  with  my
two  Pinnasses  with  an  hundred  and  twentie  men  to  my
rescue,  which  was  very  hardly  laid  unto.  At  this  house
at  our  first  comming  into  the  Towne,  my  Lieutenant
Samuel  Barnet  was  shot  on  the  side  of  his  head,  and
through  his  eare,  and  Captaine  Giles  comming  to  second
him,  was  likewise  shot  over  the  brest  and  through
Pedro  his  arme. In this meane space Pedro Melendes the

Mekndes.  Governour  of  the  Towne,  had  gathered  sixtie  Souldiers
together,  and  was  comming  toward  a  certaine  bridge  to
encounter  me,  1  having  not  then  above  eight  or  nine  men
with  mee  to  withstand  them :  but  God  did  prosper  our
proceedings  mightily.  For  the  first  two  shot  that  went
from  us,  shot  Melendes  through  his  Target,  and  went
through  both  his  armes :  and  the  other  shot  hurt  the
Corporall  of  the  field.  Whereupon  they  all  retired  to
the  house,  which  they  made  good  untill  it  was  almost  day.
Against  whom  I  sent  Captaine  Ward  with  some  Souldiers,
who  entred  the  house,  killing  divers  of  them,  and
wounded  Melendes  in  eight  places  more :  himselfe  being

294

taken  prisoner.

VI.

WILLIAM PARKER  a.d.

1601.
shot  through  both  his  thighes  in  entring,  and  some  of  his
men  hurt : but  in  the  end  he  tooke  Melendes  Prisoner,  Mekndes  the
and  became  Master  of  the  house.

My  selfe  with  others  went  to  the  Kings  house,  wherein
were  many  of  the  Souldiers,  who  would  not  come  to  any
composition,  but  stoutly  defended  the  same  against
Captaine  Giles  and  our  Lieutenant  Samuel  Barnet :  who
in  the  end  slue  divers  of  them  and  hurt  many  others,
taking  the  Kings  Scrivano  prisoner.  This  fight  endured
for  the  space  of  foure  or  five  hours.  The  fight  being
ended,  and  we  being  Masters  of  the  Kings  Treasure-house
and  all  the  Towne,  and  having  the  Governour  Melendes,
and  the  Scrivano  with  many  others  of  the  chiefest  my
Prisoners,  except  the  Alcalde  which  fled  out  of  the  Towne  [IV.
with  a  chaine  of  Gold  about  his  necke. Such  Treasure  as  I245-J

was  found  in  the  Kings  house  to  the  value  of  some  nine
or  ten  thousand  Duckets,  I  reserved  to  my  selfe,  which
was  nothing  to  that  which  wee  did  expect  (that  being  the
receite  at  one  time  of  the  yeere  of  all  the  Treasure  that
commeth  from  Peru  and  Chile,  amounting  at  least  to  five
or  sixe  Millions  of  Duckets)  and  had  I  come  but  seven
dayes  sooner,  I  had  taken  heere  an  hundred  and  twentie
thousand  Duckets  which  were  newly  laden  in  two  Frigats
for  Cartagena.  The  rest  of  the  spoile  of  the  Towne,
which  came  to  no  small  value  in  Money,  Plate,  and  Mer-
chandize, I  gave  wholy  to  my  Souldiers  :  which  being
done,  I  disposed  my  Corpses  du  guard  in  divers  places,
for  keeping  the  Towne  all  that  day  :  and  at  the  end
of  the  streete  leading  towards  Panama  on  the  South  Sea,
being  full  of  all  Artificers,  we  made  a  barricado,  where
Captaine  Giles  stood  with  another  Corps  du  guard  being
divers  times  assaulted  by  the  enemy,  whom  still  hee
valiantly  repulsed  and  put  to  the  worse.

Pedro  Melendes  the  chiefe  Governour  of  the  Towne  Brave  spirit

being  my  Prisoner,  in  regard  that  he  had  valiantly  carried ^  libera!!

himselfe  in  making  resistance  untill  he  had  tenne  or  eleven  ^JJi,
1  1  • &  t i-  1  1  1  it-  -i taptame

wounds  upon  him,  I  did  not  only  at  length  dismisse  with-  Parker.

out  any  peny  for  his  ransome,  but  also  caused  my  Chirur-

295

A.D.
l60I

Porto  bello
described.

He  abstaineth
from  setting
the  Towne  of
Porto  bello  on
fire.

Two  Frigats
taken  and
brought  away.

Their
de par  tun

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

gion  very  carefully  to  dresse  and  trimme  his  wounds  :
using  him  and  his  farre  otherwise  then  Pedro  Melendes
his  great  Uncle  used  John  Ribault,  Laudoniere,  and  the
French  Nation  in  Florida,  whom  they  most  cruelly  mur-
dered and  massacred  as  many  as  they  could  lay  any  hands
upon.

Thus  being  Master  for  one  whole  day  of  the  stately
and  new  builded  Towne  of  Porto  bello,  which  had  two
goodly  Churches  in  it  fully  finished,  and  sixe  or  seven  faire
streets,  whereof  two  were  full  of  all  necessarie  Artificers,
and  of  Merchants,  with  three  small  Forts  on  the  Townes
sides,  besides  the  great  Fort  of  Saint  Philip  on  the  other,
when  I  might  have  speedily  have  consumed  it  all  with  fire,
I  willingly  abstained  from  the  same :  knowing  that  though
I  could  have  done  the  King  of  Spaine  exceeding  great
hurt,  and  have  undone  a  number  of  the  Inhabitants,  yet
the  good  that  I  should  have  done  my  selfe,  and  mine
thereby  should  have  beene  very  small  in  comparison  of
their  damage.  Only  certaine  out  houses  wherein  their
Negros  dwelt,  I  caused  to  be  burned  to  amaze  and  put
them  in  feare  :  I  also  tooke  two  Frigats  of  theirs  which
roade  far  up  within  the  River,  the  one  of  them  having  in
her  three  pieces  of  Ordnance,  the  which  I  likewise  tooke
and  brought  away  from  thence  with  me,  with  the  which
Ordnance  we  beate  upon  the  enemy  marching  unto  us
from  the  Wester  Fort.

The  day  being  spent,  at  the  beginning  of  the  night
I  embarked  my  men,  enriched  with  the  chiefe  spoile  of
the  Towne,  and  set  saile  to  depart  with  my  owne  two
Pinnasses  and  two  shallops  and  the  foresaid  two  Spanish
Frigats  which  I  had  wonne  :  but  in  going  out  I  was  shot
in  at  the  elbow,  and  out  at  the  wrist  with  a  Musket  shot
which  came  from  the  Wester  shoare,  whereof  there  were
many  shot  over  us  :  besides  eight  and  twentie  great  shot
from  the  chiefe  and  Easter  Fort,  which  did  endanger
us  often.  But  God  so  wrought  for  us,  that  we  safely  got
forth  againe  contrarie  to  all  our  enemies  expectation,  who
made full account to sinke us in going forth. Being

296

WILLIAM PARKER  a.d.

1602.

safely  come  forth  wee  rode  with  our  Pinnasses,  and  shallops
behind  a  small  Hand  which  lay  betwixt  us  and  the  Wester
most  Fort  of  Saint  Iago,  untill  my  Vice-admirall  Captaine
Rawlins  brought  two  ships  thither,  which  rode  somewhat
to  the  Eastward  of  the  Castile  of  Saint  Philip,  under  the
Rocke  where  Sir  Francis  Drake  his  Coffin  was  throwne  Sir  Fr-
over-boord,  all  the  while  that  we  were  busied  in  gaining,  ,  ra.  e,s,
sacking,  and  possessing  the  Towne.  Our  whole  fleet  beeing
assembled  together  in  the  place  aforesaid,  I  set  the  Kings
Scrivano,  and  the  rest  of  my  prisoners  on  shore,  suffering
them  to  depart  without  paying  any  kind  of  ransome.

And  the  next  day  being  the  ninth  of  February,  I  set
saile  and  stood  off  to  Sea,  leaving  the  goodly  Haven  and
beautifull  Towne  of  Porto  bello,  which  standeth  in  ten
degrees  of  Northerly  latitude  :  and  directed  my  course
backe  againe  toward  Cartagena,  and  about  twelve  leagues
to  the  Eastward  thereof,  I  came  into  a  good  Bay  called
Sambo,  where  I  watered  and  staied  some  twelve  or  thir-  Sambo.
teene  daies,  and  riding  there  tooke  certaine  Frigats  which
were  bound  for  Cartagena.  Whereupon  the  Governour
Don  Pedro  de  Coronna,  armed  out  two  Gallies  and  a
Brigandine,  with  some  two  or  three  Frigats,  with  a
purpose  to  assault  us  ;  but  beeing  better  advised  they
would  never  come  neere  us.  When  he  heard  that  I
had  taken  Porto  bello,  one  of  the  chiefest  places  of  the
West  Indies,  with  so  small  forces,  he  pulled  his  beard,
and  sware  that  he  would  give  his  Mules  lade  of  silver,  but
to  have  a  fight  of  mee  and  my  companie.  From  this  Bay  Virtus  in  hoste
of  Sambo  wee  stood  over  for  the  Hand  of  Jamaica,  and  so  hudanda.
doubled  the  Cape  of  Saint  Antonio,  beeing  the  most
Westerly  part  of  Cuba,  and  disimboked  through  the
Gulfe  of  Bahama,  the  last  of  March  1602.  and  came
with  good  weather  to  the  lies  of  the  Acores,  where
victualling  my  Vice-admirall  and  two  Pinnasses  out  of
mine  owne  ship  for  two  moneths,  and  leaving  them  at
Sea  to  take  some  farther  purchase,  with  mine  owne  ship  I
tooke  my  course  for  Plimmouth,  and  arrived  there  in
safetie  the  sixt  of  May 1602.

297

A.D.
l60I.

[IV.  vi.

246.]

Grand
Canarie.

Punta
delaraya.

S.  Vincents.

Boinara.

Aruba.

Seven  men
killed.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Chap. X.

Certaine  Notes  of  a  Voyage  made  by  mee  David
Middleton  into  the  West  Indies  with  Captaine
Michael  Geare,  An.  Dom. 1601.

He  five  and  twentieth  day  of  May,  wee  set
saile  from  the  Lyzard,  and  the  tenth  day
of  June  we  fell  with  the  Grand  Canarie :
the  Towne  standeth  on  the  North-east
point  of  the  Hand,  and  the  Road  is  one
league  to  the  Northward  of  it.  That
night  we  stood  of  South  South-west.
And  the  five  and  twentieth  day  of  June  we  were  in
the  latitude  of  twentie  two  degrees  thirtie  minutes.

The  sixe  and  twentieth  day  of  June  wee  came  in
companie  of  seven  saile  of  Hollanders  that  were  bound
for  the  West  Indies,  to  Punta  delaraya  to  lode  Salt,  and
the  seven  and  twentieth  day  we  lost  sight  of  them.

The  second  day  of  Julie  we  fell  with  Saint  Vincent.
When  you  came  from  Saint  Vincent  to  the  Testogos,  you
must  make  the  way  South-west  by  West,  or  else  you  shall
not  fetch  it,  for  the  Current  sets  North  and  by  West  from
them.

Being  to  leeward  from  Caracus,  two  leagues  we  stood
over  North  North-west,  the  wind  being  at  East  North-
east, we  fell  twelve  leagues  to  the  Eastward  of  Boinara,
beeing  the  twelfth  of  Julie.  If  you  stand  over  from
Boinara  to  Qurasao,  minded  to  goe  to  the  Southward
of  the  Hand,  you  must  stand  South  and  by  West,  or  else
you  cannot  get  about,  because  there  is  a  Current  that  sets
North-west,  and  may  set  you  upon  the  Hand.

The  three  and  twentieth  day  of  Julie  wee  anchored  to
the  Westward  of  Qurasao,  and  there  the  Land  lies  North
and  South.

The  nine  and  twentieth  of  Julie  we  landed  upon  Aruba,
for  to  get  fresh  water,  and  there  we  had  seven  men  slaine
by  the  Indians  of  the  Hand  : and  we  rid  with  our  ship  in

298

DAVID MIDDLETON  a.d.

1601.

five  fathomes  water,  halfe  a  mile  from  the  shoare. One

point  of  the  Land  bare  North,  the  other  South-east  and

by  South,  and  there  is  an  high  Hill  in  the  middle  of  the

Hand,  and  that  bare  East  and  by  South. Betwixt  Coque

and  the  Maine  the  course  is  East  and  West.

The  shoale  of  Puntall  lieth  two  leagues  off : the  best  of  pUntal.
the  Channell  betwixt  that  Point,  and  Coque  is  in  eight,
nine  and  ten  fathomes.

From Bracheo  to  the  Parretaes  is  five  leagues  course  Bracheo.
West  and  by  South.

From the  Parretaes to  Cape  Caldera is twentie five  CapeCaldera.
leagues  course  North-west  and  by  West,  and  betwixt  the
Parretaes  and  the  Maine,  you  shall  have  foure,  Hvg,  six
and  seven  fathoms  water.

The  Road  of  Morecapana  lieth  betwixt  the  Maine  and  Morecapana.
Boracheo,  within  the  Hands.

The  eight  day  of  August  we  set  saile  from  Aruba,  and
we stood over South for the Maine, the wind being
at  East  and  by  South,  wee  fell  with  Mecola,  being  nine
leagues  from  Aruba. Saint  Ann  is  an  high  Hill  upon  the  M.  S.  Ann.
Maine  neere  unto  Mecola.

The  seven  and  twentieth  day  of  August  we  came  to
anchor  at  Portete,  that  is  to  the  Eastward  of  Cape  Portete.
La  vela,  foure  leagues.  The  Cape  bare  West  a  little
to  the  Southwards,  at  the  going  to  Portete.  And  on
your  Larboord  side  going  into  Portete,  there  is  a  round
Hill  :  being  in  the  offing  it  sheweth  verie  blacke.  The
going  into  this  Harbour  is  verie  narrow,  but  within  it  is  a
verie  broad  Sound,  and  two  thousand  saile  of  ships  may
ride  there  in  verie  good  ground,  and  you  may  ride  from
five  fathomes  to  twentie,  but  wee  ridde  in  three,  a  little
within  the  point,  on  our  Larboord  side  going  in.

The  eighteenth  of  January  wee  parted  from  our  Man  of
Warre  at  Cape  Saint  Anthony,  and  set  saile  for  England,  Cape  S.
in  a  Prize,  a  ship  of  some  one  hundred  and  fortie  tunnes,  Antony.
laden  with  Campeche  Wood  and  Hides,  the  Master  of
the  Prize  was  William  Goobreath  :  and  from  Cape  Saint
Anthony  we  stood  off  North-west  and  by  North.

299

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

1601.

The  nine  and  twentieth  day  at  noone,  we  had  sight  of

Organes.  the  Westermost  Land  of  the  Organes,  being  East  South-

east from  us,  and  then  we  stood  North-east,  and  the
twentieth  day  we  were  in  latitude  23.  degrees  15.  minutes,
the  winde  being  at  East  North-east,  we  stood  off  North,
and  from  the  twentieth  day  to  the  one  and  twentieth  day
wee  made  our  way  West  and  by  North,  and  this  day  we
were  in  latitude  23.  degrees  20.  minutes,  then  we  stood
to  the  Eastward.

The  two  and  twentieth  day,  we  were  North-west  and

Cuba.  by  North,  from  the  Crowne  in  Cuba,  fourteene  leagues,

then  we  stood  to  the  North-ward:  these  fourteene  leagues
we  turned  up  and  downe  with  the  winde  Easterly.  The
three  and  twentieth  day,  wee  were  in  latitude  of  24.
degrees  no  minutes,  the  wind  being  at  East  North-
east, and  we  lay  North  with  the  stemme,  and  this  night
we  came  in  twelve  fathomes,  being  then  in  latitude  of  24.
degrees  35.  minutes,  the  winde  being  at  East  and  by
South  we  stood  to  the  Southward. The  five  and  twen-

Cobey.  tieth day, wee fell with Cobey twelve leagues to the

Eastward  of  the  Havana,  and  this  day  about  foure  of
the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  we  had  the  Pan  of  the
Mantancas  South-east,  and  by  South  from  us  some  sixe
leagues,  the  winde being  at  East,  and  we  stood  North

[IV.  vi.  North-east three  Watches,  and brought  the  Pan upon

I247-]  the Matanzas South of us: the  winde being at East

North-east,  we  stood  to  the  Northward,  for  so  we  made

the  ships  way. The  seven  and  twentieth  day  at  foure  of

the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  wee  fell  with  the  South-east

Martyrs.  part  of  the  Martyrs :  then  wee  stood  off  South-east  and
by  South  three  watches  with  a  low  saile,  and  so  cast  about,
and  stood  North-east  and  by  North  three  watches,  and
then  observed,  and  found  the  ship  to  bee  in  the  latitude
of  24.  degrees  and  55  minuts,  being  then  South-west  and

Cape  of  by  South  of  the  Cape  of  Florida  about  three  leagues  :  the

Florida.  winde being at South-east  and by  East,  we stood off

South  and  by  West  three  watches,  and  then  cast  about,
and  stood  North-east two  watches,  and then observed,

300

DAVID MIDDLETON

A.D.

l602.

and  found  the  ship  to  be  in  25.  degrees  36.  minutes
being  the  nine  and  twentieth  day  of  Januarie,  1602.  and
then  two  watches  North  and  by  East,  and  foure  North
North-east :  and  the  thirtieth  day  at  noone  wee  had  the  Cape
Canaveral  West  and  by  North  from  us  sixe  and  twentie
leagues:  by  supposition  being  now  in  latitude  28.  degrees
14.  minutes,  the  winde  being  at  South,  wee  stood  North-
east and  by  East  into  the  Sea.  The  eighteenth  day  of
March  at  noone  (being  Thursday)  wee  fell  with  Silley,  silky.
and  wee  were  South  from  it  three  leagues  or  ten  miles,
the  winde  being  at  West  South-west,  wee  stood  for  the
Lizzard,  and  the  twentieth  day  of  this  moneth  we  came
to  winde  being  at  anchor  in  Dartmouth,  this  was  my  first
voyage  which  I  have  to  the  West  Indies.

Chap.  XL

The  description  of  the  He  of  Trinidad,  the  rich
Countrie  of  Guiana,  and  the  mightie  River
of  Orenoco,  written  by  Francis  Sparrey  left
there  by  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  1595.  and  in
the  end  taken  by  the  Spaniards  and  sent
prisoner  into  Spaine,  and  after  long  captivitie
got  into  England  by  great  sute. 1602.

The  description  of  the  He  of  Trinidad.

Orta  la  Spaniola  lyeth  North-east.  The
Spaniards  name  themselves  Conquerabians.
Anaperima  is  the  name  of  the  River,
which  goeth  to  Corona  the  Spanish
Towne.  The  North  part  is  very  moun-
tainous. The  Indians  of  Trinidad  have
foure  names.  1.  Those  of  Parico  are
called  Jaios.  2.  Those  of  Punta,  Carao  Aruacas.  3.
Those  of  Curiadan  are  called  Salvages.  4.  Those  be-
tweene  Punta  Carao,  and  Punta  de  la  Galera,  Nepeios.
But  those  which  are  servants  to  the  Spaniards,  name
themselves  Carinapagotos. The  chiefest  of  the  Indians,

301

A.D.

l602.

The  River  of
Capuri.

The  Gulfe  of
Guanipa.
The  River

A  man  a.
Orenoco.

Tivitivas.

The  River
Macurio.

Toparimaca  a
Governour.

Arwacan.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I meane  the  Kings  and Lords  of  the  Hands  in  times
past,  named  themselves  Acarewanas,  but  now  Captaines.

The  description  of  Guiana,  and  of  the  great
River  Orenoco.

GUiana  beareth  directly  East  from  Peru,  and  lyeth
almost  under  the  Equinoctiall  Line.  The  entrance
to  the  River  Orenoco  through  the  River  Capuri  at  the
mouth  at  a  full  Sea  hath  nine  foot  water,  and  at  the  ebbe
but  five  foot.  The  water  floweth  but  a  small  time,  but
increaseth  much ;  and  the  ebbe  goeth  but  slowly  :  for
it  continueth  sixe  houres.  In  the  bottome  of  the  Gulfe
of  Guanipa  there  is  the  River  of  Amana,  which  leadeth
into  Orenoco  also.  In  this  River,  which  wee  named  the
River  of  the  Red  Crosse,  wee  tooke  an  old  Tivitivan
for  our  Pilot  to  Orenoco.

The  River  of  Orenoco  or  Barequan  hath  nine  mouthes,
which  lye  on  the  North-side  of  the  mayne  land :  but  I
could  heare  but  of  seven  mouthes  upon  the  South-side.
So  that  betweene  Hands  and  broken  Lands  it  hath  some
sixteene  mouthes  in  all.  The  Hands  are  somewhat  bigge,
so  as  I  can  hardly  ghesse  how  many  leagues  it  is  from  the
North-side  to  the  South-side.  At  the  entrance  of  this
River  are  two  great  Lords  Tivitivans,  which  hold  warre
one  with  the  other  continually :  The  one  Nation  are
called  the  Tivitivans  of  Pallamos,  and  the  other  of
Hororotomaca.  He  that  entreth  the  River  of  Amana
from  Curiapan,  cannot  possibly  returne  the  same  way  hee
came,  by  reason  of  the  Easterly  windes  and  the  great
Currents,  but  must  of  force  goe  in  a  River  within  the
Land,  which  is  called  Macurio.

To  goe  from  the  He  of  Trinidad  to  the  great  River
Orenoco  the  River  of  Amana  beareth  South  :  But  parting
from  that  River  by  a  branch  which  beareth  to  the  West
we  entred  Orenoco.  Toparimaca  is  the  chiefe  Governour
under  Topiawari,  of  the  entrance  of  the  Eastermost  part
of  the  River  Orenoco.  The  Towne  of  this  Governour
is  called  Arwacan. These  are  friends  to  the  Carapanans,

302

FRANCIS SPARREY  a.d.

1602.
Tivitivans,  and  all  Nations,  the  Caribes  excepted. Cara-  Carapana

nana  lyeth  in  the  Province  of  Emeria :  and  the  Eastermost  %et  !n  *  %

r  /  .  ,  .  Province  of

part  or  Dorado  is  called  Emeria.  Emeria.

Assapana  is  the  first  Hand  in  Orenoco : it  is  but  small.  [IV.  vi.
The second Hand is called Iwana, There is another  1248.]

entrance  into  Orenoco,  which  I  discovered  not  :  but  the  ^ssaPam
Indians  name  it  Arraroopana. Europa  is  a  Kiver  which  jwana  uand.
commeth  into  Orenoco ;  but  the  head  of  it  I  know  not.  Arraroopana.
In  the  middest  of  Orenoco  there  is  a  pretie  bigge  Hand,  Europa  River.
which  is  somewhat  mountainous ;  and  the  name  of  it  is
Ocawita. One  Putima  commandeth  under  Topiawari,  in  Ocawita
the  confines  of  Morrequito,  which  lyeth  in  the  Province

Hand.

Morrequito.

romaia.

of  Arromaia. The  Hand  of  Putapaima  is  farre  up  within  Ar
the  River  of  Orenoco,  and  standeth  right  against  the  high  putapaima
Mountaine,  called  Oecope. Over  this  Mountaine  lye  the  Hand.
Playnes  of  Samia. Through  these  Playnes  you  may  goe  to  Ofcof>e-
Cumana,  or  to  the  Caracas ;  which  are  at  least  one  hun-  Je^an^m
dred  and  twentie  leagues  just  North. In  these  Playnes  Cumana.
are  foure  Nations,  which  are  held for  great  men. The
Samias, the Assawais, the  Wikeries, and the Arroras.
These  Nations  are  something  blacke.

On  the  left  side  of  this  River  Orenoco  are  two  small
Hands,  a  small  distance  the  one  from  the  other. The  one
is  called  Aroami,  the  other  Aio. In  the  morning  before  Aroamilland.
the  Sunne bee high the winde is  still Easterly  in  this  At0  lland-
place. Manoripano lyeth in the middle of Orenoco.  Manoripano.
Aromaio  is  the  name  of  Morrequito. Orenoco  reacheth  Aromai.
to  the  Mountaines  of  Wacarimoc,  which  is  to  the  East  in
the  Province  of  Emeria,  or  Carapana. The  Vallies  are
called  Amariocapana,  and  the  people  by  that  name  also.
Upon  this  River Orenoco  there  is  a  pleasant  River  for
many  kindes  of  victuals,  which  is  called  Caroli,  and  the  The  River
people  Cassipagotos.  Caroli.

This  Countrie  of  Morrequito  lyeth  in  some  five  or  sixe  j^^flfitT
degrees  to  the  North  of  the  Equinoctiall  Line. At  the
Point  of  the  River  Caroli  is  the  small  Hand  called  Caiama.  ^f'T
The  Inhabitants  of  this  Hand  Caiama  are  enemies  to  the  Epu?'emi.
Epuremi. Here is a very great fall of  Land water.  Great  Fall.

3°3

A.D.

l602.
Canuri.

Store  of  gold
among  the
Epuremians.

Cassipagotos.
Eparigotos.
Arawagotos.
Store  of  gold
beyond  the
Mountaines  of
Curaa.
Store  of  gold.
River  Arul.
River •  Gas  sip  a.
River  Atoka.
River  Caora.
River
Casnero.
Amapaia.
The  Rivers
Cari,  Limoy
Paoo,  Caturi,
Voari,  Capuri.
The  Province
of Amapaia.
Bad  water.

Guicar.
Goavar.
Papemena.

The  Hand  of
Amazones.
The  Hand
Athul.
River  Ubra.

Eregoodawe.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Canuri  lyeth  in  the  Province  of  Morrequito.  The  Gover-
nour  is  called  Wanuretona.

The  Epuremians  are  richest  in  gold  onely.  These
people  called  Epuremi  have  many  enemies,  but  three
especially  which  are  very  strong :  which  are  these ;  the
Cassipagotos,  Eparigotos,  and  Arawagotos.  Hee  that  will
passe  the  Mountaines  of  Curaa  shall  finde  store  of  gold ;
which  is  farre  to  the  West.

The  River  Arui  runneth  continually  North,  and  so  to
the  River  Cassipa,  and  from  thence  into  Orenoco :  neere
unto  the  River  Arui  are  two  Rivers,  the  one  is  called
Atoka,  the  other  Caera :  and  also  one  branch  which  is
called  Caora.  To  the  Westward  of  Caroli  is  a  fourth
River,  which  is  called  Casnero  :  it  falleth  into  Orenoco  on
the  side  of  Amapaia.

The  first  River  that  falleth  into  Orenoco  from  the
North,  is  called  Cari.  Beyond  it  on  the  same  side  is
the  River  Limo :  to  the  West  of  it  is  the  River  Paoo :
and  beyond  that  are  the  Rivers  Caturi,  and  Voari ;  and
another  called  Capuri,  which  is  dangerous  to  enter.  To
the  Westward  of  Capuri  in  the  Province  of  Amapaia,  is
most  vile,  unwholsome,  and  bad  water  to  drinke :  it  is  of
a  bad  tawnie  colour ;  it  hath  killed  many  a  man,  both
Indians  and  others.  They  say  this  water  commeth  from
Anebas.

On  the  North  part  of  Peru  is  a  way  to  enter  into
Orenoco,  as  I  have  heard  by  the  Indians.  The  first  place
whereby  they  are  to  passe,  is  called  Guicar :  the  second
Goavar,  and  so  to  the  River  of  Papemena ;  which  is  the
River  that  runneth  toward  the  Hand  of  the  Amazones.
Neere  unto  the  Hand  of  the  Amazones  is  the  famous
Hand  of  Athul.

The  River  Ubra,  bearing  to  the  West  of  Carthagena,
beareth  to  the  Southward  of  the  Hand  of  the  Amazones.
This  River  Ubra,  if  you  stand  to  the  South-west,  leadeth
to  a  part  of  Aromaiio,  which  is  called  Eregoodawe.  This
Countrie  of  Eregoodawe  is  very  Mountainous,  and  nothing
fruitfull :  it  is  inhabited  by  the  Coman  Ibes. They  have

3°4

FRANCIS SPARREY  a.d.

1602.
Ginny  wheat  but  no  store,  and  very  little  Cassavi :  Veni-
son, Hogs,  and  Conies  they  have  in  great  abundance.
The  King  or  chiefe  Governour  of  this  Province  or  part  of
Aromaiio,  which  is  called  Eregoodawe,  is  one  which
beareth  great  sway  in  those  parts,  whose  name  is
Oromona.  But  all  are  chiefly  commanded  by  Tapuawary  Oromona.
King  of  Morrequito.  Tapiawary.

In  mine  undertaking  the  discoverie  of  the  North  part
of  Orenoco,  I  was  advertised  by  certaine Indian Pilots,
that I should  finde  a  perfect  and  readie  way  to  goe  to
Peru. In  which  my  travell,  I  fell,  by  reason  of  a  great
storme,  into  a  River,  which  is  called  by  the  Indians  Salma.  River  Salma.
This  River  is  not  great :  in  three  dayes  I  passed  through
this River, and entred into the River of Papemena.  Papemena  a
This  River  of  Papemena  is  more  in  my  judgement  then  &Mt  Rwer-
five  or  sixe  Leagues  broad.

North  North-west  of  this  River  is  the  Hand  of  the
Amazones.  But  leaving  that  course,  I  came  to  the  most
sweete,  pleasant,  and  temperate  Hand  which  is  called
Athul.  If  I  had  had  companie  to  my  liking,  I  could  have  Athul,  a  most
found  in  mine  heart  to  have  stayed  there  and  spent  my  swwt&pka-
life.  Athul  is  not  rich  in  mettals :  but  some  stones  I
found  in  the  fresh-water  Rivers :  for  there  are  great  store
of  fresh-water  Rivers;  and  no  want  neither  of  Fish,
Tortoyses  (which  the  Indians  name  Catsepames)  Foules,
nor  other  good  things.  It  hath  Wood  great  store,
Fruites  all  the  yeere  in  abundance,  many  good  places  to
make  a  Towne  if  you  will,  Cotton,  and  Balsamum,  Brasill,
Lignum  vitae,  Cypresses,  and  many  other  sweete  trees.
The  earth  of  this  Hand  doth  promise  to  the  eye  to  be
good,  it  is  very  sad,  and  much  like  to  Oare,  which  I
found  in  divers  places.  I  cannot  report  of  the  goodnesse  [iV~-  vi.
of  the  stones,  because  my  knowledge  in  them  is  nothing.  1249-]

Athul  is  not  inhabited  by  any. The  Hand  is  small,  and
for  feare  of  the  Caribes,  there  is  no  body.

I returned from this good Hand  Athul  toward the  He  retumeth
River  of  Orenoco,  because  I  found  my  labour  was  lost  :  frm  Athul-
For  to  finde  the  way  to  Peru  that  way  was  impossible,
xvi  305  u

A.D.

l602.

P  ape  men  a.

Limo.
Orenoco.

Cosnero River.
Amapala.

Paoo  River.

The  rich
countrie  of
Curaa  six
weekes  travell
from  Orenoco.
Manoa.
Gold  in
abundance.

Gold  in  grains
found  in
Rivers.

Crocodiles  in
the  River  and
worse  on  land,
keepers  of
gold.
Tulahe.
Bad  pearles.

Topasses.
Camalaha.
Women  Fake
and  yet  no
fair  women.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

And  to  make  my  journey  the  shorter,  I  returned  by
the  River  Papemena,  but  left  the  River  of  Salma  cleane,
and  came  my  directest  way  to  Orenoco  :  which  mine
Indian  Pilots  held  to  bee  through  the  River  of  Limo  ;
and  so  I  came  into  the  River  of  Orenoco.  Then  I
went  from  Orenoco,  and  held  my  course  altogether
Westerly  :  because  I  found  the  West  most  rich  ;
although  it  was  most  dangerous  to  travaile  thither,  I
meane  farre  into  the  Countrie,  by  reason  of  the  Epuremi,
which  live  continually  in  armes  and  hold  warres  against
many  Nations,  but  against  three  Nations  especially.
These  are,  as  I  wrote  before,  the  Cassipagotos,  the
Eparigotos,  and  the  Arawagotos.  My  desire  was  to
goe  to  Curaa  ;  and  from  Orenoco  I  first  entred  into
the  River  of  Cosnero,  and  so  coasted  to  Amapaia,  where
is  the  bad  tawnie  water,  which  before  I  mentioned  :  from
thence  I  went  to  the  River  Paoo  ;  and  within  sixe
weekes  after  I  departed  out  of  the  River  of  Orenoco
I  came  to  the  rich  Countrie  of  Curaa.

The  Countrie  of  Curaa  is  in  the  Province  of  Guiana,
or  Manoa,  where  are  the  mynes  of  white  stone  ;  in  which
mynes  is  much  naturall  and  fine  gold,  which  the  Indians
call  Callicurii.  The  gold  in  this  place,  I  say  in  Manoa,  or
Guiana,  runneth  betweene  the  stones  like  veines ;  of
which  gold  I  had  some  store  :  but  now  the  Spaniard  is
the  better  for  it.  In  Curaa  is  also  gold  in  small  graines,
which  lye  in  the  sands  in  the  little  Rivers  or  Brookes.
I  alwayes  tooke  those  graines  for  the  finest  gold.  In
these  Rivers  where  gold  lyeth,  are  many  Aligattos  or
Crocodiles.  I  heard  by  the  Nation  of  the  Tivitivans,
that  a  place  called  Tulahe,  had  many  good  things  in  it  :
but  I  found  it  nothing  so.  Some  bad  fresh-water  pearles
I  found  there  :  which  were  nothing  round,  Orient,  nor
very  great.  I  brought  of  them  with  me  to  the
Spaniards  ;  and  they  said  they  were  no  Pearles,  but
Topasses.

Camalaha  is  a  place  where  they  sell  Women  at  certaine
times,  in  the  manner  of  a Faire. And  there  you  shall

306

FRANCIS SPARREY  a.d.

1602.

buy  colours,  such  as  the  Salvages  paint  themselves  with.
In  this  Faire,  which  is  called  Camalaha,  which  is  to  the
South  of  Orenoco,  I  bought  eight  young  Women,  the  Eight  women
eldest  whereof  I  thinke  never  saw  eighteene  yeeres,  for  Jor  a  fe~
one  red-hafted  knife  which  in  England  cost  mee  one
halfe-peny.  I  gave  these  Women  away  to  certaine
Salvages  which  were  my  friends,  at  the  request  of
Warituc  the  Kings  Daughter  of  Murrequito.

Tar  or  Taroo  is  an  Hand,  which  is  to  the  South  South-  Tar  or  Taroo,
West  of  Orenoco.  To  which  place  I  went,  because  they  an  lland'
said  there  was  never  any  that  inhabited  in  this  Hand,  but
that  it  was  in  the  manner  of  a  bayting  place  for  the  Caribes,
when  they  had  stollen  people,  which  they  meant  to  eate.
One  Captaine  Caramatoii  was  my  guide  to  this  place  :
whither  we  went  somewhat  strong,  with  intent,  if  wee
could  finde  any  Caribes  on  this  Hand,  to  kill  them  ;  but
wee  found  none.  Many  houses  wee  found  there  covered
with  straw,  which  wee  set  on  fire.  And  there  I  found
close  by  the  water  side,  going  about  the  Hand,  which
was  but  small,  many  stones  of  divers  colours.

To  the  West  of  this  River  and  Hand,  which  is  called
Tar  or  Taroo,  is  a  River,  which  is  called  Habuc  :  There  Habuc  a
are  about  this  River  in  most  places  eight,  ten,  seventeene,  Kwer-
and thirtie fathomes water. This River of Habuc
commeth  from the  Sea. The  entrance  of  this  River  at
the  mouth  is  barred ; but  at a  full  Sea  you  shall  have
fourteene  and  fifteene  foot  water  ;  but  in  the  Channell  in
which  the  Canoas  enter,  which is  but  narrow  ; there  is
more  then  sixe  fathomes : but  I  doubt  that  ships  cannot
enter  there. This  River  Habuc  is  the  best  and  surest  Habuc  scarce
harbour  that  I  could  finde  for  our  ships,  and  freest  from  e!g ?**
the  danger  of  the  enemie ; and  is  not  full  eight  dayes  Orenoco.
journey  from  Orenoco.

The  River  Europa  lyeth  to  the  East  of  Orenoco  as  you  Europa  River.
come from Trinidad : you may, as I certainly know,
going  some  twentie  leagues  in  the  River  of  great  Amana,
discover  the  great and  high Mountaine  which  is  called  Qecopa
Oecopa : being  there  you  shall  plainly  see  the  Playnes  or  Mountaine.

3°7

A.D.
l602.

Santo

Domingo.

Amapaia

River.

Amazones

Hand.

Wiaumli
River.

Maccah
River.

Woripur.
Carrabouca.

Guiana  or
Manoa.
[IV.  vi.

1250.]
Drano  River.
Anebas
Moores.

Unhealthfull
dezves.

Emeria.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Downes  of  Samia ;  through  which  Playnes  you  may  safely
march  over  the  Land  within  ten  or  twelve  leagues  of
Cumana,  or  to  the  Caracas.

From  Orenoco  also  it  is  very  easie  to  goe  to  the  Towne
of  Santo  Domingo,  which  beareth  North  North-west
directly :  but  you  must  passe  of  force  the  River  Amapaia,
leaving  the  Hand  called  Amazones  South :  and  beare  your
course  as  neere  as  you  can  North-west,  or  North  North-
west. By  this  course  you  shall  passe  and  escape  the  force
and  danger  of  the  Towne,  and  land  some  sixe  dayes
journey  from  Santo  Domingo.

The  River  Wiaumli  is  to  the  North  of  Orenoco.  To
goe  into  this  River,  which  is  little  worth,  you  may  goe  in
the  Land  till  you  come  to  another  small  River,  which  is
called  Maccah :  directing  your  course  South,  you  shall
within  two  dayes,  if  your  Canoa  bee  good,  enter  the
River  of  Wiaumli.  The  Land  taketh  the  name  of  the
River.  The  Governours  name  is  Woripur  Worrok
Halaha.  Carrabouca  is  in  the  firme  Land  of  the  great
Hand,  called  Murrequito :  it  is  the  common  trade  to  goe
to  the  rich  Guiana  or  Manoa.

Drano  is  a  faire  River,  but  it  is  dangerous  to  goe  farre
in  it,  by  reason  it  lyeth  due  South-east  from  Orenoco :
and  the  Southermost  part  of  the  Moores  of  Anebas  is  very
low,  so  that  the  tanie  waters  issue  in  great  abundance  into
this  River  of  Drano.  The  danger  for  entring  this  River
is  nothing,  but  the  doubt  is  onely  of  the  bad  water,  and
most  terrible  dewes  which  fall  from  the  Moores,  which
are  unhealthfull,  and  kill  the  Indians  daily ;  for  that
continually  when  they  travell  they  lie  in  the  open  aire.

The  Eastermost  part  of  Dorado  is  called  Emeria.
There  is  a  small  River,  which  lyeth  farre  East  in  Emeria,
and  beareth  North  North-west.  Through  this  River
called  Capurisol  is  a  sure,  a  perfect,  and  most  safe  way
to  goe  to  Peru :  but  the  journey  will  aske  eight  or  ten
weekes  to  finish  it.  Through  these  Rivers  of  force  wee
must  passe  with  Canoas  or  Ship-boats,  or  such  like :  for
there  is  alway  very  little  water.

308

FRANCIS SPARREY  ad.

1604.
The  River  of  Capurisol  lyeth  in  eight  degrees  and  two  Capurisol
terces  to  the  North  of  the  Equinoctiall  Line. But  the  Rwer'
North  starre  keepeth  his  degree  and  altitude  11.  degrees
and  two  terces. In  this  River  is  still  a  fine  small  brise  of
winde,  which  lightly  bloweth  at  West : but  at  noone  you
shall  hardly  finde  any  winde.

Chap. XII.

Captaine Charles Leigh his voyage to Guiana
and  plantation there.

He one and twentieth of  March, 1604.
Captaine Charles Leigh in the Olive
Plant, a proper Barke of some fiftie
Tunnes  accompanied  with  six  and  fortie
men  and  boyes,  departed  from  Wolwich
with intention to discover and inhabit
some part of  the Countrie of  Guiana,
where  he  had  beene  in  a  former  voyage,  they  stayed  in
the Downes untill  the  eight  and  twentieth  of  the  said
moneth,  and  passing  thence  they  touched  in  the  He  of
Mogador  on the coast of  Barbarie in the moneth of
Aprill, where we stayed about some five dayes, and
watered on the mayne land in despite of the rebell  Canoa  of
Moores,  which  would  have  had  money  for  our  watering,  water.
Thence  with  prosperous  winde  coasting  the  lies  of  Cape
Verde,  we  passed  over  to  the  West  Indies,  and  upon  the
tenth  of  May  comming  in  change  of  water,  which  shewed
thicke  and  white,  by  the  next  day  we  were  in  fresh  water,
and  the  next  day  following  about  five  in  the  morning  wee
saw  two  Hands  in  the  mouth  of  the  River  of  Amazones,  River  of
making  account  that  we  were  fortie  leagues  up  the  River,  Amazones.
and came  to an anchor in three fathoms  under  them,
which wee found low land covered with high Trees.
Then  the  Captaine  with  some  eight  of  the  best  men  of
the ship went toward the shoare, and finding many
Indians comming toward them they returned aboard,
and found the ship  almost  aground,  but  sounding  the

309

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1604.

Bay brought their ship into the Channell which they
found  very  narrow.

Within  awhile  after  foure  Indians  in  a  small  Canoa
shewed  themselves  unto  us,  to  whom  we  sent  our  Boat
with  some  of  our  commodities,  as  Hatchets,  Knives,
Glasses,  Beades,  they  had  nothing  but  Maiz  and  small
blue-headed  Parrots,  for  which  we  gave  them  some  of
our  triffles.  Not  long  after  another  Canoa  comming
out,  our  Boat  clapt  betweene  them  and  the  shoare  to
take  some  of  them,  to  learne  the  state  of  the  River  by
them,  but  they  freed  themselves  all  save  one  youth,
which  was  brought  aboard,  which  next  day  after  escaped
leaping  into  the  Sea  twelve  leagues  as  we  judged  from
land.  Thus  we  tooke  our  leave  of  the  River  of
Amazones,  and  having  uncertaine  shoaldings  all  the  way
in  our  way,  about  ten  a  clocke  in  the  night  wee  strooke
upon  a  sand  before  we  could  let  fall  our  anchor,  where
wee  beat  off  a  piece  of  our  false  keele,  before  wee  could
get  off.  Being  gotten  off,  wee  came  to  an  anchor  in
foure  fathom  and  a  halfe  water,  and  rode  there  untill
the  next  morning,  where  wee  descryed  the  land  sixe
leagues  from  us  with  the  entrance  of  a  River.

The  two  and  twentieth  of  May,  wee  arrived  in  the
R'wer  River  of  Wiapogo,  in  the  latitude  of  three  degrees  and
Wiapogo.  a  kalfe  to  the  North  of  the  Line,  where  wee  found  the
people  readie  to  give  us  the  best  entertainment  they
could,  bringing  us  Hony,  Pines,  Plantons,  Potatoes,
Cassavi  (whereof  they  make  their  bread  and  wine)  Fish
of  many  sorts,  Hennes,  Conies,  Hogs,  and  such  like.
This  day  he  tooke  an  oath  of  all  his  people  to  be  true
to  him  as  long  as  he  abode  in  the  Countrie.  Then  after
divers  conferences  with  the  chiefe  Indians,  and  namely
with  two  of  their  Countrie,  which  had  beene  before  in
England,  and  could  speake  some  English,  he  found  them
very  willing  to  have  him  and  his  people  abide  in  their
Countrie  :  who  pretending  want  of  many  necessaries,
whereof  indeed  he  stood  in  need,  and  especially  of  victuals,
hee  went  up  the  River  in  his  Boat  with  some  fourteene

310

CHARLES LEIGH  a.d.

1604.

men  to  take  perfect  view  of  a  fit  place  to  inhabit  in,  and
to  sound  the  depth  of  the  River  as  they  went.  At  his
returne  he  caused  his  ship  to  be  brought  up  hard  unto
the  falls  of  the  River  :  but  after  they  had  stayed  there  The  Falls-
one  day,  rinding  sundrie  inconveniences,  they  came  backe
againe  to  their  first  road  ;  with  a  determination  to  plant
and  seate  themselves  upon  the  first  Mount  or  high  [IV-  V1-
ground,  at  the  entrance  of  the  North  side  of  the  River.  I*53E-J

But  the  Jayos  and  Sapayos  seeing  him  and  his  company
come  downe  the  River  againe,  entreated  him  earnestly
to  stay  among  them,  offering  him  their  owne  dwelling
Houses  and  Gardens  alreadie  planted  to  their  hands,
whereof  he  accepted :  to  wit,  of  two  Houses  and  of  as
many  Gardens  as  they  thought  convenient  to  serve  his
turne,  with  condition  that  he  should  ayde  and  defend
them  against  their  enemies  the  Caribes  and  others.  Here-
upon they  made  a  great  Feast,  desiring  our  Captaine
to  bee  at  it,  and  they  demand  of  their  generalitie  of  the
staying  of  our  men  in  the  Countrey  or  no.  Whereunto
they  gave  their  free  consent,  and  desired  him  withall
to  send  into  England,  for  men  to  teach  them  to  pray.  They  desire
This  done,  the  next  day  he  brought  all  his  furniture  t0  lea™e
on  shoare,  and  bestowed  it  in  the  aforesaid  houses.  And  re  lglon'
for  the  better  assurance  of  the  performance  of  the  Sal-
vages promise,  he  demanded  pledges  of  them  to  be  sent
into  England  :  whereunto  they  willingly  condescended :
which  were  in  number  five,  whereof  two  were  of  good
account.  Hee  retayned  thirty  five  Englishmen  and
Boyes  with  him,  sending  the  rest  home  in  June,  with
the  five  Salvages  which  were  plentifully  furnished  with
their  Country  victuals,  with  Letters  to  the  right  Worship-
full  Sir  Olave  Leigh  his  brother,  of  his  successe  and
desire  to  supply  his  wants,  which  he  most  kindly  twice
supplied  to  his  great  charge  within  short  time  after.

The  Caribes  in  eight  warlike  Canowes  came  to  surprize  Caribes.
them as farre as the Mount Comaribo : whereof  the
Indians  being  advertised  by  our  fishers,  desired  Captaine
Leigh to  aide them  : which he did with some  foure

3"

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1604.

and  twentie  of  his  men  in  eight  Canowes.  But  the
battell  being  begun  after  they  had  heard  the  sound  of
our  Trumpet  and  Musket,  they  fled  to  Sea-ward,  our
Canowes  chasing  them  :  but  the  enemy  being  swifter
A  Canowe  escaped  with  casting  of  one  of  their  Canowes  which  are
taken.  aye to  cariy  twentie  men  and victuals for ten  dayes,

which  Canowe  they  brought  home.

Within  a  sennight  after  our  Captaines  returne,  hee
made  a  Voyage  in  an  Indian  Canowe  having  Indians
to  rowe  him,  accompanied  only  with  Thomas  Richardson,
his  Refiner  of  Metals,  and  John  Burt  his  Chirurgion
R.  Aracawa.  90.  miles  by  water  up  the  River  of  Aracawa,  to  a  Nation
called  the  Maurauvas,  where  he  traded  for  Tabacco  and
Cotton  yarne,  and  Cotton-wooll.  There  he  left  his
Chirurgian  being  sicke,  and  with  his  Refiner  and  three
Indians  (whereof  one  William  was  his  Interpretour)  went
up  to  a  Nation  called  Marraias  the  space  of  thirtie  miles,
where  they  passed  thorough  a  goodly  Plaine  foure  miles
broad  of  much  stonie  ground,  wherein  they  saw  Deere.
At  length  meeting  with  the  people,  they  were  kindly
entertayned  and  fed  with  such  as  they  had ;  as  dryed
Tygres  flesh,  dried  Hogges  flesh,  and  small  fish.  Then
after  some  discourse,  they  enquired  for  Gold  shewing
a  Ring.  An  old  man  spake  unto  him  and  pointed  up
into  the  Countrey,  and  the  Captaine  asking  the  Inter-
preter what  he  said,  he  told  him  that  he  said  there  was
no  such  that  way.  The  Captaine  perceiving  the  falshood
of  his  Interpretor  would  goe  no  further,  and  so  returned
home,  where  he  found  us  for  the  most  part  sicke,  and
the  Indians  not  so  kind  unto  us  as  they  had  promised  :
which  he  much  marvelled  and  grieved  at.

Within  three  dayes  after  his  returne,  his  shipwright
Richard  Haward  died  before  hee  could  make  an  end
of  his  shallop.  And  in  September  our  Captaine  himselfe
began  to  droope,  partly  of  griefe  to  see  the  weake  estate
of  his  people,  and  the  ill  performance  of  the  Indians
promises :  yet  neverthelesse  he  ceased  not  to  take  order
for the  Indians  bringing  in  of  victuals  and  such Mer-

312

CHARLES LEIGH  a.d.

1604.

chandize  as  could  be  gotten,  as  Waxe,  fine  white  long  The  Comma-
Feathers,  Flaxe,  Tabacco,  Parrots,  Monkeyes,  greene  and  L  es  °J  2e
blacke,  Cotton-yarne  and  Cotton-wooll,  sweet  Gummes,
red  Pepper,  Urapo,  and  Apriepo  woods,  Spleene  stones,
matiate  stones,  Roots  and  Berries,  which  we  thought
to  be  medicinable,  Anato  a  Berrie  or  Cod,  such  as  the
Indians  paint  themselves  red  withall  mingled  with  Oyle,
Urapo  which  is  the  heavie  wood  whereof  they  make
their  Swords  and  Bowes,  Apriepo,  a  wood  that  the
Frenchmen  and  Hollanders  fetch  away,  a  wood  which
they  call  Ayard,  which  they  kill  fish  withall.

The  fishers  beate  this  wood  with  another  piece  of  Strange
wood,  till  it  shiver  into  flakes,  which  smelleth  exceeding  fisntnS-
strong  like  Garlicke,  wherewith  in  sundry  places  of  the
creekes  going  in  according  to  the  depth  of  the  water,
they  beate  it  up  and  downe  often  in  the  River,  which
the  fish  tasting,  are  intoxicated,  and  so  distempered  with
all,  that  they  flote  and  tumble  upon  the  upper  part  of
the  water,  and  then  with  Bats  and  Poles  they  knocke
them  on  the  heads.  Their  bread  they  make  of  Cassavia,  Cassavi.
a  white  Roble  commonly  a  span  long,  and  almost  so  thicke,
which  the  women  grate  in  an  earthen  panne  against
certaine  grates  of  stone,  and  grate  three  or  foure  busshels
in  a  day :  The  juyce  thereof  they  crush  out  most  care-  The  juice.
fully  beeing  ranke  poyson  raw,  in  a  hose  of  withe,  which
they  hang  up  upon  an  hooke,  and  afterward  with  a
weightie  logge  which  they  hang  at  the  other  end  they
squeeze  out  the  water  into  an  earthen  pan  or  piece  of
a  Gourd,  and  then  seethe  the  same  juice  with  their  red
Pepper  whereby  it  becommeth  holesome,  and  if  they  will
have  it  sweete,  they  will  seethe  it  but  ordinary,  if  they
will  have  it  sowre,  they  will  seethe  it  extraordinarily,
and  use  it  in  manner  of  sawce,  and  when  they  be  sicke
they  eat  the  same  and  bread  only.  The  women  also
make  drinke  of  this  Cassava  bread,  which  in  their
Language  they  call  Arepapa,  by  baking  of  it  blacke,  dry,
and  thinne,  then  chewing  it  in  their  mouthes,  they  put
it into earthen  pots  narrow in  the  bottome  and  broad

3*3

A.D.

1604.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[IV.  vi.

252.]

Sicknesse.

The  cause.

above,  contayning  some  a  Firkin,  some  a  Kilderkin,
some  a  Barrell,  set  in  a  small  hole  in  the  ground,  with
fire  about  them.  Being  well  sod,  they  put  it  out  into
great  Jarres  of  Earth  with  narrow  neckes,  and  there  it  will
worke  a  day  and  a  night,  and  keepe  it  foure  or  five
dayes  till  it  be  stale,  and  then  gathering  together  an
hundred  and  more,  they  give  themselves  to  piping,
dancing  and  drinking.  They  make  drinke  also  of
Cassava  unchewed,  which  is  small  and  ordinary  in  their
houses.  They  use  also  to  make  drinke  of  Potatos  which
they  paire  and  stampe  in  a  Morter  being  sod,  then
putting  water  to  it,  drinke  it.

Before  and  after  the  sicknesse  of  our  Captaine,  many
of  our  men  fell  sicke,  some  of  Agues,  some  of  Fluxes,
some  of  giddinesse  in  their  heads,  whereby  they  would
often  fall  downe  :  which  grew  chiefly  of  the  excessive
heate  of  the  Sunne  in  the  day,  and  of  the  extreame
dampe  of  the  earth,  which  would  so  moysten  our
Hamackas,  or  Cotton  beds,  wherein  wee  lay  a  yard  from
the  ground,  that we  were faine to  imitate  the  Indians

The  remedle.  in  making  fires  on  both  sides  under  them.  And  for
all  that  we  could  doe,  some  nine  of  our  company  were
dead  before  our  ships  arrivall.  Besides  we  were  mightily
vexed  with  a  kinde  of  Worme,  which  at  first  was  like
to  a  Flea,  and  would  creepe  into  the  feet  especially,  and
under  the  nayles,  and  would  exceedingly  torment  us,
the  time  it  was  in,  and  more  in  the  pulling  out  with
a  Pinne  or  Needle,  if  they  were  few.  But  one  of
our  men  having  his  feete  over-growne  with  them,  for
want  of  hose  and  shooes,  was  faine  to submit  himselfe

Terrible  cure,  to  the  Indians  cure,  who  tying  one  of  his  legges  first
with  his  feete  upward,  powred  hot  melted  Waxe  which
is  blacke  upon  it,  and  letting  it  lye  upon  it  till  it  was
thoroughly  cold,  they  forcibly  pulled  it  off;  and  there-
withall  the  Wormes  came  out  sticking  in  the  same,  seven
or  eight  hundred  in  number.  This  man  was  named
John  Nettleton  a  Dier  of  London,  which  afterward  was
drowned.

Niguas  little.
Wormes,  great
torture.

CHARLES LEIGH  a.d.

1604.

In  the  middest  of  all  these  extremities  our  Captaines  In-
terpreter which  hee  had  threatned  for  his  false  demeanour
in  his  Voyage  to  the  Marraias  before  mentioned,  gave
counsell  to  his  Master  named  Anaccauri,  an  ancient  Trecherie  of
Captaine  among  them,  to  make  a  motion  among  the  a  ava&e-
Indians  at  their  next  meeting  to  say,  it  is  the  best  way  for
us  now  to  make  an  end  of  them  while  they  are  sicke  either
by  starving  or  otherwise.  For  when  the  ship  commeth,
hee  will  kill  us  for  keeping  him  without  victuals  now.
This  motion  being  made  at  their  meeting,  which  was  in
Carisava  his  house,  and  among  his  and  Martins  kinred,
(which  then  remayned  pledges  for  our  mens  safetie  in
England)  their  wives  hearing  the  Interpreters  Master
Anaccauri  broaching  this  matter  ranne  furiously  upon
him  and  tare  his  clothes  such  as  hee  wore  from  him,
and  mightily  beate  him,  the  other  of  their  kindred,
keeping  those  Indians  off  from  the  women,  which  would
have  taken  his  part.

Some  of  our  owne  men  lying  at  the  next  house  where
this  was  done,  inquired  of  an  Indian  which  owed  this
Anaccauri  a  grudge,  what  the  cause  was  of  the  said
tumult :  who  imparted  the  whole  truth  unto  them.  Our
men  comming  suddenly  to  the  Captaine,  acquainted  him
with  the  whole  matter :  who  suddenly  bethought  himselfe
and  sent  for  all  his  men  that  were  neere  him ;  and
for  Eperiago  and  Pluainma  an  Indian  that  had  beene  in
England :  which  were  two  of  the  chiefest,  and  caused
him  to  send  for  his  trayterous  Interpretor,  which  came
bringing  Hens,  drinke  and  bread :  Assoone  as  he  came,
shewing  what  hee  had  heard,  requiring  them  to  declare
what  wrong  he  had  done  them.  Who  answered,  none.
Then  said  he,  this  fellow,  meaning  the  Interpretor,  hath
sought  my  life;  and  therewith  commanded  his  men  to
bind  him  hand  and  foot,  which  done,  he  dismissed  them,
desiring  them  to  returne  the  next  morning.  In  the
meane  time  he  caused  his  Prisoner  to  send  for  a  Canowe
to  fetch  three  of  his  men,  which  were  up  in  the  River,
who immediately did so. Now having all his men

3i5

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1604.

together,  hee  caused  them  to  have  all  their  Furniture
readie :  appointing  one  William  Blake  to  see  the  same
diligently  fulfilled,  the  watch  carefully  to  be  kept  in
the  night,  and  two  to  ward  at  the  doores  all  day  with
their  Furniture,  to  take  the  Indians  weapons  out  of
their  hands  at  their  comming  in  at  the  doore.

This  being  ordayned,  the  Indians  came  the  next  day,
to  whome  the  Captaine  said,  In  regard  that  I  have  beene
so  carefull  to  punish  the  wrongs  done  unto  you,  I  would
have  you  readie  to  revenge  the  wrongs  done  unto  mee,
who  seemed  very  unwilling  to  doe  any  farther  Justice,
esteeming  his  binding  a  sufficient  punishment.  At  the
which  the  Captaine  beeing  very  much  vexed,  commanded
the  two  foresaid  Indian  Captaines  to  depart,  charging
them  to  send  him  in,  fish  and  other  victuals  for  his  com-
pany. In  the  meane  time  he  and  the  chiefe  of  his  men,
consulting  what  course  to  take  with  the  Malefactor,  they
thought  it  best  that  hee  should  lye  so  bound  untill  the
next  day  being  the  third  of  his  bondage,  and  to  send  for
the  chiefe  of  the  Indians,  and  upon  confession  of  his
fault,  and  craving  pardon  thereof,  to  be  dismissed  before
them.

M'

Captaine Charles  Leighs  Letter  to Sir  Olave
Leigh  his  Brother.

Ost loving Brother, I did write unto  you  from
Muggador,  where I stayed untill the  nineteenth
of  Aprill,  and  on  the  fourteenth  of  May  I  had  first  sight
[IV.  vi.  of  Guiana,  in  the  mouth  of  the  River  Amazones,  The  two

I253-]  and  twentieth,  I  arrived  (praysed  be  God)  in  safetie  in
the  River  Caroleigh,  heretofore  called  Wyapoco,  and  the
same  day,  I  tooke  possession  of  the  Countrey  in  sight
of  the  Indians.  The  Indians  which  doe  inhabit  this  River
are  about  one  thousand  five  hundred  men,  women,  and
children,  and  they  are  of  three  Nations,  viz.  Yaioas,
Arwarkas,  and  Sapayoas,  which  beeing  chased  from  other
Rivers,  by  the  Caribes  have  combined  themselves  together
in this place  for their better defence, and are  now  at

316

CHARLES LEIGH  a.d.

1604.

deadly  warres  with  the  Caribes.  After  that  I  had  stored
my  selfe  with  Bread  and  Roots  sufficient  untill  the  Earth
with  Gods  providence  might  yeeld  me  supply,  I  did  then
send  for  the  chiefe  Captaine  of  the  Yayoas  aboord,  whom
with  gifts  and  good  usage,  I  easily  entreated  to  stay
aboord  my  ship  untill  such  time  as  by  his  meanes  I  was
provided  with  all  kind  of  Plants,  which  their  Gardens  doe
affoord,  yet  all  this  while  he  knew  not  my  purpose.
The  day  before  I  purposed  to  make  my  intent  knowne,
there  came  another  chiefe  Captaine  of  the  Yayoas  aboord
to  dine  with  me,  who  together  with  the  former  after
Dinner  desired  to  speake  with  me,  whereupon  I  sent
for  an  Indian  who  had  beene  in  England,  to  bee  In-
terpreter, and  tooke  them  into  my  Cabbin.  The  two
Captaines  told  a  long  Storie  of  the  wrongs  the  Caribes
had  done  them,  how  they  had  driven  them  from  their
ancient  dwellings  in  other  Rivers,  killed  many  of  their
friends,  carried  their  women  and  children  away  Captives,
and  hurt  many  of  their  men,  and  thereupon  they  called
one  of  their  men  to  shew  me  how  he  was  lately  hurt
in  three  places  with  their  Arrowes,  to  conclude,  they
told  me,  how  they  purposed  the  next  Moone  to  goe
against  the  Caribes,  with  twentie  Canoas,  and  earnestly
entreated  me  if  I  stayed  so  long  to  goe  with  them  to
their  Warres.  Upon  this  good  occasion,  I  told  them
that  I  purposed  to  stay  in  the  Countrey,  seven  or  eight
moneths,  to  seeke  out  and  make  triall  of  Mynes.  And
in  the  meane  time  that  I  purposed  to  build  Houses
ashoare  at  the  head  of  the  River,  and  there  to  plant
Gardens,  that  my  men  might  have  victuals  of  their  owne
labours,  which  done,  I  would  build  a  shallop,  and  send
twentie  men  in  her  with  them  to  fight  against  the  Caribes,
withall  this  they  seemed  wonderfull  well  content,  and
thereupon  they  promised  Indians  to  helpe  mee  to  build
and  to  plant,  and  the  chiefe  Captaine  promised  himselfe
to  goe  up  with  me.  The  next  day  being  the  third  of
May,  I  set  sayle  from  the  mouth  of  Caroleigh,  and  cast
Anchor  in  a  Bay  under  Mount  Oliphe,  where  I  purposed

317

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1604.

to  plant,  and  make  my  habitation :  but  my  men  dis-
comforted with  the  sight  of  the  Woodes  which  they  were
to  fell,  grew  generally  discontented,  and  omitted  no
practices  to  overthrow  the  Voyage,  being  suborned  under
hand,  by  my  unfaithfull  Servant,  the  Master,  his  lewd
consorts  he  brought  with  him,  being  the  only  publike
maintayners  of  the  mutenie.  How  I  have  beene  troubled
with  him  and  his  consorts,  (who  intending  spoyle  and
purchase  in  the  West  Indies)  have  from  the  beginning
sought  the  overthrow  of  this  Voyage,  this  Bearer  can
certifie  you  at  large.  And  undoubtedly  hee  made  full
account  with  his  headstrong  companions  at  such  a  time
to  have  commanded  the  ship  at  his  pleasure.  To  con-
clude, amongst  other  their  practices,  they  so  consumed
the  victuals  which  should  have  mayntained  us  untill  the
earth  had  yeelded  supply  as  that  in  sixe  dayes,  our
Potatoes  which  should  have  lasted  us  two  monethes,  were
wholly  spent  hereupon  being  farre  distant  from  the
Indians,  who  inhabit  at  the  mouth  of  the  River,  fortie
miles  from  the  falls,  and  it  being  very  doubtfull,  how
wee  should  bee  furnished  with  victuals  from  them  in
our  extremitie,  I  gave  consent  that  the  ship  should  returne
to  the  mouth  of  the  River,  with  this  condition :  that  after
I  had  refurnished  them  with  victuals  and  other  things
sufficient  that  then  they  should  plant  upon  Mount
Huntlay,  two  leagues  to  the  West  of  Caroleigh :  which
being  neere  the  Indians,  and  betweene  them  and  their
enemies  they  would  be  readie  and  willing  to  furnish  us
with  victuals,  upon  any  extremitie,  to  which  condition
they  generally  consented,  that  place  being  first  motioned
by  some  of  them.  The  shippe  being  returned,  they  had
then  brought  mutinie  to  such  a  head,  as  that  to  my  face,
they  stood  in  defiance  of  the  Voyage,  and  told  me  plainly
they  would  not  stay  doe  what  I  would  or  could,  I  urged
them  with  their  promise  to  plant  on  Mount  Huntly,  one
of  them  who  seemed  most  forward  of  all  men  to  yeeld
to  that  motion :  answered  that  he  promised  in  policie,
to draw  me from Mount  Oliphe. But in the end it

318

CHARLES LEIGH  a.d.

1604.
pleased  God,  what  by  faire  meanes  and  what  by  foule,
I  brought  them  all  to  consent  to  stay  one  whole  yeere,
thorow  all  extremities,  if  it  were  possible  to  make  a  full
triall  both  of  people  and  Countrey,  and  to  plant  upon
Mount  Huntley,  according  to  their  promise.  This  agreed
upon,  I  went  ashoare  to  the  Indians,  to  provide  victuals,
and  other  necessaries  for  our  Plantation,  who  being  ex-
ceeding glad  of  my  returne ;  offered  me  to  choose  the
best  of  their  houses  and  gardens,  to  dwell  amongst  them.
For  they  were  very  unwilling  that  I  should  goe  to  any
other  place,  to  conclude,  judging  their  offers  by  many
likelihoods,  to  be  without  deceit,  I  resolved  to  abide
with  them  upon  this  condition :  that  they  should  send
foure  principall  Indians  for  England  as  pledges,  for  our
saftie  with  them  whereunto  they  willingly  condescended,
and  if  I  would,  I  might  have  twentie.  For  they  make
daily  suite  to  me  to  goe  for  England.  Beeing  in  con-
ference with  an  assembly  of  two  or  three  hundred,
purposely  met  to  crave  my  abode  amongst  them,  and
demanding  of  them  vowes  and  protestations  according
to  the  custome  of  all  people,  for  the  more  securitie  of
our  peace  and  amity:  their  answere  was  that  they  knew
not  how  to  make  vowes  and  protestations,  and  therefore
generally  they  desired  (sundry  of  their  Captaines  speaking
it  together,  with  a  low  and  humble  voice)  that  I  would
bring  them  men  to  teach  them  to  pray.  Which  motion
of  theirs,  proceeding  from  themselves  and  in  that  humble
manner,  strooke  me  I  assure  you  into  an  admiration  of
joy,  to  thinke  that  it  hath  pleased  Almightie  God  after
so  many  dangers  heretofore,  and  troubles  in  the  Voyage,
to  preserve  me  to  be  a  meanes  to  this  simple-hearted
people  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ.  Undoubtedly,  it
was  the  wonderfull  worke  of  Gods  Spirit  in  them,
whereat  all  Christian  hearts  ought  to  rejoice.  And  I  am
perswaded,  the  like  instance  hath  never  beene  before  by
any  people  in  the  World :  I  beseech  Almightie  God  to
give  a  blessed  end  to  this  hopefull  beginning.  rjy  vI

The  foureteenth  of  June,  concluding  with  the  Indians  1254.]

319

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1604.

upon  sundry  conditions,  I  purchased  of  them  the  same
day  for  a  few  Hatchets,  Houses  and  Gardens  planted
with  Cassava,  and  Potatoes  sufficient  for  all  my  company :
the  scituation  of  our  Houses  is  in  the  pleasantest  and
most  fruitfull  place  of  all  their  habitations.  And  because
it  is  a  small  Village  of  six  or  seven  houses ;  and  the  first
place  of  our  setled  aboade  I  have  named  it  Principium :
the  Hill  on  which  it  standeth  being  part  of  the  Mountaine
on  the  West  side  of  the  entrance  of  the  River,  I  have
named  Mount  Howard,  to  honour  the  remembrance  of
my  Lord  Admirall,  of  whom  heretofore  I  have  received
many  favours :  on  the  East  side  of  the  entrance  of  Caro
Leigh,  lieth  the  River  Olivoleighe  heretofore  called
Arrikowarye :  and  on  the  West  side  of  Mount  Howard
runneth  the  River  Jotrameleighe,  by  the  Indians  called
Wanarie.  The  commodities  which  this  Countrie  doth
yeelde,  and  through  industrie  will  abound  in,  are  these;
Sugar  Canes,  Cotten  and  fine  Flaxe ;  also  it  would  yeelde
great  store  of  long  Pepper,  if  there  might  be  vent  for
it  in  England :  here  is  sundry  sorts  of  Gummes,  of
Woods,  and  of  Dies,  which  I  hope  will  prove  good  com-
modities, of  all  which  I  have  sent  you  samples  by  Master
Huntlie,  especially  one  sort  of  Gumme,  which  I  am  per-
swaded  will  prove  very  rich.  Also  I  have  sent  unto  you
a  peece  of  a  Stone  taken  out  of  a  Manvate  or  Sea  Cowe.
I  am  given  to  understand  that  a  little  thereof  beaten  into
powder,  and  drunke  in  Wine  or  Ale,  will  in  few  houres
cure  any  man  that  is  troubled  with  the  Stone,  they  say
it  dissolveth  it  instantly.  I  doubt  not  but  to  get  a  dosen
of  them  before  this  time  twelve  moneths :  my  refiner
hath  made  triall  of  sundry  Minerals,  but  cannot  yet  finde
any  Mettals.  At  my  arrivall  here  I  found  a  Dutch
Shippe,  and  sithence  here  hath  arrived  another,  they
buye  up  all  the  Flaxe  they  can  get,  and  pay  so
deere  that  I  can  get  none ;  they  have  not  gotten  so
little  I  thinke  as  ten  tunnes  of  Flaxe  within  these  two
moneths.

I  doubt not  but  I shall  be  able  to  returne  a  Shippe

320

CHARLES LEIGH  a.d.

1604.
laden  with  Flaxe  and  other  commodities  the  next  yeare ;
the  Flaxe  yeeldeth  a  wonderfull  encrease,  and  will  grow
any  where,  but  especially  in  low  moorish  grounds  :  the
Indians  report  that  the  Roote  yeeldeth  increase  every
moneth,  and  everie  yeelde  may  be  some  foure  ounces,
by  this  accompt  an  acre  of  ground  planted  with  these
rootes,  and  distant  three  foote  a  sunder,  will  yeelde
17280.H.  everie  yeare,  which  amounteth  at  sixe  pence
the  pound  to  432.H.  I  doubt  this  will  not  prove
answerable  to  their  reports,  but  I  verily  beleeve  it  will
yeelde  halfe  the  encrease  they  speake  of.  The  Dutch  men
have  reported  that  it  is  worth  in  Holland  but  six  pence
the  pound,  but  they  confesse  that  Holland  will  vent
500.tunne  thereof.  Some  of  the  Duch  men  have  reported
that  it  is  worth  in  Holland  sixeteene  pence  the  pound,
which  I  rather  beleeve,  for  my  Wevers  tell  me  that  they
will  warrant  it  to  dresse  exceeding  well,  and  then  it  must
neede  be  excellent  fine  grounds  for  any  stuffe ;  for  Cotten
here  is  little,  not  worth  the  speaking  of,  yet  the  Countrie
will  yeelde  abundance,  and  in  sixe  weekes  the  seede  will
yeelde  Cotten,  and  it  beareth  continually  and  plentifully.
I  pray  you  sir  send  me  more  Weavers,  for  I  know  not
how  to  get  any  thing  spunne  for  them,  for  the  women
here  are  put  to  that  extreame  labour,  that  they  have  no
time  to  spinne,  for  they  onely  fetch  water,  cut  wood  to
burne,  and  bring  it  home  upon  their  backes,  they  gather
all  their  rootes,  and  bring  them  out  of  their  Gardens,
they  make  all  their  Bread  which  is  verie  laboursome,  they
dresse  all  the  victuals,  make  all  the  drinke,  attend  upon
the  men  while  they  are  at  meate,  and  besides,  they  dresse
up  their  houses  in  their  kinde,  and  nurse  their  owne
children :  so  as  they  are  alwayes  toiled  with  labour,  and
have  little  or  no  time  to  spinne.  For  Sugar  Canes  the
world  doth  not  yeelde  better  soyle  for  their  encrease,  and
whereas  in  Barbarie  it  is  fifteene  or  sixteene  moneths
before  they  come  to  perfection,  here  they  grow  up  in
ten  moneths.  And  in  Barbarie  they  are  planted  onely
in  two  Vallies,  where  they  are  watered  every  weeke,  but
xvi  321  x

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1604.

here  they  grow  upon  the  Mountaines,  and  never  watered
but  with  raine  onely.  A  few  yeares  I  doubt  not  will
afford  plentie  of  Sugars,  if  wee  shall  have  meanes  to
make  them.  My  loose  commodities,  as  Hatchets,  Beades,
Knives,  Looking-glasses,  &c.  are  almost  all  gone ;  a  great
part  in  buying  of  victuals,  but  the  most  part  to  stoppe
the  mouthes  of  my  Mutinors  and  monstrous  Sailours ;  to
whom  also  1  have  promised  two  third  parts  of  my  Iron.
Now  for  the  prosecuting  of  this  voyage,  in  such  sort
as  that  we  be  not  prevented  by  the  Spaniard  nor  any
other  Nation ;  I  would  entreate  you  with  as  much  speede
as  possibly  you  can  to  send  me  a  supply  of  one  hundred
men  at  least,  to  abide  here,  all  labouring  men  and
Gardners,  for  such  are  the  fittest  here  for  a  time,  with  a
few  Carpenters;  and  with  them  three  or  foure  good
peeces  of  Ordnance  with  shot  and  powder ;  also  fiftie
Calivers  for  the  men  that  stay  here :  if  you  can  send  these
men  in  two  Shippes,  I  doubt  not  but  to  lade  one  of
them  backe  in  three  moneths  after  arrivall,  and  the  other
which  I  wish  may  be  the  Olive  plant,  I  would  keepe  here
and  fit  her  for  a  Frigot  to  keepe  and  command  the  River.
I  have  written  to  my  brother  John  Leighe  to  deliver  unto
you  such  monies  as  he  hath  received  of  Gifford,  who  I
hope  hath  ere  this  time  paid  his  debts.  I  hope  you  shall
get  store  of  voluntarie  men  to  ease  the  charge  of  the
Voyage,  and  looke  what  you  shall  disburse  in  my  behalfe
for  the  accomplishment  of  the  Voyage,  I  will,  God  willing,
see  you  honestly  paid  with  advantage ;  or  else  if  it  please
you  to  put  it  in  adventure,  it  shall  be  accomplished  in
any  sort  to  your  owne  desire.  As  I  doubt  not  of  your
love  and  forwardnesse,  especially  in  so  good  an  action
so  also  I  make  no  question,  but  this  Countrie  will  in  few
years  yeelde  you  satisfaction  beyond  your  expectation.
If  my  wife  have  not  alreadie  attained  her  suite  of  the
Kings  Majestie,  I  hope  she  will  the  sooner  speede  upon
this  newes,  which  if  she  doe,  my  desire  is,  that  all  shall
be  imployed  upon  these  proceedings ;  and  to  that  effect
I have  written  to  her. I  have  written  a  Letter  to  the

322

CHARLES LEIGH  a.d.

1604.

Kings  Majestie ;  another  to  the  Lords  of  the  Counsell,
and  one  to  my  Lord  Admirall.

The  bearer  hereof,  Captaine  Huntlie  is the  worthiest
yong  Gentleman  that  ever  went  to  Sea,  upon  any  danger-
ous enterprize, he was never dismaid, neither with
extreame dangers at Sea, nor with all the Mutinies  [IV-  vl-
aboord,  which  had  beene  able  to  have  discouraged  an  old  I255-J

experienced  Souldier ;  besides,  I  found  him  alwaies  a  most
true,  faithfull,  and  loyall  friend,  and  therefore  I  pray
accompt  him  for  a  right  honest  man.  I  have  made
him  my  Lieftenant  generall  of  these  Countries  during
life,  and  therefore  I  pray  let  him  returne  chiefe  com-
mander in  the  first  supply.  I  would  pray  you  also  to
procure  to  come  with  him  some  honest  and  discreete
men  whom  I  might  relie  upon  as  trustie  friends,  and
use  as  companions  both  for  advise  and  societie,  for  I
am  now  very  uncomfortably  matched,  having  no  worldly
strength  to  trust  upon  but  my  selfe  onely.  I  have  sent
unto  you  foure  Indians,  principall  men  in  their  Countrie,
which  were  delivered  unto  me  as  pledges  of  our  safeties
here,  and  they  are  to  returne  again  the  first,  but  I
thinke  some  of  them  will  be  more  willing  to  stay  longer.
The  English  man  which  was  left  here  by  Captain  Lea,  Captaine  Lea.
is  dead,  I  pray  you  procure  Sir  Walter  Rawleighes
Indian  or  my  Lord  Admirals,  for  I  want  an  Interpreter
exceedingly,  here  is  but  one,  and  he  understandeth  but
little  to  any  purpose.  1  pray  forget  not  to  send
Preachers,  sober  and  discreete  men,  and  such  as  are
well  perswaded  of  the  Church  government  in  England,
&c.  From  Principium,  or  Mount  Howard  this  second  of
July 1604.

[Chap.  XIIL
323

A.D.
1605.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Chap.  XIII.

A  true  Relation  of  the  traiterous  massacre  of  the
most  part  of  threescore  and  seven  English
men,  set  on  land  out  of  a  Ship  of  Sir  Oliph
Leagh,  bound  for  Guiana,  in  Santa  Lucia  an
Hand  of  the  West  Indie,  the  three  and
twentieth  of  August,  written  by  John Nicol.

Ir Oliph Leagh,  a worshipfull Knight  of
Kent,  sending  a  supply  of  good  numbers
of men in a Ship called the Oliph
blossome to his  brother  Master Charles
Leigh,  which  was planted in the River
of  Wiapogo,  within  three  degrees  and  an
halfe  Northward  of  the  Equinoctiall  line
in  the  West  Indies,  which departed from  Wolwich  the
foureteenth  of  Aprill  1605,  under  the  conduct  of  Captaine
Cataline,  and Captaine Nicholas  Sainct  John ; I Seeing
desirous to see the world, consorted my selfe with
that  company. But  by  contrary  windes  and  unknowne
currents  of  the  Sea,  and  the  unskilfulnesse  of  our  Master
Richard  Chambers,  wee  were  put  to  leeward  of  our  port,
without  any hope of  recovering  the  same in any due
time:  And  being  not  victualled,  as  it  seemed  for  above
foure  or  five moneths,  after  consultation  had, we were
faine  to touch first  at the Isle  of  Barbudos, and then
at  Santa  Luzia  in the  West  Indies. Where  fearing to
perish at Sea for hunger before we should be able
being so many aboord to reach England ; Captaine
Nicolas  Saint  John,  with  the  rest  of  the  passengers,  which
Saint  L  purposed  to  have  staied  with Master Charles  Leagh  at

with  6j.  men.  Wiopogo in Guiana, resolved to stay and take their
fortune  in  the  aforesaid  fruitfull  Hand.

Thus  sixtie  seven  of  us  at  our  owne  seeking  were  left
on  shore  in  the  aforesaid  Hand  of  Santa  Luzia  the  three
and  twentieth  of  August  1605.  with  our  Swords,  Muskets,
and  Powder,  and one  Falcon,  and  one barill  of  Biscuit

324

Saint
Barbudos.
Sancta  Lucia.

Captaine
Nich.  Saint
John  staieth  at

JOHN NICOL  a.d.

1605.

onely  for  all  our  food.  The  next  day  our  Ship  departed
from  us  with  some  discontentment,  because  we  had
seased  upon  her  Boate  to  serve  our  turnes.  After  our
Shippe  was  departed  from  us,  we  lived  very  peaceably,
daily  trading  with  the  Indians  for  victuals ;  which  were
Cassavi,  Potatos,  Plantans,  Pinas,  Popayes,  Pompions,
Calabassus,  Tobacco,  Pappies,  Mammeyes,  all  very
pleasant  to  eate.  Also  they  brought  unto  us  Hens  and
Guls,  and  some  Pelicanes,  Woodcocks,  and  Snipes :  we
our  selves  did  kill  with  our  Peeces  many  of  them  like-
wise. And  every  night  we  sent  out  sixe  upon  the  sands
to  seeke  for  Tortoyses,  whereof  we  never  missed  night  Tortoises.
without  one  or  two,  and  many  times  three,  which
was  the  greatest  sustenance  we  found  ;  for  they  are  very
large  and  great.  I  have  often  taken  out  of  one  of  them
to  the  number  of  seven  hundred  eggs.  Also  the  Indians
had  great  store  of  Roan  linnen  cloathes,  Serges,  and  other
Stuffes,  and  Spanish  Wollen  cloath :  and  jarres  of
Oyle  which  they  tooke  and  saved  at  Sea  with  their
Periaguas.  For  three  Spanish  Shippes  had  beene  there
cast  away  a  little  before  our  arrivall,  if  we  had  had  a
Pinnesse  there  we  could  have  laden  her  with  many  good
commodities,  which  they  had  hid  in  their  houses  in  the
woods.  All  which  we  could  have  bought  for  Hatchets,
Knives,  Beades,  Thimbles,  Fishhookes,  and  other  such
trifles.

Thus  for  the  space  of  five  or  sixe  weekes  wee  went
not  much  abroad ;  till  our  Captaine  seeing  certaine  foure
square  Plates,  which  the  Indians  ware  on  the  small  of  their
armes,  asked  Browne,  a  Gold  finder,  his  opinion,  what
he  thought  of  them  ?  who  told  him,  that  three  parts
thereof  was  Gold.  And  asking  the  Indians  where  they  Shew  of  Gold.
got  them,  they  pointed  unto  an  high  Mountaine  on
the  North-west  part  of  the  Hand.  This  caused  Captaine
Nicholas  Saint  John,  and  John  Rogers,  who  was  our
interpreter  for  the  Spanish  tongue,  with  as  many  of
our  chiefe  men  as  could  well  goe  in  the  Boate  upon
a Munday to goe thither, promising his brother

325

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605.

Alexander  Sainct  John,  Master  Garret,  and  Master  Tench

whom he left  to  governe the rest  at  home,  to returne

[IV.  vi.  the  next  Saturday. The Indians  for three dayes after

I256-J  did not come  unto  us  with  victuals,  for  they  perceived

when the Boate went, and as we thinke, they were

The  Captaine  then at the  slaughter of  our men at the Mountayne.

and  his  men Upcm Thursday morning  we  killed two Tortoyses on

the sands :  where  wee found a great company of  the

Indian  Indians  gathered  together,  for what purpose we knew

treachene. not :  And  lest  wee  should  suspect  them  of  any  bad  intent

towards us, they  willingly offered themselves to bring

home  our  Tortoyses,  which they  tooke  into  their  Peri-

aguas,  and  brought  them  to  our  Houses.

All  that  forenoone  wee  kept  good  watch :  for  there
were  very  many  that  came  both  by  Sea  and  Land  to
the  number  of  two  or  three  hundred ;  and  divers  of
them  were  very  merrie  with  us,  drinking  of  Tabacco  and
Aquavitas,  until  ten  of  the  clocke,  and  then  they  departed
all  save  one  which  was  a  Captaine  of  the  He  of  Saint
Vincent,  called  Augramert,  and  an  old  man  which  was
his  Father :  who  promised  us,  if  wee  would  goe  to  their
houses,  that  wee  should  have  any  thing  that  they  had.
For  the  day  before  I  had  beene  at  their  houses  with
other  two  of  my  fellowes  to  have  bought  victuals :  yet
they  would  not  part  with  any,  no  not  for  any  commoditie
that  wee  had  :  and  yet  they  had  more  store  of  victuals
than  ever  I  saw  them  have  before.  But  wee  perceived
afterward,  that  it  was  provided  for  them,  that  came  to
take  their  parts  against  us,  whom  they  kept  secret  in
the  Woods.  So  we  three  returned,  and  travelled  farre
into  the  Hand,  and  passed  through  sixe  or  seven
Faire gardens.  Gardens  very  full  of  Cassabe,  Potatoes,  and  many  other
Great  Trees  of  rootes  and  fruits,  and  by  the  way  saw  many  tall  trees
hard  wood.  Gf  so  huge  bignesse,  that  wee  three  could  not  at  twice
fathome  one  of  them  about ;  and  they  were  so  hard,
that  wee  could  not  cut  them  with  our  Knives,  and  the
Barke  of  them  was  white  like  Ash.  Then  we  returned
to  our  Sconce  againe.

326

JOHN NICOL  a.d.

1605.

Upon  Thursday  after  dinner,  Master  Alexander  Saint
Johns,  Master  Francis  Kettleby  the  elder,  Master  William
Tench,  my  selfe,  and  divers  others,  to  the  number  of
eighteene,  went  with  Augramert  and  his  father,  having
neither  Bowe  nor  Arrow,  onely  his  father  had  a  Brasill
sword.  They  went  thus  meanly  armed  lest  wee  should
suspect  them.  Augramert  also  promised  Master  Alex-
ander Saint  John,  that  he  should  see  his  wife,  and  we
should  have  Hamaccos,  which  are  Indian  beds  of  net-  Hamaca  beds.
worke  made  of  cotton  yarne  to  lye  in.  So  we  travelled
along  the  Sands  very  securely,  young  Saint  John  going
a  little  space  before  playing  and  jesting  with  the  Indian
Captain,  till  they  came  within  sight  of  their  houses,  where
in  the  woods  they  had  placed  an  ambush  of  three  hundred  Treacherous
Caribes :  when  suddenly  Augramert  tooke  hold  of  his  ambush-
Rapier  with  the  one  hand  and  of  his  Poniard  with  the
other,  and  the  old  man  his  father  with  his  Brasill  sword
strooke  him  downe  to  the  ground.  Then  out  of  the
woods  came  the  Arrowes  so  thicke  about  our  eares,  that
wee  had  not  the  time  to  put  our  matches  in  our  cocks.
And  many  of  our  companie  had  their  match  to  light,
which  gave  a  great  encouragement  unto  the  enemie  ;
insomuch  that  we  discharged  not  sixe  peeces  against  them,
which  caused  divers  of  our  companie  to  flie  into  the
Sea  up  to  their  necks,  and  some  along  the  sands  as
amazed,  seeing  such  a  huge  companie  against  so  small
a  number ;  untill  young  Saint  John  recovering  againe,
encouraged  us  to  make  a  stand  at  a  point  of  Land  which
went  cornerwise  into  the  Sea.

But  all  was  in  vaine :  for  before  wee  could  make  our
peeces  readie,  there  came  another  companie  on  the  back
of  us,  and  filled  our  bodies  full  with  arrowes :  and  then
wee  betooke  us  to  our  swords  and  so  runne  through
them  :  but  still  they  encreased  out  of  the  woods,  shooting
their  arrowes  in  great  abundance,  not  daring  to  come
neere  us  untill  they  saw  us  fall  ;  and  then  with  their
great  Brasill  swords  they  strooke  out  our  mens  braines.
I  my  selfe  being  all  this  time  running  with  young  Saint

327

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605.

John,  and  Master  Kettleby,  who  behaved  themselves
most  gallantly,  having  at  the  least  one  hundred  arrowes
apiece  before  they  fell,  came  at  the  last  into  the  entrance
of  a  narrow  path,  where  five  of  my  fellowes  were  gotten
before  I  came,  and  thinking  to  have  passed  through,
there  was  another  ambush  who  killed  them  all.  I  onely
with  three  arrowes  in  me,  by  running  into  the  wood  and
swimming  over  a  standing  Lake  escaped  home,  giving
them  warning  before  they  came  to  assault  them :  and
upon  my  comming  they  all  came  in  sight  upon  the  Sands,
whom  we  soone  sent  away  by  shooting  off  our  great
Peece,  so  they  came  not  in  three  dayes  after.

Upon  Monday  there  came  to  the  number  of  thirteene
or  fourteene  hundreth  both  by  Sea  and  Land,  and  there
beset  us  round,  wee  having  nothing  but  our  Chists  to
defend  us  from  their  arrowes  :  thus  for  the  space  of  seven
or  eight  dayes  we  fought  with  them,  and  of  nineteene
men  which  were  left  of  all  our  companie,  twelve  were
sore  wounded  with  their  arrowes.  And  the  first  day  at
twelve  a  clock  they  shot  fire  in  their  arrowes  and  burned
our  houses,  thinking  then  to  have  entred  in  upon  us,
but  with  our  Falcon  wee  drove  them  backe  with  most
horrible  cryes.  After  that  our  houses  were  burned,  and
all  our  Chists  which  before  were  our  Fort,  wee  fortified
our  selves  with  the  remnants  of  the  stakes  and  thatch
which  we  had  saved  from  burning,  setting  them  in  the
ground  slopewise,  covering  it  with  sand  and  earth,  which
saved  us  ever  after  from  their  arrowes.

The  next  day  after  they  all  departed  in  their  Periaguas.
And  the  Lord  seeing  what  neede  wee  had  of  food,
contrarie  to  our  expectation,  mooved  the  hearts  of  our
very  enemies  to  bring  us  food.  For  when  all  the  rest
were  out  of  sight,  one  returned  very  well  provided  of
[IV.  vi.  victuall,  and  three  or  foure  comming  out  of  their  Piragua

I257-J  with  asmuch  as  they  were  able  to  carry  of  Cassavi,
Potatoes,  and  Plantans,  cryed  unto  us  to  exchange  with
them,  first  holding  up  their  bowes  and  arrowes,  and  after
laying them on the  ground againe in signe of peace.

328

JOHN NICOL  ad.

1605.

Which  wee  perceiving,  sent  out  three  likewise  to  bar-
gaine  without  weapons,  with  Knives  and  Beades,  and
other  trifles  :  which  traffick  being  done,  they  departed
and  we  returned,  giving  praise  to  God,  for  this  mira-
culous feeding  of  us.  For  we  had  no  meanes  of  our
selves  to  get  any  food  :  for  they  had  bereft  us  of  our
Net,  with  which  we  had  wont  to  catch  as  much  fish
of  many  sorts  as  would  suffice  us  for  a  whole  day.  Thus
they  continued  daily  for  the  space  of  seven  dayes  ;  and
then  our  victuals  began  to  faile  againe,  which  caused
us  to  hold  out  a  flagge  of  truce  :  which  they  perceiving,
came  in  peaceable  manner  unto  us.

Then  one  Francis  Brace,  which  could  speake  French,
made  them  understand  that  our  desire  was  to  give  them
all  that  we  had,  if  they  would  let  us  have  a  Piragua  to
carry  us  away.  Which  one  Captaine  Antonie  willingly
consented  unto  (contrarie  to  the  will  of  his  brother
Augramert,  Captaine  of  Saint  Vincent)  and  the  next
day  brought  it,  drawing  it  on  shoare  within  the  com-
passe  of  our  Fort  ;  for  which  we  gave  them  Hatchets,
Knives,  and  Beades,  untill  they  were  contented  :  and  to
please  them  the  more,  we  gave  them  every  one  a  Shovell
or  a  Spade,  wherewith  they  were  fully  contented,  and
so  departed.  Then  with  all  speede  we  went  all  to
worke,  some  upon  the  Saile,  which  we  made  of  very
good  Roan-cloth,  and  some  to  make  the  Mast ;  and
every  one  did  labour  all  he  could  to  be  readie  against
night.  For  Captaine  Antonie,  which  was  Captaine  of
Santa  Lucia,  told  us,  that  his  brother  Augramert  would
come  the  next  day  from  Saint  Vincent  with  twelve
Periaguas  all  laden  with  arrowes  ;  whose  words  we
alwayes  found  true.

Thus  on  a  thursday,  the  sixe  and  twentieth  of  Septem-
ber, at  one  of  the  clocke  after  midnight,  having  amongst
us  all  but  one  Barrico  of  fresh  water  to  drinke,  and
one  small  Firkin  of  Rice,  we  embarked  our  selves  being
nineteene  in  the  whole  number,  not  one  having  skill
in the Mariners art, and without  Carde or Compasse

329

A.D.

1605.

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

A  storme.

Blind  hungne  to direct us: wee sayled by the Sunne in the day-
wyage.  time, and by the Starres in the night,  going alwayes

betwixt  South-west  and  by  West.  The  victuals  that
wee  had  were  not  sufficient  to  serve  that  companie  for
three  dayes.  For  wee  had  not  above  twentie  Biscuits,
three  Cassavi  cakes,  a  dosen  Plantans,  and  some  thirtie
Potatoes,  and  some  foure  or  five  gallons  of  water,  and
a  little  barrell  halfe  full  of  Rice.  And  as  it  pleased  the
Lord  he  had  saved  it  untill  this  our  great  necessitie,
for  the  preservation  of  our  lives  :  for  all  our  other
victuall  was  gone  in  two  dayes,  and  our  water  in  three
dayes.  And  then  Master  Garret  gave  to  every  two  of
us  a  pottage  dish  of  his  Rice  twice  a  day,  which  wee
washed  in  salt  water  and  so  eate  it  raw.  Thus  we
continued  at  Sea  seeking  for  Land,  for  the  space  of
ten  dayes,  where  wee  endured  one  great  tempest,
although  to  our  great  perill,  looking  alwayes  when  wee
should  be  drenched.  The  raine  which  then  fell,  was
unto  us  in  the  middest  of  our  danger  a  great  comfort  :
for  we  saved  it  with  great  joy,  and  dranke  it,  thanking
God  for  that  good  refreshing ;  who  likewise  did  send
the  very  Fowles  of  the  aire  to  feed  us.  For  being
wearie  of  their  flight  they  would  rest  them  upon  the
side  of  our  Boat,  so  that  we  tooke  them  and  dryed
them  in  the  Sunne  with  a  little  gun-powder,  and  eate
them.  Our  Boats  brimme  was  so  neere  the  water,  that
every  wave  came  over  it,  readie  to  sinke  us,  but  that
foure  of  us  continually  did  lade  the  water  forth  by  courses.
Thomas  Mor-  Now,  on  the  tenth  day  one  Thomas  Morgan  dyed,  not
gan  dyeth.  being  able  to  live  of  that  small  allowance,  and  at  noone
we  threw  him  over  board.  Within  an  houre  after  it
pleased  God  to  glad  us  (who  were  likewise  readie  to
follow  our  fellow)  with  a  joyfull  sight  of  Land,  unto
the  neerest  part  whereof  we  made  as  fast  as  we  could.

But  the  winde  being  calme  we  were  benighted  before
we  could  come  to  it.  And  so  wanting  the  light  of
the  day,  we  were  upon  the  shoare  before  wee  were
aware, and there split our Boat to the middest, and

33°

Land.

Boat  split.

JOHN NICOL  ad.

1605.

all  our  men  were  turned  out  save  my  selfe,  which  held
the  helme,  thinking  the  next  wave  would  set  her  off
againe,  not  knowing  her  to  be  split.  But  the  breach
was  so  great  that  it  turned  me  under,  putting  me  in
great  danger  to  be  grinded  to  pieces  with  her  weight
lying  upon  me  against  the  great  Rocks  ;  yet  at  the  last
wee  all  recovered  our  selves,  some  sitting  upon  the
Rocks,  others  on  the  rootes  of  great  Trees,  thinking
there  to  save  our  selves  untill  the  morning.  William
Picks,  and  my  selfe,  went  and  haled  the  Boat  on  shoare,
which  was  split  to  the  very  middest,  and  so  farre  with
our  Swords  we  cut  off,  and  put  in  an  head  in  the  middest,
and  fastened  it  with  our  Daggers,  Knives,  and  Bodkins ;
stopping  all  the  leakes  with  our  shirts,  and  sent  five
of  our  companie  over  to  the  mayne  land  ;  which  were
Miles  Pet,  William  Picks,  Francis  Brace,  William
Kettleby,  and  William  Butcher.  They  haled  their  Boat
foure  or  five  dayes  along  the  shoare,  crossing  divers
Rivers  with  their  Boat,  being  sometimes  pursued  by
Alligatos  or  Crocodiles,  and  Sharkes.

God pittying their poore estate, guided them to a
place,  where they  found a great earthen Jarre full  of
wheat  flower  set  in  a  little  Cave,  which  they  boyled  in
the  Jarre with fresh water, and satisfied their hungrie
appetites, with thanks unto God for the  same. And
within two  dayes  after they  met with three Spaniards,  Three
with  halfe  a  dosen  Indians  and  Negroes,  travelling  from  s/>ama?^s-
Caracas  to  Coro,  driving  Horses  and  Mules  laden  with
merchandise  : who seeing their  weaknesse for want of
victuals, unloded  their Horses to  feede on the  grasse,
while they refreshed our hungrie men with plentie of  [IV-  V1-
their  good  cheere,  and  shewed  themselves  very  courteous  12 50. J

suffering  them  to  ride,  and  went  themselves  on  foot  two
or  three  dayes,  till  they  came  to  a  Towne  of  civill
Indians,  called  Tocoya,  where  they  stayed  to  refresh
them,  for  they  were  very  weake.  And  there  they  let
the  Spaniards  know  in  what  miserable  case  they  left  us  Miserable
in a desolate Hand  ; where we endured the greatest  famine-

33i

A.D.
1605.

Use  of

Tabacco.

Five  died  in
the  Hand.

Food  almost
kits  aswell  as
penurie.

Tocoya.

Coro.

Kind
Spaniards.

Good

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

miserie,  that  ever  men  did  with  life.  For  wee  con-
tinued fifteene  dayes  having  no  kinde  of  meat  but
Wilks,  salt  Water,  and  Tabacco  ;  which  did  nothing
at  all  nourish  us,  yet  neverthelesse  it  tooke  away  the
desire  of  hunger,  and  saved  us  from  eating  one  another.
In  those  fifteene  dayes  five  of  our  companie  pined  to
death,  because  they  could  not  take  Tabacco  ;  John
Parkins,  Edward  Greene,  Thomas  Stubbes,  Andrew
Swash,  and  an  old  man  called  John.  By  noting  two
or  three  of  our  men  to  die,  we  knew  by  those  tokens
when  we  drew  neere  our  death  :  which  were  these,  first
they  would  swell  very  bigge,  and  shortly  after  fall  to  the
very  bones,  and  wanting  strength  to  hold  up  their  heads,
they  would  fall  downe,  and  droope  into  their  bosomes,
and  in  twelve  houres  after  yeeld  up  the  Ghost.

At  the  fifteene  dayes  end,  Francis  Brace  having  more
strength  then  the  rest,  guided  the  three  Spaniards  with
sixe  Indians  to  the  Hand  where  we  were,  and  they  brought
victuals  with  them  :  which  when  we  had  eaten  had  almost
killed  us,  by  reason  of  the  weaknesse  of  our  stomacks,
being  so  farre  spent  that  we  could  not  digest  it,  although
we  fed  thereof  very  sparingly.  The  next  day  they  carried
us  to  the  mayne  land,  where  wee  had  horses  brought  us
to  carry  us  :  and  the  goods  wee  had  they  tooke  all  to
the  King  of  Spaines  use,  and  so  conveyed  us  to  Tocoya ;
where  wee  which  were  weake  remayned  fifteene  dayes,
and  those  which  were  strong  went  with  the  three
Spaniards  to  Coro,  which  is  some  fiftie  leagues  from
Tocoya  :  and  at  the  fifteene  dayes  end,  one  of  the
Spaniards,  whose  name  was  Sennor  Coraiaval,  came  for
us  with  horses,  who  shewed  himselfe  as  carefull  of  us,
as  if  we  had  beene  his  owne  Countrimen  and  friends,
and  brought  us  to  Coro  to  our  fellowes  :  where  we
were  brought  before  the  Governour ;  and  by  a  Flemming
which  could  speake  a  little  English,  which  had  beene  a
prisoner  there  sixteene  yeeres,  we  were  examined  of  the
cause  of  our  comming  thither  ;  who  excused  us  very
well. For  hee  knew,  that  if  we  had  confessed  whether

332

JOHN NICOL  ad.

1605.
we  were  determined  to  goe,  they  would  have  either
put  us  to  death,  or  condemned  us  to  the  Gallies.  But
he  told  them,  that  we  never  purposed  to  come  thither,
but  were  by  misfortune  and  tempest  of  winde  and  weather
driven  on  that  Coast,  and  told  them  of  all  the  dangers
which  we  had  endured,  which  drave  them  into  such  great
admiration,  that  some  said,  verily  wee  were  Devils  and
not  Men  :  others,  that  we  deserved  to  bee  canonized,
but  that  wee  were  Lutherans.

All  the  chiefe  Sennors  of  the  Towne  beeing  there,
every  man  was  desirous  to  take  one  of  us.  After  we
were  devided  among  them,  they  did  not  use  us  like  Spanish
prisoners,  but  were  as  carefull  of  us  as  of  their  owne  gwtlenesse.
children,  not  suffering  us  to  want  any  thing  necessarie
for  the  procuring  of  our  healths.  My  lot  fell  out  to
bee  entertained  by  one  whose  name  was  Senior  Francisco
Lopez  :  and  being  extreamely  sicke  of  a  Calenture,  or
hot  Fever,  one  Captaine  Peroso  which  had  married  his
daughter  having  good  skill  in  Phisicke,  came  daily  to  my
Chamber,  and  there  let  me  bloud,  dieted  me,  and  purged
me,  giving  his  owne  Wife  in  charge,  not  to  let  me
want  any  thing  that  was  there  to  be  had.  Thus  by  the
will  of  God,  and  their  tender  care  over  us,  wee  recovered
our  healths  and  strengths  againe  ;  only  two  dyed  there,  Two  more  die.
which  were  Thomas  Fletcher,  and  Fulke  Jones  a  shoo-
maker.  In  Coro  eleven  of  us  remayned  alive  (being
all  that  were  left  of  sixtie  seven,  which  were  put  on
shore  in  the  Hand  of  Santa  Luzia)  for  the  space  of
five  moneths,  every  day  going  to  one  another  when
wee  pleased  :  and  wee  rid  often  into  the  Countrey,
where  the  Indians  tooke  great  delight  in  our  company.
For  against  our  comming,  they  would  provide  all  kind
of  delicious  fruits  :  which  were  in  most  abundance  in
that  Countrey,  and  would  kill  Deere  and  wild  Hogs  for
us  ;  and  would  bring  us  Apes,  Monkeyes,  Parrots,  and
any  thing  that  they  thought  wee  delighted  in.

The Countrey  about Coro doth yeeld abundance of  Qr  the
Sugar,  Honey,  Ginger,  and  Pitch. Also  they  have  very  Countrey.

333

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605.

good  Wheate  growing  there  : but the  bread  is  for  the
most  part  made  of  Maiz,  whereof  they  have  great  plentie,

Drink  made for  they  reape  it  three  times  in  one  yeere. This  Maiz

of  aiz.  they  do  mingle  with  the  juyce  of  the  Sugar-cane,  which
maketh  an  excellent  kinde  of  bread,  and  it  will  keepe
like  Bisket.  Also  they  make  their  drinke  of  this  Maiz
and  of  Potatoes  ;  which  is  very  sweet  and  strong  :  for
the  Indians  will  be  quickly  drunke  with  it.  While  we
were  there,  a  Spaniard  rode  to  a  Farme  of  his  in  the
Countrey  with  his  brother,  where  he  had  many  Indians
dwelling  to  make  Tabacco.  One  of  his  chiefe  Indians,
which  used  to  be  familiar  with  him,  tooke  up  a  new
Hatchet,  which  his  Master  had  brought  him,  asking  him

The  treason  of  wnat  it  cost,  and  suddenly  clove  his  head  therewith  :
which  his  brother  perceiving  ranne  for  his  Rapier  ;  but
the  Indian  women  had  stolne  it  away  before  ;  and  so
they  killed  him  also  with  their  Bowes  and  Arrowes,  and
three  or  foure  Negroes,  which  seemed  to  resist  them,
and  thereupon  flied  to  the  Mountaines,  gathering  a  great
company  unto  him,  promising  them,  that  if  they  would
aide  him  against  the  Spaniards  in  Coro,  he  would  give
them  the  Spaniards  wives  and  daughters  in  marriage.
But  before  they  put  this  conspiracie  in  practice,  Captaine
Peroso  by  a  Policie  tooke  him  feasting  among  his  fellowe
and women, and tooke thirtie with him, and brought

[IV.  vi.  them all to Coro  ; where they were to suffer death

12 59-J  vvith  great  torments,  to  terrifie  the  rest. And  of  some

they  cut  off  the thumbes,  and  cut  the  sinewes  of  their

two fore-fingers, whereby they wanted the benefit of

shooting.

Our  entertainment  there  was  such,  that  we  could  not
desire  to  part  from  them  to  come  into  our  owne  Countrey
without  offending  them.  For  a  Frigat  being  readie  at
Coro  to  goe  for  Carthagena,  foure  of  us  made  intreatie  for
passage,  which  were  Philip  Glastocke,  Richard  Garret,
William  Picks,  and  my  selfe,  (John  Nicols)  for  all  the  rest
were  in  the  Countrey  upon  pleasure,  some  in  one  place,
and  some  in  another. And  when  the  ship  was  readie  to

334

JOHN  NICOL  a.d.

1605.
depart,  they  perswaded  the  Governour  not  to  let  us  goe.
For  they  told  him  that  there  were  many  ships  of  Holland
upon  the  Coast ;  and  that  if  we  went  all  in  the  Frigate,  we
would  betray  it  unto  them,  causing  the  Fathers  of  their
Churches  to  tell  us,  That  if  we  would  stay,  wee  should  be
as  themselves,  and  they  would  willingly  bestow  both  their
daughters  and  their  goods  upon  us.  Yet  notwithstanding
all  their  allurements,  our  desire  was  for  our  owne  Coun-
trey ;  and  so  three  of  us  procured  meanes  for  to  goe,  and
William  Picks  was  stayed,  by  meanes  his  Master  told  the
Governour,  that  foure  were  to  many  to  venter  in  the
Frigat.  Thus  we  departed  from  Coro  about  the  twentieth
of  Aprill,  leaving  all  those  with  whom  wee  dwelt  very
sorrowfull  for  our  departure :  who  gave  us  great  store  of
provision  for  our  Voyage.  They  were  very  loth  to  let  us
go  to  Carthagena,  for  feare  we  should  be  put  into  the
Gallies :  And  the  Governour  of  Coro  himselfe,  wrote  unto
the  chiefe  men  of  Carthagena  in  our  commendation,  as  to
Don  Pedro  de  Barres,  who  was  his  Sonne  in  Law ;  but  it
tooke  small  effect.  By  the  way  wee  touched  at  Santa
Marta,  and  watered  there.

Within  three  dayes  after  we  arrived  at  Carthagena,  we
were  committed  to  Prison  by  the  Teniente,  for  the  Gover-
nour was  dead  not  three  dayes  before  we  came  in.  Yet
we  brought  our  Letter  from  Coro,  from  one  Sennor
Gasper  Sanchio  Contador,  or  in  our  behalfe  to

one  Sennor  Antonio  Cambero,  who  prooved  a  speciall
good  friend  unto  us.  For  we  had  not  beene  an  houre  in
Prison,  but  hee  came  to  us  and  comforted  us,  and  bade  us
not  to  feare,  for  wee  should  not  want  any  thing.  So  he
went  to  the  Teniente,  and  proffered  three  of  his  Negroes
to  set  us  at  libertie,  and  if  we  made  an  escape,  he  should
have  those  Negroes  for  his  owne  use.  (The  worst  of
those  Negroes  was  worth  three  hundred  Duckets.)  But
hee  would  not,  neither  would  he  allow  us  any  victuals.
But  this  Cambero  sent  us  every  day  at  noone  one  very
good  meales  meate.  Also  there  were  three  Englishmen,
who  served  as  Mariners  in  one  of  the  King  of  Spaines

335

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605.

Gallions  which  carrie  his  Treasure :  which  after  that  they
were  at  Sea  were  by  forcible  tempest  driven  back  againe
to  Carthagena,  in  great  danger  to  be  sunk :  for  she  had
twelve  foot  water  in  her.  Some  escaped  to  Havana,  and
five  of  the  richest  ships  were  sunke  on  the  shoalds  betwixt
Carthagena  and  Havana.  These  three  Englishmen  did
allow  us  twelve  pence  a  day  so  long  as  wee  remayned  in
Prison.  Every  Saturday,  the  Teniente  with  his  Alcaldies
doe  sit  in  judgement  within  the  Prison  where  the  Teniente
commanded  that  we  should  be  sent  to  the  Gallies.  Then
one  Alcaldie,  who  was  alwayes  found  to  bee  a  favourer  of
Englishmen,  whose  name  was  Sen  nor  Francisco  Lopez  de
Moralis,  called  for  our  Examination  :  which  when  hee  had
perused,  hee  told  him,  that  hee  could  not  with  Justice
commit  us.  Who  answered  againe,  Then  let  them
remayne  in  Prison  untill  the  Gallions  come  from  Spaine,
for  the  treasure.

Within  two  moneths  after  a  Deputie  Governour  was
chosen :  unto  whom  we  framed  a  Petition ;  which  was
delivered  by  John  Frendgam ;  whose  answere  was  to  him,
that  if  wee  could  procure  any  Spaniards  to  bayle  us  for
our  forth  comming,  we  should  be  at  libertie.  Which
Sennor  Francisco  Lopez  and  Antonie  Cambero  no  sooner
heard,  but  they  entred  into  bond  of  a  thousand  Duckets
for  our  forth  comming.  And  at  our  delivery,  the
Teniente  told  us,  that  although  by  order  of  Law,  they
could  justly  have  put  us  to  death ;  yet  seeing  God  had  so
miraculously  saved  us,  and  that  we  had  endured  so  many
miseries  to  save  our  lives,  and  that  we  came  to  them  for
succour  and  reliefe,  they  were  content  to  set  us  at  libertie.
So  Francisco  Lopez  brought  a  discharge  from  the  Gover-
nour to  the  Jaylour  for  our  delivery  out  of  Prison,  and
brought  us  all  three  to  his  owne  house :  where  was
provided  for  every  one  of  us  a  severall  bed:  For  the
Countrey  is  so  hot,  that  we  cannot  lie  but  one  in  a
bed.  Our  entertainment  was  very  great,  and  all  our
services  in  plate,  with  great  varietie  of  meates,  and  of  all
the  most  delicious  Indian  fruits :  and  yet  he  thought  we

336

JOHN  NICOL  a.d.

1606.
never  fared  well  enough,  without  hee  sent  us  one  extra-
ordinary dish  or  other  from  his  owne  table.  Also  many
Gallants  resorted  to  his  house  to  play  at  Cards,  who  would
bee  very  liberall  unto  us  at  their  winning,  and  would  give
us  sixe  or  seven  pieces  of  Eight  at  a  time.

There  we  continued  untill  the  Gallions  were  readie  to
goe  for  Spaine  with  the  treasure :  then  hee  procured  us
passage  every  one  in  a  severall  ship.* And  the  day  before  *The  cause  ^

wee  embarked  which  was  about  the  first  of  August,  there  ^  Frfcuco
r  r  ^  1  •  1  Lopez  did  use

came  two  more  or  our  company  from  Loro,  which  were  us  so  %;„$„

Miles  Pet,  and  Richard  Feme,  who  were  both  placed  with  was  because

Philip  Glastocke,  in  the  shippe  called  Saint  Bartholomew,  Sir  Fr.  Drake

Richard Garret  went  in the  ship called La  Madre  de  ^JlJ'%

Dios,  and my  selfe  in  the  Santa  Cruz. So  we  were  a  $ave  ^  ^s

moneth  in  sayling  to  Havana,  where  wee  stayed  another  fathers  goods

moneth  to  trimme  the  ships. The  Governour  there  was  and  Ms  life

Don  Pedro  de  Valdes,  Prisoner  in  England  1588. So  we  wlthaU-

lived  all on  shoare  with  eighteene  pence  a  day  for  our

diet,  and  about  the  end  of  September  departed,  leaving

that shippe,  wherein Philip Glastocke, Miles Pet,  and

Richard  Feme  were,  with  another  ship  called  the  Saint

Vincent  for  want  of  provision  of  bread.

We  shot  the  channell  of  Florida,  in  eight  dayes  against  [IV-  vi.
the  winde,  and  came  along  by  the  He  of  Bermuda,  and  1260.]

were  nine  weekes  in  sayling  betweene  Havana  and  the
Coast  of  Spaine.  The  tempests  and  stormes  which  we  had,
were  wonderfull  great.  Insomuch  that  all  the  fleete  were
dispersed,  and  not  above  two  ships  did  hold  company
together.  Which  put  them  in  great  feare  lest  they  should
have  met  with  the  Hollanders ;  who  might  with  three
good  ships  have  taken  all  their  treasure  with  small  adoe
for  every  little  Caravell  did  put  them  in  feare,  thinking
her  to  be  a  man  of  Warre.

Upon  the  second  day  of  Februarie  1606.  Master  Bar-
wicke  landed  safely,  thanked  bee  God,  at  Downes  in  Kent,
and  gave  me  money  to  bring  me  to  London.

[Chap.  XIIIL
xvi  337  y

A.D.
l6o6.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Chap.  XIIII.

The  Relation  of  Master  John  Wilson  of  Wansteed
in  Essex,  one  of  the  last  ten  that  returned  into
England  from  Wiapoco  in Guiana 1606.

Aptaine  Charles  Leigh  and  his  Brother  Sir
Olave  Leigh,  did  furnish  to  Sea  the  good
ship  called  the  Phenix  with  Commodities
for  the  Countrey  of  Guiana;  and  neces-
saries for  the  Voyage,  with  fiftie  persons
to inhabit Wiapoco, of  sundry Trades
who  directing  their  course  towards  Wia-
poco, on  the  Coast  of  Guiana,  which  the  Spaniards  call
They  arr'we the  River  of  Canoas,  arrived  on  the  twentieth  of  May
at  Wiapoco. following,  where  he  found  a  ship  of  Amsterdam,  trading
with  the  Indians. They  perswaded  the  Indians,  that  our
Nation came to inhabit among  them,  only  to  oppresse
them  as  the  Spaniards  doe  in  other  parts  of  the  Indies,
which the Indians themselves confessed unto Captaine
Leigh  notwithstanding  they  offered  our  Nation  no  unkind-
nesse,  but  used  them  in  all  the  kind  manner  they  could.
For  they  provided  whatsoever  our  Company  wanted  which
they  could  get  them. In  somuch  the  Gentleman  was  like
to  have  done  right  wel,  if  it  had  not  happened  that  his
Causes  of  their  Company  had  not  mutined,  which  did  partly  arise  because
mutime.  0f  the  climate,  which  is  much  hotter  then  ours. And  for

that  they  were  unprovided  of  victuals  or  other  necessaries,
therefore  constrained  to  live  in  such  manner  as  the  Indians
themselves  doe;  for  that  they  did  see  at  their  landing
only  Mountaynes  and  Hils  covered  with  Woods.  And
for  that  the  most  part  of  them  had  beene  housholders  in
England,  not  accustomed  unto  such  a  strange  Countrey  or
Nation,  nor  such  a  diet ;  for  which  causes  they  were  so
much  discontented,  that  they  cried  to  their  Captaine,
home,  home.  Thus  the  Captaine  and  his  whole  company
was  discontented,  and  also  the  Master  of  his  ship  called
Martin Prinx,  who  shipped  himselfe shortly after their

33*

JOHN WILSON  a.d.

1606.
arrivall  into  the  Amsterdamer,  which  they  found  there,
whereupon  the  Captaine  placed  his  Mate  Richard  Pets  of
Weymouth,  to  bee  Master  of  the  Phenix,  furnishing  him
with  such  victuals  as  the  Countrey  affoorded,  as  Cassavi
for  their  bread,  and  Potatoe  Roots,  with  fish,  water,  and
such  provision  as  they  had  of  their  owne  aboord,  appoint-
ing Edward  Huntly  to  be  their  Captaine,  to  goe  for
England,  who  departed  from  Wiapoco  about  the  first  of
July  1605.  by  whom  Captaine  Leigh  advertised  his
Brother  Sir  Olave  Leigh.

After  whose  arrivall  Sir  Olave  Leigh,  hee  withall  speed  Second  votage
furnished the aforesaid ship, called the Phenix  to  Sea,  0fthePhemx-
with  Commodities  for  the  Countrey  and  other  necessaries,
with  thirtie  men  of  sundry  Trades,  appointing  the  afore-
named Richard  Pets  to  be  Master,  and  Edward  Huntly  to
bee  Captaine,  they  departed  from  Woollage,  on  the
towards Wiapoco, who arrived at their Port on the
fifteenth  of  January  following,  who  expected  with  the  rest
of  their  company  aboord,  to  have  found  the  Generall  and
his  company  on  Land,  to  have  beene  in  farre  better  case
then  they  were,  for  that  they  found  them for  the  most
part  extreame  sicke,  and  some  of  them  dead  :  and  presently
after  their  arrivall  three  or  foure  men  of  them  died,  and
the  Generall  himselfe  was  very  weake  and  much  changed,  Captain
which  partlv  proceeded  bv  reason  of  their  great  want  of  LetS^s

ZU&&R71PS5P

victuals,  for  that  the  Pidians  could  not  at  all  times  provide
them  that  they  wanted.  And  chiefly  for  that  the  company
were  perswaded  that  the  ship  would  never  have  returned  DeJ^ci^
unto  them  againe,  which  plainly  appeared  amongst  them,
for  that  at  the  arrivall  of  our  ship,  some  of  them  which
had  not  in  three  monethes  time  beene  a  stones  cast  from
their  houses,  came  aboord  of  us,  a  mile  and  more  from
their  houses  in  weake  estate,  which  caused  very  much  dis-
content amongst  our  fresh  water  Souldiers  aboord,  and
they  were  the  more  discontented,  because  they  could  not
advertize  them  of  any  commodities  the  Country  yeelded
which  would  afoord  them  present  benefit,  insomuch  that
they  wished  themselves  in  England  again. During  which

339

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1606.

parley,  our  Generall  came  not  aboord  of  us,  for  that  he

Mount  was  at  his  house  called  Mount  Howard,  a  mile  and  more

up  into  the  Land,  which  stood  on  a  hil  very  pleasantly

situated,  but  according  to  the  Country  manner,  by  reason

that  their  enemies  should  not  wel  find  their  houses  nor

suddenly  assault  them,  have  there  fore  very  rough  passages

unto  them,  invironed  all  with Mountaines,  Woods,  and

Hils. Wherefore  the  Generall  sent  one  Sidney  Harrington

[IV-  V1-  unto  Captaine  Huntly,  M.  Tederington  Preacher  and  to

p }2  l-\  the  Master  of  the  ship  to  land  their  company  in  Posses-

Ba»  sion Bay, a place which the Indians gave unto our

Generall,  and  therefore  by  him  so  named.

At  whose  landing  according  unto  the  Generall  his
Commission,  they  were  all  sworne  unto  certaine  Articles,
as  that  they  should  acknowledge  Captaine  Charles  Leigh
to  bee  their  chiefe  Generall  of  Guiana,  under  King  James
our  King  of  Great  Britaine,  and  that  they  should  not  be
hurtful  unto  the  said  Generall  his  proceedings,  but  to  ayde
and  assist  him  to  their  uttermost  powers.  Which  being
effected,  our  Generall  came  unto  us,  and  after  kinde
salutations,  having  taken  order  for  our  Lodgings,  for
that  time  hee  departed  from  us.  The  Indians  in  like
manner  after  their  Countrey  fashons  kindly  entertained
us,  and  after  further  conference  had  with  our  Generall,
hee  related  at  large  unto  us  what  had  happened  unto
him  and  his  company  in  their  absence;  that  by  reason
of  his  company  their  discontent  and  sicknesse,  they  had
not  travelled  up  into  the  mayne  Land;  and  therfore
of  his  owne  knowledge  hee  could  not  certifie  them  of
any  other  commoditie  the  Countrey  did  yeeld,  then  such
as  hee  knew  of  before  their  departure,  but  the  Indians
had  informed  them,  that  there  was  up  in  the  Mayne
Gold  &  silver,  very  rich  commodities,  as  also  Gold,  and  silver,  and
R.  Caliane.  especially  in  the  River  of  Caliane,  where  the  Caribes
inhabit,  who  are  enemies  unto  our  Indians  of  Wiapoco,
and  so  called  by  them.  Upon  which  information  our
Generall  thought  it  would  have  beene  best  to  have  peace-
ably traded  with  the  Caribes : But  our  company  misliked

340

JOHN WILSON  a.d.

1606.
thereof,  insomuch  that  the  Generall  altered  his  determina-
tion, and  agreed  to  joyne  with  their  friend  Indians  against  Expedition
the Caribes their enemies. Whereof  having  advertized  aMatn*J l  e
the  chiefest  of  them, they most kindly embraced  their
offer  presently  made  eight  of  their  Canoas  in  a  readinesse,
furnishing  them  with Bread  and  Drinke,  and Victuals,
which  for  the  most  part  are  Crabbes  and  Fish,  with  some
hundred  of  themselves  all  naked  in  their  Canoas,  whome
our  Generall  accompanied  with  some  eight  and  thirtie  of
our  company,  leaving  the  rest  to  keepe  our  Shippe  and
Houses, shipping  the  most  part  of  them  in  a  Pinnasse
that  was  built  by  one  named  Howard,  the  Keele

whereof  hee  made  of  a  Canoa,  which  prooved  a  very
fitting  Pinnasse  for  those  parts  and  Rivers.  This  Pinnasse
after  our  Generals  death  the  Indians  did  break  a  pieces
because  they  thought  wee  would  have  stolne  away  from
them  in  her  unto  the  Spaniards.  And  the  rest  of  our
company  were  placed  in  their  Canoas,  all  of  us  furnished
with  our  Caleevers :  and  so  wee  departed  on  our  Journey
and  Voyage  on  the  sixe  and  twentieth  of  February,  on
which  day  at  night  wee  came  to  a  place  which  wee  named
Mount  Huntly,  where  wee  lodged  in  the  Woods  that  Mount
night,  our  Generall  commanding  us  to  keepe  a  good  Huntlh
watch ;  which  wee  need  not  to  have  done,  for  the  Indians
themselves  were  very  watchfull,  and  wonderfull  carefull  of
our  Caleevers,  and  for  to  keepe  our  Powder  drie,  after  we
had  beene  acquainted  with  them,  and  very  diligent  for  to
please  us.

The  next  day  at  night  we  came  to  a  place  called  the
Cov,  and  there  wee  lodged,  and  the  next  day  following  Cov.
we  came  into  the  River  of  Wia ;  and  there  we  found  two  R.  Wia.
or  three  of  the  Caribes  Canoas,  but  all  their  men  were
runne  up  into  the  Woodes,  and  from  thence  our  Generall
went  up  farther  into  the  River,  where  wee  burned  certaine
of  their  houses,  not  finding  any  people  in  them.  From
whence  our  Generall  purposed  to  have  gone  farther  into
the  River  of  Caliane.  But  the  Indians  did  advertize  him,
that  there  was  an  English  ship  there,  whom  the  Generall  English  ship.

34i

A.D.

l6o6.

Urake.
Arwakes.

Mortalitie.

The  Captains
sicknesse  and
death.

[IV.  vi.

1262.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

knew  to  bee  one  Johnson  of  Plimmouth,  that  had  beene
some  fourteene  dayes  before  at  Wiapoco,  and  came  thither
in  the  way  of  Trade.  But  our  Generall  would  not  suffer
him  so  to  doe,  for  that  he  would  not  hinder  himselfe  and  his
company,  which  our  Generall  at  that  time  called  to  minde,
and  therefore  thought  it  not  good  to  proceed  in  the  River,
because  hee  doubted  that  there  would  have  risen  conten-
tion betwixt  his  company  and  Johnsons,  and  for  that  hee
also  misdoubted  wee  should  have  wanted  Bread  and
Drinke  if  hee  should  have  proceeded  in  his  journey,  and
therefore  returned  to  Wiapoco,  where  we  arrived  all,
except  one  Canoa. About  the  fourteenth  day  of  March.

Our  Generall  sent  with  foure  of  our  Nation  named
Blake,  Owen  Goldwell,  William  Crandall,  and  Henry
Powell,  with  commodities  up  into  the  Countrey,  some
thirtie  leagues  to  a  place  called  Urake  to  the  Inhabitants
there  named  Arwakes,  to  trade  with  them.  And  after
our  journey  by  reason  of  such  Raine  and  foule  weather  as
wee  had  in  the  same,  most  of  our  company  fell  sicke,  and
for  that  they  had  no  comfortable  drinkes,  nor  any  com-
forts that  sicke  persons  doe  want,  divers  of  them  died
of  the  Fluxe ;  which  the  Indians  (as  also  the  Disease
called  the  Calenture)  know  right  well  for  to  cure,  yet
concealed  it  from  our  Generall.  But  unto  us  after  his
death  they  did  reveale,  which  sicknesse  amongst  the  com-
pany caused  no  small  griefe  unto  our  Generall,  and  chiefly
to  see  such  wants  amongst  them ;  wherefore  hee  resolved
with  himselfe  to  goe  for  England,  which  hee  acquainted
the  company  with,  promising  them  to  returne  as  speedily
as  hee  could  with  provision.

Presently  after  he  had  shipped  his  provision,  and  such
Commodities  as  hee  had  gathered  together  in  the  Countrey,
and  was  in  a  readinesse  to  depart  for  England,  he  sickned
of  the  Fluxe,  and  died  aboord  his  ship,  and  was  by  Cap-
taine  Huntly  secretly  buried  on  the  Land,  the  twentieth  of
March,  whose  death  was  so  secretly  kept  by  the  Captaine,
and  the  Master  of  the  ship,  that  most  of  the  company
knew not  thereof. The  reason  was,  because  there  was

342

JOHN WILSON  a.d.

1606.

provision too little for them  which  were  shipped,  and

others of the company, if  they had knowne thereof,

would  have  pressed  to  have  come  with  them. Wherefore

Captaine  Huntly  with  Master  Tederington  our  Preacher  M-  Tedenng-

and  others  set  saile  from  Wiapoco  towards  England,  on  ton'

the  second  of  Aprill  1605.  promising  a  ship  to  returne

unto  us  within  seven  moneths,  God  not  hindering  their

intents,  which  had  happened,  for  Sir  Olave  Leigh  to  his

great  charge  had  provided  a  great  Fly-boat  of  the  burthen

of  one  hundred  and  seventy  tunnes  furnished  for  to  have

come  for Wiapoco, as I have heard since my being

here in  London,  before  Captaine  Huntly  his  arrivall  in

England,  but it pleased God that she never came  to

Wiapoco, so that we  had no comfort  of  her,  being  in

number,  left  at  Captaine  Huntlies  departure  out  of  the

Countrey  thirtie  five  persons,  of  whom  one  named  Richard  35-  persons

Sacksie  was  by  Captaine  Leigh  in  his  life  time,  appointed osL

to  bee  chiefe  amongst  us,  who  shipped  himselfe  into  a  ship

of  Middleborough, who  came  into  the  River  about  the

first  of  May  1605.  and  fourteene  more  of  our  company 15-  depart,

with  him,  and  more  that  Zealander  would  have  carried  if  Kindnesse  of  a

Sacksie  would  have  suffered  him,  such  was  his  kindnesse  Dutchman.

towards  our  Nation. Hee  gave  unto  us  such  wine  and

other comforts  as he  had,  unto  our  great  reliefes. His

comming  unto  us  to  Wiapoco,  was  to  have  sold  unto  our

Generall Negroes,  whose kindnesse we did requite  in

helping  him  to  such  commodities  as  wee  had,  and  did  get

the  Indians  to provide  Cassavi  and  Guinea  Wheate  for

bread,  with Potato  Roots  for his Negroes to  eat,  who

departed on the one  and twentieth of  May (after he

had bin some three weekes  in  the  River  of  Wiapoco)

for Point de Ray, where he shipped  of  our  company

into  his  Countrimens  ships,  some  in  one  ship  and  some

into others  for Holland, of  which  ships we heard  that

some  of  them  were  taken  by  the  Spaniards,  and  they  were

cast  over-boord  with  the  Hollanders.

The  same  day  the  Hollander  departed,  which  was  the
one  and  twentieth  of  May,  came  unto  us  a  French  ship  French  ship.

343

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1606.

of  Saint  Mallors,  who  dealt  very  kindly  with  us,  wherefore

wee did  suffer  him to  trade  with  the  Indians,  who  did

remayne there some two  moneths, unto whom many

strange  Indians  did  bring  their  commodities,  and at  his

Ten  more departure  hee  shipped  ten  of  our  men  ;  hee  tooke  Powder,

depart.  anc[ 0tfter  commodities  of  us which we had, for their

passage into France, leaving tenne of  us  behind  him,

of  which two  died before  the ship  was out  of  ken  of

us,  Nicholas  Wilkins  and  Andrew  Underhill. But  within

Two  retume  some  fourteene  dayes  after,  two  of  those  foure  which  our

out  of  the Generall  had  sent  to  trade  unto  Urake,  came  unto  us  not

Countrey  to  ,  111

thm^  expecting  ever  to  have  seene  them ;  the  other  two  were

drowned  by  the  way.  These  two  named  Owen  Goldwell,
and  William  Candall,  which  came  to  us,  reported  they  had
beene  some  fortie  miles  up  into  the  Land,  in  a  very  plaine
pleasant  Countrey,  and  brought  commodities  hereafter
written  of.

About  the  middle  of  July,  our  number  of  ten  were
all  in  good  health,  spending  our  time  in  planting  of  Carow
They  plant  called  Flaxe,  whereof  we  planted  about  twentie  English
F/aze,  &c  Acres  0f  Land,  and  some  Tabacco,  observing  the  manners
and  conditions  of  the  people,  the  nature  of  the  Land  and
what  commodities  it  yeeldeth,  and  what  commodities  of
ours  are  in  most  request  with  them.  About  the  third  of
October,  the  Indians  did  request  us  for  to  accompany
them  in  their  warres  against  the  Caribes,  whereunto  wee
willingly  did  agree.  They  provided  seven  Canoas  furnish-
ing them  with  men,  and  bread  and  drinke,  and  their
victuals  (for  the  most  part  Crabs,  and  fish  of  divers  sorts,
which  they  take  every  day  fresh  and  fresh  as  they  travell
in  the  Rivers.)  We  went  into  the  River  of  Caliane,
which  is  some  thirtie  leagues  from  Wiapoco,  where  wee
rowed  up  and  downe,  but  we  could  not  find  any  of  the
Caribes  in  the  River,  we  perswaded  them  to  land  which
they  did,  and  marched  up  some  two  miles  unto  the
Caribes  houses,  as  wee  marched  to  their  houses,  the
Caribes  came  to  the  water  side  where  our  Canoas  did  lye,
but  finding  my selfe there with my Caliver, they  had

344

JOHN WILSON  a.d.

1606.

no  great  desire  to  come  very  neere  unto  us ;  and  so  after

wee  had  burned  some  of  their  houses,  and  killed  divers  of

them,  our  company  returned  to  our Canoas,  having  lost

one  of  the  Indian  Captaines  named  Macato,  others  of  the

Indians  were  shot with three of  our company, whom

they healed as they  did themselves, with  a  leafe,  very  Surgerie.

speedily.

They  are  armed  in  their  warres  with  naked  skins,  and  Indian Armes.
their  Artillery  are Bowes  and Arrowes,  their Weapons
woodden  Swords  and  Bucklers. They  choose  their  Cap-  Mad  choice  of
taines  at  their  drunken  Feasts;  he  is  placed  in  the  middest  a  patient
of  the whole  company,  holding  his  hands  on his  head.  ^aPtaine-
After  they  have  made  an  Oration  unto  him  to  be  valiant,
and not to be treacherous  unto them, with such like
speeches :  they  whip  him  with  a  Whip  which  maketh  the
bloud  spring out  of  his  bodie  at  every stroke,  and  he
never  once  mooveth  thereat. By  these  meanes  they  try
his patience and  courage. After we had shipped our
selves into our Canoas, wee  rowed  up  and  downe  the
river of  Caliane, some eight  or  ten dayes,  which  wee  R.  Caliane
noted  for to  be  a very  faire River and navigable. It  searched.
runneth  divers  wayes  from  the  mayne  Land ;  and  great
store  of  such  commodities  hereafter  specified,  which  the
Countrey  yeeldeth  is  to  be  had  in  the  said  River. We
returned unto our houses  at  Wiapoco,  about the  first
of  November. In this Journey we were  kindly  used
of  our  consorts  our  Indians,  and  highly  respected  of  them
for  our  service  which  we  did.

After a few dayes rest at Wiapoco, the Indians
advertised us of  three  Ships which were  in  the  River  Three  ships  in
of Amasons, and that one of  them  would  come  unto  Rj  °f
us to the River of  Wiapoco some  two  moneths  after,
which  proved  to  be  true,  but  by  what  meanes  they  knew
it I could  not imagine,  except it were  by  their  divels  [IV-  vi.
meanes, which they call their Peyar, with whom the  I263-J

men have often conference, and it  will  answere  them,  J^fnz
but the  women never  that  I could  perceive ;  when  the
men will  conferre with their  Peyar, they  suffer not  a

345

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1606.

childe  to  be  in  the  house  ;  and  when  any  of  them  are
sicke,  they  know  by  him  whether  they  shall  live  or  dye ;
if  he  saith  they  shall  dye,  they  will  give  the  sicke  person
no  physicke ;  but  if  he  say  that  he  shall  live,  then  they
will  give  him  any  thing  they  have  for  his  comfort.  After
our  company  was  advertised  of  a  Shippes  comming  unto
us,  we  went  with  the  Indians  in  their  Canoas,  some
into  the  River  of  Wiapoco,  and  some  into  the  River
River  of  of  Arocow,  to  make  away  such  commodities  as  we  had
Arocow.  jeft  which  were  not  many,  reserving  some  of  them  to
give  to  our  Indians  for  our  victuals,  although  their
kindnesse  towards  us  was  such,  that  if  we  had  not  had
any  commodities,  they  would  not  have  suffered  us  to
have  wanted.  In  which  our  journey  we  noted  the  River
of  Aracow  to  be  a  very  pleasant  River,  and  yeeldeth
such  commodities  as  other  Rivers  doe;  also  the  River
of  Wiapoco  is  a  very  faire  River,  and  navigable,
which  entreth  the  maine  more  then  fortie  miles.  And
Fall.  at  the  end  thereof  there  is  a  very  great  fall  of  water
which  commeth  over  great  hils  and  mountaines  ;  some
of  our  company  were  on  the  tops  of  them,  for  some
moneths  in  the  yeare  the  Mountaines  are  drie,  and  we
were  informed  that  on  the  other  side  of  those  great
hils,  there  is  a  River  which  is  inhabited  with  many
Indians,  and  hath  the  like  commodities  that  Wiapoco
hath,  and  that  there  is  Gold  in  that  place,  which  the
Indians  calleth  Carocorce,  but  we  never  went  to  see
the  same  River,  by  reason  we  had  very  small  store  of
commodities.

At  our  returne  to  Wyapoco  we  gave  to  the  Indians
for  their  paines,  and  providing  of  us  victuals  in  our
journey  an  Axe,  for  which  they  would  have  travelled
with  us  two  or  three  moneths  time  if  occasion  had
required.  And  for  an  Axe  they  found  us  victuals  two
moneths  time  at  our  houses,  as  Bread,  and  Drinke,  and
Crabbes,  and  Fish,  and  all  such  kinde  of  flesh  as  they
killed  for  themselves,  for  the  same  price :  but  if  we
desired  any  Hennes  or  Cockes  of  them,  then  we  were

346

JOHN WILSON

A.D.

l6o6.

Three

Nations.

The  Arwakes.

to  have  given  them  some  small  trifles,  as  Beades ;  so
likewise  if  they  brought  us  in  our  travell  to  any  of
their  friend  Indians  houses,  we  must  doe  the  like  as  at
our  departure,  to  give  them  some  trifles,  as  Knives  and
Beades. So  that  we  lived  very  good  cheape.

There  are  of  the  Indians  three  sorts  which  inhabit
at  Wyapoco  with  whom  wee  were,  whose  houses  be
scituated  as  neere  the  Rivers  mouth  as  they  well  may
be,  they  are  named  the  Yayes,  the  Arwalkes,  and  the
Suppayes.  The  Yayes  are  a  people  very  proud,  and  ^  Yayes.
use  much  flouting  and  mocking  of  others,  much  given
unto  dansing,  and  are  full  of  merriment,  very  ingenious,
and  very  kinde  of  nature.  The  Arwackes  are  a  people
of  better  carriage,  and  did  use  our  company  with  better
respect  then  the  Yayes.  These  two  kinde  of  Indians
come  out  of  the  West,  wherefore  they  doe  know  all
those  Coasts,  and  they  hate  the  Spaniards  as  deadly  as
they  doe  the  Caribes.  The  Suppayes  are  a  people  more  Suppayes.
craftie  in  their  dealings,  for  they  will  not  part  with
any  thing,  but  will  have  commodities  for  commodities.
They  are  not  many  of  them,  and  wee  could  not  learne
from  whence  they  are  come.  The  men  and  women  Nakednesse.
goe  all  naked,  without  any  coverture  at  all ;  they  are
very  well  limmed  and  proportioned  of  body.  They
never  company  together  all  the  day  time,  but  as  the
women  doe  bring  them  their  victuals,  they  doe  eate
usually  every  day ;  they  have  doores  at  each  end  of  their
houses,  the  men  remaine  at  the  one  end  of  the  house,
&  the  women  at  the  other.  The  women  are  very  neate
in  making  of  their  Bread,  which  they  call  Aripo,  and
their  drinke  Passhe:  they  make  their  Bread  and  Drinke
of  a  roote  which  they  call  Cassavi,  which  maketh  good
Bread,  and  very  strong  drink,  very  pleasant  to  drinke
after  one  is  used  to  it.

Their  houses  are  built  after  the  manner  of  our  barnes  Their  houses.
in England, but much longer,  for we have  measured
some  of  them  which  were  one  hundred  and  fiftie  paces
long,  and  some  twenty  paces  broad,  one  hundred  persons

347

Men  and
women  how
they  live.

A.D.

1606.

Faire  earthen
Pots.

Baskets.
Hamakes.

Painting.
Childebirth.

Funerals.

Beasts  of  those
parts.

[IV.  vi.

1264.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

keepe  together  in  one  of  those  houses ;  they  are  most
artificially  builded  and  thetched,  so  that  no  raine  commeth
into  them :  although  in  Aprill,  May,  and  June,  and
most  of  July  very  extreame  raine  doth  fall  there.  Also
they  make  Pots  of  earth,  which  shew  as  if  they  were
guilded,  and  some  of  them  will  hold  thirtie  or  fortie
gallons  of  liquor,  they  are  very  faire  to  behold,  and
very  sweete  to  keepe  any  thing  in.  They  make  Baskets
of  divers  sorts  most  artificially,  and  their  beds  which
they  call  Hamakes ;  they  are  some  of  them  made  of
Cotten  wooll,  and  some  of  barkes  of  trees,  they  use  to
lye  in  them  hanging.  They  have  a  great  delight  to
paint  themselves  both  men  and  women,  and  especially
when  they  goe  to  any  Feast.

The  women  against  their  day  of  travell  in  childe
bearth,  make  for  that  time  a  roome  apart  in  the  house
whereunto  they  goe  all  alone,  and  are  delivered  without
any  helpe  at  all ;  and  presently  after  the  childe  is  borne,
she  calleth  for  her  husband,  and  delivereth  him  the  childe,
who  presently  washeth  it  in  a  pot  of  water,  and  painteth
it  with  sundry  colours,  which  seemed  very  strange  unto
me,  that  I  did  not  heare  the  women,  once  so  much  as
to  groane,  or  to  make  any  moane  at  all  in  all  her
time  of  her  travell :  if  any  one  of  them  dieth  they
doe  use  to  make  great  moane  for  them  some  ten  or
twelve  daies  together  after  his  death  or  longer,  according
as  the  partie  was  beloved  in  his  life  time.

And  touching  such  kinde  of  Beasts  as  are  in  the  woods
as  well  about  Wiapoco  as  in  other  places  of  the  Countrie.
There  are  great  store  of  Deere,  Hares  and  Conies,
Hogges  and  many  Monkies  great  and  small,  blacke  and
greene,  which  sorts  are  called  Marmosites,  and  great
red  ones  as  bigge  as  Baboones  (those  the  Indians  doe
kill  and  eate)  and  there  are  Leopards,  and  Porcupines,
and  Lyons;  for  in  one  place  we  did  see  a  Lyon  which
the  Indians  had  killed;  they  brought  all  their  boyes
they  had,  and  did  lay  them  on  the  Lyons  backe,  and
with a whip did give every of them three lashes,

348

JOHN WILSON  a.d.

1606.

wherefore  they  did  so  we  could  not  learne,  but  imagined
it  was  because  they  should  remember  the  place  where
the  Lyon  was  killed :  also  there  are  great  store  of  Otters,
and  a  beast  which  is  called  an  Aligator,  he  hath  a  cod
that  smelleth  like  the  Muske  cod.

Of  Foules  I  have  seene  Cockes,  Hennes,  Duckes,  and  Fowks.
Geese ;  Partridges,  Wood-doves,  Herneshaws,  Shovellers,
and  a  foule  of  a  crimson  colour,  called  Passeray  Flemingo,
&  great  store  of  white  foules,  which  the  Indians  call
Wakcrouses,  &  great  store  of  Parrats,  and  Parrakeits,
which  flye  there  in  sholes  like  Starlings  here  in  England:
also  there  is  a  Parrat  there  as  bigge  as  a  great  Hen,
blew  and  red,  very  beautifull  to  behold,  and  multitudes
of  foules  of  other  sorts,  and  Hawkes  of  divers  sorts  in
the  woods  and  Rivers.

And of  fish there are great abundance  of  all  sorts  Fishes  and
both  of  fresh  water  fish,  and  Sea  fish,  and  Crabbes  great  JM&ng  as
store; and  the Indians  take  their  fish  with  a  kinde  of e*ou'
wood  which  they  beate  against  some  stone  or  other

tree,  untill  one  end  thereof  be  all  bruised,  and  putting
that  into  the  River,  presently  the  fish  become  drunke,
and  run  themselves  on  the  shoare,  and  swim  above  water,
as  our  Haddockes  doe  in  England.

I  There  are  store  of  good  Rootes  and  Plants  with  Frultes.
Fruites,  as  the  Pina  and  Plantine,  Potatoes,  Nappoyes,
and  a  fruite  called  of  the  Indians  Poppoyes,  it  is  bigger
then  an  Apple  and  very  pleasant  to  eate,  and  sundry
sorts  of  Plums,  and  other  sorts  of  fruites  whereof  they
make  drinke  very  pleasant  to  be  drunke.

There are these commodities at Wiapocco, and in  Dying  woods
other places of the Countrie where I have  travelled, ^  other  com-
Woods of  blacke, red and yellow colours, Tobacco, Coa»/n>
Guinie  pepper,  Cotten  wooll,  Carrow  (of  us  called  Flaxe)
Anoto,  Berries  which  dye  a  very  faire  Stammell  colour,
Spignard,  whereof  a  precious  Oyle  may  be  made,  Gummes
of  divers sorts,  Bee-waxe, Feathers of  the  best sorts,
such  as  Ladies  doe  weare  in  their  hats,  and  other  Feathers
abundance. There  grow  naturally  in  many  places  Sugar

349

A.D.

l6o6.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Canes,  and  great  abundance  of  Carow  of  it  selfe,  called
of  us  Flaxe,  and  of  the  Spaniard  Pero.  Also  they  make
Oyle  which  they  paint  themselves  with  of  a  kinde  of
Nut  bigger  then  a  Chestnut,  whereof  are  great  abundance
growing ;  and  the  Manety  stone  is  to  be  had  in  the
Aracores  Countrie,  and  in  no  other  place  of  the  Indies
that  I  have  heard  of.  These  things  I  noted,  but  if
so  we  had  expected  certainely  for  to  have  had  a  Ship
of  our  owne  Nation  to  have  come  unto  us,  I  my  selfe,  and
the  rest  of  us  should  have  beene  encouraged  to  have
observed  more  then  I  have  done.  Neither  had  we  any
store  of  commodities  to  trade  up  in  the  Maine,  as  the
two  Hollanders  hath  which  are  there,  and  were  left  there
at  our  comming  from  thence  by  John  Sims,  Master  of
a  Ship  called  the  Hope  of  Amsterdam,  of  the  burthen
of  one  hundred  tuns  Fraughted  by  the  Merchants  of
Amsterdam,  and  by  their  Charter  partie  was  bound  to
lye  in  the  River  of  Wiapoco,  and  of  Caliane  six  moneths
time,  which  he  did,  for  he  lay  with  us  at  Wyapoco
from  the  twentieth  of  December  unto  the  twentieth  of
May  following,  trading  with  the  Indians,  and  sought
most  after  the  Manite  stone  and  Carow,  which  we  call
Flaxe.  They  furnished  there  two  Factors  very  well  with
Commodities  which  they  left  at  Wyapoco.  They  dealt
Their retume.  Very  kindely  with  us,  for  he  shipped  all  our  whole
company,  which  were  nine  of  us.

Taking  our  leaves  of  the  Indians  (who  were  as  un-
willing to  part  from  our  companies,  as  we  were  willing
to  goe  into  our  owne  Countrie,  saying  unto  us,  that
if  any  of  us  ever  came  to  them  againe  to  trade  with
them;  No  other  Nation  should  trade  there  but  we.
And  after  they  knew  of  our  departure;  whilest  we
remained  amongst  them,  they  brought  their  children
unto  us  for  to  name  after  our  great  mens  names  of
England,  which  we  did.  They  had  often  speech  of
Sir  Walter  Rawleigh,  and  one  came  farre  out  of  the
Maine  from  Orenogue  to  enquire  of  us  of  him,  saying
he  promised  to  have  returned  to  them  before  that  time.

35°

Sir  Walter
Rawleigh.

JOHN WILSON  ad.

1606.
After  we  had  provided  our  necessaries,  and  such  com-
modities as  we  had,  and  had  given  the  Indians  great
charge  of  the  Hollanders  Factors,  we  shipped  our  selves
and  departed  from  Wiapoco  on  the  last  of  May  1606.
And  from  thence  we  went  into  the  River  of  Caliane,
where  our  Master  John  Sims  traded  some  thirtie  dayes
with  the  Caribes,  and  other  of  the  Indians.  This  Sims
was  Masters  mate  of  the  Holland  Shippe  which  Captaine
Lee  found  in  the  River  of  Wiapoco  at  his  first  arrivall
there :  also  he  was  Master  of  the  Ship  which  the  Indians
advertised  us  was  in  the  River  of  Amazons,  and  according
to  their  saying,  God  be  thanked  he  came  to  us  to  our
Comforts.

After his departure out  of  the  River  of  Caliane,  he
sailed unto Trinidado, where  the  Spaniards  entertained  Trinidado.
him  and  his  companie  very  kindely,  for  they  gave  them
Tobacco for all such commodities as they had, and
suffered them to lade Pitch which goeth  out of  the  Fountalne  of
ground there, for that our Master durst not goe  to  Pltch-
Point de Ree to lade Sault there as he determined,
because hee  heard  that  the  Spaniard  did  lye  there  with
their men of  warre, and had taken certaine  Holland
Shippes, and had flung over boord all the  men that
were  in  them  :  our  Master  tooke  his  course  from  Trini-
dado to Amsterdam, where he arrived on the of
and  were  in  number  of  us  eight  besides  my  selfe,
named Owen Gouldwell, Robert Gardner, William
Crandall, Robert Becke, Richard Pren,  William  Frier,
Gilbert  Browne,  and  Richard  Bonecke. Since  my  being
here  I  understand  that  one  of  our  company  which  we  left  [IV.  vi.
at  Vlishinge,  named  William  Crandall  is  gone  in  a  Shippe  Iz65-]

of  Holland  for  Wyapoco,  which  voyage  they  would  have
hired  my  selfe  and  others  to  have  gone  with  them,  by
reason  we  have  the  Indians  languages :  such  is  the
diligence  of  that  Nation,  unto  whom  I  wish  well  for
the  great  kindnesse  they  shewed  my  selfe  and  others
of  our  Nation.

[Chap.  XV.
35i

A.D.

l6o6.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*The  large
journall  of
their  voiage  to
this  place,  is
for  brevity
omitted,  as  also
their  course
homewards.

*The  vertue
of  the  Guanos
a  thing  worthy
the  noting,  for
their  nature  is,
if  one  eat  a
ripe  one,  it  sets
one  a  scouring,
and  eate  a
greene  one,  it
will  stay  a
scouring.
Probatum.

Chap.  XV.

Part  of  a  Treatise  written  by  Master  William
Turner,  Sonne  to  Doctor  Turner  of  London
a  Phisitian,  touching  the  former  Voyage.

He  foureteenth  of  August,*  about  two  in
the  afternoone,  we  had  sight  of  the  Bar-
bados, which  bore  of  us  South  South-
west. The  Land  hath  two  points  bearing
East  and  West  one  from  another;  and
from  the  middle  of  it,  it  riseth  like
Tenerife,  and  is  tenne  leagues  broad,  and
is  barbarous  without  any  inhabitants,  having  great  store
of  Hogges,  Piggeons,  and  Parrats.  We  bore  for  the
Westermost  part  of  this  Hand,  and  so  wee  steered  away
West  North-west,  and  North-west  and  by  West  amongst
for  Saint  Lucia.

The  fifteenth  day,  being  thursday,  we  had  sight  of
Saint  Lucia,  bearing  West  North-west  of  us.  This  Hand
of  Saint  Lucia  is  a  very  fertile  He,  bearing  many  sorts
of  fruites,  as  Plantons,  Potatoes,  Pinos,*  Guanos,  Pom-
pins,  Cassado,  and  many  other  fruites.  It  hath  also  great
store  of  Cotten  wooll,  and  Tobacco,  but  their  Tobacco
is  not  very  good.  It  hath  also  many  wilde  Beasts  in  it,
as  Tygars,  Guanes,  Alagartos,  and  other  Beasts,  which
time  would  not  permit  us  to  see.  It  hath  also  great
store  of  Pigeons,  Parrats,  Pellicans,  Cats,  and  Dogges.
The  people  goe  naked,  having  very  long  haire,  and  are
very  honest,  kinde  hearted  people.  In  this  Hand  wee
set  our  passengers  ashoare,  and  furnished  them  with  all
things  necessary  that  our  distressed  Shippe  could  afford
them.  But  they  like  treacherous  idle  disposed  people,
not  regarding  our  kindenesse,  nor  pittying  our  necessitie,
betraied  our  Boate  from  us  one  morning  as  wee  went
ashoare,  my  selfe  and  three  or  foure  other  Gentlemen
being  in  her ;  and  then  they  detained  three  Saylers  which
were  drawing  in the  Boate keeping  them  for  their  owne

352

WILLIAM TURNER  a.d.

1606.
use,  and  afterward  sent  us  aboord  in  a  Canoa,  which  we
were  faine  to  buy  of  them  for  Knives.  The  Master  and
the  Captaine  seeing  this  their  treacherous  dealing,  and
being  out  of  all  hope  to  get  their  Boate  againe,  about
thursday  in  the  evening,  being  the  three  and  twentieth
of  August,  gave  them  a  Peece  of  Ordnance  with  intent
to  beate  downe  their  houses.  We  had  no  sooner  let  flye
at  them,  but  presently  they  shot  at  us  againe,  the  bullet
whereof  came  betweene  our  maine  Mast  and  our  Poope,
but  it  hurt  no  body.  So  that  night  we  waied,  and  went
to  a  Baye  some  two  leagues  to  leeward  of  this  roade
where  we  first  ankored.  In  this  Bay  there  are  halfe  a
dosen  of  Indian  houses  very  pleasantly  scituated  upon  the
top  of  a  hill,  with  a  fresh  water  River  at  the  foote  of  the
same  hill ;  and  in  this  Baye  we  had  very  good  trafficke
of  linnen  cloath,  and  many  pleasant  fruites,  for  our
Hatchets  and  Knives.  After  we  had  roade  here  some
sixe  houres,  we  might  plainly  discerne  our  Boate  under
saile,  whereupon  we  presently  fitted  our  small  shot,  hoping
that  their  intent  was  to  come  aboord,  and  betray  our
Shippe,  but  they  tacked  in,  and  rowed  alongst  the  shoare,
till  they  came  to  the  very  Bay  where  we  roade,  and  there
they  stopped,  and  we  were  in  good  hope  to  recover  our
Boate  againe,  but  they  tarried  there  trading  for  their
commodities  in  the  face  of  our  Ordnance  :  whereupon
we  seeing  their  daring  boldnesse  to  be  so  great  that  they  En  quo  dis-
presumed  to  trafficke  in  our  owne  Boate  before  our  noses,  cor^a  Cjves
and  to  goe  about  as  it  were  to  stop  us  from  trafficke ;  J[se"*1
we  let  flye  at  them  sixe  peeces  of  Ordnance,  and  a  vallie
of  small  shot ;  but  what  harme  we  did  amongst  them,  we
know  not,  for  they  rowed  away,  and  got  out  of  sight
of  us.  We  tearmed  the  Baye  where  we  put  these  men  a
shoare  Rogues  Baye,  &  the  Cape  we  called  Cape  Knave,  Roagues  Bay.
and  the  River,  River  of  Rascols.  Cape  Knave.

This  very  same  day  being  the foure  and  twentieth  of  #  *  /
August,  we  waied  anchor,  and  steered  away  South  South-
east,  and South-east and by South amongst  for  Saint
Vincents. And  upon Saturday,  the five  and twentieth
xvi  353  z

A.D.
l6o6.

Saint
Vincents.

Testigoes.

Granados.
[IV.  vi.

.66.

Current.

Margarita.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

day,  in  the  afternoone  we  arrived  at  the  Hand  of  Saint
Vincents,  where  we  came  within  a  Ships  length  very  nigh
the  shoare,  which  put  us  all  in  great  feare,  for  if  God  had
not  sent  us  a  gale  from  the  shoare,  we  had  runne  a
ground,  and  we  had  had  all  our  throates  cut  by  the
Indians  of  that  Hand.  So  that  night  we  tried  it  off  at
Sea  with  our  fore-top-saile,  and  fore-saile,  intending  next
day,  being  Sunday,  to  stand  it  in  againe  for  the  shoare
(because  we  had  good  hope  of  good  trafficke  there.)
But  the  current  had  driven  us  so  farre  off  at  Sea  by  the
next  morning,  and  the  winde  blew  so  vehemently  from
the  shoare,  that  we  could  by  no  meanes  fetch  the  land ;
whereupon  being  foure  leagues  from  the  shoare  of  Saint
Vincents,  we  steered  away  South  South-west,  and  South-
west and  by  South  amongst  for  the  Testigoes.  And  the
next  morning  being  monday,  we  had  sight  of  the
Granados,  bearing  of  us  South  east,  but  we  could  not
fetch  the  Testigos.  The  nine  and  twentieth  being  Wed-
nesday morning,  we  had  sight  of  five  small  Rocks,  which
bore  of  us  West  and  by  North  some  five  leagues  off:  wee
had  also  sight  of  the  Hand  of  Blanco,  whereby  wee  found
that  the  Current  had  set  us,  and  doth  set  to  the  North-
east, and  therefore  your  best  course  to  goe  from  the
Granados  to  the  Testigos,  is  to  steere  away  South-west.
The  first  of  September  being  Friday  morning  wee  had
sight  of  Margarita,  and  at  night  wee  cast  anchor  at  the
Westermost  Point  of  this  Hand,  called  Point  Macanao.
The  second  day  the  next  morning  wee  went  ashoare  with
our  Canoa,  to  see  if  wee  could  meete  with  any  Spaniards,
with  whom  wee  might  bargaine  for  some  Beeves.  But
wee  could  neither  see  Spaniards,  Beeves,  nor  fresh-water,
onely  we  found  the  dung  of  Beeves.  In  this  Hand  of
Margarita  also  there  are  great  store  of  Pelicans.  This
morning  wee  weighed ;  and  as  soone  as  wee  had  doubled
the  Point  of  Macanao,  we  had  sight  of  the  Rangeria,
which  is  as  it  were  a  little  towne,  contayning  in  it  some
fortie  or  fiftie  houses.  Here  wee  did  not  land  because
wee  saw no  people,  but  stood  it  away  South  South-east

354

WILLIAM TURNER  a.d.

1606.

and  South  and  by  East  amongst  for  the  Burdones.  About
mid-night  wee  came  close  aboard  the  shoare  by  an  Hand,
called  Febacco,  and  then  wee  sounded,  and  had  ground
at  fortie  fathome.

The  third  day  being  Monday  morning,  wee  were
becalmed,  some  three  leagues  off  from  the  mayne.  About
twelve  at  noone  the  same  day,  wee  had  sight  of  Point
de  Ray.  The  winde  and  breeses  blew  so  strongly  of  the
shoare,  that  we  could  not  come  to  anchor  that  night  to
the  Burdones.  These  Burdones  are  no  Towne,  nor  hath
any  houses,  but  belongeth  to  the  Towne  of  Comana.

The  fourth  day  being  Wednesday,  at  foure  in  the
afternoone,  wee  came  to  an  anchor  at  the  Burdones;  so
that  wee  were  three  dayes  in  getting  to  the  shoare,  being
in  sight  of  it  all  the  while.  About  twelve  at  mid-night
the  same  day,  wee  put  out  our  sayne-Net  into  the  Sea
for  to  catch  some  fish.  And  about  foure  in  the  morning
wee  found  a  great  Sword-fish  shut  into  the  Net,  which  Sword-fish.
was  fourteene  foot  long,  and  he  had  a  sword  some  three
foot  long.  The  sword  is  square,  and  blunt  at  the  end,
having  great  prickles  upon  each  side,  of  the  bignesse  of
a  wilde  Bores  tuske.  We  sent  our  Canoa  ashoare  here,
to  parley  with  them  having  a  flagge  of  truce.  The
Governour  of  Comana  perceiving  our  Canoa  comming
ashoare,  sent  a  Molato  to  parley  with  our  men,  who
saluted  them  very  kindly,  inquiring  of  us,  what  newes  in
England,  and  whether  the  Constable  of  Spaine  were  gone
home  into  Spaine  or  no ;  we  told  him  he  was  gone  into
Spaine,  before  we  set  out  of  England :  we  asked  of  him
what  newes  in  Comana  of  any  English  men,  and  when  any
had  beene  here  ;  hee  told  them  about  a  moneth  agoe,  and
that  one  of  them  had  like  to  have  beene  taken  by  a
French  Pirat,  if  a  Flemming  had  not  tooke  his  part.
This  night  there  came  foure  Spaniards  aboard  our  ship
from  a  Carvell  which  was  at  an  anchor  halfe  a  league  from
us.  These  Spaniards  burged  with  us  some  Tabacco,  and
told  us,  that  Captaine  Lee  had  a  Towne  built  for  himselfe,
and  that  the  Pinnasse  had  beene  here  a  moneth  ago.

355

A.D.
l6o6.

Cap.  Leigh
death.

Comana.

Seven  saile  of
Hollanders.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  seventh  of  September  in  the  afternoone,  there
came  the  Aide  of  Master  Eldreds  to  an  anchor  in  the
road  where  we  rode,  and  then  we  welcommed  them  with
a  shot,  and  they  gave  us  three  for  one :  after  these  our
salutations,  the  Captaine  of  the  Aide,  called  Squire,  came
aboard  us,  and  told  us,  that  Sir  Oliph  Lee  his  Pinnasse
was  come  home,  before  they  set  out  of  England,  and  that
Captaine  Lee  dyed  in  the  Pinnasse  comming  into  England  :
others  of  his  companie  said,  that  they  heard  he  was
betrayed,  and  killed  in  his  Hamaca  in  Wiapoco.  He
also  told  us,  that  he  had  left  some  thirtie  men  behind  him
which  were  in  great  miserie  and  extremitie,  both  for  lacke
of  health  and  scarcitie  of  victuals.

The  nineteenth  of  September,  Captaine  Squire  weighed,
and  left  us  going  for  Comonagota.  The  Spaniards  dare
not  trucke  with  us  for  any  thing,  but  when  that  they  steale
aboard  in  the  night ;  for  if  that  they  should  be  espyed
they  should  be  hanged :  Cloth  of  Tissue  and  Gold,  cloth
of  Silver,  Velvet,  Sattins,  Silkes,  fine  woollen  cloth  and
linnen,  as  Cambrick,  Lawne,  Holland;  new  Trunkes,
Pistols,  Fowling  peeces,  and  Muskets,  are  very  good
commodities  to  truck  with  the  Spaniards,  and  all  other
places  in  the  Indies.  I  noted  one  thing  amongst  many
things,  concerning  the  nature  of  that  climate  of  Comana.
It  is  monstrous  hot  all  the  day  long  till  it  be  noone,  and
then  there  blowes  a  coole  breese :  and  at  noone  you  shall
alwayes  have  thundering  and  lightning  without  any  raine
for  the  most  part.  The  towne  of  Comana  stands  two
miles  from  the  Sea-side,  and  cannot  be  seene  by  reason
of  the  trees  which  cover  the  sight  of  it,  but  you  may  see
the  Governours  house,  for  it  stands  upon  the  top  of  a
Hill,  looking  over  the  trees,  which  cover  the  towne.

The  eight  and  twentieth  of  September  being  Saturday,
wee  espyed  seven  saile  of  Flemmings  bound  for  Ponitra.
The  thirtieth  day  being  Monday,  we  weighed  for  Loyntra  ;
and  wee  steered  away  North  and  North  and  by  West  for
Ponitra  from  Camana ;  and  about  sixe  of  the  clocke  in
the  morning  we  arrived  there  safely.

356

WILLIAM TURNER  a.d.

1606.

The  fourteenth  of  October,  Captaine  Catlin  and  two
other  Gentlemen,  went  out  of  our  ship  upon  some  dis-
contentments, misliking  of  the  Master  of  our  ships  usage
towards  them,  and  had  their  passage  in  two  Hollanders,
that  were  riding  at  Ponitra.  The  five  and  twentieth,
about  eight  a  clocke  at  night  wee  weighed  at  Ponitra,
having  two  Flemmish  ships  our  consorts  with  us.  On
the  thirtieth  we  had  sight  of  the  Westermost  end  of  Porto  [IV-  V1-
Rico,  called  Cape  Roxo,  and  of  a  little  Hand  some  foure
leagues  off,  called  Echro.  Here  we  stayed  till  Friday  and
Saturday,  hoping  for  to  have  gotten  the  shoare  for  fresh
water,  and  Oranges  ;  but  we  had  no  winde  at  all  to  serve
our  turnes.  About  Saturday  at  noone,  there  came  unto
us  a  Flemmish  boat  with  a  dozen  men  in  it  ;  these  men
told  us,  that  upon  Sunday  the  seven  and  twentieth  day  of
this  moneth,  there  came  nineteene  saile  of  Spaniards,  and
that  they  had  taken  all  the  ships  which  we  left  behinde  us,
in  number  ten,  saving  two  ships  of  Captaine  Mogerownes,
which  scaped  by  their  swift  sayling,  and  that  they  them-
selves being  ashoare  with  their  Boat  made  an  escape  from
Ponitra,  and  so  came  to  us  at  Porto  Rico,  which  is  one
hundred  and  threescore  leagues,  where  wee  refreshed  our
selves  with  fresh  water  and  Oranges.

The  ninth  of  November  being  Saturday,  wee  disem-
bogued from  Porto  Rico.  The  two  and  twentieth  of
December  we  saw  Flores,  one  of  the  Hands  of  the
Asores.

[Chap.  XVI,
357

A.D.

1608.

23.  March,
1608.

The  Rose.

The  Patience.
The  Lilly.

Land-men

slxtie.

They  set  saile

the  23.  of

March.

^fF^^

1

They  arrive  at
Jlegranza.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Chap.  XVI.

A  Relation  of  a  voyage  to  Guiana  performed
by  Robert  Harcourt  of  Stanton  Harcourt  in
the  Countie  of  Oxford  Esquire.  To  Prince
Charles.

N  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1608.  and  the  23.
of  March,  when  I  had  furnished  my  selfe
with  one  ship  of  fourscore  tunnes,  called
the  Rose ;  a  Pinnasse  of  sixe  and  thirtie
tunnes,  called  the  Patience ;  and  a  Shallop
of  nine  tunnes,  called  the  Lilly,  which  I
built  at  Dartmouth  ;  and  had  finished  my
other  businesse  there,  and  prepared  all  things  in  readi-
nesse  to  begin  my  voyage,  the  winde  reasonably  serving,
I  then  imbarked  my  companie,  as  followeth.

In  the  Rose,  I  was  accompanied  with  Captaine  Edward
Fisher,  Captaine  Edward  Harvey,  Master  Edward  Gifford,
and  my  Cousin  Thomas  Harcourt  :  and  besides  them,  I
had  of  Gentlemen  and  others  one  and  thirtie  Land-men,
two  Indians,  and  three  and  twentie  Mariners  and  Saylers.
In  the  Patience,  my  brother  Captaine  Michael  Harcourt,
had  with  him  of  Gentlemen  and  others  twentie  Land-men,
and  eleven  Mariners  and  Saylers.  In  the  Lilly,  Jasper
Lilly  the  Master,  had  one  Land-man,  and  two  Saylers :  so
that  my  just  number  (too  great  for  so  few  ships  of  no
greater  burden)  was  in  all  fourscore  and  seventeene,
whereof  threescore  were  Land-men.  Being  thus  im-
barked, wee  set  saile  from  the  Rainge  at  Dartmouth
the  said  three  and  twentieth  of  March  ;  but  the  winde
altering  upon  a  sudden,  put  us  backe  againe  that  even-
ing ;  and  about  two  of  the  clocke  the  next  morning
(it  comming  better  for  us)  we  weighed  anchor,  and  put
to  Sea  :  the  evening  following  we  lost  sight  of  the
Lizzard,  and  steered  away  for  the  Canaries.

The  seventh  day  of  Aprill  we  fell  with  Alegranza  and
Lancerote,  two  Hands  of  the  Canaries  :  we  stood  in  with

358

ROBERT HARCOURT  a.d.

1608.

Alegranza  and  came  to  anchor  on  the  South-west  side
thereof;  that  evening  and  the  next  day  I  landed  my
companie  to  exercise  their  limmes  on  shoare  :  in  this
Hand  wee  found  no  Inhabitants,  nor  fresh  water,  neither
fruitfull  Tree,  Plant,  Herbe,  Grasse,  nor  any  thing  grow-
ing that  was  good,  onely  an  abundance  of  unwholsome
Sea-fowle,  which  after  one  meale  were  unsavourie  and  dis-
tastefully and  a  few  wilde  Capritos,  or  wilde  Goats,  which
the  craggy  Rocks  defended  from  our  hands,  and  hungrie
mouthes.

The  eighth  of  Aprill  we  departed  from  Alegranza,  and
directed  our  course  for  Tenerife,  another  of  the  Hands.  Tenerife.
The  eleventh  day  I  sent  the  Pinnasse,  and  the  Shallop  to
water  at  the  Calmes,  and  there  to  attend  my  comming ;
but  with  my  ship  I  held  my  course  for  Orotavo,  a  Towne
on  the  other  side  of  the  Hand,  in  hope  to  get  some  wine
amongst  the  Merchants  there  ;  but  not  being  able  (by
reason  of  a  contrarie  winde)  to  double  Punta  de  Nega,
wee  altered  our  course  from  Wine  to  Water.  And  the
twelfth  day  wee  passed  by  Santa  Cruz,  and  watered  that
evening  at  the  Calmes.

This watering place is  very convenient for  all such  An  excellent
as  passe  by  those  Hands,  and  is  thus  to  bee  found  ;  there  w^tennS
is a woodden Crosse neere  unto it, the high Pike of  ^
Tenerife beareth due North from  it. There is  also a
ledge of  Rocks to the Eastward of  the  landing  place,
which  is  a short Sandie  Bay. When you are landed,
you  shall  finde  the  place  about  fortie  or  fiftie  yards  from
the  Sea  side.

Then  we  stood  on  our  course  for  the  River  of  Wiapoco
in  Guiana,  having  a  prosperous  winde,  faire  weather,  and
a  smooth  Sea. The  ninth  day  of  May,  wee  fell  into  the
Current  of  the great  and famous River of  Amazones, The  River  of
which  putteth  out  into  the  Sea  such  a  violent  and  mightie  Amazones.
streame of  fresh water,  that  being  thirtie  leagues  from  the  Sga
land,  we  drunke  thereof,  and  found  it  as  fresh  and  good  leagues  from
as  in  a  Spring  or  Poole.  land.

This  River  for  the  great  and  wonderfull  breadth  (con-

359

A.D.

1608.

Joseph  Acosta.

Huron.

Girava.

Tarraconen-

sis.

[IV.  vi.

:68.]

The  eleventh
of  May  they
made  land  in
Guiana.

The  Patience
in  danger  of
wrack.

Hands  called
C  arripapoory .

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

tayning  at  the  mouth  neere  sixtie  leagues)  is  rightly
termed  by  Josephus  Acosta  the  Empresse  and  Queene
of  all  Flouds,  and  by  Hieronymus  Girava  Tarraconensis :
it  is  said  to  bee  the  greatest  not  onely  of  all  India,  but
also  of  the  whole  world  ;  and  for  the  greatnesse,  is  called
of  many  the  Sweet  Sea.  It  riseth  and  floweth  from  the
Mountaines  of  Peru,  and  draweth  out  her  streames  in
many  windings  and  turnings  under  the  Equinoctiall,  for
the  space  of  one  thousand  and  five  hundred  leagues  and
more  :  although  from  her  Fountaines  and  Springs  unto
the  Sea  it  is  but  sixe  hundred.  When  we  entred  into
the  aforesaid  Current,  we  sounded,  and  had  fortie  foure
fathome  water,  sandie  sounding.  The  tenth  day  the
colour  of  the  water  changed,  and  became  muddie,  whitish,
and  thicke  ;  then  we  sounded  againe  at  noone,  and  had
thirtie  fathome  ;  and  seventeene  at  foure  in  the  after-
noone.  The  eleventh  day  at  eight  of  the  clocke  in  the
morning  wee  made  land,  the  uttermost  Point  thereof
bearing  West  from  us,  and  came  to  anchor  in  five
fathom  water.

At  night  the  Patience  putting  in  to  neere  the  shoare,
came  to  anchor  in  two  fathome  and  a  halfe  water  upon
the  floud  which  fell  from  her  upon  the  ebbe,  and  left  her
drie  upon  the  Oaze,  and  the  next  floud  comming  in,  did
so  shake  and  beate  her  against  the  ground,  that  before
shee  could  get  off,  her  rudder  was  beaten  away,  and  her
ribs  so  rent  and  erased,  that  if  Almightie  God  had  not
preserved  her,  shee  had  beene  wrackt  :  but  (God  be
thanked)  with  much  adoe  shee  came  off  into  deeper  water,
and  mended  her  Rudder,  as  well  as  the  time  and  place
would  afford  means.  Then  we  followed  on  our  course,
coasting  along  to  the  North  North-west,  the  Land  so
trending.  It  is  very  shoale  all  along  this  Coast,  the
ground  soft  oaze,  but  no  danger  to  be  feared,  keeping
our  ship  in  five  fathom  water.

When  we  came  to  the  latitude  of  two  degrees  and  a
halfe,  wee  anchored  in  a  goodly  Bay,  by  certaine  Hands,
called  Carripapoory,  I  did  at  that  time  forbeare  to  make

360

Indian  boats.

ROBERT HARCOURT  ad.

1608.
particular  disco verie  of  this  Coast,  intending  (if  God  spare
me  life)  to  make  a  perfect  discoverie  of  the  famous  River
of  Amazones,  and  of  her  severall  branches,  and  Countries
bordering  upon  it,  and  of  all  this  tract  of  land  from  the
Amazones,  unto  the  River  of  Wiapoco,  which  contayneth
many  goodly  Provinces,  and  Signiories,  which  are  in  this
discourse,  but  briefly  mentioned  :  For  at  this  time  I  pur-
posed onely  to  prosecute  my  first  project,  which  hastened
me  unto  another  place.

From  hence  I  stood  along  the  Coast,  and  the  seven-
teenth of  May,  I  came  to  anchor  in  the  Bay  of  Wiopoco :  The  Bay  of
where  the  Indians  came  off  unto  us  in  two  or  three  Y™?0™:
Canoes,  as  well  to  learne  of  what  Nation  we  were,  as
also  to  trade  with  us  ;  who  understanding  that  we  were
English  men  boldly  came  aboard  us,  one  of  them  could
speake  our  language  well,  and  was  knowne  to  some  of  my
companie  to  be  an  Indian,  that  sometime  had  beene  in
England,  and  served  Sir  John  Gilbert  many  yeeres :  they
brought  with  them  such  dainties  as  their  Countrie
yeeldeth  ;  as  Hens,  Fish,  Pinas,  Platanaes,  Potatoes,
bread  of  Cassavi,  and  such  like  cates,  which  were  heartily
welcome  to  my  hungrie  companie  :  In  recompence
whereof,  I  gave  them  Knives,  Beades,  Jewes  trumps,
and  such  toyes,  which  well  contented  them.  But  when
I  had  awhile  entertayned  them,  and  made  known  unto
them  the  returne  of  the  Indian,  Martin,  their  Countri-
man,  whom  I  brought  with  mee  out  of  England,  they
seemed  exceeding  joyfull,  supposing  that  he  had  beene
dead,  being  above  foure  yeeres  since  he  departed  from
them.

The  Indian  before  mentioned  to  have  served  Sir  John
Gilbert  (whose  name  was  John)  whilest  he  lived  (for  he  is
now  dead,  and  dyed  a  Christian)  was  a  great  helpe  unto
us,  because  hee  spake  our  language  much  better  then
either  of  those  that  I  brought  with  mee,  and  was  ever
firme  and  faithfull  to  us,  untill  his  death.  By  him  I
understood  that  their  Towne  was  situate  upon  the  East
side  of  the  Hill  in  the  mouth  of  Wiapoco,  and  was  called

361

A.D.

1608.
A  village
called  Caripo.

A  messenger
sent  to  the
Indians.

The  Indians
came  aboard.

The  chief  men
of  the  Nation
of  the  Taios
cover  their
privities.
The  women
generally  goe
all  naked.

[IV.

VI.
I269/

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Caripo  :  that  the  Indian,  Martin,  was  Lord  thereof,  and
that  in  his  absence  his  brother  was  chiefe.  Moreover,  hee
certified  mee  that  the  principall  Indian  of  that  River  was
called  Carasana  (who  by  good  fortune)  was  then  at  Caripo,
and  so  having  spent  some  time  in  other  conference  and
friendly  entertainment,  they  tooke  their  leave,  and  departed
for  that  time.  I  sent  one  of  my  companie  with  them  to
give  notice  to  Carasana,  and  the  rest  of  the  Indians  of
Caripo,  that  I  had  brought  home  their  Countryman  Martin,
whom  they  all  thought  to  bee  dead,  and  another  of  their
Nation  also,  who  had  kindred  and  friends  amongst  them :
to  desire  him  to  come  aboard  my  ship,  and  to  bring  with
him  the  principall  Indians  of  Caripo,  that  I  might  declare
unto  them  the  cause  of  my  comming  into  their  Countrie,
and  conferre  with  them  of  other  matters  intended  for  their
good.  The  next  day  I  came  into  the  River  of  Wiapoco,
and  anchored  over  against  the  Sandy  Bay.

The  day  following  the  Indians  came  aboard  as  I  had
desired,  and  brought  us  good  store  of  their  Countrie  pro-
vision :  Carasana,  and  one  or  two  more  of  them  were
attyred  in  old  clothes,  which  they  had  gotten  of  certaine
English  men,  who  (by  the  direction  of  Sir  Walter  Raleigh)
had  traded  there  the  yeere  before ;  the  rest  were  all  naked,
both  men  and  women ;  and  this  I  observed  amongst  them,
that  although  the  better  sort  of  men  (especially  the
Yaios)  doe  cover  their  privities,  by  wearing  over  them  a
little  peece  of  cotton  cloth,  pretily  woven  after  their
manner  ;  yet  did  I  never  see  any  of  their  women  covered
in  any  part,  either  above  or  beneath  the  waste,  albeit  they
daily  conversed  amongst  us,  but  were  all  (as  the  plaine
proverb  is)  even  starke  belly  naked.

At  their  comming  aboard  my  ship,  first  Carasana  as  the
principall  amongst  them,  and  after  him  the  rest,  saluted
and  welcommed  us  after  their  rude  manner.  I  used  them
with  all  curtesie,  and  entertayned  them  as  well  as  the
straight  roome  would  give  me  leave,  giving  them  good
store  of  Aquavitae,  which  they  love  exceedingly :  I  pre-
sented to  their  view  their  two  Countrimen,  Martin  the

362

ROBERT HARCOURT  ad.

1608.
Lord  of  their  Towne,  and  Anthonie  Canabre,  who  was
a  Christian,  and  had  lived  in  England  fourteene  yeers,
both  which  I  had  brought  home  unto  them :  when  they
beheld  them,  and  after  salutations,  and  some  conference,
knew  to  bee  the  same  persons,  whom  they  supposed  had
beene  long  since  dead,  they  expressed  much  joy  and
contentment:  and  understanding  (from  their  owne
mouthes)  how  well  I  had  used  them,  they  seemed  to
be  better  pleased  with  our  comming :  and  when  their
rude  salutations  to  their  new-come  Countriman  were
ended,  I  tooke  them  apart,  and  thus  declared  the  cause
of  my  comming.

First, I brought to their remembrance the exploits  Their  confer-
performed by Sir Walter Raleigh in their Countrie,  %*££ktke
in the  reigne  of  our  late  Soveraigne  Queene  Elizabeth,  ^r  w[
when (to  free them  from  servitude) he  most  worthily  Raleighs  acts
vanquished the Spaniards at Trinidado : burned their  in  these  parts.
Towne,  tooke  their  Governour  Don  Anthonio  de  Berreo  SeeHak-t0'3-
prisoner;  delivered  five  of  the  Indian  Kings  imprisoned,
and  bound  by  the  necke  with  collers  of  Iron;  and  with
great  labour  and  perill  discovered  the  River  of  Orenoque,
and  the  Countries  adjoyning,  as  farre  as  the  Province  of
Aromaya,  the  Countrie  of  Topiawary,  and  the  River  of
Caroli  beyond  it. And  that  their  Countrimen  called  the
Orenoqueponi  (who  are  the  borderers  of  Orenoque)  did  Toe  Oreno-
then  most  willingly  submit  and  render  themselves  under  4ueP°m

retidred  thetn—

the  subjection  of  the  late  Queene ;  all  which they  well  sejves  suueas
remembred,  and  said,  that  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  promised  to  Queen
to  have  returned  againe  unto  them  long  since.  Elizabeth.

Then  I excused his not returning according to his
promise, by reason of other imployments of great
importance imposed upon him by  the late Queene  :
shewing them moreover,  that  when he could  not  (for
that  cause)  returne  himselfe, hee  sent  Captaine  Keymis  Cap.  Keymis
to visit them, and to bring him true intelligence  of  nis  voyage  to
their  estate (supposing  that hee  had left no Spaniards mana"
behinde  him  at  Trinidado of  power  to  molest  them)  to
the  end  that  reliefe  and  aide  might  bee  prepared  for  them,

363

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1608.

according  to  their  necessities,  and  oppression  of  their
enemies.  Then  I  told  them  of  the  death  of  the  late
Queene,  whereby  that  businesse  of  theirs  was  againe
hindered.

Moreover, I  declared unto them, that our gracious
Soveraigne  Lord King James, who now reigneth over
us  (being  the  onely  right  and  lawfull  Heire,  and  Successor,
to  the  Crowne  and  Dignitie  of  the  Realme  of  England,
after  the  death  of  the  late  Queene)  was  throughout  the
whole Land proclaymed King of England ; and so
comming to reigne over us, hath beene ever since
busied  in  ordering the  State  and  affaires  of  the  King-
dome,  which being (by his  great wisedome) setled in
tranquillitie  and  peace,  like  a  good,  gracious,  and  worthy
King, doth now permit his Subjects to travell abroad
into  forraine  Countries, and  Nations,  to  aide  and  assist
all such as are unjustly molested by their enemies.
Whereupon,  I  and  the  rest  of  these  worthy  Gentlemen
my  associates  and  friends, having intelligence by some
that  had  beene  followers  of  Captaine Charles Lee (who
was  a  man  well  knowne  amongst  them,  and  heretofore
Possession  of had  taken  possession  of  their  Countrie  to  his  Majesties
the  Countrie use?  anc|  was  planted  divers  yeeres in Wiapoco,  where
Wiapoco  fa ^ee lyetn buried) of the great variance and discord
Captaine  Lee depending  betweene  them  the  allied  Nations,  the  Yaios,
to  his  the Arwaccas, Sappaios, and Paragontos ; and their

Majesties  use.  enemies  the  Charibes  (all  inhabiting  betweene  the  Rivers
of  Amazones,  and  Dessequebe)  have  made  a  long  and
dangerous  voyage  into  those  parts,  to  appease  their
dissentions,  and  defend  them  against  the  Charibes,  or
other  enemies  that  shall  molest  or  oppresse  them:  and
now  being  there  arrived,  doe  intend  to  make  search  in
those  Countries  for  convenient  places,  where  such  of  our
Nation,  as  shall  hereafter  come  to  defend  them,  may  be
fitly  seated  to  dwell  amongst  them ;  that  if  any  of  those
Nations  shall  attempt  at  any  time  to  disturbe  the  quiet
living  of  their  Neighbours,  they  may  have  store  of
English  friends  at  hand  and  amongst  them,  that  will  not

364

ROBERT HARCOURT  ad

1608.

spare  their  paines  to  appease  their  discords,  nor  their  lives
to  defend  them  from  harme.

When  I  had  thus  declared  unto  them  the  cause  of  my
comming,  they  made  this  answere  ;  that  with  our  comming
they  were  well  pleased ;  but  our  number  of  men  they
thought  too  great,  that  they  wanted  meanes  to  provide
us  bread  sufficient  for  them  all,  having  but  a  small  Towne,
few  Gardens,  and  slender  provision  for  their  owne  com-
panies, because  since  Captaine  Lee  his  death,  and  his  mens
departure  from  them,  they  never  made  provision  for  any
strangers.

I  replyed,  that  albeit  their  Towne  was  small,  and  their
Gardens  few  (for  the  grounds  wherein  they  plant  their
Cassavi,  whereof  they  make  their  bread,  they  call  their
Gardens)  yet  their  Countrie  was  full  of  Inhabitants,  and
had  store  of  Gardens  to  supply  our  wants  of  bread,  and
was  plentifully  stored  with  other  provisions  sufficient  for
a  greater  number,  which  I  desired  might  bee  weekely
brought  unto  us,  as  neede  required,  for  that  I  meant  not
to  take  it  without  recompence,  but  would  give  them  for  it
such  commodities  as  should  well  please  them,  which  they
wanted :  as  Axes,  Hatchets,  Knives,  Beades,  Looking-
glasses,  Jewes  trumps,  and  such  like  things  wherein  they
most  delight.

Then  they  desired  to  consult  amongst  themselves,  which  The  Indians
I  permitted,  and  expected  their  answere  above  two  houres,  SP  t0  counselL
which  time  they  spent  in  debating  the  matter  after  their
manner,  and  drinking  Aquavitae,  and  in  the  end  desired
my  presence,  and  made  me  this  answere.

That  they  were  contented  and  well  pleased  we  should  Their
live  amongst them  ; that  they would furnish us with  answere-
houses  to  lodge  in,  and  provide  all  necessaries  for  us  in
the best  manner  they  could. But  whereas I said our  [IV-  vi.
King  would  permit  his  people  to  live  and  abide  amongst  1270.]

them, and defend them against their enemies : they
answered,  it  was  a  thing  they  greatly  desired,  and  had  ^,Str
expected  long,  and  now  they  made  much  doubt  thereof,  £*&&*  and
and  said  they  were  but  words,  having  heretofore  beene*  Captaine  Lee.

365

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1608.

promised  the  like,  but  nothing  performed.  To  resolve
that  doubt,  and  make  good  my  speeches,  I  told  them
what  I  had  spoken  should  certainely  be  performed,  and  to
that  end  I  would  leave  my  brother  in  their  Country,  and
some  of  my  company  with  him,  to  dwell  amongst  them,
untill  a  greater  supply  might  be  sent  from  England  for
their  better  defence.  Then  they  seemed  to  give  credit
to  my  words :  And  so  after  much  talke,  and  many  com-
plements to  please  the  naked  people,  I  gave  to  Carasana  a
Sword,  and  to  the  rest  some  other  things,  which  pleased
them  well :  and  then  after  their  manner  taking  their  leave,
The  Indian  they  departed.  The  next  day  the  Indian  Martyn  went
Martyn  goeth  asnoare,  and  seemed  joy  full  that  he  had  againe  recovered

his  owne  home.

The  English The  day  following  I  tooke  land,  with  my  companies  in

take  land. armes  and  colours  displayed,  and  went  up  unto  the  Towne,

where  I  found  all  the  women  and  children  standing  at  their

doores  to  behold  us. The  principall Indians  came  out

unto  me,  and  invited  me  into  the  Captaines  house,  which

untill  the  returne  of  Martyn  belonged  unto  his  brother,  as

chiefe  Lord  in  his  absence : I  went  up  with  them  and  was

The  English friendly  feasted  with  many  kindes  of  their  Countrie  cates  :

feasted  by  the wnen  \  nad  well  eaten  and  refreshed  my  selfe,  Martyn

The  zratefull to°ke  me  by  the  hand  and  said,  that  he  had  not  any  thing

offer  of  wherewith  to  requite  my  kindenesse  towards  him,  in  such

Martyn.  manner  as  he  desired ;  neither  had  he  such  delicate  fare,

and  good  lodging  for  us,  as  in  England  heretofore  we  had

beene  used  unto :  but  humbly  intreated  me  to  accept  of

his  house  in  good  part  for  my  selfe,  and  the  Gentlemen  of

my  company;  and  the  rest  should be  lodged  in other

Indian  houses  adjoyning  :  and  that  such  provision  as  the

Country  yeeldeth,  should  be  provided  for  us. His  speech

was  approved  by  the  rest of  the Indians present, who

tooke  me  by  the  hand  one  after  another,  and  after  their

manner  bad  me  welcome. I  gave  them  many  thankes,

and  some  rewards  for  their  kinde  entertainment ;  and  then

disposed  my  company  in  convenient  lodgings :  but  yet  I

kept  a  continuall  guard,  as  in  time  of  warre.

366

ROBERT HARCOURT  a.d.

1608.

When  I  had  thus  setled  my  company  at  this  village,  I The  English
went  out to view the  scituation of  the  place,  and  the  nAuf^
advantages for defence  thereof. It is a great rockie  wiapoco.
Mountaine,  not  accessable  by  reason  of  fast  woods,  and  The  strength
steepe rockes, but onely in certaine places, which are  of  the  place.
narrow  footepaths,  very  steepe  and  easie  to  be  defended :
whereby  we  were  lodged  as in  a  Fort, and most  con-
veniently in  respect  the  harbour  was so  neere,  for  our
Ships did  ride  at anchor underneath us, over against
the  foote  of  the  hill.

Being  thus  arrived  upon  the  Coast,  I  found  the  time  of
the  yeare  so  unseasonable  for  our  purpose,  that  (by  reason
of  continuall  raines)  we  were  constrained  to  lye  still  and  Continuall
doe  nothing  for  the  space  of  three  weekes,  or  a  moneth ;  ratnes-
in  which  idle  time  I  conferred  with  the  Indians,  some-
time with  one,  sometime  with  another;  and  by  helpe
of  my  Indian  Anthony  Canabre,  and  the  Indian  John
above  mentioned  (whom  I  used  for  my  interpreters)  I
gathered  from  them  as  well  as  I  could,  the  State  of  their
Countrie ;  the  manner  of  their  government  and  living ;
how  they  stood  with  their  neighbours  in  tearmes  of  peace,
and  warre ;  and  of  what  power  and  strength  they  were.
I  inquired  also  of  the  seasons  of  the  yeare  in  those  parts :
of  their  division,  and  account  of  times,  and  numbers ;  of
the  provisions  of  their  Countrie  for  victuals,  and  other
necessaries :  and  made  a  diligent  inquiry  of  all  the  com-
modities their  Country  yeeldeth,  and  what  things  were  of
most  estimation  amongst  them  :  all  which  I  have  briefely
declared  unto  your  Highnesse  in  this  following  discourse.

THis  goodly  Countrie,  and  spacious  Empire,  is  on  the  The  hounds
North part  bounded with the Sea, and the  great  ^djimits  of
River of  Orenoque, wherein Sir Walter Raleigh per-
formed his worthy and memorable discovery, on the
East  and  South  parts  with  the  famous  River  of  Amazones:
and  on  the  West  part  with  the  Mountaines  of  Peru.

The  westermost  branch  of  the  River  of  Amazones  that  branch™/
falleth  into  the  Sea,  is  called  Arrapoco :  upon  which  River  Amazones.

367

A.D.

l608.

Arrawary.

Maicary.
Anaky-u-ry
chief e  of  the
Taios.

Morooga.

Conewini.
Cooshebery.
Leonard
Rapago  Lord
of  Cooshebery.

[IV.

*7i-]

A  Mountaine
called  Cowob.

Topases  in
Cooshebery,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

are  seated  many  goodly  Signiories  well  deserving  a  parti-
cular discovery,  which  shall  (by  Gods  permission)  be
performed  hereafter.  To  the  North  of  Arrapoco  is  the
River  of  Arrawary,  which  is  a  goodly  River,  discovering  a
gallant  Countrie.  From  Arrawary  unto  the  River  of
Cassipurogh  extendeth  the  Province  of  Arricary;  con-
taining the  Signiories  of  Arrawary,  Maicary,  and  Cooshe-
bery ;  of  which  Anakyury  is  principall,  who  by  Nation
is  a  Yaio,  and  fled  from  the  borders  of  Orenoque  for
feare  of  the  Spaniards,  to  whom  he  is  a  mortall  enemy.
He  hath  seated  himselfe  in  the  province  of  Arricary,  and
now  dwelleth  at  Morooga  in  the  Signiory  of  Maicari.
To  the  North  North-west  of  which,  there  falleth  into
the  Sea  a  River  called  Conawini,  whereupon  the  Signiory
of  Cooshebery  bordereth ;  whereof  an  Indian  named
Leonard  Ragapo  is  Chiefe,  under  the  subjection  of
Anaki-u-ry.  This  Indian  is  christened,  and  hath  beene
heretofore  in  England  with  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  to  whom
he  beareth  great  affection  :  he  can  a  little  understand  and
speake  our  language,  and  loveth  our  Nation  with  all
his  heart.  During  my  aboad  at  Wiapoco,  having  intelli-
gence of  him,  and  of  his  Country,  and  that  certaine  stones
were  found  therein,  supposed  to  be  Diamonds :  I  sent  my
Cozen,  Captaine  Fisher  to  discover  the  same,  and  fetch
some  of  those  stones,  to  be  resolved  of  the  truth.

At  his  comming  thither,  Leonard  entertained  him  with
all  kindenesse,  not  after  the  ordinary  rude  manner  of  the
Indians,  but  in  more  civill  fashion,  and  with  much  respect
and  love,  he  furnished  him  with  guides  to  conduct  him
through  the  Country  to  the  place  where  the  Stones  were
found,  being  fifty  miles  Southward  up  into  the  Land :
beyond  which  place  there  is  an  high  Mountaine  appearing
in  sight,  called  Cowob,  and  on  the  top  thereof  (as  the
Indians  report)  a  great  Lake  or  Poole,  full  of  excellent
fish  of  divers  kindes.  The  Countrey  was  as  pleasant  and
delightfull,  as  ever  any  man  beheld ;  but  the  Stones  not
Diamonds  :  yet  they  were  Topases,  which  being  well  cut,
and  set  in Gold by a  cunning  workman,  doe  make  as

368

ROBERT HARCOURT  a.d.

1608.

faire  a  shew,  and  give  as  good  a  lustre  as  any  Diamond
whatsoever :  which  yeelde  good  hopes  of  better  to  be
found  hereafter :  For  where  the  Topas  is  found  on  the
Mountaines  of  Tenaseren,  in  the  East  Indies,  the  greatest
store  of  Diamonds  are  also  found.

When  my  kinsman  returned,  Captaine  Leonard  came
with  him  to  Wiapoco  (being  above  an  hundred  miles
from  his  owne  Country)  onely  to  visite  me  and  my
company ;  for  the  great  love  he  did  beare  to  Sir  Walter
Raleigh,  and  our  Nation.  I  much  marvelled  to  see  him,
for  assuredly  he  is  the  bravest  Indian  of  all  those  parts.
After  he  had  beene  with  me  a  day  or  two,  he  earnestly
requested  me  to  send  some  of  my  company  into  his
Countrey,  which  he  greatly  commended  for  the  whole-
some ayre,  and  plenty  of  victuals,  alleading  that  the  place
where  then  wee  lived  (by  his  owne  experience)  was  very
unhealthfull,  that  our  men  would  there  be  subject  to
sickenesse  and  die  :  and  for  an  instance  he  named  Captaine
Lee,  and  his  company,  who  formerly  were  planted  there,
and  almost  all  dyed  by  sicknesse  in  the  same  place :
But  he  assured  me  that  his  own  Country  Cooshebery  was
of  a  good  ayre,  pleasant,  and  healthfull ;  that  there  they
might  have  roome  sufficient  to  build  English  houses  in
(for  those  were  the  words  hee  used)  that  thither  they
should  be  welcome  and  should  want  nothing.  Much  he
perswaded  to  draw  me  to  his  desire,  which  by  his  impor-
tunity I  granted,  and  accordingly  performed  it ;  finding  The  quality  of
his  Country  answerable  to  his  report;  being  for  the  most  *&f  Province  of
part  champian  ground,  naturally  intermixt  of  plaine  fields,  s  r^'
fruitefull  meadowes,  and  goodly  woods,  in  such  admirable
order,  as  if  they  had  beene  planted  artificially  by  handy
labour.  The  fields  appearing  above  the  meadowes  in
pleasant  and  delightful!  manner,  presenting  here  and  there
unto  the  eye,  from  stately  Mounts,  most  beautifull  and
lively  prospects :  the  meadowes  bordering  on  every  side
betweene  the  fields  and  woods,  the  woods  growing  in  the
lowest  valleys  betwixt  the  meadowes,  and  commonly  are
watered  with  sweete  and  pleasant  fresh  streames  running
xvi  369  2  A

A.D.

l6o8.

Arracoory  and
Morrozvnia.

An  exceeding
high  Hill
called  Calli-
puny.

Norrak.

Anaki-u-ry.

Rivers  falling
into  the  Sea,
betweene
Amazones  and
Wiapoco.

Winary  a
creek.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

through  them :  which  strange  and  rare  mixture  of
Mounts,  Valleyes,  Meadowes,  Fields,  and  Woods,  afford
as  excellent  and  healthfull  habitations  as  can  be  wished
or  desired,  but  is  not  greatly  peopled.

From  the  River  of  Cassipurogh  N.  Westward  to  the
River  of  Arracow,  and  up  further  into  the  Land  towards
the  West,  and  South-west,  as  farre  as  the  River  of  Arwy
(which  falleth  into  Wiapoco  above  the  overfalles)  extend
the  Provinces  of  Arracoory,  and  Morownia,  which  also  to
the  landward  (by  the  relation  of  my  Brother,  Captaine
Michael  Harcourt,  and  Captaine  Harvey,  who  have
travelled  and  discovered  those  parts)  are  pleasant  and
delightfull  plaine  Countries,  like  unto  Cooshebery.  The
Arracoory  Countrie  is  well  peopled,  and  their  chiefe
Captaine  is  called  Ipero.  Betwixt  the  Wiapocoories  and
Arracoories  there  is  no  hearty  love  and  friendship,  yet
in  outward  shew  they  hold  good  quarter.  In  Morrownia,
there  is  also  store  of  people,  which  are  friendly  Indians.
In  that  Province  there  is  a  very  high  Hill  called  Callipuny,
fashioned  like  a  Sugerloafe,  or  a  Pyramis,  which  over-
vieweth  and  disco vereth  all  the  Territories  adjoyning
above  an  hundred  miles.

Beyond  the  Country  of  Morrowni  to  the  Southward
bordering  the  River  of  Arwy,  is  the  Province  of  Norrak :
the  people  thereof  are  Charibes,  and  enemies  both  to
the  Morrowinnes,  the  inhabitants  of  Morrownia,  and  to
the  Wiapopoories ;  who  are  also  under  the  subjection  of
Anaky-u-ry,  the  principall  and  greatest  Lord,  or  Cassique
of  all  the  Yaios  in  those  Provinces,  bordering  upon  the
Sea  betwixt  the  Amazones,  South-eastward,  and  Desse-
quebe  North-westward.

From  the  River  of  Amazones  to  the  Bay  of  Wiapoco,
there  fall  into  the  Sea  these  Rivers  following  :  Arrapoco
(a  branch  of  Amazones)  Arrawary,  Micary,  Conawini,  and
Cassipuroph  :  In  the  Bay  of  Wiapooco  to  the  East  of  the
said  River,  there  falleth  into  the  Sea  the  River  of  Arracow;
and  into  Arracow  falleth  the  River  of  Watts.  To  the
North  of  Wiapoco  there  is  a  small  creeke  called  Wianary,

37o

ROBERT HARCOURT  ad.

1608.

which  letteth into the Sea  a dayes  journey Westward
up  into  the  land : some  take  this  creeke  to  be  a  River,
but  they  doe  erre  in  that  opinion,  it  having  neither  Spring
nor Fountaine from whence it  falleth. To  the  North
and  North-west  of  the  said  creeke, there  is  a  ridge  of
high  Mountaines  running  towards  the  River  of  Apurwaca,
the soile whereof  is excellent and fertile  for Tobacco,
and  beareth  the  best  of  all  those  parts ;  so  are  the  Sugar-
canes  there  growing  the  best  and  fairest  that  are  found
upon the Coast :  and  all  the  tract  of  Land  betwixt  the
River of Wiapoco, and Apurwaca, is accounted the
Province of Wiapocoory, containing the Signiories of  The  Province
Wiapoco,  and  Wianary. Beneath  the  overfals  in  Wiapoco  of  Wiapocoory .
(which are  forty miles distant from the  Sea) there is
much  people,  both  of  Yaios,  and  Arwaccas :  of  the  Yaios
in this River Carasana is chiefe. Of the Arwaccas,  [W-  V1-
Arriquona  is  principall. In  Wianary  there  are  few  Indians,  c  . I272-J
and  Casurino  is  their  chiefetaine.  Arriquona.

To  the  North-west  of  the  Bay  of  Wiapoco,  there  fall  Casurino.
into the  Sea  the River  of  Apurwaca,  Cowo,  Wio,  and  Riven  falling
Caiane. Apurwaca  is  a  goodly  River,  and  well  inhabited :
Cowo  is  voide  of  inhabitants :  Wio  is  a  faire  River  and

into  the  Sea,
to  the  North
west  of

leadeth many dayes  journey into the high land, and  Wiapoco.
discovereth  a  fertile  and  hopefull  Countrey. At  Caiane
there  is  an  excellent  harbour  for  shipping  of  any  burden.,
which heretofore by Captaine Lawrence Keymis was
called  Port  Howard :  On  the  Starboord  side,  as  you  enter
this  harbour,  there  is  an  Hand  of  low  land,  called  Muc-  Muccumbro
cumbro, scituate betwixt the River of Caiane and  an  Hand.
Meccoria,  containing  in  circuit  about  sixteene  leagues. In
this  Hand  there  are  two  hils,  the  one  called  Muccumbro,
whereof the Hand taketh the name ; the other  called
Cillicedemo : from these hils the  greatest part  of  the
Hand  may  be  overviewed,  which  containeth  many  goodly
Pastures and Meadowes intermixt with some Woods,
and  is  full  of  Deere,  both  red  and  fallow.

On the Larboord  side, as you  enter  Caiane  there  is  Mattoon  an
another  Hand  of  high  Land,  called  Mattoory,  in  quantitie  Hand.

37i

A.D.

l608.

Arrawicary
chiefe  Cap-
tain e  of  the
Caiane.

Foure  or  five
men  placed  at
Caiane.

The  manner  of
their  govern-
ment.

Murder  and
Adultery
punished  by
death.

The  Indians
by  nature
jealous  over
their  wives.
The  Indians
have  many
wives.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

much  like  unto  the  first :  this  Hand  for  the  commodious
scituation,  is  of  great  effect  for  the  defence  of  the  harbour,
affording  naturally  two  such  notable  convenient  places
for  the  planting  of  Ordnance  for  that  purpose,  as  no
industry  of  art  could  devise  better,  or  more  availeable.

The  Inhabitants  of  this  Province  of  Caiane,  are  Charibes,
their  principall  commander  is  called  Arrawicary,  who
dwelleth  at  Cillicedemo  before  mentioned :  we  have
found  him  trusty  and  faithfull  to  our  Nation ;  but  to
our  friend  Leonard  of  Cooshebery,  he  is  a  mortall  enemy.
At  this  mans  house  I  left  foure  or  five  of  my  company,
thereby  to  hold  amity  and  friendship  with  the  Charibes,
to  learne  their  language,  and  to  keepe  peace  betweene
them  and  the  Yaios,  Arwaccas,  and  other  Nations  their
allies.  To  the  South-westward  of  these  Provinces  above
mentioned  towards  the  high  land,  there  be  many  others
which  hereafter  shall  be  more  exactly  described  by  a
second  discovery.

These  Provinces  &  Signiories  to  the  landward  are
not  plentifully  inhabited,  the  greatest  numbers  of  people
are  seated  neare  unto  the  Rivers,  &  travell  from  place  to
place  in  Canoes.  There  is  no  setled  government  amongst
them,  onely  they  acknowledge  a  superiority,  which  they
will  obay  as  farre  as  they  please.  In  every  Province  or
Signiory  there  is  a  chiefe  Cassique,  or  Captaine,  com-
manding all  :  So  likewise  in  every  Towne  and  Village,
they  commonly  chastise  murder  and  adultery  by  death,
which  onely  are  the  offences  punished  amongst  them,  and
certaine  persons  are  appointed  by  them  to  execute  those
punishments.  The  Indians  take  wives,  over  whom  they
are  extreame  jealous,  and  expect  great  continencie  in
them ;  for  if  they  take  them  in  adultery,  they  presently
cause  their  brains  to  be  beaten  out.  The  better  sort  of
persons  have  every  one  of  them  two  or  three  wives,
or  more,  the  rest  but  one  ;  accounting  him  that  hath  most
wives,  the  greatest  man.  Their  wives  (especially  the
elder  sort)  are  as  servants  unto  them,  for  they  make  their
bread and drinke, dresse their meate, serve them at

372

ROBERT HARCOURT

meales, and doe all the other businesse about the
house.

These  Provinces  are  peopled  with  divers  Nations  of
severall  languages,  namely,  Yaios,  Arwaccas,  Sappaios,
Paragotos,  and  Charibes.  The  Charibes  are  the  ancient
inhabitants,  and  the  other  Nations  are  such  as  have  beene
chased  away  from  Trinidado,  and  the  borders  of  Orenoque.
And  forasmuch  as  they  have  united  themselves  in  those
parts,  the  Charibes  have  held  them  in  continuall  warres,
but  the  Yaios  and  the  other  Nations  their  Allyes,  are
growne  so  strong,  that  they  have  constrained  the  Charibes
of  the  Sea-coast  to  contract  a  peace  with  them,  yet  beare
no  hearty  love  the  one  Nation  to  the  other  :  but  with  the
Charibes  inhabiting  the  in-land  parts  upon  the  Moun-
taines,  they  have  as  yet  no  peace  at  all ;  for  they  doe  often
times  come  downe  upon  them  in  great  numbers,  spoile
and  burne  their  houses,  kill  their  men,  and  carry  away
their  women,  which  is  the  greatest  cause  of  warre  and
hatred  amongst  them ;  whereof  our  men  have  seene
experience  in  Cooshebery,  where  happened  an  accident
worth  the  observing,  which  I  will  here  declare  unto  your
Highnesse.  The  Indian  Leonard  Ragapo,  before  men-
tioned, is  a  Yaio,  who  finding  the  Countrey  of  Cooshebery
slenderly  inhabited,  hath  seized  upon  it  for  his  owne
Signiorie ;  and  at  his  earnest  request,  I  sent  foure
Gentlemen  of  my  company  to  remaine  there  with  him.
The  naturall  inhabitants  that  dwell  upon  the  uttermost
bounds  thereof,  towards  the  South,  and  West,  are
Charibes,  and  enemies  to  him,  and  to  his  Nation  :  for
while  our  men  (unknowne  to  the  Charibes)  staied  at
Cooshebery,  they  assembled  themselves  together  to  the
number  of  two  hundred  or  more,  and  came  down  into  his
Signiorie,  burned  and  spoiled  houses,  roasted  one  woman,
tooke  many  prisoners,  and  intended  to  assault  him  also :
which  to  prevent  he  armed  about  fiftie  of  his  Indians,  with
their  usuall  weapons ;  which  are  Bowes  and  Arrowes,  long
Staves  sharpened  at  the  point,  and  with  fire  hardened  :
woodden Swords  and Targets very  artificially made  of

373

A.D.

1608.

Divers
languages  in
Guiana.
The  Charibes
most  ancient
upon  the  Sea
coast.

The  Indians
make  war  for
their  women.

The  Charibes
warre  upon
Leonard.

The  usual
weapons  of  the
Indians.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1608.
Leonard  wood,  and  painted  with  Beasts,  and  Birds : He  requested

*f*7  %  ^fh a^so  our  men  to  a^e  anc^  ass^st  n^m  w^tn  tne^r  Muskets,
/ e ngis  .  ^^  j  commanded  them  to  doe,  upon  all  such  occasions

offered. And so being all in readinesse,  Leonard (as

their  captain)  led  them  on  to  intercept  his  enemies ;  and

as  I  have  heard  by  Master  Henry  Baldwin  (who  then  was

[IV.  vi.  present,  and  to  observe  the  manner  of  their  warres,  gave

I273-J  him  leave  to command all) he bravely  performed  that

exploit,  in  good  order  after  their  manner,  and  with  great

The  manner  of  judgement and resolution. For  in the  Front,  he first

o?  enng  their  p]acec[  our  foure  Englishmen,  by  two  in  a  ranke  ;  next

men  in  the  .

warres.  to  tnem>  two  Indians  armed  with  woodden Swords  and

Targets  ; then two  Archers  ; and  after them two  men
with sharpned staves, instead of Pikes  : and in like
manner  ordered, and ranked all his Company. Being
thus prepared, hee marched against the Charibs,  who
(neere  at  hand)  were  comming  in  the  same  order  towards
him  ;  but  when  they  approached,  and  (unexpected)  per-
ceived our English men amongst the  Yaios,  they  were
The  Charlies  much  amazed,  and  made  a  sudden  stand  ;  which  Leonard
amazed  at  the  perceiving, guessed rightly at the cause, and  instantly
^English C ^  ma^e  g°°d  use  of  that  advantage. Hee  commanded
his  owne  company  to  keepe  their  Station,  himselfe  with
a  Sword  in his hand (which I had  given  him)  and a
Target  of  his  owne  fashion, went boldly  towards  them
to  parley  with  their  Captaines. And  having  called  them
Leonard  out,  hee reproved  them  for  comming  (as  enemies)  into

speaketh  to  the  \{x%  Signiory,  for  burning  and  spoiling  his  houses,  and
his  people  :  hee  demanded  satisfaction  for  the  hurt  done,
and  restitution  of  the  prisoners  taken,  and  warned  them
forthwith  to  depart  out  of  his  Signiory,  and  desist  from
warre  :  which  if  they  refused  to  fulfill,  he  was  there
ready  with  his  friends  the  Englishmen  to  fight  with
them,  and  revenge  his  wrongs  :  and  said  further,  that
if  in  the  conflict  any  of  the  English  men  were  slaine,
or  hurt ;  hee  would  then  fetch  all  the  rest  from  Wiapoco,
and  returne  to  burne  their  houses,  and  cut  them  all  in
pieces. Thus  hee boldly spake with such a courage,

374

ROBERT HARCOURT  a.d.

1608.

shewing  also  our  men  unto  them  (who  had  their  match

in  cocke  ready to discharge) that hee strooke  such  a

feare  into  them  all,  by  reason  of  our  mens  presence  that  The  Charibes

they  presently  agreed to peace,  performed  what  condi-  aFei  t0  Ka^f

tions  he  required,  and  then  departed  home  with  all  their  English.

company. Here  may  your  Highnesse  note  the  factions

among  the  Indian  Nations  : the  discipline  and  order  they

hold  in  warre  :  the  feare  the  Charibes  conceived  at  the

sight  of  our  English  men,  and  the  policy  of  the  Indian

Leonard,  to take advantage by  their feare, and make

our  men  his  Guard,  and  chiefe  protection  against  them.

These  things  in time  will much availe us, being  well

observed,  and  rightly  applied  according  to  occasion. But

to  our  former  discourse.

The  power  and  strength  of  these  Countries  (being  so
thinly  peopled)  is  not  very  great  to  withstand  the  might
of  forraine  enemies.  The  usuall  weapons  of  the  Indians,
are  before  described,  saving  that  their  Arrowes  are  oft
times  poisoned.  But  since  our  trade  and  commerce  with
them,  they  have  gotten  a  few  good  Swords,  Muskets,
Calivers,  and  some  small  quantity  of  shot  and  powder  ;
and  have  learned  to  handle  their  Peeces  very  orderly,
and  some  of  them  are  good  shot.

The seasons of  the yeare upon this coast, and in  The  season  of
this  climate  are  divers,  for  in  the  East  parts  of  Guiana  JJ*  ?eare  tn
towards  the Amazones,  the  dry weather,  which  we  call
their Summer begin neth in August  ; and the  violent  The  Summer
raines and tempestuous winde, which we count their e/uinuneJ  m
winter,  doe begin in February  : But in the  Westerne  The  winter
parts,  towards Orenoque,  the dry season beginneth  in  beginneth  in
October, and the raines and windes in Aprill. There  February.
is  little difference of  heate and cold in this diversity
of  seasons being so neere the Equinoctiall,  where  the
day  and night are alwayes equall  : for in those parts
wee  finde,  that  when  the  Sunne  declineth  furthest  from
them  towards the Tropicke of  Capricorne,  the ayre  is
then  clearest,  and  the  season  of  the  yeare  most  dry  ;  as
in  the  Easterne  parts  of  Guiana  in  August,  September,

375

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1608.

October,  November  and  December  :  and  when  the  Sunne

returneth  towards  the  Tropicke  of  Cancer,  then  doe  the

raines begin,  increase, and decrease, from February  to

July  :  but  sometimes  they  begin  to  fall,  and  the  Rivers

to  rise,  swell,  and  overflow  sooner  or  later  by  a  moneth  ;

and  the  yeare is sometimes more or lesse windie  and

wet,  according to the disposition of  the  heavens,  and

of  the  Planets  :  and  as  the  Sun  approacheth,  or  declineth

little,  or  much,  even  so  the  earth  wanteth  or  aboundeth

with  water  and  moisture.

Their  account They  have  no  division  or  account  of  times  or  numbers  ;

of  times  and ^ onely  reckon  by  the  Moones,  as  one,  two,  three,  foure,

numbers.  n vf/t  u j  • n  t^u •

or  five  Moones  : or  by dayes in like manner. 1  heir

numbers  they reckon thus, one,  two, three,  and  so  to

ten  : then  they  say  ten  and  one,  ten  and  two,  ten  and

three,  &c. And  to  shew  their  meaning  more  certainly,

they  will hold up one, two, three, or more of  their

fingers,  expressing  the numbers, still making signes  as

they  speake,  the  better  to  declare  their  meaning  :  when

they  will  reckon  twenty,  they  will  hold  downe  both  their

hands  to  their  feete,  shewing  all  their  fingers  and  toes,

and  as  the  number  is  greater, so will they  double  the

signe. When  they  appoint  or  promise  any  thing  to  be

done  by  a  time  limited,  they  will  deliver  a  little  bundle

of  sticks  equall to the number of  dayes, or Moones,

that they  appoint, and will themselves keepe another

bundle of the like number : and to observe their

appointed time, they will every day, or Moone  take

away  a  sticke,  and  when  they  have  taken  away  all,  then

they  know  that  the  time  of  their  appointment  is  come,

and  will  accordingly  perform their  promise.

Religion.  As  touching  Religion,  they  have  none  amongst  them,

They  use  no tnat  *  could  perceive,  more  then  a  certaine  observance  of

sacrifice,  no? the Sunne and Moone, supposing them to be alive,

religious  but  using  no  religious  worship  towards  them,  nor  offer

worship  to  any  sacrifice  to  anv  thing  ;  unlesse  they  use  a  superstition  in

riV^'vi  tne*r  drinking  feasts,  by  sacrificing  Jarres  of  drink  :  for  at

1274.]  the  death  of  any  of  their  Cassiques,  Captaines,  or  great

376

ROBERT HARCOURT  ad.

1608.

friends  whom  they  esteeme,  they will make  a  solemne

feast  (their chiefest provision being of  their best  and  The  manner  of

strongest  drinke,  which  they  call  Parranow)  which  feast  f^/^ng

shall  continue  three  or  foure  dayes,  or  as  long  as  their  ^ath  of  their

liquor  lasteth, spending their  time in dancing,  singing,  Captaines.

and  drinking  excessively  :  in  which  vice  they  exceede  all

other  Nations whatsoever,  accounting him that  will  be

drunke  first,  the  bravest  fellow  : during  this  solemnitie

of  their drinking, some women being neerest  of  their

kin  unto  the  party dead, doth stand by and cry ex-

treamely  : thus their manner  is untill  their drinke  be

spent,  and  then  the  feast  is  ended. Whether  they  use

any  superstition  in  this  custome  I  know  not ;  time  will

reveale,  and also  reforme it. It is most certaine  that

their  Peeaios  (as  they  call  them)  Priests,  or  Southsayers,  Their  Peeaios

at some  speciall  times  have  conference  with  the  Divell  or  Priests  have

(the common deceiver of mankinde) whom they call  confere*ce
^TT .  ,  11- jijj  -it with  the  dive t.

Wattipa,  and  are  by  him  deluded  ; yet  notwithstanding

their  often  conference  with  him,  they  feare  and  hate  him

much,  and  say  that  he  is  nought  :  and  not  without  great

reason, for hee will oftentimes (to  their  great  terror)

beate  them  blacke  and  blew. They  beleeve  that  the  good

Indians  when  they  dye,  goe  up,  and  will  point  towards  Their  opinion

the heavens, which they call Caupo  ; and that the  °fthe  dead-

bad Indians  goe downe, pointing to the earth, which

they  call  Soy. When  any  Cassique,  Captaine,  or  chiefs  At  the  death

man dieth amongst them, if he have a slave or  °fa  Casst(lue>

prisoner  taken  from their  enemies,  they will kill  him  ;  f Indian  merve

and  if  he have none such, then  will they  kill one  of  him  in  the

his  other  servants,  that  he  may  have  one  to  attend  him  other  world.

in  the  other  world.

The  qualitie of the Land in those  Countries,  is  of  The  quality  of

divers  kindes  ;  by  the  Sea  side  the  Land  is  low,  where  the  Land.

the  heate  would  be  most  vehement,  if  it  were  not  qualified

and  tempered  by  a  fresh  Easterly  winde  or  Brieze,  most

forcibly  blowing  in  the  heate  of  the  day  :  in  many  places

this  low  land  is  very  unhealthfull,  and  little  inhabited,  by

reason  of  the  over-flowing of  the waters  : but  for  the

377

A.D.

1608.

The  provisions
for  victuals.
The  roote  of
Cassavi
maketh  their
bread  and
drinke.

Maix,  or

Guinea

wheat.

Their  divers
kinds  of
drinke.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

most  part  it  hath  goodly  navigable  Rivers,  a  fertile  soyle,
much  people,  and  is  a  healthfull  habitation.  Upon  the
Mountaines  there  is  a  high  land,  where  the  ayre  is  coldest,
in  some  places  it  is  fruitfull,  in  others  not  :  but  generall
is  full  of  Minerals,  and  mines  of  mettals,  and  yeeldeth
as  many  as  any  part  either  of  the  East,  or  West  Indies,
both  of  the  best,  and  of  the  basest  whereof,  we  shall
(by  Gods  permission)  give  good  testimony,  to  the  benefit
of  our  Countrey,  and  honour  of  our  Nation  in  time
convenient  :  and  in  most  places  upon  the  Mountaines
there  is  sound  and  healthfull  dwelling.  There  is  also
a  middle  sort  of  land,  which  is  of  a  meane  height,  and
is  most  temperate,  healthfull,  fertile,  and  most  inhabited
of  all  other  ;  it  aboundeth  in  Meadowes,  Pastures,  and
pleasant  streames  of  fresh  water,  in  goodly  woods,  and
most  delightfull  Plaines,  for  profit,  pleasure,  sport,  and
recreation  :  and  also  is  not  void  of  Minerals.

The  provisions  of  this  Countrey  for  victuals,  are  many  :
First,  of  the  roote  of  a  tree,  called  Cassavi,  they  make
their  Bread,  in  manner  following  ;  they  grate  the  roote
upon  a  stone,  and  presse  out  the  juice  thereof,  which
being  rawe  is  poyson,  but  boiled  with  Guinea  Pepper,
whereof  they  have  abundance,  it  maketh  an  excellent
and  wholesome  sawce,  then  they  drie  the  grated  roote,
and  bake  it  upon  a  stone,  as  we  bake  our  Oaten  cakes
in  England.  This  bread  is  very  excellent,  much  like,
but  farre  better  then  our  great  Oaten  cakes,  a  finger
thicke,  which  are  used  in  the  Moorelands,  and  the  Peake
in  Staffordshire  and  Darbyshire.

There  is  a  kinde  of  great  Wheat,  called  Maix,  of  some
it  is  called  Guinea  Wheat,  which  graine  is  a  singular
provision  in  those  Countries,  and  yeeldeth  admirable
increase,  even  a  thousand  or  fifteene  hundred  for  one,
and  many  times  much  more.  It  maketh  excellent  meale,
or  flower  for  Bread  ;  and  very  good  Malt  for  Beere  or
Ale,  and  serveth  well  for  sundry  other  necessary  uses  for
the  reliefe  of  man.  Of  the  aforesaid  Cassavi  bread,  and
this  Wheate the Indians  make drinke,  which  they  call

378

ROBERT HARCOURT  a.d.

1608.

Passiaw  : it will not keepe long, but  must be spent

within  foure  or  five  dayes  :  they  make  another  kinde  of

drinke  of  Cassavi,  called  Parranow,  very  good  and  strong,  An  excellent

much  like  unto  our  best March  beere  in  England,  and  d£^adeof

that  kinde  of  drinke  will  keepe  ten  dayes  ;  many  sorts

they  have  which  I  have  tasted,  some  strong,  some  small,

some  thicke,  some  thin,  but  all  good,  being  well  made,

as  commonly  they  were  amongst  the  Yaios,  and  Arwaccas,

which  are  the  clenliest  people  of  all  those  Nations.

There  is  great  store  of  hony  in  the  Country,  and  Store  °fnonh
although  it  be  wilde  (being  taken  out  of  trees  and  buries
in  the  earth)  yet  is  it  as  good  as  any  in  the  world  ;  of
which  may  be  made  an  excellent  drinke  much  used  in
Wales,  called  Meath.  The  hony  and  the  waxe,  are  also
good  commodities  for  merchandise.

There  is  no  Vines  in  that  Country,  but  the  Soyle  being  The  s°yle
rich  and  fertile,  and  the  climate  hot,  if  they  were  planted  €y.e  *ntJor
there,  they  would  prosper  exceedingly,  and  yeelde  good
Sackes,  and  Canary  wines,  which  in  those  parts  we  finde
to  be  very  wholesome.

Many  other  necessary  provisions  sufficient  for  the  sus-
tenance of  man, doe  there  abound  in  plenty  : Namely,  Sundry  kindes
Deere  of  all  sorts,  wilde  Swine  in  great  numbers,  whereof  °i  . easts  tn
there  are  two  kindes,  the  one  small,  by  the  Indians  called
Pockiero,  which  hath  the  navile  in  the  backe  ;  the  other  Swine  which
is  called  Paingo,  and is as faire and  large as any  we  h^ve .fe.
have  in  England. There  be  store  of  Hares,  and  Conies,  ^ac^
but  of  a  kinde  far  differing  from  ours  :  There  be  Tigers,
Leopards, Ounces, Armadils, Maipuries, which are  in
taste  like  Beefe, & wil take salt  : Baremoes or Ant-
Beares,  which  taste  like Mutton, & other small  beasts  [IV.  vi.
of  the  same  taste,  coloured,  like  a  Fawne,  Elkes,  Monkies,  I275-]

and  Marmosites  of  divers  sorts,  both  great  and  small :
of  these  beasts  there  bee  innumerable,  and  by  experience
we  have  found  them  all  good  meate.  Many  other
kindes  of  beasts  there  are  of  sundry  and  strange  shapes,
which  hereafter  shall  be  figured  in  their  true  proportion
according  to  the  life  with  their  names  annexed.

379

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1608.

Great  variety Of  Fowles there bee divers kindes ; namely,  Wild-
of  Fowles. CJUC1CS) Widgins, Teales,  Wild-geese, Herons of  divers
colours, Cranes, Storkes, Pheasants, Patridges, Doves,
Stock-doves,  Black-birds,  Curlewes,  Godwits,  Woodcokes,
Snites,  Parrots  of  sundry  sorts, many other kindes of
great  and small Birds of  rare colours; besides great
ravenous  Fowles; and  Hawkes  of  every  kinde.
Divers  kindes Of  fish the  varietie is great,  first  of  Sea fish, there
offish.  js Sea-breame, Mullet, Soale, Scate, Thornebacke, the

Sword-fish,  Sturgeon, Seale,  a  fish  like unto  a  Salmon,
but as the Salmon is red, this is yellow ; Shrimps,
Oysters  hang Lobsters, and Oysters,  which hang upon  the  branches
^M  Ta'vinp-  °^  Trees  : There  is  a rare  fish  called  Cassoorwa,  which
foure  eyes, and  nath. in each eye two sights, and as it swimmeth it
the  ribs  and beareth  the  lower  sights  within  the  water,  and  the  other
backe  like  a above : the ribs and back of  this fish resemble those
parts of  a man, having  the ribs round and the back
flat, with a dent therein,  as a man hath ; it  is some-
what bigger then a Smelt, but farre exceeding it for
daintie meate ; and many other sorts there be most
excellent. Of  fresh-water fish many  kindes unknowne
in  these  parts,  but  all  exceeding  good  and  daintie :  And
I  dare  be  bold  to  say,  that  this  Countrie  may  compare
with  any  other of  the world, for the  great  varietie  of
excellent  fish  both  of  the  Sea,  and  fresh  Waters. There
is  also  a  Sea-fish  which  usually  commeth  into  the  fresh
waters, especially  in  the winter  and wet season ; it is
of  great esteeme  amongst us, and we account it halfe
flesh,  for  the  bloud  of  it  is  warme ;  it  commeth  up  into
the shallow waters in  the drowned lands, and feedeth
upon  grasse  and  weedes :  the  Indians  name  it  Coiumero,
The  Sea  cow ancj  t^e  Spaniards,  Manati,  but  wee  call  it  the  Sea-cow;
1  e  eefe' in  taste it is like beefe,  will take salt, and serve to
victuall  ships,  as  in  our  knowledge  hath beene proved
by our Countrimen : Of  this fish may bee made an
excellent  oile  for  many  purposes, the  fat  of  it  is  good
to  frie  either  fish  or  flesh; the  hide  (as  I  have  heard)
will make  good  buffer and  being  dried  in  the  Sunne,

380

ROBERT HARCOURT  a.d.

1608.
and  kept  from  wet,  will  serve  for  Targets  and  Armour
against  the  Indian  arrowes :  In  the  wet  season  the  store
of  them  are  infinite ; some  of  these  hides  were  hereto-
fore brought  into  England,  by  Sir  Walter  Rawleigh.

The severall kindes of  fruits are many, the Pina,  Sundrie  kindes
Platana,  Potato,  Medler,  Plums  of  divers  sorts,  the  Nuts  °ffruits-
of  strange  kindes. The  excellency  of  the  Pina  I  cannot  p'ina-
expresse, for I dare boldly affirme that the world
affoordeth  not  a  more  delicate  fruit  :  In  taste  it  is  like
Straw-berries, Claret-wine and Sugar. The Platana is  Platana.
also a  very  good  fruit,  and  tasteth  like  an  old  Pippin.
The  Potato  is  well  knowne. The  Medler  exceedeth  in  Potato.
greatnesse. The  Plums  I  cannot  commend,  for  to  eate
much  of  them  doth  cause  fluxes,  which  in  those  Countries
are  dangerous. The  Nuts are  good being moderately
eaten.

Medler.
Plummes.

Nuts.

HAving  thus  (most  excellent  Prince)  declared  the
severall  sorts  of  provisions  for  victuals  and  necessarie
foodes,  it  remayneth  that  I  now  make  mention  of  the
varietie  of  commodities,  found  in  the  Countrie  for  the  Thevarietieof
trade  of  merchandise,  which  in  few  yeeres,  by  our  paines  commo^i'1^'
and  industrie,  may  be  brought  to  perfection,  and  so
setled  in  those  parts,  that  not  onely  the  undertakers  may
receive  reward  for  their  indevours,  but  our  Countrie  also
may  grow  rich,  by  trading  for  the  fruits  of  our  labours.
The  first  and  principall  commoditie  of  estimation,
are  the  Sugar-canes,  whereof  in  those  parts  there  is  Sug#r  Canes.
great  plentie;  the  soile  is  as  fertill  for  them  as  in  any
other  part  of  the  world :  They  doe  there  grow  to  great
bignesse  in  a  short  time;  by  orderly  and  fit  planting
of  them,  and  by  erecting  convenient  workes  for  the
boyling  and  making  of  Sugars  (which  at  the  first  will
require  some  charge  and  expence)  may  be  yeerly  returned
great  benefit  and  wealth :  the  long  experience  of  the
Portugals  and  Spaniards,  in  Brasil,  and  the  Hand  of  the
Canaries ;  and  of  the  Moores  in  Barbarie,  may  give  us
certaine  assurance,  and  full  satisfaction thereof.

381

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1608.

Cotton  wooll. The  Cotton  wooll  is  a  generall  commoditie,  beneficiall

to our Merchants, and profitable to our Countrie,  by

making  of  Fustians,  and  serving  for  Bumbaste,  and  other

uses : for making of  Hamaccas,  which  are the Indian

beds, most necessarie in those parts, and also a fine

cotton cloth for clothing of the people. There is a

Natural! hemp  naturall Hempe  or  Flax  of  great  use,  almost  as  fine  as

or  Jt axe.  silke as  it may  be used ; we  have  now  found  out  the

best use of  it ; and  for making of  linnen cloth it  is

most  excellent.

Divers  com- There bee many rare  and singular commodities for

™ditiesfir Dyers,  of  which  sort  there  is  a  red  berrie,  called  Annoto,

Anno'to.  which being rightly prepared by the Indians, dyeth a

perfect  and  sure  Orange-tawnie  in  silke ; it hath  beene

sold  in  Holland  for  twelve  shillings  starling  the  pound,

and  is  yet  of  a  good  price. There  is  another  berrie  that

A  gum  which  dyeth  blue. There  is  also  a  gumme  of  a  tree,  whereof

dyeth  a  yellow  j  ^ave  seene  experience,  that  in  cloth  dyeth  a  sure  and

perfect yellow  in  graine. There bee  leaves of  certaine

Trees,  which being rightly prepared, doe die a deepe

red. There  is  also a  wood  which  dyeth  a  purple,  and

is of a good price; and another that dyeth yellow.

There  is  yet  another  wood  which  dyeth  a  purple  when

[IV.  vi.  the liquor is hot,  and a crimson when the liquor is

127  'J  cold. Many  other  notable  things there  are  (no  doubt)

not  yet knowne unto  us,  which  by  our  diligent  labour

and  observation  in  time  will  be  discovered  and  found.

Sweet  gums.  The  sweet  Gummes  of  inestimable  value  and  strange

operation  in  physicke  and chirurgerie,  are  innumerable ;

there is yellow Amber, Gumma  Lemnia, Colliman or

Carriman,  Barratta,  and  many  more  which  I  omit. The

The yertues  af  Colliman  hath  beene  proved  by  Master  Walter  Cary  of

Colliman  or wictnam in Buckinghamshire (a Gentleman of great

Carriman. .  .  9 . , V . x  ,  r  •  11

judgement and practice in physicke) to be or speciall

regard  for many purposes : this gumme is black and

brittle,  much  like  in  shew  to  common  pitch  ;  if  you  put

a  little  of  it  upon  burning  coales,  it  filleth  all  the  roome

with a most sweet and pleasant savour. He further

382

ROBERT HARCOURT  a.d.

1608.
reporteth  of  it,  that  certainly  if  you  hold  your  head
over  the  fume  thereof  three  or  foure  times  a  day,  it
cureth  the  giddinesse  of  the  head,  and  is  also  a  most
excellent  comfort  and  remedie  for  a  cold,  moist,  and
rheumatike  braine :  it  is  also  good  against  the  resolution
(or  as  the  common  sort  call  it)  the  dead  palsie,  whereof
the  giddinesse  of  the  head  is  often  a  messenger,  and  the
fore-teller  of  that  most  pernicious  griefe.  It  is  also  of
great  use  for  the  paine  that  many  women  have  in  the
lower  part  of  their  backs :  which  is  very  common  to
such  as  have  had  children  :  for  remedie  whereof,  it  is
to  be  melted  in  a  pewter  vessell  with  a  gentle  fire,  then
with  a  knife  it  must  be  spread  lightly  upon  a  piece  of
leather,  and  laid  warme  to  the  place  grieved,  untill  it
come  off  of  it  selfe.  This  plaister  is  also  very  good  for
aches,  and  doth  greatly  comfort  and  strengthen  the
sinewes.  Thus  much  hath  Master  Cary  written  and
reported  of  it,  and  hath  proved  by  his  owne  experience.
This  gumme  is  also  approved  to  bee  an  excellent  remedie  The  Colliman
against  the  gowt ;  and  of  singular  vertue  in  the  cure  helPeth  the
of  wounds.

The Barratta is a most soveraigne Balsamum farre  Barratta  a
excelling all others yet knowne : which by the same  ;
Gentlemans  experience  is  of  admirable  operation in the
cure  of  greene  wounds : and  being  burned  upon  coales,
is  of  a  sweet  and  odoriferous  savour.

There  bee  many  other  sweet  gummes  of  great  use  for  4 perfume
perfumes ;  whereof  one  doth  make  a  very  rare  perfume, if  sweet
much like unto the sent of  sweete Margerum, very
pleasant  and  delectable.

For physick there be also many excellent Drugs ;  D^gge*  and
namely, Spiknard, Cassia  Fistula, Sene  ; and the earth  17 -jr
yeeldeth  Bole-Armoniack,  and  Terra-Lemnia, all which
are  knowne  unto  us. There  be  other  Drugs  and  Simples
also  of  strange  and  rare  vertue,  in  these  parts  unknowne ;
of  which sort there is a little greene Apple, by the  AnaPPJe
Indians ^  called in their language,  The sleeping Apple  ;  Zokethlkepe.
which in operation is so violent, that one little bit  to  death.

383

mum.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1608.

thereof  doth  cause  a  man  to  sleepe  to  death  :  the  least

drop  of  the  juyce of  it,  will purge in vehement and

excessive manner, as dangerously was proved by my

cousin  Unton Fisher,  who  first  found  it : for  biting  a

little  of  it  for  a  taste,  and  finding  it  to  burne  his  mouth

in  some  extremitie,  did  sodainly  spit  it  out  againe,  but

some  small  quantitie  of  the  juyce  (against  his  will)  went

downe  into  his stomack,  which  for  two  or  three  dayes

space  did  provoke  in  him  an  extraordinarie sleepinesse,

and  purged  him  with  sixtie  seates. This  Apple,  for  the

purging  vertue  is  so  small  a  quantitie,  is  like  to  bee  of

good price, and great estimation in the practice of

physick ;  for  the  learned  Physicians  doe  well  know  how

to  correct  the  sleeping  qualitie  thereof  wherein  the  danger

A  berry  resteth. There  is  a  berrie  in  those  parts  very  excellent

c?linf-thn against the bloudie-fluxe, by the Indians it is called

A  leafe  curing  Kellette. The  juyce of  the  leafe called  Uppee,  cureth

the  wounds  of  the wounds of  the poysoned arrowes. The  juyce of

the poysoned the leafe called Icari, is good against the head-ache.

arrowes.  Many other Drugs and Simples are there found of

the  head-ache smgu^ar  properties  both  in  physick  and  chirurgerie,  which

if  they  should  be  severally  described  according  to  their

value  and  worthinesse,  would  containe  a  large  Volume.

A  wood  that Moreover, the Tree  wherewith they take their  fish,

makethfish ;s not a little to be esteemed, but chiefly the great

goodnesse  of  God  therein  is  highly  to bee  praysed  and

admired,  who  amongst  so  many  admirable  things  by  him

created,  and  planted in  those  parts,  hath  vouchsafed  to

bestow  upon  those  barbarous  people  so  great  a  benefit,

and  naturall  helpe,  for  the  present  getting  of  their  food

and sustenance. These trees are commonly growing

neere  unto  the  places  of  their  habitation  for  their  present

use :  for  when,  at  any  time,  they  goe  to  fish,  they  take

three  or  foure  little  sticks  of  this  tree,  and  bruise  them

upon  a  stone,  and  then  go  into certain  smal  creeks  by

the Sea-shoare,  which at a high water  are  usually full

of  very  good  fish  of  divers  kindes,  which  come  in  with

the  tyde ;  and  there  they  wade  up  and  downe  the  water,

384

ROBERT HARCOURT  a.d.

1608.
and  betweene  their  hands  rub  those  small  bruised  sticks
therein,  which  are  of  such  vertue,  that  they  will  cause
the  fish  to  turne  up  their  bellies,  and  lye  still  above  the
water  for  a  certaine  time :  In  which  space  they  presently
take  as  many  as  they  please,  and  lade  them  into  their
Canoes,  and  so  with  little  labour  returne  home  sufficiently
provided.

There  is  also  a  red  speckled  wood  in  that  Countrie,
called  Pira  timinere,  which  is  worth  thirtie  or  fortie
pounds  a  Tun :  It  is  excellent  for  Joyners  worke ;  as
chaires,  stooles,  bed-steds,  presses,  cupboords,  and  for
wainscot.  There  are  divers  kindes  of  stone  of  great  use,
and  good  price,  as  Jasper,  Porphyrie,  and  the  Spleene-
stone.

There  is  yet  another  profitable  commoditie  to  bee
reaped  in  Guiana,  and  that  is  by  Tabacco,  which  albeit  Tobacco.
some  dislike,  yet  the  generalitie  of  men  in  this  King-
dome  doth  with  great  affection  entertaine  it.  It  is
not  only  in  request  in  this  our  Countrey  of  England,
but  also  in  Ireland,  the  Neatherlands,  in  all  the  Easterly  [IV.  vi.
Countreyes, and Germany; and most of  all amongst  I277-J

the  Turkes,  and  in  Barbary.  The  price  it  holdeth  is
great,  the  benefit  our  Merchants  gaine  thereby  is  infinite,
and  the  Kings  rent  for  the  Custome  thereof  is  not  a
little.  The  Tabacco  that  was  brought  into  this  Kingdome
in  the  yeare  of  our  Lord  16 10.  was  at  the  least  worth  60000.  worth
60.  thousand  pounds:  And  since  that  time  the  store  °fTabaccoina
that  yeerely  hath  come  in,  was  little  lesse.  It  is  planted,
gathered,  seasoned,  and  made  up  fit  for  the  Merchant  in
short  time,  and  with  easie  labour.  But  when  we  first
arrived  in  those  parts,  wee  altogether  wanted  the  true
skill  and  knowledge  how  to  order  it,  which  now  of  late
we  happily  have  learned  of  the  Spaniards  themselves,
whereby  1  dare  presume  to  say,  and  hope  to  prove,
within  few  moneths,  (as  others  also  of  sound  judgement,
and  great  experience  doe  hold  opinion)  that  onely  this
commoditie  Tabacco  ;  (so  much  sought  after,  and  desired)
will  bring  as  great  a  benefite  and  profit  to  the  under-
xvi  385  2  B

A.D.

l608.

The  commodi-
ties most
esteemed  by
the  Indians.

Leaden  minds,
minde  nothing
but  golden
Mynes.

Disorders  by
mutiny.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

takers,  as  ever  the  Spaniards  gained  by  the  best  and
richest  Silver  Myne  in  all  their  Indies,  considering  the
charge  of  both.

The  things  which  the  Indians  desire  from  us  by  way  of
trade  in  exchange  for  the  above  named  commodities,
(whereby  wee  hold  societie  and  commerce  with  them)
are  Axes,  Hatchets,  Bill-hookes,  Knives,  all  kinde  of
Edge-tooles,  Nailes,  great  Fish-hookes,  Harping-irons,
Jewes  Trumps,  Looking-glasses,  blue,  and  white  Beads,
Christall  Beades,  Hats,  Pinnes,  Needles,  Salt,  Shirts,
Bands,  linnen  and  woollen  Clothes,  Swords,  Muskets,
Caleevers,  Powder  and  Shot :  but  of  these  last  mentioned,
we  are  very  sparing,  and  part  not  with  many,  unlesse
upon  great  occasion,  by  way  of  gift  to  speciall  persons.

When  the  raines  ceased,  which  was  in  July,  I  beganne
to  travell  abroad  in  search  of  those  golden  Mountaines,
promised  unto  us  before  the  beginning  of  our  Voyage,
(by  one  that  undertooke  to  guide  us  to  them)  which
filled  my  company  so  full  of  vaine  expectation,  and
golden  hopes,  that  their  insatiable  and  covetous  mindes
(being  wholy  set  thereon)  could  not  bee  satisfied  with
any  thing  but  only  Gold.  Our  guide  that  vainly  made
those  great  promises,  beeing  come  unto  the  wished  place
to  make  performance,  was  then  possessed  with  a  shame-
lesse  spirit  of  ignorance,  for  hee  knew  little,  and  could
performe  nothing.  What  other  intelligences  (of  Mynes
alreadie  found)  I  had  from  other  men  in  England,  and
from  the  Master  of  my  ship,  who  had  beene  heretofore  in
those  parts,  I  found  them  by  experience  false,  and  nothing
true  concerning  Mynes,  that  was  in  England  reported
unto  me.

Our  greedie  desire  of  Gold  being  thus  made  frustrate,
divers  unconstant  persons  of  my  unruly  company  began
to  murmure,  to  bee  discontented,  to  kindle  discords  and
dissentions,  and  to  stir  up  mutinie,  even  almost  to  the
confusion  and  ruine  of  us  all :  and  were  upon  the  point
to  shake  off  all  obedience  to  their  commanders ;  to
abandon patience, peace, and unitie, and wilfully to

386

ROBERT HARCOURT  a.d.

1608.

breake  out  into  all  mischiefe  and  wretched  disorder,  onely
because they were deceived  of  their  golden hopes and
expectations : but with good words, and comfortable
perswasions, I  pacified them for the time, and made
them  acquainted  with  my  better  hopes  conceived  of  the
commodities above mentioned. I perswaded them in  Good  to  bee
generall  from  idlenesse,  to  travell  abroad,  to  search  and  do™gsome-
seeke  out  amongst  the  Indians,  what  other  novelties  they  Vent  the  devil.
could  (though  Gold  were wanting)  whereby we might
hereafter  benefit  our  selves ;  and  still  I  employed  them
some  one  way,  and  some  another,  to  occupie  their  minds
by  doing something, the better to prevent dissention,
which commonly is bred of idlenesse, the slouthfull
Mother  of  all  filthy  vices.

As I  daily  conversed  amongst  the  Indians,  it  chanced
one day, that  one of  them presented me with  a  halfe
Moone  of  Metall,  which  held somewhat more then a
third part Gold, the rest Copper : another also gave
me a  little  Image  of  the  same Metall ;  and  of  another
I  bought  a  plate  of  the  same  (which  he  called  a  spread
Eagle)  for  an  Axe. All  which  things  they  assured  mee
were  made  in  the  high  Countrey  of  Guiana,  which  they  The  high
said  did  abound with  Images  of  Gold,  by  them called  Gountrey  °f
Carrecoory. These things I shewed to my company  ^^^
to settle their  troubled minds,  which gave much con-  with  images  of
tentment  to  the  greater  part of  them, and satisfied us  Gold.
all  that  there  was  Gold  in  Guiana. Shortly after that
my Indian Anthony  Canabre, brought me a piece of
a Rocke, of  white Sparre, whereof  the high Countrey  The  Rocks  of
is  full :  And  if  the  white  Sparres of  this kinde,  which  the  purest
are  the  purest  white  of  all  others,  (for  every  sort  of  Myne  ^r/  Mvt^/T/'
hath  a  Sparre,  and  for  the  most  part  white)  be  in  a  maine  g0u  or  siher.
Rocke,  they  are  certainly  Mynes  of  Gold,  or  Silver,  or  of
both. I  made  triall  of  a  piece  of  Sparre,  which  the  same
Indian discovered unto mee, and I found that  it held
both  Gold, and  Silver,  which  (although  it  was  in  small
quantitie) gave me satisfaction that there be richer
Mynes  in  the  Countrey  to be  found  : but  the  best  lie

387

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1608.

deeper in the earth,  and wee  had  not  time  nor power

to  make  search  for  them.
Many  over-  \  travelled  up  the  River  of  Wiapoco,  to  view  the  over-

'?* m  fals,  but  the  waters being  high  and  strong,  I  could  not

WiatOCO.  '  .  t a  11  r ii  • 1

passe  them. In  August  when  they  are  fallen,  with  some

labour they may bee passed. This River hath very

many over-falls, lying one a good distance beyond

another,  even  to the  head  thereof. Above  some  of  the

first  falls  there  dwelleth  an  Indian,  called  Comarian,  who

is  an  old  man  of  a  free  disposition ;  by  him  I  learned  that

a  certaine  distance  above  the  first  falls,  the  River  Arwy

falleth into Wiapoco : moreover that certaine dayes

journey  beyond  him  towards the  high  Land,  upon  the

borders  of  Wiapoco,  there  is  a  Nation  of  Charibes  having

eope aving  great eares 0f  an extraordinarie bignesse,  hard to bee

perhaps  these beleeved,  whom  hee  called  Marashewaccas:  amongst  these

[IV.  vi.  people  (as  Comarian  reporteth)  there  is  an  Idoll  of  stone,

1278.]  which they  worship as  their God;  they have  placed it

eares  are  made  jn a house mac[e  0f  purpose  for  the  greater  honour  of

large  i?v  art  ^

as  divers  East  k»  which  they keepe  very  cleane  and  handsome. This

Indians  use.  Idoll  is  fashioned  like  a  man  sitting  upon  his  heeles,
holding  open  his  knees,  and  resting  his  elbowes  upon
them,  holding  up  his  hands  with  the  palmes  forwards,
looking  upwards,  and  gaping  with  his  mouth  wide  open.
The  propor-  The  meaning  of  this  proportion  hee  could  not  declare,
tt0J  °fthetr  although  he  had  beene  many  times  amongst  them,  and
hath  often  seene  it.  WThat  other  Nations  were  beyond
these  he  did  not  know,  having  never  travelled  so  farre,
but  he  saith,  they  be  Charibes,  and  also  enemies  unto
them.  It  seemeth  there  bee  many  Nations  of  those  great
eared  people  :  for  in  the  River  of  Marrawini,  I  heard
also  the  like,  who  dwell  farre  up  towards  the  high  Land,
as  hereafter  you  shall  heare,  and  I  suppose,  by  the  trend-
ing of  the  Rivers  of  Wiapoco,  and  Marrawini,  are  all
one  people.

Upon  the  fourteenth  day  of  August  I  went  unto  a
Mountaine,  called  Gomeribo,  beeing  the  uttermost  point
of  Land  to  the  North-ward  in  the  Bay  of  Wiapoco ; I

388

ROBERT HARCOURT  ad.

1608.
found  the  soile  of  it  most  excellent  for  Tabacco, Maix,
Cotton-trees, Annoto-trees, Vines, and for any other
thing  that  should  bee  planted  there. When  I  had  taken
good  view  of  the place, and  found it commodious  for
many  purposes ;  then  in  the  presence  of  Captaine  Fisher,
divers Gentlemen, and others  of  my  company,  and  of
the Indians also, I tooke possession of  the Land, by  Possession
Turfe  and  Twigge,  in  the  behalfe  of  our  Sovereigne  Lord  ^^  the
King  James : I tooke  the  said possession of  a  part,  in  Qomeribo.
name of  the whole  Continent  of  Guiana,  lying  betwixt
the Rivers of  Amazones, and Orenoque, not beeing
actually  possessed,  and  inhabited  by  any  other  Christian
Prince  or  State ; wherewith  the  Indians seemed to be
well  content  and  pleased.

In  like  manner  my  Brother  Captaine  Michael  Hare-
court,  and  Captaine  Harvey,  (whom  I  left  as  his  associate,
and  he  esteemed  as  an  inward  friend)  in  a  notable  journey,
which  (to  their  great  honour)  they  performed,  to  discover
the  River  of  Arrawary,  and  the  Countrey  bordering  upon  The  like  pos-
it, (neere  adjoyning  to  the  River  of  Amazones)  did  take  sesm*  taken
the  like  possession  of  the  Land  there,  to  his  Majesties
use.

The  dangers  and  great  difficulties  which  they  in  that
attempt  incountred,  were  memorable,  and  such,  as  hardly
any  of  our  Nation  in  such  small  canoes  (being  onely
some-what  longer,  but  not  so  broad  as  our  Thames
Wherries,  and  flat-bottomed)  ever  overcame  the  like.
First  the  number  of  their  owne  attendants  besides  them-
selves, was  onely  one  man,  and  a  Boy  :  Their  troope  of
Indians  sixtie  persons.  Their  journey  by  Sea  unto  the
River  of  Arrawary  was  neere  one  hundred  leagues :
wherein  (by  the  way)  they  met  with  many  dreadfull
plunges,  by  reason  of  a  high  going  Sea,  which  breaketh
upon  the  flats  and  shoalds ;  especially,  at  the  next  great
Cape  to  the  North  of  Arraway,  which  in  respect  of  the
danger  they  passed  there,  they  named  Point  Perillous.  Point  Perilous.
Then  their  Discovery  up  the  River,  was  fiftie  leagues
more : where they  found  a Nation of  Indians, which

389

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1608.

never  had  seene  white  men,  or  Christians  before,  and
could  not  be  drawne  to  any  familiar  commerce,  or  con-
versation, no  not  so  much  as  with  our  Indians,  because
they  were  strangers  to  them,  and  of  another  Nation.
The  Discovery  of  this  River  is  of  great  importance,  and
speciall  note,  affoording  an  entrance  more  behovefull  for
the  searching  and  Discovery  of  the  Inland  parts  of
Guiana,  then  any  other  River  yet  knowne  upon  the
Coast  ;  for  trending  Westward  up  into  the  Land,  it
discovereth  all  the  Countreyes  and  Nations  to  the  South-
ward of  Arricary,  Cooshebery,  Morrownia,  and  Norrack,
which  I  have  mentioned  before.

Many  weekes  they  spent  in  this  Adventure,  still  taking
up  their  Lodgings  in  the  Woods  at  night.  Provision  of
A  great  meate  they  wanted  not,  for  fish  were  ever  plenty,  and
argument  of  at  nanci .  anc[  tne  Woods  yeelded  either  Deere,  Tigres,
Countrey.  or  Fowle :  their  greatest  want  was  of  bread  and  drinke,
which  onely  defect  did  hinder  (at  that  time)  the  accom-
plishment of  that  Discovery.  For  when  the  Indians
perceived  their  bread  to  be  neere  spent,  and  their  drinke
to  be  corrupted,  they  could  not  be  perswaded  to  proceed,
having  no  meanes  to  supply  their  wants  amongst  the
Arrawaries,  the  Indians  of  that  River  who  would  not
freely  trade  with  them  upon  this  first  acquaintance,  but
alwayes  stood  upon  their  guard,  on  the  other  side  of
the  River,  where  they  inhabited :  yet  desiring  to  obtaine
some  of  our  English  commodities,  and  make  triall  of
our  Indians  friendship,  afFoorded  some  small  Trade  for
their  present  reliefe  during  their  abode  in  that  River :
So  that  of  force  they  were  constrained  to  breake  off  their
Discoverie,  and  hasten  homeward.

But  here  their  dangers  ended  not,  for  as  they  returned,
arriving  at  certaine  Hands  called  Carripoory,  and  passing
betweene  them  and  the  mayne  Land ;  much  against  the
wils  of  all  the  Indians,  who  knowing  the  danger  of  the
place,  and  more  respecting  their  safetie,  then  their  owne
(being  themselves  all  expert  Swimmers)  would  have
disswaded them from that hazard : but they being

390

ROBERT HARCOURT  a.d.

1608.
ignorant of the perill, would needs passe on,  and  at
the  last  met with such a Boore  (as  the  Seamen  terme  A  dangerous
it)  and  violent  encounter  of  two  tydes  comming  in,  which  B°ore  at
like  two  furious  inraged  Rammes, or  Bulles  rushed  to-
gether, and oft retired backe, to  returne againe, with
greater violence, until the one by force had over-
borne the  other : that  if  (next  under  God)  the  diligent
care  and  paines  of  the  Indians  had  not  preserved  them,
they  had been there destroyed, and swallowed up  by
that  mercilesse  Boore  or  breach  of  waters ; which  (God
be  thanked)  they  escaped,  and  returned  home  in  safetie.

When  I  had  (as  before)  taken  possession  at  Gomeribo,  [IV.  vi.
in  presence  of  the  said  parties,  I  delivered  the  possession  I279-]

of  that  Mountaine  to  my  Indian  Anthony  Canabre,  To  denvere({t0
have, hold, possesse,  and  enjoy  the same, to  him, and  Indian  as  the
to his Heires  for  ever, of  our  Sovereigne Lord King  Kings  tenant.
James,  his  Heires  and  Successors,  as  his  subject ;  Yeeld-
ing  and  paying yeerely the  tenth part  of  all  Tabacco,
Cotton-wooll,  Annoto,  and  other  commodities  whatsoever,
which should hereafter be either planted or growing
within the  said Mountaine,  if  it  were  demanded. The
Indian most gladly  received the  possession upon these
conditions,  and  for  himselfe,  and  his  posteritie,  did  promise
to  bee  true  Subjects  unto  the  Kings  Majestie : his  Heires,
and Successours :  And  to  pay  the  duties  imposed  upon
them :  and  so  that  businesse being  finished,  I  returned
againe  to  Wiapoco.

Now (most worthy Prince) there came unto my
knowledge,  an inconvenience happened  by  the  carelesse
negligence  of  the  Master  of  my  ship,  who  had  the  charge
of  providing and  laying  in the provisions  and  victuals
for the Voyage, which  was  the  cause  that  I  gained  no  The  only  cause
present profit  by  it, but left  off  all  my  Discoveries  in  oflosse  by  the
the first beginning. I had a purpose at  that time to  v°ya&%
performe  a  businesse,  which  might  have  proved  profitable,
and  honourable  unto us, if  I had beene  able  to  have
stayed the time, but  it was  not  my chance  to bee  so
fortunate  :  for  the Master,  his  Mates,  and  the  Steward

39i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

1608.

of  my  Ship, came  unto  me,  and  told  mee  plainly,  that

if  I made  any  longer  abode  in  that  Countrey,  I  would

never  in  those  ships  returne  into  England :  or  if  I  did

adventure  it,  my  selfe,  and  all  my  Company  would  starve

at  Sea  for  want  of  Beere,  Syder,  and  Water,  for  all  my

Caske  was  spoyled,  because  it  was  not  Iron-bound;  the

woodden  hoopes  flew off, by  reason  of  the  heate  of  the

Climate ;  and our Beere,  and Syder, (whereof  wee  had

good  store)  did  leake  about  the  ship,  that  we  could  hardly

save  sufficient  to  releeve  us, if  wee  made  a  longer  stay

upon  the  Coast ; which  was  the  Masters fault, having

had  a  speciall  charge  to  be  carefull  of  that  onely  point.

By  this default,  I  was  constrained  to  make  a  vertue  of

necessitie,  and  prepare  my  selfe  for  England,  and  leave

my  former  purposes  to  be  accomplished  hereafter,  which

shall  be  done  (God  aiding  me)  in  time  convenient.

Then disposing of my company, I appointed my

Cap.  Michael  Brother  Captaine Michael  Harecourt  to  remayne  in  the

Harcourt  left Countrey, as chiefe  Commander  in  my  absence,  and  to

Commander  of  .  ■ '  *  ,  .  , «.  1 1 ir t

the  company, continue  the  possession on the Kings behalre ; I  gave

him directions  to  travell  abroad,  as  (occasion  served)  to

discover  the  Countrey,  to  spend  sometime  at  Cooshebery,

and sometime  also in  other places; but to make his

chiefest  residence  at  Wiapoco,  (the  only  Rendevouz  for

shippes  that  trade  upon  that  Coast)  and there  to  plant

good  store  of  Maix,  for  our  releife  of  bread  and  drinke,

which  is  the  chiefest  thing  to  be  respected  in  those  parts ;

for  other  victuals  wee need  not take  much  care  being

alwayes  easily  provided. He  performed  his  charge  with

great  reputation,  discovered  many  goodly  Provinces,  and

Possession spacious  Countreyes ;  and  worthily  continued  the  posses-

continued  3. s*on  ftjj  three  yeeres  compleate. I  left  with  him  for  his

assistance, Captaine Harvey,  who  hath  nobly  vowed  his

time  and  fortune to  be  employed  in  the  prosecution  of

this  honourable  action. For  his  Lieutenant  I  appointed

leltwUhcl^ Master  Edward  Gifford,  a  valiant  and  worthy  Gentleman  ;

taine Harcourt  and  I  left  also  with  him  of  Gentlemen  and  others,  about

at  Wiapoco. twentie  more,  with  all  such  necessaries  as  I  could  spare,

392

ROBERT HARCOURT  ad

1608.
and  thought  convenient  for  them : and  so  commending
them  to  God,  the  eighteenth  day  of  August  I  departed
from  Wiapoco,  and  the  day  following  arrived  at  Caiane.

At my  comming to Caiane my Pinnasse  received  a  The  Pinnasse
leake,  which would have  proved  dangerous,  if  we had  rece*ved  a
beene farre at Sea ; whereby enforced to attend the  Caiane.
stopping thereof, and new trimming  of  the Pinnasse ;
and unwilling to be idle in the meane space doing
nothing, I  left  my  ships there  to repaire  their  defects,
and  in  my  ship-boate  departed  thence,  the  twentie  three
of  August : taking  with  me  Captaine  Fisher,  who hath
ever  beene  (since  we  first  crept  into  the  world)  my  chiefs
companion,  both  in  Armes  and  travels ;  I  tooke  also  with
mee  his  Brother  Unton  Fisher,  Master  Cradle  the  Masters
mate  of  my  ship,  and  about  sixe  more. I  followed  the
Coast  to  the  Westward  steering  during  West,  and  passing
by  the  River of  Meccooria, I  lodged  that  night  in  the  R.Meccooria.
mouth  of  the  River  Courwo :  which  hath  a  narrow  deepe  R-  Courwo.
entrance,  and  within  affoordeth  a  good  Harbour,  which
may  in time  to  come  (for  some  speciall  purpose)  be  of
great  use.

The  next day,  and the night following  I proceeded
Westward with full saile, and passing the Rivers of  Rivers  to  the
Manmanury, Sinammara, Oorassowini, Coonannonia, West  °f
Uracco,  and  Amanna ;  I  arrived  the  twentie  five  day  at ourwo-
the  River  of  Marrawini,  which  openeth  a  faire  River,  but
is  shoale  upon  the  Barre,  which  lieth  two  or  three  leagues
off  at  Sea,  having  but two  fathome water:  within  the
Barre,  the  Channell  is  three,  foure,  five,  and  sixe  fathome
deepe. Five  leagues  within  the river  we  passed  by  cer-
taine  Hands  called Curewapory,  not  inhabited,  for  at  the  llands  caiied
rising of  the waters they are alwayes over-flowne,  of  CurowaPory-
which  sort  the  River hath very  many :  we  lodged  that
night  a  little  beyond  these  first  Hands  at  a  Village  called
Moyemon,  on  the  left  hand,  the  Captaine  thereof  is  called
Maperitaka,  of  the  Nation  of  the  Paragotos,  a  man  very
loving  and  faithfull  to  our  Nation,  whereof  we  have  had
good  proofe. The  next  day  wee  proceeded  up  the  River

393

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1608.

three  leagues,  and  stayed  at  a  Towne  called  Coewynay
on  the  right  hand,  at  the  house  of  Minapa,  (the  chiefe
Charib  of  that  Signiorie)  to  provide  two  Canoes  to
prosecute  our  journey  for  the  Discoverie  of  this  River.
[IV.  vi.  The  twentie  eight  day  we  went  forward  passing  many

Th lZ d tillages and Townes, which I forbeare  to name, and
in  discovery  of  having  gone  about  twentie leagues from the  Sea, wee
Marrawini. found  the  River  in  a  manner  barred  up  with  Rockes,  over
which  the  water  falleth  with  great  violence,  yet  notwith-
standing we  adventured  to  proceed,  and  the  further  wee
The  River  full  went,  the  more dangerous  wee  found  the  over-fals,  and
ofoverfals. m0re in number ; but when  wee had passed the  first
Mountaine,  towards  the  high  Countrey  of  Guiana,  called
Sapparow,  and discovered  farre  off  before  us  other  high
Mountains  called Matawere Moupanana,  and had pro-
Tkey  went ceeded  sixe  dayes  journey  up  the  River  (which  was  more

sixe aies xhQn fortie leagues) we met with such shoale rockie
journey  up  the  , & '  -  , .  .  . r

River.  streame,  and  great over-rals, that  there  to  our  griere  our

journey  ended.

Being  thus  for  that  time  debarred  from  our  intended

Discoverie, we prepared our selves with patience to

returne  towards  our  ships,  and  the  third  day  of  September

we turned downe  the  River,  shooting  the  over-fals  with

more  celeritie  then  when  we  came  up,  dispatching  three

dayes  journey  in one,  and  the fifth  day  returned  safe  to

Moyemon. Moyemon  ;  but  before  I  departed  thence,  Captaine  Fisher

told me  of  certaine  Plants which hee had  then  found,

much  like  unto  Rose-trees,  growing  about  halfe  a  yard

in  height,  whereof  (for  the  strangenesse  of  them)  I  cannot

forbeare  to  adde  a  word  or  two.

Trees  which These  Plants  or  little  trees  had  assuredly  the  sence  of

had  the  sense fee\[ng^  as  plainly  appeared  by  touching  them  :  for  if  you

These  grow did  ^ut  touch  a  lea^e  °f  the  tree  with  your  finger,  that

both  in  the leafe  would  presently  shrinke,  and  close  up  it  selfe,  and

East Indies &  hang  downe as  if  it  were  dead;  and  if  you  did  cut  off

m  Gumne.  See  a  }eafe  w« tk  a -re  Qf  QZzers,  then  all  the  other  leaves

Jo.Gom.to.  1.  .  r,  u  .  .m 1 . «  1

I  Q  growing  upon  the  same tree  would  instantly  shrinke  and

close  up  themselves,  and  hang  downe  as  if  they  were  dead

394

ROBERT HARCOURT  a.d.

1608.

and  withered,  and  within  halfe  a  quarter of an houre,
would  by  degrees  open  themselves  againe,  and  flourish  as
before ;  and  as often  as  you  did  either  touch  or  cut  off
any of  them,  they  would  doe the  like;  which  did  evi-
dently shew  a  restriction  of  the  Spirits,  invincibly  arguing
a  Sense. Howsoever this may  seeme strange and in-
credible to  your  Highnesse,  and  to them  that  hath  not
seene it, yet forasmuch as Scaliger, and Bartas make  ScaMgfr
mention  of  the  like,  I  dare  be  bold  to  affirme  it  upon  my  Exercit-  lSl-
credit, having seene and shewed it  to fortie others : I  Cartas  Eden
gathered  two  of  the Plants,  and  did  set  them  in  pots  in 1.  day,  2.
their  owne  earth,  and  carried  them  aboord  my  ship,  where  weeke.
I  kept them fairely  growing almost a fortnight,  untill
they were destroyed  by certaine Monkeyes that brake
loose,  and  pulled  them  in  pieces : which  might  have  beene
prevented,  but  that  I was  constrained  to  set  them  in  the
open  aire,  the  better  to  preserve  them.

The seventh day, I went  to  Wiawia,  a  great  Towne  Viawia,  a

of  Paragotos,  and  Yaios,  foure leagues  to  the  West of  1:owne  °f zo'

s? .  r  .  °  .  houses

Marrawini, whereof  Maperitaka  above mentioned, and

Arapawaka,  are  chiefe  Captaines. At  this  Towne  I  left

my Cousin Unton Fisher, and Humfrey Croxton an  M-  ^ntm

Apothecary, to  beare him  company,  and  one  servant  to A' r?#  Wf°

attend him  called Christopher  Fisher,  having  first  taken  wiawia.

order  with  Maperitaka  for  their  diet,  and  other  necessaries

both  for  travell,  and  otherwise :  who  ever  since  (according

to his promise) hath performed the part  of  an  honest

man,  and  faithfull  friend.

I  gave  directions  to  my  Cousin  Fisher  to  prosecute
the  Discoverie  of  Marrawini,  and  the  inland  parts  border-
ing upon  it,  when  the  time  of  the  yeere,  and  the  waters
better  served ;  and  if  it  were  possible  to  goe  up  into  the
high  Countrey  of  Guiana,  and  to  finde  out  the  Citie  of
Manoa,  mentioned  by  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  in  his  Dis-
coverie. He  followed  my  directions  to  the  uttermost
of  his  abilitie,  being  of  a  good  wit,  and  very  industrious,
and  enabled  to  undergoe  those  imployments,  by  obtaining
the love, and gaining the Languages of  the people,

395

A.D.
1608.

M.  Fisher
travelled
eleven  dales
journey  up  the
River  of
Morra,  viz.
100.  leagues.

The  Province

ofMore-

shegoro.

Indians  with
rough  skinnes
like  Buffe.

Divers  mighty
Nations  of
Indians  far  up
in  Marra-
wini, towards
the  high  Land.

Rivers  falling
into  Marra-
wini  Twentie
[IV.  vi.

1281.]
dales  journey
from  Taupur-
amune  to  the
head  of
Mar  raw.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

without  which  helpes,  there  is  little  or  no  good  to  be
done  in  those  parts.

When  the  waters  of  Marrawini  were  risen,  and  the
River  passable,  (much  differing  from  the  River  of  Wia-
poco,  which  is  not  to  be  travelled,  but  in  the  lowest
waters.)  Hee  began  his  journey  for  the  Discoverie
thereof,  in  company  of  the  Apothecarie,  his  servant
Fisher,  the  Indian  Maperitaka,  and  eighteene  others,  and
proceeded  eleven  dayes  journey  up  the  River,  to  a  Towne
of  Charibes,  called  Taupuramune,  distant  from  the  Sea
above  an  hundred  leagues ;  but  was  foure  dayes  journey
short  of  Moreshego,  which  is  also  a  Towne  of  Charibes,
situate  upon  the  River  side  in  the  Province  of  Moreshe-
goro  :  the  chiefe  Captaine  thereof  is  called  Areminta :
who  is  a  proud  and  bold  Indian,  much  feared  of  all
those  that  dwell  within  his  Territories,  having  a  rough
skin  like  unto  Buffe  Leather,  of  which  kind  there  be
many  in  those  parts;  and  I  suppose  proceedeth  of  some
infirmitie  of  the  bodie.

He  understood  by  relation  of  the  Indians  of  Taupur-
amune, and  also  of  Areminta,  that  six  dayes  journey
beyond  Moreshego,  there  are  divers  mightie  Nations  of
Indians,  having  holes  through  their  Eares,  Cheekes,
Nostrils,  and  neather  Lips,  which  were  called  Craweanna,
Pawmeeanna,  Quikeanna,  Peewattere,  Arameeso,  Acawre-
anno,  Acooreo,  Tareepeeanna,  Corecorickado,  Peeauncado,
Cocoanno,  Itsura,  and  Waremisso :  and  were  of  strength
and  stature  farre  exceeding  other  Indians,  having  Bowes,
and  Arrowes  foure  times  as  bigge :  what  the  Indians  also
report  of  the  greatnesse  of  their  eares,  I  forbeare  to
mention,  untill  by  experience  wee  shall  discover  the  truth
thereof.  Moreover,  hee  learned  that  there  fall  into
Marrawini  divers  great  Rivers,  called  Arrenne,  Topanna-
win,  Errewin,  Cowomma,  Poorakette,  Arrova,  Arreto-
wenne,  Waoune,  Anape,  Aunime,  and  Carapio :  whereof
some  he  hath  seene  himselfe,  That  it  was  twentie  dayes
journey,  from  Taupuramune,  to  the  head  of  Marrawini,
which  is  inhabited  by  Arwaccas,  Sappaios,  Paragotos,  and

396

ROBERT HARCOURT  a.d.

1608.

some  Yaios :  and  that  a  dayes  journey  from  thence  to  the
Land-ward  the  Countrey  is  plaine,  and  Champian  ground, The  Countrie
with long grasse. Hee passed in this  journey  above  */%££/ is*"
eightie overfals of water, and many of them very  pia-lne^  'and
dangerous:  of  some  of  them  I  had  experience  the  yeere  Champian
before. He  proceeded  no  further  at  that  present,  being  ground.
unprovided  for  so  long  a  journey,  supposing  that  it  had
beene  neerer  (then  he  found  it)  to  the  head  of  the  River
by  a  fortnights  travell : and so returned  backe  in  sixe
dayes space, intending better preparation for  a second
journey : but  his  purpose  was  prevented  by  an  untimely
death  : for  shortly  after  hee  was  drowned  by  misfortune ;
whereby  we  see,  that man determineth,  but God dis-
poseth.

THe  tenth  day  of  September  being  Sunday,  I  left  the  The  tenth  of
maine  of  Guiana,  and  in  my  ship-boat  stood  of?  into  Septemberthey
the  Sea  to  seeke  my  ships,  which  were  forced  to  ride  foure *  Guiana.
leagues  from  shore,  by  reason  of  the  shoales ;  but  as  we
passed  over  them,  we  were  in  danger  to  bee  cast  away  by  They  were  in
the  breach  of  a  Sea,  which  verily  had  sunke  our  Boat,  ^anier  t0  bee
if  with  great  celeritie  wee  had  not  lightned  her,  by  heaving  cas  awa^'
over-boord many baskets of  bread, of Cassavi, Maix,
Pinas,  Platanas,  Potatoes,  and  such  like  provision,  where-
with our  Boat  was  loden ;  by  which  means  it  pleased  God
to  deliver  us  from  present  destruction,  and  to  bring  us
safe  unto  our  ships.

When  I  came  aboord,  we  weighed  anchor,  and  steered
away from the Hand of Trinidado, and upon the
eighteenth  day  in  the  morning,  we  arrived  at  Punta  de
Galea,  where  wee  found  three  English  ships  at  anchor, They  finde  3.
which  was no small comfort unto us, considering our  En$sk  shiPs
great defects and wants. One of these shippes was  Ga>a
called the Diana, belonging to Master Lul a Dutch
Merchant dwelling in London. The other two, the
Penelope,  and  the  Indevour,  belonging  to Master  Hall,
a Merchant  also  of  London. We  stayed  at  this place
sixe daies to mend our bad Caske,  and to take fresh

397

A.D.

1608.

Pitch  gotten  in
the  earth
which  melteth
not  with  the
Sunne.

They  arrive  at
Port  de
Hispania.
Don  Sanches
de  Mendosa
commeth
aboord  their
ship.

The  Spaniards
much  molested
by  the
Charibes.

They  depart
from  Trini-
dado.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

water:  during  which  time  I  was  kindly  intreated,  and
feasted  by  the  Merchants,  and  had  supply  of  all  such
things  as  I  stood  in  neede  of;  which  courtesie  I  requited
in  the  best  manner  I  could  for  the  present.

Upon  Sunday  the  twentie  foure  of  September  we
weighed  anchor,  so  likewise  did  the  Diana  (the  other
two  shippes  beeing  gone  two  or  three  daies  before  us,)
but  the  winde  shifting  to  the  North-east,  inforced  us
backe  againe  almost  to  the  same  place  from  whence  wee
departed.  The  twentie  five  we  weighed  againe,  and  plied
along  the  shoare  towards  Cape  Brea,  about  three  leagues.
This  Cape  is  so  called  of  the  Pitch  which  is  there  gotten
in  the  earth,  whereof  there  is  such  abundance,  that  all
places  on  this  side  of  the  World  may  bee  stored  therewith.
It  is  a  most  excellent  Pitch  for  trimming  of  shippes  that
passe  into  these  Regions  and  hot  Countries,  for  it  melteth
not  with  the  Sunne,  as  other  Pitch  doth.

The  twentie  sixe  day  we  stood  along  againe,  the  winde
being  still  contrarie  and  variable,  intermixt  with  many
calmes,  and  so  continued  untill  the  second  of  October,
when  we  arrived  at  Port  de  Hispania.  Within  two  daies
after  our  arrivall  there,  Don  Sanches  de  Mendosa,  the
Teniente  for  that  yeere,  with  certaine  other  Spaniards
came  aboord  us:  wee  gave  them  the  best  entertainment
that  our  meanes,  the  time,  and  place  would  affoord,  and
had  much  friendly  conference  together.  They  told  me,
that  they  lately  had  a  conflict  with  the  Charibes,  wherein
they  had  lost  seven  or  eight  of  their  men,  and  had  many
others  hurt  and  wounded,  whereof  some  came  to  my
Chirurgion  to  have  their  wounds  dressed  during  our
abode  there.  And  they  plainly  confessed  that  they  are
very  much  molested  by  the  Charibes ;  and  knew  not
how  by  any  meanes  to  suppresse  them.

We  staied  at  Porte  de  Hispania  untill  the  seventh  day,
in  hope  to  get  some  good  Tobacco  amongst  the  Spaniards,
who  daily  fed  us  with  delaies  and  faire  words,  but  in  truth
they  had  none  good  at  that  present  for  us,  which  we
perceiving,  departed  thence  upon  the  seventh  day,  about

398

ROBERT HARCOURT  a.d.

1608.

one  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  leaving  the  other  ships

to  attend their  trade,  and  stood  away  for  the  passages,

called  Les  sciot  boccas  de  Drago,  and  disembogued  about

eight of the clocke the same morning. Then wee

steered  away  for  an  Hand  called  Meves,  and  leaving  the

Hands  of  Granado,  Saint  Vincent,  Gaudalupa,  and  Mon-

serate,  in  our  starboord  side,  wee  arrived  there  the  twelfth  They  arrive

day,  where  we  stopped  to  take  in  ballast,  and  more  water,  at eves'

for  our  ships  were  very  light.

In this  Hand  there  is  an  hot  Bath,  which  as  well  for  An  excellent
the reports that I have heard,  as also for that  I  have  hot  s^ at
seene  and found  by  experience, I  doe  hold  for  one  of eves'
the best and most  sovereigne in the World. I have
heard  that  divers  of  our  Nation  have  there  beene  cured
of  the  Leprosie,  and  that  one  of  the  same  persons  now,
or  lately  dwelt  at  Woolwich  neere  the  River  of  Thames,
by  whom  the  truth  may  be  knowne,  if  any  man  desire
to bee further satisfied therein. As for my owne
experience, although it  was not much, yet the effects
that  I  found it  worke  both  in  my  selfe,  and  others  of
my company in two daies space, doe cause mee to
conceive the  best  of  it. For at my comming thither,
I was  grievously  vexed  with  an  extreame  cough,  which  An  extreame
I much  feared  would  turne  me to  great  harme,  but  by  C0Hhcuredh
bathing  in  the  Bath,  and drinking  of  the  water,  I  was
speedily  cured : and  ever  since  that  time,  I  have  found  [IV-  vi-
the  state  of  my  body  (I  give  God  thankes  for  it) farre  1282.]

exceeding  what it was before, in strength and health.
Moreover,  one  of  my  company,  named  John  Huntbatch
(servant  to  my  brother)  as  he  was  making  a  fire,  burned  A  mam  hfnd
his  hand  with  Gunpowder,  and  was  in doubt  thereby  to  h*?*ed™th
loose  the  use  of  one  or  two  of  his  fingers,  which  were  an/L  tn-e '
shrunke  up  with  the  fire,  but  he  went  presently  to  the  Bath  cured  in
Bath,  and  washed  and bathed his hand a good space  24~  houres.
therein,  which  soopled his  fingers  in such manner,  that
with  great  ease  he  could  stir  and  stretch  them  out,  and
the  fire  was  so  washed  out  of  his  hand  that  within  the
space  of  twenty  foure  houres,  by  twice  or  thrice  washing

399

A.D.

l608.

Swellings  in
the  legges
cured  in  a  day.

They  depart
from  Meves.

They  fell  with
Fay  a/.

They  are
driven  by  a
storme  into
Ireland.

The  number
of  those  that
died.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  bathing  it,  the  sorenesse  thereof  was  cured,  onely
the  eye-sore  for  the  time  remained.  Furthermore,  two
or  three  other  of  my  company  having  swellings  in  their
legs,  were  by  the  Bath  cured  in  a  day.

Hence  we  departed  the  sixteenth  day  of  October,  in
the  afternoone,  and  leaving  the  Hands  of  Saint  Christopher,
Saint  Martin,  and  Anguilla  on  the  Starboord  side,  we
dissembogued  through  the  broken  Hands  on  the  North
side  of  Anguilla  upon  S.  Lukes  day,  where  I  thinke
never  Englishman  dissembogued  before  us :  for  we
found  all  our  Sea-charts  false  concerning  that  place,  those
broken  Hands  being  placed  therein,  to  the  Southward  of
Anguilla,  betweene  it  and  Saint  Martins,  and  we  found
them  scituate  to  the  Northward  thereof.

On  the  eleventh  day  of  November  wee  had  sight  of
Fayal,  one  of  the  Hands  of  the  Terceras,  which  we  left
on  our  starboord  side,  and  fleeted  away  for  England,
the  winde  continuing  faire  untill  the  twenty  foure  day.
But  then  it  changed,  first  to  the  East  by  North,  and
then  to  the  East  South-east,  and  became  so  violent
and  furious,  that  for  three  dayes  space  we  were  not
able  to  beare  our  saile,  but  did  drive  before  the  winde
at  the  least  three  leagues,  a  watch  out  of  our  course ;
and  the  first  land  we  made  was  Cape  Cleere,  in
the  South-west  part  of  Ireland,  where  against  our
wils  we  arrived  at  Crooke  Haven  the  twenty  nine  of
November.

During  the  time  of  my  Voyage,  we  lost  but  one
Land-man,  who  died  in  Guiana ;  and  one  Sailer,  and
an  Indian  Boy,  who  died  at  Sea  in  our  returne :  and
during  the  space  of  these  three  yeares  last  past  since
the  voyage,  of  all  the  men  which  I  left  in  the  Countrey,
being  in  number  about  thirty,  there  died  but  six,
whereof  one  was  drowned,  another  was  an  old  man  of
threescore  years  of  age,  and  another  tooke  his  death  by
his  owne  disorder ;  the  rest  died  of  sicknesse,  as  pleased
God  the  giver  of  life  :  for  such  small  losse,  his  holy
name  be  blessed  now  and  ever.

400

-Yaios  and  Charibes.

ROBERT HARCOURT

The  names  of  the  Rivers  falling  into  the  Sea
from  Amazones,  to  Dessequebe,  and  of  the
severall  Nations  inhabiting  those  Rivers.

Rivers.  Nations.

i Amazones.

2  Arrapoco,  a  branch  of  Ama-lp, .,

zones.

3  Arrawary.

4  Maicary.

5  Connawini.

6  Cassipurogh.  }  A
A  vArracoones.

7  Arracow.  J

8  Wiapoco.  1

9  Wianary,  a  creeke  or  inlet  VYaios  and  Arwaccas.

of  the  sea.  J

io  Cowo,  not  inhabited.

1 1  Apurwacca.

12  Wio.

13  Caiane.

14  Meccooria.

1 5  Courwo.

16  Manmanury.

17  Sinammara.

18  Oorassowini,  not  inhabited.

iq Coonannoma.  )  A

7  TT  f Arwaccas.

20 Uracco.  J

A.D.

l608.

Charibs.

2 1  Marrawini.

22  Amanna.

23  Camoure, or Comawin, a

branch  of  Selinama.

24  Selinama,  or  Surennamo.

25  Surammo.

26  Coopannomy.

27  Eneccare.

28  Coretine.

29  Berebisse.

xvi  401

Paragotos, Yaios,
Charibs,  Arwas.

Charibs.

Arwaccas  and  Charibs.

2  c

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1608.

Rivers.  Nations.

30  Manhica.

71 Wapary.  I  A

J A/r- •  hArwaccas.

32  Micowine.

33  Demeerare.

34  Motooronnee.

35  Quiowinne, branches of}-Charibs.

Dessequebe.
26  Dessequebe.  Arwaccas  and  Charibs.

[IV.  vi.  Every  house  hath  Cocks,  Hennes,  and  Chickens,  as  in

I283-]  England;  and  the  variety  of  fish  is  wonderfull,  without

compare ;  but  the  chiefest  comfort  of  our  Country-men  is

A  beast  and  a  this,  that  the  Beast  called  Maypury,  and  the  fish  called

fish  hke  Beefe.  the  Sea-Cow  (being  severally  as  bigge  as  a  Heifer  of  two

years  old,  and  of  which  kinde  there  are  very  many)  are  in

eating  so  like  unto  our  English  Beefe,  that  hardly  in  taste

we can  distinguish  them,  and  may  as  well  as  Beefe  be

salted, and kept for our provision. There is also a

Beast  in  colour  like  a  Fawne,  but  fuller  of  white  spots,  in

A  beast  like stature  somewhat  lesse  then  a  small  Sheepe,  and  in  taste

Mutton.  like  Mutton,  but  is  rather  better  meate :  the  Baremo  is

also of  the same taste. I have the Copie of Master

Harcourt his Patent, and he published also certaine

Articles  for  the  Adventurers,  &c.  which  for  brevity  are

omitted.

402

A RELATION OF MARWIN RIVER

A.D.

l6o8.

Chap.  XVII.

A  Relation  of  the  habitations  and  other  Observa-
tions of the River of Marwin,* and the  *i  found  this

j'  •  r> •  faire/y  written

adjoynmg  Regions.  amongst M.

Townes  in  the  River  of  Marwin.  Hak  papers,

but  know  not
Nprimis,  Marracomwin  a  little  Village  so  who  was  the
called  where the  Arwaccas dwell,  whose  Author.
chiefe  Captaine  is  Coretan,  and  is  at  the
foot  of  the  River  of  Marwin  in  a  creake
on the left hand going up the River.
Secondly,  Russia  a  little  Village  so  called
where  likewise  Arwaccas  dwell  being  like-

wise at  the  foote  of  the  River  on  the  right  hand  going  up
the  River.  Thirdly,  Moyyemon,  a  large  Towne  where
are  some  twentie  houses  all  builded  very  lately,  inhabited
by  Parawagotos  and  Yaios,  whose  chiefe  Captaine  is
Maperitacca  (being  the  Captaine  with  whom  the  Generall
left  us,  and  with  whom  we  continue)  being  on  the
left  hand  of  the  River.  Fourthly,  Kiawarie,  a  Towne
inhabited  by  Careebees,  almost  right  against  Moyyemon,

whose Chiefetaine  is Fiftly, Tonorima, a little

Village  above  Kiawary  inhabited  by  Careebees,  being  on
the  same  side  of  the  River,  who  be  governed  by  the
Captaine  of  Quvenow.  Sixtly,  Quvenow,  a  Towne
some  quarter  of  a  mile  distant  from  Tonorima,  inhabited
by  Careebees,  whose  Chiefetaine  is  Ucapea,  having  a  lame
hand.  Seventhly,  Arowatta,  a  Towne  situate  on  the
same  side  of  the  River  (whose  inhabitants  be  Careebees)
but  a  good  prettie  way  beyond,  whose  Chiefetaine  is
Seepane.  Eightly,  Comurraty,  a  Towne  situate  beyond
Arowatta,  on  the  other  side  of  the  River,  whose  Inhabi-
tants be  Careebees,  and  Chiefetaine  is  Parapane.  Ninthly,
Pasim,  a  Towne  situate  beyond  Comurratie  on  the  same
side  of  the  River  whose  Inhabitants  bee  Careeb,  and
Chiefetaine  is  Tanatweya.  Tenthly,  Paramaree,  a  Towne
situate beyond Pasim on the other  side of  the River,

403

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1608.

inhabited by Careebees, whose Chiefetaine be Juara.

There  is  beyond  Paramaree  a  lone  house,  beeing  situate

some  dayes  journey  from  Paramaree  on  the  same  side  of

the River being inhabited by Careebees. Eleventhly,

about  some  eleven  daies  journey  beyond  the  lone  house

there  is  a  towne  called  Tauparamunni,  whose  Inhabitants

be  Careebees. Twelfthly,  a  daies  journey  from  thence  is

another  Towne  called  Moreesheego,  whose  Inhabitants  be

Careebees. About some twentie daies  journey beyond

Moreesheego is a Towne called Aretonenne, whose

Long  eares, Inhabitants  bee  Careebees  having  verie  long  eares  hanging

perhaps  made to  their  shoulders,  and  they  are  reported  to  bee  a  very

hanging  gentle  and  loving  people. Some  twentie  daies  farther  is

weights  the  head  of  the  River  Marwin,  where  dwell  Parawagatos,

thereon,  as  is  Arwaccas,  and  Suppay,  and  after  a  daies  journey  in  the

used  in  the Land,  they  report  the  way  to  be  very  faire,  and  Champian
East  Indies.  A /., 1

ground  with  long  grasse.

Townes  from  the  foot  of  Marwin  on  the  North-
side  along  the  Sea.

First,  Equiwibone,  a  Towne  inhabited  by  Arwaccas
and  Parawagotos.  Secondly,  Caycooseoocooro,  in-
habited by  Arwaccas,  whose  Chiefetaine  is  Woaccomo.
Thirdly,  Amypea  inhabited  by  Arwaccas.  Fourthly,
about  six  mile  within  Land  is  Careebee,  inhabited  by
Arwaccas,  whose  Chiefetaine  is  Aramea.  Fiftly,  Wia
Wiam,  about  two  miles  from  the  Sea,  a  Towne  inhabited
by  Yaios,  Parrawagotos  and  Arwaccas,  whose  Chiefetaine
is  Araponaca.  Sixtly,  Soorry  Soorry,  some  two  mile
directly  farther  toward  the  Sea  side,  inhabited  by  Para-
wagotos, whose  Chiefetaine  is  Resurrima.  Seventhly,
Amiebas,  a  little  distant  from  Soory  Soory ;  inhabited  by
Parawagotos.  Eightly,  Vieguano,  some  sixe  mile  beyond
Soory  Soory,  inhabited  by  Yaos  and  Parawagotos.  Ninthly,
Urarinno  adjoyning  to  Vieguano,  inhabited  by  Arwaccas
and  Parawagotos.  Tenthly,  Suarer  a  daies  journey  beyond
Wia  Wiam  up  into  the  Land  inhabited  by  Arwaccas.
Eleventhly,  Simarra,  some  sixe  miles distant from  Wia

404

A RELATION OF MARWIN RIVER  a.d.

1608.

Wiam,  inhabited  by  Arwaccas.  Twelfthly,  Cauri,  a
Towne  adjoyning  to  Simarra,  inhabited  by  Arwaccas.
Thirteenthly,  Concoere,  a  Towne  adjoyning  to  Cauri,
inhabited  by  Parawagotos,  and  Arwaccas.

To  most  of  these  places  there  can  be  no  passage  but  t1^-  V1-
by  Canoas  in  the  Winter  being  marsh-medowy  grounds,  1204-J

overflowne  with  swelling  Tides. But  in  the  Summer  it  Watep
is  faire,  and  then  they  hide  their  Canoas  in  the  Woods  overJiomni-
by  the  Sea-side.

As  for  the  River  of  Marwin,  there  are  no  other  Rivers
which  fall  into  it : but  there  be  many  Hands,  and  some
very  great. The  passage  to  the  head  thereof  from  the
men  with  long  eares  is  very  dangerous,  by  reason  of  the
passage through hollow and concave Rockes, wherein
harbour Bat-mise of an unreasonable bignesse, which  &reat  Bats<
with  their  clawes  and  wings  doe  wound  the  Passengers
shrewdly : yea, and oftentimes deprive them of life.
During  which  passage  (which  is  some  quarter  of  a  mile,  Darke  and
and  very  darke ;  for  the  Rockes  are  close  above,  and  in  danSerous
fashion  like  an  Indian  house)  they  are  inforced  to  make
great  fires  in  their  Canoas,  and  put  over  their  heads  some
of  their  Crab-baskets  to  defend  them  from  the  force  of
their  clawes  and  wings,  and  so  they  safely  passe.

There  is  a  Chareebee  (with  whom  I  am  very  well
acquainted)  whose  name  is  Carouree  who  assured  me
of  certaine  transparent  stones,  both  of  a  greene  and  red  Stones  tram~
colour,  which  hee  described  by  a  greene  eare-ring  which  ^re^'r  .ee
I  shewed  him,  affirming  they  were  somewhat  bigger,  and
that  they  lay  in  a  little  gutter  at  the  head  of  the  River,
which  ran  in  a  Valley  betweene  two  Hills.

I  was  further  informed  by  a  Yaio,  an  ancient  man
(who  came  downe  from  the  head  of  the  River  Selinama
in  a  little  Canoa,  with  foure  other,  and  a  boy ;  three  of
which  were  Arwaccas,  and  one  Yaio,  who  was  borne  in
Orenoque,  and  as  1  judge,  about  the  age  of  fourescore
yeeres,  or  little  lesse)  who  reported  to  mee,  that  hee  was
one  of  them  which  with  Morequito  and  Putimay,  was  Spaniards
at  the  killing  of  nine  Spaniards,  and  a  Spanish  Pedas ;  and  killed.

405

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1608.

how  Morequito  was  put  to  death,  and  a  great  many  of
his  Indians  hanged :  himselfe  was  taken  prisoner,  and
pinched  with  Pinsers  for  his  punishment,  and  his  eares
nailed  to  wood,  which  I  conjecture  was  a  Pillourie.
Besides,  they  rubbed  his  body  over  with  salt  mixt  with
Urine,  after  they  had  pinched  him,  and  fetcht  bloud,
and  after  tyed  him  up  in  chaines.  The  reason  why  they
put  him  not  to  death,  was  because  hee  had  beene  a  great
Traveller  and  knew  the  Countries  well,  and  so  they  kept
him  for  a  Guide.

It  so  chanced,  that  the  Spaniards,  upon  his  informing

them  of  the Cassipagotos  Countrie,  and how  rich they

were,  and  how  he  would  be  their  guide,  went  with  some

companie  to  conquer  it : the  Captaine  of  the  Spaniards

was  called  Alexander,  as  he  saith. But  the  Cassipagotos

knowing  his  crueltie,  thought it better  to  fight  it  out,

then  trust  to  his  clemency,  and  so  overthrew  him  and  his

companie,  driving  them  to  their  Canoas,  in  which  fight  he

escaped :  But  yet  afterward  it  was  his  mishap  to  be  againe

in  the  hands  of  his  adversarie  by  the  meanes  of  Caripana

King  of  Emeria,  and  put  in  chaines,  and  handled  cruelly.

Spanish  His  body  was  besmeared,  as  he  said,  with  a  yellow  stone ;

devises  of fQr  SQ  ^e  canec[  [^  which  I  take  to  be  Brimstone,  and  so

Fr  Drakes  at  set  on  ^re  on  ^s  b°dy,  and  after  that  he  was  well,  and

Guatuko  on his skinne smooth and faire, they  anointed him with

the  South  Sea honie  from  top  to  toe,  and  so  scattered  dust  upon  him,  in

found  a  Negro  whjch  were  millions  of  Pismires,  tying  him  in  chaines  to  a

20  yards great  tree,  where  Muskitos  flockt  about  him  like  moates

Jong:  in the Sunne,  and did pitifully  sting him, then which

sentenced  to death  had  beene  better,  as  hee  said. Within  some  small

be  whipped  till  Space  hee  with  another  Yaio,  and three  Arwaccas  were

was" raw  and  cnosen  to  goe  a  fishing  some  two  dayes  journey  from  the

so  to  be  set  in Towne. Likewise there  went as overseers over  them

the  Sunne,  to foure  Spaniards,  three  of  which,  while  they  were  a  fishing,

be  tortured  to went  'mto  ^  Wood  a  fowling,  and  the  fourth  which  was

Muskils ^fr  ^or  tne  overseer  by  chance  fell  asleepe,  which  they

espying,  agreed  to  release  themselves  and  to  slip  from  the

shoare  with  their  Canoa,  and  went  up  Selinama  seven  dayes

406

A RELATION OF MARWIN RIVER  a.d.

1608.

journey  within  land  from  the  head  thereof  to  a  Towne

of the Arwaccas, called Cooroopon, where he now

dwelleth, whose name is Weepackea ; and the chiefe

Arwacca  which  came  with  him  is  called  Edaddeawa,  and

the  Captaine  of  Cooroopon  is  called  Naushickehan. This

Yaio  told  mee  of  a  Mountaine  at  the  head  of  Dissikeebee

which  is  called  Oraddoo,  where  is  a  great  Rocke  of  white

Spar,  which  hath  streams  of  Gold  in  it  about  the  breadth  Golden  hopes.

of  a  Goose-quill; and  this  he  affirmeth  very  earnestly.

Also  he  speaketh  of  a  Plaine  which  is  some  seven  or  eight

dayes  journey  from  the  Mountaine  where  is  great  store

of  Gold  in  graines  so  big  as  the  top  of  a  mans  finger,  and

after  the  flouds  be  fallen  they  finde  them,  which  Plaine  is

called  Mumpara.

Further,  he  spake  of  a  Valley  not  farre  distant  from
thence,  which  is  called  Wancoobanona,  which  hath  the
like:  and  he  said,  they  gather  them  the  space  of  two
moneths  together ;  which  two  moneths  are  presently  after
the  great  raines  which  wash  away  the  sand  and  gravell
from  the  grasse  which  groweth  in  turfets,  and  then  they
may  perceive  the  Gold  lie  glistering  on  the  ground.
And  of  these  they  are  very  charie.  And  the  Captaines
and  Priests  or  Peeays  doe  charge  the  Indians  very  strictly,
yea  with  punishment  of  the  whip,  that  they  be  secret,  and
not  reveale  it  to  the  Spaniard.  But  it  seemeth  they  are
willing  the  English  should  have  it,  or  else  hee  would
never  have  related  so  much  of  the  state  of  his  Countrie.

He  spake  very  much  of  Sir  Walter  Raleigh :  he  like-  Sir  W.  Ral.
wise  knew  Francis  Sparrow,  and  the  boy  which  Sir  Walter
left  behind  him  at  Topiawary  his  house. He  further  said,
that Topiawary  wondred that he heard not from Sir
Walter,  according  to  his  promise: and  how  Topiawary
did  verily  thinke,  that  the  Spaniard  had  met  with  him,
and  so  had  slaine  him. Further,  hee  saith  how  Topia-  [IV.  vi.
wary  is  dead,  and  how  one  Roponoyegrippo  succeeded  in . I285-]
his roome. Likewise he sayth Caripana the King of  J^™*^
Emeria,  who  was  very  subject  to  the  Spaniard,  and  did
once  betray  him  to  the  Spaniard,  is  now  dead : at  which

407

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1608.

he  seemed  not  a  little  to  rejoyce ;  and  how  one
Dothronias  is  in  his  place,  and  is  a  good  King,  holding
Armes  against  the  Spaniard  with  the  Cassipagotos,  and
giving  him  many  overthrowes,  so  that  now  hee  hath
cleare  left  Dissikeebee  and  not  a  Spaniard  there.  He
likewise  said,  how  Topiawary  had  drawne  in  the
Indians  Wariwackeri,  Amariocupana,  Aromaya,  Wickery,
and  all  the  people  that  belonged  to  Wanuritone,  Captaine
of  Canuria,  and  Wacariopea  Captaine  of  Sayma  against
Sir  Walter  Raleigh  his  comming  to  have  warred  against
the  Yeanderpuremei :  And  as  yet  Wanuritone  and
Wacariopea  doe  expect  his  comming.  He  addeth  further,
Twitwas  how  he  knew  the  two  Nations  of  Tivitivas,  called  Ciawana
houses  on  trees  ancj  Warawitty,  who  are  forced  in  the  flouds  to  build
°**s'  their  houses  on  the  top  of  trees. And  now  he  saith  the

Spaniard  hath  for  the  most  part  destroyed  them,  keeping
divers  of  them  to  make  and  mend  his  Canoas.  Further
hee  knew  Toparimacca,  and  sayth  hee  is  yet  living,
and  Captaine  of  Arawaca  a  Napoy,  who  likewise  doth
expect  Sir  Walter  his  comming,  and  had  drawne  a
companie  of  Indians  for  the  aide  and  assistance  of  Sir
Walter.  Likewise,  how  Putimay  is  yet  living,  and  how
the  Spaniards  have  layd  great  waite  for  him,  but  could
never  finger  him  to  bee  revenged  for  his  part  of  kill-
ing the  nine  Spaniards.  Further  he  addeth,  how  the
Spaniards  were  killed  at  a  Mountaine  called  Riconeri
in  Putimays  Countrie,  and  how  Putimay  expected  long
for  Sir  Walter  Raleigh.  Likewise  he  saith,  how  the
Epeuremei  have  now  two  very  faire  Townes,  one  called
Aruburguary,  and  the  other  Corburrimore :  and  saith,
they  are  not  good  people,  yet  they  dare  not  warre  with
Men  with  them.  He  further  affirmeth  of  the  men  whose  shoulders
shoulders  are  ^jg^gj.  then  their  heads,  which  he  called  Wy  waypanamy,

their  heads an(^  offereth  to  goe  with  me  thither  if  I  come  up  in  their
high  Countrie. For  since  the  death  of  Topiawary  they
are  friends,  and  bend  their  forces  against  the  Spaniards.
Crystal! Rock.  He further spake of  a white, cleare, high and huge
Rocke  under  a  Mountaines  side,  which  is  called  Mattuick>

408

A RELATION OF MARWIN RIVER  ad.

1608.

that  on  a  Sun-shine  day  if  a  man  looked  on  it,  it  would
dazle  his  eyes  exceedingly.  Hee  shewed  mee  before
his  departure  from  me,  a  piece  of  metall  fashioned  like  Image*  of
an  Eagle,  and  as  I  ghesse,  it  was  about  the  weight  of  g
eight  or  nine  ounces  troy  weight,  it  seemed  to  be  Gold
or  at  leastwise  two  parts  Gold  and  one  Copper,  I  offered
him  an  Axe,  which  he  refused ;  to  which  I  added  foure
Knives,  but  could  not  get  it  of  him  :  but  I  imagine  the
Dutch  at  Selinama  have  bought  it  of  him,  for  their  only
comming  was  for  Axes,  as  he  said,  hearing  that  the
Dutch  were  at  Selinama.  I  demanded  where  hee  had
that  Eagle,  his  answere  was,  hee  had  it  of  his  Uncle,
who  dwelt  among  the  Weearaapoyns  in  the  Countrie
called  Sherumerrimary  neere  the  Cassipagotos  Countrie
where  is  great  store  of  these  Images.  Further  he  said,
that  at  the  head  of  Selinama  and  Marwin  there  were
great  store  of  the  halfe  Moones,  which  hee  called  by
the  name  of  Unnaton.  He  likewise  spake  of  a  very
faire  and  large  Citie  in  Guiana,  which  hee  called  Monooan,  Monooan
which  I  take  to  be  that  which  Sir  Walter  calleth  Manoa,  &eat  Citie  in
which  standeth  by  a  salt  Lake  which  he  called  Parroowan
Parrocare  Monoan,  in  the  Province  of  Asaccona  the
chiefe  Captaine  or  Acariwannora,  as  he  called  him,  was
called  Pepodallapa.  He  further  said,  that  after  that
a  man  is  up  at  the  head  of  the  River  and  some  ten  dayes
journey  within  the  Land,  every  childe  can  tell  of  the
riches  of  Monooan.  Further  he  addeth,  how  that  once
in  every  third  yeere  all  the  Cassiques  or  Lords  and
Captaines  some  seven  dayes  journey  from  Manooan  doe
come  to  a  great  drinking,  which  continueth  for  the  space
of  ten  dayes  together,  in  which  time  they  goe  sometimes
a  fishing,  fowling,  and  hunting,  their  fishing  is  in  the  salt
Lake,  where  is  abundance  of  Canoas,  and  those  very
great.  They  have  many  fish-pooles  of  standing  water,
wherein  they  have  abundance  of  Fish.  They  have  store
of  wilde  Porkes  and  Deere,  and  other  beasts,  which  are
very  good  meate.  Their  Houses  be  made  with  many  Houses  with
lofts  and  partitions  in  them,  but  not  boorded,  but  with  lofts-

409

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1608.

barres  of  wood,  onely  the  lower  floore  on  the  ground
is  spread  with  clay  very  smooth,  and  with  fires  hardned,
as  they  doe  their  pots,  then  presently  they  build  their
houses,  as  is  before  spoken  of.  Also  he  affirmeth,  that
within  the  Citie  at  the  entring  in  of  their  houses  they
hang  Carocoore  on  the  posts  which  I  take  to  be  Images
of  gold.

Directions  to  the Towne  of  Cooropan  from
Marrawin.

FRom  the  head  of  Marrawin  to  Itshuerwa,  a  Chareeb
Towne  :  from  thence  to  Caperocca,  a  Chareeb  Towne  :
from  thence  to  a  Mountain e  called  Payen :  from  thence
to  Una,  a  Mountaine:  from  thence  to  Youwalprenay,
a  Chareeb  Towne :  from  thence  to  Tetatttecoomoyneto,  a
Chareeb  Towne:  from  thence  to  Tunstoorito,  a  Chareeb
Towne :  from  thence  to  Soynoon,  a  Parawag  Towne :
from  thence  to  Crooroorere,  a  Suppay  Towne :  from
thence  to  Macatana  a  Suppay  Towne :  from  thence  to
Pipicorwarra,  a  Mountaine :  from  thence  to  Shadden,
an  Arwacca  Towne:  from  thence  to  Lonnoo,  an
Arwacca  Towne :  from  thence  to  Horurra  a  Moun-
taine :  from  thence  to  Habittebin,  a  Plaine :  from  thence
to  Warooca,  an  Arwac.  Towne :  from  thence  to  Hardoo
an  Arwacca ;  and  from  thence  to  Coorepon,  where  he
dwelleth,  which  he  saith  is  but  ten  dayes  journey  from
the  head  of  Marrawin.

[IV.  vi. Directions  from  the  head  of  Selinama  to  Cooropan,
"J  which  is  but  seven  dayes  journey.

FRom  the  head  of  Selinama  to  Kiarno  a  Chareeb
Towne :  from  thence  to  Pommaro  a  Chareeb  Towne  :
from  thence  to  Scooadoddepon  an  Arwac  Towne :  from
thence  to  Sickene  a  Mountaine :  from  thence  to
Shuhurway  an  Arwac  Towne :  from  thence  to  Hadarinner
a  Suppay  Towne :  from  thence  to  Weeatoopona,  Arwac  :
from  thence  to  Ruttrahar,  Arwac :  from  thence  to
Caboyetitte, Arwac : from thence to Heeanannerre,

410

A RELATION OF MARWIN RIVER

Suppay :  from  thence  to  Wabockeyaway,  Arwac :  from
thence  to  Hanamob,  Arwac:  from  thence  to  Muttugga-
bee,  a  Mountaine;  and  so  to  Cooropon,  which  is  but
seven  dayes  journey  from  the  head  of  Selinama.

He  likewise  saith  it  is  but  a  moneths  journey  by
land,  from  the  head  of  Marrawin  to  the  head  of
Dissikeebee,  and  from  the  head  of  Dissikeebee  to  the  head
of  Orenoque,  a  moneths  travell.

Rivers from Brabisse  to  the Amazones.

A.D.

1608.

Branches  of
Dissikeebee

Rivers.
Brabisse.
Winniepa.
Arew.
Mannapoo.
Muccauren.
Morecoose.
Arawon.
Orenoco.
Emataccoo.
Eparramoo.
Aratooree.
Amockooroo.
Pareema.
Wine.
Moroka.
Paurooma.
Wacapwhou.
Dissikeebee.
Quiowinne
Matooronee.
Marrawin.

Amanna.

Uraco.

Coonannoma.

Oorassowinni.

Sinomarra.

411

Nations.

Chareebees.

Chareebes.

Napoys.

Napoys.

not  inhabited.

Napoys.

not  inhabited.

Yaios  Arwac.

Chareebes.

Chareebes.

Chareebes.

Chareeb.

Chareeb.

Chareeb.

Yaios.

Arwaccas.

Arwaccas.

Arwac.

Chareeb.

Chareeb.

Para.  Ya.  Cha.

&  Arwa.

Chareeb.

Arwac.

Arwac.

not  inhabited.

Chareeb.

ad PURCHAS HIS I

1608.

'ILGRIMES

Rivers.

Nations.

Mannomanury.

Chareeb.

Ecaurwa.

Chareeb.

Caurooroo.

Chareeb.

Muccurrie.

Chareeb.

Kiam.

Chareeb.

Wia.

Chareeb.

Kowo.

not  inhabited.

Apoorwacca.
Wannase.

Chareeb.
Yaios.

Wiapoco.
Aroocona.

Yaios.
Areecola.

Casippooroo.
Connawin.

Areecoole.
Yaio.

Miocaree.

Areecool.

Demeerare.

Arwac.

Miconine.

Arwac.

Wapary.
Manhica.

Arwac.
Arwac.

Keribisse.

Arwac.

Coretine.

Chareeb.  Arw.

Eueecare.

Chareeb.

Coopanomi.
Soorammo.

Chareeb.
Chareeb.

Surennamo,  alias,

Selinama.

Chareeb.

Branches  of J  Camouree,  alias,

Selinama. [  Commawin.

Arowaree.

Chareeb.

Arapoco.
Amazone.

Topaniwinni,  a  Branch  of  Marwin,  at  the  head  thereof

going  toward  Oronoque,  in  which  dwell  a  wilde  People
Swift  footmen,  called  Urokere,  which  are  swift  in  running.

The Chareebees with long  eares are called Nooraco.

Ekinnicke, a kinde of worme,

which poisoneth the

water.

And thus much of  Guianian

affaires. Some other

412

WILLIAM DAVIES

Voyages  thither  have  beene  at  large  published  by  Sir
W.  R.  and  Master  Keymis,  recorded  by  Master  Hakl.
A  later  also  with  great  noise,  preparation  and  expectation
hath  happened,  written  alreadie  in  bloud ;  therefore,
and  for  the  latenesse  needlesse  and  unworthie,  that  I
say  not  too  dismall  and  fatall  for  our  Relations.

Chap.  XVIII.

A  Description  and  Discovery  of  the  River  of
Amazons,  by  William  Davies  Barber  Surgeon
of  London.

He  River  of  the  Amazons  lieth  in  the
highest  part  of  the  West  Indies,  beyond
the  Equinoctial  Line,  to  fall  with  this
River  fortie  leagues  from  Land  you  shal
have  8.  6.  &  7.  fathomes  water,  &  you
shal  see  the  Sea  change  to  a  ruddie
colour,  the  water  shall  grow  fresh,  by
these  signes  you  may  run  boldly  in  your  course,  and
comming  neere  the  Rivers  mouth,  the  depth  of  your
water  shal  increase,  then  you  shal  make  Discoverie  of
the  Trees  before  the  Land,  by  reason  the  Land  is  very
low,  and  not  higher  in  one  place  then  another  three
foote,  being  at  a  Spring  tide  almost  all  overflowne,  God
knowes  how  many  hundred  leagues.  It  flowes  much
water  there  with  a  verie  forcible  tide.  In  this  River  I
continued  tenne  weekes,  seeing  the  fashion  of  the  people
and  Countrie  there  :  This  Countrie  is  altogether  full  of
Woods,  with  all  sorts  of  wilde  Beasts  :  as  Lions  Beares,
Woolves,  Leopards,  Baboones,  strange  Boores,  Apes,
Monkeies,  Martins,  Sanguines,  Marmosets,  with  divers
other  strange  beasts  :  also  these  Woods  are  full  of
Wild-fowle  of  all  sorts,  and  Parrats  more  plentifull  then
Pidgeons  in  England,  and  as  good  meate,  for  I  have
often  eaten  of  them.  Also  this  Countrey  is  very  full
of  Rivers,  having  a  King  over  everie  River.  In  this
place  is  continuall  Tempests,  as  Lightning,  Thunder,  and

413

A.D.

1608.

[IV.  vi.

1287.}

Distant  from
England
1 600.  leagues.
This  is  a  part
of  a  Booke  set
forth  by  the
said  Davies  of
his  miserable
captivitie.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1608.

Raine,  and  so  extreame,  that  it  continues  most  com-
monly sixteene  or  eighteene  houres  in  foure  and  twentie.
There  are  many  standing  waters  in  this  Countrie,  which
bee  full  of  Aligators,  Guianes,  with  many  other  severall
water  Serpents,  and  great  store  of  fresh  fish,  of  strange
fashions.  This  Countrie  is  full  of  Muskitas,  which  is  a
small  Flie,  which  much  offends  a  Stranger  comming
newly  into  the  Countrie.  The  manner,  fashion,  and
nature  of  the  people  is  this  :  They  are  altogether  naked,
both  men  and  women,  having  not  so  much  as  one
threed  about  them  to  cover  any  part  of  their  naked-
nesse,  the  man  taketh  a  round  Cane  as  bigge  as  a
pennie  Candle,  and  two  inches  in  length,  through  the
which  hee  puis  the  fore-skinne  of  his  yard,  tying  the
skinne  with  a  piece  of  the  rinde  of  a  Tree  about  the
bignesse  of  a  small  pack-threed,  then  making  of  it  fast
about  his  middle,  hee  continueth  thus  till  hee  have
occasion  to  use  him  :  In  each  Eare  hee  weareth  a
Reede  or  Cane,  which  hee  bores  through  it,  about  the
bignesse  of  a  Swannes  Quill,  and  in  length  halfe  an
inch,  and  the  like  through  the  midst  of  the  lower  lippe  :
also  at  the  bridge  of  the  Nose  hee  hangs  in  a  Reede  a
small  glasse  Beade  or  Button,  which  hanging  directly
afore  his  Mouth,  flies  too  and  fro  still  as  hee  speakes,
wherein  hee  takes  great  pride  and  pleasure.  Hee  weares
his  Haire  long,  being  rounded  below  to  the  neather
part  of  his  Eare,  and  cut  short,  or  rather  as  I  judged
pluckt  bald  on  the  crowne  like  a  Frier.  But  their
women  use  no  fashion  at  all  to  set  forth  themselves,
but  starke  naked  as  they  were  borne,  with  haire  long
of  their  Heads,  also  their  Breasts  hang  verie  low,  by
reason  they  are  never  laced  or  braced  up  :  they  doe
use  to  anoint  their  Bodies,  both  Men  and  Women,
with  a  kind  of  redde  Earth,  because  the  Muskitas,  or
Flies  shall  not  offend  them.

These  people  are  verie  ingenious,  craftie,  and  trea-
cherous, verie  light  of  foot,  and  good  Bowemen,  whose
like I have never seene,  for they doe ordinarily kill

414

WILLIAM DAVIES  a.d.

1608.

their  owne  food,  as  Beasts,  Fowle,  and  Fish,  the  manner
of  their  Bow  and  Arrowes  is  this.  The  Bow  is  about
two  yards  in  length,  the  Arrow  seven  foote.  His  Bow
is  made  of  Brasill-wood  verie  curious,  his  string  of  the
rinde  of  a  Tree,  lying  close  to  the  Bow,  without  any
bent,  his  Arrow  made  of  Reede,  and  the  head  of  it  is
a  fish  bone,  hee  kils  a  Beast  in  this  manner  :  standing
behinde  a  Tree,  hee  takes  his  marke  at  the  Beast,  and
wounding  him,  he  followes  him  like  a  Bloud-hound  till
he  fall,  oftentimes  seconding  his  shoot  :  then  for  any
Fowle  be  he  never  so  little,  he  never  misses  him  :  as
for  the  first,  hee  walkes  by  the  water  side,  and  when
hee  hath  spied  a  fish  in  the  water,  hee  presently  strikes
him  with  his  Arrow,  and  suddenly  throwing  downe  his
Bow,  hee  leapes  into  the  water,  swimming  to  his  Arrow
which  hee  drawes  aland  with  the  fish  fastened  to  it,
then  having  each  kild  his  owne  food,  as  well  flesh,  and
fowle,  as  fish,  they  meete  together,  to  the  number  of
fiftie  or  sixtie  in  a  company,  then  make  a  fire  after  this
fashion  :  They  take  two  stickes  of  Wood,  rubbing  one
hard  against  another,  till  such  time  as  they  bee  fired,
then  making  of  a  great  fire,  every  man  is  his  owne
Cooke  to  broile  that  which  he  hath  gotten,  and  thus
they  feed  without  Bread  or  Salt,  or  any  kind  of  drinke
but  Water  and  Tobacco,  neither  doe  they  know  what  it
meanes :  In  these  Countries  we  could  find  neither  Gold
nor  Silver  Oare,  but  great  store  of  Hennes.  For  I
have  bought  a  couple  for  a  Jewes  Harpe,  when  they
would  refuse  tenne  shillings  in  money.  This  Countrie
is  full  of  delicious  fruite,  as  Pines,  Plantines,  Guaves,
and  Potato  Rootes,  of  which  Fruits  and  Roots  I  would
have  bought  a  mans  burthen  for  a  glasse  Button  or
Bead.  The  manner  of  their  Lodging  is  this  :  they  have
a  kinde  of  Net  made  of  the  rinde  of  a  Tree  which
they  call  Haemac,  being  three  fathome  in  length,  and
two  in  breadth,  and  gathered  at  both  ends  at  length,  [IV.  vi.
then  fastning either  end to a  Tree,  to the  full  length  I28

about a yard and halfe from the ground, when hee

415

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1608.

hath  desire to sleepe,  hee creepes unto it. The King

of  everie  River  is  knowne  by  this  manner. He  weares

upon  his  head  a  Crowne  of  Parrats  feathers,  of  severall

colours,  having either about his middle,  or about his

Necke,  a  Chaine  of  Lions teeth or clawes,  or of  some

other strange beast, having a woodden Sword in his

hand, and hereby is he knowne to be the King :

Oftentimes one King warres against another in their

Canowes, which are Boats cut out of  a whole Tree,

sometimes  taking  one  another,  the  Conquerours  eates  the

Captives. By  this  time  ten  weekes  were  spent,  and

being  homewards  bound,  but  not  the  same  way

that  we  came,  for  we  sailed  unto  the  River

before the winde,  because it blowes

there  continually  one  way,  which

forces  all  shippes  that  come

thither to returne by

a contrarie way.

The  end  of  the  sixth  Booke.

416

Voyages  [IV-  vi;2

to  and  about  the  Southerne  America,  with  many

Marine Observations and Discourses of *ifindeatthe
those  Seas  and  Lands  by  English-  ££*

men  and  others.  medicinal!

receipts,  and
the  name  sub-

THE SEAVENTH  BOOKE.  scribedir.

Manoel
Tristaon

REader,  I  here  present  thee  the  exactest  Treatise  of  J^qJ^Xq^
Brasil which I have seene written by any man,  Baya:  whom
especially  in  the  Historie  of  the  multiplied  and  diversified  /  imagine  to
Nations and customes  of  men  ; as  also  in the  naturall  have  heene
Historie of Beasts, Serpents, Fowles, Fishes, Trees,  ^f^isfthh
Plants, with divers other remarkeable rarities of  those  Cooke  reported
Regions. It was written (it seemeth) by a Portugall  that  he  had  it
Frier  (or  Jesuite)  which  had  lived  thirtie  yeares  in  those  °fa  Friar:

parts, from whom (much against his will) the written f  *  e  name
^  o  /  Jesus  divers

Booke  was  taken  by  one  Frances  Cooke  of  Dartmouth  t-mes  on  t^e

in  a  Voyage  outward  bound  for  Brasil,  An. 1601.  who  top  of  the

sold  the  same  to Master Hacket for twenty  shillings  ;  page,  and  often

by  whose  procurement  it  was  translated  out  of  Portugall  ™ntlon  °f^e

into English  : which translation I have compared with  societie  maketh

the  written  Originall,  and  in  many  places  supplied  defects,  me  tkinke  him

amended  errours,  illustrated  with  notes,  and  thus  finished  a  brother  of

and  furnished  to  the  publike  view. Great  losse  had  the  tf)at-^rder^

Author  of  his  worke,  and  it  not  a  little  of  his  name*,  state.tractate

which  I  should  as  willingly  have  inserted  as  worthy  much  following.

XVI  417  2D

A.D.
l60I.

Their  opinion
of  a  floud.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

honour  for  his  industrie,  by  which  the  great  and  admir-
able workes  of  the  Creator  are  made  knowne  ;  the  visible
and  various  testimonies  of  his  invisible  power,  and  mani-
fold wisedome.  Sic  vos  non  vobis.  In  this  and  other
written  tractates  the  Spaniards  and  the  Portugals  have
taken  paines,  and  (which  was  denied  to  Spaine  and  Portu-
gall)  England  is  here  entred  into  their  labours,  and  hath
reaped  an  English  harvest  of  Spanish  and  Portugall  seede.
Another  Treatise  was  taken  by  the  said  Frances  Cooke,
written  more  fairely,  but  it  seemeth  with  the  same  hand,
part  of  which  I  have  added  for  better  knowledge  both  of
the  civill  uncivill  dealings  of  the  Portugals  with  the
Indians  ;  and  of  the  unchristian  christianize  in  their
owne  practise  and  conversion  of  the  Indians,  and  that
by  Jesuiticall  testimonie.  I  may  well  adde  this  Jesuite
to  the  English  Voyages,  as  being  an  English  prize  and
captive.

Chap. I.

A  Treatise  of  Brasil,  written  by  a Portugall
which  had  long  lived  there.

§.  1.

Of  the  beginning  and  originall  of  the  Indians
of  Brasil,  and  of  their  Customes,  Religions,
and  Ceremonies.

r  seemeth  that  this  people  hath  no  know-
ledge of  the  beginning  and  creation  of  the
world,  but  of  the  deluge  it  seemeth  they
have  some  notice :  but  as  they  have  no
writings  nor  characters  such  notice  is
obscure  and  confused  ;  for  they  say  that
the  waters  drowned  all  men,  and  that  one
onely  escaped  upon  a  Janipata  with  a  sister  of  his  that
was  with  childe,  and  that  from  these  two  they  have  their
beginning,  and  from  thence  began  their  multiplying  and
increase.

418

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  ad.

1601.

This  people  hath  not  any  knowledge  of  their  Creator,  Of  the  know-
no?  of  any  thing  of  heaven,  nor  if  there  be  any  paine  ,  &  fjr*
nor  glory  after  this  life,  therefore  they  have  no  operation  Creator  and
nor  ceremonies,  nor  divine  worship,  but  they  know  that  of  the  Soule,
they  have  soules,  and  that  they  dye  not; and  they  say  Paradise,
that  the  soules  are  converted  into  divels,  and  that  after  I- '  vu* -,
their  death  they  goe  to  certaine  fields  where  are many  j)-weiSm
figge  trees  along  by  a  faire  River,  and  all  together  doe
nothing  but  daunce. This is the cause  why they  are
greatly  afraid of  the  Divell,  whom they  call Curupira,
Taguain,  Pigtangua,  Machchera,  Anhanga  :  and  their  feare
of  him  is  so  great,  that  onely  with  the  imagination  of
him  they  dye  as  many  times  already  it  hath  happened  :
they  worship  it  not,  nor  any  other  creature,  neither  have
they  Idols  of  any  sort,  onely  some  old  men  doe  say  that
in  some  waies  they  have  certaine  Posts  where  they  offer
him  some  things,  for  the  feare  they  have  of  them,  and  Divels  feare.
because they would not die. Sometimes the Divels
appeare unto them, though very seldome, and among
them  are  few  possessed.

They  use  some  witchcrafts,  and  there  are  some  Witches,
not  because  they  beleeve  in  them,  or  doe  worship  them,
but  onely  they  give  themselves  to  the  Chupar  in  their
sicknesses,  seeming  to  them  that  they  received  their
health,  but  not  because  they  doe  think  they  have  any
divinity,  and  they  do  it  rather  to  receive  health,  then
for  any  other  respect.  There  arise  sometimes  among
them  some  Witches,  whom  they  call  Caraiba,  and  most  Caraibas
commonly  it  is  some  Indian  of  a  bad  life  ;  this  doth  JuSling-
some  witchcrafts  and  strange  things  to  nature,  as  to  show
that  he  raiseth  some  to  life,  that  makes  himselfe  dead,
and  with  these  and  other  like  things  he  carrieth  all  the
Countrie  after  him,  deceiving  and  saying  to  them  that
they  shall  not  cultivate,  nor  plant  their  Pulse  and  their
provision,  neither  digge  nor  labour,  &c.  for  with  his
comming  the  time  is  come  that  the  Mattockes  themselves
shall  digge  of  their  owne  accord,  and  the  Beasts  goe  to
the fields and bring the provision, and with these

419

A.D.

l60I,

No  proper
name  of  God.

Of  the
Manages.

They  give  no
dowries  to
their  daugh-
ters or  to  the
sons,  but  they
serve  their
mother  in  law.

Tailes.
Drinkings.

Of  the  manner
they  keepe  in
their  eating
and  drinking.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

falshoods  he  leades  them  so  deluded  and  inchanted,
that  not  looking  to  their  lives,  and  to  get  their  foode,
they  die  for  hunger,  and  these  companies  are  diminished
by  little  and  little,  till  the  Caraiba  remaineth  alone,  or
is  murthered  by  them.

They  have  no  proper  name  to  expresse  God,  but  they
say  the  Tupan  is  the  thunder  and  lightning,  and  that
this  is  he  that  gave  them  the  Mattocks  and  the  foode,
and  because  they  have  no  other  name  more  naturall
and  proper,  they  call  God  Tupan.

There  are  mariages  among  them,  but  there  is  a  great
doubt  whether  they  be  true,  as  well  because  they  have
many  wives,  as  for  the  easie  forsaking  them  for  whatso-
ever quarrell,  anger,  or  any  other  disgrace  hapning  among
them ;  but  either  true  or  not,  among  them  they  were
made  in  this  sort.  No  yong  man  did  use  to  marrie
before  he  had  taken  an  enemie,  and  he  continued  a  virgin
till  he  tooke  and  slew  him,  holding  first  his  feasts  for  the
space  of  two  or  three  yeares,  the  woman  in  like  sort  did
not  marrie  nor  know  man,  till  she  had  her  tearmes,  after
the  which  they  made  her  great  feasts  :  at  the  time  of
the  deliverie  of  the  woman  they  made  great  drinkings.
And  the  feast  being  ended,  the  marriage  remained  perfect
giving  a  net  cleane  washt ;  and  after  they  were  laid,  the
father  tooke  a  wedge  of  stone  and  did  cut  upon  a  post
or  stake,  then  they  say  hee  did  cut  the  tailes  from  the
grandchildren,  and  therefore  they  were  borne  without
them,  and  after  they  were  married  they  began  to  drinke,
for  untill  then  their  fathers  did  not  suffer  them,  teaching
them  that  they  should  drinke  heedefully,  and  should  be
considerate  and  wise  in  their  speaking,  that  the  wine
might  doe  them  no  hurt,  and  that  they  should  not  speake
bad  things,  and  then  with  a  vessell  the  old  ancient
men  did  give  him  the  first  wine,  and  hold  his  head
with  their  hands  that  he  might  not  vomit,  for  if  he
doth  vomit  they  hold  to  themselves  that  he  would  not
be  valiant.

This  people  eateth  at  all  times  by  night  and  by  day,

420

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

and  everie  houre  and  moment,  and  when  they  have  any
meate they keepe it no long time, for  they  have no
providence for the future, but presently they  eate all
that they have, and  devide it  among their  friends, in
sort  that  of  one  fish  that  they  have  they  divide  it  to  all,
and  they  hold  for  a  great  honour  and  gallantrie  to be
liberall,  and thereby  they  get  great  fame  and honour  :  Liberality,
and  they  hold  for  the  greatest  injurie  that  they  can  doe  and  opinion  of
them,  to  hold  them  for  niggards,  or  call  them  so  : and  niSiardtse-
when they  have  nothing  to  eate,  they  are  very  patient
in  hunger  and  thirst. They  have  no  flesh  or  fish  daies,
they  eate  all  manner  of  flesh,  even  of  uncleane  creatures,  Their  diet.
as Snakes,  Toades, Rats,  and such like wormes  ; they
eate also all manner  of  Fruites, saving some that are
poisonous. This  sustenance  is  ordinarily  of  that  which
the  Countrie  yeeldeth  without  husbandrie,  as  wilde  fowle,
flesh  and  fruites,  but  they  have  a  certaine  kinde  of  foode
of  a good substance, and healthfull, and many other
pulses,  whereof  hereafter  shall  mention  be  made. Ordin-
arily they  drinke  not  while  they  eate,  but  after  meate  they  Drinking.
drinke  water  or  wine  which  they  make  of  many  kindes
of  fruites,  and  rootes,  as  hereafter  shall  be  said,  of  the
which  they  drinke  without  measure or order,  even till
they  fall  downe.

They  have some particular daies  wherein  they  make
great  feasts,  and  all  ends  in  drinking,  and  they  last  two  Feasts.
or three daies, in the  which they eate not but onely
drinke, and there be men that emptie a whole great
vessell of  wine. That these drinkings may be more
festivall,  some  goe  about  singing  from  house  to  house,
calling and inviting all they finde for to drinke and
be merrie. These dancings last with musicke all the  Daunces.
time of  the drinking, in the which they sleepe not,
but  passe  it  all  in  drinking,  and  when  they  are  drunke
they  play  many  disorders,  and  they  breake  one  anothers
head, and take other mens wives, &c. They  give no  Rudenesse.
thankes  before  nor  after  meate  to  God, nor  wash  their
hands before meate, and after meate they wipe them

421

A.D.
l60l.

[IV.  vii.

1291.]

Of  the  manner
that  they  have
in  their
sleeping.

*One  house
containeth
many
Families.

Nakednesse.

Modesty.

Painting.
Galantry.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

at  their  haire,  on  their  body,  or  a  poste.  They  have
no  towels  nor  tables,  they  eate  sitting,  or  lying  in
their  nets,  or  cowring  on  the  ground  :  they  eate  their
meate  throwing  it  with  their  hand  into  the  mouth ;  and
I  omit  many  other  particularities  that  they  have  in  their
eating  and  drinking,  because  these  are  the  principall.

All  this  people  have  for  their  beds  certaine  nets  made
of  Cotten  wooll,  and  they  sleepe  in  them  hanging  in  the
ayre.  These  they  make  some  wrought,  others  of  sundry
colours,  and  as  they  remaine  in  the  ayre,  and  have  no
other  covering  or  cloathes  alwaies  in  summer  and  winter,
they  have  fire  under  them :  they  rise  not  very  early,
and  goe  to  bed  by  times,  and  in  the  mornings  there  is
one  chiefe  man  in  their  houses,  *that  lying  in  his  net
doth  preach  unto  them  for  the  space  of  an  houre,  how
they  are  to  goe  to  labour  as  their  forefathers  did,  and
he  appointeth  them  the  time,  telling  them  what  they
are  to  doe ;  and  after  he  is  up  continueth  his  preaching,
running  through  the  Towne.  They  tooke  this  custome
from  a  bird  which  is  like  a  Hawke,  which  singeth  in  the
morning,  and  they  call  it  the  King  and  Lord  of  the
other  Birds ;  and  they  say  that  even  as  that  Bird  doth
sing  in  the  mornings  to  be  heard  of  the  rest,  so  the
principall  should  make  those  preachings  and  speeches  to
be  heard  of  theirs.

All  of  them  goe  naked  as  well  men  as  women,  and
have  no  kinde  of  apparell,  and  are  nothing  ashamed :
rather  it  seemeth  that  they  are  in  the  state  of  innocencie
touching  this  behalfe  by  the  great  honestie  and  modestie
they  doe  keepe  among  themselves ;  and  when  any  man
speaketh  with  a  woman,  he  turneth  his  backe  to  her.  But
to  make  themselves  gallant  they  use  divers  inventions,
painting  their  bodies  with  the  juice  of  a  certaine  fruite
wherewith  they  remaine  black,  making  in  their  bodies
many  white  stroakes,  after  the  fashion  of  round  hose,
and  other  kinde  of  garments.  They  enplume  themselves
also,  making  Diadems  and  Bracelets,  and  other  very
fine  inventions, they  esteeme  very much  all  manner of

422

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

iine  Feathers :  they  let  no  haire  grow  in  the  parts  of  their

body,  but  they  pull  them  out,  onely  the  head  excepted,

which  they  cut  in  many  fashions,  for  some  weare  them  Neatnesse.

long  with a halfe Moone  shaven  before,  and  they say

they  tooke  this  use  from  Saint  Thomas,  and  it  seemeth

that they had  some notice of  him,  though  confusedly;

others  make  certaine  kinde  of  crownes  and  circles  that

they  seeme  Friers  : the  women  all  doe  weare  long  haire,

and  ordinarily  blacke,  and  the  haire  of  the  one  and of

the  other  is  smooth  : when  they  are  angrie  they  let  their

haire grow long : and the  women when they mourne,  Mourning.

doe  cut  their  haire,  and  also  when  their  husbands  goe  a

farre  journey,  in this  they  show  their  love  and  loyaltie

to them : the vanitie they have in their poling is so

much,  that  by  the  head  the  Nations  are  knowne.

Now  alreadie  some  doe  weare  apparell  as  well  men  Apparell
as  women,  but  they  esteeme  it  so  little  that  they  weare
it  rather  for  fashion  then  for  honesties  sake,  and  because
they  are  commanded  to  weare  it ;  as  it  is  well  seene  by
some,  that  sometimes  come  abroad  with  certaine  garments
no  further  then  the  navell,  without  any  other  thing,
and  others  onely  with  a  cap  on  their  heads,  and  leave
the  other  garments  at  home :  the  women  make  great
accompt  of  Laces  and  Combes.

These  Indians  doe  use  certaine  Cottages,  or  houses  Of  their
of  timber,  covered  with  Palme  tree  leaves,  and  are  in  Houses,
length  some  of  two  hundred  and  three  hundred  spans,  and
they  have  two  or  three  doores,  verie  little  and  low.
They  shew  their  valour  in  seeking  timber,  and  verie
great  posts,  and  of  great  continuance,  and  there  be
houses  that  have  fiftie,  sixtie  or  seventie  roomes  of
twentie  or  five  and  twentie  quarters  long,  and  as  manie
quarters  long,  and  as  many  in  breadth.  In  this  house
dwelleth  one  principall  man  or  more,  whom  all  the
rest  doe  obey,  and  ordinarily  they  are  kinsmen.  In
every  roome  of  these  dwelleth  a  houshold  with  their
children  and  family  without  any  repartition  betweene
the one and the other, and to enter in one of  these

423

A.D.
l60I.

Childebirth.

Love  and
education  of
children.

[IV.  vii.

1292.]
Friers  and
J  e  suites  paines
with  Indians
children.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

houses  is  to  enter  into  a  laberinth,  for  every  roome
hath  his  fire,  and  their  nets  hanging,  and  their  stuffe,
so  that  comming  in,  all  that  they  have  is  in  sight,  and
some  house  hath  two  hundred  persons  and  more.

The  women  when  they  are  brought  to  bed  (they
are  delivered  on  the  ground)  doe  not  take  up  the
childe,  but  the  Father  taketh  it  up,  or  some  other  person
whom  they  take  for  their  Gossip,  and  in  friendship
they  are  as  the  Gossips  among  the  Christians.  The
Father  doth  cut  the  Navell  string  with  his  teeth,  or
with  two  stones  knocking  the  one  with  the  other,  and
then  they  set  themselves  to  fasting  untill  the  Navell  string
falleth  off,  which  is  ordinarily  to  the  eight  day,  and  till  it
doth  fall  they  leave  not  their  fasting,  when  it  falleth,  if  it
bee  a  man  childe  he  maketh  it  a  Bow  with  Arrowes,  and
tieth  it  at  the  end  of  the  Net,  and  at  the  other  end  manie
handfuls  of  hearbes  which  are  the  enemies  which  his
sonne  shall  kill,  and  eate.  These  ceremonies  being  ended,
they  make  drinkings  wherewith  they  all  are  merrie.
The  women  when  they  are  delivered,  doe  presently  goe
and  wash  themselves  in  the  Rivers,  and  they  give  the
childe  sucke  ordinarily  a  yeere  and  an  halfe,  not  giving
it  any  other  thing  to  eate.  They  love  their  children
extraordinarily,  and  beare  them  in  certaine  pieces  of
Nets  which  they  call  Tupiya,  and  carrie  them  to  their
plowings  and  to  all  kind  of  labours  on  their  backes,
through  cold  and  heate,  and  they  carrie  them  like  the
Gipsies  stradling  about  their  hips ;  they  give  them  no
manner  of  correction,  that  their  children  may  not  crie.
They  have  manie  Southsayings,  for  they  put  Cotton-
clothes  ;  upon  their  head,  birds  feathers,  and  stickes :
they  lay  them  on  the  palmes  of  their  hands,  and
rocke  them  by  them  that  they  may  grow.  They  esteeme
more  to  doe  good  to  their  children  then  to  themselves,
and  now  they  esteeme  and  love  the  Fathers  verie  much
because  they  bring  them  up,  they  teach  them  to  reade,
write,  and  cipher,  and  singing,  and  to  play  on  an  Instru-
ment, a  thing  which  they  doe  much  esteeme.

424

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  ad.

1601.

When  any  guest  doth  come  to  the  house,  the  honour  of  the  custom
and  entertainment  they  make  him  is  to  bewaile  him ;  they  have  in
Now  the  guest  being  come  into  the  house  they  set  him  harboring,  or
in  the  Net,  &  after  he  is  set  without  speaking  any  2^2«*r*
word  to  him  the  wife  and  the  daughters,  and  the  other
friends  do  sit  them  downe  round  about  him  with  their
haire  loose,  touching  with  the  hand  the  partie :  they
all  begin  ne  to  weepe  with  a  high  voice  and  great
abundance  of  teares,  and  there  they  tell  in  a  versified
prose  all  things  that  have  happened  since  they  saw
one  another  to  that  houre,  and  manie  other  which  they
invent,  and  the  troubles  that  the  guest  hath  suffered
in  his  journie ;  and  all  things  else  that  may  provoke
pitie  and  teares.  The  guest  all  this  time  speaketh  not
one  word,  but  after  they  have  bewailed  him  a  good  while
they  wipe  the  teares,  and  remaine  so  quiet,  so  modest,
so  pleasant,  and  merrie  that  it  seemeth  they  never  wept,
and  then  they  salute  one  another,  and  give  their  Ereiupe,
or  welcome,  and  they  bring  him  meate,  &c.  And  after
these  Ceremonies  ended,  the  guest  telleth  wherefore  he
commeth.  The  men  likewise  bewaile  one  another,  but
it  is  in  some  weightie  matters,  as  deaths,  misfortunes
in  wars,  &c.  They  hold  it  for  a  great  courtesie  to
entertaine  all  men  and  to  give  them  all  things  necessarie
for  their  sustenance,  and  some  gifts,  as  Bowes,  Arrowes,
Birds,  Feathers,  and  other  things  according  to  their
povertie  without  any  kind  of  reward.

These  Gentiles  doe  accustome  to  drinke  the  smoake  Of  the  custom
of  Petigma,  by  another  name  the  holy  herbe,  this  they  they  have  of
drie  and make of  a  Palme-tree  leafe  a  Coffin  like  the  d™*™gg  of
joint  of  a  Cane,  and  filled  with  this  herbe,  they  fire  it
at the small end putting  the biggest in their mouth,
and  so  they  sucke  or  drinke  that  smoake,  and  they  hold
it  for  a  great  daintie  and  favour,  and  lying  in  their  Nets
they  spend  part  of  the  daies  and  of  the  nights  : to  some
it  doth  much  hurt,  and  maketh  them  dizzie  and  drunke,
to  others it  doth  much  good, and maketh  them  voide
a  great  deale  of  flegme  at  the  mouth. The  women  also

425

A.D.
l60I.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Of  the  manner
of  payments
and
husbandrie.

doe  drinke  it,  but  they  are  such  as  are  old  and  sickly,
for  it  is  verie  medicinable  unto  them,  especially  for
the  cough,  the  head-ache,  and  the  Disease  of  the  stomacke,
and  hence  come  a  great  manie  of  the  Portugals  to  drinke
it,  and  have  taken  it  for  a  vice  or  for  idlenesse,
imitating  the  Indians  to  spend  daies  and  nights  about  it.
This  Nation  hath  no  monie  wherewith  to  satisfie  the
services  that  are  done  to  them,  but  they  live  with
bartering  one  thing  for  another,  and  principally  in  change
of  wine  they  doe  all  that  they  will,  and  so  when  they
have  any  businesse,  they  make  wines,  and  advising  the
Neighbours,  and  assembling  all  the  Towne,  they  desire
them  to  helpe  them  in  their  Husbandrie,  which  they
doe  with  a  good  will ;  and  labouring  till  tenne  of  the
clocke  they  returne  home  againe  to  drinke  their  wines ;
and  if  that  day  their  tillage  be  not  ended,  they  make
other  wines,  and  so  goe  another  day  till  ten  of  the
clocke  to  make  an  end  of  their  businesse.  And  in  this
sort  doe  the  wise  White  men  or  Portugals  use,  that
know  the  use  and  fashions  of  the  Indians,  and  how
much  they  do  for  wine;  they  make  wines  for  them,
and  call  them  to  their  Husbandries,  and  to  their
Sugar-canes,  and  with  this  they  pay  them.  They  use
also  ordinarily  to  change  some  things  for  white  beades,
which  are  made  of  Wilkes:  and  in  change  of  some
Nosegaies  they  give  even  their  wives ;  and  this  is  the
ransome  wherewith  they  use  ordinarily,  that  is,  the  White
men,  for  to  buy  of  them  the  slaves,  as  well  men  as
women  that  they  have for  to  eate.

These  Indians  use  ordinarily,  chiefly  in  their  Feasts,
Collars  which  they  make  of  Wilkes,  Diademes  of
Feathers,  and  certaine  Brooches,  (that  is,  stones  which
Filthily  fine,  they  put  in  their  lower  lip)  some  greene,  white,  some
blue,  and  verie  fine,  and  are  like  Emeralds,  or  Christall,
they  are  round,  and  some  of  them  so  long  that  they
reach  to  their  breasts,  and  it  is  ordinarily  among  the
great  and  principall  men,  to  have  them  of  a  span,  or
more in  length. They  use  also  white  Bracelets  of  the

426

Of  their
Jewels  and
Brooches.

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

same  Wilkes,  and  they  put  in  their  eares  certain  white

stones of  a span  long  and  more ;  and  these  and  other

like  are  the  ornaments  wherewith  they  adorne  themselves

in their Feasts, whether they be of  slaughters of  the

enemies : or of wines ;  and these are the Riches that

they  esteeme  above  all  that  they  possesse.

These  Indians  doe  use to intreate their Wives  well,  Of  the  usage

they never strike them, neither quarrell with them,  °f^eirwwe^
J . , .  r . .' . .  . t-  - ,  ,.  '  and  how  they

except  in  the  time  or  their  drin kings,  ror  then  ordinarily  man  tfim^

they revenge themselves of them, giving for an

excuse afterward, it was the wine they had drunke,

and then they are friends as before, and the hatreds

betweene  them  last  not  long. They  goe  alwaies  together,

and  when  they  goe  abroad,  the  woman  commeth  behind

and  the  man before, that  if  any ambush bee laid, the

wife may not fall into it, and may have time to flie

while the Husband fighteth with his adversarie, &c.

But at their returning home from their fields, or

from  any  other  place  the  wife  commeth  before,  and  the

Husband behinde, that  if  any mischance shall happen,

the wife  may flie home, and the Husband  fight with

the  enemies,  or  any  other  thing. But  in  a  safe  Countrie

and  within  the  Townes  the  wife  alwaies  goeth  before,  and

the Husband behind, for they are verie  jealous, and  Jeahusie.

will  have  alwaies  their  wife  in  sight.

Though  they  be  melancholike  they  have  their  Games,  Of  their

especially  the  children  verie  divers  and  pleasant, in  the  dan™s  and

which they counterfeit manie  kinds  of  Birds,  and with eir  sonSs-

so  great  feast  and  order  as  may  be. And  the  children  [Iv~-  vii-

are  joyfull  and  given  to  play,  and  they  play  with  such  I293-J

quietnesse  and friendship, that  among them is no bad

name  heard,  or  any  scurrilitie,  or  calling  any  nickname

one  to  anothers  Father  or  Mother ;  and  seldome  doe  they

disagree  when  they  play,  nor  disorder  themselves  for  any

thing,  and  verie  seldome  doe  they  strike  or  fight  one  with

another. The  Fathers  doe  teach  them  from  their  cradles

to dance and  sing,  and  their dancings are not  sundrie

changes,  but  a  continuall  stamping  with  the  feet  standing

427

A.D.

l60I,

Instruments.

Womens
dances.

Of  their
burials.

Lamentations
to  be
lamented.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

still,  or  going  round  about,  or  stirring  their  bodie  or  their
head,  and  they  doe  it  all  by  such  compasse,  and  pleasant-
nesse  as  can  be  desired,  at  the  sound  of  a  Timbrell  made
after  the  fashion  of  those  which  the  children  use  in  Spaine
with  manie  smal  stones  within  or  certaine  seeds  whereof
they  make  also  verie  good  beads  :  and  so  they  sing
dancing  altogether,  for  they  doe  not  one  thing  without
the  other,  in  such  compasse  and  order  that  sometime  an
100.  men  dancing  and  singing  together  in  a  row  one
behind  the  other  doe  end  all  at  one  stroke,  as  if  they  were
altogether  in  one  place.  The  singers  aswell  men  as
women  are  much  esteemed  among  them,  in  so  much  that
if  they  take  an  enemie  a  good  singer,  and  an  Inventer  of
Verses,  they  therefore  spare  his  life,  and  doe  not  eate  him
nor  his  children.  The  women  doe  dance  together  with
the  men,  and  make  many  gambolls  and  gestures  with
their  amies  and  bodies,  especially  when  they  dance  alone.
They  keepe  among  themselves  differencies  of  voices  in
their  Consort :  and  ordinarily  the  women  doe  sing  the
Treble,  Counter,  and  Tenours.

They  are  verie  wicked,  especially  in  weeping  for  the
dead,  for  when  any  one  dieth,  the  Kindred  doe  cast
themselves  upon  him  in  the  Net,  and  so  suddenly  that
sometimes  they  choake  him  before  he  dieth,  seeming  to
them  he  is  dead.  And  those  that  cannot  cast  themselves
with  the  Coarse  in  the  Net  doe  cast  themselves  on  the
ground  with  such  falls  and  knockes  that  it  seemeth  a
Miracle  they  doe  not  end  their  lives  with  the  dead,  and  of
these  falls,  and  mournings  they  remaine  so  feeble  that
sometime  they  die.  When  they  mourne  they  speak
manie  pittiful  and  dolorous  words,  &  if  he  die  at  evening
all  night  long  they  weep  with  a  high  voice,  that  it  is  a
wonder  they  are  not  wearie.  For  these  mournings  they
cal  the  Neighbours,  &  kinsmen,  and  if  he  be  one  of  the
principall,  all  the  Towne  doth  meete  to  mourne,  and  in
this  they  have  also  their  points  of  honour,  and  they  curse
with  plagues  those  which  weepe  not,  saying,  that  they  shall
not  bee  mourned  for. After  he  is  dead  they  wash  him

428

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

and  paint  him  verie  bravely,  as  they  paint  their  enemies :
and  after  this  they  cover  him  with  Cotton  Yarne  that
nothing  is  seene  of  him,  and  put  a  covering  over  his  face,
and  sitting  they  put  him  in  a  great  tinnage  or  vessell  that
they  have  under  the  Earth  for  that  purpose,  and  doe
cover  it  in  such  manner  that  no  Earth  may  come  to  him,
and  the  vessel  they  cover  with  earth,  making  him  a  house
where  everie  day  they  carrie  him  meat.  For  they  say
that  when  he  is  wearie  with  dancing  he  commeth  thither  to
eate,  and  so  they  goe  for  a  certaine  time  to  bewaile  him
everie  day  all  his  Kindred,  with  him  they  burie  all  his
Jewels  or  Brooches,  that  none  may  see  them  and  grieve
thereat.  But  if  the  dead  had  any  Peece,  as  a  Sword,  &c.
that  had  beene  given  him,  it  returneth  to  him  that  gave
it,  and  hee  taketh  it  againe  wheresoever  he  findeth  it ;
therefore  they  say  that  when  one  dieth  he  loseth  all  the
right  of  that  which  was  given  him.  After  the  Coarse  is
buried,  the  Kinsmen  are  in  continuall  weeping  night  and
day,  the  one  beginning  as  the  other  endeth,  they  eate  not
but  by  night,  they  hang  their  Nets  neere  to  the  roofes,
and  the  women  after  twentie  daies  doe  cut  their  haire,  and
this  lamenting  lasteth  a  whole  Moone,  the  which  being
ended  they  make  great  Wines  or  Drinkings  to  put  away
their  mourning.  The  men  doe  cut  their  haire,  and  the
women  doe  paint  themselves  with  blacke,  and  these
Ceremonies  and  others  being  ended,  they  beginne  to
communicate  the  one  with  the  other,  aswell  the  men  as
the  women.  After  their  companions  are  dead,  some
never  doe  marrie  againe  nor  enter  into  the  Feast  of
Wines,  neither  paint  themselves  with  blacke ;  but  is  verie
seldome  among  them,  because  they  are  much  given  to
women,  and  cannot  live  without  them.

Before  they  had  any  knowledge  of  the  Portugals  they  ofthelnstru-
used  tooles  and  instruments  of  stone,  bone,  wood,  Canes,  menu  they  do
and teeth of  Beasts, &c. and  with these they hewed  use-
downe great Woods, with wedges of stones, helping
themselves  with  fire ; and  they  digged  also the  ground
with  certaine  sharpe  stakes,  and  they  made  their  Brooches,

429

A.D.
l60I.

Of  the
weapons  they
doe  use.

Cruel
arrowes.

[IV.  vii.

294.]

Cunning
Archers.

Their  Arts.
Quick-sighted.

Great  Travel-
lers and  swift.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Beades  of  Wilkes,  Bowes,  and  Arrowes,  as  well  as  now
having  Instruments  of  Iron,  but  they  spent  a  long  time  in
making  of  whatsoever  thing ;  wherefore  they  esteeme  the
Iron  verie  much,  for  the  facilitie  or  ease  which  they  finde
in  making  their  things  with  it.  And  this  is  the  reason
wherefore  they  are  glad  of  Commerce  with  the  Portugals
or  white  men.

The  weapons  of  this  people  ordinarily  are  Bowes  and
Arrowes,  and  they  boast  themselves  of  them,  and  they
make  them  of  verie  good  wood,  and  verie  faire  interlaid
with  Palme-tree  of  sundrie  colours,  they  die  their  strings
greene,  or  red,  and  they  make  their  Arrowes  verie  faire,
seeking  for  them  the  fairest  feathers  they  can  find.  They
make  these  Arrowes  of  Sundrie  Canes,  and  fasten  in  their
points  the  teeth  of  beasts,  or  certaine  verie  hard  Rushes,
or  sharpe  stickes  with  many  snagges,  and  many  times  they
empoison  them  with  herbes.  These  Arrowes  to  ones
sight  seeme  a  thing  of  mockerie,  but  are  verie  cruell
Weapons,  and  pierce  quilted  breast-plates  or  curates ;  and
striking  in  a  sticke  they  cleave  it  asunder,  and  sometimes
happen  to  goe  through  a  man  and  sticke  on  the  ground.
They  doe  exercise  themselves  in  these  Weapons  verie
young,  and  are  great  Archers,  and  so  certaine  that  no
Bird  can  escape  them  be  it  never  so  little,  or  any  vermine
of  the  Woods ;  and  there  is  no  more  but  if  they  will
shoot  an  Arrow  through  the  eie  of  a  bird  or  a  man ;  or
hit  any  other  thing  be  it  never  so  small,  they  doe  it  with
great  facilitie  and  with  their  owne  safetie ;  and  for  this
they  are  greatly  feared.  They  are  stout  also  and  fierce,
and  dreadfull  to  others.

They  are  as  vermine  of  the  Woods,  for  they  goe  a
hunting  into  the  Countrie  naked  and  barefoot,  without
any  feare.  They  have  a  marvellous  sight,  for  at  a  league
off  they  see  any  thing,  and  in  the  same  manner  they
heare.  They  guesse  verie  right  ruling  themselves  by  the
Sunne,  they  go  to  all  parts  they  list,  200.  or  300.  leagues
through  thicke  Woods,  and  misse  not  one  jot,  they
travell  much,  and  alwaies  running  a  gallop,  especially  with

43°

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  a.d.

1601,

some  charges,  no  Horse  is  able  to  hold  out  with  them.
They  are  great  fishers  and  swimmers,  they  feare  no  Sea
nor  waves,  continue  a  day  and  a  night  swimming,  and  the
same  they  doe  rowing,  and  sometimes  without  meate.
They  use  also  for  Weapons  Swords  of  wood,  and  interlay  Swords.
the  ends  of  them  with  Palme-tree  of  sundrie  colours,  and
set  Plumes  on  them  of  divers  colours,  chiefly  in  their
feasts  and  slaughters.  And  these  Swords  are  verie  cruell,
for  they  make  no  wound,  but  bruise  and  breake  a  mans
head  without  having  any  remedie  of  cure.

§•  11.

Of  their  manner  of  killing  and  eating  of  humane
flesh : and  of  their  creating  Gentlemen.

F  all  the  honours  and  pleasures  of  this  life,  none  is
so  great  for  this  people  as  to  kill  and  get  a  name
on  the  heads  of  their  Adversaries,  neither  are  there

among  them  any  Feasts,  comparable  to  those  which  they
make  at  the  death  of  those  which  they  kill  with  great
Ceremonies,  which  they  doe  in  this  manner.  Those  which
beeing  taken  in  the  Warre  are  appointed  to  die,  came
presently  from  thence  with  a  token,  which  is  a  small  coard
about  his  necke  :  and  if  hee  bee  a  man  that  may  runne
away,  he  hath  one  hand  tied  to  his  necke  under  his
chinne.  And  before  they  come  to  the  Townes  that  are  by
the  way,  they  paint  their  eie-lids,  eie-browes,  and  their
beards,  polling  them  after  fashion,  and  enpluming  them
with  Yellow  feathers  so  well  placed  that  yee  can  see  no
haire ;  which  makes  them  so  gallant  as  the  Spaniards  in
their  rich  Apparell,  and  so  they  goe  sharing  their  victorie
whereby  soever  they  passe.  When  they  come  to  their
owne  Countrie,  the  women  came  out  to  receive  them,
showting  altogether  and  striking  themselves  on  the  mouth
which  is  a  common  entertainment  among  them  ;  without
any  other  vexation,  or  imprisonment,  except  that  they
weare  about  the  necke  a  round  collar  like  a  coard  of  a
good  bignesse,  as  hard  as  a  sticke. In  this  collar  they

43i

A.D.

l60I.

Gentle  cruell
keeper.

Festival!  pre-
paration and
solemnitie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

beginne  to  weave  a  great  manie  fathomes  of  small  coard
as  long  as  a  womans  haire,  fastened  above  with  a  certaine
knot,  and  loose  underneath,  and  so  it  goeth  from  eare  to
eare  behind  the  backe,  horrible  to  looke  on.  And  if  it  be
on  the  Frontier  where  hee  may  runne  away,  they  put  him
in  stead  of  shackels  below  the  knees  a  string  of  threed
twisted  verie  hard,  which  is  too  weake  for  any  Knife ;  but
that  they  have  Keepers  that  goe  not  one  moment  from
him,  whether  he  goe  about  the  houses,  to  the  Woods,  or
by  the  Fields,  for  he  hath  libertie  for  all  this,  and  com-
monly the  keeper  is  one  that  is  given  him  for  wife,  and
also  for  to  dresse  his  meate,  with  the  which  if  his  Masters
doe  give  him  no  meate  as  the  custome  is,  he  taketh  a
Bow  and  Arrowes  and  shooteth  at  the  first  Henne  he
seeth,  or  at  a  Ducke  be  it  whosesoever,  and  none  doth
contradict  him,  and  so  he  waxeth  fat,  neither  breaking
therefore  his  sleepe,  his  laughter,  or  his  pleasure  as  the
rest,  and  some  are  as  contented  though  they  are  to  bee
eaten,  that  in  no  wise  they  will  consent  to  be  ransomed
for  to  serve ;  for  they  say  that  it  is  a  wretched  thing  to
die,  and  lie  stinking,  and  eaten  with  Wormes.  These
women  are  commonly  faithfull  in  their  charge,  for  they
receive  honour  thereby,  and  therefore  manie  times  they
are  young,  and  daughters  of  the  chiefe,  especially  if  their
brothers  are  to  be  the  skiers.  For  those  which  have  not
this  interest  manie  times,  afTect  them  in  such  manner,
that  not  onely  they  give  them  leave  to  runne  away,  but
they  also  doe  goe  with  them,  neither  have  the  women  any
other  punishment  if  they  bee  taken  againe,  then  a  few
strokes,  and  sometimes  they  are  eaten  of  those  same  to
whom  they  gave  life.

The  time  when  he  shall  die  being  determined,  the
women  beginne  to  make  vessels,  that  is,  Bowles,  Traies,
and  Pots  for  the  Wines,  so  great  that  everie  one  will  hold
a  pipe.  This  being  readie,  as  well  the  principall  as  the
rest  doe  send  their  Messengers  to  invite  others  from
sundrie  places  against  such  a  Moone  about  tenne  or
twelve leagues compasse or more, for the which none

432

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

doth  excuse  himselfe.  The  guests  doe  come  in  Mogotes
or  troupes  with  their  wives  and  children,  and  all  of  them
doe  enter  the  Towne  with  Dancers ;  and  all  the  time  the
people  are  gathering  together,  there  is  Wine  for  the
guests,  for  without  it  all  the  other  entertainments  are
nothing  worth.  The  people  being  assembled,  the  Feasts
beginne  some  daies  before  according  to  the  number,  and  [IV.  vii.
certaine ceremonies  preceding,  and everie one lasteth  a  I295-J

day.  First,  they  have  for  this  certaine  coards  of
Cotton-wooll  of  a  reasonable  bignesse,  not  twisted  but
woven  of  a  verie  faire  worke,  it  is  a  thing  among  them
of  great  esteeme,  and  none  hath  them  but  some  prin-
cipall  men,  and  according  to  their  finenesse  and  work-
manship, and  their  taking  pleasure,  it  is  to  be  beleeved
that  they  are  not  made  in  a  yeere.  These  are  alwaies
verie  safely  kept,  and  are  carried  to  the  place  with  great
feast  &  great  noise  in  certain  traies  where  a  Master  of
these  things  doth  tie  two  knots  within  from  that  which
one  of  the  points  do  run  in  such  maner  that  in  the
midst  there  remaineth  a  noose.  These  knots  are  so
fine  that  few  are  found  that  can  make  them,  for  some
of  them  have  ten  casts  about,  five  crossing  over  the
other  five,  as  if  one  should  crosse  the  fingers  of  the
right  hand  over  the  left,  &  after  they  die  them  with
the  water  of  a  white  clay  like  lime,  &  let  them  drie.

On  the  second  day  they  bring  a  great  number  of
burdens  of  wilde  Canes  or  Reeds  as  long  as  Lances  or
more,  and  at  night  they  set  them  on  fire  in  a  round
heape,  the  points  upward  leaning  one  to  another,  and  so
they  make  a  great  and  faire  high  bone-fire,  round  about
the  which  are  men  and  women  dancing  with  sheaves  of
arrowes  at  their  backe,  but  they  goe  very  swiftly ;  for
hee  that  is  to  die,  which  seeth  them  better  then  hee  is
seene  because  of  the  fire,  catcheth  hold  of  all  that  he
can,  and  catcheth  them,  and  they  beeing  many  hee
misseth  few  times.  At  the  third  day  they  make  a
dance  of  men  and  women,  all  of  them  with  pipes  of
Canes,  and  all  of  them  at  once  doe  stampe  on  the
xvi  433  2  E

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

ground,  now  with  one  foot  then  with  the  other,  all
together  without  missing  a  stroke  :  and  observing  the
same  measure  they  play  on  their  pipes,  and  there  is  no
Black  Saints,  other  singing  nor  speaking ;  they  being  many  and  the
Canes  some  bigger  and  some  smaller,  besides  the  resound-
ing in  the  Woods,  they  make  a  Hel-seeming  harmonie,
but  they  abide  it  as  if  it  were  the  sweetest  Musicke  in
the  World.  And  these  are  their  feasts,  besides  others
which  they  intermingle  with  many  graces  and  sooth-
sayings.

On  the  fourth  day,  they  carrie  the  captived  enemie
as  soone  as  the  day  breakes  to  wash  him  at  a  River,
and  they  while  the  time  that  when  they  doe  returne  it
may  be  broad  day  light,  comming  into  the  Towne,  the
Prisoner  goeth  presently  with  a  watchfull  eye,  for  hee
knoweth  not  out  of  what  house  or  doore  a  valiant  man
is  to  come  out  to  him,  that  is  to  catch  hold  of  him
behind.  For  as  all  their  happinesse  doth  consist  in  dying
valiantly,  and  the  ceremonie  that  followeth,  is  now  the
First  neerest  unto  death,  as  he  which  is  to  lay  hold  of  him,

encounters.  doth  shew  his  forces  in  over-comming  him  himselfe
alone  without  any  other  helpe,  so  he  will  shew  courage
and  force  in  resisting  him :  and  sometimes  he  doth  it
in  such  sort,  that  the  first  standing  aside  as  wearied  in
wrestling,  another  succeedeth  him  which  holds  himselfe
for  a  valianter  man,  the  which  sometimes  remaine  well
bedusted,  &  more  they  would  remaine  if  at  this  time
the  captive  had  not  his  cord  or  shakels.

This  wrestling  being  ended,  he  on  foot blowing  and
puffing with rage and wearinesse,  with the other  that
The  womens hold  him  fast,  there  commeth  forth  a  troope  of  Nymphes
parts.  which  doe  bring  a  great new painted bowle,  and in it

the  cords  rolled  up,  and  very  white,  and  this  present
being  set  at  the  feet  of  the  captive,  a  cunning  old
woman  in  these  matters,  and  Mistris  of  the  troope
beginneth  to  tune  a  Song,  whom  the  other  doe  helpe,
the  Dittie  is  according  to  the  ceremonie.  And  while
they  sing,  the  men  take  the  cords  and  the  nooze  being

434

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  ad.

1601.
put  about  his  necke,  they  give  it  another  knot  neere  to
the  other  great  ones,  that  it  may  not  lose  againe ;  and
having  made  of  every  end  a  coyle,  they  put  them  on
the  arme  of  the  woman  which  alwaies  goeth  after  him
with  this  weight,  and  if  the  weight  be  great  because
the  cords  are  great  and  long,  they  give  her  another  to
carrie  one  of  the  coyles,  and  if  he  before  was  terrible
with  the  coller,  he  is  more  now  with  those  two  knots
so  bigge  behind  about  his  necke,  and  therefore  one  of
the  verses  of  the  Song  saith,  Wee  are  those  that  make
the  necke  of  the  bird  to  stretch,  although  after  other
ceremonies,  they  say  to  him  in  another  foote,  If  thou
hadst  beene  a  Parrot  annoying  us,  thou  wouldest  have
fled.

At  this  time  the  vessels  of  wine  are  set  in  a  rowe,  in
the  middest  of  a  great  house,  and  the  house  (having  no
partitions  though  it  bee  of  twentie  or  thirtie  fathome
in  length)  it  is  full  of  people ;  and  when  they  begin  to
drinke  it  is  a  Labyrinth,  or  a  Hell  to  see  and  heare
them.  For  those  which  dance  and  sing  doe  continue  Their  songs,
with  great  ferventnesse  all  the  daies  and  nights  that  ^c-
the  wines  doe  last.  For  this  being  the  proper  feast  of
the  slaughters,  in  the  drinking  of  the  wines  are  many
particularities,  which  last  long,  and  they  make  water  at
every  stop ;  and  so  they  continue  day  and  night ;  they
sing,  dance,  drinke,  and  speake  telling  in  whoopes
through  all  the  house  of  warres,  and  acts  that  they  did ;
and  as  every  one  will  be  heard  in  his  Historie,  every
one  doth  speake  striving  to  bee  lowdest,  beside  other
noises,  without  any  intermission,  no  not  a  quarter  of  an
houre.  That  morning  in  which  they  begin  to  drinke,
they  paint  the  captive  by  a  particular  way  that  they  Adorning  oj
have  for  that  designe,  in  this  sort,  his  face  being  cleane,  the  Captive.
and  all  the  feathers  he  hath  brought  forth,  they  anoint
him  with  the  Milke  of  a  certaine  tree  that  cleaveth
very  fast,  and  they  cast  upon  it  the  powder  of  certaine
egge-shels  of  a  certaine  wild  bird,  and  upon  this  they
paint him with black very faire pictures,  and all his

435

A.D.
l60I.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[IV.

bodie  to  the  sole  of  his  foote,  and  sticke  him  all  with
feathers  which  they  have  alreadie  cut  for  that  purpose
and  died  redde,  and  that  maketh  him  to  seeme  halfe  as
bigge  againe,  and  touching  his  face  it  maketh  it  seeme
as  much  greater,  and  the  eies  so  much  the  smaller,  that
he  remaineth  an  horrible  visage.  And  in  the  same
manner  that  they  have  painted  his  face,  they  adorn  the
Sword  which  is  of  wood,  in  manner  of  a  Ferula  or
Palmer,  but  that  the  head  is  not  so  round,  but  almost
,  *9  J  three  square,  and  the  sides  doe  almost  end  in  an  edge ;
Sword  anc^ tne shaft of  it  which may bee of  seven or eight

spans  is  not  altogether  round.  It  hath  at  the  head
about  foure  fingers  broad,  and  commeth  still  narrowing
unto  the  end  where  it  hath  certaine  pendants,  or  little
bels  of  divers  coloured  feathers,  it  is  a  gallant  thing
and  of  great  esteeme  among  them,  they  call  it  Juga
penambin,  that  is,  eares  of  the  Sword.  The  last  day  of
the  wines  they  make  in  the  midst  of  the  place  cabins
of  Palme-boughs,  as  many  as  they  are  that  shall  die,
and  in  that  they  lodge,  without  entring  any  more,  any
house,  and  all  the  day  and  the  night  hee  is  well  served
with  feasts  more  then  with  meate,  for  they  give  him
no  other  foode  but  a  fruite  that  hath  the  savour  of
Nuts,  that  the  next  day  he  may  not  have  much  bloud.
The  fifth  day  in  the  morning  at  seven  of  the  clocke,
little  more  or  lesse  his  woman  doth  there  leave  him,
and  goeth  home  very  sad,  and  speaking  for  her  farewell
some  pittifull  wordes  at  the  least  fainedly.  Then  they
take  away  his  shackels,  and  passe  the  cords  from  his
neck  to  the  waste,  and  standing  at  the  doore  of  him
that  must  kill  him,  the  slaughterer  commeth  forth  in  a
dance  as  white  as  a  Dove,  painted  with  white  earth,  in
a  garment  which  they  call  a  cloke  of  feathers  tied
about  the  breast,  upward  like  the  wings  of  an  Angell,
so  dancing  he  goeth  round  about  the  place,  and  commeth
making  very  strange  countenances  with  his  eies  and
bodie,  and  with  his  hands  he  counterfeiteth  the  Kite  that
desireth  flesh,  and  with  this  Devillishnesse  hee  commeth

436

Crocodiles
teares.

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

to  the  wretch,  which  stands  with  the  coard  stretched,  on

both  sides  having  one  that  holdeth  him : and  the  poore

wretch  if  he  find  wherewith  to  throw  at  him,  hee  doth

it with a good will,  and many times they give him

wherewith,  for  many  valiant  men  doe  come  out  to  him,

so  nimble  in  winding  their  bodie  that  he  cannot  hit  them.

This  being  ended there commeth an honorable  Judge,

or  stickler  of  the  new  Knight  that  shall  bee,  and  taking

the  Sword passeth it many times betweene his legges,

putting  it  now  on  the  one  side,  now  on  the  other,  even

in the same manner that the Pipers dogs doe passe

betweene  their  legges,  and  after  taking  it by the midst

with  both hands he pointeth as with a thrust to the

eies  of  the  man  which  is  to  die; and this being done

he  turneth  the  head  of  it  upward  in the same manner

that  he  is  to  use  it,  and  putteth  it  in  the  hands  of  the

slaughterer,  as  apt and fit  already with those blessings  Hallowing

for to doe his office,  they place themselves somewhat  the  Smrd-

to  the  left  side,  in  such  sort  that  he  may  hit  him  with

the  edge  of  his  Sword  in  the  nape  of  the  necke,  for  he

striketh  at  another  place.

And  their  brutishnesse  is  so  much,  that  because  they
feare  no  other  evill  but  that  which  is  present,  they  are
as  resolute  as  if  it  were  nothing,  as  well  for  to  speake,
as  for  to  try  their  courage,  for  after  they  take  their
leave  of  life,  saying,  In  a  good  houre,  let  me  die  seeing  Butchery
many  are  dead,  and  that  besides  this  his  brethren  and  ntes-
kinsmen  remaine  here  to  revenge  them.  And  with  this
the  one  makes  him  readie  to  discharge,  and  the  other  to
avoid  his  bodie,  which  is  all  the  honour  of  his  death.
And  they  are  so  nimble  in  this  that  many  times  it  is
high  daies  before  they  are  able  to  kill  them,  for  when
he  sees  the  weapon  in  the  aire,  sometimes  hee  drawes
his  head  aside,  sometime  hee  declines  his  bodie ;  and
in  this  they  are  so  doughtie,  that  if  those  that  hold  the
points  of  the  coards  doe  gird  him  hard  (as  they  doe
when  the  slaughterer  is  slow  or  weake)  hee  puis  so
hard  that  hee  brings  them  to  him,  and  makes  them to

437

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

slacken  in  despight,  having  one  eie  on  them  another  on
the  Sword,  without  any  standing  still :  and  as  the  killer
may  not  deceive  them  with  an  offer,  and  not  strike
under  paine  of  receiving  a  fillip,  they  doe  foresee  their
stroke  in  such  sort  that  come  it  never  so  low  in  a
trise  they  stoope,  and  lie  so  flat  that  it  is  a  wonder  to
see;  and  no  lesse  is  the  taking  of  the  Sword,  holding
the  arme  in  such  sort  that  doing  him  no  hurt,  they
pul  it  downe  jointly  with  themselves,  and  they  put  it
under  the  arme  pulling  by  the  killer ;  wherein  if  they
did  not  helpe  the  other  would  dispatch  him ;  for  they
have  in  this  action  so  many  sooth-sayings  that  for  to
kill  a  child  of  five  yeere  old,  they  goe  so  prepared  as
for  to  kill  some  Giant.  And  with  these  helpes  and
incouragements  so  many  times  hee  striketh  till  hee
hitteth  and  that  is  enough,  for  assoone  as  he  is  downe
he  giveth  him  so  many  blowes  till  he  batters  his  head
Block-head,  (though  one  man  was  seene  that  had  it  so  hard  that
they  could  never  breake  it,  for  as  they  goe  bare-head,
they  have  them  so  hard  that  ours  in  comparison  of
theirs  are  like  a  Pompion,  and  when  they  will  injurie
any  White  man,  they  call  him  soft-head.)

If  this  which  they  kill  falleth  on  his  backe,  and  not
on  his  belly  they  hold  it  for  an  evill  lucke  and  prog-
nostication that  the  killer  shall  die,  and  although  he
falleth  upon  his  belly,  they  have  many  ceremonies,  which
if  they  be  not  kept  they  hold  that  the  killer  cannot
live,  and  many  of  them  are  so  painfull  that  if  any  one
did  suffer  their  troubles  for  Gods  sake,  they  would  bee
accounted  meritorious,  as  hereafter  shall  be  said,  The
poore  wretch  beeing  dead  they  carrie  him  to  a  bone-fire
that  they  have  readie  for  the  same,  and  bringing  the
bodie  neere  the  fire,  touching  him  with  the  hand,  flay  off
a  skinne  somewhat  thicker  then  the  rinde  of  a  Onion,
till  he  remaineth  cleaner  and  whiter  then  a  scalded  Pig.
Then  it  is  delivered  to  the  Butcher  which  maketh  a
hole  beneath  the  stomacke  according  to  their  use,  whereby
the  children  first  do  put  in  their  hands,  and  pull  by  the

438

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

guts untill the Butcher cutteth where  hee  listeth,  and

that  which  remaineth  in  the  hand of  everie one is his

part, and the rest is divided among the Commons ;

except  some  principal  pieces  which  for  great  honour  are

given  to  the  guests  that  are the most principall,  which

they  doe  carrie  well  rosted,  so  that  it  may  not  corrupt,

and with them afterward in their countries  they  make

new  Feasts  and  drinkings  of  wine.

The  killer  having  ended  his  office,  taking  of  the  cloke  [Iv~-  Vl'1-

of  feather,  and  leaving  the  Sword  hee  goeth  home,  where „ I^97-J

,i  ,  D . j  -ill  1 r Ceremonies  of

at  the  doore  the  same  judge  or  stickler  that  was  before  mafanj*  a  ne^

with a shooting bow in his hand, that is, one of  the  Gentleman.

points  on  the  lower  threshold,  the  other  at the  upper,

and  pulling  by  the string as  though  he  would  shoote,

the  killer  passeth betweene him so cunningly  that  hee

toucheth  in  nothing. Assoone  as  he  is  passed  the  other

loseth the string making shew that it  grieves him to

have  missed  him  whom  he  shot  at,  as  though  this  hath

vertue to make him swift  afterward in  the  warre,  and

the enemies to misse him. When he is within he

beginnes to runne through all the houses, and the

Sisters and Cousins in the same manner before him,

saying  my  Brother  is  called  N.  repeating  it  through  all

the  Townes,  and  if  the  Gentleman  hath  any  good  thing

he that goeth takes it from him till they  leave  him

nothing. This being ended they cast on the ground

certaine  legges of  a  certaine  Tree,  called  Pilan. Upon

the  which  hee  stands  all  that  day  with  so  much  silence

as  if  he  had  some  astonishment  in  him,  and  carrying  to

present  thither  the  head  of  the  dead,  they  pull  out  one

of  his  eies,  and  with  the  strings  and  sinewes  of  it  they

anoint  his  pulses,  and  cutting  of  his  mouth  whole,  they

put it on his arme as a Bracelet, and then he layeth

him  downe  in  his  Net  as  a  sicke  man,  and  certainly  hee

is sicke for feare, that if  he doe not accomplish the

Rites  perfectly,  the  soule  of  the  dead  will  kill  him.

Within  a  few  daies  they  give him  the  habit, not  in

the  breast  of  the  Coat  which  he  hath  not,  but  on his

439

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

owne  skin  race  him  all  over  the  bodie  with  the  tooth
of  a  Cutia,  that  is  like  a  Conies  tooth,  the  which  as
well  for  their  little  skill,  as  because  they  have  a  hard
skinne  it  seemes,  that  they  teare  a  piece  of  Parchment,
and  if  he  be  valiant,  they  doe  not  race  him  with  right
Market  and  strokes  but  a  Crosse  in  sort  that  there  remaine  certaine
habit  of  new  yery  £ne  workeS)  anj  some  doe  crv  anc[  groane  with  the

paine.  This  being  ended  they  have  smal  Cole  finely
grownd,  and  the  juice  of  Broamerape  wherewith  they
rub  the  cuts  overthwart,  that  they  put  him  to  great  paine
and  swelling,  which  is  yet  a  greater  torment,  while  his
wounds  doe  close,  which  continue  some  daies,  he  lyeth
still  in  his  Net  without  speaking  any  word,  nor  asking
any  thing,  and  that  he  may  not  break  his  silence,  he
hath  neere  him  water,  flowre,  and  a  certaine  fruit  like
Almonds  which  they  call  Amendnins,  for  he  tasteth
neither  fish  nor  flesh  those  daies.

After  he  is  whole,  many  daies  or  moneths  being  passed,
they  make  a  great  drinking  of  wines  that  hee  may  put
off  his  mourning,  and  cut  his  haire  which  untill  then
he  did  not,  then  hee  anoints  himselfe  with  blacke,  and
from  thence  forward  hee  remaines  enabled  to  kill  without
any  painfull  ceremonie  being  done  to  him,  and  he  also
sheweth  himselfe  honoured  and  contented,  and  with  a
certaine  disdaine,  as  one  that  hath  honour  alreadie,  and
gets  it  not  a  new.  And  so  he  doth  no  more  but  give
the  other  a  couple  of  blowes,  although  the  head  remaine
whole,  and  he  stirring  he  goeth  home,  and  presently  they
come  and  cut  off  his  head.  And  the  Mothers  with
their  children  about  their  necke,  come  to  congratulate
him,  and  hansell  him  for  the  warre,  staining  his  armes
with  that  bloud.  These  bee  the  exploits,  honours  and
vallour  whence  this  people  take  their  names,  whereof
they  boast  very  much,  and  they  remaine  thence  forward
Titles  of  Abaetes,  Murubixaba,  Mo^acara,  which  are  the  names
Honour.  anj  titles  of  Gentlemen.  And  these  are  the  unhappie
Feasts  whereon  these  wretches  doe  ground  their  felicitie
and  glorie,  before  they  have  any  knowledge  of  their  Creator.

440

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

§•  HI.

Of  the  diversitie  of  Nations  and  Languages,  and
of  the  Soyle  and  Climate.

N  all  this  Province  are  many  and  sundrie  Nations  See  before  in
of  divers  Languages,  but  one  is  the  principall  M-  K*wet.
which  comprehendeth  some  ten  Nations  of  Indians.
These  live  on  the  Sea  Coast,  and  in  a  great  part  of
the  Land,  all  of  one  Speech,  though  they  differ  in  some
words.  This  is  that  which  the  Portugals  doe  understand,
it  is  easie,  eloquent,  pleasant,  and  copious ;  the  difficultie
of  it  is  in  having  many  comparisons,  but  of  the  Portugals
almost  all  those  that  came  from  the  Kingdome ;  and  are
seated  here,  and  doe  communicate  with  the  Indians  do
know  it  in  a  short  time,  and  the  children  of  the  Portugals
borne  here  doe  speake  it  better  then  the  Portugall,  as
well  men  as  women,  chiefly  in  the  Captainship  of  Saint
Vincent,  and  with  these  ten  Nations  of  Indians  have  the
Fathers  communication,  because  they  know  their  Language,
and  they  more  tame  and  well  inclined.  These  were,  and
are  the  ancient  friends  of  the  Portugals,  with  whose  helpe
and  armes  they  conquered  this  Countrie,  fighting  against
their  owne  kindred,  and  divers  other  Nations  very  bar-
barous, and  those  of  this  generation  were  so  many  that
it  seemed  an  impossible  thing  to  extinguish  them,  but
the  Portugals  have  made  such  haste  that  they  are  almost  Portugals  use
dead,  and  they  use  such  meanes  that  they  disinhabit  the  of  Savages.
Coast,  and  flie  the  Land  inward,  some  three  hundred,
some  foure  hundred.

The  first  of  this  Language  are  called  Pitiguaras  Lords  pitiguaras.
of  Parayba,  thirtie  leagues  from  Pernambuco,  and  have
the  best  Brasill  woode,  and  are  great  friends  to  the
Frenchmen,  and  did  contract  with  them  untill  now,
marrying  their  Daughters  with  them,  but  now  in  the
yeere  1584.  Parayba  was  taken  by  James  Flares  his
Majesties  General!,  driving  out  the  Frenchmen ;  and  [IV.  vii.
he left a fortresse with a 100. Souldiers, besides the  1298.]

441

A.D.

l60I.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Viatan  a
people  eaten
out  by  the
Portugals.

Portugals  which  also  have  their  Captaine  and  Governour
one  Fructuoso  Barbosa,  that  with  the  principall  men  of
Pernambuco  carried  an  Armie  by  Land  wherewith  he
overcame  the  enemies,  for  from  the  Sea  those  of  the
Armada  fought  not.

Neere  unto  these  lived  a  great  multitude  of  people
which  they  call  Viatan,  of  these  there  are  none  alreadie,
for  they  being  friends  with  the  Pitaguaras,  and  Kindred,
the  Portugals  made  them  enemies  among  themselves,
giving  them  to  be  eaten,  that  by  this  meanes  they  might
warre  against  them  and  hold  them  for  slaves ;  and  finally,
having  a  great  dearth,  the  Portugals  in  stead  of  releeving
them,  tooke  them  Captives,  and  did  send  ship-loades  to
bee  sold  in  other  places.  There  was  joyned  with  this
a  Magician  Portugall  Priest,  that  with  his  deceits  con-
veighed  them  all  to  Pernambuco,  and  so  ended  this
Nation.  The  Portugals  remained  without  Neighbours
to  defend  them  from  the  Pitiguaras,  which  untill  now
that  they  were  overcome,  persecuted  the  Portugals  setting
on  a  sudden  upon  their  Corne,  Goods,  and  Sugar-mils,
burning,  and  killing  many  of  the  Portugals,  because  they
are  verie  warlike,  but  now  by  the  goodnesse  of  God
they  are  freed  from  this  incumbrance.

Others  there  be  that  they  call  Tupinaba,  these  inhabit
from  the  River  Royall  till  ye  come  neere  the  Illeos,
these  were  also  among  themselves  contrarie,  those  of
the  Bay  with  them  of  Camamu,  and  Tntrare.  Along
the  River  of  Saint  Francis  dwelt  another  Nation  called
Caaete ;  and  among  these  were  also  contrarieties  with
them  of  Pernambuco.

From  Illeos,  or  the  little  Hands,  and  Port  Secure,
unto  the  Holy  Ghost  inhabited  another  Nation  called
Tuplnaquin.  Tupinaquin  ;  these  proceeded  from  those  of  Pernambuco,
and  scattered  themselves  in  a  Countrie  of  the  Maine,
multiplying  exceedingly,  but  now  they  are  but  few.
These  were  alwaies  great  enemies  of  the  things  of  God,
hardened  in  their  errours,  verie  revengefull,  and  would
revenge  themselves  as  soone  as  they  see  their  enemies,

442

Tupinaba.

Caaete.

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

and  lovers  of  many  women  : of  these  alreadie  are  many
Christians,  and  they  are  flrme  in  the  faith.

There  is  another  Nation  a  kinne  to  these,  which
runneth  off  the  Maine  from  Saint  Vincent  to  Pernambuco,
called  Tupiguae,  these  were  without  number,  they  doe
diminish,  for  the  Portugals  doe  goe  to  seeke  them  to
serve  themselves  with  them,  and  those  which  escape  doe
flee  verie  farre  off  that  they  may  not  be  slaves :  There
is  another  Nation  Neighbour  to  this  called  Apigapigtanga,
and  Muriapigtanga.  There  is  also  another  Nation  con-
trarie  to  the  Tupinaquins  which  are  called  Guaracayo,
or  Itati.

Another Nation dwelleth in the Holy Ghost,  called
Timimivo,  they  were  contrarie  to  the  Tupinaquins,  but  Timimwo.
they  are  now  verie  few. Another  Nation  which  is  called
Tamuya  inhabitors  of  the  River  of  Januarie, these the  Tamuya.
Portugals  destroyed  when  they  inhabited  the  River,  and
of  them there  be  verie  few,  and  some that are in the
Maine are called Ararape, another Nation inhabiteth  Ararape.
beyond  Saint  Vincent,  about  eightie  leagues,  enemies  of
the Tupinaquins, of Saint  Vincent, of  these there are
infinite  multitudes,  and  doe  runne  along  the  Sea  Coast
and  in  the  Maine,  unto  the  Paraguai  which  the  Castilians
doe  inhabite,  all  these  Nations  abovesaid,  though  different,
and  many of  them enemies  one to another, they  have
the  Language,  and  their  conversion  is  in  hand,  and  they
have  a  great  respect  to  the  Fathers  of  the  company  of
Jesus,  and in the Maine they  sigh for them,  and  call
them  Abare,  and  Father,  desiring  they  would come to
their Countries and convert them  ; and such is their
reputation that some Portugals of badde consciences Unchristian
doe  faine themselves Fathers,  apparelling themselves  in 'mftetie  °f
Gownes, shaving their crownes, and telling them they  si  e ,
are  Abares,  and  that  they  came  to seeke  them  for  the
Churches of the Fathers which are theirs aswell as
ours. Thus  they  seduce  them,  and  assoone  as  they  come
to the Sea, they divide them among themselves, sell,
and  marke  them,  making  first  a  great  slaughter  of  them

443

A.D.
l60I.

Seventie  six
Nations  of
Tapuya.
See  of  these
Master
Knivet  which
lived  with
them.

*A  roote  so
called.

Cowards  and
cruell.

[IV.  vii.

299.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

in  the  Countrie,  robberies  and  assaults,  taking  away  their
Daughters  and  their  Wives,  &c.  And  if  it  were  not
for  these  and  other  like  hinderances,  all  those  of  this
Language  had  beene  converted  to  our  holy  Faith.

There  be  other  contrarie  Nations  enemies  to  these  of
divers  Languages,  which  in  a  generall  name  are  called
Tapuya,  and  they  are  contrarie  also  among  themselves.
In  the  Maine  first  neighbouring  to  the  Tupinaquins
inhabit  the  Guamures,  and  they  occupie  some  eightie
leagues  of  Coast  and  toward  the  Mayne  all  that  they
list.  They  are  Lords  of  the  wild  Woods,  very  great
bodied,  and  by  the  continuance  and  custome  of  going
through  the  Woods,  they  have  their  skinnes  very  hard,
and  for  this  effect,  they  beate  their  children  being  young,
with  certaine  Thistles  to  accustome  them  to  goe  in  the
wilde  Woods.

They  have  no  Husbandrie,  they  live  by  rapine,  and
by  the  point  of  the  Arrow ;  they  eate  the  *  Mandioca
raw  and  it  doth  them  no  hurt,  they  runne  verie  swiftly,
and  to  the  White  men  they  come  not  but  on  a  sudden.
They  use  verie  great  Bowes ;  they  carrie  certaine  stones
made  a  purpose  verie  bigge  that  wheresoever  they  hit,
they  may  presently  breake  the  heads  in  pieces.  And
when  they  come  to  fight,  they  hide  themselves  under
shrubs,  and  from  thence  they  play  their  part,  &  they
are  greatly  feared,  &  there  is  no  power  in  the  world  that
is  able  to  overcome  them.  They  are  great  cowards  in
the  fields  and  dare  not  come  forth,  neither  passe  they
any  waters,  use  any  shipping,  nor  are  given  to  fishing,
all  their  living  is  from  the  woods.  They  are  cruel  as
Lions,  when  they  take  any  enemies  they  cut  off  his  flesh
with  a  Reed  whereof  they  make  their  Arrowes,  and  flea
them  that  they  leave  them  no  more  but  the  bones  and
the  guts ;  if  they  take  any  child  &  are  followed,  that  they
may  not  take  it  away  alive,  they  strike  off  his  head  against
a  post.  They  disbowell  the  women  with  child  to  eate
their  children  roasted.  These  annoy  the  Port  Secure
verie much, the little Hands, and Camamu, and these

444

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  ad.

1601.
Countries  goes  to  decay  because  of  them ; their  speech
cannot  be  understood.

Besides  these  towards  the  maine  and  the  fields  of  Tucanucu  and
Caatinga,  doe  live  many  Nations  of  Tapuyas,  which  are  QmJL
called  Tucanucu,  these  live  in  the  Maine  of  the  great
River,  opposite  to  Port  Secure,  they  have  another
Language.  Others  doe  live  in  the  Maine  before  yee
come  to  Aquitigpe,  and  are  called  Nacii.  Others  which
they  call  Oquigtaiuba,  others  which  are  called  Pahi ;
these  weare  course  Cotton-clothes,  woven  like  a  Net,
with  this  they  cover  themselves  as  with  a  sacke,  they
have  no  sleeves,  they  have  a  different  speech.  In
the  Ari  are  others  which  also  live  in  the  field  going
toward  Aquitigpe.  Others  which  are  called  Larahio,  it
is  a  great  people,  of  a  different  speech.  Others  which
are  called  Mandeiu :  also  of  another  speech,  others
called  Macutu,  others  Napara,  these  have  husbandrie.
Others  called  Cuxare,  these  live  in  the  middest  of  the
field  of  the  Maine,  others  which  live  in  the  same  field,
that  are  called  Nuhinu,  others  doe  live  toward  the
Maine  of  the  Bay  which  is  called  Guayava,  they  have
a  speech  by  themselves,  other  there  about  called  Taicuiu,
these  dwell  in  houses,  they  have  another  speech,  others
in  the  same  Countrie  called  Cariu,  of  a  different  tongue.
These  three  Nations,  and  their  Neighbours  are  friends
of  the  Portugals,  others  which  they  call  Pigru,  they  dwell
in  houses,  others  which  are  called  Obacoatiara,  these  live
in  Hands  in  the  River  of  Saint  Francis,  they  have  Houses  Cave-houses.
like  unto  Caves  under  the  Earth.  These  when  the
enemies  come  against  them  flie  to  the  water,  and  by
diving  escape ;  they  continue  long  under  water,  they  have
great  Arrowes  like  halfe  Darts,  without  Bowes,  and  with
them  they  fight ;  they  are  verie  valiant,  they  eate  humane
ilesh,  they  have  a  different  tongue.

Others  there  are  that  live  farre  within  the  Maine  are
called Anhelim, they have another Language; others  Anhehim,l$c.
that  live  in  Houses  called  Aracuaiati,  they  have  another
Speech ;  others  called  Caivari,  they  live  in  Caves. Others

445

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

1601.

called  Guaianaguacu,  they  dwell  in  Caves  and  have  another
Speech ;  others  farre  within  the  Maine  called  Camucuiara ;
Great  Paps,  these  have  paps  that  reach  under  their  waste,  and  neere
to  their  knees,  and  when  they  runne  they  binde  them
about  their  waste ;  they  are  neverthelesse  great  War-
Hours,  eate  mens  flesh,  and  have  another  Speech :  Others
which  they  call  Jobiora  Apuayara,  Lords  of  sharpe
Staves,  for  they  fight  with  tosted  staves  and  sharpe,  they
are  valiant,  and  eate  humane  flesh,  they  have  another
Speech.  Others  called  Anuacuig,  they  dwell  in  Houses,
they  have  another  Speech,  but  they  understand  themselves
with  these  abovesaid  their  Neighbours.  Others  they  call
Guaiacatu,  and  Guaiatvu,  these  have  another  Speech  and
Cumpehe  dwell  in  Houses.  Others  called  Cumpehe,  these  eate
Savages  not  no  numane  flesh,  when  they  kill  the  enemie,  they  cut
off  the  head  and  carrie  it  for  a  shew,  they  have  no
Houses,  and  are  like  Gipsies.  Others  called  Guayo,  dwell
in  Houses,  they  fight  with  venomed  Arrowes,  they  eat
humane  flesh,  they  have  another  Speech.  Others  called
Cicu,  have  the  same  speech  and  customes  of  them  above-
said.  Others  called  Pahaiu  eate  humane  flesh,  and  have
another  Speech.  Others  called  Jaicuiu,  have  the  same
Speech  that  these  above.  Others  called  Tupijo,  dwell
in  Houses,  have  husbandrie,  and  another  Speech.  Others
called  Maracaguacu,  are  Neighbours  to  these  above,  and
have  the  same  Speech.  Others  called  Jacuruiu,  use
Husbandrie,  dwell  in  Houses,  and  have  another  Speech.
Others  called  Tapecuiu,  are  Neighbours  of  these  above,
and  have  the  same  speech.  Others  called  Anacuiu,  have
the  same  Speech  and  customes  that  those  above,  and
all  of  them  doe  fight  with  venomed  Arrowes.  Others
called  Piracuiu,  have  the  same  Speech  that  those  above,
and  venomed  Arrowes.

Others  called  Taraguaig,  have  another  Speech,  they
fight  with  venomed  Arrowes.  Others  called  Pahacuiu,
can  speake  the  Language  of  them  abovesaid.  Others
called  Tipi,  are  of  the  field,  and  fight  with  venomed
Arrowes. Others called Guacaraiara, have another

446

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

Speech,  and  have  Husbandries  and  dwell  in  Houses.
Others  Neighbours  to  these  above  called  Camaragoa.
Others  called  Curupija,  were  enemies  of  the  Tupinaquis.
Others  called  Aquirino,  have  another  Speech.  Others
called  Piraguayg  Aquig,  live  under  the  Rockes,  are
enemies  to  these  above.  Others  called  Piuacuiu.  Others
called  Parapota,  these  can  speake  the  Speech  of  them  of
the  Coast.  Others  called  Caraemba,  have  another  Speech.
Others  called  Caracuiu,  have  another  Speech.  Others
called  Mainuma,  these  joine  themselves  with  the  Guai-
mures  enemies  to  them  of  the  Coast,  they  understand
themselves  with  the  Guaimures,  but  they  have  another
Speech.  Others  called  Aturari,  enter  also  in  communi-
cation with  the  Guaimures,  others  called  Cuigtaio,  doe
also  communicate  and  enter  with  the  Guaimures.  Others
called  Cuigpe,  these  were  the  inhabitors  of  Port  Secure.
Others  called  Guigraiube,  are  friends  with  them  above.
Others  called  Augarari,  these  dwell  not  farre  from  the
Sea,  betweene  Port  Secure,  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  Others
called  Amixocori,  are  friends  with  the  former.  Others
called  Caraia,  doe  live  in  the  Maine  toward  Saint  Vincent,
and  went  flying  from  the  North  thither,  they  have
another  Speech.  Others  called  Apetupa,  live  in  the
Maine  toward  Aquitipi.  Others  called  Caraguatijara,
have  another  Speech.  Others  called  Aquiguira,  these  doe  [IV.  vii.
converse with the former. Another Nation liveth in  I23°-]

the  Maine,  enemies  to  the  Muriapigtauga,  and  of  the
Tarape,  it  is  a  Dwarfish  people,  low  of  bodie,  but  bigge
legged  and  backed,  the  Portugals  call  these  Pigneos,
and  the  Indians  call  them  Taepijguiri,  because  they  are
little.  Others  called  Quiriciguig,  these  doe  live  in  the
Maine  of  the  Bay,  verie  farre.  Others  called  Guirig,
these  are  great  horsemen,  and  friends  of  the  former.
Others  called  Guaiere,  doe  live  in  the  Maine  of  Port
Secure,  verie  farre  off.  Others  called  iEnaguig,  these
were  Inhabitors  of  the  Countries  of  the  Tupinaquins,  and
because  the  Tupinaquins  remained  Lords  of  the  Moun-
taines,  they  are  called  Tupinaquins.

447

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

Guaitaca.  Others called Guaitaca, doe live in the Sea Coast

betweene  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  River  of  Januarie,
they  live  in  the  fields,  and  will  not  live  in  the  Woods,
they  goe  to  eate  to  their  Husbandries,  and  come  to  the
houses  to  bed,  they  have  no  other  treasures. They  live

Beast  in  as  the  cattell  that  feedeth  in  the  fields,  and  come  not
ape.  tQ  ^  Houses  buf-  to  sleepe)  tnev  are  so  swift  in  running
that  by  footmanship  they  catch  the  game.  Others  called
Igbigranupan,  are  enemies  to  the  Tupinaquins,  they  com-
municate with  the  Guaimures,  when  they  fight  with  their
enemies,  they  make  great  noises  striking  with  certaine
stickes  upon  others.  Others  called  Quirigma,  these  were
Lords  of  the  Countries  of  the  Bay,  and  therefore  it  is
called  the  Bay  Cuirimure.  The  Tupinabas  did  expell
them  out  of  their  Countries,  and  remained  Lords  of
them,  and  the  Tapuyas  went  toward  the  South.  Others
called  Maribuco,  in  habit  in  the  Maine  right  against  the
great  River.  Others  called  Catagua,  doe  live  right
against  Jequeriquare,  betweene  the  Holy  Ghost  and  Port
Secure.  Others  called  Tapuxerig,  are  enemies  of  the
Tapuyas,  and  eate  up  their  Corne  fields.  Others  that
dwell  about  the  Maine  that  goeth  toward  Saint  Vincent,
are  called  Amocaxo,  and  were  enemies  of  the  Tupina-
quins. Others  called  Nonea,  have  verie  great  faces.
Others  called  Apuy,  dwell  neere  the  field  of  the  Maine,
they  are  great  singers,  and  have  another  Speech.  Others
called  Panaguiri,  differing  from  the  former.  Others  also
differing  called  Bigrorgya.  Others  called  Piriju,  there
are  a  great  number  of  these.

All  these  seventie  sixe  Nations  of  Tapuyas,  which  have
the  most  of  them  a  sundry  Language,  are  a  wilde  savage
and  untamed  people ;  they  are  all  for  the  most  part
enemies  of  the  people  that  dwell  in  the  Sea  Coast
neighbouring  to  the  Portugals :  onely  a  certaine  kind  of
Tapuyas,  that  live  in  the  River  of  Saint  Francis,  and
others  that  dwell  nearer  are  friends  of  the  Portugals,  and
entertaine  them  verie  well  when  they  passe  through  their
Countries. Of these many are Christians, that were

448

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

brought  by  the  Fathers  from  the  Maine,  and  learning
the  Speech  of  them  of  the  Sea  Coast  which  the  Fathers
can  speake,  they  baptized  them,  and  many  of  them  doe
live  in  the  Townes  of  the  Fathers  married,  and  serve
them  for  Interpreters,  for  the  remedie  of  so  great  a
number  of  people  as  is  lost ;  and  onely  with  these
Tapuyas,  may  some  fruit  bee  gotten,  with  the  rest  of
the  Tapuyas  no  conversion  can  be  wrought  because  of
their  mutabilitie,  and  the  having  manie  and  sundrie  very
hard  Languages.  Onely  there  remaineth  one  remedie,
if  the  Lord  God  doe  not  discover  another,  and  it  is ;
getting  some  of  their  children,  and  making  them  to
learne  the  Speech  of  the  rest,  and  serving  for  Inter-
preters may  some  fruit  be  gotten,  though  with  great
difficultie,  for  the  Reasons  abovesaid,  and  manie  other.

The  Climate  of  Brasill  generally  is  temperate,  of  good,  Of  the
delicate, and healthfull aire, where the men live on  ^mate%  &
even  to  90.  100.  and  more  yeeres,  and  the  Countrie  is  Brasill  ^
full  of  old men. Generally  it is  neither  cold  nor  hot,  of  some  notable
though  from  the  River  of  Januarie,  unto  Saint  Vincent,  things  found

there be colds and heates, but not very great. The  there;  asr ,
TT  ji  •  11 i_ • 1  x. on  the  Land

Heavens  are  very  pure  and cleere,  especially  by  night ;  as the  Sea^

the  Moone  is  very  prejudiciall  unto  health,  and  corrupteth
the  things  very  much.  The  mornings  are  verie  health-
full  :  it  hath  verie  little  twilights,  as  well  in  the  morning
as  in  the  evenings,  for  as  soone  as  it  is  day  presently
the  Sun  riseth,  and  as  soone  as  it  is  set,  it  is  night.
Their  Winter  beginneth  in  March,  and  endeth  in  August,
the  Summer  beginneth  in  September,  and  endeth  in
Februarie,  the  nights  and  daies  are  all  the  yeere  almost
equall.

The  Countrie  is  somewhat  melancholicke,  overflowne
with  many  waters,  as  wel  of  maine  Rivers,  as  from  the
Skie ;  in  it  is  great  store  of  raine  chiefly  in  Winter,  it
is  ful  of  great  Woods  that  are  greene  all  the  yeere.  It
is  a  Hilly  Countrie,  especially  toward  the  Sea  Coast,  and
from  Pernambuco  unto  the  Captaineship  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  is  verie  scarce  of  stone ;  but  from  thence  to
xvi  449  2  F

A.D.
l60I,

[VI.  vii.

301.]

The  wilde
Boare,  3.
kinds  and

mo?;

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Saint  Vincent  are  verie  rough  and  high  Mountaines,  of
great  Quarries  of  Rockie  stone,  the  food  and  waters  are
generally  healthfull,  light,  and  of  easie  digestion.  There
are  few  Commodities  for  apparell,  because  the  Countrie
yeeldeth  nothing  but  Cotton-wooll,  and  of  the  rest  the
Countrie  is  plentifull : especially  of  Cattell  and Sugars.

§• Iin-

Of  the  Beasts, Land-serpents, Fowles.

He  Deere  in  the  Brasilian  tongue  is  called  Cuacu  :
there  are  some  very  great,  like  faire  Horses,  they
are  well  headed,  and  some  have  ten  or  twelve
snags ;  these  are  rare,  and  they  are  found  in  the  River
of  Saint  Francis,  and  in  the  Captainship  of  Saint  Vincent.
These  are  called,  Cuacuapara,  they  are  esteemed  of  the
Carijos,  who  of  the  shankes  and  sinowes  make  the  points
of  their  Arrowes,  and  certaine  throwing  Balls  which  they
use  for  to  strike  downe  beasts  and  men.  There  bee  other
smaller,  they  have  homes  also,  but  they  are  onely  of
one  point :  besides  these  there  are  three  or  foure  kindes,
some  that  feede  onely  in  the  Woods,  others  onely  in
the  plaine  fields  in  heards.  They  make  great  account
of  the  skinnes,  and  of  the  flesh.

The  Tapijrete  are  the  Elkes,  of  whose  skinne  the  leather
Targets  are  made,  they  are  like  Kine,  much  more  like
a  Mule,  the  tayle  is  of  a  finger  length,  they  have  no
homes,  they  have  a  snout  of  a  quarter  long,  which  he
shrinketh  up  and  putteth  forth.  They  swimme  and  dive
very  much,  but  when  they  dive  they  take  ground  pre-
sently under  water,  and  going  on  it  they  come  out
in  another  place,  there  are  great  store  of  them  in  this
Countrie.

There  are  great  store  of  wilde  Boares,  and  it  is  the
ordinary  food  of  the  Indians  of  this  Countrie,  they  have
the  navell  on  their  backe,  and  out  of  it  there  cometh
a  sent  like  the  sent  of  little  Foxes,  and  by  that  sent  the
Dogs  doe  hunt  them,  and  they  are  easily  taken.

45°

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

There  are  others  called  Tayacutirica,  that  is  to  say,  a
Boare  that  snappeth  or  grindeth  his  teeth,  these  are  bigger
then  the  common,  and  more  rare,  and  with  their  tushes
they  goare  all  the  beasts  they  meete.

Others  are  called  Tayacupita,  that  is,  a  Boare  that
standeth  still  and  tarieth ;  these  doe  assault  the  Dogs,
and  the  men  :  and  if  they  catch  them  they  eate  them  ;
they  are  so  fierce,  that  men  are  forced  to  take  the  trees
to  escape  them,  and  some  doe  stay  at  the  foot  of  the
trees  some  dayes  till  the  man  doe  come  downe ;  and
because  they  know  this  tricke  of  theirs,  they  goe  presently
to  the  trees  with  their  Bowes  and  Arrowes,  and  from
thence  they  kill  them.  There  bee  also  other  kinde  of
Boares,  all  good  meate.

The  Acutis  are  like  the  Conies  of  Spaine,  chiefely  in  Ami.
their  teeth :  the  colour  is  dunne,  and  draweth  toward
yellow :  they  are  domesticall  creatures,  so  that  they  goe
about  the  house,  and  goe  out  and  come  in  againe  to  it,
they  take  with  their  fore-feet  all  that  they  eate,  and  so
they  carrie  it  to  the  mouth,  and  they  eate  very  fast,  and
hide  that  which  they  leave  against  they  be  an  hungred.
Of  these  there  are  many  kindes,  and  all  are  eaten.

The Pacai are  like Pigs, there are  great abundance  pacdm
of  them  ;  the flesh is  pleasant,  but  it  is heavie. They
never bring forth but one at once. There  bee  others
very  white;  these  bee  rare,  they  are  found  in  the  River
of  Saint  Francis.

There are many Ounces, some blacke, some grey,  Jagoarete.
some speckled, it a very cruell beast,  and fierce, they  M-  K-nivet
assault men exceedinly, that even on the trees they  ct,. s m
cannot  escape  them,  especially  if  they  be  bigge. When
they are flesht there is none that dare abide them,
especially  by  night: they  kill  many  beasts  at  once,  they
spoile a whole Hen-house, or a heard of  Swine,  and
to  open a  man,  or  whatsoever beast,  it  sufficeth  to  hit
him with one of  his clawes. But the Indians are so  Bold  vain-
hardie,  that  some  of  them  dare  close  with  one  of  them,  glorious
and  holdeth  it  fast,  and  kills  it  in  a  field,  as  they  doe  lndiam-

45i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

their  enemies,  getting  a  name,  and  using  all  the  cere-
monies they  doe  to  their  enemies.  They  use  the  heads
for  Trumpets,  and  the  Portugall  women  use  the  skinnes
for  Rugs  or  Coverlets,  especially  of  the  painted  ones,
and  in  the  Captainship  of  Saint  Vincent.

Carigue.  The  Carigue  are  like  the  Foxes  of  Spaine,  but  they

are  smaller,  as  bigge  as  a  Cat,  they  smell  worse  then
the  Foxes  of  Spaine  themselves,  and  they  are  grey  as
they.  They  have  a  bag  from  the  fore  to  the  hinder
feet,  with  sixe  or  seven  dugs,  and  there  they  carrie  their
young  ones  hidden  till  they  can  get  their  owne  food,
and  hath  ordinarily  sixe  or  seven  in  a  litter.  This
vermine  destroyeth  the  Hens,  for  it  goeth  not  by  day
but  by  night,  and  climes  the  trees  and  the  houses,  and  no
Bird  or  Hen  can  escape  them.

Ant Beare.or The  Tamandua  is  of  notable  admiration,  it  is  of  the

Tamandua,  a bignesse of  a great Dog, more round then long,  and

strange-  shaped °  .  P  .  .

beast.  ^e  tayle  is twice  or thrice  as long  as the bodie,  and

so full of  haire, that from the heate, raine, cold and

winde,  hee  harboureth  himselfe  all  under  it,  that  yee  can

see nothing of  him. The head is small, and hath a

thinne snout, no greater mouth then an oyle Cruze,

round and not open, the tongue is of  three quarters

long,  and with it he  licketh up the  Ants,  whereof  he

onely feeds ; hee is diligent in seeking of the Ant-

heapes, and with the clawes hee breaketh them, and

casting out his tongue the Ants sticke on it, and so

he drawes them in, having no more mouth then to

hold his tongue full of  them ; it is of  a great  fierce-

nesse,  and doth  assault many people and beasts. The

Ounces  doe  feare  them,  and  the  Dogs  exceedingly,  and

whatsoever  they  catch,  they  teare  with  their  clawes ;  they

[IV.  vii. are  not  eaten,  neither  are  they  good  for  any  thing  but

1302-]  to  destroy  the  Ant-heapes,  and they  are so many  that

they  will  never  bee  destroyed  altogether.

Tatu,  or  The  Tatu is of  the bignesse of  a Pigge,  and of  a

Armadillo. whitish  colour,  it  hath  a  very  long  snout,  and  the  body

full  of  things  like  plates,  wherewith  he  remayneth  armed,

452

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

and it  hath  certaine  pieces  hanging  downe  as  the  Badas  The  Badas

/ire thp

have. These plates are so hard, that no Arrow can Di.

.  v  • 1  • 1  • • 1 n 1  1  Rhinocerors.

pierce them, except it hits him in the fiankes ; they

digge so fast,  that it hath chanced seven and twentie

men  with  Mattockes  not  to  bee  able  to  digge  so  much

as one of  these with their snout. But if they cast

water in their holes they are presently taken : it  is  a

creature worth the seeing, and they call it an armed

Horse,  the flesh is  like Hennes flesh, or Pigge,  very

pleasant,  of  the  skinne  they  make  Purses,  and  they  are

very  faire  and  lasting,  they  are  made  tame,  and  are  bred

in  the  house. Of  these  there  be  many  kindes,  and  there

are  great  abundance  of  them.

The  Canduacu  is  the  Porcupine  of  Africa,  and  hath  Canduacu,  or
bristles  white  and  blacke,  so  great,  that  they  are  of  a  PorcuP™?:
spanne  and  a  halfe,  and  more,  and  they  cast  them  like
as  those  of  Africa.  There  be  other  of  these,  called
Candumiri,  because  they  are  smaller ;  and  they  have
bristles  as  the  other.  There  be  other  smaller,  of  the
bignesse  of  a  Cat,  with  yellow  bristles  and  blacke  at
the  points.  All  these  bristles  have  this  qualitie,  that
entring  into  the  flesh,  bee  it  never  so  little,  of  it  selfe
it  pierceth  through  the  flesh.  And  for  this  cause  these
bristles  doe  serve  the  Indians  for  an  instrument  to
bore  the  eares,  for  putting  never  so  little  in  them  in
one  night  it  pierceth  them  through.  There  be  other
smaller  like  Urchins  or  Hedge-hogs,  they  have  also
bristles,  but  they  cast  them  not,  all  these  beasts  are  of
a  good  flesh  and  taste.

The  Hirara  is  like  the  Civet  Cat,  though  some  say  Hiraras  or
it  is  not ;  they  are  of  many  colours,  viz.  grey,  blacke,  et  u'
and  white,  they  eate  nothing  but  hunnie,  and  in  this
they  are  so  terrible,  that  bee  the  hole  of  the  Bee-hive
never  so  little  they  make  it  so  bigge  that  they  may
goe  in,  and  when  they  finde  the  Hunnie  they  never
eate  it,  till  they  have  called  the  rest  of  the  young
ones,  and  then  the  old  one  going  in,  he  doth  nothing
but bring out  the Hunnie, and give it to the yong

453

A.D.
l60I.

Aquiqui,  Apes
or  Monkies.

Ape-king.

His  Oration,

His  Page.

Many  kindes
of  Monkies.

Their
Physike.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ones,  a  thing  of  great  admiration,  and  an  example  of
great  charitie  for  men,  and  that  this  is  so  the  men  of
the  Countrie  doe  affirme.

The  Aquiqui  are  very  great  Apes,  as  bigge  as  a  good
Dog,  blacke,  and  very  ougly,  as  well  the  male  as  the
female ;  they  have  a  great  beard  onely  in  the  lower
chap :  of  these  come  sometimes  a  male  one  so  yellow
that  it  draweth  toward  red,  which  they  say  is  their  King.
This  hath  a  white  face,  and  the  beard  from  eare  to  eare,
as  cut  with  the  Scissers,  and  it  hath  one  thing  much  to
be  noted,  namely,  that  he  goeth  into  a  tree,  and  maketh
so  great  a  noise  that  it  is  heard  very  farre  off,  in  the
which  he  continueth  a  great  while  without  ceasing,  and
for  this,  this  kind  hath  a  particular  instrument :  and  the
instrument  is  a  certaine  hollow  thing,  as  it  were  made
of  Parchment,  very  strong,  and  so  smooth  that  it  serveth
to  burnish  withall,  as  big  as  a  Duckes  Egge,  and  begin-
neth  from  the  beginning  of  the  gullet,  till  very  neere
the  palate  of  the  mouth  between  both  the  cheekes,  and
it  is  so  light  that  assoone  as  it  is  toucht  it  moveth  as
the  key  of  a  Virginals.  And  when  this  Ape  is  thus
crying  he  fometh  much,  and  one  of  the  little  ones  that
is  to  remaine  in  his  place  doth  cleanse  many  times  the
fome  from  his  beard.

There  are  others  of  many  kindes,  and  in  great
abundance,  they  are  blacke,  grey,  and  yellow,  the
Country-men  say  that  some  of  these,  when  they  shoot
at  them  with  an  Arrow,  catch  it  in  their  hand,  and
turne  againe,  and  throwe  it  at  the  man ;  and  when
they  are  hurt  they  seeke  a  certaine  leafe  and  chaw  it,
and  thrust  it  into  the  wound  for  to  heale  them,  and
because  they  are  alwaies  on  the  trees,  and  are  very
swift,  when  the  leape  is  great,  and  the  little  ones  cannot
passe,  one  of  them  lieth  acrosse  like  a  bridge,  and  the
rest  passe  over  him,  the  tayle  serveth  him  for  a  hand ;
and  if  any  be  strucken,  with  his  tayle  he  holdeth  fast
the  bough  whereon  he  is,  and  so  dieth  hanging,  and
falleth  not.

454

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

They  have  many  other  qualities  that  are  seene  every  Monkie-tricks.
day,  as  to  take  a  sticke  and  beate  some  body  that
doth  them  harme ;  another  found  a  basket  of  Egges,
hung  it  by  the  cord  about  his  necke,  and  going  to  the
top  of  an  house,  from  thence  made  many  mowes  at
his  master  that  went  to  seeke  him,  and  breaking  them,
did  eate  them  all  before  him,  throwing  the  shells  at  his
master.

The  beast  Cuati  is  grey,  and  like  the  Badgers  of  Cuati.
Portugall,  it  hath  the  snout  and  clawes  very  long,  it
climeth  the  trees  like  the  Monkie  :  no  Snake,  no  Egge,
no  Bird  doth  escape  it,  nor  any  thing  that  it  can  get.
They  are  made  tame  in  the  houses,  but  no  man  can
abide  them,  for  they  devoure  all ;  they  will  play  with
little  Cats,  and  whelpes,  they  are  malicious,  pleasant,  and
are  apt  for  many  things.

There  bee  other  two  or  three  greater  kindes,  as  great  Other  kinds.
Dogges, and have tushes like the wilde Boares of
Portugall ; these devoure beasts and men, and when
they  finde  their  prey,  they  compasse  it  about,  some  in
one  place,  some  in  another,  till  they  devoure  it.

Of  wilde Cats  are many kindes, some blacke, some  Wilde  Cats.
white,  some  of  a Safran  colour,  and  are  very  faire  for
any furre. These Cats are very terrible, and swift;
they  live by prey and by birds,  and they  assault  also
the  men ;  some  of  them  are  as  big  as  Dogs.

The  Jagoarucu are  the  Dogs of  Brasill,  they  are of  Jagoarucu.
a grey colour mingled with white ; very swift, and  [IV.  vii.
when they  yelpe they  are like Dogs; they have the  13°3-]

tayle very hairy, feed on fruits, and upon prey,  and
bite  terribly.

The  Tapati  are  like  the  Conies  of  Portugall,  and  Tapati.
here  they  doe  barke  like  Dogs,  especially  by  night,
and  very  often  ;  the  Indians  hold  this  barking  for  an
evill  signe  ;  they  breed  three  or  foure  at  once  ;  they
are  very  rare,  for  they  have  many  adversaries,  as  birds
of  rapine,  and  other  beasts  that  doe  eate  them.

The Jaguacini are big as the Foxes of Portugall,  Jaguacini.

455

A.D.

l60I,

Biarataca.

Stinking  beast.

Priguica,  or
Laz,inesse.

Simple  food.

Twelve  kinds
of  Rats.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  have  the  same  colour  of  a  Foxe,  they  feed  onely
upon  the  Sea-crabs,  and  among  the  Sugar-canes,  and
destroy  many  of  them  ;  they  are  very  sleepie,  for  they
kill them  sleeping,  they  doe  no  hurt.

The  Biarataca  is  of  the  bignesse  of  a  Cat,  like  a
Ferret  ;  it  hath  a  white  stroake  and  a  grey  along  the
backe,  like  a  crosse,  very  well  made ;  it  feeds  upon
birds  and  their  egges,  and  upon  other  things,  especially
upon  Ambar,  and  loveth  it  so  well,  that  all  the  night
he  goeth  by  the  Sea-side  to  seeke  it,  and  where  there
is  any,  hee  is  the  first.  It  is  greatly  feared,  not
because  it  hath  any  teeth,  or  any  other  defensive  thing,
but  it  hath  a  certaine  ventositie  so  strong,  and  so
evill  of  sent,  that  it  doth  penetrate  the  wood,  the
stones,  and  all  that  it  encountreth  withall,  and  it  is
such,  that  some  Indians  have  died  with  the  stench.
And  the  Dog  that  commeth  neere  it  escapeth  not  :
and  this  smell  lasteth  fifteene,  twentie,  or  more  dayes;
and  it  is  such,  that  if  it  lighteth  neere  some  Towne,
it  is  presently  dis-inhabited.  And  that  they  may  not
bee  perceived,  they  scrape  a  hole  in  the  ground,  and
there  within  they  voide  that  ventositie,  and  cover  it
with  earth  ;  and  when  they  are  found,  that  they  may
not  bee  taken,  their  defense  is  to  cast  out  that
stench.

The  Priguica  (which  they  call)  of  Brasill,  is  worth
the  seeing  ;  it  is  like  a  shag-haire  Dog,  or  a  Land-
spaniell,  they  are  very  ougly,  and  the  face  is  like  a
woman's  evill  drest,  his  fore  and  hinder  feet  are  long,
hee  hath  great  clawes  and  cruell,  they  goe  with  the
breast  on  the  earth,  and  their  young  fast  to  their
bellie.  Though  yee  strike  it  never  so  fast,  it  goeth
so  leasurely,  that  it  hath  need  of  a  long  time  to  get
up  into  a  tree,  and  so  they  are  easily  taken  ;  their
food  is  certaine  Fig-tree  leaves,  and  therefore  they
cannot  bee  brought  to  Portugall,  for  as  soone  as  they
want  them  they  die  presently.

In these parts are a great multitude of  Rats, and

456

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

of  them  are  some  ten  or  twelve  kindes,  some  blaclce,
others  yellow,  others  dunne,  all  are  eaten,  and  are
very  savourie,  especially  some  great  ones  that  are  like
Conies,  and  sometimes  they  are  so  many,  that  lighting
upon  a  sowne  field,  they  utterly  destroy  it.

Of Land-Snakes and Serpents.

THe Giboya is a Snake of the greatest that are  Of  the  Snakes
in this Countrie, and there are some found of  that  are  on  the
twentie foot in length, they are  very  faire, but more  m 'im
wonderfull  they  are  in  swallowing  a  whole  Deere ;  they  Giboya.
have no  poison,  neither are their  teeth  great  according
to  the bodie. To take their prey whereon they  feed,
they use this sleight. It  layeth it selfe along by the
high-wayes,  and  when  the  prey  passeth  it  leapeth  upon
it,  and  windes  it  selfe  in  such  order,  and  crusheth  it  so,
that it breaketh all his bones, and afterward licketh
it, and his licking hath such vertue, that it bruiseth
or  suppleth  it  all,  and  then  it  swallowes  it  up  whole.

There  are  others,  called  Guiraupiaguara,  that  is,  Eaters  Egge-eater.
of  birds  Egges,  it  is  very  blacke,  long,  and  hath  a
yellow  breast  ;  they  goe  on  the  tops  of  trees  as  it
were  swimming  in  the  water,  and  no  man  can  runne
so  fast  on  the  ground  as  they  on  the  trees  ;  these
destroy  the  birds,  and  their  egges  also.

There  are  others  very  bigge  and  long,  called  Caninana,  Caninana.
they are all greene, and of  a notable beautie. These
also  doe  eate  egges  and  birds,  and  kill  little  chickens.

There  is  another,  called  Boytiapua,  that  is,  a  Snake  Long-snout.
that  hath  a  long  snout,  it  is  very  slender  and  long,
and  feeds  onely  upon  Frogs.  The  Indians  observe
sooth-saying  with  this,  that  when  the  woman  hath  no
children,  they  take  this  snake  and  strike  her  with  it
on  the  hips,  and  say  she  shall  presently  have  children.

There is another, called Gaitiepia, they are found  Gaitiepia.
only in the Rarin, it is of a notable bignesse, he
smelleth so much,  like  a Foxe,  wheresoever he  goeth,
that  there  is  none  can  abide  it.

457

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.
Boy  una.  There is another, called Boyuna, that is, a blacke

Snake, it is very long and slender, it smelleth also
very  much  like  a  Foxe.

There  is  another,  called  Bom,  because  that  when  it
goeth,  it  crieth  bom,  bom,  it  is  also  very  great,  and
doth no  hurt.

There is another, called Boicupecanga, that is, a

Snake that hath prickles in his backe, they are very

great,  and  grosse,  the prickles are  very  venomous,  and

all  men  doe  avoide  and  keepe  themselves  from  them.

Jararaca  is  a name that comprehendeth foure  kindes

Snakes  that of  very  venomous  Snakes. The  first  is  greatest,  called

have  poison. Jararacucu,  that is,  great  Jararaca,  and  they  are of  ten

span  ties long, they have great tushes hidden in the

mouth along their gummes, and when they bite they

[IV.  vii.  stretch them like a finger of the hand  : they have

13°^\  their  poison  in their  gummes, their  teeth crooked,  and

a stroake upon them whereby the poison runneth.

Others say, they have it within the tooth, which is

hollow within, it hath so  vehement a poison, that in

foure and twentie  houres,  and lesse,  it killeth a man :

the poison is very yellow, like SafTran water, they

bring  foorth  many  young  ones  at  once,  one  hath  beene

taken  with  thirteene  in  her  bellie.

There  are  others,  called  Jararcoaypitiuga,  that  is,  that
hath  the  point  of  the  tayle  more  white  then  grey  :
these  are  as  venomous  as  Vipers  of  Spaine,  and  have
the  same  colour  and  fashion.

There  are  others,  called  Jararaepeba,  most  venomous ;
it  hath  a  red  chaine  along  the  backe,  and  the  breasts,
and  the  rest  of  the  bodie  is  all  grey.

There are other smaller Jararacas, that  the  greatest
is about halfe a yard long, they are of an earthie
colour, they have certaine veines in their head like
the  Vipers,  and  they  make  such  a  noise  as  they  doe.
Curucucu.  The  Curucucu  is  a  Snake  very  hideous  and  fearefull,

and  some  are  of  fifteene  spannes  long :  when  the  Indians
doe kill them they burie presently the head, because

458

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

it  hath  great  store  of  poison  :  for  to  catch  the  prey
and  the  people,  it  lieth  close  to  a  tree,  and  when  it
seeth  the  prey,  it  casts  it  selfe  upon  it,  and  so  killeth
it.

The  Boycininga  is  a  Snake,  called  of  the  Bell,  it  Boycininga.
is  of  a  great  poison,  but  it  maketh  such  a  noise
with  a  Bell  it  hath  in  his  taile,  that  it  catcheth  very
few  ;  though  it  be  so  swift,  that  they  call  it,  the
flying  Snake,  his  length  is  twelve  or  thirteene  spannes
long.  There  is  another,  called  Bociningpeba  :  this  also
hath  a  Bell,  but  smaller,  it  is  blacke,  and  very  venomous.

The  poison  of  the  Ibiracua  Snake  is  so  vehement,  Ibiracua.
that  if  it  biteth  any  person,  presently  it  makes  him
to  voide  bloud  through  all  the  passages  of  his  bodie,
to  wit,  the  eyes,  nostrils,  mouth,  eares,  and  all  open
places  else  of  his  bodie  ;  it  runneth  a  great  while,
and  if  he  be  not  holpen,  he  empties  his  bloud  and
dieth.

The  Snake  Ibiboboca  is  very  faire,  it  hath  the  head  Ibiboboca.
red,  white  and  blacke,  and  so  all  the  bodie  is  spotted
of  these  three  colours  ;  this  is  the  most  venomous  of
all,  it  goeth  slowly,  and  liveth  in  the  crannies  of  the
earth,  and  by  another  name  it  is  called,  the  Snake  of
the  colours.

The great vehemencie that these  venomous Snakes
above said have,  the great  paines they  cause,  and the
many  persons that every  day  doe  die  of  their  stinging
cannot  be exprest : and they  are so many  in number,  Store  and  sore.
that not onely the fields and the woods, but even
the houses are full of  them, and they are found in
the beds,  and  within the bootes,  when they put them
on. The  Brethren  going to  their rest  doe finde them
there wound about the benches feet, and if  they be
not holpen  when they  sting,  cutting  the  wound,  letting
him bloud, drinking Unicorns home, or Carima, or  Carima,  a
the  water  of  the Snakes-wood,  or  some  other  effectuall  ^ruSsocal^-
remedie, in foure and twentie houres and lesse he
dieth with great crying and paines, and they are so

459

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

excessive,  that  when  any  person  is  bitten  presently  he
demandeth  confession,  and  maketh  account  to  die,  and
so  disposeth  of  his  goods.

Musk-snake.  There  are  other  Snakes,  chiefely  these  Jararacas,  that
have  a  great  smell  of  Muske,  and  wheresoever  they
bee,  they  are  descried  by  the  good  and  fragrant  smell
they have.

Scorpions.  There  are  many  Scorpions,  that  every  day  are  found

in  their  beds,  among  the  bookes,  and  about  the
chambers,  ordinarily  they  kill  not,  but  in  foure  and
twentie  houres  they  cause  intolerable  paines.

Poisonous  It seemeth that this climate doth flowe in poison,

as  well  for  the  many  Snakes  there  are,  as  for  the
multitude  of  Scorpions,  Spiders,  and  other  uncleane
creatures,  and  the  Lizards  are  so  many  that  they  cover
the  walls  of  the  house,  and  the  holes  are  full  of
them.

E

Of the Fowles that are in the Land,  and are
thereon  sustained.

Ven as this climate doth flowe in poison, so it
seemeth  to create beautifulnesse in the birds,  and
as all the Countrie is full of  Groves and Woods,  so
it  is  full  of  most  beautifull  birds  of  all  colours.
Parots.  The Parots in this Countrie  are infinite,  more  then

Dawes,  or  Starlings,  or  Thrushes,  or  Sparrowes  of
Spaine,  and  so  they  make  a  cackling  as  the  birds
above-said  ;  they  destroy  them  by  thousands,  they  flie
in  flockes  alwaies,  and  they  are  so  many,  that  there
be  Hands  where  there  is  nothing  but  Parots  ;  they
are  eaten,  and  are  very  good  meate ;  they  are  ordinarily
very  faire,  and  of  many  and  sundrie  colours  and
kindes,  and  they  almost  all  speake  if  they  be  taught.
Varietie  of  The  Arara  Parots  are  those  that  by  another  name
Parots.  The  are  cauec[  Macaos  ;  it  is  a  great  bird,  and  are  very
rare,  and  by  the  sea-coast  they  are  not  found,  it  is
a  faire  bird  in  colours ;  their  breasts  are  red  as  scarlet ;
from the middle of  the bodie to the taile some are

460

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

yellow,  others  greene,  others  blue,  and  through  all
the  bodie  they  have  scattering,  some  greene,  some
yellow,  and  blue  feathers,  and  ordinarily  every  feather
hath  three  or  foure  colours,  and  the  taile  is  very  long.
These  lay  but  two  egges,  they  breed  in  the  trunkes
of  trees,  and  in  the  rockes  of  stone.  The  Indians
esteeme  them  very  much,  and  of  their  feathers  they
make  their  fine  things,  and  their  hangings  for  their
swords,  it  is  a  very  pleasant  bird,  they  become  very
tame,  and  domesticall,  and  speake  very  well  if  they
be  taught.

The  Anapuru  Parot  is  most  faire ;  in  it  all  colours  are  [IV-  vii-
found  with  great  perfection,  to  wit,  red,  greene,  yellow,  .  I3°5-J
blacke,  blue,  grey,  the  colour  of  the  Bulfinch,  and  of  all
these  colours  it  hath  the  bodie  bespeckled  and  spotted.
These  also  doe  speake,  and  they  have  another  advantage,
that  is,  they  breed  in  the  house,  and  hatch  their  young
ones,  wherefore  they  are  of  great  esteeme.

The  Araruna  or  Machao  is  very  faire,  it  is  all  blacke,  draruna.
and  this  blacke  sprinkled  with  greene,  which  giveth  it  a
great  beautie,  and  when  the  Sunne  shineth  on  him  he  is
so  shining  that  it  is  very  pleasant  to  behold ;  it  hath  the
feet  yellow,  and  the  beake  and  the  eies  red ;  they  are
of  great  esteeme  for  their  beautie,  for  they  are  very  rare,
and  breed  not  but  very  farre  within  the  Land,  and  of
their  feathers  the  Indians  make  their  Diademes  and
Pictures.

The  Parots  Aiurucuro  are  most  beautifull,  they  are  all  Aiurucuro.
greene,  they  have  a  cap  and  a  collar  of  yellow,  very  faire,
and  over  the  beake  a  few  feathers  of  a  very  cleare  blue,
which  doe  beautifie  him  very  much,  it  hath  pinions  of  the
wings  red,  and  the  taile  feathers  red  and  yellow,  sprinkled
with  greene.

The  Tuins are a kinde of  Parot  very small,  of  the  Tuin.
bignesse  of  a  Sparrow, they are  greene, sprinkled with
other  divers  colours,  they  are  much  esteemed,  as  well  for
their beautie, as because they prattle  much, and well,
and  are very  tame. They  are  so small,  that  they  skip

461

A.D.

l60I,

Gulraiuba.

Tapu.

Dangerous  to
the  eyes.

The  Guaim-
imbique :
others  call  it
the  Tomineios.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

every  where  on  a  man,  on  his  hands,  his  breast,  his
shoulders  and  his  head ;  and  with  his  bill  hee  will  cleanse
ones  teeth,  and  will  take  the  meate  out  of  the  mouth  of
him  that  brings  them  up,  and  make  many  gambols ;  they
are  alwaies  speaking  or  singing  after  their  owne  fashion.

The  Parots  Guiraiuba,  or  Yellow  birds,  neither  speake
nor  play,  but  are  sullen  and  sad  ;  they  are  much  esteemed,
because  they  are  brought  from  two  hundred  and  three
hundred  leagues,  and  are  not  found  but  in  great  mens
houses,  and  they  hold  them  in  such  esteeme,  that  they
give  the  ransom e  and  value  of  two  persons  for  one  of
them,  and  they  esteeme  them  as  much  as  the  Japanas
doe  the  Trevets  and  the  Pots,  or  any  other  great  man
esteemeth  any  thing  of  great  price,  as  a  Faulcon,  Ger-
faulcon, &c.

The  Yapu  is  of  the  bignesse  of  a  Pie-annet,  the  Dodie
of  a  fine  blacke,  and  the  taile  of  a  very  fine  yellow,  it
hath  three  tufts  on  the  head  that  are  like  little  homes,
when  hee  raiseth  them  :  the  eies  are  blue,  the  neb  very
yellow.  It  is  a  very  faire  bird,  and  hath  a  very  strong  smell
when  it  is  angrie.  They  are  very  carefull  in  seeking  their
food,  there  escapeth  not  a  Spider,  Beetle,  or  Cricket,  &c.
they  are  very  cleanly  in  a  house,  and  goe  about  like  Pie-
annets,  they  leave  nothing  unsought.  It  is  dangerous
holding  them  in  the  hand,  for  they  runne  presently  to  the
eies,  and  pull  them  out.

Of  the  small  birds  called  Guaimimbique,  there  are
sundrie  kindes,  as  Guaracig  a,  that  is,  Fruit  of  the  Sunne;
by  another  name,  Guaracig  oba,  that  is,  Covering  of  the
Sunne ;  or  Guaracig  aba,  that  is,  The  haire  of  the  Sunne ;
in  the  Antillas  they  call  it  the  risen  or  awaken  bird,  and
they  say  it  sleepeth  sixe  moneths,  and  liveth  other  sixe
moneths.  It  is  the  finest  bird  that  can  bee  imagined ;  it
hath  a  cap  on  his  head,  to  which  no  proper  colour  can
be  given,  for  on  whatsoever  side  yee  looke  on  it,  it
sheweth  red,  greene,  blacke,  and  more  colours,  all  very
fine,  and  shining;  and  the  breast  is  so  faire,  that  on
whatsoever  side  yee take  it,  it sheweth  all the  colours,

462

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  ad.

1601.

especially  a  yellow  more  finer  then  gold. The  bodie  is

grey ;  it  hath  a  very  long  bill,  and  the  tongue  twice  the

length of  the  bill ;  they  are  very  swift  in  flight,  and  in

their flight they  make a noise  like  the Bee, and  they

rather  seeme  Bees  in  their  swiftnesse  then  birds,  for  they

alwaies  feed  flying  without  sitting  on  a  tree,  even  as  the

Bees doe flie sucking the Hunnie from the flowers.

They  have  two  beginnings  of  their  generation,  some  are  Generation.

hatched  of  egges  like  other  birds,  others  of  little  bubbles,

and  it  is  a  thing  to  bee  noted,  a  little  bubble  to  beginne

to  convert  it  selfe  into  this  little  bird,  for  at  one  instant

it  is  a  bubble  and  a  bird,  and  so  it  converts  it  selfe  into

this  most  faire  bird,  a  wonderfull  thing,  and  unknowne  Note  for

to  the  Philosophers,  seeing  one  living  creature  without  Philosophers.

corruption  is  converted  into  another.

The  bird  Guiranhe  eng  eta  is  of  the  bignesse  of  a  Guiranhe  eng
Gold-finch ;  it  hath  the  backe  and  wings  blue,  and  the  eta-
breast  and  bellie  of  a  most  fine  yellow.  It  hath  a  yellow
Diademe  on  his  head  that  beautifies  him  very  much.  It
is  a  very  excellent  bird  for  the  Cage,  it  speaketh  many
waies  resembling  many  birds,  making  many  changes,  and
changing  his  speech  a  thousand  waies.  They  continue
long  in  their  song,  and  are  of  esteeme,  and  of  these  for
the  Cage  there  bee  many,  and  faire,  and  of  divers  and
sundrie  colours.

The  Tangara  is  of  the  bignesse  of  a  Sparrow,  all  blacke,  Tangara.
the  head  is  of  a  verie  fine  Orange-tawnie,  it  singeth  not,
but  it  hath  a  wonderfull  thing,  for  it  hath  fits  like  the
Falling  sicknesse,  and  for  this  cause  the  Indians  doe  not
eate  them,  for  the  avoiding  of  that  disease,  they  have  a
kinde  of  very  pleasant  dancing,  and  it  is,  that  one  of  Dance.
them  makes  himselfe  as  dead,  and  the  other  compasse
him  about  skipping  with  a  song  of  a  strange  crying  that
is  heard  verie  farre,  and  when  they  end  this  feast,  crying,
and  dancing,  he  that  was  as  dead  riseth,  and  maketh  a
great  noise  and  crying,  and  then  all  goe  away,  and  end
their  feast.  They  are  so  earnest  when  they  doe  it,  that
although  they  be  seene  and  shot  at,  they  flie  not  away.

463

A.D.

l60I,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[IV.

Tucana.

Of  these  there  bee  many  kindes,  and  all  of  them  have
accidents.

Querewa.  The bird Quereiva, is of  the  most esteemed  of  the

ii-  I  Land,  not  for  the  song,  but  for  the  beautie  of  the
1 300-J  feathers;  they  are  a  cleare  azure  in  part,  and  a  darke,
all  the  breast  is  most  fine  red,  the  wings  almost  blacke ;
they  are  so  esteemed,  that  the  Indians  doe  flea  them,  and
give  two  or  three  persons  for  the  skinnes  of  them,  and
with  the  feathers  they  make  their  Pictures,  Diademes,
and  other  fine  things.

The  Tucana  is  of  the  bignesse  of  a  Pie,  it  is  all  blacke
except  the  breast,  which  is  all  yellow,  with  a  round  red
circle ;  the  bill  is  a  large  spanne  long,  verie  great,  yellow,
and  within  is  red,  so  smooth  and  shining,  that  it  seemeth
to  bee  varnished ;  they  are  made  tame,  and  breede  in  the
houses,  are  good  to  eate,  and  the  feathers  are  esteemed
because  they  are  faire.

Gmrapanga.  The  Guirapanga  is  white,  and not being  very  big  it

crieth  so  loude  that  it  sounds  like  a  Bell,  and  it  is  heard
halfe  a  league,  and  their  singing  is  like  the  ringing  of
Bells.

Macucagua.  The Macucagua is  greater  then  any  Henne  of  Por-

tugall,  it  resembleth  the  Feasant,  and  so  the  Portugals
doe  call  it ;  it  hath  three  skinnes  one  over  another,  and
much  flesh,  and  verie  savourie,  they  lay  twice  a  yeere,  and
at  everie  time  thirteene  or  fifteene  egges,  they  goe  alwaies
on  the  ground,  but  when  they  see  any  people  they  flie  to
the  trees,  and  at  night  when  they  goe  to  roust  as  Hennes
doe.  When  they  sit  on  the  trees,  they  put  not  their  feet
on  the  boughs,  but  the  shankes  of  their  legs,  and  most  on
the  fore  part.  There  bee  many  kindes  of  these,  and
they  are  easily  shot  at.

Among  them  there  is  one  of  the  smallest,  that  hath
many  properties ;  when  it  singeth  it  foresheweth  raine,  it
crieth  so  loude,  that  it  is  incredible  of  so  small  a  bird,
and  the  reason  is,  because  the  gullet  is  verie  great.  It
beginneth  at  the  mouth  and  commeth  out  at  the  breast
betweene  the skinne and  the  flesh,  and  reacheth to  the

464

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

fundament, and returneth againe and entreth into the

crop,  and  then  it  proceedeth  as  other  birds,  and  doubleth

like  a  Trumpet  with  his  turnings. They  runne  after  any

bodie  pecking  him  and  playing  like  a  little  whelpe,  if  they

set it upon Henne egges, it sitteth over them, and

bringeth up the young  chickens,  and  if  it see a  Hen

with  chickens,  it  so  persecutes  her,  till  it  takes  them  from

her  and  broodes  them,  and  brings  them  up.

The  Hen Mutu  is  very  domesticall,  it  hath  a  combe  Mutu.
like  the  Cockes,  spotted  with  white  and  blacke,  the  egges
are  great  and  very  white,  like  a  Goose  egge,  so  hard  that  Hard  egges.
knocking  the  one  with  the  other,  they  ring  like  Iron,  and
of  them  they  make  their Maracas,  that  is,  their  Bells;
any  Dog  that  eateth  the  bones  of  it  dieth,  and  unto  men  Dogs  poison.
it  doeth  no  hurt  at  all.

In  this  Countrie  there  are  many  kindes  of  Partridges, Uru.
which  though  they  are  not  like  in  all  things  to  those  of
Spaine,  yet  are  they  very  like  in  colour,  taste,  and  in  the
aboundance.

In  this  Countrie  are  many  kindes  of  Turtle-doves,  Turtles
Stares,  and  Black-birds,  and  Pigeons  of  many  sorts,  and  innumerable>
all  these  birds  are  like  to  them  of  Portugall ;  and  the
Pigeons  and  Turtle-doves  are  in  such  abundance,  that  in
certaine  fields  farre  within  the  Land  they  are  so  many,
that  when  they  rise  they  hinder  the  light  of  the  Sunne,
and  make  a  noise  like  a  thunder ;  they  lay  so  many
egges,  and  so  white,  that  a  very  farre  off  yee  may  see  the
fields  white  with  egges,  as  if  it  were  snowe ;  and  serving
the  Indians  for  meate  as  they  doe,  they  cannot  be
diminished;  rather  from  thence  at  certaine  times  it
seemeth  they  runne  over  all  the  parts  of  this  Province.

In  this  Countrie  are  many  Ostriches,  called  Andugoacu,  Ostriches.
but  they  keep  only  within  the  Land.

The  Anima  is  a  fowle  of  rapine,  great,  and  crieth  that  Anima.
it  is  heard  halfe  a  league  and  more,  it  is  all  blacke,  hath
faire  eies,  the  beake  bigger  then  a  Cocks,  upon  this  beake
it  hath  a  little  home  of  a  spanne  in  length,  the  men  of  Horne
the  Countrie  say  that  this  Horne  is  very  medicinable  for  medicinable.
xvi  465  2  G

A.D.
l60I,

Acaiu,akinde
of  Chesnut.

Many  uses
thereof.

[IV.  vii.

1307.;

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

those  that  are  taken  in  their  speech,  as  hath  beene  proved,
hanging  it  about  the  necke  of  a  girle  that  did  not  speake,
which  spake  presently.

There  be  many  other  fowles  of  rapine,  to  wit,  Eagles,
Faulcons,  Gos-hawkes,  Merlines,  and  Tarsels,  and  many
other,  but  they  are  all  ordinarily  so  wilde,  that  they  will
flie  at  any  thing,  neither  will  they  come  to  hand,  or
stoope  to  lure.

§•  v.

Of the Brasilian Trees for fruit, medicine, and.
other  uses ; and  their  Herbes  of  rare  operations.

He  Trees  Acaiu,  are  very  great  and  faire,  they  cast
the  leafe  at  their  times,  and  the  flower  groweth
in the snags, which makes  certaine  points like

fingers,  and  in  the  said  points  there  groweth  a  red  flower
of  a  good  smell,  and  after  it  groweth  a  Chesnut,  and
from  the  Chesnut  commeth  an  Apple  as  big  as  a  great
Apple,  or  a  Pippin,  it  is  a  very  faire  fruit,  and  some  are
yellow,  others  red,  and  it  is  all  juyce.  They  are  good
for  hot  weather,  they  coole  verie  much,  and  laying  the
juyce  upon  a  white  cloth  it  never  goeth  off  till  the  cloth
bee  worne.  The  Chesnut  is  as  good  or  better  then  those
of  Portugall,  they  are  eaten  rosted,  and  raw  laid  in  water
as  blancht  Almonds,  and  of  them  they  make  Marchpanes,
and  sweet  meates  as  of  Almonds.  The  timber  of  this
tree  is  little  worth,  even  for  the  fire,  it  yeeldeth  of  it  selfe
a  certain  gumme  good  to  paint  and  write,  and  there  is
great  store.  With  the  barke  they  dye  their  yarne,  and
the  vessels  that  serves  them  for  Pots.  This  being  stamped
and  boyled  with  some  Copper,  till  the  third  part  of  the
water  be  consumed,  is  a  soveraigne  remedy  for  old  sores,
and  they  heale  quickly.  There  bee  so  many  of  these
trees  as  of  Chesnuts  in  Portugall,  they  growe  about  these
Woods,  and  they  gather  many  quarters  of  these  Chesnuts,
and  the  fruit  in  their  season  satisfie  all  men.  Of  these
Acaius  doe  the  Indians  make  Wine.

466

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

There  is  great  abundance  of  the  trees  Mangaba,  especially  Mangaba.
in  the  Bay,  for  in  other  places  they  are  rare,  in  making
they  are  like  the  barke  of  Anafega,  and  in  the  leafe
with  those  of  Frexo,  they  are  very  pleasant  trees,  and
have  alwaies  greene  leaves.  They  yeeld  fruit  twice  a
yeere,  the  first  in  a  knob,  for  then  they  doe  not  flower,
but  the  very  knob  is  the  fruit  ;  this  season  ended,  which
lasteth  two  or  three  moneths,  it  giveth  another  bearing,
first  the  flower,  which  is  altogether  like  the  Jesamine,  OrMusk-rose.
and  of  as  good  a  smell,  but  more  quicke  ;  the  fruit  is
as  big  as  an  Apricock,  yellow  and  spotted  with  some
spots  of  blacke  ;  within  it  hath  some  kernels,  but  all
is  eaten,  or  sucked  as  the  Services  of  Portugal.  They
are  of  a  very  good  taste,  and  healthfull,  and  so  light
that  eate  they  never  so  many,  it  seemes  they  eate  no
fruit  at  all.  They  ripen  not  on  the  tree,  but  fall  to
the  ground,  and  from  thence  they  gather  them  already
ripe,  or  gathering  them  greene  they  lay  them  to  ripen.
The  Indians  make  Wine  of  them.  The  tree  and  the
fruit  it  selfe  being  greene,  is  full  of  white  Milke,  and
cleaveth  to  the  hands,  and  is  bitter.

The  fruit  Murucuge  groweth  on  certaine  trees,  very  Murucuge.
high  and  like  the  wilde  Peare-trees  of  Portugall.  It
hath  a  very  long  stalke,  they  are  gathered  greene,  and
are  layd  to  ripen,  and  being  ripe  they  are  very  pleasant
and  of  an  easie  digestion.  When  they  are  to  gather  III  gathering.
them,  they  cut  downe  the  tree,  because  they  are  very
high,  and  if  this  destruction  were  not,  there  would  bee
more  abundance,  but  therefore  they  are  rare,  the  trunke
hath  great  abundance  of  white  Milke,  and  it  congealeth,
it  may  serve  for  Sealing-waxe  if  they  will  use  it.

Of the Araca trees are great abundance, of many  Araca.
sorts  ; the fruit is certaine small Peares,  yellow, red,
or greene  ; they  are pleasant,  unloathsome,  toothsome,
because  they  have  little  taste  of  sowre,  they  yeeld  fruit
almost  all  the  yeere.

This  Ombu  is a  great tree not  very  high,  but  well  Ombu.
spread  :  the  fruit  is  like  white  Plums,  yellow  and  round,

467

A.D.
l60I.

Fruit  causing
teeth  to  fall.

lacapucaya.

Haire-fal-
fruit.

Graes.

Araticu.

Pequea.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  therefore  the  Portugals  doe  call  it  a  Plum.  It
causeth  the  teeth  to  fall,  and  the  Indians  that  doe  eate
it  doe  lose  them.  The  rootes  of  this  tree  are  eaten,
and  are  very  pleasant,  and  more  toothsome  then  the
Abalancia,  for  they  are  sweeter,  and  the  sweetnesse
thereof  is  like  Sugar,  they  are  cold  and  healthfull,  and
they  are  given  to  the  sicke  of  a  Feaver,  and  it  serveth
for  water  to  them  that  goe  inward  to  the  Land,  for
they  have  no  other.

The  lacapucaya  is  of  the  greatest  and  fairest  of  this
Countrie ;  it  beareth  a  fruit  like  a  Pot,  as  big  as  a
great  Bowie,  as  thicke  as  two  fingers,  with  a  cover
upon  it,  and  within  it  is  full  of  certaine  Chesnuts  like
unto  the  Myrabolanes  ;  and  it  seemes  they  are  the
same  of  India,  when  they  are  already  in  season,  that
cover  doth  open  and  the  fruit  falleth.  If  any  doe  eate
much  of  it  green,  he  casteth  all  the  haire  he  hath  on
his  body  ;  rosted  it  is  a  good  fruit.  They  use  the  huskes
for  Cups,  and  they  are  lasting  ;  the  timber  of  this  tree
is  very  hard,  it  doth  not  rotte,  they  esteeme  it  for
the  Axel-trees  of  the  Sugar-mills.

Araticu,  is  a  tree  of  the  bignese  of  an  Orange  tree
and  greater,  the  leafe  is  like  a  Citron  tree  or  a  Lymond
tree,  it  is  a  faire  and  pleasant  tree,  it  beareth  a  fruit
as  bigge  as  Pine  apples  ;  and  they  have  a  good  smell,
and  a  reasonable  taste,  it  is  a  fruit  that  loatheth  not.

Of  these  Trees  are  many  kindes,  and  one  of  them
called  Araticupanania.  If  they  eate  much  of  the  fruit
it  proveth  a  cold  poison,  and  doth  much  hurt.  Of
the  rootes  of  these  trees  they  make  booyes  for  the
Nets,  and  they  are  so  light  as  any  Corkes.

There  be  two  sorts  of  Pequea,  one  of  them  beares
a  fruit  as  big  as  a  good  Orange,  and  so  they  have  the
rind  thicke  like  an  Orange  ;  within  this  rinde  there
is  nothing  but  Hunnie  so  cleare  and  sweet  as  any  Sugar,
in  quantitie  of  an  Ggge,  and  mingled  with  it,  it  hath  the
pippens  or  kernels.

The other Pequea  is  timber,  of  the  heaviest  of  this

468

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

Countrie, in Portugall it is  called Setim, it hath very-
fine  wanes,  it  lasteth  long  and  doth  not  rotte.

On  the  tree  Iabaticaba  groweth  a  fruit  of  the  bignesse  Iabaticaba.
of  a  Lymond  of  Sytill,  the  rinde  and  taste  is  like  a
sowrish  Grape,  from  the  roote  of  the  tree  through  all
the  body  unto  the  utmost  bough  or  sprig,  is  a  rare
fruit,  it  is  onely  found  within  the  Land  in  the  Captainship
of  S.  Vincent.  The  Indians  doe  make  of  this  fruit
a  kinde  of  Wine,  and  they  boyle  it  like  the  wine  of
Grapes.

In  this  Brasill  are  many  Coco-nuts,  excellent  like  those  Cocos.
of  India ; these  are  ordinarily  set,  and  growe  not  in  the
Woods, but in Gardens, and in their Farmes. And
there are more then twentie kindes of Palme trees,  20.  kinds  of
and  almost  all  doe  beare  fruit,  but  not  so  good  as  the  Falmes-
Cocos :  with  some  of  these  Palme  trees  they  cover  their
houses.

Besides  these  Fruit-trees  there  are  many  other  that
yeeld  sundry  fruits,  whereof  they  make  profit,  and
many  Nations  of  the  Indians  sustaine  themselves,
together  with  the  Hunnie,  whereof  there  is  great
abundance,  and  with  their  hunting,  for  they  have  no
other  sustenance.

In  the  maine  of  the  Captainship  of  Saint  Vincent  unto
Paraguay, are many  and great Woods of  Pine trees, The  Pine  tree.
even  like unto them  of  Portugall,  which  beare  Apples
and kernels ; the  Apples  are  not  so  long  but  rounder  [IV.  vii.
and  greater,  the  kernels  are  greater  and  are  not  so  hot,  ^o8-]

but  of  a  good  temperature  and  wholsome.

Cabueriba  is  very  great  and  esteemed  for  the  Balme  Of  the  Trees
that  it hath; to  get this Balme they  prick the barke  that  serve  for
of  the  tree,  and  lay  a  little  Cotton  wooll to  the  cuts,  nQ{£uerib
and  from  certaine  to  certaine  dayes  they  goe  to  gather
the Oyle that it hath distilled. The Portugals call it
Balme,  because  it  is  very  like  to  the  true  Balme  of  the
Vineyards  of  Engedi,  it  serveth  for  greene  wounds,  and  PortEngaddi.
taketh away  all the scarre : it smelleth very  well,  and  A  med'u^
of  it,  and  of  the  barke  of  the  tree  they  make  Beades,  for  wounds'

469

A.D.
l60I,

Cupayba.

For  wounds.

Ambayba.

For  wounds.

tinga.

For  the
Collicke.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  other  smelling  things.  The  Woods  where  they
growe  doe  smell  well,  and  the  beasts  doe  goe  and  rubbe
on  this  tree,  it  seemeth  to  bee  to  heale  them  of  some
diseases.  The  Timber  is  of  the  best  of  this  Countrie,
because  it  is  very  strong  and  heavy,  and  some  are  of
such  bignesse,  that  of  them  they  make  the  Beames,
Axel-trees,  and  Skrues  or  Vices  for  their  Sugar- Mills,
these  are  very  rare,  and  are  found  chiefly  in  the  Captainship
of  the  Holy  Ghost.

Cupayba  is  a  Fig-tree,  commonly  very  high,  straite
and  big,  it  hath  much  oile  within  ;  for  to  get  it  they
cut  the  tree  in  the  middest,  where  it  hath  the  vent,
and  there  it  hath  this  oile  in  so  great  abundance,  that
some  of  them  doe  yeeld  a  quarterne  of  oile  and  more,
it  is  very  cleare,  of  the  colour  of  oile,  it  is  much  set
by  for  wounds,  and  taketh  away  all  the  skarre.  It
serveth  also  for  lights,  and  burne  well,  the  beasts  knowing
the  vertue  thereof  doe  come  and  rubbe  themselves
thereat.  There  are  great  store,  the  wood  is  good  for
nothing.

The  Ambayba  Fig-trees  are  not  very  great,  and  are
not  found  in  the  true  Woods  but  in  Coppices,  where
some  sowing  hath  beene  ;  the  barke  of  this  tree  scraping
it  on  the  inside,  and  crushing  those  scrapings  in  the
wound,  laying  them  on  it,  and  binding  it  with  the  barke
it  selfe,  healeth  in  a  short  time.  There  is  great  abundance
of  them,  and  are  much  esteemed  for  their  great  vertue,
the  leaves  are  rough,  and  serve  to  smooth  any  wood,
the  timber  serveth  for  nothing.

The  Fig-tree  which  they  call  of  Hell,  Ambaigtinga,
is  found  in  Taperas :  it  yeelds  a  certaine  Oyle  that
serveth  for  lights,  it  hath  great  vertue,  as  Monardes
writeth,  and  the  leaves  are  much  esteemed  for  them
that  doe  vomit,  and  cannot  retayne  that  which  they
eate,  anointing  the  stomacke  with  the  Oyle,  it  taketh
away  the  Oppilations,  and  the  Collicke.  To  get
this  Oyle,  they  lay  it  in  the  Sunne  some  dayes,  and
stampe it, and seethe it, and presently that Oyle

470

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  ad.

1601.

commeth  on the top, which is gathered for the  effect
above-said .

Of the trees Igbacamuci there are many in Saint  Igbacamuci.
Vincent :  they  beare  a  certaine  fruit  as  good  as  Quinces,
fashioned like a Panne or a Pot, they have within
certaine  small  seeds,  they  are  the  onely  remedie  for  the  For  the
bloudy  Fluxe.  bloudy  FIuxe-

The Igcigca yeeldeth the Masticke, smelleth very  Lgcigca.
much for  a good while : they  notch the tree  in some
places,  and  in  an  instant it  stilleth  a  white  liquor  that
doth  congeale ; it  serveth  for  Plaisters  in  cold  diseases,  For  cold
and  to  perfume,  it  serveth  also  in  stead  of  incense.  diseases.

There  is  another  tree  of  this  kinde,  called  Igtaigcica,
that is, Masticke as hard as stone,  and so it seemeth
rather  Gumme-anime then Masticke, and  it  is  so hard  Gumme
and  shining  that  it  seemeth  Glasse ; it  serveth to  glase  Anime.
the earthen vessell,  and for this it is much esteemed
among  the  Indians,  and  it  serveth  also  for  cold  diseases.

There  is  a  River  betweene  Port  Secure  and  the  Illets,
that  commeth  from  more  then  three  hundred  leagues
within  the  Mayne,  it  bringeth  great  store  of  Rozen,
which  is  the  Gumme-anime  it  selfe,  which  the  Indians
doe  call  Igtaigcica,  and  the  Portugals,  White  incense  ;
it  hath  the  same  effects  that  the  Incense.

Curupicaiba is like to the Peach-trees of  Portugall  Curupicaiba.
in the  leafe  : the leaves doe distill a kinde of  liquor
like  the  Fig-trees  of  Spaine,  which  is  the  onely  remedie  For  wounds,
for  wounds  both  greene  and  old,  and  for  the  Poxe,  and  <mdfir  the
it  taketh  away  all  the  scarre  from the  wounds,  if  they oxe'
pricke  the  barke  of  it,  it  yeeldeth  great  store  of  Bird-lime,
wherewith  they  catch  the  small  birds.

There  is  great  abundance  of  the  trees  Caaroba,  the  Caaroba.
leaves  of  these  chewed  and  layd  to  the  Pock-sore  drye  For  the  Poxe.
and  heale  it  in  such  manner,  that  it  never  commeth
againe,  and  it  seemeth  that  the  wood  hath  the  same
effect  that  the  China  wood,  and  that  of  the  Antilles
have  for  the  same  disease.  Of  the  flower  they  make
a  Conserve  for  those  that  are  sicke  of  the  Poxe.

471

A.D.
l6oi.

Caarobmoco-
randiba.

For  loosenesse
and  the  Poxe.

laburandiba.

For  the  sick-
nesse  of  the
Liver.

For  the
Toothake.

Cassia  fistula.

Of  the  Oy/es
the  Indians
doe  use  to
anoint  them-
[IV.  vii.

1309.]
selves  withall.

Moxere-
quigba.

Aiuruatubira.
Aiabutipita.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  wood  Caarobmocorandiba  is  like  that  of  China,
it  is  taken  in  the  same  manner  that  the  other,  and  it
healeth  the  loosenesse,  the  Poxe,  and  other  diseases  of
cold,  it  is  grey,  and  hath  the  pith  very  hard  as  the
wood  of  China.

It  is  long  since  laburandiba  was  found,  and  it  is,  as
some  Indians  doe  say,  called  of  the  Indians  Betele.
The  Rivers  and  their  borders  are  full  of  these  trees,
the  leaves  are  the  onely  remedie  for  the  sicknesses  of  the
Liver,  and  many  in  this  Brasill  have  already  beene  cured
of  most  grievous  diseases  of  the  Liver,  with  the  eating
of  them.

There  is  another  tree  called  also  Betele,  it  is  smaller
and  of  a  round  leafe,  the  roots  of  it  are  an  excellent
remedy  for  the  tooth-ake,  putting  it  in  the  hollow  place
of  them,  it  biteth  like  Ginger.

They  say  also,  that  in  this  Brasill  is  the  tree  of  the
Cassia  fistula,  it  is  unknowne  to  the  Indians,  the  Spaniards
doe  use  it,  and  say  it  is  as  good  as  that  of  India.

The  Anda  trees  are  faire  and  great,  and  the  wood
serveth  for  all  things,  of  the  fruit  they  make  an  Oyle,
wherewith  the  Indians  doe  anoint  themselves,  and  the
women  their  haire  ;  and  it  serveth  also  for  wounds,  and
drieth  them  up  presently,  and  they  make  many  gallant
things  about  the  legs  and  body,  painting  themselves  with
this  Oyle.

The  Moxerequigba  tree  is  found  within  the  Maine,
in  the  fields,  it  is  small,  beareth  a  fruit  as  big  as  an
Orange,  and  within  it  hath  certaine  kernels,  and  of  it
altogether  they  make  an  Oyle  to  anoint  themselves,
the  barke  serveth  to  kill  fish,  and  every  beast  that
drinketh  the  water  where  it  is  cast,  dieth.

The  Aiuratubira  is  small,  beareth  a  red  fruit,  and  of
it  they  make  a  red  oile  to  anoint  themseves.

The  Aiabutipita  is  five  or  sixe  spannes  in  length,
the  fruit  is  like  Almonds  and  blacke,  and  so  is  the
Oyle,  which  they  esteeme  very  much,  and  anoint  them-
selves with  it  in  their  infirmities.

47  2

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  ad.

1601

The  Janipaba  tree  is  very  faire,  of  a  pleasant  greene ;  Jank
every  moneth  it  changeth  the  leafe,  and  is  like  a  Wal-nut
leafe,  the  trees  are  great,  and  the  timber  pleasant  to
worke;  the  fruit  is  like  great  Oranges,  and  is  like
Quinces,  or  russet  Peares ;  the  taste  is  like  Quinces :
it  is  a  good  medicine  for  the  Laske  of  all  sorts.  Of  this  Fo?-  the  Laske.
fruit  is  made  a  blacke  Inke ;  when  it  is  made  it  is
white,  and  anointing  themselves  therewith  it  stayneth
not  presently,  but  within  a  few  houres  the  partie  re-
mayneth  as  blacke  as  any  Jeat.  It  is  much  esteemed
of  the  Indians,  with  this  they  make  on  their  bodies
round  Hose  and  Doublets  all  cut,  and  they  give  certaine
strokes  in  the  face,  eares,  nose,  chinne,  armes,  legs,  and
the  same  doe  the  women,  and  they  become  very  gallant.
This  is  their  apparell,  as  well  on  the  weeke  as  on  the
Feast  day,  adding  some  feathers  to  it,  wherewith  they
adorne  themselves,  and  other  Jewels  made  of  bone :
this  colour  lasteth  on  the  body  nine  dayes  still  blacke,
and  after  remayneth  nothing ;  it  maketh  the  skinne
very  hard,  and  to  make  the  painting  the  fruit  is  to  be
gathered  greene,  for  being  ripe  it  will  not  doe  it.

The tree Iequitimguacu beareth a fruit like the  lequitim-
Spanish  Strawberie,  and  within  it  hath  a  beane  as  hard  as  &uacu'
a  sticke3  which  is  the  seed ;  they  are  of  the  best  Beades  Beades  and
than  can  be,  for  they  are  very  equall,  and  very  blacke,  ^°Pe-
and  they  have  a  glosse  like  Jeat,  the  huske  that  covereth
these  Beades,  is  more  bitter  then Aloes,  it serveth  for
Sope, and it washeth better then the best Sope in
Portugal.

A  certaine  tree  groweth  in  the  fields  and  the  Mayne  Of  the  tree
of  the  Bay,  in  dry  places  where  no  water  is,  very  great  that  hath
and broad ;  it hath certaine holes in the branches, as  wat
long  as  an  arme,  that  are  full  of  water,  that  in  Winter
nor  Summer  never runneth over,  neither  is  it knowne  Note,  Com-
whence  this  water  commeth,  and  drinke  many  or  drinke  Pare  this  with
few of  it, it is alwaies at the same stay, and so it  those  ™en~
serveth  not  onely  for  a  Fountaine,  but  also  for  a  great  gaj  -J  A
maine River : and it happeneth five hundred persons Congo.

473

A.D.
l60I.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to come to the foot of  it, and there is harbour for

them  all,  they drinke and  wash all  that they  will,  and

they never  want water;  it is very savoury  and cleare,

and  a  great  remedie  for  them  that  travell  into  the  Mayne,

when  they  can  finde  no  other  water.

Of  the  Trees In this Countrie of  Brasill are Groves,  wherein are

t  at  serve  jor  founc[  trees  of  great  bignesse and length, whereof  they

timber.  .  o  o  .°,  1  i

make  very  great  Canoas,  or  seven  or  eight  spannes  broad

in  hollownesse,  and  of  fiftie  spannes  and  more  in  length,
which  beare  a  load  like  a  great  Barke,  and  doe  carrie
twentie  or  thirtie  Rowers  of  a  side ;  they  make  like-
wise great  Beames  for  the  Sugar-mills.  There  are  many
sorts  of  wood  incorruptible  that  putting  it  in  the  ground
it  never  rotteth,  and  others  set  in  water  are  every  day
greener  and  stronger.  There  is  a  holy  wood  of  certaine
white  wanes,  whereof  are  made  very  faire  Bed-steads
and  rich.  The  Brasill  wood  whereof  the  red  Inke  is
made,  and  other  woods  of  divers  colours,  whereof  divers
Inkes  of  great  esteeme  are  made,  and  all  turned  and
carved  workes.  There  be  smelling  woods,  as  the  Jara-
randa,  and  other  kindes  of  great  price  and  esteeme,
there  are  found  white  Sandalos  or  Dates,  in  great
quantitie.  The  wood  of  Aquilla,  and  in  great  abun-
dance, that  ships  are  made  of  it.  Cedars ;  wood  of
Angolin,  and  the  Nutmeg  tree,  though  these  woods
are  not  so  fine,  and  of  so  great  smell  as  those  of  India,
yet  they  want  but  a  little,  and  are  of  great  price  and
esteeme.

Cedars  and
Nutmegs.

Mandioca.

Of  the  Herbes  that  yeeld  fruit,  and  are  eaten.

THe  ordinary  food  of  this  Country,  that  serveth
for  Bread,  is  called  Mandioca,  and  they  are  certaine
rootes  like  Carrots,  though  they  are  greater  and  longer :
these  shoot  out  certaine  stemmes  or  branches,  and  growe
to  the  height  of  fifteene  spannes.  These  branches  are
very  tender,  and  have  a  white  pith  within,  and  at  every
spanne  it  hath  certaine  joynts,  and  of  this  bignesse
they  are  broken,  and set  in the  ground as much as  is

474

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

sufficient  for  to  hold  them  up  and  within  sixe  or  nine
moneths  have  so  big  rootes  that  they  serve  for  food.
This  Mandioca  contayneth  many  kindes  in  it  selfe,
and  all  are  eaten,  and  they  are  preserved  under  the  earth
three,  foure,  or  unto  eight  yeeres,  and  needs  no  season-
ing, for  they  doe  no  more  but  take  them  out  and  make
fresh  meate  every  day,  and  the  longer  they  are  under
the  earth  the  bigger  they  growe,  and  yeeld  the  more.

It hath some  things worth the noting,  that  is, man
except,  all  creatures  desire  to  eate  it  raw,  and  it  fatteneth
them,  and nourisheth  them  exceedingly ;  but  if  when  it
is  crushed,  they  doe drinke  that  water  alone  by  it  selfe,  Thejuyce  is
they have no more  life  then  while  it  commeth  to the  Pomn-
stomacke. Of these rootes crushed and grated they
make a Meale that  is eaten, it is also layd in steepe  [IV.  vii.
till  it  corrupt,  and  then  cleansed  and  crushed,  they  make  H10-]

also  a  Flowre,  and  certaine  Cakes  like  children  very
white  and  delicate.  This  roote  after  it  is  steeped  in
water,  made  in  balls  with  the  hands,  they  set  it  upon
hurdles  at  the  smoake,  where  it  drieth  in  such  manner
that  it  is  kept  without  corrupting,  as  long  as  they  list,
and  after  scraped  and  stamped  in  certaine  great  trayes,
and  sifted,  there  remayneth  a  Flowre  whiter  then  of
Wheate,  of  the  which  being  mingled  in  a  certaine
quantitie  with  the  raw,  they  make  a  certaine  Bisquet,
which  they  call  Of  the  warre,  and  it  serveth  the  Indians
and  the  Portugals  by  Sea,  and  when  they  goe  to  warre,
as  Bisket.  Another  Bisket  bread  is  made  of  very  water
of  the  greene  Mandioca,  if  they  let  it  congeale,  and
dry  it  at  the  Sunne,  or  at  the  fire :  this  is  above  all
most  white,  and  so  pleasant  and  delicate,  that  it  is  not
made  for  every  one.  Of  this  Mandioca  dryed  at  the
smoake  they  make  many  sorts  of  broaths,  which  they  call
Mingaos,  so  healthfull  and  delicate  that  they  give  them
to  them  that  are  sicke  of  a  Feaver,  in  stead  of  Caudles
and  Restoratives,  and  of  the  same  they  make  Cakes,
Simnels,  Frutters,  little  Pyes,  Cheef-cakes  of  Sugar,  &c.
And mingled with the  flowre of Millet, or of  Rice,

475

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

they  make  leavened  bread,  that  it  seemeth  of  Wheat.
This  same  Mandioca  dryed  at  the  smoake,  is  a  great
remedie  against  poison,  chiefely  of  Snakes.  Of  this
Mandioca there is one  which they call Aypim, which

Other  kindes.  contayneth  under  it  selfe  many  kindes.  This  killeth
not  raw,  and  boyled  or  rosted  is  of  a  good  taste,  and
of  it  they  make  Flowre  or  Cakes,  &c.  The  Indians
make  wines  of  it,  and  it  is  so  fresh  and  medicinable
for  the  Liver,  that  to  it  is  attributed  not  to  have  among
them  any  diseased  of  the  Liver.  A  certaine  kinde  of
Tapuyas  doe  eate  the  poisonous  Mandioca  raw,  and
it  doth  them  no  hurt,  because  they  are  brought  up
with  it.

The  boughs  of  this  herbe  or  tree,  is  the  seed  it
selfe,  for  the  stalkes  of  it  are  planted,  the  leaves  in
time  of  need  boyled  doe  serve  for  food.

Nana-  The  herbe  Nana  is  very  common,  it  is  like  the  herbe

Aloes,  and  hath  such  leaves,  but  not  so  thicke,  and
all  round  about  full  of  very  sharpe  prickles ;  in  the
middest  of  this  herbe  groweth  a  fruit  like  a  Pine-apple,
all  full  of  flowers  of  divers  colours,  and  very  faire,
and  at  the  foot  grow  foure  or  five  sprigs,  which  are
planted ;  the  fruit  is  very  smelling,  pleasant  and  one
of  the  best  of  the  world,  very  full  of  juyce,  and  pleasant,
it  hath  the  taste  of  a  Mellon,  though  better  and  more
smelling,  it  is  good  for  them  that  are  troubled  with
the  Stone,  and  it  is  very  prejudiciall  for  Feavers.
The  Indians  doe  make  Wine  of  this  fruit,  very  strong,
and  of  a  good  taste,  the  huske  wasteth  much  the  Iron
at  the  dressing  of  it,  and  the  juyce  taketh  away  the
spottes  from  the  clothes.  There  is  so  great  abundance
of  this  fruit,  that  they  fat  their  Hogs  with  it,  and
regard  it  not  for  the  great  abundance,  they  are  also
kept  preserved,  and  raw  they  helpe  the  Sea-sicke  at
Sea,  and  with  Wine  in  the  morning  they  are  medicinable.

Pacoba,  Pacoba is the Fig-tree  which they  call  Adams, it is

Adams  Tree. neither tree nor herbe, for on the one side it be-
commeth very bigge, and groweth to twenty quarters

476

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

long, the stalke is very soft and full of  pores  ; the

leaves  that  it  hath  are  most  faire,  and  some  a  fathome

long and more, all of  them raced  like the Velvet of

Braganca, so smooth that they write  on them, and so

greene, coole, and fresh, that one sicke of  a Feaver

lying downe upon them,  the  Feaver is  mitigated with

their coolenesse. They are very fresh for to dresse

the houses, and the Churches. This herbe  beareth in

every  foote  many  impes,  and  every  one  of  them  beareth

a cluster of a certaine fruit like Figs, which hath

sometimes  about  two  hundred,  and  when  they  are  ripe,

the foote is cut  whereon the  cluster hangeth, and the

rest  doe  growe,  and  so  they  goe  multiplying  ad  infinitum,

the  fruit  is  laid to ripen and becommeth  very  yellow,

of  a  good taste,  and  healthfull,  especially  for  the  sicke

of  a Feaver, and for him that spitteth bloud, and

rosted they are  very pleasant and healthfull. It is  an

ordinary  fruit  whereof  the Gardens  are full,  and there

is  of  them  all  the  yeere.

The  herbes  Murucuia  are  very  faire,  especially  in  Murucuia.
their  flowers :  they  runne  upon  a  wall,  and  up  the  trees
like  Ivie,  the  leaves  beaten  with  a  little  Verdigrease,
is  an  onely  remedie  for  old  ulcers  and  the  Poxe,  it
beareth  a  round  fruit  like  Oranges,  other  like  Egges,
some  yellow,  some  blacke,  and  of  other  divers  colours
and  kindes.  Within  they  have  a  certaine  substance  of
kernels,  and  juyce  with  a  certaine  filme  that  covereth
them,  and  altogether  is  eaten,  it  is  of  a  good  taste,
and  it  is  somewhat  tart,  and  it  is  a  fruit  of  some
account.

In  this Country  are many other  kindes of  fruits, as  Many  other
Deaw-berries,  blacke  and  red,  Potatoes,  and  other  rootes  Brasilian
which  they  call  Mangara,  another  called  Cara,  that  is  like  ^ '
to  Turneps,  and  the  stones  of  the  earth. Of  the  Potatoes
they  make  bread,  and  divers  sweet  meats,  these  Indians
have  many  other  Pulses,  viz.  Beanes,  more  healthfull  and
better  then  those  of  Portugall,  and  in  great  abundance,
many  kindes  of  Pumpions,  and  some so  big,  that  they

477

A.D.
l60I.

Jetlgcucu.
[IV.  vii.

A  purge.

For  the  bloudy
Fluxe.

A  remedie  for
poyson.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

use  them  for  vessels  to  carie  water,  and  they  hold  two
peckes  or  more,  French  Beanes  of  many  kindes,  they
are  toothsome,  and  like  to  them  of  Portugall,  Millet
of  many  sorts,  and  of  it  they  make  Bread,  Wine,  and
it  is  eaten  tosted,  and  with  it  they  fatten  their  Horses,
Swine  and  Hennes,  and  there  are  certaine  Taiaobas,
that  are  like  Cabiges,  and  they  cause  to  purge.  And
an  herbe  called  Iambig,  the  onely  remedie  for  them
that  are  sicke  of  the  Liver,  and  the  Stone.  There  are
also  many  sorts  of  Pepper,  that  give  a  good  taste  in
the  eating.

Jetigeucu  is  the  Mechoacan  of  the  Antilles,  they  are
certaine  rootes,  long  like  Radice,  but  of  a  good  bignesse,
they  serve  for  a  purge,  this  roote  is  taken  beaten  in
wine  or  water  for  the  Ague  :  it  is  taken  preserved  in
Sugar  like  Marmalate,  it  is  boiled  with  a  Henne,  causeth
great  thirst,  but  is  profitable  and  of  great  operation.

Igpecaya,  or  Pigaya  is  profitable  for  the  bloudie  Fluxe  ;
the  stalke  is  a  quarter  long,  and  the  roots  of  another,  or
more,  it  hath  onely  foure  or  five  leaves,  it  smelleth  much
wheresoever  it  is,  but  the  smell  is  strong  and  terrible,
this  roote  beaten  and  put  in  water  all  night  at  the  deaw,
and  in  the  morning  if  this  water  with  the  same  roote
beaten  and  strained  be  drunke,  onely  the  water,  it
causeth  presently  to  purge  in  such  sort,  that  the  laske
ceaseth  altogether.

It  is  but  a  little  while  since  the  herbe  Cayapia  was
found,  it  is  an  only  remedie  for  whatsoever  poison,
especially  of  Snakes,  and  so  it  is  called  the  Snakes  herbe,
and  it  is  as  good  a  remedie  as  the  Unicorne  and  Bada,
Bezar  stone,  or  Coco  of  Maldiva  ;  nothing  profiteth  but
the  roote,  which  is  slender,  and  in  the  middest  maketh
a  knot  like  a  button,  this  beaten,  and  put  in  water  and
drunke,  it  killeth  the  poison  of  Snakes  ;  It  is  also  a  great
remedie  for  the  wounds  with  the  Arrowes  that  are
poisoned,  when  any  is  hurt  he  remaineth  fearelesse  and
secure,  drinking  the  water  of  this  roote,  it  is  also  a  great
remedie  for  the  Feaver,  continuing  it  and  drinking  of  it

478

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  a.d.

i  60  i.

some mornings, this herbe smelleth like the Fig-tree
leaves  of  Spaine.

The  herbe  Tyroqui  or  Tareroqui  is  a  principall  remedie  Tyroqui  or
for the bloudie Fluxe, the roots are all  jagged, the  T*™7???*/  ,
branches very slender, the leaves are  like Basill  ; the  ?iuxe
flowers  are  red,  and  draw  somewhat  to  a  ruddie  colour,
and  they  growe  in  the  very  points. Of  this  there  is  great
abundance,  when  it  is  gathered  it  is  yellow,  and being
dried it  turneth white, it  is  taken  in  the  same  manner
that  the  former. The  Indians  perfume  themselves  with
this  herbe  when  they  are  sicke,  that  they  may  not  die,  and
for  a  certaine  sicknesse  that  is  common  in  the  Countrie,
and  it  is  called  the  sicknesse  of  the  worme,  *  it  is  a  great  *  Perhaps  the
remedie  ;  it  serveth  to  kill  the  worme  in  the  Oxen  and  worme  in  the
Swine,  and  for  Empostumes. This  herbe  is  as  withered  -Iftioned  fa
all  night,  and  as  asleepe,  and  as  soone  as  the  Sunne  riseth,  sir  R.
it  openeth  againe,  and  shutteth  againe  when  it  is  set.  Haukins.

The  herbe  Embeguacu  serveth  much  for  the  Fluxe  of  Embeguacu
bloud,  especially  in  women  ;  the  roots  are  very  long,  and  Por  the  Fluxe
some  of  thirtie  or  fortie  fathome,  it  hath  a  strong  barke,  ^
whereof  very  strong  Cordes are made, and Cables for
ships,  and  they  are  long  lasting,  for  in  the  water  it  waxeth
greene. This  being  taken, to  wit,  the  barke  of  it,  and
perfuming  the  partie  in  the  place  of  the  Fluxe,  it  ceaseth
presently.

Caa  obetinga  is  a  small  herbe,  hath  few  leaves,  which  it  Caa  obethga.
putteth  forth  even  from  the  ground,  white  underneath,  and
greene  above,  beares  a  flower  as  big  as  a  hasell  Nut  ;  the
roots  and  the  leaves  stamped  are  an  excellent  remedie  for  For  wounds.
whatsoever  wounds,  they  use  the  leafe  also  unstamped,
which  being  laid  to  the  wound  cleaveth  fast,  and  healeth
it.

Cobaura serveth for  old sores that have already no  Cobaura.
other  remedie,  it  is  laid  beaten  and  burnt  in  the  wound,  For  woundi-
and  eateth  presently  all  the  Canker,  and  bringeth  a  new  The  Holy
skinne,  it  is  also  laid  to,  onely  the  leafe  beaten  to  skinne  %f^e' or

.  ,  J  Tobacco.

the Place'  .  .  For  sundry

The  Holy  herbe  serveth  for  divers  diseases,  as  wounds,  diseases.

479

A.D.
l60I.

For  the
worms.

Camaraca-
timbae.

For  scabs,  and
the  Poxe.

Aipo.

Meade-
M  allow.

Caraguata.

It  causeth  to
abort.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  coughs,  the  rheume,  &c.  and  principally  it  serveth  for
the  sicke  of  the  head,  the  stomacke,  and  for  the  shortnesse
of  breath,  or  the  Chine-cough.  In  this  Countrie  they
make  certaine  Coffines  of  Palme-tree  leaves,  and  being
full  of  this  herbe  dried  and  setting  it  on  fire  at  the  one  end,
they  put  the  other  in  the  mouth  and  drinke  the  smoake,  it
is  one  of  the  delicates  and  dainties  of  this  Countrie  ;  and
all  the  Countrymen,  and  even  the  Portugals  are  even  lost
for  it,  and  it  is  their  great  vice,  to  bee  all  day  and  all
night  laid  in  their  Nets,  to  drinke  this  smoake,  and  are
drunke  with  it  as  if  it  were  with  wine.

Guaraquimiya  is  the  Mirtle  tree  of  Portugall,  and
besides  other  good  properties  that  it  hath,  like  the
Broome-rape,  the  seed  of  it  is  the  onely  remedie  for  the
Body-wormes,  and  ordinarily  they  that  eate  it  doe  voide
them  presently.

Camaracatimbae  is  like  to  the  Sylvas  of  Portugall,  it  is
boyled  in  water,  and  the  said  water  is  the  onely  remedie
for  scabbes,  the  poxe,  and  new  wounds,  and  when  the
wounds  are  cured  with  the  leaves  of  the  Fig-tree  spoken
of  in  the  title  of  the  Trees,  they  wash  it  with  the  water  of
this  herbe,  whose  flower  is  most  faire,  it  seemeth  a  yellow
and  red  Jelly-flower,  and  smelleth  of  Muske,  and  of  these
they  make  Pot-boughs and  Nose-gayes for  the  Altars.

Aipo  is  the  very  Smaledge  of  Portugall,  and  hath  the
vertues,  it  is  found  onely  about  the  Sea-coast,  especially  in
the  River  of  Januarie,  and  for  this  cause  it  is  sharper,
and  not  so  sweet  in  the  taste  as  that  of  Portugall,  it  may
be  because  of  the  Seas.

There  is  great  store  of  Meade-m allow  in  this  Country,
it  hath  the  same  effects,  it  hath  certaine  flowers  as  big
as  a  Tester,  of  a  very  faire  red,  that  they  seeme  Roses
of  Portugall.

Caraguata  is  a  certaine  kinde  of  thistle,  they  beare  a
certaine  fruit  of  a  finger  long  and  yellow,  raw  they  make
the  lips  to  blister,  boiled  or  rosted  they  doe  no  harme,
but  any  woman  with  child  that  eateth  them  doth  pre-
sently abort her childe ordinarily. There bee other

480

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.
Caraguatas,  that  beare  certaine  leaves  like  Flags  very  long,
of  two  or  three  fathoms,  and  beare  a  certaine  Hartichocke
like  the  Nana,  but  they  taste  not  well  ;  these  leaves  laid
in  steepe  doe  yeeld  a  very  fine  Flaxe,  unto  the  threed
to  sowe  withall,  and  for  fishing  lines.

Timbo  are  certaine  wonderfull  herbes,  that  growe  from  [IV.  vii.
the earth like a string unto the highest top of  the  I3l2-\

Mulberie  trees,  where  they  are,  and  some  growe  close  to
the  tree  like  Ivie  : they  are  very  strong,  and  serve for
bindings,  and  some  are  as  big  as  a  mans  leg,  and  winde
them  never  so  hard  they  never  breake,  the  barke  of  these
is  very  fine  poison,  and  serveth for  a  baite  to  kill the  Timbo.
fish,  and  it  is  so  strong,  that  in  the  Rivers  wherein  it  is Baite  for
cast  it  leaveth  not a  fish  alive as farre as it hath his  ^
vertue,  and  of  these  there  be  many  sorts,  and  profitable
as  well  for  binders,  as  for  to  kill fishes.

Other  herbes  there  be  also  that  serve  for  medicines,  as
are  Sow-thistles,  Purcelane,  Beets,  Endive,  Avenca,  Basill,
and  of  all  there  is  great  abundance,  though  these  herbes
have  not  the  perfection  of  those  of  Spaine  ;  there  want  no
wilde  Mulberies  white  and  blacke,  like  those  of  Portugall,
and  great  store  of  good  Parsley,  about  the  strands,
whereof  a  good  conserve  is  made  ;  they  want  no  Pot-
flowers.

Of  smelling  herbes  in  this  Countrie  there  are  many,
Mintes,  or  wilde  Sage,  especially  in  Piratiniga,  they  smell
not  so  well  as  those  of  Portugall,  they  have  also  certaine
French  Mallowes,  with  certaine  faire  and  pleasant  flowers
which  serve  for  Nosegaies.  Many  Lillies  there  are,  not
so  fine  nor  so  red  as  those  of  the  Kingdome,  and  some
white  ones  are  also  found.

There groweth here in the Spring, an herbe that  Sleeping
sleepeth,  and  is  like  the  Mayes  of  Portugall,  and  as  that  herbe-
doth  wither  and  sleepe  after  Sun-set,  and  when  it  riseth  it n»V
openeth againe, and  showeth  her  beautie  ;  the smell  is
somewhat strange. There is also another tree that
sleepeth  in  the same  manner,  and  beareth  certaine fine
flowers,  but  they  have  no  great  smell.

XVI  481  2H

A.D.

l60I.

Erva  viva :
See  M.
Haicourt  his
Guiana
Relations.

Brasilian
herbs  smell
not.

Of  the  Canes.

Oxe-fish,
Manati.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  Quicke  herbe  is  of  a  good  height,  and  hath  boughes,
and  certaine  jagged  leaves,  of  a  pleasant  greene,  it  is  called
Quicke  herbe,  because  it  is  so  quicke  and  sensible,  that  as
soone  as  it  is  touched  with  the  hand  or  with  any  other
thing,  presently  it  hangeth  the  head,  and  withereth  as  if
they  had  done  it  great  injurie,  and  within  a  little  while
it  commeth  to  his  perfection,  and  as  many  times  it  is
touched  it  withereth,  and  commeth  againe  to  himselfe  as
before.

Many  other  herbes  there  be  like  Origanum,  and  many
other  sundrie  flowers,  but  it  seemeth  that  this  Clymate,
either  for  the  many  waters,  or  because  of  the  sunne,
infuseth  no  smell  in  the  herbes,  rather  it  seemes  to
take  it  away.

In  this  Countrie  are  many  sorts  of  Canes,  and  Tacuara
is  as  big  as  a  mans  thigh  :  others  which  have  joynts  a
fathome  long,  others  whereof  they  make  their  Arrowes,
and  are  esteemed.  Others  so  long  that  they  have  three
or  foure  Lances  in  length,  these  growe  among  the  Woods,
and  as  there  are  many,  so  there  are  many  and  long  beds
of  Canes  of  many  leagues,  and  as  they  growe  among  the
trees,  they  goe  to  seeke  the  Sunne,  and  therefore  are  so
long.

§• VI.

the  Fishes  that  swimme  in  the  salt  water  :
also  Shel-fishes,  Trees  and  Fowles  of  the  Sea  :  of
Rivers  and  the  Creatures  which  live  therein  ;
and  the  Beasts  and  Plants  brought  thither
out  of  Portugall.

He  Oxe-fish  in  these  parts  is  a  Royall  fish,  esteemed
above  all  other  fishes,  very  healthfull  in  eating,
and  of  a  good  taste,  either  salted  or  fresh  :  And
it  rather  seemeth  Beefe  then  Fish,  and  some  doubts  there
were,  because  it  was  eaten  on  fish  dayes  ;  the  flesh  is  all
grained  like  Beefe,  and  so  it  is  cut  in  slices,  and  they
dresse it at the smoake like Bacon, or hanged

482

Of

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

Beefe.  In  the  taste,  if  it  be  eaten  or  sodden  with  Cabidge,
or  other  herbes,  it  tasteth  like  Beefe,  and  drest  in  sowce  it
tasteth  like  Mutton  ;  and  rosted,  both  in  smell,  taste,
and  fatnesse  it  is  like  Porke,  and  hath  fat  also.

The  Fish  in  his  making  seemeth  a  land  creature,  and
chiefly  an  Oxe,  the  head  is  altogether  of  an  Oxe,  with
skinne  and  haire, eares,  eyes,  cheekes,  and  tongue  ; the
eyes are exceeding small for the bodie it hath, he
shutteth  and  openeth  them  when  hee  listeth,  which  other
fishes  doe  not  ;  over  the  vents  it  hath  two  skinnes  wherewith
he  closeth  them,  and  by  them  he  breatheth,  and  it  cannot
bee  long  under  water  without  breathing,  it  hath  no  more
nor  other  finnes  but  the  taile  ;  which  is  all round and
close  ;  the  bodie  is  of  a  great  bignesse,  all  full  of  yellow
haires,  it  hath  two  armes  of  a  cubite  long,  with  two  hands
like  round  peeles,  and  on  them  he  hath  five  fingers  all  close
one  to  another,  and  every  finger  hath  his  nayle  like  a
mans  nayle. Under  these  armes the female have two
paps,  wherewith  shee  bringeth  up  her  young  ;  she  beareth
but  one  at  once  :  the  inward  part  and  the  inwards  of  this
fish  are  like  an  Oxes,  with  liver,  and  lights,  &c. In  the
head  over  the  eyes  neere  the  braines  it  hath  two  stones  of
a  good bignesse, white and heavie, they are of  great
esteeme,  and  are  the  onely  remedie  for  the  Stone  : for
beaten  to  powder  and  drunke  in  wine  or  water  it  causeth
to  void  the  stone,  as  it  happened  that  giving  it  to  a  person
to drinke, leaving other many experiences, within one
houre  hee  voided  a  stone  as  bigge  as  an  Almond,  and
remained  sound,  being  before  at  the  point  of  death. The
bones  of  this  fish  are  all massie and  white  like  Ivorie.  [IV.  vii.
They  make  of  it  great  store  of  *  Butter,  they  take  two % ^^O
leaves  as  from  a  Hogge  ;  and  the  most  of  the  Butter  it  J^q-^?^'
hath  in  the  taile,  which  being  of  a  yard  or  more  in  length,  after%
it  melteth  all  into  Butter,  it  hath  a  good  taste,  and  for  to  Mantega  in
dresse  or  frie  fish,  and  for  light. It  is  verie  good  also  the  Portugall
for Medicines, as the Hogges Grease, it is white  and  word'
smelleth  well,  it  hath  no  smell  of  fish. This  fish  is  taken
with  Harping-Irons  ;  it  is  found  in  the  salt  Rivers,  neere

483

A.D.
1 60 1.

Beijupira.

The  Oxe  eie.

A  Or  four e
shillings  a
piece.
eO  Greace.

Camurupi.

f0r  Butter.
The  wild  fish.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  fresh  water  :  it  feedeth  on  an  herbe  that  groweth  by
the  borders,  and  within  the  Rivers,  and  where  this  herbe
groweth,  and  neere  the  Springs  of  fresh  water,  whereof
nee  onely  drinketh.  They  are  verie  great,  some  weigh
tenne,  others  fifteene  hundred,  and  such  a  fish  hath  beene
taken,  that  an  hundred  men  could  not  get  it  out  of  the
water, but they  broke  it  up  there  where  it  was  killed.

The  fish  Beijupira  is  like  the  Sturgeon  of  Portugall,
and  so  it  is  held  and  esteemed  of  heere  as  a  royall  fish  :
it  is  very  healthfull,  fat,  and  of  a  good  taste,  they  bee
infinite,  and  some  of  their  rowes  are  a  span  in  compasse
about  :  these  fishes  are  taken  in  the  broad  Sea,  with  a
hooke  and  line,  it  is  six  or  seven  spannes  long  ;  the  bodie
is  round,  blacke  on  the  backe  and  the  belly  white.

The  Oxe-eie  is  like  the  Tunnyes  of  Spaine,  as  well  in
bignesse  as  in  making,  inward  as  outward  ;  it  is  verie  fat,
it  hath  sometime  betweene  leafe  and  leafe  courses  of  fat
as  thicke  as  a  Portugall  d  Tester  ;  they  are  cut  in  backes
and  bellies  like  the  Tunnyes,  and  of  them  is  made  great
store  and  verie  good  e  Butter,  it  hath  leaves  like  a  Hogge,
is  a  fish  esteemed  and  of  a  good  taste,  it  deserveth  well
the  name  of  Oxe  fish,  as  well  in  his  beautie,  as  his
bignesse,  the  eies  are  properly  like  an  Oxe,  and  therefore
it  hath  this  name.

The  fish  Camurupi  is  also  a  royall  fish,  and  esteemed
in  these  parts,  the  graine  of  it  all  in  flakes,  enterlarded
with  fat  and  grease,  and  of  a  good  taste,  it  hath  many
bones  through  all  the  bodie,  and  is  dangerous  in  eating.
It  hath  a  finne  on  the  backe,  which  it  carries  alwaies  raised
upwards,  it  is  of  two  or  three  quarters  long,  the  fish  is
long  of  twelve  and  thirteene  quarters  in  length,  and  of  a
good  bignesse,  and  two  men  have  much  adoe  to  lift
up  one  of  them,  they  are  taken  with  Harping  Irons,
there  are  many  of  them,  and  much  fOile  is  made  of
them.

This  wilde  fish,  which  the  Indians  call  Piraembu,  (that
is,  a  fish  that  snorteth,  the  reason  is,  because  wheresoever
it  is,  is  heard  by  his  snorting)  is  of  a  good  bignesse,  about

484

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

eight  or  nine  spannes,  it  is  of  a  good  taste,  and  esteemed  ;
it  hath  in  the  mouth  two  stones  as  broad  as  a  hand,
exceeding  strange,  with  them  they  breake  the  Wilkes
whereof  they  feed,  the  Indians  esteeme  the  stones  and
weare  them  about  their  neckes  as  a  Jewell.

There  are  many  other  fishes  of  sundrie  kinds,  that  are
not  in  Spaine,  and  commonly  of  a  good  taste  and  health-
full.  Of  the  fishes  of  Portugall  in  these  parts  are  also
many,  to  wit,  a  fish  called  Tainhas,  and  a  great  multitude,
and  it  hath  beene  tried  that  the  Tainha  beeing  fresh,  and
laid  to  the  stinging  of  a  Snake  is  another  Unicorne.
There  want  no  Sea-breames,  a  fish  called  Chicharros,  it  is
like  a  Mackerill,  Pargos,  or  great  Sea-breames,  Sargos,
other  Sea-breames,  Garazes,  Darados  the  Needle-fish,
Cod-fishes,  but  these  are  rare,  Pilchards  like  them  of
Spaine,  are  found  at  sometimes  in  the  River  of  Januarie,
and  the  most  parts  of  the  South,  Scates,  and  Rayes  ;  these
Rayes  some  have  in  their  mouth  two  bones,  and  breake
with  them  the  Wilkes.

All  these  fishes  are  so  healthfull  that  in  these  parts  they
are  eaten  after  Milke,  after  flesh,  and  all  a  whole  Lent
without  Oile  or  Vineger,  and  it  causeth  no  scabs  nor  other
diseases  as  in  Europe,  but  rather  it  is  given  to  the  sicke,
though  they  have  a  Fever,  or  be  very  weake.

Because  this  Coast  is  full  of  many  Bayes,  Nookes,  and
Creekes,  there  came  great  store  of  Whales  to  these  Con-  The  Whale.
caves  chiefly  from  May  to  September,  when  they  spawne
and  bring  up  their  young,  and  also  because  they  come  to
the  great  store  of  fish  that  at  this  time  there  is  in  these
Creekes.  They  are  sometime  so  many  that  ye  may  see
fortie  or  fiftie  together,  men  doe  say  that  they  doe  cast  the
Amber  that  they  find  in  the  Sea,  and  whereof  they  also  Ambergrise.
feed,  and  therefore  is  some  of  it  found  in  this  Coast ;
others  doe  say  that  the  Sea  it  selfe  doth  cast  it  on  the
shoares  with  great  tempests,  and  commonly  it  is  found
after  a  great  storme,  and  all  the  beasts  doe  eate  of  this
Amber,  and  great  diligence  is  needfull  after  the  tempests
that  they  may  not  find  it  eaten. It  is  very  dangerous  to

485

A.D.

l60I

The  Sword
fish-

Battle  with
Whales.

[IV.  vii.

I3H-.
A  Tortoise.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

saile  in  small  Barkes  along  this  Coast,  for  besides  other
dangers,  the  Whales  overwhelme  many,  if  they  heare  any
ringing,  they  are  so  scared  as  Horses  when  they  heare  the
sound  of  a  Drumme,  and  are  as  fierce  as  Lions,  many
runne  upon  the  shoare,  and  great  store  of  Oile  is
made  of  them.  They  have  the  head  open,  and  there  they
breathe,  and  cast  at  once  great  store  of  water,  and  scatter
it  so  in  the  Aire,  as  if  it  were  a  great  showre.

There  is  great  store  of  the  Sword-fishes,  they  are  great
and  fierce,  for  they  have  a  snowt  like  a  Sword,  all  full  of
teeth  round  about,  verie  sharpe,  and  as  bigge  as  Dogges
teeth  or  bigger  ;  they  are  a  mans  hand  or  more,  and  the
length  is  according  to  the  greatnesse  of  the  fish.  Some  of
these  snowts  or  Swords  are  of  eight  or  ten  spannes  long  ;
with  these  they  make  a  cruell  battell  with  the  Whales,  for
raising  it  upward,  and  striking  so  many  strokes  on  her,
and  so  fast  that  it  is  a  wonderfull  thing  :  the  Sharkes
resort  to  the  bloud,  and  sucke  it  in  such  sort  till  she  dieth,
and  so  many  are  found  dead  and  cut  in.  pieces.  With
this  snowt  also  they  catch  the  fishes  whereof  they  feed.
The  Indians  use  these  snowts  when  they  are  young  for  to
beate  their  children,  and  to  feare  them  when  they  are
disobedient  unto  them.

In  this  Coast  are  many  Tortoises  ;  there  are  many
taken,  whereof  there  are  coffers,  boxes  for  the  hoasts,
cups,  &c.  These  Tortoises  doe  lay  their  egges  in  the
sands,  and  they  lay  200.  or  300.  egges  at  a  time,  they  are
as  bigge  as  Hens  egges,  verie  white  and  round  as  balles  ;
they  hide  these  egges  in  the  sand,  and  when  the  young
are  hatcht,  presently  they  goe  to  the  water,  where  they
are  nourished,  the  egges  also  are  eaten.  They  have  this
propertie,  that  though  you  boile  or  roast  them  the  white
is  ever  soft,  the  inwards  are  like  a  Hogges,  and  they
have  vents  where  through  they  breathe.  They  have
another  particularitie,  that  when  yee  turne  them  on  their
belly,  they  turne  presently  toward  the  Sea,  neither  can
they  live  otherwise.  Some  of  them  are  so  bigge  that  of
their  shels  they  make  whole  Targets,  and  one  was  taken

486

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL

upon  this  Coast  so  bigge,  that  twentie  men  could  not  lift,
nor  poise  it  from the  ground.

Upon  this  Coast  are  many  sorts  of  Sharkes,  and  in  it
are  found  sixe  or  seven  kinds  of  them  ;  it  is  a  very  fierce
and  cruell  fish,  and  kils  many  persons,  especially  those  that
swimme.  The  Rivers  are  full  of  them  ;  they  are  so  cruell
that  it  happened  one  to  runne  after  an  Indian  that  went
in  a  Boate,  and  put  him  in  such  a  straight,  that  the  young
man  leaping  ashore,  the  Sharke  leapt  after  him  thinking
to  have  caught  him,  and  fell  on  drie  land  where  they
killed  him.  In  the  broad  Sea  where  also  are  many,  they
kill  them  with  Snares,  and  Harping  Irons,  and  they  are  so
eager,  greedie,  and  love  flesh,  and  they  are  so  devouring,
that  they  find  in  their  bellies,  skinnes,  pieces  of  cloth,
shirts  and  breeches,  that  fall  from  the  Sailers,  they  goe
ordinarily  accompanied  with  certaine  verie  faire  fishes  of
divers  colours  called  Pelgrimes.  They  make  great  store
of  Oile  of  them,  and  the  Indians  use  the  teeth  in  their
Arrowes,  because  they  are  verie  sharpe,  cruell,  and
venemous,  and  verie  seldome,  or  with  great  difficultie  are
they  healed  that  are  hurt  with  them.

The  flying  fishes  are  ordinarily  of  a  spanne  long  or
little  more,  it  hath  the  eies  verie  faire,  of  a  certaine  verie
gallant  picture,  that  beautifies  it  much,  and  doe  seeme
precious  stones,  the  head  is  also  very  faire,  it  hath  wings
like  Reere-mice,  but  of  a  silver  hue  ;  they  are  much
persecuted  of  the  other  fishes,  and  for  to  escape  they  flie
in  flockes,  like  Stares,  or  Sparrowes,  but  they  flie  not
verie  high,  they  are  also  good  to  eat,  and  when  they  flie
they  glad  the  Sailers,  and  many  times  they  fall  in  the
ship,  and  come  in  at  the  Cabbin  windowes.

Botos  and  Toninas,  are  two  kinds  of  Porpoises.  Of
these  fishes  there  are  great  abundance,  as  in  Europe.

They  find  also  in  this  Coast  Salmonets,  but  they  are
rare,  and  not  so  esteemed,  nor  of  so  good  a  taste  as  those
of  Europe.  The  Soles  of  these  parts  are  verie  rare,  they
have  this  propertie,  that  when  they  are  to  be  boiled  or
fried  they  beate  them,  and  the  more  stroakes  they give

487

A.D.

l60I

Tuborones,  ot
Sharkes.

Pelgrimes.

The  flying
fish.

Soles  and
Salmonets.
A  little  red
fish  very
daintlc  in
Spaine.

A.D.
l60I,

Of  the

venemous

fishes.

Toad  fish

deadly.

Puraque,  or
Torpedo. See
Jobson.

Caramuru.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

them,  the  stiffer  they  are,  and  the  better  to  eate,  and  if
they beate  them not,  they  are  soft  and  nothing  worth.

As  in  this  Countrie  of  Brasill  are  many  Snakes,  and
venemous  Wormes,  whereof  wee  will  speake  hereafter,
there  are  likewise  many  fishes  verie  venemous.

The  Toad  fish,  in  their  language,  Amayacu,  is  a  small
fish,  a  spanne  long,  painted,  it  hath  faire  eies,  taking  it
out  of  the  water  it  snorteth  verie  much,  and  cutteth  the
hookes,  and  out  of  the  water  it  swelleth  much,  all  the
poison  lies  in  the  skinne,  and  flaying  they  eate  it  :  but
eating  it  with  the  skinne  it  killeth.  It  chanced  a  young
man  to  eate  one  with  the  skinne,  who  died  almost
suddenly  ;  the  Father  said,  I  will  eate  the  fish  that  killed
my  Sonne,  and  eating  of  it  died  also  presently,  it  is  a
great  poison  for  Rats,  for  those  that  eate  of  it  doe
die  presently.

There  is  another  kind  of  Toad  fish  of  the  same  fashion
that  the  other,  but  it  hath  many  cruell  prickles,  as  a
Hedge-hogge  ;  it  snorteth,  and  swelleth  out  of  the  water  ;
the  skinne  also  killeth,  especially  the  prickles,  because  they
are  verie  venemous,  fleaing  it,  it  is  eaten,  and  it  is  good
for  the  bloudie  Fluxe.  There  is  another  Toad  fish,
called  in  their  tongue,  Itaoca,  it  is  three  square,  and  the
bodie  such,  that  all  of  it  is  like  a  Dagger  ;  it  is  faire,  it
hath  the  eies  bluish,  it  is  eaten  fleade  ;  the  poison
consisteth  in  the  skinne,  livers,  guts,  and  bones,  whatso-
ever creature  doth  eate  it,  dieth.

Puraque  is  like  the  Scate,  it  hath  such  vertue  that  if
any  touch  it,  he  remaineth  shaking  as  one  that  hath  the
Palsie,  and  touching  it  with  a  sticke,  or  other  thing  it
benummeth  presently  him  that  toucheth  it,  and  while  he
holdeth  the  sticke  over  him,  the  arme  that  holdeth  the
sticke  is  benummed,  and  asleepe  ;  it  is  taken  with  flue-nets,
and  with  casting  Nets  it  maketh  all  the  bodie  tremble,  and
benummes  it  with  the  paine,  but  beeing  dead  it  is  eaten,
and  it  hath  no  poison.

The  Caramuru  are  like  the  Sea  Snakes  of  Portugall,  of
ten  or  fifteene  spans  long,  very  fat,  and  roasted  taste  like

488

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.
Pigge  ;  these  have  strange  teeth,  and  many  men  are
maymed  by  their  bytings,  and  the  hand  or  foot  where
they  were  bitten,  doe  rot  away.  It  hath  over  all  the
bodie  many  prickels.  The  Countrimen  say  that  they
engender  with  the  Snakes  ;  for  they  finde  them  many
times  knit  with  them,  and  many  in  the  sands  tarrying  for
the  Sea  Snakes.

Amoreaty  is  like  the  Toad fish,  it  is  full  of  prickels,  Amoreatie.
and  thrusts  himselfe  under  the  sand  along  the  shoare,  and
prickes  the  foot  or  hand  underneath  that  toucheth  it,  and
it  hath  no  other  remedie  but  only  by fire.

Amayacurub is round and of the bignesse of the
kBugallos  of  Spaine,  and  are  very  venemous,  it  hath  the  k  A  fish  so
bodie  full  of  Wartes,  and  therefore  it  is  called  Curub,  that  called-
is  to  say,  a  Wart  in  their  Language.

Jerepomonga,  is  a  Snake  that  liveth  in  the  Sea ; her  [IV.  vii,
manner  of  living  is  to  lie  very  still,  and  whatsoever  living  1315-]

thing  that  toucheth  it,  remaineth  so  fast  sticking  to  it  that  ^me°tm'
in  no  wise  it  can  stirre,  and  so  he  feedeth  and  sustaines  snake.
himselfe.  Sometimes  it  commeth  out  of  the  Sea,  and
becommeth  very  small,  and  as  soone  as  it  is  toucht  it
sticketh  fast,  and  if  they  goe  with  the  other  hand  to  lose
themselves,  they  remaine  also  fast  by  it,  and  then  it
becommeth  as  bigge  as  a  great  Cable,  and  so  carrieth  the
person  to  the  Sea,  and  eateth  it,  and  because  it  cleaveth
so  fast,  it  is  called  Terepomong,  that  is  to  say,  a  thing
that  cleaveth  fast.

Finally,  there  are  many  kinds  of  very  venomous  fishes
in  the  Sea,  that  have  so  vehement  a  poison,  that  ordinarily
none  escapeth  that  eateth  or  toucheth  them.

The  Mermen,  or  men  of  the  Sea,  are  called  in  their  Mermen,  or
language  Ypupiapra ;  the  men  of  the  country  are  so  afraid  Monsters  of
of  them,  that  many  of  them  die  only  with  the  thought  of  the  Sea'
them,  &  none  that  seeth  them  scapeth. Some  that  died
already,  being  demanded  the  cause,  said,  that  they  had
seene  this  Monster,  they  properly  are  like  men,  of  a  good
stature,  but  their  eies  are  very  hollow. The  Female  are
like women,  they have long haire,  and are beautiful ;

489

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

these  Monsters  are  found  in  the  bars  of  the  fresh  Rivers ;
in  Jagoaripe,  seven  or  eight  leagues  from  the  Bay  have
many  bin  found,  &  in  the  yeere  82.  an  Indian  going  to
fish,  was  chased  by  one,  and  fleeing  in  a  Canoa  told  it  to
his  Master.  The  Master  for  to  animate  the  Indian,
would  needs  go  see  the  Monster,  &  being  carelesse  with
one  hand  out  of  the  Canoa,  it  catcht  hold  of  him,  and
carried  him  away,  and  hee  was  never  seene  againe,  and  in
the  same  yeere  died  an  Indian  of  Franciscus  Lorenco
Cacyro.  In  Port  Secure  are  some  seene,  which  have
killed  some  Indians  alreadie,  the  manner  of  their  killing
is  to  embrace  themselves  with  the  person,  so  strongly,
kissing  and  grasping  it  hard  to  it  selfe,  that  they  crush  it
in  pieces  remaining  whole,  and  when  they  perceive  it
dead,  they  give  some  sighings  in  shew  of  sorrow,  and
letting  them  goe  they  runne  away,  and  if  they  carrie  any
they  eate  onely  the  eies,  the  nose,  the  points  of  the  fingers
and  toes,  and  privie  members,  and  so  ordinarily  they  are
found  on  the  sands  with  these  things  missing.

Of  the  Shel- The  Seas  of  these  parts  are  very  plentifull  of  Cuttles,

fishes.  Cuttle  tf\\s  fc;mc[  0f  fish  hath  a  hood  alwaies  full  of  very  blacke
Inke :  this  is  their  defence  from  the  greater  fishes,  for
when  they  come  to  catch  them,  they  cast  that  Inke  before
their  eies,  and  the  water  becommeth  very  blacke,  and
then  hee  goes  his  waies.  They  take  them  with  shooting
at  them,  but  they  baite  them  first,  they  are  also
taken  with  lights  by  night.  For  to  eate  them  they
beate  them,  and  the  more,  the  softer  they  are,  and  of
better  taste.

Jpuk.  Apula  is  a  shel-hsh  like  the  joint  of  a  Cane  : it  is  rare,

it  is  eaten,  and  drinking  it  fasting  in  Powder,  a  sovereigne
remedie  for  the  Milt  or  Spleene.

Sea-fomes.  In these  parts  are infinite  of  the Sea-fomes, and  are

great,  as  broad  as  a  hat;  they  have  many  foulds  where-
with they  catch  the  fish,  and  resemble  the  Barberie
Purses,  they  are  not  eaten  ;  if  they  sting  any  one,  they
cause  great  paines,  and  cause  to  weepe,  and  so  said  an
Indian that  was stung  with one  of  them, that  he had

490

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL

A.D.
l60I

Sea  Crabs.
Uza.

received  many  wounds  with  Arrowes,  but  never  wept  till
then  ;  they  are  never  seene  but  in  neape  tides  (or  slow
waters,  therefore  the  Portugals  call  them  Agnas  Mortas,
or  Dead  waters.)

The  Uca  is  a  kind  of  Crab  found  in  the  mire,  and  they
are  infinite,  and  the  foode  of  all  this  Countrie,  chiefly  for
the  slaves  of  Guinea,  and  the  Indians  of  the  Countrie,
they  have  a  good  taste,  upon  them  is  good  drinking  cold
water.  They  have  a  particularitie  to  bee  noted,  that
when  they  cast  their  shell  they  goe  into  their  holes,  and
there  they  are  two  or  three  moneths,  and  casting  the
shell,  mouthes  and  feet,  they  come  so  out,  and  they  grow
againe  as  before.

Guainumu  is  a  kind  of  Crab  so  great,  that  a  mans  Guainumu.
legge  will  goe  into  their  mouth.  They  are  good  to  eate ;
when  it  doth  thunder  they  come  out  of  their  holes,  and
make  so  great  a  noise  the  one  with  the  other,  that  men
have  gone  out  with  their  weapons,  thinking  they  had
beene  enemies ;  if  they  doe  eate  a  certaine  herbe,  who-
soever eateth  them  then  dieth,  these  are  of  the  Land,  but
keepe  in  holes  neere  the  Sea  side.

The  Aratu  Crabs  keepe  in  the  trunkes  of  the  trees,  Aratu.
that  grow  in  the  Oowes  of  the  Sea,  when  they  find  a
Cockle  that  gapeth,  they  seeke  presently  some  little  stone,
and  very  cunningly  put  it  into  the  Cockle ;  the  Cockle
shutteth  presently,  and  not  beeing  able  because  of  the
little  stone  it  hath  within,  they  with  their  mouthes  doe
take  out  the  fish  and  eate  it.

There  are  ten  or  twelve  kinds  of  Crabs  in  this
Countrie,  and  as  I  have  said,  they  are  so  many  in  number,
and  so  healthfull,  that  all  are  eaten,  especially  of  the
Indians,  &c.

The  Oysters  are  many,  and  some  are  very  great,  and
the  meate  is  as  broad  as  the  palme  of  the  hand :  in  these
are  some  Pearles  found  very  rich,  in  other  smaller  are  also
very  fine  Pearles  found.  The  Indians  in  old  time  came
to  the  Sea  for  Oysters,  and  got  so  many  that  they  made
great  Hils  of  the  shels,  and  the  fishes  they  carried  away

491

Ten  or  twelve
kinds  of  crabs.

Oysters.

A.D.
l601.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[IV.

Vll.

for  to  eate  all  the  yeere ;  upon  these  Hils  by  the  con-
tinuance of  time,  grew  great  Groves  of  Trees,  and  very
thicke  and  high,  and  the  Portugals  discovered  some,  and
every  day  goe  discovering  others  anew,  and  of  these  shels

Note  fir  lime,  they  make  lime,  and  of  one  onely  heape  was  part  of  the
Colledge  of  the  Bay  made,  the  Palaces  of  the  Governour,
and  many  other  buildings,  and  yet  it  is  not  ended,  the
lime  is  very  white,  good  for  to  garnish  and  lime  withall,
3l6-J  if  it  bee  in  the  raine  it  becommeth  blacke,  and  for  to
keepe  water  in  Cisternes  it  is  not  so  sure,  but  for  the  rest
as  good  as  the  stone  in  Spaine.

Muscles.  There  want  no  Muscles  in  this  Countrie :  they  serve

the  Indians  and  the  Portugals  for  Spoones  and  Knives,
they  have  a  faire  silver  colour ;  in  them  is  found  some
seed  Pearle ;  there  is  a  small  kind  of  them  whereon  the
Sea-guls  doe  feed,  and  because  they  cannot  breake  them,
they  have  such  a  naturall  instinct  that  taking  them  up
into  the  Aire,  they  let  them  fall  so  many  times  till  they
breake  it,  and  then  they  eate  them.

Perewinkles.  The  Perewinkles  are  very  tastefull,  and  good  in  this
Countrie,  and  some  seed  Pearle  is  found  in  them,  and  so
of  the  Perewinkles,  and  of  the  Muscles  there  is  great
store,  of  many  and  sundrie  kinds.

Wilkes.  The  greatest  Wilkes  which  are  called  Guatapiggoacu,

that  is,  a  great  Wilke,  are  much  esteemed  of  the  Indians,
for  of  them  they  make  their  Trumpets,  Furnitures,
Beades,  Brooches,  Earerings,  and  Gloves  for  the  children,
and  they  are  of  such  esteeme  among  them,  that  for  one
they  will  give  any  one  person  that  they  have  captive :  and
the  Portugals  gave  in  olde  time  a  Crowne  for  one :  they
are  as  white  as  Ivorie,  and  many  of  them  are  of  two
quarters  broad,  and  one  in  length.

Piraguaig.  The  Piraguaig  are  also  eaten,  and  of  the  shelles  they

make  their  Beades :  and  for  so  many  fathome  they  give  a
person.  Of  these  the  Sea  casteth  up  sometimes  great
heapes,  a  wonderfull  thing.  Of  Wilkes  and  Skallops
there  is  great  quantitie  in  this  Countrie,  very  faire,  and
to  bee  esteemed,  of  sundrie  kinds.

492

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

They  find  great  store  of  white  stone  Corrall  under  White  Corral
water,  it  groweth  like  small  Trees  all  in  leaves,  and  Canes
as  the  red  Corrall  of  India ;  and  if  this  also  were  so,  there
would  be  great  riches  in  this  Countrie,  for  the  great
abundance  there  is  of  it,  it  is  very  white,  it  is  gotten  with
difficultie,  they  make  lime  of  it  also.

There  are  great  multitudes  of  Prawn es,  because  this  Prawnes.
Coast  is  almost  all  environed  with  shelves,  and  Rockes ;
there  are  also  many  Sea-rufFes,  and  other  Monsters
found  in  the  Concavities  of  the  Rockes,  great  Cranesses
or  Crabbes  like  those  of  Europe,  it  seemes  there  bee  none
in  these  parts.

The  Mangue  Trees  are  like  the  Swallowes,  or  Willowes  Of  the  Trees
of  Europe,  there  is  so  great  quantitie  of  them  in  the  armes  that  grow  in
or  creeks  that  the  Sea  maketh  within  the  Land,  that  many  ^ansues^'
leagues  of  the  Land  is  of  these  Trees,  that  are  watered
with  the  tides.  We  travelled  I  say  leagues,  and  whole
daies  in  the  Rivers  where  these  Trees  are,  and  they  are
alwaies  greene,  faire  and  pleasant,  and  of  many  kinds.
The  wood  is  good  to  burne,  and  for  to  build  houses,  it  is
very  heavie  and  hard  as  Iron ;  of  the  barke  they  make
Inke,  and  it  serveth  to  tanne  Leather,  and  they  are  of
many  kindes.  A  certaine  kind  of  them  doe  cast  certaine
twigs  from  the  top  of  their  length  some  times  as  long  as  a
Launce,  till  they  come  to  the  water,  and  then  they  cast
many  branches  and  rootes,  and  these  branches  remaine
fast  in  the  earth,  and  while  they  are  greene  these  twigs
are  tender,  and  because  they  are  hollow  within,  they  make
good  Flutes  of  them.  In  these  Creekes  are  a  certaine
kinde  of  Gnats  called  Mareguis  as  small  as  Hennes  Lice,  Gnats.
they  bite  in  such  sort,  that  they  leave  such  a  Wheale,
smart  and  itching  that  a  man  cannot  helpe  himselfe,  for
even  through  the  clothes  they  pricke,  and  it  is  a  good
penance,  and  mortification  to  suffer  them  on  a  Morning,
or  an  Evening ;  there  is  no  other  remedie  to  defend
themselves  from  them,  but  to  anoint  themselves  with  dirt,
or  to  make  a  great  fire  and  smoke.

In  these  Creekes  are  many  Crabs,  Oysters,  and  Water

493

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

Rats,  and  there  is  one  kind  of  these  Rats,  a  monstrous
thing,  for  all  the  day  they  sleepe,  and  wake  all  night.

In  these  Creekes  the  Parrets  breeds,  which  are  so  many
in  number,  and  make  such  a  noise,  that  it  seemeth  the
noise  of  Sparrows,  or  Dawes.

On  the  Sands  they  finde  great  store  of  Parsley,  as  good
and  better,  then  that  of  Portugall  whereof  also  they  make
Conserves.

Birds  that  doe  feed,  and  are  found  in  the  salt

water.

Guiratinga.  r  I  AHe  Bird  Guiratinga  is  white,  of  the  bignesse  of  the
A  Cranes  of  Portugall ;  they  are  extreame  white,  and
have  verie  long  feete,  the  bill  verie  cruell  and  sharpe,  and
verie  faire,  of  a  verie  fine  yellow,  the  legges  are  also  verie
long,  betweene  Red  and  Yellow.  On  the  necke  it  hath
the  finest  Plume  Feathers  that  can  bee  found,  and  they
are  like  the  Estridges  Feathers  of  Africa.

Caripira.  Caripira by  another name Forked-tayles,  are many  ;

they  are  called  Forked-tayles,  because  their  taile  is  divided
in  the  middle ;  the  Indians  make  great  account  of  the
Feathers  for  the  feathering  of  their  Arrowes,  and  say  that
they  last  long,  at  sometimes  they  are  verie  fat,  the  fat  is
good  for  the  loosenesse.  These  Birds  doe  use  to  bring
newes  a  land  of  the  ships,  and  they  are  so  certaine  in  this
that  very  seldome  they  faile,  for  when  they  are  seene,
ordinarily  within  twentie  or  thirtie  daies  the  ships  doe
come,
i-  Guaca is properly the Sea-mew of Portugall, their

31/7-]  ordinarie  food  are  Cockles,  and  because  they  are  hard,  and
they  cannot  breake  them,  they  take  them  in  their  bill,  and
letting  them  fall  many  times  they  breake  them  and  eate
them ;  of  these  Sea-meawes  there  are  an  infinite  number
of  kinds,  that  the  Trees  and  the  strands  are  full  of  them.

Guirateonteon.  Guirateonteon  is  called  in  Portugall  Scald-pate,  it  is
called  Guirateonteon,  that  is,  a  Bird  that  hath  deadly
accidents,  and  that  dieth  and  liveth  againe,  as  though  it

Note.

[IV.  vi
Guaca.

had  the  Falling  sicknesse,

and  these  fits  are  so  great  that
494

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL

A.D.
l60I.

many  times  the  Indians  doe  find  them  along  the  strands,
and  take  them  in  their  hands,  and  thinking  they  are  dead
doe  fling  them  away,  and  they  assoone  as  they  fall  doe  rise
and  flie  away,  they  are  white  and  faire,  and  there  are  other
kinds  of  these  that  have  the  same  accidents.

The  Calcamar  are  as  bigge  as  Turtle-doves,  or  Pigeons ;  Calcamar,  or
the  men  of  the  Countrie  say,  that  they  lay  their  Egges  in  Sea-stamper.
the  Sea,  and  there  they  hatch,  and  breed  their  young ;  they
flie  not,  but  with  their  wings  and  feet  they  swimme  very
swiftly,  they  foreshew  great  calmes  and  showres,  and  in
calme  weather  they  are  so  many  along  the  shippes  that
the  Mariners  cannot  tell  what  to  doe,  they  are  even  the
very  spite  it  selfe,  and  melancholy.

The  Ayaya  are  as  bigge  as  a  Pye-annet,  more  white  Ayaya.
then  red,  they  have  a  faire  colour  of  white  bespotted  with
red,  the  bill  is  long  and  like  a  Spoone.  For  to  catch  the
fish,  it  hath  this  slight;  it  striketh  with  the  foot  in  the
water,  and  stretching  out  his  neck,  tarrieth  for  the  fish  and
catcheth  it,  and  therefore  the  Indians  say  it  hath  humane
knowledge.

The  Caracura  is  small  and  gray,  it  hath  faire  eies  with  a  Caracura.
verie  faire  red  circle,  it  hath  a  strange  note,  for  he  that
heareth  it  thinketh  it  is  of  a  verie  great  bird,  it  beeing  verie
small ;  for  it  singeth  with  the  mouth,  and  jointly  behind  it
maketh  a  noise  so  sounding,  loud  and  strong,  though  not
swelling  verie  well,  that  it  is  a  wonder,  it  maketh  this
sweet  Musicke  two  houres  before  day,  and  at  Evening  till
the  Evening  twilight  be  done,  and  ordinarily  when  it
singeth,  foresheweth  faire  weather.

The  Guara  is  as  bigge  as  a  Pye-annet,  it  hath  a  long  Guara.
bill  with  a  crooked  point,  and  his  feet  of  a  quarter  or  span
long,  when  it  is  hatched,  it  is  blacke,  and  after  becommeth
gray,  when  it  alreadie  doth  flie,  it  becommeth  whiter  then
any  Dove,  afterward  it  turneth  to  a  bright  red,  yet  at
length  it  becommeth  redder  then  Scarlet  it  selfe,  in  this
colour  he  continueth  till  his  death,  they  are  many  in
quantitie,  but  they  have  no  other  kind.  They  breed  well
in  Houses,  their  food  is  fish,  flesh,  and  other  things ;  their

495

A.D.
l60I

Of  the  fresh
Rivers,  and
the  things  that
in  them  are.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

food  must  be  alwaies  in  water,  the  Indians  esteeme  greatly
the  Feathers  of  these,  and  of  them  they  make  their
Diademes,  Fringes  wherewith  they  cover  the  Swords  they
kill  withall,  and  they  make  Bracelets  to  weare  on  their
armes,  and  fasten  them  to  their  haire  like  Rose-buds,  and
these  are  their  Jewels,  and  Chaines  of  Gold  wherewith
they  adorne  themselves  in  their  Feasts,  and  they  so  much
esteeme,  yea,  they  beeing  so  much  given  to  eat  humane
flesh,  they  give  many  times  the  enemies  they  have  for  to
eat  in  change  for  these  Feathers.  These  birds  goe  in
flights,  and  if  the  Sunne  doth  shine  on  them  upon  the
Sands,  or  in  the  Aire,  it  is  a  faire  thing  to  behold.  Many
other  birds  there  are  that  do  feed  on  the  Sea,  as  Hearn-
shewes,  Cormorants,  and  a  certaine  kinde  of  Eagles  (which
are  our  Asperalles)  which  would  bee  tedious  to  recite.

The  maine  Rivers  wherewith  this  Province  is  watered
are  innumerable,  and  some  verie  great,  and  have  verie
faire  barres,  not  wanting  in  the  Rivers,  Brookes  and
Fountaines,  whereof  the  Countrie  is  verie  plentifull,  and
the  waters  ordinarily  are  verie  faire,  cleere  and  healthfull,
and  plentifull  of  infinite  fishes  of  sundrie  kinds,  of  the
which  some  are  of  an  exceeding  greatnesse,  and  of  great
value,  and  verie  healthfull,  and  are  given  unto  the  sicke
for  Medicines.  These  fishes  doe  the  Indians  catch  with
Nets,  but  ordinarily  with  Hooke  and  Line.  Among  these
there  is  a  royall  fish  of  a  good  taste  and  savour,  that  is
verie  like  the  Sturgeon  of  Spaine,  this  is  called  Jau,  they  are
of  fourteene  and  fifteene  quarters  long,  and  sometimes
bigger,  and  verie  fat,  and  they  make  Butter  (or  Grease)  of
them.  And  at  sometimes  the  fish  is  so  much,  they  fat
their  Hogges  with  it.  In  the  small  Creekes  are  manie
Shrimpes,  and  some  of  a  quarter  and  more  in  length,  and
of  a  verie  good  taste  and  savour.

Fresh  water  Snakes  (and  Creatures  of  the  water.)

CuaTsnahe  *  nPHe  Snake  Cucurij  uba  is  the  greatest,  or  of  the  greatest
gm7ny  way  Is  -*  tnat  are  m  Brasill,  notable  as  well  for  greatnesse  as
wonderfull beautie,  some  are  taken  of  five  and  twentie  or  thirtie  foote

496

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  ad.

1601.
long,  and  a  yard  in  compasse.  It  hath  a  Chaine  along  the
backe,  of  notable  Pictures  and  verie  faire,  that  beginneth
at  the  head  and  endeth  in  the  Taile ;  it  hath  Teeth  like  a
Dogge,  and  laying  hold  on  a  man,  Cow,  Stagge,  or
Hogge,  winding  it  with  certaine  turnes  of  her  Taile,  it
swalloweth  the  said  thing  whole.  And  after  she  hath  it  so
in  her  belly,  she  lets  her  selfe  rot,  and  the  Ravens  and
Crowes  do  eate  her  all,  so  that  there  remaineth  nothing
but  the  bones,  and  afterward  it  breedeth  new  flesh  againe,
and  reneweth  as  before  it  was.  The  reason  whereof  is
(say  the  men  of  the  Countrie)  because  while  it  putrifieth
it  hath  the  head  in  the  mire,  and  having  life  in  the  noddle
they  live  againe ;  and  because  this  is  knowne  alreadie,
when  they  finde  them  putrified,  they  seeke  out  the  head  and  [IV.  vii.
kill  it. The  manner  of  their  feeding  is  to  waite  for  their  I3I^-J

prey,  either  beasts  or  people  laide  along  by  the  waies,  and
when  it  passeth,  it  winds  it  selfe  about  it,  and  killeth  and
eateth  it.  After  they  are  full  they  sleepe  in  such  sort,  that
sometimes  they  cut  two  or  three  pieces  of  their  Taile,  they
not  waking,  as  hath  happened  that  after  they  had  cut  two
pieces  of  the  Taile  of  one  of  these,  the  next  day  they  found
her  dead  with  two  wild  Bores  in  her  belly ;  and  it  was
about  twelve  yards  and  a  halfe  long.

The  Snake  Manima  keepeth  alwaies  in  the  water,  it  is  Mamma.
yet  greater  then  the  other  abovesaid ;  it  is  much  painted  :
and  from  his  Pictures  did  the  Gentlies  of  Brasill  take  the
painting  of  themselves.  That  Indian  holds  himselfe  for
blessed,  that  it  doth  shew  it  selfe  unto,  saying,  they  shall
live  long,  seeing  the  Manima  did  shew  it  selfe  unto  him.

Many  other  kinds  of  Snakes  there  be  in  the  Rivers  of
fresh  water,  which  I  leave  for  brevitie  sake,  and  because
there  is  nothing  in  particular  that  can  be  said  of  them.

The  Jacare  Lizards  are  of  a  notable  greatnesse,  and  some  Water
are  as  bigge  as  Dogges,  their  snowt  is  like  a  Dogge,  and  Lizar^s-
so  have  they  their  Teeth  verie  long,  they  have  over  all  the  Q^JrlJfiA
bodie  certaine  plates  like  an  armed  Horse,  and  when  they
arme  themselves,  there  is  no  Arrow  can  pierce  them,  they
are  painted  of  divers  colours,  they  doe  no hurt  to  the
xvi  497  2 1

Crocodile).

A.D.

l6oi

Hard  Egges.

Jaguarucu.  A
great  Dogge.
This  seemeth
some  kind  of
the  Hippope-
tamas.
Atacape.

Jaguapopeba.

Baeapina.

Water

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

people,  but  rather  they  take  them  easily  with  Snares,  some
have  beene  taken  of  fifteene  quarters  (or  spans)  long,  and
the  Indians  esteeme  them  much,  and  hold  them  for  estate
as  the  Rimbabas,  that  is,  Dogges,  or  any  other  thing  of
estate.  They  keepe  in  the  water,  and  on  the  land,  they
lay  Egges  as  bigge  as  Geese,  and  so  hard  that  striking  one
against  another,  they  tingle  like  Iron.  Where  these  doe
haunt  they  are  presently  perceived,  by  the  great  cries  they
give ;  the  flesh  of  these  smelleth  very  much,  especially  his
Cods  of  Muske,  and  they  are  of  esteeme,  their  dung  hath
some  vertue,  especially  it  is  good  for  the  Lelidas.

The  Jaguarucu  is  a  beast  greater  then  any  Oxe,  it  hath
Teeth  of  a  great  quarter  long,  they  keepe  in  and  out  of
the  water,  and  doe  kill  men  ;  they  are  rare ;  some  of  them
are  found  in  the  River  of  Saint  Francis,  and  in  Paraguacu.

The  Atacape  are  Woolves  smaller,  but  much  more
hurtfull,  for  they  come  out  of  the  water  to  watch  for  men,
and  being  verie  swift  they  kill  some  persons  and  eate
them.

The Jaguapopeba are the true Atters of  Portugall.
There  is  another  small  beast  of  the  bignesse  of
it  is  called  Zariguemeiu,  these  have  rich  Skinnes  for  Furres  ;
and  of  these  water  beasts,  there  are  many  other  kinds ;
some  doe  no  hurt,  others  are  verie  fierce.

The  Baepapina  are  a  certaine  kind  of  Mermen  as  bigge
as  children,  for  they  differ  nothing  from  them,  of  these
there  are  many  and  doe  no  harm.

There  be  many  of  the  water  Hogges  Capijgoara,  and
are  of  the  bignesse  of  land-hogges,  but  they  differ  in
fashions ;  in  the  roofe  of  the  mouth  it  hath  a  very  great
stone  that  doth  serve  him  for  great  Teeth.  This  the
Indians  hold  for  a  Jewell  for  their  children,  sonnes  and
daughters.  It  hath  no  taile,  they  continue  long  under
water,  but  they  lodge  on  the  Land,  and  in  it  they  bring  up
their  young ;  their  foode  is  grasse,  and  fruites  that  they
find  along  the  Rivers.

In  the  fresh  Rivers  of  waters  are  many  kinde  of  Igta
Scallops, great  and small. Some  are so  bigge  as  good

498

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  ad.

1601.

Sives,  and  serve  to  sift  their  meale  with  them ;  other  are
smaller,  and  serve  for  Spoones,  all  of  them  are  long,
and  of  a  silver  colour,  in  them  are  some  Pearles.

In  the  Rivers  are  found  many  of  the  Cagados,  (a  Sea
bird  so  called)  and  they  are  so  many  in  number,  that  the
Tapuyas  doe  feed  fat  in  a  certaine  time  of  the  yeere  with
the  Egges,  and  doe  seeke  for  them  as  for  some  other
daintie  food.

There want no Frogges in the Rivers, Fountaines,
Puddles,  and  Lakes,  and  they  are  of  many  kinds  especially
these  Guararici. The  feare  that  the  Indians  have  thereof  Guararici.
is  a  wonderfull  thing,  that  of  the  onely  hearing  it  they  die,  M&rdyewith
and  tell  them  never  so  much  they  have  no  other  remedie, ' nns
but  let  themselves  die,  so  great  is  the  imagination  and
apprehension  that  they  take  of  the  hearing  it  sing,  and
whatsoever  Indian  that  heareth  it  dieth,  for  they  say  it
doth  cast  from  it  selfe  a  brightnesse  like  a  lightning.

All  these  maine  Rivers  have  so  great  and  so  thicke
Woods  on  the  one  side  and  the  other,  that  they  saile
many  leagues  by  them  and  see  no  ground,  on  either  side,
in  them  are  many  things  to  be  told,  which  I  omit  for
brevities  sake.

Of  the  Beasts,  Trees  and  Herbes,  that  came  from
Portugall,  and  doe  grow  and  breed  in  Brasill.

THis  Brasill  is  alreadie  another  Portugall,  and  not
speaking  of  China,  which  is  much  more  temperate
and  healthfull,  without  great  heates  or  colds,  where  the
men  doe  live  long,  with  few  sicknesses,  as  the  Collicke,  of
the  Liver,  the  Head,  the  Breast,  Scabs,  nor  any  other
Diseases  of  Portugall.  Neither  speaking  of  the  Sea,  which
hath  great  store  of  fish,  and  wholsome,  nor  of  the  things
of  the  Land,  which  God  hath  given  to  this  Nation,  nor  of
many  other  commodities  which  the  men  have  to  passe
their  lives  withall ;  though  the  commoditie  of  houses  is
not  great,  for  the  most  of  them  are  of  mud  walls,  and  [IV.  vii.
thatched,  though  now  they  beginne  to  make  buildings  of  13l9»]

lime  and  stone,  and  tile,  neither  are  the  commodities  for

499

A.D.

i6oi,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

apparell  many,  because  the  Countrie  yeeldeth  no  other
cloth  but  Cotton-wooll.  In  this  place  the  people  are  in
great  need,  especially  from  the  River  of  Januarie,  unto
Saint  Vincent,  for  want  of  ships  to  bring  Merchandize
and  Clothes,  but  in  the  most  Captaineships  they  are  pro-
vided of  all  kinde  of  clothings  and  Silkes,  and  the  men
goe  well  apparelled,  and  weare  many  Silkes  and  Velvets.
But  it  is  alreadie  Portugall  as  I  said  for  the  many
Commodities  that  from  thence  doe  come  unto  it.

Horses.  In  this  Province  is  a  good  breed  of  the  Horses,  and
there  be  alreadie  great  abundance  of  them  and  very  good
Jennets  of  a  great  price,  that  are  worth  200.  and  300.
Duckets  and  more,  and  there  is  alreadie  running  at  the
Geese,  at  the  Ring,  at  Canes,  and  other  Sports  and
Skirmishes,  and  from  hence  they  begin ne  to  provide
Angola  of  Horses  whereof  they  stand  in  great  want.

Though  this  Countrie  hath  weake  pastures,  and  in
Port  Secure  is  an  Herbe  that  killeth  the  beasts  if  they  doe
eate  it,  notwithstanding  there  is  a  great  number  of  them

Kine.  alreadie,  and  all  Brasill  is  full  of  great  Heards,  and  some
have  500.  some  a  1000.  heads,  especially  in  the  fields  of
Piratininga,  because  it  hath  good  pastures,  and  are  like  to
them  of  Portugall,  and  it  is  a  pleasant  thing  to  see  the
young  breed  that  is  there.

Swine.  The  Swine  doe  like  very  well  heere,  and  they  beginne

to  have  great  multitudes,  and  heere  it  is  the  best  flesh  of
all,  yea,  better  then  Hennes  flesh,  and  it  is  given  to  the
sicke,  and  hath  a  very  good  rellish  and  taste.

Sheepe.  Unto  the  River  of  Januarie  are  many  sheepe  found
alreadie,  and  Weathers,  and  they  fatten  so  much  that
they  burst  with  fatnesse :  it  is  not  here  so  good  flesh  as
in  Portugall.

Goates.  The  Goates  are  yet  but  few,  but  yet  they  like  well  in
this  Countrie,  and  doe  multiply  verie  much,  and  in  a
short  time  there  will  be  a  great  multitude.

Hennes.  The  Hennes  are  infinite,  and  greater  then  in  the
Realme  of  Portugall,  and  because  the  Countrie  is  tem-
perate they breed well, and the Indians doe esteeme

500

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL  ad.

1601.
them,  and  breed  them  within  the  Maine,  three  hundred
and  foure  hundred  leagues ;  the  flesh  here  is  not  so  good
as  in  the  Realme.

The  Hennes  of  Peru,  like  well  in  this  Countrie,  and  Turkies.
there  is  great  abundance  of  them,  and  there  is  no  Banquet
where  they  are  not  a  dish.

The Geese doe like well in this Countrie, and are  Geese  and
in great  abundance ;  there  is  also  here  another  kind  of  Duc^s-
the  Countrie  it  selfe,  and  are  farre  greater  and  fairer.

The  Dogges  have  multiplied  much  in  this  Countrie,  Dogges.
and  are  of  many  kindes ;  they  are  esteemed  heere  as  well
of  the  Portugals  which  brought  them,  as  of  the  Indians
that  esteeme  them  above  all  the  things  they  have  :  because
they  helpe  them  in  their  hunting,  and  are  domesticall
creatures,  and  so  the  women  doe  carrie  them  on  their
backe  from  one  place  to  another,  and  nourish  them  as
Children,  and  give  them  sucke  at  the  breast.

Trees  with  prickles,  as  Orenges,  Pomecitrons,  Limons*  Trees.
of  both kinds, of  sundrie sorts do grow  well in this  *For  °*e '  kind
Countrie,  which  almost  all  the  yeere  have  fruit,  and  there  Uma$  as  it
are  so  great  Orenges  and  Pomecitron  Groves,  that  even  were  the
among  the  Woods  they  grow,  and  the  abundance  is  so  Female.
great  of  those  things that they  are not set  by. They
have  a  great  enemie,  the  Ants,  notwithstanding  there  is
great abundance, without ever being watered, and as
there  wanteth  no  Sugar,  they  make  infinite  Conserves,  to
wit,  of  Citrons,  Limons,  the  flowres,  &c.

The Fig-trees  grow verie  well heere, and there  bee  Fig-trees.
many  kindes,  as  long  Figges,  blacke  Figges,  Figge-Dates,
and  many  other  kinds,  to  the  River  of  Januarie,  that  are
hotter  ground,  they  yeeld  two  crops  in  the  yeere.

In  the  River  of  Januarie  and  Saint  Vincent,  in  the
fields  of  Piratininga,  doe  grow  many  Quinces,  and  yeeld  Quinces.
foure  crops  a  yeere,  one  after  another,  and  there  are  men
that  with  verie  few  Quince  Trees  doe  gather,  ten,  and
twelve  thousand  Quinces,  and  here  they  make  great  store
of  Marmelets  and  verie  shortly  will  those  of  the  Hand  of
Madera  be  spared.

501

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

Vines.  There are many sorts of  Grapes,  as Feriads,  Boaes,

Bastard,  Greene,  and  Gallizian  Grapes,  and  many  other.
To  the  River  of  Januarie  they  have  all  the  yeere  Grapes,
if  they  will  have  them,  for  if  they  cut  them  everie
moneth,  they  beare  everie  moneth  Grapes  successively.
In  the  River  of  Januarie  especially  in  Piratininga,  are
Vineyards,  and  are  so  loaden  that  they  bow  to  the  ground,
they  yeeld  but  one  crop.  They  beginne  alreadie  to  make
Wine,  though  with  trouble  to  preserve  it,  for  in  wood
the  Worme  doth  presently  eate  thorow,  and  earthen
vessels  they  have  none,  but  seeke  remedies  of  their  owne,
and  doe  continue  it,  and  in  a  short  space  they  will  have
many  Wines.

In the River of  Januarie  and  Piratininga,  are many

Roses.  Roses  ;  one,  Damaske  Roses,  whereof  they  distill  great

store  of  Rose-water,  and  Conserve  of  Roses  for  to  purge,

and  not  to  purge,  for  of  the  other  they  have  not,  they

seethe  the  Damaske  Roses  in  water,  and  straining  them

they  make  Conserve  of  Roses  very  good  wherewith  they

doe  not  purge.

Plants  and  Muske Melons want not in many Captaine ships,

Herbes.  anj are gQO(\ anc[ finC) many Gourds whereof they

make Conserves, many Beets whereof they make

it also, Cabbages, Cowcumbers, Raddishes, Turnops,

Mustard, Mintes, Coriander, Dill, Fennell, Pease,

[IV.  vii. Leekes, Onions, Garlicke, Borrage, and other Pulses

I32°-J  which were  brought  from Portugall,  and  grow  well in

this  Countrie.

In the River of  Januarie,  and fields of  Piratininga,
Wheate.  groweth  Wheate,  they  use  it  not  because  they  have  no

Horse-mils,  nor  Water-mils, and they have also great
trouble  in  the  gathering  of  it,  for  because  of  the  many
'That  is  foure  waters,  and  ranknesse  of  the  ground  it  commeth  altogether,
bushels  and  an  and  it  multiplied!  so  much,  that  one  Corne  beareth  sixtie
*n*' h  an<^ eigntie Eares,  and some beeing  ripe,  others  grow

Alaueraue  anew,  and  it  multiplieth  almost  in  infinitum.  Of  lesse  then
containeth  18.  a  'quarter  of  Barley  that  a  man  sowed,  in  the  field  of
bushels.  Piratininga,  hee  gathered  sixtie  and  odde  k  Alqueires,  and

502

A TREATISE OF BRAZIL

A.D.
l60I

if  men  would give  themselves to this commoditie,  the
Countrey  would  be  verie  rich  and  plentifull.

There  are  many  sorts  of  Basill,  and  Gilliflowres  Yellow,
and  Red,  and  doe  grow  well  in  Piratininga,  and  other
smelling  herbes,  as  the  ]  Onion  sese,  &c.  Smelling

Above  all  this,  Brasill  hath  one  commoditie  for  men  rT  J'  ,
to  live,  that  in  it  doe  live  disorderly,  that  there  are  but  cane^
few  Lice  or  Fleas,  but  among  the  Indians,  and  Guinne  Vermine
Moores  there  are  some  Lice ;  but  there  want  no  Hornets,  Insecta.
Dorres, Waspes, Flies, and Gnats of  so many kinds,
and  so  cruell  and venemous,  that  stinging any  person,
the  place  swelleth  for  three  or  foure  dayes,  especially  in
the  fresh  men,  which  have  their  bloud  fresh  and  tender,
with  the  good  Bread,  Wine  and  delicate  fare  of  Portugall.

Chap. II.

Articles  touching  the  dutie  of  the  Kings  Majestie
our  Lord,  and  to  the  common  good  of  all  the
estate  of  Brasill.  Written  (as  is  thought)  by
the  Author  of  the  former  Treatise.

T  greatly  behooveth  for  the  universall  The  first
good,  and  preservation  of  the  estate  of  Artlcle-
Brasill,  that  the  King  our  Lord  doe  take
all  the  Captaineships  for  his,  satisfying
the  Lordships.  For  as  the  Tenths  are
all  his  Majesties,  and  the  Lordships  have
no  more  then  the  tenth,  which is  verie

little,  at  the  least  in  the  Captaineships  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  Saint  Vincent,  Port  Secure,  and  the  Ilets,  the  said
Captaineships  are  never  provided,  neither  have  Powder,
Bullet,  or  Caleever,  &c.  for  to  defend  themselves  from  the
enemies,  and  whatsoever  French  or  English  shippe  that
goeth  thither,  doth  put  them  in  such  danger,  that  either
they  must  give  them  entrance,  and  traffick  with  them,
or  leave  them  the  Towne  and  goe  to  the  Woods,  as  now
it  was  seene  in  the  Captaineships  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  Saint  Vincent,  and  being  the  Kings  they  be  otherwise

503

A.D.
l60I.

Weaknesse  of
the  Portugal:
in  Brasill,
how  much  and
whence.

The  second
Article.

Brasill
peopled  with
exiles.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

provided,  making  Fortresses  in  the  barres  for  their
defence,  at  the  least  in  those  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the
River  of  Januarie,  as  it  was  done  in  that  of  Saint  Vincent,
in  the  which  ships  may  come  in  at  any  houre,  and  in
this  manner  will  have  a  delight  to  dwell,  and  labour  in
them  the  which  now  doe  live  in  trouble  and  complaints,
seeing  themselves  so  disfavoured,  and  in  any  danger  of
warre  they  rather  thinke  how  to  flee  away,  and  escape
with  their  Wives  and  Children,  then  how  to  defend  the
Countrey,  whose  safetie,  preservation,  and  augmenting
importeth  so  much,  as  is  notorious  to  the  good  of  all
Peru.

It  seemeth  necessarie  that  in  Brasill  there  be  a  Court
Royall,  where  many  causes  may  be  determined,  as  there
is  in  Peru,  New  Spaine,  and  in  all  his  Majesties  Pro-
vinces.

The  first  reason  that  for  this  is  offered,  is,  that  the
people  whereof  at  the  first  this  Countrey  was  inhabited,
commonly  were  banished  for  facts  committed  in  PortugalL
And  as  at  the  beginning  there  was  no  Justice  Royall  in
it,  at  the  least  in  the  Captaineships,  and  Lands  of  the
Lords,  as  all  of  them  were,  but  onely  Captaines  and
Judges,  placed  by  the  Lords  of  them,  there  was  little
regard  of  Justice,  as  well  in  them  which  ruled,  the  which
had  authoritie  for  to  kill,  hang,  &c.  and  as  they  had  no
Science,  nor  peradventure  Conscience,  ruled  rather  by
humane  respects,  friendships,  hatreds,  and  proper  gaines,
then  by  direct  reason,  as  in  the  subjects,  the  which  as
there  was  no  Justice  but  of  Gossips,  (as  the  speech  is)
did  live  at  large  as  they  listed,  having  no  bodie  to
contradict  them,  and  though  the  Kings  afterward  did  take
and  reserve  the  Justice  to  themselves  sending  Governours,
and  generall  Judges,  and  though  there  come  many  men
of  more  qualitie  to  continue  the  inhabiting  of  the
Countrey,  notwithstanding  a  great  part  of  that  first
libertie  and  licence  remained  still,  with  the  which  many
evils  were  and  are  committed  without  punishment.  For
many  of  them have  alreadie  so  much power  with  their

5°4

ARTICLES FOR BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

riches (gained God knoweth how) that I know not

whether  those  that  now  doe  rule  dare  meddle  with  them,

bee  it  that  they  feare  their  power  and  might,  or  because

fere  omnes  diligunt  munera;  and  the  Justices  that  went,

and will not be interessed  but  beare  the  Rod upright,

let them prepare  themselves to suffer troubles in this

Countrey.

The  second  reason  is,  that  many  Sutes  may  here  be
determined  definitively,  in  the  which  are  delayings  of
many  yeeres,  without  any  obtayning  of  Justice  by
Appeales  and  Grievances  to  Portugall.  Now  if  the
Governour  (as  many  times  it  hapneth)  will  put  himselfe
in  the  office  of  the  Generall  Judge,  and  with  his  power  [IV.  vii.
binds  his  hands,  all  goes  topsieturvie,  without  any  civill  *321-]

peace  in  the  Countrey,  but  rather  a  continuall  confusion,
and  perturbation,  and  the  matter  commeth  to  this  point,
that  the  Governour  apprehendeth  the  Judge  himselfe  (as
alreadie  it  hath  hapned)  and  sendeth  him  to  Portugall,
and  in  the  meane  while  the  Justice  of  the  Countrey
remayneth  in  the  hands  of  him  that  cannot  administer
it,  and  in  stead  of  reason  entreth  affection,  or  passion,
and  then  nothing  is  done  but  what  the  Governor  listeth.
The  same  behoveth,  and  peradventure  more,  to  that
which  appertaineth  to  his  Majesties  goods,  wherein  are
difficult  matters,  and  have  need  of  a  man  of  knowledge
and  conscience,  for  to  decide  them.

The  third  reason  is,  that  there  may  learned  men  of
conscience  bee  there  for  to  determine  the  Justice  of  warre,
for  want  of  that  have  many  been  made  in  Brasill,  against
all  Justice,  which  was  a  great  cause  of  the  destruction
of  the  men  of  the  Countrie,  and  so  all  the  Coast  is
almost  unhabited.  And  although  the  Kings  past  com-
mended this  greatly,  and  commanded  that  no  warre
should  be  held  lawfull,  but  that  which  should  be  made
by  order  of  the  Governour  generall,  hee  taking  first
counsell  with  the  Bishop,  and  Fathers  of  the  company,
and  experienced  persons  of  the  Countrey,  and  of  good
consciences, and the  Justice of  the warre being deter-

505

A.D.
l60I.

Jesuites  com-
plaint for  not
being  called  to
counsels  of
warre.

Depopulations.

The  fourth
Article.

Wast  of  the
Indians  by
Portugals.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

mined  by  them,  notwithstanding  many  times  it  is  not
done  with  such  examination  as  the  cause  requireth :  and
so  either  the  Fathers  of  the  company  are  not  called
thereunto,  or  if  they  be  called,  it  is  for  a  complement
of  Justice :  and  they  have  more  regard  to  the  hope  of
the  profit  that  is  offered  them,  of  getting  of  slaves  in
the  said  warre,  then  unto  the  Justice  of  it,  and  to  the
common  good,  and  danger  they  put  themselves  in,  for
sometimes  they  fare  evill  in  the  broyle,  with  the  death
of  many  Christians,  both  Portugals  and  Indians.  With
these  warres  especially  all  the  Coast  of  Pernambuco,  which
beginneth  from  the  River  of  Saint  Francis  thitherward,
which  are  fiftie  leagues,  and  the  greatest  part  of  the
Maine  is  disinhabited,  having  before  a  most  copious
number  of  Indians:  and  so  now  that  Captaineship
wanteth  Indian  friends,  to  helpe  them  to  defend,  and
it  is,  every  day  wasted,  slaine,  and  eaten  of  the  Indians
Pitiguares  of  Paraiba,  which  before  were  their  friends,
whom  they  did  also  great  injustice  to.

The  third  Article  is  about  the  Kings  Customers
Accounts,  &c.

His  Majestie  hath  a  great  obligation  to  the  Indians
of  Brasill,  to  aide  them  with  all  corporall  and  spirituall
remedie.  For  almost  all  those  of  this  Coast  are  almost
consumed  with  sicknesses,  warres  and  tyrannies  of  the
Portugals,  and  those  which  escaped,  went  into  the  Maine
to  their  kindred,  and  neither  have  these  their  lives  there.
For  when  the  ransomes  of  slaves  did  end,  which  were
held  for  lawfull,  they  invented  Armies  for  to  goe  to  the
Maine  to  bring  them  to  the  Sea  for  to  serve  them-
selves of  them  perpetually.

These  companies  are  made  in  this  manner,  three  or
foure  or  more  persons  doe  joyne,  and  everie  one  of
them  doe  put  in  so  much  stocke,  and  aske  license  of
the  Governour  to  goe  into  the  Maine  to  bring  free
Indians,  the  Governour  grants  it,  with  his  order,  to  wit,
that  they  bring  them  without  any  force  or  deceit,  but
with  their  owne  good  will,  declaring  to  them,  that  they

506

ARTICLES FOR BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

come  to  serve  the  Portugals,  and  to  helpe  thern  in  their
labours,  Sugar-mills  and  other  workes.  Having  this
License,  the  Venturers  doe  joyne  people  to  send  into
the  Maine,  to  wit,  Interpreters,  and  other  persons,  that
sometime  came  to  fiftie  or  sixtie  with  their  pieces  and
other  weapons,  and  with  many  Indian  Archers  both  free
and  bond,  that  doth  carrie  their  burdens  of  the  ransome
and  the  victuals,  and  with  helpe  if  by  deceit  they  cannot
bring  the  people  they  goe  to  seeke,  they  may  bring  it
by  force.

With  this  License  in  this  manner  they  depart,  and  Portugals  wily
never  keepe  the  order  set  downe,  as  it  is  manifest  and  manner  of
all  doe  openly  confesse  without  contradiction,  for  presently  ™ronimg  the
when  they  are  departed  they  say,  that  if  that  should  be
declared  unto  them  there,  that  certaine  it  is,  that  no
Indian  will  come,  and  therefore  they  must  use  deceits
and  force,  for  they  have  no  other  meanes  to  move  them
from  their  Countries,  and  with  this  purpose  they  goe,
without  any  regard  of  the  order,  neither  of  them  that
goe  to  the  Maine,  nor  of  the  Justices  when  they  come
from  thence,  and  so  they  use  these  Licenses,  without
any  examining  of  them.  Now  when  they  come  to  the
Townes  of  the  Indians,  that  are  within  the  Maine,  100.
and  200.  leagues,  they  beginne  presently  their  deceits,
saying  that  they  come  for  them  by  commandement  of
the  Governour,  that  they  may  come  to  enjoy  the  good
things  of  the  Sea,  and  that  they  shall  bee  together  in
their  Villages  by  themselves,  and  at  their  will  (without
making  any  manner  of  repartition)  and  that  from  thence
they  shall  helpe  the  Portugals  in  their  warres,  and  other
things.  Other  whiles  they  tell  them  that  the  Governour,
and  the  Fathers  of  the  company  doe  send  for  them  for
to  bee  in  the  Churches  of  their  kinsmen,  which  doe  learne
the  things  of  God,  naming  some  ancient  principal  Indians,
whom  they  much  esteeme,  and  hold  as  Fathers,  and  that
they  wil  be  with  them,  and  for  this  there  hath  beene
some  of  these  Interpreters,  that  ordained  among  them-
selves  one, whom they fained to be a Father of  the

507

A.D.
l60I,

[IV.  vii.

1322.]
Manifold
injuries.

Who  now  are
the  Canibals?

Unchristian

Antichristian

wickednesse.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

company, with a shaven crowne, and a long habit to
deceive  them  more  easily.

When  these  deceits,  &  other  such  do  not  prevaile,
they  use  violence,  labouring  to  kil  some,  that  doe  hinder
this  comming,  for  the  which  it  hath  hapned  to  put  poison
in  the  vessels  of  their  wine,  with  many  other  inventions,
wherwith  they  feare  them.  As  once,  that  comming  alreadie
by  the  way,  because  one  of  the  principall  Indians  did
shew  to  come  with  an  evill  will,  and  did  impart  it  with
the  rest,  it  is  said  that  they  tooke  for  a  remedie  two
or  three  to  remaine  behind  with  him  alone,  and  being
asleepe  they  choaked  him  with  a  Towell,  and  gave  out,
that  hee  died  suddenly,  because  he  would  not  come.
Other  whiles  they  kill  some  of  other  Nations,  that  are
by  the  way,  all  to  the  end,  that  those  which  they  bring
doe  not  goe  backe,  and  in  this  manner  they  bring  such
a  number  of  them,  without  provision  of  necessarie  food,
that  by  the  way  with  hunger  and  evill  usage,  a  great
part  of  them  doe  die,  and  those  that  doe  come  are  in
such  a  case,  and  so  weake,  that  it  is  needfull  before
they  come  into  the  houses,  the  Fathers  of  the  company
to  goe  about  the  Woodes  christening  the  children  at
their  Mothers  breasts  that  they  may  not  die  unbaptized,
and  others  they  find  halfe  dead,  and  full  of  flies,  that
the  Mothers  have  left,  as  not  able  to  bring  them.

Being  come  to  the  Sea  those  that  scape  alive,  having
promised  them  that  they  will  put  them  in  Townes,
at  their  owne  will,  presently  the  venturers  doe  divide
them  among  themselves,  and  many  times  they  separate  1
fathers  from  children,  wives  from,  husbands,  brethren  j
from  brethren,  &c.  and  every  one  carrieth  his  part  to  their
places,  some  one  hundred,  another  two  hundred,  another
thirtie,  &c.  every  one  according  to  the  stocke  he  putteth
in.  Besides  this,  they  give  their  share  to  the  men  that
went  to  bring  them  (for  this  is  the  money  they  pay
them  withall)  to  one  foure,  to  another  ten  &c.  and  as
many  of  these  have  no  lands  for  to  maintaine  them,
they sell them presently to others, and so they have

508

ARTICLES FOR BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

marked  and  sold  a  great  number  to  these  and  other
Captaineships,  and  as  the  poore  men  doe  see  themselves
deceived,  and  toiled  with  over-much  labour,  with  pure
griefe  they  die,  and  some  runne  away  and  goe  even  to
their  enemies,  willing  rather  to  be  eaten  of  them,  then
to  abide  such  usage  among  the  Portugals,  and  in  this
sort  of  30.  or  40000.  soules,  that  have  beene  brought,
I  know  not  whether  3000.  bee  alive,  and  with  this  a
great  part  of  the  Maine  is  destroyed.  For  the  same
licences  doe  the  Captaines  give  in  their  Captaineships,
and  the  same  is  used.

These  vexations  and  tyrannies,  are  the  cause  that  the  Effects  of
Indians  lose  the  patience,  which  alwaies  they  have  had  tyrannU.
exceeding,  and  doe  kill  some  Portugals.  Now  in  the
Maine  of  the  Bay  the  Tapuyas  a  people  which  alwayes
had  great  friendship  with  the  Portugals,  and  gave  them
passage  through  their  Countries,  and  aide  to  bring  the
Indians  abovesaid,  did  rise  with  the  deceits  and  lies  of
certaine  Portugals,  that  went  thither  with  title  of  bringing
Saltpeeter,  and  killed  some  eighteene  or  twentie  of  them.
Some  of  the  Maine  of  the  Captaineship  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  did  kill  certaine  Indians  that  certaine  Mestizos
did  carrie  with  them,  going  thither  to  play  their  accus-
tomed prankes,  for  within  their  owne  houses  they  would
have  killed  them,  and  the  Mungrels  escaped  by  flight,
and  with  this  that  people  is  alreadie  an  enemie  of  the
Portugals.  The  Maine  of  the  River  of  Januarie  with
such  other  lyes  did  revolt,  being  before  our  great  friends,
and  killed  some  Portugals,  having  a  little  before  a  Father
of  the  company  gone  thither  at  the  request  of  the  In-
habitors  of  the  Citie,  and  had  beene  sixe  moneths  with
them,  confirming  them  in  the  friendship  of  the  Portugals,
and  preaching  the  faith  unto  them  and  brought  from
divers  and  remote  places  some  600.  soules  which  now
are  Christians  baptized  almost  all  in  their  Towne  with  Conversing.
a  Church  made  within  the  River  of  Januarie,  which  are
great  helpe  for  the  defence  of  that  Citie,  and  they  helpe
every  one  to  doe  their  worke :  and  manv  other  remayning

509

A.D.

I  60 1.

Reversing

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

moved  for  to  follow  their  Kinsmen,  with  this  revolting
all  ceassed,  and  so  there  as  also  in  other  places,  the  gates
unto  Conversion  are  altogether  shut  up.

To  the  Maine  of  the  Bay,  twice  the  Fathers  of  the
company  have  gone  at  their  owne  cost,  (with  helpe  of
the  Indians  christened,  which  doe  teach,)  to  bring  some
people  for  to  furnish  the  Churches,  which  beginnes  to
diminish,  and  to  preach  the  Law  of  God  unto  them.
And  there  they  found  of  this  Soule-lesse  people,  that
were  in  the  Townes  of  the  Indians,  as  in  their  owne
houses,  and  the  Fathers  bringing  some  number  of  Indians,
which  came  from  verie  farre  to  become  Christians. These

Diverting.  Portugals  laboured  by  all  meanes  possible  to  disswade
them.  Sometimes  preaching  to  the  Indians,  that  the
Fathers  brought  them  deceived,  and  that  heere  they
would  take  away  their  Customes,  as  the  drinking  of
their  Wines,  their  many  Wives,  and  whip  their  children,
&c.  the  which  is  an  use  and  custome  among  these  pratlers

Inverting,  for  to  discredit  the  Fathers.  Not  being  able  to  prevaile
by  this  meanes,  they  tooke  another  way  and  did  contract
with  some  other  Indians,  of  the  principallest  of  those
that  remained  there,  that  they  should  sell  them  those
which  the  Fathers  carried,  giving them great  ransomes

Advening,  for  them,  and  with  this  they  pretended  to  take  them
away  perforce,  before  their  eies,  so  that  it  was  needfull
the  Fathers  to  bid  the  Indians  to  defend  themselves,
and  with  this  remedie  they  left  them. Others  came  to

Aversing.  the  high-waies  and  did  steale  them  that  the  Fathers
brought,  as  one  Mestizo  which  tooke  some  twentie  and
odde,  and  transported  them  by  another  way,  taking  wife
and  children,  brethren,  and  all  the  Family  from  a  princi-
pall  Indian,  and  left  him  alone  because  he  was  sore  hurt
in  one  foot,  and  was  not  able  to  goe.

With  these  jarrings  of  these  men  of  this  trade,  the
Indians  know  not  whom  to  trust,  nor  whom  to  beleeve,
and  by  the  same  that  they  heare  already  of  the  usage
that  is  done  here  to  theirs,  that  come  to  the  Sea.  For
this cause a great principall Indian of  the Mountaine

510

ARTICLES FOR BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

of  Rari,  that  is  from  hence  about  two  hundred  leagues,
where  now  is  the  greatest  force  of  people,  that  escaped
from the tyrannies, sent hither  a Sonne of  his to see  [IV-  vu-
how it went, and being true that which the Fathers  I323-J

had  said,  that  he  should  make  heere  some  provision
for  food  sowing  some  grounds,  and  to  returne  thither
with  some  Father  for  him  and  for  all  his  Family ;  for
to  come  and  receive  the  law  of  God.  The  Sonne  came,
and  finding  the  truth,  and  seeing  the  usage  that  is  done
to  theirs  in  the  Sugar-workes,  and  other  labours  of  the
Portugals,  he  presently  husbanded  some  grounds  in  one
of  the  Townes  of  the  Christians,  that  are  in  protection,
and  doctrine  of  the  Fathers,  with  a  determination  to
goe  and  bring  his  Father  as  he  commanded  him.  Many
other  of  this  Fort  did  leave  their  Fathers,  being  mooved  Perverting.
in  that  Mountaine,  but  with  feare  of  these  assaults  above-
said  they  dare  not  come.  Likewise  they  have  here
no  grounds  fitting  for  their  maintenance,  for  it  is  all
occupied  by  the  Portugals.  Besides  this  the  Nation
of  the  Tapuyas,  which  have  divers  Languages,  doe
not  agree  well  in  the  Sea  Coast,  for  ordinarily  they  live
here  of  the  Mountaine,  and  in  their  owne  Countrey
they  might  have  the  Evangelicall  Law  preached  unto
them.

All  the  abovesaid  well  considered,  it  seemed  necessary
that  his  Majestie  should  forbid  these  adventurings,  send-
ing a  commandement,  that  none  might  goe  thither
without  expresse  warrant  of  his  Majestie,  under  great
penalties,  the  which  with  effect  might  be  executed,  and
that  neither  the  Governours  might  give  any  licence  for
them,  seeing  how  they  which  carrie  the  said  Licenses
never  kept,  nor  will  keep  the  order  given  them,  as
aforesaid.  For  all  men  know  and  say,  that  if  it  be  Animadvert-
kept,  never  will  any  Indian  come  from  the  Maine,  as  in&
untill  now  none  came  but  deceived,  and  this  being  so
publicke,  and  daily,  and  not  the  fault  of  one  or  two
particular  men,  but  a  common  use  of  all  the  Countrey
that it passeth before the eies of  the Justices, never

5ii

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

untill  this  houre  did  the  Governours  forbid  them,  rather
past  by  it  not  punishing  any  of  them  that  so  brought
them,  nor  redressing  the  poore  Indians.  These  adven-
turings  taken  away,  the  Fathers  would  adventure  them-
selves to  goe  among  them,  to  preach  the  faith  of  Jesus
Christ,  and  make  a  Christianitie,  and  in  time,  Portugals
or  Spaniards,  might  goe  thither,  but  such  as  were  men
of  a  good  conscience  with  order  from  his  Majestie,  that
might  inhabit,  and  helpe  in  the  conversion,  and  in  this
manner,  by  the  grace  of  God  all  that  people  would  bee
subject  to  the  yoke  of  the  faith,  and  obedience  of  the
King  our  Lord.
Thefift  The  Indians that are brought from the Maine,  and

Article.  are  jn  tjie  p0wer  0f  the  Portugals,  and  all  that  are  by
the  Coast  of  Brasill,  as  wel  free  as  slaves,  have  no
kind  of  doctrine  by  obligation,  that  is  imposed  upon
them ;  for  neither  Bishops,  nor  Curates  have  any  care
of  it,  bearing  themselves  upon  the  Fathers  of  the  com-
pany, and  in  thirty  foure  yeeres  since  that  the  company
was  sent  to  these  parts  by  the  King  Don  John  the
third,  no  Curate  in  all  Brasill  did  ever  say  Masse  in
respect  of  the  Indians,  or  slaves  borne  in  the  Countrey;
only  they  baptize  the  children  with  their  offerings,  and
those  that  are  already  growne  they  need  no  more  pre-
paration, then  to  bring  them  to  be  baptized,  without
giving  them  any  other  knowledge  of  the  faith,  &  so
Note.  it  hapneth  by  their  ignorance,  that  not  only  they  receive

Subverting.  not  ^Q  grace  of  Baptisme,  but  also  sometimes  not  the
character.  It  is  pittie  to  see  the  little  regard  that  is
had  in  this,  being  the  principall  dutie  of  the  King  our
Lord.

The  Fathers  of  the  company  since  they  entred  in
to  Brasill,  tooke  this  matter  effectually,  and  in  all  places
where  they  have  houses,  there  is  alwaies  a  particular
Masse  said  for  the  slaves  all  Sundayes  and  Feast  dayes,
catechising  them  every  day,  and  sometime  Morning
and  Evening :  They  labour  to  learne  the  Countrey
Language, and instruct them in the matters of faith,

512

ARTICLES FOR BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

and  law  of  God,  they  baptize,  marrie,  and  doe  shrieve,
and  administer  other  Sacraments  unweariedly.  But
because  they  cannot  accomplish  all,  and  many  doe
perish  in  want  for  the  Curates  take  no  care  of  them
(as  if  they  were  not  their  sheepe)  it  is  necessary  that
his  Majestie  doe  provide  in  this  some  more  effectual
remedies.

The  first  remedie  offered  was,  that  his  Majestie  should  Catechtsme  in
command  to  make  a  Catechisme  in  that  Brasilian  Lan-  ^f  Brasilian
guage,  which  is  universall  from  the  River  Maravyon,
unto  the  River  of  Plate,  and  should  be  imprinted  at
his  Majesties  cost,  and  to  enjoyne  every  Curate  to  have
it,  and  to  teach  by  it.  For  though  the  most  of  them
have  not  the  language,  they  may  notwithstanding  learne
to  read  it  very  well,  and  to  teach  by  the  Booke,  as  at
the  beginning,  and  even  now  some  Fathers  of  the
company  doe,  that  the  Indians  hearing  him  reade  will
understand,  &c.

It  is  very  necessary  that his Majestie  doe  command  Thesixt
to examine the Justice that these Portugals have to  Arttcie'
serve  themselves  of  these  free  Indians  they  bring  from
the Maine  in  the  manner  abovesaid,  for  although  they
hold them with a title of  free, they have no libertie
but in name, for in truth they are more then Cap-
tives, according  to the usage they have. For first, as  Skverie  of  the
touching the soules, they care not for their doctrine,  lndlans-
nor  that  they  bee  baptized,  married,  or  live,  like  Chris-
tians, they  have  no other  respect but  of  their service,
as of  any other brute beast,  and so let them live  in
adulterie,  without  hearing  Masse,  or  shrieving,  and  many
die  without Baptisme. As touching their bodies,  their
labours  are  immoderate  and  perpetuall  by  night  and  by
day,  contrarie to the nature  of  the Indians,  which  are
sustained  with  very  little labour  in their  Countries. If
they  fall  sicke  they  have  then  lesse  care  of  them  then
of  their  slaves,  for  of  these  because  they  cost  them  their
money,  they have more regard, as the Masters  them-
selves doe  confesse.

XVI  513  2K

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

Those that have them  in  their  power,  are  served of
them,  as  of  slaves,  all  their  lives,  not  letting  them  goe
to  another  Master  or  place,  though  it  be  to  the  Churches
[IV.  vii.  of  their kinsmen, that are Christians, where they may

!324-]  be  better  instructed  in  matters  of  the  faith,  and  of  their
salutation ;  and  if  they  doe  goe  to  any  place,  though
it  be  to  the  said  Churches,  they  labour  by  themselves,
and  by  the  Justices,  to  bring  them  againe,  as  indeede
they  doe  bring,  and  put  them  in  Irons,  as  though  they
were  slaves.  Whence  ariseth  a  great  scandall  to  the
Indians  Christian,  their  kinsmen,  some  of  the  which,  as
yet  are  tender  Plants  in  the  faith,  forsake  the  Churches
and  flee  with  their  familie  about  the  woods,  grieved
with  the  injuries  that  are  done  to  theirs,  especially  in
matter  of  libertie,  which  they  so  much  esteeme,  and
for  feare  they  will  doe  the  like  with  them,  and  so
wandering  are  lost  and  never  seene  againe ;  and  truth
it  is,  that  if  it  were  not  for  the  continuall  care  and
vigilancie  that  the  Fathers  of  the  companie  have  over
them,  and  the  love  the  Indians  doe  beare  them,  because
they  are  their  masters ;  and  seeing  that  for  their  defence
they  are  hated  of  the  Portugals,  and  murmured  at,
they  had  not  continued,  no  not  these  three  small  towns
of  Christians  of  the  Baye,  wherein  may  be  about  2500.
soules,  which  onely  escaped  of  eleven  Churches,  that
there  were,  wherein  were  gathered  more  then  40000.
nor  other  Townes  likewise  of  Christians,  that  are  about
the  Captaine  shippes.  Neither  had  Governors  nor  Cap-
taines  sufficed  for  to  have  sustained  them  (as  the  ex-
perience hath  showen)  for  they  would  not  have  suffered
such  vexation,  though  they  had  died  for  it,  as  others
did  already  at  the  beginning,  running  away  and  dying,
wherewith  the  coast  was  disinhabited.
Wicked  man-  Not  onely  doe  the  Portugals  serve  themselves  of  the
stealing,  free inc[ians above said, which they bring from the

maine ;  but  they  sell  them  also  to  others,  and  they
say  with  title  of  free,  but  the  price  is  such,  that  a
lawfull slave  is  sold no  deerer,  and so  the goods,  that

5i4

ARTICLES FOR BRAZIL  a.d.

1601.

without  them  was  worth. I  put  the  case  2000.  Duckets,

with  them they  give it  for  4000. and these that doe

buy it, doe take already mastership of them, as of

slaves,  that cost  them their  money,  and so  from  hand

to  hand  their  captivitie  increaseth,  and  though  they  say

that  they  are  served  of  them,  as  of  hired  men,  the  pay

for  their service is nothing ; for it  they  give  a  cotten

garment to one or two of  the principallest  of them,

which  they  weare  in  their  service,  they  doe  not  neither

is it possible to give it to 100. or 200. that they

keepe,  as  they  themselves  confesse ;  with  the  like  usages

many  of  the  said  Indians  either  eate  earth  till  they  kill

themselves,  or  let  themselves  dye  verie  easily  with  meere

griefe  and  sadnesse. And  because  jointly  with  this  the  Through  you  is

punishments they give them are like the slaves, and  my name

these buyings and sellings are not used particularly as?  eme.
.  jo  o  t  r  j amongst  the

betweene  one  or  two  persons  secretly,  but  it  is  an  use  Gentiles.
and  custome  in  all  the  Countrie,  without  any  justice
looking  into  it.  Finally,  they  are  not  onely  served  of
them  all  their  life,  but  they  give  them  also  in  manages
to  Sonnes  and  Daughters  as  a  dowrie ;  and  at  their
deaths  they  remaine  in  their  wils  with  the  name  of  free,
but  bound  to  serve  their  children  perpetually,  whom
they  leave  them  unto  as  haereditario  jure,  and  so  the
heires  goe  to  law  about  them,  and  have  judgements,  as
if  they  were  lawfull  slaves.

As  touching  the  justice  that  is  used  with  the  Indians,  The  seaventh
the  King  our  Lord  is  to  understand,  that  although  his  Article.
Majestie  as all the Kings his  predecessors doe  recom-
mend alwaies  this  matter  of  the  Indians  to  the  Gover-
nours above all as their principall duetie, with very
effectuall words,  notwithstanding the  justice that  untill
now hath beene in Brasil toward them  was none or
verie  little,  as  it  is  plainely seene  by  the  assaults,  rob-  The  mercies  of
beries,  captivities,  and  other  vexations  that  alwaies  were  the  ung°dh
done to them,  and even now are done. Against the  are  crue  '
Indians  was  alwaies  a  rigorous  justice,  they  have  already
beene hanged, hewen in peeces,  quartered,  their hands

5i5

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGBJMES

1601.

cut,  nipped  with  hot  pincers,  and  set  in  the  mouth  of
peeces,  and  shot  away  the  Indians  for  killing  or  helping
to  kill  some  Portugall  (which  peradventure  had  well
deserved  it  at  their  hands)  but  having  persons,  not  a
few  in  Brasil,  as  alwaies  there  were,  and  yet  there  are,
notoriously  infamous  for  robbing,  stealing,  branding,
selling,  and  killing  many  Indians,  never  untill  this  time
was  there  any  show  of  punishment,  and  it  is  to  be
feared,  seeing  it  wanteth  on  earth,  that  it  will  come
from  heaven  on  all  the  inhabitants  of  Brasil.

The  eight Article  is  touching the Indians exceeding
services  without  reward.

The  ninth  Article  is  to  prevent  their  totall  destruction,
which cannot but follow the practise of  Portugals in
making  slaves  of  them  by  sowing  quarrels,  and  interes-
sing  themselves  on  one  side,  by  burning,  &c.
The  tenth  All  the  coast  of  Brasil  doth  want  and  is  destitute  of

Article.  Priests that  may  be  Curates  for the  soules,  for  in the

Bay,  except  three  or  foure  that  doe  serve  in  the  high
Church,  and  one  that  serveth  for  Curate  in  one  Parish,
that  did  learne  in  the  colledge  of  the  Companie:  there
are  no  Priests  that  know  how  to  doe  their  office,  and
their  customes  and  lives  are  much  blemished,  for  many
of  them  came  suspended  from  Portugall  for  grievous
crimes,  and  also  for  incorrigible:  and  here  as  they  want
Priests  they  are  presently  enabled  and  made  cures  of
soules,  and  although  in  the  three  Colledges  of  the
companie  that  are  in  this  Countrie,  Sc.  in  the  Bay,
Pernambuco,  and  the  River  of  Januarie,  are  ordinarie
lectures  of  matters  of  conscience,  there  is  no  Priest
that  will  heare  it,  and  as  they  are  most  ignorant,  they
doubt  nothing,  and  so  they  absolve  and  dispence  more
then  Popes  with  great  losse  of  the  soules ;  and  such
there  was,  that  dispensed  with  a  parishioner  of  his  to
communicate  after  he  had  drunk,  whereby  may  be  con-
jectured what  the  rest  will  doe.  And  with  this  they
[IV.  vii.  doe  other  follies,  and  misbehaviors  in  the  celebrating
1325.]  of  the  masse  before  the  people,  that  they  seeme  altogether

516

ARTICLES FOR BRAZIL  ad.

1601

fooles.  And  their  life  is  pittifull,  for  finally  their  care
is  to  fill  themselves  with  money,  meate,  and  drinke,  and
to  follow  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  with  a  great  scandall  of
the  secular.

Those  are  very  rare,  and  may  bee  told  with  the  finger
through  all  the  coast,  which  doe  live  a  life  worthie  the
Priestly  function  and  those  which  the  Bishop  banish  from
hence  for  their  faults  or  suspensions  to  the  River  of
Januarie,  presently  they  are  there  received  by  the  Ruler,
as  now  he  did  particularly  to  one  that  being  a  Friar
come  from  Portugall  expelled  from  the  Order  for  in-
corrigible, and  afterward  hee  was  enabled  here  by  the
Bishop,  hee  was  put  in  the  visitation,  because  he  was
not  shriven  in  three  yeeres,  celebrating  almost  every  day,
and  this  being  another  time  condemned  by  the  Bishop
in  his  Court,  and  brought  to  the  estate  that  he  came
in  from  Portugall,  expelled  his  Order,  and  banished  from
his  Bishopricke,  and  his  life  infamous  and  scandalous  to
all  the  Secular,  the  Ruler  enabled  him  presently  in  the
River  of  Januarie,  (not  without  great  scandall  of  the
good)  not  onely  for  fellow-helper  of  the  Curate  of  that
Citie,  but  also  for  a  Preacher.  And  the  Prelates  say
they  doe  all  this  because  they  have  no  other,  whom  to
give  the  Parishes  unto,  which  are  many.

[Chap.  III.

517

A.D.

1557-8.

*Lerius  with
other  Protes-
tants went  at
Vil.  his  request
to  M.  Calvin,
to  Brasill,  he
there  fortify-
ing and
pretending
Evangelical!
reformation,
from  which  he
after  aposta-
tised. The
Story  is  long,
which  I  had
by  mee  wholly
translated;
but  store  hath
bred  a  sore  ;
and  the  most
of  it  I  have
omitted;  as
also  all
Tkevets
Voyage
thither,  and
that  of
Stadius  in
those  parts,
though  al
Englished, and
readie  for  the
Presse.

Chap.  10.
Beasts  are
bred  in
America
altogether
unlike  unto

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Chap.  III.

Extracts  out  of  the Historie  of  John
Frenchman,  who  lived
Villagagnon,  Ann. 1557

Of the Beasts,

in Brasill
and 58,

§•  1.

and other living
Plants,  of  Brasill.

Lerius  * a
with Mons.

creatures, and

Efore  I  proceed  any  further,  presently  in
the  beginning  of  this  Chapter,  I  thought
good  briefly  to  admonish  the  Reader,
that  no  living  creatures  of  the  kinde  of
foure-footed  beasts  are  found  in  all  the
Brasilian  world,  altogether  like  unto  ours
in  shape  :  and  that  the  Tovoupinam-
baultii  use  not,  but  very  seldome,  to  bring  them  up  tame
at  home.  But,  that  I  may  generally  describe  the  wilde
beasts,  which  the  Barbarians  call  Soo,  I  determined  to
beginne  with  them  which  are  applyed  to  the  use  of  man.
It  seemeth,  that  that  is  to  bee  set  in  the  first  place,
which  also  is  most  common :  they  call  Tapiroussou,  of  a
reddish,  and  long  shaggie  haire,  greatly  resembling  a  Kow
in  bignesse  and  shape :  yet,  seeing  it  wanteth  homes,  and
hath  a  shorter  necke,  with  longer  and  hanging  eares,  and
more  withered  and  slender  legs,  with  an  whole  hoofe,  very
like  unto  the  hoofe  of  an  Asse,  a  man  may  rightly  say,
it  participateth  the  nature  of  the  Kow,  and  Asse.  Not-
withstanding it  difFereth  very  much  from  either,  both
because  it  hath  a  very  short  taile  (here  the  Reader  is  by  the
way  to  be  admonished,  that  very  many  beasts  are  bred  in
America,  which  have  no  taile  at  all)  and  hath  much  sharper
teeth ;  nor  may  any  danger  bee  therefore  procured  unto
men  by  this  beast,  seeing  it  useth  to  repose  safety  rather  in
flight,  then in strength. The Barbarians kill them,  as

ours.

The  wild

beast  Tapiroussou,  which  resembleth  a  Kow,  and  an  Asse. Most  American  beasts  with

out  tailcs.

518

JOHN LERIUS  ad.

1557-8.
also  many  others,  shooting  them  through  with  Arrowes,
or  use  to  catch  them  in  an  hollow  trench,  or  with  other
manner of  Traps and Gins ingeniously and cunningly
made.

But  that  wilde  beast  is  greatly  esteemed  by  the  Bar-
barians, by  reason  of  the  skinne,  which  as  soone  as  they
have taken away,  cutting the backe of  the hide in a
round  circle,  they drie it in the Sunne,  and fashion it
like  unto a Target of  the bignesse of  the bottome of  Targets  of  the
an  indifferent  vessell,  wherewith  they  repell  the  Arrowes, *  °*  * e
of  the  enemies,  received  in  the  warres. And  the  skinne  Tapiroussou.
dried in the Sunne becommeth so hard,  that I easily
beleeve  that  it  cannot  bee  pierced  through  with  the  stroke
of  any  weapon,  although  it  bee  cast  with  great  violence.
I  carefully  desired  to  bring  two  such  Targets  into  France,
but  the  famine so oppressed us returning,  that all the  Grievous
provision  of  victuall  being  spent,  not  excepting  Monkeyes  famine.
and  Parots,  and  other  living  creatures  of  the  same  kinde,
which  we  brought  with us out of  that Countrie,  those
two  Targets,  being  laid  upon  the  coales,  were  also  eaten
to  expell  hunger ;  unto  the  which  the  rest  of  the  skinnes
that  were  in  the  ship  (as  I  shall  declare  in  their  proper
place)  were  added.

Moreover, the flesh of the Tapiroussou, commeth The  taste  of
almost  neere  unto  the  taste  of  Beefe  : this  the  Barbarians  the  flesh  of  the
broyle  after  their  manner,  and  in  their  Country  language aPtr0US50U-
call  it,  Boucanare. But because I have now used that
word,  and  that  hereafter  it  shall  bee  often  repeated,  lest
the  Reader  should  any  longer  remaine  doubtfull,  occasion
being  offered,  I  will  declare  what  this  thing  is.

The  Americans  fastning  foure woodden forks in the  [IV.  vii.
ground,  of  the  thicknesse  of  an  arme,  three  foote  asunder,  I326-J

in  the  figure  of  a  square,  and  almost  of  the  equall  height
of  three  feet,  lay  stickes  acrosse  over them two fingers
distant  each  from  other,  and  so  make  a  woodden  Grate :
this,  in  their  language they name Boucan. They have  B°u™n\ a7ld
many  such  Grates  in  their  houses,  whereon  they  lay  flesh  i?ar-mns
cut  into  gobbets  or  pieces,  and  making  a  soft  fire  of  dry  Kitchin.

519

A.D.

1557-8-

The  manner  of
preserving
meats  among
the  Americans.

Meale  of
fishes.

Mans  flesh
laid  upon
Boucan.

Seouassou  a
kind  of  Deer

Taiassou  a
Bore.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

wood,  that  there  may  bee  no  smoake  almost  at  all,  they
suffer  them  to  bee  broyled  as  long  as  they  please,  after
this  manner,  having  twice  turned  them  in  the  space  of
an  houre.  And  because  they  doe  not  powder  meates
with  salt,  as  the  manner  is  here,  they  use  the  onely
remedie  of  broyling,  for  the  preserving  of  them.  There-
fore, although  they  had  taken  thirty  wilde  beasts  in  one
day,  (such  as  we  will  describe  in  this  Chapter,)  they  would
lay  them  all  cut  in  pieces,  upon  those  Grates,  as  soone
as  it  might  be  done,  lest  they  should  be  tainted  and
corrupted :  and  there,  being  often  turned,  they  are  some-
times broyled  and  scorched  above  foure  and  twenty
houres  together,  untill  the  inside  of  the  flesh  be  as  well
rosted  as  the  outside,  and  by  this  meanes  they  are  all
preserved  from  corruption.  Nor  is  there  any  other
manner  of  dressing  or  preserving  fish,  which  when  they
have  gotten,  they  dry  them  in  great  plenty,  to  make
Meale,  especially  those  which  in  their  Country  language
they  call  Piraparati,  which  are  the  very  true  and  naturall
Mullets,  of  the  which  I  shall  hereafter  speake  in  another
place.  And  these  Grates  among  the  Barbarians  are
rightly  to  bee  accounted  the  Shambles,  and  Store-house :
and  therefore  you  shall  scarce  come  to  their  Villages,
but  you  may  see  them  laden  with  the  flesh  of  wilde
beasts,  and  fishes :  and  it  usually  happeneth  also  very
often,  as  wee  shall  hereafter  speake,  if  you  come  unto  the
Barbarians,  that  you  shall  behold  these  Grates  filled  with
mans  flesh,  which,  I  thinke,  they  bring  as  spoyles  taken
from  the  conquered  enemies,  to  be  slaine,  and  eaten.

But,  that  I  may  prosecute  the  intended  description  of
wilde  beasts,  the  second  degree  of  bignesse  seemeth  to  be
given  unto  a  certaine  kinde  of  Deere,  which  they  name
Seouassou,  but  herein  they  differ  from  ours,  both  that
they  are  much  lower,  and  have  lesser  homes,  and  also  in
this,  that  they  have  as  long  shagged  haire,  as  our  Country
Goates.  But  the  American  Boare,  which  they  call  Taiassou,
is  very  like  in  shape  unto  those  which  are  bred  with
us,  in  bulke  of  body,  eares,  head,  and  feet,  very  hurtfull

520

JOHN LERIUS  a.d.

1557-8-
also,  through  his  long  and  sharpe  teeth  : yet  seeing  hee

is more leane and slender,  and terribly gnasheth and

grindeth  his  teeth  together,  hee  is  notorious  also  through

that deformitie. He hath an hole in the backe, by  Swine,  with

nature,  as  the Sea-swine have in the head,  whereby he  a^h^einthe'lr

draweth  in  breath,  and  letteth it  out. These three are

their  greatest  beasts.

There is  also among the Americans,  a certaine red
wilde  beast,  which  they name Agouti,  of  the height  of  Agouti.
a  weaned  Pig  of  thirty  dayes  old,  with  a  cloven  foot,  a
very  short  tayle,  and  with  the  nose  and  eares  almost  of
an  Hare,  most  delightfull  to  the  taste. There  are also
others  of  two  or  three kindes,  which they call Tapitis, Tapitis,  a
not  much  unlike  our  Hares,  but  somewhat  of  a  reddish  khdeofHare.
haire.

They catch great Rats also in the Woods,  of  the  Reddish  Mise.
bignesse  and  haire  of  Squirrels,  which  come  neere unto
the  delicate  taste  of  Conies.

Pag,  or  Pague,  (for  after  what  manner  they  pronounce  Pag,  a  beast
it,  you  can  scarce,  or  not  at all understand) is  a wilde  ma^ed  with
beast of  the indifferent height  of  an Hound, with a  ™°
deformed  head,  the  flesh  comming  neere  unto  the  taste
of  Veale,  with a very faire skinne, distinguished with
white,  russet,  and blacke spots,  so that it  would  be  of
great  price  with  us,  if  they  were  to  be  gotten.

There  is  another  also  found,  which  they  call  Sarigoy, Sarigoy,  a
which  the  Barbarians  eate  not,  by  reason  of  the  noysome  stinking  beast.
stinke thereof: but slaying  some of  them,  and taking
away  the  fat of  the kidneyes,  whence that stinke pro-
ceeded, wee eate them without loathing : for,  they  are
both  tender,  and  also  excellent  flesh.

There  is  also  that  which  they  call  Tatou  : this  is  not  Tatou,  armed
very well able to runne,  yet (as Hedgehogs  with us)  with  scales.
creeping  through  the  bryars  and bushes,  shee is armed  T^e  Arma~
with very hard scales,  so that shee cannot be pierced
with  a  sword,  if  also  you  wrap  the  skinne  together  being
taken off, (wherewith the Barbarians make very many
Chists,  which  they  call  Caramenos)  you  would  say  they

521

A.D.

1557-8-

Jacare,  or
Crocodiles,
kept  tame.

Touous,
Lizards.

The  greatest
Lizards  in
America,
edible.
[IV.  vii.

I327-]

Toades  eaten
in  America.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

were  warlike  Gauntlets. It  is  of  a white flesh,  and of
an  excellent  taste.

Moreover,  unto  these  beasts,  which  are  most  common
with  the  Americans,  Crocodiles,  called  Jacare,  are  added,
of  the  bignesse  of  a  mans  thigh,  and  proportionable
length  :  but  they  are  so  farre  from  doing  any  hurt,  that
the  Barbarians  houses  are  full  of  these  Jacare,  and  the
little  children  play  with  them  without  any  danger.
Those  Crocodiles  which  I  happened  to  see,  had  a  very
wide  mouth,  long  legs,  with  a  tayle  neither  round  nor
sharpe,  but  very  small  at  the  end :  and  whether,  as  some
have  written,  they  move  the  upper  chap,  I  freely  confesse,
that  I  have  not  observed.  Moreover,  the  Americans
take  Lizards,  they  call  them  Touous,  not  greene,  but
russet,  and  of  a  spotted  skinne,  like  our  Countrie  small
Lizards.  And  although  they  bee  foure  or  five  foote
long,  and  proportionable  in  bignesse,  and  therefore  of  a
terrible  forme,  yet  notwithstanding  like  Frogs,  they  abide
in  the  Rivers,  and  Marishes,  hurtfull  unto  none.  Further-
more, the  skinne  being  plucked  off,  if  they  be  bowelled,
and  sodden,  they  are  very  delicate  meate,  so  that  I  have
not  tasted  any  thing  more  sweet  in  America.  For,  they
are  of  as  white  a  flesh  as  Capons  are  with  us,  delicate,
tender  and  sweet,  that  nothing  excelleth  them :  yet  in
the  beginning  I  abhorred  the  taste  thereof,  but  afterward
when  I  had  tasted  them  better,  as  touching  meates,  the
Lizards  were  chiefly  commended  of  mee.

The  Tououpinambaultii  have  also  very  great  Toads,
which  they  eate  being  rosted,  without  towelling.  But
seeing  both  Physicians  teach,  and  it  is  also  commonly
knowne,  and  apparent,  that  the  flesh,  and  corrupt
bloud,  and  whatsoever  else  belongeth  to  the  Toade,
is  deadly,  any  one,  although  I  hold  my  peace,  may
easily  conjecture,  that  by  reason  of  the  temperatenesse
of  that  Countrie,  or  some  other  cause,  whereof  I
am  ignorant,  it  happeneth,  that  Toades,  there,  are
not  venomous,  and  dangerous  at  all,  as  they  are  with
us.

522

JOHN LERIUS  a.d.

r , ,.  r  '557-8.

They  eate  Serpents  also,  of  the  bignesse  of  a mans  The  Amen-
arme, five foote long almost. Moreover, I have  cam  use  t0
observed, that the Barbarians (as I mentioned con-  ^J^erpents
cerning Crocodiles) brought home a certaine kinde of
them, party-coloured, with blacke and red, and cast
them downe  among  their  wives  and  children,  so  secure,
that they handled them with their hands. These
monstrous  Land-Eeles,  they  cut  into  pieces,  and  dresse :
but  they  are  unsavoury,  and  of  very  little  taste.

Divers  kindes  of  Serpents  also  are  bred  with  them,
and  specially  in  the  Rivers,  where  they  appeare  greene
like  pot-herbes ;  long  and  slender,  whose  sting  is  very
hurtfull.  There  are  also  Lizards  in  the  Woods  (besides
those  which  we  mentioned  before)  very  dangerous,  as
it  shall  manifestly  appeare  by  the  discourse  which  I
will  here  set  downe.  When  therefore  I  sometimes  The  Authors
travelled  to  see  the  Countrie,  with  two  Frenchmen  in  report  of  a
my  companie,  and  that,  as  the  manner  was,  wee  had  P*°JSl°us
not  the  Barbarians  to  guide  us  in  the  way,  and
therefore  wandred  in  the  Woods,  and  passed  through
a  deepe  Valley,  hearing  the  noise  of  a  certaine  beast
comming  towards  us,  supposing  it  to  bee  some  timerous
and  harmelesse  wilde  beast,  notwithstanding,  proceeding
on  our  intended  Journey,  wee  were  secure  and  quiet
in  minde  :  but  presently,  thirtie  paces  distant  almost
from  us,  on  the  right  hand,  wee  saw  a  Lizard  on
an  hill  ;  bigger  then  the  body  of  a  man,  and  five
or  sixe  foot  long.  Hee,  being  spread  all  over  with
white  and  rough  scales  like  Oyster-shells,  holding  up
one  of  his  fore-feet,  with  his  head  aloft,  and  shining
eyes,  began  to  behold  us.  Wherefore  being  astonished
(for  none  of  us,  as  it  then  fell  out,  carried  a  Hand-
gunne,  but  had  onely  our  Swords  at  our  sides,  and
Bowes  and  Arrowes,  which  weapons  could  not  greatly
hurt  that  Monster  armed  with  such  hard  scales  :
Neverthelesse,  fearing  lest  if  wee  shifted  for  our  selves
by  flight,  being  swifter  then  wee,  he  would  dispatch
us altogether) when the one fearefully beheld the

523

A.D.

1557-8.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

other,  we  stood  still  in  the  same  place.  But  after
that  prodigious  and  fearefull  Lizard  had  beheld  us  a
quarter  of  an  houre,  with  an  open  mouth,  and  because
it  was  exceeding  hot  weather  (for  it  was  a  cleere  day,
almost  at  noone)  fetching  a  deepe  groane,  that  wee
might  easily  heare  it,  upon  a  sodaine,  he  went  unto
the  top  of  a  Mountaine,  with  so  great  noise  of  the
crashing  and  breaking  of  twigs  and  boughs,  as  a
Deere  running  through  a  Wood,  would  scarce  have
made.  Wee  therefore,  who  then  were  much  affrighted,
not  being  very  carefull  to  pursue  him,  gave  thankes
unto  God  who  had  delivered  us,  and  proceeded  againe
on  our  intended  Journey.  And  embracing  their  opinion
who  affirme,  that  the  Lizard  is  delighted  with  the
sight  of  a  man,  it  seemed  to  me,  that  the  beholding
of  us  pleased  that  Monster  as  much  as  we  were
tormented  through  his  presence.  There  is  also  a  wilde
beast  bred  with  them,  that  liveth  upon  the  prey,  which
they  call  Jan-ouare.  This  beast  hath  legs  almost  as
long  as  an  hunting  Dog,  and  matcheth  him  almost
angerous  to * swiftnesse  ; but  about  the  chinne  hath  long  shagged

men  .  .  .  r  .  .. &  ^^

haire,  with  a  spotted  skinne,  and  faire,  like  unto  a
Lynx,  and  also  very  like  in  the  rest.  The  Barbarians
not  without  just  cause,  greatly  feare  that  wilde  beast.
For  seeing  shee  is  accustomed  to  the  prey,  as  also,
the  Lion,  if  shee  catch  any  of  them,  she  teareth  him
in  pieces,  and  devoureth  him.  But  as  they  are  de-
sirous of  revenge,  and  suffer  not  any  of  those  things
unrevenged  which  are  troublesome  unto  them :  if  they
take  any,  in  hollow  trenches  which  they  make  for
that  cause,  or  with  any  other  kinde  of  Traps  or
Gins,  they  put  her  to  a  lingring  death,  shooting  her
through  with  many  Arrowes,  that  shee  might  the
longer  languish  :  and  that  it  may  the  better  appeare,
how  evilly  that  wilde  beast  dealeth  with  the  Barbarians,
when  sometimes  five  or  sixe  Frenchmen  of  the  companie
passed  by  this  way,  the  Americans  advised  us,  to
beware of  the Jan-ouare, because that  very selfe-same

524

Jan-ouare,  a
wilde  beast,

men.

JOHN LERIUS  ad.

1557-8.
weeke, shee had cruelly devoured three men in a
certaine  Village  of  theirs.

I thought good to adde to this Edition, that the
Americans,  before  the  Voyage  of  Villagagno  had  never
seene Dogs  : and therefore, when they beheld a Dog  Dogs,  first
of  the kinde of  Hounds,  which with certaine whelpes  seen  b  the
we brought thither, and that he fauned on us, they  Ameruans-
were astonished, and fled  away  from him, because (as
I mentioned before) hee came neere unto the shape
of  the  Jan-ouare. For  that  cause  also, Gomara in his
General! Indian Historie, testifieth, that in the yeere  Cap.  44.
1509. when Christopherus Columbus first arrived at
the Hand  Beringua, called also by the name of Saint
John, the Indians of  this Countrie, who made warre
with  the  Spaniards,  greatly  feared  a  red  Dog,  and  that
he  stood  them  in  as  good  stead  almost  as  two  Harque-
bussers  : because he did not onely  fiercely assaile the
Barbarians,  but  also  discerning  his  companions  from  the
Enemies,  although  being  provoked,  he  was  not  offensive
unto them, but  also taking  notice of  the Caribas (the
worst,  and  most  detestable  nation  of  all  those  Countries)
pursued them, fleeing into the middest of  the Armie
of  the  Enemies, and being so much provoked,  tooke
no  rest untill he had torne the  Enemie in pieces on  [IV.  vii.
whom  he  seized  : fighting  so  fortunately  for  the  Spaniards,  I328-]

that  being  accompanied  with  him,  they  fought  so  cheer-
fully against  the  Indians,  as  if  they  had  had  three  horse-
men in  their  companie.  Yet  this  Dog,  while  hee  swam
after  I  know  not  what  Cariba,  being  shot  with  a  poisoned
Arrow  died,  and  made  his  Master  very  sorrowfull,  and
the  Indians  joyfull  and  glad.  So,  Vallovas  also,  the  Cap.  62.
most  valiant  Captaine  of  the  Spaniards,  when  he  first
discovered  the  South  Sea,  letting  slip  the  Dogs  which
hee  had,  against  the  Indians,  who  withstood  him  from
entring  on  the  Land,  the  Barbarians  were  stricken  with
so  great  a  feare,  that  they  were  compelled  to  provide
for  themselves  by  flight  :  and  the  Dogs  of  Vallovas,
prevailed as much as the best Souldiers of  them all.

525

A.D.

1557-8-

Cay  Monkeys.

The  Industrie
of  the

Monkeyes  in
delivering
their  young
from  danger.

The  manner  of

taking

Monkeyes.

Sagouin  a
beautifull
little  beast.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Moreover,  many  Monkeyes  are  found  on  the  Brasilian
coast,  little  and  blacke,  which  they  call  Cay,  which  I
cease  to  describe,  because  they  are  very  well  knowne
unto  us.  I  will  onely  declare  this  one  thing,  that  seeing
they  continually  live  in  the  tops  of  trees,  bearing  fruits
in  cods  like  unto  our  Beanes,  wherewith  they  are
nourished,  and  meete  together  there  in  companies,
especially  when  the  smoaking  showres  fall,  it  is  a  pleasant
thing  to  heare  them  crying,  and  making  a  noise.  But
seeing  at  one  birth  they  onely  bring  forth  one  young
one,  the  Monkey,  as  soone  as  he  commeth  into  the
world  is  indued  with  that  naturall  industrie,  that  he
firmely  hangeth  about  the  necke  of  the  Syre,  or  the
Damme  :  therefore  if  Hunters  come  suddenly  upon
them,  the  Syre  or  Dammes  leaping  through  the  boughs,
he  also  taketh  his  flight  together  with  them.  For  which
cause,  the  Barbarians  cannot  easily  catch  Monkeyes  of
any  age  whatsoever  :  yet  they  cast  them  downe  from
trees  wounded  with  Arrowes,  and  afterward  having
healed  them,  and  made  them  tame  a  little  while  at
home,  they  exchange  and  barter  them  for  Merchandises.
But  at  the  first,  they  are  so  fierce,  that  they  wound
the  fingers  of  them  that  handle  them,  with  their  teeth,
so  that  being  bitten,  they  are  very  often  compelled
through  paine,  to  kill  them  with  strokes.

There  is  also  another  kinde  of  Monkey  among  the
Americans,  which  they  call  Sagouin,  of  the  bignesse  of
a  Squirrell,  and  of  a  red  haire  :  but  as  touching  the
shape,  in  the  snout,  breast,  necke,  and  almost  all  the
other  parts,  being  very  like  unto  a  Lion,  and  also  hardie,
it  giveth  place  in  beautie  to  none  of  the  little  beasts,
which  surely  I  saw  there.  And  if  it  were  as  easily
brought  over  the  Sea  as  the  rest,  it  would  be  of  farre
greater  price  and  estimation.  But  seeing  it  is  of  so
weake  a  little  bodie,  that  it  cannot  indure  the  working
of  the  ship ;  for  it  is  of  that  haughtinesse  of  spirit,  that
if  it  be  offended  never  so  little,  it  would  die  through
discontentment  : yet  some  are  here  to  be  found. But,

526

JOHN LERIUS  a.d.

1557-8-
that  I  may  freely  confesse  the  matter  as  it  is,  although
I  have  beene  curious,  I  was  not  so  diligent  in  observing
all  the  living  creatures  of  America,  as  I  desired,  never-
thelesse,  that  I  may  once  make  an  end,  I  will  yet  describe
two  kindes,  which  are  monstrous  in  shape,  as  those
that  art  most.

The one which the Barbarians call Hay, is  of the  Hay,  a
bignesse of a Dog, with an hanging bellie, like a  deformed
farrowing  Sow  with  pigge,  of  an ash-colour haire  very east'
much washed, with a very long tayle, hairy feet  after
the  manner  of  a  Beare,  and  long  clawes  : but  as,  while
it liveth in the Woods, it is very fierce  ; yet being
taken,  it  is  very  easily  tamed. But  the  naked  Tououpin-
ambaultii doe not willingly play with him, because
he  hath  both long,  and also  sharpe  clawes. They  say,
it  liveth  onely  on  aire.

The other,  whereof I am also to speake, called by
the Barbarians, Coaty, is of the height of  an Hare,  Coaty,  with  a
with short and spotted haire, little and sharpe eares,  monstrous
both  of  a  little head,  and also with an eminent  snout  s?ea
from the eyes, more then a foote long, round like a
walking-staffe, suddenly decreasing at the end,  so that
it  is  altogether  of  an  equall  thicknesse,  with  so  narrow
a mouth, that it can scarce receive the little finger.
None  may  be  found  more  monstrous  : afterward,  when
this wilde beast is taken, gathering her foure feet
together, shee bendeth her selfe to the one side or
the  other,  or  falleth  flat  downe  : nor  can shee  ever  be
raised, nor compelled to eate, unlesse Ants be given
her,  on  which  she  also  feedeth  in  the  Woods.

This Chapter also, wherein I will intreate of  Birds,  Chap,  n
I  thought  good  to  beginne  with  those  which  are  fit  for
the  maintainance  of  mans life,  and  by  a  generall  name,
are  called Oura,  by  the  Tououpinambaultii  : they  have  Oura,  birds.
great  plentie  of  those  Hennes,  unto  the  which  wee  gave
the  name  from  India,  and  they  call  them  Arginau-oussou  :  Arginau-
from that time also since the Portugals lived among  oussou,  Indian
the  Barbarians,  our  Countrymen  used  to  nourish  Hennes,  Hennes-

527

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

1557-8.

Jrginau  miri,  called  by  them,  Arginau-miri. And  although  (as  I  have

our  Countrie else-where  mentioned) they  esteeme  the  white  ones  very

Hermes.  much, that plucking off  the feathers, and dying them

red, they  might  clothe and decke themselves  ; yet for

the  most  part  they  abstain  from  both  kinds,  as  touching

the eating of them. Moreover, seeing  they  perswade

Arginau- themselves,  that  the  Egs,  which  they  call  Arginau-ropia,

ropia,an  egge.  arCj  as }t  were? poison,  they  were  not  only  astonished,

if  we supped Egs  before  them,  but  also  reproving  us,

added  moreover, that it  was not to be suffered  ; for,

while  we prevented the hatching of  chickens, we eate

an Henne in an  egge. Therefore,  they are  almost as

carefull  of  their Hennes, as of  the Birds, which live

in the Woods. They suffer them to  lay  wheresoever

they are disposed. But the Hens in like manner,

bring home their chickens out of the briars and

bushes, so that the Americane  women  may  be  without

trouble.

Together  with  the  Hennes,  the  Barbarians  also  nourish

[IV.  vii. Indian Duckes at home, they call them Upec. But

J  3 29O  because  the  Tououpinambaultii  are  so  superstitious,  that

Duckes m tney  tmn^e5  if  tney  should  eate  so  slow  a  creature,  they

should get  the same  slowness, so that if  the Enemies

should  assaile  them,  they  could  not  seeke  their  safetie  by

flight : no  man  may  easily  perswade  them  to  taste  the

least  morsell  of  them,  and  for  that  cause  they  abstaine

from  all  those  creatures  which  goe  slowly,  and  also  from

fishes,  as  Raies  or  Thornebacke,  and  others  which  cannot

swimme  swiftly. As  touching  these  Birds  which  live  in

the  woods,  they  take  them  as  great  as  Capons,  and  those

Jacous.akinde  of three sorts, which the Barbarians called Jacoutin,

of  Pheasant. Jacoupen, and Jacou-ouassou. They have all blacke

and ash-colour Feathers, and come neere unto the

Pheasants  in taste, and I may truely  affirme, that no

sweeter  or  more  delicate  meate  can  ever  be  eaten,  then

those  Jacoas  are.

Mouton  a  Besides, there are  two kindes  of  most  exquisite and

rare  Bird. choice  Birds,  which  are  named  Mouton,  of  the  bignesse

528

JOHN LERIUS  a.d.

1557-8.
of  Peacocks,  with  the  same Feathers which the  former
had,  and  they  are  very  seldome  found.

Macacoua,  and  Ynambou-ouassou,  are  two kindes of  ^  kinde
Partridges,  of  the bignesse of  our  Country  Geese, not  •£  &reat,
much  unlike  the  taste  of  Mutton. These  three  follow-
ing have  one  and  the  same  taste  almost,  Inambour-miri
of  the  height  of  Partridges :  Pegassou  Stockedoves,  and
Paicacu  the  Turtle  Dove.

But  that  I  may  briefly  finish  the  discourse  of  Birds,
which  are  found  in  great  plentie,  both  in  the  Woods,
Rivers,  and  also  in  the  shoares,  I  will  come  unto  those
which  are  not  so  fit  for  foode.  Among  the  rest,  there
are  two  kindes  of  the  same  bignesse,  which  come  neere
to  the  greatnesse  of  a  Raven  or  Crow :  which  as  the
rest  of  the  American  Birds,  have  crooked  bils  and  talons,
as  also  Parrats,  in  which  number  they  might  be  reckoned.
As  touching  the  Feathers,  as  it  is  easily  judged,  I  scarce
thought  that  Birds  of  such  excellent  beautie  were  to  be
found  in  the  whole  world,  in  the  beholding  wherof,
abundant  matter  offereth  it  selfe,  not  as  prophane  men
to  commend  nature,  but  the  creator :  and  that  it  may
manifestly  appeare,  the  first  which  the  Barbarians  call
Arat,  hath  the  feathers  in  the  traine  and  wings,  of  a  ^rat,  a  Bird
foote  and  a  halfe  long,  partly  purple  like  unto  red,  and  ™lth  excellent
partly  of  a  blew  colour,  greatly  shining,  to  the  which
also,  the  other  parts  of  the  body  are  correspondent.
When  this  Bird  moveth  in  the  Sunne,  where  she  very
much  abideth,  no  man  can  ever  be  satisfied  with  her
sight.

The  other  called  Canide,  with  the  inferiour  Feathers,  Canide,a
and  those  that  are  round  about  the  necke  shining  of  TV*  Wrf ,
the  colour  of  gold,  and  those  that  cover  the  backe,
wings,  and  traine  of  an  excellent  blew  colour,  seeing
they  seeme  to  be  under-laid  with  embrodered  gold,  and
over-laid  with  a  Velvet  Mantle  above,  it  causeth  great
admiration  to  the  beholders.

But  although  these  Birds  be  not  domesticall,  yet  they
oftner build  their  nests  in  the  tops  of  the  trees  which

XVI  529  2L

A.D.

1557-8-

Feathers,  of
the  which,
caps,  garments
&c,  are
made.

Aiourous,
great  and  very
faire  Parrats.

A  wonderfull
storie  of  a
Parrat.

Lib.  10.  cap.
43-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

are  in  the  middle  of  the  Villages,  then  in  the  woods,
whereby  it  commeth  to  passe,  that  the  Barbarians  plucke
their  Feathers  three  or  foure  times  in  the  yeare,  of  the
which  Feathers  they  make  Cappes,  Garments,  and
Bracelets,  decke  the  handles  of  their  clubbes,  and  adorne
their  bodies.  1  brought  many  such  Feathers  with  me
into  France.

Three  or  foure  sorts  of  Parrats  are  taken  there :  the
greatest  and  fairest  whereof  the  Barbarians  call  Aiourous.
These  have  the  head  intermingled  with  red,  yellow,  and
violet  colours,  the  ends  of  the  wings  scarlet  or  crimson,
the  taile,  which  is  very  long,  yellow,  and  the  rest  of  the
body  greene ;  very  few  such  are  brought  unto  us.

A  Woman  in  a  certaine  Village,  some  foure  miles
distant  from  our  Hand,  had  brought  up  one  of  this
kinde,  which  as  if  she  had  beene  indued  with  reason,
conceived  those  things  which  she  was  commanded.  As
often  as  we  went  that  way,  we  presently  heard  the
Mistresse  of  that  Bird  say,  will  you  give  me  a  Combe,
or  a  Looking-glasse,  and  I  will  presently  command  my
Parrat  to  sing  and  daunce  before  you.  If  happily  we
granted  her  request,  the  Parrat  presently  hearing  certaine
words  of  her  Mistresse,  did  not  onely  dance  on  the
pearch  where  she  sat,  but  also  pratled,  and  whistled ;
and  lastly,  she  wonderfully  counterfeited  the  Barbarians
going  to  the  wars.  To  be  short,  if  her  Mistresse  thought
good  to  bid  her  sing,  she  sung,  if  to  dance,  she  danced  :
contrarily,  if  not  rewarding  her,  with  a  little  sharper
speech  she  had  commanded  her  their  Auge,  that  is,  be
stil,  then  she  presently  held  her  peace,  nor  could  we
make  her  with  any  words  to  move  either  her  tongue,  or
feete  never  so  little :  wherefore  I  leave  it  to  the  Readers
to  be  considered  whether  if  the  Romans  had  had  such  a
Parrat  they  would  not  highly  have  esteemed  her,  who,
as  Pliny  recordeth,  sometimes  solemnized  the  death  of
a  Crow  with  innumerable  rites  of  funeral,  by  which,  at
the  place  of  Common  Pleas,  they  were  every  morning
by name saluted, and punished him with death, who

53°

JOHN LERIUS  ad.

1557-8.
killed  the  same.  The  Barbarian  woman  called  this  Parrat
Cherimbaue,  that  is  to  say,  her  best  beloved.  And  surely
she  was  so  deere  unto  her,  that  demanding  at  what  price
we  might  buy  her,  she  answered  in  scoffing  manner
Mocaovassou,  that  is  to  say,  a  great  brasse  piece,  and
therefore  we  could  not  wrest  her  from  her  at  any  price.
I  found  that  they  made  their  Nests  in  the  holes  of
hollow  Trees.

Among  the  rest  of  the  American  birds,  the  first  place
shall  be  given  to  a  certaine  Bird  named  Toucan,  whereof  Toucan,  a
we  made  mention  of  before. It  is  of  the  bignesse  of  a  ^rdofth^
Pigeon,  of  a  blacke  colour  like  a  Crow,  except  the  brest,  pf^e *
which  is  of  a yellow  colour,  compassed  from  the  lower
part  with  a  ring  of  red  feathers,  which  being  taken  away,  [IV.  vii.
the  Barbarians use it for  ornament of  the cheeks  and  ^S0-]

other  parts  of  the  body.  And  it  is  highly  esteemed  with
them,  because  they  use  it  when  they  intend  to  daunce.
From  thence  it  hath  taken  the  name  Toucan-tabourace,
that  is,  a  Feather  to  daunce  with.  Yet  notwithstanding,
they  have  such  store  of  them,  that  they  refuse  not  to
change  them  for  our  Merchandizes.  The  bill  of  this  The  monstrous
Bird  exceedeth  the  rest  of  the  body  in  length,  where-  oillofaBird.
with  a  Cranes  beake  is  not  to  be  compared,  and  there-
fore it  is  to  be  accompted  the  most  monstrous  bill  of  the
whole  world.

There  is  another  of  the  Bignesse  and  colour  of  a
Black-bird,  except  the  brest,  which  is  as  red  as  Oxe
bloud :  this,  the  Barbarians  take  away  after  the  same
manner  that  they  did  the  former,  and  call  the  Bird  Panou.  Panu  a  Bird

There  is  also  another  of  the  bignesse of  an Owzell,  ^tth  a  red
with  all  the Feathers  of  a  scarlet  colour,  this  they  call feastm
Quampian.  Quampian,  a

But  one  very  little  Bird  is  not  to  be  omitted,  of  no  Btrdofa
lesse admiration then smallnesse, which the Barbarians
call Gonambuch, with white and shining Feathers : it  Gonamboch,  a
exceedeth  not  a  drone  Bee, or Beetle in Bignesse,  yet  V*H
maketh  wonderfull  melodie  in  singing. Sitting  upon  that
great Milium which  the  Barbarians  call  Avati,  or  other

531

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1557-8.

high  plants,  she  singeth  so  loud,  that  unlesse  she  be
seene  you  would  scarce  beleeve  that  so  loud,  and  sweete
melodie  could  proceede  from  that  small  body.  She  is
not  inferior  to  our  Nightingale.
The  variety  of  But  because  I  cannot  particularly  describe  all  the
the  American  American  Birds,  which  differ  not  a  little  from  ours,  not
onely  in  kinde,  but  also  in  variety  of  colour,  as  rose
colour,  red,  violet,  white,  ash-colour,  purple,  &c.  I  will
at  length  describe  one,  which  the  Barbarians  so  observe
and  esteeme,  that  they  will  not  onely  not  hurt  her,  but
suffer  them  not  to  escape  unrevenged  who  doe  her  any
wrong.  She  is  of  the  bignesse  of  a  Pigeon,  and  ash-
colour,  the  Tououpinambaultii  heare  her  more  often  in
the  night  then  in  the  day,  with  a  mournefull  voyce,
and  beleeve  that  she  is  sent  from  their  friends  and
kindred,  unto  them,  and  also  declareth  good  lucke,  and
especially,  that  she  incourageth  and  admonisheth  them  to
behave  themselves  valiantly  in  the  warres  against  their
enemies.  Besides,  they  verily  thinke  that  if  they  rightly
observe  these  divinations,  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  they
should  vanquish  their  Enemies,  even  in  this  life,  and
after  death,  their  soules  should  flye  beyond  the  Moun-
taines,  to  their  ancestors,  perpetually  to  daunce  there.

1  chanced  once  to  lodge  in  a  Village,  named  Upec  by

the  French  men,  there,  in  the  night  I  heard  those  Birds,

not  singing,  but  making  a  lamentable  noise. I  saw  the

Barbarians most attentive, and being ignorant of the

whole matter,  reproved  their  folly. But  when  I  smiled

The  dotage  of  a  little  upon  a  French  man  standing  by  me,  a  certaine  old

the  Bar- man severely  enough restrained me  with these words :

observe *  7he° ^old  vour  peace,  least you hinder us, who attentively

singing  of  a harken to  the  happy  tidings  of  our  auncestours. For,

Bird.  as  often  as  wee  heare  these  Birds,  so  often  also  are  we

cheered,  and  our  strength  receiveth  increase.

American  The  Americane  Bees  differing  from  ours,  are  like  unto

Bees.  t^e  Jesser  blacke  flyes  wherewith  we  are  troubled  in  the

time  of  Summer,  and  make  their hony  combes in the

hole of  a  rotten tree. The Barbarians are skilfull to

532

JOHN LERIUS

gather  hony  and  waxe.  Being  gathered,  intermingled,
they  call  it  Yra-yetic,  for  Yra  signifieth  hony,  and  Yetic
waxe.  The  honey  being  severed,  they  eate  it  after  our
manner,  but  keepe  the  waxe  which  resembleth  the  black-
nesse  of  Pitch  made  into  lumps  of  the  bignesse  of  a  mans
arme.  Yet,  not  that  they  make  Torches  or  Candles
therewith,  for,  there  is  no  other  use  of  a  Candle  with
them,  then  of  a  certaine  wood  which  sendeth  forth  a  most
cleere  and  bright  flame.  But  they  chiefly  use  that  Wax
to  stop  those  huge  canes,  wherein  they  put  their  Feathers,
least  they  should  be  eaten,  and  gnawed  with  the  Butter-
flyes,  which  also  we  will  describe  in  this  place.

They  are  called  Aravers  by  the  Barbarians,  of  the
bignesse  of  Grashoppers,  they  also  come  in  great  multi-
tudes to  the  fire  as  Creekets  doe,  and  if  they  finde  anie
thing  they  eate  it,  but  especiallie  they  so  gnaw  leather
doublets  and  shooes,  that  they  whollie  consume  the
superficies  and  upper  graine  thereof.  But,  if  we
negligently  set  up  Hennes,  or  other  meates  of  that
kinde,  in  the  morning  the  bare  bones  were  found  with-
out flesh.

The  Barbarians  being  stung  with  Scorpions  applie
bruised  Scorpions  to  the  wound,  if  they  can  get  them.
Moreover,  as  we  have  elsewhere  said,  that  they  are  most
desirous  of  revenge,  nay,  I  might  almost  say,  that  they
are  made  against  all  hurtfull  things,  so  that  if  unawares
they  stumble  at  a  stone,  they  bite  them  after  the  manner
of  mad  Dogges,  and  diligently  seeke  out  all  living
creatures  hurtfull  unto  them,  and  utterly  roote  them  out
as  much  as  they  can.

The  Countrie  of  America  hath  also  land  Crabbes,  the
Tououpinambaultii  call  them  Oussa;  they  goe  in  multi-
tudes like  Locusts,  unto  the  Sea  shoare,  and  fennie
places,  and  if  any  one  goe  thither  he  may  see  them  flying
hither  and  thither :  they  convey  themselves  into  the  bodies
and  rootes  of  trees,  out  of  the  which  they  cannot  safely
be  drawne,  for  they  pinch  the  fingers  and  hands  of  such
as  take  them,  with  their  clawes. They  are  farre  leaner

533

A.D.

1557-8.

Yra,  Hony.
Yetic,  blacke
Waxe.

Aravers,
Butter-flies.

The  Bar-
barians most
desirous  of
revenge.

Land  Crabs.

A.D.

1557-8.

[IV.  vii.

I33I-]
The  report  of
a  Barbarian,
concerning  a
fish  with
hands  and
countenance,
resembling  the
shape  of  a
man.

Chap.  13.
Of  the  trees,
hearbs,  roots,
and  most
exquisite
fruits  which
grow  in  the
American
soyle.

,  Araboutan,
the  Brasil
tree,  and  the
forme  thereof

The  Country
of  America
zoanteth  all
beasts  of
burden.
The  Bar-
barians cut  the
timber  and
carry  it  into
the  Ships.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

then  the  Sea  Crabs,  but  because  they  smell  of  the  Juniper
rootes,  they  are  nothing  pleasing  to  the  taste.

His  discourse  of  America  fishes  I  have  omitted,  except
this  which  you  shall  now  heare.  I  will  not  omit  a  storie
which  I  heard  reported  by  a  Barbarian.  When,  saith  he,
on  a  certaine  day,  I  was  carried  in  a  Boate  with  certaine
others,  in  a  verie  calme  Sea,  a  certaine  huge  fish  tooke
hold  with  the  hand  on  the  brim  of  the  Boate,  and  in
my  judgement,  it  would  either  have  over  turned  it,  or
gotten  up  into  it.  I  seeing  that,  cut  off  the  hand  with
a  sickle  which  1  had  in  a  readinesse,  so  that  it  fell
into  the  Boate,  and  it  had  fine  fingers  verie  like  unto
ours:  besides,  for  paine  which  that  fish  felt,  putting  the
head  above  water,  which  was  like  unto  the  head  of  a
man,  it  squeaked  a  little,  and  made  a  certaine  noise.

First,  because  the  Brasil  tree  is  the  most  famous  of
all  that  soile  (from  whence  also  that  Countrie  hath
taken  the  name)  especially  for  the  colour  which  our
Dyers  make  therewith,  I  will  describe  it  in  this  place.
This  Tree  therefore  is  called  by  the  Barbarians,
Araboutan,  and  equalleth  our  Oake  in  height  and
plentie  of  Boughes.  Some  of  these  are  found,  the
thicknesse  whereof  containeth  full  as  much  as  three  men
can  fathome.

After  what  manner  that  Timber  useth  to  be  brought
into  the  Shippes,  I  thought  good  in  this  place  to
describe.  But  first  you  are  to  understand,  that  except
the  Merchants  were  holpen  by  the  Inhabitants,  they
could  scarce  lade  a  Ship  with  that  Timber  within  a
yeare,  both  for  the  hardnesse,  and  therefore  the  difficultie
in  cutting,  and  also  chiefely,  because  that  Countrie
wanteth  all  labouring  Beasts,  and  therefore  it  is  to  be
carried  upon  the  shoulders  of  men.  The  Barbarians
being  hired  for  Garments,  Shirts,  Cappes,  Knives,  and
other  Merchandizes,  doe  not  onely  cut,  cleave,  and
make  round  that  Timber,  but  also  laying  it  upon  their
bare  shoulders,  carrie  it  into  the  Shippes,  and  sometime
in most cumbersome  places,  lying three  or  foure  miles

534

JOHN LERIUS  ad.

1557-8.
distant  from  the  wood  to  the  shoare. But  I  expressely
say, that the Barbarians, since the French men and
Portugals came unto them, cut their Brasil trees, for
before  that  time  (as  farre  as  I  understood  from  the  elder
sort)  they  had  no  other  way  of  felling  them,  save  that  The  indent
they overthrew them by putting fire unto them.  T£™rtf
Moreover,  because  I  know  some  thinke  that  the  timber  amQngthe
which is  brought unto us, hath the thicknesse of  the  Barbarians.
trees, I purposely added, that the Barbarians made it
round, that they might the more easily carrie the
same.

Furthermore, it hath bin observed by me, for so
long time as I lived in America, and used a cleare
fire through the  benefit  of  this wood, that this kinde
of  wood  was nothing moist, which usually happeneth
to  most  of  the  other  kindes  of  wood : nay,  that  it  was
dry  as  it  were  by  nature, and  beeing  kindled,  yeeldeth The  Brasil
very  little smoake. One of  our men desired to wash  wood-> almost
our shirts, and unawares, put the  ashes of the Brasil  wlt
wood into the  lye, whereby they were so surely died  The  ashes  of
with  a  red  colour,  that  although  they  were  washed,  they  tJli 'Jjr?s**
never  changed  the  same, and being so  died with that  s^rts  ^a  red
colour,  we  were  to  put  them  on.  colour.

Because our Tououpinambaultii doe not meanely
wonder,  when  they  see  French  men,  and  other  strangers
comming farre off from remote Countries, take so
much  paines to carrie backe  their Shippes laden with
their Araboutan, that is to say, the Brasil or red
wood :  Therefore  a  certaine  elderly  man  of  the  Barbarians,
sometimes questioned me in this manner, concerning  The  conference
that matter:  What meaneth it, that you Mair and  of  a  certaine
Peros (that is French men and Portugals) come so  J^'fa*
farre to fetch Wood  ?  doth your Countrie yeeld you  Author.
no wood for  the fire  ? Then  said I,  it yeeldeth  fuell
surely,  and  that  in  great  plentie,  but  not  of  that  kinde
of  trees,  such  as  yours  are ;  especially  Brasil,  which  our
men carrie  from hence, not  to burne, as you suppose,
but  for  to  dye. Here  he  presently  excepting ;  But  have

535

A.D.

1557-8.

An  excellent
sentence-
delivered  by  a
Barbarian.

Foure  or  Jive
kindes  of  the
Palmes  in
America.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

you,  said  he,  neede  of  so  great  plentie  of  that  wood  ?
Yea  surely,  said  I,  for  seeing  even  one  Merchant  with
us  possesseth  more  Scarlet  Cloathes,  more  Knives  and
Sissers,  and  more  Looking-glasses  (alledging  knowne
and  familiar  examples  unto  him)  then  all  those  which
were  ever  brought  hither  unto  you :  he  onely  will  buy
all  the  Brasil,  to  the  end  that  many  Shippes  might
returne  laden  from  hence.  Ah  (saith  the  Barbarian)
you  tell  me  strange  and  wonderfull  things.  Then  pre-
sently remembring  what  he  had  heard,  he  proceeded
to  demand  further  questions  of  me.  But,  saith  he,
that  great  rich  man,  of  whom  you  make  report,  doth
he  not  die  ?  He  dieth,  said  I,  as  also  other  men  doe.
There,  then  (as  these  Barbarians  love  to  comment,
and  doe  not  absurdly  finish  their  intended  speech  with-
out interruption  even  unto  the  end)  he  began  to  demand
of  me :  Who  therefore,  saith  he,  is  heire  of  those  goods
which  this  man  leaveth  when  he  dieth  ?  His  children,
said  I,  if  he  have  any :  if  he  have  none,  his  brethren,
sisters,  or  his  next  kindred.

When  I  had  said  this,  surely  (saith  that  my  discreete
old  fellow)  hereby  I  easily  perceive,  that  you  Mair
(that  is  French  men)  are  notable  fooles.  For,  what
neede  you  so  greatly  to  tire  and  turmoile  your  selves
in  sailing  over  the  Sea,  in  passing  whereof  (as  being
here  arrived  you  report  to  us)  you  sustaine  so  many
miseries  ?  Is  it,  forsooth,  that  you  might  get  riches
for  your  children,  or  living  kinsfolke  ?  Is  not  the
Earth,  which  hath  nourished  us,  sufficient  also  to  main-
taine  them  ?  we  surely  have  both  children,  and  also
kinsfolke,  and  them,  as  you  see,  we  love  dearely ;  but
seeing  we  confidently  hope,  that  it  shall  come  to  passe,
that  after  our  death,  the  same  Earth  which  nourished
us,  shall  also  relieve  and  cherish  them,  therein  we
repose  our  selves  and  rest  content.

But  that  I  may  present  the  description  of  the  American
Trees,  foure  or  five  kindes  of  Palme  trees  are  found
there : among which, that is accounted most common.

536

JOHN LERIUS  ad.

1557-8.
which they call Gerau, and another also named Yri :
notwithstanding,  as  I  saw  none  of  their  fruites,  so,  as  I
thinke, I eate  none. Yri  bringeth  forth  a  round  fruite
like  Damsens  in  the  shape  of  a  large  cluster  of  so  great  [IV.  vii.
weight,  that  it  may  hardly  be  lifted  up  with  one  hand,  !332-]

but the  kernell onely is of  the  bignesse of  a Cherrie,
and  may  be  eaten. Besides,  in  the  top  of  these  Palmes, A  tendrell  or
there is a certaine white yong tendrell or branch,  y°^gbran^hm
which we cut off, to eate the same  : Philippus who  pailfes  t0  &e
was  troubled  with  the  haemroides,  affirmed, that  it  was  eaten.
a  remedy  for  that  disease,  the  warrantable  truth  whereof
I  leave  to  the  Phisitians.

There is  also another  tree, called by the Barbarians
Aiiri, which although it be very like the Palme in  Aim,  a
leaves,  with  the  stocke  armed  on  every  side  with  thornes  thorny  kinc^e
and  pricks,  resembling  the  points  of  needles. The  Fruite  ^ Hn^'
is of  an indifferent bignesse, in the middest whereof
there  is  a  kernell  of  the  whitenesse  of  Snow,  which  yet
is not to be  eaten ;  and this I suppose to  be a  kinde
of  Ebeny :  for besides that it is of  a blacke colour,
and of  such hardnesse, that the Barbarians partly use
it  for  the making  of  their  clubs  and  arrowes  (which  I
will  more  at  large  describe  when  I  shall  treate  of  their
wars) it is  also  smoothed, and made  very bright, and
lastly, is so heavie, that being cast into  the  water,  it
presently  sinketh  to  the  bottome.

They have divers coloured woods, and divers of
differing  scent :  one  smelling  like  a  rose ;  another  called
Aou-ai,  of  the most stinking smell  of  Garlicke, which  Aou-ai,  a
no  man  is  able  to indure,  while it  is  hewed or  burnt : ^inde  of  wood
it  hath  leaves  not  much  unlike  the  leaves  of  our  Apple  ^faking  smell
trees : but  the fruite  thereof  (which commeth neere in
shape to the  rough shell  of  a  Chesnut) and especially
the  kernell,  is  so  venemous,  that  to  him  that  eateth  it,
it  resembleth  the  effect  of  the  most  strong  and  deadlie
poison. Notwithstanding  our  Barbarians  highly  esteeme
that  fruite,  because  they  make  their  Rattles  of  it. Here
also it is to be considered, that Brasilia (as we shall

537

A.D.

1557-8.

Very  many
American
trees  beare
poisonous
fruits.

The  tree
Choyne,  of
whose  fruite
the  Bar-
barians make
their  Maraca.

Sabaucaie
whose  fruite  is
pj'operly  used
for  the  making
of  vessels.
This  is  a  kinde
of  Coco.

Acajou,  a
fruite  to  be
eaten.

Paco-aire,  a
tender  shrub.

Paco,  a
apple.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

hereafter  speake)  bearing  excellent  apples  of  very  many
kindes,  aboundeth  also  with  trees,  which  surely  yeelde
very  goodly  fruites,  yet  unprofitable  to  bee  eaten.
Especially  on  the  shoare  there  are  many  small  shrubbes,
the  apples  whereof  being  very  like  unto  our  Country
Medlers,  are  dangerously  eaten.  Therefore,  when  the
Barbarians  see  the  French  men,  and  other  strangers
comming  to  gather  those  apples,  often  using  the  word
Ypochi,  in  their  Country  language,  they  admonish
them  to  abstaine  from  them.

The  tree  called  by  the  Barbarians  Choyne,  is  of  an
indifferent  height,  with  leaves  of  the  shape  and  greene-
nesse  of  a  Bay  leafe,  with  Apples  of  the  bignesse  of  a
childes  head,  comming  neere  unto  the  shape  of  the
Estridges  egges,  which  surely  are  no  meate.  Of  these
the  Tououpinambaultii,  by  reason  of  the  hardnesse  of
the  shell,  piersing  some  of  them  through  whole,  in
length  and  breadth  wherewith  they  make  their  Maraca
or  Rattles :  they  also  hollow  and  divide  them  into
halves,  for  cups  and  other  small  vessels.

Sabaucaie  is  also  numbred  among  the  Brasilian  trees,
having  an  apple  bigger  then  both  a  mans  fists,  and
imitating  the  forme  of  a  cup :  in  the  bottome  whereof
certaine  small  kernels  are  found,  like  unto  Almonds,
and  almost  they  resemble  the  very  taste  of  Almonds.

Moreover,  there  is  a  tree  in  those  Countries,  of  the
height  of  our  Service  tree,  whose  apple  the  Barbarians
name  Acajou,  of  the  bignesse  and  shape  of  an  Hens
egge,  which  when  it  is  ripe,  inclining  to  the  colour  of
Gold,  like  unto  a  Quince,  is  not  onely  profitably  eaten,
but  also  yeeldeth  somewhat  a  tart  juice,  not  unpleasing
to  the  taste,  which  most  comfortably  cooleth  those  that
are  inflamed  with  heate.

Paco-aire,  is  a  shrub,  of  ten  or  twelve  foote  high,
with  a  stocke,  sometimes  of  the  thicknesse  of  a  mans
thigh,  which  notwithstanding  is  so  tender,  that  it  may  be
cut  downe  at  one  stroake  with  a  Sword  :  the  Barbarians
call  the  apple  Paco,  of  the  length  of  a  mans  hand,  not

538

JOHN LERIUS  a.d.

1557-8.
unlike a Cucumber in shape, and of  the same colour
also,  when it  commeth to  ripenesse. But these apples
grow, for the most part, twentie or five and twenty
thicke together,  on every  bough, which the  Americans
gathering,  carry  them  into  their  cottages,  of  so  great  a
waight  as  they  are  able  to  beare  with  one  hand. And
as touching the goodnesse of  this apple, when it is
ripe,  the  knop  being plucked  of  after  the  manner  of  a
fresh gathered Figge, it seemeth clottie and full of
clusters : whereby it commeth to passe, that to them
that eate it, it resembleth the Figge, whereupon, we  Paco,  a  Figge
called it a Figge :  but in taste it excelleth the most  ln  taste-
delicate Massiliensian Figges ;  and therefore not un-
worthily it  may  be  reckoned  among  the  best  fruites  of
all that  coast. The forme of  the  leaves of  Paco-aire,  The  leaves  of
is not unlike the  leaves of  water-Sorrell, but they  are  p"c°-atrei  are
of so great a bignesse, that commonly the length is  {i^esse. The
extended to six feete, and the breadth above two :  Author  saith
whereby it commeth to  passe, that I cannot be per-  it  is  like  the
swaded  by  any  meanes  to  beleeve  that  in  Europe,  Asia,  Musa-
and Africa, there are leaves of so great length and
breadth. For,  although I  heard a certaine Apothecary
affirming,  that  he  had seene  a  leafe of  Petasitis  of  the  Petasitis  large
breadth  of  an  Elle  and  a  quarter,  that  is  (for  this  Plant  round  kafe-
is round) whose circumference contained in compasse
three  Elles  and  three  quarters :  yet  this  largenesse  came
nothing  neere  to  the  greatnesse  of  our  Paco-aire. It  is
true  surely that  the  thicknesse of  those leaves  answere
not the  length, nay, they  are very slender, yet daily
lifted up, so that the middle ribbe onely beareth the
violence of  the most vehement winde, wherewith that
Country is very often troubled ;  but the rest is so
jagged and cut a sunder, that to him that beholdeth
them a farre off, these shrubs are supposed to be
decked  with  Estridges  feathers.

As  touching  the  Bombasin  Cotton-shrubs,  which  grow  C vu*
up to an indifferent heighth, they  are found in great The  Bombasin
number, in Brasill : they yeeld flowres, like the little Cotton  trees.

539

A.D.

1557-8.

Ameni-iou,

Bombasin

Cotton.

Reeds,  where-
with the
Barbarians
head  their

Arrowes.

Mastick.

Trees

continually
flourishing  in
America.

The  Plant
Ananas,  and
the  leaves
thereof.

Ananas  the
most  excellent
fruit  of  all
America.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

yellow  bels  or  buddes  of  Cucumbers :  but  when  the
Apple  is  formed,  it  commeth  not  only  verie  neer  unto
the  Mast  of  Beech,  but  also  being  ripe,  divideth  it  selfe
into  foure  parts,  which  yeeld  Bombasin  Cotton  in  flockes
of  the  bignesse  of  a  ball,  which  the  Barbarians  call
Ameni-iou.  In  the  midst  of  those  flockes  certaine  blacke
graines  are  found,  close  joined  and  verie  much  pressed
together,  after  the  forme  of  a  mans  Kidnie,  the  greatnesse
of  which  compacture  exceedeth  not  a  Beane.  Moreover,
the  Barbarian  women  are  not  unskilfull  in  gathering  and
spinning  that  Bombasin  Cotton,  for  of  it  they  make  their
beds.

Reeds  often  grow  in  the  Woods,  of  the  bignesse  of
a  mans  legge  :  but  as  I  said  before  of  Paco-aire,  they
are  so  tender,  that  while  they  are  yet  standing,  any
one  of  them  may  bee  cut  downe  with  one  streake  of
a  Sworde,  yet  being  drie,  they  are  of  such  hardnesse
that  when  they  are  cleft,  and  fashioned  after  the  manner
of  the  Surgeons  Lances,  the  Barbarians  so  head  their
Arrowes  therewith,  that  they  overthrow  wilde  beasts
flat  to  the  ground  at  one  shoot.

Masticke  also  groweth  in  this  our  America  among
the  briers  and  bushes,  which  together,  almost,  with
infinite  other  odoriferous  herbes  and  flowres,  perfumeth
the  earth  with  a  most  sweet  and  pleasant  scent.  The
Trees  are  never  spoiled  of  their  leaves,  being  not  troubled
at  all  with  the  cold,  they  flourish  all  the  whole  Yeere,
as  the  Woods  use  to  doe  with  us  in  the  moneth  of
May.

The  plant  which  bringeth  forth  the  fruit  Ananas,  is
like  in  forme  unto  the  Flowre-de-luce,  with  crooked
bending  leaves,  divided  round  about,  comming  neere
unto  Aloe,  of  the  same  forme  with  the  greater  Thistle,
but  the  Apple  which  is  of  the  bignesse  of  an  indifferent
Melon,  and  of  the  shape  of  a  Pine  Apple,  bending  to
no  part,  groweth  after  the  manner  of  our  Artichoke.

Those  Ananas  when  they  are  come  to  full  ripenesse,
are  of  a  golden  colour  imitating  blue,  and  yeeldeth  the

54o

JOHN LERIUS  a.d.

1557-8.
smell  of  the  fruit  of  the  Idean  Bramble,  so  that  by  the
smell  they  were  easily  found  of  us,  wandring  in  the
Woods  and  other  places  where  they  grow :  they  are  of
so  sweet  and  pleasant  a  taste,  that  none  of  our  preserved
fruits  excell  them.  Therefore  I  thinke  it  to  bee  the
best  fruit  of  all  America.  I  sometimes  wrung  one  of
them,  out  of  the  which  I  drew  a  Cruze  of  juice,  which
unto  me,  seemed  nothing  inferiour  unto  the  Wine  which
they  call  Malmesey.

Lastly,  as  I  have  said,  that  among  the  Americans,  no  All  the  trees,
foure-footed  beasts,  birds,  fishes,  nor  any  living  creatures, f e 7  y
in  all  things  resemble  ours  of  Europe : so  I  now  affirme,  jmerica
as  much  as  I  could  finde  by  experience  wandring  through  {except  three)
the Woods and Fields, that there are no Trees, or  differ  from
Herbes, and lastly no fruits, which are not unlike to  oun'
ours,  except  these  three  Plants,  Purslane,  Basill  Royall,
and  Fearne,  which  grow  in  certaine  places.

§.  11.

Of  the  Warre,  Battailes,  Fortitude,  and  Weapons
of  the  Barbarians  : and  of  their  Religion.

Lthough our Tououpinambaultii Tonpinenquin  Chap.  14
make immortall warre against divers bordering
Nations,  after  the  manner  of  all  the  rest  of  the

Barbarians.  Notwithstanding,  they  contend  not  by  warre
to  enlarge  their  bounds  (for  they  possesse  more  Lands
then  they  need)  or  thinke  of  the  getting  of  Riches,
by  the  spoiles,  ransomes,  and  armes  of  the  conquered.
For  as  they  all  confesse,  they  are  provoked  through  no
other  affection  then  that  they  might  most  severely  avenge
the  death  of  their  Parents  and  Friends  long  since  taken,
and  devoured  by  the  enemie.  Moreover,  when  war  is
first  proclaimed  between  certaine  of  these  people,  all  of
them  agreeing  in  this,  that  the  enemie  unto  whom  injurie
is  done,  will  perpetually  thinke  on  the  revenging  of
the  same,  and  therefore  that  it  is  to  be  attributed  to
cowardise,  if  being  brought  into  their  power,  they  suffer

54i

For  what  cause
the  Americans
make  warre.

A.D.
1557-8.

The  Bar-
barians cannot
be  reconciled  to
their  enemies.

Sen  at  us.

The  Ameri-
cans yeeld
obedience  to
the  elder  sort.

The  Oration
of  the  elder
Americans.

[IV.  vii.

1334-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

him  to  escape  unpunished  :  their  enmities  are  so  inveterate,
and  of  such  continuance,  that  they  can  never  be  reconciled
each  to  other.

But  the  manner  whereby  our  Tououpinambaultii
assemble,  being  readie  to  goe  to  the  warres,  is  this,  as
much  as  I  could  observe.  Although  they  have  no
Kings  or  Princes  among  them,  but  are  almost  equall
in  dignitie,  yet  this  is  given  them  by  nature  (which
also  was  most  exactly  in  former  times  observed  by  the
Lacedemonians)  that  they  admire  and  reverence  the  elder
sort  whom  they  call  Peoreru  Picheh,  for  their  experience
of  things  :  therefore  in  everie  Village  no  contemptible
service  and  obedience  is  performed  unto  them.  These
occasions  being  offered,  either  walking  or  sitting  in  their
Cotton  hanging  beds,  exhort  the  rest  with  these,  or  the
like  words.

What  (say  they  speaking  by  turne,  without  interruption
of  speech)  were  our  Ancestors  who  not  only  fought
against  so  many  enemies,  but  also  vanquished,  slue  and
devoured  them,  an  Example  unto  us,  that  wee  should
perpetually  lye  lurking  heere  at  home  ?  Shall  wee  suffer
our  Nation,  which  in  former  times  was  so  great  a  terrour
to  all  the  rest,  that  they  could  not  in  any  sort  indure
their  sight,  to  be  so  much  reproached  to  our  great  disgrace,
that  our  enemies  should  assaile  us  by  Warre  even  in  our
owne  houses  ?  Shall  we  through  our  cowardize  cause,
that  the  Margaites  and  Peros-ergaipa  (that  is,  those
wicked  Nations)  assault  us  first  ?  Then  that  Orator
clapping  his  shoulders  and  buttocks  with  his  hands,
addeth  these  words  with  exclamation  :  Erima,  Erima,
Tououpinambaults,  Conomiouassou  Tan,  Tan,  &c.  that
is  to  say,  My  countrimen,  and  most  valiant  young  men,
wee  are  not  so  to  doe:  but  rather  let  us  prepare  us  for
the  fight  and  bequeathe  our  selves  to  death  and  slaughter,
or  avenge  our  people.

With  these  Orations  therefore  of  the  elders,  which
sometimes  are  prolonged  for  six  houres,  the  hearers  who
most  attentively  hearken,  so  that  they  forget  not  so  much

542

JOHN LERIUS  a.d.

1557-8.
as  one  syllable,  being  increased  both  in  strength  and
courage,  speaking  each  to  other  in  everie  Village,  assemble
as  speedily  as  they  may,  at  the  prefixed  place  in  great
multitudes.  But  before  wee  bring  our  Tououpinambaultii
to  the  Battaile,  wee  are  to  declare  with  what  Weapons
they  are  furnished.

And  first  surely,  they  have  Tacapes,  that  is,  Clubs,  or  Tacape,  a
Swords  made  some  of  redde,  and  some  of  blacke  wood :  ktnde  °f

.  1  r 1 1  1 r r  r  woodden  Llub.

they  are  commonly  or  the  length  or  five  or  sixe  reete,
round  at  the  ends,  or  of  an  ovall  shape,  of  the  breadth
of  a  foote,  and  of  the  thicknesse  of  a  Thumbe  in  the
middest,  but  the  edges  are  verie  finely  sharpened,  for
they  are  made  of  verie  heavie  wood,  such  as  Boxe  is,
and  are  little  inferior  to  the  edge  of  a  verie  sharpe
Axe :  so  that  I  easily  beleeve,  that  one  Tououpinambaultian
armed  with  such  a  Clubbe,  and  inraged  with  furie,  would
bee  able  to  put  two  of  our  Countrie  Fencers  to  much
trouble,  and  drive  them  to  their  shifts.

Moreover,  they  have  Bowes,  which  they  call  Orapats,  Orapat,  a
made of  the same kinde of  wood, to wit, redde  and  Bow.
blacke ; and they  exceed ours  so much in length  and
thicknesse,  that  none  of  our  men  is  able  either  to  bend
or unbend them : insomuch as they are of  necessitie
to  use  all  their  strength  for  the  bending  of  the  Bowes
of  Children of  tenne  yeeres  old. They  use the herbe
called Tocon, for strings, which although it bee  verie  The  herbe
slender, yet is it of so great a strength, that it may  Tocou,  serving
indure the force of  an Horse. Their Arrowes  are of  irL  s  et '  t°{ms
the  length  of  an  Ell,  made  with  three  joynts : the  middle  ^he  length  of
part  consisting  of  a  Cane  or  Reede,  and  the  other  two  their  Arrowes.
of  blacke wood : and those pieces are so aptly  bound
together  with  certaine  barkes  of  Trees,  that  they  could
not bee more firmely glued. They apply two little
feathers unto them, of the length of  a foote, which
they  binde  together  with  a  Cotton  Thread,  because  Glue
is  not  in  use  with  them : they  aptly  joyne  very  sharpe
bones to  the  ends, sometimes a  piece of  a drie Reed,
of  the length of  a mans hand, cut smooth after the

543

A.D.

1557-8.

The  Ameri-
cans most
skilful/
Archers.

Targets  of
Leather.

The  Bar-
barians little
esteeme  Iron
Swords.

PURCHAS HIS PILGKIMES

manner  of  a  Surgeons  Launce  :  and  somtimes  the  verie
end  of  the  taile  of  the  fish  Raye,  which  as  I  have
elsewhere  said,  is  verie  venemous.  But,  since  the
Frenchmen  and  the  Portugals  came  into  those  Countreyes,
the  Barbarians,  after  their  manner  have  accustomed  to
strengthen  their  Arrowes  with  Iron  heads,  or  at  the  least,
with  verie  sharpe  Nailes.

We  have  already  spoken  what  their  dexteritie  is,  in
handling  their  Clubs :  but  as  touching  the  Bowes,  I  hope
that  all  they  who  have  seene  the  Barbarians,  will  confirme
that  with  their  naked  armes,  they  shoot  so  speedily,  and
so  certainly,  that  (bee  it  spoken  by  the  Englishmens  leave,
who  are  yet  accounted  the  most  skilfull  Archers)  putting
their  Arrowes  in  the  hand  wherewith  they  hold  their
Bow,  twelve  may  sooner  bee  shot  by  them,  then  sixe
by  the  Englishmen.

Lastly,  they  have  Targets  of  the  Hide  of  Tapiroussou,
which  I  mentioned  before,  broad,  plaine,  and  round,
like  to  the  bottome  of  a  Germane  Drumme,  with  these
they  cover  not  themselves  in  fight,  after  the  manner
that  our  Souldiers  use,  but  fighting,  receive  the  Arrowes
of  the  Enemies  with  them.  So  these  are  all  the  Weapons
of  the  Americans :  for  they  cover  not  their  bodies  with
other  Armour :  but  contrarily  (excepting  their  Caps  of
Feathers,  Bracelets,  and  other  short  attire,  wherewith  as
aforesaid,  they  decke  their  bodie,)  if  they  wore  but  a
shirt,  being  about  to  goe  unto  the  battaile,  they  would
presently  put  it  off,  fearing  least  they  might  be  intangled
and  incumbred  therewith.

If  they  received  Iron  Swordes  from  us,  as  I  gave  one
to  a  certaine  Moussacat  of  mine,  they  presently  cast
away  the  sheathes :  they  did  the  like  also  receiving
Knives,  delighting  in  the  brightnesse  of  them,  and
thought  them  more  serviceable  for  the  cutting  of  the
boughes  of  Trees,  then  for  fight.

Eight  or  tenne  thousand  people  being  gathered
together  after  the  manner  which  hath  beene  spoken,
with no  small  number  of  women, not  to  fight, but  to

544

JOHN LERIUS  a.d.

1557-8.
carrie  their  bagge  and  baggage,  and  provision  of  victuall,
assembling unto the Campe, they of the elder sort,  The  elder
who have slaine  and devoured  the  greatest number  of  Barbarians,
enemiess,  have  the  chiefe  command  and  conducting  of  the  faArmief'
forces:  who  being  their  Leaders,  they  prepare  themselves
for  the  journie. And  although  they  goe  without  order,
yet when they march trooping, the most  valiant men
keeping  the Front of  the Armie,  it is a  wonder how
well  all  that  whole  multitude  convey  themselves  without  [IV.  vii.
Tribunes, and Quarter-masters, so that at the sound  d133^

of  the  Trumpet  they  verie  speedily  assemble  in  battell  i)Jrians  ^eep_
array.  jng  no  order,

But  there  are  some,  who  with  homes,  which  they  call  yet  march
Inubia,  of  the  length  of  an  elle  and  an  halfe,  and  of  the  wtt^ouf
thicknesse  of  our  Country  Speare,  of  the  bredth  of  an  /Jj^WL
hand  at  the  lower  end  like  a  Trumpet,  raise  the  Souldiers,  homes'. '
both  going  out  of  their  Countrie,  and  when  the  Campe
removeth. Some  also  carrie  Whistles  made  of  the  bones  Whistles,  of
of  their enemies, slaine  and devoured  in former time,  mem ones'
wherewith they continually pipe by the way, that
they  might  stirre up the  mindes  of  their companions,
and increase their desire to kill the enemies in like
manner. But  if,  which  often  happeneth,  they  please  to
undertake  a  Voyage,  against  the  Enemie,  by  Boat, they
passe  along  the  shoares,  and  commit  not  themselves  unto
the  maine  Sea. They order  themselves  in  their Boats,
which  they  call  Ygat,  every  one  whereof  consisteth  of  the  Tgat,  a  Boat
barke  of  one  tree,  taken  off,  and  appointed  to  this  use  ;  °fthe  bar^e  °J
yet  are  they  of  such  largenesse,  that  every  one  of  them  may  a  ?ee'
receive  fiftie  men. Standing  therefore  after  their  manner,
they  drive  the  boat  forward  with  an  Oare,  plaine  on  both
sides,  which  they  hold  in  the  middle. Moreover,  these
Boats  seing  they  are  plaine,  are  rowed  with  very  little
trouble  :  yet  is  there  no  use  of  them  in  the  maine  Sea,  or  if
a  tempest  arise. But,  our  Barbarians  going  a  warfare,  in
a  great  calme,  you  may  see  a  Fleet  consisting  of  sixtie
such  Boats. And  these  passe  the  Seas  with  so  swift  a
motion,  that  they  are  presently  gone  out  of  sight. So,
xvi  545  2  M

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1557-8.

these  are  the  Armies  of  the  Toupinenquin,  both  by  Sea,

and  Land.

Being  furnished  after  this  manner,  they  sometimes  goe
The  first  fiftie  miles  into  the  Enemies  borders.  And  first  they  use
stratagem ^  strataprem# All  the  most  valiant,  leave  the  rest  with

of  the  .  & ,  It  1 t  • !

Barbarians.  tne  women  and  carriages,  one  or  two  dayes  Journey  behind
them :  they  approach  with  great  silence,  and  possesse  the
Woods,  lying  in  waite  to  entrappe  the  Enemie  for  whom
they  so  diligently  watch,  that  oftentimes  they  lie  hid  there,
for  foure  and  twentie  houres.  And  if  they  set  upon  the
Enemie  unawares,  as  many  men,  women  and  children
as  they  meete  with,  are  not  onely  brought  away,  but  also
slaine  by  the  Enemies  returning  into  their  Countrey,  and
put  upon  Boucan  in  pieces,  and  at  length  devoured.
And  they  surprize  them  so  much  the  more  easily,  because
the  Villages  (for  they  have  no  Cities)  are  not  compassed
with  walls,  and  the  Cottages  (which  yet  are  fourescore  or
an  hundred  paces  long)  have  no  Doores,  but  in  their
stead,  they  set  the  boughs  of  Palmes,  or  the  stalke  of  the
herbe  Pindo  at  their  Gates.  Yet  they  have  now  learned
to  fortifie  and  intrench  certaine  Villages  round  about,
which  border  upon  the  Enemies,  with  postes  of  Palmes,  of
sixe  foot  long,  besides,  they  strengthen  the  entrances
with  woodden  stakes  sharpe  at  the  end :  if  therefore  the
Enemies  will  assaile  those  Villages  by  night,  which  is
common  with  them,  then,  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Village
issue  safely  forth  upon  them,  whereby  it  commeth  to
passe,  that  whether  they  fight,  or  flee,  they  never  escape,
but  some  are  overthrowne  through  the  paine  of  their
wounded  feete,  who  are  presently  rosted  and  eaten  by  the
Inhabitants.

But,  if  they  desire  to  fight  in  open  warre,  bringing
forth  their  forces  on  both  sides,  it  is  scarce  credible,  how
cruell  and  horrible  the  battell  is :  whereof  my  selfe  was
a  beholder,  and  therefore  can  justly  make  report  thereof.
I,  with  another  Frenchman,  somewhat  more  curiously,  to
our  great  danger,  determined  to  accompanie  our  Bar-
barians going  to  the  warres : for  if  we  had  beene  taken,

546

JOHN LERIUS  a.d.

1557-8.
or  hurt  by  the  Margaiates,  wee  had  certainely  beene
devoured.  These  being  foure  thousand  men  in  number,
fought  with  the  Enemie  neere  unto  the  shoare,  with
such  fiercenesse,  that  they  would  have  overcome  even
the  most  furious  and  outragious.

The Tououpinambaultii, as soone as they saw the  The  howling
Enemie,  brake  out  into  so  great  and  loude  howling  and  and  e*cl*ma-
exclamation,  as  they  who here hunt Wolves, make no  Barbarians
out-cries comparable with those: for the clamour so  commhg  to  the
pierced the aire, that thunder  then could scarse have  battell.
beene  heard. But,  comming  neerer,  they  doubled  their
cries,  and  blew  their  Homes,  and  lastly, whistled with
their  Pipes,  the  one  threatned  the  other,  and  in  a  bravery
shewed  the  bones  of  their  dead  Enemies :  and  also  the  The  shewing
teeth, whereof some wore them hanging about their  of  the  bones  of
neckes,  strung  upon  a  threed  above  two  elles  long :  and
lastly, they terrified the beholders with their gesture.
But,  when  they  came  to  joyne battell, matters  fell  out
farre  worse : for, a multitude  of  Arrowes  was  shot  on
both sides, like swarming  Flyes  in number. Such as
were  wounded,  who were not few,  stoutly  plucked  the
Arrowes  out  of  their  bodies,  which  they  bit  like  madde
Dogs,  and  yet  abstayned  not  therefore  from  the  battel!.
For this Nation is so fierce and cruell, that so long  The  Bar-
as they  have  any  little  strength, they fight  continually, Marians  are
and never  betake  themselves  to  flight :  we  withdrawing  e£™*g  mg
our selves a little from the conflict, were contented
with  that  spectacle. In  the  meane  space,  I  protest,  who
have divers times here seene mightie Armies  both of
horse  and  foot  ordered  in  battell  array,  that  I  was  never
so much  delighted  in  seeing  the  Legions  of  footmen in
their  glittering  Armour,  as  in  beholding  these  Tououpin-
ambaultii, while they were fighting. For besides that
they  were pleasantly  seene  whistling,  leaping, and very
speedily and nimbly gathering themselves round in a  The  bodies  &
ring  : a  very  thicke cloude of Arrowes was moreover  weaP°nsofthe
added ;  the  feathers  whereof  being  rose-colour,  blue,  red,  fayj  w^
greene,  and  of  other  such  like  colours, gave a radiant  feathers.

547

A.D.

I557-8-

[IV.  vii.

336.]

The  captives
are  bound.

Captives
bought  by  the
Frenchmen.

Their  feasting
with  mans
fleshy  &c.  is
here  omitted,
though  fully
handled  by  the
Author:
because  we
have  glutted
you  already,
\3c.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

lustre  in  the  Sunne  ;  their  garments  also,  Caps,  Bracelets,
and  other  ornaments  of  feathers,  which  made  a  wonderfull
glittering  showe  in  the  eyes  of  the  beholders.

This  battell  being  ended  in  the  space  of  three  houres,
and  many  slaine  and  wounded  on  both  sides,  our
Tououpinambaultii  carried  away  the  victorie,  and  brought
about  thirtie  captives  more  or  lesse,  both  men  and
women,  to  their  people.  And  wee,  who  performed  no
other  service,  but  encouraged  the  Barbarians  with  our
drawne  swords,  and  small  shot,  somtimes  discharging
them,  as  we  beheld  them  fighting  (in  that  it  was  most
acceptable  unto  them  if  strangers  went  with  them  to
the  warres)  procured  so  great  an  opinion  of  us,  that
from  that  time  the  elder  sort  embraced  us  with  a  speciall
good-will  and  love.

The  Captives  therefore  being  placed  in  the  middest  of
the  Armie,  and  some  of  the  stronger  bound  with  ropes,
we  went  unto  the  Bay  of  Ganabara,  from  which  we  were
distant  about  foure  and  twenty  miles.  A  few  dayes  after,
certaine  Barbarians,  who  had  captives  with  them,  came
unto  our  Castle,  whom  by  Interpreters,  we  intreated
that  they  would  sell  certaine  slaves  to  Villagagno.  So,
a  great  part  of  the  captives  was  delivered  from  the  jawes
of  the  Barbarians :  yet  hardly,  and  against  the  will  of  the
Barbarians ;  which  not  long  after  was  plainly  declared
unto  mee.  I  bought  a  certaine  woman  with  her  little
childe  scarce  two  yeeres  old,  the  price  was  certaine
merchandise,  the  value  whereof  amounted  to  three  French
pounds.  But  hee  that  sold  them,  complained  thus  unto
mee :  What  will  be  hereafter  I  know  not,  but  since
Paycolas  (for  so  they  named  Villagagno)  arrived  here,
wee  have  scarce  eaten  the  halfe  part  of  our  captives.  I
greatly  desired  to  keepe  that  little  childe  unto  my  selfe,  but
Villagagno,  restoring  my  merchandises,  challenged  both
the  mother  and  the  sonne.  I  sometimes  said,  unto  the
mother,  that  when  I  passed  over  Sea,  I  would  transport  the
little  childe  hither.  But  shee  (the  desire  of  taking  revenge
is  so  inherent  in  the  mindes  of  that  Nation)  answered  that

548

JOHN LERIUS  a.d.

1557-8.
shee  had  rather  that  he  should  be  devoured  by  the
Tououpinambaultii,  then  to  be  carried  into  so  remote
Countries :  for  shee  hoped,  that  growing  older,  he  might
by  some  meanes  escape,  and  convey  himselfe  unto  his
Countrymen,  and  revenge  the  death  of  his  kindred.

ALthough  that  saying  of  Cicero,  be  held  for  a  most  ChaP-  l6-
certaine  Axiome  by  the  common  account  of  all  men, #/  ■
that there is no Nation so savage, nor so fierce, that  cicero  1 .  de
doth  not  know  that  they  are  to  have  a  God,  although  Legibus.
they be ignorant what  manner of  God they  ought to
have : yet, how this may appeare to be true in  our
Tououpinambaultii,  I  doe  not  sufficiently  knowe. For,  The  Tououpi-
they  are  ignorant  of  the  true  God,  and  neither  acknow-  mmbaultn^
ledge nor worship any false Gods, either  celestiall  or °.ue  q0J an£{
terrestriall :  and therefore have  no publike place  where  acknowledge
they may assemble for the cause of  Religion. They  no  false  gods,

are  ignorant  also  of  the  creation  of  the  World,  distinguish  nor  . _  ,
. °j  1  r  t r  Ti  creation  of  the

not dayes by names,  nor  prererre  one  before  another  : y

they observe not weekes, moneths and yeeres, but
measure times by the Moones. They are not onely  Computation
altogether ignorant of  Scripture, whether it be sacred  °^m/sA
or  profane,  but  also  utterly  without  Characters,  where-  Barbarians
with they might bee able to write the meaning of  thinke  of  the
the  minde. When  I  first  came  into  those  Countries,  I  Scripture.
writ  certaine  words  and sentences,  to  acquaint  my  selfe
with  their  Speech  and  read  them  presently  before  them.
They  thinking  it  to  be  a  juggling  tricke,  spake  one to
another  in  these  words  : Is it not  a  wonder, that this
man, who yesterday, knew not  so much as  one word
of our Language, (by the meanes and helpe of  this
Paper  which  teacheth  him  to  speake  our  words)  should
now so skilfully pronounce them, that they may be
understood  of  us  ?  The  Bar-

As  often  as  we  talked  with  them,  and  happened  to  Brians  hear-
make  mention  of  God,  we  said,  that  we  beleeved  in  ^J  continue
one  God,  Creator  of  Heaven  and  Earth,  who  as  he  landing  still
hath  made  the  World,  and  whatsoever  things  are  therein,  and  wondring.

549

A.D.

1557-

Toupany
Thunder.

Psal.  29.

The  Ameri-
cans beleeve
the  immor-
talitie  of
the  soule.

[IV.  vii.

1337-
Aygnan  an
evill  Spirit
vexeth  the
Savages.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

so  he  governeth  all  things  at  his  pleasure.  When  they
heard  this,  looking  one  upon  another,  and  breaking
out  into  this  word  Teh,  which  is  a  familiar  token  of
admiration  with  them,  they  stood  still,  fixed,  and
astonished  :  Moreover,  because,  as  wee  shall  speake  in
his  proper  place,  they  are  vehemently  terrified  with  the
noise  of  Thunder  (which  they  call  Toupan)  if  bearing
with  their  rudenesse,  wee  took  occasion  thereby  to
instruct  them,  and  said,  that  that  was  the  God  whereof
we  spake  unto  them,  who  that  he  might  declare  his  power,
shooke  Heaven  and  Earth  after  that  manner :  they
answered,  that  that  God  by  whom  they  were  so  terrified,
was  a  naughty  one.  I  doe  not  beleeve  that  there  is
any  Nation  in  the  whole  World,  which  may  be  more
estranged  from  all  Religion.  Yet,  that  I  may  also  declare
how  little  apparance  of  light  I  perceived,  among  those  thick
mysts  of  darknesse  wherewith  they  are  blinded  :  I  affirme,
that  they  doe  not  onely  beleeve  the  immortalitie  of  the
soules  :  but  are  also  certainly  perswaded,  that  after  death
their  soules  who  have  embraced  vertue  (but  they  define
vertue  after  their  manner,  to  wit,  to  avenge  them  of
their  Enemies,  and  to  eate  very  many)  flying  beyond
the  highest  Mountaines,  are  gathered  to  the  soules  of
their  Fathers  and  Grand-fathers,  and  there,  in  most
pleasant  Gardens,  leade  a  joyfull  life  in  perpetuall  delights,
and  dansing  :  (this  is  that  long  peregrination  of  Socrates,
and  the  Poets  Elysian  fields)  but  contrarily  the  soules  of
the  fearefull  cowards,  who  lived  ingloriously,  without
any  care  of  defending  their  Countrie,  are  violently  carried
away  by  Aygnan  (for  so  they  call  the  Devill)  and  live  in
perpetuall  torment  with  him.

These  most  miserable  Barbarians  are  wofully  even  in
this  life  tormented  by  the  Devill  (whom  by  another  name
they  call  Kaagerre)  :  For,  I  have  sometimes  seene  them,
even  while  they  were  talking  with  us,  immediately  crying
out  like  frantike  men,  Hei,  hei,  helpe  us,  for  Aygnan
beateth  us.  Nay,  they  affirmed,  that  the  wicked  spirit
was  seene  of  them  sometimes  in  the  shape of  a cruell

55o

JOHN LERIUS  a.d.

1557-8.
Beast,  sometimes  of  a  Bird,  and  sometimes  also  in  some
monstrous  forme.  And  because  they  greatly  wondred
that  wee  were  not  vexed  by  the  Devill :  therefore,  wee
telling  them  that  we  were  delivered  from  those  torments
by  that  God,  whereof  wee  often  spake  unto  them,  who
was  farre  above  Aygnan,  and  hindered  him  from  pro-
curing us  any  trouble.  It  somtimes  happened  that
danger  enforcing  them,  they  promised  to  beleeve  in
God,  but  being  delivered,  they  were  unmindfull  of  the

promise. But,  that it may  evidently appeare,  that the  Master

torments  wherwith they are  vexed,  are no pastimes,  I  ^nw ft,  which

my  selfe have somtimes seen them so stricken  with a  ^  Savages

shivering  and quaking  feare, remembring that miserie,  hath  told  me,

that  sweating  through  anguish,  and  clapping  their  thighes  that  he  knew

with their  hands, they  complained unto us  with these  ™e  °ftnetr

words. Mair  Atourassap,  Acequeiey  Aignan  Atoupaue  :  jyw'tnJ.s  con_

that is, My foole, my companion, I feare the Devill  ferre  with  this

above all other evils. But contrariwise, if  any of  us  Spirit  in

spake unto him in these words, Nacequeiey  Aygnan,  tormenting  one

I  feare  not  the  Devill : then,  bewailing  their  condition,  anlSthremim

they said ; Ah, how happie were we, if thereby we  if  he  so  dealt

might be secured from him : whereupon  we  answered,  with  them,

that therefore they were to beleeve in him who is  that  they

mightier then Aygnan. But although, as hath beene  ^fjff

said, in the present danger they promised that they  men  \$c%

would  doe  it,  yet  they  presently  returned  to  their  owne  whereupon

disposition  of  nature.  tne  man

Therefore,  although  our  Americans  confesse  not  God  7ecoveje  »
...  . D .  .  .  .  whereas  many

with the mouth, seeing among themselves they are  other  had  died.

convinced  that there is some divine power; therby I And  this

gather, that they shal neither  be excusable, nor  justly  sieves  that

take occasion  to  pretend  Ignorance. But  besides  those 'r  Tu/y

things which have beene spoken by mee, concerning  universaiit\e

the immortalitie of  the Soule,  which they  beleeve ; of  of  religion,

the Thunder, whereof they are horribly affraid ; and  howsoever

these  want
solemne  formes  of  it. Deos  fecit  timor. They  which  will  not  Deum  vereri  tanquam  parentem,
timebunt  ut  hostem.  Varre. They  are  so  much  liker  the  Devill,  which  worships  not  God,  yet
beleeveth  and  trembleth. Jam.  2.

55i

A.D.

1557-8.

Caraibes  false
Prophets.

A  relation  of
a  great
solemnitie
of  the
Barbarians.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Devils,  by  whom  they  are  tormented :  (which  three  things
are  first  of  all  to  be  noted)  I  will  moreover  adde  a  fourth
principall  matter.  That  they  have  Prophets  or  certaine
Priests  among  them,  which  they  call  Caraibes,  who  going
from  Village  to  Village,  perswade  those  miserable  men,
that  they  (because  they  have  familiaritie  with  Spirits)
give  not  onely  fortitude  and  courage  to  whomsoever
they  please,  whereby  they  might  overcome  their  enemies
in  warre,  but  also  that  through  their  helpe,  all  fruits,
and  those  great  Roots  growe,  which  we  have  said  that
the  American  soile  produceth.  Moreover,  (as  farre  as  I
understood  by  the  Neustrian  Interpreters,  who  had  lived
many  yeeres  in  those  Countries)  the  Tououpinambaul-
tians  have  this  custome,  that  every  third  or  fourth  yeere
they  assemble  together.  At  which  assemblie,  as  shall
immediatly  be  declared,  I  was  present  unawares :  con-
cerning which  I  am  to  report  that  which  followeth.  I,
with  a  certaine  Frenchman  named  Jacobus  Ruffus,  and
also  a  certaine  Neustrian  Interpreter,  travelling  farre  from
home,  turned  in  to  a  certaine  Village  to  lodge ;  the  next
day  after,  wee  prepared  our  selves  early  in  the  morning
for  our  Journey,  at  which  time  we  saw  the  Borderers
come  flocking  thither  from  all  places.  So,  the  Inhabitants
of  that  Village  joyned  themselves  with  them  that  came,
and  presently  wee  saw  sixe  hundred  gathered  together
in  a  certaine  voide  plat  of  ground.  We  demand  the
cause  of  that  meeting,  and  saw  that  multitude  divided
into  three  parts.  All  the  men  went  into  a  certaine
Cottage,  the  women  into  another,  and  the  children  also
went  into  the  third.  I,  who  had  seene  certaine  Caraibes
intermingled  with  the  men,  suspecting  that  some  un-
accustomed and  strange  thing  should  be  done  by  them,
earnestly  entreated  my  companions,  that  they  would  stand
still  there  with  me  to  observe  the  whole  matter :  which
I  obtayned  of  them.  The  Caraibes,  before  they  departed
from  the  women  and  children,  with  great  care  forbid
the  women  to  goe  out  of  their  Cottages,  but  diligently
to  attend  to  the  singing,  and  also  charged  us  to  keepe

552

JOHN LERIUS  a.d.

1557-8.
our  selves  close  in  that  Cottage  where  the  women  were :
Being  earnestly  busied  about  our  break-fast,  and  ignorant
of  those  things  which  they  purposed  to  doe,  we  heard
a  certaine  lowe  and  soft  muttering  noise  breaking  out
of  the  house  into  the  which  the  men  had  severed  them-
selves (for  that  Cottage  was  almost  thirtie  paces  distant
from  ours)  the  women  which  were  about  two  hundred
in  number,  standing,  and  giving  eare,  gather  themselves
as  it  were  on  an  heape.  But  the  men  lifting  up  their
voices  by  little  and  little,  so  that  their  distinct  words
were  heard  of  us  exhorting,  and  likewise  repeating  this
Interjection,

liilUUJJBffil

— :  , 1 — The  singing

He  be  be  he  hs  be  be  he  he  he.  Barbarians

we  heard  the  women  presently,  with a  trembling  voice

singing the same Interjection againe, he, he, he, &c.

And  they  lifted  up  their  voices  with  so  great  vehemency

of  minde,  and  that  for  the  space  of  one  whole  quarter

of  an  houre,  that  they  drew  us  who  were  the  beholders

into  admiration. And  surely,  they  did  not  onely  horribly  The  howling,

howle, but also leaped forth with great violence, and  and  horr'lhle

shaked  their  paps,  and  fomed  at the mouth,  nav  some  &jture.s  °f t  e

r 1  /  vi  1  1  ii7,  Amencane

or  them  (not  unlike  unto  those  that  are  troubled  with  women,

the  Falling-sicknesse)  fell  downe  dead. So  that  I  thinke,

that  the  Devill  entred  into  their  bodies,  and  they  suddenly

became possessed with the Devill. Moreover, having

plainly perceived those things which Bodinus writeth,  [IV.  vii.

in the  Booke  which he called Daemonomania,  concern-  J338-]

ing  the  extasie  of  Witches,  which  hee  affirmeth  to  bee  Llh'  3-^A3 •

common to all Witches, who have made an expresse

covenant  with the Devill,  and  who are often violently

carried  away  in  spirit,  the  bodie  remayning  voide  of  all

sense, although also they are sometimes carried away,

both in bodie and minde. Adde (saith he) that they  Lib.  2.  cap.  3.

never meete together in any place, but they danse, & llb-  3-

among  which,  as  farre  as  he  could gather by  the con-  ca^'  l'

fession of  certaine  Witches, they  all crie out together,

553

A.D.

1557-8-

Deut.  12.6.7,

The  Ameri-
cane  women
are  led  with
the  same
spirit,  where-
with our
countrie
Witches  are.

I  once  saw
Tomocomo  a
Virginian
dance,  with
such  extaticall
visages  and
diabolicall
behaviour,  as
if  the  Devi//
had  beene  in
him.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Har,  har,  (which  very  well  agreeth  with  He,  he,
of  our  Americans)  the  Devill  crieth,  Danse  hither,
danse  hither :  and  others  answere,  Sabbath,  Sabbath,
that  is,  A  festivall  day,  or  day  of  rest;  lifting  up  their
hands,  and  the  crops  of  herbes  or  trees  which  they
have  in  their  hands,  that  they  may  shew  a  most  assured
token  of  joy,  and  signifie  that  they  serve  the  Devill  with
all  their  heart :  and  so,  that  they  imitate  the  adoration
due  unto  God.  For,  in  the  Law  of  God,  it  was  pre-
scribed to  the  Israelites,  that  they  should  lift  up  their
hands  unto  the  Lord,  and  shew  themselves  cheerefull
before  him.  These  things,  I  say,  being  certainly  knowne,
I  gather,  that  Satan  is  Lord  of  them  both :  and  that
they  are  led  by  the  same  spirit,  so  that  the  distance  of
places  hindereth  not,  but  that  the  Father  of  lyes  may
worke  here  and  there  upon  them  who  through  the  just
judgement  of  God  are  delivered  unto  him.  Likewise,
when  I  heard  the  children  crying  altogether  (although
I  had  now  lived  halfe  a  yeere  with  the  Barbarians,  and
was  almost  acquainted  with  their  manners)  yet,  not  to
dissemble,  I  was  then  somewhat  afraid,  especially,  seeing
I  knew  not  what  should  be  the  end  of  that  matter.  At
length  those  cries  were  ended,  the  men  being  somewhat
silent,  the  children  and  women  also  altogether  holding
their  peace,  presently  the  men  began  to  sing  so  sweetly,
and  with  so  great  harmonie,  that  I  was  wonderfully
desirous  to  see  them.  But  when  1  would  have  gone
out  of  the  Cottage,  I  was  both  kept  backe  by  the
women,  and  also  admonished  by  the  Interpreter,  that
he  (who  had  already  lived  seven  yeeres  among  the  Bar-
barians) durst  never  come  to  those  solemne  meetings ;
and  lastly,  that  if  I  went  unto  them  I  should  not  doe
wisely.  Whereby  he  caused  me  to  stay  a  while,  for
feare  of  danger ;  yet,  because  hee  alledged  no  probable
reason  thereof,  the  women  and  Interpreter  somewhat
resisting,  I  went  forth :  relying  upon  the  friendship  of
certaine  ancient  men,  Inhabitants  of  that  Village.  Going
therefore unto that place  where I heard that Musicall

554

JOHN LERIUS  a.d.

1557-8.
harmonie, I made an hole through the roofe of  the
Cottage,  that  I  might  the  better  perceive  what  was  done
within. For  they  are  somewhat  long,  and  round,  after  The  forme  of
the  manner  of  our  Countrie  garden  Arbours,  and  covered  **?  American
with  grasse  from  the  top  to  the  bottome. Then,  making
a signe  with my finger, I called my  companions, and
at  length wee entred into that Cottage. As soone  as
wee  saw  that the Barbarians  were not moved  through
our  presence  (which  thing  the  Interpreter  suspected,  would
have been done) and that they kept their order very-
well,  and  proceeded  with their  Verses : we  went apart
into  a certaine corner,  and  beheld  them  without feare.
These  are  their  gestures  in  dansing. They  were  ordered  The  g^ture
in  a  round  circle,  standing  close  each  to  other: yet  so,  % f .

.  .  11111  •  •  1 Barbarians

they  tooke  not  one  another  by  the  hand  stooping,  with  Lansing  in  a

their  bodie somwhat  bending  downward,  shaking  onely round  circle.

one of  their legs, to wit, the right, with their right

hand  laid upon their  buttockes, and the left hanging

downe,  and  after  this  fashion  they  both  dansed  and  sung.

All  that  whole  multitude  made  three  such  round  Circles,

in the middle whereof  were three or foure Caraibes,

attired  with  Caps,  Garments,  and Bracelets of  feathers.

Each  of  them  in  either  hand  carried  Maraca,  that  is,  that  The  Caraibes

rattle  of  a  fruit  exceeding  the  bignesse  of  an  Estridges  c°Jfsecratmg

egge,  whereof  we  have made mention before,  for that

use,  as  they  said,  that the Spirit might speake out  of

them : and that they might rightly consecrate them,

they  continually  shooke  them.  Petum  by  the

JM  \  ^ .,  ,  .  Authour  is

Moreover, those Caraibes dansing, sometimes, went  thought  to

forward,  and  sometimes  backward,  and  did  not  continu-  differ  from

ally  stand  still  in  the  same  place,  as  the  rest. Further,  Tobacco,

I observed that with a  very  long Cane, wherein they  °eca™e  ** hath

put the herbe  Petum  * set  on fire, they often turned  sent  ^  j

themselves hither and thither,  and blew  out the fume  ihinke  it  the

of  that  herbe  upon  them  that  stood  round  about  them,  ^me.

with  these  words : Receive  the  spirit  of  fortitude,  where-  T}e  Caratbes

by  you  may  all  overcome  your  enemies. And  this  was  J^^the

often  done  by  these  Caraibes. The  celebrating  of  these  Barbarians.

555

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1557-8-

Rites and Ceremonies was prolonged for  the space of

two  houres :  those  men  continually  dansing  and  singing.
And  their  tunable  singing  was  so  sweet,  that  to  the
unskilfull  it  is  scarce  credible,  how  excellently  well  that
harmonie  agreed,  especially,  seeing  the  Barbarians  are
utterly  ignorant  of  the  Art  of  Musike.  And  surely,
although  in  the  beginning  I  was  stricken  with  a  certain
feare,  as  I  lately  mentioned,  yet  contrarily  I  was  then
so  much  over-joyed,  that  I  was  not  only  ravished  out
of  my  selfe :  but  also  now,  as  often  as  I  remember  the
tunable  agreement  of  many  voices,  both  my  minde
rejoyceth,  also  mine  eares  seeme  continually  to  ring
therewith :  but  especially  the  burden  of  the  song  yeelded
a  pleasing  sound  unto  the  eares,  which  at  the  end  -of
every  Verse,  they  sung  after  this  manner.

jagsTjTmrnTru

Hen  heura}  ke&ra ,  heara,  hem  a ,  betsra,  beurat  bitsra,  ouetk^

[IV.  vii.  Being  about  to  make  an  end  of  that  tunable  singing,

1 339-]  shaking  the  ground  with  the  right  foote  more  vehemently
than  before,  they  all  spit  also,  and  all  with  one  voice,  and
that  hoarse,  sing  this  Song  often  repeated.

pg^iSilii

Hi  be  bun  be  hua  bm  bxa.

Then  because  I  did  not  yet  plainly  understand  their
Language,  and  conceived  not  many  things  which  had
beene  spoken  by  them,  I  intreated  the  Interpreter  that
hee  would  declare  them  unto  me.  He  signifieth,  that
these  men,  first  lamented  their  dead  Ancestors,  who  were
most  valiant,  but  in  the  end  were  hereby  comforted,  in
that  they  hoped  that  after  death  they  should  at  length  go
unto  them  beyond  the  Mountaines,  and  dance  with  them,
and  celebrate  merrie  meetings  :  and  that  afterward  they
most  grievously  threatned  the  Ouetacates,  (which  are  a
people  not  farre  remooved  from  them,  with  whom  they
have perpetuall enmitie, whom also they could never

556

JOHN LERIUS  a.d.

1557-8.
overcome)  and  foretold, that  it  should  shortly  come  to
passe,  that  they  should  be  taken  and  devoured,  as  the
Caraibes  luckily  ghessed. Moreover, I  know  not  what  The  confused
they intermingled  with  their  Songs  concerning  a  floud,  0Pmton  °f the
that  the waters in times past so overflowed,  that they  concern-ing  t^e
covered  the  whole  earth  :  and  that  through  that  inundation  jjoud.
all  men  perished  except  only  their  Ancestors,  who  climbed
up into exceeding high Trees. Which last thing
commeth very neere  unto the sacred Historie, and I
never  once  heard  it  from  them  before.

The  same  day  they  were  sumptuously  received  by  the
Barbarians,  for  they  liberally  entertained  both  with  most
exquisite  meates,  and  plentifull drinke  Cauoin. I also
with  my  companions,  who  were  present  at  those  Feasts  Feast
of  Bacchus  unexpected,  were  most  honourably  entertained  fi^owing.
by  our  Moussacat,  that  is  the  Masters  of  the  house,  who
give food to their guests. But beside those things
which have  bin spoken by me,  those daies  being  past
(wherein these solemne meetings are celebrated every
third or fourth yeere among the Tououpinambaultii)
sometimes  also  before  they  came  thither,  those  Caraibes
goe  about  from  Village  to  Village,  and  command  three  or
foure  of  those  Rattles  which they call Maraca, to bee  The  decking
decked  with  the  best  feathers in every Family  : which  °f  Maraca.
being  so  decked,  they  sticke  the  longer  part  of  the  staffe,
wherewith  they  are  thrust  through in the  ground,  and
then  command  meate  and  drinke  to  be  set  before  them.
Whereby it commeth to passe, that those miserable
people, through the perswasion of those Impostors,
beleeve  that  those  hollow  fruits  decked  after  that  manner
devoure the meats. Wherefore every Moussacat  care-  A  grosse
fully  setteth  before  them,  not  only  meale  with  flesh  and  Superstition.
fish  : but also Caouin. Moreover, they serve those
Maracas  being  so  stucke  in  the  ground,  for  fifteene  whole
daies  together  with  very  great  diligence. Lastly,  those
miserable  people  after  that  so  great  bewitching  of  those
Maraca, (which they continually carrie  in their  hands)
conceive an opinion, attributing holinesse unto them,

557

A.D.

I557-8-

A  most  grosse
Errour.

1.  Reg.  18.

Truth  putteth
falsehood  to
flight.

How  the
ancient
Barbarians
enterta'me  the
Frenchmen.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

that  while  they  are  shaken  by  them,  a  certaine  Spirit
speaketh  with  them  from  the  middest  thereof.  And  they
were  so  bewitched  with  those  delusions,  that  if  we  travell-
ing that  way,  seeing  some  more  delicate  meates,  which
they  had  set  before  their  Maraca,  tooke  them  to  eate
(which  we  oftentimes  did)  the  Barbarians  supposing
that  some  great  misfortune  would  thereby  happen  unto
us,  were  offended.  Moreover,  if  taking  occasion  thereby
to  discover  their  errours,  we  signified  that  they  were
deceived  by  the  Caraibes,  not  only  because  they  taught
them  that  Maraca  did  eate  and  drinke,  but  especially  in
this,  that  they  most  falsly  vaunted  that  through  their
meanes,  the  fruits,  and  great  Roots  which  they  eate,
increased  and  grew  :  which  only  was  to  be  attributed
unto  God,  from  whom  wee  were  to  beleeve  that  wee  had
received  the  same  :  these  things,  I  say,  were  of  so  great
moment  with  them,  as  if  any  here  should  speake  against
the  Pope,  or  at  Paris,  denie  that  the  Image  of  Genouef
would  procure  raine.  For  which  cause  those  Impostors
the  Caraibes  did  no  lesse  hate  us,  then  sometimes  the
false  Prophets  of  Baal  did  Elias  detecting  their  delusions.
And  therefore  they  shunned  our  sight.

But  although  our  Tououpinambaultii,  as  hath  beene
declared  by  mee  in  the  beginning  of  this  Chapter,  neither
honour  their  Caraibes,  nor  Maraca,  with  any  externall  rite,
no  not  with  kneeling  unto  them,  nor  worship  any  thing
created,  much  lesse  adore  it,  or  call  upon  it  for  helpe.
I  will  adde  an  example  of  those  Relikes  of  Religion  which
I  observed  among  them.  When  by  chance  I  was  some-
times with  other  Frenchmen  in  a  certaine  towne  (which
they  call  Ocarentim)  and  that  we  supped  abroad  in  the
open  Aire,  the  Barbarians  Inhabitants  of  that  village
flocking  together  to  see  us,  not  to  feast  with  us  (for  this
is  their  usuall  custome,  that  they  never  sit  together  at
meate,  with  those  whom  they  reverence  most)  the  elder
men  especially  with  many  tokens  of  friendship  stood
round  about  us  as  our  guard  or  attendants  :  and  holding
in  their hands  the  bone  of  the  beake  of  a  certaine  fish,

558

JOHN LERIUS  a.d.

1557-8.
of  three  or  foure  foot  long,  in  the  forme  of  a  Sawe,  they
drove  away  the  children  from  us,  with  these  words  :  Get
you  hence  Knaves  :  for  you  are  unworthy  to  come  unto
these  men.  So  they  beheld  us  attentively,  and  holding
their  peace,  not  speaking  the  least  word  the  meane  while  :
untill  the  Banket  being  ended,  a  certaine  elderly  man
observing  us  to  begin ne  meate  with  Prayers,  and  also  to
end  Supper  with  Prayer,  comming  unto  us,  spoke  thus.  [IV.  vii.
What  meaneth  this  custom,  which  you  now  used,  when  I340«J

taking  of  your  caps,  you  all  kept  silence,  save  one,  that
spoke  ?  to  whom  appertained  that  speech  which  he  made  ?
to  any  of  you  that  are  present,  or  to  some  that  are  absent  ?
There fitly taking that occasion offered, that I might  The  occasion  of
speake  unto  them  concerning  the  true  worship  of  God,  declaring  the

•  i-i  11  r 1  -11  01  true  God

seeing  besides  the  largenesse  or  that  village,  &  the  great  unt0  the

resort  of  people  (I  also perceived the Barbarians more  Barbarians.

attentive  then  they  were  wont)  I  intreated  our  Interpreter

that he would declare my speech unto them in their

Language, that they might conceive the  same. Then

beginning  with  the  question  of  the  old  man,  I  answered

that our Prayers were directed unto God  : and that

although  he  could  not  see  him,  he  had  not  only  plainly

heard  us,  but  also  did  apparantly  know  whatsoever  we

had  hid  in  our  hearts. From thence  comming  to  the

Creation  of  the  World, I first  of  all  laboured  to  teach

them,  that  among  the  creatures  God  made  man  the  most

noble  and  excellent,  that  hee  should  so  much  the  more

endevour  to  extoll  the  glorie  of  his  Creator. And  that

we  surely  in  that  we  worshipped  him,  were  delivered  by

his  hand  from  infinite  dangers  of  a  very  long  Navigation,

in so vast a Sea,  and depending  upon  his  helpe,  were

freed  from  all  feare  of  Aignan,  both  in  this  life  and  in

the  life  to  come. Wherefore,  if  they  would  reject  the

delusions  of  their  Caraibes,  and  that  barbarous  custome  The  Bar-

of  devouring  mans  flesh,  they  should  undoubtedly  obtaine  forums  hear-

the  same  gifts  of  God,  which  they  saw  we  had. More-  w&  sPeech  °f
a  a a  \u-  • *l  .- the  true  God,

over,  we  added  many  things  concerning  the  corruption  were

and  fall  of  mankind,  that  we  might  prepare  their  minds  astonished.

559

A.D.

1557-8.

A  relation  of  a
Barbarian
most  worthy  to
bee  noted.

The  Bar-
barians pro-
mise to
embrace  the
worship  of
God,  y  are
present  at
Prayers,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

unto  Christ,  applying  Reasons  and  Examples  to  their
capacitie,  as  much  as  might  be.  Now  when  they  had
harkened  unto  us  above  the  space  of  two  houres  with
great  attention  and  admiration  :  one  of  them  reverent
for  his  authoritie  and  yeeres,  discoursed  after  this  manner  :
Surely,  you  have  here  told  us  wonderfull  and  excellent
things  ;  and  such  as  we  have  never  heard  before,  and
certainly  your  speech  hath  brought  into  my  memorie,
what  wee  have  often  heard  our  Grandfathers  report  :
To  wit,  that  even  from  ancient  time,  and  so  many
Moones  since,  as  we  cannot  now  remember,  a  certaine
Mair  (that  is  a  Frenchman,  or  stranger  of  any  other
Nation)  came  into  these  Countries,  attired  after  your
manner,  and  having  a  beard.  And  that  hee,  to  the  end
hee  might  draw  them  to  the  obedience  of  your  God,  made
such  a  speech  unto  them,  as  you  delivered  unto  us  this
day.  But,  as  it  was  reported  unto  us  by  tradition  from
our  Fathers,  they  will  not  give  credit  to  his  words.
Therefore,  presently  another  succeeded,  who  gave  them
a  Sword,  in  token  of  a  curse.  Hereupon,  followed  warres
amongst  us,  and  from  that  time,  wee  have  not  ceassed
to  exercise  crueltie  one  towards  another,  through  mutuall
slaughters.  But  now,  after  we  have  accustomed  our
selves  to  these  outrages  by  continuall  use,  if  we  should
now  suddenly  leave  our  ancient  custome,  wee  should
become  a  laughing  stocke,  and  derision,  to  the  neighbour-
ing Nations.

Heere  wee  testified  with  great  vehemencie  and  earnest
speech,  that  it  was  so  farre  off,  that  they  ought  to  be
mooved  with  the  scoffes  of  the  borderers,  that  contrarily,
if  they  seriously  worshipped  that  Creator  both  of  Heaven
and  Earth,  they  should  carrie  away  the  victorie  from  all
those,  who  for  that  cause,  should  willingly  be  troublesome
unto  them.  Lastly,  the  Lord  gave  that  efficacie  to  our
words,  that  not  only  many  Barbarians  afterwards  promised
to  frame  their  lives  according  to  that  Law  which  they  had
learned  of  us,  and  that  they  would  never  eate  the  flesh  of
their  slaine  enemies  any  more  : but  also  according  to  this

560

JOHN LERIUS  a.d.

1557-8.
conference,  kneeling  on  the  ground,  gave  thankes  with
us,  unto  God.  That  Prayer  which  was  made  unto  God,
by  one  of  our  men,  with  a  loude  voice,  in  the  middest
of  their  assembly,  was  presently  expounded  unto  them
by  our  Interpreter  :  and  so  they  brought  us  to  sleepe
in  those  hanging  beds  of  Bombasin  Cotton.  But  sleepe
had  not  yet  taken  us,  when,  behold,  wee  heare  these
Barbarians  singing  and  crying  out  together,  that  they
were  to  take  vengeance  on  their  Enemies,  and  that  more
should  be  eaten  then  before.  Behold  the  inconstancie  of
this  miserable  people,  and  the  lamentable  example  of
humane  nature.  Yet  surely,  I  perswade  my  selfe,  if
Villagagno  had  never  revolted  from  the  true  Religion,
and  that  wee  had  stayed  longer  in  those  Countries,  it
would  have  happened,  that  at  length,  some  should  have
beene  wonne  unto  Christ.

Another  time  I  being  with  three  Savages,  and  singing  The
the  104.  Psalme,  at  the  request  of  one  of  them  I  declared  Barbarians
the sense and antiquitie thereof, so many thousand  ac  now  e  Se

A/r  ttti  1  • i rr , i  ,  •  their  OWM

Moones.  Whereat  he  cried  leh,  how  happie  are  you  ignorance  and
Mair,  who  know  so  many  secrets,  which  are  hid  from  us  blindnesse.
poore  miserable  men.  Afterward,  one  of  them  to  gratifie
mee,  presented  mee  with  a  certaine  little  beast,  which  he
carried,  called  Agouti,  speaking  unto  mee  in  these  words.
Heere,  take  you  this,  because  you  have  sung  sweetly.
I  have  willingly  added  this  digression,  to  the  intent  I
might  declare  that  the  Barbarous  Americans,  although
outragious  against  their  enemies,  are  not  yet  so  rude  that
they  cannot  discerne  those  things  which  they  heare,  with
judgement.  Nay,  I  dare  affirme,  that  they  are  more  apt
in  framing  speeches,  then  our  Countrie  Peasants  are,  and
very  many  of  them  also,  who  esteeme  highly  of  them-
selves.

r.  ni.

XVI  561  2N

A.D.
1557-8.

[IV.  vii.

341-]

The  degrees

ofCon-

sangulnitie.

Polygd

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

§. III.

Of  their  Marriages,  Education  of  Children,  Poli-
tic, Hospitalitie,  Diseases,  Physicians,  Funerals
and Lamentations,

The  wonder-
full  agreement
betweene  the
American

N  Marriages,  these  degrees  of  Consanguinitie  only,
are  observed :  none  of  them  taketh  his  Mother,
Sister,  or  Daughter  to  wife :  no  regard  is  had  of
the  rest :  the  Uncle  marrieth  the  Neece,  and  so  conse-
quently. Neverthelesse,  as  shall  bee  hereafter  spoken  in
the  American  Dialogue,  no  man  may  marrie  the  Daughter
or  Sister  of  his  Atourassap.  And  he  is  called  Atouras-
sap,  whose  familiaritie  with  any  one  is  so  great,  that
both  their  goods  are  common.  There  is  no  place  for
Rites  or  Ceremonies.  Hee  who  desireth  a  Widdow,  or
Virgin,  being  certainly  perswaded  of  the  good  will  of
her  whom  hee  loveth,  goeth  to  her  Parents,  or  if  she
have  none,  to  her  next  Kindred,  and  asketh  them  whether
they  will  marrie  their  Daughter  unto  him  ?  If  they  con-
sent, he  presently  bringeth  her  home,  without  giving  her
any  assurance  of  Dowrie  and  so  keepeth  her  for  his
lawfull  Wife.  And  if  he  suffer  the  repulse,  he  giveth
over  his  Sute  without  any  perturbation  of  mind.  But
it  is  to  bee  noted,  that  Polygamy  is  usuall  with  them,
and  therefore  it  is  lawfull  for  a  man  to  marrie  as  many
Wives,  as  he  shall  think  good.  Nay,  the  more  Wives
that  any  one  hath  the  more  valiant  and  generous  hee  is
esteemed.  Among  the  rest  I  saw  one,  who  had  eight
at  home,  and  hee  often  spoke  very  much  of  them  in
commendation  of  himselfe.  But  this  is  chiefly  to  be
wondred  at,  that  in  so  great  a  multitude  of  Wives
although  one  be  beloved  of  the  Husband  above  the
rest,  the  other  never  take  it  grievously,  or  become
jealous,  or  openly  murmur.  Therefore  they  live  most
quietly  and  with  great  agreement,  weaving  their  Cotton
beds,  looking  to  the  affaires  of  the  house,  making
Gardens  and  planting  Roots.

562

JOHN LERIUS  a.d.

1557-8.
They  so  hate  adulterous  women,  that  it  lyeth  in  the  The  Savages

Husbands  power  either  to  kill  the  adultresse,  or  at  the  a*f0f"re,
.  r ,  .  ,  ....  aaultene.

least, to put her away  with great ignominie  and re-
proach. This surely is true, that they are not very  Single  women
carefull  of  preserving  the  chastitie  of  unmarried  women :
nay, they  easily  prostitute  them to any man. So that
(as I have alreadie said) 1 have seene  very many in
divers  Villages  deflowred  by  the  Neustrian  Interpreters,
who  yet  were  not reprochfully  disgraced for  the  same.
I  have  observed  that  the  younger  sort  both  men  and
women  are  not  very  much  given to  lust :  and  I  would
our  Countrey  people could  moderate themselves  aswell
in  this  behalfe. But  that  I  may  attribute  no  more  unto
them  then is meete,  I remember,  that often in their
brawling they  used  to  object  this  reproach  Tyvire,  that
is, Buggerers, one unto  another,  whereby  we  may  con-
jecture, that  that  hainous and  abhominable  wickednesse
raigneth among  them. The  women great with childe,  How  the
abstaine  only from the  greater burthens,  and  performe  American
the other  accustomed duties. And surely the women  ^^cE^ff
much  exceed the  men  in  labour,  for  the  men  (save  that  behave
sometimes  in the Morning, never at noone,  they  place  themselves.
certaine Trees to make Gardens) spend the time in
warfare, hunting, fishing, making of  woodden Clubs,
Bowes,  Arrowes, and other things  of  that kinde. As
touching the  travell  of  women; I  and  another  French-  Child-birth.
man  lodging  in  a  certaine  Village,  about  midnight  heard
a  great out-cry of a woman, and supposing she had
beene  surprized  by  the  cruell  beast  Jan-ouare,  we  arose,
and ran unto her,  and  found  the  woman  in  travell,  to
whom  the  Husband  performed  the  office  of  a  Midwife :  The  American
he receiving the Infant in his armes, cut the navell  men  performe
string  asunder with his teeth,  but pressed downe the  *HA Tc.e  °f
Nose  (for  they  esteeme  the  beautie  of  children  to  con-
sist in  the flatnesse  of  the  Nose)  the  new  borne  Infant
is presently washed,  and painted by the Father with
colours blacke  and red : then, not being wrapped in
swadling-clouts  at  all, it  is put into  a  Cotton  hanging

563

A.D.

1557-8.

The  little
Infants
Gugazves  to
play  withal.

What  the
manner  is  of
giving  Ameri-
can names.

The  food  of
Infants.

[IV.  vii.

1342.]

The  American
Infants  are
very  clean
without  the  use
of  linn  en
clothes.

In  what
things  the
Barbarians
busie  them-
selves.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

bedde.  But  if  it  bee  a  Male  childe,  the  Father  will
give  him  a  little  woodden  Sword,  a  small  Bow  and  little
Arrowes,  presently  after  his  birth,  and  lay  them  in  the
bedde  with  the  childe,  and  kissing  the  little  Babe  will
speake  unto  him  in  these  words.  My  Sonne,  when  thou
art  come  to  mans  estate,  be  valiant,  to  take  revenge  of
thine  enemies.  As  touching  the  giving  of  names,  I
remember  that  hee  of  whom  I  now  spoke,  was  named
by  the  Father  Orapacen,  which  word  signifieth  a  Bow
and  Bow-strings :  for  the  word  is  compounded  of
Orapat,  which  is  a  Bow,  and  Cen  which  signifieth  a
stringe. The  same  manner  also  is  observed  in  others.

Their  nourishment,  beside  the  Mothers  Milke,  is
chewed  Meale,  and  every  most  tender  kinde  of  meate.
The  woman  lately  delivered  lieth  downe  two  daies  only,
or  three  daies  at  the  most.  Afterward  putting  the  little
childe  in  a  Cotton  ScarfTe,  shee  either  goeth  to  the
Garden,  or  to  dispatch  her  other  businesse.

This  opinion  hath  prevailed  with  us,  that  little  children
would  have  crooked  legges,  unlesse  they  were  carefully
wrapped  and  bound  in  swadling  clouts :  But,  I  affirme,
that  the  Barbarians  nothing  regard  these  things  (who  put
the  new  borne  Infants  naked,  and  unswadled  in  their
Cotton  beds)  whose  children  notwithstanding,  goe  most
straight  and  upright  of  all  the  men  in  the  World.  The
Mothers  who  both  want  linnen,  and  also  use  not  the
helpe  of  leaves  for  these  services  (whereof  notwithstanding
they  have  great  plentie)  so  diligently  wipe  the  hinder
parts  of  the  Infants  with  small  chips  of  wood,  that  they
are  continually  free  from  all  filth.  The  elder  sort  also
observe  the  same  manner,  whom  also  (digressing  a  litle
into  this  filthy  matter)  I  thought  good  to  mention,  that
they  use  to  make  water  in  their  houses,  and  yet  no
evill  nor  stinking  savour  ariseth  from  thence :  although
they  shine  bright  almost  continually  with  often  fires,  and
are  strewed  with  sand ;  but  as  often  as  they  doe  their
easement,  they  use  to  goe  apart  farre  from  the  Houses.

Moreover,  proceeding to speake of the  Marriage  of

564

JOHN LERIUS  ad.

1557-8.
the  Tououpinambaultians,  as  far  as  shame  and  modestie  Natura/I
will permit, I affirme (contrarie to that which some  f^tveTin
have forged) that the men observing naturall shame-  tfa  American
fastnesse, doe no where openly company with their  Marriages.
Wives.

This  is  especially  worth  the  noting,  that  for  the  space
of  an  whole  yeere,  while  we  lived  in  those  Countries,
we  never  saw  any  woman  having  the  flowres.  1  thinke  The  purgation
that  they  divert  that  Fluxe  by  some  meanes  unknowne  °f the  Amen-
to  us.  For  I  saw  Maidens  of  twelve  yeeres  olde,  whose
sides  were  cut  by  their  Mothers,  from  the  arme-hole
downe  to  the  knee,  with  a  very  sharpe  tuske  of  a
certaine  beast.  And  the  young  Girles  gnashing  with
their  Teeth  through  extremitie  of  paine,  bleed  very  much :
I  conjecture  that  they  prevented  their  monthly  Fluxe  by
this  remedie.

As  touching  the  Policie  of  the  Barbarians,  it  is  scarce  The  Bar-
credible how well they  agree among  themselves, being  bananshve

.  i>eaceablv

guided  only  by  the  light  of  Nature.  Nor  may  this  be  tozet^er
spoken,  but  to  their  great  shame  who  are  instructed  in
divine  and  humane  Lawes,  which  yet  is  to  bee  under-
stood of  them  who  are  of  the  same  kindred,  or  of  the
Confederates :  for  how  they  behave  themselves  towards
their  enemies,  it  hath  beene  alreadie  by  us  declared.
Yet  if  any  contention  arise  betweene  certaine  persons
among  them  (which  very  seldome  happeneth,  for  in  the
whole  space  of  a  yeere,  while  I  lived  among  them,  it
was  my  chance  twice  only  to  see  them  brawling)  the
beholders  care  not  to  pacifie  the  strife :  but  suffer  them
to  doe  their  pleasure,  although  they  bee  readie  to  put
out  one  anothers  eies.  But  if  the  one  wound  the  other,
and  that  hee  can  bee  taken,  hee  is  wounded  in  the
same  part  of  the  bodie  by  the  Kinsmen  of  him  that  is  The  punish-
wounded.  Nay,  if  peradventure  death  follow  the  wound,  ment  of
the Murtherer  is slaine  by  the  Kinsmen of the dead,  murtherers

Lastly,  they  recompence  eie  for  eie,  tooth  for  tooth,  and  a™onf the
it r %t t>  1  1  •  t •  1  ij  Barbarians.

lire  tor  lire, but these  things  as  I  said,  very  seldome  £mv.  24. 19.

happen  among  them.  20.

565

A.D.
1557-

After  what
manner  the
villages  and
American
families  are
ordered.

The  transport-
ing of  the
American
Villages.

What  grounds
the  Americans
peculiarly
posse  sse.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  things  of  the  ground,  with  them  are  Cottages,
and  fields  farre  larger  then  might  be  required  for  main-
tenance of  the  Inhabitants.  As  touching  the  Cottages,
you  are  first  to  understand,  that  every  Village  containeth
sixe  hundred  men  :  wherefore  very  many  are  of  neces-
sitie  to  dwell  in  one  and  the  same  Cottage.  Notwith-
standing everie  Family  possessing  their  place  without
any  distance  betweene  (for  there  is  nothing  that  may
hinder,  but  that  from  one  end  unto  the  other  those
houses  lie  open,  which  for  the  most  part  are  extended
sixtie  paces  in  length)  everie  Master  of  a  Family  hath
his  wife  and  children  placed  apart.  Moreover,  you  are
to  observe  (which  surely  is  to  be  wondred  at)  that  the
Americans  inhabit  not  one  place  above  Hvq  or  sixe
moneths.  But  carrying  away  the  matter  and  herbe  Pindo,
whereof  their  houses  consist,  they  often  transport  their
Villages,  which  yet  alwaies  reteine  the  same  names.  Wee
our  selves  saw  some  Villages  remooved  a  mile  from
the  accustomed  place.  No  man  buildeth  a  Cottage,  which
he  is  not  compelled  to  finish,  nay,  to  build  and  plucke
downe,  about  twentie  times  before  his  death,  if  hee
have  attained  to  the  full  age  of  a  man.  Now  if  it  be
demanded  of  them,  why  they  change  their  habitation  so
often  ?  The  answere  is  easily  made.  That  the  changing
of  the  Aire  is  verie  profitable  for  the  health  :  besides,
that  if  they  should  alter  the  custome  of  their  ancestors,
they  should  presently  perish.  As  touching  the  fields,
everie  Moussacat  hath  certaine  particular  plats  of  ground,
which  he  chooseth  at  his  pleasure  wheresoever  he  thinketh
good  for  the  making  of  Gardens.  But  that  excessive
care  of  dividing  the  grounds,  setting  limits,  and  bounding
the  fields,  they  leave  to  our  Countrie  covetous  persons,
and  to  the  Lawyers.

Concerning  their  houshold  stufFe,  I  have  often  spoken
in  the  former  Chapters.  Yet  that  wee  may  not  omit
any  of  those  things  which  appertaine  to  the  houshold
government  of  the  Barbarians,  I  will  heere  recite  the
cunning  of  the  American  women  in  spinning  of  Cotton,

566

JOHN LERIUS  a.d.

1557-8.

whereof  there  is  manifold  use,  as  well  for  Ropes,  as  for

the  weaving  of  their  hanging  beds.

Being drawne out of the flockes, in stead of  all  How  &*

picking and carding;, they plucke it out somewhat in  American
i  1-11/'  j1,, 1  ,,  1 women  spin  the

length  with  the  ringers,  and  then  lay  it  upon  the  ground  cotten%

in  a heape  (for  they  know  not  how  to  use  Distaffes)  in

stead  of  a  Spindle  they  take  a  little  wand  of  the  thick-

nesse of a finger, and a foot in length, which they

thrust  through  a little wooden round ball, and fasten

the Bombasin  Cotton to the top of the small wand,

then  turning  that  Instrument  about  upon  their  thigh  (as

our Countriewomen doe  their Spindles) they  let  it  slip

out  of  their hands. That little round ball is turned

about, through  the houses  and streets,  like a  Wherve.

And after that manner they  spinne Threed, not only

course and  great  for  the  weaving  of  their  Cotton  Beds,

but  also  that  which  is  most  fine. Of  this  sort  I  brought

some into  France,  wherewith  I  caused  a  faire  stomacher

to  be  made  of  the  white Web, which was of so fine

and  small  a  Threed,  that  some  tooke  it  for  the  best  and

choicest  Silke.

They  call  their  Cotton  beds  Inis. The  women,  to  whom  [IV.  vii.

this  workmanship appertaineth, have their work-houses  !343-]

for their Loomes somewhat unlike to those of our J!tsj

Countrie  : for  they  are  neither  made  flat  and  plaine,  nor

consist  of  so  many  subtile  inventions,  but  being  framed

to the height of  their stature, they worke after their

manner,  and  also  beginne  their  weaving  from  the  bottome.

They  make  certaine  of  those  beds  in  the  forme  of  Nets,  How  the  Beds

and  others  thicker,  like  the  finest  Cloth. They  are  five  °f the

or  sixe  foot  long,  and  an elle broad  : unto either end ^fTf^j

Cotton loopes are added, unto the which they fasten  and  spred.

cords  :  and  hang  them  up  in  their  houses  upon  beames,

made  fit  for  this  use. But,  living  in  the  Campe,  or  in

the woods  for  hunting, or  on the shoares for fishing,

they  hang  them  upon  trees. These  beds  (that  wee  omit

nothing) when  they have  gathered  filth either through

humane  sweat,  or  by  the  smoake,  by  reason  of  the  con-

567

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1557-8.

tinuall  fire,  are  washed  cleane  after  this  manner.  The
women  gather  a  certaine  fruit  in  the  woods,  not  much
unlike  in  shape  unto  a  plaine  Gourd,  but  farre  larger,
so  that  every  Apple  may  scarce  bee  borne  with  one  hand  :
these  fruits  they  cut  into  small  pieces,  and  having  cast
them  into  some  very  great  earthen  vessell,  they  moisten
them  with  water.  Then,  they  vehemently  stirre  them
Fome,  which  about  with  a  sticke,  and  cause  a  fome  to  arise  from  them,
among  the through  the  helpe  whereof  (in  stead  of  Sope)  they  make

A mericans  •

supplieth  the  tne*r  Beds  so  cleane>  that  in  whitenesse  they  may  be
use  of  Sope.  comparable  with  the  Snowe,  or  Fullers  Clothes.  The
use  of  such  Beds  is  farre  more  commodious  in  watches,
then  that  the  Souldiers,  after  the  accustomed  manner,
should  tumble  in  Beds  of  grasse ;  for  they  both  foule
their  garments,  and  get  Lice,  and  that  which  is  more,
if  they  be  to  arise  unto  the  fight,  the  bodie  is  bruised
in  some  sort  with  the  Armes,  which  Souldiers  continually
weare :  which  in  the  siege  of  the  Citie  Sancerra,  we
proved  in  good  earnest :  For  the  Enemie  lay  a  whole
yeere  at  our  Ports.

That we may gather the rest of the Americane

houshold-stuffe into a short summe, the women (who

have the charge of  domesticall matters) prepare huge

The  American  Cannes, and make very  great  Earthen vessels,  wherein

women  make to put  tneir  Cao-uin. They  also make  Pots  of  divers

kandlUtkne' fasmons>  little  and  indifferent  Basons,  Platters,  and  other

earthen  things  of  that  sort,  vessels  which  on  the  outside  surely,

vessels.  are nothing smooth, but are so polished within, and

beautified  with  I  know  not  what  kinde  of  tincture,  which

presently  waxeth  hard,  so  that  those  women  may  easily

match  the  industrie  of  all  our  Countrie  people. Besides,

I know not what kinde of  ash-colour painting they

steepe in water,  and afterwards  make  divers formes  of

things in their vessels, within, and specially in those

wherein they lay up their Meale, and  other  kindes  of

meates, to bee preserved. The use therefore  of  them

is most acceptable, nay  those  vessels farre excell them

of  wood,  which  very  many  use  here  with  us. Yet  these

568

JOHN LERIUS  a.d.

1557-8-
Women-painters  have  this  fault,  that  when  they  have
pourtrayed  with  the  Pencill  whatsoever  they  please,  if
they  be  intreated  to  paint  the  same  againe,  they  are  not
possibly  able  to  doe  it :  because  they  have  no  example
proposed,  beside  the  industrie  of  their  owne  fantasie.
Hence  it  commeth  to  passe,  that  two  of  these  kinde  of
pictures  may  scarce  be  found  alike.

Moreover,  (as I have elsewhere said)  the  Barbarians  Pots  and  other
have Gourds, and other kindes of  fruits, which they  v*ssfls*  °f .
divide, and make hollow, and they use them  in  stead  -^  baskets  *
of  Cups, (which they  call Coui) and other  vessels of
divers  uses. They  have  also  Panniers,  large  and  meane,
and  likewise  Baskets,  very  finely  made  of  bul-rushes,  or
yellowish  grasse,  not  much  differing  from  Wheaten  straw.
These  they  call  Panacon,  and  in  them  they  put Meale
and  other  things  which  they  thinke  good.

Although the Tououpinambaultians receive  strangers  The

very  curteously,  yet  the  Frenchmen,  and  other  Strangers,  barbarians

who are ignorant  of  their Language,  were not  a  little  curteo"s.y
D .  ..  do'  entertain

astonished in the beginning, by reason or their un-  guests.

accustomed  behaviour. When  I  first conversed among

them (which happened about twenty dayes after our

arrivall  at  the  Castle  of  Colligne)  a  certaine  Interpreter

brought  me  to  certaine  Villages,  in  the  Continent : that

which I first saw, in their native Language is called

Ybouraci,  but  in  French,  Pepin,  by  the  name  of  a  certaine

Pilot,  who sometime  laded a ship  at  that  place  ; foure

miles  only  distant  from  our  Castle. In  the  very  entrance  A  pleasant

the Barbarians came thicke  about me,  and  spake unto  discourse  of

me in these words, Marape derere, Marape derere  ?  tho![ 5fA!nfs;/

that is, By what name are you called  ? which  words,  Wfhe  jut{our

surely, to mee were very barbarous, but  one of  them  when  he  first

taking  off  my  Hat,  put  it  upon  his  head  :  another  girdeth  went  unto  the

my Girdle and Sword unto his naked side : another  Ba™arians-

putteth  on  my  Coat : and  they  dull  me  with  their  cries,

and being clothed with my spoiles, runne hither  and

thither. I  then  thought  that  I  had  lost  all,  and  did  not

well knowe how safe I might be  among them. But,

569

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1557-8.

as  I  found  by  experience,  that  feare  arose  from  my
ignorance  of  their  customes,  for  they  use  to  doe  the  like
to  all  strangers,  especially  unto  them  whom  they  never
saw  before.  Now,  when  for  their  recreation,  they  had
walked  about  a  little  while  in  that  habite,  they  precisely
restore  every  thing  againe.  Then  I  was  advertised  by
the  Interpreter,  that  they  greatly  desired  to  understand
my  name :  but  in  declaring  that,  I  was  to  forbeare  usuall
names  with  us,  which  the  Barbarians  could  neither  pro-
nounce (for  in  stead  of  John,  they  said  Nian)  nor  yet
well  remember :  but  was  to  propound  somewhat  which
might  be  knowne  unto  them. The  matter  succeeded  so

m, „  happily,  that,  as  the  Interpreter  signified  unto  mee,  who

The  Authors  rr •' 1  -ir  11  *u t> r r

name  in  the was veiT skinull in tRe Brasilian Language,  my name

American Lerius signified  an  Oyster : I therefore answered, that

language. I  was  called  Leriy-oussou. They  liked  it  very  well,  and

[IV.  vii.  often using Teh, their Interjection  of  admiration,  they

!344-]  spake thus unto me. An excellent name surely, nor

have  we  ever found  any Mair,  who  had  such  a  name.

Their  They  have so good and sure a memorie,  that  if  they

memorie.  have once heard  any  mans  name,  they  never  forget it.

The same day, accompanied with the Interpreter, I

went  further,  and  turned  into the  Village  Euramiri,  so

called in their native Language,  but in French,  Goset,

after  the  name  of  a  certaine  Interpreter,  who  dwelt  there

some  little  while : wee came thither about Sunne set,

and found them dansing, and drinking  their Cao-uin,

by  reason  of  a  Captive,  whom  they  had  slaine  that  day.

I perceived the pieces of his flesh laid upon Boucan.

I thinke, you need not enquire  with how great and

horrible  feare  I  was  then stricken  : yet  that  was  but  a

small  matter,  if  it  be  compared  with  the  feare  wherewith

I  was  afterward  astonished. Wee  entred  into  a  Cottage,

and  sate upon the hanging beds,  after the accustomed

fashion ;  the  women  lament  after  that  manner  which  we

will  declare,  and  the  Master  of  the  Familie  entertaineth

us with friendly words. The Interpreter who was

acquainted  with  these  matters,  and  who  was  very  much

57o

JOHN LERIUS  a.d.

1557-8-
delighted  with  their  drinkings,  leaveth  me  unsaluted,  and
ignorant  of  all  things,  and  went  away  to  them  that  were
dansing,  and  drinking.  But  being  wearie,  after  I  had
refreshed  my  selfe  with  Meale,  and  certaine  other  meates
that  were  set  before  us,  I  lay  downe  in  the  bed.  Not-
withstanding, through  the  noise  of  their  dansing,  drinking,
and  devouring  of  the  Captive,  I  was  presently  awaked,
and  (which  was  the  chiefest  matter)  by  one  comming
unto  mee,  who  carried  the  rosted  foot  of  the  Captive
in  his  hand,  and  demanding  of  mee,  as  I  afterwards
understood,  (for  then,  I  conceived  not  his  words)  whether
I  would  eate  thereof;  I  was  so  astonished  through  feare,
that  I  was  altogether  freed  from  drowsinesse  and  sleepe.
And  I  verily  beleeved,  by  that  gesture,  which  I  tooke
in  the  worst  part,  that  the  Barbarian  had  shewed  me,
that  my  flesh  should  shortly  after  be  devoured  after  the
same  manner.  Moreover,  as  feare  begetteth  suspicion,
it  came  presently  into  my  minde,  that  the  Interpreter
had  betrayed,  and  delivered  mee  into  the  Barbarians
hands.  Wherefore,  if  I  had.  had  any  way  open  to  flee,
I  had  quickly  taken  my  flight.  But  they  stood  round
about  mee,  whose  minde  I  did  not  sufficiently  knowe,
for  they  attempted  no  evill  against  mee.  Now  being
confirmed  in  feare,  I  unluckily  ghessed,  that  I  should
presently  have  beene  slaine,  wherefore  I  passed  the  whole
night  in  powring  forth  prayers  unto  God.  At  the  first
dawning  of  the  day,  the  Interpreter  (who  had  passed  all
the  night  in  pleasure  with  the  Barbarians)  returned  unto
mee,  and  saw  mee  pale,  and  taken  with  a  Fever,  where-
upon he  demanded  whether  I  were  ill  at  ease,  &  whether
I  had  not  quietly  rested.  Then  I  began  sharply  to
reprove  him,  who  had  left  me  alone  among  those  Bar-
barians, whose  speach  I  understood  not  at  all.  Hee
openeth  the  whole  matter  to  them  who  stood  by  me
all  the  night,  to  congratulate  my  comming :  they  signifie,
that  they  perceived  the  matter  in  some  sort,  and  yet
were  sorrie,  that  I  had  passed  that  night  in  so  great  feare
of  them. And  at  length  they  breake  out  into  dissolute

57i

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1557-8.

laughter,  which  was  the  solace  and  comfort  of  that  my
feare.  From  thence  I  and  that  Interpreter,  went  unto
certaine  other  Villages.

These  are  the  Rites  which  the  Barbarians  observe  in
entertayning  Guests.  First  of  all,  as  soone  as  the  Guest
entreth  into  the  house  of  that  Moussacat,  which  hee
hath  chosen  to  bee  his  Host,  (which  is  to  be  done  in
every  Village,  nor  are  you  to  turne  into  another,  unlesse
you  will  incurre  his  displeasure)  he  must  presently  sit
downe  upon  a  Cotton  hanging  Bed,  and  remaine  quietly
there  a  while  without  speaking  any  word.  By  and  by,
the  women  come  unto  him,  compasse  the  Bed  about,
and  sitting  on  the  ground,  put  their  hands  on  their  eyes,
The  American  and  bewayling  the  happie  comming  of  the  Guest  after
women  ^s manner, they rehearse innumerable things in his

comming  of commendation. As  for  example: Have you taken so
Guests.  much  paines  to  come  unto  us : you are  good,  you  are

valiant. But  if  the  Guest  be  a  Frenchman,  they  adde,
you have brought very many excellent merchandises
unto us, which we want here. To conclude, those
women,  as  hath beene  said,  entertaine  Guests  weeping,
with  such  like  flattering speeches. But  the  Guest  who
sitteth  on  a  Cotton  bed,  if  he  desire  to  procure  favour
The  gesture  of  with his Host, settling his countenance, unlesse hee
the  Guest meane  to  weepe  in  good  earnest  (as  I  saw  some  of  our
d Americans men  °^  so  wea^e  a  courage,  that  teares  were  forced  from
them,  through  the  howling  lamentation  of  these  women)
he  must  of  necessitie  counterfeit  weeping,  answering  some-
what at  the  least,  and  fetching  deepe  sighes. This  most
How  pleasant  salutation  being  ended  by  the  women,  Moussacat^

Moussacat  ^hat  jS)  ^e  Master  of  the  Familie,  being  busily  employed
enname  -^  making  of  an  Arrow,  casts  not  so  much  as  his  eyes
for  a  certaine  time  upon  the  Guest,  as  if  he  marked
nothing.  At  length  comming  unto  the  Guest,  hee
speaketh  unto  him  in  these  words :  Ere  Ioube  ?  that
is,  Are  you  come  ?  then,  how  doe  you  ?  what  seeke
you  ?  &c.  After,  hee  demandeth,  whether  you  be
hungrie  ? if  you  grant  that  you  are,  presently  he  com-

572

JOHN LERIUS  a.d.

1557-8.
mandeth  meates  of  divers  kindes  to  be  set  before  you
in  earthen  vessels,  to  wit,  Meale,  which  with  them
supplieth  the  place  of  bread,  Venison,  Fowle,  Fish,  and
other  things  of  that  kinde:  but  because  there  is  no  use
with  them,  for  Tables,  and  Benches,  all  those  things  are
set  on  the  ground.  As  touching  Drink,  if  you  desire
Cao-uin,  &  that  it  be  in  the  house,  it  shall  presently
be  given  you.  Lastly,  after  the  women  have  stoutly
solemnized  the  comming  of  the  Guests  with  weeping,
they  come  unto  them  bringing  Fruits,  and  other  trifling
Presents,  and  so,  secretly,  demand  Combes,  Looking-
glasses,  and  little  Beades  of  glasse,  which  they  winde
about  their  armes.

Moreover,  if  you  will  lodge  all  night  in  that  Village,  [IV.  vii.
the  Moussacat  commandeth  a  very  neat  and  cleane  bed  !345-]

to  be  hanged  up  for  you,  round  about  which  he  will
cause  smal  fires  to  be  kindled,  and  often  quickned  in
the  night  with  Bellows,  which  they  call  Tatapecoua,  not
much  unlike  the  little  round  Fannes,  wherewith  the
nicer  and  more  delicate  sort  of  women  with  us,  defend
the  scorching  of  fire  from  their  faces.  Not  because  that
Countrie  is  subject  unto  cold,  but  by  reason  of  the
moisture  of  the  night,  and  especially,  because  it  is  their
usuall  manner.  Now  seeing  we  have  chanced  to  mention
Fire,  which  they  call  Tata,  and  Smoake  Tatatin,  I  thinke
it  needfull  that  I  declare  the  excellent  manner  of  kind-
ling the  same.  They  have  two  kindes  of  wood,  whereof
the  one  is  very  soft,  but  the  other  very  hard,  which
they  use  after  this  manner,  to  kindle  fire.  They  sharpen
a  twig  of  a  foot  long  of  that  hard  wood  at  the  one
end  like  a  Spindle,  and  sticke  the  point  thereof  in  any
piece  of  that  soft  wood,  then  laying  it  on  the  ground,
or  upon  a  stocke,  they  turne  that  twig  swiftly  about
with  the  palmes  of  their  hands,  as  if  they  would  pierce
an  hole  through  the  piece  of  wood  which  lieth  under.
Through  that  so  swift  and  violent  motion,  smoake  is
not  onely  raised,  but  also  fire  ;  putting  Cotton  unto  it,
or  certaine  drie  leaves  (in  stead  of  our  Countrie  tinder)

573

A.D.

1557-8-

How  strangers
requite  their
Host.

The  Bar-
barians carrie
Strangers  upon
their  shoulders .

Two  legged
amblers.

The  Bar-
barians prac-
tise charitie
even  by  the
direction  of
nature.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

fire  is  very aptly  ingendred  : whereof  I my selfe  have
made  triall.

After  that  the  Guests  have  refreshed  themselves  with
meate,  and  lodged  after  the  manner  which  we  have
declared,  if  they  be  liberal!,  they  use  to  give  unto  the
men  Knives,  Scizzers,  and  Pinsers  fit  for  the  plucking
out  of  the  haires  of  their  beards  :  to  the  women,
Combes,  and  Looking-glasses  :  and  to  the  children,  Fish-
hookes.  But,  if  the  Guest  want  victuals,  when  he  hath
agreed  of  the  price,  he  may  carrie  them  away.  More-
over, because  they  want  all  kinde  of  beasts  of  burden,
they  are  all  of  necessitie  to  travell  on  foot.  If  Strangers
bee  wearie,  and  give  a  Knife  to  any  of  the  Barbarians,
he  presently  offereth  his  helpe  to  carrie  him  that  is
wearie.  I  my  selfe  when  I  lived  in  those  Countries,
was  divers  times  carried  by  those  Porters,  and  that  surely
two  miles  journey  together.  And  if  wee  admonished
them  to  rest  a  little,  they  laughed  at  us  with  these
words  ;  What  ?  Thinke  you  that  wee  are  so  effeminate,
or  of  so  weake  a  courage,  that  wee  should  faint,  and
lie  downe  under  our  burden  ?  I  would  rather  carrie
you  all  the  day  without  any  intermission.  But  we
breaking  out  into  laughter,  wondered  at  those  two  legged
Hackneyes,  and  encouraging  them,  said  :  let  us  therefore
proceed  on  the  way.

They  exercise  naturall  charitie  abundantly  among
themselves,  for  they  daily  give  one  unto  another,  both
Fish,  Meale,  and  Fruits,  and  also  other  things  :  nay,
they  would  be  very  sorrie,  if  they  saw  their  neighbours
want  those  things  which  they  have.  They  also  use  the
like  liberalise  towards  Strangers  :  whereof,  it  shall  be
sufficient,  to  bring  one  example.  In  the  tenth  Chapter
of  this  Booke,  I  made  mention  of  a  certaine  danger,
which  my  selfe,  and  two  other  Frenchmen  escaped,  to
wit,  that  we  were  in  great  perill  of  death,  by  reason  of
an  huge  Lizard  which  met  us  in  the  way  :  at  that  time,
wee  wandred  two  dayes  through  the  middle  of  the
Woods  out  of  the  way,  and indured  no  meane  hunger,

574

JOHN LER1US  a.d

1557-8.

and  at  length  came  unto  a  certaine  Village  called  Pavo,
where  wee  had  lodged  before.  There  wee  were  most
liberally  entertained  by  the  Barbarians.  For,  having
heard  the  troubles  which  wee  had  suffered,  and  specially
the  great  danger  wherein  we  were,  that  we  were  likely
to  have  beene  devoured  by  wilde  beasts,  but  chiefly,  that
wee  were  in  danger  to  bee  slaine  by  the  Margaiates,
our  common  enemies,  neere  unto  whose  borders  wee
approached  unawares  :  and,  seeing  also  the  hurts  and
scratches  of  thornes,  wherewith  our  skin  was  miserably
rent,  they  tooke  our  harmes  so  grievously,  that  I  may
here  truly  affirme,  that  the  faigned  flatteries  where-
with our  Countrie  people  use  to  comfort  the  distressed,
are  farre  from  the  sincere  humanitie  of  that  Nation,
which  we  call  Barbarous. For, they washed our feet  A  notable

with  cleare  water  (which  put  me  in  minde  of  the  ancient  example  of  the
N  r  •..  •  .  1  curtesle  of  the

custome)  every  one  or  us  sitting  apart  upon  an  hanging  barbarians

Bed. Then the Masters of the Families, who had

alreadie provided meates to be prepared for us, and

caused  new  Meale  to  be  ground,  which (as  I  elsewhere

said)  is nothing inferiour unto the crumme of  white

bread, in goodnesse, presently, after wee had  beene  a

little  refreshed,  commanded  all  the  best  meates,  to  wit,

Venison,  Fcwle,  Fish,  and  the  most  exquisite  and  choicest

Fruits, wherewith they continually  abound, to bee  set

before  us. Moreover,  the  night  approching,  the  Mous-

sacat  our  Host,  removeth  all  the  children  from  us,  that

wee  might  the  more  quietly  rest. The next  day  after,

early  in the morning, he commeth unto us, and de-

mandeth, goe to Atourassap, (that is, dearly beloved

Confederates,)  have  you  quietly  rested  this night  ? wee

answered,  very  quietly. Then  saith  he  ; my  sonnes,  rest

your  selves  yet  a  while,  for,  yesterday,  I perceived  that

you  were  very  wearie. To  be  briefe,  I  am not  able  to

expresse  with  words, how  friendly, and  curteously  wee

were entertained. But  wee never travelled farre  from

home  without  a  Sachell  full  of  Merchandises,  which  might

serve  us in stead of  money among those Barbarians.

575

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1557-8.

Departing  therefore thence,  we gave our Hosts,  what

wee thought good  : to wit, Knives, Sizzers, Pinsers,

to  the men  : Combes, Looking-glasses, Bracelets, and

glassen  Beades,  to  the  women  :  and  Fish-hookes  to  the

children.

How  much  the \  one  day  turned  out  of  the  way  to  lodge  in  a  certaine

Barbarians Village, and  was  requested by my Moussacat, to  shew

knives  and n^m  wnat  I  nad  in  my  Sachell,  who  commanded  a  great

other  earthen  vessell  to  bee  brought,  wherein  to  put  my  mer-

merchandises. chandises  : I  tooke  them  all  out,  and  set  them  in  order :

[IV.  vii. whereat he greatly wondring, calleth the rest of  the

J346-]  Barbarians  unto him, and saith. See I pray  you, my

good  friends, what manner of  man I have entertained

with  me  : doth  it  not  manifestly  appeare  that  he  is  very

rich,  seeing  he  carrieth  so  great  wealth  about  him  ?  yet

those  would scarce have beene sold at  Paris, for two

silver  Cardicues. Then,  because  (as  we  have  said)  they

love  liberall  men, that I might procure authoritie  and

favour  among  them, I gave my Moussacat  the  best  of

my  Knives  before  them  all,  which  he  esteemed  no  lesse,

then  any  one  with  us  would  regard  a  golden  chaine,  of

very  great  price,  bestowed  upon  him.

If  peradventure  it  happen,  that  any  of  them  fall  sicke,
when  the  inward  and  familiar  friend  of  the  sicke  person
hath  declared  the  grieved  part,  one  sucketh  it  with  his
mouth,  sometimes  also  that  service  is  performed  by  cer-
Pages,  the  taine  impostors,  which  they  call  Pages,  that  is,  Physicians,
Barbarians  or  Surgeans.  (But  they  are  a  kinde  of  People  differing
from  the  Caraibes,  whereof  I  have  spoken  before.)  And
they  also  say,  that  they  draw  out  the  paine,  and  prolong
the  life.  They  are  sometimes  sicke  of  Fevers,  and  other
common  diseases  ;  but,  not  so  often,  as  wee  use  to  bee.
Moreover,  they  are  troubled  with  a  certaine  incurable
disease,  which  they  call  Pians.  This,  for  the  most  part
proceedeth  of  lust  :  yet,  I  have  seene  the  little  children
infected  therewith,  not  unlike  the  manner  of  our  Countrie
Measels.  This  contagion  breaketh  out  into  pustles,
broader then a thumbe, which overspread the whole

576

JOHN LERIUS  a.d.

1557-8.
bodie,  and  also  the  face  it  selfe.  They  never  give  meate  How  the.
to  the  sicke,  unlesse  he  desire  it,  although  he  be  readie  ,a> rJn^ns
to  perish  through  hunger.  Moreover,  although  it  be  s^^
the  most  grievous  disease,  they  that  are  healthie,  never
cease  dansing,  singing,  and  drinking  after  the  accustomed
manner,  to  dull  and  wearie  the  miserable  sicke  person
with  the  noise  :  nor  doth  he  complaine,  because  he
knoweth,  that  he  shall  not  prevaile  at  all.  But,  if  hee
die,  that  singing  (especially  if  he  be  a  Master  of  any
familie)  is  suddenly  turned  into  teares,  and  so  great
lamentation  is  made,  that  if  by  chance  we  turned  into
a  certaine  Village,  at  the  time  of  that  mourning,  we
were  of  necessitie  to  goe  to  some  other  place,  or  passe
the  night  without  sleepe.  First  of  all,  not  without
admiration,  the  women  are  heard,  which  so  crie  out  and
exclaime,  that  you  would  say  they  were  the  howling  of
Wolves  or  Dogs,  and  no  humane  voices.  But  they  powre
forth  these  complaints  with  a  trembling  voice.  That
most  valiant  man  is  dead,  who  sometimes  gave  us  so
many  Captives  to  be  devoured.  Then  the  rest  say,  O
notable  Hunter,  O  most  excellent  Fisher,  O  valiant
Killer  of  the  Portugals,  and  Margaiates.  To  be  briefe,
those  women  provoking  one  another  to  mourning,  and
embracing  armes  together,  desist  not  from  these  lamen-
tations, and  praises,  before  the  dead  bodie  be  brought
forth.

Lastly,  these  Barbarian  women  imitate  the  Bearneansian
custome  in  bewayling  their  dead  men,  whom,  as  I  have
heard,  they  follow  with  these  complaints.  La  mi  amou,
la  mi  amou,  cara  rident,  ceil  desplendou,  cama  leuge,
bet  dansadou  :  La  me  balen,  lo  m'esburbat  :  mati  depes  :
fort  tard  cougat.  that  is,  My  friend,  my  friend,  with
a  merrie  countenance,  shining  eyes,  swift  legs,  notable
danser,  strong  and  valiant,  thou  diddest  arise  early,  and
goe  late  to  bed.  The  Vascone  women  also,  who  adde
these  things  to  the  former,  Yere,  yere,  o  le  bet  rene-
gadou,  o  le  bet  iougadou  qu'bere  :  that  is,  Alas,  alas,
how  stout  and  deepe  a  Swearer  was  hee,  how  notable
xvi  577  2  o

A.D.

1557-8-

The  Graves
and  rites  of
buriall  of  the
Americans.

A  very
devillish

Dan.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

a  Gamester  ?  Moreover,  to  those  complaints  whereof
we  spoke,  the  Barbarian  women  often  adde  this  burden
of  the  Song,  He  is  dead,  he  is  dead,  whom  we  now
lament.  Then  the  men  answere  :  Alas,  he  is  dead,  and
wee  shall  see  him  no  more,  untill  wee  danse  with  him
behind  the  Mountaines,  as  our  Caraibes  teach.  Those
howling  lamentations  are  prolonged  for  sixe  houres  ;  for,
they  use  not  to  keepe  their  Dead  any  longer  unburied.
Then  digging  a  Trench,  not  long  as  we  use,  but  cir-
cular, like  a  great  Drie-fat,  they  burie  the  dead  bodie
bolt  upright.  The  dead  Masters  of  Families,  they  burie
in  the  middest  of  their  houses,  wrapped  in  their  Cotton
bed,  with  feathers,  and  other  things,  wherein  they
delighted  in  their  life  time,  laide  in  the  Grave.  Since
their  commerce  with  the  French  they  have  forborne  to
put  precious  things  in  the  Graves  :  but  they  retained  a
strange  and  very  devillish  Superstition.  The  first  night
after  the  Funerall,  the  Barbarians,  who  are  thus  per-
swaded,  that  Aygnan,  unlesse  he  found  other  meates
prepared,  would  digge  up  the  dead  bodie,  and  devoure
it,  set  no  small  store  of  vessels,  with  Meale,  Fish,  Flesh,
and  other  meats  carefully  prepared,  and  also  great  pots
full  of  their  drinke  Cao-uin,  about  the  Grave.  Which
Sacrifice  they  performe  so  long,  untill  they  thinke  that
the  dead  bodie  bee  wholly  consumed.  From  the  which
errour  they  were  the  more  hardly  removed,  because
certaine  Neustrian  Interpreters,  by  example  of  the  Sacri-
fices of  Bell,  divers  times  before  our  comming,  privily
stole  away  those  meates.  Through  which  fact  they  so
confirmed  the  Barbarians  in  errour,  that  although  we
shewed  them,  that  those  meates  set  downe  in  the  evening,
remained  in  the  morning,  yet  with  great  labour  and  diffi-
cultie  we  disswaded  very  few  from  that  errour.

As  often  as  the  Barbarians  transport  their  Villages  unto
another  place,  after  the  manner  which  wee  have  declared,
they  put  certaine  coverings  of  the  herbe  Pindo  upon
the  Graves  of  the  Dead.  Whereby  it  commeth  to  passe,
that  Travellers  may take notice  of  a  certaine  forme  of

578

JOHN LERIUS  ad.

1557-8.
a place  of  buriall. At which places, if  at any time
wandring  in  the  Woods,  they  remember  the  dead  men,
they  make  so  great  lamentation,  that  they  may  be  heard
farre  ofF.

Worse then their howlings here, worse then their
former  man-eatings,  is  the  tragicall  famine  which  attended
Lerius  and  his  fellowes  in  their  returne,  besides  dangers
of  shipwracke,  resolution of  some  to kill  their  fellowes  [IV.  vii.
for  food;  Thether  by  Sea  in  500.  fathome  depth  seeming  I347-J

like  a  marish,  the  herbes  yellowish,  with  Berries  like
those  of  Juniper,  the  leaves  like  Rue,  with  threads  like
grownd  Ivie  floting  on  the  Sea,  but  not  safely  handled ;
in  some  places  redde  filth  like  coxcombes  swimming ;
the  touching  of  which  caused  the  hand  presently  to
swell)  as  also  his  Brasilian  Dictionarie,  &c.  for  brevitie
I  have  omitted.  Villagagnons  Apostasie  from  the  Religion
was  the  cause  of  their  departure ;  whose  malice  pursued
them  homewards  to  pronounce  them  to  bee  burned  for
Heresie  upon  his  accusation  at  home  :  as  they  were
faine  to  live  from  him  in  Brasill.  Wee  will  leave
this  Religious  Frenchman,  and  acquaint  you  with  a
Germane.

END OF VOLUME XVI,

579

274

■KOto*  sect. FZ3  2  7I985

PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY

G

159

P905

1905

v.16

cop.  2
