Hakluytus Posthumus, or Purchas His Pilgrimes, Vol. 14 (Samuel Purchas, 1625)
==========================================================
Purchas His Pilgrimes (1625) - the 17th century's great sequel to Hakluyt; the largest voyage collection of its age, preserving dozens of narratives otherwise lost. The 20-volume MacLehose reprint (Glasgow, 1905-07), the standard complete edition. Vol. 14 of 20.

Hakluytus  Posthumus

or

Purchas His  Pilgrimes

In  Twenty  Volumes

Volume  XIV

GLASGOW

PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY

ROBERT MACLEHOSE 6* COMPANY LTD. FOR

JAMES MACLEHOSE AND SONS, PUBLISHERS

TO THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW

MACMILLAN AND CO. LTD.  LONDON

THE MACMILLAN CO.  NEW YORK

THE  MACMILLAN  CO.  OF  CANADA  TORONTO

SIMPKIN, HAMILTON AND CO.  LONDON

MACMILLAN AND BOWES  CAMBRIDGE

DOUGLAS AND FOULIS  EDINBURGH

MCMVI

Hakluytus Posthumus

or

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning a History of the World

in Sea Voyages and Lande Travells

by Englishmen and others

SAMUEL PURCHAS, B.D.

VOLUME  SJ£

JiL

el-loo

Glasgow
James MacLehose and Sons

Publishers  to  the  University

MCMVI

Dl  2

\

% W

"9  ST

/9of

-

THE TABLE.

PAGE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs  in
the  fourth  Booke  of  the  Second  part  of
Purchas  his  Pilgrims.

CHAP.  I.

A  Voyage  set  forth  by  the  Right  Worshipfull  Sir  Thomas
Smith,  and  the  rest  of  the  Muscovie  Company,  to
Cherry  Hand  :  and  for  a  further  Discoverie  to  bee
made  towards  the  North-Pole,  for  the  likelihood  of  a
Trade  or  a  passage  that  way,  in  a  Ship  called  the
Amitie,  of  burthen  seventie  tunnes  ;  in  the  which  I
-  Jonas  Poole  was  Master,  having  foureteene  Men  and
one  Boy  :  Anno  Dom.  1610H.  .  .  .  .  1

Jonas  Pooles  Voyage  for  Northerne  discovery.  Jonas
Pooles  Discoverie  of  Greenland.  Names  of  places.
Jonas  Poole  giveth  names  to  divers  places  in  Greenland.
Close-cove  danger.  Crosse-Road.  Beasts  in  Green-
land. Variation.  Whales.  Sea-unicornes  borne.
Greenland-discovery.  Beares  and  Deere  slaine.  Young
Beares  taken.  Sea-coale  found.  Bucks  fat.  Ice  and
fogs,  hinderance  to  Northerne  Discoveries.

A  briefe  note  what  Beasts,  Fowles,  and  Fishes  were  seene

in  this  Land.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  23

Beasts,  fowles  and  fishes  found  in  Greenland.

[Chap.  II.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued,  page

CHAP.  II.

A  Commission  for  Jonas  Poole  our  Servant,  appointed  Master
of  a  small  Barke  called  the  Elizabeth,  of  fiftie  tunnes
burthen,  for  Discovery  to  the  Northward  of  Greeneland,
given  the  last  day  of  May,  1610. H.P. ...  24

Instructions  to  Edge  and  Poole  for  Northerne  discovery.

CHAP.  III.

A  briefe  Declaration  of  this  my  Voyage  of  Discovery  to
Greeneland,  and  towards  the  West  of  it,  as  followeth  :
being  set  forth  by  the  right  Worshipfull  Sir  Thomas
Smith,  Governour  of  the  right  Worshipfull  Company
of  new  Trades,  &c.  written  by  Jonas  Poole. H.  .  34

Greeneland  Voyage  Anno  161 1.  Ice,  Whales,  Morses.
Mary  Margaret  lost.  Woodcocke  and  Marmaduke.
The  Allen  a  strange  qualited  fowle.  Other  fowles  and
beasts.

CHAP.  IIII.

A  Relation  written  by  Jonas  Poole  of  a  Voyage  to  Greene-
land, in  the  yeere  161 2.  with  two  Shippes,  the  one
called  the  Whale,  the  other  the  Seahorse,  set  out  by  the
right  Worshipfull  the  Muscovie  Merchants. H.  .  41

Dutch  Merchant  slaine.  Thomas  Marmadukes  discoveries.
Nicolas  Woodcock.  Morses  and  Whales.  Basks  and
Hollanders.

CHAP.  V.

A  Journall  of  the  Voyage  made  to  Greeneland  with  sixe
English  Shippes  and  a  Pinnasse,  in  the  yeere  161 3.
written  by  Master  William  Baffin. H.P.  ... 47

Baffins  quick  voyage  to Greenland. Spanish and Dutch
there. Kings  Armes  and  Crosse  set  up. Th.  Bonner
vi

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Pilot  to  the  Dutch.  Midnight  Sunne.  Crosse  set  up.
Biscainers  and  Dutchmen.  Many  Whales  killed.
Rocks  full  of  Foule.  Greeneland.  Refraction  altered
with  the  aire.

CHAP.  VI.

A Voyage of  Discovery to Greeneland, &c. An. 1614.

written  by  Ro.  Fotherbye. H.P. .  .  .  .  61

Fotherbies  Greenland  discovery.  Troubles  by  Ice.  Hack-
luyts  Head-land  in  Greenland.  Many  Holland  ships.
Kings  Armes  set  up  in  Trinitie  Harbour.  Cape
Barren.  Sadie  Hand.  Hackluits  Head-land.  Faire-
Haven.  Further  Discovery  of  Greenland  Coasts.  ,
Fotherby  and  Baffin.  Wiches-sound.  Sir  Thomas
Smiths  Inlet.  Holland  Discoverers.  Cause  of  Ice  in
the  Seas.  Red-clifFe  Sound.  Point  Welcome.  Kings
Armes  erected  at  Point  Welcome.  Point  Deceit.
Corpo  Santo,  either  before  or  after  a  storme.

CHAP.  VII.

A  true  report  of  a  Voyage,  Anno  161 5.  for  Discoverie  of
Seas,  Lands,  and  Hands,  to  the  Northwards  ;  as  it  was
performed  by  Robert  Fotherbie,  in  a  Pinnasse  of
twenty  tunnes  called  the  Richerd  of  London. H.P. .  82

Northerne  Discoverie,  Error  of  Gronland.  Kings  Armes
set  up. Mount  Hackluyt  in  Sir  Thomas  Smiths  Hand.

A  Letter  of  Robert  Fotherby  to  Captain  Edge,  written  in

Crosse-rode,  July  15.  161 5. .  .  .  . .  89

Fotherbyes  opinion  and  advice. King  of  Denmarks  ships.

CHAP.  VIII.

Divers  other  Voyages  to  Greenland,  with  Letters  of  those
which  were  there  employed,  communicated  to  me  by
Master  William  Heley,  in  the  yeere  161 7.  161 8.  1 619.
1620.  1621.  1623 91

Edges  Hand  and  Witches  Hand  discovered.  Store  of
lading 161 7.

vii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

A  Letter  of  Master  Robert  Salmon  to  Master  Sherwin. In

Sir  Thomas  Smiths  Bay,  the  24.  of  June  1618.  .  .  94

Hurt  by  Ice  :  more  by  Hollanders.

A  Letter  of  Master  Th. Sherwin  :  Bell-sound  this  29.  of

June,  1618 95

A Letter of  James Beversham to Master  Heley. From

Faire-haven,  the  12.  of  July,  1618. .  .  .  . 96

Greenland  Letters,  161 8.

A  Letter  of  John  Chambers  to  W.  Heley,  Bel-sound,  June

16.  1619 98

A  Letter  of  J.  Catcher  to  Master  Heley  from  Faire-haven.

Laus  Deo,  this  seventeenth  of  June,  1620.  .  .  .100

Holland Nation honorable, notwithstanding some foule
mouthes.

A  Letter  of  Robert  Salmon  from  Sir  Thomas  Smiths  Bay,

July  6.  1621 101

Laus Deo in Faire Haven, the foure and twentieth of

June,  1623 103

Salmon  and  Catchers  Greeneland  Letters.

Master Catchers Letter  : the nine and twentieth of

June 1623. ........ 105

Hollanders  strong  Fleete. Greeneland  Letters.

Captaine  William  Goodlards  Letter :  Bel-sound  this  eight

of  July, 1623.  .  .  . .  . .  .106

Peter  Goodlard  drowned. Difference  of  Whales.

CHAP.  IX.

The  late  changes  and  manifold  alterations  in  Russia  since
Ivan  Vasilowich  to  this  present,  gathered  out  of  many
Letters  and  Observations  of  English  Embassadours  and
other  Travellers  in  those  parts.  .  .  .  .108

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  *age

§.  I.  Of  the  reigne  of  Ivan,  Pheodore  his  sonne  ;  and  of

Boris. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .108

Pestilence  and  Famine  in  Russia.  Goodnesse  truest  Great-
nesse.  Supersuperlatives  of  crueltie  by  Ivan  Vasilowich
Beala. Russe  Merchants  too  much  Russian.

The  most  solemne  and  magnificent  coronation  of  Pheodor
Ivanowich,  Emperour  of  Russia,  &c.  the  tenth  of  June,
in  the  yeere  1 5  84.  seene  and  observed  by  Master
Jerom  Horsey  Gentleman,  and  servant  to  her  Majestic 1 14

Ivans  good  parts,  death,  &c.  Pompous  Ceremonies  of
Russia  Emperours  Coronation.  Solemnitie  of  Pheodors
Coronation.  Strife  for  precedence.  Sir  Jerom  Horseys
double  employment  to  and  from  Russia.  Divorce
subscribed  by  300.  Boiarens.  Boris  plots.  Demetrius
slain.  Pheodore  dieth.  Empresse  a  Nun.  Boris  saith
nay  oft,  but  takes.  Solemne  Coronation.  Boris  his
Issue,  Acts  and  Arts.

§.  2.  Occurrents  of  principall  Note  which  happened  in
Russia,  in  the  time  while  the  Honorable  Sir  Thomas
Smith  remained  there  Embassadour  from  his  Majestic 132

Sir  T.  Smiths  Embassage  to  Russia  :  his  entertaynment.
Pompous  magnificence.  Solemne  audience  by  Emp.
Boris  and  his  sonne.  Glorious  Feast.  Q.  Elizabeths
gloric  Drinking  Ceremonies.  Newes  of  Demetrius.
John  of  Denmarke  and  Oucsinia.  Boris  his  promises  ;
sudden  death  ;  rites  ;  person  ;  sonne.  Vice  a  slavery  :
politike  charitic  Basman  shifteth.  Mutinic  Dem.
his  letters.  Mosco  in  uprorc  Emp.  and  his  mothers
death.  Emperour  Boris  his  Charter  to  the  English
Moscovie  Company.

§.  3.  One  pretending  himselfe  to  be  Demetrius,  with  the
Popes  and  Poles  helpes  attaineth  the  Russian  Empire  :
his  Arts,  Acts,  Manage,  favour  to  the  English,  and
miserable  end.  ......

Jesuits  coine,  Pope  makes  currant  ;  Pole  paints  over  a  new
Demetrius.  Thuanus  his  Historie  of  the  Russian
Emperor  Demetrius.  Demetry's  Embassy  to  the
Pole.

157

IX

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

The  Copie  of  a  Letter  sent  from  the Emperor  Demetry

Evanowich,  otherwise  called  Grishco  Otreapyove. . 164.

The  Copie  of  the  translation  of  a  Commission  that  was
sent  from  the  Mosko,  from  the  Emperour  Demetry
Evanowich,  alias  Gryshca  Otreapyove  by  a  Courtier
named  Gavaryla  Samoylowich  Salmanove,  who  was
sent  downe  to  the  Castle  of  Archangell,  to  Sir  Thomas
Smith,  then  Lord  Embassadour.  .  .  .  .166

Letter  and  Passe  to  S.  John  Merick.

The  Copie  of  the  Translation  of  a  new  Priviledge  that  was
given  to  the  Company,  by  the  Emperour  Demetry
Evanowich,  otherwise  called  Gryshca  Otreapyove,  the
which  Priviledge  was  sent  into  England  over-land  by
Olyver  Lysset  Merchant,  and  servant  to  the  foresaid
Company. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .168

The  Messengers  instruction  and  speech  to  Sir  Th.  Smith.
Embass.  Demetry's  Charter  of  Priviledges  to  English
Merchants.

The  Copie  of  the  translation  of  a  Contract,  made  by  the
Emperour  Demetry  Evanowich,  otherwise  called
Gryscha  Otreapyove,  and  the  daughter  of  the
Palatine  Sendamersko,  chiefe  Generall  of  Poland. . 172

Contract-compact  betwixt  Demetrius  and  Palatin  Senda-
mersko. Demetrius  his  compact ;  marriage  ;  securitie  ;
late  provision.  Peter  Basman  and  Demetrius  slaine.
Merchants  spoiled.  Relations  of  Demetrius  his  vices,
&c.  and  of  Suiskey.  Demetrius  his  vision  and  death.
Cap.  Gilbert.

§.  4.  The  Copie  of  the  Translation  of  a  Letter  sent  from
the  new  Emperour  Vassily  Evanowich  Shoskey  to  the
Kings  Majesty  by  Master  John  Mericke. .  .  .184.

Suiskys  letter.  Russe  story  of  Demetrius  in  a  letter  of
Suisky  to  K.  James.  Romish  Religion,  Jesuites.
Russian  Empire.  Popes  Letter.  Election  of  Swiskey.
New  Patent. Polish  insolencies. Lot  oracle. Suiskys

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

vices  and  embassage.  Demetry's  multiplied.  Poles
invasion.  King  Charles  his  letter  of  agreement  with
voluntaries.  English  Voluntaries  serve  the  Sweden.
Mutinie  worst  tempest.  Fearfull  jealousie,  an
inhospitall  and  unjust  Judge.  Base  cowardise.
Prudent  Generall.  Secret  conspiracie.  Drunken
ferity.  Cruell  cowardise.  Noble  humanity.  Royall
bounty.  Misery  farre  fetched  and  deare  bought
by  Fooluntaries.  English  provided  by  their  fleeing
enemies.  Cruell  Poles.  Everhom  the  Finlander.
P.  le  Guard  Generall  of  English.  &c.  Russe  flight  ;
French  fight  &  flight  ;  English  honor  &  composition.

Captaine Margarets Letter to Master Mericke from

Hamborough,  Jan.  29.  161 2. .  .  .  .  . 225

Third  Demetrie  slaine.  Suisky  more  then  slaine.  Poles
crueltie.  Reason  of  our  Method,  and  best  use  of  this
Russian  storie.

§.  5.  Of  the  miserable  estate  of  Russia  after  Swiskeys
deportation,  their  election  of  the  King  of  Polands
Sonne,  their  Interregnum  and  popular  estate,  and
choosing  at  last  of  the  present  Emperour,  with  some
remarkeable  accidents  in  his  time. H.P. .  .  .23c

Misery  of  popular  ungoverned  government  :  no  King  all
Tyrants.

231

Pacta  inter  Primarium  Ducem  Exercituum  Regni  Poloniae,
&  inter  Heroes  Moscoviae.  .....

Accord  twixt  Poles  and  Russes  about  chusing  the  Emperour.
Ladislaus  his  composition  with  the  Russes  for  the
Empire.  Michalowich  elected  Emperour.  Peace  with
the  Poles.

CHAP.  X.

A  briefe  Copie  of  the  points  of  the  Contracts  betweene  the
Emperours  Majestie  and  the  Kings  Majestie  of  Sweden  :
in  Stolbova  the  seven  and  twentieth  of  February,  161 6. 256

Contract  betwixt  Micalowich  E.  R.  &  G.  A.  King  of
Sweden.  Agreement  twixt  Dane  and  Sweden.  Russes
travell  to  Catay.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP.  XL

A  Relation  of  two  Russe  Cossacks  travailes,  out  of  Siberia
to  Catay,  and  other  Countries  adjoyning  thereunto.
Also  a  Copie  of  the  last  Patent  from  the  Muscovite.
A  Copie  of  a  Letter  written  to  the  Emperour  from
his  Governours  out  of  Siberia. .  .  .  .  .272

The  Copie  of  the  Altine  Chars,  or  golden  Kings  Letter  to

the  Emperour  of  Russia.  .  .  .  .  .  .273

King  Altines  Letter  to  Russe  Emp.  Catay  Voyage  and
Wals.

A  Description  of  the  Empires  of  Catay  and  Labin,  and  other
Dominions  aswell  inhabited,  as  places  of  Pasture  called
Ulusses  and  Hords,  and  of  the  great  River  Ob,  and
other  Rivers  and  Land  passages.  .  .  .  .276

Countries  betwixt  Russia  and  Catay.  Yellow  Mugalls,  &c.
Friers.  Talguth.  Cara  Catay.  The  wall  and  gates.
Shirocalga.  Voyage  of  two  Russes  to  Catay  Countreyes
in  the  way.  Agreement  twixt  Dane  and  Sweden.
Russes  travell  to  Catay.  English  Priviledges  from  the
present  Russe  Emperour.  English  Priviledges,  Sealed
with  the  Golden  Seale.

CHAP.  XII.

Notes  concerning  the  discovery  of  the  River  of  Ob,  taken
out  of  a  Roll,  written  in  the  Russian  tongue,  which
was  attempted  by  the  meanes  of  Antonie  Marsh,  a
chiefe  Factor  for  the  Moscovie  Company  of  England,
1584.  with  other  notes  of  the  North-east. H. .  . 292

Anthonie  Marshes  intelligences  of  Ob,  &c. Russian  jelousie.

The  report  of  Master  Francis  Cherry  a  Moscovie  Merchant,
and  Master  Thomas  Lyndes  touching  a  warme  Sea  to
the  South-east  of  the  River  Ob,  and  a  Note  of  Francis
Gaulle. H.P 296

Cherry, Linde, Gould. Use of a North-west passage.

xii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  PAGE

CHAP.  XIII.

Discoveries  made  by  Englishmen  to  the  North-west  :
Voyages  of  Sir  Sebastian  Cabot,  Master  Thorne,  and
other  Ancients  :  and  Master  Weymouth. H.P.  . 297

Discoveries  by  Madoc,  Columbus,  Sebast.  Cabot.  Maps.
Cabotas  conceit  ;  his  and  other  English  Westerne
voyages.  Ruts  Letter  to  King  Henrie,  and  Pratos  to
Cardinall  Wolsey.

The  Voyage  of  Captaine  George  Weymouth,  intended  for
the  discovery  of  the  North-west  Passage  toward  China,
with  two  flye  Boates. ...... 306

Captaine  Weymouths  discovery  1602.  towards  the  North-
west. Current.  Maine  banke  of  Ice.  Blacke  water.
Thicke  fogges.  Mutinie  and  punishment.  Ice-thunder.
Sea  Foule.  Variation.  Variation  various.  Rockes
vanishing. Sea-Whirlewinde.

CHAP.  XIV.

James  Hall  his  Voyage  forth  of  Denmarke  for  the  discovery

of  Greenland,  in  the  yeere  1605.  abbreviated. H. . 318

North-west  Discoverie,  by  James  Hall  from  Denmarke.
Gronland  coast.  Hands  of  Ice.  Strong  Current.
Hare-Lion.  Terrible  Ice-thunder.  Banke  of  Ice.
Current,  Capes,  People,  Customes  of  Groenland.
Groenland  Boats,  Seale-killing  :  the  tides  :  Savage-
fight.  The  Countrey,  people,  beasts,  fishes  of  Groen-
land. Groenlanders  fashions.  Frost  Hand.  Con-
demned persons  landed. Store  of  Whales.

CHAP.  XV.

The second Voyage of Master James Hall, forth of
Denmarke into Greeneland, in the yeere 1606.
contracted. H. .  .  .  .  .  .  .338

xiii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Hals  second  Voyage  to  Gronland.  Voyage  from  Denmarke
to  Groenland.  Currents  and  variation.  Observations
of  Currents  and  Variations  in  Groen  voyage.  Hopes
of  a  silver  Myne.  Barter  with  Savages.  Reine-Deere.
Groenlanders  winter-houses.  Secanunga  the  true
name.  Their  returne.  Hands  of  Farre.  Ships
employed.

CHAP.  XVI.

The  Voyage  of  Master  John  Knight  (which  had  beene  at
Greeneland  once  before  1605.  Captaine  of  a  Pinnasse
of  the  King  of  Denmarke)  for  the  Discovery  of  the
North-west  passage,  begunne  the  eighteenth  of  Aprill,
1606. H 355

Pentle-frith  :  S.  Margarites  Hope,  in  Orkney.  Their
poverty.  Knights  Voyage.  North  Currents.  Fowles
white  and  blacke.  Broken  Land,  John  Knight  and
others  intercepted  by  Savages.  Fight  with  the  Savages.
Description  of  them. Broken  Hands. Sunken  Rockes.

CHAP.  XVII.

The  fourth  Voyage  of  James  Hall  to  Groaneland,  wherein
he  was  set  forth  by  English  Adventurers,  Anno  161  2.
and  slaine  by  a  Greenelander.  Written  by  William
Baffin. H 365

Hals  last  Voyage.  Baffins  observations  to  flnde  out  the
longitude.  Hall  slaine.  Hall  buried.  Mine  found
of  no  value.  Groenlanders  Tents.  Baffins  Greenland
Voyage  and  daily  observations.  Variations.  Orkney.
Groenland  beasts  with  stone  pizzles.  Swift  Boats.
Religion,  Salutation,  Burials.

CHAP.  XVIII.

A  true  Relation  of  such  things  as  happened  in  the  fourth
Voyage  for  the  Discoverie  of  the  North-west  Passage,
performed in the yeere 161 5. written by William

Baffin. H.P 379

xiv

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Foure  North-west  Discoveries.  Icie  lies  of  Dissolution  ;
the  He  of  Resolution.  Groenland  Dogges,  Boat,
Images,  people  described.  Danger  by  divers  sets  of
tides.  Proofe  to  finde  Longitude.  Observations  to
finde  the  Longitude.  Mill  and  Salisbury  Hands.
North-west  Discovery  by  Baffin.  Cape  Comfort
comfortlesse.  Divers  Hands.  Instructions  for  the
next  voyage.

CHAP.  XIX.

A  briefe  and  true  Relation  or  Journall,  containing  such
accidents  as  happened  in  the  fift  Voyage,  for  the
discovery  of  a  passage  in  the  North-west,  set  forth  at
the  charges  of  the  right  Worshipfull  Sir  Thomas  Smith
Knight,  Sir  Dudly  Digges  Knight,  Master  John
Mostenholme  Esquire,  Master  Alderman  Jones,  with
others,  in  the  good  ship  called  the  Discovery  of  London  ;
Robert  Bileth  Master,  and  my  selfe  Pilot,  performed
in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1616.  .... 396

Baffins  Letter  to  Sir  John  Wostenholme.  Sea  Unicorne,
Baffins  Bay  how  profitable  or  perillous.  Variation
admirable.  Tents,  Men,  Women,  Rites,  Dogs  of
Groenland.  Many  Sea  Unicornes  seene.  Midsummer
frost.  Whale  Sound.  Greatest  knowne  Variation.
Baffins  Bay. Use  of  Scurvie  Grasse.

CHAP.  XX.

A  briefe  Discourse  of  the  probability  of  a  passage  to  the
Westerne  or  South  Sea,  illustrated  with  testimonies  :
and  a  briefe  Treatise  and  Map  by  Master  Brigges.
H.P

Brigges  his  praise.  Baffins  death.  Buttons  hopes.  Reasons
of  a  N.W.  passage.  Testimonies  of  T.  Cowles  and
M.  Lock.  Fucas  Discovery  of  a  passage  in  47.  deg.
from  the  S.  to  the  N.  Sea.  Ivan  de  Fucas  Letters  and
Relation  of  a  passage.  Master  Locks  care.  Master
Briggs  his  Treatise  of  a  passage.  Reasons  of  a  passage
to  the  South  Sea.  Geographers  errors,
xv

THE TABLE

PAGE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs  in
the  Fifth  Booke  of  the  second  part  of
Purchas  his  Pilgrims.

CHAP.  I.

A  Description  of  the  West  Indies,  by  Antonio  de  Herrera,
his  Majesties  chiefe  Chronicler  of  the  Indies,  and  his
Chronicler  of  Castile. H.P. ..... 427

Ramusio  taxed  and  defended.  Herreras  description  of
America.  How  farre  America  hath  bin  discovered.
Nature  of  the  Loadstone.  American  Seas  :  Spanish
course  and  customes  in  those  Navigations.  Indian
Navigations.  The  ships  returne  not  by  the  same  way.
Navigation  of  the  South  Sea.  Division  of  the  Spanish
Indies.  Spanish  plantations  in  Hispaniola.  S.
Domingo.  Sugar  planted.  Spanish  plantations,  Ports,
numbers  in  Hispaniola.  Herreras  description  of  Cuba  :
her  Ports  and  Plantations.  Herreras  description  of  the
American  Hands.  Ginger.  Strong  Current.  Canibals
or  Men-eaters.  Friers  dangerous  food.  America
named  of  a  wrong  Father.  Limits  of  Venezuela.
Herreras  Description  of  the  Spanish  Indies.  Venezuelas
Government.  Prodigious  Earthquake.  Ponces  fond-
nesse.  Simplicitie  of  Florida.  Description  of  the
Coast  from  Florida  to  New  found  Land.  Florida.
New  Spaine.  Yucatan.  Mexico  described.  Mexico
described  ;  and  the  government  of  New  Spaine.
Province  of  Panuco.  Bishopricke  of  Tlascala.  Valley
of  Atlisco.  Veracruz.  Indian  Doctrines,  or  Parishes.
Bishopricks  of  Guaxaca.  Golden  Rivers  :  Cacao-money.
Mulberies  multiplyed.  No  Crosses  in  America  till  the
Spaniards  came.  A  Man  300.  yeeres  old.  Tabasco.
The  Audience  and  Province  of  Guadalajara.  Provinces
of  New  Biskay,  Civaloa,  California,  Guatimala.  Spanish
Townes  in  Honduras.  Vulcanes.  Bottomlesse  Lake.
Chiapa.  Verapaz.  Feather  pictures.  Manati-fish
described.  Gulfe  and  Coast  of  Honduras.  Province
and  Lake  of  Nicaragua.  Herreras  description  of  southern
America.  Andes  &  Sierras  of  Peru.  Herreras  descrip-
tion of  West  Indies.  Citie  and  Province  of  Panama.
Porto  bello.  Strange  case  of  a  Lizard.  River  of  Snakes.
South  Sea  Points. New  Kingdome  of  Granada. Saint

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  PAGF

Michael,  &c.  Thunderbolts.  R.  Grande  or  Magdalen.
Sancta  Martha  her  Provinces.  Cartagena.  Amazonian
women.  El  Dorado.  Herreras  W.  Indies.  Two
Rowes  and  highwayes  the  wonders  of  Nature  and  Art
in  Peru.  River  Bamba.  Raine  a  wonder.  Payta.
Admirable  high-way.  How  Emeralds  grow.  Giants.
Popayan,  Quixos,  Pacamoros.  Inhumanitie  of  Canibal
Indians.  Cali,  Caramanta,  Cartago,  &c.  Vulcans
described.  Government  of  Pacamoros  and  Gualsango.
Gold  how  gotten.  Government,  Hills,  Playnes,  and
Raynes  of  Peru.  Herreras  description  of  Peru,  S.  James,
S.  John,  Guamanga,  &c.  Finding  of  Quick-silver.
Salt  spring.  Foure  high-wayes  admired.  Earthquakes,
from  whence  they  proceed.  Fertilitie  without  raine.
The  bounds  of  Plate,  or  Charcas.  Oropesa,  Potosi.
Crosse  worshipped  worketh  miracles.  Thistle  walls  of
sober  Indians.  Eleven  Spanish  Colonies  in  Chili.
Raine  seldome,  not  so  oft.  Herreras  description  of
Chili  and  Magelane  Provinces,  &c.  Herreras  descrip-
tion of  the  West  Indies.  Sir  Richard  Hawkins.
Herreras  description  of  the  Magillane  Straits,  and  the
River  of  Plate.  Terrible  River-fall.  River  of  Plate.
Tigre  killing  and  killed.  Herreras  description  of  Brasil.
Jesuites  Colledges.  Coast  and  Ports.  Herreras  de-
scription of  the  Moluccas  ;  and  of  the  Philippinas.
Hands  of  the  Spicerie.  Tandayala,  Masbat,  Mindoro,
Manila.  Bursting  out  of  waters,  destroying  of  Cities,
Man,  and  Beast.  Coast  of  new  Guinea.  Hands  betwixt
the  West  and  East  Indies.  Five  Archbish.  27.  Bishops,
400.  Monasteries,  2.  Universities,  &c.  in  India.
Ecclesiasticall  Government  and  spirituall  provisions
in  and  for  the  Indies.  Herreras  description  of  the
Spanish-Indian  Government.  Inquisition  and  forme
of  Spanish-Indian  Government.  Herrera.  Theseverall
Spanish-Indian  Courts,  their  Residences  and  jurisdictions.
Indian  Officers  and  Offices,  how  provided  and  ordered.
Herrera.  Spanish  Government  of,  and  provisions  for
the  Indians.  Indian  Lawes.  Contractation  house.
Councell  for  the  Indies.

The  Presidents,  Counsellors,  Secretaries,  and  Attourneys,
which  unto  this  present  day  have  served,  and  doe  serve
in  the  supreme  Councell  of  the  Indies,  from  their  first
Discoverie. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .587

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Names  of  the  Spanish  Presidents  and  Councellours  for  the
Indies.

The  Governours  and  Vice-royes,  which  have  governed
untill  this  time,  the  Kingdomes  of  New-Spaine  and
of  Peru.  ........ 590

Spanish  Viceroyes  which  have  beene  in  New  Spaine  and  Peru.

ILLUSTRATIONS

Henry Brigges His Map of  the North Part of
America, ......

Hondius  His  Map  of  America,  .

Hondius  His  Map  of  Hispaniola,  Cuba,  etc.,

Hondius  His  Map  of  Florida, .

Hondius  His  Map  of  New  Spaine,

Hondius  His  Map  of  America  Meridionalis,

Hondius  His  Map  of  the  Magellan  Streight,

PAGE

Hondius  His  Map  of  Muscovia,  .  .  . 224

424

432
448
464

472
496

544

THE FOURTEENTH VOLUME

OF

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning  English  Northerne  Navigations  and

Discoveries,  relations  of  Greeneland,  Groen-

land,  the  North- West  Passage  and  other

Arctike  Regions,  and  later  Russian

Occurrents  ; with  a  Description

of  the  West  Indies  by

Antonio  de

Herrera

English Northerne Navigations, [nuv.699.]

and  Discoveries,  relations  of  Greeneland,  Groenland,

the  North-West  Passage,  and  other  Arctike

Regions,  with  later  Russian  occurents.

THE FOURTH  BOOKE.

Chap.  I.

A  Voyage  set  forth  by  the  Right  Worshipfull  Sir
Thomas  Smith,  and  the  rest  of  the  Muscovie
Company,  to  Cherry  Hand  :  and  for  a  further
discoverie  to  be  made  towards  the  North-Pole,
for  the  likelihood  of  a  Trade  or  a  passage  that
way,  in  the  Ship  called  the  Amitie,  of  burthen
seventie  tuns  ;  in  the  which  I  Jonas  Poole  was
Master,  having  fourteene  men  and  one  boy  :
A.D.  1610.

He first of March 1609. I waved at  a.D.  1609.
Black-wall  and  went  to  Gravesend. The  Secund.
third  day  I  went  downe  to  the  Noore-  Comput.Ang.
head. The  ninth,  wee  wayed  and  put  out
to Sea (blessed  bee God : ) and  by the
fifteenth  day  I  was  in  the  Bay  of  Rosse,
on  the  Coast  of  Norway,  in  Latitude  6$.

degrees :  at  what  time  the  wind  came  Northerly,  and  blew

XIV

y

A.D.

1609.

*The  Main-
sayle  without
a  Bonnet.

*Thefore-
sayle  without
a  Bonnet.

Hamersound
in  Shot/and.

North  Cape  in
71.  degrees
20.  minutes.
May  the
second.

[III.  iv.  700.]

Chery  Hand.
Ice.

PURCHAS HIS PILGBJMES

extreame  fierce,  with  great  store  of  Snow  and  Frost.  The
sixteenth  day,  wee  had  the  like  weather  and  winds,  so  that
wee  could  not  maintaine  a  *  mayne-course,  and  we  lost
some  of  our  Beere.  The  seventeenth  day,  we  had  Snow,
and  all  the  Beak-head  was  so  laden  with  Ice,  that  it  seemed
a  firme  lumpe,  and  the  wind  at  North,  which  blew  so  fierce
that  we  could  not  maintaine  a  *  fore-course,  and  drave  us
backe  to  the  altitude  63.  degrees,  $6.  minutes.  The
storme  continued  so  exceeding  violent,  that  I  was  faine  to
spoone  before  it  fortie  eight  houres,  and  the  same  wind  and
weather  continued  till  the  twentie  one  day,  and  in  that
time  wee  were  driven  as  farre  to  the  Southwards  as  Shott-
land.  And  being  faire  by  the  Land,  and  seeing  no  likeli-
hood of  faire  weather,  I  got  a  Fisher-man  to  conduct  mee
to  a  good  Harbour,  called  Hamersound,  not  so  much  to
eschew  the  stormy  weather,  as  to  stop  some  leakes,  and  to
amend  our  tackling.  I  tarryed  in  Shottland  till  the
twelfth  of  April  16 10.  at  which  time  the  wind  was
Southerly.  The  former  wind  came  to  the  North  at  mid-
night, with  great  store  of  Snow,  which  froze  as  fast  as  it
fell :  which  wind  continued  till  the  fourteenth  at  noone.
At  two  of  the  clocke  it  came  to  the  East  north-east,  and  I
stood  to  the  Northwards,  after  many  stormes,  much  cold,
Snow,  and  extreame  Frosts.  I  had  sight  of  the  North-
cape  the  second  day  of  May.  Then  I  stood  towards  Chery
Hand,  the  winde  being  at  West  North-west.  The  third
day  at  noone,  the  Cape  bare  South  South-east ;  seaventeene
leagues  off,  we  had  much  Snow  with  Frost.  The  fourth
day,  it  was  thicke  weather  with  great  store  of  Snow  and
Frost,  the  winde  at  North-west  and  by  North.  The  fift
day,  it  was  faire  weather,  the  winde  at  North  North-east.
The  sixt  day,  at  two  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  I  met
with  some  Ice,  but  not  very  thicke,  so  that  I  held  my
course  toward  Chery  Hand,  the  winde  being  at  South  :  at
five  of  the  clocke,  I  saw  the  Ice  so  thicke,  that  I  could  not
possibly  get  through  it.  Then  I  stood  to  the  West  wards
with  a  short  sayle,  and  sounded,  but  had  no  ground  at  a
hundred  fathome : thicke  foggie  weather,  at  eight  of  the

JONAS POOLE

clocke  it  began  to  cleere  up,  and  I  stoode  into  the  Ice
finding  it  scattered  in  some  places ;  and  at  twelve  at  noone,
I  found  the  Pole  elevated  above  the  horizon  74.  degrees
7.  minutes,  and  sounded,  but  had  no  ground  at  one
hundred  and  seaventie  fathomes.  From  twelve  till  foure,
I  ran  North  North-west  two  leagues,  and  sounded,  and
had  a  hundred  and  sixtie  fathomes.  Then  Chery  Island
did  beare,  as  I  judged,  North  North-west,  about  fifteene
leagues  off  or  more :  from  foure  till  eight  it  was  calme,  at
eight  of  the  clocke  the  winde  came  Southerly,  and  I  stood
towards  the  Hand  and  found  the  Ice  so  thicke,  that  the
Ship  had  no  roome  to  wend,  and  withall  such  a  fogge  that
I  could  not  see  one  Cables  length ;  in  which  time  the  Ship
had  many  a  knocke,  but  thankes  be  to  God,  no  harme  was
done.  By  twelve  of  the  clocke,  the  seaventh  day,  I  got
out  of  the  Ice  and  lay  a  hull  till  the  North  Sunne,  at  which
time  it  began  to  be  cleere  weather :  then  I  set  saile,  and
stood  to  the  Eastwards,  cold  frosty  weather.

The  eight  day  it  was  very  foggie,  the  winde  at  North
and  by  East,  with  Snow  and  Frost :  I  stood  to  the  East-
wards, in  hope  to  get  the  Easter  end  of  the  Ice,  and  so  to
Chery  Island ;  and  I  ranne  into  a  Channell  betweene  two
firme  bankes  of  Ice,  and  could  finde  no  way  through,  but
lay  in  the  Ice  till  the  ninth  day  at  a  South  Sunne.  Then  I
observed,  and  found  the  Ship  in  the  altitude  74.  degrees
and  17.  minutes,  the  winde  being  at  North  North-west,
very  faire  weather,  but  frostie.

I  sailed  in  the  abovesaid  Ice,  one  while  one  way,  and
another  while  another,  in  hope  to  finde  some  opening
towards  the  Hand  :  but  which  way  soever  I  stood,  I  saw  all
the  Sea  covered  with  Ice.  At  a  South  Sunne,  the
tenth  day,  I  observed  both  with  my  Astrolabe  and  Crosse-
staffe,  and  found  the  Poles  height  74.  degrees  and  15.
minutes:  and  the  variation  13.  degrees  and  30.  minutes
the  North  point  Westerly :  by  a  North  Sunne  I  got  out  of
the  Ice  into  the  open  Sea,  and  to  write  each  course,  way,
and  winde,  with  all  other  accidents,  would  be  too  tedious :
but  the  thirteenth  day  of  May,  at  midnight,  I  sounded,

3

A.D.
l6lO.

The  sixt  day
of  May  wee
were  in  74.
degrees  7.
minutes.

Abundance  of
Ice.

74.  degrees
15.  minutes,
variation  13.
degrees  30.
minutes.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

being  in  very  thicke  Ice,  and  had  a  hundred  thirtie  eight

The  Lyonesse fadoms ;  there  presently  I  espied  the  Lionesse  standing

was  sent  to mt0  the  iCCj  J  kept  her  company  till  eight  of  the  clocke  at

Chery  Hand. njgnt)  and  then  I  steered  as  followeth,  from  eight  above

said  till  twelve  at  noone : The  foureteenth  day  I  sailed

North-west  and  by  North  twelve  leagues,  the  winde  at

South  South-east,  thicke  foggie  weather :  from  twelve  till

foure  at  night,  I  sailed  seaven  leagues  North,  the  same

winde  and  weather  with  raine. And  by  the  fifteenth  day

at  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  I  had  sailed  North

twentie  seaven  leagues,  the  same  winde  and  weather :  at

what  time  I  supposed,  that  I  was  not  farre  from  land,

*AsCobodines  because  I  see  great  store  of  Sea-Foule  *  about  the  Ship:

wildgeese  and  at  eight  of  the  clocke  I  sounded,  but  had  no  ground  at  a

ir mocks. hundred  and  fortie  fathome  :  very  foggy  weather :  likewise

I  sounded  at  twelve  of  the  clocke  at  noone ;  no  ground  at

Ice.  a  hundred  thirtie  five  fathomes,  where  I  met  with  Ice  and

great  store  of  Fowle,  as  before,  winde  at  South,  and  foggie

weather.

I  stood  through  the  Ice,  till  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night,
holding  no  course  by  reason  of  it,  at  which  time  I  sounded,
and  had  ninetie  five  fathom  greene  oze,  the  weather  being
all  one,  and  very  much  Ice  from  eight,  till  ten  of  the
clocke.  I  sayled  North,  one  league  and  a  halfe,  and  had
seventie  five  fathoms  rockie  ground.  From  ten  till  twelve
at  midnight  I  sayled  North  one  league  and  a  halfe,  and
sounded,  and  had  thirtie  seven  fathoms,  the  wind  being  at
South,  with  great  store  of  raine  and  fogs,  and  abundance
of  Ice  round  about,  but  something  broken.  Then  I  stood
off  West  and  by  South,  and  tooke  in  all  the  Sayles,  except
the  fore-saile  and  maine  top-saile  :  and  at  one  of  the  clocke
the  sixteenth  day  sounded,  and  had  fortie  fathomes  oze :
likewise  I  sounded  at  two  of  the  clocke,  and  had  fiftie  two
fathomes :  I  could  neither  perceive  Current  nor  Tide  in
Much  raine.  all  this  time,  and  it  did  raine  as  fast  as  I  have  commonly
seene  in  England :  then  I  stood  to  the  Eastwards,  and  at
three  of  the  clocke  sounded,  and  had  fortie  fathomes  oze :
and  thus  I  sailed  among  the  Ice  East  and  East  and  by

4

JONAS POOLE  ad.

1610.
South,  and  East  North-east,  keeping  no  certaine  course,
by  reason  of  the  Ice,  and  had  these  depths  following,  30.
20.  19.  16.  and  fifteene  fathomes,  and  then  I  saw  the  Land  Land  the  16.
within  two  leagues  and  lesse  of  me,  bearing  betweene  the  day  of  May.
South  and  by  East,  and  the  North-west : then  I  stood  in
East  and  by  South,  supposing  to  have  found  a  harborough
within  a  ledge  of  rocks  that  lay  off  a  low  point,  which
seemed  like  an  Hand,  and  standing  in,  I  found  depths,  10.
9.  8.  7.  6.  7.  4.  and  three  fathomes,  standing  in  it  a  shoald
bay,  and  full  of  rockes.

Then  I  steered  away  North-west  and  by  West,  and  had
six,  seven,  eight,  and  ten  fathome  foule  ground ;  this  part
of  this  Land  is  foule  ground  a  great  way  off,  therefore
come  no  neerer  this  place  then  ten  fathome,  and  that  will
carry  you  cleere  of  all  dangers  that  I  could  see. Towards
noone  it  cleered  up,  and  I  did  looke  the  Meridian  altitude
of  the  Sunne,  which  was  34.  degrees  and  20.  minutes,  the  Note.
declination  being  21.  degrees  and  10.  minutes  North,  the
Equator  must  bee  13.  degrees  and  10.  minutes  above  and  [III. iv. 701.]
beneath my Horizon. The Complement being 76. 76.  degrees
degrees  and  50.  minutes,  the  Poles  height. Likewise  I 5°  minutes,
found by true observation the Compasse to vary 16. yariatkn\6
degrees,  and  before  I  had  sayled  foure  leagues  I  saw  a  degrees.
Sound  that  lay  East  and  by  South  in,  the  winde  comming  The  North
to  the  East  South-east;  then  I  sent  the  Skiffe  on  land  in  point  westerly.
the  mouth  of  the  Sound,  because  I  supposed  I  had  seene
Morses  on  the  land,  but  they  proved  Rocks. I  followed  Rockes.
into  the  said  Bay  with  the  ship,  but  standing  in  I  had  a
stiffe  gale  of  winde  off  the  shoare,  which  drave  abundance
of  Ice  out  of  the  Sound,  through  the  which  I  enforced  the
ship,  in  hope  there  to  have  found  an  Harbour ;  in  turning
in  I  found  these  depths,  thirtie  five,  thirtie,  twentie,  and
eighteene  fathoms. The  Boat  came  aboard  about  a  North-
west Sunne,  and  the  men  told  me  they  found  deepe  water
within and foule ground ; they saw great store of
Mohorses  lying  on  the  Ice,  but  none  on  land,  and  they  Mohorses  or
brought  a  piece  of  a  Deeres  home  aboord,  therefore  I  Morses.
called  this  Sound  Home  Sound,  and  a  Mount  that  lyeth  Homsound.

5

A.D.

l6lO.

Muscovy
Mount. .

For  these
places  see
Captain  Edges
Map.

Ice-point.

Bell  point.

Point
partition.

The  ay  re
temperate.

Lownesse  lie.
Lowsound.

The  Sounds
season.

PUKCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

foure  leagues  to  the  South  of  it,  the  Muscovy  Companies
Mount,  because  it  was  my  first  landfale.

Then  finding  no  benefit  here  to  bee  had,  nor  Haven  for
the  ship,  I  stood  to  Sea,  and  sayled  North-west  and  by
North  foure  leagues :  at  midnight  it  blew  very  hard,  and
I  stood  to  the  Westwards  with  a  short  sayle,  and  sayled
foure  leagues  West  by  eight  of  the  clock  the  seventeenth
day.  Then  I  stood  to  the  Landwards,  the  winde  being  at
South  South-west  thick  weather :  and  three  leagues  from
me  I  saw  a  Point,  which  I  named  the  Ice  Point,  because
there  lay  abundance  of  Ice  upon  it.  Then  I  saw  another
Point  beare  North  North-west  fiv^  leagues  off,  which  I
named  Bell  Point,  because  of  a  Hill  formed  like  a  Bell  on
the  top,  and  to  the  Northwards  of  Bell  Point  goes  in  a
great  Bay  with  two  Sounds  in  it,  the  one  lieth  in  East
South-east,  the  other  North-east  and  by  East ;  the  last
Sound  you  can  hardly  discerne,  by  reason  there  is  a  long
Hand  lying  in  the  mouth  of  it.  But  the  going  into  the
said  Sound  is  on  the  North  side,  yet  there  is  an  Inlet
under  Point-partition,  but  very  narrow  and  full  of  Rocks,
and  an  exceeding  strong  Tyde  setteth  in  there.  This  day
I  found  the  weather  very  warme  and  farre  temperater  then
I  have  found  it  at  the  North  Cape  at  this  time  of  the
yeere :  this  place  lying  in  77.  degrees  and  25.  minutes,
and  the  Cape  in  7 1 .  degrees  and  20.  minutes ;  this  place
being  to  the  Northwards  of  the  Cape  6.  degrees  and  5.
minutes :  and  note,  two  leagues  to  the  Southwards  of
Bell  Point  is  a  ledge  of  Rocks  three  miles  off  the  shoare,
and  come  no  neerer  the  shoare  then  fifteene  fathom  :  upon
the  North  side  of  the  Bay  is  low  land,  which  I  named
Lownesse  Hand.  I  called  the  North  Sound  Lowe  Sound.
Into  the  Bay  I  turned,  the  winde  at  East  North-east  faire
weather ;  turning  in  I  had  no  lesse  then  fortie  fathoms
close  by  the  shoare,  and  in  the  middest  no  ground  at  sixtie
fathoms,  and  being  neere  the  Point  that  parteth  both  the
Sounds,  the  winde  increased  with  raine.  Then  I  saw  the
Sound  frozen  over  from  side  to  side,  and  upon  the  Ice  a
Beare  and  great  store  of  Mohorses,  but  the  winde  blew  so

6

JONAS POOLE  a.d.

1610.

extreme  hard,  that  the  Boat  could  not  row  to  windwards,
to  trie  if  we  could  kill  some  of  them. The  fogs  and  raine  VeH  thicke
continued  till  ten  of  the  clock  the  nineteenth  day,  at  which  *°&m
time  the  raine  ceased,  and  it  did  freeze  with  snow  and
winde  and  fogs,  as  before.

From  twelve  at  mid-night  the  nineteenth  day,  till  foure
in  the  morning  the  twentieth  day,  I  sayled  three  leagues
South-west  and  by  South,  then  I  found  the  Ice  thicker
then  before.  It  was  very  thick  fogs,  with  winde,  frost,  Extreamecold
and  snow,  and  cold,  that  I  thinke  they  did  strive  here  w^ather.
which  of  them  should  have  the  superioritie.  I  put  into
the  Ice  aforesaid  in  hope  to  get  through,  and  after  many  a
sore  stroke  with  the  ship  in  it,  I  got  through  at  a  South-
west Sunne,  at  what  time  it  began  to  be  faire  weather.
Then  I  stood  through  the  Ice  towards  the  land  againe,  in
hope  that  that  land  would  prove  worth  the  labour  and
travell ;  and  going  to  set  the  mayne  top  sayle,  it  was  frozen  Sailes  frozen.
as  hard  as  ever  I  saw  any  cloath  in  all  my  life  time,  so  that
all  my  company  could  very  hardly  set  it ;  and  whereas  I
supposed,  and  have  often  said,  that  this  climate  is  not  so
subject  to  foggs  in  May  and  June,  as  it  is  in  July  and
August,  it  is  contrarie ;  for  I  have  not  seene  the  Sunne  on
the  Meridian  these  five  dayes,  nor  seene  it  at  all  in  sixtie
houres :  I  had  not  sailed  three  leagues  North-east,  when  it
was  as  thicke  as  it  was  before  with  Frost  and  Snow :  yet  I
stood  still  towards  the  Land.

The  twentie  one,  I  saw  the  Land  at  an  East  Sunne,  and
stood  towards  it,  and  at  a  South  and  by  West  Westerly,  I
observed  the  Sunne,  and  found  the  Meridian  altitude  of
it 33. degrees 30. minutes, the declination being 21.
degrees  $6.  minutes,  &c.  the  altitude  of  the  Pole  was  78.
degrees  26.  minutes. The  winde  at  North  North-east:
cold  frostie  weather :  This  place  I  called  the  Black-point  Blacke-poht
He  :  I  called  a  point  (that  lyeth  foure  leagues  to  the  North-  He.
west  of  Black-point) Cape  cold,  and  to the  South-east  Cape-cold.
of  Black-point  is  a  great  sound,  which  because  it  was
covered  with  Ice,  I  called  Ice-sound,  and  standing  neerer  Ice-sound.
to  the  shore,  I  could  not  see  any  Sound  or  Harbour  open ;

7

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

therefore  I  determined  to  stand  to  the  Northwards  to  seeke
what  good  might  be  done  that  way  to  profit  the  Merchants,
and  also  to  get  some  Wood,  for  we  had  but  little  left.  I
sounded  at  the  Black-point,  and  had  twentie  three
fathomes  streamy  ground.  At  two  of  the  clocke  I  stood
off,  and  at  midnight  stood  to  the  shore  againe,  cold  weather
with  frost,  the  winde  at  North  and  by  East.  The  two  and
twentieth  day,  at  an  East  Sunne,  I  was  faire  by  the  Land,
betweene  Cape-cold  and  Black-point,  a  league  off  where  it
fell  calme,  and  I  sounded  there,  and  had  twentie  eight
fathoms,  where  I  tried  for  Fish,  but  could  take  none.

[III.  iv.  702.]  The  three  and  twentieth  day,  at  an  East  North-east
Sunne,  I  was  within  three  leagues  of  Capecold  :  this  day  it
was  faire  weather,  and  I  tooke  the  Sunnes  height  at  twelve
of  the  clocke,  and  found  it  to  be  33.  degrees  30.  minutes,
the  declination  being  22.  degrees  13.  minutes,  the  dis-
tance of  the  Pole  from  my  Zeneth,  was  11.  degrees  17.
minutes,  the  complement  thereof  being  78.  degrees  and
43.  minutes,  the  Poles  altitude. All  this  day  it  was  calme

Faire  all  the  forenoone,  warme  sunshine  weather,  and  whereas  I

weather.  named  this  place  Cape-cold,  if  I  had  falne  with  it  this  day,

or  the  like,  I  should  have  given  it  another  name.  Here
I  tried  to  take  fish,  but  could  perceive  none.  Item,  there
is  a  point  that  beareth  from  Cape-cold  North  &  by  West

Fayer-forland.  which  I  called  Faire- forland :  this  Forland,  and  Cape-cold,
and  Black-point,  are  all  one  Hand.  At  sixe  of  the  clocke
at  night,  the  winde  came  to  the  North  North-west,  then  I
determined  to  view  the  Ice-sound  better ;  but  comming
neere  it,  I  perceived  it  packt  ful  of  Ice,  so  that  I  could  see
no  end  thereof  at  the  Top-mast-head,  neither  could  I  see
any  open  water  in  it.  At  a  North  Sun,  the  wind  came  to
the  North-east,  and  by  North,  then  I  stood  to  the  North-
wards, as  before.

The  foure  and  twentieth  day,  at  a  North-east  Sunne,  the
wind  came  to  the  South-west,  faire  weather  and  warme.
At  a  North  north-east  Sun,  I  tooke  the  Meridian  Altitude,
which  was  eleven  degrees  above  the  Horizon,  and  by
working  accordingly,  I  found  the  elevation  of  the  Pole

8

JONAS POOLE  ad.

1610.
above  the  Horizon,  to  be  78.  degrees,  37.  minutes. The
five  and  twentieth  day,  at  an  East-south-east  Sun,  I  set  the
boat  to  the  land,  neere  Fayer-forland,  and  it  being  calme  I
sounded  fortie  five  fathoms,  where  I  proved  for  fish,  but
could  find  none,  and  within  one  league  of  the  shoare  I  had  Nojtsk.
five  and  thirtie,  and  thirtie  fathome  streamy  ground. At
a  South-east Sunne, the Boat  came  aboord  laden  with  In  all  this
Wood,  and  some  Whales  fins. The  men  told  mee  there  ^^  ***j'a
was  great  store  of  Morses  in  the  Sea,  about  the  shoare  s^ore  0fOrift-
side,  and  about  thirtie  on  Land. Immediately  I  sent  my  wood,  but  none
Mate,  Nicholas  Woodcock  with  the  Boat  on  Land  againe,  groweth  here.
\  to  see  if  they  could  kill  any  of  the  said  Mohorses,  and  also  N-  ^Mdcsck.
to  search  what  other  thing  they  should  hap  to  find  that a  e~^ns'
\  might  prove  beneficiall. Moreover  I  was  certified,  that
J  all  the  Ponds  and  Lakes  were  unfrozen,  they  being  Fresh-
!  water,  which  putteth  mee  in  hope  of  a  milde  Summer
here,  after  so  sharpe  a  beginning  as  I  have  had,  and  my
opinion  is  such  (and  I  assure  my  selfe  it  is  so)  that  a
passage  may  bee  assoone  attayned  this  way,  by  the  Pole,  as  Hope  of  a
:  any  unknowne  way  whatsoever,  by  reason  the  Sun  doth  Polare
'  give  a  great  heat  in  this  climate ;  and  the  Ice,  I  meane  that  Passa&e-

that  freezeth  here,  is  nothing  so  huge  as  I  have  seene  in
I  73.  degrees.

The  sixe  and  twentieth  day,  at  a  North-east  Sunne,  the
Boat  came  aboord  againe,  having  slaine  but  two  Morses,
at  twelve  at  midnight  the  wind  came  to  the  North,  and
blew  so  hard,  that  I  was  enforced  to  try  with  a  Mayne-
course,  cold  frosty  weather,  with  snow. The  sayd  wind
I  and  weather  continued  till  a  South  Sun,  the  seven  and
twentieth  day,  at  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night,  the  wind
came  to  the  North-west  and  by  West  faire  weather,  then  I
stood  towards  the  Land  again. And  at  a  South-east  sun,
the  eight  &  twentieth  day,  I  was  within  three  leagues  of
Fayer-forland,  and  standing  in  I  sounded  divers  times,  and
1  had  these  depths,  15.  17.  19.  and  18.  fathoms,  within  five,
\  sixe,  and  seven  myles  of  the  shoare,  and  when  Fayer-
forland  did  beare  South  and  by  East  by  the  Compasse. It
being  two  miles  from  me,  I  saw  the  Land  beare  North-east

9

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

and  by  North,  about  nine  leagues  off,  the  which  because  it

Knotty-point, was  full  of  knottie  Mountaines,  I  called  Knottie-point,

and  betweene  Knottie-point,  and  Fayer-forland,  I  saw  a

great  Bay,  which  because  it  was  foggy  on  the  sudden,  I

could  not  discover. In  the  Sea,  about  the  Forland, I

saw  great  store  of  Mohorses  and  Sea-fowle,  I  sounded  in

the  Bay  and  had  ninetie  five  fathomes  rockie  ground. I

stood  to  Sea,  and  had  very  foule  weather,  with  snow,  and

Thirty  day  of  fogs,  and  frost,  which  weather  continued  till  the  thirtieth

May.  day,  at  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  at  which  time  I

was  within  one  mile  of  Fayer-forland  in  nine  fathomes,

and  then  I  sayled  East  North-east  about  two  miles,  and

C  had  these  depths, 18. 17. 16. 14.  and 12.  fathomes  all

4  rockes. Then  I  steered  South  with  the  like  depths  and

A  grounds,  but  when  I  had  runne  South  South-east  three

miles  further,  I  had  sandie  ground,  then  did  Fayer-forland

beare  West  and  by  North,  about  three  leagues  of,  the

next  cast  I  had  tenne  fathomes  foule  ground,  and  from

thence  I  steered  two  leagues  South  and  by  East,  having

7  these  depths,  10.  9.  8.  and  7.  fathomes,  then  I  saw  the

s.  Bay  covered  over  with  Ice. I  turned  out  the  wind  at

iFoule-sound. North. This  Sound  I  named  Fowle-sound,  for  in  this

Bay  are  three  Sounds ;  this  I  spake  last  of,  which  lyeth  in

South,  and  goeth  out  at  Black-point : another  lyeth  in

Deere-sound. East  South-east,  which  I  named  Deere-sound : another

Close-Cove, goeth  in  North,  which  is  called  Closse-cove,  and  being

neere  the  point  betweene  Fowle-sound  and  Deere-sound,

it  fell  calme,  and  I  sent  the  Skiffe  on  Land,  and  standing

after,  with  a  little  wind  at  West,  I  found  the  sayd  Point

very  shoale,  with  a  ridge  of  Rockes,  where  I  had  these

depths,  4.  5.  6.  7.  9.  10.  18.  and  then  30.  fathomes. At  a

South  Sun,  the  Boat  came  aboord  and  brought  Wood,  and

some  Whale-fins.

The  last  of  May,  at  an  East  North-east  Sun,  I  was
within  three  leagues  of  Knotty-point,  at  which  time  I  saw
Ice.  Ice  all  the  Sea  over  betwixt  the  West  and  the  Land  :  then  I

saw  another  Point foure  leagues  distant  from Knotty-
point,  the  one  bearing  of  the  other  North  and  by  East,

10

JONAS POOLE  a.d.

1610.

and  South  and  by  West,  and  it  is  smooth  Land,  the  which

I  named  the  Gurnerds-nose,  indifferent  warme  weather  : Gomerd-nose.

and  finding  the  Ice  to  bee  so  thicke  that  I  could  not  passe

it,  and  the  wind  comming  to  the  West,  I  stood  to  the

Southwards againe, determining to search the Sounds

better  for  a  Road,  and  for  commodities,  because  I  saw  no  [IILiv.703."

good  to  bee  gotten  in  keeping  the  Sea  amongst  the  Ice,

and  at  a  North  Sun,  I  was  in  the  entrance  of  Close-cove,  Note.

where  I  had  no  ground  at  one  hundred  &  twenty  fathomes,

and  yet  I  was  within  two  Cables  length  of  a  sunken  ledge

of  Rockes,  that  lyeth  on  the  Larboord  side  of  the  Bay  a

mile  from  the  shoare.

The  first  of  June  I  found  a  good  Road  in  Close-cove,  June.
on  the  South-west  side,  where  I  rid  in  seven  fathomes
sand  mingled  with  oze,  at  an  East  Sun  I  sent  a  Skiffe  to  a
low  Point,  that  lyeth  on  the  North  side  of  the  Bay,  where
they  found  some  Whales  fins,  and  three  pieces  of  Mohorse
teeth,  and  upon  a  little  rockie  Hand,  they  saw  neere  one
hundred  Mohorses,  which  were  there  sleeping. In  this
time  I  went  towards  the  bottome  of  the  Sound,  and  slue  a  A  Beare
white  Beare. At  a  South-west  Sun,  I  went  towards  the  s/aine.
rocke,  to  see  if  I  could  kill  any  of  the  Morses  that  lay
there,  and  as  wee  went  by  the  shoare  side  I  espied  Deere, Foure  Deere
three  of  them  I  slue,  and  one  of  my  company  one. But  thine.
when  I  came  to  the  rocke,  the  Ice  that  the  beasts  lay  on
was  hollow,  and  the  rocks  that  was  betwixt  the  Ice  and
the  sea  stood  sloping  toward  the  Sea ;  the  which  when  I
saw,  I  determined  to  go  aboord  and  let  them  alone,  yet
afterward  I  went  on  the  rocke  betwixt  the  Ice  and  the  Sea  :
and  as  I  with  the  rest  of  my  company  were  killing  them,
the  Ice  brake,  and  Ice  and  beasts  slid  into  the  Sea  together,
and  carryed  one  of  the  men  with  them,  so  that  he  escaped
out  of  that  danger  very  hardly ;  for  besides  the  weight  of
dead  Mohorses,  and  Ice  that  bruised  him,  the  beasts  that
were  alive  strook  at  him  in  the  water,  and  bruised  him  very
soare. I  had  beene  in  the  same  case,  if  I  had  not  beene
the  nimbler,  and  slipt  on  one  side. I  killed  three  Morses,
whose  teeth  I  tooke  off. Then  I  espied  the  Beare,  which

11

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

His  name  was  my  Mate  had  hurt  before  with  a  shot ;  hee  went  into  the
The.  White-  Sea,  when  hee  saw  the  Boate,  where  I  slue  him  with  a
mjUfie  .  Lance,  and  brought  him  aboord.

slalne.  The  second  day  at  a  North  and  by  East  Sunne. At  a

South  Sunne,  I  went  to  the  South  shoare  of  Deere-sound,
where  I  found  a  good  quantitie  of  Fins,  and  came  aboord,
at a  North North-west Sunne. The third  day, being
Sunday,  I  rid  still,  having  the  wind  at  West  South- West
much  wind. Then  upon  the  side  of  a  Hill,  a  mile  to
!4crossesetup.  the  Westwards  of  the  Road,  I  set  up  a  Crosse,  with  a
writing  upon  it,  signifying  the  day  of  my  arrivall  first  in
this  Land,  by  whom  I  was  set  out,  and  the  time  of  my
Crosse  road, being heere. This Road I called Crosse-road. At a
J  good  Road South-east  sunne  the  fourth  day,  I  wayed  the  wind  at
jar  a win  s.  ^-est  South-west,  and  when  I  was  almost  out,  the  wind
increased  with  fogs,  which  made  me  put  back  into  the
Road,  where  I  anchored  the  same  day  at  six  of  the  clocke,
at  afternoone. The  fifth  day,  at  a  North-east  and  by  East
sunne  I  wayed,  and  it  fell  calme,  then  I  went  to  the  East
There  is  great  side, and killed some Fowle, which I found in great
s:,ore  °fF°wje  abundance : and  when  I  was  readie  to  go  aboord,  I  saw
fourteene  Deere,  at  which  time  I  spent  all  my  powder,
ABuckslaine.  and  shot  but  one  shot,  with  the  which  I  slue  a  fat  Buck.
The  same  day,  at  a  South  sun,  I  went  on  Land  and  slue
Three  Deere two  Deere  more. And  at  a  South-west  sun  I  went  on
shine.  Land  and  slue  a  Doe,  and  took  the  Faune  alive,  and

A  fawne  brought  it  aboord,  but  it  dyed  the  next  day.  The  calme
continued  till  the  sixth  day,  at  an  East  North-east  sunne
(and  we  drove  in  the  Bay,  with  a  little  soaking  tyde  that
runneth  there.)  Then  I  sent  the  skiffe  to  the  rocke  afore-
said, to  see  what  store  of  Mohorses  were  there ;  at  three
of  the  clocke  they  came  aboord,  and  told  mee  there  was
neere  two  hundred  beasts.  I  tooke  both  the  boat  and
skiffe,  with  all  my  company,  and  went  to  the  rock,  and  in
Beam  s/aine.  going  thither  I  slue  a  Beare :  but  when  I  came  to  the
rocke,  the  beasts  began  to  goe  into  the  sea,  then  I  presently
went  on  land,  with  all  my  company,  and  slue  eightie
Mohorses. beasts,  whose  teeth  I  tooke,  and  in  going  aboord  slue

12

JONAS POOLE  ad.

1610.

another  Beare,  and  came  aboord  the  seventh  day,  at  a
North-east  sun. Then  I  saw  two  white  fishes,  which  at  White  fishes.
the  first  sight  I supposed  to  be  Beares,  they  had  long
snouts  like  Sturgeons,  two  flat  Fins  close  by  their  gils,  flat
bodied,  small  towards  their  tailes,  and  a  broad  taile.

The  tenth  day,  I  went  on  shoare  and  slue  five  Deere,  Five  Deere.
with  the  which,  and  them  that  I  slue  before  I  have
lengthened  out  my  victuals,  blessed  be  the  Creator  of  the
World,*  which  hath  not  made  any  part  thereof  in  vaine,  *Isa.  45.  18.
but  so  that  in  these  parts  (which  hath  seemed  unpossible
to  our  Ancestors  to  bee  travelled  unto,  by  reason  of  the
extreame  cold  which  they  supposed  to  bee  here)  I  find  the
ayre  temperate  in  the  Lands,  and  nothing  so  cold  as  I  have
found  at  Chery  Hand  in  five  severall  Voyages.  More-
over, in  this  Land  I  have  seene  great  store  of  Deere,  which
have  neither  bush  nor  tree  to  shelter  them  from  the
nipping  cold  of  Winter,  nor  yet  any  extraordinarie  pasture
to  refresh  them.  If  these  (I  say)  having  nothing  but  the
Rockes  for  a  house,  and  the  Starry  Canopie  for  a  covering,
doe  live  here ;  why  may  not  man,  which  hath  all  the  gifts
of  God  bestowed  upon  him  for  his  health  and  succour  ?

The  eleventh  day  in  the  morning,  I  sent  the  skiffe  to  a
Beach,  that  lyeth  Northwards  from  the  Rocke  where  we
slue  our  beasts,  but  when  they  came  to  the  Rocke,  it
beganne  to  blow  hard  at  North  North-west,  that  they
could  not  proceed  any  further,  upon  the  Rocke  they  found
a  Beare,  and  slue  him,  and  came  aboord.  In  which  time
I  tooke  the  boate  and  went  to  the  East  side,  and  slue  two  Two  Beares,
Beares  and  two  Deere.  and  two  Deere

The  twelfth  day,  at  a  North-east  sunne  I  wayed,  and  slaine-
having  very  little  wind,  I  sent  the  skiffe  to  goe  to  the
place  abovesayd,  at  a  North  sunne,  they  came  aboord  and
brought  some  Whales  Finnes  and  a  Beare,  and  told  mee
that  it  did  blow  very  much  wind  at  Sea,  yet  I  had  it  all  [III.  iv.  704.]
this  time  calme  in  the  Bay. Yet  before  I  could  get  out
of  the  Sound,  the  wind  came  to  the  North-west,  and  blew
very  hard,  which  made  mee  to  put  roome  for  Crosse-road,  Crosse-road.
where  I  rid  till  the  fourteenth  day,  in  which  time  I  caused

13

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

both  the  boates  to  bee  trimmed,  and  the  thirteenth  day  at|

noone,  I  observed  on  Land,  in  this  place,  and  found  thej

Poles  height Poles  height  79.  degrees,  fifteene  minutes,  and  the  varia-i

in  79 ,degres tion  of  the  Compasse 18.  degrees, 16.  minutes  North-;

n~!Hlm  es' west : the  same  day  I  slue  a  Bucke.

Lompassevary  r  J  01  n

18.  degrees  The  fourteenth  day,  at  a  South-east  Sunne  I  waved,!

16.  minutes, the  wind  at  South-west  foggie  weather,  at  a  South-west i

Sunne,  I  went  on  Land  and  slew  a  Buck. The  fifteenth;

day,  at  East  Sunne,  I  got  out  of  the  Bay,  at  which  time!

Ice-  I  saw  abundance  of  Ice  to  the  Sea- wards,  but  the  wind  I

came  to  the  South-east,  and  I  sayled  betwixt  the  Ice  and'

the  shoare. At  a  North-west  Sunne, I  sent  the  skiffe

(with  seven  men  in  it)  to  the  Land  under  Knottie-point,

at  which  time  the  wind  came  to  the  North-east,  and  I  stood

to  the  North-wardes,  where  I  had  these  depths,  fifteene,

thirteene, and eleven fathomes foule-ground. These

depths  were  about  a  league,  and  to  the  Northwards  of

Great  store  of  Knottie-point, I  saw  great  store  of  Whales,  the  like  I

Whales.  saw  -m  Deere-sound. The  sixteenth  day,  the  Skiffe  came

Five  Deere aboord,  and  brought  a  few  Finnes,  and  five  Deere,  and

shine.  they  told  mee  that  within  the  Bay, that  lyeth  betwixt

Knottie-point and Gurnerds-nose is a Haven, in the

entrance  whereof  is  an  Hand,  and  seven  fathomes  going

in,  but  within  eight,  nine,  fifteene,  and  twentie  fathomes

good  ground. This  maketh  Gurnerds-nose,  an  Hand,  for

this  Haven  goeth  out  on  the  North-west  side  of  Gurnerds-

Faier-Haven.  nose. I  named  this  Haven,  the  Fayre-haven ;  I  found  a

great  tyde  heere,  which  runneth  South  South-west,  the

floud  commeth  from  the  Southwards.

Then  standing  to  the  Northwards,  I  saw  the  Sea  covered

Abundance  of  yfyfa  lce?  which  lay  close  to  the  Land  which  made  me

stand  to  the  Southwards  again,  I  observed  at  Gurnerds-

79.  degrees nose,  and  found  the  Poles  height  79.  degrees,  50.  minutes.

$h'LinuteJ' f At  a  NortJl-west  Sun> the  same  day> J  sent  the  skiffe  on

Gomerdsnose  Tand  to  search  the  Coast  to  the  Southwards  of  Knottie-
point,  where  I  sounded  and  had  twenty  foure  fathomes
Foule-ground,  and  in  the  Fayre-way  I  sounded,  having
these  depths,  30. 35.  45.  and  48. fathomes  all  Rocky-

14

JONAS POOLE  a.d.

1610.

ground. By  the  seventeenth  day,  I  was  in  the  entrance  The  farthest
of  Close-cove,  at  a  South  Sun,  at  which  time  the  Skiffe  tf™  °fmy

came  aboord,  and  brought  a  Beares  skin,  and  a  Buck,  and  y*^*5

Voyage.

a  good  quantite  of  Whales  Fins  and  an  Unicornes  home,  This  Unicorns

which  was  five  foot  and  seven  inches  long,  and  in  the  home  is  the

biggest  part  of  it,  it  was  seven  inches  and  a  halfe  about.  Home  of  a  fish

The  eighteenth  day,  at  a  South  Sun,  I  came  into  the  Road,  ^Zrh^Baffins

where  I  rid  all  that  day,  having  very  much  wind  and  raine  discovery.

that  wee  could  doe  nothing. At  a  North  Sunne,  I  sent

my  Mate,  with  the  Skiffe,  and  sixe  men  to  seeke  for  more

Fins,  &c. The  ninteenth  day,  at  a  North  Sun,  they  came

aboord,  having  slaine  ten  Beares,  three  of  their  skins  and  Ten  Beares

fat  they  brought  aboord,  and  a  good  quantitie  of  Fins,  and  ^^-

six  paire  of  teeth. The  twentieth  day,  in  the  morning,

I  sent  both  the  Boat  and  Skiffe  to  flay  the  other  seven

Beares,  the  wind  being  at  North  faire  weather. But  they

were  no  sooner  gone,  but  it  blew  very  hard  at  North,

which  brought  abundance  of  Ice  out  of  the  bottome  of

the  Sound,  but  did  the  Ship  no  hurt. At  a  West  South

West  Sunne,  the  Boats  came  aboord  with  the  Beares  skins,

the  wind  abovesaid  set  so  much  Ice  out  of  the  sound

upon  the  Ship,  that  it  inforced  mee  to  set  sayle.

The  one  and  twentieth  day,  at  a  North  Sun,  I  stood
towardes  Fayer-forland,  and  sent  out  the  skiffe. The  two
and twentieth day, at a South-east sunne, they came
aboord,  with  the  skiffe  laden  with  Fins,  and  killed  five  Five  Deere
Deere. Then  I  went  on  Land  to  search  what  I  could  find,  slaine-
and  I  slew  a  Beare,  and  tooke  a  young  one  alive,  and  at  A  yongbeare
three  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone  I  came  aboord  with  the  taken-
skiffe  laden  with  Fins. The  three  &  twentieth  day,  at  a
South-east  sun,  the  Boat  came  aboord,  and  brought  a  good
quantitie  of  Finnes,  and  a  Beares  skinne. Then  I  stood  A  Beare
toward  Cape-cold,  and  the  same  day,  at  a  South  sunne,  I  slawe'
sent  the  skiffe  on  Land  to  the  North-wards  of  the  Cape,
where  they  found  sixteene  Mohorses  on  a  rocke,  which
they  slue ;  and  at  a  North-east  sun,  the  foure  and  twentieth
day,  they  had  brought  all  the  teeth  and  blubber  of  them  Take  heede  of
aboord;  at  which  time  the  wind  came  to  the  North-west,  this  point.

15

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

and  blew  verie  hard :  then  I  stood  towardes  the  Ice-sound
to  seeke  what  commodities  it  would  yeeld.  At  a  North
sunne  I  was  neere  Black-point,  which  hath  a  great  many
sunken  Rockes  lying  on  the  southermost  end  of  it,  therefore
you  must  come  no  neerer  that  shoare  then  twentie  five
fathomes.  The  five  and  twentieth  day,  till  a  South  sun,
it  was  calme,  and  the  tyde  drove  the  ship  so  farre  from  the  j
Land,  that  I  could  not  send  the  boat  on  shoare.

The  sixe  and  twentieth  day, at  a  South South-west  |
Sunne,  I  came  aboord,  more  laden  with  travell  then  com-  i

A  Bucke modities,  at  which  time  I  slue  a  Buck. Then  I  stood  I

slawe.  toward  Ice-sound,  and  at  a  Point  which  parteth  Foule-

sound  and  Ice-sound,  I  had  thirtie  fathomes  oze,  &  so  to  I
ten  fathomes  Rockes,  then  I  steered  East  along  the  shoare,  J
and  had  betwixt  thirtie  and  fifteene  fathomes  oze  and  I
sand.  In  fifteen  fathomes  I  anchored,  having  the  wind  at  !|
North  North-west,  faire  weather  at  a  North-west  sun,  at  jl
a  North  sun,  I  sent  the  skiffe  to  the  shoare  to  search  for  I
commodities.  The  seven  and  twentieth  day  of  June,  at  I
an  East  North-east  sun,  they  came  aboord,  and  brought  I
a  good  parcell  of  fins.  At  six  of  the  clock  I  sent  the
Skiffe  to  the  Land  againe,  and  set  sayle  with  the  ship ;
but  it  being  calme,  and  the  tide  setting  the  Ship  towards

[III. iv. 705.]  a  ledge  of  rocks,  made  mee  to  anchor  againe.  At  a  South
South-east  Sun,  they  came  aboord  againe,  and  brought  a
good  quantitie  of  fins :  at  a  South  Sunne  I  sent  the  Skiffe  j
towardes  the  mouth  of  Ice-sound,  and  in  the  entrance
thereof  I  found  a  Cove  in  the  which  was  twentie  fathomes,
and  so  to  thirteene,  but  by  reason  of  the  tyde,  and  edy-
winds,  I  could  not  get  into  it ;  here  the  Skiffe  came  aboord
and  brought  a  few  finnes.  Then  I  steered  to  another
Sound,  in  the  South  side  of  Ice-sound,  where  I  anchored
in  twentie  fathomes  oze,  the  same  day  at  a  North  Sun.
The  eight  and  twentieth  day  I  stayed  at  the  place  above-
said,  and  tried  the  Beares  grease  to  bring  it  into  oyle,  and

A  Beare  when  we  were  all  busied,  a  Beare  came  swimming  over
the  Bay,  towards  the  ship,  which  I  slue,  and  split  my
Peece,  the  winde  being  at  West. The  nine  and  twentieth

16

JONAS POOLE  a.d.

1610.

day,  at  a  South-east  Sunne,  I  sent  the  skiffe  to  search  the
Coast  to  the  Westwards  of  this  Bay,  the  wind  at  North-
west. The  last  of  June, the  skiffe  came  aboord,  at  a
South-east  Sunne,  and  brought  a  few  Finnes,  and  a  Bucke,  A  Bucke.
the  wind  at  North.

The  first  of  July,  being  Sunday,  I  rid  at  the  place  above-  July  the  first.
said,  in  hope  to  have  more  Mohorses  on  Land ;  I  observed
heere  and  found  this  place  in  78.  degrees,  24.  minutes,  and  78-  degrees,
the variation Westwards, seventeene degrees. Then I  24-  minutes,
sent  the  skiffe  to  see  if  any  more  beasts  were  on  Land.  VJ£'  I7' es'
The  wind  at  North-west,  faire  weather. The  second  day,
at a North North-east Sunne, they came aboord and
brought  two  Deere. The  third,  wee  slue  a  few  Morses,  Two  Deere
whose  teeth  and  blubber  wee  brought  aboord,  at  a  North-  slaine-
west  Sunne,  at  which  time  I  slue  a  Pricket : this  place  I
named  the  Green-haven. Immediately  I  sent  the  skiffe  Greene-

to  take  the  teeth,  and  fat  of  seven  beasts,  which  lay  slaine  h"rbmr  *"*

Deere  sunne
in another place. The wind at West, thicke foggie

weather. It  floweth  here  on  the  Change  day  South,  and

by  West,  and  hyeth  sixe  foot  water,  and  runneth  halfe

tyde  halfe  quarter. The  fourth  day,  we  rid  still  the  wind

at  South-west  with  fogs  and  raine,  and  very  much  wind :

at  the  same  time  I  saw  great  store  of  Ice  in  Ice  sound.  Ice.

The  fifth  day,  at  a  North-east  Sunne  I  wayed,  the  wind

at  West  thicke  weather,  and  in  standing  out  wee  slue  a  A  Beare

she  Beare,  and  tooke  her  two  young  ones. Indifferent  slatne> two

faire  weather,  we  lay  becalmed  all  this  day.  ^take™"

The  sixth  day,  I  was  off  Lownesse  (at  a  South  Sunne)

the  wind  being  at  East  blew  so  hard,  with  raine  and  thicke

weather,  that  I  was  enforced  to  take  in  all  the  sayles  save

a Mayne-course, which storme continued till eight at

night,  at  which  time  I  set  more  sayle,  and  stood  to  the

Southwardes,  hoping  to  get  some  goods  that  way. The

seventh  day,  at  noone  the  wind  came  to  the  North-east,

and  then  it  began  to  bee  cleere  weather,  at  what  time  I

saw  the  Land  of  Bel-sound,  whither  I  purposed  to  goe,

yet  could  not  by  reason  of  abundance  of  Ice,  which  lay  Ice.

above  three  leagues  from  the  Land,  which  I  could  not

xiv  17  B

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

possibly  passe.  At  a  North-west  and  by  West  sun,  I
saw  abundance  of  Ice  all  along  the  Land,  to  the  South-
wards of  Bel-sound.  The  eight  day,  at  twelve  at  noone,
I  stood  into  the  Ice,  in  hope  to  get  to  the  shoare,  the
wind  at  North  and  by  West  hasie  weather,  Horne-sound
bearing  East  North-east,  nine  leagues  of,  I  stood  to  the
landwards  till  foure  of  the  clocke,  at  which  time  I  found
the  Ice  so  thick  that  I  was  forced  to  stand  to  the  South-
wards to  eschew  it.  I  sayled  by,  and  amongst  the  Ice,
till  a  North  North-west  Sunne,  at  which  time  I  was  within
three  leagues  of  the  shoare.  Then  I  sounded,  and  had
thirtie  sixe  fathomes.  Then  I  stood  to  the  Westwards,
and  finding  all  this  part  of  the  Land  full  of  Ice,  I  purposed
to  stand  to  the  Northwards  againe  to  search  for  com-
modities that  way  :  the  wind  being  at  North-west,  I  turned
to  windwards,  till  the  tenth  day,  at  eight  of  the  clocke
before  noone,  at  which  time  wee  found  a  part  of  a  dead
A  dead  Whale,  which  I  caused to  bee  made  fast  to the  Ship,

determining  to  get  into  some  Harbour,  there  to  make  the
best  of  it  I  could.  Before  I  could  get  into  Bel-sound,  at
which  time  I  saw  all  the  bottom  of  the  Sound  full  of  Ice,
so  that  there  was  no  refuge  for  the  Ship.  Then  I  was
faine  to  turne  out  with  the  winde  at  West,  and  beganne
to  blow  verie  hard.  At  a  North-west  Sunne,  it  was  fayre
weather,  and  I  sent  my  Mate  with  the  skiffe  to  search
the  Coasts  towardes  Bel-point.  The  fourteenth  day,  at  a
North-east  Sunne,  the  skiffe  came  aboord,  and  brought
Three  Beam  three  Beares,  which  they  had  slaine.  Immediately  I  sent
slalne.  tne  Boat  for  water  and  wood,  and  then  I  stood  through

the  Ice,  and  got  through  it  by  a  North  Sun  the  fifteenth
day,  the  wind  at  North-west  foggie  weather.  Then  I
turned  to  windwards,  to  double  Lownesse,  and  got  cleere
of  it :  at  sixe  of  the  clocke  at  night  thicke  foggie  weather.
The  sixteenth  day,  at  five  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-
noone,  I  got  to  Black-point,  the  wind  comming  to  the
South,  thicke  weather.  Then  I  sent  the  skiffe  to  range
the  Coast,  and  to  search  what  they  might  find.  The
seventeenth  day,  at  ten  of  the  clocke  they  came  aboord,

18

JONAS POOLE  a.d.

1610.

and  brought  some  Fins,  and  three  Deere. Then  I  stood  Three  Deeres
towards  Crosse-road,  and  anchored  there  at  a  North-sun,  $laine-
the  wind  and  weather  as  abovesaid. The  eighteenth  day,
about  five  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  I  sent  the  skiffe
to  see  if  they  could  find  any  Morses  on  Land,  on  the
Rocke,  or  in  Deere-sound,  and  in  the  meane  time,  I,  with
the  rest  of  the  company  got  drift-wood  and  water  readie,
and  about  a  South  sunne,  a  Beare  with  two  young  ones ;  A  Beare  with
the  Dam  I  slue,  and  tooke  the  young  ones  aboord  the  two  young  ones
ship,  the  wind  Northerly,  cold,  foggie  weather. The  nine  *****<
and  twentieth  day,  in  the  morning,  I  went  to  the  East
side,  to  see  if  any  Mohorses  were  on  land ;  there  I  slue
foure  exceeding  fat  Buckes  and  a  Doe. In  which  time  Fizff  Deere
'the  skiffe  came  aboord  and  brought  two Beares  skins,  s!Ztne'B
but  found  no  beasts,  and  in  Deere-sound  they  found  Sea-  siaingm
coales,  which  burnt  very  well.  Sea-coales.

The  twentieth  day,  I  sent  the  Skiffe  into  the  bottome  [III.  iv.  706.]
of  Closse-cove  to  search  it  for  commodities,  the  wind  at
South  close  weather  with  raine :  at  eight  of  the  clock  at
night  they  came  aboord,  but  found  nothing ;  immediately
I  got  wood  and  water  aboord,  which  was  ready  before,
preparing  to  set  sayle  the  wind  and  weather  abovesaid,
we  slue  three  Deere.  The  one  and  twentieth,  I  wayed,
the  wind  at  North  faire  weather.  The  two  and  twentieth
day,  the  wind  came  to  the  West,  and  then  I  stood  to  the
Northward,  at  eight  of  the  clocke  hasie  weather.  At  twelve
of  the  clocke  at  noone  the  wind  came  to  the  North,  and
I  stood  to  the  Southwards  by  Fayer-forland.  The  three
and  twentieth  day,  at  an  East  north-east  Sunne,  the  Boat
brought  some  Whales  finnes,  and  three  Buckes,  and  one  Three  Bucks
Doe :  In  which  time  I  thought  I  had  seene  Land  beare  $laine-
West  from  me.  I  stood  to  the  Westwards,  and  by  a
South  South-east  sunne,  had  run  fifteene  leagues  West
and  by  South,  then  I  perceived  it  to  be  fogs.  The  foure
and  twentieth  day,  at  seven  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone
I  came  into  Bel-sound  and  found  but  little  Ice,  then  I  sent
the  Skiffe  to  seeke  for  a  Road  for  the  Ship,  and  also  for
commodities. The  five  and  twentieth  day,  at  three  of

19

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

the  clocke  in  the  morning,  the  Skiffe  came  aboord,  having
beene  in  the  mouth  of  the  North  Inlet,  which  I  call  Low-
sound,  they  went  into  it  by  Point-partition,  but  there  is
No  good  no  good  Channell  that  way  for  a  Ship  :  neverthelesse  there

chanell.  seemeth  to  bee  an  Inlet  or  Channell,  but  it  is  full  of  Rockes

from  side  to  side,  and  the  men  told  mee,  that  upon  the
Land  lay  some  Mohorses,  which  I  sent  them  to  kill.  At
eight  of  the  clocke,  the  Skiffe  came  aboord,  and  brought
the  teeth  of  the  sayd  beasts,  and  some  blubber.  Immedi-
ately I  sent  them  into  Bel-sound,  to  seeke  for  a  Road  for
the  Ship,  the  wind  at  West  thicke  foggie  weather.  About
an  North  West  Sunne,  I  anchored  in  Bel-sound,  in  sixteen
fathomes  ozie  ground,  this  Harbour  lyeth  about  two
leagues  above  Point-partition  on  the  South-side  of  it,  and
here  a  ship  may  ride  safe  from  all  windes.  At  a  North
A  Beare  Sunne  my  Mate  slue  a  Beare.  The  six  and  twentieth
slaine.  fe^  -m  t^e  m0rning,  it  blew  hard,  and  I  went  on  Land

A  fat  Bucke. anc[  s]ue  a  Beare,  and  a  Bucke  which  had  three  inches  and

flif*no°tgA  an  ha^e  m  tnicknesse  °f  fat  on  tne  haunches.  At  nine  of
written  of  the  tne  clocke  I  sent  both  the  Boats  to  fetch  the  fat  of  those
fatnesse  of  the  Mohorses  which  were  slaine  the  day  before,  and  likewise
rest,  yet  the  to  search  if  they  could  find  any  more,  the  wind  at  North
most  of  them wjtj1  fQ^ ^  s;x  Qf  ^  ciocfce  at  night  the  Boats  came

three  inches aDOard  with  the  fat,  and  brought  two  Buckes,  but  found

thicke  of  fat. no  beasts  on  Land.

The  seven  and  twentieth  day,  at  a  South  South-east
Sunne  I  weighed,  the  winde  being  at  North  and  by  West
faire  weather,  and  I  steered  out  (betwixt  an  Hand  and  the
point  where  I  rid)  South-west  and  by  West,  having  these
depths,  10.  7.  6.  5.  and  4.  fathomes:  then  I  was  in  the
middest  betwixt  the  said  point,  and  a  shoald  which  lay
South  and  North,  one  of  the  other,  and  after  keeping  the
same  course,  I  had  these  depths,  5.  6.  7.  8.  9.  10.  12.  and
13.  fathomes,  in  all  these  depths  I  had  sand,  and  after
oze.  At  sixe  of  the  clocke  the  wind  came  to  the  South-
west with  fogges,  and  I  turned  to  the  wind-wards.  And
at  twelve,  the  eight  and  twentieth  day  Lownesse  did  beare
North-east about foure leagues off, where I sounded

"to
20

JONAS POOLE

having  thirtie  two  fathomes  streamie  ground  with  blacke
stones,  at  which  time  it  was  calme,  and  continued  so  till
the  nine  and  twentieth  day  at  sixe  of  the  clocke  in  the
morning,  then  the  wind  came  to  the  North  with  fogges,
and  I  stood  to  the  Southwards,  and  to  see  what  Com-
modities I  could  find  that  way.

At  nine  of  the  clocke  I  was  neere  the  Ice-point,  where
I  met  with  much  Ice,  which  put  mee  from  the  Land,  and
I  was  enforced  to  steere  South-west  and  by  South  to
shunne  it,  the  winde  at  North-west  which  blew  hard  with
fogges.  The  wind  increased,  I  stood  towards  Cherrie
Hand  (if  possible  I  could  attayne  it)  for  fogges  and  Ice.
The  thirtieth  day,  at  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning
I  saw  no  Ice,  having  kept  no  certayne  course,  by  reason  of
the  Ice  which  I  had  past,  the  winde  at  North  and  by  West,
cold  foggie  weather  with  raine.  From  the  time  above-
said  till  twelve  of  the  clocke  at  noone  I  sayled  South
South-east,  and  ranne  fifteene  leagues,  the  same  wind  and
weather,  at  which  time  I  sounded  &  had  eightie  fathoms
greene  oze  like  Kowes  dung.  I  sounded  at  two  of  the
clocke,  and  at  foure  of  the  clock,  the  first,  eightie  eight,
the  second,  eightie  two  fathomes,  and  sayled  sixe  leagues,
the  former  course  wind  and  weather.  At  which  time  I
heard  a  breach  which  proved  Ice,  then  I  steered  West  to
eschew  it,  the  fogges  being  so  thicke  that  I  could  not  see
one  Cables  length.

The  last  of  July  at  noone,  I  had  sayled  South  and  by
East  halfe  a  point  Southerly  eight  leagues  having  little
wind,  and  sounded,  and  found  one  hundred  and  fortie
fathomes  thicke  foggie  weather,  and  in  haling  up  the  Lead,
a  fish  followed  it  to  the  top  of  the  water :  then  I  tryed
to  take  fish  but  could  not.  At  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the
afternoone,  the  winde  came  Southerly,  and  I  stood  to  the
Westward,  by  reason  the  Ice  lay  both  to  the  South  and
East  of  us,  at  a  North  Sunne  it  was  cleere  weather,  and  I
saw  the  Ice  round  about  us,  cold  weather  with  frost.

The  first  of  August,  we  beat  in  the  Ice  till  noone,  but
could  finde  no  end  thereof,  because  it  was  so  foggie,  and

21

A.D.

1610.

My  departure
from  the  land.
Ice.

A  fish  seene.

Ice  13  fogs  two
of  the  greatest
hinderances  in
the  Northerne
Navigations

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

the  Ice  packed  very  close  ;  yet  after  many  intricate  courses,
I  got  to  the  Westwards  of  it  at  mid-night  the  same  day,
the  winde  at  South-east,  cold  weather  with  raine  and
fogges.  And  after  I  had  seene  so  much  Ice  that  I  could
not  come  neere  Cherry  Hand,  to  prosecute  the  rest  of  my
1  stood  towards  Voyage,  I  determined  to  stand  for  England,  as  God  would
England.  g-ye  me  }eave  From  mid-night  the  first  day,  till  eight
of  the  clocke  the  second  day  before  noone,  I  sayled  South-
west and  by  South  five  leagues,  the  wind  at  East  South-
fill,  iv.  707.]  east,  thicke  fogges  with  raine.  From  the  second  day  at
eight  of  the  clocke,  till  the  third  day  at  twelve  of  the
clock  at  noone,  I  sayled  West  South-west  fifteene  leagues,
the  wind  at  South  and  by  East,  wet  foggie  weather.  From
noone  abovesaid,  till  twelve  at  noone  the  fourth  day,  I
sayled  foure  leagues  South,  the  winde  variable,  and  the
most  part  of  that  time  calme,  and  so  continued  till  eight
of  the  clocke  at  night,  at  which  time  the  wind  came  to
the  South  and  by  East,  and  blew  very  hard ;  from  the
fourth  day  at  noon  till  the  fift  day  at  noone  I  sayled  South-
west Westerly  seven  leagues.  The  sixt  day,  the  winde
was  at  South-east  cleere  weather,  at  noone  I  found  the
shippe  in  73.  degrees,  the  North  Cape  bearing  by  my
computation,  East  South-east  Easterly.  The  seventh  day
at  noone,  I  found  the  ship  in  72.  degrees  22.  minutes,
indifferent  faire  weather.  And  from  the  seventh  day  at
noone,  till  the  eight  day  at  noone  I  sayled  foure  and
twentie  leagues,  the  course  South  South-west,  the  wind
at  South-east  and  by  East,  at  which  time  it  beganne  to  be
very  foggie,  and  the  winde  came  to  the  South,  but  immedi-
atly  it  was  calme,  and  continued  so  till  mid-night.  Then
the  wind  came  to  the  North,  little  wind,  and  at  a  South
Sunne  the  ninth  day,  I  had  sayled  South  seven  leagues.
From  the  ninth  day  at  noone  till  the  tenth  day  at  that
time  I  sayled  South,  and  ranne  seven  leagues  South,  it
being  calme  most  part  of  the  day,  with  much  rayne  and
fogges.  From  twelve  the  tenth  day,  till  noone  the
eleventh  day,  I  sayled  South  and  by  West,  and  ranne
seventeene  leagues,  the  wind  Northerly. And  from  the

22

JONAS POOLE

eleventh  day  at  noone,  till  the  twelfth  at  that  time,  I  sayled
South  and  by  West  eighteene  leagues,  the  winde  at  North
North-west  faire  weather.  From  noone  the  twelfth  day,
untill  twelve  at  noone  the  thirteenth  day,  I  sayled  South
and  by  West  fortie  eight  leagues,  the  wind  betweene  the
North,  and  the  West  North-west  gustie  weather.  From
the  thirteenth  at  noone,  till  the  fourteenth  at  noone,  I
sayled  South  and  by  West  fortie  five  leagues,  the  wind
betwixt  the  West  North-west,  and  the  West  South-west
gustie  weather,  latitude  64.  degrees  21.  minutes.  From
the  fourteenth  day  at  noone,  till  the  fifteenth  day  at  that
time,  I  sayled  South  and  by  West  nine  and  twentie
leagues,  at  which  time  I  observed  and  found  the  ship  in
62.  degrees  53.  minutes  faire  weather,  the  wind  at  North.
At  foure  of  the  clocke  the  same  day,  I  saw  Skutsnesse  in
Norway  seventeene  leagues  off,  and  bearing  South-east,
from  whence  I  hold  it  superflous  to  write  it,  being  a  place
well  knowne.  The  last  of  August  I  arrived  at  London,
Blessed  be  God  for  ever  and  ever. Amen.

A.D.

16 10.

62.  degrees
.  minutes.

A briefe note what Beasts,  Fowles,  and Fishes
were  seene  in  this  Land.

B Easts :  Buckes,  and  Does,  white  Beares  and  Foxes,
of  colour  dunne  and  grey.

Fowles :  white  Partridges,  a  small  land  Bird,  like  a
Sparrow,  partly  white,  and  partly  browne,  a  Fowle  with
a  combe  and  a  tayle  like  a  Cock,  a  redde  Fowle  of  the
bignesse  of  a  Pidgeon  ;  a  white  Fowle  with  a  greene  bill,
the  top  of  the  bill  of  it  and  the  eyes  were  redde,  with
blacke  feet.  Wild  Geese,  Coluidines,  Gulls,  Sea-mewes,
Willockes,  Noddies,  Ice-birds,  Reeks,  and  Sea-pidgeons.

Fishes  :  great  store  of  Whales,  Gramposes,  Mohorses,
the  white  fish  I  spake  of  the  seventh  of  June,  a  small
fish  like  Cuplen,  likewise  I  saw  the  bones  of  Cods,  or
Haddocks ;  but  could  take  no  fish :  I  often  looked  for
Shel-fish,  but  could  take  none :  divers  of  my  company
did  see  two  Beavers.

The  Coluidine
is  as  big  as  a
Mallard,  the
male  is  neerer
of  the  colour,
and  the  female
browne.

23

A.t>.
1611.

Poole  enter-
tained by  a
certaine
stipend. He
was  as  I  have
heard,  miser-
ably and
basely
murthered
betwixt
Ratcliffe  and
London  after
his  returne
from  this

[III.iv.708.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Chap.  II.

A Commission  for  Jonas Poole  our  Servant,  ap
pointed Master of a small Barke called the
Elizabeth, of  fiftie tunnes burthen, for Dis-
coverie  to  the  Northward  of  Greenland,  given
the  last  day  of  March  161 1.

N  as  much  as  it  hath  pleased  Almightie
God,  through  the  industry  of  your  selfe
and  others,  to  discover  unto  our  Nation
a  Land  lying  in  eightie  degrees  toward
the  North-pole  :  We  are  desirous  not  only
to  discover  farther  to  the  Northward
along  the  said  Land,  to  find  whether  the
same  be  an  Hand  or  a  Mayne,  and  which  way  the  same
doth  trend,  either  to  the  Eastward  or  to  the  Westward  of
the  Pole,  as  also  whether  the  same  be  inhabited  by  any
people,  or  whether  there  be  an  open  Sea  farther  North-
ward then  hath  beene  alreadie  discovered.  For
accomplishing  of  all  which  our  desires,  we  have  made
choice  of  you,  and  to  that  end  have  entertayned  you  into
our  service  for  certayne  yeares  upon  a  stipend  certayne :
not  doubting,  but  you  will  so  carrie  your  selfe  in  the
businesse,  for  which  you  were  so  entertayned,  as  God  may
be  glorified,  our  Countrey  benefited,  your  selfe  credited,
and  we  in  our  desires  satisfied.  And  for  your  better
instruction  to  proceed  in  this  your  Voyage,  we  have
thought  good  to  set  downe  our  opinions  what  course  wee
thinke  fit  to  be  observed  in  the  same :  which  is,  That
forasmuch  as  by  your  owne  report  of  the  great  store  of
Whales  in  those  Seas,  wee  are  at  an  extraordinary  charge
this  yeare,  of  setting  out  a  ship  and  men  for  that  purpose,
which  ship  is  called  the  Marie  Margaret  of  London,  in
burthen  one  hundred  and  fiftie  tunnes  or  thereabout :  Our
meaning  is,  that  you  doe  keepe  company  with  the  said
ship,  and  not  to  leave  her,  till  God  send  you  to  the  places,

24

COMMISSION FOR  JONAS POOLE  a.d.

1611.
where  she  may  make  her  Voyage :  which  by  your  report
should  be  at  a  place  named  by  you  the  last  yeare  16 10.
Whale  Bay.

And  God  sending  you  to  the  said  place,  we  would  have
you  to  stay  there  the  killing  of  a  Whale,  or  two  or  three,
for  your  better  experience  hereafter  to  expedite  that
businesse,  if  through  extremitie  of  the  Ice  you  should  be
put  from  your  Discoveries.  And  in  the  meane  time  while
you  are  staying  about  killing  of  the  Whale,  you  may  cause
some  of  your  people  to  bee  searching  the  Coast  with  their
Shallops  for  Whale  finnes,  Morses  teeth,  Ambergreese,  or
any  other  commodities,  that  may  be  found  upon  that
Coast.  And  having  thus  stayed  a  convenient  time  with
the  said  great  ship  for  the  purpose  above  specified,  wee
would  have  you  then  to  proceed  on  your  Discoverie  for
the  satisfying  of  our  expectations  formerly  mentioned,
which  is,  to  discover  further  to  the  North  Pole  as  farre  as  Further  dis-
possibly  you  can,  and  how  the  Land  alreadie  discovered  coverie  to  the
doth  trend,  and  whether  there  be  any  inhabitants  in  the  North.
said  Land,  and  whether  there  be  an  open  Sea  to  the  North-
ward beyond  the  said  land.  And  in  this  your  coasting
the  land,  we  doubt  not  but  you  will  endeavour  with  your
Shallops  to  gather  up  all  the  Whale  finnes  you  can  finde,
to  kill  the  Morses  which  you  can  come  by  on  land,  and  to
reserve  the  teeth  and  blubber  to  the  most  advantage  that
may  bee,  the  better  to  beare  out  the  great  charge  which
you  know  we  are  at  in  these  Discoveries.  And  to  that
end  we  have  laden  in  you  eleven  Tunnes  of  emptie
caske.

And  having  spent  so  much  time  in  this  your  Discoverie,
and  in  gathering  up  of  such  commodities  as  that  Coast
will  affoord,  and  as  the  season  of  the  yeere  will  permit  you,
then  we  would  have  you  returne  for  England,  and  in  your
way  homeward  to  touch  at  the  place  where  you  left  the
Mary  Margaret,  to  see  if  shee  be  not  gone ;  and  finding
her  there,  and  that  the  time  of  the  yeere  will  permit,  wee
would  have  you  melt  your  Blubber  into  Oile  before  your
comming  from thence, to avoid the  great trouble  and

25

A.D.
l6ll

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Thomas  Edge.
See  sup.  I.  3.
c.  2.

inconvenience  you  know  we  fell  into  the  last  yeere  16 10.
by  bringing  the  same  hither  in  Blubber.  But  if  the  said
ship  should  chance  to  be  full  fished,  and  so  to  be  gone
before  your  comming  thither,  yet  we  would  have  you  stay
there,  or  at  Cherie  Hand  some  small  time  to  melt  your
Blubber :  to  which  end  we  have  appointed  Thomas  Edge
our  servant  in  that  ship  to  leave  a  Copper,  and  such  neces-
saries as  shall  serve  your  turne,  for  the  performing  of  that
businesse,  behinde  him ;  and  have  delivered  him  likewise
advertisements  at  that  place  of  their  proceedings  in  the
voyage,  and  of  their  intent,  what  course  they  purpose  to
take,  together  with  their  opinions,  what  course  they  would
have  you  take.

In  these  matters  of  Discoveries  and  uncertaine  Voyages,
the  varietie  of  occurrences  and  Sea  dangers  is  such,  as  we
cannot  directly  prescribe  a  course  certaine  to  be  held :  yet
we  hold  it  fitting  to  set  downe  Our  opinions  of  the  need-
full  :  which  are,  that  at  your  first  departure  out  of  England
you  keepe  counsell  together,  and  agree  upon  your  places
of  meetings,  if  by  tempest  of  weather  you  chance  to  bee
separated ;  still  shaping  your  course  directly  for  Chery
Hand,  where  we  would  have  you  stay.  And  if  at  your
comming  thither,  you  finde  the  same  cleere  of  Ice,  and  that
there  be  Morses  on  shoare,  then  wee  would  have  you  to
worke  upon  them,  as  time  and  opportunitie  will  permit,
alway  having  respect  to  your  intended  voyage.  And
having  dispatched  your  businesse  in  that  place,  wee  would
have  you  depart  in  company  together  for  The  Whale  Bay,
as  aforesaid,  and  to  follow  our  instructions  formerly  set
downe  to  be  done  in  that  place.  And  having  performed
Cherie  Hand,  what  may  be  done  in  the  parts  beyond  Cherie  Island,  and
so  returning  backe  againe  for  England,  we  hold  it  fit  you
make  your  Rendezvous  againe  at  the  said  Cherie  Hand,
and  there  to  stay  the  one  for  the  other,  and  to  be  killing  of
the  Beasts  there  till  the  last  of  August,  if  neede  bee.  And
if  it  happen  that  one  ship  doe  arrive  there  before  the  other,
and  no  Morses  come  on  shoare,  then  wee  would  have
them spend the time in searching for the Lead Ore,

26

COMMISSION FOR JONAS POOLE  a.d.

1611.

or  any  other  Minerall  matter  that  may  be  like  to  be  of

worth  upon  the  said  Land. And  thus  having  stayed  at

Cherie  Hand  till  the  last  of  August  the  one  for  the  other,

and not meeting together, the  ship so staying  having

made  her  Voyage,  wee  would  have  her  to  returne  directly

for  England,  and  to  leave  a  Note  in  writing  of  the  day  of

her  departure. This  is  our  opinion. Notwithstanding,

if  upon  better  grounds  you  shall  among  your  selves  finde

a  convenienter  course  to  be  held  for  the  good  of  the

Voyage,  and  the  benefit  of  us  the  Adventurers,  wee  leave

it  to  your  selves  to  agree  upon,  as  time  and  opportunitie

shall  serve.

And  for  the  avoyding  of  an  Objection  heretofore  used,
That  the  want  of  sufficient  victuals  hath  beene  the  cause
of  the  overthrow  of  the  Voyages  by  speedier  returne
home,  then  otherwise  they  would ;  wee  have  thought  fit
to  set  downe  the  quantitie  of  victuals  delivered  aboord
your  ship  in  this  our  Commission,  to  the  intent  to  cleere
our  selves  and  our  Agent  of  that  imputation,  and  to  lay
the  blame  on  your  selves,  if  by  default  the  same  be  evill
husbanded.  The  particulars  are  these.  Beefe,  22.c  3.
quarters,  18 u.  Bisquit  30.°  Beere  I4-Tunnes.  Fish,  200.
of  Haberdin,  and  halfe  an  hundred  Lings.  Cheese  300.°
weight.  Butter  three  Firkins.  Oyle  three  Gallons.
Pease  ten  Bushels.  Oate-meale  five  bushels.  Candels,
sixe  dosen.  Aquavitae,  thirtie  Gallons.  Vinegar  one
rundlet  of  twentie  Gallons.  This  proportion  of  victuals
will  last  you  seven  or  eight  moneths  with  good  husbandry,
together  with  the  helpes  of  Fish,  Fowle,  and  Beasts  that
are  to  be  had  in  abundance  upon  those  Coasts.  So  that
we  hope  you  shall  have  no  cause  to  the  contrary,  but
cheerfully  to  goe  forward  in  your  businesse,  whereby  not
onely  the  small  Barke  you  goe  in,  but  the  great  Ship  may
come  home  fully  laden  with  one  commoditie  or  other,
which  we  doubt  not  but  by  your  diligence  and  good
endevours  you  may  attayne  unto.

But  if  you  shall  chance  by  extremitie  of  Ice,  or  other-  [III.  iv.  709.]
wise to be put backe from your discoverie, or from

27

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

obtayning  commodities  upon  the  coast  of  Greenland,
whereby  to  lade  both  ships ;  then  we  would  have  you  stay
at  Cherie  Hand,  or  other  Hands  thereabout  so  long  time
as  possibly  you  can,  and  as  the  season  of  the  yeere  will
permit  you,  to  finish  the  rest  of  your  voyage.  And  if
there  bee  sufficient  lading  betweene  you  both  to  lade  the
bigger  ship,  wee  would  have  her  to  bee  dispatched  from
thence  with  all  speede,  and  you  to  stay  there  as  long  as
you  may  conveniently  for  the  good  of  the  Voyage  :  which
the  more  beneficiall  it  prooveth,  the  more  it  will  be  for
your  credit,  and  we  will  not  be  unthankefull  at  your
returne.

We  would  have  you  at  every  place  of  meeting  with  the
Mary  Margaret,  to  deliver  to  Thomas  Edge  our  servant
a  particular  Note  of  what  goods  you  have  taken  into  your
ship.  And  at  your  last  lading  place  we  would  have  you
make  a  general!  invoyce  of  the  whole  Cargason  of  goods
laden  in  your  ship,  and  having  signed  the  same,  to  seale  it
up,  and  direct  the  same  to  our  Agent  resident  in  London.
And  if  you  doe  chance  to  meete  with  the  Mary  Margaret
at  or  after  your  last  Port  of  lading,  we  would  have  you
deliver  a  Copy  of  the  said  invoyce  to  our  servant  Thomas
Edge  for  our  better  satisfaction,  what  casualtie  soever
might  happen  by  the  way,  and  at  any  hand  to  have  such
an  invoyce  ever  readie  sealed,  and  for  mortalities  sake  put
up  in  some  sure  place  of  custodie.

We  hold  it  fit,  that  you  Jonas  Poole  should  be  as  grand
Pilot  in  this  voyage  to  the  Northward.  And  therefore
we  would  have  you  to  accompany  the  great  ship,  and  to
bring  her  to  the  places  of  fishing  for  the  Whale  ;  or  to  any
other  place,  which  you  out  of  your  experience  shall  thinke
fit  to  bring  her  for  the  good  of  the  Voyage  and  benefit  of
the  Adventurers.  And  our  will  is,  That  Steven  Bennet
Master  of  the  said  great  ship  together  with  the  rest  of  the
company  in  that  ship,  doe  follow  the  said  Jonas  Pooles
directions,  as  they  will  answer  the  contrarie  upon  their
perils  at  their  comming  home.

And  for  that  heretofore  the  Company  have  beene  abused

28

COMMISSION FOR JONAS POOLE  a.d.

1611.

ij  by  lewd  and  bad  people,  who  have  imbeseled  part  of  that
taj  which  by  our  great  charges  and  adventures  hath  beene
obtayned :  Our  minde  and  will  is,  That  you  Jonas  Poole
doe  make  search  in  your  owne  ship,  that  none  of  our
!  Whale  finnes,  Morses  teeth,  Oyle,  or  any  other  commodi-
ties gathered  at  our  charge,  be  imbeseled  or  carried  away
by  any  of  the  Mariners,  who  will  looke  to  have  the  utter-
most of  their  wages  paid  them,  and  to  bee  fed  with  meate
and  drinke  sufficient.  And  God  sending  you  into
England,  we  would  have  you  suffer  none  of  your  people
to  goe  on  shoare  unsearched :  neither  would  we  have  you

I"  to  leave  the  ship  till  your  comming  into  the  River  of
Thames,  that  we  give  you  order  to  the  contrarie.  And
if  you  chance  to  be  winde  bound  upon  the  coast,  you  may
send  up  one  of  your  people  with  your  Letter,  but  not  to
come  your  selfe  on  shoare  till  our  farther  order,  as
aforesaid.

The  like  order  we  would  have  Steven  Bennet  to  use  in
his  ship,  by  vertue  of  this  our  Commission,  which  we
have  ordered  to  Thomas  Edge  our  servant  to  see  per-
formed accordingly.

And  in  as  much  as  we  have  agreed  here  with  a  Tanner  Agreement
for  all  the  Morses  hides  which  wee  kill  and  bring  into withaTanner
England,  and  have  sent  men  of  purpose  for  the  flaying,  •£.' mes
salting, and ordering of the same, whereof we have
appointed  one  to  goe  in  your  ship :  We  would  have  you
reserve  the  said  hides,  and  floore  your  ship  therewith  in
stead  of  ballast. And  if  you  obtayne  a  greater  quantitie
then  you  can  bring  away  with  you,  having  alwayes  regard
to  commodities  of  more  value,  which  are  Oyle,  Teeth,
and  Whales  finnes,  that  none  of  them  be  left  behind ;  We
would  have  you  leave  the  said  overplus  of  hides  in  some
convenient  place,  till  the  next  yeere,  that  we  send  more
store  of  shipping.

[A  Commission
29

A.D.
l6ll.

Adventures
and  losses
in  first
Discoveries.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

A  Commission  for  Thomas  Edge  our  servant,  ap-
pointed to  goe  as  our  Factor  in  the  Ship  called
the  Mary  Margaret,  of  the  burthen  of  one
hundred  and  fiftie  Tunnes,  for  the  killing  of
the  Whale  and  Morses  upon  the  coast  of
Greenland,  or  any  other  place  in  the  North
Ocean:  Given  the  31. of  March, 161 1.

YOu  are  not  ignorant  of  our  imploying  you  heretofore
in  two  severall  Voyages  to  Cherie  Hand. The  first

whereof,  by  reason  of  one  Duppers  going  thither,  together
with  certaine  men  of  Hull,  glutting  the  said  place,  prooved
to  us  a  thousand  pound  losse  of  our  principall.  As  also
in  the  second  Voyage,  because  you  could  not  come  to  set
footing  upon  the  said  Hand,  by  reason  of  the  abundance
of  Ice  lying  round  about  the  same  sixteene  leagues  com-
passe  till  the  twentie  eight  of  July,  by  which  occasion  our
whole  charge  of  setting  out  that  yeeres  adventure  had
beene  lost,  if  the  refuge  to  lade  our  ship  backe  againe  from
Saint  Michael  the  Archangel  in  Russia  had  not  holpen  us :
yet  notwithstanding  that  helpe,  wee  lost  by  that  voyage
above  five  hundred  pounds.  We  entring  into  due  con-
sideration of  the  premisses,  doe  not  impute  the  cause  of
these  our  losses  unto  you ;  but  to  the  accidents  then
happening  contrarie  to  our  expectation  :  yet  these  losses
growing  upon  us  in  the  times  of  your  imployment,  we
can  doe  no  lesse  then  put  you  in  minde  thereof,  to  the
intent  to  incourage  and  stirre  up  your  minde  to  doe  your
uttermost  indevour  to  further  the  businesse  in  this  your
third  imployment,  that  we  may  recover  our  selves  of  the
losses  formerly  sustained.  And  for  that  end  we  have
made  choice  of  you  againe  to  goe  as  our  Factor  in  the  Ship
Mary  Margaret,  of  one  hundred  and  fiftie  Tunnees,  the
Master  being  Steven  Bennet,  for  the  killing  of  the  Whale  :
And  to  that  end,  as  you  well  know,  have  bin  at  charge  of
[III.  iv.  7 10.]  procuring  of  sixe  men  of  Saint  John  de  Lux,  accustomed

3°

COMMISSION FOR THOMAS EDGE

to that function : whose names are as followeth :
videlicet,  Juan  de  Bacoyne,  Juan  de  Agerre,  Martin  de
Karre, Marsene  de  Horisada,  Domingo  de Sarria, and
Adam  de  Bellocke  : which  men  wee  would  have  to  be
used  very  kindely  and  friendly  during  this  their  voyage,
whereby  being  strangers  and  leaving  their  owne  Countrie
to  doe  us  service,  they  may  have  no  just  cause  of  com-
plaint,  but rather to be incouraged to doe us service
hereafter, if  there  be  cause. And  although  it  be  our
meaning they should be encouraged by all good and
curteous  usage  to  be  readie  to  doe  us  service,  yet  we  will
have  you  together  with  our  owne  people  and  Mariners
imployed  in  this  Voyage,  to  observe  and  diligently  put  in
practise  the  executing  of  that  businesse  of  striking  the
Whale,  as  well  as  they :  And  likewise  to  know  the  better
sorts of Whales from the worser, whereby in their
striking  *  they  may  choose  the  good,  and  leave  the  bad.
And  to  that  end  we  doe  set  you  downe  here  under,  the
severall  sorts  of  Whales,  together  with  the  differences  of
goodnesse  betweene  the  one  and  the  other,  as  we  have
gathered  the  same  by  information  from  men  of  excellencie
in  that  businesse :  who  make  knowne  unto  us,  that  there
are  eight  severall  kindes  of  Whales,  all  differing  the  one
from  the  other  in  quantitie  and  qualitie. Which  for  your
better  instruction,  we  have  thought  good  to  set  downe
in  this  our  Commission.

The  first  sort  of  Whales,  is  called  the  Bearded  Whale,
which  is  black  in  colour,  with  a  smooth  skinne,  and  white
under  the  chops ;  which  Whales  is  the  best  of  all  the
rest :  and  the  elder  it  is,  the  more  it  doth  yeelde.  This
sort  of  Whale  doth  yeelde  usually  foure  hundred,  and
sometimes  five  hundred  finnes,  and  betweene  one  hundred
and  one  hundred  and  twentie  Hogsheads  of  Oyle.  The
second  sort  of  Whale  is  called  Sarda,  of  the  same  colour
and  fashion  as  the  former,  but  somewhat  lesse,  and  the
finnes  not  above  one  fathom  long,  and  yeeldeth  in  Oyle,
according  to  his  bignesse,  sometimes  eightie,  sometimes  a
hundred  Hogsheads. The  third  sort  of  Whale  is  called

31

A.D.
l6ll.

Sixe

Biscainers
procured  for
killing  of  the
Whale  {as  I
have  heard)
by  Woodcocks
advise,  who
had  lived  and
been  imployed
with  them  in
Grand  Bay,
lie.

*This  was  a
conceit,  as  if
all  places  had
choice  of  all
kindes,  which
experience
hath  since
taught
otherwise.

See  of  the  kinds
of  Whales  sup.
471.  /  have
added  this  to
be  compared
zaith  that,  for
further  light.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

Trumpa,  being  as  long  as  the  first,  but  not  so  thicke,  of
colour  Grey,  having  but  one  Trunke  in  his  head,  whereas
the  former  have  two.  He  hath  in  his  mouth  teeth  of  a
span  long,  and  as  thicke  as  a  mans  wrist,  but  no  fins
whose  head  is  bigger  then  either  of  the  two  former,  and
in  proportion  farre  bigger  then  his  body.  In  the  head  of
Spermaceti  or  this  Whale  is  the  Spermaceti,  which  you  are  to  keepe  in
Permaciti  as  caske  apart  from  your  other  Oyle  :  you  may  put  the  Oyle
jvugai  ca  yQu  £nje  *n  fae  head  and  the  Spermaceti  altogether,  and
marke  it  from  the  other  Oyle,  and  at  your  comming  home,
we  will  separate  the  Oyle  from  the  Spermaceti.  The  like
is  to  be  done  with  the  Oyle  of  this  sort  of  Whale,  which
is  to  be  kept  apart  from  the  Oyle  of  the  other  Whales.
The  reason  is,  that  the  Oyle  of  this  sort  of  Whale  being
boyled,  will  be  as  hard  and  white  as  Tallow,  which  to  be
mingled  with  the  other  Oyle  being  liquid,  would  make  the
same  to  shew  as  footie  Oyle,  and  so  consequently  spoyle
both,  and  be  of  little  value :  you  are  therefore  to  be  very
carefull  to  keepe  the  Oyle  of  this  sort  of  Whale  apart,
as  well  of  the  head  as  of  the  body,  for  the  reasons  before
mentioned.  In  this  sort  of  Whale  is  likewise  found  the
Ambergreese.  Ambergreese,  lying  in  the  entrals  and  guts  of  the  same,
being  of  shape  and  colour  like  unto  Kowes  dung.  We
would  have  you  therefore  your  selfe  to  be  present  at  the
opening  of  this  sort  of  Whale,  and  cause  the  residue  of
the  said  entrals  to  be  put  into  small  Caske,  and  bring  them
with  you  into  England.  We  would  have  the  Master  also
to  be  by  at  the  opening  of  this  Whale,  and  to  be  made
privie  of  the  packing  of  those  Barils.  And  although  it
be  said,  that  the  Ambergreese  is  onely  in  this  Whale  and
in  none  other,  yet  we  would  not  have  you  be  absent  at  the
opening  of  any  other :  but  if  you  see  cause  to  make  a
reservation  of  the  entrals  of  every  Whale,  that  you  shall
perceive  to  be  cause  of  the  least  suspect  to  have  any  of  the
said  Ambergreese,  being  a  matter,  as  you  know,  of  good
worth,  and  therefore  not  slightly  to  be  regarded.  The
Teeth  likewise  of  this  sort  of  Whale  we  would  have  you
cause  to  be  reserved  for  a  triall ; as  also  any  other  matter

32

k4

m

?e  in

an;

COMMISSION FOR THOMAS EDGE

A.D.
l6ll

jxtraordinarie  that  you  shall  observe  in  the  same.  This
?  Whale  is  said  to  yeelde  in  Oyle  fortie  Hogsheads,  besides
:he  Spermaceti. The  fourth  sort,  &c.  as  sup.  471.  472.

And  in  as  much  as  industrie  and  diligence  are  two
Drincipall  steps  to  atchieve  great  enterprises,  and  negli-
gence and  idlenesse  are  enemies  to  the  same ;  we  would
lave  you  in  this  charge  committed  unto  you,  to  imbrace
:he  one,  and  to  avoide  the  other  :  and  to  shew  that  example
pf  paines  taking  to  the  rest  of  the  company  of  your  Ship
in  your  owne  person,  as  well  in  setting  them  on  worke,  as
in  putting  your  owne  hand  to  the  businesse  when  neede
requireth,  as  that  there  be  no  idle  time  spent,  but  that
'every  one  be  imployed  in  some  businesse  or  other  in  help-
ling  to  kill  the  Whale,  or  in  searching  the  Bayes  along  the
coast  for  Whales,  Ambergreese,  Morses  teeth,  or  any  other
strange  thing,  that  may  be  found  upon  that  coast,  or  in
killing  the  Morses,  Beares,  or  anything  that  may  make
profit  toward  our  great  charges.

Touching  directions  for  your  keeping  company  together
with  the  Elizabeth,  and  of  the  course  we  thinke  fitting
for  the  Master  of  that  Ship  to  observe,  we  have  set  the
same  downe  at  large  in  our  Commission  delivered  to  Jonas
Poole,  a  Copie  whereof  we  deliver  you  herewith,  for  your
better  instructions,  to  observe  what  is  to  be  done  on  both
your  behalfes  for  the  good  of  the  Voyage :  which  our
Commission,  we  would  have  you  strictly  observe,  unlesse
upon  some  speciall  occasion  to  us  unknowne,  and  by  the
consent  of  the  principall  Officers  in  both  the  Ships,  you
shall  see  just  cause  to  the  contrary.

You  have  with  you  an  order  set  downe  by  the  Lords

of  his  Majesties  privie  Counsell,  for  the  maintaining  of

our  Charter :  which  we  would  have  you  make  knowne  to

any  of  our  Nation,  that  you  may  chance  to  meete  withall

either  at  Cherie  Hand,  or  upon  any  of  those  coasts. And

if  any  stranger  doe  offer  you  violence,  or  doe  disturbe  you

in your  trade, you  may  both defend  your  selves, and Therestasnot
/  11  J r-  so  necessary  to

maintaine  your  trade  to  the  uttermost  of  your  powers, the  publike  is

&C.  omitted,

XIV

33

A.D.
l6ll.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[ni.iv.71 1.]

Foure  Ship.

Chap. III.

A  briefe  Declaration  of  this  my  Voyage  of  discov-
ery to  Greeneland,  and  towerds  the  West  of  it,
as  followeth  :  being  set  forth  by  the  right
Worshipfull  Sir  Thomas  Smith,  Governour  of
the  right  Worshipfull  Company  of  new  Trades,
&c.  written  by  Jonas  Poole.

Ee  set  sayle  at  Blacke-wall  the  eleaventh
of  Aprill,  161 1.  with  foure  Shippes  :  The
one  called  the  Mary-margaret,  of  burthen
one  hundred  and  fiftie  Tuns,  with  nine
and  fortie  Men  and  Boyes.  The  next
the  Elizabeth,  of  burthen  sixtie  Tuns,
with  eighteene  Men  and  Boyes.  The
third  was  called  the  Amitie,  of  burthen  seaventie  Tunnes,
with  foure  and  twentie  Men  and  Boyes.  The  fourth  was
called  the  Resolution,  with  about  sixteene  Men  and
Boyes :  the  Resolution  was  appointed  to  goe  to  Saint
Nicholas  in  Russia,  in  hope  to  make  two  Voyages  thither
See  Sup.  I.  3.  this  yeare.  The  Amitie  was  to  goe  to  Pichora  or  Nova-
zembla,  there  to  see  if  they  could  make  a  Voyage  by  way
of  trade,  or  by  killing  of  Mohorses,  &c.  The  Mary-
margaret  was  appointed  to  keepe  the  Elizabeth  companie
to  Greeneland,  abovesaid,  there  to  kill  the  Whale,  for  which
purpose  we  had  sixe  men  of  Saint  John  de  Luz,  with  all
things  fitting  for^  that  purpose.  The  Elizabeth  was
appointed  to  see  if  it  weare  possible  to  passe  from  Greene-
land towards  the  Pole,  and  to  search  in  those  Seas  what
likelihood  of  a  passage  that  way,  &c.  But  before  we
were  as  farre  to  the  Northwards  as  the  latitude  of  sixtie
five,  we  were  all  separated,  by  reason  of  contrarie  windes
and  foule  weather :  the  Elizabeth,  in  which  Ship  I  was,
was  stoked,  that  the  water  which  was  in  her  could  not
come  to  the  Pumpe,  but  lay  upon  the  balast,  which  was

34

The  Ships
separated.

A.D.

161 1.

Cherie  Hand.

Crosse  Rode.

Ice  a

hinderance  to
Whale  killing
and  discovery.

JONAS POOLE

:he  cause  we  could  beare  no  sayle  to  keepe  the  Mary-
nargaret  companie.

Yet  by  the  thirteenth  day  of  May  I  came  to  Cherie

[land,  and  the  foureteenth  I  spake  with  the  Amitie. The

f,  ;ixteenth  day  I  met  with  the  Mary-margaret,  which  kept

nee  companie  to  Greeneland,  but  in  our  passage  thither

!"  ye  saw  a  banke  of  Ice  to  the  East  wards  of  us,  above

Ci  "ortie  leagues  long. The  nine  and  twentieth  of  May,  we

fc  mchored  in  a  place  named  (by  me  the  last  yeare)  Cross-

•oad,  but  before  we  got  thither,  wee  were  much  troubled

,  vith  Ice  and  contrarie  windes,  and  we  found  almost  all  the

j!t[  sounds  full  of  Ice,  that  the  Biscainers  could  not  strike  one

nt  Whale,  although  they  saw  divers,  which  as  they  said  were

^c:  f)f  the  best  kinde  of  Whales.

I  staid  there  till  the  sixteenth  of  June,  in  which  time
:;  we  set  up  our  shalops  and  ranged  some  part  of  the  Coast,
lns>  )ut  found  little,  by  reason  the  beaches  were  covered  with
®  $now  and  Ice.  Likewise  in  the  same  time,  I  was  put  out
ie-  of  the  roade  with  Ice,  and  stood  out  West  and  by  North
n]  into  the  Sea  about  foureteene  leagues,  where  I  found  a
n:  banke  of  Ice ;  then  I  stood  into  the  sound  againe  and
1111  got  off  the  Shalop  which  was  in  the  roade,  at  which  time
ei  'which  was  about  the  eleaventh  of  June)  I  stood  to  the
Sea  againe  and  had  a  storme  at  South,  which  sunke  our
Shalop,  and  I  saw  the  Ice  lye  close  to  the  Land  in  80.  80.  Degrees.
degrees.  Then  I  went  into  Crosse  roade  againe,  and
had  a  Shalop  from  the  Mary-margaret,  and  because  I  per-
ceived the  Ice  above  said  to  lye  close  to  the  land,  and
unpossible  to  passe  that  way  there  running  verie  strong
Tides,  in  the  which  it  is  dangerous  dealing  with  the  Ice :
I  determined  to  stand  to  the  Southwards  alongst  the  said
Ice,  to  see  if  I  could  finde  the  Sea  open  that  way,  and  so
get  to  the  Westwards  of  the  said  Ice,  and  then  proceeded
on  my  Voyage :  but  I  found  it  to  lye  the  next  hand  South
South-west  and  South-west  and  by  South,  and  ranne
alongst  it  about  one  hundred  and  twentie  leagues,  at
which  time  I  supposed  my  selfe  neere  Groenland,  as  it  is
laied  downe  by  Hudson  and  others,  and  called  Hold  with

New

discovery.
Hold  with
Hope.

35

A.D.
l6ll

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Store  of
Whales.

hope :  I  ranne  neere  fortie  leagues  to  the  Westwards  of
the  Eastermost  part  of  the  said  Land,  as  it  is  laid  downe,
and  by  my  accounts  I  was  to  the  Southwards  of  it,  neere
the  latitude  74.  degrees,  where  I  saw  abundance  of  Whales
by  the  sides  of  the  Ice  ;  for  I  sailed  all  this  time  sometimes
in,  and  sometimes  by  the  said  Ice,  and  sounded  most
commonly  each  watch,  but  had  no  ground  at  160.  140.
180.  and  200.  fathomes.

Then  the  winde  came  to  the  North-west,  and  I  per-
ceiving the  Ice  to  trend  still  to  the  Southwards,  determined
to  stand  to  Greeneland,  from  whence  I  came,  there  to  make
my  Voyage  and  likewise  to  try  the  certaintie  concerning
the  misplacing  of  the  Land,  but  the  next  day,  being  about
the  seaven  and  twentieth  of  June,  the  winde  came  to  the
North,  and  I  stood  for  Cherie  Hand,  and  came  to  it  the
nine  and  twentieth  of  the  same  Moneth,  where  I  found
that  place  of  my  being,  when  1  supposed  I  should  have

Cherie  Hand,  found  Land,  did  beare  from  Cherie  Hand  West  and  by
South,  above  one  hundred  twentie  five  leagues.  When
I  came  to  the  Hand  I  saw  about  three  hundred  Morses
on  land,  but  a  storme  comming  they  went  all  into  the
Sea.

The  twelfth  of  July,  we  slue  above  two  hundred ;  and
by  the  three  and  twentieth  day  wee  had  taken  all  their
fat  Hides  and  Teeth,  which  with  the  Victuals  we  had  laded
the  ship :  then  I  determined  to  hale  up  a  shalop  to  goe  to
Greeneland,  to  search  if  I  could  finde  any  Land  or  Hands,
that  might  prove  beneficiall  the  next  yeere,  and  likewise

[III.  iv.  7 1 2.]  to  search  for  Teeth  and  Whales  Finnes.  The  foure  and
twentie,  and  five  and  twentie  dayes,  it  was  very  much
wind  at  North,  which  caused  the  Sea  to  go  so  high  that
we  could  not  land.  Yet  at  eight  of  the  clock  at  night
the  wind  ceased,  and  I  went  on  land  where  I  found
certayne  of  the  Marie  Margarets  men,  by  whom  I  under-
stood, that  the  said  ship  was  cast  away,  and  that  Master
Thomas  Edge  servant  to  the  right  Worshipfull  Company,
&c.  with  Stephen  Bennet  Master  of  the  said  shippe,  and
others  to  the  number  of  thirtie  persons,  were  arrived  on

36

Three  hundred
Morses.

Mary
Margaret  lost

neerfl

JONAS POOLE  a.d.

1611.

he  South  side  in  three  Boats,  and  that  they  parted  from
wo  Boats  in  Greenland  with  nine  men  in  them.

Immediately  Master  Edge  and  Master  Bennet  came
.board,  and  I  weighed  and  stood  to  the  West  side  of  the
land,  and  anchored  there,  and  put  neere  one  hundred
Morse-hides  on  land,  and  some  emptie  caske,  and  haled
lp  a  shallop.  The  six  and  twentieth  day  about  noone,  we
veighed  and  stood  to  the  South-west  side  of  the  Hand,
nd  sent  men  on  land  to  hale  up  two  shallops  there.  And
it  mid-night  I  set  sayle  for  Greenland,  carrying  with  mee
wo  Biscaine  shallops,  determining  there  to  try  the  Blubber
)f  those  Morses  we  had  killed,  and  bring  it  to  Oyle,  and
:o  bring  all  the  Oyle,  Teeth,  and  Finnes  which  they  had
gotten  in  that  Countrey.  And  after  divers  winds,  but
ndifferent  faire  weather,  I  arrived  at  Blacke-point  the
ast  of  July,  and  having  the  wind  at  North,  I  was  per-
^c  5waded  by  divers  that  had  gone  that  way  to  go  betwixt  the
[land  and  the  Mayne,  but  when  I  was  almost  through,  and
n  sight  of  that  place  where  the  Mary  Margaret  lyeth
sunke,  I  could  not  find  water  enough  for  the  ship,  yet
was  told  there  was  enough  by  divers  that  had  gone  that
way  in  the  shallops.  Here  we  stayed  two  dayes  to  buoy
the  channell,  which  is  shoald  and  narrow,  for  we  had  at
three  quarters  floud,  but  eleven  foot  water.

The  third  of  August  I  got  over,  and  about  eight  of  the

locke  at  night,  I  anchored  neere  the  Mary  Margaret,  the

• Sunne  being  in  79.  degrees,  and  there  I  found  a  shippe

c  of  Hull  conducted  thither  by  one  Nicholas  Woodcock,  he  Ship  of  Hull.

"jibeing  in  one  of  the  Boats  which  stayed  in  Greenland,

1 when  those  came  from  thence  that  came  to  Cherrie  Hand.

The  ships  name  was  called  the  Hopewell,  one  Thomas

Marmaduke  being  Master. Here  we  found  that  hee  had

slaine  above  one  hundred  and  thirtie  Mohorses,  which

were  left  on  land  when  Master  Thomas  Edge  came  from

thence  with  the  Boats  aforesaid,  and  we  did  determine  to

kill  at  my  arrivall. Assoone  as  the  ship  was  moored,  wee

got  out  Blubber  and  sent  it  on  land  to  bee  brought  into

Oyle, and  wee  followed  our  worke  till  the  seventh  of

37

lei

ses
k

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

August  at  noone,  at  which  time  having  Oyle  by  the  ships
side,  we  put  out  all  the  Blubber  which  was  in  hold,  save
two  tuns  and  a  halfe,  supposing  the  ship  had  ballast  enough
in  her,  for  there  was  above  twelve  tuns  of  Hides,  which
were  the  chiefest  cause  of  the  losse  of  the  ship,  and  nine
tunnes  of  Oyle,  and  above  seven  tunnes  of  ballast,  a
Hogshead  and  a  Barrell  of  Teeth :  besides  halfe  a  tunne
of  stones,  all  which  was  about  nine  and  twentie  tunne
weight,  and  to  any  unpartiall  mans  judgement,  sufficient
to  shift  a  Barke  of  sixtie  tunnes.  But  as  the  last  But
went  out  of  her,  the  ship  began  to  held,  and  with  all  a
great  many  men  went  to  leeward,  there  being  at  that  time
above  forty  aboard.  Then  the  hides  which  lay  in  hold,
slid  to  leeward,  and  brought  her  altogether  downe,  then
every  man  made  shift  to  save  his  life,  and  I  being  farre
from  the  hatches,  could  not  get  up  so  soone  as  others  did.
Double  At  which  time  I  saw  death  before  mine  eyes  two  wayes,
danger.  one  -f  j  stayed  in  hold,  I  was  sure  to  be  drowned :  the
other  if  I  went  up  the  hatches,  I  was  in  election  to  be
slaine ;  for  downe  at  the  hatches  fell  hogsheads  of  beere
and  divers  other  things,  the  least  of  them  being  sufficient
to  beate  a  mans  bones,  and  in  attempting  to  get  up,  I  was
beaten  downe  twice  and  hurt.  But  it  was  not  the  will  of
God  to  take  my  life  from  mee  then,  but  to  revive  me,  to
plucke  me  even  from  the  jawes  of  death,  and  by  swimming
and  crawling  I  got  into  the  Sea  cleere  of  the  ship  where  a
Boat  tooke  me  up,  and  blessed  bee  God,  no  man  perished
at  that  so  dangerous  an  accident.  We  being  all  got  into
three  Boats,  went  to  the  Hull  ship,  where  we  found  but
small  comfort :  for  Duke  told  us  plainly,  wee  should  not
come  aboard  his  ship,  and  caused  Pikes  and  Launces  to
bee  brought  to  keepe  us  out.  Then  Master  Edge  and
divers  others  desired  him  to  let  mee  come  aboard,  which
hee  did,  and  with  much  adoe  I  got  aboard,  having  mine
head  broke  to  the  skull,  and  my  brow  that  one  might
see  the  bare  bones,  and  by  mine  eare  I  had  a  sore  wound,
likewise  the  ribs  on  my  right  side  were  all  broken  and
sore  bruised,  and  the  collar  bone  of  my  left  shoulder  is

38

u

am

it.
mil

J

JONAS POOLE  a.d.

1611.

broken,  besides  my  backe  was  so  sore,  that  I  could  not
sai  suffer  any  man  to  touch  it.

That  which  followeth,  being  further  accusation  of
Marmaduke,  is  omitted.  And  I  have  here  added  out  of
his  Brother  Randolph  Poole  their  returne ;  omitting  the
former  part  of  his  Relations  of  the  same  Voyage.

In  this  our  great  distresse,  Thomas  Marmaduke  Master
of  the  shippe  of  Hull,  professed  great  kindnesse  towards
us,  promising  us  passage,  and  that  he  would  try  if  he  could
recover  our  ship :  but  hee  deferred  the  time  one  whole
weeke,  till  shee  was  full  of  oze,  so  that  when  wee  came  to
weigh  her,  but  her  Cables  burst,  and  so  we  left  her  to  all
our  sorrowes,  without  hope  of  recoverie.  Then  we  went
ie:||  aboard  the  ship  of  Hull,  which  God  had  prepared  for  our
rrca'  succour,  where  our  Merchant  agreeing  for  the  fraight,
we  got  the  goods  aboard ;  namely,  about  twentie,  or  one
and  twentie  tunnes  and  an  halfe  of  Oyle,  and  a  Barrell  of
Beares  Oyle,  about  tenne  tunnes  of  Whales  Finnes  bound
up  in  an  hundred  and  sixe  bundels,  in  every  one  thirtie
Finnes,  and  in  some  more,  five  Hogsheads  of  Morses
Teeth,  and  one  and  twentie  odd  paire.  And  if  our  ship
had  not  miscarried,  the  Voyage  had  beene  much  better.

The  nineteenth  of  August,  we  directed  our  course  for  [III.  iv.  7 13.]
England,  the  weather  being  reasonable  faire,  and  the  wind
for  the  most  part  betwixt  the  North  and  the  West : and
wee  continued  our  course  homeward  all  that  moneth.  They  returne

Upon  Tuesday  the  third  of  September,  about  two  of  h^mezvaJ'd-
the  clocke  in  the  morning,  we  were  imbayed  with  land,  er

and  were  neere  the  shoare  before  we  were  aware. Wee
steered  backe  North  and  by  East : and  at  twelve  of  the
clocke  we  found  our  selves  to  be  on  the  West  side  of  the
lies  of  Orkney,  and  steered  East  into  a  great  sound,  called Orkney
Pentlow  Fryth,  where  wee  beeing  entred  there  came  a  I^ds.
Boat  from  the  shoare,  which  brought  us  fresh  meat,  and  PJntl°hw.
one  of  the  men  directed  us  through  the  Sound. This  decrees  36.
Sound  lyeth  in  the  latitude  of  58.  degrees  and  36.  minutes,  minutes.
and  the  course  through,  is  East  North-east,  and  West
South-west, it  floweth there  on  the  change  day, South

39

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

South-east  and  North,  North-west  halfe  a  tyde,  nine  foote
high  or  thereabout.  At  the  entrance  in  on  the  North  side,
there  is  an  high  red  Mountayne,  and  the  Sound  there  is
twelve  miles  over:  but  farther  in  the  land  is  somewhat
lower,  and  the  Sound  narrower.  You  may  sayle  along  the
North  shoare  two  miles  off  the  land  in  fortie  or  fiftie
fathomes ;  and  on  the  said  shoare  about  foure  miles  East
South-east.  From  the  red  Cliffe  there  is  a  Bay,  into
which  you  may  steere  North  by  West,  giving  the  West
point  of  the  entrance  into  the  said  Bay  a  good  birth :  for
there  the  water  is  shoald  and  fowle  ground :  but  in  the
middle  of  the  entrance,  30.  20.  18.  12.  10.  6.  and  5.
fathomes :  but  wee  anchored  in  10.  fathomes,  fine  sandie
ground.

The  fift  of  September  at  an  East  South-east  Sunne  wee
set  sayle,  keeping  our  course  above  mentioned,  leaving
five  small  Hands  on  our  larboord  side,  and  one  Hand  on
our  starboord  side :  and  so  keeping  an  high  Cliffe,  which
lyeth  into  the  Sea  on  Scotland  side,  open  of  a  low  Land  in
the  sound  on  the  same  shoare,  we  sayled  out  as  before  is
said.

Upon  the  day  at  a  North  Sunne,  we  anchored  in

Humber  mouth  :  there  it  floweth  on  the  change  day  West

South-west. Upon  the  eight  day  we  arrived  at  Hull,

safely  and  well  in  body,  but  much  distressed  and  impayred

in  our  states,  which  God  at  his  good  pleasure  can  restore.

At  our  first  comming  to  this  Country  of  Greenland,  the

Mountaynes  and  Valleyes  thereof,  except  it  were  some

few  places,  were  all  covered  with  snow :  but  ere  we  went

away,  the  tops  of  the  high  Hils,  and  the  lower  Plaines

appeared  greene  with  Mosse,  and  some  little  quantitie  of

grasse. This  Countrey,  and  likewise  the  seas  in  these

parts,  are  subject  to  marvellous  thicke  and  mistie  weather,

especially  when the  sunne,  with  his  most  forcible  heat

Many  fat melteth  the  Ice  and  snow,  whose  vapours  obscure  the  light

Deere,  white Qf  ^  sunne making  small  difference  betweene  the  day

Beares, white, ,  1 1 •  1  • 1 •  1  1  J

y  an(i  dun  there,  and  the  irkesome  night  in  other  places.

Foxes.  We  found  in  this  Countrey  many  fat  Deere,  which  we

40

JONAS POOLE

J1  killed  with  our  Peeces  and  Dogges  at  our  pleasure,  which

Ci  was  a  great  refreshing  to  us  in  that  unquoth  place  :  many

:  white  Beares,  with  white,  grey,  and  dunne  Foxes. We

found  also  abundance  of  Fowle  : namely,  Culuidines,  sea

:  Pidgeons,  white  land  Partridges,  wild  Geese,  Willockes,

}:t  and  many  other  Fowles. Among  which  I  noted  the  nature

ls  of  one,  which  we  called  an  Allen  ; who  (like  to  the  great

fishes,  which  eate  up  the  small,  or  like  to  some  great  men,

which  devoure  all  the  labours  of  the  poore)  when  some

smaller  Birds  have  gotten  any  thing,  then  he  leaveth  not

beating  of  them,  till  they  have  cast  up  what  they  have

eaten,  which  he  laying  hold  of  devoureth  up :  and  so  with

little meate  in their  gorges, and  few  feathers  on their

backes,  he  leaveth  them  to  get  more,  not  for  themselves

but for him. We found on the shoares many huge

Morses.

There  is  great  store  of  fresh  water  in  every  Valley,
which  proceedeth  most  of  the  melted  snow.  On  every
Beech  is  great  plentie  of  drift  wood,  but  never  a  bush  nor
tree  groweth  in  those  quarters,  as  farre  as  we  have  hitherto
discovered.

Chap.  IIII.

A  Relation  written  by  Jonas  Poole  of  a  Voyage  to
Greenland,  in  the  yeere  1612,  with  two  ships,
the  one  called  the  Whale  ;  the  other  the  Sea-
horse, set  out  by  the  Right  Worshipfull  the
Muscovie Merchants.

A.D.

1612.

Abundance  of

sundry

Fowles.

Allen  a
devouring

Fowle.

Many  huge
Morses.

He  seventh  of  Aprill,  161 2.  wee  set  sayle
at  Blacke-wall,  and  went  to  Gravesend.

The  third  of  May  we  came  to  Cherie Chery  Hand.
Hand,  where  we  found  a  ship  of  Holland,
in  which  one  Alan  Salowes  an  English-
man was  Pilot. The  same  day  about  a
North  sunne  we  anchored  on  the  West

side  of  the  Hand.

The  fourth,  we  trimmed  a  shallop  which  I  left  there  the

41

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

last  yeere :  and  Alan  Salowes  went  aboard  our  Admirall,
and  Master  Russell  sent  for  Master  Thomas  Edge,  Master
Arthington,  John  Mason,  and  my  selfe :  where  wee  had
some  speech  about  detayning  him,  and  to  have  brought!
him  into  England :  but  in  the  end  hee  was  let  goe.  At  a
North  sunne  we  sent  our  shallop  to  the  South-east  side
of  the  Hand  to  fetch  a  shallop,  which  was  left  there  the
last  yeere  :  but  they  could  not  get  thither  for  Ice,  and  came

[III.  iv.  7 1 4.]  aboard  againe  at  an  East  North-east  Sunne  the  fift  day  :  at
which  time  we  weighed,  and  stood  to  the  Westward,  but
immediatly  we  altered  our  course,  and  stood  toward  the
Hand  againe  among  the  Ice ;  and  about  a  West  North-
west Sunne  wee  sent  our  Skiffe  and  Shallop  to  fetch  the
Shallop  aforesaid.  The  winde  was  at  North  and  by  West,
frostie  weather  with  snowe.

The  eight,  wee  stood  toward  Cherie  Hand  againe,  and
were  faire  by  it  at  a  South  sunne :  at  which  time  the
winde  came  to  the  South-east,  and  wee  saw  the  Hollander
standing  with  us.  Then  we  altered  our  course,  and  sayled
West  North-west,  determining,  if  hee  followed  us,  to  stay
for  him.  At  ten  of  the  clock  at  night  hee  came  to  us :
and  the  Admirall  sent  his  shallop  aboord  of  him  to  com-
mand him  to  be  gone  out  of  our  companie :  and  at  a
North  sunne  hee  stood  away  from  us,  and  sayled  North
and  by  East,  and  we  lay  by  the  lee.

The  twentieth  at  a  South  Sunne  we  saw  our  Consort,
and  spake  with  them,  and  they  told  us,  that  they  had
almost  split  their  ship  with  a  piece  of  Ice,  which  brake
nine  of  their  Timbers,  so  that  they  had  five  foot  water  in
hold.

The  one  and  two  and  twentie  dayes,  wee  plyed  to  wind-
ward, the  winde  being  at  North  faire  weather. And  at

B lac ke  point.  Blacke  point  wee  saw  great  store  of  Ice  driving  to  the
South.  At  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night  Blacke  Point  did
beare  from  mee  East  and  by  North  nine  leagues. And

Great  store  of  the  three  dayes  past  we  saw  great  store  of  Whales  within

Whales.  ten  or  twelve  leagues  off  the  Land.

Cape  Cold.  The  three  and  twentieth  we  were  faire  off  Cape  Cold ;

42

del

At

sidi

JONAS POOLE

JlraJ  where  Master  Edge  and  Master  Arthington  went  with
the  Basks  in  their  Shallops  for  Crosse-rode,  in  hope  to
kill  some  Whales.  And  we  saw  store  of  Whales  in  the
Sea.

The  five  and  twentieth  we  got  into  Foule  Sound,  all
the  Sounds  being  full  of  Ice ;  and  the  Shallops  came
aboord  and  brought  some  Venison,  which  was  very  leane.
And  at  six  of  the  clock  the  Basks  went  with  the  Shallops
to  Faire  Foreland,  to  see  if  they  could  kill  a  Whale :  and
at  a  North-west  Sunne  Master  Edge  went  with  a  Shallop,
to  see  if  Crosse-rode  were  open.

The  six  and  twentieth,  the  two  ships  abovesaid  came
into  Foule  Sound  :  one  of  them  was  that  Hollander  before
mentioned ;  the  other  was  a  ship  of  London,  called  The
Diana,  whereof  one  Thomas  Bustion  dwelling  at  Wapping
wall,  was  Master.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  Alane  Salowes  came  aboord
of  our  ship,  and  told  us,  that  his  Merchant  had  broke  his
necke  downe  a  Cliffe.  The  same  day  the  Hollander  and
the  Diana  stood  to  the  Southward.  The  winde  was  at
North  North-west,  and  Northwest,  which  kept  the  Ice  in
the  Sounds.  The  twentie  eight,  we  sent  the  long  Boat
and  our  Shallop  to  Brokennesse,  with  a  Shallop  of  ten
Tunnes,  there  to  be  set  up.  The  winde  was  at  West  with
snowe  and  frost.  The  same  day  the  Basks  came  aboord,
but  could  kill  never  a  Whale.  The  winde  came  to  the
South  South-west,  with  frost  and  snowe.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  the  winde  was  at  South  with
much  snowe.  The  same  day  one  of  our  men  dyed,
named  John  Butcher,  having  layen  sicke  about  three
weeks.  The  thirtieth,  one  Michael  Perkins  dyed  aboord
The  Whale.  The  last  of  May,  the  winde  was  at  South ;
and  wee  stood  toward  the  Foreland  in  79.  degrees.  The
same  day  at  midnight,  the  Chyrurgeon  of  The  Whale
dyed.

The  first  of  June,  we  stood  into  Foule  Sound,  where
wee  saw  abundance  of  Ice  drive  out  with  the  winde  at
East. The  second  day,  the  winde  was  at  North  and  by

43

A.D.
l6l2.

Foule  Sound.

Faire
Foreland.

The  Diana  of
London.

Dutch  Mer-
chant brake  his
necke.

Six
Biscayners.

June.

A.D.

1612.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Marmaduke.

East,  cold  frostie  weather.  All  which  day  wee  lay  under
saile  in  the  mouth  of  the  Sound.  The  third  day,  wee
spake  with  Thomas  Marmaduke  of  Hull,  in  a  ship  called
The  Hope  well.  Wee  sent  for  him  to  come  aboord,  but
he  answered,  that  he  was  not  well,  and  sent  his  Mate
Christopher  Nayler.  The  same  day,  we  stood  to  the
mouth  of  the  Sound,  but  it  was  covered  with  Ice.  And
Marmaduke  stood  to  the  Northward ;  and  as  we  were
Marmadukes  afterward  informed,  discovered  as  farre  as  82.  degrees;
Discoverie  to  two  degrees  beyond  Hakluyts  Headland.  The  fourth,
82.  degrees.  we  sent  our  snalk>p  on  shoare  in  Foule  Sound,  to  see  if
any  harbour  were  open  to  ride  in,  and  to  put  our  Admirall
on  ground  to  stop  her  leake.  The  same  day,  our  long
Boate  came  to  us  from  Brokennesse.  And  we  turned  into
the  Sound,  because  we  saw  the  Ice  drive  out  with  the
winde  at  South,  and  blew  hard.  The  fift,  we  anchored  in
Foule  Sound  in  seventeene  fathoms  water  and  sandie
ground,  where  we  saw  the  place  where  both  the  ships  lay
which  wee  lost  the  last  yeere,  covered  with  Ice.  The
same  time  wee  sent  our  shallop  with  our  Carpenters,  to
finish  the  aforesaid  shallop  at  Brokennesse.  The  winde
continued  at  South ;  and  the  Whale  turned  into  the
Sound  by  us,  and  anchored  there  at  a  South-west  by  South
Sunne.  The  ninth,  the  Admirals  Boate  and  ours  went
with  provision  and  men  to  worke  upon  a  Whale,  which
the  Basks  had  killed ;  and  we  stood  toward  the  Foreland
with  the  ships,  where  the  Whale  was  killed,  the  winde  at
South,  thicke  foggie  weather.  And  by  an  East  North-east
Sunne  wee  anchored  in  the  mouth  of  Foule  Sound  in
fifteene  fathoms,  gray  sand  with  some  shells.  At  a  West
sunne  the  Boate  came  aboord  for  caske  and  other  pro-
vision, and  told  us,  that  the  Basks  had  killed  two  other
Whales.

The  seventeenth,  one  Baske  named  Chapel,  tooke  five
of  our  English  men  to  him,  and  they  trimmed  the  shallop
to  kill  the  Whale.  About  a  West  North-west  sunne  they
went  away,  the  winde  at  South.  The  twentieth,  the
Biscaine  shallop  came  aboord  of  us  from  the  Foreland,

44

JONAS POOLE

A.D.

1612.

t'  ind  told  us  that  they  had  strooken  three  Whales,  which
jrake  away.

The  two  and  twentieth  wee  rid  still,  the  winde  being  at  [III.iv.715.]
North-west,  with  snowe  and  frost.  The  five  and  twentieth,
we  got  the  Whale  on  flote,  having  stopped  her  leake.
We  were  no  sooner  off,  but  it  blew  most  fiercely,  so  that
the  Whales  long  Boate  and  our  shallop  brake  from  the
Whales  sterne,  and  were  split  in  pieces  on  the  Ice,  that  lay
on  shoare.  The  same  day  about  a  South  sunne  two  men
came  from  Faire  Foreland,  and  told  us  that  Master  Edge
was  come  from  the  South  in  the  Pinnasse,  and  had  spoken
with  one  Nicolas  Woodcock  an  Englishman,  which  was
my  Mate  to  this  Countrey  of  Greenland  in  the  yeere  16 10.
The  said  Woodcocke  was  now  Pilot  of  a  ship  of  Saint
Sebastian  in  Biscay,  and  rid  in  Ice  Sound.  Moreover,
they  spake  with  the  men  of  the  Boate  of  the  Diana,  and
saw  the  Hollanders  Boate,  but  spake  not  with  their  men.
The  two  men  abovesaid  told  us  likewise,  that  John  Chapel
our  Baske  with  five  English  men  had  killed  a  Whale :
and  betwixt  them  and  another  shallop  they  had  slaine
another,  and  had  them  both  on  shoare.

The  seven  and  twentieth  we  rid  still,  and  our  Carpenter
went  to  worke  to  mend  the  knee  of  our  beake-head.  And
I  went  to  see  what  Morses  were  on  Land,  where  I  found
neere  one  hundred  and  fiftie.  The  eight  and  twentieth,
the  shallop  that  had  all  English  men  in  her  save  one  Baske,
came  aboord  for  provision,  and  told  me,  that  they  and
Johannes  Chapel,  had  slaine  a  great  Whale  close  by  our
ship,  which  towed  them  off  into  the  Sound,  and  our  long
Boate  followed  them.  At  the  same  time  we  saw  sixe
Whales  close  by  the  ships  side  as  we  rode  in  harbour :  and
we  saw  great  store  in  the  Sound,  and  within  one  houre
there  were  so  many  about  our  ships  and  in  the  Sound,
that  we  could  not  count  them.  About  a  North-west  sunne
our  long  Boate  brought  the  men  that  strooke  the  Whale
abovesaid,  and  towed  their  shallop  on  land :  for  the  said
Whale  had  sunke  her  with  his  taile.  The  same  time  our
Carpenter  went  to  worke  on  the  broken  shallop,  and  I  went

45

Woodcock
Pilot  of  a
Biscay  ship.

The  fourth
and  fifth
Whales  killed.

The  sixt  whale
killed.

A.D.

1612.

Three  hun-
dred Morses.

Biscainers
envie.

The  seventh
Whale  killed.

The  eight
Whale  killed.

PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

to  the  place  where  the  Morses  lay,  where  I  found  about
three  hundred  on  land.  Then  I  went  aboord  the  Whale
to  get  some  harping  Irons  :  for  they  had  all,  but  I  could
get  but  one,  because  the  rest  of  the  Basks  had  laid  them
up,  envying  that  one  Baske,  that  went  with  all  English
men,  had  done  so  much,  because  by  their  good  wills  they
would  not  have  us  to  have  any  insight  into  this  businesse.
Moreover,  hee  that  had  the  chiefest  command  in  this
voyage,  did  greatly  condemne  the  going  of  so  many
English  men  with  that  one  Baske,  either  for  feare  they
should  kill  none,  and  lose  all  their  provision  for  the  said
use,  or  for  feare  that  our  men  should  kill  the  Whale
aswell,  and  as  soone  as  they ;  yet  was  there  none  of  the
other  Boates  but  had  lost  more  then  they  had  lost.  And
as  for  killing,  there  was  not  one  Whale  killed  with  one
Boate  alone,  save  ours,  with  all  English  save  the  Baske
aforesaid,  which  slue  three  without  the  helpe  of  any  other
Boate.  This  day  the  Basks  slue  another  Whale  at  the
Foreland.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  the  broken  shallop  was  mended,
and  I  went  to  the  Foreland,  to  see  whether  the  other
shallops  would  come  where  the  ships  rode  in  harbour,
where  abundance  of  Whales  were  still.  The  same  time
the  Basks  killed  another  Whale.  Then  I  romaged  my
ship,  and  put  caske  on  land. All  this  day  it  was  calme.

The  last  of  June,  one  came  from  the  Foreland,  and  told
us,  that  the  Basks  had  slaine  two  great  Whales.  All  this
day  likewise  it  was  calme :  and  there  lay  abundance  of
huge  Whales  in  the  harbour  about  our  ships.  One  of  the
whales  abovesaid,  Johannes  with  the  five  English  men  slue
without  any  of  the  others  helpe.  For  they  stood  on  the
land  flouting,  and  saying,  that  it  was  unpossible  for  them
to  kill  him,  and  would  not  once  lanch  their  Boates  to  helpe
them  :  yet  hee  was  one  of  the  greatest  that  were  killed  this
yeere.  All  this  day  the  whales  lay  so  thicke  about  the
ship,  that  some  ran  against  our  Cables,  some  against  the
Ship,  and  one  against  the  Rudder.  One  lay  under  our
beake-head  and  slept  there  a  long  while. At  which  time

46

JONAS POOLE

:  3ur Carpenter had hung a stage close by the water,

iaif  whereon  his  tooles  lay.  And  wee  durst  not  molest  the
said  whale  for  feare  he  should  have  overthrowne  the  stage

-.  ind  drowned  all  his  tooles.  In  the  end  he  went  away,
md  carried  the  ships  head  round,  his  taile  being  foule  of

leflthe  Cable.

The  first  of  July,  at  a  North  North-east  Sunne,  the
shallops  came  to  kill  whales  in  the  harbour  where  we  rid,
and  strooke  three,  which  all  brake  away.  The  same  day,
Johannes  strooke  a  whale,  that  smit  in  the  side  of  his
shallop  and  split  it. Now  wee  perceived  the  whales  to

ik  begin  to  goe  out  of  the  Bayes.  The  second  day,  the
iBasks  slue  three  great  whales  faire  by  our  ships,  in  lesse
then  foure  houres ;  which  wee  with  our  long  Boate  and
men  towed  into  harbour,  and  made  fast  to  our  ship.  And
the  Basks  went  with  their  shallops  to  Faire  Foreland.

The  seventh  day,  wee  had  abundance  of  Ice  about  our
ships,  which  with  the  winde  and  the  tyde  drave  out  off
another  Sound.  The  eight,  we  rid  still,  and  were  troubled
with  much  Ice,  by  reason  of  a  storme  that  blue  at  South-
west and  by  west,  &c.  The  rest  is  omitted  as  having
nothing  of  note,  but  ordinarie  accidents.

Chap. V.

A  Journal  of  the  Voyage  made  to  Greenland  with
five  English  Ships  and  a  Pinnasse,  in  the  yeere
1 613. Written  by  Master  William  Baffin.

Y  the  providence  of  Almightie  God
wee  departed  from  Queenborough  the
thirteenth  day  of  May  with  sixe  good
Ships,  viz.  The  Tigre,  Admirall ;  the
Matthew,  Vice-admirall ;  the  Sea-horse,
called  the  Gamaliel,  the  Reare-admirall ;
the  Desire ;  the  Annula ;  and  the  Richard
and  Barnard ;  with  the  John  and  Francis  shortly  to  follow.
The  one  and  twentieth  day,  faire  weather,  the  winde

47

A.D.
1613.

The  ninth  and

tenth  Whales

killed.

The  eleventh,

twelfth  and

thirteenth

Whales  killed.

[III.iv.716.]

Ascension  day.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

Southward,  wee  still  making  to  the  Northwards.  This
morning  wee  had  sight  of  Land  on  the  Coast  of  Norway,
it  lying  East  and  by  North  off  about  twelve  or  fourteene
leagues.  This  day  at  noone,  we  were  in  the  latitude  of
61.  degrees  and  30.  minutes,  the  variation  of  the  Com-
passe  at  Scoutes-nes  is  eight  degrees  East,  it  being  about
ten  or  twelve  leagues  off :  wee  having  made  a  North  way
halfe  East,  about  thirtie  leagues.

The  three  and  twentieth  at  noone,  in  the  latitude  of
6$.  degrees  and  45.  minutes,  in  which  place,  the  Needle
of  Declination  doth  dippe  under  the  Horizon  63.  degrees
and  30.  minutes  by  that  Instrument  which  declineth  54.  at
London.

The  thirtieth  day,  about  three  of  the  clocke,  wee  espied

Greenland the  land  of  Greenland,  being  about  eight  or  nine  leagues

attuned  in 0ff The  Southwardest  part  of  it  bare  South-east  and  by

et^sene East  off  it,  which  shortly  wee  perceived  to  bee  the  Land

lying  in 76. degrees  and 55. minutes,  which  is  called

Horne-sound. This  Land  lyeth  by  our  common  Com-

passe  North  North-west. Within  two  houres  after  we

had  sight  of  Land,  it  began  to  snowe,  and  was  very  cold.

This  evening  the  Compasse  was  varied  thirteene  degrees

West.

The  one  and  thirtieth  day,  variable  weather  with  snowe,
and  very  cold,  and  the  winde  also  variable : and  in  the
afternoone  the  winde  was  at  the  North-east. In  the  morn-
ing, wee  espied  a  ship,  and  about  noone  we  spoke  with
her,  and  their  Master  and  Pilot  came  aboord  of  us. And
A  ship  of  Saint  wee  knew  them  to  bee  that  ship  of  Saint  John  de  Luz,
John  de  Luz. which  had  leave  of  the  Companie  to  fish. And  they  told
f , us,  that  there  were  eight  Spaniards  on  the  Coast. Also,
the  coast. wee  espied  another  ship,  which  we  supposed  to  be  a  French
The  Genera//  man,  and  had  one  Allan  Sallas  to  their  Pilot.
was  Captaine The  second  of  June,  in  the  morning,  about  five  of  the
Benjamin clocke,  our  Generall  sent  our  shallop  to  a  small  Pinke,  that
skim  infight a^  tn*s  n^gnt  we  saw  al°ng  the  shoare,  to  bid  their  Master
with  a  and  Pilot  come  aboord  us,  which  presently  they  did. The

Carrike.  Masters  name  was  Clais  Martin  of  Home,  and  his  ship

48

I

WILLIAM BAFFIN  a.d.

1613.

hi  ras  for  Dunkerke,  and  he  told  us  that  he  was  consorted

i)  nth  another  ship  that  was  his  Admirall,  the  Captaines

ame  was  Fopp  of  Dunkerke,  and  that  he  was  on  the

'oast. Wee  kept  the  Master  and  Pilot  aboord  of  us,  and

ent  some  of  our  men  aboord  of  her,  and  brought  her

nder  our  lee  : and  then,  we  sent  their  Master  aboord

i]  gaine,  charging  them  to  follow  us. This  afternoone  we

ooke  their  shallop  with  five  or  sixe  men,  whereof  two

vtrt  English  men,  and  one  Scot,  at  the  Faire  foreland.

The  fourth  day  also  faire  weather. This  morning  was  Dutch  ship.

es  he  first  Whale  killed. Wee  had  no  night  since  the  three  No  niShi- the

j.nd  twentieth  of  May. The  fift  day,  faire  weather,  but z3-°fMay-

rery  cold,  the  winde  North. Wee  sayled  along  the  Hand

>eing  about  eighteene  or  twentie  leagues  in  length ;  lying

or  the  most  part  by  the  common  Compasse  North  and  by

West  halfe  Westward. About  nine  of  the  clocke  in  the

tfternoone,  we  saw  our  other  three  ships,  viz.  the  Gamaliel,

he  Desire,  and  the  Richard  and  Barnard,  which  lay  there

o  and  fro,  because  they  could  not  goe  into  their  Harbour

)y  reason  of  the  Ice :  and  also,  because  there  were  foure

other  ships  in  a  Bay  or  Cove,  called  Pooppy  Bay,  or  Nickes

3ove : and  also  other  ships  on  the  other  side  in  Greene

harbour. We  sayled  along  the  drift  Ice  untill  about  one

br  two  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  at  which  time,  we

:ame  to  an  anchor  in  the  entrance  of  the  Sound,  because

:he  Ice  came  driving  out  so  fast.

The  sixt  day,  faire  weather,  the  winde  variable,  till  the
fternoone :  at  which  time  it  came  to  the  Northwards.
A.bout  three  in  the  afternoone  we  weighed  anchor,  and
bout  ten  of  the  clocke  we  came  to  the  foure  ships  lying
in  Pooppy  Bay :  two  of  them  being  Hollanders,  and  one  Divers
a  Rocheller,  and  the  other  a  ship  of  Burdeaux.  The  strangers.
Masters  of  the  Hollanders  came  aboord  of  our  ship,  to
speake  with  the  Generall,  both  of  them  being  of  Amster-
dam, and  brought  a  Commission  granted  by  the  Grave
Maurice,  for  to  fish  in  this  Countrey.  But,  when  they  saw
our  Kings  Majesties  Commission  granted  to  the  worship-
ifu.ll  Companie,  they  told  our  Generall,  that  they  would

XIV  49  D

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

depart  this  Coast :  having  our  Generals  Ticket  to  shew  mi
to  their  Adventurers,  that  they  were  there,  and  had  made
their  Port,  and  how  he  would  not  suffer  them  to  fish.  We|>!
anchored  close  by  the  French  ship  wherein  was  Allane
Sallas,  being  readie  to  fight,  if  they  refused  to  come  aboord
us.  So,  when  we  sent  our  shallop,  the  Master  came  pre
sently  and  their  Surgeon,  who  could  speake  English.  At
the  first,  they  denyed  that  Sallas  was  aboord  of  them  :  but,
[III.  iv.  7 1 7.]  being  hardly  urged,  they  confessed  that  hee  and  one
Thomas  Fisher  an  English  man  were  aboord,  who  were
both  presently  sent  for.  This  Sallas  was  their  Pilot,  and
Fisher  was  their  Gunner.

The seventh day faire  weather, we  road still  at an

anchor. This  day  I  observed  the  latitude  of  the  place,

Lat.  78.  deg.  and  found  it  in  78.  degrees  24.  minutes. The  variation

24.  minut. of  the  Compasse  is  in  this  place  15.  degrees  21.  minutes

Ship  of  Biscay.  West. About  a  North  Sunne  a  small  ship  of  Biscay  came

into  the  harbour  where  we  roade.
Snozoe.  The  eight  day,  for  the  most  part  snow,  the  winde  South-

ward. This  day  the  Master  of  the  French  ship,  being  a
ship  of  nine  score,  or  two  hundred,  called  the  Jaques  of
Burdeaux,  agreed  with  our  Generall  that  hee  might  fish
on  the  coast :  our  Generall  was  to  have  halfe  the  Whales  he
could  kill.  Also,  this  day,  the  Master  of  the  ship  of
Rochel,  and  the  Master  of  the  small  ship  of  Biscay,  were
agreed  to  depart  from  the  coast.

The ninth day, faire weather. This morning the
Gamaliel our  Reare-Admirall, and the  Desire  weighed
Greene  anchor  to  goe  for  Greene  harbour,  where  two  ships  lay,  one

harbour.  of  Dunkerke,  and  the  other  of  Saint  Sebastian  in  Biscay.

The  Captaine  of  the  Dunkerke,  called  Fopp,  had  beene
with  our  Generall,  and  told  him  that  he  would  depart  from
this  Coast.  Our  Generall  gave  him  leave  to  take  the
Pilot  of  the  small  Pinke,  and  the  other  Dutch  men  he  had
taken  of  his  ;  keeping  only  the  English  men  and  the  Scots.
Also,  the  two  ships  of  Holland,  with  the  ship  of  Biscay,
and  that  of  Rochel  weighed  anchor,  and  departed  from  this
Harbour. About  six  of  the  clocke  in the  afternoone,

5°

WILLIAM BAFFIN

le  ime  the  Master  of  the  ship  of  Saint  Sebastian  aboord  of
:  s,  being  brought  by  one  of  the  Masters  Mates  of  the

A.D.
1613.

)esire  (they  having  taken  two  of  his  Shallops)  to  know

'•  ur Generals pleasure, whether he should have them

;  *aine,  or  no. Our  Generall  gave  them  him  againe,  upon

Dndition, that he would depart the Coast. About a

forth  North-west  Sunne,  we  weighed  anchor  to  goe  for

lorne-Sound, where  we heard, that there  were  divers

:;  lips ;  the  wind  Northward  a  small  gale.

The  tenth  day,  faire  weather,  the  winde  at  North,  being
ery  close  weather.  About  a  North  Sunne  we  came  to
n  anchor  in  the  entrance  of  Low  Sound,  where  we  saw  Low  sound,
wo  ships  ride  at  anchor.  Our  Generall  sent  our  shallop
d  see  what  ships  they  were,  who  found  them  to  bee  the
wo  ships  of  Holland.  Also  our  long  Boate  went  on
loare  to  set  up  the  Kings  Majesties  Armes  upon  a  low  His  Majesties
oint  of  land,  lying  a  great  way  off,  called  Low-nesse. drmes  and  a

Ve  set  up  a  Crosse  of  wood,  and  nayled  the  Armes  upon °sse  set  u?

r  '  J  r at  Low-nesse.

The  thirteenth  day,  in  the  morning,  it  snowed  very  fast,  Snowe.
eing  very  thicke  weather,  the  winde  variable,  we  standing
ff  from  the  land.  About  seven  of  the  clock  it  began  to
eere  up,  at  which  time  we  espied  three  ships  ;  and  making
oward  them,  at  length  we  perceived  them  to  be  the  three
hips  which  came  from  the  Bay  where  we  road :  the  winde
lso  was  at  East  and  by  South,  and  blew  a  very  stiffe  gale,
"hen  we  stood  in  for  the  shoare,  and  spent  most  of  this
ay  in  turning  up  Horne-Sound.  And  about  a  North
^orth-west  Sunne,  at  ten  a  clock  wee  espied  six  ships  lying
t  anchor  on  the  South  side  of  the  Sound,  in  a  small  Bay.
"he  one  of  them  was  Captaine  Fopp  the  Dunkerker,  who
ame  in  before  us,  and  was  appointed  by  our  Generall  to
ome  into  this  harbour,  and  there  to  stay  for  us,  and  to
rot  to  the  Foreland,  to  have  his  other  ship  which  we  kept
here.  Foure  of  them  were  Biscaines  of  Saint  Sebastian  ;
nd  one  of  them  was  in  the  harbour  where  we  road  and
ound  the  French  ship  :  The  sixt  was  a  ship  of  Amsterdam,
therein  Thomas  Bonner  was  Master  and  Pilot,  and  above

Thomas
Bonner
Englishman,
Master  and
Pilot.

5i

A.D.
1613.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

twentie English men more. All the Biscaines came
aboord  of  us  as  soone  as  we  were  at  an  anchor : bul
Thomas  Bonner  refused  to  come,  being  sent  for  by  oui
Generall. Our  Generall  commanded  our  Gunner  to  shool
at him, he  himselfe discharging the second Ordnance.
Then  presently  he  began  to  set  saile,  and  cut  his  cable
thinking  to  get  from  us  :  but  wee  having  shot  him  through
three  or  foure  times,  they  began  to  weave  us,  so  we  sent
our  shallop  and  he  came  aboord. There  were  five  or  sixe
more  of  the  English  men  fetched  aboord,  and  some  of  our
men  sent  to  bring  her  to  an  anchor,  where  shee  might  ride
safe :  for,  shee  was  almost  run  ashoare. This  was  aboutL
a  North  sunne,  or  eleven  a  clocke. The  Biscaines  werelp
charged  presently  to  depart,  so  soone  as  they  had  filled!
fresh  water,  which,  they  said,  they  wanted ;  and  to  bring
what  Whale  finnes  they  had  found,  or  had  taken,  or  other
things.

The  fourteenth  day,  faire  weather,  the  winde  at  East
North-east.  This  morning  one  of  the  Biscaines  brought
a  few  Whale  finnes  aboord  of  us,  and  the  skin  of  a  Beare,
which  they  had  killed.  Then  was  our  Boat-swaine  sent
aboord  of  them  to  search  their  ships,  and  to  bid  them
depart.  Our  Generall  kept  the  Holland  ship,  wherein  was
Thomas  Bonner,  to  the  use  of  the  Companie.  This  day  I ;
observed  the  latitude  of  this  place  by  a  Quadrant  of  foure
foote  Semidiameter,  and  found  it  to  stand  in  76.  degrees
55.  minutes :  the  Declination  of  the  Needle  under  the
Horizon,  is  67.  degrees  30.  minutes,  pointing  to  the
Northwards :  but  pointing  to  the  Southwards,  it  is  80.
degrees.  The  variation  of  the  Compasse  is  12.  degrees
14.  minutes  west  from  the  true  Meridian :  but  from  our
common  sayling  Compasse  it  is  17.  degrees,  because  the
Compasse  is  touched  five  degrees  and  a  halfe  to  the  East-
ward, and  the  variation  is  to  the  Westward.

This  day  in  the  afternoone,  the  foure  ships  of  Biscay

[III. iv. 7 1 8.]  departed from this Harbour, which is called Horne-

Sound : and  about  a  North  sunne,  I,  with  the  Master

Thomas  Sherin  went  ashoare  with  other,  to  set  up  another

52

76,  4ff.  55.

min.  declina-
tion 67.  deg.
30.  min.
Variation  12.
deg.  14.  min.

WILLIAM BAFFIN  a.d.

1613.

Crosse  with  the  Kings  Majesties  Armes,  cast  in  Lead,
layled  upon  it.  Then  I  observed  the  Sunne  upon  his
-North  Meridian,  by  my  foresaid  Quadrant,  and  found  it
-elevated  above  the  Horizon  10.  degrees  and  thirtie
;:  minutes  :  but  because  his  heigth  at  the  South  Meridian,
]\  and  his  heigth  at  the  North  did  not  agree,  in  finding  of
:fthe  Latitude,  I  did  abate  five  minutes  from  each,  as  the
:i:  meane  betwixt  both  :  for  his  altitude  at  the  South  Meridian
;:tiwas  36.  degrees  40.  minutes,  the  declination  23.  degrees
;*  and  29.  minutes.

The  fifteenth  day,  faire  weather,  the  winde  in  the  morn-
]j;  ing  South,  but  almost  calme.  This  day  about  noone  we
*:t  weighed  anchor  with  the  ship  of  Amsterdam,  and  divers
of  her  men  were  fetched  aboord  us  with  their  Shipper,
and  some  of  our  men  were  sent  aboord  her  with  one  of
our  Masters  Mates,  called  Master  Spencer.  All  this  day
it  was  so  calme,  that  wee  were  faine  to  towe  our  ship.
Our  Carpenter  did  trim  up  two  of  the  Biscaine  Shallops
which  they  did  leave  behinde  them,  and  they  did  leave
divers  Hoopes  and  Caske  staved  ashoare.

The  eighteenth  day,  faire  weather,  the  winde  variable,
we  stearing  away  Northward.  This  afternoone  wee  met
with  another  ship  of  Biscay,  being  a  ship  of  two  or  three
hundred  Tunnes.  Our  Generall,  as  he  did  to  the  rest,
caused  her  Master  and  Pilot  to  come  aboord  us,  to  whom
he  shewed  his  Commission,  charging  them  to  depart  this
Countrey.  They,  seeing  no  remedie,  were  content,  so
soone  as  they  had  filled  fresh  water.  Wee  met  with  them
off  the  Southward  part  of  the  Hand.  Our  Generall  being
so  neere  Greene  Harbour,  where  the  Gamaliel  and  the
Desire  road,  wee  went  into  the  Sound  to  see  them,  with
this  great  ship  of  Biscay,  and  the  ship  of  Amsterdam.
We  found  that  the  entrance  of  Greene  Harbour  was  quite
stopped  with  Ice ;  and  ran  our  ship  into  it,  thinking  to  get  Abundance  of
through,  but  wee  could  not.  Then  wee  got  her  out  Ice.
againe,  and  came  to  the  Bay  where  wee  roade  on  the  other
side  of  the  Sound  in  Pooppy  Bay,  or  Niches  Cove.

The  nineteenth  day,  faire  weather,  the  winde  North-

53

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1613.

ward. This  day  about  twelve  of  the  clock  we  came  t<

an  anchor  in the  foresaid  Bay. This  afternoone  then

came  another  ship  of  Saint  Sebastian  into  the  Bay  when

wee  roade : and  about  seven  of  the  clocke,  the  Captain*

came  aboord  of  us,  who  told  us  that  he  had  lost  six  of  hi*

men  and  a  shallop  upon  the  coast  of  Groineland,  upon  an

An  Hand  in Hand  in  the  latitude  of  72.  degrees  or  thereabouts. This

72  degrees  on  was  t^g  Master  which  had  beene  here  the  last  yeere,  and

G '  yStJ made a  great voyage, Master  Woodcocke being their

Pilot. His  making  so  great  a  voyage,  was  the  cause  that

so  many  ships  were  here  this  yeere.

The  twentieth  in  the  morning,  we  had  newes  that  the
John  and  Francis  was  come  about  two  dayes  agoe,  and
Three  and  that  they  had  killed  one  and  twentie  Whales  at  the  Fore-
twentie  whales  ianc^  anj  fad  also  killed  two  at  Greene  harbour.  This
day  it  was  very  close  weather  with  some  snowe ;  the
winde  North-west.  This  afternoone  the  Captaines  of
the  two  Biscay  ships  were  commanded  to  depart  this
Coast.

The  one  and  twentieth,  wee  perceived  another  ship
standing  toward  us.  Wee  lessened  our  sailes  and  stayed
for  her  to  see  what  shee  was.  At  length,  we  perceived  her
to  bee  another  Biscaine.  About  a  North  sunne  we  came
to  an  anchor  in  Greene  harbour,  by  the  Gamaliel,  and
the  Desire,  and  the  ship  of  Burdeaux :  and  the  Biscaine
followed  us.  So  soone  as  they  were  come  to  an  anchor,
their  Captaine  came  aboord  of  us,  to  whom  our  Generall
shewed  his  Commission  as  he  had  done  to  the  rest,  charg-
ing him  to  depart  those  Coasts,  and  told  him,  that  hee
would  take  away  some  of  their  shallops.  They  earnestly
intreated  him  not  to  take  them  away,  and  they  would
depart :  the  Captaine  offering  his  bond  to  our  Generall,
that  if  he  stayed  either  in  Greenland,  Groineland,  or  Cherie
Hand,  he  would  willingly  forfait  all  he  was  worth.  There
was  another  Whale  killed  in  Greene-harbour,  in  the
A  man  slahe.  killing  whereof  there  was  a  man  slaine,  and  a  Boate
overwhelmed,  by  too  much  haste  of  following  him,  after
the  harping  Iron  was  in  him.

54

V

to  be
at  be
then

n

hasn

min

ore

wes

WILLIAM BAFFIN

A.D.
1613.

Oil*

i

Latitude  78.
deg.  7.  min.

Note.

A  South  South
west  Moone
maketh  a  full
Sea  here.

The  three  and  twentieth  day,  faire  weather,  the  winde
Northward.  This  day,  and  the  last  night  I  observed  the
latitude  of  the  place  where  we  roade,  and  found  it  by  both,
to  bee  in  the  latitude  of  78.  degrees  7.  minutes :  the  skie
at  both  observations  being  very  cleere,  where  I  finde  that
there  is  no  sensible  error  betweene  a  South  observation
and  a  North,  the  skie  being  cleare.  But  if  the  skie  be
hasie,  there  will  be  some  difference,  as  of  eight  or  ten
minutes,  being  observed  on  shoare  by  some  large  Quadrant
or  other  Instrument  for  the  purpose,  also  a  South  South-
west Moone  by  the  common  Compasse,  maketh  a  full  Sea
in  this  place.

The  ninth  of  July,  faire  weather,  the  winde  at  North.
This  day  wee  stood  to  the  Southward  along  the  Hand :
but,  toward  night  it  fell  calme,  and  then  the  winde  came
to  the  West.  The  tenth  day,  faire  weather,  but  thicke  and
close,  the  winde  South  South-west.  All  this  day  we  stood
for  Bell-Sound.  Our  Generall  went  on  shoare  this  after-
noone,  and  killed  foure  Deere,  and  brought  a  young  Morse
alive  with  him  aboord.

The  eleaventh  day  faire  weather,  but  calme.  This
afternoone  wee  perceived  five  shippes  in  a  Bay  in  Bel-
sound.  The  winde  was  so  calme,  that  we  were  faine  to
towe  in  our  shippes,  and  about  a  North  North-west  sunne,
we  came  to  an  anchor  by  them,  with  our  three  ships,  viz.
the  Tigre  Admirall,  the  Mathew  Vice-Admirall,  and  the
Richard  and  Barnard,  having  made  all  things  readie  for  to
fight.  These  five  shippes  which  rid  here,  the  one  was  a
great  shippe  of  Biscay  of  seven  hundred  Tunnes,  and  the  [III.  iv.  719
two  Hollanders,  which  we  found  the  sixt  of  June  in
Pooppy-bay,  and  one  small  Pinke  of  Amsterdam,  and
another  small  shippe  of  Rochell.  This  great  shippe  of
Biscay,  which  we  expected  would  have  fought  with  us,
sent  their  Captaine  aboord  of  us  before  we  came  to  an
anchor,  and  submitted  themselves  unto  the  Generall.  The
two  ships  of  Amsterdam,  whose  Masters  names  were  these,
viz.  Cornelius  Calias,  William  Vermogon,  Admirall,  and
John  Jacob  Vice-Admirall,  these  two  would  gladly  have

55

A  Biscayan
ship  ofjoo.

tuns.

A.D.
1613.

Many  rockes
full  ofFozole.
Lisets  Hands.

Eighteene
Whales  killed.

Three  Whales
killed  by  the
English.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

stood  out  with  us,  if  the  Biscaine  would  have  assistec
them.

The  twelfth  day  faire  weather.  This  day  the  ship  of
John  Jacobo  was  unladen  of  such  goods  as  shee  had  in
her ;  as  Oyle,  Blubber,  and  Morses  skinnes.  The
thirteenth  day  I  was  sent  in  a  shallop  to  Greene
Harborough.

The  fourteenth  day,  thicke  close  weather,  the  winde
Northward ;  but  toward  noone  it  began  to  cleare  up,  and
then  it  blew  more  winde.  About  a  West  sunne,  we  came
to  a  small  Hand,  or  rather  a  Rock,  where  Morses  use  to
come :  where  we  found  seaven  which  we  killed,  and
knocked  out  their  teeth,  and  let  them  lye.  In  this  place
are  many  of  these  rockes,  where  are  great  multitudes  of
foule,  and  they  are  called  Lizets  Hands.  The  Land  all
along  is  so  full  of  Rockes,  that  it  is  unpossible  for  any
shippe  to  come  neere  the  Maine,  but  in  the  Sands  which
are  very  deepe,  and  good  to  come  in.  All  this  evening
and  night  wee  rowed  betweene  this  Hand  and  Ice-sound.

The  fifteenth  day,  about  nine  or  tenne  a  clocke,  we
came  to  the  shippes  in  Greene-harborough,  where  we
found,  that  they  had  killed  eighteene  Whales  in  all.
Foure  of  these  ships  were  Frenchmen,  which  had  killed
eight  Whales  for  the  Companie  according  to  the  agree-
ment which  the  Generall  had  made  with  them  :  which  was,
that  they  should  kill  eight  for  us,  and  after,  what  they
could  kill,  should  be  for  themselves.  Our  English  men
had  killed  three  in  this  place,  and  the  Baskes  in  the  Desire
also  three.  The  Desire  had  taken  in  an  hundred  tunnes
of  Oyle  when  wee  came  there,  and  she  was  to  be  laden  so
soone  as  she  could.

The  seaventeenth  day  also  faire  weather,  the  winde
Northward.  This  day,  toward  a  West  Sunne,  the  Master
of  the  French  shippe  came  from  Sea-horse  Bay,  who  went
thither  to  speake  with  our  Generall :  because  Master
Mason  and  Master  Cooper  had  stayed  his  Shallops  from
going  to  Sea,  in  regard  they  would  not  observe  the  orders
which  the  Generall  had  appointed  them :  which  were,  that

56

WILLIAM BAFFIN

those  Whales  which  our  Englishmen  did  chase,  they
should  not  follow,  nor  our  men  should  not  follow  the
Whales  they  chased.  For  the  order  of  the  Biscaines  is,
that  who  so  doth  strike  the  first  Harping  Iron  into  him,  it
is  his  Whale,  if  his  Iron  hold.  This  evening,  I  say,  he
returned  from  Sea-horse  Bay,  having  lost  his  labour :  for
the  Generall  and  Master  Edge  were  in  Bell-sound.  We
understood  by  him,  that  they  had  killed  some  eight  and
thirtie  Whales  in  all ;  and  that  there  was  one  hundred  and
sixtie  tunnes  of  Oyle  ready  made.

The  five  and  twentieth  day  in  the  morning,  the  Desire
weighed  Anchor  to  go  to  the  Generall,  and  the  Master  of
the  French  ship  also  this  morning  went  from  thence  to
speake  with  the  Generall,  because  of  a  Whale  which  was  in
strife  betweene  his  Biscaines  and  ours :  when  for  pilfering
and  for  some  peremptorie  speeches,  two  of  the  Rochellers
were  ducked  at  our  Yard  arme,  the  one  on  the  one  side,
and  the  other  on  the  other.  This  day  I  also  observed  the
latitude  of  this  place,  and  found  it  to  be  77.  degrees  40.
minutes.  Also,  the  variation  of  the  Compasse  is  13.
degrees  1 1 .  minutes  West.  This  variation  was  observed
the  third  of  August  in  the  morning :  the  height  of  the
sunne  above  the  Horizon  was  17.  degrees  24.  minutes,
and  the  declination  was  14.  degrees  41.  minutes  North  in
the  latitude  of  77.  degrees  40.  minutes,  and  his  Magnetical
azimuth  was  63.  from  South  to  East.  The  ninth  day  wee
had  sight  of  Master  Bonners  Ship,  wherein  was  Master
Marmaduke,  who  had  beene  to  the  Northward  as  farre  as
Faire-haven :  and  now,  as  he  said,  he  was  bound  to  the
southward  to  discover  beyond  Point  Looke-out,  having
his  direction  from  Master  Edge,  as  he  said.  Our  Generall
told  him,  that  hee  had  hindered  the  Voyage  more  by  his
absence,  then  his  discoverie  would  profit ;  and  that  it  were
best  that  he  went  backe  with  him  to  the  Fore-land,  and
that  he  would  give  no  licence  to  goe  now  for  Discoverie,
because  the  yeare  was  farre  spent :  but  bad  him,  according
to  his  Commission,  so  to  proceede.  The  twelfth  day  I
observed,  and  found  the  latitude  of  this  place  by  an  exact

57

A.D.
1613.

Eight  esf
thirty  Whales
killed.

August  1.

Latitude  yy.
degrees,  40.
minutes.
Variation,  1  3 .
degrees,  1 1 .
minutes.

A.D.
1613.

Latitude  79.
degrees,  14.
minutes.
This  was  Ma.
Cudners  ship
of  London.

Latitude  79.
degrees  8.
minutes.

Sunnes
refraction.

[III.iv.720.]

Note.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

observation  to  be  in  79.  degrees  14.  minutes. They  in
the  Pooppy-Bay  had  seene  a  ship  of  England  off  Black
point,  and  had  spoken  with  her,  who  told  them  that  they
were  come  from  Kildeene.

The  foureteenth  day  faire  weather,  the  Winde  at  North
North-east.  This  day  about  tenne  a  clocke  in  the  fore
noone,  we  waied  anchor  to  goe  homeward,  being  sixe  ships
in  company,  viz.  the  Tigre  Admirall,  the  Gamaliel  Vice-
Admirall,  the  John  and  Francis,  the  Annula,  the  ship  of
Burdeaux  which  the  Generall  agreed  with  to  fish  in
Greene-harborough,  and  the  Biscay  ship  which  fished  in
Sir  Thomas  Smiths  Bay.

The  fifteenth  day  very  faire  weather,  all  the  forenoone
almost  calme :  in  the  afternoone,  an  easie  gale  at  North-
east.  This  day  about  twelve  a  clocke  at  noone,  wee  were
against  Faire  Foreland,  which  is  in  the  latitude  of  79.
degrees  8.  minutes.  This  night  was  very  cleere  and  faire
weather,  and  also  calme,  by  which  meanes  I  had  very  good
opportunitie  to  finde  the  sunnes  refraction.  For  behold-
ing it  about  a  North  North-east  sunne,  by  the  common
Compasse,  at  which  time  the  sunne  was  at  the  lowest,  it
was  but  one  fift  part  of  his  body  above  the  Horizon,
having  about  foure  fifth  parts  below,  so  neere  as  I  could
gesse.  His  declination  for  that  instant  was  10.  degrees
35.  minutes  North,  being  at  noone  in  the  2.  degree  7.
minutes  of  Virgo,  his  daily  motion  was  58.  minutes:
whose  halfe  beeing  nineteene  to  bee  added  to  the  former,
because  it  was  at  twelve  houres  afore  noone.  I  say  his
place  at  that  instant  was  2.  degrees  26.  minutes  of  Virgo,
whose  declination  was  as  before  10.  degrees  35.  minutes:
the  Latitude  of  the  place  was  78.  degrees  47.  minutes,
whose  complement  was  11.  degrees  13.  minutes,  the
declination  being  substracted  from  the  complement  of  the
Poles  elevation,  leaveth  38.  minutes,  foure  five  part  of
which  12.  minutes;  which  being  substracted  from  38.
leaveth  26.  minutes  for  the  Refraction.  But,  I  suppose
the  Refraction  is  more  or  lesse,  according  as  the  ayre  is
thicke  or  cleare,  which  I  leave  for  better  schollers  to  dis-

58

WILLIAM BAFFIN

cusse  :  but  this  I  thought  good  to  note,  for  the  better
helpe  of  such  as  doe  professe  this  studie.

The  sixteenth  day  also  very  faire  weather,  and  for  the
most  part  calme  :  the  winde  that  was,  was  at  North-west.
This  morning,  we  espied  a  ship  out  in  the  offen,  over
against  Cold-cape,  which  we  stood  with,  and  she  also  stood
with  us.  And  when  we  came  to  her,  wee  found  her  to  be
the  Desire,  a  shippe  of  Alborough.  Our  Generall  sent
for  the  Master  and  Merchant  aboard  of  us,  who  certified
him  that  they  came  from  Killedeeve,  and  that  they  had
made  but  a  bad  Voyage  of  fish :  and  they  were  come  to
see,  if  we  could  fraight  them  home.  The  Merchant  was
of  London,  whose  name  was  Master  Cudner ;  the  Masters
name  was  Fletcher,  who  also  brought  sixe  men  which
Thomas  Bonner  had  left  at  Cherie  Hand.  These  sixe  men
had  killed  but  one  Morse  all  this  yeere  at  the  Hand :  who
also  told  us,  that  William  Gourdon  was  gone  to  the  North-
wards. At  noone,  the  three  and  twentieth  day,  I  observed
the  variation  of  the  Compasse,  and  found  it  to  be  one
degree  5.  minutes  East.

The  three  and  twentieth  day  faire  weather,  with  a  fine
gale  at  North  and  by  East.  We  stearing  away  South  and
by  West  halfe  South  :  being  at  noone,  by  supposition,  in
the  latitude  of  69.  degrees  no  minutes.  Having  sailed
since  yesterday  noone,  some  thirtie  leagues  South,  true.

The  foure  and  twentieth  day,  very  faire  weather  and
cleere,  the  winde  all  the  fore-noone  Northwards,  but  about
noone  it  came  to  the  South-east.  This  morning  I
observed  the  middle  starre  in  the  Great  Beares  tayle,  and
found  it  to  bee  in  the  latitude  of  68.  degrees  24.  minutes
about  two  a  clocke,  at  which  time  that  starre  was  on  the
Meridian  under  the  Pole.  Also  I  observed  the  starre  in
the  Beares  Rumpe  about  one  a  clock,  and  found  the  like
latitude.  Also  all  this  day  we  had  sight  of  Rost  Hands,
being  about  ten  or  eleven  leagues  off  us.  Also  at  noone
I  observed  the  latitude  by  the  Sun,  and  found  us  to  be  in
the  latitude  of  68.  degrees  no  minutes,  which  did  agree
with  the  former  Observations  by  the  starres. Also  the

59

A.D.
1613.

M.  Cudner  of
London.

William
Gourdon.

Variation  1.
degree  5.  mitt.

Rost  Hands  or
R  os  ten.

68.  deg.  no
min.

A.D.
1613.

The  variation
4.  degrees  8.
minutes  East.

Variation  5.
deg.  3 .  minutes
East.

The  lying  of
the  land  about
Scoutsnesse.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

variation  of  this  place  is  4.  degrees  8.  minutes  East  from
the  true  Meridian,  wee  having  runne  since  yesterday  noone
some  two  and  twentie  leagues  South  and  by  West.
Almost  all  the  afternoon  it  was  almost  calme.

The  five  and  twentieth  day  also  very  faire  weather,  the
winde  this  morning  came  to  the  East  South-east  a  fine  easie
gale.  We  steered  away  South  and  by  West  halfe  West
ten  leagues,  being  at  noone  in  the  latitude  of  67.  degrees
5  minutes.  The  variation  of  this  place  is  5.  degrees  3.
minutes  East,  neere  to  the  set  of  our  Compasse.  This
Evening  the  winde  came  to  the  South  South-west,  which
continued  about  two  Watches.

The  nine  and  twentieth  day  faire  weather,  with  a  good
gale  of  winde  at  North  North-east.  From  two  this  last
night  to  sixe,  we  stood  away  South-west  and  by  South,  and
at  sixe  we  steered  away  South  South-west,  being  at  noone
by  observation,  in  62.  degrees  no  minutes.  The  land
about  Scoutesnesse  lyeth  in  this  sort :  from  sixtie  three
toward  sixtie  two,  it  is  nineteene  leagues  South  South-
west halfe  Westward :  from  thence  tenne  leagues  South
and  by  West,  which  is  two  or  three  Hands,  which  are  the
Westwardest  land  in  Norway,  lying  in  the  latitude  of  62.
degrees  44.  minutes.  But  whether  these  Hands,  or  a
Point  of  land,  which  lyeth  about  three  or  foure  leagues
more  to  the  North,  be  called  Scoutesnesse,  I  know  not.
The  sixt  of  September  we  entred  the  Thames.

60

A.D.
1614.

ROBERT FOTHERBY

Chap.  VI.

A  Voyage  of  Discoverie  to  Greenland,  &c.  Anno
1 6 14. Written  by  Ro.  Fotherbye.

He  ship  Thomasine  went  downe  from
Black-wall  to  Woolwich  the  sixteenth  of
Aprill,  and  from  thence  to  Gravesend  the
three  and  twentieth,  where  shee  remayned
untill  the  eight  and  twentieth  of  the  same  ;
and  weighing  from  thence  she  anchored
againe  in  Tilberie  Hope,  with  ten  ships
more  of  good  burthen,  and  two  Pinnasses  all  of  the  Green-
land Fleet,  set  forth  also  at  the  charge  of  the  said  Company,
under  the  command  of  Master  Benjamin  Joseph,  Chiefe
Captayne  and  Generall  of  the  said  Fleet.

We  set  sayle  out  of  Tilberie  Hope  the  fourth  of  May,  [III.iv.721.]
and  came  to  an  anchor  the  same  day  in  Lee  Road,  where
we  stayed  till  the  next  morning,  then  wee  set  sayle  againe
and  went  forth  to  Sea  before  night.  We  went  forth

We  proceeded  in  company  of  the  Fleet,  and  met  with  ?L  .  ,

stragling  Ice  the  five  and  twentieth  of  May  in  the  latitude  iceinit.de?.
of  75.  degrees  10.  minutes,  through  which  wee  passed  10.  minutes.
without  danger,  holding  on  our  course  all  that  day,  till
time  of  mid-night ;  then  we  found  the  Ice  so  close  packt
together,  that  we  were  forced  to  tacke  about,  and  stand
to  the  Westward,  till  wee  found  more  open  passage,  wee
plyed  through  it  without  any  great  danger,  till  the  eight
and  twentieth  day :  but  then  being  in  sight  of  Land,  we
passed  amongst  very  much  Ice  all  the  fore-noone,  which
lay  in  great  abundance  on  both  sides  of  us :  but  a  desire
(as  it  seemes)  to  get  through  it,  drew  us  on  to  be  the  more
intangled  with  it,  for  about  noone  we  could  neither  find  a
passage  to  goe  forward,  nor  way  to  retyre  backe  againe,
but  being  nine  ships  and  two  Pinnasses  (for  the  Prosperous
and  the  Desire  lost  Company  through  foule  weather,  the
one  and  twentieth  of  May,  otherwise  we  had  beene
thirteene  sayle)  we  began  very  suddenly  to  bee  inclosed

61

Sherzvin.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

and  shut  up  with  Ice.  Now  every  one  wrought  the  best
Eleven  Sayles.  meanes  he  could  for  the  safetie  of  his  ship ;  Our  Master  in
fast  h  the  Ice.  the  Thomasine,  caused  a  Hauser  and  a  Grapnell  to  be
■ff*  Thr  carried  forth,  and  laid  upon  a  great  Hand  of  Ice,  and  so  we

rid  as  at  an  Anchor,  and  by  that  meanes  wee  stayd  from
forceable  rushing  against  other  peeces ;  afterward  we  laid
forth  an  anchor  for  surer  hold,  and  made  fenders  of  an  old
Cable,  which  was  hung  over  the  ships  sides  to  keepe  the
Ice  from  piercing  of  her  plankes.  Wee  rid  thus  from  the
eight  and  twentieth  of  May  till  the  second  of  June,  still
floating  as  the  wind  drove  us  with  our  anchor,  holding
Hand,  which  now  we  accounted  as  the  shoare,  and  made
use  thereof  accordingly,  for  upon  it  our  Carpenter  sealed
and  trimmed  our  lesser  shallop.
June.  On  the  second  of  June  we  had  a  great  homeming  Sea,

the  wind  being  at  North-west,  whereby  we  judged  we
were  not  farre  from  an  open  Sea  to  windward  of  us ;  there
wee  resolved  to  make  tryall  what  we  might  doe,  to  free
our  selves  out  of  the  Ice.  In  the  afternoone  about  three  a
clock  we  got  aboard  our  Anchor,  letting  fall  our  fore  top-
sayle,  and  putting  forth  our  Mizen ;  and  so  drove  a  sterne
for  a  while,  till  the  floating  Hand  gave  way  ;  then  wee  filled
our  top-sayle,  and  attempted  divers  places  where  to  passe,
but  had  repulse  and  fell  asterne  againe  ;  notwithstanding  at
the  length  we  prevayled,  and  with  much  adoe  we  attayned
We  goe  ckere  an  open  Sea  at  a  North,  and  by  West  Sunne,  parting  very
off  the  Ice.  gladly  from  these  ill  neighbouring  Hands ;  which  at  our
parting  from  them,  gave  us,  or  rather  received  from  us
some  knockes,  but  whilest  we  remayned  amongst  them
they  seemed  much  more  perillous  then  they  proved  hurt-
full,  so  wee  praysed  God  for  our  safe  deliverance,  wishing
that  the  rest  of  the  ships  which  we  left  in  the  Ice,  were  as
cleere  out  of  it  as  was  the  Thomasine.

Having  attayned  the  open  Sea  to  the  Westwards,  we

proceeded  to  the  Northwards ;  keeping  the  Ice  still  on  our

tieMar™'1'*1 starboord  side>  and  met  with  the  Mal7  An-Sarah,  that  got

Jn-Sarah a^s0  ^ree  °^  tne  *ce  ^e  same  da7  tnat  we  came  forth  of  it ;

we  kept  company  together  till  the  next  day,  when  being  as

62

ROBERT FOTHERBY

high  as  Prince  Charles  Hand,  we  both  stood  in  for  the
shoare,  the  Mary  An-Sarah  going  for  Bel-sound,  her
assigned  Harbour ;  but  we  proceeded  to  the  Fore-land,
where  when  wee  came  the  sixt  of  June,  wee  met  with  two
shallops  that  belonged  to  the  Desire,  wherein  was  Cuth-
bert  Appleyard,  and  William  Simmes  Harponiers ;  by
whom  we  understood,  that  the  Prosperous  and  the  Desire
had  more  desiredly  prospered,  then  all  the  rest  of  the  Fleet,
they  escaped  the  danger  that  all  the  rest  fell  into,  and  came
to  the  Fore-land  the  third  of  June,  rinding  the  Harbour
open.

Here  was  yet  no  worke  begunne,  for  they  had  not  seene
one  Whale  since  their  comming  into  the  Harbour ;  so  that
for  us  there  was  no  cause  of  stay  to  bee  helpfull  unto
them,  and  therefore  we  proceeded  to  the  Northward,
hoping  to  find  the  shoare  still  as  free  from  Ice,  as  it  was
at  this  place ;  but  it  fel  out  contrary  to  our  expectations,
for  being  come  as  farre  as  Maudlen  Sound,  in  the  latitude
of  79.  degrees  34.  minutes,  we  met  with  some  stragling
Ice,  and  from  the  mayne  top  we  saw  much  Ice  lye  betwixt
us  and  Hackluyts  Head-land,  which  seemed  to  bee  close  to
the  shoare,  therefore  we  sent  some  men  in  a  shallop  to
Maudlen  Sound,  to  see  if  it  were  open,  that  wee  might
harbour  our  ship  there,  and  search  for  a  leake  which  wee
found  her  subject  unto  in  foule  weather.

The  Sound  was  open,  and  we  anchored  in  a  good
Harbour,  but  the  Ice  was  not  gone  cleere  from  the  shoare,
therefore  we  could  not  hale  our  ship  aground,  but  we
carined  her  and  set  up  our  Biscaine  shallop  which  we
carried  with  us  out  of  England  in  pieces.

The  next  day  after  our  comming  hither  I  went  forth  in
a  little  shallop  (the  other  being  then  unset  together)  to
see  how  the  Ice  lay  at  Hackluyts  Head-land,  and  whether
we  might  passe  with  our  ship  that  way  or  no.  Being  come
forth  of  the  Harbour,  we  perceived,  that  it  was  very  foule
weather  at  Sea,  notwithstanding  I  proceeded  into  Faire
Haven,  where  the  South  Harbour  was  then  open,  but
much  Ice  lay  then  in  the  Sound  unbroken  from  shoare  to

63

A.D.
1614.

We  came  to
the  Fore  land.

We  proceeded
to  the  North-
wards.

Maudlen
Sound.

Hackluyts
Head-land.

We  anchored
in  Maudlen
Sound.

I  went  forth
in  a  shallop.

A.D.
1614.

[III.iv.722.]

We  set  sayle
out  ofMaud-
len  Sound  and
followed  the
Ice.

Prince

Charles  Hand
in  78.  degrees
40.  minutes.
Wee  stood
againe  for
shoare.

Eleven  Hol-
land ships.

We  anchored
in  Sir  T.
Smiths  Bay.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

shoare ;  otherwise  wee  might  have  passed  that  way  to
Hackluyts  Head-land,  betwixt  the  Hand  and  the  mayne
Land ;  we  stayed  here  till  the  next  morning,  then  the
weather  beganne  to  cleere  up,  and  wee  put  forth  to  Sea
againe,  intending  to  goe  without  the  Hands :  but  being
out  of  the  Harbour  wee  found  the  foule  weather  to  be
such,  as  our  little  weake  shallop  was  not  able  to  endure,
therefore  we  returned  againe  to  our  ship  into  Maudlen
Sound,  where  we  killed  two  Female  Morses,  and  took
their  Teeth,  Hides  and  Blubber.

On  the  tenth  of  June  we  set  sayle  out  of  Maulden
Sound,  and  coasted  along  to  the  North-ward,  till  we  were
past  Hackluyts  Head-land,  but  then  we  saw  the  Ice  lye
before  us,  extending  close  to  the  shoare,  so  that  for  us  to
passe  further  that  way,  it  was  not  possible :  therefore  wee
turned  to  the  Westward,  to  see  if  wee  could  find  passage
further  from  the  shoare.  Wee  sayled  as  the  Ice  trended
West  and  West  South-west  till  the  thirteenth  day,  and
keeping  still  alongst  it,  we  found  it  to  trend  neerest  South
and  South  South-west,  we  proceeded  well  thus  far,  till  we
came  under  the  latitude  of  Prince  Charles  his  Hand,  in  78.
degrees  40.  minutes,  being  eight  and  twentie  leagues  from
shoare,  but  then  we  altered  our  course,  and  stood  in  for
the  Foreland,  to  goe  and  be  helpfull  to  the  other  ships
there  for  the  furthering  of  their  Voyage  according  to  our
Instructions  (as  some  did  understand  them)  but  contrary
I  am  sure  to  some  of  our  desires.  When  we  came  neere
the  Fore-land,  we  saw  eleven  ships  of  Hollanders  under
sayle,  plying  to  the  Southwards :  one  of  them  came  roome
towards  us,  and  strucke  her  top-sayles  twice,  whereby  we
supposed  they  tooke  us  for  some  of  their  Fleete,  which
they  wanted,  but  wee  held  on  our  course  still  into  Sir
Thomas  Smiths  Bay,  where  we  came  to  an  anchor  the
fifteenth  of  June,  by  the  John-Anne-Francis,  and  the
Desire,  the  Mary  Margaret  being  then  under  sayle  to  go
to  the  Fore-land.

Here  was  yet  no  need  of  any  helpe  that  we  could  make
them,  for  they  had  hitherto  neyther  killed  nor  seene  one

$4

ROBERT FOTHERBY

Whale  since  their  first  comming  in  hither;  therefore  we
thought  it  best  not  to  stay  here,  but  rather  goe  to  Faire
Haven,  where  wee  should  bee  more  readie  to  proceed  on
our  Discoverie  when  the  Ice  would  give  us  leave,  and  in
the  meane-time  wee  might  bee  helpfull  to  the  two  ships
thither  assigned  for  the  making  of  their  Voyage,  and  so
much  the  rather  wee  hasted,  because  we  understood  that
the  Hollanders  also  set  forth  a  ship  on  Discoverie.

We  set  sayle  the  seventh  of  June,  and  met  with  the
Prosperous,  that  came  from  Crosse-road,  and  was  going
into  Sir  Thomas  Smiths  Bay,  there  to  get  some  Bricke  and
Lime  to  mend  their  Fornace,  as  Nicholas  Woodcocke  the
Master  told  us  ;  then  we  went  forth  to  Sea,  and  being
about  foure  leagues  from  the  shoare,  the  winde  began  to
blow  so  hard  from  the  North-west,  that  wee  were  forced
back  againe  to  seek  Harbour,  and  came  to  an  anchor  the
nineteenth  of  June,  in  Crosse-road.  Here  we  stayed  two
dayes,  much  wind  blowing  at  the  North  North-east,  till
the  one  and  twentieth  of  June,  and  then  in  the  after-noone
the  wind  came  to  the  East  and  by  South,  and  the  weather
was  faire,  therefore  at  a  North  North-west  Sunne,  we
weighed  and  set  sayle  againe,  and  so  did  the  Thomas
Bonaventure,  that  came  to  an  anchor  by  us  this  morning,
beeing  also  bound  for  Faire  Haven.

This  next  day  in  the  afternoone  we  were  thwart  of
Maudlen  Sound,  and  the  weather  being  faire  and  calme,
we  sent  a  shallop  to  the  Northward,  to  see  what  alteration
there  was  amongst  the  Ice,  and  to  seeke  out  some  good
Harbour  for  a  ship,  and  also  to  set  up  the  Kings  Armes  at
Hackluyts  Head-land,  or  some  other  convenient  place.

When  Master  Baffin  was  gone  from  the  ship  in  the  fore-
said shallop,  I  went  presently  into  the  other  shallop  into
Maudlen  Sound,  there  to  set  up  the  Kings  Armes ;  and
also  to  see  if  there  were  any  Morses  come  ashoare ;  when
I  was  within  the  Sound,  I  found  no  Beeches  bare  for
Morses  to  come  upon :  for  Ice  and  snow  lay  yet  undis-
solved from  the  shoare  side,  but  I  went  to  the  Harbour,
and  there  caused  a  Crosse  to  be  set  up,  and  the  Kings
xiv  65  e

A.D.
1614.

We  went  forth
of  Sir  T.
Smiths  Bay.

We  were
driven  backe
againe  into
Crosse-road.

We  set  sayle
out  of  Crosse-
road.

One  shallop  to
the  North-
ward.

The  other  into
Maudlen
Sound.

A.D.
1614.

The  Kings
Armes  set  up
in  Trinitie
Harbour.

Trinitie
Harbor  is
under  the
parallel  of
79.  degrees
34.  minutes.
We  came  to
an  anchor  in
Faire  Haven.

No  Whales
were  yet  come
in.

[III.iv.723.]
The  shallop
returned  from
the  North-
wards.
Cape  Barren.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Armes  to  bee  nayled  thereon ;  under  which  also  I  nayled  a
piece  of  sheet  Lead,  whereon  I  set  the  Moscovie  Com-
panies Marke,  with  the  day  of  the  moneth  and  yeere  of
our  Lord.  Then  cutting  up  a  piece  of  Earth,  which  after-
ward I  carried  aboard  our  ship,  I  tooke  it  into  my  hand
and  said,  in  the  hearing  of  the  men  there  present  to  this
effect.

I  take  this  piece  of  Earth,  as  a  signe  of  lawfull  posses-
sion (of  this  Countrey  of  King  James  his  New-land,  and
of  this  particular  place,  which  I  name  Trinitie  Harbour)
taken  on  the  behalfe  of  the  Company  of  Merchants,  called
the  Merchants  of  New  Trades  and  Discoveries,  for  the
use  of  our  Sovereigne  Lord  James  by  the  grace  of  God,
King  of  great  Brittaine,  France,  and  Ireland,  whose  Royall
Armes  are  here  set  up,  to  the  end  that  all  people  who  shall
here  arrive  may  take  notice  of  his  Majesties  Right  and
Title  to  this  Countrey,  and  to  every  part  thereof.  God
save  King  James.

This  is  a  good  safe  harbour,  and  is  under  the  latitude  of
79.  degrees  34.  minutes,  as  I  have  found  by  good  observa-
tion, and  have  of  Westerly  variation  25.  degrees.  When
I  had  here  set  up  the  Kings  armes,  I  returned  toward  our
ship,  which  was  come  to  an  anchor  at  the  entrance  of  Faire
haven,  staying  till  the  floud  came,  because  that  at  the  Tide
of  Ebbe,  there  runnes  a  great  current  out  of  the  Sound ;
so  at  the  next  floud,  we  came  into  Faire  haven  and
anchored  by  the  Gamaliel  and  the  Thomas  Bonaventure,
the  three  and  twentieth  day  of  June.

Then  John  Mason,  Master  of  the  Gamaliel,  came
aboord  of  our  ship,  and  I  asked  him  if  he  had  any  worke
for  our  men,  for  I  would  cause  them  to  come  a  shore :
he  told  me,  that  hitherto  he  had  not  seene  a  Whale  come
in,  but  his  Furnaces  and  Coppers  were  already  set  up,  and
therefore  as  yet  he  had  no  neede  of  helpe,  but  when
occasion  served  he  would  imploy  them.  This  day  about
eleaven  a  clocke  Master  Baffin  returned  in  the  Shallop
from  the  Northwards :  he  said  that  he  had  beene  at  Cape
Barren,  which  is  the  point  of  an  Hand  three  or  foure

66

ROBERT FOTHERBY

A.D.
1614.

leagues  from  Hackluits  head-land,  but  further  then  that
he  could  not  passe  for  Ice  which  lay  close  to  the  shore,  and
he  had  not  set  up  the  Kings  armes  in  any  place.

On  Munday  the  seven  and  twentieth  day  of  June,  I
went  forth  againe  in  the  Shallop  to  the  Northward,  partly
to  see  what  alteration  there  might  be  in  the  Ice,  with  the
Easterly  windes  which  had  blowne  hard  since  the  Shallop
last  returned,  but  chiefely  to  set  up  the  Kings  armes  in
some  places  convenient,  because  there  was  none  set  up  to
the  Northwards  of  Maudlen  sound.

We  rowed  to  Cape  Barren,  where  formerly  Master
Baffin  had  bin,  and  finding  the  Ice  there  gone  from  the
shore,  we  proceeded  further  to  an  Hand  which  now  we  call
the  Saddle,  in  respect  of  the  forme  thereof,  more  then  a
league  distant  from  Cape  Barren.  In  our  way  thither  it
began  to  snow,  and  grew  to  be  a  great  and  vehement
storme  from  the  West  North-west,  therefore  we  hasted  and
got  to  the  lee  side  of  the  aforesaid  Hand,  and  there  made
fast  our  Shallop  with  a  grapnell  laid  upon  the  Icie  shore,
using  the  best  meanes  we  could  with  our  shallops  saile  to
keepe  us  from  the  extremitie  of  so  cold  an  harbour :  we
staid  here  eight  houres,  and  the  storme  continued  driving
the  Ice  still  Eastward  in  great  abundance  and  with  wonder-
full  swiftnesse  :  when  the  weather  began  to  cleere,  I  caused
the  men  to  rowe  to  Leewards  to  another  Hand  a  league
distant,  which  seemed  then  to  be  a  Cape  of  the  maine  land,
purposing  there  to  set  up  the  Kings  armes ;  but  afterwards
wee  found  it  to  be  an  Hand,  and  to  the  maine  wee  could
not  come  for  broken  Ice.

This  stormie  weather  continued  from  Munday  night  till
Friday  morning,  during  which  time  we  had  beene  but
eleaven  leagues  at  the  furthest  from  our  ship,  yet  went  we
so  farre  as  we  could  have  gone,  had  the  weather  beene
never  so  faire  ;  for  at  foure  leagues  distance  from  Cape
Barren,  the  Ice  lay  firme  and  unbroken  two  or  three  miles
from  the  shore,  and  close  againe  to  it  lay  the  shattered  Ice
thronged  together  with  this  present  storme.

On  Friday  morning  we  came  backe  againe  to  Hackluits  Julie.

67

Saddle  Hand.

A  Storme.

A.D.
1614.

The  Whales
began  now  to
come  in.

Two  Whales
escaped.

We  came  forth
of  Faire
haven.

We  met  with
Ice  and  stood
to  the  North-
wards.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

headland,  and  there  I  set  the  Kings  armes  in  the  like
manner  as  at  Trinitie  Harbour :  from  thence  we  rowed
towards  our  ship,  and  as  we  entred  into  Faire-haven,  there
came  a  Whale  that  accompanied  us  into  the  harbour  leap-
ing and  advancing  himselfe  almost  quite  out  of  the  water,
falling  headlong  downe  againe  with  great  noise ;  we  hasted
aboord  our  ship,  and  I  sent  forth  both  our  Shallops  to
strike  this  Whale  if  they  could,  and  told  Master  Mason  of
her  comming  in,  who  also  went  forth  in  his  Shallop  :  but  it
seemes  the  Whale  past  under  the  Ice  which  lay  yet
unbroken  betwixt  the  North  harbour  and  the  South
harbour,  for  they  could  not  see  her  againe.

The  next  day  there  came  more  Whales  in,  and  Robert
Hambleton,  our  Masters  mate  strucke  two,  which
unluckily  escaped ;  the  first  for  want  of  helpe,  the
Gamaliels  Shallop  being  in  chase  of  another  Whale,  and
our  owne  little  Shallop  not  able  to  row  against  a  head-sea
to  assist  the  other :  so  that  at  length  the  Whale  having
towed  the  Shallop  forth  to  Sea,  the  harpingiron  came  out :
the  second  was  also  strucken  within  the  sound,  and  ranne
under  the  Ice,  which  lay  yet  unbroken  at  the  East  end  of
the  Sound,  and  drew  the  Shallop  upon  it  cleare  out  of  the
water ;  by  which  meanes  the  Harpingiron  came  forth.
Here  we  remained  till  the  sixt  of  Julie,  our  men  and
Boates  being  helpefull  at  all  times  to  further  the  Voyage.

The  sixt  of  Julie  we  set  saile  forth  of  Faire-haven,
intending  to  make  triall  if  wee  could  to  get  to  Westwards
of  the  Ice,  and  so  proceede  to  the  Northwards,  having  sent
away  one  of  our  Shallops  the  day  before,  provided  with
twentie  dayes  Bread,  to  coast  alongst  the  shoare,  search
the  Beach  for  Commodities,  and  set  up  the  Kings  Armes
at  places  convenient,  hoping  thereby  to  prevent  the
Hollanders,  who  now  rid  in  the  North  harbour  of  Faire-
haven,  and  were  ready  for  the  first  opportunitie,  to  discover
and  take  possession  of  other  harbours,  having  two  Ships
to  goe  forth  onely  upon  Discovery.

We  sailed  Westwards  from  Faire-haven  seven  leagues,
and  then  met  with  a  maine  banke  of  Ice  which  trended

68

ROBERT FOTHERBY

North  &  South,  the  Sea  appeared  to  the  Northwards  to  be
open  so  far  as  we  could  see,  therfore  we  plied  that  way :
when  we  had  run  seven  or  eight  leagues  more,  the  Ice  lay
so  thick  on  every  side,  that  we  were  bard  from  proceeding
any  further ;  then  we  stood  in  toward  the  shore,  and  being
a  little  to  the  Northwards  of  Cape  Barren,  our  Shallop  had
sight  of  us,  &  came  rowing  to  us  through  the  broken  Ice.
Master  Baffin  told  us  the  shore  to  the  Eastward  was  much
pestered  with  Ice,  and  he  had  set  up  the  Kings  armes  at
the  entrance  of  a  faire  Sound,  about  foure  leagues  distant
from  Cape  Barren.

Now  the  weather  being  faire  and  calme,  Master  Sherwin,
Master  Baffin  and  I,  went  in  the  Shallop  to  the  place  where
the  Kings  Armes  were  set  up,  purposing  (because  the  ayre
was  very  cleere)  to  goe  upon  some  high  mountaine,  from
whence  we  might  see  how  the  Sea  was  pestered  with  Ice,
and  what  likelihood  there  was  of  further  proceeding.
According  to  this  our  intent,  we  ascended  a  very  high  hill,
and  from  thence  we  saw  the  Ice  lye  upon  the  Sea  so  farre
as  we  could  discerne,  so  that  the  Sea  seemed  to  be  wholly
toured  with  Ice,  save  onely  to  the  Eastwards :  we  thought
that  we  saw  the  water  beyond  the  Ice,  which  put  us  in
some  hope  that  we  should  ere  long  get  passage  with  our
Shallops  along  the  shore,  if  we  could  not  passe  with  our
shippe.  Being  thus  satisfied,  we  returned  abord  our  ship
and  plyed  towards  Faire  haven,  advising  amongst  our
selves  of  the  best  course  we  could  to  further  the  businesse
committed  unto  us.

We  resolved  to  make  our  discovery  along  the  shore  with
both  our  Shallops,  and  to  carry  with  us  our  provision  for
the  Whale-killing,  conceiving  good  hopes  besides,  of
profit  which  the  beaches  would  afford  us ;  therefore  we
intended  when  our  ship  was  brought  safe  into  harbour
againe,  to  goe  from  her  with  both  our  Shallops,  and  to  put
in  practise  this  our  late  resolution.  But  the  weather  fall-
ing calme,  and  a  fogge  succeeding,  which  continued  three
dayes,  so  that  our  ship  came  not  into  harbour  till  the
twelfth  of  July ;  I  went  from  her  the  eleventh  day,  intend-

69

A.D.
1614.

Our  Shallop
came  to  us.

[in.iv.724.]

We  returned
towards  Faire
haven.

We  intended
to  discover  in
Shallops.

I  went  forth
in  the  one
Shallop.

the  other
Shallop

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

ing  to  search  the  Beaches,  till  Master  Baffin  came  to  me

with  the  other  Shallop,  and  then  we  to  proceede  both

together :  but  before  he  came,  I  had  gone  so  farre  as  that

the  Ice  would  not  suffer  mee  to  passe  a  Boates  length

further,  and  I  had  also  searched  a  very  faire  Beach  which

was  altogether  fruitlesse.

Master  Baffin Master  Baffin  came  to  me  at  a  place  appointed  the  foure-

came  to  me  in  teenth  day  of  Julie,  in  the  other  Shallop,  and  we  proceeded

both  together  to  the  Eastwards  againe,  and  found  passage

amongst  the  Ice  about  a  league  further  then  I  had  lately

beene,  so  that  we  came  to  the  firme  Ice,  that  lay  almost  two

Red-beach. miles  from  the  shoare  of  Red-beach,  unbroken  up  this

We  hailed  our  yeare. Here  wee  haled  up  our  Shallops  out  of  the  water,

Shallop  upon }est  the  broken  Ice  which  is  carried  to  and  fro  with  the

the  Ice.  winde, might split them  or  bruse them : then Master

Baffin  and  I  with  foure  men  more  walked  over  the  firme

Ice  and  went  ashore  on  Red-beach,  where  we  travelled

about  the  space  of  three  miles  by  the  shore  side,  but  found

no  commodities  as  we  expected  to  have  done ;  for  here

had  the  Hulmen  been  in  161 2.  as  we  might  know  by  fires

that  they  had  made,  and  gathered  the  fruites  that  many

yeares  before  had  brought  forth. Thus  as  we  could  not

finde  that  which  wee  desired  to  see,  so  did  we  behold  that

which  we  wished  had  not  beene  there  to  be  seene,  which

was  great  abundance  of  Ice,  that  lay  close  to  the  shore  and

also  off  at  Sea  so  farre  as  we  could  discerne ;  wherefore

being  thus  satisfied,  and  more  wearie  to  know  that  we

could  passe  no  further,  then  with  travailing  so  farre,  we

We  returned returned  to  our  Shallops,  and  went  aboord  of  our  Ship  in

to  our  Shallop.  Faire  haven  on  Sunday  the  seventeenth  of  July,  passing

the  neerest  way  betwixt  the  Hands  and  the  maine  Land,

for  now  the Ice  was  broken  betwixt the South-harbor

where we rid, and the North harbour, where the

Hollanders  rid.

The  next  day  we  sent  our  Shallop  to  the  North-east
side  of  Faire  haven,  there  to  lye  for  the  comming  of  the
Whales  over  against  the  Gamaliels  two  Shallops  that  lye
on  the  other  side  for  the  same  purpose.

70

ROBERT FOTHERBY

The  twentieth  of  July,  wee  were  under  saile  to  goe  forth
of  Faire  haven  with  the  Gamaliel,  purposing  to  have  taken
two  Ships  that  rid  at  the  entrance  of  Maudlen-Sound,  with
John  Mason,  who  first  descried  them,  supposed  to  be  the
one  a  Bask,  and  the  other  an  English  man  ;  but  the  winde
blew  right  into  the  Harbour,  so  that  we  could  not  get
forth,  and  therefore  we  came  to  an  anchor  againe  where
we  rid  before.

On  the  one  and  twentieth  of  July,  our  Harponiers  killed
a  Whale,  which  split  one  of  our  Shallops  and  strucke  the
Harponier  that  was  in  her  overboord  :  but  both  hee  and
the  rest  of  the  men  were  relieved  and  taken  into  an  other
Shallop  :  then  we  sent  our  Carpenter  to  mend  the  Shallop
that  was  split :  and  on  the  five  and  twentieth  day  they
helpt  to  kill  another  Whale.

On  the  sixe  and  twentieth  of  July,  I  drew  the  plat  of
Faire  haven,  as  it  is  here  projected  (but  here  too  costly  to
insert.)

When  this  Scoale  of  Wrhales  were  past,  we  went  out  of
Faire  haven  the  first  of  August  with  both  our  Shallops,
Master  Baffin  in  the  one,  and  I  in  the  other,  with  five  men
more  in  each  Shallop,  thinking  that  now  we  should  finde
the  Ice  broken  and  cleere  gone  from  the  shore,  conceiving
some  good  hope  to  proceede  and  make  some  new  dis-
covery, which  was  the  chiefe  occasion  of  our  imployment.
Wee  passed  over  Red  cliffe-Sound,  which  we  found  cleare
of  Ice ;  and  from  thence  we  proceeded  to  Red-beach,  where
we  also  found  great  alteration  since  our  last  being  there,
notwithstanding  the  Ice  was  not  cleerely  voided  from  the
shore  ;  for  in  some  places  it  was  firme  and  unbroken  off,
for  the  space  almost  of  halfe  a  mile  :  so  we  rowed  alongst
it,  till  wee  came  neere  the  North  end  of  the  Beach  which
lyeth  furthest  into  the  Sea,  and  there  we  found  an  open
way  to  the  shore  with  our  Shallops,  and  went  on  land ;  but
seeing  in  all  places  great  abundance  of  broken  Ice,  we  lay
close  to  the  shoare,  and  doubting  that  although  perhaps
with  much  adoe,  we  might  get  about  the  point  of  the
Beach,  yet  should  we  still  be  pestered  with  Ice  from  pro-

71

A.D.

1614.

We  were
under  saile
and  came  to  an
anchor  again c.

We  killed  a
Whale.

August.
We  went  to
the  North-
wards with
our  Shallops.

We  got  to  the
shoare  of  Red
Beachwithour
Shallops.

A.D.
1614.

We  walked
over  Red-
beach.

[in.iv.725-]

The  Kings
armes  are  set
up  at  Wiches
Sound.

We  passed
over  Wiches
Sound.

We  found
Beach  Fins.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ceeding  any  further,  we  resolved  to  walke  over  land,  to
the  other  side  of  the  Beach,  where  we  saw  a  hill  about
foure  miles  distant,  from  which  we  thought  we  should  be
satisfied,  how  much  further  it  was  possible  for  us  to  pro-
ceed :  so  thither  we  travailed,  where  when  we  came,  wee  saw
a  very  faire  Sound  on  the  East  side  of  the  Beach  which  was
open  within,  but  there  lay  very  much  Ice  at  the  entrance
of  it,  which  although  it  was  extended  more  then  halfe  over
Sound,  yet  we  doubted  not  but  if  we  could  get  our
Shallops  about  the  Beach,  we  should  finde  either  one  way
or  other  to  passe  over  the  said  Sound,  &  from  the  high  land
on  the  other  side,  we  should  receive  very  good  satisfaction,
if  the  weather  continued  faire  and  cleare  as  now  it  was,
therefore  we  intended  to  make  triall  what  we  might  do ;
but  before  we  returned  we  went  down  to  the  point  of  the
Beach,  at  the  entrance  of  the  Sound,  and  there  set  up  a
Crosse,  and  nailed  a  sixe  pence  thereon  with  the  Kings
Armes.  This  being  done,  we  returned  to  our  Shallops,
and  according  to  our  late  determination,  we  rowed  about
the  point  of  Red-beach,  and  with  many  crooked  windings
amongst  the  Ice,  at  length  we  got  over  Wiches  Sound  (for
so  it  is  now  named.)

As  soone  as  we  were  over  on  the  other  side,  about
two  leagues  from  Red-beach,  Master  Baffin  and  I  clambred
up  a  very  high  hill,  from  whence  we  saw  a  point  of  land
bearing  East  North-east,  by  the  ordinary  Compasse  eigh-
teene  or  twentie  leagues  distant,  as  I  supposed.  Wee
likewise  saw  another  faire  Sound  to  the  Southwards  of
us,  which  was  much  pestered  with  Ice,  but  we  could  not
see  the  end  of  it.  Here  upon  the  mountaine  wee  set
up  a  Warelocke,  and  then  came  downe  againe  with  lesse
labour,  but  more  danger  then  we  had  in  getting  up,  by
reason  of  the  steepinesse  thereof :  then  we  walked  to  the
shoare  side,  and  there  found  many  beach  Finnes,  whereby
I  conjectured  that  Master  Marmadukes  men  in  his  first
discovery,  made  in  Anno  161 2.  had  not  beene  upon  this
land  to  search  the  Beaches,  for  in  all  other  places  where
we  had  beene  heretofore,  we  could  finde  nothing  at  alL

72

ROBERT FOTHERBY  a.d.

1614.

Now  therefore  we  resolved  to  make  further  search  alongst
this  shoare,  and  to  proceede  with  our  Shallops  so  farre
as  we  possibly  could  :  whereupon  wee  returned  to  our
men  againe  whom  we  left  with  our  Shallops,  where  we
first  landed.

Having  stayed  here  a  while  and  observed  the  latitude
which  I  found  to  be  79.  degrees  54.  minutes,  we  saw  a
Shallop come rowing towards the extreamest point of  We  met  with
this shoare, therefore  we hastned towards them to see  ^la^rtsease
who  were  therein,  and  found  them  to  be  Master  Marma-
dukes  men,  lately  come  from  their  ship  the  Harts-ease,
which  they  said  they  left  at  Sea  amongst  the  Ice,  about
a  league  from  Red  Beach : here  they  were  setting  up  a
Crosse,  which  they  said  that  they  found  there  fallen  downe,
and  had  beene  formerly  set  up  in  the  time  of  Master  Note.
Marmadukes  first  discovery,  by  one  Laurence  Prestwood,
whose  name  I  saw  thereon  engraven,  with  two  or  three
names  more,  and  it  had  the  date  of  the  seventeenth  of
August  1 61 2. Upon  this  Crosse  they  nailed  the  Kings
Armes.

Here  we  parted  from  them,  and  according  to  our  former
determination  we  proceeded,  some  in  the  Shallops  amongst
the  Ice,  and  others  on  shoare,  till  wee  went  about  foure
leagues  further :  in  which  space  we  found  many  more
Finnes,  and  one  paire  of  Morses  teeth,  but  now  we  found
the  Ice  so  close  packt  together,  that  wee  could  not  proceede
any  further  with  our  Shallops :  wherefore  Master  Baffin
and  I  intended  to  walke  over  land  untill  we  should  be
better  satisfied  how  farre  this  Sound  went  in,  for  wee
could  as  yet  see  no  end  of  it,  and  it  seemed  to  make  a
separation  of  the  land ;  so  leaving  our  men  here  with  the
Shallops,  wee  travailed  almost  a  league  further,  till  we
came  to  the  point  of  a  sandie  beach,  that  shot  into  the
Sound,  which  was  wonderfully  stored  with  drift  Wood
in  great  abundance.  From  this  point  we  received  such
satisfaction  as  we  looked  for,  because  we  saw  the  end  r /  *  tr
of  the  Sound  which  lies  South  in  about  ten  leagues.  It  smiths  Inlet
hath  in  it  a  good  harbour  that  is  landlockt,  and  doubtlesse  discovered.

73

A.D.
1614.

We  returned

towards  our

Ship.

A  storme

beganwhenwe

were  amongst

Ice.

We  get  forth
of  Ice.

We  came
aboord  our
ship.

The  Holland
Discoverers  go
homewards.

Our  ship  went
forth  to  Sea.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

it  is  a  good  place  for  the  Whale-killing  if  it  be  not  every
yeare  as  now  it  is  pestered  with  Ice.  Here  I  saw  a  more
naturall  earth  and  clay  then  any  that  I  have  seene  in  all
the  Countrie,  but  nothing  growing  thereupon  more  then
in  other  places.  This  Sound  is  that  which  formerly  had
and  still  retaineth  the  name  of  Sir  Thomas  Smiths  Inlet.

Being  thus  satisfied,  we  came  backe  againe  to  our
Shallops,  and  seeing  no  way  but  one,  we  returned  towards
our  Ship ;  but  before  we  could  get  to  Red-beach,  there
arose  a  very  great  storme  from  the  East  North-east,  after
we  had  entered  amongst  the  Ice  in  Wiches  Sound,  so  that
we  were  separated  the  one  Shallop  from  the  other,  whereby
our  danger  was  the  greater :  for  whiles  wee  were  both
in  company  together,  the  one  might  have  beene  helpefull
to  the  other  when  neede  required,  and  more  easie  it  seemed
to  save  them  both,  then  being  separated  to  keepe  either  of
them  from  wracke ;  but  God  (who  in  his  wonted  mercie
is  ever  ready  to  relieve  the  faithfull  distressed)  did  not
onely  so  provide  that  we  met  together  againe,  and  indeede
were  helpefull  the  one  to  the  other  (otherwise  I  doubt
the  one  Shallop  had  miscarried,  for  she  was  in  great  danger)
but  also  delivered  us  safely  out  from  amongst  these
perillous  rockes  of  Ice,  which  it  was  very  hard  to  shun,
and  at  the  length  brought  us  into  an  open  Sea,  where
with  as  scant  a  saile  as  we  could  make,  we  past  swiftly
before  the  winde,  the  Sea  comming  divers  times  over
the  sternes  of  our  Shallops,  which  wet  our  skinnes,  that
had  scarse  any  dry  cloathes  on  before  to  keepe  them  warme,
by  reason  of  a  drizeling  Snow  which  fell  with  the  storme  :
then  we  went  aboord  our  Ship  into  the  South  harbour  of
Faire  haven,  the  fift  of  August,  with  one  hundred  and
fiftie  Beach  finnes,  and  one  paire  of  Morses  teeth,  giving
thanks  to  God  for  his  blessing  and  mercifull  deliverance.

The  ninth  of  August,  two  ships  of  the  Hollanders,  that
were  appointed  for  Northerne  Discovery,  were  seene
thwart  of  Faire  Haven,  sayling  to  the  Southwards.

The  eleventh  of  August,  we  set  sayle  forth  of  Faire
Haven,  the  winde  at  South  South-west,  intending  to  make

74

ROBERT FOTHERBY  a.d.

1614.

tryall,  if  yet  the  Ice  would  admit  us  to  have  passage  to

the  Northwards  or  the  North-eastwards. We  held  our

course  from  Cape Barren, North-east  and  by  East, till

seven  a  clocke  at  night,  at  which  time  having  runne  eight We  met  with

leagues  from  the  shoare,  wee  met  with  the  Ice  which  lay  lce  etSht

East  and  by  South,  and  West  and  by  North,  and  bore  up  ^from

.  . / ,  '  r  J .  '  * the  Shore.

alongst  it  to  the  Eastwards,  tor  the  winde  was  now  come

to  the  North  North-west ;  then  wee  tackt  about  to  the

Westwards,  and  plyed  off  and  on  close  by  the  Ice,  till  the  [III.iv.726.]

thirteenth  day  at  mid-night,  still  expecting  a  change  of  We?hedoff

the  weather,  that  we  might  have  made  some  adventure  lce  tw0  d

amongst  the shatterd Ice, for  both  on  the  twelfth  and

thirteenth  day,  the  winde  blew  hard  at  North,  and  the

weather  was  cold,  thicke,  and  very  winter-like  with  fall  of

snow : this  winde  being  so  contrarie,  drove  both  the  Ice

and  our  ship  to  leewards  towards  the  shoare,  so  that  wee

were  forced  to  put  into  Harbour  againe,  and  came  to  an

Anchor  the  fourteenth  day  in  the  North  Harbour  of  Faire  We  anchored

Haven,  where  the  Fleet  of  Hollanders  lately  rid,  at  which  againe  in  the

time  the  Hartsease  was  there  at  an  Anchor.  North  Harbor.

Now  was  the  Land  both  Mountaynes  and  Plaines  wholly
covered  with  snow ;  so  that  almost  all  mens  mindes  were
possessed  with  a  desire  of  returning  for  England :  But
to  prevent  a  sudden  resolution  for  a  homeward  Voyage
without  further  satisfaction,  I  made  motion  that  once
againe  we  might  goe  forth  with  our  shallops,  to  see  what
alteration  there  might  bee  found  alongst  the  shoare.  It
fell  out  that  I  was  to  goe  in  one  shallop  for  this  purpose,  /  went  to  the
so  I  tooke  with  me  eight  men,  and  went  from  our  ship  Eastwards  in
the  fifteenth  day  of  August.  a  shalloP-

We rowed to Red-cliffe Sound, where we passed
through  much  Ice  that  was  newly  congealed  being  thicker  Ice  was  newly
then  an  halfe  Crowne  piece  of  silver,  notwithstanding  we  frozen  in  Red-
broke  way  through  it,  and  being  over  the  Sound,  we  had  cli&e  Sound'
a  cleere Sea  againe ; then  we proceeded  to  Red-beach,
where  finding  the  shoare  cleere  of  Ice  (which  at  my  last ,  .  J ,  ,  J

1 .  ,  to  1 r  11  i\ V  • -i  * '  intended  to

being  there  was  wonderfully  pestered)  I  conceived  good  goe  once  t0
hope  to  finde  passage  to  the  furthest  Land  from  thence  Point  Desire.

75

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

in  sight,  bearing  East  halfe  a  point  Southerly,  nine,  or
ten  leagues  distant ;  to  this  end  we  put  off  from  the  shoare
of  Red-beach,  and  rowed  a  league  and  more  in  an  open
Sea,  and  then  met  with  Ice  which  lay  dispersed  abroad,
and  was  no  hinderance  to  our  proceeding,  so  that  we  con-
tinued rowing  the  space  of  sixe  houres,  in  which  time
we  had  gotten  more  then  halfe  way  over :  but  then  we
found  the  Ice  to  lye  very  thicke  thronged  together,  so
that  it  caused  us  much  to  alter  our  course,  sometimes
Southward  and  sometimes  Northwards,  and  even  in  this
time,  when  we  thought  wee  stood  in  most  need  of  cleere
weather,  it  pleased  God  to  send  us  the  contrary,  for  it
A  great  snow  beganne  to  snow  very  fast,  which  made  the  Ayre  so  thick
began.  tjlat  we  cou\^  not  see  to  make  choice  of  the  most  likely

way  for  us  to  passe,  therefore  I  thought  good  to  stay  here
awhile,  hoping  that  ere  long  the  weather  would  bee  more
agreeable  to  our  purpose ;  so  a  Grapnell  being  laid  forth
upon  an  Hand  off,  to  hold  fast  our  shallop,  a  Tent  was
made  of  the  shallops  sayle  to  keepe  the  weather  from  us,
and  we  remayned  here  five  houres,  but  finding  no  altera-
tion in  the  constant  weather,  I  willed  the  men  to  take
downe  the  Tent,  and  with  faire  tearmes  perswaded  them,
that  notwithstanding  the  wet  weather,  it  were  good  to  be
doing  something,  to  get  over  to  the  desired  shoare,  where
we  might  refresh  our  selves,  and  have  fire  to  dry  our  wet
clothes ;  they  seemed  well  content  with  this  motion,  and
/  could  not  so  we  rowed  the  space  of  foure  houres  more,  the  Ice  still
passe  for  Ice.  causmg  us  to  hold  a  South  and  South  South-east  course,
which  carried  us  further  into  Sir  Thomas  Smiths  Inlet,
and  put  us  from  the  place  where  we  wished  to  be.

The  thicke  snowie  weather  continued  all  this  time,  which
was  very  uncomfortable  to  us  all,  but  especially  to  the
men  that  rowed ;  and  as  the  snow  was  noysome  to  their
bodies,  so  did  it  also  begin  to  astonish  their  mindes,  as
I  well  perceived  by  their  speeches,  which  proceeded  upon
The  original/  this  occasion.  The  snow  having  continued  thus  long,
cause  of  ice  at  anj  fa^mg  Up0n  the  smooth  water,  lay  in  some  places  an
inch  thicke,  being  alreadie  in  the  nature  of  an  Ice  com-

76

ROBERT FOTHERBY  a.d.

1614.

pact,  though  not  congealed,  and  hindred  sometimes  our

shallops way ; this I say caused some of them, not

altogether  without  reason  to  say,  that  if  it  should  now

freeze  as  it  did  that  night  when  we  came  over  Red-clirTe

Sound, we  should  be  in  danger  here  to  be  frozen  up.

Howsoever  this  search  might  bee  a  meanes  to  discourage

the  rest,  that  considered  not  of  such  a  thing  till  they  had

heard  it  spoken  of :  yet  true  it  is,  that  I  saw  no  likelihood,

by  reason  of  the  Ice,  how  to  attayne  my  desire  at  this

time,  and  therefore  I  bade  them  row  toward  the  shoare  /  went  backe

of  Red-beach  againe,  where  I  intended  to  stay  till  the  againetoRed-

weather  might  happily  be  more  convenient. So  holding eac  '

a  West  North-west  course,  so  neere  as  the  Ice  would  suffer

us,  wee  came  to  the  East-side  of  Red-beach,  having  beene

eighteene  houres  amongst  the  Ice,  during  all  which  time

the  snow  fell,  and  as  yet  ceased  not. When  we  had  been

here  about  an  houre  it  began  to  cleere  up,  and  the  wind

to  blow  hard  at  East,  which  rather  packt  the  Ice  close

together  in  this  place  then  disperst  it,  so  that  I  was  now

out  of  hope  to  get  any  further  then  I  had  beene  alreadie :

wherefore  I  returned  toward  our  ship,  intending  as  I  went  /  returned

to  make  a  more  particular  Discoverie  of  Broad-bay,  and  towardi  our

Red-cliffe  Sound,  hoping  that  one  place  or  other  would ?'

afford  some  thing  worthy  of  the  time  and  labour. When

we  were  come  to  the  West  side  of  Red-beach,  it  began

to  blow  much  wind,  where  withall  the  Sea  growing  to  be

great,  all  men  advised  to  passe  over  Broad-bay,  whilst  the

winde  and  weather  would  serve  us  to  sayle,  for  they  said

it  was  like  to  be  very  foule  weather : so  seeing  that  it

was  no  convenient  time  for  coasting,  we  came  over  the

Bay  to  Point  Welcome  (which  I  so  named  because  it  is  a  Point

place,  where  wee  oftentimes  rested,  when  wee  went  forth  Welcome.

in  our  shallops)  it  is  about  foure  leagues  distant  from  the

North  end  of  Red-beach.

At  this  point  the  Hollanders  had  set  up  Prince  Maurice
his  Armes,  neere  unto  a  Crosse  which  I  had  caused  to
bee  set  up  above  a  moneth  before,  and  had  nayled  a  sixe
pence  thereon  with  the  Kings  Armes,  but  the  men  that  [IH.iv.727.]

77

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

were  with me, went (without any such  direction  from
mee)  and  pulled  downe  the  said  Princes  Armes,  whilst  I
was  gone  up  a  Mountayne  to  looke  into  the  Sea,  if  I
could  see  any  Ice  : and  when  I  came  downe  againe  they
told  me,  that  the  six  pence  was  taken  from  the  Crosse
that  I  had  set  up,  and  there  was  another  post  set  by  it>
with  the  Hollanders  Armes  made  fast  thereon,  which  they
had  pulled  downe ;  so,  because  the  six  pence  was  taken
The  Kings away,  I  caused  one  to  nayle  the  Kings  Armes  cast  in  Lead
Armes  are  set  upon the  Crosse : which  being  done  we  rowed  to  the
UpokfWe  ^ kottome  of  Red-cliffe  Sound,  and  as  we  coasted  alongst
Welcome. tne  snoare>  we  searched  two  little  Beaches,  which  had  some
/  went  into wood  on  them,  but  nothing  that  we  found  of  better  value.
Red  diffe  About  two  leagues  within  the  Sound,  on  the  East  side

Sound.  there is  an Harbour  where shippes may  ride  in good

ground  Land-lockt,  but  if  other  yeeres  be  like  this, I
cannot  say  that  it  is  an  Harbour  fitting  for  ships,  because
it  is  late  ere  the  Sound  breake  up ;  for  even  now  there
lay  much  Ice  at  the  bottome  of  it,  insomuch,  that  I  was
forest  to  leave  the  shallop,  because  I  could  not  passe  with
her  for  Ice,  and  walke  two  miles  over  stonie  Mountaynes,
with  another  man  in  my  company,  to  bee  satisfied  con-
cerning a  point  of  Land  that  shot  into  the  Sound,  whether
it  were  an  Hand  or  no,  as  by  all  likelihood  it  seemed  to
bee : but  when  I  came  to  the  farthest  part  of  it,  I  saw
it  joyne  to  the  mayne  Land,  wherefore  I  called  it  Point
Point  Deceit. Deceit,  because  it  deceived  mee  so  much. From  hence
/  came  aboord  wee  proceeded  toward  our  shippe,  and  came  aboord  of
our  ship.  her  in  the  North  Harbour  of  Faire  Haven,  on  Friday

night  being  the  nineteenth  of  August,  where  she  rid
alone ;  for  Master  Marmaduke  was  gone  forth  to  Sea
that  day.

The  two  and  twentieth  of  August,  John  Mason  Master

of  the  Gamaliell,  came  over  from  the  South  Harbour  for

A  Whale  lay helpe  to  hayle  up  a  Whale  which  had  beene  sunke  four-

sunkenfour- teene  dayeS)  in  one  hundred  and  twentie  fathome  depth,

y  ' or  else  to  pull  the  Warpe  and  Harping  Iron  out  of  her,

for  now  it  was  time  to  take  her  or  forsake  her. Master

78

ROBERT FOTHERBY  a.d.

1614.
Sherwin  our  Master  caused  our  long  Boate  to  bee  manned
and  went  with  him  ;  when  they  came  where  the  Whale
was  sunke,  they  haled,  and  shee  presently  rose,  bolting
suddenly  up  with  a  thundring  cracke  made  with  the  burst-
ing of  her  bodie  ;  and  notwithstanding  shee  had  layen  so
long,  yet  had  shee  all  her  Finnes  fast. Whilst  this  was
in  doing,  the  Hartsease  was  comming  into  the  Harbour  TheHartsease
from  the  Northward,  and  anchored  by  our  ship  an  houre  anchoredbyus.
after.

Here  wee  stayed  till  the  seven  and  twentieth  of  August,
and  since  my  last  returne  hither  in  the  shallop  from  the
Eastwards,  the  weather  hath  beene  commonly  warme,  and  Warme

the  Mountaynes  were  now  more  cleere  of  Snow,  then  they  we*th*r%n  the
. .  .  J  .  .  .  ,  1-1  11 end  of  August.

had  beene  any  time  this  yeere,  notwithstanding  there  had

much  snowe  fallen  since  the  beginning  of  this  moneth,

but  it  was  quite  consumed,  and  a  greater  signe  of  warmth

and  thaw  was  now  to  bee  observed  then  any  time  of  the

yeere  heretofore ;  namely,  by  the  often  falling  of  the  Ice

into the Sea  from  the  huge snowie  bankes, making  a

noyse  like  Thunder,  so  that  the  time  was  very  hopefull,

but  thus  wee  made  use  of  occasion  offered.

The  seven  and  twentieth  of  August,  it  was  faire  and
warme  weather,  calme  till  noone,  then  had  wee  a  gale
of  winde  from  the  South  South-west,  wherewithall  wee
set  sayle  out  of  Faire-haven  in  the  company  of  the  We  set  say le  to
Hartsease,  with  whom  wee  had  beene  in  termes  of  the  Eastward-
consortship,  but  nothing  was  concluded.  About  sixe  a
clocke  at  night  wee  were  sixe  leagues  from  Cape  Barren,
which  bore  from  us  South-west  and  by  South.

Wee  proceeded  still  to  the  North-eastward,  and  on  the
eight  and  twentieth  day  in  the  morning  wee  had  runne
about  twentie  leagues  from  Cape  Barren,  in  an  East  North-
east way  by  the  ordinary  Compasse,  being  open  of  Sir
Thomas  Smiths  Inlet,  nine  or  tenne  leagues  from  the
shoare ;  at  which  time  wee  were  come  to  the  Ice  that
trended  East  South-east,  and  West  North-west,  but  the
Sea  being  very  rough,  wee  stood  off  againe  from  the  Ice ;
in  the  afternoone  it  fell  calme,  and  at  night  we  had  a  gale

79

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1614.

The  Thomas- of  winde  at  East,  and  the  ship  was  steered  West,  and

he  returns  for  tnen  South-west  homewards.
ngan  '  The  nine  and  twentieth  day,  the  winde  Easterly  an

easie  gale ;  at  foure  a  clocke  in  the  afternoone  Hackluyts
Head-land  bore  from  us  South  east  by  East  foure  leagues
distant : this  Evening  was  very  warme.

The  thirtieth  day,  the  winde  at  North-east  an  easie  gale,
at  foure  a  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  Maudlen  Point  bore
East  North-east  halfe  a  Point  Easterly  about  three  leagues
distant :  towards  the  Evening  it  fell  calme,  the  weather
not  cold.

The  thirtieth  day,  faire  Sunne-shine  weather  and  calme
till  noone,  and  then  we  had  a  good  gale  of  winde  from
the  North-east,  being  five  leagues  distant  from  the  Fore-
land, which  bore  South-east ;  now  wee  altered  our  course
and  stood  to  the  West-ward :  therefore  to  keepe  us  still
in  the  parallel  that  now  wee  were  in  which  was  79.  degrees

We  stood  to 3  % minutes, West North-west course was directed, in

the  westwards.  reSpect  Qf  tne  Variation,  to  make  good  a  true  West  way.
This  course  wee  held  till  we  had  runne  about  twentie
leagues,  and  then  wee  ranne  twentie  leagues  more  in  a
West  and  by  North  course  till  one  a  clocke  on  Friday
morning ;  at  which  time  it  fell  calme ;  and  wee  heard  the
Sea  make  a  great  noyse,  as  if  wee  had  beene  neere  Land,
but  wee  rather  judged  it  to  bee  Ice,  as  indeed  it  proved

[III.  iv.  728.]  to  Deej  for  m  tne  morning  when  it  was  light  and  cleere,  wee
saw  the  Ice  about  a  league  from  us,  which  trended
Southerly ;  having  now  a  gale  at  East  North-east,  wee
steered away South and South South-east, but  in the

Wee  met  with  afternoone  we  were  embayed  with  a  long  banke  of  Ice,
which  wee  could  not  weather,  therefore  wee  were  faine
to  tacke  about,  and  the  winde  having  come  more  Southerly
then  it  was  in  the  morning,  wee  stood  off  from  the  Ice
North-east  and  North-east  and  by  North,  and  then  to  the
Southwards  againe,  making  sundrie  boardes  to  get  forth
to  wind-wards  of  the  Ice.

The  third  day  before  noone,  wee  had  sight  againe  of
Ice  to  Westwards  of  us,  and  at  noone  were  under  the

80

Ice.

ROBERT FOTHERBY  a.d.

1614.

parallel  of  78.  degrees  27.  minutes,  according  to  my  Obser-
vation :  then  wee  stood  a  way  South  to  keepe  cleere  of
the  Ice,  for  wee  had  a  great  homing  Sea,  although  but
little  winde ;  and  therefore  durst  not  be  to  bold  to  edge
too  neere  it,  especially  the  wind  being  Easterly  as  then
it  was.

On  the  fourth  day  our  men  saw  the  Ice  againe  from
the  mayne  top-mast  head,  and  therefore  wee  still  main-
tayned  a  Southerly  course : the  next  day  it  began  to  be
foggie,  and  continued  close  weather  and  hazie  for  three
dayes,  so  that  wee  had  no  more  sight  of  the  Ice ;  neyther  We  left  the
could  wee at this time receive any further satisfaction  lu  an<*  came
concerning the same : therefore wee kept a Southerly  for  Enifand-
course  so  neere  as  wee  could,  although  wee  had  but  little
winde,  and  the  same  very  variable  till  the  ninth  day,  but
then  wee  had  a  good  gale  of  winde  at  West  North-west.

On  the  tenth  day  Seeing  Saturday,  wee  were  by  my
reckoning  fiftie  leagues  distant  from  Low-foot,  which  bore
from  us  East  South-east  halfe  a  Point  Southerly :  this
day  the  wind  shifted  to  the  South-west,  and  at  night  came
to  the  South  with  much  raine ;  then  came  backe  againe
to  the  West  North-west  and  began  a  great  storme.  A  storme

This  night  the  Master  and  others  saw  a  light  upon  the  beSanne-
Fore-bonnet,  which  the  Saylers  call  a  Corpo Santo  : it  A  Corp
appeared  like  the  flame  of  a  Candle,  and (as  Sea-men  Sdn/°-
observe)  it  alwayes  presageth  an  ensuing  storme;  which  a/thend^f
to  verifie,  this  foule  weather  continued  the  next  day,  and  storms.
grew  to  be  so  vehement  on  Sunday  night,  that  the  Sea
oftentimes  over-raked  our  ship,  and  wee  were  faine  to
lye  atry  with  our  fore  course  onely,  and  our  Mayne  top-
mast also  strucke,  which  last  thing  (as  Sea-men  say)  is
seldome  done  at  Sea,  then  about  one  a  clocke  we  were
forced  to  take  in  our  fore  course,  and  to  lye  a-hull  for
five  houres.

The  fourth  day  of  October,  the  shippe  came  to  Wapping
with  the  whole  number  of  men  that  shee  carryed  forth
(my  selfe  excepted  that  was  come  before)  being  sixe  and
twentie,  all  in  perfect  health.

xiv  81  f

A.D.
1615.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Chap. VII.

true  report  of  a  Voyage  Anno  16 15,  for  dis-
coverie  of  Seas,  Lands,  and  Hands,  to  the
Northwards  ;  as  it  was  performed  by  Robert
Fotherbie,  in  a  Pinasse  of  twentie  tunnes  called
the  Richard  of  London  :  set  forth  at  the  charge
of  the  Right  Worshipfull  Sir  Thomas  Smith,
Knight,  my  very  good  Master,  and  Master
Richard  Wiche,  Governours  :  and  the  rest  of
the  Worshipfull  Company  of  Merchants,  called
the  Merchants  of  New  Trades  and  Discoveries,
trading  into  Moscovia,  and  King  James  his
New  Land.

Y the providence of Almightie God I
went  forth  of  Harwich  Harbour  in  the
foresaid  Pinnasse,  the  twelfth  of  May,  in
the  company  of  eight  shippes  of  the  Fleet,
for  King  James  his  New  Land,  who  in
foule  weather  out-sayled  me  in  the  lati-
tude 71.  degrees,  or  thereabouts. So  I
proceeded  alone  towards  King  James  his  New  Land  :  and
met  with  Ice  in  latitude  73.  degrees  30.  minutes,  I  stood
North-eastwards for  the  west  of  King  James  his  New
Land,  and  had  sundry  conflicts  with  the  Ice  in  rainie  and
wet  foggie  weather,  and  had  sight  of  Land  the  eleventh
of  June,  and  on  the  nineteenth  of  the  same  I  anchored
in  Faire  Haven. Here  I  stayed  till  the  third  of  July,
for  the  Pinnasse  had  received  some  hurt  amongst  the  Ice,
which  to  amend,  I  was  faine  to  hale  her  aground,  besides
divers  other  things  necessary  to  be  done,  which  detayned
mee  longer  then  willingly  I  would  have  stayed  there.
From  hence  I  sayled  Northward,  but  met  with  Ice  in
Hackluyts latitude  79.  degrees  50.  minutes,  being  six  leagues  from
Headland. Hackluyts  Head-land,  then  I  coasted  the  Ice  as  it  lay  in

82

ROBERT FOTHERBY  a.d.

1615.

Points  and  Bayes  to  the  Westwards  and  South-westward,
and  being  thirtie  leagues  from  the  Land  in  latitude  79.
degrees  10.  minutes,  I  found  it  to  trend  Northward  and
North-westwards,  and  coasted  it  to  the  latitude  of  79.  [III.iv.729.]
degrees  50.  minutes,  but  then  I  was  embayed  with  Ice,
and  was  faine  to  stand  out  againe  and  sailed  above  ten
leagues  before  I  got  cleere  :  when  I  was  out  of  this  Bay,
I  proceeded  South  Westerly  with  the  Ice  on  the  starboord
to  the  latitude  78.  degrees  30.  minutes,  where  being  fortie
leagues  from  the  shoare,  I  was  againe  embayed  with  the
Ice,  and  having  had  faire  Sun-shine  weather  all  the  day,
which  made  mee  the  bolder  to  stand  so  neere  it,  the  weather
on  a  sudden  fell  foggie,  and  the  wind  beganne  to  blow
hard  at  South,  which  put  us  to  great  trouble  and  no  small
perill :  but  the  Almightie  power  who  hath  mercifully  Perill  and
delivered  us  heretofore  out  of  as  great  dangers,  preserved  escape.
us  also  from  this  :  when  wee  were  gotten  cleere  off  the
Ice,  we  had  the  Sea  much  growne,  and  the  storme  increas-
ing, but  beeing  desirous  still  to  keepe  the  Sea,  I  stood
close  by  the  wind  under  a  payre  of  coarses,  till  the  Pinnasse
waxt  leake  with  bearing  too  much  sayle,  and  there  was
forced  to  lye  atry  under  a  mayne  coarse  only  :  and  although
shee  stemmed  South-east  and  South-east  by  South,  yet
was  she  hurried  violently  to  the  North-eastwards,  and
by  the  mercifull  providence  of  God  we  fell  right  with
the  Fore-land,  in  latitude  79.  degrees,  then  I  stood  over
Sir  Thomas  Smiths  Bay  for  harbour  in  Crosse-road,  where
I  anchored  the  thirteenth  of  July  being  Thursday.  I
stayed  here  foure  dayes,  in  which  time  my  men  mended
the  Sayles  and  ships  tackling  that  had  received  hurt  by
the  late  storme,  and  made  a  new  mayne  Sayle  to  serve
in  time  of  need,  and  on  the  seventeenth  of  July  I  weighed
out  of  Crosse-road,  and  sayling  Westwards  from  thence
came  to  Ice  againe  in  latitude  78.  degrees  40.  minutes,
which  I  coasted  as  it  lay  neerest  South-west,  or  more
Westerly,  but  with  many  Points  &  Bayes,  wherewith  I
was  sometimes  intangled,  yet,  God  be  thanked,  got  cleere
againe,  either  by  helpe  of  Oares  or  Sayles  without  any

83

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

hurt.  In  this  sort  I  proceeded  with  good  satisfaction,
although  not  with  so  good  content,  till  I  came  to  the
latitude  of  76.  degrees,  beeing  above  one  hundred  leagues
from  Point  Looke-out,  but  then  was  crossed  with  a  con-
trarie  storme  from  the  South-west  and  South  South-west,
which  drove  me  to  the  South-east  ward,  till  I  came  in
the  latitude  of  74.  degrees,  and  then  I  made  my  way
Westward  againe,  so  neere  as  I  could  lye,  close  by  the
Note.  winde,  and  over-ranne  the  formerly  supposed  Land  of

Errour  of  Groynland,  which  some  have  layd  downe  in  plats  and
Gronknd.  extended  to  75.  degrees.  When  I  came  into  the  latitude
of  73.  degrees,  I  stood  West  and  North-west,  and  fell
with  Ice  againe  in  latitude  73.  degrees  50.  minutes,  and
thought  indeed  at  that  time  that  I  was  neere  Land  by
abundance  of  Fowle,  which  we  saw  in  great  flockes :  but
Fogges.  such  thicke  fogges  have  continued  for  three  or  foure  dayes
together,  that  we  might  sooner  heare  the  Land  if  any
were,  then  see  it,  and  so  did  we  first  find  this  Ice  by
hearing  the  rut,  thinking  till  we  saw  it,  that  it  had  beene
Land,  so  that  we  were  embayed  with  it,  before  we  thought
that  we  had  beene  neere  it ;  then  I  stood  out  againe  and
coasted  the  Ice  still  to  the  Westwards  Southerly,  but  could
see  no  Land,  as  I  expected  to  have  done,  untill  wee  came
under  the  latitude  of  7 1 .  degrees  thirtie  minutes,  and  then
High  Hill  we  espyed  a  snowie  Hill  very  high  in  the  cloudes,  for
this  day  was  very  cleere  at  Sea,  but  the  fogge  was  not
yet  cleered  from  the  Land,  so  that  we  could  see  no  part  of
it,  but  only  the  top  of  a  snowie  Mountayne,  which
appeared  very  high  although  wee  were  fourteene  or  fifteene
leagues  distant  from  it,  bearing  off  us  South-east  and  by
South.

Then  I  stood  in  for  the  shoare,  supposing  it  had  beene
part  of  the  Mayne  of  Groynland :  for  the  fogge  lay  on
each  side  of  this  Mount,  as  if  there  had  beene  a  great
Continent  under  it,  but  it  proved  otherwise,  for  as  we
came  neerer  to  it,  the  fogge  dispersed  more  and  more,
and  when  wee  were  five  leagues  distant,  the  Land  appeared
in  forme  like  an  Hand.

84

ROBERT FOTHERBY  a.d.

1615.

When  I  came  neerer  the  shore,  I  could  find  no  Harbor
to  anchor  in.  Notwithstanding,  the  weather  being  faire
&  calme,  I  hoist  out  my  Boat  &  went  ashore  with  three
men  more,  and  set  up  the  Kings  Armes :  then  we  searched
a  Sandie  Beach,  which  was  abundantly  stored  with  drift  Driftwood.
wood,  but  yeelded  no  other  fruits,  that  we  could  find
worth  the  taking  up,  so  I  returned  aboord  againe,  and
sent  ashoare  my  Boat  to  fetch  some  wood.  But  before
the  men  had  laid  into  her  the  little  quantitie  that  she  was
able  to  carrie,  they  came  aboard  againe,  for  the  wind  began
to  blow  hard,  and  the  Sea  to  goe  loftie,  so  that  here  was
no  place  for  us  to  abide  any  longer,  otherwise  I  was  pur-
posed to  have  searched  further  alongst  the  shoare,  but  this
gale  of  winde  comming  Northerly  I  stood  from  hence  to
the  Westwards,  being  desirous  to  see  more  Land  or  finde
a  more  open  Sea.  And  having  sayled  about  fifteene  or
sixteene  leagues  I  met  with  Ice  again,  in  latitude  71.
degrees,  and  coasted  it  eight  or  nine  leagues  further  West-
ward, and  South-westward  as  it  lay,  but  then  the  wind
came  to  the  South-west,  and  we  stood  close  by  it  a  while
to  the  Southwards,  but  finding  the  gale  to  increase,  and
considering  that  it  was  the  most  contrary  winde  which
could  blow  against  my  further  proceeding  (for  the  Ice  as
we  found  did  trend  neerest  South-west,  and  besides  if
there  had  beene  any  high  Land  within  twentie  leagues  of
us,  wee  might  perfectly  have  made  it,  the  weather  was
so  faire  and  cleere.)  In  these  respects,  and  for  the  Reasons
following,  I  tooke  the  benefit  of  this  wind  to  returne  to
the  North-eastwards  againe,  being  now  about  two  hundred
leagues  from  King  James  his  New  Land  in  latitude  71.
degrees.  Note.

First,  I  purposed  to  sayle  alongst  the  South-east  side
of  the  Land  that  I  had  discovered,  to  bee  better  satisfied
what  Harbours  there  were,  and  what  likelihood  of  profit
to  ensue ;  and  from  thence  to  proceed  to  the  place  where
I  first  fell  with  Ice  in  latitude  73.  degrees  when  I  was
driven  to  the  South-eastwards  with  a  Westerly  storme,
for  I  am  yet  verily  perswaded,  that  being  there  we  were  [III. iv. 730.]

85

A.D.
I6l5.

Sir  T.  Smiths
Hand.

Mount
Hackluyt.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

not  farre  from  Land,  although  wee  could  not  see  it  by
reason  of  thicke  foggie  weather.  Then  my  further  intent
was,  if  I  found  no  good  occasion  to  spend  my  time  there,
for  to  coast  the  Ice,  or  try  the  open  Sea  to  the  Northwards,
betwixt  73.  and  76.  degrees,  where  formerly  I  had  not
received  desired  satisfaction  by  reason  of  a  storme  that
drave  me  off,  and  then  I  purposed,  if  time  might  seeme
convenient,  to  proceed  to  the  North  Coast  of  King  James
his  New  Land,  to  have  seene  what  hope  was  there  to  be
had  for  passage  Northward,  or  for  compassing  of  the
Land,  which  is  most  like  to  be  an  Hand.

I  stood  away  East  and  by  South,  and  being  neere  the
foresaid  Hand,  the  winde  came  to  the  West  and  blew  a
very  hard  gale,  wherewith  I  passed  alongst  the  South-east
side  of  the  Hand  under  a  paire  of  coarses,  but  without
that  satisfaction  which  I  expected :  for  the  winde  blowing
so  stormie,  and  the  Sea  growne  very  great,  I  was  forced
to  stand  further  from  the  shoare  then  willingly  I  would
have  done,  and  besides  there  was  a  thicke  fogge  upon
the  Land,  whereby  I  could  not  be  satisfied  what  Harbours
or  Roads  were  about  it,  yet  might  we  see  three  or  foure
Capes,  or  Head-lands,  as  if  there  went  in  Bayes  betwixt
them.  I  sayled  about  it,  and  then  stood  to  the  North-
ward againe,  and  being  now  assured  that  it  was  an  Hand,
I  named  it  Sir  Thomas  Smiths  Hand.

This  Hand  is  about  ten  leagues  in  length,  and  stretcheth
North-east  and  South-west :  it  is  high  Land,  and  at  the
North  end  of  it  there  is  a  Mountayne  of  a  wonderfull
height  and  bignesse,  all  covered  with  Snow,  which  I  called
Mount  Hackluyt ;  the  base  or  foot  of  it  on  the  East  side
is  almost  foure  leagues  long,  it  hath  three  such  sides  at
the  base  lying  out  to  the  Sea,  and  from  the  fourth  side
doth  the  rest  of  the  Hand  extend  it  selfe  towards  the
South-west,  which  is  also,  as  it  were,  a  place  fortified  with
Castles  and  Bulwarkes,  for  on  each  side  there  bee  three
or  foure  high  Rockes  which  stand  out  from  the  Land,
appearing  like  Towres  and  Forts.  It  lyes  in  the  parallel
"71.  degrees,  where  the  Needle  varieth  from  the  true

86

of

ROBERT FOTHERBY  a.d.

1615.
Meridian  Westwards  eight  degrees.  The  Land  is  gener-
ally so  farre  as  I  have  seene,  Rockie  and  very  barren,  and
worse  then  the  Land  that  I  have  seene  in  King  James
his  New  Land,  under  eightie  degrees,  for  there  is  no
grasse  but  mosse,  and  where  I  first  landed  upon  low
ground,  all  the  stones  were  like  unto  a  Smiths  sinders
both  in  colour  and  forme,  the  sand  is  generally  mixed
with  a  corne  like  Amber ;  the  Beaches  are  abundantly
stored  with  drift  wood  and  many  stones,  light  like  Pumis,
which  will  swimme  on  the  water.  I  saw  many  traces  of
Foxes  and  the  footing  of  Beares,  but  not  any  signe  of
Deere  or  other  living  creatures,  and  very  small  store  of
Fowle.

From  hence  I  stood  to  the  Northward  according  to  my
former  purpose,  but  was  crossed  with  a  contrarie  storme
from  the  North-west  which  put  me  off  to  the  Eastward :
but  as  the  wind  shifted  I  made  my  way  to  the  North-
westwards all  I  could,  and  came  againe  to  the  Ice  in  latitude
75.  degrees,  from  whence  I  proceeded  towards  King  James
his  New  Land,  and  had  sight  of  the  Land  the  eighteenth
of  August,  being  in  latitude  77.  degrees  30.  minutes,  and
having  a  hard  gale  of  wind  then  at  North-west,  I  stood
close  by  it  under  a  paire  of  coarses,  but  could  not  weather
Prince  Charles  Hand,  and  therefore  I  bore  up,  intending
to  goe  into  Nicks  Cove,  which  is  on  the  North  side  of
Ice-sound,  there  to  attend  a  faire  winde,  and  in  the  meane
time  to  get  ballast  aboard  the  Pinnasse,  and  all  other  things
necessary.  But  comming  to  enter  into  the  Harbour,  1
thought  it  not  a  place  convenient,  because  I  could  hardly
have  gotten  out  againe  with  a  Southerly  wind,  which
would  carrie  me  to  the  Northwards,  and  therefore  I  stood
over  for  Green-harbor,  where  I  anchored  at  one  a  clocke
in  the  morning,  the  nineteenth  of  August.

Here  I  caused  my  men  to  launch  a  shallop,  and  to  get
ballast  and  water  aboard  the  Pinnasse,  and  before  nine  a
clocke  at  night  I  was  readie  to  proceed  Northward  with
the  first  faire  winde.  I  stayed  here  five  dayes,  during
which  time  it  blew  hard  for  the  most  part  at  North  and

87

A.D.
1615.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Hudsons  Hold-
with-hope
questioned,  as
before  also.

North-west,  and  on  the  foure  and  twentieth  of  August,
the  winde  came  to  the  East  North-east  as  wee  supposed,
till  we  were  out  of  the  Harbour,  so  I  set  sayle  to  proceed
Northward,  and  had  the  wind  Easterly  out  of  Ice-sound,
wherewith  I  stood  North-west  towards  Cape  Cold,  but
being  cleere  of  the  high  Land,  we  found  the  wind  to  bee
at  North  North-east,  therefore  I  resolved  of  another
course,  which  was  this.

Having  perused  Hudsons  Journall  written  by  his  owne
hand  in  that  Voyage  wherein  hee  had  sight  of  certayne
Land,  which  he  named  Hold-with-hope ;  I  found  that  by
his  owne  reckoning  it  should  not  be  more  then  one
hundred  leagues  distant  from  King  James  his  New  Land,
and  in  the  latitude  of  72.  degrees  30.  minutes  or  there-
abouts :  therefore  seeing  I  could  not  proceed  Northward,
I  purposed  to  goe  to  the  South-westwards  to  have  sight
of  this  Land,  and  discover  it,  if  wind  and  weather  would
permit.  So  I  stood  away  South-west,  and  sometimes
West  South-west,  till  I  had  runne  one  hundred  and  thirtie
leagues,  and  was  by  account  in  latitude  72.  degrees  30.
minutes,  where  having  the  wind  contrarie  to  proceed
further  Westward,  I  stood  Eastward  till  I  had  runne  thirtie
leagues,  in  which  course  I  should  have  seene  this  Land,
if  credit  might  be  given  to  Hudsons  Journall,  but  I  saw
not  any.  And  having  a  hard  gale  of  winde  still  Northerly,
I  conceived  no  course  so  good  to  be  taken  at  this  time,
as  to  speed  homewards ;  and  so  stood  to  the  Southwards,
directing  my  course  for  England,  this  beeing  the  eight
and  twentieth  of  August.  After  which  time  the  wind
continued  Northerly  till  the  sixt  day  of  September,  and
[III. iv. 73 1.]  then  wee  were  on  the  coast  of  Scotland  in  latitude  57.
degrees,  and  on  the  eight  day  of  September  had  sight
of  the  land  of  England  on  the  coast  of  Yorkeshire.  Thus
by  the  great  mercy  of  God  have  we  escaped  many  dangers,
and  after  a  cold  Summer  have  some  taste  of  a  warme
Autumne.  All  glorie  therefore  be  to  God  the  Father,
the  Sonne,  and  the  Holy  Ghost. Amen.

By  this  briefe  Relation,  and  by  the  plat  wherein  I  have

88

V

ROBERT FOTHERBY  a.d.

1615.

:raced  the  ships  way  upon  each  severall  traverse  it  may

plainly  appeare,  how  farre  the  state  of  this  Sea  is  discovered

i)etwixt  80.  and  71.  degrees  of  latitude,  making  difference

}f  longitude  26.  degrees  from  the  Meridian  of  Hackluyts

rleadland.

Now  if  any  demand  my  opinion  concerning  hope  of  a
massage  to  bee  found  in  those  Seas ;  I  answer,  that  it  is
:rue,  that  I  both  hoped  and  much  desired  to  have  passed
iirther  then  I  did,  but  was  hindred  with  Ice :  wherein
ilthough  I  have  not  attayned  my  desire,  yet  forasmuch  as
it  appeares  not  yet  to  the  contrarie,  but  that  there  is  a
spacious  Sea  betwixt  Groinland  and  King  James  his  New-
and,  although  much  pestered  with  Ice ;  I  will  not  seeme
to  disswade  this  worshipfull  Companie  from  the  yeerly
dventuring  of  1 50.  or  200.  pounds  at  the  most,  till  some

rther  discoverie  be  made  of  the  said  Seas  and  Lands
djacent,  for  which  purpose  no  other  Vessell  would  I
dvise  unto,  then  this  Pinnasse  with  ten  men,  which  I
hold  to  bee  most  convenient  for  that  action,  although
eretofore  I  conceived  otherwise,  but  now  I  speake  after
good  experience,  having  sayled  in  her  out  and  in  above
:two  thousand  leagues.

Ro. FOTHERBY.

A Letter  of  Robert  Fotherby  to  Captaine  Edge,
written  in  Cross-rode,  July  15,  161 5.

M Aster  Edge,  By  the  mercy  of  God  I  came  into
Crosse-road  on  Thursday  last,  being  driven  from
Sea  neere  shoare  by  extreme  tempest.  At  the  beginning
of  the  storme  I  was  unwittingly  embayed  with  Ice  above
fortie  leagues  from  land,  in  latitude  78.  degrees  and  30.
minutes,  but,  thankes  be  to  God,  I  got  cleare  of  it,  yet
not  without  much  trouble  and  great  danger.  Having
plyed  under  two  coarses  to  and  againe  so  long  till  my
Pinnasse  was  made  leake  with  bearing,  I  tryed  it  under
a  mayne  coarse  and  stem'd  South-east  and  South-east  and
by  South,  notwithstanding  I  was  hurried  to  the  North-

89

Denmarke.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

ward,  and  fell  right  with  the  Foreland,  which  by  reason
of  the  misty  storme  we  could  not  see  till  we  were  within
a  league  of  it ;  then  I  stood  over  the  Bay  and  came  to  an
anchor  here,  where  I  must  be  forced  to  stay  till  our  sailes
be  mended,  and  a  new  mayne  coarse  be  made,  if  not  a
fore  coarse  also.  Then  I  purpose  to  goe  to  Sea  againe,
and  to  proceed  in  coasting  the  Ice  to  the  Westward,  if  it
hinder  me  to  proceed  Northward.  I  have  already  coasted
it  from  Hackluyts  Headland  to  the  latitude  aforesaid,
and  intend  to  beginne  againe  so  neare  as  I  can  at  the
place  where  I  was  put  off  with  the  storme.  I  came  from
Faire  Haven  the  fourth  of  July,  and  then  had  there  beene
killed  twelve  Whales,  besides  one  found  dead,  and  another
brought  in  by  Fra.  Birkes,  which  he  found  at  Sea  before
he  came  into  Faire  Haven.
Ships  of  the  When  I  came  in  hither,  here  were  three  Ships  and  a
King  of  Pinnasse  of  the  King  of  Denmarks ;  they  rid  in  deepe
water  about  a  league  and  a  halfe  from  the  Road,  but
weighed  from  thence,  and  the  Admirall  came  to  an  anchor
close  by  me,  and  sent  to  intreat  me  to  come  aboord  of
him ;  I  went  aboord  and  was  courteously  entertayned  by
the  Generall,  who  questioned  me  of  the  Country,  and
asked  me  by  what  right  the  English  Merchants  did  resort
and  fish  in  this  place  :  I  told  him,  by  the  King  of  Englands
right,  who  had  granted  a  Patent  to  the  Muscovie  Company
of  Merchants,  whereby  he  authorizeth  them,  and  for-
biddeth  all  others  to  frequent  these  places.  Then  he
entreated  me  to  goe  with  him  to  Sir  Tho.  Smiths  Bay,
to  the  two  English  ships  there.  I  told  him,  it  would  be
losse  of  time  to  me,  because  I  had  some  businesse  here
to  doe,  and  then  to  goe  forth  presently  to  Sea  againe  to
prosecute  my  Discovery.  He  said,  that  he  would  have
me  goe  with  him  to  be  witnesse  what  passed  betwixt  him
and  you,  for  he  had  matters  of  importance  to  acquaint
you  withall,  which  concerned  our  King  and  theirs,  and
therefore  intreated  me  to  give  direction  presently  to  weigh
and  set  saile,  for  I  must  needs  goe  with  him  :  I  replyed
againe,  that  it  would  be  a  great  losse  unto  me  of  time,

90

ROBERT FOTHERBY  ad.

1617.
and  I  knew  not  how  to  answer  it ;  but  he  told  me  peremp-
torily that  I  must  goe  with  him.  So  seeing  no  remedie,
I  bad  the  Master  be  readie  :  then  he  presently  weighed
and  kept  me  aboord  him,  but  afterwards  meeting  with
the  two  Captaines  that  came  from  you,  he  returned  and
anchored  againe  in  Crosse-road.  I  received  very  courteous
entertaynment  of  the  Admirall,  Vice-admirall,  and  of
Captaine  Killingham :  but  Captaine  Killingham  being
aboord  of  me,  went  away  as  he  seemed,  discontented
because  I  would  not  give  him  a  young  Morse  I  have
aboord,  which  I  denyed  to  doe,  because  I  writ  to  my
Master  from  Faire  Haven,  that  such  a  thing  I  have,  and
will  bring  alive  into  England,  if  I  may.  When  he  went
off  aboord  of  me,  he  said,  he  would  shoot  downe  my
flag :  And  soone  after  there  came  a  shot  which  flue  over
us,  out  of  the  Admirall,  and  I  expected  another ;  but  soone
after  there  came  a  man  aboord  of  me  out  of  the  Admirall,
to  see  if  any  of  your  men  that  came  in  the  Shallop,  would
goe  with  them  into  the  Bay,  and  he  swore  unto  me  that
the  shot  was  made  to  call  their  Boat  aboord,  because  they
were  ready  to  weigh.  As  farre  as  I  can  perceive,  their
purpose  is  to  see  what  Grant  the  King  of  England  hath
made  unto  the  Companie,  for  they  seeme  to  pretend  that  [lll.iv.732.]
the  right  of  this  Land  belongs  to  the  King  of  Denmarke,
and  neither  to  English  nor  Hollanders.  Thus  with  my
heartie  commendations  to  your  selfe,  and  Master  Bredcake,
together  with  my  praiers  for  your  prosperous  voyage,  I
commit  you  to  God.

Chap.  VIII.

Divers  other  Voyages  to  Greenland,  with  Letters
of  those  which  were  there  employed,  commun-
icated to  mee  by  Master  William  Heley.

An.  1 61 6.  Edges  Hand  was  discovered,  and  a  prosperous
voyage  was  made,  all  the  ships  being  laden,  under  the
command  of  Captaine  Thomas  Edge. An.  161 7.  Witches

91

A.D.
1617.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Hand  was  discovered ;  and  what  voyage  was  made
appeareth  in  the  Letter  following,  written  to  Master
Decrow  by  William  Heley.

Laus  Deo,  in  Portnick  the  12.  of  August,
1617.

Worshipfull  Sir,

Y  dutie  remembred,  May  it  please  you  to
understand,  that  through  Gods  blessing
our  Voyage  is  performed  in  all  the
Harbours  in  the  Countrie  this  yeere,  with
a  greater  overplus  then  our  ships  will
carry :  so  that  in  some  places  wee  must
of  force  leave  good  store  of  Oyle  and
Blubber  behinde  for  the  next  yeere.  Wee  are  all  for  the
most  part  readie  to  set  sayle,  being  full  laden :  onely  I
desire  to  see  the  Coast  cleere  of  Interlopers,  whereby  our
provisions  may  be  left  in  securitie.  We  tooke  a  ship  of
Flushing,  called  the  Noahs  Arke  (Master,  John  Versile)
in  Horne-sound,  having  out  of  him  two  hundred  hogs-
heads of  Blubber  and  two  Whales  and  a  halfe  to  cut  up,
a  great  Copper,  and  divers  other  provisions,  and  sent  him
away  ballasted  with  stones.  There  were  two  more  of
them  who  were  gone  laden  with  Blubber,  before  we  could
get  thither,  having  intelligence  of  our  comming.  There
were  also  two  Danes,  who  made  one  hundred  and  odde
tunnes  of  Oyle,  and  laded  one  ship  for  Copen-haven,  the
other  with  halfe  the  Oyle  and  Finnes  for  Amsterdam,  and
left  the  Country  about  the  sixth  or  seventh  of  August.
And  for  Master  Cudner,  he  rid  in  Portnick,  where  he
killed  eleven  Whales,  and  made  some  seventie  and  odde
tunnes  of  Oyle,  which  is  laden  aboord  him  and  his  Finnes.
In  whom,  if  our  ships  had  come  together  thither  as  I
desired,  I  would  have  laden  fortie  or  fiftie  tunnes  of  Oyle
in  him,  and  displaced  his  men  and  sent  him  for  England :
but  bad  weather  hindring  our  ships  getting  thither,  and
his  sudden  departure  after  our  comming  in  with  the
Pleasure,  shee  being  laden  and  not  sufficiently  fitted  to

92

WILLIAM HELEY  a.d.

1617.

surprise  him,  he  escaped,  but  I  sent  her  away  in  company
with  him,  whereby  he  may  not  doe  any  hurt  in  other  places
in  the  Country.  I  would  have  had  him  to  have  taken
in  some  Oyle,  for  which  I  offered  him  fraight,  so  I  night
put  some  men  into  him  to  see  to  it,  and  that  it  might  be
Drought  safe  to  London  :  but  he  refused,  yet  protesteth,
he  purposeth  to  bring  his  ship  and  goods  to  London  :  his
voyage  is  by  the  thirds,  so  that  his  men  will  rather  dye
then  forget  that  they  have  got.  The  small  ship  John
Ellis  is  returned  from  the  South  Eastward,  having  made
some  further  discovery,  and  killed  some  eight  hundred
Seamorse,  and  laden  the  teeth,  and  thirtie  tunnes  of  hides,
and  the  rest  of  his  lading  in  Oyle :  he  brought  some
Sea-horse  blubber  with  him.  He  met  with  Thomas
Marmaduke  of  Hull  in  those  parts,  who  had  not  done
any  thing  when  he  saw  him  towards  making  a  voyage,
but  went  for  Hope  Hand,  and  no  doubt  but  hee  will  doe
much  spoile  there.  As  for  the  Beare,  shee  departed  for
Hamborough  the  third  of  August  out  of  Crosse-road ;
and  the  Gray-hound  in  company  with  her  for  England,
who,  I  hope,  is  safely  arrived,  and  by  whom  I  hope  you
understand  of  her  proceedings  at  full.

The  Whales  killed  this  yeere  in  the  Country  are  about
one  hundred  and  fiftie  in  number,  and  the  Oyle  made
will  be  about  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  odde  tunnes,
besides  the  blubber  left  for  want  of  caske.  The  lading
of  this  ship  is  one  hundred  and  eightie  tunnes,  as  by  the
Bill  of  lading  here  inclosed.  Thus  having  not  further
wherewith  to  acquaint  your  Worship,  withall  praying  God
to  send  all  home  in  safety  with  a  good  passage ;  I  humbly
take  my  leave,  and  doe  rest

Readie  at  our  Worships  command  in  all
dutifull  service.

William  Heley.

[A  Letter
93

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1618.

[III.iv.733.]  A  Letter  of  Master  Robert  Salmon  to  Master
Sherwin.  In  Sir  Thomas  Smithes  Bay,  the
24.  of  June, 161 8.

LOving  friend  Master  Sherwine,  I  kindly  salute  you,
wishing  you  as  much  prosperitie  as  unto  my  selfe,
&c.  Since  our  comming  into  the  Bay,  we  have  beene
much  troubled  with  Ice  and  Northerly  windes,  so  as  we
have  not  beene  two  dayes  free  of  Ice.  We  had  a  storme
Northerly  which  brought  in  much  Ice,  so  as  we  were
inclosed  withall  eight  dayes :  there  went  such  a  Sea  in
the  Ice  that  did  beate  our  ships  very  much  for  foure  and
twentie  houres,  that  I  did  thinke  we  should  have  spoyled
our  ships :  but  I  thanke  God  we  cannot  perceive  any  hurt
at  all  it  hath  done  to  us ;  also  we  have  broken  two  anchors
with  the  Ice ;  we  have  killed  thirteene  Whales,  but  they
yeeld  but  little,  in  regard  of  the  Ice  which  hath  much
hindred  us  in  our  worke,  for  in  ten  dayes  we  could  not
doe  any  worke  the  Bay  was  so  full  of  Ice :  the  Bay  was
full  as  low  as  Fox  nose,  and  now  at  this  present  the  Bay
is  full  of  shattered  Ice,  the  windes  hanging  Northerly
keepes  it  in.  Here  is  five  sayle  of  Flemmings  which  have
fourteene  and  sixteene  pieces  of  Ordnance  in  a  ship ;  and  joi
they  doe  man  out  eighteene  Shallops,  so  that  with  theirs
and  ours  here  is  thirtie  Shallops  in  the  Bay,  too  many  for
us  to  make  a  voyage :  there  is  at  the  least  fifteene  hundred
tunnes  of  shipping  of  the  Flemmings ;  we  have  reason-
able good  quarter  with  them,  for  we  are  merry  aboord  of
them,  and  they  of  us ;  they  have  good  store  of  Sacks,  and
are  very  kinde  to  us,  proffering  us  any  thing  that  we  want.
I  am  very  doubtfull  of  making  a  voyage  this  yeere,  yet  I
hope  Crosse-road  will  helpe  us  for  one  ship,  the  Company
must  take  another  course  the  next  yeere :  if  they  meane
to  make  any  benefit  of  this  Country,  they  must  send
better  ships  that  must  beat  these  knaves  out  of  this  Coun-
try, but  as  farre  as  I  can  understand  by  them,  they  meane
to  make  a  trade  of  continuance  of  it : they  have  every

94

ROBERT SALMON  ad.

1618.

one  of  them  Grave  Maurices  Commission  under  his  Hand
and  Seale  :  we  will  let  them  rest  this  yeere,  and  let  who  will
take  care  the  next  yeere,  for  I  hope  not  to  trouble  them.
I  pray  remember  my  dutie  to  the  Captaine,  and  also  to
honest  Master  Thornbush,  and  to  John  Martin  ;  Master
Smith  doth  remember  his  love  to  you,  and  to  all  the  rest
of  his  friends  :  we  are  well  as  this  present,  I  thanke  God  :
I  pray  let  us  heare  from  you  when  you  have  any  convay-
ance  ;  I  hope  wee  shall  goe  home  in  companie  together  as
wee  came  out.  Thus  with  my  love  once  againe  remem-
bred  to  you,  beseeching  God  to  send  us  all  a  prosperous
voyage,  and  joyfully  to  meet,  I  rest.

A  Letter  of  Master  Th.  Sherwin  : Bell-sound  this
29.  of  June, 1 6 1 8.

M Aster  William  Heley,  your  Letter  I  received,
wherein  I  understand  you  have  tooke  very  great
griefe,  which  I  am  very  sorry  for  :  but  I  am  in  good  hope
to  come  to  you  my  selfe  one  of  these  dayes,  that  I  may
comfort  you  with  a  good  couple  of  Hennes  and  a  bottle
of  Canary  wine,  but  I  pray  bee  carefull  of  your  selfe  and
keepe  you  warme,  and  take  heede  the  Nodis  doe  not  pick
out  your  eyes :  but  as  for  the  Flemmings  let  them  all  go
hang  themselves,  and  although  you  be  not  strong  enough
to  meddle  with  them,  yet  the  worst  wordes  are  too  good
for  them,  the  time  may  come  you  may  be  revenged  on
them  againe.  The  Captaine  wishes  they  would  come  all
into  Bell-sound  and  beat  us  out,  and  carry  us  for  Holland ;
here  is  a  great  fleet  of  them  in  this  Country.  Here  came
in  two  Flemmings,  but  wee  handled  them  very  honestly,
but  for  feare  of  after-claps,  or  had  it  beene  the  latter  part
of  the  yeere,  we  would  have  handled  them  better ;  now
they  be  gone  for  Horne-sound,  I  would  that  they  had  all
of  them  as  good  a  paire  of  homes  growing  on  their  heads,
as  is  in  this  Country.  As  concerning  our  voyage,  Master
Salmon  can  certifie  you  both  in  Horne-sound,  and  in  our
harbour. My  brother  Busse,  John  Martin,  and  I,  dranke

95

fy

M

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1618.

to  you,  and  wish  you  many  a  Venison  pasty.  We  have
so  little  to  doe  wee  feare  we  shall  all  have  the  Scurvy,  but  ^
we  have  pulled  downe  the  Flemmish  house,  and  brought
it  neere  more  fit  for  our  turne.  Thus  praying  you  to
remember  my  love  to  all  at  Faire-haven,  I  cease,  with  my
prayers  to  God,  to  send  you  and  us  all  a  prosperous
voyage,  with  all  your  good  health,  that  we  may  goe  merrily
home  together.

A Letter  of  James  Beversham  to Master  Heley.
From  Faire-haven,  the  12.  of  July,  161 8.

Aster  Heley,  My  commendations  remembred  to
your  selfe,  Master  Salmon,  Master  Smith,  and
Master  Beymond,  as  also  to  Master  Wilkenson,  Mate
Headland,  Master  Greene,  and  the  rest  of  our  good  friends
with  you,  wishing  all  your  healths  as  my  owne ;  I  am
very  sorry  to  understand  of  the  annoyances  by  the  Flem
mings,  both  with  you  and  other  places  ;  as  also  of  the
small  hope  there  is,  in  making  a  voyage  this  yeere.  For
our  parts  we  are  and  have  beene  so  pestered  with  Ice  these
twentie  dayes,  that  we  have  not  beene  able  to  goe  out  to
Sea  with  our  Shallops  above  twice  in  the  time,  neither
have  we  beene  able  to  doe  any  good  by  reason  of  foule
[III. iv. 734.]  weather  and  fogs,  nor  have  seene  any  more  then  one
Whale  in  all  that  time,  which  after  shee  was  killed  turned
us  to  much  trouble,  by  reason  of  foule  weather,  and  forced
us  at  last  to  leave  her  in  the  Ice,  where  the  Beares  made  a
prey  of  her,  who  I  feare  will  spoyle  her  before  shee  be
recovered.  We  have  killed  sixteene  Whales  besides,
whereof  the  Flemmish  Biscainers  stole  one,  for  which  they
have  promised  satisfaction,  but  they  are  so  shut  up  with
Ice  that  they  are  not  able  to  stirre  either  Ships  or  Shallops.
All  the  Sea  to  the  Northward  of  Hakluyts  headland,  and
both  Eastward  and  Westward  thereof,  is  packt  so  full  of
Ice,  that  I  feare  it  will  overthrow  our  voyage,  and  put  our
ships  in  much  hazard,  the  Lord  release  us  of  that  miserie
in  due  time,  I  neither  have  nor  will  be  slack  to  doe  my

96

JAMES BE  VERS  HAM  a.d.

1618.

best  endevours  for  the  good  of  the  voyage,  the  prosperitie
whereof  I  doe  much  wish  and  desire  both  here  and  in  all
other  places.  I  pray  remember  my  love  to  the  Captaine,
by  your  next  convoy  to  the  Southward,  with  my  com-
mendations to  all  the  rest  of  our  friends ;  thus  for  present
wishing  your  health,  I  kindly  take  my  leave,  and  rest  your
loving  friend.

I  had  thought  to  have  added  a  large  Discourse  of  occur-
rents  betwixt  the  Dutch  and  English  in  Greenland  this
161 8.  and  had  prepared  it  to  the  Presse.  But  having
alreadie  given  some  Relation  thereof  from  Captaine  Edge
&c.  and  seeing  the  insolencies  of  some  of  the  Dutch  were
intolerable  to  English  spirits,  which  then  suffered,  or  here-
after should  reade  them  ;  I  chose  rather  to  passe  them  by ;
advising  my  Countrimen  not  to  impute  to  that  Nation
what  some  frothy  spirit  vomits  from  amidst  his  drinke,
but  to  honor  the  Hollanders  worth,  and  to  acknowledge
the  glorie  of  the  Confederate  Provinces,  howsoever  they
also  have  their  sinks  and  stinking  sewers  (too  officious
mouthes,  such  as  some  in  this  businesse  of  Greenland,
beyond  all  names  of  impudence  against  his  Majestie,  and
his  Leege  people,  as  others  elsewhere  have  demeaned
themselves)  whose  lothsomnesse  is  not  to  be  cast  as  an
aspersion  to  that  industrious  and  illustrious  Nation.
Every  Body  hath  its  excrements,  every  great  House  its
Vault  or  Jakes,  every  Citie  some  Port  exquiline  and  dung-
hils,  every  Campe  the  baggage  ;  the  World  it  selfe  a  Hell :
and  so  hath  every  Nation  the  retriments,  scumme,  dregs,
rascalitie,  intempered,  distempered  spirits,  which  not
fearing  God  nor  reverencing  Man,  spare  not  to  spue  out
that  to  the  dishonor  of  both,  which  saving  the  honor  of
both  can  scarsly  be  related  after  them.  A  difference  is
to  be  made  of  relation  and  personall  faults,  of  which  we
have  said  enough  in  the  East  India  quarrels,  twixt  ours
and  the  Dutch.

[A  Letter
XIV  97  G

L

a».  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1619.

A Letter  of  John Chambers  to W. Heley, Bel-
sound  June  16.  1619.

Oving  and  approved  good  friend,  Master  William
Heley,  &c.  I  am  forc't  to  write  in  teares  unto  you
Terrible  for  the  losse  of  our  Men,  by  the  most  uncouth  accident
Disaster.  tjiat  eyer  f^fou  unto  poore  men.  The  thirteenth  of  June
last  we  were  put  ashore  in  the  Ice  Bay,  our  Shallops  being
not  aboord :  but  as  soone  as  wee  heard  of  it,  we  made
what  haste  we  could,  and  haled  our  shallops  upon  the  Ice,
and  went  aboord  our  ship.  By  that  time  we  had  beene
there  an  houre,  making  what  meanes  we  could  to  get  her
out,  a  maine  peece  of  the  Cliffe  falling,  the  fearefullest
sight  that  ever  I  beheld  being  then  aboord,  expecting
nothing  else  but  death,  with  all  the  rest  that  were  in  her :
But  God  of  his  great  mercie  and  providence  delivered  us,
that  were  not  then  appointed  to  dye,  that  were  past  all
hope  of  life ;  for  the  Ice  fell  so  high  and  so  much,  that  it
carried  away  our  fore-Mast,  broke  our  maine-Mast,
sproung  our  Bouldstrit,  and  fetcht  such  a  careere  that  she
heaved  a  piece  of  Ordnance  over-boord  from  under  our
halfe  Decke,  hove  me  over  boord  amongst  the  Ice  in  all
the  sea,  and  yet  I  thanke  the  Lord  I  was  never  hurt  with
a  piece  of  Ice,  although  it  pleased  God  they  were  spoyled
and  killed  close  by  me.  Thus  having  related  unto  you
the  miserie  of  this  our  Voyage,  hoping  of  your  aide  and
assistance  in  what  you  may,  I  shall  be  ever  bound  to  pray
for  you.  The  Captaine  bid  me  write  unto  you  for  a  five
inch  Haser,  which  I  pray  you  spare  me  and  it  be  possible :
I  have  writ  the  particular  of  our  wants  in  my  Brother
Sherwins  Letter,  which  I  pray  you  be  a  meanes  to  further
me  in.  Thus  ceasing  any  further  to  trouble  you,  I  com-
mit you  unto  the  Lord,  unto  whom  I  pray  to  blesse  and
prosper  you  in  this  your  present  Voyage,  with  all  the
rest  of  your  dayes.

The  men  that  are  killed  are  these : My  Mate  Money,,

98

JOHN CHAMBERS  a.d.

1619.
Nicholas  Greene  and  Allin  the  Butcher. There  be  many
more  hurt  which  I  hope  will  recover  it  by  the  helpe  of
God  and  the  meanes  of  a  good  Surgeon.

LOving  friend  Master  Heley,  I  kindely  salute  you,  &c.
Your  Letter  I  received  the  fifth  of  this  present :
wherein  I  understand  of  the  backwardnesse  of  your
Voyage,  the  which  I  am  hartily  sorrie  for :  but  you  must
be  content,  seeing  it  is  the  will  of  God  it  shall  be  so,  and
that  other  harbours  take  neighbours  fare  with  you  :  our
best  hopes  of  our  Voyage  was  upon  you,  for  of  our  selves
we  doe  little,  in  regard  we  are  much  troubled  with  Ice,
and  have  bin  so  this  ten  dayes,  which  hath  made  us  hale
a  shoare  sixe  or  seaven  times  for  it :  we  have  had  the
windes  at  North-east,  and  East  North-east,  and  at  North-
west, which  now  keepes  in  the  Ice  :  we  have  killed  ten
Whales,  whereof  eight  are  made  into  Oyle,  which  hath
made  one  hundred  and  eleaven  Tuns  &  a  halfe,  the  other
two  were  killed  the  fourth  of  this  present,  being  very
large  fish,  not  doubting  but  they  will  make  sixe  and  [III.iv.735,
thirtie  or  fortie  tunnes :  we  have  the  hundred  tunnes
aboord,  the  rest  Master  Barker  taketh  in,  in  regard  Master
Bushes  shippe  is  not  fitted  up,  we  shall  make  her  fore-
Mast  to  serve  againe  and  all  things  else  for  this  Voyage.
The  fourth  of  this  present,  George  Wivelden  came  from
Horne-sound,  where  they  have  killed  foure  Whales,  they
have  bin  much  troubled  with  windes  Easterly,  also  much
Ice,  there  is  so  much  Ice  off  of  Point  Looke  out,  that
George  could  not  get  about.  This  Ice  hath  put  in  young
Duke  of  Hull  into  Horne-sound,  his  ship  being  much
torne  with  the  Ice,  his  Merchant  is  now  aboord  of  us,  his
name  is  Medcafe,  whom  the  Captaine  doth  detaine,  his
Voyage  is  utterly  overthrowne,  for  he  hath  lost  one  shallop
with  sixe  men,  and  another  shallop  broken  with  the  Ice,
his  Ruther  Irons  being  all  broken,  his  Steeme  broke  a  way
close  to  the  Woodings,  also  George  did  meete  with  a
Fleming  of  Flushing,  burthen  two  hundred  tuns,  the
which  he  thinkes  is  cast  away  with  Ice,  for  the  Ice  did

99

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1619.

beate  her  very  sore.  I  understand  by  M.  Catchers  Letter,
that  there  is  eleaven  saile  of  Flemmings  and  Danes  about
them,  I  doubt  not  but  we  shall  call  them  to  account  of
how  many  tunnes  of  Oyle  they  have  made,  as  they  did
call  us  the  last  Voyage  to  account :  my  love  is  such  unto
them,  that  I  protest  I  could  wish  with  all  my  heart  that  we
might  goe  and  see  them,  and  to  spend  my  best  bloud  in
the  righting  of  our  former  wrongs.  Also  I  understood  by
Robert  Foxe,  that  Adrian  of  Flushing  is  one  of  them,
I  should  be  very  glad  to  see  him,  that  I  might  balance  the
account  with  him.  The  Captaine  willed  mee  to  write
unto  you  concerning  the  Russe  house,  that  if  you  cannot
set  it  up,  that  then  you  should  make  an  English  house  of
it,  and  to  place  the  post  of  a  Deales  length,  and  to  be
three  Deales  in  length,  and  so  much  in  breadth,  and  so
to  cover  it  with  Deales  the  next  yeare,  and  so  he  thinketh
that  it  will  make  two  frames :  also  hee  could  wish  that
you  would  remove  the  Coppers  more  up  into  the  Bay.
I  pray  you  commend  me  to  my  loving  friend  Master
Sherwine,  Master  Wilkinson,  Master  Henderson  and
Michael  Greene ;  also  my  love  remembred  unto  your
selfe,  I  take  my  leave,  hoping  we  shall  see  you  at  the  Fore-
land ere  it  be  long :  till  when,  I  pray  God  to  blesse  you
and  prosper  you  in  all  your  proceedings.  Resting  still
Your  assured  friend  to  command

Robert  Salmon  Junior.
Bell-sound  the  fifth  of
July.  1 619.

A  Letter  of  J.  Catcher  to  Master  Heley  from
Faire-haven.  Laus  Deo,  this  seventeenth  of
June,  1620.

LOving  Brother,  with  my  best  love  I  salute  you,  wish-
ing you  better  then  we  at  this  time,  to  have  good
store  of  Whales  to  make  for  you  and  us  a  Voyage,  for  we
have  seene  small  store  of  Whales,  but  have  killed  none
as  yet. In  the  Flemish  harbour  there  is  three  Flemings

100

JOHN CATCHER  a.d.

1621

great  shippes,  whereof  is  one  Statesman  of  Warre,  who

have  set  to  Sea  eighteene  shallops  with  three  Biscaners  in

everie  shallop  ; and  in  our  harbour  two  of  the  Kings  of

Denmarkes  ships,  who have  set  to  Sea  seaven  shallops

with  three  Biscainers  in  everie  shallop  : the  Hollanders

have  killed  one  Whale,  and  found  one  Whale  of  the  last

jreares  killing. I  thought  good  to  send  to  you  the  sooner,

because  we  hope  you  have  good  store  of  Whales,  that  you

may  send  for  us  to  you,  which  I  pray  God  you  may,  for

we  are  in  great  doubt,  but  our  hope  is,  if  that  you  are  not

yet  provided  to  send  for  us,  we  have  a  great  time  to  stay

In  this  Countrie,  in  which  time,  it  may  so  please  God,

that  we  may  here  make  a  Voyage. For  our  selves,  one  of

our  men  is  dead,  and  one  other  sicke,  so  that  wee  have

but  one  and  fiftie  men,  which  is  too  little  as  you  know,

therefore  if  you  can  spare  us  three  men,  they  will  stand

us  in  good  stead  :  if  our  Voyage  commeth  in,  there  is  to

the  Northward  good  store  of  Ice,  which  putteth  us  in  good

comfort  that  we  shall  have  Whales  :  the  Danes  doe  report

that  there  is  two  shippes  to  come  from  Denmarke  to  our

harbour,  but  as  yet  are  not  come. I  pray  you  commend

us  to  Master  Wilkinson,  Master  Greene,  Master  Hedlam,

Master  Cleyborne,  Master  Alpho,  and  all  the  rest  of  our

good  friends. Humfrey  Moore  is  very  sicke,  so  that  we

shall  want  a  Harponiere. I  know  not  what  to  write  more

to  you,  for  with  griefe  I  write  this. Thus  kindely  taking

my  leave,  beseeching  God  to  blesse  us,  and  send  us  a  good

Voyage,  with  a  merry  meeting,  I  rest

Your  loving  brother  to  use

John  Catcher.

A Letter of Robert Salmon from Sir Thomas
Smiths  Bay,  July  6.  1621

LOving  friend  Master  Heley,  with  my  love  I  salute
you,  &c.  These  are  to  certifie  you,  that  upon  the
fifteenth  of  the  last,  we  arrived  at  Sir  Thomas  Smiths
unfortunate  Bay  : since  which  time  we  have  killed  sixe

IOI

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 62 1.

Whales,  which  are  almost  reduced  into  Oyle,  being  some
seventie  tunnes  or  somewhat  more ;  so  within  a  day  or
two  we  may  goe  sleepe,  for  I  feare  we  have  our  portion
of  Whales  in  this  place :  wee  have  not  seene  a  Whale  this
foureteene  dayes,  and  faire  weather  is  as  scarse  as  the
Whales,  for  ten  daies  together  nothing  but  blow,  some-
time Southerly  and  sometime  Northerly :  I  doe  verily
[III. iv. 736.]  perswade  my  selfe  that  God  is  much  displeased  for  the
blood  which  was  lost  in  this  place,  and  I  feare  a  perpetuall
curse  still  to  remaine  yet ;  God  I  know  is  all-sufficient,
and  may,  if  it  please  him,  send  a  Voyage  in  this  place.
Newes  from  Faire-haven  I  can  write  you  none,  for  as  yet
we  have  not  heard  from  him :  the  reason  thereof  I  cannot
conceive ;  I  feare  his  Shallop  is  miscarried,  for  certainely
else  we  should  have  heard  from  him  ere  this,  or  some  other
cause  there  is  :  I  pray  God  it  be  not  so.  I  pray  commend
me  to  Master  John  Hedlam,  and  tell  him  that  the  Master
and  Pilot  doe  set  both  their  horse  together,  being  very
great  friends :  also  I  pray  commend  me  to  my  Cosen
William  Driver  and  Master  Wilkinson,  wishing  them  all
happinesse.  I  am  in  good  hope  that  you  have  done  some
good  upon  the  Whale,  not  doubting  but  you  will  have
sufficient  for  your  selves  and  to  helpe  your  neighbours,
the  which  I  desire  may  be.  Other  newes  I  have  none  to
write  you.  So  desiring  God  to  blesse  you  in  your  pro-
ceedings in  this  your  Voyage,  I  take  my  leave :  Resting
Your  loving  friend  to  command

Robert  Salmon  Jun.

Nine  Ships  were  imployed  Anno  1622.  of  which  one
for  Discoverie.  Their  disastrous  successe  you  may  reade
before,  page  469.  The  last  Fleete  Anno  1623.  was  set
forth  by  the  former  Adventurers,  under  the  command  of
Captaine  William  Goodlard,  William  Heley  being  Vice-
admirall.  Of  the  successe  thereof  you  may  read  the
Letters  following.

102

NATHANIEL FANNE  a.d.

1623.

Laus  Deo  in  Faire-Haven,  the  foure  and  twentieth
of  June,  1623.

M Aster  Heley,  your  health  wished,  as  also  a  happy
accomplishment  of  your  pretended  Voyage  desired.
I  had  written  you  according  to  order,  of  all  matters
happening  since  our  arrivall,  had  not  contrarie  windes  and
weather  prevented,  and  therefore  have  taken  the  first
opportunitie  offering  at  present.

Wee  arrived  at  our  harbour  with  both  our  Ships  in
safetie  upon  the  third  of  this  present,  blessed  be  God,
finding  the  yeare  past  to  have  beene  a  verie  hard  season,
in  regard  of  the  great  quantitie  of  Snow  and  Ice,  but  yet
not  very  offensive  to  us  in  respect  of  our  good  harbour.
Touching  our  proceeding  upon  our  Voyage,  by  the  eight
of  this  present  we  had  killed  thirteene  Whales,  and  then
were  all  our  Shallops  constrained  in,  by  reason  of  foule
weather,  till  the  fifteenth,  dicto,  and  upon  the  fifteenth  we
killed  two  more,  which  being  all  boyled  but  the  heads,
and  then  estimated  will  hardly  make  past  eightie  Tunnes,
which  is  a  very  small  quantitie.  The  weather  continued
bad  till  the  twentie  two,  dicto,  and  upon  the  three  and
twentieth  we  killed  three  more,  which  by  probabilitie  will
make  neere  fortie  Tunnes.  And  thus  wee  doubt  not  but
by  degrees  we  shall  accomplish  our  Voyage,  by  the  grace
of  God.

As  touching  our  order  for  the  Flemmings,  wee  went  as
yesterday  aboord  them,  supposing  that  wee  should  have
found  the  Danes  there,  but  they  are  not  as  yet  arrived,
but  wee  found  there  five  sailes  of  Flemmings,  the  Admirall
five  hundred  Tunnes,  the  Vice-admirall  of  the  same
burthen,  the  other  three  neere  two  hundred  each  Ship,
having  also  fiftie  or  sixtie  persons  amongst  them,  having
foure  and  twentie  Shallops  belonging  to  their  five  Ships,
and  are  building  Houses  and  Tabernacles  to  inhabit,  for
they  make  new  and  substantiall :  also  they  told  us,  they
expected  one  or  two  Ships  more  everie  day :  after  some

103

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1623.

time  we  had  conference  concerning  the  order  given  us  with
the  Generall  Cornelius  Ice,  and  declared  unto  him  that  the
time  granted  them  to  fish  upon  King  James  his  New  Land
was  expired,  and  thereupon  his  Majestie  hath  granted  to
our  Principals  a  Commission  under  the  broad  Seale  of
England  for  the  depressing  of  any  Interloper  or  Flemming
whatsoever  that  we  shall  meete  withall  upon  this  Coast ;
yet  notwithstanding  it  pleased  our  Principals  to  appoint
us  to  goe  aboord  them,  and  in  a  loving  manner  to  informe
them  hereof,  which  if  you  will  condescend  unto  and  desist
fishing,  you  shall  manifest  your  selves  friends  to  our
Principals ;  if  otherwise,  you  shall  cause  them  to  compell
by  force,  who  had  rather  perswade  by  love.  Unto  which
he  answered,  that  he  heard  of  no  such  matter  in  Holland,
for  if  there  were,  it  should  be  certified  by  writing  :  to
which  we  answered,  that  Sir  Nowel  Carroon  their  Agent
was  not  ignorant  of  it,  who  should  give  information  :  and
saith  he,  I  have  a  Commission  from  the  Prince  of  Orange,
for  the  making  of  my  Voyage  upon  this  Coast,  which  was
procured  by  my  Merchants  for  my  defence  :  and  this  is
that  could  be  gotten  by  words  from  him.

Also  at  our  first  arrivall,  there  rode  two  Biskie  shippes
with  the  Flemmings,  but  within  a  day  or  two  they  waied
and  stood  for  the  Southward  :  but  inquired  of  the  Flem-
mings what  port  they  were  bound  for,  they  answered,  for
the  North  Cape ;  but  Master  Mason  is  perswaded  they
are  at  Greene-harbour :  to  which  purpose  I  wrote  to
Master  Catcher,  that  he  gives  order  to  his  shallop  that
goes  to  Bel-sound,  to  stand  in  for  the  harbour,  to  give  the
Captaine  true  information.  And  so  for  present  I  rest,
intreating  you  to  remember  me  to  Master  Salmon  and
Master  John  Hadland  :  and  thus  contracting  my  sailes,
lest  the  winde  of  my  words  carrie  me  into  the  Ocean  of
discourse,  here  I  anchor :  resting

Your  friend

Nathaniel  Fanne.

104

JOHN CATCHER  ad.

1623.

Master  Catchers  Letter  the  nine  and  twentieth  of  [III.iv.737.

June,  1623.

BRother  Heley,  with  my  best  love  I  salute  you,  wish-
ing your  health  with  a  prosperous  Voyage,  &c. Since
our departure, we have had much foule weather and
troubled  with  Ice  before  we  could  get  into  harbour,  and
after  we  came  into  harbour,  we  never  let  fall  anchor,  by
reason  of  the  Ice,  till  the  sixteenth  of  this  month,  in  which
time  we  killed  sixe  Whales  at  the  Fore-land,  which  made
but  eighteene  Tuns  and  a  halfe  ; and  since  we  have  killed
sixe  Whales  more,  which  I  hope  will  make  in  all  upwards
of  eightie  Tunnes. We  have  fit  nine  Shallops  verie  well,
and  I  thanke  God  not  one  of  our  Men  faileth,  save  one
that  was  shot  accidentally  with  a  Musket. I  hope  some
of  the  Southerne  harbours  will  supply  our  wants,  if  there
be  any,  which  I  feare  there  will :  our  harbour,  manie  say
still,  is  unpossible  to  make  a  Voyage,  by  reason  that  the
Flemmings  shed  bloud  there,  which  I  pray  God  to  take
that  plague  from  us. For  Faire-haven,  I  doubt  not  but
that  you  shall  heare  by  the  Letters  sent  you  of  the  pro-
ceedings ; but Master Sherwin writ, that there  is  five
Flemmings  of  five  hundred  Tunnes  a  peece : there  was
also two Biscainers  which the English nor Flemmings
would  suffer  to  fish  : therefore  they  departed,  and  said
they  would  goe  for  the  North  Cape  ;  but  I  thinke  they  are
in  Greene-harbour,  or  gone  to  the  Eastward  ;  which  if
they  be  in  Greene-harbour,  our  Shallop  going  to  Bel-sound
shall  touch  there  to  see,  and  so  certifie  the  Captaine,  and
know  his  will  what  he  would  have  done  in  it : I  hold  it
not  fit  that  they  should  harbour  there. There  are  no
Danes  in  the  Countrie  as  yet,  &c.

°5

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

:623.

L

Captaine William Goodlards Letter  : Bell-sound
this  eight  of  July,  1623.

Oving  friend  Master  Heley,  I  kindely  salute  you,
wishing  health  to  you  with  the  rest  of  your  companie,
praising  the  Lord  for  your  good  successe  in  your  fishing.
To  certifie  you  of  our  proceedings ;  wee  have  killed  here
in  Bel-sound  three  and  thirtie  Whales,  and  lost  manie
more  by  Irons  broken,  yet  I  hope  sufficient  to  fill  our
ships :  we  have  boiled  a  hundred  and  eightie  Tunnes,  of
which  a  hundred  and  sixtie  aboord  our  Ship,  and  make
account  sixtie  tunnes  more  will  fill  our  hould.  Our
Whales  here  prove  verie  watrish  and  leane,  which  maketh
bad  Oyle,  and  hindereth  us  much  in  boyling.  This  pre-
sent day  our  shallop  came  from  the  Fore-land,  at  which
time  they  had  killed  fifteene  Whales  verie  small,  and  are
verie  doubtfull  of  a  Voyage  there  :  if  God  sendeth  fish  into
this  harbour,  I  will  not  spare  till  I  have  killed  sufficient  to
fill  all  our  Casks,  to  leave  for  them  if  there  be  occasion.
The  foure  and  twentieth  of  June,  there  was  killed  at
Faire-haven  eighteene  Whales,  which  prove  verie  small
to  yeelde,  by  their  estimation  one  hundred  and  twentie  I
Flemmings.  tunnes :  having  there  five  Flemmings  well  fortified,  and
ships  of  fivt  hundred  Tuns  some  of  them,  and  two  more
expected  thither  everie  day,  which  I  feare  will  hinder  much
our  shippes  in  their  fishing  this  yeare,  and  in  my  judge-
ment not  to  be  removed  From  thence,  for  they  having  a
Commission  from  the  States  to  fish  upon  this  Coast ;  were
our  whole  Fleete  there,  and  could  put  them  away,  yet
would  they  flie  to  one  of  our  Southerne  harbours,  and  so
should  we  spend  our  time  in  following  of  them,  and  lose
our  Voyage,  &c.  There  were  two  French  Ships  of  Saint
John  de  Luz  at  Faire-Haven,  which  were  put  away  by  the
Flemmings  and  our  Ships,  which  they  judge  are  gone
for  the  Cape.

With  a  heavie  heart  I  write  you  the  lamentable  accident
which  happened  here  the  eight  and  twentieth  of  June,  our

106

WILLIAM GOODLARD  a.d.

1623.

shallops  all  out  in  chase,  and  my  selfe  asleepe  ;  my  brother  Peter  Good-
having  a  shallop  lying  by  the  ships  side,  spide  a  Whale  lard  drouned>
going  into  the  Ice  Bay,  followed  him  and  strucke  him,
and  his  rope  being  new  ranne  out  with  kinckes,  which
overthrew  his  shallop,  where  he  lost  his  life  with  my  Boy
Bredrake,  being  as  we  thinke  carried  away  with  the  rope
(the  dearest  Whale  to  me  that  ever  was  strucke  in  this
harbour)  there  was  never  anie  losse,  I  thinke,  went  so
neere  my  heart,  &c.

Many  other  Letters  I  could  have  added,  but  doubt  I
have  already  wearied  you  with  this  uncouth  Coast,  whereto
our  English  Neptunes  are  now  so  wonted,  that  there  they
have  found  not  onely  Venison  but  Pernassus  and  Helicon ;
and  have  melted  a  Musaean  Fountain  out  of  the  Green-
land Snowes  and  Icie  Rockes. Whole  Elaborate  Poems
have  I  seene  of  Master  Heley,  as  also  of  James  Presson,
there  composed  :  but  we  have  harsher  Discoveries  in  hand,
to  which  wee  are now  shipping  you. This I thought
good  at  our  parting  to  advertise  thee,  that  Master  Heley
hath  affirmed  to  me  touching  the  diversitie  of  weather  in
Greeneland ; that  one  day, it  hath  beene so  cold  (the  Cold  and
winde  blowing  out  of  some  quarter)  that  they  could  scarce  heat.  s^ranSeh
handle  the  frozen  sailes  :  another  day  so  hot,  that  the  pitch
melted  off  the  ship,  so  that  hardly  they  could  keepe  their
cloathes  from  pollution : yea,  he  hath  seene  at  midnight
Tobacco lighted or  fired by the Sunne-beames  with a  Tobacco
Glasse. Likewise  for  a  farewell  to  our  Whale-storie,  I  lighted  by  the
thought  good  to  deliver  Stowes  relation  touching  a  Whale  Su!\  at
somewhat  differing  in  forme  from  those  here  usually  found mg
in Greeneland : myselfe  also  having spoken  with  some
diligent  viewers  thereof  in  Thanet  where  it  was  taken
Julie  9.  1574.  shooting  himselfe  on  shore  besides  Rammes-
gate  in  the  Parish  of  Saint  Peter,  and  there  dying  forsaken
of  his  Ocean  parent. Hee  came  on  shoare  about  sixe  of
the  clocke  at  night,  and  died  about  sixe  the  next  morning,
before  which  time  he  roared  and  was  heard  more  then  a  [III. iv. 738.]
mile  on  the  land. The  length  was  two  and  twentie  yards,
the  nether  jaw  twelve  foote  in  the  opening : one  of  his

107

A.D.
1623.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

eyes  (which  in  the  Greene-land  Whale  is  verie  small,  not
much  greater  then  the  eye  of  an  Oxe)  being  taken  out  of
his  head,  was  more  then  sixe  Horses  in  a  Cart  could  draw ;
a  man  stood  upright  in  the  place  whence  the  eye  was  taken.
The  thicknesse  from  the  backe  whereon  he  lay,  to  his
bellie,  which  was  upwards,  was  fourteene  foote  ;  his  taile  of
the  same  breadth  :  three  men  stood  upright  in  his  mouth  :
betwixt  his  eyes  twelve  foote :  some  of  the  ribs  sixteene
foote  long :  the  tongue  fifteene  foote  long :  his  liver  two
Cart  load :  into  his  nostrils  anie  man  might  have  crept :
the  Oyle  of  his  head  Spermaceti,  &c.

Gods  mercy  to
England
whiles  zvarres

Chap.  IX.

The  late  changes  and  manifold  alterations  in  Russia
since  Ivan  Vasilowich  to  this  present,  gathered
out  of  many  Letters  and  Observations  of  Eng-
lish Embassadors  and  other  Travellers  in  those

parts.

§•  1.

Of  the  reigne  of  Ivan,  Pheodore  his  sonne  ;  and  of

Boris.

Eader,  I  here  present  thee  not  what  I
would  of  Russian  affaires,  but  what  I
could.  We  Englishmen  under  the
government  of  his  Majestie,  have  enjoyed
such  a  Sunshine  of  peace,  that  our  Sum-
mers day  to  many  hath  beene  tedious ;
they have loathed their Manna, and

For

the  rest  of  the  longed  for  I  know  not  what  Egyptian  flesh  pots
World.

what  else  are  Warres  but  pots  set  over  the  fire  of  Anger
(how  often  of  Furie,  yea  of  Hell,  the  Furies  or  Devils
blowing  the  coales)  and  boyling  mans  flesh?  whole
Families,  Villages,  Townes,  Cities,  Shires,  Provinces,  not
onely  hurried  thereby  in  confusions  of  State,  harried  and
enflamed  with  combustions  of  goods  and  goodnesse,  but

108

OBSERVATIONS OF RUSSIA  a.d.

1570.

the  flesh  of  Men,  Women,  and  Children,  but  chered  and
as  it  were  boyled  beyond  the  manifold  shapes  of  Death,
unto  the  bones,  into  the  Vapors,  Froth,  Scumme,  Chaos,
nothing  and  lesse  then  nothing  of  Humanitie!  Such  is
the  inhumanitie,  the  immanitie,  the  inanitie  of  Warres!
And  such  Warres  have  made  impressions  into  all  our
Neighbour  Countries  (whiles  wee  sit  under  the  shadow
of  Beati  Pacifici)  have  lightened  on  Turkie  and  blasted
the  Seraglio,  have  thunder-stricken  Barbarie,  have  torne
the  Atlas  there,  and  rent  the  Grison  Alpes  in  Europe  ;
have  shaken  France  with  earthquakes  ;  have  raysed  Belgian
stormes,  Bohemian  broyles,  Hungarian  gusts,  Germanian
whirlewinds  (these  selfe-divided  in  Civill,  that  is,  the  vilest,
uncivillest  massacres  and  worst  of  Warres)  that  I  mention
not  the  inundations  and  exundations  of  Poland ;  the
Snowes  and  Mists  of  Sweden,  the  Danish  Hailes  and
Frosts.  But  all  these  and  more  then  all  these  Tempests,
Turnado's,  Tuffons  have  combined  in  Russia,  and  there
made  their  Hell-mouth  centre,  there  pitching  the  Tents  of
Destruction,  there  erecting  the  Thrones  of  Desolation.

Pestilence  and  Famine  had  gone  two  yeeres  before  as  A.  Thuan.
direful  Heralds,  to  denounce  these  dreadfull  warres  and  Mstor.I.i$$.
mutations  of  State :  the  Pestilence  possessing  the
Northerne  parts  of  the  World,  and  dispossessing  it  of
many  many  thousands  :  the  Famine  in  Russia  wanting
necessaries  to  eate,  necessarily  devoured  all  things,  not
onely  Cats,  Mice,  and  impure  Creatures,  but  mens  flesh
also,  and  that  in  neerest  necessitude,  Parents  revoking  to
their  wombes  by  unnaturall  passage  the  dearest  pledges  of
Nature,  which  having  even  now  dyed  with  hunger,  were
made  preservatives  from  like  death  to  those  which  first
had  given  them  life.  The  Mightier  made  sale  of  the
Poorer,  yea,  Fathers  and  Mothers  of  their  Sonnes  and
Daughters,  and  Husbands  of  their  Wives,  that  price  might
bee  had  to  buy  Corne,  which  was  now  beyond  all  names
of  whatsoever  price  credible.  But  these  things  must  be
further  searched.

Bloudinesse  is  a  slipperie  foundation  of  Greatnesse,  and

109

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1570.

the Mercifull  have the  promise to  finde  mercy : other

Jam.  3.  wisedome  (how  ever  seeming  politike)  is  earthly,  sensuall,

devillish ;  yea,  ruine  to  the  foole-wise  Consultors,  as
appeareth  in  Pharaohs  working  wisely,  that  is,  cruelly,  to

Exod.  1.  prevent the multiplying Israelites. The greatest of

Creatures  on  Sea  and  Land,  the  Elephant  and  Whale,  live
on  grasse,  weeds,  and  simpler  diet,  not  on  rapine  and  flesh
or  fish-devouring  prey :  Thunders  and  all  tempestuous
stormes  trouble  not  the  higher  aiery  Regions,  but  the
lower  and  those  next  the  baser  earthy  dregs,  the  sediment
and  sinke  of  the  World :  nor  doth  ancient  Philosophie
reckon  Comets  other  then  Meteors,  or  falling  Starres  to
be  Starres  indeed,  but  excludes  both  from  the  heavenly
Sphaeres.  Had  Alexander  followed  this  rule,  and  sought
Greatnesse  in  Goodnesse  (like  him  which  is  Optimus
Maximus,  the  Great  God,  the  great  Good  of  the  World)

[III. iv.  739.]  and  in  himselfe  rather  then  others,  in  being  Master  of
himselfe  then  Lord  of  large  Territories ;  he  neither  had
sighed  after  the  conquests  of  other  Worlds  which  Foolo-
sophie  had  created,  before  he  had  seene  the  tenth  part  of
this  ;  nor  had  dyed  by  poyson  in  a  forraine  Countrie,  forced
to  content  himselfe  with  possessing,  nay,  being  possessed
of  a  few  feet  of  earth  :  then  had  he  beene  in  very  deed
(now  but  in  Title)  Great  Alexander.  Great  Goodnesse  is
the  true  and  good  Greatnesse.

I  know  not  how  fit  a  Preface  this  may  seeme  to  the
ensuing  Russian  Relation  ;  this  I  am  sure,  that  they  which
write  of  Ivan  Vasilowich,  the  Great  Great  Muscovite,  doe
lay  heavie  aspersions  on  his  Father  and  Grand-father,  but
on  himselfe  supersuperlatives  of  crueltie  (that  I  mention
not  other  vices)  both  for  Matter  and  Forme.  These
things  are  delivered  particularly  in  the  Histories  of
Alexander  Gwagninus,  Tilmannus  Bredenbachius,  Paulus
Oderbornius,  Reinoldus  Heidensten  and  others,  in  large
Tractates  written  thereof  purposely.  His  merits  of  the
English  might  procure  a  silence  of  his  evils  (wee  of  all
men  being  in  regard  of  respect  to  our  Nation  unworthy  to
speake,  that  which  hee,  if  those  Authours  have  not  beene

ITO

OBSERVATIONS OF RUSSIA  a.d.

I57°'
malicious,  was  worthy  to  heare)  if  so  dreadfull  effects  did

not  force  an  Historian  (that  is,  the  Register  of  the  execu-
tion of  Acts  of  Gods  bountie  and  justice  decreed  in  the
Court  of  Divine  Providence)  to  looke  to  the  direfull
Cause  in  foregoing  sinnes,  that  after  Ages  may  heare  and
feare.

I  will  touch  a  few  of  those  which  Gwagninus  alone dl.  Gwagnim
relates. His  owne  brother  being  accused  An. 1570.  by  dQ^pie'Mosc'
Wiskonati,  is  said  without  leave  granted  to  cleare  himselfe, brother  t0  the
to  bee  put  to  exquisite  tortures  first,  and  after  to  death  ;  his  Emperor
wife  stripped  and  set  naked  to  the  eyes  of  all,  and  then done  to  death.
by  one  on  horse-backe  drawne  with  a  rope  into  the  River  Hef  a,^es
and  drowned. John  Piotrowich,  a  man  of  principall  com-  ^/f/ ^ere
mand,  accused  of  treason,  presenting  himselfe  to  him,  not  omitted.
admitted to make any purgation, was set in Princely
accoutrements  on  a  Throne,  the  Emperour  standing  bare-
headed before  him  and  bowing  to  him,  but  soone  after
with  a  knife  thrusting  him  to  the  heart,  the  Attendants
adding  other  Furies  till  his  bowels  fell  out ; his  body
dragged  forth,  his  servants  slaine,  three  hundred  others  in
his  Castle  executed, his  Boiarens  all  gathered into  one
house and  blowne  up with poulder ; their  Wives  and
Daughters  ravished  before  his  face  by  his  followers,  and
then  cut  in  pieces,  and  no  living  thing  left  in  their  houses
or  grounds ; the  husbandmens  wives  stripped  naked  as
they  were  borne  and  driven  into  a  Wood,  where  were
Executioners  purposely  set  to  give  them  their  fatall  enter-
tainment. His  Chancellor  Dubrowsti  sitting  at  table  with
his  two  Sonnes,  were  also  upon  accusation  without  answere
cut  in  pieces,  and  the  third  sonne  quartered  alive  with
foure  wheeles,  each  drawne  a  divers  way  by  flfteene  men.
Miessoiedowyschly,  supreme  Notarie,  displeasing  him,  his
wife  was  taken  from  him,  and  after  some  weeks  detayning
was  with  her  hand-maid  hanged  over  her  husbands  doore,
and  so  continued  a  fortnight,  he  being  driven  to  goe  in
and  out  by  her  all  that  time. Another  Notaries  wife  was
ravished and then sent home and hanged over her
husbands  table,  whereat  he  was  forced  daily  to  eate. In

in

A.D.

1570.

*7oo.  women
at  one  time;
378.  prisoners
at  another.
500.  Matrons
and  Virgins  of
noble  bloud
exposed  to  be
ravished  by  the
Tartars  in  his
sight  at
another  time
fcff.

*A  Secretarie
cutting  off  his
privities  he
died  presently;
which  the
Emperour
construing  to
be  done  pur-
posely, caused
him  there
instantly  to
eate  what  he
had  cut  off.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

travelling  if  he  met  any  woman  whose  husband  he  liked
not,  he  caused  her  to  stand  with  her  nakednesse  disclosed
till  all  his  retinue  were  passed.  Cutting  out  tongues,
cutting  off  hands  and  feet  of  his  complayning  Subjects,  and
other  diversified  tortures  I  omit ;  as  also  the  guarding  his
father  in  lawes  doores  with  Beares  tyed  there,  that  none
might  goe  in  or  out,  hanging  his  servants  at  his  doores,
torturing  him  for  treasure ;  casting  hundreds  of  men  *  at
once  into  the  water  under  the  Ice ;  two  thousand  seven
hundred  and  seventie  thus  and  by  other  tortures  executed
at  Novogrod  An.  1569.  besides  women,  and  the  poorer
persons  which  Famine  forced,  did  eate  the  bodies  of  the
slaine,  and  were  after  slaine  themselves ;  the  Archbishop
also  set  on  a  Mare  with  his  feet  tyed  under  the  belly,  and
made  to  play  on  Bag-pipes  thorow  the  Citie ;  the  Monks
spoyled  and  slaine ;  Theodore  Sirconii,  the  Founder  of
twelve  Monasteries,  tortured  to  shew  his  treasure  and  then
slaine :  Wiazinsky  his  Secretarie,  by  many  dayes  renewed
tortures  dying  :  hee  recreating  himselfe  with  letting  Beares
loose  in  throngs  of  people  ;  John  Michalowich  Wiskewati
the  Chancellor,  his  eares,  lips  and  other  members  one  after
another  cut  off  *  by  piece-meale,  notwithstanding  all  pro-
testations of  his  innocency ;  above  two  hundred  other
Nobles  at  the  same  time  variously  executed,  one  his
Treasurer,  two  other  Secretaries ;  the  Treasurers  wife  set
on  a  rope  and  forcibly  dragged  to  and  fro  thereon  (by  that
torturing  her  naked  flesh  to  learne  her  husbands  treasures)
whereof  soone  after  she  dyed  in  a  Monasterie,  into  which
shee  was  thrust.  All  these  are  but  a  little  of  that  which
Gwagninus  alone  hath  written.  A  taste  and  touch  is  too
much  of  bloud,  and  in  such  immanities.  He  is  also  said
in  a  famine  to  have  gathered  many  people,  in  expectation
of  almes,  on  a  bridge,  and  there  guarded  the  bridge  being
cut  to  drowne  them,  as  the  readiest  way  for  cheapnesse  of
corne.  But  I  lothe  such  crudities.  His  last  crueltie  was
on  himselfe,  dying  with  griefe,  as  was  thought,  for  the
death  of  his  eldest  sonne  Ivan,  whom  falsly  accused  he
struck  with  a  staffe  wrought  with  Iron,  whereof  he  dyed  in

112

OBSERVATIONS OF RUSSIA  a.d.

1570.

few  dayes  after.  Hee  was  a  man  accused  for  communi-
cating in  disposition  with  his  father,  and  as  a  joyfull
Spectator  of  his  tragicall  executions.

But  if  any  delight  to  reade  the  terrible  and  bloudie  Acts
of  Ivan  Basilowich,  he  may  glut,  if  not  drowne  himselfe
in  bloud,  in  that  Historie  which  Paul  Oderborne  hath
written  of  his  life,  and  both  there  and  in  others  take
view  of  other  his  unjust  Acts.  I  will  not  depose  for  their
truth,  though  I  cannot  disprove  it :  adversaries  perhaps
make  the  worst.  For  my  selfe  I  list  not  to  rake  sinkes  [III. iv.  740.]
against  him,  and  would  speake  in  his  defence,  if  I  found
not  an  universall  conspiracy  of  all  Historie  and  Reports
against  him.  I  honour  his  other  good  parts,  his  wit,  his
learning  (perhaps  better  then  almost  any  other  Russe  in
his  time)  his  exemplarie  severity  on  unjust  Magistrates,
his  Martiall  skill,  industrie,  fortune,  whereby  he  subdued
the  Kingdoms  of  Casan  and  Astracan  (which  also  the
Turke  sending  from  Constantinople  an  Armie  of  three
hundred  thousand  to  dispossesse  him  of,  A.  1569.  besides
his  hopes  and  helpes  from  the  Tartars,  few  returned  to
tell  their  disasters,  and  the  destructions  of  their  fellowes)
besides  what  hee  got  in  Siberia  and  from  the  Pole,  Sweden,
Prussian,  extending  his  Conquests  East,  West,  North,  and
South  :  yea,  his  memorie  is  savourie  still  to  the  Russians,
which  (either  of  their  servile  disposition  needing  such  a
bridle  and  whip  ;  or  for  his  long  and  prosperous  reigne,
or  out  of  distaste  of  later  tragedies)  hold  him  in  little
lesse  reputation  (as  some  have  out  of  their  experience
instructed  me)  then  a  Saint.  \\

His  love  to  our  Nation  is  magnified  by  our  Countrimen
with  all  thankfulnesse,  whose  gaines  there  begun  by  him,
have  made  them  also  in  some  sort  seeme  to  turne  Russe
(in  I  know  not  what  loves  or  feares,  as  if  they  were  still
shut  up  in  Russia,  &  to  conceale  whatsoever  they  know  of
Russian  occurrents)  that  I  have  sustayned  no  small  torture
with  great  paines  of  body,  vexation  of  minde,  and  triall  of
potent  interceding  friends  to  get  but  neglect  and  silence
from  some,  yea  almost  contempt  and  scorne.  They
xiv  113  h

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1570.

alledge  their  thankfulnesse  for  benefits  received  from  that
Nation,  and  their  feare  of  the  Dutch,  readie  to  take  advan-
tage thereof,  and  by  calumniations  from  hence  to  intervert
their  Trade.  This  for  love  to  my  Nation  I  have  inserted
against  any  Cavillers  of  our  Russe  Merchants  :  though  I
must  needs  professe  that  I  distaste,  and  almost  detest  that
(call  it  what  you  will)  of  Merchants  to  neglect  Gods  glorie
in  his  providence,  and  the  Worlds  instruction  from  their
knowledge ;  who  while  they  will  conceale  the  Russians
Faults,  will  tell  nothing  of  their  Facts ;  and  whiles  they
will  be  silent  in  mysteries  of  State,  will  reveale  nothing
of  the  histories  of  Fact,  and  that  in  so  perplexed,  diversi-
fied chances  and  changes  as  seldome  the  World  hath  in  so
short  a  space  seene  on  one  Scene.  Whiles  therefore  they
which  seeme  to  know  most,  will  in  these  Russian  Relations

yhelpe  me  little  or  nothing  (except  to  labour  and  frustrated
hopes)  I  have  (besides  much  conference  with  eye  witnesses)
made  bold  with  others  in  such  books  as  in  divers  languages
I  have  read,  and  in  such  Letters  and  written  Tractates  as
I  could  procure  of  my  friends,  or  found  with  Master
Hakluyt  (as  in  other  parts  of  our  storie)  not  seeking  any
whit  to  disgrace  that  Nation  or  their  Princes,  but  onely
desiring  that  truth  of  things  done  may  bee  knowne,  and
such  memorable  alterations  may  not  passe  as  a  dreame,  or
bee  buried  with  the  Doers.  Sir  Jerome  Horsey  shall
leade  you  from  Ivans  Grave  to  Pheodores  Coronation.

>.

*0,

The  most  solemne  and  magnificent  coronation  of

Thedor.  Pheodor  Ivanowich,  Emperour  of  Russia,  &c,

the  tenth  of  June,  in  the  yeare  1584.  seen  and

Sir  Jerom  observed  by  Master  Jerom  Horsey  Gentleman,

Horsey-  and  servant  to  her  Majestic

The  death  of  "II  fHen  the  old  Emperor  Ivan  Vasilowich  died  (being

IvanVasili- \\ about the eighteenth of  April, 1584. after our

vneh\tfi\. computation)  in  the  Citie  of  Mosco,  having  raigned  fiftie

foure  yeares,  there  was  some  tumult  &  uprore  among  some

of  the  Nobilitie  and  Comminaltie,  which  notwithstanding

114

JEROME HORSEY  a.d.

1584.
was  quickly  pacified.  Immediately  the  same  night,  the
Prince  Boris  Pheodorowich  Godonova,  Knez  Ivon  Pheo-
dorowich, Mesthis  Slafsky,  Knez  Ivan  Petrowich  Susky,
Mekita  Romanowich  and  Bodan  Jacoulewich  Belskoy,
being  all  noble  men,  and  chiefest  in  the  Emperours  Will,
especially  the  Lord  Boris,  whom  he  adopted  as  his  third  Lord  Boris
son,  and  was  brother  to  the  Empresse,  who  was  a  man  adopted  as  the

very  well  liked  of  all  estates,  as  no  lesse  worthy  for  his  Em^rors

.J  1-1  11 1  -JJ-  third  sonne.

valour  and  wisedome  :  all  these  were  appointed  to  dispose,

and  settle  his  Sonne  Pheodor  Ivanowich,  having  one
sworne  another,  and  all  the  Nobilitie  and  Officers  whoso-
ever. In  the  morning  the  dead  Emperour  was  laid  into
the  Church  of  Michael  the  Archangell,  into  a  hewen
Sepulchre,  very  richly  decked  with  Vestures  fit  for  such  a
purpose  :  and  present  Proclamation  was  made  (Emperour
Pheodor  Ivanowich  of  all  Russia,  &c.)  Throughout  all
the  Citie  of  Mosco  was  great  watch  and  ward,  with
Souldiors,  and  Gunners,  good  orders  established,  and
Officers  placed  to  subdue  the  tumulters,  and  maintaine
quietnesse  :  to  see  what  speede  and  policie  was  in  this
case  used,  was  a  thing  worth  the  beholding.  This  being
done  in  Mosco,  great  men  of  birth  and  accompt  were  also
presently  sent  to  the  bordering  Townes,  as  Smolensko,
Vobsko,  Kasan,  Novogorod,  &c.  with  fresh  garrison,  and
the  old  sent  up.  As  upon  the  fourth  of  May  a  Parliament
was  held,  wherein  were  assembled  the  Metropolitane,
Archbishops,  Bishops,  Priors,  and  chiefe  Clergie  men,  and
all  the  Nobility  whatsoever :  where  many  matters  were
determined  not  pertinent  to  my  purpose,  yet  all  tended  to
a  new  reformation  in  the  governement :  but  especially  the
terme,  and  time  was  agreed  upon  for  the  solemnizing  of
the  new  Emperours  coronation.  In  the  meane  time  the
Empresse,  wife  to  the  old  Emperour,  was  with  her  childe
the  Emperours  son,  Charlewich  Demetrie  Ivanowich,  of
one  yeares  age  or  there  abouts,  sent  with  her  Father
Pheodor  Pheodorowich  Nagay,  and  that  kindred,  being
five  brothers,  to  a  towne  called  Ouglets,  which  was  given  [in.iv.741.]
unto  her,  and  the  yong  Prince  her  sonne,  with  all  the

IT5

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1584.

Lands  belonging  to  it  in  the  shire,  with  officers  of  all  sorts
appointed,  having  allowance  of  apparell,  jewels,  diet,  horse,
&c.  in  ample  manner  belonging  to  the  estate  of  a  Princesse.
The  time  of  mourning  after  their  use  being  expired,  called
Sorachyn,  or  fortie  orderly  dayes,  the  day  of  the  solemniz-
The  day  of  ing  of  this  coronation,  with  great  preparations,  was  come,
Pheodor  his  Demg  Upon  the  tenth  day  of  June,  1584.  and  that  day
then  Sunday,  he  being  of  the  age  of  twenty  five  years  :
at  which  time,  Master  Jerom  Horsey  was  orderly  sent
for,  and  placed  in  a  fit  roome  to  see  all  the  solemnity.
The  Emperour  comming  out  of  his  Pallace,  there  went
before  him  the  Metropolitane,  Archbishops,  Bishops,  and
chiefest  Monkes,  and  Clergie  men,  with  very  rich  Coapes
and  Priests  garments  upon  them,  carrying  pictures  of  our
Lady,  &c.  with  the  Emperors  Angell,  banners,  censers,
and  many  other  such  ceremonious  things,  singing  all  the
way.  The  Emperour  with  his  nobility  in  order  entred
the  Church  named  Blaveshina  or  Blessednes,  where  prayers
and  service  were  used,  according  to  the  manner  of  their
Church :  that  done,  they  went  thence  to  the  Church  called
Michael  the  Archangell,  and  there  also  used  the  like
prayers,  and  service  :  and  from  thence  to  our  Lady  Church,
Prechista,  being  their  Cathedrall  Church.  In  the  middest
thereof  was  a  chaire  of  majestie  placed,  wherein  his
Ancestors  used  to  sit  at  such  extraordinary  times :  his
roabes  were  then  changed,  and  most  rich  and  unvaluable
garments  put  on  him :  being  placed  in  this  Princely  seate,
his  nobilitie  standing  round  about  him  in  their  degrees,
his  imperiall  Crowne  was  set  upon  his  head  by  the  Metro-
politane, his  Scepter  globe  in  his  right  hand,  his  sword  of
Justice  in  his  left  of  great  riches  :  his  six  crowns  also,  by
which  he  holdeth  his  Kingdomes  were  set  before  him,  and
the  Lord  Boris  Pheodorowich  was  placed  at  his  right  hand  :
then  the  Metropolitan  read  openly  a  booke  of  a  small
volume,  with  exhortations  to  the  Emperour  to  minister
true  Justice,  to  injoy  with  tranquility  the  Crowne  of  his
ancestours,  which  God  had  given  him,  and  used  these
words  following :

116

JEROME HORSEY  a.d.

1584.

Through  the  will  of  the  almightie  and  without  begin-
ning God,  which  was  before  this  world,  whom  we  glorifie
in  the  Trinitie,  one  onely  God,  the  Father,  the  Sonne,  and
the  holy  Ghost,  maker  of  all  things,  worker  of  all  in  all
every  where,  fulfiller  of  all  things,  by  which  will,  and
working,  he  both  liveth  and  giveth  life  to  man  :  that  our
onely  God  which  enspireth  everie  one  of  us  his  onely
children  with  his  word  to  discerne  God  through  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  and  the  holy  quickning  spirit  of  life,  now  in
these  perillous  times  established  us  to  keepe  the  right
Scepter,  and  suffer  us  to  raigne  of  our  selves  to  the  good
profit  of  the  land,  to  the  subduing  of  the  people,  together
with  the  enemies,  and  the  maintenance  of  vertue.  And
so  the  Metropolitan  blessed  and  laid  his  crosse  upon  him.
After  this,  he  was  taken  out  of  his  chaire  of  Majesty,
having  upon  him  an  upper  roabe  adorned  with  precious
stones  of  all  sorts,  orient  pearles  of  great  quantity,  but
alwayes  augmented  in  riches :  it  was  in  weight  two
hundred  pounds,  the  traine  and  parts  thereof  borne
up  by  six  Dukes,  his  chiefe  imperiall  Crowne  upon  his
head  very  precious :  his  staffe  imperiall  in  his  right
hand  of  an  Unicornes  home  of  three  foote  and  a  halfe
in  length  beset  with  rich  stones,  bought  of  Merchants
of  x^usburge  by  the  old  Emperour,  in  Anno  1581.  and
cost  him  7000.  Markes  sterling.  This  Jewel  Master
Horsey  kept  sometimes,  before  the  Emperour  had  it.
His  Scepter  globe  was  carried  before  him  by  the  Prince
Boris  Pheodorowich  :  his  rich  cap  beset  with  rich  stones
and  pearles,  was  carried  before  him  by  a  Duke :  his  sixe
Crownes  also  were  carried  by  Demetrius  Ivanowich  Godo-
nova,  the  Emperours  unckle,  Mekita  Romanowich  the
Emperors  unckle,  Stephen  Vasiliwich,  Gregorie  Vasili-
wich, Ivan  Vasiliwich  brothers  of  the  bloud  royall.  Thus
at  last  the  Emperour  came  to  the  great  Church  doore,
and  the  people  cried,  God  save  our  Emperour  Pheodor
Ivanowich  of  all  Russia,  His  Horse  was  there  ready
most  richly  adorned,  with  a  covering  of  imbrodered
pearle and precious stones, saddle, and all furniture

117

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1584.

agreeable to  it,  reported to  be  worth 300000. markes
sterling.

There  was  a  bridge  made  of  a  hundred  &  fiftie  fadomes
in  length,  three  manner  of  waies,  three  foot  above  ground,
and  two  fadome  broad,  for  him  to  goe  from  one  Church  to
the  other  with  his  Princes  and  nobles  from  the  presse  of
the  people,  which  were  in  number  infinite,  and  some  at
that  time  pressed  to  death  with  the  throng.  As  the
Emperor  returned  out  of  the  Churches,  they  were  spred
under  foot  with  cloth  of  Gold,  the  porches  of  the  Churches
with  red  Velvet,  the  Bridges  with  Scarlet,  &  stammelled
cloth  from  one  Church  to  another :  and  as  soone  as  the
Emperor  was  passed  by,  the  cloth  of  gold,  velvet  and
scarlet  was  cut,  &  taken  of  those  that  could  come  by  it,
every  man  desirous  to  have  a  piece,  to  reserve  it  for  a
monument :  silver  and  gold  coine,  then  minted  of  purpose
was  cast  among  the  people  in  great  quantitie.  The  Lord
Boris  Pheodorowich  was  sumptuously  and  richly  attired,
with  his  garments  decked  with  great  orient  pearle,  beset
with  all  sorts  of  precious  stones.  In  like  rich  manner
were  apparelled  all  the  family  of  the  Godonovaes  in  their
degrees,  with  the  rest  of  the  Princes  and  nobilitie,  whereof
one  named  Knez  Ivan  Michalowich  Glynsky,  whose  roabe,
horse  and  furniture,  was  in  register  found  worth  one
hundred  thousand  markes  sterling,  being  of  great
antiquitie.  The  Empresse  being  in  her  Pallace,  was  placed
in  her  chaire  of  Majesty  also  before  a  great  open  window :
most  precious,  and  rich  were  her  robes,  and  shining  to
behold,  with  rich  stones,  and  orient  Pearles  beset,  her
crowne  was  placed  upon  her  head,  accompanied  with  her
Princesses,  and  Ladies  of  estate  :  then  cried  out  the  people,
God  preserve  our  noble  Empresse  Irenia.  After  all  this,
[III. iv. 742.]  the  Emperour  came  into  the  Parliament  house,  which  was
richly  decked :  there  he  was  placed  in  his  royall  seat
adorned  as  before  :  his  sixe  crownes  were  set  before  him
upon  a  Table  :  the  Bason  and  Ewre  royall  of  gold  held  by
his  knight  of  gard,  with  his  men  standing  two  on  each
side  in  white  apparell  of  cloth  of  silver,  called  Kindry  with

118

JEROME HORSEY  a.d.

1584.
scepters  and  battle-axes  of  gold  in  their  hands,  the  Princes
and  nobility  were  all  placed  according  to  their  degrees  all
in  their  rich  roabes.

The  Emperour  after  a  short  Oration,  permitted  every
man  in  order  to  kisse  his  hand  :  which  being  done,  he
removed  to  a  princely  seate  prepared  for  him  at  the  table :
where  he  was  served  by  his  Nobles  in  very  princely  order.
The  three  out  roomes  being  very  great  and  large  were
beset  with  plate  of  gold  and  silver  round,  from  the  ground
up  to  the  vauts  one  upon  the  other :  among  which  plate
were  many  barrels  of  silver  and  gold  :  this  solemnitie  and
triumph  lasted  a  whole  weeke,  wherein  many  royall  pas-
times were  shewed  and  used :  after  which,  the  chiefest
men  of  the  Nobilitie  were  elected  to  their  places  of  office
and  dignitie,  as  the  Prince  Boris  Pheodorowich  was  made
chiefe  Counsellour  to  the  Emperour,  Master  of  the  Horse,
had  the  charge  of  his  person,  Lieutenant  of  the  Empire,
and  warlike  engins,  Governor  or  Lieutenant  of  the  Empire
of  Cazan,  and  Astracan,  and  others :  to  this  dignitie  were
by  Parliament,  and  gift  of  the  Emperour  given  him  many
revenewes  and  rich  lands,  as  there  was  given  him,  and  his
for  ever  to  inherite  a  Province  called  Vaga,  of  three
hundred  English  miles  in  length,  and  two  hundred  and
fiftie  in  bredth,  with  many  Townes  and  great  Villages
populous  and  wealthy :  his  yearely  Revenew  out  of  that
Province,  is  five  and  thirtie  thousand  Markes  sterling,
being  not  the  fifth  part  of  his  yeare  Revenue.  Further,
he  and  his  house  be  of  such  authoritie  and  power,  that  in
forty  dayes  warning,  they  are  able  to  bring  into  the  field  a
hundred  thousand  Souldiours  well  furnished.

The  conclusion  of  the  Emperours  Coronation  was  a
peale  of  Ordnance,  called  a  Peale  royall,  two  miles  without
the  Citie,  being  a  hundred  and  seventy  great  pieces  of
brasse  of  all  sorts,  as  faire  as  any  can  be  made  ;  these
pieces  were  all  discharged  with  shot  against  bulwarkes
made  of  purpose  :  twentie  thousand  hargubusers  standing
in  eight  ranks  two  miles  in  length,  apparelled  all  in  velvet,
coloured silke  and stammels,  discharged  their  shot  also

119

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1584.

twise  over  in  good  order :  and  so  the  Emperour  accom-
panied with  all  his  Princes  and  Nobles,  at  the  least  fiftie
thousand  horse,  departed  through  the  Citie  to  his  pallace.
This  royall  coronation  would  aske  much  time,  and  many
leaves  of  paper  to  be  described  particularly  as  it  was  per-
formed :  it  shall  suffice,  to  understand  that  the  like
magnificence  was  never  seene  in  Russia.

The  Coronation,  and  other  triumphs  ended,  all  the
Nobilitie,  officers,  and  Merchants,  according  to  an  accus-
tomed order  every  one  in  his  place  and  degree,  brought
rich  presents  unto  the  Emperour,  wishing  him  long  life,
and  joy  in  his  kingdome.

The  same  time  also  Master  Jerom  Horsey  aforesaid,
remaining  as  servant  in  Russia  for  the  Queens  most  excel-
lent Majestie,  was  called  for  to  the  Emperour,  as  he  sate
in  his  Imperiall  seat,  and  also  a  famous  Merchant  of
Netherland  being  newly  come  to  Mosco  (who  gave  him
John  de  Wale,  selfe  out  to  be  the  King  of  Spaines  subject)  called  John  de
Wale,  was  in  like  sort  called  for.  Some  of  the  Nobilitie
would  have  preferred  this  subject  of  the  Spaniard  before
Master  Horsey  servant  to  the  Queen  of  England,  where-
unto  Master  Horsey  would  in  no  case  agree,  saying,  hee
would  have  his  legges  cut  off  by  the  knees,  before  hee
would  yeelde  to  such  an  indignitie  offered  to  his  Sove-
raigne  the  Queenes  Majestie  of  England,  to  bring  the
Emperour  a  present,  in  course  after  the  King  of  Spaines
subject,  or  any  other  whatsoever.  The  Emperour,  and
the  Prince  Boris  Pheodorowich  perceiving  the  contro-
versie,  sent  the  Lord  Treasurer  Peter  Ivanowich  Galavyn,
and  Vasili  Shalkan,  both  of  the  Counsell,  to  them,  who
delivered  the  Emperour  backe  Master  Horseys  speech :
whereupon  he  was  first  in  order  (as  good  reason)  admitted
and  presented  the  Emperour  in  the  behalfe  of  the  English
Merchants  trading  thither,  a  present,  wishing  him  joy,
and  long  to  raigne  in  tranquilitie,  and  so  kissed  the
Emperours  hand,  he  accepting  the  present  with  good
liking,  and  avouching,  that  for  his  Sisters  sake,  Queene
Elizabeth  of  England,  he  would  be  a  gracious  Lord  to  her

120

JEROME HORSEY  a.d.

1584.
Merchants,  in  as  ample  manner  as  ever  his  Father  had
beene  :  and  being  dismissed,  he  had  the  same  day  sent
him,  seaventie  dishes  of  sundry  kinds  of  meats,  with
three  carts  laden  with  al  sorts  of  drinks  very  bountifully.
After  him  was  the  foresaid  subject  of  the  Spanish  King
admitted  with  his  present,  whom  the  Emperor  willed  to
be  no  lesse  faithfull  &  serviceable  unto  him,  then  the
Queen  of  Englands  subjects  were  &  had  been,  &  then
the  King  of  Spains  subjects  shold  receive  favor  accord-
ingly.

All  these  things  thus  in  order  performed,  prayses  were
sung  in  all  the  Churches.  The  Emperour  and  Empress
very  devoutly  resorted  on  foote  to  many  principal
Churches  in  the  Citie,  and  upon  Trinitie  Sunday  betooke
themselves  to  a  progresse  in  order  of  procession,  to  a
famous  Monasterie  called  Sergius  and  the  Trinitie,  sixtie
miles  distant  from  the  Citie  of  Mosco,  accompanied  with
a  huge  armie  of  Noblemen,  Gentlemen,  and  others,
mounted  upon  goodly  Horses  with  furniture  accordingly.

The  Empresse  of  devotion  tooke  this  journey  on  foote

all  the  way,  accompanyed  with  her  Princesses  and  Ladies,

no  small  number  :  her  Guard  and  Gunners  were  in  number

twentie thousand : her  chiefe Counsellor or  Attendant,

was  a  noble  man  of  the  bloud  Royall  her  Uncle  of  great

authoritie,  called  Demetri  Ivanowich  Godonova. All  this

progresse ended, both the Emperour and Empresse

returned  to  Mosco  : shortly  after,  the  Emperour  by  the

direction  of  the  Prince  Boris  Pheodorowich,  sent  a  power  [m.iv.743.]

into  the  Land  of  Siberia,  where  all  the  rich  Sables  and

Furres  are  gotten. This  power  conquered  in  one  yeere

and  a  halfe  one  thousand  miles. In  the  performance  of

this  warre,  there  was  taken  prisoner  the  Emperour  of  the

Country,  called  Chare  Sibersky,  and  with  him  many  other chare

Dukes  and  Noble  men,  which  were  brought  to  Mosco,  Sibersky

with  a  guard  of  Souldiers  and  Gunners,  who  were  received  ppncf  °f

into  the  Citie  in  very  honourable  manner,  and  doe  there !-nat\in

.  . . '  '  prisoner  c5

remaine  to  this  day.  brought  t0

Hereupon  the  corrupt  Officers,  Judges,  Justices,  Cap-  Mosco.

121

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1584.

taines  and  Lieutenants  through  the  whole  Kingdome  were
remooved,  and  more  honest  men  substituted  in  their
places,  with  expresse  commandement,  under  severe
punishment  to  surcease  their  old  bribing  and  extortion
which  they  had  used  in  the  old  Emperours  time,  and
now  to  execute  true  justice  without  respect  of  persons :
and  to  the  end  that  this  might  be  the  better  done,  their
lands  and  yeerly  stipends  were  augmented :  the  great
taskes,  customes,  and  duties,  which  were  before  laid  upon
the  people  in  the  old  Emperours  time,  were  now  abated,
and  some  wholly  remitted,  and  no  punishments  com-
manded to  be  used,  without  sufficient  and  due  proofe,
although  the  crime  were  capitall,  deserving  death  :  many
Dukes  and  Noble  men  of  great  Houses,  that  were  under
displeasure,  and  imprisoned  twentie  yeeres  by  the  old
Emperour,  were  now  set  at  libertie  and  restored  to  their
lands :  all  prisoners  were  set  at  libertie,  and  their  tres-
passes forgiven.  In  summe,  a  great  alteration  universally
in  the  government  followed,  and  yet  all  was  done  quietly,
civilly,  peaceably,  without  trouble  to  the  Prince,  or  offence
to  the  Subject :  and  this  bred  great  assurance  and  honour
to  the  Kingdome,  and  all  was  accomplished  by  the
wisedome  especially  of  Irenia  the  Empresse.

These  things  being  reported  and  carried  to  the  eares

of  the  Kings  and  Princes  that  were  borderers  upon  Russia,

they grew so fearfull and terrible to them, that the

Monarch  of  all  the  Scythians  called  the  Crim  Tartar  or

Sophet  Keri great  Can  himselfe,  named  Sophet  Keri  Alii,  came  out  of

A  lit  King  of  his  owne  Countrie  to  the  Emperour  of  Russia,  accom-

tfie  ?rt™s panied  with  a  great  number  of  his  Nobilitie  well  horsed,

i^gSC0  although  to  them  that  were  Christians  they  seemed  rude,

yet  they  were  personable  men,  and  valiant :  their  comming

was  gratefull  to  the  Emperour,  and  their  entertainment

was  honourable  : the  Tartar  Prince  having  brought  with

him his wives also, received of the Russe Emperour

entertainment,  and  Princely  welcome  according  to  their

estates.

Not  long  after,  one  thousand  and  two  hundred  Polish

122

JEROME HORSEY

Gentlemen,  valiant  Souldiers,  and  proper  men  came  to
Mosco,  offering  their  service  to  the  Emperour,  who  were
all  entertayned  :  and  in  like  sort  many  Chirkasses,  and
people  of  other  Nations  came  and  offered  service.  And
as  soone  as  the  report  of  this  new  created  Emperour  was
spred  over  other  Kingdomes  of  Europe,  there  were  sent
to  him  sundrie  Ambassadors,  to  wish  him  joy  and  pros-
peritie  in  his  Kingdome  :  thither  came  Ambassadors  from
the  Turke,  from  the  Persian,  the  Bogharian,  the  Crim,
the  Georgian,  and  many  other  Tartar  Princes.  There
came  also  Ambassadors  from  the  Emperour  of  Almaine,
the  Pole,  the  Swethen,  the  Dane,  &c.  And  since  his
Coronation  no  enemie  of  his  hath  prevailed  in  his  attempts.

It  fell  out  not  long  after,  that  the  Emperour  was  desirous
to  send  a  message  to  the  most  excellent  Queene  of
England,  for  which  service  he  thought  no  man  fitter  then
Master  Jerome  Horsey,  supposing  that  one  of  the  Queenes
owne  men  and  subjects  would  bee  the  more  acceptable
to  her.  The  summe  of  which  message  was,  That  the
Emperor  desired  a  continuance  of  that  league,  friendship,
ami  tie  and  intercourse  of  traffique  which  was  betweene
his  Father  and  the  Queenes  Majestie  and  her  Subjects,
with  other  private  affaires  besides,  which  are  not  to  bee
made  common.

Master  Horsey  having  received  the  Letters  and
Requests  of  the  Emperour,  provided  for  his  journey  over
Land,  and  departed  from  Mosco  the  fift  day  of  September,
thence  unto  Otver,  to  Torshook,  to  great  Novogrod,  to
Vobskie,  and  thence  to  Nyhouse  in  Livonia,  to  Wenden,
and  so  to  Riga  :  (where  he  was  beset,  and  brought  forth-
with before  a  Cardinall,  called  Ragevil,  but  yet  suffered
to  passe  in  the  end  : )  From  thence  to  Mito,  to  Golden,
and  Libou  in  Curland,  to  Memel,  to  Koningsburgh  in
Prussia,  to  Elbing,  to  Dantzike,  to  Stetine  in  Pomerland,
to  Rostock,  to  Lubeck,  to  Hamborough,  to  Breme,  to
Emden,  and  by  Sea  to  London.  Being  arrived  at  her
Majesties  Royal  Court,  and  having  delivered  the
Emperours  Letters  with  good  favour,  and  gracious  accept-

123

A.D.

1584.

The  new
Emperor
Pheodore
Ivanowitch  his
Letters  and
Requests  to  the
Oueene.

Master
Horseys
voyage  from
Mosco  to
England  over
land.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ance,  he  was  forthwith  againe  commanded  to  repasse  into
Russia,  with  other  Letters  from  her  Majestie  to  the
Emperour,  and  Prince  Boris  Pheodorowich,  answering
the  Emperours  Letters,  and  withall  requesting  the  favour
and  friendship,  which  his  Father  had  yeelded  to  the
English  Merchants  :  and  hereunto  was  he  earnestly  also
solicited  by  the  Merchants  of  London  themselves  of  that
Companie,  to  deale  in  their  behalfe.  Being  thus  dis-
patched from  London  by  Sea,  he  arrived  in  Mosco,  the

1586.  twentieth  of  Aprill,  1586.  and  was  very  honourably  wel-

commed,  and  for  the  Merchants  behoofe,  obtayned  all  his
Requests,  being  therein  specially  favoured  by  the  Noble
Prince  Boris  Pheodorowich,  who  alwayes  affected  Master
Horsey  with  speciall  liking.  And  having  obtayned
priviledges  for  the  Merchants,  he  was  recommended  from
the  Emperour  againe,  to  the  Queene  of  England  his
Mistresse,  by  whom  the  Prince  Boris,  in  token  of  his
honourable  and  good  opinion  of  the  Queenes  Majestie,

[III.  iv.  744.]  sent  her  Highnesse  a  Royall  present  of  Sables,  Luzarns,
cloth  of  Gold  and  other  rich  things.  So  that  the  Com-
panie of  English  Merchants,  next  to  their  thankfulnesse
to  her  Majestie,  are  to  account  Master  Horseys  paines
their  speciall  benefit,  who  obtayned  for  them  those  privi-
ledges, which  in  twentie  yeeres  before  would  not  be
granted.

The  manner  of  Master  Horseys  last  dispatch  from  the
Emperour,  because  it  was  very  honorable,  I  thought
good  to  record.  Hee  was  freely  allowed  post-horses  for
him  and  his  servants,  victuals  and  all  other  necessaries
for  his  long  journey :  at  every  Towne  that  he  came  unto
from  Mosco  to  Vologda,  which  is  by  Land  five  hundred
miles,  he  received  the  like  free  and  bountifull  allowances,
at  the  Emperours  charge.  New  victuall  and  provision
were  given  him  upon  the  River  Dwina  at  every  Towne
by  the  Kings  Officers,  being  one  thousand  miles  in  length.
When  he  came  to  the  new  Castle,  called  Archangel,  he
was  received  of  the  Duke  Knez  Vasili  Andrewich
Isvenogorodsky  by  the  Emperours  Commission  into  the

124

JEROME HORSEY  a.d.

1586.

Castle,  Gunners  being  set  in  rankes  after  their  use,  where
he  was  sumptuously  feasted :  from  thence  he  was  dis-
patched with  bountifull  provision  and  allowance  in  the
Dukes  Boat,  with  one  hundred  men  to  rowe  him,  and
one  hundred  Gunners  in  other  Boats  to  conduct  him,  with
a  Gentleman  Captaine  of  the  Gunners.  Comming  to  the
Road  where  the  English,  Dutch,  and  French  ships  rode,
the  Gunners  discharged,  and  the  shippes  shot  in  like
manner  fortie  sixe  pieces  of  their  Ordnance,  and  so  hee
was  brought  to  his  lodging  at  the  English  house  upon
Rose  Hand.

And,  that  which  was  the  full  and  complete  conclusion
of  the  favour  of  the  Emperour  and  Boris  Pheodorowich
toward  Master  Horsey,  there  were  the  next  day  sent  him
for  his  further  provision  upon  the  Sea  by  a  Gentleman
and  a  Captaine,  the  things  following.  Sixteene  live  Oxen,
seventie  Sheepe,  six  hundred  Hens,  five  and  twentie
flitches  of  Bacon,  eightie  bushels  of  Meale,  six  hundred
loaves  of  bread,  two  thousand  Egges,  ten  Geese,  two
Cranes,  two  Swannes,  sixtie  five  gallons  of  Meade,  fortie
gallons  of  Aquavitae,  sixtie  gallons  of  Beere,  three  young
Beares,  foure  Hawkes,  store  of  Onions  and  Garleeke,  ten
fresh  Salmons,  a  wilde  Boare.

All  these  things  were  brought  him  downe  by  a  Gentle-
man of  the  Emperours,  and  another  of  Prince  Boris
Pheodorowich,  and  were  received  in  order  by  John  Frese
servant  to  Master  Horsey,  together  with  an  honourable
present  and  reward  from  the  Prince  Boris,  sent  him  by
Master  Francis  Cherry  an  English  man  :  which  present
was  a  whole  very  rich  piece  of  cloth  of  Gold,  and  a  faire
paire  of  Sables.

IVan  Vasilowich  is  reported  to  have  had  seaven  Wives,
and of them to have left three children surviving,
Theodore  or  Pheodore  and  Demetrius  a  yongling  by  his
last  wife,  and  a  Daughter,  which  was  the  wife  of  L.  Boris  Thuan.  hut,
aforesaid, whose sister Pheodore had married in his  /#.  120.
Fathers  life  time,  who  would  have  caused  her  divorse  for

125

A.D.
1586.

Divorce
urged.

d.  fi.  y

S.  I.  H.

Boris  his  plot.

Thuan.  hist.
lib.  135.  see.
Demetrius
slain  some  tell
that  one  pre-
tended his
coller  stood
awry,  in
mending  it  cut
his  throate.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

her  barrennesse  (as  he  had  caused  Ivan  his  eldest  sonne
divers  times  to  doe  and  his  refusing  it  at  last,  was  the
occasion  of  that  angry,  last,  and  fatall  blow,  before  men-
tioned) but  being  protracted  by  faire  excuses  for  a  time,
the  divorse  of  soule  and  body  in  the  Father  prevented
that  in  the  marriage  bed  of  the  Sonne.  Yet  by  his
Testament  he  ordained,  that  if  within  two  yeares  she
proved  not  fruitfull,  hee  should  marrie  another.  The
executers  urged  this  after  that  terme  expired ;  but  Gernia
or  Irenia,  so  wrought  with  her  husband,  that  their  counsels
were  frustrate  :  wherein  she  was  assisted  by  the  politicke
wisdome  of  her  brother  Boris,  who  was  now  become  chiefe
Pilot,  though  not  the  Master  in  that  Russian  ship  :  and
is  said  formerly  to  have  been  no  small  doer  in  those  cruel
designes  of  Ivan  his  deceassed  Master ;  yet  had  he
cunningly  cast  the  blame  on  him  now  dead,  and  wisely
insinuated  into  the  peoples  favour,  by  mitigating  the
severitie  of  his  Decrees.  You  have  read  before  of  his
great  Revenues  and  wealth,  recorded  by  eye  witnesses.
Thuanus  saith,  that  three  hundred  of  the  Knazeys  and
Boiarens,  whereof  the  Senate  of  the  Empire  consisted,
by  advise  of  the  Executors,  had  subscribed.  Boris  made
the  simpler  Emperor  beleeve,  that  it  was  a  conspiracie
against  him :  whereupon  they  were  all  committed,  ten  of
which  (whom  he  thought  his  most  dangerous  adversaries)
were  suddainly  and  privly  executed :  to  the  rest,  he
procured  the  Emperours  pardon  and  favour,  seeming  very
sorrowfull  that  this  clemency  had  beene  so  much  fore-
slowed  :  and  that  the  hastie  execution  had  prevented  his
officious  indevors  for  their  deliverance.  And  that  he
might  seem  serious,  he  got  their  goods  to  be  restored  to
their  heires  :  so  working  himselfe  into  the  good  liking  of
all  degrees.

But  soone  after,  yong  Demetrius  the  Emperours  brother
was  slaine,  as  hee  was  going  to  Church  betwixt  two
Boiarens,  by  a  mad  man  (as  he  seemed)  who  was  thereupon
suddenly  slaine ;  but  the  author  which  set  him  on  worke,
could  not  be  found  : whereupon  Boris  was  suspected  to

126

OBSERVATIONS OF RUSSIA  a.d.

1598.

affect  the  soveraigntie. Thuanus  elsewhere  telleth,  that

hee  corrupted  those  which  were  about  Demetrius  :  and  the

great  Bell  being  rung  as  is  usuall  in  cases  of  fire  to  bring

the  people  together,  Demetrius  at  that  noise  running  forth,

some  were  set  in  that  tumult  to  kil  him,  which  accordingly

was  effected,  as  he  was  comming  downe  a  Ladder : the

rumour  whereof,  caused  the  tumultuous  people  (making

no  curious  search  for  the  doers)  to  kil  those  of  the  Family

which  they  met  in  their  furie,  to  put  the  suspition  thereof

from  themselves  :  which  notwithstanding,  Boris  exercised

severer  tortures  and  terrible  executions  upon  them,  and

as  one  which  hartily  execrated  the  fact,  burned  the  fort  *It  was  in  the

to  expiate  the  parricide. This  place  being  farre  remote  *  Northern

from  the  Court,  whither  he  was  thought  purposely  to  have  ^;JS/f/s

sent  him,  could  not  admit  so  open  evidence  of  manifold  [in.iv.745.]

testimony ;  but  that  it  gave  occasion  of  other  Tragedies,

by  another  supposed  Demetrius,  as  shall  anon  appeare.

Meane  while,  Boris  could  not  escape  aspersion  of  the  fact

past,  and  suspition  of  like  intended  to  the  present  Prince,

and  therefore  was  forced  to  conjure  up  his  best  wits  to

worke  him  into  better  reputation. He  did  hereof  either

take  occasion,  or  make  occasion  by  divers  fires  in  *  divers  *Some  write

Cities  of  the  Kingdome,  the  Houses  being  of  wood,  and  th^  he  caused

easily  consumed  : which  losse  (made,  as  some  deliver  by ive™Places
f. *  .  j . .  .  v . ' .  .  J in  Mosco  to  be

his  own  incendiaries, he seemed  much  to  commiserate, *r^  andthen

and  by  affected  bountie,  repaired  those  ruines  out  of  the  afterwards  out
publique  Treasure  :  others  say,  out  of  his  private  purse  : )  of  his  owne
thus,  not  onely  raising  so  many  Phoenixes  out  of  those  cost  rePatred
ashes ; but making  devouring  fire, become  fuell  to his
magnificence, and raking reputation out of the flames
and  cinders : thence  erecting  a  Theatricall  scene  whereon
to acte in popular spectacles, his many parts of care,
industry,  alacrity,  wisedome,  power,  bounty,  and  whatso-
ever  might fether his  nest in the peoples hearts, thus
easily stoln  and  entertained  in  affection  to him,  whiles
Theodore  lived,  which  was  not  long : he  dying  in  the
yeare  1598.  on  twelfe  day,  having  lived  thirty  sixe  yeares,
and  reigned  neere  fourteene. His  impotency  of  body  and

127

A.D.
1598.

D.  Flet.

Death  of
Theodore.

The  Empresse
succeedeth.

•

Russians  use  of
fortie  dayes
mourning  for
an  Emperours
death.

The  Queene
iurneth  Nun.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

minde,  you  have  read  before  in  part.  Thuanus  affirmeth,
that  Ivan  Vasilowich  his  Father  said,  he  was  fitter  to  ring
Bels  in  Churches,  then  to  governe  an  Empire ;  aluding
therein  to  his  superexceeding  devotion  and  most  devout
superstition.  His  death  caused  a  new  aspersion  on  Boris
as  procured,  in  some  mens  conceits  (and  reports)  by
poyson.

His  dead  body  was  buried  with  his  ancestors,  in  Saint
Michaels  Temple  in  the  Castle,  and  Souldiours  were
presently  sent  to  the  borders,  to  prohibite  ingresse  or
egresse.  Theodores  will  was  read,  and  therein  Gernia
(or  Irenia)  his  wife,  and  the  Patriarch,  entrusted  with  the
administration  of  the  State.  Hereupon  a  generall  State
assembly  was  assembled  at  Mosco,  and  their  oathes  given
to  the  Empresse.  After  this  the  Empresse  went  into  a
Nunnery,  to  passe  there  the  fortie  dayes  destined  to
publique  sorrow :  in  which  time  (whether  of  her  owne
or  with  her  brothers  accord)  making  shew  of  unspeakable
sorrow  for  her  deceased  Lord,  she  renounced  the  world,
and  transferred  the  Imperiall  government  upon  the
Knazeys  and  Boiarens,  which  her  Husband  had  bequeathed
to  her ;  that  they,  according  to  their  wisdome,  and  love
to  their  Countrie,  might  take  care  thereof.  This  was
done  by  her  brothers  counsell,  to  try  what  the  people  would
doe :  who  were  so  moved  therewith,  that  they  came
thronging  to  the  Nunnerie  gates,  lamentably  imploring
her  care  in  so  perillous  a  time,  whom  onely  they  were
bound  to  serve.  And  when  she  bad  them  goe  to  the
Knazeys  and  Boiarens ;  they  protested  against  them,
saying,  they  had  sworne  to  her,  and  would  be  ordered
by  L.  Boris,  her  brother.  Hereupon  Boris  Pheodorowich
goeth  out  to  appease  their  tumult,  and  undertaketh  for  the
fortie  dayes  of  mourning,  together  with  the  Knazeys  and
Boiarens  to  administer  the  Empire.  In  which  time,  the
Empresse  renounced  secular  cares,  and  professed  her  selfe
a  Nunne ;  changing  her  name  from  Gernia  to  Alexandrina.
The  time  of  mourning  being  past,  the  people  were
called into the Castle, and the Chancellour made an

128

-

OBSERVATIONS OF RUSSIA  ad.

1586.

Oration,  perswading  them  to  sweare  obedience  to  the
Knazeys  and  Boiarens,  which  they  with  out-cryes  dis-
claymed,  offering  to  doe  it  to  the  Queene  and  L.  Boris.
The  Councell  sitting  to  consider  hereof,  the  Chancellor
came  forth  againe,  and  commanded  them  to  sweare  to  the
Knazeys  and  Boiarens ;  the  Queene  having  now  become
a  Nunne.  Whereupon  they  all  named  Boris  her  Brother,
as  one  worthy  of  the  State,  to  whom  they  were  readie  to
sweare.  Hee  being  present,  rose  up  and  modestly  excused
himselfe,  protesting  his  unwillingnesse  and  unworthinesse,  Boris  his  will-
and  bidding  them  chuse  some  other  more  worthy.  And  ing  unwilling-
going  withall  into  the  Church,  they  laid  in  manner  force-  nesse
able  hands  on  him,  with  loud  cryes  and  lamentations,
beseeching  him  not  to  forsake  them.  Whereat  he  wept
and  still  refused,  alleaging  his  insufficiencie  :  and  to  kindle
greater  desire  in  the  people  and  Nobles,  absented  and  hid
l|  himselfe  with  his  Sister  in  the  Nunnerie  the  space  of  a
I  moneth.  In  which  space  the  people  fearing  his  flight,
1  besieged  the  place,  and  with  continuall  clamours  urged
the  Queene,  to  perswade  her  Brother  to  accept  of  the
Empire  which  she  had  refused.  Shee  againe  sends  them
to  the  Knazeys  and  Boiarens,  the  mention  of  whose  names
>  seemed  to  cast  them  into  a  fit  of  mutinie  and  sedition.
Boris  then  commeth  forth  and  tels  them,  if  they  were  no
quieter,  he  also  would  take  Sack-cloth,  and  (as  his  Sister
had  done)  enter  into  a  Monasterie.  They  made  so  much
greater  stirres,  casting  out  some  desperate  threats  of
,  looking  to  themselves,  where  the  Common-wealth  was
desperately  neglected.  The  Queene  then  wonne  by  their
1  importunitie  perswadeth  her  brother  no  longer  to  resist
Gods  will,  which  had  put  this  constancie  into  the  peoples
mindes,  and  to  accept  that  which  thus  God  seemed  to
command,  praying  for  his  blessing  therein.

Boris  after  new  excuses,  at  last  seeming  overcome  by
his  Sisters  intreaties,  and  to  have  held  out  sufficiently  to
remove  envie,  assenteth  to  her,  and  shee  signifieth  as
much  to  the  people,  to  whom  she  presents  him,  praying
them  to  be  as  loyall  to  him,  as  they  had  beene  earnest  for
xiv  129  1

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1586.
Boris  his him. Boris also spake unto them : Forasmuch as it
speech.  seemeth good to the Divine Grace and Providence,

whereby  all  things  are  governed,  that  by  common  consent
and  continuall  Prayers  intreated,  I  take  on  mee  the  Princi-
palitie  over  you,  and  all  the  Provinces  of  Russia,  I  will
[III. iv.  746.]  no  longer  resist,  how  heavie  soever  I  conceive  this  burthen
to  my  shoulders,  but  have  determined  to  undertake  your
protection  with  greatest  fidelitie,  being  readie  to  sway
the  Russian  Scepter  and  Government,  as  farre  as  Gods
grace  shall  enable  mee.  On  the  other  side  bee  you  fai th-
ru 11  to  mee  and  to  my  command,  as  God  may  you  helpe.
I  am  your  most  gentle  King.
Boris  Joyfull  acclamations  followed,  with  all  protestation  of

Emperor.  their  fidelitie  and  future  obedience.  He  entring  into  the
Monasterie,  after  Prayers,  received  the  first  Benediction.
The  people  returned  full  of  joy,  and  the  Bels  (of  which
are  numbred  in  Mosco,  three  thousand)  resounded  the
publike  Festivitie.  All  the  Magistrates  and  Officers,  &
such  as  received  Salarie  of  the  King,  go  presently  to  the
Monasterie  and  carrie  Gold,  Silver,  Precious  Stones,
Pearles,  Bread,  and  Salt,  (after  the  solemne  custome)  with
wishes  of  long  life  &  al  happines,  and  desiring  to  accept
in  good  worth  their  Presents.  He  with  thankes  rendred,
accepts  only  the  Bread  and  Salt,  saying,  these  were  his ;
the  rest  they  should  take  to  themselves.  Then  doth  hee
HisWife,Son,  bid  them  to  a  Feast,  and  presently  with  Mary  his  Wife,
6sP  Daughter.  Theodore  his  Sonne  of  ten  yeeres  old,  and  Arsenica  his
Daughter  being  sixteene,  he  goeth  out  of  the  Monasterie
with  pompeous  Procession  to  the  Castle.  Like  Presents
were  offered  to  his  Wife  and  Children,  which  accepted
only  the  Bread  and  Salt,  remitting  the  rest  to  the  Pre-
senters. When  he  was  comne  to  the  Castle,  he  chose  his
Sisters  Lodging ;  for  that  of  the  Prince  deceased,  as
offensive  by  his  death,  was  destroyed  and  after  new  built.
After  Festivall  entertaynment  of  innumerable  people,
solemne  Oath  was  taken  of  all  the  Governours ;  those
things  being  in  action  till  May.  Then  came  newes  that
Tartars. the  Crim  Tartars  had  entred  the  borders  thinking  to  find

130

OBSERVATIONS OF RUSSIA  a.d.

1586.

all things troubled with an interregne ; whereupon he

assembled  an  Armie  of  three  hundred  thousand,  and  went

in person against them. But  the  Tartars  hearing  how

things  went,  returned  home  and  sent  Embassadors  to  the

Emperours  Tents. Hee  returned  with  them  to  Mosco,

where  the  next  September  (which  is  the  beginning  of  the

Russian New yeere, which enters in other  places  with  Russian  New

January following) hee was publikely blessed by the  yeere-

Patriarke,  carrying  a  golden  Crosse  in  his  hand,  and  on

the  fourteenth  of  September,  before  the  Knazeys,  Boiarens,

Bishops  and  other  Orders,  had  the  Crowne  set  on  his  head  Boris  crowned.

by  the  Patriarke,  and  the  Scepter  put  in  his  hand,  with

the  Solemnitie  in  such  cases  accustomed.

Twelve  dayes  together  all  Orders  were  feasted  in  the
Castle,  and  the  Magistrates  and  Officers  had  a  yeeres
pay  given  them.  Merchants  also  of  other  Countries  had
Immunities  and  Priviledges  granted.  The  Rustickes  had
their  payments  to  their  Boiarens  reasonably  rated,  and
their  persons  made  more  free.  Germane  Merchants  had
moneyes  lent  them  to  repay  seven  yeeres  after  without
Usurie.  Widdowes,  and  Orphans,  and  poorer  persons
received  much  Almes.  Pheodores  Obsequies  were
solemnely  performed,  and  the  Priests  richly  rewarded ;  and
that  Empire  which  seemed  dead  with  the  death  of  the
house  of  Beala,  now  was  as  it  were  revived,  and  received
a  glorious  Resurrection.

Thus  have  we  delivered  you  Thuanas  his  report  touch-
ing Boris  manner  of  acquiring  the  Empire  without  publike
envie,  and  cunning  wiping  off  the  aspersions  of  Pheodore
and  Demetrius  their  deaths.  And  as  every  bodie  is
nourished  by  Aliments  correspondent  to  the  Principles
of  the  Generation,  so  did  hee  seeke  by  politike  wisdome
to  establish  that  which  by  wise  Policies  he  had  gotten.
Wherein  his  care  was  not  little  to  multiply  Treasure,  and  His  policies.
as  at  first  hee  had  seemed  popularly  prodigall,  so  after
a  small  time  of  his  Reigne,  hee  became  providently
penurious,  the  wonted  allowances  of  the  Court  being  much
;  shortened  from  that  which  had  beene  in  former  times,  as

131

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1586.

I have received from eye-witnesses. Likewise he was

carefull to hold good tearmes with his Neighbouring

Princes, and  aswell  by  plots  at home,  as  by  forreigne

Aliance  indevoured  to  settle  on  his  Race  this  new  gotten

Empire. He  is  said  for  this  end  to  have  sought  a  Wife

for  his  sonne  out  of  England,  and  a  Husband  for  his

Daughter  out  of  Denmarke. His  Wife  was  a  woman  of

haughtie  spirit,  who  thought  her  too  good  for  any  Hollop

(so  they  call  a  slave,  and  such  she  esteemed  all  the  subjects)

and  on  such  tearmes  she  is  said  to  have  beene  denied  to  a

P.  Basman. great  man  his  best  Souldier  and  Commander  of  his  Armie.

But  while  his  Sunne  shined  now  in  the  height  of  his

course,  and  with  brightest  and  warmest  beames  of  pros-

peritie,  there  arose  grosse  vapours  out  of  Demetrius  his

grave, which  grew quickly  into  a  blacke darke  cloud,

and not only  eclipsed that Imperiall  glorie, but soone

engendred  a  bloudie  storme,  which  with  a  floud  swept

away  that  whole  Family,  and  over-whelmed  also  the  whole

Empire. Contraries  set  together  cause  the  greater  lustre  ;

for  which  cause  I  will  bring  on  the  stage  a  Gentleman,

*Where  the which  attended  Sir  Thomas  Smith  employed  in  Honour-

cenmious able  Embassage  from  his  Majestie  of  Great  Brittaine  to

^elnZTtof"  the  then  flourishing  Emperor  Boris :  and  out  of  his  large

muck  to  insult  Relations  deliver  you  this  which  followeth  in  his  owne

on  Boris  his words  (omitting  the  most  part  *  to  our  purpose  not  so

disasters. pertinent)  in  the  Booke  printed,  Anno 1605.

[III.iv.747.]  §• II.

Occurrents  of  principall  Note  which  happened  in
Russia,  in  the  time  while  the  Honourable  Sir
Thomas  Smith  remayned  there  Embassador
from  his  Majestie.
Ir  Thomas  Smith  Knight,  accompanied  with  Sir  T.
Challenor  and  Sir  W.  Wray  Knights,  divers
Gentlemen  and  his  owne  Attendants,  repayred  to

the  Court  on  the  tenth  of  June  1604.  tnen  tymg  at  Green-
wich, where by the Right Honourable the Earle of

132

AMBASSAGE  OF  SIR  THOMAS  SMITH  a.d.

1604.

Salisburie  he  was  brought  to  His  Majestis  presence,  kissed
his  Hand,  &c.  The  next  day  he  tooke  leave  of  the  Prince,
and  on  the  twelfth  being  furnished  with  his  Commission,
he  came  to  Gravesend,  and  next  morning  went  aboord
the  John  and  Francis  Admirall :  and  the  two  and  twentieth
of  July  anchored  within  a  mile  of  the  Archangell.  The
sixteenth  of  September,  hee  came  to  Vologda :  the  five
and  twentieth  to  Perislawe,  and  there  staid  three  dayes,
and  then  departed  to  Troites,  (that  faire  and  rich  Monas- \/^
terie)  so  to  Brattesheen  and  Rostovekin,  five  versts  from
the  great  Citie  of  Musco.  The  fourth  of  October,  the
Prestave  came  and  declared  the  Emperours  pleasure  that
hee  should  come  into  the  Mosco  that  forenoone :  presently
after  came  Master  I.  Mericke  Agent,  with  some  twentie
Horses  to  attend  his  Lordship,  which  forth-with  was  per-
formed. Then  we  did  ride,  til  we  came  within  a  little
mile  of  the  many  thousands  of  Noblemen  and  Gentlemen
on  both  sides  the  way,  attended  on  horsebacke  to  receive
his  Lordship.  Where  the  Embassadour  alighted  from
his  Coach,  and  mounted  on  his  foot-cloth  Horse,  and  so
rode  on  with  his  Trumpets  sounding.  A  quarter  of  a
mile  farther,  met  him  a  proper  and  gallant  Gentleman
a-foot  of  the  Emperours  stable,  who  with  Cap  in  hand,
declared  to  the  Embassadour,  that  the  Emperour,  the
young  Prince,  and  the  Master  of  the  Horse,  had  so  farre
favoured  him,  as  to  send  him  a  Jennet,  very  gorgeously
trapped  with  Gold,  Pearle,  and  Precious  Stone :  and
particularly,  a  great  Chaine  of  plated  Gold  about  his  necke,
to  ride  upon.  Whereupon  the  Embassador  alighted,
imbraced  the  Gentleman,  returned  humble  thankes  to  them
all,  and  presently  mounted.  Then  he  declared  that  they
likewise  had  sent  horses  for  the  Kings  Gentlemen,  which
likewise  were  very  richly  adorned,  then  for  all  his  fol-
lowers :  which  Ceremonie  or  State  performed,  and  all  being
horsed,  he  departed,  we  riding  orderly  forward,  till  wee
were  met  by  three  great  Noblemen,  severed  from  the  rest
of  the  multitude,  and  the  Emperours  Tolmache  or  Inter-
preter with  them.

i33

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 604.

They  being  within  speech,  thus  began  that  Oration
they  could  never  well  conclude :  Which  was,  That  from
their  Lord  and  Master  the  mightie  Emperour  of  Russia,
&c.  they  had  a  message  to  deliver  his  Lordship.  The
Embassadour  then  thinking  they  would  be  tedious  and
troublesome  with  their  usuall  Ceremonies ;  prevented  their
farther  speech  with  this  (to  them  a  Spell)  That  it  was
unfitting  for  Subjects  to  hold  discourse  in  that  kind  of
complement,  of  two  such  mightie  and  renowmed  Poten-
tates on  horsebacke.  They  (hereby  not  only  put  by
their  Ceremonious  Saddle-sitting,  but  out  of  their  Paper
instructions)  allighted  suddenly,  as  men  fearing  they  were
halfe  unhorsed,  and  the  Embassadour  presently  after  them,
comming  very  courteously  all  three,  saluting  the  Embassa-
dour and  the  Kings  Gentlemen,  taking  them  by  the  hands.
Thus  like  a  Scholer,  too  old  to  learne  by  rote  (the  Duke
named  King  Volladamur  Evanywich  Mawsolskoy)  with
his  Lesson  before  him,  declared  his  message ;  which  was,
that  he  with  the  other  two  Noblemen,  were  sent  from  the
Great  Lord,  Emperour  and  great  Duke  Boris  Pheodo-
rowich,  selfe-upholder,  great  Lord  Emperour,  and  great
Tedious  Title.  Duke  of  all  Russia,  Volademer,  Moskoe  and  Novogrode,
King  of  Casan  and  Astracan,  Lord  of  Vobskoe,  great  Duke
of  Smolenskoe,  Tuer,  Huder,  Ughory,  Perme,  Viatsky,
Bolgory,  &c.  Lord  and  great  Duke  of  Novogrod  in  the
Low  Countreyes,  of  Chernigo,  Rezan,  Polotskey,  Rostove,
Geraslave,  Bealozera,  Leifland,  Oudorskey,  Obdorskey,
Condingskey.  King  of  all  Syberia  and  the  North  Coasts,
Commander  of  the  Countreyes  of  Iversky,  Grysinsky,  and
Emperour  of  Kabardivskey,  of  Chirkasky,  and  of  the
whole  Countrey  of  Garskey,  and  of  many  other  Countreyes
and  Kingdomes  Lord  and  Emperour,  to  know  of  his
Majesties  health  of  England,  the  Queene  and  Princes.
The  second,  being  a  Captayne  of  Gunners  (the  Emperours
Guard)  named  Kazrine  Davydowich  Beaheetchove,  pro-
nouncing the  Emperour  and  Princes  Title,  said  hee  was
sent  from  them  to  know  his  Lordships  health  and  usage,
with  the  Kings  Gentlemen. The  third,  was  one  of  the

i34

AMBASSAGE  OF  SIR  THOMAS  SMITH  a.d.

1604.

Secretaries,  named  Pheodor  Boulteene,  observing  the
former  order  did  deliver  what  he  had  in  command  from
the  Emperor,  Prince  and  Empresse,  to  informe  the
Embassador  of  their  much  favour  towards  him,  and  the
Kings  Gentlemen,  in  providing  for  his  Honourable  enter-
tayne  and  ease,  a  faire  large  house  to  lodge  in  :  Also  that
they  three  were  sent  from  the  Emperour,  Prince,  and
Empresse,  to  be  his  Prestaves,  to  supply  the  Emperours
goodnesse  toward  him,  to  provide  his  necessaries,  and
deliver  any  sute  it  pleased  the  Ambassadour  to  make  to
the  Emperour.  To  all  which  the  Embassadour  very
wisely  gave  answere  (as  they  made  report  unto  the
Emperour.)

So  we  all  presently  mounted  againe,  the  Prestaves  on
either  hand  of  the  Ambassadour  his  Horse  and  Foot-cloth
being  led  by  his  Page,  some  small  distance,  his  Coach
behind  that,  and  some  sixe  thousand  Gallants  after  behind  [III.iv.748.}
all :  who  at  the  Embassadors  riding  through  the  guard,
that  was  made  for  him,  very  courteously  bowed  himselfe.
Thus  was  he  followed  by  thousands,  and  within  the  three
wals  of  the  Citie,  many  hundreds  of  young  Noblemen,
Gentlemen,  and  rich  Merchants  well  mounted,  begirt  the
wayes  on  every  side  :  divers  on  foot  also,  even  to  the  gate
of  the  house  where  the  Embassadour  was  to  be  lodged,
which  was  some  two  miles.  Whither  being  come,  he
was  brought  into  his  Bed-chamber  by  the  Noblemen  his
Prestaves,  where  with  many  thankes  for  their  honourable
paines,  they  were  dismist,  betaking  themselves  to  their
further  affaires.  The  next  morning  came  three  other
Prestaves  with  the  former,  to  know  of  his  Lordships
health,  and  how  he  had  rested  the  night  past :  withall,
that  if  his  Lordship  wanted  any  thing,  they  all,  or  any
one  of  them,  were  as  commanded,  so  readie  to  obey
therein.  These,  with  the  Interpreter  and  sixe  Gentlemen
were  most  within  the  walls,  lodged  in  a  house  over  the
gate,  besides  we  had  fiftie  Gunners  to  attend,  and  guard
us  in  our  going  abroad.

The  eight  of  October  being  the  fourth  day  after  our

i35

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1604.

comming  to  Musco,  the  Prestaves  came  to  his  Lordship
to  let  him  understand,  they  heard  he  should  goe  up  the

Strange  next  day :  wherefore  they  desired  his  speech  and  Embas-

request.  sage  to  the  Emperour  :  and  the  rather,  that  the  Interpreter!

might  (as  they  pretended)  translate  it.  To  this  purpose,
very  earnestly  at  severall  times  they  made  demand.  The
Embassadour  answered,  that  he  was  sent  from  a  mightie
Prince,  to  bee  his  Embassadour  to  their  Emperour,  and
being  sent  to  their  Master,  he  deemed  it  not  only  a  dis-
honour to  him,  but  a  weaknesse  in  them,  to  require  that
at  his  hands.

His  audience.  The  eleventh  of  October,  his  Lordship  being  sent  for
by  his  Prestaves  there  wayting,  having  excellent  Jennets
for  himselfe,  the  Kings  Gentlemen,  and  good  horses  for
the  rest :  as  likewise  two  gallant  white  Palfreis  to  carrie
or  draw  a  rich  Chariot,  one  parcell  of  the  great  Present,
with  his  followers  and  the  Emperours  guard,  carrying  the
rest :  on  each  side  the  streets  standing  the  Emperours
guard  with  Peeces  in  their  hands  well  apparelled,  to  the
number  of  two  thousand  by  esteeme,  many  Messengers
posting  betwixt  the  Court  and  our  Prestaves.  Thus  with
much  state,  softly  riding,  till  we  came  unto  the  utmost
gate  of  the  Court  (having  passed  through  the  great  Castle
before)  there  his  Lordship  dismounted.  Then  met  him  a
great  Duke  (named  Knase  Andriay  Metowich  Soome-
derove)  with  certayne  Gentlemen,  to  bring  him  up.  So
in  order  as  we  rode,  we  ascended  the  staires  and  a  stone
Gallerie,  where  on  each  side  stood  many  Nobles  and
Courtiers,  in  faire  Coates  of  Persian  Stuffe,  Velvet,
Damaske,  &c.  At  the  entry  to  the  great  Chamber,  two
Counsellors  encountred  the  Embassadour,  to  conduct  him
through  that  Roome,  round  about  which  sat  many  grave
and  richly  apparrelled  Personages.  Then  we  entred  the
Presence,  whither  being  come,  and  making  obeysance,
we staid to heare, but not understand, a very  gallant

P.  Basman.  Nobleman,  named  Peter  Basman,  deliver  the  Emperours
Title :  Then  the  particular  of  the  Presents,  and  some
other Ceremonies : which performed, the Embassadour

136

AMBASSAGE  OF  SIR  THOMAS  SMITH  a.d.

1604.

having  libertie,  delivered  so  much  of  his  Embassage,  as
the  time  and  occasion  then  affoorded  :  After  which  the
Emperour  arising  from  his  Throne,  demanded  of  the  King
of  Englands  health,  the  Princes,  and  Queenes :  then  of
the  Embassadors  and  the  Kings  Gentlemen,  and  how  they
had  beene  used  since  they  entred  within  his  Dominions  :
to  all  which  with  obeysance  wee  answered  as  was  meete.
Then  the  young  Prince  demanded  the  very  same.

The  Embassador  having  taken  the  Kings  Letter  of  his
Gentleman  Usher,  went  up  after  his  obeysance  to  deliver
it,  which  the  Lord  Chancellor  would  have  intercepted.
But  the  Embassadour  gave  it  to  the  Emperours  owne
hands,  and  his  Majestie  afterwards  delivered  it  to  the  Lord
Chancellor :  who  tooke  it,  and  shewing  the  superscription
to  the  Emperour  and  Prince,  held  it  in  his  hand  openly
with  the  Seale  towards  them.  Then  the  Emperour  called
the  Embassadour  to  kisse  his  hand,  which  he  did,  as
likewise  the  Princes,  and  with  his  face  towards  them
returned.  Then  did  hee  call  for  the  Kings  Gentlemen  to
kisse  his  hand,  and  the  Princes,  which  they  after  obeysance
made,  did  accordingly.  Afterwards,  his  Majestie  invited
his  Lordship,  the  Kings  Gentlemen  and  the  rest  to  dine
with  him,  as  likewise  Master  I.  Mericke  Agent  by  name,
who  gave  his  attendance  there  on  the  Embassadour,  and
was  now  (as  divers  times)  very  graciously  used  of  the
Emperour  and  Prince  :  no  stranger  (that  I  ever  heard  off)
like  him  in  all  respects.

Being  entred  the  Presence,  we  might  behold  the
excellent  Majestie  of  a  mightie  Emperour,  seated  in  a  Emperoun
Chaire  of  Gold,  richly  embroydered  with  Persian  Stuffe  :  &"**•
in  his  right  hand  hee  held  a  golden  Scepter,  a  Crowne
of  pure  Gold  upon  his  head,  a  Coller  of  rich  stones  and
Pearles  about  his  necke,  his  outward  Garments  of  Crimson
Velvet,  embroydered  very  faire,  with  Pearles,  Precious
stones  and  Gold  :  On  his  right  side,  (on  equall  height  to
his  Throne)  standing  a  very  faire  Globe  of  beaten  Gold,
on  a  Pyramis,  with  a  faire  Crosse  upon  it,  unto  which
before  hee  spake, he  turned  a  little  and  crost  himselfe.

i37

A-*>.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1604.

Nigh  that,  stood  a  faire  Bason  and  Ewer,  which  the
Emperour  often  useth  daily.

Princes  Close  by  him  in  another  Throne  sat  the  Prince,  in  an

splendour.  outward  Garment  like  his  Fathers,  but  not  so  rich,  a  high
blacke  Foxe  Cap  on  his  head,  worth  in  those  Countreyes
five  hundred  pound,  a  Golden  Staffe  like  a  Friers,  with
the  likenesse  of  a  Crosse  at  the  top.  On  the  right  hand
of  the  Emperour,  stood  two  gallant  Noblemen  in  cloth
of  Silver  Garments,  high  blacke  Foxe  Cappes,  great  and

Pollaxes.  long  chaines  of  Gold  hanging  to  their  feet,  with  Pollaxes

[III.  iv.  749.]  on  their  shoulders  of  Gold.  And  on  the  left  hand  of  the
Prince  two  other  such,  but  with  Silver  Pollaxes. Round

Coumell  and  about  the  benches  sat  the  Councell  and  Nobilitie,  in
Golden  and  Persian  Coats,  and  high  blacke  Foxe  Caps,
to  the  number  of  two  hundred,  the  ground  being  covered
with  Cloth  of  Arrasse,  or  Tapistrie  :  The  Presents  standing
all  the  while  in  the  Roome,  within  little  distance  of  his
Majestie,  where  he  and  the  Prince  often  viewed  them.
Being  now  by  our  Prestaves  and  others  come  for  to  Dinner,
who  led  us  through  much  presse  and  many  Chambers  to
one  very  faire  and  rich  Roome,  where  was  infinite  store

Plate.  Qf  massie  Plate  of  all  sorts ;  Towards  the  other  end  stood

the  Emperours  Uncle,  named  Stephean  Vaselewich  Godo-
nove,  Lord  High  Steward,  being  attended  with  many
Noblemen  and  Gentlemen,  whom  my  Lord  in  his  passage
saluted,  which  with  an  extraordinary  countenance  of  aged
Joy,  he  received,  making  one  of  their  honourable  Nods.

Dimng  roome.  The  Embassador  entred  the  dining  Roome,  where  we
againe  viewed  the  Emperour  and  Prince,  seated  under  two
Chaires  of  State,  readie  to  dine,  each  having  a  Scull  of
Pearle  on  their  bare  heads,  but  the  Princes  was  but  a

Change  of Coronet. Also  their  Vestments  were  changed.

The  former  Duke,  that  for  that  day  was  the  Embassa-
dours  Prestave,  came,  as  commanded  from  the  Emperor,
and  placed  the  Embassador  at  a  Table,  on  the  bench  side,
some  twentie  foot  from  the  Emperour.  Then  the  Kings
Gentlemen,  Master  Mericke,  Master  Edward  Cherrie,  and
all  the  rest  were  placed,  so  that  our  eyes  were  halfe  opposite

138

AMBASSAGE  OF  SIR  THOMAS  SMITH  a.d.

1604.

to  the  Emperour.  Over  against  the  Embassadour  sat  his
Prestaves  uppermost.  Also  in  this  large  place  sat  the
Privie  Counsell,  to  the  number  of  two  hundred  Nobles  Two  hundred
at  severall  Tables.  In  the  midst  of  this  Hall  might  seeme  Nobles  Zuests-
to  stand  a  great  Pillar,  round  about  which,  a  great  heigth
stood  wonderfull  great  pieces  of  Plate,  very  curiously
wrought  with  all  manner  of  Beasts,  Fishes  and  Fowles,
besides  some  other  ordinarie  pieces  of  serviceable  Plate.

Being  thus  set  (some  quarter  of  an  houre  as  it  were,
feeding  our  eyes  with  that  faire  Piller  of  Plate)  we  beheld
the  Emperours  Table  served  by  two  hundred  Noblemen,  Three  hun-
all  in  Coats  of  cloth  of  Gold. The  Princes  Table  served  dred  noble
with  one  hundred  young  Dukes  and  Princes  of  Cassan,  Servitors.
Astrican,  Syberia,  Tartaria,  Chercasses  and  Russes,  none
above  twentie  yeeres  old.

Then  the  Emperour  sent  from  his  Table  by  his  Noble
Servitors,  to  my  Lord  and  the  Kings  Gentlemen,  thirtie
Dishes  of  meate,  and  to  each  a  loafe  of  extraordinary  fine
bread.  Then  followed  a  great  number  of  strange  and
rare  Dishes,  some  in  Silver,  but  most  of  massie  Gold ;
with  boyled,  baked,  and  rosted,  being  piled  up  on  one
another  by  halfe  dozens.  To  make  you  a  particular
Relation,  I  should  doe  the  entertaynment  wrong,  consist-
ing almost  of  innumerable  Dishes :  Also,  I  should
over-charge  my  memory,  as  then  I  did  mine  eyes  and
stomacke,  little  delighting  the  Reader,  because  Garlicke  Gar/ike  and
and  Onions,  must  besawce  many  of  my  words,  as  then  Onions.
it  did  the  most  part  of  their  Dishes.

For  our  Drinkes,  they  consisted  of  many  excellent  kinds  Drinkes.
of  Meades,  besides  all  sorts  of  Wine  and  Beere. Divers  Meads.
times  by  name,  the  Emperor  sent  us  Dishes  : but  in  the
midst  of  Dinner  hee  called  the  Embassadour  up  to  him,
and  dranke  our  Kings  health,  where  the  Emperour  held
some  discourse  of  our  King  and  State. But  at  one  time
(striking  his  hand  advisedly  on  his  brest)  Oh,  said  hee,
my  deere  Sister  Queene  Elizabeth,  whom  I  loved  as  mine  Memory  of  0.
owne  heart,  expressing  this  his  great  affection  almost  in  ^*«fttfl.
a  weeping  passion. The  Embassador  receiving  the  Cup

i39

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1604.

from  his  Princely  hand,  returned  againe  to  his  owne  place,,
where  all  of  us  standing,  dranke  the  same  health  out  of
the  same  Cup,  being  of  faire  Christall,  as  the  Emperour
had  commanded,  the  Wine  (as  farre  as  my  judgement  gave
leave)  being  Alligant.

Thus  passing  some  foure  houres  in  banquetting,  and
refreshing  our  selves  too  plentifully,  all  being  taken  away,
we  did  arise.  The  Embassadour  and  the  Kings  Gentle-
men beeing  called  by  name  to  receive  from  his  Emperiall
hands,  a  Cup  (or  rather  as  they  call  it  a  Yendover)  of
excellent  red  Mead,  a  favour  among  them  never  observed
before,  which  Cups  for  they  were  great  and  the  Mead
very  strong,  we  often  sipped  at,  but  without  hurting  our
memories,  we  could  not  say  Amen  unto :  which  the
Emperour  perceiving,  commanded  them  to  be  taken  away,
saying,  Hee  was  best  pleased  with  what  was  most  for  our
healths.

Thus  after  our  low  courtesies  performed,  wee  departed
from  his  presence,  riding  home  with  the  same  former
guard  and  attendance  to  our  Lodgings ;  where  our
Prestaves  for  that  instant  left  us,  but  shortly  after  they
came  againe,  to  accompany  a  great  and  gallant  Duke,  one
of  them  that  held  the  Emperours  golden  Pollaxes,  named
Knes  Romana  Pheodorowich  Troya  Narove,  who  was  sent
from  his  Majestie  to  make  the  Embassadour  and  the  Kings
Gentlemen  merrie  :  likewise  having  instructions  to  drinke
their  Emperours,  our  Kings,  and  both  the  Princes  healths,
and  divers  Princes  else,  which  hee  did  himselfe  very  freely
and  some  of  us,  as  many  of  them  as  wee  could  with  our
owne  healths,  there  being  such  plentie  of  Meades  and
other  Drinkes,  as  might  well  have  made  fortie  Russes
have  stumbled  to  sleepe.  Thus  light-headed,  and  well
Gifts,  laded  especially  if  you  take  knowledge  of  the  thirtie  yards
of  cloth  of  Gold,  and  the  two  standing  Cups  with  covers,
which  the  Embassadour  rewarded  him  withall,  before  he
departed.

But  unwelcome  newes  within  foure  dayes  after  our
audience  so  unhappily  came,  as  not  only  our  Affaires,  but

140

AMBASSAGE  OF  SIR  THOMAS  SMITH  a.d.

1604.

any  else,  except  counsell  against  present  danger,  was  not
regarded. For  this  was  held  for  currant,  that  one  who  named  Newes  of
himselfe  Demetrie  Evanowich  Beala,  as  the  Sonne  of  their  Demetrius.
late  Emperor  Ivan  Vasillowich  ; hee  that  in  the  reigne  of  [III.iv.750.]
Pheodor  Evanowich  his  brother  was  in  his  infancie,  as
was thought, murthered at Ougleets, is now revived
againe,  and  up  in  armes  for  his  right  and  inheritance  :
whereupon  presently  was  sent  an  Armie  of  two  hundred
thousand  Souldiers,  either  to  take  or  slay  him. But  he
was so strengthened with Poles, Cossacks, &c. that a
number  of  Russes  yeelded  to  his  obedience.

Upon  the  one  and  twentieth  of  November,  the  young
Prince  of  an  ancient  custome  going  to  a  Church  within
•  Mosco,  the  Kings  Gentlemen  upon  knowledge  thereof
I  {the  Ambassador  being  unwilling  to  be  seene  publike,  as
also  for  that  the  Emperor  himselfe  did  not  goe  as  hee  was
accustomed)  went  and  attended  where  his  Excellency
might  see  them,  and  they  safely  behold  him,  who  rode  in
a  very  faire  and  rich  sled,  having  a  gallant  Palfrey  lead  by  Princes  pomp
two  Groomes  to  draw  it,  many  hundreds  running  before
to  sweepe  the  snowe  away  where  he  should  passe,  and  were
said  to  bee  slaves,  which  I  verily  beleeve,  because  certainly
they  were  his  Subjects.  Then  came  the  Prince  richly
apparelled  with  two  Tartar  Princes  standing  before  on
his  sled,  and  two  young  Dukes  behind,  with  two  hundred
sleds  following  him.

The  eight  of  Februarie,  the  Emperor  sent  us  sleds  to
ride  abroad,  and  this  day  the  rather,  that  we  might  behold
a  reported  victorie,  against  the  reputed  Rebell  Demetrie,
&c.  So  we  the  Kings  Gentlemen  did  behold  three
hundred  poore  Prisoners,  seventeene  Ensignes,  and  eleven
Drums  brought  in,  with  more  glorie  then  victorie.  About
this  time  returned  Peter  Basman,  one  of  the  Generals,  Peter  Batman.
who  had  performed  very  honourable  service,  and  certainly,
he  was  the  man  of  greatest  hope  and  expectation  in  the
whole  Empire,  who  was  brought  into  the  Mosco,  with  all
the  Counsell,  Nobles,  Gentlemen,  and  Merchants,  a  grace
never  performed  before  to  any  Subject. But  not  without

141

A.D.

1604.

Oucsinia  the
Princesse.

Second
audience.

Citizens
Souldiers.

PLTRCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

suspition  of  some  extraordinarie  secret  herein,  and  besides
particular  favours,  bountifull  rewards,  and  a  promise  he
should  never  goe  againe  untill  the  Emperor  himselfe  went,
he  was,  being  but  a  young  man,  made  a  Privie  Counsellor.
Forthwith  one  thing  I  will  you  shall  observe  the  Emperors
favour,  and  his  then  noble  Spirit,  he  making  divers  times
sute  (as  was  thought)  because  they  were  in  great  danger,
to  goe  againe  to  the  warres,  once  prostrated  himselfe  to
obtayne  his  desire,  but  falling  down  too  humbly,  hee  could
not  easily  rise  againe,  whereby  the  Emperor  understanding
of  his  many  and  great  wounds,  was  said  to  weepe,  rising
himselfe  up  to  raise  and  helpe  him  up,  but  extraordinarie
Causes  have  the  like  Effects,  as  hereafter  you  shall  under-
stand.

We  were  lodged  in  the  same  house  where  the  young
Prince  John  of  Denmarke,  brother  to  that  King  and  our
now  Queene  of  England,  did  lodge,  (who  would  have
married  the  young  Princesse  Oucksinia,  the  Emperors
only  daughter,  but  that  he  unhappily  there  died)  but  not
in  any  of  those  lodgings :  for  it  is  a  custome  there,  that
where  a  Prince  dyes  (especially  a  stranger)  not  of  long
time  after  to  let  any  other  lodge  there.

Now  the  Ambassador  understanding  of  the  conveni-
ence of  his  passage  downe  by  sled-way,  also  fearing  (as
wise  men  had  cause)  what  the  issue  of  these  warres  would
be,  knowing  the  state  here  used  in  any  sutes,  bethought
himselfe  advisedly  that  it  was  high  time,  being  the  middest
of  Februarie,  to  desire  a  second  audience  for  his  sooner
dispatch,  which  he  forthwith  requested,  and  wrote  a  letter
to  that  purpose  unto  the  Lord  Chancellor.

Upon  the  tenth  of  March,  the  Ambassador  with  the
Kings  Gentlemen  all  richly  apparelled,  and  all  his  followers
decently  attending,  very  honourably  (as  before)  and  with
the  like  recourse  of  beholders,  and  guard  of  Gunners  (but
that  they  were  said  to  bee  Citizens  by  reason  of  their
warres,  but  in  like  apparell)  was  attended  to  the  Court,
being  received  with  the  former  grace,  or  more,  he  ascended
the  Presence : the  Emperour  and  Prince  holding  their

142

AMBASSAGE  OF  SIR  THOMAS  SMITH  a.d.

1604.

wonted state,  onely  changing  their  Vestments  with  the
season,  but  for  the  riches  nothing  inferior.

So  soone  as  the  Ambassador  and  the  Kings  Gentlemen
were  come  opposite  to  his  Throne,  hee  commanded  seates
that  they  might  sit  downe :  then  with  a  Majestick  coun-
tenance, representing  rather  constraint  then  former
cheerfulnesse,  he  declared,  that  He,  his  Sonne  and
Councell,  had  considered  his  Majesties  Letter,  the
Majestie  of  King  James  of  England,  as  also  on  what-
i soever  else  was  desired,  and  in  token  of  his  joyfull  received
lamitie  with  the  renowmed  King  of  England,  as  with  his
I  Predecessor,  he  had  wrote  his  Princely  Letters  to  that
purpose.  Herewith  the  Chancellor  from  the  Emperour
!  delivered  the  Ambassadors  his  Highnesse  Letters  to  his
!  excellent  Majestie.  Withall  understanding  by  the  Chan-
cellor hee  had  some  farther  matter  to  intreat  of,  then  in
his  Briefe  to  his  Majestie  was  remembred :  therefore  hee
had  appointed  foure  principall  Councellors  to  consult  with
him  of  his  Requests,  which  was  done.  After,  the  Ambas-
sador yeelding  courteous  thanks  for  his  Majesties  favour,
his  Lordship  attended  by  many  Nobles,  proceeded  to  the
Councell  Chamber,  whither  presently  after  came  foure
Councellors,  and  the  Emperours  Tolmach :  who  after
salutations,  we  withdrew  to  the  next  chamber,  where  wee
passed  away  an  houre  in  discourse,  among  many  young
Nobles,  having  the  Ambassadors  Interpreter.  In  the  end,
after  three  or  foure  goings  and  returnes  of  the  Chancellor
from  the  Emperour,  wee  went  againe  before  him  (where
after  hee  had  commanded  us  to  sit  downe  as  before)  by
the  mouth  of  the  Chancellor  was  openly  delivered  a  Briefe
of  the  whole  Embassie  (and  that  dayes  particular  desire,
according  to  the  Ambassadors  request,  confirmed.)  Also
in  good  and  pleasing  language,  was  declared  the  great  [III.iv.75 1.]
desire  that  the  Emperour  had,  for  the  continuance  of  peace
and  amitie  with  the  renowmed  James  King  of  England,
as  with  the  late  Queene  Elizabeth,  withall  that  in  due  time
(all  accidents  well  ended)  he  would  send  an  honourable
Ambassador  for  further  affaires,  as  likewise  to  congratulate

143

A.D.

1604.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

with  our  King  of  his  happinesse  in  so  plausible  comming
to  his  Right  and  Inheritance. Likewise,  a  Grant  of  a  new
Priviledge  for  the  Companie,  which  he  said  should  be
Golden  Seale.  under  the  golden  Seale,  &c.

Which  ceremonious  speech  ended,  the  Emperor  called
for  the  Ambassador  and  the  Kings  Gentlemen  to  kisse  his
hand,  and  the  Princes :  which  done,  with  the  Emperors
nod  or  bowing  to  us,  as  likewise  the  Princes,  desiring  the
remembrance  of  his  and  the  Princes  commendations  to  his
Majestie,  the  Prince,  and  Queene  of  England,  we  were
dismissed,  but  not  before  the  Emperor  said  he  would  send
home  to  us.  Thus  we  tooke  our  last  leave  of  the
Emperors  Court,  being  more  graciously  and  especially
entertayned  then  before,  or  then  ever  any  would  take
knowledge  Ambassadors  were  used  withall :  we  are  honor-
ably attended  home,  and  a  Duke  of  great  account,  named
Knas  Evan  Evannowich  Courletev,  was  attended  with
many  of  the  Emperors  servants  within  our  Gates :  follow-
Great  dinner,  ing  him  a  dinner,  sent  from  the  Emperor  by  some  two
hundred  persons,  consisting  of  three  hundred  severall
dishes  of  Fish  (for  it  was  now  Lent)  of  such  strangenesse,
greatnesse,  and  goodnesse  (for  their  number)  as  it  were  not
to  bee  beleeved  by  any  report,  but  by  a  mans  owne  eye-
sight, with  infinite  store  of  Meades,  and  Beere,  in  massie
plate,  &c.

The  eighteenth  of  March,  the  Emperor  sent  by  Vassilly
Gregorewich  Telepnove,  the  Roll  wherein  was  the
Demands  of  the  Ambassador,  and  the  particulars  of  the
whole  negotiation,  as  there  at  large  appeares.  The  nine-
teenth, his  Majestie  sent  by  Menshoy  Buldecove,  under
Treasurer,  a  royall  Present  to  the  Ambassador  of  many
particulars,  also  to  each  of  the  Kings  Gentlemen,  being
rewarded,  he  departed.

The twentieth of March, being honourably accom-

panyed  with  thousands  of  Gallants  of  each  side  the  streets

Embassadors all  along  as  we  passed,  the  Ambassador  departed  from  the

departure. Citie  of  Mosco,  with  the  whole  numbers  of  horse-men

still  becking  us,  till  we  came  a  short  mile  on  this  side  the

144

AMBASSAGE  OF  SIR  THOMAS  SMITH  a.d.

1604.

3itie  where  we  made  a  stand,  and  after  some  complement

joetweene  the  Ambassador  and  his  kinde  and  honourable

:Prestave, the  Duke  Vollagdemor,  with  almost  weeping

m  his  part,  the  Ambassador  went  from  the  Emperors  sled

to  his  coach  set  upon  a  sled,  and  wee  alighted  from  the  Sled-passage.

Emperors  horses,  and  betooke  our  selves  to  our  easie  and

j'pleasant  passage  in  sleds,  such  a  passage  as  this  part  of  the

World  would  wonder  at,  in  which  a  man  though  hee  goe

1  Hackney  pace,  may  as  easily  reade  as  sleepe.

Thus  accompanyed  with  Master  John  Mericke,  Master
William  Russel,  sometimes  Agent  for  the  Dutch,  and
many  other  Merchants,  we  easily  rode  that  night  to  Bratte-
j'shin,  thirtie  miles  from  the  Mosco.  The  next  morrow
(taking  leave  of  them  all,  we  continued  our  journey  fiftie
jjind  sixtie  versts  a  day  easily.

Within  few  dayes  after  wee  heard  newes  certainly  of
the  Emperors  sudden  and  untimely  death  :  which,  con-  Emperor  Boris
Isidering  neither  the  Prestave,  the  Governour,  or  Bishop,  his  death.
had  not  or  would  not  of  ten  dayes  after  take  knowledge  of,
we  might  in  the  meane  time  have  doubted  of,  but  that  his
Lordship  had  it  from  Master  John  Mericke  by  Letter
particularly.  His  death  was  very  sudden,  and  it  was  in
it  selfe,  very  strange  :  for  within  some  two  houres  after
dinner,  having  (as  hee  usually  had)  his  Doctors  with  him,
who  left  him  in  their  judgements  in  health,  as  the  good
meale  he  made  could  witnesse,  for  hee  dined  well,  and  fed
plentifully,  though  presently  after  as  may  be  thought,
feeding  over-much,  hee  felt  himselfe  not  onely  heavie,  but
also  payned  in  his  stomacke :  presently  went  into  his
'chamber,  laid  himselfe  upon  his  bed,  sent  for  his  Doctors
.(which  alwayes  speeded)  yet  before  they  came,  hee  was
past,  being  speechlesse  and  soone  after  dying.  Before  his
death  (as  speedie  as  it  was)  hee  would  bee  shorne,  and  new  jfew
christned  :  what  the  cause  was  otherwise  then  the  griefe,  christening.
inward  sorrow,  with  divers  distractions  about  the  warres,
iand  their  bad  successe,  fearing  the  worst  on  his  part,  onely
iGod  knowes :  yet  who  so  remembers  Gods  judgements,
or  Princes  policies  for  Kingdomes,  with  mans  sinfulnesse,
xiv  145  k

A.D.
1605.

Emperors
person.

I

His  respect  to
his  sonne.

[III.  iv.  752.

* Because  he

had  done  more
for  him,  then

might  law-
fully be

commanded.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  considereth  the  one  with  the  other,  may  bee  satisfied,
if  not  contented.

For  the  Emperours  person,  he  was  tall  and  well  bodied,
teaching  out  of  his  authoritie  obedience,  of  an  excellent
presence,  black  and  thin  haired,  well  faced,  round  and  close
shaved,  strong  limmed.  A  Prince  framed  betweene
Thought  and  Resolution,  as  being  ever  in  labour,  but
never  till  death  delivered  :  never  acting  (though  ever  plot-
ting) but  in  his  Closet  or  Councel  Chamber.  One  rather
obeyed  then  loved,  being  feared  where  hee  was  not  served  :
doubtlesse,  upholding  a  true  Majestie  and  government  in
every  part,  but  in  his  owne  minde  :  that  it  is  a  question,
whether  he  were  more  kinde  to  Strangers,  or  severe  and
just  to  his  Subjects,  or  hatefull  and  terrible  to  his  Enemies.
A  father  and  a  Prince,  whose  wordes,  counsels,  observa-
tions, policies,  resolutions,  and  experiments,  were  but  the
life  of  his  deare  Sonne,  never  advising,  entertayning,  no
not  praying  without  him.  In  all  Ambassies  and  Negotia-
tions, remembring  his  sonnes  name  with  his  owne,  loving
him  (being  lovely)  for  that  himselfe  would  bee  loved,
unwilling  to  spare  his  presence,  desirous  to  have  him  at
all  occasions  before  his  eyes.  I  shall  not  doe  amisse,  to
give  a  taste  of  the  fruit  sprung  from  so  stately  a  Tree.
Being  by  a  learned  and  well  travailed  Gentleman  divers
times  particularly  advised,  to  let  the  Prince  take  some
more  (then  no  recreation)  by  which  meanes  he  might  aswell
prolong  his  life,  as  instruct  his  judgement  and  delight  his
minde  :  Oh,  would  the  Emperour  answere,  one  sonne  is  no
sonne :  nay,  I  am  perswaded,  three  sonnes  to  me  is  but
halfe  a  sonne.  But  had  I  sixe  sonnes,  then  I  might  safely
say  I  had  one,  how  then  should  I  part  with  that  at  any
time,  I  know  not  to  bee  mine  for  any  time.  This  may
give  satisfaction  to  any  understanding  both  of  his  feares
and  jelousies  :  his  great  love,  and  much  care.  It  was  an
usuall  speech  with  the  Emperour  upon  good  reason  to  say,
hee  was  the  Lord  and  father  of  his  sonne,  yet  withall,  That
he  was  not  onely  his  servant,  but  his  very  *  slave.

Two  policies  of  the  said  Emperour  I  shall  willingly

146

AMBASSAGE  OF  SIR  THOMAS  SMITH  ad.

1605.

Jcquaint  you  with,  for  divers  reasons. One  was,  when
ee  caused  lire  to  bee  kindled  in  foure  parts  of  Mosco ;
j/hereat  himselfe  was  noted  to  be  very  diligent,  with  all
Lis  Nobles  and  Courtiers  : and  after  it  was  quenched,  he
lent his bountie to them all, that builded anew their
liouses,  and  repaid  all  their  losses. And  this  was  but  to
top  the  rumour,  then  so  common,  of  his  strange  gayning
I  he  Empire  : by  which  stratagem  of  his,  when  his  people
Hvere  readie  to  mutinie,  they  were  created  anew  good  Sub-
lets ;  yet  did  admire  his  not  onely  care,  but  goodnesse
' pwards  them  all.

A  second,  was  at  that  time  the  Land  was  visited  with  a
'nightie  famine,  and  as  great  a  plague  (some  foure  yeeres
lince)  whereof  a  third  of  the  whole  Nation  is  rated  to
lave  died  :  and  the  murmuring  multitude  said  the  cause
vas,  their  electing  of  a  murderer  to  the  Empire ;  where-
|bre  God  did  thus  visit  them :  Whereupon,  hee  caused
I  Galleries  to  bee  builded  round  about  the  utmost  wall  of
he  great  Citie  of  Mosco,  and  there  appointed  daily  to  bee
inven  to  the  poore,  twentie  thousand  pounds  sterling :
vhich  was  accordingly  performed  for  one  moneth ;  where-
upon the  common  peoples  mouthes  and  bellies  were  well
1  topped.

Here  wee  lodged  till  the  sixt  of  May,  being  wearied
[vith  the  inconstancie  and  ill-come  newes  of  flying  reports,
vhereupon  the  time  of  the  yeere  requiring,  the  Ambas-
sador resolved  to  passe  downe  the  River  to  Colmogro,  as
veil  that  hee  might  the  sooner  have  newes  from  England,
is  happily  to  bee  out  of  feare  of  any  disaster,  the  rumours
)eing  innumerable  and  uncertaine.

After  the  suspicious  death  of  the  old  Emperour  Boris
Dheodorowich,  &c.  by  the  appointment  of  the  Prince  (then
heir  expected  Emperour)  and  the  Counsell,  Peter  Basman  Peter  Basman
that  noble  Sparke)  was  speedily  dispatched  and  sent  as  sent  against
^enerall  unto  their  ill  succeeding  warres,  as  their  last  hope  ^emetrtusy
indeed  hee  prooved  so  in  a  contrarie  sense)  and  the  onely  revo
•efuge  to  the  Commons : whither  being  come,  hee  with
limselfe  presented  most  of  his  command,  as  many  as  freely

147

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605.

would  offer  themselves :  Under  which  were  all  the  Eng-
lish, Scots,  French,  Dutch  and  Flemmings,  whatsoever:
and  with  him,  or  rather  before  him  (as  least  suspected)
Ries  Vasili  Evanch  Goleeche,  the  other  Generall,  a  man
of  great  birth,  and  in  the  prioritie  of  place,  to  bee  received
before  Peter  Basman.  All  which,  the  now  well  knowne
newly  opinionated  Emperour  very  graciously  received,
happily  not  without  some  jelousie  of  many  particulars.

Demetrius  now  sent Messengers  with  Letters  which
entred the Suburbs, where the Commons in infinite
numbers  brought  them  safe  into  the  spacious  Plaine  before
the  Castle  gate : within  which,  as  daily  they  did  use,  so
now  were  all  the  Counsellors  in  consultation ;  but  happily
not  in  a  secret  Counsaile ;  also  wherein  was  the  Emperiall
Court.
Tumult  of  the There  these  Boyerens  made  demand  for  many  of  the
Commons. Counsellors, especially for  the Godonoves, to come to
heare  their  right  King  Demetrius  Evanowich  speaking
unto  them  by  Letters  :  Who  yet  after  refusall  (and  I  cannot
condemne  all)  many  came ;  the  Commons  being  resolved,
else  to  fetch  them  out. Then,  by  the  Boyerens  aloud  was
read  the  Emperours  Letters,  to  this  effect.
Demetrius  his That  hee  much  wondred  at  that  time,  wherein  expedi-
Letter.  tion  was  to  bee  accounted  safest  policie,  having  sent  many

Letters  and  Messengers  to  them,  concerning  their
approoving  him  to  bee  their  lawfull  Prince,  as  being  the
sonne  of  Evan  Vasilowich  their  late  Emperour,  and  the
onely  brother  of  Pheodor  Evanowich  selfe-upholder,  of
happy  memorie,  both  with  invincible  Arguments  and
direct  Reasons  to  the  manifesting  thereof,  they  (notwith-
standing his  long  patience  and  gracious  remisnesse)  were
not  onely  so  proud  as  not  to  answere  his  Princely  Letters,
but  so  presumptuous  as  to  retayne  his  Messengers,
whereby  they  made  themselves  apparently  to  bee  no  lesse
Vipers  to  the  State  in  obscuring  him,  then  Traytors  to
himselfe  the  true  and  right  Emperour,  by  defrauding
them  :  yet  giving  him  a  strong  Argument  by  their  Silence,
of  their  guiltinesse  ;  also  allowing  thereby,  time  and  oppor-

AMBASSAGE  OF  SIR  THOMAS  SMITH  a.d.

1605.

tunitie  (if  hee  had  not  beene  their  true-borne  Emperour,

and  with  the  naturall  Mother,  tendered  the  life  of  her

deare Children) to have conquered and destroyed the

whole  Nation.

All  which  notwithstanding,  hee  (being  confident  in  his
owne  conscience,  of  his  just  Title,  made  the  Prince  of
patience  and  humilitie  from  his  former  many  great
miseries  and  dangers)  had  in  his  Princely  wisedome  and
clemency  againe  wrote  these  (but  certainly  his  last  Peace-
requiring,  and  Grace-offering  Letters  :  yea,  was  content  to
desire  them  he  might)  and  doubted  not  shortly  but  he
should  command,  onely  ayming  at  the  good  of  the  Com-
monwealth and  State  in  general! ;  as  he  that  without  much
shedding  of  his  Subjects  blcud,  desired  the  Kingdome.

Also  to  this  end  hee  had  sent  men  of  great  birth,  viz.  [III.iv.75 3.
Rues  Pheodor,  Evanowich  Methithsosky,  and  Rues
Demetre,  Evanowich  Suskey ;  and  given  them  Commis-
sion to  displace  his  Enemies,  and  Prestave  the  Godonoves,
and  others,  till  his  further  pleasure  were  knowne,  consum-
ing those  monstrous  bloud  suckers  and  Traytors,  with
returne  of  the  Commons  answere  thereunto  :  Likewise  to
demand  his  Messengers,  and  they  to  bee  brought  before
the  Commons,  whom  hee  had  reason  to  beleeve  were  ill—
intreated,  if  not  murthered ;  withall,  that  if  they  did
submit  themselves  now  to  him,  as  to  their  lawfull  Prince
and  Soveraigne,  (which  hee  was  truely  resolved  their  con-
sciences were  guiltie  of)  that  yet  they  should  finde  him  a
gracious  and  mercifull  Lord ;  if  otherwise,  a  severe  and
just  Revenger  of  them,  and  their  many  misdeedes  towards
him,  as  hee  that  had  his  Sword  ever  unsheathed  to  execute
his  vengeance  on  them  all :  and  was  easily  perswaded  they
were  not  ignorant  of  the  many  Victories  hee  had  obtayned
formerly  against  them,  when  they  would  seeme  able  and
willing  to  fight  with  his  Souldiers :  and  how  afflicted  and
troubled  herewith  they  all  were :  But  that  now,  he  had
their  chiefe  and  strongest  Heads  and  Armes  in  his  owne
hand,  the  whole  World  might  not  betroth  him  they  durst
once  speake  openly  against  him,  as  assured  that  all  (except-

149

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605.

ing  a  very  few,  and  they  of  the  worst)  in  heart  were  his
loyall  Subjects,  &c.

But  before  this  Letter  was  halfe  read,  the  Hearts  and
Hands  of  the  multitude  were  strangely  combined  together,
not  one  speaking,  but  all  confusedly  like  fettered  and
chayned  Horses  stamping  ;  being  indeed  without  any  feare,
but  of  not  doing  mischiefe  enough,  all  (as  one)  running
violently  into  the  Castle,  where  (meeting  two  of  the  piti-
fully tormented  Messengers)  they  pawsed  to  heare  them
as  sufficiently  as  their  insufficiencie  would  permit  them,
deliver  the  vilde  manner  of  their  torturing,  whipping,  and
roasting,  which  was  in  deede  a  Whip  and  Spurre  to  drive
them,  without  wit  or  humanitie,  as  if  they  had  beene  fired
like  Gun-powder  with  the  very  sparkes  of  heate  :  Such
barbarous  crueltie,  beastly  actions,  and  inhumane
spectacles,  as  without  the  great  Devill  had  beene  their
General!,  no  particular  could  have  acted ;  laying  violent
hands  on  all  they  met :  but  not  killing  (the  great  mercy
of  God)  any  man  of  account.

Thus  the  whole  Citie  was  in  an  uproare,  all  the  Coun-
sellors houses,  sellers,  and  studies  ransacked,  beginning
with  the  Godonoves ;  spoyling,  renting,  and  stealing  all
they  met  with ;  but  carrying  little  away  but  drinke,  which
they  could  not  carry  away.

The  Commons  (no  doubt)  would  have  made  this  day
little  inferiour  to  the  massacre  of  Paris,  so  violent  and
devillish  were  their  sudden  resolutions  ;  but  that  the  Nobles
(best  beloved  and  obeyed)  intreated,  where  none  could
command :  others  perswading,  all  wishing  an  end  to  this
most  miserable  and  never  exampled  mischiefe.  But  the
multitude  did  what  they  would  and  could ;  especially  on
the  greatest,  which  certainly  were  the  worst :  So  as  the
Empresse  flying  to  a  safer  lodging,  had  her  coller  of  Pearle
pluckt  from  her  necke.

Then  the  Prince,  Empresse,  and  Princesse,  were  pre-
staved  (a  second  command  being  come  from  the  Campe)
with  the  Godonoves,  and  many  others  that  were  suspected
most :  The  Nobles  joyning  in  one  counsell  for  the  present

150

AMBASSAGE  OF  SIR  THOMAS  SMITH  a.d.

1605.

ordering  of  these  sudden  accidents,  and  for  answere  to  the
Prince  Demetrius  Evanowich,  who  suddenly  was  by
generall  consent  concluded  (by  the  particular  knowledge  of
Bodan  Belskey  a  great  Counsellor,  that  was  privie  to  his
departure,  and  some  others)  to  bee  their  right  and  lawfull
Emperour,  onely  a  few  excepted.  So  as  the  young  Prince
was  by  many  (but  particularly  by  his  mother)  counselled  to
leave  the  Kingdome  utterly,  before  it  forsooke  him ;  to
follow  his  Fathers  example  in  murdering  himselfe,  and
herein  his  mother  (that  Map  of  miseries,  that  Cradle  of
crueltie)  and  his  onely  deare  sister  would  associate  him.

Letters  were  devised,  and  Messengers  framed  to  effect
this  desperate  treacherie  on  his  innocent  life ;  so  as  in  very
few  dayes  (for  Mischiefe  hath  the  wings  of  Thought  and
Resolution) they three did consent (an unhappy con-
junction) to  destroy  themselves ;  and  rather  to  lay  violent
hands  upon their  hatefull  lives, then make  an  Enemie
seeme  cruell  in  executing  Justice  on  them: which*  yet  *Thushe:but
certainly  this  Emperour  never  dreamt  of,  but  determined  others  *"ribe
the Prince should be within himselfe, not lesse then  '^^Hu/his
Absolute,  and  in  a  very  great  Dukedome. The  Princely  cemmana\  ana>
Mother  began  the  health  of  Death  to  her  noble  Sonne,  this  selfe-
who  pledged  her  with  a  heartie  draught,  therein  so  much  murther  was
strength  did  hee  adde  to  his  vile  wicked  obedience,  that  Pretended  to
hee  prooved  a  banquerout  presently,  and  hand  in  hand  /jJ/fcfT^
embracing each other, they fell, and died as one, the  Death  of
Mother  counselling  and  acting,  whilest  the  child  bethought  Mother  &
and suffered : yet see Providence and Commiseration,  Sonne-
Constancy  and  Obedience  :  the  Princesse  dranke,  but  like  a
Virgin  temperately  : so  as  modestie  (the  want  of  which
was  the  death  of  the  Mother)  now  prooved  the  life  of  the
Daughter.

However  it  was  with  Boris  for  other  things,  I  thought
it  not  amisse  to  adde  this  testimonie  of  his  respect  to  the
English  Nation  and  Merchants  in  Priviledges  granted
them,  as  followeth.

[One  Almightie
151

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605.

(III.  iv.  7 54.]  /^\Ne  Almightie  God  without  and  before  the  Beginnings
EmperorBoris  \J  the  Father,  the  Sonne,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  whom  we
P  tTt glorifie  in  the  Trinitie,  our  onely  God,  Creator  and  Pre-
lated  whiles server  of  all  things  everywhere,  by  which  Will  and  Work-
er Th.  Smith  ing,  he  liveth  and  giveth  life  unto  Man ;  Our  onely  God
was  there. which  inspireth  every  one  of  us  his  Children  with  his  holy-
Word,  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Spirit  of  Life,
now  in  this  latter  times,  establish  us  to  hold  the  right
Scepter,  and  suffer  us  of  our  selves  to  reigne,  for  the  good
of  the  Land,  and  the  happinesse  of  the  People,  together
with  our  Enemies,  and  to  the  doing  of  good.

We  the  great  Lord  Emperour  and  great  Duke  Boris
Pheodorowich  of  all  Russia,  sole  Commander  of  Volo-
demer,  Mosco,  Novogrod,  Emperour  of  Cazan,  King  of
Astracan,  Lord  of  Vobsko,  and  great  Duke  of  Smolensko,
of  Twersko,  Vhorskoy,  Permskoy,  Vatskoy,  Bolharskay,
and  of  others,  Lord  and  great  Duke  of  Novagrod  in  the
low  Country  of  Chernego,  Rezan,  Polotskay,  Rostovskoy,
Yeraslavskoy,  Belozerskoy,  Leeflanskoy,  Owdorskoy,
Obdorskoy,  Condinskoy,  and  all  Siberia,  and  the  North
parts ;  Lord  and  Commander  of  Everskoy  Land,  and
Cabardinskoy  Country,  and  of  Cherces,  and  Igarskoy
Land,  as  also  of  many  others  Lord  and  Commander,  with
our  Sonne  Prince  Phedar  Borisowich  of  all  Russia.  We
have  bestowed  on  the  Merchants  of  England,  viz.  Sir
John  Hart,  Knight ;  Sir  William  Webb,  Knight ;  Richard
Saltanstall,  Alderman ;  Nicolas  Moshley,  Alderman ;
Robert  Dove,  William  Garaway,  John  Harbey,  Robert
Chamberlin,  Henrie  Anderson,  John  Audwart,  Francis
Cherie,  John  Merick,  Anthony  Marlar  ;  Wee  have  granted
and  licenced  them  to  come  with  their  ships  into  our
Dominion  the  Country  of  Dwina,  with  all  manner  of
Commodities,  to  trade  freely  from  the  Sea  side  and  within
our  Dominions,  to  the  Citie  of  our  Empire  of  Mosco.
Also  there  made  sute  unto  us  Sir  John  Hart,  Knight,  and
his  Companie,  to  gratifie  them  to  trade  to  our  Citie  of
Mosco, and to our Heritage of  great Novogrod and

IS*

ENGLISH MERCHANTS' PRIVILEGES  ad

1605

Vobsko,  and  to  all  parts  of  our  Empire,  with  their  Com-
modities, and  to  Trade  freely  without  custome :  upon
which  Wee  the  great  Lord  Emperour  and  great  Duke
Boris  Pheodorowich  of  all  Russia,  with  our  Sonne  Prince
Pheodor  Borisowich  of  all  Russia,  have  granted  unto  the
English  Merchants,  Sir  John  Hart,  Knight,  and  his
fellowes,  for  our  Sisters  sake  Queene  Elizabeth,  free
passage  to  come  into  our  Kingdome  of  Mosco,  and  into
all  the  rest  of  our  Dominions,  with  all  manner  of  Com-
modities to  trade  and  traffick  freely  at  their  pleasure.  Also
we  have  commanded,  not  to  take  any  kinde  of  Custome
for  their  goods,  nor  any  other  Customes  whatsoever,  viz.
for  passing  by  any  place  by  Land,  nor  for  passing  by  any
place  by  Water ;  nor  for  Custome  of  their  Boats  or  Head
money,  nor  for  passing  over  Bridges  and  Ferries,  nor  for
any  entrie  of  Wares  :  as  also  all  manner  of  other  Customes
or  Duties  whatsoever  wee  command  shall  not  bee  taken  of
them  :  But  they  shall  not  bring  other  mens  goods  into  our
Dominions,  nor  likewise  recarry  out  of  our  Kingdome  any
other  mens  goods  as  their  owne :  nor  to  sell  or  barter  for
other  men.  Neither  shall  our  Subjects  buy  and  sell  for
them  or  from  them :  neither  shall  they  keepe  any  of  our
peoples  goods  or  pawnes  by  them  to  owne  or  colour  them.
Likewise  they  shall  not  send  any  of  our  Subjects  to  any
Towne  or  Citie  to  buy  Commodities.  But  what  Citie
they  come  into  themselves  they  shall  sell  their  owne
Commodities,  and  buy  our  Commodities.  And  when  they
shall  come  to  our  Heritage  to  great  Vobsko  and  Novagrod,
or  to  any  other  Citie  within  our  Dominions  with  their
Commodities,  that  then  our  Gentlemen  and  Governours,
and  all  other  officers  shall  suffer  and  let  them  passe  accord-
ing to  this  our  Letter,  and  to  take  no  manner  of  Custome
of  them  whatsoever  for  any  of  their  Commodities  for
passing  by,  nor  for  passage  over  any  Bridges  :  neither  shall
they  take  any  other  Custom  whatsoever  in  all  our
Dominions.  And  wheresoever  they  happen  to  come,  and
doe  proceed  to  buy  and  sell ;  as  also  wheresoever  they
shall  passe  through  with  goods  not  buying  of  any  Com-

i53

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605.

moditie  nor  selling  their  owne,  then  in  those  Cities  they
shall  take  of  them  no  manner  of  Custome  whatsoever  as
aforesaid :  and  wee  have  gratified  and  given  them  leave
to  trade  in  all  parts  of  our  Dominions  with  their  goods
freely  without  Custome.  And  likewise  whensoever  the
English  Merchants  shall  bee  desirous  to  buy  or  sell  or
barter  their  wares  with  our  Merchants  wares  for  wares,
then  shall  they  sell  their  wares  whole  sale  and  not  byretaile,
Cloth  by  the  pack  and  by  Clothes  and  by  remnants ;  and
Damasks  and  Velvets  by  the  Piece  and  not  by  the  Yard,
or  askeene,  and  such  Commodities  as  is  to  be  sold  by
waight,  not  to  sell  them  by  the  small  waights,  that  is  to
say,  by  the  Zolotnick.  Also  they  shall  sell  Wines  by  the
Pipe  and  the  Hogshead,  but  by  the  Gallon,  Quart  or  Pot
or  Charke  they  shall  not  sell :  moreover,  they  shall  buy,
sell  and  exchange  their  owne  Commodities  themselves,
and  the  Russe  Merchants  shall  not  sell  or  exchange  for
them  or  from  them  their  Commodities,  neither  shall  they
carry  any  mans  goods  to  no  manner  of  place  under  colour
of  their  owne,  and  which  of  the  English  Merchants  would
at  any  time  sell  his  Commodities  at  Colmogro  on  the
Dwina,  or  at  Vologda  and  at  Yeraslavly  they  may,  and  of
all  their  Commodities  throughout  all  our  Cities  and
Dominion,  our  Gentlemen,  Governours,  and  all  other
Officers  shall  take  no  manner  of  Custome  according  to  this
our  Imperiall  Letter  of  favour.  Also  through  all  our
Dominions,  Cities,  and  Townes  they  shall  hire  Carriers,
Boats,  and  men  to  labour  or  rowe  in  the  said  Boats  at
their  owne  cost.  Likewise  when  as  the  English  Mer-
chants shall  desire  to  goe  out  of  our  Dominion  into  any
other  Kingdome,  or  into  their  owne  Land,  and  that  we
thinke  it  good  for  them  to  take  with  them  from  our
Treasure  any  Commodities  to  sell  or  exchange  them  for
us,  for  such  Commodities  as  shall  be  fitting  to  our  King-
dome,  and  to  deliver  them  to  our  Treasurer :  and  with
those  their  and  our  goods,  our  Gentlemen  and  Governours
shall  suffer  them  to  passe  through  all  Cities  and  Townes
[III. iv. 75 5.]  within  our  Dominions  without  Custome  as  before. And

i54

ENGLISH MERCHANTS' PRIVILEGES  ad.

1605.

when  they  have  ended  their  Market,  and  doe  desire  to  goe
from  the  Mosko,  then  they  shall  appeare  in  the  Chancerie
to  the  Keeper  of  our  Seale,  the  Secretarie  Vassily  Yacolo-
wich  Schellcalov.  Likewise,  if  there  happen  to  the
English  Merchants  any  extremitie  by  Sea,  or  that  a  ship
be  broken,  and  that  it  be  neere  any  place  of  our  King-
dome,  then  we  command  that  all  those  goods  shall  bee
brought  out  justly,  and  bee  given  to  the  English  people
that  shall  at  that  time  bee  in  our  Land,  or  if  they  be  not
here,  then  to  lay  them  up  all  together  in  one  place,  and
when  the  Englishmen  come  into  our  Land,  then  to  deliver
those  goods  to  them.  Also  wee  have  bestowed  on  the
English  Merchants  the  House  of  Yourya,  in  the  Mosko
by  a  Church  of  Saint  Maxims  neere  the  Marget,  to  dwell
in  it  as  in  former  time,  keeping  one  House-keeper  a  Russe,
or  one  of  their  owne  strangers :  but  other  Russe  folkes
they  shall  not  keepe  any.  Likewise  these  Merchants  have
Houses  in  divers  our  Cities  as  followeth  :  A  House  at
Yeres,  a  House  at  Vologda,  a  House  at  Colmogro,  and  a
House  at  Michael  the  Archangell,  being  the  shipping-
place  :  these  said  Houses  they  shall  keepe  as  in  former
time  according  to  this  our  Imperiall  Letter  of  favour,  or
gratified  without  paying  any  manner  of  Rent  or  any  other
duties  whatsoever,  either  at  Mosko,  Yereslave,  Vologda,
Colmogro,  or  at  the  Castle  of  the  Archangell,  neither  shall
they  pay  any  taxe.  Also  at  those  Houses  at  Yereslave,
Vologda,  Colmogro,  and  at  Archangell  they  shall  have
House-keepers  of  their  owne  Countrey-men,  or  Russes  of
a  meane  sort  that  are  not  Merchants,  a  man  or  two  in  a
House  :  to  lay  up  their  goods  in  those  Houses,  and  to
make  sale  of  their  goods  out  of  those  Houses,  to  whom
they  will  according  to  this  our  Imperiall  Letter  of  favour,
but  their  Russe  House-keepers  in  their  absence  shall  not
sell  any  of  their  Commodities.  And  the  English  Mer-
chants shal  come  with  their  ship  to  their  Port,  as  in  former
times  they  have  done  to  unlade  their  goods  out  of  their
ships,  and  likewise  to  lade  them  againe  with  our  Russia
Commodities,  at  their  owne  charges  of  Boates  and  hire  of

i55

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605.

men,  and  ferrying  over  the  said  goods  from  their  ships  ta
their  House  at  the  Castle  of  Archangell.  Likewise  our
Officers,  Customers,  and  Swornemen  shall  take  a  just  note
of  all  such  goods  as  they  have  both  of  Russia  and  English
Commodities,  and  the  note  to  passe  under  the  Merchants
Firma,  because  it  may  be  knowne  what  goods  passeth  of
the  strangers  and  of  the  Russes.  But  they  shall  not  looke
over  their  goods,  neither  unbind  any  packs  in  any  place,
and  when  they  doe  send  their  owne  Englishmen  from
Archangell  to  our  Citie  of  Mosko,  or  doe  send  Russia
Commodities  into  their  owne  Land,  Then  all  our  Officers
and  Customers  shall  let  them  passe  without  delay,  accord-
ing to  this  our  Letter  of  favour.  And  whensoever  the
Merchants  shall  be  desirous  to  send  any  of  their  owne
Countreymen  into  their  owne  Land,  or  into  any  other
Kingdome  over  Land :  they  shall  doe  it  freely  with  our
Imperiall  Majesties  order,  without  carrying  any  Com-
moditie  over  with  them,  and  they  shall  have  their  Letters
of  Passe  given  them  in  the  Embassdours  Office.  And
concerning  any  matters  of  debate  or  controversie  in  Mer-
chandize, or  injurie,  then  they  shall  be  judged  by  the
Keeper  of  the  Seale,  and  Secretarie  Vassily  Yacolowich
Shelcolov,  doing  right  and  Justice  to  both  parties  with
equitie  and  truth,  and  what  cannot  be  found  out  by  Law,,
Lot  Law.  or  Inquisition,  there  shall  be  used  Lots.  His  Lot  that  is
taken  forth,  shall  have  right  done  unto  him.  Likewise,  in
what  place  else  in  all  our  Kingdome  there  doe  happen  any
matter  of  discord  in  Merchandize  or  by  injurie,  then  our
men  of  authoritie,  or  Governours,  and  all  manner  of  our
Officers  shall  doe  true  Justice  betweene  them :  and  what
cannot  be  sought  out  by  Law  shall  be  sought  out  by  Lot :
his  Lot  that  is  taken  out  shall  have  right  done  unto  him
as  before  mentioned,  as  also  they  shall  not  take  any
custome  or  dutie  of  them  for  any  Law  matter,  not  in  any
place  in  our  Kingdome.  Moreover,  this  our  Imperiall
Letter  in  all  our  Realme  and  Dominion,  our  Officers,  and
all  manner  of  our  subjects  shall  not  disobey  or  breake  it  in
any  point  whatsoever,  but  if  there  bee  any  that  doth  dis-

156

ENGLISH MERCHANTS' PRIVILEGES  a.d.

1605.

obey  this  our  lmperiall  Letter  of  favour,  that  then  those
people  shall  bee  in  our  high  displeasure,  and  executed  to
death.  This  our  lmperiall  Letter  of  gratitude,  is  given  at
our  lmperiall  Palace  and  House  in  our  Citie  of  Mosko,
from  the  yeere  of  the  beginning  of  the  World  7107.  in
the  month  of  November  :  being  underwritten  as  followeth.
By  the  great  Lord  Emperour  and  great  Duke  Boris
Pheodorowich  of  all  Russia,  selfe-upholder :  his  Keeper
of  the  Seale,  and  Secretarie  by  name  Vassily  Yacolowich
Sheallcalove.

X

§. III.

One  pretending  himselfe  to  be  Demetrius,  with
the  Popes  and  Poles  helpes  attayneth  the
Russian  Empire  :  his  Arts,  Acts,  Marriage,
favour  to  the  English,  and  miserable  end.

Aving  thus  presented  you  Boris  his  Tragedie  out  of
that  printed  Author,  and  his  Grant  to  the  English
from  a  written  Copie ;  it  shall  not  bee  amisse  to
take  more  leisurely  and  mature  view  of  this  Pretender,
against  whom  Boris  his  desire  of  secrecie  (permitting  none
guiltie  of  the  murther  to  survive)  had  unfurnished  him
of  Arguments.  He  produced  a  Purse  given  him  by  his
Mother ;  with  the  Historie  of  his  life  after  that  sending
him  away  and  acknowledging  another  whom  she  was  more
willing  to  act  that  bloudy  Scene  then  her  own  Son:  with  [ni.iv.756.]
other  particulars  which  bred  strong  confidence  in  such  as
(weary  of  Boris)  were  desirous  it  should  be  so.  But  for
the  death  of  the  yong  Emperor,  &  his  mother,  it  is  by
most  ascribed  to  Demetrius,  who  seeing  the  people  of
Musco  his  friends,  and  the  Emperour  and  his  Mother  in
hold,  pretended  he  could  not  come  thither  whiles  his
enemies  lived,  whereupon  they  in  a  mutinie  slue  them  ;  to
avert  the  envie  whereof,  it  is  probable  that  it  was  made  to
be  their  owne  act,  and  their  Keepers  therefore  by  him
imprisoned.  Boris  his  daughter  was  thrust  into  a  Nun-
nerie,  and  so  made  dead  also  to  the  succession. But  as  I

i57

A.D.
1605.

Thu.  II  135.

The  Jesuites
first  authors,
orfautors  at
f  least  of  this
Demetrius.

Sigismunds
father  John
was  imprisoned
by  KingEricus
1564.

V

Cossaks.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

have  before  delivered  out  of  that  diligent,  learned  and
sincere  Historian  Thuanus,  Boris  his  attayning  the  Scepter,
I  shall  likewise  intreat  your  patience  out  of  him  to  receive
these  Relations  of  Demetrius.

Thuanus  writeth  that  after  the  murther  of  that  (true
or  false)  Demetrius,  some  yeeres  after  in  the  borders  of
Polonia  and  Muscovia,  appeared  one  which  called  him-
selfe  Demetrius,  and  in  testimonie  thereof,  shewed  a  Wart
in  his  face,  and  one  arme  shorter  then  the  other  (noted
before  in  the  true  Demetrius)  a  man  of  sharpe  wit,  bold
courage,  liberall  mind,  gentle  behaviour,  and  of  parts
composed  to  a  Scepter-worthinesse.  First,  was  he  made
knowne  to  the  Jesuites  of  principall  note  in  Poland,  to
whom  he  promised  if  he  might  receive  helpe  for  the
recovery  of  his  just  Inheritance,  his  first  care  should  be  to
reduce  the  Russians  to  the  Union  of  the  Romish  Church.
This  thing  was  commended  to  the  Pope  as  conducing  to
the  enlarging  of  the  holy  See,  by  his  ayde,  and  furtherance
with  the  Polish  King  and  Nobilitie,  to  be  promoted  ;  which
also  was  done  by  the  Jesuites  themselves,  who  brought  him
to  George  Miecinsy  Palatine  of  Sendomir  a  man  potent  in
that  Kingdome,  with  whom  he  covenanted  also  to  marrie
his  Daughter  if  hee  succeeded  in  his  Russian  Enterprize.
He  had  lurked  awhile  in  Liefland,  casting  off  his  Cowle,
and  had  there  learned  to  speake  and  write  the  Latine
Tongue  :  and  had  written  to  Pope  Clement  the  Eighth,
with  his  owne  hand  not  inelegantly.  And  being  by  the
said  Palatine,  and  Visnovitzi  his  Sonne  in  Law,  brought
before  King  Sigismund,  he  made  a  pithy  and  Masculine
speech,  that  he  should  remember  that  himselfe  had  beene
borne  in  Prison  and  Captivitie,  whence  Gods  mercie  had
delivered  him,  to  learne  him  to  succour  others  afflicted  with
like  disastre.

Thus  by  the  Kings  favour,  the  Palatines  money,  the
Jesuites  industrie  (not  to  mention  the  Popes  Sanctitie)  he
procured  an  Armie  of  ten  thousand  Souldiers  in  Poland
well  furnished,  and  in  his  Russian  March,  winneth  to  his
partie  the  Cossaks  a  kind  of  men  which  follow  forreigne

158

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1605.

Warres  and  prey,  and  leades  with  him  tenne  thousands  of
them.  Passing  Boristhenes  hee  first  charged  upon
Zerniga,  &  summoned  them  to  yeeld  to  the  true  heire  Zerniga,
Demetrius,  which  was  done  by  Ivan  Takmevy,  who  had
before  conceived  dislike  against  Boris.  Corelas  com-
manded  the  Cossaks,  a  notorious  Sorcerer.  He  was  the
Author  of  the  siege  of  Putinna  a  populous  Citie,  which  Puttnna
Michelowich  Soltekovi  held  with  eight  thousand  Cossaks,  yee  e  '
whom  also  he  wrought  with,  that  hee  admitted  and
followed  Demetrius.  Hereupon  Boris  sends  an  Army  of
an  hundred  thousand  men  against  him.  He  also  sends
Ambassadors  into  Poland,  to  put  them  in  minde  of  the
league  betwixt  both  Nations,  and  earnestly  desired  this
counterfeit  Demetrius,  a  Priests  Bastard  and  notable
Sorcerer,  to  bee  delivered  unto  him  alive  or  dead,  adding
threats  if  they  persisted,  and  withall  working  under-hand
with  the  Nobles  to  deterre  the  King  from  his  ayde.  But
by  the  Popes  and  Jesuites  prevayling  power  nothing  was
effected,  the  King  and  the  Poles  resolving  to  assist  him,  as
thinking  it  the  best  course  to  accord  both  Nations.

Both Armies met at Novogrod, where Palatine  The  Palatine
Sendomir the Generall, in the end of  Januarie, 1605.  de^ated-
thinking  to  find  a  revolt  in  the  Russian  Armie,  gave  a
rash  on-set,  &  was  put  to  flight,  and  after  returned  to
Poland. Demetrius  retyred  himselfe  to  Rilskie  Castle  (in
the  borders)  with  a  few,  and  forsaken  of  others,  he  for-
sooke not himselfe. Hee had brought with him two
Divines  of  the  Cistercian  Order  which  returned  home  : Cistercians
two  Jesuites  also,  Nicolas  Cherracovi  and  Andrew  Lovitizi,  ^d  Jesuits.
which  had  beene  Authors  of  the  Expedition, and  now
encouraged him  by  their  exhortations  and  examples  of
patience. He  confident  (as  hee  made  shew)  in  the  justice
of  his  cause,  when  he  was  to  begin  battell  or  skirmish,  used
to  call  upon  God,  so  as  he  might  bee  heard  of  all,  with  his
hands  stretched  forth,  and  his  eyes  lifted  up  to  heaven,  in
such  like  words. O  most  just  Judge,  kill  me  first  with  a  Demetrius  his
Thunderbolt,  destroy  me  first,  and  spare  this  Christian  C0Tifi^nt
bloud,  if  unjustly,  if  covetously,  if  wickedly  I  goe  about  Prayer-

W

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605.

this  Enterprize  which  thou  seest.  Thou  seest  mine
innocencie,  helpe  the  just  cause.  To  thee  O  Queene  of
Heaven,  I  commend  my  selfe  and  these  my  Souldiers.
Which  if  they  be  truly  related,  and  he  not  the  true
Demetrius,  he  was  either  an  impudent  Jugler,  or  exceed-
ingly gulled  with  fortunes  daliance  and  prosperous
successe,  which  concluded  in  a  Tragicall  period.

Part  of  Boris  his  Armie  was  now  comne  to  Rilsky,
where  in  a  battle  betwixt  the  horsemen  of  both  parts,
Demetrius  his  Demetrius  got  the  better,  and  the  lately  conquered,  and
v'utorie.  presently  fewer,  became  Victors ; at  the  first  encounter

a  thousand  being  slaine,  two  hundred  taken,  and  the
rest  put  to  flight,  leaving  their  footmen  to  the  slaughter,
and  the  baggage  to  the  spoyle.  Hereupon  five  neigh-
bouring Castles  with  their  severall  Territories,  yeelded
Bialogrod.  to  Demetrius,  one  of  which,  Bialogrod  yeelded  him  a
hundred  and  fiftie  Peeces  of  Ordnance.  The  Captaynes
Leptina.  were  delivered  into  his  hands. Soone  after  Jaleka  and

Leptina  yeelded,  in  which  Hinsko  Otiopelus,  that  famous
Severiayeelds.  Sorcerer  was  taken  :  after  which  all  Severia,  a  large  Princi-
palitie, came in, and eight Castles ; Demetrius using
great  modestie  in  this  unexpected  victorie. Boris  meane-
[III. iv. 757.]  while sent some with large promises to murther him,
and  the  Patriarke  excommunicated  all  which  favoured  him.
Demetrius  writ  hereof  modestly  to  the  Patriarke,  and  to
Boris  also,  offering  faire  conditions  to  his  Family,  if  he
would  resigne  his  usurped  Empire,  which  he  with  indigna-
tion rejected. That  happened  when  the  Embassadors  of
Denmarke  and  Sweden  were  in  his  Court  to  joyne  league
Boris  dyeth. with  him  against  the  Pole. In  that  consultation  Boris  is
Some  say,  that  sa^  to  nave  beene  in  such  a  chase,  that  hee  fell  downe
with  Aqua suddenly,  much  bloud  passing  from  his  mouth,  nosthrils
vita  to poy son  and  eares ;  and  in  the  end  of  Aprill  hee  dyed;  some  say
others.  of  an  Apoplexie,  others,  of  poyson  which  hee  drunke :

JNeque  trim after  hee  had  reigned  seven  yeeres. His  Wife  with  her

.yH!*^!!^?  Sonne  were  advanced  to  the  Throne  after  him,  and  the
est,  quam  nects  x M .  ,  *  ,

artifices  arte Nobihtie  sworne  to  them. The  dead  bodie  was  buried
perire  sua. without  any  pompe. Constantine  Fidler  a  Lieflander  of

160

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1605.

Rie  made  an  elegant  Oration  in  his  prayse,  whose  brother
Caspar  served  Boris.

Presently  Peter  Basman  was  sent  away  with  an  Armie.*  *Some  say  of
Hodunius  (a  neere  Kinsman  of  Boris)  besieged  Crom,  6ooo°-  men-
to  rayse  whom,  Demetrius  used  this  policie.  Hee  sent  a
simple  man  thither,  which  being  deceived  himselfe  might
deceive  others,  with  Letters  that  fortie  thousand  were
comming  to  ayde  the  besieged.  He  being  taken  (sent  by
a  way  which  he  could  not  escape)  and  examined  with
tortures  confesseth  the  same  with  his  Letters :  which
caused  a  tumult  in  the  Campe  ;  and  in  the  end,  the  besieged
taking  advantage  of  the  rumour  still  increased  by  some
sent  purposely  with  reports  that  they  had  seen  the  new
auxiliaries  issued  with  a  counterfeit  shew  of  great  numbers,
and  caused  the  Russians  to  consult  of  yeelding.  Basman  Basman
also  the  new  Generall  yeelded  and  cried  out  with  a  loud  yeeldeth.
voyce,  that  Demetrius  was  the  true  heire,  and  therefore
all  true  hearted  Muscovites  should  follow  his  example ;
which  the  most  followed.  Hodunius  was  taken,  and
refusing  to  acknowledge  Demetrius  was  cast  in  Prison.
In  the  Tents  were  huge  Ordnance  found.  After  this
Campe-alteration,  followed  the  like  in  Mosco,  the  people
resounding  the  name  of  Demetrius.  The  Empresse  and
her  sonne  were  committed  to  ward,  where  some  write  that
they  poysoned  themselves,  some  that  Demetrius  com-
manded it.  The  Germanes  flying  out  of  the  Borissian
Campe  to  Demetrius  drew  many  with  them.

From  Crom  doth  Demetrius  now  march  towards  Mosco,  Demetrius
the  people  all  the  way  flocking  to  see  their  new  Prince,  commeth  to
who  in  twentie  removes  came  thither  on  the  19.  of  June,  Mosco->hts
and entred with pompous procession of Souldiers &  ^trance.
Priests, the Russian Priests having Banners with the
Pictures  of  the  blessed  Virgin  and  their  Tutelare  Saint
Nicolas,  in  the  end  of  al  the  Patriarch,  and  after  him
Demetrius  by  himselfe  on  a  white  Palfray  with  a  gallant
trayne  of  attendants. Thus  hee  goeth  to  the  Temple  of
our  Ladie,  and  after  Prayers,  from  thence  to  Saint  Michaels
Church  in  which  his  Father  lay  buried,  and  hearing  that
xiv  161  l

A.D.
1605.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Boris  lay  there  interred,  he  presently  commanded  his  body
to  be  taken  up  and  to  be  removed  to  a  meaner  Chappell
without  the  Citie.  Passing  by  Boris  his  peculiar  House,
he  could  not  endure  the  sight,  but  sent  workemen  pre-
sently to  race  the  same ;  saying,  they  were  infamous  with
Sorceries,  and  that  an  image  was  said  to  be  placed  under
the  ground,  holding  in  the  hand  a  burning  Lampe,  having
underneath  store  of  Gunpouder  buried ;  things  so  dis-
posed, that  the  Oyle  failing,  and  the  Lampe  breaking  the
fire  should  (had  it  not  beene  before  spied  and  removed)
blow  up  that,  and  the  houses  adjoyning.  Thus  had  Boris
impeached  him,  and  he  now  Boris  of  Magicall  arts,  which
are  usuall  accusations  in  those  parts.

Thence  he  went  to  the  Imperiall  Pallace,  and  beganne
to  governe  the  Empire,  more  inclining  to  the  Poles  and
forreiners,  then  to  the  Russes :  which  untimely  expressing
himselfe,  hastned  his  ruine.  Seventie  noble  Families  of
Boris  his  kindred  or  faction  were  exiled,  that  their  Goods
might  be  shared  amongst  strangers,  and  new  Colonies  of
men  planted,  brought  into  Russia.  His  clemency  was
remarkable  to  Suisky,  who  being  condemned  for  not  onely
refusing  to  acknowledge  this  Emperour,  but  uttering  also
reproachfull  speeches  of  him  (as  being  of  base  Parentage,
and  one  which  had  conspired  with  the  Poles  to  overthrow
the  Russian  Temples,  &  Nobility)  and  now  his  prayers
ended,  and  the  fatall  stroake  on  his  knees  expected,  on  the
seaventh  of  July,  by  unexpected  mercy,  even  then  received
his  pardon.  The  last  which  yeelded  to  him  were  the
Plescovites.  Some  tell  of  exceeding  Treasures  also  which
hee  found  laid  up  for  other  purposes,  which  through  his
profusenesse  soone  vanished.  The  first  of  September,  was
designed  to  his  inauguration  (being  New  yeeres  day  to  the
Russes,  as  sometimes  to  the  Jewes)  but  for  other  causes
it  was  hastned,  and  his  Mother  was  sent  for  out  of  a
Monasterie  (into  which  Boris  had  thrust  her)  farre  from
the  Court.  An  honorable  Convoy  was  herein  employed,
Respect  to  his  and  himselfe  with  great  shew  of  Pietie  went  to  meet  her,
embraced her with teares, and bare-headed, on foot,

162

Poles
advanced.

Clemencie  to
Sutskey.

V

Mother.

OCCU11RENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1605.

attended  her  Chariot  to  the  Castle  ;  whence  afterwards  she
removed  with  her  women  into  a  Monasterie  where  the
Noblest  Virgins  and  Widdowes  of  Russia  use  to  sequester
themselves  from  the  World.  His  Mother  was  noted  to
answere  with  like  affection  to  him,  whether  true  or  dis-
sembled on  both  parts.  At  his  entrance  to  the  Kingdome,
after  Ceremonies  ended,  Nicolas  Cnermacovius  a  Jesuite
made  him  a  goodly  Oration  :  the  like  was  done  by  the
Senate.  To  the  Jesuits  was  alotted  a  faire  place  of  enter-  Jesuits.
tavnment  not  far  from  the  Castle,  wherein  to  observe  the
Romish  Rites  and  Holies :  and  even  then  by  their  meanes
he  had  declared  himselfe  in  that  point,  but  for  feare  of
Suiskie  hee  stayed  till  fitter  oportunitie.

Having  thus  setled  things,  his  care  was  to  recompence
the  Poles,  to  enter  league  with  that  Nation,  and  to  con-  Embassage  to
summate  the  Marriage. For  which  purpose  hee  sent  three  Poland.
hundred  Horsemen  with  Athanasius  the  Treasurer,  who  [III.iv.758-]
in  November  came  to  Cracovia,  had  audience  of  King
Sigismund,  where  he  with  all  thankfulnesse  acknowledged
[the  Kings  forwardnesse  with  his  Nobles  to  recover  his
right,  whereto  God  had  given  answerable  successe  beyond
i  expectation ;  that  he  deplored  the  Turkish  insolencies  in
I  Hungary  and  other  parts: to  vindicate  which,  he  would
I  willingly  joyne  with  the  Pole,  and  other  Christian  Princes  :
meane whiles hee was willing to make an everlasting
league  with  him,  and  to  that  end  entreated  his  good  leave
to  take  unto  himselfe  a  Wife  out  of  Poland,  namely,  Anna
Maria,  the  Daughter  of  George  Miecinsie  the  Palatine  of
ISendomir,  to  whom  for  money,  men,  and  endangering  of
his  owne  life,  hee  was  so  much  engaged. The  eight  day
after,  the  Contract  was  solemnely  made  by  the  Cardinal,
Bishop of Cracovia, and the Embassadour with her v
Parents  feasted  by  the  King. Demetrius  had  sent  her  and
1  her  Father,  Jewels  worth  200000.  Crownes.

Thus  farre  have  wee  followed  Thuanus,  and  hee  Jacobus
Margaretus  a  French  Captayne  of  Demetrius  guard  of
Partisans,  which  published  a  Booke  hereof.  Now  let  us
present you a little English Intelligence touching this

163

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605.

Demetrius  and  his  respect  to  men  of  our  Nation  in  those
parts,  and  first  his  Letter  to  Sir  John  Mericke.

The  Copie  of  a  Letter  sent  from  the  Emperor
Demetry  Evanowich,  otherwise  called  Grishco
Otreapyov  :  the  which  Letter  was  sent  to  Mas-
ter John  Merrick  Agent,  out  of  the  Campe,  as
Master  Merrick  was  taking  his  Journie  to  the
Sea-side,  the  eighth  of  June,  Anno  1605.

FRom the great Lord Emperour and great Duke
Demetry  Evanowich  of  all  Russia. To  the  English
Marchant  John  Merrick,  wee  give  to  understand,  that  by
the  just  judgement  of  God  and  his  strong  power,  we  are
raised  to  our  Fathers  throne  of  Vladedmer,  Mosko,  and
of  all  the  Empire  of  Russia ;  as  great  Duke  and  sole  com-
mander : likewise  we  calling  to memorie  the  love  and
amitie  of  our  Father,  the  great  Lord  Emperour  and  great  ji
Duke  Evan  Vassilywich  of  all  Russia,  and  our  Brother  j
Theodor  Evanowich  of  all  Russia,  which  was  held,  and  ,
kept  by  them  and  other  great  Christian  Princes,  in  the  |j
same  forme  and  manner  doe  we  likewise  intend,  and  pur-
pose to  hold  and  keepe  Love  and  amitie :  but  especially,
and  above  all  others,  doe  we  intend  to  send  and  to  have  lj
love  and  friendship  with  your  King  James,  and  all  you  his  i
English Merchants, we  will favour more then before.
Further,  as  soone  as  this  our  Letter  doth  come  to  your  j
hand,  and  as  soone  as  you  have  ended  your  Markets  at  the
shipping  place  of  Michael  the  Archangell,  then  to  come  up
to  Mosco  to  behold  our  Majesties  presence. And  for  your
poste  Horse  I  have  commanded  shall  be  given  you ;  and  j)
at  your  comming  to  Mosco,  then  to  make  your  appear-
ance in  our  Chancery,  to  our  Secretarie  Ofanasy  Vlassov.  I
Written  in  our  Majesties  Campe  at  Tooly,  in  the  yeare  of  !
the world Anno seaven thousand one hundred and  I
thirteene.

164

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1605.

The  Copie  of  the  translation  of  a  Passe  given  to
Master  John  Merrick,  which  was  given  him
in  the  time  of  his  being  in  the  Campe  at
Molodove  with  the  Emperour  Demetry  Evan-
owich,  otherwise  called  Grishco  Otreapyove.

FRom  the  great  Lord  Emperour  and  great  Duke
Demetry  Evanowich  of  all  Russia,  from  Mosco  to  our
Cities  and  Castles,  as  also  to  the  Castle  of  Archangell  at
the  Shipping  place  and  haven  to  our  Generals,  Secretaries,
and  all  other  our  Officers,  &c.

There  did  make  suite  unto  us  the  English  Marchant
John  Merricke  and  his  Company,  that  we  would  gratifie
them  to  be  suffered  to  passe  to  the  new  Castle  of  Arch-
angell, or  to  the  shipping  place  or  haven,  in  regard  of
trafficke  of  Merchandise.

Also,  that  if  he  doe  send  home  any  of  his  fellowes  and
servants  from  the  shipping  place,  being  of  the  English,
that  then  they  might  be  suffered  to  passe  into  England.
Also  that  to  whatsoever  Citie  of  ours  the  English  Mar-
chant  John  Mericke,  and  his  fellowes,  doth  or  shall  come
unto  ;  then  all  yee  our  Generals,  Secretaries,  and  all  other
our  Officers,  shall  suffer  them  to  passe  every  where,  with-
out all  delay.  And  as  for  our  Customes,  as  for  passing  by
or  for  head  mony,  our  custome  of  goods,  you  shall  not
take  any  of  them  nor  of  their  servants.  Likewise,  when
the  English  Merchants  John  Merricke  with  his  fellowes
and  servants,  shall  come  to  the  Castle  of  Archangell,  then
Timophey  Matphewich  Lazarove,  and  our  Secretary
Rohmaneum  Mocaryoved,  Voronove,  at  the  foresaid
Castle  of  Archangell,  shall  suffer  and  permit  the  English
Merchant,  John  and  his  companie  to  trade  freely.  More-
over, when  at  the  shipping  place  they  have  ended  and
finished  their  Markets,  and  that  then  the  said  John  Mer-
ricke shall  desire  to  send  into  England  any  of  his  fellowes
or  servants  with  goods,  then  likewise  they  shall  be  suffered
to  passe. But  Russe  people,  and  other  strangers  of  Mosco

165

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605.

shall  not  be  suffered  to  passe  further :  that  if  John  Mer-
ricke  with  his  fellowes  and  servants  doe  not  goe  for
England :  but  after  their  Market  is  ended  doe  purpose  to
come  backe  againe  to  Mosco  ;  that  then  at  the  Castle  of
[III.  iv.  7 59.]  Archangell  Timophey  Matphewich  Lazarove,  and  our
Secretarie  Rohmaneev  Voronave ;  as  also  at  all  other  our
Castels  and  Cities,  our  Generals,  Secretaries,  and  all  other
our  Officers  shall  let  passe  the  English  Merchant  John
Merricke  with  his  fellowes  and  servants,  without  all  stay
or  hinderance,  and  as  for  custome  of  them,  their  goods,  or
their  servants,  there  shall  not  be  any  taken.

And  after  the  Reading  of  this  our  Letter  and  Passe,  you
shall  keepe  the  Copie  of  it  by  you :  but  this  you  shall
deliver  backe  againe  to  the  said  John,  and  his  companie.
Written  at  our  Campe  at  Molodone,  the  yeare  from  the
beginning  of  the  World  71 13.  the  eighteenth  of  June.

The  last  of  July  1605.  at  Archangell.

The  Copie  of  the  translation  of  a  Commission  that
was  sent  from  the  Mosko,  from  the  Emperour
Demetry  Evanowich,  alias  Gryshca  Otreapyove
by  a  Courtier  named  Gavaryla  Samoylowich
Salmanove,  who  was  sent  downe  to  the  Castle
of  Archangell,  to  Sir  Thomas  Smith,  then  Lord
Embassadour  :  as  followeth.

THe  great  Lord  Emperour,  and  great  Duke  Demetry
Evanowich  of  all  Russia,  hath  commanded  Gavareela
Samoylowich  Salmanove,  to  goe  to  Vologda,  and  from
Vologda  to  the  new  Castle  of  Archangell,  or  wheresoever
he  shall  overtake  the  English  Ambassadour  Sir  Thomas
Smith.  Also  when  he  hath  overtooke  the  Ambassadour,
then  Gavareele  shall  send  the  Ambassadour  his  Interpreter
Richard  Finch,  willing  him  to  certifie  unto  the  Ambas-
sadour, that  the  great  Lord  Emperour  and  great  Duke
Demetry  Evanowich,  sole  commander  of  Russia,  hath
sent unto him one  of  his Courtiers, in regard of  his

166

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1605.

!  Majesties  affaires : and  after some two houres  respite,

i  Gavareela  himselfe shall  ride to the  Ambassadour,  and

deliver  unto  him  his  Majesties  speeches,  as  followeth.

THe  great  Lord  Emperour  and  great  Duke  Demetry
Evanowich  of  all  Russia,  and  of  many  Kingdomes
Lord  and  commander,  Hath  commanded  thee,  Thomas  the
English  Ambassadour,  to  certifie  unto  James,  King  of
England,  Scotland,  France  and  Ireland,  that  by  the  just
judgement  of  God,  and  his  strange  power,  we  are  come
and  succeeded  into  the  place  of  our  Father  and  predeces-
sours  :  as  also  we  are  come  to  the  throne  of  the  great  and
famous  Kingdome  of  Vlodemer  Mosco,  and  to  the  Empire
of  Cazan,  Astaracan  and  Siberia,  and  of  all  the  Kingdomes
of  the  Empire  of  Russia  ;  being  an  Empire  belonging  to
the  great  Lords,  Emperours,  and  great  Dukes  of  all  Russia.
Moreover,  we  calling  to  memorie  the  sending,  love  and
amitie  betwixt  our  Father,  the  great  Lord  and  Emperour,
and  great  Duke  Evan  Vasilywich  of  all  Russia,  of  famous
memorie :  as  also  our  Brother,  the  great  Lord  and
Emperour,  and  great  Duke  Feoder  Evanowich  of  all
Russia,  sole  commander,  with  their  sister  Elizabeth,
Queene  of  England  :  in  the  like  manner  doe  we  purpose
to  have  sendings,  and  to  be  in  love  with  your  Lord  King
James,  and  more  then  hath  bin  in  former  time.  And  in
token  of  our  said  love  and  amitie,  we  doe  intend  to  favour
all  his  subjects  in  our  Land,  and  to  give  unto  them  freer
libertie  then  they  have  had  heretofore ;  and  you  his
Ambassadour,  we  have  commanded  to  dispatch  without  all
delay  or  hindrance.  Therefore  we  would  have  you  to
make  knowne  unto  your  Lord  King  James,  our  Majesties
love.  And  as  soone  as  God  shall  grant  the  time  of  our
Coronation  to  be  finished,  and  that  we  are  crowned  with
the  Emperiall  crowne  of  our  predecessours,  according  to
our  manner  and  worthinesse ;  then  we  the  great  Lord
Emperor,  and  great  Duke  Demeetry  Evanowich  of  all
Russia  sole  Commander,  will  send  our  messenger  to  salute
each  other,  according  to  the  former  manner. And  con-

167

G

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605.

cerning  those  Letters  which  were  sent  by  you  from  Borris
Godenove,  we  would  have  you  deliver  them  backe  againe
to  our  Courtier  Gavareela,  and  after  the  deliverie  of  our
speeches  to  returne  him  to  the  Emperour,  under  written
by  the  Chancellour  Ofanasy  Evanowich  Vlaseov.

The  Copie  of  the  Translation  of  a  new  Priviledge
that  was  given  to  the  Company,  by  the  Empe-
rour Demeetry  Evanowich,  otherwise  called
Gryshca  Otreapyove,  the  which  Priviledge  was
sent  into  England  over-land  by  Olyver  Lysset
Marchant,  and  servant  to  the  foresaid  Company.

Od,  the  Trenitie  before,  and  without  the  beginning,
the  Father,  the  Sonne,  and  the  holy  Ghost,  establish
us  to  hold  and  keepe  our  Scepter  and  Realme  for  the  good
of  our  Land,  and  the  happinesse  of  our  people.  Wee  the
resplendant  and  manifest,  and  not  the  miserable  upholder,
but  sole  commander,  the  great  Duke  Demetry  Evanowich,
by  the  mercy  of  God,  Caesar  and  great  Duke  of  Russia,
and  of  all  the  Empire  of  Tartaria,  and  many  other  King-
domes  ;  as  also  of  the  great  Monarchic  of  Mosco,  Lord
Emperour  and  Commander,  Have  bestowed,  and  gratified
[III.  iv.  760.]  unto  the  English  Merchants,  viz.  Sir  Thomas  Smith,
Knight,  Sir  John  Spencer,  Knight,  Sir  Humfrey  Wild,
Knight,  Robert  Dove,  Robert  Chamberline,  William  Gara-
way,  John  Harvey,  Richard  Stapers,  John  Merricke,
Richard  Wryght,  Richard  Cocks,  Thomas  Farrington,
Richard  Wych,  George  Bowles,  Bartholomew  Barnes,
Richard  Bowldra,  John  Casten,  Edward  Chery,  Thomas,
the  sonne  of  Alexander  alias  Hicks  :  we  have  given  them
free  liberty  to  come  with  their  ships  into  our  Realme  and
Dominion,  and  to  the  Country  of  Dwina,  &  to  the  Castle
of  Archangel,  and  to  Colmogro,  with  all  maner  of  com-
modities, and  to  trade  freely,  as  also  to  come  from  the  sea
side  by  land  or  by  water,  to  our  great  dominion  and
Caesars  City  of  Mosco,  &  great  Novogrod  and  Vobsko,
and  all  other  cities  within  our  dominions,  to  trade  with  all

168

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1605.

manner  of  commodities,  in  the  same  forme  and  manner,
as  heretofore  was  bestowed  on  the  English  Merchants,  in
the  time  of  our  father  of  famous  memory,  the  great  Lord
and  Caesar,  and  great  Duke  Evan  Vassilywich  of  all  Russia,
sole  Commander,  and  as  was  granted  unto  them  in  the
time  of  our  Brother  the  great  Duke  Theodor  Evanowich
of  all  Russia  sole  Commander.  And  as  for  custome  of
their  goods,  or  for  passing  by,  as  also  for  the  custome  of
their  boates,  or  for  Head-money,  or  for  going  over  bridges
or  Ferryes,  or  for  entrie  of  goods,  As  also  all  manner  of
Custome  whatsoever,  we  command  shall  not  bee  taken  of
them  :  Also  the  English  Merchants  shall  not  bring  nor
sell  other  mens  goods  in  our  Dominion,  as  their  owne :
neither  shall  our  Subjects  buy,  or  sell,  or  traffique  for.
Also  our  Subjects  pawnes  they  shall  not  keep  by  them,
nor  send  others  about  the  Cities  to  buy  goods  :  but  what
Cities  they  come  into  themselves  they  shall  trafficke  and
sell  their  owne  commodities,  and  buy  Russe  commodities
freely :  And  when  they  come  into  our  Dominion  of  great
Novogrod  and  Vobsko,  or  to  any  other  Cities  within  our
Realme  to  trafficke  with  their  goods,  and  that  after  the
market  is  past,  they  shall  bee  desirous  to  passe  for  Mosco,
or  for  England,  then  our  Gentlemen  and  Governours,  and
all  people  shall  according  to  this  our  Caesars  Letter,  let
them  passe  without  delay,  and  as  for  Customes  for  them
and  their  goods  they  shall  not  take  any.  And  whither-
soever they  passe  with  their  goods,  without  buying  any
commodities,  or  selling  their  owne  ;  Then  likewise  in  those
Cities  they  shall  passe,  and  not  take  of  them  any  manner
of  Custome  whatsoever  as  before  :  also  the  English  Mer-
chants shall  trafficke  as  followeth  ;  They  shall  barter  their
owne  goods,  by  the  whole  Salecloth  by  the  Packe,  and  by
the  Clothes  :  Damaske  and  Velvet  not  by  the  piece,  but  by
the  areshine  and  by  retaile  and  retaile  weights  they  shall
not  barter  or  sell.  Also  goods,  which  is  sold  by  weight,
by  retaile,  or  by  the  zolotnicke  they  shall  likewise  not  sell.
And  Claret  wine  they  shall  sell  by  the  piece,  but  by  retaile,
as  by  the  Veader  stop,  or  Pot  and  Charck  they  shall  not  sell.

169

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605.

Likewise  they  shall  buy  and  sell,  and  barter  their  goods
themselves :  but  the  Russe  Merchant  shall  not  sell  nor
barter  their  goods  for  them ;  neither  shall  they  carry  other
mens  goods  in  colour  of  their  owne,  not  to  any  place  what-
soever. Also  if  the  English  Merchants  bee  minded  to
make  sale  of  their  commodities  at  Colmogro,  or  on  the
Dwina,  or  at  Vologda,  or  at  Yeraslave,  then  they  shall  doe
it  freely.  And  for  their  said  goods  in  all  our  Cities  within
our  Realme,  our  Gentlemen  and  Governors,  and  all
manner  of  our  Officers  shall  not  of  them  take  any  Tole
or  custome,  according  to  this  our  Caesars  Letter  of  Favour.
And  in  all  our  Cities  within  our  dominion,  they  shall  hyre
Carryers  Boats,  and  men  to  row  them  freely  as  before.
And  as  the  order  is  of  the  Merchants  within  our  Realme :
so  likewise  if  the  English  Merchants  be  desirous  to  goe
out  of  our  Realme,  into  any  other  Kingdome,  or  into
their  owne  Countrey :  as  also  if  they  bee  desirous  in  our
Realme  to  buy  any  Staple  commoditie,  and  to  carry  it  into
their  owne  Land,  then  shall  they  likewise  buy  and  trafficke
freely  at  pleasure,  and  those  Staple  commodities  which  are
fitting  for  our  Caesars  Treasure,  they  shall  likewise  bring
it  to  our  Treasure  freely  at  pleasure,  and  for  the  said  Staple
commodities  in  all  our  Cities,  our  Officers  shall  not  take
any  manner  of  Custome :  but  they  shall  suffer  them  to
passe  without  any  staying  of  them.  Also  when  the  Eng-
lish Merchants  have  ended  their  market,  and  shall  desire
to  goe  from  the  Mosco,  then  they  shall  appeare  in  the
Embassadours  Office,  to  our  Chancellour  and  Secretarie
Evan  Cowrbatov  Hramoteenop.  Moreover,  if  that  by  the
providence  of  God,  the  English  Merchants  have  any  ship-
wracke,  and  that  the  said  ship  bee  brought  or  driven  to
any  place  within  our  Realme,  then  our  Caesars  commande-
ment  to  those  places  where  the  ship  is  brought  in,  that
our  men  in  office  doe  seeke  out  the  English  Merchants
goods  justly,  and  to  give  them  to  the  English  people  that
shall  bee  at  that  time  in  our  Land.  But  if  at  that  time  there
bee  none  of  them  in  our  Realme,  then  to  gather  them
together,  and  to  lay  them  up  in  one  place :  and  so  when

170

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1605.
the  English Merchants  doe  come  there,  by  our  Caesars
I  Order, to deliver those goods to the said Merchants.
!  And  whereas  the  English Merchants  according  to  their
former  Letters  of  Favor  had  a  house  in  the  Mosco  by  the
Church  of  the  holy  Maxim  by  the  market,  which  was
granted  unto  them  by  our  predecessour  the  great  Lord  and
Caesar  of  Russia,  the  said  English  Merchants  shall  dwell  in
the  said  house  as  heretofore  they  have  done :  Keeping  one
I  house-keeper  a  Russe,  or  one  of  their  owne  strangers,  but
any  other  Russes  they  shall  not  keepe. Moreover  the
said  English Merchants  have  houses  in  other  Cities,  a
I  house  at  Yeraslave,  a  house  at  Vologda,  a  house  at  Col-
!  mogro,  and  a  house  at  the  shipping  place  at  the  Castle  of
the  Archangell : and  those  houses  they  shall  keepe  and
hold  by  them,  according  to  our  Caesars  Favour  or  Grati-
I  tude, as in former time they have done, and for  any
'  subsidie,  rent,  dutie,  or  any  custome  whatsoever  for  the
said  houses  there  shall  not  be  any  taken  of  them  :  and  their
other  houses, as  at Yeraslave, Vologda, Colmogro  and
Archangell,  they  shall  have  house-keepers  of  their  owne
countrie-men  or  Russes,  but  the  Russes  shall  bee  meane
men,  a  man  or  two  at  a  house  :  And  they  shall  lay  their
goods  in  those  houses,  and  likewise  shall  make  sale  of  their
goods  out  of  their  houses,  to  whom  they  will,  according
to  this  our  Caesars  Letter  of  Favour,  and  their  house-
keepers being  Russes  shall  not  buy  or  sell  any  manner  of
commodities  in  their  absence. Also  they  shall  come  with
their ships to the shipping  place, as  before  with their  [Hl.iv.76
Commodities,  and  to  unlade  out  of  the  shippe  their  goods,
and  to  lade  their  shippe  with  Russe  goods,  with  their  owne
hired  labourers,  as  also  to  carry  their  owne  goods  over
in  their  owne  Boats  and  Vessels,  to  their  owne  house  at
the  Castle  of  Archangell. And  whatsoever  goods  they
have,  our  chiefe  Customer,  and  Officers,  and  sworne  men,
shall  take  a  note  of  the  goods  under  their  owne  firme,  both
of  goods  they  bring  in,  and  also  of  goods  they  carry  out.
But  they  shall  not  looke  over,  neither  unpacke  their  packes
in  any  place ; as  also  they  shall  suffer  them  to  passe  in  all

171

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605.

places,  without  all  stay  or  delay,  according  to  this  our
Caesars  priviledge  and  Letter  of  favour.  Also  whensoever
the  English  Merchants  shall  be  desirous  to  send  out  of
our  Realme  into  their  owne  Land  any  of  their  servants
overland,  or  into  other  Kingdomes,  then  they  shall  likewise
send  their  people  overland  with  our  Caesars  order  freely,
but  without  carying  any  Commodities,  and  their  passe  shall
be  given  them  in  the  Embassadours  office.  Further,  con-
cerning any  matter  of  controversie  that  any  man  shall  have
to  doe  with  them  either  in  bargaining,  or  in  injury,
according  to  this  our  Caesars  order,  they  shall  be  judged
by  our  Counsellor  and  Secretary  Evan  Cowrbatov  Hramo-
teev :  Therefore,  as  before,  wheresoever  they,  or  any  of
their  servants,  in  all  our  Realme^  in  what  Citie  soever,
have  any  matter  of  controversie  in  Bargaining,  or  in
Injurie  against  any  man,  or  that  any  man  have  any  matter
against  any  of  them,  then  in  all  our  Cities,  our  Gentlemen,
and  Governours,  and  all  other  our  Officers,  shall  judge
them,  doing  justice  betwixt  either  of  them  with  equitie
and  truth.  This  priviledge  or  letter  of  favour  was  given
at  our  Caesars  Pallace  of  Mosco.  From  the  world  Anno
71 13.  in  the  moneth  of  December.

The  Copie  of  the  Translation  of  a  Contract,  made
by  the  Emperour  Demetry  Evanowich,  other-
wise called  Gryshca  Otreapyove,  and  the
daughter  of  the  Palatine  Sendamersko,  chiefe
Generall  of  Poland,  in  the  time  of  Demetry  his
being  in  Poland,  the  which  was  sent  over  by
Master  John  Merrick,  and  translated  out  of
Russe  into  English  for  the  Kings  Majestie,  as
followeth.

A  True  Translation  of  a  writing  out  of  Polish  into
Russe,  given  by  a  Monke  who  left  his  habit,  called
by  the  name  of  Gryshca  Ocreapyove,  supposed  to  be  the
Son  of  the  Emperour  Evan  Vassiliwich,  named  Demeetry

172

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1605.

Evanowich,  who  gave  this  assurance  under  his  firme,  to
the  Palatine  Sendamersko,  as  also  hath  beene  avouched  by
one  Bewcheesko,  principall  Secretary  unto  the  said
Demetry,  before  all  the  Nobilitie  of  Russia,  that  this  said
writing  was  written  by  the  Generall  his  owne  hande,  as
followeth.

Wee  Demetry  Evanowich,  by  the  mercy  of  God,  Prince
of  all  Russia,  of  Owgleets  Demetryuskoy,  and  Lord  of
all  the  Empire  of  Mosco,  and  being  of  the  stocke  of
Preatrove  ;  Calling  to  memorie  our  former  life,  being  not
in  that  forme  and  manner,  as  is  in  other  great  Monarchies,
as  was  in  the  time  of  our  Predecessours,  and  other
Christian  people.  Neverthelesse,  by  the  providence  of
God  almightie,  from  whom  proceedeth  a  beginning  and  an
end,  and  from  whom  commeth  life  and  death  ;  We  have
by  him  espied  and  made  choise  unto  our  selfe,  with  good
liking,  in  the  time  of  our  being  in  the  Kingdome  of
Poland,  of  a  Companion,  of  great  and  honorable  birth,  and
of  godly  education,  and  is  such  a  companion,  with  whom
we  shall  by  the  mercie  of  God,  live  peaceably :  which  is
the  resplendent  and  Noble  Lady  Marina,  daughter  to  the
great  Palatine  Sendemersko.  And  upon  this  occasion
have  taken  him  for  our  Father,  and  having  requested  of
him  to  give  unto  us  his  Daughter,  Maryna  in  mariage,
and  in  regard  that  wee  are  not  yet  in  our  owne  Kingdome,
therefore  doe  we  purpose  hereafter  to  take  order  for  her
comming  unto  us  with  the  Generall  Sendamersko.  Like-
wise, when  I  doe  come  to  live  in  my  owne  Kingdome,  then
shall  the  Palatine  Sendamersko  remember  his  faithfull  and
true  promise  with  his  Daughter,  the  Lady  Maryna  her
vow,  my  selfe  remembring  my  owne  vow,  and  so  both
of  us  to  hold  it  faithfully  with  love  and  affection,  and  to
that  end  doe  we  binde  our  selves  by  our  writings.  Like-
wise, first  and  principally,  in  the  name  of  the  holy  Trinitie,
I  doe  give  my  faithfull  and  true  princely  promise,  that  I
will  take  in  marriage  the  Lady  Maryna.  If  on  the  con-
trary, I  doe  not,  then,  I  wish  that  I  might  give  this  as  a
curse upon my selfe : also, so soone as I shall make

i73

\J

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605.

entrance  into  our  Kingdome,  and  heritage  of  Mosco,  then
will  I  give  the  Palatine,  the  Lord  her  Father,  a  reward  of
tenne  thousand  peeces  of  Polish  gold.  And  to  the  Lady
Maryna  our  wife,  in  consideration  of  her  great  and  long
Journey,  as  also  for  the  providing  and  furnishing  of  her
selfe,  I  will  give  out  of  my  Treasure  Velvets  wrought  with
Silver  and  Gold.  And  the  Messengers  that  shall  be  sent
to  me  from  the  Lord  her  Father,  or  from  the  Lady  her
selfe,  I  shall  not  hold  or  keepe,  but  shall  let  them  passe,
and  will  reward  them  with  gifts,  which  shall  be  a  token  of
our  Princely  favour ;  and  thereunto  doe  we  give  this  our
Princely  promise.  Secondly,  as  soone  as  we  shall  come
to  the  Imperiall  throne  of  our  Father,  then  presently  will
we  send  our  Embassadour  to  the  resplendant  King  of
Poland  to  certifie  unto  him,  as  also  to  intreate  him  to  take
knowledge  of  this  businesse  now  passed  betwixt  us,  and
withall,  that  he  would  be  pleased  to  suffer  us  to  conclude
and  effect  this  our  said  businesse,  without  losse  or
hindrance.  Also  unto  the  forenamed  Lady  Maryna  our
[III. iv.  762.]  wife,  we  give  two  Lordships,  viz.  Novogrod  the  great,  and
Vobsko,  with  all  the  Provinces  belonging  to  the  same,
with  Counsellors,  Gentlemen,  and  Yeoman,  and  Priests,
fitting  for  a  Congregation,  to  rule  and  governe  freely  with
full  authority  in  the  same  forme  and  manner,  as  if  we
ruled.  And  my  selfe  to  have  no  more  right  or  title  nor
authoritie  in  the  said  two  Cities  of  Novogrod  and  Vobsko  :
and  thereunto  doe  I  binde  my  selfe  with  this  writing,  and
doe  wholly  give  and  bestow  all  on  the  said  Lady
Maryna  that  is  contained  in  this  writing,  as  soone
as  by  Gods  helpe  we  shall  be  married  together,  and
thereunto  have  given  this  our  writing,  sealed  with
our  princely  Seale.  But  if  by  chance  our  wife  hath
not  by  us  any  children,  then  in  those  two  Lordships  before
specified,  shee  shall  place  men  in  authoritie  of  her  owne,
to  governe  and  to  doe  Justice  :  and  also  it  shall  be  free
for  the  said  men  in  authoritie,  to  give  Lands  and  Inherit-
ance to  their  owne  Souldiers,  and  to  trade  freely  at  pleasure,
as  shall  be  best  liking  to  them,  and  as  though  it  were  in

J74

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  ad.

1605.

their  owne  true  and  lawfull  dominion,  and  to  build
Monasteries,  and  to  set  up  the  Romish  Religion,  and  to  Promise  of
have  Latine  or  Romish  Priests  and  Schooles.  But  she  Romsh
her  selfe  to  abide  and  remaine  with  us.  And  concerning  ' '  lSton-
her  Priest,  to  have  as  many  as  shall  be  needefull  to  be  kept
for  her  owne  godly  Romish  Religion,  without  all  let  or
hindrance  :  and  as  wee  our  selfe  by  the  mercy  of  God  are
already  inclined  to  the  same,  so  will  wee  likewise  with
earnest  care,  seeke  by  all  meanes  to  bring  all  the  Kingdome
of  Mosco  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Romish  Religion,  and
; to  set  up  the  Church  of  Rome.  Also,  if  God  should  not
[grant  unto  us  good  successe,  whereby  this  be  performed
within  a  yeare  ;  then  it  shall  be  at  the  pleasure  of  our
[Father  to  separate  mee  and  his  daughter  Maryna.  But  if
it  please  him  to  forbeare  till  another  yeare,  then  doe  I  passe
(this  my  Bill,  with  my  owne  handwriting,  and  thereunto  I
[have  sworne  my  selfe,  and  given  a  vow  according  to  the
[holy  order,  and  all  in  this  Bill  to  hold  and  keepe  carefully :
,as  also  that  I  shall  bring  all  the  Russe  people  to  the  Latine
.Religion.  Written  at  Sambore  the  five  and  twentieth  of
May,  in  Anno  1604.  Underneath  was  his  firme,  to  all
ithis  foresaid  as  appeareth  :  Prince  Demetry  of

Owglets.

NOw  let  us  returne  with  Thuanus  into  Poland,  where
with  his  Historical  eies  we  see  this  glorious  Spouse,
her  Father,  Uncle,  &  trayne  of  women  accompanying  the
Russian  Embassador  in  his  returne ;  whom  many  Mer-
chants out  of  Italie  and  Germanie  followed  in  hope  of
jgaine.  In  this  lingring  journey,  they  continued  from  the
lend  of  January  to  the  sixe  and  twentieth  of  Aprill,  before
they  entred  Mosco.  And  the  seventh  day  after,  Peter
Basman  with  a  great  troupe  of  Courtiers  and  Nobles,
jattended  the  Spouse  to  the  Court,  where  shee  was
'solemnely  entertayned  by  her  Husband,  and  thence  con-
veighed  to  the  Monasterie  where  his  Mother  abode.  The
fourth  day  after,  all  things  being  prepared,  shee  was  Demetrius  his
\ brought  into  the  Palace,  and  the  next  day  married  to  him  Marriage.

i75

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605.

by  the  Patriarch  after  Evening  Prayer. Both  of  them

Both  crowned,  also,  solemnely  crowned,  returned  with  sound  of  Musick
and  Ordnance  into  the  Castle,  and  the  night  passed  with
great  Jubilee,  Demetrius  his  mind  being  filled  notwith-

Conspiracie.  standing  with  cares.  For  a  conspiracie  which  had  beene
hatching  sixe  moneths,  now  growing  to  ripeness,  terrified
him  :  against  which  hee  had  armed  himselfe  with  forreigne
aides.  At  first  hee  had  brought  a  guard  of  Germanes  out
of  Poland,  which  being  without  example  of  his  Predeces-
sors, and  seeing  it  disliked  of  his  subjects,  hee  dismissed,
together  with  all  forren  Souldiers.  They  being  thus  sent
away  without  pay,  returned  with  the  casheered  Polanders
to  the  borders,  where  they  committed  many  outrages  to
the  greater  discontent  of  the  Russes.  Many  of  them
found  grievances  notwithstanding,  in  his  too  much
respect  to  the  Poles :  and  many  made  question  of
his  birth.  Many  were  suspected  of  conspiracie,  and
divers  tortured,  which  was  but  quenching  fire  with  Oyle,
the  flame  growing  greater.  And  now  beganne  Demetrius
to  repent  of  his  hastie  dismissing  his  guards,  and  began
a  new  Check-roll  of  Lieflanders  and  Germanes,  to  which
hee  added  an  hundred  English  Halberdiers  and  as  many
Scots (their  Captaynes  hee  calleth  Matthias  Cnotsenius

*/  suppose  this  and  *  Albert  Lant)  and  an  hundred  French  under  Jaques

should  bee Margeret  armed  with  Partisans. Then  also  he  inlarged

me^Caim Ws  pay>  but  t0°  kte*

Gilbert  I  have Alexander  Gosenskie  Corvinus  was  sent  Embassadour

often  heard  of  from  Poland  with  rich  Presents,  and  Letters  from  King

in  that  place  of  Sigismund  to  Demetrius,  which  because  they  expressed  not

service,  which  ^t  Title  of  Emperour  were  not  received  nor  opened. In

_«.«.«-*,  «f "  excuse  whereof  the  Embassadour  used  words  unsufferable
mentaries  oj  .  .  .

these  affaires  to  Russian  patience,  that  he  should  goe  and  deprive  the
which  I  have  great  Turke  of  those  Titles.  Demetrius  dissembled  not-
much  sought  to  withstanding,  in  regard  of  his  past  experience,  and  hoped
L  rMer  ne^Pes  fr°m  tne  Pole.  The  dayes  following  were  spent  in
chants  hands,  pastimes  and  sloth.  Saturday  was  solemne  to  the
Russians,  a  Feast  then  happening  which  they  preferre
before Easter. The Emperour and Empresse sate

176

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1605.

crowned  in  the  Hall,  and  made  a  great  Feast  to  their
owne  and  to  strangers ;  in  which  the  Pole  Embassadour
refused  to  be  present,  except  he  might  sit  at  the  Princes
Table,  as  the  Russian  Embassadour  had  beene  honoured  at
Cnicovia.  The  Russes  denied  stiffely,  but  Demetrius  at
length  yeelded.  Many  peremptorie  and  licentious  pass-
ages happened,  the  Poles  carrying  themselves  domineer-
ingly to  the  Russes,  as  Victors  to  the  conquered.
Demetrius  at  first  over-bold,  now  beganne  to  feare,  and
warned  the  Poles  to  bee  warie,  and  sent  for  all  his  guards.
On  Friday,  the  Russes  preparing  for  offence,  and  the  Poles
for  their  defence  (for  they  and  not  the  Prince,  seemed  to
bee  then  in  danger)  in  the  Evening  the  Nobles  command
the  people  to  arme  against  the  next  day.  The  Empresse
[was  this  while  secure,  and  made  ready  a  magnificent  Feast
against  Sunday.  But  on  Saturday  (the  sixteenth  of  the  Bloudie  day.
'Kalends  of  June)  the  Conspirators  assemble  early,  and  a
great  cry  is  raysed  to  kill  the  Poles  and  Demetrius.  Some  [Ill.iv.  763.]
oreedie  of  spoyle  runne  presently  to  the  Poles  Lodgings,
assault  them  and  embroyle  all  with  slaughters.  Others
runne  to  the  Castle.  Few  of  the  guard  were  there,  delay
having  bred  securitie  in  Demetrius,  nor  were  any  of  their
Captaynes  seene.  Margaret  then  lay  sicke  as  he  after  told
me  (Thuanus)  which  disease  saved  his  life.  Things  were
idone  with  such  furie  and  celeritie,  that  many  Russes  in
Polish  attire  were  slaine  before  they  were  knowne.

Peter  Basman  came  running  forth  halfe  naked,  &  was  p.  Basman
tilled  by  one  of  his  own  servants. Suiskie  their  Leader,  slain.
Carrying  a  Sword  in  one  hand,  a  Crosse  in  the  other,  caused
the  great  Bel  to  be  rung  in  token  of  fire  that  Demetrius
might  be  raised  &  come  forth  of  his  Parlor. He  awakned
[with  the  noyse,  now  seeing  a  greater  danger  then  fire,
':aketh  a  Turkish  Sword,  and  suddenly  slips  downe  out  of
i  window,  breaking  his  legge  with  the  fall,  whereby  he
was  easily  taken  by  the  people,  and  by  Suiskoys  command  Demetrius
carried  into  the  greater  Hall,  where  Embassadours  have  taken  and
audience. There some upbrayding his impostures, he e'
with  his  sword  layd  one  on  the  ground  :  and  then  desired
xiv  177  M

A.D.
1605.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Contumelious
usage.

the  Nobilitie  to  permit  him  to  speake  to  the  people,  which
was  denyed.  Some  say  that  he  obtayned  of  Suiskey,  that
he  might  be  tryed  by  the  testimonie  of  Vasilowich  his
Wife  ;  which  being  brought  out  of  the  Nunnery,  affirmed
before  the  Nobles  on  her  oath,  that  her  Sonne  Demetrius
was  many  yeeres  before  murthered  by  Boris  his  perfidies,
which  she  at  first  seeing  the  peoples  favour,  and  just
revenge  on  Boris,  willingly  dissembled,  whereupon  they
ranne  upon  him,  and  with  many  wounds  slue  him.  Thus
writeth  Peter  Paterson  of  Upsal  which  then  was  in  Russia.
When  they  had  slaine  him,  they  thrust  a  rope  thorow  his-
secret  parts,  and  drew  him  thorow  the  myre  into  the
Market  place,  where  he  remayned  foure  dayes  lying  all
gorie  and  myrie  on  a  boord,  with  Peter  Basman  under  it,
and  an  ugly  Vizar  over  it,  a  Bag-pipe  in  his  mouth,  with
other  lascivious  cruelties  exercised  on  his  dead  body.

The  Palatine  Sendomir  (or  Sandamersko)  was  blocked
up  in  his  House,  and  other  Poles  Houses  rifled,  many  of

Poles  slaine.  which  died  not  unrevenged,  howsoever  by  numbers  over-
comne.  Viteneskie  after  much  slaughter  of  the  assayling
Russes,  when  he  saw  Ordnance  brought,  set  forth  a  white
flagge  in  token  of  yeeding,  bidding  his  Servants  cast
abroad  his  money ;  which  whiles  the  people  were  gather-
ing, he  and  his  made  way  with  their  Swords  with  great
slaughter,  &  yeelded  to  the  Boiarens  which  came  from  the

The  Queene.  Castle.  The  miserable  Bride  was  not  only  spoyled  of
inestimable  Treasure,  but  of  all  her  Apparell,  and  Jewels,
carefull  only  of  her  Father  and  Uncle,  and  thinking  it  a
happy  purchase,  if  she  might  save  her  life  and  recover  her
Countrey.  Meanewhile,  without  her  Garment  to  cover
her,  without  Bed  to  lye  on,  without  securitie  of  life,  shee
expected  in  poore  Weeds  the  issue  of  the  peoples  furie.

Merchants  Many  Merchants  endured  like  fates. Ambrose  Cellar,

spoyled.  besides  the  losse  of  thirtie  thousand  Crownes,  lost  his  life-

James  Win  was  with  his  own  Sword  beheaded  :  Nathan
lost  one  hundred  and  fiftie  thousand  Florens :  Nicolas
Limborough  fiftie  thousand.  Two  of  Auspurg  had  lent
two  hundred  thousand  Crownes  to  Demetrius,  which  now

178

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1605.

I  was  not  to  pay  them.  Marcellius  lost  an  hundred  thou-
sand Florens.  Twelve  hundred  Poles  lost  their  lives ;
I  many  were  saved  by  the  Boiarens.  Foure  hundred
Russes  were  slayne.  At  night  the  tumult  ceased.  Scarsly  Russes  slaine.
[would  the  people  give  leave  to  bury  the  bodies  after  three
dayes  wallowing  in  the  durt,  in  the  Germane  Churchyard.
Alter  this  tempest  was  calmed,  the  Boiarens  assembled
in  counsell  about  a  new  Election,  where  Suiskey  made
speech  to  them,  professing  himselfe  sorrowfull  for  that  had  Suiskeys
passed,  in  the  execution  of  a  just  zeale  to  the  Imperiall  sPeecfl-
Family  and  his  Countrey,  and  in  hatred  of  a  cruell  Tyrant :
that  Ivan  Vasilowich,  how  ever  injuriously  taxed  by  some,
had  left  Kingdomes  annexed  to  his  Inheritance  as  Monu-
ments  of  his  great  spirit ;  by  whom  he  had  beene  sent  to
Stephen  King  of  Poland  to  treate  of  peace,  and  ever  since
had  so  carried  himselfe  in  the  State,  that  none  could  justly
blame  him  :  that  John  being  dead,  Theodore  succeeded,
but  another  ruled,  who  murthered  the  yonger  brother,  and
as  was  thought,  after  that  poysoned  the  other ;  so  attayn-
ing  the  Empire,  which  how  miserable  was  it  all  his  time?
that  Demetrius  therefore  (whosoever  he  was)  found
friends,  himselfe  amongst  others,  but  when  their  Religion  v
was  endangered,  Forreiners  advanced,  Lawes  violated,
Exotike  fashions  brought  in,  liberties  suppressed,  he  with-
stood with  the  peril  of  his  life  ;  which  it  grieved  him  to
have  enjoyed,  as  a  Theeves  benefit,  by  his  grant  which  had
no  right  to  take  it :  yet  seeing  their  forwardnesse  in  a
cause  so  just  (would  God  it  had  not  beene  so  bloudy)
more  regarding  his  Countreyes  safety  then  rumours  and
reports,  hee  had  beene  their  Captayne  to  doe  that  which
God  the  disposer  of  Kingdomes  by  the  successe  had
approoved,  so  that  now  they  were  freed  from  a  cruel
Tyrant,  nor  had  they  any  Sorcerer  or  Impostor  to  mock
them  :  that  it  remayned  now,  seeing  the  Imperiall  Family
was  extinct,  they  should  now  seeke  one  of  noblest  bloud,
of  wisest  experience,  of  most  religious  zeale,  who  might
esteeme  his  peoples  hearts  his  strongest  Forts,  such  an  one
as  either  is,  or  is  thought  to  bee  the  best  man  to  become

179

A.D.

1605.

He  is  chosen
Emperour.

[III.iv.764-

The  Devi//  is
often  slan-
dered: and  by
ill  wilier s,  bad
is  made  worse.
And  so
perhaps  by
Suiskeys  fac-
tion was  this
Demetrius.

The  former
part  of  this
intelligence  I
found  in  Mas-
ter Hackluyts
Papers;  the
latter  by  con-
ference,  &c.
Son  of  Gregory
Peupoly. See
Suiskeys  Letter
following.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

their  Prince.  Thus  was  himselfe  chosen  Emperour  the
thirteenth  of  the  Kalends  of  June.  A  writing  was  pub-
lished to  Justine  the  killing  of  Demetrius,  a  runnagate
Fryer  called  Grishka,  or  Gregorie  Strepy,  professed  in  the
Monasterie  in  the  Castle  (which  therefore  hee  would  never
enter  lest  hee  should  bee  knowne)  with  other  aspersions
of  Heresie,  Sorcerie,  affectation  of  inducing  Popery  (the
Popes  Letters  also  challenging  his  promise  produced)  to
give  the  Jesuites  Temples,  Colledges,  and  other  neces-
saries ;  with  other  over-tures  to  the  Palatine  Sandomersko,
for  Smolensko,  and  Novogrod ;  his  bringing  in  Poles  in
Russian  Roomes,  his  luxurie,  riot^  pompe,  reserving  Boris
his  Daughter  in  a  Nunnerie  with  intent  of  incestuous  lust,
having  Murthered  her  Mother  and  Brother ;  making  a
silver  Throne  with  sixe  Lions  on  each  side,  and  other
pride ;  abusing  Nunneries  to  lust  and  lasciviousnesse,  &c.
But  wee  shall  give  you  hereof  more  authenticke  testi-
monie  then  this  of  Thuanus  in  Suiskeys  Imperiall  Letter
to  His  Majestic  Meanewhile  touching  this  Demetrius
we  will  produce  a  few  English  Testimonies  extracted  out
of  their  Letters  and  Relations  :  wherein  if  some  circum-
stantial discrepance  appeare  (in  things  done  both  so  farre
and  so  foule  in  tumultuous  furie,  where  men  had  rather
hide  themselves  then  become  witnesses,  lest  whiles  they
would  bee  Spectators,  they  should  bee  forced  to  bee  Actors,
and  have  their  parts  acted  in  that  bloudie  Tragedy)  it  is  no
marvell.  I  produce  all  Witnesses  I  can,  in  a  cause  of  so
remarkeable  consequence,  and  choose  rather  to  bee  prolixe
then  negligent,  that  the  Reader  out  of  so  much  evidence
may  better  weigh  and  examine  the  truth.

THe  late  Emperour  of  Russia  called  by  the  name  of
Demetry  Evanowich,  is  now  credibly  said  (as  some
of  them  say)  to  have  beene  the  Sonne  of  a  Russe  Gentle-
man, named  Gregorie  Peupoloy,  and  that  in  his  younger
yeeres  he  was  shorne  a  Frier  into  a  Monasterie :  from
whence  hee  afterwards  privily  got  away,  travelled  into
Germanie  and  other  Countreyes,  but  had  his  most  abiding

180

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1605.

in  Poland,  in  which  time  he  attayned  to  good  perfection
in  Armes  and  Military  knowledge  ;  with  other  abilities  of  Occasion  of
surnciencie  ;  Afterwards  finding  a  conceit  taken  by  the  ambltlon-
Russes  of  a  secret  conveying  away  of  Demetry  Evanowich,
brother  and  heire  to  Pheodore  Evanowich  Emperour  ;  and
that  some  other  should  be  made  away  in  his  steed  :  And
finding  also  the  generall  distaste  of  the  Government  of  Boris  ill
Boris  then  Emperour,  who  after  a  faire  beginning,  did  in  government.
his  latter  yeeres  uphold  himselfe,  and  his  house  with
oppression  and  crueltie  :  And  having  also  many  circum-
stances and  oportunities  of  time  and  age,  and  such  other
likelihoods,  to  advantage  and  second  his  pretence,  began
first  to  broach  his  Title  (as  before)  and  by  degrees  found
such  a  generall  acceptation  of  all  sorts  of  people,  that  it
so  daunted  Boris,  that  (as  it  was  then  rumoured  about)
hee,  first,  and  afterwards  his  Wife,  and  his  Sonne  succeed-
ing him,  made  themselves  away  by  Poyson.  Though
now  it  goeth  for  certayne,  that  the  poysoning  of  them  was
procured  by  the  Pretender,  to  make  the  easier  way  to  the
[Empire,  which  thereby  he  obtayned,  entring  and  con-  Demetrius
tinuing  the  same  with  all  the  State,  and  greatnesse  that  EmPerour-
such  a  place  required  :  Untill  at  length  the  Russes  moved
rather  by  other  certainties,  then  by  any  thing  discovered
by  himselfe,  the  sixt  day  after  his  marriage  (which  was  kept
with  very  great  pompe  and  solemnitie)  being  the  seven-
teenth of  May  last  past,  taking  a  time  when  the  Poles
stood  least  on  Guard  ;  came  to  the  Court  with  one  con-
sent of  Nobilitie  and  Commons  about  three  of  the  clocke
in  the  morning,  and  mastring  the  Guards,  drew  the
Emperour  out  of  his  bed  from  the  Empresse,  and  charging
him  that  hee  was  not  the  true  Demetry  Evanowich,  but  a
False  Pretender,  he  confessed  the  Deceit,  and  was  forthwith
pewed  in  pieces  by  the  multitude  :  Peter  Basman  resisting  He  is  slaine.
was  likewise  slaine  ;  and  both  brought  into  the  Market
ace,  where  their  bodies  lay  for  a  time  to  bee  viewed  of
jry  man.  The  old  Queene  denied  him  to  bee  her
Sonne,  excusing  her  former  acknowledgement  to  have
proceeded  from  feare  and  the  generall  acceptance  which  he

181

>1;

ve]

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605.

found amongst the people. As many Poles as made

resistance, were slaine to the number of seventeene

hundred. The  new  Empresse, her  Father,  his  brother

with  the  other  Poles  were  committed  to  safe  keeping,  to

the  number  of  eight  or  nine  thousand.

And then proceeding to a new  Election they  chose

Suiskey  Emperour  Vassiloe  Evanowich Shoskey, who not  long

Emperour before  was  at  the  Blocke to  have  beene  beheaded,  for

reporting  that  hee  had  seene  the  true  Demetry  Evanowich

after  he  was  dead,  and  did  helpe  to  burie  him. But  the

Emperour  did  recall  him,  and  afterwards  advanced  him  to

the  chiefest  place  of  dignitie  about  his  person. He  is

*This  might the  next  of  bloud  *  living,  descended  of  the  Race  of  the

be  rumoured: old  Emperour  Ivan  Vasilowich,  of  the  age  of  fiftie  yeeres

Others  say  hee  or  thereabouts,  never  married,  but  kept  under  during  Boris
was  not  of  that •  -r,.  c  • 1  j  *  £.  r

butofven time?  a  -Pnnce  or  great  wisdome,  and  a  great  favourer  or

noble  bloud.  °ur  Nation,  as  did  specially  appeare  by  the  care  hee  had  to

See  sup.  in  guard the English House from  rifling, when the late

Fletcher  and  Demetry  was  brought  in  by  the  Poles.

uanus.  ^e  jate  pretenc|er  was  0f  stature  low,  but  well  set,

Demetrius  his  . . r  1 1 r  1  1  •

person  hard  favoured  and  or  no  presence ; howsoever  otherwise

described.  of  a  Princely  disposition,  executing  Justice  without
Some  say  that  partialities  ;  And  not  remitting  the  insolencie  even  of  the
he  was  not  like  p0}es  .  we[\  seene  m  martiall  practises,  and  trayning  his
Demetrius  and  XT  «  .,.  .  1 t-\ • v  r  111

that  he  seemed  Nobilitie  to  the  Discipline  or  warre,  to  make  them  the

a  dozen  yeeres  readier  against  the  Tartar,  not  given  either  to  women  or

elder:  but  drinke,  but  very  liberall  and  bountifull,  which  occasioned

perhaps  they  some  grievous  Exactions  to  maintayne  the  same.  And  to
mistake  this  1  °i  • i.i_  r  i_ 1  i_  •

for  an  other  conclude,  a  man  in  the  opinion  or  such  as  knew  him,  not

after  Preten-  unworthy  of  a  better  gotten,  and  longer  continued  Empire,
der,  calling  which  hee  lost  chiefly  through  the  greatnesse  of  his  minde,
himselfe  supposing  that  none  of  his  Subjects  durst  attempt  any

tDemtri  s  su  matter  against  his  person,  when  as  in  the  meane  time
&c.9  as  after  tne  practice  went  on  with  such  a  generall  Conjuration,
shall  appeare,  that  the  Russes  were  summoned  by  the  ringing  of  a  Bell
a  deformed  to  bee  readie  to  enter  the  Court.  And  to  shake  off  that
rin  '  6  1  Government  which  would  have  made  them  a  more  noble
Nation  then  formerly  they  beene.

182

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA

%

A.D.

1605.

IT  is  reported  by  some  of  Ours,  that  hee  the  rather  was
inclinable  to  our  Nation  in  the  respect  he  bare  to  his
Majestie,  having  read  that  his  worthy  Worke  dedicated
to  Prince  Henrie.  Hee  is  said  also  to  have  beene  a
resolute  man  of  his  hands,  to  have  delighted  in  fighting
with  the  Beare  ;  active  and  strong.  I  have  likewise  heard
that  hee  gave  the  command  of  his  Guard  consisting  of
strangers  to  Captayne  Gilbert  a  Scot ;  to  have  made  one
Buchenskoy  (a  Learned  and  Religious  Protestant)  his
Secretarie  ;  and  otherwise  to  have  beene  so  alienated  from
Russian  manners,  and  so  well  affected  to  Strangers,  that
They  conspired  as  aforesaid.  The  people  are  said  to  have
entred  the  Castle  (which  was  a  quadrant,  having  a  high
bricke  wall  of  seven  stories,  and  another  of  stone,  and  a
Market  place)  with  stones  in  their  pockets  (which  are  rare
thereabouts)  and  some  with  weapons.

Some  report  from  Captayne  Gilberts  Relation,  that  lying
on  his  bed  not  long  before  his  death  (as  hee  thought,
awake)  an  aged  man  came  to  him,  which  sight  caused  him
to  arise  and  come  to  Captayne  Gilbert,  and  his  guard  that
watched,  but  none  of  them  had  seene  any  thing.  Here-
upon he  returned  to  his  Bed,  but  within  an  houre  after  he
againe  troubled  with  like  apparition  called,  and  sent  for
Buchinskie  :  telling  him  that  he  had  now  twice  seene  an
aged  man,  who  at  the  second  comming  told  him,  that
though  for  his  owne  person  he  was  a  good  Prince,  yet  the
injustice  and  oppressions  of  his  inferiour  Ministers  must
bee  punished,  and  his  Empire  should  bee  taken  from  him.
In  this  perplexitie  his  Secretarie  gave  him  good  and  holy
counsell,  saying  till  true  Religion  were  there  planted,  his
Officers  would  bee  lewd,  the  people  oppressed,  and  God
Almightie  offended,  who  perhaps  by  that  Dreame  or
Vision  had  admonished  him  of  his  dutie.  The  Emperour
seemed  much  moved,  and  to  intend  that  good  which
that  Countrey  was  not  so  happy  to  receive.  For  a  few
dayes  after  (as  that  Relation  averreth)  his  Russe  Secretarie
came  to  him  with  a  Sword,  at  which  the  Emperour  jested,

183

Captayne

Gilbert.

Buchenskoy.

Stones  rare
about  Mosco.

Captaine
Gilberts  report
of  a  Vision.

y

V

A.D.

1605.

Another
manner  of
his  death
reported.

Co/uga.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  hee  suddenly  after  sawcie  speeches  assaulted  him,  with
many  other  Grandes  of  that  Conspiracie,  and  like  another
Caesar  slue  him,  crying  Libertie,  before  his  guards  could
apprehend  the  danger ;  of  which  some  were  slaine,  but
the  most  with  Gilbert  their  Captayne,  got  to  a  place  called
Coluga,  which  with  the  helpe  of  some  Russes  they  forti-
fied and  held  for  their  defence.  Buchinskie  the  Secretarie
was  taken  and  imprisoned,  the  strangers  murthered,  the
English  except,  who  have  in  all  changes  been  well  beloved
of  the  Russians ;  as  indeed  they  deserve,  having  alway
done  good  service  to  the  Emperours.  And  their  interest
saved  the  life  of  that  worthy  man  Buchinskey,  which  they
requited  with  much  observance  to  the  succeeding  Em-
perour  Suiskey,  who  comes  next  to  be  spoken  of ;  and  first
you  shall  have  his  Letter  to  our  Gracious  Sovereigne.

/  find  him
called  Shoskey,
Suiskey,
Ziska,  &c.
the  just  trans-
lation and
pronunciation
being  hard.

§.  nil.

Suiskey  the  Successour  his  Letter  to  our  King,  des-
cribing the  former  Demetrius  his  Acts  and
Tragedie.

The  Copie  of  the  Translation  of  a  Letter  sent  from
the  new  Emperour  Vassily  Evanowich  Shoskey
to  the  Kings  Majestie  by  Master  John  Mericke.

The  love  and  mercie  of  God  that  guideth  us  in  the
wayes  of  peace,  we  glorifie  with  the  Trinitie.

Rom  the  great  Lord  Emperour  and  great  Duke
Vassily  Evanowich  of  all  Russia,  sole  Commander
of  Voladomer,  Mosko,  Novogrod,  King  of  Cazan

and  Astracan,  of  Syberia,  Lord  of  Vobsko,  and  great  Duke
of  Smolensko,  Twerskoy,  Yavharskoy,  Pearmskoy,  Vats-
koy,  Bollharskoy,  and  of  other :  Lord  and  great  Duke  of
Novogroda  of  the  Low  Countrey  of  Cherneego,
Rezanskoy,  Polotskoy,  Rostovskoy,  Yereslaveskoy,  Bealo-
zerskoy,  Leeflanskoy,  Owdorskoy,  Obdorskoy,  Condin-
skoy,  and  Commander  of  all  the  North  parts  :  also  Lord

184

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d

1606.
I  of  the  Land  of  Eeverskoy,  Cartalinskoy,  and  over  the
'Empire  of  the  Gorgians  of  the  Land  of  Cabardinskoy,
jland  Eeharskoy  Land,  likewise  of  many  other  Lordships
IjLord  and  Commander.

To  our  beloved  Brother  James  King  of  England,  Scot-
iland,  France,  and  Ireland,  Wee  give  to  understand  that
ISigismund  King  of  Poland,  and  great  Duke  of  Letto,  in
Anno  7109.  did  send  unto  the  late  Emperour  Boris,  his
jEmbassadour  named  Lewis  Sapeago,  being  Chancelor  of
ijthe  great  Dukedome  of  Poland,  requesting  the  said
(Emperour  Boris,  that  the  former  league  and  peace
made  and  concluded  upon  by  the  great  Lord  Em-
iiperour  and  great  Duke  Theodore  Evanowich  of  all
|Russia,  and  him  Sigismond  King  of  Poland,  might  be  IIII.iv.766.]
ilstedfastly  holden  and  continued  till  the  time  of  that  league
"were  expired.  As  also  that  the  Emperour  Boris  would
inlarge  the  said  league  for  thirtie  yeeres  more,  whereupon  League  with
the  Emperour  Boris  yeelded  thus  farre  unto  the  request  the  Pole.
flof  the  King  of  Poland,  that  hee  would  continue  the  old
illeague  till  the  full  time  were  expired,  and  assent  to  a  new
[league  for  twentie  yeeres  more ;  and  to  that  effect  he
tooke  an  Oath,  to  hold  and  keepe  all  the  contents  faith-
fully, mentioned  in  the  said  Writing,  touching  the  same
Ijleague  :  and  instead  of  the  King  of  Poland,  his  Embas-
isadour  Lewis  Sapeagoe  was  sworne  in  the  presence  of  the
jEmperour  Boris.  And  after  the  Polish  Embassadour  was
|departed  from  the  Mosko,  the  Emperour  Boris  sent  unto
ISigismund  King  of  Poland  his  Embassadour,  being  one
Ibf  the  Privie  Councell,  called  Michailo  Zleabowich
(Sallteecove,  with  some  others  to  end  and  finish  the  afore-
said league,  to  the  which  league  the  King  of  Poland
Hhimselfe  was  sworne  in  the  presence  of  the  Emperour's
[Embassadour  to  hold  and  keepe  the  said  league  faithfully,  He  taxeth  the
jiccording  to  the  tenour  of  their  Writing.  King  of

But  not  long  after  Sigismund  King  of  Poland,  with  one  Poland.  ^
Pavarade,  entred  into  such  a  practise,  as  he  therein  falsified  Alle&atl0ns
pis  Oath,  and  made  way  to  the  shedding  of  much  Christian  ^"ending
ploud  : First,  by  retayning  and  upholding  one  Gryshca  Demetrius.

185

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1606.

Otreapyove,  a  Runnagate,  a  Conjurer,  and  one  that  left
his  profession  being  a  Monke,  and  ran  away  out  of  Russia
into  Poland ;  and  being  come  thither,  tooke  upon  him
to  be  the  Son  of  the  great  Emperour  Evan  Vassilawich
of  famous  memorie,  and  by  name  Demetry  Evanowich :
when  as  it  was  well  knowne  in  our  Kingdome,  that
before  he  was  shorne  a  Monke,  he  was  commonly
called  Yowshco,  Son  to  one  Bowghdan  Otreapyove,
dwelling  at  a  place  called  Galitts :  and  when  hee  had
committed much villanie, to save his life he shoare

A  Frier.  himselfe  a  Frier,  and  so  runne  from  one  Monasterie
to  another ;  and  lastly,  came  into  a  Monasterie  called
Chowdo, where hee was made one of the Clearkes ;

A  Clearkc.  being  so  placed  there  by  the  Patriarke  of  Mosko  him-
selfe :  But  he  did  not  leave  off  his  former  life ;  for  he
continued  still  in  his  most  Devillish  actions,  as  he  did
before  he  was  shorne,  committing  villany,  forsaking  God

Magician.  and  falling  to  the  studie  of  the  Blacke  Arte,  and  to  many
such  like  evils  he  was  inclined.  Also  there  was  found
by  him  a  Writing  which  shewed  how  he  was  falne  from
God,  and  the  same  was  made  well  knowne  to  the  holy
Patriarch  of  Mosko,  and  of  all  Russia,  and  to  the  Metro-
politanes,  Archbishops,  and  Bishops,  and  to  all  the  holy
Cleargie  :  whereupon  the  said  Rulers  of  our  true  Christian

Greeke  Faith,  which  is  from  the  Grecian  Law,  for  these  his  most

Church.  ungodly  works,  consulted  to  send  him  to  perpetuall  Prison,

there  to  end  his  life.  Whereupon  this  notorious  Instru-
ment of  Satan,  perceiving  this  his  overthrow,  and  that  his
vile  practises  were  discovered,  ran  away  out  of  the  King-

F light  to  Letto.  dome  of  Mosko,  beyond  the  borders,  and  into  Letto  to  a
place  called  Keeyeve :  thus  according  to  the  Devils
instructing  of  him,  as  one  forsaken  of  God,  he  made  this
his  doing  manifestly  known  to  all  people,  leaving  off  his
Monks  Habit,  and  withall  by  the  counsell  and  advice  of
our  Enemie  the  Polish  King,  and  one  of  his  Palatines

m  George.  named  Sandamersko  Yourya,"1  with  Duke  Constantine,
and  Duke  Veshnevetskoy  and  his  Brethren  with  other
Polish  Lords  that  were  of  his  Councell,  began  to  call  him

186

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA

A.D.

l6o6.

the  Son  of  the  great  Lord,  Emperour  and  great  Duke
Evan  Vassilywich,  by  name  Prince  Demetry  of  Owglitts.

As  also  by  his  villanous  treacherie  and  the  Devills  per-
swading  of  him,  he  made  much  trouble  in  our  Land,  by
sending  abroad  many  of  his  intising  and  provoking
Letters,  to  divers  places  upon  the  borders  of  our
Countrey :  that  is,  to  a  place  called  Done,  and  to  the
Yolgoe,  to  our  Cossacks  and  Souldiers,  naming  himselfe  to
be  the  Prince  Demetry  of  Owglitts.  Moreover,  there
came  to  our  Kingdome  of  Mosko  many  Polish  Spies,
which  brought  and  dispersed  Libels  both  in  Citie  and
Townes,  and  in  the  high-wayes,  practising  to  rayse  dis-
sention  in  the  Kingdome  of  Mosko.  Also  it  is  well
knowne,  not  only  to  them  in  the  Empire  of  Mosko,  but
likewise  in  other  Kingdomes,  that  the  great  Lord
Emperour,  and  great  Duke  Evan  Vassilywich  of  famous
memory,  had  a  Sonne  called  by  the  name  of  Prince
Demetry,  and  after  his  Fathers  decease,  there  was  given
unto  him  and  his  Mother  the  Citie  of  Owglitts.  But  in
the  yeere  7095.  being  in  the  Reigne  of  the  great  Lord,
Emperour  and  great  Duke  Theodore  Evanowich  of  all
Russia,  this  foresaid  Demetry  was  murthered  by  the  order
and  appointment  of  Boris  Godenove.  And  at  his  Funerall
was  his  Mother  now  called  the  Empresse  Martha,  with
her  owne  Brethren  by  name  Michaila  and  Greegory  the
Sonnes  of  Theodore  Nahovo.  Likewise  to  his  burying,
there  was  sent  from  the  Mosko  Metropolitanes,  and
Archimandreets,  and  Abbots :  and  the  great  Lord
Emperour,  and  great  Duke  Theodore  Evanowich  sent
to  his  Funerall  many  Nobles  and  Courtiers  of  the  Land  Buriall.
which  saw  him  buried  in  the  chiefest  and  principall  Church
of  Owglitts.  Moreover,  Martha  the  Dutches  and
Empresse  his  Mother  is  yet  living,  and  many  of  her
Brothers  and  Unckles,  which  doe  at  this  present  time
serve  us  the  great  Lord  Emperour,  and  great  Duke  Vassily
Evanowich,  of  all  Russia  sole  Commander  :  Likewise  in
these  last  yeeres  past,  as  in  Anno  71 1 1.  and  in  Anno  71 12.
and  71 13.  concerning  that  foresaid  Tray  tour  and  Here-

187

Demetry  of
Owglits.
His  murther.

y

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

1606.

ticke,  the  forsaken  of  God  Gryshca  Otreapyove,  many  of
our  Gentlemen,  Captaynes  and  others  our  Officers  did
many  times  write  from  the  North  parts  of  the  borders  of
our  Kingdome  into  Poland  and  Letto,  and  to  others  their
inferiour  Cities,  to  the  Rulers  and  Governours  of  the
same ;  as  also  our  spirituall  people :  the  Patriarke,  the
Metropolitans,  Archbishops,  and  Bishops  wrote  unto  the

Letters  to spirituall  people  of  Poland,  declaring  unto  them  what  that

Poland.  Heretick  and  Traytor  was,  likewise  from  whence  he  came

and  what  manner  of  person  he  was ;  as  also  of  his
demeanour,  and  likewise  of  the  occasion  why  hee  runne
away  to  them  out  of  the  Land,  as  also  the  manner  of  the
making  away  of  the  Prince  Demetry,  and  withall
requested  the  Rulers  and  Spirituall  people  of  Poland,  that
they  knowing  what  Runnagate  this  was,  would  not  give
credit  unto  him,  nor  to  make  a  breach  of  the  late  league
concluded  upon.

[III.  iv.  767.]  But  the  Governours  of  the  Dukedome  of  Poland  and
Letto,  as  also  the  spirituall  men,  according  to  the  King  of
Poland  his  commandment,  gave  no  credit  unto  our  writ-
ings, but  began,  more  then  before  to  intice  and  perswade
men  to  uphold  the  Traitor,  and  to  aide  him.  Moreover,
to  make  trouble  and  dissention  in  our  Land,  they  tooke
this  forsaken  of  God,  Greeshca  unto  them,  and  cald  him
by  the  name  of  Prince  Demetry  of  Owglits :  likewise  the
King  gave  unto  him  a  chaine  of  gold,  with  many  thousand

Polish  aides,  peeces  of  Polish  gold,  to  the  defraying  of  his  charges ;  as
also  sent  in  armes  to  our  borders  with  one  of  his  Lords,
the  Palatine  Sendamersko,  and  another  of  his  chiefest
Lords,  with  many  troopes  of  Poles.  But  when  the
Emperour  Boris  understood  how  that  this  Gryshca
Otreapyove  was  called,  by  the  name  of  Prince  Demetry
Evanowich  of  Owglits,  and  withall,  that  they  did  aide  and
helpe  him  against  the  Kingdome  of  Russia :  he  caused  his
Counsell  to  send  a  messenger,  as  from  themselves,  to  the
Polish  Lord  Panameerada,  which  Messenger  was  named

Smeemoy  sent.  Smeernay  Otreapyove,  being  Unckle  to  the  said  Gryshca
Otreopyove  being  the  Son  of  one  Jamateen  Otrepayov,

188

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1606.

onely  to  declare  unto  them  what  this  Gryshca  was ;  but
that  Polish  Lord  Panameerada  would  not  suffer  him,  and
his  Unckle  to  be  brought  face  to  face.  But  he  made
answer  to  the  said  Messenger  Smeernay,  that  they  did  not
aide  him,  neither  did  they  stand  for  him  in  any  sort.

So  after  he  had  sent  away  the  Messenger  Smeernay,  the
King  of  Poland,  and  the  Lord  Panameerada  did  aide
Gryshca  Otreapyove  with  men  and  treasure  more  liberally
then  before,  purposing  to  make  great  strife  and  trouble,
and  to  shed  much  bloud  in  the  Kingdome  of  Mosco.
Also  at  the  same  time  Sigismund,  King  of  Poland,
requested  the  aide  of  one  of  the  Princes  of  Crim  in  Crim  Tartar.
Tartaria,  named  Cazateera ;  and  to  that  end  he  should
aide  Gryshca  with  his  forces,  against  the  Kingdome  of
Mosko  ;  and  he  in  consideration,  did  promise  to  give  unto
the  foresaid  Crim,  Prince,  what  hee  would  demand.  Then
the  Emperour  Boris  understanding  what  practises  were  in
hand,  being  altogether  contrary  to  the  league ;  thereupon
purposely  he  sent  to  Sigismund  King  of  Poland,  another
speciall  Messenger,  one  named  Posnicke  Agareove ;  like-
wise at  the  same  time,  the  holy  Patriarke  of  Mosco,  and
all  Russia,  with  the  Metropolitans,  Archbishops,  and
Bishops,  with  all  the  rest  of  the  holy  Clergie,  sent  their
Messengers  with  Letters  to  the  State  of  Poland,  and  so  Another
the  great  Dukedome  of  Letto,  to  the  Archbishops,  and  Messenger.
Bishops,  and  to  all  the  Spiritualtie.  Moreover,  in  the
said  Letters,  the  Emperour  Boris  with  the  Patriarke,  and
all  the  holy  assembly,  wrote  unto  the  Lord  Panameerada
concerning  Gryshca,  making  it  knowne  unto  them  what
he  was,  and  wherefore  he  ranne  away  into  Poland,  and
likewise  that  the  Sonne  of  the  great  Lord  Emperour,  and
great  Duke  Evan  Vasiliwich,  the  Prince  Demetry  was
dead  :  And  to  that  intent,  that  the  King  Sigismund  should
not  give  credit  to  the  said  Gryshca,  and  that  they  should
not  spill  Christian  bloud,  nor  violate  the  league.

Hereupon  Sigismund  King  of  Poland  writ  unto  the
Emperour  Boris,  and  further,  by  word  of  mouth,  both  he
and  Panameerada  delivered  to  the  said  messenger  in  his

189

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1606.

message,  that  hee  did  hold  and  keepe  their  League,  and
moreover,  did  not  violate  or  breake  his  oath  no  manner  of
way :  and  likewise  did  write,  that  he  did  not  ayde  that
foresaid  Gryshca,  neither  did  give  credit  unto  him  :  withall
denying  that  he  was  with  him  in  his  Kingdome :  and
further  he  did  write,  that  if  there  were  any  out  of  Poland
or  Letto  that  did  aide  or  assist  him,  that  then  they  should
be  executed.  But  after  he  had  dispatched  away  the
messenger  of  Boris,  not  regarding  his  oath,  still  more  and
more  did  aide  and  helpe  this  Gryshca  Otreapyove.  Also
the  Palatine  Sendamersko,  and  Myhala  Ratanisko  came
into  the  Kingdome  of  Mosco,  to  a  place  called  the  Land
of  Seeversko,  putting  the  people  of  that  Land  in  feare,
and  perswading  them  there,  this  Gryshca  was  the  true
Prince,  and  that  the  King  of  Poland  and  Panameerada,
had  found  out  the  certaintie  thereof :  and  therefore  they
will  have  Poland  and  Letto  stand  for  him.  Also  from  out
of  many  other  Kingdomes  they  goe  to  aide  and  assist
him :  likewise  other  inferiour  Kingdomes  are  willing  to
stand  for  him :  moreover,  that  Gryshca  in  the  foresaid
Land  of  Seeversko,  and  in  other  places  of  our  Borders,
by  the  meanes  of  his  divellish  practises  and  conjurations
did  intise  and  tempt  him  to  fall  to  him  :  likewise  the  people
of  those  foresaid  places  of  the  Land  of  Seeversko,  and  on
the  Borders,  being  simple  people,  and  resorting  seldome  to
the  Citie  of  Mosco,  and  being  intised  by  Gryshca,  and  the
rest  of  the  Governours,  could  not  withstand,  but  yeelded
them  unto  them.  Whereupon  against  those  Polonians
and  Lettoes,  and  other  enemies  that  were  already  entred
the  Kingdome  of  Mosco,  the  Emperour  sent  his  Nobles
with  a  great  Armie :  but  by  the  appointment  of  God,  the
Emperour  Boris  deceased ;  upon  whose  death,  the  chiefest
of  the  Nobles  departed  the  Campe.  And  after  their
departure,  the  Armie  hearing  of  the  death  of  the
Emperour,  and  being  drawne  thereto  by  feare  and  other-
wise, at  last  yeelded  themselves  over  unto  Gryshca,  as  the
Borderers  had  done  before.

Also  the  foresaid  Gryshca,  by  the  helpe  of  the  Divell,

190

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1606.

ipjid  King  Sigismund,  and  Panameerada,  came  into  the
i'Citie  and  Kingdome  of  Mosco,  to  the  great  disquietnesse
land  trouble  of  the  whole  Land ;  by  whom  the  Religion  was
^corrupted,  and  by  him  were  many  true  Christians  put  to
j;exile,  for  denying  his  right  and  interest  to  the  Kingdome
(of  Mosco.  And  shortly  after  he  was  setled  in  the  King-
dome,  and  he  tooke  to  wife  the  daughter  of  one  Sanda-
mersko,  as  was  appointed  by  the  King  of  Poland  and
['Panameerada  :  the  which  wife  of  his  was  in  Mosco  with
her  Father  and  Brother  Senatskoy,  and  with  one  Vesh-
nevetskoy,  with  their  Polish  and  Letto  Lords,  and  other
ipeople,  by  whom  Religion  was  prophaned  :  as  also  we  were  Mutation  of
[forced  and  driven  to  receive  many  wrongs  and  injuries,  Religion.
jwhich  the  people  of  the  Kingdome  of  Mosco  could  not
jindure.  Also,  at  last  this  Greeshca,  by  the  counsell  of
the  Palatine  Sandamersko  his  Father  in  Law,  and  by  the
counsell  of  Veshnevetskoy,  and  other  Polish  and  Letto
ipeople,  which  he  brought  in  with  him,  was  purposed,  by  a  [III. iv.  768.]
.secret  politicke  devise  to  have  put  to  death  the  Metro-
politans, Archbishops,  and  Bishops,  and  all  the  holy  and
spirituall  assembly,  with  the  Nobles,  and  Courtiers,  and
divers  others  which  were  of  the  better  people,  and  so  to
ihave  sent  others  into  Poland  and  Letto  ;  withall  to  have
changed  the  Religion,  and  to  have  established  the  Romish  Romish
Religion,  for  which  purpose  he  brought  with  him  many  Religion  and
Jesuites.  Jesuites'

The  which  we  the  great  Lord  and  great  Duke  Vasily
Evanowich,  of  all  Russia,  with  the  Metropolitans,  Arch-
bishops, and  Bishops,  and  with  all  the  holy  spirituall
assembly,  and  with  the  Nobles,  Courtiers,  and  Commons
of  the  Kingdome  of  Mosco,  well  considering,  and  per-
ceiving what  an  alteration  this  would  be  to  our  Christian
faith,  with  the  overthrow  and  utter  undoing  to  our  whole
Kingdome  :  we  then  earnestly  bewail'd  and  lamented,  and
withall  hartily  prayed  to  the  almightie  Trinitie  our  onely
Lord  God,  that  liveth  and  defendeth  mankinde,  that  it
would  please  him  to  deliver  us,  and  the  Common-wealth
[from  those  vile,  cruell,  divellish  attempts,  and  devises  of

191

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1606.

theirs.  Thus  desiring  the  mercy  of  God,  we  all  returned
and  stood  stedfast  to  our  former  unspotted  and  true  Chris-
tian faith,  against  that  usurper  and  counterfeit  Gryshca
and  his  Counsell,  with  a  resolution  to  stand  in  the  same
manfully,  and  even  to  the  death,  hoping  and  longing  for
the  time  that  all  people,  and  warlik  men  and  Souldiors
and  many  others  of  the  Empire  of  Mosco  might  come  to
gather  themselves  together,  &  that  they  might  likewise
perceive  and  discern  this  usurping  Heretick,  and  his
divellish  courses,  by  which  he  did  decline  from  the  true
Large  Empire  Christian  faith  of  our  Religion.  The  largenesse  of  the
of  Russia.  Kingdome  of  Mosco  cannot  be  unknowne  unto  you  our
loving  Brother,  how  farre  it  extendeth  it  selfe  both  to  the
South,  and  to  the  West,  as  also  to  other  places,  that  in
halfe  a  yeares  space  they  could  not  gather  themselves
together.  But  when  as  the  power  and  warlike  Souldiours,  \
and  all  other  people  were  gathered  together,  then  through  if
the  mercie  and  favour  of  God,  this  enemy  of  Gods  Com-
monwealth was  discovered  to  all  what  he  was.  And  the
Empresse  Martha,  being  Mother  of  the  true  Prince
Demetry  Evonowich,  did  certifie  unto  us  before  the
Metropolitans,  Archbishoppes,  and  Bishoppes,  and  before
all  the  holy  assembly,  as  also  to  the  Nobles  and  Courtiers,
and  other  Officers,  and  men  of  worth  within  our  Empire,
did  shee  deliver,  that  her  Sonne  the  Prince  Demetri  was
murthered  beyond  reason,  at  a  place  called  Owglits,  by
appointment  of  Boris  Godenove,  and  that  he  dyed  in  her
armes ;  yet  did  this  Gryshca  falsely  call  himselfe  by  the
name  of  him  that  was  murthered.

Also  we  found  in  the  custody  of  this  Gryshca,  the  Copie
of  a  writing,  which  was  the  contract  and  agreement  that
he  made  betwixt  him  and  the  Palatine,  before  his  comming
See  before.  out  of  Poland ;  in  which  was  written,  that  as  soone  as  he
did  come  to  the  Kingdome  of  Mosco,  that  then  he  would
take  to  wife  the  daughter  of  the  Palatine,  and  would  give
her  two  Provinces,  called  great  No vogrod  and  Vobsko,with
counsell,  Courtiers,  Gentlemen,  and  Priests,  fitting  to  a
Congregation,  with  inferior  Castles  and  Lands,  freely  in

192

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1606.

hose  foresaid,  to  build  and  set  up  Monasteries,  and  also

d  set  up  the  Romish  Religion  ;  And  when  he  came  to  the

lingdome  of  Mosco,  that  then  he  should  give  unto  the

Watine  tenne  thousand  pieces  of  Polish  Gold,  which  is

y  our  Russia  account,  three  hundred  thousand  Markes  :

nd  to  his  wife,  in  consideration  of  her  long  Journey,  he

romised  to  give  cloth  of  Gold,  and  cloth  of  Silver,  and

f  all  the  best  things  that  was  in  the  Treasurie  of  the

ijngdome of Mosco. Likewise, that hee the said

rryshca  at  his  comming  to  Mosco,  would  take  order  to

ring  these  things  to  passe  with  all  diligence,  whereby  he

light  draw  all  the  Dominion  of  Mosco  from  our  true

Grecian Religion, and so to have turned us into the

.omish  Religion,  and  to  have  destroyed  the  holy  Church

(ver  all  the  Empire  of  Mosco,  and  so  to  have  built  up  the

eligion  of  the  Church  of  Rome :  and  for  the  performing

F  all  this,  the  said  Gryshca  was  sworne  to  the  Palentine

andamersko,  in  the  presence  of  the  Teachers  of  the  Land,

I  beforesaid ;  that  he  according  to  his  owne  handwriting,

ould  hold  all  the  said  covenants  with  all  diligence,  as

kewise  to  bring  all  the  Empire  of  Mosco  to  the  Romish

eligion. The which covenants and agreements the

'■enerall Sandamersko himselfe hath confessed to our

lajestie,  and  Nobles,  that  the  foresaid  agreements  and

nvenants  betwixt  him  and  the  foresaid  Gryshca  were  true,

ad  how  that  they  trusted  one  to  another :  moreover,  the

.alatine  did  certifie  unto  our  Nobles,  how  Gryshca  sent

um  a  Letter  under  his  owne  hand  and  Seale,  in  which  he

romised  to  give  him  Smolensko,  with  all  the  Provinces

felonging  thereto,  and  another  place  called  Seeverow,  as

iso gave him liberty to set  up Monasteries, and the

religion  of  the  Church  of  Rome. Further,  there  was

bund  by  him  Letters  which  were  sent  to  him  from  the  Popes  Letter

jope  of  Rome,  and  the  Cardinals,  and  Priests,  to  that

pectj  that  he  should  remember  and  withall  be  mindefull

t>  take  in  hand  speedily  those  matters  and  businesse  upon

ihich  he  had  given  to  Sigismund,  and  the  Cardinals  his

roth  and  vow,  the  which  was,  as  beforesaid,  to  be  himselfe

XIV  193  N

w

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1606.

of  the  Romish  Religion,  as  also  to  bring  all  the  people  of  Re
the  Kingdome  of  Russia  into  the  same  Romish  Religion,^
not  onely  them  that  of  themselves  were  willing  thereto,^
but  also  others  by  compulsion,  and  to  put  them  to  deaths
that  sought  to  contrary  the  same. And  not  onely  them  ^
of  the  Kingdome  of  Russia,  but  likewise  other  godly  M(
people  of  severall  Religion  : and  that  doe  serve  in  the  ^
Kingdome  of  Mosco,  as  the  Catholicks,  and  the  Calvinists,  ^
them  likewise  he  should  seeke  to  bring  into  the  Romish^
Religion  with  all  perswasions. Moreover,  Gryshca  him
selfe,  before  us,  and  our  Nobles,  and  Courtiers,  and  before
our  Commons,  did  acknowledge  as  much,  and  thereupon  ](
yeelded  himselfe  to  be  in  fault :  as  also  that  he  did  all  with
helpe  of  the  Divell,  having  forsaken  God.

For  which  these  his  vile  actions,  this  Gryshca,  according  anc
to  the  true  justice,  received  an  end  to  his  life,  and  was  by&
abundance  of  people  slain  in  the  Mosco,  where  he  lay  Cit

[III.  iv.  769.]  three dayes in the midst of the Citie, to the viewR,
of  all  such  like  usurpers,  and  disturbers. And  because  his

Blaine  \$ body  was  loathsome  unto  us,  we  caused  it  to  be  carried  out|M

burnt.  0f  tne  Citie,  and  there  to  be  burnt.

This  Enemie  thus  having  ended  his  life,  then  the  Kings
sonnes  of  divers  Countries,  now  dwelling  within  our  King-
dome,  with  the  Patriarke,  Metropolitanes,  Archbishops,  ft
and  Bishops,  with  the  Nobles,  Courtiers,  and  the  Com-ipr
mons,  made  entreaty  unto  us  Vasili  Evanowich,  to  raigne  Cit

Election  of and  governe  over  them  and  over  all  the  Kingdome  of  jUr

Swisky.  Mosco,  as  their  Lord,  Emperour,  and  great  Duke  of  all  the

Russia.  According  to  which  entreatie  made  unto  us  by
the  said  Kings  sons  of  divers  Countries,  as  likewise  by  oui^er
Nobles,  Courtiers,  Merchants,  and  all  the  rest  of  the
Commons  of  all  the  Kingdome  of  Mosco,  Wee  are  come
to  the  great  Kingdomes  of  Volodemar,  Mosco,  Novogrod.  wid
and  as  also  of  the  Kingdomes  of  Cazan,  Astracan,  andain
Siberia,  and  over  all  the  Provinces  of  the  Empire  of  h
Mosco :  as  also  wee  the  great  Lord  Emperour,  anc1
great  Duke  of  all  Russia,  are  crowned  with  our  Imperial
Crown : and for the said Kings sonnes of divers

194

ur

v

l!1
i

Bell

be-

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1606.

Religions,  and  our  Nobles,  Courtiers,  and  Souldiers,  and
11  manner  of  People,  doe  serve  our  Imperiall  Majesty
vith  desire  and  good  liking  voluntarily,  and  not  by
lelusions  and  conjurations,  as  the  Poles  and  Lettoes  were
switched  by  Grishca.  But  we  the  great  Lord  Emperour
ind  great  Duke  Vasili  Evanowich,  with  great  care  stayed
ind  restrayned  our  People  from  the  spoyle  of  the  Poles
jnd  the  Lettoes,  defending  them  from  death ;  and  withall
lave  commanded  to  let  goe  many  of  them  into  Poland  and
Uetto  :  but  the  chiefest  of  them  that  were  of  the  Councell,
nd  that  practised  to  bring  trouble  and  dissention  in  the
fcingdome  of  Mosco,  are  now  taken.  And  we  to  doe  an
lionour  unto  the  dead  body  of  the  true  Demetrie,  have
jupon  conference  with  our  Metropolitanes,  Archbishops,
ind  Bishops,  and  all  the  holy  Assembly,  our  Nobles  and
Courtiers,  and  all  the  Kingdome  of  Mosco)  sent  to  the
titie  of  Owglets  a  Metropolitan,  named  Filareta,  of
*.ostove  and  Yeraslave,  who  was  called  before  he  was  made
Metropolitan,  Theodor  Neekete,  which  being  one  of  the
Cobles  in  times  past,  and  with  him  the  Archbishops  of
Vstracan,  called  Feodosia,  and  our  Nobles  the  Duke  Evan
Vlichalowich  Vorotinskoy,  with  the  rest  of  his  fellowes,
iommanding  them  to  bring  up  with  them  the  body  of  the
^rince  Demetrie  Evanowich,  who  was  murthered  by  the
ppointment  of  Boris  Godonove,  and  to  bring  it  up  to  our
titie  of  Mosco  with  great  honour,  which  body  shall  be
juried  in  the  principall  Church  of  Mosco,  called  Michael
he  Archangel,  neare  to  his  father  the  great  Lord
Emperour  and  great  Duke  Evan  Vasilowich  of  famous
nemorie,  and  by  Gods  power  his  body  shall  not  be  touched
br  abused  any  manner  of  way.  Likewise  will  we,  by  the
kvour  of  God,  honour  the  Funerall  of  Demetrie  Evano-
wich with  speciall  solemnitie,  which  body  performeth  many
jures,  and  worketh  miraculously  unto  them,  that  come  to  Miracles.
pm  with  Faith  to  be  cured  of  their  diseases.

And  now  most  loving  and  deare  brother,  wee  calling
Jvell  to  minde  the  great  amitie  and  friendship  that  was
betwixt  the  great  Lord  Emperour,  and  great  Duke  Evan

i95

ii

A.D.

l6o6.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

Sir  John
Merricke.

Vasilywich,  and  his  Sonne  Theodor  Evanowich,  the
Emperour  Boris,  and  the  great  Lady  Queene  Elizabeth :
the  like  brotherly  love  doe  we  desire  to  have  with  you,
most  loving  and  deare  brother,  to  be  established  and  con-
tinued betwixt  us,  as  it  was  with  them,  during  our  lives.
Therefore  may  it  please  you,  our  loving  brother  James,
King  of  England,  after  the  hearing  of  these  great  and
strange  dangers  past,  to  rejoyce  with  us,  that  he  hath
delivered  from  such  a  vile  enemy,  and  that  he,  our
mercifull  God,  hath  divided  and  scattered  that  wicked
counsell,  and  that  he  hath  turned  their  cruelty  upon  their
owne  head,  to  their  shame  and  confusion.  And  concern-
ing your  Merchants  that  were  in  our  Kingdome,  John
Merricke  with  his  fellowes,  we  have  graced  them  with  our
Emperiall  presence ;  as  also  have  given  unto  the  said  John
New  Patent.  Merricke  and  his  fellowes,  a  new  privilege,  and  Letters  of
favour,  by  which  they  shall  come  into  our  Kingdome,  and
to  traficke  with  all  manner  of  goods  freely,  without  paying
any  Custome  whatsoever,  and  as  to  them  was  granted  in
former  time,  and  this  favour  we  have  given  them  to  mani-
fest unto  you  our  loving  Brother,  our  Brotherly  love.
And  the  reason  that  we  have  not  sent  to  you,  loving
brother,  our  Embassadour,  is,  because  we  had  not  time,  in
regard  of  many  our  Emperiall  affaires,  but  hereafter  doe
purpose  to  send,  to  visite  you  in  your  Kingdome.  Written
at  our  Emperiall  palace  and  Citie  of  Mosco,  from  the  be-
ginning of  the  World  Anno  71 14.  the  fourth  day  of  June.
Thus  is  Demetrius  painted  out  by  his  Enemies,  which
perhaps  were  not  altogether  led  with  simplicitie  of  truth,
but  in  many  things  made  him  worse,  that  they  might  make
their  owne  cause  (bad  enough)  to  appeare  better.  They
tell  also  of  great  outrages  committed  by  the  Poles,  (like
those  sometimes  here  in  England  by  the  Danes)  their
proud  insulting  over  the  men,  ravishments  of  women,
fetching  them  out  of  their  houses  and  husbands  bosomes
to  serve  their  lusts :  neither  did  Demetrius,  as  they  say,
punish  them  ;  one  onely  being  sentenced,  and  hee  violently
rescued  from  execution  by  the  Poles. They  say  also  that

196

606.

Thu.  I.

i35.

Polish
insolencies.

en

heii

0

mi

HI
Ct

b(
ivi
mpi
esti

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1606.

Demetrius  his  body  was  plucked  out  of  the  grave  and
•unit,  the  ashes  throwne  into  the  aire,  the  seeds,  as  the
equele  seemed  to  shew,  of  many  Demetrii  after.

Suiskey  is  also  by  some  reported  to  have  beene  chosen  Choosing  by
m  lot  in  this  manner. The  Nobles  cast  lots  foure  times  loL
p  receive  a  Successor,  as  it  were,  by  divine  sentence  in
pt-oracle : in every of  which times the lot fell upon
fuiskey  (for  as  some  say,  there  were  three  or  foure  neerer
pen  hee)  he  modestly  refusing  and  enforced  by  constancy
if  the  various  lot  to  accept  that  Scepter ;  whereof  others
fiinke  him  as  ambitious,  as  was  modest  Boris  before  him.
however,  he  hath  left  his  name  and  memorie  written  in
s  blacke  inke  as  either  Boris  or  Demetrius,  if  Reports  bee
hie,  which  say  that  he  proved  a  wicked  Prince,  partly  by  [III.  iv.  770.]
loison, partly  by  the  Tartars,  making  away  all,  whose
loud  might  by  Nobilitie  threaten  a  probabilitie  of  their  Suiskeys  vices.
roving  his  Corrivals. Yea,  he  is  said  to  have  sent  for  The  like  is  told
Pitches  and  Sorcerers,  Laps,  Samoeds,  Tartars,  or  what-  °fK-  &**rd
Dever  other  Nation yeelded such Hell-hags, incarnate  ^^J^'
lends, the Devils  blacke  guard, to  consult about his  $m  0fone  t0
Empire  and  succession ;  and  (the  Devill  is  a  murtherer)  to  succeed,  whose
ave  sealed their  predictions  with  bloud. Thus  being  na™e  began
Did  that  one  Michalowich  should  succeed,  he  is  said  pre-  ^'^j^*'
sntly  to  have  plotted  the  death  of  three  Grandes  of  that  George  Duke
ame, his best servants : yet the superstitious people  of  Clarence  his
bserve  (after  much  chopping  and  changing)  that  in  little  brother %  and
me  the  State  was  settled  on  one  of  that  Name,  which  still  Jet  GjSfjr
tfaieth  the  Scepter ;  Who  then  being  a  youth  of  no  State-  A  pr-tnt^
*rror,  was  his  attendant  in  Court  and  bare  an  Axe  (after  book  16 14.
leir  custome)  before  him.  tels  of  a  great

One of his first Acts, was to send into Poland an  man> named.
Embassage,  which  could  not  bee  admitted  audience  till  fa^jfa*
anuarie. Hee thereby complayned of Sandomerskos  one  Q/asco
rtes  which  obtruded  that  Changeling  on  Russia,  whereby  a/as  arrayned,
bove  two  hundred  of  principal!  Nobilitie  had  lost  their  and  to  prevent
ves  : demanding  restitution  of  the  moneys  which  that  *^e  fine  °J
mpostor  had  caused  to  bee  transported  into  Poland,  and  stabbed
*stitution  of  goods ;  otherwise  hee  would  with  Charles  himselfe,  fcfr.

197

lervi

a.i>.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1606.

of  Sweden  Duke  of  Suderman, enter  Poland  with  an
Armie  to  bee  revenged  for  the  league  (which  they  had
sworne)  broken,  &c. Sigismund  answered  modestly,  with
excuse  of  their  helping  the  right  Heire  in  their  conceits,
and  that  his  desire  was  that  peace  should  continue  (being
loth  in  times  then  tumultuous  at  home,  to  provoke  a
forreine enemie, so neere in dwelling, so remote in
affection)  Sandomersko  still  remayned  prisoner  in  Russia.
But  things  being  better  setled  in  Poland,  and  growing
worse  in  Russia,  by  the  dislike  conceived  against  Suiskey,
a  double  danger  grew  to  him  both  from  another  revived
Demetrius  (yea  many  pretending  that  Name  and  Title  did
after  arise,  as  out  of  his  dispersed  ashes)  within  Russia;
and  from  the  Poles  without,  willing  both  to  assist  him
under  colour  of  Revenge,  and  with  hope  of  Conquest  also,
to  invade  and  fish  for  themselves  in  troubled  waters.
As  for  that  Demetrius  new  risen  from  the  dead  (not  to
Cap.  Gilbert,  mention  the  others  of  inferiour  note)  I  shall  relate  Captaine
Gilberts  reports  which  knew  him  and  was  by  him  enter  -
tayned,  as  I  received  them  of  a  judicious  friend  of  mine,
which  had  them  from  his  owne  mouth. Hee  being  at
Coluga  (as  before  is  said)  received  a  Letter  from  this  new
*Thuan  tels Demetrius  *,  so  written  that  it  appeared  to  bee  of  the
that  fourteene  former  Demetrius  his  owne  hand  :  and  thus  also  he  used  to
missing  in  the  ^oe  to  otners  Demg  able  to  counterfeit  his  writing,  and  to
Kings  stable relate  such  other  particulars  as  seemed  impossible  to  any
on  the  massacre  but  Demetrius  to  doe. Hereupon  Captaine  Gilbert  went!  Iiirr
day,  and vn\h.  his  Guard  of  Souldiers  to  meete  him  and  the  Polake
occ™' ^nd Generall  which  came  with  him. And  whiles  he  was  yet  a !  anc
suspicion  of good  distance  off,  Ah  (this  Demetrius  called  to  him)  my '  De
escape,  &c true  servant,  where  were  you  and  my  Guard,  when  the '  '
villaines  hurt  me  ?  but  if  I  had  followed  the  counsell  which Ad
you  gave  me  such  a  time  in  such  a  place  (relating  the sm;
particulars)  I  had  prevented  them. This  circumstance  had  I  p
moved  him  to  beleeve  this  to  be  the  former  Demetrius,
had  not  he  differed  from  this  in  person,  as  night  from  day.
A  strange Thus  also  he  said  he  affirmed  to  the  Pole  Generall,  asking
Juggler.  him  how  he  liked  this  Demetrius,  that  This  and  That  were &

198

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  ad.

1606.

as  like  as  Night  and  Day  (for  the  former  was  of  goodly
I  personage,  and  this  a  very  deformed  wretch.) The  Pole
Ireplyed,  It  is  no  matter,  Captaine,  this  Demetrius  shall
!  serve  our  turne  to  bee  revenged  of  the  perfidious  and
Ibloudie  Russe. And  this  Demetrius  acted  the  other  so
I  needy,  and  could  so  cunningly  and  confidently  relate  parti-
cular passages of past occurrents, that the Lady of
I  Demetrius was by him bedded. Thus was miserable
i  Russia  ground  betwixt  these  two Mill-stones, the  pre-
tending Demetrius and the super-intending Pole.
Suiskey is helped not a little by the English, which  English  aide.
I  brought him strangely and adventurously powder and
I  munition  to  his  Castle  to  Mosco,  which  yet  at  last  by  revolt
!  of  the  Citizens  delivers  up  it  selfe  and  him  to  the  Poles.
And  as  for  that  pretending  Demetrius,  he  was  afterwards
murthered  in  his  Campe  by  a  Tartar. But  it  is  meet  to
!  take  hereof  larger  view.

Sigismund  King  of  Poland  layeth  claim  to  Sweden,  as  Sweden  Title,
sonne  to  King  John  (who  is  said  to  have  unjustly  deprived
Ericus  of  his  life  and  Kingdome)  whose  yonger  brother
Duke  Charles  first  received  his  Nephew  King  Sigismund
(then  also  elected  and  still  continuing  King  of  Poland)  but
upon  warres  which  after  arose  betwixt  them,  the  issue  was,
that  the  Pole  holds  the  Title ;  but  Charles  obtayned  both
Regall  Title  and  Power,  wherein  his  Sonne  hath  succeeded.
Suiskey  takes  hold  of  this  difference,  and  Charles  assists
him  with  an  Armie  sent  under  the  command  of  Pontus  de
la  Gard  a  French  Coronell,  consisting  of  English,  French,  Forraine  aides
and  Scots.  These  march  to  Mosco,  which  the  new  t0  the  Russes.
Demetrius  and  Poles  held  besieged,  and  put  Demetrius
into  such  feare,  that  not  trusting  the  Pole,  and  fearing  his
Adversaries  on  both  sides,  he  stole  away  by  night  with  a
small  retinue  :  and  the  Poles  obtayned  Articles  of  com-
position and  departed.  But  miserable  were  the  distresses
by  famine,  fire,  sword,  rapes,  and  other  outrages  in  other
parts  of  Russia,  caused  by  other  Poles ;  and  yet  these  but
as  a  beginning  and  prelude  to  other  following.  For  the
King  of  Poland  entred  with  a  huge  Armie  (some  say  of

199

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1606.

an  hundred  thousand  men)  invaded  the  Muscovite,  and
especially  laid  siege  to  Smolensko.  He  is  reported  thence
to  have  sent  twentie  thousand  to  besiege  Mosco.

Suiskey  had  sent  to  King  Charles  for  more  aide,  which
[III.  iv.  7j  1.]  he  procured  out  of  England,  and  other  Countries,  of  which
I  had  rather  let  you  heare  an  eye-witnesse  speake  of  this,
as  elsewhere  other  English  men  have  related  their  owne
voyages.  This  indeed  deserveth  relation,  as  a  tragedie  of
meaner  persons  with  manifold  vicissitudes  of  miseries
(attending  voluntarie  Souldiers)  as  before  you  have  seene
tragedies  of  Princes  and  Grandes.  And  first  you  may
reade  King  Charles  his  compact  and  promised  stipend  to
such  voluntaries,  which  for  the  more  understanding
Readers  delight  I  have  here  inserted.

NOs  Carolus  Nonus,  Dei  gratia  Suecorum,  Gothorum,
Wandalorum,  Finnonum,  Coreliorum,  Lapporum,
Conanorum,  Esthonumque  in  Livonia,  &c.  Rex.  Notum
facimus  quod  illustrem  &  generosum  nobis  syncere
dilectum  Dominum  Jacobum  Spentzium,  Baronem  Wol-
merschonium  in  ministrorum  nostrorum  numerum
clementer  receptum,  omnium  qui  nostris  nunc  militant,
aut  in  posterum  militaturi  sunt  auspiciis,  Anglorum,
Scotorumque  ducem  &  praefectum  constituimus,  ea  con-
ditione  ut  in  nostrum,  Regnique  nostri  usum,  pedites
mille,  &  equites  quingentos,  spectatae  virtutis  .milites  con-
scribat,  adductosque  ineunte  vere  ad  12.  scilicet  Maii
sequentis  Anni  1609.  in  Regno  sistat.  Cui  nos  ad  dictos
milites  tarn  colligendos  quam  in  regnum  traducendos,  in
pedites  quidem  novem,  in  equites  vero  quatuor  thalerorum
imperialium  millia  &  quingintos  assignavimus.  Cum
autem  in  regnum  praefatus  militum  numerus  appulerit,
illis  si  equos  &  arma  subministraverimus,  ea  peditum
quidem  singulorum  dimidii  equitum  vero  duorum  de
cujusque  stipendio  menstruo  thalerorum  singulis  men-
sibus  donee  pro  armis  &  equis  nobis  satisfiat,  detractione
solventur.  Ipsi  duci  primario  Peditum  vero  singulis
cohortibus  (quarum  quaevis  ducentis  Capitaneo  caeterisque

200

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1609.

officiariis  una  comprehensis  constabat)  mille  septingentos
thaleros in mensem dabimus. Equidem autem cohors

Suaelibet  centum  equites  continebit.  Quod  si  pauciores
lerint,  quot  persona:  in  prima  lustratione  defecerint,
totidem  thalero  menstruo  Capitaneorum,  Equicumque
Magistrorum  stipendio  detrahentur :  In  sequentibus  vero
lustrationibus  quae  singulis  mensibus  semel  institui  debent,
si  qui  forte  interea  ex  hac  vita  decesserint,  aut  alio
quocunque  modo,  militum  numerus  fuerit  ita  diminutus,
ut  pedites  cujusque  cohortis  ducentis  pauciores  sint  (non
tamen  in  earn  paucitatem  redactus  ut  ad  tuendum,
ornandumque  vexillum  modo  militari  pedites  impares
inveniantur)  Capitanee  nihilominus  stipendium  integrum
ad  sex  menses  persolvetur,  quod  si  postea  defectum  non
suppleverit,  ipse  officio  Capitanei  carebit  &  pedites  ipsius
per  caeteras  cohortes,  ad  earum  supplementum  distri-
buentur.  Equites  vero  cohortis  cujusque,  si  centum
pauciores  fuerint,  Magister  equitum  nihilominus  donee
numerus  sexagenario  major  fuerit  stipendium  integrum
consequetur,  idque  ad  sex  menses  duntaxat.  His  autem
exactis,  nisi  praestitutum,  centum  equitum  numerum  sup-
pleverit, ipse  munere  suo  privabitur,  &  equites  per  caeteras
cohortes  distribuentur.  Magistro  equitum  centum,
Vicario  seu  locum  tenenti  quadraginta,  Signifero  triginta,
Decurioni  viginti,  singulis  ductoribus  viginti,  cuique
buccinatori  sex,  Equitibus  vero  singulis  duodecem  thaleri,
in  singulos  menses  munerabuntur.  Dicto  autem  duci
generali,  ut  sequentes  officiarios  sibi  adjungeret  clementer
permisimus :  Vicarium  generalem,  cui  quadringintos,
praefectum  vigiliarum,  cui  nonaginta,  Secretarium  cui
octoginta,  Praetorem  cui  sexaginta,  Praefectum  annonae  cui
sexaginta,  Pastorem  cui  sexaginta,  Chirurgum  cui  quad-
raginta, Archicustodem  cui  quadraginta,  Inspectorem
armorum  cui  quadraginta,  Tympanistam  cui  sedecim
florenos  in  singulos  menses  promissimus.  Primus  autem
stipendii  mensis  intra  decimum  quintum  diem  a  militum  in
regnum  adventu  inchoabitur.  Liberam  quoque  habebit
praefatus dux Primarius plenamque justitiae exercendae

201

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

potestatem  in  omnes  suo  imperio  subjectos,  idque  in  omni
criminis  genere  excepto  crimine  lasae  Majestatis ;  Peditum
cuique  subsidii  loco  thalerum  unum ;  Capitaneis  autem  &
reliquis  officiariis  stipendii  singulis  designati  dimidium ;
Magistro  militum  duodecim ;  Ejus  Vicario  octo ;  signi-
fero  sex,  cuique  Decurioni  quatuor  singulis  ex  tribus
ordinum  ductoribus  tres,  Buccinatori  unum  cum  dimidio,
singulis  vero  equitibus  duos  in  septimanam  thaleros
dabimus ;  Semestri  quolibet  exacto  habitaque  accurata
supputatione,  quod  de  menstruo  stipendio  reliquum  est,  eis
persolvetur,  habita  tamen  ratione  numeri  quern  in  singulis
delectibus  seu  militum  lustrationibus  Capitanei  equi-
tumque  Magistri  exhibuerint.  Quod  si  dux  militibus  suis
secundum  aliquod  praelium  fecerit,  aut  arcem  urbemque
aliquam  vi  expugnaverit,  eo  ipso  die  quo  id  contigerit
priore  finito  novus  mensis  inchoabitur.  Liberum  quoque
erit  Ducibus  singulis,  quoties  necesse  erit  ad  cohortium
supplementum  adducendum  aliquem  mittere,  qui  dum
absens  erit  stipendium  suum  nihilominus  consequetur,  pro
singulis  autem  qui  in  supplementum  adducti  fuerint  decern
thaleri  numerabuntur.  Quod  si  in  praeliis,  velitationibus,
excubiis  aut  alio  quovis  casu  quenquam  ducum,  aut
militum  in  hostium  potestatem  venire  contigerit,  idque
non  spontanea  deditione  aut  alia  ratione  subdola  &  fraudu-
lenta  accidisse  compertum  fuerit,  is  alius  suae  conditionis
statusque  captivi  permutatione  liberabitur.  Hostium
vero  aliquis  si  captivus  ad  nos  nostrive  exercitus  Ducem  a
quoquam  eorum  perductus  fuerit,  quod  pro  sui  liberatione
captivus  praetium  spoponderit,  id  ei,  qui  captivum  duxerit,
numerabitur.  Quod  si  quisquam  norum  militum  pila
ictus  tormentaria,  aut  alio  quovis  modo  mutilus,  aut
mancus  evadat,  ita  ut  ipse  se  alere  victumque  quaerere
nequeat,  illi  a  nobis  pro  ut  cujusque  requirit  status  &
conditio,  honestum  stipendium  per  omnem  vitam  sup-
peditabitur :  sin  vero  diutius  in  hoc  Regno  nostro
commorari  noluerit,  turn  unius  mensis  accepto  stipendio
integrum  ei  erit,  quo  libuerit  commigrare.  Cum  cohortes,
sive simul, sive seperatim exauctorabuntur, singulis

202

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1609.

officiariis  &  militibus  mensis  unius  numerabitur  stipen-
dium.  Si  aut  praefatus  primarius  aut  alius  inferiorum
Ducum  vel  Officiariorum  a  S.  R.  M.  Britanniae  accersetur,
persoluto  quod  tunc  forte  restabit  stipendio,  ipsoque  duce
remunerate,  libera  dabitur  discedendi  facultas.  In  quorum
evidentiorem  fidem  manus  propria  subscriptione  Regiaeque  [III.iv.772.]
nostri  sigilli  appensione  praesentes  munivimus.  Ex  Regia
nostra  Stocholmensi  die  7.  Octobris,  Anni  Millesimi
sexcentesimi  octavi.

Subscript.  Carolus.

A  Bout a fortnight before Midsummer, which was
A.  1609.  a  companie  of  Voluntaries,  to  the  number  of
a  thousand  and  two  hundred  Souldiers,  were  at  severall  1200.
times  shipped  from  England  to  passe  into  Sweden,  to  aide  Sou^teJs
the  King  of  that  Countrie  in  his  warres  against  the  King  S^ELnd.°
of  Poland. To  which  aide  divers  other  Nations  did  like-
wise resort,  as  French,  high  Dutch,  &c. Of  the  English
Companies  that  went  thither,  the  first  was  commanded  by
one Calvine a Scot ; who by appointment was made  Colonel
Lieutenant  Colonell,  and  chiefe  of  the  other  Captaines  over  Calvine.
the  footmen.

After  the  first  Companie  was  gone,  a  second  number  of
three  hundred  men  (of  which  I  the  Relator  of  this,  was
one)  were  put  into  one  ship  belonging  to  Sweden,  and
came  from  thence  for  us.  We  were  assaulted  with  a  great
tempest,  and  were  tossed  so  long,  that  all  our  victuals  were  A  tempest.
almost  spent :  the  miserie  of  which,  threw  us  into  more
desperate  feares :  now  were  wee  assaulted  by  double
deaths  (Famine  and  Shipwrack)  what  course  to  take  for
our  reliefe  no  man  presently  knew.  Continue  without
foode  it  was  impossible,  and  as  impossible  was  it  for  us
to  recover  the  Land  in  any  short  time,  without  the  assured
destruction  of  us  all.  At  this  season,  our  Commanders
were  these ;  Lieutenant  Benson,  Lieutenant  Walton,  who
was  Provost  Martiall  of  the  field ;  and  an  Ancient  of  the
Colonels  companie.  The  common  Souldiers  vowed  and
resolved to compell the Mariners (seeing the present

203

A.D.

1609.

Another
tempest  of  the
mutinous
vulgar.

They  land  in
Jutland.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

miseries,  and  no  hopes  promising  better)  to  set  us  all
on  shoare  upon  the  first  Land  that  could  be  discovered.
Our  Commanders  did  what  they  could  by  disswasion  to
alter  this  generall  resolution,  because  they  feared  it  would
bee  the  losse  of  the  greatest  part  of  our  Companies,  if
they  came  once  to  bee  scattered :  and  besides,  they  knew
that  it  would  redound  to  their  dishonour  and  shame,  if
they  should  not  discharge  the  trust  imposed  upon  them
by  our  Captaines,  which  trust  was  to  conduct  us  and  land
us  before,  whilest  our  Chieftanes  remayned  a  while
behinde  in  England,  to  take  up  the  rest  of  our  Companies.
Yet  all  this  notwithstanding,  Land  being  discovered,  there
was  no  eloquence  in  the  world  able  to  keep  us  aboord  our
ship,  but  every  man  swore  if  the  Master  of  the  ship  would
not  set  us  on  the  shoare,  the  sailes  should  be  taken  into
our  owne  hands,  and  what  was  resolved  upon  (touching
present  landing)  should  in  despite  of  danger  be  effected.
Upon  this  the  Master  of  the  ship  and  the  Mariners  told
us,  that  if  we  put  to  land  in  that  place,  we  should  all  either
perish  for  want  of  victuals,  which  were  not  to  bee  had  in
that  Countrie,  or  else  should  have  our  throats  cut  by  the
people.  Wee  resolved  rather  to  trie  our  bad  fortunes  on
the  land,  and  to  famish  there  (if  that  kind  of  death  must
needes  attend  upon  us)  then  to  perish  on  the  Seas,  which
we  knew  could  affoord  us  no  such  mercy :  and  on  shoare
wee  went,  as  fast  as  possibly  we  could.  When  our  Officers
saw,  that  there  was  no  remedie,  nor  force  to  detayne  us
aboord,  they  then  disheartned  us  no  longer,  but  to  our
great  comforts  told  it,  that  the  Master  of  the  ship  (which
thing  hee  himselfe  likewise  openly  confessed)  knew  both
the  Land  and  Governour  thereof  (as  indeed  we  proved
afterwards  he  did  : )  and  therefore  desired  they  all  our  com-
panies not  to  misse-behave  themselves  toward  the  people,
for  that  it  was  an  Hand  called  Juthland,  under  the
Dominion  of  the  King  of  Denmarke,  but  subject  to  the
command  of  a  Lord,  who  under  the  King  (as  his  Sub-
stitute) was  the  Governour.

And  that  we  might  be  the  better  drawne  to  a  civill

204

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1609.

behaviour  towards  the  Inhabitants,  our  Officers  further
told  us,  that  they  would  repaire  to  the  Lord  Governour  of
the  Countrie,  and  acquaint  him  with  the  cause  of  our
unexpected  landing  there ;  upon  which  we  all  promised  to
offer  no  violence  to  the  people ;  neither  was  that  promise
violated,  because  we  found  the  Inhabitants  tractable,  and
as  quiet  towards  us,  as  we  to  them :  yet  the  greater
numbers  of  them  ran  away  with  feare,  at  the  first  sight  of
us,  because  (as  afterward  they  reported)  it  could  not  bee
remembred  by  any  of  them,  that  they  ever  either  beheld
themselves,  or  ever  heard  any  of  their  ancestors  report,
that  any  strange  people  had  landed  in  those  places  and
parts  of  the  Hand :  for  they  thought  it  impossible  (as  they
told  us)  that  any  ship  should  ride  so  neere  the  shoare,  as
ours  did,  by  reason  of  the  dangerous  Sands.

Our  Officers  so  soone  as  they  were  at  land,  went  to  the
Governour  of  the  Hand,  whilest  the  Souldiers  (who  stayed
behind  them)  ran  to  the  houses  of  the  Ilanders,  of  purpose
to  talke  with  the  people,  and  at  their  hands  to  buy  victuals
for  a  present  reliefe :  but  when  wee  came  among  them,
they  could  neither  understand  us  nor  we  them  ;  so  that  the
Market  was  spoiled,  and  wee  could  get  nothing  for  our
money,  yet  by  such  signes  as  wee  could  make,  they  under-
stood our  wants  pitied  them,  and  bestowed  upon  us,  freely,
a  little  of  such  things  as  they  had.  In  the  end,  a  happy
meanes  of  our  reliefe  was  found  out  by  a  Souldier  amongst
us  who  was  a  Dane  by  birth,  but  his  education  having
beene  in  England,  no  man  knew  him  to  be  other  then  an
English  man.

This  Dane  made  use  of  his  owne  native  language,  to
the  good  both  of  himselfe  and  us,  certifying  the  people  [III.iv.773.
(who  the  rather  beleeved  him  because  he  spake  in  their
knowne  tongue)  of  the  cause  that  compelled  us  to  land
upon  their  Coast,  and  that  we  intended  no  mischiefe,
violence,  or  money :  to  which  report  of  his  they  giving
credit,  stood  in  lesse  feare  of  us  then  before,  and  thereupon
furnished  us  with  all  such  necessaries,  as  the  Countrie
affoorded  to  sustaine  our  wants. The  foode  which  wee

205

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.
Fish  cheape.  bought  of  them  was  onely  fish,  and  a  kinde  of  course
bread,  exceeding  cheape. Of  which  foode  there  was  such
plentie,  that  for  the  value  of  three  pence  wee  had  as  much
fish  as  twentie  men  could  eate  at  a  meale,  and  yet  none  of
the  worst  sorts  of  fish,  but  even  of  the  very  best  and
daintiest,  as  Mackrels  and  Lobsters,  and  such  like. In
which  our  trading  with  the  poore  simple  people,  we  found
Ignorant them  so  ignorant,  that  many,  yea  most  of  them  regarded
Bores.  not  whether  you  gave  them  a  Counter,  or  a  Shilling :  for

the  bigger  the  piece  was,  the  more  fish  they  would  give
for  it :  but  besides  fish  wee  could  get  no  other  sustenance
from  them,  or  at  least,  could  not  understand  that  they  had
any  other.  But  observe  what  happened  in  the  meane
time  that  we  were  thus  in  traffique  with  the  Ilanders  for
victuals,  our  Officers  (as  before  is  said)  being  gone  to  the
Lord  Governour,  who  lay  about  twelve  English  miles
from  the  Sea  side,  the  Master  of  our  ship  on  a  sudden
hoysed  up  sailes,  and  away  he  went,  leaving  one  of  his
owne  men  at  shoare,  who  accompanied  our  Officers  as  their
guide,  through  the  Hand.  The  cause  of  the  ships
departure,  did  so  much  the  more  amaze  us,  by  reason  it
was  so  unexpected,  and  the  reason  thereof  unknowne  to
us :  But  wee  imagined  the  Master  of  the  ship  and
Mariners  feared  to  receive  us  into  the  Vessell  againe,
because  some  of  our  men  at  their  being  at  Sea,  threatned
the  Saylers,  and  offered  them  abuses  before  they  could  be
brought  to  set  us  on  land.

On  the  next  day  following,  the  Lord  Governour  of
the  Hand  came  to  us,  bringing  our  Officers  along  with
him,  yet  not  being  so  confident  of  us,  but  that  (for  avoyd-
ing  of  any  dangers  that  might  happen)  he  came  strongly
guarded  with  a  troupe  of  Horse-men  well  armed.  And
(upon  his  first  approch)  demanding  where  our  ship  was,
it  was  told  him  in  what  strange  manner  it  stole  away  and
forsooke  us :  he  then  asked  what  we  intended  to  doe,  to
which  we  all  answered,  that  we  would  be  ruled  by  our
Officers  :  hereupon  hee  inquired  of  them,  what  they  would
have  him  to  doe  in  their  behalfes :  they  requested  nothing

206

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1609.

else  at  his  hands,  but  onely  his  favourable  Passe  through
the  Countrie,  and  a  ship  to  carry  us  forward  into  Sweden  :
to  which  request  hee  made  answere,  that  he  could  grant
no  such  licence  untill  he  had  made  the  King  of  Denmarke
acquainted  with  our  being  there,  for  the  Hand  belonged
to  the  King,  he  said,  and  he  was  no  more  but  an  Officer
or  Substitute  under  him.  Yet  in  consideration  that  our
ship  had  so  left  us  in  a  strange  Land,  he  promised  to  doe
all  that  lay  in  his  power  to  effect  our  good  :  but  withall
told  us,  that  the  people  had  inward  feares,  and  were  possest
with  suspitions,  that  our  intents  of  landing  upon  such  a
Coast,  were  not,  as  we  our  selves  affirmed,  only  to  get
foode,  but  rather  to  make  spoile  of  the  poore  Inhabitants.
And  therefore,  to  remoove  all  such  feares  and  jealousies
out  of  the  peoples  hearts,  he  held  it  most  convenient  for
the  generall  safeties  of  both  parties,  to  separate  our
numbers,  and  to  spreade  us  abroad  in  the  Countrie,  one
and  one  in  a  house,  where  it  was  agreed  that  we  should
receive  both  a  lodging,  and  meate,  and  drinke,  untill  hee
had  sent  to  the  King  of  Denmarke  some  of  his  owne  men
with  our  Officers,  to  understand  his  Majesties  pleasure,
and  what  should  become  of  us.

To  this  we  all  agreed,  and  accordingly  for  that  purpose,
were  by  the  Lord  Governour,  safely  by  these  armed  horse-
men which  were  his  guard,  conducted  to  his  owne  house.
To  that  place  were  al  the  people  of  the  Hand  summoned
together,  they  came  at  the  appointed  day  to  the  number
of  five  or  six  hundred,  circling  us  round  with  Bils,
Holbards,  two-hand  Swords,  and  divers  other  weapons :
And  at  the  first  sight  of  us  grew  into  such  rage,  that
presently  they  would  have  cut  all  our  throats,  and  hewed
us  to  pieces,  but  that  the  authoritie  of  the  Governor  kept
them  from  offering  violence,  yet  was  hee  faine  to  use
the  fairest  meanes  of  perswasion  to  allay  their  furie.  For
they  would  not  beleeve  but  that  our  arrivall  there  was  to
destroy  them.  Yet  the  Governour  shewed  unto  them
all  our  number,  which  was  but  three  hundred  men,  and
those  all  unweaponed,  and  so  consequently,  neither  likely

207

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PXLGRIMES

1609.

nor  able  to  undertake  any  mischiefe  against  them :  Charg-
ing the  unruly  multitude,  upon  paine  of  death,  not  to
touch  the  least  finger  of  us,  but  to  divide  us  equally  into
severall  Villages,  as  it  should  seeme  best  unto  them,  and
so  bestow  kinde  and  loving  entertainment  upon  us  till
they  heard  further  from  him,  which  command  of  his  they
accordingly  performed.

Immediately  upon  this  setling  of  them  and  us  in  quiet-

nesse,  one  of  our  Officers  with  two  of  the  Governours  men,

were  sent  away  to  the  King  of  Denmarke,  to  understand

his  Highnesse  pleasure,  which  Messengers  were  no  sooner

dispatched  about  the  businesse,  but  the  Ilanders  growing

Jealousie  of more  and  more  suspitious,  came  againe  to  the  Governour,

the  people. ancj  never  would  cease  or  give  over  troubling  him,  untill

they  had  gotten  him  to  make  Proclamation  (in  hearing

of  us  all.) That  if  any  of  us  would  freely  discover  the

true  cause  of  our  landing  upon  that  Coast,  and  reveale

the  plots  of  any  dangerous  enterprise  intended  against

them,  he  should  not  onely  be  rewarded  with  great  store

of  money,  and  have  new  apparell  to  his  backe,  but  also

should  without  tortures,  imprisonment,  or  death  be  set

free,  and  sent  backe  againe  into  his  owne  Countrie. This

Proclamation  strucke  us  all  with  feare  and  astonishment,

[III.  iv.  774.]  because  albeit  we  to  our  selves  were  not  guiltie  of  any

plot,  or  villany  intended  to  the  place  or  people,  yet  wee

knew  this  might  be  a  meanes  to  endanger  all  our  lives,

how  innocent  soever. Our  suspition  of  danger  fell  out

Griffin  a  base  according  to  our  feares  :  for  one  Thomas  Griffyn  a  Welch

coward  and man,  one  of  our  owne  company,  went  and  kneeled  before

traitor  to  his ^  QOVernour,  and  with  a  face  counterfeiting  a  guiltinesse

and  fearefull  destruction,  told  him  that  we  came  thither

onely, and  for  no  other  purpose, then to surprise  the

Hand,  kill  the  Inhabitants,  make  spoile  of  their  wives  and

goods,  and  having  set  fire  of  their  Townes  and  Villages,

to  flye  to  Sea  againe. Yet  for  all  this  would  not  the

A  wise  Governour  beleeve  him,  telling  him  it  was  a  matter  very

ovemour. unlik;ely,  that  so  small  a  number,  so  distressed  for  want

of foode, so weather-beaten and so disarmed, should

208

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1609.

venture  upon  an  enterprise  so  full  of  dangerous  events  :
but  the  villaine  replyed,  that  all  those  complaints  of  want,
were  but  songs  to  beguile  the  people,  for  that  upon  the
least  Allarum  given,  other  ships  that  lay  hovering  at  Sea,
and  furnished  both  with  men  and  armour,  would  on  the
sudaine,  and  that  very  shortly  land  for  the  same  desire
of  spoyle,  as  these  their  fellowes  had  done,  and  therefore
counselled  the  Governour  to  prevent  such  imminent
mischiefes  betimes.

The  Governour  being  thus  farre  urged,  presently  called
before  him  Lieutenant  Walton,  whose  lodging  was
appointed  in  his  house,  and  having  related  to  him  all  that
Griffin  had  discovered,  and  withall,  demanding  of  Lieu-
tenant Walton  what  he  could  say  to  this  matter  of  treason
and  conspiracie :  the  Lieutenant  at  the  first  stood  amazed,
and  utterly  denied  any  such  intended  villany,  protesting
by  the  faith  of  a  Souldiour,  that  this  report  of  the  Welch-
man  proceeded  from  the  rancour  of  a  vile  traitors  heart,
and  therefore  on  his  knees  intreated  the  Governour,  not
to  give  credit  to  so  base  a  villaine,  who  for  the  greedinesse
of  a  little  money,  went  about  to  sell  all  their  lives,  and  to
make  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  Hand  become  murderers :
The  rest  lay  scattered  about  and  knew  nothing  of  the
matter.  Now  soone  after,  just  as  the  traitor  had  told
the  Governour,  that  more  ships  were  not  farre  off,  but
were  ready  to  second  us  upon  our  arrivall,  it  chanced  that
in  the  very  heat  of  this  businesse,  and  their  feares  of  danger
where  none  was,  two  other  shippes  full  of  armed  Souldiers  Two  Ships.
came  to  the  same  place  of  the  Hand  where  our  shippe
put  in  :  These  two  ships  had  brought  Souldiours  out  of
the  low  Countries  (a  cessation  of  warres  being  there)  and
were  going  into  Swethland,  as  we  were,  but  by  crosse
windes  and  fowle  weather,  lay  so  long  at  Sea,  that  wanting
victuals,  they  were  driven  in  hither  for  succour.  Whose
sudaine  approach  and  arivall  being  signified  to  the  Lord
Governor,  the  Welch-mans  words  were  then  thought  true ;
all  the  Hand  was  presently  up  in  Armes  to  resist  the
strength  and  furie  of  a  most  dangerous  supposed  enemy :
xiv  209  o

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

and  so  secretly  did  the  Inhabitants  put  on  Armes,  that  ancl
we  who  were  kept  like  prisoners  amongst  them,  knew
not  of  these  uproares.  But  night  approaching,  the
Generall  gave  speciall  charge  that  secret  watch  should
be  set  and  kept  over  every  Souldior  that  lodged  in  any
mans  house  :  which  by  the  common  people  was  as  narrowly
performed,  for  they  did  not  onely  watch  us  as  the  Governor
commanded,  but  amongst  themselves  a  secret  conspiracie
was  made,  that  in  the  dead  of  night,  when  wee  should  be
fast  asleepe,  they  should  come  and  take  us  in  our  beds,
Hard  usage,  and  there  to  binde  us  with  cords :  it  being  an  easie  thing
to  doe  so,  when  our  company  were  divided  one  from
another  over  the  whole  Hand.  At  the  houre  agreed  upon,
the  plot  was  put  in  force,  for  they  entred  our  Chambers,
and  bound  every  Souldier  as  he  lay,  making  them  all
ready  like  so  many  sheepe  marked  out  for  the  slaughter.
For  mine  owne  part,  I  had  five  men  and  three  women
to  binde  me,  who  so  cunningly  tyed  me  fast  with  cords,
whilst  I  slept,  and  felt  nothing,  nor  dreampt  of  any  such
matter,  that  with  a  twitch  onely  I  was  plucked  starke  naked
out  of  my  bed,  and  laid  upon  the  cold  earth  underneath  a
Table,  with  my  armes  bound  behinde  me,  so  extreamely
hard,  as  foure  men  could  draw  them  together,  my  feete
tyed  to  the  foote  of  the  Table,  and  my  necke  bound  to
the  upper  part  or  bord  of  the  Table.

In  these  miserable  tortures  lay  I,  and  all  the  rest  (in
severall  houses)  all  that  night,  and  the  most  part  of  the
next  day,  our  armes  and  legges  being  pinched  and  wrung
together  in  such  pittilesse  manner,  that  the  very  bloud
gushed  out  at  the  fingers  ends  of  many.  The  enduring
of  which  torments  was  so  much  the  more  grievous,  because
none  knew  what  we  had  done  that  could  incense  them
to  this  so  strange  and  spitefull  cruelty,  neither  could  we,
albeit  we  inquired,  learne  of  our  tormenters  the  cause,
because  we  understood  not  their  language.

Whilest  thus  the  whole  Hand  was  full  of  the  cries  of
wretched  men,  and  that  every  house  seemed  a  shambles,
ready  to  have  Innocents  there  butchered  the  next  day,

210

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1609.

1  md  that  every  Ilander  had  the  office  of  a  common  cut-

I  throate  or  executioner ;  Gods  wonderfull  working  turned

II  the  streame  of  all  their  cruelty : For  the  two  ships  that
M  :ame  out  of  the  low  Countries,  and  whose  arrival!  drave

so  many  miserable  soules  almost  upon  the  rocks  of
destruction,  having  in  that  dolefull  and  ruinous  night,
gotten  some  provision  aboord,  weighed  Anchor,  and
departed  towards  Swethland.  Which  happy  newes  being
served  up  at  breakfast  to  the  Lord  Governour  betimes
n  the  morning,  and  that  the  Shippes  had  offerd  no  violence
:o  the  Countrey,  but  had  paid  for  what  they  tooke  :  About
heaven  of  the  clocke  the  very  same  day  at  noone,  wee
were  all  like  unto  so  many  dead  men  cut  downe,  and
oidden  to  stand  upon  our  legges,  although  very  few  had
scarce  legges  that  could  stand.

Of  one  accident  more  that  befell,  I  thinke  it  not  amisse
:o  take  note,  which  began  merrily,  but  ended  tragically,  [III. iv.  775.
ind  in  bloud ;  and  that  was  this  :  Foure  of  our  company
Deing  lodged  in  one  Village,  and  they  being  bound  to
:he  peace,  as  you  may  perceive  the  rest  were ;  it  happened
:hat  an  Hoast,  where  one  of  them  lay,  had  tipled  hard,
ind  gotten  a  Horses  disease,  called  the  Staggers  :  In  comes  Effects  of
ie  stumbling,  to  the  roome  where  the  poore  Englishman  drunkennesse.
was  bound  to  the  Table  hand  and  foote :  which  thing
:he  drunken  Sot  beholding,  drew  his  Hatchet,  which  he
wore  at  his  girdle,  according  to  the  fashion  of  the  Country,
ind  because  hee  would  be  sure  his  prisoner  should  not
Escape,  with  his  Hatchet  he  cleft  his  head.  And  thinking
tn  that  drunken  murderous  humour,  he  had  done  a
glorious  act,  away  he  reeles  out  of  his  owne  house  to  that
louse  where  the  other  three  Souldiours  lay  bound,  where
seating  at  the  doores  and  windowes,  and  the  Hoast  asking
what  he  meant  to  make  such  a  damnable  noyse ;  he  told
him  so  well  as  he  could  stammer  it  out,  that  the  Lord
jovernour  had  sent  him  thither  to  put  the  three  English-
men to  death.  Upon  this,  the  divell  and  he  (hand  in
land)  were  let  in,  the  one  standing  so  close  at  the  others
*lbow,  that  he  never  left  him  till  he  had  cleft  two  of  their

211

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

heads,  that  lay  bound :  and  being  then  weary  (it  should
seeme)  with  playing  the  butcher,  he  never  ceased  swearing
and  staring,  and  flourishing  with  his  bloudy  Axe  about
their  heads,  till  the  people  of  the  house  had  hung  the
third  man  upon  a  beame  in  the  roome.  But  they  having
lesse  cunning  in  the  Hang-mans  trade,  then  will  to  practise
it,  tyed  not  the  halter  so  fast  about  his  necke,  as  to  strangle
him :  so  that  after  hee  had  hung  an  houre,  hee  was  cut
downe,  revived  againe,  was  well,  and  afterwards  was  slaine
in  Russia.

This  bloudy  feast  being  thus  ended,  and  all  stormes
as  we  well  hoped,  being  now  blowne  over  to  our  freedome,
and  sitting  at  liberty  from  our  tormentors ;  on  the  necke
of  these  former  miseries  fell  a  mischiefe  more  dangerous
to  us  then  all  the  rest :  for  tidings  were  brought  to  the
Governour,  that  our  Auncient,  who  travailed  with  the
Governours  two  men  to  the  King,  had  trayterously
murdered  those  his  guides,  and  then  ranne  away  himselfe :
upon  this  rumour,  nothing  but  thundring  and  lightning
flew  from  the  common  peoples  mouthes :  there  was  no
way  now  with  us  but  one,  and  that  one  was,  to  have  all
Cruell  our  throats  cut,  or  our  heads  cleft  with  their  Axes. But

cowardise  and  tne  Governor  pittying  our  misfortunes,  laboured  both  by
base  jealouste.  ^\s  authority  &  by  faire  speeches,  to  keepe  that  many-
headed  dogge  (the  multitude)  from  barking.  And  in  the
end,  when  he  saw  nothing  but  the  bloud  of  us  poore
Englishmen  would  satisfie  their  thirst,  because  they  still
held  us  in  suspition  and  feare ;  he  most  nobly,  and  like  a
vertuous  Magistrate,  pawned  to  the  inhumane  Rascals  (to
my  knowledge)  his  honour,  all  that  ever  he  was  worth,
yea,  his  very  life  unto  them,  that  within  three  dayes  the
messengers  sent  to  the  King,  should  returne  home,  and
that  during  those  three  dayes  we  should  be  of  good
behaviour  to  the  Ilanders :  and  besides  that,  if  they  did
not  returne  in  such  a  time,  that  then  he  would  deliver  us
up  into  their  hands.  Our  Auncient  with  the  Governours
King  of  Den-  two  men,  came  home  upon  the  third  day,  to  the  Gover-
marks  bounty,  nours  house,  and  brought  from  the  King  of  Denmarke

212

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1609.

his  licence,  to  carry  us  not  onely  through  the  Country,
but  commanding  that  we  should  be  allowed  shipping  also
at  convenient  place,  to  carry  us  to  Sweveland,  whither
we  were  to  goe :  And  according  to  this  Licence  the
Governour  caused  us  to  be  called  all  together  the  very
next  day ;  at  which  time,  Thomas  Griffin  the  Welch  Judas,
who  had  all  this  while  lyen  feasting  in  the  house  of  the
Lord  Governour,  began  to  tremble  and  repent  him  of  his
villanie,  begging  most  base  forgivenesse  on  his  knees,
both  from  the  Governour,  and  us  his  Countrimen  and
fellow  Souldiours,  protesting  that  what  he  did,  came  out
of  his  feare  to  save  his  owne  life.  But  our  Officers  (upon
hearing  him  speake  thus)  had  much  adoe  to  keepe  the
companies  from  pulling  downe  the  house  where  Griffin
lay,  because  they  would  in  that  rage  have  hewed  the
villaine  in  peeces.

But  leaving  him  and  all  such  betrayers  of  mens  bloud
to  the  hell  or  their  owne  consciences,  let  us  set  forward
out  of  this  infortunate  Hand,  and  not  stay  in  any  place
slse,  till  in  small  Boates  wee  come  by  water  to  Elzinore  Elzinore.
in  Denmarke,  where  wee  joyfully  got  aboard  once  more ;
ind  are  hoysing  up  sailes  for  Sweveland.  Yet  even  in
this  sun-shine  day  a  storme  fals  upon  us  too :  for  our
Officers  not  having  sufficient  money  to  furnish  us  with
victuals,  wee  were  enforced  to  pawne  our  Auncient  and
Lieutenant  Walton,  for  the  safe  returne  of  the  Shippe,
with  condition,  that  they  should  not  be  released  untill  a
sufficient  summe  of  money  was  sent  to  defray  all  charges.
5o  that  we  left  our  Officers  behinde  us ;  but  the  King
of  Sweveland  did  afterwards  release  them,  and  then  they
came  to  us.  But  before  their  comming,  wee  having  a
good  winde,  landed  at  a  place  called  Newleas  in  Sweve :
and  from  thence  were  carried  to  Stockholme  (the  Kings  Stockholme.
seate)  and  there  was  the  King  at  the  same  time ;  betweene
which  two  places,  it  was  a  daies  march  on  horsebacke.

Upon  this  our  arrivall  at  Stockholme,  wee  met  with  the
rest  that  had  gone  before  us,  and  with  divers  others  of
our  Countrimen,  that  came  out  of  the  Low-countries,  as

213

ad.  PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

1609.

before  is  related. In  this  place  we  lay  so  long,  and  had
such  poore  meanes,  that  wanting  money  to  buy  foode,  wee
wanted  foode  to  maintaine  life,  and  so  a  number  of  us
Misery  after were  readie  to  starve  :  till  in  the  end,  our  miseries  making
misery.  us  desperate,  we  fell  together  by  the  eares  with  the  Burgers

of  the  Towne  :  in  which  scambling  confusion  and  mutinie,
every  man  got  one  thing  or  other,  of  which  he  made
present  money  to  relieve  his  body  withall :  yet  lay  wee
[III. iv.  776.]  at  the  walles  of  the  Citie,  crying  out  continually  for  money,
money,  till  our  throates  grew  hoarse  with  hauling,  but
the  stones  of  the  walles  gave  more  confort  to  us,  then
the  Inhabitants.  One  day  (above  all  the  rest)  wee  heard,
that  the  King  was  to  ride  a  Hunting ;  and  wee  imagining
that  all  the  abuses,  wrongs,  and  miseries,  which  wee
endured,  proceeded  from  some  under-hand  hard  dealing,
and  packing  of  our  Captaines  and  Officers,  resolved  to
gather  about  the  King  at  his  comming  forth,  and  to  cry
out  for  money :  but  the  King  being  angry  (as  wee  sup-
posed) came  riding  amongst  us,  drawing  his  Pistoll  from
the  Saddle-bow,  as  if  hee  purposed  to  have  shot  some
of  us :  but  seeing  none  of  us  to  shrinke  from  him,  nor
to  be  dismayed,  hee  rode  backe  againe,  wee  following  him,
and  desiring,  hee  would  either  give  us  money,  or  else  to
kill  us  out-right ;  one  amongst  the  rest  (whose  name  was
William  Attane)  spake  to  the  King  aloud,  thus :  I  hold
it  honour  to  dye  by  the  hands  of  a  King,  but  basely  to
starve  to  death,  I  will  never  suffer  it.  Upon  these  our
clamours,  the  King  looking  better  upon  our  necessities,
sent  money  the  next  day,  and  immediately  after  gave  us
a  moneths  meanes  in  money,  and  two  moneths  meanes  in
cloath,  to  make  us  apparrell.

Of  the  cloath  wee  received  some  part,  but  the  money
Captaines  being  payed,  was  by  our  Captaines  sent  into  England  to
cozenage.  their  wives ;  no  part  of  it  ever  comming  to  the  poore
common  Souldiours  hands :  for  presently  upon  this,  wee
were  commanded  aboord  the  Ships,  with  promise  that
when  wee  were  aboord,  wee  should  have  our  money.  But
being  in  the  Shippes  under  hatches,  away  were  wee  carried

214

A.D.

1609.

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA

with  provision  onely  of  one  moneths  victuals :  when  by
reason  of  the  weather,  wee  were  forced  to  lye  eight  weekes
at  Sea  :  in  all  which  time,  wee  had  nothing  but  pickelled
Herrings,  and  salt  Stremlings,  with  some  small  quantitie
of  hard  dryed  meates  :  by  which  ill  dyet,  many  of  our
men  fell  sicke,  and  dyed.  In  the  Shippe  wherein  I  was,
wee  lived  fourteene  dayes  without  bread,  all  our  best  foode
being  salt  Herrings,  which  wee  were  glad  to  eate  raw ;
the  best  of  us  all  having  no  better  sustenance.

At  the  last,  it  pleased  God  to  send  us  to  a  place  called
Ufrasound  in  Fynland,  where  wee  landed,  (Fynland  being  Finland.
subject  to  the  King  of  Sweveland.)  From  Ufrasound  wee
were  to  goe  to  Weyborough,  a  chiefe  Towne  in  the
Countrie  of  Fynland :  where  wee  no  sooner  arrived,  but
our  Souldiors  ranne  some  one  way,  and  some  another,  so
long  that  the  Captaines  were  left  alone  with  the  Shippes :
This  running  away  of  them,  being  done  onely  to  seeke
foode,  so  great  was  their  hunger.

By  this  carelesse  dispersing  themselves,  they  lost  the  Dispersing.
command  of  the  whole  Countrey,  which  they  might  easily
have  had,  if  they  had  beene  united  together :  and  not
onely  were  deprived  of  that  benefit,  but  of  Horses  also,
which  were  allowed  by  the  King  for  them  to  ride  upon.
So  that,  what  by  the  reason  of  the  tedious  Journey  (which
wee  were  to  travell,  being  fourescore  leagues)  and  what
by  reason  of  the  extreame  cold,  being  a  moneth  before
Christmas,  at  which  time  the  Snow  fell,  and  never  went  off
the  ground  untill  Whitsontide  following ;  but  all  the
Raine,  and  all  the  Snow  that  fell,  freezing  continually,
divers  of  our  men  were  starved  to  death  with  the  Frost.
Some  lost  their  fingers,  some  their  toes,  some  their  noses,
many  their  lives  :  insomuch,  that  when  wee  all  met  at
Weyborough,  wee  could  make  no  more  but  one  thousand
and  foure  hundred  able  men ;  and  yet  when  we  were
landed  at  Ufrasound,  wee  were  two  thousand  strong ;  the
extremity  of  the  cold  Countrey  having  killed  so  many
of  our  Souldiours  in  so  little  time.

At  our  landing  at  Weyborough  wee  had  good  hopes

215

Distresse  by
Frost.

A.D.

1609.

Their  miser-
able march
into  Russia.

Want  ofmeate
and  of  Water.

[III.  iv.  777.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  receive  better  comforts,  both  of  money  and  victuals :
for  the  Inhabitants  told  us,  the  King  had  allowed  it  us,
and  in  that  report  they  spake  truth :  yet  contrary  to  our
expectation,  wee  lay  there  about  fourteene  dayes,  and
had  nothing  but  a  little  Rice,  of  which  we  made  bread,
and  a  little  butter,  which  was  our  best  reliefe.  Drinke
had  we  none,  nor  money :  our  Captaines  gave  us  certaine
letherne  pelches,  onely  made  of  Sheeps  skins,  to  keepe  us
from  the  cold.

At  this  place  we  received  armes  to  defend  us  against
the  enemy,  and  six  Companies  that  were  allowed  by  the
King  for  Horsemen,  received  Horses  there.  From  thence
wee  were  to  march  into  Russia,  where  our  enemies  con-
tinued. But  the  journey  was  long  and  uncomfortable :
for  wee  marched  from  Newyeares  day  untill  Whitsontide,
continually  in  Snow,  having  no  rest,  but  onely  a  little  in
the  nights.  So  that  the  miseries  and  misfortunes  which
wee  endured  upon  the  borders  of  Fynland,  were  almost
insufferable,  by  reason  the  number  of  them  seemed
infinite.  For  all  the  people  had  forsaken  their  houses
long  before  wee  came,  because  they  were  evermore
oppressed  by  Souldiours :  by  which  meanes  we  could
get  neither  meate  nor  drinke,  but  were  glad  to  hunt
Cats,  and  to  kill  them,  or  any  beasts  wee  could  lay
hold  on,  and  this  wee  baked,  and  made  them  serve  for
daily  sustenance.  The  greatest  calamitie  of  all  was,  wee
could  get  no  Water  to  drinke,  it  had  beene  so  long  frozen
up,  and  the  Snow  so  deepe,  that  it  was  hard  to  say,  whether
wee  marched  over  Water,  or  upon  Land.  So  that  wee
were  compelled  to  digge  up  Snow,  and  with  stones  redde
hot,  to  melt  in  tubbes,  and  then  to  drinke  it.

This  affection  continued  about  twelve  or  fourteene
dayes,  till  we  came  into  Russia.  Upon  our  very  first
entrance  into  which  Kingdome,  we  marched  over  an  arme
of  the  Sea,  that  was  eight  leagues  over,  many  of  us
starving  to  death  in  that  passage,  by  the  cold  freezing
windes  that  blew  the  same  day.  In  which  frosty  journey,
I  saw  so  much  bread  as  a  man  might  buy  for  twelve  pence,

216

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  ad.

1609.

sold  away  in  little  bits,  for  the  value  of  fortie  shillings.

But  this  misery  ended  the  next  day,  at  our  setting  foot

into  Russia,  where  we  found  plenty  both  of  corne  and

cattle ; onely the people  of the  Countrey  ranne  away,  Russians

leaving  all  their  goods  behinde  them,  but  so  cunningly  runne  azvay-

hidden,  that  the  best  pollicie  of  ours  could  hardly  finde

them  out. By  this  meanes  of  the  peoples  running  away,

we  were  glad  to  play  the  Millers,  and  to  grinde  all  our

corne  our  selves,  to  bake  our  bread,  and  to  dresse  our

owne  victuals. Then  marched  wee  up  to  Novogrod  (a  Novogrod.

chiefe  Citie  in  Russia)  where  wee  were  to  receive  all  our

meanes  that  rested  behinde  unpayed : but  our  Captaines

ibeguiled  us,  and  kept  it  for  themselves : yet  to  stoppe

iOur  mouthes,  they  told  us  wee  should  goe  into  Muscovy,

and  there  all  reckonings  should  be  made  even.

We had scarce marched above three dayes towards
(Muscovy,  but  that  newes  came,  how  a  certaine  number
of  our  enemies  lay  in  a  sconce  by  the  way ;  the  strength  Polake
iof  them  was  not  perfectly  knowne,  but  it  was  thought  enemies.
jthey  were  not  above  seven  hundred,  and  that  we  must
use  some  stratagem  to  expell  them  from  thence : upon
which  relation,  our  Captaines  drew  forth  to  the  number
|of  three  hundred  English  horsemen,  and  two hundred
'.French horsemen : so that in all we  were about five
hundred  that  were  appointed  to  set  upon  the  supposed
iseven hundred Polanders, (our enemies) that so lay
itinsconsed  :  upon  whom  we  went. Our  chiefe  Commander
Idn  that  service  was  Monsier  la  Veile,  a  French  man,  who
so  valiantly  led  us  on,  that  the  enemy  hearing  of  our
iComming,  fled  over  a  water  that  was  by  the  sconce ;  yet  They  fled.
Ipot  with  such  speede,  but  that  wee  slue  to  the  number  of
jifoure  hundred  of  their  side,  and  lost  onely  three  men
|of  our  owne :  but  we  tooke  the  sconce. About  the  sconce  Sconce  taken
jstood  a  faire  Towne  called  Ariova,  with  a  river  called  the  with  store  of
IVolga,  running  through  the  middle,  but  no  bridge  over  Arms-
{jit ;  onely  a  few  Boates  and  Sloates  (made  and  cut  out  of
jtrees)  were  there,  to  carry  the  people  over  from  the  one
(halfe  of  the  Towne  to  the  other. This  sconce  furnished

217

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

us  not  onely  with  great  store  of  riches,  but  also  with  a
number  of  Polish  Horses,  and  as  many  armes  as  served
to  arme  five  hundred  men  ;  our  want  of  that  commoditie
being  as  much  as  of  any  thing  besides :  for  of  those  five
hundred  men  that  went  upon  the  service,  there  were  not
three  hundred  fixed  armes ;  yet  through  the  hand  of  him
that  deales  victories,  or  overthrowes,  as  it  pleaseth  him
best,  the  day  was  ours.

Over  this  river  Volga  the  enemies  were  never  driven
before,  either  by  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  or  by  the  King
of  Swethland :  for  which  cause  (as  afterward  wee  heard)
the  next  day  when  they  departed  from  the  other  side  of
the  River,  they  burnt  that  halfe  of  the  Towne  on  which
side  they  were  themselves,  and  in  most  bloudy,  barbarous,
Poles  cruelties  and  cruell  manner,  made  havocke  both  of  men,  women  and
most  execrable,  children,  albeit  (not  above  halfe  a  yeare  before)  the  Inhabi-
tants on  that  side  had  revolted  from  their  owne  Emperour,
and  turned  to  them.  In  which  tyrannicall  uprore,  their
custome  was,  to  fill  a  house  full  of  people,  and  then  (the
doores  being  locked  upon  them,  that  none  might  issue
forth)  the  house  was  fired  about  their  eares :  and  often-
times were  yong  children  taken  by  the  heeles,  and  cast
into  the  middest  of  the  flames :  This  inhumane  tyrannie
being  practised  not  onely  by  the  Poles,  that  were  our
enemies,  but  even  by  those  Russes  that  were  traitors  to
their  owne  Emperour,  and  served  under  the  Poles,  and
were  called  Cossakes,  whose  cruelty  farre  exceeded  the
Polish.

The  Towne  being  thus  burnt  to  the  earth,  all  the  sixe
thousand  (which  as  I  said  before,  fled  over  the  River,
out  of  the  sconce,  and  were  by  us  supposed  to  be  but
seven  hundred)  came  downe  in  full  battalion  to  the  Rivers
side  with  such  fiercenesse,  as  if  presently  they  and  their
horses  would  have  sworn  over,  to  fight  with  us,  which
being  perceived,  our  poore  five  hundred  stood  ready  to
resist  them.  But  whether  they  feared  our  numbers  to  be
greater  then  they  were,  and  that  wee  had  some  other  secret
Forces,  I  know  not :  but  away  they  marched,  the  selfe  same

218

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1609.

day  in  which  they  came  downe  in  that  bravery,  not  doing
any  thing :  of  which,  wee  for  our  parts,  were  not  much
sorry ;  because  if  the  battailes  had  joyned,  wee  knew  our
selves  farre  unable  to  withstand  them.  And  this  was  the
service  of  the  most  noate,  that  wee  went  upon.

Two  or  three  other  sconces  and  Townes  we  tooke  from
our  enemies,  they  not  once  daring  to  resist  us,  because
they  knew  nothing  of  our  numbers  and  force.  But  the
dishonest  dealings  of  our  Captaines,  made  the  whole  Armie  Caytiffe
discontent ;  insomuch,  that  our  Souldiors  would  often-  Captaines.
times  deny  to  goe  forth  upon  service,  because  they  had
beene  almost  a  yeare  in  the  Land  and  had  received  no
more  but  one  Rubble  (amounting  to  the  value  of  ten
shillings  English.)  So  that  upon  these  discontents,  fiftie
of  our  men  ranne  away  to  the  enemy  at  one  time,  and  Fugitives.
discovered  to  them  our  strength.  After  which,  we  durst
not  be  so  bold  as  before  we  had  beene.  The  fire  of  a
new  conspiracie  was  likewise  kindling,  but  it  was  per-
ceived, and  quenched  with  the  bloud  of  the  conspirators,
of  which,  the  chiefe  were  hanged.  On  therefore  we  went :
when  we  came  within  fortie  leagues  of  Muscovie,  newes  [III.iv.778.]
was  brought,  that  the  enemy  had  beleaguard  seven
thousand  Russes  that  were  our  friends,  and  that  unlesse
wee  forced  the  siedge  to  breake  up,  the  seven  thousand
Russes  would  every  man  be  starved  where  they  lay.  This
sad  report,  (albeit  we  had  resolved  never  to  goe  upon
any  more  service,  untill  wee  had  our  pay)  so  wrought  in
our  hearts,  that  wee  much  pittied  the  miseries  of  others,
because  wee  our  selves  had  tasted  of  the  like.

Our  Generall  (whose  name  was  Everhorne)  was  a
Fynlander,  and  with  a  company  of  Fynland  blades  (as  they
tearme  them)  well  appointed  on  Horsebacke,  was  by  the
King  of  Sweveland,  sent  after  us,  as  our  Convoy,  untill
wee  should  come  to  Pontus  le  Guard,  who  was  chiefe  Pontus  le
Generall  over  the  whole  armie  of  strangers  that  came  into  Guard.
the  Land :  so  that  according  as  he  was  sent  and  charged
by  the  King,  hee  overtooke  us  before  we  came  to  Ariova.
By the intreatie therefore of this Fynlander, and the

219

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

flattering  promises  of  our  owne  Captaines,  we  were  con-
tented to  goe  upon  this  service,  and  to  deliver  the  Russes,
or  to  dye  our  selves  in  the  action.  Yet  with  condition,
that  (as  they  promised  to  us)  we  should  by  the  way  meete
our  chiefe  Generall,  Pontus  le  Guard,  who  with  certaine
numbers  of  English,  French  and  Dutch  (which  the  yeare
before  were  come  into  the  Land)  was  upon  a  march  out
of  Muscovy,  not  onely  to  meete  us,  but  to  joyne  with
us,  and  pay  us  all  our  money  which  remained  good  to  us ;
provided  likewise,  that  so  soone  as  ever  wee  should  release
the  seven  thousand  Russes,  our  money  should  be  payed
downe.  On  these  conditions  (I  say)  wee  yeelded  to  goe
upon  the  businesse.

They  meet.  At  length  Pontus  le  Guard  met  us  (according  to  the

promise)  and  with  him  was  money  brought  to  pay  us,
and  his  word  given  that  presently  wee  should  receive  it.
But  the  lamentable  estate,  in  which  the  poore  besiedged
Russes  were  (within  the  sconce)  being  at  the  point  of  death
for  want  of  foode,  required  rather  speedy  execution,  then
deliberation :  so  that  the  necessities  of  their  hard  fortunes
craving  haste,  on  wee  went,  having  about  ninteene  or

[III. iv. 779.]  twenty  thousand  Russes,  that  were  people  of  the  same
Countrey,  joyned  to  our  Armie,  to  aide  them  in  this
enterprize.  But  as  we  all  were  upon  a  march,  the  enemy
having  received  intelligence  of  our  approaching,  set  for-
ward, to  the  number  of  eight  thousand  Lanciers  and  more,
to  intercept  us  by  the  way :  and  being  within  one  dayes
march  of  the  place  to  which  wee  were  likewise  going,  they
set  fire  upon  three  or  foure  Villages  hard  by  the  place
where  we  lay  at  Grasse  with  our  Horses,  for  a  token  that

An.  1 610.  they  were  comming.  And  this  was  done  upon  Mid-
summer day  last  in  the  morning,  by  breake  of  day.  Then
came  they  thundring  with  shouts  and  cries  to  set  upon
us :  but  no  sooner  was  the  Alarum  given,  when  the
greatest part of those nineteene or twenty thousand

Base  Russe Russes,  that  were  joyned  to  us  as  our  aide,  fled  most  basely

flight.  before  any  blow  was  given. This  sudden  cowardize  of

theirs  somewhat  amazed  us : but  the  houre  being  now

220

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1610.

come,  wherein  we  were  not  to  talke  of  dangers,  but  to
goe  meete  them,  with  our  sixe  companies  of  English  horse,
we  bravely  resisted  the  Polanders,  and  with  great  hurt  to
them,  but  with  little  losse  upon  our  part,  charged  them
three  severall  times.

At  last  Pontus  le  Guard  (our  chiefe  Generall)  tooke  his  P.  le  Guard
heeles  and  fled too, leaving  us  utterly  destitute  of  all  fieeth-
direction  : which  much  astonished  us,  as  not  well  under-
standing what  to  doe :  for  our  greatest  strength  (being  by
their  flight)  taken  from  us,  none  but  wee  strangers  were
left  in  the  field,  and  of  us  there  was  not  in  all,  above  two
thousand,  and  of  that  number  there  were  above  six  hundred
French  horsemen,  who  seeing  both  the  Generall  gone,  and  French  flee.
the  Russes  fled,  turned  their  backs  upon  us,  and  ranne
away  too  most  valiantly,  yet  not  out  of  the  field,  but  to
the  enemy.

Then  were  wee  not  above  twelve  or  fourteene  hundred
at  the  most  left  to  resist  eight  thousand  at  the  least :  upon
whom  notwithstanding,  our  six  companies  of  English
horsemen,  charged  three  severall  times,  without  any  great
losse,  but  with  much  honor :  And  at  the  fourth  time,  for  English
want  of  powers  to  second  them  (which  the  French  should  honour-
have  done)  all  our  six  companies  were  scattered  and  over-
throwne  with  the  losse  of  few  of  our  colours.  The
Captaines  over  these  sixe  Companies  of  Horse,  were
these :

Captaine  Crale,  of  whose  company  I  was.  Captaine
Kendricke,  Captaine  Benson,  Captaine  Carre,  Captaine
Colbron,  Captaine  Creyton.

Which  six  Captaines  had  not  in  all  their  companies
above  five  hundred  men.  In  this  battaile,  Captaine
Creyton  was  slaine  in  the  field ;  Captaine  Crale  was  shot
in  the  knee,  and  within  a  short  time  after  dyed  of  that
wound ;  not  above  twelve  of  his  companie  escaping.
Captaine  Kendrick  was  wounded  in  divers  places  of  the
head,  and  dyed.  Captaine  Benson  was  shot  in  the  hand,
and  wounded  in  the  head,  and  yet  escaped,  and  lived :
onely  Captaine  Carre  and  his  Cornet  escaped,  but  all  his

221

t

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

companie  scattered  and  lost. Divers  other  Officers  were
slaine,  whose  names  I  cannot  remember.

Thus  were  all  our  English  horse-men  dispersed  and
overthrowne,  to  the  number  of  five  hundred  and  upwards.
Our  Generall  Everhorne  with  his  companies  of  Finland,
or  Finsco  blades,  were  also  put  to  retrait :  so  that  there
was  not  left  in  the  field  above  sixe  or  seven  hundred,
which  were  foot-men.  And  of  these,  one  halfe  was
English,  one  halfe  Dutch,  who  kept  onely  a  certaine  place
by  a  wood  side,  barricadoed  about  with  wagons,  having
with  them  foure  field  pieces,  with  which  they  did  great
spoile  to  the  Enemie.  But  their  number  being  but  few,
neither  durst  they  venture  on  the  Enemie,  nor  durst  the
Enemie  enter  upon  them,  but  kept  them  still  (as  it  were
besieged)  in  that  place  onely,  because  they  could  no  wayes
escape.  The  inconvenience  of  which  cooping  up  in  so
narrow  a  roome,  being  looked  into,  and  the  dangers  on
every  side  well  considered,  it  was  held  fittest  for  safetie,
to  summon  the  Enemie  to  a  parley.  In  which  parley,  the
Enemie  offered,  that  if  they  would  yeeld,  and  fall  to  their
sides,  they  should  have  good  quarter.  And  if  any  man
had  desire  to  goe  for  his  owne  Countrie,  hee  should  have
libertie  to  goe  with  a  Pasport  from  the  King  of  Poland.
Or  if  any  would  serve  the  King  of  Poland,  hee  should
have  the  allowance  of  very  good  meanes  duly  paid  him.
Upon  these  compositions  they  all  yeelded,  and  went  to
the  Enemie ;  onely  Captaine  Yorke  and  his  Officers,  with
some  few  of  their  Souldiers,  went  backe  into  the  Countrie,
and  came  not  to  the  Enemie,  as  the  rest  had  done :  who
from  thence  marched  up  to  the  Polish  Leaguer,  being  ten
miles  distant  from  the  place,  and  there  they  continued.
But  such  as  desired  to  travell  to  their  owne  Countries,
were  sent  to  the  King  of  Polands  Leaguer,  which  lay  at
that  time  at  a  place  called  Smolensko,  and  there  accordingly
had  their  Passe,  to  the  number  of  one  hundred,  of  which
number  I  my  selfe  was  one.  What  became  of  the  resth
I  know  not :  but  I  with  five  more  held  together  in
travell,  untill  we  came  to  Dantzicke,  a  great  Towne  in

222

31

i)

i)

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1611.

Prussia, being distant from Smolensko one hundred
leagues.

To  make  an  end  of  this  Storie  of  the  Foxe  and  the
Beare,  the  pretending  Demetrius  and  contending  Suiskey ;
it  is  reported,  that  Demetrius  seeing  these  perplexities  of
Suiskey,  raysed  a  great  Armie  of  such  Russes  as  volun-
tarily *  fell  to  him  (the  Pole  having  now  rejected  him,  *Some  say  he
except  some  Voluntaries)  and  againe  laid  siege  to  Mosco  ;  hadt  1 00000.
Zolkiewsky  for  Sigismund,  beleagred  another  part  thereof  w  u  !s
with  fortie  thousand  men,  whereof  one  thousand  and  five  credibie,
hundred were English, Scottish, and French. Suiskey
seeing  no  hope  to  withstand  them,  his  Empire  renouncing
him, hee would seeme to renounce the Empire first,  [III.  iv. 780.]
betaking  himselfe  to  a  Monasterie. But  not  the  sanctitie
of  the  place, nor  sacred name of  an  Emperour  might
protect  or  secure  him. The  Muscovites  yeelded  up  their  Moscoyee/ded.
Citie  and  his  Person to the  Pole, and the Castle  was
manned for Sigismund. All joyne against Demetrius,
who  betaketh  him  to  his  heeles,  and  by  a  Tartar  (as  before
is  said)  was  slaine  in  his  campe. Charles  King  of  Sweden  Second  Deme-
dyed  Octob.  30.  161 1.  and  Gustavus  his  sonne  succeeded.  &h*  skint.
Sigismund  obtayneth  Smolensko  also  after  two  yeeres  siege
and  more :  in  which  time  the  Defendants  had  held  out  so
resolutely,  that  the  Polish  Peeres  and  States  (which  in  that
Kingdom  beare  great  sway)  had  called  the  King  to  their
Parliament,  the  rather  in  regard  of  the  King  of  Denmarke
vvarring  upon  Sweden  (in  which  warre  divers  thousands
)f  our  English  voluntaries  *  assisted  the  Dane)  but  he  * : Under  the
first  desiring  to  trie  his  fortune,  carried  the  Citie  with  two  Y^h^r
n  hundred  pieces  of  Ordnance  and  other  rich  spoile. Many  ^fjoln  **'
were  slaine,  and  divers  great  persons  taken,  of  which  was  p00/ey  yr#
the  Archbishop. Many  were  blowne  up  (as  was  thought)
by  their  owne  voluntarie  act,  by  fire  cast  into  the  store-
house,  in  which  is  said  to  have  beene  (if  our  Author
nistake  not)  fifteene  thousand  vessels  of  poulder :  where-  A.  Jansonius,
apon  seemed  to  returne  the  very  Chaos,  or  in  stead  thereof  quindedes
1 Hell into the World. It is accounted one of the  mufs^serum
strongest  Forts  in  Christendome,  the  walls  able  to  beare

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

1611.

two Carts meeting in the  breadth. It was taken the

twelfth  of  July,  1610.

Suiskeys  Suiskey  was  carried  into  Poland  and  there  imprisoned

imprisonment 'm  Waringborough  Castle,  and  after  the  losse  of  libertie

and  his  Empire,  exposed  to  scorne  and  manifold  miseries,

hee  dyed  in  a  forraine  countrie. But  before  that  Tragedie

the  Poles  are  said  to  have  more  then  acted  others. For

when  they  held  him  prisoner  before  his  departure  from

Moscovia,  they  sent  for  many  Grandes  in  Suiskeys  name

as  if  he  had  much  desired  to  see  them  before  his  fatal

farewell,  to  take  a  friendly  and  honourable  leave  of  them

Polish crueltie.  They  come,  are  entertayned,  and  in  a  private  place  knocked

on  the  head  and  throwne  into  the  River : and  thus  wa

most  of  the  chiefe  remayning  Nobilitie  destroyed. The

Poles  fortified  two  of  the  Forts  at  Mosco,  and  burnt  twc

others,  as  not  able  to  man  them. But  the  Muscovite  alsc

there  held  them  besieged  till  famine  forced  them  to  yeeld :

Their  reward,  the  Russians  finding  there  sixtie  barrels  of  pouldred  mam

flesh  (it  seemeth  of  such  as  had  dyed,  or  were  slaine,  thai

Eaters  of  mans  their  death  might  give  life  to  the  Survivers)  a  just,  bul

flesh  fined  to  miserable  and  tragicall  spectacle. We  shall  conclude  this

eatemans Discourse  with  giving  you  two  Letters,  the  one  taker

out  of  a  Letter  written  from  Colmogro  Sept.  7.  (the  yeere

is  not  dated)  amidst  these  broiles ;  the  other  from  Captaine

Margaret  before  mentioned  by  Thuanus :  and  after  them

for  further  illustration  and  profitable  use  of  this  storie

is  added  part  of  a  Letter  of  Doctor  Halls.

ON  Thursday  morning  came  George  Brighouse  fron
Mosco,  he  hath  beene  three  weekes  on  the  way,  bul
fW°ht  W  °Se  ky  reason  of  his  small  staying  here,  I  can  learne  but  smal
married  occurrents,  which  is,  still  Mosco  holdeth  out,  of  late  some

Demetrie of  the  Nobilitie  issued  out  and  gave  the  Enemie  a  smal"
that  was  skirmish, slue neere foure thousand of them, tooke

slaine;  who pr}soners  one  hundred  and  seventie,  whereof  eleven  Polisr
now  had  £>, 1  n  1  1 •

recovered Gentlemen gallant men, are  almost starved m prison

libertie.  Sandomirsky  *  is  entred  the  borders  with  a  new  supply

224

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF MUSCOVIA

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1611.

of  Souldiers,  the  which  Demetrie  his  sonne  in  Law  hath

ong  since  expected.

The  Crim  Tartar  is  returned  from  thence  into  his  owne  Russia  spoyled
Country,  hath  taken  more  then  twentie  thousand  prisoners  h  Tartars.
:aptives  out  of  Resan  and  thereabouts : Knez  Scopin  *
s  two  nineties  from  Yeraslave,  he  meanes  to  march  from
hence  to  Mosco,  but  by  Georges  speeches  he  makes  no
rreat  haste.

Bouginsky  that  was  Secretarie  to  Demetrie,  is  still  under
>restave  with  an  Officer,  was  almost  starved  with  hunger,
>ut  Master  Brewster  doth  daily  releeve  him  to  his  great
:omfort.

George Brighouse came Poste by Volodemer : the
Drincesse,  wife  to  Evan  Evanowich,  that  was  eldest  sonne
o  the  a  old  Emperour  (shee  to  whom  you  gave  the  good  a  Genera//  of
ntertainment  to)  is  there  at  his  going  up  and  comming  *{!ef°rces.  °f
>acke,  made  very  much  of  him  ;  he  dined  in  her  Presence  : rUJ^  y
fter  dinner  sent  him  a  great  Present  of  many  dishes  and  A  Dane
Irinkes  for  your  sake,  and  often  remembred  you  and  your  borne,  see
Teat  kindnesse  to  her  and  hers ;  still  remembring  T.  La. &oc t.  Halls
nd  kept  him  so  a  long  time  in  her  owne  Cell.  Evan*'

There  is  a  great  conspiracy  still  in  the  Mosco  against  Vasilowuh.
he  Emperour  Vasili  Evanowich,  onely  the  Muscovites  Suiskey  now
tand  with  him,  and  very  few  of  the  Nobilitie.  Daily  raigning.
here  issueth  out  by  force  or  stealth  divers  of  the  Gentrie,  citieml  *
lost  of  the  Dutch  c,  specially  the  Women  are  gone  out  cLieflanders
f  the  Mosco  to  the  Tartar.  It  is  supposed  that  the  that  inhabit
Lmperour  cannot  long  hold  out,  and  *  Demetrie  Evano-  there-

rich  is  reported  to  bee  a  very  wise  Prince.  ine  second

r  J  Demetrius,

which  was

^aptain  Margarets  Letter  to  Master  Merick  from  so°ne  afier

tt 1  it  m. s  slaine  by  a

Hamborough,  Jan.  29.  ^1612.  Tartar.

Right  worshipfull  Sir,  I  could  not  omit  this  commoditie  English
without  commending  my  service  to  your  Worship,  account.
nd  also  briefly  to  advertise  you  of  the  State  of  Mosco,
hich  is  not  as  I  could  wish. Also  I  left  Master  Brewster
good  health  at  my  departure ;  but  three  dayes  after  the
xiv  225  p

Dl

em

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

The  Poles  in  Towne  within  the  red  wall  was  burnt  with  certaine  fin
Mosco  besieged  gajs  shot  'm  by  the  Russes,  so  that  there  is  but  three  house:
tui^'fZTi  left  whole,  the  English  house  also  being  burnt.  Maste:
English  house  Brewster  is  constrained  to  nave  his  dwelling  in  a  belle:
burnt.  under  the  Palace,  without  great  friends  except  Misslofsqui

The Generall Cotquevilsh is arrived there, and left 1
sufficient  number  of  men  to  keepe  the  Castle,  and  th<
red  Wall,  hee  himselfe  with  his  Armie  is  gone  toward
Resan,  and  he  hath  sent  with  much  to  doe,  and  upoi
certaine  conditions, to  the  River  of  Sagia  towards  th<
Volga,  to  bring  victuals  to  maintayne  them  that  are  in  th<
Castle  besieged  of  the  Muscovites. The  King  of  Polant
is  altogether  resolved  to  goe  there  in  person  this  summer  ate
and  if  the  Russes  have  no  forraine  helpe,  as  there  is  n<  i
appearance,  no  question  it  will  come  to  passe  as  I  wri  jee
last  to  your  Worship,  that  they  will  be  forced  to  yeeld  |e
I  write  briefly  to  your  Worship,  because  I  hope  to  tak
my  voyage  to  France  through  England,  and  there  to  mee
with  your  Worship ;  intreating  your  Worship  to  accep
these  few  lines  as  a  testimony  of  the  service  I  have  vowei  |js
to  your  Worship,  &c.  and  so  I  end  in  haste.  1 1

net
Thus  have  we  finished  foure  Acts  of  this  Tragedie  )eca
the  first,  ending  with  the  end  of  Bealas  family ;  the  seconc
with  the  ruine  of  that  of  Boris ;  the  third,  with  that  (what  Pj
soever)  Demetrius ;  the  fourth,  with  this  Suiskey,  attende
with  that  shadow  or  ghost  of  another  Demetrius.  No^fe
as  I  have  seene  sometimes  the  Spectators  of  Tragedie  L
whiled  with  discourse  of  a  Chorus,  or  (as  in  our  vulgai^
entertayned  with  musicke,  to  remit  for  a  time  those  bloudi  Ljtj
impressions  fixed  in  attentive  mindes ;  so  have  we  reprc  L
sented  Pheodores  Coronation  added  to  the  first ;  Boris  h:  D(j  (
Charter  to  the  English  to  conclude  the  second;  that  qL
Demetrius  to  the  third,  and  for  this  fourth  I  have  heif$m(
made  bold  with  a  Letter  of  my  worthy  friend  (so  am
bold  to  call  that  good  Man,  zealous  Protestant,  elegar
Writer,  industrious  Preacher,  learned  Doctor,  an  ^
Reverend  Deane,  Doctor  Hall,  a  Hall  adorned  with  slve

226

tli

Id

OIM

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1612.

ich  Arras,  and  with  all  the  ground,  light,  life,  the  All

>f  these,  Christian  humilitie)  which  may  serve  as  a  Letter

f  commendation  to  my  intent,  as  it  was  intended  to  another

porke,  which  had  it  beene  publike,  might  have  prevented

he  greatest  part  of  this : A  worke  of  Master  Samuel  Master  Sa.

>outheby,  in  Sir  Th.  Smiths  Voyage  mentioned,  touching  Southeby.

hose  Russian occurrents  which  he  in  part  saw. As  a

Traveller  he  deserveth  place  here. And  howsoever  I  have

either  beene  so  happy  to  see  the  Worke  nor  the  Work-

tian,  yet  this  Epistle  tells  what  we  have  lost,  and  my

zorke  easily  proclaimes  the  defect  of  such  a  Wardrobe,

eing  (as  you  see)  like  a  Beggars  cloke,  all  of  diversifyed

>atches ;  so  much  more  labour  to  mee,  in  both  getting

nd  stitching  them,  though  so  much  lesse  satisfaction  to

hee. Once,  as  I  have  placed  this  long  Russian  storie  in

^he  midst  of  Marine  Discoveries,  to  refresh  the  Reader

k  while  on  Land  :  so  amidst  these  tragicall,  harsh  Relations,

-e thus  seeke  to  recreate  thy  wearie  spirits  with  this  chat

:P  f  mine,  and  after  these  Minda  gates,  more  really,  with

'lis  Letter  so  usefull  to  the  present  subject,  so  pleasing

1 the stile. The whole, and the next following to a

•uchinski,  the  Reader  may  finde  in  his  so  oft  published

epecades  of  Epistles.

Jii

rRavell perfiteth wisedome ; and observation gives
perfection to travell : without which, a man may
lease  his  eyes,  not  feede  his  braine ;  and  after  much  earth
leasured,  shall  returne  with  a  weary  body,  and  an  empty
linde. Home is more safe, more pleasant, but lesse
•uitfull  of  experience :  But,  to  a  minde  not  working  and
rejiscursive,  all  heavens,  all  earths  are  alike. And,  as  the
nd  of  travell  is  observation ;  so,  the  end  of  observation
the  informing  of  others : for,  what  is  our  knowledge
smothered  in  our  selves,  so  as  it  is  not  knowne  to  more  ?
uch  secret  delight  can  content  none  but  an  envious  nature,
ou  have  breathed  many  and  cold  aires,  gone  farre,  seene
m(jiuch,  heard  more,  observed  all. These  two  yeares  you
»ave  spent  in  imitation  of  Nabuchadnezzars  seven;  con-

227

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

1612.

y

V

versing with such creatures as Paul fought with a
Ephesus. Alas !  what  a  face,  yea  what  a  backe  of  a  Churcl
have  you  seene  ?  what  manners  ?  what  people  ? Amongs
whom,  ignorant  Superstition  strives  with  close  Atheisme
Treachery  with  Cruelty,  one  Devill  with  another ;  whiL
Truth  and  Vertue  doe  not  so  much  as  give  any  challengi
of  resistance. Returning  once  to  our  England  after  thi
experience,  I  imagine  you  doubted  whether  you  were  01
Earth,  or  in  Heaven. Now  then  (if  you  will  heare  mee  1
whom  you  were  wont)  as  you  have  observed  what  yoi  1
have  seene, and  written what  you have  observed ; so
publish  what  you  have  written : it  shall  be  a  grateful
labour,  to  us,  to  Posteritie. I  am  deceived,  if  the  fickle
nesse  of  the  Russian  State,  have  not  yeelded  more  memor  oj
able  matter  of  Historie  then  any  other  in  our  Age,  o  I
perhaps  many  Centuries  of  our  Predecessors. How  shal
I  thinke,  but  that  God  sent  you  thither  before  these  broiles  |el
to  bee  the  witnesse,  the  Register  of  so  famous  mutations
He  loves  to  have  those  just  evils  which  hee  doth  in  on
part  of  the  World,  knowne  to  the  whole,  and  those  evils
which  men  doe  in  the  night  of  their  secresie,  broughlf
forth  into  the  Theater  of  the  World ;  that  the  evill  o
mens  sinne  being  compared  with  the  evill  of  his  punish
ment,  may  Justine  his  proceedings,  and  condemne  theirsL
Your  worke  shall  thus  honour  him ;  besides  your  secon<
service,  in  the  benefit  of  the  Church. For,  whiles  yoii
discourse  of  the  open  Tyrannie  of  that  Russian  Nero,  Joh]
Basilius ;  the  more  secret,  no  lesse  bloudy  plots  of  Boris
the  ill  successe  of  a  stolne  Crowne,  though  set  upon  th
head of  an harmelesse Sonne ; the  bold  attempts  an(
miserable  end  of  a  false,  yet  aspiring  challenge ;  the  per
fidiousnesse of a servile people, unworthy of bette
Governours ; the  misse-carriage  of  wicked  Governours
unworthy  of  better  Subjects ;  the  unjust  usurpations  o
men,  just  (though  late)  revenges  of  God  ;  crueltie  rewarded
with  bloud,  wrong  claimes  with  overthrow,  treachery  wit)
bondage ;  the  Reader,  with  some  secret  horror,  shall  drav
in  delight,  and  with  delight  instruction : Neither  knov

228

Lir

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1612.

any  Relation  whence  hee  shall  take  out  a  more  easie
Lesson  of  Justice,  of  Loyaltie,  of  Thankefulnesse.

But  above  all,  let  the  World  see  and  commiserate  the  [III.iv.782.]
hard  estate  of  that  worthy  and  noble  Secretarie,  Buchinsky.
Poore  Gentleman !  his  distresse  recalls  ever  to  my  thoughts
flEsops  Storke,  taken  amongst  the  Cranes :  He  now
lourishes  his  haire,  under  the  displeasure  of  a  forreigne
Prince ;  At  once  in  durance,  and  banishment.  He  served
in  ill  Master ;  but,  with  an  honest  heart,  with  cleane
lands.  The  Masters  injustice  doth  no  more  infect  a  good
Servant,  than  the  truth  of  the  Servant  can  justifie  his  ill
Vlaster.  A  bad  Worke-man  may  use  a  good  Instrument :
.nd  oft-times  a  cleane  Napkin  wipeth  a  foule  mouth.  It
oyes  me  yet  to  thinke,  that  his  pietie,  as  it  ever  held
riendship  in  Heaven,  so  now  it  winnes  him  friends  in
his  our  other  World  :  Lo,  even  from  our  Hand  unexpected
leliverance  takes  a  long  flight,  and  blesseth  him  beyond
ope  ;  yea  rather,  from  Heaven,  by  us. That  God,  whom  1

n  lee  serves,  will  bee  knowne  to  those  rude  and  scarce
umane  Christians,  for  a  protector  of  innocence,  a  favourer
f  truth,  a  rewarder  of  pietie.  The  mercy  of  our  gracious
"ing,  the  compassion  of  an  honourable  Counsellour,  the
:>ve  of  a  true  friend,  and  (which  wrought  all,  and  set  all
n  worke)  the  grace  of  our  good  God, shall  now  lose

J  lose  bonds,  and  give  a  glad  welcome  to  his  libertie,  and
willing  farell  to  his  distresse.  He  shall  (I  hope)  live
d  acknowledge  this ;  in  the  meane  time,  I  doe  for  him,
"hose  Russian  Affaires  are  not  more  worthy  of  your
Records,  than  your  love  to  this  friend  is  worthy  of  mine,
or  neither  could  this  large  Sea  drowne  or  quench  it,  nor
me  and  absence  (which  are  wont to  breed  a  lingring

resumption  of  friendship)  abate  the  heate  of  that  affec-
on,  which  his  kindnesse  bred,  religion  nourished.  Both
irenesse,  and  worth  shall  commend  this  true  love ;  which
o  say  true)  hath  beene  now  long  out  of  fashion.  Never
mes  yeelded  more  love ;  but,  not  more  subtle.  For
/ery  man  loves  himselfe  in  another,  loves  the  estate  in

101  le  person  : Hope  of  advantage  is  the  Load-stone  that

229

i

IT

in

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

drawes  the  yron  hearts  of  men ;  not  vertue,  not  deserl
No  Age  affoorded  more  Parasites,  fewer  friends  :  The  mos
are  friendly  in  sight,  serviceable  in  expectation,  holloa
in  love,  trustlesse  in  experience.  Yet  now,  Buchinsk)
see  and  confesse  thou  hast  found  one  friend,  which  hat
made  thee  many,  &c.

§•  v.

Of  the  miserable  estate  of  Russia  after  Swiskey
deportation,  their  election  of  the  King  0
Polands  Sonne,  their  Interregnum  and  popula
estate,  and  chusing  at  last  of  the  presen
Emperour,  with  some  remarkable  accidents  ii
his  time.

Hus have we seene the Russian sinnes utterl

rooting  up so many  Russian Imperiall  Familie

and  persons :  the  whole  Family  of  Ivan  extirpate

that of Boris succeeding, annihilate ; two pretendin

Demetrii  and  Suiskie  extinct : and  yet  have  wee  greate

abhominations  to  shew  you. No  Tyrant,  no  Serpent,  n

Dragon is so  exorbitant  and  prodigious  as that  whic

hath many heads : and therefore in divine Vision

Monarchies (how ever excessive and tyrannical) hav

beene  resembled  by  simpler  and  more  uniforme  beast!

Dan.  2.  y  7.  but  the  Devill  in  a  great  red  Dragon  with  seven  head

&  8-  and  ten  homes,  and  the  Beast  likewise  to  which  hee  gav

I2-3-  ^  nis  power  and  his  seat  and  great  authoritie,  which  opene

iy[  Y[ ' his  mouth in  blasphemie  against God, &c. On whic

Jud.iy.6.&  sate  the  great  Whore,  the  Antichristian  Babylon. Ther

18.  1.  y  19.  was  no  King  in  Israel,  is  both  Alpha  and  Omega,  Prefac

1.  (£21.25.  and  Conclusion  Divine  Writ  to  some  misery  in  Israel

as  if  all  Kings  and  no  King,  were  the  Circumference  o

all the  lines  proceeding  from Mischiefes  Centre. An<

now  was  Russia  a  Monster  of  many  heads, that  is,

bodie  fallen  into  many  pieces. One  man  possessed  of  th

Wife  of  that  double  Demetrius,  got  to  Astracan,  ther

230

ad

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1612.

;  seating  himselfe  to  set  up  an  usurped  shop  of  Rule ;  the

^Southerne parts chose Prince Vladislaus, Son of K.

o,  Sigismund  of  Poland ; those  of  the  North  thought  of

;'a  other  Princes ; and at last  when neither the Fig-trees  Jud.  9.

iat  sweetnesse  nor  Olives  fatnesse,  nor  cheering  Wine  from
the Vine could take place in their inconstancie, the
Brambles  conceived  a  fire  which  devoured  the  Cedars  of
Libanus :  a  popular  government  happened,  or  if  you  will.  Popular
a  Confusion  of  the  multitude  bare  sway,  which  killed  and  &ve™ment  tn

ej"  murthered  every  Great  Man,  whom  any  Rascall  would
accuse  to  be  a  friend  to  the  Poles,  or  to  any  of  the  dead
Emperours,  whom  those  popular  injudicious  Judges
fancied  not.  And  now  Russia  blushed  with  impudencie,
that  is  with  shamelesse  sight  of  the  daily  effusion  and
profusion  of  her  best  bloud ;  now  every  man  was  an
Actor :  and  oh  had  they  beene  but  Actors !  too  really  did
they  present  (not  represent)  bloudie  Tragedies,  of  which
their  whole  Countrey  was  becomne  the  Theatre  ;  the  Devill
the  Choragus  (a  Murtherer  from  the  beginning)  and  the
whole  World  Spectator,  stupid  with  admiration,  quaking

d  with  horrour  of  so  uncouth  a  sight !

Now  for  the  overtures  betwixt  the  Muscovites,  and
Stanislaus  Stanislawich  Zolkiewskie,  Generall  of  the
Polakes,  touching  their  Election  of  Vladislaus  Sonne  of
King  Sigismund,  and  the  Articles  propounded  :  also  the
answere  of  Prince  Vladislaus  to  the  same  Articles,  Anno
1 61 2.  I  have  here  expressed  in  Latine  as  I  found  them;
fearing  I  should  be  over-tedious  to  translate  them,  especi-
ally seeing  the  businesse  came  not  to  effect :  and  the
English  Articles  following  of  the  Russian  Embassage  to  [III.iv.783/

a|the  King  of  Poland,  doth  lay  open  that  and  other  passages

%  of  the  Russian  Confusions.

Pactainter Primarium  Ducem  Exercituum  Regni
Polonias,  &  inter  Heroes Moscoviae.

SErenissimi Potentissimique Imperatoris Sigismundi
tertii Dei gratia Regis Poloniae, Magnique Ducis
^Lithuania?,  Russiae,  Prussiae,  Samogitise,  Kieviae,  Volhoniae,

231

.p.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

Podoliae,  Podlachiae,  Suecorum,  Oestonorum,  aliorumqu
nee  non  haereditarii  Regis  Suecorum,  Gottorum,  Van
dalorum,  Finlandiaeque  Principis.  Palatinus  Kijeviensis  ten!
Primarius  Dux  Exercituum  Regni  Poloniae  Capitaneu
Rohativensis,  Camaenacensis,  Kalusciensis.  Ego  Stanis
laus  Stanislaides  Zolkiewsky  de  Zolkwia,  Manifestun
facio  praesentibus  pactis,  &  confirmatis  meis  Uteris.  Quoc
Omnipotentis  in  Trinitate  adorandi  Dei  gratia,  &  volun
tate,  turn  &  benedictione  venerabilis  Hermogenis,  Mos
covitarum,  totiusque  Russia?  Patriarchae,  Metropolitarum
Archiepiscoporum,  Episcoporum,  Archimandrytarum
Humaenorum  totiusque  venerabilis  Cleri.  Et  pos
pacta  omnium  Heroum,  Comitum,  Capitaneorum
Primariorum  Dapiferorum,  Aulicorum,  Tenutariorum
Aulicorum  arcibus  Praefectorum,  &  Decurionum  Sclo-
petariorum,  necnon  quorumvis  Moscoviae  haeredum
Heroumque  liberorum,  Advenarum,  Mercaturam  exer-
centium,  Jaculatorum,  velitum,  Fabrorum  tormentariorum,
&  reliquorum  incolarum  magni  Imperii  Moscovitarum.
Heroes,  utpote  Comes  Albertus  Ivanoviz  Mscislawskii,
Dux  Venceslaus  Venceslaides  Galicziin,  Albertus  Ivanoviz
Seremetii,  Dux  Venceslaus  Mieliechii,&  Primarii  Deputati
Venceslaus  Telepnievii,  &  Thomas  Lugowskii,  &  universi
totius  Moscoviae  Primates,  Egerunt,  deliberaveruntque
mecum,  de  eligendo  Imperatore,  in  Wlodiimiriense
universumque  Moscovitarum  Imperium,  ac  tradiderunt
mihi  suam  confirmatam  sigillatamque  obligationem  &
sacrosanctum  vivificum  baptisma  sacrae  Regiae  Majestatis
exosculati  sunt  non  tantum  Primarii  Comites,  sed  etiam
Heroes,  incolentes  Aulici,  Capitanei,  Primarii  Dapiferi,
Aulici,  Cubicularii,  Structores,  Tenutarii,  &  Decuriones
Sclopetariorum,  omnisque  dignitatis  homines,  Jaculatores,
velites,  Fabri  Tormentarii,  variisque  status  serviles,  &
liberi  homines  Imperii  Moscovitici,  Hunc  in  modum :
Quod  venerabilis  Hermogenes  Moscoviae,  &  universal
Russiae  Patriarcha,  Metropolitae,  Archiepiscopi,  Episcopi,
Archimandrytae,  Humaeni  singuli  &  universi  venerabiles
Heroes,  Capitanei,  Primarii  Dapiferi,  Aulici,  Cubicularii,

232

tm

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1612.

|W  Structores, & Decuriones Sclopetariorum, Tenutarii,
M  haeredes Heroum,  Advenae, homines Mercaturam  exer-
centes,  Jaculatores,  Velites,  Fabri  tormentarii,  omnis  sortis
■««l  serviles,  &  haereditarii Imperii Moscovitici, constituunt
is-  Legatos mittere, atque supplicare magno Imperatori,
^  Serenissimo Sigismundo Regi Poloniae, & Serenissimo
od  sacrae  ejus  Majestatis  Regiae  filio  Vladislao  Sigismundi,  ut
■i"  Serenissimus Imperator Sigismundus Rex, commisereri
eorum velit, constituatque Vlodiimiriensis totiusque
m,  Imperii  Moscovitici  Imperatorem  Vladislaum  Sigismundi
m,  sacrae suae Regiae Majestatis filium. Quod ut fiat,
»t  venerabilis Hermogenes totius Moscoviae Patriarcha,
n,  Metropolitae, Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Archimandrytae,
Humaeni, totus denique venerabilis Clerus, Deum ter
optimum  maximum  rogat,  &  Imperatorem  Serenissimum
Vladislaum Sigismundi filium sacrae Regiae Majestatis
Imperio  totius  Moscoviae  constitui  laeto  exoptant  animo.
Omnes etiam Heroes, Aulici Imperatorii, Capitanei,
Primarii Dapiferi, Equites, Cubicularii, Structores,
Decuriones  Sclopetariorum,  Tenutarii,  in  arcibus  Praefecti,
Dispensatores,  liberi  Heroum,  Advenae,  Mercaturam  exer-
centes,  Jaculatores,  velites, Fabri tormentarii, omnisque
conditionis serviles, &  liberi incolae Imperii Moscoviae,
Serenissimi Imperatoris, filii Serenissimi Regis  Poloniae
Vladislai Sigismuntoviz, & posteritatis (si quae ipsius
futura)  exosculati  sunt  sacrosanctum  vivificum  baptisma,
hoc  signo  indicantes,  se  cum  ipsi  Imperatori,  turn  omni
ipsius  posteritati  aeternis  temporibus  servituros,  omniaque
prosperima  exoptantes,  in  omnibus  non  secus  ut  superiori-
bus haereditariis magnis Imperatoribus, & Caesaribus,
Magnis  item  Ducibus  universi  Imperii  Moscovitici,  nee
ullum  malum  ipsi,  &  ejus  posteritati  ominaturos,  machina-
turos, cogitaturos, aut alium quempiam ex Moscovito
Imperio,  vicinisque  Imperiis,  in  Imperatorem  Moscoviae,
praeter Serenissimum Vladislaum Sigmuntoviz filium
Serenissimi  Regis  Poloniae  introductores, adoptaturosve.
Quibus  vero  cum  conditionibus  in  Imperatorem  Mosco-
vitici Imperii eum sint suscepturi, hac de re Heroes

233

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

Dux  Albertus  Ivanoviz  Mscislawskii  cum  Collegis  suis
tradidere  mihi  obligatorium  pactum.  Ego  vero  Primarius
dux  Regni  Poloniae,  post  pactum  istud  in  scriptis  mihi
traditum,  de  omnibus  punctis  cum  Heroibus  certam  con-
clusionem  constituimus,  &  approbavimus.  Harumque
conditionum  approbandarum  gratia  tradidi  Heroibus  Duci
Alberto  Ivanoviz  cum  Collegis  ejus  obligationem,  &  con-
firmavi  meae  manus  subscription,  &  sigilli  appositione,  &
sacrosanctum  vivificum  Baptisma  exosculatus  sum  ego
Primarius  Dux  exercituum  Regni  Poloniae  &  omnes
Primipili,  Centuriones  sese  obligando,  pro  Magno  Impera-
tore  nostro  Serenissimo  Sigismundo  Rege  Poloniae,
ipsiusque  filio  Serenissimo  Vladislao,  Sigmuntoviz,  &  pro
magnis  Imperiis,  universoque  magno  Regno  Poloniae,
Magnoque  Ducatu  Lithuaniae,  &  pro  nobismetipsis,
totoque  exercitu,  qui  est  penes  sacrosanctam  Regiam
Majestatem,  &  penes  me  Primarium  suum.  Eum  in
modum.  Quod  benedictione  castissimae  Deiparae,  &
Sanctorum,  qui  magna  miracula  in  Moscovia  praestitere,
utpote  Sancti  Petri  Alexii  &  Anthonii,  omniumque
Sanctorum,  Serenissimus  Sigismundu  Rex  noster  Poloniae
miserebitur  Imperii  Moscovitici,  &  creabit  Imperatorem
Wlodiimiriensem,  omniumque  magnorum  Imperiorum,
totius  Muscoviae,  filium  sacrae  suae  Regiae  Majestatis
[III.  iv.  784.]  Vladislaum  Sigmuntoviz.  Cum  vero  jam  Serenissimus
Vladislaus  Sigmuntoviz  Alius  Serenissimi  Regis  Poloniae
advenerit  ad  Arcem  Sedis  Imperatoriae  Moscoviticae,  turn
coronabitur  in  Imperatorem  Wlodiimiriensem,  omniumque
totius  Moscoviae  Imperiorum,  ipsique  Imperatoria  Corona,
&  Diadema  imponetur  a  venerabili  Hermogene  Patriarcha
totius  Moscoviae,  &  ab  universo  venerabili  Clero  Graecae
Religionis,  secundum  pristinum  morem  &  dignitatem.
Factus  vero  Serenissimus  S.R.  Majestatis  films  Vladislaus
Sigmuntoviz  Imperator  Moscoviae,  Templa  Dei  in  Mos-
covia per  omnes  Arces,  Vicos,  universumque  Imperium
Moscoviae  repurgabit,  &  augebit  in  omnibus  ad  pristinam
consuetudinem,  &  ab  omni  incommodo  tutabitur,  turn
Sanctis Dei, & Divorum imaginibus, & castissimae

234

-~r\

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1612.
Deiparae,  omnibus  ossibus  Sanctorum,  quae  magna  prodigia
in  Moscovia  faciunt,  debitum  cultum  flexis  genibus  prae-
stare,  illaque  adorare  tenebitur.  Et  Politicae,  nee  non
Spirituali  utriusque  sexus  Christianitati,  omnibusque  vere
Christianis,  ut  sint  verae  Christianae  legis  Graecae  Religionis
non  prohibebit.  Romanae  Religionis  aliarumque  diver-
sarum  Sectarum  Religionis  Templa,  aut  Synagogas,  in
Moscovitici  Imperii  Arcibus,  &  pagis,  nullibi  aedificare
debet  ut  nihilominus  in  Arce  Moscovia  praefata,
unum  Romanum  Templum  esse  possit,  propter  homines
Polonos,  &  Lithuanos,  qui  penes  Imperatorem  filium
Serenissimi  R.  Polo,  sunt  futuri,  ea  de  re  cum  sacra  R.
Majestate,  &  venerabili  Hermogene  Patriarcha  Moscoviae,
omnibus  spiritualibus,  turn  Heroibus,  &  Capitaneis
collatio  instituenda.

Religio  autem  sacrosancta  Graeca  nullo  in  puncto
violanda,  aut  perturbanda,  vel  alia  quaepiam  inusitata  intro-
ducenda  est,  in  idque  danda  opera,  ut  sancta,  vera,
Christiana  Graeca  Religio,  suam  integritatem,  &  cultum
retineat,  juxta  morem  antiquum,  nee  Imperium  Mos-
coviticum,  ejusque  incolae,  veri  Christiani,  a  Graeca
Religione  ad  Romanam,  aut  aliam  quampiam,  vi,  seu
robore,  &  servitute,  aliisque  his  similibus  modis  ab-
ducantur.

Judaei  in  universum  Moscoviae  Imperium  causa  Mer-
caturae,  aut  alterius  cujuspiam  rei  proficisci  ne  permit-
tantur.  Venerabilia  &  ossa  Sanctorum,  ab  Imperatore  filio
Serenissimi  R.  Pol.  Vladislao  Sigmuntoviz  sancta  cum
veneratione  debent  venerari.  Et  venerabilem  Hermo-
genem  Patriarcham  Moscoviae,  Metropolitas,  Archi-
episcopos,  Episcopos,  Archimandrytas,  Humaenos,  Praes-
byteros,  Diaconos,  &  praesentes  spirituales,  universumque
Clerum  Christianae  sacrosanctae  Religionis  Graecae,  debito
afficere  honore,  in  omnibusque  tutari,  spiritualibus  negotiis
sese  immiscendo,  alienas  sectas  praeter  Graecam  religionem
introducere  nullas  debet.  Quod  autem  Templis,  Monas-
teriisve  non  Patrum  dicatur,  de  variis  proventibus,  &  qui
dabantur antiquorum tempore Imperatorum Moscoviae,

235

:>

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

utpote  sacrati  panes,  legumina,  summae  pecuniales,  &  his
de  variis  reditibus  similia  :  hos  prqventus  Ecclesiae  dicatos,
&  omnium  Imperatorum  antiquorum  Moscoviae,  nee
Herorum,  aut  aliorum  hominum  donationes,  si  quas
Templis,  aut  Monasteriis  Dei  dicaverunt,  aut  dicaturi
sunt,  adimere  debet,  nulla  secundum  antiquum  morem
constituta  violando.  Spirituales,  &  Regulares  status  nullo
modo  infringendo,  Dimensariis  omnia  pensa  spiritualia,  &
Regularia,  quibus  antiquitus  dabantur,  ex  fisco  Impera-
torio  omnia  reddendo,  ut  solitum  fuit,  &  ex  Imperatorio
Thesauro  in  Templa  &  Monasteria,  stipem  variorum
redituum  augendo.  Heroes,  Imperatorii  Aulici,  Capi-
tanei,  Primarii  Dapiferi,  Cubicularii,  &  cujusvis  generis
Tenutarii,  in  omnibus  negotiis,  in  omnibus  Imperialibus,
Castrensibus,  &  terrestribus  causis,  in  Arcibus  Palatini,
Capitanei,  sive  Tenutarii  &  Telonarii,  aut  alii  cujusmodi
Praefecti,  &  omnis  conditionis  homines,  ut  antiqua  retine-
ant  Privilegia  prout  constitutum  est  in  Moscovitico
Imperio,  ab  antiquis  magnis  Imperatoribus,  in  id  Serenis-
simus  Imperator  incumbet  serio.

Poloni  vero  &  Lithuani,  in  Moscovia  nullis  in  terres-
tribus, forensibus  negotiis,  aut  Arcibus  Palatinorum,
Capitaneorumve  esse  debent,  nee  successiones  Praefecturae,
aut  dignitatis  in  Arcibus  illis  tribuendae  sunt.

Quia  autem  Poloni,  &  Lithuani  ex  utroque  Imperio
videtur  consultum,  ut  praeficiantur  confinibus  Arcibus  ad
absolutum  levamen  hujus  Imperii,  ea  de  re  Serenissimus
Imperator  cum  Heroibus  collationem  instituet  suo
tempore.

Jam  vero  universa  Respublica  supplex  Serenissimum
Imperatorem  precatur,  ne  ad  executionem  perducat  hanc
conditionem,  antequam  fuerit  hac  in  parte  utrinque
deliberatum.

Qui  vero  Poloni  &  Lithuani  penes  Serenissimum
Imperatorem  Vladislaum  Sigmuntoviz  sunt  futuri,  eos  non
solum  honoraturi,  sed  etiam  contentaturi  pecuniali  nume-
ratione,  &  promoturi  secundum  uniuscujusque  merita
sumus.

236

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1612.

Moscovitici  Imperii  Heroes,  Aulicos,  Imperatorios,
Capitaneos,  Primarios  Dapiferos,  Cubicularios,  Praefectos,
Structures,  Tenutarios,  Arcium  Praefectos  Sclopetariorum,
omnesque  ad  Aulam  Imperatoriam  pertinentes  homines,  &
liberos  Heroum,  Advenas,  Mercatores,  Jaculatores_,  velites,
Fabros  tormentarios,  &  omnis  conditionis  bellicosos
homines,  aliosque  hccredes  Imperii  Moscovitici,  Serenis-
simus  Imperator  debet  habere  in  dignitate,  honore,  gratia,
&  amore,  ut  fuit  antiquitus  apud  primos  magnos  Moscoviae
Imperatores ;  Nee  antiquos  mores  &  status  qui  erant  in
Imperio  Moscoviae  immutare,  vel  Moscoviae  Ducum,
Heroumque  viduas  Advenis  in  patria,  vel  Tenutis  elocare,
aut  deprimere.

Tributa  pecunialia,  stipendia  reddere,  &  haereditates
quas  aliquis  possidebat  ad  haec  usque  tempora,is  etiamnum,
&  in  posterum  possidere  debet.

Haereditaria  bona  a  nemine  abalienare,  sed  semper
omnibus  hominibus  Moscovitici  Imperii  providere  per-
pendendo  servitia  eorum,  prout  aliquis  de  Republica
meritus  est.

Advenis  omnibus  qui  vocati  fuerant  ex  variis  Nationi-
bus, a primis Imperatoribus Moscoviae, necessariis  [in.iv.785.]
providere, prout antea solitum fuit : nee stipendia,
Tenutas,  &  possessiones  eorum  ab  iis  abalienare.

Heroibus,  Aulicis,  Cubiculariis,  Dapiferis,  &  liberis
Heroum,  omnibusque  Aulae  Imperatoriae  inservientibus,
Imperatoriam  benevolentiam  commonstrare,  &  salaria
debita,  secundum  antiquum  morem  reddere,  Serenissimus
Imperator  tenebitur.

Quod  si  vero  alicui  salaria  multiplicabuntur,  posses-
sionesque  aut  tenutae,  supra  ejus  dignitatem,  vel  contra
alicui  minuentur,  praeter  culpam  ipsius,  ea  de  re  Serenis-
simus Imperator  conferre,  &  consultare  debet  cum
Heroibus  Primariis  :  &  prout  unanimes  decreverint,  idque
secundum  aequitatem,  ita  sit  facturus.

Qui  vero  Aulici,  aut  liberi  Heroum  sumunt  beneficio
Imperatoris,  ex  Arcibus  omnibus  stipendiariis,  quibus
beneficia  tempore  praeteritorum  Magnorum  Imperatorum

237

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

Moscoviae  ob  merita  ipsorum  dabantur,  illis  quoque  jam
&  stipendia  pecunialia,  &  alimentaria,  ex  Mandato  Impera-
toris  danda  sunt.

In  Arce  dicta  Moscovia,  aliisque  Arcibus,  Judicia
exequi  debent,  &  observari  ut  solitum,  secundum  statuta
Moscovitici  Imperii.  Quod  si  vero  aliqua  essent  corri-
genda, ad  corroborationem  Judiciorum,  conceditur  Serenis-
simo  Imperatori,  sed  cum  consensu  omnium  Heroum
Universitatis  Moscoviae,  ita  tamen,  ut  respondeant
aequitati.

Magnus  autem  Imperator  Serenissimus  Rex  Poloniae,
Magnus  Dux  Lithuaniae,  cujusque  totius  Regni  Poloniae,
Imperia,  necnon  Magnus  Ducatus  Lithuaniae,  cum  Magno
Imperatore  filio  Regis  Poloniae  Vladislao,  Sigmuntoviz,  cum
omnibus  Imperiis  Moscoviae,  in  amicitia,  societate,  amore,
aeternis  temporibus  inviolabiliter,  nee  contra  se  invicem
exercitus  colligere,  &  bella  concitare  nullis  modis  debent.

Quod  si  autem  aliquis  hostium  tentarit  impetus  facere  in
Imperium  Moscoviae,  sive  etiam  in  Regnum  Poloniae,  &
Magnum  Ducatum  Lithuaniae  :  contra  istiusmodi  omnes
hostes  junctis  viribus  insurgere  utrumque  Imperium
tenebitur.

Caeterum,  in  Tartarorum  finibus  quod  si  necessum
fuerit  servare  utriusque  Imperii  milites,  cum  jam
coronatus  fuerit  filius  Serenissimi  Regis  Poloniae,  Impera-
tor Imperii  Moscovitarum :  hac  de  re  collatio  cum
Heroibus  instituenda,  &  cum  magno  Imperatore  Serenis-
simo  Sigismundo  Rege  Poloniae,  idque  decenter,  animo
sincero,  absque  ulla  machinatione  damni  alicujus,  aut
Tyrannidis  illationis  in  homines  Moscovitici  Imperii :
honorem,  vitam,  aut  aliud  quippiam  istiusmodi  nemini
adimendo,  cujuscunque  conditionis  ille  fuerit :  Aut  si  in
Poloniam,  vel  Lithuaniam,  aliaque  Imperia  Moscovitici
Imperii  homines  transmittendo,  aut  ex  Lithuania  in  locum
eorum  alicujus  alterius  generis  homines  supponendo :
Uxores,  aut  liberos  alicujus  dolose  corrumpendo,  vel
sobolis  procreandae  gratia  sumendo,  &  ad  exteras  Nationes
parentes  cum  liberis  transmittendo.

238

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  ad.

1612.

Qui  autem  ex  quocunque  Imperio  istiusmodi  facinoris
reus,  &  poena  dignus  inveniretur :  Is  in  Imperatoriis  &
terrestribus  judicibus  prout  meruit,  puniendus  est :  &
decretum  per  Imperatorem  aut  Heroes,  vel  Capitaneos  de
illo  ferendum.

Uxores  autem  eorum  &  liberi,  fratres,  &  qui  istud
facinus  nee  perpetrarunt,  nee  ipsis  fuit  cognitum,  aut  illud
perpetrandum  consentiere.  Illi  nedum  puniendi,  sed
secundum  aequitatem  Privilegiorum  suorum,  patrimonia,
tenutas,  vitam,  aulas,  retinere  debent.

Sin  vero  reus  non  possit  explorari,  nemo  turn  Judicio
Imperatoris,  at  Heroum  judicari,  puniri,  proscribi,  vel
incarcerari,  aut  ad  alienos  transmitti  debet :  sed
unusquisque in suis Tenutis & Aulis conservari.

Steriles  autem,  quia  ex  hac  decesserint  vita,  bona  ab  illis
relicta,  vel  consanguineis  ipsorum,  sive  cuicunque  ipsi
legaverint,  tradenda :  id  tamen  non  absque  mutua  colla-
tione,  &  consilio  esse  debet.

Porro  quoniam  tempore  praesentis  seditionis  multi
perire,  &  multos  ex  Moscovitis  prostratos  constat  a  Polonis,
&  Lithuanis,  &  contra  Polonos  &  Lithuanos  a  Moscovitis  :
istud  factum,  &  nunc,  &  imposterum,  nee  commemor-
andum,  nee  ulla  vindicta  utrinque  pensandum  esse  debet.

Qui  autem  Poloni,  &  Lithuani  Primipoli,  Centuriones,
aliique  diversae  sortis  homines  duxere  captivitatem  in
Imperio  Moscoviae,  quorum  aliqui  adhuc  in  vinculis
tenentur,  illi  ex  Moscoviae  Imperio  reddendi,  sine  ulla
pecuniali  liberatione.  Turn  quoque  vice  versa  Aulici,
liberi  Heroum,  Jaculatores,  Velites,  Fabri  tormentarii,
omnesque  serviles  &  liberi  homines,  Aulicorum  liberi,
Jaculatorum,  Fabrorum  tormentariorum,  Sclopetariorum,
&  horum  similium.  Item  Matres,  Uxores,  Liberi,  &
his  similes,  ex  Imperio  Moscovitarum,  virilis  aut
muliebris  sexus,  in  praesentem  servitutem  praesente
primo  Moscovitarum,  virilis  aut  muliebris  sexus,
in  praesentem  servitutem  praesente  primo  Moscovitarum
Imperatore  Venceslao  accepti  in  Poloniam  vel  Lithuaniam,
illi  ab  Imperatore  Serenissimo  Rege  Poloniae,  restituendi  a

239

a.d.  PUKCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

minimis  ad  maximos  usque  absque  pecuniali  redemptione.
Proventus  Imperatorios  ex  Arcibus,  aliisque  possessioni-
bus,  turn  ex  tenutis  &  arendis  census,  omnesque  reditus,  ^
debet  Serenissimus  Imperator  exigere,  ut  antea  fecere
Primi  Imperatores,  &  prioris  Magistratus  mores,  &  statuta
absque  consensu  in  nullis  immutare.

Arces,  aut  Civitates,  quae  bello  vastatae,  ad  eas  mittere
debet  Serenissimus  Imperator,  &  praecipere,  ut  con-
scribantur  Registra  eorum,  quae  per  vastationem  periere :
ut  vicissim  sumptis  proventibus  aliunde,  secundum  con-
scripta  registra,  possint  resarciri.

Quorum  vero  Haereditates,  Possessiones,  vel  Tenutae

[III. iv. 786.]  spoliatae,  iis  levamen  dandum,  sed  non  absque  consensu

Heroum. Et quae recens vastatae Arces, illas quam-

primum restaurare, consilio inito cum Heroibus, &

Nobilibus.

Mercatores  Moscovitici  Imperii  omnium  Civitatum,  in
Polonia  &  Lithuania,  sic  Poloni,  Lithuani,  in  Moscovia,
Polonia,  Lithuania,  merces  coemere  debent  more  usitato,
ut  antea  :  Istud  tamen  cavendum,  ne  invicem  sibi  facessent
negotia  Mercatores,  &  alii  Christiani  in  Lithuaniam  ex
Russia,  &  ex  Lithuania  in  Russiam,  sese  transportando
cum  mercibus  Heroes,  &  Aulici  omnes,  mancipia  debent
in  servitute  detinere,  prout  solitum.

In  Volda,  Dona,  &  Tekier  Arcibus,  velites,  si  illis  opus
fuerit,  servari  debent :  de  quibus  Serenissimus  Imperator
conferre  debet  cum  Heroibus,  &  Nobilibus,  postquam
coronabitur.

Arces  Moscovitici  Imperii,  ad  Imperatorem  pertinentes,  (tf
turn  illae,  quae  in  tenutas  Polonis,  &  Lithuanis  traditae  sunt,
vel  quas  jam  Vor  praefatus  sub  potestatem  suam  subjecit :  ie
Ego  Primarius  Dux  exercituum  Regni  Poloniae,  constitui
cum  Heroibus  Moscoviae,  quod  Serenissimus  Rex  Poloniae,  k
Filio  sacrae  suae  Regiae  Majestatis  Serenissimo  Vladislao
Sigmuntoviz,  has  arces,  cum  omnibus  quae  sunt  vastatae,  |j
Moscovitico  Imperio  restituere  debet.  Illustres  vero  mti(
Legati  Moscovienses,  hoc  in  negotio  tractaturi  sunt  cum  %<
sacra  Regia  Majestate  de  sumptibus,  &  expensis  sacrae  :onfi

240

ei

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  ad.

1612.

legiae  Majestatis  in  milites  expositis,  &  de  persolvendis
Polonis,  &  Lithuanis,  sunt  quoque  consultaturi,  quomodo
bsolvi  possint.

Vor  autem  praefatus,  qui  sese  Caesaridem  Moscovitici  Demetrius
Imperii, Demetrium Evanoviz appellat : de illo, mihi  suppositious
Primo  Duci  Regni  Poloniae  consilium  ineundum,  &  omnis  secun"us-
:ura  habenda,  ut  capi,  vel  penitus  e  vita  tolli  possit.

Qui  postquam  captus,  vel  occisus  fuerit,  Ego  Primarius

ux  Exercituum  Regni  Poloniae,  cum  exercitu  sacrae
Majestatis  a  primaria  Arce,  sedis  Imperatoriae,  Moscovia
Draefata  discedere  ad  Arcem  Mozaisko,  vel  ubi  fuerit  opus,
x>st  collationem  cum  Heroibus  institutam,  ibique  Legatos
Moscoviae,  &  mandatum  sacrae  Regiae  Majestatis,  prae-
itolari  tenebor.  Quod  si  nihilominus  Vor  praefatus  contra
mperatoriam  arcem  Moscoviam  sic  dictam  tentaverit
nsidiari,  aut  seditiones  aliquas  excitare ;  Ego  Primarius
Dux  Regni  Poloniae,  ilium  profligare,  &  armis  persequi
enebor.

Dominum  vero  Sapieza,  qui  se  Vor  praefato  adjunxit,  ab
llo  &  exercitum  Polonicum,  &  Lithuanicum  abducere ;
^uod  si  idem  Vor  praefatus,  ex  Moscovia  cum  Ruthenis
liscesserit,  militum  autem  Polonorum,  &  Lithuanorum
[uosdam  apud  se  detinuerit ;  Ego  Primarius  Dux  Regni
^oloniae,  cum  exercitu  sacrae  Regiae  Majestatis,  una  cum
-leroibus  Moscoviae,  ne  sanguicidium  imposterum  ex-
•rdiatur,  sed  Imperium  pace  publica  assecuratum
tabiliatur,  dabimus  operam.

Mulier  vero,  quae  cum  eodem  Vor  praefato  per  Demetrii
vioscoviticum  Imperium,  cum  exercitu  passim  grassatur,  primi  sup.
mperatricem  Moscoviae  sese  ventilando  ;  Illi  prohibendum  u?or-  Pa^a~

eandem  se  imposterum  cognominare,  vel  quippiam  UmJlia-
stiusmodi,  aut  aliquas  difficultates,  contra  Imperium
Joscoviticum  moliri  audeat :  sed,  quamprimum  in
^loniam  reducenda  est.  Imperator  vero  Serenissimus,
lius  Regis  Poloniae  Vladislaus  Sigmuntoviz  in  omnibus
ntiquitus,  jura  sancita,  &  pacta  Magnorum  Legatorum
Moscoviae,  cum  Serenissimo  Sigismundo  Rege  Poloniae,  &
11  unfirmata  privilegia  imitari  debet.

XIV  24I  Q

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

Civitatem  &  Arcem  Smolinsk  praefatum  quod  attinet
Ego  Dux  Primarius  exercituum  regni  Poloniae  supplicab<
apud S. R. Majestatem, ut prohibeat, ne milites b
Civitate  tanta  homicidia  exerceant,  &  Arcem  spolient.
De  Baptismo De baptismate vero, ut illud Imperator Vladislau
repetendo. Sigmuntoviz,  filius  sacrae  Regiae  Majestatis  suscipiat,  8
baptizetur  in  illorum  Sacrosancta  legis  Graecae  religione,  ii
illaque  perseveret,  ut  &  de  aliis  nondum  contractis  actis,  8'
conditionibus, & reliquis circumstantiis antiquitus it
Imperio  Moscovitico,  ad  praesentem  usque  expeditionen!
bellicam observatis : Inter Serenissimos Imperatores 8  3
Imperia  omnium,  consilium  &  collatio  institui  debet,  u!
amor,  &  amicitia,  utrinque  augeri,  &  conservari  possit,
Qua  de  re,  Ego  Primarius  Dux  militiae,  cum  jam  a  S.  R  pt
Majestate  commissa,&  mandata  nulla  habeam,  contuli  cuniie
Heroibus,  quid  ipsis  responsi  sum  daturus : sed  primurri  k
cum  sacra  Regia  Majestate  hoc  in  negotio,  turn  etiam  cunlim
Serenissimo  Imperatore  Vladislao  Sigmuntoviz  filio  sacra
Regiae  Majestatis,  conferam.  t

Insuper,  Ego  Primarius  Dux  exercituum  regni  Poloniae  «ti
in  Arcem  Moscoviam  praefatam,  Polonos,  Lithuanos,  Gerjati
manos,  &  omnis  generis  bellicosos,  qui  sunt  mecum,  f  ir
cum  Domino  Sapieza,  absque  permissu  Heroum,  vel  ips&i
necessitate,  intromittere  non  debeo.  In  Arcem  Mos-  eg
coviam  praefatam,  Mercatorum  Polonorum,  &  Lithuan-  bi
orum,  mercium  coemendarum  gratia,  ex  omnibu  otu
Provinciis  regni  Poloniae,  cum  meis  Imperialibus  testi-  mi
monialibus  literis,  non  ultra  viginti,  vel  paulo  plures  sum  icii
intromittendi :  absque  literis  a  me  datis  testimonialibus,  ir  sere
Arcem  Moscoviam  praefatam,  aut  alibi,  nemo  proficiscost
debet.  ui

Ob majus vero robur, & confirmationem PactorurrHo;
istorum,  Ego  Primarius  regni  Poloniae  Dux  exercituum,  onri
Stanislaus  Stanislaides,  Zolkiewsky  de  Zolkwia  sigilluirioli
meum  apposui,  &  manum  propriam  subscripsi. Sic  etiair
Domini Primipoli, & Centuriones exercitus, qui tuir;
temporis  mihi  aderant,  ad  haec  mea  scripta  nomina  sua  sub
scripsere. Datum  in  Castris,  apud  Arcem,  sedis  Impera-

242

h

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1612.

toriae Moscovitici Imperatoris. Anno 1610. Augusti

27.  die.

:Responsum ad Pacta inter Primarium Ducem  [lll.iv.787.]
Exercituum Regni Poloniae, & Heroes Mos-
coviae, Serenissimi Regis Poloniae,  &  Serenis-
simi Vladislai  Sigmuntoviz  Filii  Sacrae  Regiae
Majestatis.

\/f* Agnus  Dei  gratia  Imperator  Vladislaus  Sigmuntoviz,
LVX  Filius  Serenissimi  Regis  Poloniae,  Sueciae,  &c.
\.mplissimi  Moscovitarum  Imperii  universo  venerabili
Zlero,  Ministris  Dei  vigilantissimis,  Heroibus,  Capitaneis,
iberis  Heroum,  Advocatis  velitum,  Jaculatoribus,  &
Aelitibus,  Advenis,  Mercatoribus,  omnibus  servilibus,  &
iberis  hominibus  significamus.  Nos  quandoquidem  vobis
mperatorem  totius  Imperii  Moscovitici,  Caesarem,  &
vlagnum  Principem  Wlodymiriensem,  necnon  uni-
ersarum  Moscovitici  Imperii  Provinciarum  coronari
etiistis :  Nos  quoque  post  Legatorum  vestrorum  suppli-
ationem,  pro  vobis  intercessimus  apud  Serenissimum
ertium  Regem  Poloniae,  Magnumque  Ducem  Lithuaniae,
)ominum  parentem  nostrum,  ut  secundum  suae  sacrae
legiae  Majestatis  misericordiam,  consuetudinem,  vestrae
abveniat  calamitati,  &  prout  caepit,  ad  finem  usque  vos,  &
Dtum  Moscoviticum  Imperium  restauret,  &  pace  con-
rmet :  &  sanguinem  Christianum  qui  per  malos  quosdam
acis  publicae  violatores,  &  perjuros  effunditur,  coerceat :
erenissimus  itaque  Rex  Poloniae,  Dominus  Parens  noster,
ost  vestrum  Legatorum  supplicationem,  &  nostram  filii
11  intercessionem,  Decrevit  nobiscum  filio  suo,  in
loscoviticum  Imperium,  iter  quamprimum  suscipere :  ut
mfirmetur  Imperium,  &  sanguicidium  sanguinis  vestri
)hibeatur,  vobis  vero  pax,  &  Patria,  ex  integro  restituatur.
t  vobis  venerabili  Clero,  Heroibus,  Incolis,  Capitaneis,
universis  cujuscunque  sortis  hominibus,  Spiritualibus,
Politicis,  istud  necessario  sciendum  est.  Vos  autem,
ai  Serenissimo  Regi  Poloniae,  Domino  Parenti  nostro,  &

243

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

nobis,  ad  hoc  usque  tempus  fidem  inviolatam  conservasti
jam  quoque  nobis Magnis  Imperatoribus  vestris  offic
vestra, & promptitudinem animi conservabitis, adven
umque  nostrum  in  Imperium  Moscoviticum,  cum  gaud:
in  pace  expectabitis. Qui  vero  mala  de  nobis  opinion
contumacia,  &  seductione  Vor  praefati,  repulsam  fecere,  i  fe
ne amplius tergiversentur, promittendo illis nostra]
benevolentiam,  &  amorem,  persuadere  debetis,  &  ad  nc
Imperatores  convertere,  ut  sint  quoque  vobiscum  unan  mc
mes, Et supremi Cancellarii Exercitus, Serenissimiqu  nir
Regis  Poloniae,  Domini  Parentis  nostri, nostrisque  sej  In
adjungant : Et cum supremo Cancellario, de nostr
Imperatoriis, & terrestribus negotiis consultent, con
modaque  Patriae  curent,  ut  quamprimum  possit  Imperiui  oss
Moscoviticum,  ad  pristinum statum  reduci, &  paci,
tranquillitati  antiquae  restitui : ac  nos,  donee  venerimu  ror
laeti  praestolentur. Seditiosis,  ac  male  de  nobis  opinant  isu
bus, nullam fidem habeant, nee ullis obediant, q\
secundum  animi  sui  praesumptionem  falsam,  se  suamqu
posteritatem Imperatoribus Moscoviticis successurai
arbitrantur. Et  qui  de  sacra  Regia  Majestate,  Domin
Parente nostro, nobisque metipsis, rumores nefario
scriptis  ad  Arcium  Praerectos  literis  sparsere,  &  dissem
narunt,  verbaque  dolose  excogitata,  inter  homines  dimisen
&  jam  disseminant : atque  hac  tyrannide,  &  malitia  su;
recentes seditiones in Moscovia concitaverunt, quibi:
multam  copiam  sanguinis  Christiani  frustra  effundi  pas:
sunt,  &  totum  Imperium  diviserunt,  &  hac  pertinacia,  atqu
malitia  sua,  Dei ter  Opt. Max.  castissimaeque  Deipar;:m
voluntati,  necnon  Serenissimi  Sigismundi  Dei  gratia  Reg'
Poloniae  misericordiae,  &  ipsius  benevolo  erga  se  animjre

Hadversantur,  Nobisque  Serenissimo  Imperatori  juramer
turn  exosculatione  vivifici  Baptismatis  praestitum  violanerv
Quare  quosdam  eorum  jam  etiam  propterea  Deus  Omnimti
potens,  justo  suo  judicio,  ex  hac  vita  sustulit,  &  puniit  araf
quosdam  vero,  ejus  atrocissima  vindicta  expectat,  nisi  ier
sua  contumacia  conversi,  apud  nos,  Magnos  Imperatore  osti
suos,  culpam  quamprimum  supplices  deprecentur. Insupei  m

244

em

BStl

\>

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1612.

mnibus  vobis  in  universum  sciendum  est.  quod  ii,  qui

d  nos  Magnos  Imperatores  suos,  &  nostram  misericordiam,

sylumque  confugerint,  iis  secundum  magnum  affectum

ostrum  Imperatorium,  miserebimur :  paenis  remissis  con-

onabimus omnia, & in tutelam eosdem nostrum

cipiemus.  \\

Sacrosanctam  quoque  Religionem  vestram  Legis  Graecae

^ermittimus,  earumque  secundum  constitutiones  Patrum

Sanctorum, tuebimur, in nullo puncto violandam, &

nmutandam. Et universam venerabilium Patrum,

e^inistrorum Dei Confessariorum vestrorum Coronam,

ebito in honore sumus  habituri. Heroes, Aulicos, &

Njjuscunque sortis alios diligere, promovere, patriam

Possessionem,  pecunialem,  aliamque  omnem  provisionem,

nemine abalienando : sed suum unicuique attribuere

Wromittimus, secundum antiquam consuetudinem : &

ntiisuper nostra Imperatoria provisione, unumquemque

icundum  ipsius  dignitatem,  &  merita  promovere. Qui

(juatem in malitia, & contumacia sua perseverare non

issabunt, ii, Deum Opt. Max. & castissimam ejus

iin  fenitricem, strictissimo illos gladio punituros certo

:iant : &  nostrum  Imperatorium  benevolum  animum,  in

am,  &  vindictam  mutatum  experientur. Non  vult  enim

erdieus Omnipotens, ut, ob malitiam, & contumaciam

uaebellium, innocentium ulterius sanguis effundatur,

bu'empla Dei spolientur, &  gloria sancti Nominis ejus,

asstagis,  ac  magis  deprimatur. Vos  omnes,  apud  animum

sstrum  diligentius  perpendite,  &  his, qui  adhuc  nobis

Tin  Tgiversantur  renunciate,  ut  animo  mutato,  ad  veritatis

^nitionem  redeant,  &  seditiosos,  &  pacis  publicae  diremp-

:ni(j)res  relinquant.

Jam  vero,  ad  quas  Arces,  &  Civitates,  hae  literae  nostrae
^rvenerint,  Mandamus,  ut  eorum  Capitanei,  &  Tenutarii,
mnia  ad  victum  necessaria,  &  pecuniam  colligant,  in
iratisque  habeant,  ad  nostrum  adventum.  Interea
xercitus  sacrae  Regiae  Majestatis,  Domini  Parentis  nostri,
reDstrique  proprii,  ne  ullum  detrimentum  patiantur,  sed
;:eria  in  fraterno  amore,  quoad  venerimus,  vinatis  :  Et  donee

245

V

A.D.

1612.

[III.iv.788.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

\\

Rureck.

Pheodor

Evanowich.

Boris

Godonove.

G  re  go  rii
Eutrophy
Rostrige.
Demetrii
Evanowich.

Primates.

Lord  Palatin
ofSandomire.

v

Vasili  Evano-
wich Suiskey.

Opt.  Max.  ex  mera  gratia  sua,  nostraque  Imperatoriun
cura,  &  diligentia,  toto  Imperio  Moscovitico  firmato,  8
restaurato,  vobis  potiri  concesserit.  Dabantur  Varsoviae
Anno  Domini  161 2.  9.  die  Martii.

The  points  of  the  Embassage  of  the  Russiar
Messenger  sent  to  his  sacred  Majesty,  briefly
collected.

BY  what  manner  their  naturall  Lords  ruled  over  them
they  alleaged,  to  wit,  beginning  from  Borik,  who  wa
of  the  bloud  of  Augustus  Caesar,  Emperour  of  Rome
even  unto  the  last  Lord  and  Emperour  Pheodor  Evano
wich,  in  whom  their  Race  ceased.

That  Boris  Godonove  abiding  with  Pheodor  Evanowich
was  created  (by  his  owne  force  and  power)  Emperour  o
Lord :  but  after  a  little  time,  the  pleasure  of  God  S(
working,  being  thrust  out  of  the  Imperiall  seate,  departe(
this  life  shamefully,  and  by  violent  death,  together  witl
his  Wife  and  Children.

That  Christophorus  Otropitii  the  Rostrige,  being  o
base  descent,  under  the  Name  which  he  did  beare  o:
Emperour,  otherwise  Demetrii  Evanowich,  slaine  a
Owglets,  did  fraudulently  and  by  deceit  (wherewith  hi
deceived  the  common  people,  and  others  that  beleevec
them)  obtaine  the  Imperiall  Seate  by  force,  without  th<
consent  of  the  Spiritualtie,  and  all  the  chiefe  Bishops  anc
Lords,  and  great  men  of  the  Kingdome,  who  durst  no
withstand  the  same,  seeing  the  Commons  to  yeeld  there
unto.

How  the  excellent  Lord  Palatin  of  Sandomire,  gav<
his  daughter  in  marriage  to  the  Rostrige,  and  himself
(many  Gentlemen  both  of  the  Kingdome  of  Poland,  an(
great  Duchy  of  Litow,  accompanying  him)  came  int(
Moscovia.

Then,  that  Vasili  Evanowich  Suiskey,  with  his  brethren
and  many  others  associated  to  this  attempt,  and  stirring
up  other  great  men  of  the  Land,  did  kill  the  Rostrige

246

lei

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA

with  many  Gentlemen  of  Poland,  and  the  great  Duchy
of  Litow,  and  put  the  rest  into  divers  Castles.  And  him-
selfe  was  made  Emperour,  although  he  were  not  elected
by  all  the  States.  Whereupon  many  of  our  sort  did  not
willingly  acknowledge  him  Emperour,  and  many  would
not  obey  him.

How  another  named  the  Wor,  did  rise  up  at  Kalusia,
and  caused  himselfe  to  bee  named  Demetrii,  and  so
accounted.  Whereof  when  many  (both  Russes  and  Poles)
heard,  they  assembled  unto  him,  thinking  him  to  be  the
true  Demetrii :  and  the  Russes  did  so  much  the  more
willingly  draw  unto  him,  because  of  the  murtherers.

How  others  called  Wors,  did  name  and  call  themselves
sonnes  of  the  slaine  Emperour,  as  Ivan,  Peter,  Pheodor,
and  by  many  and  divers  other  names :  and  under  the  same
names,  did  consume  the  State,  and  shead  much  bloud.

How  the  Kings  sacred  Majestie,  comming  to  Smol-
ensko,  sent  his  Messengers  the  Lord  of  Prsemislave,  and
other  noble  men,  who  comming  unto  the  Campe,  the
forenamed  Wors  fled  away  :  but  divers  of  the  Russes  came
unto  his  Majestie.  And  taking  counsell  with  the  Boiarins,
at  that  time  remayning  with  Suiskey  in  the  chiefe  Citie,
we  sent  our  Messengers  to  his  Majestie  at  that  time,  being
at  Smolensko,  viz.  Michael  Salticove,  and  others,  request-
vciing  that  his  Majestie  would  grant  us  his  Sonne  to  be  our
Lord.

How  they  were  dispatched  away,  and  what  answere  they
brought  from  his  Majestie,  with  conditions  engrossed,  and
signed  with  his  hand  and  seale.

How  that  after  the  deposing  of  Suiskey,  the  noble
Lord  Generall  of  the  Kingdome,  comming  into  Moscovia,
concluded  all  the  said  businesses  and  treaties :  and  con-
firmed them  with  the  oath  of  himselfe,  and  his  fellow
Souldiers.  And  that  they  after  that  oath,  likewise  made
their  oath  for  the  same.  Then,  that  for  the  greater  defence
of  the  said  principall  Citie  from  the  Wors,  they  sent
Souldiers  into  the  Citie,  and  sent  also  their  Messengers
from  the  whole  Countrie  Fidareta,  the  Metropolitan  and

247

A.D.

1612.

The  Wor.
Co/uga.

Other  Wors,
or  pretenders,
Ivan,  Peter,
Pheodor.

The  King  of
Poland.
The  Lord  of
Pramislave.

Michael
Salticove.

The  Articles
are  before  in
Latin.

V

A.D.

1612.

Vasili
Galichin.

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

v Galechin

Vasili  Galichin,  with  others,  unto  the  Kings  Majestie,  and
required  an  oath  in  his  Majesties  behalfe,  of  all  the  severall
Provinces.

How  that  his  Majesties  Souldiers  dwelled  and  behaved
themselves  in  this  capitall  Citie  of  Mosco,  before  the
troubles  began,  without  injuring  any  man,  punishing  the
evill  according  to  their  deserts.

How  the  Boiarins  handled  other  Gentlemen,  and
principall  persons  of  the  Russe  Religion,  although  more
inclined  unto  them :  but  especially  the  Officers  and
Servants  of  the  Wors,  as  also  such  as  had  fled  over.

It  followeth,  how  they  often  sent  word  unto  the  Citie
of  Smolensko,  and  willed  them  to  deliver  up  the  Citie
unto  his  Majestie,  to  bee  under  his  prosperous  government
and  power.  As  for  the  secret  plots  of  their  Messengers,
Galechin  and  others,  they  said,  they  were  ignorant,  as  also
HalusinaWor  of  some  unknowne  practises,  handled  with  the  Wor  called
or  Pretender.  Halusin.  But  they  said,  that  they  had  written  very  often
to  the  Citie  of  Smolensko,  and  commanded  them  to  doe
whatsoever  stood  with  his  Majesties  pleasure,  and  liked
him,  without  further  effusion  of  bloud.

How  also  it  befell  in  the  chiefe  Citie  to  Lepun,  and
Sarusky,  and  the  other  Rebels,  when  they  violated  their
fidelitie.

That  they  certified  his  Majesties  Souldiers  thereof,  and
that  they,  with  them,  did  rise  against  the  Rebels,  and
that  even  to  this  present,  they  doe  keepe,  and  will  keepe
their  oath  once  made,  and  their  due  obedience  unto  their
Lord.

And,  in  that  Lepun  was  punished  of  God  for  his
treacherie,  and  departed  this  life  with  so  shamefull  a
death,  wee  thinke  it  to  bee  for  the  good  example  of  others,
to  reduce  them  into  their  former  estate,  to  revoke  others
unto  their  fidelitie,  and  for  keeping  their  oath  alreadie
given.

Therefore,  after  many  circumstances,  they  inferred,  that
they  would  presently  send  their  Messengers  to  the  generall
Parliament : but mooved with the perswasion of the

248

[III.iv.789.

Lepun.
Saruski.

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  ad.

1612.
honourable  Lord  Generall,  to  wit,  that  his  Majestie  would
bee  contented  with  their  fidelitie  once  made,  and  performed
under  oath,  and  with  their  griefe  for  the  same  cause,  and
will  cheerefully  forgive  them  :  and  doth  not  refuse  to  give
his  Sonne  to  raigne  over  them.  Adding  withall,  that
many  Kingdomes,  to  wit,  the  Kingdome  of  Hungarie,
the  Kingdome  of  Bohemia,  and  a  great  part  of  Russia,  doe
earnestly  request,  that  he  would  receive  them  under  the
happy  government  of  his  Majestie :  that  they  might  enjoy
Ithe  priviledges  of  Poland,  and  Litow,  to  which,  none  in
the  whole  world  can  be  compared.

But,  because  his  Excellent  Majestie,  as  a  Christian  Lord,
Rejecting  all  other  Kingdomes,  and  Dominions,  will
'graciously  receive  under  his  Rule  and  government  the
said  Dominions,  and  that  he  is  sorry  for  their  destruction  :
he  therefore  now  admonisheth  them,  if  they  will  bee  under
•his  prosperous  Rule,  and  enter  into  an  union  together  with
(the  Kingdome  of  Poland,  and  the  great  Duchy  of  Litow,
land  live  friendly  with  them :  if  they  will  performe,  and
consent  thereunto,  His  Excellent  Majestie  promiseth  to  The  King
remit  their  offence,  and  to  receive  them  under  his  happy  assents.
government  and  authoritie,  and  refuseth,  and  by  no  meanes
will  alter  or  change  their  faith  and  conscience,  or  places
dedicated  unto  God,  or  builded  for  devotion  :  neither  will
impose  on  them  any  other  Religion,  or  alter  their  ancient
Manners,  or  Customes,  but  will  bestow  on  them  privi-
ledges and  offices :  and  that  the  Rights  and  Priviledges,
which  the  Poles,  with  the  great  Duchy  of  Litow  doe  enjoy,
shall  be  conferred  on  them  :  and  that  they  shall  be  equalled
jwith  the  Kingdome  and  great  Duchy  of  Litow,  &c.  which
jjurisdictions  and  priviledges,  in  former  times,  their  Prede-
cessors wanted.

For  this  perswasion  therefore  of  the  honourable  Lord
|Generall,  which  he  had  in  charge  from  his  Majestie  to
make,  they  yeeld  all  thankes :  but  notwithstanding  they
.propound,  and  plainly  adde,  that  their  oath  shall  be  so,
that  his  Majesties  sonne  shall  succeed  in  their  government,
with  certaine  additions,  to  wit,  that  they  will  have  none

249

A.D.

1612.

Klutzinsky  a
Wor  or
Pretender,
acknowledged
Emperour.

Astracan.
Lapland.

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

other  over  them  but  onely  his  Majesties  sonne,  and  that
the  whole  Land  doth  make  it  knowne,  and  propound  their
judgement  and  sentence,  by  way  of  denunciation,  that  by
no  meanes,  but  by  offering  his  Majesties  sonne,  these
troubles  of  Moscovia  can  be  extinguished.  Adding
withall,  that  at  that  time,  in  the  first  troubles,  when  the
honourable  Lord  Generall  came  into  the  Country  of  Mos-
covia, and  required  the  oath  for  the  Kings  Majesties
sonne :  if  his  Majestic  had  made  any  mention  thereof,
it  is  certaine,  that  the  Commons  and  all  the  Nobilitie,
would  not  have  consented  thereunto  by  any  meanes,  and
that  greater  effusion  of  bloud  had  risen  thereupon :  And
that  they  had  taken  for  their  Prince  Klutzinsky,  called  the
Wor,  to  whom  all  were  not  assembled,  who  also  at  that
time  had  a  great  power  of  men,  as  well  of  Poles,  as  Russes
and  Litowes.  They  therefore  seeing  the  great  discord
amongst  the  people,  taking  counsell,  did  freely  choose  for
their  Lord  and  Emperour  his  Excellent  Majesties  sonne,
unto  whom  they  had  a  great  affection,  and  who  had  a
long  time  before  layen  in  their  hearts :  assuring  them-
selves also,  that  by  this  election  of  his  Majesties  sonne,
many  troubles  and  dissentions  would  be  pacified,  and  so
rejected  the  aforesaid  Wor  Klutzinsky :  As  also  they
received  into  their  chiefe  Citie  the  chiefe  Generall.  But,
when  it  was  heard  that  his  Excellent  Majestie,  would  by
no  meanes  give  unto  them  his  sonne  for  their  Lord,  and
to  rule  over  them,  they  fell  into  such  effusion  of  bloud
and  insurrections,  As  also  the  same  time,  the  whole
Country  of  Moscovia  looked  and  expected  nothing  else
then  his  Majesties  sonne.  Calling  to  memorie,  for  their
better  advice,  that  it  was  to  be  feared,  least  whilest  his
Majestie  came  too  late  with  his  sonne,  divers  parts  of
the  Land  should  choose  unto  themselves  several!  Lords.
As  to  the  Southward  the  Castles  Strachen  and  others,  to
the  King  of  Persia ;  part  of  Pomerland  and  Siberia,  to
the  Kings  of  Denmarke  and  England ;  Novogrod,  Plesco,
Ivanogrod,  and  others,  to  the  King  of  Sweden :  and  that
the  other  Cities  would  choose  to  themselves  other  Lords

250

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1612.

separate  from  the  rest.  In  the  meane  season,  they  desire
his  Excellent  Majestie,  to  make  a  speedy  end  of  these
warres,  according  to  his  Obligation  and  promise  ratified
by  the  oath  of  the  honorable  Lord  Generall,  and  the
whole  Armie :  and  that  his  Majestie  himselfe,  with  his
sonne,  would  come  into  Moscovia.  They  request  also,
that  his  Excellent  Majestie  would  retayne  with  himselfe
and  his  Sonne,  Counsellors,  and  Messengers  of  their
Commonwealth,  for  the  ordayning  and  concluding  of  per-
petuall  Conditions.  They  request  also,  that  his  Majestie,
in  the  name  of  his  Sonne,  would  send  unto  all  the  Inhabi-
tants of  the  Townes,  and  write  unto  the  severall  Cities,
signifying  his  comming  into  their  Dominions,  and  willing,  [III.iv.790.]
that  out  of  the  severall  Provinces,  all  sorts  of  men  send
their  Messengers,  to  treate  and  conclude  of  the  affaires
of  all  sorts  of  People,  and  of  perpetuall  tranquillitie.
Promising  after  the  said  Charge  and  Letters  to  all  people
in  generall,  and  notifying  from  their  said  Lord,  that  (by
Gods  grace)  there  may  bee  throughout  the  whole  Land
of  Moscovia,  tranquillitie,  peace,  and  securitie.

To  conclude,  they  pray  heartily  unto  the  Lord  God,  to
grant  unto  his  Majestie  in  this  businesse  begun,  a  pros-
perous and  speedy  end.

Thus  have  wee  seene  dissolute  resolutions,  or  resolute
dissolutenesse,  men  onely  constant  in  inconstancy,  resolved  ^USiian
upon  irresolution. As  we  often  see  sicke  persons  turning  tnconstancy-
every  way,  and  no  way  eased ;  in  the  night  time  longing
for  day,  and  in  the  day  for  night ;  such  was  now  the  Russian
sicknesse,  they  would  and  they  would  not,  and  yet  would
againe,  and  againe  would  not,  they  scarsly  knew  what  or
why  ;  fluctuating  in  an  inward  storme  of  diversifyed  hopes,
feares,  desires,  distracted  affections,  no  lesse  then  in  that
outward  broile  of  State. For  it  was  not  long  that  they
looked  toward  Poland,  whether  for  breach  of  conditions
of  that  part,  or  out  of  inveterate  hate  to  the  Pole,  or  their >  /
Nationall  jealousie  and  distrust  of  Strangers,  or  a  naturall
inconstancy ; they  fell  off  from  that  Prince : and  their
Chancellor (Father to the now raigning Emperour)

251

A.D.

1612.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

employed  there  with  others  in  Embassage)  were  detayned
thereupon  prisoners.  It  is  also  reported  that  they  made
secret  overtures  to  His  Majestie  of  Great  Britaine,  and
that  Sir  John  Merick  and  Sir  William  Russel  were  therein
employed  :  but  the  strong  convulsions  and  sharpe  agues
and  agonies  of  that  State  could  not,  or  would  not  endure
the  lingring  of  such  remote  phisicke  ;  the  wheele  of  Things
being  whirled  about  before  such  a  Treatie  might  admit
a  passage  of  Messengers  to  and  fro.  Once  that  Russian
Head  grew  so  heady  and  giddy,  that  at  last  it  bred
Many-headed  innumerable  Heads,  yea  the  whole  Body  became  Heads

body.

Janson.  A.
1612.

in  the  worst  of  tyrannies,  a  popular  (government  shall  I
say?  or)  confusion.  Neither  were  Hydras  heads  (mon-
strously multiplying  two  for  each  cut  off)  like  this :  for
besides  so  many  Wor's  after  the  first  and  second  Demetrius
(which  might  make  up  that  comparison)  each  limbe,  nay
almost  each  haire  of  this  Hydra  (not  the  Nobles  alone,
but  the  basest  which  had  nothing  but  themselves,  and
were  nothing  but  Numbers)  became  so  many  prodigious
Heads ;  they  also  like  Pharaohs  leane  kine  devouring  the
fat,  and  upon  light  pretences  beheading  themselves  in
cutting  off  the  heads  and  nobler  Persons  amongst  them.

When  they  had  thus  made  away  almost  all  the  Grandes,
and  left  the  South  parts  to  the  spoile  of  the  Poles,  which
once  againe  were  drawing  neere  to  Mosco  to  besiege  it ;
the  Poles  also  suffered  some  disaster,  their  Souldiers
mutinying  for  want  of  pay,  and  banding  themselves  to
returne  into  Poland,  there  invaded  the  Mints  and
Custome-houses,  and  some  governments,  detayning  them
for  their  pay ;  sending  also  threatning  Letters  to  divers
Cities  and  Townes,  forced  divers  Nobles  and  Plebeians
to  composition.  The  Turkes  and  Tartars  brake  likewise
into  Walachia,  Moldavia,  and  Polonia,  so  that  Zolkiewsky
or  Sulcosky  the  Generall  was  forced  to  goe  against  them,
of  whom  he  made  so  great  a  slaughter,  that  the  Great
Turke  committed  the  Polake  Embassadour  at  Constanti-
nople to  Ward,  and  threatned  the  Poles  with  invasion.
These  mutinous  Souldiers  continued  meane  while  that  and

252

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  a.d.

1613.

the  next  yeere  to  spoile  Poland,  doing  much  damage  to
the  King  and  the  Bishops,  challenging  many  millions  due,
as  they  said,  for  pay.  Yea  they  passed  further  into
Prussia,  and  made  spoile  in  every  place,  on  the  eight  of
November  16 13.  passing  with  a  great  prey  to  Thorn,
being  parted  into  three  Bands,  the  Sapians,  the  Sborovians,
and  Smolenskians.  Another  companie  of  them  terrified
Silesia.  The  Tartars  likewise  made  impression  and  com-
mitted great  spoile  in  Podolia.

Thus  an  Armie  divided  could  not  conquer,  nor  so  utterly  Gods  provi-
exterminate  Russia  as  otherwise  opportunity  was  offered : vidence

the Pole Souldiers being herein like angry Elephants  Permts  {he

,.  ,  , B  , ,  ^ fe  *  r, , utter  ruine  of

which  sometime  recoyle  upon  their  owne  troupes  and  doe  Russ'ta,

more  spoyle  then  the  enemy  could  either  have  effected
or  expected. But  whiles  the  Invaders  were  thus  invaded,
the  Russes  were  forward  to  worke  those  executions  on
themselves, which their  enemies  could  have  wished to
them ;  till  at  last  awakened  with  the  horrour  of  their  owne
evils,  some  began  to  thinke  of  a  better  course. In  the
North  about  the  Dwina,  a  bold  fellow,  a  Butcher,  rayling  Strange
at  the  Nobilities  basenesse,  and  the  Officers  corruptions,  alteration  of
said, if  they  would  choose  a  good  Treasurer  and pay  affaires  h  a
Souldiers  well,  they  might  have  those  which  would  fight Butcher-
and  expell  the  Poles  their  Enemies : provided,  that  they
would  first  choose  a  worthy  Generall,  for  which  place  he
recommended  to  them  a  poore  maymed  Gentleman,  called
Pozarsky,  who  had  done  good  service,  but  being  neglected,
now  had  retyred  himselfe  not  farre  off. The  multitude
approved  the  Butchers  counsell,  and  chose  Pozarsky  for  Pozarsky
their  Leader,  and  that  Butcher  for  a  Treasurer,  delivering  chosen
into  his  hands  what  money  they  had,  which  he  so  faith- Ge"eraH>  and
fully disbursed, Pozarsky also discharging so well the  Treasurer
trust  reposed,  that  a  great  Army  was  gathered,  and  the
siege  of  Musco  thereby  raysed. And  joyning  with  Knes
Demetry  Mastroukswich  (a  kind  of  Tartar  which  com-
manded an  Army  of  Cossaks  in  service  of  the  Russe)  they
fell in consultation with Boris Liciu, the third Great  Boris  Liciu.
Souldier  of  that  Countrey,  upon  choice  of  an  Emperour.

253

A.D.
1613.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Micalowich
Son  to  the
Chancellor
chosen.

Their  mindes  herein  disagreeing  (some  naming  one,  some
another)  some  named  Mastroukswich  himselfe,  other  for
[III. iv. 79 1.]  further  securitie  against  the  Poles,  and  to  recompence  the
sufferings  and  imprisonment  of  the  Russian  Chancellor  in
Poland,  named  his  young  Sonne  Micallowich,  under  whose
Empire  (having  a  good  Councell  appointed)  they  might
live  happily.  This  was  first  approved  by  the  Cossaks,
and  then  by  the  other  Armies,  the  Butcher  also  was  taken
to  become  a  Counsellor,  and  those  three  Leaders  aforesaid
were  made  Militarie  Commanders  for  the  present
Emperour  against  the  Poles.  Embassadours  also  were
sent  to  divers  Princes  to  mediate  betwixt  them  and  the
Pole,  and  betwixt  them  and  the  Sweden ;  and  by  his
Majestie  of  Great  Brittaine  (whom  God  long  preserve
to  reigne  over  us)  his  countenance  and  intercession,  there
hath  beene  some  agreement,  and  the  young  Emperour  hath
setled  his  Dominions  in  peace,  making  at  last  a  truce  for
fourteene  yeeres  with  the  Poles,  obtayning  also  in  that
Treatie  his  Father  the  Chancellour  his  libertie  and  returne
out  of  Poland,  who  since  is  consecrated  Patriarke  of
Russia.

His  Embassadour  to  the  Emperour  came  to  Lintz  in
December  1613.  and  thence  was  conveighed  by  the
Emperours  Officers  to  the  Court,  where  hee  had  solemne
audience,  where  after  rich  presents  of  Furres  and  his
Letters,  he  delivered  his  speech,  that  Michael  Phedorowich
was  now  by  unanimous  consent  advanced  to  the  Russian
Empire,  and  willing  to  entertayne  and  continue  the  ancient
confederacie  betwixt  both  Empires  :  desiring  the  Imperiall
Majestie  to  dehort  the  Pole  from  his  unjust  attempts,  to
deliver  the  Russe  Captives,  and  not  againe  to  infest  the
recovered  Musco,  but  to  enter  into  peace,  and  abstayne
from  Christian  bloudshed.  Likewise  to  send  an  Embassa-
dour to  his  Court,  &c.  This  mediation  Caesar  promised,
and  gave  the  Embassadour  liberall  entertainment,  and
gentle  dispatch.

Not  long  after  in  May  16 14.  the  Russian  Embassadour
had  audience  with  the  States  of  the  United  Provinces  at

254

Our  Kings
mediation.

His  Fathers
returne  and
Patriarkship

Janson.

OCCURRENTS IN RUSSIA  ad.

1616.
Hage ;  and  before  that  in  England.  I  was  present  both
at  his  arrivall  at  Gravesend,  and  his  honourable  entertayn-
ment  into  London,  and  saw  him  also  presently  after  the
running  at  Tilt  at  White-hall,  the  foure  and  twentieth
of  March,  admitted  to  his  Majesties  presence,  performing
that  Russian  Rite  of  bowing  with  his  face  downe  to  or
neere  the  ground,  &c.

Anno  161 5.  The  Turkish  Embassador  treated  with  the
Cesarean  Majestie  about  the  mediation  betwixt  the  Pole
and the Muscovite, who employed to that purpose
Erasmus  Heidel  and  the  Baron  of  Dohn. The  Pole  not-
withstanding sent  an  Army  in  his  Sonnes  challenge  (who
was shortly to follow to Smolensko) into Muscovia ;
Pontus  Tellagard  the  Sweden  Commander  infesting  also
the  Russians  at  the  same  time. But  the  next  yeere  161 6.
Sir  John  Merike  Knight,  a  man  of  great  experience  in  Sir  J.  Menkes
those Northerne parts, was employed his Majesties  negotiation.
Embassadour  to  negotiate  betwixt  those  two  Great  Princes,  ^r.  Du^h
the Moscovite  and  the Sweden, the  Articles  of  whose  SJ^ Embass°
imposition  I  obtayned  by  the  mediation  of  Sir  Thomas  dor  in  a
Smith  (my  ancient  Benefactor  in  this  kind)  and  have  here  troublesome
ommunicated  to  thee,  but  in  another  Chapiter  as  being  time>  when  &
iow  past  our  Tragicke  Thunders : as  also  the  following  couf  . not  w
Russe-China  Newes,  that  you  may  see  not  only  the  face  t0  Moscofor
of  Russia  washed  from  her  bloudy  pollutions, but  her  the  enemie,  in
lands  further  then  ever  extended  (fortunate  in  treaty  of  the  first  times
Commerce)  as  far  as  China : likewise  the  Russe  Patent  0fMtcalowlch-
o  the  English. Sweet  is  the  name  of  Peace,  and  the
:hing  it selfe  a Heaven upon  Earth. Blessed  are the
Peacemakers (His Majesties  word else-where, here  his
leed)  for  they  shall  be  called  (said  the  only  begotten  Son)
:he  Children  of  God ;  even  the  God  of  peace  will  make
:hem  his  heires  of  Heaven,  which  (models  of  Deity)  seeke
:o  establish  the  peace  of  God  upon  Earth. And  let  it
lot  seeme  tedious  here  to  present  these  His  Majesties
Travels, amongst  our  other  Travellers, but in  a  more
glorious  manner  (liker  to  God  unmoveable  which  moveth
dl  things)  who  hath  not  only  been  our  Sunne,  and  with

255

A.D.
l6l6.

PTXRCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

lightsome  heate  and  influence  filled  our  Brittish  Hemi-
sphere, but  hath  dispersed  his  bright  rayes  of  Light,  and
warmed  with  sweet  quickning  beames  of  heat,  those
remoter  frozen  Climates  of  Sweden  and  Russia,  (not  to
mention,  or  but  to  mention  the  quarrels  of  Denmarke  and
Sweden)  and  after  their  long  frostie  Night  (such  is  the
nature,  such  was  the  state  of  those  States)  to  reduce  the
faire  day-light  of  Peace,  the  warmth  whereof  hath  thawed
the  Icie  hardned  hearts  of  Enmity,  and  filled  all  things  with
sweets,  and  cheere  of  a  returning  Spring.  Nulla  salus
bello,  pacem  te  poscimus  omnes.

[III.  iv.  792.]

Oblivion  of

former

quarrels.

Michaelo
Pheodorowich
Emperor  of
Russia.

Gustavus
Adolphus
King  of
Sweden.

Chap.  X.

briefe  Copie  of  the  points  of  the  Contracts
betweene  the  Emperours  Majestie,  and  the
Kings  Majestie  of  Sweden:  at  Stolboua  the
seven  and  twentieth  of  February, 161 6.

Nprimis,  and  especially  that  all  matters
be  set  aside,  forgotten,  pacified,  and
renounced,  which  passed  these  former
yeeres  since  the  conclusion  of  peace  at
TafHna  in  the  yeere  7003.  betweene  the
former  great  Lords,  Emperours,  and  great
Dukes  of  all  Russia,  and  afterwards  our
great  Lord,  Emperour  and  great  Duke  Michaelo  Phedoro-
wich  of  all  Russia  Sam.  his  Imperiall  Majestie,  and  Empire
of  Russia ;  and  betweene  their  late  high,  mightie  Lord
King  Charles  the  Ninth  of  Sweden,  the  above  named
Kings  Majesties  highly  honored  and  beloved  Father,
especially  their  high  mighty  Lord  King  Gustavus  Adolphus
of  Sweden,  his  Kingly  Majesty  and  the  Crowne  of
Sweden  :  As  also  both  the  Princes  their  Dominions,  Lands,
Cities,  and  people,  chance  or  hap  of  the  Subjects,  which
happened  or  was  done  by  robbery,  burning,  killing,  or
other  enmities  whatsoever  might  bee,  or  by  whom  it  was
done,  that  all  those  griefes  and  troubles  in  all  matters  shall

256

RUSSIAN TREATY WITH SWEDEN  a.d.

1616.

(be  set  aside,  and  hereafter  not  be  revenged  or  remembred
of  neither  party,  for  ever  and  by  this  present  strong  con-
Iclusion  of  peace  betwixt  our  great  Lord  Emperour  and
Igreat  Duke  Michaelo  Pheodorowich  of  all  Russia,  Sam.
land  betwixt  their  great  mightie  Lord,  King  Gustavus
jAdolphus  of  Sweden,  &c.  and  of  other  Dominions,  Lands,
Castles,  aswell  those  of  old,  as  those  which  by  this  con-
clusion of  peace  are  given  and  yeelded  up,  and  betwixt  all
ithe  Subjects  and  people  to  bee  renewed,  established,  con-
firmed and  held  unremoveable  in  the  manner  of  a  peace
i  for  ever  and  ever ;  and  sure  friendship  perpetually :  Also
(that  the  Emperours  Majesty,  and  the  Kings  Majesty  shall
^desire  one  anothers  best  in  all  matters,  and  neyther  seeke  a
(better  friend,  but  to  deale  faithfully  and  truly  in  all  matters
(reciprocally.

2.  Item,  is  given  unto  our  great  Lord  Emperour  and
('great  Duke  Michaelo  Pheodorowich  of  all  Russia,  Sam.
|lhis  heires,  successors  and  hereafter  comming  great  Lords,
Emperors,  and  great  Dukes  of  all  Russia,  and  the  Empire
thereof,  by  their  great  Lord  King  Gustavus  Adolphus  of
Sweden ;  for  himselfe,  his  successors,  and  hereafter  being
Kings  of  Sweden,  and  for  the  whole  Crowne  of  Sweden,
doth  deliver  and  cleere  by  the  power  of  this  conclusion  of
peace,  these  Castles  of  the  Empire  in  Russia  with  the
Townes  and  Suburbs  which  were  taken  in  these  yeeres,
namely,  great  Novogrod,  Stararousse,  Porcove,  Lodiga,  Great  Novo
Odo,  with  their  Territories,  Somerskey,  Volost,  with  the  grod,  &c.
Villages  belonging  to  the  Emperors  Houshold,  to  Metro-
polie,  Monasteries,  Gentlemens  Lands,  Inheritances,
Earmes, with all their profits and revenues according

|to  former  Borders  and  Limits,  except  those  Castles  which
nthe  Emperours  Majestie  doth  yeeld  by  power  of  this  Con-
tract of  peace,  as  hereafter  more  certainly  shall  be  exprest.

3.  Item,  The  Kings  Majestie  of  Sweden  doth  give  unto
the  Emperours  Majestie,  with  the  aforesaid  Castles  and

iTownes,  all  manner  of  Church  ornaments  which  are  in  the t . •
I'Church  of  Sophia,  The  Sapience  of  God,  and  within  all  their  goods.
Churches  and Monasteries in  Novogrod, and in other  13c
xiv  257  R

returned  to  the
Russe.

a.d.  PUKCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

Castles  and  Townes  which  the  Kings  Majesty  hath  given
to  the  Emperours  Majesty  without  carrying  any  thing
away.  Also  the  Kings  Majesty  doth  give  the  Metropolite
and  all  the  Spiritualtie,  with  all  their  goods,  as  also  all
manner  of  Russe  people  what  calling  soever  they  be,  which
are  in  those  Townes,  Castles,  and  Territories,  dwelling
now  or  planting  themselves  there  with  their  Wives,
Children,  and  all  their  goods  whatsoever  any  hath.  As
also  the  Kings  Majesty  shall  give  all  manner  of  Writings
and  Bookes,  which  are  in  those  Castles  and  Townes  to  be
found  in  Roserades  judgement  houses,  or  elsewhere  with
all  Russe  Ordnance,  Munition,  and  Provisions  there
belonging,  and  the  Bells  in  those  aforesaid  Castles  and
Townes,  in  such  manner  as  they  were  the  twentieth  of
November  last  past,  according  to  agreement  made  with
the  Kings  most  excellent  Majesty  of  Great  Britaines
Sir  J.  Merike  Ambassadour  Sir  John  Merick,  except  those  Bells  which
Ambassador.  the  peopie  0f  Novogrod  themselves  did  sell  after  that
agreement,  for  the  payment  of  Souldiers,  and  were  carried
away  from  Novogrod,  but  those  Bells  which  the  Kings
servants  and  people  did  take  perforce  without  buying,  shall
be  in  right  manner  sought  out  and  brought  backe  againe
to  Novogrod  and  restored  there.  Also  which  Bells  the
Kings  Majesties  people  bought  at  Novogrod,  it  shall  bee
free  for  the  Novogrod  men  to  redeeme  them  backe  againe
at  the  same  price  they  sold  them  for,  and  the  Kings  people
hereafter  shall  not  buy  any  more  Bells  of  the  people  of
Novogrod  by  no  meanes  whatsoever.

4.  Item, the  Kings Majesties  people  of  Sweden, at
their  departure  out  of  the  Emperours  Majesties  Castles
and  Towns  aforesaid,  namely,  great  Novogrod,  Stararouse,
Porcove, Lodiga, Somersko,  Volosco, &c. shall  use  no
Libertie  of violence  to  the  Emperors  Majesties  people  by  burning,
persons.  robbing,  or  killing,  neyther  carry  any  Russe  people  with

them  to  the  Kings  Majesties  side,  neither  men,  nor  women,
nor  children,  nor  any  of  their  goods :  and  if  any  goods
remayne  of  the  Swethish  people,  at  their  going  out  of  the
aforesaid  Towne,  which  at  that  time  they  cannot  take  all

258

RUSSIAN TREATY WITH SWEDEN  a.d.

1616.

with  them,  such  goods  shall  be  kept  in  safetie  by  those
with  whom  they  are  left,  till  such  time  as  every  one  of
them  shall  come  thither  for  his  owne  goods,  or  send  some
bodie  for  them,  and  these  people  shall  have  free  libertie  to
goe  without  all  molestation  or  let,  to  come  for  their  goods,
and  to  returne  a^aine  at  their  owne  convenient  time.

5.  Item,  the  Kings  Majesties  Governours  and  Officers  [III.  iv. 793.]
shall  deliver  unto the  Emperours  Majesties  Voyavodes

md  Commanders  the  above  named  Townes  and  Castles,
to  say  great  Novogrod,  Stararouse,  Porcove,  with  their
Territories,  and  Somerskey,  Volost  in  presence  of  the  great
Gentlemen,  the  which  the  above  said  great  Ambassadour
Sir  John  Merike  Knight,  &c.  or  the  said  Kings  Majesties
Gentlemen,  the  which  the  above  said  great  Ambassadour
shall  send  to  that  end  clensing  and  giving  over  the  said
Castles  and  Townes,  two  weekes  after  this  contract  is  con-  Time  of
firmed  betweene  us  both,  great  Commissioners  by  deliverie.
Writings,  Hand,  Seale,  and  Kissing  of  the  Crosse  of  our
side,  and  on  their  part,  by  oath  upon  the  holy  Evangelists.

6.  And  after  that  the  Castle  of  Lodiga  and  Territories,
shall  bee  delivered  to  the  Emperours  Majesties  Messengers
jy  the  Kings  Majesties  Governour,  three  weekes  after  the
ronfirmation  of  this  contract,  in  presence  of  the  abovesaid
*reat  Lords,  James  King,  &c.  his  Gentlemen,  which  to
:hat  purpose  the  great  Ambassadour  shall  send,  then  the
said  Castle  and  Province  to  be  redeemed  and  given  up,
.vith  all  the  Russe  Ordinance,  people  thereto  belonging,
lone  to  be  carried  away,  nor  no  violence  to  bee  offered
:hem  by  robbing,  or  otherwise  spoyling  of  them ;  nor  no
^.usse  Ordnance  to  bee  carried  away. But  the  Castle  of
Ddow,  and  Province,  and  people  is  to  remayne  on  the  Odoto  to
£ings  Majesty  Gustavus  Adolphus  of  Sweden,  for  a  time,  remayne
ill this contract of peace be confirmed by both the  cauttonary-
Potentates,  by  their  Writings,  by  the  Emperours  Majesty

vith  the  Seale  of  the  Empire,  and  by  the  Kings  Majesties

land  and  Seale  of  the  Kingdome  of  Sweden,  as  also  by

he  Emperours  Majesties  kissing  of  the  Crosse,  and  the

i  (Kings Majesties  Oath  upon the  holy  Evangelists  con-

259

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

1616.

firmed,  and  the  borders  divided  and  measured  out  justly.
And  the  Ambassadour  which  both  the  Princes  shall  send
to  that  effect  having  beene  with  both  the  Princes  shall
returne  againe  to  the  borders,  having  well  concluded  the
busines,  as  then  two  weeks  after  that  time  the  Emperors
Majesties  Voyavodes  and  Commanders,  which  his  Majestie
shall  send  for  the  receiving  of  the  said  Castle  and  Province
of  Odow  from  Vlasquo  shall  receive  the  said  from  the
Kings  Majesties  Governours,  with  all  the  Russe  people
and  Ordnance  with  all  their  goods,  and  what  they  have,
and  as  long  as  the  Castle  of  Odow  is  on  the  Kings
Majesties  side,  all  the  people  of  Odow  and  the  Province
thereof  shall  give  unto  the  Kings  Majesty  their  former
Corne,  and  doe  service  as  before  for  the  mayntayning  of
those  Souldiers  that  remayne  there,  the  Kings  Majesties
people  in  the  meane  time  shall  do  to  those  people  of
Odow  no  violence  nor  robbery,  neyther  carry  any  Russe
people,  or  Ordnance  from  thence,  nor  cause  any  to  be  con-
veighed  away.
Charles  Philip  7.  Item,  the  Kings  Majestie  G.  A.  &c.  best  beloved
Prince  of brother  Prince  Charles  Phillip,  Prince  hereditarie  of  S.  &c.

hfclam**0  sha^  nerea^ter  ky  no  claime  or  challenge  to  these  Castles,
and  Townes,  namely  great  Novogrod,  Porcove,  Stararouse,
Somerskey,  Volost,  Odow,  Ladogo,  and  all  their  confines,
borders  and  Provinces ;  nor  come  upon  them  with  no
manner  of  Warre,  to  seeke  to  attaine  them  :  nor  remember
any  more  that  oath  which  formerly  the  people  of  those
places  made  to  the  Prince  C.  Ph.  Also  the  Kings  Majestie
GA.  shall  promise  not  to  give  any  aide  of  men  or  money
to  his  abovesaid  Brother  C.Ph.  against  the  aforesaid  Castles
and  Townes  in  no  wise.

8.  And  against  or  in  Hew  of  the  above  said  our  great
Lord  Emperor,  and  great  D.M.F.  of  all  Russia,  Sam.  &c.
for  himselfe, his  successours,  and  hereafter  being  great

Zar  or  Czar,  Lords,  Zares,  and  great  Dukes  of  all  Russia,  &c.  and  for

iSaeItDu{ehe  the  whole  EmPire  of  a11  Russia>  &c-  especially,  for  the  .
dominion  of  Novogrod  the  great,  hath  given  and  yeelded  I
unto  their  high  mighty  Lord  King  G.A.  of  S.  &c.  from  the

260

RUSSIAN TREATY WITH SWEDEN  a.d.

1616.

dominion  of  Novogrod,  from  himselfe  and  the  whole  Places  yeelded
Empire  of  Russia,  especially  in  respect  of  love  and  friend-  h  the  .
ship,  these  Castles,  Forts,  and  Land,  following,  which  here-  f.  cweJin
tofore  did  adjoyne  to  the  Dominions  of  Novogrod,  as
namely  Evanogrod,  Yam,  Coporea,  Orieseke,  with  all  unto
them  adjoyning,  Townes,  Lands,  and  Provinces,  with  all
Townes,  and  Villages  in  the  Countrey  to  them  belonging,
and  due  unto  them,  according  to  their  former,  just,  and
launcient  borders,  with  the  people  that  dwell,  and  plant
themselves  there,  with  all  other  profits,  revenewes  ;  and
paiments,  with  the  shoares  of  Rivers,  with  Lakes,  nothing
pxempted,  the  Emperours  Majestie  hath  yeelded,  and
given  to  their  Kings  Majestie,  G.A.  of  Sweden  &c.  as
proper  and  owne  to  him  and  his  Majesties  successours,  and
hereafter  being  Kings  of  Sweden,  and  to  the  Crowne  of
Sweden  for  an  everlasting  propertie  for  them  to  hold,  with-
out cavillation  or  any  contradiction,  by  the  Emperours
Majestie,  or  his  Majesties  Successours,  or  hereafter  being
Emperours,  and  great  Dukes  of  all  Russia,  as  also  by  the
ivhole  Empire  of  Russia,  and  from  the  Dominion  of
Novogrod,  for  everlasting  times,  in  all  points,  as  former
nreat  Lords,  and  great  Dukes  of  all  Russia,  held  and  kept
he  same ;  namely  the  late,  of  blessed  memory,  great  Lord
pmperour,  and  great  Duke  Evan  Vasiliwich,  of  all  Russia,
bam.  and  the  great  Lord  Emperour,  and  great  Duke,
l^heodor  Evanowich  of  all  Russia,  Sam.  and  the  spiritualty,
lis  Monkes,  and  all  others  in  those  Castles  and  Townes,  as
veil  Gentlemen,  as  other  inhabitants  of  the  said  places,
wo  weekes  after  the  conclusion  of  this  contract,  when  it
-hall  be  revealed  unto  them,  they  shall  have  free  libertie,
IlII  such  as  desire  to  goe  to  the  Emperours  Majesties  side,
vith  their  wives,  children,  families,  all  goods  and  chattels,
vhich  way  soever  they  will  into  the  Emperours  Majesties
Lands  and  Townes.  And  that  all  Russe  people,  in  the
laid  Castles,  Forts,  and  Townes,  might  know  the  same :  it
s  here  agreed  and  concluded,  that  as  soone  as  the  con-
clusion of  this  peace  shall  be  effected  and  confirmed
betwixt  us  both,  the  great  Potentates  great  Commissioners

261

A.t>.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

shall  send  their  Posts  and  Messengers  into  all  the  afore-  P
named  Townes  and  Castles,  which  they  in  presence  of  the  P
Lord  King  James  his  great  Ambassadours,  Messengers,  F
shall  openly  reveale  and  proclaime,  that  all  spiritualty,  with  »
their  goods,  Courtiers,  Gentlemen,  Burgesses,  and  Townes-  r
[III.  iv.  794.]  men,  which  are  desirous  to  goe  from  thence  within  two  F
weeks  after  to  the  Emperors  Majesties  side,  they  shall  W
have  libertie  to  go  from  thence  with  their  wives,  children,
families,  all  their  goods,  and  chatties,  and  none  of  them
to  leave  any  thing  behinde  them  against  their  wil,  neither
to  be  staied  nor  violated  by  the  Kings  Majesties  people ;
but  moreover,  to  have  convoys  and  prestaves,  to  bring
them  without  all  feare  or  wrong  to  the  Emperours
Majesties  next  borders,  in  such  manner  that  they  be
neither  robbed  nor  killed,  but  especially  and  certainely,  itj^
is  concluded  and  agreed  on  betweene  us  both  sides  great
Commissioners,  that  all  Russe  Countrie  Priests,  and
Husbandmen  in  the  said  Townes  and  Countries  which  are  fco
given  and  yeelded  by  the  Emperours  Majestie,  shall  by  g1"1
no  manner  of  meanes  be  inticed  or  carried  from  thence,  but  vec
shall  remaine  there  with  their  wives,  children,  and  familie,  gr(
under  the  Sweths  Crowne,  as  also  all  Courtiers,  Gentle-  sue
men,  and  Burgesses,  which  doe  not  remove  from  thence,
in  the  foresaid  two  weekes.

9.  As  also  from  the  Emperours  Majestie,  great  Lord
and  great  Duke  M.  F.  of  all  Russia,  Sam.  &c.  the  Kings
Money  to  be Majestie,  &c.  shall  have  20000.  rubbles,  in  ready  good
given  to  the current  unchangeable  Silver  deynings,  and  those  monies  E
immediately  as  soone  as  this  contract  of  peace  shall  be  anc
concluded  and  confirmed  betweene  us,  shall  be  given  to
the  Kings  Majestie  of  Sweden  great  Commissioners  by  the
great  Embassadour  of  the  Kings  most  excellent  Majestie
of  great  Brittaine  his  great  Ambassadour  Sir  John  Mer-
ricke,  Knight.
Ordnance  and io.  And  as  for  the  Russe  Ordnance  in  these  Castles
Munition  to which  shall  be  given  to  our  Lord  Emperour,  and  great
remaine.  Duke? &c> frQm the Kings Majestie G  A &c which

Ordnance shall remaine there, shall be given to his

262

RUSSIAN TREATY WITH SWEDEN  ad.

1616.

Majesties  Officers,  and  what  munition  of  Artillerie,  as
►rovision  for  Warres,  and  Bels,  and  other  matters,  which
heir  Kings  Majestie  hath  taken  in  the  Land  of  Russia  out
>f  those  Castles,  before  the  contract  which  the  Kings
Majesties  great  Commissioners,  and  the  great  Lord  King
ames  &c.  great  Ambassadour  Sir  John  Merricke,  Knight,
lid  erect,  as  the  twentieth  of  November,  such  Ordnance
nd  provisions  shall  remaine  to  the  Kings  Majesties  use,
.nd  Crowne  of  Sweden,  without  all  contradiction  or
:avilation.

1 1 .  And  because  the  late  great  Lord  Emperour,  and
p-eat  Duke  Vasilly  Evanowich  of  all  Russia,  Sam.  did  give
.nd  confirme  by  writings,  unto  their  high,  mighty,  late
^ord,  King  Charles  the  ninth  of  S.  &c.  and  to  the  Crowne
)f  Sweden  the  Castle  Corela,  and  the  Province  thereof,
or  that  faithfull  and  good  willing  aide  which  was  done
into  him,  against  the  Polish  people :  in  like  manner  doth
:onfirme,  and  establish  the  same  by  this  contract  of  our  The  contract  of
rreat  Lord  Emperour,  and  great  Duke  M.F.  &c.  the  same  v-  E\for
eelding and donation of the great Lord Zare, and  h!^^?
rreat Duke Vasily Evanowich, &c, for himselfe, his  tor-te^  con_
uccessours, and hereafter  being  Emperours, and  great  firmed  to
Dukes  of  all  Russia,  and  for  the  whole  Empire  of  all  Sweden.
Russia,  that  the  said  Castle  of  Coreila,  with  all  profits,
evenewes,  and  rents,  by  Land  and  by  Water,  according

o  their  former  auncient,  and  now  being  borderers,  nothing
exempted  in  all,  accordingly  as  it  was  by  former
imperours,  and  great  Dukes  of  all  Russia,  as  they  possest
|ind  held  it,  so  hereafter  it  shall  remaine  to  their  Kings
vlajestie,  G.A.  of  S.  &c.  and  to  his  Majesties  Successours,
ind  hereafter  following  Kings  of  Sweden,  and  the  Crown
)f  Sweden,  without  all  cavillation  or  contradiction  for
everlasting  times.

12.  And  that  hereafter  there  be  no  more  difficulty  or
/ariance  concerning  the  borderers  of  the  Land,  it  is  con-
luded  and  agreed  upon,  that  in  this  yeare  7125.  upon
he  first  of  June,  our  great  Lord  Emperour,  and  great
Duke  M.F.  &c.  and  their  high,  mighty  King  G.A.  &c.

263

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

shall  send  on  both  sides,  speciall  good  Courtiers,  and
Commissioners  Notaries,  to  meete  between  Lodiga  and  Oreseke,  at  the
of  both  sides  to  m0uth  of  the  River  Lava,  whence  it  doth  fall  into  the
meL  Lake  of  Lodiga,  so  that  they  shall  meete  upon  the  said

River,  on  the  midst  of  the  Bridge,  which  of  both  sides
their  people  shall  make  upon  that  River,  and  when  there
the  one  shall  have  shewed  the  other  their  ample  Commis-
sions, and  shall  appeare  that  they  are  worthy  to  measure
out  the  borders  thereby,  betweene  the  Emperours
Majestie,  and  the  Kings  Majesties  Lands :  so  that  from
the  borders  of  Novogrod,  Lodiga,  and  Odow,  with  their
Provinces,  and  also  from  Somerskey,  Volost,  be  devided
from  the  auncient  and  former  precincts,  and  borders  of
Oreseeke,  Copora,  Yam  and  Evanogorod,  in  just  manner
as  it  ought  to  be,  at  the  same  time  next  ensuing  the  first
day  of  June,  then  the  said  Courtiers  and  Notaries,  three
in  presence  in  the  said  manner  on  both  sides,  shall  meete
together  upon  the  borders  of  Novogrod,  betweene  the
Province  of  Olimets  and  Corela  at  Salomensky  Towne,  by
the  Lake  of  Lodiga ;  which  Courtiers  also  shall  view  the
same  Provinces  according  to  the  former  borders,  and  as  the
former  are  exprest,  how  they  have  bin,  and  confirme  the
same,  and  if  they  so  chance,  that  they  cannot  happen  upon
the  former  auncient  borders,  then  shall  they,  by  just
inquisition,  make  new  borders  and  Land-markes,  in  such
manner,  that  hereafter  there  be  no  further  controversie
concerning  those  borders,  and  those  Courtiers  or  Gentle-
men shall  not  part  asunder  of  neither  side,  till  they  have
sufficiently  and  friendly  ended  that  businesse  in  all  manner,
and  what  those  Courtiers  shall  finish  and  effect  in  this
manner,  the  same  according  as  befitteth  there  shall  expresse
by  writing  upon  parchment  on  both  sides,  and  confirme
the  same  by  their  subscription,  Seales,  kissing  of  the
Crosse,  and  oath  interchangeable :  and  as  concerning  the
deviding  of  borders,  and  the  Gentlemen  shall  doe  it,  as
namely  of  Novogrod,  Lodiga,  Odo,  Somerskey,  Volost,  of
one  part,  and  also  betweene  Oreseke,  Copora,  Yam,  and
Evanogorod,  on  the  other  side,  and  also  betweene  the

264

RUSSIAN TREATY WITH SWEDEN  a.d.

1616.

borders  of  Novogrod  and  Corela,  shall  be  set  downe  and
written,  the  same  shall  be  inremoveable  and  fast  for  ever-
lasting times,  by  our  great  Lord  Emperour,  and  great
Duke  Michall  Fedorowich  of  all  Russia,  &c.  and.  the  Kings
Majestie  Gustavus  Adolphus,  &c.  and  their  successours,
and  hereafter  being  on  both  sides,  for  everlasting  times,
according  to  this  contract  of  an  everlasting  peace  :  and  for  [III. iv. 795.]
more  firme  confirmation  of  the  same,  that  it  shall  be  held
i|ind  kept ;  it  shall  be  declared  further  in  the  Letters  of
jzontract,  which  shall  be  hereafter  given  betweene  both
(Princes,  from  the  Emperours  Majestie,  by  kissing  the
Crosse,  and  confirmation  of  his  said  Letters  by  his  great
Seale,  and  by  the  Kings  Majesties  oath  upon  the  holy
Evangelists.

13.  As  also  the  former,  of  blessed  and  most  famous
memory,  great  Lord  Emperour,  and  great  Duke  Fedor
lEvanowich  of  all  Russia,  Sam.  our  great  Lord  Emperour,
:nnd  great  Duke  Michall  Fedorowich,  of  all  Russia,  Sam.
:kc. Unckle  in  conclusion  of  peace  made  at  Tavsin,  in
(the  yeare  7103.  did  yeelde  and  give  over  all  his  pretention
iand  claime  to  the  Countrey  of  Leifland,  as  also  the  great
Lord  Emperour,  and  great  Duke  Vasily  Evanowich,  of  all
Russia,  Sam.  in  a  conclusion  of  peace  made  at  Wyburgh,
in  the  yeare  71 17,  did  renounce  the  same;  so  it  is  now
nere  concluded  and  agreed,  that  our  great  Lord  Emperour,
and  great  Duke  M.F.  &c.  and  his  successours,  and  here-
after being  Emperours  and  great  Dukes,  shall  at  no  time
for  ever  challenge  unto  themselves  any  right,  or  pretence
to  the  Countrey  of  Leifland  ;  neither  shall  our  great  Lord  The  title  of
Emperour  and  great  Duke  M.F.  of  all  Russia,  Sam.  nor  Leifland
pis  successours,  great  Lords,  Emperours,  and  great  Dukes  *£?*?! y
bf  all  Russia,  hereafter  write  unto  their  great  Lord,  King  j^raA
Gustavus  Adolphus,  nor  his  successours  hereafter,  being  Jnnoy  uj.
iKings  of  Sweden,  nor  to  the  Crowne  of  Sweden,  with  the  now  confirmed.
title  of  Leifland,  or  those  Castles  which  the  Emperours
Majestie  hath  now  renounced  to  the  Kings  Majestie  for
sver,  neither  by  Letters  of  confirmation  to  write  them-
selves, or name themselves in them, nor suffer his

265

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

Voyavodes,  Servants  and  Commanders,  to  write  them-
selves with  the  title  of  Leifland,  or  the  Townes  aforesaid,
neither  in  writing  nor  speeches,  to  name  themselves.  As
also  our  great  Lord  Emperour,  and  great  Duke  M.F.  of
all  Russia,  Sam.  his  successours,  and  hereafter  being  great
Lord  Emperour,  and  great  Duke  of  all  Russia,  in  their
writings  and  speeches,  shall  give  to  their  Kings  Majestie,
and  hereafter  being  Kings  of  Sweden,  their  accustomed
title  of  Leifland,  and  Corella.  Item,  on  both  sides,  the
great  Commissioners  have  agreed,  since  at  this  Treatie  we
could  not  accord  upon  the  full  title  of  both  the  great
Potentates ;  As  to  intitle  the  Emperours  Majestie,  and
of  many  other  Dominions,  Lord  and  Conquerour,  and  the
Kings  Majestie,  with  the  title  of  Ingermanland,  wee  have
of  both  sides  great  Commissioners,  referred  the  same  to
both  great  Potentates  liking  therein ;  and  if  that  either
Title  to  be  Potentate  will  be  pleased  to  write  the  other  with  the  full
given.  tjt]C)  as  t0  1.]^  Emperours  Majestie,  the  Kings  Majestie

doth  write  the  full  title  with  the  word  Conquerour ;  and
that  the  Emperours  Majestie  also  doe  write  to  the  Kings
Majestie  his  full  title  with  Ingermanland,  then  both  the
Potentates  are  to  send  those  titles  by  their  Ambassadours,
and  nominate  the  same  full  title  in  one  of  their  Letters
of  confirmation,  and  the  other  Letter  to  be  written  accord-
ing to  this  our  present  agreement :  and  if  in  both  the
Letters,  the  titles  be  written  to  the  full  as  the  Emperours
Majesties  full  title,  with  Conquerour,  and  the  Kings
Majestie  with  Ingermanland,  then  both  sides  Ambas-
sadours shall  shew  one  the  other  the  said  Letters,  and
having  shewen  them,  shall  goe  to  each  Prince  with  the
same ;  if  then  on  either  side  the  Potentate  shall  not  like
thereof,  and  shall  send  the  said  Letters  of  confirmation
with  the  short  title,  according  to  this  our  present  agree-
ment :  the  Ambassadours  of  both  sides  shall  in  like  manner
make  knowne  the  same  one  to  the  other,  and  so  proceede
therewith  to  both  Potentates.
Commerce  of  x4-  Also  it  is  agreed  and  concluded,  that  there  shall  be
Trade.  free  commerce  of  Trade  betweene  both  the  great  King-

266

RUSSIAN TREATY WITH SWEDEN

lomes,  the  Empire  of  Russia,  and  the  Kingdome  of
swethen,  and  both  Kingdomes  subjects  :  so  that  all  the
subjects  of  our  great  Lord  Emperour,  and  great  Duke
Michael  Fedorowich,  of  all  Russia,  Sam.  Merchants  of
he  Dominions  of  Russia,  from  Novogrod,  Plesco,  and
)ther  Cities  and  Townes,  paying  their  due  custome,  shall
lave  free  liberty  without  let  to  trafficke  at  Stockholme,
sViburgh,  Revell,  Narve,  and  other  Townes  in  the  Coun-
ries  of  Swethland,  Fynland,  and  Leifland,  and  they  that
Iwell  and  plant  themselves  at  Ivangrod,  Yam,  Copora,
^ettingburgh,  and  Coreilla,  what  Nation  soever,  either
lusse  or  other  people,  shall  have  free  liberty  without  let
o  trafficke,  and  to  trade,  paying  their  due  custome,  in  the
ight  Custome  houses,  at  Mosco,  Novogrod,  Plesco,
^odiga,  and  other  Townes  of  Russia,  with  the  Emperours
Majesties  subjects,  and  also  have  libertie  to  travell  through
he  Dominions  of  our  great  Lord  Emperor,  and  great
Duke  M.F.  &c.  for  their  trade  of  Merchandize  within  the
Dominions  of  Russia.

15.  And  by  reason  heretofore  our  great  Lord  Emperour
nd  great  Duke  Michall  Phedorowich,  of  all  Russia,  &c.
lis  Majesties  subjects  Merchants,  had  their  free  house  of
nerchandize  at  Revell,  also  now  by  contract  of  Tavsin  and
\Viburgh,  it  is  concluded  they  should  have  a  good  place
"or  a  house,  appointed  them  in  Revell,  as  also  in  other  the
£ings  Majesties  Townes,  as  at  Stockholme,  and  Wyburgh,
hey  shall  have  house  and  Divine  Service,  according  to
heir  Religion,  in  the  said  houses,  without  let  or  hinder-
ince,  but  at  Revell  in  their  Church,  as  formerly  they  have
lone  ;  yet  to  set  up  no  Church,  according  to  their  Religion,
^nd  as  heretofore  their  Kings  Majesties  his  Subjects  have
iad  a  free  house  of  trade  at  Novogrod,  now  also  according
o  the  contract  of  Tavsina,  and  Wyburgh,  they  are  to
lave  a  good  place  for  a  house,  prepared  them  at  Novogrod,
md  the  Emperours  Majesties  other  Cities,  at  Mosco  and
3lesco,  house  for  the  said  purpose,  and  use  their  Divine
Service  according  to  their  Religion,  in  the  house ;  but  to
Duild  no  Churches  for  that  use  any  where.

267

A.£>.
l6l6.

Merchants  of
both  Kingdoms
to  have  houses
and  Churches
in  each  others
Countries.

A.D.
I6l6.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

For  brevitie,  I  have  omitted  the  following  Articles  to
the  29.  the  substance  whereof  is  as  followeth.  The  16.
determineth  what  debts  shall  be  recoverable.  The  17.
Free  passage  of  Subjects  thorow  each  others  Territories.
18.  Freedome  of  Prisoners,  on  both  sides.  19.  Liberty  of
Inhabitants  to  stay  in  the  places  surrendred.  20.  Fugi-
[III.  iv.  796.]  tives  to  be  redelivered.  21.  Borderers  to  be  restrained
from  robberies.  22.  For  ending  of  quarrels,  if  any
happen.  23.  24.  Confirmation  of  former  contracts,  of
Tawsina  andWiburge.  25.  No  private  or  publike  practise
to  be  made  against  each  other.  26.  Shewing  of  Letters
of  confirmation  at  the  meeting  of  Ambassadours  of  both
sides.  27.  Honorable  convoy  for  Ambassadours  on  either
part. 28.  And  also  for  Interpreters  free  passage.

29.  Item,  It  is  agreed  and  concluded,  that  if  by  the
permission  and  pleasure  of  God,  there  happen  an  alteration
of  government  in  Sweden  or  Russia,  then  that  Prince
which  shall  newly  come  to  his  government  first,  shall
reveale  by  his  Ambassador  to  the  other  Prince  from  him-
selfe,  and  after  that  the  other  shall  visit  him  by  his
Ambassadour.

30.  Item,  If  it  so  fall  out  at  any  time,  that  of  both  sides
the  Princes,  as  our  great  Lord,  &c.  &  their  great  Lord
King  Gustavus  Adolphus  shall  send  one  to  the  other  their
great  Ambassadours,  to  confer  of  good  matters,  then  those
said  great  Ambassadours  upon  the  borders  shall  meet  with-
out all  controversie  or  strife,  either  betweene  Odow  and
Evangorod ;  or  betweene  Lodiga  and  Oreseke,  where  they
shall  thinke  most  fitting  for  them  on  both  sides,  in  the
midst  of  the  division  of  the  borders,  and  there  to  conferre
of  these  good  matters  in  friendly  and  loving  sort,  eyther
by  the  Princes  Commission  or  other  commandement,  as
they  shall  have.

31.  Item,  If  it  happen  that  the  Emperours  Majesties
Subjects  and  Merchants,  their  Boates,  Lodies,  and  Mer-
chants Vessels  shall  go  to  Revell,  Wybourgh,  or  other
Townes  and  Castles  of  Swethen,  Fynland  or  Liefland,  or
ships and other Vessels, whereupon the Emperours

268

New  Ambas-
sadors in  case
of  new
successors.

Place  of

Ambassadors

meeting.

RUSSIAN TREATY WITH SWEDEN  a.d.

1616.

Majesties  Ambassadours  and  Messengers  shall  be  going
to  the  Emperors  Majestie,  to  the  Pope,  into  England,  or
my  other  Kingdome,  by  the  Kingdome  of  Swethen,  or
zomming  backe  againe  bee  cast  away  and  brought  to  the
Swethish  shoare,  eyther  upon  the  Salt  Sea  or  the  Lake  of  Case  of
Lodiga,  by  tempests  or  other  meanes,  such  people  shall  ^hipwracke.
lave  free  libertie  without  hinderance  to  goe  from  thence
Iwith  all  the  goods  they  can  save  or  shall  get  saved,  and
phe  Kings  Majesties  people  shall  helpe  them  to  save  their
goods.  In  like  manner  if  it  happen  with  the  Kings
|Majestie  Gustavus  Adolphus  of  Swethen,  &c.  Subjects,
jind  Merchants  Boats,  and  Merchants  Vessels  with  Com-
Inodities,  or  otherwise  be  cast  away  and  brought  to  the
Emperors  Majesties  shoare  upon  the  Ladigo  or  Plesco
Lake,  then  these  people  shall  have  free  liberty  to  goe  away
with  all  their  goods  which  they  can  save  or  get  to  be  saved
without  let  or  hinderance,  and  the  Emperors  Majesties
oeople  shall  helpe  them  to  save  their  goods.

32.  Item,  It  is  concluded  and  agreed  on,  that  our  great
■^ord,  &c.  shall  not  ayde  or  assist  against  the  Kings  Majesty  Neither  party
if  Sweden  Gustavus  Adolphus,  and  the  Crowne  of  Sweth-  t0  atde  the
land,  the  Kingdome  of  Poland  and  Lettow,  nor  his  Sonne  '
Ladislaus  and  the  Crowne  of  Poland,  and  the  Dukedome
!)f  Lettow,  nor  all  the  Dominions  of  Poland  and  Lettow,
lor  shall  helpe  him  with  men  or  treasure,  nor  stand  for
lim  as  one  himselfe,  nor  any  other  Prince  for  him  shall  not
)ractise  or  seeke  any  thing  against  the  King  of  Sweden.
!  Those  Lands  and  Castles  which  belongeth  to  the  King-
dome  of  Sweden  of  old,  or  those  which  now  the  Emperours
Majesty  hath  yeelded  to  the  Kings  Majesty  by  this  con-
clusion of  peace,  he  shall  not  seeke  to  get  them  under
lim,  or  have  possession  of  them.  In  like  manner  the
Kings  Majesty  of  Sweden  shall  not  stand  against  the
Emperours  Majesty  &c.  to  assist  the  King  of  Poland  and
Lettow,  and  all  the  Dominions  of  Poland  and  Lettow,
ueyther  with  men  nor  treasure,  and  not  to  be  with  him
'lis  one.  Neyther  shall  the  Kings  Majesty  by  himselfe  or
other  Princes  and  Governours  seeke  any  practise  against

269

A.D.
l6l6.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Emperours  Majestie  and  his  Lands  and  Castles  which
belong  to  the  Emperour  of  Russia,  hee  shall  by  no  meanes
seeke  to  get  under  him  or  possesse  the  same.  It  is  also
agreed  and  concluded  betweene  us,  that  those  Ambas-
sadours  which  the  Emperours  Majesty  shall  send  to  the
Kings  Majesty,  and  the  Kings  Majesty  to  the  Emperours
Majesty  for  the  confirmation  of  this  conclusion  of  peace,
shall  have  full  authority  to  conferre  betweene  the
Emperours  Majesty  and  the  Kings  Majesty  of  Swethland
for  a  union  and  joynt  assistance  against  Sigismond  King
of  Poland,  and  the  Crowne  of  Poland,  and  the  great
Dukedome  of  Lettow  in  such  manner  as  shall  be  thought
fit  and  requisite  by  both  the  Princes.

33.  And  for  more  certaine  and  firme  assurance,  that  all
Confirmation,  this  here  hath  bin  concluded,  and  agreed  on  betweene  us
the  above  said  Emperours  Majestie,  and  Kings  Majesties
great,  ample,  and  powerful!  Ambassadours,  by  the
mediation  and  intercession  of  the  great  Lord  King  James
his  Majesties  great  Ambassadour,  in  his  presence,  this  con-
clusion is  made,  established,  and  finished,  and  shall  by  our
great  Lord,  and  great  Duke  M.F.  of  all  Russia,  Sam.  and
by  his  successours,  and  hereafter  being  great  Lords,
Emperours,  and  great  Dukes,  be  kept  faithfully,  firmely,
and  unmoveable,  and  shall  be  followed  in  all  points,  and
finished  without  all  falshood  or  deceipt :  and  our  great
Lords,  Emperours,  and  great  Dukes,  &c.  by  his  command-
ment, wee  his  great  Commissioners,  Ocholvech  and
Namestincke  of  Susdall  Knese  Dannyll  Evanowich
Mezetskey.  I  the  Emperours  Majesties  Dwarenni  and
Namestincke  of  Shatskey  Olexsey  Evanowich  Zuzen.  I
the  Emperours  Majesties  Duke,  Michcola,  Meketesin
Novokseno.  I  the  Emperours  Majesties  Duke,  Dobrenia
Semenov,  have  confirmed  this  conclusion  of  peace,  with
the  kissing  of  the  Crosse,  and  thereunto  set  our  hands  and
Seales :  also  the  Kings  Majesties  of  great  Brittaines  great
Ambassadour,  Sir  John  Merricke  Knight,  Gentleman  of
his  Majesties  privie  Chamber,  for  the  more  witnessing  of
the  same,  that  this  is  also  concluded  here  betweene  us,

270

Names  of  the
Commis-

sioners.

RUSSIAN TREATY WITH SWEDEN  ad.

1613.

hath  firmed  with  his  owne  hand  and  Seale,  both  these
obligations,  and  a  confirmation,  which  wee  the  Emperours
(Majesties  ample  Ambassadours,  have  given  to  the  Kings
Majesties  great  Commissioners ;  and  against  that  we  have
taken  the  like  writing  of  confirmation,  from  the  Kings
Majesties  great  Ambassadours.  Written  at  Stalbo,  in  [IH.iv.  797.]
tfrhe  yeare  from  the  creation  of  the  World  7125.  the  seven
knd  twentieth  day  of  February.

HAving  here  presented  the  fruits  of  his  Majesties
mediation  betwixt  the  Muscovite  and  Sweden :  I
[nought  good  also  to  adde  this  other  testimonie  of  Beati
j^acifici,  in  the  peaceable  fruits  of  his  endevours  betwixt
:the  said  King  of  Sweden,  and  the  King  of  Denmarke,
|fter  bloudy  warres  betwixt  them,  in  which  the  English
l/oluntaries  were  so  great  a  part :  of  whom  (if  I  mistake
jaot)  foure  thousand  served  the  Dane,  under  the  command
)f  the  right  honorable  the  Lord  Willoughby.  The
Articles  of  agreement  betwixt  them  are  these  six,  con-
cluded January  16.  16 13.  translated  out  of  the  Dutch
"opie,  Printed  at  Copenhagen  first,  and  after  at  Ham-
>urge.

1.  That  the  King  of  Sweden  shall  have  againe  the  Citie
i>f  Calmar,  with  all  that  belongeth  unto  it,  excepting
Artillery,  which  shall  be  restored  to  the  King  of  Den-
narke,  or  to  be  sold  for  his  profit.

2.  That  the  King  of  Denmarke  shall  have  Elsborch  and
)rland,  with  all  the  forces  and  strength  of  Arensborch,  in
uawne,  for  the  space  of  twelve  yeares  ensuing,  for  the
turn  of  fifteene  Ton  of  Gold ;  the  which  sum  of  money
(he  King  of  Sweden  shall  pay  unto  the  King  of  Denmark
within  the  foresaid  twelve  yeares,  at  certaine  times,  in
jlonsideration  of  his  charges  during  the  said  warres.

3.  That  the  Navigation  and  passages  by  Seas  and  Land
t>  Norway  shall  be  used  free  without  any  hinderance  of
lose  of  Sweden.

4.  That  Lapland  shall  be  free  without  giving  of  any
ontribution.

271

A.D.
1613.

Ambassadour
from  Catay
and  from  the
King  of
Altine. See

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

5.  That  the  King  of  Denmarke  shall  have  Grone-land
free,  without  paying  of  any  contribution  unto  the  King  of
Sweden.

6.  That  the  King  of  Denmarke  shall  beare  the  three
Crownes  without  any  gaine-saying  or  contradiction  of  the
King  of  Sweden  (which  was  the  first  and  principall  cause  of
these  aforesaid  bloudy  and  unneighbourly  warres,  and  con
tinuall  irruptions.) Both  Kings  subscribing  hereto.

Chap. XL

A  relation  of  two  Russe  Cossacks  travailes,  out  of
Siberia  to  Catay,  and  other  Countries  adjoyning
thereunto.  Also  a  Copie  of  the  last  Patent
from  the  Muscovite.  A  Copie  of  a  Letter
written  to  the  Emperour  from  his  Governours
out  of  Siberia

O  our  Lord  Emperour  and  great  Duke
Michailo  Fedrowich  of  all  Russia,  your
Majesties  Vassals,  Evan  Koorakin,  and
Evan  Koboolitin,  doe  knocke  their  heads,
&c.  Lord  this  present  7127.  yeere  (or
1619)  we  writ  unto  your  Majestie  by  a
Cozack  of  Tobolsko,  Clement  Oboshkin,

that  there  were  come  to  Tobolsko  Ambassadours  out  of
the  Dominions  of  Catay,  and  from  the  King  of  Altine
with  the  people  of  Tobolsko.  Evashko  Petlin,  and
Andrashko  Madiegene :  And  with  them  together  doe  go
sup.pag.  527.  to  you  great  Lord  Ambassadours,  out  of  the  Dominions
^  5  5 2-  of  Labin,  and  the  Altine  Char,  from  Skiugia  with  presents,

the  which  we  dispatcht  to  your  Majestie,  with  Burnash  1
Nikonove,  the  sixt  of  July,  and  before  them  wee  dispatcht  ^
to  your  Majestie  Evashko  Pettlin  and  Patoy  Kizall,  by:i
whom  we  sent  unto  your  Majestie  a  Letter  from  Tambur,
King  of  Cathay,  and  a  Copie  of  the  King  Altines  Letter  j
translated,  with  a  Card  and  description  of  the  places,  which  j.
way  Evashko Petlin, &  Andrushko Madigene, passed  [ar

272

5  in
mis
nai
nil

COSSACK  TRAVELS  a.d.

1619.

from  the  Castle  of  Tomao,  into  the  Dominions  of  Catay,

as  also  in  what  other  Dominions  they  were. The  Letter

it  selfe  which  came  from  Altine  Char,  Labatharshan  doth  t^ns^ate  ty

carrie  to  your  Majestie : but  as  for  the  Letter  out  of  china

Catay,  there  is  none  in  Tobolsko  to  translate  it.  Characters.

The  Copie  of  the  Altine  Chars,  or  golden Kings
Letter  to  the  Emperour  of  Russia.

TO  the  Lord  Emperour  and  great  Duke :  The  golden
King  received  your  Letter.  In  former  times  (Lord)
it  came  to  my  hearing,  that  your  Princely  good  Ambassa-
dours,  did  seeke  a  way  or  passage  to  come  to  me,  since
which  time  it  is  now  thirteene  yeeres,  but  then  the  people  [III.  iv.798.]
of  Iskirgi,  Tubents,  Mattara,  &  black  Kolmaks  did  not  EasterneTar-
suffer  your  Princely  good  Ambassadors  to  come  to  me,  tar  attons'
but  did  rob  and  spoile  them.  Now  since  ten  of  your
Majesties  people  are  come  to  me,  and  I  have  sent  to  you
[chkmen  Kichenga,  to  do  obeysance  unto  your  Majesty,
ind  see  your  Princely  eyes,  whom  your  Majestie  vouch-
safed to  doe  their  obeysance  and  see  your  Princely  eyes,
i^nd  to  me  you  sent  of  your  Grace  three  Cups  of  Silver,  Russian
t  Bow,  a  Sword,  two  Gunnes,  and  two  Garment  Clothes,  Presents-
iill  which  your  Princely  favours  I  have  received,  and  what
;hall  bee  behovefull  for  your  Majesty  from  hence,  I  will
urnish  you  withall :  As  also  I  am  to  request  your  Majestie
n  respect  the  Ambassadours  doe  passe  betweene  us  very
niserably,  and  poore,  by  reason  there  are  now  some  small
yarres  betwixt  us  and  the  blacke  Kolmacks,  and  there  are
>ut  small  forces  in  Tobolsko  Castle,  and  in  the  Castles  of
iTomuo,  Tarko,  and  from  the  Barban  people.  Now  if  so
be  your  Majestie  will  favour  me,  and  defend  me  with
hese  people  from  Karakula ;  and  will  bee  pleased  to  pro-
eed  on  warre  on  your  owne  side,  and  I  on  mine,  that
patter  will  bee  done  betweene  us ;  and  all  good  matters
ontinue  betwixt  us.  And  so  by  your  Princely  favour,
-  Embassadors  may  continually  passe  betweene  us.  Ivan
farchan  Varchies  and  Andrei  Tarchan  Varchies,  did
xiv  273  s

A.D.

1619.

Tarchan  of
Labaia.

Sirgos.

Three

Leopards,  &c.
for  a  Present.

His  requests.

Relation  of
two  Russe
travellers  of
their  Voyage
to  Catay.

Tomo  a  new
Castle  beyond
Ob. See  sup.
pag.  527.

Kirgis.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

conduct  two  of  your  Majesties  Messengers  into  the
Dominions  of  Catay,  according  to  your  Majesties  com-
mandement,  and  they  are  returned  to  me  againe  out  of
Catay.  Also  (Lord)  there  is  come  unto  me  the  Tarchan
of  Labaia,  and  I  have  sent  unto  you  with  my  Presents  the
said  Tarchan  Labar  and  Kitibacshii  Anchaii,  and  with  them
ten  men,  and  two  men  of  Sirgos  ;  in  their  Letter  is  written
that  there  is  sent  unto  your  Majestie  three  Leopards  with
their  clawes,  an  Irbish  with  his  clawes,  three  Lizernes  with
their  clawes,  a  red  and  a  yellow  Damaske  upon  a  gold
ground,  a  piece  of  Velvet,  and  an  ambling  Horse.  And
I  am  humbly  to  request  your  Majestie,  if  it  bee  your
Majesties  favour  to  grace  mee  for  your  owne  honour  with
a  garment  of  cloth  of  Gold,  and  of  divers  colours,  five
Garments  of  fine  Cloth,  a  Head-piece,  a  shirt  of  Male,
a  Sword,  a  Bow,  twentie  Gunnes,  a  Flaggon  of  Gold,  a
Kettle  of  Silver,  and  five  sorts  of  Precious  Stones,  of  each
one,  a  Jennet,  a  Dwarfe,  and  Workmen  to  make  Guns  and
Powder,  and  two  thousand  pence.  Your  Majesties  name
is  growne  renowmed  and  famous  every  where,  therefore
I  doe  reverence  unto  your  Majestie,  because  many  Kings
of  many  Countreyes  have  spread  abroad  the  fame  of
your  Majesties  name  every- where.  And  I  request  that
Ambassadours  may  speedily  passe  betwixt  us,  and  now
if  it  be  your  Majesties  favour,  I  desire  you  to  dispatch
these  my  Ambassadours  with  speed  to  me  backe  againe.

Anno  7128.  the  three  and  twentieth  of  September  in
the  Emperours  Dominions  at  Soldota,  a  Cazacke  of
Siberia,  called  Evashko  Pettlin,  did  report,  beeing
examined  of  his  Travels.  The  last  yeere  past  7127.  hee
said  that  the  Boiaren  and  Voyavod  Knez  Evan  Simonowich
Koorockin,  sent  him  from  the  Castle  of  Tomo,  and  his
fellow  Andrashko,  to  conduct  the  Kings  Altines  Ambassa-
dours, as  also  to  inquire  or  search  the  Kingdomes  of  Catay.
They  went  from  the  Castle  of  Tomo,  about  the  ninth  of
May,  and  travelled  from  Tomo  to  Kirgis,  with  much
expedition  tenne  dayes,  and  in  Kirgis  is  a  Duke  subject
to  the  Emperours  Majestie,  his  name  is  Nemi,  who  gave

274

COSSACK  TRAVELS  a.d.

1619.

them  victuals  and  post. Through  this  Land  of  Kirgis
they  went  halfe  a  day, and  came to the  Dominion  of
Mutalla,  to  the  Altine  King,  who  gave  them  provisions  Mutalla.
and  post,  and  dispatched  them  thence : so  they  passed
through  his  Land  five  weekes  to  the  Country  of  Shere-  Sheremugala.
mugaly ;  where  raigneth  a  Queene  called  Manchika,  who  Q>  Manchika.
caused  to  have  provision  and  post  given  them. In  this
Countrey  of  Sheromogula  they  travelled  foure  dayes,  and
came  into  the  Dominions  of  Catay ;  called  Crim,  where
is  a  wall  made  of  stone  fifteene  fathomes  high,  alongst  the  Wall  of
side  of  which  wall  they  went  ten  dayes,  where  they  saw  Catay.
pettie Townes and Villages belonging to the Queene
Manchika ;  but  in  those  ten  dayes  they  saw  no  people
upon  the  wall  at  all. At  the  end  of  these  ten  dayes,  they
came to the gate, wherein lye very great Peeces of  The  gate  and
Ordnance, shooting  shot  as  bigge  as  a  mans  head,  and  &uard-
in  the  said  gate  standeth  in  watch  three  thousand  men,
and  they  come  with  their  Merchandizes  to  traffique  at  the
gate. The  Altine  men  also  come  to  the  gate,  with  their
Horses  to  sell  to  the  Catay  men  ;  but  are  not  permitted
to  come  within  the  walls,  except  very  few  at  once. Thus
their  whole  travell  from  Tomo  Castle  to  this  gate,  was  See  for  better
twelve  weekes,  besides  some  dayes  that  they  stood  still,  understanding
and  from  the  gate  to  the  great  Empire  of  Catay  tenne  hereof->  Goes
dayes,  and  came  to  the  Citie  or  Castle  of  Catay  about  the  je°uitee\
beginning  of  September,  and  were  lodged  in  the  great  Relations  in
Embassadors  house : and  having  beene there  in Catay  the  second
foure  dayes,  there  used  to  come  unto  them  a  Secretary  Booke.
with  two  hundred  men  upon  Asses  very  well  apparelled,
and  did  entertayne  and  feast  them  with  Sacke  and  other
Drinkes made of Grapes, and told them that the
Emperour,  or  King  Tambur  had  sent  him  to  aske  them
wherefore  they  were  come  into  the  Dominions  of  Catay.
Whereupon they answered that our great Lord and
Emperour  had  sent  them  to  discover  the  Dominions  of
Catay,  and  see  the  King  thereof;  but  hee  answered  them
againe,  that  without  presents  they  could  not  see  the  King,
and  withall  gave  them  a  Letter,  which  Letter  they  brought

275

A.D.

1619.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

with  them  to  Tolbosko,  and  from  thence  is  sent  to  the
Emperours  Majestie  by  them.  Out  of  Catay  they  went
about  the  twelfth  of  October,  and  came  to  the  Castle  of
Tobolsko  about  Whitsontyde  the  same  yeere  1619.

[III.  iv.  799.]

*Such  are  the
Tartars
dwellings  or
jleetings,
rather  with
their  beasts.
Their
Journal,  or
daily

journeyesfrom
place  to  place.
Huge  Lake.

I

King  A I  tine.
Ulusses,  or
Tartarian
Hords.

A  Description  of  the  Empires  of  Catay  and  Labin,
and other Dominions aswell inhabited, as  .j,
places  of  Pasture*  called Ulusses  and Hords,
and  of  the  great  River  Ob,  And  other  Rivers!
and  Land  passages.

FRom  Kirgis  to  the  River  Bakanna  is  sixe  dayes  travell,
and  from  Bakanna  to  Kinchike,  is  nine  dayes  travell,
from  Kinchike  to  the  great  Lake,  (in  which  Lake  Rubies
or  Saphires  grow)  is  three  dayes  travell,  and  the  compasse
of  that  Lake  is  twelve  dayes  travell  on  horsebacke.  There
falleth  also  into  the  said  Lake  foure  Rivers,  to  wit  from
the  East,  South,  West  and  North,  yet  the  water  doth  not
increase  in  the  Lake,  nor  decrease.  There  falleth  yet
another  River  into  the  said  Lake,  which  commeth  from
betweene  the  East  and  the  North,  and  is  called  Kitta,  upon
which  we  went  fifteen  dayes  to  the  head  of  it,  where  we
found  the  King  Altine  in  progresse ;  the  way  is  very  stony.
And  from  the  King  Altine  to  an  Ulusses  five  dayes  travell ;  ^
the  Ulusses  is  called  Algunat,  and  the  Duke  in  it  is  called
Tormoshine ;  from  him  to  another  Ulusses  five  dayes,  the
Ulusses  is  called  Chikursha,  and  the  Duke  in  it  is  called
Carakula ;  from  thence  to  an  Ulusses  five  dayes  called
Suldussa,  wherein  is  a  King  called  Chaksata,  from  him  to
an  Ulusses  called  Bisut,  five  dayes,  the  Dukes  name  is
Chichim ;  from  him  to  an  Ulusses  called  Iglethin,  ^.wt
dayes,  the  Duke  is  Taschils  Cherekta,  from  him  to  an
Ulusses  called  Beskutae,  five  dayes,  the  Duke  is  called
Cherkar,  from  him  to  an  Ulusses  called  Girut,  foure  daies
without  water,  the  Duke  is  called  Chichevoas.  From  him
to  an  Ulusses  called  Isut  five  dayes,  the  Duke  of  it  is
called  Chechen. From  him  to  an  Ulusses  called  Tulent

276

COSSACK  TRAVELS  ad.

1619.
Unient  foure  dayes, the  Duke  is  called Tayku, Katin.
From  him  to  the  Ulusses  Yogorsin  three  dayes,  there  is  a
King  called Bakshuta. From  thence  to  an Ulusses  of
the yellow Mugalls called Mugolchin, wherein is a  Yellow
Dutchesse called Manchika, with her Sonne Ouchai  Mugals,  or
Taichie,  it  is  within  two  dayes  journey  of  the  Land  of  Moal-Tartars-
Mugalla,  a  very  dangerous  passage  through  the  cliffes  of
the  Rockes,  which  being  past  they  came  into  the  Land  of
Mugalla,  wherein  are  two  Castles  or  Cities  built  of  stone,  Mugalla,  or
they  are  called  with  them  Bashum,  in  one  of  them  is  a  Tartaria
Duke  called  Talaii  Taishen  ;  and  in  the  other  the  Duke  ?r^^
is  called  Egidon  Taishen ;  there  is  also  a  third  Citie  in  l^Bactria^to
it  called  Lobin,  wherein  doth  governe  a  woman  called  the  Sea.
Dutchesse  Manchika  with  her  Sonne,  the  said  Dutchesse
doth  command  all  the  Cities  of  Mugalla,  and  her  command
extendeth  into  Catay. If  any  man  be  to  travell  over  the
borders,  and  into  Catay,  he  must  have  a  Passe  under  her
Seale ;  which  if  they  have  not,  they  may  not  passe  through
Catay. The  Land  of  Mugalla  is  great  and  large  from
Bughar  to  the  Sea ;  all  the  Castles  are  built  with  stone  Their
foure square : at the corners, Towers, the ground or  buildings.
oundation  is  layd  of  rough,  grey  stone,  and  are  covered
with  Tiles, the gates  with counterwards  as our  Russe
yates  are,  and  upon  the  gates  alarum  Bels  or  Watch-bels
)f  twentie  poode  weight  of  metall,  the  Towers  are  covered
with  glazed  Tiles ;  the  houses  are  built  with  stone  foure
:ornerd  high,  within  their  Courts  they  have  low  Vaults,
dso  of  stone,  the  seelings  whereof,  and  of  their  houses  are
:unningly  painted  with  all  sorts  of  colours,  and  very  well
>et  forth  with  flowres  for  shew. In  the  said  Countrey
)f  Mugalla  are  two  Churches  of  Friers,  or  Lobaes,  built  Friers.
)f  square  stone,  and  stand  betweene  the  East  and  the
k>uth ;  upon  the  tops  of  them  are  made  beasts  of  stone,
md  within  the  Church  just  against  the  doore  are  set  three  »/

rreat  Idols  or  Images,  in  the  forme  of  women  of  two  Idols.
ind  an  halfe  fathome  long,  gilt  all  over  from  the  heads
o  the  feet,  and  sit  a  fathome  high  from  the  ground  upon
leasts  made  of  stone,  which  beasts  are  painted  with  all

277

A.D.
1619.

Candles.

Candles  burn-
ing without
Jlame.

Rites  of
Religion.

Come.

Fruits.

People  and
attyre.

Distilled
wine.

[III.  iv.  800.]

Cutuffsy  or
Patriarkes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

manner  of  brave  colours.  Those  Idols  have  each  in  their
hand  a  Vessell,  and  there  burne  before  them  three  tallow
Candles ;  on  the  right  side  of  them  are  erected  eight  Idols
more  in  the  forme  of  men,  and  on  the  left  side  eight  Idols
more  in  the  forme  of  Maydens,  gilt  all  over  from  the
head  to  the  foote,  their  armes  stretched  out  after  the
manner  as  the  Mugall  people,  or  Religious  men  use  to
pray.  And  a  little  way  from  these  Idols  stand  two  Idols
more  made  naked  as  a  man  is  in  all  parts,  not  to  be
discerned,  even  as  though  he  were  alive,  having  before
them  Candles  burning,  as  small  as  a  straw,  and  burne
without  a  flame  only  in  an  Ember  or  Corall.

Their  service  or  singing  in  these  Churches  is  thus.
They  have  two  Trumpets  of  a  great  length,  about  two
fathomes  and  an  halfe  long,  and  when  they  sound  on  these
Trumpets,  and  beate  upon  Drummes,  the  people  fall
downe  upon  their  knees  and  clap  their  hands  againe,  cast-
ing their  armes  asunder,  they  fall  to  the  ground  and  lye  so
halfe  an  houre.  Their  Churches  are  covered  with  glazed
Titles.  As  for  bread  in  the  Land  of  Mugalla  there  groweth
all  manner  of  Graine,  as  Prosso,  or  Russe  Rice,  Wheate,
Oates,  Barley,  and  all  sorts  of  other  Graine  in  abundance,
and  their  Wheate  bread  is  as  white  as  Snow.  As  for
Fruit  in  Mugalla  they  have  of  all  sorts,  as  Apples,  Melons,
Arbuses,  Pompeons,  Cheries,  Lemons,  Cucumbers,  Onions,
Garlicke.  The  men  are  not  faire,  but  the  women  exceed-
ing faire,  and  weare  for  their  Apparell,  Velvets  and
Damasks,  the  Capes  of  their  Garments  both  of  the  men
and  women  hang  downe  to  their  shoulders.  They  distill
Aquavitae  out  of  all  sorts  of  Graine,  without  Hops.  As
for  Precious  Stones  and  Gold  they  have  none,  but  for
Silver  they  have  great  store  out  of  Catay.  Their  Boots
they  weare  of  their  owne  fashion.  They  have  no  Horses,
only  Mules  &  Asses  in  abundance ;  they  till  and  plough
their  ground  with  great  and  small  Ploughes,  as  we  doe  in
Siberia  at  Tobolsko.  Their  Cuttuffs  are  in  our  Language
Patriarkes,  and  both  in  Mugalla  and  Catay  are  but  two
Cuttuffs  ; the  one  was  about  twentie,  and  the  other  thirtie

278

COSSACK  TRAVELS  ad.

1619.

yeeres  of  age. Within  the  Churches  are  made  for  them
high  places  with  seats  whereupon  they  sit :  the  King  doth
honour  them  with  bowing  downe  before them. Their
Lobaes  are  in  our  Language  Friers,  which  are  shorne  about  Lobas,  or
twentie  yeeres  of  age,  and  know  no  women  from  their  Fnen
Mothers  wombe,  they  eate  flesh  continually  every  day,  ^**™"cte'
and  shave  both  Beards  and  Mustachoes : their  Garments
are  of  Damaske  of  all  sorts  and  colours,  and  their  Hoods
yellow,  they  say  that  their  Religion  and  ours  are  all  one,
only  the  Russe  Monkes  are  blacke,  and  theirs  white.

Beyond  the  Land  of  Mugalla  are  three  other  Countreyes  Three
or  Dominions,  stretching  towards  Bughar,  the  one  called  Kingdomes.
Ortus,  the  Kings  name  there  is  Evakan,  the  Citie  is  of  Ortus.
stone,  and  the  Kingdome  rich.

The  other  is  called  Dominions  of  Talguth,  the  Kings  Talguth.
name  is  Savelanche,  his  Cities  are  also  of  stone,  and  his
Kingdome  rich.

The  third  Countrey  where  the  chiefe  Citie  is,  is  called
Shar,  and  the  King  thereof  is  called  Zellezney,  or  Iron  star.
King,  his  Kingdome  is  rich,  and  not  farre  from  Bughar.
From  this  Iron  King  come  Diamonds,  and  all  these  three
Kingdomes  are  under  the  South,  and  on  the  other  side  of
the  blacke  Mugalls  are  the  yellow  Mugalls,  stretching  all Blacke
alongst  the  Sea,  aswel  Townes  as  walking  people,  with  Mugols,  or
their  Families  and  Herds.  Cara  Cata>

From  the  Countrey  of  Mugalla,  where  the  Dutchesse
Manchika  dwelleth,  to  the  Citie  of  Shrokalga  in  Catay,  Shrokalgain
is  two  dayes  travell  on  horsebacke  : and  the  bordering  Catay.
or  frontier  wals  stand  under  the  South  towards  Bughar,  Walls  of
two  moneths  travell,  all  made  of  Bricke  of  fifteene  fathome  Catay.
high,  whereupon  they  told  about  a  hundred  Towres  in
sight,  on  both  sides  of  them,  but  towards  Bughar,  and
towards  the  Sea,  the  Towres  are  not  to  bee  numbred,  and
every  Towre  standeth  from  another  about  a  flight  shot
distant. The  said  wall  stretcheth  downe  towards  the  Sea
foure  moneths  travell. The  people  of  Catay  say,  that  this
wall  stretcheth  alongst  from  Bughar  to  the  Sea,  and  the
Towres  upon  it  stand  very  thicke ;  it  was  made,  as  they

279

A.D.
1619.

Tower-becons.

Car  a  Catay.
But  Jive  gates
in  the  wall.

Shtrocalga.

Short
Ordnance.

Tara.

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

say,  to  be  a  border  betweene  Mugalla  and  Catay.  The
Towres  upon  it  are  to  the  end,  that  when  any  enemy
appeareth,  to  kindle  fires  upon  them,  to  give  the  people
warning  to  come  to  their  places  where  they  are  appointed
upon  the  wall.  At  the  entring  without  the  wall  dwell
the  blacke  Mugalls ;  and  within  is  the  Countrey  and  Cities
of  Catay.  In  the  wall  to  Catay  are  five  gates,  both  low,
and  straight  or  narrow,  a  man  cannot  ride  into  them
upright  on  horse-backe,  and  except  these  five  gates  there
is  no  more  in  all  the  wall ;  there  all  manner  of  people
passe  into  the  Citie  of  Shrokalga.

Within  the  borders  or  wall  is  a  Citie  or  Castle  of  Catay,
called  Shirokalga,  built  of  stone,  the  Governour  thereof
is  called  Duke  Shubin,  who  is  sent  thither  for  a  time  from
Tambur  King  of  Catay,  the  Castle  is  very  high  walled
and  artificially  built ;  the  Towres  are  high  after  the  manner
of  Mosco  Castle,  in  the  Loope-holes  or  Windowes  are
Ordnance  planted,  as  also  upon  the  Gates  or  Towres ;  their
Ordnance  is  but  short,  they  have  also  great  store  of  small
shot,  and  the  Watchmen  every-where  upon  the  Gates,
Towres,  and  Wals,  well  appointed ;  and  assoone  as  they
perceive  the  Sunne  going  downe,  the  Watch  dischargeth
their  Peeces  of  Ordnance  thrice,  as  also  at  the  breake  of
day  in  the  morning,  they  shoot  out  of  their  Pieces  thrice,
and  doe  not  open  the  Castle  Gates  till  the  sixt  houre  of
the  day.  Within  the  Castle  are  shops  built  of  stone,  and
painted  cunningly  with  divers  colours,  wherein  they  have
all  manner  of  Merchandizes,  as  Velvets,  Damaskes,
Dorogoes,  Taffataes,  Cloth  of  Gold,  and  Tissue  of  divers
colours,  sundry  sorts  of  Sugars,  Cloves,  &c.  in  the  Gover-
nours  house  is  a  strong  Watch  of  Partisans  and  Halberds,
and  their  Drummes  made  like  great  Barrels.  When  the
Governour  goeth  abroad,  they  carry  a  Canopie  over  him,
and  make  way  before  him  with  Rods,  as  before  our
Emperour  in  Mosco.

And  from  Shirokalga  to  the  Citie  Yara  is  three  dayes
travell :  this  Citie  is  large,  built  of  stone,  and  the  circuit
of  it  is  two  dayes  travell,  with  many  Towres,  and  foure

280

COSSACK  TRAVELS  a.d.

1619.

jSates  to  come  in  at,  the  Markets  in  the  Citie  are  well
iind  richly  accommodated,  with  Jewels,  Merchandizes,
Grocerie,  or  Spices,  the  Citie  well  inhabited  having  no
blace  void  or  waste  in  it.  The  houses  and  shops  are
tDuilt  with  stone,  with  streets  betweene ;  the  Governours
:iere  are  called  Duke  Bym  and  Duke  Juchake,  heere  they
nave  Post  Stages  as  wee,  their  Markets  have  a  very
odoriferous  smell  with  Spices.

And  from  this  Citie,  to  a  Citie  called  Tayth,  is  three  Tayth.

iiayes  journey,  it  is  built  of  stone,  large,  and  high  walled,

K is in compasse two daies travel about, at the first

tomming  to  it  are  five  gates  barred  and  bolted  with  Iron,

'/cry  thicke  and  close,  fastned  with  Nailes ;  the  houses  and

lihops,  or  Ware-houses  are  all  built  of  stone,  wherein  are

all manner of Merchandizes, Spices, or Grocerie, and

orecious  things  more  abundant  then  in  the  aforesaid  Cities,

they  have  Tavernes  or  Drinking  houses  stored  with  all

nanner of Drinkes, as  Aquavitae, Meade, and Wines

rom  beyond  Seas  in  abundance,  there  they  have  also  their

Watch, Ordnance, and Munition in great store ; the

jovernours  of  this  place  are  one  Duke  Tuga,  and  the

)ther  Duke  Zumia,  there  wee  saw  Sinamon,  Anniseeds,

Apples, Arbuzes, Melons, Cucumbers, Onions, Gar-

icke, Radish, Carrets, Parsenips, Turnops, Cabbage,  [III.iv.801.]

^imons,  Poppiseeds,  Nutmegs,  Rice,  Almonds.  Pepper,

lubarbe,  &  many  other  Fruits,  which  we  know  not,  so

hat  they  want  nothing  whatsoever  groweth  in  the  World  ;

he  shops  are  within  the  Citie,  stored  of  all  manner  of

"ommoditie  as  is  said,  as  also  victualling  and  drinking

-louses,  stored  with  all  manner  of  Drinkes,  where  they

nave  also  Dicers  and  Whores,  as  with  us. Their  Prisons

n  the  Citie  are  of  stone,  for  theft  they  hang  the  theeves,

..nd  for  Robberie  or  Murther  they  stake  the  Murtherers,

>r  else  head  them.

And  from  Shirokalga  to  a  Citie  of  Catay,  called  Shirooan Shirooan.
s  a  dayes  journey  :  this  Citie  is  built  of  stone  high  walled,
nd  large  in  compasse,  it  is  a  dayes  travell,  it  hath  twelve
towres ;  whereupon,  as  also  on  the  Citie  Gates  is  planted

281

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1619.

Ordnance  and  small  shot  great  store,  with  a  continuall
Watch  or  Guard,  night  and  day,  at  the  first  comming  are
five  Gates  well  furnished  with  Ordnance  and  Warlike
Munition ;  and  from  one  Gate  to  the  other  through  the
Citie  is  halfe  a  dayes  going.  The  Governour  of  this
place  is  called  Duke  Sanchik.  For  Victuals  and  Merchan-
dizes, here  is  more  then  in  the  Cities  mentioned,  all  their  fo
shops  very  full,  and  the  Citie  so  populous,  that  one  can  fji
hardly  passe  the  streets  for  the  throng  of  people.  The
Ambassadors  Houses  are  also  faire  built  of  stone,  their
Wels  covered  with  Brasse,  so  that  this  Citie  is  adorned
more  with  precious  things  then  the  former  mentioned,
and  much  more  populous.
White  Castle.  Now  from  the  Citie  of  Tayth,  to  a  Citie  called  White
Castle,  is  two  dayes  travell :  this  Citie  is  built  of  white
stone,  and  thereof  hath  his  name,  it  is  high  walled  and
large,  being  in  compasse  or  circuit  three  dayes  travell,
at  the  first  entry  it  hath  three  Gates  under  one  Towre,
the  Gates  are  high  and  wide  with  strong  Iron  barres :
and  the  Gates  fastened  with  Iron  Nayles  whited  with
Tinne,  it  hath  great  Ordnance  in  the  Gates  and  Towres :
some  Peeces  carrying  shot  of  two  Poode  waight,  the  shops
within  the  Citie  reach  from  Gate  to  Gate,  and  betweene
them  are  streets  paved  with  stone,  all  their  shops  and
houses  are  built  of  stone  before  their  shops.  They  have
grates  painted  cunningly,  with  all  manner  of  colours,
flowres  and  such  like,  and  upon  the  shops  are  the  houses
painted  cunningly  with  Pictures  and  flowres  in  divers
colours,  and  the  painting  within  is  upon  Pastboord  adorned
with  Damaske  and  Velvets ;  heere  is  more  abundance  of
.  Riches  and  Commodities  then  in  any  of  the  Cities  afore
mentioned.  The  Governours  names  here  were  Duke
Toyvan,  and  Duke  Sulan.

From  this  white  Citie,  or  Castle,  to  the  greatest  Citie
of  all  Cataya,  called  Catay,*  is  two  dayes  journey,  where

*  Catay  greatest  Citie  of  Catay.  If  Catay  be  the  same  with  China  (as
before  in  Goes  and  the  Jesuites  is  observed)  many  difficulties  arise.  But
this  Russian  Relation  and  that  of  Chaggi  Memet  seeme  to  agree  to  place

282

COSSACK  TRAVELS  ad.

1619.

the  King  himselfe  dwelleth,  it  is  a  very  great  Citie,  built
of  white  stone  foure  square,  and  in  compasse  it  is  foure
dayes  journey,  upon  every  corner  thereof  are  very  great
Towres  high  built,  and  white,  and  alongst  the  wall  are
very  faire  and  high  Towres,  likewise  white  and  inter-
mingled with  Blue  or  Azure,  upon  the  Gates,  Wall,  and
Towres,  the  Loop-holes  or  Windowes  are  well  furnished
with  Ordnance,  and  a  strong  Watch.  In  the  midst  of  this
white  Citie  standeth  a  Castle  built  of  Magnet,  or  Load-
stone, wherin  the  King  himselfe  dwelleth,  called  Tambun  ;
this  Castle  standeth  so  in  the  midst  of  this  Citie,  that
every  way  you  have  halfe  a  dayes  going  to  it  from  the
Gates,  through  the  streets  which  hath  stone  shoppes  on
both  sides  with  all  manner  of  Merchandizes ;  upon  their
shops  they  have  their  houses  built  of  stone,  cunningly
painted  more  then  the  former  Cities.  The  Castle  of
Magnet  is  curiously  set  forth  with  all  manner  of  artificiall
xnd  precious  devices,  in  the  middest  whereof  standeth
the  Kings  Palace,  the  top  whereof  is  all  gilt  over  with
h;j)|Gold.  And  they  would  not  admit  us  to  come  before  their
King  without  Presents,  saying,  it  was  not  the  manner  of
|Catay,  to  come  before  their  King  without  some  Present,
and  though  (said  they)  your  white  Emperour  had  but
sent  with  his  first  Ambassadours  to  our  King  some  thing
of  no  great  value,  our  King  would  have  sent  him  many
precious  things,  and  dismissed  you  his  Ambassadours
'honourably,  and  have  sent  his  Ambassadours  with  you :

some  Catay,  North  from  China,  if  this  did  not  speake  of  the  wall.  The
(Tartar  names  so  differ  from  those  of  the  Portugalls,  that  it  is  hard  to
reconcile  them.  And  the  Jesuits  make  foure  moneths  travell  from  the
wall  to  Pequin,  which  is  here  but  a  few  daies :  except  we  say  the  Russes
lentred  the  wall  at  the  North  East  part  of  it  :  which  the  shortnesse  of
(their  journey  admits  not.  Perhaps  this  chiefe  Citie  was  but  the  chiefe
of  that  Province  where  the  Vice-roy  resided,  and  they  were  willing  to
'make  the  most  of  their  travells  Russica  fide.  Yet  the  neerenesse  of  the
iSea,  there  also  causeth  scruple.  I  suppose  rather  that  these  Russes
entred  China  but  a  little  way,  and  received  the  Vice-royes  Letter  only
'(there  observed  with  Regall  Rites)  and  had  much  by  Relation  of  that
jlittle  which  they  tell.  How  ever  I  have  here  offered  this  to  thy  view  at
more  leisure  to  use  thy  more  judgement.

283

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1619.

but  now  hee  only  endeth  his  Letter  to  your  Emperour.
The  Citie  of  Catay,  where  the  King  dwelleth,  is  built  upon
an  even  plaine  ground,  and  is  incompassed  round  about
with  a  River  called  Youga,  which  falleth  into  the  blacke
Sea,  which  is  from  the  Citie  Catay  seven  dayes  travell,
so  that  there  come  no  ships  neerer  the  Citie  Catay,  then
seven  dayes  travell  off,  but  all  things  are  transported  in
small  Vessels  and  ship-boats.  The  Merchandizes  the
King  doth  send  into  all  parts  of  his  Dominions  of  Catay,
and  from  thence  are  carried  over  the  borders,  into  the
Land  of  Mugalla,  to  the  King  Altine,  to  the  blacke
Kollmakes,  to  the  Iron  King,  into  Boghar  and  other
Dominions,  their  Patriarkes  and  Friers,  travell  with  the
Commodities,  as  Velvets,  Sattens,  Damaskes,  Silver,
Leopard  Skinnes,  Turkesses,  and  blacke  Zenders,  for  which
they  buy  Horses,  and  bring  them  into  Catay,  for  in  Catay
are  but  few  horses,  only  Mules  and  Asses,  and  Cloth  they
have  none,  their  Horses  and  Silver  goeth  into  strange
Countreyes,  or  as  they  say,  Nemtsii,  the  Silver  is  made
in  Brickes,  which  they  call  Kritsii,  valued  each  Kritsii  at
fiftie  two  Rubles,  their  Apparell  they  weare  with  long
broad  hanging  sleeves,  like  the  Gentlewomens  Summer-
coats  or  Lettniks  in  Russia,  the  people  are  very  faire  but
not  warlike,  timorous  &  most  their  endevour  is  in  great
and  rich  traffick.  They  told  us  that  not  long  before  our
comming,  the  people  of  Mugalla  had  taken  two  Castles
[III. iv.  802.]  from  them  by  deceit,  also  they  told  us  that  their  King
hath  a  stone  which  lighteth  as  the  Sunne  both  day  and
night,  called  in  their  Language  Sarra,  and  in  our  Tongue
Jachant,  or  Rubie ;  another  stone  they  say  hee  hath,  which
driveth  away  water  from  it,  it  is  also  called  a  Rubie.
Merchants.  There  come  to  them  Strangers,  or  Nemtsii  every  yeere,
with  all  manner  of  Merchandizes,  and  barter  for  Deere
Skinnes,  and  Loshids,  Sables,  Bevers,  Velvets,  Taffataes,
and  Zendews,  or  Calico ;  these  strangers,  they  say,  come
K  t  11  to  them  out  of  the  blacke  Sea,  from  the  East  and  the

River.  South,  also,  they  say,  there  is  a  River  called  Kartalla :

Ob.  which  falleth  into  the  great  River  Ob ;  but  they  know

284

ENGLISH MERCHANTS' PRTVILEDGES  a.d.

1621

neyther the head, nor the fall of it, they imagine it

commeth  out  of  the  blacke  Sea,  and  falleth  into  it  againe,

upon this River dwell many people with walking

Herds.

For  a  triple  testimony  of  Sir  John  Merikes  honourable
courtesie,  I  have  added  this  succeeding  Patent,  which  how-
soever in  some  things  it  concurre  with  the  former  of  Boris
and  Demetrius ;  Yet  those  being  obscurely  translated  or
written,  this  may  illustrate  them ;  and  it  also  presenteth  ^
both  larger  Priviledges,  the  Patriarkes  name  joyned  with  /  >y
the  Emperours,  and  the  Golden  Seale.

WE  the  great  Lord  Emperour  and  great  Duke
Michaell  Pheodorowich  of  all  Russia,  sole  Com-
mander of  Volodemer,  Mosco,  and  Novogrod,  Emperour
of  Cazan,  Emperour  of  Astracan,  Emperour  of  Siberia,
Lord  of  Plesco,  and  great  Duke  of  Smolensky,  Twensky,
Ugorsky,  Psermesky,  Vatsky,  Bolgorsky,  and  others ;
Lord  and  great  Duke  of  Novogrod,  in  the  lower
Countreyes,  Cheringosky,  Rahansky,  Rostovskey,  Yara-
slavsky,  Belozersky,  Udorskey,  Obdorsky,  Condinsky,  and
of  all  the  Northerne  parts  Commander,  and  Lord  over  the
Country  of  Iversky,  and  Caberdynland,  Cherkaskey,  and
of  the  Dukedomes  of  Igorskey,  and  of  many  other  King-  \  \
jidomes,  Lord  and  Conquerour.  Together  with  the  great
Lord  Philleret  Neketich,  the  holy  Patriarke  and  Head  of
I  the  Reverend  Clergie  of  the  Imperiall  Citie  of  Mosco,  and
of  all  Russia  by  the  flesh  our  naturall  Father,  and  by  the
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  our  Spirituall  Pastor  and  Ghostly
'Father.

Whereas  there  was  sent  unto  us  the  great  Lord
^Emperour,  and  great  Duke  Michaell  Pheodorowich  of
all  Russia,  and  to  our  Father,  the  great  Lord,  the  holy
ijPatriarke  of  Mosco,  and  of  all  Russia,  From  our  loving
IBrother  James,  by  the  grace  of  God,  King  of  England,
Scotland,  France,  and  Ireland  ;  and  of  many  others  his
i Majesties Ambassadour Sir John Merike, Knight and

285

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1621.

Gentleman  of  his  Majesties  Privie  Chamber,  upon  bod
our  Princely  Affaires.

The  said  Sir  John  Merike,  in  the  name  of  our  saic  tr
loving Brother King James requested our Imperial
Majestie, and our Father the great Lord, the hoi
Patriarke,  to  bee  pleased  graciously  to  favour  the  Englisl
Merchants,  to  grant  them  leave  to  come  with  their  shippe:
unto  our  Port  and  Havens  of  Archangell,  with  all  kinc
of  Commodities,  and  freely  to  traffique  from  the  Sea  side
to  our  Imperiall  Citie  of  Mosco,  and  to  our  Patrimonii  in
of  great  Novogrod  and  Plesco,  and  unto  all  other  oui  ^
Cities,  Townes,  and  Countreyes  of  our  Empire,  with  al
sorts  of  Commodities,  without  paying  of  Custome  in  a;
ample manner as formerly hath beene granted to the
English Merchants, and that our Imperiall Majestie
together  with  our  deere  Father  the  holy  Patriarke,  woulc
be pleased to grant anew our gracious Priviledges
under  our  Princely  Seale,  according  as  our  Predecessors
Emperours,  and  great  Dukes  of  all  Russia,  have  hereto-
fore granted  unto  them.

We  therefore  the  great  Lord  Emperour,  and  great  Duke  ffl]
Michaell  Pheodorowich  of  all  Russia,  sole  Commander
together  with our deere Father the holy Patriarke offci
Mosco,  and  of  all  Russia ;  for  the  love  we  beare  to  our  let
most  loving  Brother  the  great  Lord  King  James,  with  to
whom  wee  are  willing  and  desirous  ever  to  remayne  in  Sou
the  strongest  bonds  of  brotherly  love  and  friendship,  have  or
graciously  granted  to  his  Kingly  Majesties  Subjects  the  co
English  Merchants,  Sir  Thomas  Smith  Knight,  Sir  Johnde
Merike  Knight,  Sir  Richard  Smith  Knight,  Sir  William  ipe
Russell Knight, Sir George Bowles Knight, Hugh;m
Hamersley  Alderman,  Ralph  Freeman,  Richard  Wytch,  gr
Morris  Abbot,  Robert  Bateman,  William  Stone,  Rowland
Healing,  Job  Hanby,  Richard  Ironside,  Edward  James,  to
John  Caslen,  Benjamin  Deicrow,  Fabyan  Smith,  and  their
fellowes  free  leave  to  come  with  their  shippes  into  our
Kingdomes,  into  our  Countreyes  of  Dweena,  unto  the
Port  of  Archangell, and  from  thence  to our  Imperiall  sa

286

ENGLISH MERCHANTS' PRIVTLEDGES  a.d.

1621.

ikCitie  of  Mosco,  and  of  Novogrod  the  Great,  and  unto
Plesco,  and  into  all  other  the  Cities  of  our  Empire,  to
ic  trade  and  trarfique  with  all  kind  of  Merchandizes,  free
ill  of  all  Customes,  as  well  the  great  Customes  as  Tole :
)ly  unlading  of  Vessels  or  Boats,  passages  through  any  place
sh  by  water  or  Land  entries,  Head-money,  Bridge-money,
$  Ferryings,  or  any  manner  of  Customes,  or  Duties  whatso-
ever can  bee  named.

The  English Merchants  being  thus  licensed  to  trade

lie  in  our  Kingdomes,  free  of  all  customes  for  their  owne

commodities,  shall  neither  colour  nor  sell  strangers  wares,

as  their  owne  ;  neither  shall  our  people  sell  for  them  any

aiof  their  goods,  nor  yet  shall  they  keepe  any  of  our  people

hejunder  their  protection  :  and  into  what  Cities  the  English

e  Merchants  themselves,  or  their  Factors,  or  Servants  shall

come  with  their  goods,  it  shall  be  lawfull  for  them  freely

to  trafficke  and  sell  their  owne  commodities,  in  barter,

or  otherwise  against  Commodities  of  our  Countrey.

And  whensoever  the  said  Merchants  shall  come  into
our  Patrimony  of  great  Novogrod  and  Plesco,  or  into
any  other  the  Cities  of  our  Empire ;  Wee  straightly
command  our  Nobles  in  generall,  and  all  other  our  [III. iv.  803.]
authorized  people,  that  according  to  this  our  Imperiall
letters  of  priviledge,  they  suffer  the  foresaid  Merchants
to  passe  without  all  manner  of  hindrance  or  lets,  &  with-
in out  taking  any  manner  of  custome  of  them  for  themselves,
or  for  their  goods ;  and  into  what  place  soever  they  shall
come,  or  passe  with  their  Merchandize,  and  shall  not
1  desire  to  buy  nor  sell  with  our  people  ;  those  our  authorized
people  shall  freely  let  them  passe  without  taking  any
manner  of  customes,  according  to  this  our  Imperiall
gracious  priviledge.

And  wheresoever  the  English  Merchants  shall  happen
1  to sell or barter any of their commodities with our
Merchants,  they  are  to  barter  and  sell  them  in  their  owne
house  by  grosse  sale,  and  not  by  retaile,  in  small  measure ,  u  °J
and  weight,  as  by  the  yard,  pound  and  ounce ;  that  is  to  doubtfall pass-
say,  their  Cloath  by  whole  Cloathes  and  Packs :  Damaske  ages,/>ag.  760.

287

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1621.

and  Velvets  by  the  Peece ;  and  all  other  wares  that  are  to
be  sold  by  weight  accordingly.  Also  the  Wines  by  the
great,  viz.  by  the  Butt,  the  Pipe,  the  Hogshead,  and  by
the  Aume,  and  not  by  small  measure,  as  Veders  or  Pots.

And  the  said  English  Merchants  are  to  sell  and  barter
their  owne  Commodities  themselves  in  our  Empire.  But
the  Russe  Merchants  shall  neither  sell  nor  barter  for  them,
neither  shall  the  English  carry  or  transport  to  or  from
any  place,  any  Wares  belonging  to  other  Strangers,  by
way  of  their  owne  goods.

And  if  the  said  English  Merchants  shall  be  desirous  to
sell  any  of  their  commodities,  at  Colmogro,  or  upon  the
River  of  Dwina,  or  at  Vologda  or  Yereslave,  or  other
the  Townes  and  Cities  of  our  Empire,  they  may  sell  at
their  pleasures ;  as  likewise  at  their  owne  choise  and
pleasure,  they  may  transport  their  goods  into  all  or  any
part  of  our  Dominions,  and  hire  Carriers,  Boats,  and  men
at  such  price  as  they  themselves  can  agree.

Also  when  the  English  Merchants  themselves,  or  any
of  their  Factors,  doe  travell  out  of  our  Dominions  into
their  owne,  or  other  forraigne  Kingdomes,  and  that  wee
shall  be  pleased  to  deliver  them  of  our  Treasure,  they
shall  take  it  with  them,  and  sell,  and  barter  it  for  such
commodities  as  wee  shall  thinke  fit  and  necessarie  for
our  use,  and  Treasury :  our  Governours,  and  all  other  our
Officers,  in  all  our  Cities  and  Dominions,  shall  suffer  them
and  their  people  freely  to  passe  without  taking  any  custome
of  them :  but  when  the  English  Merchants  have  done
their  trafficke,  and  are  going  from  our  Citie  of  Mosco,
they  shall  give  notice  thereof  unto  the  Chancellour  of  our
Office  of  Ambassadours.

Further,  when  any  English  Merchants  shall  come  with
their  Shippes  and  Vessels  by  Sea,  into  our  Dominions,
and  that  any  misfortune  happen  unto  them  by  shipwracke
on  any  of  our  shoares  or  coasts,  our  Governours  and
Officers  shall  cause  search  to  be  made  for  their  goods,  and
shall  aide  and  helpe  them  faithfully  therein,  and  the  goods
gathered together shall be restored to the English

288

ENGLISH MERCHANTS' PRIVILEDGES  a.d.

1621,

Merchants,  who  shall  be  at  that  time  in  our  Kingdomes ;
and  if  there  shall  be  at  that  time  none  of  the  English
Merchants,  or  people  in  our  Kingdomes,  the  said  goods
shall  be  taken  and  laid  up  in  safety,  and  delivered  without
delay  to  the  English  Merchants  when  they  shall  come  into
our  Countrey,  and  shall  challenge  the  same.

Further,  of  our  gracious  goodnesse,  we  gave  free  leave
to  the  English  Merchants,  and  Company,  to  keepe  the
house  in  Mosco  by  Saint  Maxsime  behinde  the  Market
place,  and  shall  remaine  after  their  old  manner,  and  therein
I  shall  have  one  housekeeper  a  Russe,  or  else  one  of  their
jowne  Servants,  but  no  other  Russe  people:  the  houses
which  the  English  Merchants  have  in  other  places  of  our
[Dominions,  as  at  Yereslave,  Vologda,  Collm.  and  at  Saint
iMichaell  Archangell,  they  shall  keepe  and  use  at  their
pleasure,  according  to  our  former  gracious  favour,  without
'paying  any  duetie,  rent,  taxe,  or  any  manner  of  custome
iwhatsoever :  neither  shall  the  people  of  the  said  Townes
take  any  thing  of  them,  or  theirs,  for  any  duetie  whatso-
ever belonging  to  their  houses :  and  the  said  English
Merchants  shall  enjoy  their  said  houses  peaceably  to  them-
selves, without  the  annoyance  of  any  Stranger  or  other
I  to  lodge  in  them,  whether  in  time  of  their  being  there,
lor  in  their  absence.

And  in  their  houses  at  Yereslave,  Vologda,  Collmogro,
and  Archangell,  they  shall  likewise  have  a  housekeeper  of
their  owne  people,  or  of  our  Subjects,  a  man  or  two  of
lithe  meaner  sort ;  but  so,  that  those  our  people  be  no
merchants.

Their  Housekeeper  being  a  Russe  shall  not  undertake
to  meddle  or  sell  any  of  their  wares  without  themselves
•be  present,  and  they  the  English  Merchants,  by  vertue
of  this  our  gracious  Letters  of  priviledge,  shall  lay  their
wares  and  commodities  in  their  owne  houses,  and  sell
:hem  to  whom  they  please.

And  it  shall  be  lawfull  for  the  said  Merchants,  when
:hey  shall  arrive  at  our  Sea  Port,  to  lade  and  unlade  their
Merchandizes,  as  in  times  past,  at  their  pleasures : and
xiv  289  T

*]

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1621.

when  they  lade  or  unlade  their  Shippes,  it  shall  be  lawfull
for  them  to  hire  any  of  our  Subjects  to  helpe  them,  and
shall  have  leave  to  carry  their  goods  to  and  fro  with  their
owne  Vessels,  and  howse  them  in  their  owne  Ware-houses  :
onely  they  shall  give  a  note  under  their  hand  to  our
Governours,  Customers,  or  sworne  men,  what  goods  they
bring  in,  and  Shippe  out ;  Whereby  it  may  be  knowne
what  goods  commeth  in,  and  goeth  out  of  our  Kingdomes  :
but  in  no  wise  our  Officers  shall  open  or  unpacke  any
of  their  Wares  or  Merchandize  in  any  place  wheresoever.

Also  when  the  English  Merchants  shall  Shippe  or
transport  any  of  their  Countrie  Commodities  from  Saint
Michaell  Archangell,  to  our  royall  Citie  of  Mosco,  or
Russe  Commodities,  into  their  owne  Countrie :  our
authorised  Officers  and  Customers,  by  vertue  of  this  our
[III.  iv.  804.]  Imperiall  Letters  of  priviledge,  shall  suffer  them  to  passe
with  their  goods  in  and  out,  without  doing  them  any
manner  of  hindrance.

And  whensoever  any  of  the  said  English  Merchants
or  Factors  shall  have  occasion  to  send  overland,  out  of
our  Dominions,  any  of  their  people,  or  Servants,  into  their  Ji
owne  Countrie  overland,  they  shall  freely  passe  by  this  fa
our  speciall  command,  onely  they  are  to  take  a  passe  letter  La
from  our  Chancellour  of  the  Office  of  Embassie.

And  whosoever  in  any  of  our  Cities,  shall  have  any  |Le
matter  against  the  English  Merchants  by  way  of  con-
tention, we  command  that  none  of  our  Governours,  nor
other  of  our  Officers,  doe  judge  the  English  Merchants,
their  Factors  or  people :  neither  shall  they  send  Officers
for  them,  except  for  matter  of  murther  or  theft,  and  that
also  not  to  be  done,  but  by  manifest  token  thereof :  but
the  English  Merchants,  their  Factors  and  people,  shall
onely  have  triall,  and  be  judged  in  our  Imperiall  Citie  of
Mosco,  by  vertue  of  this  our  gracious  Letters  of  privi-
ledge, before  our  Chancellour  in  this  Office  of  Embassie,
and  in  no  other  place  or  Towne,  and  he  to  heare  their
causes,  and  to  give  justice  betweene  both  parties,  according
to  equitie  and  right ;  and  where  the  truth  cannot  be  found

290

3o

HI

111

ENGLISH MERCHANTS' PRIVILEDGES  a.d.

1621.

out  by  Law,  it  shall  be  referred  to  oath  and  lot,  and  on
whom  soever  the  lot  fals,  to  him  shall  the  right  be
adjudged.

And  if  any  of  the  English  Merchants,  in  any  of  our

Cities within our Kingdomes, doe complaine of any

wrong  offered them  by  our  people, for  debts  growing

Dy trade or  otherwise  : we command our  Governours,

md  all  other  our  authorised  people,  that  they  presently

minister  true  justice  unto  them. And  for  any  wrong  or

Dther  matter  of  controversie  that  the  English  Merchant

shall  have  against  any  of  our  Subjects,  our  Governours

ind  other  our  authorised  people  upon  their  complaint  for

ill  controversies  (matters  of  debt  excepted)  shall  give  our

Subjects  so  offending  upon  suretie,  setting  them  time  to

ippeare  at  Mosco,  to  answere  the  same  with  the  English

Merchants,  face  to  face,  before  our  Chancellour,  in  the

Office  of  Embassy :  and  in  these  matters  our  Chancellour

hall truely examine the businesse, and minister true

ustice  : and  what  by  examination  cannot  be  found,  shall

>e  referred,  as  before,  to  oath  and  lot : the  Judges  and

Justices  through  our  Dominions  shall  take  no  kinde  of

luetie of  the English Merchants for their  matters of

^aw.

We  will  and  command,  that  these  our  Imperiall  gracious
setters  of  priviledge,  be  strictly  observed  in  all  points,
n  all  parts  of  our  Dominions,  and  by  all  our  Subjects,
jovernours,  Secretaries,  and  other  Officers,  without  dis-
tbeying  in  any  thing.

And  whosoever  shall  not  obey  this  our  Princely  and
racious  Letters  of  priviledge,  but  shall  offer  wrong  to
he  English  Merchants,  those  our  Subjects  shall  be  with
is  in  our  high  displeasure.

These  our  gracious  Letters  of  priviledges,  are  sealed
nth  our  Imperiall  Seale  of  Gold,  in  our  Princely  Pallace  Sealed  with
f  our  Imperiall  Citie  of  Mosco,  in  the  yeare  from  the  the  Golden
Vorlds  creation  7129.  in  the  moneth  of  May,  the  eleventh e'

Subscribed  by  our  Imperiall  Majesties  Chancellour  of

291

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1621.

our  Office  of  Embassy,  and  our  privie  Chancellour  Evan
Corbatovesin  Gramotin.

BUt  it  is  now  high  time  to  leave  Russia,  and  all  that
Barbarous  shoare,  of  Samotees  and  Tartars :  onely
we  will  borrow  helpe  of  some  Barbarians  to  shippe  us
thence  to  Sea.  And  although  Finch,  Gourdon,  and  others
have  in  the  former  Booke  inserted  so  great  light :  yet
seeing  Master  Marsh  hath  entertained  other  guides,  we
will  take  Sea  by  Ob,  and  thence  set  forth  on  further  dis-
coveries.

Chap. XII.

Notes  concerning  the  discovery  of  the  River  of
Ob,  taken  out  of  a  Roll,  written  in  the  Russian
tongue,  which  was  attempted  by  the  meanes  of
Antonie  Marsh,  a  chiefe  Factor  for  the  Mos-
covie  Company  of  England,  1584.  with  other
notes  of  the  North-east.

Irst  he  wrote  a  Letter  from  the  Citie  of

Mosco,  in  the  yeare  7092.  after  the  Russe

accompt,  which  after  our  accompt  was  in

the  yeare 1584.  unto  foure  Russes  that

used  to  trade  from  Colmogro  to  Pechora,

and  other  parts  Eastward  :  whose  answere

was  :

By  writings  received  from  thee,  as  also  by  reports,  wee

understand  thou  wouldest  have  us  seeke  out  the  mouth

of  the  River  Ob ;  which  we  are  content  to  doe ;  and  thou

must  give  therefore  fiftie  rubbles : it  is  requisite  to  goe

to  seeke  it  out  with  two  Cochimaes,  or  companies ;  and

each  Cochima  must  have  ten  men :  and  wee  must  goe  by

the  River  Pechora  upwards  in  the  Spring,  by  the  side  of

the  Ice,  as  the  Ice  swimmeth  in  the  River,  which  will  aske

Ouson  River,  a fortnights time ; and then we must fall  into Ouson

292

How  to  finde
out  Ob  from
Pechora.

ANTHONY MARSH

River,  and  fall  downe  with  the  streame  before  we  come  to
Ob,  a  day  and  a  night  in  the  spring.  Then  it  will  hold
us  eight  dayes  to  swimme  downe  the  River  Ob,  before
we  come  to  the  mouth :  therefore  send  us  a  man  that  can
write ;  and  assure  thy  selfe  the  mouth  of  Ob  is  deepe.
On  the  Russe  side  of  Ob  sojourne  Samoeds,  called
Ugorskai  &  Sibierskie,  Samoeds ;  and  on  the  other  side
dwel  another  kinde  of  Samoeds,  called  Monganei,  or
Mongaseisky,  Samoeds.  We  must  passe  by  five  Castles
that  stand  on  the  River  of  Ob.  The  name  of  the  first
is  Tesvoi  Gorodok,  which  standeth  upon  the  mouth  of
the  River  Padou.  The  second  small  Castle  is  Nosoro-
gorodock,  and  it  standeth  hard  upon  the  side  of  Ob.  The
third  is  called  Necheiour-goskoy.  The  fourth  is  Chared-
mada.  The  fift  is  Nadesneaa,  that  is  to  say,  The  Castle
of  comfort,  or  trust ;  and  it  standeth  upon  the  River  Ob,
lowermost  of  all  the  former  Castles  toward  the  Sea.

Heretofore  your  people  have  bin  at  the  said  River
of  Obs  mouth  with  a  Ship,  and  there  was  made  shipwracke,
;  and  your  people  were  slaine  by  the  Samoeds,  which  thought
that  they  came  to  rob  and  subdue  them.  The  Trees  that
grow  by  the  River  are  Firres,  and  a  kinde  of  white,  soft
and  light  Firre,  which  we  call  Yell.  The  bankes  on  both
sides  are  very  high,  and  the  water  not  swift,  but  still  and
deepe.  Fish  there  are  in  it  as  Sturgeons,  and  Cheri,  and
Pidle,  and  Nelma,  a  dainty  fish  like  white  Salmons,  and
Moucoun,  and  Sigi,  and  Sterlidi :  but  Salmons  there  are
none.  Not  farre  distant  from  the  maine,  at  the  mouth
of  Ob,  there  is  an  Island,  whereon  resort  many  wilde
beasts,  as  white  Beares,  and  the  Morses,  and  such  like.
And  the  Samoeds  tell  us,  that  in  the  winter  season,  they
oftentimes  finde  there  Morses  teeth.  If  you  would  have
us  travell  to  seeke  out  the  mouth  of  Ob  by  Sea,  we  must
goe  by  the  Isles  of  Vaygats,  and  Nova  Zembla,  and  by
the  Land  of  Matpheove,  that  is,  by  Matthewes  Land.
And  assure  thy  selfe  that  from  Vaygats,  to  the  mouth  of
Ob,  by  Sea,  is  but  a  small  matter  to  sayle.  Written  at
Pechora,  the  yeare  7092.  the  twenty  one  of  February.

293

A.D.

I584.

[III.iv.805.]

Ugorskai  and
Sibierskie.

A  shipwracke
at  the  mouth  of
Ob.

An  Island
neere  the
mouth  of  Ob.

The  way  to

discover  Ob  by

Sea.

Mattpheove  or

Matthewes

land.

After  our  stile

1584.

A.D.

1584.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Caninos.

Medemske.
Carareca.
Carska.
Ob.

Caninos.
Colgoieve.
Nova  Zembla.

Naromske.
Mattuschan
Tar.

The  Sands.
The  two  Seas  :
that  is,  the
North  and  the
East  Sea.
The  bignes  of
the  Cliffe  or
Isle  of
Mattuschan.
Anthonie
Marsh  sent
two  of  his  men
upon  the  dis-
covery of  Ob
by  land  with
foure  Russes.
Bodan  Master
Marsh  his
man  brought
to  Mosco.

Master  Marsh  also  learned  these  distances  of  places
and  Ports,  from  Caninos  to  Ob  by  Sea.

FRom  Caninos  to  the  Bay  of  Medemske  (which  is
somewhat  to  the  East  of  the  River  Pechora)  is  seven
dayes  sayling.  The  Bay  of  Medemsky  is  over  a  day  and
a  halfe  sayling.  From  Medemske  Savorost  to  Carareca,
is  sixe  dayes  sayling.  From  Carska  Bay  to  the  farthest
side  of  the  River  Ob,  is  nine  dayes  sayling.  The  Bay
of  Carska  is  from  side  to  side,  a  day  and  a  nights  sayling.

He  learned  another  way  by  Nova  Zembla  and  Mat-
thuschan  Yar  to  Ob,  more  North-eastward.  From  Caninos
to  the  Hand  of  Colgoieve,  is  a  day  &  a  nights  sayling.
From  Colgoieve  to  Nova  Zembla  are  two  dayes  sayling.
There  is  a  great  Osera  or  Lake  upon  Nova  Zembla,  where
wonderfull  store  of  Geese  and  Swannes  doe  breede,  and
in  moulting  time  cast  their  feathers,  which  is  about  Saint
Peters  day :  and  the  Russes  of  Colmogro  repaire  thither
yearely,  and  our  English  men  venter  thither  with  them
severall  shares  in  money  :  they  bring  home  great  quantitie
of  Doune-Feathers,  dried  Swannes,  and  Geese,  Beares
skinnes,  and  Fish,  &c.  From  Naromske  Reca  or  River
to  Mattuschan  Yar,  is  sixe  dayes  sayling.  From
Mattuschan  Yar  to  the  Perovologli  Teupla,  that  is  to  say,
To  the  warme  passage  over-land,  compassing  or  sayling
round  about  the  Sands,  is  thirteene  dayes  sayling :  And
there  is  upon  the  Sands  at  a  full  Sea,  seven  fathomes  water,
and  two  fathomes  at  a  low  water.  The  occasion  of  this
highing  of  the  water,  is  the  falling  into  the  Sea  of  the
three  Rivers,  and  the  meeting  of  the  two  Seas,  to  wit,
The  North  Sea,  and  The  East  Sea,  which  make  both  high
water  and  great  Sands.  And  you  must  beware  that  you
come  not  with  your  Shippe  neere  unto  the  Hand  by  the
River  Ob.  From  Mattuschan  Yar  to  this  Hand,  is  five
dayes  sayling.  Mattushan  Yar  is  in  some  parts  fortie
Versts  over,  and  in  some  parts  not  past  six  Versts  over.

The  aforesaid  Anthonie  Marsh  sent  one  Bodan  his  man,

294

ANTHONY MARSH  a.d.

1584.
a  Russe  borne,  with  the  aforesaid  foure  Russes,  and  a
yong  youth,  a  Samoed,  which  was  likewise  his  Servant,
upon  the  discovery  of  the  River  of  Ob,  by  Land,  through
the  Countrie  of  the  Samoeds,  with  good  store  of  com-
j  modifies to trafficke with the people. And these his
Servants  made  a  rich  Voyage  of  it,  and  had  bartered  with
:the  people  about  the  River  of  Ob,  for  the  valew  of  a
!  thousand  rubles  in sables, and  other  fine Furres. But
I  the  Emperour  having  intelligence  of  this  Discovery,  and
I  of  the  way  that  Bodan  returned  home  by,  by  one  of  his
Ichiefe Officers  lay  in  waite  for  him, apprehended  him,
J  and  tooke  from  him  the  aforesaid  thousand  Markes  worth
!of  Sables,  and  other  Merchandises,  and  delivered  them
!  into the Emperours Treasurie, being sealed up, and
i  brought  the  poore  fellow  Bodan  to  the  Citie  of  Mosco,
where  he  was  committed  to  prison,  and  whipped,  and  there
detained a long while after, but in the end released.
1  Moreover,  the  Emperours  Officers  asked  Anthonie  Marsh,
I  how  he  durst  presume  to  deale  in  any  such  enterprise  ?
;To  whom  he  answered,  that  by  the  priviledges  granted
to the English Nation, no part of the Emperours
Dominions  were  exempted  from  the  English  to  trade  and
,  trafficke  in  :  with  which  answere,  they  were  not  so  satisfied,
1  but  that  they  gave  him  a  great  checke,  and  forfeited  all
I  the  aforesaid  thousand  Markes  worth  of  goods,  charging
him  not  to  proceede  any  further  in  that  action  :  whereby
I  it  seemeth  they  are  very  jealous  that  any  Christian  should  [III. iv.  806.]
grow  acquainted  with their  Neighbours that border to  Russian
the  North-east  of  their  Dominions,  for  that  there  is  some  Jealousie  °f
great  secret  that  way,  which  they  would  reserve  to  them-
selves onely. Thus much I understood by Master
Christopher  Holmes.

[The  report
295

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1584.

The  report  of  Master  Francis  Cherry  a  Moscovie
Merchant,  and  Master  Thomas  Lyndes  touch-
ing a  warme  Sea  to  the  South-east  of  the  River
Ob,  and  a  Note  of  Francis  Gaulle.

M Aster  Francis  Cherry,  one  of  the  chiefe  Merchants
of  the  Moscovy  Companie,  which  was  the  Emperour
Ivan  Basiliwich  his  Interpreter,  and  hath  travailed  in
person  into  Permia  farre  to  the  East  in  Russia,  saith,
That  he  hath  eaten  of  the  Sturgeon  that  came  out  of  the
River  of  Ob.  And  that  in  those  parts  it  is  a  common
received  speech  of  the  Russes  that  are  great  travailers,
that  beyond  Ob  to  the  South-east  there  is  a  warme  Sea.
Which  they  expresse  in  these  words  in  the  Russe  tongue ;
Za  Oby  reca  moria  Teupla,  that  is  to  say,  Beyond  the
A  warme  Sea  River  Ob  is  a  warme  Sea.  Furthermore,  Master  Thomas
beyond  Ob.  Lynde  an  honest  and  discreet  English  Merchant,  which
ThomasLinde  ^atn  likewise  lived  many  yeeres  in  those  parts  of  Moscovy,
saith,  That  this  Sea  beyond  Ob,  is  by  the  report  of  the
Russes,  that  are  travailers,  so  warme,  that  all  kinde  of
Sea  fowles  live  there  as  well  in  the  Winter  as  in  the
Summer,  which  report  argueth,  that  this  Sea  pierseth  farre
into  the  South  parts  of  Asia.

Third  Volume
of  English
voyages,  pag.
446.

FRancis  Gaulle  that  passed  the  Ocean  betweene  Japan
and  Nova  Hispania,  in  the  Latitude  of  37.  degrees
and  a  halfe,  writeth  thus.  Proving  a  great  Sea  to  come
from  the  North-east  parts  of  Tartarie ;  running  thus  East
and  East  and  by  North  about  three  hundred  leagues  from
Japan,  we  found  a  very  hollow  water,  with  the  streame
running  out  of  the  North  and  North-west,  with  a  full
and  very  broad  Sea,  without  any  trouble  or  hinderance
in  the  way  that  we  past.  And  what  winde  soever  blue,
the  Sea  continued  all  in  one  sort  with  the  same  hollow
water  and  streame,  untill  we  had  passed  seven  hundred
leagues.  About  two  hundred  leagues  from  the  Coast  of
New  Spaine  we  began  to  lose  the  said  hollow  Sea,  whereby

296

FRANCIS GUALIJE

A.D.

1584.

I  perswade  my  selfe  that  there  you  shall  finde  a  Channell
or  strait  passage  betweene  the  firme  Land  of  New  Spaine
and  the  Countrie  of  Asia  and  Tartaria.  We  found  all  this
way  Whales,  Tunnies,  Bonitos,  which  are  fishes  that  keepe
in  Channels,  Straits,  and  running  Waters,  there  to  disperse
their  seede,  which  further  confirmeth  me  in  that  opinion.

But  seeing  thus  we  are  shipped  from  Russia,  and  have  See  of  these
igaine  taken  Sea,  that  which  Ice  permitted  not  to  Stephen  voyages,  Hak.
Burrough,  Pet  and  Jackman,  nor  others,  English  and  Tom-  lm
Dutch,  which  have  attempted  that  North-east  passage ;
md  that  which  Master  Baffin  said  to  me,  that  if  he  might
have  imployment,  he  would  adventure  to  discover  from
i:he  Coast  of  China  and  Japan  on  the  North  of  Asia  hither-
ward  ;  all  this  shall  be  suddenly  pervious  to  our  swifter
ind  unstayable  thoughts,  to  set  us  in  a  new  discovery  by
Danish  and  English  assistance  for  a  North-west  passage,
50  often,  not  so  fortunately  attempted,  as  by  Reason  it
jeemeth  probable  and  almost  certaine,  especially  that  way
#here  Sir  Th.  Button  and  Nelson  left.  But  we  will  dis-
:over  these  Discoveries  more  methodically  and  historically
:o  you,  that  you  may  see  the  English  ancient  right,  as
[  may  say,  to  those  parts  of  the  new  World.

Chap. XIII.

Discoveries  made  by  English-men  to  the  North-
west :  Voyages  of  Sir  Sebastian  Cabot,  Master
Thorne,  and  other  Ancients :  and  of  Master
Weymouth.

E  have  before  given  some  light  of  the
North-west,  in  Hudsons  and  other  mens
Voyages.  The  desire  of  Riches  in  some,
of  Knowledge  in  others,  hath  long  wheted
mens  industries,  to  finde  out  a  more  com-
pendious way  to  the  East  Indies,  by  a
shorter  cut  then  the  usuall  passage,  which
n going to the places of  principall Trade there, and

297

A.D.

1 1 70.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  returning  thence  by  enforced  compassings,  is  made
no  lesse  a  Voyage  for  time,  cost,  danger  and  labour,  then
the  immediate  compassing  of  the  whole  Globe,  as  in
Master  Candishes  circumnavigation  (not  to  mention
others)  is  evident.  But  if  either  by  the  North-east,  or
North-west,  or  North,  a  passage  be  open,  the  sight  of  the
Globe  (the  Image  of  the  site  of  the  World)  easily  sheweth
with  how  much  ease,  in  how  little  time  and  expense  the
same  might  be  effected,  the  large  Lines  or  Meridians
[III.  iv.  807.]  under  the  Line  contayning  sixe  hundred  miles,  contracting
themselves  proportionably  as  they  grow  neerer  the  Pole,
where  that  vast  Line  and  Circumference  it  selfe  becomes
(as  the  whole  Earth  to  Heaven,  and  all  earthly  things
to  heavenly)  no  Line  any  more,  but  a  Point,  but  Nothing,
but  Vanitie.  Hence  such  laborious  searches  from
Columbus  his  first  discoverie  (that  also  occasioned  by  a
conceit  of  finding  the  East  by  the  West,  whereupon  he
named  Hispaniola  Ophir,  thinking  he  had  then  arrived
at  the  East  Indies)  especially  the  English,  seated  com-
modiously  for  that  discoverie,  and  to  reigne  over  the
Northerne  and  Westerne  Ocean,  have  herein  beene  more
then  industrious.

Doctor  Powell  in  his  historie  of  Wales  saith,  that
Madoc  sonne  of  Owen  Guyneth  left  the  Land  in  conten-
tion betwixt  his  brethren,  and  prepared  certaine  ships  with
men  and  munition,  and  sought  adventures  by  Sea,  sayling
West,  and  leaving  the  Coast  of  Ireland  so  farre  North,
that  hee  came  unto  a  Land  unknowne,  where  he  saw
many  strange  things.  There  hee  left  many  of  his  people
An.  1 1 70,  and  returned  for  more  of  his  owne  Nation  and
Friends  to  inhabite  that  large  Countrie,  going  the  second
time  thither  with  ten  sailes.  This  westerne  Land  is  like
to  be  some  part  of  the  West  Indies,  though  the
universavagenesse  of  those  parts  make  it  questionable
where.  But  he  which  seeth  how  some  of  our  English  in
small  time  have  growne  wilde  in  Ireland,  and  become  in
language  and  qualities  Irish,  few  of  whom  doe  in  exchange
become  civilized  and  English  (even  as  healthfull  men  are

298

Some  thlnke
that  the
Mexican
Kings  (Mute-
zuma  the  last,
professed  that
they  were
strangers)
were  hence
derived.

DISCOVERIES TO THE NORTH WEST  a.d.

1480.

easier  infected  in  a  contagious  aire,  then  sicke  men
Recovered  in  that  which  is  wholesome  and  sound)  will
not  wonder  that  in  so  many  Ages  the  halfe  civilized  Welsh
amongst  Barbarians,  without  succession  of  Priests  and
intercourse  of  these  parts  might  wholly  put  on  feritie.
Meredith  ap  Rise  a  Welsh  Poet,  which  lived  before
Columbus,  had  begun  his  discoverie,  hath  these  verses.

Madoc wyf, myedic wedd, Jawn Genau, Owyn

Guynedd
Ni  finnum  dir,  fy  enaid  oedd  Na  da  Mawr,  ond  y

moroedd. that  is.

Madoc  I  am  the  sonne  of  Owen  Gwynedd,  with  stature

large  and  comely  grace  adorned,
No  lands  at  home  nor  store  of  wealth  me  please,  My

mind  was  whole  to  search  the  Ocean  seas.

Columbus also sent his brother Bartholomew to King

Henrie  the  seventh,  to  make  offer  of  his  service  in  the

New- Worlds  discoverie,  which  fell  by  the  way  into  the

lands  of  Pirats,  whereupon  povertie  assaulted  him  with

;icknesse  in  a  forraine  Countrie,  so  that  hee  was  forced  d'e  vfta  pairis

l:o  get  somewhat  about  him  by  making  of  Maps : one  Christoph.

whereof  had  this  more  ancient  then  elegant  inscription. Col.  c.  13.

Janua  cui  patria  est,  nomen  cui  Bartholomaeus
Columbus  de  Terra  Rubra,  opus  edidit  istud
Londoniis  An.  Domini  1480.  atque  insuper  anno
Octavo  decimaque  die  cum  tertia  mensis.
Februarii.  Laudes  Christo  cantentur  abunde.

Whose  Countrie  Genua  is,  whose  name  Bartholomaeus
Colon  de  Terra  Rubra,  this  worke  set  forth  new
At  London,  A  thousand  foure  hundred  eightie
Februarie  thirteenth,  sing  praise  to  Christ  on  height.

One  of  these  Maps  hee  presented  to  King  Henrie  with

299

A.D.

H97-

See  Hak.  torn,
3-f"g>  5-

This  Map,
some  say ,  aw
/rf^/Z  0#/  of
SirSeb.  Cabots
Map  by  Clem.
Adams  154.9.

Ramus.
Tom.  2.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  said  offer,  who  cheerfully  accepted  the  same,  and  sent
to  call  his  brother  into  England,  who  before  he  could
effect  it,  was  imployed  by  the  King  of  Castile.

Columbus  his  fortunes  awakned  others  industrie,
amongst  the  rest  John  Cabota  a  Venetian,  and  his  three
sonnes  Lewis,  Sebastian,  and  Sancius,  who  obtayned  a
Patent  of  King  Henrie  the  seventh  for  discoverie  with
five  ships  with  English  Masters,  Mariners,  and  Colours
also,  the  same  to  erect  in  whatsoever  Lands  unknowne
before  to  Christian,  to  hold  the  same  to  them  and  their
Heires  as  Vassals  and  Lieutenants  to  the  Crowne  of
England,  paying  the  fifth  part  of  their  gaine  at  Bristoll,
&c.

In  the  yeere  1497.  John  Cabot  a  Venetian,  and  Sebastian
his  sonne  (these  are  the  wordes  of  the  great  Map  in  his
Majesties  privie  Gallerie,  of  which  Sebastian  Cabot  is
often  therein  called  the  Authour,  and  his  Picture  is  therein
drawne,  with  this  Title,  Effigies  Sebast.  Caboti  Angli
filii  Io.  Ca.  Venetiani  Militis  Aurati,  &c.)  discovered  that
Land  which  no  man  before  had  attempted  Jun.  24.  about
five  in  the  morning.  This  Land  he  called  Prima  vista
(primum  visam,  or  first  seene)  because  that  was  first
descried  from  Sea.  That  Hand  which  lyeth  out  before
the  land,  he  called  Saint  Johns  Hand,  because  on  that
feast  day  it  was  discovered.  The  Inhabitants  weare  beasts
skins  and  as  much  esteeme  them,  as  we  doe  garments  most
precious.  In  their  warres,  they  use  Bowes,  Arrowes,
Pikes,  Darts,  Clubs  of  wood  and  Slings.  The  soile  is
barren  in  some  places  and  yeeldeth  little  fruit,  but  it  is
full  of  white  Beares  and  Stags  of  unusuall  greatnesse.  It
aboundeth  with  Fishes  and  those  great,  as  Seales  and
Salmons  ;  Soles  also  an  elle  long.  Especially  there  is  great
store  of  those  fishes  which  they  call  commonly  Bacallaos.
There  breede  also  Hawkes  as  blacke  as  Ravens,  Partridges
and  blacke  Eagles.

Thus  wee  see  New-found  Land  discovered  by  English
Ships,  Mariners  and  jurisdiction.  Sir  Sebastian  Cabot,
for  his  English  breeding,  conditions,  affection  and  advance-

300

k

DISCOVERIES TO THE NORTH WEST  a.d.

H97-
ment, termed an English man, thus reported of this
voyage ;  That  upon  occasion  of  the  admiration  of  Colum-
dus  his  voyage  into  the  East,  where  Spices  grew,  by  the
West, so rife then in the Court of  King Henrie  the  See  Hak.
seventh,  there  arose  in  his  heart  a  great  desire  to  attempt  ^om.^.pag.y.
some  notable  thing. And  understanding  by  the  Sphere  [III.  iv.  808.]
'saith  he)  that  if  I  should  saile  by  the  North-west,  I  should
oy  a  shorter  Tract  come  into  India ;  I  thereupon  caused
:he  King  to  be  advertised  of  my  devise ;  who  immediately
:ommanded  two  Carvels  to  bee  furnished  with  all  things
lppertayning  to the  Voyage ;  which  was, as  farre  as  I
-emember,  in  the  yeere  1496.  in  the  beginning  of  Summer.
[  beganne  therefore  to  saile  toward  the  North-west,  not
rhinking  to  find  any  other  Land  then  that  of  Cathay,  and
from  thence  to  turne  toward  India. But  after  certaine
iayes  I  found  that  the  Land  turned  toward  the  North,  All  the  Coast
which was to me a great displeasure. Neverthelesse,  t0  Florida  dis-
sayling  along  by  the  Coast  to  see  if  I  could  finde  any  c^erf..  yJ

n;irb,  & 1 t  r  1 1 t 1M1  •  1 English:  from

julfe  that  turned,  I  round  the  Land  still  continent  to  the  5-  je„  30
c6.  degree  under  our  Pole. And  seeing  that  there  the  min.  as  he
"oast  turned  toward  the  East,  despayring  to  finde  the  writ  to ^
Dassage,  I  turned  backe  againe,  and  sayled  downe  by  the  Ram™*0-R-
3oast  of  that  Land  toward  the  Equinoctiall  (ever  with  ^  as  likewise
ntent  to  finde  the  said  passage  to  India)  and  came  to  that  he  was  the
Dart  of  this  firme  land,  which  is  now  called  Florida  ;  where  cause  of  the
ny victuals fayling I returned towards England ; the  &ussta* and
:umults  and  preparations  of  warres  against  Scotland  caused  ^tscoveries
^hat  then  no  more  consideration  was  had  to  this  voyage.
Whereupon  I  went  into  Spaine,  &c. By  the  King  and
Queene  there  he  was  set  forth  and  discovered  the  River
of  Plate,  and  sayled  into  it  more  then  sixe  score  leagues.
After  this  he  made  many  other  voyages,  &c. Sir  Seb.
Cabot  was  after  by  King  Edward the sixt constituted
2rand  Pilot  of  England  with  the  annuall  stipend  of  one See  sup.  /.  2.
hundred  and  sixtie  six  pounds  thirteene  shillings  and  foure  Cm  l'
pence,  and  was  Author  of  the  Russian  and  North-easterne
discoveries. Fabian  in  his  Chronicle  A.  R.  Hen.  7.  14.
hath  this  testimonie. This  yeere  also  were  brought  unto

301

A.D.

H97-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Thorn  and
Eliot  first
finders  of
America.

the  King  three  men  taken  in  the  New-found  Land,  in
W.  Purchas.  William  Purchas  time  being  Major.  These  were  clothed
in  beasts  skins,  and  did  eate  raw  flesh,  and  spake  such
speech  that  none  could  understand  them,  and  in  their
demeanour  like  to  bruit  beasts,  whom  the  King  kept  a
long  time  after.  Two  yeeres  after  I  saw  two  of  them
at  Westminster,  apparelled  like  English,  &c.

Master  Robert  Thorne  writes,  that  his  Father  and
Master  Hugh  Eliot  a  Merchant  of  Bristoll,  were  the  first
discoverers  of  New-found  Land :  and  if  the  Mariners
would  have  beene  ruled  and  followed  their  Pilots  minde,
the  West  Indies  had  beene  ours :  so  that  it  seemeth  this
Discoverie  was  before  that  of  Columbus.  Master
Hakluyt  hath  published  the  particulars  of  these  things
more  fully,  as  also  divers  Treatises  touching  the  North-
west of  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert  and  others :  to  which  I
referre  the  Reader ;  and  no  lesse  for  the  Voyages  made
by  divers  English  into  those  parts :  three  by  Sir  Martin
Frobisher,  in  the  yeeres  1576,  77,  and  78.  Two  of
Captaine  John  Davies,  in  86,  and  87.  that  of  Master  Hore,
An.  1536.  that  of  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert,  1583.  that  of
Master  Charles  Leigh  to  Ramea,  An.  1597.  and  before
in  1593.  that  of  George  Drake;  with  those  of  Jaques
Cartier,  and  divers  others.  My  purpose  is  not  to  steale
Master  Hakluyts  labours  out  of  the  World,  by  culling
and  fleecing  them  for  our  purpose,  but  by  this  Index  to
instruct  men  where  they  may  have  festivall  store  in  this
kinde.  I  had  rather  give  you  new  things.  Such  are  to
the  World,  these  that  you  had  before  in  Hudsons  voyages
set  together,  as  also  those  of  Greenland :  and  such  are
those  of  Waymouth,  Knight,  Hall,  Baffin,  &c.  And  first,
as  Foreman  of  our  Quest,  we  will  give  you  Sir  Humphrey
Gilberts  Letter,  written  with  his  owne  hand  from  New-
found Land,  whereof  he  tooke  formall  possession  to  the
Crowne  of  England,  and  was  as  a  Martyr  of  those  Dis-
coveries. It  was  written  to  Sir  George  Peckham  (a  great
Adventurer  in  that  voyage,  and  a  greater  in  one  of  longer
life,  his  written  Treatise  of  Westerne  planting,  extant  in

302

DISCOVERIES TO THE NORTH WEST  a.d.

1583.
Vlaster  Hakluyts  third  Tome)  and  I  have  here  inserted,
t  being  hitherto  unprinted,  as  a  memorial  of  both  their
vorths",  and  after  it  (though  in  time  before)  wee  will
ecreate  you  with  a  plaine  Mariners  Letter  endorsed  in
lomely  phrase,  To  the  Honourable  Kings  Grace  of  Eng-
and,  here  (as  I  thinke)  given  you  from  the  Originall.  I
lave  also  another  written  to  Cardinal!  Wolsey  touching  the
jame  voyage  in  Latin,  by  Albertus  de  Prato ;  for  the
i  ntiquitie,  rather  then  any  remarkable  raritie,  worthy  here
o  be  mentioned.

;P*Ir  George,  I  departed  from  Plymouth  on  the  eleventh
3  of  June  with  five  sailes,  and  on  the  thirteenth  the
krke  Rawley  ran  from  me  in  faire  and  cleere  weather,
|iaving  a  large  winde.  I  pray  you  solicite  my  brother
lawley  to  make  them  an  example  of  all  Knaves.  On
he  third  of  August  wee  arrived  at  a  Port  called  Saint
ohns,  and  will  put  to  the  Seas  from  thence  (God  willing)
o  soone  as  our  ships  will  be  ready.  Of  the  New-found
.and  I  will  say  nothing,  untill  my  next  Letters.  Be  of
ood  cheare,  for  if  there  were  no  better  expectation,  it
7ere  a  very  rich  demaynes,  the  Country  being  very  good
nd  full  of  all  sorts  of  victuall,  as  fish  both  of  the  fresh
rater  and  Sea-fish,  Deere,  Pheasants,  Patridges,  Swannes,
nd  divers  Fowles  else.  I  am  in  haste,  you  shall  by  every
Messenger  heare  more  at  large.  On  the  fifth  of  August,
entred  here  in  the  right  of  the  Crowne  of  England ;  and
ave  engraven  the  Armes  of  England,  divers  Spaniards,
?ortugals,  and  other  strangers,  witnessing  the  same.  I
an  stay  no  longer ;  fare  you  well  with  my  good  Lady :
Ind  be  of  good  cheare,  for  I  have  comforted  my  selfe,
nswerable  to  all  my  hopes.  From  Saint  Johns  in  the
Tew- found  Land,  the  8.  of  August,  1583.

Yours  wholly  to  command,  no  man  more,

Hum.  Gilbart.

I mentioned before Master Thornes fathers finding  [III.  iv.  809.]
Jew-found  Land,  with Master  Eliot. These  animated

303

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGBJMES

1583.

King  Henrie  the  eight  to  set  forth  two  ships  for  discoverie,
one  of  which  perished  in  the  North  parts  of  New-found
Land.  The  Master  of  the  other,  John  Rut,  writ  this
Letter  to  King  Henrie,  in  bad  English  and  worse  Writing.
Over  it  was  this  superscription.

Master  Grubes  two  ships  departed  from  Plymouth  the
10.  day  of  June,  and  arrived  in  the  New-found  Land  in
a  good  Harbour,  called  Cape  de  Bas,  the  2 1 .  day  of  July :
and  after  we  had  left  the  sight  of  Selle,  we  had  never  sight
of  any  Land,  till  we  had  sight  of  Cape  de  Bas.

P Leasing  your  Honorable  Grace  to  heare  of  your  servant
John  Rut,  with  all  his  Company  here,  in  good  health,
thanks  be  to  God,  and  your  Graces  ship.  The  Mary  of
Gilford,  with  all  her  thanks  be  to

God :  And  if  it  please  your  honorable  Grace,  we  ranne
in  our  course  to  the  Northward,  till  we  came  into  53.
degrees,  and  there  we  found  many  great  Hands  of  Ice  and
deepe  water,  we  found  no  sounding,  and  then  we  durst
not  goe  no  further  to  the  Northward  for  feare  of  more
Ice,  and  then  we  cast  about  to  the  Southward,  and  within
foure  dayes  after  we  had  one  hundred  and  sixtie  fathom,
and  then  wee  came  into  52.  degrees  and  fell  with  the
mayne  Land,  and  within  ten  leagues  of  the  mayne  Land
we  met  with  a  great  Hand  of  Ice,  and  came  hard  by  her,
for  it  was  standing  in  deepe  water,  and  so  went  in  with
Cape  de  Bas,  a  good  Harbor,  and  many  small  Hands,
and  a  great  fresh  River  going  up  farre  into  the  mayne
Land,  and  the  mayne  Land  all  wildernesse  and  mountaines
and  woods,  and  no  naturall  ground  but  all  mosse,  and
no  inhabitation  nor  no  people  in  these  parts :  and  in  the
woods  wee  found  footing  of  divers  great  beasts,  but  we
saw  none  not  in  ten  leagues.  And  please  your  Grace,  ta
the  Samson  and  wee  kept  company  all  the  way  till  within  }ei
two  dayes  before  wee  met  with  all  the  Hands  of  Ice,  that
was  the  first  day  of  July  at  night,  and  there  rose  a  great
and  a  marvailous  great  storme,  and  much  foule  weather;

3°4

w

DISCOVERIES TO THE NORTH WEST  ad.

1527.

I  trust  in  Almightie  Jesu  to  heare  good  newes  of  her.
,\nd  please  your  Grace,  we  were  considering  and  a  writing
bf  all  our  order,  how  we  would  wash  us  and  what  course
vee  would  draw  and  when  God  doe  send  foule  weather,

that  with  the  Cape  de  Sper  shee  should  goe,  and  he  that
tame  first  should  tarry  the  space  of  sixe  weeks  one  for
ipother,  and  watered  at  Cape  de  Bas  ten  dayes,  ordering
bf  your  Graces  ship  and  fishing,  and  so  departed  toward
||he  Southward  to  seeke  our  fellow :  the  third  day  of
i|\ugust  we  entered  into  a  good  Haven,  called  Saint  John,
j.nd  there  we  found  eleven  saile  of  Normans,  and  one
ijSrittaine,  and  two  Portugall  Barkes,  and  all  a  fishing,  and
o  we  are  readie  to  depart  toward  Cape  de  Bas,  and  that
;s  twentie  five  leagues,  as  shortly  as  we  have  fished,  and
[o  along  the  coast  till  we  may  meete  with  our  fellow,  and

'  jo  with  all  diligence  that  lyes  in  me  toward  parts  to  that
jlands  that  we  are  commanded  by  the  grace  of  God,  as
ve  were  commanded  at  our  departing :  And  thus  Jesu
ave  and  keepe  your  honorable  Grace,  and  all  your  honour-
able Rever.  in  the  Haven  of  Saint  John,  the  third  day  of

;  i\ugust,  written  in  haste.  1527.

By  your  servant  John  Rut,  to  his  uttermost
of  his  power.

I  have  by  me  also  Albert  de  Prato's  originall  Letter,
1  Latin  stile,  almost  as  harsh  as  the  former  English,  and
earing  the  same  date,  and  was  indorsed,  Reverend,  in
'hristo  Patri  Domino  Domino  Cardinali  &  Domino  Legato
iingliae :  and  began,  Reverendissime  in  Christo  Pater
ilutem.  Reverendissime  Pater,  placeat  Reverendissimae
aternitati  vestrae,  scire,  Deo  favente  postquam  exivimus

Plemut  quae  fuit  x.  Junii  &c.  (the  substance  is  the  same
/ith  the  former,  and  therefore  omitted)  Datum  apud  le
aya  Saint  Johan  in  Terris  Novis,  die  x.  Augusti,  1527.
Lever.  Patr.  vest,  humilis  servus,  Albertus  de  Prato.  (the
ame  written  in  the  lowest  corner  of  the  sheet.)

[The  voyage
xiv  305  u

A.D.
l602.

Mosc.  and
Turkie
Companies.
Master  Cart-
wright  had  bin
in  Persia  and
Turkie. See
the  former
Tome.
Buquhamnes.

[III.iv.810.]

Orkney.
The  Start.

59.  degrees
30.  minutes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The voyage of Captaine George Weymouth,
intended  for  the  discoverie  of  the  North-west  |
Passage  toward  China,  with  two  flye  Boates.

ON  Sunday  the  second  day  of  May,  1602.  in  the  after
noone,  I  weighed  anchor  and  set  saile  from  Redcliffe
with  two Fly-boates, the  one  called  the  Discovery,  o||
seventie  Tunnes ;  and  the  other  called  the  God  speed,  of
sixtie  Tunnes,  to  discover  the  North-west  passage,  having  i
in  my  ships  five  and  thirtie  men  and  boyes,  throughly!]
victualled  and  abundantly  furnished  with  all  necessaries
for a yeere and an halfe, by the right Worshipfull
Merchants  of  the  Moscovie  and  Turkie  Companies :  who
for  the  better  successe  of  the  voyage  provided  mee  of  a
great travailer and learned Minister one Master John
Cartwright. The  Master  under  mee  in  the  Discoverie
was  one  William  Cobreth,  a  skilfull  man  in  his  profession ;
and  in  the  God  speed,  one  John  Drewe,  and  Mate  in  the
said  ship  one  John  Lane.

The first of  June, we descried Buquhamnes in the
Latitude  of  57.  degrees. The  second  day  we  saw  the
Point  of  Buquhamnes  North-west  from  us,  being  a  veryj(
smooth  land ;  and  the  land  by  it  to  the  Southward  riseth
with  many  Homocks. There  lyeth  a  ledge  of  Rockes
hard  by  the  Nesse,  in  a  sandie  Bay  faire  by  the  shore
When  we  came  neer  the  land,  we  met  with  a  fisher  Boat,
and  I  agreed  with  one  of  the  fisher  men  to  carry  me
betweene  the  Isles  of  Orkney,  because  I  was  not  acquainted
with  the  coast. The  fourth  day,  at  ten  of  the  clocks,  weeL
descried  the  Isles  of  Orkney. Some  of  those  Southerne
Hands  are  prettie  high  land ;  but the  Northerne  Hand,
which  is  called  the  Start,  is  very  low  land. There  is  no
danger,  giving  the  shore  a  good  birth,  unlesse  it  be  byt|
the  Norther  point  of  the  Start : there  doth  a  ledge  of
Rockes  lye  a  mile  from  the  shoare. At  noone  I  found
my  selfe  to  be  in  the  latitude  of  59. degrees  and  30.  ^
minutes,  the  point  of  the  Start  bearing  West :  and  at  one]

306

GEORGE WEYMOUTH  a.d.

1602.

)f  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  we  saw  a  faire  He,  which  Faire  lie.
>are  North-east  and  by  North  from  us :  and  at  eight  of
he  clocke  at  night,  wee  were  North  of  the  Start :  Then
directed  my  course  West  and  by  North. The  fifth  day
bout  ten  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  we  ranne  some
enne  leagues,  and  then  we  saw  two  small  Hands,  some Two  small
wo  leagues  off : and  at  eight  and  nine  of  the  clocke  we  Hands.
aw  foure  or  five  Boats  or  Fisher-men,  and  spake  with
>ne  of  them,  and  they  were  Scottish-men. The  sixt,  in
he  morning  fell  much  raine,  and  lasted  till  nine  of  the
locke :  and  at  ten  of  the  clocke  it  cleared  up,  and  became
ery  faire  weather,  and  very  temperate  and  warme,  and
ur  course  was  West. The  seaventh,  the  winde  was  at
^ast  and  by  North,  faire  weather,  and  our  course  West,
"he  eight, at  noone  I  observed  the  Sunne,  and  found
s  to  be  in  59.  degrees  and  fortie  seven  minutes,  and  we
in  West  South-west.
The  twelfth  day  we  held  our  course  West,  the  winde
East  North-east,  with  fogge  in  the  morning :  at  noone
observed  the  Sunne,  and  found  my  selfe  in  57.  degrees, 57.  degrees
id  §§.  minutes,  the  variation  here  was  nothing  at  all. 55*  ****■  no
he  thirteenth  at  noone,  our  course  was  West  and  by  vartatton-
rorth,  the  winde  at  North-east,  with  fogge  some  three
-  foure  houres,  and  then  cleare  againe : the  ayre  very
arme,  as  in  England  in  the  moneth  of  May. The  foure-
;enth  was  faire  weather,  and  the  winde  at  East  North-
ist,  and  our  course  West  and  by  North. The  fifteenth
uch  raine  all  the  forenoone,  our  course  West,  the  winde
East  and  by  North. The  sixteenth,  the  winde  was  at
orth  North-east, with much  raine, winde  and fogge.
the  forenoone,  being  very  cold,  and  at  noone,  I  observed
e Sun, and  found us to be  in 57. degrees  and 35.
inutes : we  found  the  variation  to  be  eleven  degrees  Variation
Westward ;  and  by  that  meane  I  found  my  selfe  to  be  eleven  degrees
le  degree  more  to  the  Southward,  then  we  should  have  Westwara-
n  by  our  course ;  for  we  could  not  see  the  Sunne  in
houres  before  this  day  at  noone,  and  at  our  last  obser-
tion  before  this,  which  was  the  twelfth  day,  we  could

3°7

A.D.

l602.

No  variation.

Guls  and
Pigions.

59-  &&  5i-

min.

A  great  Hand
of  Ice.

Groneland.

A  maine  bank
of  Ice.

Black  water
as  thick  as
puddle.

The  Cape  of
desolation.

60.  deg.  37.
min.

Store  of  Guls.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

not  finde  any  variation  at  all.  Then  we  stood  close  by
a  winde  to  the  Westward,  the  winde  being  at  North
North-east.  The  seaventeenth  wee  ranne  North  and  by
West,  the  winde  at  North  North-east,  faire  weather.  This
day  we  saw  many  gray  Guiles,  and  some  Pigions.  The
eighteenth  at  noone  I  observed  the  Sunne,  and  found  our
selves  to  be  in  the  latitude  of  59.  degrees,  and  51.  minutes.
And  then  we  first  descried  a  great  Hand  of  Ice,  which
lay  North  from  us,  as  farre  as  we  could  ken  it  from  the
head  of  our  maine  topmast :  and  about  two  of  the  clocke
in  the  afternoone,  we  saw  the  South  part  of  Groneland,
North  from  us  some  ten  leagues.  As  we  coasted  this  Ice
to  the  Northward,  we  found  it  to  be  a  maine  banke  of
Ice ;  for  we  saw  the  other  end  of  it  to  beare  West  North-
west from  us ;  the  winde  being  at  South  South-west,  little
winde :  Then  we  ranne  West  South-west,  to  cleere  us  of
the  Ice.  The  nineteenth,  the  winde  was  at  East  South-
east, with  some  small  raine.  The  twentieth,  our  course
was  West  North-west,  the  winde  being  at  North  and  by
East,  little  winde.  This  day  sometimes  we  came  into
blacke  water  as  thicke  as  puddle,  and  in  sailing  a  little
space  the  water  would  be  cleare  againe.  Seeing  this
change  of  water,  so  often  to  be  thick,  and  cleare  againe
so  suddenly,  we  imagined  it  had  beene  shallow  water:
then  we  sounded,  and  could  fetch  no  ground  in  one
hundred  and  twenty  fathomes  :  and  the  Sea  was  so  smooth,
that  we  could  discerne  no  current  at  all.  At  this  time
I  reckoned  the  Cape  of  desolation  to  beare  North  North-
east twentie  foure  leagues  from  us.  The  one  and
twentieth,  the  winde  was  variable.  The  two  and
twentieth,  we  were  in  the  latitude  of  60.  degrees  and
37.  minutes:  the  winde  being  at  West,  wee  ranne  North
and  by  West.  The  seaven  and  twentieth,  the  winde  was
at  West  South-west :  then  our  course  was  North-west
and  by  North,  the  weather  faire  and  warme,  as  in  England,
in  the  moneth  of  May.  This  day  we  saw  great  store  of
Guiles,  which  followed  our  Ship  sundry  dayes.

The  eight  and  twentieth, the  winde  being  at  North

308

GEORGE WEYMOUTH

and  by  West,  wee  directed  our  course  to  the  Westward ;
and  about  twelve  of  the  clocke  the  same  night,  we  descried
the  land  of  America,  in  the  latitude  of  62.  degrees  and
30.  minutes ;  which  we  made  to  be  Warwicks  foreland.
This  Headland  rose  like  an  Hand.  And  when  we  came
neere  the  Foreland,  we  saw  foure  small  Hands  to  the
Northwards,  and  three  small  Hands  to  the  Southward  of
the  same  Foreland.  The  Foreland  was  high  land  :  all  the
'tops  of  the  hils  were  covered  with  Snow.  The  three
Ismail  Hands  to  the  Southward  were  also  white,  that  we
!:ould  not  discerne  them  from  Hands  of  Ice :  also  there
was  great  store  of  drift  Ice  upon  the  Eastside  of  this
Foreland :  but  the  Sea  was  altogether  voide  of  Ice :  the
Land  did  lye  North  and  by  East,  and  South  and  by  West,
Deing  six  leagues  of  length.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  at  sixe  of  the  clocke  in  the
morning,  wee  were  within  three  leagues  of  this  Foreland :
:hen  the  winde  came  up  at  North-east  and  by  East,  a
^ood  stifle  gale  with  fogge :  and  wee  were  forced  to
>tand  to  the  Southward,  because  wee  could  not  wether
ji:he  Land  to  the  Northward :  and  as  wee  stood  to  the
Southward  along  by  Warwicks  Foreland,  we  could  dis-
cerne none  otherwise,  but  that  it  was  an  Hand.  Which
!f  it  fall  out  to  be  so,  then  Lumleys  Inlet,  and  the  next
Southerly  Inlet,  where  the  great  Current  setteth  to  the
West,  must  of  necessitie  be  one  Sea ;  which  will  be  the
greatest  hope  of  the  passage  that  way.  The  thirtieth,
j  he  winde  was  at  North-east,  with  fogge  and  Snow.  This
[lay  wee  came  into  a  great  whirling  of  a  Current,  being
In  the  latitude  of  61.  degrees,  and  about  twelve  leagues
from  the  coast  of  America.

The  first  day  of  July,  the  winde  was  at  West,  with
oggt  and  Snow ;  the  ayre  being  very  cold.  This  day
vee  came  into  many  Overfals,  which  seemed  to  runne  a
nreat  current ;  but  which  way  it  did  set,  wee  could  not
yell  discerne.  The  greatest  likelihood  was,  that  it  should
et  to  the  West.  But  having  contrary  windes  some  six-
eene  or  seventeene  dayes,  we  alwayes  lay  in traverse

309

A.D.

l602.

America
descried  in
62.  degr.  and
30.  min.

[III.iv.811.]

Warwicks
Foreland  sup-
posed to  be  an
Hand.

The  greatest
hope  of  the
North-west
passage.
A  current
Westward  in
sixtie  one
degrees.

A  current
likely  to  set  to
the  West.

A.D.

l602.

A  tnaine  bank
of  Ice  in  60
degrees.

The  North
coast  of
America
seemeth  to  be
broken  land.

Blacke  puddle
water.

America
againe
discried  in
63.  deg.  53.
min.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

among  these  overfals ;  but  could  never  finde  any  great
current  by  our  courses  :  wee  sounded  sometimes,  but  could
get  no  ground  in  one  hundred  and  twentie  fathomes.

The  second  day,  wee  descried  a  maine  Banke  of  Ice
in  the  latitude  of  60.  degrees :  the  winde  was  at  North
North-west,  and  very  faire  weather.  Wee  wanting  fresh
water  did  sayle  close  to  this  Land  of  Ice,  and  hoysed  out
our  Boate,  and  loaded  her  twice  with  Ice,  which  made
us  very  good  fresh  water.  Within  twenty  leagues  of  the
coast  of  America,  wee  should  oftentimes  come  into  many
great  overfals.  Which  doth  manifestly  shew,  that  all  the
coast  of  America  is  broken  Land.

The  third,  the  winde  was  at  South-west,  very  foggie :
and  as  wee  stood  toward  the  coast  of  America,  wee  met
with  another  maine  Banke  of  Ice.  The  fogge  was  so
thicke,  that  we  were  hard  by  the  Ice,  before  wee  could
see  it.  But  it  pleased  God  that  the  winde  was  faire  to
put  us  cleare  from  this  Ice  againe ;  and  presently  it  began
to  cleare  up,  so  that  wee  could  see  two  or  three  leagues
off ;  but  we  could  see  no  end  of  the  Ice.  Wee  judged
this  Ice  to  be  some  tenne  leagues  from  the  coast  of
America.  We  found  the  water  to  be  very  blackish  and
thicke,  like  puddle  water.

The  eight,  the  winde  was  at  North  North-west,  very
faire  weather ;  wee  standing  to  the  Westwards  met  with
a  mighty  maine  Banke  of  Ice,  which  was  a  great  length  and
breadth,  and  it  did  rest  close  to  the  shoare.  And  at  eleven
of  the  clocke  in  the  forenoone,  wee  descried  againe  the
Land  of  America,  in  the  latitude  of  6%.  degrees  and  $3.
minutes,  being  very  high  Land  :  and  it  did  rise  as  Hands,
the  toppes  being  covered  with  Snow.  This  Land  was
South-west  and  by  West,  some  five  leagues  off  us :  we
could  come  no  neerer  it  for  the  great  quantitie  of  Ice,
which  rested  by  the  shoare  side.

The  ninth,  the  winde  being  at  North-east  and  by  East,
blew  so  extreamely,  that  we  were  forced  to  stand  to  the
Southward,  both  to  cleare  our  selves  of  the  Land,  and
of  the  Ice : for  the  day  before  we  passed  a  great  banke

310

GEORGE WEYMOUTH  ad.

1602.
of  Ice,  which  was  some  foureteene  leagues  to  the  Eastward
of  us,  when  the  storme  began ;  but  thankes  be  to  God,
we  cleared  our  selves  both  of  the  Land  and  of  the  Ice.
This  day  in  the  afternoone  the  storme  grew  so  extreame,
that  we  were  forced  to  stand  along  with  our  forecourse
to  the  Southward.

The  seventeenth  was  very  foggie,  the  winde  being  at
East :  and  about  two  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  wee
saw  foure  great  Hands  of  Ice,  of  a  huge  bignesse : and
ibout  foure  of  the  clocke  we  came  among  some  small
scattered  Ice,  and  supposed  our  selves  to  be  neere  some
great  Banke. The  fogge  was  very  thicke,  but  the  winde
arge  to  stand  backe  the  same  way  wee  came  in;  or  else
t  would  have  indangered  our  lives  very  much. And  at
line  of  the  clocke  at  night  we  heard  a  great  noyse,  as  The  loathsome
hough it had bin the breach of some shoare. Being  noyse  of  Ice.
lesirous  to  see  what  it  was,  we  stood  with  it,  and  found
t  to  be  the  noyse  of  a  great  quantity  of  Ice,  which  was
pery loathsome to be heard. Then wee stood North
^orth-west,  and  the  fogge  continued  so  thicke,  that  wee
ould  not  see  two  Shippes  length  from  us : whereupon
ve  thought  good  to  take  in  some  of  our  sayles ;  and  when
;>ur  men  came  to  hand  them,  they  found  our  sayles,  ropes,  Sayles,  ropes
nd  tacklings,  so  hard  frozen,  that  it  did  seeme  very  strange  **<l  tackling
into  us,  being  in  the  chiefest  time  of  Summer.  frozen.

The  eighteenth  day,  the  winde  was  at  North-east  and

North,  the  ayre  being  very  cleere  and  extreame  cold,
rith  an  exceeding  great  frost ;  and  our  course  was  North-
west. This  day  in  the  forenoone,  when  we  did  set  our
ayles,  we  found  our  ropes  and  tacklings  harder  frozen
hen  they  were  the  day  before  :  which  frost  did  annoy
is  so  much  in  the  using  of  our  ropes  and  sayles,  that  wee
/ere  enforced  to  breake  off  the  Ice  from  our  ropes,  that
hey  might  runne  through  the  blockes.  And  at  two  of  the
locke  in  the  afternoone,  the  winde  began  to  blow  very
ard,  with  thicke  fogge,  which  freezed  so  fast  as  it  did  fall  Thick  fogge
pon  our  sayles,  ropes,  and  tackling,  that  we  could  not  freeztnSas
lmost  hoyse  or  strike  our  sayles,  to  have  any  use  of  them.  ***  as  lt*e  '

311

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1602.

This  extreame  frost  and  long  continuance  thereof,  was  a
maine  barre  to  our  proceedings  to  the  Northward,  and  the
discouraging  of  all  our  men.

The  nineteenth  day,  the  winde  was  at  North  and  by
[III.  iv.  8 1 2.]  East,  and  our  course  to  the  Eastwards.  The  same  night
Mutinie.  following,  all  our  men  conspired  secretly  together,  to  beare
up  the  helme  for  England,  while  I  was  asleepe  in  my
Cabin,  and  there  to  have  kept  mee  by  force,  untill  I  had
sworn  unto  them  that  I  would  not  offer  any  violence
unto  them  for  so  doing.  And  indeede  they  had  drawn
in  writing,  the  causes  of  their  bearing  up  of  the  helme,
and  thereunto  set  their  hands,  and  would  have  left  them
in  my  Cabin :  but  by  good  chance  I  understood  their
pretence,  and  prevented  them  for  that  time.

The  twentieth  day,  I  called  the  chiefest  of  my  Company
into  my  Cabin,  before  Master  John  Cartwright  our
Preacher,  and  our  Master,  William  Cobreth,  to  heare
what  reasons  they  could  alleadge  for  the  bearing  up  of  the
Helme,  which  might  be  an  overthrow  to  the  Voyage,
seeing  the  Merchants  had  bin  at  so  great  a  charge  with
it.  After  much  conference,  they  delivered  mee  their
reasons  in  writing :

Concluding, that  although it  were  granted, that  we|
might  winter  betweene  60.  and  70.  degrees  of  latitude,
with  safetie  of  our  lives  and  Vessels,  yet  it  will  be  May  \
next  before  wee  can  dismore  them,  to  lanch  out  into  the
Sea. And  therefore  if  the  Merchants  should  have  purpose
to  proceede  on  the  discoverie  of  these  North-west  parts
of  America ;  the  next  yeare  you  may  be  in  the  aforesaid
latitudes  for  England,  by  the  first  of  May,  and  so  be(
furnished  better  with  men  and  victuals,  to  passe  and  pro-
ceede in  the  aforesaid  action.

Seeing  then  that  you  cannot  assure  us  of  a  safe  harbour
to  the  Northward,  wee  purpose  to  beare  up  the  Helme
for  England,  yet  with  this  limitation,  that  if  in  your  wise-
dome,  you  shall  thinke  good  to  make  any  discovery,  either
in  60.  or  57.  degrees,  with  this  faire  Northerly  winde,
we  yeelde  our  lives  with  your  selfe, to  encounter  any

312

GEORGE WEYMOUTH  ad.

1602.
danger. Thus  much  we  thought  needefull  to  signifie,  as
a  matter  builded  upon  reason,  and  not  proceeding  upon
feare  or  cowardise.

Then,  wee  being  in  the  latitude  of  68.  degrees  and  53. 68.  deg.  53.
minutes : the  next  following,  about  eleven  of  the  clocke,  min.
they  bare  up  the  Helme,  being  all  so  bent,  that  there  was
no  meanes  to  perswade  them  to  the  contrary. At  last
understanding of it, I came forth of my Cabin, and
demanded of them, who bare  up the Helme? They
answered  me,  One  and  All. So  they  hoysed  up  all  the They  return
sayle  they  could,  and  directed  their  course  South  and  by  frm  the
West.  _  _  N°rlh-

The  two  and  twentieth,  I  sent  for  the  chiefest  of  those,
which  were  the  cause  of  the  bearing  up  of  the  Helme,
and  punished  them  severely,  that  this  punishment  might  Mutiners
be  a  warning  to  them  afterward  for  falling  into  the  like  punished.
mutinie. In  the  end,  upon  the  intreatie  of  Master  Cart-
wright  our  Preacher,  and  the  Master,  William  Cobreath,
upon their submission, I remitted some part of their
punishment. At  twelve  of  the  clocke  at  noone,  wee  came
hard  by  a  great  Hand  of  Ice :  the  Sea  being  very  smooth  a  great  Hand
and  almost  calme,  wee  hoysed  out  the  Boates  of  both  our  of  Ice  cracked
Shippes : being  in  want  of  fresh  water,  and  went  to  this  l&eathmder-

Iland  to  get  some  Ice  to  make  us  fresh  water. And  as  ia?'f"

&, ,  .  ~  r 1  • t / 1  •  1  • overthrowne.

wee  were  breaking  oft  some  or  this  Ice  (which  was  vene

painefull  for  us  to  doe ;  for  it  was  almost  as  hard  as  a

Rocke : )  the  great  Hand  of  Ice  gave  a  mightie  cracke  two

or  three  times,  as  though  it  had  bin  a  thunder-clappe ;

and  presently  the  Hand  began  to  overthrow,  which  was

like  to  have  sunke  both  our  Boates,  if  wee  had  not  made

good  haste  from  it. But  thankes  be  to  God,  we  escaped

this  danger  very  happily,  and  came  aboord  with  both  our

Boates,  the  one  halfe  laden  with  Ice. There  was  great Great  store  of

store  of  Sea  Foule  upon  this  Hand  of  Ice.  Sea  Foule

The  five  and  twentieth  and  six  and  twentieth,  the  winde  uPon  the  lce'
being  at  East,  did  blow  a  hard  gale,  and  our  course  was
West  and  by  South,  with  fogge. This  day  in  the  after-
noone  I  did  reckon  my  selfe  to  be  in  the  entering  of  an

313

A.D.

l602.

An  Inlet  in
6 1 .  degrees  iff
40.  minutes.

The  return  out
of  the  Inlet.

The  variation
3  5  •  degrees
Westward.

An  Hand  on
the  coast  of
America  in
$$.deg.  y
30.  min.

[III.iv.813.]

The  God-
speede  stroke
upon  a  piece  of
Ice.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Inlet,  which  standeth  in  the  latitude  of  61.  degrees  and
40.  minutes.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  the  winde  was  at  South  South-
east, and  blew  very  hard,  our  course  was  West.  The
eight  and  twentieth  and  nine  and  twentieth,  our  course
was  West  and  by  South,  the  winde  blowing  very  hard
at  East  South-east,  with  fogge  and  raine.  The  thirtieth,
the  winde  came  up  in  a  showre  by  the  West  North-west,
blowing  so  hard,  that  wee  were  forced  to  put  a  fore  the
Sea.  Now  because  the  time  of  the  yeare  was  farre  spent,
and  many  of  our  men  in  both  Shippes  sicke,  wee  thought
it  good  to  returne  with  great  hope  of  this  Inlet,  to  bee
a  passage  of  more  possibilitie,  then  through  the  Straight
of  Davis :  because  I  found  it  not  much  pestered  with  Ice,
and  to  be  a  straight  of  fortie  leagues  broad.  Also  I
sayled  an  hundred  leagues  West  and  by  South,  within  this
Inlet;  and  there  I  found  the  variation  to  be  3$.  degrees
to  the  Westward,  and  the  needle  to  decline,  or  rather
incline  83.  degrees  and  an  halfe.

The  fifth  of  August  (the  winde  all  that  while  Westerly)
wee  were  cleare  of  this  Inlet  againe.  The  sixth  the  winde
was  at  East  South-east  with  fogge.  The  seaventh,  eight,
and  ninth,  we  passed  by  many  great  Hands  of  Ice.  The
ninth  day  at  night,  we  descried  the  land  of  America,  in
the  latitude  of  $$.  degrees,  and  30.  minutes.  This  Land
was  an  Hand,  being  but  low  land  and  very  smooth  :  then
the  night  approaching,  and  the  weather  being  something
foggie  and  darke,  we  were  forced  to  stand  to  the  North-
ward againe.  This  night  we  passed  by  some  great  Hands
of  Ice,  and  some  bigge  peeces  which  did  breake  from  the
great  Hands :  and  we  were  like  to  strike  some  of  them
two  or  three  times :  which  if  we  had  done,  it  might  have
endangered  our  Shippes  and  lives.  Our  consort,  the  God-
speede,  strooke  a  little  piece  of  Ice,  which  they  thought
had  foundred  their  Shippe ;  but  thankes  be  to  God  they
received  no  great  hurt,  for  our  Shippes  were  very  strong.

The  tenth  day,  the  winde  was  at  North-east  and  by
North,  with  fogge  and  raine ;  and  our  course  was  to  the

3*4

GEORGE WEYMOUTH  a.d.

1602.

South-eastward : for  we  could  by  no  meanes  put  with

the  shoare,  by  reason  of  the  thicknesse  of  the  fogge,  and

that  the  winde  blew  right  upon  the  shoare,  so  that  we

were  forced  to  beare  saile  to  keepe  our  selves  from  the

land, untill  it  pleased  God to send  us  a  cleare,  which

God  knoweth  we  long  wanted. At  sixe  of  the  clocke  in

the  afternoone,  it  was  calme ;  and  then  I  judged  my  selfe,

by  mine  account,  to  be  neere  the  Land : so  I  sounded,

and  had  ground  in 160. fathomes, and  fine  grey Osie

Sand  :  and  there  was  a  great  Hand  of  Ice,  a  ground  within

a  league  of  us,  where  we  sounded,  and  within  one  houre

it  pleased  God  to  send  us  a  cleere. Then  we  saw  the  land

some  foure  leagues  South-west  and  by  South  from  us.

This  land  lyeth  East  and  by  South,  and  West  and  by

North,  being  good  high  land,  but  all  Hands,  as  farre  as  Many  Hands.

wee  could  discerne. This  calme  continued  untill  foure

of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone  of  the  eleventh  day : the

weather  being  very cleere, we could not discerne any

Current  to  goe  at  all  by  this  Land. This  day  the  Sea

did  set  us  in  about  a  league  neerer  the  Land,  so  that  wee

judged  our  selves  three  leagues  off. Here  we  sounded

againe,  and  had  but  eightie  fathoms.

The  variation  of  the  Compasse  we  found  to  be  22. The  variation
degrees  and  10.  minutes  Westward. At  five  of  the  clocke  22-  deSrees  i0
there  sprung  up  a  fine  gale  of  winde,  at  East  South-east, est'
and  being  so  neere  night,  wee  stood  to  the  Southward,
thinking  the  next  day  to  seeke  some  harbour. But  it
pleased  God, the  next  day, being  the  twelfth, to send
us  a  storme  of  foule  weather,  the  winde  being  at  East  A  Storme.
and  by  South,  with  fogge :  so  that  we  could  by  no  meanes
get  the  shoare. Thus  wee  were  forced  to  beate  up  and
downe  at Sea, untill it should  please  God to send us
better  weather.

The  foureteenth,  I  thought  good  to  stand  to  the  West-
ward to  search  an  Inlet,  in  the  latitude  of  56.  degrees.
I  have  good  hope  of  a  passage  that  way,  by  many  great
and  probable  reasons.

The  fifteenth  the  winde  continued  at  the  South,  with

315

A.D.

l602.

55-  &g-  3i-

min.

Variation  17.
degr.  15.  min.
They  discrie
the  land  again .

55.  deg.  20.
min.

A  pleasant
low  land,  being
all  Hands.
55.  degrees.
The  variation
18.  deg.  and
12.  min.
Westward.

Temperate
ayre.

Great  hope  of
a  passage  in
three  places.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

exceeding  faire  weather,  and  our  course  was  West.  We
were  this  day  at  noone  in  the  latitude  of  55.  degrees  and
31.  minutes:  and  I  found  the  variation  to  be  17.  degrees
and  15.  minutes,  to  the  Westward.  And  about  seven  of
the  clocke  at  night,  we  descried  the  Land  againe,  being
tenne  leagues  to  the  Eastward  of  this  Inlet.  This  Land;
did  beare  from  us  South-west,  some  eight  leagues  off :
and  about  nine  of  the  clocke  the  same  night,  the  winde
came  to  the  West ;  which  blew  right  against  us  for  our
entring  into  this  Inlet.

The  sixteenth,  the  winde  was  at  West  North-west,  and
was  very  faire  weather,  and  our  course  South-west :  about
nine  of  the  clocke  in  the  forenoone,  we  came  by  a  great
Hand  of  Ice ;  and  by  this  Hand  we  found  some  peeces
of  Ice  broken  off  from  the  said  Hand :  And  being  in
great  want  of  fresh  water,  wee  hoysed  out  our  Boates
of  both  Shippes,  and  loaded  them  twice  with  Ice,  which
made  us  very  good  fresh  water.  This  day  at  noone  wee
found  our  selves  to  be  in  the  latitude  of  55.  degrees  and
twentie  minutes :  when  we  had  taken  in  our  Ice  and
Boates,  the  weather  being  very  faire  and  cleare,  and  the
winde  at  West  North-west,  we  bent  our  course  for  the
Land,  and  about  three  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,
we  were  within  three  leagues  of  the  shoare.  It  is  a  very
pleasant  low  Land ;  but  all  Hands,  and  goodly  sounds
going  betweene  them,  toward  the  South-west.  This
Land  doth  stand  in  the  latitude  of  $$.  degrees;  and  I
found  the  variation  to  be  to  the  West  18.  degrees  and
12.  minutes.  This  coast  is  voide  of  Ice,  unlesse  it  be
some  great  Hands  of  Ice,  that  come  from  the  North,  and
so  by  windes  may  be  driven  upon  this  coast.  Also  we
did  finde  the  ayre  in  this  place  to  be  very  temperate.
Truely  there  is  in  three  severall  places  great  hope  of  a
passage,  betweene  the  latitude  of  62.  and  54.  degrees ;
if  the  fogge  doe  not  hinder  it,  which  is  all  the  feare  I
have.  At  sixe  of  the  clocke,  wee  being  becalmed  by  the
shoare,  there  appeared  unto  us  a  great  ledge  of  rockes,
betweene  us  and  the  shoare,  as  though  the  Sea  did  flye

316

GEORGE WEYMOUTH  a.d.

1602.

over  it  with  a  great  height. As  we  all  beheld  it,  within

one  houre,  upon  a  sudden  it  vanished  cleane  away  5  which Agreatkdgof

seemed  very  strange  unto  us  all. And  to  the  Eastward Rocksstrangh

of  us,  some  two  leagues,  we  saw  a  great  Rocke,  lying ^"^e^Rocke

some  three  leagues  off  the  Land : we  then  supposing  it

to  be  shoald  water,  by  this  broken  ground,  sounded,  but

could  get  no  ground  in  one  hundred  and  sixtie  fathoms.

About  seven  of  the  clocke,  there  sprung  up  a  gale  of

winde,  by  the  South  South-east,  which  was  a  very  good

winde  to  coast  this  Land.

But  the  seventeenth  in  the  morning,  the  winde  being
at  the  South,  it  began  to  blow  so  extreamely,  that  we
durst  not  stay  by  the  shoare,  for  it  was  like  to  be  a  great
storme : then  our  course  was  East  North-east,  to  get  us
Sea  roome. This  storme  still  increasing,  our  flye-boates
did  receive  in  much  water  ;  for  they  wanted  a  Sparre-decke,
which  wee  found  very  dangerous  for  the Sea. About
twelve  of  the  clocke  at  noone,  this  day  there  rose  up  a
great  showre  in  the  West,  and  presently  the  winde  came  A  Whirl-
out  of  that  quarter  with  a  whirle,  and  taking  up  the  Sea  winde  taktnS
into  the  ayre,  and  blew  so  extreamely,  that  we  were  forced  u* e ea'
alwayes  to  runne  before  the  Sea,  howsoever  the  winde  did  [III.iv.814.]
blow. And within twelve houres after this storme
beganne,  the  Sea  was  so  much  growen,  that  we  thought
our  flye  Boates  would  not  have  beene  able  to  have  endured

it

The  eighteenth,  the  winde  was  at  North-west,  and  the

storme  increased  more  extreame,  and  lasted  untill  eight

of  the  clocke  in  the  morning  of  the  nineteenth  day,  so

furious,  that  to  my  remembrance,  I  never  felt  a  greater :

yet  when  we  were  in  our  greatest  extremities,  the  Lord

delivered  us  his  unworthy  servants. And  if  the  winde,

with so great a storme, had bin either  Northerly, or

Southerly,  or  Easterly  but  one  day,  we  had  all  perished

against  the  Rocks,  or  the  Ice :  for  wee  were  entred  thirty  They  were

leagues  within  a  Head-land  of  an  Inlet,  in  the  latitude  eftered  }°-

rb  r ,  t.-i  1^1  1  1  -1 leagues  into  an

or  56.  degrees. But  it  pleased  God  to  send  us  the  winde  iniet'm  56.

so  faire,  as  we  could  desire,  both  to  cleare  our  selves  of  degrees.

317

A.D.

l602.

They  returned
for  England.
This  Book  was
also  subscribed
by  W.  Cobreth
and  John
Drew.
The  lands  end.

May  1605.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Land  and  Ice.  Which  opportunitie  caused  us  for  this
time  to  take  our  leaves  of  the  coast  of  America,  and  to
shape  our  course  for  England.

The  fourth,  in  the  morning,  wee  descried  the  Hand  of
Silly  North-east  and  by  East,  some  foure  leagues  off  us.
Then  wee  directed  our  course  East  and  by  North :  and
at  tenne  of  the  clocke  in  the  forenoone,  wee  descried  the
Lands  end,  and  next  day  were  forced  to  put  into  Dart-
mouth.

Chap. XIV.

James  Hall  his  Voyage  forth  of  Denmarke  for  the
discovery  of  Greeneland,  in  the  yeare  1605.
abbreviated.

N  the  name  of  God  Amen,  we  set  sayle
from  Copeman-haven  in  Denmarke,  the
second  day  of  May,  in  the  yeare  of  our
redemption  1605.  with  two  Shippes  and
a  Pinnace :  The  Admirall,  called  the
Frost,  a  shippe  of  the  burthen  of  thirty
or  fortie  lasts,  wherein  was  Captaine,  and
chiefe  commander  of  the  whole  Fleet,  Captaine  John
Cunningham,  a  Scottish  Gentleman,  servant  unto  the
Kings  Majestie  of  Denmarke,  my  selfe  being  principall
Pilot.  The  Lyon  Viceadmirall,  being  about  the  foresaid
burthen,  wherein  was  Captaine,  one  Godscaio  Lindenose,
a  Danish  Gentleman,  and  Steereman  of  the  same,  one
Peter  Kilson  of  Copeman-haven.  The  Pinnace,  a  Barke
of  the  burthen  of  twelve  Lasts,  or  thereabouts :  wherein
John  Knight  of  was  Steereman  or  commander,  one  John  Knight,  my
whom  after.  Countrie-man.  So  setting  sayle  from  Copeman-haven,
with  a  faire  gale  of  winde  Easterly,  wee  came  unto
Elsonure,  where  we  anchored,  to  take  in  our  water.

The  third  day  we  tooke  in  our  water,  at  which  time,
the  Captaines,  my  selfe,  with  the  Lieutenants,  and  the
other  Steeremen,  did  thinke  it  convenient  to  set  downe
certaine  Articles,  for  the  better  keeping  of  company  one

318

John
Cunningham

JAMES HALL

A.D.

1605.

with  another, to  which  Articles  or  covenants  wee  were
all  severally  sworne,  setting  thereunto  our  hands.

The  sixt  we  came  to  Flecorie,  into  which  harbour,  by  Flecorie.

Gods  helpe,  we  came  at  two  a  clocke  in  the  afternoone.

The  seaventh  day  we  supplied  our  wants  of  wood  and

j  water. The  eight  day,  about  two  a  clocke  in  the  after-

,  noone,  we  set  sayle  forth  of  the  harbour  of  Flecorie,  about

I  six  a  clock  it  fell  calme, till  about  eight, about  which

j  time, the  Nase  of  Norway,  by  the  Danish  men,  called

i  Lyndis-nose,  bare  next  hand  North-west  of  us,  sixe  leagues

off ;  at  which  time  I  directed  my  course West  North-

,  west,  finding  the  compasse  varied  7.  degrees  10.  minutes,

to  the  Eastwards  of  the  true  North.

The  thirteenth,  we  had  sight  of  the  Hand  of  Faire  He,
!  and  also  of  the  South-head  of  Shotland,  called  Swimborne
head,  which  are  high  Lands :  at  noone,  the  Hand  of  Faire
He  bearing  West  halfe  a  point  Northerly :  foure  leagues
off  I  made  observation,  and  found  us  in  the  latitude  of
59.  degrees  20.  minutes.  This  night  about  seven  a  clocke,
wee  came  about  an  English  league  to  the  Northwards
of  the  North-west  end  of  Faire  lie,  wee  met  with  a  great
race  of  a  tyde,  as  though  it  had  beene  the  race  of  Portland,
it  setting  North  North-west.  Being  out  of  the  said  rac<s,
I  directed  my  course  West  and  by  North,  having  the
winde  North-east  and  by  North :  this  evening  Faire  He
bearing  East  South-east  foure  leagues ;  Swimborne  head,
North-east  and  by  North  eight  leagues :  the  Hand  of
Foole,  North-east  and  by  East,  seven  leagues.  I  found
by  exact  observation,  the  compasse  to  be  varied  to  the
East-ward  of  the  true  North  60.  degrees  10.  minutes.

The  fourteenth  in  the  morning,  the  winde  came  to  the
East  South-east,  wee  steering  West  and  by  North  away :
this  morning  the  Hand  of  Faire  He  did  shew  in  my  sight
to  bee  about  ten  leagues  off,  at  which  time  we  did  descrie
two  of  the  Westermost  Hands  of  Orkney,  which  did  beare
South-west  and  by  South.

The  eighteenth,  the  winde  at  North-west  and  by  West,
wee  laid  it  away  South-west  and  by  West,  and  sometimes

3*9

Variation
observed.

A  race  of  a
tide.

Variation
observed.

A.D.

1605.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

South-west.  This  day  at  noone  wee  were  in  the  Latitude
[III. iv. 8 1 5.]  of  58.  degrees  40.  minutes.  The  nineteenth  day,  the
winde  at  South-west  and  South-west  and  by  West,  wee
lying  as  the  night  before,  being  at  noone  in  the  Latitude
of  59.  degrees  and  a  halfe.  The  foure  and  twentieth  day,
the  winde  at  North-east  and  by  East,  we  steering  still
with  a  fresh  gale  West  South-west,  this  evening  we  looked
Basse  Hand  to  have  seene  Busse  Hand,  but  I  doe  verily  suppose  the
wrong  placed.  same  to  be  placed  in  a  wrong  Latitude  in  the  Marine
Charts.  The  sixe  and  twentieth  at  noone,  wee  were  in
the  latitude  of  57.  degrees  45.  minutes.  The  thirtieth
day  in  the  morning  betweene  seven  and  eight,  the  weather
began  to  cleere,  and  the  Sea  and  winde  to  waxe  lesse,
wee  looking  for  the  Lion  and  the  Pinnasse,  could  have
no  sight  of  them,  we  supposing  them  to  bee  asterne  off
us,  we  standing  still  under  our  courses.  This  day  the
winde  came  to  the  North-east  and  by  East,  being  very
cold  weather,  we  lying  North  North-west  away.  Making
my  observation  at  noone,  I  found  us  in  the  latitude  of
59.  degrees  15.  minutes,  our  way  North  North-west  fortie
leagues.  This  afternoon  between  one  and  two  a  clock
we  descried  Land,  it  bearing  North  North-east  off  us
about  ten  leagues  off  North-east  &  by  North  off  us  about
ten  leagues,  it  being  a  very  high  ragged  land,  lying  in
the  latitude  of  59.  degrees  50.  minutes,  lying  alongst
South-east  and  by  South,  and  North-west  and  by  North.
This  Head-land  wee  named  after  the  Kings  Majesties
of  Denmarke,  because  it  was  the  first  part  of  Groenland,
which  we  did  see.  This  afternoone  about  one  a  clock,
bearing  in  for  the  shoare  we  saw  an  Hand  of  Ice,  which
bore  West  South-west  of  us  three  leagues  off,  so  having
the  wind  at  East  South-east,  we  bore  in  for  the  shoare,
The  shoare  where  wee  found  so  much  Ice  that  it  was  impossible  either
full  of  Ice.  for  us  or  any  other  ship  to  come  into  the  shoare  without
great  danger :  yet  wee  put  our  selves  into  the  Ice  as  wee
thought  convenient,  being  incumbred  and  compassed  about
with  the  same  in  such  sort,  as  the  Captaine,  my  selfe,  the
Boatswaine  with  another  of  our  companie,  were  forced

320

First  sight  of
Groenland.

Cape
Christian.

JAMES HALL  a.d.

1605.
to  goe  overboord  upon  an  Hand  of  Ice,  to  defend  it  from
the  ship,  at  which  time  I  thought  it  convenient  to  stand
off  into  the  Sea  againe,  and  so  being  cleere  of  the  Ice,
to  double  Cape  Desolation, to  the  North-westwards  of  Cape
which  I  doubted  not  but  to  find  a  cleer  coast,  so  standing  Desolation.

i  away  all  this  night  West  South-west,  to  cleere  us  of  the
Ice,  which  lay  farre  from  the  shoare,  being  very  thicke
towards the Land with great Hands of Ice that it is

i  wonderfull.  This  evening,  the  Cape  Christian  bearing
North-east  and  by  East  five  leagues,  I  found  the  Compasse  Compasse

;  varied  12.  degrees  15.  minutes  to  the  North-westwards,  varied.
Moreover,  standing  to  Seaward  from  the  foresaid  Cape,

;  we  came  in  blacke  water,  as  thicke  as  though  it  had  beene  Black  water.
puddle  water,  we  sayling  in  the  same  for  the  space  of
three  houres.

The  one  and  thirtieth  in  the  morning  faire  weather,
with  the  winde  somewhat  variable,  wee  steering  away
North-west  and  by  West,  betweene  foure  and  five  in  the
morning  we  had  sight  of  the  Lion  againe,  but  not  of  the  Sight  of  the
Pinnasse.  They  being  a  Sea-boord  off  and  having  espied  Lien.
us,  they  stood  with  us,  at  which  time  the  Captaine,  Lieu-
tenant, and  Steereman  came  aboord  us,  earnestly  intreating
mee  to  bestow  a  Sea  Chart  of  the  Steerman,  and  to  give
him  directions  if  by  tempestuous  weather  they  should
lose  us,  they  protesting  and  swearing  that  they  would
never  leave  us  as  long  as  winde  and  weather  would  permit
them  to  keepe  companie  with  us.  By  whose  speeches
I  being  perswaded  did  give  them  a  Sea  Chart  for  those
Coasts,  telling  them  that  if  they  would  follow  me,  that
by  Gods  assistance  I  would  bring  them  to  a  part  of  the
Land  void  without  pester  of  Ice,  and  also  harbour  the
ships  in  good  Harbour,  by  Gods  helpe ;  they  swearing
and  protesting,  that  they  would  follow  mee  so  long  as
possibly  they  could,  with  which  oathes  and  faire  speeches
I  rested  satisfied,  thinking  they  had  thought  as  they  had
sworne,  but  it  fell  out  otherwise. So  having  made  an

!  end  with  us  about  noone,  they  went  aboord  againe,  wee

being  this  day  in  the  latitude  of  59.  degrees  45.  minutes,

xiv  321  x

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605.

having  stood  all  the  night  before,  and  this  forenoone  also,
so  nigh  the  shoare  as  wee  could  for  Ice,  the  Cape  Christian
South  South-east  and  North  North-west,  and  from  the
Cape  to  Cape  Desolation,  the  Land  lyeth  East  and  by-
South,  and  West  and  by  North  about  fiftie  leagues.  This
day  betweene  one  and  two  a  clocke,  the  Vice-admirals
Boat,  being  newly  gone  aboord,  it  fell  very  hasie  and
thicke,  so  that  wee  could  not  see  one  another  by  reason
of  the  fog,  therefore  our  Captaine  caused  to  shoote  off
certaine  Muskets  with  a  great  peece  of  Ordnance,  to  the
intent  the  Lion  might  heare  us,  which  heard  of  them
they  presently  stood  with  us,  at  which  time  the  fogge
began  somewhat  to  cleere,  wee  having  sight  one  of  another
and  so  stood  alongst  the  shoare,  as  nigh  as  we  could  for
Ice.
June  1605.  The  first  of  June,  wee  had  a  fresh  gale  of  winde  at

South-west,  wee  steering  North-east  and  by  North  into
the  shoare,  about  three  in  the  morning  there  fell  a  mightie
fogge,  so  that  we  were  forced  to  lye  by  the  lee,  for  the
Lion  playing  upon  our  Drum  to  the  intent  for  them  to
heare  us,  and  to  keepe  companie  with  us,  they  answering
us  againe  with  the  shooting  of  a  Musket,  wee  trimming
our  sailes,  did  the  like  to  them,  and  so  stood  away  North-
east and  by  East :  larboord  tackt  aboord  halfe  a  glasse,
Hands  of  Ice.  when  we  were  hard  incumbred  amongst  mightie  Hands
Mightie  Gf  Ice,  being  very  high  like  huge  Mountaines,  so  I  caused

incumbrance  of  tQ  cast  about  ancj  stanc|  to  tfe  Westwards  North-west  and

A  mishtie ^7  West. About  twelve  of  the  clocke  this  night  it  being

current  setting  still  calme,  wee  found  our  selves  suddenly  compast  round

North  North-  about  with  great  Hands  of  Ice,  which  made  such  a  hideous

wesL  noyse  as  was  most  wonderfull,  so  that  by  no  meanes  wee

could  double  the  same  to  the  Westward :  wherefore  wee

were  forced  to  stand  it  away  to  the  Southwards,  South

[III.  iv.  8 1 6.]  South- West, stemming the Current, for by the same

Current  wee  were  violently  brought  into  this  Ice,  so  being

incumbred  and  much  to  doe  to  keepe  cleere  of  the  mightie

Hands  of  Ice,  there  being  as  both  I  and  others  did  plainly

see  upon  one  of  them  a  huge  rocke  stone,  of  the  weight

322

JAMES HALL  a.d.

1605.

of  three  hundred  pounds  or  thereabouts,  as  wee  did
suppose.  Thus  being  troubled  in  the  Ice  for  the  space
of  two  or  three  houres,  it  pleased  God  that  we  got  thorow
the  same.

The  second  day  in  the  morning  about  three  a  clocke,
I  came  forth  of  my  Cabin,  where  1  found  that  the  Shipper
whose  name  was  Arnold  had  altered  my  course  which  I
had  set,  going  contrarie  to  my  directions  North  North-
west away,  whereupon  hee  and  I  grew  to  some  speeches,
both  for  at  this  time  and  other  times  hee  had  done  the
like.  The  Captaine  likewise  seeing  his  bad  dealing  with
me,  did  likewise  roundly  speake  his  minde  to  him,  for
at  this  instant  wee  were  nigh  unto  a  great  banke  of  Ice,
which  wee  might  have  doubled  if  my  course  had  not  beene
altered,  so  that  we  were  forced  to  cast  about  to  the  South-
wards, South  and  by  East  and  South  South-east,  with  the
winde  at  South-west  and  by  South  or  South-west  till  ten
a  clocke,  when  we  stood  againe  to  the  Westwards,  lying
West  North-west  and  North-west  and  by  West,  being  at
noone  in  the  latitude  of  60.  degrees  18.  minutes,  Cape
Desolation  is,  I  did  suppose,  bearing  North  and  by  West
three  or  foure  leagues  off,  the  weather  being  so  thicke
and  hasie  that  wee  could  never  see  the  Land.

The  fourth  day  betweene  one  and  two  a  clocke  in  the
morning,  it  began  to  blow  a  fresh  gale  Easterly,  we
steering  away  North  and  North  and  by  West,  we  being
at  noone  in  the  latitude  of  59.  degrees  50.  minutes,
having  made  a  West  and  by  North  way  foure  and  twentie
leagues.  This  evening  about  seven  a  clocke  we  had  very
thicke  water,  and  continued  so  about  halfe  an  houre :
about  nine  a  clocke  we  did  see  a  very  high  Hand  of  Ice
to  the  windward  of  us,  and  about  halfe  an  houre  after
with  some  drift  Ice,  they  in  the  Lion  thorow  the  feareful-
nesse  of  their  Commanders  presently  cast  about  standing
away  larboord  tackt,  till  they  did  perceive  that  I  stood
still  away  as  I  did  before,  without  impediment  of  the
Ice,  they  cast  about  againe  and  followed  us.

The  fift  in  the  morning,  being  very  faire  weather  with

323

A.D.

1605.

A  huge  high
Hand  of  Ice.

Noyse  by  the
fall

Our  people
determined  to
returne  backe
againe.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  winde  at  East  South-east,  our  course  North  North-
west, some  of  our  people  supposed  they  had  seene  the
Land :  our  Captaine  and  I  went  aboord  the  Pinnasse,
when  after  an  houre  of  our  being  there  wee  did  see  the
supposed  Land  to  be  an  hasie  fogge,  which  came  on  us
so  fast  that  wee  could  scarce  see  one  another.  But  the
Lion  being  very  nigh  unto  us,  and  it  being  very  calme,
wee  laid  the  Pinnasse  aboord  of  her,  and  so  the  Captaine
and  I  went  aboord  of  them.

The  ninth  day  about  foure  a  clocke,  it  began  to  blow
an  easie  gale  at  South-east  and  by  South,  I  directing  my
course  still  North  North-west,  when  some  of  our  people
would  not  be  perswaded  but  they  did  see  Land,  and  there-
fore I  stood  in  North  and  by  East  and  North  North-east,
till  about  three  a  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  when  wee  met
with  a  huge  and  high  Hand  of  Ice,  wee  steering  hard  to
board  the  same,  and  being  shot  a  little  to  Northwards  of
it,  there  fell  from  the  top  thereof  some  quantitie  of  Ice,
which  in  the  fall  did  make  such  a  noyse  as  though  it  had
beene  the  report  of  five  Cannons.  This  evening  wee
came  amongst  much  drift  Ice,  being  both  windwards  and
to  leewards  of  us,  yet  by  Gods  helpe  we  got  very  well
through  the  same,  when  being  cleere  I  directed  my  course
againe  North  North-west.

The  tenth  day  the  winde  at  South-west  and  by  West,
I  steering  still  North-west  and  by  North.  This  forenoone
also  wee  met  with  great  Hands  of  Ice,  it  being  very  hasie
and  thicke  weather,  the  which  did  drive  them  in  the  Lion
into  great  feare,  and  calling  to  us  very  fearfully  perswaded
me  to  alter  my  course  and  to  returne  homeward,  saying
that  it  was  impossible  for  us  by  any  working,  and  course
keeping  to  sease  upon  the  Land,  which  did  drive  all  our
companie  into  such  a  feare,  that  they  were  determined,
whether  I  would  or  not,  to  have  returned  home,  had  not
the  Captaine  as  an  honest  and  resolute  Gentleman  stood
by  mee,  protesting  to  stand  by  me  so  long  as  his  blood
was  warme,  for  the  good  of  the  Kings  Majestie,  who  had
set  us  forth,  and  also  to  the  performing  of  the  Voyage.

324

JAMES HALL  ad

1605.
Which  resolution  of  his  did  mitigate  the  stubbornenesse
of  the  people  :  yet  nothing  would  perswade  those  fearfull
persons  in the  Lion, especially  the  Steerman,  who had
rather  long  before  this time  have  returned  home, then
to  have  proceeded  on  the  action,  as  before  the  said  Steer-
man  had  done  when  he  was  imployed  eight  yeeres  before  Former
in  the  said  action  or  discoverie. Therefore  our  Captaine  discoveries.
and  my  selfe  seeing  their  backwardnesse  now,  as  before
we  had  done,  went  our  selves  the  same  evening  into  the
Pinnasse,  having  a  mightie  banke  of  Ice  of  our  larboord  4  mightie
side,  and  spake  to  them  very  friendly,  giving  order  both  hanke  °flce-
to  our  owne  ship  and  to  them,  that  they  should  keepe  a
Seaboord  of  us  (for  I  did  suppose  this  banke  of  Ice  to
lye  in  the  narrowest  of  the  Streight,  betweene  America
and  Groenland,  as  indeed  by  experience  I  found  the  same
to  be)  therefore  I  determined  to  coast  the  Ice  alongst  till
I  found  it  to  bee  driven  and  fall  away,  by  reason  of  the
swift  current  that  setteth  very  forcibly  through  the  said
Strait,  and  then  by  the  grace  of  God  to  set  over  for  a
cleere  part  of  the  coast  of  Groenland,  so  all  this  night
we  coasted  the  Ice  as  close  aboord  as  we  could  East  North-
east  and North-east and  by  East, till  about midnight,
when  we  found  the  said  banke  to  fall  away.

The  eleventh  day,  being  cleere  of  the  Ice,  I  stood  away
North  North-east  till  sixe  a  clocke,  when  we  met  with  [III.iv.817.]
another  great  banke  of  Ice,  at  which  time  the  Commanders  Anotherbanke
of  the  Lion  being  now  againe  very  fearfull  as  before,  of  Ice.
came  up  to  our  ship,  perswading  the  Shipper  and  Com-
panie  to  leave  us,  and  to  stand  to  Seaboord  with  them.
But the Shipper  who was  also  Lieftenant  of  the ship,
being  more  honestly  minded,  said,  that  he  would  follow
us  so  long  as  he  could  :  with  which  answere  they  departed,
using  many  spitefull  wordes,  both  of  the  Captaine  and
mee, saying we were determined to betray the Kings
ships,  at  which  time  they  shot  off  a  peece  of  Ordnance,  The  Lions
and so stood away from us. I seeing their perverse  departing
dealing  let  them  goe,  wee  coasting  alongst  the  Ice  North  ^ro
North-east  with  a  fresh  gale,  it  being  extreme  cold  with

325

A.D.
1605.

A  mightie
current.

Sight  of  Land.

Mount
Cunningham.

Queene  Annes
Cape.

Queene
Sophias  Cape.

Christians
Foord.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

snow  and  hayse,  the  Sea  also  going  very  high  by  reason|
of  a  mightie  current,  the  which  I  found  to  set  very  force-!
ably  through  this  Strait,  which  being  nigh  unto  America!
side,  setteth  to  the  Northwards,  and  on  the  other  sidej
to  the  contrarie,  as  by  proofe  I  found.  So  coasting  alongsti
this  mayne  banke  of  Ice,  which  seemed  as  it  had  beenei
a  firme  Continent  till  about  eleven  a  clocke,  when  weej
espyed  the  Ice  to  stretch  to  windward,  on  our  weather
bow  wee  setting  our  starboord  takes  aboord,  stood  away
East  and  by  South  with  the  winde  at  South  and  by  East,
till  wee  had  doubled  a  Seaboord  the  Ice,  at  which  time
I  directed  my  course  directly  over  for  the  cleere  coast  of
Groineland,  East  and  by  North,  which  course  I  directed
all  the  Frost  to  goe,  wee  standing  away  our  course  all
this  night,  it  being  very  much  snow  and  sleete.

The  twelfth  day  in  the  morning  about  foure  a  clocke,
we  espyed  the  Land  of  Groenland,  being  a  very  high
ragged  Land,  the  tops  of  the  Mountaines  being  all  covered
with  snow,  yet  wee  found  all  this  coast  utterly  without
Ice,  wee  standing  into  the  Land  espyed  a  certaine  Mount
above  all  the  rest,  which  Mount  is  the  best  marke  on
all  this  Coast,  the  which  I  named  Mount  Cunningham
after  the  name  of  my  Captaine.  We  comming  into  the
shoare  betweene  two  Capes  or  Head-lands,  the  Land  lying
betweene  them  North  and  by  East,  and  South  and  by
West,  the  Southmost  of  which  Forelands  I  named  Queene
Annes  Cape,  after  the  name  of  the  Queenes  Majestie
of  Denmarke,  and  the  Northermost  of  the  two  I  called
Queene  Sophias  Cape,  after  the  name  of  the  Queene
Mother.

So  standing  into  the  Land,  we  came  amongst  certaine
Hands,  where  sayling  in  still  amongst  the  same  unto  the
Southermost  foot  of  the  foresaid  Mount,  wee  came  into
a  goodly  Bay,  which  wee  did  suppose  to  be  a  River,  being
on  both  sides  of  the  same  very  high  and  steepe  Moun-
taines, wee  named  the  same  King  Christianus  Foord,  after
the  name  of  the  Kings  Majestie  of  Denmarke.  So  sayling
up  this  Bay,  which  wee  supposed  to  bee  a  River,  the  space

326

JAMES HALL  ad

1605.
of  sixe  or  seven  English  leagues,  finding  in  all  that  space
no  anchoring,  being  marvellous  deepe  water,  till  at  the
length  we  had  sayled  up  the  Bay  the  foresaid  distance,
at  length  I  brought  the  Ship  and  Pinnasse  to  an  anchor  Our
in sixteene fathom shellv ground, at which time our  Anchoring.
Captaine and I went aland, giving thankes unto God
for  his  unspeakable  benefits,  who  had  thus  dealt  with  us
as to bring us to this desired Land into so good an
Harbour ; which done, the Captaine and I walked up  Our  first
the  Hills, to see if  wee  could see  any  of  the  people,  landing  in
having  our  Boat  to  row  alongst  with  us. Having  gone  Groinknd.
alongst  the  River  side  upon  the  tops  of  the  Hills  the
space  of  three  or  foure  English  miles ;  at  length  looking
towards  our  Boat,  wee saw  upon  the  River  side  foure
of  the  people  standing  by  their  Houses  or  rather  Tents,  Our  first  sight
covered  over  with  Seale-skins. Wee  comming  downe  the  of  the  people.
Hills  towards  them  (they  having  espyed  us)  three  of  them
ranne  away  upon  the  Land,  and  the  other  tooke  his  Boat
and  rowed  away  leaving  their  Tents. Wee  being  come
downe  the  Hills  called  to  our  men  in  the  Boat,  and  entring
into  her  rowed  towards  the  Savage  who  was  in  his  Boat  Boat  of  Seale
made  of  Seale-skins. Hee  holding  up  his  hands  towards  &**-
the  Sunne,  cryed  Yota ;  wee  doing  the  like,  and  shewing
to  him  a  knife,  hee  presently  came  unto  us  and  tooke  the
same  of  the  Captaine. When  hee  had  presently  rowed
away  from  us,  wee  rowed  a  little  after  him,  and  seeing
it  was  but  in  vaine  wee  rowed  aland  againe  and  went Our  entring
into  their  Tents,  which  wee  found  covered  (as  is  aforesaid)  tnt0  thetr
with  Seale-skins. Wee  finding  by  the  houses  two  Dogs  Tents-
being  very  rough  and  fat,  like  in  shape  to  a  Foxe,  with
very  great  abundance  of  Seale  fish,  lying  round  about
their  Tents  a  drying,  with  innumerable  quantities  of  a
little  fish  unto  a  Smelt  (which  fish  are  commonly  called
Sardeenes)  of  which  fish  in  all  the  Rivers  are  wonderfull
skuls, these  fishes  also  lay  a  drying  round  about  their
Tents  in  the  Sunne  in  great  heapes,  with  other  sundrie
kindes. Then entring into their Tents, wee found
certaine  Seale  skins  and  Foxe  skins  very  well  drest ;  also

327

A.D.

1605.

Eaters  of
Dogs.

[III.  iv.  8 1 8.]
Of  the  other
sort  of  Boats.
There  is  one
of  these  Boats
in  Sir  T.
Smiths  Hall.

The  manner
of  killing  of
their  great  fish
or  Seales.

Their  comming
to  our  ships.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

certaine  Coates  of  Seale  skins  and  Fowle  skins  with  the
feather  side  inward :  also  certaine  Vessels  boyling  upon
a  little  Lampe,  the  Vessell  being  made  after  the  manner
of  a  little  Pan,  the  bottome  whereof  is  made  of  stone,
and  the  sides  of  Whales  finnes ;  in  which  Vessell  was  some
little  quantitie  of  Seale  fish  boyling  in  Seale  oyle ;  and
searching  further,  wee  did  finde  in  another  of  their  Vessels
a  Dogs  head  boyled,  so  that  I  perswaded  my  selfe  that
they  eate  Dogs  flesh.  Moreover,  by  their  houses  there
did  lye  two  great  Boates,  being  covered  under  with  Seales
skins,  but  aloft  open  after  the  forme  of  our  Boates,  being
about  twentie  foote  in  length,  having  in  each  of  them
eight  or  ten  tosts  or  seates  for  men  to  sit  on,  which  Boates,
as  afterwards  I  did  perceive,  is  for  the  transporting  of
their  Tents  and  baggage  from  place  to  place,  and  for  a
saile  they  have  the  guts  of  some  beast,  which  they  dresse
very  fine  and  thin,  which  they  sow  together.

Also  the  other  sorts  of  their  Boats  are  such  as  Captaine
Frobisher,  and  Master  John  Davis  brought  into  England,
which  is  but  for  one  man,  being  cleane  covered  over  with
Seale  skins  artificially  dressed  except  one  place  to  sit  in,
being  within  set  out  with  certaine  little  ribs  of  Timber,
wherin  they  use  to  row  with  one  Oare  more  swiftly,  then
our  men  can  doe  with  ten,  in  which  Boates  they  fish  being
disguised  in  their  Coates  of  Seale  skinnes,  whereby  they
deceive  the  Seales,  who  take  them  rather  for  Seales  then
men  ;  which  Seales  or  other  fish  they  kill  in  this  manner.
They  shoot  at  the  Seales  or  other  great  fish  with  their
Darts,  unto  which  they  use  to  tye  a  bladder,  which  doth
boy  up  the  fish  in  such  manner  that  by  the  said  means
they  catch  them.  So  comming  aboord  our  ships  having
left  certaine  trifles  behind  us  in  their  Tents,  and  taking
nothing  away  with  us,  within  halfe  an  houre  after  our
comming  aboord,  the  Savage  to  whom  wee  had  given
the  Knife  with  three  others,  which  we  did  suppose  to  be
them  which  we  saw  first,  came  rowing  to  our  ships  in
their  Boats,  holding  up  their  hands  to  the  Sunne,  and
striking  of  their  brests,  crying  Yota. We  doing  the  like,

328

JAMES HALL  a.d.

1605.

they  came  to  our  shippe  or  Captaine :  giving  them  bread
and  Wine,  which,  as  it  did  seeme,  they  made  little  account
of ;  yet  they  gave  us  some  of  their  dryed  fishes,  at  which
time  there  came  foure  more,  who  with  the  other  bartered
their  Coats,  and  some  Seale  skinnes,  with  our  folke  for
old  Iron  Nailes,  and  other  trifles  as  Pinnes  and  Needles,
with  which  they  seemed  to  be  wonderfully  pleased,  and
having  so  done,  holding  their  hands  towards  the  Sunne
they  departed.

The  thirteenth,  there  came  fourteene  of  them  to  our
ship,  bringing  with  them  Seale  skinnes,  Whale  Finnes,
with  certayne  of  their  Darts  and  Weapons,  which  they
bartered  with  our  people,  as  before. This  day  I  made
observation  of  the  latitude,  and  found  this  Roadsted  in  observation  of
the  latitude  of  66.  degrees  25.  minutes,  and  the  mouth  the  latitude.
of  this  Bay  or  Sound,  lyeth  in  the  latitude  of  66.  degrees
30.  minutes. Also  here  I  made  observation  of  the  tydes, observation  of
and  found  an  East  and  West  Moone  to  make  a  full  Sea,  the  tides.
upon  the  Full  and  Change,  more  it  floweth,  three  fathome
and  an  halfe  water,  right  up  and  downe.

The  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  dayes  we  rode  still,  the

people  comming  to  us,  and  bartering  with  us  for  pieces

of  old Iron, or  Nailes, Whale Finnes, Seales Skinnes,

Morse  Teeth,  and  a  kind  of  Home  which  we  doe  suppose

to  be  Unicornes  Home,  at  which  time  the  Captaine  went

with our  Boat, to the  place  where  we had seene  their

Tents,  but  found  them  removed ;  and  the  other  fish  and

the  Seale  fish  lying  still  a  drying  : the  Captaine  taking

a  quantitie  of  the  Sea  fish  into  the  Boat,  caused  some  of

the Mariners to boyle it ashoare, the Savages helping

our  men  to  doe  the  same,  the  Captaine  using  them  very

friendly,  they  having  made  about  a  barrell  and  an  halfe

of  Oyle, leaving  it  aland all night, thinking to bring

ithe  same  aboord  in  the  morning. But  the  Savages  the

same  night  let  the  same  forth. Yet  notwithstanding,  the

Zaptaine  shewed  no  manner  of  discontent  towards  them. n ,  . ..
nni •  t  «i -r»«  t  Uur  departing

The  sixteenth  day,  I  went  into  the  Pinnasse,  to  discover  inthePinnasse

:ertaine Harbours to the Northwards, the wind being  from  the  ship.

329

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605.

at  East  South-east,  I  loosed  and  set  saile,  but  instantly
it  fell  calme,  and  so  continued  about  an  houre.  When
the  wind  came  opposite  at  the  West  North-west  a  stifle
gale,  we  spending  the  tide  till  the  floud  being  come,  I
put  roome  againe,  and  came  to  an  Anchor  a  little  from
the  Frost  in  twelve  fathomes  sandie  ground.  About  one
in  the  afternoone,  the  Frost  departed  from  us  further  up
the  Bay,  which  we  did  suppose  to  be  a  River,  promising
to  abide  our  returne  two  and  twentie  dayes.

The  seventeenth  day,  the  wind  continuing  at  the  West
North-west  blowing  very  hard,  wee  rode  still,  the  people
comming  and  bartering  with  us.

The  eighteenth  day,  the  winde  and  weather  as  before,
wee  riding  still.  This  forenoone  there  came  to  the  number
of  thirtie  of  them,  and  bartered  with  us  as  they  had  done
before,  which  done,  they  went  ashoare  at  a  certaine  point
about  a  flight-shot  off  us,  and  there  upon  a  sudden  began
The  Savages  to  throw  stones  with  certaine  Slings  which  they  had  with-
begin  to  sling  out  any  injury  offered  at  all ;  yea,  they  did  sling  soi
stones  at  us.  fierceiy3  tnat  we  COuld  scarce  stand  on  the  hatches.  I
seeing  their  brutish  dealing,  caused  the  Gunner  to  shoot;
a  Falcon  at  them,  which  lighted  a  little  over  them,  at;
which  time  they  went  to  their  Boates,  and  rowed  away.!
About  one  a  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  they  came  againe,
to  us  crying  in  their  accustomed  manner,  Yliont,  they  being
sixtie  three  in  number,  the  shipper  inquired  of  me  whether
they  should  come  to  us  or  not,  I  willed  him  to  have  all
things  in  a  readinesse,  they  comming  in  the  meane  time  k
nigh  to  the  Pinnasse,  I  did  perceive  certaine  of  them  »
to  have  great  bagges  full  of  stones,  they  whispered  one  «
They  sling  with  another  began  to  sling  stones  unto  us.  I  presently,
stones  againe.  s^ot  0ff  a  little  Pistol  which  I  had  for  the  Gunner,  and
the  rest  of  the  folke  to  discharge,  which  indeed  they  did.
but  whether  they  did  hurt  or  kill  any  of  them  or  notj
I  cannot  certainly  tell,  but  they  rowed  all  away  making  a
howling  and  hideous  noise :  going  to  the  same  point,
whereas  in  the  forenoone  they  had  beene,  being  no  soonei
come  on  Land,  but  from  the  Hils  they  did  so  assaile  ue

330

JAMES HALL  a.d.

1605.
with  stones,  with  their  slings,  that  it  is  incredible  to  report,
in  such  sort  that  no  man  could  stand  upon  the  Hatches,
till  such  time  as  I  commanded  for  to  lose  sailes  and  bonnets
two  mens  height,  to  shield  us  from  the  force  of  the  stones,
and  also  did  hide  us  from  their  sight ;  so  that  we  did
ply  our  Muskets  and  other  Peeces  such  as  wee  had  at
them  :  but  their  subtiltie  was  such,  that  as  soone  as  they
did  see  fire  given  to  the  Peeces,  they  would  suddenly
ducke  downe  behind  the  Cliffes,  and  when  they  were  [III.iv.819.]
discharged,  then  sling  their  stones  fiercely  at  us  againe.
Thus  having  continued  there  till  foure  a  clocke,  they
departed  away.

The  nineteenth  day  in  the  morning,  about  foure  a
clocke  it  beeing  calme,  I  departed  from  this  Roadsted,
so  causing  our  men  to  row  alongst  the  shoare,  till  the  tide
of  the  ebbe  was  bent,  at  which  time  it  began  to  blow  a
fresh  gale  at  North-west  and  by  West,  we  turning  downe
till  about  two  a  clocke,  when  the  tide  of  floud  being
come :  when  I  came  to  an  Anchor  in  an  excellent  Haven,
on  the  South  side  of  Cunninghams  Mount,  which  for  the
goodnesse  thereof, I named  Denmarkes  Haven.  Denmarks

The  twentieth  day,  in  the  morning  the  weather  beeing  Haven.
very  rainie  with  a  little  aire  of  wind,  I  loosed  and  caused
to  row  forth  of  the  foresaid  Harbour,  and  comming  forth
betweene  the  Hands  and  the  maine,  the  people  being  as
it  seemed  looking  for  us  espied  us:  making  a  hideous  The  people
noise,  at  which  time  at  an  instant  were  gathered  together  come  aga^-
about  seventie-three  Boats  with  men  rowing  to  us.  I
seeing  them,  thought  it  best  to  prevent  the  worst,  because
we  were  to  come  hither  againe  :  therefore  to  dissemble
the  matter,  I  thought  it  best  to  enter  into  barter  with
them  for  some  of  their  Darts,  Bowes  and  Arrowes,  wee
finding  every  one  of  them  to  bee  extraordinarily  furnished
therwith  :  so  rowing  forth  to  Sea  amongst  the  Hands,
there  stil  came  more  Boats  to  the  number  of  one  hundred
and  thirtie  persons,  they  still  rowing  by  us,  made  signes
to  us  to  goe  to  anchor  amongst  some  of  the  Hands :  but
1  preventing  their  devices,  made  certaine  Skonces  with

33i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605.

our  sailes,  to  defend  us  from  their  Stones,  Arrowes  and

The  subtiltie Darts. They  seeing  this,  went  certaine  of  them  from

of  the  Savages.  us  rQwing  to  certaine  Hands,  to  which  they  did  thinke

wee  would  come : leaving  no  more  but  about  ten  men

and  Boates  about  us,  who  rowed  alongst  the  space  of

an  houre  with  us,  making  signes  of  friendship  to  us. At

length  perceiving,  that  wee  were  not  minded  to  goe  forth

amongst  these  Ilands,  upon  which  the  rest  of  their  folke

were,  they  threw  certaine  shels  and  trifles  into  the  Boat,

making  signes  and  tokens  to  fetch  them,  the  which  my

Boy  called  William  Huntries  did. He  being  in  the  Boat,

My  Boy  shot they  presently  shot  him  through  both  the  buttockes  with

with  a  Dart. a  j)ar^  at  which  time  they  rowed  from  us,  they  mustering

upon  the  Ilands  to  the  number  of  three  hundred  persons,

keeping themselves farre enough from our danger.

About  sixe  a  clocke  this  Evening  it  began  to  blow  a  faire

gale  Easterly,  we  getting  off  to  Sea,  stood  all  this  night

North  and  by  East  alongst  the  Land.

A  Topographicall  Description  of  the  Land  as  I  did
discover  the  same.

NOw  having  proceeded  for  the  discoverie  of  the  Coast
and  Harbours  so  farre,  and  so  long  time  as  the  time
limited  to  me,  therefore  I  thinke  it  convenient,  to  makei
a  briefe  description  of  the  same,  according  as  by  my  short
experience  I  found  the  same  to  be.
The  descrip- The  Land  of  Groenland  is  a  very  high,  ragged  and
tionoftheland  mountainous  Countrey,  being  all  alongst  the  Coast  broken
of roen  an  .  jjanc[S)  makmg  verv  goodly  Sounds  and  Harbours,  having
also  in  the  Land  very  many  good  Rivers  and  Bayes,  into
some  of  which  I  entred  sayling  up  the  same  the  space
of  ten  or  twelve  English  leagues,  finding  the  same  very
navigable,  with  great  abundance  of  fish  of  sundrie  sorts.
Ofthefer- The  Land  also  in  all  places  wheresoever  I  came,  seemed
tihty  of  the to De  very  fertile,  according  to  the  Climate  wherein  it
oun  *y- lyeth : for  betweene  the  Mountaynes  was  most  pleasant

332

JAMES HALL  a.d.

1605.
Plaines  and  Valleyes,  in  such  sort  as  if  I  had  not  seene
the  same,  I  could  not  have  beleeved,  that  such  a  fertile
Land in shew  could bee in these Northerne Regions.
There  is  also  in  the  same  great  store  of  Fowle,  as  Ravens,  Store  offowk.
Crowes,  Partridges,  Pheasants, Sea-mewes,  Guiles,  with
other sundry sorts. Of Beasts I have not seene any,
except  blacke  Foxes,  of  which  there  are  very  many. Also  Blacke  Foxes.
as I doe suppose there are many Deere, because that
comming to certaine places  where the people had had
their  Tents,  we  found  very  many  Harts  Homes,  with
the  bones  of  other  beasts  round  about  the  same. Also
going  up  into  the  Land  wee  saw  the  footing  and  dunging
of  divers  beasts,  which  we  did  suppose  to  be  deere,  and
other  beasts  also,  the  footing  of  one  which  wee  found
to  be  eight  inches  over,  yet,  notwithstanding  we  did  see
none  of  them  : for  going  some  two  or  three  miles  from
the  Pinnasse  we  returned  againe  to  goe  aboord. More-
over, in  the  Rivers  we  found  sundry  sorts  of  Fishes,  as  Fishes.
Seales,  Whales,  Salmons,  with  other  sorts  of  fishes  in  great
abundance. As concerning the Coast, all  alongst it is  of  the  Coast.
a  very  good  and  faire  Land,  having  very  faire  shoalding
of  the same : for being three  English leagues  off the
same,  I  found  very  faire  shoalding  in  fifteene  fathomes,
and  comming  neerer  the  same  fourteene,  twelve,  and  tenne
fathomes  very  faire  sandie  ground. As  concerning  the
people,  they  are  (as  I  doe  suppose)  a  kinde  of  Samoites,  Of  the  people.
or  wandring  Nation travelling  in  the Summer  time  in
Companies  together,  first  to  one  place,  and  having  stayed
in  that  place  a  certayne  time  in  hunting  and  fishing  for
Deere  and  Seales  with  other  fish,  streight  they  remove
themselves with their Tents and baggage to another.  T^e  cojour  0r
They  are  men  of  a  reasonable  stature,  being  browne  of  the  people.
colour,  very  like  to  the  people  of  the  East  and  West  The  people
Indies. They  be  very  active  and  warlike,  as  we  did  per-  verJ  actwe-

ceive  in  their  Skirmishes  with  us,  in  using  their  Slings  Jheyeatthetr
. t-.  . .  ,  r~*  J . . °  & meat  most  part

and  Darts  very  nimbly. Iney  eat  their  meate  raw,  or  raWt

a  little  perboyled  either  with  bloud,  Oyle,  or  a  little  water,  [III. iv. 820.]

which  they  doe  drinke. They  apparell  themselves  in  the

333

A.D.
1605.

Of  their
apparell.

Of  their
weapons.

We  could  see
no  Wood.
Drift-wood.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

skinnes  of  such  beasts  as  they  kill,  but  especially  with
Seales  skins  and  fowle  skins,  dressing  the  skins  very  soft
and  smooth,  with  the  haire  and  feathers  on,  wearing  in
Winter  the  haire  and  feather  sides  inwards,  and  in  Summer
outwards.  Their  Weapons  are  Slings,  Darts,  Arrowes,
having  their  Bowes  fast  tyed  together  with  sinewes ;  their
Arrowes  have  but  two  feathers,  the  head  of  the  same
being  for  the  most  part  of  bone,  made  in  manner  and
forme  of  a  Harping  Iron.  As  concerning  their  Darts,
they  are  of  sundry  sorts  and  fashions.  What  knowledge
they  have  of  God  I  cannot  certainly  say,  but  I  suppose
them  to  bee  Idolaters,  worshipping  the  Sunne.  The
Countrey  (as  is  aforesaid)  seemeth  to  be  very  fertile,  yet
could  I  perceive  or  see  no  wood  to  grow  thereon.  Wee
met  all  alongst  this  Coast  much  Drift-wood,  but  whence
it  commeth  I  know  not.  For  coasting  all  this  Coast
alongst  from  the  latitude  of  66.  degrees  and  an  halfe,
untill  the  latitude  of  69.  degrees,  I  found  many  goodly
Sounds,  Bayes,  and  Rivers :  giving  names  unto  divers
of  them,  and  purposing  to  proceed  further,  the  folke  in
the  Pinnasse  with  me  did  earnestly  intreate  me  to  returne
to  the  ship  againe,  alleaging  this,  that  if  we  came  not
in  convenient  time,  the  people  in  the  ship  would  mutinie :
and  so  returne  home  before  we  came :  the  which  indeed
had  fallen  forth,  if  the  Captaine  as  an  honest  Gentleman
had  not  by  severe  meanes  withstood  their  attempts,  who
would  needes  contrarie  to  their  promises  have  beene  gone
home  within  eight  dayes  after  my  departure  from  them.
But  the  Captaine  respecting  his  promise  to  mee,  would
by  no  meanes  consent,  but  withstood  them  both  by  faire
meanes  and  other  wayes.  So  that  upon  the  seventh  day
of  July,  I  returned  again  into  the  Kings  Foord,  which
they  in  the  ship  had  found  to  be  a  Bay,  and  comming  to
the  place  where  wee  had  left  the  ship  hoping  to  have
found  them  there,  I  saw  upon  a  certaine  point  a  Warlocke
of  stones,  whereby  I  did  perceive  that  they  were  gone
downe  the  Ford.  So  the  tide  of  ebbe  being  come,  it
being  calme  we  rowed  downe  the  Foord,  finding  in  the

334

it

JAMES HALL  a.d.

1605.
mouth  of  the  same  amongst  the  Hands,  many  good  Sounds
and  Harbours.

The  tenth  day  of  July  the  wind  being  at  North  North-  July  1605.
west,  I  beeing  in  a  certaine  Sound  amongst  the  Hands,
it  being  high  water  I  weighed,  stood  West  forth  of  the
Foord  going  to  Sea  on  the  South  side  between  a  little
Hand  and  the  Maine,  which  Hand  at  our  first  comming,
we  called  Frost  Hand,  after  the  name  of  the  ship : we  Frost  Hand.
espied on the South sides certaine Warlockes set up,
whereupon I suspected that the Frost might be there,
commanded  the  Gunner  to  shoot  off  a  Peece  of  Ordnance,
they  presently  answered  us  againe  with  two  other. We
seeing  the  smoake  (but  heard  no  report)  bore  in  to  them,  Our  meeting
comming  to  an  Anchor  in  a  very  good  Sound  by  them,  againe  with
and  found  them  all  in  health  : the  Captaine  being  very  tne  shlP-
glad  of  our  comming,  forasmuch  as  hee  had  very  much
'trouble  with  the  company  for  the  cause  aforesaid. Also
in  the  time  of  our  absence  the  people  did  very  much
villanie  to  them  in  the  ship,  so  that  the  Captaine  tooke
three  of  them;  other  of  them  also  he  slew,  but  the  three  Three  of  the
which  he  tooke  he  used  with  all  kindnesse,  giving  them  PeoPle  tafien-
Mandillions  and  Breeches  of  very  good  cloth,  also  Hose,
jShoes,  and  Shirts  off  his  own  backe. This  afternoone,  I
Iwith  my  Boy  came  againe  aboord  the  ship,  taking  in  this
Evening  all  our  provision  of  water.

The  eleventh  day,  the  wind  being  at  North  North-east,
<we  set  saile  forth  of  the  Sound  which  we  named  Frost
;Sound,  but  before  our  comming  forth  of  the  same  our
Captaine  commanded  a  young  man  whose  name  was
'Simon,  by  the  expresse  commandement  of  the  State-holder
of  Denmarke  to  bee  set  aland,  wee  also  in  the  Pinnasse  Two  men  set
set  another  aland,  they  both  being  Malefactors,  the  which  <da*d-
was  done  before  our  comming  away,  we  giving  to  them
things  necessarie,  as  victuall  and  other  things  also.  Thus
having  committed  both  the  one  and  the  other  to  God,
wee  set  saile  homewards,  we  standing  forth  to  Sea  South-
west, and  South-west  and  by  West  till  noone,  when  making
observation,  Queene  Annes  Cape  bearing  South  and  by

335

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605.

East  halfe  Easterly  some  ten  leagues,  I  found  my  selfe
in  the  latitude  of  66.  degrees  10.  minutes,  when  I  directed
my  course  South  South-west  till  sixe  aclocke  when  wee
were  amongst  much  Drift  Ice,  being  to  leeward  two  points
upon  our  lee-bow,  so  that  I  was  forst  to  lie  off  West
North-west  till  we  were  cleere  of  the  same,  at  which  time
I  directed  my  course  South-west  and  by  South,  wee  sayling
so  all  the  night  following.

The  twelfth  day,  the  wind  at  North  North-east,  wee

went  away South-west  and  by  South  till  ten  a  clocke,

when  we  were  amongst  more  Drift  Ice,  wee  being  againe

to  lie  West  North-west,  to  get  cleere  of  the  same,  which

we  did  about  noone,  we  having  this  day  and  the  Evening

before  a  mightie  hollow  Sea,  which  I  thought  to  be  a

A  great  current,  the  which  setteth  thorow  Fretum  Davis  to  the

current  setting  Southwards,  as  by  experience  I  proved  :  for  making  obser-

w  *rd °Ut  ~ vat^on  tms  day  at  noone5  we  found  our  selves  in  the

latitude of 62. degrees 40. minutes, whereas the day

before  we  were  but  in  the  latitude  of  66.  degrees 10

minutes,  having  made  by  account  a  South  and  by  West

way  about  ten  leagues. This  afternoone  I  directed  my

course  South  South-west.

The  thirteenth  day,  the  wind  as  before,  we  steered  still

South  and  by  West,  being  at  noone  in  the  latitude  of

60.  degrees 17.  minutes,  going  at  the  same  time  away

South  and  by  East. This  foresaid  current  I  did  find  to

set  alongst  the  Coast  of  Gronland  South  and  by  East

The  fourteenth  day,  close  weather,  being  an  easie  gale

we  steering  South-east  and  by  East. The  fifteenth  day,

[III. iv. 82 1.]  stil  close  weather  til  noone,  we  steering  as  before,  being

in  the  latitude  of  59.  degrees. This  day  at  noone  I  wentj

away  East  South-east ;  this  afternoone  it  was  hasie  and

Drift  he. still  weather,  when  we  had  sight  of  some  Drift  Ice. The

16.  day,  close  weather  with  the  wind  at  North-west  and

by  West,  our  course  East  South-east  til  about  ten  aclock,

A  mighty  bank  when  we  met  with  a  mightie  bank  of  Ice  to  windward

°*  of  us,  being  by  supposition  seven  or  eight  leagues  long,

wee  steering  South  South-east  to  get  cleere  of  the  same.

336

JAMES HALL  a.d.

1605.
We  met  all  alongst  this  Ice  a  mightie  scull  of  Whales.  A  great  scul of
Moreover,  wee  light  with  a  great  current,  which  as  nigh  Whales.
as we could suppose, set West North-west over for &eat
America. This  day at noone, the weather  being  very
thicke, I could have no observation, this Evening by
reason  of  the  Ice,  wee  were  forced  to  lye  South  and  by
West,  and  South  South-west,  to  get  cleere  of  the  same,
amongst  which  we  came  by  divers  huge  Hands  of  Ice.

The  seventeenth  day,  being  cleere  of  the  Ice,  about
foure  in  the  morning,  I  directed  my  course  South-east  by
South  till  noone,  at  which  time  I  went  away  East  and  by
South,  the  weather  being  very  haysie  and  thicke  :  about
midnight  it  fell  calme,  the  wind  comming  up  Easterly.

The  eighteenth  day,  the  wind  still  Easterly,  we  lying
East  South-east,  away  under  a  couple  of  courses  larboord
tackt.  This  day  in  the  forenoone,  we  saw  certayne  Hands
of  Ice.  The  nineteenth  day,  the  wind  still  Easterly  with
the  weather  very  hasie.

The  first  day  of  August  also  it  was  very  thicke  weather,
with  a  faire  gale  at  South-west  and  by  West.  This  fore-
noone wee  met  with  a  scull  of  Herrings,  so  that  I  knew
wee  were  not  farre  from  the  lies  of  Orkney,  so  having
a  shrinke  at  noone,  I  found  us  in  the  latitude  of  58.
degrees  40.  minutes,  at  which  time  I  sounded  with  the
deepest  Lead,  finding  42.  fathomes  redde  sandie  ground,
tc  with  some  blacke  dents.  This  Evening  betweene  five
;:  ind  sixe  a  clocke  wee  sounded  againe,  when  we  had  no
more  but  twentie  fathomes  dent  ground,  whereby  I  knew
that  we  were  faire  by  the  shoare,  when  some  of  our  men
ooking  forth  presently,  espied  one  of  the  Hands  of  We  fell  with
Orkeney,  it  being  very  thicke,  wee  cast  about,  and  stood  Orkney.
with  a  small  sayle  to  Seaboord  againe,  we  lying  West
^orth-west  off  all  this  night.

The  tenth  day,  about  five  in  the  morning,  we  came
hwart  of  the  Castle  of  Elsonvere,  where  we  discharged
ertaine  of  our  Ordnance,  and  comming  to  an  Anchor  in
he  Road,  the  Captaine  with  my  selfe  went  ashoare,  and
learing  of  his  Majesties  being  at  Copeman-Haven,  wee
xiv  337  Y

A.D.

1605.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

presently  went  aboord  againe,  and  set  sayle  comming  tf
thither  about  two  a  clocke.  The  Pinnasse  also  which
he  had  lost  at  Sea,  in  which  my  Countreyman  John  Knight
was  Commander,  came  also  the  same  night  about  foure
a  clocke,  both  they  and  we  being  all  in  good  health,  praised  >
bee  Almightie  God. Amen.

Chap.  XV.

The  second  Voyage  of  Master  James  Hall,  forth  of
Denmarke  into  Groenland,  in  the  yeere  1606
contracted.

:et

Godske
Lindeno.

Captaine
Cunningham.

Hans  Browne
a  Gentleman
of  Norway.
Rickerson  a
Dane.

Andres  Nell  of
Bergen.

E  departed  from  Copeman-Haven,  the
seven  and  twentieth  of  May,  in  the
yeere  of  our  Redemption  1606.  with
foure  ships  and  a  Pinnasse.  The  Frost
beeing  Admirall,  wherein  went  for
principall  Captaine  of  the  Fleet  Captaine
Godske  Lindeno  a  Danish  Gentleman
with  my  selfe,  being  under  God  Pilot  Major  of  the
Fleet.  In  the  Lyon  which  was  Vice-Admirall,  went  for
Captaine  and  Commander,  Captaine  John  Cunningham  a
Scottish  Gentleman,  who  was  with  me  the  yeere  before.
In  the  Yewren  went  Hans  Browne,  a  Gentleman  of
Norway.  In  the  smal  ship  called  The  Gilleflowre,  went
one  Castine  Rickerson  a  Dane.  In  the  Pinnasse  called
the  Cat,  went  one  shipper  Andres  Nell,  of  Bergen  in
Norway.  So  by  the  providence  of  God,  wee  weighed
and  set  saile  about  sixe  a  clocke  in  the  Evening,  with  a
faire  gale  at  South  South-west,  comming  to  an  Anchor
in  Elsonoure  Road  to  take  in  our  water.

The  nine  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  we  shot  off
a  Peece  of  Ordnance,  for  all  the  Captaines  and  Com-
manders to  come  aboord  of  us,  who  being  come,  our
Captaine  commanded  the  Kings  Orders  to  bee  read,  which
done,  they  returned  aboord,  at  which  time  wee  weighed
with  a  faire  gale  at  East  North-east,  standing  away  North

338

tt

JAMES HALL  a.d.

1606.

and  by  West  till  I  had  brought  the  Cole  North-east  and
by  East  off,  when  I  steered  away  North  North-west,  and
North-west  and  by  North.  This  Evening  about  five  a
clocke,  I  set  the  Annold,  it  bearing  West  halfe  Northerly,
three  leagues  and  an  halfe.  All  this  Evening  wee  stood
away  North-west  and  by  North.

The  thirtieth  day,  the  wind  at  East  South-east,  wee
steering  as  before,  this  morning  about  sixe  a  clocke,  the
Lesold  bore  West  and  by  North  of  us  sixe  leagues  off.
At  five  this  Evening,  the  Scaw  bearing  West  South-west
five  leagues,  I  directed  my  course  West  North-west,  with
the  wind  at  North-east  and  by  East.

The  one  and  thirtieth  in  the  morning,  very  hasie  weather
with  a  stiffe  gale  at  East  North-east,  we  steering  West  [III. iv. 822.]
North-west  away,  till  about  nine  a  clocke,  when  we  had
a  shrinke  of  the  Land  which  was  the  wester  gate  of
Mardo,  we  steering  alongst  the  Land.  Wee  came  to  an
inchor  in  Flecorie,  where  we  were  to  make  and  take  in  Our  comming
wood and  water.  to  Flecorie.

The  second  of  June  we  weighed,  and  came  forth  of  Our
he  Harbour  of  Flecorie  about  sixe  in  the  morning,  having  departure.
i  fresh  gale  at  East  North-east. About  eleven  at  noone,
[  set  the  Nase  of  Norway,  it  bearing  North  North-west
oure  leagues  off. The  fourth  day  in  the  morning  about
:wo  a  clock,  we  were  faire  by  the  high  Land  of  the  Yeddoe,
[  causing  to  cast  about  stood  to  the  Southwards,  West
ind  by  South  and  sometimes  West. This  day  at  noone,
[  found  my  selfe  in  the  latitude  of  57.  degrees  45.  minutes,
:he  Nase  of  Norway  bearing  East  North-east  two  and
:wentie  leagues  off. This  day  at  noone  also  I  cast  about
md stood to the Northwards, lying North with the
temme,  having  the  winde  at  North  North-west. This
ifternoone  dyed  one  of  our  Groinlanders  called  Oxo. All  One  of  our
his  evening,  and  the  night  following,  the  winde  as  before,  Groenlanders
ve  lying  also  North  with  little  winde.  2e, £- .

-ri  11  1  -i  n 1  11 Thefift  and

1  he seventh day, the winde at boutn-west and by  s-lxt  mostwhat
jouth  and  South  South-west,  we  steering  West  and  West  calme.
.nd  by  North. This  day  at  noone  we  were  in  the  latitude

339

A.D.

[606.

Shotland.

Our  Groen-
lander  dyed.

Sight  of  Land
with  Ice.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  58.  degrees  40.  minutes.  The  tenth  day  about  foure
in  the  morning,  it  began  to  blow  a  fresh  gale  at  East  and
by  South,  at  which  time  we  stood  alongst  the  Land  to
the  Southward,  till  I  had  brought  the  South  Head  of
Shotland,  called  Swinborne  Head,  North-west  and  by
North  about  three  leagues  off ;  and  Faire  He  next  hand
South-west  and  by  South  eight  leagues  off,  at  which  time
I  directed  my  course  away  West  with  a  fresh  gale  at
East  South-east  about  halfe  an  houre  to  three.  I  set  the
South  head  of  Shotland  it  bearing  North-east  eight  leagues
off,  Faire  He  next  hand  South-east  seven  leagues  off,
foule  next  hand  North  foure  leagues,  wee  still  steering
away  West  with  a  fresh  gale  at  East  South-east.  All
this  afternoone  and  the  night  following  it  was  very  thicke
and  raynie  weather,  the  winde  continuing  as  before.  This
night  at  midnight  dyed  the  Groenlander  which  we  had
aboord  us,  named  Omeg.

The  fourteenth  day,  the  winde  as  the  night  before  a
faire  gale,  we  steering  as  we  did  before,  with  haysie
weather  having  a  shrinke,  at  noone  I  found  us  in  the
latitude  of  58.  degrees  40.  minutes,  having  made  a  West
and  by  South  way  Southerly  two  and  thirtie  leagues,
differing  to  the  Westward  from  the  Meridian  of  the  Nase
19.  degrees  45.  minutes.  This  afternoone  we  had  a  faire
gale  at  South-east  with  thicke  weather,  we  steering  away
West.

The  fifteenth  day,  the  winde  as  before,  we  steering
away  West,  being  by  my  imagination  in  the  latitude  of
58.  degrees  40.  minutes.  The  three  and  twentieth  day,
the  winde  at  the  North-east  a  faire  gale,  we  steering
betweene  the  West  North-west,  and  the  West  and  by
North,  being  at  noone  in  the  latitude  of  56.  degrees  10.
minutes,  having  by  reason  of  a  Northerly  current  contrarie
to  my  expectation,  made  a  West  way  Southerly  two  and
twentie  leagues.  The  Compasse  also  as  I  doe  suppose,
being  varied  more  then  a  Point  to  the  westwards.

The  first  of  July  wee  saw  Land  being  eight  leagues
off,  with  a  great  banke  of  Ice  lying  off  South-west,  wee

340

JAMES HALL  a.d.

1606.
setting  our  tacks  aboord  laid  off  East  and  by  South  and
East  South-east,  to  double  the  same,  about  two  a  clocke

I  having  doubled  the  same,  wee  went  away  West  and  by
.  South  all  this  evening  and  night  following. This  Land

I I  did  suppose  to  be  Busse  Hand ;  it  lying  more  to  the
Westwards  then  it  is  placed  in  the  Marine  Charts.

The  second  day  thicke  weather  with  the  winde  at  North
North-west,  we  steering  West  and  by  North. This  after-
noone  we  were  in  a  great  Current  setting  South  South-  A  current.
west. The  which  I  did  suppose  to  set  betweene  Busse
Hand and Freseland over  with America ; wee steering
West  North-west  with  a  faire  gale  at  North. This  night
about  nine  a  clocke,  the  Pinnasse  came  foule  of  the  Vice-  The  Pinnasse
admirall,  where  with  her  anchor  shee  tore  out  about  a  came  foule  of
foot  of  a  planke  a  little  above  water,  and  broke  downe  the on'
the  beakes  head.

The  sixth  making  observation,  I  found  us  in  the  latitude
of  58.  degrees  50.  minutes,  contrarie  to  my  expectation,
whereby  I  did  see  the  Southerly  Current  to  bee  the  princi-  South  current.
pall  cause.  The  seventh  day,  the  winde  at  North  and  by
East,  we  lying  West  North-west,  being  at  noone  in  the
latitude  of  59.  degrees  40.  minutes,  our  way  North-west
two  and  twentie  leagues.  This  evening  I  found  the  North
Point  of  the  Compasse  to  be  varied  12.  degrees  5.  minutes,  Variation
to  the  Westward  of  the  true  North.  observed.

The  eight  day,  the  winde  came  up  more  Southerly
betweene  the  South-west,  and  the  South-west  and  by
West  with  an  easie  gale,  we  steering  away  North-west
and  by  West ;  being  at  noone  in  the  latitude  of  59.  degrees
30.  minutes,  having  by  reason  of  the  Current  and  Varia-
tion made  a  West  way  Southerly  about  ten  leagues.

The  ninth  day  close  weather,  it  being  calme  all  the
forenoone,  wee  perceiving  by  our  ships  which  lay  becalmed,
p.  violent  Current  setting  South-west.  This  day  at  noone,  A  current
|tve  were  in  the  latitude  of  59.  degrees  40.  minutes.  The  setting  South-
|:enth  about  foure  in  the  morning,  the  winde  came  up  to
:he  North  North-west.  I  casting  about  stood  to  the
Westwards,  lying  West  with  the  stemme,  being  in  the

34i

west.

A.D.

l6o6.

Sight  of
America  in
58.  degrees
and  30.
minutes.
[III.  iv.  823.]

J  Current.

Variation
observed.

Compassed
about  with  Ice.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

latitude  of  60.  degrees  16.  minutes.  We  saw  the  coast
of  America  about  nine  leagues  off,  at  which  time  I  made
observation  of  the  variation,  and  found  the  Needle  varie
24.  degrees  to  the  Westwards  of  the  true  North.

The  Hill  tops  were  covered  with  snow,  and  the  shoare
to  the  Northwards  full  with  Ice,  but  to  the  Southwards
it  seemed  cleere.  Here  I  found  a  great  Current  to  set
West  into  the  shoare,  which  about  midnight  did  bring
us  to  bee  incumbred  with  very  many  Hands  of  Ice,  having
much  to  doe  to  get  cleere  off  the  same  without  danger :
but  by  Gods  helpe  it  being  faire  weather  with  a  fresh
gale  at  South-west,  wee  got  cleere  off  the  same,  standing
East  South-east  and  South-east  and  by  East.

The  fourteenth  in  the  morning  being  cleere  of  the  Ice,
I  went  away  East  North-east  and  North-east  and  by  East
till  eight  a  clocke,  when  I  directed  my  course  North-east
and  by  North,  being  at  noone  in  the  latitude  of  59.
degrees,  the  Cape  or  Head  land  which  wee  saw  that  night
bearing  West  South-west  sixteene  leagues  off.  All  this
afternoone  and  night  following  it  was  for  the  most  part
still  weather :  this  evening  I  found  the  variation  23.
degrees  $$.  minutes.

The  sixteenth  faire  weather  with  a  fresh  gale  at  East
South-east,  our  course  as  before,  being  in  the  latitude  of
60.  degrees  20.  minutes,  the  ships  way  North  and  by
East  northerly  twentie  leagues.  This  afternoone  and  the
night  following  the  wind  as  before,  we  steering  still  North-
east and  by  North.

The  eighteenth  also  thicke  weather,  being  forced  to
stand  away  North  North-west  to  double  a  great  banke
with  great  Mountaines  of  Ice  almost  incredible  to  be
reported,  yet  by  the  helpe  of  God  wee  passed  the  same,
sayling  all  this  day  by  great  and  huge  mountainous  Hands
of  Ice,  with  the  winde  at  South-west  and  by  South,  being
at  noone  in  the  latitude  of  63.  degrees  45.  minutes.  Wee
did  see  our  selves  beset  round  about  with  mightie  bankes
of  Ice,  being  forced  to  make  more  saile,  and  to  lye  to
and  againe  all  this  night  to  keepe  us  cleere  of  great  and

342

JAMES HALL

small  Hands  of  Ice,  where  many  times  we  were  in  such
danger,  that  we  did  looke  for  no  other  thing  then  present
death,  if  God  had  not  beene  mercifull  unto  us  and  sent
us  cleere  weather,  where  by  his  assistance  we  kept  our
selves  very  hardly  and  with  great  difficultie  cleere  of  the
Ice.

The  nineteenth  day  in  the  morning  cleere  weather  with
a  fresh  gale  at  South-west,  wee  plying  amongst  the  Ice
to  see  if  wee  could  get  a  gut  to  get  cleere  of  the  same,
at  which  time  wee  saw  the  Land  of  America  about  the
latitude  of  64.  degrees,  it  lying  next  hand  South  and
North,  being  high  ragged  Land  covered  with  snow,  the
shoare  being  all  beset  with  Ice.  So  lying  off  and  on
amongst  the  Ice  in  great  perill  till  about  noone,  when
God  of  his  goodnesse  sent  us  to  espie  a  little  gut  where
wee  went  through,  and  stood  South  South-east  away,
comming  still  by  many  Hands  of  Ice.  Heere  I  did  finde
both  by  my  course  and  reckoning  (the  variation  also  of
the  Compasse  respected)  that  wee  were  carried  with  a
mightie  Current  to  the  Westwards,  as  both  now  and
afterwards  wee  did  probably  proove  and  see  the  same.
For  I  setting  my  course  from  the  coast  of  America  in  the
latitude  of  58.  degrees  and  a  halfe  for  the  coast  of  Groen-
land  North  North-east  with  a  compasse,  whose  wyers  were
placed  more  then  two  third  parts  of  a  Point  to  the  East-
wards of  the  North,  the  variation  being  23.  degrees  30.
minutes  Northwesting  and  24.  degrees,  as  by  observation
I  found  betweene  the  latitude  of  58.  and  a  halfe  and  54.
degrees,  yet  I  did  finde  my  selfe  contrarie  either  to  mine
owne,  or  to  any  of  their  expectations  which  was  in  the
Fleet  with  mee,  carried  almost  foure  Points  with  the
Current  to  the  westwards  over  our  judgements.

The  twentieth,  wee  still  sayled  to  the  Eastwards  by
many  great  Bankes  and  Hands  of  Ice,  being  still  compassed
in,  wee  being  forced  to  stand  to  the  Southwards  to  get
cleere,  where  being  sometimes  becalmed,  wee  did  plainly
see  and  perceive  our  selves  carried  into  the  Ice  to  the
westward very violently. This Current setteth West

343

A.D.

1606.

Land  of
America.

A  mighty  cur-
rent setting  to
the  westward.

Note.

Here  I  did
give  direction
to  the  other
steerman  to
direct  their
course  for
Groenland.

A.D.
l6o6.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Variation
observed.

North-west.  The  twentieth  in  the  evening  I  found  the
Compasse  varied  23.  degrees.

The  one  and  twentieth  day  in  the  morning  faire  weather,
wee  espyed  a  gut  through  the  Ice,  it  seeming  cleere  to
the  southwards  of  the  same,  where  bearing  into  the  same
about  noone,  wee  were  cleere  of  all  the  Ice  by  the  mercifull
providence  of  God.  Here  I  observed  the  latitude,  it
being  63.  degrees  2,3-  minutes.  Now  having  the  one  and
twentieth  day  at  afternoone  caused  the  Admirall  to  call
the  other  Captaines  and  Steermen  aboord,  with  whom
wee  might  conferre,  and  having  shewed  briefly  my
reckoning  with  the  other  events,  which  contrarie  to  my
expectation  had  happened,  the  cause  whereof  at  that  instant
they  did  plainly  see  and  perceive :  They  confessing,  the
The  Current.  Current  as  they  did  now  plainly  see,  to  bee  the  cause  of
the  same.  So  having  done,  I  gave  to  the  other  Steermen
directions,  that  being  cleere  of  the  Ice  they  should  goe
betweene  the  East  and  the  East  and  by  North  over  for
the  coast  of  Groenland  and  not  to  the  Northwards  of  the
East  and  by  North,  because  of  the  former  events.  And
now  at  this  instant,  by  Gods  helpe,  being  cleere  I  called  to
them,  giving  the  same  directions.  This  afternoone  and
the  night  following  it  was  calme.  This  evening  I  found
the  Compasse  varied  23.  degrees  25.  minutes.

The  two  and  twentieth  day  at  noone  I  found  us  in  the
latitude  of  63.  degrees  20.  minutes.  The  three  and
twentieth  faire  weather,  the  ayre  very  cold,  as  with  us
in  the  moneth  of  Januarie,  the  winde  variable  betweene
the  East  North-east,  and  the  South-east  and  by  East,
being  at  noone  in  the  latitude  of  63.  degrees,  having  made
[III. iv. 824.]  a  South-east  and  by  South  way  eleven  leagues.  This  day
at  noone  I  cast  about  to  the  Westwards,  the  other  ships
doing  the  like,  lying  North-east  and  by  North  with  the
stemme,  finding  this  evening  the  Needle  varied  to  the
Westwards  23.  degrees  30.  minutes.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  the  winde  variable  betweene
the  South  South-east  and  the  South-east  and  by  South
with  raine  and  fogge. This  day  about  eleven  a  clocke

344

Variation
observed.

Variation
observed.

JAMES HALL  a.d.

1606.

wee  did  see  much  Ice  to  leeward,  wherefore  I  cast  about
to  the  Southwards,  the  winde  comming  to  the  East  North-
east, wee  lying  South-east  with  the  stemme, supposing
the  ship  to  have  made  a  North  and  by  West  way  halfe
Northerly  two  and  twentie  leagues. This  afternoone,  by
reason  of  the  fogge,  we  lost  sight  of  the  Lion  and  the  Wee  lost  the
Gilliflowre, wee looking earnestly forth for them, and  ^.f^
shooting  both  we  and  the Urin  divers  pieces  of  Ord- l  t"ozv?e-
nance, but wee could neither see nor heare them, at
which time  the  winde  came  up  Southerly,  we  standing
away our  course betweene the East and  East and by
North.

The  five  and  twentieth,  wee  had  sight  of  Groenland,
being  about  ten  leagues  to  the  Southward  of  Queene
Amies  Cape.  Wee  standing  away  East  South-east  in
with  the  Land  with  the  winde  at  South.  All  this  night
it  did  blow  very  much,  wee  steering  North  by  West  and
North  North-west.

The  seven  and  twentieth  day  in  the  morning  was  reason-
able cleere  weather  with  a  fresh  gale  at  South  South-west.
This  morning  betweene  foure  and  five  of  the  clocke,  I
ispyed  Queene  Annes  Cape  to  beare  East  by  South  next
land  of  mee,  and  King  Christians  Foord  South  South-
east of  me,  being  thwart  of  Rumels  Foord,  Queene  Sophias
Zape  bearing  North  halfe  westerly,  about  five  leagues  off.
Therefore  I  thought  it  convenient  to  put  into  Cunning-
lams  Foord  where  the  silver  was,  both  in  regard  that  I  The  silver
lad  sworne  to  his  Majestie  as  concerning  the  same ;  and  Myne-
dso  because  wee  were  expressely  commanded to  bring
lome  of  the  same. So  having  a  faire  gale  at  Wrest  South-
vest,  wee  came  into  the  aforesaid  River,  anchoring  in  a
^ery  good  Sound,  hard  by  the  Ure,  in  sixteene  fathoms,
it  the  mouth  of  Cunninghams  Foord,  about  Rv&  of  the  The  place  of
locke. There came presently foure of the Countrie  the  Sllver
>eople  unto  us  after  their  old  accustomed  manner. This  Myne-
vening  about  sixe  of  the  clocke  the  Urin  anchored  by
is. This night the Admirall, my selfe, and Captaine
Browne  went  on  Land  to  see  the  Myne  of  silver :  where

345

A.D.
l606.

Barter  for
Seaks  skinnes
and  Whales
finnes.

Many  greene
Hands.

Another  fiord.

Queene
Sophias  Cape.

Reine  Deere.
Ramels  Foord.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

it  was  decreed,  that  we  should  take  in  as  much  thereof
as  we  could.

On  Sunday  the  third  of  August,  the  Savages  seeing
our  curtesie  toward  them,  bartered  Seales  skinnes  and
Whales  finnes  with  us :  which  being  done,  wee  went  to
our  Boat,  and  rowing  away,  three  of  them  taking  their
Boats,  rowed  with  us  up  the  Foord,  calling  to  other  of
the  people,  telling  them  and  making  signes  to  us,  of  our
dealing  towards  them.  Then  they  also  came  to  us  and
bartered  with  us  for  old  Iron  and  Knives,  for  Seales  skinnes
and  coates  made  of  Seales  skinnes,  and  Whales  finnes,
and  rowed  still  all  with  us.  In  the  end,  having  rowed
five  or  sixe  leagues  up  the  Foord,  and  seeing  it  to  bee  but
a  Bay,  wee  returned  alongst  many  greene  and  pleasant
Hands,  where  wee  found  good  anchoring :  the  people  still
followed  us  to  the  number  of  five  and  twentie  persons
till  about  sixe  of  the  clocke ;  when  it  fell  thicke  with  some
raine,  and  the  winde  being  Southerly,  wee  rowed  in  among
the  Sounds,  at  which  time  they  went  from  us :  wee  rowing
our  Boat  to  one  of  the  Hands  went  to  supper.  And  having
supped,  wee  rowed  some  three  leagues  up  an  other  Foord,
where  we  found  very  shallow  water,  in  which  place  we
stayed  with  our  Boat  all  that  night.

The  fourth  day  in  the  morning  about  three  of  the  clocke,
wee  returned  to  our  ship  againe  with  a  gale  of  winde
Southerly,  being  somewhat  thicke  and  raynie  weather,
sayling  by  the  Land  among  the  Hands,  till  we  came  three
leagues  to  the  Northwards  of  Queene  Sophias  Cape,  when
going  without  the  Hands,  wee  met  with  a  very  high  Sea,
so  that  wee  had  much  to  doe,  but  by  the  providence  of
Almightie  God,  the  Boat  was  preserved  from  being  swal-
lowed up  of  the  Sea.  In  the  end,  wee  got  againe  among
the  Hands,  and  so  about  noone  wee  came  to  our  ships.
The  fift  day,  some  of  our  men  went  on  Land  among  the
Mountaines,  where  they  did  see  reine  Deere.

The  sixt  day,  I  casting  about,  stood  into  the  shoare
South-east,  till  wee  had  brought  Ramels  Foord  East  and
by North off  us, bearing roome for the same Foord.

346

JAMES HALL  a.d.

1606.
There  goeth  a  very  hollow  Sea  betweene  the  Hands  of  A  hollow  Sea.
the  Kings  Foord  and  Ramels  Foord. The  winde  being
somewhat still,  wee  towed  on  head  with  our  Boats  till
wee  came  thwart  of  a  Bay,  in  which  I  was  in  the  Urins
Boat,  which  I  named  Fos  Bay,  after  the  name  of  Philip  Fes  Bay.
de  Fos,  Pilot  of  the  Urin. But  the  Admirals  wilfulnesse
was  such,  that  I  could  by  no  meanes  counsaile  him  therein
though  night  were  at  hand,  but  hee  would  goe  up  the
Foord,  till  wee  came  on  the  starboord  side  of  the  Foord
to  sixe  and  twentie  fathomes  sandie  ground. The  Urin
let fall  anchor  by  us, but the  winde  comming  off  the
Land  (our  Captaine  and  Companie  being  so  obstinate  and
willfull,  that  I  could  by  no  meanes  get  them  to  worke
after  my  will)  the  ship  drave  into  the  mid-foord,  where
wee  could  have  no  ground  at  an  hundred  fathoms,  till  No  ground  at
the  Tyde  of  flood  came,  when  the  flood  set  the  ship  to loo-fathoms
the  shoare  : but  I  laying  out  a  Cage-anchor  got  the  ship  \f-pos  £* £S
off ;  and  setting  our  foresaile,  stood  for  another  roade  up
the  River.

The  eight  day  about  foure  in  the  morning,  wee  came
to  an  anchor  in  twentie  fathomes  sandie  ground,  having  [m.iv.825.]
very  faire  shoalding  within  us. About  noone  the  Urin
came  and  anchored  by  us. It  floweth  in  this  River  South-  Fos  River  in
least  and  North-west,  and  it  standeth  in  the  latitude  of  66.  degrees
66.  degrees  and  25.  minutes.  25'  mnutes'

The ninth in the morning, our Captaine with the  ATown found
Captaine of the Urin, went with their Boates up the  ten  lea£ues  UP
I  River,  where  they  did  come  to  see  their  winter  houses,  *  e er'
,which  were  builded  with  Whales  bones,  the  balkes  being
of  Whales  ribbes,  and  the  tops  were  covered  with  earth,
and  they  had  certaine  Vaults  or  Sellers  under  the  earth
foure  square,  about  two  yards  deepe  in  the  ground. These
I houses  were  in  number  about  some  fortie. They  found
iialso  certaine  Graves  made  up  of  stones  over  the  dead
bodies  of  their  people,  the  carkasses  being  wrapped  in
ijSeales  skins,  and  the  stones  laid  in  manner  of  a  Coffin
lover  them. _  \ A  man  left  en

This  day,  in  this  place  we  set  a  man  on  Land,  which  Land.

347

A.D.

i6o6.

Five  of  the
people  taken
againe.

Groenland
called  by  the
Inhabitants
Secanunga.

Knights
Hands.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

had  served  our  Captaine  the  yeere  before,  which  for  a
certaine  fault  committed  by  him  our  Captaine  left  behinde
in  the  Countrie.  About  noone  our  men  came  aboord
againe ;  and  after  Dinner  some  of  the  people  came  unto
us,  of  whom  wee  caught  five  with  their  Boates  and  stowed
them  in  our  ships,  to  bring  them  into  Denmarke,  to
enforme  our  selves  better  by  their  meanes  of  the  state  of
their  Countrie  of  Groineland,  which  in  their  owne
language  they  call  Secanunga,  and  say,  that  up  within
the  Land  they  have  a  great  King,  which  is  carried  upon
mens  shoulders.

The  tenth  of  August  in  the  morning,  the  winde  being
at  East  South-east,  we  weighed  and  came  forth  of  Rombes
Foord,  but  being  come  forth  to  Sea  amongst  the  Hands,
the  winde  came  up  to  the  South-west  and  by  South,  the
Sea  going  marvellous  high,  we  lying  West  and  West  and
by  North  to  Sea,  doubling  certaine  Hands  and  Rockes.
Where  the  Sea  going  so  wonderfull  high  had  set  us  upon
the  Rockes,  where  we  had  all  dyed,  if  God  of  his  mercy
at  that  instant,  when  wee  saw  nothing  before  our  eyes
but  present  death,  had  not  sent  us  a  great  gale  of  winde
at  South  South-west,  whereby  wee  lay  West  North-west
away  with  a  flawne  sheat,  wee  doubling  of  the  Hands  and
Rocks,  were  forced  to  goe  between  certaine  little  Hands,
which  lye  off  Queene  Sophias  Cape  foure  leagues  into
the  Sea.  The  which  Hands  I  named  the  yeere  before,
Knights  Hands,  after  the  name  of  John  Knight.  So
having  passed  these  Hands  not  without  great  danger,  wee
found  betweene  them  many  blinde  Rocks,  and  being  cleere
in  the  Sea.  The  thirteenth  at  noone,  we  were  in  the
latitude  of  66.  degrees  50.  minutes,  being  off  Cape  Sophia
West  and  by  North  halfe  westerly  about  sixteene  leagues.

The  eighteenth  about  foure  in  the  morning,  we  got
cleere  off  the  Ice,  steering  South  and  by  West  away,  it
being  very  thicke  weather  till  noone,  when  it  cleered  up  :
at  which  time  wee  saw  the  shoare  rising  like  Hands,  being
very  high  and  stretching  South  and  by  East,  and  North
and  by  West  about  foure  and  twentie  leagues,  the  shoare

348

JAMES HALL  a.d.

1606.

Deing  beset  all  fiill  with  Ice,  so  that  in  that  place  it  is
impossible  for  any  ship  to  come  into  the  shoare.  Also
of  the  Southermost  of  these  two  Capes,  lay  such  a  great
)anke  of  Ice  stretching  into  the  Sea,  that  wee  were  forced
to  lye  West  and  by  North  to  double  the  same.

All  this  afternoone,  wee  were  almost  compast  with  Ice,
we  bearing  to  the  same,  the  winde  comming  up  to  the
East  South-east,  we  standing  South  to  the  Ice  were  forced
to  loose  for  one  Hand,  and  to  beare  roome  for  another
till  about  foure  a  clocke,  when  by  Gods  helpe  wee  got
cleere  off  the  same,  the  winde  comming  up  to  the  South-
east and  by  South,  wee  lay  South-west  and  by  South  off
all  this  night.

The  two  and  twentieth  thicke  weather,  the  winde  as
uefore. This  morning  about  seven  a  clocke  we  saw  a
saile  West  and  by  South  of  us,  we  standing  to  him,  for
it  was  our  Vice-admirall  the  Lion,  who  had  beene  greatly  Wemetagaine
troubled  with  the  Ice,  wee  being  glad  to  meete  one  another  wlth  the  Lion.
againe.

The  eight  and  twentieth  about  foure  in  the  morning,
the  storme  ceased,  the  winde  comming  up  to  the  West
South-west.  About  three  a  clocke  wee  set  our  sailes
standing  South-east  away.  But  being  under  saile,  we
spyed  great  bankes  and  Hands  of  Ice  to  leeward  of  us,
ying  off  East  and  by  South,  which  Ice  I  did  judge  to
ye  off  Cape  Desolation  about  eight  leagues  off  :  the  which
Dy  reason  of  the  fogge  we  could  not  see.

The  nine  and  twentieth  about  sixe  in  the  morning,  the
winde  came  up  to  the  North-east  and  by  North,  we  making
;aile  went  South  South-east  away  till  noone  with  a  stiffe
*ale,  wee  seeing  in  the  morning  pieces  of  drift  Ice  to
windward  of  us ;  having  at  noone  a  shrinke  of  the  same
[  found  us  in  the  latitude  of  59.  degrees  46.  minutes,
laving  from  noone  to  noone  made  a  South-east  and  by
50uth  way  eight  leagues.

The  one  and  thirtieth,  the  winde  continuing,  wee
lolding  still  our  course  with  the  winde  still  at  North
^orth-west,  with  faire  and  cleere  weather  it  blowing  very

349

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1606.

much,  so  that  wee  stood  away  under  a  couple  of  courses
low  set,  the  Sea  very  much  growne,  being  in  the  latitude
of  59.  degrees  10.  minutes,  having  made  an  East  South-
east way  somewhat  Easterly  foure  and  thirtie  leagues.
This  afternoone  after  my  observation,  wee  saw  some
Hands  of  Ice  with  some  drift  Ice,  I  something  marvelling
of  the  same,  knowing  both  by  my  account  and  my  noones
observation,  that  we  were  shot  too  farre  from  any  part  of

[III. iv.  826.]  Groinland,  that  was  described  in  the  Marine  Chart.  For
the  furthermost  part  described  therein  is  not  in  the  latitude
of  60.  degrees,  and  we  being  now  in  the  latitude  of  59.
degrees  ten  minutes,  Cape  Desolation  bearing  West
North-west  halfe  Northerly  about  sixtie  foure  leagues,
and  Cape  Christian  which  was  the  next  known  part  of
Groenland  North-west  and  by  West  westerly  eight  and
thirtie leagues, so holding our course East South-east

Sight  of  Land,  away,  about  foure  a  clocke  we  had  sight  of  Land,  being
very  high  Land,  it  lying  alongst  East  South-east  about
sixteene  leagues,  the  westermost  part  seemed  either  to
fall  away  East  North-east,  and  the  southermost  point
bearing  East  northerly,  fell  away  East  and  by  North.
This  Land  is  very  high,  having  the  Hills  covered  with
snow,  the  shoare  being  very  thicke  with  Ice :  this  place
because I knew  not  whether  it  was  of  the Mayne or

Frost  Hand,  an  Hand,  I  named  Frost  Hand,  after  the  name  of  the
ship.

The  first  of  September,  at  noone,  I  made  observation,
and  found  us  in  the  latitude  of  58.  degrees,  having  made
a  South-east  and  by  South  way  southerly  sixe  and  twentie
leagues.  This  day  at  noone  I  directed  my  course  East
and  by  South.  This  afternoone  about  sixe  a  clock  it  fell
calme,  and  so  continued  all  the  night  following. This

Variation evening  I  found  the  variation 10.  degrees  50.  minutes

observed. Northwesting.

The  fourth  day  the  winde  at  East  and  by  South,  we
lying  South  and  by  East,  having  a  shrinke  of  the  sunne
about  noone,  I  did  suppose  us  in  the  latitude  of  57.
degrees  20.  minutes,  having  made  a  South-east  and  by

35°

JAMES HALL  a.d.

1606.
South  way  southerly  about  ten  leagues ;  all  this  day  and
the  night  following  we  lay  as  before.

The  eight  day  faire  weather,  the  winde  as  before,  it
being  almost  calme,  wee  going  away  as  before,  being  at
noone  in  the  latitude  of  58.  degrees  36.  minutes,  having
made  an  East  North-east  way  northerly  twentie  leagues,
by  reason  of  the  great  southerly  Sea. All  this  afternoone  A  great
and  the  night  following  it  was  for  the  most  part  calme.  Southerne  Sea.
This  evening I found the Compasse  varied  about two  Variation
degrees  45.  minutes  north  westing.  observed.

The  ninth  day  also  faire  weather,  the  winde  southerly
a  fresh  gale,  our  course  still  East,  being  at  noone  in  the
latitude  of  58.  degrees  40.  minutes,  our  way  East  and
jby  North  easterly  twelve  leagues.  This  afternoone  the
ifwinde  came  up  to  the  South  or  South  and  by  East  with
raine.  This  night  about  midnight  thicke  weather  with
pine,  the  winde  comming  to  the  South-east,  we  lying  East
1  North-east  and  North-east  and  by  East  with  the  stemme.

The  tenth  day  about  two  in  the  morning,  the  winde
ibame  up  to  the  South  South-west,  wee  steering  our  course
East,  being  at  noone  in  the  latitude  of  59.  degrees  10.
minutes,  having  made  an  East  and  by  North  way  easterly
foure  and  fortie  leagues,  wee  having  a  fresh  gale  westerly.
iThis  day  wee  saw  one  of  the  Fowle  the  which  are  on
:he  Hand  of  Bas  in  Scotland,  called  Bas  Geese.  This  A  Bas  Goose.
'evening  I  found  the  variation  1.  degree  4.  minutes  north-  Variation

easting".  observed  to  the

The  eighteenth,  this  forenoone  about  nine  a  clocke,  North-easL
kvee  espyed  land,  rising  somewhat  ragged,  the  Eastermost
Doint  of  the  same  bearing  South-east  and  by  South,  and
:he  Westermost  part  South  and  by  West  about  eight
eagues.  These  Hands  by  my  account  and  observation,
:[  found  to  be  the  Hands  of  Ferris,  being  at  noone  in  the  Sight  of
observation  of  62.  degrees  5.  minutes.  Ferris.

The  nineteenth  I  set  a  little  Rocke,  called  the  Monke ;
which  lyeth  off  to  the  South-east  end,  it  being  about  five
ji  clocke,  East  South-east  of  us  three  leagues  off. This
light  about  ten  a  clocke  it  fell  calme.

35i

A.D.

l6o6.

The  streame
under  the
Hands  of
Farre.

Turco.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  twentieth,  wee  did  see  the  streame  had  set  us  to
the  Northwards.  This  streame  setteth  under  the  Hands
of  Farre  next  hand  East  and  West.  So  casting  about
wee  stood  to  the  westwards,  lying  West  South-west  and
sometimes  West  and  by  South,  and  sometimes  South-
west, it  being  very  raynie  weather,  about  midnight  it
fell  calme  and  so  continued  all  night  unto  the  morning.

The  first  of  October  in  the  afternoone  about  foure  of
the  clocke,  we  had  sight  of  The  Holmes.  The  second
day,  wee  steered  away  South-east  and  by  South  and  South
South-east  for  The  Col.  And  about  eight  of  the  clocke
this  night  wee  came  into  Turco,  where  wee  rode  all  the
day  following.  The  third  day  at  night  the  winde  came
to  the  North-east ;  so  wee  weighed  and  came  into  Elsenor
Road.  The  fourth  day,  by  the  providence  of  God,  we
arrived  in  our  desired  Port  of  Copen  Haven,  1606.

The  severall  burthens  and  numbers  of  men
employed  in  the  ships  of  the  Fleet  aforesaid,
were  as  folio weth.

THe  Trust  being  Admirall,  was  of  sixtie  tunnes,  had
eight  and  for  tie  men.  The  Lion  Vice-admirall,  was
of  seventie  tunnes,  had  eight  and  fortie  men.  The  Urin
or  Eagle  Reare-admirall,  of  one  hundred  tunnes,  had  fiftie
men.  The  Gilliflowre  was  of  fortie  tunnes,  had  six-
teene  men.  The  Pinnasse  called  the  Cat,  was  of  twentie
tunnes,  had  twelve  men.  Bredaransies  Foord  is  most
Northerly.  Cunninghams  Foord  is  next  in  sixtie  seven
degrees  and  odde  minutes.  The  Foord  wherein  they  saw
the  Towne  ten  leagues  up  the  same,  is  two  leagues  to  the
South  of  Cunninghams  Foord.  The  Kings  Foord  is  in
sixtie  sixe  degrees  and  an  halfe.
[III. iv. 827.]  William  Huntris  of  Stowborow  in  Yorke-shire,  is
Master  Hall  his  man,  and  is  allowed  thirtie  pound  by
the  yeere  of  the  King  of  Denmarke,  for  his  skill  in  Navi-
gation.

352

JAMES HALL

I  have  also  Master  Halls  Voyage  of  the  next  yeere
1607.  to  Groenland  from  Denmarke,  written,  and  with
representations  of  Land-sights  curiously  delineated  by
Josias  Hubert  of  Hull,  but  the  Danes  (envious  perhaps
that  the  glory  of  the  Discovery  would  be  attributed  to
the  English  Pilot)  after  the  Land  saluted,  mutinied,  and
in  fine  forced  the  ship  to  returne  for  Island.  For  which
cause  I  have  here  omitted  the  whole.

A.D.

1606.

Chap. XVI.

The  Voyage  of  Master  John  Knight,  (which  had
beene  at  Groenland  once  before  1605.  Captaine
of  a  Pinnasse  of  the  King  of  Denmarke)  for
the  Discovery  of  the  North-west  Passage,
begun the  eighteenth  of  Aprill 1606.

Set  sayle  from  Gravesend  in  a  Barke  of  April  \%.
fortie  tunnes,  called  the  Hope-well,  well  l6°6-
victualled  and  manned  at  the  cost  of  the
Worshipfull  Companies  of  Moscovie,  and
the  East  Indie  Merchants,  for  the  Dis-
coverie of the North-west Passage the
eighteenth of  Aprill 1606. and arrived
the  sixe  and  twentieth  of  the  same  moneth  in  the  He  of
Orkney,  in  a  Sound  called  Pentlefrith. Heere  wee  were  pentlefrith,  in
Stayed  with  contrary  winds  at  West  and  North-west,  and  Orkney.
^vith  much  storme  and  foule  weather  above  a  fortnight.
In which  meane space, I entertained  two men of  this
Countrey,  which  are  both  lustie  fellowes  at  Sea  and  Land,
^nd  are  well  acquainted  with  all  the  Harbours  of  these
North  parts  of  Scotland. These  men  brought  us  into  a
/ery  good  Harbour,  called  Saint  Margarites  Hope,  where  Saint  Marga-
te had  the  Sea  open  to  us  for  all  winds  that  are  good  for  rites  Sound.
Us  to  proceed  on  our  Voyage. In  this  Countrey  we  found
ittle  worthy  of  Relation. For  it  is  poore,  and  hath  no
#ood  growing  upon  it. Their  Corne  is  Barley  and  Oates.
xiv  353  z

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

1606.

Their  fire  is  Turffe,  their  houses  are  low  and  unseemely
without,  and  as  homely  within.

Upon  Munday  the  twelfth  of  May,  I  set  sayle  from
Saint  Margarites  Sound  or  Hope  in  Orkney,  at  nine  of
the  clocke  in  the  morning,  our  course  being  West  and
by  South  :  and  at  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night,  the  Hill
called  Hoyce,  did  beare  West  Southerly  eleven  or  twelve
leagues,  and  the  Stacke  South  and  by  East  Easterly  three
leagues  and  an  halfe,  the  winde  beeing  at  East  South-
east.

This  day  was  for  the  most  part  calme,  and  sometimes

wee  had  a  fresh  gale  of  winde  :  our  course  was  West  and

by  South,  halfe  a  point  Southerly. This  day  I  passed  by

Two  small two  small  Hands. The  one  of  them  is  called,  the  Clete,

Hands.  anc[  the  other  the  Run. They  are  distant  foure  leagues

the  one  from  the  other. The  course  betweene  them  is

South-west  and  North-east. The  Southermost  is  called

the  Clete,  and  is  the  lesser  of  the  twaine  : it  is  distant

from  the  North-east  part  of  Lewis,  called  the  Bling-head,

seven  leagues  :  and  the  course  betwixt  them  is  North-west

The  Bling- and  South-east. Also  this  Bling-head  is  distant  from  the

head  the  parro  Head,  of  the  Hieland  of  Scotland  West  and  by

pan  of  Lewis North  halfe  a  point  Westerly,  and  is  distant  seventeene

leagues. Also  the  course  betweene  Bling-head  and  the

North-west  part  of  Lewis,  is  West  and  by  South  halfe

a  point  Westerly, and faire low  Land  without  Wood.

There  is  good  riding  all  along  the  shoare,  the  winde  beeing

off  the  Land,  and  in  some  places  are  very  good  Harbours

for  all  winds. From  eight  to  twelve  at  night,  we  ran

sixe  leagues  West  South-west.

This  morning  we  had  a  fresh  gale  of  wind  at  East

North-east :  our  course  was  South-west  and  by  West  two

houres  five  leagues. From  two  to  ten  South-west,  and

by  South  20.  leagues. From  ten  to  twelve  West  South-

Fifty-eight west  sixe  leagues. The  latitude  at  noone  was  58.  degrees

degrees  27. 27. minutes.

mn'  From  Wednesday  at  noone  till  Thursday  at  noone,  was

for  the  most  part  raine  and  fogge,  the  wind  at  North-east

354

JOHN KNIGHT  ad.

1606.

and  by  East :  our  course  was  West  halfe  a  point  Southerly  :
our  latitude  at  noone  being  Thursday, 58. degrees  23.
minutes. From  Thursday  at  noone  till  Friday  at  noone,
being  the  sixteenth,  our  way  was  West  Southerly  about
twentie  leagues: the  latitude  at  noone  was  58.  degrees
19.  minutes. This  night  the  wind  was  sometimes  variable
betweene  the  South  and  by  West  and  South-east,  with
faire  weather,  the  Magneticall  Declination 18.  degrees: Eighteene
the  height  of  the  Pole  was  58.  degrees  10.  minutes. Also  degrees  of
in  the  morning  the  Sunne  beeing  tenne  degrees  above  the  var'l^tl0n-
Horizon,  was  distant  from  the  East  to  the  North-wards
of  the  East  twentie  two  degrees.

From  Friday  at  noone  untill  midnight  was  little  wind
Southerly,  and  sometimes  calme,  and  from  midnight  till
twelve  at  noone  the  next  day  a  stifTe  gale  of  wind  at
East  North-east.  This  foure  and  twentie  houres  I  judged
our  way  to  be  made  good  West,  something  Southerly
thirtie  leagues.  The  latitude  at  noone  was  58.  degrees  [III.iv.828.]
10.  minutes.  Also  the  sunne  did  rise  fiftie  degrees  to
the  Northward  of  the  East.

From  Saturday  at  noone  being  the  seventeenth,  till
Sunday  at  noone  being  the  eighteenth,  our  course  was
West  and  by  South  a  stifTe  gale  of  wind  fiftie  leagues,
being  close  weather,  we  made  no  observation  of  latitude.

From  Sunday  at  noone  till  Munday  at  noone  I  steered
away  West  and  West  and  by  South,  having  a  storme  at
East  and  by  North  : our  course  was  West  and  Southerly
ftie  leagues.

From  Munday  at  noone  till  midnight,  our  course  was
West  and  Southerly :  and  from  that  time  till  noone  West
ind  by  North  and  West  among.  I  judged  wee  sayled
rjfortie  leagues  these  foure  and  twentie  houres,  being  for
the  most  part  foggie.  The  latitude  at  noone  was  57.
degrees  50.  minutes.

From  Tuesday  at  noone  till  noone  on  Wednesday,  our

:ourse  was  West  and  by  North  fortie  five  leagues,  being *

r .  .  -ii  •  tt &  1 1 & ^  current  to

toggle weather  without observation. Here  wee had a  ^  Nort/i-
rurrent,  which  I  judge  setteth  to  the  Northwards.  ward.

355

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1606.

From  Wednesday  at  noone  till  Thursday  at  noone,
being  the  two  and  twentieth,  our  course  was  West  and
by  North  fiftie  leagues  with  much  fogge  and  close
weather,  and  much  winde  at  North-east  and  by  East.

From  Thursday  at  noone  till  midnight,  our  course  was
West  and  by  North.  Then  the  winde  came  to  the  North  :
wee  tooke  in  our  mayne  course,  and  I  spooned  away  with
our  fore-saile  till  Friday,  the  winde  being  at  North  North
east,  I  judged  our  way  West  South-west,  the  twelve  houres
that  I  spooned  about  fifteene  leagues,  the  other  twelve
houres  West  Northerly  five  and  twentie  leagues.  This
Many  Guiles  three  and  twentieth  day,  wee  saw  many  Guiles  and  much
and  much Rock-weed.

From  Friday  at  noone  till  Saturday  at  noone,  I  judged
our  way  to  bee  made  South-west  and  by  West,  but  it
proved  West  and  by  South,  rather  Westerly,  twentie
A  current  to  leagues  by  reason  of  a  current,  that  I  judge  setteth  to
the  North-east  the  North-eastward.  The  latitude  at  noone  was  57
degrees  53.  minutes.  The  variation  of  the  Compasse
was  about  a  point  to  the  Westward.  This  forenoone
and  all  night  the  wind  was  at  North  a  very  hard  gale ;
wee  spooned  with  our  fore-sayle.  Also  this  forenoone,
we  saw  much  Sea  Tange  and  Rock- weed.

From Saturday at noone till Sunday at noone, our

course  was  Southward  about  twentie  leagues, the  wind

being  Northerly. This  day  we  saw  much  Rock-weed  and

Drift-wood. The  latitude  was  fiftie  seven  degrees. The

The  variation  variation  was  to  the  Westward  thirteene  degrees  or  there-

13.  degrees about. The sunne being five degrees high in the

westwara. morning,  was  twentie  foure  degrees  to  the  Northward  of

the  East.

From  Sunday  at  noone  till  two  of  the  clocke  the  next
day  in  the  morning,  beeing  Munday,  our  course  was
West  North-west,  we  made  our  way  West  and  by  North
twentie  leagues,  having  a  fresh  gale  at  South-east  and
by  East :  it  fell  calme  till  foure  of  the  clocke :  then  it
blew  an  easie  gale  at  West  South-west,  wee  stemming
North-west,  &c.  betweene  that  and  North  North-east  the

356

:n«

X

JOHN KNIGHT  a.d.

1606.
wind  being  variable. The  wind  freshed  toward  noone.
This  morning  we  saw  an  Owle.  An  Owle.

The latitude at noone the eight and twentieth, was

57.  degrees  57.  minutes. The  variation  of  the  Compasse The  variation
was  fourteene  degrees  and  an  halfe  to  the  West. This i\- degrees
day  wee  had  blacke  water,  and  many  over-falls,  streame  c  t^nJ^  t
leeches,  and  sets  of  currents,  as  it  seemed  to  the  North-
ward, and  some  to  the  Westward.

The  thirtieth,  we  found  our  latitude  to  be  fiftie  eight  Ft/tie  eight
degrees. Heere  it  seemed  that  we  were  in  a  tyde  gate,  degrees  of
which  I  judged  to  set  North  and  South,  or  that  it  was attiu  e'
the  Eddie  of  the  currents,  which  we  saw  the  other  day.
Also  wee saw  white Fowles, which  cheeped  like Spar- White  fowles.
hawkes. Also  we  saw  driving  many  dead  Cowes.  Dead  Cowes.

The  one  and  thirtieth,  the  sunne  being  fiftie  degrees
above  the  Horizon,  I  found  it  to  bee  twentie  seven  degrees
to  the  Eastward  of  the  South  :  againe  in  the  afternoone,
the  sunne  beeing  fiftie  degrees  high,  it  was  distant  from
the  South  to  the  Westward  fiftie  one  degrees :  at  noone
it  was  $$.  degrees  6.  minutes,  the  height  of  the  Pole  was

58.  degrees  3.  minutes. The  variation  of  the  Compasse  The  variation
was  twentie  foure  degrees  toward  the  North-west. Our  °fthe

way  made  these  twentie  foure  houres  was  not  above  sixe  ^jL^raMr/l-
leagues  West,  being  little  wind  for  the  most  part.  westward.

From  Saturday  at  noone  till  two  of  the  clocke  it  was
calme :  then  it  began  to  blow  an  easie  gale  at  North.  At
night  I  observed  the  sunne  setting,  and  found  it  to  set
twentie  one  degrees  to  the  Westward  of  the  North,  the
winde  continuing  variable  betweene  the  North  and  the
West  North-west  till  noone,  being  the  first  of  June.  June  1.
Then  I  found  my  selfe  by  observation  to  be  in  the  latitude
of  57.  degrees  35.  minutes.  I  judged  our  way  from
noone  to  noone  West  and  by  South  or  thereabout  thirteene
leagues.

From  Sunday  at  noone  till  ten  of  the  clocke  the  same
Evening,  it  was  calme.  Then  it  began  to  blow  a  stifle
gale  of  wind  at  South  South-east.  Our  course  was  West
till noone, the next day  being Munday, twentie three

357

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1606.
Many  bkcke leagues. This day wee saw many blacke Fowles like
wildfowles. Willockes  flying  in  flockes  together.
Latitude  56. The  fourth  my  latitude  at  noone,  was  56.  degrees  40.
degrees.  minutes. The  latitude  next  day  at  noone  was  fiftie  sixe

Variation  24. degrees. The  variation  of  the  Compasse  by  the  Scale
degrees  was  twentie  degrees,  and  by  my  other  Instrument  twentie

Westward. foure  degrees  to  the  West. The  sunne  was  twentie  two
degrees  and  an  halfe  high,  and  to  the  North  of  the  West
thirtie  degrees  by  the  Instrument,  and  twentie  sixe  degrees
bv  the  Scale.
Fifty  eight  Our  latitude  at noone the eleventh, was  fiftie  eight

degrees.  degrees. And  at  night  the  sunne  did  set  fourteene  degrees

to  the  Westward  of  the  North,  and  did  rise  fiftie  degrees
to  the  Eastward  of  the  North.

The  thirteenth,  the  Ice  seemed  to  be  dispersed  thinner

with  the  wind,  or  some  other  accident : then  I  set  sayle

with  our  two  courses,  but  was  forced  to  take  them  in

againe,  and  moored  to  another  great  Hand  of  Ice,  about

a  mile  to  the  Westward  of  the  other. Here  setteth  some

A  small  smal  current  to  the  South-westward. For  the  great  flakes

current  to  the 0f  ice  tnat  were  somewhat  deep,  drave  to  the  Southward,

and  the  other  small  Ice  which  was  flotie  drave  with  the

wind,  which  was  variable  betwixt  the  North-west  and  the

Sight  of  Land  North. Here  we  were  in  sight  of  Land,  which  bore  West

like  Hands. South-west  from  us,  shewing  in  some  parts  like  Hands.

Our  latitude  at  noone  was  57.  degrees  25.  minutes.

From  Friday  at  noone  till  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night,
wee  continued  moored  to  the  aforesaid  Ice  :  then  it  fell
calme,  and  I  loosed  and  rowed  to  the  West-ward  with
our  Oares,  hoping  to  get  thorough,  till  twelve  of  the
clocke,  then  the  Ice  grew  very  thicke.  I  moored  againe
till  foure  of  the  clocke  the  next  morning.  Then  we
rowed  and  sayled  with  an  easie  gale  of  wind  till  eight
of  the  clocke  the  next  morning  being  Saturday.  Then
it  began  to  blow  a  fresh  gale  Easterly,  and  we  cunned
the  ship  among  the  Ice  with  our  Oares  till  noone.  Our
latitude  was  fiftie  eight  degrees.  From  Saturday  at  noone
till  midnight  wee  guided our  shippe  to the  Westward

358

JOHN KNIGHT  ad.

1606.

among  the  Ice  with  our  Oares,  hoping  to  get  thorough  :
but  wee  were  suddenly  compassed  about  with  many  great
Hands  of  Ice,  and  continued  so  distressed  with  a  sore
storme  of  wind  at  South-east,  being  foggie  and  thicke
weather :  we  were  so  bruised  betweene  mightie  great
Hands  of  Ice,  that  we  were  in  danger  every  minute  to
be  crushed  in  pieces  with  force  of  the  heaving  and  setting
of  the  said  Ice  with  the  great  Sea  that  the  wind  made,
had  not  God  of  his  mercie  provided  for  us  :  for  our  owne
endevours  did  little  availe  to  our  helpe,  though  wee
employed  all  our  industries  to  the  uttermost  of  our
powres.

The nineteenth, we descryed the Land of  America,  The  Land  of
which  riseth  like  eight  Hands : the  Northermost  part  of  Amenca
it  did  beare  North  and  by  West  about  fifteene  leagues  ^crjfr™s
from  us. I  observed  the  latitude,  and  found  my  selfe  4g#'  minutes.
to  be  in  $6.  degrees  and  48.  minutes. The  variation  of  America  here
the  Compasse  was  twentie  five  degrees  to  the  Westward,  ^cweth  like
All  this  Coast  sheweth  like  broken  Land  or  Hands ;  and  broken  llands'
the  tyde  of  floud  commeth  from  the  Northward.

Tuesday  the  foure  and  twentieth  all  the  morning,  there
blew  a  storme  Northerly,  and  such  a  suffe  of  the  Sea,
and  so  much  Ice  came  in,  that  our  fasts  brake  that  were
fast  on  shoare,  and  our  Rudder  was  driven  from  our
sterne  with  the  force  of  mightie  Hands  of  Ice  ;  so  that
we  were  forced  to  hale  close  into  the  bottome  of  the  Cove
to  save  our  clothes,  furniture  and  victuals  :  wee  did  our
best,  but  before  we  had  done,  our  ship  was  halfe  full  of
water :  the  night  comming  upon  us  being  wearie,  we
tooke  a  little  rest.

On  Wednesday,  we  went  hard  to  worke  when  the  ship

was  on  ground,  to  get  the  water  out  of  her,  and  to  stop

so  many  of  her  leakes  as  we  could  come  by,  and  to  save

so  much  of  our  bread  as  we  could  ;  and  some  went  to

building our shallop. Also I caused our Boate to be

lanched  over  the  Hand  ;  and  sent  my  Mate  Edward  Gorrell, „ ,,  .
.  . ,  .  1 /•  1  1  1  Gorrell  the

with  three  others,  to  seeke  for  a better  place  where  to  Masters

bring  our  ship  on  ground,  if  it  were  possible,  to  mend  Mate.

359

A.D.
1606.

M.  John
Knight  with
Jive  more
passeth  over  to
a  great  Hand,
where  he  and
three  of  his
company  seem
to  have  bin
intercepted  by
the  Savages.

Their
Trumpettor.

[III.iv.830.]

Their  Shallop
not  finished.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

her  againe.  But  they  returned  without  any  certaintie  by
reason  of  the  abundance  of  Ice,  which  choked  every  place.
They  found  wood  growing  on  the  shoare.

Thursday  being  faire  weather.]  Here  Master  John
Knight  ended  writing  in  this  Journall.  On  this  Thursday
the  sixe  and  twentieth  of  June  in  the  morning,  our  Master
caused  some  of  our  men  to  goe  aboord  our  ship,  to  save
what  things  they  could.  And  hee  and  Edward  Gorrell
his  Mate,  and  his  brother,  and  three  more  of  our  Company
tooke  the  Boate,  carrying  with  them  foure  Pistols,  three
Muskets,  five  Swords,  and  two  halfe  Pikes  for  to  goe  over
to  a  great  Hand,  which  was  not  above  a  mile  from  our
ship,  to  looke  if  they  could  find  any  Harbour  or  any
Cove,  to  get  our  ship  into  for  to  mend  her.  Also  he
carried  an  Equinoctiall  Diall  with  him,  and  paper  to  make
a  Draught  of  the  Land.  When  they  were  passed  over
to  the  other  side,  our  Master,  his  Mate,  and  his  brother,
and  one  more  went  on  shoare,  leaving  two  of  us  in  the
Boate  with  one  Musket,  one  Sword,  and  an  halfe  Pike
to  keepe  it :  which  two  stayed  in  the  Boate  from  ten  of
the  clocke  in  the  morning,  untill  eleven  of  the  clocke  at
night,  but  could  heare  no  newes  of  them  after  their
departure  up  into  the  top  of  the  Hill.  Then  did  the
Trumpettor  sound  two  or  three  times,  and  the  other  did
discharge  his  Musket  two  or  three  times,  and  so  they
came  away  to  the  other  side  to  the  West  of  the  Company,
where  the  ship  was :  where  they  were  watching  for  our
comming ;  who  seeing  us  two  comming  and  no  more,
they  marvelled  where  the  rest  of  the  company  were.
When  wee  came  on  shoare,  they  enquired  for  our  Master
and  the  rest  of  our  company.  But  we  could  tell  them
no  newes  of  them  after  their  departure  out  of  the  Boat,
but  that  we  did  see  them  goe  up  to  the  top  of  the  Hand.
Which  report  did  strike  all  our  men  into  a  great  feare
to  thinke  in  what  extremitie  we  were,  because  we  did
want  our  Master  and  three  of  our  best  men,  and  our
Ship  lay  sunke,  and  we  had  nothing  to  trust  to  but  our
Shallop,  which  was  not  at  that  time  halfe  finished. This

360

JOHN KNIGHT  a.d.

1606.
night  lying  on  shoare  in  our  Tent,  which  was  betweene
two  Rockes,  we  kept  very  good  watch,  for  feare  of  any
peoples  sudden  assaulting  of  us  :  or  if  our  Master  and
his  company  had  travailed  so  farre,  that  they  could  not
come  againe  that  night,  and  would  shoote  a  Musket,  that
wee  might  heare  them. But  they  came  not  at  all.

The  next  day  being  Friday,  and  the  seven  and  twentieth
of  June,  wee  consulted  to  goe  over  seven  of  us  with  our
Boate,  to  try  if  we  could  see  or  learne  any  news  of  our
Master,  or  any  of  our  men  ;  for  we  were  afraid  that  they
were  either  surprised  by  the  Savages  of  the  Countrie,  or
else  devoured  by  the  wilde  Beasts.  So  we  tooke  with  us
seven  Muskets,  and  Swords,  and  Targets,  and  such  pro-
vision as  we  had  in  the  Ship,  and  went  downe  to  the
Sea-side,  but  wee  could  not  get  over  for  Ice.  At  length  They  could  not
we  returned,  with  much  adoe  to  get  on  shoare,  and  went  Passe  t0  the
to  our  Ship,  to  save  what  things  we  could  all  that  day. &eat  lland

On  Saturday,  the  eight  and  twentieth,  we  did  likewise
save  what  things  we  could,  and  gat  all  our  things  out  of
our  Ship,  and  made  her  cleane  in  hold,  having  faire
weather,  hoping  in  God  to  save  her,  and  to  mend  all
things,  as  well  as  we  could ;  for  she  lay  upon  hard  rocks :
wherefore  we  kept  her  as  light  as  we  could,  for  beating
and  bruising  of  her  hull.  That  night  about  nine  of  the
clocke,  it  began  to  raine  very  sore,  and  so  continued  all
night :  and  about  one  of  the  clocke  at  night,  our  Boate-
Swaine  and  our  Steward  being  at  watch,  and  their  watch
almost  out,  the  Steward  went  aboord  the  Ship  to  pumpe,
leaving  the  Boate-Swaine  at  watch  some  Musket  shot
length  from  our  Tent :  while  he  was  in  pumping,  there
came  over  the  rocks  a  great  sort  of  the  Countrey  people
toward  the  place  where  the  Boate-Swaine  was :  who  when
they  saw  him,  they  shot  their  arrowes  at  him,  running  TheSavagesof
toward  him  as  fast  as  they  could.  Whereupon  hee  dis-  the  Countrie
charged  his  Musket  at  them,  and  fled  to  our  Tent  as  assault  our

r & 1  U1-1-  11J1  1  men  at  one  °f

fast  as  nee  could,  thinking  they  had  beset  us,  they  were  t^  c/oc£e  at
so many of them in sight. The Steward hearing his  night.
Musket  goe  off,  came  out  of  the  Ship,  and  as  he  was

361

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1606.

comming,  saw  the  Savages  running  to  our  Shallop,  and
cryed  out  to  us  that  were  asleepe  in  our  Tent,  to  come
to  rescue  the  Boate-Swaine,  and  the  Shallop.  We  made
what  haste  we  could ;  when  we  came  towards  them,  and
saw  so  many  of  them  in  our  Shallop,  we  were  afraid  we
were  betraid.  At  this  time  it  rained  very  sore ;  yet  calling
our  wits  together,  we  sent  two  of  our  men  backe  unto

Our  men our  Tent,  the  rest  of  us  made  toward  them,  and  shot  at

expuhe  the them  some  three  or  foure  Muskets  :  who  when  they  saw

Savages.  us  sn0ote,  they  stood  in  our  Shallop,  and  held  up  their
hands  unto  us,  calling  one  to  another.  Then  thought
we  with  our  selves,  that  we  were  better  to  dye  in  our
defence  in  pursuing  of  them,  then  they  us,  being  but
eight  Men  and  a  great  Dogge.  When  they  saw  us
marching  toward  them  so  fiercely,  our  Dogge  being
formost,  they  ranne  away :  but  we  durst  not  pursue  them
any  further,  for  it  was  in  the  night,  and  they  were  in

Above  fiftie sight  above  fiftie  men. Thus  we  recovered  our  Shallop.

avages  Then  we  sent  some  more  of  our  men  to  our  Tent  to

keepe  it ;  and  the  rest  followed  toward  the  place  whither
they  fled.  But  before  we  could  overtake  them,  they  were
gotten  into  their  Boates,  and  were  rowing  away  through
the  Ice ;  which  was  so  thicke,  that  they  could  not  passe

Very  great  away?  but  stucke  fast ;  for  their  Boates  were  very  great :
oates  of  t  e  wee  seejng  them  sticke  fast  in  the  Ice,  some  setting  with
Oares,  and  some  rowing,  came  so  neere  them,  as  we  could,
and  shot  at  them  some  dozen  shot,  before  they  could  get
cleere :  which  shot  caused  them  to  cry  out  very  sore  one
to  another ;  for  their  Boates  were  full  of  men. As  farre

The  descrip-  as  we  COuld  judge, they be very little people, tawnie

turn  oj  t  e coloured, thin  or  no  beards,  and  flat  nosed,  and  Man-

bavages.  '

eaters.

On  Sunday,  the  nine  and  twentieth,  all  day  long  we

gat  such  things  as  we  could  aboord  our  Shippe,  for  feare

they  should  come  over  with  more  men,  and  beset  us,  our

Ship  lying  betweene  two  great  Rocks,  and  all  without

so  full  of  Ice,  that  we  could  not  passe  any  way  to  Sea,

no  not  with  a  Boate. That  day,  two  of  our  men  kept

362

JOHN KNIGHT  a.d.

1606.

watch  upon  the  Rocks,  to  give  us  warning,  if  they  did
come  over  with  Boats.  Then  did  our  Carpenter  make
what  shift  hee  could  with  our  Shallop,  and  did  tench  her
in  some  places,  but  neither  calked  her,  nor  pitched  her.
Then  did  wee  take  her,  and  bring  her  downe  close  to  the
Shippe,  and  there  shee  did  stand  all  night.

On  Munday,  the  thirtieth  day  in  the  morning  we  went
to  worke  to  cut  the  Ice  with  Axes  and  Pick-axes,  to  get
our  Shippe  ;  for  all  about  the  Hand  was  nothing  but  Ice,
and  no  place  to  ride  free  neither  with  Shippe  nor  Boate.
That  night  it  pleased  God,  that  wee  got  her  out,  and
came  away  rowing  with  our  Oares ;  but  she  was  exceeding
leake,  and  our  Shallop  too  :  and,  which  was  worse,  we  had
never  a  Rudder  to  stirre  our  Ship  withall.  Wee  rowed
all  that  night  among  the  Ice.

The  first  and  second  dayes  of  July,  we  continued  also
rowing  up  and  downe  among  the  floting  and  driving  Ice,
with  little  hope  of  recovering  our  Countrey.

The  third  of  July,  we  had  a  gale  of  winde  at  North,
and  a  great  current  setting  to  the  Southward  :  Then  made  A  great  Cur-
we  fast  our  Ship  to  an  Hand  of  Ice,  and  went  to  worke,  rent  setting  to

.xi  0 si.

md  to  stow  her  things  within  boord,  to  make  her  stiffe ;  *oum'
for  wee  had  never  a  whit  of  balast  in  her. Then  did  our
Carpenter  make  what  shift  he  could,  to  hang  our  Rudder,
having  nothing  convenient  in  our  Ship  to  make  Gudgins,  [III. iv.  831.]
nor  Pintels. Then  were  we  forced  to  breake  open  our
Masters  Chest,  and  to  take  all  the  Iron  bands  off  it,  to
make  fast  two  Pick-axes,  for  two  Pintels,  and  to  binde  Pintels  are
our  Rudder  withall. So,  as  it  pleased  God,  that  night  small  Iron  pins
we  hanged  our  Rudder,  having  but  two  Pintels  and  a  *?  V~fJ t0
Cable  through  the  middle  of  it,  to  keepe  it  to  with  two  and  hung  the
tacks. Then  were  we  in  good  hope  to  get  cleare  of  the  Rudder  to  the
Ice,  because  wee  had  some  steerage,  though  it  was  but  Stern-post,
bad  : for  before,  we  durst  beare  but  little  sayle,  our  Ship ^c'
being  so  leake,  and  her  stemme  so  sore  beaten  with  the
rocks  and  Ice,  and  having  no  steerage,  but  were  forced  to
rowe  with  our  Oares,  till  wee  were  all  sore  and  weary.
The  next  day  about  tenne  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,

363

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1606.

the  winde  came  to  the  West  North-west,  and  was  faire

weather : so  we  steered  away  East  and  by  North,  to  get

They  get  out of 'us  out  of  the  Bay:  And  at  noone,  the  watch  being  out,

*  \ th wnicn  was  the  third  watch  that  we  had  after  we  came

rode. ^ out  °f  the  Countrey  (for  before,  continually  we  did  watch

all,  to  keepe  our  Shippe  cleare  of  the  Ice,  as  neere  as  we

could)  we  began  to  Pumpe  our  Shippe,  but  could  not

make  her  sucke  in  a  thousand  stroakes,  if  she  had  stood

but  one  halfe  houre  unpumped. Then  were  wee  forced

to  unromage  our  Ship,  to  see  if  we  could  finde  our  leakes.

We  soone  found  a  great  many  of  leakes,  but  not  that

which  caused  us  to  Pumpe  so  sore. At  the  last,  we  found

Our  Shippes fa  close  abaft  our  forefoot,  where  her  keele  was  splintred

ee  e  was jfl  twQ  Qr  tjlree  p}aces where  the  Sea  came  running  in

splintered  in  r  . . r  ...  ,  . r to  .  .

two  or  three so  ^ast>  that  it  was  not  possible  to  keepe  her  tree  with

places.  both  our  Pumps,  and  wee  could  not  come  to  it  to  stop

it ;  for  it  was  under  the  timbers.  Then  did  wee  take
our  maine  Bonnet,  and  basted  it  with  Occom,  and  put
it  overboord,  right  against  our  leake,  which  eased  us  some
foure  or  five  hundred  strokes  in  an  houre. Then  upon

They  consult  to  consultation  had  among  our  selves,  wee  resolved  to  shape

touch  at  New-  our  course  towards  Newfound  Land,  to  see  if  we  could

pun  an  .  get  any  place  to  mend  our  Ship,  hoping  there  to  meete
with  some  English  or  French  men.  At  this  time  we  had
one  of  our  men  very  sicke,  and  another  had  his  hand
very  sore  splitted ;  and  most  of  us  all  were  so  sore  with
rowing  and  pumping,  that  we  were  scarce  able  to  stirre,
but  that  we  must  perforce.

The  fift  of  Julie,  wee  shaped  our  course  for  New  found
Land,  with  the  winde  at  West  South-west.

The  one  and  twentieth,  the  winde  was  at  South  South-
west ;  and  we  fell  with  the  Land,  being  nothing  but  broken

Broken  Hands  Hands. Then  we  stood  to  the  Westward,  being  in  the

^Jl'fjf"^  latitude  of  49.  degrees  and  an  halfe.

latitude.  The  two  and  twentieth  was  faire  weather,  and  the  winde

very  variable :  and  about  sixe  of  the  clocke  at  night,  the
winde  came  to  the  West  North-west.  Then  we  steered
in  among  the  Hands,  to  see  if  we  could  finde  any  harbour

364

JOHN KNIGHT

to  mend  our  Shippe  ;  for  she  was  very  leake.  When  we
were  come  in  among  them,  we  found  nothing  but  broken
Hands,  and  a  great  current,  which  did  set  from  Hand  to
Hand,  and  had  no  ground  at  an  hundred  fathoms.  That
night  we  were  very  sore  intangled  with  sunken  Rocks,
and  in  great  danger  of  casting  away  our  Ship,  having  very
thicke  weather  :  wherefore  we  kept  to  and  fro  all  that  night.

The  foure  and  twentieth  of  July,  in  the  morning,  we
spied  some  dozen  Shallops,  which  were  fishing  some  two
leagues  from  us.  Then  wee  made  what  way  wee  could
toward  them,  &c.  We  remained  in  this  Bay  of  Fogo,
in  repairing  our  Shippe,  and  refreshing  of  our  selves
untill  the  two  and  twentieth  of  August.  Then  taking
our  leaves  of  our  kinde  and  loving  friends,  with  giving
them  most  heartie  thankes  for  their  goodnesse  towards
us,  we  put  forth  to  the  Sea,  and  with  an  indifferent  and
reasonable  good  passage  we  arrived  safely  in  Dartmouth
in  Devonshire,  and  sent  word  to  London  unto  our  owners,
of  the  losse  of  our  Master  and  his  three  companions,  and
of  the  dolefull  successe  of  our  Voyage,  the  foure  and
twentieth  day  of  September, 1606.

The  rest  of  this  Journall,  from  the  death  of  Master  John
Knight,  was  written  by  Oliver  Browne,  one  of  the  Company.

Chap.  XVII.

The  fourth  Voyage  of  James  Hall  to  Groeneland,
wherein  he  was  set  forth  by  English  Adven-
turers, Anno  161 2.  and  slaine  by  a  Greenelander.
Written  by  William  Baffin.

Ednesday,  the  eight  of  July,  161 2.  in  the
morning  I  perceived  the  Sunne  and  the
Moone,  both  very  faire  above  the  horizon,
as  I  had  done  divers  times  before.  At
which  time  I  purposed  to  finde  out  the
longitude  of  that  place,  by  the  Moones
comming  to  the  Meridian.  Most  part
bf  this  day  I  spent  about  finding  of  the  Meridian  line ;

365

A.D.
l6l2.

Many  broken
Hands  which
were  the  Isles
de  Foga.
Sunken  Rocks.

Twelve
Shallops  of
Fishermen.

A.D.

1612.

[III.  iv.  832.]

60.  degrees
30.  minutes
difference  of
longitude
betweene  the
meridian  of
London  and
Cockins  Sound
in  Groenland.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

which  I  did  upon  an  Hand  neere  the  Sea,  hanging  at  the  \
extreames  of  my  Meridian  line  two  threeds  with  Plummets  %
at  them,  instead  of  an  index  and  sights.

Thursday,  the  ninth  day  very  early  in  the  morning  III
went  on  shoare  the  Hand,  being  a  faire  morning,  and
observed  till  the  Moone  came  just  upon  the  Meridian.
At  which  very  instant,  I  observed  the  Sunnes  height,  and
found  it  8.  degrees,  53.  minutes,  North:  in  the  elevation
of  the  Pole  6$.  degrees  20.  minutes.  By  the  which,  I
working  by  the  doctrine  of  sphericall  triangles,  having  «
the  three  sides  given,  to  wit,  the  complement  of  the
Poles  elevation ;  the  complement  of  the  Almecanter ;  and
the  complement  of  the  Sunnes  declination,  to  finde  out
the  quantitie  of  the  angle  at  the  Pole :  I  say,  by  this
working,  I  found  it  to  be  foure  of  the  clocke,  17.
minutes,  and  24.  seconds.  Which  when  I  had  done,
I  found  by  mine  Ephemerides,  that  the  Moone  came
to  the  Meridian  at  London  that  morning  at  foure
of  the  clocke,  25.  minutes,  34.  seconds:  which  17.
minutes,  24.  seconds,  substracted  from  25.  34.  leaveth
8.  10.  of  time,  for  the  difference  of  longitude  betwixt
the  Meridian  of  London  (for  which  the  Ephemerides  was
made)  and  the  Meridian  passing  by  this  place  in  Groen-
land. Now  the  Moones  motion  that  day,  was  12.  degrees
7.  minutes  :  which  converted  into  minutes  of  time,  were
48.  minutes,  29.  seconds:  which  working  by  the  rule  of
proportion,  the  worke  is  thus  :  if  48.  minutes,  29.  seconds  ;
the  time  that  the  Moone  commeth  to  the  Meridian  sooner
that  day,  then  she  did  the  day  before,  give  360.  the  whole
circumference  of  the  earth,  what  shall  8.  minutes  10.
seconds  give,  to  wit,  60.  degrees,  30.  minutes,  or  neere
there  about :  which  is  the  difference  of  longitude  betweene
the  Meridian  of  London,  and  this  place  in  Groenland,
called  Cockins  Sound,  lying  to  the  Westward  of  London.

This  finding  of  the  longitude,  I  confesse  is  somewhat
difficult  and  troublesome,  and  there  may  be  some  small
errour.  But  if  it  be  carefully  looked  unto,  and  exactly
wrought, there  will  be  no  great  errour,  if  your  Ephe-

366

JAMES HALL  ad.

1612.

nerides  be  true.  But  some  will  say,  that  this  kinde  of  Objection.
vorking  is  not  for  Marriners ;  because  they  are  not
icquainted  to  worke  propositions  by  the  table  of  signes,
ind  an  instrument  is  not  precise  enough  to  finde  out  the
loure,  minute,  and  second.  For  the  losse  of  one  minute
)f  time,  is  the  losse  of  7.  degrees  of  longitude.  I  answere,  Amwere.
hat  although  the  most  part  are  not  used  to  this  worke,
^et  I  know  some  of  the  better  sort,  which  are  able  to
vorke  this  and  the  like  propositions  exactly.  And  those
vhich  yet  cannot,  and  are  desirous  to  learne,  may  in  short
>pace  attaine  to  such  knowledge  as  shall  be  sufficient  for
uch  things.  And  how  necessary  it  is,  that  the  longitude
if  places  should  be  knowne,  I  leave  to  the  judgement  of
ill  skilfull  Marriners,  and  others  that  are  learned  in  the
Vlathematicks.

This  afternoone  it  was  agreed  by  the  chiefe  of  our
Company,  that  our  Master,  James  Hall,  should  goe  in
he  smaller  Ship,  farther  to  the  Northward.

The  foresaid  Thursday  in  the  evening,  he  departed
)ut  of  the  Patience  into  the  Harts-ease,  to  get  forth  of
he  Harbor,  which  our  Master  called  Cockins-ford,  in
emembrance  of  Alderman  Cockin  one  of  the  Adven-
urers  :  which  place,  is  in  the  latitude  of  65.  degrees,  20.
ninutes.  And  the  variation  of  the  compasse  is  23.
legrees,  58.  minutes,  to  the  Westward.  That  evening
#as  very  calme,  and  we  towed  our  Shippe  forth  with
he  Shallops  and  Ships  Boat.  But  within  an  houre  or
wo  after  we  were  got  into  the  Offin  ;  the  winde  being
it  North,  it  blew  a  great  storme,  which  continued  all
hat  night.

The  foureteenth,  our  Master  turned  the  Ship  up  to  the
River  againe,  toward  the  River  where  the  supposed  mine
hould  be.  But  the  tyde  was  so  farre  spent,  that  we
:ould  not  get  to  Sea,  but  were  constrained  to  Anker  in
1  roade  at  the  South  side  of  the  River,  some  three  leagues
Tom  the  Patience,  in  which  place  are  many  good  Rode-
steeds  to  be  found.

Thursday,  the  sixteenth  day,  the  winde  was  at  North-

367

Cockins  Ford
in  65.  deg.
20.  min.

Variation  23.
deg.  58.  min.

Many  good
Rodes.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

west,  and  blew  so  stiffe  a  gale,  that  we  could  not  get  to
Sea  that  day.  That  night,  eighteene  of  us  went  into
the  Hands  to  looke  for  some  Deere,  but  found  none. But

Great  footing,  we  perceived  the  foote-steps  of  some  great  Beast,  which
wee  supposed  to  be  of  some  great  Elke :  the  foote  was
as  bigge  as  any  Oxe  foote.

Tuesday,  the  twentie  one,  the  weather  still  continued
in  such  sort,  that  wee  could  not  by  any  meanes  get  to
the  River,  where  the  supposed  Myne  should  bee. Where-

Ramels  Rwer.  fore  our  Master  bare  roome  for  Ramelsford,  being  a  River
Southward  of  another,  called  Cunninghams  ford,  some
twelve  leagues.  And  we  came  to  an  Anchor  at  the
entrance  on  the  Southside  of  the  Ford,  about  seven  of
the  clocke.

Wednesday,  the  two  and  twentieth  day,  about  nine
or  ten  of  the  clocke,  the  Savages  came  to  barter  with  us,
being  about  fortie  of  them,  and  continued  about  an  houre

James  Hall anc[  an  halfe : At  which  time  our  Master  James  Hall,
j  j  7 being  in  the  Boate,  a  Savage  with  his  Dart  strooke  him

Savage.  a  deadly  wound  upon  the  right  side,  which  our  Surgean

did  thinke  did  pierce  his  liver.  We  all  mused  that  he
should  strike  him,  and  offer  no  harme  to  any  of  the  rest :
unlesse  it  were,  that  they  knew  him  since  he  was  there
with  the  Danes ;  for  out  of  that  River  they  carried  away
five  of  the  people,  whereof  never  any  returned  againe :
and  in  the  next  River,  they  killed  a  great  number.  And
it  should  seeme  that  he  which  killed  him,  was  either
brother,  or  some  neere  kinsman  to  some  of  them  that
were  carried  away :  for  he  did  it  very  resolutely,  and
came  within  foure  yards  of  him.  And,  for  ought  we
could  see,  the  people  are  very  kinde  one  to  another,  and
ready  to  revenge  any  wrong  offred  to  them.  All  that
day  he  lay  very  sore  pained,  looking  for  death  every
houre,  and  resigned  all  his  charge  to  Master  Andrew  L
Barker,  Master  of  the  Harts-ease,  willing  him  to  place  ol

nil  'v8^1  another  in  his  roome  Master  of  the  small  Ship.

The  death  of Thursday,  the  three  and  twentieth,  about  eight  of  the  *

James  Hall, clocke  in  the  morning  he  dyed,  being  very  penitent  for  L

368

WILLIAM BAFFIN  a.d.

1612.

ill  his  former  offences.  And  after  we  had  shrowded  him,
vee  carried  him  in  the  Shallop,  to  burie  him  in  some  out
land,  according  to  his  owne  request  while  he  was  living.
\fter  we  had  buried  him,  we  went  in  the  Shallop  to  seeke
:or  the  mine,  which  we  had  expected  so  long.  All  that
day  we  rowed  along  toward  the  North,  passing  by  a  Cape  Queene
:alled,  Queene  Sophias  Cape.  That  night  we  staied  at  Sophias  Cape.
in  Hand,  some  three  leagues  short  of  the  River.

Friday,  the  foure  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning,  wee
•owed  along,  and  came  to  the  place,  which  is  on  the  South-
;ide of the  entrance  of  Cunninghams  River : And  we  Cunninghams
bund  divers  places,  where  the  Danes  had  digged ;  it  was  Rwer-

kinde of  shining stone, which  when our  Goldsmith,
ames  Carlile,  had  tried,  it  was  found  of  no  value,  and  The  supposed
lad  no  mettall  at  all  in  it: but  was  like  unto  Moscovie  Mine  found  to
ludde,  and  of  a  glittering  colour. That  day  after  we
lad  dyned,  wee  rowed  up  that  River  some  foure  leagues,
vhere  divers  of  our  company  went  up  into  the  Moun-
aines,  and  found  a  Valley  more  pleasant,  then  they  had  <A  pleasant
eene  in  the  Countrey. That  evening  we  returned,  and y'
ame to the place where the Danes had digged their
upposed  Mine,  and  tooke  some  of  it  in  our  Boate  to
arry  with  us,  and  returned  toward  our  Ship. That  night
ve  rowed  and  sailed,  and  the  next  morning  about  nine
)f  the  clocke,  we  came  to  our  Ship.

Saturday, the five and twentieth, being Saint James
lis  day,  in  the  forenoone,  we  came  to  our  Shippe,  lying
>n the South side  of  the  River,  called  Ramels  River,
^.nd  as  soone  as  our  Master  found,  that  the  people  came
10  more  to  trade  with  us,  he  determined  to  depart  with
he  Shippe  into the  Kings  Ford  to  the  Patience : and
owing  about  the  harbour,  where  we  lay  to  finde  some
leerer  way  out  to  the  Sea,  we  found  among  the  Hands,  Many  of  their
.'here  many  of  their  winter  houses  had  bin,  and  some  winter  houses
f  their  Tents  were  but  lately  carried  away. In  which  ™  Ramels
lace  wee  also  found  one  of  their  long  Boates,  made  of  %vher'f  ,.
yood,  and  bound  together  for  the  most  part,  with  shivers  their  greater
)f  Whales  fins,  and  covered  with  Seales  skinnes,  being  Boates.
xiv  369  2  A

A.D.

16x2.

Ramels  Ford
in  the  latitude
of  67.  degrees.
The  variation
is  24.  degrees.
16.  minutes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

some  two  and  thirtie  foote  in  length,  and  some  five  foote
broad,  having  tenne  thoughts  or  seates  in  it.  That  day
about  twelve  of  the  clocke  we  weighed  anchor,  and
departed  out  of  Ramels  Ford,  which  lieth  in  the  latitude
of  67.  degrees,  and  the  variation  of  the  compasse  is  24.
degrees  16.  minutes,  being  a  very  faire  River,  and  one
of  the  most  principall,  which  wee  saw  in  that  Countrey,
stretching  in  East  and  East  and  by  South.  This  night,
about  one  of  the  clocke,  we  came  to  the  Patience,  lying
in  the  Kings  Ford.

Sunday,  the  sixe  and  twentieth,  Master  Andrew  Barker,
and  our  Merchant,  Master  Wilkinson,  with  other  of  the
Company,  were  in  conference  about  returning  home,
because  that  since  our  Master  was  slaine,  none  of  the
Savages  would  trade  with  us,  as  they  were  wont.

Wednesday,  the  nine  and  twentieth,  we  were  likewise
occupied  about  taking  in  of  ballast ;  for  our  Shippe  was
very  light :  and  that  evening  it  was  agreed,  that  Andrew
Barker,  Master  of  the  Harts-ease,  should  goe  Master  of  d
the  Patience,  which  was  sore  against  the  minde  of  William
Gourdon  : and  William  Huntrice  was  appointed  Master  v
of  the  Harts-ease,  and  John  Gartenby,  one  of  the  quarter  f
Masters  of  the  Patience,  was  Masters  mate  of  the  Harts-  {
ease.

Tuesday, the  fourth  of  August,  in  the  morning  the
winde  being  Northerly,  a  very  small  gale  we  got  to  Sea,  x\
where  the  winde  came  to  the  Southward,  and  we  tacked  \
sometime  on  the  one  boord,  and  sometime  on  the  other,
making  small  way  on  our  course.

Munday  the  tenth,  was  raine  and  foule  weather,  as  it||
had  continued  every  day  since  wee  came  from  harbour,
saving  the  seventh  day,  which  was  somewhat  faire :  For
commonly  while  the  winde  is  South,  it  is  very  thick  and
foule  weather.  We  tacked  sometimes  on  one  boord,  and
sometimes  on  the  other,  making  a  South  by  West  way,
at  noone  sixe  leagues.

Wednesday,  the  twelfth,  it  waxed  calme,  we  being  some-
Bumils  Cape,  what Southward of  a  Cape, called Burnils Cape : and

370

William
Huntrice
Master  of  the
Hearts-ease.

They  come  out
of  harbour.

Thick  and
foggie
weather,  the
winde  being
South.

WILLIAM BAFFIN  a.d.

1612.

ibout  three  or  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  afternoone,  the
svinde  came  to  the  North  and  by  West,  an  easie  gale,
vith  faire  weather.

The  eighteenth,  at  noone  we  were  in  58.  deg.  50.  min.
The  seventeenth  day,  I  tooke  the  variation  of  the  com-  Variation  13.
)asse,  finding  it  to  be  13.  degrees  22.  minutes,  contrary  degr.21.mm.
o  the  observations  of  others  in  this  place.  And  if  any
loe  doubt  of  the  truth  thereof,  they  may  with  a  little
xiines  prove  it.  The  eighteenth  of  August,  the  declina-
ion  of  the  Sunne  was  9.  degrees  58.  minutes,  for  the
Meridian  of  London.  But  we  being  almost  foure  houres
)f  time  to  the  Westward  thereof,  there  are  three  minutes
be  abated  from  the  rest :  and  so  the  declination  was
).  degrees  $$.  minutes  ;  and  his  height  above  the  horizon
vas  24.  degrees  40.  minutes  in  the  latitude  of  59.  degrees
).  min.  and  his  distance  from  the  South  to  the  Westward,
>y  the  compasse,  was  81.  degrees.  And  for  truth  of  the
irst  observation,  I  tooke  another  shortly  after,  finding
hem  not  to  differ  above  4.  minutes.

Wednesday  the  nineteenth,  the  winde  still  continued
vith  thicke  and  hasie  weather,  we  being  at  noone
the  latitude  of  58.  degrees  30.  minutes,  or  there-
tbout,  making  a  South  South-east  way,  about  ten
eagues.

Thursday  the  twentieth,  was  faire  weather,  the  winde
.t  East  North-east,  wee  steered  away  South-east  and
>outh-east  and  by  East,  making  at  noone  a  South-east
md  by  South  way,  about  thirtie  leagues,  being  at  noone
n  the  latitude  of  57.  degrees  20.  minutes.  This  day  in
he  afternoone,  I  tooke  the  variation  of  the  compasse,  and  Variation  11.
bund  it  about  11.  degrees  10.  minutes.  degr.io.mm.

Friday  the  one  and  twentieth,  faire  weather,  with  the  [Ill.iv.  834.]
vinde  at  North  and  North  by  East,  and  we  made  an  East
>outh-east way, halfe Southerly twentie foure leagues,
)eing  at noone by observation, in the latitude of $6.
iegrees  50.  minutes.

Saturday  the  two  and  twentieth,  faire  weather,  the  wind
t  North  and  North  by  East,  wee  made  an  East  way  halfe

37*

A.D.

1612.

Variation  7.
degrees  23.
minutes.

Variation  7.
degrees  20.
minutes.

The  true
variation  6.
deg.  4.
minutes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Southerly,  some  twentie  two  leagues,  being  at  noone  in
the  latitude  of  56.  degrees  47.  minutes.

Sunday  the  three  and  twentieth,  faire  weather,  the  wind
at  West  North-west,  we  making  an  East  and  East  by
North  way  about  twentie  foure  leagues.  This  day  I  tooke
the  variation  of  the  Compasse,  and  found  it  to  be  7.
degrees  23.  minutes,  being  at  noone  in  the  latitude  of  57.
degrees  26.  minutes.

Munday  the  foure  and  twentieth,  being  S.  Bartholo-
mewes  day,  faire  weather  with  a  North  North-west  wind
wee  making  an  East  North-east  way,  halfe  Northerly  about
twentie  seven  leagues,  and  were  at  noone  by  observation
in  the  latitude  of  58.  degrees  4.  minutes.  This  day  I
observed  and  found  the  Compasse  to  be  varied  7.  degrees
20.  minutes.

Tuesday  the  five  and  twentieth,  faire  weather  and
calme :  the  winde  at  North,  wee  made  a  North-east  and
by  East  way  seventeene  leagues,  being  at  noone  in  the
latitude  of  58.  degrees  30.  minutes.  This  day  I  found
the  common  Compasse  to  be  varied  one  point,  and  the
true  variation  to  bee  6.  degrees  4.  minutes.

Wednesday  the  sixe  and  twentieth  faire  weather  also,
with  the  wind  North  North-west,  we  made  a  North-east
and  by  East  way  halfe  about  twentie  two  leagues,  being
in  the  height  of  59.  degrees  10.  minutes.

Thursday  the  seven  and  twentieth  indifferent  faire
weather,  with  a  stiffe  gale  of  wind  at  the  North  North-
west, we  making  a  North-east  way  about  thirtie  one
leagues,  being  at  noone  in  the  latitude  of  60.  degrees  10.
minutes.

Friday  the  eight  and  twentieth,  the  wind  at  South-east
with  a  stiffe  gale,  wee  made  good  about  noone  a  North-
east and  by  East  way  about  twentie  nine  leagues.  This
day  in  the  afternoone  it  blew  so  great  a  storme,  that  wee
were  in  great  distresse,  the  winde  at  East  South-east.  But
about  eleven  of  the  clocke  it  came  to  the  North-west,  and
North-west  by  North.  And  we  ranne  some  twentie
leagues.

372

WILLIAM BAFFIN  a.d.

1612.

Saturday  the  nine  and  twentieth,  it  blew  so  stiffe,  that
wee  could  beare  none  but  our  fore-saile,  making  an
East  and  by  South  way  halfe  Southerly,  about  thirtie
leagues.

Sunday  the  thirtieth,  all  the  forenoone  it  blew  a  very
stiffe  gale,  and  about  noone  the  winde  came  Southerly ;
and  it  blew  a  very  great  storme,  which  continued  all  that
day  and  that  night  in  such  sort,  that  we  could  not  saile
at  all,  but  all  that  night  lay  at  hull.

Munday  the  one  and  thirtieth,  in  the  morning  about
foure  of  the  clocke,  the  winde  came  to  the  South-west  a
very  stiffe  gale.  At  which  time  we  set  our  fore-saile.
The  wind  continued  all  this  day  and  night,  we  steered
away  East  and  by  South,  making  at  noone  an  East  North-
east way  about  thirtie  foure  leagues.

Tuesday  the  first  of  September,  the  wind  still  continued
I  at  South-west,  blowing  a  very  stiffe  gale,  we  steered  away
[East  and  by  South,  making  an  East  way  about  fiftie
leagues.  This  day  at  noone  we  were  in  the  latitude  of
60.  degrees  45.  minutes.

Wednesday  the  second  faire  weather  with  the  wind  at
I  South-west,  wee  made  an  East  and  by  South  way  halfe
la  point  Southerly  about  fortie  two  leagues,  being  at  noone
in  the  latitude  of  60.  degrees  10.  minutes.  This  day  I
observed,  and  found  the  Compasse  to  be  varied  three
degrees  to  the  Westward.

Thursday  the  third  day  faire  weather,  the  wind  at  South-
jwest :  wee  made  an  East  by  North  way  at  noone  about
twentie  leagues.  This  day  in  the  after-noone,  the  winde
being  at  North  North-west,  it  blew  a  very  stiffe  gale  for
two  Watches  ;  and  toward  seven  or  eight  of  the  clocke
the  storme  so  increased,  that  our  shippe  was  not  able  to
|beare  any  saile. And  all  that  night  wee  lay  at  hull.

Friday  the  fourth,  the  storme  still  continued,  and  we
could  beare  no  saile  all  that  day  till  about  foure  of  the
clocke  in  the  afternoone,  at  which  time  we  set  our  fore *£ ofthri'
course,  and  our  maine  course. The  night  before  in  the  consort,  The
storme, we lost The Harts-ease. This day  wee made  Hartsease.

373

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

some  twelve  leagues  East  and  by  North. And  we  fell  tc|
lee-ward  lying  at  hull  some  five  leagues  South  by  West.

Saturday  the  fift  calme  weather,  but  very  thicke  anq
close  all  the  forenoone :  the  wind  continued  still  at  North
North-west,  we  making  from  the  time  wee  set  our  course^
the  day  before,  about  twentie  leagues  East  halfe  Southerly
beeing  at  noone  in  the  latitude  of  59.  degrees  53.  minutes.j
Sunday  the  sixt,  faire  weather,  the  wind  at  North  North-
west, we  steering  away  East  North-east,  and  East  and  by
North,  made  an  East  by  North  way,  halfe  Northerly  some
29.  leagues,  being  at  noone  in  60.  degrees  10.  minutes]
Variation  6. This  day  the  Compasse  was  varied  to  the  East  sixe  degrees]
degrees  to  the This  afternoone  it  was  almost  calme : and  wee  sounded.;
Ground  found anc^  f°und  ground  at  sixtie  eight  fathomes. This  Evening
about  ten  of  the  clocke  the  wind  came  to  the  South-east.
Munday the seventh, very faire weather, the wind);
[III. iv. 83 5.]  South-east  and South-east  by  East, wee  tacked  in the]
morning  to  the  North-ward,  and  ranne  East  North-easti
and  East  by  North  untill  seven  or  eight  in  the  afternoone :
at  which  time  we  tacked  up  to  the  Southward,  and  wenti
away  South-west  till  toward  twelve  a  clocke  that  night);
twentie  leagues.

Tuesday  the  eight,  in  our  morning  Watch  I  found  ourl

selves  to  be  in  59.  degrees  20.  minutes :  And  about  fivel

Land  0f  ^g  docke  I  espied  Land,  which  we  supposed  to  bee

Th^ll '  of t^ie  ^es  °^  Orkney,  as  afterward  we  found  them  to  be  thej

Orkney.  * same. And  toward  three  of  the  clocke,  we  came  to  an;

Anchor  in  a  Channell  running  betweene  the  Hands ;  where;

the  people  came  to  us,  and  brought  us  Hennes,  Geese,

and  Sheepe,  and  sold  them  to  us  for  old  clothes  and  shooes,]

desiring rather them then money. There are about!

eighteene  of  these  Hands,  which  are  called  by  the  namej

of  the  Orkeneis.

Wednesday  the  ninth,  it  was  thicke  weather,  and  the]
winde  so  Easterly  that  wee  could  not  weigh  Anchor.

Thursday  the  tenth,  faire  weather,  and  the  wind  came
to  the  North-west,  and  about  noone  we  weighed  Anchor  a
and  toward  five  of  the  clocke  we  were  cleere  off  the  lies.

374

WILLIAM BAFFIN

The  Channell  for  the  most  part  lyeth  North-west  and
South-east. All  that  night  we  stood  away  South-east.

Friday  the  eleventh,  faire  weather,  with  the  wind  at
North  North-west.  And  about  nine  of  the  clocke  in  the
morning,  we  steered  away  South  South-east.  At  which
time  wee  had  sight  of  Buquham-nesse  :  And  about  two
of  the  clocke  we  were  thwart  of  it.  The  seventeenth,
we  came  to  an  Anchor  in  Hull  Road,  for  which  the  Lord
bee  praysed.

Here  I  thinke  it  not  amisse  briefly  to  relate  the  state
and  manners  of  the  people  of  Groenland,  forasmuch  as  I
could  learne  :  As  also  what  likelihood  there  is  of  a  passe
into  the  Sea,  which  lyeth  upon  Tartarie  and  China.

The  North-west  part  of  Gronland  is  an  exceeding  high
Land  to  the  Sea-ward,  and  almost  nothing  but  Moun-
taynes ;  which  are  wonderfull  high  all  within  the  Land,
as  farre  as  wee  could  perceive :  and  they  are  all  of  stone,
some  of  one  colour,  and  some  of  another,  and  all  glistering,
as  though  they  were  of  rich  value ;  but  indeed  they  are
not  worth  any  thing.  For  our  Gold-smith  James  Carlile
tryed  very  much  of  the  Ure,  and  found  it  to  bee  nothing
worth.  If  there  bee  any  Mettall,  it  lyeth  so  low  in  the
Mountaynes,  that  it  cannot  bee  well  come  by.  There
are  some  Rocks  in  these  Mountaynes,  which  are  exceeding
pure  Stone,  finer,  and  whiter  then  Alabaster.  The  sides
of  these  Mountaynes  continually  are  covered  with  Snow
for  the  most  part,  and  especially  the  North  sides,  and  the
North  sides  of  the  Valleyes,  having  a  kind  of  Mosse,  and
in  some  places  Grasse  with  a  little  branch  running  all  along
the  ground,  bearing  a  little  blacke  Berrie,  it  runneth  along
the  ground  like  Three-leafed  Grasse  heere  in  England.
There  are  few  or  no  Trees  growing,  as  farre  as  wee  could
perceive,  but  in  one  place  some  fortie  miles  within  the
Land,  in  a  River,  which  wee  called  Balls  River.  There
I  saw  on  the  South-side  of  an  high  Mountayne,  which
we  went  up,  and  found  (as  it  were)  a  yong  Grove  of  small
Wood,  some  of  it  sixe  or  seven  foot  high  like  a  Coppice
in  England,  that  had  beene some two or  three  yeeres

375

A.D.

1612.

The  lying  of
the  Channell
in  Orkney.

Buquham-
ness.

They  arrive

at  Hull.

High  Moun-
taynes of  stone
very  pure.

No  profitable
Ure.

Continuall
Snow.

Grasse.

No  Trees.
Balls  River.

A  Grove  of
small  wood.

A.D.

1612.

Foxes.

White  Hares.
Deere.

These  seeme
to  be  Elkes,  or
Losshes.

Dogges  like
Wolves.

The  pizzels  of
Dogges  and
Foxes  are
bone:  so  also
is  the  Morses
fizzle,  of
which  I  have
by  me  one  of
stone.

The  great
swiftnesse  of
their  Boats.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

cut.  And  this  was  the  most  Wood  that  wee  saw  growing
in  this  Countrey ;  being  some  of  it  a  kind  of  Willow,
Juniper,  and  such  like.

We  found  in  many  places  much  Angelica.  We  suppose
the  people  eate  the  Roots  thereof,  for  some  causes.  For
we  have  seene  them  have  many  of  them  in  their  Boats.

There  are  great  store  of  Foxes  in  the  Hands,  and  in
the  Mayne,  of  sundry  colours  :  And  there  are  a  kind  of
Hares  as  white  as  Snow,  with  their  furre  or  haire  very
long.

Also  there  be  Deere,  but  they  are  most  commonly  up
within  the  Mayne  very  farre ;  because  the  people  doe  so
much  hunt  them,  that  come  neere  the  Sea.  I  saw  at  one
time  seven  of  them  together,  which  were  all  that  wee  did
see  in  the  Countrey :  But  our  men  have  bought  divers
Coates  of  the  people  made  of  Deeres  skinnes,  and  have
bought  of  their  Homes  also.  Besides,  we  have  divers
times  seene  the  footsteps  of  some  beast,  whose  foote  was
bigger  then  the  foot  of  a  great  Oxe.  Furthermore,  the
Inhabitants  have  a  kinde  of  Dogges,  which  they  keepe
at  their  Houses,  and  Tents,  which  Dogges  are  almost
like  unto  Wolves,  living  by  fish,  as  the  Foxes  doe.  But
one  thing  is  very  strange,  as  I  thought :  for  the  Pizzels
of  both  Dogges  and  Foxes  are  bone.

The  people  all  the  Summer  time  use  nothing  but  fishing,
drying  their  fish,  and  Seales  flesh  upon  the  Rockes  for
their  Winter  Provision.  Every  one  both  man  and  woman
have  each  of  them  a  Boate  made  with  long  small  pieces
of  Firre-wood,  covered  with  Seales  skinnes  very  well  drest,
and  sewed  so  well  with  sinewes  or  guts,  that  no  water
can  pierce  them  through,  beeing  some  of  them  above
twentie  foot  long,  and  not  past  two  foot,  or  two  foot  and
an  halfe  broad,  in  forme  of  a  Weavers  shittle,  and  so
light,  that  a  man  may  carrie  many  of  them  at  once  for
the  weight.  In  these  Boates  they  will  row  so  swiftly,
that  it  is  almost  incredible :  for  no  ship  in  the  World
is  able  to  keepe  way  with  them,  although  shee  have  never
so  good  a  gale  of  wind :  and  yet  they  use  but  one  Oare,

376

WILLIAM BAFFIN

who  sitting  in  the  middle  of  their  Boate,  and  holding
their  Oare  in  the  middle,  being  broad  at  each  end  like
our  Oares,  will  at  an  instant  goe  backward  and  forward,
as  they  please.

In  these  Boates  they  catch  the  most  part  of  their  food,
being  Seales  and  Salmons,  Morses,  and  other  kinds  of
fishes.  Some  they  kill  with  their  Darts,  and  other  some
with  Angles,  having  a  Line  made  of  small  shivers  of
Whales  Finnes,  and  an  Hooke  of  some  fishes  bones :  with
which  Line  and  Hookes,  we  also  have  caught  very  much
fish.

Also  they  have  another  kinde  of  Boate,  which  is  very
long.  For  wee  have  seene  one  of  them  thirtie  two  foot
in  length,  open  in  the  toppe  like  our  Boates ;  having  tenne
seates  in  it.  In  which  when  they  remoove  their  Dwel-
lings, they  carrie  their  Goods  or  House-hold-stuffe :  for
they  remoove  their  Dwellings  very  often,  as  their  fishing
doth  serve,  living  in  the  Summer  time,  in  Tents  made
of  Seales  skinnes,  and  in  Winter  in  Houses  some-what
in  the  ground.

Wee  could  not  particularly  learne  their  Rites  or  Cere-
monies :  but  generally  they  worship  the  Sunne,  as  chiefe
Authour  of  their  Felicitie.  At  their  first  approach  unto
us  they  used  with  their  hands  to  point  up  to  the  Sunne,  and
to  strike  their  hands  upon  their  brests,  crying  Ilyont ;  as
who  would  say,  I  meane  no  harme :  which  they  will  doe
very  often,  and  will  not  come  neere  you,  untill  you  doe
the  like  ;  and  then  they  will  come  without  any  feare  at  all.

They  burie  their  dead  in  the  Out-Ilands  neere  the  Sea
side.  Their  manner  of  Buriall  is  this.  Upon  the  tops
of  the  Hils  they  gather  a  company  of  stones  together,
and  make  thereof  an  hollow  Cave  or  Grave,  of  the  length
and  breadth  of  the  bodie,  which  they  intend  to  burie,
laying  the  stones  somewhat  close  like  a  wall,  that  neyther
Foxes,  nor  other  such  beasts  may  devoure  the  bodies,
covering  them  with  broad  stones,  shewing  afarre  off  like
a  pile  of  stones.  And  neere  unto  this  Grave  where  the
bodie  lyeth,  is  another,  wherein  they  burie  his  Bow  and

377

A.D.

1612.

Their  Oares
broad  at  both
ends.

[III.iv.836.;
Salmons  and
Morses,  &c.

Angles  and
Lines.

Their  great
Boats  32.  foot
long.

They  worship
the  Sunne.
Their
salutation.

Their  burials.

They  burne
the  weapons
and  all  other
Furniture  of
the  dead.

A.D.

1612.

They  use  fire.

They  are  not
Man-eaters.

Nai/es  y  old
Iron  greatly
desired  of  the
Savages.

Men  are  not
to  goe  among
Savages
without  their
weapons.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Arrowes,  with  his  Darts  and  all  his  other  Provision,  which
hee  used  while  hee  was  living.  Hee  is  buried  in  all  his
Apparell :  and  the  coldnesse  of  the  Climate  doth  keepe
the  bodie  from  smelling  and  stinking,  although  it  lye  above
the  Ground.

They  eate  all  their  Food  raw,  and  use  no  fire  to  dresse
their  Victuals,  as  farre  as  wee  could  perceive.  Also  wee
have  seene  them  drinke  the  Salt-water  at  our  shippes  side :
But  whether  it  bee  usuall  or  no,  I  cannot  tell.  Although
they  dresse  not  their  meate  with  fire,  yet  they  use  fire  for
other  things,  as  to  warme  them,  &c.

Divers  of  our  men  were  of  opinion,  that  they  were
Man-eaters,  and  would  have  devoured  us,  if  they  could
have  caught  us.  But  I  doe  not  thinke  they  would.  For
if  they  had  bin  so  minded,  they  might  at  one  time  have
caught  our  Cooke,  and  two  other  with  him,  as  they  were
filling  of  water  at  an  Hand,  a  great  way  from  our  ship.
These  three  I  say  were  in  the  ships  Boate  without  eyther
Musket,  or  any  other  Weapon,  when  as  a  great  company
of  the  Savages  came  rowing  unto  them  with  their  Darts,
and  other  Furniture,  which  they  never  goe  without,  and
stood  looking  into  the  Boate  for  Nayles,  or  any  old  Iron,
which  they  so  greatly  desire,  while  our  men  were  in  such
a  feare,  that  they  knew  not  what  to  doe.  At  length  our
Cooke  remembred  that  hee  had  some  old  Iron  in  his  pocket,
and  gave  each  of  them  some,  as  farre  as  it  would  goe,
with  his  Key  of  his  Chest.  And  presently  they  all
departed  without  offering  any  harme  at  all.  But  this  I
speake  not,  that  I  would  have  men  to  trust  them,  or  to
goe  among  them  unprovided  of  Weapons.

378

WILLIAM BAFFIN

A.D.
1615.

Chap.  XVIII.

A  true  Relation  of  such  things  as  happened  in  the
fourth  Voyage  for  the  Discoverie  of  the  North-
west Passage,  performed  in  the  yeere  161 5.
Written  by  William  Baffin.

Fter  three  sundry  Voyages  towards  the
North-west,  to  the  great  charge  of  the
Adventurers :  the  last  being  under  the
command  of  Captaine  Gibbins  (in  which
was  little  or  nothing  performed.)  Yet
the  Right  Worshipfull  Sir  Dudley  Digges
Knight,  Master  Wostenholme  Esquire,
Master  Alderman  Jones,  with  others  being  not  therewith
discouraged,  This  yeere  161 5.  againe  set  forth  the  Dis-
covery, a  ship  of  fiftie  five  tunnes  or  thereabouts,  which
ship  had  beene  the  three  former  Voyages  on  the  action.
The  Master  was  Robert  Bileth,  a  man  well  acquainted
that  way :  having  beene  employed  in  the  three  former
Voyages :  my  selfe  being  his  Mate  and  Associate,  with
fourteene  others  and  two  Boyes.

The  sixteenth,  we  weighed  Anchor  at  Saint  Katharines,
and  that  tyde  came  to  Blackwall,  the  winde  being  at
South  South-west.  The  seventeenth,  wee  went  downe  to
Gravesend,  and  the  eighteenth  to  Lee,  where  we  anchored
that  night.

Upon  the  sixt  of  May,  we  saw  Land  on  the  Coast  of
Groenland,  on  the  East  side  of  Cape  Farewell :  and  that
night  we  had  a  great  storme :  so  wee  kept  a  Southerly
course  to  get  about  the  Ice  which  lay  on  that  shoare,  and
then  kept  our  course  untill  the  seventeenth  day  of  May,
all  which  forenoone  we  sayled  by  many  great  Hands  of
Ice,  some  of  which  were  above  two  hundred  foot  high
above  water  (as  I  proved  by  one  shortly  after)  which  I
found  to  be  two  hundred  and  fortie  foot  high,  and  if
report  of  some  men  be  true,  which  affirme,  that  there  is

379

The  first  by
Hudson,  in
which  hee
perished;  the
second  by  Sir
Thomas
Button,  the
third  by  Ca*
taine  Gibb

[in.iv.837.]

Groenland.

Cape

Farewell.

High  hie
Hands.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

but  one  seventh  part  of  the  Ice  above  water,  then  the
height  of  that  piece  of  Ice,  which  I  observed  was  one
hundred  and  fortie  fathomes,  or  one  thousand  sixe  hundred
and  eightie  foote  from  the  toppe  to  the  bottome :  this
proportion  I  know  doth  hold  in  much  Ice,  but  whether
it  doe  so  in  all,  I  know  not.

This  seventeenth  of  May,  about  noone  we  were  come
to  the  firme  Ice,  as  one  would  suppose,  being  in  the  lati-
tude of  61.  degrees  26.  minutes  or  thereabout,  being  the
lie  of  latitude  of  the  South  part  of  the  He  of  Resolution :  we
Resolution,  comming  to  this  Ice,  our  Master  asked  my  opinion  con-
cerning the  putting  into  the  Ice.  My  judgement  was
it  would  be  best  for  us  to  stand,  and  ply  it  up  to  the
Northwards.  Hee  answered,  we  were  on  the  North  side
of  the  South  Channell,  and  much  Ice  we  must  passe
through,  and  if  that  we  could  get  some  two  or  three
leagues  within  the  Ice,  it  would  every  tide  open,  and  we
should  get  some  thing  onward  of  our  way,  having  all
the  Channell  to  the  South-wards  of  us.  So  with  this
resolution  we  put  within  the  Ice,  the  wind  being  at  East
North-east :  this  first  entrance  I  liked  not  very  well,  scarce
finding  any  place  to  put  in  our  ships  head,  and  being  neere
thirtie  leagues  from  the  shoare,  towards  Evening  wee
were  fast  amongst  the  Ice.

But  sometimes  each  day  the  Ice  would  a  little  open,
we  making  what  way  we  could  towards  the  North-west
in  for  the  shoare  till  the  two  and  twentieth  day,  having
had  the  wind  all  Southerly.  Yet  we  plainly  saw  that  we
set  to  the  Southwards,  for  all  that  wee  could  doe.

The  two  and  twentieth  day,  the  wind  came  up  at  North
North-west :  then  our  Master  determined  to  stand  forth
againe.  For  if  the  wind  should  have  come  to  the  North-
east, it  would  be  unpossible  for  us  to  fetch  any  part  of
the  Channell,  seeing  wee  drove  so  fast  to  the  Southwards,
with  Southerly  winds,  and  having  so  farre  into  the  shoare,
not  having  seene  the  Land.

Our  Master  was  also  determined  to  spend  some  twentie,
or  foure  and  twentie  dayes  in  Fretum  Davis,  to  see  what

380

WILLIAM BAFFIN  a.d.

1615.

hopes  would  be  that  wayes,  supposing  there  would  be
little  good  to  be  done  in  Hudsons  Streights  for  this  time
limited  :  then  we  plying  to  get  to  Sea-ward,  and  so  by
eight  a  clock  at  night,  the  three  and  twentieth  day,  we
were  cleere  of  the  thick  Ice  :  againe,  the  Lord  make  us
thankfull,  the  wind  at  North-west  and  by  North  faire
weather  :  but  no  sooner  were  we  forth  of  the  Ice,  but
that  our  Master  changed  his  opinion  :  and  beeing  cleere
of  this  thicke  Ice  wee  stood  to  the  Northward  as  much
as  the  Ice  and  winde  would  give  us  leave,  running  some
thirteene  leagues  true  North-east  by  North,  being  in  the
latitude  of  61.  degrees  50.  minutes.  The  foure  and
twentieth  day  faire  weather :  the  five  and  twentieth  day,
also  faire  weather,  the  wind  at  North  and  by  West,  till
sixe  a  clocke,  we  having  made  a  North-east  by  North
way  about  twelve  leagues  and  an  halfe,  our  latitude  at
noone  62.  degrees  20.  minutes,  at  sixe  a  clocke  the  wind
was  at  the  North  North-east.  The  sixe  and  twentieth
day,  all  the  forenoone  faire  weather  and  cold :  but  in  the
afternoone  it  blew  very  hard,  being  close  hasie  weather,
that  about  two  a  clocke  this  afternoone  wee  tooke  in  our
sailes  and  hulled  with  our  ship  till  the  next  morning  at
foure  a  clocke,  all  the  time  that  we  sayled  this  day  we
past  through  many  ledges  of  Ice  having  great  quantitie
to  the  Northward  of  us,  and  having  runne  about  twentie
one  leagues  true  upon  a  West  course.  And  note  where
I  put  this  word  true,  I  meane  the  true  course,  the  variation
of  the  Compasse,  and  other  accidents  allowed.

The  seven  and  twentieth  day  close  foggy  weather  with
much  snow  freezing  on  our  shrowds  and  tackling  :  the
like  we  had  not  all  this  yeare  before  :  but  towards  foure
a  clocke  in  the  afternoone  it  began  to  cleere  up,  and  about
five  a  clocke  we  saw  Land,  being  the  Hand  of  Resolution,
and  bearing  West  from  us  about  thirteene  or  fourteene
leagues.  This  morning  we  set  sayle,  and  stood  to  and
fro  as  the  Ice  would  suffer  us,  and  at  ten  at  night,  wee
moored  our  ship  to  a  piece  of  Ice,  the  wind  being  at
West.

381

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

The  eight  and  twentieth  day  being  Whitsunday,  it  was
faire  weather,  but  the  winde  was  at  the  West,  and  West
by  North :  al  this  day  we  were  fast  to  the  piece  of  Ice.
Yet  we  plainly  perceived  that  we  set  a  great  deale  more
into  the  Streights  with  the  floud.  Then  we  set  forth
with  the  ebbe  the  nine  and  twentieth  day,  the  wind  was
variable,  and  faire  weather  :  about  eleven  a  clock  we  set
saile  and  tacked  to  and  fro  along  by  the  Hand.  And  about
two  a  clocke  the  next  morning,  the  wind  came  to  the
South  South-east,  but  we  had  so  much  Ice  that  we  could
doe  but  little  good  with  a  faire  wind,  the  wind  continued

No  night.  all  this  day  and  night  a  stiffe  gale  :  this  night  (or  rather
Evening,  because  it  was  not  darke  at  all)  we  were  set
within  the  point  of  the  Hand  :  so  that  now  we  were  within
the  Streights.

The  one  &  thirtieth  day  also  faire  weather,  the  wind
for  the  most  part  at  North  North-west,  the  afternoone
being  cleere  wee  saw  the  point  of  the  South  shoare,  called
Buttons  lies,  to  beare  from  us  due  South  by  the  Compasse,
which  is  indeed  South South-east, somewhat  Eastward,

Variation  24. because  here  the  Compasse  is  varied  to  the  Westwards

degrees.  twentie  foure  degrees.

[III. iv. 838.]  The  first  of  June,  wee  had  some  snow  in  the  forenoone,
but  very  faire  weather  in  the  afternoone,  the  wind  at  West
North-west.  We  perceiving  the  Ice  to  be  more  open  close
aboord  the  shoare,  made  the  best  way  we  could  to  get
in,  and  to  come  to  Anchor,  if  the  place  were  convenient ;
and  by  seven  a  clocke  we  were  in  a  good  Harbour,  on  the
North-west  side  of  the  Hand  of  Resolution,  where  an
East  South-east  Moone  maketh  full  Sea,  or  halfe  an  houre
past  seven  on  the  change  day,  as  Sea-men  account  the
water  doth  rise  and  fall,  neere  foure  fathomes ;  the  Com-
passe doth  vary  to  the  West  24.  degrees  6.  minutes,  and
is  in  longitude  West  from  London  66.  degrees  35.
minutes.  The  breadth  of  the  South  Channell,  or  the
distance  betweene  the  Hand  and  the  South  shoare,  is  six-
teene  leagues,  and  the  North  Channell  is  eight  miles  wide
in  the  narrowest  place.

382

WILLIAM BAFFIN  a.d.

1615.

Upon  this  Hand  we  went  on  shoare,  but  found  no
certaine  signe  of  Inhabitants,  but  the  tract  of  Beares  and
Foxes,  Rockes  and  stonie  ground,  hardly  any  thing
growing  thereon :  it  is  indifferent  high  Land  to  the
Northward,  having  one  high  Hill  or  Hummocke  on  the
North-east  side,  but  to  the  Southward  is  falleth  away  very
low.

The  second  of  June  in  the  morning  the  wind  came  up
at  East  South-east,  with  much  snow  and  fowle  weather  :
about  noone  wee  weighed  Anchor,  and  stood  up  along
by  the  Hand,  so  well  as  the  Ice  would  give  us  leave  to
get  to  the  North  shoare.  Wee  continuing  our  courses
so  neere  the  North  shoare,  as  conveniently  we  could,  with
much  variable  weather  and  windes,  but  stedfast  in  con-
tinuance among  Ice,  till  the  eight  day,  having  the  wind
full  contrary  to  us,  and  being  somewhat  neere  a  point
of  Land,  or  rather  a  company  of  Hands,  which  after  wee
called  Savage  lies,  having  a  great  Sound  or  In-draught,  Savage  lies.
betweene  the  North  shoare  and  them.  At  sixe  a  clocke
we  came  to  Anchor  neere  one  of  them,  being  the  Easter-
most  saving  one.  But  whiles  wee  were  furling  our  sailes,
we  heard  and  saw  a  great  company  of  Dogges  running  up  Dogges.
and  downe,  with  such  howling  and  barking,  that  it  seemed
very  strange.  Shortly  after  we  had  moored  our  ship,  we
sent  our  Boat  somewhat  neerer  the  shoare,  to  see  if  they
could  perceive  any  people ;  who  returning,  told  us  that
there  were  Tents  and  Boats,  or  Canowes,  with  a  great
many  Dogges,  but  people  they  saw  none.  After  Prayer,
when  our  men  had  supt,  wee  fitted  our  Boate  and  our
selves  with  things  convenient :  then  my  selfe  with  seven
others  landed,  and  went  to  their  Tents,  where  finding  no
people,  we  marched  up  to  the  top  of  a  Hill  (being  about
a  flight  shot  off)  where  we  saw  one  great  Canow  or  Boat,  Great  Boat
which  had  about  fourteene  men  in  it,  being  on  the  furthest,  with  H-  men-
or  North-west  point  of  the  Hand,  and  from  us  somewhat
more  then  a  Musket  shot.  Then  I  called  unto  them,
using  some  words  of  Groenlandish  speech,  making  signes
of  friendship. They  did  the  like  to  us ;  but  seeing  them

383

A.D.
1615.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

»/

Images.

described.

so  fearefull  of  us,  and  we  not  willing  to  trust  them,  I
made  another  signe  to  them,  shewing  them  a  Knife  and
other  Trifles,  which  I  left  on  the  top  of  the  Hill,  and
returned  downe  to  their  Tents  againe.  There  wee  found
some  Whales  Finnes  to  the  number  of  fortie  or  fiftie,
with  a  few  Seale  skinnes  which  I  tooke  aboord,  leaving
Knives,  Beades,  and  Counters  instead  thereof ;  and
amongst  their  houses  I  found  a  little  bagge,  in  which
was  a  company  of  little  Images  of  men ;  one  the  Image
of  a  woman  with  a  child  at  her  backe,  all  the  which  I
brought  away.

Among  these  Tents  being  five  in  number,  all  covered
with  Seales  skinnes,  were  running  up  and  downe,  about
Their  Dogges  thirtie  five  or  fortie  Dogges  ;  most  of  them  muzled.  They
were  of  our  mungrell  Mastiffes,  being  of  a  brinded  blacke
colour,  looking  almost  like  Wolves.  These  Dogges  they
use  in  stead  of  Horses,  or  rather  as  the  Lappians  doe  their
Deere,  to  draw  their  sleds  from  place  to  place  over  the
Ice :  their  sleds  are  shod  or  lined  with  great  bones  of
fishes  to  keepe  them  from  wearing,  and  their  Dogges  have
Collars  and  Furniture  very  fitting.

These  people  have  their  Apparell,  Boots,  Tents,  and
other  necessaries  much  like  to  the  Inhabitants  in  Groine-
land,  saving  that  they  are  not  so  neate  and  artificiall,
seeming  to  bee  more  rude  and  uncivill,  ranging  up  and
downe  as  their  fishing  is  in  season.  For  in  most  places
where  wee  came  ashoare,  we  saw  where  people  had  beene,
although  not  this  yeere  ;  but  where  their  Habitation  or
their  abode  in  Winter  is,  I  cannot  well  conjecture.

This  Hand  lyeth  in  the  latitude  of  62.  degrees  30.
minutes,  and  in  longitude  West  from  London,  72.  degrees
or  neere  thereabouts,  being  sixtie  leagues  from  the  entrance
of  the  Streights  :  here  the  Compasse  doth  varie  27.  degrees
30.  minutes,  and  a  South-east  Moone  foure  degrees  East
maketh  a  full  Sea :  it  doth  ebbe  and  flow  almost  as  much
water,  as  it  doth  at  the  Resolution,  and  here  the  floud
commeth  from  the  Eastward,  although  our  Master  was  of
opinion  to  the  contrarie.

3S4

The  people
described.

Situation.

WILLIAM BAFFIN  a.d.

1615.

The  tenth  day  in  the  morning,  at  sixe  a  clocke  we  set

i  sayle,  the  winde  at  North,  which  continued  not,  but  was

I  very  variable  till  noone,  and  then  it  came  to  North-west,

i  we  having  sayled  along  by  the  shoare,  about  some  nine

leagues  and  an  halfe  North  North-west,  the  Ice  lying  so

thicke  in  the  offen,  that  wee  could  not  well  get  out  of

i  it : then  perceiving  a  good  Harbour  betweene  two  small

;  Hands  and  the  Mayne,  wee  went  in  with  our  ship,  where

wee  moored  her,  and  stayed  till  the  twelfth  day  at  Evening.

In  this  place  it  is  high  water  on  the  change  day,  at

nine  of  the  clocke,  or  a  South-east  Moone  maketh  a  full

I  Sea :  the  latitude  of  this  place  is  62.  degrees  40.  minutes ;

,and  the  floud  doth  come  from  the  Eastward,  although  our  [III. iv.  839.]

Master  was  perswaded  otherwise,  as  well  in  this  place,  as

j  at  Salvage  Ilands : for  being  among  Hands,  every  point

hath  his  severall  set  and  eddie. But  I  going  to  the  top

tof  the  Hand,  plainely  perceived  the  Ice  to  come  from  the

South-east,  and  from  the  North-west  on  the  ebbe. In

this  place  is  no  signe  of  people,  as  we  could  perceive.

The  sixteenth  day,  lying  still  in  the  Ice,  the  weather

being  very  close  and  hasey,  as  it  hath  beene  these  six

dayes :  and  being  neere  a  great  company  of  Ilands,  in  the

afternoone, the  winde  being  at  West  North-west, wee

I  stood  in  amongst  these  Ilands,  and  in  the  evening  we

moared  our  Shippe  to  one  of  them  in  a  small  cove,  the

better  to  defend  her  from  the  Ice. In  this  place  wee

stayed  all  the  seventeenth  day :  and  upon  the  eighteenth,

being  Sunday,  about  eleven  a  clocke  we  set  sayle,  being

almost  calme,  making  the  best  way  wee  could  to  get  forth.

Here  are  a  great  company  of  Hands,  each  hath  his  severall  Many  Hands

set  and  eddy,  that  the  Ice  doth  so  runne  to  and  fro,  and  and  several!

with  such  violence,  that  our  Shippe  was  in  more  safetie  ^

further  off  then  in  this  place : the  latitude  of  the  He  we

rode  by  is  63.  degrees  26.  minutes,  and  longitude  West

from  London,  neere  72.  degrees  25.  minutes: the  Com-

passe  hath  variation  27.  degrees  46.  minutes;  and  at  a

quarter  of  an  houre  after  nine  on  the  Change  day,  doth

make  a  full  Sea. This  Evening,  and  the  next  morning,

xiv  385  2  b

A.D.
1615.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

wee  had  a  faire  steering  gale  of  winde  at  South-east,  wee
standing  along  by  the  Land,  it  beeing  all  small  broken
Hands,  to  a  point  of  Land  about  twelve  leagues  in  distance
from  the  He  wee  put  last  from :  which  Point,  I  called
Broken  Point.  Broken  Point,  it  being  indeede  a  point  of  broken  lies.

On  the  nineteenth  day,  by  twelve  a  clocke  at  noone,
wee  were  about  foure  miles  from  the  Point  before  named,
fast  inclosed  with  Ice,  very  faire  weather ;  and  well  we
might  have  called  this  Point  Fairenesse  or  Faire  Point,
for  from  this  day  till  the  thirtieth  day,  the  weather  was
so  faire,  and  almost,  or  altogether  calme,  that  in  few  places
elsewhere,  finer  weather  could  not  be ;  and  till  the  seven
and  twentieth  at  night,  wee  were  so  fast  inclosed  up  with
Ice,  that  at  some  times  one  could  not  well  dippe  a  paile
of  water  by  the  Ship  sides :  while  wee  were  thus  fast  in
the  Ice,  upon  the  one  and  twentieth  day,  I  saw  both  the
Sunne  and  Moone  at  one  time,  as  indeede  it  is  usuall  in
faire  weather.

This  one  and  twentieth,  being  faire  weather,  as  afore
is  said,  and  I  seeing  both  the  Sunne  and  Moone  so  faire :
I  thought  it  a  fit  time  to  make  an  observation  for  the
longitude.

But  the  two  and  twentieth  day  being  very  faire  and
cleare,  and  also  calme,  being  almost  as  steedy  as  on  shoare :
it  was  no  neede  to  bid  me  fit  my  Instrument  of  variation
to  take  the  time  of  the  Moones  comming  to  the  Meridian,
having  also  my  quadrant  ready  to  take  the  Sunnes  almi-
canter,  it  being  indifferent  large,  as  of  foure  foote
semideamiter :  have  taken  the  variation  of  my  needle  as
precisely  as  possible  I  could,  which  was  28.  degrees  20.
minutes  West,  and  if  any  be  desirous  to  worke  the  same,
they  may,  but  my  worke  was  as  folio weth.

The  Sunnes  almicanter,  at  the  instant  when  the  Moone
was  on  the  Meridian,  was  26.  degrees  40.  minutes :  and
the  Sunnes  declination  for  that  time  23.  degrees  6.
minutes.  By  which  three  things  given,  I  found  the  houre
to  be  five  a  clocke  4.  minutes  52.  seconds,  1.  third  4.
fourths,  or  76.  degrees,  13.  minutes,  16.  seconds,  of  the

386

Observations
of  longitude.

WILLIAM BAFFIN  a.d.

1615,

equinoctiall  afternoone : and  according  to  Searles  Ephe-

merides,  the  Moone  came  to  the  Meridian  at  London  at

foure a clocke 54. minutes, 30. seconds : and after

Origanus  the  Moone  came  to  the  Meridian  at  foure  a

clocke  52.  minutes,  5.  seconds,  at  Wittenberge  the  same

day. Now  having  this  knowne,  it  is  no  hard  matter  to

finde  the  longitude  of  this  place  sought. For  according

to the Moones  meane motion, which is 12. degrees  a

day,  that  is  in  time  48.  minutes:  and  to  this  account,  if

she  be  on  the  Meridian  at  twelve  a  clock  this  day,  to

morrow  it  will  be  48.  min.  past 12. So  I  having  the

time  found  by  observation  at  this  place,  viz. 5.  houres,

4.  minutes,  52.  seconds,  1.  third  4.  fourths: but  in  this

jl  neede  not  come  so  precise :  and  at  London,  at  4.  houres,

54. minutes, 30. seconds : which substracted from the

former, leaveth 10. minutes, 22. seconds^ 1. third, 4.

fourths,  now  the  Moones  motion  the  foure  and  twentie

houres,  was  22.  degrees,  38.  minutes: which  converted

into  time,  is 50.  minutes  25. seconds  20. thirds: then

the  proportion  standeth  thus;  If  50.  minutes,  25.  seconds,

.20. thirds, give 360. degrees, what shall 10. minutes,

22. seconds, 1. third,  4.  fourths  give? the  fourth  pro-

portionall,  will  be  74.  degrees  5.  minutes,  which  is  West

of  London  ;  because  the  Moone  came  later  by  10.  minutes,

22. seconds, and by the same working by Origanus

Ephemerides, the  distance  is 91.  degrees, 35. minutes,

West  of  West. But  whether  be  the  truer, I  leave  to

Dthers  to  judge : in  these  workings  may  some  errour  be

committed,  if  it  be  not  carefully  looked  unto :  as  in  the

observation,  and  also  in  rinding  what  time  the  Moone

:ommeth to the Meridian, at the place where the

Ephemerides is supputated for, and perchance in the

Ephemerides  themselves :  in  all  which,  the  best  judicious

may  erre :  yet  if  observations  of  this  kinde,  or  some  other,

it  places  farre  remote,  as  at  the  Cape  Bonasperanze,  Bantam,

fapan,  Nova  Albion,  and  Magellan  Straits,  I  suppose  wee

hould  have  a  truer  Geography  then  we  have. And  seeing

1  am  entred  to  speake  of  celestiall  observations,  I  will  note

387

a.d.  PUKCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

another  which  I  made  the  twenty  sixt  of  April,  being
outward  bound  at  Sea,  by  the  Moones  comming  in  a
right  line,  with  two  fixed  Starres ;  the  one  was  the  Lyons
heart,  a  Starre  of  the  first  magnitude ;  the  other  a  Starre
in  the  Lyons  rumpe,  of  the  second  magnitude,  as
followeth :  The  circumference  or  outward  edge  of  the
[III.  iv.  840.]  Moone,  being  in  a  right  or  straight  line,  with  those  two
Starres  before  named :  at  the  instant  I  tooke  the  altitude
of  the  South  ballance,  which  was  2.  degrees  38.  minutes,
because  I  would  have  the  time :  but  in  this  it  is  good
to  waite  a  fit  time,  as  to  have  her  in  a  right  line,  with
two  Stars  not  farre  distant,  and  those  not  to  be  much
different  in  longitude,  because  the  Moon  will  soone  alter
the  angle  or  position,  and  such  a  time  would  be  taken
when  the  Moone  is  in  the  nintieth  degree  of  the  eclipticke
above  the  horizon,  for  then  there  is  no  paralell  of  longitude,
but  onely  in  latitude :  but  who  so  is  painefull  in  these
businesses,  shall  soone  see  what  is  needefull,  and  what  is
not :  my  observations  were  as  followeth :

'Right  assention 46.  deg.  28.  min.  30.  sec.
Declination -  - 13.  deg.  57.  min.  30.  sec.

Lyons  heart -J  Longitude 24.  deg.  29.  min.  45.  sec.

Latitude —  -  -  00.  deg.  26.  min.  30.  sec.
Almicanter —  33.  deg.  40.  min.  00.  sec.i

I  Right  assention  163.  deg.  23.  min.  00.  sec.
Declination -  -  22.  deg.  78.  min.  00.  sec.
Longitude-  -  - 5.  deg.  53.  min.  45.  sec.
Latitude-  -  -  - 14.  deg.  20.  min.  00.  sec.

IParalax 00.  deg.  47.  min.  46.  seel
Latitude 03.  deg.  20.  min.  00.  sec.  iNorth.
Almicanter-  -  37.  deg.  00.  min.  00.  sec. J
Latitude  of  the  place  -  -  §6.  deg.  43.  min.

These  notes  I  have  set  downe,  that  if  any  other  be
desirous  to  trie,  they  may  spend  a  little  time  therein;
my  selfe  have  spent  some  therein,  and  more  I  would  have
spent,  if  leisure  would  have  permitted : but  finding  it

388

WILLIAM BAFFIN  a.d.

1615.

not  to  my  minde,  I  have  not  here  set  downe  my  particular
worke :  the  working  of  this  observation  I  received  from
Master  Rudston.  Masjer

But  if  it  had  pleased  God,  we  had  performed  the  action u  ston'

we  were  bound  for,  I  would  not  feare  but  to  have  brought

so  good  contentment  to  the  Adventurers,  concerning  the

true  scituation  of  notable  places,  that  small  doubt  should

j  have  beene  thereof :  but  seeing  so  small  hopes  are  in  this

i  place, I have not set downe so many observations as

>  otherwise  I  would.

We  lying  here  inclosed  with  the  Ice  with  faire  &  calme

•weather  (as  before  is  said)  till  the  seven  and  twentieth

1  day  at  evening,  at  which  time  we  set  sayle ;  the  winde

i  at  South-east,  an  easie  gale : all  the  eight  and  twentieth

and  nine and twentieth  dayes, we made the  best  way

I  through  the  Ice  we  could,  but  the  nine  and  twentieth  day,

;the  Ice  was  more  open  then  it  had  beene  these  ten  dayes

before,  and  at  noone  we  saw  Salisbury  Hand,  it  bearing

due  West  from  us.

The  first  of  July  close  foggie  weather,  with  much  raine,
the  winde  at  South  South-east :  by  noone  this  day  we
iwere  some  three  leagues  from  the  Land  :  but  having  much
lice  by  the  shoare,  we  stood  along  the  Hand  to  the  North-
ward :  and  the  next  morning  wee  were  faire  by  another
small  He,  or  rather  a  company  of  small  Hands,  which
after  we  called  Mill  Hand,  by  reason  of  grinding  the  Ice,  Mill  Hand.
ias  this  night  we  made  proofe  thereof :  at  noone,  being
dose  to  this  He,  wee  took  the  latitude  thereof,  which  is
neere  64.  degrees.  Here  driving  to  and  fro  with  the  Ice
ill  this  day,  till  seven  or  eight  a  clocke,  at  what  time  the
|[ce  began  to  open  and  separate ;  The  Ice,  as  is  said,
beginning  to  open :  we  had  not  stood  along  by  the  He,
on  the  East  side  thereof,  an  houre ;  but  the  Ice  came
'driving  with  the  tide  of  floud  from  the  South-east,  with
Imch  swiftnesse,  that  it  over  went  our  Shippe  having  all
3ur  sayles  abroad  with  a  reasonable  gale  of  winde,  and
Dut  her  out  of  the  streame,  into  the  eddy  of  these  lies.

This  Hand  or  lies,  lying  in  the  middle  of  the  channell,

389

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

having  many  sounds  running  through  them,  with  many
points  or  headlands,  encountering  the  force  of  the  tide,
caused  such  a  rebound  of  water  &  Ice  (which  ran  one
way,  and  the  streame  another)  our  ship  having  met  the
Ice  with  the  first  of  the  floud,  which  put  her  so  neere  the
shoare,  that  she  was  in  the  partition  betweene  the  Ice,
which  the  eddy  caused  to  runne  one  way,  and  the  streame
the  other,  where  shee  endured  great  distresse ;  but  God,
which  is  still  stronger  then  either  Ice  or  streame,  preserved
us  and  our  Shippe  from  any  harme  at  all.  This  continued
till  towards  a  high  water,  which  was  about  one  a  clocke ;
then  with  no  small  trouble  we  got  into  the  channell,  and
stood  away  to  the  North-west  ward.  After  we  had  past
some  distance  from  this  Hand,  wee  had  the  Sea  more  open
then  it  was  since  we  put  first  into  the  Straits ;  and  sailed
all  the  next  day  through  an  indifferent  cleare  Sea,  with
the  winde  at  South-west :  but  towards  eight  a  clocke  at
night,  wee  were  come  againe  into  much  Ice ;  this  Ice
being  more  thicker  and  bigger  then  any  wee  had  beene
among :  this  place  where  we  began  to  be  inclosed  againe,
is  sixe  and  twenty  leagues  distant  from  the  small  Hand
we  were  at  last :  and  our  true  course  North-west  by  West :
after  wee  were  fast  in  the  Ice,  we  made  but  small  way,
yet  we  perceived  a  great  tyde  to  set  to  and  fro.  The  next
day,  wee  sounded,  and  had  ground  at  one  hundred  &
twentie  fathoms,  soft  Osey  ground :  standing  more
Northerly :  the  next  morning  we  had  ground  at  eightie
fathoms,  then  the  winde  came  to  the  North,  and  we
setting  somewhat  Southward,  had  ground  at  a  hundred
and  ten  fathoms.  Thus  seeing  this  great  abundance  of
Ice  in  this  place,  and  the  more  we  got  to  the  North-west
ward,  the  shoalder  it  was,  the  Ice  also  being  foule  and
durtie,  as  not  bred  farre  from  shoare :  our  Master  deter-
mined to  stand  to  the  Eastward,  to  be  certainely  informed
of  the  tide.

The  sixt  day  in  the  morning,  we  brake  in  a  planke
and  two  timbers  in  our  Ships  bow,  which  after  we  had
mended,  we  proceeded  for  to  get  to  the  East  side,  which

390

WILLIAM BAFFIN  a.d.

1615.

we  called  the  North  shoare,  because  it  is  the  Land  stretch-
ing from  the  Resolution,  on  the  North  side  of  the  Straits.

The  seventh  day  we  saw  the  land,  it  being  but  low  land,  [III.iv.841.]

I  and  the  Sea  is  shoald,  in  respect  of  other  places,  having

ten  or  twelve  fathom  about  a  league  off  from  shoare,  some

thirty  fathoms  five  or  six  leagues  off  shore,  but  further

!  off  some  twenty  or  eighteene  leagues,  there  is  a  hundred

I  or  a  hundred  and  five  fathoms ;  having  very  good  channell

j  ground,  as  small  stones  &  shels,  some  twelve  or  fourteene

!  leagues  from  shoare,  but  the  further  off  the  more  Osey :

and  also  here  is  a  very  great  tide  runneth  to  the  North-

iward,  which  this  evening  we  found  to  be  the  tyde  of

iebbe, for  comming  with our  Shippe neere the shoare,

I  about  seven  a  clocke,  we  hoysed  out  our  Boate,  then  I

with  five  other  went  on  shoare,  and  found  it  to  ebbe :

we  staied  on  shoare  about  an  houre  and  a  halfe,  in  which

I  time  the  water  fell  about  three  foote  and  a  halfe,  and  a

South-south  East  Moone  maketh  a  full  Sea,  or  halfe  an

houre  past  tenne,  as  Sea  men  account :  we  saw  no  signe

of  people  to  be  here  this  yeare,  but  in  yeares  heretofore

ithey  have  beene,  as  we  might  well  see  by  divers  places,

where  their  tents  had  stood : and  perchance  their  time

of fishing was not yet come, there being such great

abundance  of  Ice  as  yet.

The  eight  day  the  winde  was  at  West,  and  the  ninth
almost  calme :  wee  reeking  neere  to  this  shoare  the  tenth
day,  our  Master  determined  to  stand  for  Nottinggams  Nottinggams
Hand,  to  make  triall  of  the  tide  there ;  yet  the  winde  was  I^nd.
tat  South-west  so  that  we  were  forced  to  turne,  but  towards
night  it  came  to  the  North  North-west,  so  that  then  we
stood  away  to  the  West  wards,  leaving  the  search  of
Nottinggams  He,  having  a  great  swelling  Sea,  come  out
of  the  West  with  the  winde  which  had  blowne,  which
put  us  in  some  hope :  the  eleventh  day  in  the  morning,
we  saw  Land  West  from  us,  but  had  no  ground  at  one
hundred  &  thirty  fathoms  :  so  standing  along  by  the  Land
which  here  lay  about  North-west  by  North,  the  next  morne
we  were thwart  of  a Bay : then standing  over  to the

39i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

Northwards  towards  a  faire  Cape  or  head  land  which  we
saw,  in  the  after-noone  it  was  almost  calme,  and  being
about  a  league  from  shoare,  we  hoysed  out  our  Boat,  and
sent  some  of  our  men  in  her,  to  see  what  tide  it  was  by
the  shoare,  and  from  whence  it  came ;  they  went  from
the  Ship  at  five  a  clock,  and  came  aboord  againe  at  eight,
who  brought  us  word,  that  it  was  falling  water,  and  that
it  had  eb'd  while  they  were  on  shoare  somewhat  above
two  foot :  also  they  affirmed,  that  the  floud  came  from
the  Northward  in  this  place,  the  which  we  also  perceived
by  the  setting  of  our  Ship,  she  setting  a  pace  to  the  North-
ward, although  no  whit  of  winde :  also  we  might  see
by  the  rocks,  that  the  water  was  now  falne :  this  put  us
in  great  comfort  and  hope  of  a  passage  in  this  place.
Cape  Comfort,  Then  our  Master  called  this  Cape  or  head  land,  Cape
Comfort,  for  the  reasons  beforesaid ;  also  we  had  one
hundred  and  fortie  fathoms  in  depth,  not  a  league  from
the  shoare :  and  here  a  South  by  East  Moone  maketh
a  full  Sea :  the  latitude  of  this  Cape  is  65.  degrees  00.
min.  and  85.  degrees  20.  minutes  West  from  London.
But  this  our  sudaine  comfort  was  as  soone  quailed,  for
the  next  day  having  doubled  the  Cape,  and  proceeded
not  past  ten  or  twelve  leagues,  but  we  saw  the  land  trend-
ing from  the  Cape  to  the  Westward,  till  it  bare  from  us
North-east  by  East,  and  very  thicke  pestered  with  Ice,
and  the  further  we  proceeded,  the  more  Ice,  and  the  more
Northerly,  the  shoulder  water  and  small  shew  of  any  tide.
At  six  a  clocke  this  afternoone,  we  sounded,  &  had  ground
in  one  hundred  and  thirty  fathoms,  soft  Osey,  having  had
at  noone  one  hundred  &  fiftie  fathoms.

This  was  the  farthest  of  our  Voyage,  being  in  the  lati-
tude of  65.  degrees  26.  minutes,  and  longitude  West  from
London  86.  degrees  10.  minutes:  for  seeing  the  land
North-east  by  East,  from  us  about  nine  or  ten  leagues
off,  and  the  Ice  so  thicke  :  our  Master  was  fully  perswaded,
that  this  was  nought  else  but  a  Bay,  and  so  tacked  and
turned  the  Shippes  head  homewards,  without  any  farther
search.

392

WILLIAM BAFFIN  a.d.

1615.
The  fourteenth  day,  the  winde  was  for  the  most  part
at  South-east,  that  we  could  make  but  small  way  backe
againe :  and  the  next  morning  very  foule  weather,  we
comming  to  an  Anchor  in  a  small  Inlet,  neere  the  Cape
Comfort,  on  the  North-west  side  thereof ;  here  wee  found,
as  on  the  other  side,  a  South  by  East  Moone,  to  make
a  full  Sea ;  but  from  whence  the  floud  came,  we  could  not
well  see,  it  being  so  foule  weather  at  Sea :  in  the  after-
noone  the  winde  came  to  North  by  West :  then  we  waied,
and  stood  along  to  the  Southwards  by  the  shoare,  with
a  stiffe  gale  of  winde,  and  very  hasey.  By  the  sixteenth
day  at  noone  we  met  with  a  great  quantitie  of  Ice,  lying
some  few  leagues  within  the  point  of  the  Land :  among
this  Ice  we  saw  a  great  number  of  Sea  Morse,  not  seeing
any  more  in  all  the  Straits  but  here,  and  these  very  feare-
full,  not  suffering  a  Ship  or  Boat  to  come  neere  them :
by  eight  a  clock  we  were  come  to  this  Southern  point,
which  I  called  Sea  Horse  point,  where  we  came  to  anchor  Sea  Horse
open  in  the  Sea,  the  better  to  try  the  tide :  here  most  P°'int-
apparently  we  found  to  all  our  companies  sight,  that  in
this  place  the  tide  of  floud  doth  come  from  the  South-
ast,  and  the  ebbe  from  the  Northwest.  We  weighed,
nd  stood  over  with  a  stiffe  gale  of  winde,  which  con-
tinued all  this  day,  and  toward  night  very  foule  weather
&  a  sore  storme :  by  tenne  a  clocke  we  were  come  to
Anchor  on  the  North-west  side  of  Nottinghams  He,  where
ire  two  or  three  smal  lies,  lyeth  off  from  the  greater,  which
make  very  good  Sounds  &  Harbors :  about  this  He  we
lad  store  of  Ice,  but  nothing  as  we  had  heretofore  in
Dther  places.  We  staied  about  this  Hand  til  the  seven
md  twentieth  day,  having  much  foule  weather,  many
stormes,  often  fogs,  and  uncertaine  windes,  many  times
we  weighed  anchor  to  goe  to  that  side  of  the  He,  where
his  Ship  road  when  Captaine  Button  was  in  her :  finding
n  other  places  of  this  He  the  tyde  of  floud  to  come  from  [III.iv.842.]
he  South-east  ward,  and  the  time  of  high  water  on  the
:hange  day,  to  be  at  halfe  an  houre  past  ten,  and  not  at
lalfe  an  houre  past  seven,  as  they  supposed. In  these

393

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

ten  dayes  we  staied  about  this  He,  we  fitted  our  Ship  with
ballast,  and  other  necessaries,  as  we  had  neede  of.

Then  proceeded  as  followeth  the  sixe  and  twentieth
day,  being  indifferent  faire  weather,  we  passed  betweene

Salts burie  Ik.  Salisburies  He  and  Nottinghams  He  at  the  South  Point
thereof,  I  meane  of  Nottinghams  He,  where  are  many
small  low  lies,  without  the  which  had  beene  a  fit  place
for  us  to  have  anchored,  to  have  found  out  the  true  set
of  the  Tyde.  But  our  Master  being  desirous  to  come
to  the  same  place  where  they  had  rode  before,  stood  along
by  this  lie  to  the  Westward,  and  came  to  an  anchor  in
the  eddy  of  these  broken  grounds,  where  the  ship  rode
at  no  certaintie  of  Tyde.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  the  next  morning  the  weather
proved  very  foule  with  much  raine  and  winde,  so  that  our
Reger  anchor  would  not  hold  the  ship  at  eightie  fathoms
scope,  but  was  driven  into  deepe  water,  that  wee  were
forced  to  set  saile,  the  winde  being  at  East,  and  then
come  to  the  East  North-east  and  about  noone  at  North-
east, still  foule  weather,  being  under  saile,  we  stood  away
towards  Sea  horse  Point :  our  Master  (as  I  suppose)  was
perswaded  that  there  might  bee  some  passage  betweene

Swan  Hand,  that  Point  of  Land  and  that  Land  which  they  called  Swan
Hand :  so  this  afternoone  we  saw  both  Sea  horse  Point
and  Nottinghams  Hand,  the  distance  betweene  them  is
not  past  fifteene  or  sixteen  leagues,  bearing  the  one  from
the  other  North-west  and  South-east.

The  eight  and  twentieth  day  in  the  morning,  wee  were
neere  to  Sea  horse  Point,  the  Land  trending  away  West
South-west  so  farre  as  wee  saw,  and  very  much  pestred
with  Ice.  At  seven  a  clocke  our  Master  caused  us  to
tacke  about,  and  stood  away  South-east  and  by  South.
The  nine  and  twentieth  the  next  day  at  eleven  a  clocke,

Digges  He. we came to anchor at Digges He, having very foule  1 1
weather. At  this  place  where  we  rode  it  lyeth  open  to :
the  West, having  two  of  the  greatest lies, breake  off
the  force  of  the  Flood,  till  the  Tyde  be  well  bent;  for
after  the  water  were  risen  an  houre  and  a  halfe  by  the  : ,

394

WILLIAM BAFFIN  a.d.

1615.

shoare,  then  would  the  ship  ride  truly  on  the  Tyde  of
Flood  all  the  Tyde  after.  Now  the  time  of  high  water
on  the  change  day,  is  halfe  an  houre  past  ten  or  neere
thereabout.

The  thirtieth  day,  being  faire  weather,  wee  weighed  and
stood  along  close  by  Digges  He,  where  we  presently  per-
ceived the  Salvages  to  bee  close  on  the  top  of  the  Rocks :  Salvages.
but  when  they  saw  we  had  espyed  them,  divers  of  them
came  running  downe  to  the  water  side,  calling  to  us  to
come  to  anchor,  which  we  would  have  done  if  conveniently
we  could.  But  in  this  place  the  water  is  so  deepe,  that
it  is  hard  to  finde  a  place  to  ride  in,  which  we  seeing  lay
to  and  fro  with  our  ship,  while  some  of  our  men  in  the
Boat  killed  about  some  seventie  fowles,  for  in  this  place
is  the  greatest  number  of  fowles  (whom  we  call  Willocks)  Wilhcks.
that  in  few  places  else  the  like  are  not  seene,  for  if  neede
were  we  might  have  killed  many  thousands,  almost
incredible  to  those  which  have  not  seene  it.  Here  also
as  we  lay  to  and  fro  with  our  ship,  wee  had  sufficient
proofe  of  the  set  of  the  Tyde :  but  when  our  men  were
come  aboord  againe,  we  set  all  our  sailes  for  homewards,
making  the  best  expedition  we  could ;  but  on  the  third
of  August,  wee  were  forced  to  come  to  anchor  about
thirtie  leagues  within  the  Resolution  He  on  the  North
shoare.  The  next  day  wee  weighed  anchor  :  And  the  fifth
day  in  the  forenoone,  we  past  by  the  Resolution  Hand,
but  saw  it  not :  Thus  continuing  our  courses  (as  in  the
briefe  Journall  may  be  seene)  with  much  contrarie  windes
and  foule  weather.

Wee  had  sight  of  Cape  Cleere  in  Ireland  the  sixt  of
September :  the  next  morning  by  day  light,  we  were  faire
|by  Seely,  and  that  night  at  two  a  clocke  the  next  morne,
we  came  to  anchor  in  Plymouth  Sound  with  all  our  men
living,  having  onely  three  or  foure  sicke,  which  soone
recovered.

The  next  yeere  being  againe  employed  in  discoverie,
amongst  other  instructions  they  received  this. For  your

395

A.D.
1615.

[III.  iv.  843.]

PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

course  you  must  make  all  possible  haste  to  the  Cape
Desolation,  and  from  thence,  you  William  Baffin  as  Pilot,
keepe  along  the  Coast  of  Groenland  and  up  Fretum  Davis,
untill  you  come  toward  the  height  of  eightie  degrees,  if
the  Land  will  give  you  leave.  Then  for  feare  of  inbay-
ing,  by  keeping  too  Northerly  a  course,  shape  your  course
West  and  Southerly,  so  farre  as  you  shall  thinke  it
convenient,  till  you  come  to  the  latitude  of  sixtie  degrees  :
then  direct  your  course  to  fall  with  the  Land  of  Yedzo
about  that  height,  leaving  your  farther  sayling  Southward
to  your  owne  discretion,  according  as  the  time  of  the
yeere  and  windes  will  give  you  leave,  although  our  desires
be,  if  your  voyage  prove  so  prosperous  that  you  may  have
the  yeere  before  you,  that  you  goe  so  farre  Southerly  as
that  you  may  touch  the  North  part  of  Japan,  from  whence
or  from  Yedzo,  if  you  can  so  compasse  it  without  danger,
we  would  have  you  to  bring  home  one  of  the  men  of
the  Countrey,  and  so  God  blessing  you  with  all  expedition
to  make  your  returne  home  againe.

Chap.  XIX.

To  the  Right  Worshipfull  Master  John  Wosten-
holme  Esquire,  one  of  the  chiefe  Adventurers
for  the  discoverie  of  a  passage  to  the  North-
west.

Orthy  Sir  ;  there  neede  no  filling  a  Journall
or  short  Discourse  with  preamble,  com-
plement, or  circumstance,  and  therefore  I
will  onely  tell  you,  I  am  proud  of  any
Remembrance,  when  I  expose  your  Worth
to  my  Conceit,  and  glad  of  any  good
fortune,  when  I  can  avoid  the  imputation
of  ingratitude,  by  acknowledging  your  many  favours  :  and
seeing  it  is  not  unknowne  (to  your  Worship)  in  what
estate  the  businesse  concerning  the  North-west  hath  beene
heretofore,  and  how  the  onely  hope  was  in  searching  of

396

WILLIAM BAFFIN

Fretum  Davis,  which  if  your  selfe  had  not  beene  the  more
forward,  the  action  had  well  nigh  beene  left  off :  Now  it
remayneth  for  your  Worship  to  know,  what  hath  beene
performed  this  yeere :  wherefore  I  entreat  you  to  admit
of  my  custome,  and  pardon  me  if  I  take  the  plaine  highway
in  relating  the  particulars,  without  using  any  refined
phrases  and  eloquent  speeches.

Therefore  briefly,  and  as  it  were  in  the  forefront,  I
intend  to  shew  you  the  whole  proceeding  of  the  voyage
in  a  word  :  as  namely,  there  is  no  passage,  nor  hope  of
passage  in  the  North  of  Davis  Streigths,  wee  having
coasted  all  or  neere  all  the  Circumference  thereof,  and
finde  it  to  be  no  other  then  a  great  Bay,  as  the  Map  here
placed  doth  truly  shew :  wherefore  I  cannot  but  much
admire  the  worke  of  the  Almightie,  when  I  consider  how
vaine  the  best  and  chiefest  hopes  of  man  are  in  things
uncertaine.  And  to  speake  of  no  other  matter,  then  of
the  hopefull  passage  to  the  North-west ;  How  many  of
the  best  sort  of  men  have  set  their  whole  indevours  to
prove  a  passage  that  wayes,  and  not  onely  in  Conference,
but  also  in  Writing  and  publishing  to  the  World,  yea
what  great  summes  of  money  hath  beene  spent  about  that
action,  as  your  Worship  hath  costly  experience  off.
Neither  would  the  vaine-glorious  Spaniard  have  scattered
abroad  so  many  false  Maps  and  Journals,  if  they  had  not
beene  confident  of  a  passage  this  way,  that  if  it  had  pleased
God,  a  passage  had  beene  found,  they  might  have  eclipsed
the  worthy  praise  of  the  Adventurers  and  true  Dis-
coverers ;  and  for  my  owne  part,  I  would  hardly  have
beleeved  the  contrarie,  untill  mine  eyes  became  witnesse
of  that  I  desired  not  to  have  found,  still  taking  occasion
of  hope  on  every  little  likelihood,  till  such  time  as  we  had
almost  coasted  the  Circumference  of  this  great  Bay.
!  Neither  was  Master  Davis  to  be  blamed  in  his  report  and
great  hopes,  if  he  had  anchored  about  Hope  Sanderson,  to
!  have  taken  notice  of  the  Tydes :  for  to  that  place  which  is
;  in  72.  degrees  12.  minutes  the  Sea  is  open,  of  an  unsearch-
1  able  depth,  and  of  a  good  colour,  onely  the  Tydes  keepe  no

397

A.D.
1615.

Howsoever  the
passage  this
way  was
embayed;  yet
that  former
discoverie  of
Sir  Tho.
Button  [then
by  him  kept
secret  for  some
intent  of  his)
is  both  more
probable  and
to  the  most
judicious  more
then  probable  ;
and  that  by
that  Tyde
argumentfrom
the  West,  as  in
Master  Brigs
his  Map
and  notes
appeareth.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

certaine  course,  nor  rise  but  a  small  height,  as  eight  or  nine
foote,  and  the  flood  commeth  from  the  Southward,  and  in
all  the  Bay  beyond  that  place  the  Tyde  is  so  small,  and  not
much  to  be  regarded,  yet  by  reason  of  snow  melting  on  the
Land,  the  Ebbe  is  stronger  then  the  Flood,  by  meanes
whereof,  and  the  windes  holding  Northerly  the  fore-part
of  the  yeere,  the  great  lies  of  Ice  are  set  to  the  Southward,
some  into  Fretum  Hudson,  and  others  towards  New  found
land,  for  in  all  the  Channell  where  the  Sea  is  open  are  great
quantities  of  them  driving  up  and  downe,  and  till  this
yeere  not  well  knowne  where  they  were  bred.

Now  that  the  worst  is  knowne  (concerning  the  passage)
it  is  necessarie  and  requisite,  your  Worship  should  under-
stand what  probabilitie  or  hope  of  profit  might  here  be  »
made  hereafter,  if  the  voyage  bee  attempted  by  fitting
men.  And  first  for  the  killing  of  Whales,  certaine  it  is
that  in  this  Bay  are  great  numbers  of  them,  which  the  1
Store  of  Grand  Biscainers  call  the  Grand  Baye  Whales,  of  the  same  kinde
Bay  Whales,  which  are  killed  at  Greenland,  and  as  it  seemeth  to  me
easie  to  be  strooke,  because  they  are  not  used  to  bee  chased
or  beaten,  for  we  being  but  one  day  in  Whale  Sound  (so
called  for  the  number  of  Whales  that  wee  saw  there)
sleeping  and  lying  aloft  on  the  water,  not  fearing  our  ship
or  ought  else ;  that  if  wee  had  beene  fitted  with  men  and
things  necessarie,  it  had  beene  no  hard  matter  to  have
strooke  more  then  would  have  made  three  ships  a  saving
voyage,  and  that  it  is  of  that  sort  of  Whale  there  is  no
Baffin  twice  at  feare.  I  being  twise  at  Greenland,  tooke  sufficient  notice
Greenland.  t0  know  them  againe  ;  beside  a  dead  Whale  wee  found  at
Sea,  having  all  her  finnes  (or  rather  all  the  rough  of  her
mouth)  of  which  with  much  labour,  we  got  one  hundred
and  sixtie  the  same  evening  we  found  her ;  and  if  that  li
foule  weather,  and  a  storme  the  next  day  had  not  followed,
wee  had  no  doubt,  but  to  have  had  all  or  the  most  part  of
them,  but  the  winde  and  Sea  arising  shee  broke  from  us,
and  we  were  forced  to  leave  her.  Neither  are  they  onely
to  be  looked  for  in  Whale  Sound,  but  also  in  Sir  Tho.
Smiths  Sound,  Wostenholme  Sound,  and  divers  other  places.

398

WILLIAM BAFFIN  a.d.

1615.
For  the  killing  of  Sea  Morse,  I  can  give  no  certaintie,  Morses.
but  onely  this,  that  our  Boat  being  but  once  ashoare  in  all
the  North  part  of  this  Bay,  which  was  in  the  entrance  of
Alderman  Jones  Sound,  at  the  returne,  our  men  told  us,
they  saw  many  Morses  along  by  the  shoare  on  the  Ice ;
:>ut  our  ship  being  under  saile,  and  the  winde  comming
faire,  they  presently  came  aboord  without  further  search,
besides  the  people  inhabiting  about  74.  degrees,  told  us  by
livers  signes,  that  toward  the  North  were  many  of  those

leasts,  having;  two  long  teeth,  and  shewed  us  divers  pieces  Sea  Vmcorne.

r  „i '  to  to  5  v  The  home  is

di  the  same.  still  kett  in

As  for  the  Sea  Unicorne,  it  being  a  great  fish,  having  a  t^e  ^es  at
long  home or  bone,  growing  forth  of  his forehead or  Windsore
lostril  (such  as  Sir  Martin  Frobisher  in  his  second  voyage  {where  I  have
:ound  one)  in  divers  places  we  saw  of  them,  which  if  the  seene  *£  ne?re
lorne  be  of  any  good  value,  no  doubt  but  many  of  them  an(i  CVessed
nay  be  killed.  \$c.

And  concerning  what  the  Shoare  will  yeeld,  as  Beach  [III.iv.844.]
innes,  Morse  teeth,  and  such  like,  I  can  little  say,  because
Nt  came  not  on  shoare  in  any  of  the  places  where  hope
vas  of  finding  them.

But  here  some  may  object  and  aske,  why  we  sought  that
Zoast  no  better :  to  this  I  answere,  that  while  we  were
hereabout,  the  weather  was  so  exceeding  foule  wee  could
lot,  for  first  wee  anchored  in  Wostenholme  Sound,  where
presently  our  ship  drove  with  two  anchors  a  head,  then
vere  we  forced  to  stand  forth  with  a  low  saile.  The  next
lay  in  Whale  Sound,  we  lost  an  Anchor  and  Cable,  and
ould  fetch  the  place  no  more ;  then  we  came  to  anchor
leere  a  small  Hand,  lying  between  Sir  Tho.  Smiths  Sound,
.nd  Whale  Sound,  but  the  winde  came  more  outward,  that
ve  were  forced  to  weigh  againe  ;  neverthelesse  if  wee  had
>eene  in  a  good  harbour,  having  but  our  Ships  Boat,  we

urst  not  send  her  farre  from  the  ship,  having  so  few  men
as  seventeene  in  all)  and  some  of  them  very  weake ;  but
he  chiefe  cause  wee  spent  so  little  time  to  seek  a  Harbour,
vas  our  great  desire  to  performe  the  Discoverie,  having
he  Sea  open  in  all  that  part,  and  still  likelihood  of  a

399

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1615.

passage ;  but  when  we  had  coasted  the  Land  so  farre  to
the  Southward,  that  hope  of  passage  was  none,  then  the
yeere  was  too  farre  spent,  and  many  of  our  men  very
weake,  and  withall  we  having  some  beliefe  that  ships  the
next  yeere  would  be  sent  for  the  killing  of  Whales,  which
might  better  doe  it  then  wee.

And  seeing  I  have  briefly  set  downe,  what  hope  there  is
of  making  a  profitable  voyage,  it  is  not  unfit  your  Worship
should  know  what  let  or  hinderance  might  be  to  the  same.
The  chiefest  and  greatest  cause  is,  that  some  yeere  it  may
happen  by  reason  of  the  Ice,  lying  betweene  72.  degrees  I
and  a  halfe,  and  76.  degrees  no  minutes,  that  the  ships  1
cannot  come  into  those  places,  till  toward  the  middest  of  j
July,  so  that  want  of  time  to  stay  in  the  Countrey  may;
bee  some  let : yet  they  may  well  tarry  till  the  last  of  j
August,  in  which  space  much  businesse  may  be  done,  and
good  store  of  Oile  made  :  neverthelesse  if  store  of  Whales
come  in  (as  no  feare  to  the  contrarie)  what  cannot  bee  made
in  Oile  may  bee  brought  home  in  Blubber,  and  the  Finnes
will  arise  to  good  profit. Another  hinderance  may  bee,
because  the  bottome  of  the  Sounds  will  not  be  so  soone
cleere  as  would  be  wished,  by  meanes  thereof  now  and
then a Whale may be lost (the same case sometime
chanceth  in  Greenland)  yet  I  am  perswaded  those  Sounds
before  named,  will  all  be  cleere  before  the  twentieth  of
July :  for  we  this  yeere  were  in  Whale  Sound  the  fourth
day  among  many  Whales,  and  might  have  strooke  them
without  let  of  Ice. Furthermore,  there  is  little  wood  to
bee  expected,  either  for  fire  or  other  necessaries,  therefore
Coles  and  other  such  things  must  bee  provided  at  home,
they  will  bee  so  much  the  readier  there.

Thus  much  I  thought  good  to  certifie  your  Worship,
wherein  I  trust  you  will  conceive,  that  much  time  hath  not
beene  spent  in  vaine,  or  the  businesse  over  carelesly
neglected,  and  although  wee  have  not  performed  what  we
desired  (that  is,  to  have  found  the  passage)  yet  what  wee
promised  (as  to  bring  certaintie  and  a  true  description)
truth  will  make  manifest,  that  I  have  not  much  erred.

400

asse
admirable.

WILLIAM BAFFIN  a.d.

1616.

And  I  dare  boldly  say  (without  boasting)  that  more  good
discoverie  hath  not  in  shorter  time  (to  my  remembrance)
beene  done,  since  the  action  was  attempted,  considering
how  much  Ice  we  have  passed,  and  the  difficultie  of  sayling
so  neere  the  Pole  (upon  a  traverse)  and  above  all,  the
variation  of  the  Compasse,  whose  wonderfull  operation  is  Variation  of
such  in  this  Bay,  increasing  and  decreasing  so  suddenly  f^.^
and  swift,  being  in  some  part  (as  in  Wostenholme  Sound,
and  in  Sir  Tho.  Smiths  Sound)  varied  above  five  Points
or  56.  degrees,  a  thing  almost  incredible  and  matchlesse  in
all  the  world  beside,  so  that  without  great  care,  and  good
observations,  a  true  description  could  not  have  beene  had.
In  fine,  whatsoever  my  labours  are  or  shall  be,  I  esteeme
them  too  little,  to  expresse  my  thankefull  minde  for  your
many  favours,  wherein  I  shall  be  ever  studious,  to  supply
my  other  wants  by  my  best  endevours,  and  ever  rest  at
Your  Worships  command,

William  Baffin.

A  briefe  and  true  Relation  or  Journall,  contayning
such  accidents  as  happened  in  the  fift  voyage,
for  the  discoverie  of  a  passage  to  the  North-
west, set  forth  at  the  charges  of  the  right
Worshipfull  Sir  Tho.  Smith  Knight,  Sir  Dudly
Digges  Knight,  Master  John  Wostenholme
Esquire,  Master  Alderman  Jones,  with  others,
in  the  good  ship  called  the  Discoverie  of
London  ;  Robert  Bileth  Master,  and  my  selfe
Pilot,  performed  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord
1616.

[N  the  Name  of  God,  Amen.  The  forenamed  ship  March  26,
being  in  full  readinesse  upon  the  twentie  sixe  of  March,
ve  set  saile  at  Gravesend,  being  in  number  seventeene
arsons,  having  very  faire  weather,  which  continued  till
he  second  of  April :  by  that  time  we  were  off  Portland,
hen  the  winde  comming  Westward  with  foule  weather,
xiv  401  2  c

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

we  kept  Sea  till  the  fourth  day,  then  being  not  able  to
fetch  Plimouth,  bore  roome  for  Dartmouth,  where  wee
stayed  eleven  dayes,  in  which  time  was  much  foule  weather
and  westerly  windes.

[III.iv.845.]  The  fifteenth  day  of  Aprill,  being  cleere  of  Dartmouth,
we  were  forced  the  next  day  to  put  into  Plimouth.  The
nineteenth  day  we  set  saile  from  thence,  and  the  twentieth
in  the  morning  we  past  betweene  the  Lands  end  and  Silly
with  a  faire  winde.  Continuing  our  course,  as  in  the
briefe  Table  or  Journall  is  set  downe,  with  every  particular
from  noone  to  noone,  that  here  I  need  not  make  a  tedious
repetition,  nothing  worthy  of  note  hapning,  but  that  we
had  a  good  passage,  and  the  first  Land  we  saw  was  in

Groinland.  Fretum  Davis,  on  the  coast  of  Groinland  in  the  latitude
of  6$.  degrees  20.  minutes.  On  the  fourteenth  of  May
in  the  forenoone,  then  sixe  of  the  people  being  a  fishing
came  to  us,  to  whom  we  gave  small  pieces  of  Iron,  they
keeping  us  companie  being  very  joyfull,  supposing  wee
had  intended  to  come  to  anchor :  but  when  they  saw  us
stand  off  from  shoare  they  followed  us  a  while,  and  then
went  away  discontented,  to  our  seeming.

We  prosecuting  our  Voyage,  were  loth  to  come  to
anchor  as  yet,  although  the  winde  was  contrarie,  but  still
plyed  to  the  Northward,  untill  we  came  into  70.  degrees
20.  minutes :  then  wee  came  to  anchor  in  a  faire  Sound
(neere  the  place  Master  Davis  called  London  Coast.)  The
twentieth  of  May  at  evening,  the  people  espying  us  fled
away  in  their  Boates,  getting  on  Rocks  wondring  and
gasing  at  us,  but  after  this  night  we  saw  them  no  more,

Men  and  dogs,  leaving  many  Dogs  running  to  and  fro  on  the  Hand.

At  this  place  we  stayed  two  dayes,  in  which  time  wee
tooke  in  fresh  water  and  other  necessaries :  here  we  had  k
some  dislike  of  the  passage,  because  the  Tydes  are  so  \
small  as  not  arising  above  eight  or  nine  foot,  and  keepe  no  m
certaine  course,  but  the  neerest  time  of  high  water  on  the  i\
change  day  is  at  a  quarter  of  an  houre  past  nine,  and  the
Flood  commeth  from  the  South.

The  two  and  twentieth  day  at  a  North  Sunne,  wee  set

402

Sanderson.

WILLIAM BAFFIN  a.d.

1616.

saile  and  plyed  still  Northward,  the  winde  being  right

against  us  as  we  stood  off  and  on. Upon  the  sixe  and

twentieth  day  in  the  afternoone,  we  found  a  dead  Whale,  Dead  Whale.

about  sixe  and  twentie  leagues  from  shoare,  having  all  her

finnes. Then  making  our  ship  fast,  wee  used  the  best

meanes  wee  could  to  get  them,  and  with  much  toile  got  a

lundred  and  sixtie  that  evening. The  next  morning  the

Sea  went  very  high  and  the  winde  arising, the  Whale

3roke  from  us,  and  we  were  forced  to  leave  her  and  set

;aile,  and  having  not  stood  past  three  or  foure  leagues

Vorth-westward,  came  to  the  Ice,  then  wee  tacked  and

;tood  to  the  shoare-ward,  a  sore  storme  ensued.

By  the  thirtieth  day  in  the  afternoone,  wee  came  faire  by

rlope  Sanderson,  the  farthest  Land  Master  Davis  was  at,  Hope

ying  betweene  72.  and  73.  degrees ; and  that  evening  by

.  North  Sunne  we  came  to  much  Ice,  which  we  put  into,

>lying  all  the  next  day  to  get  through  it.

The  first  of  June,  we  were  cleere  of  the  Ice  before

.amed,  and  not  farre  from  shoare,  the  winde  blowing  very

.ard  at  North  North-east,  then  we  put  in  among  divers

ilands,  the  people  seeing  us  fled  away  in  all  haste  leaving

|heir  Tents  behinde,  and  upon  a  small  Rocke  they  hid  two  Tents,  Men

ioung  Maides  or  Women. Our  ship  riding  not  farre  off,  end  Women.

ft  espyed  them,  to  whom  our  Master  with  some  other

:'if  our  companie  went  in  the  Boate,  they  making  signes

;  d  be  carried  to  the  Hand  where  their  Tents  were  close

;  djoyning. When  they  came  thither,  they  found  two  old

;?romen  more,  the  one  very  old,  to  our  esteemation  little

lease  then  fourescore, the  other  not  so  old. The  next

J  me  we  went  on  shoare,  there  was  another  Woman  with

: child  at  her  back,  who  had  hid  her  selfe  among  the

;}|.ocks,  till  the  other  had  told  her  how  well  wee  had  used

:liem,  in  giving  them  pieces  of  Iron  and  such  like,  which

:jiey  highly  esteeme,  in  change  thereof  they  give  us  Seales

Itinnes,  other  riches  they  had  none,  save  dead  Seales,  and

it  of  Seales,  some  of  which  fat  or  blubber  afterward  we

JLrried  aboord,  the  poore  women  were  very  diligent  to

•i'.rry  it  to  the  water  side  to  put  into  our  caske,  making

403

A.D.
I6l6.

Womens
Hands.

The  people
described.

Women.

Religion.

Buriall  of
Men  and
Dogs.

[III.  iv.  846.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

shew  that  the  men  were  over  at  the  Mayne,  and  at  an
other  small  Hand  something  more  Eastward.  Then
making  signes  to  them  that  wee  would  shew  them  our
ship  and  set  them  where  the  men  were  :  the  foure  youngest
came  into  our  Boate ;  when  they  were  aboord  they  much
wondred  to  see  our  ship  and  furniture :  we  gave  them  of
our  meat,  which  they  tasting  would  not  eate.  Then  two
of  them  wee  set  on  the  Hand,  where  they  supposed  the
men  to  be ;  the  other  two  were  carried  to  their  Tents
againe.  Those  that  went  to  seeke  the  men  could  not
finde  them,  but  came  as  neere  the  ship  as  they  could,  and
at  evening  wee  set  them  over  to  the  other.

This  place  wee  called  Womens  Hands ; it  lyeth  in  the
latitude of 72. degrees 45. minutes : here the Flood
commeth  from  the  Southward,  at  nep  Tydes  the  water
ariseth  but  sixe  or  seven  foote,  and  a  South  South-east
Moone  maketh  a  full  Sea. The  Inhabitants  very  poore,
living  chiefly  on  the  flesh  of  Seales,  dryed,  which  they
eate  raw,  with  the  skinnes  they  cloathe  themselves,  and
also  make  coverings  for  their  Tents  and  Boats  which  they
dresse very well. The Women in their apparell are
different  from  the  men,  and  are  marked  in  the  face  with  j  mj
divers  blacke  strokes  or  lines,  the  skin  being  rased  withjjj
some  sharpe  instrument  when  they  are  young,  and  blacke  |  (,'
colour  put  therein,  that  by  no  meanes  it  will  be  gotten  :e;
forth.  j  \

Concerning  their  Religion,  I  can  little  say :  onely  they  §e
have  a  kinde  of  worship  or  adoration  to  the  Sunne,  which  jW
continually  they  will  point  unto  and  strike  their  hand  on
their  breast,  crying  Ilyont ;  their  dead  they  burie  on  the
side  of  the  Hils,  where  they  live  (which  is  commonly  on
small  Hands)  making  a  pile  of  stones  over  them,  yet  not  jor
so  close  but  that  wee  might  see  the  dead  body,  the  aire  I  of  j
being  so  piersing  that  it  keepeth  them  from  much  stinking  iIeri
savour.  So  likewise  I  have  seene  their  Dogs  buried  in  »-
the  same  manner.  r

Upon  the  fourth  day  we  set  sayle  from  thence,  having  -,
very  faire  weather,  although  the  winde  were  contrary,  and

404

:3v

WILLIAM BAFFIN  ad.

1616.
plyed  to  and  fro  betweene  the  Ice  and  the  Land,  being  as
it  were  a  channell  of  seven  or  eight  leagues  broad  :  then  on
the  ninth  day,  being  in  the  latitude  of  74.  degree  4.
minutes,  and  much  pestered  with  Ice,  neere  unto  three
small  Hands,  lying  eight  miles  from  the  shore,  we  came  to
anchor  neere  one  of  them.

These  Hands  are  used  to  be  frequented  with  people  in
the  latter  part  of  the  yeare,  as  it  seemed  by  the  houses  and
places  where  the  tents  had  stood :  but  this  yeare  as  yet
they  were  not  come :  here  the  tides  are  very  small,
especially  the  floud,  which  ariseth  not  above  five  or  six
foot,  yet  the  ebbe  runneth  with  an  indifferent  streame,
the  cause  thereof  (in  mine  opinion)  is  the  great  abundance
of  Snow,  melting  on  the  Land  all  this  part  of  the  yeare.

The  tenth  day  wee  set  sayle  from  thence,  and  stood
through  much  Ice  to  the  Westward,  to  try  if  that  further
from  the  shoare,  wee  might  proceede ;  but  this  attempt
was  soone  quailed,  for  the  more  Ice  we  went  through,  the
thicker  it  was,  till  wee  could  see  no  place  to  put  in  the
Ships  head.

Seeing,  that  as  yet  we  could  not  proceede,  we  deter-
mined to  stand  in  for  the  shoare,  there  to  abide  some  few
dayes,  till  such  time  as  the  Ice  were  more  wasted  and  gone
Ifor  we  plainely  saw  that  it  consumed  very  fast)  with  this
^solution  we  stood  in,  and  came  to  anchor  among  many
Hands,  in  the  latitude  of  73.  degrees  45.  minutes. On
:he  twelfth  day  at  night  here  wee  continued  two  dayes
without  shew  or  signe  of  any  people,  till  on  the  fifteenth
lay  in  the  morning,  about  one  a  clocke,  then  came  two  and  4.2.  Inhabi-
~ortie  of  the  Inhabitants  in  their  Boates  or  Canoas,  and  fonts.
^ave  us  Seale  skinnes,  and  many  peeces  of  the  bone  or
aorne  of  the  Sea  Unicorne,  and  shewed  us  divers  peeces Unkomes
)f  Sea  Mors  teeth  ; making  signes  that  to  the  Northward  homes.
itvere  many  of  them :  in  exchange  thereof,  we  gave  them
small  peeces  of  Iron,  Glasse  Beads,  and  such  like :  at  foure
;everall  times  the  people  came  to  us,  and  at  each  time
Drought  us  of  the  aforesaid  commodities,  by  reason  thereof
ve  called  this  place  Home  Sound.  Home  Sound.

405

A.D.
l6l6.

They  see  many
Sea  Unicornes.

Sharp  frost  on

Midsummer

day.

Sir  Dudly
Digs  his  Cape.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Here  we  stayed  six  dayes,  and  on  the  eighteenth  day  at
night,  we  set  sayle,  having  very  little  winde ;  and  being
at  Sea,  made  the  best  way  we  could  to  the  Northward,
although  the  winde  had  beene  contrary  for  the  most  part
this  moneth,  but  it  was  strange  to  see  the  Ice  so  much
consumed  in  so  little  space,  for  now  we  might  come  to  the
three  Hands  before  named,  and  stand  off  to  the  Westward
almost  twenty  leagues,  without  let  of  Ice,  untill  we  were
more  North  (as  to  74.  degrees  30.  minutes)  then  we  put
among  much  scattered  Ice,  and  plyed  to  and  fro  all  this
month,  still  in  the  sight  of  shoare,  and  many  times  fast  in
the  Ice,  yet  every  day  we  got  something  on  our  way,
nothing  worthy  of  note  happening,  but  that  at  divers
times  we  saw  of  the  fishes  with  long  homes,  many  and
often,  which  we  call  the  Sea  Unicorne :  and  here  to  write
particularly  of  the  weather,  it  would  be  superfluous  or
needlesse,  because  it  was  so  variable,  few  dayes  without
Snow,  and  often  freezing,  in  so  much,  that  on  Midsummer
day,  our  shrowds  roapes  and  sailes  were  so  frozen,  that  we
could  scarce  handle  them ;  yet  the  cold  is  not  so  extreame,
but  it  may  well  be  endured.

The  first  of  July  we  were  come  into  an  open  Sea,  in  the
latitude  of  75.  degrees  40.  minutes,  which  a  new  revived
our  hope  of  a  passage,  and  because  the  winde  was  contrary,
wee  stood  off  twenty  leagues  from  the  shoare,  before  we
met  the  Ice  :  then  standing  in  againe  ;  when  we  were  neere
the  Land,  we  let  fall  an  anchor  to  see  what  tyde  went,  but
in  that  we  found  small  comfort.  Shortly  after  the  winde
came  to  the  South-east,  and  blew  very  hard,  with  foule
weather,  thicke,  and  foggie :  then  we  set  sayle,  and  ran
along  by  the  Land :  this  was  on  the  second  day  at  night.
The  next  morning  we  past  by  a  faire  Cape,  or  head  land,
which  wee  called  Sir  Dudley  Digges  Cape,  it  is  in  the
latitude  of  76.  degrees  35.  minutes,  and  hath  a  small
Hand  close  adjoyning  to  it,  the  winde  still  increasing,  we
past  by  a  faire  Sound  twelve  leagues  distant  from  the
former  Cape,  having  an  Hand  in  the  midst,  which  maketh  (
two  entrances. Under  this  Hand  we  came  to  anchor  ;  and

406

\:>

WILLIAM BAFFIN

A.D.

[616.

Wostenholme
Sound.

had  not  rid  past  two  houres,  but  our  Ship  drove,  although
we  had  two  anchors  at  the  ground,  then  were  we  forced
to  set  sayle,  and  stand  forth  :  this  Sound  wee  called  Wosten-
holme  Sound  ;  it  hath  many  Inlets  or  smaller  Sounds  in  it,
and  is  a  fit  place  for  the  killing  of  Whales.

The  fourth  day  at  one  a  clocke  in  the  morning,  the
storme  began  againe  at  West  and  by  South,  so  vehement,
that  it  blew  away  our  forecourse,  and  being  not  able  to
beare  any  sayle,  wee  lay  a  drift  till  about  eight  a  clocke,
then  it  cleared  up  a  little,  and  we  saw  our  selves  imbayed
in  a  great  Sound  :  then  we  set  sayle  and  stood  over  to  the
South-east  side,  where  in  a  little  Cove  or  Bay  we  let  fall
an  anchor,  which  we  lost  with  cable  and  all,  the  winde
blowing  so  extreamely  from  the  tops  of  the  hils,  that  we
could  get  no  place  to  anchor  in,  but  were  forced  to  stand  to
and  fro  in  the  Sound,  the  bottome  being  all  frozen  over ;
toward  two  a  clocke  it  began  to  be  lesse  winde,  then  we
stood  forth.

In  this  Sound  we  saw  great  numbers  of  Whales,  there-
fore we  called  it  Whale  Sound,  and  doubtlesse  if  we  had  Whale  Sound.
beene  provided  for  killing  of  them,  we  might  have  strooke
very  many. It  lyeth  in  the  latitude  of  77.  degrees  30.
minutes. All  the  fift  day  it  was  very  faire  weather,  and
wee  kept  along  by  the  Land  till  eight  a  clock  in the
[evening,  by  which  time  we  were  come  to  a  great  banke
I  of  Ice,  it  being  backed  with  Land,  which  we  seeing,  deter-
mined to  stand  backe  some  eight  leagues,  to  an  Hand  we  [III. iv.  847.]
! called  Hackluits  He,  it  lyeth  betweene  two  great  Sounds,
the  one  Whale  Sound,  and  the  other  Sir  Thomas  Smiths  sir  Thomas
i  Sound: this  last  runneth  to  the  North  of  seventy  eight  Smiths  Sound
degrees,  and  is  admirable  in  one  respect,  because  in  it  is  in  78-  deg.
the  greatest  variation  of  the  Compasse  of  any  part  of  the  yar\at\on  0f
jWorld  known  :  for  by  divers  good  Observations  I  found  it  the  compasse
ito  be  above  five  points  or  fifty  six  degrees  varied  to  the  56.  degrees  to

the  West.
\Which  may  make  questionable  D.  Gilberts  rule.  Tom.  1.  /.  2.  c.  I.  that  where  more  earth  is,
more  attraction  of  the  compasse  happeneth  by  variation  toward  it. Now  the  known  continents
\of  Asia,  Ifjc.  must  be  unspeakably  more  then  here  there  can  be,  and  yet  here  is  more  variation
\then  about  Japan,  or  Brazil,  Peru,  l5c

407

A.D.

l6l6.

Caries  Hands.
*This  Map  of
the  authourfor
this  and  the
former  Voyage
with  the
Tables  of  his
journall  and
sailing,  were
somewhat
troublesome
and  too  costly
to  insert.
Alderman
Jones  Sound.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Westward,  so  that  a  North-east  and  by  East,  is  true  North,
and  so  of  the  rest.  Also  this  Sound  seemeth  to  bee  good
for  the  killing  of  Whales,  it  being  the  greatest  and  largest
in  all  this  Bay.  The  cause  wherefore  we  minded  to  stand
to  this  Hand,  was  to  see  if  we  could  find  any  finnes  or
such  like  on  the  shore,  and  so  indeed  this  night  wee  came
to  anchor,  but  with  such  foule  weather,  that  our  Boat
could  not  land.  The  next  day  wee  were  forced  to  set
sayle,  the  Sea  was  growne  so  high,  and  the  wind  came  more
outward.  Two  dayes  wee  spent  and  could  get  no  good
place  to  anchor  in :  then  on  the  eight  day  it  cleered  up,
and  wee  seeing  a  company  of  Hands  lye  off  from  the  shoare
twelve  or  thirteene  Leagues,  wee  minded  to  goe  to  them,
to  see  if  there  we  could  Anchor.  When  wee  were  some-
thing neere,  the  winde  tooke  us  short ;  and  being  loth  to
spend  more  time,  we  tooke  opportunitie  of  the  wind,  and
left  the  searching  of  these  Hands,  which  wee  called  Careyes
Hands,  all  which  Sounds  and  Hands  the  Map  *  doth  truly
describe.

So  we  stood  to  the  Westward  in  an  open  Sea,  with  a
stifFe  gale  of  wind,  all  the  next  day  and  till  the  tenth  day
at  one  or  two  a  clocke  in  the  morning,  at  which  time  it  fell
calme  and  very  foggie,  and  wee  neere  the  Land  in  the
entrance  of  a  faire  Sound,  which  wee  called  Alderman
Jones  Sound.  This  afternoone  being  faire  and  cleere,  we
sent  our  Boat  to  the  Shoare,  the  ship  being  under  sayle,
and  assoone  as  they  were  on  shoare,  the  wind  began  to
blow ;  then  they  returned  againe,  declaring  that  they  saw
many  Sea  Morses  by  the  shoare  among  the  Ice,  and  as
farre  as  they  were,  they  saw  no  signe  of  people,  nor  any
good  place  to  anchor  in  along  the  shoare.  Then  having
an  easie  gale  of  wind  at  East  North-east,  we  ranne  along
by  the  shoare,  which  now  trendeth  much  South,  and
beginneth  to  shew  like  a  Bay.

On  the  twelfth  day  we  were  open  of  another  great
Sound,  lying  in  the  Latitude  of  74.  degrees  20.  minutes,
and  we  called  it  Sir  James  Lankasters  Sound :  here  our
hope  of  passage  began  to  be  lesse  every  day  then  other,

408

WILLIAM BAFFIN  ad.

1616.
for  from  this  Sound  to  the  Southward,  wee  had  a  ledge  of
like  betweene  the  Shoare  and  us,  but  cleare  to  the  Sea
ward,  we  kept  close  by  this  ledge  of  Ice  till  the  foureteenth
lay  in  the  afternoone,  by  which  time  wee  were  in  the
atitude  of  71.  degrees  16.  minutes,  and  plainely  perceived
he  Land  to  the  Southward  of  70.  degrees  30.  minutes,  They  see  Land
hen  wee  having  so  much  Ice  round  about  us,  were  forced  and  find  them-
o  stand  more  Eastward,  supposing  to  have  beene  soone  selvesembatea-
leare,  and  to  have  kept  on  the  off  side  of  the  Ice,  untill
ve  had  come  into  70.  degrees,  then  to  have  stood  in  againe.
But  this  proved  quite  contrary  to  our  expectation  :  for  wee
vere  forced  to  runne  above  threescore  leagues  through
^ery  much  Ice,  and  many  times  so  fast,  that  wee  could  goe
10  wayes,  although  we  kept  our  course  due  East ; and
vhen  wee  had  gotten  into  the  open  Sea,  wee  kept  so  neere
he  Ice,  that  many  times  we  had  much  adoe  to  get  cleare,
ret  could  not  come  neere  the  Land,  till  we  came  about  68.
legrees,  where  indeede  we  saw  the  shoare,  but  could  not
ome  to  it  by  eight  or  nine  leagues,  for  the  great  abundance
»f  Ice. This  was  on  the  foure  and  twentieth  day  of  July  :
hen  spent  we  three  dayes  more  to  see  if  conveniently
7ee  could  come  to  anchor,  to  make  trial  of  the  tides,
>ut  the  Ice  led  us  into  the  latitude  of  65.  degrees  40.
linutes. Then  wee  left  off  seeking  to  the  West  shoare,
ecause  wee  were  in  the  indraft  of  Cumberlands  lies,  and  Cumberland*
hould  know  no  certaintie, and  hope  of  passage  could  H*s-
e  none.

Now  seeing  that  we  had  made  an  end  of  our  discovery,
nd  the  yeare  being  too  farre  spent  to  goe  for  the  bottome
f  the  Bay,  to  search  for  drest  Finnes ;  therefore  wee
etermined  to  goe  for  the  Coast  of  Groineland,  to  see  if
'e  could  get  some  refreshing  for  our  men  :  Master  Hubert
nd  two  more,  having  kept  their  Cabins  above  eight  dayes
Desides  our  Cooke,  Richard  Waynam,  which  died  the  day
efore,  being  the  twenty  six  of  July)  and  divers  more  of
ur  company  so  weake,  that  they  could  doe  but  little
ibour.  So  the  winde  favouring  us,  we  came  to  anchor  in
le  latitude  of  6$.  degrees  45.  minutes,  at  six  a  clocke  in

409

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

the  evening,  the  eight  and  twentieth  day,  in  a  place  called
Cockln  Sound.  Caukin  Sound.

The  next  day  going  on  shoare,  on  a  little  Hand  we  found
Scurvy  Grasse.  great  abundance  of  the  herbe  called  Scurvie  Grasse,  which
we  boyled  in  Beere,  and  so  dranke  thereof,  using  it  also
in  Sallets,  with  Sorrell  and  Orpen,  which  here  groweth  in
abundance ;  by  meanes  hereof,  and  the  blessing  of  God
all  our  men  within  eight  or  nine  dayes  space  were  in
perfect  health,  and  so  continued  till  our  arrivall  in
England.

Wee  rode  in  this  place  three  dayes  before  any  of  the
Six  men.  people  came  to  us ; then  on  the  first  of  August,  six  of

the  Inhabitants  in  their  Canoas,  brought  us  Salmon  Peale,
and  such  like,  which  was  a  great  refreshment  to  our  men :
the  next  day  following,  the  same  six  came  againe,  but  after
that  we  saw  them  no  more  untill  the  sixt  day,  when  we  had
wayed  anchor,  and  were  almost  cleere  of  the  harbour  ;|
then  the  same  six  and  one  more,  brought  us  of  the  likej
commodities, for which we gave them Glasse Beads,:
Counters  and  small  peeces  of  Iron,  which  they  doe  as
much  esteeme,  as  we  Christians  doe  Gold  and  Silver.
[III.  iv.  848.] In this Sound  we saw  such  great  Scales  of  Salmon  |
Plenty  of swimming  to  and  fro,  that  it  is  much  to  be  admired  :  here
Salmon.  *t  flowetn  about  eighteene  foote  water,  and  is  at  the  highest  1

on  the  change  day  at  seven  a  clocke :  it  is  a  very  good
harbour,  and  easie  to  be  knowne,  having  three  high  round  j
hils  like  Piramides  close  adjoyning  to  the  mouth  of  it,  |
and  that  in  the  middest  is  lowest,  and  along  all  this  coast  j
are  many  good  harbours  to  be  found,  by  reason  that  so  \
many  Hands  lye  off  from  the  maine.

The  sixt  of  August,  by  three  a  clocke  in  the  afternoone,
wee  were  cleere  of  this  place,  having  a  North  North-
west winde,  and  faire  weather,  and  the  Lord  sent  us  a
speedy  and  good  passage  homeward  as  could  be  wished :
for  in  nineteene  dayes  after,  wee  saw  Land  on  the  coast
of  Ireland,  it  being  on  the  five  and  twentieth  day :  the
seven  and  twentieth  at  noone  we  were  two  leagues  from
Silly,  and  the  thirtieth  day,  in  the  morning  wee  anchored

410

WILLIAM BAFFIN

at  Dover  in  the  roade,  for  the  which  and  all  other  his
blessings  the  Lord  make  us  thankfull.

A.D.
I6l6.

Chap.  XX.

A  briefe  Discourse  of  the  probabilitie  of  a  passage
to  the  Westerne  or  South  Sea,  illustrated  with
testimonies  :  and  a  briefe  Treatise  and  Mappe
by  Master  Brigges.

Thought  good  to  adde  somewhat  to  this
Relation  of  Master  Baffin,  that  learned-
unlearned  Mariner  and  Mathematician ;
who  wanting  art  of  words,  so  really
employed  himselfe  to  those  industries,
whereof  here  you  see  so  evident  fruits.
His  Mappes  and  Tables  would  have  much
illustrated  his  Voyages,  if  trouble,  and  cost,  and  his  owne
despaire  of  passage  that  way,  had  not  made  us  willing  to
content  our  selves  with  that  Mappe  following  of  that
thrice  learned  (and  in  this  argument  three  times  thrice
industrious)  Mathematician,  Master  Brigges,  famous  for
his  readings  in  both  Universities,  and  this  honourable
Citie,  that  I  make  no  further  Voyage  of  Discovery  to  finde
and  follow  the  remote  Passage  and  extent  of  his  name.
Master  Baffin  told  mee,  that  they  supposed  the  tyde  from
the  North-west,  about  Digges  Hand  was  misreported,  by
mistaking  the  houre,  eight  for  eleven  :  and  that  hee  would,
if  hee  might  get  employment,  search  the  passage  from
Japan,  by  the  coast  of  Asia,  or  (qua  data  porta)  any  way  hee
could.  But  in  the  Indies  he  dyed,  in  the  late  Ormus
businesse,  slaine  in  fight  with  a  shot,  as  hee  was  trying  his  Boffins  death.
Mathematical  projects  and  conclusions.

Now  for  that  discovery  of  Sir  Thomas  Button,  I  have
solicited  him  for  his  Noates,  and  received  of  him  gentle
entertainment  and  kinde  promises :  but  being  then  forced
to  stay  in  the  Citie  upon  necessary  and  urgent  affaires,  he
would  at  his  returne  home,  seeke  and  impart  them. Since

411

A.D.
I6l6.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  King
satisfied
touching  the
passage.

I  heare  that  weightie  occasions  have  detained  him  out  of
England,  and  I  cannot  communicate  that  which  I  could
not  receive :  which  if  I  doe  receive,  I  purpose  rather  to
give  thee  out  of  due  place,  then  not  at  all.  Once  he  was
very  confident  in  conference  with  me  of  a  passage  that
way,  and  said  that  he  had  therein  satisfied  his  Majestie,
who  from  his  discourse  in  private,  inferred  the  necessitie
thereof.  And  the  maine  argument  was  the  course  of  the
tyde :  for  wintering  in  Port  Nelson  (see  the  following
Mappe)  hee  found  the  tyde  rising  every  twelve  houres
fifteene  foote  (whereas  in  the  bottome  of  Hudsons  Bay  it
was  but  two  foote,  and  in  the  bottome  of  Fretum  Davis
discovered  by  Baffin,  but  one)  yea  and  a  West  winde
equalled  the  nep  tydes  to  the  spring  tydes ;  plainely
arguing  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Sea,  which  is  on  the
West  side  of  America.  The  Summer  following  he  found
about  the  latitude  of  60.  degrees  a  strong  race  of  a  tide,
running  sometimes  Eastward,  sometimes  Westward ;
whereupon  Josias  Hubbard  in  his  plat,  called  that  place
Hubbarts  Hope,  as  in  the  Map  appeareth.  Now  if  any
make  scruple,  because  this  discovery  was  not  pursued  by
Sir  Thomas  Button,  let  him  consider,  that  being  Prince
Henries  Servant,  and  partly  by  him  employed  (whence  I
thinke  he  named  the  Country  New  Wales)  the  untimely
death  of  that  Prince  put  all  out  of  joint ;  nor  was  hee  so
open,  that  others  should  have  the  glory  of  his  discoverie.

And  if  any  man  thinke  that  the  passage  is  so  farre,  as
the  Maps  use  to  expresse  America,  running  out  into  the
West :  it  is  easily  answered,  that  either  of  negligence,  or
over-busie  diligence,  Maps  by  Portugals  in  the  East,  and
Spaniards  in  the  West,  have  beene  falsely  projected.
Hence  that  fabulous  strait  of  Anian,  as  before  by  Francis
Gaules  testimonie  and  navigation  is  evident :  And  hence
the  Portugals  to  bring  in  the  Moluccas,  to  that  moity  of
the  world  agreed  upon  betwixt  the  Spaniards  and  them,
are  thought  to  have  much  curtailed  Asia,  and  the  longitude
of  those  Hands,  giving  fewer  degrees  to  them  then  in  just
[III.  iv.  849.]  longitude  is  requisite. So  the  older  Maps  of  America

412

Hubberts
hope.

Fr.  Gaul
therewith.

ON  THE NORTH  WEST PASSAGE  a.d.

1616.
make  the  Land  from  the  Maeelane  Straits  to  the  South
Sea,  runne  much  West,  when  as  they  rather  are  contracted
somewhat  Easterly  from  the  North. The  like  is  justly
supposed  of  their  false  placing,  Quivira,  and  I  know  not
(nor  they  neither)  what  Countries  they  make  in  America,
to  run  so  farre  North-westward,  which  Sir  Francis  Drakes
Voyage  in  that  Sea  (his  Nova  *  Albion,  being  little  further  *TMs  easily
Westward  then  Aquatulco)  plainely  evince  to  be  otherwise.  aPPeareth  tn
Yea  the  late  Map  of  California  found  to  be  an  Hand,  the  °yo\age^\JS
Savages  discourses  in  all  the  Countries  Northwards  and  comparing  that
Westwards  from  Virginia :  fame  whereof  filled  my  friend  before  of
Master  Dermer  with  so  much  confidence,  that  hearing  of
strange  Ships  which  came  thither  for  a  kinde  of  Ure  or
earth,  the  men  using  forkes  in  their  diet,  with  Caldrons
to  dresse  their  meate,  &c.  things  nothing  sutable  to  any
parts  of  America,  hee  supposed  them  to  come  from  the
East,  neere  to  China  or  Japan,  and  therefore  he  made  a
Voyage  purposely  to  discover : but  crossed  with  divers
disasters,  hee  returned  to  Virginia,  frustrate  of  accomplish-
ment that  yeare,  but  fuller  of  confidence,  as  in  a  Letter
from  Virginia  he  signified  to  me,  where  death  ended  that
his  designe  soone  after. But  how  often  are  the  usuall
Charts  rejected  by  experience  in  these  Navigations,  in  this
worke  recorded  ? Painters  and  Poets  are  not  alwayes  the
best  Oracles.

For  further  proofes  of  a  passage  about  those  parts  into
the  West  Sea  (or  South,  as  it  is  called  from  the  first
discovery  thereof  to  the  South,  from  the  parts  of  New
Spaine,  whence  it  was  first  descried  by  the  Spaniards)  there
is  mention  of  a  Portugall  (and  taken  in  a  Carricke  in
Queene  Elizabeths  dayes,  of  glorious  memory)  confirming
this  opinion  ;  Sir  Martin  Frobisher  also  from  a  Portugall
in  Guinie,  received  intelligence  of  such  a  passage,  he
saying  he  had  past  it.  The  Pilots  of  Lisbone  are  said
generally  to  acknowledge  such  a  thing  ;  and  the  Admirall
of  D.  Garcia  Geoffroy  Loaisa  of  Cite-Real,  in  the  time  of
Charles  the  fifth,  is  reported  by  the  Coast  of  Baccalaos  and
Labrador, to have gone to the Moluccas. Vasco de

4X3

A.D.
I6l6.

Some  of  our
Merchants  are
said  not  to  be
so  willing  for
like  causes
with  this
discoverie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Coronado  writ  to  the  Emperour,  that  at  Cibola  he  was  one
hundred  and  fiftie  leagues  from  the  South  Sea,  and  a  little
more  from  the  North.  Antonio  de  Herera,  the  Kings
Coronista  Major  (part  of  whose  worke  followeth)  maketh
with  us  also,  in  the  distances  of  places  by  him  described.
But  to  produce  some  authority  more  full,  I  have  here
presented  Thomas  Cowles  a  Marriner,  and  Master  Michael
Locke  Merchant,  and  after  them,  a  little  Treatise  ascribed
to  Master  Brigges,  together  with  his  Map.  And  if  any
thinke  that  the  Spaniard  or  Portugall  would  soone  have
discovered  such  a  passage :  these  will  answere,  that  it  was
not  for  their  profit  to  expose  their  East  or  West  Indies  to
English,  Dutch,  or  others,  whom  they  would  not  have
sharers  in  those  remote  treasures  by  so  neere  a  passage.
First,  Thomas  Cowles  averreth  thus  much.

I  Thomas  Cowles  of  Bedmester,  in  the  Countie  of
Somerset,  Marriner,  doe  acknowledge,  that  six  yeares
past,  at  my  being  at  Lisbon,  in  the  Kingdome  of  Portu-
gall, I  did  heare  one  Martin  Chacke,  a  Portugall  of
Lisbon,  reade  a  Booke  of  his  owne  making,  which  he  had
set  out  six  yeares  before  that  time,  in  Print,  in  the  Portu-
gale  tongue,  declaring  that  the  said  Martin  Chacke  had
found,  twelve  yeares  now  past,  a  way  from  the  Portugall
Indies,  through  a  gulfe  of  the  New  found  land,  which  he
thought  to  be  in  59.  degrees  of  the  elevation  of  the  North
Pole.  By  meanes  that  hee  being  in  the  said  Indies,  with
foure  other  Shippes  of  great  burden,  and  he  himselfe  in  a
small  Shippe  of  fourescore  tunnes,  was  driven  from  the
company  of  the  other  foure  Shippes,  with  a  Westerly
winde :  after  which,  hee  past  alongst  by  a  great  number
of  Hands  which  were  in  the  gulfe  of  the  said  New  found
Land.  And  after  hee  overshot  the  gulfe,  he  set  no  more
sight  of  any  other  Land,  untill  he  fell  with  the  Northwest
part  of  Ireland ;  and  from  thence  he  tooke  his  course
homewards,  and  by  that  meanes  hee  came  to  Lisbone  foure
or  five  weekes  before  the  other  foure  Ships  of  his  company
that  he  was  separated  from,  as  before  said. And  since  the

414

I:

ON  THE  NORTH  AYEST PASSAGE  a.d.

1596.

same  time,  I  could  never  see  any  of  those  Books,  because
he  King  commanded  them  to  be  called  in,  and  no  more
)f  them  to  be  printed,  lest  in  time  it  would  be  to  their
lindrance.  In  witnesse  whereof  I  set  to  my  hand  and
narke,  the  ninth  of  Aprill.  Anno  1579.

Note  made  by  me  Michael  Lok  the  elder,
touching  the  Strait  of  Sea,  commonly  called
Fretum  Anian,  in  the  South  Sea,  through  the
North-west  passage  of  Meta  incognita.

I  T  7"Hen  I  was  at  Venice,  in  Aprill  1596.  happily  arrived

jVV there  an  old  man,  about  threescore  yeares  of  age,

ailed commonly Juan de Fuca, but named properly

^postolos  Valerianos,  of  Nation  a  Greeke,  borne  in  the

land  Cefalonia,  of  profession  a  Mariner,  and  an  ancient

>ilot  of  Shippes. This  man  being  come  lately  out  of

paine, arrived first at Ligorno, and went thence to

lorence  in  Italie,  where  he  found  one  John  Dowglas,  an

Englishman, a famous Mariner, ready comming for

renice,  to  be  Pilot  of  a  Venetian  Ship,  named  Ragasona

3r  England,  in  whose  company  they  came  both  together

3  Venice. And  John  Dowglas  being  well  acquainted  with

le  before,  he  gave  me  knowledge  of  this  Greeke  Pilot,

nd  brought  him  to  my  speech: and  in  long  talke  and  [III.iv.850.]

onference  betweene  us,  in  presence  of  John  Dowglas  :  this

ireeke  Pilot  declared  in  the  Italian  and  Spanish  languages,

^us  much  in  effect  as  followeth.

First  he  said,  that  he  had  bin  in  the  West  Indies  of
paine  by  the  space  of  fortie  yeeres,  and  had  sailed  to  and
•om  many  places  thereof,  as  Mariner  and  Pilot,  in  the
srvice  of  the  Spaniards.

Also  he  said,  that  he  was  in  the  Spanish  Shippe,  which  in
"turning  from  the  Hands,  Philippinas  and  China,  towards
Nova  Spania,  was  robbed  and  taken  at  the  Cape  California,
\y  Captaine  Candish  Englishman,  whereby  he  lost  sixtie  Captaine
lousand  Duckets,  of  his  owne  goods.  Candish.

Also  he  said,  that  he  was  Pilot  of  three  small  Ships

415

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

which  the  Vizeroy  of  Mexico  sent  from  Mexico,  arme
with  one  hundred  men,  Souldiers,  under  a  Captair
Spaniards,  to  discover  the  Straits  of  Anian,  along  the  coa<
of  the  South-Sea,  and  to  fortifie  in  that  Strait,  to  resist  th
passage  and  proceedings  of  the  English  Nation,  whic
were  feared  to  passe  through  those  Straits  into  the  Sout
Sea.  And  that  by  reason  of  a  mutinie  which  happene
among  the  Souldiers,  for  the  Sodomie  of  their  Captain*
that  Voyage  was  overthrowne,  and  the  Ships  returne
backe  from  California  coast  to  Nova  Spania,  without  an
effect  of  thing  done  in  that  Voyage.  And  that  after  thei
returne,  the  Captaine  was  at  Mexico  punished  by  justice.
Also  he  said,  that  shortly  after  the  said  Voyage  was  s
ill  ended,  the  said  Viceroy  of  Mexico,  sent  him  out  again
Anno  1592.  with  a  small  Caravela,  and  a  Pinnace,  arme
with  Mariners  onely,  to  follow  the  said  Voyage,  for  dis
covery  of  the  same  Straits  of  Anian,  and  the  passag
thereof,  into  the  Sea  which  they  call  the  North  Sea,  whic
is  our  North-west  Sea.  And  that  he  followed  his  cours
in  that  Voyage  West  and  North-west  in  the  South  Ses
all  alongst  the  coast  of  Nova  Spania,  and  California,  an<
the  Indies,  now  called  North  America  (all  which  Voyag
hee  signified  to  me  in  a  great  Map,  and  a  Sea-card  of  min
owne,  which  I  laied  before  him)  untill  hee  came  to  th
Latitude  of  fortie  seven  degrees,  and  that  there  findin
Land  trending  that  the  Land  trended  North  and  North-east,  with  a  broa
tn  47-  Inlet  of  Sea,  betweene  47.  and  48.  degrees  of  Latitude

egrets.  kee  entrec[  thereinto,  sayling  therein  more  then  twenti

dayes,  and  found  that  Land  trending  still  sometime  North
west  and  North-east,  and  North,  and  also  East  an(
South-eastward,  and  very  much  broader  Sea  then  was  a
the  said  entrance,  and  that  hee  passed  by  divers  Hands  ii
that  sayling.  And  that  at  the  entrance  of  this  said  Strait
there  is  on  the  North-west  coast  thereof,  a  great  Hedlanc^
or  Hand,  with  an  exceeding  high  Pinacle,  or  spired  Rocke  m
like  a  piller  thereupon.

Also  he  said,  that  he  went  on  Land  in  divers  places,  anc
that  he  saw  some  people  on  Land,  clad  in  Beasts  skins

416

doi

ti-

*

;e

ON  THE  NORTH  WEST PASSAGE  a.d.

1596.

and  that  the  Land  is  very  fruitfull,  and  rich  of  gold,  Silver,
Pearle,  and  other  things,  like  Nova  Spania.

And  also  he  said,  that  he  being  entred  thus  farre  into
the  said  Strait,  and  being  come  into  the  North  Sea  already,
and  finding  the  Sea  wide  enough  every  where,  and  to  be
about  thirtie  or  fortie  leagues  wide  in  the  mouth  of  the  The  mouth  of
Straits,  where  hee  entred ; hee  thought  he  had  now  well  the  s*ra*g&t
discharged  his  office,  and  done  the  thing  which  he  was  entrej  -0  or
sent  to  doe  : and  that  hee  not  being  armed  to  resist  the  ^_0.  leagues
force  of  the  Salvage  people  that  might  happen,  hee  there-  broad.

:i:  fore  set  sayle  and  returned  homewards  againe  towards  Nova
Spania,  where  hee  arrived  at  Acapulco,  Anno  1592.  hoping

S(|to  be  rewarded  greatly  of  the  Viceroy,  for  this  service

n(done  in  this  said  Voyage.

Also  he  said,  that  after  his  comming  to  Mexico,  hee  was
greatly  welcommed  by  the  Viceroy,  and  had  great  promises
of  great  reward,  but  that  having  sued  there  two  yeares
time,  and  obtained  nothing  to  his  content,  the  Viceroy  told

'S(him,  that  he  should  be  rewarded  in  Spaine  of  the  King
himselfe  very  greatly,  and  willed  him  therefore  to  goe  into

^Spaine,  which  Voyage  hee  did  performe.

Also  he  said,  that  when  he  was  come  into  Spaine,  he

nfwas greatly welcommed there at the Kings Court, in

lirordes  after  the  Spanish  manner,  but  after  long  time  of
suite  there  also,  hee  could  not  get  any  reward  there  neither

alto  his  content.  And  that  therefore  at  the  length  he  stole
iway  out  of  Spaine,  and  came  into  Italie,  to  goe  home
igaine  and  live  among  his  owne  Kindred  and  Countrimen,
he  being  very  old.

Also  he  said,  that  hee  thought  the  cause  of  his  ill  reward

2  had  of  the  Spaniards,  to  bee  for  that  they  did  understand

I  yery  well,  that  the  English  Nation  had  now  given  over  all
:heir  voyages  for  discoverie  of  the  North-west  passage,

n(  wherefore  they  need  not  feare  them  any  more  to  come  that

a  way  into  the  South  Sea,  and  therefore  they  needed  not  his
service  therein  any  more.

Also  he  said,  that  in  regard  of  this  ill  reward  had  of  the
Spaniards,  and  understanding  of  the  noble  minde  of  the

XIV  417  2D

it

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

Queene  of  England,  and  of  her  warres  maintayned  so

valiantly against the Spaniards, and hoping that her

Majestie  would  doe  him  justice  for  his  goods  lost  by

Captaine Candish, he would bee content to goe into ur

England,  and  serve  her  Majestie  in  that  voyage  for  the

discoverie  perfectly  of  the  North-west  passage  into  the  ft

South  Sea,  and  would  put  his  life  into  her  Majesties  hands

to  performe  the  same,  if  shee  would  furnish  him  with

onely  one  ship  of  fortie  tunnes  burden  and  a  Pinnasse, ft

The  straight  to  anj  that  he  would  performe  it  in  thirtie  dayes  time,  from *

be  discovered Qne  end ^ Qther f  ^ Streights. And  he  wiUed  me  k

tn  30.  dayes.  • • -r^ 1 1

so  to  write  into  England.

[III.iv.851.]  And  upon  this  conference  had  twise  with  the  said  Greeke
Pilot,  I  did  write  thereof  accordingly  into  England  unto
the  right  honourable  the  old  Lord  Treasurer  Cecill,  and  to
Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  and  to  Master  Richard  Hakluyt  that
famous  Cosmographer,  certifying  them  hereof  by  my
Letters.  And  in  the  behalfe  of  the  said  Greeke  Pilot,  I
prayed  them  to  disburse  one  hundred  pounds  of  money,  to
bring  him  into  England  with  my  selfe,  for  that  my  owne
purse  would  not  stretch  so  wide  at  that  time.  And  I  had
answere  hereof  by  Letters  of  friends,  that  this  action  was
very  well  liked,  and  greatly  desired  in  England  to  bee
effected ;  but  the  money  was  not  readie,  and  therefore
this  action  dyed  at  that  time,  though  the  said  Greeke  Pilot
perchance  liveth  still  this  day  at  home  in  his  owne  Countrie
in  Cefalonia,  towards  the  which  place  he  went  from  me
within  a  fortnight  after  this  conference  had  at  Venice.

And  in  the  meane  time,  while  I  followed  my  owne
businesse  in  Venice,  being  in  Law  suit  against  the  Com-
panie  of  Merchants  of  Turkie,  and  Sir  John  Spencer  their
Governour  in  London,  to  recover  my  pension  due  for  my
office  of  being  their  Consull  at  Aleppo  in  Turkie,  which
they  held  from  me  wrongfully.  And  when  I  was  (as  I
thought)  in  a  readinesse  to  returne  home  into  England,
for  that  it  pleased  the  Lords  of  her  Majesties  honourable  \
Privie  Counsell  in  England,  to  looke  into  this  Cause  of  It
my  Law  suit  for  my  reliefe ; I  thought  that  I  should  be

418

in

ON  THE NORTH  WEST PASSAGE  a.d.

1596.

able  of  my  owne  purse  to  take  with  me  into  England  the
said  Greeke  Pilot.  And  therefore  I  wrote  unto  him  from
Venice  a  Letter,  dated  in  July  1596.  which  is  copied  here-
under.

Al  Magco  Sigon  Capitan  Juan De  Fuca  Piloto  de
Indias,  amigo  mio  charmo-  en  Zefalonia.

MUy  honrado  Sennor,  siendo  yo  para  buelverme  en
Inglatierra  dentre  de  pocas  mezes,  y  accuerdandome
de  lo  trattado  entre  my  y  V.  M.  en  Venesia,  sobre  el  viagio
de  las  Indias,  me  ha  parescido  bien  de  scrivir  esta  carta  a
V.  M.  paraque  si  tengais  animo  de  andar  con  migo,  puedais
escribirme  presto,  en  que  maniera  quereis  consertaros.  Y
puedais  embiarmi  vuestra  carta,  con  esta  nao  Ingles  que
sta  al  Zante  (sino  hallais  otra  coientura  meier)  con  el
sobrescritto  que  diga,  en  casa  del  Sennor  Eleazar  Hycman
Mercader  Ingles,  al  tragetto,  de  San  Thomas  en  Venisia.
Y  Dios  guarde  la  persona  de  V.  M.  Fecha  en  Venesia  al
primer  dia  de  Julio,  1596.  annos.

Amigo  de  V.  M.  Michael  Lok  Ingles.

And  I  sent  the  said  Letter  from  Venice  to  Zante,  in  the
ship  Cherubin.  And  shortly  after  I  sent  a  copie  thereof  in
the  ship  Mynyon.  And  also  a  third  copie  thereof  by
Manea  Orlando  Patron  de  Nave  Venetian.  And  unto
tmy  said  Letters  he  wrote  mee  answere  to  Venice  by  one
Letter  which  came  not  to  my  hands.  And  also  by
,another  Letter  which  came  to  my  hands,  which  is  copied
here-under.

Al  Illmo  Sigor-  Michal  Loch  Ingles,  in  casa  del
Sigor-  Lasaro  Merca.  der  Ingles,  al  tragetto  de
San  Thomas  en  Venesia.

MUy  Illustre  Segon  lo  carta  de  V.  M.  recevi  a  20.  dias
del  Mese  di  Settembre,  por  loqual  veo  Loche  V.  M.
me manda, io tengho animo de complir  Loche tengo

419

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

promettido  a  V.  M.  y  no  solo  yo,  mas  tengo  vinte  hombre
para  lievar  con  migo,  por  che  son  hombres  vaglientes ;
assi  estoi  esperando,  por  otra  carta  che  avise  a  V.  IV
parache  me  embiais  los  dinieros  che  tengo  escritto  aV.  IV
Porche  bien  save  V.  M.  como  io  vine  pover,  porche  m
glievo  Capitan  Candis  mas  de  sessanta  mille  ducados,  com
V.  M.  bien  save :  embiandome  lo  dicho,  ire  a  servir
V.  M.  con  todos  mis  compagneros.  I  no  spero  otra  coss
mas  de  la  voluntad  e  carta  de  V.  M.  I  con  tanto  nostn
Sigor-  Dios  guarda  la  Illustre  persona  de  V.  M.  mucho
annos. De  Ceffalonia  a  24.  de  Settembre  del  1596.

Amigo  &  servitor  de  V.  M.

Juan  Fuca. )ono

iitei

inti

Grei

v

fid

disc

kytl

Spai

itrei

fori

k

1

;n

tl
h

por.

Eng

DOI

Lor

Let'

And  the  said  Letter  came  to  my  hands  in  Venice,  th<
16.  day  of  November,  1596.  but  my  Law  suite  with  th<
Companie  of  Turkie  was  not  yet  ended,  by  reason  oi
Sir  John  Spencers  suite  made  in  England  at  the  Queenej
Court  to  the  contrarie,  seeking  onely  to  have  his  mone)
discharged  which  I  had  attached  in  Venice  for  my  saic
pension,  and  thereby  my  owne  purse  was  not  yet  readie
for  the  Greeke  Pilot.

And  neverthelesse,  hoping  that  my  said  suite  would
have  shortly  a  good  end ;  I  wrote  another  Letter  to  this
Greeke  Pilot  from  Venice,  dated  the  20.  of  November.
1596.  which  came  not  to  his  hands.  And  also  another
Letter,  dated  the  24.  of  Januarie  1596.  which  came
to  his  hands.  And  thereof  he  wrote  me  answere,
dated  the  28.  of  May,  1597.  which  I  received  they
[III.iv.852.]  first  of  August  1597.  by  Thomas  Norden  an  English
Merchant  yet  living  in  London,  wherein  he  promised  still
to  goe  with  me  into  England,  to  performe  the  said  voyage
for  discoverie  of  the  North-west  passage  into  the  South
Sea,  if  I  would  send  him  money  for  his  charges  according
to  his  former  writing,  without  the  which  money,  he  said
he  could  not  goe,  for  that  he  said  he  was  undone  utterly,
The  Ship  when  he  was  in  the  ship  Santa  Anna,  which  came  from
Santa  Anna. China,  and  was  robbed  at  California. And  yet  againe

420

p

ON THE  NORTH WEST PASSAGE  a.d.

1602.

afterward  I  wrote  him  another  Letter  from  Venice,  where-

unto  he  wrote  me  answere,  by  a  Letter  written  in  his

Greeke  language,  dated  the  20.  of  October, 1598. the

which  I  have  still  by  me,  wherein  he  promiseth  still  to  goe

with  me  into  England,  and  performe  the  said  voyage  of

^discoverie  of  the  North-west  passage  into  the  South  Sea

by  the  said  streights,  which  he  calleth  the  Streight  of  Nova  The  Streight

Spania,  which  he  saith  is  but  thirtie  daies  voyage  in  the  of  Nova

streights,  if  I  will  send  him  the  money  formerly  written  sP*ma ,thtrtte
/- 1  • 1  ^1  1  •  1  t  1  1  1 day  es  journey

for  his  charges. The  which  money  1  could  not  yet  send  int^e

him,  for  that  I  had  not  yet  recovered  my  pension  owing  Streight.

mee  by  the  Companie  of  Turkie  aforesaid. And  so  of

long  time  I  stayed  from  any  furder  proceeding  with  him

in  this  matter.

And  yet  lastly,  when  I  my  selfe  was  at  Zante,  in  the

moneth  of  June  1602.  minding  to  passe  from  thence  for

'England  by  Sea,  for  that  I  had  then  recovered  a  little

money  from  the  Companie  of  Turkie,  by  an  order  of  the

Lords  of  the  Privie  Counsell  of  England,  I  wrote  another

Letter  to  this  Greeke  Pilot  to  Cefalonia,  and  required  him

to  come  to  me  to  Zante,  and  goe  with  mee  into  England,

DUt  I  had  none  answere  thereof  from  him,  for  that  as  I

neard  afterward  at  Zante,  he  was  then  dead,  or  very  likely

"o  die  of  great  sicknesse. Whereupon I  returned my

selfe  by  Sea  from  Zante  to  Venice,  and  from  thence  I  went

3y  land  through  France  into  England,  where  I  arrived  at

~hristmas, An. 1602. safely, I thanke God, after my

ibsence  from  thence  ten  yeeres  time ; with  great  troubles

lad  for  the  Company  of  Turkies  businesse,  which  hath

:ost  me  a  great  summe  of  money,  for  the  which  I  am  not

/et  satisfied  of  them.

[A  Treatise
421

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

A  Treatise  of  the  North-west  passage  to  the  Sout
Sea,  through  the  Continent  of  Virginia,  and  h
Fretum  Hudson.

THe  noble  plantation  of  Virginia  hath  some  vei
excellent  prerogatives  above  many  other  famo\
Kingdomes,  namely,  the  temperature  of  the  aire,  tl
fruitfulnesse  of  the  soile,  and  the  commodiousnesse
situation.

The  aire  is  healthfull  and  free  both  from  immodera
heate,  and  from  extreme  cold  ;  so  that  both  the  Inhabitan
and  their  Cattell  doe  prosper  exceedingly  in  stature  an
strength,  and  all  Plants  brought  from  any  other  remoi
climate,  doe  there  grow  and  fructifie  in  as  good  or  bett<
manner,  then  in  the  soile  from  whence  they  came.  Whic
though  it  doe  manifestly  proove  the  fruitfulnesse  of  tr
soile,  yeelding  all  kindes  of  Graine  or  Plants  committe
unto  it,  with  a  rich  and  plentifull  increase ;  yet  cannot  tr
fatnesse  of  the  earth  alone  produce  such  excellent  effect
unlesse  the  temperature  of  the  aire  be  likewise  so  favou
able,  that  those  tender  sprouts  which  the  earth  dot
abundantly  bring  forth,  may  bee  cherished  with  moderal
heate  and  seasonable  moisture,  and  freed  both  froi
scorching  drought,  and  nipping  frost.

These  blessings  are  so  much  the  more  to  be  esteemec
because  they  are  bestowed  upon  a  place  situated  so  conven
ently,  and  at  so  good  a  distance  both  from  Europe,  and  th
West  Indies,  that  for  the  mutuall  commerce  betwixt  thes
great  and  most  rich  parts  of  the  habitable  world,  ther
cannot  bee  devised  any  place  more  convenient  for  th
succour  and  refreshing  of  those  that  trade  from  henc
thither :  whether  they  be  of  our  owne  Nation,  or  of  ou
Neighbours  and  Friends,  the  multitude  of  great  an
navigable  Rivers,  and  of  safe  and  spacious  Harbours,  as  1
were  inviting  all  Nations  to  entertaine  mutuall  friendship
and  to  participate  of  those  blessings  which  God  out  of  th
abundance of his rich Treasures, hath so graciousl

422

HENRY BRIGGS  AD;

1616.

bestowed  some  upon  these  parts  of  Europe,  and  others  no
lesse  desired  upon  those  poore  people :  which  might  still
have  remayned  in  their  old  barbarous  ignorance,  without
knowledge  of  their  owne  miserie,  or  of  Gods  infinite  good-
nesse  and  mercy  ;  if  it  had  not  pleased  God  thus  graciously
r  both  to  draw  us  thither  with  desire  of  such  wealth  as  those
u  fruitfull  Countries  afford,  and  also  to  grant  us  so  easie,
certaine,  and  safe  a  meanes  to  goe  unto  them :  which
0  passage  is  in  mine  opinion  made  much  more  secure  and
easie  by  the  commodious  Harbours  and  refreshing  which
Virginia  doth  reach  out  unto  us.  The  coasts  of  Florida  to
[{ the  West,  being  not  so  barberous ;  and  of  New  England
j,  tc  the  East,  somewhat  more  out  of  the  way,  amongst  so
many  Flats  and  small  Hands  not  so  safe.  Neither  is  the
commodiousnesse  of  Virginia's  situation  onely  in  respect
of  this  West  Atlanticke  Ocean,  but  also  in  respect  of  the
Indian  Ocean,  which  we  commonly  call  the  South  Sea,
which  lyeth  on  the  West  and  North-west  side  of  Virginia,
on  the  other  side  of  the  Mountaines  beyond  our  Falls,  and
openeth  a  free  and  faire  passage,  not  onely  to  China,  Japan,
and  the  Moluccaes ;  but  also  to  New  Spaine,  Peru,  Chili,
and  those  rich  Countries  of  Terra  Australis,  not  as  yet
fully  discovered.  For  the  Sea  wherein  Master  Hudson
did  winter,  which  was  first  discovered  by  him,  and  is
therefore  now  called  Fretum  Hudson,  doth  stretch  so
farre  towards  the  West,  that  it  lyeth  as  farre  Westward  [III.iv.853.]
as  the  Cape  of  Florida :  So  that  from  the  Falls  above
Henrico  Citie,  if  we  shape  our  journey  towards  the  North-
west, following  the  Rivers  towards  the  head,  wee  shall
undoubtedly  come  to  the  Mountaines,  which  as  they  send
divers  great  Rivers  Southward  into  our  Bay  of  Chesepiock,
so  likewise  doe  they  send  others  from  their  further  side
North-westward  into  that  Bay  where  Hudson  did  winter.
For  so  wee  see  in  our  owne  Countrie,  from  the  ridge  of
Mountaines  continued  from  Derbishire  into  Scotland,  doe
issue  many  great  Rivers  on  both  sides  into  the  East
Germane  Ocean,  and  into  the  Westerne  Irish  Seas  :  in  like
sort  from  the  Alpes  of  Switzerland  and  the  Grizons,  doe

423

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

runne  the  Danubie  Eastward  into  Pontus  Euxinus,  th
Rhene  into  the  North  Germane  Ocean,  the  Rhosne  Wes
into  the  Mediterrane  Sea,  and  the  Po  South  into  th
Adriatike  Sea.  This  Bay  where  Hudson  did  winter
stretcheth  it  selfe  Southward  into  49.  degrees,  and  canno
be  in  probabilitie  so  farre  distant  from  the  Falls  as  tw(
hundred  leagues  ;  part  of  the  way  lying  by  the  Rivers  sid
towards  the  Mountaines  from  whence  it  springeth :  anc
the  other  part  on  the  other  side  cannot  want  Rivers  like
wise,  which  will  conduct  us  all  the  way,  and  I  hope  earn
us  and  our  provisions  a  good  part  of  it.  Besides  tha
Bay,  it  is  not  unlikely  that  the  Westerne  Sea  in  some  othe
Creeke  or  River  commeth  much  neerer  then  that  placjh
For  the  place  where  Sir  Thomas  Button  did  winter,  lTnot,
more  Westerly  then  Master  Hudsons  Bay  by  one  hur  .tte
and  ninetie  leagues  in  the  same  Sea,  doth  extend  it  se±„i
very  neere  as  farre  towards  the  west  as  the  Cape  of  Cali-
fornia, which  is  now  found  to  bee  an  Hand  stretching  i
selfe  from  22.  degrees  to  42.  and  lying  almost  directl)
North  and  South ;  as  may  appeare  in  a  Map  of  that  Ilanc
which  I  have  seene  here  in  London,  brought  out  oi
Holland ;  where  the  Sea  upon  the  North-west  part  ma)
very  probably  come  much  neerer  then  some  doe  imagine :
who  giving  too  much  credit  to  our  usuall  Globes  anc
Maps,  doe  dreame  of  a  large  Continent  extending  it  selfe
farre  Westward  to  the  imagined  Streight  of  Anian,  where
are  seated  (as  they  fable)  the  large  Kingdomes  of  Cebola
and  Quivira,  having  great  and  populous  Cities  of  civil!
people ;  whose  houses  are  said  to  bee  five  stories  high,
and  to  have  some  pillars  of  Turguesses.  Which  relation
are  cunningly  set  downe  by  some  upon  set  purpose  to  put
us  out  of  the  right  way,  and  to  discourage  such  as  other
wise  might  be  desirous  to  search  a  passage  by  the  way
aforesaid  into  those  Seas.

Gerardus  Mercator,  a  very  industrious  and  excellent
Geographer,  was  abused  by  a  Map  sent  unto  him,  of  foure
Euripi  meeting  about  the  North  Pole ;  which  now  are
found  to  bee  all  turned  into  a  mayne Icie Sea. One

424

HENRY BRIGGS  a.d.

1616.

demonstration  of  the  craftie  falshood  of  these  usuall  Maps
is  this,  that  Cape  Mendocino  is  set  in  them  West  North-
west, distant  from  the  South  Cape  of  California,  about
seventeene  hundred  leagues,  whereas  Francis  Gaule  that
was  imployed  in  those  discoveries  by  the  Vice-roy  of  New
Spaine,  doth  in  Hugo  Linschotten  his  booke  set  downe
their  distance  to  be  onely  five  hundred  leagues.

Besides  this,  in  the  place  where  Sir  Thomas  Button  did
winter  in  57.  degrees  of  latitude,  the  constant  great  Tydes
every  twelve  houres,  and  the  increase  of  those  Tydes
whensoever  any  strong  Westerne  winde  did  blow,  doe
trongly  perswade  us  that  the  mayne  Westerne  Ocean  is
lot  farre  from  thence ;  which  was  much  confirmed  unto
:hem  the  Summer  following ;  when  sayling  directly  North
rom  that  place  where  they  wintered,  about  the  latitude  of
So.  degrees,  they  were  crossed  by  a  strong  Current  running
sometimes  Eastward,  sometimes  Westward :  So  that  if
we  finde  either  Hudsons  Bay,  or  any  Sea  more  neere  unto
he  West,  wee  may  assure  our  selves  that  from  thence  we
nay  with  great  ease  passe  to  any  part  of  the  East  Indies :
^.nd  that  as  the  World  is  very  much  beholding  to  that
"amous  Columbus  for  that  hee  first  discovered  unto  us  the
West  Indies ;  and  to  the  Portugal  for  the  finding  out  the
)rdinarie  and  as  yet  the  best  way  that  is  knowne  to  the
last  Indies,  by  Cape  Bona  Speranza :  So  may  they  and
11  the  world  be  in  this  beholding  to  us  in  opening  a  new
nd  large  passage,  both  much  neerer,  safer,  and  farre  more
wholesome  and  temperate  through  the  Continent  of
"irginia,  and  by  Fretum  Hudson,  to  all  those  rich  Coun-
ries  bordering  upon  the  South  Sea,  in  the  East  and  West
ndies.  And  this  hope  that  the  South  Sea  may  easily  from
Virginia  be  discovered  over  Land,  is  much  confirmed  by
he  constant  report  of  the  Savages,  not  onely  of  Virginia,
ut  also  of  Florida  and  Canada  ;  which  dwelling  so  remote
ne  from  another,  and  all  agreeing  in  the  report  of  a  large
ea  to  the  Westwards,  where  they  describe  great  ships  not
nlike  to  ours,  with  other  circumstances,  doe  give  us  very
reat  probabilitie  (if  not  full  assurance)  that  our  endevours

425

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

this  way  shall  by  Gods  blessing  have  a  prosperous  and
happy  successe,  to  the  encrease  of  his  Kingdome  and  Glorie
amongst  these  poore  ignorant  Heathen  people,  the
publique  good  of  all  the  Christian  world,  the  never-dying
honour  of  our  most  gracious  Soveraigne,  the  inestimable
benefit  of  our  Nation,  and  the  admirable  and  speedie
increase  and  advancement  of  that  most  noble  and  hopefull
Plantation  of  Virginia ;  for  the  good  successe  whereof
all  good  men  with  mee,  I  doubt  not,  will  powre  out  their
prayers  to  Almightie  God.

H.  B.

426

:r

A.D.

I  60 1

Voyages, and  Travels

to  and  in  the  New  World,  called  America  : Rela-
tions of  their  Pagan  Antiquities  and of  the
Regions  and  Plantations  in  the  North  and
South  parts  thereof,  and  of  the  Seas
and  Hands  adjacent.

THE FIFTH  BO  ORE.

Chap.  I.

A  Description  of  the  West  Indies,  by  Antonio  De
Herrera#  his  Majesties  Chiefe  Chronicler  of
the  Indies,  and  his  Chronicler  of  Castile.

To  the  Licentiate  Paul  of  Laguna,  President  of  the
Royall  and  Supreme  Councell  of  the  Indies.

He  Licentiate  John  of  Obando,  Predecessor
of  your  Lordship  (in  whose  time  the
Office  of  chiefe  Chronicler  of  the  Indies
was  instituted,  for  writing  with  greater
authoritie,  foundation,  and  truth,  the
Acts  of  the  Castilians,  in  the  New  World,
and  to  see  and  examine  that  which  the
lother  Chroniclers  should  write  (for  I  finde  that  almost  to

*I  found  this  Worke  translated  in  M.  Hakluyt's  Papers;  but  I  can
Iscarsely  call  it  English,  it  had  so  much  of  the  Spanish  garbe,  in  litterall

427

[III.  v.  855.]

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

all  that  is  written  no  credit  could  be  given,  for  over-much  (
licence,  wherewith  untill  then  it  was  done)  hee  used  great
diligence  in  gathering  the  most  certaine  Relations  that
were  found  as  well  in  the  Indies,  as  in  Spaine,  of  that
which  happened  in  the  Discoveries  of  those  Regions,  the
foundations  of  those  Townes  and  Customes  of  the  people.
And  many  yeers  being  past  after  his  death,  without
making  any  beginning  of  this  History,  your  Lordship
being  provided  for  President  of  the  Royall  and  Supreme
Councell  of  the  Indies,  knowing  how  much  it  behoved,
[III.  v.  856.]  tnat  deeds  so  worthy  of  memorie  should  no  longer  be
buried,  and  that  they  should  be  written  by  a  Royall
Chronicler  (seeing  so  much  fruit  is  gotten  of  Historie,
that  it  exceedeth  so  much  the  Picture,  as  the  soule,  the
bodie,  against  the  opinion  of  a  moderne  Writer.)  Provid-
ing all  the  meanes  necessarie  with  liberalise  and  diligence,
have  beene  the  meere  and  onely  Instrument ;  following
the  opinion  of  S.  Augustine,  that  this  Historie,  and  the
Description  that  followeth  hath  come  to  the  present  estate.
And  because  it  hath  not  beene  of  least  importance  to
honour  the  Author,  animating  him  to  goe  forward  with
so  great  a  labour,  conforming  your  selfe  with  the  universall
opinion  of  the  much  that  is  due  to  the  watchings,  and
labours  of  the  Writers ; placing  this  Office  of  Chiefe

and  verball  affectation  and  obscuritie.  I  have  examined  it  with  the
Spanish  Originall,  and  compared  it  also  with  the  Latine  Transla-
tion, with  great  paines  for  thy  greater  pleasure  &  profit,  correcting  and  if
illustrating  the  phrase  and  sence,  being  before  very  rude,  obscure  and
in  very  many  places  utterly  sencelesse.  But  having  none  to  write  for  ;
mee  but  my  owne  hands,  I  rather  chose  to  amend  this  as  I  could,  then
to  translate  it  anew.  I  have  seene  it  also  in  French.  The  Latine  is
exceeding  false  in  some  numbers,  as  2000.  for  20000.  divers  times,  &c.
which.  I  note  for  their  sakes  which  reade  that  and  have  not  the  Spanish.
I  have  not  contracted  this  (as  I  have  done  divers  other  Relations)
because  it  is  a  briefe  contraction  of  the  Spanish-Indian  Contractation,
presenting  the  Spanish  Proceedings,  Colonies,  Townes,  Officers  and
Government  Spirituall  and  Temporall  in  the  Indies.  This  Author
hath  written  eight  Decades  of  the  Spanish  Acts  in  the  West  Indies,
which  give  great  light  to  those  parts,  but  would  be  too  long  for  this
Worke.

428

ANTONIO DE HERRERA

A.D.

l60I,

'.amusio

Chronicler  in  that  point  and  reputation  that  so  noble  an

Exercise  deserveth,  (as  the  most  famous  men  of  the  World

have  judged  it,  and  it  is  esteemed  and  talked  of  among  all

Nations  be  they  never  so  barbarous)  your  Lordship  shall

be  praysed  eternally,  and  thanked  of  all  that  are  interessed  Re

in  it ; by  which  is  procured  the  making  mention  of  their  uncharitably

Fathers,  and  Predecessors  with  their  Names  and  Countrey,  M^/tLJL

all  that  hath  beene  possible,  against  the  barbarous  and  most  the  filly  of

unjust  opinion  of  John  Baptista  Ramusio,  in  his  Proeme  Spanish

in  the  third  Volume  of  the  Navigations,  where  hee  saith  Authors  which

to  bee  a  vaine thine:, and  ridiculous, that  the  Spanish  are .more
A .  1 1  1 1 to •  •  •  •  1  1 curious  to  set

Authors should take  paines in writing the names  and  ^owne  t^e

Countrey  of  those  which  served  in  the  matters  of  the  names,  13c.  of

Indies. Wherein  he  sheweth  the  venime  of  the  envie  those  which
-  conceived  of  the  glorious  deeds  of  these  Catholike  Kings,  h"ve  there
u,  and  of  the  Castillian  Nation,  seeing  the  Chronicles  doe  thouzh^but"^
wj  serve  to  honour  the  good,  and  to  reproch  the  evill,  for  an  rebellions, then

xample  of  those  to  come ; which  could  not  be  obtayned  the  description
te  with  the  opinion  of  this  Ramusius,  whom  the  saying  of  °fthe  beasts,

Cato  against  the  Grecians  doth  fit.  But  the  opinion  oftv^  j*  Earth
fit!  pour  Lordship  hath  beene  according  to  your  prudence  and!  Heaven,  &c.
sa|  valour,  of  the  which  as  it  is  just,  there  will  be  a  perpetuall"  in  the  Indies:
ani  memorie,  and  for  that  which  this  Nation  is  indebted  unto  for  whlch

iom for the same, you shall bee reknowledged of it ee  l  eie,

eternally. God  keepe  your  Lordship,  from  Vallyadolyeede  Oviedo.

:he  fifteenth  of  October  1601.

THH<
1 be

compasse  of  the  Earth  is  360. degrees,  which  Chap.  1.
eing  reduced  to  leagues  of  Castile  are  6300.  and  by  Of  the  bounds
he  compasse  of  the  Earth  is  understood  the  Sea  together  ^LfjS1"!

vith  it,  which  two  Elements  make  the  Globe ;  whose
lpper  face  in  part  is  Earth,  and  in  part  is  Sea :  The
Ancients  divided  the  Earth  in  three  parts,  and  gave  to
very  one  his  name.  The  first  they  called  Europe,  more
elebrated  then  any  of  the  other.  The  second  Asia,  which
s  greater  then  the  rest,  and  contayneth  the  great  King-
iome  of  China.  The  third  Africa.  And  men  being  in  a
upposition  that  the  World  contayned  no  more  then  was

Indies.

\

429

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

rehearsed,  not  contenting  themselves  with  it,  entred  in  the
Art  of  Navigating,  and  in  the  invention  of  ships  of  high
building,  fitting  them  in  such  order  that  they  might  abide
{The  the  force  of  the  waves  of  the  Sea,  &  in  this  Art1  the

taveZr ^ assed  SPaniar<^s  nave  surpassed  all  the  Nations  of  the  World.
all  Nations  of  For  whiles  there  reigned  Ferdinand  in  Castile  and  in  Lyon,
the  World,  in  the famous Kings Catholike Ferdinando the  Fift, and
'Navigation  of  Isabella  a  most  wise,  prudent,  and  most  puissant  Queene ;
high  built ancj  j)on  John  the  Second,  called  the  Pellican,  raigned  in
member  that  a  P°rtugall,  (nee  that  ever  will  be  worthy  of  memory)  Don
Spaniard Christopher  Colon,  first  Admirall  of  the  Indies,  having
speakes  it.) lived  many  yeeres  married  in  Spaine ; with  the  counsell
of  Martin  of  Bohemia,  a  Portugall  borne  in  the  Hand  of
Fayall,  a  famous  Astrologian ; and  especially  a  Judiciarie,
and  of  others  with  whom  he  communicated  it,  gave  a
beginning  to  the  Discovery  of  that  which  at  this  day  is
counted  the  fourth  part  of  the  World,  and  the  greatest  of
them  all,  and  taking  his  course  toward  the  Sunne  setting,
Pallos,  is  to gomg  from  Pallos  a  Village  of  the  Earle  of  Miranda,  in
say  staves,  or the  Coast  of  Andaluzia,  he  sayled  so  much  by  the  Ocean,
stickes.  tjlat  kee  founc[  this  great  Land,  which  the  Equinoctial!

Line  cutteth  in  the  middest,  and  it  goeth  so  farre  toward
the  South,  that  it  reacheth  to  fiftie  two  degrees  and  an
halfe,  and  goeth  so  high  to  the  North,  that  it  hides  it  selfe
mThe  under  the  Pole  Articke,  without"1  knowing  any  end.

Spaniards  did  The  greatnesse  of  this  fourth  part  hath  set  the  people  N
mttkn  W°U  in  great  admiration,  whose  description  shall  here  be  N
Passage.  handled,  under  the  name  of  Hands,  and  firme  Land  of  the  to

Ocean  Sea,  because  they  are  compassed  with  this  Sea,  andjpa
placed  to  the  West,  and  are  commonly  called,  the  WestL
Indies,  and  the  New  World,  and  comprehended  within  the
limits  of  the  Kings  of  Castile  and  of  Lyon. Which  is  an
Hemisphere,  and  halfe  of  the  World,  of  180.  degrees,
beginning  to  reckon  from  a  Meridian  Circle,  which  passeth(j
by thirtie nine, or by fortie degrees of longitude,  U
Occidentall  from  the  Meridian  of  Toledo,  through  the  l
mouth of the River Maranyon, and to the Orientall,l}
through the  Citie  of  Mallaca, in sort, that  at twentiefc

43°

rt

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  ad.

1601.

eagues  sayling  for  a  degree,  these  bounds  have  from  the

one  part  to  the  other  3900.  Castillan  leagues,  every  one  of

000.  paces,  of  five  foot  of  a  Castillan  yard,  which  men

ay are sixtie Italian miles, from the Orient to the

Occident, which the  Sea-men  doe  call  East  and  West.

A.nd  this  account  of  twentie  leagues  to  a  degree,  is  accord-

ng  to  Ptolomie,  and  to  the  opinion  of  many  curious  men.

t  hath  seemed  to  others  that  the  miles  of  every  degree  are

eventie,  and  that  they  make  no  more  then  seventeene

eagues  and  an  halfe  of  Castile,  which  is  held  for  the  truest

iccount.

The  degrees  of  longitude,  which  are those that  are
•eckoned  by  the  nEquinoctiall,  which  goeth  from  East  to  "  How  the
West,  through  the  middest  of  the  Orbe,  and  Globe  of  the  deZr?es  °f
iarth,  have  not  beene  able  to  bee  taken  well,  because m&tu  *aie
here  is  no  fixed  signe  in  the  Heaven. Degrees  of  altitude
re  those  which  are  taken,  and  reckoned  from  the  Pole
vhich  fall  out  certayne,  because  it  is  a  fixed  point,  which  is  [HI.  v.  857.]
he  marke  that  is  taken,  by  the  which  it  shall  be  shewed  in
his  description.

There  is  discovered,  and  navigated  from  the  North  to  What  is
he  South,  from  60.  degrees  of  Septentrional  altitude,  unto  discovered  and
iftie  three  Austral,  which  are  1977.  leagues  of  ground,  TA^EneM
vhich  hath  in  breadth,  at  the  broadest  1300.  and  thence  have  dis-
ownewards  unto eighteene, which  is  the  narowest  by  covered  far
Nombre  de  Dios,  or  Portobelo,  unto  Panama,  whereby  mre;  From
Mature  divided  this  Land,  leaving  almost  the  halfe  of  it  ^nJ^nd^'
o  the  North,  and  the  rest  to  the  South,  which  are  the  two  jromyS.  in
>arts  of  these  bounds. The  third,  is  the  Hands  and  firme  Groin/and  to
and, that  lye to the East of Mallaca, where through 57:  of  South
)asseth the Line of the partition, betweene the two  laMude-
Zrownes  of  Castile  and  Portugall,  the  which  although  they
re  part  of  the  East  India,  they  are  named  of  the  West
respect  of  Castile,  as  shall  bee  seene  in  the  generall
vlap  that  followeth.

And  because  the  Discoverie  of  all  these  Regions,  from  A  marvello

[hence so great Riches have beene brought to these  effect  of  the
ingdomes,  is  due  unto  the  Load-stone,  I  will  set  downe  Loadstone.
43*

A.D.

l60I.

Don  Antonie
Ossorio,  dis-
covered a
great  secret  of
the  Loadstone.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

heere  a  wonderfull  effect  of  his,  discovered  by  Don
Antonie  Ossorio,  a  Gentleman  of  Valladolid,  and  it  is,
that  it  doth  communicate  to  the  Iron,  more  attractive
vertue  then  naturally  it  hath  of  it  selfe,  seeing  that  apply-
ing an  Iron  to  the  part  of  the  stone  that  hath  most  force,
much  more  weight  will  bee  raysed  with  the  Iron,  then
with  the  stone  it  selfe,  so  it  bee  joyned  with  it,  in  sort  that
to  a  Load-stone,  that  weigheth  no  more  then  two  pound  one
quarter,  and  hath  no  naturall  vertue  for  to  lift  more  then
sixe  ounces  weight,  it  made  the  Iron  in  my  presence  to  lift
fourteene  pound  of  Iron,  and  this  vertue  hath  not  the
Load-stone  of  Spaine,  a  thing  that  causeth  the  Philo-
sophers to  muse  much  upon.

The  Author  had  here  inserted  a  Table  or  Generall  Map
of  America ;  the  defect  of  which  wee  have  supplyed  with
this  farre  more  complete  of  Hondius.

[III.  v

Chap.  2
Of  the

Navigation  of
the  Indies.

How  many
Navigations
there  bee  to
these  Indies.

858.]  rpHe  Ocean  that  is  toward  the  East,  is  called  the  North
A  Sea,  and  that  which  falleth  to  the  West,  Mar  del  Sur,
or  the  South  Sea  :  this  washeth  Nova  Hispania  and  Peru  :
that  washeth  those  Regions  which  are  situated  on  the
South  coast  of  Brasile  toward  the  Magellan  Streight :  and
especially  the  North  coast  from  Brasile  toward  Castile,  and
other  Septentrional  parts.  These  two  vast  Seas  are
divided  into  other  lesser  Seas  and  Gulfes,  and  are  sayled  by
foure  principall  Navigations.  The  first  and  most  ancient,
from  Castile  to  Terra  firme,  and  to  Nova  Hispania.  The
second,  from  Castile  to  the  River  of  Plate,  and  the  Streight
of  Magellan.  The  third,  from  the  coast  of  Nova
Hispania  to  Guatimala,  and  Panama,  to  Peru,  Chile,  and
the  Streight.  And  the  last,  and  newest,  from  Nova
Hispania  to  the  Hands  of  the  West,  and  trafficke  of  China,
as  it  is  seene  in  the  Table  preceding.

The  first  Navigation,  because  it  is  most  used,  called
Carrera  de  las  Indias,  The  course  of  the  Indies,  is  divided
in  two,  one  to  the  port  of  Saint  John  of  Ulua  in  Nova
Hispania,  whitherto  from  Sivil  is  sayled  about  one
thousand  and  seven  hundred  leagues  in  two  moneths  and

432

Africa:

K^i'^W  "w  AniiiiVs'  In.  1

k_ Amvttrnt!

"

t"r"£$  fmiii  ■*&*£$  Jiqujivt

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF AMERICA

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  ad.

1601.
an  halfe  : and  another  to  Nombre  de  Dios,  and  now  to
Porte  bello,  which  is  in  the  Kingdome  which  they  call
Terra  firme,  of  one  thousand  and  foure  hundred  leagues,
in  two  moneths  large,  and  both  goe  by  one  course,  till  they
come  to  the  Hands  of  the  North  Sea,  from  Saint  Lucar  of  Difficultie  in
Barrameda,  whence  yee  cannot  take  Sea  without  a  Pilot  goingoutofthe
skilfull  in  the  Channell,  a  fit  winde  and  spring  Tydes,  and  faJc"r°fSaint
Mght  of  the  day,  or  lights,  for  to  see  the  markes  of  the
Jarre.

The  Times  for  to  begin  these  Navigations,  are  divers.  In  what  times
For Nova Hispania, the winter being past, from the  these  Naviga-
beginning  of  April  unto  the  end  of  May,  and  not  after,  %^are  t0  be
that  they  may  not  come  to  the  Hands  of  the  North  Sea
after  August,  when  the  North  windes  begin  to  reigne,  and
the  Uracanes  doe  begin,  which  are  stormes  and  great  gusts  Monsons.
arising of  contrarie windes. And to Terra  firme, the
Navigation  is  before  the  entring  of  the  Winter,  in  all
August  and  September,  that  they  may  come  to  Porte  bello
from  November  forward,  when  by  the  beginning  of  the
North  windes  that  Coast  is  alreadie  least  diseased,  and
more  healthfull.

From  Saint  Lucar  they  goe  to  the  Canaries,  whither  The  voyage  of
there  is  about  two  hundred  and  fiftie  leagues  of  Naviga-  the  Fleets  **&

tion, of  eight  or  ten  dayes, through the  Gulfe  de  las  thp  c°me  [°

o##  t  j  t j  o  tne  place  where

Yeguas ; which  in  winter  is  very  dangerous  for  stormes: they  goe.
and  in  the  Port  of  Canarie  they  cast  anker  when  they
thinke  it  good,  or  else  in  the  Port  of  Gomera,  which  is
;the  best  of  those  Hands. From  the  Canaries  they  saile
to  Desseada,  which  stands  in  15.  degrees  and  little  more;
and to Dominica, whither they make seven hundred
leagues,  through  the  great  Ocean,  and  they  stay  five  and
twentie  dayes,  whereby  they  cannot  returne,  because  the
•'Brises  are  ordinarie,  and  contrarie  at  their  returne. The
Brises are windes which comprehend all the Easterne  What  thing
windes  with  all  their  quarters,  and  are  so  ordinarie  and  the  Brises  are.
firme,  because  the  swift  motion  of  the  First  Moover,  doth
carry  after  him  the  Element  of  the  Aire,  as  the  other
superior  Orbes : and  so  the  Aire  followeth  alwaies  the
xiv  433  2  E

A.D.
l60I.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

They  take
water  alreadie
in  the  lie  of
Guadalupe,
where  the
Courses  are
divided.

motion of  the  Day, goin|
varying,  and  the  effectual!

from  East to  West, never
motion  of  the  Aire  carrieth|
after  him  also  the  vapours  and  exhalations  that  doe  arise!
from  the  Sea,  and  therefore  the  Brise  winde  which  runneth;
from  the  East,  is  so  continuall  in  those  parts. This  voyage1
from  the  Canaries  to  Dominica,  Peter  Arios  of  Avila,
which  was  called  Gentill  and  the  Juster,  made  the  first,  thei
yeere of 15 14. when hee went with an Armie fori!
Governour  and  Captaine  generall  of  the  Kingdome  ofl
Golden  Castile,  now  called  Terra  firme,  since  which  thei
Navigation  hath  beene  ordered,  that  untill  then  went  outj
of  order.

Because  it  is  now  ordered  that  fresh  water  and  wood  bei )
not  taken  in  the  Hand  of  Desseada,  and  in  Dominica,  the  .
Fleet  of  Nova  Espanna  goe  hence  to  Occoa,  a  Port  of  thei
Hand  Hispan-yola,  to  take  refreshing,  and  they  stay  long  I
because  the  stormes  from  Cuba  doe  overtake  it. Andij
they  that  goe  for  Nova  Espanna,  doe  water  in  the  Ilandjj
of  Guadalupe,  and  there  they  divide  the  courses. The|j
fleet  of  Nova  Espanna  goeth  in  demand  of  the  Cape  ofij
Saint  Antonie,  which  is  in the  furthest  part  and  most!
Occidentall  of  the  Hand  of  Cuba,  to  which  place  they  sailei  j
about  five  hundred  leagues  in  twentie  dayes  ordinarily,  in
sight  of  Saint  John  of  Porto  Rico  and  of  Espannola,  two
leagues  off  the  Port  of  Saint  Domingo,  running  along  the
coast  by  the  Point  of  Nizao,  and  betweene  the  Hands  of
Cuba  and  Jamayca, they  goe  with  great heede  of  the!
shoales,  which  are  called  the  Jardines,  neere  to  the  middest  for
of  the  coast  of  Cuba  where  many  ships  have  beene  lost,
passing  afterward  in  sight  of  the  Hand  of  Pinos  and  Cape  i
Correntes twelve leagues short of the Cape of Saint
Antonie. From  whence  there  are  two  courses  to  the  Port
of  Veracruz,  both  of  ten  or  twelve  dayes ; one  which
they  call  Within  Land,  of  two  hundred  and  fiftie  leagues,
for  the  Summer  time  from  May  to  September,  when  there
bee  no  North  windes  which  are  crosse  windes  on  the  coast
of  Yucatan,  whereby  they  passe ; and  another  which  they
call Without, for the time of Winter, of about two

434

r

ANTONIO DE HERRERA

hundred  and  eightie  leagues  somewhat  higher  in  altitude  :
and  the  best  Navigation,  for  to  goe  to  the  Port  of  Saint
John  de  Ulua,  is  to  leane  to  the  coast  of  Florida,  and  the
Playnes  of  Almeria,  that  no  contrarie  wind  stay  him  from
seasonable  attayning  the  Port  of  Saint  John  de  Ulua.

The  fleets  that  went  from  Dominica,  and  now  goe  from
Guadalupe  to  Terra  flrme  (whither  is  about  foure  hundred
leagues  voyage  of  fifteene  dayes)  they  goe  in  demand  of
Cartagena,  farre  off  the  coast  of  Terra  firme,  where  the
Brises  are  almost  perpetuall,  and  contrarie  to  the  returne,
and  the  Southerne  windes  continuall  in  Summer,  and  the
Northerne  in  Winter,  which  are  crosse  windes.  They  doe
reknowledge  by  the  way  the  Cape  de  Vella,  between  Santa
Martha  and  a  Venezuela,  and  the  Cape  b  del  Aguja  neere
Cartagena,  where  they  unlade  the  merchandise  that  are  to
goe  to  New  Kingdome ;  and  those  which  are  to  passe
to  Peru,  are  carried  to  Porte  bello,  whitherto  from  Carta-
gena are  ninetie  leagues,  foure  or  sixe  dayes  sayling,
reknowledging  the  Point  of  Captina,and  from  the  Canaries
to  Cartagena  is  five  and  thirtie  dayes  sayling.

Those  that  goe  to  Hunduras  and  Guatemala,  goe  in
companie  with  them  of  Nova  Espanna,  unto  Cape
Tiburon,  the  utmost  Westerne  part  of  Espannola,  from
whence  running  along  by  the  Hand  of  Jamayca  on  the  North
side,  unto  the  Point  of  the  c  Negrillo,  the  uttermost  of
it,  they  put  to  Sea  in  demand  of  the  Cape  of  the  Camaron,
the  beginning  of  the  Gulfe  and  Province  of  Hunduras,
from  whence  they  goe  to  anker  to  Truxillo  fifteene  leagues
to  the  West  from  the  Cape,  where  the  merchandize  are
unladen  that  are  to  remaine  there,  and  the  rest  doe  passe
to  the  Port  of  Cavallos,  and  to  Golfo  Dulce,  along  the
coast  by  the  Gulfe  of  Hunduras,  to  transport  them  to
Guatemala.

r  I  ^He  returne  from  the  Indies  to  Spaine,  cannot  be  made

-L by  the  course  which  they  take  in  going  thither,  and

therefore  they  must  come  to  a  greater  height,  going  out  of

jthe  Tropicks  to  seeke  fresh  windes  which  doe  blow  from

435

A.D.

l60I.

Which  is  the
best  Naviga-
tion from  that
Cape  ofS.
Antonie,  to  S.
John  de  Ulua.

[III.  v.  859.]

a  Or  little
Venice.
bOrofthe
Needle.

The  voyage  of
Hunduras  and
Guatemala.

c  Or  little
black  Moore.

Chap.  3.
Wherein  hee
prosecuteth
the  Naviga-
tions of  the
Indies.

A.D.

l60I.

The  Fleets  doe
returne  to
Castile  by
another  way.
When  the
fleets  ought  to
depart  to  come
for  Castile.
Whither  the
Fleets  doe  goe
from
Cartagena.

d  Or  take
away  sleepe.

The  ships  of
Hunduras  re-
knowledge  the
Cape  of  Saint
Antonie.
When  the
Fleets  of  Nova
Espanna  doe
depart  thence.

The  voyage  of
them  of  Santa
Martha  and
Venezuela.

Navigation
from  the
Avana  to
Castile.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

towards  the  North ;  all  the  Fleetes  doe  meete  in  the  Port
of  Havana,  about  the  moneth  of  June,  to  come  to  Spaine  [
before  Winter ;  for  the  East  winde  is  against  them,  and
is  traverse  in  the  Channell,  and  the  South  also  is  traverse
in  the  Coast  from  the  Cape  Saint  Vincent  to  Saint  Lucar.  ;
The  fleet  of  Terra  firme,  departeth  from  May  forward
from  Porte  bello,  when  the  North  windes  doe  alreadie
cease ;  and  returneth  to  Cartagena  to  take  the  freight  of
Silver  and  Gold  from  the  new  Kingdom  of  Granada :  and
also  for  to  avoid  the  Coast  of  Veragua,  and  the  streame  of
Nicaragua,  whence  they  can  hardly  get  out  if  they  ingulfe
themselves  by  reason  of  the  Brises,  and  contrarie  and
dangerous  Currents  that  are  in  the  way.  From  Cartagena
they  goe  for  Cape  Saint  Antonie,  the  furthest  West  of  ij
Cuba  about  two  hundred  leagues,  voyage  of  ten  dayes,
with  care  of  the  shoales  that  are  in  the  way  of  Serrana  and
Serranilla,  and  dQuitasveno,  and  from  the  Cape  of  Saint
Antonie  to  the  Avana,  are  neere  fiftie  leagues :  and  the
ships  that  come  from  Hunduras,  doe  come  also  to  reknow-
ledge  the  Cape  of  Saint  Antonie.

The  fleetes  of  Nova  Espanna  doe  depart  in  the  begin-
ning of  May,  while  the  North  windes  doe  last,  which  doe
serve  for  the  returne  to  the  Avana,  ascending  a  little  in
altitude  unto  the  Sound,  which  they  call  las  Tortugas,  unto
which  place  they  saile  about  three  hundred  leagues  in
fifteene  dayes.

The  ships  of  Santa  Martha  and  Venezuela,  to  come  to
Castile,  came  out  betweene  Cuba  and  Hispaniola,  to
reknowledge  the  Cape  of  Saint  Nicholas  in  the  Western
part  of  it,  from  whence  through  the  middest  of  the  lies  of
the  Lucayos,  they  goe  take  the  course  of  the  fleets,  and
when  they  come  in  sight  of  the  Cape  of  Saint  Antonie,
they  goe  to  the  Avana  for  feare  of  Pirates.

From  the  Avana  to  Castile,  having  past  the  Channell  of
Bahama  (which  the  Pilot  Antonie  of  Alaminos  sayled  first
of  all,  the  yeere  15 19.)  they  doe  saile  through  the  Gulfe
which  is  called  of  the  North,  or  of  the  Sagarzo,  about  nine
hundred  or  a  thousand  leagues  or  more  (a  sayling  of  five

436

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  ad.

1601.

and  twentie  or  thirtie  dayes  with  ordinarie  windes)  by  two

wayes,  one  for  Summer,  in  a  greater  height,  till  they  come

to  thirtie  eight  or  thirtie  nine  degrees,  in  the  which  stand

the  Hands  of  Azores ;  and  another  for  Winter,  by  a  lesser  Navigation

height,  because  of  the  stormes  and  showres  which  doe  come  from  the  I  lands

alwayes  neere  unto  it,  whereby  they  goe  unto  thirtie  nine  °{ .  z'0?'esunt0
. ]  \  { , '.  o  .  Saint  Lucar.

degrees  no more, wherein standeth the Hand  or oanta

Maria,  one  of  the  lies  of  Azores,  and  they  ascend  one
degree  more  for  to  touch  in  the  Tercera,  where  the  fleets
doe  alwayes  come  to  take  refreshing,  without  permitting
any  one  to  goe  ashoare.  And  from  the  Hands  of  Azores
unto  Saint  Lucar  of  Barrameda,  the  Mariners  make  three
hundred  leagues  of  Navigation  in  fifteene  dayes,  others  in
thirtie  for  the  many  Brises  that  doe  reigne  in  this  Gulfe
of  the  Azores,  whereby  they  saile  till  they  come  upon  the
Coast  of  Portugal,  and  the  doubling  of  the  Cape  Saint
Vincent ;  and  after  in  sight  of  the  Coast  unto  the  Port  of
Saint  Lucar.

The  Navigation from  Castile to the  River  of  Plata  Navigation  to
(whitherto  there  is  one  thousand  and  sixe  hundred  leagues,  tne  River  °f
and  to  the  Streight  of  Magelanes  neere  two  thousand) ata'
hath  beene  much  longer  in  the  time  then  in  the  distance
of  the  way,  because  being  necessarie  to  come  to  those
Provinces in their Summer, which is from September
forward,  they  cannot  depart  from  Castile  at  such  time  as
not  to  passe  the  Equinoctiall  by  June  or  August,  when  in
it  the  Calmes  are  many  and  very  great,  and  therefore  they
stay  five  moneths  in  the  Voyage,  which  might  bee  made
in  two  or  three,  if  from  Sivil  they  did  depart  by  August
or  before :  and  touching  in  the  Canaries  they  goe  North
and  South,  to  eight  or  nine  degrees  on  the  other  side  of
the  Equinoctiall,  from  whence  some  doe  saile  East  and
West,  to  reknowledge  the  Cape  of  Saint  Augustine  in
Brasile,  and  afterward  in  sight  of  the  Land  unto  the  River
of  Plate  and  the  Streight. Others  from  the  eight  degrees
have  gone  straight  through  the  South  Sea  to  the  Streight,
although  few  have  come  to  passe  it,  before  the  Summer  bee  [III.  v.  860.]
ended,  which  is  very  short  and  full  of  stormes,  because  it

437

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 60 1.

stands  in  so  great  a  height,  whereby  this  Navigation  is  ji

very  difficult.
Navigation  of The  Navigation  of  the  South  Sea  hath  alwayes  beene  I;
the  South  Sea.  aiong  tne  Coast,  and  because  the  South  windes  are  very  j

continuall,  and  the  Current  of  the  Streight  ordinarie  to
Navigation  of  the  North  ; The  Navigation  of  Panama  to  the  Citie  of  ;

cZTJls^'  The  Kin&s>  is  wont  to  contmue  two  moneths,  and  the  I
Reyes  returne  lesse  then  thirtie  dayes,  and  the  same  from  the  I

Kings  to  Chile,  from  whence  to  Panama  are  sayled  nine  I
hundred  leagues  in  lesse  then  two  moneths,  eight  being  :
needfull  for  the  going,  which  is  alreadie  shorter  then  it
was : for  putting  to  the  Sea  they  finde  better  windes  to  :
performe  it.
Navigation  of The  Navigation  to  the  Westerne  Hands,  Malucas  and  j
the  West Philippinas,  from  Castile  to the  Streight  of  Magellane  :
passeth  foure  thousand  leagues,  and  so  for  being  so  long
as  for  the  difficultie  of  passing  the  Streight  of  Magellanes,  j
it  is  held  for  difficult  to  use  it,  and  from  Nova  Espanna
through  the  Westerne  Gulfe,  which  is  in  the  South  Sea.  I
This  Navigation  was  made  from  the  Port  of  the  Nativitie
in  the  Coast  of  Nova  Espanna ; at  this  time  it  is  made  :
from  the  Port  of  Acapulco,  from  whence  to  the  Malucas  j
and  Philippinas,  they  doe  make  a  voyage  of  one  thousand  j
sixe  hundred,  or  a  thousand  and  seven  hundred  leagues,  j
which  is  sayled  in  two  moneths,  or  two  and  a  halfe,  depart-  I
ing  in  November  which  is  the  time  most  free  from  calmes.  I
And  the  returne  to  Nova  Espanna  is  longer,  because  not  j
being  able  to  returne  the  way  they  went,  it  is  necessarie  I
to  ascend  to  39.  degrees,  and  depart  in  May  and  June,  I
when  the  Brises  bee  less,  and  they  stay  foure  moneths
in sayling two thousand  leagues that may  bee in the
journey.

Chap.  4. "TVTAture  having  divided  these  western  Indies  in  two

Of  the  Indies ±\  parts,  by  the  Isthmos  or  narrownesse  from  Porte  bello

of  the  North. tQ  panamaj  placed  the  one  to  the  North,  and  the  other  to

the  South ;  wherefore  wee  will  call  them  the  Indies  of  the

North,  and  of  the  South. The  Kings  of  Castile  and  Lion,

438

ANTONIO DE HERRERA

with  the  advice  of  the  supreme  Councell  of  the  Indies,
have  ordayned,  that  in  each  place  there  bee  a  Vice-roy,
Courts,  and  Governments,  and  Bishopricks,  as  hereafter
shall  bee  shewed.  And  first  shall  be  entreated  of  the
Northerne  Indies,  which  commonly  they  call  Nova
Hispania,  because  the  first  discoverers  (which  were  John
Grijalva  and  his  Companions)  having  not  seene  in  the
Hands  houses  of  stone,  nor  other  things  as  in  Spaine,  which
here  they  found  with  people  apparelled,  and  more  civill ;
They  named  it  New  Spaine :  which  exceedeth  the  other
part  of  the  Indies  in  pastures,  and  therefore  they  have
innumerable  Cattle  of  all  sorts :  and  it  exceedeth  also  in
husbandrie  and  fruits  :  it  hath  no  wine,  because  generally
the  grapes  doe  not  ripen  with  perfection,  the  raines  of  July
and  August  not  suffering  them  to  ripen.  The  *  upper
Hands  have  also  great  Pastures,  and  a  pleasant  prospect :
for  all  the  yeere  they  are  greene  and  flourishing,  with
great  pleasantnesse,  and  great  Arcabucos,  which  are  very
thick  Groves  and  Inclosures,  and  in  the  Playnes  are  great
Lakes  and  Quagmires.  Neither  Bread  nor  Wine  grow
in  them ;  for  the  great  ranknesse  of  the  ground  doth  not
suffer  it  to  ripen  nor  eare :  the  Rivers  for  the  most  part
have  gold.  Florida,  Nicaragua,  and  Guatimala  are  almost
in  this  manner,  as  of  all  more  particularly  wee  will  rehearse
in  their  place,  and  in  the  Table  following  shall  the  bounds
of  these  Northern  Indies  bee  seene.

A.D.
l60I.

Here  was
inserted  a
Map  of  the
North  parts  of
America.  But
Master
Briggs  hath
in  the  former
booke  given
you  a  farre
farre  better ;  to
which  I
referre  you.
Which  bee  the
1 n dies  of  the
North  and
which  of  the
South.

Wherefore  it
was  called
New  Spaine.
Greatpastures
in  New
Spaine.
*The

weathermost
or  upper
Hands.

THe  Court  of  the  Hand  Hispaniola,  which  in  time  and  Chap.  5.
place  is  the  first,  being  neerest  unto  Castile,  it  hath  °f  the  bounds
of  bounds  East  and  West  five  hundred  and  fiftie  leagues,  f-on  e0ftt™-  *f~
and  North  and  South  more  then  three  hundred,  wherein  Dominicke.
are  included  the  Hands  and  Governments  of  Hispaniola,
Cuba,  Saint  John,  Jamayca,  Margarita,  and  the  fishing  of
the  Pearle :  the  Province  and  Government  of  Venezuella,
and for neernesse the Provinces of new Andaluzia,
Guayana,  and  Florida,  with  all  the  Hands  of  the  North
Sea,  which  doe  passe  a  hundred  which  are  named,  and  are
above  sixe  hundred  great  and  small :  and  those  which  doe

439

A.D.
l60I,

Chap.  6.
Of  the  Hand
Hispaniola
and  of  Cuba.

Cazabi  bread.

Ten  Spanish
Townes.

[III.  v.  861.]
The  Citie  of
Saint
Dominga.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

leane  toward  the  Coast  of  Terra  firme,  the  Mariners  doe
call  of  the  Leeward,  and  the  other  to  the  Weatherward.
The  temperature  of  them  all  is  commonly  moist  and
exceeding  hot,  and  although  they  be  plentifull  in  Pastures
and  Trees,  they  are  not  so  of  the  Seedes  of  Castile,  nor  of
Wheat,  Barly,  Vines,  nor  Olives :  but  there  is  great  store
of  great  Cattell  and  small,  as  Kine,  Mares,  Swine,  and
Sheepe,  and  therefore  their  principall  trafficke  is  Hides  and
Sugar,  for  there  is  great  store ;  and  although  in  the  most
of  them  there  is  gold ; it  is  not  sought  for.

THe  Countrie-men  called  the  Hand  of  Hispaniola,  Ayti
and  Quisqueya,  which  signifieth  Roughnesse,  and  a
great  Countrie.  The  figure  of  it  is  like  a  Chesnut  leafe :
it  stands  in  nineteene  degrees  and  a  halfe  of  elevation  of
the  Pole,  it  compasseth  about  foure  hundred  leagues  and
somewhat  more,  and  hath  in  length  East  and  West  an
hundred  and  fiftie,  and  North  and  South  from  thirtie  to
sixtie  where  it  is  broadest,  it  is  very  plentifull  of  Sugar,
and  Cattell,  and  of  Yuca,  the  roote  whereof  maketh  the
Cazabi,  the  bread  of  the  Countrimen.  They  have  no
Millet  nor  Wheat,  although  they  begin  to  reape  some  in
the  inward  parts  and  coldest.  It  is  rich  of  Copper  mynes
and  other  metals,  and  some  veine  of  Gold  though  but
little  is  gotten,  for  want  of  workemen  :  it  hath  ten  Spanish
Townes.

The  Citie  of  Saint  Dominicke  or  Domingo  neere  the
Coast  of  the  South,  on  the  River  of  Ozama,  stands  in  the
said  19.  degrees  and  a  halfe,  and  60.  of  Occidentall  longi-
tude from  the  Meridian  of  Toledo,  from  whence  unto  it
there  may  bee  by  direct  line  one  thousand  two  hundred
fortie  seven  leagues,  it  hath  above  sixe  hundred  housholds.
There  is  resident  in  it  the  Audience  or  Councell,  the
Officers  of  the  Goods  and  Royall  Treasure ;  a  Mint  house,
and  the  Cathedrall  Church.  And  the  Archbishoprick  hath
for  Suffraganes  the  Bishopricks  of  the  Conception  de  la
Vega  (which  is  united  with  that  of  Saint  Dominicke)  those
of  Saint  John,  Cuba,  Venezuela,  and  the  Abbotship  of

440

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

1601.

Jamayca ;  and  in  the  Citie  are  Monasteries  of  Dominicans,

Franciscans, Mercenaries, and other two of  Nunnes, a

Grammar  Schoole,  with  foure  thousand  *  Pesos  of  Rent,  *Peso  is  foure

and  an  Hospitall  with twentie thousand. The Haven  slLal%r!.g[
1  • 1 •  1  1  1 r  1  • • • 1  1 English.

which  is  great,  and  capable  or  many  ships,  is  in  the  mouth

of  the  River  Ozama,  and  hath  the  Citie  on  the  West,

which  the  Deputie  Don  Bartholomew  Collon  did  build

the  yeere 1494.  on  the  East  side,  better  and  wholsomer

in  situation,  and  the  chiefe  Knight  of  Alcantara,  Nicholas

of  Ovando  being  Governour  of  Hispaniola,  An. 1502.

removed  it  where  now  it  is,  from  the  other  side  the  River

to  the  East,  upon  occasion  that  the  Citie  had  fallen  by  a

great  Earthquake. The  Village  of  Salvalyon  of  Yguey,  Sabalyon  of

eight  and  twentie  leagues  from  Saint  Dominicke  to  the  fguey-

East, of the Archbishoprick ; the Captaine, John of

Esquivel, did people it. The Village of the Zeybo,  The  Village  of

twentie  leagues  from  Saint  Dominicke  to  the  East,  toward  tyl*0*

the  Hand  of  Saona : the  Captaine  also  planted  it  in  the

time of Nicholas of Ovando. The Village of Cotuy  ElCotuy.

sixteene  leagues  from  Saint  Dominicke  to  the  North,  and

very  close  in  his  circuit,  Roderick  Mexia  of  Trillo,  founded

it. The  Village  of  Azua  in  Compostella,  in  the  coast  of  Azua.

the  South,  foure  and  twentie  leagues  from  Saint  Dominicke

to  the  West,  in  his  borders  are  many  sugar  Mills ;  it  was

peopled  by  the  President  James  Vellazques,  it  was  called

Compostella  by  a  Gallizian  Knight,  which  held  an  Heritage

in  that  situation,  and  Azua  is  the  name  of  the  place  which  Who  carried

the  Indians  had  there. The  first  that  carried  sugar  Canes  t0  the  lndies

to  the  Indies,  and  began  to  make  triall  of  them  there,  was  ^  sugar

one  Atienca,  and  the  Bachellor  Velosa. The  Village  of  ia  raguana.

Yaguana,  which  they  call  Santa  Marie  of  the  Port,  seated  [III.  v.  862.]

on  the  Westerne  coast  of  the  Hand,  is  fiftie  or  sixtie  leagues

from  Saint  Dominicke,  as  betweene  the  North  and  the

West ;  the  chiefe  Knight  Nicholas  of  Ovando  did  people

it.

The  Citie  of  the  Conception  of  the  Valley,  is  in  the  Concecion  de

Kingdome  of  Guarinoex,  which  the  first  Admirall  Don  la  Vega'

Christopher  Collon  built,  neere  to  the  which  he  obtayned

441

A.D.

l6oi,

The  wood  of
the  Crosse  of
the  Valley.
Saint  J  ago  de
los  Cavalleros.

Puerto  de
Plata.

Monte
Christe.

La  Isabella.
La  Ferapaz.
Sahatierra.

The
Maguana.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  victorie  in  the  great  battaile  of  the  Valley  Royall :  it
is  twentie  leagues  from  Saint  Dominicke  to  the  North-east,
where  is  a  Cathedrall  Church  (although  there  is  no  Prelate,
for  it  is  united  to  the  Church  of  Saint  Dominicke)  it
hath  one  Monasterie  of  religious  Franciscans,  where  is
the  wood  of  the  Crosse  which  the  Indians  could  not  burne,
cut,  nor  overthrow,  which  hath  done  many  miracles.

Saint  Jago  de  los  Cavalleros  is  ten  leagues  from  the
Citie  de  la  Vega  directly  to  the  North-east ;  it  was  first
a  Fortresse  which  the  first  Admirall  made  in  the  Countries
of  the  Cacique  Guanacovel,  for  the  securitie  of  the  Valley,
and  the  Fort  Magdalene  which  was  foure  leagues  off.

The  chiefe  Knight  of  Alcantara,  Nicholas  of  Ovando,
An.  1502.  did  people  the  Port  of  Plate  in  the  North
coasts,  five  and  thirtie  or  about  fortie  leagues  from  Saint
Dominicke,  because  the  ships  of  Castile  might  more  com-
modiously  trafncke,  and  because  it  was  no  more  then
ten  leagues  from  the  great  Valley,  where  in  other  ten
leagues  stood  the  Village  of  Saint  James,  and  the  Con-
ception within  sixteen,  and  within  twelve  the  Mynes  of
Cibao,  and  it  was  of  the  Bishoprick  of  the  Valley,  the
Port  of  Plate  stands  in  little  more  then  twentie  degrees.
The  Village  of  Monte-Christe,  is  in  the  coast  of  the
North  fourteene  leagues,  to  the  West  of  Port  of  Plate,
and  fortie  from  Saint  Dominicke,  is  of  the  Bishoprick  of
the  Valley ;  it  hath  a  good  Haven,  and  certaine  salt  Pits
in  it ;  Nicholas  of  Ovando  did  build  it.

There  was  in  old  times  in  this  Hand  the  Citie  of  Isabella,
now  disinhabited,  which  the  first  Admirall  built  the  yeere
1493.  the  Village  of  Verapaz  in  Xaragua,  which  James
Velazques  built  in  the  yeere  1503.  and  the  same  yeere
peopled  also  Salvatierra  of  the  Zabana,  which  signifieth
Playnes  and  Pastures,  in  the  Indian  language :  and  that
Province  is  plaine  and  faire.  Hee  also  peopled  (betweene
the  two  mightie  Rivers  Neyba  and  Yaqui)  the  Village  of
Saint  John  of  the  Maguana,  in  the  middest  of  the  Hand,
where  the  Church  continueth  yet ;  and  heere  reigned
Coanabo,  who  tooke  Alfonso  de  Oieda. Hee  also  planted

442

Spaniards
there  were  in
the  Hispaniola

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

1601.

Villanueva  de  Yaquime  upon  the  Haven,  where  Oieda  Villanueva.

cast  himselfe  to  swim,  being  prisoner  in  a  ship,  with  two

paire  of  fetters ;  and  it  stands  in  the  South  coast,  which

the  Admirall  did  call  the  Coast  and  Haven  of  Brasile.

The  Village  of  Bonao  is  neere  unto  Cotvy,  which  the  El  Bonao.

first  Admirall  also  built,  where  hee  made  a  Fort  for  the

securitie  of  the  Mynes,  which  were  the  first  that  were

found  in  this  Hand. The  Village  of  Bonaventure  is  eight  La  Buenaven-

leagues  from  Saint  Dominicke  to  the  North,  and  Lares  tura-

de  Guahaba,  which  Nicholas  of  Ovando  peopled,  being

Comendador  Lares.

This  Hand  flourished  so  much,  that  there  were  in  it
fourteene thousand Castillanes, many of them Noble H°°°
people,  and  the  Plantations  of  other  parts  which  happened
afterward,  caused  it  to  be  disinhabited ;  for  from  it,  and
from  the  Hand  of  Cuba,  went  all  the  substance  for  the  at  her
new  Countreyes  that  were  found.  beginning.

The  Ports,  Roades,  Capes,  and  Points  most  famous,  Ports  fcf
and  the  Hands  pertayning  to  the  Coast  of  this  Hand,  are  Potnt'  most
in  the  South  Coast,  the  Point  of  Nizao,  ten  leagues  from
Saint  Dominicke  to  the  West.  The  Port  of  Ocoa,  eigh-
teene,  which  is  a  Bay  where  the  Fleets  which  goe  for
Nova  Espania  doe  anchor  and  take  refreshing,  when  they
doe  not  anchor  in  the  nooke  of  Zepezepin,  which  is  neere
unto  it,  or  in  another  which  they  call  the  Faire  Haven,  Puerto,
two  leagues  before  they  come  to  Ocoa.  Azua  a  Port  and  Hermso-
Towne  twentie  foure  leagues  beyond  Ocoa  la  Calongia,  a
large  Point  thirtie  leagues,  right  against  the  Hands  of
Boata  and  Altobelo,  five  leagues  from  the  Coast,  and  the
Beatados.  Yaquimo  about  thirtie  foure  more  to  the  West,
and  Abaque,  an  Hand  neere  the  Cape  of  Tiburon,  the
furthest  West  of  Hispaniola :  la  Nabaza  ten  leagues  to
the  Sea  East  and  West  from  the  Cape,  and  Cape  Rojo
twelve  leagues  from  it  to  the  North :  the  Rookes,  or
Hermanos  Trees,  Isle  Oucillos  neere  the  Coast  that  turneth
to  the  East :  Caymito  another  little  Hand  betweene  these,
and  Guanabo  another  Hand  of  eight  leagues  in  length,
in  the  nooke  of  Yaguana. The  Port  and  Cape  of  Saint

443

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

Nicholas, the  furthest  West  on  the  North  side  of  the
*Or  Gnats. Hand. A  little  further  the  Port  of  *  Mosquitos,  in  the
North  Coast,  and  twentie  leagues  forward  the  Port  of
Valparayso,  or  of  the  Conception,  North  and  South,  with
the  Tortuga  an  Hand  neere  the  Coast  of  five  leagues  in
length : Port  Royall  twelve  leagues  to the  West  from
Monte-Christe,  which  is  as  much,  or  a  little  more  before
Isabela,  and  this  from  the  Port  of  Plate,  other  twelve
leagues : Cabo Frances, and Cabo del  Cabron, in the
turning,  which  the  Coast  maketh  to  the  East,  before  the
Gulfe  of  Samana,  which  entreth  five  or  sixe  leagues  the
Land  inward,  unto  the  place  where  the  Towne  of  Sancta
Where  they Cruz  stood. And  in  the  River  of  Samana,  was  the  first
frsttim*  *  *  t*me  t^iat  Armes  were  taken  against  the  men  of  the  Indies  ;
against  because they would have done violence to the first

Indians.  Admirall. The  Cape  of  Deceit,  (Cabo  del  Enganno)  is

the  furthest  West  of  the  Hand  where  the  Coast  returneth
by  the  South  to  the  West,  at  the  beginning  of  the  which
stands  the  Saona,  an  Hand  which  the  fleets  doe  reknow-
ledge,  when  they  goe,  and  somewhat  more  towards  Saint
Dominicke  is  another  little  Hand,  which  is  called  Saint
Katherine ;  and  all  the  names  rehearsed  were  given  by  the
first  Admirall.
[III.  v.  863.]  The  Hand  of  Cuba  which  first  was  called  Juana,  or
Cuba.  Joane,  by  the  Father  Don  Juan,  and  after  it  was  com-

manded to  be  called  Fernandina  by  his  Father.  The
Captaine  Sebastian  of  Ocampo,  made  an  end  of  compassing
the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1508.  by  order  of  Nicholas  of
Ovando :  for  untill  then  it  was  not  wholly  believed  that
it  was  Land,  and  the  yeere  1 5 1 1 .  the  President  James
Velazques  went  over  with  three  hundred  Spaniards,  by
order  of  the  second  Admirall  to  pacifie  it.  It  hath  two
hundred  and  thirty  leagues  from  the  Cape  of  Saint
Antonie,  unto  the  Point  of  Mayzi,  going  by  Land,
although  by  the  Sunne,  and  by  water  there  are  not  so
many.  It  hath  in  breadth  from  the  Cape  of  Crosses,  to
the  Port  of  Manati,  fortie  Hve  leagues,  and  then  it
beginneth  to  streighten,  and  goeth  to  the  last  Cape,  or

444

ANTONIO DE HERRERA

Occidentall  Point,  where  it  is  narrow,  of  twelve  leagues,
little  more  or  lesse,  from  Matamano  to  the  Avana.  Her
situation  is  within  the  Tropicke  of  Cancer,  from  twentie
to  twentie  one  degrees,  the  Countrey  is  almost  all  plaine,
with  many  Forrests,  and  thicke  Woods  :  from  the  Easterne
Point  of  Mayci,  for  thirtie  leagues  it  hath  most  high
Mountaynes,  and  likewise  in  the  middest  it  hath  some,
and  there  runne  from  them  to  the  North,  and  to  the
South,  very  pleasant  Rivers,  with  great  store  of  fish.
On  the  South  side  it  hath  the  little  Hands,  which  the
first  Admirall  called  the  Queenes  Garden,  and  the  other
on  the  North  side,  which  James  Velazquez  called  the
Kings  Garden,  the  trees  are  of  many  differences,  and
wild  Vines  as  bigge  as  a  man :  they  gather  no  Wheate
nor  other  Seedes  of  Spaine,  but  great  abundance  of
Cattle :  it  hath  great  Copper  Mynes,  and  of  Gold,  and
it  is  found  in  the  Rivers,  though  it  be  base  in  the
touch.

James  Velazquez  peopled  first  the  Citie  of  Saint  James
in  the  South  Coast,  fortie  leagues  from  the  Cape  of
Tiburon,  which  is  in  Hispaniola,  and  two  leagues  from
the  Sea,  neere  to  a  Port,  one  of  the  best  in  the  World,
for  securitie  and  greatnesse.  The  Citie  came  to  have  two
thousand  Inhabitants ;  now  it  hath  few  with  a  Governours
Deputie :  the  Cathedrall  Suffragane  to  Saint  Domingo,
is  resident  in  it,  and  a  Monastery  of  Franciscan  Friers.
The  Village  of  Baracoa,  is  a  Towne  furthest  East  of  the
Hand  of  Cuba,  at  the  beginning  of  the  North  Coast  60.
leagues  from  the  Citie  of  S.  James  toward  the  East  North-
east, which  was  also  an  inhabiting  of  the  President
James  Velazquez.  The  Village  of  Bayamo,  which
James  Velazquez  also  built,  is  20.  leagues  from  S.  James
to  the  North-west,  it  is  the  soundest  Town  of  the  Hand,
of  a  more  open  soyle,  and  of  a  good  disposition.  The
Village  and  Port  of  the  Prince,  in  the  Coast  of  the  North,
is  about  fortie  leagues  from  Saint  James  to  the  North-
west. The  Village  of  Sancti  Spiritus,  is  a  Port  on  the
South  side,  betweene  the  Trinidad,  and  the  Cayo  de  Basco

445

A.D.

l60I.

5.  J  ago.

Baracoa.

Bayamo.

Puerta  del
Principe.

Sancti
Spiritus.

A.D.

l60I.

El  Albana,  or
the  Havana.

Puerto  de
Carennas.

Wherefore  it
was  called  the
Slaughters.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Porcallo,  of  Figueroa,  about  fiftie  leagues  from  Saint
James,  a  Colonie  of  James  Velazquez.

The  Village  and  Port  of  Saint  Christopher  of  the  Abana,
is  in  the  North  Coast,  almost  opposite  to  Florida,  in
twentie  two  degrees  and  an  halfe  in  height,  of  more  then
sixe  hundred  Housholds ;  where  the  Governour  resides
and  the  Officers  Royall.  The  Port  is  marvellous  in  great-
nesse  and  securitie,  especially  since  that  King  Philip  the
Second,  the  prudent,  sent  the  Campe-master  John  of
Texeda,  and  Baptista  Antonelli,  to  fortifie  it :  in  it  all
the  Fleetes  of  the  Indies  doe  meete  for  to  come  for  Spaine
in  company.  It  was  first  called  the  Port  of  Carennas :
and  James  Velazquez  built  this  Village,  and  all  the  rest
of  the  Hand,  with  the  assistance  of  the  Father  Bartolome
de  las  Casas,  which  afterward  became  a  Dominicke  Frier,
and  Bishop  of  Chiapa.

The  Ports  and  Capes,  and  point  of  the  Coast  of  Cuba,
and  the  Hands  belonging  to  it  besides  those  which  are
rehearsed  are  in  the  South  Coast,  the  Port  of  the  Citie  of
Saint  James  in  twentie  degrees,  and  twentie  five  leagues
to  the  West :  the  Port  of  Sancti  Spiritus,  Cape  of  the
Crosse  twelve  leagues  forward,  and  the  Queenes  Gardens,
which  is  a  great  shelfe  of  Hands  and  shoales :  the  Port
of  Trinitie  in  twentie  one  degrees,  about  thirtie  leagues
from  the  Cape  of  the  Crosse,  and  ten  more  to  the  West,
the  Gulfe  of  Xagua,  a  great  defence  with  some  Hands,
in  the  middest,  and  forward  the  Two  Sisters,  two  Hands
at  the  beginning  of  the  great  shelfe,  and  Hands,  and
shoales,  which  they  call  Camarco,  betweene  the  Coast  and
the  Hands,  which  is  of  ten  leagues  in  length,  and  seven
in  breadth  twelve  leagues  from  the  Cape  of  Correntes,
which  is  as  many  from  the  Cape  of  Saint  Antonie,  the
furthest  West  of  this  Hand.  In  the  North  Coast  standeth
the  Port  of  Abana,  and  thirtie  leagues  to  the  East  is  the
Port  of  Slaughters  where  was  a  Towne,  and  was  called
de  Matancas,  of  the  Slaughters,  because  the  Indians  killed
certaine  Spaniards,  which  they  carried  in  their  Canoose
under  securitie  to  the  other  side,  only  one  escaping,  and

446

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

1601.

two  women  whom  they  kept  sometime  with  them. From
:  the  *  Matancas  to  the  Port  of  Yucanaca,  are  fiftie  leagues  *Or

to the  Kings  Garden, which  is  a  great shelfe  of  little  Slaughters.

Illets  and  shoales,  and  at  the  end  of  the  Hand  Obahava,

eight  leagues  before  the  Port  of  the  Prince,  foure  or  six
1  from  the  Port  of  Fernando  Alanso,  and  six  to  the  East

of  this,  Cubana  which  is  a  point. The  Port  of  Varocoa
I  is  about  twentie  leagues  before  the  point  of  Maizi,  the

farthest  West  of  Cuba,  and  the  hidden  Port  and  Gulfe

neere  to  Cape  f  Roio,  in  the  South-coast,  about  twentie  *  Or  Red.
I  leagues  from  the  Port  of  Pidgeons,  which  is  about  ten
I  leagues  from  the  Port  of  Saint  James.

THe  Hand  of  Jamayca  was  so  abundant  of  victuals,  [III.  v.  864..]
and  breedings,  that  it  gave  great  provision  of  Cotton, C&ap.  7.
Horses,  Swine,  and  Cozabi,  for  the  new  Discoveries,  and  J/a£a  ™  *
the  first  Admirall  called  it  Saint  James,  when  hee  discovered  s.  John  the
it :  and  the  first  that  passed  to  inhabit  it,  was  the  Captayne  Lucayos,  iff
John  Esquivell,  the  yeere  1509.  by  order  of  the  second  the  Caniballs.
Admirall Don Diego Colon. It stands in seventeene
degrees  and  an  halfe  of  altitude  in  the  middest  of  it,  and
I  twentie  leagues  from  Cuba  to  the  South,  and  as  many
I  from  Hispaniola,  direct  to  the  West. It  hath  in  compasse
I  one  hundred  and  fiftie  leagues,  it  hath  East  and  West
j fiftie, and twentie in breadth. There are in it three
i Villages,  Sivill  in  which  is  the  Seat  of  the  Colledge,  toward
the  North Coast somewhat  Westerly; John Squivell  a  ShUl,Me!U!a,
Gentleman  of  Sivill  peopled  it : Melilla,  which  stands  in &  Oriston,
[the  North Coast, fourteene leagues from Sivill to the  lf^'f™gsof
East :  Oristan  in  the  South  Coast  towards  the  West  four-  J "
teene leagues from Sivill, and are Plantations of the
President  Francisco  de  Garay,  which  governed  in  it. But
of  the  Towne  de  la  Vega,  whence  the  Admirals  Lords
of  this  Hand  tooke  the  Title  of  Dukes,  nor  of  other  two
Plantations  painted  in  some  Maps,  there  is  no  notice.

There  is  in  the  Coast  of  this  Hand,  the  Point  of  Cape  °f
Morauta  the  uttermost  West  of  it,  by  the  North  Coast  Morauta-
iten  leagues  to  the  West,  the  Port  of  Jauta,  and  tenne

447

A.D.

l60I.

The first civill
warre  among
the  Spaniards,
was  in
Jamaica.

n  Or  Lizards.
0  Or  Negrillo.

p0r  open  the
eye.

S.  Juan  de
puerto  Rico.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

leagues  forward  the  Port  of  Melilla,  where  they  say  the
first  Admirall  arrived,  and  called  it  Santa  Gloria,  when
hee  returned  lost  from  Veragua ;  and  heere  happened  to
him  the  mutiny  of  the  Porras  of  Sivill :  and  it  was  the
first  Civill  Warre  of  the  Indies.  Other  ten  leagues  thence
standeth  the  Port  of  Sivill,  before  the  Point  Negrillo,
from  whence  the  Coast  windeth,  unto  the  Cabo  de  Falcon,
neere  to  Oristan,  and  goeth  by  the  South  to  the  Port  of
Guayano.  And  five  leagues  from  this  Coast,  are  the
Harmingas,  a  dangerous  shoale,  and  seven  leagues  further
las  Vivoras,  small  Hands  compassed  with  shoales,  and  to
the  South  of  them  the  Serrana,  and  a  little  Hand  compassed
with  shoales,  with  other  foure  or  five  neere  unto  it,  and
to  the  North-west  of  it,  the  Serranilla,  and  to  the  West
of  it  the  Roncador,  another  Rocke,  and  to  the  South-west
of  it,  Saint  Andrewes,  an  Hand  compassed  with  shoales
North  and  South,  with  Nombre  de  Dios,  about  fortie
leagues  from  it,  and  neere  from  thence  another  called
Sancta  Catilina ;  the  n  Caymanes  directly  West  from
Jamayca,  twentie  five  leagues  from  the  little  °  Blackmoore,
which  are  two  little  Hands  sixe  leagues  the  one  from  the
other,  and  the  great  Cayman  another  Hand  of  seven
leagues  in  length,  fifteene  leagues  from  the  Caymanes  to
the  West,  and  to  the  North  Coast,  betweene  Cuba  and
Hispaniola,  another  shoale  which  is  called  p  Abre-ojo.

The  Hand  of  Saint  John  of  Port  Rico,  which  the  Indians
called  Barriquen,  lyeth  betwixt  twelve  and  fifteene  leagues
from  Hispaniola,  to  the  East,  of  fortie  five  leagues  in
length,  East  and  West,  and  from  North  to  South,  betwixt
twentie  and  thirtie,  very  plentifull  of  all  that  Hispaniola
hath,  and  of  Millet,  Yuca,  and  of  Mynes  of  Gold.  The
temperature  is  good,  and  almost  one  all  the  yeere,  except
in  December  and  January.  There  is  in  it  three  Spanish
Townes  with  a  Government,  and  a  Bishoppricke :  the
President  John  Ponce  of  Lion  passed  to  discover  this
Hand  the  yeere  1508.  being  Governour  in  the  Province
of  Yguey,  for  Nicholas  of  Ovando  in  Hispaniola,  and
returned  the  yeere  15 10.  by  order  of  the  King  to  people

448

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF HISPANIOLA, CUBA, ETC.

ANTONIO DE HERRERA

A.D.
l60I,

S.  John.

Guadianilla.
S.  German.

it. The  Citie  of  Saint  John,  is  in  the  beginning  of  the

North  Coast,  on  the  East  side  in  eighteene  degrees  of

height,  and  they  call  it  of  Port  Rico,  for  the  excellencie

of the Haven. The Bishop and the Governour are

resident  in  it,  and  the  Officers  of  the  Kings  Revenues  :

and  it  is  SufTragane  to  Saint  Domingo. Arrecibo  stands The  Arrecibo

thirtie  leagues  to  the  West  from  Port  Rico : the  Towne

of  Guadianilla,  or  Saint  German  the  New,  in  the  Westerne

Coast  three  and  thirtie  leagues  from  Port  Rico to the

South-west.

There  was  in  old  time  in  this  Hand  another  Towne

which  was  called  Guanica,  in  the  South  Coast,  at  the  end

of  it  where  now  is  the  Port  of  Mosquitos,  which  is  very

good,  from  whence  it  was  removed  to  another  situation

I  of  the  Westerne  Coast,  which  they  call  Aguada,  or  the

I  Watering,  with name  of  Soto-Mayor : there  is  in this

Hand  a  row  of  Mountaynes,  that  divide  it  in  the  middest

East  and  West  unto  the  Sea,  and  Borders  of  Saint  German,

I  and  heere  is  found  the  Tree  called  Tabernaculo,  which

yeeldeth  white  Rozen,  like  Gumme-Anime,  and  it  serveth

for  Pitch  for  the  ships,  and  for  fire  or  light,  and  it  is

medicinable  to  take  out  the  colde  or  numnesse,  and  to

cure  wounds.

There  are  few  Ports  in  this  Hand,  for  all  the  Coast  of
the  North  is  very  foule  with  shoales,  and  Rockes :  those
that  are,  are  to  the  East  from  the  Port  of  Saint  John.  The
River  of  Luysa,  and  that  which  they  call  Canoba,  and  la
Cabeca ;  the  farthest  East  point  of  the  Hand,  neere  to
I  the  Hill  of  the  Loquillos,  and  in  it  a  Port  which  they
[call  Saint  James ;  three  leagues  further  is  another  called
Yabucoa,  and  three  leagues  from  the  Coast,  on  this  side
of  the  passage,  is  a  little  Illet,  and  at  the  beginning  of
the  South  passage,  another  which  they  call  Boyqui,  and
forward  the  Hand  of  Saint  Anne,  Guayama  a  Port,  and
iafterward  the  Rivers  Neabon,  and  Xavia,  six  leagues
Ibefore  the  Port  of  Guadianilla,  two  leagues  to  the  East
of  the  River  of  Mosquitos,  in  whose  mouth  is  the  River
called  Guanica,  and  six  leagues  from  it,  the  Cape  Roio,
xiv  449  2  F

The  tree
Tabernacle.

The  havens  of
this  Hand.

A.D.
l60I.

[III.  V.  865.]

Who  carried
the  Ginger  to
the  Hands  of
Barlovento.

The  Hands  of
the  Luc  ay  cs.

Where  the
Channel/  of
Bahama  is.
Admirable
Current,

Baxos  de
Bimini.

Guanahanithe
first  Land  that
was  discovered
in  the  Indies.

PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

the  furthest  West  of  the  South  Coast :  and  to  the  West
of  it,  toward  Hispaniola  is  the  Hand  of  Mona,  and  to  the
North  of  it  the  Manico,  and  Zecheo,  other  two  little
Hands :  the  Port  of  Pines,  and  the  Port  of  Mayaguez,
and  the  Bay  of  Saint  German  the  old,  and  the  mouth  of
the  River  Guanabo,  or  the  Watering,  and  that  of
Guahataca  more  forward,  and  afterward  in  the  North
Coast,  that  of  Camay,  and  of  Cibuco,  and  Toa,  neere
to  Port  Rico,  and  in  the  middest  of  the  Coast  of  the  South
Sea,  leaning  unto  it  the  Haberianas,  foure  or  five  little
Hands.  There  is  also  much  Ginger  gathered  in  this  Hand,
which  is  a  Root  like  unto  Madder,  or  Saffron,  which
the  Portugals  brought  from  the  East,  to  this  Hand  of
Barlovento.

The  Hands  which  are  to  the  North  of  Saint  John,
Hispaniola,  and  Cuba,  of  which  none  is  inhabited  with
Spaniards,  are  called  the  Lucayos.  One  the  most  Septen-
trionall,  is  above  twentie  seven  degrees  of  altitude,  which
is  called  Lucayoneque,  or  Yucayoneque,  which  hath  almost
to  the  West  Bahama  another  Hand  in  twentie  sixe  degrees
and  an  halfe,  of  thirteene  leagues  in  length,  and  eight
in  breadth,  from  whence  the  Channell  of  Bahama  betweene
Florida  and  the  shoales  Delos  Mimbres  taketh  the  name,
whereby  the  Currents  of  the  Sea  doe  goe  so  swift  to  the
North,  that  although  the  wind  be  prosperous  the  ships
cannot  enter  it,  and  although  they  be  contrary  they  goe
with  the  Currents.

The  shelves  of  Bimini,  are  so  called  of  an  Hand  in  the
middest  of  them,  of  five  leagues  in  length,  which  the
first  Admirall  gave  the  name  the  first  time  he  came  to
Cuba,  and  it  is  that  which  John  Paul  of  Lyon  did  agree
to  inhabit.  Abacoa,  is  another  in  the  middest  of  the  said
shelfe  of  twelve  leagues  in  length  :  Cigateo  of  twentie
five.  Curateo,  another  small  Hand  in  twentie  sixe
degrees :  and  Guanima  fifteene  leagues  of  length,  and  ten
in  breadth,  and  neere  unto  it  Guanahani,  the  first  Land
of  the  Indes,  which  the  first  Admirall  discovered,  which
he  called  Saint  Saviour ;  Yuma  of  twentie  leagues,  and

450

ANTONIO DE HERRERA

A.D.

l60I

eight  in  breadth,  in  twentie  foure  degrees  and  an  halfe,
which  the  Admirall  named  Isabella,  in  honour  of  the
famous  Queene  Donna  Isabella  his  particular  Protectresse,
and  that  gave  him  this  Discoverie.  Jumeto  in  twentie
three  degrees  and  an  halfe,  fifteene  leagues  in  length,  to
the  North  of  Hispaniola.  Samana  seven  leagues  over,
betweene  Jumeto  and  Guanima^  three  square  of  eight
leagues  in  length,  in  twentie  foure  degrees,  Yabaque  of
ten  leagues,  in  twentie  two  degrees  and  an  halfe.  Mira-
par-vos,  are  three  little  Hands  in  triangle,  compassed  with
shelves,  to  the  South  of  Jumeto.  Mayaguava,  twentie
leagues  in  length  and  ten  in  breadth,  in  twentie  three
degrees.  Yuagua  of  ten  leagues,  in  twentie  degrees  and
an  halfe.  The  Caycos,  an  Hand  of  five  leagues,  in  twentie
one  degrees,  and  to  the  North  of  it  is  another,  called
Hamava,  and  another  Conciva.  Macarey  stands  in
twentie  degrees  compassed  with  shelves.  Abreojo  is  a
great  shelfe  of  fifteene  leagues,  the  middest  of  it  in  twentie
degrees,  and  among  these  Hands  are  many  little  ones
without  name.

The  Hands  that  are  from  the  Hand  of  Saint  John  of
1  Porte-Rico,  to  the  East  of  it,  toward  the  coast  of  Terra
firme,  were  called  the  Canibals,  by  the  many  *  Caribes,  The  Canibah.
eaters  of  humaine  flesh  that  were  in  them  : and  in  their  *  Or  Indian
language,  Canibal,  is  to  say  Valiant  man ;  for  they  were  Sjf
held  for  such  of  the  other  Indians. All  these  Hands  are  Qaniball
dangerous  for  shelves,  and  the  nearest  to  Saint  John,  are  signifieth.
Sancta  Cruz,  to  the  South-west  from  it,  in  16.  degrees,
and  a  halfe  of  sixteene  leagues,  and  Saba  las  Virgines,
I  two  little  illets  compassed  with  shelves,  and  other  eight
or  ten  Hands,  the  greatest  of  ten  leagues :  Virgen  gorda,
and  the  Blancos  or  White  Hands,  Westward  from  Virgen
jgorda,  La  Ane  gada,  or  seven  leagues  in  length,  in  18.
degrees  and  a  halfe  compassed  with  shelves,  as  Sambrero
iis,  a  little  Hand  neere  unto  it : and  these  Hands  which
are  called the Weather Hands or Barlovento, the first
Admirall  discovered :  and  in  particular,  the  men  of  Sancta
Cruz,  and  others,  had  a  custome  to  goe  and  hunt  for

45 1

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

Men  hunters,  men  to  the  Hand  of  Saint  John,  for  to  eate,  and  at  this
day  they  of  Dominica  doe  it.  They  did  eate  no  women,
but  kept  them  for  slaves.  Now  they  say,  that  within  this
Frier  unwhol-  little  while,  they  of  Dominica  did  eate  a  Fryer,  and  that
some  food.  ay  they  which  did  eate  his  flesh,  had  such  a  fluxe,  that
some  dyed,  and  that  therefore  they  have  left  eating  humane
flesh :  and  it  may  be,  because  instead  of  men,  with  lesse
danger,  they  steale  Kine  and  Mares,  for  the  great  quantitie
there  is  of  them,  and  with  this  they  satisfie  their  raging
appetite.

Anguilla  hath  ten  leagues  of  length,  it  standeth  in  18.
degrees. Saint  Martin  in  17.  degrees  and  a  halfe,  it  is
of  sixteene  leagues,  compassed  with  little  Illets  :  and  neere
unto it Saint Eustace, Saint Bartholomew, and Saint
Christopher,  every  one  of  tenne  leagues. The  Barbada
in  17.  degrees  and  a  halfe,  compassed  with  shelves,  neere
to the Redouda and the Snowes or Nieves, and of
Mouserrate, of  five  leagues  every  one, in 15. degrees
and  a  halfe. The  Antigua,  Guadalupe,  and  Todos  Santos,
from  14.  to  15.  degrees. The  Desseada  to  the  East  of
Guadalupe,  about  sixe  leagues,  the  first  which  the  Admirall
Don  Christopher  discovered,  in  the  second  Voyage  that
he  made  to  the  Indies,  in 14.  degrees  and  a  halfe,  for
which  the  fleete  goe  alwayes  from  the  Canaries. Mari-
galaute,  the  name  of  the  Shippe  the  Admirall  had,  five
leagues  to  the  South-west  from  the  Desired,  and  from
the  Dominica,  in  13.  degrees,  twelve  leagues  in  length,
where  the  Fleetes  take  in  water  and  wood,  For  it  hath  good
roades, although with danger  of the Canibals. Neere
unto Dominica  to the South, stands Matinino, Sancta
Lucie,  and  the  Barbudos,  the  which  because  they  fall  on
the  left  hand  of  the  Fleetes,  when  they  goe,  they  call
them  already  of  the  Hands  of  the  Leeward  (de  Sotavento)
which  appertaine  to  the  coast  of  Terra  firme  :  and  of  them
the greatest, the first, and the most Orientall is the
[III.  v.  866.]  Trinidad, neere  two  hundred  leagues  from Hispaniola,
North  and  South  with  the  Dominica,  about  sixtie  leagues
from  it. It  hath  fiftie  leagues  in  length  East  and  West,

452

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

i  60  i.

and  almost  thirty  in  breadth. The  Admirall  discovered  The  discovery
it  the  yeare  1498.  the  third  Voyage  that  he  made  to  the  of  the  Hand  of
Indies,  and  called  it  the  Trinitie,  because  having  great  ^ "™ ie
trouble  in  the  Voyage,  he  had  promised  to  God  to  give I+9g.
such  a  name  to  the  first  Land  that  he  should  finde,  and
presently  the  Mariner  that  was  in  the  top,  saw  three  points
of  Land,  whereby  the  name  fitted  every  way  to  his  vowe :
then  hee  discovered  also  the  mouthes  of  the  Dragon,  and
of  the  Serpent,  the  gulfe  of  Paria,  and  all  the  firme  Land
unto  Cumana,  which  injustly  Americus  Vesputio  claimes  Amgancie  of
I  to  himselfe,  whose  name  unworthily  is  given  to  the  port  J^neru^
\  which  they  call  Peninsula  Australis  or  Indies  of  the  South. s^m
(This  Hand  of  Trinidad  is  knowne  that  it  is  no  good
i  Countrie,  though  it  hath  many  Indians ;  it  hath  thirtie
1  five  leagues  of  longitude,  and  others  say  more,  and  twentie
five  of  latitude,  it  stands  in  8.  degrees :  the  most  orientall
part  of  it,  is  a  point  on  the  North  side,  which  is  called
Ide  la  Galera :  and  to  the  North  of  it  a  small  Hand,  com-
•  passed  with  little  lies,  which  they  call  Tabago  : and  in
1  the  South  coast  a  Cape  which  they  call  the  Round  Point :
at  the  East,  the  point  of  Anguilla,  at  the  West  in  the
gulfe  of  Paria,  which  is  that  that  is  from  the  Hand  to
'Terra firme, which may be  eight leagues of distance,
i  because  the  firme  Land  maketh  an  oblique  semicircle,  as  a
jDiadem ;  and  in  the  entrance  of  the  East  is  the  distance
irecited ;  in  the  entrance  of  the  West,  the  straightnes  is
;much,  and  with  great  depth,  and  two  little  Hands  at  the
end  of  the  North  coast ;  by  the  West,  which  is  called  the
Dragons mouth : and to the North S. Vincent, and
Granada,  other  two  little  Hands.

The  Hand  of  Margarita,  so  named  by  Christopher
jColon,  the  first  Admirall  (as  also  all  the  rest,  a  most
jsufficient  proofe  of  the  Finder,  to  the  confusion  of  those
which  deprived  him  of  the  glory  of  the  discoverie  of  the
irme  Land,  attributing  it  to  themselves,  although  changing
the  times)  it  is  twentie  leagues  from  Trinidad  Westward,
imd  one  hundred  and  seventy  from  Hispaniola :  it  hath
isixteen  leagues  in  length  East  and  West,  and  yet  some

453

A.D.
l60I.

Wherefore
men  do  say
that  the  fishing
of  the  Pearles
passed  from  the
Hand  of
Cubagua.

*0r  the
Friers.

Chap.  8.
OfFenezuela,
river  of
Hacha,  new
Florida,  and
Gulfe  of  Nova
Hispania,
which  is  the
rest  that
remaineth  of
the  limits  of
this  Counsell.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

say  twenty,  and  the  halfe  in  breadth ;  it  hath  no  store  of
water,  although  it  is  very  plentifull  of  Pastures  for  Cattle.
There  is  in  it  two  Townes,  one  neare  the  Sea,  which
reacheth  to  a  fortresse  where  the  Governour  is  resident,
and  another  two  leagues  within  the  Land,  which  is  called
the  Valley  of  Sancta  Lucie :  there  is  in  his  coast  a  good
port,  and  a  nooke,  and  many  beds  of  Pearles,  whither
the  fishing  of  them  is  removed,  which  before  was  in
Cubagua,  and  they  say  it  went  away  from  thence,  for
the  rumour  of  the  ordnance  of  the  many  Shippes  that
resorted  to  this  Hand,  to  the  trafficke  of  the  Pearles,  which
was  very  great.  Cubagua  stands  one  league  from  Mar-
garita to  the  East,  there  is  no  water  in  it,  and  yet  the  new
Cadiz  was  built  there,  and  they  carried  their  water  seven
leagues,  from  the  River  of  Cumana.  To  the  East  of
Cubagua  are  foure  little  Illets,  close  by  the  shoare,  which
the  first  Admirall  called  Los  *  Frayles :  and  to  the  East
between  them  and  Granada,  other  foure  or  five,  which  he
called  (Los  Testigos)  the  Witnesses,  and  to  the  West
after  Cubagua,  another  little  Hand  which  he  named
(Tortuga)  the  Tortoyse,  neere  to  the  point  of  Araya :  and
from  hence  the  discovery  being  made  from  below  Paria,
he  went  to  Hispaniola,  with  a  purpose  to  finish  the  dis-
covery of  Terra  firme :  and  as  here  after  shall  be  seene,
hee  went  after  to  discover,  and  found  the  Hands  of  the
Guanaios,  and  from  before  Veragua,  untill  he  passed
Nombre  de  Dios.  The  Officers  and  Royall  treasure  are
in  Margarita :  and  it,  and  the  Hand  of  Cubagua,  are  in
eleven  degrees,  a  little  more.

THe  Government  of  Venezuela  parteth  the  bounds
in  the  coast  of  Terra  firme,  to  the  East,  with  the
new  Andaluzia,  from  whence  to  the  River  of  Hacha,  and
Government  of  Sancta  Martha,  with  which  it  joyneth
by  the  West,  is  an  hundred  and  thirty  leagues,  and  within
the  Land  about  eightie,  unto  the  bounds  of  the  new  King-
dome  of  Granada.  In  this  Countrie  are  vaines  of  Gold
of  more  then  two  and  twentie  carracts  and  a  halfe  : it  is

454

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

i  60  i.

plentifull  of  Wheate,  because  there  is  two  harvests  in  the

yeare,  and  most  abundance  of  all  kinde  of  Cattle,  great

and  small. There  goeth  from  this  Province  great  store

of  Meale,  Bisket,  Cheese,  Bacon,  and  much  Cotten-linnen  :

and  in  the  port  of  Guayra,  in  the  Province  of  Caracas,

are  laden  many  Cowe-Hides,  and  Sarsaparilla. There  is

in  it  eight  Spanish  Townes :  and  the  name  Venezuela  was

given  it,  because  when  the  Belzares,  Almaines,  went  to

governe  in  this  Province  the  yeare  1528.  by  a  covenant

which  they  made  with  the  Emperour,  they  thought  to

inhabit  in  a  Rocke  and  hils  that  are  in  the  mouth  of  the  wherefore  it

Lake  of  Maracaybo,  where  it  falleth  in  the  Sea,  a  Towne  was  called

which  they  named  Venezuela. It  stands  in  8.  degrees, VfMxu£la,or

j  o ' little  Venice.

a  little  more,  and  from  hence  the  Government  tooke  the

name.  His  first  Towne  is  the  Citie  of  Coro,  which  the  The  Cine  of
Indians  call  Coriana,  which  commonly  they  call  now  Coro.
Venezuela,  it  stands  in  11.  degrees  of  altitude,  and  79.
degrees  one  third  part  from  the  Meridian  of  Toledo,  one
thousand  and  five  hundred  leagues  from  it :  here  the
Governor  is  wont  to  be  resident,  and  there  is  the  Cathedrall
Church  suffragane  to  the  Archbishop  of  S.  Dominicke.
John  of  Ampues  built  first  this  Citie,  and  then  those  that
went  for  the  Belzares  made  their  abode  in  it,  the  first
was  Ambrose  Alsinger :  it  is  so  healthfull,  and  of  so  good
an  ayre,  that  there  is  no  neede  of  Physitians.

The  second  place  is  our  Lady  of  Carvalleda,  in  the  Our  Lady  of
Province  of  Caracas,  neere  to  the  Sea,  East  from  Coro  Carvalleda.
eightie  leagues,  and  with  a  bad  Haven  : Don  Francisco
Faiardo built it the yeare 1560. which went for that  [III.  v.  867.]
purpose  from  the  Margarita. S.  James  of  Lyon  in  the
same  Province,  seven  leagues  within  the  Land,  and  three
from  Carvalleda  to  the  South,  and  sixtie  from  Coro,  where
at  this  time  the  Governour  is  most  resident. The  new
Valencia  sixtie  leagues  from  Coro,  and  twentie  five  from
S.  James  of  Lyon,  seven  from  the  port  of  Burburata,  The  S.  Jago  de
Captaine  Villacinda  peopled  it. The  new  Xerez  about  Leon-
fifteene  leagues,  almost  South  from  the  new  Valencia,  and  Xerez-
twentie  from  the  new  Segovia,  and  sixtie  from  Coro  to  the  Segovia.

455

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

South-east, a  new  Towne. The  new  Segovias, in  the
Province  of  Bariquizimito,  twentie  leagues  from  Xerez

Tucuyo.  to  the  South,  and  tenne  from  Tucuyo,  and  eightie  from
Coro  to  the  South-east,  where  the  Officers  royall,  the
Governour,  and  the  Lieutenant  are  resident  at  times :
John  of  Villegas  peopled  it  in  the  yeare  1552.  The  Citie
of  Tucuyo  is  famous,  because  in  it  they  slew  the  tyrant
Lope  of  Aguirre,  it  stands  tenne  leagues  from  Segovia,
to  the  South-west,  eightie  five  from  Coro ;  it  is  the  habi-

Trucillo.  tation  of  the  Captaine  Carvajal.  Truxillo,  or  our  Ladie
of  Peace,  in  the  Province  of  Cuycas,  about  eightie  leagues
almost  to  the  South,  direct  from  Coro,  somewhat  to  the
East,  and  twentie  five  from  Tucuyo,  directly  to  the
West.

The  Auditor  Vallejo  discovered  this  the  yeare  1549,
the  Bacheller  Tollosa  being  Governour  in  it :  and  the
yeare  1559.  the  Captaine  James  Garcia  of  Paredes
inhabited  Truxillo :  and  there  may  be  in  this  Government
more  then  1 00000.  Indies  tributaries,  and  in  them  are
not  comprehended  from  eighteene  under,  nor  above  fiftie
yeares,  because  the  supreme  Counsell  of  the  Indies  hath
provided,  that  in  no  place  of  this  Orbe,  these  doe  pay
tribute :  and  because  daily  they  increase  and  diminish
in  number,  it  cannot  be  said  precisely  and  perfectly  how
many  there  are.

The  Lake  The  Lake  of  Maracaybo,  which  the  Castilanes  call  of
Maracaybo.  our  Lacjy?  [s  0f  fresh  water,  it  entreth  fortie  leagues  within
the  Land,  from  the  Sea,  and  hath  more  then  tenne  in
breadth,  and  eighty  in  compasse,  with  many  Townes  upon
his  Borders :  in  the  end  of  it  entreth  a  River  that
descendeth  from  the  new  Kingdome  of  Granada,  by  the
which,  and  the  Lake,  Marchandise  are  transported  which
came  to  the  new  Kingdome  of  Castile,  and  to  other  places ;
some  of  the  men  of  this  Lake  doe  live  in  Boates,  their
houses  being  made  in  the  Trees  within  the  water,  and  at
the  Border,  whence  it  tooke  also  at  the  first,  the  name  of
Venezuela ;  sayling  by  some  parts  of  this  Lake,  ye  can
see  no  Land : there  enter  into  it  other  great  Rivers,  it

456

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

i  60  i.

runneth  to  the  Sea,  it  hath  about  halfe  a  league  of  mouth,
and  in  it  the  shoale  and  rocks  abovesaid.

The  Ports,  Capes,  and  Points  of  the  coast  of  this  The  ports  and
Government,  and  those  annexed  unto  it,  are  to  the  West,  P°tnts  °fthe
Marcapava,  the  Urchila,  an  Hand  against  the  River  jr^™^™
Oynare,  neere  to  another  called  Rocke  of  the  Ilets,  and
afterward  the  Cape  of  the  Codera,  and  Puerto  Flechardo,
and  the  haven  of  Sardinas  or  Pilchers :  and  opposite  the
He  of  Aves  or  Birds,  before  Burburata,  a  marvellous
haven,  which  the  Bachiler  Tolosa  peopled,  and  is  a  Scale
or  Port  for  the  new  Kingdome  (Nuevo  Reyno)  &
Provinces  of  Peru,  and  after  that  is  Gulfo  triste,  and  to
the  North  of  the  Bonayre,  an  Hand  of  ten  leagues  in
length,  and  eight  in  breadth,  and  afterward  Punta  seca,
and  right  against  it  Curacao,  and  a  little  forward  Curacaute,
foureteene  leagues  in  length,  right  against  the  Cape  of
S.  Roman  to  the  South  of  the  Hand  of  Aruba.  S.  Roman
entreth  twentie  leagues  into  the  Sea,  it  standeth  twelve
from  Coro,  the  Indians  doe  call  it  Paraguana,  it  lacketh
a  little  to  be  an  Hand :  it  may  have  in  compasse  twenty
five  leagues  and  more  of  plaine  ground,  with  a  Mountaine
almost  in  the  middest :  it  is  discovered  a  great  way  into
the  Sea.  There  is  at  the  beginning  of  the  Gulfe  of
Venezuela,  the  entrance  and  channell  of  the  Lake  of
Maracaybo,  and  at  the  entrance  of  it  the  River  Mitare,
and  to  the  West  the  Monkes,  three  little  Ilets  close  by
the  Point  and  Cape  of  Coquibocoa,  where  onely  in  all
the  Indies  was  found  waight  and  touch  for  the  Gold,  and
afterwards  the  deepe  Baye  (Balna  Honda)  and  the  Portete,
the  Cape  de  Vela,  which  the  Captaine  Alfonsus  of  Ojeda
named,  when  Americo  Vespucio  went  with  him  the  first
time,  much  after  that  the  Admirall  discovered  this  coast,
which  stands  in  12.  degrees,  somewhat  more.  And  there
is  from  the  Cape  de  Vela,  to  the  River  of  Hache  eighteene
leagues,  without  any  stone  in  them,  nor  water,  but  raine
water.  This  Government  remained  destroyed,  since  the
time  of  the  Almaines,  because  they  would  not  inhabit,
onely  seeke  to  make  slaves,  and  to  waste  the  Countrie.

457

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 60 1.

They  called  first  the  River  of  Hache,  our  Ladie  of  the
Snowes,  and  after  of  the  Remedies,  neere  unto  the  Sea,
betweene  Venezuela,  and  Sancta  Marta  to  the  East,  thirtie
leagues  from  it,  and  sixtie  from  Coro  to  the  West,  North
and  South  with  the  Cape  de  Vela,  with  eight  leagues  of
bounds  betweene  Venezuela  and  Sancta  Marta,  without
showes  of  Gold.  It  is  governed  by  Alcaldes  immediate
to  the  Counsell  of  Hispaniola,  and  the  Spiritualtie  is  of
the  Bishopricke  of  Sancta  Marta.  The  Towne  is  1000.
paces  from  the  Sea,  on  a  little  hill :  the  Haven  hath  the
North  for  travers,  it  is  a  most  fertile  Countrie,  and  yeeldeth
whatsoever  is  in  Castile :  there  are  many  Tigers,  Beares,
Ants,  and  Lizards  in  the  Rivers,  much  Gold,  and  Stones
of  divers  vertues,  for  the  Spleene,  the  Kidneys,  for  the
Milt,  and  Flux,  and  they  have  good  Salt-pits.  Nicolas
Federman  for  the  Belzares,  was  he  that  began  to  inhabit
this  Towne.  The  government  of  Serpai,  which  they  call
the  new  Andaluzia,  and  in  the  Indian  Language  Guayana,
extends  the  limits.  From  the  Hand  of  Margarita  unto
the  river  Marauyon,  three  hundred  leagues  to  the  East,
and  as  many  North  and  South  within  the  Land,  wherein
[III.  v.  868.]  the  Indians  Omagues  are  included,  and  the  Omygas,  with
the  Provinces  of  Dorodo,  to  the  south  of  this  Government,
wherein  falleth  by  the  Coast  the  Province  of  Maracapana,
in  the  bounds  of  Veneculela,  where  the  mouths  of  Sancta
Fe  were  inhabited,  in  whose  Borders  is  the  knob  of  Unare,
and  neere  unto  it  a  great  Lake  with  great  store  of  fish
and  salt,  and  the  Indians  which  are  called  of  Perito,  twentie
leagues  within  the  Land,  and  the  Indians  Paleuques,  so
called  for  the  Poles  wherewith  they  fortified  themselves,
and  the  Province  of  Cumana,  North  and  South  with
the  Margarita,  where  is  a  Towne  of  Spaniards,  which
is  called  new  Cordova,  which  the  Captayne  Goncalo
of  Ocampo  built,  when  he  went  to  chastise  the  Indians
of  Cumana,  for  the  destruction  of  the  Monastery  of  the
Religious  Franciscans.  And  to  the  East  of  the  Hand
of  Trinidad,  and  the  River  of  Saint  John  of  the
Amazones,  is  the  Province  of  the  Indians  Arvacas,  part

458

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  ad.

1601.

of  the  Caniballs,  and  all  Warlike,  that  never  are  quiet
or  peaceable.

After  the  point  of  Paria,  which  stands  in  seven  degrees,
and  the  Dragons  Mouth  neere  unto  Trinidad  stands  the
point  Del  Gallo,  or  Anegada,  to  the  South  of  the  Trinitie,
and  the  River  of  Paria,  or  Orivico,  which  some  call
Yuyapari ;  and  others  will  have  that  these  two,  and
the  River  of  Saint  John,  and  of  Orellana  be  all  one
thing,  and  also  the  Marauyon ;  but  in  this  they  are
deceived.  There  be  other  Rivers  in  the  Province  of  the
Arvacas  that  are  well  knowne,  the  River  of  Saint  John,
or  of  Orellana  springeth  in  the  Andes  of  Peru,  right
against  Cuzco,  from  whence  it  runneth  fifteene  hundred
leagues,  or  more,  winding  under  the  Equinoctiall,  by
Countreyes  well  inhabited,  though  not  well  discovered,
till  it  came  to  run  into  the  North  Sea,  whose  mouth  hath
in  breadth  fiftie  leagues ;  and  in  the  first  five  hundred  from
the  mouth  upward,  many  Hands  inhabited ;  and  eightie
or  a  hundred  leagues  more  to  the  West,  stands  the  River  R-wer
of  Morauyon,  almost  in  the  bounds  whereby  passeth  the  Morauion.
Line  of  the  Division  betweene  Castile  and  Portugall,  and
is  great  and  terrible,  having  fifteene  leagues  of  mouth,
and  the  streame  commeth  from  the  parts  of  the  South,  and
the  Provinces  of  Brasill,  and  they  say  that  the  spring  is
under  Popayau,  and  the  bounds  of  the  new  Kingdome  of
Granada.

Seven leagues from Cumana stands the Hand of  The  Hand  of
Cubagua,  where  stood  as  was  said,  the  new  Cadiz  which  Cubagua.
was  disinhabited  because  the  fishing  for  Pearles  fayled :
this  Hand  had  no  water  that  could  be  drunke,  nor  trees,
nor  beasts ;  for  all  is  brackish,  except  those  Hogges  that  Strange  Hogs.
have the Navell in their  backe-bone, and some small
Conies,  and  having  so  great  inhabiting,  they  went  seven
leagues  to  the  river  of  Cumana  for  water,  although  there  Anearthquake
was  an  opinion  that  it  bred  webbes  in  the  eyes. In  this  m  the  coast  °f
River  and  coast,  hapned  in  the  yeare  1530.  the  first  of  T*rrafime>
September,  the  haven  being  cleare,  the  Sea  did  rise  foure \c%0.  very
fadomes  from  his  ordinary  course,  and  entring  into  the  admirable.

459

A.D.
l60I.

Margarita.

Florida.

The  spring
which  John
Ponce  didseeke
that  renued  the
old  men.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

earth  it  began  to  shake,  and  the  fortresse  which  the
Captaine  Jacome  of  Castellon  had  built  by  order  of  the
Counsell  of  Hispaniola,  fell,  and  the  earth  did  open  in
many  places,  whereout  sprang  much  salt  water  as  blacke
as  inke,  and  did  stinke  of  brimstone,  and  the  mountaine
of  the  gulfe  of  Cariaco  remained  open  with  a  great  rift :
many  houses  fell,  many  people  died  drowned,  and  with
feare,  and  taken  with  the  earth  quake.  Margarita  one
league  from  Cubagua  a  more  pleasant  Hand,  the  Bachiller
Marcelo  of  Villalobos  did  people  it.

The  Province  and  Government  of  Florida,  bordering
on  the  Counsell  of  Hispaniola,  according  to  the  Govern-
ment of  Peter  Melendez,  is  all  that  which  lyeth  from
the  River  of  Palmes,  which  doth  confine  with  the  Govern-
ment of  Panuco  in  new  Spaine,  limits  of  the  Counsell
of  Mexico,  which  is  neere  the  tropicke  in  22.  degrees,
unto  the  point  of  Bacallaos,  which  falleth  in  48.  degrees,
and  a  halfe,  in  the  which  are  1258.  leagues  of  Coast,
and  from  thence  to  73.  degrees  of  altitude  to  the  North
by  the  Coast,  and  within  the  Land  all  that  which  hee
discovereth.  Of  this  hath  beene  coasted  and  discovered,
from  the  River  of  Palmes  unto  the  Point  of  Sancta  Helena,
and  the  River  Jordan,  which  are  about  600.  leagues,  it  is
a  firme  Land  of  a  good  climate,  plentifull,  and  well
inhabited  in  many  places,  as  those  that  went  through  it
with  Hernando  of  Soto  did  know  it,  the  yeare  1536.  and
1537.  John  Pardo  borne  in  Cuenca,  went  by  Land  from
Florida  to  new  Spaine,  in  lesse  then  two  yeares,  and  it
is  the  neerest  Europe  of  any  part  of  the  Indies,  &  from
the  Bay  of  S.  Joseph,  which  is  eightie  leagues  from  Panuco.
There  is  also  discovered  unto  New  found  Land,  but  that
which  is  particularly  taken  for  Florida,  is  the  point  that
goeth  into  the  Sea  North  and  South,  with  the  Hand  of
Cuba,  of  a  hundred  leagues  in  length,  and  twentie  five
in  breadth  East  and  West,  and  (when  it  is  most)  thirtie.
John  Ponce  of  Lyon  discovered  it  Anno  1512.  on  Easter
day,  and  for  this  cause  he  called  it  Florida :  and  after-
ward returned  the  yeere 1521.  and  retired  wounded  to

460

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

1601.

Cuba,  where  he  dyed,  leaving  a  report  that  he  sought

the  Fountaine  or  River  which  the  Indians  said  that  old

men washing themselves therin, became yong. This

Province  is  according  to  the  temperature  of  Castile,  and

many  fruits  were  found  there  like  the  fruits  of  Spain,  and

it  seemeth  fit  for  Cattle  and  Corne. There  is  no  Gould, They  °f

neither  seemeth  that  the  Indians  did  know  it,  nor  Silver ;  ^f**"  q*J%

for  it  hath  beene  seene  that  they  have  found  the  Chests  Syver  nor

with  bars  of  it  and  money  in  their  coasts,  and  made  no  Monie.

account  of  it :  yet  Hernando  de  Soto,  within  the  inward

parts of the great River, found great abundance of

Pearles.

There  are  but two  Fortresses  in this  Province  with
men  in  Garison,  both  in  the  Coast  that  looketh  to  the
East : the  one  is  called Saint Marke, in  the  point  of
Saint Helena, about one hundred leagues from the
Havana, and  another  of Saint  Augustin, which  is  the
principall,  because  the  haven  is  good,  and  is  neere  the  [III.  v.  869.]
channell  of  Baliama. It  stands  about  fiftie  leagues  from
los  Martyres,  which  are  many  little  Hands  inhabited,  which
are  neare  the  point  of  Florida,  whereby  it  joyneth  most  Ports ,  Capes,
with  the  Hand  of  Cuba,  a  league  and  a  halfe,  and  lesse,  and  ^omts  °f
the  one  from  the  other,  with  a  ranke  of  shelves  with °
mouthes,  in  twentie  three  or  twentie  foure  leagues,  which
these  Martyres  have  in  length ;  whose  beginning  on  the
West  side,  is  called  the  Point  of  the  Martyres,  and  to
the  East,  the  Head  of  the  Martyres ;  and  there  is  an
Hand  of  foureteene  leagues  in  length,  and  very  narrow,
the  Point  of  it  is  the  first  of  Terra  firme  to  the  East,
in  24.  degrees  and  a  halfe,  where  a  Towne  of  Spaniards
was  built,  which  continued  not,  and  to  the  North,  almost
direct  the  River  Ays,  and  more  Northward  in  28.  degrees,
the  Point  of  the  Caves,  and  forward  the  River  of  *  Gnats,  *Or
before  the  River  of  Matanca,  which  is  so  called  by  that  Mosquitos.
which  Peter  Melendez  did  to  the  Captaine  Ribao,  and  his  S^Srf^
Frenchmen :  and  the  Point  of  S.  Augustin  in  29.  degrees  f/orMa $ee
three  quarters,  and  ten  leagues  from  thence  the  River  of  Hak.  103.
S.  Mathew,  from  whence  the  Coast  turneth  to  the  North

461

A.D.
l60I.

The  Coast  of
the  North  unto
the  Baccallaos.

*0r  Los

Gamos.
The  great
River  of
S.  Marie.

*Las
Tortugas.
[III.  v.  870.

Bahia  de
Carlos.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

North-east,  all  with  the  Hands  and  Bays  leaning  unto  it
unto  the  Cape,  or  Point  of  Saint  Hellen,  which  stands  in
32.  degrees  and  a  halfe,  which  was  discovered  by  chance
the  yeare  1520.

In  all  the  rest  of  the  Coast  that  is  betweene  the  point
of  Sancta  Helena,  by  New  found  Land  and  the  Bacallaos,
unto  the  Land  of  Labrador,  which  reacheth  and  passeth
the  height  of  England,  there  is  no  Towne  nor  Govern-
ment of  Spaniards,  although  by  divers  times  and  Nations,
it  hath  beene  discovered  and  Navigated,  and  it  is  knowne
there  is  above  one  thousand  leagues  journey  of  Land
without  gold,  and  the  more  in  height  the  worse,  and  lesse
habitable.  There  be  many  Rivers,  and  Ports,  that  because
they  are  not  well  knowne  nor  frequented,  there  is  no
mention  made  but  of  the  River  of  the  *  Stagges,  by
another  name  of  Sancta  Marie,  which  is  a  very  great  and
maine  River,  almost  in  the  midst  of  the  Coast  betweene
the  Baccallaos,  from  whence  the  great  River  Ochelago
entreth  within  the  Land  toward  the  West,  which  divers
times  the  strangers  have  navigated,  beleeving  to  have
found  that  way  passage  to  new  Spaine.  And  in  the  Coast
of  Florida,  which  looketh  to  the  West,  are  the  *  Tortoyses,
seven  or  eight  Hands  together:  and  to  the  North  of  the
point  of  los  Martyres,  the  Muspa  in  terra  firme.  And
thirteene  leagues  to  the  North,  the  Bay  of  Charles,  by
another  name  of  John  Ponce  of  Lyon,  and  as  much  more
forward,  the  Bay  of  Tampa,  thirtie  three  leagues  from
the  Bay  of  Tocobaga,  by  another  name,  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  or  de  Mervelo,  in  twentie  nine  degrees  and  an
halfe  of  height,  where  beginneth  that  which  properly  is
called  Florida.  Many  have  thought,  that  by  this  side
of  Florida,  toward  the  land  of  Labrador,  there  might  a
streit  be  found  to  communicate  the  North  &  the  South
Seas  together,  saying  that  as  it  had  beene  found  to  the
South,  there  should  be  one  to  the  North :  but  experience
doth  shew,  that  the  South  passage  is  no  streight,  at  the
least  it  is  alreadie  in  doubt,  and  by  the  North  untill  now,
though  it  hath  beene  much  sought  for  it  hath  not  beene

462

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

1601.

found,  and  hee  that  went  neerest  to  it  was  the  President
Peter  Melendez,  by  some  conjectures.

All  the  Coast  on  the  West  side,  unto  the  Government
of  Panuco,  which  is  above  300.  leagues,  is  called  The
Gulfe  of  New  Spaine,  wherein  is  no  Towne  of  Spaniards,  The  Gulfe  of
though  it  was  given  for  a  government  to  Pamphilo  of  nova  Espania.
Narvaez,  and  to  Hernando  of  Soto,  and  first  to  Francisco
de  Garay,  and  of  his  people  in  particular. The  Country
is  very  poore  of  victuals,  and  the  people  miserable,  and
although  in  it  are  many  Rivers  and  Ports,  no  mention  is
made  of  them,  because  they  are  not  well  knowne. This
Gulfe  hath  two  entrances : by  the  one  the  currents  doe
enter  furiously,  betweene  Yucatan  and  Cuba,  and  goe  out
with  a  greater  force  betweene  the  same  Hand  of  Cuba,  and
the  point  of  Florida,  and  running  doe  make  the  channell  The  Channel/
of  Bahama,  which  taketh  his  name  of  the  Hand  rehearsed.  °fBahama-

THe  second  Audience  which  was  setled  in  the  Indies,  Chap.  9.

is that of New Spaine, and Nunyo de Guzonau  Of  the  limits

Cavallero  de  Guadalajara  was  the  first  President, till  a  ff^^™"11
Governour  were  provided,  and  because  he  gave  no  satis-
faction, there was another new Councell quickly sent,

md  for  President  of  it  Don  Sebastian  Ramirez  of  Fuen-  Don  Sebastian

Ileal,  which  of  a  Judge  of  the  Chancerie  of  Granada,  went  Ramirez

for  President  of  the  Councell  of  Saint  Dominicke,  and  JJfdSeof

Bishop  of  the  Citie  of  the  Conception  of  the  Valley,  a  for  pres^ent

person  of  great  Learning,  Vertue,  and  Valour. Hee  had  0fS.

the  charge  of  the  Government,  Justice,  and  disposition  Dominicke.

of  the  goods  Royall,  the  Warre  remayning  at  the  charge  Great

if  the  Marquesse  of  the  Valley,  with  order  to  communi-  ^J^lie  Don

bate  with  the  President,  that  which  appertayned  thereto ;  Sebastian

jmd  betweene  them  was  alwayes  great  conformitie. The  Ramirez,  and

Dounds  of  this  Councell,  on  the  one  side  doth  not  com-  Don  Hernando

Drehend  that  which  commonly  is  called  New  Spaine,  and  L°1tes-
on the  other  it  comprehendeth  more,  because  the  new
Gallicia,  which  is  a  Councell  by  it  selfe,  is  part  of  New
Spaine.

The  Province  of  Yucatan,  falleth  within  the  bounds

463

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

of  it,  which  as  now  it  is,  may  have  in  length  about  foure
hundred  leagues,  from  the  furthest  East  of  Yucatan,  unto
where  it  parteth  bounds  with  the  Councell  of  new  Gallozia,
and  North  and  South,  about  two  hundred  from  the  end
of  the  Government  of  Panuco  unto  the  South  Sea,  his
bounds  remayning  open  on  the  North  side,  whose  princi-
pall  Provinces  are  the  Archbishopricke  of  Mexico, the
Bishoprickes  of  Mechoacan,  and  that  of  los  Angelos,  or
Tlascala,  and  of  Guaxaca,  and  of  Chiapa,  and  the  Govern-
ments of  Panuco  and  Yucatan,  with  that  of  Tobosco,  and
for  circuit  or  commerce,  the  Hands  Phillipinas,  and  the
dispatch  of  the  Navigation  of  China.
New  Spaine. New  Spaine  is  one  of  the  best  Provinces  of  the  new
World,  and  the  most  habitable  in  a  good  temper,  having
abundance  and  plentie  of  Corne,  Millet,  and  Cattle,  and
all other  necessaries  for  humane  life,  except Oyle  and
Wine,  and  although  in  many  places  of  it  there  is  Gold,
Silver  is  most  generall, whereof  there  are many  good
Mynes.

The  Archbishopricke  of  Mexico,  falleth  betweene  the
Bishopricke  of  los  Angelos,  and  that  of  Mechoacan,  it
hath  in  length  North  and  South,  one  hundred  and  thirtie
leagues,  and  in  breadth  eighteene,  which  it  hath  by  the
Coast  of  the  South Sea, unto sixtie  within  the  Land,
wherein  are  included  the  Provinces  of  Mexico,  and  to
the  North-east  of  it  Lateotlalpa,  Meztitlau,  Xilotepeque,
and  Panuco  the  most  distant :  and  to  the  West,  Matalzingo
neere  to  Mexico,  and  Cultepeque  the  furthest  off :  and  to
the  East,  Tezcuco  neere  to  Mexico  :  and  to  the  South-east,
Chalco,  neere  to  that  of  Mexico :  and  to  the  South  of  it
Suchimilco,  the  first,  and  after  Tlaluc,  and  betweene  South
and South-west Coyxca, and  Acapulco, the  furthest  to]
the  South. There  are  no  more  in  all  but  foure  Townes
of  Spaniards,  although  in  the  Province  of  Mexico  are
Tenoxtitlan. many  Spaniards  dwelling  in  the  Townes  of  the  Indians.
Scribed  it ' The^  callec*  Mexico  in  olc*  time,  Tenoxtitlan ;  it  stands
from  Toledo xrx  nineteene  degrees  and  an  halfe  of  altitude,  and  one
1^0.  leagues,  hundred  and  three  degrees  of  longitude  from  the  Meridian

464

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF FLORIDA

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

1601.

)f  Toledo, from  whence  it  may  be  distant  by  a  direct

..ine, one thousand seven hundred and fortie leagues,

vhich  are  eight  houres  of  *  Sunne  :  it  stands  in  the  middest  *That  is,  the

)f  two  great  Lakes  that  doe  compasse  it,  the  one  of  salt  Stmnertsem

vater,  because  his  bottome  is  Salt-petrish ;  the  other  fresh  etf °^e'

laving  fish,  and  voydeth  into  the  Salt  one ;  each  is  of  Toledo,  then  at

ive  leagues  in  breadth,  and  eight  in  length,  and  both  Mexico:

loe  compasse  thirtie  three  leagues. They  goe  into  the  whlc^  seemes

^itie  by  three  causies  of  halfe  a  league  in  length,  and  notJusiy
,  J . . r  .  1 o &  • 1  1 1  • • calculated.

here are in it roure thousand Spaniards, and thirtie

housand Houses of Indians or more. In the foure

.ncient  streets  wherein  the  Citie  was  divided,  in  the  time

>f  their  Paganisme,  which  at  this  day  is  called  of  Saint

ohn, Saint Mary the Round, Saint Paul, and Saint

Sebastian ;  and  the  Tlatelulco  is  the  principall  street  which

hey  call  Saint  James.

The  Councell  is  Resident  in  Mexico,  and  the  Vice-roy  [III.  v.  871.]
roverneth in it, and  three  Judges, the  Officers  of  the
Revenue  and  Royall  Treasure,  a  Founding  House,  and

Mint House,  and  the  Archiepiscopall Metropolitan,  Sufraganes  of

lat  hath  for  Suffraganes  the  Bishoprickes  of  Tlascala,  *~. .  ~ r
tv  k 1  &  r»  «•  • • i-ii  •  -\r  bishopric ke  of

juaxaca, Mechoacan, new Gallicia, Lhiapa, Yucatan, Mexico.

Guatemala, Verapaz, and the Phillipinas. And Don

rernando  Cortes  was  he  that  built  this  great  Church,  and

et  for  Bases  of  the  Pillars  certayne  Idols  of  stone  which

re  seene  to  this  day,  and  the  Bishop,  President  and  Gover-

our  of  New  Spaine,  Don  Sebastian  Ramirez  of  Fuenleal,

ontinued  the  building  with  great  speed. The  first  Bishop

f  Mexico  was  Frier  John  de  Zumarraga  of  the  Order

f  Saint  Francis,  of  great  vertue  and  example,  borne  in

)urango,  in  the  Lordship  of  Biskeye,  which  also  was  the

rst  Archbishop.

There are in Mexico Monasteries of Dominican,

Tanciscan,  and  Austine  Friers,  the  company  of  Jesus,  El

"armen,  la  Merced,  the  Bare-foot,  and  Trinitarie  Friers;  mSc.o/the life

en Monasteries of Nunnes, one Colledge of Indian  fjjj in  the

hildren,  and  another  of  Arrepentidas,  the  Repentantes"1  "From  the

nd  nRecogidas,  or  Retyred,  and  the  Universitie,  where  World.

xiv  465  2  G

A.D.

I  60 1.

*Los  ciento  y
cincocabeceras
de  doctrina.  1
thinke  he
meaneth  some
Parishionall
division,  in
each  of  which
the  Indians
had  their
peculiar
Priests  and
Schooles  of
priests  to  teach
them  religion.
After  in  cap.
2$  he  cals
them  beneficios
curados.
Benefices,
with  Cure,  as
zes.

[III.  v.  872.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

curious  and  learnedly  the  Sciences  are  read  with  other
Colledges and Hospitals. And the Spaniards which
inhabit  the  bordering  Townes  of  the  Indians,  and  Granges,
are  about  three  thousand,  and  there  are  reckoned  about
two  hundred  and  fiftie  Townes  of  Indians,  in  which  the
chiefe  places  of  *  Doctrine  are  one  hundred  and  five  :  and  in  '
them  and  thereabouts  are  six  thousand  Granges,  more  then  Jin
five  hundred  thousand  tributarie  Indians,  and  more  then  \%
one hundred and fiftie Monasteries of Franciscan,  jpr
Dominican,  and  Austine  Friers. And  the  Doctrines  (or  Me
Schooles)  of  Priests  and  Friers,  to  teach  the  Faith  Catholike  $ :
to  the  Indians,  are  without  number,  besides  the  Fathers  ft;
of  the  Company,  and  Mercenarie  Friers  : there  is  also  gt
Resident  in  Mexico,  the  holy  Office  of  the  Inquisition,  }w
whereof  we  will  intreat  hereafter.

In  the  Coast  bounding  on  this  Archbishopricke  towards Ui
the  South  Sea,  and  the  Province  of  Acapulco,  is  the  good  if  1
Port  of  Acapulco,  in  seventeene  degrees  height,  sixe
leagues  from  the  River  Yopes,  whereby  the  Archbishop-
ricke is  joyned  with  the  Bishopricke  of  Tlascala.  And  On.
other  eight  more  to  the  West,  the  River  of  Citala,  andfon
other  foure,  the  River  of  Mitla.  In  the  Coast  of  thejne:
North,  it  hath  that  which  falleth  in  the  Government  of |tiiei
Tanuco.  In  the  limits  of  this  Councell  are  the  Mynes  t;;')
of  Puchuca,  fourteene  leagues  from  Mexico,  and  the'ij'
Mynes  of  Tasco  twentie  two,  those  of  Ysmiquilpo,  whichpe
are  of  Lead,  twentie  two,  the  Mynes  of  Talpuiana  twentie  fc
foure,  the  Mynes  of  Temazcaltepeque  eighteene,  those  of  jrJ
Cultepeque  22.  those  of  Zacualpa  twentie,  those  offcje
Zupanguo  40.  those  of  Guanaxato  sixtie,  those  of  Com- Hi
maia,  seven.  From  Guanaxuato :  those  of  Achichica, lve!
eighteene  from  the  Citie  of  los  Angelos,  and  those  off]}
Gantla,  or  Zumatlan,  and  Saint  Lewes  of  the  Peace,  and  tile:
in  them  all  there  may  bee  above  foure  thousand  Spaniards,  pfevj
which  with  industrie  and  labour  doe  attend  these  Mynes,  j^u
all  of  Silver  except  one,  which  as  hath  beene  said,  is  ofh
Lead,  and  procuring  that  the  Indians  taking  example  of|r
them,  may  live  politickly :  and  the  first  that  with  marvel-  Lj

466

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

i  60  i.

lous  cunning  and  wisdome,  brought  in  the  breedings  of
:attell  and  tillages,  which  have  beene  the  mightiest  meanes
'or  the  preservation  of  the  Mynes,  was  the  above  said
President  Don  Sebastian  Ramirez  of  Fuenleal,  originall  Don  Sebastian
md  the  foundation  of  all  the  good  of  those  Realmes.  brw^in  the

The Province of  Panuco to the North of Mexico,  breeding  and
^Junno of  Guzman had in government : it hath fiftie  ploughing.
eagues  in  breadth,  and  in  length,  and  after  it  was  incor-  Government  of
)orate  with  the  limits  of  the  Councell  or  Audience  of  Panuco-
Vlexico. The  Countrey  that  looketh  toward  New  Spaine
s  the  best,  plentifull  of  victuals,  and  hath  some  Gold.
That  which  runneth toward Florida  is  miserable, from
whence  till  yee  come  to  his  bounds,  are  more  then  five
tundred  leagues. This  government  hath  three  Spanish
ownes,  Panuco,  in  somewhat  more  then  twentie  three
egrees,  and  by  another  name  the  Village  of  Saint  Stephen
f  the  Haven,  which  Goncalo  of  Sandovall  built,  by  order
f  the  Marquesse  Don  Fernando  Cortes,  when  they  went
d  resist  Francisco  Garay,  and  to  pacifie  the  Indians  of
hila,  the  yeere  1520.  and  it  standeth  sixtie  five  leagues
•om  Mexico  to  the  North  North-east,  eight  leagues  from
le  Sea,  neere  to  a  River  whose  entry  is  a  Haven  :  it  is  a
liefe  Alcaldia,  or  Justiceship,  provided  by  the  Vice-roy
f New Spaine. The Village of Saint James of the  S.  Jago  de  los
alleyes,  twentie  five  leagues  from  Panuco  to  the  West. ^^«
'he  Village  of  Sant  Luys  de  Tampico,  eight  leagues  from
anuco  to  the  North-east,  neere  to  the  Sea :  and  although
1  the  Coast  of  this  government  are  many  Rivers,  &  some
t)de  unto  the  River  of  Palmas,  they  are  not  knowne  in  the
ulfe  of  New  Spain,  but  the  River  of  Panuco,  &  his
iven,  which  is  not  very  good.

The  Bishopricke  of  Tlascala,  which  by  another  name  is
lied  de  los  Angelos,  betweene  the  Archbishopricke  of  Los  Angeks.
;Iexico,  and  the  Bishopricke  of  Guaxaca,  is  of  100.
agues,  and  more  in  length,  from  the  Coast  of  the  South
that  of  the  North,  and  betwixt  the  confines  of  the
rchbishopricke,  and  of  Guaxaca  80.  and  as  many  in
eadth,  by  the  Coast  of  the  North  Sea,  and  no  more  then

467

A.D.

l60I.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  Bishop
Don  Sebastian
Ramirez  built
the  Citie  of
the  Angels.

d  Vulcan  or
Bolcan,  is  a
place  whence
fire  issueth,  as
Etna,  Hecla,

Tlascala.

The  Valley  of
Atlisco
famous.

18.  or  20.  by  that  of  the  South. There  is  not  in  it  alp1
more  then  three  Spanish  Towns,  which  is  the  City  oi|^
Towne  of  the  Angels  22.  leagues  from  Mexico  to  the  '•
East,  somewhat  inclining  to  the  South,  of  1500.  housholdi  ^
in  foure  streets : it  is  a  Chiefe  Justice-ship  where  the  &  '
Cathedral  Suffragane  to  the  Archbishoprick  of  Mexico  is  *&
Resident,  with  Monasteries  of  Dominicks,  Franciscan,  an
Austine  Friers,  one  of  Nuns,  &  one  Colledge  of  mor
then  500.  Indian  children,  to  be  instructed,  with  1000
Pezos  rent,  which  the  Bishop  Don  Sebastian  Ramirez  buil
which  sent  the  Batchelor  Salmeron  Auditor  of  the  Counce
to  build  this  City,  and  although  he  had  determined  to  ha
made it in Tlascala, he left it because he  would
endamage  the  Indians,  nor  touch  their  Lands ; for  he  ha
a  great  regard  in  generall  to  the  good  of  the  Indians,  and-3
in  particular  for  those  of  Tlascala,  being  so  well  deserving  J-
of  the  Crowne  Royall.

The  Citie  was  built  in  the  bounds  of  Cholula,  fromP
whence  went  25000.  men  to  warre,  and  it  was  seated  in  M]
Plaine  called  Cuetlaxcoapa,  neere  to  a  Valley  called  Atlisco.|?[
on  the  border  of  a  small  River  that  commeth  out  of  thjP
d  Vulcan,  where  they  gather  Wheate,  Wine,  and  all  theF
Fruits  of  Castile,  Sugar  and  Flaxe,  and  all  manner  of :3[
Herbs.  For  it  is  a  temperate  Countrey,  more  hot  thetP
cold,  although  the  Corne  of  the  grounds  neerest  the  Citiej^
are  somewhat  blasted :  and  a  little  space  from  Tlascala,!-1
spring  Fountaynes  whence  groweth  a  River  that  when  it™
commeth  betweene  the  Citie  of  the  Angels  and  Cholula,to
it  goeth  very  great  and  without  fish,  it  passeth  through  theP
Provinces  of  Mechoacan,  and  entreth  into  the  South  Sea^
by  Zacatula,  and  there  bee  in  it  so  many  Caymanes,  01F
Crocodiles,  that  they  have  dispeopled  some  places.

In  Tlascala  to  the  North  of  the  Angels,  which  stands  inP
more  then  twenty  degrees  in  height,  where  the  Cathedral!.. ::
Church  was  till  the  yeere  1550.  when  it  was  remooved  to*1
the  Citie :  the  first  Bishop  was  Frier  Julian  Garces,  th§F
Valley  of  Atlisco,  which  may  have  in  breadth  about  one'-,
league  and  an  halfe,  where  the  Corne  is  never  blasted,  and

468

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

1601.

'here  is  gathered  in  it  above  1 00000.  Haveges,  and  there
ire  more  then  1000.  Spaniards  that  do  traffick  in  it,  and
7.  leagues  from  the  Citie  to  the  East,  is  the  Valley  of
Dcumba :  and  in  the  Province  of  Tepeaca,  the  Marquesse
}f  the  Valley  built  a  Spanish  Towne,  which  he  called
Segura :  and  in  the  Valley  of  S.  Paul,  may  be  other  1300.
lousholds  of  Spaniards,  in  Farmes  and  Grangeries  of
:attle,  that  multiply  so  much,  that  there  were  men  that
vith  two  shag-haird  sheepe  came  to  have  above  40000.

The  Citie  of  Veracruz,  one  way  stands  sixtie  leagues  La  Veracruz.
torn  Mexico,  and  by  another  sixtie  five,  it  stands  one
marter  of  a  league  from  the  Sea,  it  is  of  more  then  two
jiundred  Spanish  housholds.  There  is  in  it  Treasurie
^.oyall,  and  House  of  Contractation.  The  Port  is  called  San  Juan  de
mint  John  of  Ulua,  a  name  which  the  Captayne  John  y1™-
jrijalva,  which  discovered  it  the  yeere  151 8.  and  the  frame  *-  '  v*  ?3-J
>f  the  Key  that  it  hath,  the  Vice-roy  Don  Antonie  of
vlendoca  began.  It  is  five  leagues  from  the  mouth  of  the
^.iver  of  Veracruz,  between  the  Coast  and  the  little  Hand,
vhich  is  about  one  league  in  compasse,  compassed  with
helves,  and  so  low  that  the  tydes  doe  cover  it  right  against
le  mouth  of  the  River  of  Saint  John  of  Ulua.  They  goe
nto  this  Haven  by  two  Channels  :  the  most  frequented  is
hat  of  the  Flat,  the  other  is  called  the  Gallisian  Channell,
i/hich  is  very  deepe,  and  there  the  ships  doe  fasten  them-
elves  to  a  great  wall  of  more  then  foure  hundred  foot
rith  Rings  of  Iron  and  Brasse,  and  when  the  North  winds
re  very  strong,  they  are  not  very  sure.  The  Veracruz
tands  in  eighteene  degrees,  somewhat  more,  and  there  was
j/ont  to  be  the  unloading  of  the  Fleets,  and  they  stayed
Dure  or  five  monethes  in  unloading,  because  it  stands  five
iagues  from  Saint  Juan  of  Ulua,  therefore  it  is  now  made
1  the  Port  of  Buytron,  which  is  from  the  Port  of  Saint
chn  of  Ulua  about  eight  hundred  paces,  and  it  is  finished
1  one  moneth  and  an  halfe,  and  it  is  called  Buytron,  by  a
iouse  that  was  there  of  one  called  Buytron,  and  they
egin  to  make  a  Towne  there  in  that  situation.
There are in this Bishopricke two hundred chiefe

469

A.D.

I  60 1.

*J  kinde  of
Parish  or
Schoole

division. Spa.
partidos  de
doctrina.

Chap.  10.
Of  the

Bishoprickesof
Guaxaca,
Mechoacan
and  Yucatan  :
y  of  the
Province  of
Tabasco,
which  is  the
rest  of  the
bounds
described.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Townes  of  the  Indians,  and  one  thousand  subject,  although
there  may  be  two  hundred  fiftie  five  thousand  Tributarie
Indians,  in  thirtie  six  charges  of  *  Doctrine  of  Priests,
and  thirtie  Monasteries  of  Dominicke,  Franciscan,  and
Austine  Friers :  and  in  the  Coast  of  this  Bishopricke  on
the  North  Sea,  is  the  River  of  Alvarado,  where  the  bounds
of  the  Bishopricke  of  Guaxaca,  and  the  River  of  Almeria
doe  joyne  neere  to  the  River  of  Saint  John  of  Ulua,  where
the  Towne  of  Medellin  was  built  by  Andrew  of  Tapia,
the  yeere  1522.  when  the  Marquesse  Don  Fernando  Cortes
sent  the  said  Andrew  of  Tapia,  and  Goncalo  of  Sandevall,
to  conferre  with  Christopher  of  Tapia,  which  had  Warrants
to  take  away  the  Government  of  New  Spaine  from  the
Marquesse,  and  the  Factor  Salazar,  and  the  Over-seer
Peralmindez  dispeopled.  The  River  of  Almeria  springeth
in  the  long  Rowe,  in  the  Provinces  of  Totonaques,  and
Micantle,  and  betweene  Mountaynes  it  goeth  into  the
North  Sea,  and  against  this  River  is  the  Hand  of  Sacrifices,
which  the  Captayne  Grijalva  gave  the  name  unto,  and  the
River  of  Zempoala  to  the  North  from  Veracruz,  and
upward  the  River  of  Saint  Peter  and  Saint  Paul,  which
springeth  in  the  same  Rowe,  and  the  River  of  the  Cazones,
Tuspa,  and  Tamiagua,  neere  the  Government  of  Panuco.

TPIe  Bishopricke  of  Guaxaca  (so  called  by  the  Province
wherein  it  is,  and  Antequera  by  the  Citie  where  the
Cathedrall  is  resident  betweene  the  Bishopricke  of  the
Angels,  and  the  Bishoprickes  of  the  Councell  of  Guate-
mala) is  of  one  hundred  and  twentie  leagues,  from  the  one
Sea  to  the  other,  by  the  Confines  of  the  Bishopricke  of
Tlascala,  and  sixtie  by  the  Confines  of  Chiapa,  and  one
hundred  in  breadth  by  the  Coast  of  the  South  Sea,  and
fiftie  by  the  North  Sea,  wherein  are  included  the  Provinces
of  la  Misteca,  high  and  low ;  the  high  fortie  leagues  from
Antequera  to  the  West,  &  the  low  more  to  the  South  Sea.
John  Nunnez  Sedenno,  and  Fernando  of  Badajoz  inhabited
first  the  Citie  of  Antequera :  and  after  the  first  Councell
of  Mexico  inhabited  it  againe ; the  only  Judges  therein

470

::i]

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  ad.

1601.

were  Batchelour  John  Ortiz  of  Matienzo,  and  Delgadillo,
which  was  the  first,  that  as  a  man  of  Granada,  began  to
breed  Silke  in  Mexico.  The  President  and  Governour,
the  Bishop  Don  Sebastian  Ramirez,  began  the  Cathedrall
Church,  the  beginning  of  the  good  of  those  Kingdomes :
the  Church  hath  all  the  Pillers  of  Marble  of  one  piece,  very
great  and  bigge,  and  the  Citie  hath  about  foure  hundred
Spanish  Housholds.

This  Valley  of  Guaxaca,  from  whence  the  Marquesse  of  Guaxaca

the  Valley  taketh  his  Title,  beginneth  from  the  Mountayne  ™e  °J the

f Cocola, in the bound of Guaxoloticlan. In it is  ^  yaUei

thered  much  Silke,  Corne,  and  Millet ;  it  hath  the
apoteca  Tongue.  There  hath  beene  in  it  good  Mynes  of
old.  The  situation  of  the  Citie  of  Antequera  (which  as
lath  beene  said)  they  call  Guaxaca,  was  inhabited  with
Deople  of  Mexico,  which  lay  in  Garrison  by  order  of  the
second  Motezuma,  and  the  many  Garrisons  that  the  Kings
)f  Mexico  had  through  their  Empire  made  general  in  it
:he  Mexican  Tongue.  The  River  of  this  Citie  doth  sinke  Sinking
mder  the  ground,  against  Cimatlan,  and  riseth  two  leagues  Rw*r.
off,  at  the  Mountaynes  of  Coatlan,  other  two  from
juaxaca ;  and  at  a  halfe  a  league  from  the  Citie  right
igainst  a  Hill  that  stands  to  the  North,  is  a  point  of  a  little
Bill,  and  there  goeth  a  glade  of  a  Valley  all  plaine,  for  the
pace  of  eight  leagues,  which  is  the  abovesaid  faire  Valley
)f  Guaxaca,  pleasant,  and  temperate,  and  of  a  most  health-
ull  Ayre,  where  plentifully  are  gathered  all  kind  of  things,
nd  especially  fruits  of  Castile,  most  pleasant.  To  the
>outh-west  stands  the  Province  of  Tutepeque,  which  hath  Tutepeque.
nany  Townes  by  the  Sea-coast,  and  is  of  more  then  sixtie
eagues :  and  that  of  the  River  of  Alvarado,  betweene  the
sforth  and  North-east :  and  that  of  the  Zapotecas  to  the
^orth-east  from  Antequera,  and  Guazacoaloco  in  the  Con-
ines of  Tabasco,  all  rough  Countrey,  &  notwithstanding
he  rich  Mynes  of  Gold,  little  is  gotten  because  of  the
oughnesse.  There  are  foure  Spanish  Townes.  The  said
-itie  of  Antequera  is  eightie  leagues  from  Mexico,  to  the
•outh-east  in  the  high  way  of  Chiapa,  and  Guatemala :

47i

A.D.

l60I,

[III.  v.  874.]
5.  Alifonso  of
the  Zapotecas.

S.  James  of
Nexapa.
El  Espirito
Santo.

Golden
Rivers.

Cocao-money
and  Wine.

The  Indians
should  pay  no
Tithes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  the  first  that  entred  to  pacifie  this  Province,  was  Johr
Nunnez  of  Mercado,  the  yeere  1522.  by  Commission  oi
Don  Fernando  Cortes,  and  from  thence  were  men  of  Wail
sent  to  serve  the  King  Quantimoc,  in  the  defence  01
Mexico,  when  Don  Fernando  Cortes  subdued  it.

The  Treasurer  Alfonso  of  Estrada,  when  he  did  govern
in  Mexico,  inhabited  the  Village  of  Saint  Alifonso  de  lo
Sapotecas,  twentie  leagues  from  Antequera,  toward  th
North-east.  They  live  in  it  by  Gold,  Cotton-wooll,  an
Millet,  there  are  above  thirtie  thousand  Indians  tributaries
It  stands  betweene  most  high  Hils.  Saint  Jago  de  Nexap
in  the  Valley  of  Nexapa,  twentie  leagues  from  Antequei
to  the  East,  in  the  way  of  Chiapa,  and  Guatemala.  Th
Village  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  Province  of  Guazacoalc
at  the  Coast  of  the  North  Sea,  in  the  Confines  of  Tabasc
is  ninetie  leagues  from  Antequera.  Goncalo  of  Sandovafi
inhabited  it  in  the  yeere  1522.  It  hath  about  flftie  Town
of  Indians,  it  stands  on  the  border  of  the  River,  on  tl
side  of  Chiapa :  this  River  springeth  in  the  Mountayn
of  the  Mixes,  and  Choutales,  neere  to  Tecoantepeque,  ai|
with  the  waters  of  the  Neighbour  Provinces  of  Chiapa
and  the  Choutales,  it  goeth  into  the  North  Sea,  there  entc
into  it  ships  of  one  hundred  tun.

In  all  this  Bishopricke  there  is  no  River  that  doth  r
yeeld  Gold,  and  the  Indians  doe  live  without  want  if  t1
will  worke,  for  they  lacke  nothing  for  backe  nor  belly  :
they  have  the  Cacao,  a  Fruit  like  Almonds,  which  ser
for  Money,  and  they  make  Wine  of  it,  and  it  is  t
tosted,  and  is  held  for  a  great  sustenance. They  are  v
some  Countreyes,  and  pleasant. The  silke  was  b
nourished  by  the  Castilians,  with  the  Mulberie  Tree
the  Countrey,  wherewith  the  Indians  served  themse.1
for  to  make  Paper  of  the  second  barke :  and  the  Spani
have  planted  so  many  of  Castile,  that  they  grow  infinit*
and  if  the  Indians  did  pay  tithe  of  it,  and  of  other  thL
five  Bishoprickes  might  be  made ; but  none  doe  pay  t
but  the  Castilians  onely.

This  Bishopricke  hath  three  hundred  and  fiftie  ]

472

:<  i

'  Cctrt><[uij>a4ui

SteS^'dS*** ...... y  \chichinucS  ;■«  HIS  PANIA  nf B

SM9

iixtUn

'Mil  \

::P£^V

::F^

TTT  I I"  J  I  "l"  I  I  .1

'Vgacat-  , )  v, -.
■Shimon-  &  L  j Wia

'J  ~ -  vn  villi

a

«KX<N.

^Wi'

.  Cat.tlutln

:6S

tt~tttttxi  Mfiiii|iiii  in

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF NEW SPAINE

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  ad.

1601.

townes  of  Indians,  and  in  them,  and  in  three  hundred
Granges of more then an hundred & fifty thousand
tributary  Indians,  &  one  hundred  and  twentie  Monasteries
of  Dominicke  Friers,  and  the  rest  Schooles  of  Priests  for
Doctrine. The  Coast  of  the  North  Sea  of  this  Bishop-
ricke,  beginneth  in  the  River  of  Alvarado,  that  commeth  River  of
from  the Mountaynes  of  the  Zapotecas, and  betweene  Alvarado.
many  other  it  goeth  to  the  Province  of  Chinautla,  and
crossing  overthwart  the  Mountaynes  whence  it  sprung,
goeth  out  into the  North  Sea, betweene  the  River  of
Guazacoalco,  and  Saint  John  of  Ulua,  and  there  is  also  the
River  called  Agualulco,  whose  mouth  may  serve  for  a
Haven ; and  the  divided  Rocke,  a  point  of  the  Land  that
commeth  from  the  Mountaynes  of  Saint  Martine,  named
by  ships  that  have  bin  lost  upon  a  shoale  full  of  Rockes
under  water,  which  lye  along  the  Coast  right  against  them
in  the  Coast  of  the  South  Sea. This  Bishoprick  hath  the
Haven  of  Guatulco  in  fifteene  degrees  and  an  halfe,  great,  Guatulco.
good, and frequented. The President Don Peter of
Alvarado  set  this  Province  of  Guatulco  in  obedience,  and
the  Port  of  Tecoantepeque  is  neere,  which  also  is  reason-
able ; and  the  Towne  is  great,  and  there  is  in  it  a  great
fishing  for  Shrimps,  and  other  fish  which  they  carrie  to
Guaxaca,  and  in  the  high  way  of  Cuyztata  is  a  Myne  of
Christall-borill. Tecoantepeque  is  fortie  five  leagues  from
Antequera,  they  passe  by  the  Mountaynes  of  the  Chou-
tales,  Nixapa,  and  Mexalpeque,  whitherto  this  Bishopricke
extendeth,  and  hath  many  Townes  subject  by  the  Coast  of
the  Sea.

The  Bishopricke  of  Mechoacan  (which  is  a  Province  The  Bishop-
betweene  the  Archbishopricke  of  Mexico,  and  the  new  ride  of
Galicia)  hath  in  breadth  by  the  Coast  of  the  South  Sea,  Mechoacan.
about  eightie  leagues,  and  sixtie  within  the  Land,  with
open  bounds,  by  the  Septentrionall  parts  :  in  it  are  included
the  Provinces  of  Zacatula,  and  of  Colima,  both  in  the
Coast  of  the  South  Sea. The  Citie  of  Mechoacan,  or
Pazcuaro,  in  little  more  then  nineteene  degrees,  and  fortie  Pazcuaro.
seven  leagues  from  Mexico,  of  plaine  way. In  Guayan-

473

A.D.
l60I

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Zinzofiza.

gareo  called  Vallodolid,  is  Resident  the  Cathedrall
Suffragane  to  Mexico,  with  two  Monasteries  of  Francis-
cans, and  Austine  Friers.  The  Master  of  the  field
Christopher  of  Olid  built  Mechoacan,  the  Cathedrall  was
first  Resident  in  Zinzonza,  unto  the  yeere  1544.  that  he
removed  it  to  Pazcuaro.  The  Bishop  was  Don  Basco  de
Quiroga ;  and  it  hath  one  Monasterie  of  Franciscan,
another  of  Austine  Friers,  and  it  stands  seven  leagues  from
Mechoacan,  to  the  East.

The  Mynes  of  Guauaxnato,  are  twentie  eight  leagues
from  Mechoacan,  to  the  North,  toward  the  Zacatecas,
wherein  there  are  about  sixe  hundred  Castilians,  in  two
Campes  *  which  they  have  with  their  chiefe  Alcade  or
Commissioner,  and  the  seate  and  dwelling  of  those  that
follow  the  Mynes  is  a  Reall  or  Campe.  The  Village  of
Saint  Michaell,  in  the  Province  of  Mechoacan,  is  thirtie
five  leagues  from  Pazcuaro,  to  the  North-east,  in  a  rough
Countrey.  And  the  Village  of  the  Conception  of  Salaya,
which  was  built  by  commandement  of  the  Vice-roy,  Don
Martin  Enriquez,  the  yeere  1570.  for  to  assure  the  way
of  the  Chichimecas.  The  Village  of  Saint  Philip  fiftie
leagues  off  Mechoacan,  toward  the  North,  and  sixtie  two
from  Mexico  to  the  North-west,  with  one  Monasterie  of
Austine  Friers,  in  a  barren  soyle  and  cold  ;  it  was  built  for
the  securitie  of  the  way  of  the  Zacatecas.

The  Province  and  Village  of  Zacatula,  in  the  Coast  of
the  South  Sea,  stands  in  more  then  18.  degrees,  and  fortie
leagues  from  Mechoacan,  to  the  South-west,  neere  the  Sea  ;
John  Rodriguez  of  Villavorte,  and  Sinon  of  Cuenca,  built
it  the  yeare  1523.  it  stands  ninetie  leagues  from  Mexico,
and  the  Province  and  Village  of  Colima,  in  little  more  then
18.  degrees,  in  the  Coast  of  the  South  Sea,  and  in  the
confines  of  new  Galicia,  fiftie  leagues  from  Mechoacan,  to
[III.  v.  875.]  the  South-west,  with  a  chiefe  Commissioner,  in  a  hot  soyle,
and  plentifull  of  Cacao,  and  Cassia  Fistola,  with  Gould,
and  well  conditioned  people.  Goncalo  of  Sandonal  built
it  in  the  yeare  1522.  All  the  Countrie  of  Mechoacan  is
most  plentifull  of  Wheate,  Millet,  and  all  kinde  of  Spanish

474

Guauaxnato.

*Reales.

Village  of  S.
Michaell.

The  Concep-
tion of  Salaya.

The  Village  of
S.  Phillip.

Zacatula.

Colima.

ANTONIO DE HEllltERA  a.d.

i  60  i.

Fruites,  unci  Cattle,  stored  of  Fish :  it  hath  Graine,
Cochinilla,  and  Cotten  wooll,  and  the  people  is  industrious,
and  given  to  labour.

There  are  in  this  Bishopricke  one  hundred  and  thirtie
Townes,  the  nintie  foure  head  Townes  with  Schooles  of
Doctrine  :  this  Bishopricke  reacheth  no  Coast  of  the  Sea
of  the  North,  in  the  South  Sea  are  many  Rivers,  and  in  the
furthest  West  of  the  Province,  almost  in  the  border  of  the
new  Galicia,  is  the  port  of  Navidad,  in  the  height  of  19.
degrees,  good  and  frequented,  from  whence  the  Naviga-
tion is  made  to  the  Phillipinas ;  and  more  to  the  East,
neere  the  Port  of  Saint  James :  there  are  very  good
Copper  Mines  in  these  bounds,  of  the  which  the  Indians
make  very  curious  Vessels,  for  it  is  pleasant,  and  other
so  hard  that  they  digge  the  ground  with  it  instead  of
Iron,  which  they  could  never  doe  till  the  Spaniards
taught  it.  Yucatan.

The  Province  and  Government  of  Yucatan  (which  tooke
this  name  when  the  Captaine  Franciscus  Fernandez  dis-
covered it,  and  our  Ladie  of  the  Remedies,  when  John  of
Grijalva  discovered  Cozumel)  was  at  the  first  held  for  an
Hand,  because  it  was  almost  compassed  with  Sea,  in  sort
that  it  may  be  called  Peninsula,  and  it  compasseth  more
then  two  hundred  and  fiftie  leagues  :  it  is  in  length  where
it  extends  it  selfe  East  and  West,  about  one  hundred
leagues,  and  as  many  North  and  South,  from  the  Coast
that  looketh  to  the  North,  unto  the  part  that  doth  confine
with  the  Provinces  of  Guatemala,  whereby  it  hath  over-
thwart  about  five  and  twentie  leagues.  The  temperature  it  was  a  devise
is  hot,  and  very  moist,  and  though  there  be  no  River,  nor  of  those  which
running  water  in  it  all,  the  water  is  so  neare  for  Wels,  and  s™d  the

they  finde  so  many  shels  of  Sea-fish  under  the  stones,  that rosses  ™e?e
1  •  ji/^i-  1  ii-  •  found  oj

this,  and  the  Coast  being  so  low,  hath  given  occasion  to  Latten  in

suspect  that  it  hath  beene  Sea  in  other  times  :  it  is  much  Yucatan,

compassed  with  Wood :  they  gather  no  Corne,  nor  seedes  whereas  there

of  Castile, there  is  no  Gould,  nor  any  other  kinde  of  ™v?rw-as  h

Mettall,  whence  is  knowne  the  invention  (or  deceit)  of  jn^es  yefore

those  which  said  that  there  were  found  in  this  Province,  the  Spaniards.

475

A.D.
l60I.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRJMES

A  Man  of
300.  y eaves
old.

Merida.

when  the  Spaniard  entred  in  it,  Crosses  of  Latten,  which
was  never  found  in  any  Province  of  the  Indies :  it  is  very
plentifull  of  game,  especially  wilde  Boares  and  Deere,  they
breede  up  in  it  great  store  of  Poultrie :  they  gather  much
Cotten  wooll,  and  Azure,  the  people  multiplieth  and  liveth
long ;  a  man  there  was  which  attained  to  three  hundred
yeares  :  it  hath  all  the  kinde  of  Cattle  of  Spaine,  and  good
Horses.

There  are  in  this  Government  without  that  of  Tabasco,
which  goeth  joyntly  with  it,  foure  Spanish  Townes,  and
one  Bishopricke :  and  the  Townes  are  buildings  of  the
first  Governour,  the  President  Don  Francisco  of  Monteio.
The  Citie  of  Merida  is  in  twentie  degrees  height,  almost
in  the  middest  of  the  Province,  neerer  to  the  coast  of  the
North  Sea,  twelve  leagues  within  the  Land.  In  it  are
resident  the  Governour,  the  Officers  of  Revenues,  and
treasure  Royall,  and  the  Cathedrall  suffragane  to  Mexico,
with  a  Monasterie  of  Franciscane  Fryers,  they  called  it
Merida,  for  the  great  and  auncient  buildings  that  it  hath
like  Merida  in  Castile,  and  it  causeth  admiration,  that
having  no  kinde  of  Mettall  in  this  Province,  so  great
Stones  could  be  wrought,  in  the  which  were  found
engraven  naked  men,  with  eare-rings,  whereof  is  inferred
that  they  were  Temples,  and  that  it  was  a  very  famous
Countrie.  The  Village  of  Valladolid  is  thirtie  one  leagues
from  Merida,  toward  the  South-east  with  a  most
sumptuous  Monasterie  of  Franciscan  Fryers,  and  15000.
tributarie  Indians  in  the  limits.  The  Village  and  port  of
Campeche.  Saint  Franciscus  of  Campeche,  in  20.  degrees,  in  the  Coast
that  looketh  to  new  Spaine,  about  fiftie  leagues  from
Merida  to  the  West,  declining  to  the  South,  it  hath  a
reasonable  Haven,  though  little  depth  for  being  a  Bay.
Don  Franciscus  of  Monteio  gave  it  the  name.  The
Village  of  Salamanca  the  President  called  so  by  his  owne
Countrie.  In  the  Provinces  of  Bacalar,  and  Chetemal,
seventie  leagues  from  Merida,  North  and  South,  leaning
to  the  West,  and  other  seventie  from  Valladolid,  neere  to
the  Coast  of  the  gulfe  of  Honduras  : there  are  in  this

476

Valladolid.

Salamanca.

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

1601.

Province  Monasteries  of  Franciscanes,  and  six  Schooles  of

Priests  for  Doctrine.

The  Coast  of  all  this  Province  is  so  shallow,  that  in  Shallow
few  parts  ye  can  ride  at  anker  at  lesse  then  foure  or  five  z?ajtl"&'
leagues  from  the  Land,  and  so  there  is  no  Port  but  for
small Shippes, and  it  floweth  and  ebbeth  more  in this
Coast  then  in  any  other  place  of  these  Provinces  of  new
Spaine. The  Ports  that  are,  be  these: Ciclo,  and  Teli-  The  Ports  and
chaque,  Cical  and  Cauquil :  the  River  with  two  mouthes,  *Q™jff*sf
Campeche  in  the  Coast  that  looketh  to  new  Spaine,  and
in  it  the  small  Cape  from  whence  the  Coast  beginneth  to
winde  to  the  East,  and  neere  to  the  Point  a  little  Hand
which  is  called  la  Desconocida  or  the  Unthankefull,  com-
passed with  shelves : and  to  the  West  from  this,  about
eighteene  leagues,  another  which  they  call  the  Zarza,  and
the  Triangle,  which  are  three  small  Hands,  close  by  another
little  Hand  compassed  with  shelves,  other  sixteene  leagues
from  a  Cabo  Delgado,  Hands  de  Arenas  (of  Sandes)  and  the  a  Or  Sharpe.
Redde  (la  Bermeia)  and  another  Hand  thirtie  leagues  from
the  said  Cape  to  the  North,  and  los  Negrillos,  three  little
Ilets  compassed  with  shelves,  to  the  East  from  the  b  Redde,  b  Or  Bermeia.
about thirtie  five  leagues, and the  cScorpiones twentie  cOr
leagues  of  the  coast  North  and  South,  with  Merida,  and  dlacranes.
the  Cape  of  Coutoche,  the  Point  most  to  the  East  of
Yucatan,  from  whence  goe  foure  little  Hands,  which  are
called  de  Mugeres  of  Women,  leaning  to  the  Coast  in
the  which  is  the  Hand  of  Cozumel,  named  by  the  famous
Idoll  Place  in  it,  whither  all  the  people  of  the  Province  [III.  v.  876.]
went  in  Pilgrimage ; it  stands  foure  leagues  to  the  Sea,  at
the  beginning  of  the  Gulfe  of  Honduras,  almost  North  A  famous
and  South  with  Valladolid, more  inward  to the  Gulfe,  w"2flfthe
other  three  little  Ilets  with  shelves,  almost  over  against  the  centiks  in
Lake  of  Bacalal,  which  is  within  the  Land  thirtie  leagues  Cozumel.
from the  Lake  of  Chetemall, in the Coast that  goeth
painted  with Hands  unto Salamanca, which is the  first
Pantoia,  neere  one  shelfe  called  *Quitasnenno,  and  another  * Or  take
Zaratan,  and  another  Lamanay,  and  the  last  Ylbob.  away  sleePe-

The Province of Tabasco, which goeth with the  Tabasco.

477

A.D.
l60I.

Rivers  of  this
Province.
Lake  of
Xicalango.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Government  of  Yucatan,  and  falleth  upon  the  Coast  of  the
North  Sea  in  the  gulfe  of  new  Spaine,  hath  in  length  East
and  West,  about  fortie  leagues,  from  the  confines  of
Yucatan,  unto  the  confines  of  Goazacoalco,  wherewith  it
joyneth  on  the  East,  and  as  much  North  and  South  from
the  North  Sea,  unto  the  confines  of  Chiapa.  It  is  all
plaine  ground  of  Marshes,  Lakes  and  Quagmires,  and  so
they  goe  over  it  in  Boates,  and  Canoes ;  it  is  very  moist,
and  hot,  and  therefore  very  plentifull  of  Pastures  for  Kine,
and  of  Millet  and  Cacao,  which  is  the  greatest  stocke  or
substance  of  this  Province,  wherein  is  onely  one  Town,
which  is  Tabasco,  and  by  another  name,  the  Village  of  our
Lady  of  the  Victorie,  so  called  for  the  Victory  that  Don
Hernando  Cortez  had  there  of  the  Indians,  when  hee  went
to  new  Spaine,  the  yeare  151 9.  The  tribute  which  the
Indians  doe  pay  in  this  Province,  is  two  thousand
Xiquipiles  of  Cacao,  and  every  Xiquipill  are  eight
thousand  Almonds,  and  one  load  maketh  three  Xiquipiles
or  Terces.  In  the  Coast  of  this  Province  besides  other
Rivers  and  Marshes,  is  found  the  Lake  of  Xicalango,  or
Port  Royall,  great  and  capable,  with  two  little  Hands  at  the
mouth,  and  it  was  the  Captaine  Lewis  Martin,  that  by
order  of  Don  Fernando  Cortes,  made  an  end  of  pacifying
this  Province.

Chap.  11. 'T^He  bounds  of  the  Counsell  of  new  Gallicia  or  of

If  fthe 'cZnlel ^ Jalisco  (which  Nunno  of  Guzman  said  hee  had  dis-

ofGuada- covered, and  Don  Fernando Cortes, that the  Captaine

lajara.  Goncalo  of  Sandovall,  did  it  in  his  name,  when  hee  sent

him  to  pacifie  the  Colimas)  it  parteth  bounds  with  the

Counsell  of  new  Spaine,  neere  by  the  Port  of  the  Nativitie,

and  the  Lake  of  Chiapala,  going  toward  the  North-east,

whereby  (and  by  the  North,  and  somewhat  of  the  West,

for  it  is  not  all  discovered)  it  hath  the  bounds  open,  for

the  rest  to  the  West  is  all  Sea : that  which  is  inhabited

on  the  one  side,  and  the  other,  may  come  to  one  hundred

leagues, wherein are comprehended the Provinces of

Guadalajara,  Xalisco,  the  Zacatecas,  Chiametla,  Culiacan,

478

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

1601.

the  new  Bizkey,  and  Cinoloa  ;  and  for  Circuit  the  discoverie
of  the  Provinces  of  Cibola,  and  of  Quibira.

The temperature of the Province, and borders of
Guadalajara,  is  good,  and  the  Countrie  plentifull  of  Corne, Guadalajara.
and  Millet,  and  other  Seedes  of  Spaine,  and  many  Vaines
of  Silver : there  are  in  it  Spanish  Townes. Nunno  of
Guzman  peopled  the  Citie  of  Guadalajara,  the  head  of  this
Kingdome,  the  yeare  1 53 1.  and  gave  it  the  name  of  his
Countrie:  it  stands  in  106.  degrees  and  a  halfe  of  longi-
tude from  the  Meridian  of  Toledo, 1780.  leagues  by  a
direct  Voyage,  &  in  20.  degrees  one  third  part  in  height,
eightie  seven  leagues  from  Mexico,  betweene  the  North
and  the  West,  more  toward  the  West :  in  it  is  resident  the
Counsell,  the  Officers  of  the  revenues,  &  Royall  treasurie,
and  the  Cathedrall  suffragan  to  Mexico,  since  the  yeare
1570.  for  before  it  was  commanded  to  be  built  in  Compos-
tella  : it  hath  one  Monasterie  of  Franciscan,  another  of
Austine  Friers. Nunno  of  Guzman  built  also  the  Village
of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  Tepique  :  and  the  Village  of  Sancta  The  Holy
Marie  of  the  Lakes,  stands  thirtie  leagues  from  Guadalajara  Ghost-
to  the  South-east,  with  the  chiefe  Commissioner. It  was  s™c*a  Marie
built  for  to  be  sure  of  the  Chichimecan  Indies,  that  are  in  TheChkhime-
Countries  between  the  North  and  the  East,  a  barbarous  Cas
people,  which  live  scattered  in  the  field,  without  any  taste
of  humanitie  or  policie,  living  in  Caves,  &  in  the  Groves
like  savage  beasts ; they  live  upon  wilde  chase  and  fruits,
they  know  no  riches,  nor  pleasure  ; they  goe  naked,  and
some  covered  with  Beasts  skins  :  their  Weapons  are  Bowes
and  Arrowes,  they  are  well  bodied,  great  eaters,  they  make
wine  of  certaine  rootes  wherewith  they  drinke  themselves
drunke.

In  the  Province  of  Xalisco,  which  is  plentifull  of  Millet,  Xalisco.
more  then  of  Sheepe,  or  Horses,  there  is  onely  the  Citie
of  Compostella  neere  the  Sea,  three  and  thirtie  leagues
Torn  Guadalaxara,  to  the  West,  where  the  Counsell  was  at
the  first,  and  commanded  to  build  the  Cathedrall,  untill
the  yeare  1560.  that  they  removed  to  Guadalajara  to  be
more  in  the  borders  :  there  is  in  it  a  Monasterie  of  Fran-

479

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

1601.

ciscan  Friers ;  and  it  was  also  inhabited  by  Nunno
Guzman,  the  yeare  153 1.  which  travelled  two  yeares  in
these  Countries,  which  they  called  the  greater  Spaine,  in
emulation  of  Don  Fernando  Cortes,  in  all  that  time
nothing  being  knowne  of  him  in  Mexico.  The  Village
of  the  Purification,  to  the  South-west,  from  Guadalajara,
and  thirtie  leagues  from  it,  neere  the  port  of  the  Nativitie,
in  the  confines  of  the  bounds  of  this  Counsell,  and  of  that
of  Mexico,  in  a  very  hot  and  sickly  Countrie :  and  unto
the  end  of  the  yeare  1 53 1 .  Nunno  of  Guzman  discovered
one  hundred  and  fiftie  leagues  of  Land  by  the  Coast  of
Xalisco,  which  stand  in  somewhat  more  then  22.  degrees.
TheZacatecas.  In  the  Province  of  the  Zacatecas,  are  rich  mines  of
Silver,  and  want  of  Water,  Corne  and  Millet :  there  are
three  Townes  of  Spaniards,  and  foure  Camps  appointed  of
mines :  those  which  they  call  of  the  Zacatecas  are  the
principall,  fortie  leagues  from  Guadalaxara  to  the  North,
[III.  v.  877.]  and  eightie  from  Mexico,  wherein  are  ordinarie  more  then
five  hundred  Spaniards,  five  hundred  Slaves,  one  thousand
Horses  and  Mules,  and  one  Monasterie  of  Franciscane
Fryers ;  and  there  is  resident  alwayes  one  of  the  Officers
Royall  of  Guadalajara.  In  this  Province  also  are  the
Mines  of  Avinyo,  in  the  confines  of  the  Zacatecas,  and
those  of  Saint  Martin  seven  and  twentie  leagues  from  the
Zacatecas,  to  the  North-west,  wherein  are  wont  to  be  about
foure  hundred  Spaniards,  and  Xerez  of  the  Frontier,  thirtie
leagues  from  Guadalaxara,  to  the  North,  and  tenne  from
the  mines  of  the  Zacatecas,  in  the  way  to  them.  There  are
besides  these  other  Reales  or  Campes,  whereof  no  mention
is  made,  because  they  are  so  famous.  The  Village  of  the
The  Erena.  Erena,  &  the  Mines  called  of  the  little  *  Hat,  are  five  and
0 ,  twenty  leagues  from  Zacatecas  to  the  North-west,  neere  to

those  of  Saint  Martin,  and  others  that  are  in  the  limits.  The
*TheNameof  Village  of  *  Nombre  de  Dios,  is  sixtie  eight  leagues  from
G°d-  the  Citie  of  Guadalajara,  and  tenne  from  the  Mines  of

Saint  Martin  to  the  North,  with  a  Monasterie  of  Francis-
can Friers,  aboundant  in  Corne,  and  Millet,  and  good
Mines  in  his  Borders. The  Village  of  Durango,  in  the

480

ANTONIO DE HERRERA

A.D.

1 60 1.

3orders  of  the  Mines  of  Saint  Martin,  and  the  Valley  of
Saint  Salvador,  eight  leagues  from  Nombre  de  Dios,  a
vholesome  Countrie,  &  many  Rivers,  with  whose  watering
hey  gathered  great  store  of  Corne,  and  Millet,  and  of
)ther  Provisions,  and  in  the  Borders  are  the  Mines  of
Saint  Luke,  and  a  very  good  Salt-pit.  And  the  Indians  of
his  Kingdome  in  many  places  were  in  armes,  and  the
3hichimecas,  and  Guachachiles  did  great  hurt  in  the  way
>f  Guadalajara  to  the  Zacatecas,  and  this  warre  was  very
ostly,  and  tedious,  and  was  ended,  the  Marquesse  of
/illamanrique  being  Viceroy.  The  Indians  are  divided  in
his  precinct  in  one  hundred  and  foure  partitions  or  tribes.

The  Province  of  new  Bizkie,  is  North-westward  from  Nueva
he  Zacatecas  flftie  leagues  from  them ; a  Countrie  of  Pit-caya.
Provisions,  and  much  Cattell,  and  of  good  Silver  Mines,
he  Mines  of  Hindehe  are  in  it,  of  Sancta  Barbola,  and  of .
>aint  John,  and  in  it  is  the  Province  of  Topia ;  and  in  this
liscovery,  and  inhabiting, Franciscus  Ybarra  did  many
ervices. The Province of Chiametla, twenty leagues  Chiametla.
•road  and  long,  in  the  Coast  of  the  South  Sea,  about  fortie
"agues  from  Xalisco, hath Mines  of  Silver,  and  in  it
tands  Saint  Sebastian,  a  Village  of  Spaniards,  which  was
rst  of  the  Counsell  of  Mexico,  and  it  stands  in  more  then
.2.  degrees. Culiacan  is  a  government  in  the  South  Sea,
aore  to the  East,  and  West  from  Chiametla ; it  is  a
•lentifull Countrie of Victuals, and showes of Silver
4ines,  whereof  there  is  a  Campe  peopled,  which  they  call
f  the  Virgins. The  Village  of  Saint  Michael,  eightie  S.  Michael.
sagues  from  Compostella,  and  one  hundred  and  three  from
juadalajara,  Nunno  of  Guzman  inhabited  it  the  yeare

531-

The  Province  of  Civaloa,  the  last,  and  most  Septen-  Civaka.

rionall  of  the  new  Kingdome  of  Galicia,  two  and  fortie
*agues  from  Culiacan,  one  hundred  and  fiftie  from  Guada-
ijara  to  the  North,  was  a  Towne  built  in  it  that  was
ailed  Saint  John  of  Civaloa,  of  Spaniards,  and  could  not
e  kept.  This  Province  was  discovered,  Don  Antonie  of
4endoca  being  Viceroy  in  new  Spaine,  and  they  said  there

XIV  481  2H

A.D.
l60I.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Quibira.

Cibola.

was  a  Citie  seene  wrought  with  stone,  which  they  called
Granada,  and  that  those  Indians  were  warriers,  and  that
in  the  Countrie  was  great  store  of  Victuals.  Quibira,
stands  in  fortie  degrees,  of  a  temperate  and  fruitfull  soyle,
Cibola,  stands  thirtie  leagues  from  Culiacan,  toward  the
North,  and  Quibira  two  hundred  from  Cibola  to  the  East ;
it  is  all  of  poore  people  ;  for  that  they  have  no  Cotten,  they
weare  Deere  skinnes,  and  of  the  Countrie  Kine,  which
have  a  lumpe  on  the  ridge  of  the  backe,  and  long  haire  in
the  fore  parts,  the  homes  lesser  then  ours ;  and  in  them
consisteth  the  greatest  part  of  the  sustenance  of  the  people,
for  of  the  skinne  they  cloathe,  and  make  Shooes,  and
Cords  ;  they  eate  the  flesh,  and  make  tooles  of  the  bones  :
they  have  sundry  languages  in  this  Province,  because  they
communicate  little  the  one  with  the  other.
California.  California  is  a  great  point  of  the  Land  that  putteth  out
to  the  Sea  in  the  uttermost  West  of  new  Spaine  in  two
and  twentie  degrees  height,  from  whence  it  extendeth  to
the  North-west,  neere  about  two  hundred  leagues,
although  of  it  there  is  no  certaine  notice,  nor  of  the  Ports,
and  Hands  of  the  Gulfe  California,  which  is  made  betweene
the  said  point,  and  Gulfe  of  new  Spaine,  which  goeth  along
that  way,  as  to  the  North-west ;  in  the  which  although
there  be  many  Rivers,  Capes,  and  Points,  and  landing-
places,  there  is  no  particular  notice  had  of  them,  because
they  are  not  much  frequented.  At  the  beginning,  and
entrance  of  this  Gulfe  are  very  long  and  narrow  Hands
along  the  Coast,  and  very  close  with  it,  which  is  called  the
Guayavall,  that  reacheth  from  the  River  of  our  Ladie,  or
of  Sebastian  of  Bora,  unto  the  River  of  Christmas  in  |
Culiacan.  The  River  of  the  Village  of  Saint  Michael  is
called  Ciguatlan ;  and  neerer  to  new  Spaine  is  the  River
of  Pastla,  and  against  it  the  Desart  Hand,  and  afterward
the  River  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  port  of  Xalisco,  and
to  the  South  of  the  point  of  California,  is  Annublada  or  the
Cloudie  Hand,  and  the  Hand  of  Saint  Thomas,  and  the
Hand  of  Flores,  and  another  which  is  called  Las  Monias.

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  ad.

1601.

IT  was  first  called  the  Counsell  of  Guatemala  of  the  Chap.  12.
confines,  because  it  was  commanded  first  to  be  built  in  Of  the  Bounds
the  confines  of  the  Provinces  of  Nicaragua,  and  Guate-  of^jjmes^of
mala,  without  assigning  any  certaine  Towne. It  hath  in  Guatemala.
length  East  and  West  two  hundred  and  fortie  leagues,  and
from  the  Meridian  from  84.  to  98.  of  longitude,  and  North
nd  South,  in  breadth  one  hundred  and  eightie,  from  9.  to  [III.  v.  878.]
10.  degrees  of  height,  unto  eighteene  or  nineteene,  in  the
Which are comprehended the Provinces of Guatemala,
Soconusco,  Chiapa,  Suchitepeque,  the  aVerapaz,  Honduras  a  Or  true
and  Cacos,  Saint  Saviour,  and  Saint  Michael,  Nicaragua,  Peace-
Chuluteca,  Taguzgalpa,  and  b  Costarica,  and  in  every  one  b  Or  Rich
pf  these  Provinces  they  alter  in  speech :  and  according  to  coast-
the  opinion  of  Religious  men,  it  was  the  worke  of  the
Divell,  for  to  plant  dissentions  and  discord  betweene  these
Nations  which  were  bloody  and  revengefull. The  Govern-
ment and  Province  of  Guatemala  on  the  South  Sea  coast,  Guatemala.
Un  length  of  it  may  be  about  seventie  leagues,  and  in
Dreadth  North  and  South  thirtie : it  is  a  Countrie  of  a
^ood temperature, plentifull of Millet, Cotten wooll,
3orne  and  other  fruits,  though  they  preserve  not  the  Seede
of  one  yeare  for  the  other :  the  waters  are  few,  but  when
!t  raineth  they  are  very  violent  from  Aprill  to  October,
:he  windes  are  North  and  South,  and  the  North  lasteth
Dut  fifteene  or  twentie  dayes,  and  it  is  very  cold,  and
larious. There  are  in  it  five  Spanish  Townes,  buildings  of
:he  President  Don  Pedro  of  Alvarado,  in  the  yeare  1524.
fend  25. The  Citie  of  Saint  James  of  Guatemala,  whose  Saint  James.
situation  was  called  Cachequill,  which  signifieth  an  Eagle,
because  the  Generall  of  this  Nation,  when  hee  went  to
.varre,  did  beare  an  Eagle  for  his  Plume :  it  is  the  head  of
he  Government,  where  the  Counsell  is  resident,  in  24.
degrees  and  a  halfe  of  height,  and  93.  degr.  from  the
Meridian  of  Toledo,  from  whence  it  may  bee  distant  by  a
greater  circle  of  one  thousand sixe  hundred  and sixtie
eagues,  and  it  is  twelve  from  the  Sea,  and  a  towne  of  sixe
mndred Spanish  housholds : the  Officers  of  the  goods
md  Royall  Treasure,  are  resident  there,  the  melting  house,

483

A.D.
l60I

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Saint
Salvador.

and  the  Cathedrall  Suffragane  to  Mexico,  with  one
Monasterie  of  Dominicans,  and  another  of  Mercenarie
Friars,  and  one  Hospitall,  and  in  the  bounds  five  and
twentie  thousand  tributarie  Indians.  This  Citie  is  seated
in  a  very  pleasant  Valley,  with  fruits  of  divers  sorts,  and
all  kinde  of  provision  and  dainties.

The  Citie  of  Saint  Saviour,  which  in  the  Indian
language  is  called  Cuzcatlan,  is  fortie  leagues  from  Saint
James  to  the  South-east,  with  one  Monasterie  of  Domini-

The  Trinitie.  cans.  The  Village  of  the  Trinitie,  which  in  the  Indian
tongue  was  called  Conzonate,  sixe  and  twentie  leagues
from  Saint  James  to  the  South-west,  foure  leagues  from
the  Port  of  Axacutla.  It  is  a  chiefe  Commissionership
with  title  of  his  Majestie,  with  one  Monasterie  of
Dominicans,  in  a  plentifull  soile  of  Cacao,  and  the  Indians
of  it  are  of  the  jurisdiction  of  Saint  James,  it  is  a  place  of
great  trafncke,  and  the  Port  a  touch  for  the  ships  of  Peru,

Saint  Michael  and  of  New  Spaine.  The  Village  of  Saint  Michael  sixtie
two  leagues  from  Saint  James,  and  two  and  twentie  from
Saint  Saviour  to  the  South-west,  two  leagues  from  the
Sea  and  Bay  of  Fonseca,  which  serveth  it  for  Haven,  and
in  the  bounds  are  eightie  Townes  of  Indians.  The
Village  of  Xerez  of  the  frontier,  in  the  Indian  speech
called  Chuluteca,  in  the  confines  of  Guatemala  and
Nicaragua,  eightie  leagues  from  Saint  James,  and  twentie
from  Saint  Michael  to  the  South-east,  both  plentifull  of
Cotton  wooll  and  Millet.  Neere  the  Citie  of  Saint  James
is  that  *  Volcan  so  famous  of  Guatemala,  and  in  all  the
Indies  are  many  of  these  Volcanes  (but  the  most  famous
are  those  of  Guatemala,  which  hath  burst  out  divers  times,
casting  fire,  stones,  and  ashes,  with  great  hurt  of  the
Countrie.)  That  of  Arequipa,  of  Tlascala,  Quito,  and
others.  In  this  Countrie  are  many  springs  of  water,  hot,
and  of  sundrie  properties  and  colours ;  there  is  much  and
good  Balme,  which  the  Spaniards  knew  without  learning
it  of  the  Indians,  against  the  which  some  Author  speaketh,
and  also  liquid  Amber,  Gumme-anime,  Copall,  and  Suchi-
copall,  and  other  Gummes,  and  Liquoris  most  perfect,  and

484

Xerez,.

*  Or  fieri  e
mouthes  like
JEtna.

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

1601.

beasts  that  breed  the  Bezar  stone,  they  gather  great  store
of  Cacao,  which  is  great  riches  :  it  is  a  meane  Tree,  the  Cacao
leaves  like  a  Chesnut  though  bigger,  it  giveth  flower  and  described.
fruit  every  Moone,  and  the  same  doe  in  that  Countrie  the
Orange  trees.  The  Cacao  is  a  tree  that  loveth  moisture
better  then  the  Sunne,  and  therefore  they  plant  neere  him
another  tree  to  shadow  him.

The  Ports  of  this  Government  in  the  South  Sea,  beside  Ports  of  this
the  rehearsed,  are  the  Bay  of  Fonseca  neere  to  Saint  Government.
Michael,  in  twelve  degrees  and  a  halfe  of  height,  Gil
Goncales  of  Avila  gave  it  the  name  in  the  yeere  1522.  for
the  Bishop  John  Rodrigues  of  Fonseca,  President  of  the
Councell  of  the  Indies.  And  within  the  Bay  is  an  Hand
Iwhich  he  named  Petronilla,  by  a  Neece  of  the  Bishop.
The  Port  of  Acaxutla,  neere  to  the  Trinitie,  in  twelve
degrees  height,  is  the  best  of  this  Government  for  New
Spaine  and  Peru,  and  the  Bay  of  Guatemala  twelve  leagues
from  it,  and  the  River  of  Xicalapa  seven  leagues  from  the
Bay  to  the  West.  On  the  North  side  this  Province  hath
ho  coast,  for  it  commeth  not  to  the  Sea  by  fortie  leagues,
anto  a  landing  place  which  they  call  the  Port  of  the  fresh
Gulfe,  from  whence  the  merchandize  that  goe  from  Spaine,
ire  conveighed  by  the  Gulfe  of  Honduras,  into  the  Land
•vith  carriages  unto  Guatemala,  Saint  Saviour,  and  the
Trinitie,  and  twelve  leagues  before  Guatemala,  in  the  high
yay  of  Mexico,  is  the  great  Lake  of  Atitlau,  of  ten  Bottomlesse
eagues  in  compasse,  and  foure  in  breadth,  without  bottom.  Lake.

The  Province  and  Government  of  Soconusco  is  the  Soconusco.
urthest  West  from  Guatemala  upon  the  coast  of  the  South
ka,  of  length  and  breadth  about  foure  and  thirtie  leagues,
)lentifull  of  Cacao  (the  greatest  trafficke  of  it,  and  of  all
'hat  in  it  is  sowne  except  Wheat)  there  is  no  more  then
bne  Spanish  towne,  which  is  called  Guevetlan,  founded  by
Don  Pedro  de  Alvarado,  where  the  Governour  is  resident ;
ler  coast  which  is  in  the  South  Sea,  beginneth  seven
eagues  from  the  River  of  Ayutla  to  the  West,  and  pre-
ently  the  Rivers  Coatlan,  Capanercalte,  Colatl,  Haztatlan,
\mituc,  and  Qiiizatatlan.

485

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

[III.  v.  879.] The  Province  and  Bishoprick  of  Chiapa  is  Mediter-
Chiapa.  ranean, betweene Soconusco by the South, and the

uttermost  of  New  Spaine  by  the  West,  and  by  the  North
*Or  true  and  the  East,  betweene  Tabasco  and  *  Verapaz,  in  length
peace.  East  and  West  about  fortie  leagues,  and  some  lesse  in

breadth,  some  lesse  fertile  of  Wheat  and  Millet,  and  other
Seedes,  and  of  Cattell,  except  Sheepe  that  are  not  many.
It  hath  one  Towne  of  Castilians,  which  is  called  Citie
Royall,  seventie  leagues  from  Saint  James  of  Guatemala
toward  the  North-east,  which  by  a  particular  priviledge  is
governed  by  ordinarie  Justices. The  Cathedrall  is  resident!
here  with  one  Monasterie  of  Dominicke  Friars,  and  many
Indian  Townes  in  her  limits  : Chiapa  is  the  principallestj,
Towne  of  them,  from  whence  the  Province  tooke  the|it
name. The Countrie-men have skill in breeding of
Horses,  that  those  of  this  Countrie  become  the  best  that
are  in  New  Spaine :  they  are  Musicians  and  Painters,  and|^
learne  any  Trade  that  doth  consist  in  arte : they  were  in
old  time  of  Nicaragua,  and  the  Captaine  James  of  Maza
riegos,  the  yeere  1 53 1.  built  this  Citie  in  a  Valley  where
now  it  stands,  round,  of  a  marvellous  situation  in 18
degrees  and  a  halfe,  sixtie  leagues  from  the  North  Sea
and  as  many  from  the  South.
Verapaz.  The  Province  of  Verapaz  (a  name  which  the  Dominicke!

Friars  gave  it,  because  they  pacified  it  with  preaching)  isr
also  Mediterranean  betweene  the  bounds  of  Soconusco,
Chiapa,  Yucatan,  Honduras,  and  Guatemala,  of  thirtie
leagues  over,  and  as  many  from  Saint  James  of  Guatemala ;
a  moist  Countrie,  and  therefore  the  better  for  the  Millet
that  in  it  is  gathered  twice  a  yeere,  and  for  Wheat.  There
is  Cotton  wooll,  and  some  Cacao,  and  much  Fowle  of  those  0
Picture  tnat  give  tne  coloured  feathers  for  the  pictures  which  the

Jeat  ers.  Indians  doe  make,  which  is  a  merchandize  of  this  Pro

vince,  and  the  Kings  of  Mexico  carried  them  from  thii
Province,  which  was  the  most  esteemed  thing  they  had,
and  it  was  judged  for  a  great  sinne  to  kill  these  Fowles,
but  to  plucke  them  and  to  let  them  flie.  There  is  in  this
Countrie  but  one  Monasterie  of  Dominicke  Friars,  with

486

fi

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

1601.

one  Indian  Towne  of  seventeene  Indian  children  that  are
there,  by  order  of  the  religious  men  for  to  instruct  them
the  better  ;  for  before  they  lived  scattered  and  like  savages,
and  now  they  live  like  Christians,  and  in  temporall  things
politikely.

In  this  Province  there  is  no  Governour,  but  a  chiefe
Justice,  provided  by  the  Councell. The  River  of  Zacatula
divideth  this  Province  from  the  Province  of  Guatemala,
from  the  which  it  extendeth  unto  the  fresh  Gulfe,  whither
all  the  Rivers  of  it  doe  runne,  whereby  and  by  the  many  falls
of  waters  that  descend  from  most  high  Hils,  the  Countrie
was  so  moist,  that  the  Millet  rotted ; but  it  is  bettered
:v  in  the  temperature,  since  the  cutting  downe  of  the  Woods
it  hath  many  Lions,  Tigres,  and  BufFes,  whose  flesh  the
Indians  doe  eate  although  it  be  luscious  and  soft ; it  is
called  the  Fresh  Gulfe,  for  the  multitude  of  the  Rivers  Go/fo  doke.
which  on  that  side  doe  enter  into  the  Sea. The  water  is
fresh,  and  there  are  exceeding  great  Fishes,  and  specially
the  Manati,  which  is  the  Sea  calfe,  which  swimmeth  so  Manati  a  fish
delicately,  that  being  very  great  he  maketh  no  noyse  ;  when  described.
hee  fleeth  he  goeth  to  the  Deepe,  and  waxeth  angrie  and
fierce against them that seeke him, and giveth great
strokes  ;  his  flesh  is  very  fat  like  unto  fat  beefe.

HPHe  Province  and  Government  of  Honduras  hath  in  chap.  13.

-L length  East  and  West,  by  the  coast  of  the  North  Sea,  Of  Honduras,

more  then  one  hundred  and  fiftie  leagues,  and  in  bredth  Nicaragua,

from  the  Sea  unto  the  bounds  of  Costa  Rica  and  Guate-  1*. *,
1  • 1 • • 1 1  tt-11  1  • 1 t  n Rua,  or  the

mala,  in  parts  eigntie  :  it  hath  many  riills,  and  is  plentirull  j^  Coast.

of  Millet,  Wheat,  and  all  sorts  of  Cattell,  and  some  Mynes  Honduras.

of  gold  and  silver :  there  is  in  it  sixe  Spanish  Townes  in

iDne  Bishopricke,  and  the  first  Bishop  was  Friar  John  of

Talavera,  Prior  of  Prado,  of  the  Order  of  Saint  Jerome  of

Spaine.

The  Citie  of  Valladolid,  in  the  Indian  language,  is  called

omayagua,  in  more  then  sixteene  degrees,  stands  sixtie

agues  from  Saint  James  of  Guatemala  to  the  East,  and

ibout  fortie  from  the  North  Sea  :  in  it  is  the  Governour

487

A.D.
l60I.

*0r  of  our
Lady  of  the
Favour.

Visitation  of
the  Inginer
Baptista
Antoneli  of
the  way  of  the
Port  of
Cavallos  or
Horses,  to  the
Bay  of
Fonseca.
*Thankes  bee
to  God.

Saint  Peter.

Saint  John.
[III.  v.  880.]

Truxillo.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

resident,  and  the  Cathedrall,  since  the  yeere  1558.  when  11
went  from  Truxillo,  whereat  first  it  was ;  and  one  Monas-
terie  de  la  Merced.*  The  Captaine  Alonso  of  Cacerei
pacified  this  Countrie,  by  order  of  Don  Peter  of  Alvarado  :
it  stands  in  the  middest  of  the  two  Seas,  and  from  the  one
to  the  other  are  three  and  fiftie  leagues,  from  the  Port  de
Cavallos  or  of  Horses  in  the  North  Sea,  unto  the  Bay  of
Fonseca  in  the  South  Sea,  and  the  Inginer  Baptista
Antoneli  visited  this  way,  by  order  from  the  King  ;  because
many  thought  that  by  it  the  traffkke  of  the  North  Sea
was  more  easie  to  the  South  Sea.  and  hee  found  that  it  had!
many  inconveniences.

The  Citie  of  *  Gracias  a  Dios,  is  thirtie  leagues  fromj
Valladolid  almost  to  the  West ;  the  Captaine  Gabriel  of
Rojas  peopled  it  1530.  for  the  benefit  of  the  Mynes  of;
gold  that  were  thereabouts,  and  had  great  encounters  with
the  Indians,  which  assaulted  him  many  times  in  a  Fort  that
he  had.  But  the  Governours  of  Honduras  and  Nicaragua,
not  succouring  him  by  reason  of  grudges  betweene  them,
hee  was  forced  to  forsake  it.  And  in  the  yeere  1536.
Captaine  Goncalo  of  Alvarado,  inhabited  this  Citie  againe.
The  Village  of  Saint  Petro  is  thirtie  leagues  from  Coma-
yagua to  the  North,  somewhat  aside  to  the  West,  and
eleven  from  the  Port  of  Cavallos,  where  the  Officers  Royal]
are  resident,  because  the  Port  of  Cavallos  is  sickly,  whither
the  dispatches  of  the  ships  doe  come.  The  President
Don  Peter  Alvarado  built  it  1536.

The  Village  of  Saint  John  of  the  Port  de  Cavallos  is
in  15.  degrees  of  altitude,  eleven  leagues  from  Saint  Peter,
foure  from  Comayagua,  it  is  inhabited  with  Factors  of  the
Merchants,  and  with  Black-moores,  because  it  is  an
unwholesome  Port ;  for  although  it  be  a  Bay,  it  is  a  good
one,  it  was  called  the  Port  of  The  Horses,  because  some
were  cast  in  the  Sea  by  a  storme.  The  Citie  of  Truxillo
is  sixtie  leagues  from  Comayagua  to  the  North-east,  and
fortie  from  the  Port  of  Horses  to  the  East,  and  one  from
the  North  Sea :  the  Cathedrall  was  here,  the  Haven  is
called  Saint  Gil,  it  is  good,  though  it  be  a  Bay  dead  and

488

ANTONIO DE HERRERA

A.D.

l60I.

Valley  of

O  lane  ho.

sheltered,  where the  ships  that  goe  for  Guatemala  doe

touch  first. Francisco  de  las  Casas,  began  to  inhabit  this

Citie  1524.  and  because  they  were  all  people  of  Estrema-

dura, he  called  it  Truxillo,  and  Don  Hernando  Cortes

ended  the  inhabiting  of  it  when  he  went  to  the  Ybueras.

The  Village  of  Saint  George  of  Olancho,  is  fortie  leagues  Saint  George.

from  Comayagua  to  the  East,  of  fortie  housholds,  and  in

her  borders  sixteene  thousand  tributarie  Indians,  and  much

gold,  chiefly  in  the  River  of  Guayape,  ten  leagues  from

this  Towne. This  Valley  of  Olancho  is  very  pleasant  and

profitable, and in it was much gold gotten, and the

Governours  of  Honduras  and  Nicaragua,  had  in  other

times  great  differences : for  every  one  would  have  it  in

his jurisdiction, and therefore here it was where Gil

Goncales  Davila  tooke  one  hundred  and  twentie  thousand

Pesos  of  gold  of  Hernando  of  Soto,  and  dismissed  the

people  which  Pedrarias  Davila  had  for  his  defence ; and

here  Gabriel  of  Rojas  defended  the  entrance  of  Goncalo  of

Sandoval,  for  Don  Hernando  Cortes  did  send  him  from

Truxillo,  and  here  the  Indians  killed  John  Grijalva,  a  very

famous  Captaine,  and  others.

The  coast  of  this  Province  is  all  in  the  North  Sea,  in  the
Gulfe  which  they  call  de  Honduras,  which  is  all  the  Sea
coast  betweene  this  Province  and  Yucatan,  to  the  place
where  it  joyneth  with  it  by  Verapaz,  where  it  was  called
the  Gulfe  of  Guanajos,  the  first  Point  is  of  the  Ybueras,
so  called,  because  they  first  found  many  pompions  on  the
Sea,  which  they  call  Ybueras  in  the  language  of
Hispaniola ;  it  stands  in  sixteene  degrees  of  height.
Neere  to  the  Fresh  Gulfe  a  Port  for  Guatemala,  where
Saint  Gil  of  Bonavista  was  built,  neere  to  the  Cape  of
Three  Points  to  the  East  from  the  Fresh  Gulfe,  and  Gil
Goncales  Davila  peopled  it  1524.  And  more  to  the  East
is  the  River  Piche,  and  Rio  Baxo,  and  the  River  of  Ulva,
by  another  name  Balahama  before  the  Port  of  Horses,
which  stands  in  fifteene  degrees.  And  afterward  the  River
and  Point  de  la  Sal,  and  Triumpho  de  la  Cruz,  a  Cape  of
three  points,  where  the  yeere  1524.  the  Master  of  the  field

489

Points  and
Ports  of  this
Government.

A.D.
l60I.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Bahla  honda.
Cabo  de
Gracias  a
Dios.

Christopher  of  Olid  planted ;  and  the  River  Hulma  or  of
Xagua,  and  to  the  North  of  his  mouth  the  Hand  of  Utila ;
and  to  the  North-east,  Guayana,  Helen,  and  Guanaja,  and
Saint  Francise  North  and  South  with  the  Point  of  Truxillo,
which  are  the  Hands  of  the  Guanajos.  The  said  Point  is
called  by  another  name,  Cabo  Delgado,  the  Small  Cape,
*0r  Shrimpe.  or  of  Honduras,  from  whence  to  the  Cape  of  *  Camaron,
in  search  whereof  they  goe  from  Jamayca,  are  thirteene
Rivers,  and  at  the  Point  of  the  Cape  a  plazell  or  great
shelfe  of  more  then  twentie  leagues  into  the  Sea,  and  in
the  middest  of  it  neere  to  the  Coast  a  great  Hand,  which
is  called  the  Hand  de  los  Eaxos  (of  the  shelves)  and  another
to  the  North,  neere  the  shelfe  called  Saint  Millan,  and
having  passed  the  shelfe,  the  Bay  of  Cartago,  and  the
Deepe  Bay,  before  the  Cape  of  thanks  be  to  God,  which
stands  in  fourteen  degrees  one  third  part,  and  to  the  North
of  it  three  Hands,  which  they  call  the  Viciosas,  and  Quita
suenno  or  Take  away  sleepe,  and  Roncador,  the  Suorter,
two  dangerous  shelves,  and  having  passed  the  Cape,  the
Gulfe  of  Nicuesa,  where  hee  was  lost  in  the  yeere  15 10.
and  the  River  of  Yare  in  thirteene  degrees,  where  the
Governments  of  Honduras  and  Nicaragua  are  joyned.

The  Hands  of  the  Guanajos,  which  are  the  rehearsed,
the  first  Admirall  Don  Christopher  Colon  discovered  1502.
in  the  last  voyage  he  made  to  the  Indies,  when  he  dis-
covered Terra  firme  in  the  coast  of  Veragua,  where  his  ill
lucke  appeared  ;  for  if  as  he  went  to  Veragua,  hee  had  gone
to  the  other  side,  he  had  discovered  New  Spaine.

The  Province  and  Government  of  Nicaragua,  which  the
Governour  James  Lopez  of  Salzedo,  called  the  New  King-
dome  of  Lion,  on  the  West  joyneth  with  Guatemala,  and
on  the  North  with  Honduras,  and  on  the  South  with  *Costa
Rica.  It  is  of  one  hundred  and  fiftie  leagues  East  and
West,  and  eightie  North  and  South,  a  plentifull  Countrie
of  Millet,  Cacao,  Cotton  wooll,  store  of  Cattell,  without
Corne  or  Sheepe,  it  hath  five  Spanish  Townes,  Lion  of
Nicaragua  is  one  hundred  and  foure  leagues  from  Saint
James  of  Guatemala  about  the  South-east,  and  twelve  from

490

Nicaragua.

*Or  rich
Coast.

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

1601.
the  South  Sea,  neere  to  the  great  Lake  of  Nicaragua,  where
the  Governour  is  resident,  the  Royall  Officers,  and  the
Cathedrall,  and  James  Alvarez  Ossorio  was  the  first  Bishop.
It  hath  five  Monasteries  of  Mercenaries,  and  in  her  bounds
one hundred and twentie thousand tributarie Indians.
The  Citie  of  Granada  is  sixteene  leagues  from  Lion,  which  Granada.
and  Lion  were  built  by  the  Captaine  Franciscus  Hernandez
1523.  and  Granada  stands  by  the  border  of  the  great  Lake,
and  foure  and  twentie  leagues  from  the  Port  of  Realejo,
besides  the  great  Lake,  stands  the  Lake  of  Lindiri,  and
the  famous  Vulcan  or  Fierie  mouth  of  Massayatan. The  Lake  of
great  Lake  ebbeth  and  floweth,  it  hath  many  Hands,  it  Nicaragua.
runneth  into  the  North  Sea,  by  the  River  which  is  called ocanoJ *s~
El  Desaguadero,  or  The  Voyding,  it  hath  great  store  of Mombacho.
Fish  and  many  Lizards. At  two  leagues  from  it,  and
seven  from  Granada  is  the  great  fierie  mouth  of  Mom-
bacho, very  high  with  many  Groves  of  divers  fruits,  of
which  much  refresh  the  Countrie. A  Friar  perswading
himselfe  that  that  masse  of  fire  that  in  so  many  yeeres
burned  without  consuming  within  the  mouth  of  Massaya
was gold, having made by a certaine arte certaine
Cauldrons  with  their  chaines  to  draw  it,  they  scarcely  came
at  the  fire,  when  the  Cauldron  and  the  Chaine  were  melted
like  Lead.

The  new  Segovia  which  was  the  beginning  of  Peter  [III.  v.  881.]
Arias  his  plantation,  is  thirtie  leagues  from  Lion  to  the  Segovia.
North,  and  as  many  from  Granada,  somewhat  Northward
also,  in  which  limits  much  gold  is  gotten. And  Jaen  a  Jam.
Citie  is  thirtie  leagues  from  the  North  Sea,  in  the  end  of
the  great  Lake,  whereby  the  River  which  they  call  the
Voyding, and the merchandize  which are carried from
Nombre  de  Dios,  and  now  from  Porte  bello,  are  convayed
in  it. The  Village  of  Realejo  one  league  from  the  Port  of
the  Possession,  which  commonly  is  called  of  the  Realejo,  Realejo.
stands  in  eleven  degrees  and  a  halfe,  and  is  one  of  the
best  Ports  and  surest  in  all  that  Coast,  wherein  are  made
good  ships  by  reason  of  the  good  provision  of  Timber
there.

491

A.£>.

1601.

Ports  and

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

There  are  in  this  Government  many  Townes  of  Indians,
and  in  them  store  of  tributaries,  and  in  the  Confines  of
this  Government,  and  of  Costa  Rica,  and  of  Nicoya  eight
and  fortie  leagues  from  Granada,  in  the  South  coast,  is  a
Corregidorship  ;  in  which,  and  in  the  Hand  of  Chyra,
which  is  of  the  jurisdiction  thereof  eight  leagues  to  the
Sea,  are  many  tributarie  Indians  of  the  Crowne  Royall,
subject  in  other  times  to  the  Councell  of  Panama,  unto  the
yere  1573.  at  which  time  it  was  incorporated  in  Costa
Rica  ;  whose  Governour  placeth  a  Deputie,  and  the  Bishop
of  Nicaragua  a  Vicar. There  is  in  it  a  reasonable  Port,

Rivers  of  thh  -m  tfe  coast  Qf  tfas  province  on  the  North  Sea.  After
this  is  the  River  Yare  that  divideth  it  from  that  of  Hon-
duras, the  River  of  Yairepa,  before  the  River  and  Port
of  Saint  John,  which  is  called  the  Voyding  or  Desaguadero,
with  a  great  Hand  at  the  mouth,  and  after,  some  other
Rivers  common  to  Costa  Rica.  In  the  South  Sea,  it  hath
besides  the  Realejo,  the  Port  of  Saint  James,  before  the
Chira,  and  the  Port  of  Paro  right  against  Nicoya,  in  the

*De  Salinas.  Gulfe  called  of  the  *  Salt-pits,  before  the  Point  of  Saint
Lazarus,  and  the  Cape  of  Borrica,  at  the  East  side  whereof
are  the  Hands  of  Saint  Marie,  Saint  Martha,  Cobaya,  and
Sebaco,  neere  to  the  bounds  of  Veragua,  common  to  Costa
Rica.

In  the  Coast  of  Nicaragua,  on  the  South  side,  the  Village

Bruxelles.  of  Bruxelles  was  peopled  1529.  and  James  Lopes  of
Salcedo  disinhabited  it,  because  they  had  received  in  it
Pedro  de  los  Rios,  Governour  of  Castilla  del  Oro,  which
went  to  take  the  Government  of  Nicaragua,  where  Salcedo
had  thrust  himselfe,  and  had  gone  from  Honduras  his
owne  Government  unto  it.  Captaine  Franciscus Hernandez,
planted  it  1524.  in  the  doubtfull  Streight,  in  the  seate  of
Uritina,  and  on  the  one  side  it  had  the  Sea,  on  the  other  the
Playnes,  and  on  the  third  side  the  Mountaine  of  the
Mynes,  and  in  all  this  Orbe  there  are  no  Indians  more
expert  in  the  Castillan  tongue  then  those  of  Nicaragua.

Costa  Rica.  .  The  Province  and  Government  of  Costa  Rica,  the
furthest  East  of  the  Northerne  Indies,  and  Councell  of

492

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

i  60  i.

Guatemala,  hath  in  length  East  and  West  ninetie  leagues

from  the  Confines  of  Veragua  unto  those  of  Nicaragua,

with  which  it  joyneth  by  the  North,  and  by  the  West.

In  it  are  two  Townes,  it  is  a  good  Countrie,  with  many

showes  of  Gold,  and  some  of  Silver. The  one  Towne  is

the Village of Aranjues five leagues from Chomes  Aranjuez.

Indianes,  a  Towne  of  the  jurisdiction  of  Nicoya. The

Citie  of  Cartago,  fortie  leagues  from  Nicoya,  and  twentie  Cartago.

from  the  Sea  almost  in  the  middest  of  the  Province,  hath

a  Port  and  landing  place  in  the  Coast  of  the  South  Sea,

and  the  North  Sea,  wherein  there  is  some  Rivers  betweene

Nicaragua  and  Veragua,  common  to  this  Government,  and

the  Bayes  of  Saint  Jerome  and  of  Caribaco,  neere  the  limits

of  Veragua.

nr^He  part  of  the  Indies  of  the  South  is  unjustly  called  Chap.  14.

,  JL America,  it  is  all  that  is  discovered  from  Nombre  de  °f  the  Indies

ios  and  Panama  to  the  South,  wherein  is  included  Terra

firme,  the  Kingdomes  of  Piru,  the  Piru  Chile,  which  the

ndians  call  Chille ; The  Provinces  of  the  Streight,  the

River  of  Plate  and  Brasile,  where  are  five  Councels  of

Panama,  new  Kingdome  of  Granada,  Saint  Francise  of

Quito,  Lima,  the  Charcas,  and  the  eleven  Governments :

Dart  of  their  Coast  toucheth  in  the  North  Sea,  and  part  in

the  South  : in  the  which  for  the  most  part  reigneth  the

South  and  the  South-west,  which  contrarie  to  his  nature

there pleasant, and doth mitigate the great heate,

whereby  that  Countrie  may  bee  inhabited,  although  it  never

l-ayneth  nor  hayleth  in  it,  but  in  a  very  little  distance.

And  the  two  rowes  of  Mountaines  that  runne  equally  A  great

hrough  all  these  Indies,  have  a  great  difference,  though  difference  of

:hey  are  in  one  altitude  of  the  Pole:  for  the  one  is  well  te™pe™turein

-eplenished  with  Trees  and  it  alwayes  rayneth  in  it,  and  0fp:ru  r°WeS

t  is  hot : the  other  is  all  bare,  and  cold  in  Summer  and

Winter. These  rowes  are  called  Andes,  and  Sierra  or  the

Mountayne; they  have  most  high  Hils,  and  £oe  in  sight  Thetworowes
m  '  o  o doe  runne

:he  one  of  the  other  one  thousand  leagues,  almost  equally.  a/mst  IOOO#
[n  the  Hill  are  bred  sundrie  beasts,  and  in  the  parts  where  leagues  equall.

493

Qualities  of
the  Province
of  Callao.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

1601.

they  open  they  make  Valleys,  which  is  excellent  dwelling,
as  that  of  Xanxa,  and  Guaylas,  and  Yucay.  In  the  Andes
also  are  bred  sundrie  beasts,  and  past  the  Citie  of  Cuzco,
these  rowes  doe  divide  themselves,  leaving  in  the  middest
a  great  champaine  Countrie,  which  is  the  Province  of
Collao,  where  are  infinite  Rivers,  Lakes,  and  Pastures,
without  Trees  or  Wood,  for  the  distemperature  of  the
Countrie,  though  wholesome  and  much  inhabited.  There
followeth  after  it  the  Province  of  the  Charcas,  hot  and  of
great  plentie,  with  very  rough  Hills  of  great  riches  of
Mynes :  and  the  figure  of  these  Indies  is  seene  in  the
Table  before  going.

[III.  v.  882.]  r  I  ^He  limits  of  the  Counsell  of  Panama,  which  was  first

A called  Castilla  del  Oro,  and  afterwards  Terra  Firme,

are  very  small,  for  the  Counsell  is  principally  resident

there, for  the  dispatch  of  the  Fleetes,  and  Merchants,

Quantities  of which  goe  and  come  to  Piru :  it  hath  in  length  East  and

the  Countrie  of  West,  about  nintie  leagues,  from  the  confines  of  the
anama,an  government  of  Cartagena,  and  Popayan,  unto  the  Castle
of  Veragua,  and  in  breadth  from  the  South  Sea  to  the
North  sixtie  leagues,  and  thence  downeward  unto
eighteene  by  Nombre  de  Dios,  or  Porto  bello  to  Panama :
it  is  a  ground  generally  very  rough  with  Mountaines,
full  of  quagmires,  the  ayre  close  with  vapours,  moist,  hot,
and  for  this  cause  very  sickly  from  May  unto  November,
a  barren  soyle,  and  destitute  of  many  things :  for  there
groweth  nothing  but  Millet,  and  very  little,  though  there
be  good  Pastures  for  Kine,  and  breeding  of  Cattle.  The
government  of  Veragua  stands  in  the  bounds  of  this
Counsell,  and  in  it,  and  in  that  of  Panama  these  Townes
following.

Panama.  The  Citie  of  Panama  is  in  the  coast  of  the  South  Sea,

neere  unto  it,  in  9.  degrees  of  latitude,  and  82.  of  longi-
tude from  the  Meridian  of  Toledo,  from  whence  it  is
distant  by  direct  way  one  thousand  five  hundred  and  sixtie
leagues. It  is  a  Towne  of  six  hundred  housholds,  the !
most  are  Merchants  and  dealers. And  with  the  Counsell

494

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

1601.

are  resident  the  Kings  Officers,  and  Royall  treasurie,  which
doe  goe  already  to  Portobello,  when  there  is  any  Fleete  to
the  dispatching  of  it,  and  likewise  the  Cathedrall  suffragan
to  the  Archbishopricke  of  the  Kings  (delos  res)  is  here
resident  with  three  Monasteries,  of  Dominicke,  Francis-
cane  and  Merced  Friers.  The  Port  of  this  Citie  is  reason-
able, although  at  low  water  the  Ships  remaine  dry,  and
therefore  in  Summer  they  ride  in  the  strand,  and  in  winter
in  the  haven  of  Perico,  two  leagues  from  the  citie.
Pcdrarias  Davila  peopled  it,  being  Governour  of  Castillo,
del  Oro,  or  of  the  Gold,  against  the  will  of  the  dwellers  of
Sancta  Marie,  the  auncient  of  Darien,  the  yeare  1 5 1 9.  and
a  little  after  the  Cathedrall  Church  was  removed  thither ;
and  it  might  have  had  a  better  seate,  and  more  wholesome,
and  to  the  purpose  for  the  trafficke  of  the  South  Sea,  not  [III.  v.  883.]
going  very  farre  from  whence  the  Citie  now  stands.

The  Citie  of  Nombre  de  Dios,  was  by  James  of  Nicuesa
first  planted  15 10.  and  afterward  by  James  of  Albitez,
by  order  of  Pedrarias,  and  he  was  the  first  Admirall  that
discovered  her  port.  It  is  removed  to  Portobelo,  for  Portebello.
the  first  Admirall  discovered  it,  and  gave  the  name,  because
it  was  more  wholesomer,  and  fitter  for  the  loading  and
unloading  of  the  Fleetes,  and  for  their  securitie,  and  of
the  new  Citie  of  Saint  Phillip,  which  is  built  there :  the
Inginer  Baptista  Antonelli,  hath  made  a  Castle,  and
appointed  another  on  the  other  side  the  haven,  for  to
ikeepe  the  entrie.  The  Merchandize  are  carried  from
Portobelo  to  Panama  by  two  wayes,  one  by  Land  with
[carriage,  which  is  eighteene  leagues  of  lesse  difficultie
then  by  the  way  of  Nombre  de  Dios :  the  other  by  Sea,
land  the  River  of  Chagre,  whose  mouth  is  eighteene  leagues
from  Portobelo,  to  the  West,  whereby  the  Merchandize
jgoe  up  when  the  water  reacheth  to  the  vent  of  the  Crosses,
'and  from  thence  they  go  in  carriages  five  leagues  to
Panama.

The  Village  of  Nata  stands  thirtie  leagues  from  Panama  Saint  James  of
to  the  West, in  the  Coast  of  the South  Sea,  Captaine  Nata-
■Franciscus  Companion  peopled  it,  by  order  of  Peter  Arias,

495

A.D.
l6oi.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Ada.

A  strange  case
of  a  Lizard.

for  the  warre  with  the  Casique  Urraca.  The  inhabiting
of  Acla,  and  Captaine  Gabriel  of  Rojas  finished  by  com-
mandement  of  Peter  Arias,  in  the  Coast  of  the  North  Sea,
and  entrance  of  the  Gulfe  of  Uraba,  right  against  the
Hand  of  Pinos,  whereof  at  this  present  there  is  no  more
memory  then  that  there  was  the  death  of  that  famous
Captaine,  whose  memory  will  last  eternally,  the  President
Basco  Nunnez  of  Balboa,  and  of  his  company.  In  the
breach  of  Almagro,  and  in  the  head  of  the  River  Chiepo,
there  is  Gold,  and  in  times  past  was  much  gotten.  In
all  these  Rivers  are  many  Lizards  or  Crockadiles,  and
very  great,  which  put  the  first  discoverers  and  pacifiers
to  great  trouble,  and  did  devoure  some  men.  It  happened
that  a  man  being  in  a  Boate  neere  to  the  Kings  House
in  Panama,  a  Lizard  came  and  snatched  him  from  the
Stearne  of  the  Boate,  and  carried  him  away  to  eate  him
on  certaine  Rockes,  and  having  begunne  to  teare  him  in
pieces,  they  shot  at  him  with  a  Caliver  and  killed  the
Lizard,  so  that  he  before  his  death  received  the  Sacraments
of  the  Church.

The  Province  of  Veragua,  which  stands  in  somewhat
more  then  tenne  degrees,  doth  confine  with  Costarica,  on
the  West  side :  it  hath  in  length  East  and  West  fiftie
leagues,  and  in  breadth  five  and  twentie :  a  Mountainous
Countrie,  full  of  bushes,  without  Pastures  or  Cattle,
Wheate,  Barley,  little  Millet  or  little  Pulse ;  but  full  of
Gold  with  many  vaines  of  it,  and  rich  Mines  in  the
Rivers,  and  breaches,  and  those  Indians  that  are,  are  in
warre :  it  hath  the  Citie  of  the  Conception  fortie  leagues
from  Nombre  de  Dios,  to  the  West,  where  the  Governour
and  the  Officers  (which  they  of  Panama  at  this  present
doe  provide)  are  resident.  The  Village  of  Trinitie  stands
six  leagues  to  the  East  of  the  Conception  by  Sea  (for
yee  cannot  goe  by  Land)  neere  to  the  River  of  Bethleem,
Holy  Faith.  at  three  leagues  from  the  Sea.  The  Citie  of  *  Sancta  Fe
stands  twelve  leagues  from  the  Conception  to  the  South,
with  melting  houses,  and  Deputie  Officers.  The  Citie  of
Charles,  in  the  coast  of  the  South  Sea,  neere  to  the  Sea,

496

Veragua.

The
Conception.

The  Trinitie.

Charles.

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF AMERICA MERIDIONALIS

i

It

ANTONIO DE HERRERA

A.D.
l60I.

iftie  leagues  from  the  Citie  of  Sancta  Fe,  to  the  East :
ill  the  Indians  of  this  government  are  in  warre.

There  is  no  Port  or  name  in  the  two  Coasts  South,  The  Ports.
Imd  North,  of  this  government,  and  in  all  the  bounds
pf  the  Counsell,  are  the  Rivers,  Ports,  and  points  follow-
ing. The  Bay  of  Carabaco,  or  Saint  Hierome,  in  the
Coast  of  the  North  Sea,  and  the  confines  of  Veragua,  and
to  the  East  of  it,  and  of  the  River  of  the  Trinitie,  of  the
conception,  and  of  Bethlehem  (where  was  the  first
Inhabiting  that  the  first  Admirall  made  in  Terra  firme,
\>f  all  that  Orbe,  in  the  yeare  1503.  which  continued  not) :
jind  right  against  the  Shield,  an  Hand,  and  the  River  of  El  Escudo.
Chagre,  and  more  to  the  East  a  league  the  Portete,  to
the  place  where  the  Admirall  came  discovering  the  same
/eere,  and  the  Ports  of  a  Langostas  twelve  leagues  from
Sombre  de  Dios,  to  the  West,  and  the  Port  de  Gallinas
or  of  Hennes  nine  degrees,  and  the  Port  of  Bonaventure
rix,  Portobelo  five,  and  right  against  it  the  Hands  of  the
I  Lookings,  and  those  of  the  Provisions  or  Bastimentos :
tnd  having  Nombre  de  Dios  two  leagues,  the  River  of
r  Sardinilla,  and  the  Hand  of  d  Sardina,  foure ;  and  the
:River  of  Millet  or  Mayz,  and  the  River  of  Snakes,  or
Culebras,  eight ;  and  at  the  entry  of  the  Gulfe  of  Uraba,
ivhere  in  the  yeare  1509.  the  Bachiller  Enciso  built  the
Citie  of  Sancta  Marie  of  Darien.  This  Bachiller  Enciso
,vas  he  that  published  that  in  the  Province  which  was  called
Castilla  del  Oro,  there  were  places  where  the  gold  was
iished  with  nets,  which  encouraged  many  people  to  goe  to
:he  Indies,  which  passed  in  the  yeare  15 14.  with  Peter  Arias
Oanila :  and  the  President  Basco  Nunnez  of  Balboa,  went
.513.  from  the  Darien  in  demand  of  the  South  Sea,  and
liscovered  it.  The  Point  of  the  Hand  of  Captiva,  stands
light  against  the  Mountaines  of  Saint  Bias,  and  the  Hand
bf  Comagre,  and  the  Hand  of  Pinos,  more  within  the
pulfe  of  Uraba,  and  in  the  inward  Port  of  it,  the  Port
pf  Nilcos,  neere  to  the  mouth  of  the  River  of  Darien,
Ivhich  divideth  the  bounds  of  this  Counsell,  and  those
hf  the  Governement  of  Cartagena,  and  there  is  Culata
xiv  497  2  1

a  Or  Locusts.

hLas  Minis.

c  Or  Little

Pilcherd.

d Or Pilchard.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

de  Uraba,  where  in  the  yeare  1510.  Alonso  of  Oieda
inhabited  Saint  Sebastian  of  Uraba.  This  Gulfe  stands
in  8.  degrees,  it  hath  foureteene  leagues  of  longitude  into
the  Lands,  and  in  the  entrie  it  hath  six  in  breadth,  and
[III.  v.  884.]  a  little  forward  fiftie,  and  at  the  end  foure,  and  five  leagues
within  was  the  Citie  of  Sancta  Marie,  the  auncient  of
Darien.

In  the  South  Sea  stands  the  Cape  of  Sancta  Marie,  and
point  (de  Guerra)  of  Warre,  and  toward  Panama,  the
Gulfe  of  Parita,  or  Paris  where  stands  Nata,  the  point
of  Chiame,  the  Countrie  of  that  Cazique  Chiapes,  the
friend  of  Basco  Nunnez  of  Balboa,  which  holpe  him  in
his  discovery :  and  passed  the  Port  of  Panama,  the  River
of  Chepo,  and  the  Balsa,  or  of  Congos  in  the  inner  part
of  the  Gulfe  of  Saint  Michael,  North  and  South  from  the
Hand  of  Pearles,  and  the  Point  or  Port  of  Pinyas,  at
the  entrie  of  the  Gulfe  on  the  South  side,  which  is  fiftie
leagues  from  Panama,  and  twentie  overthwart  to  the  Gulfe
of  Uraba,  and  Puerto  Quemado,  or  Burnt  Haven,  neere
to  the  Cape  of  Corrientes,  in  5.  degrees  of  altitude  Septen-
trionall.

Chap.  16. r  I  \He  bounds  of  the  Counsel  of  the  New  Kingdome

The  limits  of ± h^th  in  length  East  and  West,  three  hundred  leagues,

Sancta  Fe  of anc^  as  man7  North  and  South,  wherein  are  comprehended

Bogota: which  the  Provinces  of  the  New  Kingdome,  the  governments

is  the  new of  Sancta  Martha,  and  Cartagena,  and  part  of  that  of

Kingdome  of p0payan ;  &  for  borders  the  Provinces  of  the  Dorado,

rana  a. Qr  new  Stremadura : the  Province  of  New  Kingdome,

which  is  that  which  the  Counsell  governeth : it  hath  in

length  from  East  to  West  foureteen  leagues,  and  eightie

in  breadth  North  and  South  of  plaine  ground,  for  the

most  part  with  Valleys  and  hils,  and  good  Pastures  for

all  sort  of  Cattle,  which  are  in  abundance,  and  in  many

places, Wheate, Millet, and the fruits of  Castile, and

generally  much  Gold  and  very  fine,  and  Mines  of  Copper  i\

&  Steele : and  the  Countrie  men  for  the  most  part  are

able  men,  great  traffickers,  and  doe  weare  Cotten  cloath.i

498

ANTONIO DE HERRERA

A.D.

l60I.

And  the  Townes  that  be  in  the  Kingdome  of  Spaniards,

are  the  Citie  of  *  Sancta  Fe  of  Bogota,  which  was  built  *Hoh  Faith-

at  the  foote  of  Bogota,  so  called  by  the  Cazique  which

was  called  Bogota,  which  the  President  Goncalo  Ximenez

of  Quesada  built,  and  gave  the  name  to  the  Citie  and  to

the  Kingdome, because  he  was  of  Granada, though  in

the discovery the President Belalcazar, and Nicholas

Federman had  part : it stands 72. degrees  and  a  halfe

of  longitude  from  the  Meridian  of  Toledo,  which  by  a

greater  circle  may  be  one  thousand  foure  hundred  and

tortie leagues, and 4. degrees on this side of the

[Equinoctial, it  hath more  then six  hundred  housholds,

in it is  resident the Counsell, the Kings Officers  and

Royall treasurie, and Melting house, the Cathedrall

Metropolitane,  whose  suffragans  are,  Popayan,  Cartagena

ind  Sancta  Marta,  with  a  Monasterie  of  Dominicke  and

another  of  Franciscane  Friers,  and  in  her  borders  more

jthen  fiftie  thousand  tributarie  Indians  and  the  Lake  of  Lake  of

jGuatavita,  which  was  a  worshipping  place  of  the  Indians, GuatavUa,

where  it  is  reported  that  they  did  cast  great  summes  of

Gold  in  offring  to  the  Idols.

The  Village  of  Saint  Michael  in  the  bounds  of  Sancta  SaintMickael.
Fe,  twelve  leagues  from  it  to  the  North,  was  built  for
trafficke  with  the  Pauche  Indians,  because  being  of  a  hot
Zountrie  it  did  them  hurt  to  goe  to  Sancta  Fe,  which  is
cold.  The  Citie  of  Tocayma  fifteene  leagues  from  Sancta  Tocayma.
"e,  to  the  West,  somewhat  inclined  to  the  North,  with  a
Monasterie  of  Dominicke  Friers,  was  inhabited  the  yeare
[545.  by  the  Captaine  Hernando  Vanegas,  in  the  border
:>f  the  maine  River  Pati,  which  runneth  into  the  River
Magdalene.  It  hath  no  gold,  and  is  most  hot,  and  by
light  there  falleth  no  Deaw  in  it.  In  all  the  Kingdome
:here  is  no  generall  tongue,  that  which  is  most  understood,
s  that  of  the  Pauches.  In  the  Province  of  the  Musos,
ind  Colimas,  which  by  another  name  are  called  Canupeis,
five  and  twentie  leagues  in  length,  to  the  North-west  of
Bogota,  a  rough  Countrie,  sound,  plentifull  of  Pastures,
3old,  and  Emeralds  : there  are  two  Townes ;  the  Citie

499

A.D.
l60I.

The  Trinitie

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*0r  Flies.

The  Pa/ma.

Tunia.

of  the  Trinitie  twentie  leagues  from  Sancta  Fe,  to  the
North-west,  which  the  Captaine  Lanchero  inhabited  the
yeere  1582.  when  hee  went  to  warre  with  the  Indians
*  Moscas,  a  quicke  and  fearefull  Nation :  and  in  these
bounds  stands  the  rich  Mine  of  the  Emeralds,  with  many
Indians  which  yet  are  peaceable,  and  in  the  Province  of
Chiagnachi,  which  signifieth  Snailes,  for  there  be  many.

The  Village  of  Palma  in  the  Colimas,  of  a  temper
hotter  then  cold,  fifteene  leagues  from  Sancta  Fe  to  the
North-west,  the  Captaine  Don  Gutierre  of  Ovalle  built
it  1572.  in  the  Province  of  Tunia,  which  tooke  the  name
of  the  Cazique,  almost  to  the  North,  direct  to  that  of
Bogota,  and  in  all  like  unto  it :  The  Citie  of  Tunia  stands
two  and  twentie  leagues  from  Sancta  Fe,  to  the  North-
east, on  a  high  hill,  a  strong  scituation,  for  the  warre
with  the  Indians.  There  goe  out  of  this  Citie  above
two  hundred  Horse-men,  and  it  is  the  most  aboundant
of  Victuals  of  all  the  Borders,  and  there  is  the  greatest
Market  in  all  the  Realme :  it  hath  one  Monasterie  of
Dominicke,  another  of  Franciscane  Friers.  The  Captaine
Goncalo  Xuarez  Rondon  built  it,  for  the  President
Gonzalo  Ximenez  of  Pulsada.  The  Citie  of  Pamplona
seventy  leagues  from  Sancta  Fe  to  the  North-east,  hath
one  Monasterie  of  Dominick  Friers ;  much  Gold  is
gotten  in  it,  it  hath  abundance  of  Cattle :  the  Bachiller
Michael  Diaz  of  Armendariz  peopled  it.  The  Village  of
Saint  Christopher  is  thirteene  leagues  from  Pamplona  to
the  North,  the  Captaine  Franciscus  of  Caceres  built  it
*Or  Crying,  neere  the  Province  of  *  Grita,  so  called  because  the  Indians
came  out  of  the  high  wayes  to  shoute  and  crie  after  the
Spaniards,  and  to  kill  them :  little  Gold  is  gotten  in  it,
and  it  hath  commoditie,  for  to  breede  Cattle.

The  Citie  of  Merida,  in  the  bounds  of  the  government
of  Venezuela  and  the  New  Kingdome,  fortie  leagues  from
Pamplona  to  the  North-east :  it  is  a  plentifull  Countrie  of
Mines  of  Gould,  and  of  Wheate.  The  Citie  of  Belez
thirtie  leagues  from  Sancta  Fe  to  the  North,  and  fifteene
from  Tunia,  hath  one  Monasterie  of  Franciscane  Fryers :

500

Pamplona.

Merida.

[III.  v.  885.]

Belez.

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

i  60  i.

the  Captaine  Goncalo  Ximenez  Rondon  inhabited  it. It

lis  a  Countrie  where  many  thunderboults  fell,  and  there  Thunderbolts.

Ifall  not  so  many  since  the  holy  Sacrament  of  the  Altar

(is  there  abiding : it  hath  one  fierie  mouth that  casteth

many  stones. The Citie  of Mariquita  of  Ybague, by Mariquita.

lanother name Saint Sebastian of the Gould, is fortie

[leagues  from  Sancta  Fe  to  the  North-west,  the  Captaine

LPedroso  peopled  it  1 55 1 .  in  certaine  Meadowes,  leaning

to  the  hill,  the  temper  is  very  hot. The  Citie  of  Ybague  rbague.

is

three  hundred  leagues  from  Sancta  Fe,  almost  to  the

West :  it  is  the  first  Towne  of  the  New  Realme,  that
doth  confine  with  Popayan,  the  Captaine  Andrew  Lopez
of  Galarza  peopled  it  1 551.  by  commission  of  the  Counsell,
for  to  eschew  the  harmes  these  Indians  did  with  those
of  Tocayma,  and  Cartago,  and  for  to  open  the  way  to
the  government  of  Popayan,  it  hath  a  Monasterie  of
Dominicke  Friers.

The  Citie  of  the  Victorie  of  the  Remedies,  fiftie  leagues  Vktorie  de  hs
from  Sancta  Fe,  to  the  North-west,  is  very  rich  of  Mines.  Remedies.
The  Citie  of  Saint John of  the  Plaines, fiftie  leagues  Saint  John  of
:rom Sancta  Fe  to the South, is  a  Countrie of  much  the  P^tnes.
ia  Sould. The  Citie  of  Tudela  which  the  Captaine  Peter
th  }f  Ursua  built,  by  order  of  the  Bachiller  Don  Michael
Diuz  of  Armendariz  was  disinhabited,  because  the  Indians
*  Moxcas  received  hurt  by  it. And  there  are  of  the  limits  *0r  Wyes.
}f  the  Counsell  of  the  new  Realme,  seven  Townes  of
:he  government of  Popayan, Sancta Fe of  Antiochia,
3aramanta,  Arma,  Anzerma,  Cartago,  Saint  Sebastian  of
he  Silver,  and  Saint  Vincent  de  las  Pazes.

The  Merchandize  enters  this  Kingdome,  by  the  great
^iver  of  Magdalene,  from  the  *  Baranca  of  Malamba,  of  *Or  Water-
he  jurisdiction  of  Cartagena,  and  the  first  that  sent  to  course.
liscover  this  River,  was  Garcia  of  Lerma,  Governour  of  ?ic lGJ-1n^  or
kneta  Martha 153 1. It  entreth  into  the  Sea  so  broad  R^r™
md  strong,  that  at  the  passing,  the  Ships  are  wont  to
)e  in  danger,  if  they  goe  not  somewhat  distant,  for  the
ombat  of  the  current,  and  working  of  the  Sea. It  hath
n  Hand  in  the  mouth, it  is  navigated  more  then  one

501

II!

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

hundred  and  fiftie  leagues,  and  in  more  then  three  hundred
it  is  not  waded :  it  commeth  from  above  Popayan  from
two  Fountaines  that  are  fortie  leagues  distant,  by  which
joyning  the  River  is  made :  it  was  called  of  Magdalene,
because  on  that  day  was  the  mouth  discovered,  in  12.
degrees  of  height,  and  six  and  twenty  leagues  from
Cartagena.
Sanaa  The  Province  and  Government  of  Sancta  Martha  in

Martha.  fa^  coast  of  Terra  firme  is  seventie  leagues  in  breadth
and  length,  betweene  Carthagena  and  the  River  of  Hache  :
it  is  a  plentifull  Countrie  of  Millet,  and  Potatoes,  much
Gould,  and  Copper,  and  some  Emeralds,  and  other  Stones  :
in  it  are  five  Spanish  Townes ;  and  though  there  be  many
of  the  Countrie-men,  the  most  are  in  warre.  The  Presi-
dent Bastidas  peopled  the  Citie  of  Sancta  Martha  1525.
neere  to  the  Sea,  in  10.  degrees  of  latitude,  and  74.  of
longitude,  one  thousand  foure  hundred  and  twentie  leagues
from  Toledo,  where  is  resident  the  Governour,  and  Officers
Royall,  and  the  Cathedrall  suffragan  to  the  New  King-
dome.  The  Port  is  reasonable.  This  Government  hath
foure  Provinces,  Pozignay,  Betona,  Chimica,  and  Tayrona,
which  signifieth  a  Forge,  and  with  great  reason,  because
in  that  Countrie  are  an  infinite  quantitie  of  diversitie  of
Mettals,  and  Stones  of  great  esteeme  and  value.
Tenerife,  Tenerife  stands  by  the  border  of  Rio  Grande  or  the

great  River  (which  is  that  of  Magdelene)  fortie  leagues
from  Sancta  Martha  to  the  South-west,  part  by  the  Sea,
and  part  by  Land : Franciscus  Euriques  did  people  it,
by  order  of  Goncalo  Perez  which  governed  in Sancta
Tamala- Martha,  by  Commission  of  the  President  Lugo.  Tama-
meque. lameque,  or  Village  of  the  Palmes  is  sixtie  five  leagues
from Sancta Martha to the South, and twentie from
Tenerife,  two  leagues  from  the  Great  River :  the  Captaine
The  Kings.  Bartholomew  Dalva  peopled  it  1561. The  Citie  of  los
Reyes  in the  Valley  of  Upari, is  plentifull of Millet,
Provision,  and  Cattle,  and  of  much  Copper,  to  the  South-
east of  Sancta  Martha,  fiftie  leagues  from  it,  and  thirtie
from the River of Hache : the Captaine Sanct Anne

502

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  ad.

1601.

peopled  it,  by  commandement  of  the  Bachellor  Michael
Diuz, a  La Ramada was built before, called first new  *  Sancta
Salamanca,  fortie  leagues  from  Sancta  Martha  to  the  East,  Ramada.
and  eight  from  the  River  of  Plate,  at  the  overflowings  of
the  Snowie  Mountaine. It  stands  in  the  Valley  of  Upani,
where  there  is  as  much  Copper  as  Stone. The  Merchan-
dize of  this  Government  goeth  up  to  the  New  Kingdome
by  the  marsh  of  this  Citie,  which  is  eight  leagues  from
it  by  the  Sea,  and  afterward  twelve  unto  the  Barranca  of
Malambo, in the  great  River. Ocanna  is  also  in this  Ocanya.
Government,  which  the  Captaine  Franciscus  Hernandez
inhabited  1572.  and  was  first  called  Sancte  Anne. There
is  in  the  Coast  of  this  Government  the  River  of  Buhia,
neere Ramada, and the River of Piras, and that of
b  Palomino,  where  a  Captaine  of  this  name  was  drowned,  b  Or  Tong
and  the  River  of  Don  James,  the  c  Ancones  of  Buritaca,  Pigeon.
and  the  Cape  of  d  Aguia  neere  Sancta  Martha,  right  against  c®r  Nf°
the  hill  of  Bonda,  and  the  River  of  Gayra,  to  the  West. Needle

The  Province  and  Government  of  Cartagena,  in  the  Cartagena.
Coast  of  Terra  firme,  and  the  North  Sea,  hath  in  length
East  and  West,  from  the  River  of  the  Magdalene,  unto
the  River  of  Darien,  eightie  leagues  North  and  South,
and  as  many  unto  the  confines  of  the  New  Kingdome,
though  men  say  it  is  more  in  Voyage.  The  Countrie  is
Mountainous  of  Hils  and  Valleys,  of  high  Trees,  rainie
and  moist :  the  seedes  of  Castile  beare  no  seede,  there  is
no  Wheate,  nor  Gould,  but  in  some  places.  There  is  [III.  v.  886.]
much  rozen  made  in  some  Mountaines  of  this  Govern-
ment, and  Gums  arromaticke,  and  other  liquors  which  they
get  out  of  the  Trees,  and  great  quantitie  of  Sanguis
Draconis,  and  a  very  fragrant  balme  of  great  vertues.

The  Citie  of  Carthagena  stands  neare  the  Sea,  two  citie  of
leagues  from  the  Point  of  Canoa,  to  the  West,  in  tenne  Cartagena.
degrees  of  latitude,  and  seventie  six  of  longitude,  one
thousand  foure  hundred  and  sixtie  leagues  from  Toledo,
of  more  then  five  hundred  housholds,  among  them  above
two  thousand  women.  In  it  is  resident  the  Governour,
the  Kings  Officers,  &  treasurie  Royall,  and  the  Cathedrall

5°3

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

suffragan  to  the  New  Realme,  with  Monasteries  of  fc
Dominick  and  Franciscan  Friers.  The  scituation  is  plain,  L
and  almost  like  an  Hand,  the  Sea  compasseth  it  on  the
North  side,  &  it  is  a  rough  coast,  and  very  shallow ;  and
on  the  land  side  it  hath  an  arme  of  the  Sea  which  reacheth
to  a  Marish,  which  is  the  Lake  of  Canapote,  which  ebbeth
&  floweth  after  the  order  of  the  Sea,  &  at  the  same  houre,
and  they  passe  from  the  Citie  to  Terra  firme,  by  a  Bridge
and  a  manner  of  a  Causie,  which  hath  about  two  hundred
and  fiftie  paces.  The  Citie  is  built  on  Sand,  &  within  two
fathoms  they  finde  fresh  water,  though  sometimes  it  is
unwholesome,  not  so  much  as  the  coast  of  Nombre  de
Dios ;  for  the  ayres  in  respect  of  the  Marish  are  wont  to
cause  diseases,  but  for  the  most  part  it  is  wholsome.  The
Haven  is  one  of  the  least  of  the  Indies,  though  the  great
Ships  doe  ride  farre  from  the  Citie.  It  hath  at  the  entrie
an  Iland  like  that  of  Escombrera  in  Cartagena  of  Castile,
whereby  they  called  it  Cartagena,  and  the  Iland  was  called
Codego,  now  they  call  it  Caxes,  it  hath  two  leagues  in
length,  &  little  more  then  halfe  a  league  in  bredth :  it
was  wont  to  be  inhabited  with  Indian  Fishers,  &  it  hath
no  water.  The  first  that  saw  Carthagena,  in  the  year
1502.  was  Roderick  Bastidas,  &  the  year  1504.  Juan  de
la  Cosa  or  John  of  the  Thing  went  a  shore,  and  found
Lewes  Guerra,  and  they  were  the  first  that  began  the
warre  with the  Indians,  which  were  proud  and  bould,

Amazonian  and  both  men  and  women  fought,  with  venomed  arrows.

women.  Afterward  returned  Alonso  of  Oieda  with  John  of  the
Thing  for  Pilot  Major,  &  Americo  Vespucio  for  Mariner,
&  some  years  after  Gregorie  of  Obiedo  took  upon  him
to  inhabit  Cartagena,  &  performed  it  not.  The  year  1532.
went  Don  Pedro  of  Eredia  born  in  Madrid,  and  inhabited
it,  and  pacified  a  great  part  of  the  Countrie,  though  with
labour  and  cunning,  because  the  people  were  very  warlike,

Valiant and  there  was  a  woman  that  before  they  could  take  her,

Virago. being about eighteene yeeres old, slew  with her  Bow

Saint  James  eight  Spaniards.

ofTolu.  The  Village  of  Saint  James  of  Tolu,  is  six  leagues

5°4

ANTONIO DE HERRERA

A.D.

i6oi.

The  Village  of
Marie.

Saint
Se&astian.,

rom  the  Sea  to  the  South-west  of  Cartagena  two  leagues
iom  it,  part  by  Sea  (for  by  Land  it  cannot  be  gone)  and
MTt  by  the  Marishes  and  Mountaines.  It  is  a  sound
Countrie,  of  great  breedings,  and  tillage,  and  fruits  of
Castile  :  the  President  Don  Peter  of  Heredia  peopled  it.
The  Village  of  Marie  thirtie  two  leagues  from  Cartagena,

0  the South, is  also the inhabiting  of  Don  Peter  of
rleredia, in the yeare 1534. The  Village of  *  Sancta  *Holy  Crosse.
Cruz  of  Mopox  is  seventie  leagues  from  Cartagena  by

he  Sea  and  River  of  Magdalene,  neere  whose  border  it

iltands,  &  whereby  they  goe  about  more  then  halfe  the

pay ; it is not sound being among Quagmires. A

Zaptaine  of  Don  Peter  of  Heredia  peopled  it  1535. The

,-eare  of 1509.  the  Bachiller  Eusico  (as  hath  been  said)

nhabited  Sancta  Marie,  the  auncient  of  the  Darien,  which

5 in this Government, forsaking the Village of Saint

Sebastian  of  Bona  vista,  which  the  same  Captaine  Alonso

le  Oieda  had  inhabited,  in  the  furthest  place  of  Uraba :

1  afterward  the  Captain  Alonso  of  Heredia  inhabited
jiaint  Sebastian  againe,  for  the  President  his  Brother,  in

ertaine  little  hils,  almost  halfe  a  league  from  the  Sea.
and  in  the  yeare  1537.  the  Bachiller  John  of  Vadillo  went
iut  of  Saint  Sebastian  with  a  good  number  of  Souldiours,
•nd  passing  many  troubles,  &  most  rough Mountains,

1  thick  woods,  came  to  the  Citie  of  Antioquia,  of  the
■  overnment  of  Popayan,  &  there  was  a  Souldior  that  from
pence  came  to  the  Citie  of  the  Plate,  in  the  Charcas,  which

5  1200.  leag.

The  *  Barranca  of  Malambo,  which  is  a  Custome  house
j  f  the  jurisdiction  of  Cartagena,  thirtie  leagues  from  it,

p  the  border  of  the  great  River,  and  twenty  from  Sancta
i/Iartha,  &  six  from  the  Sea,  where  the  Merchandize  that
Ire  carried  by  Land  to  the  New  Realme  are  unloaden,  &

•om  the  Barranca  are  carried  up  by  the  River  in  Canooes.
Lower  then  Nopox  entreth  the  River  of  Cauca  into  the

JLiver  of  Magdalene,  which  also  springeth  about  Popayan  :

1  more  toward  Cartagena  and  to  the  West,  standeth  the

inobbe,  and  the  point  of  Zamba,  and  Butrio  del  gato  or

5°5

The

Barranca.
*Or  Water-
course.

A.D.

l60I.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

El  Darado
Guiana.

Arbolera,  and  the  seven  Cottages,  and  the  point  of  the
Canowe,  two  leagues  from  Cartagena,  and  the  point  of
Ycacos  at  the  entrie  of  the  port,  right  against  the  Hand
of  Carex,  and  the  point  of  the  Ship  in  Terra  firme ;  at  the
other  lesser  entrie  of  the  port,  and  almost  to  the  North,
is  a  little  Hand  which  is  called  Sardina,  and  in  the  coast
of  Tolu  the  Hands  of  Baru,  which  are  six,  and  at  the
entrie  of  the  Gulfe  of  Uraba  the  six,  which  are  called  of
Saint  Bernard,  right  against  the  River  Zenu :  and  more
within  the  Gulfe,  the  strong  Hand,  and  the  Tortoyse.
The  port  of  Zenu  stands  five  and  twenty  leagues  from
Cartagena,  it  is  a  great  Bay  that  hath  his  entrance  by
the  East,  it  is  secure :  here  they  make  store  of  Salt,  and
it  tooke  the  name  of  the  Towne  Zenu,  which  standeth
on  the  River.

In  the  Provinces  of  the  Darade,  or  new  Estremadura
(which  circuit  pertaines  to  the  bounds  of  the  Counsell
of  the  New  Realme)  many  Captains  have  entred  by  Sea,
and  by  sundry  parts  of  the  Land,  and  have  never  found
the  riches  which  the  same  promiseth.  They  fall  on  the
other  side  of  the  River  of  Saint  John  of  Amazones,  by
another  name  Orellana  (which  some  erroniously  wil  have
to  be  the  Meranyon)  and  here  is  the  Orinico,  and  other
great  Rivers,  and  the  Gulfe  of  Paria  which  maketh  the
firme  land,  with  the  Land  of  the  Trinitie,  &  the  mouthes

[III.  v.  887.]  of  the  Serpent,  &  the  Dragon,  which  the  first  Admirall
named,  where  he  saw  himselfe  in  great  danger,  for  the
conflict  which  the  fresh  waters  make  there  with  the  salt,
whereof  he  had  yet  no  notice,  and  here  beginneth  the,

Great  Tydes. flowing  of  the  Sea  to  be  very  great,  unto  the  streight  of
Magellan,  and  goeth  continuing  through  all  the  coast  oft
Piru,  and  New  Spaine.

The  Provinces  of  Piru  (whose  name  hath  extended  it
selfe  more  then  it  was  at  the  beginning)  include  all  the
Empire  of  the  Ingas,  or  more ;  for  when  it  was  won  it
was  divided  in  two  governments,  that  of  Don  Franciscus
Picarro,  called  the  New  Castile,  from  the  Quito  unto  the
Cuzco, sixtie  leagues  below  the Chincha : and that  of

506

Piru,  or  Peru.

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

i  60  i.

Don James of Almagro, called the New Toledo, two
lundred  leagues  toward  the  Streight  from  Chincha ;  which
governments  were  distinct  until  the  Councell  de  los  Reyes
ras  established,  and  a  Vice-roy  provided  for  the  King-
lomes  of  Piru,  in  whose  government  are  included,  the
Councell  of  Saint Francis  of  the  Quito, that  of  Lima
lor  de  los  Reyes  of  the  Kings)  that  of  the  Charcas,  the
jrovernment  of  Chile,  &  countries  of  the  Streights,  the
lands of Salomon to the West, and for borders the
Provinces  of  the  River  of  Plate,  and  that  which  determin-
jtely is comprehended under the government of the
wice-roy. It  hath  in  length  North  and  South  from  two
jhousand  leagues  upward,  and  East  and  West,  that  which
5  discovered  from  the  South  Sea  to  the  North  Sea. The
wo  Rowes  that  have  beene  spoken  of,  doe  passe  through  ThetwoRowes
11  the  Provinces  of  Piru  North  and  South,  that  of  the  of  the  Indies  of
Vndes  from  Popayan,  and  yet  many  will  have,  that  from  /  e  out '
Terra  firme  and  New  Spaine,  till  it  ends  in  the  *  Streight,  *Of
ind  the  other  lesse,  from  the  Quito  unto  Chile,  along  the  Magellan.
oast,  twelve  leagues  distant,  little  more  or  lesse.

The  two  wayes  passed  betweene  these  two  Mountaines,  The  two  great
ie  one  which  they  called  of  the  Ingas,  by  the  Andes  from  wayes  of  Piru.
asto  unto  Chile,  which  hath  nine  hundred  leagues  in
ength,  and  five  and  twentie  foote  of  Cawsie,  and  every
oure leagues  very sumptuous houses, which they call
ambos,  where  was  provision  of  victuals  and  apparell,
nd  every  halfe  league  men  that  were  in  postes  for  to  Postes.
arry messages, and orders from hand to hand. The
ther  way  went  through  the  middest  of  the  Playnes,  along
he  coast  of  five  and  twentie  foote  broad,  betweene  two
alls of  a mans height, from  Piru unto Chile, where
oth  the  wayes  met. And  it  is  to  be  noted,  that  all  the
ndies  of  the  South  are  not  to  be  understood  by  Piru,  for  p'tru  «  not  all

hath  beene  said, it  is  not  but  that  which  beginneth thf  In^es  °J
■om  Saint  Francis  of  Quito,  which  is  under  the  Equi-
octiall  Line,  and  runneth  along  unto  Chile,  going  out
f  the  Tropicks,  which  may  bee  sixe  hundred  leagues,
nd  fiftie  in  breadth,  though  toward  the  Chachapoyas  there

507

A.D.

l60I.

Los  Llanos.
Las  Sierras.

Diversitie  of
nature.

Chap.  17.
Of  the
Councell  of
Saint  Francis
of  the  Quito.

*0r

Cynamon.
El  Quito.

Aire  and
seasons.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

is  more,  and  it  is  divided  in  three  parts :  The  Playnes,
which  have  ten  leagues  in  breadth,  and  in  parts  lesse,  they
are  the  coast  of  the  Sea :  The  Hills,  which  have  about
twentie,  and  is  all  Hills  and  some  Valleys :  and  the  Andes
other  twentie,  which  are  most  thicke  Groves  and  Woods
and  in  so  little  space  as  fiftie  leagues  equally  distant  fromjij
the  Line  and  Pole :  there  is  so  great  diversitie,  that  in  ;01
the  one  place  almost  it  rayneth  alwayes,  and  in  the  other
almost  never,  which  is  the  Coast,  and  in  the  third  which
is  the  Mountaines  that  fall  in  the  middest  of  these
extreames,  sometime  it  rayneth,  and  sometime  not,  for
it  hath  his  Summer  and  Winter  as  in  Castile :  and  the
causes  of  not  rayning  in  the  Coast,  and  rayne  in  the  Andes,
are  spoken  of  in  the  beginning  of  the  Historic

Ft
\
3

THe  bounds  of  the  Councell  resident  in  Quito,  and
confining  Northward  with  that  of  Panama,  in  the
Port  of  Bonaventura,  and  on  the  North-east  with  the
New  Realme,  and  on  the  South  with  that  of  Lima ;  hath
in  length  by  the  South  coast,  which  is  the  place  where  it
lengthens  most,  about  two  hundred  leagues  from  the  Port
of  Bonaventure,  which  is  in  the  Gulfe  of  Panama,  or  of
Saint  Michael,  the  Port  of  Payta  in  the  coast  of  Piru,
and  from  thence  crosse  to  the  uttermost  of  Popayan,  more
then  other  two  hundred  and  fiftie,  the  limits  remayning
open  on  the  East  side :  in  it  is  included  three  Govern-
ments, besides  those  of  the  Councell,  which  are  Popayan,
Quixos,  la  Canela,*  and  that  of  Juan  de  Salinas,  of  the
Pacamoros,  and  Gualsango,  divided  in  two  Bishopricks.

The  Province  and  Government  of  Quito,  which  the
Councell  governeth,  hath  in  length  eightie  leagues,  from
neere  the  Equinoctiall  to  the  other  side,  and  in  it  these
Townes  of  Spaniards  following.  The  heaven  and  earth
thereof,  although  it  stands  under  the  Equinoctiall,  is  like
to  that  of  Castile,  cleere  and  faire,  rather  cold  then  hot,
and  in  parts  where  the  snow  continueth  all  the  yeere,  it
rayneth  from  October  to  March,  which  they  call  the
winter ;  and  in  the  other  moneths  they  cut  their  Grasse,

508

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

i  60  i.
which  though  it  be  not  long  it  is  fit  for  the  Cattell  of

Castile,  whereof  there  is  great  store ;  and  of  Wheat  and

Barley, and  gold in some places : and in this Region

they  live  pleasantly,  for  there  is  nothing  more  pleasant

for  humane  life,  then  to  enjoy  a  wholesome  and  cleere

skie,  for  they  have  no  Winter  to  trouble  them  with  cold,

nor  Summer  to  molest  with  heat. The  Townes  are,  the

Citie of Saint Franciscus of Quito, where Athavalpa  Athavalpa  or

Emperour  of  Piru  was  borne,  it  stands  in  halfe  a  degree  Atabaliba.

of  height  from  the  Equinoctiall,  and  eightie  two  from

the  Meridian  of  Toledo,  by  a  greater  circle  one  thousand

(sixe  hundred  eightie  sixe  leagues  from  it,  and  sixtie  from

(the  South  Sea ;  it  is  of  five  hundred  housholds : In  it  is

resident the  Councell  for  matters  of  Justice, for  those

pf  the  Government  are  at  the  Vice-roy  his  charge. There

ire  also  in  this  Citie  the  Officers  of  the  Kings  Rents  and

jtreasurie  Royall,  and  the  Cathedrall  of  this  Bishopricke,  [III.  v.  888.]

Suffragane  to  the  Archbishop  of  The  Kings  (los  Reyes)

piere  are  three  Monasteries  of  Dominicke,  Franciscan,  and

Mercenarie  *  Friars  :  and  in  her  jurisdiction  eightie  seven  *F?iars  de  la

Townes,  or  parcialities  of  Indians. In  the  situation  where  Merced,orour

this  Citie  was  built,  were  certaine  great  lodgings  which J!  *  °*

pe King Topayuga built, and his sonne Guayvacapa

■oeautified,  and  were  called  Quito,  from  whence  the  Citie

:ooke  the  name :  the  President  Sebastian  of  Belalcacar,  a

souldier  of  Don  Franciscus  Picarro  built  it,  a  loyall  man

:o  the  King,  by  order  of  the  President  Don  James  of

Almagro,  which  left  him  for  Governour  of  the  Province

\vhen  hee  went  unto  it,  having  ended  the  agreement  with

the  President  Don  Peter  of  Alvarado.

The  River  Bamba  in  the  Province  of  the  Purvaes,  is  River  Bamba.
4  Countrie  to  Castile  in  the  temperature,  of  herbes,  flowres,
and  other  things  :  it  is  a  towne  of  shepheards,  it  stands
ive  and  twentie  leagues  to  the  South-west  of  Saint
Francisce  of  Quito,  the  way  to  the  Kings,  wherein  are
rortie  thousand  head  of  cattell,  the  greatest  part  sheepe.
Here  the  Yugas  had  certaine  Royall  houses,  and  here
:he  President  Belalcazar  had  a  tedious  battaile  with  the

5°9

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

Indians,  and  overcame  them,  and  in  this  place  was  the
agreement  rehearsed  of  Don  James  of  Almagro  and  Don
Peter  of  Alvarado,  and  in  it  was  the  Citie  of  Quito  first
built.

Cuenca.  The  citie  of  Cuenca  (which  the  Marques  of  Cavyete

commanded  to  be  built,  being  Vice-roy  of  Piru,  which
by  another  name  is  called  Bamba,  one  and  fiftie  leagues
from  Quito  to  the  South)  is  a  Corregidorship  provided  fa
of the Vice-roy, with one Monasterie of Dominicke.

another  of  Franciscan  Friars. In  her  jurisdiction  are  rich  aid
mynes  of  gold,  some  of  silver,  and  rich  mynes  of  q\iick-l  port

Loxa.  silver,  copper,  Iron,  and  Brimstone. The  citie  of  Loxajave

*  Or  Briar,  otherwise  called  la  Zarca  eightie  leagues  from  the  citie  ofiffii
Quito toward the  South,  and  thirtie  from  Cuenca,  is  I
Governourship  provided  by  the  Vice-roy ;  it  hath  Monas^  a
teries  of  Saint  Dominicke  and  of  Saint  Francis,  it  stands^
in  the  way  from  Cuzco  to  Quito,  from  whence  it  is  eightie
leagues,  in  the  faire  Valley  of  Cuxibamba,  betweene  two
Rivers. Captaine  Antonie  of  Mercadillo  built  it  in  the  and
yeere 1546. for to pacifie the countrimen which were

Zamora. somewhat disordered. The citie of  Zamora, which isW
called  of  the  Alcaydes,  is  ninetie  leagues  from  Quito  South
eastward,  having  passed  the  Rowe  of  the  Andez : it  is
a Government provided by the Vice-roy: it hath a  situ;
Monasterie  of  Franciscans ;  they  reape  no  Wheat  because
the  countrie  is  very  raynie :  it  hath  rich  Mynes  of  gold
wherin  they  find  graines  of  foure  pound  waight  and  more :
the  Captaine  Mercadillo  peopled  it  the  yeere  1549.  by  a
covenant with Captaine Benavente : It stands twentie  1am
leagues  from  Loxa,  having  past  the  Rowe  which  divideth  k
the  bankes  of  the  South  Sea  from  the  North,  the  Indians  fide
did  call  it  Zamara : that  part  of  the  countrie  is  called  t,  a
Poroauca,  which  signifieth  Indians  of  warre : much  gold  1
is  gotten  there,  and  there  hath  beene  graines  brought  to  x
his  Majestie  of  twelve  pound  waight,  and  there  are  Salt-  .
pits  of  salt-water.  i.

Jaen.  The  citie  of  Jaen  is  five  and  fiftie  leagues  from  Loxa,

and  thirtie  from  the  Chachapoyas ;  Captaine  James  Palo-

5IQ

ik'i

Pro

hre

ron

pet

.tea

ANTONIO DE HERRERA

mino  built  it  1549.  in  the  Provinces  of  Chuquimayo,  in
Ithat  of  Chacaynga.  The  citie  of  Saint  Michael  of  Piura
lis  in  the  Province  of  Chila,  one  hundred  and  twentie
leagues  from  Quito  South-eastward,  and  five  and  twentie
from  the  Port  of  Payta,  where  the  bounds  of  this  Councell
doth  end.  It  is  a  Government  at  the  providing  of  the
Vice-roy :  it  hath  one  Monasterie  of  Mercenaries.
Though  in  this  countrie  rayne  is  holden  for  a  wonder,
there  are  good  watered  grounds,  that  beare  good  Wheat
md  Millet,  and  the  seedes  and  fruits  of  Castile.  The
port  of  Payta  stands  in  the  jurisdiction  of  this  Citie,  in
five  Southerne  degrees,  which  is  good,  great,  and  secure,
where  the  ships  that  goe  from  Guatemala  to  Piru  doe
touch.  The  Marques  Don  Franciscus  Picarro  built  it
in  the  yeere  1 53 1 .  the  first  of  these  Kingdomes,  and
where  the  first  Temple  was  erected  in  the  honour  of
3od,  and  the  holy  Mother  Church  of  Rome.  All  the
Province  and  borders  of  the  Valleys  of  Tumbez  are  drie,
ind  the  high-way  of  the  Ingas  passeth  through  these
Valleys  of  Piura,  betweene  trees  and  pleasant  shadowes,
ind  betweene  the  principall  Valley  are  joyned  two  or
:hree  Rivers  :  the  Citie  was  built  at  the  first  in  Tangazala,
torn  whence  it  was  remooved  because  it  was  a  sickly
ituation,  and  now  it  stands  betweene  two  Valleys,  and
vet  is  somewhat  sickly,  especially  for  the  eyes,  for  the
*reat  windes  and  dusts  of  the  Summer,  and  great  moistures
)f  the  Winter.

The  Citie  of  Saint  James  of  Guayaquil,  by  another
lame  las  Culata,  sixtie  leagues  from  Quito,  and  fifteene
rom  the  Sea  to  the  South-west,  it  is  a  Government  pro-
vided by  the  Vice-roy :  the  President  Belalcazar  peopled
t,  and  many  of  the  Indians  having  rebelled,  and  slaine
nany  Spaniards,  the  Captaine  Franciscus  of  Orellana
peopled  it  againe  1537.  it  is  a  most  plentifull  and  pleasant
Zountrie,  and  hath  great  store  of  hony  in  the  hollow
places  of  trees :  The  waters  of  this  River  which  runne
ilmost  under  the  Equinoctiall,  are  thought  healthfull  for
he  French  disease,  and  other  such  like. Many  people

A.D.

I  60 1.

Saint  Michael
of  Piura.

Raine  a

wonder.

Payta.

High-way
admirable.

Ban  J  ago  de

Guayaquil.

The  Rivers
that  goe  to  the
North  Sea  are
greater  then
those  that  goe
to  the  South
Sea.

ion

lat

ley
id

tee
the

TO

ley

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

went  to  the  River  to  recover  health,  for  the  multitude
of  the  rootes  of  Zarcaparrilla  that  are  in  the  River:  it i
is  not  very  great,  nor  those  that  run  to  the  South  Sea  are
so  bigge  as  those  that  runne  into  the  North  Sea,  because
they  runne  but  a  little  way ;  but  notwithstanding  they
are  strong  and  with  sudden  flouds,  because  they  fall  from

How  the  riven  the Mountaine. The Indians  doe  use  many  shifts  forpe

are  passed  in t0  passe  them ;  they  have  in  some  places  a  rope  over  it,

u'  and  a  basket  on  it,  and  the  passenger  being  put  into  it,

they  pull  him  from  the  other  side. In  other  Rivers  the

Indian  goeth  riding  on  a  trusse  of  straw,  and  carrieth

[III.  v.  889.]  the  passenger  behinde  him :  in  other  places  they  have  a
great  Net  of  gourds,  upon  the  which  they  lay  the  cloathes  Tei
and  the  persons,  and  the  Indians  fastened  with  certaine
coardes  goe  swimming  and  pulling  as  coach-horses ;  and  f
a  thousand  other  artes  they  use  for  to  passe  the  Rivers
The  Port  of  this  Citie  stands  neere  unto  it,  for  the  River
is  very  broad,  whereby  they  bring  up  the  merchandise
from  the  Sea,  and  they  goe  by  land  to  Quito. The  yeere  F

Castro.  1568.  Captaine  Contero  planted  the  citie  of  Castro,  in

the  Valley  of  Vili,  the  Licentiate  Lope  Garcia  of  Castro

PiR.  beng  Governour. Vili  is  in  the  Provinces  of  Bunigando,

Imdivono,  and  Gualapa,  which  they  call  the  Province  of
the  Emeralds,  and  he  went  about  it  from  Guayaquil,  and
discovered  all  these  Provinces  from  Passao  unto  the  River  *sl
of  Saint  John,  which  entreth  into  the  South  Sea.

*Or  old  Port.  The  Citie  of  Puerto  Viejo  *  is  about  eightie  leagues
from  Saint  Francis  of  Quito  to  the  West,  though  not  of
open  way,  and  other  fiftie  from  Saint  James  of  Guayaquil,
whereby  yee  goe  from  Quito  :  in  her  borders  stands  the
Passao,  which  is  the  first  Port  of  the  countrie  of  Piru,
and  from  it,  and  from  the  River  of  Saint  James,  began
the  government  of  the  Marques  Don  Franciscus  Picarro :
and  because  this  countrie  is  so  neighbour  to  the  Equi-
noctiall  line,  that  it  stands  in  one  degree ;  some  beleeve  it
is  unwholsome,  but  in  other  parts  as  neere  the  Line  men1
live  with  much  health,  plentie  and  abundance  of  all  things
for  the  sustenance  of  man, against the  opinion  of  the

5i*

un

lad
1st

3W1

Jue

'Oil

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

1601.

indent : and  so  it is  that  the  Indians  of  this  countrie
doe  not  live  long, and  in many  of  them  there  breede
rertaine  red  warts  in  the  foreheads  and  noses,  and  other
Darts, which beside the disease being grievous, it dis-
jigureth them very much, and it is beleeved that it
JDroceedeth  of  eating  some  fish. In  these  bounds  stands
he towne of Manta, whither  great riches have beene  Monta.
brought  from  within  the  Land ;  and  it  is  held  for  certaine,
hat  here  is  a  Myne  of  Emeralds,  which  are  the  best  of
[he Indies,  and  they  grow  in  a  stone  like  Cristall,  and  How  the
jhey  making  like  a  veine,  and  by  little  and  little  congealing  Emeralds  do
md refining themselves, and of halfe white and halfe  g70W'
greene,  they  goe  ripening  and  recovering  their  perfection.
}rhe  Captaine  Franciscus  Pacheco  peopled  this  citie  1535.
|>y  order  of  Don  James  de  Almagro  :  it  hath  many  Indians
n  warre  :  there  is  in  it  a  Monasterie  of  Mercenarie  Friars,
jhey  gather  no  Wheat,  for  it  rayneth  the  eight  moneths
n  the  yeere  from  October  forward,  and  there  are  many
j;ood  showes  of  gold.

In  the  coast  of  this  Government  are  the  Ports,  Hands,  Ports  fcf
nd  Points  following. The  c  Aucon  of  d  Sar  dinas,  before  Potnts  °f^e
he  Bay  of  Saint  James,  which  is  fifteene  leagues  from  the  coast  °* /  u
^oint  of  Manglares  to  the  South,  and  then  the  Bay  of  c  0r  ^00j^e\
•aint  Matthew,  and  after  the  Cape  of  Saint  Francis;  and  dOr  Pikhers.
•ast  it  Quiximies,  foure  Rivers  before  Portete,  where  the
■lacke  Moores  that  saved  themselves  of  a  ship  that  was  A  towne  of
ast away,  joyned  with the Indians,  and  have  made  a  blackeMoores.
fcwne ;  the  Passao,  a  Point  or  Port  of  Indians,  where  they
ay  the  Equinoctiall  line  passeth,  neere  the  Mountaine  of
iueaque,  and  the  Bay  of  Carta  which  is  before  old  Port,
'ne  degree  from  the  Equinoctiall  to  the  South,  and  five
^agues  from  thence  the  Cape  of  Saint  Laurence,  and  neere
*om  thence  the  Hand  of  Plate,  and  forward  the  Ports  of
'alio,  and  Calango,  before  the  Point  of  Saint  Helen,  in
#0  degrees  hight ;  the  River  of  Tumbez  in  foure  degrees,
nd  the  Hand  of  the  Puna  neere  unto  it,  and  the  Hand
f  Sancta  Clara  somewhat  more  to  the  Sea,  and  Cabo  bianco
fteene  leagues  from  Tumbez  to  the  South,  and  then  the

XIV  513  2K

A.D.

l60I.

e  Or  white

Cape.

f  Or  woolves.

the  Point  of
Santa  Helena.

I

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Point  of  Parina,  and  to  the  South  the  Hand  of  e  Lobos
foure  leagues  from  the  Port  of  Payta  abovesaid,  and  1;
Silla,  before  the  Point  del  Aguia,  and  the  Port  of  Tangora
The  Giants  of The  men  of  this  countrie  say,  that  in  old  time  then
came  by  Sea  in  Balsas  (which  are  many  pieces  of  timbe
fastened  one upon another) men  so bigge  that had  a
much  from  the  knee  downward,  as  an  ordinarie  man  11  ^
all  his  body,  and  that  they  made  certaine  Wells  most  deep  t
in  a  quicke  Rocke,  which  at  this  day  are  seene  very  fresl  i0
and  cold  in  the  Point  of  Saint  Helen,  and  that  becaus<
that  they  used  most  abominable  sinnes,  fire  fell  from  heavei^
and  consumed  them  all,  and  now  are  found  in  that  situatioi  ^
exceeding  great  bones  of  men,  and  pieces  of  teeth  o^:
fourteene  ounces  weight,  and  in  New  Spaine  in  the  bound  JS
of  Tlascala,  are  bones  found  of  the  like  bignesse. Then  B-
are  in  this  Point  of  Saint  Helen,  eyes  and  veine  of  Tarre|f]
so  perfect  that  they  might  calke  with  it,  and  it  commeti
out  very  hot.

Chap.  18.
OfPopayon,
Quixos,
Canela,
Pasamoros,
and  Gual-
songo,  which
are  the  rest  of
the  bounds  of
the  C ounce II  of
Quito.

The  Citie  of
Popayan.

THe  government  of  Popayan  one  hundred  and  twenti<L(
leagues  North  and  South,  from  the  confines  of  th<L
Province  of  Quito,  under  the  Equinoctiall  unto  the  conjy
fines  of  Cartagena  by  the  North,  and  another  one  hundreQ,
from  the  confines  of  new  Realme  by  the  East  unto  thljjj:
South  Sea,  wherein  are  some  Spanish  townes,  part  of  th<  ea:
Councell  of  Quito,  and  part  of  the  new  Realme.  Th(,f
countrie  is  commonly  rough  and  very  raynie,  and  therefore -i^
they  have  little  Millet,  and  lesse  Wheat,  and  no  store  oi%
Cattell,  but  it  is  rich  of  Mynes  of  gold,  and  the  Towne:  lf
are  these  following.  kj

The  citie  of  Popayan  stands  in  two  degrees  and  a  halfi  :lr
to  the  Septentrionall  part  of  the  Equinoctiall,  and  78.  ancj!os
a  halfe  of  longitude,  one  thousand  five  hundred  and  eighties
leagues  from  Toledo  :  in  it  is  resident  a  Lieftenant  Gover-ji|jv
nour,  the  Cathedrall,  and  one  Monasterie  of  Mercenary  ^
Friars.  The  President  Sebastian  of  Belalcazar  peoplec  ]e
this  citie  1537.  the  people  of  these  Provinces  are  farre  ]
different  from  that  of  Piru,  for  these  are  of  greater  under-  T,

5i4

ANTONIO DE HERRERA

A.D.

1 60 1.

Call.

*Or  great
Cappes.

standing, and lived in more policie : the men of this

government  lived  as  in  liberties. It  was  called  Popayan,

}f  the  name  of  the  Cazique  Lord  of  it :  it  hath  part  in  the  [III.  v.  890.]

:oast  of  the  South  Sea,  and  high Mountaines  that  goe

Eastward  : and  on  another  side  the  Row  of  the  Andes,

md  on  both  sides  spring  many  Rivers,  and  the  River  of

he  Magdalene  is  one,  which  runneth  into  the  North  Sea  :

n  this  government  are  many  coole  and  wholesome  townes,

ind  others  hot  and  sickly.

The  Citie  of  Cali  stands  in  foure  degrees,  and  two  and
wentie  leagues  from  Popayan,  and  eight  and  twentie  from
he  South  Sea,  it  was  inhabited  1537.  by  the  Captaine
vlichael  Munioz ;  and  Sebastian  of  Belalcazar  made  it
irst  in  the  townes  which  are  called  the  *  Gorroves ;  it
lath  the  seate  in  a  plaine  Valley,  leaning  to  the  foot  of  a
rlill,  the  temper  is  hot,  the  Governour,  the  Officers,  and
he  Kings  treasure  are  resident  in  it ;  a  melting  house,  a
VIonasterie  of  Mercenaries,  another  of  Augustine  Friars.
The  Port  of  Bonaventure  falleth  in  his  jurisdiction  in
hree  degrees  and  a  halfe  of  altitude :  in  it  are  some
lousholds  resident  for  to  receive  the  merchandize.  The
ndians  of  Cali  are  of  a  good  condition,  and  good
Christians,  their  old  Lord  was  called  Lisupete.  The
Ullage  of  Saint  Fe  of  Antiochia,  is  more  then  an  hundred  Antiochia.
eagues  from  Popayan  to  the  north-east,  in  the  borders
>f  the  River  Cauca,  of  the  bounds  of  the  Councell  of
he  New  Realme,  and  Bishopricke  of  Popayan,  rich  in
Vlynes  of  gold,  neere  to  the  Hill  of  Buritaca  famous  for
he  much  gold  that  was  in  it :  it  is  seated  in  certaine
Raines.  The  countrie  people  are  good  folkes,  well  made
nd  white,  and  the  temperature  is  such  that  they  goe
o  sleepe  on  the  houses,  without  any  offence  of  the  deaw :
hey  breede  much  Cattell,  many  fruits,  and  fish  in  the
livers  and  Plashes :  the  Captaine  Gaspar  of  Rhodes
nhabited  it  by  commission  of  the  President  Belalcazar,
he  yeere  1 541 .

The  Village  of  Caramanta  is  sixtie  or  seventie  leagues  Caramanta.
rom  Popayan  to  the  North-east,  neere  to  the  great  River

515

ad.  PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

1 60 1.

Cauca,  of  the  bounds  of  the  New  Realme,  government  r(h
and  Bishopricke  of  Popayan,  plentifull  of  Millet  and  other
seedes,  without  Wheat,  and  with  little  Cattell,  though
they  have  many  Swine,  they  goe  by  the  River  in  five  or
sixe  houres  to  Antiochia,  though  it  bee  fiftie  leagues;
for  it  runneth  very  swift :  it  is  the  plantation  of  the  aJe
President  Belalcazar.  The  village  of  Saint  James  of
Arma.  Arma,  which  hath  many  Mynes  of  gold,  is  fiftie  leagues

from  Popayan  to  the  North-east,  declining  to  the  East,
it  is  of  the  Councell  of  the  new  Realme,  the  government
and  Diocesse  of  Popayan ;  without  Wheat  or  seedes  of
Castile,  but  plentifull  of  the  countrie  seedes. The  Presi
dent Belalcazar inhabited this village, and here hee  (
beheaded the Marshall George Robledo. It stands  iev
sixteene  leagues  from  Ancerma  :  the  people  of  the  countrie
Canibals. are  so  butcherly  that  the  quicke  are  the  sepulchre  of  the
Inhumanitie  of  dead,  for  it  hath  beene  seene  the  husband  to  eate  thej|e
*f  ^T- %  w^e>  the  brotner  the  brother  or  sister,  the  sonne  the  father,
Arma " anc^  having  fatned  any  captive,  the  day  that  they  are  to
eate  him,  they  bring  him  forth  with  many  songs,  and  the
Lord  commandeth that  an Indian  doe  goe  cutting  off
every  member,  and  so  alive  they  goe  eating  him,  and  c
after  the  inhabiting  of  Arma  they  have  eaten  more  then  f «
eight thousand Indians, and some Spaniards  have  also  L
suffered  this  martyrdome.  tlirt

Ancerma.  The  village  of  Saint  Anne  of  Ancerma  is  fiftie  leagues  L

from  Popayan  to  the  North-east,  in  the  border  of  Cauca,  j)0r(]
of  the  Councell  of  the  new  Kingdome,  government  andj^]
Bishopricke  of  Popayan,  without  Cattell  or  Wheat,  very  L
much  annoyed  with  thunder-bolts : the  Captaine  George  \
Robledo  built  it  by  order  of  Laurence  of  Aldana. Like-  -r
wise  the  men  of  this  countrie  are  eaters  of  humane  flesh ;  j
they  goe  naked,  they  have  no  Idols,  nor  any  thing  toju
worship : there  are  in  this  jurisdiction  good  Mynes  of  1;
gold ; the  climate  is  hot, and  many  thunder-bolts  doe  r
Cartago.  fall. The  citie  of  Cartago,  five  and  twentie  leagues  from  j

Popayan  about  the  North-east,  is  of  the  Councell  of  the  n
New  Realme,  Government  and  Bishoprick  of  Popayan,

516

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  ad

i  60  i.

vithout  Wheat  or  any  seedes  of  Castile :  it  is  a  temperate
nd  wholesome  countrie,  of  little  gold,  it  rayneth  much,
■hey  breede  no  other  cattell  but  Kine,  and  Mares : they
iiave  many  Mountaines,  in  the  which  breede  many  Lions,
figres, Beares, and *  Dantas, and wilde Boares : they  *Or  Buffet.
iave  a Monasterie of  Franciscan Friars : the Captaine
lieorge  Robledo  inhabited  it,  and  it  was  called  Cartaga,
•ecause  all  the  inhabiters  were  of  Cartagena. The  village
»f  Timana  is  fortie  leagues  from  Popayan  to  the  South- Timana.
last,  and  sixtie  from  Santa  Fe  of  Bogota,  and  thirtie  from
Ihe  Provinces  of  Dorado ; here  is  a  Lieftenant  of  the
rovernour,  which  also  hath  at  his  charge  Saint  Sebastian
lie  la  Plata : the  Indians  of  their  borders  doe  decay,  for
they are so inhumane that in many places they have  inhumanitie  of
•ublike  shambles  of  men  which  they  take  captive. They  these  Indians.
ave  their  seate  in  the  beginning  of  the  Valley  of  Neyva,
he  temper  is  most  hot :  in  their  bounds  is  a  Mountaine
/here  they  digge  the  Load-stone,  and  the  Indian  Paezes  Where  the
re  neere,  and  the  Pixaos,  which  also  are  *  Caribes.  Load-stone  is

The  Citie  of  Guadalajara  of  Buga,  is  fifteene  leagues  %%?  '

*om  Popayan  to  the  North-east,  is  of  the  bounds  of  the  kunume  flesh
'ouncell  of  Quito,  and  Diocesse  of  Popayan. The  Citie  Buga.
f  Saint  Sebastian  of  the  Plate,  in  the  confines  of  this  Saint  Sebas-
rovernment is thirtie  five  leagues from  Popayan, and  tian  tftke
hirtie to the South-west from Santa Fe, Diocesse of  p  te-
'opayan,  where  are  many  Mynes  of  silver,  and  in  her
orders  twentie  foure  repartitions  :  it  is  three  leagues  from
le  Port  of  Onda,  in  the  great  River  of  Magdalen,  where
lose  that  come  up  from  Cartagena  doe  land : it  is  built
1  a  Plaine,  neere  to  the  River  Guala : there  are  many
Earthquakes,  and  in  Winter  it  is  more  hot  then  cold,
"he  Countrymen  goe  to  decay,  because  the  c  Caribes  which  "OrCanibals.
ley call del Rincon do eate them and have publike
hambles  of  them,  without  any  remedie  for  it : and  the
'resident Belalcazar built this Citie. The Citie of  [HI.  v.  891.]
dmaguer  is  twentie  leagues  from  Popayan  to  the  South-  Almaguer.
ast ; it  is  plentifull  of  Wheate  and Millet,  and  other
eeds,  and  cattle,  and  it  hath  Gold :  the  Captaine  Alonso

5*7

A.D.
l60I.

*High  Judge
of  Residencia.

Truxillo.

Agreda.

Saint  John  de
Pastor.

Religion.

What  the
jEtnaes  are,
and  whereof
they  proceede.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

of  Fuenmayor,  by  order  of  the  Licentiate  Brizenyo  Gover-j  ir>
nour,  and  d  Judge  of  Accounts,  of  Popazan  peopled  it  ittra
being  seated  in  a  Hill  of  Zabana,  and  the  climate  is  fresh,  t
and  the  people  doe  weare  Cotton-cloth.

S.  John  of  Truxillo,  and  by  another  name  Yscauce  is  s  di
thirtie  leagues  from  Popayan  to  the  South-east.  Thejierit
Citie  of  Madrigall,  or  Chapanchica,  thirtie  five  from  { I
Popayan  about  the  South,  a  rough  Countrey,  where  they  i  cc
neither  reape  Wheate,  nor  breed  cattell,  though  they  gather  Sug£
Millet  twice  a  yeere  in  their  jurisdiction  :  and  for  the  ICast
roughnesse  of  the  Countrey,  the  men  are  evill  to  pacifie3ieei
and  in  this  Citie,  and  in  the  Citie  of  Agreda,  and  torn
Almaguer,  are  Mynes  of  Gold.  Agreda,  and  by  another  T
name  Malga,  stands  fortie  five  leagues  from  Popayan  to  Dro\
the  South-west.  The  Citie  of  Saint  John  of  the  Pasture,  ie
so  called  because  it  is  a  Countrey  of  many  Pastures,  it  twa
stands  fiftie  leagues  from  Popayan,  about  the  South-west,  ind
and  as  many  from  Quito  about  the  North-east,  and  infitk
one  degree  from  the  Equinoctiall  Diocesse  of  Quito,  In  Sain
a  good  soyle,  of  a  good  climate,  and  plentifull  of  Milletjriiic
and  other  provisions,  with  Mynes  of  Gold ;  In  her  borders:  ke
are  24000.  Indians  of  fee,  which  are  not  Caniballs,  butfe
of  evill  visages,  filthy,  and  simple:  they  had  no  Idols  1:
in  the  time  of  their  Paganisme,  they  beleeved  that  after) Ccrr
death  they  should  goe  to  live  in  more  joyfull  places.  The 'k
River  which  they  call  Whoate,  is  betweene  Pasta,  andu;:
Popayan,  it  is  of  a  very  delicate  water,  and  passed  thisione
River  is  the  Mountayne  whither  Goncalo  Picarro  didiie
follow  the  Vice-roy  Blasco  Nunyez  Vela,  and  unto  the:  he
River  Augasmayo,  which  is  in  this  Province  came  theilk
King  Guaynacapa.  JFran

Beyond  the  River  Caliente  or  hot  River  in  a  Moun-  fa
tayne,  is  a  fine  mouth,  that  casteth  store  of  smoake,  and  the
it  brake  forth  in  ancient  times,  as  the  Countreymen  doe  :wo
say.  The  Philosophers  being  willing  to  declare  what  Mi
these  firie  mouthes  or  jEtnaes  are,  doe  say,  that  as  in  the: Han
Earth  are  places  that  have  vertue  to  attract  a  vaporie  0
substance,  and  to  convert  it  into  water,  whereof  the  con-Is m

518

ANTONIO DE HERKERA  a.d.

i  60  i.

,inuall  springs  are  made  : there  are  also  places  that  doe

ittract to themselves dry and hote exhalations, which

xe  converted  into  fire  and  smoake,  and  with  the  force

>f  them they  cast also  another  grosse substance  which

s  dissolved  into  ashes,  or  into  stones,  and  these  are  the

ierie  mouthes. Saint  John  de  Pasto hath Monasteries

>f  Dominicke,  Franciscan,  and  Mercenarie  Friers  : it  is

l cold Countrey, with abundance of victuals, it hath

nigar  Mils,  and  many  Fruites  of  the  Countrey  and  of

Castile  :  when  the  Captaine  Lawrence  of  Aldona  built  it,

lee  called  it e  Villa  viciosa  de  Pasto,  it  stands  fortie  leagues  cOr  theranke

From  the  South  Sea,  towards  the  Hand  Gorgova.  Village  of

There  hath  beene  disinhabited,  or  diminished  in  this  Pasture-
Province,  the  Citie  of  Antiochia,  the  Village  of  Neyva  in  Neyva.
he  Valley  of  Neyva,  twentie  leagues  from  Tumava,  and
t  was  through  the  rigour  of  the  Indian  Paezes,  and  Pixaos,
Lnd  for  the  Manipos,  in  the  Valley  of  Saldavya,  and  the
Zitie  of  Saint  Vincent  of  the  Paezes,  sixtie  leagues  from  Saint  Vincent.
>aint  John  of  the  Plaines,  in  the  confines  of  Popayan,
vhich Domingos Lozavo built, and the Citie of los
Vngelos, twentie  two  leagues  from  Tocayma,  and  nine  The  Angels.
rom  Neyva. There  is  in  the  Coast  which  this  govern-  Rivers,Capes,
nent extendeth on the South Sea, from the Cape of  and  Po'tnts  °f
Zorrientes,  that  stands  in  five  degrees  Septentrionall  from  **? ast  °f
he  Line, the  River  of  Solinas,  betweene  the  Cape  of  mnf
2orrientes  and  the  Hand  of  the  Palmes  in  foure  degrees
me  third  part,  and  in  the  Coast  that  lyeth  unto  Gorgova,
he  River  of  Saint  John  among  many  other  which  make
he  Countrey  boggie,  and  right  against  the  mouth,  the
[land of Gorgova, two leagues compasse, where Don
i^ranciscus  Picarro  was  forsaken  of  all  his  men,  with  his
hirteene  companions. The  River  of  Saint  Lucar,  and
he  River  of  Nicardo,  before  the  River  of  f  Zedros,  in  {Or  Cedars.
"wo  degrees  from  the  Line,  in  which  stands  the  He  del
jallo,  and  after  the  Port  of  the  Crosse,  and  the  point  of
Manglares,  where  beginneth  the  Coast  of  Quito.

Of  the  government  of  the  Quixos,  and  Canela,  there
s  no  more  notice,  but  that  it  falls  to  the  East  of  the

519

T

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

Province  of  Quito,  and  part  of  the  South,  toward  the
government  of  John  of  Salinas ;  there  are  in  it  three
Spanish  Townes,  with  a  Governour  which  the  Vice-roy
of  Piru  provideth,  and  in  spirituall  respect  it  is  of  the
Bishopricke  of  Quito :  the  Countrey  is  rough  and  Moun
taynous,  without  Wheate,  and  little  Millet,  with  certayne
Trees  which  seeme  of  Cinamon.  The  first  Towne  is
Baeca  eighteene  leagues  from  Saint  Francis  of  Juito,
toward  the  South-east,  where  the  Governour  is  Resident :
the  Citie  of  Archidova  is  twentie  leagues  beyond  Baeca :
the  Citie  of  Avila  stands  to  the  North  of  Archidova.
Pacamoresand  The  government  and  Province  of  Pacamoros  and
Guahongo.  Gualsango,  or  of  John  of  Salinas  whose  bounds  and  limits
are  one  hundred  leagues,  which  were  assigned  him  to
the  East,  from  twentie  leagues  before  the  Citie  of  Zamora,
in  the  Rowe  of  the  Andes,  and  as  many  more  North  andfcom
South.  It  is  a  good  Countrey  in  temper  and  disposition  Sou
for  Wheate,  seeds,  and  cattle,  of  rich  Mynes  of  Gold! and
where  they  have  pieces  of  great  bignesse :  there  are
in  it  foure  Townes  of  the  Bishopricke  of  Quito,  for
the  Captaine  John  of  Salinas  did  build  them.  The
Citie  of  Valladolid  is  in  seven  degrees  height,  twentie
leagues  from  Loxa  to  the  South-east,  having  past  the
Rowe  of  Piru,  the  Citie  of  Loyola,  or  Cumbruania  is
sixteene  leagues  to  the  East  from  Valladolid :  the  Citie
of  Saint  James  of  the  Mountaynes,  fiftie  leagues  from
Loyola,  toward  the  East,  and  in  her  borders  much  gold,
and  very  high  in  touch,  and  as  touching  the  gold  we
[III.  v.  892.]  need  not  intreat  of  his  excellencies,  being  holden  for
the  Supreame  power  in  the  World.  It  is  gotten  in  these
In  how  many  Mynes  in  three  manners :  The  first  is  in  Pippens,  which
sorts  the  gold  are  wj10je  pieces  without  mixture  of  any  other  Metall,
%lnPWu  °and  tnat  neec^  not  to  ^e  purified  by  fire,  and  these  graines
other  places,  commonly  are  like  a  Pompeon  Seed,  and  sometimes
bigger:  of  this  gold  is  found  but  litle,  in  respect  of  the
rest.  The  second  sort  is  in  stone,  which  is  a  vaine  that
groweth  in  the  stone  it  selfe,  and  these  stones  are  found
in the  government  of  John of Salinas  very  great, all

520

t)

Citi

of  1

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

i  60  i.

"  passed  through  with  gold,  and  some  which  are  halfe  Gold,

the  which  is  found  in  Pits  and  Mynes,  and  it  is  hard  to

worke. The  third,  is  gotten  in  powder,  and  is  the  greatest

quantitie,  and  this  is  found  in  Rivers,  or  in  places  where

some  streame  of  water  hath  passed,  and  the  Rivers  of

these  Indies  have  many,  especially  in  the  Kingdoms  of

Chile, Quito, New Realme of Granada, and in the

beginning  of the Discoveries, there  were many in the

B  Weather Hands. The highest in touch is that of  *  Barlevento.

Carabaya  in  the  Piru,  and  that  of  Valdivia  in  Chile,  for

it  reacheth  to  twentie  three  Charracts  and  an  halfe,  and

yet  it  passeth.

Chap.  19.

THat  which  is  called  Piru,  is  proper  and  particularly  Of  the  bounds

the  bounds  of  the  Councell  of  los  Reyes,  and  is  or  Audienc^of

comprehended  North  and  South, from  sixe  unto  seven  The  Kings,  or

Southerne degrees  of  altitude, which  are two hundred  los  Reyes.

and  twentie  leagues,  though  in  Voyage they  put  three  M********

hundred  from  the  point  del  Aguia,  beyond  Payta,  whereby  €*£!netkmt  in

it  joyneth  with  the  Councell  of  Quito,  till  passing  the  tne  p/aynes  of

Citie  and  Port  of  Arequipa,  where  beginneth  the  Councell  Piru.

of  the  Charcas,  East  and  West. The  inhabited  part  of  h  Some  are  of

this  Councell  hath  about  one  hundred  leagues  from  the  ^*'^*L/

Coast  of  the South  Sea  toward  the  East,  whereby  her  trees  are

bounds  remayne  open  unto  the  Provinces  of  the  River  of  nourished  by

Plate,  and  of  Brasill,  that  which  is  from  the  Rowe,  where,  vapours:  yea

as  hath  beene  said,  it  rayneth  continually,  unto  the  Sea,  that  the

they  call the  Plaines of  Piru, in the which it neither  ^^7 nourish

rayneth  nor  thundreth,  because  the  great  height  of  the  living  Crea-

Mountain  doth  shelter  the  Plaines  in  such  sort,  that  it  tures.  So  Gen.

permitteth  no  wind  from  the  Earth  to  blow,  whereby  the  *•  *  ™!st '"

Sea  wind  reigneth,  which  having  no  contrary  doth  not  TheSunne  as

represse  the  vapours  that  doe  arise  to  make  raine,  in  sort  Head  of  the

that  the  shelter  of  the  Hill  hindereth  the  thickning  of  World,  the

the  vapours:  and  this  want  of  matter  causeth  that  in  that  Hart  as  Sonne

Coast  the  vapours  are  so  thinne,  that  they  make  no  more  in , y'

then a moyst or dankish mist, which is profitable  for  nourishment

their  sowings,  which  have  not  without  the  h  mist  so  much  by  vapours.

521

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

1601.

vertue,  be  they  never  so  much  watered.  The  Countrey
is  all  sandie  grounds,  except  the  Valleyes  which  are  made
by  courses  of  the  Rivers,  that  descend  from  the  Moun-
tayne,  where  much  Corne  is  gathered  by  the  waterings,
Wine,  Oyle,  Sugar,  and  the  other  Seeds,  and  Fruits,  of
Castile,  and  of  the  Countrey.  In  the  skirts  and  hils  sides
of  the  Mountayne,  are  great  Pastures  and  breedings  of
cattell,  and  the  temper  variable,  and  as  would  be  desired ;
for  the  height  is  cold,  and  the  low  hot,  and  the  middlemost
partakers  of  the  extreames,  as  they  are  more  or  lesse  neere
them.  The  government  of  this  Councell,  and  of  Quito,
and  of  the  Charcas,  is  in  the  charge  of  the  Vice-roy,  and
there  are  the  Townes  following  in  the  circuit  of  this
Councell.
The  Citie  of  The  Citie  of  the  Kings  (or  of  Lima,  because  the  Valley
The  Kings,  or  js  so  caH^  which  was  the  name  of  the  Cazique,  and  it
is  the  greatest  and  broadest  Valley,  of  all  those  that  are
from  Tumbez  unto  it)  stands  neere  the  South  Sea,  in
twelve  degrees  of  Southerne  altitude,  and  eightie  two
from  the  Meridian  of  Toledo,  distant  from  it  about  one
thousand  eight  hundred  and  twentie  leagues  by  a  greater
circle :  it  hath  above  three  thousand  housholds :  the
Marques  Don  Franciscus  Picarro  built  it,  in  the  beginning
of  the  yeere  1533.  because  suspecting  that  the  President
Don  Peter  of  Alvarado  would  come  downe  to  the  Sea
coast,  when  hee  went  with  an  Host  from  Guatemala
meanewhile  that  Don  James  of  Alvarado  went  to  resist
him  to  the  Provinces  of  Quito,  hee  went  to  intercept
him  the  passages  of  the  Sea.  Neere  this  citie,  on  the
East  side,  passeth  a  River  from  whence  all  the  houses
doe  take  water,  and  their  gardens,  wherein  are  excellent
fruits  of  Castile  and  of  the  Countrie,  and  it  is  one  of  the
best  Climates  of  the  World,  seeing  there  is  neither  famine
nor  pestilence ;  nor  doth  it  rayne  or  thunder,  nor  fall
there  any  thunder-bolts  or  lightnings,  but  the  Heaven
is  alwayes  cleere  and  very  faire.

In this Citie is resident the Vice-roy, the Royall
Councell,  an  assembly  of  chiefe  Justices,  the  Officers  of Fran

522

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

1601.

the  Kings  Rents,  and  treasurie  Royall,  the  Tribunall  of

the holy and generall Inquisition, which was founded

when the Inquisition of New Spaine was. The

Inquisitor generall in these Kingdomes was then the

Cardinall Don  James  of  Espinosa Bishop  of Siguenca,

it having proceeded with mature deliberation, For the

augmenting  of  our  holy  Catholike  Faith,  and  Christian

Religion. There is also in this Citie an Universitie,  Such  holinesse

where  very  learnedly  the  Sciences  are  read,  and  Schooles  °J  Jait  \suc

r n-  J  i  riTT  -i  i-ii meanes  to

of divers languages or the Indians, in the which the  w/^/^  it

Fathers  of  the  Companie  of  Jesus  are  very  diligent,  to  force  gluing
reape  fruit  in  the  preaching  of  the  Gospell. In  this  Citie  tips  and  Let-
is  the  Archepiscopall  resident,  whose  Suffraganes  are  the  tlce  Hetner->
Bishops of Chile, Charcas, Cuzco, Quito, Panama,  compiawet]K
Nicaragua, and the River of Plate. There are three Universitie
Parishes,  and  five  Monasteries  of  the  foure  Orders,  and  and  Jesuites.
of  the  Companie  of  Jesus,  and  two  of  Nunnes. Callao
which  is  her  Port,  is  two  leagues  from  it,  great,  capable,
and  very  good,  where  are  store  of  houses,  one  of  Justice,
a  custome  House,  one  Church,  and  one  Monasterie  of
Dominicke  Friars : here  hath  beene  seene  the  Wine  and
the  Water  set  to  coole  in  the  Sea  in  flaggons,  whence  Sea  cooleth.
it  is  inferred  that  the  Ocean  hath  the  vertue  to  temper
and  refresh  the  over-much  heate. Many  doe  affirme  that
in  this  Citie  are  twelve  thousand  Women  of  all  Nations,  [III.  v.  893.]
and  twentie  thousand  blacke-Moores.  Women  and

The  Village  of  Arnedo  in  the  Valley  of  Chancai,  is J^°j
ten  leagues  from  The  Kings, and  halfe  a  league  from
the  Sea,  with  a  Monasterie  of  Dominicke  Friars,  rich  of
Vines : the  Earle  of  Nieva  built  it. The  Village  of  the
*  Parrilla, or Santa, is by the Valley  where it stands, *OrGHdiron.
fiftie ^ive leagues from The Kings, and fifteene from
Truxillo  neere  the  Sea,  neere  to  a  great  and  faire  River,
with  a  good Haven, in nine  degrees,  where  the ships
that  saile  by  the  coast  of  Piru  doe  touch. The  Citie  of
Truxillo  is  in  the  Valley  of  Chimo,  which  Don  James  of  Truxillo.
Almagro  plotted  first,  and  afterward  the  Marques  Don
Franciscus  Picarro  built  it  in  the  yeere 1533. It  hath

523

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

many  Vines  and  fruits  of  Castile,  and  Wheat :  it  is  all
watered  ground,  and  a  wholesome  Countrie,  and  there  bee
great  Orchards  of  Oranges,  and  breeding  of  Poultrie.  It
stands  in  seven  degrees  and  a  halfe,  eightie  leagues  from
Lima  neere  the  Sea,  with  Monasteries  of  Saint  Dominicke,
Saint  Francis,  and  Saint  Augustine,  and  another  of  the
Mercenaries,  and  Officers  Royall,  provided  by  the  Vice-
roy :  and  in  her  bounds  about  fiftie  thousand  tributarie
Indians,  in  two  and  fortie  repartitions.  The  Port  is  two
leagues  off  in  an  open  Bay,  evill,  and  of  little  securitie.

Mirafiores.  The  Village  of  Miraflores  is  in  the  Valley  of  Zava,  ninetie
five  leagues  from  the  Citie  of  The  Kings  to  the  North

Chachapoyas.  side,  and  neere  to  the  Sea.  The  Citie  of  Chachapoyas,
or  Saint  John  of  the  Frontier,  is  about  one  hundred  and
twentie  leagues  from  the  Citie  of  The  Kings  to  the  North-
east, it  hath  one  Monasterie  of  the  Mercenaries,  and
another  of  the  Franciscans :  in  her  bounds  are  Wheat,
Millet,  and  Flaxe,  many  Mynes  of  gold,  and  more  then
twentie  thousand  tributarie  Indians,  which  held  out
valorously  a  long  time  against  the  Ingas,  but  in  the  end
they  were  over-come,  and  for  greater  quietnesse  of  the
Countrie  they  carried  many  of  them  unto  Cuzco,  and
they  inhabited  in  a  Hill  which  is  called  Carmenga. These

Faire  Indians,  are  the  whitest  and  best  favoured  Indians  of  all  the  Indies,
and  the  Women  very  faire.  The  Marshall  Alfonsus  of
Alvarado,  entred  in  this  Province  the  yeere  1536.  by
order  of  the  Marques  Don  Francisco  Picarro,  and  pacified
it,  and  built  the  said  Citie  in  a  strong  situation  called
Levanto,  and  afterward  he  passed  to  the  Province  of  the
Guancas.

Saint  James  of The  Citie  of  Saint  James  of  the  Valleys,  or  Moyobamba,

the  Valleys,  more  then  one  hundred  leagues  from  The  Kings  North-
eastward, and  five  and  twentie  from  Saint  John  of  the
Frontier,  stands  in  a  very  raynie  soile,  and  plentifull  of

Lion  of  Cattell. The  Citie  of  Lion  of  the  Guanuco,  fiftie  leagues

Guanuco.  from  the  Cite  of  The  Kings  to  the  North,  neere  the  high-
way of  the  Ingas,  somwhat  distant  towards  the  East,  hath
Monasteries of Dominicans, Franciscans, and Mercen-

524

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

1601.
aries,  and  in  her  bounds  thirtie  thousand  tributarie
Indians.  Anno  1539.  for  the  warre  that  the  Tyrant
Yllotopa  made  to  this  Province,  the  Marques  Don
Franciscus  Picarro  sent  Captaine  Gomez  of  Alvarado
which  built  it,  and  afterward  it  was  disinhabited,  and
Peter  Barroso  reedified  it,  and  after  the  battell  of  Chupas
the  Licentiate  Vaca  de  Castro,  sent  Captaine  Pedro  de
Puelles  to  make  an  end  of  the  plantation.  It  stands  in
a  good  and  wholesome  situation,  abundant  of  victuals
and  Cattell :  it  hath  Mynes  of  silver,  and  the  people  is
of  good  capacitie.  They  reape  much  Wheat,  for  the
Indians  have  learned  to  be  good  husbandmen :  for  as
before  in  these  Indies  there  was  no  Wheat,  nor  Barley,
nor  Millet,  nor  Panick,  nor  any  seede  of  the  bread  of
Castile  of  Europe,  and  they  knew  other  kindes  of  Graine
and  Rootes,  only  of  the  which  Mayz  or  Millet  was  the
principall,  being  found  in  all  the  Indies ;  the  Countrimen
have  since  delighted  much  in  it,  and  have  received  it
well  in  those  places  where  it  is  gathered,  because  the  Qualities  of
Mayz  is  not  so  strong  nor  of  so  much  substance  as  the  the  Millet.
Wheat :  it  is  fatter,  and  hot,  and  engendreth  bloud,  it
groweth  in  Canes,  and  beareth  one  or  two  bunches,  and
some  Spaniards  doe  eate  it  where  they  have  no  other
shift.

The  Citie  of  Guamanga,  or  Saint  Juan  of  the  Victorie,  Guamanga.
sixtie  leagues  from  Lima  to  the  South-east,  in  the  way
of  the  Ingas,  Bishoprick  of  Cuzco,  hath  Monasteries  of
Dominicans,  Franciscans,  and  Mercenaries,  and  one  of
Nunnes,  and  in  her  bounds  more  then  thirtie  thousand
tributarie  Indians :  it  is  plentifull  of  Wheate  and  Wine,
and  rich  of  silver  Mynes.  The  Marques  Don  Franciscus
Picarro  built  this  Citie  1539.  and  placed  it  the  first  time
in  a  towne  of  Indians  called  Guamanga,  neere  to  the  great
Row  of  the  Andes,  and  left  for  his  Lieftenant  the  Captaine
Francisco  de  Cardenyas.  Afterward  it  was  removed  to
the  Playne  where  now  it  is,  neere  to  certaine  small  Hills
on  the  South  side,  and  nigh  to  a  Brooke  of  good  water.
In  this  Citie  are  the  best  houses  in  Piru,  of  stone  and

S25

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

bricke ; the seate is healthfull, without  offence  of the

Sunne,  the  Aire,  the  Deaw,  or  the  Moisture,  or  the  Heate.

Great  There  are  found  in  her  borders  certaine  great  buildings

buildings. (which  the  Indians  say  certaine  white  men  with  beards,

which  came thither  before the Ingas, did  build) much

differing  from  the  building  of  the  Ingas : the  most  of

the  Countrimen of  this Countrie  are Mitimaes, which

Transplanting  is  to  say, Transplanted,  for  the  Ingas  did  use  for  the

as  of  Egyptians  greater  securitie  of  the  Empire,  to  take  from  one  Province

the  Israelites'  ^e  People  tne7  did  not  trust,  and  send  them  to  live  in

2.  Reg.  17/ another.

J  ewes  to  Bab. Guamanga  is  sixtie  leagues  from  Cuzco,  and  in  the
&c-  way  are  the  Hills  and  Playne  of  Chupas,  where  Vaca  de

Castro,  and  Don  James  de  Almagro  the  yonger  did  fight ;
and  forward  are  the  buildings  of  Vilcaf,  in  the  high  way
in  Andabaylas,  eleven  leagues  from  Guamanga,  which  was
Temple  of  the  the  centre  of  the  Ingas ;  and  here  was  the  great  Temple
Sunne.  0f  jjje  Sunne. The  Province  of  the  Andabaylas  is  long

and  hath  much  tame  Cattell,  and  victualls ;  from  thence
they  come  to  the  River  of  Abancay,  nine  leagues  neerer
Cuzco,  where  the  President  Don  James  of  Almagro  the
[III.  v.  894.]  elder  overthrew  and  apprehended  Alfonso  of  Alvarado,
Generall  of  the  Marques  Don  Francisco  Picarro.  There
followeth  the  River  of  Apurima,  eight  leagues  from
Passado,  or  the  Passage,  which  is  very  great ;  and  then
the  Hill  of  Vilcaconga,  where  the  said  President  Almagro
over-came  a  great  battell  of  the  Indians,  before  he  won
Cuzco,  and  the  Valley  of  Xaquixaguana  is  neere  betweene
two  rowes  of  Hills,  not  broad  nor  long,  where  the  Presi-
dent Pedro  la  Gasca,  by  the  vertue  of  those  valiant  and
faithfull  Captaines  Ynojosa,  Peter  of  Valdibia,  Gabriel
of  Rojas,  Alfonsus  of  Alvarado,  and  others  (of  the  which
in  their  place  shall  be  made  mention  particularly)  did
over-throw  Goncalo  Picarro,  and  tooke  him  :  and  from  this
Valley  to  the  Citie  of  Cuzco  are  five  leagues :  and  in  this
Valley  they  gather  great  store  of  Wheat,  and  have  great
store  of  Cattell

526

ANTONIO DE HERRERA

Eight  or  ten  leagues  from  the  Citie  of  Guamanga,
somewhat  North-westward,  are  the  Mynes  of  Guan-
cabelica,  which  they  call  El  Assiento  de  Oropesa,  where
ordinarily  are  resident  more  then  three  hundred  Spaniards.
The  Indians  did  worke  in  them  to  take  out  the  red  Oaker,
to  paint  themselves  when  in  the  time  of  their  Paganisme
they  went  to  warre,  which  is  the  Vermillion  :  and  the
Licenciate  Lope  Garcia  of  Castro,  governing  in  Piru  in
the  yeere  1566.  a  Portugall  called  Henrie  Garces,  con-
sidering that  of  the  Vermillion  the  quick-silver  is  gotten,
went  to  make  a  triall,  and  found  it  to  be  so.  This  metall
the  Romanes  carried  from  Castile  in  stone,  and  out  of  it
they  got  quick-silver,  and  held  it  for  great  riches.  The
Indians  knew  it  not,  nor  minded  any  more  then  the  ver-
milion. The  greatest  profit  it  yeeldeth,  is  to  purifie  the
silver  from  the  earth,  Lead,  and  Copper,  wherewith  it
groweth  :  it  eateth  all  the  other  metals,  and  pierceth  them
as  the  Tin,  Iron,  and  Lead,  and  therefore  they  carry  it  in
leather,  or  vessels  of  earth.  Quick-silver  serveth  also  for
other  effects,  and  medicinall  matters.

In  this  seat  of  Guania  Velica  is  a  spring,  that  as  it
springeth  it  congealeth  in  a  soft  stone,  of  the  which  they
make  their  houses,  and  the  Men  or  Beasts  that  doe  drinke
it,  die :  for  within  the  body  it  converteth  into  a  stone.
In  the  Bathes  that  are  called  of  Inga  neere  the  Cuzco,
are  two  spouts  of  water  the  one  neere  the  other,  the  first
is  hot,  and  the  second  cold,  that  it  seemeth  God  did  place
them  there  for  to  temper  themselves.  In  the  same  bounds
is  a  Spring,  that  as  it  springeth  it  becomes  good  and
white  salt :  in  this  place  the  two  great  Rowes  doe  begin
to  separate  themselves,  and  make  in  the  middest  a  great
Champaine  ground,  which  is  called  the  Province  of  Collao,
where  are  very  many  Rivers,  and  there  is  the  great  Lake
of  Titicaca,  and  great  pasture  grounds.  Though  it  be  a
plaine  Countrie,  it  hath  the  same  height  and  distemperature
of  the  Hills  ;  it  hath  no  Trees,  nor  Wood  ;  the  bread  that
is  eaten  are  rootes  that  are  called  Papas,  which  grow  also
in  all  Piru  ;  it  is  a  healthfull  Countrie,  and  much  inhabited,

527

A.D.

l601.

Chap.  20.
Of  that  which
remayneth  of
the  Councell  of
the  Kings.

Profit  of
quick  silver.

Springtuming
into  stone,  and
killing.

Hot  and  cold
Bathes.

Salt  spring.
Cordilleras  or
rowes  divided.

Collao.

A.D.
I60I.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  Lake

Titic  ac  a.

Cuzco.

and  multiplieth  every  day ;  it  hath  store  of  Cattell  of
all  sorts.

The  Lake  of  Titicaca  compasseth  eightie  leagues,  and
in  some  places  it  hath  eightie  fathom  deepe,  and  in  this,
and  in  the  waves  are  raysed  when  there  is  any  winde,  so
that  it  seemeth  as  a  Bay  of  the  Sea,  from  which  it  stands
about  sixtie  leagues,  twelve  or  thirteene  Rivers  enter  into
it,  and  many  Brookes,  and  from  it  goeth  a  River  into
another  Lake,  which  they  call  the  Aulagas,  which  hath  no
voyding  place,  though  because  some  Eyes  of  water  have
beene  seene  that  under  ground  goe  into  the  Sea,  it  is
judged  that  it  might  bee  the  water  of  these  Lakes  did
goe,  opening  a  way  through  the  entrailes  of  the  Earth  unto
the  Sea.  Round  about  the  great  Lake  are  many  Townes,
and  in  it  great  Hands,  with  great  Tillage  in  them,  and
there  were  the  Indians  wont  to  keepe  their  most  precious
things  for  greater  securitie.

The  great  Citie  of  Cuzco,  Seate  Royall  of  the  Ingas,
and  Head  of  their  Empire  (and  now  of  the  Kingdomes
of  Piru,  by  a  Title  which  it  hath  of  it  from  the  Kings  of
Castile  and  Lion)  stands  in  thirteene  degrees  and  a  halfe
height,  seventie  eight  of  longitude,  one  hundred  and  five
and  twentie  leagues  from  the  Citie  of  The  Kings  to  the
South-east,  of  more  then  one  thousand  Spanish  housholds ;
the  Marques  Don  Franciscus  Picarro  founded  it.  It  hath
eight  Parishes,  and  foure  Monasteries  of  the  foure  Orders,
of  Saint  Dominicke,  Saint  Francis,  Saint  Augustine,  the
Mercenaries,  and  the  Companie  of  Jesus,  and  one  of
Nunnes.  Heere  is  resident  the  Cathedrall,  Suffragane  to
the  Archbishopricke  of  The  Kings.  There  goe  from  this
Citie  since  the  time  of  the  Ingas  from  the  Market  place

Foure  high foure  high  wayes  towards  the  foure  parts  of  the  world ;

wayes  most  one  canec[  Chinchasuyo  to  the  North,  toward  the  Playnes
and  Provinces  of  Quito  :  another  Condesuyo,  to  the  West
toward  the  Sea :  the  third  called  Collaosuyo,  to  the  South
and  Chile :  and  the  fourth  to  the  East,  which  they  call
Andesuyo,  which  goeth  to  the  Andes  and  skirts  of  the
Mountaine. It  stands  in  a  soile  of  a  good  temper,  moder-

528

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

1601.

ately  fresh  and  healthfull,  free  from  all  venemous  wormes,  No  venemous
and  plentifull  of  all  things,  with  a  thousand  kindes  of  tvormts,
fruits  of  Castile,  and  smelling  herbes  and  flowres  at  all
times  which  are  of  great  delight. In  her  jurisdiction  is
the  Valley  of  Toyma  :  there  is  great  trafficke  of  Coca,  and
showes  of  Gold,  Silver,  and  Quick-silver ;  and  there  may
bee  in  her  borders  about  an  hundred  thousand  tributarie
Indians. In  all  the  parts  of  these  Indies  the  Indians  have
a  great  delight  in  carrying  ordinarily  in  the  mouth  Rootes,
Boughes,  or  Herbes,  and  that  which  they  most  use  in  all
Piru,  is  the  Coca,  for  as  they  say,  they  feele  little  hunger,  Coca  a  tree.
and  finde  themselves  with  great  vigour  chewing  it  alwaies,  [in.  v.  895.]
though  it  rather  seemeth  a  custome  inherited,  or  a  vice.
This  is  planted,  and  groweth  to  small  trees,  which  are  culti-
vated and  cherished,  and  yeeld  a  leafe  like  myrtle,  and
dried  they  carry  it  in  baskets  to  sell,  and  much  mony  is
gotten  by  it.

In  the  Valley  of  Vilcabamba,  stands  Saint  Francis  of  the  Saint  Francis
victorie  in  Andesuyo,  between  the  Row  of  the  Andes,  ofthevictorie.
about  twentie  leagues  from  Cuzco  to  the  East  side,  with
a Governour provided by the Vice-roy : it is of the
Bishopricke  of  Cuzco,  in  a  rough  ground,  and  of  great
Mountaines.

The  village  of  Saint  John  del  Oro,  is  in  the  Province  Saint  John  of
of  Carabaya  eightie  leagues  from  Cuzco  to  the  East  South-  the  Gold-
east,  and  thirtie  to  the  East  from  the  Lake  of  Collao,  and
it  is  called  del  Oro,  of  the  Gold,  for  the  great  store  that  is
in her  borders. The Citie  of  Arequipa  is  in sixteen  Arequipa.
degrees  somewhat  more,  one  hundred  and  thirtie  leagues
from  the  Citie  of  The  Kings,  almost  to  the  South-east  as
the  Coast  runneth,  and  sixtie  from  the  Citie  of  Cuzco,  of
the Bishopricke of Cuzco : it hath Monasteries of
Dominicks,  Franciscans,  and  Mercenaries ; it  hath  fiftie
thousand tributarie Indians, and is of most pleasant
temperature  to  live  in  of  all  places  in  Piru. They  gather
in  her  borders  great  store  of  Wine,  and  Wheat. The
Port  is  at  the  entrie  of  the  River  Chile,  which  passeth  neere
the  Citie  where  the  merchandize  is  unladen.

xiv  529  2  L

A.D.

l60I.

Earth-quakes
in  the  Indies
very  terrible
and  strange.

From  whence
the  earth-
quakes doe
proceede.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Arequipa  stands  in  the  Valley  of  Quilca,  fourteene
leagues  from  the  Sea.  In  her  jurisdiction  is  the  Province
of  Condesuyo,  the  Townes  or  the  Hubinas,  Gollaguas,
Chiquiguanita,  and  Quimistaca ;  the  Marques  Don  Fran-
cisco Picarro  built  it  1534.  it  is  very  subject  to  earth-
quakes as  all  these  Indies,  especially  the  Sea  coasts.  In
the  yeere  1582.  there  was  an  earth-quake  that  almost
ruinated  this  Citie,  and  since  there  hath  beene  another,  and
a  breaking  out  of  a  fierie  mouth,  whereof  they  tell  strange
things,  in  the  yeere  1586.  There  was  another  in  the
Citie  of  the  Kings  the  ninth  of  July,  which  ran  one
hundred  and  seventie  leagues  in  length  by  the  Sea  side,
and  fiftie  within  the  Land  ;  it  spoyled  the  Citie,  indangered
few  people,  because  they  went  out  into  the  fields,  and  a
little  after  the  earth-quake  was  past,  the  Sea  went  out  of
her  bounds,  and  entred  a  great  way  within  the  Land
fourteene  fathom  deepe.  Such  another  earth-quake  was
in  Quito  the  next  yeere,  in  the  Citie  of  la  Paz  in  the  yeere
1 58 1.  a  great  high  Rocke  fell  which  tooke  under  it  a  great
many  Indian  witch  trees,  and  the  earth  which  fell  did  run
one  league  and  a  halfe.  In  Chile  was  another  great  earth-
quake that  over-threw  Mountaines  and  Valleyes,  stopped
the  Current  of  the  Rivers,  brought  the  Sea  out  of  her
limits  the  space  of  some  leagues,  cast  downe  whole
Townes,  and  slue  many  men.  The  Philosophers  say  that
the  earth-quake  proceedeth  from  the  heate  of  the  Sunne,
and  of  other  celestiall  Bodies,  which  not  onely  doe  draw
the  exhalation  to  themselves,  and  the  vapour  of  the  super-
ficies of  the  earth,  but  that  also  which  is  in  the  bowels  of
it,  which  comming  out  engendreth  windes  and  raynes ;
and  if  it  happen  that  the  earth  is  so  close  that  the  exhalation
cannot  come  out  any  way,  then  it  mooveth  from  one  part
to  another  through  the  pores  of  the  earth,  with  great
violence  breaking  forth,  as  the  powder  in  a  Myne,  tearing
with  such  a  furious  rage,  that  it  renteth  the  earth  where  it
is,  and  openeth  it  selfe  a  way  with  great  furie,  and  so  much
furious  it  is,  how  much  more  the  exhalation  inclosed  is
greater.

S3©

Tii
om
iirti

keq
icke

ifY

IT
ire  p

f%

It

rhen

ier  b

lome
irme

to

lasse
drink

bit!
fliej
pin
me  c
rcll.
)on
Ella
csol
[real
eagi
ilcnt
:hu
icy
irect
in  a
itayr
lin

Clou
en

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  ad.

i6oi.

The  Village  of  Saint  Michael  de  la  Ribera  is  sixe  leagues  Saint  Michaet
rom  the  Sea,  in  the  Valley  of  Camana,  one  hundred  and  °fthe  Rtber-
hirteene  leagues  from  The  Kings,  two  and  twentie  from
Irequipa  to  the  part  of  the  Equinoctiall,  of  the  Bishop-
icke  of  Cuzco. The  Village  of  Valverde  in  the  Valley  Palverde.
f  Yea,  five  and  thirtie  leagues  from  the  Citie  of  The
lings,  ten  from  the  Port  of  Saugalla,  is  of  the  jurisdiction
f  The  Kings,  and  of  the  Archbishopricke ; her  borders
re  plentiful!  of  Wheat,  Millet,  and  Fruits,  and  of  much
Vine.

The  Village  of  Cavyete,  or  of  Guarco,  by  the  Valley  Guano.

|/here  it  stands,  is  distant  from  The  Kings  five  and  twentie

pagues  to  the  South,  one  league  and  a  halfe  from  the  Sea :

er  bounds  are  plentifull  of  bread  the  best  of  this  King-

ome,  whence  is  carried  great  quantitie  of  meale  to  Terra

rme. Before  the  comming  to  this  Valley,  are  the  Valleys

f  Chilca,  and  Mala  ; in  the  first  it  never  rayneth,  neither

•asseth  any  Fountaine  nor  Brooke  through  it,  and  they

rinke  of  the  Wells,  and  it  is  full  of  arable  grounds,  and

"uits,  which  grow  onely  by  the  deaw  of  the  Heaven.  Fertilitie

hey  catch  many  Pilcherds  in  the  Sea,  and  with  every  ^'f f ';*<»'•

•  r  tv* -ii i  •  1111  • •  Pilchards.

raine  or  Millet  they  put  into  the  hole  where  it  is  sowen

ne  or  two  of  the  heads,  and  with  that  moysture  it  groweth

/ell. In  the  Valley  of  Mala,  Don  James  of  Almagro,  and

)on  Franciscus  Picarro  being  in  quarrell,  the  father  Bova-

illa  of  the  Merced  or  Mercenarie  Order,  as  an  Arbitrator

esolved  their  differences ; through  this  Valley  passeth  a

Teat River, which doth them great pleasure. Five

"agues  forward  is  the  River  of  Guarco  in  a  Valley  most

lentifull  in  all  things,  where  the  Countrimen  maintayned

he  warre  foure  yeeres  against  the  Ingas,  and  to  preserve  it

ihey  caused  to  build  a  Citie,  and  called  it  Cuzco,  and

rected  for  the  triumph  of  the  victorie  a  great  Fortresse

n  a  Hill,  that  the  waves  of  the  Sea  doe  beate  upon  the

tayres. Sixe leagues from Guarco is the Valley of

Chincha,  famous,  pleasant,  and  very  plentifull,  where  a

vlonasterie  of  Dominicke  Friars  was  built  in  stead  of  the

emple  of  the  Sunne  which  the  Indians  had,  with  the

53'

th

•ecko.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

Monasterie  of  the  Virgins. Then  followeth  the  Valley  T
of  Yea,  which  is  no  lesse  plentifull,  going  out  of  the  *
Valleys,  and  Rivers  of  Nasca,  and  the  principall  is  called
Caxamalca,  where  excellent  Wines  are  made. They  goe
Ocanna.  from  these  Valleys  to  that  of  Hacari,  where  stands  Ocanna,  ia

Camana,  and  Quilca,  which  is  the  Port  of  the  Citie  of  Cop
Arequipa,  and  forward  are  the  Valleys  of  Chuli,  and^£llt
[III.  v.  896.]  Tambopalla,  and  the  Deylo,  and  them  of  Tarapaca,  Rivers
and  plentifull,  with  good  Mynes  of  silver,  and  neere  the^
Sea :  the  Indians  of  the  Hands  of  The  Seales  doe  carry
great  store  of  Fowles  dung  for  their  grounds,  wherewith
of  a  barren,  they  make  a  plentifull  ground.
Ports,  Capes,  There  are  in  the  coast  of  this  Councel  from  the  Pointp
ThifTounds  del  Aguia>  of  the  Needle,  where  it  joyneth  with  that  of
of  the  Counsel  Quito,  in  sixe  degrees  of  Southerne  altitude,  the  Hands  and  ^e '
of  The  Kings.  Ports  following;  two  Hands  which  they  call  de  Lobos  in^(
seven  degrees,  the  one  foure  leagues  from  the  Coast,  and^c
the  other  more  to  the  Sea ;  and  forward  another  called  of
Saint  Rooke  to  the  South-east,  neere  to  Pazcamayo,  and
forward  Puerto  de  Mai  Abrigo,  ten  leagues  before  the
Port  of  Truxillo,  in  seven  degrees  and  a  halfe,  and  seven
leagues  from  the  Port  of  Guanape ;  and  of  Sancta  in  nine ^01
degrees,  and  five  leagues  from  this  to  the  South,  Porte  esPec
Ferrol ;  and  sixe  from  it  that  of  Cazma ;  and  afterward  ^ar(
eight  leagues  the  Port  of  Guarmey  at  the  mouth  of  a
River;  and  the  Barranca  twentie  leagues  to  the  South;)0
and  the  Port  of  Gaura  where  is  a  very  great  Salt  pit ;  and
after  this  the  Hand  of  Lima,  at  the  entrie  of  the  Port  of  Bishc
Collao ;  and  twentie  leagues  to  the  South  the  Point  of  Capt;
Guarco,  and  one  Hand  de  Lobos  Marinos,  or  Seale  fishes^
neere  to  it,  and  the  Point  of  Chica  in  fifteene  degrees,  and  iever
neere  to  the  Nasca ;  and  forward  the  Point  of  Saint  plft
Laurence,  in  the  Valley  of  Quilca,  and  neere  the  River  of
Arequipa,  and  the  Creeke  of  Chulien ;  and  afterward  the
River  of  Nombre  de  Dios,  where  the  limits  doe  joyne  by
the  Coast  of  the  Counsels  of  The  Kings,  and  of  Charcas.

So1
Plate,

Tli

i\

and  c

Bisk
vince
isfro
lasse
L  iwid

duet

eagi

art

532

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

i  60  i

He  bounds  of  the  Counsell  of  Charcas  (which  parteth Chap.  21.
limits with that of  The Kings, stands in twentie  °/fe^oun^,
iegrees  and  a  halfe  of  Southerne  altitude,  by  the  River  of  °^m 'J^™™/-
Sombre  de  Dios,  and  the  beginning  of  the  Lake  of  Collao)  t/ie  p/afey  or
lath  in  length  three  hundred  leagues  unto  the  Valley  of  of  Charcas.
3opiapo,  beginning  of  the  Province  of  Chile  in  eight  and
wentie  degrees  of  height, though in  voyage they  are
eckoned  neere  foure  hundred  leagues  East  and  West,  that
yhich  is  betweene  of  the  South  Sea  unto  the  North  Sea,
>r  South  which  answereth  to  the  Provinces  of  the  River  of
5late,  which  though  it  is  not  altogether  discovered,  it  is
mderstood that by placing all the Countrie of this
"ounsell  in  much  altitude,  it  is  more  cold  then  hot.

The  Government  of  this  Counsell,  is  at  the  charge  of
he  Vice-roy  of  Piru,  as  that  of  the  Counsell  of  Quito,
nd  of  The  Kings :  there  are  two  Governours,  and  two
Sishopricks,  that  of  Charcas  and  Tucuman.  The  Pro-
vince of  the  Charcas  (which  commonly  is  named  that  which
s  from  the  bounds  of  the  Counsell  of  The  Kings,  till  they
!)asse  Potosi)  hath  in  length  North  and  South  about  one
tundred  and  fiftie  leagues,  and  as  many  East  and  West ;
Countrie  not  very  plentifull,  though  abundant  of  Cattell,
specially  in  Collao,  that  is  from  the  Lake  of  Titicaca  unto
"harcas,  where  the  Winter  and  Summer  are  contrarie  to
Europe  :  it  is  a  plentifull  Countrie  of  all  Cattell,  especially
•f  sheepe,  which  are  many,  and  of  a  very  fine  wooll.

In  this  Province  are  foure  Townes  of  Spaniards  of  one
Sishopricke,  which  are  the  Citie  of  the  Plate,  which  the
3aptaine  Peranzures  inhabited,  in  the  yeere  1583.  by  order
>f  the  Marques  Don  Franciscus  Picarro.  It  stands  in
even  tie  two  degrees  of  longitude  from  the  Meridian  of
Toledo,  from  whence  it  may  be  distant  by  a  greater  circle
me  thousand  seven  hundred  and  eightie  leagues,  and  in
dneteene  degrees  of  latitude,  one  hundred  seventie  five
eagues  from  Cuzco  to  the  South,  or  Antartick  Pole  within
he  Tropicks,  in  the  uttermost  of  the  Torrid  Zone.  There
re  in  the  borders  of  this  Citie  in  Chacaras  (which  are  Heredades  de
nanured  grounds)  eight  hundred  Spanish  housholds. It  grangerias.

533

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

is  a  Countrie  extreme  cold,  whereas  it  should  be  temperate
or  hot,  according  to  the  height  of  the  Pole  it  stands  in:
the  Counsell  and  the  Cathedrall  is  resident  in  this  Citie,
and  there  are  Monasteries  of  Dominicke,  Franciscan,
Augustines,  and  Mercenarie  Friars,  and  in  her  jurisdiction
sixtie  thousand  tributarie  Indians,  divided  in  nine  and
twentie  repartitions,  and  the  seedes  of  Castile  doe  grow
well,  and  there  are  many  rich  mynes  of  silver.

Our  Lady  of The  Citie  of  our  Lady  of  the  Peace,  by  another  name

the  Peace.  the  New  Towne,  and  Chuquiabo,  in  the  middest  of  the
Collao,  one  hundred  leagues  from  Cuzco,  and  eightie  from
the  Plate,  hath  Monasteries  of  Franciscans,  Augustines,
and  Mercenaries,  with  store  of  Wines  and  Cattell.  Cap-
taine  Alfonsus  of  Mendoca  built  it  1549.  when  was
President  the  Governour  of  Piru,  the  Licentiate  Pedro  de
la  Gasca,  afterward  Bishop  of  Siguenca. The  Province  of

Chicuito.  Chicuito  in  Collao,  somewhat  North-east  from  the  Pro-
vince of  Plata,  more  then  an  hundred  leagues  from  it,
inhabited  by  Indians,  with  a  Spanish  Governour,  of  the
Bishopricke  of  Charcas,  and  one  Monasterie  of  Dominicks,
hath  much  Cattell,  and  it  stands  at  the  border  of  Titicaca.

Oropesa.  Oropesa,  is  a  plantation  of  the  Vice-roy  Don  Francisco  de

Toledo,  in  the  Valley  of  Cochabamba,  twentie  leagues
from  the  Citie  of  la  Plata;  their  husbandrie  is  crops  of
Wheat,  Millet,  and  Cattell.

Potosi.  The  Imperiall  Towne  of  Potosi  is  in  nineteene  degrees

of  altitude,  eighteene  leagues  from  the  Citie  of  the  Plate,
and  about  eight  from  the  Lake  of  the  Aulagas  to  the  East,
in  the  skirt  of  the  Hill  of  Potosi,  that  looketh  to  the
North-east ;  it  hath  five  hundred  housholds  of  Spaniards
which  doe  attend  the  mynes,  and  of  Merchants,  and  about
50000.  Indians  of  ordinarie  goers  and  commers  to  the
trafficke  of  the  silver.  And  though  it  be  a  Towne  of  it
selfe,  it  hath  no  Ruler,  but  that  of  the  citie  de  la  Plata.
There  reside  the  Officers,  and  Royall  treasurie  of  this
Province,  for  the  mynes  of  the  Hill  of  Potosi,  which  a
Castillane  discovered  1545.  called  Villaroel,  by  meanes  of

[III.  v.  897.]  certaine Indians; and it is  called  Potosi, because the

534

m
fourw

The ,

darkc
allth

ano )

ilk!

jOOie

iinet
So

Port
Mvii
peal

NOD

|otte
<&
fc(

purr

the]
Roar

lass
tei

A.D.

[601.

ANTONIO DE HERRERA

Indians  doe  so  call  Hills  and  high  places;  and  the  silver
was  so  much  that  they  got  at  the  beginning  in  the  yeere
1549.  every  Saturday,  that  when  they  cast  it,  there  came
to  the  Kings  lifts  from  five  and  twentie  to  thirtie  thousand
Pesos.  The  Hill  is  flat  and  bare,  their  habitation  drie  and
cold,  unpleasant,  and  altogether  barren.  It  bringeth  forth
no  fruit,  graine  or  herbe,  and  because  of  the  silver  it  is  the

Ereatest  inhabiting  of  the  Indies,  which  hath  about  two
:agues  in  circuit,  and  where  all  kinde  of  dainties  are
found,  and  plentie,  though  brought  thither  by  carriages.
The  colour  of  the  ground  of  the  Hill  draweth  towards  red,
darke.  The  forme  is  like  a  Sugar  loafe,  that  over-peareth
all  the  other  Hills  that  are  neere  it :  the  going  up  is  rough,
and  yet  they  goe  up  on  horse-backe  ;  it  extendeth  a  league,
and  from  his  top  to  the  foote  is  about  a  quarter  of  a  league.
It  hath  on  all  sides  rich  veines  of  silver,  from  the  top  to
the  foote,  and  the  Port  of  Arica  whereby  the  merchandize  Arica.
come,  and  the  silver  of  this  Hill  is  carried,  is  from  it  about
ninetie  leagues,  almost  West.

Sixe  leagues  from  the  aforesaid  Hill  in  the  way  of  the

ort  of  Arica,  is  the  Hill  of  Porco,  an  ancient  seate  of  Porco.
Mynes  of  silver :  whence  it  is  affirmed  the  Ingas  got  the
greatest  part  of  the  silver  that  was  in  the  Temple  of  the
Sunne  of  Curianche,  whence  yet  is  and  will  much  silver  be
gotten.

Santa  Cruz  de  la  Sierra  stands  one  hundred  leagues  from The  holy  crosse
the  Charcas  to  the  East,  in  the  way  whereby  they  goe  from  of  the  Hill.
the  Charcas  to  the  Assumption,  in  the  Provinces  of  the
River  of  Plate,  whitherto  they  make  three  hundred  leagues
journey,  with  a  Governour  provided  by  the  Vice-roy,  of
the  Diocesse  of  the  Charcas,  and  one  Monasterie  of  Mer-
:enaries,  in  a  Countrie  scarce  of  water,  though  plentifull
of  Wheat,  Wine,  and  Millet. This  Province  hath  neigh-
Dourhood  with  many  Nations  of  Infidell  Indians,  and  many  miracles  many,
of  them  are  alreadie  baptized,  and  the  first  that  strooke  a  wasfor
devotion  in  the  Countrimen,  was  a  Spanish  Souldier,*  that  wuked"es
was  among  them,  fled  for  faults  ;  which  for  a  great  anguish  p^zi.  ^ See
hey  were  in  for  water  made  them  a  great  Crosse,  and  AcJ.j.c.27.

535

*This  Apostle
after  his

A.D.

1601.

Ports  &
Points  of  this
Counsell.

Los  Faral-
lones.

Punta  Blanc  a.

Quebrada

Honda.

Province  of
Tucaman.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

perswaded  them  to  worship  with  great  devotion  that  same
Crosse,  and  to  aske  water ;  and  God  for  his  mercy  heard
them,  and  sent  them  much  raine  in  the  yeere  1560.  The
Captaine  Nuflo  of  Chaves  went  out  of  the  Citie  of  the
Ascention  in  the  River  of  Plate,  to  discover,  and  comming
to  Sancta  Cruz  of  the  Hill,  having  made  great  discoveries,
the  people  came  unto  him,  and  seeming  to  him  that  hee
was  neere  to  Piru,  went  to  the  Citie  of  The  Kings,  where
the  Marques  of  Cavyete  was  Vice-roy,  and  with  his  order,
and  for  Lieftenant  of  his  sonne  Don  Garcia  of  Mendoca,
the  Captaine  Nuflo  of  Chaves  went  againe  to  inhabit  this
Citie,  though  he  came  out  of  the  River  of  Plate,  with
purpose  to  discover  the  Provinces  of  the  Dorado.

In  the  Coast  of  this  Councell,  which  beginneth  in  seven-
teene  degrees  and  a  halfe  in  the  River  of  Nombre  de  Dios,
or  Tambopalla,  is  the  Port  of  Hilo  neere  to  a  River,  in
eighteene  degrees  and  a  halfe,  and  more  to  the  South,  El
Morro  de  los  Diablos,  and  the  Port  of  Arica  in  nineteene
degrees  one  third  part,  and  that  of  Tacama  in  one  and
twentie,  and  the  Point  of  Tarapaca  to  the  South,  and
more  forward  the  River  of  Pica,  and  that  de  la  Hoja,  or  of
the  Leafe,  and  of  Montelo,  the  Port  of  Mexillones,  and
more  to  the  South  the  Point  of  the  Beacones,  or  Morto
Moreno,  before  the  Bay  and  River  of  Sancta  Clara,  and
more  to  the  South  the  Breach,  and  the  White  point,  and
the  Deepe  breach,  and  the  River  of  Sancta  Clara,  about
thirtie  leagues  from  the  River  of  Copiapo,  where  the  Coast
of  Chile  beginneth,  and  the  Coast  of  the  Charcas  endeth.
The  Province  and  Government  of  Tucaman,  is  all  Medi-
terrane ;  her  bound  begins  from  the  Countrie  of  the
Chichas,  which  are  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Imperiall
village  of  Potosi :  it  stands  in  the  same  Line  of  the  Citie
of  the  Assumption  of  the  River  of  Plate,  about  an  hundred
leagues  from  the  South  Sea  coast ;  it  doth  confine  with  the
Province  of  Chile,  it  is  a  Countrie  of  a  good  temper,
reasonably  plentifull,  and  untill  now  without  Mynes  of
silver,  or  gold.  There  is  in  it  some  Spanish  Townes  in
one  Bishopricke,  which  are  of  the  Citie  of  Saint  Iago  del

536

ANTONIO DE HERRERA

Estero,  which  at  the  beginning  they  named  del  Varco,  or
of  the  Boate,  in  eight  and  twentie  degrees  of  altitude,  one
hundred  eightie  five  leagues  from  Potosi  to  the  South,
declining  somewhat  to  the  East :  the  Governour  and  the
Officers  of  the  goods,  and  treasurie  Royall,  and  the  Bishop,
and  the  Cathedrall  are  resident  here.

The  Citie  of  Saint  Marie  of  Talavera,  is  five  and  fortie
leagues  from  Saint  James  to  the  North,  and  fortie  from
Potosi  in  sixe  and  twentie  degrees. The  Citie  of  Saint
Michael  of  Tucuman  eight  and  twentie  leagues  from  Saint
James  to  the  West,  in  the  way  of  the  Charcas  in  seven  and
twentie  degrees. There  were  inhabited  in  this  Govern-
ment in  the  time  of  Don  Garcia  of  Mendoca,  his  father
'the  Marques  of  Cavyete  being  Vice-roy,  the  New  London,
|and  Calchaque,  which  they  called  hNew  wisedome,  in  the
Province  of  the  Jurias,  and  Draguita,  which  afterward  were
dishabited  within  a  few  yeeres. The  people  of  this  Countrie
goeth  clothed  in  woollen,  and  in  wrought  leather,  made  by
arte  like  the  guilt  or  wrought  leather  of  Spaine  : they
breed  much  Cattell  of  the  Countrie,  by  reason  of  the  profit
of  their  wooll :  they  have  the  Townes  very  neere  the  one
to  the  other,  and  the  Townes  are  small,  because  there  is
|but  one  kindred  in  every  one,  they  are  compassed  round
about  with  ^ardones,  and  thornie  trees  for  the  warres
that  they  had  among  themselves. They  are  great  husband-
men, and  it  is  a  people  that  is  not  drunke,  for  they  are  not
given  to  drinke,  as  other  Nations  of  the  Indies. There
are  in  the  Province  seven  mayne  Rivers,  and  more  then
eightie  Brookes  of  good  waters,  and  great  pastures : the
Winter  and  the  Summer  are  at  such  times  as  in  Spaine :
it  is  a  healthfull  Countrie  and  of  a  good  temper,  and  the
first  that  entred  in  it,  were  the  Captaines  Diego  de  Rojas,
Philip Gutterres, and Nicolas de Heredia ; they dis-
covered on  this  side  the  River  of  Plate  unto  the  Fortresse
of  Gabota.

A.D.

l60I.

Saint  James  of
the  Marsh.

Talavera.
SaintMichael.

New  London.
h  Hisp.  Nueva
Cordura.

1 A  kinde  of
Thistle  that
groweth  every
stemme  foure
inches  square,
and  as  high  as
a  man  on  horse
backe,  and
taketh  much
ground,  for
there  grow
many  out  of
one  roote.
[III.  v.  898.]

537

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

Chap.  22. T"\On  Diego  de  Almagro  was  provided  the  yeere  1534.

Of  the  bounds y^J  jn  Toledo  for  Governour  of  two  hundred  leagues  of

domeofctik  ground  beyond  the  Government  of  the  Marques  Don
Francisco  Picarro,  toward  the  Streight  of  Magellan,
intituling  this  part,  The  new  government  of  Toledo.
Hee  went  to  pacifie  this  Countrie,  and  because  he  forsooke
it,  it  was  given  in  charge  to  the  Marques  Don  Francisco
Picarro  1537.  and  he  commended  it  1540.  to  the  Captaine
Peter  of  Valdinia  ;  who  went  thither  with  one  hundred  and
fiftie  Spaniards.  All  the  Countries  of  this  Kingdome  lye
to  the  South  of  the  Equinoctiall,  in  a  more  Southerne
altitude  then  the  Kingdome  of  Piru,  and  her  Provinces
within  the  Torride,  from  the  Equinoctiall  unto  the  Tro-
picke  of  Capricorne,  which  passeth  a  Desart,  which  they
call  of  Atacama,  which  is  from  twentie  three  to  twentie
sixe  degrees,  and  then  beginneth  the  Kingdome  of  Chile,
which  the  Indians  call  Chille,  and  before  the  inhabited

Rio  de  la  Sal.  Countrie  is  the  River  of  The  Salt,  in  three  and  twentie
degrees  and  three  quarters,  which  from  the  East  side  of
the  Row  of  Mountaines,  runneth  to  the  West  into  the
Sea,  through  a  very  deepe  Valley,  and  though  it  hath  the
water  very  cleere  ;  all  that  the  Horses  are  wet  with  it  when
they  drinke,  is  congealed  with  the  heate  of  the  Sunne ;
and  it  is  so  meere  salt  that  it  cannot  bee  drunke,  and  in
the  borders  it  is  congealed  :  the  River  is  before  the  entring
in  the  first  Province  of  Chile  two  and  twentie  leagues
where  the  Xagueyes  are,  which  are  Wells  of  water,  for
there  is  no  other  in  the  two  and  twentie  leagues,  and  all
the  Kingdome  stands  within  the  Zone,  which  the  ancient
men  called  Deserte,  which  is  inhabited  with  white  Indians,
and  it  is  situated  on  the  borders  of  the  South  Sea,  which  is
Mare  Magnum,  which  is  included  betweene  her  Coast  and
the  Coast  of  China.

This  Government  taken  largely  unto  the  Streight,  hath
in  length  North  and  South,  from  the  Valley  of  Copiapo
where  it  beginneth in seven  and  twentie  degrees, five fife
hundred  leagues,  and  in  breadth  East  and  West,  from  the
South  Sea  to  the  North  Sea,  from  foure  hundred  to  five

538

bit

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

1601.

hundred  of  ground  to  be  pacified,  which  doth  straighten
it  selfe,  till  it  remayneth  by  the  Streight  in  ninetie  or  in  an
hundred  leagues.  That  which  is  inhabited  of  this  Govern-
ment, may  bee  three  hundred  along  the  North  Sea  coast,
and  the  breadth  of  it  twentie  leagues  and  lesse,  unto  the
Rowe  of  the  Andes,  which  doe  end  neere  the  Streight,  and
it  passeth  through  this  Kingdome  very  high,  and  almost
covered  at  all  times  with  snow.  All  the  Countrie  is  plaine,
at  the  least  there  is  no  great  roughnesse,  except  where  the
Rowe  of  Piru  doth  reach,  and  doth  end  within  two  or
three  leagues  of  the  Coast.

The  temper  and  qualitie  of  it  (though  it  bee  not  without
some  difference  for  the  varieties  of  the  heights  it  standeth
in  altogether)  is  of  the  best,  and  most  inhabitable  that  is  in
the  Indies,  in  temperature  like  unto  Castile,  in  whose
opposite  altitude  it  falleth  almost  all,  and  in  abundance
land  goodnesse  of  victuals,  and  plentie  of  all  things,  riches
of  Mynes  and  Metals,  and  force  and  vigour  of  the  Countri-
men,  which  for  being  so  great  warriors  have  alwayes  beene
evill  to  pacifie,  and  there  bee  many  out  in  the  Mountaines,
and  Breaches  of  the  end  of  the  Rowe,  the  Provinces  of
Arauco,  Tucapel,  and  the  Valley  of  Puren,  the  bounds  and
borders  betweene  the  Citie  of  the  Conception,  and  los
Confines,  and  la  Imperial.

In  this  Government  are  eleven  Spanish  Townes,  with  a
Governour  placed  in  the  matters  of  the  Government  to
e  Vice-roy,  and  Councell  of  Piru,  after  the  Councell  that

s  in  the  Countrie  was  taken  away  ;  and  there  is  in  it  two
Bishopricks  Suffraganes  to  the  Archbishoprick  of  the
Kings.  In  the  Bishopricke  of  Saint  James  are  foure  Saint  James.
Townes.  The  Citie  of  Saint  James  in  the  time  of  the
irst  inhabiting  of  Chile,  founded  by  Captaine  Peter  of
Valdinia,  it  stands  in  thirtie  foure  degrees  and  a  quarter
:>f  altitude,  seventie  seven  of  longitude,  one  thousand  nine
lundred  and  eightie  leagues  from  Toledo  by  a  direct  Line,
ifteene  from  the  Sea,  and  ten  beyond  the  Valley  of  Chile,
#hich  they  named  at  the  first  New  Extreame.  In  it  is
:he  Cathedrall  resident  with  Monasteries  of  Dominicke,

539

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

Franciscan,  and  Mercenarie  Friars,  in  a  plentifull  soile  of
wheat,  Wine,  and  other  things,  and  of  very  rich  Mynes  of
gold,  and  in  her  jurisdiction  more  then  eightie  thousand
Indians  in  sixe  and  twentie  repartitions.  This  Citie  is
served  of  the  Port  of  Valparayso  at  the  mouth  of  the
River  Topocalma,  which  passeth  neere  unto  it.

The  Serena.  Captaine  Valdinia  peopled  also  la  Serena  in  the  yeere

1 544.  neere  to  a  good  Haven ;  it  is  the  first  Towne  of
Spaniards,  at  the  entrie  of  Chile  sixtie  leagues  from  the
Citie  of  Saint  James,  somewhat  North-west  neere  to  the
Sea in the  Valley of  Coquimbo, with Monasteries of

Raines  seldom  Franciscan,  and  Mercenarie  Friars. It  rayneth  in  it  but

and  never,  three  or  foure  times  a  yeere,  and  in  the  Countries  before
it, it never rayneth. The Port which they call of

Coquimbo.  Coquimbo,  stands  in  two  and  thirtie  degrees,  it  is  a  good
Nooke  where  the  ships  of  Piru  doe  make  a  stay.  In  the
Province  of  Chucuito,  which  is  on  the  other  side  of  the
Rowe  of  the  Andes,  in  a  cold  and  barren  Countrie,  doe

Mendoza. stand  the  Citie  of  Mendoca,  and  of  Saint  John  of  the

Samt  John  of Frontier  ;  for  Don  Garcia  of  Mendoca  peopled  them  both.

the  Frontier. The  q^  rf  Mendo9a  is  of  the  same  height  with  Saint

James,  about  fortie  leagues  from  it,  of  a  difficult  way,  for
the  snow  that  is  in  the  Andes.  The  Citie  of  Saint  John
of  the  Frontier  stands  to  the  South  of  the  Citie  of
Mendoca.
[III.  v.  899.]  In  the  Bishopricke  of  the  Imperiall  are  seven  Spanish
Townes,  which  are  the  Citie  of  the  Conception  in  seven
and  thirtie  degrees  of  height,  seventie  leagues  to  the  South
of  the  Citie  of  Saint  James,  neere  to  the  Sea,  Peter  Valdinia
inhabited  it  in  the  yeere  1550.  The  Governours  are
resident  in  it,  since  the  Councell  (that  was  there  from  the
yeere  1567.  unto  1574.)  was  taken  away.  There  are
Monasteries  of  Dominicans,  Franciscans,  and  Mercenarie
Friars.  The  Port  of  this  Citie  stands  in  a  nooke  at  the
shelter  of  an  Hand.  The  Citie  of  the  new  village  of  los
Now  village  of  Infantes,  or  los  Confines  ;  Don  Garcia  of  Mendoca  peopled
the  Infants.  }t?  an(j  tne  Governour  Villagran  commanded  it  to  be  called
de  los  Confines. It  stands  sixteene  leagues  from  the  Con-

540

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

1601.

ception  to  the  side  of  the  Streight,  eight  leagues  from  the

Row  of  the  Andes,  and  foure  from  that  which  goeth  along

the Coast. It hath one Monasterie of Dominicans,

another  of  Franciscan  Friars. The  warlike  Indians  come

to  the  bounds  of  this  Citie,  and  the  mayne  River  Biobio

by  them,  and  others  which  doe  enter  into  it,  and  the  River

Ninequeten.

Peter  of  Valdinia  peopled  the  Citie  of  the  Imperiall  Thelmperiall.
1 55 1.  which  is  in  nine  and  thirtie  degrees  of  height,  nine
and thirtie leagues from the Conception toward the
Streights side, three leagues from the Sea, where the
Cathedrall  is  resident  with  one  Monasterie  of  Franciscans,
another  of  Mercenarie  Friars  ;  and  in  her  bounds  are  more
then  eightie  thousand  Indians,  with  many  other  that  in  her
bounds  are  in  armes. The  River  Cauten  passeth  neere  it,
which  is  navigable  to  the  Sea,  though  the  Haven  bee  not
good nor secure. Captaine Valdinia peopled also the
*  Rich  Village,  sixteene  leagues  from  Imperiall,  about  the  **ffi\
South-eastward,  and  about  foure  and  fortie  from  the  Con- % a'
ception,  neere  to  the  Snowy  Row,d  with  one  Monasterie  d  Cordillera
of  Franciscans,  another  of  Mercenaries,  in  a  Countrey  cold  ^evada-
and  barren  of  Bread  and  Wine.

The  Citie  of  Valdinia  is  two  leagues  off  the  Sea,  and  Valdinia.
fiftie  from  the  Conception  to  the  Streight  ward :  peopled
also  by  Captaine  Valdinia,  with  Monasteries  of  Domini-
cans, Franciscans,  and  Mercenaries,  in  a  plentifull  Countrie
of  Wheat,  and  Seedes,  and  in  place  of  good  pastures  for
Cattell,  and  without  Vines.  The  merchandize  comes  up
by  the  River  of  Valdinia,  which  passeth  neere  it,  and  the
Port  stands  in  the  mouth  of  it  in  fortie  degrees  of  height.
The  Citie  of  Osorno,  Don  Garcia  of  Mendoca  peopled,  Osomo.
sixtie  leagues  or  more  from  the  Conception  to  the  port  of
the  Streight,  seven  leagues  from  the  Sea.  It  hath  one
Monasterie  of  Dominicans,  another  of  Franciscans,  with
another  of  Nunnes,  in  a  cold  Countrie,  scarce  of  victuals,
but  of  much  gold,  and  in  her  bounds  two  hundred
thousand  Indians  of  repartition.  The  Citie  of  Castro,
which  was  inhabited  by  the  Licenciate  Lope  Garcia  de

54i

A.D.
l60I

Castro.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Ports  and
Rivers  of  this
government.

Castro,  being  Governour  of  the  Kingdomes  of  Piru,  the
which  is  called  in  the  Indian  tongue  Chilue,  which  is  the
last  of  the  inhabited  in  Chile,  in  an  Hand  of  those  that  are
in  the  Lake  of  Ancud,  or  Chilue,  and  the  Archipelagus
stands  in  three  and  fortie  degrees  of  altitude,  one  and
fortie  leagues  to  the  South  of  Osorno,  with  a  Monasterie
of  Franciscans,  with  twelve  thousand  Indians  of  reparti-
tion in  her  bounds,  for  it  is  an  Hand  of  fiftie  leagues  in
length,  and  from  two  untill  nine  in  breadth,  which  the
Sea  made  with  other  great  ones,  tearing  the  Land  unto
the  Row  of  the  Andes.  It  is  a  mountaynous  Countrey,
and  close,  plentifull  of  Wheate,  and  of  Millet,  and  Mynes
eOro  bolador.  of  flying  gGold,  on  the  Strand  a  thing  fewe  times,  or
seldome  seene.

The  Governour  Villagran  tooke  away  the  name  of  the
Citie  which  was  Cavyete,  that  Don  Garcia  of  Mendoca
inhabited,  and  commanded  to  call  it  Tucapel,  and  afterward
disinhabited  it.  There  are  in  this  Government  which
beginneth  in  two  and  twentie  degrees,  the  Port  and  River
of  Copeapo,  and  to  the  South  of  it,  the  Port  of  Guascoin
another  River,  and  the  River  of  Coquimbo  in  two  and
thirtie  degrees :  and  past  this  the  Port  of  the  Cigua  in
the  River,  and  the  Port  of  Quintero  at  the  mouth  of  the
River  of  Concagua,  before  the  Port  of  Saint  James,  or
Valparayso,  and  the  Port  of  Topocalma  in  the  River  of
Maypa :  and  past  the  River  of  Maule  the  Port  of  the
eHerradura,  at  the  mouth  of  the  River  Itata,  before  the
Port  of  the  Conception  in  the  great  River  of  Biobio  to  the
North,  the  Hand  of  Saint  Marie  right  against  the  State  of
Aranco,  and  the  Port  of  Cavyete,  and  the  Hand  of  Mocha
more  to  the  South,  and  the  Port  of  Cauten,  which  is  that
of  the  Imperiall,  and  to  the  South  the  landing  place  and
the  River  of  Token  before  the  Port  of  Valdinia,  and  past
this  the  Point  of  the  Galley,  and  more  to  the  South  the
great  Bay  or  Port  of  Osorno  in  the  River  de  las  Canoas,
and  to  the  South  of  it  about  thirtie  leagues  to  the  Lake  de
los  Coronados  the  broadest  River  of  this  Realme,  and  at
the  end  of  this  Realme  the  Lake  of  Aucud.

e Or  Horse
shooe.

I

the :

beta
of  a
men
seem
jcen
leets
efti
peer*
vhic
irtl

Tl
ind
nan]
lc:,
elati
3uk
Ion
ipe

tri'i;

legri
leere
rithi

Barh:

Me
ird

kn

aint
eene

■<azai

542

M

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

i  60  i.

En  doe  call  the  Streight  of  Magellanes,  that  which  Chap.  24.

is  past  the  River  of  Plate  by  the  South  Sea ;  from  °fthe  Pro~

he  last  of  Chile,  unto  the  Streight  two  hundred  leagues  ^/f/J'l

pefbre  it,  from  two  and  fortie  or  three  and  fortie  degrees

)f  altitude,  unto  two  and  fiftie  and  more,  for  although

pen  have  sayled  through  both  the  Seas  divers  times,  and

leene  people  in  them  unto  the  Streight  it  selfe,  it  hath  not

!>eene  pacified,  nor  made  inhabiting,  but  that  which  the

jleete  that  Diego  Flores  de  Valdes  carried  to  the  Streight

pft  in  the  mouth  of  the  Streight  on  the  North  side,  in  the

•eere 1582.  which  was  called  the  Citie  of  Saint  Philip,

Irhich  for  being  in  so  much  altitude  could  not  be  preserved  pH.  v.  900.]

br  the  great  cold,  and  therefore  that  navigation  is  difficult

md dangerous for the continuall tempests, and great

tormes  of  windes  that  are  at  all  times.

The  Ports,  Capes,  and  Points  of  the  Coast  of  the  one  Ports,  Capes,

nd  the  other  Sea  unto  the  Streight,  although  they  be  ^d  Points  of

ijiany,  and  some  are  not  pointed  in  the  Cardes  of  Naviga- J'* c

ion,  it  appeareth  not  wholly,  neither  is  there  any  certaine

blation  of  all. And  the  most  knowne  of  the  Coast  from

Chile unto the Streight, which  runneth from  Valdinia

bout  an  hundred  leagues  to  the  West  South-west  are,  the

lape  of  Saint  Andrew  in  seven  and  fortie  degrees,  from

-hence  the  Coast  turneth  directly  to  the  South  unto  the

treight,  by  the  Cape  of  Saint  Roman  in  eight  and  fortie

egrees,  and  neere  unto  it  the  Hand  of  Saint  Catalina,

eere  to  the  great  Bay  which  they  call  gHartichoked,  and  eHisp.

ithin  it  the  Bay  of  our  Lady,  and  the  Hand  of  Santa  ^karchofado,

arbara,  and  more  forward  the  Ports  of  Hernan  Gallego  in  l/jC1il

,  ir-i  i-i  1 1 -r» 6 r  an  artichoke.

ght  and  tortie  degrees  two  third  parts,  and  the  Bay  of  Qr  Yerdi-

he  Kings  eighteene  leagues  from  the  Port  of  Hernan  nando  of

:allego,  and  the  Bay  of  Saint  John  in  fiftie  degrees  one  Callicia.

ijiird  part,  the  Cape  of  Saint  Francisco  in  one  and  fiftie,
hereby  some  Channels  doe  enter  into  the  Land,  and  the
and  de  la  Campana,  or  of  the  Bell,  eleven  leagues  from
lint  Francis :  also  with  some  Channels  which  have  not
*ene  navigated  within  the  Land,  and  the  Bay  of  Saint

. azarus  in  two  and  fiftie  degrees,  with  Channels  on  the

543

A.D.
l60I.

Sir  Richard
Hawkins.

Streight  of
Magellan.

[III.  v.  901.]

This  is  not
true:  for Cap-
taine  Winter
&  others  have
done  it;  which
howsoever  he
ca/sPirats,yet
they  have
better  des-
covered  these
Straights  then
the  Spaniards.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

sides,  which  enter  very  broad  and  long  to  the  one  and  the
other  parts,  which  have  not  beene  navigated,  and  a  great
Sea  of  Hands  which  alwayes  was  said  to  bee  at  the  South
side  neere  to  the  mouth  of  the  Streight,  the  which  Sir
Richard  Hawkins  denyeth ;  for  hee  saith,  That  at  this
mouth  of  the  Streight  on  the  South  side,  he  found  no
more  then  foure  small  Hands,  and  one  in  the  middest  like  a
Sugar  loofe,  and  that  at  the  least  they  are  distant  from  the
mouth  of  the  Streight  sixe  leagues,  and  the  great  Sea  is  on
the  one  side,  and  he  holdeth  for  certaine  it  is  that  which
they  say  is  the  firme  Land  of  the  South  side  of  the  Streight,
and  that  there  is  no  firme  land.  The  Streight  though  they
have  past  it  from  the  South  to  the  North  side,  by  order
of  the  Vice-roy  Don  Franciscus  of  Toledo,  Peter  Sarmi-
ento,  and  Antonie  Pablo  Corso,  and  it  is  knowne  it  stands
from  52.  to  53.  degrees  of  altitude,  where  it  draweth  most
to  the  South,  and  that  in  length  it  hath  one  hundred  and
ten  leagues,  or  one  hundred  and  fifteene,  little  more  or
lesse,  and  in  breadth  from  one  to  tenne :  it  hath  never
beene  navigated  to  an  end  from  the  South  Sea  to  the  North
Sea,  nor  the  Pyrats  that  have  past  it  from  the  North  to  the
South,  are  understood  to  have  returned  by  it.  The  above
said  Sir  Richard  Hawkins  saith,  that  he  sailed  many  dayes
by  the  Straight,  and  afnrmeth  that  all  the  Countrie  on  the
South  side  is  no  firme  Land,  but  many  Hands  which  reach
to  $6.  degrees ;  the  which  he  might  know,  because  he
sayled  to  the  same  $6.  degrees  through  the  middest  of
those  Hands,  and  seeing  he  found  nothing  but  Sea,  hee
followed  his  course  againe  through  by  the  Straight,  and
that  this  cannot  be  so  farre,  the  differences  of  Seas,  which
the  many  entrings  doe  cause  that  are  among  those  Hands,
and  that  the  habiting  of  them  is  of  people  on  the  North
side,  which  doe  passe  to  those  Hands  to  sustaine  themselves
of  fishings,  and  in  their  seasons  returne  to  their  Countries ;
and  that  he  comprehended  this  of  many  things  especially
of  not  having  seene  any  seated  inhabitating,  but  some
Cabbins  which  the  Indians  doe  make  for  a  time.  The
same  said  Sir  Francis  Drake,  that  it  hapned  him  when  he

544

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF THE MAGELLAN STREIGHT

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

i  60  i.

assed  the  Straight,  the  yeare  1579.  who  after  his  comming
ut  into  the  South  Sea,  he  ran  along  with  tempests  com-
assing  this  Sea,  unto  the  mouth  of  the  North  Sea,  and
y  the  same  way  he  had  runne,  he  made  sure  his  navigation
d  the  South  Sea.

The  parts  most  famous  of  the  Straight  at  the  entring
f  the  South  are  the  Cape  Desseado,  or  Desired,  in  53.
egrees,  and  the  Channell  of  all  Saints,  two  and  twentie
jagues  from  the  mouth,  very  broad,  and  large,  and  past

the  port  of  the  Treason,  and  afterward  another  great
irge  Channell  which  runneth  to  the  North-west,  and  Row-
mds  Bell,  a  great  Rocke  in  the  middest  at  the  beginning
a  Channell.  They  gave  it  this  name  of  one  of
4agellanes  fellowes  called  Rowland,  who  went  to  reack-
owledge  it,  which  was  a  Gunner :  the  point  of  possession
hich  is  foure  leagues  from  the  Cape  of  Virgenes,  at  the
ntring  of  the  North  Sea  in  52.  degrees  and  a  halfe  of
titude,  when  Peter  *  Sarmiento,  and  Antonie  Pablo  Corso  *°r  Vine
y  order  which  they  had  to  reknowledge  the  Straight,  for  Tmi-

had  beene  commanded  long  before  for  to  see  if  it  were

more  easie  navigation  to  the  South  Sea,  then  that  of
anama :  they  viewed  the  two  narrow  places,  that  at  the
ntrie  of  the  North,  and  it  seemed  to  Peter  Sarmiento
lat  the  one  was  so  narrow,  that  with  Artillerie  it  might  0r  0r^~
e  kept,  and  so  much  he  perswaded  it,  that  although  the  nance'
)uke  of  Alva  affirmed  it  was  impossible,  the  Armie  which
ames  Flower  carried  unfruitfully  was  sent  about  it,  and
1  the  end  was  knowne  that  that  navigation  is  dangerous,
nd  the  flowing  of  two  Seas  which  come  to  meete  in  the
liddest  of  the  Straight,  doe  withdraw  themselves  with
uch  furie,  ebbing  in  some  places  more  then  sixtie  fathoms,
lat  when  the  Shippes  did  carry  nothing  but  Cables  to
reserve  themselves  from  loosing  that  which  they  had
lyled,  they  would  goe  full  froaghted.

In  foure  hundred  leagues,  there  is  of  Coast  from  the
louth  of  the  Straight,  unto  the  River  of  Plate,  which
unneth  altogether  North-east  and  South-west,  there  is
ie  River  of  Saint  Ilefonsus  twelve  leagues  from  the  Cape
xiv  545  2  M

A.D.
l60I.

*Hisp.  rio
Gallego.

Chap.  24.
Of  the  Pro-
vinces of  the
River  of
Plate,  fcf  of
Brasile.
Sebastian
Gabote
remaineth  in
the  River  of
So/is,  which  is
called  of  the
Plate.  He  was
an  English-
man by  breed-
ing, borne  a
Venetian,  but
spending  most
part  of  his  life
in  England
and  English
imployments.
See  the  former
Booke.

Plentifulnesse
of  the  Pro-
vinces of  the
Riverof Plate.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  the  Virgenes,  the  aGallizian  River,  and  the  Bay  of
Saint  James,  foureteene  leagues  from  the  River  of  Sancta
Cruz, in 50. degrees, and at the mouth an Hand
called of the Lyons, and the Port of Saint Julian
in 49. degrees, and the River of John Serrana tcnd
the  South  of  the  Hands  of  Duckes,  in  47.  degrees,  there:
River of Cananor in 45. degrees, the Cape of Saint earei
Dominicke,  before  the  Cape  of  three  Points,  and  the  Land -hi
de  los  Humos  or  of  the  Smoakes,  in  38.  degrees,  the  Poinif
of  Sancta  Hellene,  and  of  Saint  Apollonia,  in  37.  degrees^
before  the  White  Cape,  at  the  entrie  of  the  River  of  Plate  >
on  the  South  side.

fiicl
nc
ler
rea(

e:t

.$?:;

n

JOhn  Dias  de  Solis  discovered  the  River  of  Plate  1 5 1 5.  l0vt
and  Sebastian  Gaboe  an  English-man,  going  with  an^  t\
Armie  by  order  of  the  Emperour,  in  pursuit  of  the  Fleets
which  Frier  Garcia  de  Loaysa  Commander,  had  carried a$?e
to  the  Hands  of  the  Malucos,  and  conceiving  hee  could  ie  In
not  overtake  them,  he  thought  good  to  busie  himselfe;Ea
in  something  that  might  be  profitable ;  and  entred  the^it
yeare  29.  discovering  the  River  of  Plate,  where  he  wajjahtu
almost  three  yeares ;  and  being  not  seconded,  with  relatiorliU
of  that  which  he  had  found,  returned  to  Castile,  having  hi,
gone  many  leagues  up  the  River,  he  found  Plate  or  Silveireat
among  the  Indians  of  those  Countries,  for  in  the  warre!^,
which  these  Indians  had  with  those  of  the  Kingdomes  o
Piru  they  tooke  it,  and  from  hence  it  is  called  the  Rivei)ure
of  Plate,  for  before  it  was  called  the  River  of  Solis.  These iousa
Provinces  are  joyned  with  those  of  Brasil :  by  the  line  oi ie  rr
the  markes  they  have  no  determined  bounds,  but  by  th(,e  q,
Coast  of  the  Sea  that  falleth  to  the  North,  and  entrance  fed
of  the  River  of  Plate,  of  the  which  the  Countrie  hatl^,
taken  the  name,  and  the  mouth  of  this  River  may  stanc!0re;
sixteene  hundred  leagues  from  the  Bay  of  Saint  Lucar  oi  Qj,
Barrameda.  ^

All  these  Provinces  are  very  plentifull  of  Wheate,  Wine  op  t
and  Sugar,  and  all  other  seedes  and  fruites  of  Castile  dc%
grow  well :  they  have  great  Pastures  for  all  sorts  of  CattleL .

546

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

1601.

hich  have  multiplied  infinitely,  especially the  Horses,

id  though  they  have  beene  many  yeares  without  thinking

lere  were  any  Mines  of  Gold,  or  of  Silver,  they  have

ready  found  a  showe  of  them,  and  of  Copper,  and  Iron,

id  one  of  very  perfect  Amathists. All  these  Provinces

e  of  one  Government,  with  title  Royall,  subordained  for

^arenesse  to  the  Vice-roy  of  Piru,  with  one  Bishopricke

herein  are  three  Spanish  Townes,  and  a  great  multitude

:  the  Countrie  men,  of  big  bodies,  and  well  conditioned.  [III.  v.  902.]

nd the Townes are ; the Citie of  our Lady of the

ssumption, the  first  inhabiting, and the  head  of  this  The

rovince,  it  stands  in  25.  degrees  and  a  halfe  of  altitude : AssumPtlon-

e  Captaine  John  of  Salazar  built  it  by  order  of  the

overnour  Don  Peter  Mendoca. The  territory  thereof

as  first  called  Gurambare : it  hath  Brasil  at  the  right

md  two  hundred  and  eightie  leagues,  and  in  this  com-

isse  it  hath  the  Citie  Royall  at  eightie  leagues,  which

e  Indians  call  Guayra. And  on  the  side  of  Piru,  which

East  and  West,  it  hath  at  foure  hundred  and  eightie

Agues,  the  Citie  of  la  Plata,  and  at  two  hundred  and

T|orhtie,  the  Citie  of  Sancta  Cruz  de  la  Sierra  or  of  the

::B[ill,  which  Nuflo  of  Chanes  built. To  the  South  side

(jhich  is  toward  the  Straight  of  Magelane,  it  hath  very

ufeat and rich Countries, and this Citie stands three

"jindred  leagues  from  the  mouth  of  the  River  of  Plate,

s  liilt  neere  to  the  River  Paraguaye,  on  the  East  side,  with

ure  hundred  Spanish  Housholds,  and  more  then  three

^Jlousand  children  of  those  that  were  borne  to  them  in  Note.

e  Countrie  (which  they  call  Mestizos)  in  it  are  resident

e  Governour,  and  Officers  Royall,  and  the  Cathedrall

tfliich  is  called  the  Bishopricke  of  the  Plate,  suffragan  to

e  Archbishoprick  of  the  Kings,  and  in  her  jurisdiction

ore  then  400000.  Indians,  which  doe  increase  daily.

Citie  Royall  was  called by  another name Ontiveros, Ciudad  real.

lilt  by  Ruidias  de  Melgareio  ;  it  stands  eightie  leagues

Dm the  Assumption North-east, toward the Land of

•asil,  neere  to  the  River  Parana ;  it  stands  in  a  good

yle  of  Victuals,  and  Vines,  and  much  good  Copper,  and

547

A.D.
l60I.

Fall  or

Cataract  very
terrible.

*0r  Good
ay  res.

Ports  and
Points  of  this
Coast.

aHisp.  Puerto
cerrado.
hRiopoblado.
Bahia  onda.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

great  number  of  Indians,  which  also  doe  much  increase
In  this  River  Parana,  neere  the  Citie  Royall,  there  is  aL
great  fall,  that  no  man  dare  come  neere  it  by  Land  within  301;
two  hundred  paces,  for  the  great  noyse,  and  mist  of  thcjtit
water,  and  by  the  River  no  Canoe,  nor  Boate  dare  come|,[
neere  by  a  league ;  for  the  furie  of  the  water  doth  carry  eao
it  to  the  fall,  which  is  above  two  hundred  fathomes  off  eaL
a  steep  Rock,  and  it  is  so  narrow,  and  the  water  goethip
so  close,  that  it  seemes  ye  may  throw  over  it  with  a  dart.  Easi

*  Buenos  ayres  is  a  Towne  which  in  old  time  wassa
disinhabited  neere  the  place  where  now  it  is  built  againe,  ium
in  the  Province  of  the  Morocotes,  in  the  borders  of  the  nan
River  of  Plate,  in  a  plentifull  soyle,  where  all  things  of  thev
Castile  doe  grow  very  well ;  the  Governor  Don  Peter  of  ,f  j|
Mendoca  built  it  1535.  which  caused  all  that  which  Gabote^
forsooke  to  be  discovered.  All  this  Countrie  is  commonly ^
plaine :  for  except  the  Cordilleras  or  Rowes  (which  are  :0mi
on  the  Sea  coast,  and  may  be  twentie  leagues  toward  Brasilia
afterwards  compassing  all  the  Countrie  toward  the  River  :ne]
Maranyon)  and  the  Rowes  of  the  Kingdomes  of  Piru,  allj[ara
is  plaine,  except  some  small  hils.  f

There  are  knowne  in  the  Coast  of  these  Provinces  from  the
the  Land  of  Brasil,  unto  the  River  of  Plate  five  or  sixu
reasonable  Ports,  the  Port  of  Saint  Vincent,  in  33.  degrees ^
height,  right  against  Buenabrigo,  an  Hand  where  the  lineal,
of  the  repartition  passeth ;  and  six  leagues  to  the  South  ^
the  River  Ubay,  and  the  Port,  and  the  Iland  de  la  Cananea  nort
in  35.  degrees;  and  forward  the  River  de  la  Barca,  before y
the  Port  of  Bahia  or  River  of  Saint  Francis,  and  theleei
Iland  of  Sancta  Catalina,  by  another  name  the  Port  of  the  ^
Vera,  or  Port  of  the  Duckes  (de  Peros)  and  the  Port  of|ee]
Don  Roderigo,  twentie  leagues  to  the  South  from  Sancta fleet
Catalina,  an  Iland  29.  degrees  and  more  to  the  South,  m
five  leagues  a  Close  Haven,  and  fifteene  the  b  Inhabited  iee(j(
River,  and  as  much  the  Deepe-Bay  from  this,  and  the
River  Tiraqueri,  in  32.  degrees  and  a  halfe,  before  theTv
Cape  of  Saint  Marie,  which  is  in  2$.  degrees  at  the  entrie  {
of  the  River  of  Plate.

548

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  ad.

1601.

The  River  is  called  in  the  Indian  language  Paranaguazu,  River  of  Plate.
nd  commonly  Parana,  hath  his  entrie  and  mouth  in  the
>outh  Sea,  from  thirtie  five  unto  thirtie  six  degrees  of
ltitude, between the  Capes  of  Saint Marie,  and  Cape
Manke,  which  is  from  the  one  to  the  other  about  thirtie
leagues  of  mouth,  and  from  thence  inward  other  tenne
leagues  in  breadth,  with  many  Hands  in  the  middest,  and
Ipany  very  great  maine  Rivers,  which  enter  into  it  by  the
Last  and  West  side,  unto  the  Port  of  the  Kings,  which
5  a  great  Lake  called  of  the  Xarayes,  little  lesse  then  three
lundred  leagues  from  the  River  of  Plate,  where  enter
nany  Rivers  that  come  from  the  skirts  of  the  Andes  and
hey  may  be  of  those  Rivers  that  proceede  in  the  Provinces
>f  the  Charcas  and  Cuzco,  which  runne  toward  the  North,
thereby  entreth  another  maine  arme  into  the  said  Lake,
yhich  hath  given  occasion  to  thinke  that  this  River  doth
ommunicate with the River of Saint John of the
s:|^mazones ;  others  say  that  it  commeth  from  the  Lake  of
he  Dorado,  which  is  fifteene  journies  from  the  Lake  of  the
Carayes,  though  there  be  opinions  that  there  is  no  Darado.
The  Captaine  Salazar  governing  in  these  Provinces  by  The  chance  of
■;:  he  death  of  Don  Peter  Mendoca,  in  the  yeare  1545.  a  the  Captaine
;  Spaniard  being  in  his  bed  and  his  wife  by  him  on  the  out a^za^  Wlt
r&lide,  in  the  night  there  came  a  Tigre  and  gave  the  man
^  I blow  that  he  killed  him,  and  carried  him  away,  and  Tigre  killeth
•etweene certaine Caves he did devoure him : in the  and  ls  kllled-
Qorning the Captaine Salazar went forth with fiftie
>ouldiours  to  seeke  the  Tigre,  and  going  through  a  wood,
iee  went  alone  by  a  path,  and  as  soone  as  hee  discovered
he  Tigre,  hee  being  flesh  set  upon  him,  and  at  the  time
iee  lifted  up  the  pawe  for  to  strike  him,  the  Captaine  let
lee  the  Shaft  out  of  his  Cross-bowe,  and  strooke  him  to  the
leart,  and  it  fell  downe  dead :  an  exploit  of  great  courage,
teede  and  dexteritie.  [III.  v.  903.]

Chap.  25.

rHe  Provinces  and  Countrie  of  Brasil  in  the  Coast  2  ,

of  the  North  Sea,  and  Terra  firme,  is  called  all  that  Countrie  of

7hich  falleth  to  the  East  from  the  line  of  the  repartition,  Brasil.

549

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

0

from  twentie  nine  degrees  of  longitude  from  the  Meridian  r<

of Toledo, unto thirtie nine, which are two hundred  j°1

leagues  from  East  to  West,  and  foure  hundred  and  fiftie  k  l

North  and  South,  from  two  degrees  of  Southerne  altitude,)

by  the  Cape  de  Humos  or  of  Smoakes,  unto  five  and

twenty, by  the Hand  of  Buenabrigo or  Good-harbour  J

And  from  the  first  inhabiting,  unto  the  last  of  Brasil,]onif

there  are  three  hundred  and  fiftie  leagues. Vincent  YanesiuU

Vincent  Yanes  Pinzon  discovered  first  this  Countrie  by  commandement  iure-.

Pinzm,  borne  0f  the  Kings  Catholike,  and  presently  after  him  James  legre

^fPalosdU-6  °^ Lepe, in the yeare 1500. and six moneths after  ion?

covered  the Poralvarez  Cabral,  going  with  a  Portugall  armie  to  India,

Brasily  and which  to  avoide  the  Coast  of  Guinea  did  put  so  much  to

then  Diego  de  the  Sea  that  he  found  this  Countrie,  and  called  it  Sancta

e*e'  Cruz,  because  on  that  day  he  discovered  it. All  of  it  is

very  hot  in  Winter  and  Summer,  and  very  ramie,  and

compassed  with  Woods  and  Mists,  unhealthfull,  and  full  if

of  venemous  Wormes,  plentifull  in  Pastures  for  Cattle,

and  not  for  Wheate,  nor  Millet ;  there  are  in  it  great  K

showes  of  Silver  and  Gold,  but  as  the  Portugals,  have  no

stocke  to  make  any  profit  of  the  Mines,  they  leave  them

as  they  are.

The  principall  foode  of  this  Countrie  is  the  Cazabii
which  they  make  of  the  Yuca,  and  the  greatest  trafficke
is  Sugar,  and  Cotten  Bumbast,  and  Brasil  Wood,  whichlndia
was  it  that  gave  it  the  name. There  are  in  all  the  Province  ?rov:
nine  Governments,  which  are  called  Captainships,  and  in  liens
them  seventeene  Portugal  Townes : in  it  may  be  about  ip
three  and  thirtie  hundred  housholds,  and  great  multitude  1a
of  warlike  Indians,  which  have  not  suffered  the  Portugals  iepte
to  build  but  on  the  Coast,  in  which  are  many  Rivers,
Landings, and many  Ports, and very safe, where any
Ships  may  come  in,  be  they  never  so  bigge.
Inhabitings  of The  Colonie of  the  first  Captainship, and the  mostN
the  Coast  of auncient  }s  Tamaraca,  the  second  Pernambuco,  five  leagues
from  Tamaraca  to  the  South,  in  eight  degrees  of  altitude,
and  there  is  a  house  of  the  Fathers  of  the  Companie  of  Di
Jesus :  the  other  is,  that  of  all  Saints,  one  hundred  leagues

55°

0. 1
ea;
tw<

iure-
.egre
to

hu'
>in

IK

u

urisd

wth
B.Sai
n  to
land
i  hoc
nth<

ncre
Br

ort

1}

Sim

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  ad.

1601.

from  Pernambuco  in  thirteene  degrees,  and  there  the
jpovernour,  the  Bishop,  and  the  Auditour  generall  of  all
lie  Coasts  are  resident,  and  it  hath  a  Colledge  of  the  ManyJesuites
j  'ompany :  the  fourth  Captainship  of  the  Hands  is  thirtie  Oolledges.
jpagues  from  the  Bay  of  All  Saints,  in  foureteen  degrees
1:  two  third  parts,  it  hath  a  House  of  the  Fathers  of  the
I'ompanie.  In  this  Captainship  is  found  a  Tree  where
ut  they  take  a  precious  Balme.  The  Captainship  of  the
lure-haven  is  thirtie  leagues  from  the  Hands  in  sixteene  Puerto  seguro.
degrees  and  a  halfe :  it  hath  three  Inhabitings,  and  a
||louse  of  the  Fathers  of  the  Companie.  The  Captaine-
pip  of  the  Holy-Ghost  fiftie  leagues  from  Puerto  seguro,
Ii  twentie  degrees,  where  they  gather  much  Brasil,  and
jpere  is  one  house  of  the  Company.  The  Captainship  of
jpe  River  of  Genero  is  sixtie  leagues  from  the  Holy-Ghost,
Ii  twentie  three  degrees  and  one  third  part,  with  a  house
If  the  Fathers  of  the  Company,  and  they  cut  in  their
arisdiction  much  Brasil  Wood ;  the  River  is  very  faire,
pth  fine  and  profitable  borders.  The  last  Captaineship
j;  Saint  Vincent,  sixtie  leagues  from  the  River  of  Genero,
1  foure  and  twentie  degrees,  it  hath  a  fortresse  in  an
iland  for  a  defence  against  the  Indians  and  Pirates,  and
l|  house  of  the  said  Fathers,  which  have  done  great  profit
1  the  inhabiting  of  this  Countrie,  and  conversion  of  the
ndians,  and  their  libertie.  The  Cattle  that  are  in  these
Provinces  are  many,  and  great  breeding  of  Swine,  and
jiens,  they  gather  much  Amber  which  the  Sea  casteth  Ambar.
Lp  with  stormes  at  the  spring  tides,  and  many  persons
lave  inriched  themselves  with  it.  Their  Summer  is  from
•eptember  to  February,  and  the  Winter  from  March  unto
August ;  the  dayes  are  almost  as  long  as  the  nights,  they
Increase  and  diminish  onely  an  houre,  in  the  winter  the
pnde  is  alwaies  at  South  and  South-east,  in  Summer
North-east  and  East  North-east.

There  are in this Coast eight or  tenne  Ports more  The  prind-
principall then the  rest, which  are the  River  of  Saint  Palest  Ports  of
Oominicke and de las Virtudes to the North-east of  thls  QmsL
pernambuco,  and  Tamaraca,  which  is  an  Hand,  and  as  it

55i

A.D.

l60I,

Cabo  Frio.

Chap.  26.
Of  those  which
men  call  the
Indies  of  the
West,  which
are  the  Hands
Philippinas,
coast  of  China,
Japan,  and
the  Lequias.

[III.  v.  904.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

is  said,  the  first  Plantation,  and  before  the  Cape  of  Saint
Austine,  which  stands  in  nine  degrees,  the  River  of  Saint
Francis  in  ten  degrees  and  a  halfe,  which  is  great  and
mightie :  the  Bay  of  All  Saints  three  leagues  broad,  and
thirteene  into  the  Land  unto  Saint  Saviour,  the  River  and
Port  Trevado,  where  the  Ships  doe  touch  that  goe  this
Voyage,  and  the  River  of  Canamum  in  thirteene  degrees
and  a  halfe,  the  River  of  the  Beades  or  of  Saint  Austine
is  foureteen  degrees  and  a  halfe ;  and  the  River  of  the
Virgenes  in  sixteene.  Portesecure  in  seventeen  degrees:
the  River  of  Parayua  in  twentie  degrees,  neere  to  Sancti
spiritus :  the  River  of  Genero  neere  to  Saint  Sebastian,
and  Cold  Cape  in  three  and  twentie  degrees  beyond  Saint
Vincent.

INdies  of  the  West,  are  all  the  Hands  and  firme  Land
comprehended  within  the  markes  of  the  Crowne  of
Castile  and  of  Lyon,  at  the  Occidentall  end  of  the  said
bounds ;  whose  line  as  is  said  passeth  on  the  other  side
the  world,  through  the  Citie  of  Malaca  from  whence
toward  the  East,  and  New  Spaine,  is  a  great  Gulfe  of
infinite  Hands  great  and  small,  and  many  pieces  of  Coasts,
and  firme  Land,  which  are  divided  into  the  Hands  of  the
Spicerie,  or  of  the  Malucos,  Hands  Philipinas,  the  Coast
of  China,  Hands  of  the  Lequios  and  Japones,  Coast  of
the  new  Guinea,  Hands  of  Salomon,  and  of  Ladrones  or
the  Theeves :  the  temper  of  all  these  Hands  and  Lands
in  generall  is  moist,  and  temperately  hot,  plentifull  of
Victuals,  and  Beasts,  with  some  Gold,  but  base,  no  Silver,
store  of  Wax,  and  the  people  of  sundry  colours,  and  the
ordinary  colour  like  Indians,  and  some  white  among  them,
and  some  cole-blacke.

The  Hands  of  the  Spicerie  (which  properly  are  called
so,  because  all  the  Pepper,  Cloves,  Sinamon,  Ginger,  Nut-
megs, and  Masticke  that  is  spent  in  Europe,  is  brought
from  them)  are  many,  though  the  most  famous  of  that
Gulfe  are  five  small  Hands  under  the  Equinoctiall  in  one
hundred  nintie  foure  degrees  from  the  Meridian  of  Toledo,

552

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

1601.

included  in  the  morgage  which  the  Emperor  Charles  the
jfift  made  of  them to the  King  of  Portugall  for three
hundred  and  fiftie  thousand  Duckets,  which  are  Terrenate  °fthese  m  I-
!of  eight or  nine  leagues  compasse, with a  Port  called  ^'£  \™n h
jTalangame,  and  in  it  raigned  Corala,  which  yeelded  him-  voiages  in  the
jselfe  for  subject  to  the  King  of  Castile,  when  the  Shippes  first  Tome.
|that  remained of Magelanes  fleete found these Hands.  SeeMagelanes
The  Hand  of  Tidore  stands  one  league  from  Terrenate  to °y*&- om-
the  South,  it  hath  tenne  leagues  compasse. The  Hand  QertaineTree
\of  Matil,  or  Mutier  is  of  foure  leagues  compasse,  and  is  bcaringakind
|under  the  Equinoctiall,  and  Maquin  three  leagues  to  the  of  Date.
jSouth,  of  seven  in  compasse,  and  tenne  leagues  to  the  South.
IBatan  or  Baquian  is  twentie  leagues  in  compasse. In  the
([land  of  Tidore  raigned  Almanzor,  which  also  gave  him-
>elfe  for  subject  of  the  King  of  Castile,  the  which,  and
Carala  did  write  and  John  Sebastian  of  the  Cano,  borne
in  the  Village  of  Guitarca,  in  the  Province  of  Guipuzcoa
'Drought  their  Letters ;  the  which  departing  from  Tidore
n  the  yeare  1522.  touched  in  the  Hand  of  Zamatia,  and
*oing  up  to  almost  fortie  two  degrees  toward  the  Antar-
icke  Pole,  he  arrived  at  the  Hand  of  Saint  James  of  the
jreene  Cape  or  Cabo  Verde,  and  from  thence  to  Sivill
vith  the  Shippe  called  the  Victorie,  having  spent  seven
noneths  time  little  lesse  in  comming  from  the  Hand  of
Tidore. Patian  is  the  fift  Hand  like  the  other ;  Moores
nhabited  in  it,  and  Gentiles  also,  which  knew  not  the
mmortalitie  of  the  soule. And  when  the  Shippe  of  the
leete  of  Fryer  Garcia  of  Loaysa  came,  Roiami  raigned
n  Tidore  of  thirteene  yeares  of  age,  and  againe  acknow-
edged  the  King  of  Castile,  and  also  the  King  of  Gilolo
ailed Sultan Abderta meniani, and confirmed it with
n  oath. Gilolo  is  an  Hand  under  the  line  foure  leagues
listant  from  those  rehearsed ;  it  is  of  two  hundred  leagues
ompasse,  without  Spicerie :  the  Hand  of  Ambon  in  three
iegrees  and  a  halfe  to  the  South,  from  the  Hand  of  Gilolo
7ithout Spicerie. The Hands of  Bandan are in foure
degrees  or Southerne  altitude,  where  the  Nutmegge  is
athered,  and  Mace ;  and  the  Burro,  which  is  to  the  West

553

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

of  Ambon,  and  Timor,  another  Hand  to  the  South-west
from  Bandan,  almost  one  hundred  leagues,  without
Spicery,  but  rich  of  Sandalo,  Zeinda,  fiftie  leagues  from
Timor,  to  the  North-west  of  forty  leagues  compasse,
plentiful  of  Pepper,  and  the  Hand  of  Celebes,  which  is
very  great,  &  Borney  greater,  neere  the  straight  of  Malaca,
which  is  made  in  the  firme  Land ;  &  Zamatia,  which  in
old  time  they  called  Taprobana.  There  be  other  manie
great  Hands,  and  small,  which  remaine  to  the  South  side,
neere  Java  Major  &  Minor,  and  to  the  North  toward hst
the  coast  of  Chyna :  the  Portugals  have  a  fortresse  inj
Terrenate,  and  other  in  the  Citie  of  Malaca  at  the  entrie
of  the  Archipelagus.

The  Hands  Philippinas  are  a  Sea  of  thirtie  or  fortie
great  Hands,  besides  many  other  small  ones  which  are?
together  in  lesse  then  two  hundred  leagues  in  length  North  Ue
and  South,  and  one  hundred  in  breadth  betweene  Newj
Spaine,  and  the  Gulfe  of  Bengala,  and  they  are  about
seventeene  hundred  leagues  from  the  Port  of  the  Nativitie
in  New  Spaine,  from  six  to  fifteene  or  sixteene  degrees
of  Septentrional  altitude,  of  a  reasonable  temperature,
and  plentifull  of  victuals,  specially  of  Rice,  and  some
base  Gold  in  some  places,  and  in  some  Hands  are  Cinamon
Cinamon  and  trees,  and  long  Pepper.  The  Countriemen  are  of  a  good
ong  eppeu  gj^p^  anc[  jn  some  Hands  they  are  blacke,  and  those
which  live  in  the  center  of  the  Countrie  are  whiter  then
those  that  live  in  the  Sea  coasts.  There  are  good  Ports,
and  Timber  for  Shipping,  the  names  of  the  principallest
Hands  are  Mindano,  which  is  the  greatest,  and  most
Southward,  of  a  hundred  leagues  in  length,  and  three
hundred  in  compasse,  a  rough  Countrie,  but  plentifull
of  Millet,  Waxe,  Rice,  Ginger,  and  some  Cinamon,  and
Mines  of  Gold,  with  good  Havens,  and  Rodes :  the  Hand
of  Good-tokens,  and  Saint  John  leaning  to  Mindanao,  ol
the  East  side,  of  twenty  leagues  in  length  North  andnV
South ;  Behol,  ten  leagues  more  to  Mindanao  on  the  ^
North  side,  nineteene  leagues  in  length.

The  Hand  of  Buglas  or  of  Negros,  by  reason  of  those

554

dalle

Sty
ift
litl]
[lii

km
ind
{1

'Kii'i

Uvil
t!

Hi

engt

re;

MO

n>  0

till

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  A.t>.

1 60 1.

:hat  are  in  it,  is  in  the  middest  of  that  Sea  to  the  West,

)f  fortie  leagues  in  length  North  and  South,  and  foureteen

n  breadth,  and  in  her  coast  are  some  Pearles  : the  Hand

if  Zubu  in  the  middest  of  all,  of  thirtie  leagues  in  length

>Jorth  and  South,  and  in  it  a  Spanish  Towne,  called  the

tillage  of  Jesus,  on  the  East  side,  with  one  good  Haven,

>esides  other  that  are  in  the  Hand,  the  Captaine  Ferdinando

Vlagellanes  discovered  this  Hand,  in  the  yeare  1520.  the

Cing  yeelded  then  himselfe  for  subject  to  the  Crowne  of

astile, and  before  he  discovered  the Hands,  which  he

ailed  de  las  Velas  Latinas,  because  they  sailed  in  their

>hippes  with  sayles  of  Mats  made  of  Palme  tree  leaves

fter  the  Latine  fashion ;  and  from  Zubu  Magellanes  went

wth  the  King,  to  warre  against  the  King  of  Matan,  in  In  Matan  it

little  Hand  close  to  that  of  Zubu  on  the  South  side, was  where

M  /here  being  too  valiant  and  confident  he  was  slaine ;  and  F^din^ndo

w  he  Spaniards  following  their  Voyage  in  demand  of  the  was  \iaine%

lands  of  the  Spicerie,  they  discovered  Quepindo,  Pulvan,

nd  Burney,  which  is  a  great,  rich,  and  plentifull  Hand

ree  f  Rice,  Sugar,  Goates,  Swine,  Cammels  :  it  wants  Wheate,

m  Lsses,  and  Sheepe ;  it  hath  Ginger,  Camphire,  Mirabolans,

nd  other  Drugges. Alvaro  of  Saavedra  discovered  also  [in.  v.  905.]
M  le Phillippines, and tooke possession of them in the  Alvaro  of
;oo  eare 1527.  for  the  Crowne  of  Castile,  which  by  order Saavedra  _
f  the  Marquesse  of  the  Valley  went  from  the  Port  of  0ftfoPMifo-
'ivitlanejo  in  New  Spaine,  in  demand  of  the  Hands  of  phe  fir  the
art  le  Spicerie,  and  particularly  he  was  in  Mindanao  : and  Crowne  of
lis  digression  hath  not  bin  out  of  purpose.  Castile,  in  the

Returning  to  the  order  of  the  Phillippines,  there  yeare  I$27'
)lloweth  the  above  said  Abuyo,  or  Babay  thirtie  leagues  in
;ngth  North  and  South,  and  tenne  in  breadth,  in  which
:e  good  Mines,  and  Pearles,  in  her  coast :  Tandayala  most
imous  of  all,  which  for  being  first  discovered,  is  called
hillipine,  of  which  all  take  the  name,  in  memory  of  the
ivincible  King  Don  Philip  the  second,  the  Prudent.  It
ath  fortie  leagues  on  the  North  side,  and  of  the  East
forth  North-east,  and  South  South-west,  and  twelve
agues  in  breadth  where  most,  with  good  Havens  and

555

A.D.

l60T.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  Ciiie  of
Manilla.

Hisvoiageyou
have  before.

1 1000.
Hands.

Roades :  Masbat  a  meane  Hand  to  the  West  of  Tandaya,
of  seventeene  leagues  in  length,  and  fifteene  in  breadth,
with  one  Haven  :  Mindoro  of  five  and  twentie  leagues  in
length  North  and  South,  and  halfe  in  breadth ;  there  is
Pepper  in  it,  and  Mines  of  Gold  :  the  Hand  of  Luzan,  called
the  New  Castile,  as  great  or  greater  then  Mindanao,  the
most  Septentrionall  of  the  Phillipines,  in  the  which  is  built
Manila,  a  Citie  of  Spaniards,  with  title  of  Famous  where
the  Governour,  Officers  of  the  goods,  and  chest  Royall,  and
the  Cathedrall  are  resident ;  it  is  a  plentifull  soyle  of
Victuals,  with  many  Mines  of  Gold :  the  Haven  of  this
Citie  is  bad,  and  for  all  that  there  is  great  trafficke  with  the
Chynas,  which  bring  Porcelane  Vessell,  Tinsels,  coloured
silkes,  and  other  Merchandize :  Lucon  hath  in  length  two
hundred  leagues,  and  it  is  very  narrow.

In  all  these  Hands  are  many  Mahometanes,  whither  they
came by the East India, and could easily plant their
falshood  amongst  those  blinde  Gentiles. Captaine  Magel-
lanes  as  above  said  discovered  these  Hands,  the  yeare  1520.
going  with  an  Armie  of  the  Crowne  of  Castile,  in  search
of  the  Hands  of  the  Malucoes,  and  tooke  possession  of
them,  and  afterward  Michael  Lopez  of  Legazpi  made  an
end  of  discovering  them,  the  yeare  1564.  with  an  Armie
which  hee  tooke  from  New  Spaine,  by  order  of  the  Vice- one  ar
roy,  Don  Lewis  of  Velasco  :  it  is  judged  that  those  Hands
doe  amount  to  eleaven  thousand  great  and  small. Therejthev
are  pacified  about  fortie  of  them,  and  converted  more  then
a  Million  of  men  unto  the  Catholike  Faith,  with  so  many  was
expences  of  the  Crowne  Royall,  not  having  had  untill  now  akv
any  profit  from  those  Countries ; for  every  Religious  man  dome
of  those  that  are  sent  thither,  doth  cost  to  set  there  one
thousand  Duckets. Those  which  hitherto  have  laboured  Bo  wa
in  that  Vineyard,  with  most  great  fruite  of  the  soules,  are  Fi
the  Religious  Dominicans,  Franciscans,  Barefooted,  and  wave
Austine  Fryers,  and  the  Company  of  Jesus; and  from|waten
these  Hands  hath  beene  begun  to  bridle  the  Mahometans,
which  from  the  Coast  of  Asia  went  by  little  and  little
extending  through  these,  and  other  Hands,  and  also  to  the  jof  the

556

Ban

of

dive

Tfc
the  c-

plentj
dome:
coast
sylin,
the  K
twent:
tode,
Couni
the  co
with  i
forth
inhabi
fromi
East;
of  Pat
eight
vinces

ike  tl

>reat
)lace,

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

1601

Chinas  and  Japones,  and  the  Portugals  had  already  lost  the  Since,  the
Jands  of  the  Malucos,  if  the  Spaniards  of  the  Provinces  ™£n£rsem
of  the  Philippines  had  not  holpen  and  succoured  them  ^  jJortimh.
divers  times  and  many  wayes.

There  is  already  a  plainer  notice  had  of  the  Chynas,  by  China:  see  our
:he  commerce  of  the  Philippines,  and  their  riches  and  jjTJ^
Dlenty  is  knowne  :  it  is  of  the  richest  and  mightiest  King-
iomes  of  the  World,  and  from  Manila  may  be  to  the
:oast  of  China  three  hundred  leagues,  of  eight  dayes
sayling,  and  the  coast  of  that  Countrie  goeth  running  as  to
:he  North-east,  more  then  seven  hundred  leagues,  from
:wentie  one  to  twenty  two  degrees  of  Septentrional  lati-
:ude,  and  upward,  and  it  is  known  that  crosse  over  the
ountrie  inward  is  a  Voyage  of  five  or  sixe  moneths,  to
:he  confines  of  Tartaria  ;  being  a  Countrie  of  great  Cities,

ie  .vith  many  Townes,  and  the  people  politicke,  and  prepared
or  their  defence,  but  not  warlike,  and  the  Coast  much
nhabited  with  maine  Rivers,  and  good  Havens  :  it  extends
rrom  seventeene  unto  fiftie  degrees  North  and  South,  and
last  and  West  it  occupieth  two  and  twentie :  the  Citie
)f  Paquin,  where  the  King  hath  his  Court,  stands  in  fortie
ight  degrees  of  our  Pole,  it  is  divided  in  fifteene  Pro-
vinces, sixe Maritime, and nine Mediterrane, and the

a  me  are  devided  from  the  other  with  certaine  Mountaines
ike  the  Pirineis,  and  there  are  but  two  passages  whereby
hey  doe  communicate.

Thomas  Perez  Ambassadour  of  the  King  of  Portugall,  The  Provinces
vas  from  Cantan  to  Nanqui  foure  Moneths,  travelling  *fc^fem
.lwayes  to  the  North  :  and  to  the  largenesse  of  this  King-
iome  is  joyned  the  plentie  of  the  Countrie,  which  is  great,
or  the  which  the  multitude  of  the  navigable  Rivers  that
lo  water  it,  are  a  help,  wherewith  it  seemes  a  pleasant
7orrest  or  Garden,  and  the  abundance  is  doubled  by  many
yayes,  for  the  Kings  spare  no  cost  to  make  the  Countrie
watered  in  every  place,  cutting  great  hils,  and  making
p-eat  Valleys  plaine  ;  and  the  heate  not  wanting  in  any
)lace,  for  all  the  Countrie  almost  is  contained  in  the  bounds
)f  the  temperate  Zone,  nor  the  moisture  by  the  clemencie

557

and

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

of  nature,  and  by  the  industrie  of  men  it  is  incredibly  all
multiplied,  and  all  being  compelled  to  busie  themselves
in  something,  there  is  not  one  foote  of  ground  left  unpro-
fitable. In  Canton  among  other  notable  things  they  say
there  are  a  great  number  of  blinde  men  that  doe  labour  in
something,  every  one  as  he  is  able,  and  being  forbidden
the  going  out  of  the  Kingdome  without  licence,  the  which
is  never  granted,  but  for  a  limited  time  it  is  necessary
that  the  propagation  increasing  continually,  the  number
of  the  people  be  without  end,  especially  that  they  hold  for
a  certaine,  that  for  five  persons  that  doe  dye,  there  are
seven  borne,  and  the  purenesse  of  the  ayre  is  so  much,
that  they  doe  not  remember,  there  hath  beene  any  univer-

[III.  v.  906.]  sail  plague,  and  with  all  these  good  things  they  have  their
troubles  also,  for  there  are  earthquakes  that  destroy  whole
Cities,  disinhabit  the  Countrie,  and  suppresse  the  auncient
Rivers,  and  raise  others,  and  doe  make  great  Mountaines
plaine,  with  a  miserable  misfortune  of  that  people.

The  yeare  1555.  there  burst  out  of  the  intrailes  of  the
earth  such  abundance  of  water,  that  it  over-flowed  the
space  of  sixtie  leagues,  and  destroyed  seven  Cities  with
their  jurisdictions.  And  this  as  touching  the  continent
of  China.  There  is  through  all  the  Coast  a  multitude  of
Hands,  the  greater  part  are  unto  us  unknowne.  Not  farre
from  Nanqui,  is  the  Cape  of  Lampo,  the  Hand  of  Aveniga,
Abarda,  Sumbar,  Lanqui,  and  the  Hand  of  Horses,  of  the
which  no  particular  notice  is  had.  Passing  the  Citie  of<
Chincheo,  stands  Lamao,  and  a  great  number  of  Hands
are  seene  about  Cantan,  and  these  are  the  most  celebrated,
Lantao,  Macao,  Veniaga,  where  is  the  Port  of  Tamo,
Lampacao,  Sancoan,  in  all  the  which  the  King  of  China
hath  Garrisons  on  Sea  and  Land,  except  in  Lampacao
which  is  not  inhabited.

Macao.  \n  Macao,  by  another  name  Macan,  the  Portugals  have

a  Towne, and  the  Chinas  knowing the  valour  of  the  ipines
Portugals,  and  the  favour  they  have  of  the  Castillans  of  Teat
the Phillipines, suffer it with an evill will, but the
Portugals  seeke  to  preserve  themselves,  for  their  profitable

558

50

Cantai
no  Ha
the  mi
the*i

Phillip

iirtie

tboi

joven
he  Co

Japa
tiea,  in

pe  (
:ount  1
ixtie
ptly
hen  w

\
he  a

fce  ::
01!  Ill

Europe
lien  an
tand  i
esse,  ;
apone:
►ecause
11,  and
ame  n<
s  the
rench,
,  that
fne  fi
a

oaap;
hose  K

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

1601.

:ommerce in China. Sancon is thirtie leagues from

3antan,  where  sometimes  the  Portugals  have  touched,  and

10  Hand  of  China  is  of  greater  importance  then  Anian  in  Jinan.

he  mouth  of  the  Gulfe  of  Cauchinchina,  five  leagues  from

he  *  Firme  Land,  and  one  hundred  and  eightie  from  the  *Or  Terra

^hillipines,  and  it  is  so  bigge,  that  they  affirme  it  to  have  *rme'

hirtie  Fortresses ; in  it  is  a  fishing  for  small  Pearles. It

s  aboundant  of  Victuals,  and  of  many  Fruits  :  under  the

jovernment  of  Cantan,  the  principall  Port  of  China,  and

he  Countrie  men  are  grosse  and  rude  people.

Japan  is  many  Hands  divided  with  small  armes  of  the  Japan.
•ea,  in  three  and  thirtie  Kingdomes,  whose  head  is  the
itie  of  Meaco,  distant  variable  from  China,  and  they
iw  ount  from  the  Hand  of  Goto  in  Japon  to  Liampo  in  China
10k  ixtie  leagues,  which  is  the  neerest.  The  Japones  doe
lent  [ready  molest  the  Chinas,  more  with  piracies,  and  thefts,
lien  with  just  war,  because  Japan  being  divided  in  sundry
lands,  and  divers  Princes,  they  can  make  no  warre  against
be  Chinas,  but  with  weake  forces.  They  are  more  war-
Ac  jke  and  valiant  then  the  Chinas :  it  is  a  temperate
nil  'ountrie,  plentifull  of  Seedes,  Cattle  and  Fowle  of
urope,  it  hath  Mines  of  Iron  and  Steele :  the  Countrie
len  are  strong,  valiant,  and  for  much  labour  :  those  Hands
kit  rand  in  thirtie  five  degrees  of  the  Pole,  little  more  or
iga  'sse,  according  to  the  distance  of  every  Hand.  The
ipones  doe  not  understand  the  Chinas  but  by  writing,
cause  of  the  Characters,  or  Letters  being  one  for  them  Characters
.1,  and  though  they  signifie  the  same,  they  have  not  the  Ciphers.
ime  name,  for  they  are  to  declare  things,  and  not  words,
the  figures  of  Arithmeticke,  that  if  a  9.  be  set,  the
rench,  the  Castillan,  and  the  English  man  doe  understand
,  that  it  signifieth  9.  but  every  one  doe  name  it  after  their
wne  fashion.
By  another  side  the  Japones  doe  confine  with  the  Phil-
pines,  from  whence  there  is  commerce  with  them,  and  a
reat  incouragement  is  given  to  the  Fathers  of  the
ompany,  for  to  labour  in  the  conversion  of  the  people  of
lose  Kingdomes,  where  notable  fruite  hath  beene  gotten,

559

as

Mi'

A.D.
l60I.

Lequ'ios.

Chap.  27.
Of  the  new
Guinea,
Hands  of
Salomon,  and
the  Theeves,
wherewith
endeth  that
which  they  cal
West  Indies.
The  Lequios.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

tic

or:«
Fr

for  the  which  these  Hands  are  much  celebrated  in  the
world,  and  by  the  comming  of  the  Ambassadours  of  the
new  Christendome  to  the  Pope,  and  to  the  King  Phillip
the  second,  the  Prudent :  and  so  as  nature  placed  them  in  a
scituation  separated  from  the  rest  of  the  Land,  the  men
of  that  Region  are  differing  in  customes  from  other  people.
In  the  yeare  1592.  Nobunanga  which  caused  himselfe  to  ions
be  called  Emperour  of  Japan,  interprised  with  eightie
Vessels,  and  20000.  men,  certaine  Provinces  tributarie
unto  China,  and  wan  it.

From  the  Hand  of  Simo,  which  is  among  them  of  Japan
the  greatest,  is  extended  a  row  of  small  Hands,  called  the
Lequios,  and  doe  prolong  themselves  toward  the  Coast  glit
of  China ;  the  two  greater,  which  is  every  one  of  fifteene
or  twentie  leagues,  neere  the  Coast  of  Japan,  are  called
the  greater  Lequio,  and  other  two  also  great,  though  not  'oint
so  much,  which  are  at  the  end  of  the  Rowe,  they  call  lood-
Lequio the  lesser : some  are  inhabited  of  well  shapen  Lvi.
people,  white,  politicke,  well  apparelled,  warlike,  and  of
good  reason,  they  abound  in  Gold  more  then  others  of
that Sea, and not lesse in Victuals, Fruits, and good  t
Waters. Neere  unto  the  lesser  Lequio  stands  Hermosa,  lat
or  the  beautifull  Hand,  which  hath  the  same  qualitie,  and ':
say  it  is  as  big  as  Sicilie.

en

to

f$a

THe  Coast  of  new  Guiena  beginneth  one  hundred
leagues  to  the  East  of  the  Hand  of  Gilolo,  in  little
more  then  one  degree  altitude,  on  the  other  side  of  the
Equinoctiall,  from  whence  it  is  prolonged  toward  the  East
three  hundred  leagues,  till  it  come  to  five  or  six  degrees.
It  hath  beene  doubted  untill  now,  whether  it  be  an  Hand
or  firme  Land,  because  it  doth  enlarge  it  selfe  in  so  great
a  Voyage  from  being  able  to  joyne  with  the  Countries  of
the  Hands  of  Salomon,  or  Provinces  of  the  Straight  of
Magellanes  by  the  South  side ;  but  this  doubt  is  resolved
with  that  which  those  do  affirme  that  sailed  on  the  South
side  of  the  Straight  of  Magelanes,  that  that  is  not  a
continent, but Hands, and that presently followeth a

560

ood

a;  h
ayri:
sve

KCOV

)St  w.

ill,

at  hi
picer!
The
b,i
lis  n;
ecaus
toti
iem  h

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

1601.

xicious  Sea,  and  among  those  that  doe  affirme  it  is  Sir
ichard  Hawkins,  an  English  Knight,  which  was  five  and  Str  R\
>rtie  dayes  among  the  same  Hands.  aw  ins'

From  the  Sea  the  Land  of  this  coast  of  Guinea  seemeth  [III.  v.  907.]

ood,  and  the  men  that  have  been  seene  are  cole  black,  ^ancls  a^
id  in  the  coast  are  many  Hands  with  good  roads,  and  JastofGuine
orts  whereof  is  no  particular  notice ; for  having  sailed  it
t3  :w  times,  those  which  are  found  in  some  cards  are  Aguada
ric  r  the  watering  to  the  East  thirty  five  leagues  from  the
rst  Land,  is  in  one  degree  of  Southern  altitude ; and
at  ghteene  forward  the  port  of  Saint  James,  and  the  Hand
:  the  Crespos  of  sixteene  leagues  long  neere  the  coast,
as:  ght  against  the  Port  of  Saint  Andrew,  and  neere  to  it
:ni  le  River  of  Saint  Peter,  and  Saint  Paul,  before  the  Port
c  Saint  Jerom,  and  a  small  Hand  neere  the  a  thrust  out  *  Or  Curled.
oint, 40. leagues  from S. Austin, which  they  call  of
ood-peace,  and  more  forward  from  it,  the  b  Shelter,  and  hHisj>.
vill people, two little Hands, and the Bay of Saint  P^tasalida.
icholas,  fiftie  leagues  from  Puntasalida,  and  among  other uenaPax
ands  one  of  white  men,  and  the  Mother  of  God  before
I  ood  Baye,  and  of  the  Nativitie  of  our  Lady,  the  last  of
lat  which  is  discovered,  and  as  to  the  North  from  it  the  CAbn&0-
aymana,  an  Hand  without  in  the  Sea  among  others  which
ive  no  name.

The  Meridionall  coast  is  not  yet  known,  the  first  that
scovered  the  new  Guine  was  Alvaro  of  Saavedra,  being
st  with  many  stormes  from  his  course,  returning  to  new
:>ain,  when  in  the  year  1527.  the  Marques  of  the  Valley
nt  him  that  on  that  side  he  should  seek  the  Hands  of  the
Dicerie.

The  Hands  of  Salomon  are  eight  hundred  leagues  from  Hands  of
iru,  &  the  opinion  that  is  held  of  their  riches,  gave  them  Salomon.
is  name,  the  which  properly  are  called  of  the  West,
cause  they  fal  to  the  West  from  the  Provinces  of  Piru,
Dm  the  place  that  Alvaro  of  Mendoca  made  discovery  of
em  by  order  of  the  Licentiate  Lope  Garcia  de  Castro  his
nckle,  Governor  of  the  Kingdomes  of  Piru,  in  the  yeare
^67.  the  first  that  saw  the  Land  of  these  Hands  was  a

XIV  561  2N

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

yong  man,  called  Trejo,  in  the  top  of  a  Ship :  they  are
from  seven  degrees  of  altitude  on  the  other  side  of  the
Equinoctiall  about  1500.  leagues  from  the  Citie  of  the
Kings,  they  are  many  in  quantity  and  greatnes,  and
eighteen  the  most  famous,  some  of  300.  leagues  in  com-
passe,  and  two  of  200.  and  of  100.  and  of  50.  and  thence
downward,  besides  many  which  are  not  yet  made  an  end
of  coasting,  and  they  say  that  they  might  be  a-continent
with  the  coast  of  the  new  Guiney,  and  the  Countries  to
be  discovered  toward  the  West  of  the  straight :  the
Countrie  of  these  Hands  seemeth  of  a  good  temper,  and
habitable,  plentifull  of  victuals,  and  Cattell :  there  were
found  in  them  some  fruits  like  those  of  Castile,  Swine  &
Hens  in  great  number :  the  Countrie  men  some  of  a
brown  colour  like  Indians,  others  white  &  ruddie,  and
some  cole  blacke,  which  is  an  argument  of  continuance
with  the  Countries  of  the  new-Guinie,  whereby  there  may
so  many  differences  of  people  be  mingled  of  those  which
resort  to  the  Hands  of  the  Spicery.

The  greatest  and  most  renowned  are Sancta  Ysabel,
from  eight  to  nine  degrees  of  altitude,  of  more  then  1 50.
leagues  in  length,  and  eighteene  in  breadth,  and  one  good
port  called  of  the  Star  :  Saint  George  or  Borbi  to  the  South
CI.  de  of  S.  Isabel  one  league  and  a  halfe,  of  thirty  leagues  com-

Jtrazifes. passe. Saint  Marcos,  or  Saint  Nicholas  of  one  hundred
leagues  compasse  to  the  South-east  of  Saint  Isabel ; the  ■
Hand of the c  Shelves as great as the former to the
South  of  Saint  Isabel,  and  Saint  Jerome  to  the  West  of
100.  leagues  compasse; and  Guadalcavall  to  the  South-
west greater  then  all :  and  to  the  East  of  Saint  Isabel,  the  ;
dOr  Good Hand  of  d  Buenavista,  and  Saint  Dimas,  and  the  Hand  of  L
sight.  Florida  of  twenty  leagues  circuit  every  one ; and  to  the  [  the

eOr  Boughes.  East  of  it,  the  Hand  of  e  Ramos  of  200.  leagues  compasse,  jjm
[OrFrantkke.  and  neere  to  it  Malay ta,  and  f  Atreguada  of  thirty,  and  the  deoj
three  Maries,  certaine  little  Hands,  &  the  Hand  of  Saint  eg]'
John  of  twelve  leagues  compasse  betweene  the  Atreguada  i0the
and  the  Hand  of  S.  James  to  the  South.  Malata  of  100.  e  Ea
leagues  circuit,  and  to  the  South-east  of  it,  the  Hand  of  ands

562

hi

egre

lat

lip!
OVcfi

Th
agetl

fth.

nc
ictus

d  n

w

rthe

Ding
nglii
regu

itao
tnds

in:-,
ardei

ail

ANTONIO DE HERRERA

Bint  Christopher  as  bigge  as  it :  and  Saint  Anne,  and
aint  Catherine,  two  small  Hands  fast  by  it :  the  Name  of
rod,  a  small  Hand  distant  from  the  other  fiftie  leagues,  in
ven  degrees  of  altitude,  and  in  the  same  Rumbe  to  the
forth  of  Saint  Isabel,  the  Shelves,  which  they  call  of
Candelaria.

There  is  in  the  voiage  that  is  made  from  Piru  to  the
ands  of  Salomon,  an  Hand  called  of  S.  Paul,  in  fifteen
egrees  of  altitude,  700.  leagues  from  Piru,  nineteen
egrees,  300.  leagues  of  Land,  others  which  may  be  those
lat  they  called  of  Salomon,  and  they  say  also  that  they
ight  be  others  which  this  little  while  have  beene  dis-
>vered  in  the  same  Rombe  of  Chile.

The  Hands  of  the  Theeves  are  a  row  of  16.  smal  Hands
>gether  which  runne  North  and  South,  with  the  middest
:  the  coast  of  Guiney,  from  twelve  degrees  of  altitude
ito  seventeene  Septentrionall  or  more,  not  farre  from  the
hillippinas  to  the  East.  They  are  all  barren  ground,
id  miserable,  without  Cattle,  or  Mettals,  scarce  of
ictuals,  inhabited  with  poore  people,  well  shapen,  naked,
id  much  inclined  to  steale,  even  to  the  nayles  of  the
lippes  that  came  there,  whereby  Magelane  named  them
'  the  Theeves,  in  the  yeare  1520.  when  he  came  to  them
)ing  in  demand  of  the  Spicerie.  Their  names  are,  the
nglish,  the  most  North,  and  after  it  Ota  Mao,  Chemechoa
regua,  Agan,  or  Pagan,  Oramagan,  Gugnan,  Chareguan,
atan,  Saepan,  Bota,  Volia.  There  are  among  these
inds  Phillipines,  other  eighteene  or  twenty,  called  of  the
ings,  Archipelagus,  or  Hands  of  the  Corrall,  and  the
aniens,  another  quantity  of  little  Hands,  and  Pialogo,
int  Vilan,  another  little  Hand,  the  Gardens,  and  the  Hand

the  Matalotes,  and  that  of  the  Shelves,  and  of  Saint
hn,  or  of  Palmes,  neere  the  Malucos,  and  on  the  North
le  of  the  Theeves,  five  or  six  little  Hands  together,  called
B  g  Volcanes,  where  is  store  of  Cochinilla  ;  and  h  Malpelo
other  small  Hand,  where  are  *  Civaloes  very  fine,  and  on
e  East  side  of  the  Theeves,  the  two  Sisters,  two  little
mds  in  ten  degrees,  and  Saint  Bartholomew  in  foureteene

563

A.D.

l60I.

Hisp.  N ombre
de  Dios.

eOr

Candlemasse.

La  Ingksa
Hands  of  the
Ladrones.

La  Inglcsa.

The  Kings.

Hands  of

Corral.

The  Gardens.

sOr

^Ethnaes.

h  Or  Evill

haire.

*J  Tree  so

called.

Two  sisters.

S.  Bartholo-

A.D.
l60I,

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[III.  v.  908.]  and  more  toward  new  Spaine,  the  Shelves,  Look  how  thou
goest,  Take  away  sleep,  or  See  thou  sleep  not ;  &  neere  to
them  the  Hand  of  Martine,  and  Saint  Paul,  another  small
Hand  with  shelves,  and  the  inhabited  the  most  Eastward
toward  new  Spaine,  Alvaro  of  Saavedra  was  also  in  the
Hand  of  the  Theeves,  in  the  yeare  1527.  returning  from
the  Hand  of  Spicerie  to  new  Spaine.

Martin.
Saint  Peter,
and  Saint
Paul.

Chap.  28.
Of  the  supreme
Counsel  of  the
Indies,  and  of
the  spirituall
government,
and  Ecclesias-
tic all  Roy  all
Patronage.

Counsell  of  the
Indies.

THe  Catholike  King  of  Castile,  and  of  Lyon  continuing
in  their  auncient,  and  Christian  pietie,  presently  after
these  new  Countries  were  discovered,  and  joyned  with  this
faire  Monarchic,  procured  to  plant,  and  settle  the  Catholike
Religion  in  them,  and  temporall  pollicie,  with  so  much  care
and  advice  of  the  wisest  men  of  these  Kingdomes.  For  as
the  discoveries  did  increase  the  businesses,  they  formed  a
particular  Counsell  with  President  and  Councellours,  that
busying  themselves  in  no  other  thing,  with  more  diligence
they  might  resort  to  that  which  so  much  pertained  to  the
service  of  our  Lord  God,  and  government  of  that  Orbe.
And  because  hereafter  mention  shall  be  made  of  the
persons  which  from  the  beginning  have  laboured,  and
served  in  the  supreame  Counsel  of  the  Indies,  which  hath
carried  so  great  a  waight  unto  this  present  houre,  first  shall
be  spoken  of  the  spirituall  and  temporall  government,  and
the  rest  worth  the  knowing,  that  the  order  of  that  Mon-
archic may  be  understood,  with  all  brevitie.

The  first  thing  that  these  godly  Kings  did  charge  and
command  the  first  Discoverer,  and  from  man  to  man
commanded  the  other  Discoverers  and  Governours  of  that
new  World  with  very  straight  orders,  was,  that  they  should
procure  that  the  people  which  they  carried,  with  the
Christian  life,  and  with  their  good  customes,  should  give
such  example  to  the  Indians,  that  they  might  be  glad  to
imitate  them,  and  should  binde  them  unto  it,  entring  first
according  to  the  Evangelicall  Law,  the  religious  men
preaching  it,  that  so  rather  with  the  sweetnesse  of  it,  then
with  the  force  and  noyse  of  Armes  it  should  be  admitted,
and  that  justice  should  be  administred  with  such  equalitie

564

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  ad.

i  60  i.
to  all  men,  that  it  might  be  much  respected  &  esteemed.
All  went  forward,  the  townes  went  augmenting  in  such
manner,  that  with  the  zeale  of  the  service  of  God,  and
;good  of  the  men  it  hath  come  to  such  a  point,  that  at  this
day  there  are  found  built  and  established  in  all  that  Orbe
of  this  Crowne  possessed,  as  before  hath  beene  seene,  five
lArchbishopricks,  twentie  seven  Bishopricks,  two  famous  How  many
|Universities,  where  with  great  learning  and  doctrine  al  ^chbishop-
jithe  Sciences  are  read,  more  then  foure  hundred  Monas- Bishopricks
ijteries  of  religious  Dominicks, Franciscans, Augustines,  Monasteries,
(Mercenaries, and the Companie of Jesus, with some  and  Schooles  of
^Monasteries  of  Nunnes,  and  Colledges,  infinite  Hospitals, poctrine  are
and  Fraternities, innumerable  store  of  beneficed  Cures,  So  Humma_ '
which  are  called  Doctrines,  for  to  teach  those  new  Con-  deros  is  said  to
verts, and Heremites, and Chappels in the high-way  signifie,  the
erected on pillars, having Crucifixes in them, without  translator  had
(number. All  the  which  was  begun  at  the  charge  of  the  ^jj^jjj*
:  Crowne,  and  at  this  day  it  goeth  forward  where  there  is  no  panitentiarii.
maintenance  for  it. In  effect,  this  Catholike  pietie  by  the
clemency  of  God  goeth  from  good  to  better,  augmenting
with  so  much  reverence  and  honour  of  God,  that  in  no
place  of  Christendome  it  is  done  with  more  order  or  care,
!by  the  care  of  the  supreme  Councell  of  the  Indies. Of
the  which  is  inferred,  that  the  Concession  of  the  Apostolike
Roman  Sea  made  to  the  Crowne  of  Castile,  and  of  Lion,
of  the  Patronage  Ecclesiasticall  of  that  New  World  was
a  very  great  remedie,  in  the  which  our  Lord  God  (as  Hee
which  onely  is  Hee  that  seeth,  and  preventeth  all  things
to  come)  did  a  thing  worthy  of  His  greatnesse,  seeing
Hee  hath  shewed  the  experience  that  if  this  had  beene
governed  otherwise,  it  had  beene  impossible  to  have  pro-
ceeded with  the  harmonie,  and  even  concent  as  it  hath,  of
Religion,  Justice,  and  Government,  with  so  much  obedi-
bnce  and  quietnesse.

The  Ecclesiasticall  Patronage  is  governed  in  the  same  How  the
manner that in the Kingdome of  Granada, the Kings  Ecclesiasticall
Catholike  presenting  to  the  chiefe  Bishop  onely  the  Arch-  Patronage  is
ishops,  and  Bishops,  that  from  his  holy  hand  they  may

565

governed.

'Ot

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

receive  these  Prelacies,  and  may  dispatch  their  Bulls,
procuring  alway  that  they  be  persons  of  a  religious  life,
and  great  learning.  All  the  other  Dignities  and  Benefices  |be
are  provided  by  the  King,  and  consultation  of  the  supremj
Councell  of  the  Indies,  and  they  go  not  to  Rome  for  Buls :
and  their  rents  consist  in  tithes  and  first  fruits  which  arise
of  the  Spanish  inhabiters.  For  in  the  most  places  of  these  to  ti
Indies  the  Countrie  men  paie  not,  and  where  the  tithes  acqui
are  wanting,  it  is  supplied  out  of  the  goods  royall :  and  etido1
touching  the  tithes  and  first  fruits  that  are  to  be  paied,  M
many  ordinances  and  rates  are  made  according  to  the  stile  :ause
of  these  Kingdomes,  that  the  men  of  each  Colony,  it  is  :usto
just  it  should  follow  her  customes.  And  though  the  from
Kings  of  Castile,  and  of  Lyon,  are  Lords  of  the  tithes  by  jove
Apostolike  concession,  &  might  take  them  to  himselfe,
supplying  where  it  wanteth  with  that  which  in  other  places  br  P
doth  exceede,  he  leaveth  them  to  the  Prelates  &  Churches,  p
providing  of  his  own  goods  Royall  with  the  liberality  of
so  Catholik  Princes,  to  all  the  necessities  of  the  poore
Churches,  giving  to  every  one  that  is  built  anew  the  fe
greatest  part  of  that  which  is  spent  in  the  building,  with

*Of  Images a  Chaliz,  a  Bell,  and  a  painted  *  Table.

or  Pictures.  That  the  distribution  of  that  which  proceedeth  of  the

tithes,  and  of  that  which  is  bestowed  out  of  the  goods  ilish
Royall  in  maintenance  of  the  Prelates,  Dignities,  and
Canons  of  the  Cathedrall  Churches,  and  Benefices,  Cures,
and  persons  that  are  occupied  in  the  divine  Service,  and
instructing  of  the  Indians,  may  be  fruitfully  imploied
according  to  the  holy  intention  of  the  Kings  ;  the  supreme
Counsell  hath  made  good  ordinances.  First,  that  all  the
said  persons  be  of  an  approved  life  and  customes,  &  loya
especially  those  that  doe  meddle  in  the  Doctrines,  being

[III.  v.  909.]  first examined touching *  learning, and after in the
Las  Letras. langUage  0f  the  Indians  ;  for  it  would  little  availe,  that  the

Disciples  should  not  understand  the  Maister :  and  that  lathe
these  do  continually  reside :  and  that  no  Curate,  or  if  th
Teacher  may  have  two  Benefices ;  and  that  those  which  lervei
shall from these parts passe to the Indies be more- :very

566

Bat

Ben
cat

thou

ime

)ro\
lall
aTi

lose

irovi
nail
icfon

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

i  60  i.

ipproved,  it  is  commanded  that  no  Priest  doe  passe  with-
out licence  of  his  Prelate  and  of  the  King,  and  that  if  any
pe  there  found  without  it,  presently  they  should  send  him
jo  Spaine.

And that the manner how the Royall Patronage is  He  continueth
Governed  may  better  be  understood,  seeing  it  appertained  the  gw*r*e-
|io this Crowne, because that it hath discovered and  ™"clesiasticall
.cquired that New World ; and hath also built and  Patronage.
ndowed,  out  of  the  goods  Royall,  so  many  Churches,  &
vlonasteries,  as  by  the  Apostolike  concession,  that  for  no
ause  the  said  patronage,  nor  any  part  of  it,  either  by
iustome,  or  prescription,  or  other  title  may  be  separated
rom  it :  it  is  ordained  what  care  the  Vice-roies,  Counsels,
jovernors,  &  Rulers,  are  to  have  in  it,  and  what  penalties
he  transgressors  should  incur. First,  that  no  Cathedrall
r Parish Church, Monasterie, Hospitall, nor votive
Church,  should  be  founded  without  consent  of  the  King,
"hat  when  in  the  Cathedrall  Churches  there  are  not  foure
Beneficed  men  resident,  provided  by  royall  presentation,  *Or  Pen-
1  canonicall  provision  of  the  Prelate,  because  the  other  doners,
rebends  be  voide,  or  absent  for  more  then  eight  moneths
though  for  a  lawfull  cause.) The  said  Prelate,  till  such
ime  as  the  King  doth  present,  may  chuse  to  the  accom-
lishing of the foure Clarks (besides those that are
rovided  and  resident)  of  the  most  sufficient  of  those  that
hall  offer  themselves,  without  that  the  said  provision  be
.1  Titulo  (to  be  removeable  at  pleasure)  &  that  they  have

0  seate  in  the  Quire,  nor  voice  in  Counsell.  That  no
'relate  may  make  canonicall  institution,  nor  give  posses-
ion of  any  Prebend,  or  Benefice,  without  presentation
toyall,  &  in  such  a  case  that  without  delay  they  make  the
rovision,  and  command  to  resort  with  the  fruits. That

1  all  the  dignities,  &  Prebends,  the  learned  be  preferred
efore  the  unlearned,  and  those  which  have  served  in  the
'athedral  Churches  of  Castile,  and  have  more  exercise
f  the  service  of  the  Quire,  before  them  that  have  not
erved  in  them.  That  at  the  least  there  be  presented  for
very  Cathedrall  Church  a  graduate  Lawyer,  &  a  Divine

567

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGEJMES

1601.

for  the  Pulpet,  with  the  obligation  that  in  these  Kingdoms!  t
the doctoral Canons, & Magistrates have ; & another  j
learned  Divine  to  read  the  sacred  Scripture :  and  another!  t
Lawyer or Divine for the Cannonship of Pennance,  I
according  to  the  sacred  Counsell  of  Trent. That  all  the  f
other  Benefices,  Cures,  and  simples,  secular,  and  regulars,  a
and  the  Ecclesiasticall  Offices  that  shall  be  voide,  or  pro-|  1
vided  anew. That  they  may  be  made  with  lesse  delay,
and  the  Royall  patronage  may  be  preserved,  it  is  com-
manded that  they  be  made  in  the  forme  following. That
any  of  the  abovesaid  Benefices,  or  Offices  being  voide,  the
Prelate  shall  command  to  make  edicts  with  a  competent
tearme,  and  of  those  that  shall  offer  themselves  having
examined  them,  and  being  informed  of  their  behavior,
shall  name  of  the  best ;  and  the  Vice-roy  or  Governor  of
the  Province,  shal  chuse  one  and  remit  the  election  td
the  Prelate,  that  he  make  the  provision,  Collation,  and
Cannonicall  institution  by  way  of  recommendation,  and
not  in  a  perpetuall  title,  so  that  when  the  King  doth  make
the presentation, and in it shal be  expressed that the
collation be made in a perpetuall title, the Canonicall
institution  shall  be  in  title,  and  not  in  recommendation:
and  the  presented  by  the  King  be  alwayes  preferred  before
the  presented  by  his  Ministers.
Provision  of That  in  the  repartitions,  and  Towns  of  the  Indians,
the  Prebends, anc[  other  places  where  they  have  no  benefice  to  elect,  or
and  Benefices.  means to piace one to administer the Sacraments, the
Prelates  shall  procure  there  be  one  to  teach  the  Doctrine,
making  an  Edict,  and  having  informed  himselfe  of  his
sufficiency  and  goodnes,  he  shall  send  the  nomination  to
the  Ministers  Royal,  that  they  do  present  him  one  of  the
two  nominated,  and  if  there  be  but  one,  that,  and  in  the
vertue  of  such  a  presentation  the  Prelate  shall  make  the
provision,  giving  him  the  instruction  how  he  is  to  teach,
and  commanding  him  to  give  notice  of  the  fruits. That
in  the  presentations  of  all  the  dignities,  offices,  and  bene-
fices, the  best  deserving,  and  that  most  exercised  in  the
conversion  of  the  Indians,  and  the  administration  of  the

568

Cun
and
Hoi
aess

the
sid

wlie
men
Aat

tlie

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

1601.

Sacraments  shall  be  provided ;  which,  &  those  that  best
speak  the  language  or  the  Indians,  shall  be  preferred  before
the  other.  That  he  which  shall  come  or  send  to  request  his
Majestie  to  present  him  to  some  dignitie,  office,  or  bene-
fice, shall  appeare  before  the  Ministers  of  the  Province,
and  declaring  his  petition,  he  shall  give  information  of
his  kindred,  learning,  customes  &  sufficiency,  and  the
Minister  shall  make  another  of  his  office,  and  with  his
opinion  to  send  it,  and  that  the  pretendant  do  bring  also
an  approbation  from  his  Prelate ;  for  without  these
diligences  those  that  come  shall  not  be  admitted.  That
none  may  obtaine  two  Benefices,  or  dignities  in  one,  or
in  sundry  Churches.  That  the  presented  not  appearing
before  the  time  contained  in  the  presentation  before  the
Prelate,  it  shall  be  voide,  and  they  may  not  make  him  a
Cannonicall  institution.

BEsides  that  which  is  rehearsed,  it  is  provided  that  they  Chap.  29.
doe not  permit any  Prebendary  in the  Cathedrall  Of  the
Churches,  to  enjoy  the  rents  of  it,  except  it  be  serving  & Ptntua
being  resident ; and  that  the  Benefices  of  the  Indians  be  mnt  Gooa>s  0j
Cures,  and  not  simples,  and  that  in  the  new  discoveries,  Men  deceased:
and  plantations  that  shall  be  made,  there  be  presently  an  of  the  married:
Hospitall  built  for  the  poore,  and  sicke  persons,  of  sick-  ""J^ffff
nesses  that  are  not  contagious,  which  shall  be  placed  neere  fnd  Lneral
the  Temple,  and  for  a  Cloyster  of  the  same ; that  for  the  inquisition.
sicke  of  contagious  diseases, the  Hospitall  shall  be  set Building  of  an
that  no  hurtfull  winde  passing  by  it  doe  strike  in  the  HosPtta^-
other  inhabiting,  and  if  it  be  built  on  a  high  place  it  will
be  better. And  because  the  King  being  informed  that
goods  of  the  deceased in those  parts  do  not  come  so  [III.  v.  910.]
wholly  as  they  might,  nor  so  soone  to  the  hands  of  the
heyres,  by  will  of  the  said  deceased, for  many  causes,
whereby  the  heires  received  great  damage,  and  the  testa-
ments were  not  performed  :  for  a  remedy,  it  was  provided, Orders  for  the
that  whatsoever  Spaniard  shall  come  to  any  Village,  or  goods  of  the
Towne  of  those  parts, he  shall  present  himselfe  before  deceased-
the  Clarke  of  the  Counsell,  where  he  shall  Register  the

569

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

name,  and  surname  of  such  a  one,  with  the  place  of  his
aboad or birth, that his death happening, it may be
knowne  where  those  that  are  to  be  his  heires  may  be
found. That  the  ordinary  Justice,  with  the  most  auncient
Ruler,  and  the  Clark  of  the  Counsell  shall  take  charge  of
the  goods  of  the  persons  that  shall  dye,  and  shal  set  them
in  an  Inventorie,  before  a  Scrivener  and  Witnesses :  and
the  debts  that  he  did  owe,  and  were  owing  him,  and  that
which  is  in  Gold  &  Silver,  small  Pearle,  and  other  things
shall  be  sold,  and  put  in  a  Chest  of  three  Locks,  whose
Keyes  the  three  persons  abovesaid  shall  keepe. That  the
goods  be  sold  in  a  publike  out-cry,  with  the  Testimony
of  a  Scrivener : that  if  neede  be,  an  Atturney  shall  be
constituted. That  the  said  Justices  doe  take  accompt  of
all  those  that  have  charge  of  dead  mens  goods,  and  recover
all  that  they  are  behinde  hand  without  any  appeale,  and
doe  put  it  in  the  Chest  of  the  three  Keyes. That  having
any  Will  of  the  deceased  where  he  dyeth,  and  the  Heires
or  Executors,  the  Justice  shall  not  meddle  in  any  thing,
neither  take  the  goods,  taking  only  notice  who  be  the
Heires of the said deceased. That the said Justices,
Rulers,  and  Scriveners  doe  send  also  to  the  Contractation-
house  of  Sevill,  all  that  which  they  shall  recover  of  the
goods  of  the  deceased,  declaring  the  name,  surname,  and
aboad of every one deceased, with the Copy of the
Inventory  of  his  goods,  that  they  may  be  given  to  his
Heires,  by  the  order  that  touching  the  same  is  given.
That  when they  take  accompt  of  those  that  have  had
goods  of  men  deceased,  it  shall  be  sent  to  the  supreme
Counsell  of  the  Indies,  with  a  very  particular  relation,  and
reason  of  all. That  the  Justices  doe  with  care  enforme
themselves  carefully  of  those  which  have  in  possession  the
goods of  men deceased, whether they have done any
fraude,  and  prejudice  to  the  goods  they  have  had  in  pos-
session, &  send  to  the  Counsel  notice  thereof,  that  they
may  give  accompt  with  paiment  to  the  Justices  above  said.
That  accompt  be  given  every  yeere,  and  the  memoriall  of
the  dead  that  have  beene  that  yeere  shall  be  shewed  to  the jras

57o

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  ad.

1601.

Governor  of  the  Country,  &  of  the  goods  they  had,  that
they  may  be  sent  to  Sevill,  &  be  given  to  his  heires,  and
the  Testaments  be  fulfilled,  with  good  accompt  and  reason
that  is  behoovefull.  For  in  every  Counsell,  one  of  the
Justices  is  Judge  of  the  goods  of  the  deceased,  the  one
succeeding  another,  from  the  yongest  to  the  eldest,  by
their  turne,  which  doth  send  his  Commissaries  through
the  bounds  to  take  accompt  of  the  houlders,  and  there  be
iny  carelessenesse,  the  Justices  are  charged  therewith  in
:he  visitations  which  are  made  of  them,  and  before  when
:here  are  any  Plaintifes.

Those Catholike Kings being informed that in the  Touching

[ndies were many married Spaniards, which lived  married  men.

Separated from their  wives, of the which, besides the

offence  that  was  done  to  our  Lord  God,  there  followed  a

jjreat  inconvenience  to  the  Plantation  of  those  Countries,

jbr  that  such  not  living  seated  in  them,  were  not  con-

jinued,  neither  did  they  attend  to  build,  plant,  breed,  nor

owing,  nor  doing  other  things,  which  the  good  inhabiters

:re  wont  to  doe,  whereby  the  Townes  doe  not  increase,  as

is behoofefull, and as they would do if there came

jnhabitors  with  their  wives  &  children,  as  true  Townsmen  ;

>eing  willing  to  remedy  the  abovesaid,  commanded  that

11  and  every  person  or  persons  that  should  be  found  to  be

larried,  or  betrothed  in  these  Kingdomes,  should  come

ipto  them  for  their  wives,  and  not  returne  to  the  Indies

/ithout  them,  or  with  sufficient  proof  that  they  are  dead.

knd  the  same  order  was  given  for  all  the  Kingdomes,  of

hat  new  world,  and  sundry  times  hath  beene  reiterated,

jnd  commanded  to  be  executed  upon  grievous  penalties.

Proceeding  from  the  yeare  1492.  when  the  discovery  The  holy
f this Orbe was begun, in directing and setling the Office  of  the
pirituall  government, as  hath  beene  seene, for  greater  inquisit'lon-
erfection,  and  enduring  of  it :  The  Catholike  King  Don
hillip  the  second,  called  the  Prudent,  considering  that
mong  the  great  benefits  that  the  Indians  have  received,
leir illumination to receive the Evangelicall Doctrin
as  the  greatest,  which  hath  extended  it  selfe,  and  con-

57i

.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

sidering  also  the  singular  grace  which  God  for  his  mercy-
hath  used  with  them,  in  giving  them  knowledge  of  our
holy  Catholike  Faith ;  that  it  was  necessary  to  have  a
speciall  vigilancy  in  the  conserving  of  the  devotion,  and
reputation  of  the  inhabitors,  and  Castillane  pacifiers,  which
with  so  many  labours  procured  the  augmenting  of  the
Religion,  and  exalting  of  the  Catholike  Faith  (as  in  those
parts  like  faithful  &  Catholik  Christians,  and  good  naturall
and  true  Castillans  they  have  done)  &  seeing  that  those
which  are  out  of  the  holy  Catholike  &  Apostolic  Roman
Church,  obstinate,  and  stubborne  in  their  errors,  and
heresies,  do  alwayes  procure  to  pervert  the  faithful
Christians,  labouring  to  draw  them  to  their  false  opinions,
scattering  certain  damned  Books,  whereof  hath  followed
great  hurt  to  our  sacred  Religion ;  and  having  so  certain
experience  that  the  best  meanes  to  prevent  these  evils,
consisteth  in  the  separating  the  communication  of  heretical
persons,  punishing  their  errors,  according  to  the  disposi-
tion of  the  sacred  Canons  &  laws  of  these  Kingdoms
(which  by  this  holy  means,  by  the  divine  clemency  have
beene  preserved  from  this  wicked  contagion,  and  is  hoped
they  will  be  preserved  hereafter)  to  the  end  that  the  Orbe
doe  not  receive  so  much  hurt,  where  the  inhabiters  of  these
Kingdomes  have  given  so  good  example  of  Christianity,
&  the  Country-born  have  not  perverted  themselves  with
erronious  doctrines  of  the  hereticks :  It  seemed  good  to
his  Majestie,  with  the  advice  of  the  Cardinal  D.  James  of
Espinosa,  Bishop  of  Siguenca,  Inquisitor  generall  in  these
[III.  v.  911.]  Kingdoms,  a  man  of  great  prudence,  and  of  many  rare
parts  and  vertues,  for  the  which  he  made  election  of  his
person,  to  help  him  to  beare  the  burden  of  so  many  King-
domes,  and  Lordships,  and  of  the  Counsels  of  the  holy,
and  generall  Inquisition,  and  of  the  supreame  Counsell
of  the  Indies  (for  it  behoved  to  place  one  Counsell  of  the
holy  Office  in  Mexico  ;  for  the  Kingdomes  of  New  Spaine,  ^
and  the  rest  of  the  Indies  of  the  North,  and  another  in
the  Citie  of  the  Kings,  for  the  Kingdomes  of  Piru,  and  L
the  adherents,  which  are  called  the  Indies  of  the  South) ffere

572

lia1
of
V

ac
Phil

thr .

|jres<

KG !

seate

Hen
War
ror'
Spai
Gov
ivo
Ifere

1

he
jove

hose

'ir
Beet

a

da;;:

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

i  60  i.

,vhich  the  authority  that  the  Councels  of  these  Kingdomes
lave,  so  that  as  yet  they  should  not  meddle  with  the  cases
)f  the  Indians,  but  onely  of  the  Castillanes,  &  other
Nations  that  should  be  found  in  the  Indies,  and  so  that
he  appeals  should  come  to  the  supreame  Counsell  that  is
•esident  in  this  Court,  as  it  is  done  in  Spaine,  and  in  the
iccomplishing  thereof,  in  the  yeare  1570.  the  King  Don
Phillip  the  second,  called  the  Prudent,  gave  a  generall
)ower  to  the  Towne  of  Madrid,  the  16.  of  August,  that
he  Apostolike  Inquisitours  that  should  be  named  for  the
>resent,  and  for  hereafter  against  the  hereticall  pervers-
lesse,  &  Apostacie ;  and  the  Officers  and  Ministers
lecessary  for  this  holy  Office,  which  was  commanded  to  be
seated  in  the  Cities  of  Mexico,  and  of  the  Kings,  should
exercise  &  use  their  Offices,  and  royall  warrants,  that  Don
Vlartin  Enriques,  and  Don  Franciscus  of  Toledo,  Vice-
oyes,  and  Captains  generall  in  the  Kingdomes  of  New
Spaine,  and  Piru,  and  the  Counsels,  and  Justices,
jovernours,  and  other  persons  should  give  all  aide,  and
avour  to  the  holy  Officio,  and  the  Inquisitors,  and  Officers
vere  nominated,  as  in  their  owne  place  shall  be  spoken
nore  at  large.

rHese  Catholike  Kings,  most  wisely  constituted  the  Chap.  30.
Supreme Counsell of the Indies, that they might  Of  the  forme

lelpe  them  to  beare  so  great  a  burden,  as  is  already  the  °* g°vern~
ri r\  \  11/^11  1 • ment  of  the

;overnment  or  that  Orbe,  and  the  Counsell  consisteth  in  supreame
>ne  President,  and  eight  or  more  Counsellors,  as  necessitie  Counsell  of  the
equireth  with  one  Atturney,  Secretaries,  Clerkes  of  the  Indies,  and  of
Chamber,  Relators,  and  other  Officers,  and  an  Office  of
\xcompts,  where  a  notice  is  had  of  all  the  goods  Royall  of
hose  parts. And  that  proceeding  might  be  according  to  Chanceries
ule  and  order,  they  declared  first  that  the  Counsell  should  royall  of  those
neet  three  houres  every  day  in  the  morning,  and  two  in  Parts-
he  afternoone,  three  dayes  in  the  weeke  that  bee  no  holy
[ayes,  and  that  they  should  firme  the  Warrants  that  should
»e  delivered  for  these  Kingdoms  ; but  that  those  that
yere  for  the  Indies,  should  have  the  seale  Royall : and

573

the  Institution
of  the
Counsels,  and

A.D.

l60l.

Appeaks.

d  Which  is
1 00.  pound
English,
taking  two
Ryals  for  one
shilling.

e  Which  as  we
accompt  44 1 .
pound  3
shillings  and
one  third  part
of  a  pennie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

that  in  those  parts  it  should  have  supreme  jurisdiction,
and  might  make  Lawes,  and  Decrees,  to  see  and  examine
whatsoever  Statutes,  Constitutions  of  Prelates,  Senates,
Chapters,  and  Convents  of  the  Religious,  and  of  the
Vice-royes,  Courts,  and  Counsels ;  and  that  in  the  Indies,
and  in  these  Kingdoms,  in  matter  dependant  of  them  it
should  bee  obeyed  :  that  the  government  of  the  Indies
should  bee  like  this  of  these  Kingdomes,  and  that  more  in
particular  the  Counsell  doe  occupie  it  selfe  in  the  matters  of
government.  That  in  Suites  remitted  those  of  the  Coun-
cell  Royall  shall  come  to  give  their  voyces  to  that  of  the
Indies,  and  that  two  voyces  shall  make  a  Sentence  in  suites
of  500.  d  Pesos,  or  under.  That  there  be  a  second  Sup-
plication in  a  case  of  10000.  Pesos:  that  they  deale  not
in  the  repartitions  of  the  Indians  in  those  parts,  but  the
Processes  well  perused  in  the  Courts  according  to  a  Law,
called  of  Malinas  (for  there  it  was  made)  they  shall  come
to  the  Supreme  Counsell :  touching  order  to  be  held  in
matters  of  services,  that  the  Counsell  doe  see  them  all ;
and  in  matters  of  rewards,  that  which  the  greatest  part
doth  determine,  shall  be  done,  and  that  in  these  there  be  a
Supplication,  and  that  no  expedient  suite  be  seene  the
third  time :  and  that  in  the  matters  they  doe  resolve  with
brevitie,  that  the  charges  be  given  to  the  best  deserving,
and  that  they  be  not  given  to  the  allied  and  kinsmen  of
them  of  the  Counsell ;  neither  may  such  bee  Solicitors,
nor  Atturneys ;  in  the  providings  of  the  Office  no  price
shall  be  admitted :  nor  that  they  of  the  Counsell  have  any
Indians  of  repartition,  and  they  shall  assist  in  their  houses,
that  the  Suiters  may  find  them  there,  when  they  goe  not
to  Counsel :  and  that  due  secrecy  be  kept  in  all  things,
and  above  all  that  the  Counsell  have  a  particular  care  of
the  Conversion  and  good  Instruction  of  the  Indians,  and
of  the  spirituall  government ;  and  that  of  e  600000.
Marmediz  upward  the  appeale  shall  come  to  the  Counsell ;
that  they  may  appeale  from  the  Sentences  in  the  five  Cases
of  naturall  death,  or  mayming  of  a  member,  or  other
bodily  punishment,  publike  shame,  or  racking,  and  the

574

ANTONIO DE HERRERA

xppeales shall come to the Counsell, with many other
audable  orders,  which  are  omitted  for  brevities  sake.

That  the  President  being  a  learned  man,  shall  have  a
/oice  in  matters  of  Government,  gratuities,  and  favours,
/isitations,  and  accompts,  and  not  in  suits,  because  he  may
)e  the  more  free  for  the  government  of  the  Counsell ;  and
leing  unlearned  he  shall  have  no  voice,  but  in  matters  of
rrace,  government,  and  favour,  and  that  he  may  assemble
he  Counsell  in  his  owne  house,  and  have  a  noate  of  the
msinesses,  and  that  the  Counsellours  doe  not  accompany
vith  the  Suitors.  And  because  it  seemed  a  necessary
hing  that  one  Fiscad  or  Atturney  should  assist  in  Coun-
ell,  it  was  commanded  he  should  have  the  same  stipend
hat  the  Counsellours,  and  that  they  deliver  him  the
lispatches  of  the  Office,  that  he  have  a  care  to  know  how
hat  is  accomplished  which  is  provided  for  the  Indies ;  that
ecessary  Papers  be  given  him  for  his  Office,  that  he  doe
ee  the  visitations  before  Counsell :  that  he  have  a  book
d  register  all  the  capitulations  that  are  taken  with  the
ting,  another  wherein  he  may  set  down  the  Atturneys
'leas  :  that  he  delay  not  the  suits  :  that  his  demands,  or
lose  that  are  against  him  be  admitted,  if  the  Counsel
link  it  good :  that  he  keep  a  book  of  that  which  is
Dncluded  for  the  cases  ;  that  he  have  a  care  to  know  the
)fficers  that  doe  omit  to  send  a  relation  every  yeere  to
le Counsell.

Having  ordained  all  that  which  appertaineth  to  the
ounsell,  which  is  the  head  of  this  Government,  with
lany  other  orders  which  are  not  rehearsed  for  brevitie ;
ley  proceeded  in  ordering  all  the  Provinces  of  the  Indies,
1  the  matters  of  justice,  as  neede  required  :  and  these
atholike  Kings  desiring  the  common  good  of  that  new
orld,  that  their  subjects  that  should  possesse  it,  having

zeale  to  the  service  of  our  Lord  God,  good,  profit,  &

se  of  the  said  Subjects,  &  to  the  peace,  and  quitenesse  of
ie  Towns,  as  the  King  is  bound  unto  God,  and  to  them,
>r  to  accomplish  with  the  Office  that  he  hath  in  earth,  hee
tought good to command to place the Courts and

575

A.D.
[60I.

He  continue  th
the  orders  of
the  supreame
Counsell.

[III.  v.  912.]

Institution  of
the  Courts
royall  of  the
Indies.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

Royall  Chanceries, that  (as  hath  beene  said)  are  in  the

Indies, with the Statutes, and orders that hath beene

given  them,  that  the  Ministers  may  doe  their  office,  and

justice  be  well  administred,  and  the  Townes  obtained  the

benefit  pretended.

The  Court  of The  first  Court  that  was  established,  was  in  the  Citie

*??.  of  Saint  Dominicke  in  the  Hand  of  Hispaniola,  with  one

y ' President  a  learned  man,  though  now  because  of  the  warre

he  is  a  Souldiour,  with  title  of  Captaine  Generall,  and

aOr  foure  Justices  that  beare  rods,  like  an  a  Alcalde,  and  deale

Ordinary m  civill  and  criminall  matters,  in  a  degree  of  apeale,  and

Justice,  xsc -n  tjie  mstance  m  matter  of  Court,  and  the  Government

is  onely  commended  to  the  President  (which  now  is  in]

Don Antonio Ossorio) and the limits thereof. The

The  Court  of  second Court was established in the Citie of Mexico,

Mexico.  m  New Spaine : the  first  President  which  was  Nunyo

of Guzman, had no authoritie, for he was placed

but  for  a  season : with  the  second  Court,  the  Bishop  D.

Sebastian Ramirez (for he was  so in the Court of

Hispanyola)  he  had  the  Government  of  the  Kingdomes,

and  the  supreame  authoritie,  and  hee  left  that,  established

that  which  belonged  unto  it,  and  unto  justice,  as  at  this

present  it  is. The  President  of  this  Court  is  the  Vice-roy

(which  now  is  the  Earle  of  Monterrey)  there  are  eight

Justices,  which  doe  judge  in  civill  matters,  and  in  the

appeale  of  the  cases  of  government  which  the  Vice-roy

establisheth. There  are  three  Justices  of  criminall  cases,

which  beare  rods,  and  deale  in  criminal  cases,  and  two

Atturnies,  one  of  civill,  another  of  criminall  causes,  and

hee  provideth  the  Rulers  charges  that  are  not  reserved

to  the  King,  and  the  other  Officers,  and  helpes  of  cost  in

releases, and vacations in the limits of  this Court of

Mexico,  and  in  that  Counsell  of  new  Galicia.

The  Court  of The  third  Court  was  that  of  Panama  in  Terra  firme

(for  this  name  was  given  to  it,  because  it  was  the  first

place  where  from  the  Hands  the  Castillanes  went  to  inhabit,

called and  as  their  common  speech  was  to  say  that  they  went  and

Terra  firme. came  from  the  Firme  Land,  though  other  Provinces  were

r576;

Panama.

Wherefore  it
was

ANTONIO DE HERRERA

found  in  the  firme  land  of  that  Orbe)  this  Province  con-
tinued this  name,  loosing  that  of  Castilla  del  Oro,
wherewith  the  Kings  commanded  it  should  be  called  :  and
when  the  affaires  of  Peru  grew  greater,  in  the  yeare  1542.
it  was  thought  good  that  this  Court  should  be  removed
to  the  Citie  of  The  Kings,  where  the  Vice-roy  (which  now
is  Don  Lewis  of  Velasco)  hath  at  his  charge  the  govern-
ment of  these  limits,  and  that  of  the  Courts  of  the  Charcas
and  Quito.  There  is  in  this  Court  of  the  Kings  eight
Justices,  three  Justices  of  Court,  and  two  Atturneys,  in
the  same  order  as  in  Mexico  :  and  the  Vice-roy  is  resident
in  the  Citie  of  the  Kings,  and  is  the  President  of  this
Court,  and  shall  be  in  the  other  two,  when  he  is  present  in
them,  and  doth  divide  all  the  repartitions  of  Indians  that
ire  voide  in  the  bounds  of  them.

The  fourth  Court  was  established  in  the  Province  of
the  Confines,  and  seeming  it  was  needlesse  it  was  dis-
solved, and  the  yeare  1570.  it  was  established  againe  in
:he  Citie  of  Saint  James,  of  the  Kingdome  of  Guatemala :
•n  it  is  one  President  which  is  the  Doctor  Criado  of
"astile :  foure  Justices  with  rods,  and  one  Attorney.
They  sit  on  civill  and  criminall  cases,  in  appeales,  and  in
:he  first  instance  :  in  matters  of  Court  the  President  onely
lath  the  Government,  and  assigneth  the  Indians,  pro-
•ideth  the  Rulerships,  and  other  Offices  temporall.  The
rift  Court  was  established  in  the  Citie  of  Sancta  Fe  de
Bogata,  in  the  new  Kingdome  of  Granada,  with  one
IPresident  (which  now  is  the  Doctor  Francisco  de  Sande)
roure  Justices  with  rods,  and  one  Atturney,  with  the  same
liuthority  that  the  former.  The  sixt  was  established  in
he  Citie  of  Guadalajara,  of  the  new  Kingdome  of  Gallicia,
mth  one  Regent,  three  chiefe  Justices,  which  dispatched  a
*reat  while  without  Seale,  and  the  matters  increasing,  the
Seale  was  given,  and  a  Register,  and  a  President  was
placed,  which  now  is  Doctor  Sanctiago  de  Vera :  and  three
Justices  with  rods,  one  Atturney,  and  the  Viceroy  of  New
5paine  hath  the  Government.  The  seventh  Court,  was
placed  in  the  Citie  of  Saint  Francis  of  Quito,  of  the
xiv  577  2  o

A.D.

l60I

Court  of  the
Citie  of  the
Kings.

The  Court  of
Guatemala.

The  Court  of
the  new
Kingdome.

The  Court  of
the  new
Kingdome  of
Galicia.

The  Court  of
Quito.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

Province  of  Piru,  where  there  was  also  a  Regent,  chiefe
Justices  without  Seale,  and  afterward  the  Court  was  estab-
lished with  a  President  (which  now  is  the  Licentiat  Miguel
de  Vuarar)  with  three  Justices  with  rods,  &  one  Atturny
with  the  same  faculty  of  Guadalajara,  the  government,
&  the  rest  remaining  to  the  Vice-roy  of  Piru,  as  abovesaid.
The  Court  of  The  eight  Court  was  in  the  Citie  of  the  Plate,  in  the
the  Charcas. pr0yince of the Charcas, with a Regent and chiefe
Justices : after there was placed a President, foure
Justices  with  rods,  Atturney, Seale, and  Register,  and
now  is  President  the  Licentiat  Cepeda,  with  reservation  of
the  providing  the  charges,  and  the  rest  to  the  Vice-roy  of
Counsellof Piru. The  ninth  Court,  is  that  which  was  established
Panama.  againe  in  the  Citie  of  Panama,  with  a  President  of  *  Sword

Soldiour  anc^  Cloake,  because  of  the  matters  of  warre,  which  is  \

now  Don  Alonso  de  Sotomayor,  with  the  title  of  Captaine
Generall  of  Terra  firme :  there  are  three  Justices  with
roddes,  which  doe  deale  in  Appeales  of  civill  and  criminall
cases,  and  at  first  instance  in  matters  of  Court,  and  it
hath  onely  the  Government.  In  the  Citie  of  Saint
James,  of  the  Province  of  Chile,  was  placed  the  tenth
[III.  v.  913.]  Court,  and  because  it  seemed  needelesse,  it  was  dissolved,
and  a  Governour  was  provided,  which  dependeth  on  the
The  Court  of  Viceroy  of  Piru.  In  the  Citie  of  the  Philippinas,  called
thePhilhpines.  Manila,  was  a  Court,  and  it  was  dissolved,  because  it
seemed  needelesse :  a  few  yeares  since  it  was  established
againe,  with  a  Captaine  Generall  which  is  Don  Peter  of
Acunya  which  is  President,  and  foure  Justices,  and  one
Atturney,  with  the  same  authoritie  that  the  other  Courts.
For  the  Catholike  Kings  of  Castile,  with  the  advise  of
the  supreme  Councell  of  the  Indies,  doe  alwayes  provide
with  a  sincere  and  just  minde,  that  which  is  convenient
for  the  preservation,  and  augmenting  of  the  spirituall  and
temporall  things  of  those  parts,  without  any  spare  of
expences,  or  labor :  and  every  Court  hath  according  to
the  use  of  these  Kingdomes,  Secretaries,  Relators,  Ser-
geants, Porters,  and  the  Officers  which  are  necessarie.

578

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

1601.

THe  harmonie  and  agreement  of  this  great  Monarchic, Chap.  31.
is  such,  that  to  every  Minister  hath  beene  given  the  °fthe  thm&
1 •  • 1  it 1  r  r  ' a\. that  are

authontie that as well  by  reason or estate, as  tor the  provijea>  ;n

reputation of justice hath seemed to be convenient,  the  supreme
reserving  to  the  supreme  Majestie  that  which  hath  beene  Councellofthe
judged to be necessarie to  his  authoritie. For to the  lndies  wlth
Vice-royes  and  Presidents,  that  they  may  have  to  reward  ^'av^w*
the  well-deserving,  and  they  be  more  respected,  there  are
Offices  assigned which they may provide, and matters
wherein  they  may  gratifie,  and  to  the  providing  of  the
Person  Royall  have  remayned,  with  consultation  of  the
supreme  Councell  of  the  Indies  the  offices  following.

For  the  Kingdome  of  Chile  a  Governour  and  a  learned  The  govern-
Justice, with facultie to incommend or authorise the  mj-nts  ™htch
Indians  : another  for  Tucuman,  with  tne  same  facultie : proz/j^f  -in
another for the Provinces of the River  of  Plate, for  the  Indies.
Popayan,  Sancta  Martha,  Cartagena,  and  Veragua,  with
their  Governour  in  every  one  with  the  same  power. In
the  Provinces  of  Nicaragua,  and  the  Rich  Coast,  one :  in
the  Hand  of  Cuba,  one  Governour,  and  Captaine  which  is
resident  in  the  Citie  of  Saint  Christopher  of  the  Avana :
there  are  besides  the  Governours  of  the  Hand  of  Saint
John of Porte-rico, Venezuela, Soconusco, Yutacan,
3ozumel,  and  Tabasco,  which  is  all  one  government  with
mthoritie  to  commend  the  Indians. His  Majestie  pro-
/ideth  also  the  governments  of  Honduras,  the  Margarite,
Florida,  new  Bisquie,  Dorado,  those  of  the  new  Realme
)f  Lion,  and  that  of  Pacamoros,  Ygualsango,  which  are
:or  terme  of  life,  and  the  same  in  the  Provinces  of  Choco,
^uixos,  the  Cynamom,  Hands  of  Salomon,  Sancta  Cruz
->f  the  Hill,  and  the  last  is  that  of  the  new  Andalusia.

Likewise  there  are  provided  by  his  Majestie  the  Ruler-  The  Ruler-
hips  following. The  Cuzco,  the  Citie  of  the  Plate,  and  s^{ that  his
he  seate  of  the  mynes  of  Potosi,  and  the  Province  of  p^^ge  °*
3hicuito, the Andes of Cuzco, the citie of Truxillo,
Vrrequipa, Saint James of Guayaquil, Guamanga, the
itie  of  the  Peace,  Chiquiabo,  Saint  John  of  the  Frontier,
Jon  of  Guanuco,  Old  Haven,  Zamora,  the  inhabiting  of

579

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 60 1.

the  mynes  of  the  Zacatecas  in  new  Galicia,  Cuenca,  Loxa,
Tunja,  the  citie  of  Mexico,  the  citie  of  the  Kings,  the
province  of  Nicoya.  Chiefe  Justiceships,  are  those  of  the
village  of  Saint  Saviour  of  the  province  of  Guatemala,
*Or  the  name  the  inward  part  of  Hispaniola,  *  Nombre  de  Dios,  the
of  God.  village  of  Chuluteca,  province  of  the  Chiapa,  Zapotlitan,

the  village  of  Nata,  Sancta  Marie  of  the  victorie  in
Tabasco.  And  the  chiefe  Bayliwickes  are,  in  the  citie  of
Saint  Dominicke  in  Mexico,  in  Guadalajara,  Saint  James
of  Guatemala,  Panama,  holy  Faith  of  Bogota,  Saint
Francis  of  Quito,  the  citie  of  the  Kings,  the  Plata.  In
the  Cities  recited  in  every  one  is  a  chiefe  Bayliefe,  which
hath  a  voice  in  Councell  as  a  Ruler,  and  Deputies  named,
for  the  use  of  his  Office,  and  in  every  Court  is  another
chiefe  Bayliefe  with  facultie  to  name  other  two  Deputies.
For  the  government  of  the  goods  Royall  are  provided
by  his  Majestie,  with  the  opinion  of  the  supreme  Councell
of  the  Indies,  many  Officers,  Factors,  Treasurers,  Tellers,
and  Over-seers,  which  all  doe  give  assurance  in  Castile
and  in  the  Indies,  of  good  and  faithfull  administration :
and  because  this  new  Commonwealth  doth  augment  so
much,  it  seemed  behoofefull  to  the  service  of  God,  and  of
the  King,  to  ennoble  and  authorize  it  more,  with  placing
two  Vice-royes,  one  in  New  Spaine,  another  in  the  King-
domes  of  Piru,  that  in  the  Kings  name  they  should
governe  and  provide  the  things  belonging  to  the  service
of  God,  and  of  the  King,  and  to  the  conversion  and
instruction  of  the  Indians,  sustayning,  continuing,
inhabiting,  and  ennobling  of  the  said  Kingdomes,  which
experience  hath  shewed,  that  it  hath  beene  convenient :
to  the  which  Vice-royes  instructions  are  given  very
particular  of  that  which  is  recited,  and  that  they  may  have
in  protection  the  holy  office  of  the  Inquisition,  and  with
their  strong  arme  to  defend  and  protect  it,  that  this  con-
formitie  as  a  fast  knot,  may  be  the  pure  and  true
preservation  of  the  spirituall  and  temporall  Estate,  which
is  the  best  and  truest  estate,  and  most  according  to  the
Evangelicall  estate.

580

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

i6oi.

The  Vice-royes  are  commanded  also,  and  likewise  the That  wkkk  is

Judges,  not  to  have  houses  proper,  nor  to  trafficke,  nor  firbidden  the

contract,  nor  be  served  of  the  Indians,  neither  have  any  a^J~J^/s

*  Grangeries,  nor  meddle  in  Armies,  nor  Discoveries  ;  that  *  where  herds

they  receive  no  guifts  nor  presents  of  any  person ; nor  of  Cattell  are

borrow  mony,  nor  any  thing  to  eate  ; nor  pleade, nor  bred.

receive  arbitrements. That  no  Lawyer  may  plead  where

his  father,  father  in  law,  brother  in  law,  cousin,  or  sonne

is  Judge. That  no  Vice-roy,  President,  Justice,  Judge  of

the  criminall  Cases,  Solicitor,  nor  their  children  may  marry

in the  Indies. That  no  Governours,  Rulers, nor  their

Deputies,  may  buy  Lands,  nor  build  Houses,  nor  trafficke

in  their  jurisdiction. That  they  may  not  farme  the  Bayli-

wickes, nor Jaylorships, nor other offices. That no

Governour,  Ruler,  nor  chiefe  Bayliefe,  during  the  time  of

his  office,  may  marry  in  the  bounds  of  his  jurisdiction.

That  no  Judge  be  provided  for  a  Ruler,  neither  shall  the

isaid  Judges,  or  Bayliefs,  have  any  charge  in  which  they  [III.  v.  914.]

are  to  make  any  absence  from  their  offices : neither  shall

any  office  of  justice  be  given  to  the  sonnes,  sonne  in  law,

brothers  in  law,  nor  fathers  in  law  of  Presidents,  Justices,

lor  Solicitors,  nor  to  the  Officers  of  the  Courts,  and  of  the

^oods  Royal,  neither  to  servants  not  allied  of  theirs :  and

:he  same  is  commanded  the  Vice-royes. And  that  none

}f the abovesaid Ministers, doe accept warrant for

recoveries  nor  other  things,  nor  serve  themselves  of  the

Indians without paying them. That no Advocate,

krivener,  nor  Relator,  doe  dwell  in  the  house  of  Judge,

lor  Bayliefe,  nor  the  Suiters  serve  the  Judges. That  the

ludges  of  Panama,  doe  not  accompanie  themselves  with

;he  Dealers,  nor  give  leave  to  their  wives  to  accompanie

hem. And  that  no  Justices  of  all  the  Courts,  shall  have

much communication with the Suiters, Advocates, nor

i^tturneys  :  neither  in  body  of  a  Court  to  goe  to  Marriages,

'funerals, nor Spousals, except it be a very weighty

matter : neither visite any Neighbour for any cause.

fhat  they  doe  not  meddle  in  matters  of  the  Common-

/ealth,  nor  any  Justice,  nor  other  minister  of  the  Court,

581

A.D.

l6oi.

Chap.  32.
Wherein  hee
continueth  the
matter  of  the
good  govern-
ment of  the
Indies.

Interpreters.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

may  have  two  offices  in  it.  And  besides  these  many  other
Ordinances,  and  good  Lawes,  which  are  all  concerning
administration  of  justice.

ANd  because  these  Catholike  Kings  have  left  nothing
which  most  wisely  they  have  not  provided  for
according  to  their  dutie,  the  first  thing  they  command
the  Vice-royes,  and  all  the  Ministers  in  general!  and
particular  is,  the  good  usage  of  the  Indians,  and  their
preservation,  and  the  accomplishing  of  the  Orders  which
are  made  as  touching  this,  for  to  punish  the  Offenders
with  great  rigour :  and  as  the  Indians  doe  learne  the
Castillan  policie,  and  can  complaine,  and  know  in  what
things  they  receive  wrong,  for  their  greater  ease  it  is
provided,  that  they  give  no  place  that  the  ordinarie
writings  be  made  in  the  suites  betweene,  or  with  the
Indians,  neither  make  any  delayes,  as  it  is  wont  to  happen,
by  the  malice  of  some  Advocates,  and  Atturneys,  but
that  summarily  they  be  determined,  keeping  their  uses
and  customes,  not  being  manifestly  injust,  and  that  by  all
meanes  possible,  they  doe  provide  the  good  and  short
dispatch  of  them.  And  having  notice  that  in  the
interpretation  of  the  Indians  languages,  there  were  some
fraudes ;  for  to  prevent  all,  it  was  ordayned,  that  every
interpretation  be  made  by  two  Interpreters,  which  shall
not  confer  both  together  about  that  which  is  controverted
by  the  Indian :  and  that  before  they  be  received  to  the  use
of  the  office,  they  shall  take  their  oath  to  administer  it
faithfully,  and  that  they  receive  no  guifts  of  the  Indians
suiters,  nor  of  others.  That  they  doe  assist  at  the  Agree-
ments, Courts,  and  visitations  of  the  Prisons.  That  in
their  houses  they  heare  not  the  Indians,  but  to  carry  them
to  the  Court.  That  the  Interpreters  be  not  Solicitors,  not
Atturneys  of  the  Indians.  That  they  aske  them  nothing.
And  for  their  greater  good,  it  is  provided,  that  the  Atturney
of  the  supreme  Councell  of  the  Indies,  bee  Protector  of  the
Indians,  and  defend  them  in  their  suites,  and  aske  in  the
Councell all the necessarie things for his instruction,

582

Castillanes
and  the  Court
tr'iwomev

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

1601.

preservation,  and  politike  life :  and  now  there  are
appointed  Protectors  in  the  Kingdomes  of  Piru,  and  New
Spaine,  with  new  orders  for  their  better  usage.

It  is  also  commanded,  to  set  up  Schooles  of  the  Schooles  jor
Castillane  tongue,  that  the  Indians  may  learne  it,  and  may  £  ™mJ°
doe  it  from  their  childhood ;  and  that  no  vagabond  Spanish
Spaniard  doe  dwell  or  remayne  in  the  Townes  of  the  tongue.
Indians,  nor  among  them,  but  that  the  Vice-royes  and
the  Courts,  doe  put  all  diligence  in  driving  such  out  of
the  Land,  shipping  them  for  Castile:  and  the  *  Countrie  *  See/ the
borne  be  compelled  to  serve  and  to  learne  Trades.  And
as  well  to  the  Prelates,  as  to  the  Vice-royes,  Courts,
Governours,  and  Rulers,  and  other  whatsoever  Justices,  is
ordayned,  and  particular  care  is  had  they  doe  accomplish
it,  that  they  doe  provide  how  the  oifences  that  were  done
to  God  may  cease,  in  the  Indians  marrying  whiles  they
are  children,  without  having  respect  of  age :  the  Caziques
marrying  with  more  than  one  woman,  though  he  be  an
Infidel :  in  hindering  that  when  some  Cazique  did  die
they  should  kill  another  to  bee  buried  with  him,  and
other  like  abominable  uses.  That  it  be  permitted  to  the
Indians  that  they  may  dispose  of  themselves  what  they
list,  as  free  men,  and  exempted  from  all  manner  of  labour,
though  it  shall  bee  procured  that  they  doe  labour  and  not
be  idle,  and  may  have  libertie  to  dispose  of  their  goods,
the  Lands  being  set  to  sale  by  out-cry  thirty  dayes,  and
the  moveable  nine,  the  Justice  being  present.  That  the
Lands  remayning  of  any  Indian  deceasing  without  a  Will,
shall  remayne  in  the  Townes  where  they  dwelt.  That
they  make  the  Markets  freely,  and  sell  in  them  their
merchandize.  That  their  good  uses  and  ancient  customes
be  approved.  That  they  may  send  to  these  Kingdomes
Indian  Atturneys  for  three  yeeres.  That  the  *  Residencies  *Or  accompts
be  published  in  the  Indian  Townes,  to  see  if  any  will  of  the  Judges,
demand  justice.  That  in  every  Towne  of  the  Indians  or  Justtces-
there  bee  an  Hospitall  with  the  things  necessarie.

In  this  matter  of  the  Indian  slaves,  there  were  in  the  That  they  be
beginning  of  the  Discoveries  divers  opinions,  and  orders,  no  slaves-

583

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 60 1.

governing  themselves  as  the  time  required  and  the  state
of  the  things :  but  after  the  Bishop  Don  Sebastian
Ramirez  came  for  President  of  New  Spaine,  this  use  was
absolutely  abolished,  notwithstanding  the  ancient  one
which  the  Indians  had  to  make  themselves  slaves  one  to
another :  neither  might  they  buy  of  them,  nor  receive
them,  neither  that  any  person  may  bring  to  these  King-
domes  any  Indian  in  title  of  a  slave,  though  he  be  taken
in  lawfull  warre :  and  for  this  are  so  straight  orders  given
that  they  are  effectually  kept,  and  so  in  no  place  of  the
[III.  v.  915.]  Indies  are  Indian  slaves,  though  they  be  out  of  the
bounds  of  Castile  and  Lion.  And  to  eschew  this  incon-
venience the  more,  the  bringing  Indians  to  these  parts  for
whatsoever  title  it  bee,  is  forbidden.
About  unquiet  And  the  quietnesse  for  the  Commonwealth  being  above
persons.  a}}  veiy  necessarie, facultie  is  given to the  Vice-royes,

Presidents,  Governours,  and  other  Justices,  that  they  may
drive  away,  and  banish  from  the  Indies  all  unquiet
persons,  and  send  them  to  these  Kingdomes,  judging
it  so  to  bee  convenient  for  the  quietnesse  of  those,  but
that  it  bee  not  for  hatred  or  passion,  nor  for  any  such
reason.

And  that  it  may  be  some  bridle  to  the  Superiors,  they
are  commanded,  that  they  hinder  no  man  the  writing  to
the  King,  to  his  Councell,  and  to  other  persons,  what  they
will :  neither  open,  nor  take  any  papers,  or  letters,  under
great  penalties,  and  that  they  permit  to  passe  and  repasse
through  the  Countrie  them  that  will,  providing  wayes
and  bridges  in  the  places  where  they  are  wanting.
Matters  of  As  touching  the  matters  of  Warre,  it  is  also  provided

warre.  w'lth great deliberation, for the Vice-royes greater

authoritie,  facultie  is  given  them  to  have  a  Guard  on  foot,
and  on  Horse-backe :  to  make  a  casting  place  for
Ordnance  and  Bullets,  and  a  building  for  munitions,  to
levy  men,  arme  ships,  and  make  fortifications,  and  provide
all  the  rest  convenient  for  the  defence  of  those  Kingdomes,
and  how  the  excesses  of  the  Souldiers  may  be  eschewed,
as  well  by  Land  as  by  Sea,  and  to  them  that  goe  in  the

584

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

1601.

fleetes,  committing the  punishing  of  them to  whom  it
belongeth,  for  to  excuse  competencies  of  jurisdiction.

It  hath  already  beene  said  how  all  the  Government  of The  home  oj
this  Orbe,  depends  of  the  supreme  and  Royall  Councell  JrgjJjT  *"
of  the  Indies,  that  are  neere  the  Person  Royall. But  as
it  is  necessarie  that  the  executions  of  those  parts  have  corre-
spondence in  these  ;  and  here  also  there  be  they  that  may
provide  in  effecting  that  is  behoofefull  for  the  matters
there  : it  was  necessarie  to  place  in  Sivil,  where  all  the
trafficke  of  the  Indies  doth  come,  a  house  Royall  of  con-
tractation  of  it,  that  medleth  not  but  in  the  dispatching
}f  those  businesses,  and  dependants  of  them,  without  any
Derson  nor  Justice  doe  intermeddle  in  any  thing  belonging
:o  the  Indian  affaires :  and  it  is  in  substance,  a  Tribunall
)f  great  authoritie,  in  the  which  is  a  President,  which  now
s  Don  Bernardino  Delgadillo  of  Avellaneda,  a  Teller,  a
Treasurer,  one  Factor,  three  learned  Judges,  one  Solicitor,
me  Relator,  one  Sergeant,  Scriveners,  Porter,  Jaylor,  and
>ther  Officers. In the Hands  of  Tenerife  and  Palma,
.re placed two learned Judges, called Officers Royall,
>r  Judges  of  the  Registers,  to  cause  Orders  to  be  kept
hat  are  given  for  the  lading  and  Registers  of  those  Hands,
nd  Navigation  of  that  voyage. The  house  of  the  Con-
ractation  hath  her  instruction  and  ordinances,  how  her
urisdiction is to be governed and exercised, and the
earned  Judges  have  it  also  for  their  use  and  exercise,
eeping  in  the  seeing  of  the  plea,  betweene  parties,  the
rder that is held in the Courts of Valladolid, and
jranada  : and  because  the  particular  care  of  the  officers
f  this  house,  is  the  dispatch  of  the  Fleetes  and  Armies,
4at  they  may  depart  in  due  times,  they  employ  them  -
slves  in  it  with  great  diligence,  and  in  receiving  them
lat come, and setting in safeguard the Gold, Silver,
ewels,  and  other  things  that  doe  come,  with  a  distinction
f  the  waight  and  carracts,  charging  themselves  with  all,
lat  there  may  be  more  account  and  reason,  and  for  to
lake  the  provisions  of  the  Fleetes  and  Armies. There
e  so  good  orders  given,  that  neither  the  Ministers  doe

585

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1 60 1.

exceed,  nor  the  Subjects  receive  wrong,  for  all  passeth
very  conformable  to  the  intention  of  these  Godly  and
Catholike  Kings,  by  meanes  of  the  great  diligence  of  the
supreme  Councell  of  the  Indies.
Instruction  of  And  because  the  businesses  of  the  Indies  have  increased
the  Councell  of Q  mucu that  the  supreme  Councell  could  not  dispatch

Lamara.  or  of .  .  \ « .  .  .  r  .  ,  ,  r

Houshold.  them  with  the  brevitie  convenient  to  the  good  government
of  that  Orbe,  and  the  benefit  of  the  Suiters,  with  the
advice  of  the  President  and  supreme  Councell ;  the  King
Don  Philip  the  third  our  Lord,  in  imitation  of  his
Catholike  and  Godly  Predecessors,  for  the  greater  good
of  his  subjects,  hath  instituted  a  Privie  Councell,  where
all  the  businesses  of  spirituall  and  temporall  warrants,
favours  and  rewards  may  bee  conferred  and  dispatched :
and  besides  this,  there  are  two  Halls  instituted,  where  on
dayes  appointed  they  may  intreat  of  matters  of  warre,  with
the  President  and  three  Counsellors  of  the  Indies,  and
two  or  three  of  the  Counsell  of  warre,  and  other  dayes,
of  the  matters  of  the  goods,  by  the  President  and  Coun-
sellors of  Indies,  and  two  of  the  Counsell  of  the  goods,
Atturney,  and  Secretarie  of  the  Counsell  of  the  Indies,
the  President  naming  those  that  he  shall  thinke  best  for  it.
That  the  And  as  these  Catholike  Kings  doe  alwayes  looke  to  the

Indies  shall  Denefit  0f  the  people  of  that  Orbe,  considering  that  the
alienated  propagation  of  the  holy  Gospell  in  no  part  of  it  could  goe
more  prosperously  by  any  other  hands  then  his,  nor  bee
attended  for  his  preservation,  and  to  have  the  Conquerours
and  Inhabiters  of  those  parts  more  satisfied,  seeing  all
were  his  Subjects,  and  borne  in  these  Kingdomes,  declared
by  their  Royall  warrants,  dated  the  yeere  1520.  in  Valla-
dolid,  and  in  the  yeere  1523.  in  Pamplona,  that  their
Majesties,  nor  any  of  their  Heires,  in  no  time  shall
alienate  from  the  Crowne  Royall  of  Castile  and  Lion,  the
Hands  and  Provinces  of  the  Indies,  Towne,  or  any  part
of  them,  and  so  they  promised  it  and  gave  their  Royall
word.

586

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  a.d.

1601.

The Presidents, Counsellors, Secretaries, and  [HI.  v.  916.]
Atturneys,  which unto  this  present  day  have
served,  and  doe  serve  in  the  Supreme  Councell
of  the  Indies,  from  their  first  Discoverie.

Pre

SIDENTS.

JOhn  Rodriguez  of  Fonseca,  brother  to  the  Lord  of
Coca  and  Alaejos,  Archbishop  of  Rosano,  and  Bishop
of  Burgos,  being  Deane  of  Sivil,  governed  that  which
appertayned  to  the  dispatching  of  the  Fleets  and  Armies
of  the  Indies,  till  the  Catholike  King  Don  Fernando  V.
called  him,  to  the  end  that  in  his  Court  hee  might  take
charge  of  the  Indian  affaires,  and  he  did  it  till  the  Emperor
came  to  reigne,  which  commanded  that  the  Doctor
Mercurino  Gatinara  his  great  Chancellor,  should  be
Superintendent  of  all  the  Councels,  and  all  the  dispatches
passed  through  his  hands,  and  intermedled  in  all  the
Assemblies  that  were  made.

Friar  Garcia  of  Loaysa  Generall  of  the  Order  of  Saint
Dominicke,  the  Emperours  Confessor,  Bishop  of  Osma,
which  was  Archbishop  of  Sivil,  and  Cardinall.

Don  Garcia  Maurique,  Earle  of  Osorno,  which  being
Assistant  of  Sivil,  did  governe  till  the  Cardinall  came
from  Rome.

Don  Lewis  Hurtado  of  Mendoca,  Marques  of  Monde-
jar,  which  after  was  President  of  the  Royall  and  supreme
Councell  of  Castile.

The  Licenciate  Don  Franciscus  Tello  of  Sandoval,
which  having  beene  of  the  Councell  of  the  Indies,  went
for  President  of  the  Royall  Chancerie  of  Granada,  and
from  thence  came  to  governe  in  the  Councell  of  Indies.

The  Licenciate  Don  John  Sarmiento  was  also  of  the
Councell  of  the  Indies,  and  after  went  to  governe  in
the  Royal  Chancerie  of  Granada,  from  whence  he  returned
to  be  President  of  the  Royall  and  supreme  Councell  of
the  Indies.

587

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1601.

Lewis  Quixada,  Lord  of  Villagarcia,  and  of  the  Counceli
of  Warre.

The  Licentiate  John  of  Obando,  of  the  supreme
Counceli  of  the  holy  Inquisition,  did  preside  in  the
Counceli  of  the  Indies,  and  of  the  goods  Royall

The  Licenciate  Don  Antonio  de  Padilla,  of  the  Royal
and  supreme  Counsell  of  Castile,  passed  to  be  President
of  the  Counceli  of  the  Orders,  and  after  to  the  supreme
Counceli  of  the  Indies.

The  Licenciate  Hernando  of  Vega  and  Fonseca,  of  the
supreme  Counceli  of  the  holy  and  generall  Inquisition,
passed  to  the  Counceli  of  the  goods  Royall,  and  from  it
to  the  Royall  and  supreme  Counceli  of  the  Indies.

The  Licenciate  Don  Pedro  de  Moya  of  Contreras,  the
first  Inquisitor  that  went  to  Mexico  for  to  seate  the  holy  I
Office  in  that  Citie.  Hee  was  Archbishop  of  that  Citie,  C
and  President  of  the  supreme  Counceli  of  the  Indies.

The  Licenciate  Paul  of  Laguna,  of  the  Royall  and
supreme  Counceli  of  Castile,  and  of  the  holy  and  generall
Inquisition,  passed  to  governe  in  the  Counceli  of  the
goods  Royall  and  Tribunals  of  it,  and  was  after  President

5
of  the  supreme  Counceli  of  the  Indies :  and  in  his  time (

0

c
0

began  the  Royall  Counceli  of  the  House-hold,
Counsellors.

HErnando  of  Vega,  Lord  of  Grajal,  which  was  chiefe
Knight  of  Lion,  and  President  of  the ,  Counceli  of
Orders.  Licenciate  Lewis  Zapata.  Licenciate  Moxica.
Doctor  S.  James.  Doctor  Palacios  Penbios.  Doctor
Goncalo  Maldonado,  which  was  Bishop  of  the  citie
Rodrigo.  Master  Lewis  Vaca,  Bishop  of  Canarie.
Doctor  Aguirre.  Doctor  Mota,  Bishop  of  Badajoz.  1
Doctor  Sosa.  Doctor  Peter  Martyr  of  Angleria,  Abbot
of  Jamayca.  Mosiur  of  Lassao,  of  the  Emperours
Chamber,  and  of  the  Counceli  of  Estate.  Licenciate
Garcia  of  Padilla,  of  the  habit  of  Calatrana.  Doctor
Beltran.  Doctor  Galindez  of  Carvajal.  Doctor  Bernal.
Licenciate Peter Manuel. Licenciate Rodrick of the

588

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  aj>.

1601.

Court.  Licenciate  Montoya.  Licenciate  Mercado.
Licenciate  Antonie  of  Aguilera.  Licenciate  Don  Her-
nando of  Salas.  Licenciate  John  Thomas.  Doctor
Villafanye.  Licenciate  Bottelbo  Maldonado.  Licenciate
Otalora.  Licenciate  James  Gasca  of  Salazar.  Licenciate
Gamboa.  Doctor  Gomez  of  Santillana.  Licenciate
Espadero.  Licenciate  Don  James  of  Zunnigo.  Licen-
ciate Lopez  of  Sarria.  Licenciate  Enao.  Doctor  Lope
of  Bayllo.  Licenciate  Gedeon  of  Ynojosa,  of  the  habit
of  Saint  James.  Licenciate  Villafanne.  Doctor  Antonie
Goncalez.  Licenciate  Franciscus  Balcazar.  Licenciate
Medina  of  Sarauz.  Licenciate  Don  Lewis  of  Mercado.
Doctor  Peter  Gutierrez  Flores.  Licenciate  Peter  Dayes
of  Tudanca.  Licenciate  Benitte  Rodriguez  Valtodano.
Licenciate  Austine  Alvarez  of  Toledo,  and  of  the
Chamber.  Doctor  Don  Roderick  Zapata.  Licenciate
Peter  Brano  of  Sotomayor.  Licenciate  Molina  of
Medrano,  of  the  habit  of  Saint  James,  &  of  the
Chamber,  Commissioner  of  this  Historie.  Licenciate
James  of  Armenteros.  Licenciate  Alonso  Perez  of
Salazar.  Licenciate  Goncalo  of  Aponte,  and  of  the
Chamber.  Licenciate  Don  John  of  Ocon,  of  the  habit
of  Calatrana.  Licenciate  Hernando  of  Saanedra.  Licen-
ciate Don  Thomas  Ximenez  Ortiz.  Licenciate  Eugenius
of  Salazar.  Licenciate  Don  Franciscus  Arias  Maldonado.
Licenciate  Andrew  of  Ayala.  Licenciate  Benavente  of
Benavides.  Licenciate  Roocke  of  Villagutierre  Chuma-
zero.

Secretaries.

JOhan Colona. Michael  Perez of  Almazan. Gaspar
of  Gricio. The  Knight  Lope  of  Conchillos. Fran-
ciscus of  the  Cobos,  chiefe  Commander  of  Lion. John
of Samano. The Commander Franciscus of Eraso. [III.  v.  917.
Antonie  of  Eraso. The  Commander  John  of  Ybarra.

589

A/D  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

IOOI.

Atturneys  or  Sollicitors.

THe  Licenciate  Franciscus  of  Vargas.  Licenciate
Prado.  Licenciate  Martin  Ruyz  of  Agreda.  Doctor
Franciscus  Hernandez  of  Liebana.  Licenciate  Jerome  of
Ulloa.  Licenciate  Gamboa.  Licenciate  Lopez  of  Sarria.
Licenciate  Scipion  Antolinez.  Licenciate  Negron.  Doctor
Valencuela.  Doctor  Marcus  Caro.  Licenciate  Bennet
Rodriguez  of  Valtodano.  Licenciate  Alonso  Perez  of
Salazar. Licenciate  Roocke  of  Villagutierre  Chumazero.

The  Governours,  and  Vice-royes,  which  have
governed  untill  this  time,  the  Kingdomes  of
New  Spaine,  and of  Piru.

In  New  Spaine.

DOn  Fernando  Cortes  Marques  of  the  Valley,  Gover-
nour,  chiefe  Justice,  and  Captaine  general!.
The  Licenciate  Lewis  Pance,  of  the  House  of  the  Duke
of  Arcos,  Judge  of  *  Residencie,  with  facultie  to  take  the
government,  and  by  his  death  the  Licenciate  Marcus  of
Aguilar,  naturall  of  the  Citie  of  Ezija,  was  subrogated
his  Deputie,  and  because  of  his  death  succeeded  within
two  moneths ;  hee  substituted  his  authorities  in  the
Treasurer  Alonso  of  Estrada,  borne  in  Citie  Royall :  and
the  death  of  Lewis  Pance  being  knowne  in  Castile,  it
was  provided  that  Marcus  of  Aguilar  should  governe,
and  in  defect  of  him,  Alonso  of  Estrada,  till  the  first
Court  came,  with  order  that  Nunno  of  Guzman,  Knight
of  Guadalajara,  Governour  of  Panuco,  a  President  did
come :  and  because  it  was  convenient  to  take  away  those
Judges,  others  were  sent  in  their  places,  and  for  President
in  the  government  universall  of  New  Spaine,  Don
Sebastian  Ramirez  of  Fuenleal,  Bishop  of  Saint  Domin-
icke,  and  of  the  Conception,  late  President  of  the  Court
of  Saint  Dominicke,  a  man  of  great  learning,  and  that
after  many  dignities  died  in  Castile  Bishop  of  Cuenca,

59o

N

ANTONIO DE HERRERA  ad.

1601.

and  then  the  charge  of  Captaine  generall  was  given  anew
to  the  Marques  Don  Hernando  Cortes,  that  he  might
governe  the  matters  of  warre,  with  the  advise  of  Don
Sebastian  Ramirez.

The  first  that  had  title  of  Vice-roy  and  Captaine  generall
pf  New  Spaine,  was  Don  Antonie  of  Mendoca,  brother
pf  the  Marques  of  Mondejar.

Don  Lewis  of  Velasco,  a  Gentleman  of  the  House  of
the  high  Constable  of  Castile.

Don  Gaston  of  Peralta,  Marques  of  Falces.

Don  Martine  Enriquez  of  Almansa,  brother  of  the
Marques  of  Alcannizes,  the  Kings  Steward.

Don  Laurence  Xuarez  of  Mondoca,  Earle  of  Corunya,
fcvhich  deceased  being  provided  for  Piru,  and  by  his  death
Don  Peter  Moya  of  Contreras,  Archbishop  of  Mexico,
governed  in  the  meane  while.

Don  Alvaro  Manrique  of  Zunniga,  Marques  of
Vrillamamuque,  brother  of  the  Duke  of  Bojar.

Don  Lewis  of  Velasco,  sonne  to  the  abovesaid  Don
ewis  of  Velasco,  which  passed  to  governe  the  Kingdomes
)f  Piru,  where  at  this  present  hee  is.

Don  Gaspar  of  Zunniga  and  Fonseca,  Earle  of  Mon-
errey,  which  governeth  at  this  day.

In  the  Kingdomes  of  Piru.  Or  of  the

DOn Franciscus Picarro, Marques of the Charcas,  e^^9f

Governour,  chiefe  Justice,  and  Captaine  generall.  Justice,  or

The  Licenciate  Vaca  of  Castro,  of  the  habit  of  Saint  other  Officer

ames,  of  the  supreme  Councell  of  Castile,  carried  Title  after  their

f  Governour  generall.  'IZd  tTsee  if

Blasco  Nunnez  Vela,  a  Gentleman  of  Avila,  was  the  any  ^ui  com-

irst that carried the Title of Vice-roy and Captaine  plaine  of  any

general  of  the  Kingdomes  of  Piru.  wrong  done  to

The  Licenciate  James  de  la  Gasca,  of  the  Councell  of  ^'"J^*

he  holy  and  generall Inquisition, carried the  Title of  pay^  damage

^resident  of  the  new  Court  that  was  sent  to  the  Citie  of  so  sustained  by

"he  Kings,  and  of  Governour  generall,  with  facultie  to  his  default.
rive  the  government  of  Armes  to  whom  hee  thought

59i

ad.  PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

I  60 1.

best.  He  died  Bishop  of  Siguenca,  and  his  Funerall  and
Trophees  are  seene  in  Magdalene  Church  in  Valladolid,
and  in  his  absence  the  government  remayned  to  the  Court
of  the  Citie  of  The  Kings.

The  second  that  carried  Title  of  Vice-roy  and  Captaine
generall,  was  Don  Antonie  of  Mendoca,  that  governed
the  Kingdoms  of  New  Spaine.

Don  Andrew  Hurtado  of  Mendoca,  Marques  of
Cauyete.

Don  James  of  Zunyga  and  Velasco,  Earle  of  Nieva.

The  Licenciate  Lope  Garcia  of  Castro,  of  the  Royall
and  supreme  Councell  of  the  Indies,  caried  title  of  Presi-
dent and  Governor  general.

Don  Franciscus  of  Toledo,  brother  to  the  Earle  of
Oropesa,  Steward  to  the  King.

Don  Martin  Enriquez,  from  the  charge  of  New  Spaine,
passed  to  governe  the  Kingdomes  of  Piru.

Don  Garcia  of  Mendoca,  Marques  of  Cavyete.

Don  Lewis  of  Velasco,  from  the  charge  of  New  Spaine,
passed  to  the  Kingdomes  of  Piru,  where  now  he  is,  and
at  the  instant  of  the  impression  of  this  Worke,  is
provided  for  Vice-roy  and  Captaine  generall  of  those
Kingdomes,  Don  John  Pacheco,  Duke  of  Escalona.

Printed  at  Madrid  by  Juan  Flamenco. An.  1601.

END OF VOLUME XIV.

«jl4

'UTWirw^v

PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY

G

159

)5
v.14
cop.  2
