Hakluytus Posthumus, or Purchas His Pilgrimes, Vol. 13 (Samuel Purchas, 1625)
==========================================================
Purchas His Pilgrimes (1625) - the 17th century's great sequel to Hakluyt; the largest voyage collection of its age, preserving dozens of narratives otherwise lost. The 20-volume MacLehose reprint (Glasgow, 1905-07), the standard complete edition. Vol. 13 of 20.

Hakluytus  Posthumus

or

Purchas His Pilgrimes

In Twenty  Volumes

Volume XIII

GLASGOW

PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY

ROBERT MACLEHOSE fr  COMPANY LTD. FOR

JAMES MACLEHOSE AND SONS, PUBLISHERS

TO THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW

MACMILLAN AND CO. LTD.  LONDON

THE MACMILLAN CO.  NEW YORK

THE  MACMILLAN  CO.  OF  CANADA  TORONTO

SIMPKIN, HAMILTON AND CO.  LONDON

MACMILLAN AND BOWES  CAMBRIDGE

DOUGLAS AND FOULIS  EDINBURGH

MCMVI

Hakluytus Posthumus

or

Purchas His  Pilgrimes

Contayning a History of  the World

in Sea Voyages and Lande Travells

by Englishmen and others

By
SAMUEL PURCHAS, B.D.

VOLUME  -?SH |*>

qX.ZOO

Glasgow
James MacLehose and Sons

Publishers  to  the  University

MCMVI

c-

DEC

i9or

<H3 , ^

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs  in
the  third  Booke  of  the  second  part  of
Purchas  his  Pilgrims.

To  the  Reader.

Sebastian Cabota first  Author  of  all certaine Northerne
discoveries.

CHAP. II.

A  briefe  discoverie  of  the  Northerne  discoveries  of  Seas,
Coasts,  and  Countries,  delivered  in  order  as  they  were
hopefully  begun,  and  have  ever  since  happily  beene
continued  by  the  singular  industrie  and  charge  of  the
Worshipfull  Societie  of  Muscovia  Merchants  of  London,
with  the  ten  severall  Voyages  of  Captaine  Thomas
Edge  the  Authour.  ......

§  I.  Greenland  first  discovered  by  Sir  Hugh  Willoughby  :
the  Voyages  of  Frobisher,  Pet,  and  Jackman,  Davis,
the  Dutch ;  First  Morse  and  Whale-killing,  with
further  discoveries. .......

Northerne  inundations.  Hans  Societie.  Sir  H.  Willoughbie.
Greenland  discovered  by  Sir  H.  Willoughbie,  Borough,
&c.  English  and  Dutch  Discoveries  to  the  North.
Capt.  Edge.  Sea  Unicornes  home.  Whale  Voyage.
Shipwracke. Hull  Ship.

PAGE

y

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§  2.  Dutch,  Spanish,  Danish  disturbance ;  also  by  Hull
men,  and  by  a  new  Patent,  with  the  succeeding
successe  and  further  discoveries  till  this  present. .  1 5

Greenland  Voyage  disturbed  by  English  and  others.  Dis-
covery, &c.  Of  the  Discoverie  of  Greenland  by  the
English.  Greenland  businesse  embroiled  by  new
Societie  and  Zelanders.  Losse  and  hindrance  by
Dutch  and  Danes,  wracke,  hunger,  cold.

§  3.  The  description  of  the  severall  sorts  of  Whales,  with
the  manner  of  killing  them  :  Whereto  is  added  the
description  of  Greenland.  .....  26

Of  huge  great  Whales,  and  the  manner  of  killing  them.
Of  the  making  of  Oyle. Severall  kinds  of  Whales.

The  description  of  Greenland.  .  .  .  .  .  31

The  description  of  Greenland  by  Ro. Fotherby.

CHAP. III.

The  first Navigation  of  William Barents, alias Bernards,

into  the  North  Seas; Written  by  Gerart  de  Veer. .  35

The  first  Voyage  of  William  Barents  to  the  North  Seas.
The  Discoverie  of  the  Northerne  Seas  by  the  Dutch.
The  wonderfull  strength  of  a  white  Beare.  Cape
Nassaw.  Stones  glistering  like  Gold.  Orange  Hands,
&c.  Navigations  into  the  North-Seas,  by  William
Barents.

CHAP. IIII.

A  briefe  declaration  of  Barents  his  second  Navigation,  made
in  Anno  1595.  behind  Norway,  Muscovia,  and  Tar-
taria,  written  by  Gerart  de  Veer. ....  49

Barents  his  second  Navigation  behind  Norway,  Muscovia,
&c.  Image  point.  Samoyeds  Land.  Traen-bay.
Images.  Samoyeds ;  their  haire,  apparell,  stature,
sleds,  shooting.  Beelt-hooke,  so  called  of  certaine
Images  there  found.  Wey-gates.  Twist-point.
Matfloe  and  Delgoy  Hands.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  pAGB

CHAP.  V.

The  third  voyage  Northward  to  the  Kingdoms  of  Cathaia,

and  China,  in  Anno  I  596. Written  by  Gerart  de  Veer.  61

§  1.  What  happened  to  them  at  Sea,  before  they  came  to

build  their  House.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  61

Three  Sunnes  and  foure  Raine-bowes.  Ice.  Danger
escaped.  Beare  fights.  Dead  Whale.  Red  Geese.
Barnacles.  Greenland.  Low-land.  Beare-Iland.
Cherie-Iland.  Willoughbies  Map-conceited  Land.
Admirals  Hand.  Variation.  Point  Nassaw.  Beares
assault.  Icie  thunder.  Orange  Hand.  Nova  Zembla.
Point  Desire.  Flushingers  head.  Mergates.  Danger-
ous frosts.  Strange  escape.  Ice  Haven.  Icy  Hills.
The  great  providence  of  God  in  preserving  our  men
from  danger.  Violent  and  incredible  freezing.  Ground
not  to  be  thawed.

§  2.  Their  cold,  comfortlesse,  darke  and  dreadfull  winter :
the  Sunnes  absence,  Moones  light,  Sunnes  unexpected
returne  with  miraculous  speed.  Of  Beares,  Foxes,
and  many  many  wonders.  .....  88

A  May-pole  of  Frozen  Snow.  Northerne  Tides  and  Sea.
Beere  melted.  Sea  covered  with  Ice.  A  Beare
assaults  the  Ship.  White  Foxes.  Darknesse.  Allow-
ance of  Bread  and  Beere.  Foxe-trap.  Wine  sharing.
Bathing.  Foxe  skinne  Caps.  Ice  cracking  frights.
Cold  stronger  then  fire.  Sacke  frozen.  Cold  blisters.
Sunnes  comfort.  Foxes  daintie  as  Venison.  Burne
before  and  Freeze  behind.  Snow  higher  then  their
House.  Day-light  espied.  Beares  in  the  Ship.  The
Sunne  appeareth.  Sunnes  appearance.  Cape  de
Tabin.  Streight  of  Anian.  Tempestuous,  foule,
cloudy,  mystie,  snowy  and  dismall  weather.  Sunnes
heate.  Beares  grease  usefull  for  Lamps.  Tartarian
Sea.  Shooes  of  Felt  and  Rugge.  Shooes  frozen.
A  Beare  assault  our  house. A  Beares  Denne.

§3.  Their  preparation  to  goe  from  thence:  they  depart
in  a  Boat  and  Scute  both  open,  and  come  to  Cola,
1 143.  miles.  Their  many  dangers  by  Beares,  Ice,
Famine,  Scorbute,  in  the  way.  .  .  .  . 125

vii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.

Their  many  dangers  by  Beares,  Ice,  Famine,  Scorbute.
They  mend  their  Boat.  Beares  Liver  venomous.
They  prepare  to  depart  from  Nova  Zembla ;  and
leave  a  Letter.  Point  Desire.  Search  for  Birds  and
Egges.  Ice-point.  Computation  of  miles  from  Nova
Zembla  to  the  Coast  of  Russia.  Miraculous  Deliver-
ance. Losse  of  Goods.  One  Beare  eate  another.
Beare  eight  foot  thicke.  Crosse  Hand.  Search  for
stones.  Crosse  Hand.  Blacke  Point.  Admirals  Hand.
Sea-horses.  Cape  Plancio.  Strange  breeding  of  Birds.
S.  Laurence  Bay.  Leple  leaves  cure  the  scowring
Scorbuticall  Disease.  Russian  Compasse.  Lapland.
Russian  Houses.  Laplanders.  Slutterie  a  Fast-breaker.
Kilduin.  Quasse  drinke.  Friends  meeting  together
cause  of  great  Joy.

This  was  written  by  William  Barentson  in  a  loose  Paper,
which  was  lent  mee  by  the  Reverend  Peter  Plantius
in  Amsterdam,  March  the  seven  and  twentieth,  1609.

Intelligence  from  the  Samoieds.

CHAP. VI.

A  Treatise  of  Iver  Boty  a Gronlander,  translated  out  of

the  Norsh  language  into  High  Dutch. H. . . 163

The  Journall  of  Iver  Boty,  &c.  Fishing  for  Whales.
Hunting  of  white  Beares.  Hot  waters.  Stone  that
Fire  cannot  hurt. Wildernesse. Punnus  and  Potharse.

The  Course  from  Island  to  Groneland 169

Gronland  Commodities. Counsell  for  Gronland  Travellers.

CHAP. VII.

A  description  of  the  Countries  of  Siberia,  Samoieda,  and
Tingoesia.  Together  with  the  Journeyes  leading  unto
the  same  Countries  toward  the  East  and  North-east,
as  they  are  daily  frequented  by  the  Moscovites. . 171

§  I.  Discoverie  of  Siberia,  and  the  subjecting  of  the  same

to  the  Russes.  . . .  . . .  .171

viii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  PAGE

The  Discoverie  of  Siberia.  The  Trade  to  the  River  Obi.
Osoil.  Imperiall  Priviledge.  River  Wichida.  Oneekos.
Raine  Deere.  Swift  Dogs.  Samoieds  shooting.
Malefactors.

§  2.  A  briefe  description  of  the  Wayes  and  Rivers,  leading
out  of  Moscovia  toward  the  East  and  North-east  into
Siberia,  Samoiedia,  and  Tingoesia,  as  they  are  daily
frequented  by  the  Russes  :  with  further  discoveries
towards  Tartaria  and  China. .  .  . .  .180

Rivers  Petsora,  Soiba,  Cosna,  and  Toera.  Mountaines.
Churches.  Greekish  Religion  exercised  among  the
Russes.  Tartar  King.  Tara  Towne.  Comgof-scoi
Castle.  Tingoesies.  Pisida.  The  plesantnesse  of
those  Countries.  The  towling  of  Bells.  Mountaines
casting  out  flames  of  fire.

§  3.  A  Note  of  the  travels  of  the  Russes  over  Land,  and
by  water  from  Mezen,  neere  the  Bay  of  Saint  Nicholas
to  Pechora,  to  Obi,  to  Yenisse,  and  to  the  River
Geta,  even  unto  the  Frontiers  of  Cataia ;  brought
into  England  by  Master  John  Mericke,  the  English
Agent  for  Moscovie,  and  translated  out  of  the  Russe
by  Richard  Finch. H. .  .  .  .  .  .193

Discoverie  of  Pechora  to  Ob.

CHAP. VIII.

A  voyage  made  to  Pechora  161 1.  Written  by  William
Gourdon  of  Hull,  appointed  chiefe  Pilot,  for  discoverie
to  Ob,  &c. H 194

Excellent  Whale-killers.  Bigs  Hole.  Cape  Comfort.
Hakluyts  River.  Flote-wood.  Russe  Crosses.  Store
of  Muskitos.  The  Dry  Sea.  River  Pechora.  Courteous
entertainment. Chiefe  Customer. Fishing  for  Salmons.

IX

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP. IX.

A  Letter  of  Richard  Finch  to  the  Right  Worshipfull  Sir
Thomas  Smith,  Governour;  and  to  the  rest  of  the
Worshipfull  Companie  of  English  Merchants,  trading
into  Russia :  touching  the  former  voyage,  and  other
observations. H.  .  .  .  .  .  .205

Crosses  standing  on  the  Sand.  Emperours  Priviledges.
Pewter  dishes  great  commodities.  Fish  Omeli.  Geese,
Hawkes,  Swannes  great  store.  Travelling  Deere.
Russe  Merchants.  Commodities,  Provisions.  Elephants
Teeth,  how  sold.  Mezen  Commodities.  Towne
Pechora.

The  names  of  the  places  that  the  Russes  sayle  by,  from
Pechorskoie  Zavorot,  to  Mongozey  :  with  the  manner
of  their  travell,  and  distance  betweene  each  place,  or
time  of  Sayling,  Hailing,  and  Rowing  unto  the  same. 217

Greene  Hands.  Thicke  or  troubled  River.  Greene  Lake.
Mezen,  a  Towne  of  great  trafficke  for  Furres.  Peoza
reca.

CHAP. X.

The  Voyage  of  Master  Josias  Logan  to  Pechora,  and  his
wintering  there,  with  Master  William  Pursglove,  and
Marmaduke  Wilson. Anno 1611. H. . . . 222

Hand  of  Toxar.  Ducke  hunting.  Sables,  Beavers,  white
Foxes.  Arkania.  Frost  in  August.  Traffique  and
merchandise  beneficiall.  A  generall  Fast  for  three
dayes.  The  Samoieds  quarrell  at  Slobodca.  Stones
resembling  Gold.  Tobolsco  a  Citie  of  great  trade.
Mowtnoy  River.  Indiga  River ;  deepe  water,  good
Harbour. Knocke  John.

Extracts taken out  of  two Letters  of  Josias  Logan  from

Pechora,  to  Master  Hakluyt  Prebend  of  Westminster. 236

Blacke  River. White  Citie. Horses, Armour.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP. XI.
A  briefe  relation  of  a  Voyage  to  Pechora,  and  wintering
there,  began  in  the  yeere  1611. Written  by  William
Pursglove. H.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .239

Voyage  over  Land.  Mountaynes,  Rocks ;  Marish  ground.
Sleds  drawne  by  Deere.  Manner  of  travelling.
Dangerous  Wolves.  Fishing  for  Bealugos,  how  taken.
Commodious  Rivers.  Traffique.  Danilo  Stolb  in
Lapland.

Other  observations  of  the  said  William  Pursglove. .  . 249

William  Pursgloves  Observations.  Molgomsey  a  great  Mart
Towne. Assembly  of  Hunters.

The  travell  from  Pechora  to  Permia,  Ougoria,  and  to  the
River  Ob,  and  the  Townes  situated  thereupon,  over
Land. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .252

King  Alteene. White  and  speckled  Hawkes. Blacke  Foxes.

Commodities for Pechora, Siberia, Permia,  Ougoria, and

among  the  Tingussies. .  .  .  .  .  .254.

Commodities  for  the  Tingussies. .  .  .  .  .254.

CHAP. XII.

Later  observations  of  William  Gourdon,  in  his  wintering
at  Pustozera,  in  the  yeeres  1614.  and  161 5.  with  a
description  of  the  Samoyeds  life. H. .  . . 255

The  River  Coy.  Shapkina.  Novgorotka.  Habeaga,  &c.
Rivers,  Azua,  Ouse,  Mensha,  Bolsha,  Hoseda,  Haryena,
Habeaga.  Samoyeds  apparell,  Sleds,  Deere,  Women,
Polygamic  Religion,  &c.  Samoyeds  buriall,  Yeere,
Oath,  Divinations,  stature,  hardinesse,  trade.

CHAP. XIII.

Divers  Voyages  to  Cherie  Hand,  in  the  yeeres  1604,  1605,

1606, 1608, 1609. Written  by  Jonas  Poole. H.  . 265

Store  of  Fowles.  Sea-Fowles  found  on  Shoare.  Small
Foxes. Cherie Hand, why  so  called. Assumption

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.

point.  Leaden  Myne.  Extreame  cold.  Driving  Ice.
Mount  Miserie.  Unholesome  fogge.  Beares.  Morses.
Abundance  of  beasts  slayne  in  short  time.  Cowardly
Beares  cruell  to  Cowards.  Beares  skin  thirteene
foot  long.  Young  white  Beares  brought  home.  Seales.
Much  Ice  :  no  fog,  &c.  Possession  taken  of  Cherie
Hand.  Beares  eaten.  Foxes  :  drift  wood.  Mynes  of
Lead  found  on  Gull-Land.  Good  Sea-coales.  Ship
endangered  by  Ice.  Many  Morses  slaine.  Their  Oile
and  teeth.  Chery  Hand  Voyages.  First  Discovery
thereof  by  St. Bennet.

CHAP. XIIII.

Divers  Voyages  and  Northerne  discoveries  of  that  worthy
irrecoverable  Discoverer  Master  Henrie  Hudson.  His
Discoverie  toward  the  North  Pole,  set  forth  at  the
charge  of  certaine  Worshipfull  Merchants  of  London,
in  May  1607.  Written  partly  by  John  Playse  one
of  the  Companie,  and  partly  by  H.  Hudson. H. . 294.

Passage  sought  to  the  East  Indies  by  the  Pole  by  H.
Hudson.  Whales.  High  Mountaynes.  Youngs  Cape.
Temperate  Land.  Flocks  of  Birds.  Mount  of  Gods
Mercy.  Vogel  hooke.  Their  Shroudes  and  Sayles
frozen.  A  Blacke  and  Blue  Sea.  The  Greene  Sea.
Collins  Cape.  Whale  dangerous,  &c.  Seales  in
abundance.  Collins  Cape.  Newland.  Hands.  Gods
mercifull  deliverance. Whales  Bay. Davis  Streights.

CHAP. XV.

A  second  voyage  or  employment  of  Master  Henrie  Hudson,
for  finding  a  passage  to  the  East  Indies  by  the  North-
east:  written  by  himselfe. H.  .  .  .  .313

Hudsons  seeking  Passage  to  the  East  Indies  by  the  North-
east. Sea  colours.  Sight  and  description  of  a  Mer-
maide.  Needles  inclination.  Sunnes  variation.
Beares,  Seales,  Mid-night  Sun.  Swart  Cliffe  in  Nova
Zembla.  Beares,  Deere,  Foxes.  White  Deere.  Store
of  Drift  wood.  Many  good  Bayes.  Cause  of  the  Ice
in  Nova  Zembla.  Costing  Sarch.  Brunell.  Greene
Sea.  Thunder.  No  night  in  ten  weekes.
xii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  PAGE

CHAP. XVI.

The  third  voyage  of  Master  Henrie  Hudson  toward  Nova
Zembla,  and  at  his  returne,  his  passing  from  Farre
Hands,  to  New-found-Land,  and  along  to  fortie  foure
degrees  and  ten  minutes,  and  thence  to  Cape  Cod,
and  so  to  thirtie  three  degrees ;  and  along  the  Coast
to  the  Northward,  to  fortie  two  degrees  and  an  halfe,
and  up  the  River  neere  to  fortie  three  degrees.
Written  by  Robert  Juet  of  Lime-house. H. .  . 333

Master  Hudsons  third  Voyage  to  Nova  Zembla,  &c.  Farre
Hands.  Busse  Hand.  Stars  seene  and  water  changed.
Currents.  Current  to  the  South.  Great  storme.
Variations  of  the  Compasse.  New-found  Land.
French-men  Fishing.  Store  of  Cods  taken.  Scoales
of  Herrings,  Salvages  come  aboord,  &c.  Hudsons
River.  French  Trade.  Savages  Houses  spoyled.  A
current  to  the  South-west,  and  South-west  by  West.
B.  Gosnold.  Cape  Cod.  The  Flats.  Current  and
variation.  A  white  Sandie  shoare.  The  Barre  of
Virginia.  Kings  river.  The  banke  of  Virginia.
Great  Bay  and  Rivers.  Many  Hands.  Deceitfull
streames.  Three  great  Rivers.  Salmons.  Mullets.
Rayes.  Colman  slaine.  Colmans  Point.  Treacherous
Savages.  The  Savages  bring  Oysters,  Beanes,  Grapes,
Pompions,  &c.  The  Savages  Oration.  Chest-nut
trees,  Wal-nut  trees,  &c.  Treacherie  of  the  Savages.
Myne  of  Copper  or  Silver.

CHAP. XVII.

An  Abstract  of  the  Journall  of  Master  Henrie  Hudson,  for
the  discoverie  of  the  North-west  passage,  begun  the
17.  of  Aprill,  1 6 10.  ended  with  his  end,  being
treacherously  exposed  by  some  of  the  Com  panic H. 374

Master  Henrie  Hudsons  Discoverie  of  the  North-west
Passage. Cape  Worsenholme. Cape  Digs.

A  larger  discourse  of  the  same  voyage,  and the  successe

thereof,  written  by  Abacuk  Pricket.  .  .  . 377

xiii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  pagb

Lousie  Bay.  Store  of  Whales.  Hudsons  discoverie  further
then  any  Englishman  had  beene.  King  James  Cape.
Queen  Annes  Cape.  Prince  Henries  Cape.  Fowles
hanged.  Michaelmasse  Bay.  Sea  of  two  colours.
Ship  frozen  in,  hard  wintring.  Greenes  lewdnesse.
Hudsons  wintring  and  diet.  Midicinable  bud.  Savages
bartering.  Greene  and  Wilson  conspire  with  Juet
against  Hudson.  Greenes  Conspiracy.  Hudson,  the
Carpenter  and  others  exposed.  Discord  and  Division,
dangerous  in  Voyages.  Ebbe  from  East ;  Floud  from
West.  Vengeance  pursueth  villeny.  Trecherous
Savages  repay  Savage  Trecherie.  Murtherers  murthered.
Misery,  Danger  of  some ;  Death  of  some.  Arrivall.
Widhouses  Letter  and  notes.

A  Note  found  in  the  Deske  of  Thomas  Widhouse,  Student
in  the  Mathematikes,  he  being  one  of  them  who  was
put  into  the  Shallop. .  .  .  .  .  .411

Articles  against  Juet,  &c.

CHAP. XVIII.

The  discoveries  of  M.  M.  Nicolo,  and  Antonio  Zeni,
gathered  out  of  their  Letters  by  Francisco  Marcolino :
whereto  is  added  Quirino  his  shipwracke. H.  P. . 413

Travels  of  Zeni  into  Frisland,  Groenland,  Estotiland.
Canibals  of  Drogio. Icaria. Zichmuis  Citie.

The  shipwracke  of  Master  Piero  Quirino,  described  by
Christophoro  Fioravanti,  and  Nicolo  di  Michiel,  who
were  present  there: here  contracted. H.  P. .  . 417

Quirino.  Terrible  tempest  and  shipwracke.  Ship  forsaken.
SchifFe  lost.  Cold,  Hunger,  Thirst,  Diseases,  ill
Steerers  in  a  hard  Voyage.  Shipwracke  attended  by
Famine,  Cold,  Discord,  Lice,  &c.  Hunger  good
sauce.  Hands  of  Saints  and  Rustene.  Releese  by
a  Priest.  Rostene  bartering,  dyet,  sinceritie.  Nor-
wegian simplicitie  and  customes.  Long  nights  and
dayes.  Returne  from  Norway  to  Venice  by  London.
Francos franknesse.

xiv

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP. XIX.

Ancient  commerce  betwixt  England  and  Norway,  and  other

Northerne  Regions.  .  .  .  .  .  .437

Liars  reward.  Arthurs  Conquests.  Edgars  great  Navie
and  Titile.  Danes  who  ;  when  first  infested  England  ;
their  Customs.  Thurs  sacrifice.  Danes  spoyling,
massacre,  revenge.  Hocktide.  Canutus.  S.  Olave.
Cnutos  Pilgrimage  to  Rome.  Cunildas  champions
victory.  Suanus.  Two  Haralds  Hacon.  Olave  and
Lewis.  King-Saints.  Monkes  of  Norway  reformed
by  M.  Paris. Nic.  de  Lynna.

CHAP. XX.

A  briefe  Memoriall  of  the  great  travels  by  Sea  and  Land,
of  Master  George  Barkley,  Merchant  of  London,  in
Europe,  Asia,  Africa,  and  America,  and  their  Hands. 451

700.  sayle  at  once  at  Elsenore.  Danske  building.  Amber.
Amber-frog.  Swallow-story.  High  walls  of  Vistula.
Kreitzherne.  Ladie  Knights  order  in  Prussia  dissolved.
Savage  Momeses.  Sacs.  Leave-rites.  Peibus.  Narve.
Letto.  Serpent-superstition.  Poles  and  Tartars
Customes.  Jewish  Sorcery,  or  Christians  Imposture.
Tome.  Norway  gentlemen.  Sweden  villenage.
Loretto  Ladies  Legend,  rich  vestries,  &c.

CHAP. XXI.

Collections  out  of  Martin  Broniovius  de  Biezerfedea  sent
Ambassadour  from  Stephen  King  of  Poland,  to  the
Crim  Tartar :  Contayning  a  description  of  Tartaria,
or  Chersonesus  Taurica,  and  the  Regions  subject  to
the  Perecop  or  Crim  Tartars,  with  their  Customes
private  and  publike  in  peace  and  warre.  .  .  .461

Long  miles :  great  Frost :  Borders  next  the  Crim  Tartar.
Tartars  Houses,  progresse,  regresse,  Beasts.  Perecopia.
Skul-forts.  Water-pipes.  Ruines  Ethnike  and  Chris-
tian ;  Admirable  Vaults.  Crim-Tartars  Cities  and
Villages. Genuois  Acts  and  valour. Capha  described.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Colchis,  Deepe  wels,  Salt  Lake,  Plentie  of  Taurica.
Taurica  seasons,  soyle,  bounds,  originall,  Princes.
Election  of  the  Chan  and  Galga.  Counsellors,  Religion,
Government.  Tartars  obedience  and  agreement ;  diet
and  life.  Embassadors.  Turkes  power  in  Taurica.
Chans  Money,  Provision,  Warre.  Tartarian  invasions.
The  Chans  Tenth.  Captives  miserie.  Tartars  armie,
armes,  horses,  slight-fight,  Captives. Discipline,  honour.

CHAP. XXII.

Dithmar  Blefkens  his  Voyages,  and  History  of  Island  and

Groenland. ........ 4.92

Island  described,  first  peopled.  Gronland  and  Islland  first
found  ; peopled  from  Norway.

Of  the  Islanders  Religion. ...... 494

Iseland  Bishops. Reformation  of  Religion. Tadde  Bonde.

The  Life  and  Manners  of  the  Islanders.  .  .  . 497

Islanders  dispositions  good  and  evill.  Old  Men.  No
Bread.  Lousie  love,  common  Lodging,  long  Nights
pastime.

Of  the  wonderfull  standing  Pooles,  Lakes,  and  Fountaines

in  Island. ........ 502

Stone  water. Strange  waters.

Of  the  wonderfull  Mountaines  in  Island.  .  .  . 503

Stranger  fires. Strangest  tales  of  Hecla. Ice-wonder.

Of  the  Riches  of  the  Islanders. .  .  .  .  .506

The  creatures  of  Island,  Woods,  Mines,  Whale-bones.  Island
Monsters  and  various  Sea-formes.

Of  the  Judgement  of  the  Islanders.  .  .  .  .510

Place  of  Judicature.  Trials,  sentence,  execution.  Pigmie-
fancy.

Of  Groneland. 512

S.  Thomas  fountaine.  Voyage  of  Gronland.  Boats  of
leather  and  of  barke.  The  Authors  survey  of  Hecla,
and  sickness  thereupon.

xvi

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

CHAP XXIII.

Extracts  of  Arngrim  Jonas,  an  Islander,  his  Chrymogaea  or

History  of  Island:  published  Anno  Dom.  1609. H.  P. 519

First  names  and  Discoveries  of  Island.

§  1.  Of  Island, the Situation, Discoverie, Plantation  and

Language. .  . .  . .  .  .  .519

First  Names  and  Discoveries  of  Island.  Island  so  called  of
Ice.  It  is  not  Thule.  Length  and  Breadth.  Bounds
and  Division  of  Island  ;  first  plantation,  when  and  how.
First  habitation  and  habitations,  condition  and  condi-
tions of  Island.  Islanders  retaine  the  Gottish  language:
the  letters  thereof.

§  2.  A  discourse  of  the  first  Inhabitants  of  the  Northerne
World,  supposed  to  be  Giants  expelled  from  Canaan.
Of  the  Islanders  Houses,  Fewell,  Victuall. .  . 533

Letters  and  Grammer  of  Island.  First  Northerne  Inhabi-
tants. First  peoplers  of  the  North  :  Fermotus,  Norus,
Gorus,  Thorro,  etc.  Giants  first  inhabitants  of  the
North,  etc.  Procopius  testimonie  of  Giants.  Islanders
ancient  manners.  Houses,  stoves,  tillage,  beasts,  fowle,
fish,  drinkes. Island  bankets,  money.

§  3.  Of  their  Politie,  and  Religion  in  old  times. .  . 546

Ancient  Religion,  founders  and  politie.  Ethnike  rites  and
humane  sacrifices.  Devill-circle.  Christianitie.  Magis-
trates and  Courts :  provisions  for  Poore,  against  Beggars.
Office  of  the  Reppagogi,  and  of  the  superiour  Magis-
trates. HofFsgodar,  Reppagogies,  Logman.  Island
Officers.

ILLUSTRATIONS

Nor-

Map of  Greenland, with the manner of  killing
Whales,  Morses  and  Beares,

Hondius  His  Map  of  Norwegia  and  Suetia

Hondius  His  Map  of  Denmarke,

Hondius  His Map  of  the  Arctike  Pole,  or
therne  World, ....

Hondius  His  Map  of  Borussia  or  Prussia,

Hondius  His  Map  of  Livonia  or  Leifland,

Hondius  His  Map  of  Lithuania,

Hondius  His  Map  of  Polonia, .

Hondius  His  Map  of  Taurica  Chersonesus,

Hondius  His  Map  of  Island,

Ancient  Gottish  Letters,

PAGE

44.0
448

456
464

47*
480
488
496
512
53i

XIX

THE THIRTEENTH VOLUME

OF

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning  the  Northerne  Discoveries  of  Seas,

Coasts  and  Countries  towards  the  West  and

East ;  with  Collections  of  Siberia,  Tar-

taria,  Greenland  and  Iceland

by  Englishmen  and

others

v

To  the  Reader.

[ili.iii.461.]

I  Thought  good  here  to  give  an  account  of  my  course.
Having  spent  much  time  in  that  other  World,  so  little
known  to  This  (Tartaria  and  China)  that  the  parts  least
known  might  be  made  best  known  :  I  have  comne  neerer
home,  to  Russia,  and  her  neighbours,  the  neerer,  or  Chrim
Tartars,  the  Samoyeds,  and  others ;  whereof  Doctor
Fletchers  Story  being  so  elaborate  (where,  though  the
centre  bee  Russia,  yet  his  circumference  is  more  generall)
and  by  men  judicious  which  have  in  those  parts  enjoyed
most  honourable  employment,  and  exactest  intelligence,
commended ;  I  have  given  him  the  first  place.  And  if
some  terme  bee  mollified,  or  some  few  things  omitted,  it
is  not  to  defraud  Thee  of  the  Historie  (which  for  substance
is  whole,  as  by  perusall  is  found)  but  not  to  defraud  our
industrious  Countrymen  in  their  merchandizing  mysterie,
wherein  some  perhaps  would  hence  seeke  occasion  of
undermining.  For  like  cause  I  have  given  the  next  place
to  Captaine  Edge,  (the  one  our  gowned  Generall  by  Land,
the  other  in  his  generall  Historie  also  by  Sea)  as  deserved  for  77-  ^eir
by  his  ten  yeeres  Voyages,  and  his  other  Merits.  As  for  and^hatl'f  2
the  question  of  Willoughbies  Land,  I  list  not  to  dispute
it ;  but  I  thinke,  neither  Hollander  (as  is  also  confessed

by  the  French  Booke,  called,  The  Historie  of  Spitsberghe  a
J  > ■  J  r  &  that  the  last-].

with  a  little  touch  of  the  running  Pen  might  appeare.  2 .  His  hand,  I  am  sure,  is  of  the  old

fashion  of  that  time,  as  appears  by  a  Will  I  have  with  his  hand,  and  perhaps  all  of  his  hand.

Some  English  Maps  have  made  an  Hand  in  that  height  where  none  is:  and  the  Dutch  Willebord

lies:  {which  they  say  are  eight  in  73.)  have  small  likelihood :  perhaps  Sir  Hugh  Willoughbie

might  misreckon,  by  not  knowing  the  variation  of  the  Compas  and  Sea  rules :  which  I  take  to  be

most  likely,  and  H.  G.  A.  confesseth  also.

XIII  1  A

aH.  G.  A.  in

confutation  of
the  English
assertion  for
Willoughby,
sayth,  11  est
bien  vray  que
nos  Mariniers
n^ont  trouve
au  dit  lieu  de
72.  degrees
aulcun  Pays.
72.  in  Sir
Hugh

Willoughbies
Booke  perhaps
was  mistaken

in  old  writing,
being  very  like
each  other,  so

V

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

on  the  Dutch  behalfe)  nor  any  other  have  found  any  such
Lands  as  his  Storie  describes,  but  some  part  of  those  which
now  with  a  generall  name  wee  call,  Greenland  (howsoever
the  makers  of  Maps  and  Globes  may  create  Lands  and
Hands  at  pleasure,  especially  in  unknowne  places)  and  the
first  setled,  ordinary,  and  orderly  Voyages  for  the  Whale-
killing,  and  the  most  for  discoverie  in  those  parts  have
beene  made  by  the  English,  their  gaynes  awakening  the
Hollander  to  that  enterprise,  and  that  also  (as  elsewhere
in  the  World)  by  English  guides.  That  which  I  most
grieve  at  in  this  contention,  is  the  detention  of  further
discovery  to  the  Pole  and  beyond  (where  it  is  not  likely
to  be  colder  then  here,  and  at  the  Arctike  circle  :  as  in  the
Red  Sea,  Ormus,  and  the  Countrey  about  Balsara  on  this
side  the  Tropike,  is  found  greater  heat  then  under  the
Line  it  selfe)  the  desire  of  gayne  every  where  causing
debate,  and  consequently  losse  of  the  best  gaine  both  in
Earth  and  Heaven.  Merchants  might  get  the  World,
and  give  us  the  World  better,  if  Charitie  were  their
Needle ;  Grace,  their  Compas ;  Heaven  their  Haven,  and
if  they  would  take  their  height  by  observing  the  Sunne
of  Righteousnesse  in  the  Scripture-astrolabe,  and  sound-
ing their  depth  by  a  Leading  Faith,  and  not  by  a  Leadden
bottomlesse  Covetousnesse :  that  is,  if  they  would  seeke
the  Kingdome  of  Heaven  first,  all  things  should  bee
added ;  they  should  finde  World  enough  in  the  Indian,
and  Polare  Worlds,  and  wee  and  they  should  arrive  at
better  knowledge  of  the  Creator  and  Creatures.  And  of
all  men  (that  I  may  a  little  further  answere  that  Historie
of  Spitsberghe)  I  would  be  glad  to  see  agreement  betwixt
the  English  and  Dutch,  both  because  I  honour  that
Nation,  as  hath  appeared  in  this  whole  worke  of  Voyages,
in  which  and  of  which  the  Dutch  are  so  great  a  part :
and  because  in  Region,  Religion,  Originall  Nation,
ingenious  and  ingenuous  disposition,  and  (that  which  here
brings  both  on  our  Stage)  the  glory  of  Navigation,  they
are  so  neere  us,  and  worthie  to  be  honored.  It  is  true
that  every  where  the  English  hath  beene  the  elder  Brother,

/

TO THE READER

a  Doctor,  and  Ductor,  to  the  Hollanders,  in  their  Martiall
feats  at  home, and Neptunian exploits  abroad, (that I
mention not their permitted wealthie fishing on the
English  shoare)  whom  had  they  followed  with  as  true  and
due  respect,  as  with  happie  successe ;  quarrels  had  not  so
distracted  and  distorted  both  sides. I  appeale  to  Dutch  hSebastian
ingenuitie,  if  ever  they  did  any  thing  wholly  New  (but cabota  the
give  names)  in  remotest  Navigations,  without  English  English
lights. Columbus  an  Italian  had  the  honour  of  finding  Columbus,
America,  and  the  Spaniards  the  happinesse. But  for  the  son»e  °fJohn

-*•  ^  fl w  P7lPtlfl.fi

North  America,  and the  whole  Northern  New  World, bred  hegreJ
Cabotab  borne  or  bred  at  least  in  England,  was  either  and  Dis-
Actor  or  Author. For  the  Dutch,  I  have  shewed,  for  the  covererfir
compassing  of  the  World,  and  for  the  East  Indies  before, Henry  tie
that  our  Drake,  Candish,  Mellis,  Davis,  Adams,  &c.  were America] and
their  Fore-runners,  Pilots,  and  Guides :  Yea,  their  New-  first  Gover-
found Land Voyages, and all the Northerne coast of  nour  of  the
America  were  discovered  by  Sebastian  Cabota,  and  other  Moscovte
Englishmen. I adde their New Straights Southwards ^^Drake
from  those  of  Magelane  were  discovered  before  by  Drake,*  first  finder  of
as  in  the  Map  of  Sir  Francis  Drakes  Voyage  presented the  S.
to Queene Elizabeth, still hanging in His Majesties  Speights,
Gallerie  at  White  Hall,  neere  the  Privie  Chamber,  and  l%dJf%£'
by  that  Map  (wherein  is  Cabotas  Picture,  the  first  and  j^ap  -t5
great  Columbus  for  the  Northerne  World)  may  be  seene. Queene
In  which  Map,  the  South  of  the  Magelane  Straits  is  not Elizabeths  ^
a  Continent,  but  many  Hands,  and  the  very  same  which p*cture->  Wlth
they have stiled in their Straits, Barnevels Hands had  y^/^w^v
long  before  beene  named  by  the  most  auspicate  of  Earthly Trident,  and
Names, and  let  themselves  be  Judges,  with  which the  Triton  sound-
other  is as little  worthie to be mentioned, as a kind ™g  her  Fame,
Mother,  and  an  unkind  Traitor. The  Name  Elizabeth  c  yerses  fe
is  expressed  in  golden  Letters,  with  a  golden  Crowne, Deus  'cequor
Garter,  and  Armes  affixed  :  The  words  ascribed  thereunto  em  donat
are  these,  Cum  omnes  fere  hanc  partem  Australem  Conti-  Re&na
nentem  esse  putent,  pro  certo  sciant  Insulas  esse  Navi- Triton'laudes
gantibus  pervias,  earumque  australissimam  Elizabetham  a  ejflat  ubique
D. Francisco  Draco  Inventore  dictam  esse. The  same  tuas.

A.D.

1553-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

height  of  57.  degrees,  and  South-easterly  situation  from
the  Magelan  Westerne  Mouth  give  further  evidence.
And  my  learned  friend  Master  Brigges  told  me,  that  he
[III.iii.462.]  hath  seene  this  plot  of  Drakes  Voyage  cut  in  Silver  by
a  Dutchman  (Michael  Mercator,  Nephew  to  Gerardus)
many  yeeres  before  Scouten  or  Maire  intended  that
Voyage.  As  for  Nova  Zemla  by  Stephen  Burrough,  and
others,  long  before  discovered,  they  also  have  given  new
names,  which  I  envie  not :  onely  I  feare  a  vae  soli,  and
hate  ingratitude  both  ours  and  theirs.  But  too  much  of
this.  Next  to  this  more  generall  Discourse  shall  follow
the  Dutch  Northerne  Voyages,  and  the  English  North-
easterne :  after  which  wee  will  take  a  more  complementall
leave  of  that  Continent,  and  from  thence  visite  the
Northerly  and  North-westerne  Discoveries ;  at  once  hunt-
ing for  a  New  World  and  a  New  passage  to  This.

Chap.  II.
A  briefe  Discoverie  of  the  Northerne  Discoveries
of  Seas,  Coasts,  and  Countries,  delivered  in
order  as  they  were  hopefully  begunne,  and
have  ever  since  happily  beene  continued  by
the  singular  industrie  and  charge  of  the
Worshipfull  Society  of  Muscovia  Merchants
of  London,  with  the  ten  severall  Voyages  of
Captaine  Thomas  Edge  the  Authour.

§•  1.

Greenland  first  discovered  by  Sir  Hugh  Wil-
loughbie  ;  the  Voyages  of  Frobisher,  Pet  and
Jackman,  Davis,  the  Dutch ;  First  Morse  and
Whale-killing,  with  further  Discoveries.

He  Northerne  parts  of  the  World  have  ever  beene
held  to  be  Officina  Gentium  &  velut  Vagina
Nationum, Natures Shop and Store-house of

W.  Gemeti-
censis  de
Ducib.
'Norman.

Men, better furnished then any other part of the

4

THOMAS EDGE  a.d.

1553-
Earth,  and  from  whence  those  notable  Inundations
came  first  of  the  Cymbrians  and  Teutons,  in  the
time  of  the  antient  Romans ;  and  secondly  of  the
Gothes  and  Vandals  under  Attila,  to  the  confusion  of
things  both  Divine  and  Humane  in  all  the  Southerne
parts  of  Europe,  as  farre  as  Barbarisme  could  prevaile
against  Civilitie  and  Religion.  For  remedie  whereof  the
Townes  alongst  the  Baltick  Sea  entred  into  a  confederacy
under  the  names  of  the  Hans  Townes,  and  undertooke  Hans  Townes.
the  keeping  of  those  Northerne  people,  and  the  securing
of  these  Southerne  Kingdomes  from  any  the  like  over-
flowings, upon  such  Priviledges  and  Immunities  as  were
granted  and  agreed  unto  them  by  all  the  Southerne
Princes,  and  according  to  such  Lawes  as  were  made  and
provided  for  the  maintenance  and  strength  of  the  said
Hans  Townes,  amongst  which  the  supreme  and  funda-
mentall  Lawe  was  that  none  of  these  Nations  so  secured
should  have  trade  or  commerce  in  any  parts  beyond  the
Baltike  Seas,  to  the  end  the  barbarous  people  might  not
bee  enabled  thereby  to  practise  or  move  against  the  Hans
Townes :  which  was  the  cause  together  also  with  the
extremitie  of  cold,  that  those  Northerne  Seas  were  never
looked  unto  untill  the  yeere  1553.  At  which  time  the
trade  of  this  Kingdome  waxing  cold  and  in  decay,  and
the  Merchants  incited  with  the  fame  of  the  great  masse
of  riches  which  the  Portugals  and  Spaniards  brought  home
yeerely  from  both  the  Indies,  entred  into  a  resolution,
notwithstanding  the  prohibition  of  the  Hans  Law  to  dis-
cover the  Northerne  Seas,  which  so  long  had  beene  frozen
and  shut  up ;  and  to  see  whether  they  could  not  affoord
a  passage  to  Cathay  and  the  East  Indies,  and  accordingly  Cathay,  See
provided  three  ships,  and  sent  them  forth  under  the  com-  l-  2.  cap.  i.of
mand  of  Sir  Hugh  Willoughbie,  Knight,  who  embarqued  *yS  whole
himselfe  in  a  ship  called,  the  Bona  Esperanca,  Admirall  2°^e'
of  that  Voyage,  with  Richard  Chancellor  Captaine  of  the
Edward  Bonaventure,  together  with  a  third  ship,  called
the  Bona  Confidentia.  These  three  ships  falling  downe
from  Ratcliffe,  the  tenth  of  May  in  the  foresaid  yeere

5

A.D.

1553-

*An  errour  in
the  latitude,
the  hand-
stands in  77.

[III.iii.463.]

Greenland
discovered  by
Sir  Hugh
Willoughbie.
This  Voyage
was  written
by  Sir  H.
mil.  and
found  in  his
ship. In
Januarie  after
he  was  alive,
as  appear es  by
a  Will  of  Gab.
Will,  his
kinsman,  sub-
scribed by
Sir  Hug.
Willoughbie
which  Will  I
now  have^  and
keepe  as  a
Relike  of  that
worthie  dis-
coverer and
first  finder  of
King  James
his  New-land.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

went  on  their  Voyage,  and  proceeding  as  farre  as  the
Cape  of  Norway,  they  were  severed  by  a  tempest.  Chan-
cellor after  he  had  stayed  at  Ward-house  seven  dayes,
expecting  the  Admirall  and  the  other  ships,  according  to
a  former  appointment  upon  any  such  casualtie,  and  hearing
nothing  of  them,  went  on,  and  discovered  the  Bay  of  Saint
Nicolas,  and  setled  a  trade  there,  which  hath  continued
to  these  times.

Sir  Hugh  Willoughbie  was  driven  to  the  height  of
72.  *  where  hee  fell  upon  an  Hand,  now  knowne  by  the
name  of  Willoughbie  Land,  and  lieth  from  Sinam  (upon
the  Continent  of  Norway)  East  and  by  North  an  hundred
and  sixtie  leagues  or  thereabouts,  from  thence  he  went
North  and  North-west,  and  within  eight  dayes  after  he  fell
upon  a  Land  which  lay  West  South-west,  and  East  North-
east, betweene  74.  and  75.  degrees  of  latitude,  and  plying
Westward  along  by  the  Land,  he  was  driven  by  the  wind
to  put  to  Sea  againe,  untill  the  wind  came  about.  Then
they  made  towards  the  Land  againe,  and  bare  with  it,
but  finding  that  place  unfit  for  landing,  they  haled  out
againe,  running  along  the  Land  sixteene  leagues  North-
west, where  they  found  a  faire  Bay,  went  on  Land  and
found  the  place  inhabited.  From  thence  they  put  to  Sea
againe,  runne  alongst  the  coast  for  fortie  leagues  together,
till  at  length  they  came  to  an  anchor  within  two  leagues
of  the  shoare,  where  they  landed,  and  found  two  or  three
good  Harbours.

Afterwards  they  entred  into  the  Haven  which  ranne  up
into  the  Maine  about  two  leagues,  where  they  remained
for  the  space  of  a  weeke  upon  the  maine  Land.  They
found  Beares,  great  Deere,  Foxes,  and  other  beasts.  They
sent  out  three  men  three  dayes  journey  to  the  South-west,
and  three  others  also  full  West,  all  which  returned  after
divers  dayes  travelling,  and  found  no  people  nor  any
likelihood  of  habitation.  And  this  is  that  Land  which
now  is  called  Greenland,  or  King  James  his  New-land,
and  is  knowne  to  the  Hollanders  by  the  name  of  Spits-
bergen. Sir  Hugh  Willoughbie  returned  into  Lapland,

6

THOMAS EDGE  ad.

.578.
where  he  and  his  companie  were  frozen  to  death,  in  the
Haven  called  Arzina,  neere  Kegor.

The  Muscovia  Merchants  having  thus  setled  a  trade
in  Russia,  and  being  incorporated  by  the  name  of,  The
Merchants  of  England,  for  the  discoverie  of  new  trades,
pursued  their  first  resolutions  for  finding  a  way  to  Cathay
by  the  North-east,  and  in  the  yeere  1556.  sent  out  Stephen
Burrough,  for  discoverie  of  the  River  Obb,  who  proceed-
ing forwards  in  that  Voyage  discovered  the  River  Pechora,
the Streights of  Vaigats and Novazembla  * ; went on *See  Hack/.
shoare  upon  the  Hand  of  Vaigats,  and  upon  the  North v- tom-  lm
Continent  of  Russia ;  met  with  the  Samoeds,  observed  **a**' ^'
their  manner  of  life,  their  Religion,  their  Sacrifices  to  their
rude  and  ill  shaped  Idols ;  and  the  yeere  being  spent,
returned  into  Russia.

The  Companie  having  sought  for  the  North-east  passage,
and  finding  such  difficulties  as  are  mentioned in their
particular  Journals,  resolved  to  make  triall,  if  the  North-
west part  could  not  affoord  a  passage  to  the  Indies,  which
was  the  first  and  maine  scope  of  their  Northerne  Dis-
coveries. And  in  the  yeere 1576. they sent  forth Sir 1576.
Martin  Frobisher  with  two  Barkes,  who  comming  into lr ^r l
the  height  of  62. or  thereabouts, found  a  great Inlet, Hak^  tm
now knowne by the name of Frobishers Streights, 25.  &  seqq.
into which he put himselfe, and sayled sixtie leagues
with  a  mayne  Land  on  each  side,  and  so  for  that  yeere
returned.

The  next  yeere  following  he  made  a  second  Voyage  to
that  place,  purposely  to  lade  himselfe  with  a  kind  of  Oare,
which  the  yeere  before  he  had  found  there,  and  gave  hope
by  the  colour  to  yeeld  Gold,  and  being  laden  with  some
quantitie,  returned.

The  yeere  following,  being  1578.  having  made  tryall  1578.
here  of  that  Oare,  and  finding  it  not  to  fall  out  according
to  his  expectation,  hee  was  furnished  out  to  proceed  in
the  further  discoverie  of  those  Streights,  and  entring  into
the  same,  made  way  so  farre  as  hee  thought  fit,  and  then
returned  backe,  having  first  taken  possession  thereof  in

7

A.D.

1578.

1580.

Pet  and  Jack-
man.  Hak.
to.  \.p.  445.

1583.

Sir  H.  Gil-
bert. Hak.
to.  3.  p.  143,

1585.

MasterDavis.
Hak.  to.  3.
p.  98.  &  seq.

1586.

587.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  name  of  Queene  Elizabeth  of  famous  memorie,  who
called  the  place  Meta  incognita :  he  brought  home  some
of  the  Natives,  and  left  some  of  his  men  there.

In  the  yeere  1580.  the  Companie  sent  out  a  second
Voyage  for  the  discoverie  of  the  River  Obb,  and  thence
to  goe  on  to  Cathay ;  furnishing  forth  two  ships  under
the  command  of  Arthur  Pet,  and  Charles  Jackman,  who
following  their  instructions,  arrived  at  Vaigats,  passed
those  Streights  with  a  particular  observation  of  those
Hands  and  places  therein,  plyed  along  the  East  part  of
Novazembla,  and  the  North  of  Russia,  and  the  Samoeds
Countrey,  so  farre  as  the  Ice  would  give  them  leave,  and
finding  no  possibilitie  of  passage  by  reason  of  the  Ice,
returned  backe  in  the  latter  end  of  the  yeere.  By  this
time  the  Voyage  of  Saint  Nicolas  was  knowne,  and  become
a  beaten  trade.  And  the  Companie  sent  out  yeerely
thither  ten  or  twelve  ships,  which  returned  fraighted  with
the  commodities  of  that  Countrey.

In  the  yeere  1583.  by  the  leave  and  admittance  of  the
Moscovia  Companie,  Sir  Humfrey  Gilbert  went  out  for
the  discoverie  of  the  North  part  of  Terra  Florida,  came
into  the  great  River  called,  Saint  Laurence  in  Canada,
tooke  possession  of  the  Countrey,  setled  the  government
of  the  fishing  there  which  is  so  well  knowne  in  these
times.

In  the  yeere  1585.  Master  John  Davis  was  furnished
out  at  Dartmouth  with  two  Barkes,  for  the  discoverie  of
the  North-west,  came  into  the  height  of  66.  plyed  along
the  coast,  observed  the  probabilitie  of  a  passage,  and  in
the  end  of  the  yeere  returned.

In  the  yeere  following,  being  1586.  hee  went  on  againe
in  the  further  discoverie  thereof,  found  a  great  Inlet
betweene  $$.  and  $6.  of  latitude,  which  gave  him  great
hope  of  a  passage,  traded  with  the  people  there,  and  so
returned.

In  the  yeere  1587.  hee  made  a  third  Voyage  to  those
places,  followed  his  course  to  the  North  and  North-west,
to the  Latitude  of  67. degrees, having  the  Continent

8

THOMAS EDGE  a.d.

1587.

(which  hee  called  America)  on  the  West  side  and  Groine-
land,  which  hee  named  Desolation  on  the  East,  and  going
on  the  height  of  86.  degrees,  the  passage  enlarged  so  that
hee  could  not  see  the  Westerne  shoare.  Thus  he  con-
tinued in  the  Latitude  of  73.  degrees  in  a  great  Sea  free
from  Ice,  of  an  unmeasurable  depth,  but  by  the  occasion
of  the  departure  of  two  Ships  which  were  in  company
with  him,  which  hee  left  Fishing  at  a  place,  he  returned  [ni.m.464.]
home.  This  passage  continueth  the  Name  and  memorie
of  the  first  Discoverer,  and  is  called  Fretum  Davis.  And  FretumDavh.
thus  the  Discoverie  of  the  Northern  Seas  proceeded  on
from  time  to  time,  by  the  endeavour  and  charge  of  the
Muscovia  Companie,  untill  they  had  particularly  dis-
covered the  Lands,  Coasts,  Hands,  Straights,  Havens,
Bayes,  Rivers  and  other  places  therein,  and  measured  every
part  thereof,  by  their  often  tracing  to  and  fro  :  Together
also  with  the  observation  of  the  Commodities  and  Advan-
tages, arising  from  every  part  of  the  same,  continuing
even  unto  these  times  to  haunt  and  frequent  the  parts
which  they  had  formerly  found  out ;  As  by  their  yeerely
Reportaries  and  Journals  may  appeare,  and  that  either
without  emulation  or  competition  of  any  other  Nation,
that  ever  came  into  those  parts  or  enterprised  any  Dis-
coverie there  untill  of  late  yeeres,  as  appeares  by  this  that
followeth.

When  Richard  Chancelor  had  setled  a  trade  with  John
Vasilowich  then  Emperour  of  Russia,  and  his  Ambassa-
dours  had  beene  heere  in  England,  to  accomplish  matters
requisite  for  maintenance  of  the  Amitie  and  Entercourse
made  and  agreed  upon  betweene  these  two  Crownes  ;  King
Philip,  Queene  Marie,  Dukes  also  at  that  time  of  Bur-  Hak-  TGm-  l-
gundie,  and  Soveraignes  of  all  the  Netherlands,  made  a  ?a&'  297*
grant  of  Priviledge  unto  the  Muscovia  Merchants  for
the  sole  Trade  of  those  Seas,  prohibiting  all  others  to
haunt  and  frequent  the  same,  without  speciall  Licence  and
consent  of  the  sayd  Companie  :  which  grant  of  Priviledge
was  accordingly  enjoyed  without  disturbance  or  inter-
loping of  the  Hollanders,  who  out  of  obedience  either

9

A.D.

1553-

1553.
1578.

25-

1594-

These  Voiages
follow.

I595-

1596.

/  have  by  me  a
French  Storie
o/Spitzbergh,
published
161  3  by  a
Dutchman
which  writeth
against  this
English
allegation,
&c.  but  hotter
arguments
then  I  am
willing  to
answer.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  the  Prohibition  made  by  their  Soveraigne,  or  for  that
they  durst  not  adventure  into  these  Seas,  did  not  any  way
attempt  to  bee  seene  or  appeare  there,  either  for  Discoverie
or  trade  of  Merchandize,  for  the  space  of  five  and  twentie
yeeres,  after  the  Port  of  Saint  Nicholas  was  first  Dis-
covered and  found  out  by  the  English.  For  the  Company
having  as  is  above  mentioned,  made  their  first  Discoverie
in  the  yeere  1553.  there  was  never  heard  of  any  Nether-
lander that  frequented  those  Seas,  untill  the  yeere  1578.
At  which  time  they  first  began  to  come  to  Cola,  and  within
a  yeere  or  two  after,  one  John  de  Whale  a  Netherlander,
came  to  the  Bay  of  Saint  Nicholas,  being  drawne  thither
by  the  perswasion  of  some  English  for  their  better  meane
of  Interloping,  which  was  the  first  man  of  that  Nation
that  ever  was  seene  there.  And  this  as  is  formerly  noted
was  five  and  twentie  yeeres  after  it  was  Discovered  by
the  Muscovia  Merchants.

Afterwards  the  Hollanders  crept  in  more  and  more,
and  in  the  yeere  1594.  they  made  out  foure  Ships  for
Discoverie  of  the  North-east  passage  to  China,  the  Master
Pylot  whereof  was  William  Barrents,  these  came  upon
the  Coast  of  Novazembla  to  the  Latitude  of  77.  degrees,
drew  backe  againe  towards  the  Straights  of  Vaigats,  and
then  returned  giving  Names  unto  some  places  and  Pro-
montories upon  that  Land.

In  the  yeere  1595.  They  sent  out  a  second  Voyage,
tracing  the  way  through  the  Straights  of  Vaigats  in  the
same  steps,  as  Pet  and  Jackman  had  formerly  passed,  and
so  returned.

In  the  yeere  1596.  They  set  out  a  third  Voyage  with
two  Ships,  the  one  of  which  shaped  her  course  from  the
Cape  of  Norway,  to  an  Hand  in  the  Latitude  of  74.
degrees,  which  wee  call  Cherie  Hand,  and  they  call  Beare
Hand,  and  from  thence  to  Greenland,  where  Sir  Hugh
Willoughbie  had  beene  two  and  fortie  yeeres  before,  for
so  long  time  there  is  betweene  the  first  Discoverie  thereof
and  the  yeere  1596.  And  from  thence  to  the  North-east
part  of  Novazembla,  in  the  Latitude  of  76.  degrees,  where

10

THOMAS EDGE

they  Wintred  and  lost  their  Ship,  and  came  home  with
much  difficultie.

In  the  yeere  1603.  Stephen  Bennet  was  imployed  by
the  Companie,  in  a  Ship  called  the  Grace,  to  those  parts
Northwards  of  the  Cape,  and  was  at  Cherie  Hand  and
killed  some  Sea-horses,  and  brought  home  Lead  Oare  from
thence.

In  the  yeere  1608.  the  said  fellowship  set  foorth  a  Ship
called  the  Hope-well,  whereof  William  Hudson  was
Master,  to  discover  to  the  Pole,  where  it  appeareth  by  his
Journall,  that  hee  came  to  the  height  of  8 1 .  degrees,  where
he  gave  Names  to  certayne  places,  upon  the  Continent
of  Greenland  formerly  discovered,  which  continue  to  this
day,  namely,  Whale  Bay,  and  Hackluit  Headland,  and
being  hindred  with  Ice,  returned  home  without  any  further
use  made  of  the  Countrey,  and  in  ranging  homewards,
hee  discovered  an  Hand  lying  in  71.  degrees,  which  hee
named  Hudsons  Tutches.

Heere  it  is  to  bee  understood,  that  the  Companie
having  by  often  resort  and  imployment  to  those  parts,
observed  the  great  number  of  Sea-horses  at  Cherie  Hand,
and  likewise  the  multitude  of  Whales,  that  shewed  them-
selves upon  the  coast  of  Greenland ;  They  first  applyed
themselves  to  the  killing  of  the  Morces,  which  they  con-
tinued from  yeere  to  yeere  with  a  Ship  or  two  yeerely  ;
in  which  Ships  the  Companie  appointed  Thomas  Welden
Commander,  and  in  the  yeere  1609.  tne  Companie
imployed  one  Thomas  Edge  their  Apprentice,  for  their
Northerne  Voyage,  and  joyned  him  in  Commission  with
the  fore  sayd  Welden.  Now  the  often  using  of  Cherie
Hand,  did  make  the  Sea-horse  grow  scarse  and  decay,
which  made  the  Companie  looke  out  for  further  Dis-
coveries.

In  the  yeere  16 10.  the  Companie  set  out  two  Ships,  viz.
the  Lionesse  for  Cherie  Hand,  Thomas  Edge  Commander ;
and  the  Amitie,  for  a  Northerne  Discoverie,  the  Master  of
which  Ship  was  Jonas  Poole  :  who  in  the  moneth  of  May
fell  with  a  Land,  and  called  it  Greenland,  this  is  the  Land

11

A.D.

1 6 10.

William
Hudson
Discovered  to
81.  Degrees.

Whale  Bay,

Hackluits

Headland.

Hudsons
Toutches.

I

Thomas
Welden.
1609.

Thomas  Edge
the  Author.

1 610.
Jonas  Poole
first  Earner  of
Greenland.

[III.iii.465.]

A.D.

[6  io.

*See  Baffin;
North-west
Discoverie. ,
Unicome,  a
Sea  fishes
Home.
1611.

First  Whale-
killing.
Biscay  ners
used.

500.  Morses
killed.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

that  was  discovered  by  Sir  Hugh  Willoughby  long  before,
which  Ship  Amitie  continued  upon  the  coast  of  Greenland,
discovering  the  Harbours  and  killing  of  Morces,  untill
the  moneth  of  August,  and  so  returned  for  England,
having  gotten  about  some  twelve  Tunnes  of  goods,  and
an  Unicornes  *  home.

In  the  yeere  1 6 1 1 .  the  Companie  set  foorth  two  Ships
for  Greenland,  the  Marie  Margaret  Admirall,  burthen  one
hundred  and  sixtie  tunnes,  Thomas  Edge  Commander ;
and  the  Elizabeth,  burthen  sixtie  tunnes,  Jonas  Poole
Master,  well  manned  and  furnished  with  all  necessarie
Provisions,  they  departed  from  Blackwall  the  twentieth
of  Aprill,  and  arrived  at  the  Foreland  in  Greenland  in
the  Latitude  of  79.  degrees,  the  twentieth  of  May  follow-
ing, the  Admirall  had  in  her  six  Biskayners  expert  men
for  the  killing  of  the  Whale :  this  was  the  first  yeere  the
Companie  set  out  for  the  killing  of  Whales  in  Greenland,
and  about  the  twelfth  of  June  the  Biskayners  killed  a
small  Whale,  which  yeelded  twelve  Tunnes  of  Oyle,  being
the  first  Oyle  that  ever  was  made  in  Greenland.  The
Companies  two  Shalops  looking  about  the  Harbour  for
Whales,  about  the  five  and  twentieth  of  June  rowing  into
Sir  Thomas  Smith  his  Bay,  on  the  East  side  of  the  Sound
saw  on  the  shoare  great  store  of  Sea-horses ;  after  they  had
found  the  Morses  they  presently  rowed  unto  the  Ship,
being  in  crosse  Road  seven  leagues  off,  and  acquainted  the
Captayne  what  they  had  found.  The  Captayne  under-
standing of  it,  gave  order  to  the  Master,  Stephen  Bennet,
that  he  should  take  into  his  Ship  fiftie  tunnes  of  emptie
Caske,  and  set  sayle  with  the  Ship  to  goe  into  Foule
Sound.  The  Captayne  went  presently  away  in  one
Shallop  with  sixe  men  unto  the  Seamorse,  and  tooke  with
him  Lances,  and  comming  to  them  they  set  on  them  and
killed  five  hundred  Morses,  and  kept  one  thousand  Morses
living  on  shoare,  because  it  is  not  profitable  to  kill  them
all  at  one  time.  The  next  day  the  Ship  being  gone
unto  the  place  &  well  mored  where  the  Morse  were
killed, all the men belonging to the Ship went on

12

THOMAS EDGE  a.d.

1611.

shoare,  to  worke  and  make  Oyle  of  the  Morses ;  and
when  they  had  wrought  two  or  three  dayes,  it  fortuned
that  a  small  quantitie  of  Ice  came  out  of  Foule  Sound,
and  put  the  Ship  from  her  Moring.  The  Master  and  ten
men  being  a  board  of  the  Ship,  let  fall  their  Sheat  anchor
which  brought  the  Ship  up  to  ride ;  the  Ice  comming  upon
her  againe,  brought  her  Anchor  home  and  ranne  the  Ship
ashoare,  where  shee  by  the  Masters  weake  Judgement  was
cast  away,  and  all  their  Bread  spoyled  not  fit  to  eate.  The  Shipwrackeby
Ship  being  cast  away  without  hope  of  recoverie,  the  Com-  e'
mander  Thomas  Edge  gave  order,  that  all  the  Morse
living  on  shoare  should  be  let  goe  into  the  Sea,  and  so
gave  over  making  of  Oyle,  and  presently  haled  up  ashoare
all  his  Shallops  and  Boates,  being  five,  setting  the  Car-
penter to  trim  them,  the  Saylers  to  make  Sayles  and
Wastcloathes  for  the  Boates,  fit  to  serve  them  at  Sea.
Having  fitted  their  Boates  as  well  as  they  could  with  the
small  provision  they  had,  being  in  number  foure  small
Shallops  and  the  ships  Boate,  they  divided  their  men  into
them  equally  with  what  provisions  of  victuals  they  could
well  carrie,  and  after  they  had  sayd  Prayers  all  together
on  Land ;  being  fiftie  men  they  departed  from  the  place
where  they  lost  their  Ship,  on  the  fifteenth  of  July  with
the  winde  Southerly,  and  rowed  thirtie  or  fortie  leagues
to  the  Southward,  and  then  they  lost  companie  of  one
Shallop  and  their  ships  Boate  of  Home  Sound,  which  two
Boates  met  with  a  Hull  Ship,  and  acquainted  him  with
the  losse  of  the  London  Ship,  and  that  shee  had  left  on
land  goods  woorth  fifteene  hundred  pounds :  So  our  men
carryed  the  Hull  Ship  into  Foule  Sound,  to  take  in  the  Hull  Ship.
Companies  goods  and  to  kill  some  Sea-horses  for  her  selfe
at  that  place.  The  Captayne  and  two  other  Shallops  put
from  the  Coast  of  Greenland  in  the  height  of  77-§.
Degrees,  and  set  their  course  for  Cherie  Hand,  which  lyeth  Cherie  Hand.
in  74.  Degrees  ( — )  sometimes  Sayling  and  sometimes
Rowing  and  made  Cherie  Hand  the  nine  and  twentieth  of
July,  having  beene  in  their  Shallops  at  Sea  fourteene  dayes,
and  comming  into  the  Hand  with  a  great  storme  at  North-

13

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

west,  with  much  difficultie  they  landed  on  the  South  side
of  the  Hand.

Being  on  shoare,  the  Captayne  sent  three  of  his  Saylers
over  land  unto  the  North  roade,  being  three  miles  distant
from  that  place,  to  see  if  the  Elizabeth  was  there,  and
they  saw  a  Ship  riding  in  the  North  roade,  and  being  over-
joyed they  returned  backe  unto  the  Captayne  to  acquaint
him,  without  staying  to  speake  with  any  of  the  Ships
companie,  and  by  good  hap  the  Master  of  the  Elizabeth
espyed  men  on  the  Shoare,  being  at  that  time  weighing
Anchor  to  set  sayle  for  England,  upon  which  hee  stayed
and  sent  the  Boate  ashoare  to  see  what  men  they  were,
and  when  the  men  of  the  Elizabeth  came  ashoare,  they
found  them  to  bee  men  of  the  Mary  Margaret,  and  so
went  aboard  unto  the  Master  to  acquaint  him  ;  whereupon
the  Master  caused  Anchor  to  bee  weighed  and  went  to
the  South  side  of  the  Hand,  and  there  tooke  in  the
Captayne,  and  hee  being  aboard  understanding  what  a
poore  Voyage  the  Elizabeth  had  made,  gave  order  to  the
Master  to  goe  for  Greenland,  there  to  take  in  such  Goods
as  the  sayd  Edge  had  left  in  Foule  Sound.  They  departed
from  Cherie  Hand  the  first  of  August,  and  arrived  at  Foule
Sound  the  Fourteenth  Dicto :  where  they  found  two
Boates  which  they  had  lost  companie  of  before,  and
all  their  men  being  come  thither  with  a  Hull  Ship
which  they  met  with,  and  brought  to  that  place ;
which  Ship  had  spent  all  the  yeere  in  Home  Sound,  and
got  little  goods.  The  Elizabeth  being  mored,  the  Cap-
tayne gave  order  unto  the  Master  to  deliver  out  of  his
Ship,  all  the  goods  hee  had  got  at  Cherie  Hand,  which
was  Sea-horse  hydes  and  Blubber,  being  of  little  woorth,
And  to  take  in  the  Oyle  and  Whale-finnes,  which  were

[III.iii.466.]  gotten  by  the  Marie  Margarets  companie,  the  Master  in
unlading  of  his  Ship  brought  her  so  light,  that  unfortun-

Ship  over-set.  atly  hee  over-set  her,  having  goods  in  her  worth  seven
hundred  pounds.  This  ill  chance  happening  unto  the  two
London  Ships,  the  Captayne  of  them  agreed  with  Thomas
Marmaduke  Master  of  the  Hull  Ship,  to  take  in  the  goods

14

THOMAS EDGE

which  was  saved,  at  the  rate  of  five  pounds  the  Tunne,
which  was  a  great  rate  (notwithstanding  they  had  beene
a  meanes  to  get  him  goods  worth  five  hundred  pounds
for  the  Hull  Ship)  and  upon  the  one  and  twentieth  of
August,  1 6 1 1 .  they  departed  from  Greenland  in  the  Hope-
well, being  ninetie  nine  men  in  all,  and  arrived  at  Hull
the  sixth  of  September,  where  the  sayd  Edge  tooke  out
the  Companies  goods,  and  Shipped  them  for  London  by
order  from  the  Companie.  This  yeere,  Edge  in  coasting
in  the  Shallops,  discovered  all  the  Harbours  on  the  West
side  of  Greenland.

A.D.

1612.

§•  n.

Dutch,  Spanish,  Danish  disturbance  ;  also  by  Hull
men,  and  by  a  new  Patent,  with  the  succeed-
ing Successe  and  further  Discoveries  till  this
present.

NT  the  yeere  161 2.  the  Companie  set  forth  two
Ships,  viz.  The  Whale,  burthen  one  hundred  and
sixtie Tunnes, and the Sea-horse, burthen one

hundred  and  eightie  tunnes,  under  the  Command  of  John
Russell,  and  Thomas  Edge,  for  discovering  and  killing  of
the  Whale.  They  discovered  that  yeere  nothing  worth
writing  of,  by  reason  of  some  falling  out  betwixt  Russell
and  Edge ;  yet  they  killed  that  yeere  seventeene  Whales,
and  some  Sea-horses,  of  which  they  made  one  hundred
and  eightie  Tunnes  of  Oyle  with  much  difficultie ;  as  not
being  experimented  in  the  businesse.  This  yeere  the
Hollanders  (to  keepe  their  wont  in  following  of  the
English  steps)  came  to  Greenland  with  one  Ship,  being
brought  thither  by  an  English  man,  and  not  out  of  any
knowledge  of  their  owne  Discoveries,  but  by  the  direction
of  one  Allen  Sallowes,  a  man  imployed  by  the  Muscovia
Companie  in  the  Northerne  Seas  for  the  space  of  twentie  Sallowes.
yeeres  before ;  who  leaving  his  Countrey  for  Debt,  was
entertayned  by  the  Hollanders,  and  imployed  by  them  to
bring  them  to  Greenland  for  their  Pylot. At  which  time

*5

Hollanders.

Allen

A.D.

1612.

Spanish  Ship.

Woodcocke
Imprisoned.

1613.

Benjamin
Joseph.

Fifteene  ships
Interlopers.

Hope  Island.

1 614.

Thirteen  Ships
and  two
Pinnasses
armed.

Eighteene
Dutch  ships.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

being  met  withall  by  the  Companies  Ships,  they  were
commanded  to  depart,  and  forbidden  to  haunt  or  frequent
those  parts  any  more  by  mee  Thomas  Edge.  There  was
also  a  Spanish  Ship  brought  thither,  by  one  Nicholas
Woodcocke  this  yeere,  a  man  formerly  imployed  by  the
sayd  Companie ;  which  Spanish  Ship  made  a  full  Voyage
in  Green-harbour.  But  Woodcocke  at  his  returne  into
England,  being  complained  of  by  the  Companie,  was
Imprisoned  in  the  Gatehouse  and  Tower,  sixteene
Moneths,  for  carrying  the  Spanish  Ship  thither.

In  the  yeere  1613.  the  Companie  set  out  for  Greenland
seven  sayle  of  Ships,  under  the  Command  of  Benjamin
Joseph,  and  Thomas  Edge,  the  Ships  departed  from
Gravesend  the  six  and  twentieth  of  Aprill,  and  arrived
in  Greenland  the  fourteenth  of  May.  This  yeere  the
English  had  the  Kings  Patent  under  the  broad  Seale  of
England,  to  forbid  all  Strangers  and  others,  but  the  Mus-
covia  Companie  to  use  the  Coast  of  Greenland.  The
English  met  with  fifteene  sayle  of  great  Ships,  two  of
them  were  Dutch  Ships,  the  rest  were  French,  Spanish,
and  of  the  Archdukes,  besides  foure  English  Interlopers.
The  Companies  Ships  forced  them  all  from  the  Coast  of
Greenland,  not  suffering  any  of  them  to  make  a  Voyage ;
they  tooke  from  the  two  Dutch  Ships  certayne  goods,
but  in  going  to  take  it,  they  neglected  their  owne  voyage,
which  was  damnified  thereby  to  the  value  of  three  or  foure
thousand  pounds.  For  their  Ships  came  home  dead
Fraight  two  or  three  hundred  Tunnes  by  that  meanes.
This  yeere  was  Hope  Hand  and  other  Hands  discovered,
to  the  Eastward  by  the  Companie.

In  the  yeere  following,  which  was  1614.  the  Companie
set  out  for  Greenland,  thirteene  great  Ships  and  two
Pinnasses,  under  the  Command  of  Benjamin  Joseph,  and
Thomas  Edge,  all  which  Ships  were  well  appointed  with
all  manner  of  Artillerie  for  defence,  and  other  necessaries
for  the  making  of  their  Voyage  and  for  Discoverie.  This
yeere  the  Hollanders  set  out  for  Greenland  eighteene  great
Ships,  whereof  foure  of  them  were  of  the  States  men  of

16

THOMAS EDGE

Warre,  Ships  with  thirtie  pieces  of  Ordnance  a  piece.
This  yeere  the  Dutch  stayed  and  fished  for  the  Whale  per-
force, they  were  farre  stronger  then  the  English,  which  was
a  cause  that  the  English  Ships  came  home  halfe  laden,
and  the  Dutch  with  a  poore  Voyage.  This  yeere  the
Companie  Discovered  unto  the  Northwards  of  Greenland,
as  farre  as  80.  Degrees  odde  Minuts,  in  the  Ship
Thomazen,  as  by  her  daily  Journall  doth  appeare  at  large ;
in  which  Ship  was  imployed  Thomas  Sherwin,  and  William
Baffin,  being  the  second  Voyage  they  were  imployed  into
those  parts.  And  some  Hands  to  the  Eastwards  of  Green-
land, were  Discovered  by  foure  Ships  imployed  in  that
service,  as  by  their  Journall  more  at  large  appeareth.

In  the  yeere  161 5.  the  Companie  set  out  for  Greenland,
two  sayle  of  great  Ships  and  two  Pinnasses,  under  the
Command  of  Benjamin  Joseph,  and  Thomas  Edge,  who
following  their  Instructions,  arrived  upon  the  Coast  of
Greenland  the  sixth  of  June,  which  they  found  to  bee
much  pestered  with  Ice,  and  being  foggie  weather,  they
runne  into  the  Ice,  so  farre,  that  they  were  fast  in  it
fourteene  dayes  before  they  could  cleare  themselves  of  it.
This  yeere  also  the  Hollanders  set  out  fourteene  sayle  of
ships,  whereof  three  of  them  were  States  Men  of  warre
of  great  force ;  they  killed  Whales  in  Horn-sound,  Bel-
sound,  and  Faire-haven,  and  stayed  upon  the  coast  of
Greenland  perforce,  as  they  did  the  former  yeere ;  whereby
the  English  came  home  halfe  laden.  This  yeere  also  the
King  of  Denmarke  sent  unto  Greenland  three  of  his  ships,
Men  of  warre,  to  demand  a  toll  of  the  English  ;  but  they
had  none  payd  them :  for  they  fell  with  the  Foreland  in
79.  degrees,  where  Captaine  Edge  was,  and  he  denyed
payment  of  any  toll,  alledging  that  the  Countrey  of  Green-
land belonged  to  the  King  of  England.  These  were  the
first  Danish  ships  that  ever  came  to  Greenland,  who  had
for  their  Pilot  one  James  Vaden,  an  Englishman  to  bring
them  thither.

In  the  yeere  161 6.  the  Company  set  out  for  Greenland
eight  Sayle  of  great  ships,  and  two  Pinnasses  under  the

A.D.

1616.

80.  Degrees
discovered.

Sherwin  and
Baffin.

161

[III.iii.467.]

Fast  in  Ice,  in
J  une  fourteene
dayes.

King  of
Denmarke
demands  Toll.

Un-English
English  to
serve  Dutch,
Spanish,
Dane,  against
their  ozvne.
1616.

XIII

r7

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1616.

command  of  Thomas  Edge,  who  following  his  course,
arrived  in  Greenland  about  the  fourth  of  June,  having
formerly  appointed  all  his  ships  for  their  severall
Harbours,  for  their  making  of  their  Voyage  upon  the
Whale,  and  having  in  every  Harbour  a  sufficient  number
of  expert  men,  and  all  provisions  fitting  for  such  a  Voyage.
This  yeere  it  pleased  God  to  blesse  them  by  their  labours,
that  they  full  laded  all  their  ships  with  Oyle,  and  left  an
over-plus  in  the  Countrey,  which  their  ships  could  not
take  in.  They  imployed  this  yeere  a  small  Pinnasse  unto
the  East-ward,  which  discovered  the  East-ward  part  of

Edges  Hand.  Greenland,  Namely,  the  Hand  called  now  Edges  Hand,
and  other  Hands  lying  to  the  North-wards  as  farre  as
seventie  eight  degrees,  this  Pinnasse  was  some  twentie
tunnes,  and  had  twelve  men  in  her,  who  killed  one
thousand  Sea-horses  on  Edges  Hand,  and  brought  all  their
Teeth  home  for  London.  This  was  the  first  yeere  that
ever  the  Company  full  laded  all  their  ships  sent  to  Green-
land, and  this  yeere  they  made  twelve  or  thirteene  hundred
tunnes  of  Oyle  in  Greenland  by  the  fourteenth  of  August.
All  the  ships  arrived  in  safety  in  the  River  of  Thames,  in
the  moneth  of  September.  The  Hollanders  had  this
yeere  in  Greenland  foure  ships,  and  those  kept  together
in  odde  places,  not  easily  to  bee  found,  and  made  a  poore
Voyage.

161 7.  In  the  yeare  161 7.  the  Company  set  out  for  Greenland

fourteene  Sayle  of  ships,  and  their  two  Pinnasses  furnished
and  manned  with  a  sufficient  number  of  men  and  all  other
provisions  fitting  for  that  Voyage,  under  the  command  of
Thomas  Edge.  They  departed  from  Gravesend,  about
the  foure  and  twentieth  of  Aprill,  and  arrived  upon  the
Coast  of  Greenland,  the  eight  and  twentieth  of  May  all
in  safety.

At  our  first  comming  upon  the  Coast  this  yeere,  I  met
with  a  Dutch  shippe  of  two  hundred  tunnes,  which  I
commanded  aboard,  the  Captaynes  name  was  Cocke,  who
told  mee  there  were  ten  Sayle  of  Dutch  upon  the  Coast,
and  two  men  of  Warre,  and  that  he  came  to  make  a

18

THOMAS EDGE  a.d.

1617.

Voyage  upon  the  Whale.  I  shewed  him  the  Kings  Com-
mission, and  commanded  him  by  vertue  thereof  to  depart
from  the  Coast,  willing  him  to  acquaint  the  rest  of  his
Countrey-men  with  it.  And  further,  I  told  him  that  if  I
met  with  him  or  any  Dutch  ships  heereafter,  I  would  take
from  them  what  they  had  gotten,  and  thus  having  enter-
tayned  him  aboord  with  me  courteously,  I  let  him  goe
without  taking  any  provisions  from  him.  At  his
departure  from  mee,  hee  promised  hee  would  but  stay  to
meet  with  two  of  his  Consorts,  which  hee  had  lost  com-
pany with  the  day  before,  and  then  hee  would  directly  goe
for  Flushing,  and  acquaint  his  Merchants,  that  the  English
Captayne  would  not  suffer  him  to  stay  upon  the  Coast  of
Greenland ;  but  it  seemeth  at  his  meeting  with  his
Consorts,  they  agreed  altogether  to  goe  into  Horne-sound,
and  there  they  killed  some  few  Whales  which  they  saved
in  Blubber.  I  understanding  of  it,  gave  order  to  my
Vice-admirall  when  he  was  laden,  that  he  should  goe  into
Horne-sound,  and  put  the  Flemmings  from  thence,  and
take  what  they  had  gotten,  which  he  did  accordingly  :  but
the  goods  he  tooke  from  the  Dutch  ships,  were  not  worth
to  the  English  twentie  pounds,  for  it  was  but  Blubber  and
Finnes,  which  they  had  no  need  of,  in  regard  they  had
killed  as  many  Whales  as  would  lade  their  ships,  and  more
then  they  could  carry  or  save.  This  yeere  the  English
made  nineteene  hundred  tunnes  of  Oyle  in  Greenland,
and  all  their  ships  arrived  at  home  in  the  moneths  of
August  and  September  in  safetie.  They  also  employed  a
ship  of  sixtie  tunnes,  with  twenty  men  in  her,  who
discovered  to  the  Eastward  of  Greenland,  as  farre  to  the
North-wards  as  seventie  nine  degrees,  and  an  Hand  which
he  named  Witches  Hand,  and  divers  other  Hands  as  by  the  Witches
Map  appeareth,  and  killed  store  of  Sea-horses  there,  and  lland'
then  came  into  Bel-sound :  where  hee  found  his  lading  of
Oyle,  left  by  the  Captayne  which  he  tooke  in.  This  yeere
the  Hull  men  set  a  small  ship  or  two  to  the  East-wards  of
Greenland,  for  the  Hull  men  still  followed  the  steps  of  the  Hu^  men-
Londoners,  and  in  a  yeere  or  two  called  it  their  Discovery,

l9

A.D.
1617.

l6l8.

Zealanders.

Marmaduke.
[III.iii.468.;

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

which  is  false  and  untrue,  as  by  Oath  in  the  Admiraltie  doth
appeare. The  Dutch  likewise  practise  the  same  course.

In  the  yeere  161 8.  some  difference  having  passed
betweene  the  English  and  some  Zelanders,  the  yeere
before,  in  King  James  his  Newland,  alias  Green-
land (which  Zelanders  were  never  in  those  parts  before,)
and  upon  promise  of  the  present  departure  were  per-
mitted to  passe  else-where  with  their  provisions  which
they  had,  and  comming  to  Cherrie  Hand,  and  meeting
with  one  English  Interloper  of  Hull ;  namely  Marma-
duke, he  animated  the  said  Zelanders  to  returne  back  for
Greenland,  alleaging  unto  them,  that  the  Companies  ships
were  in  each  severall  Harbour  busied  about  their  Voyage,
and  that  none  would  stirre  from  his  Harbours  to  molest
them,  and  that  they  being  three  ships  of  force,  might
returne  to  a  Harbour  in  that  Countrey,  called  Hornsound,
and  there  make  a  Voyage  perforce,  which  the  said
Zelanders  did  attempt,  and  there  manned  out  divers
Shallops,  having  many  Biskainers,  and  killed  store  of
Whales,  setting  those  English  at  nought.  Whereupon
Captayne  Thomas  Edge,  chiefe  Commander  of  the
English  Fleet,  having  laden  those  ships  that  were  in
Harbour  with  him,  and  presently  sent  for  William  Hely,
his  Vice-admirall,  giving  him  order  (who  was  not  then
full  laden,  but  in  good  forwardnesse)  to  fit  the  ship  he  was
in,  and  goe  to  Horne-sound  afore-said,  and  put  the  said
Zelanders  from  thence :  which  the  said  Hely  presently
put  in  execution.  But  before  his  comming  thither,  the
Zelanders  had  notice  by  an  English  Surgeon,  that  if  they
did  not  depart,  the  English  Vice-admiral  would  come
presently  and  force  them  from  thence.  Whereupon  the
Zelanders  laded  all  the  goods  they  had  in  two  ships,  and
sent  them  away  before  the  comming  of  the  English  Vice-
admirall,  leaving  one  ship  behind,  with  certaine  caske  of
Blubber,  and  two  Whales  and  an  halfe  uncut  up,  in  a
bravado  to  trye  if  the  English  would  meddle  with  them
or  not,  which  said  ship  and  goods  there  left,  were  surprized
by  the  said  English  Vice-admirall ; the  goods  detayned

20

THOMAS EDGE

A.D.

l6l8.

to  the  Companies  use ;  and  the  ship  restored  there  to  the
Zelanders ;  which  ship  having  in  her  ten  cast  Peeces,  and
sixtie  men,  and  having  intelligence  of  one  of  the  Com-
panies ships,  at  that  time  laden  in  the  Countrey  with  one
hundred  and  eightie  tunnes  of  Oyle,  the  Zelander  gave
out  he  would  lie  in  waite  and  take  that  ship  of  the
Companies  and  her  lading,  and  carrie  her  to  Zeland.  For
prevention  whereof,  the  said  Vice-admirall  tooke  sixe
Peeces  of  Ordnance,  and  some  Powder  from  the  ship  of
Zeland,  which  were  in  England  restored  to  the  owners.

In  which  said  yeere  161 8.  the  Zelanders  sending  over
for  restitution  of  the  goods  taken  from  them.  A  new
Company  commixt  of  English,  Scottish  and  Zelanders,
through  the  meanes  of  one  Sir  John  Conningham  Knight,  Sir  John
procured  a  grant  for  setting  forth  of  shipping  to  those  Cunningham.
parts,  which  might  utterly  have  overthrowne  and  spoiled
the  trade  of  the  first  discoveries  thereof :  and  to  that  end
divers  of  the  chiefe  men  were  hired  by  the  new  Company
that  had  been  servants  to  the  first  discoverie,  and  much
shipping  and  provisions  agreed  for.  Whereupon  there
was  an  agreement,  that  the  East  India  Adventurers  should  East  India
joyne  stocke  with  the  Moscovia  Adventurers,  and  be  one  Adventurers
joynt  Companie  for  that  trade  of  King  James  his  Wne%
Newland.  The  Scottish  Companies  Patent  thereupon
dissolved,  to  the  Moscovia  Companies  great  trouble  and
cost,  in  taking  of  all  the  provisions  they  had  bespoken,
and  paying  ready  money  for  the  same,  having  no  use
thereof,  but  great  part  spoyled,  and  came  to  little  good,
and  in  joyning  unfortunately  with  the  East  India
Companie,  in  which  yeere,  and  the  next  yeere  after,  their
Voyages  proved  very  ill,  and  they  were  losers,  and  much
vexed  and  crossed  in  their  proceedings,  to  the  great  dis-
heartning  and  detriment  of  the  Moscovia  Companie :  yet
that  yeere  161 8.  they  set  forth  thirteene  ships  and  two
Pinnasses,  under  the  command  of  the  said  Captaine
Thomas  Edge,  who  arriving  upon  the  coast  of  King  James
his  Newland,  in  the  beginning  of  June  separated  them-
selves to  severall  Harbours,  for  accomplishing  of  their

21

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1618.

Voyages,  the  most  part  being  ships  of  no  force.  Presently
after  in  all  Harbours  where  the  English  were,  arrived
great  store  of  ships  of  Zeland,  in  warlike  manner,  being
ships  of  great  force,  who  continued  in  the  same  Harbours
amongst  the  English,  setting  two  boats  to  the  English
one,  with  Biskainers,  with  a  full  purpose  to  drive  the
English  from  their  Harbours,  and  to  revenge  the  injurie
(as  they  termed  it)  done  them  the  yeere  before :  and  for
that  the  Scottish  Patent  was  dissolved ;  wherein  many
Flemmings  were  to  be  interested.  And  to  that  purpose
towards  the  latter  end  of  July,  ten  Saile  of  the  said
Zelanders,  being  at  a  Harbour  called  the  Foreland,  where
the  said  William  Heley,  Vice-admirall  of  the  English
Fleet  that  yeere,  was  in  the  ship  Pleasure,  Master  Robert
Salmon,  with  one  English  ship  and  a  Pinnasse  there  of  no
force,  set  upon  the  said  English  Vice-admirall,  threatning,
if  hee  would  not  yeeld  presently,  to  dispoyle  him  of  ship
and  goods,  not  permitting  to  take  his  men  aboord.  And
with  two  of  their  chiefest  ships  layd  the  English  Vice-
admirall  aboord,  there  being  but  seven  English  aboord
the  ship,  which  they  detayned  for  foure  and  twentie
houres,  the  Zelanders  not  daring  to  enter,  making  many
bravadoes  and  attempts,  thinking  to  make  the  English  to
yeeld,  and  stand  to  their  mercy,  which  was  refused.  And
thereupon  five  of  those  Zelanders  ships ;  namely,  the
Fortune  of  Camphire,  burthen  foure  hundred  tunnes,
with  eighteene  cast  Peeces,  besides  brasse  Bases  and
Murtherers,  Captaine  Hubreght  Cornelisson  ;  the  Saint
Peter  of  Flushing,  burthen  three  hundred  tunnes,  with
eighteene  cast  Peeces,  Captaine  Cornelius  Cooke ;  the
Salamander  of  Flushing,  two  hundred  tunnes,  fourteene
cast  Peeces,  Captaine  Adrian  Peeterson  ;  the  Cat  of  Delph
Haven,  with  sixteene  cast  Peeces,  Abraham  Leverstick
being  Captaine  and  Generall  of  the  Zelanders,  and
William  Johnson  of  Milliworth,  in  a  ship  with  fourteene
cast  Peeces :  all  which,  after  much  conference  passed
betwixt  the  said  Zelanders  and  William  Hely :  which
said  Zelanders  gave  out  many  uncivill  speeches  against

22

THOMAS EDGE  ad.

1619.

the Kings Majestie, not esteeming his Commission ;

alledging  that  there  was  good  law  in  Flanders  for  what

they  did. And  on  Sunday  the  nineteenth  of  July,  161 8. Dutch  assault

did  forcibly  set  upon  the  said  English  Vice-admirall,  five  the  English.

together  plying their  great Ordnance, small Shot, and

Murderers,  seeking  what  in  them  lay  to  kill  and  spoile  all

the  English  that  were  aboord : who  resisted  their  force,  [III.iii.469.]

and  in  spite  of  all  their  opposers  set  sayle,  saluting  them

with  their  Ordnance,  and  maintayning  fight  against  them

till  their  Sayles  were  shot  downe,  some  of  their  chiefe  men

slaine,  others  hurt,  and  their  ship  forced  either  to  anchor,

or  run  ashoare. The  Zelanders  used  the  English  very

unkindly,  rifling  their  ship  of  all  their  goods,  and  taking

away  all  their munition  and  artillery, not leaving  any

goods  ashoare,  but  burning  up  the  Caske,  not  permitting

the  English  to  take  in  fresh  water,  but  shot  their  Boat

thorow  in  going  ashoare,  and  minding,  as  they  protested

and  swore  unto  the  said  William  Hely,  that  they  would

take  and  ransacke  all  the  English  ships  in  the  Countrey,

and  carrie  the  English  Captaine  to  Zeland  : having  as

they said, that  yeere in those  parts 23. sayle of  well

appointed  ships,  onely  to  overthrow  all  the  English,  all

which  were  to  meet  in  Scotland  outward  bound. After

the  surprising  of  the  said  English  Vice-admirall,  all  the

rest  of  the  English  ships  being  dispersed  farre  asunder,

could  not  joyne  together,  being  in  all  places  hundred  by

the  Flemmings :  and  by  that  meanes  the  English  Voyage

utterly  overthrowne,  to  the  extraordinary  great  losse  and

charge  of  the  Companie, the  most  part  of  their  ships

returning  home  without  any  goods.

The  next  yeere  161 9.  the  said  Moscovia  and  East  India  161 9.
Companies  set  out  nine  ships,  and  two  Pinnasses,  under
the  command  of  the  said  Captaine  Edge,  in  which  yeere,
divers  Hollanders  being  in  the  Northermost  Harbour  in
the  Countrey,  employing  great  quantitie  of  Boats  in
chasing  the  Whale  there,  off  into  the  Sea,  put  them  by
their  usuall  course,  so  that  the  Companies  ships,  being
five  of  the  nine,  in  the  two  Northermost  Harbours,  were

23

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[619.

disappointed  of  their  Voyage  in  those  Harbours ;  and
thinking  to  better  it  in  the  other  Harbours ;  the  foresaid
William  Heley  sending  a  Shallop  with  ten  men  in  her,
with  Letters  to  the  said  Captaine  Edge,  of  their  ill  successe
to  the  Northwards,  the  said  Shallop  was  cast  away,  and  all
the  men  lost :  and  the  said  Captaine  being  laden,  sent  a
Pinnasse  to  the  said  Heley  in  August,  advertising  him  of
his  departure,  thinking  all  the  ships  to  the  Northward  had
been  laden,  wishing  them  to  haste  home.  By  meanes  of
which  Shallops  casting  away,  the  Voyage  was  greatly
hindred  to  the  Companies  exceeding  great  losse ;  in  that
the  Hollanders  did  as  then  bring  over  great  quantitie  of
Whale-oyle,  and  sold  it  at  under  rates,  so  that  the  Com-
panie  was  forced  to  keepe  theirs  on  their  hands  twelve
moneths,  and  sell  it  afterwards  at  a  very  small  price,  and
lost  one  ship  in  her  returne  homewards  neere  Yarmouth :
which  did  so  much  dishearten  the  said  Companie,  that
they  dissolved  againe,  and  thought  verily  to  have  adven-
tured no  more  thither  (their  successe  those  two  yeeres
past,  in  which  the  East  India  Companie  joyned  with  them
was  so  bad,  that  any  that  would  buy  their  provision  might
enjoy  the  benefit  of  the  Trade  there.)  At  which  time,
the  worthie  and  famous  Merchants  Adventurers  ;  namely,
Ralph  Freeman,  Benjamin  Deicrowe,  George  Strowd,
with  Captaine  Thomas  Edge,  all  brethren  of  the  Moscovia
Companie,  pitying  the  down-fall  of  so  worthie  a  Trafficke,
in  which  yeerely  so  many  poore  Land-men  received  great
comfort,  and  breeding  of  Mariners,  at  their  owne  charge
compounded  with  the  said  Companies,  and  tooke  that
1620.  Trade  into  their  hands.  In  which  yeere  1620.  they  set
out  seven  sayle  of  ships,  under  the  command  of  William
Goodlad,  and  the  said  William  Heley ;  in  which  said
yeere,  by  reason  of  great  store  of  Flemmings  and  Danes
in  the  foresaid  Northermost  Harbours,  their  ships  had
ill  successe  to  the  Northwards,  and  were  forced  to  passe
from  Harbour  to  Harbour  to  seeke  to  make  a  Voyage,
but  could  not,  and  so  returned  home  halfe  laden,  with
seven  hundred  tunnes  of  Oyle.

24

THOMAS EDGE  a.d.

1622.

The  next  yeere  1621.  the  foresaid  Adventurers  hired,  162 1.
and  set  forth  eight  ships,  seven  for  the  Whale  Voyage,
and  one  to  the  South-eastwards  upon  Discoverie,  under
the  command  aforesaid,  which  yeere  in  one  of  their
chiefest  Harbours  their  Voyage  was  overthrowne,  by
reason  of  the  foresaid  Flemmings  and  Danes,  being  to
the  Northward,  as  aforesaid,  putting  the  Whale  by  her
course,  and  in  all  places  in  the  Countrey  generally  dis-
heartned,  and  out  of  hope  to  have  made  any  Voyage  that
yeere,  whereby  to  have  earned  their  bread.  Yet  it  pleased
God  afterwards  in  some  Harbours,  Whales  hitting  in,  a
Voyage  was  performed,  and  1 100.  tunnes  of  Oyle  brought
home,  to  the  great  encouragement  of  the  said  Adven-
turers :  otherwise  that  Trade  had  beene  utterly
overthrowne.

The  yeere  following  1622.  the  said  Adventurers  at  1622.
their  owne  charge  set  forth  nine  ships,  under  the  command
aforesaid,  and  therein  employed  divers  Land-men,  many
of  which  afterwards  prove  good  Sea-men,  and  are  fit  for
any  Sea  service.  Eight  of  which  ships  were  appointed  to
make  their  Voyage  upon  the  Whale,  and  one  to  goe  on
discoverie  to  the  South-eastwards.  But  ill  successe
happening,  one  of  their  greatest  ships  of  burthen,  whereof
John  Masson  was  Master,  having  in  her  two  hundred  tuns
of  Caske,  Coppers,  and  divers  provisions,  was  unfor-
tunatly  cast  away  against  a  piece  of  Ice,  upon  the  coast  Shipzuracke.
of  King  James  Newland,  foure  leagues  from  the  shoare,
in  which  ship  perished  nine  and  twentie  men,  and  the
remainder  being  three  and  twenty,  were  by  the  providence
of  the  Almightie  miraculously  saved  in  a  Shallop,  coasting
thirtie  leagues  afterwards  to  meet  with  some  other  ships
to  find  some  succour,  having  neither  bread  nor  drinke,
nor  any  meanes  whereby  to  get  any  food  :  and  so  remayned
three  dayes  in  extreme  cold  weather,  being  in  a  small  Boat
ready  to  bee  swallowed  up  of  every  wave,  but  that
God  provided  better  for  them.  Many  of  which  people
their  hands  and  feet  rotted  off,  being  frozen,  and  they
died  in  the  Countrey. The  rest  of  the  ships  returned  [III.iii.470.]

25

A.D.
l622.

*The

ordinarie
growne
Whale.
Finnes.

Small  eyes.
Some  kinds
have  greater.
Stow  mentions
one  taken  on
Tenet  shoare,
the  eye  of
which  was  a
Cart-hade,
a  man  might
stand  in  the
hole  upright:
The  like  wee
may  ghesse  of
the  throat,  l$c.
Nature  being
herein

luxuriant,  and
diversified.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

home  laden,  bringing  in  them  1300.  tuns  of  Oyle,  yet
the  foresaid  chiefe  Harbour  could  not  performe  their  full
lading  there,  by  reason  of  the  Flemmings  and  Danes  being
to  the  Northwards,  as  aforesaid,  which  doth  yeerely  hinder
the  Companies  ships  from  making  a  Voyage.

§.  in.

The  Description  of  the  severall  sorts  of  Whales,
with  the  manner  of  killing  them :  Whereto  is
added  the  Description  of  Greenland.

He  Whale  is  a  Fish  or  Sea-beast  of  a  huge  bignesse,
about  sixtie  five  *  foot  long\  and  thirtie  five  foot

thicke,  his  head  is  a  third  part  of  all  his  bodies
quantitie,  his  spacious  mouth  contayning  a  very  great
tongue,  and  all  his  finnes,  which  we  call  Whale  finnes.
These  finnes  are  fastned  or  rooted  in  his  upper  chap,  and
spread  over  his  tongue  on  both  sides  his  mouth,  being  in
number  about  two  hundred  and  fiftie  on  one  side,  and  as
many  on  the  other  side.  The  longest  finnes  are  placed
in  the  midst  of  his  mouth,  and  the  rest  doe  shorten  by
their  proportionable  degrees,  backward  and  forwards,  from
ten  or  eleven  foot  long  to  foure  inches  in  length,  his  eyes
are  not  much  bigger  then  an  Oxes  eyes,  his  body  is  in
fashion  almost  round  forwards,  growing  on  still  narrower
towards  his  tayle  from  his  bellie,  his  tayle  is  about  twentie
foot  broad,  and  of  a  tough  solid  substance,  which  we  use
for  blockes  to  chop  the  Blubber  on  (which  yeelds  Oyle)
and  of  like  nature  are  his  two  swimming  finnes  (and  they
grow  forward  on  him.)

This  creature  commeth  oftentimes  above  water,
spouting  eight  or  nine  times  before  he  goeth  downe
againe,  whereby  he  may  be  descried  two  or  three  leagues
off.  Then  our  Whale-killers  presently  rowe  forth  from
the  place  where  they  stand  to  watch  for  him,  making  what
haste  they  can  to  meet  him :  but  commonly  before  they
come  neere  him,  he  will  be  gone  downe  againe,  and
continue  a  good  while  before  he  riseth  ;  so  that  sometimes

26

THOMAS EDGE

they  rowe  past  him.  Yet  are  they  very  circumspect,  ever
looking  round  where  they  may  espie  him  risen,  or  discerne
his  way  under  water,  which  they  call  his  Walke.  When
he  is  up  and  the  Shallops  neere  him,  they  rowe  towards
him  very  resolutely,  as  if  they  would  force  the  Shallop
upon  him,  if  hee  went  downe  under  water :  but  the
Harponyre,  who  standeth  up  in  the  head  of  the  Boat,
darteth  his  Harping-iron  at  the  Whale  with  both  his
hands,  so  soone  as  he  commeth  within  his  reach ;  where-
with the  Whale  being  strucken,  presently  descendeth  to
the  bottome,  and  therefore  doe  they  reare  out  a  rope  of
two  hundred  fathome,  which  is  fastned  to  the  Harping-
iron,  and  lieth  coyled  in  the  Boat :  And  they  let  him  have
as  much  of  the  rope  as  reacheth  to  the  bottome,  and  when
they  perceive  him  rising  they  hale  in  the  rope  to  get  neere
him,  and  when  the  Whale  commeth  up  above  water,  then
do  the  men  lance  him  with  their  lances,  either  out  of  one
Shallop  or  the  other ;  for  most  commonly  there  bee  two
Shallops  about  the  killing  of  one  Whale.  In  lancing  him
they  strike  neere  to  the  finnes  he  swimmeth  withall,  and
as  lowe  under  water  neere  his  bellie  as  conveniently  they
can  :  but  when  he  is  lanced,  he  friskes  and  strikes  with
his  tayle  so  forcibly,  that  many  times  when  hee  hitteth  a
Shallop  hee  splitteth  her  in  pieces ;  so  that  the  men  are
relieved  and  taken  in  by  another  Shallop  :  and  sometimes
he  striketh  so  fully  upon  them,  that  some  of  the  men  are
either  maymed,  or  killed  with  his  stroke.  Therefore  they
who  undertake  this  businesse  which  is  the  principall  thing
in  the  Voyage,  must  not  onely  bee  bold  and  resolute,
but  also  discreet  and  wary ;  otherwise  their  rash  forward-
nesse  may  prevent  them  of  their  expected  conquest ;
considering  they  have  no  shield  to  withstand  the  offended
beast  their  enemy,  but  onely  by  a  heedfull  warinesse  to
avoide  the  receiving  of  his  dangerous  stroke.  Swimming
is  also  requisite  for  a  Whale-killer  to  be  expert  in,
for  it  may  be  a  meanes  to  save  his  life,  when  he  hath
lost  his  Boat,  and  another  is  not  neere  presently  to  helpe
him.

A.D.
l622.

You  may  see
this  Story  of
theWhale-kill-
ing  presented
lively  in  the
Map,  which
Captaine
Edge  hath
liberally
added  to  this
Relation.

27

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

1622.

The  Whale  having  received  his  deadly  wound,  then  he
spouteth  bloud  (whereas  formerly  he  cast  forth  water)
and  his  strength  beginneth  to  fayle  him ;  but  before  he
dieth,  hee  will  sometimes  draw  the  Shallop  three  or  foure
miles  from  the  place  where  he  was  first  stricken  :  and  as
he  is  a  dying,  he  turneth  his  bellie  upwards,  which  lieth
uppermost  being  dead.  Then  they  fasten  a  rope  to  his
tayle,  and  with  the  Shallops,  one  made  fast  to  another,
they  towe  him  towards  the  ship  with  his  tayle  foremost.
Then  doe  they  lay  him  crosse  the  sterne  of  the  ship,
where  he  is  cut  up  in  this  manner ;  two  or  three  men  in
a  Boat  or  Shallop  come  close  to  the  side  of  the  Whale,
and  hold  the  Boat  fast  there  with  a  Boat-hooke ;  and
another  standing  either  in  the  Boat,  or  most  commonly
upon  the  Whale,  cutteth  the  fat  (which  we  call  Blubber)
in  square  pieces  with  a  cutting  Knife,  three  or  foure  foot
long.  Then  to  race  it  from  the  flesh,  there  is  a  Crane  or
Capsten  placed  purposely  upon  the  poope  of  the  ship,
from  whence  there  descendeth  a  rope  with  a  hooke  in  it ;
this  hooke  is  made  to  take  hold  on  a  piece  of  Blubber :
and  as  the  men  winde  the  Capsten,  so  the  cutter  with  his
long  knife  looseth  the  fat  from  the  flesh,  even  as  if  the
[III.iii.47 1.]  lard  of  a  Swine  were  to  be  cut  off  from  the  leane.  When
a  piece  is  in  order  cut  off,  then  let  they  lower  the  Crane,
and  let  downe  the  Blubber  to  flote  upon  the  water,  and
make  a  hole  in  some  part  of  it,  putting  a  rope  thorow  it ;
and  so  they  proceed  to  cut  off  more,  fastning  ten  or
twentie  pieces  together  to  bee  towed  a  shoare  at  one  time,
being  made  fast  to  the  sterne  of  a  Boat  or  Shallop.  These
pieces  being  thus  brought  unto  the  shoare  side,  they  are
drawne  by  one  and  one  upon  the  shoare  with  an  high
Crane,  or  carried  up  by  two  men  on  a  Barrow  unto  a
Stage,  there  to  be  cut  into  small  pieces  about  a  foot  long,
but  thin  :  then  it  is  carried  unto  the  choppers  by  two
boyes,  with  two  little  hand-hookes,  taking  in  each  hand  a
piece,  and  so  they  put  it  into  half-tubs  which  stand  behind
the  choppers,  out  of  which  the  choppers  take  it  up ;  who
stand  at  the  side  of  a  boat  which  is  raised  of  an  equall

28

THOMAS EDGE  a.d.

1622.

height  fit  for  the  furnace.  And  the  boat  being  fitted  with
all  things  necessarie  for  the  choppers,  they  place  the
chopping  blockes,  which  they  make  of  the  Whales  tayle,
and  the  Blubber  is  layd  ready  for  them,  as  they  use  it,  in
small  pieces  upon  the  boord  whereon  they  stand.  Then
the  choppers  take  it  up  with  hand-hookes,  and  lay  it  on
their  blockes,  and  chop  it  in  thin  pieces  (the  thinner  he
cuts  it,  the  better  it  is)  and  when  it  is  chopped,  they  put  it
off  the  blocke  downe  into  the  Shallop,  with  a  short
Paddle  made  like  a  Cole-rake  :  and  thus  doe  sixe  or  eight
men  stand  chopping  on  the  one  side  of  the  boat,  and  on
the  other  side  of  the  boat  about  two  or  three  yards  distant
are  the  Furnaces  and  Coppers  placed  and  heated.  Then
betweene  the  chopping  boat  and  the  Coppers,  is  layd  a
broad  thicke  planke,  on  which  standeth  a  hogshead,  which
contayneth  as  much  as  is  put  into  the  Copper,  at  one
time  for  one  boyling,  and  the  tub  being  emptied,  is  made
to  slide  unto  the  chopping  boat  againe,  being  there  filled
with  a  copper  ladle  againe,  and  put  into  another  Copper.
When  it  is  boyled  enough,  the  small  pieces  of  Blubber,
which  wee  call  Fritters,  will  looke  browne  as  if  they  were
fried.  Then  are  they  taken  out  with  copper  ladles,  and
some  of  the  Oyle  also  with  them,  and  put  into  a  Barrow
made  close  to  dreyne  the  Oyle,  which  standeth  over
another  Shallop,  that  is  set  on  the  back-side  of  the  Furnace
to  receive  the  Oyle  in,  and  as  soone  as  the  Fritters  are
taken  cleane  out  of  the  Copper,  then  presently  is  the  tub  of
small  Blubber  emptied  into  the  Copper  againe  to  be  also
boyled.

The  Boat  into  which  the  hot  Oyle  is  put  out  of  the
Coppers,  is  ever  kept  halfe  full  of  water,  which  doth  not
onely  coole  the  Oyle  before  it  runne  into  the  Caske,  but
also  is  a  cleanser  of  it  from  drosse,  which  descendeth  to
the  bottome  of  the  Boat.  Out  of  the  Oyle-boat  doth  the
Oyle  runne  thirtie  or  fortie  yards  in  Troughs  or  Gutters,
and  so  into  Buts  or  Hogsheads,  which  being  filled,  is
rolled  off  to  coole,  and  another  Caske  layd  to  fill,  and
when  there  is  any  quantitie  of  Oyle  made,  it  is  carried

29

A.D.
l622.

Whale  Finnes.

Eight  kinds  of

Whales

known.

1.  Grand  bay
Whale.

2.  Sarda.

3.  Trumpa.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

aboord  the  ship  in  rafts.  In  this  manner  is  the  Oyle
saved  and  prepared.

Now  concerning  the  Whale  Finnes,  the  Whales  head
being  cut  off  from  the  body  (as  hee  floteth  at  the  sterne  of
the  ship  where  hee  is  cut  up)  is  towed  by  a  Boat  as  neere
the  shoare  as  it  will  come  :  but  it  is  aground  in  twelve
or  thirteene  foot  water,  then  by  crabes  which  are  placed
on  land  it  is  drawne  on  land,  at  severall  times  when  the
water  is  at  highest,  so  neere  the  dry  shoare,  that  men  at
a  lowe  water  with  their  Boats  on,  cut  off  the  Blubber  and
Finnes,  which  by  the  crabes  are  drawne  on  shoare,  and
the  Finnes  are  with  Axes,  one  severed  from  another,  and
being  made  cleane,  are  packed  up  by  fiftie  in  a  bundle,
and  so  shipped.

There  are  eight  severall  kinds  of  Whales,  and  differing
the  one  from  the  other  in  goodnesse,  quantitie  and
qualitie.

The  first  sort  of  Whale  is  called  the  Grand-bay,  taking
his  name  from  Grand-bay  in  Newfoundland,  as  having
there  beene  first  killed  :  he  is  blacke  of  colour,  with  a
smooth  skinne,  and  white  underneath  the  chaps.  This
Whale  is  the  best  for  Oyle  and  Finnes  of  all  the  rest
(and  doth  yeeld  most  the  elder  it  growes.)  This  sort  of
Whale  doth  yeeld  about  an  hundred  hogsheads  of  Oyle,
and  some  five  hundred  Finnes.

The  second  sort  of  Whale  is  called  Sarda,  of  the  same
colour  as  the  former,  but  somewhat  lesser,  and  the  Finnes
likewise  lesser,  and  yeelds  in  Oyle  according  to  his  big-
nesse,  sometimes  seventie  hogsheads,  or  eightie  hogsheads.
This  Whale  hath  naturally  growing  upon  his  backe,  white
things  like  unto  Barnacles.

The  third  sort  of  Whale  is  called  Trumpa,  being  as  long
as  the  first,  but  thicker  forwards,  of  colour  more  gray  then
the  former,  having  but  one  spoute  in  his  head,  and  the
rest  have  all  two  ;  he  hath  in  his  mouth  teeth  about  a
span  long,  and  as  thicke  as  a  mans  wrist,  but  no  finnes  ;  his
head  is  bigger  then  the  two  former,  and  in  proportion
farre  bigger  then  his  bodie. In  the  head  of  this  Whale

30

THOMAS EDGE

A.D.
l622.

Spermaccete.

is  the  Permesitie,  which  lieth  there  in  a  hole  like  a  Well.
This  is  the  Whale  that  is  supposed  to  yeeld  the  Amber-
greese ;  There  taken  about  fortie  hogsheads  of  Oyle
besides  the  Permesitie.

The  fourth  sort  of  Whale  is  called  Otta  Sotta,  and  is 4-  0iia  SoUa-
of  the  same  colour  of  the  Trumpa,  having  finnes  in  his
mouth  all  white,  but  not  above  halfe  a  yard  long,  being
thicker  then  the  Trumpa,  but  not  so  long :  he  yeelds  the
best  Oyle,  but  not  above  thirtie  hogsheads.

The  fift  sort  of  Whale  is  called  Gibarta,  of  colour  blacke  5-  Gibarta.
like  the  two  first,  saving  that  it  hath  standing  upon  the
top  of  his  backe,  a  finne  halfe  a  yard  long.  This  Whale
is  as  bigge  as  the  first ;  his  fins  little  or  nothing  worth,  [III.iii.472.]
being  not  above  halfe  a  yard  long  :  and  hee  yeeldeth  about
twelve  hogsheads  of  Oyle,  all  which  his  backe  yeelds ;  as
for  his  bellie  it  yeelds  nothing  at  all.

The  sixt  sort  is  called  Sedeva,  being  of  a  whitly  colour,
and  bigger  then  any  of  the  former,  the  finnes  not  above
one  foot  long,  and  he  yeelds  little  or  no  Oyle.

The  seventh  is  called  Sedeva  Negro,  of  colour  blacke,
with  a  bumpe  on  his  backe ;  this  Whale  yeelds  neither
Oyle,  finnes,  nor  teeth,  and  yet  he  is  of  a  great  bignesse.

The  eight  sort  is  called  Sewria,  of  colour  as  white  as 8-  Sewria.
snow,  of  the  bignesse  of  a  Wherrie,  he  yeelds  not  above
one  hogshead  or  two  of  Oyle,  nor  any  finnes,  and  is  good
meate  to  be  eaten.

6.  Sedeva.

7.  Sedeva
Negro.

The  description of  Greenland.

GReenland  is  a  place  in  Nature  nothing  like  unto  the
Name :  for  certainly  there  is  no  place  in  the  World,
yet  knowne  and  discovered  that  is  lesse  greene  then  it.
It  is  covered  with  snow,  both  the  Mountaines  and  the
lower  Lands,  till  about  the  beginning  of  June,  being  very
Mountainous,  and  beareth  neither  grasse  nor  tree,  save
onely  such  as  grow  upon  the  Moores  and  heathie  grounds,
in  the  North  parts  of  England,  which  we  call  Heath,  or
Ling.  This  groweth  when  the  snow  melteth,  and  when
the  ground  beginneth  to  be  uncovered. And  on  this  doe

31

Antiphrastical
appellation.
I  have  found
this  description
of  Greenland,
with  other
notes,  written
by  Ro.
Fotherby.

*-D-  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1022.

Deere,  the  Deere  feed  in  the  Summer  time,  and  become  very  fat
therewithall  in  a  moneths  space,  but  how  they  live  in  the
Winter  time  it  is  not  easily  to  be  imagined.  For  seeing
at  the  end  of  May  wee  find  the  ground  all  covered  with
snow,  it  is  very  like,  that  in  the  time  of  Winter  there  is
no  part  bare,  where  any  thing  can  grow ;  especially  during
the  time  that  the  Sunne  is  altogether  depressed  under  the
horizon,  which  in  the  latitude  of  77.  degrees,  continueth
from  the  eighteenth  of  October  till  the  fourth  of
Februarie.  This  Countrey  by  all  probabilities  hath  never
been  inhabited  by  any  people ;  notwithstanding,  I  thinke
men  might  live  there,  carrying  thither  good  store  of
provision  of  victuals,  and  other  things  necessary  against
the  cold,  which  perhaps  will  be  vehement  in  the  Winter
time,  by  the  former  reasons ;  namely,  because  the  Sunne
remayneth  so  long  under  the  Horizon.

Neverthelesse,  there  will  not  be  any  continuance  of  dark-
nesse,  because  the  Sunne  in  his  greatest  declination  will
be  but  10.  degrees  under  the  Horizon,  at  this  time  of
his  being  in  the  South  of  the  Meridian  in  the  former
latitude  of  77.  degrees,  which  is  once  in  foure  and
twentie  houres ;  and  therefore  the  time  of  their  Noone
will  bee  much  lighter  then  our  Night  here  in  England,
when  the  dayes  are  at  the  longest ;  for  then  is  the  Sunne
15.  degrees  under  the  Horizon  at  midnight,  and  yet  the
greatest  darknesse  is  but  like  twi-light.  And  although  it
bee  a  generall  saying,  and  a  common  received  opinion,
that  the  further  North  the  greater  cold,  yet  experience
teacheth,  that  it  is  not  alwaies  true.  For  at  Mosco,  and
thereabouts  in  the  Winter  time,  there  is  extreme  frosts
and  cold  weather,  insomuch  that  oftentimes  men  are
brought  home  dead,  being  starved  with  cold ;  and  many
have  their  noses  and  eares  caused  to  fall  off,  through  the
extremity  of  the  piercing  aire :  yet  at  Edenborrow,  which
is  more  Northerly  by  one  degree  and  an  halfe,  and  in  all
places  neere  unto  it  the  aire  is  temperate,  and  the  cold
tolerable,  the  snow  never  lying  any  long  time  on  the
ground after it is fallen. Notwithstanding, wee have

32

#»

ilVhale  u  crlmarh about  6oJ~ooU  lortae

n fk<-  whale  comes  aboue  water  yjhallov ,
r  towards  htm  and  beiruj  tvithin  reach  ofhn

the  barpotner  darts  his  harpitiqiron  at  him  out  of  both
his  hands  and  heirigjafl  they  lance  him  to  death

The-  -yJUole  is  cut  up  as  hee  lyecjlotmj  croQe  the
jhrarne  ofajhirrp  the  blubber  is  tutforn  th/jlejhby
veeces  »  or+footc  hnj  anileinj^jafed

They -place  i..or  f.eegers  on  a  rue anJ y  choppvyloat
m  the  oneJdeanlAe  cxliy  hoj.tr  on  the  otherliJe  to  receiur
ovle  off  cogtrs.the  cnoptllull'cr  teinj  hoyled  is  taken  '  ^
'outoftheroprjunJ.putmtilkerhafketJorharo^e ' '
w  the  oyle  IS  Jre,lned  and  runes  mtojl cooler  w is ffu

""■IS  %CO,

The  manner  of  killing yScamptces

Hie  s

.. ; — ~w*

camorce  is  m  quantity  as  hiaq
san  oxe

rWbcn  the  whale  is  killed  hce  is  m  this  marpO.
Unved  to  the  flriprps  by  Uvoe  or  three  Jhal:
lops rnadeja'st  one  to  another  .  ,

._ju

frfrx^jfi^L^jj^Jfr-

%-^«4

"The  peeccs  ofiluiber  are  towed  to  thejhore
Jide  by  ajhallov  and  dnuvne  onjlore  by

'JTrus  the?  make  cleane  antljcrapej  iv%alf

MAP OF  GREENLAND, WITH THE MANNER  OF KILLING
WHALES, MORSES AND BEARES

ROBERT FOTHERBY

snow  remayning  all  the  yeere  long  in  divers  places  of
England,  but  the  reason  of  this  is,  because  the  aire  is  ever
warmest  neere  unto  the  Sea  shoare,  (as  Edenborrow
standeth)  and  contrariwise  the  cold  is  most  vehement  in
places  which  are  farthest  remote  from  the  Sea,  as  Mosco
is  situated.

All  the  Creatures  that  appeare  unto  us  upon  the  Land,
are  Deere,  Beares,  and  Foxes,  and  sundrie  sorts  of  wilde
Fowle,  as  Cuthbert  Duckes,  Willockes,  Stints,  Sea-
pigeons,  Sea-parrets,  Gulls,  Noddies,  &c.  The  Author
addes  a  discourse  of  sending  condemned  men  to  inhabite
there,  with  divers  projects  for  their  service  there,  for  the
further  discoverie  how  best  to  bee  effected,  for  such  things
as  are  most  necessary  for  this  employment  of  Whale-
killing,  &c.  but  because  experience  hath  given  best
instructions  already,  and  destructions  must  otherwise  be
prevented,  I  have  forborne  to  detayne  the  Reader  in  those
(otherwise  judicious)  speculations.

The  Southermost  part  of  Greenland  stands  in  76.
degrees  30.  minutes,  which  wee  call,  Point  Looke  out,
and  we  have  discovered  all  the  West  side  of  the  Land  as
farre  unto  the  Northwards  as  80.  degrees  odde  minutes :
in  which  compasse  wee  have  already  experience  of  sixe
or  eight  good  Harbours  for  the  killing  of  the  Whale ;
and  on  the  East  side  we  have  discovered  as  farre  as  78.
degrees,  finding  divers  Hands,  great  and  small,  yeelding
good  Harbours,  and  store  of  Whales,  and  Sea-horses ;
and  for  a  further  discovery  on  the  East  side,  I  am  per-
swaded  it  had  beene  farre  greater,  if  the  Dutch  had  not
so  disturbed  us  in  our  proceedings,  as  also  the  Hull-men,
who  ever  practised  to  follow  our  steps,  after  the  discoverie
within  one  yeere  or  two :  as  by  our  Masters  Journall
more  at  large  may  appeare.  The  best  actions  have  their
hindrances  and  crosses,  and  so  hath  this  had ;  for,  the
Dutch  have  beene  a  bane  to  this  Trade  and  Discoverie :
The  Hull-men  have  done  some  bad  service  in  this  Action,
for  they  were  the  first  that  carried  the  Dutch  to  the
Tutches,  as  by  Wivendens  Oath  and  Journall  appeares,
xtii  33  c

A.D.
l622.

Yet  in  China
even  neere  the
Sea,  and  farre
neerer  the
Sun,  betwixt
30.  and  40.
the  Winters
are  extreme.
R.  Foth.

A.D.

l622.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[III.iii.473.]  they  were  also  a  cause  of  that  bad  Voyage,  to  us  in  161 8.
in  that  they  animated  the  Flemmings  to  come  backe  to
Greenland  againe,  as  appeareth  in  this  Journall,  in  the
yeere  1617.  they  have  done  some  other  ill  services  against
us  as  well  as  the  Dutch,  but  in  regard  they  are  our
Country-men,  I  will  omit  and  wish  their  amendment,  and
pray  to  God  to  send  a  good  and  further  Discovery  to  bee
made  in  these  Northerne  parts. Amen.

y/

*Prolego~
mena.  ad
Hudsoni
Detect,  edit.
Amstelodami
per  Hes.
Gerard.
1611.

REader,  I  present  thee  here  three  admirable  Voyages
of  Discovery  made  by  the  Dutch,  no  whit  envying
their  due  prayse,  but  honouring  their  worthy  Acts  and
Arts.  They  have  formerly  beene  published  in  Dutch,  and
translated  by  W.  Philip.  I  have  heere  abbreviated  them,
as  my  use  is  with  others,  to  avoid  prolixitie.  The  Dutch
themselves  *  write  that  after  the  English  Russian  Trade,
one  Oliver  Buneli  moved  with  hope  of  gaine,  went  from
Enckhuysen  to  Pechora,  where  he  lost  all  by  shipwracke,
having  discovered  Costinsarca  in  Nova  Zemla.  These
Navigations  of  the  English,  and  that  of  Buneli,  and  the
hopes  of  China  and  Cathay,  caused  the  States  Generall  to
send  forth  two  shippes  under  the  command  of  Hugo
Linschoten,  to  the  Streights  of  Wey-gates,  and  two  others
under  William  Bernards,  by  the  perswasion  of  P.  Plancius
to  goe  right  Northwards  from  Nova  Zemla.  Linschot
went  fiftie  miles  beyond  the  Streights,  the  Northerly
winds,  and  late  season  forcing  him  backe.  Bernards
Journall  here  followeth,  of  that  and  his  two  later  Voyages,
the  two  later  written  by  one  employed  therein.

34

WILLIAM BARENTS

A.D.
1594.

Chap. III.

The  first  Navigation  of  William  Barents,  alias
Bernards  into  the  North  Seas ;  Written  by
Gerat  de  Veer.

T  is  a  most  certayne  and  an  assured  Asser-
tion, that  nothing  doth  more  benefit  and
further  the  Common-wealth  (specially
these  Countryes)  then  the  art  and  know-
ledge of  Navigation,  in  regard  that  such
Countreyes  and  Nations  as  are  strong  and
mightie  at  Sea,  have  the  meanes  and  ready

way  to  draw,  fetch,  and  bring  unto  them  for  their  mayn-
tenance,  all  the  principallest  commodities  and  fruits  of  the
Earth.

In  these  Navigations  we  must  not  be  dismayed  if  some
mislike,  or  if  we  cannot  perfect  a  Discovery  in  the  first,
second,  or  third  Voyage.  Alexander  Magnus  (after  he
had  wonne  all  Grecia,  and  from  thence  entred  into  little
and  great  Asia  ;  and  comming  to  the  farthest  parts  of
India,  there  found  some  difficultie  to  passe)  said,  If  wee  A  thing  not

had  not  gone  forward,  and  persisted  in  our  intent,  which  contlnue  >
o  '  r  >  cannot  bee

other  men  esteemed  and  held  to  be  impossible,  we  had  efected.
stil  remayned  and  stayed  in  the  entry  of  Cicilia,  where  as  All  things  are
now  we  have  over-runne  and  past  through  all  those  large  effected  in
and  spacious  Countreyes  : for  nothing  is  found  and  effected  convement
all  at  one  time,  neyther  is  any  thing  that  is  put  in  practice,
presently  brought  to  an  end. To  the  which  end,  Cicero
wisely  saith ; God hath given  us  some  things,  and  not
all  things,  that  our  Successors  also  might  have  some-what
to  doe. Therefore  we  must  not  leave  off,  nor  stay  our
pretence in the middle of  our proceedings,  as  long  as
there  is  any  commoditie  to  be  hoped,  and  in  time  to  bee
obtayned  :  for  that  the  greatest  and  richest  Treasures  are
hardliest  to be found. I  thought  good to  set  downe,
in  regard  that  I  have  undertaken  to  describe  the  three
Voyages  made  into  the  North  Seas,  in  three  yeeres,  one

35

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1594.

after  the  other  ; behind Norway,  and  along  and  about

Muscovia,  towards  the  Kingdome  of  Cathaia,  and  China :

whereof,  the  two  last,  I  my selfe holpe  to  effect ; and

yet  brought them not  to  the desired  end  that  we  well

hoped.

The  first  find- First,  to  shew  our  diligent,  and  most  toylesome  labour

tngts  hardy anc|  paines  taken,  to  find  out  the  right  course  ;  which  we

attempt  is could  not  bring  to  passe,  as  wee  well  hoped,  wished,  and

easier.  desired,  and  possible  might  have  found  it,  by  crossing  the

Seas,  if  we  had  taken  the  right  course  ;  if  the  Ice  &  the

shortnesse  of  time,  and  bad  crosses  had  not  hindered  us.  We

have  assuredly  found  that  the  onely  and  most  hinderance

to  our  Voyage,  was  the  Ice  that  we  found  about  Nova

Zembla, under 73. 74. 75.  and 76. degrees  ; and not

so  much  upon  the  Sea  betweene  both  the  Lands :  whereby

it  appeareth,  that  not  the  neerenesse  of  the  North-pole,

but  the  Ice  that  commeth  in  and  out  from  the  Tartarian

Sea,  about  Nova  Zembla,  caused  us  to  feele  the  greatest

cold. Therefore in regard that the neerenesse of  the

Pole  was  not  the  cause  of  the  great  cold  that  wee  felt,

if  wee  had  had  the  meanes  to  have  held  our  appointed  and

intended  course  into  the  North-east,  we  had  peradventure

found  some  entrance  :  which  course  wee  could  not  hold

from  Nova  Zembla,  because  that  there  we  entred  amongst

great  store  of  Ice ;  and  how  it  was  about  Nova  Zembla,  we

could  not  tel,  before  we  had  sought  it  ;  and  when  we  had

sought  it,  we  could  not  then  alter  our  course,  although

also  it  is  uncertayn,  what  we  should  have  done,  if  we  had

continued  in  our  North-east  course,  because  it  is  not  yet

found  out. But  it  is  true,  that  in  the  Countrey  lying

under  80.  degrees,  (which  we  esteeme  to  be  Greenland)

there  is  both  Leaves  and  Grasse  to  be  seene  :  Wherein,

[III.iii.474.]  such Beasts as feed of  Leaves and Grasse (as Harts,

A  comparison Hinds,  and  such  like  beasts)  live,  whereas  to  the  contrary

of  the  heate in Nova Zembla, there groweth neyther Leaves nor

U'h\ u'  Grasse,  and  there  are  no  beasts  therein  but  such  as  eate

under  the flesh,  as  Beares  and  Foxes,  &c. Although  Nova  Zembla

North  Pole, lyeth  4.  5.  and  6.  degrees  more  Southerly  from  the  Pole,

36

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1594.
then  the  other  Land  aforesaid. It  is  also  manifest,  that
upon  the  South  and  North-side  of  the  Line  of  the  Sunne
on  both  sides, betweene both the  Tropicks,  under 23.
degrees  and  an  halfe,  yet  it  is  as  hot,  as  it  is  right  under
the  Line. What  wonder  then  should  it  be,  that  about  the
North-pole  also,  and  as  many  degrees  on  both  sides,  it
should  not  be  colder  then  right  under  the  Pole  ? It  was
not  the  Sea,  nor  the  neerenesse  unto  the  Pole,  but  the
Ice  about  the  Land,  that  let  and  hindered  us  (as  I  said
before)  for  that  assoone  as  we  made  from  the  Land,  and
put more into  the Sea,  although it was much further
Northward,  presently  we  felt  more  warmth,  and  in  that
opinion our  Pilot  William Barents  dyed, who notwith-  The  resolute
standing  the  fearefull  and  intolerable  cold  that  he  indured,  intfn!  and
yet  he  was  not  discouraged,  but  offered  to  lay  wagers  with  °^//^m
divers  of  us,  that  by  Gods  helpe,  hee  would  bring  that  Barents.
pretended  Voyage  to  an  end,  if  he  held  his  course  North-
east from  the  North  Cape. But  I  will  leave  that,  and
shew  you  of  the  three  Voyages  aforesaid,  begunne  and  set
forth  by  the  permission  and  furtherance  of  the  Generall
States  of  the united  Provinces,  and  of  Prince  Maurice,
as Admirall of the Sea, and the rich Towne of
Amsterdam.

First,  you  must  understand,  that  in  Anno  1594.  there
was  foure  ships  set  forth  out  of  the  united  Provinces,
whereof  two  were  of  Amsterdam  ;  one  of  Zelandt,  and
one  of  Enckhuysen,  that  were  appointed  to  sayle  into
the  North  Seas,  to  discover  the  Kingdomes  of  Cathaia,
and  China ;  Northward  from  Norway,  Muscovia,  and
about  Tartaria,  whereof  William  Barents,  a  notable  skilfull
and  wise  Pilot,  was  Commander  over  the  ships  of  Amster-
dam, and  with  them  upon  Whit-sunday,  departed  from
Amsterdam,  and  went  to  the  Texell.  June  -

Upon  the  fifth  of  June  they  sayled  out  of  the  Texel,  The  particu-
and having  a good wind and faire weather,  upon  the  i*rs  beeing
three  and  twentieth  of  June,  they  arrived  at  Kilduin  in  knozvne  t0
Muscovia,  which  for  that  it  is  a  place  well  knowne  and  Mariners1 1
a  common  Voyage, I  will make no further  description  omit.

37

A.D.

I594-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

thereof.  The  nine  and  twentieth  of  June,  at  foure  of
the  clocke  in  the  after-noone,  they  set  sayle  out  of
Kilduin.

The  fourth  of  July  they  saw  Nova  Zembla,  lying  South-
east and  by  East  six  or  seven  miles  from  them,  where  they
had  blacke  durtie  ground  at  one  hundred  and  five  fathome.
William  Barents  tooke  the  height  of  the  Sunne  with  his
Crosse-staffe,  when  it  was  at  the  lowest,  that  is  betweene
North  North-east,  and  East  and  by  North,  and  found
it  to  be  elevated  above  the  Horizon  six  degrees  and  J.
part,  his  declination  being  12.  degrees  and  $$.  minutes,
from  whence  substracting  the  aforesaid  height,  there
resteth  sixteenth  degrees  and  35.  minutes,  which  being
substracted  from  90.  degrees,  there  resteth  73.  degrees
and  25.  minutes.  Then  they  woond  Eastward  and  sayled
five  miles,  East  and  by  South,  and  East  South-east,  and
past  by  a  long  point  of  Land  that  lay  out  into  the  Sea,

Langenes.  which  they  named  Langenes,  and  hard  by  that  point  East-
ward, there  was  a  great  Bay,  where  they  went  a  Land  with
their  Boat,  but  found  no  people.  From  Langenes  to  Cape
Bapo,  East  North-east  it  is  foure  miles.  From  Cape  Bapo
to  the  West  point  of  Lombsbay  North-east  and  by  North
are five miles, and betweene them both there  are  two

Lombsbay.  Creeks.  Lombsbay  is  a  great  wide  Bay,  on  the  West-
side  thereof  having  a  faire  Haven,  six,  seven,  or  eight
fathome  deepe,  blacke  sand,  there  they  went  on  shoare
with  their  Boat,  and  upon  the  shoare  placed  a  Beacon,
made  of  an  old  Mast  which  they  found  there  ;  calling  the
Bay  Lombsbay,  because  of  a  certayne  kind  of  Beares
so  called,  which  they  found  there  in  great  abundance.
The  East  point  of  Lombsbay,  is  a  long  narrow  point,  and
by  it  there  lyeth  an  Hand,  and  from  that  long  point
to  Sea-ward  in,  there  is  a  great  Creeke.  This  Lombsbay
lyeth  under  74.  degrees  and  \.  part.  From  Lombsbay  to
the  point  of  the  Admirals  Hand,  they  sayled  six  or  seven
miles,  North-east  and  by  North.  The  Admirals  Hand  is
not  very  faire  on  the  East-side,  but  a  farre  off  very  flat,  so
that  you  must  shunne  it  long  before  you  come  at  it,  it  is

38

Admirals
Hand.

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1594.
also  very  uneven,  for  at  one  casting  of  the  Lead  they  had
ten  fathome  deepe,  and  presently  at  another  casting  of  the
Lead  they  had  but  six  fathome,  and  presently  after  that
againe  ten,  eleven,  and  twelve  fathome,  the  streame  run-
ning hard  against  the  Flats.

From the  East-end of  the Admirals  Hand,  to Cape  Cape  Negro.
Negro,  that  is  the  Blacke  point,  they  sayled  about  five  Black  point.
or six  miles,  East North-east,  and  a  mile  without  the
Blacke point  it is seventy fathome deepe, the ground
slimy,  as  upon  Pamphius,  right  East-ward  of  the  Blacke
point,  there  are  two  sharpe  pointed  Hils  in  the  Creeke,
that  are  easie  to  be  knowne. The  sixt  of  July,  the  Sunne
being  North, they come right before  the  Blacke  point
with faire weather, this Blacke point lyeth under 75.
degrees and 20. minutes. From the Blacke point to
Williams  Hand, they sayled  seven  or  eight miles, East  Williams
North-east,  and  betweene  them  both  about  halfe  a  mile,
there  lay  a  small  Hand.

The  seventh  of  July  they  sayled  from  Williams  Hand,
and  William  Barents  tooke  the  height  of  the  Sunne,  with
his  Crosse-staffe,  and  found  it  to  be  elevated  above  the
Horizon  in  the  South-west  and  by  South  ^.  degrees  and
6.  minutes,  his  declination  being  22.  degrees  and  49.
minutes,  which  being  added  to  53.  degrees  and  6.  minutes,
make  75.  degrees  and  $$.  minutes.  This  is  the  right
height  of  the  Pole  of  the  said  Hand.  In  this  Hand  they
found  great  store  of  Driftwood,  and  many  Sea-horses  [III.iii.475/
being  a  kind  of  fish  that  keepeth  in  the  Sea,  having  very  Sea-horses,  or
great  teeth,  which  at  this  day  are  used  in  stead  of  Ivory  Morses-
or  Elephants  Teeth,  there  also  is  a  good  Road  for  ships,
at  twelve  and  thirteene  fathome  deepe  against  all  winds,
except  it  bee  West  South-west,  and  West-winds,  and
there  they  found  a  piece  of  a  Russia  ship,  and  that  day
they  had  the  wind  East  North-east,  mistie  weather.

The  ninth  of  July  they  entred  into  Beeren-fort,  upon  Beeren-fort
the  Road  under  Williams  Hand,  and  there  they  found  a  white  Beare,
white  Beare,  which  they  perceiving,  presently  entred  into  terri^e-
their  Boat,  and  shot  her  into  the  bodie  with  a  Musket,  but

39

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1594.

the  Beare  shewed  most  wonderfull  strength,  which  almost
is  not  to  be  found  in  any  beast,  for  no  man  ever  heard  the
like  to  be  done  by  any  Lion  or  cruell  beast  whatsoever :
for  notwithstanding  that  she  was  shot  into  the  bodie,  yet
she  leapt  up,  and  swamme  in  the  water,  the  men  that
were  in  the  Boat  rowing  after  her,  cast  a  Rope  about
her  necke,  and  by  that  meanes  drew  her  at  the  sterne  of
the  Boat,  for  that  not  having  seene  the  like  Beare  before,
they  thought  to  have  carryed  her  alive  in  the  ship,  and
to  have  shewed  her  for  a  strange  wonder  in  Holland ;
but  she  used  such  force,  that  they  were  glad  that  they
were  rid  of  her,  and  contented  themselves  with  her  skinne
only,  for  shee  made  such  a  noyse,  and  strove  in  such  sort,
that  it  was  admirable,  wherewith  they  let  her  rest  and
gave  her  more  scope,  with  the  Rope  that  they  held  her  by,
and  so  drew  her  in  that  sort  after  them,  by  that  meanes
to  wearie  her  :  meane-time,  William  Barents  made  neerer
to  her,  but  the  Beare  swamme  to  the  Boat,  and  with  her
fore-feet  got  hold  of  the  sterne  thereof,  which  William
Barents  perceiving,  said,  she  will  there  rest  her  selfe,  but
she  had  another  meaning,  for  she  used  such  force,  that
at  last  she  had  gotten  halfe  her  body  into  the  Boat,  where-
with the  men  were  so  abashed,  that  they  ranne  into  the
further  end  of  the  Boat,  and  thought  verily  to  have  beene
spoyled  by  her,  but  by  a  strange  meanes  they  were
delivered  from  her,  for  that  the  Rope  that  was  about
her  necke,  caught  hold  upon  the  hooke  of  the  Ruther,
whereby  the  Beare  could  get  no  further,  but  so  was
held  backe,  and  hanging  in  that  manner,  one  of  the
men  boldly  stept  forth  from  the  end  of  the  Scute,  and
thrust  her  into  the  bodie  with  a  half-pike ;  and  therewith
shee  fell  downe  into  the  water,  and  so  they  rowed  for-
ward with  her  to  the  shippe,  drawing  her  after  them,
till  shee  was  in  a  manner  dead,  wherewith  they  killed  her
out-right,  and  having  slayed  her,  brought  the  skin  to
Amsterdam.

The  twentieth  of  July,  they  sayled  out  of  Beeren-fort
from  Williams  Hand,  and  the  same  day  in  the  morning

40

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1594.

got  to  the  Hand  of  Crosses,  and  there  went  on  Land  with  Hand  of
their  Pinnasse,  and  found  the  Hand  to  be  barren,  and  full  Crosses-
of  Cliffes  and  Rocks,  in  it  there  was  a  small  Haven,
whereinto  they  rowed  with  their  Boat.  This  Hand  is
about  halfe  a  mile  long,  and  reacheth  East  and  West ;
on  the  West  end  it  hath  a  banke,  about  a  third  part  of  a
mile  long,  and  at  the  East  end  also  another  banke,  upon
this  Hand  there  standeth  two  great  Crosses,  the  Hand
lyeth  about  two  long  miles  from  the  firme  Land,  and
under  the  East-end  thereof  there  is  a  good  Road,  at  sixe
and  twentie  fathome  soft  ground ;  and  somewhat  closer  to
the  Hand  on  the  Strand,  at  nine  fathome  sandie  ground.

From  the  Hand  of  Crosses  to  the  point  of  Cape  Cape  Nassaw.
Nassaw,  they  sayled  East,  and  East  and  by  North  about
eight  miles :  it  is  a  long  flat  point  which  you  must  be
carefull  to  shunne,  for  thereabouts  at  seven  fathome  there
were  flats  or  shoales,  very  farre  from  the  Land  ;  it  lyeth
almost  under  76.  degrees  and  a  halfe.  From  the  West
end  of  Williams  Hand,  to  the  Hand  with  the  Crosses  is
three  miles,  the  course  North.  From  Nassaw  point
they  sayled  East  and  by  South,  and  East  South-east
five  miles,  and  then  they  thought  that  they  saw  Land
in  North-east,  and  by  East,  and  sayled  towards  it  Hve
miles  North-east  to  descrie  it,  thinking  it  to  bee  another
Land,  that  lay  Northward  from  Nova  Zembla,  but  it
began  to  blow  so  hard  out  of  the  West,  that  they  were
forced  to  take  in  their  Marsaile,  and  yet  the  wind  rose
in  such  manner,  that  they  were  forced  to  take  in  all  their
Sayles,  and  the  Sea  went  so  hollow,  that  they  were
constrayned  to  drive  sixteene  houres  together,  without
sayle,  eight  or  nine  miles  East  North-east.

The  eleventh  of  July  their  Boat  was  by  a  great  wave
of  the  Sea  sunke  to  the  ground,  and  by  that  meanes
they  lost  it,  and  after  that  they  drave  without  sayles  five
miles,  East  and  by  South ;  at  last  the  Sunne  being  almost
South-east,  the  wind  came  about  to  the  North-west,  and
then  the  weather  began  somewhat  to  cleere  up,  but  yet  it
was very mistie. Then they hoysed up their sayles

41

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1594.

againe  and  sayled  foure  miles  till  night,  that  the  Sunne
was  North  and  by  East,  and  there  they  had  sixtie  fathome
deepe,  muddie  ground,  and  then  they  saw  certayne  flakes
of  Ice,  at  which  time  upon  the  twelfth  of  July  they  woond
West,  and  held  North-west,  and  sayled  about  a  mile  with
mistie  weather,  and  a  North-west  wind,  and  sayled  up  and
downe  West  South-west  three  or  foure  miles,  to  see  if
they  could  find  their  Boat  againe :  after  that  they  woond
againe  with  the  wind,  and  sayled  foure  miles  South-east,
till  the  Sunne  was  South-west,  and  then  they  were  close
by  the  Land  of  Nova  Zembla,  that  lay  East  and  by
North,  and  West  and  by  South  ;  from  thence  they
woond  over  againe  till  noone,  and  sayled  three  miles,
North  and  by  West,  and  then  till  the  Sunne  was  North-
west, they  held  North-west  and  by  North  three  miles,
then  they  woond  East-ward  and  sayled  foure  or  five  miles
North-east  and  by  East.

The  thirteenth  of  July  at  night,  they  found  great  store
of  Ice,  as  much  as  they  could  descry  out  of  the  top,  that
lay  as  if  it  had  beene  a  plaine  field  of  Ice,  then  they  woond
Westward  over  from  the  Ice.
[III.iii.476.]  The  seventeenth  of  July,  William  Barents  tooke  the
height  of  the  Sunne  with  his  Astrolabium,  and  then  they
were  under  77.  degrees  and  a  J.  of  the  Pole,  and  sayled
Southward  six  miles,  and  perceived  the  firme  Land,  lying
South  from  them.  Then  they  sayled  till  the  nineteenth
of  July  in  the  morning,  West  South-west  sixe  or  seven
miles,  with  a  North-west  winde,  and  mistie  weather,  and
after  that  South-west  and  South-west  and  by  West  seven
miles,  the  Sunne  being  77.  degrees  5.  minutes  lesse.
Then  they  sayled  two  miles  South-west,  and  were  close
by  the  land  of  Nova  Zembla,  about  Cape  Nassaw.

The  five  and  twentieth  of  July,  they  were  so  inclosed
about  with  flakes  of  Ice,  that  out  of  the  top  they  could
not  discerne  any  thing  beyond  it,  and  sought  to  get
through  the  Ice,  but  they  could  not  passe  beyond  it.
At  night,  they  tooke  the  height  of  the  Sunne,  when  it
was  at  the  lowest  betweene  North  and  North-east, and

42

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1594.

North-east  and  by  North,  it  being  elevated  above  the
Horizon  6.  degrees,  and  £.  his  Declination  being  19.
degrees  50.  minutes,  now  take  6.  degrees  f.  from  19.
degrees  and  50.  minutes,  and  there  resteth  13.  degrees
5.  minutes,  which  substracted  from  90.  there  resteth  77.
degrees  lesse  5.  minutes.

The  sixe  and  twentieth  of  July  in  the  morning,  they
sayled  sixe  miles  South  South-east,  till  the  Sunne  was
South-west,  and  then  South-east  sixe  miles,  and  were
within  a  mile  of  the  land  of  Nova  Zembla,  and  came
againe  to  Cape  Trust.  Cape  Trust.

The  eight  and  twentieth  of  July,  the  height  of  the  Sun
being  taken  at  noone  with  the  Astrolabium,  it  was  found
to  be  elevated  above  the  Horizon  57.  degrees  and  6.
minutes,  her  Declination  being  19.  degrees  and  18.
minutes,  which  in  all  is  76.  degrees  and  24.  minutes,
they  being  then  about  foure  miles  from  the  land  of
Nova  Zembla,  that  lay  all  covered  over  with  Snow,  the
weather  being  cleare,  and  the  winde  East.

The  nine  and  twentieth  of  July,  the  height  of  the
Sun  being  taken  with  the  Crosse-staffe,  Astrolabium  &
Quadrant,  they  found  it  to  be  elevated  above  the
Horizon  32.  degrees,  her  declination  being  19.  degrees,
which  substracted  from  32.  there  resteth  13.  degrees  of  the
Equator,  which  being  substracted  from  90.  there  rested
77.  degrees,  and  then  the  nearest  North  point  of  Nova
Zembla,  called  the  Ice  point,  lay  right  East  from  them.  Ice  point.
There  they  found  certaine  Stones  that  glistered  like  gold,
which  for  that  cause  they  named  Gold-stones,  and  there  Gold  Stones.
also  they  had  a  faire  Bay  with  sandie  ground.

Upon  the  same  day  they  woond  Southward  againe,  and
sayled  South-east  two  miles  betweene  the  Land  and  the
Ice,  and  after  that  from  the  Ice-point  East,  and  to  the
Southward  sixe  miles  to  the  Hands  of  Orange ;  and  there  Orange
they  laboured  forward  betweene  the  Land  and  the  Ice,  Hands.
with  faire  still  weather,  and  upon  the  one  and  thirtieth
of  July  got  to  the  Hands  of  Orange.  And  there  went
to one  of  those Hands, where they  found about two

43

described.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I594-

hundred  Walrushen,  or  Sea-horses,  lying  upon  the  shoare

Morses  t0  Dast.  themselves  in  the  Sunne.  This  Sea-horse  is  a
wonderfull  strong  Monster  of  the  Sea,  much  bigger  then
an  Oxe,  which  keepes  continually  in  the  Seas,  having  a
skin  like  a  Sea-calfe  or  Seale,  with  very  short  hayre,
mouthed  like  a  Lion,  and  many  times  they  lye  upon  the
Ice;  they  are  hardly  killed  unlesse  you  strike  them  just
upon  the  forehead,  it  hath  foure  Feet,  but  no  Eares,  and
commonly  it  hath  one  or  two  young  ones  at  a  time.  And
when  the  Fisher-men  chance  to  finde  them  upon  a  flake  of
Ice  with  their  young  ones,  shee  casteth  her  young  ones
before  her  into  the  water,  and  then  takes  them  in  her
Armes  and  so  plungeth  up  and  downe  with  them,  and
when  shee  will  revenge  her-selfe  upon  the  Boates,  or
make  resistance  against  them,  then  she  casts  her  young
ones  from  her  againe,  and  with  all  her  force  goeth  towards
the  Boate  (whereby  our  men  were  once  in  no  small  danger,
for  that  the  Sea-horse  had  almost  stricken  her  teeth  into
the  sterne  of  their  Boate)  thinking  to  over-throw  it,  but
by  meanes  of  the  great  crie  that  the  men  made,  she  was
afraid,  and  swomme  away  againe,  and  tooke  her  young  ones
againe  in  her  armes.  They  have  two  teeth  sticking  out
of  their  mouthes,  on  each  side  one,  each  being  about  halfe
an  Ell  long,  and  are  esteemed  to  bee  as  good  as  any  Ivorie
or  Elephants  teeth,  specially  in  Muscovia,  Tartaria,  and
thereabouts  where  they  are  knowne,  for  they  are  as  white,
hard,  and  even  as  Ivorie.

The  Sea-horses  that  lay  bathing  themselves  upon  the
Land,  our  men  supposing  that  they  could  not  defend
themselves  being  out  of  the  water,  went  on  shoare  to
assaile  them,  and  fought  with  them,  to  get  their  Teeth
that  are  so  rich,  but  they  brake  all  their  Hatchets,  Cuttle-
axes,  and  Pikes  in  pieces,  and  could  not  kill  one  of  them,
but  strucke  some  of  their  Teeth  out  of  their  mouthes,
which  they  tooke  with  them  :  and  when  they  could  get
nothing  against  them  by  fighting,  they  agreed  to  goe
aboord  the  Ship,  to  fetch  some  of  their  great  Ordnance,  to
shoot  at  them  therewith ;  but  it  began  to  blow  so  hard,

44

WILLIAM BARENTS  ad.

1594.
that  it  rent  the  Ice  into  great  pieces,  so  that  they  were
forced  not  to  doe  it,  and  therewith  they  found  a  great
white  Beare  that  slept,  which  they  shot  into  the  bodie,
but  shee  ranne  awav,  and  entred  into  the  water  ;  the  men
following  her  with  their  Boate,  and  killed  her  out-right,
and  then  drew  her  upon  the  Ice,  and  so  sticking  a  halfe-
pike  upright,  bound  her  fast  unto  it,  thinking  to  fetch  her
when  they  came  back  againe,  to  shoot  at  the  Sea-horses
with  their  Ordnance,  but  for  that  it  began  more  and  more
to  blow,  and  the  Ice  therewith  brake  in  peeces,  they  did
nothing  at  all.

After that,  William Barents finding that hee could
hardly  get  through,  to  accomplish  and  end  his  pretended  [III.iii.477.]
Voyage, his men also beginning to bee wearie, and
would sayle no further, they all together agreed to
returne backe againe, to meet with the other Ships  Their  retume
that had  taken  their  course  to  the Wey-gates, or the  backe  againe.
Straights of Nassaw, to know what Discoveries they
had  made  there. The  first  of  August  they  turned  their
course  to  sayle  backe  againe  from  the  Hands  of  Orange ;
there William Barents  tooke the  height  of  the  Sunne,
it  being  under  71.  degrees  and  -^,  and  there  they  found
a  great Creeke, which  William Barents  judged to bee
the place  where  Oliver  Brunei  had beene  before,  called  Oliver
Costincsarch. From  the  Blacke  Hand  they  sayled  South,  Brunei!.
and South  and  by  East to another small point three  Bkcke  Iland'
miles,  on  which  point  there  stood  a  Crosse,  and  therefore
they called it the Crosse-point,  there  also  was a flat
Bay  and low water,  five,  six,  or seven fadome deepe
soft  ground. From  Crosse-point they  sayled along  by  Crosse-point.
the  land  South  South-east  foure  miles,  and  then  came  to
another  small  point,  which  behind  it  had  a  great  Creeke,
that  reached  Eastward  : This  point  they  called  the  fifth
point,  or Saint Laurence  point. From  the fifth  point
they sayled to the Sconce point three miles, South
South-east,  and  there  lay  a  long  blacke  Rocke  close  by
the land, whereon there stood a Crosse ; then they
entred  into  the  Ice  againe,  and  put  inward to  the Sea

45

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1594.

because  of  the  Ice.  Their  intent  was  to  sayle  along  the
coast  of  Nova  Zembla  to  the  Wey-gates,  but  by  reason
that  the  Ice  met  them,  they  woond  Westward,  and
from  the  ninth  of  August  in  the  Eevening,  till  the
tenth  of  August  in  the  Morning,  sayled  West  and  by
North  eleven  miles,  and  after  that  foure  miles  West
North-west,  and  North-west  and  by  West,  the  winde
being  North ;  in  the  Morning  they  woond  Eastward
againe,  and  sayled  untill  Eevening  ten  miles  East,  and
East  and  by  South ;  after  that  East,  and  East  and  by
North  foure  miles,  and  there  they  saw  land,  and  were
against  a  great  Creeke,  where  with  their  Boate  they
went  on  land,  and  there  found  a  faire  Haven  five
fathome  deepe,  sandie  ground.  This  Creeke  on  the
North  side  hath  three  blacke  points,  and  about  the
three  points  lyeth  the  road,  but  you  must  keepe  somewhat
from  the  third  point,  for  it  is  stonie,  and  betweene  the
second  and  third  point  there  is  another  faire  Bay,  for
North-west,  North,  and  North-east  windes,  blacke  sandie
Saint  ground. This  Bay  they  called  Saint  Laurence  Bay,  and

Laurence  Bay.  tnere tnev  tooke the height  of  the  Sunne,  which  was
70.  degrees  and  § .

From  Saint  Laurence  Bay,  South  South-east  two  miles
Sconce  point,  to  Sconce  point,  there  lay  along  blacke  Rocke  close  by
the  land,  whereon  there  stood  a  Crosse,  there  they
went  on  Land  with  their  Boat,  and  perceived  that
some  men  had  beene  there,  and  that  they  were  fled
to  save  themselves,  for  there  they  found  sixe  Sackes
with  Rye-meale  buried  in  the  ground,  and  a  heape  of
stones  by  the  Crosse,  and  a  Bullet  for  a  great  Piece,
and  thereabouts  also  there  stood  another  Crosse,  with
three  Houses  made  of  wood,  after  the  North  Countrey
manner :  and  in  the  houses  they  found  many  barrels
of  Pike-staves,  whereby  they  conjectured,  that  there
they  used  to  take  Salmons,  and  by  them  stood  five  or
six  Coffins,  by  Graves,  with  dead  mens  bones,  the
Coffins  standing  upon  the  ground  all  filled  up  with
stones; there also lay  a broken  Russia  ship,  the  Keele

46

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1594.

thereof  being fortie foure foot long, but they could

see no man  on  the  Land : it  is a  faire Haven  for  all

windes,  which they  called the  Meale-haven,  because  of

the Meale that they found there. From the blacke

Rocke or Cliffe with the Crosse, two miles South

South-east,  there  lay  a  low Hand  a  little  into  the  Sea;

from whence they sayled nine or ten miles South

South-east, there the height of the Sunne was 70.

degrees  and 50.  minutes,  when  it  was  South  South-west.

From  that Hand they sayled  along  by  the  Land foure

miles South-east and by South, there they came to

two Hands, whereof  the  uttermost  lay  a  mile  from  the

Land : those  Hands  they  called  Saint  Clara.

Then  they  entred  into  the  Ice  againe,  and  woond
inward  to  the  Sea  in  the  wind,  and  sayled  from  the
Hand  untill  Eevening,  West  South-west  foure  miles,
the  wind  being  North-west ;  that  Eevening  it  was  very
mistie,  and  then  they  had  eightie  fathome  deepe.

Then  againe  they  sayled  South-west  and  by  West,
and  West  South-west  three  miles,  there  they  had
seventie  fathome  deepe,  and  so  sayled  till  the  thirteenth
of  August  in  the  morning,  South-west  and  by  West
foure  miles,  two  houres  before  they  had  ground  at
fiftie  sixe  fathome,  and  in  the  morning  at  fortie  five
fathome,  soft  muddie  ground.  Then  they  woond  from
the  land  and  sayled  North,  and  North  and  by  East
foure  miles,  from  thence  they  woond  to  land  againe,
and  sayled  till  the  fourteene  of  August,  five  or  sixe
miles  South-west,  sayling  close  by  the  land,  which  (as
they  ghesse)  was  the  Hand  of  Colgoyen.  Colgoyen.

August  the  fifteenth,  the  Sun  being  South-west,
William  Barents  tooke  the  height  thereof,  and  found
it  to  bee  elevated  above  the  Horizon  35.  degrees,  his
Declination  being  14.  degrees  and  J.  so  that  as  there
wanted  $$.  degrees  of  90.  which  $$.  and  14.  degrees
J.  being  both  added  together,  made  69.  Degrees  15.
Minutes,  which  was  the  height  of  the  Pole  in  that
place, the wind being North-west, then they sayled

47

A.D.
1594.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Matfloe  and
Delgoy.
They  meet
with  their
companie.

two  miles  more  Eastward,  and  came  to  the  Hands
called  Matfloe  and  Delgoy,  and  there  in  the  morning
they  met  with  the  other  Ships  of  their  companie,  being
of  Zelandt  and  Enck-huysen,  that  came  out  of  Wey-
gates  the  same  day  there  they  shewed  each  other  where
they  had  beene,  and  how  farre  each  of  them  had  sayled
and  discovered.

The  Ship  of  Enck-huysen  had  past  the  Straights  of
Wey-gates,  and  said,  that  at  the  end  of  Wey-gates  hee
had  found  a  large  Sea,  and  that  they  had  sayled  fiftie  or
sixtie  miles  further  Eastward,  and  were  of  opinion  that
they  had  beene  above  the  River  Obi,  that  commeth
out  of  Tartaria,  and  that  the  Land  of  Tartaria  reacheth
North-eastward  againe  from  thence,  whereby  they
[III.iii.478.]  thought  that  they  were  not  farre  from  Cape  Tabin,
which  is  the  point  of  Tartaria,  that  reacheth  towards
the  Kingdome  of  Cathai,  North-east  and  then  South-
ward, and  so  thinking  that  they  had  Discovered  enough
for  that  time,  and  that  it  was  too  late  in  the  yeere  to
sayle  any  further,  as  also  that  their  Commission  was
to  discover  the  scituation,  and  to  come  home  againe
before  Winter,  they  turned  againe  towards  the  Wey-
gates,  and  came  to  an  Hand  about  five  miles  great,
lying  South-east  from  Wey-gates  on  the  Tartarian  side,
and  called  it  the  States  Hand,  there  they  found  many
Stones  that  were  of  Christall  Mountayne,  being  a  kind
of  Diamond.

When  they  were  met  together,  as  I  sayd  before,
they  made  signes  of  joy,  discharging  some  of  their
Ordnance,  and  were  merrie,  the  other  Ships  thinking
that  William  Barents  had  sayled  round  about  Nova
Zembla,  and  had  come  backe  againe  through  the  Wey-
gates  :  and  after  they  had  shewed  each  other  what  they
had  done,  and  made  signes  of  joy  for  their  meeting,
they  set  their  course  to  turne  backe  againe  for  Holland,
and  upon  the  sixteenth  of  August  they  went  under  the
Hands  of  Matsloe  and  Delgoy,  and  put  into  the  road,
because the wind was North-west, and lay till the

48

States  Hand.

WILLIAM BARENTS

eighteenth of  August. Then  they  set  sayle, and  came
to  the  Texel  the  sixteenth  of  September.

A.D.

1595-

Chap.  IIIL

A  briefe  Declaration  of  Barents  his  second  Navi-
gation, made  in  Anno  1595.  behinde  Norway,
Muscovia,  and  Tartaria,  written  by  Gerat  de
Veer.

He  foure  Ships  aforesaid,  being  returned
home  about  Harvest-time,  in  Anno
1594.  they  were  in  good  hope  that  the
Voyage  aforesaid  would  bee  done,  by
passing  along  the  Straights  of  Wey-
gates,  and  specially  by  the  report  made
by  the  two  Ships  of  Zelandt,  and  Enck-
huysen,  wherein  John  Huyghen  of  Linschoten  was
Committee,  who  declared  the  manner  of  their  travell
in  such  sort,  that  the  Generall  States  and  Prince
Maurice  resolved,  in  the  beginning  of  the  next  yeere
to  prepare  certayne  Ships,  not  onely  (as  they  went
before)  to  discover  the  passage,  but  to  send  certayn
Wares  and  Merchandizes  thither,  wherein  the  Merchants
might  lade  what  Wares  they  would,  with  certaine
Factors  to  sell  the  said  Wares,  in  such  places  as  they
should  arrive,  neither  paying  Fraight  nor  Custome.
Peter  Plantius  a  learned  Cosmographer,  being  a  great
furtherer  and  setter  forward  of  this  Voyage,  and  was
their  chiefe  Instructer  therein,  setting  downe  the  scitua-
tion  of  the  Coasts  of  Tartaria,  Cathaia,  &  China;  but
how  they  lye  it  is  not  yet  sufficiently  Discovered,  for
that  the  courses  and  rules  by  him  set  downe,  were  not
fully  effected,  by  meanes  of  some  inconveniences  that
fell  out,  which  by  reason  of  the  shortnesse  of  time
could  not  bee  holpen.

In Anno 1595. the Generall States of  the united
Provinces, and Prince Maurice, caused seven Ships  to
xiii  49  D

A.D.
I595-

James  Hems-
kerke  famous
for  the
Gibralter
exploit.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

bee  prepared  to  sayle  through  the  Wey-gates,  or  the
Straights  of  Nassaw,  to  the  Kingdome  of  Cathaia  and
China :  two  out  of  Amsterdam,  two  out  of  Zelandt,
two  out  of  Enck-huysen,  and  one  out  of  Rotterdam  :
sixe  of  them  laden  with  divers  kindes  of  Wares,  Mer-
chandizes, and  with  Money  and  Factors,  to  sell  the
said  Wares;  the  seventh  being  a  Pinnasse,  that  had
Commission,  when  the  other  Ships  were  past  about  the
Cape  de  Tabin  (which  is  the  furthest  point  of  Tartaria)
or  so  farre,  that  they  might  sayle  forth  Southward,
without  any  let  or  hinderance  of  the  Ice,  to  turne
backe  againe,  and  to  bring  newes  thereof:  and  I  being
in  William  Barents  Ship  that  was  our  chiefe  Pilot,  and
James  Hems-kerke  chiefe  Factor,  thought  good  to
write  downe  the  same  in  order,  as  it  is  hereafter
declared,  as  I  did  the  first  Voyage,  according  to  the
course  and  stretching  of  the  Land  as  it  lyeth.

First,  after  we  had  beene  mustered  at  Amsterdam,
and  every  man  taken  an  Oath,  that  was  then  purposely
ministred  unto  us ;  upon  the  eighteene  of  June  wee
sayled  to  the  Texel,  from  thence  to  put  to  Sea,  with
other  Ships  that  were  appointed  to  meet  us  at  a  certayne
day ;  and  so  to  begin  our  Voyage  in  the  name  of  God.
The  second  of  July  wee  set  sayle  out  of  the  Texel.  The
fifth  of  August,  the  North  Cape  lay  about  two  miles
East  from  us,  and  when  the  Sunne  was  North-west,  the
Mother  and  her  Daughters  lay  Southward  from  us  foure
miles.

The  seventeenth,  wee  saw  great  store  of  Ice,  all  along
the  Coast  of  Nova  Zembla,  and  casting  out  the  Lead,
had  75.  fathom  soft  ground.  After  that  we  held  divers
courses  because  of  the  Ice,  and  sayled  South-east  and
by  East,  &  South  South-east,  for  the  space  of  eighteene
miles,  till  the  eighteenth  of  August,  when  the  Sunne
was  East,  and  then  we  cast  out  the  lead  againe,  and
found  30.  fathome  soft  ground,  and  within  two  houres
after  that,  fathome,  red  sand,  with  small  shelles :  three
Glasses  after that  we  had ground at twentie  fathome,

50

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1595.
red  sand,  with  blacke  shels,  as  before :  then  wee  saw
two  Hands,  which  they  of  Enck-huysen  gave  the  names
of  Prince  Maurice,  and  his  Brother,  which  lay  from  us
South-east  three  miles,  being  low  Land,  and  then  wee
sayled  eight  miles,  till  the  Sun  was  South.  Then  we
sayled  East,  and  oftentimes  casting  out  the  lead,  we  found
twentie,  nineteene,  eighteene,  and  seventeene  fathome  [III.iii.479.]
deep,  good  ground  mixed  with  black  shels,  and  saw  the
Wey-gates  (the  Sunne  being  West)  which  lay  East  North-
east from  us  about  five  miles,  and  after  that  we  sayled
about  eight  miles-
Then  we  sayled  under  70.  degrees,  untill  we  came  to
the  Wey-gates,  most  part  through  broken  Ice,  and  when
we  got  to  Wey-gates,  we  cast  out  our  Lead,  and  for
a  long  time  found  thirteene  and  fourteene  fathome,  soft
ground,  mixed  with  blacke  shels,  not  long  after  that  we
cast  out  the  Lead  and  found  ten  fathome  deepe,  the  wind
being  North,  and  we  forced  to  hold  stifly  aloofe,  in  regard
of  the  great  quantitie  of  Ice,  till  about  mid-night,  then
were  forced  to  wind  Northward,  because  of  certaine  Rocks
that  lay  on  the  Southside  of  Wey-gates,  right  before  us,
about  a  mile  and  a  halfe,  having  ten  fathome  deepe  :  then
we  changed  our  course,  and  sayled  West  North-west  for
the  space  of  foure  Glasses,  after  that  we  woond  about
againe  East,  and  East  and  by  South,  and  so  entred  into
Wey-gates,  and  as  wee  went  in,  wee  cast  out  the  Lead,
and  found  seven  fathome  deepe,  little  more  or  lesse,  till
the  nineteenth  of  August,  and  then  the  Sunne  being
South-east,  we  entred  into  the  Wey-gates,  in  the  Road,
the  wind  being  North.  The  right  Channell  betweene  the
Image  point  and  the  Samuters  Land  was  full  of  Ice,  so  Image  point.
that  it  was  not  well  to  bee  past  thorow,  and  so  we  went  Samoyeds
into  the  Road  (which  we  called  the  Traen  Bay,  because  we  l™d'
found  store  of  Traen-oyle  there,)  this  is  a  good  Bay  for  the  raen  a^'
course  of  the  Ice,  and  good  almost  for  all  winds,  and  we
may  sayle  so  farre  into  it  as  we  will,  at  foure,  five,  and
three  fathome,  good  Anchor-ground,  on  the  East  side  it
is  deepe  water.

5i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I595-

The  twentieth  of  August,  the  height  of  the  Sunne
being  taken  with  the  Crosse-stafFe,  wee  found  that  it  was
elevated  above  the  Horizon  69.  degrees  21.  minutes,  when
it  was  South-west  and  by  South,  being  at  the  highest,  or
before  it  beganne  to  descend. The  one  and  twentieth  of

They  goe  on  August,  we  went  on  Land  within  the  Wey-gates  with
foure  and  fiftie  men,  to  see  the  situation  of  the  Countrey,
and  being  two  miles  within  the  Land  we  found  many
Vel-werck,  Traen,  and  such  like  Wares,  and  divers  foot-
steps of  men,  and  Deere  ;  whereby  wee  perceived  that
some  men  dwelt  there  abouts,  or  else  used  to  come
thither. And  to  assure  us  the  more  thereof,  wee  might

Images.  perceive  it  by  the  great  number  of  Images,  which  we
found  there  upon  the  Image  of  Beelthooke,  (so  called  by
us)  in  great  abundance,  whereof  ten  dayes  after  wee  were
better  informed  by  the  Samuters  and  the  Russians,  when
wee  spake  with  them.  And  when  wee  entred  further  into
the  Land,  we  used  all  the  meanes  we  could,  to  see  if  we
could  find  any  houses  or  men,  by  whom  we  might  be
informed  of  the  situation  of  the  Sea  there  abouts,  whereof
afterward  we  had  better  intelligence  by  the  Samuters  ;  that
told  us,  that  there  are  certayne  men  dwelling  on  the
Wey-gates,  and  upon  Nova  Zembla,  but  v/e  could  neither
find  men,  houses,  nor  any  other  things,  so  that  to  have
better  information,  wee  went  with  some  of  our  men
further  South-east  into  the  Land;  towards  the  Sea-side,
and  as  we  went,  we  found  a  path-way  made  with  mens
feet  in  the  Mosse  or  Marsh-ground,  about  halfe  knee
deepe,  for  that  going  so  deepe  we  felt  hard  ground  under
our  feet,  which  at  the  deepest  was  no  higher  then  our
shooes,  and  as  we  went  forward  to  the  Sea-coast,  we  were
exceeding  glad,  thinking  that  we  had  seene  a  passage  open,
where  we  might  get  through,  because  we  saw  so  little
Ice  there  :  and  in  the  Evening  entring  into  our  ship
againe,  we  shewed  them  that  newes.  Meane-time,  our
Master  had  sent  out  a  Boat  to  see  if  the  Tartarian  Sea  was
open,  but  it  could  not  get  into  the  Sea  because  of  the  Ice,
yet  they rowed  to the Crosse-point, and there let  the

52

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1595'
Boat  lye,  and  went  over  the  Land  to  the  West  point,  and
there  perceived  that  the  Ice  in  the  Tartarian  Sea,  lay  full
upon the  Russian Coasts, and in the  mouth  of  Wey-
gates.

The  three  and  twentieth  of  August  we  found  a  Lodgie,
or  Boat  of  Pitzore,  which  was  sewed  together  with  Bast
or  Ropes,  that  had  beene  Northward  to  seeke  for  some
Sea-horses  Teeth,  Traen,  and  Geese,  which  they,  fetcht
with  their  Boat,  to  lade  in  certaine  shippes  that  were
to  come  out  of  Russia  through  Wey-gates.  Which  ships
they  said  (when  they  spake  with  us)  were  to  sayle  into
the  Tartarian  Sea,  by  the  River  of  Oby,  to  a  place  called
Ugolita  in  Tartaria,  there  to  stay  all  Winter,  as  they  used
to  doe  every  yeere :  and  told  us  that  it  would  yet  bee
nine  or  ten  Weekes  ere  it  began  to  freeze  in  that  place,
and  that  when  it  once  beganne  to  freeze,  it  would  freeze
so  hard,  that  as  then  men  might  go  over  the  Sea  into
Tartaria  (along  upon  the  Ice)  which  they  called
Mermare.

The  foure  and  twentieth  of  August  in  the  morning
betimes,  we  went  on  board  of  the  Lodgie,  to  have  further
information  and  instruction  of  the  Sea,  on  the  Eastside
of  Wey-gates,  and  they  gave  us  good  instruction,  such
as  you  have  heard.

The  five  and  twentieth  of  August  we  went  againe
to  the  Lodgie,  and  in  friendly  manner  spake  with  them,
we  for  our  parts  offering  them  friendship  ;  and  then  they
gave  us  eight  fat  Geese,  that  lay  in  the  bottome  of  their
Boat:  we  desired  that  one  or  two  of  them  would  goe
with  us  aboard  our  ship,  and  they  willingly  went  with  us
to  the  number  of  seven;  and  being  in  our  ship,  they
wondred  much  at  the  greatnesse  and  furniture  of  our
ship ;  and  after  they  had  seene  and  looked  into  it  in
every  place,  we  set  Fish,  Butter  and  Cheese  before  them
to  eate,  but  they  refused  it  :  saying,  that  that  day  was
a  Fasting  day  with  them,  but  at  last  when  they  saw  some
of  our  Pickled  Herrings,  they  eate  them  both  heads,
tayles,  skinnes,  and  guts, and having  eaten  thereof,  we

53

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I595-
[III.iii.480.]  gave  them  a  small  Firkin  of  Herrings,  for  the  which  they
gave  us  great  thankes,  knowing  not  what  friendship  they
should  doe  us  to  requite  our  courtesie,  and  wee  brought
them  with  our  Pinnasse  into  the  Traen  Bay.  About
Noone  we  hoysed  up  our  Anchors  with  a  West  North-
west wind;  the  course  or  stretching  of  Wey-gates,  is
East  to  Cruis  point,  and  then  North-east  to  the  Twist
point,  and  somewhat  more  Easterly:  From  thence  the
Land  of  Wey-gates,  reacheth  North  North-east,  and
North  and  by  East,  and  then  North,  and  somewhat
Westerly,  wee  sayled  North-east  and  Eastward  two  miles,
by  the  Twist  point,  but  then  we  were  compelled  to  saile
backe  againe,  because  of  the  great  store  of  Ice,  and  tooke
our  course  to  our  Road  aforesaid  :  and  sayling  backe
againe  we  found  a  good  place  by  the  Crosse  point,  to
anchor  in  that  night.  The  six  and  twentieth  of  August
in  the  morning  we  hoysed  Anchor,  and  put  out  our
fork-saile,  and  so  sailed  to  our  old  Road,  and  there  to
stay  for  a  more  convenient  time.

The  eight  and  twentie,  nine  and  twentie,  and  thirtieth
of  August  till  the  one  and  thirtieth,  the  wind  for  the
most  part  was  South-west,  and  William  Barents  our
Captaine  sailed  to  the  South-side  of  Wey-gates,  and  there
went  on  Land,  where  we  found  certaine  WTildmen  (called
Samuters)  and  yet  not  altogether  wilde,  for  they  being
They  speake  twentie  in  number,  staid  and  spake  with  our  men,  being
with  but  nine  together,  about  a  mile  within  the  Land,  our  men

Samoyeds.  nQt  tnmking  to  find  any  men  there  (for  that  we  had  at
other  times  beene  on  Land  in  the  Wey-gates,  and  saw
none)  at  last,  it  being  mistie  weather,  they  perceived  men,
five  and  five  in  a  company,  and  wee  were  hard  by  them
before  we  knew  it  :  then  our  Interpretour  went  alone
towards  them  to  speake  with  them ;  which  they  perceiving,
sent  one  towards  us,  who  comming  almost  to  our  men,
tooke  an  Arrow  out  of  his  Quiver,  offering  to  shoot  at
him ;  wherewith  our  Interpretor,  being  without  Armes,
was  afraid,  and  cryed  unto  him,  saying  (in  Russian
speech ;) Shoote not, we are friends : which the  other

54

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1595.
hearing,  cast  his  Bow  and  Arrowes  to  the  ground,  there-
with giving  him  to  understand  that  he  was  well  content  to
speake  with  our  man :  which  done,  our  man  called  to
him  once  againe,  and  said  :  We  are  friends :  whereunto
he  made  answere  and  said ;  then  you  are  welcome :  and
saluting  one  the  other,  bended  both  their  heads  downe
towards  the  ground,  after  the  Russian  manner  :  this  done,
our  Interpretor  questioned  with  him,  about  the  situation
and  stretching  of  the  Sea  East-ward  through  the  Streights
of  Wey-gates;  whereof  he  gave  us  good  instruction,
saying :  that  when  they  should  have  past  a  point  of  land
about  five  daies  sailing  from  thence,  shewing  North-
eastward ;  that  after  that,  there  is  a  great  Sea  (shewing  Sea  open.
towards  the  South-east  upward,)  saying,  that  he  knew  it
very  well,  for  that  one  had  beene  there  that  was  sent
thither  by  their  King  with  certaine  Souldiers,  whereof
he  had  beene  Captaine.

The  manner  of  their  Apparell  is,  like  as  we  use  to  Samoyeds
paint  Wildmen,  but  they  are  not  wilde  ;  for  they  are  apparttt-
of  reasonable  judgement :  they  are  apparelled  in  Harts
skinnes  from  the  head  to  the  feet,  unlesse  it  be  the
principallest  of  them,  which  are  apparelled,  whether  they
be  men  or  women,  like  unto  the  rest,  as  aforesaid,  unlesse
it  be  on  their  heads,  which  they  cover  with  certaine
coloured  Cloth  lined  with  Furre :  the  rest  weare  Caps
of  Harts  or  Bucks  skinnes,  the  rough  side  outwards,
which  stand  close  to  their  heads,  and  are  very  fit.  They
weare  long  Haire,  which  they  pleate  and  fold,  and  let  it  Haire,  person,
hang  downe  upon  their  backes.  They  are  (for  the  most  stature-
part  all)  short  and  low  of  stature,  with  broad  flat  faces,
small  eyes,  short  legs,  their  knees  standing  outwards  ;  and
are  very  quicke  to  goe  and  leape.  They  trust  not
Strangers  ;  for  although  that  wee  shewed  them  all  the
courtesie  and  friendship  that  wee  could,  yet  they  trusted
us  not  much  :  which  wee  perceived  hereby,  that  as  upon
the  first  of  September  wee  went  againe  on  Land  to  them,
and  that  one  of  our  men  desired  to  see  one  of  their
Bowes  :  they  refused  it,  making  a  signe  that  they  would

55

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I595-

Their  King,  not  doe  it.  Hee  that  they  called  their  King,  had  Centinels
standing  abroad,  to  see  what  was  done  in  the  Countrey,
and  what  was  bought  and  sold  :  At  last,  one  of  our  men
went  neerer  to  one  of  the  Centinels,  to  speake  with  him,
and  offered  him  great  friendship,  according  to  their
accustomed  manner,  withall  giving  him  a  Bisket ;  which
he  with  great  thankes  tooke,  and  presently  eate  it ;  and
while  he  eate  it,  hee  still  lookt  diligently  about  him
on  all sides  what was  done.

Their  Sleds.  Their  Sleds  stood  alwayes  readie  with  one  or  two  Harts

in  them,  that  runne  so  swiftly  with  one  or  two  men  in
them,  that  our  Horses  are  not  able  to  follow  them.  One
of  our  men  shot  a  Musket  towards  the  Sea,  wherewith
they  were  in  so  great  feare,  that  they  ranne  and  leapt  like
mad  men :  yet  at  last,  they  satisfied  themselves,  when
they  perceived  that  it  was  not  maliciously  done  to  hurt
them  :  and  we  told  them  by  our  Interpreter,  that  we  used
our  Peeces  in  stead  of  Bowes ;  whereat  they  wondered,
because  of  the  great  blow  and  noyse  that  it  gave  and
made  :  and  to  shew  them  what  wee  could  doe  therewith,
one  of  our  men  tooke  a  flat  stone  about  halfe  a  handfull
broad,  and  set  it  upon  a  Hill  a  good  way  off  from  him  :
which  they  perceiving,  and  thinking  that  we  meant  some-
what thereby,  fiftie  or  sixtie  of  them  gathered  round  about
us :  and  yet  some-what  farre  off,  wherewith  hee  that  had
the  Peece,  shot  it  off,  and  with  the  Bullet  smote  the
stone  in  sunder :  whereat  they  wondred  much  more  then
before.

Departure.  After  that,  wee  tooke  our  leaves  one  of  the  other,  with

great  friendship  on  both  sides  ;  and  when  we  were  in  our
Pinnasse,  wee  all  put  off  our  Hats,  and  bowed  our  heads
unto  them,  sounding  our  Trumpet :  They  (in  their
manner)  saluting  us  also,  and  then  went  to  their  Sleds
againe.

[III.iii.481.]  And  after  they  were  gone  from  us,  and  were  somewhat
within  the  Land,  one  of  them  came  riding  to  the  shoare,

Image.  to  fetch  a  rough-hewed  Image,  that  our  men  had  taken

off  the  shoare,  and  carrved  into  their  Boate  :  and  when

56

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

I595-
hee  was  in  our  Boate,  and  perceived  the  Image,  he  made
us  a  signe  that  wee  had  not  done  well  to  take  away  that
Image  : Which we beholding, gave  it  to him againe  :
Which  when  hee  had  received,  he  placed  it  upon  a  Hill
right  by  the  Sea-side,  and  tooke  it  not  with  him,  but  sent
a  Sled  to  fetch  it  from  thence  :  and  as  farre  as  wee  could
perceive,  they esteemed that Image to be their  God  ;
for  that  right  over  against  that  place in  the  Wey-gates
which  wee  called  Beelthooke,  we  found  certayne  hundreds  Hundreds  of
of  such  carved Images,  all  rough  about  the  Heads,  being  tUskapen
somewhat  round,  and  in the  middle,  having  a  little  hill mages'
in  stead  of  a  Nose  ; and  about  the  Nose two  cuts,  in
place  of  Eyes  ; and  under  the  Nose  a  cut,  in  place  of
a  Mouth. Before  the  Images,  wee  found  great  store  of
Ashes,  and  bones  of  Harts  :  whereby  it  is  to  bee  supposed,
that  there  they  offered  unto  them.

The  second  of  September,  a  little  before  Sunne  rising,
wee  put  forth  an  Anchor  to  get  out,  for  that  the  winde
as  then  blew  South  South-west  ;  it  being  good  weather
to  get  out,  and  ill  weather  to  lye  still :  for  wee  lay  under
a  low  Banke.  The  Admirall  and  Vice-admirall  seeing  us
making  out,  began  also  to  hoyse  their  Anchors,  and  to
set  sayle.  When  wee  put  out  our  Focke-sayle,  the  Sunne
was  East  and  by  South  :  and  then  wee  sayled  to  the
Crosse-point,  and  there  wee  cast  Anchor  to  stay  for  the
Vice-admirals  Pinnasse  ;  which  with  much  labour  and
paines,  in  time  got  out  of  the  Ice,  by  often  casting  out
of  their  Anchor  :  and  in  the  Eevening  shee  got  to  us  :
in  the  Morning  about  two  houres  before  Sunne  rising
we  set  sayle,  and  by  Sunne  rising,  wee  got  within  a  mile
Eastward  of  the  Twist-point,  and  sayled  Northward  sixe
miles,  till  the  Sunne  was  South.  Then  wee  were  forced
to  wind  about,  because  of  the  great  quantitie  of  Ice,
and  the  Myst  that  then  fell,  at  which  time  the  winde
blew  so  uncertayne,  that  we  could  hold  no  course,  but
were  forced  continually  to  winde  and  turne  about,  by
reason  of  the  Ice,  and  the  unconstantnesse  of  the  winde,
together  with  myst, so  that  our  course  was  uncertayne,

57

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1595-

and  wee  supposed  that  we  had  sayled  Southward  up
towards  the  Samuters  Countrey,  and  then  held  our  course
South-west,  till  the  watchers  were  North-west  from  us  ;
then  we  came  to  the  point  of  the  States  Hand  lying
Eastward  about  a  Musket  shot  from  the  land,  having
13.  fathom  deepe.

The  fourth  of  September,  wee  hoysed  Anchor  because
of  the  Ice,  and  sayled  betweene  the  firme  Land  and  the

States  Hand.  States  Hand,  where  we  lay  close  by  the  States  Hand  at
foure  and  five  fathom  deepe,  and  made  our  Ship  fast  with
a  Cable  cast  on  the  shoare,  and  there  wee  were  safe  from
the  course  of  the  Ice,  and  divers  times  went  on  land
to  get  Hares,  whereof  there  were  many  in  that  Hand.
The  sixth  of  September,  some  of  our  men  went  on
shoare  upon  the  firme  land  to  seeke  for  Stones,  which
are  a  kinde  of  Diamond,  whereof  there  are  many  also
in  the  States  Hand  :  and  while  they  were  seeking  the
Stones,  two of  our  men  lying  together  in  one  place,  a

A  Beare  kills  great  leane  white  Beare  came  suddenly  stealing  out,  and

two  men.  caught  one  of  them  fast  by  the  necke,  who  not  knowing

what  it  was  that  tooke  him  by  the  necke,  cryed  out
and  sayd  ;  Who  is  that  that  pulls  mee  so  by  the  necke  ?
wherewith  the  other  that  lay  not  farre  from  him  ;  lifted
up  his  head  to  see  who  it  was,  and  perceiving  it  to  bee
a  monstrous  Beare,  cryed  out  and  sayd,  Oh  Mate  !  it
is  a  Beare,  and  therewith  presently  rose  up  and  ranne
away.

The  Beare  at  the  first  falling  upon  the  man,  bit  his
head  in  sunder,  and  suckt  out  his  blood,  wherewith  the
rest  of  the  men  that  were  on  the  Land,  being  about
twentie  in  number,  ranne  presently  thither,  either  to  save
the  man,  or  else  to  drive  the  Beare  from  the  dead  body  :

Herstoutnesse.  and  having  charged  their  Pieces  and  bent  their  Pikes,
set  upon  her,  that  still  was  devouring  the  man,  but
perceiving  them  to  come  towards  her,  fiercely  and  cruelly
ranne  at  them,  and  got  another  of  them  out  from  the
Companie  which  shee  tore  in  pieces,  wherwith  all  the  rest
ranne  away.

58

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1595.
We  perceiving  out  of  our  Ship  and  Pinnasse,  that
our  men  ranne  to  the  Sea-side  to  save  themselves,  with
all  speed  entred  into  our  Boates,  and  rowed  as  fast  wee
could  to  the  shoare  to  relieve  our  men.  Where  being
on  Land,  we  beheld  the  cruell  spectacle  of  our  two  dead
men,  that  had  beene  so  cruelly  killed  and  torne  in  pieces
by  the  Beare,  wee  seeing  that,  incouraged  our  men  to
goe  backe  againe  with  us,  and  with  Pieces,  Curtelaxes,
and  Halfe-pikes,  to  set  upon  the  Beare,  but  they  would
not  all  agree  thereunto  :  some  of  them  saying,  our  men
are  already  dead,  and  we  shall  get  the  Beare  well  enough,
though  we  oppose  not  our  selves  into  so  open  danger,
if  wee  might  save  our  fellowes  lives,  then  wee  would
make  haste,  but  now  we  need  not  make  such  speed,
but  take  her  at  an  advantage,  with  most  securitie  for
our  selves,  for  we  have  to  doe  with  a  cruell,  fierce,  and
ravenous  Beast.  Whereupon  three  of  our  men  went
forward,  the  Beare  still  devouring  her  prey,  not  once
fearing  the  number  of  our  men,  and  yet  they  were  thirtie
at  the  least  :  the  three  that  went  forward  in  that  sort,
were  Cornelius  Jacobson,  Master  of  William  Barents  ship,
William  Gysen,  Pylot  of  the  Pinnasse,  and  Hans  van
Nuflen,  William  Barents,  Purser  :  and  after  that  the  sayd
Master  and  Pylot  had  shot  three  times  and  mist,  the
Purser  stepping  somewhat  further  forward,  and  seeing
the  Beare  to  be  within  the  length  of  a  shot,  presently
levelled  his  Piece,  and  discharging  it  at  the  Beare,  shot
her  into  the  head  betweene  both  the  eyes,  and  yet  she
held  the  man  still  fast  by  the  necke,  and  lifted  up  her
head  with  the  man  in  her  mouth,  but  she  began  som-
what  to  stagger  wherewith  the  Purser  and  a  Scottish-man
drew  out  their  Curtelaxes  and  strooke  at  her  so  hard,  [III.iii.482.]
that  their  Curtelaxes  burst,  and  yet  she  would  not  leave
the  man,  at  last  William  Geysen  went  to  them,  and
with  all  his  might  strooke  the  Beare  upon  the  snout  They  kill  the
with  his  Piece,  at  which  time  the  Beare  fell  to  the  Seare-
ground,  making  a  great  noyse,  and  William  Geysen,
leaping  upon  her  cut  her  throat. The seventh  of  Sep-

59

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I595-

tember,  wee  buried  the  dead  bodies  of  our  men  in  the
States  Hand,  and  having  flayed  the  Beare,  carryed  her
Skin  to  Amsterdam.

The  ninth  of  September,  we  set  sayle  from  the  States
Hand,  but  the  Ice  came  in  so  thicke  and  with  such  force,
that  we  could  not  get  through,  so  that  at  Eevening  we
came  backe  againe  to  the  States  Hand,  the  winde  being
Westerly.  There  the  Admirall  and  the  Pinnasse  of
Rotterdam,  fell  on  ground  by  certayne  Rockes,  but  got
off  againe  without  any  hurt.

The  tenth  of  September,  we  sayled  againe  from  the
States  Hand  towards  the  Wey-gates,  and  sent  two  Boates
into  the  Sea,  to  certifle  us  what  store  of  Ice  was  abroad  :
and  that  Eevening  wee  came  all  together  into  Wey-gates,
Tzvist-point.  and  Anchored  by  the  Twist-point.  The  eleventh  of
September  in  the  Morning,  we  sayled  againe  into  the
Tartarian  Sea,  but  we  fell  into  great  store  of  Ice,  so
that  we  sayled  backe  againe  to  the  Wey-gates,  and
Anchored  by  the  Crosse-point,  and  about  midnight  we
saw  a  Russian  Lodgie,  that  sayled  from  the  Beelt-point
towards  the  Samuters  Land.  The  thirteenth  of  Septem-
ber, the  Sunne  being  South,  there  began  a  great  storme
to  blow  out  of  the  South  South-west,  the  weather  being
mistie,  melancholy,  and  snowie,  and  the  storme  increasing
more  and  more,  we  drave  through.

The  fourteenth  of  September,  the  weather  began  to
bee  somewhat  clearer,  the  winde  being  North-west,  and
the  storme  blowing  stiffe  out  of  the  Tartarian  Sea,  but
at  Eevening  it  was  faire  weather,  and  then  the  wind
blew  North-east,  the  same  day  our  men  went  on  the
other  side  of  Wey-gates,  on  the  firme  land,  to  take  the
depth  of  the  Channell,  and  entred  into  the  Bough  behind
the  Hands,  where  there  stood  a  little  House  made  of
wood,  and  a  great  fall  of  water  into  the  land.  The  same
Morning  we  hoysed  up  our  Anchor,  thinking  once  againe
to  try  what  wee  could  doe  to  further  our  Voyage,  but
our  Admirall  being  of  another  minde,  lay  still  till  the
fifteenth  of  September. The  same  day  in  the  Morning,

60

WILLIAM BARENTS

A.D.
1596.

the  winde  drave  in  from  the  East-end  of  the  Wey-gates,

whereby we were forced presently to hoyse Anchors,

and  the  same  day  sayled  out  from  the  West-end  of  the

Wey-gates, with all our Fleet, and made homewards

againe, and that day  past  by  the Hands  called Matfloe  Matfloe  and

and Delgoy, and that night we sayled twelve miles,  ^o/gpy.

North-west  and  by  West,  till Saturday  in the  morning,

and  then  the  winde  fell  North-east,  and  it  began  to  Snow.

We  saw  the  point  of  Candynaes,  lying  South-east  from

us,  and  then  wee  had  seven  and  twentie  fathom  deepe,

red  sand  with  blacke  shels.

The  nine  and  twentieth  of  September,  in  the  Eevening,
entred  into  Ward-house,  and  there  we  stayed  till  the
tenth  of  October.  And  that  day  we  set  sayle  out  of
Ward-house,  and  upon  the  eighteenth  of  November,  we
arrived  in  the  Maes.

Chap. V.

The  third  Voyage  Northward  to  the  Kingdomes
of  Cathaia,  and  China,  in  Anno  1596.  Written
by  Gerat  de  Veer.

§.  1.

What  happened  to  them  at  Sea,  before  they  came
to  build  their  House.

Fter  that  the  seven  Ships  (as  I  said  before)
were  returned  backe  againe  from  their
North  Voyage,  with  lesse  benefit  then
was  expected,  the  Generall  States  of  the
United  Provinces  consulted  together,  to
send  certayne  Ships  thither  againe,  a  third
time,  to  see  if  they  might  bring  the  said
Voyage  to  a  good  end,  if  it  were  possible  to  bee  done :
but  after  much  Consultation  had,  they  could  not  agree
thereon,  yet  they  were  content  to  cause  a  Proclamation
to  be  made,  that  if  any, either  Townes,  or Merchants,

61

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

were  disposed  to  venture  to  make  further  search  that
way,  at  their  owne  charges,  if  the  Voyage  were  accom-
plished, and  that  thereby  it  might  be  made  apparant,
that  the  sayd  passage  was  to  be  sayled,  they  were  content
to  give  them  a  good  reward,  in  the  Countries  behalfe,
naming  a  certayne  summe  of  money.  Whereupon  in  the
beginning  of  this  yeere,  there  was  two  Ships  rigged  and
set  forth  by  the  Towne  of  Amsterdam,  to  sayle  that
Voyage,  the  men  therein  being  taken  up  upon  two  Con-
ditions :  viz.  What  they  should  have  if  the  Voyage
were  not  accomplished,  and  what  they  should  have  if
they  got  through,  and  brought  the  Voyage  to  an  end,
promising  them  a  good  reward  if  they  could  effect  it,
thereby  to  encourage  the  men,  taking  up  as  many  un-
married men  as  they  could,  that  they  might  not  bee
disswaded  by  meanes  of  their  Wives  and  Children  to
leave  off  the  Voyage.  Upon  these  Conditions,  those
[III.iii.483.]  two  Ships  were  ready  to  set  sayle  in  the  beginning  of
May.  In  the  one,  Jacob  Heemskerke  Hendrickson,  was
Master  and  Factor  for  the  Wares  and  Merchandizes ;
and  William  Barents  chiefe  Pylot.  In  the  other,  John
Cornelison  Riip,  was  both  Master  and  Factor  for  the
goods  that  the  Merchants  had  laden  in  her.

The  fifth  of  May,  all  the  men  in  both  the  Ships  were

Mustered,  and  upon  the  tenth  of  May,  they  sayled  from

Amsterdam,  and  the  thirteenth  of  May  got  to  the  Ulie.

The  thirtieth  of  May  we  had  a  good  winde,  and  sayled

North-east,  and  wee  tooke  the  height  of  the  Sunne  with

our  Crosse-staffe, and  found  that  it  was  elevated  above

the  Horizon  47.  degrees  and  42.  minutes,  his  Declination

J!*e'  n  was  21.  degrees  and  42.  minutes,  so  that  the  height  of

andfoure tne  ^°^e  was  ^9*  degrees  and  24.  minutes.

Rain-bowes.  The first  of  June we  had  no  night,  and the  second

The  like  hath  Qf  June  we  had  the  winde  contrarie,  but  upon  the  fourth

^TknTabmt  °f  JUne  We had  a  Sood whlde'  °Ut °f  the  WeSt North"
the  time  this west>  and  sayled  North-east. And  when  the  Sunne  was

worke  entred about  South  South-east,  wee  saw  a  strange  sight  in the

the  Presse. Element :  for  on  each  side  of  the  Sunne  there  was  another

62

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1596.
Sunne,  and  two  Raine-bowes,  that  past  cleane  thorow  the
three  Sunnes,  and  then  two  Raine-bowes  more,  the  one
compassing  round  about  the  Sunnes,  and  the  other  crosse
thorow  the  great  rundle ;  the  great  rundle  standing  with
the  uttermost  point,  elevated  above  the  Horizon  28.
degrees :  at  noone  the  Sunne  being  at  the  highest,  the
height  thereof  was  measured,  and  wee  found  by  the
Astrolabium,  that  it  was  elevated  above  the  Horizon
48.  degrees  and  43.  minutes,  his  Declination  was  22.
degrees  and  17.  minutes,  the  which  being  added  to  48.
degrees  43.  minutes,  it  was  found  that  wee  were  under
71.  degrees  of  the  height  of  the  Pole.

John  Cornelis  ship  held  aloofe  from  us,  and  would  not
keepe  with  us,  and  would  hold  no  course  but  North  North-
east, for  they  alledged,  that  if  wee  went  any  more  Easterly,
that  then  we  should  enter  into  the  Wey-gates,  but  wee
being  not  able  to  perswade  them,  altered  our  course  one
point  of  the  Compasse,  to  meet  them,  and  sayled  North-
east and  by  North,  and  should  otherwise  have  sayled
North-east,  and  somewhat  more  East.

The  fifth,  wee  saw  the  first  Ice,  which  we  wondered  Ice.
at,  at  the  first,  thinking  that  it  had  beene  white  Swannes,
for  one  of  our  men  walking  in  the  Fore-decke,  on  a
sudden  began  to  cry  out  with  a  loud  voyce,  and  said ;  that
hee  saw  white  Swannes :  which  wee  that  were  under
Hatches  hearing,  presently  came  up,  and  perceived  that
it  was  Ice  that  came  driving  from  the  great  heape,  showing
like  Swannes,  it  being  then  about  Eevening,  at  midnight
we  sayled  through  it,  and  the  Sunne  was  about  a  degree
elevated  above  the  Horizon  in  the  North.

The  sixth,  about  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-noone,
wee  entred  againe  into  the  Ice,  which  was  so  strong  that
we  could  not  passe  through  it,  and  sayled  South-west  and
by  West,  till  eight  Glasses  were  runne  out,  after  that  we
kept  on  our  course  North,  North-east,  and  sayled  along
by  the  Ice.

The  seventh,  we  tooke  the  height  of  the  Sunne,  and
found  that  it  was  elevated  above  the  Horizon  38.  degrees

63

A.D.
1596.

Greene  water.

Beares,  or
Cherie-Iland.

Egges.

Danger
escaped.

Variation  of
the  Compasse.

Great  white
Beare.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  38.  minutes,  his  Declination  being  22.  degrees  38.
minutes;  which  being  taken  from  38.  degrees  38.  minutes,
wee  found  the  Pole  to  bee  74.  degrees ;  there  we  found
so  great  store  of  Ice,  that  it  was  admirable  :  and  we  sayled
along  through  it,  as  if  we  had  past  betweene  two  Lands.
The  water  being  as  greene  as  Grasse,  and  we  supposed
that  we  were  not  farre  from  Greenland,  and  the  longer
we  sayled,  the  more  and  thicker  Ice  we  found.  The
eight  of  June,  we  came  to  so  great  a  heape  of  Ice,  that
we  could  not  sayle  through  it.

The  ninth  of  June,  we  found  the  Hand  that  lay  under
74.  degrees  and  30.  minutes,  and  as  we  ghest,  it  was  about
five  miles  long.  The  tenth,  we  put  out  our  Boate,  and
therewith  eight  of  our  men  went  on  Land,  and  as  we
past  by  John  Cornelisons  ship,  eight  of  his  men  also  came
into  our  Boate,  whereof  one  was  the  Pilot.  Then  William
Barents  asked  him,  whether  we  were  not  too  much  West-
ward, but  hee  would  not  acknowledge  it :  whereupon  there
passed  many  words  betweene  them,  for  William  Barents
sayd,  he  would  prove  it  to  bee  so,  as  in  truth  it  was.
The  eleventh,  going  on  Land,  we  found  great  store  of
Sea-Mewes  Egges  upon  the  shoare,  and  in  that  Hand  we
were  in  great  danger  of  our  lives:  for  that  going  up  a
great  Hill  of  Snow,  when  wee  should  come  downe  againe,
we  thought  we  should  all  have  broken  our  neckes,  it  was
so  slipperie,  but  we  sate  upon  the  Snow  and  slid  downe,
which  was  very  dangerous  for  us,  to  breake  both  our
armes  and  legges,  for  at  the  foot  of  the  Hill  there  was
many  Rockes,  which  we  were  likely  to  have  fallen  upon,
yet  by  Gods  helpe  we  got  safely  downe  againe.  Meane
time  William  Barents  sate  in  the  Boate,  and  saw  us  slide
downe,  and  was  in  greater  feare  then  we,  to  behold  us  in
that  danger.  In  the  said  Hand,  we  found  the  varying  of
our  Compasse,  which  was  13.  degrees,  so  that  it  differed
a  whole  point  at  the  least :  after  that  wee  rowed  aboord
John  Cornelisons  ship,  and  there  we  eate  our  Egges.

The  twelfth  in  the  morning,  we  saw  a  white  Beare,
which  wee  rowed  after  with  our  Boate,  thinking  to  cast  a

64

her.

tin

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1596.

Rope  about  her  necke  ;  but  when  we  were  neere  her,  she  was
so  great,  that  we  durst  not  doe  it,  but  rowed  backe  againe
to  our  Ship  to  fetch  more  men  and  our  Armes,  and  so
made  to  her  againe  with  Muskets,  Harquebusses,  Hal-
berts,  and  Hatchets.  John  Cornelisons  men  comming
also  with  their  Boate  to  helpe  us:  and  so  being  well
furnished  of  men  and  weapons,  we  rowed  with  both  our  [III.iii.484.]
Boates  unto  the  Beare,  and  fought  with  her  while  foure  Fight  with
Glasses  were  runne  out,  for  our  Weapons  could  doe  her
little  hurt :  and  amongst  the  rest  of  the  blowes  that  we
gave  her,  one  of  our  men  strooke  her  into  the  backe  with
an  Axe,  which  stucke  fast  in  her  backe,  and  yet  shee
swamme  away  with  it;  but  we  rowed  after  her,  and  at
last  we  cut  her  head  in  sunder  with  an  Axe,  wherewith
she  dyed  :  and  then  wee  brought  her  into  John  Corneli-
sons ship,  where  we  flayed  her,  and  found  her  Skinne  to  Beares  ski?,
bee  twelve  foot  long:  which  done,  we  eate  some  of  her  ll- foot  long.
flesh ;  but  wee  brookt  it  not  well.  This  Hand  we  called
the  Beare-Iland.

The  thirteenth  we  left  the  Hand,  and  sayled  North,  and
somewhat  Easterly,  the  winde  being  West,  and  South-
west, and  made  good  way :  so  that  when  the  Sunne  was
North,  wee  ghest  that  we  had  sayled  sixteene  miles  North-
ward from  that  Hand.

The  fourteenth,  when  the  Sunne  was  North,  we  cast  out
our  Lead  one  hundred  and  thirteene  fathome  deepe,  but
found  no  ground,  and  so  sayled  forward  till  the  fifteenth
of  June,  when  the  Sunne  was  South-east,  with  mistie  and
drisling  weather,  and  sayled  North,  and  North  and  by
East :  about  Eevening  it  cleared  up,  and  then  we  saw  a
great  thing  driving  in  the  Sea,  which  we  thought  had
beene  a  Ship :  but  passing  along  by  it,  we  perceived  it
to  bee  a  dead  Whale,  that  stunke  monstrously ;  and  on  Dead  Whale.
it  there  sate  a  great  number  of  Sea-mewes:  At  that  time,
wee  had  sayled  twentie  miles.

The  sixteenth,  with  the  like  speed  we  sayled  North  and
by  East,  with  mistie  weather ;  and  as  we  sayled,  we  heard
the  Ice  before  we  saw  it ;  but  after,  when  it  cleared  up,
xiii  65  E

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

we  saw  it,  and  then  woond  off  from  it,  when  as  we  ghest  we
had  sayled  thirtie  miles.  The  seventeenth  and  eighteenth,
we  saw  great  store  of  Ice,  and  sayled  along  by  it,  untill  we
came  to  the  point,  which  we  could  not  reach,  for  that  the
wind  was  South-east,  which  was  right  against  us,  &  the
point  of  Ice  lay  Southward  from  us:  yet  wee  lavered  a
great  while  to  get  beyond  it,  but  we  could  not  doe  it.
The  nineteenth,  we  saw  Land  againe,  then  we  tooke  the
height  of  the  Sun,  and  found  that  it  was  elevated  above
the  Horizon  33.  degrees  and  37.  minutes:  her  Declination
being  23,  degrees  and  26.  minutes:  which  taken  from
the  sayd  33.  degrees  and  37.  minutes,  wee  found  that  we
80.  Degrees  were  under  80.  degrees  and  II.  minutes:  which  was  the
and  1 1  height of  the  Pole  there. This Land was very  great,

minutes.  ancj  we  sayiec[  Westward  along  by  it,  till  we  were  under

79.  degrees  and  a  halfe,  where  we  found  a  good  road,
and  could  not  get  neare  to  the  Land,  because  the  winde
blew  North-east,  which  was  right  off  from  the  Land :  the
Bay  reacheth  right  North  and  South  into  the  Sea.

The  twentie  one,  we  cast  out  our  Anchor,  at  eighteene
fathome  before  the  Land ;  and  then  we  and  John  Corneli-
sons  men,  rowed  on  the  West-side  of  the  Land,  and  there
fetched  Balast :  and  when  we  got  on  boord  againe  with
Another  fight  our  Balast,  we  saw  a  white  Beare  that  swamme  towards
with  a  white  our  snip  ;  whereupon  we  left  off  our  worke,  and  entering
in  the  Boate  with  John  Cornelisons  men,  rowed  after  her,
and  crossing  her  in  the  way,  drove  her  from  the  Land,
wherewith  she  swamme  further  into  the  Sea,  and  we
followed  her;  and  for  that  our  Boate  could  not  make
good  way  after  her,  we  manned  our  Scute  also,  the  better
to  follow  her :  but  shee  swam  a  mile  into  the  Sea ;  yet  we
followed  her  with  the  most  part  of  all  our  men  of  both
Ships  in  three  Boats,  and  strooke  oftentimes  at  her,  cutting
and  hewing  her,  so  that  all  our  Armes  were  most  broken
in  pieces.  During  our  fight  with  her,  shee  strooke  her
Clawes  so  hard  in  our  Boate,  that  the  signes  thereof  were
seene  in  it ;  but  as  hap  was,  it  was  in  the  fore-head  of
our  Boate : for  if  it  had  beene  in  the  middle  thereof,  she

66

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1596.

had  (peradventure)  over-throwne  it,  they  have  such  force
in  their  Clawes :  At  last,  after  we  had  fought  long  with
her,  and  made  her  wearie  with  our  three  Boates  that  kept
about  her,  we  overcame  her  and  killed  her :  which  done,
we  brought  her  into  our  ship,  and  flayed  her :  her  Skinne  Beares  skin
being  thirteene  foot  long.  After  that,  we  rowed  with  our  ^l- foot  long.
Scute,  about  a  mile  inward  to  the  Land,  where  there  was
a  good  Haven,  and  good  Anchor  ground,  on  the  East-
side  being  sandie,  there  wee  cast  out  our  Lead,  and  found
sixteene  fathom  deepe,  and  after  that,  ten,  and  twelve
fathome,  and  rowing  further,  we  found  that  on  the  East-
side  there  was  two  Hands,  that  reached  Eastward  into  the
Sea:  on  the  West-side  also  there  was  a  great  Creeke  or
River,  which  shewed  also  like  an  Hand.  Then  we  rowed
to  the  Hand  that  lay  in  the  middle,  and  there  we  found
many  Red  Geese-egges,  which  we  saw  sitting  upon  their  Red  Geese
Nests,  and  drove  them  from  them,  and  they  flying  away,  EiSes-
cryed,  red,  red,  red  :  and  as  they  sate  we  killed  one  Goose
dead  with  a  stone,  which  we  drest  and  eate,  and  at  least
sixtie  Egges,  that  wee  tooke  with  us  aboord  the  ship,  and
upon  the  two  and  twentieth  of  June,  we  went  aboord
our  ship  againe.

Those  Geese  were  of  a  perfit  Red  colour,  such  as  come  Red  Geese
into  Holland  about  Weiringen,  and  everie  yeere  are  there  ^reed  their
taken  in  abundance,  but  till  this  time  it  was  never  knowne  "JSSl  g^'*'
where  they  hatcht  their  Egges,  so  that  some  men  have  Degrees  in
taken  upon  them to  write,  that  they  sit  upon  Trees  in Greenland.
Scotland,  that  hang  over  the  Water,  and  such  Egges  as  Fa^e  °f
fall from them downe into the Water become young
Geese,  and  swim  there  out  of  the  water ;  but  those  that
fall  upon  the  Land  burst  in  sunder,  and  are  lost :  but  this
is  now  found  to  bee  contrary,  and  it  is  not  to  be  wondred
at,  that  no  man  could  tell  where  they  breed  their  Egges,
for  that  no  man that ever  wee knew, had  ever  beene
under 80. Degrees : nor  that  Land under 80.  degrees,
was  never  set  downe  in any  Card,  much  lesse  the  red
Geese  that  breed  therein.

It  is  heere  also  to  bee  noted,  that  although  that  in  this  Note,

67

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

[III.iii.485.]  land  which  we  esteeme  to  be  Greenland,  lying  under
80.  Degrees,  and  more,  there  groweth  Leaves  and  Grasse,
and  that  there  are  such  Beasts  therein  as  eate  grasse,
as  Harts,  Buckes,  and  such  like  beasts  as  live  thereon,
yet  in  Nova  Zembla  under  76.  Degrees,  there  groweth
neither  Leaves  nor  Grasse,  nor  any  Beasts  that  eate
grasse  or  leaves  live  therein,  but  such  Beasts  as  eate
Flesh,  as  Beares  and  Foxes  :  and  yet  this  Land  lyeth
full  4.  Degrees  from  the  North  Pole,  further  then  Green-
land aforesayd  doth.

The  three  and  twentieth,  wee  hoysted  Anchor  againe,
and  sayled  North-westward  into  the  Sea  ;  but  could  get
no  further,  by  reason  of  the  Ice  ;  and  so  we  came  to
the  same  place  againe  where  we  had  layne,  and  cast
Anchor  at  eighteene  fathome  :  and  at  Eevening  being
at  Anchor,  the  Sunne  being  North-east,  and  somewhat
more  Eastward,  wee  tooke  the  height  thereof,  and  found
it  to  be  elevated  above  the  Horizon  13.  degrees  and
10.  minutes,  his  Declination  being  23.  degrees  and  28.
minutes  :  which  substracted  from  the  height  aforesaid,
resteth  10.  degrees  and  18.  minutes,  which  being  sub-
stracted from  90.  degrees,  then  the  height  of  the  Pole
there  was  79.  degrees  and  42.  minutes.

After  that,  we  hoysted  Anchor  againe,  and  sayled  along
by  the  West  side  of  the  Land,  and  then  our  men  went
on  Land,  to  see  how  much  the  Needle  of  the  Compasse
Beare  assaults  varyed  : Meane time there came a great  white Beare
them.  swimming towards the Ship,  and  would have climbed

up  into  it,  if  we  had  not  made  a  noyse  ;  and  with  that
wee  shot  at  her  with  a  Piece,  but  she  left  the  ship,  and
swam  to  the  Land,  where  our  men  were  :  which  we
perceiving,  sayled  with  our  ship  towards  the  Land,  and
gave  a  great  shout ;  wherewith  our  men  thought  that  wee
had  fallen  on  a  Rocke  with  our  Ship,  which  made  them
much  abashed  ;  and  therewith  the  Beare  also  being  afraid,
swamme  off  againe  from  the  Land,  and  left  our  men,
which  made  us  glad  :  for  our  men  had  no  Weapons
about  them. Touching the  varying  of  the Compasse,

68

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1596.

for  the  which  cause  our  men  went  on  Land,  to  trie  the  Variation  of
certaintie  thereof: it  was  found  to  differ 16.  Degrees. theCompasse

The  five  and  twentieth  of  June,  we  hoysted  Anchor  1  '  e&ees-
againe,  and  sayled  along  by  the  Land,  and  went  South,
and  South  South-west,  with  a  North  North-east  winde,
under  79.  degrees.  There  we  found  a  great  Creeke  or
River,  whereinto  we  sayled  ten  miles  at  the  least,  holding
our  course  Southward  ;  but  we  perceived  that  there  we
could  not  get  through  :  there  we  cast  out  our  Lead,
and  for  the  most  part  found  10.  fathom  deepe,  but  we
were  constrained  to  lavere  out  again,  for  the  winde  was
Northerly,  and  almost  full  North,  and  we  perceived  that
it  reached  to  the  firme  land,  which  we  supposed  to  bee
Low-land,  for  that  wee  could  not  see  it  any  thing  farre,
and  therefore  we  sayled  so  neere  unto  it,  till  that  we
might  see  it,  and  then  we  were  forced  to  lavere,  and
upon  the  seven  and  twentieth  of  June  we  got  out  againe.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  we  got  beyond  the  point
that  lay  on  the  West  side,  where  there  was  so  great  a
number  of  Birds,  that  they  flew  against  our  Sayles,  and  Store  of  Birds.
wee  sayled  ten  miles  Southward,  and  after  that  West,
to  shun  the  Ice.  The  nine  and  twentieth,  wee  sayled
South-east  and  somewhat  more  Easterly,  along  by  the
Land,  till  we  were  under  76.  degrees  and  50.  minutes,
for  we  were  forced  to  put  off  from  the  Land,  because
of  the  Ice.  The  thirtieth  of  June,  wee  sayled  South,
and  somewhat  East,  and  then  we  tooke  the  height  of
the  Sunne,  and  found  that  it  was  elevated  above  the
Horizon  38.  degrees  and  20.  minutes,  his  Declination
was  23.  degrees  and  20.  minuts,  which  being  taken
from  the  former  height,  it  was  found  that  we  were  under
75.  degrees.

The first  of  July wee saw the Beare-Iland againe,  July.
and  then  John  Cornelison  and  his  Officers  came  aboord Cherie-lknd.
our  ship, to  speake  with us  about altering  our  course,
but  wee  being  of  a  contrary  opinion,  it  was  agreed  that
we should follow  on our course, and hee his  : which
was,  that  he  (according  to  his  desire)  should  sayle  unto

69

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

80.  Degrees  againe  :  for  he  was  of  opinion,  that  there
he  should  finde  a  passage  through,  on  the  East  side  of
the  Land  that  lay  under  80.  Degrees.  And  upon  that
They  part  agreement  we  left  each  other,  they  sayling  Northward,
compame.  anc[  wee  Southward,  because  of  the  Ice,  the  winde  being
East  South-east.

The  second,  we  sayled  Eastward,  and  were  under  74.
degrees,  having  the  wind  North  North-west,  and  then
wee  woond  over  another  Bough,  with  an  East  North-
east winde,  and  sayled  Northward.  In  the  Eevening  the
Sunne  being  about  North-west  and  by  North,  we  woond
about  againe  (because  of  the  Ice)  with  an  East  winde,
and  sayled  South  South-east,  and  about  East  South-east,
and  then  we  woond  about  againe  (because  of  the  Ice)  and
the  Sunne  being  South  South-west,  we  woond  about
againe,  and  sayled  North-east.  The  third,  we  were  under
74.  degrees,  having  a  South-east  and  by  East  winde,
and  sayled  North-east  and  by  North  :  after  that  wee
woond  about  againe  with  a  South  winde,  and  sayled  East
South-east,  till  the  Sunne  was  North-west,  then  the  winde
began  to  be  somewhat  larger.

The  eight,  wee  had  a  good  North-west  winde,  and
sayled  East  and  by  North,  with  an  indifferent  cold  gale
of  wind,  and  got  under  72.  degrees  and  15.  minutes.
The  ninth  of  July,  we  went  East  and  by  North,  the
wind  being  West.  The  tenth  of  July,  the  Sunne  being
South  South-west,  we  cast  out  our  Lead,  and  had  ground
at  one  hundred  and  sixtie  fathome,  the  wind  being  North-
east and  by  North,  and  we  sayled  East  and  by  South,
under  72.  degrees.  The  eleventh,  we  found  70.  fathome
deepe,  and  saw  no  Ice,  then  wee  ghest  that  we  were
right  South  and  North  from  Dandinaes,  that  is  the  East-
point  of  the  White-sea,  that  lay  Southward  from  us,
and  had  sandie  ground,  and  the  banke  stretched  North-
ward into  the  Sea,  so  that  we  were  out  of  doubt  that  we
[III.iii.486.]  were  upon  the  banke  of  the  White  Sea,  for  wee  had
found  no  sandie  ground  all  the  Coast  along,  but  onely
that  banke. Then  the  wind  being  East  and  by  South,

70

WILLIAM BARENTS  ad.

1596.
we sailed South, and South and by East, under 72.
degrees,  and  after  that,  we  had  a  South  South-east  Wind,
and  sayled  North-east  to  get  over  the  Banke.

The  thirteenth  of  July,  we  sayled  East  with  a  North
North-east  wind  :  then  wee  tooke  the  height  of  the
Sunne,  and  found  it  to  be  elevated  above  the  Horizon

54.  degrees  and  38.  minutes,  his  declination  was  21.
degrees  and  54.  minutes,  which  taken  from  the  height
aforesaid,  the  height  of  the  Pole  was  found  to  bee  73.
degrees,  and  then  againe  wee  found  Ice,  but  not  very
much,  and  we  were  of  opinion,  that  we  were  by
Willoughbies  Land.  The  fourteenth,  we  sayled  North-  Wilhughbies
east,  the  wind  being  North  North-west,  and  in  that  sort  Land  conceited
sayled  about  a  dinner  time,  along  through  the  Ice,  and  f™m  some

in  the  middle  thereof  we  cast  out  our  Lead,  and  had
ninety  fathome  deepe,  in  the  next  quarter  wee  cast  out
our  Lead  againe,  and  had  an  hundred  fathome  deepe,
and  we  sayled  so  farre  into  the  Ice,  that  wee  could  goe
no  further  :  for  wee  could  see  no  place  where  it  opened,
but  were  forced  (with  great  labour  and  paine)  to  lavere
out  of  it  againe,  the  wind  blowing  West,  and  we  were
then  under  74.  degrees  and 10.  minutes.

The  fifteenth,  we  drave  through  the  middle  of  the
Ice  with  a  calme,  and  casting  out  our  Lead,  had  an
hundred  fathome  deepe,  at  which  time  the  wind  being
East,  wee  sayled  West.  The  sixteenth,  we  got  out  of
the  Ice,  and  saw  a  great  Beare  lying  upon  it,  that  leaped
into  the  water  when  shee  saw  us  :  Wee  made  towards
her  with  our  ship,  which  shee  perceiving  got  up  upon
the  Ice  againe,  wherewith  wee  shot  once  at  her.  Then
wee  sayled  East  South-east,  and  saw  no  Ice,  ghessing
that  we  were  not  farre  from  Nova  Zembla,  because  we
saw  the  Beare  there  upon  the  Ice,  at  which  time  we
cast  out  our  Lead,  and  found  an  hundred  fathome
deepe.

The  seventeenth,  we  tooke  the  height  of  the  Sunne,
and  it  was  elevated  above  the  Horizon  37.  degrees  and

55.  minutes, his declination was 21. degrees and 15.

71

A.D.
I596.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Admirals
Hand.

Crosse  Hand
in  76.  degrees
20.  minutes.

minutes,  which  taken  from  the  height  aforesaid,  the
height  of  the  Pole  was  74.  degrees  and  40.  minutes  :  and
when  the  Sunne  was  in  the  South,  we  saw  the  Land  of
Nova  Zembla.  Nova  Zembla,  which  was  about  Lomsbay  :  I  was  the
first  that  espied  it.  Then  we  altered  our  course,  and
sayled  North-east  and  by  North,  and  hoysed  up  all  our
sayles,  except  the  Fore-sayle  and  the  Lesien.  The
eighteenth,  wee  saw  the  Land  againe,  being  under  75.
degrees,  and  sayled  North-east  and  by  North,  with  a
North-west  wind,  and  we  gate  above  the  point  of  the
Admirals  Hand,  and  sayled  East  North-east,  with  a  West
Wind,  the  Land  reaching  North-east  and  by  North.
The  nineteenth,  wee  came  to  the  Crosse  Hand,  and
could  get  no  further,  by  reason  of  the  Ice,  for  there
the  Ice  lay  still  close  upon  the  Land,  at  which  time  the
wind  was  West,  and  blew  right  upon  the  Land,  and
it  lay  under  76.  degrees  and  20.  minutes.  There  stood
two  Crosses  upon  the  Land,  whereof  it  had  the  Name.

The  twentieth,  we  anchored  under  the  Hand,  for  we
could  get  no  further  for  the  Ice.  There  we  put  out
our  Boat,  and  with  eight  men  rowed  on  Land,  and
went  to  one  of  the  Crosses,  where  we  rested  us  a  while
to  goe  to  the  next  Crosse,  but  being  in  the  way  wee
saw  two  Beares  by  the  other  Crosse,  at  which  time  we
had  no  weapons  at  all  about  us.  The  Beares  rose  up
upon  their  hinder  feet  to  see  us  (for  they  smell  further
than  they  see)  and  for  that  they  smelt  us  :  therefore
they  rose  upright,  and  came  towards  us,  wherewith  we
were  not  a  little  abashed,  in  such  sort  that  we  had  little
lust  to  laugh,  and  in  all  haste  went  to  our  Boat  againe,
still  looking  behind  us,  to  see  if  they  followed  us,
thinking  to  get  into  the  Boat,  and  so  put  off  from  the
Land  :  but  the  Master  stayed  us,  saying,  hee  that  first
beginnes  to  runne  away,  I  will  thrust  this  Hake-stafFe
(which  he  then  held  in  his  hand)  into  his  ribs  ;  for  it
is  better  for  us  (said  hee)  to  stay  all  together,  and  see
if  we  can  make  them  afraid  with  whooping  and  hollowing ;
and  so  we  went  softly  towards  the  Boat,  and  got  away,

72

Two  Beares.

Their  sent.

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1596.

glad  that  we  had  escaped  their  clawes,  and  that  we  had

the  leasure  to  tell  our  fellowes  thereof.

The  one  and  twentieth  we  tooke  the  height  of  the
Sunne,  and  found  that  it  was  elevated  above  the  Horizon
35.  degrees  and  15.  minutes,  his  declination  was  21.
degrees,  which  being  taken  from  the  height  aforesaid,
there  rested  14.  degrees,  which  substracted  from  90.
degrees,  then  the  height  of  the  Pole  was  found  to  be
76.  degrees  and  15.  minutes,  then  we  found  the  variation  Variation  26.
of  the  Compasse  to  bee  26.  degrees.  The  same  day  degrees,
two  of  our  men  went  againe  to  the  Crosse,  and  found  ter  a?s  1  '
no  beares  to  trouble  us,  and  wee  followed  them  with
our  Armes,  fearing  least  wee  might  meet  any  by  chance,
and  when  we  came  to  the  second  Crosse,  we  found  the
foot-steps  of  two  Beares,  and  saw  how  long  they  had
followed  us,  which  was  one  hundred  foot-steps  at  the
least,  that  way  that  we  had  beene  the  day  before.  The
two  and  twentieth  being  Munday,  wee  set  up  another
Crosse,  and  made  our  Marke  thereon  :  and  lay  there
before  the  Crosse  Hand,  till  the  fourth  of  August,  meane
time  we  washt  and  whited  our  Linnen  on  the  shoare.

The  thirtieth,  the  Sunne  being  North,  there  came  a
Beare  so  neere  to  our  ship,  that  we  might  hit  her  with
a  stone,  and  we  shot  her  into  the  foot  with  a  Piece,
wherewith  shee  ranne  halting  away.  The  one  and
thirtieth  of  July,  the  Sunne  being  East  North-east,  seven
of  our  men  killed  a  Beare,  and  flayed  her,  and  cast  her
bodie  into  the  Sea.  The  same  day  at  noone  (by  our
Instrument)  we  found  the  variation  of  the  Needle  of
the  Compasse  to  be 17.  degrees.

The  first  of  August  we  saw  a  white  Beare,  but  she  ran  [III.iii.487.]
away  from  us.  The  fourth,  we  got  out  of  the  Ice,  to  the  August.
other  side  of  the  Hand,  and  anchored  there :  where,  with
great  labour  and  much  paine,  we  fetched  a  Boat  full  of
stones  from  the  Land.  The  fifth,  wee  set  sayle  againe
towards  Ice-point,  with  an  East  Wind,  and  sayled  South
South-east,  and  then  North  North-east,  and  saw  no
Ice  by  the  Land,  by  the  which  we  lavered. The  sixth,

73

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

PointNassazv.  we  gate  about  the  point  of  Nassaw,  and  sayled  forward
East,  and  East  and  by  South  along  the  Land.

The  seventh,  we  had  a  West  South-west  Wind,  and
sayled  along  by  the  Land,  South-east,  and  South-east
and by  East, and saw but a  little Ice, and then  past

Trust-point,  by  the  Trust-point,  which  we  had  much  longed  for :
at  Eevening  we  had  an  East  Wind,  with  mistie  Weather,
so  that  we  were  forced  to  make  our  ship  fast  to  a  piece
of  Ice,  that  was  at  least  thirtie  sixe  fathome  deepe  under
the water, and more then sixteene fathome above the

Ice 52. fathom  water: which in  all was two and fifty fathome thick,

deepe.  for  jt  }ay  fast  UpQn  ground,  the  which  was  thirtie  sixe

fathome  deepe.  The  eight  in  the  morning  we  had  an
East  Wind,  with  mistie  Weather.

Snow.  The ninth, lying  still  fast to  the  great  piece  of  Ice,

it  snowed  hard,  and  it  was  mistie  weather,  and  when
the  Sunne  was  South,  we  went  upon  the  Hatches  (for
we  alwayes  held  watch)  where  as  the  Master  walked
along  the  ship,  he  heard  a  beast  snuffe  with  his  nose,
and looking over-boord, he  saw  a  great  Beare  hard  by

Beares  the  ship,  where  hee  cryed  out,  a  Beare,  a  Beare ;  and  with

assault.  that  all  our  men  Came  up  from  under  Hatches,  and  saw  a

great  Beare  hard  by  our  Boat,  seeking  to  get  into  it,
but  we  giving  a  great  shout,  she  was  afraid,  and  swamme
away,  but  presently  came  backe  againe,  and  went  behind  a
great  piece  of  Ice,  whereunto  we  had  made  our  ship  fast,
and  climbed  upon  it,  and  boldly  came  towards  our  ship  to
enter  into  it :  but  we  had  torne  our  Scute  Sayle  in  the
ship,  and  lay  with  foure  Peeces  before  at  the  Boot-sprit,
and  shot  her  in  the  bodie :  and  with  that,  shee  ranne
away ;  but  it  snowed  so  fast  that  wee  could  not  see
whither  shee  went :  but  wee  ghest  that  shee  lay  behind
a  high  Hoovell ;  whereof  there  were  many  upon  the
piece  of  Ice.

The  tenth,  being  Saturday,  the  Ice  began  mightily
to  breake,  and  then  wee  first  perceived  that  the  great
piece  of  Ice  whereunto  we  had  made  our  ship  fast,  lay
on the  ground ;  for  the  rest  of  the  Ice  drave  along  by

74

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1596.

it,  wherewith  wee  were in great  feare that  wee  should

bee  compassed  about  with  the  Ice,  and  therefore  we  used

all  the  diligence and  meanes  that  we  could  to  get  from

thence,  for  we were in great doubt :  and  being under

sayle,  wee  sayled  upon  the  Ice,  because  it  was  all  broken

under  us,  and  got to  another  piece of  Ice ;  whereunto

we made our  ship  fast  againe  with  our  Sheate  Anchor,

which we made fast upon it ; and there we lay till

Eevening:  and  when  we  had  supped,  in  the  first  quarter,

the said piece  of  Ice  began  on a sudden to burst  and  Icie  thunder.

rend  in pieces, so fearefully  that  it  was  admirable ;  for

with one great cracke it burst into foure hundred

pieces  at  the  least :  we  lying  fast  to  it,  weighed  our  Cable,

and  got  off  from  it,  under  the  water  it  was  ten  fathome

deepe,  and  lay  upon  the  ground,  and  two  fathome  above

the  Water ;  and  it  made  a  fearefull  noyse  both  under  and

above  the  Water  when  it  burst,  and  spread  it  selfe  abroad

on  all sides. And  being  with  great  feare,  gotten  from

that  piece of  Ice,  wee  came to  another  piece,  that  was

six  fathome  deepe  under  the  Water :  to  which  wee  made  a

Rope  fast  on  both  sides. Then wee  saw  another  great

piece  of  Ice, not  farre  from us,  lying  fast in  the  Sea,

that was as sharpe above,  as it had  beene a  Tower ;

whereunto wee rowed: and casting  out  our  Lead, we

found  that  it  lay  twentie  fathome  deepe,  fast  on  the  ground

under  the  Water,  and  twelve  fathome  above  the  Water.

The  eleventh  being  Sunday,  we  rowed  to  another  piece

of  Ice, and cast out our  Lead, and found that  it  lay

eighteene fathome deepe  fast  to  the  ground  under  the

Water,  and  ten  fathome  above  the  water. The  twelfth,

wee  sayled  neere  under  the  Land,  the  better  to  shunne

the  Ice,  for  the  great  flakes  that  drave  in  the  Sea,  were

many fathome deepe under the Water,  and we were

better defended from them being at foure and five

fathome Water, and there ranne a great current of

water from the Hill. There we made our ship  fast

againe  to  a piece of  Ice, and called that point, The

small  Ice  point.

75

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

The  thirteenth  in  the  morning,  there  came  a  Beare
from  the  East  point  of  the  Land,  close  to  our  ship,
and  one  of  our  men  with  a  Peece  shot  at  her,  and
brake  one  of  her  legs,  but  she  crept  up  the  Hill  with

Beare  killed,  her  three  feet,  and  we  following  her,  killed  her,  and
having  flayed  her,  brought  the  skinne  aboord  the  ship.
From  thence  wee  set  sayle,  with  a  little  gale  of
Winde,  and  were  forced  to  lavere,  but  after  that  it
began  to  blow  more  out  of  the  South,  and  South
South-east.

Orange  Hand.  The  fifteenth,  we  came  to  the  Hand  of  Orange,  where
we  were  inclosed  with  the  Ice,  hard  by  a  great  piece
of  Ice  where  we  were  in  great  danger  to  lose  our  ship,
but  with  great  labour  and  much  paine,  we  got  to  the
Hand,  the  Wind  being  South-east,  whereby  we  were
constrayned  to  turne  our  ship,  and  while  we  were  busied
thereabouts,  and  made  such  noyse,  a  Beare  that  lay
there  and  slept,  awaked,  and  came  towards  us  to  the
ship,  so  that  wee  were  forced  to  leave  our  Worke
about  turning  of  the  ship,  and  to  defend  our  selves
against  the  Beare,  and  shot  her  into  the  bodie,  where-
with she  ranne  away  to  the  other  side  of  the  Hand,  and
swamme  into  the  water,  and  got  up  upon  a  piece  of
Ice,  where  she  lay  still,  but  we  comming  after  her  to
the  piece  of  Ice  where  she  lay,  when  she  saw  us,  she
leapt  into  the  water,  and  swamme  to  the  Land :  but
we got betweene her and  the Land, and strooke  her

[III.iii.488.]  on  the  head  with  a  Hatchet,  but  as  often  as  wee  strooke
at  her  with  the  Hatchet,  she  duckt  under  the  water,
whereby  wee  had  much  to  doe  before  we  could  kill
her :  after  she  was  dead  we  flayed  her  on  the  Land,
and  tooke  the  skinne  aboord  with  us,  and  after  that,
turned  our  shippe  to  a  great  piece  of  Ice,  and  made  it
fast  thereunto.

The  sixteenth,  ten  of  our  men  entring  into  one
Boat,  rowed  to  the  flrme  Land  of  Nova  Zembla,  and
drew  the  Boat  up  upon  the  Ice,  which  done,  we  went
up a high Hill, to  see  the  situation  of  the  Land,  and

76

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1596.

found  that  it  reached  South-east,  and  South  South-east,
and  then  againe  South,  which  wee  disliked,  for  that  it
lay  so  much  Southward  :  but  when  wee  saw  open  water
South-east,  and  East  South-east,  we  were  much  com-
forted againe,  thinking  that  we  had  wonne  our  Voyage
and  knew  not  how  we  should  get  soone  enough  aboord,
to  certifie  William Barents  thereof.

The  eighteenth,  we  made  preparation  to  set  sayle,
but  it  was  all  in  vaine :  for  wee  had  almost  lost  our
Sheat  Anchor,  and  two  new  Ropes,  and  with  much  lost
labour  got  to  the  place  againe  from  whence  wee  came :
for  the  streame  ranne  with  a  mightie  current,  and  the
Ice  drave  very  strongly  upon  the  Cables,  along  by  the
ship,  so  that  we  were  in  feare  that  wee  should  lose
all  the  Cable  that  was  without  the  ship,  which  was  two
hundred  fathome  at  the  least,  but  God  provided  well
for  us,  so  that  in  the  end,  we  got  to  the  place  againe
from  whence  we  put  out.

The  nineteenth  it  was  indifferent  good  weather,  the
Wind  blowing  South-west,  the  Ice  still  driving,  and
wee  set  sayle  with  an  indifferent  gale  of  Wind,  and
past  by  the  point  of  Desire,  whereby  we  were  once  Point  Desire.
againe  in  good  hope,  and  when  we  had  gotten  above
the  point,  we  sailed  South-east  into  the  Sea-ward,  foure
miles,  but  then  againe  wee  entred  into  more  Ice,  whereby
wee  were  constrayned  to  turne  backe  againe,  and  sayled
North-west  untill  we  came  to  the  Land  againe,  which
reacheth  from  the  point  of  Desire,  to  the  head  point,
South  and  by  West  six  miles :  from  the  head  point  to
Flushingers  head,  it  reacheth  South-west,  which  are  three
miles  one  from  the  other:  from  the  Flushingers  head,
it  reacheth  into  the  Sea,  East  South-east,  and  from
Flushingers  head  to  the  point  of  the  Hand,  it  reacheth
South-west,  and  by  South,  and  South-west  three  miles :
and  from  the  Hand  point,  to  the  point  of  the  Ice  Haven,
the  Land  reacheth  West  South-west  foure  miles :  from
the  Ice  Havens  point  to  the  fal  of  Water,  or  the  streame
Bay,  and  the  low  Land,  it  reacheth  West  and  by  South,

77

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

and  East  and  by  North  seven  miles : from  thence  the
Land  reacheth  East  and  West.

The  one  and  twentieth,  we  sayled  a  great  way  into
the  Ice  Haven,  and  that  night  anchored  therein :  next
day  the  streame  going  extreame  hard  Eastward,  wee
haled  out  againe  from  thence,  and  sayled  againe  to  the
Hand  point,  but  for  that  it  was  misty  Weather,  comming
to  a  piece  of  Ice,  wee  made  the  ship  fast  thereunto,
because  the  Wind  beganne  to  blow  hard  South-west
and  South  South-west.  There  we  went  up  upon  the
Ice,  and  wondred  much  thereat,  it  was  such  manner
Earth  on  the  of  Ice :  For  on  the  top  it  was  full  of  Earth,  and  there
top  of  Azure  wee  found  above  fortie  Egges,  and  it  was  not  like  other
Ice,  for  it  was  of  a  perfect  Azure  colour  like  to  the  Skies,
whereby  there  grew  great  contention  in  words  amongst
our  men,  some  saying  that  it  was  Ice,  others  that  it
was  frozen  Land :  for  it  lay  unreasonable  high  above
the  Water,  it  was  at  least  eighteene  fathome  under  the
water  close  to  the  ground,  and  ten  fathome  above  the
water  :  there  wee  stayed  all  that  storme,  the  Wind  being
South-west  and  by  West.  The  three  and  twentieth,
wee  sayled  againe  from  the  Ice,  South-eastward  into
the  Sea,  but  entred  presently  into  it  againe,  and  woond
about  to  the  Ice  Haven.  The  next  day  it  blew  hard
North  North-west,  and  the  Ice  came  mightily  driving
in,  whereby  we  were  in  a  manner  compassed  about
therewith,  and  withall  the  Wind  beganne  more  and
more  to  rise,  and  the  Ice  still  drave  harder  and  harder,
so  that  the  pinne  of  the  Rother,  and  the  Rother  were
Boat  broken  shorne  in  pieces,  and  our  Boat  was  shorne  in  pieces
with  Ice.  betweene  the  ship  and  the  Ice,  we  expecting  nothing
else,  but  that  the  ship  also  would  be  prest  and  crusht
in  pieces  with  the  Ice.

The  five  and  twentieth,  the  Weather  began  to  be
better,  and  we  tooke  great  paines,  and  bestowed  much
labour  to  get  the  Ice,  wherewith  we  were  so  inclosed,
to  goe  from  us,  but  what  meanes  soever  we  used  it
was all  in  vaine,  but  when the  Sunne  was  South-west,

78

WILLIAM BARENTS  ad.

1596.

the  Ice  began  to  drive  out  againe  with  the  streame,
and  we  thought  to  saile  Southward  about  Nova  Zembla,
to  the  Streights  of  Mergates,  seeing  we  could  there  find
no  passage.  Wee  having  past  Nova  Zembla,  were  of
opinion  that  our  labour  was  all  in  vaine,  and  that  we
could  not  get  through,  and  so  agreed  to  goe  that  way
home  againe ;  but  comming  to  the  Streame  Bay,  wee
were  forced  to  goe  backe  againe,  because  of  the  Ice
which  lay  so  fast  thereabouts,  and  the  same  night  also
it  froze,  that  wee  could  hardly  get  through  there,  with
the  little  wind  that  we  had,  the  Wind  then  being
North.

The  six  and  twentieth,  there  blew  a  reasonable  gale  of
Wind,  at  which  time  wee  determined  to  sayle  backe  to
the  point  of  Desire,  and  so  home  againe,  seeing  that
wee  could  not  get  through  the  Wergats,  although  we
used  all  the  meanes  and  industry  wee  could  to  get  for-
ward, but  when  we  had  past  by  the  Ice  Haven,  the  Ice
began  to  drive  with  such  force,  that  wee  were  inclosed  Inclosed  with
round  about  therewith,  and  yet  we  sought  all  the  meanes  In-
we  could  to  get  out,  but  it  was  all  in  vaine :  and  at  that
time  we  had  like  to  have  lost  three  men  that  were  upon
the  Ice  to  make  way  for  the  ship,  if  the  Ice  had  held  the
course  it  went,  but  as  we  drave  backe  againe,  and  that  the
Ice  also  whereon  our  men  stood,  in  like  sort  drave,  they  [III.iii.489.]
being  nimble,  as  the  ship  drave  by  them,  one  of  them
caught  hold  of  the  beak  head,  another  upon  the  shrouds,
and  the  third  upon  the  great  brase  that  hung  out  behind,
and  so  by  great  adventure  by  the  hold  that  they  tooke,
they  got  safe  into  the  ship  againe,  for  which  they  thanked  Escape  of  'three
God  with  all  their  hearts :  for  it  was  much  likelier  that  mn-
they  should  rather  have  beene  carried  away  with  the  Ice,
but  God,  by  the  nimblenesse  of  their  hands,  delivered
them  out  of  that  danger  which  was  a  pitifull  thing  to
behold,  although  it  fell  out  for  the  best,  for  if  they  had
not  beene  nimble,  they  had  surely  dyed  for  it.  The  same
day  in  the  evening,  wee  got  to  the  West-side  of  the  Ice
Haven,  where  wee  were  forced in  great  cold,  povertie,

79

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

miserie,  and  griefe,  to  stay  all  that  Winter,  the  winde  then
beeing  East  North-east.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  the  Ice  drave  round  about  the
ship,  and  yet  it  was  good  weather,  at  which  time  we  went
on  Land,  and  being  there  it  began  to  blow  South-east,
with  a  reasonable  gale,  and  then  the  Ice  came  with  great
Ship  lifted  up,  force  before  the  bough,  and  drave  the  ship  up  foure  foot
and  beset  with  high  before,  and  behind  it  seemed  as  if  the  keele  lay  on
the  ground,  so  that  it  seemed  that  the  ship  would  be  over-
throwne  in  the  place,  whereupon  they  that  were  in  the
ship,  put  out  the  Boat,  therewith  to  save  their  lives,  and
withall  put  out  a  flagge  to  make  a  signe  to  us,  to  come
aboard  :  which  we  perceiving,  and  beholding  the  ship  to
be  lifted  up  in  that  sort,  made  all  the  haste  we  could
to  get  aboord,  thinking  that  the  ship  was  burst  in  pieces,
but  comming  unto  it,  we  found  it  to  be  in  better  case  then
we  thought  it  had  beene.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  we  got  some  of  the  Ice  from
it,  and  the  ship  beganne  to  sit  upright  againe,  but  before
it  was  fully  upright,  as  William  Barents  and  the  other
Pilot  went  forward  to  the  bough  to  see  how  the  ship  lay,
and  how  much  it  was  risen ;  and  while  they  were  busie
upon  their  knees  and  elbowes  to  measure  how  much  it
Another  was,  the  ship  burst  out  of  the  Ice  with  such  a  noise,  and

danger.  so  great  a  cracke,  that  they  thought  verily  that  they  were

all  cast  away,  knowing  not  how  to  save  themselves.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  the  ship  lying  upright  againe,
wee  used  all  the  meanes  wee  could,  with  Iron  hookes  and
other  instruments,  to  breake  the  flakes  of  Ice  that  lay
one  heaped  upon  the  other,  but  all  in  vaine ;  so  that  we
determined  to  commit  our  selves  to  the  mercy  of  God,
and  to  attend  aide  from  him,  for  that  the  Ice  drave  not
away  in  any  such  sort  that  it  could  helpe  us.  The
thirtieth,  the  Ice  began  to  drive  together  one  upon  the
other  with  greater  force  then  before,  and  bare  against  the
ship  with  a  boystrous  South-west  winde,  and  a  great  snow,
so  that  all  the  whole  ship  was  borne  up  and  enclosed,
whereby  all  that  was  both  about  it  and  in  it,  began  to

80

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1596.

cracke,  so  that  it  seemed  to  burst  in  an  hundred  pieces,
which  was  most  fearefull  both  to  see  and  heare,  and  made
all  the  haire  of  our  heads  to  rise  upright  with  feare :  and
after  that,  the  ship  (by  the  Ice  on  both  sides  that  joyned
and  got  under  the  same)  was  driven  so  upright,  in  such
sort,  as  if  it  had  beene  lifted  up  with  a  Wrench  or
Vice.

The  one  and  thirtieth  of  August,  by  force  of  the  Ice,
the  ship  was  driven  up  foure  or  five  foot  high  at  the  beake
head,  and  the  hinder  part  thereof  lay  in  a  clift  of  Ice,
whereby  wee  thought  that  the  Rother  would  bee  freed
from  the  force  of  the  flakes  of  Ice,  but  notwithstanding,  it
brake  in  pieces  stafFe  and  all :  and  if  that  the  hinder  part  Rother  broken.
of  the  ship  had  beene  in  the  Ice  that  drave,  as  well  as  the
fore  part  was,  then  all  the  ship  would  have  beene  driven
wholly  upon  the  Ice,  or  possibly  have  runne  on  ground,
and  for  that  cause  wee  were  in  great  feare,  and  set  our
Scutes  and  our  Boat  out  upon  the  Ice,  if  need  were,  to
save  our  selves,  but  within  foure  houres  after,  the  Ice
drave  away  of  it  selfe,  wherewith  wee  were  exceeding  glad,
as  if  wee  had  saved  our  lives,  for  that  the  ship  was  then
on  flote  againe,  and  upon  that  we  made  a  new  Rother  and
a  StafFe,  and  hung  the  Rother  out  upon  the  hookes,  that  if
we  chanced  to  bee  borne  upon  the  Ice  againe,  as  we  had
beene,  it  might  so  be  freed  from  it.

The  first  of  September  being  Sunday,  while  we  were  at  September.
prayer,  the  Ice  began  to  gather  together  againe,  so  that  the
ship  was  lifted  up  two  foot  at  the  least,  but  the  Ice  brake
not.  The  same  evening  the  Ice  continued  in  that  sort  still
driving  and  gathering  together,  so  that  we  made  prepara-
tion to  draw  our  Scute  and  the  Boat  over  the  Ice  upon  the
Land,  the  wind  then  blowing  South-east.  The  second,  it
snowed  hard  with  a  North-east  wind,  and  the  ship  began
to  rise  up  higher  upon  the  Ice,  at  which  time  the  Ice  burst
and  crackt  with  great  force,  so  that  wee  were  of  opinion
to  carrie  our  Scute  on  Land  in  that  foule  weather,  with
thirteene  barrels  of  Bread,  and  two  hogsheads  of  Wine,  to
sustaine  our  selves  if  need  were.

xiii  81  F

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

The  third,  it  blew  hard  but  snowed  not  so  much,  the
wind  being  North  North-east,  at  which  time  we  began  to
be  loose  from  the  Ice,  whereunto  we  lay  fast,  so  that  the
Scheck  broke  from  the  Steven,  but  the  plankes  wherewith
the  ship  was  lined,  held  the  Scheck  fast,  and  made  it  hang
on,  but  the  Boutloofe  and  a  new  Cable  (if  we  had  failed
upon  the  Ice)  brake  by  forcible  pressing  of  the  Ice,  but
held  fast  againe  in  the  Ice,  and  yet  the  ship  was  staunch  ;
which  was  wonder,  in  regard  that  the  Ice  drave  so  hard,
and  in  great  heapes,  as  big  as  the  Salt-hils  that  are  in
Spaine,  and  within  a  Harquebusse  shot  of  the  ship,
betweene  the  which  wee  lay  in  great  feare  and  anguish.
The  fourth,  the  weather  began  to  cleare  up,  and  we  saw
[III.iii.490.]  the  Sunne,  but  it  was  very  cold,  the  wind  being  North-
east we  being  forced  to  lie  still.  The  fift,  it  was  faire
Sun-shine  weather,  and  very  calme,  and  at  evening  when
we  had  supped,  the  Ice  compassed  about  us  againe,  and
wee  were  hard  enclosed  therewith,  the  ship  beginning  to
lie  upon  the  one  side,  and  leaked  sore,  but  by  Gods  grace
it  became  staunch  againe,  wherewith  we  were  wholly  in
feare  to  lose  the  ship,  it  was  in  so  great  danger :  at  which
time  wee  tooke  counsell  together,  and  carried  our  old
socke  Sayle,  with  Powder,  Lead,  Peeces,  Muskets,  and
other  furniture  on  Land,  to  make  a  Tent  about  our  Scute
that  we  had  drawne  upon  the  Land,  and  at  that  time  we
carried  some  Bread,  and  Wine  on  Land  also,  with  some
Timber  therewith  to  mend  our  Boat,  that  it  might  serve
us  in  time  of  need.

The  sixt,  it  was  indifferent  faire  Sea-weather,  and  Sun-
shine, the  wind  being  West,  whereby  we  were  somewhat
comforted,  hoping  that  the  Ice  would  drive  away,  and
that  wee  might  get  from  thence  againe.  The  seventh,  it
was  indifferent  weather  againe,  but  we  perceived  no
opening  of  the  water,  but  to  the  contrary,  it  lay  hard
enclosed  with  Ice,  and  no  water  at  all  about  the  ship,  no
not  so  much  as  a  bucket  full.  The  same  day,  five  of  our
men  went  on  Land,  but  two  of  them  came  backe  againe,
the  other  three  went forward about two miles  into  the

82

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1596.
Land,  and  there  found  a  River  of  sweet  water,  where  also  River  of  fresh
they  found  great  store  of  Wood  that had beene driven  ™terj  and
thither,  and  there  they  found  the  footsteps  of  Harts  and
Hinds,  as  they  thought,  for  they  were  cloven  footed,  some
greater  footed  then  others,  which  made  them  judge  them
to  be  so.

The  eight,  it  blew  hard  East  North-east,  which  was  a
right  contrary  wind  to  doe  us  any  good,  touching  the
carrying  away  of  the  Ice,  so  that  we  were  still  faster  in  the
Ice,  which  put  us  in  no  small  discomfort.  The  ninth,  it
blew  North-east,  with  a  little  snow,  whereby  our  ship  was
wholly  enclosed  with  Ice,  for  the  wind  drave  the  Ice  hard
against  it,  so  that  we  lay  three  or  foure  foot  deepe  in  the
Ice,  and  our  Sheck  in  the  after  Steven,  brake  in  pieces,
and  the  ship  began  to  be  somewhat  loose  before,  but  yet
it  was  not  much  hurt.  In  the  night  time,  two  Beares
came  close  to  our  ship  side,  but  we  sounded  our  Trumpet,
and  shot  at  them,  but  hit  them  not,  because  it  was  darke,
and  they  ranne  away.  The  tenth,  the  weather  was  some-
what better,  because  the  wind  blew  not  so  hard,  and  yet
all  one  wind.

The  eleventh,  it  was calme  weather,  and  eight of  us
went  on  Land,  every  man  armed,  to  see  if  that  were  true
as  our  other  three  companions  had said, that  there  lay
Wood  about  the  River,  for  that  seeing  we  had  so  long
woond  and  turned  about,  sometime  in  the  Ice,  and  then
againe  got  out,  and  thereby  were  compelled  to  alter  our
course,  and  at  last  saw  that  we  could  not  get  out  of  the  Shipfastned
Ice,  but  rather  became  faster, and could not loose  our  in  Ice.
ship,  as  at  other  times  we  had  done,  as  also  that  it  began
to  be  Winter,  we  tooke  counsell  together  what  we  were
best  to  doe,  according  to  the  time,  that  we  might  winter  They  deter-
there,  and  attend  such  adventure  as  God  would  send  us:  mine  to  winter
and  after  we  had  debated  upon  the  matter  (to  keepe  and  there-
defend  our  selves  both  from  the  cold,  and  wilde  beasts)  we
determined  to  build  a  house  upon  the  Land,  to  keepe  us
therein  as  well  as  wee  could,  and  so  to  commit  our  selves
unto  the  tuition  of  God,  and  to  that  end  we  went  further

83

A.D.
1596.

How  God  in
our  extremest
need,  when  zve
were  forced  to
lie  all  the
Winter  upon
the  Land,  sent
us  Wood  to
make  us  a
house,  and  to
serve  us  to
burne  in  the
cold  Winter.

Three  Beares.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

into  the  Land,  to  find  out  the  convenientest  place  in  our
opinions,  to  raise  our  house  upon,  and  yet  we  had  not
much  stuffe  to  make  it  withall,  in  regard  that  there  grew
no  trees,  nor  any  other  thing  in  that  Countrey  convenient
to  build  it  withall :  but  wee  leaving  no  occasion  unsought,
as  our  men  went  abroad  to  view  the  Countrey,  and  to  see
what  good  fortune  might  happen  unto  us,  at  last  we  found
an  unexpected  comfort  in  our  need,  which  was,  that  we
found  certaine  trees  roots  and  all,  (as  our  three  com-
panions had  said  before)  which  had  beene  driven  upon  the
shoare,  either  from  Tartaria,  Muscovia,  or  else  where ;  for
there  was  none  growing  upon  that  Land,  wherewith  (as  if
God  had  purposely  sent  them  unto  us)  we  were  much
comforted,  being  in  good  hope  that  God  would  shew  us
some  further  favour ;  for  that  Wood  served  us  not  onely
to  build  our  house,  but  also  to  burne,  and  serve  us  all  the
Winter  long,  otherwise  without  all  doubt,  we  had  died
there  miserably  with  extreme  cold.

The  twelfth,  it  was  calme  weather,  and  then  our  men
went  unto  the  other  side  of  the  Land,  to  see  if  they  could
find  any  Wood  neerer  unto  us,  but  there  was  none.  The
thirteenth,  it  was  calme  but  very  misty  weather,  so  that  we
could  doe  nothing,  because  it  was  dangerous  for  us  to  goe
into  the  Land,  in  regard  that  we  could  not  see  the  wilde
Beares,  and  yet  they  could  smell  us,  for  they  smell  better
then  they  see.  The  fourteenth  it  was  cleare  Sun-shine
weather,  but  very  cold,  and  then  we  went  into  the  Land,
and  layed  the  Wood  in  heapes  one  upon  the  other,  that  it
might  not  bee  covered  over  with  the  Snow,  and  from
thence  meant  to  carrie  it  to  the  place  where  we  intended  to
build  our  house.

The  fifteenth  in  the  morning,  as  one  of  our  men  held
watch,  we  saw  three  Beares,  whereof  the  one  lay  still
behind  a  piece  of  Ice,  the  other  two  came  close  to  the
ship;  which  wee  perceiving,  made  our  Peeces  ready  to
shoot  at  them,  at  which  time  there  stood  a  Tub  full  of
Beefe  upon  the  Ice,  which  lay  in  the  water  to  be  seasoned,
for  that  close  by  the  ship  there  was  no  water :  one  of  the

84

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1596.
Beares  went  unto  it,  and  put  in  his  head  to  take  out  a
piece  of  the  Beefe,  but  she  fared  therewith  as  the  Dog  did
with  the  Pudding,  for  as  she  was  snatching  at  the  Beefe,
shee  was  shot  into  the  head,  wherewith  shee  fell  downe
dead,  and  never  stirred :  the  other  Beare  stood  still,  and
looked  upon  her  fellow,  and  when  shee  had  stood  a  good
while,  shee  smelt  her  fellow,  and  perceiving  that  she  was  [III.iii.491.]
dead,  shee  ran  away,  but  wee  tooke  Halberts  and  other
Armes  with  us,  and  followed  her,  and  at  last  she  came
againe  towards  us,  and  we  prepared  our  selves  to  with-
stand her,  wherewith  she  rose  up  upon  her  hinder  feet,
thinking  to  rampe  at  us,  but  while  shee  reared  her
selfe  up,  one  of  our  men  shot  her  into  the  bellie,  and
with  that  she  fell  upon  her  forefeet  againe,  and  roaring
as  loud  as  she  could,  ran  away.  Then  we  tooke  the
dead  Beare,  and  ript  her  bellie  open  ;  and  taking  out
her  guts,  we  set  her  upon  her  fore-feet,  that  so  she
might  freeze  as  shee  stood,  intending  to  carrie  her
with  us  into  Holland,  if  wee  might  get  our  ship  loose,
and  when  we  had  set  the  Beare  upon  her  foure  feet,
we  began  to  make  a  Sled,  thereon  to  draw  the  Wood
to  the  place  where  we  went  to  build  our  house,  at
that  time  it  froze  two  fingers  thicke  in  the  salt  water,  It  freezeth  in
and  it  was  exceeding  cold,  the  wind  blowing  North-  the  salt  water
east.  twofingers

The  sixteenth,  the  Sunne  shone,  but  towards  the
evening  it  was  misty,  the  wind  being  Easterly,  at  which
time  we  went  to  fetch  Wood  with  our  Sleds,  and  then
wee  drew  foure  beames  above  a  mile  upon  the  Ice  and
the  Snow,  that  night  againe  it  froze  above  two  fingers
thicke.  The  seventeenth,  thirteene  of  us  went  where
the  Wood  lay  with  our  Sleds,  and  so  drew  five  and
five  in  a  Sled,  and  the  other  three  helped  to  lift  the
Wood  behind,  to  make  us  draw  the  better,  and  with
more  ease,  and  in  that  manner  we  drew  Wood  twice
a  day,  and  laid  it  on  a  heape  by  the  place  where  we
meant  to  build  our  house.

The  three  and twentieth,  wee  fetcht  more  Wood  to

85

thicke  in  a
night.

A.D.

1596.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

build  our  house,  which  wee  did  twice  a  day,  but  it
grew  to  be  misty  and  still  weather  againe,  the  wind
blowing  East,  and  East  and  North-east,  that  day  our
Carpenter  being  of  Purmeceat  died,  as  wee  came  aboord
about  evening.  The  foure  and  twentieth,  we  buried
him  under  the  sedges,  in  the  clift  of  a  hill,  hard  by
the  water,  for  we  could  not  dig  up  the  earth,  by  reason
of  the  great  frost  and  cold,  and  that  day  wee  went
twice  with  our  Sleds  to  fetch  Wood.
House builded.  The  five  and  twentieth,  it  was  darke  wether,  the  wind
blowing  West,  &  West  South-west,  and  South-west,
and  the  Ice  began  somwhat  to  open,  and  drive  away  ;
but  it  continued  not  long,  for  that  having  driven  about
the  length  of  the  shot  of  a  great  Peece,  it  lay  three
fathoms  deepe  upon  the  ground  :  and  where  we  lay
the  Ice  drave  not,  for  we  lay  in  the  middle  of  the
Ice  ;  but  if  we  had  layne  in  the  mayne  Sea,  we  would
have  hoysed  sayle,  although  it  was  then  late  in  the
yeere.  The  same  day  we  raysed  up  the  principles  of
our  house,  and  began  to  worke  hard  thereon,  but  if
the  ship  had  beene  loose,  we  would  have  left  our  building,
and  have  made  our  after  Steven  of  our  ship,  that  we
might  have  beene  ready  to  sayle  away  if  it  had  beene
possible.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  wee  had  a  West  wind  and
an  open  Sea,  but  our  ship  lay  fast,  wherewith  we  were
not  a  little  grieved,  but  it  was  Gods  will,  which  we
most  patiently  bare,  and  wee  began  to  make  up  our
house,  part  of  our  men  fetched  Wood  to  burne,  the
rest  played  the  Carpenters :  and  were  busie  about  the
house,  as  then  we  were  sixteene  men  in  all,  for  our
Carpenter  was  dead,  and  of  our  sixteene  men  there  was
still  one  or  other  sicke.  The  seven  and  twentieth,  it
Hard  and  blew  hard  North-east,  and  it  froze  so  hard,  that  as  we
violentfrost.  put  a  nayle  into  our  mouthes  (as  when  men  worke
Carpenters  worke  they  use  to  doe)  there  would  Ice
hang  thereon  when  we  tooke  it  out  againe,  and  make
the bloud follow : the same day there came an old

86

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1596.

Beare  and  a  young  one  towards  us,  as  we  were  going
to  our  house,  being  all  together  (for  we  durst  not  goe
alone)  which  we  thought  to  shoot  at,  but  she  ran  away,
at  which  time  the  Ice  came  forcibly  driving  in,  and  it
was  faire  Sun-shine  weather,  but  so  extreme  cold,  that
we  could  hardly  worke,  but  extremity  forced  us  there-
unto.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  it  was  faire  weather,  and
the  Sunne  shone,  the  Wind  being  West  and  very  calme,
the  Sea  as  then  being  open,  but  our  ship  lay  fast  in  the
Ice  and  stirred  not ;  the  same  day  there  came  a  Beare
to  the  ship,  but  when  she  espyed  us,  she  ranne  away,
and  we  made  as  much  haste  as  wee  could  to  build  our
House.  The  nine  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  the
Wind  was  West,  and  after-noone  it  blew  Northerly,  and
then  wee  saw  three  Beares  betweene  us  and  the  House,
an  old  one  and  two  young  ;  but  we  notwithstanding
drew  our  goods  from  the  ship  to  the  House,  and  so
got  before  the  Beares,  and  yet  they  followed  us  :  never-
thelesse,  we  would  not  shun  the  way  for  them,  but
hollowed  out  as  loud  as  we  could,  thinking  that  they
wold  have  gone  away,  but  they  would  not  once  goe
out  of  their  foot-path,  but  got  before  us,  wherewith
we  and  they  that  were  at  the  house,  made  a  great  noyse,
which  made  the  Beares  run  away,  and  we  were  not  a
little  glad  thereof.  The  thirtieth  the  Wind  was  East,
and  East  South-east,  and  all  that  night  and  the  next
day  it  snowed  so  fast,  that  our  men  could  fetch  no  Wood,
it  lay  so  close  and  high  one  upon  the  other  :  then  wee
made  a  great  fire  without  the  House,  therewith  to  thaw
the  ground,  that  so  we  might  lay  it  about  the  House,
that  it  might  bee  the  closer  ;  but  it  was  all  lost  labour,  Ground  not  to
for  the  Earth  was  so  hard,  and  frozen  so  deepe  into  be  thawed.
the  ground,  that  wee  could  not  thaw  it,  and  it  would
have  cost  us  too  much  Wood,  and  therefore  wee  were
forced  to  leave  off  that  labour.

87

A.D.

1596.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[iil.iii.492.]

Maypole  of
Snow.

§•  II.

Their  cold,  comfortlesse,  darke  and  dreadfull
Winter  :  the  Sunnes  absence,  Moones  light,
Sunnes  unexpected  returne  with  miraculous
speed.  Of  Beares,  Foxes,  and  many  many
Wonders.

He  first  of  October,  the  Wind  blew  stiffe  North-
east, and  after-noone  it  blew  North,  with  a  great
storme  and  drift  of  Snow,  whereby  wee  could
hardly  goe  in  the  Wind,  and  a  man  could  hardly  draw
his  breath,  the  Snow  drave  so  hard  in  our  faces,  at
which  time  we  could  not  see  two  ships  length  from
us.  The  second  before  noone,  the  Sunne  shone,  and
after  noone  it  was  cloudie  againe,  and  it  snew,  but  the
weather  was  still,  the  Wind  being  North,  and  then
South,  and  wee  set  up  our  House,  and  upon  it  wee
placed  a  May-pole  made  of  frozen Snow.

The  third  before  noone,  it  was  calme  Sun-shine
weather,  but  so  cold,  that  it  was  hard  to  bee  indured,
and  after-noone  it  blew  hard  out  of  the  West,  with
so  great  extreme  cold,  that  if  it  had  continued,  we  should
have  beene  forced  to  leave  our  worke.  The  fourth,  the
Wind  was  West,  and  after-noone  North,  with  great
store  of  Snow,  whereby  we  could  not  worke  :  at  that
time  we  brought  our  Anchor  upon  the  Ice  to  lye  the
faster,  when  wee  lay  but  an  Arrow  shot  from  the  Water,
the  Ice  was  so  much  driven  away.

The  fifth,  it  blew  hard  North-west,  and  the  Sea  was
very  open  and  without  Ice,  as  farre  as  we  could  discerne,
but  we  lay  still  frozen  as  we  did  before,  and  our  ship
lay  two  or  three  foot  deepe  in  the  Ice,  and  wee  could
not  perceive  otherwise,  but  that  wee  lay  fast  upon  the
ground,  and  then  it  was  three  fathome  and  a  halfe  deepe.
The  same  day  we  brake  up  the  lower  deck  of  the  fore-
part of  our ship, and with  those Deales we covered

88

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1596.

our Houses, and made it slope over head, that the

Water  might  runne  off,  at  which  time  it  was  very  cold.

The  sixth,  it  blew  hard  West  South-west,  but towards

Eevening,  West  North-west,  with  a  great  Snow,  that  wee  Extreme

could hardly thrust our heads out of  the doore, by  Snozv-

reason  of  the  great  cold. The  seventh,  it  was  indifferent

good weather, but yet very cold, and wee calk't our

House,  and  brake  the  ground  about  it  at  the  foot  thereof :

that  day  the  Wind  went  round  about  the  Compasse.

The  eight,  all  the  night  before  it blew so hard,  and

the  same  day  also,  and  snowed  so  fast,  that  we  should

have  smothered,  if  we  had  gone  out  into  the  Ayre  ;  and

to  speake  truth,  it  had not  beene  possible  for  any  man

to  have  gone  one  ships  length,  though  his  life  had  layen

thereon  :  for  it was  not  possible for  us  to  goe out of

the  House  or  ship. The  ninth,  the  Wind  still  continued  Hence  %tt  may

North, and blew, and snowed hard, all that day the  "Wf**

course  or  the
Wind  as  then blowing  from the  Land, so  that all  that  Tides  and  Sea

day we  were  forced to stay  in the ship, the weather  is  from  the

was  so  foule.  North.

The  tenth,  the  weather  was  somewhat  fairer,  and  the

Wind calmer, and blew South-west, and West, and

South-west,  and  that  time  the  Water  flowed  two foote

higher  then  ordinary,  which  we  ghest  to  proceede  from

the  first  North-wind,  which  as  then  had  blowne. The

same  day  the  weather  began  to  be  somewhat  better,  so

that  we  began  to  go  out of  our ship  againe  : and as

one  of  our  men  went  out,  he  chanced  to  meet  a  Beare,

and  was  almost  at  him  before  hee  knew  it,  but  presently

he  ranne  backe  againe  towards  the  ship,  and the Beare

after  him  ; but  the Beare  comming  to  the  place  where

before  we  had  killed  another  Beare,  and  set  her  upright,

and  there  let  her  freeze  (which was covered over with

Ice, and yet  one of  her  pawes reached about it)  shee

stood  still,  whereby  our  man  got  before  her,  and  climbed

up  into  the  ship,  in  great  feare,  crying,  A  Beare,  a  Beare  ;

which  we  hearing,  came  above  Hatches  to  looke  on  her,

and  to  shoot  at  her,  but  we  could  not  see  her,  by  meanes

89

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

of  the  exceeding  great  smoke,  that  had  so  sore  tormented
us  (while  we  lay  under  Hatches)  in  the  foule  weather
which  we  would  not  have  indured  for  any  money,  but
by  reason  of  the  cold  and  snowie  weather,  wee  were
constrayned  to  doe  it,  if  wee  would  save  our  lives,  for
aloft  in  the  ship  we  must  undoubtedly  have  died  ;  the
Beare  stayed  not  long  there,  but  ranne  away,  the  Wind
then  being  North-east.  The  same  day  about  Eevening,
it  was  faire  weather,  and  we  went  out  of  our  ship  to
the  House,  and  carried  the  greatest  part  of  our  Bread
thither.

The  eleventh,  it  was  calme  weather,  the  Wind  being
South,  and  somewhat  warme,  and  then  we  carried  our
Wine  and  other  Victuals  on  Land  :  and  as  we  were
hoysing  the  Wine  over-boord,  there  came  a  Beare
towards  our  ship,  that  had  layen  behind  a  piece  of  Ice,
and  it  seemed  that  we  had  waked  her  with  the  noyse
we  made  :  for  wee  had  seene  her  lye  there,  but  wee
thought  her  to  be  a  piece  of  Ice ;  but  as  she  came
neere  us,  we  shot  at  her,  and  she  ranne  away,  so  we
proceeded  in  our  worke.  The  twelfth,  it  blew  North,
and  somewhat  Westerly,  and  then  halfe  of  our  men
kept  in  the  House,  and  that  was  the  first  time  that  we
lay  in  it,  but  wee  indured  great  cold,  because  our  Cabins
were  not  made  ;  and  besides  that  wee  had  not  Clothes
enough,  and  we  could  keepe  no  fire  because  our  Chimney
was  not  made,  whereby  it  smoked  exceedingly.

The  thirteenth,  the  Wind  was  North  and  North-west,
[III.iii.493.]  and  it  began  againe  to  blow  hard,  and  then  three  of  us
went  aboord  the  ship,  and  laded  a  Sled  with  Beere,
but  when  wee  had  laden  it,  thinking  to  goe  to  our
House  with  it,  suddenly  there  rose  such  a  Wind,  and
so  great  a  storme  and  cold,  that  wee  were  forced  to
goe  into  the  ship  againe,  because  wee  were  not  able  to
stay  without,  and  wee  could  not  get  the  Beere  into  the
ship  againe,  but  were  forced  to  let  it  stand  without
upon  the  Sled:  being  in  the  ship,  wee  indured  extreame
cold,  because  wee  had  but  a  few  clothes  in  it.

90

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1596.

The  fourteenth,  as  wee  came  out  of  the  ship,  wee
found  the  Barrell  of  Beere  standing  upon  the  Sled,  but
it  was  fast  frozen  at  the  heads,  yet  by  reason  of  the
great  cold,  the  Beere  that  purged  out,  froze  as  hard
upon  the  side  of  the  Barrell  as  if  it  had  bene  glued
thereon,  and  in  that  sort  wee  drew  it  to  our  House,
and  set  the  Barrell  an  end,  and  dranke  it  first  up,  but
wee  were  forced  to  melt  the  Beere,  for  there  was  scant  Beere  melted.
any  unfrozen  Beere  in  the  Barrell,  but  in  that  thicke  Yeast
that  was  unfrozen  lay  the  strength  of  the  Beere,  so  that
it  was  too  strong  to  drinke  alone,  and  that  which  was
frozen  tasted  like  water,  and  being  melted  we  mixt  one
with  the  other,  and  so  dranke  it,  but  it  had  neither
strength  nor  taste.

The  fifteenth,  the  Wind  blew  North  and  East,  and
East  South-east,  that  day  we  made  place  to  set  up  our
doore,  and  shoveled  the  Snow  away.  The  eighteenth,
the  Wind  blew  hard  East  South-east,  and  then  we
fetched  our  Bread  out  of  the  Scute  which  wee  had  drawne
up  upon  the  Land,  and  the  Wine  also  which  as  then
was  not  much  frozen,  and  yet  it  had  layne  sixe  Weekes
therein,  and  not  withstanding  that  it  had  oftentimes
frozen  very  hard.  The  same  day  wee  saw  another
Beare,  and  then  the  Sea  was  so  covered  over  with  Ice,  Sea  covered
that  wee  could  see  no  open  water.  with  Ice.

The  nineteenth,  the  Wind  blew  North-east,  and  then
there  was  but  two  men  and  a  Boy  in  the  ship,  at  which
time  there  came  a  Beare  that  fought  forcibly  to  get  Beare  assaults
into  the  ship,  although  the  two  men  shot  at  her  with  the  ship.
pieces  of  Wood,  and  yet  she  ventured  upon  them,
whereby  they  were  in  an  extreame  feare,  each  of  them
seeking  to  save  themselves,  the  two  men  leapt  into  the
Ballast,  and  the  Boy  climbed  into  the  foot  Mast  top,
to  save  their  lives,  meane  time,  some  of  our  men  shot
at  her  with  a  Musket,  and  then  shee  ranne  away.  The
twentieth,  it  was  calme  Sunne-shine  weather,  and  then
againe  wee  saw  the  Sea  open,  at  which  time  wee  went
on boord to fetch the rest of  our Beere  out  of  the

91

All  come  to  the
House.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

1596.

Barrels  and ship, where  wee found some  of  the  Barrels  frozen in

Iron  hopes pieces,  and  the Iron  hoopes  that  were  upon  the  Josam

broken  with t> 1  1 r  •

,  .barrels  were  also  frozen  in  pieces.

The  two  and  twentieth,  the  Winde  blew  coldly,  and
very  stiffe  North-east,  with  so  great  a  Snow,  that  wee
could  not  get  out  of  our  doores.  The  three  and
twentieth,  it  was  calme  weather,  and  the  Winde  blew
North-east,  then  wee  went  aboord  our  ship,  to  see  if
the  rest  of  our  men  would  come  home  to  the  House;
but  wee  feared  that  it  would  blow  hard  againe,  and
therefore  durst  not  stirre  with  the  sicke  man,  but  let
him  lye  still  that  day,  for  hee  was  very  weake.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  the  rest  of  our  men  beeing
eight  persons,  came  to  the  House,  and  drew  the  sicke
man  upon  a  Sled,  and  then  with  great  labour  and  paine,
wee  drew  our  Boat  home  to  our  House,  and  turned
the  bottome  thereof  upwards ;  that  when  time  served
us  (if  God  saved  our  lives  in  the  Winter  time)  wee
might  use  it :  and  after  that,  perceiving  that  the  ship
lay  fast,  and  that  there  was  nothing  lesse  to  be  expected
then  the  opening  of  the  water,  wee  put  our  Anchor  into
the  ship  againe,  because  it  should  not  be  covered  over
and  lost  in  the  Snow,  that  in  the  Spring  time  wee  might
use  it :  for  we  alwayes  trusted  in  God  that  hee  would
deliver  us  from  thence  towards  Summer  time,  eyther
one  way  or  other.  The  Sunne,  when  we  might  see
it  best  and  highest,  began  to  be  very  low,  and  we  used
all  the  speed  we  could  to  fetch  all  things  with  Sleds
out  of  our  ship  into  our  House,  not  onely  meate  and
drinke,  but  all  other  necessaries,  at  which  time  the  Wind
was  North.

The  five  and  twentieth,  wee  fetcht  all  things  that
were  necessary  for  the  furnishing  of  our  Scute  and  our
Boate :  and  when  we  had  laden  the  last  Sled,  and
stood  readie  to  draw  it  to  the  House,  our  Master  looked
about  him  and  saw  three  Beares  behind  the  ship  that
were  comming  towards  us,  whereupon  hee  cryed  out
aloud to feare them away, and wee presently leaped

92

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1596.

forth to defend our  selves as  well as we could : and,

as  good  fortune  was,  there  lay  two  Halberds  upon  the

Sled,  whereof  the Master tooke  one,  and  I the  other,

and  made  resistance  against  them  as  well  as  we  could ;

but the rest of  our men  ranne  to save  themselves  in

the ship, and as they ranne, one  of  them  fell  into  a

Clift of  Ice,  which  grieved us  much : for  we  thought

verily that the Beares would  have  ranne  unto  him,  to

devoure him, but God defended him : for the Beares

still  made towardes the  ship  after  the men that  ranne

thither  to  save  themselves. Meane  time,  wee and  the

man  that  fell  into  the  Clift  of  Ice,  tooke  our  advantage,

and  got  into  the  ship  on  the  other  side,  which  the  Beares  Fight  with

perceiving,  they  came fiercely  towards  us, that had no  Beares.

other  Armes to defend  us withall, but onely the two

Halberds,  which  wee  doubting  would  not  bee  sufficient,

wee still  gave them worke  to doe by  throwing  Billets

and other things at them,  and every time  we threw,

they ranne  after  them as a  Dogge useth to doe at  a

Stone  that  is  cast  at  him. Meane  time,  wee  sent  a  man

downe  under  Hatches  to  strike  Fire,  and  another  to  fetch  [III.iii.494.]

Pikes, but wee could get no Fire, and so wee had

no meanes to  shoote : at the  last,  as the  Beares  came

fiercely  upon  us,  wee  strooke  one  of  them  with  a  Halberd

upon the Snowt, wherewith shee gave backe, when

shee felt her selfe hurt, and went away, which the

other two  that were not so great  as  shee, perceiving,

ranne away:  and wee thanked God that wee were so

well  delivered  from  them,  and  so  drew  our  Sled  quietly

to our House,  and there shewed our men what  had

happened  unto  us.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  the  Wind  was  North,  and
North  North-west,  with  indifferent  faire  weather :  then
wee  saw  open  Water  hard  by  the  Land,  but  wee
perceived  the  Ice  to  drive  in  the  Sea,  still  towards  the
ship.  The  seven  and  twentieth,  the  Wind  blew  North-
east, and  it  snowed  so  fast,  that  wee  could  not  worke
without  the  doore. That  day  our  men  killed  a  White

93

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

White  Foxe. Foxe,  which they  flead  : and after they had  rosted  it,

ate thereof, which tasted like Conies flesh  : the same

day  we  set  up  our  Dyall,  and  made  the  Clocke  strike,

and  wee  hung  up  a  Lampe  to  burne  in  the  night  time,

Bearesfatfar  wherein we  used  the fat  of  the  Beare  which  wee  melt,

amP*-  ancj  burnt  in  the  Lampe.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  the  Wind  still  blew  North-
east, and  then  wee  fetched  Segges  from  the  Sea-side,  and
layd  them  upon  the  Sayle  that  was  spread  upon  our
House,  that  it  might  bee  so  much  the  closer  and  warmer :
for  the  Deales  were  not  driven  close  together,  and  the
foule  weather  would  not  permit  us  to  doe  it.  The
thirtieth,  the  Winde  yet  continued  North-east,  and
the  Sunne  was  full  above  the  Earth,  a  little  above  the
Horizon.  The  one  and  thirtieth,  the  Winde  still  blew
North-east,  with  great  store  of  Snow,  whereby  wee  durst
not  looke  out  of  doores.
November.  The first of November, the Wind still continued

Sun&Moone.  North-east,  and  then  wee  saw  the  Moone  rise  in  the
East  when  it  beganne  to  bee  darke,  and  the  Sunne  was
no  higher  above  the  Horizon  then  we  could  well  see
it,  and  yet  that  day  we  saw  it  not,  because  of  the  close
weather,  and  the  great  Snow  that  fell,  and  it  was  extreame
cold,  so  that  we  could  not  goe  out  of  the  House.

The second, the Wind blew West, and somewhat

South, but in  the Eevening  it  blew  North, with  calme

Sun  rueth  ^ weather, and that day we saw the Sunne  rise South

South-east, and it went  downe South South-west,  but

it  was  not  full  above  the  Earth,  but  passed  in  the  Horizon

South-west, along by the Earth : and the same day one of  our

not  fall  above men killed  a Fox  with a Hatchet, which was flayed,

the  Earth. roasted  and  eaten. Before  the  Sunne  began  to  decline,

Beares  wee saw no Foxes, and then the Beares  used  to  goe

from  us.

The  third,  the  Wind  blew  North-west  with  calme
weather,  and  the  Sunne  rose  South  and  by  East,  and
somewhat  more  Southerly,  and  went  downe  South  and
by  West,  and  somewhat  more  Southerly  ; and  then  we

94

South  South
east,  and  goe th
downe  South

WILLIAM BARENTS  ad.

1596.

could  see  nothing  but  the  upper  part  of  the  Sunne
above  the  Horizon,  and  yet  the  Land  where  wee  were,
was  as  high  as  the  Mast  of  our  ship,  then  wee  tooke
the  height  of  the  Sunne,  it  being  in  the  eleventh  degree,
and  fortie  eight  minutes  of  Scorpio,  his  Declination  being
fifteene  degrees  and  twentie  foure  minutes,  on  the  South-
side  of  the  Equinoctiall  Line.

The  fourth,  it  was  calme  weather,  but  then  wee  saw  They  see  the
the Sunne no more, for it was no longer  above  the  Sun  no  more
Horizon,  then  our Chirurgion made a  Bath (to  bathe  f^^
us in) of  a Wine-pipe,  wherein wee entred  one  after  ^  novo  0'r
the  other, and it did  us much good, and  was  a  great  ourOctob.z^.
meanes of  our health. The same day wee tooke a
White  Foxe, that oftentimes  came  abroad, not  as  they
used at other times :  for that  when  the  Beares  left  us
at  the  setting  of  the  Sunne,  and  came  not  againe  before
it rose,  the Foxe  to the contrarie came abroad when
they  were  gone.

The  fifth,  the  Winde  was  North,  and  somewhat  West,

and  then wee saw open water upon the  Sea,  but  our

shippe lay still fast in the Ice,  and  when the  Sunne

had  left us, wee saw the Moone  continuall  both day  Moone  con-

and  night, and never  went  downe when  it  was  in the  thually  seene

highest  degree. The  sixt,  the  Winde  was  North-west,  *  the  Sunnes

d  o  »  ' absence

still weather,  and then our men  fetcht a Sled  full  of

Fire-wood,  but  by  reason  that  the  Sunne  was  not  seene,

it  was  very  darke  weather.

The seventh, it was darke weather, and very  still,  Darknesse.

the  Winde  West,  at  which  time  wee  could  hardly  discerne

the  Day  from  the  Night,  specially  because  at  that  time

our  Clocke  stood still,  and by  that meanes  wee  knew

not when it was day, although it was day, and  our

men  rose  not  out  of  their  Cabins  all  that  day  ;  but  onely

to make  water,  and therefore they knew  not  whether

the light they saw, was the light of  the day or of

the  Moone ;  whereupon,  they  were  of  severall  opinions,

some  saying,  it  was  the  light  of  the  day,  the  others  of

the night : but as wee tooke good  regard  thereunto,

95

A.D.
1596.

Bread  shared
and  Beere.

[III.iii.495.]

Beere  strength
lesse  with
frost.

Ship  ballast
covered  with
water.

fox -trap.

Wine  shared.
Drinke  water.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

wee  found  it  to  bee  the  light  of  the  day  about  twelve
of  the  clocke  at  noone.

The  eight,  it  was  still  weather,  the  Winde  blowing
South,  and  South-west.  The  same  day  our  men  fetcht
another  Sled  of  Fire-wood,  and  then  also  wee  tooke  a
White  Foxe,  and  saw  open  water  in  the  Sea.  The  same
day  wee  shared  our  Bread  amongst  us,  each  man  having
foure  pound  and  tenne  ounces,  for  his  allowance  in
eight  dayes,  so  that  then  we  were  eight  dayes  eating
a  Barrell  of  Bread,  whereas  before  wee  ate  it  up  in  five  or
six  dayes :  we  had  no  need  to  share  our  flesh  and  fish,
for  we  had  more  store  thereof;  but  our  drinke  failed  us,
and  therefore  we  were  forced  to  share  that  also  :  but
our  best  Beere  was  for  the  most  part  wholy  without  any
strength,  so  that  it  had  no  savour  at  all :  and  besides
all  this,  there  was  a  great  deale  of  it  spilt.  The  ninth,
the  Wind  blew  North-east,  and  somewhat  more  Northerly,
and  then  we  had  not  much  day  light,  but  it  was  altogether
darke.  The  tenth,  it  was  calme  weather,  the  Wind
North-west,  and  then  our  men  went  into  the  ship  to
see  how  it  lay,  and  wee  saw  that  there  was  a  great  deale
of  water  in  it,  so  that  the  ballast  was  covered  over  with
water,  but  that  it  was  frozen,  and  so  might  not  bee  pumpt
out.  The  eleventh,  it  was  indifferent  weather,  the  Wind
North-west.  The  same  day  we  made  a  round  thing  of
Cable  yarne,  and  like  to  a  Net,  to  catch  Foxes  withall,
that  wee  might  get  them  into  the  House,  and  it  was  made
like  a  Trap,  which  fell  upon  the  Foxes  as  they  came
under  it,  and  that  day  we  caught  one.

The  twelfth,  the  Wind  blew  East,  with  a  little  light :
that  day  wee  began  to  share  our  Wine,  every  man  had
two  Glasses  a  day,  but  commonly  our  Drinke  was  water,
which  we  melted  out  of  Snow,  which  we  gathered  without
the  House.  The  thirteenth,  it  was  foule  weather,  with
great  Snow,  the  Wind  East.  The  fourteenth,  it  was  faire
cleere  weather,  with  a  cleere  Skie  full  of  Starres,  and
an  East-wind.  The  fifteenth,  it  was  darke  weather,  the
Wind North-east, with a  vading  light. The  sixteenth,

96

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1596.

it  was  weather  with  a  temperate  Ayre,  and  an  East-wind.

The  seventeenth,  it  was  darke  weather,  and  a  close  Ayre,

the  Wind  East. The eighteenth it  was  foule  weather,

the  wind  South-east :  then  the  Master  cut  up  a  packe  of

course Clothes, and divided it amongst  our men that

needed  it,  therewith  to  defend  us  better  from  the  cold.

The  nineteenth,  it  was  foule  weather,  with  an  East-wind,

and  then  the  Chist  with  Linnen  was  opened,  and  divided

amongst  the  men  for  shift,  for  they  had  need  of  them,  for

then  our  onely  care  was  to  find  all  the  meanes  we  could

to  defend  our  bodie  from  the  cold. The  twentieth,  it  was

faire  still  weather,  the  Wind  Easterly,  then  wee  washt  our

sheets,  but  it  was  so  cold,  that  when  wee  had  washt  and

wrung  them,  they  presently  froze  so  stiffe,  that  although  111  washing.

wee  layed  them  by  a  great  fire,  the  side  that  lay  next  the

fire  thawed,  but  the  other  side  was  hard  frozen,  so  that

wee  should  sooner  have  torne  them  in  sunder  then  have

opened  them,  whereby  wee  were  forced  to  put  them  into

the seething water againe to thaw them, it was so

exceeding  cold. The  one  and  twentieth,  it  was  indifferent

weather with a North-east wind, then we  agreed that

every  man  should  take  his  turne  to  cleave  Wood,  thereby

to  ease  our  Cooke,  that  had  more  then  worke  enough  to

doe  twice  a  day  to  dresse  meate,  and  to  melt  Snow  for

our  Drinke,  but  our  Master  and  the  Pilot  were  exempted

from  that  Worke.

The  two  and  twentieth,  the  Wind  was  South-east,  it
was  faire  weather,  then  wee  had  but  seventeene  Cheeses,
whereof  one  we  ate  amongst  us,  and  the  rest  were  divided  to
every  man  one  for  his  portion,  which  they  might  eate  when
he  list.  The  three  and  twentieth,  it  was  indifferent  good
weather,  the  Wind  South-east,  and  as  we  perceived  that
the  Fox  used  to  come  oftner,  and  more  then  they  were
wont,  to  take  them  the  better,  wee  made  certaine  Trappes
of  thicke  Planckes,  whereon  wee  laid  stones,  and  round
about  them  placed  pieces  of  shards  fast  in  the  ground,
that  they  might  not  digge  under  them,  and  so  got  some  of
the  Foxes.  The  foure  and  twentieth,  it  was  foule
xm  97  G

A.D.
1596.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

weather,  and  the  Wind  North-east,  and  then  wee
Bathing  and  prepared  our  selves  to  goe  into  the  Bath,  for  some  of
purging.  us  were  not  very  well  at  ease,  and  so  foure  of  us  went

into  it,  and  when  we  came  out,  our  Surgeon  gave  us
a  Purgation,  which  did  us  much  good,  and  that  day
we  tooke  foure  Foxes.  The  five  and  twentieth,  it
was  faire  cleere  weather,  the  Wind  West ;  and  that  day
we  tooke  two  Foxes  with  Springs  that  we  had  purposely
set  up.

The  six  and  twentieth,  it  was  foule  weather,  and  a  great
storme  with  a  South-west  Wind,  and  great  store  of  Snow,
whereby  wee  were  so  closed  up  in  the  House,  that  wee
could  not  goe  out,  but  were  forced  to  ease  our  selves
within  the  House.  The  seven  and  twentieth,  it  was
faire  cleere  weather,  the  Wind  South-west,  and  then  we
made  more  Springes  to  get  Foxes,  for  it  stood  us  upon  to
doe  it,  because  they  served  us  for  meate,  as  if  God  had
sent  them  purposely  for  us,  for  we  had  not  much  meate.
The  eight  and  twentieth  of  November,  it  was  foule
stormie  weather,  and  the  Winde  blew  hard  out  of  the
North,  and  it  snew  hard,  whereby  wee  were  shut  up
againe  in  our  House,  the  Snow  lay  so  closed  before  the
doores.

The nine and  twentieth,  it  was faire  cleere  weather,

and  a  good  Ayre :  the  Wind  Northerly,  and  we  found

meanes  to  open  our  doore  by  shoveling  away  the  Snow,

whereby wee got  one of  our doores  open, and  going

out,  wee  found  all  our  Traps  and  Springes  cleane  covered

Store  of  Snow,  over  with  Snow,  which  wee  made  cleane,  and  set  them  up

againe  to  take  Foxes :  and  that  day  wee  tooke  one,  which

Fox-skin-caps,  as  then  served  us  not  onely  for  meate,  but  of  the  skinnes

wee  made  Caps  to  weare  upon  our  heads,  wherewith  to

keepe  them  warme  from  the  extreame  cold. The  thirtieth,

it  was  faire  cleere  weather,  the  Wind  West,  and  six  of

us  went  to  the  ship,  all  well  provided  of  Armes  to  see

how  it  lay  :  and  when  wee  went  under  the  fore  Decke,

wee  tooke  a  Foxe  alive  in  the  ship.

December.  The first  of  December, it  was foule weather  with a

98

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1596.

South-west  Wind,  and  great  store  of  Snow,  whereby  we

were  once againe stopt  up in the House,  and  by  that

meanes  there  was  so  great  a  smoake  in  the  House,  that  [III.iii.496.]

we could hardly make fire,  and  so  were  forced  to  lye  Lye  still  in

all  day  in  our  Cabins,  but  the  Cooke  was  forced  to  make  Ca^ns-

fire  to  dresse  our  meate. The  second,  it  was  still  foule

weather,  whereby  wee  were  forced  to  keepe  still  in  the

House,  and  yet  wee  could  hardly  sit  by  the  fire,  because

of  the  smoake,  and  therefore  stayed  still  in  our  Cabins,

and  then  we  heated  stones,  which  we  put  in  our  Cabins  Stones  heated

to  warme  our  feet,  for  that  both  the  cold  and  the  smoake  t0  heat  them-

were  un  supportable.  Cold  and

o  tnoake
The  third,  we  had  the  like  weather,  at  which  time  as

we  lay  in  our  Cabins,  wee  might  heare  the  Ice  cracke  in  the  Ice  cracking

Sea,  and  yet  it  was  at  the  least  halfe  a  mile  from  us,  which  n°yse-

made  a  huge  noyse,  and  we  were  of  opinion,  that  as  then

the  great  Hils  of  Ice  which  wee  had  seene  in  the Sea,

in Summer  time, brake one from the other,  and for

that during those two or three  dayes, because of  the

extreame smoake, we made not so much fire as we

commonly  used  to  doe,  it  froze  so  sore  within  the  House,

that the  Wals  and  the Roofe thereof  were  frozen two

fingers  thick with Ice, and also in our Cabins where  Ice  in  the

we  lay all  those three  dayes, while  wee  could  not  goe  House.

out : by  reason  of  the  foule  weather,  we  set  up  the  Glasse

of  twelve houres, and when  it was  runne  out,  wee  set

it  up  againe,  still  watching  it  lest  wee  should  misse  our

time. For  the  cold  was  so  great,  that  our  Clocke  was  Clock  frozen.

frozen,  and  might  not  goe,  although  we  hung  more  waight

on  it  then  before.

The fourth, it was faire cleere weather, the Wind

North-east,  and  then  we  began every  man  by  turne  to

digge  open  our  doores  that  were  closed  up  with  Snow,  for  Doore  digged

we saw that it  would  be often to doe, and therefore  open.

we  agreed  to  worke  by  turnes,  no  man  excepted  but  the

Master  and the  Pilot. The  fifth,  it  was  faire  weather

with  an  East-wind,  and  then  we  made  our  Springes  cleane

againe  to take Foxes. The sixt,  it  was  foule  weather

99

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

againe,  with  an  Easterly  Wind,  and  extreame  cold,  almost
not  to  bee  indured,  whereupon  wee  lookt  pittifully  one
upon  the  other,  being  in  great  feare,  that  if  the  extreamitie
of  the  cold  grew  to  bee  more  and  more,  wee  should
all  dye  there  with  cold,  for  that  what  fire  soever  we  made,
Cold  stronger  it  would  not  warme  us,  yea,  and  our  Sacke  which  is
then  fire  and  so  j^^  was  frozen  very  hard,  so  that  when  wee  were
every  man  to  have  his  part,  we  were  forced  to  melt
it  in  the  fire,  which  wee  shared  every  second  day  about
halfe  a  pint  for  a  man,  wherewith  we  were  forced  to
sustayne  our  selves,  and  at  other  times  wee  dranke
water,  which  agreed  not  well  with  the  cold,  and  we
needed  not  to  coole  it  with  Snow  or  Ice,  but  we  were
forced  to  melt  it  out  of  the  Snow.

The  seventh,  it  was  still  foule  weather,  and  we  had
a  great  storme  with  a  North-east  Wind,  which  brought
an  extreame  cold  with  it,  at  which  time  wee  knew  not
what  to  doe,  and  while  we  sate  consulting  together,  what
were  best  for  us  to  doe,  one  of  our  companions  gave  us
Sea-coale  fire,  counsell  to  burne  some  of  the  Sea-coales  that  we  had
brought  out  of  the  ship,  which  would  cast  a  great  heate
and  continue  long,  and  so  at  Eevening  we  made  a  great
fire  thereof,  which  cast  a  great  heat  :  at  which  time
wee  were  very  carefull  to  keepe  it  in  :  for  that  the  heate
beeing  so  great  a  comfort  unto  us,  we  tooke  care  how  to
make  it  continue  long  :  whereupon  wee  agreed  to  stop  up
all  the  doores  and  the  Chimney,  thereby  to  keepe  in
the  heate,  and  so  went  into  our  Cabins  to  sleepe,  well
comforted  with  the  heate,  and  so  lay  a  great  while  talking
Swounding  y  together  ;  but  at  last  we  were  taken  with  a  great  swound-
stifiing  by  the  [ng  and  dazeling  in  our  heads,  yet  some  more  then  other
Cole-vapour  somC)  wnich  we  first  perceived  by  a  sicke  man,  and
therefore  the  lesse  able  to  beare  it,  and  found  our  selves
to  be  very  ill  at  ease,  so  that  some  of  us  that  were
strongest,  start  out  of  their  Cabins,  and  first  opened
the  Chimney,  and  then  the  doores,  but  he  that  opened
the  doore  fell  downe  in  a  swound  upon  the  Snow,  which
I  hearing,  as  lying  in  my  Cabin  next  to  the  doore,  start

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1596.

up,  and  casting  Vinegar  in  his  face,  recovered  him  againe,

and  so  he  rose  up  : and  when the doores were  open,

we  all  recovered  our  healths  againe,  by  reason  of  the  cold  Benefit  of  cold.

Ayre,  and so  the  cold  which  before  had  beene  so  great

an Enemy  unto  us,  was  then  the  onely  reliefe  that  wee

had,  otherwise  without  doubt,  we  had  dyed  in  a  sudden

swound, after that the Master, when we were come

to  our  selves  againe,  gave  every  one  of  us  a  little  Wine

to  comfort  our  hearts.

The  eight,  it  was  foule  weather,  the  winde Northerly,
very  sharpe  and  cold, but  we  durst  lay  no  more  coales
on,  as  wee did the  day  before,  for  that  our  misfortune
had  taught  us,  that  to  shunne  one  danger  we  should  not
runne  into  another. The  ninth,  it  was  faire  cleare  weather,
the  skie  full  of  Starres,  then  we  set  our  doore  wide  open,
which  before  was  fast  closed  up  with  Snow,  and  made  our
Springes  ready to take Foxes. The  tenth,  it  was  still
faire  Star-light  weather,  the  winde  North-east: then  wee
tooke  two  Foxes,  which  were  good  meate  for  us,  for  as
then  our  victuals  began  to  bee  scant,  and  the  cold  still
increased,  whereunto  their  Skinnes  served  us  for  a  good
defence. The  eleventh,  it  was  faire  weather,  and  a  cleere
ayre  but  very  cold,  which hee that  felt  not  would not
beleeve,  for  our  Shooes  froze  as  hard  as  homes  upon  our  Shooes  on  feet
feete, and  within they were white frozen,  so  that we  frozen  within.
could not weare  our  shooes,  but were  forced  to  make  They  ware  no
great Pattents, the upper part being Sheepe-skinnes,  snooes-
which  we  put  on  over  three  or  foure  payre  of  Sockes,  and
so  went  in  them  to  keepe  our  feet  warme.

The  twelfth,  it  was  faire  cleere  weather  with  a  North-
west winde,  but  extreame  cold,  so  that  our  House  walls
and  Cabbins  were  frozen  a  finger  thicke  ;  yea,  and  the
Cloathes  upon  our  backes  were  white  over  with  Frost,  and  Clothes  on
although  some  of  us  were  of  opinion,  that  wee should  their  &&&&
lay  more  coles  upon  the  fire  to  warme  us,  and  that  we  p/r?- 7  -.
should  let  the  chimney  stand  open,  yet  we  durst  not  doe
it,  fearing  the  like  danger  we  had  escaped. The  thirteenth,
it  was  faire  cleere  weather,  with  an  East  winde  :  then  we

IOI

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1596.

tooke  another  Foxe,  and  tooke  great  paines  about  pre-
paring and  dressing  of  our  Springes,  with  no  small
trouble, for that if  wee stayed too long without the

Cold  blisters,  doores,  there  arose  blisters  upon  our  Faces  and  our
Eares.  The  fourteenth,  it  was  faire  weather,  the  winde
North-east,  and  the  skie  full  of  starres,  then  we  tooke  the
height  of  the  right  shoulder  of  the  Rens,  when  it  was
South  South-west,  and  somewhat  more  Westerly  (and
then  it  was  at  the  highest  in  our  Compasse)  and  it  was
elevated  above  the  Horizon  20.  degrees  and  28.  minutes,
his  Declination  being  6.  degrees  and  18.  minutes,  on  the
North-side  of  the  line,  which  Declination  being  taken  out
of  the  height  aforesayd,  there  rested  14.  degrees,  which
being  taken  out  of  90.  degrees,  then  the  height  of  the
Pole  was  76.  degrees.

The  fifteenth,  it  was  still  faire  weather,  the  winde  East :
that  day  wee  tooke  two  Foxes,  and  saw  the  Moone  rise
East  South-east,  when  it  was  sixe  and  twentie  dayes  old,
in  the  signe  of  Scorpio.  The  sixteenth,  it  was  faire  cleere
weather,  the  winde  East :  at  that  time  wee  had  no  more
Wood  in  the  house,  but  had  burnt  it  all  :  but  round
about  our  house  there  lay  some  covered  over  with  Snow,
which  with  great  paine  and  labour  we  were  forced  to
digge  out,  and  so  shovell  away  the  Snow,  and  so  brought
it  into  the  house,  which  wee  did  by  turnes,  two  and  two
together,  wherein  we  were  forced  to  use  great  speed,  for
wee  could  not  long  endure  without  the  House,  because  of

Extreame  and  the  extreame  cold,  although  we  wore  the  Foxes  skinnes

terrible  about  our  heads,  and  double  apparell  upon  our  backes.

freezing.  ^^  seventeenth,  the  winde  still  held  North-east,  with

faire  weather  and  so  great  Frosts,  that  wee  were  of
opinion,  that  if  there  stood  a  Barrell  full  of  water  with-
out the  doore,  it  would  in  one  night  freeze  from  the  top
to  the  bottome.  The  eighteenth,  the  winde  still  held
North-east,  with  faire  weather  :  then  seven  of  us  went
out  unto  the  Ship  to  see  how  it  lay,  and  being  under
the  decke,  thinking  to  finde  a  Foxe  there,  we  sought
all  the  holes  but  we  found  none  ; but  when  we  entred

102

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1596.

into the Cabbin and had stricken fire to see in what

case the ship was,  and whether the water rose higher

in it, there wee found a Foxe, which we tooke  and

canyed it home, and eate  it,  and then  we  found  that

in  eighteene dayes absence (for it was so long since

we  had  beene  there)  the  water  was  risen  about  a  finger

high,  but  yet  it was  all Ice,  for  it  froze as fast  as it

came in, and the vessels  which  wee had brought  with

us  full  of  fresh water out of  Holland,  were frozen  to

the  ground.

The  nineteenth,  it  was  faire  weather,  the  winde  being

South  : then  we  put  each  other  in  good  comfort,  that  Sunnes

the  Sunne  was  then  almost  halfe  over,  and  ready  to  come  comfort.

to  us  againe,  which  wee  sore  longed  for,  it  being  a  weary

time  for  us  to  bee  without  the  Sunne,  and  to  want  the

greatest  comfort  that  God  sendeth  unto  man  heere  upon

the  earth,  and  that  which rejoyceth every  living thing.

The  twentieth,  before  noone  it  was  faire  cleere  weather,

and  then  we  had  taken  a  Foxe, but  towards  Eevening,

there  rose  such  a  storme  in  the  South-west,  with  so  great

a  snow,  that  all  the  house  was  inclosed  therewith. The  House  inclosed

one and twentieth, it  was faire  cleere  weather, with  a  wlth  mow-

North-east  winde,  then  we  made  our  doore  cleane  againe,

and  made  a  way  to  goe  out,  and  clensed  our  Traps  for  the

Foxes,  which  did  us  great  pleasure  when  we  tooke  them,

for  they  seemed  as  daintie  as  Venison  unto  us. The  two

and twentieth, it  was foule weather, with great store

of  snow,  the  winde  South-west,  which  stopt  up  our  doore

againe,  and  wee  were  forced  to  digge  it  open  againe,  which

was  almost  every  day  to  doe. The  three  and  twentieth,

it  was  foule  weather,  the  wind  South-west,  with  great  store

of  snow,  but  wee  were  in  good  comfort  that  the  Sunne

would come againe to us, for as  we ghest, that day

hee was in Tropicus Capricorni, which is the furthest  Sun  in

Signe  that  the  Sunne  passeth  on  the  South-side  of  the  Tropicus  Cap-

line,  and  from  thence  it  turneth  Northward  againe. The  r'lcorn'u  24-

foure  and  twentieth,  being  Christmasse  Eeven,  it  was  faire ecem'
*  o  '  novo.

weather,  then  wee  opened  our  doore  againe,  and  saw  much

103

A.D.

1596.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Cold
Christmasse

111  signe
Indeed.

Cold

invincible

open  water  in  the  Sea  :  for  we  had  heard  the  Ice  cracke
and  drive  :  although  it  was  not  day,  yet  we  could  see
so  farre.  Towards  Eevening  it  blew  hard  out  of  the
North-east,  with  great  store  of  Snow,  so  that  all  the
passage  that  wee  had  made  open  before,  was  stopt  up
againe.  The  five  and  twentieth,  being  Christmasse  day,  it
was  foule  weather,  with  a  North-west  winde,  and  yet
though  it  was  foule  weather,  we  heard  the  Foxes  runne
over  our  House,  wherewith  some  of  our  men  sayd,  it  was
an  ill  signe  ;  and  while  we  sate  disputing  why  it  should
bee  an  ill  signe,  some  of  our  men  made  answer,  that  it
was  an  ill  signe  because  wee  could  not  take  them,  to  put
them  into  the  Pot  or  roast  them,  for  that  had  beene
a  very  good  signe  for  us.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  it  was  foule  weather,  the  winde
North-west,  and  it  was  so  cold  that  we  could  not  warme
us,  although  wee  used  all  the  meanes  we  could  with  great
fires,  good  store  of  cloathes,  and  with  hot  stones  and
billets,  layd  upon  our  feete  and  upon  our  bodies,  as  we
lay  in  our  Cabbins;  but  notwithstanding  all  this,  in  the
morning  our  Cabbins  were  frozen,  which  made  us  behold
one  the  other  with  sad  countenance,  but  yet  wee  com-
forted our  selves  againe  as  well  as  we  could,  that  the
Sunne  was  then  as  low  as  it  could  goe,  and  that  it  now
began  to  come  to  us  againe,  and  we  found  it  to  bee  true :
for  that  the  Dayes  beginning  to  lengthen,  the  Cold  began
to  strengthen,  but  hope  put  us  in  good  comfort,  and
[III.iii.498.]  eased  our  paine.  The  seven  and  twentieth,  it  was  still
foule  weather,  with  a  North-west  wind,  so  that  as  then
wee  had  not  beene  out  in  three  dayes  together,  nor  durst
not  thrust  our  heads  out  of  doores,  and  within  the  house
it  was  so  extreame  cold,  that  as  we  sate  before  a  great
Fire,  and  seemed  to  burne  on  the  fore-side,  we  froze
behind  at  our  backes,  and  were  all  white  as  the
Countrey-men  use  to  bee,  when  they  come  in  at  the
gates  of  the  Towne  in  Holland  with  their  Sleds,  and
have  gone  all  night.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  it  was  still  foule  weather  with

104

Burne  before,
freeze  behind.

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1597-
a  West  wind,  but  about  Eevening  it  began  to  cleere  up,
at  which  time  one  of  our  men  made  a  hole  open  at  one  of
our  doores,  and  went  out  to  see  what  newes  abroad,  but
found  it  so  hard  weather  that  hee  stayed  not  long,  and  told
us  that  it  had  snowed  so  much,  that  the  Snow  lay  higher  Snow  higher
then  our  house,  and  that  if  he  had  stayed  out  longer,  his  then  the  house.
eares  would undoubtedly have beene frozen off. The
nine  and  twentieth,  it  was  calme  weather,  and  a  pleasant
ayre,  the wind being  Southward  : that  day, he, whose
turne  it  was,  opened  the  doore,  and  digged  a  hole  through
the  Snow,  where  we  went  out  of  the  house  upon  steps,  as  Snow-steps.
if  it  had  beene  out  of  a  Celler,  at  least  seven  or  eight  steps
high,  each  step  a  foote  from  the  other,  and  then  we  made
cleane  our  Springes  for  the  Foxes,  whereof  for  certaine
dayes  we had not taken any  : and as we made them
cleane, one of  our men found  a  dead  Foxe  in  one  of
them, that was frozen as hard as a stone, which he
brought  into  the  house,  and thawed it before the fire,
and after flaying it, some of our men eate it. The
thirtieth,  it  was  foule  weather  againe,  with  a  storme  out  of
the  West,  and  great  store  of  Snow,  so  that  all  the  labour
and  paine  that  we  had  taken  the  day  before  to  make  steps
to  goe  out  of  our  house,  and  to  dense  our  Springes,  was
all  in  vaine,  for  it  was  all  covered  over  with  Snow  againe,
higher  then  it  was  before. The  one  and  thirtieth,  it  was
still  foule  weather,  with  a  storme  out  of  the  North-west,
whereby  we  were  so  fast  shut  up  into  the  house,  as  if  wee
had  beene  prisoners,  and  it  was  so  extreame  cold,  that  the
fire  almost  cast  no  heate  :  for  as  we  put  our  feet  to  the
fire,  we  burnt  our  hose  before  we  could  feele  the  heate,  so  pjr£  con_
that  we  had  worke  enough  to  doe  to  patch  our  hose  :  and  quered,  heat
which  is  more,  if  we  had  not  sooner  smelt,  then  felt  them,  melt  before
we  should  have  burnt  them  ere  we  had  knowne  it.  *

After  that  with  great  cold,  danger,  and  disease,  wee  had
brought  this  yeere  unto  an  end,  we  entred  into  the  yeere
of  our  Lord  God  1597.  the  beginning  whereof,  was  in  An.  Dom.
the  same  manner  as  the  end  of  Anno  1596.  had  beene, 1 597-
for  the  weather  continued  as  cold,  foule,  and  Snowie,  as  it

105

a.d.  PUKCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*597-

January,  was  before,  so  that  upon  the  first  of  January  wee  were

inclosed  in  the  House,  the  winde  then  being  West :  at  the
same  time  wee  agreed  to  share  our  Wine  every  man  a
small  measure  full,  and  that  but  once  in  two  dayes  :  and
as  we  were  in  great  care  and  feare  that  it  would  bee  long
before  we  should  get  out  from  thence,  (and  we  having  but
small  hope  therein)  some  of  us  spared  to  drinke  wine  as
long  as  we  could,  that  if  we  should  stay  long  there,  we
might  drinke  it  at  our  need.  The  second,  it  blew  hard
with  a  West  wind,  and  a  great  storme  with  both  Snow
and  Frost,  so  that  in  foure  or  five  dayes,  we  durst  not  put
our  heads  out  of  the  doores,  and  as  then  by  reason  of  the
great  cold,  we  had  almost  burnt  all  our  Wood  ;  notwith-
standing, we  durst  not  goe  out  to  fetch  more  wood,
because  it  froze  so  hard,  and  there  was  no  being  without
the  doore,  but  seeking  about  we  found  some  peeces  of
wood  that  lay  over  the  doore,  which  we  clove,  and  withall
clove  the  blockes  whereon  we  used  to  beate  our  Stock-
fish, and  so  holpe  our  selves  so  well  as  we  could.  The
third,  it  was  all  one  weather,  and  we  had  little  wood
to  burne.  The  fourth,  it  was  still  foule  stormie  weather,
with  much  Snow  and  great  cold,  the  winde  South-west,
and  we  were  forced  to  keepe  in  the  house  :  and  to  know
where  the  wind  blew,  we  thrust  a  halfe-pike  out  at  the
Vane.  Chimney  with  a  little  cloath  or  feather  upon  it,  but
as  soone  as  wee  thrust  it  out,  it  was  presently  frozen  as
hard  as  a  peece  of  wood,  and  could  not  goe  about  nor
stirre  with  the  wind.

The  fifth,  it  was  somewhat  still  and  calme  weather :
then  wee  digged  our  doore  open  againe,  that  we  might
goe  out,  and  carrie  out  all  the  filth  that  had  beene  made,
during  the  time  of  our  being  shut  in  the  house  ;  and
made  every  thing  handsome,  and  fetched  in  Wood  which
we  cleft,  and  it  was  all  our  dayes  worke  to  further  our-
selves as  much  as  we  could,  fearing  least  we  should  be
shut  up  againe  :  and  as  there  were  three  doores  in  our
portall,  and  for  that  our  house  lay  covered  over  in  Snow,
wee  tooke the  middle  doore  thereof  away,  and digged

106

WILLIAM BARENTS  ad.

I597-

a  great  hole  in  the  snow,  that  lay  without  the  house,  like

to  a  side  of  a  vault,  wherein  we  might  goe  to  ease  our
selves,  and  cast  other  filth  into  it  :  and  when  we  had
taken  paines  all  day,  we  remembred  our  selves  that  it
was  Twelfth  Eeven,  and  then  we  prayed  our  Master  that
we  might  be  merrie  that  night,  and  sayd,  that  we  were
content  to  spend  some  of  the  Wine  that  night  which  we
had  spared,  and  which  was  our  share  every  second  day,
and  whereof  for  certayne  dayes  wee  had  not  drunke,  and  so
that  night  we  made  merrie,  and  drunke  to  the  three  Kings,  Three  Kings
and  therewith  we  had  two  pound  of  Meale,  whereof  wee  °fCu^n-
made  pan-cakes  with  Oyle,  and  every  man  a  white  Bisket,
which  we  sopt  in  Wine,  and  so  supposing  that  we  were  in
our  owne  Countrey,  and  amongst  our  friends,  it  com-
forted us  as  well  as  if  we  had  made  a  great  banquet  in  our
owne  house  :  and  we  also  made  tickets,  and  our  Gunner
was  King  of  Nova  Zembla,  which  is  at  least  two  hundred  King  of  Nova
miles  long,  and  lyeth  betweene  two  Seas.  Zembla.

The  sixt,  it  was  faire  weather,  the  wind  North-east,  then
wee  went  out  and  cleansed  our  Traps  to  take  Foxes,  which
were  our  Venison,  and  we  digged  a  hole  in  the  Snow,
where our firewood lay,  and  left it close above  like  a  [III.iii.499.]
vault ;  and  from  thence  fetched  out  our  Wood  as  we  needed
it. The  seventh, it was foule weather againe, with a
North-west  wind,  and  some  Snow,  and  very  cold,  which
put  us  in  great  feare  to  be  shut  up  in  the  house  againe.
The  eight,  it  was  faire  weather  againe,  the  wind  North  :
then  wee  made  our  Springes  ready  to  get  more  Venison  :
which  wee  longed  for,  and  then  wee  might  see  and  marke  Day-light
day-light,  which  then  began  to  encrease,  that  the  Sunne  as  espied.
then  began  to  come  towards  us  againe,  which  put  us  in  no
little  comfort.

The  ninth,  it  was  foule  weather,  with  a  North-west
wind,  but  not  so  hard  weather  as  it  had  beene  before,  so
that  we  might  goe  out  of  the  doore  to  make  cleane  our
Springes.  The  tenth,  it  was  faire  weather  with  a  North
wind :  then  seven  of  us  went  to  our  ship  well  armed,
which  we  found  in  the  same  state  wee  left  it  in,  and  in  it

107

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*597-

Beares  in  the wee  saw  many  footsteps  of  Beares,  both  great  and  small,
ship.  whereby  it  seemed  that  there  had  beene  more  then  one  or

two  Beares  therein ;  and  as  we  went  under  hatches,  we
strooke  fire,  and  lighted  a  Candle,  and  found  that  the
water  was  risen  a  foot  higher  in  the  ship.  The  eleventh,
it  was  faire  weather,  the  wind  North-east,  and  the  cold
began  to  be  somewhat  lesse,  so  that  as  then  we  were  bold
to  goe  out  of  the  doores,  and  went  about  a  quarter  of  a
mile  to  a  Hill,  from  thence  we  fetched  certaine  stones,
which  we  layd  in  the  fire,  therewith  to  warme  us  in  our
Cabins.

The  twelfth,  it  was  cleare  weather,  the  wind  North-west :
that  evening  it  was  very  cleare,  and  the  skie  full  of  Starres,
OculusTauri.  then  wee  tooke  the  height  of  Oculus  Tauri,  which  is  a
bright  and  well  knowne  Starre,  and  we  found  it  to  be
elevated  above  the  Horizon  29.  degrees  and  54.  minutes,
her  declination  being  15.  degrees  54.  minutes  on  the
North  side  of  the  Line.  This  declination  being  sub-
tracted from  the  height  aforesaid,  then  there  rested
14.  degrees,  which  subtracted  from  90.  degrees,  then
the  height  of  the  Pole  was  76.  degrees,  and  so  by
measuring  the  height  of  that  Starre,  and  some  others,
wee  ghessed  that  the  Sunne  was  in  the  like  height,  and
that  we  were  there  under  76.  degrees,  and  rather  higher
then  lower.

The  thirteenth,  it  was  faire  still  weather,  the  wind
Westerly,  and  then  wee  perceived  that  day-light  began
more  and  more  to  encrease,  and  we  went  out  and  cast
Bullets  at  the  bale  of  the  Flag-staffe,  which  before  we
could  not  see  when  it  turned  about.  The  fourteenth,  it
was  faire  weather  and  a  cleare  light,  the  wind  Westerly,
and  that  day  we  tooke  a  Foxe.  The  fifteenth,  it  was  faire
cleere  weather,  with  a  West  wind,  and  sixe  of  us  went
aboord  the  ship,  where  wee  found  the  Bolck-vanger
(which  the  last  time  that  we  were  in  the  ship,  wee  stucke
in  a  hole  in  the  fore  decke,  to  take  Foxes)  pulled  out  of
the  hole,  and  lay  in  the  middle  of  the  ship,  and  all  torne  in
pieces  by  the  Beares,  as  we  perceived  by  their  footsteps.

108

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

*597-

The  sixteenth,  it  was  faire  weather,  the  wind  Northerly,
and then we  went  now  and  then out  of  the  house  to
stretch out our  joynts and our  limbs with going and
running, that we might not become lame, and about
noone  time  we  saw  a  certaine  rednesse  in the side,  as  Aurora
a  shew  or  messenger  of  the  Sunne  that  began  to  come  blusheth^  to  lie
towards  us. The  seventeenth,  it  was  cleare  weather  with  so  ons  tn
a  North  wind,  and  then  still  more  and  more  wee  perceived
that  the  Sunne  began  to  come  neerer  unto  us,  for  the  day
was  somewhat  warmer,  so  that  when  we  had  a  good  fire,
there  fell  great  pieces  of  Ice  downe  from  the  walls  of  our  Coldrelenteth.
house,  and  the  Ice  melted  in  our  Cabins,  and  the  water
dropped downe, which was not so before, how  great
soever our fire was; but that night it was cold
againe.

The  eighteenth,  it  was  faire  cleare  weather,  with  a
South-east  wind,  then  our  Wood  began  to  consume,  and
so  we  agreed  to  burne  some  of  our  Sea-coles,  and  not  to
stop  up  the  Chimney,  and  then  we  should  not  need  to
feare  any  hurt,  which  we  did,  and  found  no  disease
thereby,  but  we  thought  it  better  for  us  to  keepe  the
Coles,  and  to  burne  our  Wood  more  sparingly,  for  that
the  Coles  would  serve  us  better  when  we  should  sayle
home  in  our  open  Scute.

The  one  and  twentieth,  it  was  faire  weather  with  a
West  wind  :  at  that  time  taking  of  Foxes  began  to  fayle
us,  which  was  a  signe  that  the  Beares  would  come  againe,
as  not  long  after  we  found  it  to  be  true,  for  as  long  as  the
Beares  stay  away,  the  Foxes  came  abroad,  and  not  much
before  the  Beares  come  abroad,  the  Foxes  were  but  little
seene.

The  two  and  twentieth,  it  was  faire  weather  with  a
West  wind :  then  we  went  out  againe  to  cast  the  Bullet,
and  perceived  that  day-light  began  to  appeare,  whereby
some  of  us  said,  that  the  Sunne  would  soone  appeare  unto
us,  but  William  Barents  to  the  contrary  said,  that  it  was
yet  two  weekes  too  soone.  The  three  and  twentieth,  it
was  faire calme  weather,  with  a  South-west  wind: then

109

A.D.

!597<

Sunne
appeareth
againe,
Jan.  24.
[III.iii.500.]

Sun  fully  seen.

How  the  Sun
which  they
had  lost  the  4.
of  November
did  appeare  to
them  againe
upon  the  24.  of
January,
which  was
very  strange,
and  contrary
to  all  learned
mens  opinions.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

foure  of  us  went  to  the  ship,  and  comforted  each  other,
giving  God  thankes  that  the  hardest  time  of  the  Winter
was  past,  being  in  good  hope  that  we  should  live  to  talke
of  those  things  at  home  in  our  owne  Countrey  :  and  when
we  were  in  the  ship,  we  found  that  the  water  rose  higher
and  higher  in  it,  and  so  each  of  us  taking  a  Bisket  or  two
with  us,  wee  went  home  againe.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  it  was  faire  cleare  weather,
with  a  West  wind :  then  I,  and  Jacob  Heemskerke,  and
another  with  us  went  to  the  Sea-side,  on  the  South  side  of
Nova  Zembla,  where  contrary  to  our  expectation,  I  first
saw  the  edge  of  the  Sunne,  wherewith  wee  went  speedily
home  againe,  to  tell  William  Barents,  and  the  rest  of  our
companions  that  joyfull  newes :  but  William  Barents  being
a  wise  and  well  experienced  Pilot,  would  not  beleeve  it,
esteeming  it  to  be  about  fourteene  dayes  to  soone  for  the
Sunne  to  shine  in  that  part  of  the  World ;  but  we
earnestly  affirmed  the  contrarie,  and  said,  that  we  had
seene  the  Sunne.

The  five  and  twentieth,  and  sixe  and  twentieth,  it  was
misty,  and  close  weather,  so  that  wee  could  not  see  any
thing :  then  they  that  layed  the  contrary  wager  with  us,
thought  that  they  had  won :  but  upon  the  seven  and
twentieth  day  it  was  cleare  weather,  and  then  wee  saw  the
Sunne  in  his  full  roundnesse  above  the  Horizon,  whereby
it  manifestly  appeared  that  wee  had  seene  it  upon  the
foure  and  twentieth  day  of  January.  And  as  we  were  of
divers  opinions  touching  the  same,  and  that  wee  said,  it
was  cleane  contrary  to  the  opinions  of  all  old  and  new
Writers ;  yea,  and  contrary  to  the  nature  and  roundnesse
both  of  Heaven  and  Earth ;  some  of  us  said,  that  seeing
in  long  time  there  had  beene  no  day,  that  it  might  be  that
we  had  overslept  our  selves,  whereof  we  were  better
assured :  but  concerning  the  thing  in  it  selfe,  seeing  God
is  wonderfull  in  all  his  workes,  we  will  referre  that  to  his
almightie  power,  and  leave  it  unto  others  to  dispute  of,
but  for  that  no  man  shall  thinke  us  to  be  in  doubt  thereof,
if  wee  should  let  this  passe  without  discoursing  upon  it,

no

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1597-

therefore  we  will  make  some  declaration  thereof,  whereby
we  may  assure  our  selves  that  we  kept  good  reckoning.
You  must  understand,  that  when  we  first  saw  the  Sun,
it  was  in  the  fift  degr.  and  25.  min.  of  Aquarius,  and  it
should  have  staid  according  to  our  first  ghessing,  till  it  had
entred  into  the  16.  deg.  and  27.  min.  of  Aquarius,  before
he  should  have  shewed  there  unto  us,  in  the  height  of  76.
deg.  Which  we  striving  and  contending  about  it  amongst
our  selves,  could  not  be  satisfied,  but  wondred  thereat,
and  some  amongst  us  were  of  opinion,  that  we  had  mis-
taken our  selves,  which  neverthelesse  we  could  not  be
perswaded  unto,  for  that  every  day  without  fayle,  wee
noted  what  had  past,  and  also  had  used  our  Clocke  con-
tinually, and  when  that  was  frozen,  wee  used  our  Houre-
glasse  of  twelve  houres  long,  whereupon  wee  argued
with  our  selves,  in  divers  wise,  to  know  how  we
should  finde  out  that  difference,  and  leave  the  trueth  of
the  time,  which  to  trie,  wee  agreed  to  looke  into  the
Ephemerides  made  by  Josephus  Schala,  Printed  in  Venice,
for  the  yeeres  of  our  Lord  1589.  till  A.  1600.  and  we
found  therein,  that  upon  the  foure  and  twentieth  day  of
January,  (when  the  Sun  first  appeared  unto  us)  that  at
Venice  the  Clocke  being  one  in  the  night  time,  the
Moone  and  Jupiter  were  in  conjunction,  whereupon  we
sought  to  know  when  the  same  conjunction  should  be
over  or  about  the  house  where  wee  then  were,  and  at  last
wee  found  that  the  foure  and  twentieth  day  of  January
was  the  same  day  whereon  the  conjunction  aforesaid
happened  in  Venice,  at  one  of  the  clocke  in  the  night,  Difference  of
and  with  us  in  the  morning,  when  the  Sunne  was  in  jpg*/***
the  East  :  for  we  saw  manifestly  that  the  two  Planets  yen-tce  an^
aforesaid  approached  neere  unto  each  other,  untill  such  their  wintring
time  as  the  Moone  and  Jupiter  stood  one  just  over  the  place.
other,  both  in  the  signe  of  Taurus,  and  that  was  at  sixe  of
the  clocke  in  the  morning,  at  which  time  the  Moone  and
Jupiter  were  found  by  our  Compasse,  to  be  in  conjunction
over  our  house,  in  the  North  and  by  East  point,  and  the
South  part  of  the Compasse  was  South  South-west,  and

in

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I597-

there  we  had  it  right  South,  the  Moone  being  eight  dayes
old,  whereby  it  appeareth,  that  the  Sunne  and  the  Moone
were  eight  points  different,  and  this  was  about  sixe  of  the
clocke  in  the  morning: this  place  differeth  from  Venice
five  houres  in longitude, whereby we  may  ghesse  how
much  we  were  neerer  East  then  the  Citie  of  Venice,  which
was  five  houres,  each  houre  being  15.  degrees,  which  is  in
all  75.  degrees,  that  we  were  more  Easterly  then  Venice,
by  all  which  it  is  manifestly  to  be  seene,  that  wee  had  not
fayled  in  our  account,  and  that  also  wee  had  found  our
right longitude, by the two Planets  aforesaid, for the
Towne  of  Venice  lieth  under  37.  degrees  and  25.  minutes
in longitude,  and  her  declination  is  46.  degrees  and  5.
minutes, whereby it  followeth  that our place of  Nova
Zembla, lieth under 112. degrees  and  25. minutes  in
longitude,  and  the  height  of  the  Pole  76.  degrees,  and  so
you  have  the  right  longitude  and  latitude,  but  from  the
uttermost  point  of  Nova  Zembla  to  the  point  of  Cape  de
Tabin,  the  uttermost  point  of  Tartaria,  where  it  windeth
Southward,  the  longitude  differeth  60.  degrees  ;  but  you
Note  fir  deg.  must  understand,  that  the  degrees  are  not  so  great  as  they
of  longitude. are  uncJer  the  Equinoctiall  Line,  for  right  under  the  Line
a  degree  is  fifteene  miles,  but  when  you  leave  the  Line,
either Northward or Southward, then the degrees in
longitude  doe  lessen,  so  that  the  neerer  that  a  man  is  to
the  North  or  South  Pole,  so  much  the  degrees  are  lesse :
so that  under the 76. degrees Northward, where we
wintred,  the  degrees  are  but  three  miles  and  two  third
parts ;  whereby  it  is  to  be  marked,  that  we  had  but  60.
degrees  to  saile  to  the  said  Cape  de  Tabin,  which  is,  220.
miles,  so  the  said  Cape  lieth  in 172.  degrees  in  longitude
as  it  is  thought :  and  being  above  it,  it  seemeth  that  we
should  be  in  the  Streight  of  Anian,  where  we  may  sayle
boldly  into  the  South,  as  the  Land  reacheth. Now  what
further  instructions  are  to  be  had  to  know,  where  wee  lost
the  Sunne  under  the  said  76.  degrees  upon  the  fourth  of
November,  and  saw  it  againe  upon  the  foure  and  twentieth
of  January ;  I  leave  that  to  be  described,  by  such  as  make

112

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1597-
profession  thereof,  it  sufficeth  us to  have  shewed,  that  it
failed  us  not  to  appeare  at  the  ordinary  time.

The  five  and  twentieth  of  January,  it  was  darke  cloudy
weather, the  wind Westerly,  so  that the  seeing  of  the
Sunne  the  day  before,  was  againe  doubted  of,  and  then
many  wagers  were  layd,  and  we  still  looked  out  to  see  if
the  Sunne  appeared,  the  same  day  we  saw  a  Beare,  (which  Beam
as  long as the Sunne appeared not unto us  we saw  retur*e  mth
not)  comming  out  of  the  South-west  towards  our  house,  rjjj  •n-l\ol  i
but when  we  shouted at her  she  came  no neerer,  but
went away  again. The six & twentieth,  it was faire
cleare  weather, but  in  the  Horizon  there  hung  a  white
or  darke cloude,  whereby  we  could not  see  the  Sunne,
whereupon the  rest of our companions, thought that
we  had  mistaken  our  selves  upon  the  foure  and  twentieth
day, and that the Sunne appeared not unto us, and
mocked us, but we were resolute in our former
affirmation,  that we  had  seene the Sunne, but not in
the full roundnesse : That Eevening the Sicke man  sicke  man
that was  amongst  us,  was  very  weake,  and  felt  himselfe  dieth.
to  bee  extreame  sicke,  for  he  had  layne  long  time,  and
we  comforted him  as  well  as  we might,  and gave  him
the best  admonition that  we could,  but hee  dyed not
long  after  midnight.

The  twentie  seven  it  was  faire  cleare  weather,  with  a
South-west  wind,  then  in  the  morning  we  digged  a
hole  in  the  snow  hard  by  the  house,  but  it  was  still  so
extreame  cold,  that  we  could  not  stay  long  at  worke,
and  so  wee  digged  by  turnes,  every  man  a  little  while,
and  then  went  to  the  fire,  and  another  went  and  sup-
plied his  place,  till  at  last  wee  digged  seven  foot  depth
where  wee  went  to  burie  the  dead  man,  after  that  when
we  had  read  certaine  Chapters,  and  sung  some  Psalmes,
wee  all  went  out  and  buried  the  man,  which  done  we
went  in  and  brake  our  fasts,  and  while  we  were  at
meate,  and  discoursed  amongst  our  selves,  touching  the
great  quantitie  of  snow  that  continually  fell  in  that
place,  wee  said  that  if  it  fell  out,  that  our  house
xiii  113  H

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1597-

should  bee  closed  up  againe  with  snow,  wee  would
flnde  the  meanes  to  climbe  out  at  the  chimney,  where-
upon our  Master  went  to  trie  if  hee  could  climbe  up
through  the  chimney,  and  so  get  out,  and  while  hee
was  climbing  one  of  our  men  went  forth  of  the  doore,
to  see  if  the  Master  were  out  or  not,  who  standing
upon  the snow,  saw  the Sunne, and  called  us  all  out,

The  Summer,  wherewith  we  all  went  forth,  and  saw  the  Sun  in  his
full  roundnesse,  a  little  above  the  Horizon,  and  then
it  was  without  all  doubt,  that  wee  had  seene  the  Sunne
upon  the  foure  and  twentieth  of  January,  which  made
us  all  glad,  and  we  gave  God  heartie  thankes,  for  his
grace  shewed  unto  us,  that  that  glorious  light  appeared
unto  us  againe.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  it  was  faire  weather,  with
a  West  wind,  then  we  went  out  many  times  to  exercise
our  selves,  by  going,  running,  casting  of  the  ball,  (for
then  we  might  see  a  good  way  from  us)  and  to  refresh
our  joynts,  for  wee  had  long  time  sitten  dull,  whereby
many  of  us  were  very  loose.  The  nine  and  twentieth,
it  was  foule  weather,  with  great  store  of  snow,  the  wind
North-west,  whereby  the  house  was  closed  up  againe
with  snow.  The  thirtieth,  it  was  darke  weather,  with
an  East  wind ;  and  we  made  a  hole  through  the  doore,
but  wee  shoveled  not  the  snow  very  farre  from  the
portall,  for  that  as  soone  as  we  saw  what  weather  it
was,  wee  had  no  desire  to  goe  abroad.  The  one  and
thirtieth,  it  was  faire  calme  weather,  with  an  East  wind,
then  we  made  the  doore  cleane,  and  shoveled  away
the  snow,  and  threw  it  upon  the  house,  and  went  out,
and wee saw  the Sunne  shine cleere, which comforted

Beare.  us, meane  time we saw a Beare, that came towards

our  house,  but  wee  went  softly  in,  and  watched  for
her  till  shee  came  neerer,  and  as  soone  as  she  was
hard  by  we  shot  at  her,  but  she  ran  away  againe.

February.  The first of February, being Candlemasse Eeve, it

was  boisterous  weather,  with  a  great  storme,  and  good
store  of  snow,  whereby  the  house  was  closed  up  againe

114

WILLIAM BARENTS  ad.

1597-
with  snow,  and  we  were  constrained  to  stay  within
doors,  the  wind  then  being  north-west.  The  second  it
was  foule  weather,  and  as  then  the  Sunne  had  not  rid
us  of  all  the  foule  weather,  whereby  wee  were  somewhat
discomforted,  for  that  being  in  good  hope  of  better
weather  wee  had  not  made  so  great  provision  of  wood
as  we  did  before.  The  third,  it  was  faire  weather,
with  an  East  wind,  but  very  mystie,  whereby  wee
could  not  see  the  Sunne,  which  made  us  somewhat
melancholy,  to  see  so  great  a  myst,  and  rather  more
then  we  had  had  in  the  Winter  time,  and  then  we
digged  our  doore  open  againe,  and  fetched  the  wood
that  lay  without  about  the  doore  into  the  house,  which
we  were  forced  with  great  paine  and  labour  to  dig  out
of  the  snow.  The  fourth,  it  was  foule  weather,  with
great  store  of  snow,  the  wind  being  South-west,  and
then  wee  were  close  up  againe  with  snow,  but  then
wee  tooke  not  so  much  paines  as  we  did  before,  to  dig
open  the  doore,  but  when  we  had  occasion  to  goe  out  we
climbed  out  at  the  chimney,  and  eased  our  selves,  and
went in  againe  the  same  way.

The  fifth,  it  was  still  foule  weather,  the  wind  being
East,  with  great  store  of  snow,  whereby  wee  were  shut
up  againe  into  the  house,  and  had  no  other  way  to  get
out  but  by  the  chimney,  and  those  that  could  not  They  goe  out
climbe  out,  were  faine  to  helpe  themselves  within  as  wel  at  the
as  they  could.  The  sixth,  it  was  still  foule  stormy  chmney-
weather,  with  store  of  snow,  and  we  still  went  out  at
the  chimney,  (and  troubled  not  our  selves  with  the
doore,)  for  some  of  us  made  it  an  easie  matter  to
climbe  out  at  the  chimney.  The  seventh,  it  was  still
foule  weather,  with  much  snow,  and  a  South-west  wind,
and  we  thereby  forced  to  keep  the  house,  which  grieved
us  more  then  when  the  Sun  shined  not,  for  that  having
seene  it,  and  felt  the  heate  thereof,  yet  wee  were  forced
not  to  injoy  it.  The  eight,  it  began  to  be  fairer
weather,  the  wind  being  South-west,  then  wee  saw  the
Sun rise South, South-east, and went downe South

IT5

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1597-

South-west,  by  the  Compasse  that  we  had  made  of
Lead,  and  placed  according  to  the  Meridian  of  that
place,  but  by  our  common  Compasse  it  differed  two
points. The ninth,  it was faire cleere weather, the

[III.in.502.]  wind  South-west,  but  as  then  wee  could  not  see  the
Sunne,  because  it  was  close  weather  in  the  South,  where
the  Sunne  should  goe  downe.  The  tenth,  it  was  faire
cleare  weather, so that  wee could  not tell where the

Heat  of  the wind  blew, and then  we  began to  feele some  heat of
unite.  tne  gun^  kut -n tne  ^evening  it  began  to  blow  some-

what cold  out  of  the  west.

The  eleventh,  it  was  faire  weather,  the  wind  South,
that  day  about  noone,  there  came  a  Beare  towards  our
house,  and  wee  watched  her  with  our  Muskets,  but
shee  came  not  so  neere  as  wee  could  reach  her,  the
same  night  wee  heard  some  Foxes  stirring,  which  since
the  Beares  began  to  come  abroad  againe  we  had  not
much  seene.  The  twelfth,  it  was  cleere  weather  and
very  calme,  the  winde  South-west,  then  we  made  our
Traps  cleane  againe,  meane-time  there  came  a  great
Beare  towards  our  house,  which  made  us  all  goe  in,
and  wee  levelled  at  her  with  our  Muskets,  and  as  shee
came  right  before  our  doore,  we  shot  her  into  the
brest,  cleane  through  the  heart,  the  bullet  passing  through
her  body,  and  went out againe at her  tayle,  and was

Beare  slaine. as  flatte  as  a  Counter,  the  Beare  feeling  the  blow,  leapt

backwards,  and  ranne twentie  or  thirtie foot from the

house,  and  there  lay  downe,  wherewith  wee  leapt  all  out

of the house,  and ranne to  her,  and found her still

alive,  and  when she  saw  us,  shee rear'd up her  head,

as if she  would gladly  have  done  us some  mischiefe,

but we trusted her not,  for that  we  had tryed their

strength  sufficiently  before,  and therefore  wee  shot her

twice into the  body  againe,  and therewith shee dyed :

,  r  Then  we  ript  up  her  belly,  and  taking  out her  guttes,
100.  Pound  of  j  ,  .r *\ .u tj  u  a a u

fat  taken  out  of  drew  her home to the House  where we flayed her,

a  Beare,  use- and tooke at least  one hundred pound  of fat  out of

full  for  Lamps,  her  belly,  which  wee  molt  and burned in  our Lampe.

116

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1597-
This  Grease  did  us  great  good  service,  for  by  that
meanes  we  still  kept  a  Lampe  burning  all  night  long,
which  before  wee  could  not  doe,  for  want  of  Grease,
and  every  man  had  meanes  to  burne  a  Lampe  in  his
Cabbin,  for  such  necessaries  as  hee  had  to  doe.  The
Beares  skinne  was  nine  foot  long,  and  seven  foot  broad.

The  thirteenth,  it  was  faire  cleere  weather  with  a
hard  West  winde,  at  which  time  we  had  more  light  in
our  house  by  burning  of  Lampes,  whereby  we  had
meanes  to  passe  the  time  away,  by  reading  and  other
exercises,  which  before  (when  we  could  not  distinguish
Day  from  Night,  by  reason  of  the  darkenesse,  and  had
not  Lamps  continually  burning)  wee  could  not  doe.
The  foureteenth,  it  was  faire  cleere  weather,  with  a
hard  West  wind  before  noone,  but  after  noone,  it  was
still  weather,  then  five  of  us  went  to  the  Ship  to  see
how  it  lay,  and  found  the  water  to  increase  in  it,  but
not  much.  The  fifteenth,  it  was  foule  weather,  with  a
great  storme  out  of  the  South-west,  with  great  store
of  Snow,  whereby  the  House  was  closed  up  againe,
that  Night  the  Foxes  came  to  devoure  the  dead  body
of  the  Beare,  whereby  we  were  in  great  feare,  that  all
the  Beares  thereabouts  would  come  thither,  and  there-
fore wee  agreed,  as  soone  as  we  could  to  get  out  of
the  house  to  burie  the  dead  Beare  deepe  under  the
Snow.

The  sixteenth  of  February,  it  was  foule  weather,  with
great  store  of  Snow  and  a  South-west  wind,  that  day
was  Shrove-tuesday,  then  we  made  our  selves  somewhat
merrie  in  our  great  griefe  and  trouble,  and  every  one
of  us  dranke  a  draught  of  Wine.

The  nineteenth,  it  was  faire  cleere  weather,  with  a
South-west  winde,  then  we  tooke  the  height  of  the
Sunne,  which  in  long  time  before  wee  could  not  doe,
because  the  Horizon  was  not  cleere ;  as  also  for  that
it  mounted  not  so  high,  nor  gave  not  so  much  shadow,
as  we  were  to  have  in  our  Astrolabium,  and  therefore
we made an Instrument that was halfe  round,  at the

117

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I597-

one  end  having  90.  degrees  marked  thereon,  whereon
we  hung  a  thread  with  a  Plumet  of  Lead,  as  the
water  Compasses  have,  and  therewith  we  tooke  the
height  of  the  Sunne,  when  it  was  at  the  highest,
and  found  that  it  was  3.  degrees  elevated  above  the
Horizon,  his  Declination  11.  degrees  and  16.  minutes,
which  being  added  to  the  height  aforesayd,  made  14.
degrees  and  16.  minutes,  which  substracted  from  90.
degrees,  there  rested  75.  degrees  and  44.  minutes  for
the  height  of  the  Pole,  but  the  aforesayd  3.  degrees
of  height,  being  taken  at  the  lowest  side  of  the
Sunne,  the  16.  minutes  might  well  be  added  to  the
height  of  the  Pole,  and  so  it  was  just  76.  degrees,
as  we  had  measured  it  before.  The  twentieth,  it  was
foule  weather,  with  great  store  of  snow,  the  wind
South-west,  whereby  we  were  shut  up  againe  in  the
house.

The  two  and  twentieth,  it  was  cleere  faire  weather,
with  a  South-west  wind,  then  we  made  ready  a  Sled
to  fetch  more  Wood,  for  need  compelled  us  thereunto;
for  as  they  say,  hunger  driveth  the  Wolfe  out  of  his
denne,  and  eleven  of  us  went  together,  all  well  appointed
with  our  Armes,  but  comming  to  the  place  where  we
should  have  the  Wood,  we  could  not  come  by  it,  by
reason  it  lay  so  deepe  under  the  Snow,  whereby  of
necessitie  we  were  compelled  to  goe  further,  where  with
great  labour  and  trouble  we  got  some :  but  as  we
returned  backe  againe  therewith,  it  was  so  sore  labour
unto  us,  that  we  were  almost  out  of  comfort,  for  that
by  reason  of  the  long  cold  and  trouble  that  we  had
indured,  we  were  become  so  weake  and  feeble,  that
we  had  little  strength,  and  we  began  to  bee  in  doubt,
that  we  should  not  recover  our  strengths  againe,  and
should  not  be  able  to  fetch  any  more  Wood,  and  so
we  should  have  dyed  with  cold,  but  the  present  neces-
sitie and  the  hope  wee  had  of  better  weather,  increased
our  forces,  and  made  us  doe  more  then  our  strengths
afforded, and when  we came neere to our  house,  we

118

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

*597-

saw  much  open  water  in  the  Sea,  which  in  long  time
we  had  not  seene,  which  also  put  us  in  good  comfort,
that  things  would  bee  better.

The  five  and twentieth, it  was foule  weather  againe,  [III.iii.503.]
and  much  Snow,  with  a  North  winde,  whereby  we  were
closed  up  with  Snow  againe,  and  could  not  get  out  of
our  House.

The  eight  and  twentieth  of  February,  it  was  still
weather,  with  a  South-west  wind,  then  ten  of  us  went
and  fetched  another  Sled  full  of  Wood,  with  no  lesse
paine  and  labour  then  wee  did  before,  for  one  of  our
companions  could  not  helpe  us,  because  that  the  first
joynt  of  one  of  his  great  Toes  was  frozen  off,  and  so  hee
could  doe  nothing.

The  first  of  March,  it  was  faire  still  weather,  the  wind  March.
West  but  very  cold,  and  we  were  forced  to  spare  our
Wood,  because  it  was  so  great  labour  for  us  to  fetch
it,  so .  that  when  it  was  day,  we  exercised  our  selves  as
much  as  we  might,  with  running,  going,  and  leaping,
and  to  them  that  lay  in  their  Cabins,  wee  gave
hot  stones  to  warme  them,  and  towards  night  we  made
a  good  fire,  which  we  were  forced  to  endure.  The
second,  it  was  cold  cleere  weather,  with  a  West  wind,
the  same  day  we  tooke  the  height  of  the  Sunne,  and
found  that  it  was  elevated  above  the  Horizon  6.  degrees
and  48.  minutes,  and  his  Declination  was  7.  degrees  and
12.  minutes,  which  substracted  from  90.  degrees,  resteth
76.  degrees  for  the  height  of  the  Pole.  The  third,  it
was  faire  weather  with  a  West  wind,  at  which  time  our
Sicke  men  were  somewhat  better,  and  sate  upright  in
their  Cabins,  to  doe  some  thing  to  passe  the  time  away,
but  after  they  found  that  they  were  too  ready  to  stirre
before  their  times.  The  fourth,  it  was  faire  weather,
with  a  West  wind,  the  same  day  there  came  a  Beare
to  our  House,  whom  we  watcht  with  our  Pieces,  as  wee
did  before,  and  shot  at  her,  and  hit  her,  but  shee  runne
away,  at  that  time  five  of  us  went  to  our  Ship,  where
we  found that the Beares had made work, and had

119

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1597-

opened  our  Cookes  cupboard,  that  was  covered  over  with
snow,  thinking  to  finde  some  thing  in  it,  and  had
drawne  it  out  of  the  Ship  where  we  found  it.
Note.  The  seventh,  it  was  still  foule  weather  and  as  great
a  winde,  so  that  wee  were  shut  up  in  our  House,  and
they  that  would  goe  out  must  climbe  up  through  the
Chimney,  which  was  a  common  thing  with  us,  and  still
we  saw  more  open  water  in  the  Sea,  and  about  the  Land,
whereby  wee  were  in  doubt  that  the  Ship  in  that  foule
weather,  and  driving  of  the  Ice,  would  bee  loose  (for
as  then  the  Ice  drave)  while  we  were  shut  up  in  our
House,  and  wee  should  have  no  meanes  to  helpe  it.
The  eight,  it  was  still  foule  weather,  with  a  South-west
storme,  and  great  store  of  Snow,  whereby  we  could  see
no  Ice  in  the  North-east,  nor  round  about  in  the  Sea,
whereby  we  were  of  opinion,  that  North-east  from  us
there  was  a  great  Sea.  The  ninth,  it  was  foule  weather,
but  not  so  foule  as  the  day  before,  and  lesse  snow,
and  then  we  could  see  further  from  us,  and  perceive
that  the  water  was  open  in  the  North-east,  but  not  from
us  towards  Tartaria,  for  there  we  could  still  see  Ice  in
the  Tartarian  Sea,  otherwise  called  the  Ice  Sea,  so  that
we  were  of  opinion,  that  there  it  was  not  very  wide,  for
when  it  was  cleere  weather,  we  thought  many  times  that
wee  saw  the  Land  and  shewed  it  to  our  companions,
South  and  South-east  from  our  house,  like  a  hilly
Land,  as  land  commonly  showeth  it  selfe,  when  we
see  it.

The  eleventh,  it  was  cold,  but  faire  Sun-shine  weather,
the  wind  North-east,  then  we  tooke  the  height  of  the
Sunne  with  our  Astrolabium,  and  found  it  to  bee  ele-
vated above  the  Horizon  10.  degrees  and  19.  minutes,
his  Declination  was  3.  degrees  and  41  minutes,  which
being  added  to  the  height  aforesayd,  made  14.  degrees,
which  substracted  from  90,  degrees,  there  resteth  76.
degrees  for  the  height  of  the  Pole.  Then  twelve  of  us
went  to  the  place  where  wee  used  to  goe,  to  fetch  a
Sled  of  Wood,  but  still  we  had  more  paine  and  labour

120

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1597-
therewith,  because  we  were  weaker,  and  when  we  came
home  with  it,  and  were  very  wearie,  we  prayed  the
Master  to  give  each  of  us  a  draught  of  Wine,  which
hee  did,  wherewith  we  were  somewhat  releeved  and
comforted,  and  after  that  were  the  willinger  to  labour,
which  was  unsupportable  for  us,  if  meere  extremitie  had
not  compelled  us  thereunto,  saying  oftentimes  one  unto
the  other,  That  if  the  Wood  were  to  be  bought  for
Money,  we  would  give  all  our  Earnings  or  Wages
for  it.

The  twelfth,  it  was  foule  weather,  the  Winde  North-
east, then  the  Ice  came  mightily  driving  in,  which  the
South-west  Wind  had  beene  driven  out,  and  it  was  then
as  cold,  as  it  had  bin  before  in  the  coldest  time  of
Winter.

The  fifteenth,  it  was  faire  weather,  the  Wind  North,
that  day  wee  opened  our  doore  to  goe  out,  but  the  cold
rather  increased  then  diminished,  and  was  bitterer  then
before  it  had  beene.

The  sixteenth,  it  was  faire  cleere  weather,  but  extreame
cold  with  a  North  Wind,  which  put  us  to  great  ex-
treamitie,  for  that  we  had  almost  taken  our  leaves  of  the
cold,  and  then  it  began  to  come  againe.  This  continued
till  the  one  and  twentieth.

The  one  and  twentieth,  it  was  faire  weather,  but  still
very  cold, the  Wind North, the same day  the Sunne
entred  into  Aries  in  the  Equinoctiall  Line,  and  at  noone  Sol  in  Aries.
wee  tooke  the  height  of  the  Sunne,  and found  it  to  be
elevated 14. degrees above the Horizon, but for that
the Sunne was in the middle Line, and of  the  like
distance  from both the Tropickes, there was no  decli-
nation, neither  on  the  South  nor  North  side,  and  so  the
14.  degrees  aforesayd  being  substracted  from  90.  degrees,
there rested 76. degrees for the height of  the Pole.
The same day, we made shooes of Felt or Rugge,  Shooes  of  Felt
which  we  drew  upon our feete, for  we could not  goe  and  Rugge.
in  our  shooes,  by  reason  of  the  great  cold,  for  the  shooes
on  our  feet  were  as  hard  as  homes,  and then  we  fetcht

121

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I597-

[III.iii.504.]  a  Sled  full  of  Wood  home  to  our  house,  with  sore  and
extreame  labour,  and  with  extremitie  of  cold  which  we
indured,  as  if  March  meant  to  bid  us  farewell,  for  our
hope  and  comfort  was,  that  the  cold  could  not  still  con-
tinue in  that  force,  but  that  at  length  the  strength  thereof
would  bee  broken.

The  three  and  twentieth,  it  was  very  foule  weather,
with  infernall  bitter  cold,  the  wind  North-east,  so  that
we  were  forced  to  make  more  fire,  as  we  had  beene  at
other  times,  for  then  it  was  as  cold  as  ever  it  had
beene,  and  it  froze  very  hard  in  the  floore  and  upon
the  walls  of  our  house.  The  foure  and  twentieth,  it
was  alike  cold,  with  great  store  of  snow,  and  a  North
wind,  whereby  we  were  once  againe  shut  up  into  the
house,  and  then  the  Coles  served  us  well,  which  before
by  reason  of  our  bad  using  of  them,  we  disliked  of.  The
sixe  and  twentieth,  it  was  faire  cleare  weather,  and  very
calme,  then  we  digd  our  selves  out  of  the  house  again,
and  went  out,  and  then  we  fetcht  another  Sled  of  Wood,
for  the  great  cold  had  made  us  burne  up  all  that
we  had.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  it  was  faire  weather,  the
wind  South-west,  whereby  the  Ice  drave  away  very  fast.
The  same  day,  sixe  of  us  went  aboord  the  ship  to  see
how  it  lay,  and  found  it  still  in  one  sort ;  but  we  per-
ceived that  the  Beares  had  kept  an  evill  favoured  house
therein.

Aprill  The  second  of  Aprill,  it  was  faire  weather,  the  wind

North-east  and  very  calme,  then  wee  tooke  the  height
of  the  Sunne,  and  found  it  to  be  elevated  above  the
Horizon  18.  degrees  and  40.  minutes,  his  declination
being  4.  degrees  and  40.  minutes,  which  being  substracted
from  the  height  aforesaid,  there  rested  14.  degrees,  which
taken  from  90.  degrees,  the  height  of  the  Pole  was  76.
degrees.

The sixt, it was still foule weather, with a stiffe

Beare  assault North-west  wind,  that  night  there  came  a  Beare  to  our

the  house. house,  and  we did  the best  we  could  to  shoot  at  her,

122

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1597-
but  because  it  was  moist  weather,  and  the  cocke  foisty,

our  Peece  would  not  give  fire,  wherewith  the  Beare  came
boldly  toward  the  house,  and  came  downe  the  staires
close  to  the  doore,  seeking  to  breake  into  the  house,
but  our  Master  held  the  doore  fast  to,  and  being  in  great
haste  and  feare,  could  not  barre  it  with  the  piece  of
Wood  that  wee  used  thereunto  ;  but  the  Beare  seeing
that  the  doore  was  shut,  shee  went  backe  againe,  and
within  two  houres  after  shee  came  againe,  and  went
round  about  and  upon  the  top  of  the  house,  and  made
such  a  roaring,  that  it  was  fearefull  to  heare,  and  at  last
got  to  the  chimney,  and  made  such  worke  there,  that
wee  thought  shee  would  have  broken  it  downe,  and  tore
the  sayle  that  was  made  fast  about  it  in  many  pieces,
with  a  great  and  fearefull  noise,  but  for  that  it  was
night,  we  made  no  resistance  against  her,  because  wee
could  not  see  her,  at  last  she  went  away  and  left  us.

The  fourteenth,  it  was  faire  cleare  weather  with  a  West
wind,  then  we  saw  greater  hills  of  Ice  round  about  the
ship,  then  ever  we  had  seene  before,  which  was  a  feare-
full thing  to  behold,  and  much  to  be  wondred  at,  that
the  ship  was  not  smitten  in  pieces.  The  fifteenth,  it
was  faire  calme  weather  with  a  North  wind,  then  seven
of  us  went  aboord  the  ship,  to  see  in  what  case  it  was,
and  found  it  to  be  all  in  one  sort,  and  as  wee  came  backe
againe,  there  came  a  great  Beare  toward  us,  against  whom
we  began  to  make  defence,  but  she  perceiving  that,  made
away  from  us,  and  we  went  to  the  place  from  whence
shee  came  to  see  her  Den,  where  we  found  a  great  hole  Beares  Den.
made  in  the  Ice,  about  a  mans  length  in  depth,  the  entrie
thereof  being  very  narrow,  and  within  wide,  there  we
thrust  in  our  Pikes  to  feele  if  there  was  any  thing  within
it,  but  perceiving  it  was  empty,  one  of  our  men  crept
into  it,  but  not  too  farre,  for  it  was  fearefull  to  behold,
after  that  we  went  along  by  the  Sea-side,  and  there  we
saw,  that  in  the  end  of  March,  and  the  beginning  of
Aprill,  the  Ice  was  in  such  wonderful  manner  risen  and
piled  up  one upon  the other, that it was wonderfull,

123

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1597-

in  such  manner as  if  there had beene whole Townes

made  of  Ice,  with  Towres  and  Bulwarkes round  about

them.

The  sixteenth,  it  was  foule  weather,  the  wind  North-
west, whereby  the  Ice  began  somewhat  to  breake.  The
seventeenth,  it  was  faire  cleare  weather,  with  a  South-west
wind,  and  then  seven  of  us  went  to  the  ship,  and  there
we  saw  open  water  in  the  Sea,  and  then  wee  went  over
the  Ice-hills  as  well  as  we  could,  to  the  water,  for  in  sixe
or  seven  moneths  we  had  not  gone  so  neere  unto  it,
and  when  we  got  to  the  water,  there  we  saw  a  little
bird  swimming  therein,  but  as  soone  as  it  espied  us,  it
dived  under  the  water,  which  we  tooke  for  a  signe,  that
there  was  more  open  water  in  the  Sea  then  there  had
beene  before,  and  that  the  time  approached  that  the  water
would  open.

The  eighteenth  of  Aprill,  it  was  faire  weather,  the  wind
South-west,  then  wee  tooke  the  height  of  the  Sunne,
and  it  was  elevated  above  the  Horizon  25.  degrees  and
10.  minutes,  his  declination  11.  degrees  and  12.  minutes,
which  being  taken  from  the  height  aforesaid,  there  rested
13.  degrees  and  58.  minutes,  which  substracted  from  90.
degrees,  the  height  of  the  Pole  was  found  to  be  75.
degrees  58.  minutes  ;  then  eleven  of  us  went  with  a  Sled
to  fetch  more  Wood,  and  brought  it  to  the  house,  in  the
night  there  came  another  Beare  upon  our  house,  which
we  hearing,  went  all  out  with  our  Armes,  but  the  Beare
ran  away.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  it  was  faire  weather,  with  a
North  wind,  then  we  tooke  the  height  of  the  Sunne
againe,  and  found  it  to  bee  elevateed  28.  degrees  and  8.
minutes,  his  declination  14.  degrees  and  8.  minutes,  which
substracted  from  90.  degrees,  there  rested  76.  degrees  for
[III.iii.505.]  the  height  of  the  Pole.  The  nine  and  twentieth,  it  was
faire  weather,  with  a  South-west  wind,  then  we  played  at
Colfe,  both  to  the  ship,  and  from  thence  againe  homewards
to  exercise  our  selves.  The  thirtieth,  it  was  faire  weather,
the  wind South-west, then in the  night  wee  could  see

124

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1597-
the  Sunne  in  the  North  (when  it  was  in  the  highest)  just
above  the  Horizon,  so  that  from  that  time  wee  saw  the
Sunne  both  night  and  day.

§•  in.

Their  preparation  to  goe  from  thence  :  they  depart
in  a  Boat  and  Scute  both  open,  and  come  to
Cola,  1 143.  miles.  Their  many  dangers  by
Beares,  Ice,  Famine,  Scorbute,  in  the  way.

He  first  of  May,  it  was  faire  weather  with  a  West May.
wind,  then  wee  sod  our  last  flesh,  which  for  a  long
time  we  had  spared,  and  it  was  still  very  good,

and  the  last  morsell  tasted  as  well  as  the  first,  and  we
found  no  fault  therein,  but  onely  that  it  would  last  no
longer.  The  second,  it  was  foule  weather,  with  a  storme
out  of  the  South-west,  whereby  the  Sea  was  almost  cleare
of  Ice,  and  then  wee  beganne  to  speake  about  getting
from  thence,  for  we  had  kept  house  long  enough  there.
The  third,  it  was  still  foule  weather,  with  a  South-west
wind,  whereby  the  Ice  began  wholly  to  drive  away,  but
it  lay  fast  about  the  ship,  and  when  our  best  meate,  as
flesh,  and  other  things  beganne  to  faile  us,  which  was
our  greatest  sustenance,  and  that  it  behooved  us  to  be
somewhat  strong,  to  sustaine  the  labour  that  wee  were  to
undergoe,  when  we  went  from  thence,  the  Master  shared
the  rest  of  the  Bacon  amongst  us,  which  was  a  small
Barrell  with  salt  Bacon  in  pickle,  whereof  every  one  of  us
had  two  ounces  a  day,  which  continued  for  the  space  of
three  weekes,  and  then  it  was  eaten  up.

The  fourth,  it  was  indifferent  faire  weather,  the  wind
South-west,  that  day  five  of  us  went  to  the  ship,  and
found  it  lying  still  as  fast  in  the  Ice  as  it  did  before,  for
about  the  middle  of  March  it  was  but  seventy  five  paces
from  the  open  water,  and  then  it  was  five  hundred  paces
from  the  water,  and  enclosed  round  about  with  high  hills
of  Ice,  which  put  us  in  no  small  feare,  how  wee  should

125

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I597-

bring  our  Scute  and  our  Boat  through  or  over  that  way
into  the  water,  when  wee  went  to  leave  that  place.  That
night  there  came  a  Beare  to  our  house,  but  as  soone  as
shee  heard  us  make  a  noyse,  she  ranne  away  againe,  one
of  our  men  that  climbed  up  in  the  Chimney,  saw  when
shee  ranne  away,  so  that  it  seemed  that  as  then  they  were
afraid  of  us,  and  durst  not  bee  so  bold  to  set  upon  us,  as
they  were  at  the  first.  The  fift,  it  was  faire  weather,  with
some  snow,  the  wind  East,  that  Eevening,  and  at  night  wee
saw  the  Sunne  when  it  was  at  the  lowest,  a  good  way  above
the  Earth.  The  sixt,  it  was  faire  cleare  weather,  with  a
great  South-west  wind,  whereby  we  saw  the  Sea  open
both  in  the  East  and  in  the  West,  which  made  our  men
exceeding  glad,  longing  sore  to  be  gone  from  thence.
The  seventh,  it  was  foule  weather,  and  snew  hard,  with
a  North  wind,  whereby  we  were  closed  up  againe  in  our
house.

The  tenth,  it  was  faire  weather  with  a  North-west  wind,
that  night  the  Sunne  by  our  common  Compasse  being
North  North-east,  and  at  the  lowest,  we  tooke  the  height
thereof,  and  it  was  elevated  3.  degrees  and  45.  minutes,
his  declination  was  17.  degrees  and  45.  minutes,  from
whence  taking  the  height  aforesaid,  there  rested  14.
degrees,  which  substracted  from  90.  degrees,  there  rested
76.  degrees  for  the  height  of  the  Pole.

The  fourteenth,  wee  fetcht  our  last  Sled  with  fire-wood,
and  still  ware  our  shooes  made  of  Rugge  on  our  feet.

The  five  and  twentieth,  it  was  faire  weather,  with  an
East  wind,  then  at  noone  time  wee  tooke  the  height  of
the  Sunne,  that  was  elevated  above  the  Horizon  34.
degrees  and  46.  minutes,  his  declination  20.  degrees  and
46.  minutes,  which  taken  from  the  height  aforesaid,
there  rested  14.  degrees,  which  taken  from  90.  degrees,
rested  76.  degrees  for  the  height  of  the  Pole.  The
sixe  and  twentieth,  it  was  faire  weather,  with  a  great
North-east  wind,  whereby  the  Ice  came  in  againe.  The
seven  and  twentieth,  it  was  foule  weather,  with  a  great
North-east  wind,  which  drave  the  Ice  mightily  in  againe,

126

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1597-
whereupon  the  Master,  at  the  motion  of  the  companie,
willed  us  to  make  preparation  to  be  gone.

The  nine  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  it  was  reason-
able faire  weather,  with  a  West  wind,  then  ten  of  us  went
unto  the  Scute  to  bring  it  to  the  house  to  dresse  it,  and
make  it  ready  to  sayle,  but  wee  found  it  deepe  hidden
under  the  snow,  and  were  fayne  with  great  payne  and
labour  to  digge  it  out,  but  when  wee  had  gotten  it  out  of
the  snow,  and  thought  to  draw  it  to  the  house,  wee  could
not  doe  it,  because  wee  were  too  weake,  wherewith  wee
became  wholly  out  of  heart,  doubting  that  wee  should
not  bee  able  to  goe  forward  with  our  labour,  but  the
Master  encouraging  us,  bade  us  strive  to  doe  more  then
wee  were  able ;  saying,  that  both  our  lives  and  our  well-
fare  consisted  therein  :  and  that  if  wee  could  not  get  the
Scute  from  thence,  and  make  it  ready,  then  hee  said  wee
must  dwell  there  as  Burgers  of  Nova  Zembla,  and  make  Burgers  of
our  Graves  in  that  place :  but  there  wanted  no  good-will  Nova  Zembla.
in  us  but  onely  strength,  which  made  us  for  that  time  to  [III.iii.506.]
leave  off  worke  and  let  the  Scute  lie  still,  which  was  no
small  griefe  unto  us,  and  trouble  to  thinke  what  were  best
for  us  to  doe ;  but  after  noone  being  thus  comfortlesse
come  home,  wee  tooke  hearts  againe,  and  determined  to
turne  the  Boat  that  lay  by  the  house  with  her  keele
upwards,  and  to  amend  it,  that  it  might  bee  the  fitter  to
carrie  us  over  the  Sea,  for  wee  made  full  account  that  we
had  a  long  troublesome  Voyage  in  hand,  wherein  wee
might  have  many  crosses,  and  wherein  wee  should  not  bee
sufficiently  provided  for  all  things  necessarie,  although
wee  tooke  never  so  much  care,  and  while  wee  were  busie
about  our  worke,  there  came  a  great  Beare  unto  us,  where-
with wee  went  into  our  house,  and  stood  to  watch  her  in
our  three  doores,  with  Harquebusses,  and  one  stood  in  the
Chimney  with  a  Musket,  this  Beare  came  boldlier  unto  us
then  ever  any  had  done  before,  for  shee  came  to  the
neather  step  that  went  to  one  of  our  doores,  and  the  man
that  stood  in  the  doore  saw  her  not,  because  hee  looked
towards  the  other  doore,  but  they  that  stood  within  saw

127

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

her,  and  in  great  feare  called  to  him,  wherewith  he  turned
about,  and  although  he  was  in  a  maze,  he  shot  at  her,
and  the  Bullet  past  cleane  through  her  body,  whereupon
she  ranne  away.  Yet  it  was  a  fearefull  thing  to  see,  for
the  Beare  was  almost  upon  him  before  hee  saw  her,  so  that
if  the  Peece  had  fayled  to  give  fire  (as  oftentimes  they
doe)  it  had  cost  him  his  lire,  and  it  may  bee,  that  the
Beare  would  have  gotten  into  the  house.  The  Beare
being  gone  somewhat  from  the  house  lay  downe,  where-
with wee  went  all  armed  and  killed  her  out  right,  and
when  wee  had  ript  open  her  bellie :  we  found  a  piece  of  a

Bucke.  Bucke  therein,  with  haire,  skinne  and  all,  which  not  long

before  shee  had  torne  and  devoured.

The  one  and  thirtieth  of  May,  it  was  faire  weather,
but  somewhat  colder  then  before,  the  wind  being  South-
west, whereby  the  Ice  drave  away,  and  we  wrought  hard
about  our  Boat,  but  when  wee  were  in  the  chiefest  part
of  worke,  there  came  another  Beare,  as  if  they  had  smelt
that  wee  would  be  gone,  and  that  therefore  they  desired
to  taste  a  piece  of  some  of  us,  for  that  was  the  third  day,
one  after  the  other,  that  they  set  so  fiercely  upon  us,  so
that  wee  were  forced  to  leave  our  worke,  and  goe  into  the
house,  and  shee  followed  us,  but  we  stood  with  our  Peeces
to  watch  her,  and  shot  three  Peeces  at  her,  two  from  our
doores,  and  one  out  of  the  Chimney,  which  all  three  hit
her : but  her  death  did  us  more  hurt  then  her  life,  for

Beam  Liver  after  we  ript  her  belly,  we  drest  her  Liver  and  eate  it,

venomous.  which  in  the  taste  liked  us  well,  but  it  made  us  all  sicke,
specially  three  that  were  exceeding  sicke,  and  wee  verily
thought  that  wee  should  have  lost  them,  for  all  their
skins  came  off,  from  the  foot  to  the  head,  but  yet  they
recovered  againe.

June.  The  third  of  June,  in  the  morning  it  was  faire  cleare

weather  the  wind  West,  and  then  wee  were  somewhat
better,  and  tooke  great  paines  with  the  Boat,  that  at  last  we
got  it  ready,  after  we  had  wrought  sixe  dayes  upon  it :
about  Eevening  it  began  to  blow  hard,  and  therewith  the
water  was  very  open,  which  put  us  in  good  comfort  that  our

128

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1597-
deliverance  would  soone  follow,  and  that  we  should  once
get  out  of  that  desolate  and  fearefull  place.

The  fourth,  it  was  faire  cleare  weather,  and  indifferent
warme,  and  about  the  South-east  Sunne,  eleven  of  us
went  to  our  Scute  where  it  then  lay,  and  drew  it  to  the
ship,  at  which  time  the  labour  seemed  lighter  unto  us
then  it  did  before,  when  wee  tooke  it  in  hand  and  were
forced  to  leave  it  off  againe.  The  reason  thereof  was,
the  opinion  that  wee  had  that  the  snow  as  then  lay  harder
upon  the  ground,  and  so  was  become  stronger ;  and  it
may  be  that  our  courages  were  better,  to  see  that  the  time
gave  us  open  water,  and  that  our  hope  was  that  wee
should  get  from  thence ;  and  so  three  of  our  men  stayed
by  the  Scute  to  build  her  to  our  minds :  and  for  that  it
was  a  Herring  Scute,  which  are  made  narrow  behind,
therefore  they  sawed  it  off  behind,  and  made  it  a  broad
stearne :  and  better  to  brooke  the  Seas,  they  built  it  also
somewhat  higher,  and  drest  it  up  as  well  as  they  could,
the  rest  of  our  men  were  busie  in  the  house  to  make  all
other  things  ready  for  our  Voyage,  and  that  day  drew  two
Sleds  with  victuals  and  other  goods  unto  the  ship,  that
lay  about  halfe  way  betweene  the  house  and  the  open
water,  that  after  they  might  have  so  much  the  shorter
way,  to  carrie  the  goods  unto  the  water  side,  when  wee
should  goe  away :  at  which  time  all  the  labour  and  paines
that  wee  tooke,  seemed  light  and  easie  unto  us,  because  of
the  hope  that  wee  had  to  get  out  of  that  wilde  Desart,
irkesome,  fearefull,  and  cold  Countrey.

The  fift,  it  was  foule  weather,  with  great  store  of  haile
and  snow,  the  wind  West,  which  made  an  open  water,
but  as  then  we  could  doe  nothing  without  the  house,  but
within  we  made  all  things  ready,  as  Sayles,  Oares,  Masts,
Sprit,  Rother,  Swerd,  and  all  other  necessarie  things.
The  sixt,  in  the  morning  it  was  faire  weather,  the  wind
North-east,  then  wee  went  with  our  Carpenters  to  the
ship,  to  build  up  our  Scute,  and  carried  two  sleds  full  of
goods  into  the  ship,  both  victuals  and  Merchandise,  with
other  things,  which  wee  meant  to  take  with  us ;  after
xiii  129  1

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1597-

that  there  rose  very  foule  weather  in  the  South-west,  with

snow,  haile,  and  raine,  which  wee  in  long  time  had  not
had,  whereby  the  Carpenters  were  forced  to  leave  their
worke,  and  goe  home  to  the  house  with  us,  whereby  also
we  could  not  be  drie,  because  wee  had  taken  off  the
Deales,  therewith  to  amend  our  Boat  and  our  Scute,  there
lay  but  a  sayle  over  it,  which  would  not  hold  out  the
water,  and  the  way  that  lay  full  of  snow  began  to  be  soft,
so  that  wee  left  off  our  shooes  made  of  Rugge  and  Felt,
and  put  on  our  Leather  shooes.
[III.iii.507.]  The  eight,  it  was  faire  weather,  and  wee  drew  the  wares
to  the  ship,  which  wee  had  packed  and  made  ready,  and
the  Carpenters  made  ready  the  Scute,  so  that  the  same
evening  it  was  almost  done,  the  same  day  all  our  men
went  to  draw  our  Boat  to  the  ship,  and  made  ropes  to
draw  withall,  such  as  wee  use  to  draw  with  in  Scutes,
which  wee  cast  over  our  shoulders,  and  held  fast  with  all
our  hands,  and  so  drew  both  with  our  hands  and  our
shoulders,  which  gave  us  more  force,  and  specially  the
desire  and  great  pleasure  wee  tooke  to  worke  at  that  time,
made  us  stronger.

The  tenth,  wee  carried  foure  Sleds  of  goods  into  the
ship,  the  wind  then  being  variable,  and  at  evening  it  was
Northerly,  and  wee  were  busie  in  the  house  to  make  all
things  ready,  the  Wine  that  was  left  we  put  into  little
vessels,  that  so  wee  might  divide  it  into  both  our  vessels,
and  that  as  wee  were  enclosed  by  the  Ice,  (which  wee  well
knew  would  happen  unto  us)  wee  might  easilier  cast  the
goods  upon  the  Ice,  both  out  and  into  the  Scutes,  as  time
and  place  served  us.  The  eleventh,  it  was  foule  weather,
and  it  blew  hard  North  North-west,  so  that  all  that  day
we  could  doe  nothing,  and  we  were  in  great  feare  lest  the
storme  would  carrie  the  Ice  and  the  ship  both  away
together,  (which  might  well  have  come  to  passe)  then  wee
should  have  beene  in  greater  miserie  then  ever  wee  were,
for  that  our  goods  both  victuals  and  others,  were  then  all
in  the  ship,  but  God  provided  so  well  for  us,  that  it  fell  not
out  so  unfortunatly. The  twelfth,  it  was  indifferent  faire

130

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1597-
weather,  then  we  went  with  Hatchets,  Halberds,  Shovels,
and  other  instruments,  to  make  the  way  plaine,  where  we
should  draw  the  Scute  and  the  Boat  to  the  water  side,
along  the  way  that  lay  full  of  knobs  and  hills  of  Ice,
where  wee  wrought  sore  with  our  Hatchets  and  other
instruments,  and  while  we  were  in  the  chiefest  of  our
worke,  there  came  a  great  leane  Beare  out  of  the  Sea
upon  the  Ice  towards  us,  which  we  judged  to  come  out  of
Tartaria  :  for  we  had  seene  of  them  twenty  or  thirty  miles
within  the  Sea,  and  for  that  wee  had  no  Muskets,  but
onely  one,  which  our  Surgeon  carried,  I  ranne  in  great
haste  towards  the  ship  to  fetch  one  or  two,  which  the  Beare
perceiving  ranne  after  mee,  and  was  very  likely  to  have
over  taken  me,  but  our  companie  seeing  that,  left  their
worke  and  ranne  after  her,  which  made  the  Beare  turne
towards  them,  and  left  me,  but  when  she  ran  towards
them,  she  was  shot  into  the  body  by  the  Surgeon,  and
ranne  away ;  but  because  the  Ice  was  so  uneven  and  hilly,
she  could  not  goe  farre,  but  being  by  us  overtaken,  we
killed  her  out  right,  and  smote  her  teeth  out  of  her  head,  Beare  slayne.
while  she  was  yet  living.

The  thirteenth,  it  was  faire  weather,  then  the  Master
and  the  Carpenters  went  to  the  ship,  and  there  made  the
Scute  and  the  Boat  ready,  so  that  there  rested  nothing  as
then,  but  onely  to  bring  it  downe  to  the  water  side,  the
Master  and  those  that  were  with  him,  seeing  that  it  was
open  water,  and  a  good  West  wind,  came  backe  to  the
house  againe,  and  there  hee  spake  unto  William  Barents
(that  had  beene  long  sicke)  and  shewed  him,  that  he
thought  it  good,  (seeing  it  was  a  fit  time)  to  goe  from  They  depart.
thence,  and  so  willed  the  companie  to  drive  the  Boat  and
the  Scute  downe  to  the  water  side,  and  in  the  name  of
God  to  beginne  our  Voyage,  to  sayle  from  Nova  Zembla :
then  William  Barents  wrote  a  Letter,  which  he  put  in  a
Muskets  charge,  and  hanged  it  up  in  the  Chimney,
shewing  how  he  came  out  of  Holland,  to  sayle  to  the
Kingdome  of  China,  and  what  had  happened  unto  us
being  there  on  Land,  with  all  our  crosses,  that  if  any  man

131

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

J597-

chanced  to  come  thither,  they  might  know  what  had
happened  unto  us,  and  how  we  had  beene  forced  in  our
extremitie  to  make  that  house,  and  had  dwelt  ten  moneths
therein,  and  for  that  wee  were  put  to  Sea  in  two  small
open  Boats,  and  to  undertake  a  dangerous  and  adven-
turous Voyage  in  hand,  the  Master  wrote  two  Letters,
which  most  of  us  subscribed  unto,  signifying  how  wee
had  stayed  there  upon  the  Land  in  great  trouble  and
miserie,  in  hope  that  our  ship  would  bee  freed  from  the
Ice,  and  that  we  should  sayle  away  with  it  againe,  and
how  it  fell  out  to  the  contrary,  and  that  the  ship  lay  fast
in  the  Ice,  so  that  in  the  end  the  time  passing  away,  and
our  victuals  beginning  to  faile  us,  we  were  forced  for  the
saving  of  our  owne  lives,  to  leave  the  ship,  and  to  sayle
away  in  our  open  Boats,  and  so  to  commit  our  selves  into
the  hands  of  God.  Which  done,  he  put  into  each  of  our
Scutes  a  Letter,  that  if  wee  chanced  to  lose  one  another,  or
that  by  stormes  or  any  other  misadventure  we  happened
to  be  cast  away,  that  then  by  the  Scute  that  escaped,  men
might  know  how  we  left  each  other,  and  so  having  finished
all  things  as  we  determined,  we  drew  the  Boat  to  the
water  side,  and  left  a  man  in  it,  and  went  and  fetcht  the
Scute,  and  after  that  eleven  Sleds  with  goods,  as  Victuals,
with  some  Wine  that  yet  remayned,  and  the  Merchants
goods,  which  we  preserved  as  well  as  we  could,  vz.  sixe
packes  with  fine  woollen  Cloth,  a  Chest  of  Linnen,  two
packets  with  Velvet,  two  small  Chests  with  Money,  two
Dri-fats  with  mens  Clothes  and  other  things,  thirteene
Barrels  of  Bread,  a  Barrell  of  Cheese,  a  flitch  of  Bacon,
two  Runlets  of  Oyle,  sixe  small  Runlets  of  Wine,  two
Runlets  of  Vineger,  with  other  packes  belonging  to  the
Saylers,  so  that  when  they  lay  all  together  upon  a  heape,  a
man  would  have  judged  that  they  would  not  have  gone
into  the  Scutes,  which  being  all  put  into  them,  we  went
to  the  house,  and  first  drew  William  Barents  upon  a  Sled
to  the  place  where  our  Scutes  lay,  and  after  that  we  fetcht
Claes  Adrianson,  both  of  them  having  beene  long  sicke,
and  so  we  entred  into  the  Scutes,  and  divided  our  selves

132

WILLIAM BARENTS

into  each  of  them  alike,  and  put  into  either  of  them  a
sicke  man,  then  the  Master  caused  both  the  Scutes  to  lie
close  one  by  the  other,  and  there  we  subscribed  to  the
Letters  which  he  had  written,  and  so  committing  our
selves  to  the  will  and  mercy  of  God,  with  a  West  North-
west wind,  and  an  indifferent  open  water,  we  set  sayle
and  put  to  Sea.

The  fourteenth  of  June  in  the  morning,  the  Sunne
Easterly,  wee  put  off  from  the  Land  of  Nova  Zembla,
and  the  fast  Ice  thereunto  adjoyning,  with  our  Boat  and
our  Scute,  having  a  West  wind,  and  sayled  East  North-
east all  that  day  to  the  Hands  point,  which  was  five  miles,
but  our  first  beginning  was  not  very  good,  for  we  entred
fast  into  the  Ice  againe,  which  there  lay  very  hard  and
fast,  which  put  us  into  no  small  feare  and  trouble,  and
being  there,  foure  of  us  went  on  Land,  to  know  the
situation  thereof,  and  there  we  tooke  many  Birds,  which
wee  kild  with  stones  upon  the  clifts.

The  sixteenth,  we  set  sayle  againe,  and  got  to  the  Hand
of  Orange,  with  a  South  wind,  which  is  eight  miles
distant  from  the  Point  of  Desire,  there  we  went  on  Land
with  two  small  Barrels,  and  a  Kettle,  to  melt  snow,  and
to  put  the  water  into  the  Barrels,  as  also  to  seeke  for
Birds  and  Egges,  to  make  meate  for  our  sicke  men.  We
put  to  the  Sea  againe  with  a  South-east  wind  and  drowsie
miseling  weather,  whereby  we  were  all  dankish  and  wet,  for
wee  had  no  shelter  in  our  open  Scutes,  and  sayled  West,
and  West  and  by  South,  to  the  Ice-point,  and  wee  made  our
Scutes  fast  to  a  great  piece  of  Ice,  and  there  eate  somewhat,
but  the  weather  was  still  fouler  and  fouler,  so  that  we  were
once  againe  enclosed  with  Ice,  and  forced  to  stay  there.

The  seventeenth  in  the  morning,  when  we  had  broken
our  fasts,  the  Ice  came  so  fast  upon  us  that  it  made  our
haires  stare  upright  upon  our  heads,  it  was  so  fearefull  to
behold :  by  which  meanes  we  could  not  make  fast  our
Scutes,  so  that  we  thought  verily  that  it  was  a  fore-shewing
of  our  last  end,  for  wee  drave  away  so  hard  with  the  Ice,
and  were  so  sore  prest  betweene  a  flake  of  Ice,  that  we

i33

A.D.

*597-

[III.iii.508.]

The  letter  is
omitted. It
was  subscribed
by  Jacob
Hemskerke,
Peter  Peterson
Vosy  Master
Hans  Fosy
Laurence  Wil-
limsony  Peter
Cornelison,
John  Remar-
sont  William
Barents,
Gerrat  de
Veer,  Leonard
Hendrickson,
Jacob  Johnson
Scheadamy
Jacob  Johnson
Sterrenburg.
Orange  I  land.

Open  Scutes.

A.D.

*597«

Dangerous
attempt  to
draw  the  Boat
over  the  Ice.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

thought  verily  the  Scutes  would  burst  in  a  hundred  pieces,
at  last,  being  in  this  discomfort,  and  extreme  necessitie,
the  Master  said,  if  we  could  take  hold  with  a  rope  upon
the  fast  Ice,  we  might  therewith  draw  the  Scute  up,  and
so  get  it  out  of  the  great  drift  of  Ice,  but  as  this  counsell
was  good,  yet  it  was  so  full  of  danger,  that  it  was  the
hazard  of  his  life  that  should  take  upon  him  to  doe  it,
and  without  doing  it,  was  it  most  certaine,  that  it  would
cost  us  all  our  lives :  this  counsell  as  I  said  was  good,  but
no  man  (like  to  the  tale  of  the  Mice)  durst  hang  the  Bell
about  the  Cats  necke,  fearing  to  bee  drowned,  yet
necessitie  required  to  have  it  done,  and  the  most  danger
made  us  choose  the  least,  so  that  being  in  that  perplexitie,
I  being  the  lightest  of  all  our  companie,  tooke  on  me  to
fasten  a  rope  upon  the  fast  Ice,  and  so  creeping  from  one
piece  of  driving  Ice  to  another,  by  Gods  helpe  got  to  the
fast  Ice,  where  I  made  a  rope  fast  to  a  high  howell,  and
they  that  were  in  the  Scute,  drew  it  thereby  unto  the  said
fast  Ice,  and  then  one  man  alone  could  draw  more  then
all  of  them  could  have  done  before,  and  when  we  had
gotten  thither,  in  all  haste  wee  tooke  our  sicke  men  out,
and  layed  them  upon  the  Ice,  laying  clothes  and  other
things  under  them,  and  then  tooke  all  our  goods  out  of
the  Scutes,  and  so  drew  them  upon  the  Ice,  whereby  for
that  time  we  were  delivered  from  that  great  danger,
making  account  that  we  had  escaped  out  of  deaths  clawes,
as  it  was  most  true.

The  eighteenth,  we  repaired  and  amended  our  Scutes
againe,  being  much  bruised  and  crushed  with  the  racking
of  the  Ice,  and  were  forced  to  drive  all  the  nayles  fast
againe  and  to  piece  many  things  about  them,  God  sending
us  Wood,  wherewith  we  molt  our  Pitch,  and  did  all  other
things  that  belonged  thereunto,  that  done,  some  of  us
went  upon  the  Land  to  seeke  for  Egges,  which  the  sicke
men  longed  for,  but  we  could  finde  none,  but  we  found
foure  Birds,  not  without  great  danger  of  our  lives,
betweene  the  Ice  and  the  firme  Land,  wherein  wee  often
fell,  and  were  in  no  small  danger.

i34

WILLIAM BARENTS

The  nineteenth,  it  was  indifferent  weather,  the  wind
North-west,  and  West  South-west,  but  we  were  still  shut
up  in  the  Ice,  and  saw  no  opening,  which  made  us  thinke
that  there  would  be  our  last  abode,  and  that  we  should
never  get  from  thence.

The  twentieth,  Claes  Adrianson  and  William  Barents
died,  the  death  of  William  Barents  put  us  in  no  small
discomfort,  as  being  the  chiefe  Guide,  and  onely  Pilot  on
whom  wee  reposed  our  selves,  next  under  God.

The  two  and  twentieth  in  the  morning,  it  blew  a  good
gale  out  of  the  South-east,  and  then  the  Sea  was  reason-
able open,  but  we  were  forced  to  draw  our  Scutes  over  the
Ice  to  get  unto  it,  which  was  great  paine  and  labour  unto
us ;  for,  first  we  were  forced  to  draw  our  Scutes  over  a
piece  of  Ice  of  fifty  paces  long,  and  there  put  them
into  the  water,  and  then  againe  to  draw  them  up  upon
other  Ice,  and  after  drew  them  at  the  least  an  hundred
paces  more  over  the  Ice,  before  we  could  bring  them  to  a
good  place  where  we  might  easily  get  out,  and  being  gotten
unto  the  open  water  we  committed  our  selves  to  God,
and  set  sayle  the  Sun  being  about  East  North-east,  with  an
indifferent  gale  of  wind  out  of  the  South,  and  South
South-east,  and  sayled  West,  and  West  and  by  South,  till
the  Sunne  was  South,  and  then  we  were  round  about
enclosed  with  Ice  againe,  and  could  not  get  out,  but  were
forced  to  lie  still,  but  not  long  after  the  Ice  opened  againe
like  to  a  sluce,  and  we  past  through  it  and  set  sayle  againe,
and  so  sayled  along  by  the  Land,  but  were  presently
enclosed  with  Ice,  but  being  in  hope  of  opening  againe,
meane  time  wee  eate  somewhat,  for  the  Ice  went  not  away
as  it  did  before :  after  that  wee  used  all  the  meanes  wee
could  to  breake  it,  but  all  in  vayne,  and  yet  a  good  while
after,  the  Ice  opened  againe,  and  we  got  out,  and  sayled
along  by  the  Land,  West  and  by  South,  with  a  South
wind.

The  three  and  twentieth,  wee  sayled  still  forward  West
and  by  South,  till  the  Sunne  was  South-east,  and  got  to  the
Trust-point,  which  is  distant  from  the  Ice-point  five  and

i35

A.D.

*597«

W.  Barents
dieth.

Enclosed
again  with
Ice:

and  againe.
[III.iii.509.]

Trust-point.

A.D.

1597-

Extreame
cold.

The  stretching
of  the  Land
from  the  house
where  we
wintred,  along
by  the  North-
side  of  Nova
Zembla,  to  the
Straights  of
Wey-gatsi
where  we  past
over  to  the
Coast  of
Russia,  and
over  the
en  trie  of  the
white  Sea  to
Cola,  accord-
ing to  the
Card  here
insuing.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

twentie  miles,  and  then  could  goe  no  further,  because  the
Ice  lay  so  hard  and  so  close  together,  and  yet  it  was  faire
weather :  the  same  day  we  tooke  the  height  of  the  Sunne
with  the  Astrolabium,  and  also  with  our  Astronomicall
Ring,  and  found  his  height  to  be  37.  degrees,  and  his
Declination  23.  degrees  and  30.  minutes,  which  taken
from  the  height  aforesayd,  there  rested  13.  degrees  and  30.
minutes,  which  substracted  out  of  90.  degrees,  the  height
of  the  Pole  was  76.  degrees  and  30.  minutes,  and  it  was
faire  Sun-shine  weather,  and  yet  it  was  not  so  strong  as  to
melt  the  Snow,  that  we  might  have  water  to  drinke,  so
that  wee  set  all  our  Tinne  platters  and  other  things  full  of
Snow  to  melt,  and  so  molt  it,  and  put  snow  in  our
mouthes,  to  melt  it  downe  into  our  throates,  but  all  was
not  enough,  so  that  we  were  compelled  to  endure  great
thirst.

FRom  the  Low-land,  to  the  Streame  Bay,  the  course
East  and  West,  foure  miles.  From  the  Streame  Bay,
to  the  Ice-haven  point,  the  course  East  and  by  North,
foure  miles.  From  the  Ice-haven  point,  to  the  Hands
point,  the  course  East  North-east,  five  miles.  From  the
Ilands  point,  to  the  Flushingers  point,  the  course  North-
east and  by  East,  three  miles.  From  the  Flushingers
point,  to  the  Head  point,  the  course  North-east,  foure
miles.  From  the  Head  point,  to  the  point  of  Desire,  the
course  South  and  North,  sixe  miles.  From  the  point  of
Desire,  to  the  Hand  of  Orange,  North-west,  eight  miles.
From  the  Ilands  of  Orange,  to  the  Ice  point,  the  course
West,  and  West  and  by  South,  five  miles.  From  the  Ice
point,  to  the  point  of  Trust,  the  course  West  and  by
South,  five  and  twentie  miles.  From  the  point  of  Trust,
to  Nassawes  point,  the  course  West,  and  West  and  by
North,  ten  miles.  From  the  Nassaw  point,  to  the  East  end
of  the  Crosse  Hand,  the  course  West  and  by  North,  eight
miles.  From  the  East  end  of  the  Crosse  Hand,  to  Williams
Hand,  the  course  West  and  by  South,  three  miles.  From
Williams  Hand, to the  Blacke  point, the  course  West

136

WILLIAM BARENTS  ad.

1597-
South-west,  sixe  miles.  From  the  Blacke  point,  to  the
East  end  of  the  Admirable  Hand,  the  course  West  South-
west, seven  miles.  From  the  East  to  the  West  point  of
the  Admirable  Hand,  the  course  West  South-west,  five
miles.  From  the  West  point  of  the  Admirable  Hand,  to
Cape  Planto,  the  course  South-west  and  by  West,  ten
miles.  From  Cape  de  Planto,  to  Lombs-bay,  the  course
West  South-west,  eight  miles.  From  Lombs-bay,  to  the
Staves  point,  the  course  West  South-west,  ten  miles.
From  the  Staves  point,  to  Langenesse,  the  course  South-
west and  by  South,  fourteene  miles.  From  Langenesse,
to  Cape  de  Cant,  the  course  South-west  and  by  South,
sixe  miles.  From  Cape  de  Cant,  to  the  point  with  the
Blacke  clifts,  the  course  South  and  by  West,  foure  miles.
From  the  point  with  the  Blacke  clifts,  to  the  Blacke
Hand,  the  course  South  South-east,  three  miles.  From
the  Blacke  Hand,  to  Constint-sarke,  the  course  East  and
West,  two  miles.  From  Constint-sarke,  to  the  Crosse
point,  the  course  South  South-east,  five  miles.  From
Crosse  point,  to  Saint  Laurence  Bay,  the  course  South
South-east,  sixe  miles.  From  Saint  Laurence  Bay,  to
Mel-haven,  the  course  South-east,  sixe  miles.  From
Mel-haven,  to  the  two  Hands,  the  course  South  South-
east, sixe  miles.  From  the  two  Hands,  where  we  crost
over  to  the  Russia  Coast,  to  the  Hands  of  Matfloe  and
Delgoy,  the  course  South-west,  thirtie  miles.  From
Matfloe  and  Delgoy,  to  the  Creeke  where  we  sayled  the
compasse  round  about,  and  came  to  the  same  place  againe,
two  and  twentie  miles.  From  that  Creeke,  to  Colgoy,
the  course  West  North-west,  eighteene  miles.  From
Colgoy,  to  the  East  point  of  Camdenas,  the  course  West
North-west,  twentie  miles.  From  the  East  point  of
Camdenas,  to  the  West  side  of  the  White  Sea,  the
course  West  North-west,  fortie  miles.  From  the
West  point  of  the  White  Sea,  to  the  seven  Hands,  the
course  North-west,  foureteene  miles.  From  the  seven
Hands,  to  the  West  end  of  Kilduin,  the  course  North-
west, twentie  miles. From  the  West  end  of  Kilduin,  to

i37

a.h.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1597-

the  place  where  John  Cornells  came  unto  us,  the  course
North-west  and  by  West,  seven  miles.  From  thence  to
Cola,  the  course  West  Southerly,  eighteene  miles.

So  that  wee  sayled  in  the  two  open  Scutes,  sometimes
in  the  Ice,  then  over  the  Ice,  and  through  the  Sea,  three
hundred  and  eightie  one  miles  Flemish,  which  is  one
thousand  one  hundred  fortie  and  three  miles  English.

The  foure  and  twentieth  of  June,  the  Sunne  being
Easterly,  we  rowed  heere  and  there  in  the  Ice,  to  see
where  we  might  best  goe  out,  but  wee  saw  no  opening,
but  when  the  Sunne  was  South,  we  got  into  the  Sea,  for
the  which  we  thanked  God  most  heartily,  that  hee  had
sent  us  an  unexpected  opening,  and  then  we  sayled  with
an  East  winde,  and  went  lustily  forward,  so  that  we  made
our  account  to  get  above  the  point  of  Nassawes  close  by
the  land,  and  wee  could  easily  see  the  point  of  Nassawes,
and  made  our  account  to  bee  about  three  miles  from  it.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  it  still  blew  hard  out  of  the
South,  and  broke  the  Ice  whereunto  we  were  fast  in
pieces,  and  we  thereby  drave  into  the  Sea,  and  could  get
no  more  to  the  fast  Ice,  whereby  we  were  in  a  thousand
dangers  to  bee  all  cast  away,  and  driving  in  that  sort  in
the  Sea,  wee  rowed  as  much  as  we  could,  but  we  could  not
get  neere  unto  the  Land,  therefore  we  hoysed  up  our
Focke,  and  so  made  up  with  our  sayle,  but  our  Fock-
mast  brake  twice  in  peeces,  and  then  it  was  worse  for  us
then  before,  and  notwithstanding  that  there  blew  a  great
gale  of  Wind,  yet  we  were  forced  to  hoyse  up  our  great
[III.iii.510.]  Sayle,  but  the  winde  blew  so  hard  into  it,  that  if  wee  had
not  presently  taken  it  in  againe,  we  had  sunke  in  the  Sea,
or  else  our  Boate  would  have  been  filled  with  water,  for
the  water  began  to  leape  over-boord,  and  wee  were  a  good
way  in  the  Sea,  at  which  time  the  waves  went  so  hollow,
that  it  was  most  fearefull,  and  wee  thereby  saw  nothing
but  death  before  our  eyes,  and  every  twinckling  of  an  eye
looked  when  wee  should  sinke.  But  God  that  had
delivered  us  out  of  so  many  dangers  of  Death,  holpe  us
once  againe,  and  contrary  to  our  expectations,  sent  us  a

138

William  Barents  aa

1597-
North-west  wind,  and  so  with  great  danger  wee  got  to  the
fast  Ice  againe,  when  we  were  delivered  out  of  that  danger,
and  knew  not  where  our  other  Scute  was,  wee  sayled  one
mile  along  by  the  fast  Ice,  but  found  it  not,  whereby  we
were  wholly  out  of  heart,  and  in  great  feare  that  they  were
drowned,  at  which  time  it  was  mystie  weather,  and  so
sayling  along,  and  hearing  no  newes  of  our  other  Scute,
we  shot  off  a  Musket,  which  they  hearing  shot  off  another,
but  yet  we  could  not  see  each  other,  meane  time  approch-
ing  neerer  to  each  other,  and  the  weather  waxing  somewhat
cleerer,  as  wee  and  they  shot  once  againe,  we  saw  the
smoake  of  their  Piece,  and  at  last  we  met  together  againe,
and  saw  them  lye  fast,  betweene  driving  and  fast  Ice,  and
when  we  got  neere  unto  them,  we  went  over  the  Ice,  and
holpe  them  to  unlade  the  goods  out  of  their  Scute,  and
drew  it  over  the  Ice,  and  with  much  paine  and  trouble
brought  it  into  the  open  water  againe,  and  while  they  were
fast  in  the  Ice,  wee  found  some  Wood  upon  the  Land  by
the  Sea  side,  and  when  we  lay  by  each  other,  we  sod  some
Bread  and  Water  together,  and  eat  it  up  warme,  which  did
us  much  good.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  when  the  Sunne  was  in  the
East,  wee  layd  all  our  goods  upon  the  Ice,  and  then  drew
the  Scutes  upon  the  Ice  also,  because  we  were  so  hardly
prest  on  all  sides,  with  the  Ice,  and  the  wind  came  out  of
the  Sea  upon  the  Land,  and  therefore  wee  were  in  feare  to
be  wholly  inclosed  with  the  Ice,  and  should  not  be  able  to
get  out  thereof  againe,  and  being  upon  the  Ice,  we  layd
sayles  over  our  Scutes,  and  lay  downe  to  rest,  appointing
one  of  our  men  to  keepe  watch,  and  when  the
Sunne  was  North  there  came  three  Beares  towards
our  Scutes,  wherewith  hee  that  kept  the  Watch  cryed,
three  Beares,  three  Beares,  at  which  noyse  wee  leapt  Three  Beares.
out  of  our  Boates  with  our  Muskets,  that  were  laden  with
hayle-shot  to  shoote  at  Birds,  and  had  no  time  to  dis-
charge them,  and  therefore  shot  at  them  therewith,  and
although  that  kinde  of  shot  could  not  hurt  them  much,
yet  they  ranne  away,  and  in  the  meane  time  they  gave  us

i39

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1597.

leasure  to  lade  our  Muskets  with  bullets,  and  by  that
meanes  wee  shot  one  of  the  three  dead,  which  the  other
two  perceiving  ranne  away,  but  within  two  houres  after
they  came  againe,  but  when  they  were  almost  at  us  and
heard  us  make  a  noyse,  they  ranne  away,  at  which  time  the
winde  was  West,  and  West  and  by  North,  which  made  the
Ice  drive  with  great  force  into  the  East.

The  nine  and  twentieth  of  June,  the  Sunne  being  South
South-west,  the  two  Beares  came  againe  to  the  place  where
the  dead  Beare  lay,  where  one  of  them  tooke  the  dead
One  Beare  Beare  in  his  mouth,  and  went  a  great  way  with  it  over
carry eth  ^  t^e  TUgger\  Ice,  and  then  began  to  eate  it,  which  we  per-
mouthandeat  ctlv'mg  snot  a  Musket  at  her,  but  she  hearing  the  noyse
it.  thereof  ranne  away,  and  let  the  dead  Beare  lye,  then  foure

of  us  went  thither,  and  saw  that  in  so  short  time  she  had
eaten  almost  the  halfe  of  her,  we  tooke  the  dead  Beare  and
layd  it  upon  a  high  heape  of  Ice,  that  we  might  see  it  out
of  our  Scute,  that  if  the  Beare  came  againe  we  might
Strong  Beare.  shoot  at  her,  at  which  time  we  tryed  the  great  strength  of
the  Beare,  that  carryed  the  dead  Beare  as  lightly  in  her
mouth,  as  if  it  had  beene  nothing,  whereas  wee  foure  had
enough  to  doe  to  carry  away  the  halfe  dead  Beare  betweene
us.
July.  The  first  of  July,  it  was  indifferent  faire  weather,  with

a  West  North-west  wind,  and  in  the  Morning  the  Sunne
being  East,  there  came  a  Beare  from  the  driving  Ice
towards  us,  and  swam  over  the  water  to  the  fast  Ice
whereon  we  lay,  but  when  she  heard  us,  she  came  no
neerer  but  ran  away,  and  when  the  Sunne  was  South-east,
the  Ice  came  so  fast  in  towards  us,  that  all  the  Ice  whereon
we  lay  with  our  Scutes  and  our  goods,  brake  and  ran  one
peece  upon  another,  whereby  we  were  in  no  small  feare,
for  at  that  time  most  of  our  goods  fell  into  the  water,  but
wee  with  great  diligence  drew  our  Scutes  further  upon  the
Ice  towards  the  Land,  where  we  thought  to  be  better
defended  from  the  driving  of  the  Ice,  and  as  we  went  to
fetch  our  goods,  we  fell  into  the  greatest  trouble  that  ever
we  had  before,  for  that  wee  endured  so  great  danger  in  the

140

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1597-
saving  thereof,  that  as  we  layd  hold  upon  one  peece
thereof,  the  rest  sunke  downe  with  the  Ice,  and  many
times  the  Ice  brake  under  our  owne  feete,  whereby  we
were  wholly  discomforted,  and  in  a  manner  cleane  out  of
all  hope,  expecting  no  issue  thereof,  in  such  sort  that  our
trouble  at  that  time  surmounted  all  our  former  cares  and
impeachments,  and  when  wee  thought  to  draw  up  our
Boates  upon  the  Ice,  the  Ice  brake  under  us,  and  we  were
carryed  away  with  the  Scute,  and  all  by  the  driving  Ice,
and  when  we  thought  to  save  the  goods,  the  Ice  brake
under  our  feet,  and  with  that  the  Scute  brake  in  many
places,  especially  that  which  wee  had  mended,  as  the
Mast,  the  mast  planke,  and  almost  all  the  Scute,  wherein
one  of  our  men  that  was  sicke,  and  a  Chest  of  money
lay,  which  we  with  great  danger  of  our  lives  got  out  from
it,  for  as  we  were  doing  it,  the  Ice  that  was  under  our
feet  drave  from  us,  and  slid  upon  other  Ice,  whereby  wTe
were  in  danger  to  burst  both  our  armes  and  our  legges,  at
which  time,  thinking  that  wee  had  beene  cleane  quit  of
our  Scute,  we  beheld  each  other  in  pittifull  manner,  know-
ing not  what  we  should  doe,  our  lives  depending  thereon,
but  God  made  so  good  provision  for  us,  that  the  peeces
of  Ice  drave  from  each  other,  wherewith  we  ranne  in  great  [III.iii.511.]
haste  unto  the  Scute,  and  drew  it  to  us  againe  in  such  case
as  it  was,  and  laid  it  upon  the  fast  Ice  by  the  Boate,  where
it  was  in  more  securitie,  which  put  us  unto  an  exceeding
and  great  and  dangerous  labour,  from  the  time  that  the
Sunne  was  South-east,  untill  it  was  West  South-west,  and
in  all  that  time  wee  rested  not,  which  made  us  extreame
wearie,  and  wholy  out  of  comfort,  for  that  it  troubled  us
sore,  and  it  was  much  more  fearefull  unto  us,  then  at  that
time  when  William  Barents  dyed,  for  there  we  were  almost
drowned,  and  that  day  we  lost  (which  was  sunke  in  the
Sea)  two  Barrels  of  Bread,  a  Chist  with  Linnen  Cloth,  a
Dry  Fat  with  the  Saylors  Clothes,  our  Astronomicall  Ring,
a  packe  of  Scarlet  Cloth,  a  Rundlet  of  Oyle,  and  some
Cheeses,  and  a  Rundlet  of  Wine,  which  bouged  with  the
Ice  so  that  there  was  not  any  thing  thereof  saved.

141

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

l597-

The  fourth,  it  was  so  faire  cleere  weather,  that  from
the  time  we  were  first  in  Nova  Zembla,  we  had  not
the  like.  The  fifth,  it  was  faire  weather,  the  Wind
West,  South-west,  the  same  day  dyed  John  Franson  of
Harlem.

The  seventh,  it  was  faire  weather  with  some  Raine,  the
Winde  West  South-west,  and  at  Evening  West,  and  by
North,  then  we  went  to  the  open  water,  and  there  killed
thirteene  Birds,  which  we  tooke  upon  a  piece  of  driving
Ice,  and  laid  them  upon  the  fast  Ice.

The  ninth,  in  the  morning,  the  Ice  began  to  drive,
whereby  we  got  open  water  on  the  Land  side,  and  then
also  the  fast  Ice  whereon  we  lay,  beganne  to  drive  where-
upon the  Master  and  the  men  went  to  fetch  the  Packe  and
the  Chist,  that  stood  upon  the  Ice,  to  put  them  into  the
Scute,  and  then  drew  the  Scutes  to  the  water,  at  least
three  hundred  and  fortie  paces,  which  was  hard  for  us  to
doe,  in  regard  that  the  labour  was  great,  and  we  very
weake,  and  when  the  Sunne  was  South  South-east  we  set
sayle  with  an  East-wind,  but  when  the  Sunne  was  West,
we  were  forced  to  make  towards  the  fast  Ice  againe,
because  thereabouts  it  was  not  yet  gone,  the  Winde  being
South,  and  came  right  from  the  Land,  whereby  wee  were
in  good  hope  that  it  would  drive  away,  and  that  we  should
proceed  in  our  Voyage.  The  tenth,  from  the  time  that
the  Sunne  was  East  North-east,  till  it  was  East,  we  tooke
great  paines  and  labour  to  get  through  the  Ice,  and  at  last
we  got  through,  and  rowed  forth,  untill  we  happened  to
fall  betweene  two  great  flakes  of  Ice  that  closed  one  with
the  other,  so  that  we  could  not  get  through,  but  were
forced  to  draw  the  Scutes  upon  them,  and  to  unlade  the
goods,  and  then  to  draw  them  over  to  the  open  water  on
the  other  side,  and  then  we  must  goe  fetch  the  goods  also
to  the  same  place,  being  at  least  one  hundred  paces  long,
and  when  we  were  in  open  water  againe,  we  rowed  forward
as  well  as  we  could,  but  we  had  not  rowed  long,  before  wee
fell  betweene  two  great  flakes  of  Ice,  that  came  driving
one  against  the  other,  but  by  Gods  helpe,  and  our  speedy

142

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1597-
rowing,  we  got  from  betweene  them,  before  they  closed
up,  and  being  through  we  had  a  hard  West  Winde,  right
in  our  Teeth,  so  that  of  force  we  were  constrayned  to
make  towards  the  fast  Ice  that  lay  by  the  shoare.

The  eleventh,  in  the  morning  as  we  sate  fast  upon  the
Ice,  the  Sunne  being  North-east,  there  came  a  great  Beare  Huge  Beare.
out  of  the  water  running  towards  us,  but  we  watcht  for
her  with  three  Muskets,  and  when  she  came  within  thirtie
paces  of  us,  wee  shot  all  the  three  Muskets  at  her,  and
killed  her  out-right,  so  that  she  stirred  not  a  foot,  and  we
might  see  the  fat  runne  out  at  the  holes  of  her  skinne,
that  was  shot  in  with  the  Muskets,  swimme  upon  the
water  like  Oyle,  and  so  driving  dead  upon  the  water,  we
went  upon  a  flake  of  Ice  to  her,  and  putting  a  Rope  about
her  necke,  drew  her  up  upon  the  Ice,  and  smit  out  her
Teeth,  at  which  time  we  measured  her  bodie,  and  found  it
to  be  eight  foot  thicke,  then  we  had  a  West  Wind  with
close  weather,  but  when  the  Sunne  was  South  it  began  to
cleere  up,  then  three  of  our  men  went  to  the  Hand  that  lay
before  us,  and  being  there,  they  saw  the  Crosse  Hand,  lying
West-ward  from  them,  and  went  thither  to  see  if  that
Summer  there  had  beene  any  Russian  there,  and  went
thither  upon  the  fast  Ice,  that  lay  betweene  the  two  Hands,
and  being  in  the  Hand,  they  could  not  perceive  that  any
man  had  beene  in  it  since  wee  were  there,  there  they  got
seventie  Egges,  but  when  they  had  them,  they  knew  not
wherein  to  carrie  them,  at  last  one  of  them  put  off  his
Breeches,  and  tying  them  fast  below,  they  carried  them
betweene  two  of  them,  and  the  third  bare  the  Musket :
and  so  came  to  us  againe,  after  they  had  beene  twelve
houres  out,  which  put  us  no  small  feare  to  thinke  what
was  become  of  them,  they  told  us  that  they  had  many
times gone up to the knees in water, upon the Ice
betweene  both  the  Hands :  and  it  was  at  least  sixe  mile  to
and  fro,  that  they  had  gone,  which  made  us  wonder  how
they  could  indure  it,  seeing  we  were  all  so  weake. With
the  Egges  that  they  had  brought,  wee  were  all  well  com-
forted, and  fared  like  Lords,  so  that  we  found  some  reliefe

H3

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

'597-

in  our  great  miserie,  and  then  wee  shared  our  last  Wine
amongst  us,  whereof  every  one  had  three  Glasses.

The  twelfth,  in  the  morning,  when  the  Sunne  was  East,
the  Wind  began  to  blow  East,  and  East  North-east,  with
mystie  weather,  and  at  Eevening  sixe  of  our  men  went
into  the  Land,  to  seeke  certayne  stones,  and  found  some,
but  none  of  the  best  sort,  and  comming  backe  againe,
eyther  of  them  brought  some  Wood.  The  thirteenth,  it
was  a  faire  day,  then  seven  of  our  men  went  to  the  firme
Land  to  seeke  for  more  stones,  and  found  some,  at  which
time  the  Wind  was  South-east.  The  fourteenth,  it  was
faire  weather,  with  a  good  South  Wind,  and  then  the  Ice
began  to  drive  from  the  Land,  whereby  wee  were  in  good
[111.111. 5 12.J  h0pe  to  have  an  open  water,  but  the  Wind  turning
Westerly  againe,  it  lay  still,  when  the  Sunne  was  South-
west, three  of  our  men  went  to  the  next  Hand  that  lay
before  us,  and  there  shot  a  Bercheynet,  which  they  brought
to  the  Scute,  and  gave  it  amongst  us,  for  all  our  goods
were  common.

The  sixteenth,  there  came  a  Beare  from  the  firme  Land,
that  came  very  neere  unto  us,  by  reason  that  it  was  as
white  as  Snow,  whereby  at  first  we  could  not  discerne  it  to
be  a  Beare,  because  it  shewed  so  like  the  snow,  but  by
her  stirring  at  last  we  perceived  her,  and  as  she  came  neere
unto  us,  we  shot  at  her  and  hit  her,  but  shee  ranne  away :
that  morning  the  Wind  was  West,  and  after  that  againe,
East  North-east  with  close  weather.  The  seventeenth,
about  the  South  South-east  Sunne,  five  of  our  men  went
againe  to  the  neerest  Hand,  to  see  if  there  appeared  any
open  water,  for  our  long  staying  there  was  no  small  griefe
unto  us,  perceiving  not  how  wee  should  get  from  thence,
who  being  halfe  way  thither,  they  found  a  Beare  lying
behind  a  piece  of  Ice,  which  the  day  before  had  beene  shot
by  us,  but  shee  hearing  us  went  away,  but  one  of  our  men
following  her  with  a  Boat-hooke,  thrust  her  into  the
skinne,  wherewith  the  Beare  rose  up  upon  her  hinder  feet,
and  as  the  man  thrust  at  her  againe,  she  strooke  the  Iron
of  the  Boat-hooke  in  pieces,  wherewith  the  man  fell  downe

144

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

J597-
upon  his  buttockes,  which  our  other  two  men  seeing,  two
of  them  shot  the  Beare  into  the  bodie,  and  with  that  she
ranne  away,  but  the  other  man  went  after  her  with  his
broken  staffe,  and  strooke  the  Beare  upon  the  backe,
wherewith  the  Beare  turned  about  against  the  man  three
times  one  after  the  other,  and  then  the  other  two  came  to
her  and  shot  her  into  the  bodie  againe,  wherewith  shee  sat
downe  upon  her  buttockes,  and  could  scant  runne  any
further,  and  then  they  shot  once  againe,  wherewith  shee
fell  downe,  and  they  smote  her  Teeth  out  of  her  head  :  all
that  day  the  Winde  was  North-east,  and  East  North-east.

The  eighteenth,  about  the  East  Sun,  three  of  our  men
went  up  upon  the  highest  part  of  the  land  to  see  if  there
was  any  open  water  in  the  Sea,  at  which  time  they  saw
much  open  water,  but  it  was  so  far  from  the  land,  that
they  were  almost  out  of  comfort,  because  it  lay  so  far  from
the  land,  and  the  fast  Ice,  being  of  opinion  that  we  should
not  be  able  to  draw  the  Scutes  and  the  goods  so  farre
thither,  because  our  strengthes  still  beganne  to  decrease :
and  the  sore  labour  and  paine  that  we  were  forced  to  indure
more  and  more  increased,  and  comming  to  our  Scutes,  they
brought  us  that  newes,  but  we  being  compelled  thereunto
by  necessitie  abandoned  all  wearinesse  and  faint-hearted-
nesse,  and  determined  with  our  selves  to  bring  the  Boats
and  the  goods  to  the  water  side,  and  to  row  unto  that  Ice,
where  wee  must  passe  over  to  get  to  the  open  water,  and
when  wee  got  to  it,  wee  unladed  our  Scutes,  and  drew
them  first  over  the  Ice  to  the  open  water,  and  after  that
the  goods ;  it  beeing  at  the  least  one  thousand  paces,  then
wee  set  sayle,  till  the  Sunne  was  West  and  by  South ;  and
presently  fell  amongst  the  Ice  againe,  where  wee  were
forced  to  draw  up  the  Scutes  againe  upon  the  Ice,  and
beeing  upon  it,  wee  could  see  the  Crosse  Hand,  which  wee
ghest  to  bee  about  a  mile  from  us,  the  Wind  then  being
East,  and  East  North-east.

The  nineteenth,  lying  in  that  manner  upon  the  Ice,
about  the  East  Sunne,  seven  of  our  men  went  to  the
Crosse  Hand,  and  being  there  they  saw  great  store  of  open
xiii  145  k

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

*597-

water  in  the  West,  wherewith  they  much  rejoyced,  and
made  as  great  haste  as  they  could  to  get  to  the  Scutes
againe,  but  before  they  came  away  they  got  ioo.  Egges,
and  brought  them  away  with  them,  and  comming  to  the
Scutes,  they  shewed  us  that  they  had  seene  as  much  open
water  in  the  Sea  as  they  could  discerne,  being  in  good
hope,  that  that  would  be  the  last  time  that  they  should
draw  the  Scutes  over  the  Ice,  and  that  it  should  bee  no
more  measured  by  us,  and  in  that  sort  put  us  in  good
comfort,  whereupon  we  made  speed  to  dresse  our  Egges,
and  shared  them  amongst  us,  and  presently  the  Sunne
being  South  South-west  we  fell  to  worke,  to  make  all  things
ready  to  bring  the  Scutes  to  the  water,  which  were  to  be
drawne  at  least  two  hundred  paces  over  the  Ice,  which  wee
did  with  a  good  courage,  because  we  were  in  good  hope
that  it  would  be  the  last  time,  and  getting  to  the  water,
we  put  to  Sea  with  Gods  helpe,  with  an  East,  and  East
North-east  Wind,  and  a  good  gale,  so  that  with  the  West
Sunne,  we  past  by  the  Crosse  Iland,  which  is  distant  from
Cape  de  Nassawes  ten  miles,  and  presently  after  that  the
Ice  left  us,  and  wee  got  cleere  out  of  it,  yet  wee  saw  some
in  the  Sea,  but  it  troubled  us  not,  and  so  wee  held  our
course  West  and  by  South,  with  a  good  gale  of  Wind  out
of  the  East,  and  East  North-east,  so  that  wee  ghest  that
betweene  every  meale-tyde  we  sayled  eighteene  miles.

The  twentieth,  having  still  a  good  gale  about  the  South-
east Sunne,  wee  past  along  by  the  Blacke  Point,  which  is
twelve  miles  distant  from  the  Crosse  Iland,  and  sayled
West  South-west,  and  about  the  Eevening  with  the  West
Admirals  Sunne,  we  saw  the  Admirals  Iland,  and  about  the  North
Hand.  Sunne  past  along  by  it,  which  is  distant  from  the  Blacke
Point  eight  miles,  and  passing  along  by  it,  we  saw  about
two  hundred  Sea-horses,  lying  upon  a  flake  of  Ice,  and
wee  sayled  close  by  them,  and  drave  them  from  thence,
which  had  almost  cost  us  deere,  for  they  beeing  mightie
strong  fishes,  and  of  great  force,  swamme  towards  us,  (as
if  they  would  be  revenged  on  us  for  the  despight  that  we
had  done  them)  round  about  our  Scutes  with  a  great

146

WILLIAM BARENTS

A.D.

1597-

[III.iii.513.]

Cape  Plancio.

Langenes.

noyse,  as  if  they  would  have  devoured  us,  but  we  escaped
from  them,  by  reason  that  we  had  a  good  gale  of  Wind,
yet  it  was  not  wisely  done  of  us  to  wake  sleeping  Wolves.
The  one  and  twentieth,  we  past  by  Cape  Plancio,  about  the
East  North-east  Sunne,  which  lyeth  West  South-west
eight  miles  from  the  Admirals  Hand,  and  with  the  good
gale  that  we  had  about  the  South-west  Sunne,  we  sayled
by  Langenes,  nine  miles  from  Cape  Plancio  :  there  the
Land  reacheth  most  South-west,  and  we  had  a  good  North-
east wind.

The  two  and  twentieth,  we  having  so  good  a  gale  of
wind  when  wee  came  to  Cape  de  Cant,  there  we  went  on  Cape  Cant.
land  to  seeke  for  some  Birds  and  Egges,  but  we  found
none,  so  we  sayled  forwards,  but  after  that  about  the  South
Sunne  we  saw  a  Clift  that  was  full  of  Birds,  thither  wee
sayled  and  casting  stones  at  them,  we  killed  two  and
twentie  Birds,  and  got  fifteene  Egges,  which  one  of  our
men  fetcht  from  the  Clift,  and  if  we  would  have  stayed
there  any  longer,  wee  might  have  taken  a  hundred  or  two
hundred  Birds  at  least,  but  because  the  Master  was  some-
what further  into  Sea-ward  then  we,  and  stayed  for  us,
and  for  that  wee  would  not  loose  that  faire  fore-wind,  we
sayled  forwards  along  by  the  Land,  and  about  the  South-
west Sunne,  wee  came  to  another  point,  where  wee  got  a
hundred  twentie  and  five  Birds,  which  wee  tooke  with  our
hands  out  of  their  Nests,  and  some  wee  killed  with  stones,
and  made  them  fall  downe  into  the  water,  for  it  is  a  thing
certayne  that  those  Birds  never  used  to  see  men,  and  that
no  man  had  ever  sought  or  used  to  take  them,  for  else  they
would  have  flowne  away,  and  that  they  feared  no  bodie,
but  the  Foxes  and  other  wild  beasts,  that  could  not  climbe
up  the  high  Clifts,  and  that  therefore  they  had  made  their
Nests  thereon,  where  they  were  out  of  feare  of  any  beasts
comming  unto  them,  for  we  were  in  no  small  danger  of
breaking  of  our  legges  and  armes,  especially  as  we  came
downe  againe,  because  the  Clift  was  so  high  and  so  steepe,
those  Birds  had  every  one  but  one  Egge  in  their  Nests,  and
that  lay  upon  the  bare  Clift  without  any  straw  or  other

147

Strange  Birds
breeding  in
strong  cold.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I597*

thing  under  them,  which  is  to  be  wondred  at,  to  thinke  how

they  could  breede  their  young  ones  in  so  great  cold,  but  it

is  to  be  thought  and  beleeved,  that  they  therefore  sit  but

upon  one  Egge,  that  so  the  heate  which  they  give  in

breeding  so  many,  may  be  wholly  given  unto  one  Egge.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  it  was  faire  weather,  but  the
winde  still  Northerly,  whereby  wee  were  forced  to  lye  still,
and  about  noone  we  tooke  the  height  of  the  Sunne  with
our  Astrolabium,  and  found  it  to  be  elevated  above  the
Horizon  37.  degrees  and  20.  minutes,  his  declination  20.
degrees  and  10.  minutes  which  substracted  from  the
height  aforesaid  rested  17.  degrees  and  10.  minutes,  which
taken  from  90.  degrees,  the  height  of  the  Pole  was  73.
degrees  and  10.  minutes,  and  for  that  we  lay  still  there,
some  of  our  men  went  oftentimes  on  Land  to  seeke  stones,
and  found  some  that  were  as  good  as  ever  any  that  we
found.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  wee  had  sayled  from  Cape  de
Cant,  along  by  Constinsarke,  to  the  Crosse  Point,  twentie
miles,  our  course  South  South-east,  the  Wind  North-west.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  it  was  faire  weather  with  a
North-east  wind,  then  we  sayled  along  by  the  Land,  and
with  the  South-west  Sunne,  got  before  Saint  Laurence
Bay,  or  Sconce  Point,  and  sayled  South  South-east  six
Two  Russian  miJeS)  anc[  being  there,  wee  found  two  Russians  Lodgies,  or
Lodzies  ships  beyond  the  Point,  wherewith  we  were  not  a  little

comforted,  to  thinke  that  we  were  come  to  the  place  where
we  found  men,  but  were  in  some  doubt  of  them,  because
they  were  so  many,  for  at  that  time  we  saw  at  least  thirtie
men,  and  knew  not  what  they  were,  there  with  much  paine
and  labour  we  got  to  Land,  which  they  perceiving,  left
off  their  worke,  and  came  towards  us,  but  without  any
Armes,  and  we  also  went  on  shoare,  as  many  as  were  well,
for  divers  of  us  were  very  ill  at  ease,  and  weake  by  reason
of  a  great  scouring  in  their  bodies,  and  when  wee  met
together,  wee  saluted  each  other  in  friendly  wise,  they
after  theirs,  and  wee  after  our  manner,  and  when  we  were
met,  both  they  and  wee  lookt  each  other  stedfastly  in  the

148

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

x597-
face,  for  that  some  of  them  knew  us,  and  wee  them,  to  bee
the  same  men  which  the  yeere  before,  when  we  past
through  the  Wey-gates  had  beene  in  our  ship :  at  which
time  wee  perceived  that  they  were  abasht  and  wondred  at
us,  to  remember  that  at  that  time  wee  were  so  well
furnished  with  a  great  ship,  that  was  exceedingly  pro-
vided of  all  things  necessary,  and  then  to  see  us  so  leane
and  bare,  with  so  small  Scutes  in  that  Countrey :  and
amongst  them  there  were  two,  that  in  friendly  manner
clapt  the  Master  and  me  upon  the  shoulder,  as  knowing  us
since  that  Voyage :  for  there  was  none  of  all  our  men  that
was  as  then  in  that  Voyage,  but  we  two  only,  and  asked  us
for  our  Crable,  meaning  our  ship,  and  we  shewed  them
by  signes  as  well  as  we  could  (for  we  had  no  Interpreter)
that  we  had  lost  our  ship  in  the  Ice,  wherewith  they  said,
Crable  pro  pal  (which  wee  understood  to  bee,  Have  you
lost  your  ship?)  and  we  made  answere,  Crable  pro  pal,
which  was  as  much  as  to  say,  That  we  had  lost  our  ship,
and  many  more  words  we  could  not  use,  because  we  under-
stood not  each  other,  then  they  made  shew  to  be  sorrie  for
our  losse,  and  to  be  grieved  that  we  the  yeere  before  had
beene  there  with  so  many  ships,  and  then  to  see  us  in  so
simple  manner,  and  made  us  signes  that  then  they  had
drunke  Wine  in  our  ship,  and  asked  us  what  drinke  wee
had  now,  wherewith  one  of  our  men  went  into  the  Scute
and  drew  some  water,  and  let  them  taste  thereof,  but  they
shak't  their  heads,  and  said,  No  dobbre  (that  is,  It  is  not
good)  then  our  Master  went  neerer  unto  them,  and  shewed
them  his  mouth,  to  give  them  to  understand  that  we  were
troubled  with  a  loosenesse  in  our  bellies,  and  to  know  if
they  could  give  us  any  counsell  to  helpe  it,  but  they
thought  wee  made  shew  that  wee  had  great  hunger  where-
with one  of  them  went  unto  their  Lodging,  and  fetcht  a
round  Rie  Loafe,  weighing  about  eight  pounds,  with  some  [III.iii.514.]
smored  Fowles  which  we  accepted  thankfully,  and  gave
them  in  exchange  halfe  a  doozen  of  Muschuyt,  then  our
Master  led  two  of  the  chiefe  of  them  with  him  into  his
Scute,  and  gave  them  some  of  the  Wine  that  we  had,  being

149

A.D.

1597.

No  Raine.

Scurvy-grasse,
or  Leple  leaves
cure  their
scowring  and
Scorbutica//
infirmitie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

almost  a  Gallon,  for  it  was  so  neere  out :  and  while  we
stayed  there,  we  were  very  familiar  with  them,  and  went
to  the  place  where  they  lay,  and  sod  some  of  our  Mischuyt
with  water  by  their  fire,  that  we  might  eat  some  warme
thing  downe  into  our  bodies,  and  wee  were  much  com-
forted to  see  the  Russians  for  that  in  thirteene  moneths
time,  that  we  departed  from  John  Cornelison,  we  had  not
seene  any  man,  but  onely  monsterous  and  cruell  wild
Beares.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  it  was  reasonable  faire  weather,
and  that  morning  the  Russians  beganne  to  make  prepara-
tion to  bee  gone,  and  to  set  sayle :  at  which  time  they
digged  certayne  Barrels  with  Trayne  Oyle  out  of  the  sieges
which  they  had  buried  there,  and  put  it  into  their  ships.

The  thirtieth,  lying  at  Anchor,  the  Wind  still  blew
North-west,  with  great  store  of  Raine,  and  a  sore  storme,
so  that  although  we  had  covered  our  Scutes  with  our
Sayles,  yet  we  could  not  lye  dry,  which  was  an  unaccus-
tomed thing  unto  us :  for  wee  had  had  no  Raine  in  long
time  before,  and  yet  we  were  forced  to  stay  there  all  that
day.

The  one  and  thirtieth,  in  the  morning,  about  the  North-
east Sunne,  wee  rowed  from  that  Hand  to  another  Hand,
whereon  there  stood  two  Crosses,  wee  thought  that  some
men  had  layne  there  about  Trade  of  Merchandize,  as  the
other  Russians  that  wee  saw  before  had  done,  but  wee
found  no  man  there,  the  Wind  as  then  beeing  North-west,
whereby  the  Ice  drave  still  towards  the  Wey-gates :  there
to  our  great  good  wee  went  on  Land,  for  in  that  Hand  wee
found  great  store  of  Leple  leaves,  which  served  us  exceed-
ing well,  and  it  seemed  that  God  had  purposely  sent  us
thither :  for  as  then  wee  had  many  sicke  men,  and  most
of  us  were  so  troubled  with  a  scouring  in  our  bodies,  and
were  thereby  become  so  weake,  that  wee  could  hardly
row,  but  by  meanes  of  those  leaves  we  were  healed
thereof :  for  that  as  soone  as  we  had  eaten  them,  we  were
presently  eased  and  healed,  whereat  wee  could  not  choose
but  wonder,  and  therefore  wee  gave  God  great  thankes

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

*597"
for  that,  and  for  many  other  his  mercies  shewed  unto  us,
by  his  great  and  unexpected  aide  lent  us,  in  that  our
dangerous  Voyage  :  and  so  as  I  said  before,  wee  eate  them
by  whole  handfuls  together,  because  in  Holland  we  had
heard  much  spoken  of  their  great  force,  and  as  then  found
it  to  be  much  more  then  we  expected.

The  first  of  August,  the  Wind  blew  hard  North-west,  August.
and  the  Ice  that  for  a  while  had  driven  towards  the  entry
of  the  Wey-gates,  stayed  and  drave  no  more,  but  the  Sea
went  very  hollow,  whereby  we  were  forced  to  remove  our
Scutes  on  the  other  side  of  the  Hand,  to  defend  them  from
the  waves  of  the  Sea,  and  lying  there  wee  went  on  Land
againe  to  fetch  more  Leple  leaves,  whereby  we  had  beene
so  well  holpen,  and  still  more  and  more  recovered  our
healths,  and  in  so  short  time,  that  we  could  not  choose  but
wonder  thereat,  so  that  as  then  some  of  us  could  eate
Bisket  againe,  which  not  long  before  they  could  not  doe.
The  second,  it  was  darke  mistie  weather,  the  Winde  still
blowing  stiffe  North-west,  at  which  time  our  victuals
beganne  to  decrease,  for  as  then  wee  had  nothing  but  a
little  Bread  and  Water,  and  some  of  us  a  little  Cheese.

The  third,  about  the  North  Sunne,  the  weather  being
somewhat  better,  wee  agreed  amongst  our  selves  to  leave
Nova  Zembla  and  to  crosse  over  to  Russia,  and  so  com-
mitting our  selves  to  God,  we  set  sayle  with  a  North-west
Wind,  and  sayled  South  South-west  till  the  Sunne  was
East,  and  then  we  entred  into  Ice  againe,  which  put  us  in
great  feare,  and  about  the  South-west  Sunne  got  cleere
thereof,  and  entred  into  the  large  Sea,  where  wee  saw  Ice,
and  then  what  with  sayling  and  rowing  we  had  made
twentie  miles,  and  so  sailing  forwards  wee  thought  to
approch  neere  unto  the  Russian  Coast ;  but  about  the
North-west  Sunne  we  entred  into  Ice  againe,  and  then  it
was  very  cold.

The  fourth,  about  the  South-east  Sunne,  being  gotten
out  of  the  Ice,  we  sayled  forward  with  a  North-west  Wind,
and  held  our  course  Southerly,  and  when  the  Sunne  was
South,  at  noone  time  we  saw  the  Coast  of  Russia  lying

151

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1597-

before  us,  whereat  we  were  exceeding  glad,  and  going

neerer  unto  it,  we  strooke  our  sayles  and  rowed  on  Land,

and  found  it  to  be  very  low  Land,  like  a  bare  Strand  that

might  be  flowed  over  with  the  water,  there  we  lay  till  the

Sunne  was  South-west,  but  perceiving  that  there  wee  could

not  much  further  our  selves,  having  as  then  sayled  from

the  Point  of  Nova  Zembla  (from  whence  we  put  off)

thither  full  thirtie  miles,  wee  sayled  forward  along  by  the

Coast  of  Russia,  with  an  indifferent  gale  of  Winde,  and

when  the  Sunne  was  North,  we  saw  another  Russian  Jolle

or  ship,  which  we  sayled  unto  to  speake  with  them,  and

being  hard  by  them,  they  came  all  above  Hatches,  and  wee

cryed  unto  them  Candinaes  Candinaes  (whereby  we  asked

if  we  were  about  Candinaes)  but  they  cryed  againe  and

Pitzora.  said,  Pitzora,  Pitzora,  (to  shew  us  that  wee  were  there

abouts)  and  for  that  wee  sayled  along  by  the  Coast,  where

it  was  very  dry,  supposing  that  we  held  our  course  West

and  by  North,  that  so  we  might  get  beyond  the  Point  of

ompasse Candinaes,  we  were  wholy  deceived  by  our  Compasse,  that

Neighbour- stood  upon  a  Chist  bound  with  Iron  bands  which  made  us

hood.  vary  at  least  two  Points,  whereby  we  were  much  more

Southerly  then  wee  thought  our  course  had  beene,  and  also

[III.iii.51 5.]  farre  more  Easterly,  for  wee  thought  verily  that  we  had  not
beene  farre  from  Candinaes,  and  wee  were  three  dayes
sayling  from  it  as  after  we  perceived,  and  for  that  we  found
our  selves  to  bee  so  much  out  of  our  way,  we  stayed  there
all  night  till  day  appeared.

The  twelfth  of  August,  it  was  faire  weather,  at  which
time  the  Sunne  being  East,  wee  saw  a  Russia  Lodgie  come
towards  us,  with  all  his  sayles  up,  wherewith  we  were  not
a  little  comforted,  which  we  perceiving  from  the  Strand,
where  we  lay  with  our  Scutes,  we  desired  the  Master  that
we  might  goe  unto  him,  to  speake  with  him,  and  to  get
some  victuals  of  them,  and  to  that  end  we  made  as  much
haste  as  we  could,  to  launch  out  our  Scutes,  and  sayled
towards  them,  and  when  we  got  to  them,  the  Master  went
into  the  Lodgie,  to  aske  them  how  farre  wee  had  to
Candinaes, which we could not well learne of them,

152

WILLIAM BARENTS  ad.

1597-
because  wee  understood  them  not,  they  held  up  their  five
Fingers  unto  us,  but  we  knew  not  what  they  meant
thereby,  but  after  we  perceived  that  thereby  they  would
shew  us,  that  there  stood  five  Crosses  upon  it,  and  they
brought  their  Compasse  out  and  shewed  us  that  it  lay  Russian
North-west  from  us,  which  our  Compasse  also  shewed  us,  ComPasse-
which  reckoning  also  we  had  made :  but  when  we  saw  we
could  have  no  better  intelligence  from  them,  the  Master
went  further  into  their  Ship,  and  pointed  to  a  barrell  of
Fish  that  he  saw  therein,  making  signes  to  know,  whether
they  would  sell  it  unto  us,  shewing  them  a  peece  of  eight
Rials,  which  they  understanding  gave  us  one  hundred  and
two  Fishes,  with  some  Cakes  which  they  had  made  of
Meale  when  they  sodde  their  Fish,  and  about  the  South
Sunne  wee  left  them.

The  sixteenth  of  August  in  the  Morning,  sayling  for-
ward North-west,  we  perceived  that  we  were  in  a  Creeke,
and  so  made  towards  the  Russian  Lodgie,  which  we  had
seene  on  our  starre-boord,  which  at  last  with  great  labour
and  much  paine  wee  got  unto,  and  comming  to  them
about  the  South-east  Sunne,  with  a  hard  winde,  we  asked
them  how  farre  we  were  from  Zembla  de  Cool  or  Kilduin,
but  they  shooke  their  heads,  and  shewed  us  that  wee  were
on  the  East-side  of  Zembla  de  Candinaes.

The  seventeenth,  lying  at  Anchor  in  the  Morning  at
breake  of  day,  wee  saw  a  Russian  Lodgie  that  came  sayling
out  of  the  white  Sea,  to  whom  we  rowed,  that  we  might
have  some  instruction  from  him,  and  when  we  boorded  him,
without  asking  or  speaking  unto  him,  he  gave  us  a  loafe
of  Bread,  and  by  signes  shewed  us  as  well  as  he  could,
that  hee  had  seene  our  Companions,  and  that  there  was
seven  men  in  the  Boate,  but  wee  not  knowing  well  what
they  sayd,  neither  yet  beleeving  them,  they  made  other
signes  unto  us,  and  held  up  their  seven  Fingers,  and
pointed  to  our  Scute,  thereby  shewing  that  there  was  so
many  men  in  the  Boate,  and  that  they  had  sold  them
Bread,  Flesh,  Fish  and  other  victuals :  and  while  wee
stayed  in  their  Lodgie,  we  saw  a  small  Compasse  therin,

i53

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I597-

which  we  knew  that  they  had  bought  of  our  chiefe
Boatson,  which  they  likewise  acknowledged.  About  mid-
night wee  found  a  fall  of  fresh  Water,  and  then  we  went
on  Land  to  fetch  some,  and  there  also  wee  got  some  Leple-
leaves,  and  as  wee  thought  to  row  forward,  we  were  forced
to  sayle,  because  the  flood  was  past,  and  still  we  lookt
earnestly  out  for  the  point  of  Candinaes,  and  the  five
Crosses,  whereof  we  had  beene  instructed  by  the  Russians,
but  we  could  not  see  it.

The  Eighteenth,  in  the  Morning  the  Sunne  being  East,
we  puld  up  our  Stone,  (which  we  used  in  steed  of  an
Anchor)  and  rowed  along  by  the  Land,  till  the  Sunne  was
South,  and  then  we  saw  a  point  of  Land  reaching  into  the
Sea,  and  on  it  certayne  signes  of  Crosses,  which  as  we
went  neerer  unto  we  saw  perfectly,  and  when  the  Sunne
was  West,  we  perceived  that  the  Land  reached  West  and
South-west,  so  that  thereby  we  knew  it  certainely  to  bee
the  point  of  Candinaes,  lying  at  the  mouth  of  the  white
Sea,  which  we  were  to  crosse,  and  had  long  desired  to  see
it.  This  Point  is  easily  to  bee  knowne,  having  five
Crosses  standing  upon  it,  which  are  perfectly  to  be  dis-
cerned, and  having  a  good  North-east  wind  (which  was
not  for  us  to  slacke)  we  set  forward  in  the  Name  of  God,
and  when  the  Sunne  was  North-west,  we  past  the  Point,
and  all  that  night  and  the  next  day  sayled  with  a  good
Wind,  and  all  that  time  rowed  but  while  three  Glasses
were  runne  out,  and  the  next  Night  after  ensuing,  having
still  a  good  wind,  in  the  Morning  about  the  East  North-
east Sunne,  we  saw  Land  on  the  West-side  of  the  white
Sea  which  we  found  by  the  rushing  of  the  Sea  upon  the
Land  before  we  saw  it,  and  perceiving  it  to  bee  full  of
Clifts,  and  not  low  sandie  ground  with  some  Hills,  as  it
is  on  the  East-side  of  the  white  Sea,  wee  assured  our  selves
that  we  were  on  the  West-side  of  the  white  Sea,  upon  the

Lapland.  Coast  of  Lapland,  for  the  which  we  thanked  God,  that  he
had  helped  us  to  sayle  over  the  white  Sea  in  thirtie  houres,
it  being  fortie  Dutch  miles  at  the  least,  our  course  being
West  with  a  North-east  winde.

i54

i\

WILLIAM BARENTS

The  twentieth,  we  espied  certayne  Crosses,  with
Warders  upon  them,  whereby  we  understood  that  it  was  a
good  way,  and  so  put  into  it,  and  being  entred  a  little  way
within  it,  we  saw  a  great  Russian  Lodgie  lying  at  Anchor,
whereunto  we  rowed  as  fast  as  we  could,  and  there  also  we
saw  certayne  Houses  wherein  men  dwelt,  and  when  wee
got  to  the  Lodgie,  we  made  our  selves  fast  unto  it,  and
cast  our  tent  over  the  Scute,  for  as  then  it  began  to  rayne,
then  we  went  on  land  into  the  Houses  that  stood  upon
the  shoare,  where  they  shewed  us  great  friendship,  leading
us  into  their  Stoves  and  there  dryed  our  wet  Cloathes,  and
then  seething  some  Fish,  bade  us  sit  downe  and  eate  some-
what with  them.  In  those  little  houses  wee  found
thirteene  Russians,  who  every  morning  went  out  to  Fish
in  the  Sea,  whereof  two  of  them  had  charge  over  the  rest,
they  lived  very  poorely,  and  ordinarily  eate  nothing  but
Fish  and  Bread  :  at  Eevening  when  we  prepared  our  selves
to  goe  to  our  Scute  againe,  they  prayed  the  Master  and  me
to  stay  with  them  in  their  Houses,  which  the  Master
thanked  them  for,  would  not  doe,  but  I  stayed  with  them
all  that  night :  besides  those  thirteene  Men,  there  was  two
Laplanders  more,  and  three  Women  with  a  Child,  that
lived  very  poorely  of  the  overplusse  which  the  Russians
gave  them,  as  a  peece  of  a  Fish,  and  some  fishes  heads
which  the  Russians  threw  away,  and  they  with  great  thank-
fulnesse  tooke  them  up,  so  that  in  respect  of  their  povertie,
we  thought  our  selves  to  bee  well  furnished :  and  yet  we
had  little  enough,  but  as  it  seemed  their  ordinary  living
was  in  that  manner,  and  we  were  forced  to  stay  there,  for
that  the  wind  being  North-west,  it  was  against  us.

The  one  and  twentieth,  wee  met  our  other  Companie
wherewith  we  rejoyced,  and  shewed  each  other  of  our  pro-
ceedings, and  how  wee  had  sayled  too  and  fro  in  great
necessitie  and  hunger,  and  yet  they  had  beene  in  greater
necessitie  and  danger  then  we,  and  gave  God  thankes
that  hee  had  preserved  us  alive,  and  brought  us  together
againe,  and  then  we  eate  something  together  and  dranke
of  the  cleere  Water,  such  as  runneth  along  by  Collen

i55

A.D.

x597-

Russlan
Houses.
[III.iii.516.]

Laplanders
miserable  life.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1597-

through  the  Rhene,  and  then  we  agreed  that  they  should

come  unto  us,  that  we  might  sayle  together.

The  two  and  twentieth,  the  rest  of  our  men  with  the
Boate  came  unto  us,  about  the  East  South-east  Sunne,
whereat  wee  much  rejoyced,  and  then  we  prayed  the
Russians  Cooke  to  bake  a  sacke  of  Meale  for  us,  and  to
make  it  Bread  paying  him  for  it,  which  hee  did,  and  in
the  meane  time,  when  the  Fisher-men  came  with  their
Fish  out  of  the  Sea,  our  Master  bought  foure  Cods  of
them,  which  we  sodde  and  eate,  and  while  we  were  at
meate,  the  chiefe  of  the  Russians  came  unto  us,  and  per-
ceiving that  we  had  not  much  Bread,  hee  fetched  a  Loafe
and  gave  it  us,  and  although  we  desired  them  to  sit  downe
and  eate  some  meate  with  us,  yet  we  could  by  no  meanes
Slutterieafast  get  them  to  grant  thereunto,  because  it  was  their  Fasting
breaker.  day,  and  for  that  we  had  powred  Butter  and  fat  into  our

Fish ;  nor  wee  could  not  get  them  once  to  drinke  with
us,  because  our  Cup  was  somewhat  greasie,  they  were  so
superstitious  touching  their  Fasting  and  Religion,  neither
would  they  lend  us  any  of  their  Cups  to  drinke  in,  least
they  should  likewise  bee  greased,  at  that  time  the  wind
was  North-west.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  the  wind  blew  East,  and  then
the  Sunne  being  East,  we  got  to  the  seven  Hands,  where
we  found  many  Fisher-men,  of  whom  we  enquired  after
Cool  and  Kilduin,  and  they  made  signes  that  they  lay
West  from  us,  (which  we  likewise  ghest  to  bee  so)  and
withall  they  shewed  us  great  friendship,  and  cast  a  Codde
into  our  Scute,  but  for  that  wee  had  a  good  gale  of  wind,
we  could  not  stay  to  pay  them  for  it,  but  gave  them  great
thankes,  much  wondering  at  their  great  courtesie,  and  so
with  a  good  gale  of  wind  we  arrived  before  the  seven
Hands,  when  the  Sunne  was  South-west,  and  past  betweene
them  and  the  Land,  and  there  found  certayne  Fisher-men
that  rowed  to  us,  and  asked  us  where  our  Crable  (meaning
our  Ship)  was,  whereunto  we  made  answer,  with  as  much
Russian  language  as  wee  had  learned,  and  sayd,  Crable
pro  Pal  (that  is,  our  Ship  is  lost)  which  they  understand-

156

\\

WILLIAM BARENTS  ad.

1597-
ing,  sayd  unto  us,  Cool  Brabouse  Crable,  whereby  we
understood,  that  at  Cool  there  was  certayne  Netherland
Ships,  but  wee  made  no  great  account  thereof,  because  our
intent  was  to  sayle  to  Ware-house,  fearing  least  the
Russians  or  great  Prince  of  the  Countrey  would  stay  us
there.

The  five  and  twentieth,  sayling  along  by  the  Land  with
a  South-east  wind,  about  the  South  Sunne,  we  had  a  sight
of  Kilduin,  at  which  time  we  held  our  course  West  North-  Kilduin.
west,  and  sayling  in  that  manner  between  Kilduin  and  the
firme  Land,  about  the  South  South-west  Sunne,  we  got  to
the  West  end  of  Kilduin,  and  being  there  looked  if  we
could  see  any  Houses  or  people  therein,  and  at  last  we
saw  certayne  Russian  Lodgies  that  lay  upon  the  Strand,
and  there  finding  a  convenient  place  for  us  to  Anchor  with
our  Scutes,  while  wee  went  to  know  if  any  people  were  to
bee  found,  our  Master  put  in  with  the  Land,  and  there
found  five  or  sixe  small  Houses,  wherein  the  Laplanders
dwelt,  of  whom  we  asked  if  that  were  Kilduin,  whereunto
they  made  answer,  and  shewed  us  that  it  was  Kilduin,  and
sayd,  that  at  Coola  there  lay  three  Brabants  Crables  or
Ships,  whereof  two  were  that  day  to  set  sayle :  wee  found
a  small  House  upon  the  shoare,  wherein  there  was  three
Men  and  a  great  Dogge,  which  received  us  very  friendly,
asking  us  of  our  affaires,  and  how  we  got  thither,  where-
unto we  made  answer,  and  shewed  them  that  we  had  lost
our  Ship,  and  that  wee  were  come  thither  to  see  if  we
could  get  a  Ship  that  would  bring  us  into  Holland :
whereunto  they  made  us  answer  as  the  other  Russians  had
done,  that  there  was  three  Ships  at  Coola,  whereof  two
were  to  set  sayle  from  thence  that  day,  then  wee  asked
them  if  they  would  goe  with  one  of  our  men  by  Land  to
Coola,  to  looke  for  a  Ship,  wherewith  wee  might  get  into
Holland,  and  sayd  we  would  reward  them  well  for  their
paines,  but  they  excused  themselves,  and  sayd,  that  they
could  not  goe  from  thence,  but  they  sayd  they  would  bring
us  over  the  Hill,  where  we  should  finde  certayne  Lap-
landers whom  they  thought  would  goe  with  us,  as  they

i57

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

!597-

did  :  for  the  Master  and  one  of  our  men  going  with  them
over  the  Hill,  found  certaine  Laplanders  there,  whereof
they  got  one  to  goe  with  our  man,  promising  him  two
Ryals  of  eight  for  his  paines,  and  so  the  Laplander  going
with  him,  tooke  a  Piece  on  his  necke,  and  our  man  a
Boat-hooke,  and  about  Eevening  they  set  forward,  the
winde  as  then  being  East,  and  East  North-east.
[III.iii.517.]  Xhe  sixe  and  twentieth,  it  was  faire  weather,  the  wind
South-east,  at  which  time  we  drew  up  both  our  Scutes
upon  the  Land,  and  tooke  all  the  goods  out  of  them,  to
make  them  the  lighter ;  which  done,  we  went  to  the
Russians  and  warmed  us,  and  there  dressed  such  meates  as
wee  had,  and  then  againe  we  began  to  make  two  meales  a
day,  when  we  perceived  that  we  should  every  day  finde
more  people,  and  we  dranke  of  their  drinke  which  they
call  Quasse,  which  was  made  of  broken  peeces  of  Bread,
and  it  tasted  well :  for  in  long  time  wee  had  drunke
nothing  else  but  Water.  Some  of  our  men  went  further
into  the  Land,  and  there  found  blew  Berries  and  bramble
Berries,  which  they  plucked  and  eate,  and  they  did  us
much  good,  for  we  found  that  they  healed  us  of  our  loose-
nesse,  the  wind  still  blew  South-east.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  it  was  indifferent  good
weather,  and  then  we  drew  the  Scutes  upon  the  Land
againe,  that  we  might  take  the  rest  of  the  goods  out  of
them,  because  the  wind  still  blew  hard  North,  and  North
North-west,  and  having  drawne  the  Scutes  up,  we  spred
our  sayles  upon  them,  to  shelter  us  under  them,  for  it  was
still  mystie  and  raynie  weather,  much  desiring  to  heare
some  newes  of  our  man,  that  was  gone  to  Coola  with  the
Laplander.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  wee  spyed  the  Laplander  com-
ming  alone  without  our  man,  whereat  we  wondred,  and
were  somewhat  in  doubt,  but  when  hee  came  unto  us,  he
shewed  us  a  Letter  that  was  written  unto  our  Master,
which  he  opened  before  us,  the  Contents  thereof  being,
that  hee  that  had  written  the  Letter  wondred  much  at  our
arrivall in that place, and that long since hee verily

158

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

I597-
thought  that  we  had  beene  all  cast  away,  being  exceeding
glad  of  our  happie  fortune,  and  how  that  he  would
presently  come  unto  us  with  victuals,  and  all  other  neces-
saries to  succour  us  withall,  we  being  in  no  small
admiration  who  it  might  bee,  that  shewed  us  so  great
favour  and  friendship,  could  not  imagine  what  he  was,  for
it  appeared  by  the  Letter  that  he  knew  us  well :  and
although  the  Letter  was  subscribed,  by  me  John  Cor-
nelison  Rip,  yet  wee  could  not  bee  perswaded  that  it  was
the  same  John  Cornelison,  who  the  yeere  before  had  beene
set  out  in  the  other  ship  with  us,  &  left  us  about  the  Beare
Hand :  for  those  good  newes  we  payd  the  Laplander  his
hyer ;  and  besides  that,  gave  him  Hose,  Breeches,  and
other  furniture,  so  that  hee  was  apparelled  like  a
Hollander :  for  as  then  wee  thought  our  selves  to  bee
wholly  out  of  danger,  and  so  being  of  good  comfort,  we
layd  us  downe  to  rest.  Heere  I  cannot  chuse  but  shew
you  how  fast  the  Laplander  went :  for  when  he  went  to
Coola,  as  our  Companion  told  us,  they  were  two  Dayes
and  two  Nights  on  the  way,  and  yet  went  apace,  and
when  he  came  backe  againe  he  was  but  a  Day  and  a  Night
comming  to  us,  which  was  wonderfull,  it  being  but  halfe
the  time,  so  that  we  sayd,  and  verily  thought  that  hee
was  halfe  a  Conjurer,  and  he  brought  us  a  Partridge,  which
hee  had  killed  by  the  way  as  he  went.

The  thirtieth,  wee  saw  a  Russian  Joll  come  rowing  with
John  Cornelison,  and  our  Companion  that  we  had  sent  to
Coola,  who  being  landed,  wee  received  and  welcommed
each  other,  with  great  joy  and  exceeding  gladnesse,  as  if
either  of  us  on  both  sides  had  seene  each  other  rise  from
death  to  life  againe :  for  we  esteemed  him,  and  hee  us  to
bee  dead  long  since  :  hee  brought  us  a  Barrell  of  Roswicke
Beere,  Wine,  Aqua  vite,  Bread,  Flesh,  Bacon,  Salmon,
Suger,  and  other  things,  which  comforted  and  relieved  us
much,  and  we  rejoyced  together  for  our  so  unexpected
meeting :  at  that  time  giving  God  great  thankes,  for  his
Mercie  shewed  unto  us.

The  first  of  September,  in  the  Morning  with  the  East  September.

i59

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1597-

Sun,  we  got  to  the  West-side  of  the  River  of  Cook,  and
entred  into  it,  where  we  rowed  till  the  Flood  was  past,
and  then  wee  cast  the  Stones  that  served  us  for  Anchors
upon  the  ground,  at  a  point  of  Land  till  the  Flood  came
in  againe :  and  when  the  Sunne  was  South,  wee  set  sayle
againe  with  the  Flood,  and  so  sayled  and  rowed  till  mid-
night, and  then  wee  cast  Anchor  againe  till  morning.
The  second,  in  the  Morning,  we  rowed  up  the  River,
Trees  a  rare  and  as  we  past  along  wee  saw  some  Trees  on  the  River
sight.  sjjC)  wnich  comforted  us,  and  made  us  glad  as  if  we  had

then  come  into  a  new  world,  for  in  all  the  time  that  wee
had  beene  out,  we  had  not  seene  any  Trees,  and  when  we
were  by  the  Salt  Kettles,  which  is  about  three  miles  from
Coola,  we  stayed  there  a  while,  and  made  merrie,  and
then  went  forward  againe,  and  with  the  West  North-west
Sunne,  got  to  John  Cornelisons  Ship,  wherein  we  entred
and  drunke  :  there  wee  began  to  make  merrie  againe,
with  the  Saylers  that  were  therein,  and  that  had  beene  in
the  Voyage  with  John  Cornelison  the  yeere  before,  and
bad  each  other  welcome  :  then  we  rowed  forward,  and  late
Cook.  in  the  Eevening  got  to  Coola,  where  some  of  us  went  on

Land,  and  some  stayed  in  the  Scutes  to  looke  to  the
goods :  to  whom  we  sent  Milke  and  other  things  to  com-
fort and  refresh  them,  and  we  were  all  exceeding  glad  that
God  of  his  mercie  had  delivered  us  out  of  so  many  dangers
and  troubles,  and  had  brought  us  thither  in  safetie.

The third, wee unladed all our goods, and there

refreshed our selves after our toylesome and wearie

Journey,  and  the  great  hunger  wee  had  endured,  thereby

to  recover  our  healths  and  strengths  againe.

Their  Scute  The eleventh, by  leave and  consent of  the Bayart,

and  Boat  layd  Governour  of  the  great  Prince  of  Moscovia,  we  brought

up  fir  a  our  Scute  and  our  Boate  into  the  Merchants  House,  and

there  let  them  stand  for  a  remembrance  of  our  long,  farre

(and  never  before  sayled  way)  and  that  wee  had  sayled  in

then  the  old ' those  open  Scutes,  almost  foure  hundred  Dutch  miles,

worlds  Argo. through,  and  along  by  the  Sea  Coasts  to  the  Towne  of

Coola.

1 60

Monument:
how  much
more  worthily

WILLIAM BARENTS  a.d.

1595.

The  seventeenth  of  September,  John  Cornelison  and  [III.iii.518.]
our  Master  being  come  aboord,  the  next  day  about  the
East  Sunne,  we  set  sayle  out  of  the  River  Coola,  and
with  Gods  grace  put  to  Sea,  to  sayle  homewards,  and
being  out  of  the  River,  wee  sayled  along  by  the  Land
North-west  and  by  North,  the  winde  being  South.

Upon  the  nine  and  twentieth  of  October,  wee  arrived
in  the  Mase,  with  an  East  North-east  wind,  and  the  next
morning  got  to  Maseland  Sluce,  and  there  going  on  Land,
from  thence  rowed  to  Delfe,  and  then  to  the  Hage,  and
from  thence  to  Harlem.  And  upon  the  first  of  November
about  Noone,  got  to  Amsterdam,  in  the  same  Clothes  that
wee  wore  in  Nova  Zembla,  with  our  Caps  furr'd  with
white  Foxes  skinnes.  The  newes  thereof  being  spred
abroad  in  the  Towne,  it  was  also  carryed  to  the  Princes
Court  in  the  Hage,  at  which  time  the  Lord  Chancellour
of  Denmarke,  Ambassadour  for  the  sayd  King,  was  then
at  Dinner  with  Prince  Maurice :  for  the  which  cause  we
were  presently  fetcht  thither  by  the  Scout,  and  two  of
the  Burgers  of  the  Towne,  and  there  in  the  presence  of
those  Ambassadours,  and  the  Burger-masters,  wee  made
rehearsall  of  our  Journey  both  forwards  and  backwards.

I  thought  good  to  adde  hither  for  Barents  or  Barentsons
sake,  certaine  Notes  which  I  have  found  (the  one  Trans-
lated, the  other  Written  by  him)  amongst  Master
Hakluyts  Paper.

This  was  Written  by  William  Barentson  in  a  loose
Paper,  which  was  lent  mee  by  the  Reverend
Peter  Plantius  in  Amsterdam,  March  the  seven
and  twentieth,  1609.

THe  foure  and  twentieth  of  August,  Stilo  novo  1595. Intelligence
wee  spake  with  the  Samoieds,  and  asked  them  how  the  from
Land  and  Sea  did  lye  to  the  East  of  Way-gates. They Sam°yeds-
sayd  after  five  dayes  journey  going  North-east,  wee  should * 595'
come  to  a  great  Sea,  going  South-east. This  Sea  to  the
East  of  Way-gats,  they  sayd  was  called  Marmoria,  that
xiii  161  l

A.D.
1595.

Barkes  going
from  Pechora
to  Gielhsidi:
wintering
there.

Gielhsidi  won
from  the  Tar-
tars 1592.
1592.

No  Ebbe  nor
Floud.

September  9.

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

is  to  say,  A  calme  Sea.  And  they  of  Ward-house  have
told  us  the  same.  I  asked  them,  if  at  any  time  of  the
yeere  it  was  frozen  over?  They  sayd  it  was.  And  that
sometimes  they  passed  it  with  Sleds.  And  the  first  of
September  1595.  Stilo  novo,  the  Russes  of  the  Lodie  or
Barke  affirmed  the  same ;  saying,  that  the  Sea  is  some-
times so  Frozen,  that  the  Lodies  or  Barkes  going
sometimes  to  Gielhsidi  from  Pechora,  are  forced  there  to
Winter :  which  Gielhsidi  was  wonne  from  the  Tartars,
three  yeeres  past.

For  the  Ebbe  and  Flood  there  I  can  finde  none ;  but
with  the  Winde  so  runneth  the  streame.  The  third  of
September,  Stilo  novo,  the  winde  was  South-west,  and
then  I  found  the  water  higher,  then  with  the  winde  at
North  or  North-east.  Mine  opinion  is  grounded  on
Experience,  That  if  there  bee  a  passage,  it  is  small :  or
else  the  Sea  could  not  rise  with  a  Southerly  Winde.  And
for  the  better  proofe  to  know  if  there  were  a  Flood  and
Ebbe,  the  ninth  of  September,  Stilo  novo,  I  went  on
shoare  on  the  South  end  of  the  States  Hand,  where  the
Crosse  standeth,  and  layd  a  Stone  on  the  brinke  of  the
Water,  to  prove  whether  there  were  a  Tide,  and  went
round  about  the  Hand  to  shoote  at  a  Hare,  and  returning,
I  found  the  Stone  as  I  left  it,  and  the  Water  neither  higher
nor  lower  :  which  prooveth  as  afore,  that  there  is  no  Flood
nor  Ebbe.

162

A TREATISE OF GREENLAND

A.D.

I560.

Chap.  VI.

A  Treatise  of  Iver  Boty  a  Gronlander,  translated
out  of  the  Norsh  Language  into  High  Dutch,
in  the  yeere  1560.  And  after  out  of  High
Dutch  into  Low  Dutch,  by  William  Barentson
of  Amsterdam,  who  was  chiefe  Pilot  aforesaid.
The  same  Copie  in  High  Dutch,  is  in  the
hands  of  Jodocus  Hondius,  which  I  have  seene.
And  this  was  translated  out  of  Low  Dutch,  by
Master  William  Stere,  Marchant,  in  the  yeere
1608.  for  the  use  of  me  Henrie  Hudson.
William  Barentsons  Booke  is  in  the  hands  of
Master  Peter  Plantius,  who  lent  the  same  unto
me.

Nprimis,  it  is  reported  by  men  of  Wise-
dome  and  Understanding  borne  in  Gron-
land,  That  from  Stad  in  Norway  to  the
East  part  of  Island,  called  Horn-nesse,  is
seven  dayes  sayling  right  West.

Item,  men  shall  know,  that  betweene
Island  and  Gronland,  lyeth  a  Riffe  called
Gombornse-skare. There  were  they  wont  to  have  there Gombomse-
passage  for  Gronland. But  as  they  report  there  is  Ice &are.
upon  the  same  Riffe,  come  out  of  the  long  North  Bottome, The  long
so  that  we  cannot  use  the  same  old  Passage  as  they  thinke. 'North  bottom.

Item,  from  Long-nesse  on  the  East  side  of  Island  to
the  abovesaid  Horn-nesse,  is  two  dayes  sayle  to  the  Brim-
stone Mount.

Item,  if  you  goe  from  Bergen  in  Norway,  the  course  is [III.iii.519.]
right  West,  till  you  bee  South  of  Rokenesse  in  Island  :
and  distant  from  it  thirteene  miles,  or  leagues. And  with
this  course  you  shall  come  under  that  high  Land  that
lyeth  in  the  East  part  of  Groneland,  and  is  called  Swafster. Swafster.
A  day  before  you  come  there,  you  shall  have  sight  of  a

163

A.D.
I560.

Whitsarke.

Hernoldus

Hooke.

Sound  Haven
in  Groneland.

Skagen  Ford.

Beare  Ford.

A  great
fishing  for
Whales.

A  great
Szualth.

Allabong
Sound.

Store  of  Oxen.

The  hie
Mountayne.
The  Haven  of
Fendebother.
Note.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

high  Mount,  called  Huit-sarke  :  and  betweene  Whitsarke
and  Groneland,  lyeth  a  Head-land  called  Hernoldus
Hooke ;  and  thereby  lyeth  an  Haven,  where  the  Norway
Merchants  Ships  were  wont  to  come  :  and  it  is  called
Sound  Haven.

Item,  if  a  man  will  sayle  from  Island  to  Gronland,  hee
shall  set  his  course  to  Snofnesse,  which  is  by  West  Roke-
nesse  thirteene  miles,  or  leagues  right  West,  one  day  and
nights  sayling,  and  after  South-west  to  shun  the  Ice,  that
lyeth  on  Gombornse-skare ;  and  after  that  one  day  and
night  North-west.  So  shall  hee  with  this  course  fall  right
with  the  abovesayd  Swafster,  which  is  high  Land,  under
which  lyeth  the  aforesayd  Head-land,  called  Hernoldus
Hooke,  and  the  Sound  Haven.

Item,  the  Easter  Dorpe  of  Groneland  lyeth  East  from
Hernoldus  hooke,  but  neere  it,  and  is  called  Skagen  Ford,
and  is  a  great  Village.

Item,  from  Skagen  Ford  East,  lyeth  a  Haven  called
Beare  Ford :  it  is  not  dwelt  in.  In  the  mouth  thereof
lyeth  a  Riffe,  so  that  great  Ships  cannot  harbour  in  it.

Item,  there  is  great  abundance  of  Whales :  and  there
is  a  great  Fishing  for  the  killing  of  them  there :  but  not
without  the  Bishops  consent,  which  keepeth  the  same  for
the  benefit  of  the  Cathedrall  Church.  In  the  Haven  is  a
great  Swalth :  and  when  the  Tide  doth  runne  out,  all  the
Whales  doe  runne  into  the  sayd  Swalth.

Item,  East  of  Beare  Ford,  lyeth  another  Haven  called
Allabong  Sound :  and  it  is  at  the  mouth  narrow,  but
farther  in,  very  wide :  The  length  whereof  is  such,  that
the  end  thereof  is  not  yet  knowne.  There  runneth  no
Streame.  It  lyeth  full  of  little  lies.  Fowle  and  Oxen  are
there  common :  and  it  is  playne  Land  on  both  sides,
growne  over  with  greene  Grasse.

Item,  East  from  the  Icie  Mountayne,  lyeth  an  Haven
called  Fendebother ;  so  named,  because  in  Saint  Olafes
time  there  was  a  Ship  cast  away,  as  the  speach  hath  beene
in  Groneland ;  In  which  Ship  was  drowned  one  of  Saint
Olafes  men,  with  others :  and  those  that  were  saved  did

164

A TREATISE OF GREENLAND  ad.

1560.

burie  those  that  were  drowned,  and  on  their  Graves  did
set  great  stone  Crosses,  which  wee  see  at  this  day.

Item,  somwhat  more  East  toward  the  Icie  Mountayne,
lyeth  a  high  Land,  called  Corse  Hought,  upon  which  they Corse  Hought.
Hunt  white  Beares,  but  not  without  the  Bishops  leave,  for  An  hunting  of
it  belongeth  to  the  Cathedrall  Church. And  from  thence  ^J^erl
more  Easterly,  men  see  nothing  but  Ice  and  Snow,  both a//  Desart.
by  land  and  water.

Now  wee  shall  returne  againe  to  Hernoldus  Hooke, The  Townes
where  we  first  began  to  come  to  the  first  Towne  that  lyeth  fro™  HeJ.~
on the  East-side  of  Hernoldus Hooke, called Skagen pyesttvard.
Ford  :  and  so  we  will  write  the  Names  of  all  that  lye  on
the  West-side  of  the  Ford  or  Sound.

Item,  West  from Hernoldus  Hooke, lyeth  a  Dorpe
called  Kodosford,  and  it  is  well  built : and  as  you  sayle The  Towne  of
into  the  Sound,  you  shall  see  on  the  right  hand  a  great Godosfird.
Sea  and  a Marsh : and  into this  Sea  runneth a  great
streame : and  by  the Marsh  and Sea standeth  a  great
Church,  on  which  the  Holy  Crosse  is  drawne,  of  colour  A  great
white  : it  belongeth  to  Enelnesse  de  Hokesong,  and  the Church  with  a
Land  to  Peters  Wike.  w  .

Item, by Peters Wike, lyeth a great Dorpe called peters  wike:
Wartsdale,  by  which  lyeth  a  water  or  Sea  of  twelve  miles Wartsdall.
or  leagues  over : in  which  is  much  Fish  : And  to  Peters
wike  Church  belongeth  Wartsdale  Boy  or  Towne,  and  the  Boy  in  the
Villages.  Nors*  tongue,

Item,  neere  this  Boy  or  Towne,  lyeth  a  Cloyster  or  sffj£ef
Abbey,  in  which  are  Canons  Regular,  it  is  Dedicated  to  AMonasterie.
Saint Olafes, and Saint Augustines name. And to it
belongeth  all  the  Land  to  the  Sea  side,  and  toward  the
other  side  of  the  Cloyster.

Item,  next  Godosford,  lyeth  a  Ford  called  Rompnes  RompnesFord.
Ford : And there lyeth a Cloyster of Nuns of Saint A  Nunnerie.
Benedicts  Order.

Item,  this  Cloyster  to  the  bottome  of  the  Sea,  and  to
Wegen  Kerke,  was  Dedicated  to  Saint  Olafe  the  King. WegenKerke.
In  this  Ford  lye  many  small  lies. And  to  this  Cloyster
belongeth  halfe  the  Ford  and  the  Church. In  this  Sound

165

A.D.

I560.

Hot  waters  in
Groneland.

A  place  called
Vose,  belong-
ing to  the
King.

Saint  Nicolas
Church.

Emestnes

Ford.

Southzvoders

Wicke.

Bloming.

Granwicke.

Daleth

Garden.

J  great  Wood.

[III.iii.520.]
Oxen,  Kine,
and  Horses.

Excellent
Stone,  that  fire
cannot  hurt.

Eight  great
Orchards
belonging  to
the  Cathedrall
Church.
SwalsterFord.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRJMES

are  many  warme  Waters.  In  the  Winter  they  are
intollerable  hot :  but  in  the  Summer  more  moderate ;  and
many  Bathing  in  them  are  cured  of  many  diseases.

Item,  betweene  Rompnes  and  the  next  Sound,  lyeth  a
great  Garden  called  Vose,  belonging  to  the  King.  There
is  also  a  costly  Church  dedicated  to  Saint  Nicolas.  This
Church  had  the  King  before  this.  Neere  it  lyeth  a  Sea  of
Fresh  water,  called  ,  in  which  is  great  abundance

of  Fish,  without  number.  And  when  there  falleth  much
Rayne,  that  the  Waters  doe  rise  therewith,  and  after  fall
againe,  there  remayneth  upon  the  Land  much  Fish  drie.

Item,  when  you  sayle  out  of  Emestnes  Ford,  there
lyeth  an  Inlet,  called  South-woders  Wike :  and  somewhat
higher  in  the  same  Sound,  and  on  the  same  side,  lyeth  a
little  Cape  called  Bloming  :  and  beyond  that  lyeth  another
Inwike  called  Granwike,  and  above  that  lyeth  a  Garden
called  Daleth,  which  belongeth  to  the  Cathedrall  Church.
And  on  the  right  hand  as  you  sayle  out  of  the  same  Sound,
lyeth  a  great  Wood,  which  pertayneth  to  the  Church,
where  they  feede  all  their  Cattell,  as  Oxen,  Kine,  and
Horses :  And  to  the  Church  pertayneth  the  Sound  of
Emestnes  Ford.  The  high  Land  lying  by  Emestnes
Ford,  is  called  The  Ramos  hayth  :  So  called,  because  that
on  those  Hills  doe  runne  many  Roe  Deere,  or  Reyne
Deere,  which  they  use  to  Hunt,  but  not  without  the
Bishops  leave.  And  on  this  high  Land  is  the  best  Stone
in  all  Groneland.  They  make  thereof  Pots,  because  fire
cannot  hurt  it.  And  they  make  of  the  same  stone  Fattes
or  Cisternes,  that  will  hold  ten  or  twelve  Tunnes  of
water.

Item,  West  from  this  lyeth  another  high  Land,  called
The  long  high  Land :  and  by  another  called
whereon  are  eight  great  Orchards,  all  belonging  to  the
Cathedrall  Church. But  the  Tenths  thereof  they  give  to
Warsedall  Church.

Item,  next  to  this  Sound  lyeth  another  Sound  called
Swalster  Ford,  wherin  standeth  a  Church  called  Swalster.
This  Church  belongeth  to  all  this  Sound,  and  to  Romse

166

A TREATISE OF GREENLAND

Ford,  lying  next  it.  In  this  Sound  is  a  great  Garden
belonging  to  the  King,  called  Saint  Henlestate.

Item,  next  to  that  lyeth  Ericks  Ford,  and  entring
therein  lyeth  an  high  Land  called  Ericks  Hought ;
which  pertayneth  the  one  halfe  to  Devers  Kerke,  and  is
the  first  Parish  Church  on  Groneland,  and  lyeth  on  the
left  hand  as  you  sayle  into  Ericks  Ford :  and  Devers
Kerke  belongeth  all  to  Meydon  Ford,  which  lyeth  North-
west from  Ericks  Ford.

Item,  farther  out  then  Ericks  Ford,  standeth  a  Church
called  Skogel  Kerke,  which  belongeth  to  all  Medford :
And  farther  in  the  Sound  standeth  a  Church  called  Leaden
Kerke.  To  this  Church  belongeth  all  thereabout  to  the
Sea  ;  and  also  on  the  other  side  as  farre  as  Bousels.  There
lyeth  also  a  great  Orchard  called  Grote  Lead,  in  which  the
Gusman  (that  is  a  chiefe  or  BaylifFe  over  the  Boores)  doth
dwell.

And  farther  out  then  Ericks  Ford,  lyeth  a  Ford  or
Sound  called  Fossa,  which  belongeth  to  the  Cathedrall
Church :  and  the  sayd  Fossa  Sound  lyeth  as  men  sayle
out  towards  Ericks  Ford  ;  and  to  the  North  of  it  lye  two
Villages,  the  one  called  Ever-boy,  and  the  other  Forther-
boy,  because  they  lye  so.

Item,  from  thence  farther  North  lyeth  Breda  Ford,  and
after  that  Lormont  Ford  from  that  West,  and  from  Lor-
mont  Ford  to  the  West  is  Ice  Dorpe.  All  these  are  places
built,  and  in  them  dwell  people.

Item,  from  the  Easter  builded  Land  to  the  Wester
Dorpe,  is  twelve  miles  or  leagues  :  and  the  rest  is  all
waste  land.  In  the  Dorpe  in  the  West  standeth  a  Church,
which  in  times  past  belonged  to  the  Cathedrall  Church,
and  the  Bishop  did  dwell  there.  But  now  the  Skerlengers
have  all  the  West  Lands  and  Dorps.  And  there  are  now
many  Horses,  Oxen,  and  Kine,  but  no  people  neither
Christian  nor  Heathen ;  but  they  were  all  carryed  away  by
the  Enemie,  the  Skerlengers.

All  this  before  Written  was  done  by  one  Iver  Boty
borne  in  Gronland,  a  principall  man  in  the  Bishops  Court :

167

A.D.

1560.

Ericks
Hought.

Skogel  Kerke.

Fossa  Sound.

Breda  Ford.
Larmut  Ford.
Ice  Dorpe.

The
Skerlengers.

Many  Horses,
Oxen,  and
Kine.

Iver  Boty  the
Author.

A.D.

1560.

A  great  Wil-
dernesse  called
Hemel  Hats-
felt,  to  the
North  of  the
West  land.
Mines  of
Silver,  white
Beares,  white
Hawkes,  all
sorts  of  Fish.

Groneland  not
so  cold  as
lseland  or
Norway.

Fruits.

Punus  and
Potharse.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

who  dwelt  there  many  yeeres,  and  saw  and  knew  all  these
places.  He  was  chosen  by  the  whole  Land  for  Captayne,
to  goe  with  Ships  to  the  West  land,  to  drive  away  their
Enemies  the  Skerlengers.  But  hee  comming  there,  found
no  people  neither  Christian  nor  Heathen,  but  found  there
many  Sheepe  running  being  wilde,  of  which  Sheepe  they
tooke  with  them  as  many  as  they  could  carrie,  and  with
them  returned  to  there  Houses.  This  before  named  Indo
Boty  was  himselfe  with  them.

To  the  North  of  the  West  Land,  lyeth  a  great  Wilder-
nesse  with  Clifes  or  Rockes,  called  Hemel  Hatsfelt.
Farther  can  no  man  sayle,  because  there  lye  many  Swalgen
or  Whirle-pooles  :  and  also  for  the  Water  and  the  Sea.

Item,  in  Groneland  are  many  Silver  Hills,  and  many
white  Beares  with  red  patches  on  their  heads ;  and  also
white  Hawkes,  and  all  sorts  of  Fish,  as  in  other  Countries.

Item,  there  is  Marble  stone  of  all  colours,  also  Zevell
stone  or  the  Load  stone,  which  the  Fire  cannot  hurt,
whereof  they  make  many  vessels,  as  Pots,  and  other

great  vessels.

Item,  in  Groneland  runneth  great  streames,  and  there  is
much  Snow  and  Ice  :  But  it  is  not  so  cold,  as  it  is  in  Island
or  Norway.

Item,  there  grow  on  the  high  Hills,  Nuts  and  Acornes,
which  are  as  great  as  Apples,  and  good  to  eate.  There
groweth  also  the  best  Wheate,  that  can  grow  in  the  whole
Land.

This  Sea  Card  was  found  in  the  lies  of  Fero  or  farre,
lying  betweene  Shot-lant  and  Island,  in  an  old  reckoning
Booke,  written  above  one  hundred  yeeres  agoe :  out  of
which  this  was  all  taken.

Item,  Punnus  and  Potharse,  have  inhabited  Island
certayne  yeeres,  and  sometimes  have  gone  to  Sea,  and
have  had  their  trade  in  Groneland.  Also  Punnus  did
give  the  Islanders  their  Lawes,  and  caused  them  to  bee
written.  Which  Lawes  doe  continue  to  this  day  in  Island,
and  are  called  by  name  Punnus  Lawes.

168

A TREATISE OF GREENLAND

A.D.

I560.

The  Course  from  Island  to  Groneland.

IF  men  bee  South  from  the  Haven  of  Bred  Ford  in
Island,  they  shall  sayle  West,  till  they  see  Whitsarke
upon  Groneland,  and  then  sayle  somewhat  South-west  rill
Whitsarke  bee  North  off  you,  and  so  you  need  not  feare
Ice,  but  may  boldly  sayle  to  Whitsarke,  and  from  thence
to  Ericks  Haven.

If  men  be  North  the  Haven  of  Bredford  in  Island,  then
sayle  South-west,  till  Whit  sarke  beare  North  :  then  sayle
to  it,  and  so  come  to  Ericks  Haven.

If  you  see  Ice,  that  commeth  out  of  Trolebothon,  you
shall  goe  more  Southerly,  but  not  too  farre  South  for
feare  of  Freesland,  for  there  runneth  an  hard  streame.
And  it  is  fifteene  miles  or  leagues  from  Freesland.

Item,  Freesland  lyeth  South,  and  Island  East  from
Gronland.

Item,  From  the  Ice  that  hangeth  on  the  Hilles  in  Gron-
land, commeth  a  great  Fogge,  Frost  and  Cold.  And
such  a  Fogge  commeth  out  of  the  Ice  of  Trolebothon  :
and  it  is  a  great  Wildernesse.

There  are  Sables,  Marternes,  Hermelins,  or  Ermins,
White  Beares,  and  White  Hawkes,  Seales,  White  and
Gray,  Gold  and  Silver  Hills,  also  Fish  dryed  and  salted,
and  thousands  of  Salmons :  also  store  of  Losh  Hides  and
other  Hides.  There  are  Hares,  Foxes,  Wolves,  Otters,
and  Veltfrasen.

Now  if  it  please  God  they  come  to  Gronland,  then
shall  they  set  but  two  men  on  shoare ;  who  shall  take  with
them  divers  kindes  of  Marchandize :  and  let  them  deale
with  good  order,  and  let  them  bee  such  as  can  make  good
Report,  what  they  there  doe  see  or  finde ;  and  let  them
observe  whether  men  may  there  Land  or  no,  with  the  love
of  the  Inhabitants.

And  I  counsaile  and  charge  those  that  shall  Trade  for
Gronland,  that  they  set  no  more  folke  on  Land,  but  they
keepe  men  enough  to  man  the  Ship. And  looke  well  to

169

[III.iii.521.]

Trolebothon.

Trolebothon ,  a

great

Wildernesse.

The

Commodities

of  Gronland.

Good  Counsell
for  travelling
to  Gronland.

A.D.

I560.

Tender-boxes
for  fire.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  course  you  hold  to  Gronland,  that  if  those  that  bee  set
on  shoare  bee  taken,  they  may  come  home  againe  with
Gods  helpe.  For  if  shipping  returne,  they  may  come
home  or  bee  releeved  in  a  yeere  and  a  day.  And  in  your
living  there  so  demeane  your  selves  to  them,  that  in  time
you  may  winne  the  Countrey  and  the  people.

Remember  my  Scholler  and  Clearke,  which  shall  bee
there  appointed  as  Commander,  that  you  send  those  on
Land,  that  will  shew  themselves  diligent  Writers,  and  that
they  carrie  themselves  so,  that  they  may  learne  thereby
the  State  of  the  Countrey.  They  shall  take  with  them
two  Boats  and  eight  Oares,  and  take  Tynder-boxes  for  fire
if  there  be  no  Habitation.  Also  set  up  Crosses  of  Wood
or  Stone,  if  need  be.

Courses  for
Gronland.

A  storme  in
the  North.
Whitsarke.

Erich  Ford.

This  Note  following  was  found  in  an  old  Booke  of
Accomdts,  in  the  Yeere  1596.

INprimis,  From  Gtad  in  Norway,  standing  neere  the
Latitude  of  sixtie  three  Degrees,  you  shall  hold  your
course  due  West :  and  that  course  will  bring  you  upon
Swartnesse  in  Gronland.  And  in  this  course  is  the  least
streame  and  least  perill  of  Swalgen  or  Indrafts.  There  is
lesse  perill  this  way,  then  is  on  the  North-side ;  you  shall
keepe  %.  of  the  Sea  on  Freesland  side,  and  one  third  on
Island  side.  And  if  it  bee  cleere  weather,  and  you  have
kept  your  course  right  West,  you  shall  see  the  Mount  of
Snevels  Jokul  in  the  South-west  part  of  Island.  And  if
you  have  a  storme  in  the  North,  you  must  shunne  it  as
you  can,  till  Whitsarke  be  North  of  you.  Then  shall  you
sayle  right  with  it,  and  seeke  the  Land :  and  you  shall
finde  a  good  Haven,  called  Ericks  Ford.

Item,  If  you  bee  betweene  Gronland  and  Island,  you
may  see  Snevels  Jokul  on  Island,  and  Whitsarke  on  Gron-
land, if  it  be  cleere  weather.  Therefore  men  of  experience
doe  affirme,  that  it  is  but  thirtie  leagues  betweene  both.

Also  if  you  have  a  storme  betweene  Gronland  and
Island,  you  must  have  care  you  bee  not  laid  on  Freesland

170

A DESCRIPTION OF SIBERIA

A.D.

1612.

with  the  streame  and  Winde ;  for  the  streame  or  Current
doth  run  strong  upon  Freesland,  out  of  the  North.

Also  if  you  have  a  storme  out  of  the  South,  you  shall  ^  5t0™*u  tn
not  sayle  out  of  your  course,  but  keepe  it  as  neere  as  you
can  possibly,  till  Whitsarke  in  Gronland  beare  North  off
you :  then  sayle  toward  it,  and  you  shall  come  into  Ericks
Ford,  as  it  is  afore-said  in  the  first  Article.

the  South.

Chap. VII.

A  Description  of  the  Countries  of  Siberia,
Samoieda,  and  Tingoesia.  Together  with  the
Journeyes  leading  unto  the  same  Countries
toward  the  East  and  North-east,  as  they  are
daily  frequented  by  the  Moscovites.

§.  i.

Discoverie of  Siberia,  and the subjecting  of  the
same  to  the Russes.

[iil.iii.522.]

Here  is  in  Moscovie,  a  Kindred  called  the
Sonnes  of  Oneeko,  of  a  rusticke  or  base
descent,  and  first  sprung  from  one
Oneeko  a  Husband-man.  He  being  very
rich  in  Lands,  dwelt  upon  a  certaine  River
called  Wichida,  or  Witsogda,  falling  into
the  River  Duina,  which  about  one  hun-
dred leagues  beneath,  neere  unto  the  Castle  called  S.
Michael  the  Archangel,  which  falleth  into  the  White  Sea.
This  Oneeko  being  rich  (as  is  said)  had  also  many  Chil-
dren, God  having  largely  blessed  and  provided  him  with
plentie  of  all  things.  Yet  neverthelesse,  hee  had  an
earnest  desire  and  affection,  to  know  what  Countreyes
were  possessed  and  inhabited  by  those  people,  which
yeerely  came  into  Russia  to  trafficke,  bringing  with  them
costly  Furres,  and  divers  other  Merchandizes,  much
diffring  in  Language,  Apparel,  Religion,  and  Behaviour,

171

The  first  and
second  Para-
graphs were
published  in
La  tine  by
Hesse//  Ger-
ardus  An.
1 61 2.  here  a
little  con-
tracted: the
last  I  found  in
M.  Hakluyts
Papers.
Arica  or
Oneeka
Wichida.
White  Sea  to
the  North  of
Russia.

A.D.

1612.

Samoieds.

Oysel  and
Ustiug  Mart
Townesfor  the
Samoieds.

Thefirst
Voyage  unto
the  Samoieds
countreyes.

The  second
Voyage.

Many  Deserts
and  divers
great  Rivers.
River  Obi.
Great  wealth
to  be  gotten  by
the  Trade  to
the  River  of
Obi.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

calling  themselves  Samoieds,  and  by  other  unknowne
names.  These  people  came  every  yeere  downe  the  River
Wichida,  and  exchanged  their  Commodities  with  the
Russes  and  Muscovites,  in  the  Townes  of  Osel  and
Ustiug,  on  the  River  Duina ;  which  at  that  time  were
the  Receits  and  chiefe  Mart  Townes  of  all  kind  of
Marchandizes,  but  especially  of  costly  Furres.  Oneeko
therefore  (as  hath  beene  said)  was  most  desirous  to  know,
from  whence  these  people  came,  or  what  Countreyes  they
did  inhabit,  easily  conjecturing,  That  great  wealth  was
there  to  be  gotten ;  since  the  Furres  yeerely  brought
them  amounted  to  a  great  summe  of  Money.  Where-
fore secretly  hee  got  acquaintance  and  consorted  himselfe
with  divers  of  them,  and  sent  in  their  company  about
tenne  or  twelve  of  his  owne  people  into  those  parts ;
enjoyning  them,  that  through  what  Countreyes  so  ever
they  should  travell,  they  should  make  diligent  search
of  every  particular  thing  therein,  and  fully  observe  the
Manners,  Rites,  Dwellings,  and  whole  course  of  life  of
those  Nations;  that  at  their  returne  they  might  bring
from  thence  perfect  knowledge  thereof.  Which  they
having  at  length  performed,  he  entertayned  them  bounti-
fully at  their  returne,  and  shewed  them  all  favour,  but
with  especiall  charge  to  keepe  silence.  Hee  likewise  kept
all  these  things  close  to  himselfe,  not  revealing  them  to
any  man.

And  the  next  yeere  following,  he  sent  thither  a  greater
number  of  his  people,  joyning  with  them  certayne  of
his  Kindred  and  Alliance.  These  carried  with  them
divers  base  Marchandize ;  as  small  Bels,  and  other  like
Dutch  small  Wares ;  and  tooke  diligent  notice  of  every
thing  in  those  parts ;  and  after  they  had  passed  many
Deserts,  and  divers  great  Rivers,  they  came  to  the  River
Obi :  where  making  Acquaintance  and  Friendship  with
the  Samoieds,  they  found  that  Furres  were  to  be  had
for  a  small  price,  and  that  great  wealth  was  there  easily
to  be  gotten ;  and  further,  that  this  people  had  not  any
Cities,  but  lived  together  in  Companies,  and  peaceably,

172

A DESCRIPTION OF SIBERIA  a.d.

1612.

and  governed by  some  of  the ancientest  among them  ;  Conditions  of

that  they  were  lothsome  in  their  feeding,  and  lived  on  the  the  people.

flesh of  such beasts as they tooke : that  they had no  D t

knowledge  of  Corne  or  Bread,  were  cunning  and  skilfull  No  Bread.

Archers,  making their Bowes of  a  gentle and flexible  Shooting.

kind  of  Wood,  and  that  their  Arrowes  were  headed  with

sharpened stones  or  fish bones :  with  those  they killed

wilde  beasts,  which  are  exceeding  plentifull  in  those  places  :

that  they  sowed  also  with  bones  of  fishes,  serving  them

for  Needles ;  their  thred  being made of  the  sinewes  of

certaine  small  beasts,  and  so  they  sew  together  the  Furres,

wherewith they cloath themselves: the Furrie side in  Apparell.

Summer  turned  outward,  and  in  Winter  inward. That

they  covered  their  Houses  with  the  Skins  of  Elkes  and  Homes.

such  like  beasts,  little  esteemed among  them. Finally,

these Messengers of  Oneeko, searched curiously into

every matter, and returned home stored with costly

Furres.

Now  when  as  Oneeko  understood  by  their  report,  that

which he  so  much longed to know, he together with

certayne others of  his Friends,  continued his  Trafficke  Great  wealth

into those Countreyes for divers yeeres together: by  0<>tayne*  fy

,  r .1  J r\ 1  • i_^«  j continuance  of

meanes  whereof the Oneekos grew very mightie, and  thls  ^oya^m

bought  great  Possessions  in  all  parts.  Those  that  dwelled
neere  unto  them  beeing  ignorant  from  whence  all  this
wealth  arose,  greatly  wondred  at  it.  For  the  Oneekos
builded  Churches  in  some  of  their  Villages.  Yea,  after-  [III.iii.523.]
ward  they  erected  in  the  Towne  of  Osoil  upon  the
Wichida,  where  at  that  time  they  dwelt,  an  exceeding
faire  Church,  which  was  raysed  from  the  very  founda-
tions of  hewen  stone.  Finally,  they  knew  no  end  of
their  goods.

Now  among  the  Russes  it  goeth  for  a  common
Proverbe,  that  Hee  which  hath  no  friends  in  Court,
is  scarce  to  be  accounted  in  the  number  of  the  living.
For  most  commonly  it  happeneth,  that  they  that  excell
others  in  any  thing,  are  presently  envyed  and  falsly
accused in the Princes Court, where  if  they  have  not

173

A.D.

1612.

L.  Boils,  that
Theodore
Emperour.
The  Russes
pronounce  th
as  ph.

Imperiall

priviledge.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

a  friend  to  succour  them,  they  are  forth-with  without
hearing  the  cause,  oppressed  ;  yea,  and  utterly  ruined.
For  which  cause  the  Oneekos  beeing  growne  to  much
wealth,  as  is  said,  got  into  the  favour  of  one  of  the
greatest  in  the  Court,  which  was  Borisodanova,  Brother
to  the  Wife  of  the  Emperour  Pheodar  Evanowich  then
reigning;  to  whom  also  he  succeeded  in  the  Empire.
Unto  this  Boris  the  Oneekos  determined  to  reveale  the
whole  matter :  who  first  presenting  him  with  gifts  after
the  custome  of  the  Countrey,  prayed  him  to  grant  them
hearing  in  a  matter,  which  they  had  to  deliver  for  the
benefit  of  the  whole  Empire.  Boris  presently  listning
to  this  Petition,  received  them  with  extraordinary  kind-
nesse :  and  after  they  had  declared  unto  him  the  situa-
tion of  the  Countreys  of  Samoiedia,  and  Siberia,  then
what  they  had  seene  and  observed  therein,  and  how
great  Riches  might  thence  arise  unto  the  Empire  of
Moscovia.  Boris  presently  grew  into  an  ardent  desire
to  set  forward  this  businesse,  entertayning  them  as  his
Children,  and  gracing  them  to  the  uttermost  of  his  power,
procuring  them  from  the  Emperour  a  most  ample  Privi-
ledge, by  which  it  was  ordayned,  That  they  should  for
ever  enjoy  the  Lands  which  they  possessed,  and  might
dispose  of  them  unto  their  Heires  at  their  pleasure.
And  farther,  if  it  happened  they  were  abiding  in  the
Citie  of  Moscua,  he  tooke  them  into  his  owne  Sled :
which  among  the  Moscovites  is  the  greatest  kind  of
honour,  especially  being  offered  by  principall  Noblemen,
such  as  then  was  Boris,  a  man  of  the  greatest  power,
and  in  whom  the  chiefe  authoritie  of  the  Empire  rested.
Boris  pondering  these  things  attentively,  signified  the
whole  matter  to  the  Emperour,  to  whom  it  was  very
pleasing;  And  not  sleeping  about  the  matter,  employed
therein  certayne  Captaynes  and  Gentlemen  of  small  abilitie
of  his  owne  followers :  commanding  them  to  prepare
themselves  to  goe  to  that  Journey,  in  company  of  such
as  the  Oneekos  should  appoint  unto  them,  and  that
they  should  apparell  themselves  gallantly,  and  like  unto

i74

A DESCRIPTION OF SIBERIA  a.d.

1612.

Ambassadors,  adding  further  certayne  Souldiers,  and
Presents  of  small  value  to  be  distributed  among  the
people,  to  which  they  should  come :  enjoyning  them
further  to  note  diligently  all  Passages,  Rivers,  High-
wayes,  Woods,  and  what  else  they  should  meete  with
in  their  travell ;  as  also  to  commit  to  memorie  the  names
of  them ;  that  at  their  returne  they  might  make  a  faithfull
and  true  report  thereof;  adding  further  that  they  should
intreat  the  people  with  all  courtesie,  and  that  they
should  seeke  out  some  convenient  place  for  building  of
Castles  and  Fortresses,  and  that  in  any  case  (if  it  were
possible)  they  should  bring  backe  with  them  into  Mos-
covia,  some  of  the  Inhabitants  of  those  Countryes.

These  Messengers  being  sufficiently  furnished  with  all  The  first
things  necessary  for  the  Journey,  namely,  Apparell,  v°ya&esetout
Weapons,  Money,  and  Presents,  departing  from  the  QQdCnova.
Moscua,  not  long  after  came  to  the  River  Wichida,  and  to
the  Oneekos :  who  also  sent  some  of  their  owne  people
with  them.  Assoone  as  they  were  arrived  into  those  parts,
they  began  to  performe  what  was  given  them  in  charge,
shewing  freely  all  tokens  of  courtesie  unto  the  barbarous
people,  and  carefully  observing  who  were  of  greatest
authoritie  among  them,  to  whom  they  used  reverence
and  gave  gifts,  such  as  were  of  small  and  almost  no
value  to  themselves,  but  which  seemed  so  precious  unto
the  other,  that  when  the  Moscovites  were  comming  a
farre  off  towards  them,  they  would  stay  for  them  with
great  dancings  and  clapping  of  their  hands,  and  cast
themselves  downe  at  the  feet  of  the  Givers,  being  so
gallantly  attyred,  accounting  them  altogether  as  Gods.
The  Moscovites  using  the  Samoieds  for  their  Interpretors,
which  had  continued  certayne  yeeres  in  the  Villages  of
Moscovia,  to  learne  their  Language,  began  to  discourse
with  the  Barbarians  concerning  their  Emperour  of  Mos-
covie,  whom  they  wonderfully  extolled,  and  made  him
little  lesse  then  an  Earthly  God,  enterlacing  other  things
with  all,  whereby  those  people  were  stirred  up  to  wish
that they might behold these things with their eyes.

i75

A.D.

1612.

They  submit
themselves  to
the

Moscovites.

Travaile
beyond  Obi.

Elkes  or
Loshes.

[in.iii.524.]

Raine  Deere.
Dogs  equal  in
swiftnesse  to
Harts.

Samoieds
shooting.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

These  their  desires  were  pleasing  to  the  Moscovites,
who  signified  that  they  were  likewise  well  contented
therewithall :  Adding,  that  they  would  leave  certayne
pledges  among  them,  which  during  the  Samoieds  abode
in  Moscovia,  might  learne  their  Language :  And  by  this
meanes  they  drew  unto  their  purpose  the  good  will  of
many  of  the  people  on  the  West-side  of  Obi,  who  of
their  owne  accord  subjected  themselves  to  the  authoritie
of  the  Moscovites,  and  suffered  them  to  lay  a  Taxation
upon  them,  promising  yeerely  of  every  head  (not
excepting  the  Boyes  that  were  but  yet  learning  to  handle
the  Bow)  two  skinnes  of  Sables ;  which  to  themselves
were  of  no  value,  but  esteemed  of  the  Moscovites  as
precious  as  Jewels.  These  they  promised  to  deliver  to
such  a  Treasurer  as  the  Emperour  should  ordayne.
Neither  did  they  faile  to  performe  the  same.

After  this  the  Messengers  passed  over  the  River  Obi,
and  travelled  beyond  it  almost  two  hundred  leagues
toward  the  East  and  North-east,  having  seene  by  the
way  many  wild  beasts  of  strong  shapes,  most  cleere
Fountaynes,  extraordinary  Plants  and  Trees,  pleasant
Woods,  and  Samoieds  of  divers  sorts,  whereof  some  did
ride  on  Elkes  or  Loshes,  other  were  drawne  in  Sleds
by  Raine  Deere,  and  others  also  were  drawne  by  Dogges,
which  are  equall  to  Harts  for  swiftnesse.  Finally,  many
other  things  in  their  whole  Journey  they  met  with,  not
before  seene,  and  therefore  to  be  marvelled  at :  which
orderly  and  truly  noted  downe,  that  they  might  more
certainly  report  the  same  at  their  returne.  And  so  at
length  taking  with  them  some  voluntarie  Samoieds,  and
leaving  there  divers  of  their  owne  people  to  learne
their  Language,  they  returned  backe  into  Moscovia;
where  at  their  first  conveniencie  they  made  knowne  to
Boris,  and  by  him  unto  the  Emperour  the  whole  successe
of  their  Voyage.

They  marvelled  at  the  Samoieds  which  were  brought
unto  them,  commanding  them  to  make  some  shew  of  their
cunning  in  shooting ; which  they  did  so  perfectly,  that

176

A DESCRIPTION OF SIBERIA  a.d.

i  6 12.
almost  it  seemed  to  any  man  incredible.  For  taking  a
piece  of  Coyne  lesse  then  our  *  Pennie,  and  fastning  it  *St'wer.
to  the  stocke  of  a  Tree,  and  then  going  as  farre  from
the  same,  as  they  could  very  hardly  discerne  it,  they
did  every  time  that  they  did  shoot  so  assuredly  hit  the
same,  that  they  did  not  once  misse  it.  Where  at  many
of  the  beholders  did  above  measure  wonder.

And  on  the  other  side,  the  Samoieds  as  greatly
wondred  both  at  the  Moscovites  manner  of  living  and
fashions,  as  also  at  the  statelinesse  of  the  Citie :  neither
did  they  without  a  certayne  terrour  behold  the  Emperour
himselfe,  so  richly  attired  and  mounted  either  on  Horse-
backe,  or  in  his  Coach  drawne  by  many  Horses  together,
and  environed  with  so  many  Nobles  most  gallantly
adorned.  Then  with  admiration  they  beheld  the  Guards
furnished  with  their  Calivers,  of  whom  about  foure
hundred  waited  on  the  Emperour  at  his  going  abroad.
So  oft  also  as  they  heard  the  ringing  of  the  Bells,  which  y/
are  very  many  among  the  Moscovites,  and  saw  so
many  faire  shops,  and  the  rest  of  the  Cities  beautie,
they  were  altogether  astonished,  and  thought  themselves
to  bee  in  some  Mansion  of  the  Gods ;  wishing  withall,
that  they  were  a  while  among  their  Countrey-men  to
tell  them  of  all  things.  Yea,  they  reported  themselves
to  be  happie,  that  they  had  the  fortune  to  serve  so
glorious  an  Emperour,  whom  they  altogether  accounted
as  a  Divine  power.  The  Meates  which  the  Moscovites
did  set  before  them,  they  did  greedily  eate :  whereby
it  plainely  appeared,  that  the  same  were  more  pleasant
to  their  taste,  then  the  raw  flesh,  or  fish  dried  in  the
winde,  wherewith  they  feed  themselves  at  home.  Finally,
they  promised  to  receive  the  Emperour  for  their  Lord ;
and  to  perswade  their  Countrey-men,  inhabiting  farre
and  wide  to  doe  the  same.  They  humbly  also  prayed  the
Emperour  to  vouchsafe  them  the  favour,  to  send  them
certaine  Governours  to  rule  over  them,  and  to  whom  they
might  pay  the  aforesaid  Tribute.  Concerning  their  Idola-
trie,  there  was  no  speech  made  thereof,  but  they  were  left
xiii  177  m

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

to  their  owne  customes.  Notwithstanding,  I  thinke  that
the  Christian  Faith  would  easily  be  spred  among  them,  if
they  had  sufficient  and  godly  Teachers.  Neither  doubt  I
but  the  Moscovites  would  have  taken  order  therein,  if  they
had  not  beene  hindred  by  these  most  troublesome  Warres.
These  things  so  done  as  is  declared,  the  Oneekos
were  raised  to  great  Honours,  and  endowed  with  great
Priviledges,  as  also  with  Supreme  Authoritie  over  many
places,  adjoyning  unto  their  Lands,  enjoying  Possessions
lying  one  hundred  miles  asunder  upon  the  Rivers  of
Duina,  Whichida,  and  Suchana :  so  that  they  are  very
mighty  and  rich,  and  increase  daily  in  greater  Honours.
It  was  further  ordayned  by  the  Moscovites,  that  there
should  bee  places  chosen  by  the  River  Oby,  and  in
the  fields  adjoyning  unto  it,  fortified  by  the  naturall
situation  for  the  building  of  Castles  thereon,  and  furnish-
ing them  with  Garrisons,  and  that  there  should  be  sent
thither  a  chiefe  Governour,  principally  for  further  dis-
covering the  Countrey,  and  bringing  it  under  subjection.
These  things  so  ordayned,  did  likewise  take  effect. And

Castles  first  of  all  there  were  builded  certaine  Castles  enclosed
with  certaine  strong  beames,  cut  out  of  the  Woods
thereby,  and  fastned  one  in  another  in  double  rewes,
filled  betweene  with  earth,  and  fortified  with  Garrisons;
And  so  great  a  multitude  of  men  is  duely  sent  thither,
that  in  some  places  there  are  Cities  assembled,  consisting
of  Poles,  Tartars,  Russes,  and  other  Nations  mingled
together. For, into these parts are sent all that are

Sinke  of banished,  Murtherers,  Traitors,  Theeves,  and  the  scumme

bad  people.  Qf  such  as  deserve  death  :  some  of  which  are  for  a  time
kept  in  prison,  others  enforced  to  continue  there  for
certaine  yeeres,  every  one  according  to  the  rate  of  his
offence  :  whereby  there  are  very  populous  assemblies  of
people  growne  together,  who  with  the  Castles  already
builded,  doe  almost  make  a  pretie  Kingdome :  Many
men  of  the  meane  sort,  daily  flocking  thither,  the  rather
for  that  they  enjoy  great  priviledges,  neither  pay  any
thing  for  the  Lands  which  they  possesse.

178

builded.

A DESCRIPTION OF SIBERIA  a.d.

1612.

The  whole  Countrey  is  called  Siberia,  the  Citie  builded  Siberia  and

therein Siber. And  in  deed  at  the first,  the  Offenders  Slber-

among  the  Moscovites,  did  no  lesse  tremble  at  the  name

of  Siberia, then *  doe evill persons in London,  when  *Then  Male-

they  are  threatned  with  New-gate :  for  they  were  forth-  Jactors  °f

.  i  •  «m •  1?  1 V • /v •  Amsterdam  at

with  sent  away  into  Siberia. But  now  the  often  inflicting  the  Prison

of  that punishment is almost growne into contempt, yv.

But Noblemen and great Personages, if  at any time

they incurre the Princes displeasure, doe  as yet very

much  loath  the  name  of  Siberia. For  many  times  both

themselves,  with  their  Wives  and  Families  are  sent  away

into  those  parts :  where  some  Office  is  committed  unto

them,  till  the  Emperours  anger  bee  asswaged,  and  they

called  home  into  Moscovia.

I  will  now shew  the way  by  which they  travell  out

of  Moscovia  into  those  parts,  and  that  in  the  best  manner  [III.iii.525.]

that I could  get notice thereof. Which  whatsoever  it  Thh  J°urnf

shall  seeme  to  bee,  I  have  not  attayned  unto  it,  without t  was

great  paines  and  ready  furtherance  of  some  friends,  which  hardly

I found in the Court, while I continued in Russia :  obtained  by

who  though  they  were ready  to  pleasure  me,  and  that  some  friends  in

I  had  beene  very instant  with them about  it,  yet  with

much  adoe  were  brought  to  communicate  this  particular

Journall  unto  me. For  if  at  any  time  after,  when  the  The  great

land should bee at quiet, it should any way come  danger  for

to  light,  doubtlesse it  would  cost them  all their  lives,  JfJ^ g  thls

For such is the disposition of the Russes, that they

will  not  indure  to  have  the  secrets  of  their  State  to  bee

made  knowne.

179

A.D.

1612.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Osoil.

Javinis  17.
dales  journey
distant  from
Osoil,  against
the  streame.

§•  II.

A  briefe  Description  of  the  wayes  and  Rivers,
leading  out  of  Moscovia  toward  the  East  and
North-east  into  Siberia,  Samoiedia,  and  Tin-
goesia,  as  they  are  daily  frequented  by  the
Russes  :  with  further  Discoveries  towards
Tartaria  and  China.

Rom  the  Citie  Osoil  upon  the  River  Wichida,  where

the  Oneekos  dwell,  they  goe  against  the  streame,

untill  they  come  to  Javinis,  a  little  Towne  built

by  the  Russes,  and  it  is  distant  from  Osoil  almost  seven-

teene  dayes  journey. Whither  before  they  come, they

passe many Rivers and Woods. The River Wichida

Jugoria.  springeth  out  of  the Mountaines  of  Jugoria,  which  to

the  South  joyne  upon  Tartarie,  and  from  thence  runne
Northwards  to  the  Ocean  Sea. Out  of  the  same  Moun-

RwerPetsora.  taines  issueth  the  River  Petsora,  which  falleth  into  the
Ocean  Sea  on  this  side  the  Streight  of  Waygats.  From
Javinis,  after  three  weekes  journey,  they  come  to  Neem ;
a  River  so  named  of  the  gentle  gliding  of  her  streames
through  the  Woods.  For  Neem  in  English  signifieth  Still
or  Dumbe.  On  this  River  they  proceed  about  five  dayes
space  with  their  Boats ;  and  then,  for  that  the  Neem  taketh
his  course  another  way,  for  shortning  their  journey,  they
must  of  force  cause  their  stuffe  to  be  carried  by  Land,
the  space  of  a  league  :  And  so  they  come  to  the  Wisera,
a  River  issuing  out  of  certaine  Rockes  adjoyning  to  the
Mountaines  of  Jugoria.  These  Rockes  the  Moscovites
call  Camenas.  From  hence  they  are  carried  downe  the
River  Wisera,  for  the  full  space  of  nine  dayes,  untill  they
come  to  Soil  Camscoy,  a  small  Towne  builded  by  the
Moscovites,  for  refreshing  of  Travellers  for  a  short  space,
which  hence  forward  are  to  proceed  on  their  Journey  by
Land.  As  for  the  Wisera,  it  keeping  on  his  course  some-
what farther,  at  length  falleth  into  the  Cam,  which  passing

180

Neem  River
3.  weekes
journey  from
Javinis.

From  Neem  to
Wisera  5.
dayes  journey.

From  Wisera
to  Soil
Camscoy  9.
dayes.

A DESCRIPTION OF SIBERIA  a.d.

1612.

by  Viatcam,  a  Towne  of  Moscovia,  falleth  into  the  great
River  Rha,  commonly  called  Volga,  which  entreth  with  Volga  by  the
seventy  branches  into  the  Caspian  Sea,  as  I  have  received  Tartars  called
from  eye  witnesses.

The  Towne  of  Soil  Camscoy  is  reasonably  inhabited,  Soil  Camscoy.
having  many  Villages  round  about  it.  The  Inhabitants,
for  the  most  part  are  Russes  or  Tartars.  Here  is  great
store  of  Cattell,  and  chiefly  of  Horses.  Travellers  having
here  somewhat  refreshed  themselves,  doe  lade  their
carriages  on  Horses,  and  travell  for  the  most  part  through
Mountaines  full  of  Firres,  Pines,  and  other  trees  of  strange
sorts.  Betweene  these  Mountaines  they  passe  over  the
Rivers  Soiba,  and  from  thence  over  Cosna,  both  running  The  River
toward  the  North-east.  s°jj>a-  .

Now  these  Mountaines  are  divided  into  three  parts ; ~
whereof  the  two  first  are  passed  over  each  of  them  in  Mountaines  in
two  dayes,  and  the  third  in  foure  dayes. The  first  part  three  parts.
is called Coosvinscoy Camen : The second Cirginscoy Coovmscoy
Camen :  The  third  Podvinscoy  Camen. And  doubtlesse  camen:
all  these  mountainous  Countries  are  much  different  from  Camen.
the  other  Countries  out  of  which  they  enter  into  them. Podvinscoy
For  the  Woods  upon  them,  are  fairer  and  thicker  growne  Camen.
with  trees,  bearing  every  where  divers  sorts  of  Plants.
These  three  Desarts  are  frequented  by  none  in  a  manner
but  Tartars,  and  Samoieds,  who  onely  hunt  after  those
costly Furres, which are to pay their tribute to the
Emperour  of  Moscovia. The  Mountaines  of  Podvinscoy
Camen  are  higher  then  the  rest,  and  for  the  most  part
covered  with  Snow  and  Cloudes,  and  therefore  difficult
for  Travellers  to  passe  over :  but  by  little  and  little  they
have  a  gentle  descent. From  thence  they  come  to  Verga-  Vergateria.
teria,  in  which  Towne  they  must  abide  untill  the  Spring,
by  reason  of  the  River  Toera,  which  arising  not  farre  Toera  River.
from  thence,  is  all  the  rest  of  the  yeere  very  shallow.

But  the  Spring  approaching,  when  the  Snow  melts  from
the  hoary  Hills,  and  the  Land  waters  arise,  it  is  passed  v . ,
over  with  Skiffes  and  small  Boats. Vergateria  is  the  first  /ntT^lne  of
Towne  of  the  Countrey  of  Siberia,  and  was  begun  to  be  Siberia.

181

A.D.

1612.

1590.

Russian

Governour,

[III.iii.526.]

Five  dayes
journey  to
Japhanis.

Tabab  a
mighty  River
200.  leagues
from  Toera.

From  Japhanis
to  Tinna  1 2 .
dayes  journey
by  sled.
Many  travell
farre  beyond
Oby  toward
the  East  y
South.

Tobolsca  the
chiefe  Towne
of  Siberia.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

builded  with  some  other  Townes  within  these  one  and
twenty  yeeres.  It  is  reasonably  full  of  buildings,  and
the  lands  about  it  are  tilled  as  in  Moscovia.  Heere  there
is  resident  for  the  Emperour  of  Moscovia  a  Governour,
which  yeerely  at  the  beginning  of  the  Spring,  by  way  of
the  Rivers  doth  distribute  great  store  of  Corne,  and
Victuals  among  the  Castles  with  Garrisons  throughout  all
Siberia :  furnishing  also  in  like  manner  the  Moscovites,
which  remayne  beyond  the  River  Oby.  For  in  those
places  the  ground  is  not  yet  tilled ;  and  the  Samoieds,  as
before  is  said,  for  the  most  part  feed  on  the  flesh  of  wilde
beasts.

Downe  the  River  Toera,  in  five  dayes  they  come  to
Japhanis,  a  Towne  builded  and  inhabited  within  these
two  yeeres.  Thence  againe  they  passe  downe  the  Toera,
and  having  proceeded  two  dayes  thereon,  they  are  enforced
by  reason  of  the  often  windings  and  turnings  of  the  River,
to  cut  over  it  in  certaine  places,  for  shortning  of  the  way.
In  these  places  there  now  dwell  here  and  there,  Tartars
and  Samoieds,  living  for  the  most  part  upon  Cattell  and
Fishing.

At  length  leaving  Toera,  they  come  to  the  mighty
River  Tabab,  distant  from  Vergateria  about  two  hundred
leagues.  And  from  thence  they  proceed  farther  to  Tinna,
a  populous  Towne,  and  builded  by  those  above  mentioned.
But  many  travell  also  from  Japhanis  to  Tinna,  by  Sleds
in  the  Winter  time,  in  the  space  of  twelve  dayes.  And
here  is  used  much  buying  and  selling  of  costly  Furres,
betweene  the  Muscovites,  Tartars,  and  Samoieds.  And
this  is  a  very  convenient  place,  for  such  as  determine  to
stay  in  the  Countrey  not  above  sixe  moneths.  But  many
doe  search  the  further  parts,  and  travell  farre  beyond  the
Oby,  toward  the  East  and  South.

From  Tinna  they  come  to  Tobolsca,  the  chiefe  of  all
the  Townes  of  Siberia :  wherein  is  the  seat  of  the  chiefe
Governour  of  Siberia,  and  of  the  Moscovites  that  are  in
the  same.  To  this  place  yeerely  are  brought  from  the
other  Townes  of  the  whole  Countrey,  as  well  on  this  side,

182

A DESCRIPTION OF SIBERIA

as  beyond  Oby  the  tributes,  which  being  brought  together,
and  guarded  with  Souldiers,  are  after  carried  into  Mos-
covia  to  the  Emperour.  Here  also  the  Law  is  most
severely  administred  :  and  all  the  other  Governours  in
Samoiedia,  and  Siberia,  are  bound  to  obey  him  onely.
In  this  Citie  besides  is  the  chiefe  Market  of  commodities
brought  out  of  Moscovia ;  the  Tartars  out  of  the  South
parts,  and  almost  farthest  parts  of  Tartarie,  and  men  of
other  Nations  repairing  thither :  who,  the  farther  that
the  report  of  these  Countries  reacheth,  doe  in  so  much
the  greater  number  assemble  thither :  whereby  there
ariseth  great  profit  to  the  Moscovites.  Furthermore,  in
divers  places  there  are  Churches  and  Chappels  erected,
wherein  the  Greeke  Religion  is  exercised,  which  among
the  Russes,  and  other  Northerne  People  is  most  used,
although  corrupted  with  divers  Superstitions.  But  how-
soever, no  man  is  forced  against  his  will  to  their  Religion :
but  certaine  gentle  meanes  are  used  by  the  Russes,  by
which  these  people  are  perswaded  and  wonne  thereunto.

The  Citie  Tobolsca  is  situated  on  the  River  Yrtis,
which  with  a  most  forcible  streame,  and  as  it  were  another
Danubius,  rising  from  the  South,  taketh  his  course  toward
the  Oby,  through  which  it  seemeth  to  runne  with  the  same
course.  On  the  other  side  is  the  River  Tobol,  of  which
the  Citie  taketh  her  name.  Into  this  falleth  the  River
Tassa,  which  seemeth  to  spring  from  the  North-east,  and
from  certaine  Mountaines  there  upon  the  Coast.  On  the
side  of  this  River  the  Moscovites  have  of  late  builded  a
Towne,  called  Pohemy,  inhabited  with  dwellers  drawne
out  of  Siberia,  for  no  other  cause,  but  that  it  is  environed
with  an  exceeding  fertile  soyle,  as  also  with  very  pleasant
Woods,  wherein  divers  sorts  of  wilde  beasts  doe  breed,
as  Panthers,  Ounces,  Foxes,  Sables,  and  Marterns.  Now
Pohemy  is  distant  from  Tobolsca,  about  two  weekes
Journey  toward  the  North-east.  Yrtis  with  almost  the
like  distance  from  Tobolsca,  falleth  into  the  Oby.  And
at  the  mouth  of  it  was  builded  a  Towne,  called  Olscoy-
gorod,  but  afterward  razed  downe  by  commandement  of

183

A.D.
l6l2.

W

Tobolsca  on  the
River  Yrtis.

Tobol  River.
Tassa  River.

Pohemy  a
Towne.

Trtis  River

Olscoygorod
razed.

A.D.

1612.

Zergolta  a
town  builded
in  an  Hand  of
theRiverOby.

Noxinscoy
Castle  200.
leagues  above
Zergolta.

They  travell
400.  leagues
into  the  Inland
beyond
Noxinscoy.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Governour  of  Siberia :  The  cause  whereof  was  not
then  knowne :  which  notwithstanding  I  guesse  to  have
been  either  the  extremity  of  the  cold,  or  that  the  Towne
stood  nearer  unto  the  Sea  then  they  thought  fit,  and  feared
lest  some  inconvenience  might  grow  thereby,  for  which
cause  about  fiftie  leagues  above  that  razed  Towne,  they
builded  another  upon  an  Hand  of  the  River  Oby,  called
Zergolta.  From  hence  sayling  up  the  River,  they  use
small  sayles,  either  because  winds  blow  faintly,  or  for  the
highnesse  of  the  shoare :  so  that,  though  the  Oby  bee
almost  every  where  very  broad ;  notwithstanding,  they
drew  their  Boats  in  it  with  ropes,  altogether  after  the
same  sort  that  they  travell  up  the  Rivers  of  Moscovia.

Two  hundred  leagues  above  Zergolta,  they  came  to
Noxinscoi,  a  Castle  builded  thirteene  yeers  agoe,  at  which
time  the  Governour  sent  certaine  men  thither  out  of
Siberia,  to  seeke  out  Countries  profitable  for  mankind,
and  fit  to  build  Townes  in.  Wherefore  at  that  time  they
builded  this  Castle,  and  furnished  it  with  a  certaine  Garri-
son, in  a  very  pleasant,  wholsome,  warme,  and  fertile  soyle,
and  wherein  were  great  store  of  Beasts  and  Fowles  of
rare  kinds.  The  very  Castle  being  situated  toward  the
South-east,  by  little  and  little  grew  to  be  a  Citie.  The
Inhabitants  whereof  were  enjoyned  to  proceed  by  degrees
into  further  and  more  temperate  Countries,  and  to  trafrlcke
truely  in  every  place,  and  courteously  and  kindly  to  entreat
all  people  that  they  met  withall :  whereby  at  length  they
might  more  largely  extend  the  Dominion,  and  spread
abroad  the  Russian  Name.  Wherefore  flocking  thither
in  great  numbers,  and  piercing  into  the  Inland  foure
hundred  leagues,  they  found  goodly  Countries,  but  not
inhabited.  And  whereas  ten  yeeres  past,  having  sayled
two  hundred  leagues  up  the  River  Oby,  they  lighted  upon
a  Countrey  very  fruitfull  and  pleasant,  which  was  very
temperate,  and  free  from  all  discommodities,  and  the
Winters  very  short,  and  in  a  manner  none  at  all,  they
tooke  occasion  thereupon  to  returne  into  Siberia,  &  to
send word of these things into Moscovia. Boris

184

A DESCRIPTION OF SIBERIA  a.d.

1612.

Godonova  was  then  Emperor  there,  who  having  received  The  Reigneof

such  good  tidings,  forthwith  commanded  the  Governour  B°ns

of  Siberia,  that  with  all  speed  hee  should  cause  a  Citie

to  bee  builded  there. The  Governour  obeyed,  and  there

was a Castle builded upon his commandement, with

certaine  houses  adjoyned ;  so  that  now  it  is  a  large  Citie.  [III.iii.527.]

The  name  thereof  is  Tooma,  because  they  understood,  The  Citie

that  a  great  multitude  of  Tartars  in  times  past  were  seated  Tooma.

there,  of  whom  this  Citie  tooke  that  name  for  the  pleasant-

nesse  of  the  situation  thereof. And  it  is  reported  that

these  Tartars  had  at  that  time  a  King,  whose  name  was  Tartar  King.

Altin : Whereby  it  came  to  passe,  that  the  Citie  which

was first builded, held out many assaults of sundry

people  that  dwelt  in  those  Champion  Countreyes. And

now  this  Citie  is  so mightie, that  in  processe  of  time

some  reasonable  great  Kingdome  is  likely  to  grow  out

off  it.

Furthermore,  betweene  this  Castle  of  Noxinscoi,  and
the  Citie  Tooma,  and  Siberia,  the  Moscovites  daily  doe
discover  many  people  dwelling  in  the  In-land  parts,  some
of  whom  call  themselves  Ostachies,  and  now  are  growne  Ostachies  a
into  one  bodie  with  the  Tartars,  Samoieds,  and  Russes,  people.
living  friendly  together ;  they  have  many  Kings  among
them,  almost  like  unto  the  Indians  (I  speake  of  the  pettie
Kings,  not  of  the  greater  Kings  of  India.)  And  to  bee
briefe,  the  Moscovites  have  proceeded  so  farre  into  that
mayne  Land,  that  we  have  just  cause  to  marvell  thereat.
Moreover,  there  are  many  Castles  and  Townes  betweene
the  Rivers  of  Obi  and  Yrtis,  builded  almost  at  the  same
time  when  Tobolsca  was,  and  are  now  proper  Townes :
whose  Inhabitants  are  Moscovites,  Tartars,  and  Samoieds
of  their  kind,  which  we  call,  The  tame  Samoieds,  in  respect
of  those  which  are  altogether  wild.

And  the  first  of  the  Townes  is  Tara  :  from  which  place  Tara  a
it is neere  ten  dayes  journey  between Obi  and Yrtis.  Towne.
Then Jorgoetum, builded about fifteene yeares past.  J°rg°*tum-
Besobia,  and  Mangansoiscoigorod,  both  of  them  builded  Mangansoi-
above Jorgoetum toward the South. The Inhabitants  scoigorod.

A.D.

1612.

Narim  and
Tooma  beyond
Obi.

Reyne  Deere
and  exceeding
swift  Dogs
used  insteed  of
Horses  and  fed
with  Fishes.

Telta  Rivet-
to  the  East
beyond  Obi.
Comgof-scoi
Castle.

Ten  weekes
travell  East-
ward from
Obi,  wherein
the  Tingoesies
were  first
discovered.
Tingoesie
a  people
dwelling  in
Companies
upon  the  great
River  Jenisce.
The  Tingoesies
deformed  with
swellings
under  their
throats:  a
disease  attend-
ing drinkers  of
Snow-water.
Mountaines  on
the  East  side
ofJenisci
casting  out  fire
and  brimstone.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

that  dwell  on  the  west  side  of  the  River  Obi,  seeke  daily
to  discover  more  and  more.  On  this  side  of  Obi  are  seated
the  Cities  Tobolsca,  Siberia,  Beresaia,  and  certaine  others,
builded  upon  certaine  Rivers  :  and  more  are  builded  daily.
Beyond  Obi  are  Narim,  Tooma,  and  divers  other  Cities,
the  Inhabitants  whereof  insteed  of  Horses  use  Reyne
Deere,  or  exceeding  swift  Dogs,  which  they  fatten  with
divers  kinds  of  fishes,  and  especially  with  Thornebacks ;
because  they  thinke  they  be  made  the  stronger  with  that
kinde  of  food.  Jorgoetum,  whereof  I  spake  before,  is
builded  in  an  Hand  of  the  River  Obi.

Also  above  Narim  as  men  travaile  toward  the  East,  they
meete  with  the  River  Telta :  on  the  banke  whereof  they
have  builded  a  Castle,  named  Comgof-scoi.  The  garrison
Souldiers  of  which  Castle,  together  with  the  Inhabitants
of  Narim,  about  seven  yeeres  past,  were  commanded  by
the  Governour  of  Siberia  to  travell  East,  and  diligently
to  search  what  unknowne  Nations  dwelt  in  those  parts.
Therefore  travelling  through  certaine  vast  Deserts,  for
the  space  of  tenne  weekes  or  there  abouts,  passing  in  the
way  through  many  faire  Countreys,  many  Woods,  and
Rivers,  at  length  they  espied  certaine  Cottages  set  up  in
the  fields,  and  certaine  Hords  or  Companies  of  people.
But  because  they  had  Samoieds  and  Tartars  for  their
guides,  which  were  acquainted  with  those  places,  they  were
not  afraid.  The  people  came  unto  them  reverently,  and
with  humble  behaviour,  and  signified  by  the  Samoieds  and
Tartars,  that  they  were  called  Tingoesi,  and  that  their
dwelling  was  upon  the  banke  of  the  great  River  Jenisce,
which  they  said  did  spring  from  the  South  South-east,  but
that  they  knew  not  the  head  thereof.  These  people  were
deformed  with  swellings  under  their  throats,  and  in  their
speech  they  thratled  like  Turkie-cocks.  Their  language
seemed  not  much  to  differ  from  the  Samoieds,  which  also
understood  many  of  their  words.

Jenisce  being  a  River  farre  bigger  then  Obi,  hath  high
mountaines  on  the  East,  among  which  are  some  that  cast
out  fire  and  brimstone. The  Countrey  is  plaine  to  the

186

A DESCRIPTION OF SIBERIA  a.d.

1612.

West,  and  exceeding  fertile,  stored  with  plants,  flowers,

and  trees  of  divers  kinds. Also  many  strange  fruits  do

grow  therein,  and  there  is  great  abundance  of  rare  Fowles.

Jenisce  in  the  spring  overfloweth  the  fields  about  seventie  The  overflow-

leagues, in like manner as they report unto us, as  ™g  of  Jenisce

Nilus  doth  Egipt. Wherwith  the  Tingoesi  being  well  tn  thf  5pnng '
o  r  t»  ■  1 • 1 as  it  may seem

acquainted, doe keepe beyond the River, and in the  j-rm  meited
mountaines,  untill  it  decrease,  and  then  returne,  and  bring  Snow.
downe  their  heards  of  Cattell  into  the  plaines.

The  Tingoesi  being  a  very  gentle  people,  by  the  per-
swasion  of  the  Somoieds,  without  delay  submitted  them-
selves to  the  same  Governours  which  they  obeyed,  whom
they  reverenced  as  a  kind  of  Gods.  But  what  God  they
worship,  or  with  what  rites,  it  is  uncertaine,  neither  as
yet  can  bee  knowne,  the  Moscovites  being  negligent
searchers  into  such  things.

Neither  hereafter  will  I  marvell,  though  the  Streight  of  Reason  why
Waygats  bee  stopped  up to the  North-east,  with  such WaWts  \*
huge  Mountaines  of  Ice,  since  the  Rivers  Obi  and  Jenisce,  \°ce
and  very  many  more,  whose  names  are  not  yet  knowne,  jce  60.  or  50.
powre  out  so  huge  a  quantitie  thereof,  that  in  a  manner  fathoms  thickc
it  is  incredible. For  it  commeth  to  passe  in  the  beginning  in  the  height
of  the  spring,  that  in  places  neere  unto  the  Sea,  the  Ice  °* a^^ats'
through  the  excessive  thicknesse  and  multitude  thereof,
doth  carrie  downe  whole  woods  before  it. And  without
doubt  this  is  the  cause, that  about the shoares  of  the
Streight  of  Waygats,  so  great  abundance  of  floting  wood
is  every  where  seene. And  whereas  in  that  Streight  neere
unto  Nova  Zembla,  it  is  extreame  cold,  it  is  no  marvell,
if  in  regard  of  the  narrownesse  of  the  Streight,  so  huge
heapes  of  Ice  are  gathered  and  frozen  together,  that  in
the  end  they  grow  to  sixtie,  or  at  least  to  fiftie  fathoms
thicknesse,  as  this  present  yeere  (161 2)  they  measured  the
same,  which  at  the  cost  of  Isaac  Lamer  went  thither  in
a  small  Barke,  in  whose  companie  the  said  Isaac  Lamer  [III.iii.528.]
would  have  sent  mee,  but  I  would  not. For  I  am  readie
to  prove,  that  this  is  no  passible  way,  and  that  they  will
still  lose  their  labour,  whosoever  shall  attempt  the  same,

187

A.D.

1612.

The  first
voyage  East-
ward beyond
the  River
Jenisce.
Many  Nations
dwell  toward
the  South,
which  are  in
warre  one  with
another. Such
are  the  Zaga-
tay  Tartars,
as  before  in
Goes  is  seene.

The  second
voyage  East
beyond  the
River  Jenisce.

Certaine
people  taken.

The  River
Pisida.

Bells.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

unlesse  they  take  another  course  in  the  businesse.  But
let  us  returne  to  our  purpose.

Furthermore,  those  whom  I  mentioned  before,  under-
tooke  a  long  Journey  beyond  the  River  Jenisce  Eastward,
and  were  somewhat  afraid  to  turne  to  the  South,  taking
with  them  certaine  Tingoesies,  by  whom  they  were
informed,  that  many  Nations  dwelt  toward  the  South,
which  differed  much  from  them,  whose  Kings  were  most
commonly  in  warre  one  with  another.  But  having
travelled  certaine  dayes  to  no  great  purpose,  at  length
they  returned  home ;  Yet  before  their  returne  they  gave
order  to  the  Tingoesies,  to  search  those  Countreys  more
thorowly ;  who  promise  that  they  would  doe  so  :  And
they  renewed  the  league  which  formerly  they  had  made
with  the  Moscovites.  The  Moscovites  at  their  departure,
left  divers  of  their  people  in  those  parts,  and  also  certaine
Samoieds  and  Tartars  their  confederates,  after  they  had
bestowed  some  small  gifts  among  the  Tingoesies.

The  yeere  following,  the  Tingoesies  sent  divers  of  their
owne  people  Eastward :  who  travelling  somewhat  farther
then  they  had  done  before,  at  length  found  another  mightie
River,  somewhat  lesser  then  Jenisce,  but  as  swift  as  it :
And  following  the  course  thereof  some  few  dayes,  they
lighted  upon  certaine  people  whom  they  tooke,  being
swifter  a  foot  then  they :  But  they  could  not  understand
their  language,  saving  that  by  certaine  signes  and  words
of  the  Salvages,  which  often  repeated  om  om,  they  con-
jectured that  on  the  other  side  of  the  River,  they  heard
it  often  thunder.  They  added  also,  that  they  had  often
heard  the  noyse  of  men  in  those  parts :  And  pointing
to  the  River  with  their  fingers,  they  often  repeated  the
word  Pisida  :  whereby  the  Tingoesies  gathered,  that  that
should  bee  the  name  of  the  River ;  but  by  the  voyces  om
om,  the  Moscovites  did  afterward  gather,  that  they  were
knollings  of  Bells.  The  Tingoesies  at  their  returne  from
thence,  carried  with  them  divers  of  the  people  of  that
Countrey,  which  died  all  by  the  way,  either  for  feare,  or
through  change  of  ayre. The  Tingoesies  were  verie  sorrie

A DESCRIPTION OF SIBERIA  a.d.

1612.

for  their  deaths. For  at  their  returne  they  affirmed,  that  The  descrip-
they  were  men  of  good  understanding,  well  set,  with  small  twn  °f^e
eyes,  flat  faced,  browne  colour,  and  enclining  to  tawnie. ^nfupon*
When  the  Moscovites  understood  these  things  by  the  tne  River
Samoieds,  which  returned  into  Siberia  out  of  the  Countrey  Pisida. Such
of  the  Tingoesies, eftsoones  they  were  stirred  up  with  are  the  PeoP!e
a  great desire to search out the farther  parts of that  °lQttheT^lars
Countrey,  wherefore  they  became  sutors  to  the  Governour,  ana>  chinoh.
that  they  might  bee  sent  thither  with  some  others  joyned
with  them. Hee  presently  yeelded  to  their  request,  grant-
ing  unto them a certaine companie of Souldiers, and
enjoyned  them  curiously  to  search  out  all  things,  and  to
take  with  them  Tingoesies,  Samoieds,  and  Tartars. So
beeing  about  seven  hundred  men,  they  passed  the  River  The  third
Obi,  and  came  to  the  River  Jenisce  through  the  countreys  voyage  beyond
of  the  Samoieds  and  Tingoesies. And  passing  the  River,  J*msce
they  marched  forth  Eastward,  having  the  Tingoesies  for
their  guides  : which  did  not  onely  serve  them  as  guides,
but  also  plentifully  provided  all  the  company  with  victuals,
taking  with  wonderfull  dexteritie,  Fowles,  Goats,  Reyne
Deere, and such like wilde beasts : as also no small
quantitie  of  fish  out  of  the  Rivers  which  they  met  in
the  way. Having  travailed  as  farre  as  the  River  Pisida,
they  pitched  their  Tents  on  the  banks  thereof,  with  pur-
pose to  stay  there  till  it  were  passable,  the  Ice  being  shortly
to  breake  up,  because  the  spring  was  at  hand,  at  which
time  they  came  thither,  yet  they  durst  not  passe  over  the

River  Pisida  ;  having  now  plainly  heard  the  sound,  whereof  , e  0W™%°J
1  1  • 1  1 r  1-11  • 1 • 1 1 brazen  Bells:

they  were  advertised  before  :  which  they  certainly  judged  0f  which  they

to  bee  nothing  else  but  the  towling  of  Brazen  Bells ;  and  have  in

when  the  wind  blew  from  the  farther  side  of  Pisida,  they  China,  and

sometimes  heard  the  noyse  of  men  and  horses. Moreover  ^lrha{s  tn  the

they  saw  certayne  sayles,  though  but  a  few ;  whereby  they  aj,ove  fL

conjectured  that  they  were  vessels,  which  sayled  downe  Horses  in

the streame. They sayd further, that the sayles  were  Pisida.

square,  like  the  Indian  sayles,  as  wee  suppose. But  seeing  Vesseis sayling

no  people  at  all  on  that  side  of  the  River  where  they ™th Square"

remained,  after  they  had  staied  there  a  certaine  space,  and  sayles.

A.D.

[6l2.

They  came
not  home  till
Autumne.
The  plesant-
nesse  of  this
Countrey  in
Aprill  and
May.

[III.iii.529.]

The  opinion  of
the  Author  of
this  Story.

The  fourth
Voyage  to  the
River  Pisida.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

had  perceived  that  in  the  spring  time  the  River  did  greatly-
swell  (which  neverthelesse  they  can  hardly  affirme  for  a
certaintie,  since  the  shoare  is  high  on  both  sides : )  At
length  by  very  great  journeys,  and  yet  not  before  Autumne
they  returned  home  to  Siberia ;  reporting,  and  that  upon
their  oathes,  That  in  the  moneths  of  April  and  May,  they
were  very  much  delighted  with  the  exceeding  faire  shew
of  that  Countrey ;  And  that  they  had  seene  therein  many
rare  Plants,  Flowers,  Fruits,  Trees,  Fowles,  and  wild
Beasts.  But  the  Moscovites  are  nothing  curious  in  such
things,  as  men  that  seeke  after  nothing  but  gaine,  in  all
things  else  very  negligent  and  rude.

These  newes  being  brought  to  the  Court  of  Moscovia,
the  Emperour  Boris,  and  the  Noblemen  that  were  with
him,  much  wondering  thereat,  and  inflamed  with  a  great
desire  to  search  out  exactly  all  particulars,  resolved  the
yeere  next  ensuing,  to  send  Ambassadours  thither,  which
should  carrie  presents  with  them,  and  should  take  Tartars,
Samoieds,  and  Tingoesies  in  their  companie.  And  they
were  enjoyned  to  search  out  the  further  side  of  the  River
Pisida,  and  to  make  a  league  of  friendship  with  the  Kings
if  they  found  any,  and  set  downe  in  writing  all  things
that  they  could  observe  by  the  way,  and  should  make
report  of  them  most  exactly.  But  these  things  did  not
take  effect,  because  of  the  breaking  out  of  the  civill  warres,
among  the  Moscovites  in  the  meane  season.

I  am  of  opinion,  that  in  this  countrey  is  the  beginning,
and  the  bounds  of  the  Kingdome  of  Cataia,  which
bordereth  upon  China.  Yet  I  feare  the  Moscovites  will
lose  their  labour,  if  they  ever  returne  thither.  But  time
will  declare  the  event  hereof.

Yet  for  all  this,  by  the  commandement  of  the  Gover-
nours,  even  in  the  time  of  this  warre,  there  was  a  voyage
made  into  those  parts,  many  Inhabitants  of  Siberia  being
employed  in  the  same,  who  passing  over  the  River  Jenisce,
travelled  further  on  foot,  divers  of  whom  died  by  the
way,  being  not  accustomed  to  hardnesse.  These  also
found  many  things  agreeable  to  the  relation  of  the  former..

190

A DESCRIPTION OF SIBERIA  a.d.

1612.

And  they  likewise  did  oftentimes  heare  the  towlings  of

brazen  Bells. But  upon  the  disswasions  of  the  Tingoesies  The  totaling  of

they  durst  not  passe  the  River : But  they  stayed  awhile  Brazen  Bells.

in  the  Mountains,  out  of  which  they  saw  oftentimes  flames  Mountaynes

of  fire  ascend  ;  &  they  brought  thence  some  small  quantitie  c*sttng  '*'

of  brimstone,  and  of  touch-stone  :  so  that  some  rich  Mines  ^ames  °^u

seeme  to  bee  in  those  hills. Moreover,  the  Governour

of  Siberia  caused  certaine  covered  Boats  to  bee  made,  and

commanded  them  to  saile  downe  by  the  shoare  of  the  River  Thefift

Obi,  in  the  first  beginning  of  the  spring,  and  to  coast  the  0°lafn/^e

same  continually  till  they  came  to  the  River  of  Jenisce ;  Sea-coast  to

wherein  they  should  afterward  saile  certaine  dayes,  dis-  the  River

charging  it  selfe  (as  hee  thought)  into  the  sea. He  sent  Jenisce.

others  likewise  to  travell  over  Land  : giving  commande-

ment  to  both  of  them  before  they  went :  To  the  Land-men,

that  they  should  stay  by  the  Rivers  side  untill  the  Boates

arrived ;  and  that  if  they  did  not  arrive  there,  then  after

one  yeere  they  should  returne. To  them  that  were  in

the  Boates,  over  whom  he  made  one  Lucas  Captayne,  he  Lucas  Captain

gave  in  charge,  diligently  to  discover  the  Coast,  and  what-  °J?C . ,

o  o •> o /  '  Discovene  oy

soever  thereon  was  worthy  to  bee  observed. They  did  Sea>
as  they  were  enjoyned. And  the Mariners  arriving  at
the  mouth  of  the  River  Jenisce,  met  with  certayne  of  them
which travelled over  Land, which were sent before in
Boats  and  Skiffes  downe  the  River.

In  their  journey,  they  found  all  things  in  a  manner
to  fall  out  as  the  Governour  had  fore-told.  But  Lucas
being  dead  by  the  way,  and  some  others,  they  thought
it  the  best  course,  for  both  of  the  Companies  to  returne
the  same  way  that  they  came  :  And  when  they  came  home
into  Siberia,  they  declared  unto  the  Governour  the  whole
successe  of  their  journey :  which  caused  the  same  to  be
sent  unto  the  Emperour :  And  this  Relation  is  layed  up
among  the  Treasures  of  Moscovia  untill  these  Warres  bee
ended ;  and  then,  as  it  is  thought,  it  shall  bee  examined.
But  wee  feare  that  by  this  time  it  is  perished,  which  if
it  be  so,  truly  it  is  much  to  be  lamented,  in  regard  that
they  have  found  so  many  rare  and  sundry  Hands,  Rivers,

191

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

Fowles,  and  wild  beasts,  and  that  farre  beyond  the  River

Jenisce.

Taes  River Moreover, the  River  Taes  falleth  into  the  River  of

jalleth  into Q^  springing  as  it  seemeth,  out  of  places  neere  unto

the  River  Jenisce,  and  out  of  a  great  Wood  in  those

parts ;  out  of  which  Wood  another  River  seemeth  also  to

have  his  Fountayne  not  farre  from  the  River  Taes,  and

falleth  into  the  River  of  Jenisce. So  that  even  from  Obi

The  River they  travell  by  water  along  the  Coast  of  the  Samoieds,

Torgahe anc[  passing  only  two  leagues  over  Lands,  they  meet  with

fa  etiinto  t^  River  Torgalse,  downe  which  with  the  streame  they
J  enisce .  © •*  j

An  Over-hall  ^  mto  ^e  River  Jenisce.  And  this  is  a  very  easie
of  two  leagues  way,  and  lately  found  out  by  the  Samoieds,  and  the
only.  Tingoesies.

Doubtlesse  (it  is  to  be  lamented)  that  the  Hollanders
have  not  had  good  successe  in  passing  the  Streight  of
Way-gats ;  but  surely  they  know  not  the  right  way  to
attempt  the  same. For  if  they  attempt  it  by  shippes,
though  it  were  an  hundred  times,  it  would  hardly  once
The  right  way  take  effect. But  if  they  would  throughly  discover  these
to  discover  the  Countreyes, then  they  should  stay  two  or  three  yeares
tTt  ~6aSt about  Petsora  and  Way-gats,  where  they  should  not  want
Note'.  good  Havens,  nor  Victualls  :  and  from  thence  they  should

send  out  some  with  small  Boates  to  discover  the  further
parts,  by  the  very  example  of  the  Russes,  whose  Friend-
ship if  they  would  procure  unto  themselves,  they  should
easily  find  Guides  and  Pilots :  and  so  at  length  all  these
Coasts  would  throughly  bee  discovered.

Doubtlesse  goodly  Countreyes  would  bee  found  out,
and  not  only  Hands,  but  the  Mayne  Land  also.  Yet
there  is  just  cause  to  doubt,  whether  America  above  China
joyne  not  with  some  of  the  three  parts  of  the  old  World  :
As  wee  see  Africa  joyned  unto  Asia,  with  a  narrow  necke
of  Land  upon  the  Redde  Sea.  And  doubtlesse,  this
seemeth  likely  to  bee  true.  For  who  can  affirme,  that
they  bee  separated?  Saving  that  they  have  found  some
things  in  the  Writings  of  prophane  Authors,  whereby  it
may  be  prooved,  and  bring  many  Arguments  from  thence.

192

A NOTE OF RUSSIAN TRAVELS  a.d.

1612.

And  though  these  parts  bee  not  joyned  together,  yet  they

must  needs  bee  divided  with  some  small  Streight.

§. III.  [III.iii.530.]

A  Note  of  the  Travels  of  the  Russes  over  Land,
and  by  Water  from  Mezen,  neere  the  Bay  of
Saint  Nicholas  to  Pechora,  to  Obi,  to  Yenisse,
and  to  the  River  Geta,  even  unto  the  Frontiers
of  Cataia  ;  brought  into  England  by  Master
John  Mericke,  the  English  Agent  for  Mosco-
vie,  and  translated  out  of  the  Russe  by  Richard
Finch.

Rom  Mezen  to  Pechora,  is  a  thousand  Versts ;  and  Mezen.
the  same  is  travelled  with  Reyne  Deere. From
Pechora  to  Montnaja  Reca,  or  The  troubled  River,  Pechora.

and  to  the  parts  of  Mongosey,  it  is  travelled  in  Boats Montnaja
called Coaches in seven Weekes. At this place is a  Reca-
certayne  Over-hal,  where  the  foresaid  Boats  or  Vessels  are  The  Voloc,  or
drawne  over  by  men. Out  off  Montnaja  Reca,  or  The Over-hall.
troubled  River,  passing  this  Over-hall, they  enter  into
Zelena  Reca,  or  the  Greene  River. From  Zelena  Reca,  Zelena  Reca.
or  the  Greene  River  to  Obi, is  three  Weekes  rowing, qj,\  River.
running  downe  with  the  Current ;  but  with  a  faire  wind
it  is  no  more  but  three  dayes  and  three  nights  Journey.
From  Obi  to  Taes  Castle,  is  a  Weekes  rowing. From  Tats  River
Taes  Castle  to  the  River  Yemissey  upon  long  Woodden  and  Castle.
Pattens  through  the  Snow,  is  three  Weekes  travaile. But
through  the  deepe  Channell  in  the  afore-said  Vessels,  called
Coaches,  is  foure  Weekes  travayle. It  bringeth  them  to
a place, called  Toorou-hansko Zeemovia, that is, The  Toorou-hansko
Wintering place of one called Toorouhan. Having  Zeemovia.
travelled  to  this  Toorou-hansko  Zeemovia,  they  come  out
on  the  backe  side  to  a  place  called,  The  River  of  Tin-  Tingoosie
goosie, being a stonie or Rocky River, which falleth  River-
into the River Yenisey. In that place live the Tin-  Tenisey
goosies,  and  people  of  the  afore-said  Land  of  Tingoosi.  River,
xiii  193  n

A.D.

1612.

The

Boulashies.
Seeahee.
Tenisey  the
greater  and
/esse.
Imbaki.
Ostaki.
Geta  River.

Summers
travell  from
Tingosey  to
Geta.
Vessels  of
greater  bur-
then drawne
with  the  Rope,
a  thing  used  in
China.

PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

Beyond  them  live  a  people  called  The  Boulashees :  And
beyond  the  Boulashees  inhabit  the  people  of  Seelahee.
These  people  report  concerning  Yenisey  the  Great,  and
Yenisey  the  Lesser :  That  beyond  this  fore-said  Yenisey
inhabit  the  people  Imbaki  and  the  Ostaki,  which  are  a
kind  of  Tartars.  Also  beyond  the  Tingoosies  is  a  River
called  Geta,  which  was  travailed  by  the  Russes  of  Vashen,
and  Russes  of  Pechora.  These  men  by  report  lived  in
the  parts  of  Geta,  sixe  yeeres.  After  which  one  of  the
Russes  of  Vashen,  named  Wolfe,  returned  into  Siberia ;
and  he  reported,  that  he  was  travailing  from  Tingoosie
to  Geta  a  Summer.  Likewise,  this  said  Wolfe  reported,
that  a  Samoied  told  him,  that  in  Yenisey  the  greater  were
Vessels  of  a  great  burthen,  seene  to  be  drawne  with  the
Rope,  by  a  very  great  number  of  people  :  but  hee  could  not
tell  what  people  they  were,  neither  whither  they  did  intend
to  travaile  with  the  said  Vessels.

Chap.  VIII.

A  Voyage  made  to  Pechora  1611.  Written  by
William  Gourdon  of  Hull,  appointed  chiefe
Pilot,  for  Discoverie  to  Ob,  &c.

He  eleventh  of  Aprill  we  weighed  Anchor
at  Blacke-wall  in  the  River  of  Thames,
in  a  ship  called  the  Amitie  ;  whereof  James
Vadun  was  Master,  and  sayling  along  the
Coasts  of  England,  Scotland,  Norway,  and
Finmarke,  on  the  eleventh  of  the  next
moneth  of  May,  wee  found  our  selves  in
the  latitude  of  7 1 .  degrees  40.  minutes.

The  twelfth,  wee  ranne  fortie  eight  leagues  North
North-east,  the  wind  being  at  South  South-east,  and  found
our  selves  in  the  latitude  of  73.  degrees  42.  minutes,  and
at  night  wee  had  shoaldings  of  Cherie  Hand :  for  wee
were  enjoyned  by  our  Commission  to  touch  there,  although
it  were  three  degrees  to  the  North  out  of  our  way.

194

WILLIAM GOURDON

The  thirteenth,  being  Whit-sunday  it  cleered  up,  and
then  we  did  see  Cherie  Hand  six  leagues  East  South-east
from  us.

The  fourteenth,  being  faire  weather,  we  stood  to  the
Northwards,  thinking  to  have  gone  on  shoare,  but  we
could  not  for  Ice,  and  labouring  to  Land  on  the  South
side  of  the  Hand,  wee  met  with  Jonas  Poole  about  Eeven-
ing  in  the  Elizabeth,  who  came  as  then  to  the  Hand,
and  was  set  forth  by  the  Right  Worshipfull  Company  of
our  Russian  Merchants,  to  discover  further  Northward,
from  eightie  degrees  toward  the  North  Pole.  Then  we
stood  to  the  Eastward,  where  wee  found  great  store  of
Ice.

The  fifteenth,  we  spent  on  the  South-side  of  the  Hand,
in  hope  of  the  arrivall  of  the  Marie  Margaret,  which
being  a  ship  of  nine  score  Tunnes,  was  set  forth  very
chargeably  by  the  aforesaid  Russian  Company,  and  had
in  her  sixe  Baskes,  being  excellent  Whale-killers  of  Saint
John  de  Luz,  for  the  killing  of  the  Whale  on  the  Coast
of  Greenland,  in  a  Road  called  Crosse  Road,  standing
exceeding  farre  to  the  North,  even  in  the  latitude  of  79.
degrees  and  better.  The  same  day  at  night,  seeing  that
there  we  could  doe  no  good,  we  determined  to  proceed
on  our  Voyage  for  the  River  of  Pechora :  and  Letters
being  given  one  to  the  other  for  Testimoniall  of  our
meeting  in  that  place,  we  left  Jonas  Pooley,  and  directed
our  course  to  the  Eastward.

The  two  and  twentieth  of  May,  we  came  to  a  small
Hand,  called  Bigs  Hole  by  Tapani  Harbour.  The  three
and  twentieth,  we  arrived  at  the  He  of  Kildin  in  Lappia.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  Josias  Logan,  which  was
appointed  Factor  for  Pechora,  and  my  selfe  with  two  more,
went  to  Olena,  and  stayed  there  all  the  five  and  twentieth,
being  Saturday,  where  wee  found  a  ship  of  Yarmouth,
whereof  James  Wright  of  Hull  was  Master,  of  whom  we
learned  the  proceeding  of  the  Hollanders.

The  seventh  of  June,  in  the  morning  we  had  sight  of
the  Coast  of  Lappia,  a  little  short  of  Cape  Comfort,  and

i95

A.D.
l6ll.

Cherie  Hand.

Jonas  Poole.

Six
Biscainers.

Crosse  Road.
[III.iii.531.;

May.

Bigs  Hole.
Kildin  in
Lappia.

Olena.

June.

Cape  Comfort.

A.D.
l6ll.

A  ship  of
Amsterdam.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Callinos.

met  with  a  ship  of  Amsterdam,  by  which  we  sent  Letters
to  Master  John  Mericke  our  English  Agent,  then  Resfdent
in  Colmogro ;  and  we  had  two  Hogsheads  of  Beere  of
them.

The  eight,  we  plyed  to  Cape  Comfort,  the  wind  at
South-east.

The  ninth  being  Sunday,  in  the  morning  wee  put  off
from  the  Coast  of  Lappia,  to  crosse  over  the  White  Sea,
to  the  Cape  of  Callinos  corruptly,  and  commonly  called
Candinos.  At  noone  we  passed  through  some  Ice,  the
weather  being  thicke  and  foggie.

The  eleventh,  we  plyed  to  the  Cape  of  Callinos,  passing
through  much  Ice,  the  wind  at  North  North-east.  And
therefore  wee  thought  it  better  to  goe  to  the  Southward
againe :  and  in  the  Eevening  we  came  to  an  Anchor  in
ten  fathomes.  This  night  wee  had  a  sore  storme ;  the
winde  at  North-east.

The  twelfth,  in  the  morning  we  weighed,  and  in  weigh-
ing brake  our  Anchor :  and  then  wee  stood  to  the  South-
ward, and  came  to  an  Anchor ;  and  at  night  wee  went
on  shoare  for  Wood,  and  Water,  where  was  good
store  of  Drift  Wood :  And  within  a  ledge  of  Rockes  on
Ten  Lodias  of  the  West-side  of  Callinos  there  lay  ten  Lodias  or  Russe
Phega  bound  smaU  shippes,  some  fourteene  or  fifteene  Tunnes  the
Zembk  biggest  (of  a  Towne  called  Pinega)  all  which  were  bound

for  Nova  Zembla,  to  kill  the  Morsse :  with  the  men  of
which  Fleete  wee  had  some  conference,  and  did  see  their
Provisions :  which  were  Launces  of  their  fashion,  and
Harping  Irons  ;  their  Victuals  were  Salt-fish,  Butter,  Bacon,
Meale,  their  Drinke  Quasse.

The  sixteenth,  in  the  morning  wee  weighed  and  stood
our  course  for  the  lie  of  Colgoieve,  the  wind  being  at
South  South-west,  and  did  find  the  Ice  that  was  close
to  the  shoare  to  bee  open :  but  at  night  finding  that  we
could  not  sayle  our  course  for  the  Ice,  we  thought  it
better  to  stay,  and  so  came  to  an  Anchor.

The  seventeenth,  wee  weighed  in  the  morning,  and
stood  along  the  shoare,  which  did  lye  South-east  by  East,

196

They  goe  on
shoare.

WILLIAM GOURDON  a.d.

1611.

and  North-west  by  West.  And  in  the  after-noone,  wee
went  on  shoare  with  our  shallop,  and  came  to  a  River,
which  we  called  Hakluyts  River,  where  wee  did  see  cer-
tayne  Samoieds,  with  their  Deere  :  but  when  they  perceived
us,  they  fled  into  the  Land,  carrying  with  them  such
things  as  in  haste  they  could  get  together :  but  left  most
of  their  necessaries,  as  Bowes,  Arrowes,  long  Speares,
wanting  Iron  heads  burnt  at  the  end,  Harping  Irons,
Wimbles,  and  Morsse-skinnes,  lying  hid,  some  in  one
place,  some  in  another :  which  wee  caused  our  men  to
uncover,  and  would  not  suffer  them  to  take  any  thing
away ;  only  I  tooke  the  Pizzell  of  a  Morsse  which  they
had  lately  killed ;  and  Josias  Logan  left  a  Knife,  that  they
might  not  shunne  us  hereafter.  The  same  Eevening  we
anchored  and  stayed  all  night.

The  eighteenth,  wee  weighed,  and  at  noone  wee  came
to  an  Harbour ;  which,  as  wee  thinke,  was  the  very  same  A  good
where  Master  Stephen  Burrow  was  in  his  Discoverie  of  Harbour.
Vaigatz,  and  Nova  Zembla,  1556.  where  there  is  twelve,  burrow
or  thirteene  foot  at  high  water  upon  the  Barre,  and  within
six or seven fathomes. Also in this  place  were three
Lodias  of  Pinega,  which  when  they  saw  us  come  in,  rowed  Three  Lodias
out,  and  at  night  returned,  and  some  of  their  men  came  of  Pinega.
aboord  of  us,  and  told  us  that  they  could  not  passe  for
Ice ;  and  said,  that  they  were  bound  for  Sharskai  Gooba,  Sharkai
or  Shar  Bay  to  fish  for  certayne  fishes ;  which  they  call  Gooba,  which
Omilie,  which  are  somewhat  like  a  Shad,  and  for  Morsses.  ^j"  e  &eat

The  twentieth,  Josias  Logan  and  my  selfe  went  over  Hayuburi.
to  the  Mayne,  which  was  distant  two  leagues,  and  came  They  land  the
to  a  great  River  in  67.  degrees  and  40.  minutes,  where  third  time.
there  had  beene  people : and  there  we  saw  foure  or  five  ^8reat
great  white  fishes  swimming,  which  are  foure  or  five  yards
long,  and  called  by  the  Russes  Belluga,  whereof  they  make
Oyle,  whereof  afterward  we  found  at  Pechora,  great  store
to  be  spoyled.

The  one  and  twentieth,  we  sent  our  men  for  Wood,
for  there  was  good  store  of  Flote-wood  as  we  had  found  Fhte-wood.
all  the  Coast  along,  but  none  growing.

197

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

The  two  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning  we  came  over
the  Barre,  the  winde  at  South  South-east,  directing  our
course  for  the  He  of  Colgieve ;  and  at  noone  wee  passed
through  much  Ice,  which  lay  so  thicke  that  wee  could
not  sayle,  but  tooke  in  our  sayles,  and  made  fast  our  ship
to  a  piece  of  Ice.

The  three  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning  wee  set  sayle,

and  plyed  to  the  Wind-ward,  the  wind  at  South-east,  with

raine :  and  at  night  wee  mored  to  a  Cake  of  Ice.

[III.iii.532.] The  foure  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning  we  set  sayle,

and  plyed  to  wind-ward,  the  wind  at  South-west  to  get

cleere  of  the  Ice ;  and  at  noone  we  observed  and  found

our  selves  to  bee  in  67.  degrees  12.  minutes,  and  in  the

after-noone  we  had  sight  of  the  Land  againe,  being  foure

leagues  to  the  Southwards  of  the  aforesaid  Harbour ;  and

A  sore  tyde finding  the  Tyde  to  set  very  sore  upon  the  shoare  to  the

upon  t  e Westward,  we  stood  to  the  Eastward,  bearing  through

the  Ice,  and  at  twelve  at  night  wee  mored  to  a  piece  of

Ice.

The  Hve  and  twentieth,  we  loosed  and  sayled  to  the
Eastward,  till  we  found  the  Ice  so  thick,  that  we  could
not  passe  further :  then  we  made  fast  to  a  piece  of  Ice  :
the  wind  at  North  North-east,  thicke  fogge,  and  some
raine.  The  six  and  twentieth,  we  set  our  fore  top-sayle,
the  wind  at  North  North-east,  blowing  hard  and  thicke
fogge :  we  stood  sometimes  one  way,  sometimes  another,
as  we  could  find  the  Ice  open ;  and  at  noone  we  had  sight
of  the  shoare,  being  foure  or  five  leagues  off,  and  the
Ice  lying  so  thicke,  that  we  could  make  no  meanes  to
get  farther  from  the  shoare :  wherefore  wee  made  fast  to
a  great  Cake  of  Ice.  The  seven  and  twentieth,  wee  lay
still,  the  Ice  lying  very  close,  with  thicke  foggie  weather :
the  wind  at  North  North-west.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning  it  was  cleere,
and  the  Land  did  beare  North  by  West  seven  leagues
off,  and  then  we  set  sayle,  passing  to  the  Eastward  till
noone :  then  we  made  fast  to  a  piece  of  Ice,  it  being  very
foggie : the  wind  at  West  North-west. And  the  same

198

WILLIAM GOURDON  ad.

1611.
day  at  eight  in  the  after-noone  wee  loosed  from  the  Ice,
it  being  cleere,  the  wind  at  North-west. And  at  mid-
night we  got  cleere  of  the  Ice,  keeping  our  course  East
North-east.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  at  eight  in  the  morning,  we
had  sight  of  Cape  Swetinos,  the  winde  at  North  North-  Cape
west,  with  thicke  foggie  weather :  At  noone,  finding  the  ^zvetmos-
Ice  to  lye  close  to  the  shoare,  we  cast  about  to  the  West-
ward. And  at  eight  in  the  Eevening,  wee  came  to  an
Anchor  in  tenne  fathomes ;  and  then  I  went  on  shoare,  William
where  there  were  two  Russian  Crosses : the  Land  was  Gourdan  goeth
smooth,  and  full  of  fresh  Ponds,  being  a  kind  of  white  ^/^*
Chalke  Cliffes. At our  comming  aboord, we  weighed  crosses.
and  stood  neerer  to  the  shoare  because  of  the  Ice.

The  thirtieth,  in  the  morning  the  Ice  came  so  extreamely
upon  us,  that  we  could  not  weigh ;  for  our  men  being
cast  from  the  Capstan,  our  Cable  brake,  and  so  wee  lost
an  Anchor.  Then  seeing  wee  could  not  passe  to  the
Eastward,  wee  stood  to  the  Westward  of  Cape  Swetinos,  j  decpe  Bay
into  the  afore-said  deepe  Bay  in  seven  fathomes :  the  Westward  of
wind  at  East  North-east,  cleere  weather.  ^aPem

The  first  of  July,  we  went  on  shoare  to  see  if  there  ^[1*1]  on
were  any  thing  to  take  notice  of :  but  wee  found  nothing  Land  againe.
worth  the  going. For  only  we  saw  a  wild  Deere,  and
an  House  of  Wood  after  the  Russe  fashion,  where  people  An  house  of
had  beene. The  second,  likewise  we  rode  still,  and  going  Wood.
againe  on  shoare  we  did  see  the  Ice  all  gone  to  the  East-
ward ;  and  so  came  aboord. The  third,  at  sixe  in  the
morning  we  weighed,  the  wind  at  East  North-east,  and
plyed  through  some  Ice :  and  at  foure  in  the  after-noone
we  got  cleere  of  it :  and  at  eight  of  the  clocke  wee  came
to  an  Anchor,  it  being  calme  and  cleere  weather : then
I  went  on  shoare,  where  we  were  first ;  and  came  aboord  They  goe  on
because  of  the  great  abundance  of  Muskitos  or  Gnats. At  Landthe sixth

our  comming  having  the  winde  at South-west,  we set  u™f' , r
1  1 °  1 1 °i 1  Abundance  of

sayle  and  stood  along  the  shoare.  Muskitos.

The fourth, we sayled along the shoare with faire

weather,  having  the  winde  variable. The  fifth,  wee  plyed

199

A.D.
l6ll,

Crosses  found
and  cert  ay  ne
Russes  at  the
mouth  of
Pechora.

The  depth  of
the  Barre  of
the  River  of
Pechora.
They  passe
over  the
Barre,  and
ride  in  six
fathoms  water.

They  goe  up
the  River  of
Pechora,  over
The  Dry  Sea.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  the  Eastward,  wind  at  North-east  by  East  faire  weather.
The  sixth,  wee  plyed  along  the  shoare,  the  wind  at  North
by  East.  And  in  the  after-noone  wee  passed  through
much  Ice.  The  seventh,  we  plyed  through  the  Ice  to  the
Eastward,  the  winde  at  East  North-east,  thicke  and  foggie.
The  eight,  with  cleere  weather,  the  winde  at  North  North-
east, we  plyed  to  the  Eastward ;  and  at  noone  observed
the  Sunne  having  69.  degrees  40.  minutes :  At  Eevening
we  had  sight  of  the  Land  to  the  Eastward  of  the  River
of  Pechora ;  and  thinking  to  get  into  the  shoare  we  could
not  for  the  shoald  water.

The  ninth,  in  the  morning  we  stood  backe  to  find  the
Barre  or  entrance  of  the  River  of  Pechora.  And  in  the
after-noone,  seeing  the  Sand  over  the  Ice,  which  was  not
broken  off  from  the  shoare,  I  went  thither  with  my  shallop,
and  going  on  shoare,  we  espyed  three  Crosses,  and  certayne
Russes  walking  upon  the  Sand ;  who  told  us,  that  that
was  the  place  that  we  desired :  and  one  of  them  came
aboord  our  ship  to  bring  us  over  the  Barre.  But  comming
to  shoald  water,  wee  durst  not  trust  his  skill,  but  stood
backe  againe,  and  came  to  an  Anchor  in  foure  fathomes.

The  tenth,  in  the  morning  I  went  to  sound  the  Barre ;
where  we  had  eleven  and  tenne,  and  in  one  place  but  nine
foot  water.  And  comming  aboord  wee  set  sayle  to  come
in.  And  in  going  over  the  Barre  we  were  on  ground ;
but,  God  be  thanked,  wee  got  well  over,  and  came  to  an
Anchor  in  six  fathomes.

The  eleventh,  the  Ice  brake  off  from  the  shoare,  and
came  so  fast  upon  us,  that  we  could  not  shift  from  it,  but
were  put  on  ground  upon  a  Sand ;  yet  God  be  thanked
without  any  harme.  The  same  day  leaving  our  ship  lying
so,  Josias  Logan  our  Factor,  my  selfe,  William  Pursglove,
being  rowed  in  our  Skiffe  by  six  of  our  Mariners,  tooke
our  way  toward  the  Towne  over  a  shoald  Sea,  which  the
Russes  cal,  The  Dry  Sea :  which  may  very  wel  be  so
called.  For  on  the  starboord  or  West  side  going  up  is  a
low  dry  Sand,  and  on  the  Larboord  or  East  side  is  all
shoald  water,  as  two,  three,  or  foure  foote  water. And

200

WILLIAM GOURDON

seven  leagues  within  to  the  South-west  is  an  Hand,  called
Dolgoi,  that  is  to  say,  The  long  Hand,  which  you  must
keep  on  the  Larboord  or  East  side,  &  then  steer  away
South  South-west,  neere  upon  twentie  leagues,  all  in  shoald
water ;  and  then  you  shall  come  to  the  sight  of  an  high
Land  called  The  Bolvan ;  which  in  the  Russe  Tongue
signifieth,  a  Blocke :  which  you  must  leave  on  the  Lar-
boord, or  East  side.  And  be  sure  to  keepe  the  channell,
which  doth  trend  South-west,  and  South-west  by  West.
By  report  of  the  Inhabitants  the  River  hath  two  and
seventie  mouthes.

The  twelfth,  we  passed  over  the  Drie  Sea,  (which  the
Russes  call  in  their  Language,  Suchoi  Morie,)  to  the
mouth  of  the  River  Pechora :  where  we  found  many
small  Hands,  some  a  mile,  some  two  miles  in  length,  and
so  shoald  water,  that  wee  could  not  get  to  the  shoare  with
our  Shallop,  but  lay  in  her  all  night  at  an  anchor,  being
uncertaine  which  way  to  take :  and  seeing  so  many
entrances  before  us,  we  could  hit  right  at  none.  The
thirteenth,  in  the  morning  wee  got  to  an  Hand,  at  the
very  mouth  of  the  River,  where  wee  stayed  all  the  day,
having  much  wind  and  fogge.  The  fourteenth,  being
Sunday,  we  set  sayle  from  the  Hand,  the  Sea  going  very
high :  and  at  noone  we  came  by  Gods  direction,  into  one
of  the  chiefest  entrances  of  the  River  Pechora ;  and  came
to  an  house,  where  there  were  two  and  their  families,  who
made  us  the  best  entertaynment  that  they  could,  and  gave
us  directions  how  to  goe  to  the  Towne.

The  fifteenth,  we  came  to  a  Sari  or  Ferme  house  of
one  of  the  principall  men  of  the  Towne ;  who  bid  us
kindly  welcome :  and  as  the  place  and  season  affoorded,
hee  made  us  good  cheere.  He  lay  there  at  this  time,  to
take  Duckes,  Swannes,  Geese,  and  other  Fowles :  for
then  was  the  time  of  the  yeere.  Their  feathers  they  sell,
and  their  bodies  they  salt  for  winter  provision.  He  also
gave  us  a  man  to  bring  us  to  the  Towne.

The  sixteenth,  we  came  to  the  Towne  of  Pustozera,
which  standeth  upon  a  Lake. There  was  no  Gentleman

201

A.D.
l6ll.

Dolgoi  is  seven
leagues  up
from  the
Bane.

[III.iii.533.]
The  Bolvan,
or  East  head-
land of  the
River
Pechora.
The  channell
trendeth
South-west.

An  Hand
neere  the
mouth  of  the
River.

They  find  one
of  the  chiefest
entrances  of
the  River.

They  come  to
a  Ferme  house
of  a  principall
man  of  the
Towne.

The  Towne  is

called

Pustozera.

A.D.
l6ll

Pechora
runneth
through
Siberia,  and
farther.

Two  Caches
of  Lodias,
bound  for
Mougunzea.
He  buyeth  two
Falcons.

The  stocke  of
goods  left  in
Pustozera.

24.  Lodias
bound  for
Mugunzea,
which  is  to  the
Eastward  of
Ob.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

or  Governour  in  the  Towne  at  our  arrivall :  for  he  had
destroyed  the  Castle,  and  fled  away  the  last  Winter.  For
certaine  dayes  wee  could  have  no  answer,  whether  wee
might  stay  or  no,  all  the  chiefe  men  being  abroad  for
their  Winters  provision.  But  the  chiefe  Customer
Matphe,  sending  men  to  know  their  mindes,  the  three
and  twentieth  day  of  the  same  moneth  of  July,  we  were
embraced  of  them,  and  desired  to  stay,  and  they  appointed
us  an  house  to  dwell  in.  Furthermore,  they  told  us  that
the  River  Pechora  was  more  convenient  for  us,  then  the
River  of  Duyna :  and  that  a  great  part  of  the  goods,
which  come  to  Colmogro  upon  Dwina,  doe  passe  in  one
place  or  other  by  the  River  Pechora,  which,  they  say,
runneth  through  Siberia ;  and  how  much  farther  they
themselves  know  not.  The  five  and  twentieth,  in  the
morning,  having  one  of  their  Boats  full  with  feathers,
wee  departed  from  the  Towne,  taking  our  leaves  of  Josias
Logan,  who  stayed  behind.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  we  came  downe  to  the  Bolvan,
where  wee  went  aboord  of  two  Coches  of  some  fifteene
tunnes  a  piece,  bound  for  Mougunzea.  Here  I  went  on
shoare,  and  bought  an  airie  of  Slight-falcons,  being  very
young.  The  seven  and  twentieth,  in  the  Eevening  wee
came  aboord  our  ship,  and  the  same  night  tooke  in  the
Feathers,  and  laded  their  Boat  againe  with  Meale,  sending
her  up  to  the  Towne  by  the  Russes  that  brought  her
downe.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  we  got  out  our  goods,  which
were  appointed  to  be  left  at  Pechora,  under  the  charge
of  Master  Logan,  and  made  ready  our  ship.  The  nine
and  twentieth,  wee  weighed  anchor,  and  fell  lower  downe,
the  wind  North  North-east.  The  thirtieth,  wee  rode  still,
and  in  the  after-noone  two  Lodias  that  were  fishing  for
Omulais,  went  out  to  Sea,  the  wind  at  North-west  by
West.  The  one  and  thirtieth,  the  wind  being  at  West
North-west,  there  came  in  foure  and  twentie  sayles  of
Lodias  or  Coches,  all  bound  for  Mugunzea :  but  the  yeere
being  farre  spent  they  gave  over  their  Voyage,  and  went

202

WILLIAM GOURDON  a.d.

1611.

to  the  Towne  of  Pustozera,  to  winter.  Out  of  one  of
the  which  Lodias  we  hired  a  man  belonging  to  the  Towne,
to  stay  with  William  Pursglove  and  Marmaduke  Wilson,
by  our  goods,  till  the  Lodia  came,  which  we  had  hired.
Which  two  were  to  winter  with  Master  Logan  in  the
Countrey.  The  aforesaid  foure  and  twentie  Lodias  were
of  Colmogro,  Pinega,  Mezen,  and  Pustozera.

The  first  of  August,  the  wind  at  West,  we  weighed,
and, God  bee  thanked, came safely  over the  Barre  of  They  safely
Pechora. From  thence  wee  directed  our  course  for  Nova  passetheBarre
Zembla : and  at  noone  we  came  to  Ice : where  having  °fPec/wra'
sayled  many  points  of  our  Compasse,  at  mid-night  wee
tooke  in  our  sayles,  and  made  fast  to  a  piece  of  Ice ;  the
weather  being  very  thicke  and  foggie. The  second  being
very  cleere,  and  seeing  no  way  to  passe  to  the  Northward
for  Ice,  we  determined  to  return  ;  and  because  the  yeere
was  so  farre  spent  to  go  for  Cherie  Hand,  to  see  if  it  pleased
God  to  give  us  there  any  good  successe,  for  the  bearing
of  the  charges  of  this  Voyage. So  wee  loosed,  and  at
eight  in  the  Eevening  wee  got  cleere  off  the  Ice,  keeping
our  course  by  the  edge  of  it,  which  did  lie  East  by  North,
and  East  North-east. The  third,  at  noone  we  had  sight
of  Colgoieve  Hand,  and  tooke  the  latitude,  being  on  the  Colgoieve
North side of the Hand which was 69.  degrees 20.  ^^69-
minutes :  and  at  night  I  went  on  shoare  to  see  the  Land,  ^nute's  *
which  was  high  clay  ground  : and  I  came  where  there
was  an  airie  of  Slight-falcons : but  they  did  flie  all  away Falcons.
save  one,  which  I  tooke  up,  and  brought  aboord. This
He  of  Colgoieve  is  but  thirtie  leagues  from  the  Barre  of
Pechora.

The  fourth,  we  passed  through  some  Ice,  and  at  noone
wee  got  cleere  off  it,  and  stood  to  the  Northward,
Colgoieve  bearing  South-west  sixe  leagues,  the  wind  at
East  North-east.  The  fift,  we  had  faire  weather,  the
wind  at  East  South-east,  wee  sayled  two  and  thirtie  leagues
North  North-west,  we  observed,  and  found  our  selves  in  [iii.iii.534.1
70.  degrees  and  40.  minutes.  The  sixt,  the  wind  being  70  degrees
at  South  South-west,  we  steered  North  North-west  fortie  4°-  minutes.

203

A.D.
l6ll.

72.  degrees
34  minutes.

74.  degrees
30.  minutes.

74.  degrees
57.  minutes.

They  arrive  at
Cherie  Hand.

30.  Lodias.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

leagues,  and  were  in  72.  degrees  34.  minutes.  The
seventh,  the  wind  was  variable,  the  weather  faire :  we
steered  North  by  West,  eight  and  thirtie  leagues,  and  at
noone  had  the  latitude  of  74.  degrees  30.  minutes.  And
at  eight  in  the  Eevening  we  sounded,  and  had  eightie
fathomes  greene  Oze.  The  eight,  the  wind  at  West,  we
sayled  North  twenty  leagues  :  in  the  morning  we  sounded,
and  had  seventy  fathoms  Oze :  and  at  three  in  the  after-
noone,  the  wind  comming  North,  wee  cast  about  to  the
Westward.

The  ninth,  faire  weather,  we  sayled  thirteene  leagues
West,  the  wind  at  North.  At  noone  we  sounded,  and
had  an  hundred  and  twentie  fathomes,  greene  slime.  The
tenth,  the  wind  variable,  with  fogge  and  raine  :  wee  steered
West  North-west  five  and  twentie  leagues :  and  at  noone
we  observed,  and  had  the  latitude  of  74.  degrees  57.
minutes.  The  eleventh,  was  thicke  foggie  weather ;  wee
sayled  foure  and  twentie  leagues  West :  and  at  eight  in
the  Eevening  wee  sounded,  and  had  ninety  fathomes,
soft  Oze.  The  thirteenth,  at  noone  wee  had  sight  of
Cherie  Hand,  being  within  a  mile  of  it,  before  we  did
see  it :  and  the  same  Eevening  wee  got  into  the  Cove,
and  mored  our  ship.  Here  we  stayed  twelve  dayes,  taking
what  it  pleased  God  to  send,  which  was  but  little.

The  sixe  and  twentieth  of  August,  we  left  the  Hand,
because  the  time  of  the  yeere  was  farre  spent,  and  returned
for  England,  where  (blessed  be  God)  we  safely  arrived
in  Saint  Catharines  Poole,  in  the  River  of  Thames,  on
Saturday  being  Saint  Matthews  day,  and  the  one  and
twentieth  of  September,  1 6 1 1 .

There  were  in  the  Haven  of  the  River  Pechora,  at  our
being  there,  about  thirtie  Lodias,  or  small  Russe  ships,
having  ten,  twelve,  fourteene,  and  sixteene  men  in  each
of  them :  which  purposed  to  have  gone,  some  to  Nova
Zembla,  some  to  Tasse  gorodoc,  and  some  to  other  places
in  Mougumsey,  to  the  East  of  the  River  Ob.  These
Lodias  for  the  most  part,  were  of  Ustiug,  Colmogro,
Pinega,  Mezen,  and  Pechora.

204

WILLIAM GOURDON

A.D.
l6ll.

Also,  we  that  went  up  to  the  Towne,  found  about  fiftie  5°-  Cayucks
Cayucks,  or  Boats  of  foure,  five,  six,  and  seven  tunnes  orfisfltH
a  piece,  fishing  in  the  River  of  Pechora  for  Salmons,  and • t£g  Riv~r
other  kinds  of  fish  ;  most  of  which  Cayucks  come  from  Pechora.
the  great  Towne  of  Ustiug,  and  the  Townes  thereunto
adjoyning,  by  the  River  Jug,  through  the  Land  into  the
River  Pechora,  and  at  the  Bolvan,  at  the  Rivers  mouth
they  tooke  most  part  of  their  Salmon.

Chap. IX.

A  Letter  of  Richard  Finch  to  the  Right  Worship-
full  Sir  Thomas  Smith,  Governour  ;  and  to  the
rest  of  the  Worshipfull  Companie  of  English
Merchants,  trading  into  Russia  :  touching  the
former  Voyage,  and  other  observations.

Ight  Worshipfull,  my  dutie  remembred
unto  you,  with  prayer  to  God  for  the
preservation  of  your  healths  and  pros-
perous successe  in  all  your  worthie  affaires.
My  last  Letters  unto  you  were  from
Typani  in  Lapland,  by  Thomas  Hare-
castle  of  Hull,  dated  the  foure  and
twentieth  of  May,  161 1.  The  other,  the  nine  and
twentieth  of  May  from  Kyldin  neere  Camen,  by  a  ship
of  Hamburg :  which  foresaid  Letters  were  directed  to  our
Governour,  the  right  Worshipfull  Sir  Thomas  Smith,
Knight.  May  it  now  please  you  further  to  understand,
That  the  ninth  day  of  July,  wee  came  to  the  mouth  of  They  arrive
the  River  of  Pechora,  which  the  Russes  call  Pechorskoi  in  the  Port  °f
Zavorot  with  our  ship.  And  being  entred  into  the  afore-  1
said  Harbour,  it  was  full  of  Ice,  and  hard  to  finde  :  for
we  found  no  mayne  Land,  save  a  small  Sound  behind
the  Ice.  And  labouring  to  and  fro  along  the  same,  we
sent  William  Gourdon  in  our  Shallop  manned  to  the
shoare:  who,  as  soone  as  they  were  landed,  espied  two  landing
Crosses  standing  on the  sand: and  presently  our  men  the  sand.

205

ninth  of  July.

Two  Crosses

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

i6n.

espied three men  comming toward them. These men
Pinega.  belonged  to  three  Boats  of  Pinega,  which  Boats  had  beene

in  our  companie  not  long  before, at  a  place  called  by
them,  Promoya,  by  us,  Obscure,  but  by  other  Writers,
Morshovitz. One  of  these  Russes  came  on  boord  of  our
ship,  and  told  us,  that  wee  could  goe  no  farther  with  our
ship,  then  the  place,  that  their  Vessels,  called  Coaches,  rid
in ;  and  that  to  the  Towne  we  must  goe  in  small  Vessels ;
giving  us  directions  to  sayle  by,  for  the  better  finding
of  the  Towne. After  our  getting  over  the  Barre  of  the
Pechorskoi  Zavorot,  and  that  we  were  come  to  an  anchor,
Ship  endan- we  rode  in  great  danger  by  the  abundance  of  Ice,  and
gered  by  Ice. fae  strong  tide  both  of  the  ebbe  and  floud,  which  drove
the  same  so  forcibly  against  our  ship. For,  the  eleventh
of  July, lying  in foure  fathomes  water,  a  piece  of  an
Hand  of  Ice,  set  with  such  a  power  against  our  ship,  that
it  drove  us  out  of  our  riding  into  eight  foot  and  an  halfe,
and  nine  foot  water.
[III.iii.535.] The  eleventh  of  July,  Master  Josias  Logan,  William
Gourdon,  and  William  Pursglove,  with  our  Shallop  went
up  to  the  Towne  of  Pechora,  taking  directions  of  the
Russes  for  the  finding  of  the  same. Neverthelesse,  two
dayes after their departure from our ship, they had
mistaken  their  way,  if  by  chance  they  had  not  met  with  a
small  Russe  Boat, in  which  were  Russes that  directed
them. Being  about  thirty  Versts  from  the  Towne,  they
came  to  the  house  of  one  Vasili  Deadoolove,  who  at  this
present is one of the chiefest Customers : by which
Customers  the  Towne  of  Pechora  is  now  governed,  since
there  was  no  Gentleman  sent  from  the  Mosco. This  man
gave  them  good  entertaynment,  and  sent  up  with  them  a
man of his owne, fearing that the people  would bee
amazed  at  our  mens  sudden  and  unexpected  comming.
Our  men Yet  as  soone  as  they  espied  our  people,  they  were  all
arrive  at exceedingly  afraid. Divers  of  them  with  their  women
Pechora  ^e^ *nt0 tne Woods, untill that one of the chiefest

People  afraid Customers  had  sent  for  them  other  Customers,  who  at
of  the  English,  that time were all out of Towne. But being met

206

RICHARD FINCH

A.D

16

I.

together,  Master  Logan  shewed  them  the  Priviledges,  of
severall  of  their  Emperours  granted  to  your  Worships.
After  the  perusing  of  which,  with  the  good  report  given
of  Master  Mericke,  your  Agent,  and  our  Nation  by  one
of  Colmogro,  with  whom  Master  Logan  was  acquainted ;
the  Townes-men  were  well  satisfied  :  and  appointed  our
people  an  House.  And  many  of  them  sent  Bread,  Pies,
Ducks,  Fish,  and  such  like  unto  them,  entertayning  them
very  well,  according  to  the  fashion  of  the  Countrey,  with
continuall  admiration  how  they  found  the  Towne.

Touching  the  Inhabitants,  there  is  no  doubt,  but  that
they  will  be  glad  of  our  trading  thither.  Neverthelesse,
by  that  which  I  have  heard  and  perceived,  it  is  very  likely,
that  the  same  will  be  distastfull  to  the  Merchants  of  the
Countrey,  and  others  that  travell  thither  in  the  Winter
time,  out  of  many  parts  of  Russia :  and  also,  to  them  that
trade  in  the  Summer  time,  by  Sea  to  Mongosey,  and
through  the  River  of  Peoza  in  Cayucks  to  Perm,  Oust-
zilme,  and  Pechora.

The  seven  and  twentieth  of  July,  our  Shallop  with  a
small  Russe Boat, returned to our  ship from Pechora
Towne,  departing  from  the  same  the  Thursday  before,
being the  five and twentieth of  July, in our foresaid
Shallop, and Russe Boat, were sent downe by Josias
Logan,  five  and  fortie  bags  of  white  Partridges  feathers, white
and  an  hundred  and  seventie  white  Foxe  skinnes. These  Partridges
Feathers  and  Foxe  skinnes,  are  bought  of  a  Colmogro ^d  Foxes.
man, to be payd for the same in Russia by Master
Mericke ;  and,  as  I  understand,  not  so  cheape  as  others
doe  buy  there  of  the  Fowlers  themselves. But  if  two
men  were  left,  one  at  Pechora,  another  at  Oust-zilme,  and
Perm,  with  ready  money  and  a  little  commodities,  much  Commodities.
good  might  be  done  in  the  Winter  time  by  buying  of
Sables, Severs, Bevers  wombs, Squerrils, Foxe  skinnes
white  and  dunne,  Losh  hides,  and  Deere  skinnes. And
for  the  transportation  of  your  goods  to  Pechora,  or  bring-
ing of  your  goods  from  Pechora ;  the  same  may  be  done
from  Arch-angel  upon  the  Duyna  to  Mezen,  and  from

207

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

Mezen  to  Pechora,  Oust-zilme,  and  Perm,  both  by  Winter
over  Land,  and  in  Summer  through  fresh  water  Rivers,  or
alongst  the  shoare  with  speed,  and  with  a  little  charge :  as
by  the  manner  of  their  ordinary  travell  appeareth,  as  it
hath  beene  of  a  trueth  delivered  mee,  from  the  mouthes
of  men  of  long  experience.

The  last  of  August,  came  into  Pechorskoi  Zavorot,  or

the  Haven  of  Pechora,  sixe  and  twentie  Lodias  or  Boats,

The  Fleet  of which  was  the  Fleet  set  out  from  Oustiug,  Colmogro,

Mongosey  of pjnegaj  anc{  Mezen  :  all  of  them  being  bound  for  Mongo-

Or  MoTal se^  :  ^ut  navmg  been  crossed  with  contrary  winds,  &  the

time of the yeere being spent, they gave over their

intended  Voyage ;  purposing  with  the  next  faire  wind,  to

From  Pechora  sayle  to  the  Towne  of  Pechora,  there  to  lay  up  their  Lodias

to  Colmogro  is  an(j  commodities  till  the  next  Spring,  and  themselves  with

atmonfiS their  small  Boats  or  Wherries  to  goe  home,  passing  from

River,  thence  up  the  River  of  Peoza,  which  they  told  me  they

could  easily  doe  in  a  moneths  time. As  soone  as  this

Fleet  of  Lodias  was  come  to  an  anchor,  many  of  them

came  aboord  of  our  ship,  wondring  to  see  a  ship  there.

They  demanded  of  me,  how  wee  came  thither,  and  what

the  intent  of  our  comming  was  :  and  whither  we  purposed

to  sayle  from  thence. Among  these  were  some  which

seemed to be Merchants, who asked to buy Lists,

remnants  of  Cloth, Cap-clothes,  Aqua  vitae, especially,

Small  Pewter they  asked  for  small  Pewter  Dishes,  which  I  understand

Dishes,agreat  to  ^e  a  commoditie  sold  by  them  to  the  Samoyeds,  at  a

great  rate. I  answered  them,  that  the  goods  which  wee

had  brought,  were  part  already  at  Pechora,  and  the  rest

was  to  be  transported  thither,  as  soone  as  the  Vessell  came

that  was  hired  to  carrie  the  same  up :  so  that,  if  any  of

them  were  minded  to  buy  of  our  commodities,  they  might

have  it  of  one  of  our  Countrey-men  there. After  which,

two  or  three  of  them  demanded  of  me,  whether  I  would

buy  any  Sables,  or  Squerrils :  which  was  but  a  brag. At

this  time  many  of  them  being  on  boord  together,  some  of

them  were  in  private  talke,  which  was  my  chance  to  over-

heare,  and  was  as  followeth : If  these  Neamchines,  or

208

commoditie.

RICHARD FINCH  a.d.

1611.

Strangers  resort  to  these  places,  it  will  be  an  occasion  in
short  time  to  make  us  to  be  without  Bread.  The  like
speeches  I  heard  a  little  before,  of  two  men  of  Pinega ;
and  of  an  old  man  remayning  in  Pechora,  that  came  downe
to  our  ship  with  the  Feathers.

Touching  the  goods  left  with  William  Pursglove,
Marmaduke  Wilson,  and  the  Russe,  in  regard  the  same
lay  in  no  good  place,  we  were  desirous  to  have  hired  one
of  their  Russe  Boats,  to  have  carried  the  same  to  the
Towne  at  a  reasonable  rate ;  the  rather  because  it  was  on
their  way,  and  their  Boats  were  not  overladen  :  which  they
with  two  Boats  might  have  done  with  ease:  yet  they  [III.iii.536.]
would  not,  unlesse  wee  would  give  them  thirtie  or  five  and
twentie  Rubbels  at  the  least,  and  that  with  Condition,  that
they  might  distribute  into  each  Boate  somewhat  thereof.
Therefore  understanding  their  unreasonable  demand,
having  a  Boate  already  hyred,  wee  utterly  refused  to  talke
with  them  any  further  thereof :  especially  when  they  were
minded  to  divide  the  goods  into  all  the  sixe  and  twentie
Lodias  or  Boates  :  which  had  beene  a  tricke  to  have  lost  all.

The first of  August, leaving Master  Josias Logan,  August  1.
William  Pursglove,  and  Marmaduke  Wilson,  at  Pechora,
wee  sayled  over  the  Barre  of  Pechorskoie  Zavorot,  direct-
ing our  course  for  Nova  Zembla,  till  that  wee  had  runne  so
farre,  and  were  so  inclosed  in  huge  Ice,  that  in  a  Day  and  Huge  Ice.
a  Night  we  could  goe  neither  backward  nor  forward  :  And
finding  no  meanes  to  proceed  on  our  intended  Voyage  for
Nova  Zembla,  wee  cleared  our  selves  out  of  that  place.
Truth  it  is,  that  this  hath  beene  an  hard  Summer  to  all
the  Russes,  both  to  them  which  were  bound  for  Mon-
gozey,  and  those  that  went  to  kill  Morses,  and  fishing  of  a
certayne  Fish  called  Omeli. From  the  foresayd  place  wee Omeli
set  our  course  for  Cherie  Hand,  intending  to  meete  with  Fishing.
the He of Colgoieve, and WTilloughbies Land. With  They  land  on
Colgoieve  wee  met,  but  we  missed  of  the  other. The  fff*f  °f
seventh  of  August,  William  Gourdon  and  I  with  our °&otevet
Shallop  went  on  shoare. This  Colgoieve,  is  a  very  long
and  broad  Hand  with  many  Vallies  in  it. On  the  same  are
xiii  209  o

A.D.
l6ll.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Geese.

Two  Hawkes
taken.

Thomas  Edge.
See  sup.  c.  2.

many  Geese,  which  the  Russes  use  to  take  with  Nets  in  the
time  of  the  yeere,  before  they  bee  over  fledge.  In  this
Hand  seemeth  to  bee  store  of  Hawkes.  Heere  William
Gourdon  and  our  Cooper,  caught  two  Hawkes,  whereof
one  was  spoyled  in  the  taking,  the  other  remayneth  alive.
Cherle  Hand.  The  thirteenth  of  August,  wee  arrived  at  Cherie  Hand,
standing  in  74.  degrees  and  odde  minutes,  and  Anchored
in  the  South  Cove,  finding  the  same  very  cleare  of  Ice.
And  presently  after  our  Ship  was  at  an  Anchor,  James
Vadin  the  Master,  William  Gourdon,  and  I,  went  on
shoare  on  the  Cove  to  looke  for  Morses.  Here  we  found
a  certayne  Note,  which  was  left  there  oy  Thomas  Edge :
the  effect  of  which  was :  That  he  arrived  there  with  three
Shalops  from  Greenland,  and  that  there  he  had  found  the
Ship  called  the  Elizabeth,  and  that  hee  was  gone  in  her
to  Greenland  the  foure  and  twentieth  of  July,  hoping  to
finde  the  goods  which  hee  had  left  there  :  and  that  hee  did
purpose  to  returne  againe  to  Cherie  Hand  with  as  much
speed  as  could  be  made. Subscribed  :  Thomas  Edge.

At  our  comming  to  the  Hand,  wee  had  three  or  foure
dayes  together  very  fine  weather :  in  which  time  came  in
reasonable  store  of  Morses,  both  at  the  South  Cove  and
at  the  North-side :  and  wee  were  in  good  hope  we  should
have  made  a  saving  Voyage.  Neverthelesse,  though  there
were  store  of  Beasts,  yet  by  no  meanes  would  they  goe  on
those  beaches  and  places,  that  formerly  they  have  beene
killed  on.  But  fortie  or  fiftie  of  them  together,  went  into
little  holes  within  the  Rocke,  which  were  so  little,  steepe
and  slipperie,  that  as  soone  as  wee  did  approach  towards
them,  they  would  tumble  all  into  the  Sea.  The  like
whereof  by  the  Masters  and  William  Gourdons  report,
was  never  done.  For  lying  as  they  did,  and  being  so  shey
as  they  were,  it  was  not  possible  to  doe  any  good  upon
them.  Moreover,  to  get  them  off  these  foresaid  Rockes
to  make  them  come  on  shoare  upon  their  accustomed
places,  the  Master  and  our  men  on  both  sides  of  the  Hand
went  to  drive  them  away,  yet  they  would  not.  But  by
often  driving  of  them  out  of  their  holes,  we  killed  as

Morses
fearefull.

210

RICHARD FINCH  a.d.

161 1.

many  as  wee  could. In  the  end  the  weather  growing

stormie  and  cold,  there  were  few  or  none  of  them  left.

Wherefore  seeing  all  hope  of  good  to  be  done  of  them  to

be  past,  wee  departed  from  thence  the  sixe  and  twentieth August  26.

of  August,  161 1.  for  England. We  did  not  perceive  any

Ship  of  Hull  to  have  beene  there  this  Summer.

Having  touched  the  chiefest  points  of  our  Voyage,  I
thinke  it  meete  to  set  downe  somewhat  of  the  State,  Com-
modities, and  Trade  of  Pechora,  Oust  Zilma,  and  Parmia.

The  Towne  of  Pechora  is  small,  having  three  Churches  Pechora.
in  it : and  the  most  part  of  the  people  are  poore. In
the  Spring  and  a  great  part  of  the  Summer,  they  live  by
catching  of  Partridges,  Geese,  Duckes,  and  Swannes,  of
which  they  every  Summer  take  a  great  number. The
flesh  of  these  Fowles  they  salt,  and  live  of  them  the
most  part  of  the  Winter. But  the  feathers  of  the  said
Fowle they gather together, and sell to the men of
Colmogro,  Oustiug,  and  others,  that  come  everie  yeere Oustiug.
out  of  Russia  to  buy  the  same : Some  of  them  give  a
little  money  before  hand  to  the  Fowlers. Which  must  be
done  with  great  care  as  the  times  are  now. One  Meafed
a  mans sonne  of  Pechora, whose Father  is a  man of
great  dealings,  told  mee,  That  they  sold  white  Partridge
feathers  to  men  of  Colmogro  for  readie  money,  at  five
Altines  the  Poud,  and  Duckes  feathers  (among  which  was
Downe) they  sold  now  for  seven  or  eight  Altines the
Poud. Likewise  hee  told  me  that  in  former  times  the  A  Poud  is  37.
Russes  that  used  to  trade  thither,  before  the  people  of  Potfnd> or  the
the  Countrey  knew  what  Commodities  were  worth,  had  i*rjj
commonly  a  Poud  of  Partridge  feathers  for  two  pence  of  weight. An
their  money,  and  a  peece  of  cake  Sope  worth  at  Colmogro Alteen  is  five
ten  pence  of  their  money. So  that  the  chiefest  Com-  of  their  Pence,
moditie  and  best cheape is Feathers, being  bought at  a  Groat  °f
Pechora  with  readie  Russe  money  of  the  Fowlers  them-
selves, and  not  of  the  Ligers  there,  that  use  to  sell  them
to  us  at  Archangel  on  the  River  of  Duyna.

Moreover  one  hundred  English  miles  on  this  side  of
the  Towne  of  Pechora, is  a  place  called  by  them the

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

A  great  Bolvano,  where  they  take  great  store  of  Salmons. But  it

fishing  of is  alwayes  the  first  of  August  before  they  begin  to  cast

Ifhnh the out  their  •Nets* ^nd  oftentimes  toward  the  later  part  of

first  of  August.  tne  Summer, they  have  such  store,  that  they  are  sold

[III.iii.537.]  ordinarily  for  foure-pence  a  Fish,  and  sometimes  for  a

penie  a  Fish  of  their  money. Yea,  in  a  plentifull  yeere,  I

have  beene  told,  one  may  buy  whole  draughts  of  Salmons

for  a  very  small  summe  of  money. The  Salmons  heere

are  fat :  three  Fishes  weighing  commonly  a  Powd  and  no

more. The  best  sort  of  the  people  of  Pechora,  use  to

preserve  a  great  quantitie  of  their  Salmon  with  a  little  salt.

For  they  salt  eightie,  or  one  hundred  Fishes  with  a  Powd

of  Salt :  and  many  times  in  plentiful  yeres,  much  Fish  is

cast  away  for  want  of  salt ;  which  they  are  loath  to  bestow

when  Salt  is  deare.

This  Salmon  is  carryed  by  the  Pechora  men  to  Mezen
in  Sleds,  drawne  with  Reyne  Deere.  But  if  they  be
minded  to  carrie  the  said  Fish  from  Mezen  to  Colmogro,
then  they  carrie  the  same  from  thence  with  Sleds  drawne
with  Horses.

Also  many  men  of  Colmogro,  Pinega,  and  Mezen,  buy
Salmons  at  Pechora,  and  carrie  it  in  the  Winter  time  to
Mezen,  to  which  place  they  pay  from  Pechora  for  the  hyer
of  a  Sled  and  a  Reyne  Deere,  ordinarily  ten  Altines,  being
twelve  dayes  journey :  and  from  Mezen  to  Colmogro,
being  sixe  dayes  journey,  they  pay  foure-pence  a  Powd  at
the  most.  The  Deere  that  travell  from  Pechora  to
Mezen,  will  not  draw  above  seven  Powd  weight.  This
way  is  travelled  every  Winter  twice.  The  first  is  sixe  or
eight  weekes  before  Christmasse.  And  the  second  time  is
two  or  three  weekes  before  Shrovetide :  which  bee  the
times  that  they  very  diligently  observe  to  sell  the  Salmon
in.  Most  part  of  the  men  of  Pechora,  have  every  one  his
Travelling  owne  Deere  to  travell  with.  And  some  particular  men  of
Deere.  the  better  sort  have  twentie  or  thirtie  Deere,  which  they

let  out  to  hyer  in  the  Winter  time ;  and  in  the  Summer
time  they  put  them  foorth  to  the  Samoyeds  to  keepe.
Also when the Winter way is set and beaten, many

212

RICHARD FINCH  a.d.

l6ll.

Merchants  and  others  come  out  of  Russia  to  buy  Sables>
Bevers,  Bevers  wombes,  Squirrels,  blacke,  white  and  dunne
Foxes,  of  which  in  the  Winter  time  is  store,  brought
thither  by  the  Samoieds  round  about  those  parts :  which
Trading  is  in  the  Winter  time  and  not  else.  The  chiefest
Russe  Merchants  or  Furriers  that  use  these  parts,  I  have
beene  told,  are  the  Obleazoves,  the  Shepetkins,  and  the
Yeadomskoies.  The  Commodities  carryed  by  them,  are
red,  and  yellow  Cloathes ;  but  chiefly  Russe  money,  with
which  they  buy  Commodities  there  of  the  Russes,  as  well
as  that  which  they  buy  of  the  Samoieds  in  barter.

The  Commodities  carryed  from  Volochda,  Oustiug,
Colmogro,  Pinega,  and  Mezen,  to  Pechora  and  Mon-
gozei,  are  Meale,  Bacon,  Butter,  Ote-meale,  Tolockno,
and  Salt,  with  some  small  quantitie  of  Yeasts  and  tanned
Leather,  with  some  Cloath,  and  other  of  our  Commodi-
ties. These  Commodities  at  Mongozei  are  sold  at  great
rates.  But  at  Pechora,  Commodities  are  sold  sometimes
deare  and  sometimes  cheape,  in  respect  of  profit.  For  if
the  Fleet,  being  at  least  thirtie  Boates  that  set  out  every
Summer  for  Mongozey,  laden  with  these  Provisions  and
Commodities  aforesaid,  bee  crossed  with  contrarie  windes  ;
and  that  by  the  latenesse  of  the  yeere  they  cannot  reach
to  Mongozey,  but  are  constrayned  to  leave  the  same  and
come  for  Pechora,  (as  this  yeere  1 6 1 1 .  they  were  : )  Then
commonly  Meale,  Bacon,  and  such  like  Commodities  with
them  are  not  deare.  For  by  report  a  little  quantitie  of
Meale  doth  serve  all  those  parts.  For  the  greater  part
of  them  live  of  fresh  Fish  sod  and  dryed  in  stead  of  Fish  in  stead
Bread,  of  which  Fish  they  have  plentie.  Likewise,  there  of  Bread.
useth  not  to  goe  from  Colmogro  with  these  Provisions,
above  two  Boates  in  a  Summer  directly  to  the  Towne  of
Pechora :  especially  since  the  Towne  was  burnt,  and  that
there  was  no  Governour  in  the  same.

Also  by  the  Mongozey  men  it  did  appeare,  that  there
was  no  likelihood  for  them  to  utter  that  quantitie  of  Com-
modities at  Pechora,  at  any  rate.  For  if  there  had,  there
would  not  have  resolved  to  lay  up  their  goods  in  Ware-

213

A.D.
l6ll.

Oust  Zilma.

Perm.

[in.iii.538.]

Elephants
teeth,  whence,
and  which
way.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

houses  till  the  next  Spring,  and  then  to  proceed  for
Mongozey.

Further  from  the  Towne  of  Pechora,  is  a  place  called
by  the  Russes,  Oust  Zilma.  This  is,  by  the  description
given  unto  me  in  distance  from  Pechora,  as  Oustiug  is
from  Colmogro  :  and  is  likewise  to  bee  travelled  by  water
against  the  streame :  And  in  Winter  time  it  is  to  bee
travelled  in  Sleds  drawnewith  Reyne  Deere.  In  this  place
of  Oust  Zilma,  is  great  store  of  Squirrels,  Bevers,  and
Bevers  wombes,  Foxe  skinnes  white  and  dunne,  and  other
Furres,  but  chiefly  Squirrels,  of  which  is  great  store  by  all
mens  report,  that  I  have  talked  withall.  So  that  having  a
man  in  the  Winter  time  at  this  place,  a  good  quantitie  of
Squirrels  and  other  Furres,  may  bee  provided  at  a  reason-
able rate.  Moreover,  heere  are  to  be  bought  Losh-hydes,
and  Deere-skinnes,  which  in  the  Winter  time  are  brought
to  this  Towne  of  Oust  Zilma  from  Perm,  which  is  not
farre  from  thence.  But  to  buy  Losh-hydes  and  Deere-
skinnes,  the  best  course  is  to  goe  from  Oust  Zilma  to
Perm,  and  to  buy  them  there,  where  one  should  bee  sure
to  have  Choise,  and  at  a  farre  better  rate.  Also  those  that
use  to  come  out  of  Russia  in  the  Winter  time  to  Perm,  to
buy  these  foresaid  Hydes  ;  toward  the  later  part  of  Winter
carrie  all  these  Hydes  by  Sleds,  some  two  or  three  dayes
Journey  from  Perm  to  the  side  of  a  certayne  River,  neere
unto  which  is  a  small  Towne  or  Village ;  where  as  soone  as
the  Ice  is  gone,  they  have  small  Dorshenicks  and  Floates,
on  which  they  lade  their  Hydes,  and  being  out  of  this
River,  they  enter  into  Duyna,  and  transport  them  to
Colmogro  and  Archangell.

Likewise  being  at  Pechora,  Oust  Zilma,  or  any  of  those
parts,  there  is  in  the  Winter  time  to  bee  had  among  the
Samoyeds,  Elephants  teeth,  which  they  sell  in  pieces
according  as  they  get  it,  and  not  by  weight.  And  I  have
beene  told,  they  sell  the  same  at  a  very  small  rate.  It  is
called  in  Russe,  Mamanta  Kaost.  Thus  much  may  suffice
at  this  time  to  bee  spoken  of  Pechora,  Oust-Zilma,  and
Perm.

214

RICHARD FINCH  ad.

i6ir

Now  I  will  set  downe  as  I  have  beene  enformed  by  i.
divers  Russes,  the  Names  of  the  chiefest  places  which  they
use  to  sayle  unto  from  Slobodca,  an  Haven  so  called  in
the  Province  of  Mezen,  to  the  Pechorskoie  Zavorot,  or
the  Haven  of  the  River  of  Pechora,  and  the  Distances  to
each  place :  with  a  Direction  how  to  sayle  from  Pechor-
skoie Zavorot  up  to  the  Towne  of  Pechora.

I  will  also  set  downe  the  Russes  sayling  from  the  fore-  2.
sayd Pechorskoie Zavorot, to the Yowhorskoie-share.
And  from  thence  to  the  River  of  Ob  : and  thence  to
Mongozey.

I  will  likewise  set  downe  a  true  Direction,  to  goe  by 3.
water  in  their  Boates  called  Cayooks,  through  the  River
of  Peoza,  and  other  Rivers,  till  they  come  from  Mezen  to
Oust  Zilma,  and  Pechora.

Likewise  I  meane  to  write  of  the  Samoieds,  travelling  4.
from  Vaygats  to  the  parts  of  Mongozey,  in  the  Winter
time,  and  from  thence  backe  againe  to  the  foresayd  Towne
of  Mezen,  called  Slobodca.

Lastly,  I  will  intreate  of  such  Commodities  as  are  to 5.
bee  had  at  Mezen,  with  the  speedie  passage  from  thence
to  Colmogro  by  Sea,  or  by  Land  in  the  Sommer  time.
And  it  is  as  followeth.

The  things  above  mentioned,  that  I  have  not  seene  my
selfe,  I  have  not  sleightly  set  downe  from  the  mouthes  of
one  or  two,  but  from  the  mouthes  of  many  ancient  men,
well  experienced  in  the  Travels  and  Trades  of  all  these
parts,  which  Master  James  Vadun  the  Master  of  our  Ship
can  likewise  witnesse.  Therefore  if  the  same  may  bee  any
way  beneficiall  unto  the  Company,  and  that  thereby  I  have
discharged  my  dutie  unto  your  Worships,  I  shall  bee
heartily  glad  thereof.  Thus  fearing  I  have  beene  over
tedious  by  my  rude  Letter,  I  rest,  with  my  heartie  prayer
unto  Almightie  God,  for  the  happie  preservations  of  your
selves,  and  all  yours.  Written  on  Shipboord,  the  last  of
August,  1 6 1 1 .

Your  Worships  humble  Servant  to  command,

Richard  Finch.
215

A».  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

roii.

The  Names  of  the  principall  places,  which  the
Russes  sayle  by  from  Mezen  to  the  Pechorskoie
Zavorot,  or  the  Haven  of  Pechora. 1 6 1 1.

FRom  Mezen  to  Candinos,  with  a  faire  wind  and  stiffe
gale,  is  thirtie  houres  sayle :  They  sayling  commonly
almost  40.  leagues  in  foure  and  twentie  houres,  according
to  which  it  is  50.  leagues.  From  Candinos  to  the  He  of
Colgoie,  is  as  before  thirtie  houres  sayling,  and  after  40.
leagues  in  foure  and  twentie  houres,  is  50.  leagues.  From
Candinos  to  Premoya  or  Obscure,  is  twentie  houres
sayling,  or  35.  leagues.  From  the  He  of  Colgoie  to
Colocol-cova,  is  fifteene  houres  sayling,  and  reckoned  as
above  appeareth,  is  25.  leagues.  Along  the  shoare  of  this
place  are  heapes  of  Sand,  in  the  forme  of  Bells.  There-
fore the  Russes  call  this  place  Colocol-cova,  being  derived
from  Colocol,  which  in  English  signifieth  a  Bell.  From
Colocol-cova  to  the  Peasaneetsa,  is  three  houres  sayle,  or
5.  leagues.  This  place  is  onely  a  small  Brooke  which  they
use  for  a  Sea-marke,  more  then  for  any  benefit  is  to  bee
reaped  at  the  same.  From  Peasaneetsa  to  the  Pechorskoie
Zavorot  is  sixe  houres  sayle,  or  10.  leagues.  So  that
from  Colgoie  Hand  to  this  foresayd  Pechorskoie  Zavorot,
is  not  above  40.  leagues  at  the  most.

A  direction  to  sayle  from  the  Pechorskoie  Zavorot,
where  wee  rode  with  our  Ship  in  August  161 1.
to  the  Towne  of  Pechora,  as  followeth.

FRom  this  Pechorskoie  Zavorot,  they  sayle  into  the
Soohoie  Mora,  or  Drie  Sea,  and  not  before :  stirring
away  from  hence  South-west  and  by  South,  and  in  a  faire
gale  of  Winde,  in  foure  houres  they  come  to  an  Hand
Dolgoie  Hand  calletci  Dolgoie.  This  Hand  is  reported  to  bee  three  or
'*  '  e  oome  foure  Russe  Versts  long,  having  on  it  in  some  time  of  the
yeere  many  Geese,  which  the  men  of  Pechora  take  before
they  bee  able  to  flie. From  this  Dolgoie,  they  stirre  away

216

RICHARD FINCH  a.d.

1611.

South  South-west ;  and  sayling  this  course  with  a  faire  gale

of  wind,  in  eight  or  nine  houres  sayle  they  come  in  sight

of  the  maine  Land,  being  an  indifferent  high  Land. This

Land  is  called  the  Boluanov ;  and  this  is  20.  leagues  at The  Boluanov.

the  most. This  Boluanov  they  have  on  their  Larboord

side. Neere  this  place  are  divers  that  inhabite  in  Russe

Houses :  where  in  the  Summer  time  they  lye  a  Fowling,

and  fishing  of  a  certayne  Fish  called  Omeli,  which  are  like

our  Maccarels. If  need  bee,  heere  a  man  may  have  a

guide  or  good  instructions  to  conduct  him  to  Pechora [III.iii.539.]

Towne. Hard  by  this  Boluanov,  is  the  Oustia  or  barre  of

the  entring  of  Pechora  River. For  as  soone  as  you  are

over  this  barre,  you  come  into  the  Rivers  mouth,  which

leadeth to Pechora Towne. If it bee thicke foggie

weather,  then  one  of  them  continually  soundeth  the  depth

of  the  Channell, keeping  as  neere  as they  can in the

deepest  water : and  in  so  doing,  they  seldome  mistake

their  way,  so  that  they  stirre  away  West  from  the  Boluanov

to  the  Rivers  mouth,  keeping  the  Land  on  their  Star-

boord  side. And  by  all  mens  report,  from  the  Boluanov

to  Pechora  Towne,  is  with  a  faire  winde  and  stiffe  gale,

not  above  twentie  houres  sayle :  which  according  to  their

sayling,  is  about  three  and  thirtie  leagues. And  it  is  not

above  fiftie  leagues  from  the  Pechorskoie  Zavorot,  where

our  Ship  lay,  to  Pechora  Towne.

The  names  of  the  places  that  the  Russes  sayle  by,
from  Pechorskoie  Zavorot,  to  Mongozey  :  with
the  manner  of  their  Travell,  and  Distance  be-
tweene  each  place,  or  time  of  Sayling,  Hailing,
and  Rowing  unto  the  same.

FRom  Pechorskoie  Zavorot  to  Matpheyove  Ostrove,  or  Matpheyove-
Hand,  is  with  a  faire  wind  and  stiffe  gale,  at  the  most 0str°ve.
thirtie  houres  sayle,  which  being  reckoned  as  before,  after
fortie  leagues  in  foure  and  twentie  houres,  is  fiftie  leagues  :
to which they stirre away East. From Matpheyove rouhorskoie
Ostrove  to  the  Youhorskoie-share,  is  nine  houres  sayle  or Share.

217

A.D.
l6ll.

The  Mee-
danetskoie
Zavorot :
where

Hainburie  is.
The  two
Hands  called
Zelentsee,  or
the  Greene
Islands.
Dolgoie
O strove )  or  the
Long  Hand.

Korskoie

Gooba.

Meastuoy

Ostrove,  or

Meastuoy

Hand.

A  River.

Mootnoya
Reca,  or  the
Thicke  or
troubled
River.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

fifteene  leagues. When  they  are  come  to  this  Hand,  they
stir  away  from  thence  East  to  the  said  Youhorskoie-share.
Also  in  cleere  weather  from  Matpheyove  Ostrove,  they
can  see  the  maine  Land,  with  the  Meedanetskoie  Zavorot :
where  the  two  Hands  bee  called  the  Zelentsee  or  Greene
Hands : to  which  Hands  many  of  the  Russes  resort,  to
take a kinde of Fishes, called Omeli, which are like
Maccarels : of  which  heere  are  store. This  maine  Land
they  have  on  their  right  hand  or  Starboord  side,  lying
South  from  Matpheyove  Ostrove. Also  to  the  South-
ward of  the  Matpheyove  Ostrove,  is  another  Hand  which
the  Russes  call  Dolgoie,  that  is,  the  long  Hand. So  that
there  are  two  Dolgoies  : the  one,  within  the  Pechorskoie
Zavorot,  entring  into  the  Soohoy  Mora,  or  Drie  Sea :
The other is this, which is betwixt the Matpheyove
Ostrove,  and  the  Yougorskoie-share ;  lying  as  before  was
sayd,  South  from  the  sayd  Matpheyove  Ostrove. From
which  Hand  in  a  cleere  day  they  can  see  the  Land  of
Vaygats,  which  lyeth  on  the  Larboord  side,  being  very
high Land. So that stirring out-right, in the middle
betweene  the  Meadanetskoie  Land  on  their  Starboord,  and
the  land  of  Vaygats  on  their  Larboord  side,  they  sayle
directly  into  the  Yougorskoie-share. Likewise  there  is
not  much  of  this  Yougorskoie-share. For  they  say,  that
being  at  one  end,  they  can  see  the  Sea  at  the  other  end
thereof. Also,  about  the  Land  of  Vaygats  are  neither
Flats  nor  Shoalds. From  the  Yougorskoie-share  to  the
Carskoie  Gooba,  is  twelve  houres  sayle,  or  twentie  leagues.
In this Bay of Gooba, is the Meastuoy Ostrove, or
Meastuoy  Hand. Further  it  is  to  bee  remembred,  that
as  soone  as  they  enter  this  Carskoie  Gooba  or  Bay,  they
sayle  up  a  River,  leaving  this  Bay  on  their  Starboord  :
which River bringeth them into the Mootnoya Reca,
which signifieth the thicke or troubled River. From
Carskoie  Gooba  to  this  Mootnoya  Reca,  is  20.  leagues.
Likewise,  being  a  little  past  the  Yougorskoie-share,  there
may  bee  described  an  high  Land,  which  they  call  Socoha
Looda,  that  is,  The  Hawkes  perch. And  being  over  the

218

RICHARD FINCH

Mootnoya  Reca,  which  they  are  eight  dayes  and  eight
nights  in  hailing  along  the  shoare  by  the  Rope  or
Beachava,  they  come  into  two  Lakes,  which  two  Lakes
from  one  end  to  the  other  they  commonly  row  over  in  one
Day  or  two  Tides  :  the  same  not  being  above  ten  or
twelve  leagues.  Having  gotten  to  the  end  of  those  two
Lakes,  they  come  to  a  place  called  the  Navoloke  which
signineth  an  Over-hall.  And  it  is  almost  two  hundred
fathoms,  or  foure  hundred  paces  in  length  :  And  having
emptyed  their  Vessels,  called  Coaches,  laying  poles  under
them,  with  the  Companies  or  men  of  foure  or  five  Boates,
having  twelve  or  thirteene  men  in  a  Boate,  they  hall  their
Vessels  over,  launching  them  into  a  third  Lake,  which
they  call  the  Zelenoy  Osera,  that  is,  the  Greene  Lake.
These  Over-halls  constraine  them  to  consort  themselves
into  Companies :  otherwayes  they  could  not  get  this  way
to  Mongozey.  At  the  end  of  this  Zelenoy  Osera,  or
Greene  Lake,  they  come  into  the  Zelenoya  Reca,  or
Greene  River,  into  which  they  runne  with  the  streame,
being  often  compelled  to  emptie  their  great  Boates  with
their  Lodias,  or  Wherries,  laying  their  Goods  upon  the
shoare  :  which  being  done  they  row  their  great  Lodias  over
the  shoalds  emptie ;  and  having  got  over  the  shoalds,  they
bring  their  goods  on  boord  againe.  And  thus  they  doe  in
divers  places  of  this  Zelenoya  Reca,  or  Greene  River :  by
reason  whereof  they  are  commonly  ten  dayes  from  the
Over-hall,  before  they  can  get  through  this  foresayd  River,
which  is  all  with  the  streame ;  but  the  Distance  hereof
cannot  yet  bee  perfectly  learned.  Being  come  to  the  end
of  the  Zelenoya  Reca,  they  enter  into  the  River  of  Ob  ;
and  having  rowed  a  little  way  up  the  same,  they  come  to  a
place  which  they  likewise  call  Zavorot :  which  signifieth  a
turning,  winding,  or  entring  into  a  place.  From  this
Zavorot,  they  turne  into  the  Tawze  Reca,  stirring  away
South  to  Tawze  River ;  but  it  is  foure  and  twentie  houres
sayle,  or  fortie  leagues  from  the  River  of  Ob,  before  they
come  into  any  part  of  the  Tawze  Reca.  In  the  River  of
Ob,  are  neither  Woods  nor  Inhabitants,  till  they  sayle  so

219

A.D.
l6ll,

Two  Lakes.

The  Navoloke ;
or  Over-hall.

Zelenoy
Osera,  or  The
Greene  Lake.

Zelenoya
Reca,  or  The
Greene  River
falleth  into
Ob.

The  River

Ob.

The  Zavorot

in  the  River

of  Ob.

Tawze  Reca.

[III.iii.540.]

A.D.
l6ll.

Taes.
Tawze
Gorodoc,  or
Castle.

Mongosey.

The  Samoyeds
on  the  Mayne,
over  against
Vaygats,
travell  in  the
Winter  to
Mongosey.
We  may  learn
of  these
Samoyeds,  the
trade  of
Mongosey  at
Mezen  more
perfectly.

Mezen  a
Town  of  great
traffick  for
Furres.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

farre  up  the  same,  that  they  come  neere  to  Siberia. But
there  are  Woods.

When  they  are  entred  into  this  Tawze  River,  they  have
foure  dayes  and  foure  nights  sayling  to  Tawze  Castle,  with
a  faire  wind  and  a  stiffe  gale :  But  if  they  bee  driven  to
row  to  the  Tawze  Gorodoc  or  Castle,  then  they  are  twelve
dayes  and  twelve  nights  rowing  thither  at  the  least,  having
calme  weather.  This  Tawze  Gorodoc,  or  Tawze  little
Castle,  with  the  Villages,  Townes,  and  all  other  places
thereto  belonging,  is  by  all  the  Russes  generally  called
Mongosey.  At  this  place  are  two  Gentlemen  or  Gover-
nours,  with  three  or  foure  hundred  Gunners,  and  small
Castles  in  severall  places  of  these  parts  of  Mongosey.
Moreover,  the  men  of  Mezen,  from  whom  I  had  all  these
Notes,  told  me ;  That  in  the  Winter  time  there  went  men
from  Siberia  to  Mongosey,  to  buy  Sables  :  delivering  unto
mee,  that  the  Sables  taken  by  the  Samoyeds  about
Mongosey,  are  richer  in  Furres  then  those  that  come  from
Siberia.  Also  they  told  me,  that  the  Samoyeds  inhabiting
upon  the  mayne  land  over  against  Vaygats,  travelled  in
the  Winter  time  with  their  Reyne  Deere  to  the  parts  of
Mongosey,  to  kill  Sables  and  other  beasts :  and  doe  carrie
their  Furres  from  thence  to  Mezen,  to  sell  there  at  a  place
called  by  the  Russes,  Slobodca,  to  which  they  did  com-
monly resort  about  Shrove-tide,  staying  not  there  long,
but  as  soone  as  they  had  made  sale  of  their  Furres,  they
departed  home  againe.  Further,  these  men  of  Mezen
told  me,  that  in  the  Winter  time  with  them  was  to  be  sold
store  of  Squerrils,  Beavers,  Beavers  wombs,  and  some
Sables.  And  that  all  those  that  travelled  in  the  Winter
time  from  any  part  of  Mongosey,  Sibira,  Pechora,  and
Oust-selma,  to  any  part  of  Russia  whether  they  were
Merchants,  or  buyers  up  of  the  Furres,  or  the  Samoyeds
that  caught  them  ;  they  must  of  force  come  to  their  Towne
of  Mezen,  to  hire  Horses  to  carrie  them  to  Colmogro.
By  which  meanes  they  told  mee,  their  Towne  was  well
replenished  with  all  manner  of  Furres,  especially  of
Squerrils. Also they informed me, that divers of

220

RICHARD FINCH  a.d.

1611.

Colmogro,  and  other  parts  of  Russia,  that  sold  us  Furs,

for  the  most  part  bought  the  same  of  them,  lying  there

in the  Winter  time  for  that  purpose. Therefore, said

they,  if  that  any  of  our  Nation  would  trade  into  their

parts,  they  would  be  glad  thereof,  and  that  they  may  be

furnished  of  all  sorts  of  Furres,  and  at  a  farre  better  rate

then  hitherto  we  have  had  them  at. And  that  wee  could

upon  any  occasion  be  quickly  at  Colmogro  in  the  Winter

time  by  Sled,  or  in  any  part  of  the  Spring  or  Summer

time  by  Boats,  at  a  very  small  charge. Lastly,  that  in

the  Spring  time  we  should  not  faile  of  a  parcell  of  Trane-

oyle, and Deeres skinnes, which every Summer they

transported  to  Archangel  to  sell.

A  true  direction  of  the  Russes  travelling  from
Mezen,  with  Cayooks  or  small  Boats,  through
the  River  Peoza,  and  from  thence  to  a  place
called  by  them  Peaskanoy  Navolock,  or  The
Sandy  Over-hall,  passing  from  thence  through
other  Rivers,  till  they  come  to  Oust-selma,
and  to  the  Towne  of  Pechora  :  And  is  as
folio  weth.

HAving embarqued themselves at Mezen, in these  Mezen.
small  Cayooks  or  Boats,  covered  with  the  barkes  of
trees,  they  sayle  to  a  River  called  Peoza  Reca. From  Peozareca.
thence  they  sayle,  or  draw  their  Boats  to  a  place  called,  the
Peaskanoy  Navolock,  or  Sandy  Over-hall. From  Mezen  Peaskanoy
to  this  Over-hall  is  ten  dayes  haling  along  the  shoare  with  Navoloc
the  rope. This  said  Over-hall  is  five  Russe  Versts  over.
And  after  they  have  unladen  their  goods  out  of  their
Cayooks,  they  draw  the  said  Vessels  over  at  times  with
Horses,  that  come  from  Mezen  of  purpose  ;  lying  there
the  most  part  of  the  Summer,  to  that  intent :  and  they  pay
sixe  pence  Russe  for  drawing  over  an  empty  Boat. Being
over  this  Over-hall,  they  drive  with  the  streame  in  three
dayes  to  the  Towne  of  Oust-selma :  and  with  the  streame Oust-selma.
in  foure  dayes  they  drive  to  a  place  called  Pustozera  :  and

A.D.
l6ll.

Pustozera.

TheBoluanov.

Pechora.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

from  Pustozera  against  the  streame  they  come  to  the
Boluanov,  and  from  the  Boluanov  to  the  Towne  of
Pechora.  Also,  many  of  these  Boats  very  often  in  their
returne  home  with  their  foresaid  Cayooks,  carrie  Furres
to  Ustiug,  and  divers  other  places  into  the  Countrey  of
Russia. All  which  they  doe  in  a  Summers  time.

[ni.iii.54i-]  Chap.  X.

The  Voyage  of  Master  Josias  Logan  to  Pechora,
and  his  wintering  there,  with  Master  William
Pursglove,  and  Marmaduke  Wilson.  Anno
161 1.

He  first  of  July,  William  Gurdon,  Richard
Finch,  and  William  Pursglove,  went  on
shoare  at  Suatinose,  where  two  Crosses
stand.  The  second,  wee  weighed  anchor
againe,  and  stood  into  the  Bay  because  of
the  Ice :  and  that  night  wee  went  on
shoare  againe.  The  third,  we  weighed
anchor,  and  stood  it  about  Suatinose.  The  fift,  we  stood
to  the  Eastwards  rive  leagues  more,  and  about  twelve  of
the  clocke  at  night,  wee  were  thwart  of  the  Hand  of  Toxar.
The  tenth,  at  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night,  we  weighed,
and  went  over  a  Barre,  at  two  fathomes,  and  came  into
Harbour,  where  wee  anchored  at  ten  of  the  clocke  in  the
morning  in  five  fathoms,  having  sands  round  about  us,
being  land-locked.  The  eleventh,  my  selfe,  William
Gurdon,  and  William  Pursglove,  with  sixe  of  our  men
more,  departed  from  the  ship  with  our  Shallop,  to  goe  up
Pustozera. to  the  Towne  of  Pustozer.

The  fourteenth,  wee  arrived  at  the  fishing  house  of  one
Evan  Vasiliov  sene  sowhav,  where  the  people  were  afraid
of  us,  and  were  ready  to  runne  away :  but  we  spake  to
them,  and  gave  them  some  Biscuit  and  Aqua  vitae,  and
they  sod  us  some  fish,  and  shewed  us  our  way  to  another
Fishery : but  they  ran  away  from  us,  so  we  departed  on

222

The  former
part  of  the
Voyage  is
omitted,  to
avoid  tedious
repetition.

Toxar.

JOSIAS LOGAN  a.d.

1611.

our  way.  The  fifteenth  day,  at  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the
afternoone  wee  met  with  a  Russe,  that  was  borne  at
Ustiug,  who  gave  us  Milke,  and  such  things  as  he  had,
and  we  gave  him  some  Biscuit,  and  some  Aqua  vitae,  and
hee  directed  us  unto  another  Fishery,  about  some  five
miles  from  that  place  where  wee  arrived,  about  sixe  of  the
clocke  the  same  night.  But  comming  ashoare,  we  found
not  any,  save  one  man,  who  after  some  conference  had
with  us,  and  giving  him  some  Bread,  and  some  of  our
Aqua  vitae,  hee  told  us,  that  the  Master  of  the  house,
with  three  of  his  sonnes  were  hunting  of  Duckes,  and
that  their  wives  were  afraid,  and  were  runne  into  the
Woods  to  hide  themselves,  leaving  a  young  childe  behind
them  for  haste.  So  he  brought  us  into  the  house,  where
by  that  time  that  we  had  stayed  an  houre  (because  there
were  so  many  Muschitaes,  which  are  like  unto  a  Midge,
and  sting  most  horribly,  so  that  we  were  not  able  to  stay
without)  the  Master  of  the  house,  and  his  sonnes  came
thither,  who  at  the  first,  were  afraid,  thinking  we  came  to
rob  them.  And  they  were  about  to  shoot  our  men  in  the
Boat ;  but  one  of  our  men  holding  up  a  Biscuit  cake,  they
then  came  to  them,  and  spake  unto  them  :  but  our  men
not  understanding  them,  made  them  signes  to  the  house,
where  my  selfe,  William  Gurdon,  and  William  Pursglove
were  :  who,  when  they  came  into  the  house,  being  yet
afraid,  they  came  in  one  after  another.  Now,  when  we
had  saluted  them  after  the  Russe  manner,  they  asked  us
of  whence  we  were,  and  for  what  cause  we  came  thither :
whereunto  I  made  answere,  that  wee  were  English-men,
who  because  of  the  troubles  in  Russia,  came  thither  to
seeke  a  Trade,  having  heard  divers  times  of  the  fame  of
those  parts.  Then  hee  replied,  that  in  times  past  those
places  had  beene  good  for  trading :  but  now,  by  reason
of  a  bad  Governour,  in  those  troublesome  times,  upon  a
spleene  he  had  fired  the  Towne,  and  burned  above  an  ju/y,
hundred  houses :  and  so  by  that  meanes  they  were  fallen
into  poverty,  and  trading  decayed,  by  reason  of  his  great
exactions. Yet  hee  said,  that  they  have  great  store  of

223

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

Salmon,  and  that  the  last  yeere  they  got  above  15000.
Salmons,  and  in  the  Winter  is  their  chiefest  Mart.  For
then  the  Samoyeds  come  thither  from  divers  places,  and
bring  Sables,  and  Beavers,  white  Foxes,  Rosamackes,
Feathers,  and  some  Squerrils.  So  having  supped  with
him,  we  gave  him  a  gallon  of  our  Aqua  vitae,  and  some
fortie  cakes  of  our  white  Biscuit,  and  three  or  foure  pound
of  Raisins :  for  we  heard,  that  he  was  one  of  the  prin-
cipallest  men  in  the  Towne.  Then  desiring  his  favour,
he  holpe  us  to  a  man  to  goe  with  us  up  to  the  Towne,
because  of  the  fearefulnesse  of  the  people,  which  they
conceive  through  the  Warres  of  the  Poles :  and  so  wee
departed  from  thence  that  night  to  the  Towne.

The  sixteenth,  in  the  afternoone  we  arrived  at  the
Towne  of  Pustozera,  where  wee  found  not  many  people,
considering  the  number  of  houses  there,  which  are  betwixt
fourescore  and  an  hundred,  being  of  wood,  built  after  the
Russian  manner,  and  they  are  subject  unto  the  Russe,
observing  all  their  Rites  as  doe  the  Russes.  The  people
were  all  abroad  (some,  in  getting  of  Morses  Oyle,  and
Belougaes  Oyle,  and  some  fishing  of  a  fish  called  Ometta,
which  is  a  very  sweet  fish,  and  some  hunting  Duckes)
saving  the  Customers,  and  three  or  foure  more,  who  were
likewise  afraid  of  us,  although  we  had  one  of  their  owne
people  with  us,  and  were  ready  to  flee  away.  So  we  seeing
their  fearefulnesse,  caused  their  man  to  goe  first  on  shoare
with  us  three  above  mentioned,  not  permitting  the  rest  of
our  men  to  come  on  Land  as  yet :  then  hee  calling  to
them,  they  stayed,  still  peeping  from  behind  the  corners
of  their  houses,  untill  at  the  last  there  was  a  Russe,  one  of
Colmogro,  that  had  wintred  with  them,  who  knew  me,
[III.iii.542.]  and  had  seene  me  some  two  yeeres  before  at  Cola  in
Cola  in  Lappia, at his Uncles house. And so he encouraged

appia.  them, speaking  greatly  in our  commendation, shewing

them,  that  I  was  a  Merchant,  and  came  to  trade  with
them,  and  not  with  any  intent  of  harme :  for  hee  knew
mee  very  well,  and  told  them,  that  I  was  at  Cola  foure  or
five  yeeres  together,  and  lay  at  his  Uncles  house. So  he

224

JOSIAS LOGAN  a.d.

1611.

came  to  me,  and  tooke  me  by  the  hand,  asking  me  how

I  did,  and  told  me  his  name,  and  how  hee  had  seene  mee

with  his  Uncle  at  Cola. Then  I  called  to  mind,  that  I

had  seene  him  there,  and  so  we  grew  acquainted :  and  he

went  with  us  to  the  Custome-house,  where  staying  an

houre, at  length the  Customer  came : and  after  many

questions  had  concerning  our  comming  thither,  I  craved

licence,  that  foure  of  us  might  winter  with  them :  which

they  denyed,  alledging  that  they  durst  not  without  the

Emperour  of  Russia  his  licence. Whereupon  I  answered,

that  the  Emperours  Majestie,  when  he  was  raigning,  was

very  gracious  unto  our  Nation,  above  all  other  strangers ;

and  shewed  what  great  priviledges  hee  had  bestowed  on

our  people :  and  how  by  the  English-mens  meanes  at  the

first ;  what  a  trade  is  now  at  Arkania,  and  what  profit Arkania.

came,  not  onely  into  his  Majesties  Treasurie,  but  also  into

all parts of his Dominions, which in time might be

brought hither : and withall shewed the Emperours

priviledge. Wherefore  then  they  began  to  put  away  feare,

and  willed  us  to  stay  five  or  sixe  dayes,  untill  he  had  sent

for  the  chiefest  men  of  the  Townes-men,  who  were  abroad,

and  then  they  would  give  us  an  answer. Then  I  desired,

that  we  might  have  an  house  to  be  in,  and  not  to  stay

without  doores. So  he  gave  libertie  to  any  that  would,

to  entertayne  us,  whereto  there  was  one  Callem  that  made

answer,  that  he  would : whereupon  wee  went  with  him,

and  were  in  an  Ambar  of  his,  untill  wee  received  answer

from  them. In  the  meane  time  wee  made  much  of  them,

and  feasted  them  with  our  Aqua  vitae,  Biscuit,  and  Figs,

that  we  might  the  better  obtayne  their  love.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  the  Customers  came  to  give

us  our  answere,  and  told  us,  that  they  had  concluded  that

we  might  stay  if  wee  would  :  but  they  must  write  up  to

the  Musko  of  our  being  here. So  we  thanked  them,  and

gave them such entertaynment as  we could, and sent

presents  to  sixe  of  them  of  the  chiefest,  which  they  tooke

very  thankfully,  and  promised  what  favour  they  could. So

this  night  I  made  ready  my  Letters  to  send  for  England.

xiii  225  p

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

The  fourth  of  August,  five  and  twentie  Lodyas  arrived

at  the  Towne  laden  with  Meale,  and  others  which  were

Molgomsey. bound  for  Molgomsey :  but  by  reason  of  contrary  winds,

they  were  forced  into  Pechora,  and  came  up  to  the  Towne

of  Pustozer,  and  unladed  to  make  sale.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  we  removed  from  the  house

Pole  baptized  where  we  were  at  the  first,  unto  a  Poles  house,  who  is

Russe.  christened  Russe,  where  we  are  to  remayne  all  the  Winter.

Frost  in  The  nine  and  twentieth,  the  frost  was  so  strong,  that

August.  the  Ozera  was  frozen  over,  and  the  Ice  driving  in  the

River  to  and  againe,  brake  all  the  nets,  so  that  they  got

no  Salmon,  no  not  so  much  as  for  their  owne  victuals.

The  second  of  September,  the  frost  brake  up  againe,  and

it  was  open  weather. The  eight  of  September,  there  was

a  Soyma,  which  the  Towns-men  bought,  that  went  downe

the  River  to  have  gone  for  Jugoria,  and  had  a  faire  wind :

but  they  neglecting  two  dayes  sayling,  that  would  have

carried  them  forth  of  the  River  to  the  Sea,  the  wind  came

contrary,  so  that  they  were  wind-bound,  and  could  not  get

any further : and on the nineteenth, gave over their

Voyage,  and  came  up  to  the  Towne.

The  thirteenth  of  October,  the  frost  was  so  extreme,
that  the  Ozera  stood  in  one  night,  that  men  did  walke  on
it  the  next  day,  and  so  continued  all  the  Winter  after.

The  twelfth  of  November,  there  went  two  men  of
Penega  to  Ust-zilma,  to  buy  Squerrils,  and  Beavers,  and
other  commodities.  The  thirteenth,  the  Sunne  arose  at
South  and  by  East  by  the  Compasse,  and  set  at  South-
west and  by  West.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  there  went  divers  men,  with
at  the  least,  three  or  fourescore  Sleds  drawne  with  Deere,
Slobodca  to  a  place  called  Slobodca,  where  they  hold  a  Mart,  from

Mart.  the  beginning  of  December  to  the  middle  thereof : and

they  carried  fresh-water  fish  thither,  with  whom  William
Pursglove  went  into  Russia.  The  sixe  and  twentieth,  the
Sunne  arose  at  South  and  by  West  by  the  Compasse,  and
set  at  South-west  and  by  West.

The  first  of  December,  the  Sunne  arose  at  South  and  by

226

JOSIAS LOGAN

A.D.

1612.

West  Westerly  by  the  Compasse,  and  set  South-west  and
by West Southerly. The fourth, the Towns-men of
Pechora  went  over  land  into  Jugoria,  to  trade  with  the Jugoria.
Inhabitants  there,  and  the  Samoyeds.

The  eleventh,  Marmaduke  Wilson  said  that  he  saw  the
Sunne,  but  it  was  but  the  way  of  the  Sunnes  beames.
The  thirteenth,  I  saw  the  Sunnes  beames  my  selfe,  but  I
could  not  see  the  Sun  it  selfe,  although  I  watched  it  very
strictly.  The  fourteenth,  it  was  snowie,  and  stormie
weather,  and  continued  so  untill  the  foure  and  twentieth
day,  which  was  close  weather  also.

The  five  and  twentieth,  being  Christmas  day,  I  saw  the
Sunne,  and  it  rose  at  South  and  by  West,  and  set  at  South-  Sunne
west  and  by  South,  it  having  the  neathermost  part  of  it retumeth.
all the way just with the Horizon. The sixe and
twentieth,  it  was  stormy  and  snowy  weather,  and  so  con-
tinued untill  the  end  of  the  moneth.

The  second  of  Januarie,  the  Sunne  arose  at  South,
somewhat  Westerly,  and  set  South-west  a  little  Southerly,
it  mounting  a  pretie  height  above  the  Horizon.

The  fift,  William  Pursglove  returned  from  Colmogro.
The  eleventh,  the  Sunne  arose  at  South  by  East  by  the
Compasse,  and  set  at  South-west  and  by  West.

The  twelfth,  there  came  a  command  from  the  Patriarch,  [III.iii.54.3.]
that  there  should  bee  a  generall  Fast,  both  for  young  and  General/  Fast
old,  not  exempting  the  sucking  babes:  which  began  the  for  three  dayes
thirteenth,  continuing  three  dayes  space,  they  neither  eat-
ing nor  drinking,  so  much  as  water,  neither  admitted  they
their  sucking  Babes,  save  those  that  fainted,  to  whom  they
gave  a  few  Figs  and  a  little  water.

The  nineteenth,  the  Inhabitants  of  Pustozer  that  went
into  Jugoria,  returned  from  thence,  having  had  but  an
hard  Voyage,  by  reason  of  the  Warres  which  the  Samoyeds
had  amongst  themselves :  so  that  they  durst  not  goe  into
Molgomsey,  where  they  catch  the  most  part  of  the  Sables
which  come  into  Russia.

The  three  and  twentieth,  came  the  Carratchey,  which  is
the  chiefe  of  the  Samoyeds,  but  they  had  no  commodities

very  strict.

22'

A.D.

1612.

Russes  fraud.

February.

Samoyeds
quarrell.

Variation.

The  report  of  a
Russe,  a  great
Traveller  of
the  way  from
Pechora  to  Ob.
Medemskoy
Zavorot.
Zyelensa  two
Hands.
Breit-vinnose.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  speake  of,  by  reason  of  the  Warres :  so  that  they
neither  durst  trade  with  the  Samoyeds  of  Molgomsey,
neither  hunt  for  the  Sables  themselves,  which  at  other
times  they  were  wont  to  doe.  The  thirtieth,  I  had  the
chiefe  Carratchey,  his  sonne,  his  sonnes  sonne,  and  his
brothers  sonne  at  Dinner,  and  had  some  conference  with
him,  who  told  mee,  that  they  had  seene  ships  in  the
Vaygats,  two  yeeres  one  after  another :  but  they  durst  not
bee  seene  of  them,  but  fled  from  them :  for  the  Russes
told  them,  that  they  would  kill  them,  or  carrie  them  away
prisoners.  Yet  they  seemed  to  be  glad  of  our  comming,
when  they  saw  our  behaviour,  and  the  entertaynment  that
they  had  of  us :  Neverthelesse,  they  are  very  timerous,
and  unreasonable  covetous,  as  by  more  acquaintance  I
perceived  by  them.

The  second  of  February,  the  most  part  of  the  Samoyeds
went  to  Slobodca  with  their  commodities,  because  in  the
Summer  they  had  beene  together  by  the  eares  with  the
Samoyeds  of  Callenose,  and  had  slayne  one  or  two  of
them :  wherefore  they  went  to  agree  with  them,  and  to
pay  ransome  for  some  of  their  men  that  were  taken  after-
wards.

The  fifteenth,  the  Sunne  arose  at  South-east,  a  little
Southerly,  and  set  at  West  and  by  South  Westerly.  The
sixteenth,  the  Sunne  arose  at  South-east,  and  set  at  West
due  by  the  Compasse  as  I  could  set  it,  the  variation  being
two  points  Westerly :  for,  at  a  South  South-west,  the
Sunne  commeth  to  the  Meridian.

The  twentieth,  I  had  conference  with  a  Russe,  concern-
ing their  trade  of  Molgomsey,  who  had  beene  there  twice,
and  he  was  the  first  that  ever  attempted  it,  and  none  hath
beene  farther  then  he  to  the  Eastwards.  And  he  told  me,
that  their  course  from  Medenskoy  Zavorot,  at  the  mouth
of  Pechora  to  the  Eastward,  to  the  two  Hands  called
Zyelensa,  is  two  dayes  and  three  nights  distance,  sayling
with  a  faire  wind.  From  thence  to  Breit-vinnose,  three
dayes  and  three  nights  sailing  with  a  faire  wind,  which  is
within  the  Streight  of  Vaygats. And  from  thence  by  an

228

JOSIAS LOGAN

Hand,  or  rather  a  Rocke,  called  Socolia  Lowdia,  leaving  it
on  the  Starboord  side  for  feare  of  Rockes,  still  keeping
your  course  North-east,  untill  you  come  to  a  long  Point
on  the  Starboord  side,  with  a  sand  lying  off  into  the  Sea
three  miles,  some  five  or  sixe  dayes  sayling.  Which  when
you  have  gotten  about,  you  must  hold  your  course  some-
what more  enclining  to  the  South,  five  or  six  dayes  more :
and  then  you  shall  come  to  the  River  of  Ob  ;  against  the
mouth  whereof  lieth  an  Hand :  but  you  must  keepe  the
Sea-boord  of  it,  by  reason  it  is  shoald  betwixt  it  and  the
Mayne.  The  Land  all  alongst  the  shoare  is  a  fine  lowe
Land,  and  the  going  into  the  River,  is  on  the  East  side  of
the  Hand.  The  River  is  reported  to  be  a  Summer  dayes
sayling  over  in  bredth,  and  is  full  of  Hands  :  whereby  they
report  it  to  be  shoald.  Yet,  in  my  opinion,  so  great  a
River  cannot  be  without  a  mayne  channell ;  which  as  yet
they  have  not  sought  for :  and  therefore  they  judge  it
innavigable.  Also  they  report  it  to  bee  very  plentifull  of
Fish  of  divers  sorts :  but  the  people  here,  and  the  Russes
are  unwilling  that  wee  should  goe  thither.  Moreover,
hee  told  mee,  that  from  the  River  Ob  to  the  Eastwards,
the  Land  stretcheth  East,  some  sixe  or  eight  dayes  sayling
more.  To  the  Eastward  of  the  River  Ob  lieth  another
great  River  as  large  as  Ob,  and  is  very  deepe  water,  and
runneth  from  the  South,  how  farre  as  yet  it  is  unknowne.
Although  that  hee  affirmed,  that  he  himselfe  had  sayled  at
the  least  three  weekes  up  the  River :  and  all  along  as  they
went,  they  met  with  sundry  sorts  of  People,  differing  in
Language  one  from  another,  which  they  call  Samoyeds.
Yea,  and  the  People  there  did  certifie  them,  that  up  more
towards  the  South,  there  are  Tartars  inhabiting,  who  ride
upon  Horses.  And  hee  affirmed,  that  they  found  pieces
of  Ploughes  that  had  beene  driven  downe  the  River  by
the  flouds,  caused  by  the  Snow  melting  from  the
Mountaines.  This  River  is  very  high  Land,  and  deepe
water  on  both  sides.  Into  this  River,  on  the  East  side
falleth  another  River,  called  Tingussey,  and  the  Inhabi-
tants thereof  are  so  called  :  whereby  I  conjecture,  that  it

229

A.D.

1612.

Socolia
Lowdia.

A  long  Point.
From  Medem-
skoy  Zavorot
to  Ob.  is  16.
dayes  sayling.

An  Hand.

Obis  full  of
Hands,  broad
and  shoald.

The  people  of
Pechora,  and
the  Russes  are
unwilling  that
we  should  goe
to  Ob.
The  River
Venice.

Samoyeds

Horses.
Ploughes.

The  River  of
the  Tingussey  s.

A.D.

1612.

Tangut
mentioned  by
Polo,  a  large
Kingdom
Northward
from  Cathay,
of  China.
The  River
Pisida.
Gunnes.

March.

[III.iii.544.]

Pustozera  in
68.  degrees
30.  or  35.
minutes.

Aprill.

The  report  of
a  Permack.

Tenissey  :
beyond  it  the
land  trendeth
due  East.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

is  not  farre  from  the  Citie  Tangut  in  Cathay.  These
Tingusses  report,  that  there  is  another  huge  River,  that
trendeth  to  the  Southwards,  which  the  necke  of  a  Land
parteth  from  the  River  of  Tingussey :  wherein  there  are
great  ships,  not  unlike  unto  the  Russes  ships,  that  sayle
in  it,  having  many  Masts  and  Gunnes,  which  when  they
are  shot  off,  make  all  the  earth  shake  with  the  noyse :
which  should  seeme  to  be  the  Chinians  that  trade  thither
in  the  Summer,  and  returne  backe  againe  ere  the  Winter
doth  come.  The  like  also  amrmeth  another,  being  a
Russe,  who  hath  beene  in  the  River  of  Tingussey,  where
the  people  make  this  report.

The  first  of  March,  the  Russes  tooke  their  Journey  from
hence,  from  Pustozer  into  Russia,  with  such  commodities
as  they  bought.

The  twelfth,  the  Sunnes  altitude  by  the  Quadrant  was
67.  degrees  and  40.  minutes ;  and  the  declination,  no
degrees  52.  minutes,  which  being  added,  maketh  68.
degrees  and  30.  minutes,  being  the  true  heigth  of
Pustozer.

The  thirteenth,  the  Sun  arose  at  East  and  by  South  a
little  Southerly,  and  set  at  West  North-west.  This  day
the  Sunnes  altitude  by  the  Quadrant  was  67.  degrees  20.
minutes;  and  the  declination,  1.  degree  15.  minutes:
which  added  together,  maketh  68.  degrees  35.  minutes:
so  that  I  conclude,  that  Pustozer  standeth  in  about  68.
degrees  30.  minutes.  The  eight  and  twentieth,  the  Sunne
arose  at  East  and  by  North,  and  set  at  North-west  and  by
West.

The  eleventh  of  Aprill,  the  Inhabitants  of  this  Towne
returned  from  Slobodca,  bringing  with  them  Rie,  Rie-
meale,  and  other  provisions.

The  one  and  twentieth,  having  conference  with  a  Per-
mack, concerning  what  commodities  were  to  be  had  at  the
Towne  of  Ust-zilma,  he  told  me,  that  there  were  Losh
hides,  Squerrils,  Sables,  white  Foxes,  and  Rosomackes.
Moreover,  he  told  me,  that  beyond  the  River  of  Yenissey,
the  Land  trendeth  due  East,  and  then  there  is  a  River

230

JOSIAS LOGAN

called  Peaseda,  and  beyond  that  another  called  Catonga,
which  runneth  into  Cathay  :  whose  King,  these  Permacks
and  Russes  call  Teulka  tsar.  The  River  lieth  North  and
South  as  they  of  Yenissey  say,  but  they  cannot  tell  how
farre :  for,  there  hath  not  any  beene  up  the  River,  by
reason  they  are  afraid  of  their  shot.  And  this  Permack
told  me,  that  on  the  Sea  coast  betwixt  these  two  Rivers,
Peaseda  and  Catonga,  they  found  certaine  stones  like  unto
Gold,  and  some  like  Silver,  being  about  the  halfe  way
betwixt  the  two  Rivers.

The  two  and  twentieth,  we  had  newes  brought  that  the
Ice  was  broken,  in  the  Pechora,  all  alongst  by  the  sides.

The  ninth  of  May,  the  Sunne  arose  at  North-east
somwhat  Easterly,  and  set  at  North  somwhat  Westerly,  it
being  just  foure  houres  by  the  Houre-glasse  under  the
Horizon.

The  three  and  twentieth,  the  Sun  did  not  goe  under  the
Horizon,  for  it  was  a  pretie  height  above  the  Horizon,
at  a  North  North-east  point  of  the  Compasse :  it  then
being  at  the  lowest.  The  foure  and  twentieth,  we  had
newes  that  the  Pechora  brake  up,  upon  the  twentieth  day
of  this  instant  moneth.  The  sixe  and  twentieth,  at  foure
of  the  clocke  in  the  after-noone,  I  departed  from  Pustozer,
to  goe  to  Ust-zilma,  where  I  arrived  the  thirtieth  day
instant.  And  the  River  of  Pechora  lieth  most  part  North
North-east,  and  South  South-west,  and  sometimes  North
and  South.  Ust-zilma,  is  a  Village  of  some  thirtie  or
fortie  houses,  and  standeth  in  the  height  of  66.  degrees
and  30.  minutes.  They  have  Corne  growing  there,  both
Barley  and  Rie :  and  their  Barley  is  passing  faire  and
white  almost  as  Rice.

The  ninth  of  June,  I  departed  from  Ust-zilma  backe
againe  to  Pustozer,  where  I  arrived  the  eleventh  of  June.
The  one  and  twentieth,  seventeene  Soymas  departed  from
hence  to  goe  to  Molgomsey :  some  belonging  to  this
place,  some  to  Ust-zilma,  and  some  to  Mezen,  and
Penega.  The  two  and  twentieth,  divers  Boats  went  from
hence  to  the  Sea,  to  fish  for  Omelyes  and  Bealowgaes  Oyle.

231

A.D.
l6l2.

Peslda  River.
Catonga
River  runneth
out  of  Cathay.

Stones  like
Gold  and
Silver  in  the
midway
betweene
Pisida  and
Catonga.
May.

The  River  Ice
breakes  up.

Foure  dayes
journey
betweene
Pustozer  and
0 ust-zilma.
Oust-zilma  is
in  66.  degrees
30.  minutes ,
\3  there  grow
faire  Barley
and  Rie.
June.

17.  Soymas
depart
for  Molgomsey.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1612.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  I  sent  downe  William  Pursglove
to  the  Sea  side,  to  buy  the  Oyle  which  God  shall  send
them.
July-  The  third  of  July,  I  received  a  Letter  forth  of  England,

by  the  way  of  Colmogro.

The fift, we had newes that the Governour and
Tom  Souldiers  of  Tom  have  burnt  the  Towne,  and  fled  from

combustion.  thence,  by  reason  they  wanted  victuals,  and  their  pay :
and  about  three  hundred  of  them  intended  to  come  to
Ust-zilma,  to  rob  the  Inhabitants  thereof.  This  day  I
was  told,  that  from  Pustozer  up  Pechora  with  a  faire  wind,
to  the  River  of  Ouse,  is  three  weekes  travell :  and  then
up  the  River  of  Ouse,  to  Podcamen,  ten  dayes,  and  from
thence  to  Ob,  eight  dayes,  drawne  by  Deere :  and  from
thence  to  Beresova,  sixteene  dayes,  which  is  a  Towne  of
trading.  This  mine  Host  told  me,  that  he  was  a  prisoner
at  Beresova,  and  at  Tobolsco :  and  hee  affirmeth,  that
Tobolsco  is  a  Citie  of  great  trade,  and  that  the  Teseeks,
Bowhars,  and  Tartars,  come  thither  to  trade,  who  bring
Silkes,  Velvets,  Grogran,  Sendames,  and  Kindackes,  and
that  great  store  of  Cloth,  Pewter,  and  Copper  may  be
vented  there.  Also  there  is  great  store  of  Furres,  as
Sables,  Squerrils,  Foxes,  Blacke,  Rosamackes,  and  Beavers.
He  sayth,  that  from  Pustozer  to  Vade  in  Jugoria,  which  is
on  this  side  Ob,  with  carriage  upon  Deere,  it  is  a  moneths
Journey,  and  Nosova  is  on  the  other  side  of  Ob  ;  and  it  is
two  weekes  and  an  halfe  with  light  carriage  or  post.
Moreover,  he  told  me,  that  Pechora  runneth  into  Veleka-
permia,  five  weekes  journey  from  Pustozer,  and  from
Veleca  permia  to  Verho  towria,  nine  dayes  journey  by
Horse  and  Sleds  :  and  from  thence  to  Tumen  by  River,
ten  dayes :  and  from  Tumen  to  Tobolsco,  sixe  dayes  by
the  River  Irtish,  and  is  the  chiefe  Citie  of  all  Siberia.
And  from  Tobolsco  to  Sowrgout,  is  sixe  weekes  Journey
up  the  River  Ob,  from  whence  come  all  the  rich  Furres
which  come  to  Arcania.  From  Sowrgout  to  Tome,  which
Intelligence  of  ls  amongst  the  Tartars,  is  three  weekes  up  the  River  Ob  :
the  Countrey. and  yet  none  knoweth  how  farre  the  Ob  runneth  further,

232

JOSIAS LOGAN

as  he  sayth,  he  was  carried  these  wayes  to  the  Musko,  in
the  beginning  of  Rostriga  his  time.

The  sixteenth,  I  was  told  by  a  Permack,  having  some
speech  with  him  concerning  the  Vaygats,  that  from
Medniskoy  Zavorot  to  the  Vaygats,  is  one  day  and  a
nights  sayle  with  a  faire  wind.  And  as  you  goe  forth  of
the  Vaygats,  there  lieth  an  Hand  called  Meastno  Ostrove,
not  being  farre  from  Socolia  Lowdy :  and  from  Vaygats
through  Yougorskoy  shar  into  Oarskoy  gouba,  (which  is
a  great  Bay  and  deepe)  is  two  dayes  and  one  nights  sayling
into  Mowtnoy  River,  the  course  East,  somewhat
Southerly.  And  from  Mowtnoy  to  Sharrappa  shar,  which
is  an  Inlet,  is  halfe  a  dayes  sayling  :  and  from  thence  to
Yowconove  is  halfe  a  dayes  sayling,  which  is  an  high
Land  :  and  from  thence  to  Naromzia  is  a  dayes  sayling.
And  there  are  three  little  Rivers  betwixt  them :  and  there
are  Morses  all  alongst  that  shoare,  and  farther  he  knew
not  by  Sea.  But  he  sayth,  that  the  River  Ob  is  a  dayes
sayling  right  over.  And  from  Zylena  reca  to  the  Taz-
zavorot,  the  course  is  South-east,  a  dayes  sayling  :  and
from  the  Zavorot  of  Taz  to  the  Rivers  mouth,  is  a  day  and
a  nights  sayling :  and  there  is  an  Hand  in  the  mouth
thereof,  being  high  land.  And  from  thence  up  the  River,
the  course  is  South-east  to  the  Towne  eight  dayes  journey,
to  be  haled  with  a  rope,  there  runneth  such  a  streame.
But,  ere  you  come  to  the  Taz  River,  there  is  another
River  on  the  Starboord  side,  called  Powre,  where  they  get
of  the  best  Sables  that  come :  and  you  must  leave  the
Hand  at  the  Taz  on  the  Larboord  side.  And  from  Taz
Towne  up  the  River  Volochanco,  is  sixe  dayes  journey
Easterly  against  the  streame,  untill  you  come  to  a
Vollocke,  about  a  mile  and  an  halfe  long,  Marish  ground,
and  so  into  another  River,  some  foure  dayes  rowing  with
the  streame,  to  the  River  that  is  called  Trowhan,  which
is  a  great  River,  and  falleth  into  Yenissey,  some  three
dayes  journey  more  with  the  streame  :  at  the  entrance
whereof  lieth  an  Hand,  called  by  the  same  name,  whereon
there  is  a  little  Towne  of  the  same  name. From  thence

A.D.

1612.

Course  of
Pechora.

Modeneskoy
zavorot.

Meastnoy
Ostrove.

[in.iii.545.]

Scola  Lowdia.

Towgarkoy

shar.

Carskey

Gouba.

Mowtnoy  a

River.

Sharrappa

Shar.

Towconova.

'Naromzia

River.

Ob.

Zylena  River.

Taz  Zavorot.

Taz  River.

An  Hand  in

the  mouth  of

Taz.

The  Towne.

Powre  River.

An  Hand

called

Trowgan.

233

A.D.

1612.

The  River
Hautike
runneth  out  of
Cathay.

August.
They  depart
from
Pustozera.

Gloubocke  in
69  degrees
12.  minutes.

Co  Hoc  ok  ova.

Mezyou
Sharry.

Oliver
Brunei/.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

downe  the  River  Yenissey  to  the  River  Hautike,  is  twelve
dayes  sayling :  and  it  is  a  great  River,  and  runneth  to  the
East  (as  it  is  thought)  into  Cathay,  which  of  the  Permacks,
is  called  Kithayskoy  Tsarrstua.

The  fift  of  August,  my  selfe,  and  the  Boy,  went  aboord
the  Lodia  departing  from  Pustozer.  The  tenth,  we
arrived  at  the  Gloubocke,  which  are  the  deepe  water,
whither  William  Purseglove  was  come  with  the  Oyle,
where  we  melted  what  we  could,  before  we  departed.  The
twelfth,  I  observed  in  the  Gloubocke,  and  had  it  on  the
Quadrant  56.  degrees  30.  minutes :  and  the  Declination
was  12.  degrees  42.  minutes,  so  it  standeth  in  69.  degrees
12.  minutes.

The  eighteenth,  we  departed  from  the  Gloubocke,  and
entred  the  Dry  Sea,  and  arrived  at  the  Zavorot  the  one
and  twentieth.

The  two  and  twentieth,  we  weighed  and  went  out  to
Sea,  the  wind  at  East  North-east,  but  the  wind  comming
to  the  North-west,  we  put  roomer  againe,  and  came  to  an
Anchor  at  the  Zavorot  againe.  The  foure  and  twentieth,
I  observed  at  the  Zavorot,  and  had  it  on  the  Quadrant  63.
degrees  no  minutes,  and  the  Declination  was  7.  degrees  26.
minutes,  so  it  standeth  in  about  70.  degrees  30.  minutes.

The  six  and  twentieth,  we  departed  from  the  Zavorot
about  noon,  the  wind  being  at  East,  the  land  trending
betwixt  it  &  Collocolcova  East  &  West,  being  two
Voadaes,  or  sixty  Versts  distance.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  we  came  to  an  Hand  called
Mezyou  Sharry,  being  sixtie  Versts  to  the  Eastwards  of
Suatinose,  and  it  is  about  ten  Versts  in  length,  and  two
Versts  broad.  At  the  East  end  thereof,  Oliver  Brunell
was  carried  into  Harbour  by  a  Russe,  where  he  was  Land-
locked, having  the  Hand  on  the  one  side,  and  the  Mayne
on  the  other.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  we  departed  from  Mezyou
Sharry,  the  wind  at  North-east,  a  little  gale,  but  before
night  it  fell  thicke,  and  wee  steered  away  North-west,  and
about  mid-night,  it  came  to  the  North  North-east  blowing

234

JOSIAS LOGAN  a.d.

1612.

a  very  sore  storme :  so  that  we  were  not  able  to  beare  our
sayle  aloft,  and  having  floud  under  foot,  we  were  fogged
into  the  Bay,  and  put  ashoare  some  two  houres  before  day,
upon  the  long  point  of  the  obscure  Harbour,  about  three
miles  to  the  Westwards,  the  wind  being  at  North :  where
we  got  all  our  goods  on  Land,  alwayes  looking  when  the
Lodia  would  have  split.  But,  by  Gods  Almightie  Pro-
vidence, she  beate  over  that  Sand,  and  lay  betwixt  it  and
the  beach  :  so  that  when  the  tyde  was  fallen,  she  sate  on
ground,  as  if  she  had  beene  in  a  creeke,  the  Sands  all  dry
round  about  her.  Also  on  the  West  side  of  Suatinose,  in
the  Bay  is  a  great  River,  called  Indiga,  which  is,  deepe  Indiga.
Water,  and  a  good  Harbour  for  a  ship,  as  the  Russes  doe
report.

The  thirtieth,  the  storme  continued  all  the  day  long.
The  one  and  thirtieth,  about  noone  it  blew  lesse  wind,
and  at  night  we  stopped  our  leakes  as  well  as  we  could.

The  first  of  September,  in  the  morning  wee  got  our  September.
goods  againe  aboord.  The  second,  in  the  morning,  we
went  roomer  with  the  obscure  Harbour,  the  wind  being
at  the  North-west,  but  at  noone,  it  came  to  the  South-
east and  East  South-east,  so  we  weighed,  and  stood  to
the  Westwards  againe,  untill  wee  came  to  the  River,
where  wee  came  on  shoare  the  last  yeere :  which  is  called
Zenovea,  where  wee  anchored  a  little  to  the  Eastwards,
and  ridde  the  most  part  of  that  night.

The  third,  in  the  morning  we  weighed,  and  stood  to
the  Westwards,  but  the  wind  comming  to  the  West  South-
west blowing  hard,  and  having  the  tyde  against  us,  we
anchored  againe  about  ten  of  the  clocke  on  Thursday,
being  the  third  day :  yet  within  two  houres  after,  we  were
forced  to  weigh,  and  put  roomer  to  a  little  River  or
Creeke,  that  is,  called  Creostova :  where  wee  ridde  untill
the  ninth  day.  Then  we  loosed,  thinking  to  have  gone
forth  to  Sea,  the  wind  being  Easterly  ;  but  it  blowing  hard,
and  there  running  a  great  streame  of  fresh  water,  that  it
put  us  on  ground  againe,  wee  were  in  great  danger  againe  [III.iii.546.]
of  losing  all. So  wee  were  forced  to  get  all  things  on

235

A.D.

1612.

Knocke  John.

Danielove
Stolbe.

Churva  Nose.
Arkania.

Colmogro.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

shoare  againe,  and  then  got  her  off  the  eleventh  day,  and
went  into  the  Creake  againe :  and  stopping  our  leakes  as
well  as  we  could,  we  got  our  goods  aboord  againe.

The  fourteenth,  the  winde  comming  to  the  East  South-
east, wee  got  forth  to  Sea  with  much  adoe ;  and  soone
after,  the  winde  came  to  the  East  North-east,  a  faire  gale :
and  wee  stood  it  alongst  the  Land  South-east  and  by
South,  and  North-west  and  by  North  all  that  after-
noone  untill  mid-night ;  at  what  time  we  were  thwart  of
Callenose.  The  fifteenth,  about  three  of  the  clocke  in  the
morning,  the  winde  came  to  the  North-east,  and  blew  very
hard,  so  we  steered  away  South  South-west,  and  at  night
wee  fell  with  a  shoald,  which  they  said,  is  thwart  of  the
Mezen  mouth ;  but  I  take  it,  it  was  Knocke  John.

The  sixteenth,  in  the  morning  about  eight  or  nine  of
the  clocke,  having  carried  but  an  hullocke  of  our  sayle  all
night,  we  fell  with  Danielove  Stolbe  on  the  Coast  of
Lappia,  the  wind  being  at  South,  and  blowing  hard,  so
that  we  went  into  Harbour  at  the  West  of  the  Iland,  there
standing  five  Crosses  on  it,  it  being  a  Rocke.  And  there
are  foure  Warlocks  on  the  Mayne,  and  another  on  a
Rocke  to  the  Westwards :  yet  it  is  but  for  Lodyes,  and
that  a  bad  one  also,  beeing  full  of  Rockes  round  about,
where  we  rid  untill  the  six  and  twentieth.  Then  we
departed  forth  of  Daniela  Stolbe  about  noone,  and  at  night
we  came  to  Sosnovets,  where  we  rid  air  night.  The  seven
and  twentieth,  in  the  morning  we  fell  with  Churva  Nose.
The  eight  and  twentieth,  wee  arrived  at  Arkania,  where
wee  landed  our  Oyle.  The  nine  and  twentieth,  wee
arrived  at  Colmopro.

Extracts  taken  out  of  two  Letters  of  Josias  Logan
from  Pechora,  to  Master  Hakluyt  Prebend  of
Westminster.

THere  use  to  come  hither  in  the  Winter  about  two
thousand  Samoieds  with  their  Commodities,  which
may  be  such  as  we  dreamed  not  on  yet. For  by  chance

236

JOSIAS LOGAN

A.D.

1612.

one  came  to  us  with  a  piece  of  an  Elephants  Tooth,  which This  piece  of

he  said  he  bought  of  a  Samoied. And  heere  are  men an  Elephants

called  Tingussies,  whose  Countrey  is  beyond  the  Rivers

of  Obi,  and  Taes ;  and  bordereth  upon  the  great  River

Yenisse  :  which  is  a  good  River  and  a  deepe,  and  falleth

into  the  Sea  Naromzie  : And  it  should  seeme  it  is  not

farre  from  China. Therefore  you  may  conceive  what  hope

there  is  of  this  Enterprize,  if  it  please  God  it  may  be

followed  as  it  ought  to  be. Thus  beseeching  Almightie

God  to  blesse  you  and  us,  I  commit  you  to  the  protection

of  him,  who  is  the  giver  of  all  goodnesse,  Jul.  24.  161 1.

Tooth  was  sent
into  England.

The  Sea
Naromzie.

THere  come  two  or  three  thousand  Samoieds  hither  to
trade  with  their  Sables,  Beavers,  Blacke  Foxes,
Squirrels,  Wolfes,  Rosomackes,  Ermines.  And  here  is
caught  in  September,  good  store  of  Salmon,  Traine  of  a
certayne  great  fish,  called  a  Bealouga,  and  Morsses,  and
Seales  Oyle  in  the  Sommer  time,  and  White  Foxes  and
Feathers.  I  had  some  conference  with  a  Russe,  who  told
mee  that  the  Samoieds  told  him,  that  there  lye  Minchins,
which  in  their  Language  is  strangers,  buried  in  the  Sand
in  Coffins,  with  their  armes  a  crosse  their  brests :  which
they  estimate  to  be  about  sixtie  yeeres  ago  :  And  that
they  found  Writing  Tables  in  one  of  their  pockets,  and
other  small  Trifles  which  they  tooke  away.  The  Vaygats
is  sometimes  open  and  sometimes  shut :  and  upon  them
groweth  Christall  of  the  Mount.  The  Russes  and  Per-
macks  trade  yeerely  with  them  of  the  River  Obi,  and
beyond.  They  goe  by  Sea  into  the  great  Bay  beyond
Pechora,  called  Yowgorsky  Shar :  into  which  there  fall
foure  Rivers ;  The  Eastermost  whereof  they  call  Cara
Reca,  or  the  Blacke  River ;  beyond  which  they  passe  unto
another,  called  Moetnaia  Reca ;  then  they  come  to  a  Voloc
or  necke  of  Land,  which  continueth  but  three  Versts  ;  over
which  they  draw  their  Boats  and  goods,  and  so  come  to
another  River,  called  Zelena  Reca,  or  The  Greene  River,
which  bringeth  them  into  Obi :  Into  which  on  the  Easter
side,  the  River  Taes  falleth,  making  but  one  mouth  with

237

In  another
Letter  from
Pechora,
August  16.

Chry stall upon
the  Vaygats.

Yowgorsky
Shar.
Cara  Reca.

Moetnaia

Reca.

The  Voloc  or

necke  of  Land.

Z,elena  Reca.

Obi  River.

Taes  River.

A.D.

1612.

Tenissey
River.

Tinguissey  a
people.

A  White
Citie.

Great  ringing
of  B  els.

Horses.

People  in
Armour.

They  are  not
far  re  from
Cataia  and
China.
[III.iii.547.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  River  Obi,  being  shoald,  and  they  report  it  to  bee  as
broad  toward  the  mouth,  as  a  man  can  discerne  over,
having  many  Hands  therein.

Moreover,  there  is  another  great  River,  called  Yenissey
beyond  Taes  :  which  they  say,  is  rather  bigger  and  deeper
then  Obi ;  and  it  runneth  up  into  the  Land  no  man
knoweth  how  farre :  Although  they  have  discovered  some
fourteene  dayes  rowing  up  therein  :  neither  can  they  learne
of  the  Inhabitants  thereof  how  farre  it  stretcheth ;  whom
they  call  Tingussey :  who  are  a  proper  people  of  them-
selves. And  the  Samoieds  report  that  they  have  travelled
so  farre,  that  they  came  within  sight  of  a  White  Citie  or
Towne :  which  should  seeme  to  be  builded  of  stone,  for
they  durst  not  goe  to  make  triall :  and  they  heard  great
ringing  of  Bels.  Also  they  say,  that  they  saw  beasts,
but  they  were  not  like  their  Deere ;  for  they  had  a  great
Mane,  a  long  Taile,  no  Homes,  and  their  footing  was
round,  not  cloven,  as  their  Deeres  are :  and  they  use  to
ride  upon  their  backs,  and  not  to  draw  in  Sleds  as  their
Deere  use  to  doe.  These  I  assure  my  selfe  are  Horses.
And  further  they  report,  that  there  came  people  unto
them  all  made  of  Iron,  their  heads,  armes,  hands,  and
legges :  so  that  neither  Arrowes,  Swords,  nor  Speares,
could  enter ;  which,  as  I  conjecture,  were  people  in
Armour.  For  they  said,  that  two  hundred  of  them  they
thought  were  able  to  conquer  all  their  Realme.  By  this
you  may  gather,  that  they  are  not  farre  from  Cataia  and
China.  Thus  have  I  shewed  unto  you  the  greatest  secret,
and  the  neerest  to  the  truth  that  I  know.  Requesting
you,  if  you  thinke  it  meet,  that  the  Right  Honourable
the  Earle  of  Salisburie  might  have  a  Copie  thereof.  Thus
wishing  you  health  and  prosperitie  in  this  World,  and
felicitie  in  the  World  to  come,  I  cease.

238

WILLIAM PURSGLOVE

A.D.
l6ll.

Pechora,  and
yeere 161 1.

Chap.  XL

A  briefe  Relation  of  a  Voyage  to
wintering  there,  began  in  the
Written  by  William  Pursglove.

Aster  Josias  Logan,  and  William  Gourdon,
having  received  directions  from  the  Right
Worshipfull  Company  of  English  Mer-
chants, Trading  Russia.  The  eleventh
of  Aprill,  161 1.  departed  from  Blacke-
wall  in  the  River  of  Thames,  in  a  good
ship,  called  the  Amitie ;  whereof  James

Vadum  of  Rederiffe  was  Master.

The  sixteenth  of  July,  we  arrived  at  Pustozera,  being
much  wondred  at  by  the  Inhabitants,  a  Permac  received  us
into  his  House,  and  let  us  have  a  Warehouse  for  our
goods.  We  all  continued  there  untill  the  five  and
twentieth  of  July.  Then  wee  returned  in  our  Shallop
againe  to  our  ship,  having  a  small  Russe  Boate  in  our
company,  to  carrie  some  of  the  Feathers  and  Downe,
which  we  brought  there,  our  owne  Boat  not  beeing  able
to  carrie  all,  being  pestered  with  our  Provision,  and  some
Feathers,  and  White  Foxes.  Wee  came  aboord  our  ship
the  seven  and  twentieth  of  July,  where  wee  delivered  those
White  Foxes,  Feathers,  and  Downe,  and  an  exceeding  rich
blacke  Foxe  skinne,  having  laded  the  Russe  Boate  with
part  of  our  goods.  The  rest  of  our  goods  they  laid  upon
the  Sand  to  be  sent  up  afterward,  leaving  mee  and  Marma-
duke  Wilson,  and  an  hired  Russe  with  them,  where  wee
attended  to  heare  of  Boates  from  the  Towne.  But  Master
Logan  not  hearing  of  any  above  a  tunne  and  an  halfe,
could  not  get  any  to  come  downe  to  us ;
feared  to  goe  over  the  dry  or  shoald  Sea
Boates  being  laden.

The  one  and  thirtieth,  our  ship  departed  over  the  Barre,
purposing  to  make  their  Voyage  in  Nova  Zembla,  or
some Hands not farre distant from thence. At their

They  were
first  received
into  a  Per-
macks  House.

an

because  they
their  little

in

239

A.D.
l6ll.

August.

November.
His  Voyage
over-land  to
Siobotca  and
Colmogro.
Mountaynes
iff  Cameniy  or
Rockes.

He  arriveth  at
Siobotca,  the 9.
of  December
in  16.  dayes

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

departure  there  were  five  and  twentie  Coaches  or  Soymas,
in  that  Road  of  Pechora,  with  at  least  two  hundred  men
in  them  bound  for  Molgomsey ;  but  hindered  by  contrary
Windes  and  Ice,  our  shippes  being  over  the  Barre,  they
all  came  on  shoare  to  us ;  some  threatning,  others  flatter-
ing us,  but  after  I  had  bestowed  two  Bottles  of  Beere
among  some  of  the  best  of  them,  they  all  went  up  to
Pustozeras  where  most  of  them  that  had  any  goods  to  sell
stayed  all  Winter,  and  sold  their  Commodities  in  barter
with  the  Inhabitants,  and  when  they  could  happen  secretly
upon  any  Samoieds,  they  would  be  trading  with  them
also  :  which  is  contrarie  to  the  Priviledges  granted  by  the
Emperour  to  the  Pustozerits.  Their  Wintering  there
was  no  little  hinderance  to  us  for  the  sale  of  our  goods.

We  arrived  at  the  Towne  the  seventh  of  August.  In
mine  absence  Master  Logan  had  hired  part  of  an  House
of  one,  called  Tiffon  Vriawich,  a  Polonian,  who  was
turned  Russe.

The  three  and  twentieth  of  November,  I  departed  from
Pustozera  to  goe  for  Russia,  at  three  of  the  clocke  in  the
afternoone,  in  the  Company  of  certayne  Russes,  Permacks,
and  Samoieds,  which  Samoieds  were  our  Guides  over  the
Mountaynes :  and  one  dayes  journey  over  the  Rocks,
which  they  call  Cameni,  which  are  not  Rockie  Hills,  as  in
Norway,  but  high  Lands,  yet  in  most  places  smooth,  and
most  marish  grounds  full  of  little  Hillocks,  which  being
covered  with  Snow  and  frozen,  did  not  much  annoy  us.
Our  Argeshey  or  Caravan  were  about  two  hundred  and
ten  Sleds,  drawne  the  most  part  with  two  Deere  in  a  Sled.
They  had  also  about  two  hundred  spare  Deere,  to  ease
the  wearied.  We  kept  company  untill  the  fourth  of
December  together,  having  passed  two  third  parts  of
our  way  to  Siobotca,  being  the  first  Towne  in  the  Countrey
of  Mesen,  that  we  saw.  And  then  in  company  of  foure
Sleds,  having  each  two  choice  Buckes,  with  a  Samoied  in
the  fift  for  our  Guide,  we  left  the  Argeshey,  and  rid  post
for  Siobotca,  where  wee  arrived  the  ninth  of  December,  at
ten  of  the  clocke  at  night. In  this  Towne  I  found  one

240

WILLIAM PURSGLOVE

Thomas  Ligon  an  Englishman,  who  had  served  Master
Richard  Cockes  of  London,  who  saluting  mee  in  English,
marvelled  much  to  meet  me  there :  and  carried  me  from
the  rest  of  my  company  to  his  Lodging,  and  gave  me
there  very  kind  entertaynment.  The  next  morning  I
departed  thence  in  his  Sled,  having  over  night  hired  an
Horse  to  the  next  Towne,  which  was  flfteene  Versts  off :
And  so  travelling  day  and  night,  changing  Horses  at
every  convenient  place,  I  came  to  Colmogro  the  twelfth
of  December :  and  delivered  my  Letters  from  Master
Josias  Logan  our  Factor  in  Pustozera,  to  Master  Fabian
Smith,  then  Agent  for  the  English  Company.  Having
rested  my  selfe  foure  dayes  there,  and  received  certayne
Money  to  helpe  to  put  off  some  of  our  goods  at  Pechora,
I  departed  from  Colmogro  the  seventeenth  of  December,
and  came  to  Slobotca  the  nineteenth  day  ;  the  height  of
the  Pole  being  there  some  sixtie  five  degrees.  I  stayed
there  till  the  two  and  twentieth  of  the  said  moneth,  by
which  time  the  Permacks  and  the  Inhabitants  of
Pustozera,  were  readie  to  returne  to  Pechora  with  their
goods,  being  Rie,  Malt,  Hops,  Salt,  Aqua-vitae,  and  some
course  Cloth.  Moreover,  divers  Russes  having  their
Sonnes  or  Kinsmen  Leigers  there,  in  Winter  doe  send
Cloth  and  Money  over  Land.

Having  made  my  provision  for  my  journey,  and  taken
my  leave  of  Master  Thomas  Ligon,  wee  set  forward  that
night,  and  rid  not  above  five  and  twentie  Versts,  to  a
place  where  wee  found  the  Argeshey  which  set  out  from
Slobotca  the  two  and  twentieth  day  in  the  morning  by
breake  of  day.  We  had  better  passage  in  our  returne,
then  we  had  in  our  journey  from  Pustozera,  by  reason  of
much  Snow  fallen  in  the  time  of  our  being  in  Russia,  and
frozen  so  hard,  that  it  bare  both  Deere  and  Sleds  in  all
places.  Wee  kept  together  with  the  Argeshey,  being
then  two  hundred  and  fiftie  Sleds,  till  we  had  passed  more
then  two  thirds  of  our  way  over  the  Mountaynes :  and
then  long  before  day  having  chosen  Buckes  of  the  best,
wee  departed  the  fourth  of  Januarie,  being  eight  Sleds  in
xiii  241  Q

A.D.
l6l2.

Thomas  Ligon.

He  arrive  that
Colmogro  the
12.  of
Decemb.

[III.iii.548.]

Snow  better eth
their  Travell.

The  fourth  of
Januarie.

A.D.

1612.

Mosse  food for
the  Deere.

The  manner  of
travelling
with  the
Samoieds.

Their  Tents.

Hard-soft
lodging.

Poore
Samoieds.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

company,  and  rid  post  all  that  day  and  night  following,
beeing  Moone-light,  save  sometimes  for  the  space  of  an
houre  that  wee  stayed  where  the  Samoied  our  Guide
knew  there  was  good  store  of  Mosse,  (which  is  white)  to
refresh  our  Deere.  The  fifth  of  Januarie,  we  came  to
Pustozera,  having  in  fortie  houres  travelled  three  hundred
and  fiftie  Versts  with  our  choice  Buckes.  Our  Argeshey
or  Caravan  arrived  there  after  us  the  twelfth  of  Januarie.

The  Samoieds  being  the  onely  Guides  in  Winter,  either
from  Pustozera  to  Slobotca,  or  to  any  other  places  East-
ward, as  Ougoria,  Siberia,  or  Molgomsey  know,  by  their
continuall  travell,  the  way,  though  it  be  never  so  thick
weather,  as  also  where  most  store  of  white  Mosse  is  grow-
ing :  and  according  as  they  find  themselves  neere  unto
some  mossie  place,  be  it  somthing  before  night,  or  within
night  foure  or  five  houres  before  they  can  come  thither :
there  for  that  Night  they  pitch  their  Tents,  being  for  the
most  part  made  of  Deere  and  Elkes  skinnes :  we  had  in
our  companie  foure  great  Tents  set  up,  and  some  twentie
under  each  Tent.  This  worke  of  pitching  the  Tents
belongeth  unto  the  Women.  In  the  meane  time  the  men
unyoake  the  Deere,  and  turne  them  loose  to  digge  through
the  Snow,  bee  it  never  so  deepe,  for  their  food  and
sustenance.  Then  the  Samoieds  (of  every  Tent  one)  out
of  the  next  Wood,  provide  as  much  Fuell  as  shall
their  turnes  for  their  abode  there.  First,  they  set
Kettles  full  of  Snow  water,  which  being  melted,  they
drinke  thereof  every  one  a  good  draught :  then  they
seeth  their  Supper,  using  as  before  Snow  water  melted  for
their  Drinke.  Our  lodgings  were  upon  the  Snow  within
our  Tents,  round  about  the  Fire,  having  under  us  for  our
Beds  the  skinnes  of  Deere,  covered  with  our  day  apparell.
For  all  the  time  of  our  journey,  the  Merchants,  whether
Stranger,  Russe,  or  Permac,  according  to  the  number  of
them,  make  provision  of  Victuals  to  feed  the  whole
familie  in  every  Tent,  every  man  his  day  about,  together
with  the  Samoieds,  their  Wives  and  Children ;  who  carrie
all  their  Houshold  every  where  with  them  ;  and  out  of

242

serve
on

WILLIAM PURSGLOVE

their  Sonnes  and  Daughters,  they  appoint  a  watch  over
their  Deere,  for  feare  of  the  Wolfe  and  other  Beasts,
which  notwithstanding  their  watch  sometimes  kill  in  a
night  one  or  two  of  their  Deere,  as  it  fell  out  two  nights
in  our  journey  to  Slobotca.  This  Slobotca  is  a  pretie
Towne,  having  in  December  and  Januarie,  great  resort  of
people  repayring  thither,  as  well  Rich  Russes  out  of  many
places,  with  money  to  buy  Furres,  as  others  with  provision
of  Meale  and  Malt,  and  other  Commodities,  to  furnish
the  Pustozerits,  as  also  to  buy  Fish,  to  wit,  Salmons,  Oyle
of  Bealugos,  Deere  skinnes,  and  Furres  of  them.

The  tenth  of  January,  the  Inhabitants  of  Pustozera,
returned  from  Trading  with  the  Samoieds  of  Ougoria,  on
which  Journey  they  set  forward  the  five  and  twentieth  of
November  :  and  within  three  dayes  after,  came  betwixt
eight  or  nine  hundred  Samoieds  with  a  small  quantitie  of
their  Commodities,  in  respect  of  former  yeeres,  by  reason
of  Warre  betweene  the  Samoieds  of  Ougoria,  and
Molgomsey,  who  were  wont  to  Trade  one  with  another,
and  not  to  warre  one  against  another.  So  Sables,  and
other  Commodities  being  scant,  the  inhabitants  sold  them
very  deare :  yet  notwithstanding,  the  Russes  bought  up
all,  striving  one  to  have  them  before  another.  So  that
after  that  little  money,  which  we  had  was  bestowed,  wee
could  not  doe  any  thing  in  barter.  Moreover,  the  Russes
did  not  onely  informe  against  us  to  the  Inhabitants  to
stirre  them  up  against  us,  but  also  used  the  like  meanes  to
the  Samoieds  to  disswade  them  from  trading  with  us,
either  in  their  owne  Countries,  or  else-where ;  alleadging
that  wee  would  betray  them,  and  not  onely  carrie  them
away  to  make  them  Slaves,  and  robbe  them,  but  also  would
murther  and  destroy  all  the  rest,  wheresoever  wee  should
come.  The  Inhabitants  also  of  Pustozera,  being  incensed
by  the  Russes,  doubting  wee  would  enter  farther  into  their
Trade  Eastward,  began  also  to  hinder,  and  forbid  the
Samoieds  to  come  to  us.  Yet  by  meanes  of  our  Hoast
being  a  Poke  borne,  we  spake  with  divers  of  the  principall
of  the  Samoieds,  hee  being  our  Interpreter,  and  wee  our

243

A.D.
l6l2.

Dangerous
Wolves.

Slobotca.

Trade  with
the  Samoieds
of  Ougoria.

Eight  or  nine
hundred
Samoieds  come
to  Pustozera.

The  false  sug-
gestions of  the
Russes  against
us.

A.D.

1612.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

selves  understood  certayne  Samoieds  speaking  broken
Russe,  and  by  these  meanes  we  found  out  more  at  large
the  despitefulnesse  of  the  Russes,  and  the  envie  of  some
of  the  Inhabitants  against  us ;  as  also  their  feare,  least  wee
or  any  other  Stranger,  should  enter  into  further  Discoverie
of  their  trafficking  toward  the  East,  but  especially  about
the  River  Ob.  Some  sayd  we  were  sent  as  spyes  to  betray
their  Land  to  the  Pole  or  the  Swethen,  with  whom  they
then  had  warre.  Some  gave  counsell  to  put  us  under  the
Water  :  others  advised  to  set  us  upon  the  Sand,  where
wee  should  have  beene  without  all  doubt  drowned  in  short
[III.iii.549.]  space,  others  thought  best  to  send  us  up  to  the  Nobilitie,
and  to  seaze  on  all  our  goods  to  the  use  of  the  State.  But
divers  of  the  best  in  the  Towne,  with  whom  wee  kept  all
friendship  that  possible  we  could,  withstood  those  bloudie
practises. The  Lord  therefore  bee  blessed.

The  fifth  of  March,  the  Inhabitants  of  Pustozer  went
againe  to  Slobotca,  carrying  the  Russes  with  their  Com-
modities thither.

They  returned  home  the  eleventh  of  Aprill,  1612.
The  one  and  twentieth  of  Aprill,  water  was  first  seene
upon  the  maine  River  Pechora  above  the  Ice,  descending
from  above  Oust-zilma.

The  twentieth  of  May,  the  Ice  brake  up.  The  five  and
twentieth  of  May,  certayne  of  the  Inhabitants  of  Pustozer,
went  by  water  unto  Oust-zilma.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  Josias  Logan  with  our  Hoast
the  Polonian,  hired  a  Boate  and  went  toward  Oust-zilma,
carrying  with  him  certayne  Cloath  and  Copper  Kettles,  in
hope  to  sell  them  well  there,  being  intreated  in  the
Summer  before  by  one  of  their  Townesmen  to  come
thither,  or  to  send  one  to  Winter  there  :  alledging  that
they  got  great  store  of  Losh-hydes,  Squirrels,  Sables,  and
Bevers.  Which  some  yeeres  indeed,  as  we  were  credibly
informed,  falleth  out  according  to  his  report.  But  at  his
arrivall  there,  divers  of  the  Townesmen  came  against  him,
and  would  not  suffer  him  nor  any  of  his  Boate  to  Land  for
the  space  of  ten  houres :  but  in  the  end,  they  let  him  goe

244

March.

Aprill,  1 61  2.

May  20.  the
Ice  brake  up.

Our  men
intreated  to
winter  at
Oust-zilma.

WILLIAM PURSGLOVE  a.d.

1612.

on shoare, after, as wee suppose, the Inhabitants of

Pustozer  had  bought most  of  their  Commodities. So

that  hee  staying  there  two  dayes,  could  get  but  nine  Losh-

hydes,  and  halfe  a  timber  of  course  Sables,  in  barter  for

some  Cloath  and  Copper. The  principall  cause  of  his

going  thither,  was,  to  meete  with  some  of  the  Permacks

out  of  Permia,  who  some  yeeres  come  downe  with  Rie,

and  Rie-meale,  and  thought  to  have  given  notice  to  those

Permacks  of  our  being  at  Pustozer,  and  to  have  willed

them to have perswaded their  Countrey-men to bring

thither  the  next  Spring  following  all  their  Commodities,

being  Waxe,  Honey,  Losh-hydes,  and  Furres,  which  they

might  doe  for  halfe  the  charge  that  they  are  at  in  bringing

them  to  Archangell,  on  the  River  Duina.

Oust-zilma  is  a  pretie  Towne  of  some  sixtie  Houses : Oust-zilma,
and  is  three  or  foure  dayes  sayling  with  a  faire  wind  against
the  streame  from  Pustozer,  but  backe  againe  they  may
sayle  it  in  two  dayes.

The third of June, came the first Russes in their  June  3.
Cayooks  by  River  out  of  Russia to  Pustozer. These
Cayooks,  be  small  Boates  of  two  tunnes,  having  two  men
in  each  Boate.

The  twentieth  of  June,  nine  Russe  Coaches  or  Soymas, Sixteene
passed by Pustozer from Oust-zilma for Molgomsey. Soymas  depart
The  one  and  twentieth,  sixe  Russe  Soymas  more  departed  JorMolg°msey-
from Pustozer : all the rest having given over their
Voyage,  which  came  thither  the  Summer  before, 1 6 1 1 .
The two and twentieth, one Soyma belonging to the
Towne  of  Pustozer,  departed  for  Molgomsey.

The  three  and  twentieth,  and  foure  and  twentieth,  the
Inhabitants  of  Pustozer,  went  to  Fish  for  Bealugos  under  Fishing  for
the  Bolvan,  being  the  highest  Land  neere  unto  the  Drie  Bealugos
Sea,  and  two  dayes  sayling  from  the  Towne.  under  the

The  five  and twentieth, I departed  after  them, and °va
arrived  there  the  seven  and  twentieth,  hoping  to  have
provided  good  store  of  Bealugos  Oyle. But  it  fell  out
contrarie  : though  there  were  above  fiftie  Boates,  having
in  every  Boate  three  men,  and  in  many  foure,  by  reason

245

A.D.

1612.

Manner  of
killing  them.
The  Russes
upon  the  Ice
use  to  kill  the
Morse  as  they
doe  their
Bealugo:  but
their  rope  is
longer,  and  a
ban'ell  made
fast  at  one  end
to  buoy  it.

Samoieds
povertie.

Bealugo  made
meate  in
Italie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

it  pleased  God  to  send  such  windie  and  stormie  weather,
that  the  Boates  could  not  goe  to  Sea  in  many  dayes
together,  during  their  wonted  time  of  Fishing  for  those
Beasts ;  being  till  the  twentieth  of  July.  Then  every
man  leaveth  that  Fishing,  and  repaire  to  their  owne
Fisherie,  to  hunt  Ducks,  Geese,  and  Swannes,  which  most
yeeres  they  get  in  abundance,  and  make  good  profit  of
their  Feathers  and  Downe :  as  also  of  their  Flesh,  which
they  salt  up  in  Caske  for  Winter  provision,  serving  them
also  all  the  Summer  for  Flesh  dayes.  These  Bealugos
they  catch  with  harping  Irons,  tyed  fast  to  a  long  rope  of
ninetie  or  an  hundred  fathoms,  with  a  staffe  of  the  length
of  two  yards  or  somewhat  longer,  being  put  loose  into  the
Iron,  wherewith  when  the  beast  commeth  within  the  reach
of  him  that  striketh,  he  smiteth  him  with  the  Iron,  leaving
it  in  the  Beast :  then  the  rope  being  layed  out  cleere  to
vere  out,  the  man  holding  his  Staffe  still  in  his  hand :  but
the  Beast  being  wounded  hasteneth  to  the  bottome,  where
having  beate  himselfe  neare  to  death,  they  hall  in  their
rope  by  little  and  little,  the  Beast  ascending  thereby.  And
if  they  finde  him  not  neere  death,  they  strike  him  againe :
and  being  dead  they  cut  off  his  skinne  with  the  fat  on  it  in
many  parts,  some  the  breadth  of  two  hands,  some  more  or
Jesse.  Then  comming  on  shoare,  they  take  the  Fat  from
the  skinne,  .and  cut  it  in  small  peeces  to  dissolve  it  to
Oyle,  casting  away  the  Flesh  which  is  red,  to  the  Fowles
of  the  Sea ;  except  some  poore  Samoied  come  that  way,
who  taketh  it,  though  it  have  lyen  putrifying  two  or  three
dayes,  and  dryeth  it,  and  maketh  good  cheare  with  it  with
his  Familie.  This  Beast  is  as  bigge  as  two  good
Sturgions.  Moreover,  I  was  informed  by  an  ancient
Traveller,  that  the  Flesh  and  Fat  of  that  Beast,  being  cut
as  Beefe  and  salted  in  Caske,  is  a  great  and  rich  Com-
moditie  in  Italie ;  which  cannot  chuse  but  to  bee  much
better  then  young  Whales,  which  I  have  heard  that  the
Biskayners  use  to  preserve  for  good  meate.  With  the
Fat  of  some  one  of  these  Beasts,  they  will  fill  three  Barrels,
of  some  lesser  two  barrels,  and  some  yeeld  but  one  barrel!

246

WILLIAM PURSGLOVE

of  Blubber,  which  they  call  Shilliga.  In  that  Summer
when  I  was  there,  by  reason  of  Northerly  windes  blowing
hard,  they  killed  by  all  their  Boates  not  above  fortie
Beasts  :  with  some  Boate  they  killed  two,  with  other  three,
with  some  foure. But  with  most  not  one.

The  thirteenth  of  July,  I  received  a  Letter  from  Master
Josias  Logan,  the  effect  whereof  was ;  That  the  Company
of  our  English  Merchants  of  Russia,  had  sent  a  Boate  out
of  Russia  by  River,  which  stood  them  in  foureteene
Rubbels  or  Marks,  for  us  to  goe  in  her,  or  by  Lodia  for
Russia.  For  they  were  purposed  not  to  send  a  Ship  for
us  that  yeere.

The  ninth  of  August,  Master  Josias  Logan,  and
Marmaduke  Wilson,  came  from  the  Towne  of  Pustozera
in  a  Lodia  to  goe  for  Russia,  and  Anchored  in  the
Glowbuc,  which  is  a  deepe  place  of  the  River.  Heere
wee  stayed  ten  dayes  to  make  up  our  Oyle.  In  the  meane
time  the  Lodia  got  her  full  lading  with  Omelies,  and
Seegies  salted  in  Caske,  attending  a  faire  winde.

The  ninth  of  August,  wee  set  sayle  out  of  the  Glowbuc,
and  entred  the  Suchoi-morie,  that  is,  The  Drie  or  shoald
Sea,  and  stirred  away  next  hand  North  North-east.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  a  little  before  day,  not  thinking
wee  had  beene  so  neere  the  Land,  we  were  on  the  Breches
of  Promoi  Coskoi,  or  the  Sands  of  Promoi,  a  bad  Harbour
so  called  by  the  Russes,  and  beate  over  one  Sand  by  Gods
providence  onely,  so  high,  being  halfe  full  of  water,  that
in  dispaire  of  ever  getting  her  off  againe,  wee  unladed
most  of  the  goods,  as  Fish,  Oyle,  Feathers,  Downe,  and
Losh-hydes,  as  soone  as  it  began  to  bee  day-light,  and  that
the  Russes  knew  us  to  bee  upon  the  mayne  Land.  The
thirtieth  day,  being  somewhat  calme,  and  the  wind
Easterly,  but  thicke  weather  still,  there  came  three  men
from  Vasilie  Beregen  his  Lodia,  who  was  our  Consort,
while  wee  were  working  to  get  our  Lodia  a  floate  againe,
and  told  us,  that  their  Lodia  was  beaten  in  peeces  upon
the  mayne  Land,  some  seven  or  eight  Versts  to  the  West-
ward off  us. The  one  and  thirtieth,  wee  laboured  againe,

247

A.D.
l6l2.

[III.iii.550.]
July  13.
A  Boate  sent
by  River  to
Pustozera,  to
fetch  home
Master  Logan
and  his
Company  into
Russia.
August.

The  Gloubuc.

Promoi  Coskoi.

A.D.

1612.

September.

'North-west
windes  cause
high  Tides  on
this  Coast.
Much  Snozu.

Candinos.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  by  Gods  assistance  got  her  a  floate,  having  taken  out
almost  all  her  goods :  and  that  night  laded  some  part
againe.

The  first  of  September,  wee  got  all  our  goods  aboord,
and  at  Night-tide  being  faire  weather,  the  winde  North-
west and  Moone-light,  wee  put  from  that  comfortlesse
place,  and  went  into  the  Promoi  Harbour,  having  on  the
Barre  nine  or  ten  foote  water ;  but  within  foure  or  five
fathoms.  A  South-west  Moone  maketh  there  a  full  Sea.
It  is  in  the  great  Bay  betweene  Suetinos  and  Candinos.
The  second,  the  winde  at  East  North-east  faire  weather,
wee  set  sayle  with  our  leake  Lodia,  the  Pumpe  never
resting.

The  third,  the  winde  variable,  wee  sayled  along  the
shoare  till  about  Noone :  then  the  wind  comming  to  the
West,  wee  put  backe  againe  for  Christova  Stanovecha,
which  is  the  Crosse  Harbour,  where  wee  rode  in  a  fine
River,  having  a  bad  Barre.

The  ninth,  in  the  Morning  wee  purposed  to  put  to  Sea
againe,  the  winde  Easterly :  but  the  Barre  was  so  growne
and  warped  up  with  sands,  when  wee  came  upon  the
entrance  of  it,  that  we  could  not  passe  over,  neither  with
Wind  nor  Oares,  but  were  forced  upon  the  mayne :  where
our  Lodia  was  beaten  so  high  upon  the  sand,  that  all  hope
of  saving  her  was  past.  That  day  wee  got  out  of  her
an  hundred  Barrels  of  Fish  and  Oyle,  and  yet  we  could
not  get  her  off  againe.

The  tenth,  the  winde  being  at  North-west,  caused  high
Tides,  by  which  meanes  we  got  her  off,  and  brought  her
againe  into  Harbour.  The  eleventh  wee  had  so  much
winde  and  Snow,  that  we  could  not  get  our  goods  aboord
all  that  day.  The  twelfth,  we  got  all  aboord,  having
stopped  most  of  our  leakes  with  Mosse  and  old  Cloutes.

The  thirteenth,  the  wind  at  East,  faire  weather,  wee  put
to  Sea  out  of  that  bad  Harbour,  leaving  one  of  our  Boates
there,  and  eight  Barrels  of  Fish  to  ease  our  leake  Lodia.
The  fourteenth,  about  mid-night  we  were  thwart  of
Candinos,  and  stirred  South-west,  and  South  South-west

248

WILLIAM PURSGLOVE

A.D.
1613.

all  the  next  day  :  but  the  Night  following  being  much
winde,  the  Russes  esteeming  themselves  to  bee  on  the
Westerne  shoare,  strooke  sayle,  and  by  Day-light  we  saw
Land  to  the  Westward  of  the  White  Sea,  being  the  six-
teenth day :  and  wee  were  forced  againe  into  another  bad
Harbour,  called  Danilo  Stolb,  that  is,  Daniels  Piller,  on  Danilo  Stolb
the  Coast  of  Lapland,  where  we  made  our  Lodia  fast  'tn  Lapland.
among  the  Rockes  :  where  shee  lay  drie  halfe-tide,  and  lay
there  beenept  and  wind-bound  untill  the  sixe  and
twentieth  day :  and  then  at  Tide-time  wee  got  out  of  that
place.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  wee  entred  into  the  River  of
Duyna,  and  landed  that  night  at  the  Castle  of  Archangel Archangel.
in  the  English  House,  all  our  Oyle,  Losh-hydes,  and  other
goods,  as  Feathers,  Downe,  &c.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  about  mid-night  we  came  to
the  English  House  at  Colmogro,  and  there  continued  all Colmogro.
the  Winter.

The  three  and  twentieth  of  Aprill  1613.  the  River  of
Duyna  brake  up  at  Archangel.

Other  Observations  of  the  sayd  William  Pursglove.

FRom  Medenskoie  Zavorot  to  the  He  of  Vaygats,  is
two  dayes  sayling  with  a  Russe  Lodia.  From
Vaygats  to  the  River  Ob,  is  foure  dayes  sayling.  The
River  Ob  lyeth  North  and  South.  The  course  from
Vaygats  to  Toukoi-coscoy,  is  North-east ;  and  from  thence
East  to  the  mouth  of  Ob.  Within  the  Ob  some  three
dayes  sayling,  is  a  River  on  the  East  side  called  Tas,
having  as  it  were  a  Barre  at  the  entrance  thereof :  yet
there  is  alwayes  eleven  or  twelve  foote  water  upon  it,  but
within  it  is  very  deepe.  Within  two  dayes  sayling  within
the  Tas,  the  Russe  hath  builded  a  Towne  and  a  Castle,
being  called  Molgomsey ;  where  all  the  Hunters  of  Beasts
assemble,  and  bring  their  Furs  with  them.  Also  the
Russe  Soymas  or  Boats  and  those  of  Pustozera,  come
thither  with  their  Meale  and  other  Merchandizes.  And
having  sold or  bartered their  Commodities, every  one

249

Medeniskoie

Barre

Vaygats

Hand.

The  River

Ob.

The  River
Tas.

[IIIiii.551.]

Molgomsey  a
great  Mart.

A.D.
1613.

Qugoria  and
Naromzai.

Store  of
Morses.

They  returne
from  Ougoria
in  Januarie.

Moetnaia
Reca.

Zelenai  Reca.
Ob  Reca.
Tas  River.

An  Hand  in

the  mouth  of

Tas.

A  Towne.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

returneth  home,  some  to  Pustozera,  and  others  to  Russia.
The  Hunters  also  provide  against  the  next  Winter  for
Hunting  againe.

There  are  three  Rivers  under  the  high  Land  of  Ougoria
and  Naramzey,  and  great  store  of  Morsses  about  the  point
of  Naramzei,  whither  the  Inhabitants  of  Pustozera  doe
send  a  Lodia  in  the  Autumne,  with  divers  Commodities
to  trade  with  the  Ougorian  Samoieds.  Also  they  kill
many  Morsses,  onely  taking  their  Teeth,  and  travell
among  the  Samoieds  all  the  Winter  to  trade  with  them,
and  returne  over  Land  to  Pustozera  in  Januarie  next
following.  Some  yeeres,  if  the  winde  doe  not  serve  them
instantly,  they  are  glad  to  give  over  that  Voyage  by  Sea.
As  for  example,  in  the  yeere  1 6 1 1 .  when  we  wintered
there,  the  frost  came  upon  them  before  they  had  wind  to
serve  them ;  whereupon  they  were  forced  to  give  over  that
Voyage.  And  assoone  as  they  could  travell  by  Sled,  some
of  the  richest  of  the  Sonnes  and  Servants  of  the  Towns-
men, were  sent  with  certayne  Commodities  to  barter  with
the  Samoieds,  against  their  Fathers  or  other  Friends  should
come  after  in  the  Winter,  and  to  buy  up  all  the  best  Furs
and  other  Commodities.

The  Russes  when  they  sayle  for  Molgomsey  in  their
Soymas,  goe  not  about  Naramzei  point  to  the  mouth  of
the  River  Ob,  but  sayle  up  a  narrow  River,  called
Moetnaia  Reca,  that  is  to  say,  the  Muddie  River,  &  at  the
head  therof  they  hale  their  Boats  over  a  little  neck  of  land
into  the  River  Zelenai,  that  is,  the  Green  River,  &  so  fall
down  into  the  River  Ob  :  and  so  saile  Southward  up  the
River  Ob  till  they  come  to  the  River  Tas.  From  the
Barre  of  Tas  to  the  Rivers  mouth,  is  above  a  daies  &  a
nights  sailing.  There  is  an  Hand  in  the  mouth  of  Tas,
being  very  high  land.  From  thence  the  River  to  the
Towne,  leaving  the  Hand  on  the  left  hand  are  eight  dayes
sayling.  But  ere  you  come  to  the  Tas  River,  there  is  a
small  River  called  Power,  or  Piet ;  where  they  get  the
best  Sables  of  all  Molgomsey.  And  up  the  River  Tas
to  Volochanko,  against  the  streame  are  sixe  dayes  sayling

250

WILLIAM PURSGLOVE

Eastward,  till  you  come  to  a  Voloc,  or  necke  of  Land  a
mile  and  an  halfe  over,  beeing  marish  ground,  over  which
the  Russes  and  Pustozerits  hale  their  Boats  into  another
River,  called  Torowhan,  and  rowing  downe  with  the
streame  three  dayes,  they  fall  into  the  mightie  River
Yenisce.  At  the  mouth  of  the  River  Torowhan,  there
dwell  people  on  an  Hand,  having  builded  them  a  little
Towne  and  a  Church.  And  from  thence  they  sayle  downe
the  River  to  Hawtick,  which  is  a  great  River,  and  runneth
unto  the  East.

The  River  of  the  Tingussies,  is  three  dayes  and  three
nights  sayling  within  the  River  Yeniscey.  There  are  no
Woods  neere  unto  the  mouth  of  Jenisce.  But  in  the
River  of  Tingussie  are  great  store  of  Woods.  There  are
two  or  three  Rivers  betweene  the  mouth  of  Yenisce  and
Tingussie,  but  not  so  large  as  the  Tingussie  River  is ;
neere  unto  which  the  Russes  doe  fish  :  and  assoone  as  it
freezeth,  they  go  againe  to  their  old  trade  of  hunting  the
Sables,  Bevers,  and  Foxes.  And  having  in  two  winters
so  laboured  for  themselves,  those  that  be  good  Husbands
return  rich  into  Russia :  And  except  they  fall  againe  into
povertie  through  fire  or  other  wayes,  never  returne  thither
againe.

The  Tingussies  are  a  taller  people  then  the  Samoieds,
and  weare  their  Garments  made  of  skins  shorter,  and
made  closer  to  their  bodies  then  the  Samoieds.  They  be
a  very  gentle  people  to  converse  withall.

From  the  mouth  of  Ob  to  the  great  River  Jenisce,  as
a  Russe  told  mee,  is  foure  dayes  and  foure  nights  sayling.
Betwixt  Ob  and  Yenisce,  is  high  blacke  Land.

Beyond  Jenisce  Eastward  is  another  great  River,  called
Pisida.  The  Land  trendeth  due  East  beyond  the  River
Jenisce  to  Pisida :  and  to  another  River,  called  Catowga,
which  commeth  out  of  Cathay,  whose  King  the  Permackes
call  Teulka  Tsar.  The  River  lyeth  North  and  South,  they
know  not  how  farre.  For  the  Tingussies,  of  whom  they
had  intelligence  of  this  River,  are  afraid  of  Gun-shot  that
they  doe  heare,  which  they  use  on  the  South  part  of  that

25i

A.D.
1613.

A  necke  of
Land.

The  River
Torowhan.

The  River
Hawtick.

The  River  of
the  Tingussies.

Two  or  three
Rivers  from
Tingussie  to
the  mouth  of
Yenisce.

The  River
Pisida.
The  River
Catowga.

A.D.
1613.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

River,  and  dare  not  travell  up  it.  In  it  they  saw  Vessels
Ships  with  two  with  two  or  three  sayles  ;  which  in  the  Spring,  sayle  downe
or  three  saiks.  fae  River  Northward,  and  in  the  Autumne,  returne  againe
to  the  South.  But  they  know  not  whether  they  fish,  or
goe  to  gather  some  Mynes,  which  are  supposed  to  be  in
those  Countreyes,  not  daring  to  goe  neere  them.  It  was
told  me,  that  betwixt  Pisida  and  Catowga,  about  the  mid-
way upon  the  Sea-coast  were  found  divers  Stones,  some
like  unto  Gold  in  colour,  other  white  and  like  Silver.
Also  the  Tingussies  have  seene  people  about  that  great
River,  called  Catowga,  riding  on  Horses :  and  it  is  said,
that  there  is  great  store  of  Corne,  Beefes,  Horses,  Sheepe,
and  Goates  in  this  Countrey.

Horses  about
the  River
Catowga.

The  travell  from  Pechora  to  Permia,  Ougoria,  and
to  the  River  Ob,  and  the  Townes  situated
thereupon,  over  Land.

FRom  Pustozera  up  the  River  Pechora,  with  a  faire
wind  to  the  River  Ouse,  is  fourteene  dayes  sayling
by  River. From  Ouse  to  Podcamen,  ten  dayes. From

[III.iii.552.]  Podcamen  to  Ob  eight  dayes  by  Deere  in  Winter  time,
assoone  as  the  Snow  is  fallen  and  frozen. From  thence

Bereseva.  to  Bereseva  sixteene  dayes ;  which  is  a  Towne  of  Trade,
it  is  from  Pustozera  to  Vade  in  Ougoria,  beeing  on  the
West  side  of  Ob,  a  monethes  journey  or  travell  by  Deere.
This  Vade  is  a  little  Towne,  having  the  Houses  thereof
builded  under  the  ground.

The  River  of  Pechora,  runneth  through  great  Permia ;
and  the  head  thereof  is  five  Weekes  travell  from  Pus-
tozera.

From  Great  Permia,  is  nine  dayes  travell  by  Horse  and
Sled  to  Vercho-towria.  Vercho  signifieth  in  the  Russe
Tongue,  The  higher :  as  Vercho-towria,  is  Towria  The
higher.  From  thence  by  River  is  ten  dayes  journey  to
Tumen.  From  Tumen  to  Tobolsca,  sixe  dayes  downe
the  River  Irtish.  Tobolsca  is  the  chiefest  Citie  in  Siberia.
From  Tobolsca  to  Surgout,  or  Sergalt,  is  sixe  Weekes

Verchio-
towria.

Tobolsca.
Surgout.

2^2

WILLIAM PURSGLOVE  a.d.

1613.

journey  up  the  River  Ob. From  Surgout  to  the  Citie

Tom,  seated  among  the  Tartars,  is  three  Weeks  up  the  Tom.

River  Ob. The  Russes  know  no  farther  of  the  River

Ob  ;  nor  how  farre  it  stretcheth  to  the  Southward  : But

they  suppose  that  it  runneth  much  farther  to  the  South,

by  reason  there  come  so  many  severall  Nations  downe  the  Many  Nations

said  River  to  trade  at  Surgout,  and  Tobolsca :  as  namely,  come  downe  the

the  people  of  Boughar,  the  Tesicks  or  Persian  Merchants,  rwe1  ' ' ,

ir  P  -r*  A11  tv/1-11-1  from  tne  South

and  many  sorts  or lartars. Abraham  Michaelovicn  was  to  trade  at

chiefe  Customer  at  Surgout, 1 6 1 1 . And  hee  told  me, Surgout  and

that  hee  received  for  the  Emperours  Custome  for  goods,  Tobolsca.

bought and sold that yeere, the summe of sixteene

thousand  Robles,  or  Markes.

Moreover,  he  told  me,  that  the  people  of  Cathay  doe
trade  to  Surgout,  and  people  from  divers  other  Kingdomes,
as  from  Alteen  Tzar,  or  King  Alteen,  who  among  other  The  Country
things  bring  Plates  of  Silver  and  sell  them.  Another  °f^inS
Russe  named  Philat,  who  had  travelled  farther  among  the
Tingussies,  then  any  other  Russe,  and  speaketh  their
Language,  told  mee  he  had  bought  of  a  Tingussie,  a
Plate  of  Silver  weighing  in  Russe  Money  fortie  two
Alteens,  foure  Dingoes,  for  twentie  blue  Glasse  Beades. An  Altine  is

Beresova  upon  the  Ob,  before  you  come  neere  Tobolsca,  six  pence,  a
is  a  Towne  of  Trade  for  Furres,  but  especially  for  Losh-
hides  ;  which  are  bought  for  tenne  Alteenes  a  piece.  I  was
told  by  a  Permac,  that  there  was  a  Russe  which  bought
foure  thousand  Elkes,  or  Losh-hides  there  for  a  fourth
part  of  a  Roble  or  Marke  a  piece.

To  the  Eastward  of  Pechora  are  store  of  Hawkes,
which  I  hold  to  bee  as  good  as  the  Turkie  Hawkes,  namely,
slight  Falcons,  Goshawkes,  and  Jer-falcons,  whereof  some
are  as  white  as  Snow,  others  speckled  White  and  Red.  Hawkes  as
Likewise,  there  are  all  kinds  of  the  richest  Sables  brought  whlte  as  5now-
from  Molgomsey,  and  blacke  Foxes.  There  is  also
Christall  of  the  Mountayne.  If  we  might  have  libertie
to  travell  those  Countreyes,  wee  might  have  these  Com-
modities cheaper  there  then  at  Pechora.  And  within  the
Ob  we  might  vent  our  Commodities  at  a  better  rate.

253

peme.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGBJMES

1613.

Commodities  for  Pechora,  Siberia,  Permia,  Ougoria,
and  among  the  Tingussies.

Russe  Money.  Thirst,  at  Pechora  readie  Money,  being  Russe  Money,
-T  is  the  best  and  principallest  both  to  put  off  other
goods  to  profit,  as  also  to  get  credit  among  the  Merchants
strangers  at  our  first  comming  thither,  till  Trade  be  setled
and  knowne  through  Permia,  and  Siberia.  Salt,  Rie,
Meale,  white  Danske  Rie  Kil-dryed  for  heating  in  the
ship,  Oat-meale  and  Butter  for  the  Samoieds ;  all  sorts  of
course  Cloth,  some  fine  Cloth,  Copper,  and  Brasse  Kettles
of  the  middle  size,  from  two  pound  to  thirtie,  or  thirtie
five.  But  Brasse  not  above  fifteene  pound  with  eares  of
Brasse,  all  the  Kettles  and  eares  of  one  piece.  Also  Files
to  sharpe  Arrowes  and  other  things,  small  Horse-bels,
course  Canvasse  for  upper  Gownes.  Foure  peny,  sixe
peny,  and  ten  peny  Nayles :  small  Anchors  of  foure  and
twentie  pound  a  piece.  Frankincense  for  their  Churches
and  Houses.

p

Cloth.

Commodities  for  the  Tingussies.

lEwter,  Pewter  Sawcers,  Little  Platters,  Flat  Poringers,
some  graven,  some  ungraven. Nests  of  Cups,  some
graven,  others  ungraven. Salt-sellers. Plates,  or  sheets
A  course °f  Latten  being  white. Hamborough  Lichenaes,  Blue,
Hamborough Red, and Tawny. But I think our  course Northerne
dozens,  and  course Kersies  Northerne  dyed into those
colours,  would  vent  as  well  and  better  then  they : they
being  thicker  walked. And  the  Samoieds  delight  alto-
gether in  thicke  Cloth. Grey  doozens  of  an  easie  price
would  vent  well  among  the  Permacks,  which  weare  much
grey  or  mingled  coloured  course  Cloth. And  some  course
doozens  died  Yellow,  or  Northerne  course  Cloth  Red  and
Yellow,  would  bee  no  bad  Commoditie.

Aqua  vitae  of  two  sorts,  the  best  and  indifferent  for
the Samoieds. Glasse  Beades, Skie  coloured. Needles

254

WILLIAM GOURDON

round  and  three  square. Brasse  Basons,  Russe  Linnen

Cloth,  or Polish Linnen Cloth. Hops, Mault, Russe

Sope.  All  sorts  of  strong  Wines,  as  Sacke  and  Canarie

Wine.  Bacon  is  a  good  Commoditie  in  Siberia.

A.D.
1614.

WmL

1614.

His  Journey
within  30.
leagues  of  Ob,
and  neere  to
Bersoma.

Chap. XII.  [in.iii.553O

Later  Observations  of  William  Gourdon,  in  his
Wintering  at  Pustozera,  in  the  yeares  16 14.
and  1615.  with  a  Description  of  the  Samoyeds
life.

He  twentieth  of  November,  I  departed  November,
from  Pustozera,  to  goe  to  Yougorie,  at
foure  in  the  after-noone,  and  did  ride
most  of  the  Night,  before  wee  came  to
the  Choome,  going  East  South-east.  The
one  and  twentieth,  Mihiloe  returned  to
the  Towne,  and  we  removed  and  went
our  Journey,  faire  and  little  wind.  The  two  and  twentieth,
little  wind  North,  wee  kept  on  our  course  East  South-
east, having  gone  from  the  Towne  50.  miles,  at  night
Mihiloe  came  to  us.  The  three  and  twentieth,  little  wind,
we  went  on  our  Journey,  and  at  Noone  passed  over  a
little  River,  called  Coy,  falling  North  into  Pechora,  14.
leagues  below  the  Towne,  and  at  Night  came  all  the
Russes  from  the  Towne,  having  gone  24.  miles  East
South-east.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  wee  removed  on  our  Journey
being  very  cold,  and  went  not  above  ten  miles  East  South-
east, at  Night  wee  broke  one  of  our  Sleds,  which  went
laden  with  Victuals.

The  five  and  twentieth,  wee  went  forward  very  slowly,
at  Noone  I  received  a  Letter  from  Master  Copman  by
Foma  Creticove,  this  after-noone  another  had  his  Sled
broken,  we  went  10.  or  12.  miles.  The  sixe  and  twentieth,
we  continued  on  our  Journey,  and  at  Eeven  we  passed
over  a  River,  called  Shapkina,  falling  South  into  Pechora ;

255

The  River
Coy,  falling
into  Pechora.

The  River
Shapkina,
falling  into
Pechora.

A.D.
1614.

The  River
Novgorotkof
falling  into
Shapkina.

Habeaga
River  falling
into  Pechora.

December.

The  River
Haryena,
falling  into
Colvoy.
The  River
Colvoy  falling
into  Ouse.

Saint  Nicholas
Day.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

halfe  way  betwixt  Pustozer  and  Oust-zilma,  a  Sled  broken
and  mended  out  of  hand,  going  East  South-east  15.  miles.
The  seven  and  twentieth  being  Sunday,  the  wind  at  South-
west, did  blow  very  hard,  and  Snow  all  the  day,  the  snow
driving  that  wee  could  hardly  see  which  way  to  goe,  yet
we  kept  on  East  South-east  18.  miles.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  in  the  Morning,  wee  passed
over  Novgorotka  River,  which  falleth  West  South-west
into  Shapkina  River,  sixe  dayes  Journey  above  Oust-zilma,
the  wind  South-west,  and  Snow  all  day,  wee  kept  on  still
East  South-east  15.  miles.  The  nine  and  twentieth,  the
wind  South,  with  Snow  all  day,  being  not  cold,  we  went  on
East  South-east  20.  miles.  The  thirtieth,  the  wind  East
South-east,  very  cold  in  the  after-noone,  we  passed  over
Habeaga  River,  which  falleth  into  Pechora,  sixe  dayes
Journey  above  Oust-zilma,  going  20.  miles.

The  first  of  December,  the  wind  East  blowing  very
hard,  the  Snow  did  drive  so  hard,  that  we  could  not  goe
forward,  but  stood  still  all  day  and  did  not  remove.  The
second,  calme  and  not  so  cold,  wee  went  on  East  South-
east 10.  miles.  The  third,  in  the  Morning  it  was  very
warme,  at  Noone  the  wind  North,  it  was  extreame  cold,
the  Snow  driving  very  thicke,  in  the  after-noone  we  passed
over  the  River  Haryena,  which  falleth  into  Colvoy  South-
east, having  gone  East  South-east  15.  miles.

The  fourth  day  warme,  we  went  East,  at  Eeven  we
came  to  a  River  called  Colvoy,  which  falleth  South  into
the  River  Ouse,  where  wee  stayed  all  Night,  having  gone
20.  miles.  The  fift,  in  the  Morning  we  went  on  upon
the  River  six  or  seven  miles  East  and  by  North,  and  came
where  it  parted  in  two,  the  one  keeping  North-east,  the
other  being  called  Sandavets ;  from  the  South-east  wee
went  betwixt  them  both  East  and  by  South  12.  miles,  and
tooke  up  our  lodging  upon  a  Playne  where  no  Wood  is
to  bee  seene.

The  sixt,  being  Saint  Nicholas  day,  which  with  the
Russes  is  held  a  principall  day,  in  the  morning  they  caused
their  Images  to  bee  brought  into  the  Choome,  lighting

256  v \

WILLIAM GOURDON  a.d.

1614.

Wax-candles  before  them,  making  their  Prayers  to  them,
according  to  their  order ;  after  which,  I  gave  them  a  bottle
of  Aqua  vitae,  wherewith  the  Guides  were  drunke  that  J
they  could  not  guide  their  Deeres,  but  set  me  to  direct  the
way  by  Compasse,  which  I  did  all  the  day,  although  I  had
but  little  skill,  we  went  South-east  and  by  East  20.  miles.

The  seventh,  being  very  faire  weather,  our  Guides  lay
all  the  day  with  Pohmeall,  and  could  not  goe  forward.
The  eight,  faire  and  calme,  we  went  forward  South-east
and  by  East  10.  miles,  and  tooke  up  our  lodging  by  a
small River which falleth into Sandavets River, The  J  small  River
ninth,  very  cold,  that  we  had  much  adoe  to  keepe  our  falling  into
selves  from  freezing,  going  on  foot  all  the  day  over  a  *andavets-
playne  where  no  Wood  groweth,  going  South-east 15.
miles,  and  lay  by  a  Wood  side  all  night. The  tenth,  the
Frost  was  so  extreame,  that  wee  lay  still  and  could  not  Terrible
proceed. The  eleventh,  being Sunday, the Frost  con- Fro$L
tinued  extreame, we  removing, there  were few  in the
Companie  that  had  not  some  part  of  their  faces  frozen,
and  my  selfe,  although  I  was  something  better  provided
then  any  of  them,  yet  I  had  something  to  doe  to  keepe
my  selfe  from  freezing,  going  on  foot  most  part  South-
east and  by  East  15.  miles. The  twelfth,  the  Frost  was
so  extreame,  that  there  was  no  looking  forth,  but  lay  still
all  day. The  thirteenth,  not  altogether  so  cold,  wee  pro-
ceeded on  our  Journey  20.  miles  South-east  &  by  East,
and  at  night  we  passed  over  the  River  Hoseda,  which  The  River
falleth  South-east  into  the  River  Azua. The  fourteenth,  Iioseda\
the  winde  South,  with  Snow  and  not  so  cold,  we  went  j™a  "
thorow  Woods  20.  miles,  East  South-east. The  fifteenth,
the  wind  South,  with  Snow,  and  not  so  cold,  we  went  [III.iii.554.]
East  South-east,  at  Noone  wee  passed  over  Azua  River, The  River
which  falleth  South  into  Ouse,  we  continued  still  East  dz.ua,  fatting
South-east  30.  miles.  tnt0  0use'

The  sixteenth, the  wind  South,  in  the  Morning  we
set  forth  East  South-east,  over  a  high  ridge  or  Moun-  The  Mountain
tayne,  called  Yangoda,  and  upon  the  top  of  the  same  the  Jm&oda>
wind  shifting  North,  with  Snow  so  thicke,  that  our  Guides
xiii  257  R

A.D.

1614.

The  River
Rogavaya
Mensha,
falling  into
Ouse.

The  River
Rogavaya
Bolsha, falling
into  Ouse.

Altitude  and
Variation.

Januarie.
Returne.

Wilde  Deere.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

did  not  know  well  which  way  to  goe,  yet  sometimes  backe
and  somtimes  forward,  with  much  adoe  we  got  over,  in
the  Eevening  passing  over  the  River  Rogavaya  Mensha,
falling  South  into  Ouse,  where  we  stayed  all  Night,  having
gone  20.  miles.

The  seventeenth,  faire  and  warme,  wee  passed  thorow
Woods,  where  the  Snow  was  very  deepe,  and  came  to
a  Playne,  called  Correapin  Tundra,  where  a  Russe  whose
name  was  Correapa  dyed,  (and  was  buried,  therefore  they
gave  that  place  that  Name)  some  thirtie  yeeres  past,  where
we  stayed  all  Night,  having  gone  15.  miles  South-east
and  by  East.  The  eighteenth,  in  the  Morning  wee  went
on  thorow  Woods,  the  Snow  being  very  deepe,  and  at
Mid-night  we  came  to  the  River  Rogavaya  Bolsha,  where
the  Russes  had  a  Gorodocke,  and  bartering  with  the
Samoits,  having  gone  30.  miles  East  South-east,  the  River
falleth  with  turnings  to  the  Southward  into  Ouse ;  heere
I  stayed  till  the  sixth  of  January.

The  thirtieth  of  December,  I  observed  with  my  Astro-
lobia,  and  had  the  Sun  2.  degrees  above  the  Horizon.
Latitude  65.  degrees  and  48.  minuts,  the  variation  of  the
Compasse  being  20.  degrees.

The  sixth  of  January,  at  three  in  the  after-noone,  wee
departed  from  the  Gorodocke,  the  wind  South  South-west
blowing  very  hard,  going  North-west  30.  miles,  and  at
mid-night  came  to  the  Choome.  The  seventeenth,  the
wind  South  South-west,  blowing  very  hard,  the  Snow
driving  so  thicke,  that  we  could  not  goe  over  the  Moun-
tayne,  called  Yangoda,  but  stayed  by  a  Wood  side,  having
gone  West  North-west  15.  miles.  The  eight,  in  the
Morning  wee  passed  over  the  River,  called  Rogavaya
Mensha,  and  at  Noone  over  the  Yangoda,  keeping  backe
our  way  30.  miles  West  North-west,  faire  and  warme.
The  ninth,  little  wind  North  but  sharpe,  we  went  on
North-west  and  by  West,  at  Noone  we  passed  over  Azua
River,  and  in  the  after-noone  came  to  a  Herd  of  wilde
Deere,  the  Samoits  killed  three,  giving  me  a  haunch ;
going  in  all  30.  miles.

258

WILLIAM GOURDON  ad.

1615.

The  tenth,  calme  and  very  cold,  we  went  on  20.  miles,
West  North-west.  The  eleventh,  little  wind  South-east ;
at  Noone  we  passed  over  Hoseda  River,  which  falleth
South-east  into  Azua,  we  went  30.  miles  North-west  &  by
West.  The  twelfth,  the  wind  South  and  cold,  we  went
West  and  by  South,  over  many  Creeks  &  Ponds  25.
miles.  The  thirteenth,  this  day  the  wind  South  and  not
cold,  we  went  West  &  by  South  30.  miles,  thorow  many
woods  and  plaines.  The  fourteenth,  faire  and  warme,
at  Noone  we  passed  over  Saudaets  River,  which  falleth
South-west  into  Colvoy,  we  went  West  and  by  North
30.  miles.

The  fifteenth,  being  Sunday,  we  went  West  North-
west over  a  broad  playne,  with  many  great  Ponds,  at
Night  we  passed  over  Colvoy  River,  going  South  into
the  River  Ouse,  which  falleth  into  Pechora,  nine  dayes
journey  from  Oust-zilma,  we  went  30.  miles,  having  most
of  our  Deere  tyred,  the  Snow  was  so  deepe.  The  six-
teenth, little  wind,  we  went  on  West  North-west,  at  noone
we  passed  over  Haryena  River,  which  falleth  South-east
into  Colvoy,  going  20.  miles.  The  seventeenth,  the  wind
South,  blowing  very  hard,  the  Snow  driving,  wee  went
West  North-west  25.  miles,  at  Night  we  tooke  up  our
lodging  upon  the  River  Habeaga,  which  falleth  into
Pechora,  sixe  dayes  journey  from  Oust-zilma.

The  eighteenth,  we  went  on  West  North-west  10.  miles,
where  the  Townesmen  over-tooke  us,  riding  post  to  the
Towne,  where  making  our  selves  ready,  wee  followed,  the
same  Eevening  we  passed  over  Novgorotka  River,  which
falleth  West  South-west  into  Shapkina  River,  which  falleth
South-west  into  Pechora,  halfe  way  betwixt  Pustozer  and
Oust-zilma,  and  in  the  Morning  we  passed  over  Coy
River,  which  falleth  into  Pechora  14.  leagues  Northward
from  Pustozer ;  and  the  same  day,  being  the  nineteenth
day  in  the  after-noone,  wee  came  to  the  Towne,  having
rid  above  150.  miles  without  rest.  The  last  of  Aprill,  ^.nl1'
161 5.  being  Sunday,  was  the  first  appearing  of  the  water,  increasing.
increasing at Pustozera. The seventh of May, Evan  May.

259

A.D.
1615.

Oust-ztlma.

Glouboka  is
6y.  degrees
55.  minutes.

[m.iii.555.]

July.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Croticove,  had  almost  slaine  with  a  knife  his  two  Uncles,
Foma  Croticove,  and  Erasmi  Croticove.

The  eighteenth,  the  water  was  at  the  highest,  being  so
extreame  that  many  were  forced  out  of  their  Houses,  and
we  our  selves  in  like  manner,  having  the  water  a  foot
deepe  in  our  bed  Chamber.  The  twentieth,  the  water
did  a  little  begin  to  fall,  and  so  continued  falling  by
degrees.

The  ninth  of  June,  my  servant  Marmaduke  Wilson
came  from  Oust-zilma,  having  Wintered  there,  to  buy
and  sell  goods,  bringing  with  him  such  Commodities  as
the  place  doth  affoord,  as  Sables,  Rosomacks,  Wolves,
Ermins,  Squirrils,  &c.

The  fifteenth,  we  laded  three  small  Lodias  with  goods,
to  carrie  downe  to  the  Glouboka.  The  three  and
twentieth,  I  departed  from  Pustozer,  and  came  to  the
Glouboka  the  five  and  twentieth,  with  two  small  Lodias
laden  with  goods.  The  eight  and  twentieth  of  June,  I
observed  at  the  Glouboka,  which  I  found  to  lye  in  the
height  of  67.  degrees  $$.  minutes,  and  the  Compasse
varyed  18.  degrees.  The  last  of  June,  I  went  from  the
Glouboka  to  passe  over  the  Drie  Sea,  the  wind  at  South,
but  the  wind  comming  to  the  North,  I  returned  backe  the
next  day.  The  second  of  July,  being  Sunday,  the  wind
at  South  South-east,  I  departed  the  second  time,  to  come
to  the  Zavorot,  but  comming  neere  Dolgoy,  an  Hand  lying
in  the  Drie  Sea,  the  Ice  lay  so  firme,  that  we  could  not
passe  but  returned  backe  to  the  Glouboka.

The  fourth  of  July,  John  Copman  came  to  the  Glouboka,
bringing  with  him  all  our  goods  for  sayle,  having  payed
all  Customes  and  duties  for  the  same.  The  sixth  of  the
same,  I  departed  the  third  time  from  the  Glouboka,  the
wind  at  South,  but  did  not  continue,  but  came  to  the
East,  and  East  North-east,  so  rowing  alongst  the  shoare,
wee  passed  to  the  West  side  betwixt  the  shoalds  and  the
shoare,  and  having  passed  the  Wester  Hand,  called
Lovetskoy,  we  came  to  the  Zackharreoveberoge  or  Coast,
which  doth  lye  South-west  and  North-east,  and  put  into

260

WILLIAM GOURDON  a.d.

1615.

a  small  River,  where  we  stayed  (the  seventh)  all  night,

and  the  next  day  with  Sayle  and  Oares,  wee  came  to  a

Bay  to  the  South  of  Casnets  Nose,  where  we  stayed  all

night,  the  wind  East  South-east.

The  eight,  in  the  Morning  we  passed  by  Cuznets-Nose
amongst  the  Ice,  having  much  adoe  to  get  cleare,  the
wind  at  North  North-west,  and  at  Night  we  came  to  the
Zavorot,  where  were  five  and  twentie  sayle  of  small  Lodias,
some  going  for  Munganzea,  other  for  Fish,  and  some
going  to  Pustozer,  who  told  me  they  had  beene  aboord
our  Ship  at  Sea.  The  ninth,  this  day  being  Sunday,  our
Ship  came  over  the  Barre,  where  I  was  received,  not
looked  for.  The  eleventh,  at  Night  we  departed  from
the  ship,  and  went  to  get  downe  our  goods  from  the
Glouboka  and  the  Towne.

The  sixteenth,  I  departed  from  the  Glouboka,  with
three  small  Lodias  laden  with  goods,  but  the  wind  at
East  North-east,  two  of  them  returned  backe,  but  I  kept
on  and  came  aboord  our  Ship  the  eighteenth  in  the  morn-
ing. The  twentieth,  the  other  two  came  with  the  goods
aboord,  and  the  one  and  twentieth,  we  returned  to  the
Glouboka  with  three  Boates,  and  got  thither  that  night.
The  three  and  twentieth,  I  came  the  second  time  from
the  Glouboka,  with  three  Boates  with  goods,  and  the  next
morning  came  to  our  Ship,  where  I  remayned,  sending
up  all  the  Boats  the  sixe  and  twentieth  of  July.

The  eight  of  August,  came  John  Copman  with  Thomas
Dogget,  bringing  two  Boats  laden  with  goods,  fitting  to
set  sayle  for  Holland,  but  did  not  depart  till  the  21.  of
August.  And  the  three  and  twentieth  of  September,
(giving  heartie  thankes  to  God)  we  arrived  at  Dort  in
Holland.

NOw  for  the  manner  of  the  Samoits  in  their  Journey,  Apparellof
their  upper  Coat  is  called  a  Parka,  which  is  for  the  Samoye^s.
most part of  Deere-skin, and some of  white Foxe or
Wolverin,  which  they  weare  the  hayre  or  furre  outward,
under that they have another  Coat, which is called a

261

A.D.
1615.

Sleds.
Deere
szviftnesse.

Women.

Tent  and
Chappell.
Superstition.

No  Tozvnes.

Marrie
Wives,  bought
and  sold.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Mallek,  made  of  young  Fawne-skins,  or  Hare-skins,  or
Swan-skins,  very  soft  and  well  dressed,  a  Cap  of  Bever,
double  and  close  to  their  heads,  with  two  flaps  for  their
Eares,  tyed  under  their  Chin,  a  payre  of  Breeches  of
Deere-skin  with  the  hayre  inwards,  upon  their  Feete  they
have  sockes  or  stockins  of  Deere-skin,  the  hayre  to  their
skin,  upon  that  long  Bootes  which  they  call  Pemyes,  made
of  the  legges  of  Deere-skins,  thus  apparelled,  they  sit  upon
their  Sleds  crosse-legged,  with  a  Deere-skin  under  them.
Two  Deere  being  yoaked  to  a  Sled,  they  will  runne  with
such  swiftnesse,  and  so  long  to  continue,  as  is  not  to  be
beleeved,  except  to  those  that  have  seene  the  same.  For
riding  post,  they  will  ride  without  rest  or  sleepe,  two
hundred  miles  in  foure  and  twentie  houres ;  but  with  their
Argish  or  stuffe,  thirtie  miles  in  twelve  houres ;  their
Women  usually  doe  guide  their  Argish,  which  is  ten  Sleds,
and  to  every  Sled  a  Bucke,  all  made  fast  one  after  another,
the  Men  in  the  way  doe  provide  Wood  for  firing,  and
doe  hunt  for  all  manner  of  Beasts  &  Fowle,  which  the
women  dresse.  It  is  the  Womans  labour  to  set  up  the
Choome  or  Tent,  making  one  place  therein  alwayes  Holy,
which  the  woman  must  not  set  her  foot  into,  neither  goe
about  the  Tent  round ;  which  if  they  chance  to  doe,  they
will  presently  remove  all,  for  feare  of  the  Wolfe  or  Beare,
which  they  say,  would  devoure  them  if  they  did  not
remove.

Their  Tent  or  Choome,  is  made  in  this  manner;  first,
they  set  up  long  Firre-poles,  then  they  have  sixe  quarters
double  of  Deere-skin,  which  being  set  up,  they  throw
Snow  round  about  the  edges  a  yard  thicknesse,  leaving  the
top  open  for  to  vent  smoake,  making  a  Fire  in  the  middle,
spreading  Deere-skins,  upon  which  they  lye,  in  which
manner,  it  is  altogether  as  warme  as  the  Stoves  in  Russia,
they  have  no  Townes,  neither  any  certaine  place  of  abode,
but  with  their  Deere  they  travell  from  place  to  place,
where  they  finde  the  best  Mosse  for  their  Deere.

Their  Wives  they  buy  for  Deere,  and  will  have  if  hee
have  abilitie  foure  or  five  Wives,  with  whom  he  lyeth  by

262

WILLIAM GOURDON

A.D.
1615.

Rings  and
Bels.

turn  every  night  several ;  he  is  the  richest  man  that  hath
most  Deere  or  Daughters,  selling  them  to  any  that  will
give  most  for  them.  In  their  Marriages  having  agreed  Marriages.
of  price,  they  use  not  great  Ceremonies ;  onely  they  make
a  Feast  to  their  friends,  after  which  the  Woman  is  brought
to  the  Man  that  hath  bought  her,  shee  being  hung  with
many  Iron  Rings  and  Brazen  Bels,  all  departing  out  of
the  Tent  save  they  two  till  the  next  Morning,  and  then
he  departeth ;  but  if  he  bee  one  of  wealth,  they  will  con-
tinue their  Feast  seven  dayes.  It  falleth  out  many  times,
that  after  they  have  had  their  Wives  halfe  a  yeere  or  a
yeere,  they  will  turne  them  backe  to  their  Friends,  taking  Divorce.
their  Deeres  againe,  paying  for  the  charge  of  the  Feast,
which  is  alwayes  to  bee  made  at  her  Fathers  charge,  and
losing  the  increase  of  his  Deere.

They  have  not  knowledge  of  the  true  God,  but  worship  Religion.
Blocks  and  Images  of  the  Devill,  unto  which,  they  will
strangle  tame  Deere,  rubbing  the  bloud  on  the  Idols,  and
eating  the  meate  themselves.

When  a  Rich  man  dyeth,  because  hee  should  not  travell  Funerals.
on  foot,  his  friends  will  kill  three  Deere  to  draw  him  in
the  new  World,  and  they  will  strangle  a  Slave  to  tend
on  him.  The  Deere  they  kill  in  this  manner  to  serve  the  [III.iii.556.]
dead  man,  they  make  a  Stake  sharpe,  which  they  thrust
into  the  Beasts  fundament,  with  many  howlings  and
cryings,  till  they  be  dead.  The  Master  with  the  Slave
they  burie,  the  Deere  they  eate  as  well  raw,  as  boyled  or
roast,  although  they  use  all  three.

If  a  young  Child  dye  under  foureteene  of  their  yeeres,
which  is  seven  of  ours,  they  doe  hang  it  by  the  necke  on
some  Tree,  saying,  it  must  flie  to  Heaven.

If  any  Controversie  bee,  which  cannot  bee  decided  or
the  truth  knowne,  then  one  of  the  two  betwixt  whom  the
Controversie  is,  must  bee  sworne,  which  is  in  this  manner ;
they  will  make  an  Image  of  a  Man  of  Snow,  bringing
a  Wolves  nose,  delivering  a  Sword  to  him  that  must
sweare,  he  rehearsing  by  name  all  his  Friends,  desiring
that  they  might  all  bee  cut  in  peeces  in  that  manner,  as>

263

Their  yeere
but  halfe  a
yeere.

Judgement  or
Oath.

A.D.
1615.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Divination.

hee  doth  cut  that  Image  of  Snow.  Then  he  himselfe,
doth  cut  the  Image  of  Snow  all  to  peeces  with  the  Sword ;
then  after,  the  Wolves  nose  being  layd  before  him,  he
desires  that  the  Wolfe  may  destroy  all  his  tame  Deere,
and  that  hee  may  never  more  take  or  kill  any  wilde  Deere
after  that,  if  hee  speake  not  the  Truth,  so  cutting  the
Wolves  nose  in  peeces,  there  is  no  more  to  bee  sayd  of
that  Controversie.
Their  persons.  The  Samoit  is  stout  and  bold  of  Spirit,  not  very  tall
but  broad  Brested,  broad  Faces,  with  hollow  Eyes.  Their
ordinary  instruments  for  Warre,  are  Bowes  and  Arrowes,
very  dangerous,  they  have  long  Speares,  (the  heads  bee
made  in  Monganzey,  by  another  sort  of  Samoits)  and
short  Swords,  not  much  unlike  some  that  I  have  seene
brought  from  East  India.

When  they  would  know  any  thing  to  come,  they  send
for  their  Priest  or  Witch  to  converse  with  the  Devill,
sitting  in  one  side  of  the  Tent,  having  before  his  face
a  peece  of  an  old  shirt  of  Mayle,  hung  with  Bels  and
peeces  of  Brasse,  in  his  right  hand  a  great  Tabor  made
with  a  Wolves  skinne,  beating  upon  the  same  with  a
Hares  foot,  making  a  very  dolefull  sound,  with  singing
and  calling  for  the  Devill,  to  answer  his  demand,  which
being  ended,  they  strangle  a  Deere  for  a  Sacrifice,  making
merrie  with  the  Flesh.

The  Women  be  very  hard  of  Nature ;  for  at  their
Child-bearing,  the  Husband  must  play  the  Midwife,  and
being  delivered,  the  Child  is  washed  with  cold  water  or
Snow,  and  the  next  day  the  Woman  able  to  conduct  her
Argish.

The  Russes  have  a  yeerely  Trade  with  the  Merchants
of  Boghar,  at  a  place  called  Tumen  in  Tartarie,  whither
they  of  Boghar  come  with  Camels  every  yeere.

From  Tumen  in  Tobal  in  Siberia,  they  come  in  foure-
teene  dayes.

From  Tobal,  they  come  to  Beresova  in  nine  dayes,  all
downe  the  River  Ob.

From  Beresova,  partly  by  the  River  Ob,  then  over  a

264

Womens
hardinesse

JONAS POOLE

necke  of  Land  of  halfe  a  mile  over,  into  the  River  Ouse,
and  downe  the  River  Ouse  into  the  River  Pechora,  and
so  to  Pustozera  in  three  weekes.  At  Pustozera,  the
English  have  Wintered  three  yeeres.

A.D.

1604.

Chap. XIII.

Divers  Voyages  to  Cherie  Hand,  in  the  yeeres  1604.
1605.  1606.  1608.  1609.  Written  by  Jonas
Poole.

Ee  set  sayle  *  from  London  the  fifteenth
of  Aprill  1604.  m  a  Ship  called  the  God
Speed,  of  sixtie  Tunnes,  with  thirteene
Men  and  a  Boy ;  our  Merchant  was  one
Master  Thomas  Welden,  our  Master  was
one  Steven  Bennit  of  Saint  Catherins.
We  arrived  at  Cola  in  Lapland,  the  first
of  May,  where  wee  tarried  till  the  last  of  the  same  Moneth,
at  which  time  wee  set  sayle  from  Cola,  and  went  to  an
Harbour  called  Pechingo,  which  lyeth  betweene  Cola  and
Ward-house.  In  which  Harbour  of  Pechingo,  we  con-
tinued untill  the  thirtieth  of  June.  At  which  time  wee
set  sayle  from  thence,  and  through  contrarie  windes  and
foule  weather,  were  put  into  Ward-house,  where  we  tooke
in  fresh  water,  and  stayed  untill  the  sixth  of  July.

The  same  day,  the  wind  came  Southerly,  and  we  steered
away  Northwest  and  by  North  about  $6.  leagues,  wee
observed  the  Sunne  at  twelve  of  the  clocke  at  Noone,  and
found  our  selves  to  be  in  73.  degrees  5.  minutes  of
Northerly  Latitude.  The  seventh  of  July,  it  was  all
day  calme,  and  wee  sounded,  but  had  no  ground  in  two
hundred  and  fiftie  fathoms.  The  eight  day,  we  had  little
winde,  which  was  at  South-east,  and  foggie  weather ;  and
at  eight  of  the  clocke  at  Night,  wee  saw  great  flockes  of
Sea-fowles,  which  we  call  Willockes  :  some  of  these  Fowles
had  each  of  them  a  small  Fish  in  their  bills,  and  flew
toward  the  North-west  and  by  North. The  other  without

265

*This  was
Master
Bennets
second  Voyage
thither.
His  first
Voyage
thither  A .
1603.  /  have
added  at  the
end  of  this
Chapter,  after
Pooles  Rela-
tions :  this
being  set  before
I  saw  that.

A.D.

1604.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Fish,  some  of  them  flew  contrarie  to  the  former,  and  some
sate  in  the  Sea  very  neere  our  Ship.

About  twelve  of  the  clocke  at  night  we  sounded,  and
had  ground  at  one  hundred  and  twentie  fathomes.  We
steered  away  North-west  and  by  North,  till  foure  of  the
clocke  the  eight  day  in  the  morning,  then  it  fell  calme :

A  Morse.  and  as  the  ship  lay  still,  our  Master  spied  a  Morsse,  which
came  to  our  ship  and  swamme  round  about  it. While

[III.iii.557.]  we  were  all  gazing  at  this  Monster,  I  spied  the  Hand  ten
leagues off, bearing North North-west halfe a point

Cherk  Hand Westerly,  which  shewed  very  high  Land,  and  much  Snow

described.  upon  it.  The  wind  came  to  the  North-east.  The  ninth
day,  wee  came  to  an  Anchor  on  the  South  South-east  side,
in  five  and  twentie  fathomes  streamie  ground.  We  hoysed
out  our  Boate,  and  Master  Welden  went  toward  the  Land  :
but  thinking  to  have  landed  he  could  not,  because  there
went  a  great  Sea,  and  great  store  of  Ice  all  along  the
shoares  side. Within  one  houre  the  Boate  came  aboard,

Store  of fowles.  and  they  said,  there  were  so  many  Fowles,  that  they
covered  the  Rockes,  and  flew  in  such  great  flockes,  that
they  shewed  like  a  Cloud.  While  thus  they  were  talking
close  by  the  Boate,  rose  up  an  huge  Morsse,  putting  his
head  above  the  water,  looking  earnestly  at  the  Boate,  and

Morses  made  such  an  horrible  noyse  and  roaring,  that  they  in

roaring.  the  Boate  thought  he  would  have  sunke  it.

The  same  day,  at  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night,  we
weighed  and  stood  away  South-west  and  by  South  about
foure  miles,  where  wee  doubled  the  Southermost  point
of  the  Hand,  and  found  the  Land  to  trend  North  North-
west, and  all  along  the  shoare  some  scattering  Ice.  We
sayled  along  the  shoare,  finding  seventeene,  eighteene,  and
sometimes  twentie  fathomes,  streamie  ground  with  white
shels.  We  held  this  course  till  wee  saw  all  the  Norther-
most  part  of  the  Hand :  and  being  within  three  miles  of
it,  and  about  thirteene  miles  from  the  Point,  wee  came
round  about  it.  And  some  two  miles  from  the  Land,  we
anchored  in  sixteene  fathomes,  streamie  ground.  We  had
not  ridden  one  houre  to  an  end,  but  a  great  piece  of  Ice

266

JONAS POOLE  a.d.

1604.

came  directly  with the  tyde  upon us ;  and  before  wee

could  weigh,  it  strooke  the  ship  with  such  force,  that  it

hilded  on  the  one  side. Assoone  as  it  was  past,  we  went

on  shoare,  where  wee  found  abundance  of  Sea  Fowles,  as  Abundance  of

Willocks,  Guiles,  Noddies,  Sea-mewes,  a  small  Fowle  like  Sea-fowks

a Willocke, and divers others, as wilde Geese, Sea-  J0* on

pidgeons,  Oxbirds,  and  such  like  :  whereof  Master  Thomas

Welden  killed  so  many  with  his  Peece,  that  we  almost

laded  our  Boate  with  them. The  same  night  we  shot

three  heaps  of  fishing-lines,  but  when  we  haled  them,  wee

found  neither  fish  nor  bayte  :  for  the  Seales  had  eaten  them

all  off.

The  ninth  day,  Master  Welden  and  our  Master  went
on  shoare,  to  see  what  they  could  finde.  They  went  in
the  fore-noone  about  eight  of  the  clocke,  and  came  againe
about  foure  in  the  after-noone  very  weary,  seeing  nothing
but  small  Foxes,  almost  like  Dogges  in  every  respect,  Small  Foxes.
save  their  smell  and  their  tayles.  In  the  meane  time,  the
Masters  Mate  and  my  selfe  observed  the  Sunne,  and
found  that  part  of  the  Hand  to  be  in  74.  degrees  and  45.  74.  degrees.
minutes.  45-  minutes.

The  tenth  day  we  weighed,  having  the  wind  Southerly,
and  found  the  Land  to  trend  away  East  South-east.  The
length  of  this  side  is  about  ten  miles,  good  ground.  We
had  not  sailed  past  sixe  miles,  but  we  saw  a  sandie  Bay,
against  which  we  came  to  an  Anchor  in  nine  fathomes.
We  had  not  furled  our  Sayles,  but  we  saw  many  Morses
swimming  by  our  ship,  and  heard  withall  so  huge  a  noyse
of  roaring,  as  if  there  had  beene  an  hundred  Lions.
Immediately  wee  manned  our  Boate,  wherein  was  Master
Welden  and  sixe  men  more :  we  landed,  and  saw  abund-
ance of  Morsses  on  the  shoare,  close  by  the  Sea-side ;  and
drawing  neere  unto  them,  wee  perceived  that  they  were
all  of  the  same  company,  which  wee  had  seene  before.
It  seemed  very  strange  to  us  to  see  such  a  multitude  of
Monsters  of  the  Sea,  lye  like  Hogges  upon  heapes :  In
the  end  wee  shot  at  them,  not  knowing  whither  they
could  runne  swiftly  or  seize  upon  us  or  no. To  be  briefe,

267

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1604.

wee  had  but  three  Peeces,  Master  Welden  a  Fowling
Peece,  my  selfe  a  Musket,  and  another  a  Musket.  Their
Peeces  were  spoyled  instantly.  For  Master  Weldens  was4
clyoed,  the  other  man  when  hee  had  shot  one  by  himselfe,
thought  to  knocke  him  on  the  head  with  the  stock,  but
split  his  Peece.  I  shot  still,  and  some  when  they  were
wounded  in  the  flesh,  would  but  looke  up  and  lye  downe
They  kill  the  againe.  Some  were  killed  with  the  first  shot ;  and  some
Morses.  would  goe  into  the  Sea  with  five  or  sixe  shot :  they  are  of

such  an  incredible  strength.  When  all  our  Powder  and
shot  was  spent,  wee  would  blow  their  eyes  out  with  a
little  Pease  shot,  and  then  come  on  the  blind  side  of  them,
and  with  our  Carpenters  Axe  cleave  their  heads.  But
for  all  that  we  could  doe,  of  above  a  thousand  we  killed
but  fifteene.  We  tooke  off  their  heads,  and  when  we
had  done,  we  went  stragling  up  and  downe  to  see  what
we  could  find.  I  found  the  first  Tooth  that  was  cast  upon
the  Hand,  and  going  a  little  farther  alone,  I  found  as  many
The  Morses  Teeth  more,  as  I  and  three  men  more  could  carrie,  which
Teeth.  filled  an  Hogshead : all  which  we  did  deliver  to  Master

Welden.

The  next  day  following,  being  the  eleventh  day,  we
went  on  shoare  againe,  and  killed  about  sixe  more :  And
afterward  wee  went  up  into  the  Land,  and  saw  nothing
but  Fowle  and  Foxes.  I  perceived  in  deed  a  great  print
of  a  Beares  foote ;  and  after  that  many  other  footings,  but
yet  saw  no  Beare  or  other  wild  beast.

The  twelfth,  wee  weighed  from  thence,  and  stood  to
the  Eastward :  wee  had  not  gone  past  foure  miles,  but
we  found  the  Land  to  fall  away  South-east  and  by  South.
The  length  of  this  side  is  about  twelve  miles.  All  this
side  we  went  close  by  the  shoare  with  our  Boate,  and  the
ship  sayled  along  about  three  miles  off.  We  went  often-
times on  shoare,  but  could  see  nothing  on  all  that  side
Abundance  of  but  Fowle,  and  abundance  of  Drift  Wood,  the  most  part
Drift  Wood.  whereof  was  Firres,  which  have  beene  beaten  up  and  downe
the  Sea.  This  day  being  Sunday,  about  eight  of  the
clocke  at  night,  we  anchored  within  two  miles  of  the  place

268

JONAS POOLE

where  we  arrived  at  the  first.  The  same  night  wee  went
on  shoare,  and  in  a  Bay  under  an  huge  Cliffe  of  a  Rocke,
upon  the  Beach,  wee  found  neere  a  thousand  Morses :  we
killed  thirtie  or  thereabouts,  and  when  wee  had  taken  off
their  heads,  we  went  aboord.

The  thirteenth,  wee  went  on  shoare  againe,  and  with
our  Pieces  fell  a  killing  of  the  beasts.  One  of  our  com-
pany, named  Richard  Lang-castle  split  his  Piece,  and  with
all  his  hand  :  but  Master  Welden  with  Salves  of  his  owne,
healed  it  so  skilfully,  that  he  hath  the  use  of  it  againe.
We  killed  that  day  sixtie  Morses,  all  the  heads  whereof
were  very  principall.  When  we  had  done,  wee  went  about
a  mile  to  the  Eastward,  to  see  what  wee  could  finde :  And
landing  at  a  Bay  where  Master  Bennit  had  beene  the
yeere  before,  and  found  a  piece  of  Lead  Ure,  wee  looked
for  the  same,  but  found  none.  The  same  day  returning
aboord,  wee  set  sayle  for  Pechingo  in  Lapland,  where  wee
arrived  the  five  and  twentieth  of  July ;  and  stayed  there
foure  dayes :  at  which  time  we  set  sayle  for  Cola,  and
arrived  there  the  eight  of  August,  where  wee  continued
till  the  sixteenth  day,  at  which  time  we  departed  thence
for  England,  and  arrived  in  the  Thames  the  fifteenth  of
October,  of  the  yeere  aforesaid  1604.

When  wee  came  to  London,  because  Sir  Francis  Cherie
Knight  and  Merchant  was  at  the  charges  of  this  Discoverie,
this  Hand  was  called  Cherie  Hand.

A.D.

1605.

[III.iii.558.]
A  thousand
Morses  found.

1603.  Lead
Ure  was
found.
Pechingo.

Cola.

Why  the  Hand
was  called
Cherie  Hand.

The  third  Voyage  to  Cherie  Hand,  performed
by  Master  Welden  Merchant,  and  Stephen
Bennet  Master,  in  the  yeere 1605.

IN  the  yeere  above  said,  wee  set  sayle  from  London,
the  first  of  May,  with  one  ship  of  sixtie  tunnes,  and
two  and  twentie  men  and  boyes.  The  three  and  twentieth
of  the  said  moneth,  we  were  taken  by  a  ship  of  Dunkirke.
They  tooke  from  us  two  Hogsheads  of  strong  Beere,  our
Muskets,  a  Fowling  Peece  of  Master  Weldens,  which
cost  three  pounds  sterling. After  the  Captayne  had  mis-

269

A.D.

1605.

Assumption.

July  2.
Cherie  Hand.

Many  Morses
killed  with
shot  and
Javelings.

The  fight  of
the  Morse.

Oyle  made  of
the  fat  of  the
Morses.

Eleven  tuns  of
Oyle.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

used  us  at  his  pleasure,  though  we  were  in  peace  with
his  Countrey,  he  let  us  goe.

The  eight  and  twentieth  of  June,  we  put  off  from
Assumption  Point,  which  is  a  place  not  farre  from  the
North  Cape,  and  about  70.  degrees  in  latitude,  but  by
contrarie  winds  wee  were  put  backe  againe.  Yet  the
second  of  July,  we  came  to  Cherie  Hand,  and  anchored
on  the  South-east  side :  and  having  a  Shallop  in  pieces  to
set  up,  we  carried  it  on  shoare,  and  went  to  worke  upon
it ;  and  the  third  day  after  we  had  it  on  flote.  The  sixth
day  we  entred  into  a  Cove,  having  all  our  men  on  shoare
with  shot  and  javelings,  and  slue  abundance  of  Morses.
The  yeere  before  we  slue  all  with  shot,  not  thinking  that
a  javeling  could  pierce  their  skinnes :  which  we  found
now  contrarie,  if  they  be  well  handled,  for  otherwise,  a
man  may  thrust  with  all  his  force  and  not  enter :
or  if  he  doe  enter,  he  shall  spoyle  his  Lance  upon
their  bones ;  for  they  will  strike  with  their  fore-
feet, and  bend  a  Lance  round,  and  breake  it,  if  it
bee  not  all  the  better  plated.  They  will  also  strike
with  their  Teeth  at  him  that  is  next  them :  but  because
their  Teeth  grow  downward,  their  strokes  are  of  small
force  and  danger.  After  we  had  opened  the  beasts  which
we  had  slaine,  we  tooke  out  the  blubber,  and  carried
it  a  mile  into  the  Bay,  where  wee  set  up  the  shallop.  The
reason  why  we  carried  it  thither,  was,  because  we  thought
that  the  fire  of  our  Furnace  would  scare  them  away :  for
wee  did  boyle  all  their  fat  to  bring  it  into  Oyle.  Thus
wee  followed  our  businesse  till  the  foure  and  twentieth
of  July,  at  which  time  wee  had  very  foule  weather  with
fogs.  Now  the  ship  riding  in  the  same  Cove,  where  we
killed  our  Morses,  had  taken  in  eleven  tunnes  of  Oile,
and  the  teeth  of  all  the  beasts  aforesaid.  Then  we  made
preparation  to  be  gone  home :  and  I  was  sent  with  our
shallop,  and  eight  men  with  me  to  fetch  our  Tent,  and
our  boyling  Coppers,  our  mens  Clothes  and  some  Teeth.
At  my  returne,  when  I  was  almost  aboord,  comming
through  a  place  betweene  the  Hand  and  a  Rocke,  which

270

JONAS POOLE  a.d.

1605.

of  necessitie  we  must  needs  passe,  the  tyde  being  against
us,  and  a  stiffe  gale  of  winde  blowing  out  of  the  Sea,
made  the  Sea  flye  very  high  upon  the  Rockes,  whereby
we  had  like  to  have  beene  sunke :  for  our  Boat  was  almost
full  of  water ;  and  if  wee  had  not  speedily  rowed  backe
againe,  wee  had  dyed  each  man  of  us.  To  make  short,
we  got  into  a  Cove,  where  the  Rockes  did  keepe  the
growne  Seas  from  us,  &  we  lighted  our  Boat.  In  this
Cove  I  found  a  Myne  of  Lead  Ure,  and  digged  up  about  A  Myne  of
thirtie  pounds  weight  of  it,  which  I  brought  into  England.  Lead.
And  calling  to  mind  that  wee  were  in  sight  of  our  ship,
when  we  shipped  the  water  which  I  spake  of  before,  I
mistrusted  that  they  thought,  as  they  did  indeed,  that
we  were  all  drowned.  Therefore  I  demanded  who  would
goe  with  me,  to  the  top  of  a  ClifFe  which  stood  over
against  the  ship?  And  one  John  Jenings  said,  that  he
would  goe :  he  had  not  gone  halfe  way,  but  hee  would
goe  no  farther  because  it  was  so  cold,  and  the  Hill  stood
sloping  very  steepe  toward  the  Sea,  and  all  the  side  of
it  was  loose  Earth,  which  we  must  needs  passe.  Then
I  went  forward  all  alone,  and  found  all  our  men  on  shoare,
saving  an  old  man,  and  a  sicke  man.  But  the  ClifFe  being
so  high  and  steep,  that  they  under  it  could  scarce  under-
stand what  I  said,  nor  I  what  they  said,  but  with  much
adoe :  They  demanded,  as  I  tooke  it,  if  all  our  men  were
wel :  I  told  them  yea,  as  loud  as  I  could :  And  then  I
threw  downe  a  piece  of  the  lead  Ure  which  I  had  found,
which  M.  Welden  took  up :  And  when  I  was  going  away
I  heard  them  shout,  and  looking  behind  me,  I  saw  them  [III.iii.559.]
all  point  toward  the  Skiffe  that  lay  at  anchor  hard  by  the
shoare ;  whereby  I  perceived  that  the  rope  was  broken,
which  made  it  fast  to  the  shoare,  and  the  Skiffe  was  gone
off  to  the  length  of  her  rope ;  so  that  they  could  not  go
aboord  except  one  of  them  did  swim  to  the  Skiffe,  which
was  exceeding  dangerous,  both  because  it  was  extreame
cold,  and  also  for  feare  of  being  killed  by  the  Morses,  Extreame  cold
that  were  in  the  Sea  all  about  the  Boat.  Whereupon  with  the  z^.  of
all  speed  possible  I  ranne  to  helpe  our  men  in  that  dis-  Ju^'

271

A.D.
1605.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Mount
Misery.

tresse ;  and  comming  to  the  Shallop,  some  were  willing,
and  some  unwilling :  But  I  said  that  out  I  would ;  and
taking  nothing  aboord  with  me  but  a  few  teeth,  wee  got
out :  and  in  the  place  where  we  had  like  to  have  beene
sunke  before,  wee  had  a  great  hollow  Sea :  but  our  Boat
being  light,  and  the  tyde  with  us,  wee  got  through :
whereat  M.  Welden,  and  Steven  Bennet  our  Master,  with
all  the  company  were  not  a  little  joyfull,  and  gave  God
humble  thankes,  that  had  of  his  great  mercy  defended
us  from  a  great  many  of  dangers  that  day.  For  that  day
Abundance  of  wee  saw  abundance  of  yce  driving  toward  the  Hand,  but
driving  he.  the  winde  and  tyde  shifting,  put  it  another  way.  Like-
wise two  boyes  had  like  to  have  beene  slaine  with  the  fall
of  a  rocke,  which  fell  close  by  them,  they  being  but  newly
stepped  out  of  the  place  where  the  rocke  fell.

In  the  time  that  we  were  in  this  distresse,  I  called  the
Mountaine  by  the  name  of  Mount-miserie,  which  is  so
called  at  this  day.  Likewise  there  is  a  very  high  Moun-
taine on  the  East  South-east  point  of  this  Hand :  which,
because  Master  Welden  and  1  got  two  Foxes  neere  it,  I
called  it  Mount  maleperdus,  alluding  to  the  name  in  the
merrie  booke  of  Reinold  the  Fox.

The  sixe  and  twentieth  of  Julie,  wee  got  out  of  the
Cove  with  the  Ship,  having  such  a  fogge,  that  although
wee  ridde  so  neere  the  land,  that  we  could  heare  the  fowle
that  were  on  shoare,  yet  wee  could  not  see  the  land.  This
fogge  continued  untill  the  eight  and  twentieth  of  July:
on  which  day  having  cleerer  weather,  wee  got  our  water
and  other  provision  aboord ;  and  set  sayle  for  England,
and  passing  by  the  coast  of  Finmarke  and  Norway,  we
arrived  at  London  the  foure  and  twentieth  of  August
1605.

The  fourth  Voyage  to  Chery  Hand,  1606.

WE  set  sayle  from  London  in  a  Ship  and  a  Pinnasse;
the  Ship  being  of  burden  sixtie  Tuns,  and  the  same
that  I  was  in  the  Summer  before  ;  Master  Thomas  Welden
was  Merchant,  and  Master  Bennet  Master,  having  in  all

272

A  monstrous

August.  24.
A  Ship  and
Pinnasse  set
forth.

JONAS POOLE  ad.

1606.

two  and  twentie  men  and  boyes.  The  Pinnasse  was  of
twentie  Tunnes,  and  had  eight  men  in  her,  and  I  Jonas
Pool  was  Master  of  her :  we  were  set  out  by  Master
Russell,  one  of  the  Moscovie  Company.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  wee  had  sight  of  land  on  the
coast  of  Norway,  in  the  latitude  of  sixtie  degrees  and  a
halfe ;  nine  leagues  off.

The  sixteenth  of  June,  we  fell  with  the  Assumption,  it  The
bearing  South  and  by  West  eight  leagues  off : and  we  Assumption.
lay beating betweene the North Cape and it, till the
eighteenth  of  June  :  At  what  time  wee  put  off,  and  steered
away  North  North-west  about  fiftie  five  leagues,  and  found  Much  Ice  55.
much  Ice  : wee  thought  to  have  gotten  through  it,  but  leagues  from
could  not :  and  when  wee  had  spent  twelve  houres  in  it,  ^  North
and  having  the  wind  Northerly,  we  put  backe  againe.
The two  and twentieth, we  fell  with the  North  Cape
againe,  at  twelve  of  the  clock  at  noone. The  foure  and
twentieth,  we  put  off  againe,  and  being  five  and  fortie  Ice  within  45.
leagues  from  the  Cape,  wee  met  with  Ice,  and  upon  a  leagues  of  the
piece  of  Ice  we  saw  a  Beare. The  Ship  being  on  head  Jr^ Pe'
of  us,  bare  close  to  the  Ice;  and  Master  Welden  shot  the  icezn. leagues
said  Beare  dead  at  the  first  shot. This  Beare  was  from  from  any  land.
the  neerest  land  above  seven  and  twentie  leagues,  and
lived  of  Seales  or  other  fish  that  he  could  prey  upon.

The  second  of  July,  we  saw  Cherie  Hand  at  a  North  July  2.
sound : the  land  bearing  North  and  by  West  about  ten
leagues  off. The  same  time  we  sounded  and  had  ground
at  seventie  five  fathoms,  white  small  shelly  ground  with
small  blacke  stones.

The  third  of  July  wee  anchored  on  the  West  side  of
the  Hand  in  twentie  fathoms,  having  verie  much  Ice. I
observed  the  Sunne  at  the  lowest,  and  found  the  latitude
of  that place to bee in 74. degrees, $$. minutes. It  Part  of  Cherie
followeth  there  South-west  and  by  South ;  and  the  floud  ^fj n ]*J
commeth  from  the  South-west.  5f  minutes.

The  fifth  and  sixth  dayes,  we  were  troubled  with  much  The  floud
Ice ;  but  it  being  broken,  we  brought  the  ends  of  our  commeth  from
Cables  to  our  maine  Masts ;  and  having  a  good  tyde,  we  theSouth-west-
xiii  273  s

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1606.

did  sheere,  as  wee  tearme  it,  cleere  off  the  Ice. We  ridde

The  thirteenth  thus  in  Ice  sixe  dayes,  to  wit,  untill  the  thirteenth  day ;

Th  Uy't f  at  wnat  ^me  tne  -^ce  Degan  to  goe  way,  and  the  Morses

the  Morse. came  on  shoare. For  their  nature  is  such,  that  they  will

not  come  on  land  as  long  as  any  Ice  is  about  the  land.

The  fourteenth,  we  went  on  land ;  Master  Welden,  and
Master  Bennet,  with  the  Ships  company,  and  I  with  the
company of the Pinnasse. And being altogether on
shoare,  and  seeing  of  the  beasts  sufficient  to  make  our
voyage,  wee  prepared  to  goe  to  killing. Master  Welden
and  Master  Bennet  appointed  mee  to  take  eleven  men
with  mee,  and  to  goe  beyond  the  beasts  where  they  lay ;
that  they  and  wee  might  meet  at  the  middest  of  them,
and  so  inclose  them,  that  none  of  them  should  get  into
the  Sea.
[III.iii.560.] As  I  fetched  a  compasse  about,  before  we  were  aware,
A  great  white  rose  a  great  white  Beare  within  a  Pikes  length  of  us:
Beare.  whereupon  we  made  a  stand,  and  my  selfe  having  both

a  Musket  and  a  Lance,  thought  to  have  shot  him :  but
remembring  my  selfe,  that  the  report  of  my  Peece  might
make  all  the  Morses  goe  into  the  Sea,  and  so  hazard  our
Voyage,  I  went  to  him  with  my  Lance.  All  this  while  he
sate  foming  at  the  mouth,  and  would  not  stirre,  but  gaped
and  roared  as  though  he  would  have  eaten  us  all :  but
presently  wee  pricked  him  in  the  snout ;  and  then  with
an  easie  pace  we  proceeded  on  with  our  businesse ;  and
Seven  or  eight  before  six  houres  were  ended,  we  had  slayne  about  seven

hslatfhsixe  or  eiSht  hundred  Beasts- And  after  that  Master  WTelden
houres.  sme  tne  Beare. For  ten  dayes  space  we  plyed  our  busi-

nesse very  hard,  and  brought  it  almost  to  an  end.

The  foure  and  twentieth  of  July,  wee  had  the  winde
A  great  Frost  at  North-east :  and  it  freezed  so  hard,  that  the  Ice  did  hang
thez^o/July.  on  our  Clothes.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  we  had  taken  in  two  and  twentie
tuns  of  the  Oyle  of  the  Morses,  and  three  hogsheads  of
their  Teeth.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  Master  Welden  slue  another
Beare.

274

JONAS POOLE

The  eight  and  twentieth,  we  tooke  in  Water  and  Wood.
The  nine  and  twentieth,  we  set  sayle  for  England.
The fifteenth of August, 1606. we arrived in the
Thames.

A.D.

1608.

The  sixth  Voyage  made  to  Cherie  Hand,  the  South
part  whereof  standeth  in  74.  degrees  and  40.
minutes  of  Northerly  latitude,  in  the  yeere
1608.

THe  sixteenth  of  Aprill,  in  the  yeere  1608.  we  set
sayle  from  Blacke  wall,  and  came  to  Gravesend  in  a
ship  called  the  Paul.

The  one  and  twentieth  of  May,  we  were  within  4.
leagues  of  the  North  Cape,  standing  in  71.  degrees  and
%  of  North  latitude.  The  foure  and  twentieth,  wee
came  to  Ward-house.  The  five  and  twentieth,  we
weighed,  and  came  to  Tipany  in  Lapland  the  sixe  and
twentieth :  where  we  stayed  about  our  businesse  till  the
thirteenth  of  June.

The  thirteenth  of  June  aforesaid,  wee  weighed  anchor,
and  directed  our  course  for  Cherie  Hand.  The  eighteenth,
at  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning  wee  saw  Cherie
Hand,  it  bearing  North  North-west  10.  leagues  off:  and
at  foure  of  the  clocke  at  night  wee  anchored  on  the  North-
west side  of  it :  and  Master  Welden  went  on  Land  on
the  North  side,  and  slue  a  Beare.

The  nineteenth,  we  rid  still,  and  Master  Welden  went
to  the  North  side  againe,  and  slue  another  Beare.  The
same  day  we  sent  two  men  to  the  South  side  of  the  land,
to  see  if  there  were  any  Morses  on  shoare.  They  came
againe  the  next  day,  and  said,  that  there  were  great  store.

The  twentieth  and  one  and  twentieth  dayes  it  was  calme,
and  the  weather  cleere,  and  wee  had  it  as  hot  as  I  have
commonly  felt  in  England  at  that  time  of  the  yeere.  For
the  Pitch  did  runne  downe  the  ships  sides ;  and  that  side
of  the  Masts  that  was  to  the  Sunne  ward,  was  so  hot,
that  the  Tarre  did  frye  out  of  it,  as  though  it  had  boyled.

275

May.  21.

Ward-house.
Tipany.

June  13.
Cherie  Hand.

A  Beare
slaine.

Another
Beare  slayne.

Great  he  ate
the  20.  and
21.  of  June.

A.D.

l6o8.

1000.  Morses
killed  in  seven
houres.

July  3.
A  Voyage  set
out  by  Master
Duppa  to
Cherie  Hand,
1607.

A  living
Morse  brought
into  England.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  two  and  twentieth,  at  a  North-east  Sun,  we  weighed
and  went  to  the  South  side  of  the  Hand,  and  came  into  a
Cove,  where  the  Morses  were,  and  slue  about  900.  or
1000.  of  them  in  lesse  then  seven  houres:  and  there  wee
plyed  our  businesse  untill  the  second  of  July :  at  what
time  we  had  taken  into  our  ship  22.  tunnes  and  three
hogsheads  of  Oyle.

The  third  of  July,  being  Sunday,  one  Richard  Stevens
of  Harewich  came  to  the  said  Cherie  Hand,  in  a  ship
called  the  Dragon,  being  set  out  by  Master  Duppa,  a
Brewer  dwelling  in  Saint  Catharines  neere  the  Tower  of
London ;  which  set  out  a  ship  with  Master  Thomas
Welden  the  yeere  before  1607.

The  ninth  day,  we  made  our  Voyage,  and  came  out  of
the  Cove,  having  taken  in  31.  tunnes  of  Oyle,  and  one
hogshead,  one  barrell,  and  one  terce  of  Morses  teeth :
besides  400.  other  teeth.

The  twelfth,  we  tooke  into  our  ship  two  young  Morses,
male  and  female,  alive :  the  female  died  before  we  came
into  England :  the  male  lived  above  ten  weekes.  When
wee  had  watered,  we  set  sayle  for  England  about  foure
of  the  clocke  in  the  morning.

The  fourteenth  day,  we  saw  the  Hand  bearing  North
North-west,  15.  leagues  off  us,  and  sounded,  and  had  85.
fathoms,  greene  Oze,  like  Doves  dung.

The  twentieth  of  August,  wee  arrived  at  London ;  and
having  dispatched  some  private  businesse,  we  brought  our
living  young  Morse  to  the  Court,  where  the  King  and
many  honourable  personages  beheld  it  with  admiration
for  the  strangenesse  of  the  same,  the  like  whereof  had
never  before  beene  seene  alive  in  England.  Not  long
after  it  fell  sicke  and  died.  As  the  beast  in  shape  is  very
strange,  so  is  it  of  strange  docilitie,  and  apt  to  be  taught,
as  by  good  experience  we  often  proved.

276

JONAS POOLE  a.d.

1609.

The  seventh  Voyage  to  Cherie  Hand,  made  in  the  [III.iii.561.]

yeere  1609.

WEe  were  furnished  with  two  ships,  determining  to
goe  to  Tipany  in  Lapland,  to  buy  fish  of  the  Lappes
and  Russes,  and  afterward  to  goe  to  Cherie  Hand :  the
one  was  called  the  Lionesse,  in  which  I  went  for  Master,
the  other,  the  Paul,  which  was  there  the  last  yeere,  1608.

The  one  and  twentieth  day  of  March,  we  weighed
anchor  at  Gravesend :  and  the  sixe  and  twentieth,  we
came  to  Harwich :  where  it  was  concluded,  that  the
Lionesse  should  goe  directly  to  Cherie  Hand.  The
fifteenth  of  Aprill,  we  weighed  at  Harewich  :  and  the  last
of  the  same  moneth  we  fell  betweene  Lofoot  and  Zenam  Lofoot.
upon  the  Coast  of  Finmark.  Zenam.

The  second  of  May,  we  came  to  the  North  Cape ;  and  May  2.
the  same  day  wee  stood  for  Cherie  Hand : but  meeting
with  contrary  winds  and  foule  weather,  we  bare  backe
againe  for  the  Cape,  and  fell  with  the  Land  the  fourth  day.
The  fift  day  in  the  morning,  we  put  the  second  time  from
the  North  Cape  ;  and  the  eight  day  wee  anchored  at  Cherie  They  arrive  at
Hand. It  did  freeze  very  hard, but  we  found no Ice  Cherie  Hand
about  the  Hand,  save  that  which  clave  to  the  Rockes. We  the*-°fMay-
went  into  the  Cove  with  our  Shallop,  and  found  eight
Morses  on  the  Ice  hard  by  the  shoares  side :  And  we  also
found  all  the  beasts  that  were  killed  the  last  yeere  not
washed  away  with  the  Sea,  covered  over  with  Snow  and
Ice. Wee  thought  to  have  gotten  abundance  of  Fowle  Fowle.
as  wee  had  done  in  the  yeeres  before :  but  they  would  not
sit ;  the  reason  was,  because  they  were  but  new  come  to
the  Hand,  and  not  setled  as  then : yet  some  Fowle  we
got, and came aboord. And because the wind was
Northerly,  that  we  could  not  conveniently  goe  to  the  North
side  with  the  ship,  we  determined  to  send  some  men  over
Land,  to  see  if  there  were  any  Morses  on  shoare  upon
that  side. The  ninth  day,  I  prepared  to  goe  over  Land
to  the  North  side,  about  a  North-east  Sunne,  with  three

277

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

men  in  my  companie. I  my  selfe  had  a  Musket,  and

about  a  quarter  of  a  pound  of  Powder,  and  sixe  Bullets ;

an  Halfe-pike  in  mine  hand,  and  an  Hatchet  at  my  backe.

One  of  the  men  had  a  birding  Peece ;  the  other  two  had

each  of  them  a  Javelin. Wee  went  over  the  Snow  and

Ice  apace  outward ;  but  came  wearily  homeward,  by  reason

we  rested  not  any  where. And  when  we  were  within  a

mile  of  the  other  side,  one  of  my  companie  said,  he  saw

Three  Beares.  a  Beare : whereupon  we  looked  up,  and  saw  three  great

ones. Whereupon  I  made  a  stand,  and  gave  each  of  my

companie  some  Aqua  vitae,  and  a  little  Bread,  and  told

them, that wee must not in any  case seeme fearefull,

Qualite  of because  the  nature  of  them  is  such,  that  whosoever  seemeth

Beares.  fearefull,  or  offereth  to  runne  away,  they  will  seize  upon

eare  a  him. In  this  time  I  made  my  Musket  readie : and  the

Beares  seeing  us  to  come  toward  them,  stood  upon  their

feet,  and  two  of  them  went  toward  the  Sea : The  third

stood  still  champing  and  foming,  as  though  hee  would

have  eaten  us. When I  was  within  shot  of  him, he

beganne  to  follow  his  fellowes,  still  looking  behind  him

with  his  former  gesture  :  In  the  meane  while  I  got  ground

of  him,  the  three  men  following  mee  with  their  weapons.

In  the  end  the  angry  devill  turned  backe,  and  came  directly

toward  mee  :  I  let  him  come  within  two  long  Pikes  lengths,

A  Beare and  gave  him  such  a  welcome,  that  hee  fell  downe  stone

shine.  dead. The  company  that  were  with  me  were  glad  as  well

as  I :  yet  I  had  beene  at  the  killing  of  Beares  before. After

17.  Beares  in  this  Beare  was  slayne,  we  told  seventeene  more,  whereof

sight.  three  were  young  ones. This  done,  we  went  on  to  the

Sea  side,  where  we  found  the  Shallop  which  we  left  the

yeere  before. Wee  were  no  sooner  set  to  eate  a  little  food,

Young  Beare-  but  there  came  a  Beare  with  two  young  ones  as  big  as

whelps.  Lambes  of  a  moneth  old :  they  skipped  about  their  dams

necke,  and  played  with  one  another  very  wantonly. The

dame  came  so  neere  that  I  shot  at  her,  and  being  loth  to

hurt  the  young  ones,  being  playing  about  her  fore-parts,

I  shot  her  through  the  top  of  the  shoulder,  then  she  went

away. Immediatly we saw another Beare comming

278

JONAS POOLE  a.d.

1609.
toward  us,  which  before  came  to  us,  stood  upon  his  hinder
feet  twice  or  thrice,  using  the  same  countenance  that  the
first  did,  which  I  slue. I  let  him  come  very  neere,  and
thinking  to  give  him  his  pasport,  the  flint  of  my  Musket
was  broken,  which  made  him  come  very  neere  us. Then
the  fellow  that  had  the  birding  piece  shot  him  into  the
foot :  whereupon  he  ran  away  faster  then  wee  could  follow
him. Wee  seeing  so  many  Beares,  and  having  no  store
of  Powder  nor  Shot,  bent  our  journey  toward  our  ship
againe. Wee  had  not  come  a  quarter  of  a  mile,  but  wee
saw  a  huge  Beare  fast  a  sleepe  on  the  Snow. I  went  softly
toward  him,  and  gave  him  such  a  fllip,  that  he  never  rose
out  of  the  place  where  he  lay. His  skin  when  he  was  a  Beare
flayed was thirteene foot long. A neere neighbour  slayn,  the  skin
of his hearing the report of my  Peece came toward  wherofwas
me : and him I slue also. Now, having but one  a  third  Beare
shot left, I thought it not best to bestow it there,  s/ayne.
although I saw another lie upon the Snow hard by.
While  we  sate  downe  to  rest  us  in  the  mid-way,  there
came  toward  us  another  Beare  with  one  young  one :  they
came  almost  within  shot,  and  went  backe  againe  :  presently
shee  turned  againe,  and  came  within  shot  of  me,  and  stood
on  her  hinder  legs  directly  upright,  and  so  did  the  young
one. I  made  account  they  would  have  come  neerer  ; but
they  to  the  contrarie  ran  away. Wee  came  being  very
wearie  aboord  our  ship  about  a  North-west  Sunne. Then
wee  weighed,  and  stood  to  the  Northward,  having  the
wind  at South; and by three of  the  clocke the  next  The  tenth  day.
morning,  wee  came  to  the  North-east  Point  with  the  ship.
There wee manned our Shallop, and Master Thomas  [III.iii.562.]
Welden  and  I  went  on  shoare,  where  hee  slue  five  Beares, Sixe  Beares
and  I  one,  and  I  wounded  two  more  very  sore. And  s^yne-
before  a  North  Sunne,  our  men  had  fleyed  them  all ; both  All  the  Beares
them  that  I  slue  the  day  before,  and  them  that  wee  slue  fayed-
this  last  time :  for  they  were  all  together.

The  eleventh  day,  we  went  on  Land,  and  washed  some
old  fleyed  Morses  skinnes,  which  had  lyen  there  two
yeeres : but  they  will  hardly  prove  good. The  twelfth

279

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

day,  we  rid  at  the  West  side,  and  got  some  Fowle  with
shot,  and  there  we  rid  till  the  thirteenth.

The  thirteenth,  wee  saw  very  much  Ice  to  the  South-
wards and  Westwards,  wich  came  driving  so  fast  toward
the  shoare  where  wee  rid,  that  wee  were  forced  to  weigh,
and  stood  to  the  North  side  of  the  Hand.  The  Ice
followed  us  still :  then  wee  stood  to  the  East  side  of  the
Hand :  and  there  wee  found  both  the  Hand  and  our  selves
encompassed  round  with  Ice.  But  the  winde  being
Westerly,  and  a  good  stiffe  gale,  it  blew  the  Ice  about  a
mile  and  an  halfe  from  the  Eastern  side :  by  which  meanes
wee  got  betwixt  the  Ice  and  the  Hand,  and  stood  to  the
Southward,  but  saw  not  any  thing  in  all  the  Sea  save  Ice ;
saving  close  by  the  Land  a  little  open  Sea  trending  to  the
South-westward.  That  way  wee  stood  with  our  fore  top-
sayle,  and  stood  one  while  one  way,  and  another  while
another  way,  and  could  not  see  open  Sea  till  the  fifteenth
of  the  same  moneth ;  at  a  North-west  Sunne  wee  saw  the
open  Sea :  onely  a  ledge  of  Ice  which  began  to  part
insunder,  was  betwixt  us  and  it.  Toward  that  place  we
stood,  and  intending  by  Gods  helpe  to  get  through,  we
made  provision  to  defend  the  ship  from  the  Ice,  by  hanging
Cables  ends,  and  Plankes,  and  Capstan  barres  about  the
bowes  of  our  ship.  But  for  all  our  fendors,  our  ship  Jiad
a  great  knocke  upon  a  piece  of  Ice.  About  a  North
Sunne,  we  got  out  into  the  open  Sea ;  with  humble
thankes  to  God  for  our  deliverance.
Frost  the  16.  The  sixteenth  day,  the  Hand  did  beare  North-east  and
of  May.  by  North,  eight  leagues  from  us  : and  it  did  freeze  all

that  day, the  wind  being  at  North, which  was  almost
calme. The  seventeenth,  at  noone  the  Hand  did  beare
North-east  and  by  North, about nine  leagues  off, the
Snow.  wind  Southerly,  snowy  weather. The  same  day  we  saw

a  sayle,  bearing  East  North-east  off  us  about  5.  leagues.
The  eighteenth,  the  Hand  did  beare  North  about  15.
leagues  off,  the  wind  being  at  East  and  by  North,  Snow
and  frosty  weather.  The  nineteenth,  at  twelve  of  the
clocke  at  noone  the  Hand  bare  North  and  by  East :  and

280

Snow.

JONAS POOLE

we  finding  the  Ice  somewhat  scattered,  and  the  wind
Southerly,  put  roome  toward  the  Hand,  and  upon  one
piece  of  Ice  we  saw  five  Seales :  one  I  killed,  and  one  I
tooke  alive,  and  brought  it  aboord  our  ship.  But  wee
could  not  come  neere  the  Hand  by  sixe  leagues.  The
wind  came  to  the  West  with  thicke  weather  and  Snow.
The  twentieth,  at  twelve  at  noone  the  Hand  beare  North
North-west,  about  twelve  leagues  off.  We  sounded,  and
had  ioo.  fathoms,  greenish  Oze,  faire  weather,  but  cold.

The  one  and  twentieth,  we  saw  the  ship  that  wee  had
seene  the  seventeenth  day ;  wee  spake  with  them  about
12.  at  noone.  The  Master  told  us  he  was  of  Hull.  Wee
demanded  whether  he  was  bound  ?  He  told  us,  to  Cherie
Hand,  and  that  there  he  would  make  his  Voyage.  The
Hand  at  this  time  did  beare  North  and  by  East  about  nine
leagues  off ;  and  it  was  faire,  but  cold  frostie  weather.
The  22.  23.  24.  and  25.  dayes,  we  did  beate  up  and  downe
in  the  Ice.  The  26.  27.  and  28.  dayes,  likewise  wee  say  led
up  and  downe  in  the  Ice ;  having  the  wind  Northerly,  and
the  Hand  bearing  betweene  the  North  and  the  North
North-east,  cold  weather.  The  nine  and  twentieth,  the
Hand  beare  North  nine  leagues  off,  the  wind  at  North-
east, snowy  weather  and  Frost.

The  thirtieth  day,  we  slue  26.  Seales,  and  espied  three
white  Beares :  wee  went  aboord  for  Shot  and  Powder,  and
comming  to  the  Ice  again,  we  found  a  shee-Beare  and  two
young  ones  :  Master  Thomas  Welden  shot  and  killed  her  :
after  shee  was  slayne,  wee  got  the  young  ones,  and  brought
them  home  into  England,  where  they  are  alive  in  Paris
Garden.  The  one  and  thirtieth,  we  beate  up  and  downe
in  the  Ice,  but  could  not  come  neere  the  Land  for  Ice ;  the
winde  was  Northerly.

The  first  of  June,  we  got  within  five  or  sixe  miles  of
the  Hand :  but  finding  very  much  Ice  close  by  the  Land,
we  stood  off  againe,  the  wind  being  at  North-east,  cold
weather.  The  second  day,  we  got  within  three  leagues
of  the  Hand  :  but  finding  exceeding  much  Ice  round  about
us,  we  stood  off  againe,  the  wind  at  North-east,  cold  frostie

281

A.D.

1609.

Five  seales.

Snozv.

A  ship  of
Hull.

Frosty  wether,

Snozv  &  frost.
26.  Seales.

A  Beare  killed
on  the  Ice.
Two  young
white  Beares
brought  into
England.

June  1.

Frost.

A.D.

1609.

The  Hull

man.

20.  leagues

North-west  off

the  Hand.

No  fog  in  a
moneths  space.

[III.iii.563,
The  first
thaw.

Fogges.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRTMES

weather.  From  the  second  day  to  the  fift,  wee  sayled  first
one  way,  and  then  another,  as  the  wind  and  Ice  would
give  us  leave.  The  wind  being  at  North  and  by  East,
and  the  Hand  being  betweene  the  North-west  and  by
North,  within  sixe  leagues  and  lesse.

The  sixth  day,  we  spake  with  the  Hull  man,  who  told
us,  that  he  was  put  twentie  leagues  to  the  North-west  of
the  Hand,  being  fast  in  the  Ice.  We  had  the  wind
Northerly,  and  frosty  weather ;  the  Land  bearing  North
North-west.  The  seventh  and  eight,  we  beate  up  and
downe  in  the  Ice :  the  Hand  did  beare  North-west  eight
leagues  off.  The  winde  was  Northerly,  with  cold  and
frostie  weather.

The  ninth,  the  Land  beare  North-west  off  us  about  six
leagues  off.  That  day  we  had  the  first  fogge  since  the
time  of  our  arrivall,  which  was  the  eight  of  May.  Neither
lost  wee  the  sight  of  the  Hand  above  eighteene  houres  in
all  this  time.  This  day,  about  a  North-east  Sunne  it
began  to  thaw ;  and  in  sixe  houres  the  snow  was  melted,
which  lay  upon  the  Ice  above  sixe  inches  thicke :  which
put  us  in  good  hope  that  the  Ice  was  almost  past.

The  tenth,  we  got  within,  sixe  miles  of  the  shoare :
where  I  made  an  attempt  to  have  got  to  the  land  with  the
Shallop :  but  comming  within  three  miles  of  the  shoare,  I
could  get  no  farther,  the  Ice  was  so  thicke,  and  such  foggy
weather.  I  made  another  attempt  the  same  day,  and  got
within  one  mile  of  the  Land :  but  the  Ice  was  so  thicke
that  I  could  get  no  farther.  The  same  day  wee  saw  good
store  of  Morses  on  the  Ice  and  in  the  Sea.

The  eleventh  and  twelfth,  we  plyed  up  and  downe  fayre
by  the  Hand,  to  see  if  wee  could  get  on  Land  with  our
Shallop  ;  but  the  Ice  was  so  close  about  the  Land,  that  wee
could  not  by  any  meanes.  This  day  the  wind  was  at
South-east,  thicke  foggie  weather.  The  thirteenth,  we
had  thicke  fogge  and  calme  weather;  and  when  it  began
to  cleere,  wee  had  sight  of  the  Souther  part  of  the  Hand,
bearing  South-east,  about  sixe  miles  off ;  but  it  fell  thicke
suddenly  againe. There  wee  anchored  in  fortie  fathoms,

282

JONAS POOLE  ad.

1609.
white  shelly  ground ;  and  rid  till  ten  of  the  clocke  at
night :  at  what  time  I  prepared  to  goe  on  shoare,  as  fast
as  I  could  with  a  Shallop  and  sixe  men.  About  eleven  of
the  clocke  we  put  from  the  Ship,  and  with  great  labour
got  through  the  Ice  to  the  Hand,  by  a  North-east  Sunne.

The  fourteenth  day,  I  landed  on  the  Wester  side  of  the
Hand,  and  determined  to  goe  from  thence  to  the  North
side,  where  wee  slew  the  Beares. The  ninth  of  May  I The  Beares
left  three  men  with  the  Shallop,  and  tooke  three  men  with  skine  on  the
me. In  my  journey  I  found  such  bad  way,  that  I  had  no  North  5lde'
stomacke  to  goe  through  ; for  where  there  was  no  snow,
the  ground  was  so  soft,  and  without  grasse,  that  we  went
up  to  the  anckles  in  dirt ; and  where  the  snow  lay,  which
was  in  some  holes,  three  or  foure  fathoms  thicke,  it  was  so
soft,  that  we  slipt  each  step  up  to  the  twist ; so  that  wee
were above three houres in going scarce two miles.
Whereupon,  considering  it  would  bee  long  before  I  should
get  ten  miles  and  backe  againe,  I  returned  to  our  Shallop,
and  found  that  the  men  which  I  left  had  killed  some  fowle,
which  wee  sod,  and  when  wee  had  eaten  them,  I  prepared
to  goe  in  the  Shallop  to  the  North  side. I  went  close  by
the  shoare ; for  the  Sea  was  full  of  Ice. As  wee  went
along  by  the  Cliffes,  we  got  good  store  of  Fowle ; which
made  us  glad  and  joyfull,  because  there  was  no  hope  to
get  aboord  the  Ship  that  day,  nor  the  next. About  a
North-west  Sun  wee  got  to  the  place  abovesaid,  and  found
nine  Beares,  three  of  them  I  slew,  the  other  tooke  the  Sea.
Those  three  that  were  slaine  we  flead,  and  tooke  their  Three  Beares
flesh  and  salted  it  in  their  skinnes ; which  I  stowed  in  the  slaine,
Shallop  for  feare  of  a  dearth. I  had  a  terce  full  of  salt  Powd^ and
there,  which  wee  left  in  that  place  the  eleventh  of  May.

The  fifteenth  day,  when  wee  had  ended  our  businesse,
and  eaten  some  of  our  Beares  flesh,  and  set  up  an  Ensigne
in  token  of  our  possession  of  the  Hand,  wee  prepared  to  Possession
be  gone :  and  about  an  East  North-east  Sunne  the  wind  ^fn-°^f/
came  Westerly ;  which  made  me  thinke,  as  it  proved,  that  for  the
the  Ship  would  be  on  the  South-east  side  of  the  Hand ;  Muscovie
and  when  wee  were  comming,  and  almost  at  the  North-east  Company.

283

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

point,  we  saw  nine  men ;  presently  I  knew  them  to  bee
the  men  of  Hull.  Along  I  came  to  the  East  side,  where
Drift  wood  on  we  tooke  in  drift  wood,  and  a  broad  stone  to  make  a  fire
the  East  side.  Up0n  in  our  Boat.  While  wee  were  there,  wee  espied  our
ship  under  her  Fore-topsayle,  and  her  Misen.  We  made
The  Cove.  aH  the  haste  we  could,  and  came  to  the  Cove,  where  wee
made  our  voyage  the  Summer  last  past.  There  likewise
I  set  up  a  Pike,  with  a  white  cloth  upon  it,  and  a  letter
signifying  our  possession  for  the  right  worshipfull  Com-
pany trading  to  Moscovie.  When  I  had  done,  I  espied
the  Hull  mans  Boat  rowing  into  the  Cove,  and  a  Tent
set  up  in  the  bottom  of  the  Bay.  I  went  thither,  and
told  him  we  had  taken  possession  there,  the  eight  of
May  last.  He  answered,  That  if  the  beasts  came  on
shoare,  he  would  kill  them  if  he  could ;  and  that  there
were  as  good  men  which  ventured  in  that  Ship,  as  the
Company.  I  told  him  he  durst  not  answer  these  words
in  England,  and  so  departed  and  got  some  Fowle.  About
a  South-west  Sunne  wee  stood  toward  our  Ship,  having
the  wind  at  West  South-west,  and  the  Ship  bearing  from
us  South-east  about  foure  leagues.  I  had  not  sailed  ten
miles,  but  the  Ice  was  so  close  and  firme,  that  I  could  not
get  aboord,  nor  backe  againe  ;  for  it  closed  with  such  force,
that  it  made  the  Shallops  sides  cracke,  as  though  they
would  have  met  together.  Wee  laboured  very  sore  to
save  our  Boat,  because  it  did  concerne  our  lives,  and  got
her  into  a  place  where  shee  lay  betweene  two  pieces  of
Ice.  After  this  sort  we  drave  with  the  Ice  till  we  had  lost
sight  of  our  Ship,  which  was  about  a  North  sun  ;  and
still  wee  drave,  being  not  able  otherwise  to  move  till  we
were  above  eight  leagues  from  the  Hand.

The  sixteenth  day,  at  an  East  South-east  Sun,  the  Ice
began  to  open.  Then,  although  my  Company  were  in
despaire,  and  said  it  was  impossible  to  get  out,  to  worke
wee  went,  and  by  cutting  off  Ice,  and  removing  of  it  one
piece  from  another,  we  made  way  through  toward  the
Land.  The  neerer  to  the  Land  wee  got,  wee  found  the
more  open  Sea  ;  and  by  a  North  Sunne  wee  got  on  shoare.

284

on  Gull  Hand.

JONAS POOLE  ad.

1609.

After  wee  had  given  God  thankes  for  our  deliverance  out
of  such  extreame  danger,  wee  eate  some  Fowle  and  Beares  They  feed  on
flesh,  which  wee  sod  under  a  Cliffe. There  wee  found  Beares  flesh.
nine  young  Foxes,  and  killed  the  old  one. There  also  we  Nine  Foxes
slept  upon  the  cold  Sand,  which  was  not  past  three  inches  found.
thicke,  and  underneath  Ice ; and  staied  here  till  a  South-
east Sunne  the  seventeenth  day.

The  seventeenth,  we  went  from  this  place  to  the  Cove,
where  we  found  the  Hull  mans  Boat. I  made  a  tilt  of  the
Shallops  sayle,  and  sod  some  Beares  flesh  and  Fowle ; and
stayed  about  the  Cove  all  that  day. And  upon  an  Hand,  [lil.iii.564.]
commonly called Gull-Hand, I found three Mynes of  Three  Mynes
Lead Ure ; but having no fit tooles to breake the  of  Lead  found
Rocks,  and  also  because  it  was  in  the  view  of  the  Hull
mans  Tent,  I  was  forced  to  let  it  rest,  till  the  Ships  could
get  into  the  Cove.

The  eighteenth  day,  wee  went  to  the  North  side  of  the
Hand,  and  in  our  way  wee  found  good  Sea-coales  to  burne  : Good  Sea-coles
some  wee  tooke  with  us  to  try  them,  and  found  them  good,  found  on  the
And  on  the  North  side  I  slew  two  Beares. Then  wee  lJfnd'
shared  the  bread  that  was  left ; and  wee  had  but  two  ^  .
cakes  to  a  man : for  some  of  my  Company  while  I  was
asleepe,  or  killing  of  the  Beares,  had  broken  open  the
chest  wherein  the  bread  was,  and  had  conveyed  some  away.
Our  beere  was  spent  before  this  time,  and  we  were  faine  to
drinke  snow  water.

The  ninteenth,  wee  went  to  the  Cove,  the  wind  being
Westerly,  to  see  if  wee  could  espy  our  Ship ;  but  wee
could  not,  neither  could  shee  come  neere  the  Hand  for  Ice  ;  An  hug,
for  all  the  Sea,  as  farre  as  I  could  see  from  the  top  of  an  passe  of  I
high  Hill  was  covered  with  Ice,  saving  that  within  a
quarter  of  a  mile  off  the  shoare,  it  was  cleere  round  about
once  in  a  tyde.

The  twentieth  day,  I  went  to  the  North  side  againe,
and  slew  a  Beare. Thus  wee  spent  the  time,  sometimes  Another
on  one  side,  sometimes  on  the  other,  never  staying  above  Beare  shine.
one  day  in  one  place  till  the  Ship  came  in ; which  was
the  seven  and  twentieth  of  June,  on  which  day  I  slew

285

e  com-
ce.

A.D.
1609.

Another
Be  are  slaine.

Their  Ship  got
in  the  second
time.

The  Matthew.

The  Marie
Margarite.

July.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

another  Beare.  I  slew  seven  in  all,  whose  flesh  we  eate
full  saverly,  forgetting  the  oyly  ranknesse  of  it ;  for
hunger  is  a  savourie  sawce.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  our  ship  came  to  an  anchor
on  the  North  side,  where  we  then  were ;  assoone  as  we
saw  her,  we  needed  no  bidding  to  go  aboord.  When  we
were  come  to  the  ship  side,  they  bad  us  welcome :  but
whereas  we  thought  to  have  releeved  our  selves,  wee
found  it  farre  otherwise ;  because  the  Ship  had  a  knocke
with  a  piece  of  Ice  in  the  Sterne,  which  brake  in  the
corner  of  a  Planke  under  the  water,  so  that  our  bread-
roome  was  full  of  water,  and  all  our  bread  spoyled,  saving
about  one  hundred  weight :  which  was  but  a  small
quantitie  for  three  and  forty  men.  This  day  a  Ship  called
the  Matthew  came  to  an  anchor  by  us.  Then  Master
Welden  and  I  went  on  shoare,  where  we  found  one  John
Skinner,  Masters  mate  of  the  Matthew,  with  eleven  men
by  him.  We  set  up  our  Tent,  and  told  him  there  was  no
voyage  for  him  to  make :  but  our  necessitie  was  such,
that  we  were  faine  to  take  foure  hundred  of  bread  of  them,
upon  some  condition,  which  I  will  not  speake  of  here.
The  same  day  wee  thought  to  have  taken  a  Copper  aboord,
which  I  digged  out  of  the  snow ;  but  by  negligence  it  was
let  fall  into  the  Sea,  yet  afterward  taken  up  againe  and
carried  aboord.  The  same  day,  another  Ship  called  the
Mary  Margarite  came  into  the  said  Cove  on  the  South
side.

The  eighteenth,  I  went  to  the  Cove  with  the  Shallop
and  sixe  men,  where  I  found  the  Marie  Margarite ;  there
passed  no  great  kindnesse  betweene  them  and  me.  I  slew
three  Morses  there,  two  were  lost,  the  others  head  I
brought  aboord.  The  next  day  I  came  aboord  our  Ship,
and  we  rid  on  that  side,  looking  still  when  any  beasts
would  come  on  shoare,  till  the  second  of  July.  Then  we
weighed,  and  stood  to  the  East  side  of  the  Hand ;  because
the  wind  was  at  West  North-west,  and  great  store  of  Ice
came  from  those  parts.  We  had  not*  rid  one  houre  to  an
end,  but  we  saw  a  Skiffe  comming  towards  us. In  this

286

JONAS POOLE  a.d.

1609.

Skiffe  was  one  Josias  Logan,  and  Thomas  Edge,  Factors  Logan  and

in  the  Paul  for  the  worshipfull  Company. They  told  us  Ed&e-

that  the  Paul  was  in  the  Cove,  and  the  ship  of  Hull.

They  went  aboord  againe,  and  when  the  tyde  was  spent,

we weighed and thought to have  anchored neere the

Cove ; but  the  wind  was  so  far  Easterly,  that  we  could

not ; so  wee  went  to  the  Wester  side,  and  ridde  there  till

the  fourth  day,  where  we  got  Fowle ; for  in  all  the  time  Fowle  their

of  our  being  about  the  Hand,  and  in  the  Ice,  they  were  our  liefest  food

chiefest  food.  mextreamiHe.

The  fourth,  we  weighed  and  went  to  the  North  side ;
where  we  were  troubled  with  much  Ice :  The  wind  was
at  West  and  by  North,  which  brought  the  Ice  whole  upon
us ; so  that  we  were  forced  to  weigh  againe.

The sixth, we came into the  Cove ; where Master
Welden  slew  a  Beare. The  eight  day,  he  slew  another  a  Beare
Beare ; and  the  same  day  I  went  to  the  North  side,  with  slaine.
the  Shallop  and  victuals  for  the  men  which  kept  on  that  A*other
side. I  stayed  there  till  the  fourteenth  of  July  :  on  which eare  slaine'
day  we  had  the  wind  Northerly,  with  snow  and  frost,  and  Snow  and
the  Hand  environed  round  with  Ice. In  this  time  the  Frost-
Ships  Company  on  the  South  side  did  digge  some  Minerall  Some  Mineral/
Lead. And  we  caught  above  twentie  Foxes,  which  we  Lead  digged.
did  eat  as  saverly  as  if  they  had  beene  Venison.  FowTaKn*

The  fifteenth  day,  by  a  North-east  Sunne  we  came
aboord  the  Ship,  which  lay  in  the  Cove,  with  our  Shallop
and  all  our  provision  that  was  on  the  North  side.  And
the  Lionesse  prepared  to  goe  to  Saint  Nicolas  in  Russia,  as
it  was  appointed  before  in  London.

The  sixteenth,  the  wind  being  North-east  brought  such
store  of  Ice  to  the  Hand,  that  it  was  compassed  round
close  to  the  shoare ;  and  filled  the  Cove  so  full,  that  by
no  meanes  possible  the  Ships  could  get  out,  but  ridde  still
shut  in  for  five  dayes.

The  seventeenth,  the  Ice  began  to  open  at  the  mouth
of  the  Cove,  and  some  were  willing  to  goe  out  with  their
Ships ;  but  covetousnesse  had  like  to  have  brought  us  all
to  great  misery :  for  each  man  striving  to  ride  longest  in

287

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

the  Cove,  supposing  that  there  the  Morses  would  come
first  on  shoare,  they  found  it  cleane  contrary  ; for  the  wind
Dangers  by came  Southerly,  and  blew  all  the  Ice  from  this  side  of  the
the  Ice.  Hand,  save  that  which  was  in  the  Cove : which  pressed

[III.iii.565.]  so  sore  upon  our  Ships,  that  our  Anchors  could  not  hold
us.  For  the  Matthew  was  put  from  three  Anchors,  and
drove  with  that  small  tyde,  that  runneth  there  within  her
length  of  a  sunken  Rocke :  but  a  great  piece  of  Ice  on
ground  upon  the  Rocke  did  keepe  her  from  it.  And  when
the  floud  came  againe,  she  was  driven  within  halfe  her
length  of  the  Rockes ;  so  that  they  were  glad  to  get  most
of  their  victuals  out  of  her  upon  the  Rockes,  looking  each
minute  when  she  should  split  in  sunder.  And  though  the
rest  of  the  ships  did  not  drive  as  she  did,  yet  they  had
many  a  sore  stroke  with  the  Ice.  For  the  Southerly  wind
caused  a  hollow  Sea  to  come  in ;  so  that  our  ships  strooke
with  such  force  against  the  Ice,  that  wee  could  hardly
stand  on  our  feete  in  them.  Then  each  man  layed  to  his
hand  to  save  his  ship,  by  putting  Plancks  and  old  Cables
ends,  and  bundels  of  Hoops  betweene  their  ships  and  the
Ice.  But  they  were  beaten  all  to  pieces  presently.  Then
we  put  pieces  of  Elme  Plancke  betweene  the  bowes  of  the
Paul,  in  which  ship  I  was :  Immediately,  they  also  were
beaten  into  small  pieces,  although  they  were  above  foure
inches  thicke.  With  the  stroke  that  brake  the  Plancke,
the  Carpenter  said,  the  ships  side  did  cracke,  and  two
timbers  were  broken.  Then  presently  wee  also  got  out  of
the  ship  most  of  our  victuals,  and  carried  it  to  the  shoare.
There  might  you  see  a  sorrowfull  spectacle.  For  all  the
ships,  being  five  in  number,  were  so  fast  in  the  Ice,  that  all
the  men  that  were  in  them  all,  which  were  one  hundred
eightie  two,  could  not  imagine  how  to  save  one.  Among
the  rest,  we  made  account  that  the  Matthew  would  sinke,
ere  long :  because  the  Ice  had  broken  nine  timbers  on  one
side,  and  eleven  on  the  other ;  so  that  the  Greene  Sea  did
come  into  the  ship :  and  her  mayne  beame  was  broken  at
that  instant  likewise.  In  this  sort  we  continued  till  the
twentieth  day  following ; when  we  looked  still  to  bee  put

288

JONAS POOLE  a.d.

1609.

on  the  Cliffes  with  the  force  of  the  Ice,  that  pressed  upon
our  ships  so  sore,  that  our  Anchors  could  not  possibly  hold.
Upon  the  twentieth  day,  it  pleased  God  to  bring  the

wind  Westerly,  then  the  Ice  began  to  open,  and  to  drive  Awarpe,isa

out  of  the  Cove  by  little  and  little,  to  our  great  comforts.  RoPe  (com~

But  that  Ice  that  did  not  get  cleane  out,  came  backe  againe,  ^^ser)  used

and  ranne  round  in  a  Circle ; so  that  wee  had  a  continual  t0  warpe  a

labor  to  defend  the  ships  from  it. Whereupon  we  made  ship,  that  is,

meanes  to  get  out  by  long  l  Warps,  as  wee  terme  them.  wtth  an
Wee  were  faine  to  let  slip  one  Cable,  and  the  Lionesse  one. "c°r  entt0

r  J  the  Hawser

The  Matthew  had  but  one  Cable  and  Anchor; but  they  andlaydoutto

borrowed  one  of  us. By  a  North-west Sunne,  all  the  hale  the  ship

ships  got  out  of  the  Ice  to  the  Coves  mouth ;  where  we  forward :

stayed for the ebbe. When the ebbe was come, the  ™fe*£/™nt

Lionesse  departed  on  her  Voyage  to  Saint  Nicholas  in  wind  toCarrie

Russia. And presently the Matthew, and the Mary  out,  or  into  a

Margarite  set  saile  and  got  out. Then  wee  in  the  Paul  Harbour.

set  sayle,  and  before  our  Anchor  was  up,  it  got  hold  upon  ™ A  Bitter,  is

one  of  Matthewes  Cables,  that  shee  lost,  when  shee  drove  ^/bk  about  *

out,  and  brought  us  up  to  a  m  Bitter,  so  that  wee  were  the  Bitts,  for

very  neere  the  Rockes : but  wee  got  off  againe,  and  rid  when  they

there  till  a  North-west  Sunne  the  next  day.  co™e  t0

The  one  and  twentieth  day,  we  weighed  and  stood  to  t"£e  °^tuJ^e

the  East  side  of  the  Hand,  where  wee  found  the  Mary  Wuh  it  about

Margarite,  which  had  lost  her  Boat. Streight  way  we  the  Bitts  {two

sayled  to  the  North  side,  where  we  anchored  and  rid  till  mayne  s1uare

a  North  Sunne.  Timbfr,which

The  two  and  twentieth  day,  it  cleered  up  of  a  fogge,  stand  Pillar

which  had  continued  since  the  time  of  our  comming  out  wise  in  the

of the Cove. And  wee thought it best to fetch the  loos*  of  the

victuals  aboord,  which  we  carried  on  shoare  when  the  ship  sf^  ?  m*kf,
ri  1  ,. .  , T  r  fast  the  Cable

was  like  to  be  split  with  Ice.  unto)  that  they

Then  Josias  Logan  and  I  tooke  seven  men  more  with  may  by  little
us,  and  came  to  the  Cove  on  the  South  side :  where  wee  f nd  l'lttle  vere
found  abundance  of  Morses  lying  on  the  Ice,  that  was  in  ltoutafea[e:
the  Cove.  I  slue  one  of  them,  and  tooke  off  his  head :  °a  Zpperffile,
the  Cable  would  runne  out  end  for  end,  that  is  altogether;  but  thus  stopped,  the  shippe  is  said
to  bee  brought  to  a  Bitter.  The  Bitter  end  is  that  end  of  the  Cable  within  boord  at  the  Bitts.
Xlii  289  T

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

1609.

we  could  not  get  to  the  shoare  where  our  victuals  lay,
but  we  made  a  fire  under  a  Cliffe  in  the  same  Cove.

The  three  and  twentieth  day,  wee  got  to  our  victuals,
and  Josias  went  with  it  to  our  shippe :  but  I  tarried  at  the
Cove,  hoping  that  the  beasts  would  come  on  Land  when
the  Ice  was  gone  ;  as  they  did  afterward.  There  I  tarried
till  the  five  and  twentieth  of  July ;  at  what  time  Josias
Logan  came  to  mee  with  the  Shallop,  and  a  Skiffe  loden
with  Caske  and  other  provision ;  and  told  mee,  that  they
had  slaine  five  or  sixe  hundred  Morses  on  the  North  side.
Hee  tarried  with  mee  till  the  seven  and  twentieth  of
July :  now  seeing  no  beastes  did  come  on  Land,  because
the  Ice  did  hang  about  the  Cove,  he  went  to  the  North
side  againe :  but  the  same  day  after  he  was  gone,  they
began  to  come  on  Land.

The  next  day  following,  being  the  eight  and  twentieth,
wee  slue  about  eightie,  and  tooke  their  Blubber  and
Teeth.  Then  they  began  to  come  on  shoare  againe  the
thirtieth  day :  at  what  time  Master  Bonner  was  come  into
the  Cove  to  seeke  his  Anchors.  Then  his  men  came  on
shoare,  and  we  slue  about  one  hundred  and  fiftie  beast
more.  But  there  rose  a  storme  at  South-east,  that  brought
in  such  a  surge,  that  it  washed  above  sixtie  beasts  into
the  Sea ; so  that  most  of  them  were  lost.

The  next  day  being  the  last  of  July,  Master  Welden

and  Master  Jones  came  to  the  Cove  with  about  twelve

men,  being  all  very  wearie. For  they  had  left  the  Shallop

in  a  Cove  on  the  North-west  side  of  the  Hand,  and  came

over  Land. Then  to  worke  wee  went  on  all  hands,  and

placed  our  Coppers. And  by  the  fift  day  of  August  we

had  ended  our  businesse ;  and  the  ship  came  from  the

North  side  into  the  Cove.

[III.iii.566.] The  sixt  of  August,  I  tooke  the  Skiffe  and  seven  men

August.  t0  fetck  tjle  Shallop  to  the  Cove,  that  Master  Welden

had  left  in  a  Cove,  on  the  North-west  side  of  the  Hand,

the  last  of  July. When  I  came  to  the  place,  considering

I  was  neere  the  North  side,  where  we  commonly  make

Note.  our  Voyage,  and  also  desired  by  Master  Welden,  if  I  could

290

JONAS POOLE  a.d.

1603.

goe,  to  doe  so,  I  went  thither,  and  found  about  five  and

fortie  as  good  headed  beasts  for  Teeth,  as  ever  I  saw.

Wee  had  no  more  Launces  to  kill  them  with  all,  but  two,

I  tooke  one,  and  a  lustie  fellow  that  was  our  Cooper  had

the  other  :  we  had  not  killed  past  ten  but  his  Lance  brake.

Then  I  slue  all  the  rest  in  lesse  then  two  houres ;  and  wee

tooke  their  Teeth ;  and  the  next  day  by  a  West  Sunne

wee  came  aboord  the  Paul  with  them.

The  eight  day,  wee  got  the  Southermost  Point  of  the
Hand :  where  wee  rid  all  that  day.  Their  Skiffe  from
their  long  Boats  sterne,  and  we  manned  our  Boat  to  fetch
her  againe :  but  then  rose  such  a  fogge,  that  we  had  like
to  have  lost  both  our  Boats  and  men ;  but  they  got  to  the
ship  againe  with  much  adoe.

The  ninth  day,  it  was  calme ;  but  wee  had  such  a  fogge,
that  wee  could  not  see  two  Cables  length  from  the  ship.
And  about  eight  of  the  Clocke  at  night,  wee  lost  our
Skiffe  altogether.

The  tenth  day,  we  had  a  little  Wind  at  North-west  and
by  West.  Then  seeing  no  amendment  of  the  weather,
wee  left  the  ship  of  Hull  behind  us  in  the  Hand,  and  about
sixe  of  the  Clocke  set  sayle  for  England,  and  arrived  safely
at  London  the  last  of  August,  1609. Blessed  bee  God.

A  Voyage  performed  to  the  Northwards,  Anno
1603.  in  a  ship  of  the  burthen  of  fiftie  tunnes,
called  the  Grace,  and  set  forth  at  the  cost  and
charges  of  the  Worshipfull  Francis  Cherie.
Written  by  William  Gorden  ;  being  the  first
Voyage  to  Cherie  Hand  ;  which  came  to  my
hands  since  the  former  (or  rather  later  Voyages)
were  in  the  Presse.

[He  ship  being  readie  the  tenth  of  Aprill,  whereof
was  Master  Stephen  Bennet,  and  for  Factor  and
Over-seer  William  Gorden,  our  Directions  from
the  said  Merchant,  were  first  to  proceed  to  Cola,  and  there

291

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1603.

to  make  sale  of  such  goods  as  we  had,  and  to  take  in  such
other  as  the  Countrey  of  Lappia  did  affoord,  and  then
to  proceed  upon  some  Discoverie.  Wherefore  omitting
our  Journey  to  Cola,  as  a  matter  of  small  importance,
being  so  well  knowne  before,  after  our  Affaires  ended,
we  were  readie  to  proceed  forward.  But  our  men  not
being  hired  thereunto  would  have  refused,  if  there  had
not  beene  made  an  agreement  by  meanes  of  Josias  Logan,
who  was  to  lye  there  as  Factor  for  Master  Cherie,  the
Master  and  my  selfe,  partly  with  promises,  partly  with
gifts.  And  thus  setting  forward  the  sixt  of  August,  from
the  River  of  Cola,  being  determined  to  have  sayled  into
80.  degrees  of  latitude,  if  nothing  did  hinder  us ;  or  if
we  did  not  light  upon  some  land :  our  determination  was

An  Hand,  hindered  by  meanes  of  meeting  with  an  Hand,  and  like-
wise the  yeere  being  farre  spent,  keeping  our  course  from
the  West  end  of  Kilden,  to  the  Hands  of  Ward-house,
which  wee  passed  the  tenth  of  August  with  little  wind ;
then  directing  our  course  North  North-west,  the  wind
at  South-west  easie  wind,  so  that  the  eleventh  day  we
did  reckon  our  selves  to  have  sayled  twentie  leagues
North-west.  The  twelfth  day,  it  was  most  part  calme
and  foggie.  The  thirteenth  day,  it  was  cleere,  and  the
wind  at  South,  and  we  had  sayled  twentie  two  leagues
North  North-west.  The  fourteenth  day,  the  wind  at
East,  we  kept  our  course  and  sayled  ten  leagues,  and  the
same  day  being  thicke  and  foggie,  we  had  thought  wee
had  seene  Land  about  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-
noone,  bearing  from  us  West  North-west,  and  North-west
by  West,  but  sayling  towards  it  three  houres,  keeping  still
his  forme,  and  not  altering  till  the  wind  increasing,  caused
it  to  fade  away  (for  it  was  no  other  then  a  banke  of  fogges)
after  we  had  sayled  three  leagues  changing  our  course,
we  sayled  then  fifteene  dayes  twentie  leagues,  North-west
and  by  North,  still  having  close  weather,  that  we  could
not  make  any  observation.  The  sixteenth  day  in  the
morning,  at  two  of  the  clock,  we  did  see  two  great  high
Hils,  which  did  seeme  to  us  above  the  Clouds,  and  did

292

JONAS POOLE  a.d.

1603.

seeme  very  neere,  but  we  found  it  otherwise  for  sayling
towards  it,  we  found  it  further  then  we  did  expect,  for  it
was  sixe  of  the  clocke  at  night  before  wee  could  come
neere  unto  the  Land,  where  wee  anchored  in  thirtie
fathomes.  In  which  time  we  could  not  sayle  lesse  then
eighteene  leagues  North  and  by  West.  That  night  our
Master  knowing,  better  what  did  belong  unto  those
Affaires,  would  not  suffer  the  Boat  to  goe  aland  till  the
morning :  which  was  the  seventeenth  day  of  August,  and
before  our  going  aland,  the  Master  caused  a  shanke  of
Lines  to  bee  shot  for,  to  toy  for  fish,  and  then  he  and
my  selfe  with  foure  of  our  Company  went  aland.  First,
upon  a  little  Hand  neere  adjoyning,  where  we  had  much
adoe  to  get  to  our  Boat  againe,  by  reason  of  the  steepnes
of  the  Rockes :  then  we  went  on  shoare  upon  the  Mayne,  [III.iii.567.
where  at  our  comming  on  Land,  wee  did  see  two  Foxes,
one  White,  the  other  Blacke.  Thus  spending  most  part
of  the  day,  wee  returned  aboord  our  ship  without  any
profit :  only  one  of  our  men  tooke  up  a  piece  of  Lead,
and  I  found  a  piece  of  a  Morses  Tooth,  by  which  we
perceived  that  the  Sea  Morses  did  use  thither,  but  the
time  for  that  yeere  was  past,  for  we  did  see  none.  After
our  comming  aboord,  having  haled  the  Line,  we  found
nothing  but  one  fish  thereon,  wherefore  presently  weigh-
ing Anchor,  we  sayled  West  to  see  if  we  could  have
any  true  observation,  the  next  day  which  wee  had,  and
found  our  selves  to  bee  in  74.  degrees  30.  minutes.  The
same  day  directing  our  course  for  London,  where  we
arrived  the  tenth  of  September,  by  Gods  helpe,  in  health
and  safetie.

293

A.D.

1607.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

May.

The  lies  of
Shotland.

No  variation.

61.  degrees
1 1 .  minutes.
The  inclina-
tion of  the
Needle.
June.

Chap.  XIIII.

Divers  Voyages  and  Northerne  Discoveries  of  that
worthy  irrecoverable  Discoverer  Master  Henry
Hudson.  His  Discoverie  toward  the  North
Pole,  set  forth  at  the  charge  of  certaine  Wor-
shipfull  Merchants  of  London,  in  May  1607.
Written  partly  by  John  Playse  one  of  the
Company,  and  partly  by  H. Hudson.

Nno  1607.  Aprill  the  nineteenth,  at  Saint
Ethelburge  in  Bishops  Gate  street,  did
communicate  with  the  rest  of  the  Parish-
ioners these  persons  Seamen,  purposing
to  goe  to  sea  foure  dayes  after,  for  to  dis-
cover a  Passage  by  the  North  Pole  to
Japan  and  China.  First,  Henry  Hudson
Master.  Secondly,  William  Colines  his  Mate.  Thirdly,
James  Young.  Fourthly,  John  Colman.  Fiftly,  John
Cooke.  Sixtly,  James  Beubery.  Seventhly,  James  Skrut-
ton.  Eightly,  John  Pleyce.  Ninthly,  Thomas  Baxter.
Tenthly,  Richard  Day.  Eleventhly,  James  Knight.
Twelfthly,  John  Hudson  a  Boy.

The  first  of  May  1607.  we  weyed  Anchor  at  Gravesend,
and  on  Tuesday  the  sixe  and  twentieth  day  in  the  morn-
ing, we  made  the  lies  of  Shotland,  and  at  noone  we  were
in  60.  degrees  12.  minutes,  and  sixe  leagues  to  the  East-
ward of  them  :  the  Compasse  had  no  variation.  We  had
sixtie  foure  fathomes  at  our  sounding,  blacke,  ozie,  sandie,
with  some  yellow  shels.  Our  ship  made  more  way  then
we  did  suppose.  On  Saturday  the  thirtieth  of  May,  by
our  observation  we  were  in  61.  degrees  11.  minutes.
This  day  I  found  the  Needle  to  incline  79.  degrees  under
the  Horizon.  For  foure  dayes  space  we  made  very  little
way  by  contrary  winds.

On  Thursday  the  fourth  of  June,  we  were  by  our
observation  still  in  61.  degrees  and  14.  minutes,  eight  and

294

HENRY HUDSON

twentie  or  thirtie  leagues  from  the  Norther  part  of  Shot-
land  :  the  Land  bearing  by  our  Accompt  East  and
by  North  off  us,  I  found  variation  in  five  degrees
Westerly.

The  seventh  of  June,  wee  were  in  63.  degrees  25.
minutes.  The  eighth,  all  the  fore-noone  we  had  a  fresh
gale  Southerly ;  we  steered  away  North  and  by  West,  and
by  observation  we  were  in  65.  degrees  27.  minutes.

The  eleventh,  wee  saw  sixe  or  seven  Whales  neere  our
shippe :  wee  were  in  sixtie  seven  degrees  thirtie  minutes.
About  five  of  the  clocke,  the  winde  came  up  at  North-
east and  by  East ;  wee  steered  away  North  North-west
with  a  fresh  gale  all  the  night  at  East.  The  twelfth,  the
winde  was  at  East  North-east,  a  stifTe  gale,  wee  steered
away  as  afore,  and  accounted  wee  had  runne  by  this  day
noone  thirtie  leagues.  In  the  after-noone  wee  steered
away  North  and  by  West  fifteene  leagues,  all  the  night
prooved  a  great  fogge  with  much  wind.

The  thirteenth,  betweene  one  and  two  in  the  morning,
we  saw  some  Land  on  head  of  us,  and  some  Ice :  and  it
being  a  thicke  fogge,  we  steered  away  Northerly,  and
having  much  wind  wee  stood  away  South  and  by  East,  sixe
or  eight  leagues.  Our  sayle  and  shroudes  did  freeze.  At
eight  in  the  morning  it  cleered  up,  the  wind  being  at
North-east  and  by  East,  with  much  wind  wee  were  hardly
able  to  maintayne  a  sayle.  This  was  a  very  high  Land,
most  part  covered  with  Snow.  The  neather  part  was
uncovered.  At  the  top  it  looked  reddish,  and  underneath
a  blackish  Clay,  with  much  Ice  lying  about  it.  The  part
which  we  saw  when  wee  cast  about,  trended  East  and
West :  And  the  Norther  part  which  we  saw,  trended
North-east  and  by  North,  and  North-east :  and  the  length
which  wee  saw  was  nine  leagues ;  wee  saw  much  Fowle.
Also  wee  saw  a  Whale  close  by  the  shoare.  We  called  the
Head-land  which  we  saw,  Youngs  Cape ;  and  neere  it
standeth  a  very  high  Mount  like  a  round  Castle,  which
wee  called,  the  Mount  of  Gods  Mercie.  All  the  after-
noone,  and  all  the  Eevening  it  rained. At  eight  in  the

295

A.D.

1607.

65.  degrees
27.  minutes.
6j.  degrees
30.  minutes.

Toungs  Cape.

The  Mount  of
Gods  mercie.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1607.

Eevening  we  cast  about,  and  steered  all  night  North  and
by  West,  and  sometimes  North  North-west.

Snow.  The  fourteenth,  being  neere  the  Land  we  had  Snow.

At  foure  in  the  morning,  the  wind  vering  Northerly,  we
cast  about  and  stood  South-east  and  by  South.  This  day
wee  had  much  wind  and  raine,  we  shorted  sayle  being
neere  the  Land.  The  fifteenth,  in  the  morning  it  blowed
so  much  wind  at  North-east,  that  wee  were  not  able  to

[III.iii.568.]  maintayne  any  sayle,  wee  then  strooke  a  hull,  and  let  our
ship  drive,  wayting  for  a  fitter  wind ;  this  night  was  very
much  raine.  The  sixteenth,  was  much  wind  at  North-
east. The  seventeenth,  we  set  sayle  at  noone,  we  steered
away  East  and  by  South,  and  East  South-east.  The
eighteenth,  in  the  afternoone  a  fine  gale  South-east,  which
toward  the  Eevening  increased,  and  we  steered  North-
east three  Watches,  twelve  leagues.  The  nineteenth  we
steered  away  North  North-east  sixteene  leagues.  At
noone  wee  had  raine  with  fogge.  From  twelve  to  foure
we  steered  North  North-east  eight  leagues,  and  did
account  our  selves  in  seventie  degrees  neerest  hand :  pur-
posing to  see  whether  the  Land  which  we  made  the
thirteenth  day,  were  an  Hand  or  part  of  Groneland.  But
then  the  fogge  increased  very  thicke  with  much  wind  at
South,  which  made  us  alter  our  course,  and  to  shorten  our
sayle,  and  we  steered  away  North-east.  Being  then  as
we  supposed,  in  the  Meridian  of  the  same  land,  having
no  observation  since  the  eleventh  day,  and  lying  a  hull
from  the  fifteenth  to  the  seventeenth  day,  wee  perceived
a  current  setting  to  the  South-west.  This  day  wee  saw
three  Whales  neere  our  ship,  and  having  steered  away
North-east  almost  one  watch,  five  leagues,  the  Sea  was
growne  every  way :  we  supposed  wee  were  thwart  of  the
North-east  part  of  that  Land  which  we  made  the  thirteenth
day,  and  the  current  setting  to  wind-ward.  The  reason
that  mooved  us  to  thinke  so  ;  was,  that  after  we  had  sayled
five  or  sixe  leagues  in  this  Sea,  the  wind  neither  increasing
nor  dulling,  we  had  a  pleasant  and  smooth  Sea.  All  this
night  was  foggie  with  a  good  gale  of  wind,  we  steered

296

HENRY HUDSON

away  North-east  untill  the  next  day  at  noone,  and  sayled
in  that  course  twentie  leagues.

The  twentieth,  all  the  morning  was  a  thicke  fogge  with
the  winde  at  South :  wee  steered  North-east  till  noone.
Then  we  changed  our  course,  and  steered  away  North
North-east,  hoping  for  an  open  Sea  in  our  course  to  fall
with  the  bodie  of  Newland.  This  day  at  two  in  the
afternoone  it  cleered  up,  and  wee  saw  the  Sunne,  which
wee  had  not  seene  since  the  second  of  this  moneth.
Having  steered  North  North-east,  two  watches  and  an
halfe,  fifteene  or  sixteene  leagues  wee  saw  Land  on  our
Larboord,  about  foure  leagues  off  us,  trending  as  wee
could  ghesse  North-east  and  South-west.  We  steered
away  East  North-east,  the  wind  at  South  a  good  gale,
but  reasonable  cleere :  wee  saw  many  Birds  with  blacke
backes,  and  white  bellies  in  forme  much  like  a  Ducke  :
we  saw  also  many  pieces  of  Ice  driving  at  the  Sea.  We  *
loofed  for  one  and  went  roomer  for  another.  And  this
morning  about  foure,  a  thicke  fogge  we  saw  a  head  of  us.

The  one  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning  we  steered
North-east,  and  East  North-east  two  watches,  five  or  sixe
leagues.  Then  it  grew  thicke  fogge.  And  we  cast  about,
and  steered  North-east  and  East  North-east  two  watches,
sixe  leagues,  finding  wee  were  embayed.  The  wind  came
at  East  South-east  a  little  gale  :  we  *  tacked  about  and  lay
South.  All  this  night  was  a  thicke  fog  with  little  wind,
East  we  lay  with  the  stemme.

The  two  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning  it  cleered  up,
being  calme  about  two  or  three  of  the  clocke :  after  we
had  a  prettie  gale,  and  we  steered  away  East  and  by  North
three  leagues.  Our  observation  was  in  72.  degrees  38.
minutes,  and  changing  our  course,  we  steered  North-east,
the  wind  at  South-east  a  prettie  gale.  This  morning
when  it  cleered  up,  we  saw  the  Land,  trending  neere  hand
East  North-east,  and  West  South-west,  esteeming  our
selves  from  it  twelve  leagues.  It  was  a  mayne  high  Land,
nothing  at  all  covered  with  snow :  and  the  North  part  of
that  mayne  high  Land  was  very  high  Mountaynes,  but

297

A.D.

1607.

Note.

Land  on  their

Larboord.

Many  Fowles.

Much  drift

Ice.

*To  looje,  is

to  keepe  close

to  the  wind:

1 00.  mer  cont.

*To  tacke  the
ship,  is  to  bring
her  head  about
to  lye  the  other
way.

Land  not
covered  with

Snow.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1607.

we  could  see  no  snow  on  them.  We  accounted  by  our
observation  the  part  of  the  mayne  Land,  lay  neerest  hand
in  73.  degrees.  The  many  fogs  and  calmes  with  contrary
winds,  and  much  Ice  neere  the  shoare,  held  us  from  farther
Discovery  of  it.  It  may  bee  objected  against  us  as  a
fault,  for  haling  so  Westerly  a  course.  The  chiefe  cause
that  moved  us  thereunto,  was  our  desire  to  see  that  part
of  Groneland,  which  (for  ought  that  we  know)  was  to  any
Christian  unknowne :  and  wee  thought  it  might  as  well
have  beene  open  Sea  as  Land,  and  by  that  meanes  our
passage  should  have  beene  the  larger  to  the  Pole :  and  the
hope  of  having  a  Westerly  wind,  which  would  be  to  us  a
landerly  wind  if  wee  found  Land.  And  considering  wee
found  Land  contrarie  to  that  which  our  Cards  make
mention  of;  we  accounted  our  labour  so  much  the  more
worth.  And  for  ought  that  wee  could  see,  it  is  like  to  bee
a  good  Land,  and  worth  the  seeing.

On  the  one  and  twentieth  day,  in  the  morning  while  we
steered  our  course  North  North-east,  we  thought  we  had
embayed  our  selves,  finding  Land  on  our  Larboord,  and
Ice  upon  it,  and  many  great  pieces  of  Drift  Ice :  we
steered  away  North-east,  with  diligent  looking  out  every
cleere  for  Land,  having  a  desire  to  know  whether  it  would
leave  us  to  the  East,  both  to  know  the  bredth  of  the  Sea,
and  also  to  shape  a  more  Northerly  course.  And  con-
The  Land  of  sidering  wee  knew  no  name  given  to  this  Land,  wee
Hold  with thought  good  to  name  it,  Hold  with  hope,  lying  in  73.

degrea.  ?3' degrees  of  latitude.

The  Sunne  was  on  the  Meridian  on  the  South  part  of
the  Compasse,  neerest  hand.  Heere  is  to  bee  noted  that
when  we  made  The  Mount  of  Gods  Mercie,  and  Youngs
Cape,  the  Land  was  covered  with  snow  for  the  most  part,
and  extreame  cold,  when  wee  approached  neere  it :  But
this  Land  was  very  temperate  to  our  feeling.  And  this
likewise  is  to  be  noted,  that  being  two  dayes  without
observation  ;  notwithstanding,  our  lying  a  hull  by  reason
of  much  contrary  wind,  yet  our  observation  and  dead
reckoning  were  within  eight  leagues  together,  our  shippe

298

HENRY HUDSON  a.d.

1607.
beeing  before  us  eight  leagues. This  night  untill  next [III.iii.569.]
morning  prooved  little  Winde.

The  three  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning  we  had  an  hard
gale  on  head  of  us,  with  much  rayne  that  fell  in  very  great
drops,  much  like  our  Thunder  showers  in  England ;  wee
tacked  about  and  stood  East  Northerly  with  a  short  sayle,
to  our  feeling  it  was  not  so  cold  as  before  we  had  it.  It
was  calme  from  noone  to  three  of  the  clocke  with  fogge.
After  the  winde  came  up  at  East  and  East  South-east,  we
steered  away  North-east  with  the  fogge  and  rayne.
About  seven  or  eight  of  the  clocke,  the  winde  increased
with  extreame  fogge,  wee  steered  away  with  short  sayle
East  North-east,  and  sometimes  East  and  by  North.
About  twelve  at  mid-night,  the  wind  came  up  at  South-
west, we  steered  away  North,  being  reasonable  cleere
weather.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning  about  two  of
the  clocke,  the  Masters  mate  thought  he  saw  Land  on  the
Larboord,  trending  North  North-west  Westerly,  and  the
longer  we  ranne  North,  the  more  it  fell  away  to  the  West,
and  did  thinke  it  to  bee  a  mayne  high  Land.  This  day  A  mayne  high
the  wind  being  Westerly,  we  steered  away  North,  and  by  Land.
observation  wee  were  in  73.  degrees  nearest  hand.  At
noone  we  changed  our  course,  and  steered  away  North
and  by  East,  and  at  our  last  observation,  and  also  at  this,
we  found  the  Meridian  all  Leeward  on  the  South  and  by
West,  Westerly  part  of  the  Compasse,  when  we  had  sayled
two  Watches  eight  leagues.

The  five  and  twentieth,  the  wind  scanted  and  came  up
at  North  North-west,  we  lay  North-east  two  Watches  8.
leagues.  After  the  wind  became  variable  betweene  the
North-east  and  the  North,  we  steered  away  East  and  by
North,  and  sometimes  East,  we  had  thicke  fogge.  About
noone  three  Granpasses  played  about  our  shippe.  This
After-noone  the  wind  vered  to  the  East  and  South-east,
we  haled  away  North  and  by  East.  This  night  was  close
weather,  but  small  fogge  (we  use  the  word  Night  for  dis-
tinction  of  time, but  long  before this the Sunne  was

299

A.D.

1607.

75.  Degrees.

Land  not farre
off-

76.  degrees
38.  minutes.

Greenland  or

New/and

discovered.

78.  Degrees.
Vogel  Hooke.

Temperate
ay  re.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

alway  above  the  Horizon,  but  as  yet  we  could  never  see
him  upon  the  Meridian  North.)  This  Night  being  by
our  accompt  in  the  Latitude  of  75.  degrees,  we  saw  small
flockes  of  Birds,  with  blacke  Backes  and  white  Bellies,  and
long  speare  Tayles.  We  supposed  that  Land  was  not
farre  off,  but  we  could  not  discrie  any,  with  all  the
diligence  which  we  could  use,  being  so  close  weather,  that
many  times  we  could  not  see  sixe  or  seven  leagues  off.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning  was  close
weather,  we  had  our  wind  and  held  our  course  as  afore.
This  day,  our  observation  was  76.  degrees  38.  minutes,
and  we  had  Birds  of  the  same  sort  as  afore,  and  divers
other  of  that  colour,  having  red  Heads ;  that  we  saw
when  we  first  made  the  Mount  of  Gods  Mercy  in  Green-
land, but  not  so  many.  After  we  steered  away  North  and
by  East:  two  Watches  10.  leagues,  with  purpose  to  fall
with  the  Souther  part  of  Newland,  accounting  our  selves
10.  or  12.  leagues  from  the  Land.  Then  wee  stood  away
North-east  one  Watch  five  leagues.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  about  one  or  two  of  the
clocke  in  the  morning  we  made  Newland,  being  cleere
weather  on  the  Sea  ;  but  the  Land  was  covered  with  fogge,
the  Ice  lying  very  thick  all  along  the  shoare  for  15.  or  16.
leagues  which  we  saw.  Having  faire  wind  wee  coasted  it
in  a  very  pleasing  smooth  sea,  and  had  no  ground  at  an
hundred  fathoms,  foure  leagues  from  the  shoare.  This
day  at  noone,  wee  accounted  we  were  in  78.  degrees,  and
we  stood  along  the  shoare.  This  day  was  so  foggie,  that
we  were  hardly  able  to  see  the  Land  many  times,  but  by
our  account  we  were  neare  Vogel  Hooke.  About  eight
of  the  clocke  this  Eevening,  we  purposed  to  shape  our
course  from  thence  North-west.  Heere  is  to  bee  noted,
that  although  we  ranne  along  neere  the  shoare,  we  found
no  great  cold,  which  made  us  thinke,  that  if  we  had  beene
on  shoare  the  place  is  temperate.  Holding  this  North-
west course,  about  ten  of  the  clocke  at  night,  we  saw
great  store  of  Ice  on  head  off  us,  bearing  Wester  off  us ;
which  we  could  not  goe  cleere  off  with  the  foresayd  course.

300

HENRY HUDSON  a.d.

1607.

Then  we  tact  about,  and  stood  away  betweene  the  South
and  the  South-east,  as  much  desirous  to  leave  this  Land
as  we  were  to  see  it.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  was  a  hard  gale  of  wind  all
the  fore-noone  betweene  the  South  and  the  South-west.
We  shaped  our  course  ,  we  did  it  to

bee  farther  from  the  Ice  and  Land.  It  pleased  God  that
about  twelve  of  the  clocke  this  night  it  cleered  up,  and
we  found  that  we  were  betweene  the  Land  and  the  Ice ;
Vogel  Hooke  then  bearing  nearest  hand  East  off  us.
Then  we  tacked  about,  and  stood  in  for  the  shoare,  having
Sea-roome  between  the  Ice  and  the  Land.  The  nine  and
twentieth,  at  foure  in  the  morning  the  wind  at  North-east,
a  pretie  gale,  we  thought  best  to  shorten  our  way,  so  we
tacked  about  and  stood  North  North-west,  the  wind  a
little  increasing.  About  twelve  at  noone,  we  saw  Ice  a
head  off  us ;  we  cast  about  again,  and  stood  away  East
South-east  with  very  much  wind,  so  that  we  shortned  our
sayles  for  the  space  of  two  Watches.  Then  about  eight
this  Eevening,  we  strucke  a  Hull,  and  it  proved  the
hardest  storme  that  we  had  in  this  Voyage.  The  thirtieth,
in  the  morning  was  stormie ;  about  noone  it  ceased,  at
seven  in  the  Eevening  it  proved  almost  calme.

The  first  of  July,  all  the  fore-noone  the  wind  was  at  ju/y.
South-east,  we  stood  North-east  for  the  shoare,  hoping  to
finde an open Sea betweene the shoare and the Ice.
About  noone  wee  were  embayed  with  Ice,  lying  betweene
the  Land  and  us. By  our  observation  we  were  in  78. 78.  degrees
degrees 42. minutes, whereby we accounted we  were 4-2-  minu^s-
thwart  of  The  great  Indraught. And  to  free  our  selves
of  the  Ice,  we  steered  betweene  the  South-east  and  South,
and  to  the  Westward,  as  we  could  have  sea;  And  about [III.iii.570.]
six, this Eevening it pleased God to give us cleere
weather ;  and  we  found  we  were  shot  farre  into  the  Inlet, The  great
being  almost  a  Bay,  and  environed  with  very  high  Moun- In^eL
taynes,  with  low  Land  lying  betweene  them ;  wee  had  no
ground  in  this  Bay  at  an  hundred  fathoms. Then  being
sure  where  we  were,  we  steered  away  West,  the  wind  at

301

A.D.

1607.

78.  Degrees
56.  Minutes.

78.  degrees
33.  minutes.

The  skroudes
and  sayles
frozen.

The  mouth  of
the  Inlet.

77.  degrees
30.  minutes.

78.  degrees.
The  end  of  the
Sacke.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

South-east  and  calme,  and  found  all  our  Ice  on  the  Norther
shoare,  and  a  cleare  Sea  to  the  Southward.

The  second,  it  pleased  God  to  give  us  the  wind  at
North-east,  a  faire  gale,  with  cleere  weather,  the  Ice  being
to  the  Northward  off  us,  and  the  weather  shoare,  and  an
open  Sea  to  the  Southwards  under  our  Lee.  We  held  on
our  course  North-west  till  twelve  of  the  clocke ;  having
sayled  in  that  course  10.  leagues,  and  rinding  the  Ice  to
fall  from  us  to  the  ,  we  gave  thankes  to  God,

who  marvellously  preserved  us  from  so  many  dangers,
amongst  so  huge  a  quantitie  of  Ice  and  Fogge.  We
steered  away  North-west,  hoping  to  be  free  from  Ice,  we
had  observation  78.  degrees  $6.  minutes,  we  fell  with  Ice
againe,  and  trended  it  as  it  lay  betweene  the  West  and
South  South-east.  The  third,  we  had  observation  78.
degrees  33.  minutes.  This  day  wee  had  our  shrouds
frozen,  it  was  searching  cold,  we  also  trended  the  Ice,  not
knowing  whether  we  were  cleare  or  not,  the  wind  being  at
North.

The  fourth,  was  very  cold,  and  our  shroudes  and  sayles
frozen,  we  found  we  were  farre  in  the  Inlet.  The  wind
being  at  North,  we  beare  up  and  stood  South  South-east,
and  South  and  South-west  by  West  till  ten  this  night.  The
fift,  was  very  much  wind  at  North  Easterly :  at  twelve  we
strooke  a  Hull,  having  brought  our  selves  neare  the  mouth
of  the  Inlet.

The  sixth,  in  the  morning  the  wind  was  as  before,  and
the  Sea  growne.  This  morning  we  came  into  a  very
Greene  Sea,  we  had  our  observation  77.  degrees  30.
minutes.  This  after-noone  the  wind  and  Sea  asswaged.
About  foure  of  the  clocke  we  set  sayle,  and  steered  North-
west and  by  West,  the  wind  being  at  North  North-east.
This  day  proved  the  clearest  day  we  had  long  before.
The  seventh,  at  foure  in  the  morning  was  very  cleare
weather,  and  the  fairest  Morning  that  we  saw  in  three
weekes  before,  we  steered  as  afore,  being  by  our  account
in  78.  degrees  nearest  hand,  and  out  of  the  Sacke.  We
found  we  were  compassed  in  with  Land  and  Ice,  and  were

302

HENRY HUDSON

againe  entred  into  a  Blacke  Sea,  which  by  proofe  we  found
to  be  an  open  passage.  Now  having  the  wind  at  North
North-east,  we  steered  away  South  &  by  East,  with
purpose  to  fall  with  the  Southermost  part  of  this  Land :
which  we  saw,  hoping  by  this  meane,  either  to  defray  the
charge  of  the  Voyage,  or  else,  if  it  pleased  God  in  time
to  give  us  a  faire  wind  to  the  North-east,  to  satisfie
expectation.  All  this  day  and  night  afterward  proved
calme.

The  eight,  all  the  fore-noone  proved  calme,  and  very
thicke  fogge.  This  morning  we  saw  many  peeces  of
Drift-wood  drive  by  us,  we  heaved  out  our  Boate  to  stop
a  leake,  and  mended  our  riggings.  This  day  wee  saw
many  Seales,  and  two  Fishes  which  we  judged  to  bee  Sea-
horses, or  Morses.  At  twelve,  this  night  we  had  the
winde  at  East  and  by  South,  wee  stood  away  North-east.

The  ninth,  all  the  fore-noone  was  little  wind  at  South-
east, with  thicke  fogge.  This  day  we  were  in  amongst
Hands  of  Ice,  where  we  saw  many  Seales.

The  tenth,  in  the  morning  was  foggie,  afterward  it
proved  cleere,  we  found  we  were  compassed  with  Ice  every
way  about  us ;  wee  tacked  about,  and  stood  South  and  by
West,  and  South  South-west  one  Watch  five  leagues,
hoping  to  get  more  Sea-roome,  and  to  stand  for  the  North-
east, we  had  the  wind  at  North-west.

The  eleventh,  very  cleere  weather,  with  the  winde  at
South  South-east,  we  were  come  out  of  the  Blue  Sea  into
our  Greene  Sea  againe,  where  we  saw  Whales.  Now
having  a  fresh  gale  of  wind  at  South  South-east,  it
behooved  mee  to  change  my  course,  and  to  sayle  to  the
North-east,  by  the  Souther  end  of  Newland.  But  being
come  into  a  Greene  Sea,  praying  God  to  direct  mee,  I
steered  away  North  ten  leagues.  After  that,  we  saw  Ice
on  our  Larboord,  we  steered  away  East  and  by  North  three
leagues,  and  left  the  Ice  behind  us.  Then  we  steered
away  North  till  noone.  This  day  wee  had  the  Sunne  on
the  Meridian  South  and  by  West,  Westerly,  his  greatest
height  was  37.  degrees  20.  minutes. By  this  observation

303

A.D.

1607.

A  Blacke  and
open  Sea.

Much
Drift-wood.

Many  Seales.
Morses.

From  hence  it
seemeth  is
taken  out  of
Hen.  Hudsons
ozone  Notes.
Blue  and
Greene  Seas.

A.D.

1607.
79.  degrees
17.  minutes.

Sick  of  Be  ares
flesh  unsalted.

80.  degrees.

Nezvland  or
Greenland,  of
which  the  Hol-
landers hath
made  a  little
Discoverie  by
Barents,  as
before  is
delivered,  but
neither  so
farre,  nor  so
exact,  nor  so
use  full:  nor
first  as  before
is  observed  of
Sir  H.
Willoughbies
English
exacter  Dis-
coveries
finding  the
Whale  and
Morse  benefit,
they  also
enterloped.
[III.iii.571.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

we  were  in  79.  degrees  17.  minutes,  we  had  a  fresh  gale
of  wind  and  a  smooth  sea,  by  meanes  whereof  our  ship
had  out-runne  us.  At  ten  this  Eevening  cleere  weather,
and  then  we  had  the  company  of  our  troublesome  neigh-
bours Ice  with  fogge.  The  wind  was  at  South  South-
west. Heere  we  saw  plentie  of  Seales,  and  we  supposed
Beares  had  beene  heere,  by  their  footing  and  dung  upon
the  Ice.  This  day,  many  of  my  Companie  were  sicke  with
eating  of  Beares  flesh  the  day  before  unsalted.

The  twelfth,  for  the  most  part  was  thicke  fogge,  we
steered  betweene  South  and  by  East,  and  South  South-
east 2.  l/2.  leagues,  to  cleere  us  of  the  Ice.  Then  we  had
the  wind  at  South,  we  steered  till  noone  North-east  five
leagues.  This  morning  we  had  our  shrouds  frozen.  At
noone  by  our  accompt  we  were  in  80.  degrees,  being  little
wind  at  West  South-west,  almost  calme  with  thicke  fogge.
This  after-noone  we  steered  away  North,  and  sometimes
North-east.  Then  we  saw  Ice  a  head  off  us,  we  cast  about
and  stood  South-east,  with  little  wind  and  fogge.  Before
we  cast  about  by  meanes  of  the  thicke  fogge,  we  were  very
neere  Ice,  being  calme,  and  the  Sea  setting  on  to  the  Ice,
which  was  very  dangerous.  It  pleased  God  at  the  very
instant  to  give  us  a  small  gale,  which  was  the  meanes  of
our  deliverance,  to  him  be  praise  therefore.  At  twelve
this  night,  it  cleered  up,  and  out  of  the  top  William
Collins  our  Boat-swaine  saw  the  Land,  called  Newland  by
the  Hollanders,  bearing  South  South-west  twelve  leagues
from  us.

The  thirteenth,  in  the  Morning  the  wind  at  South  and
by  East,  a  good  gale,  we  cast  about  and  stood  North-east
and  by  East,  and  by  observation  we  were  in  80.  degrees
23.  minutes.  This  day  we  saw  many  Whales.  This  fore-
noone  proved  cleere  weather,  and  we  could  not  see  any
signe  of  Ice  out  of  the  top.  Betweene  noone  and  three
of  the  clocke,  we  steered  away  North-east  and  by  East
five  leagues,  then  we  saw  Ice  on  head  off  us,  we  steered
East  two  Glasses  one  league,  and  could  not  be  cleare  of
the  Ice  with  that  course. Then  we  steered  away  South-

3°4

HENRY HUDSON

east  two  leagues l/2.  after  we  sayled  East  and  by  North,
and  East  foure  leagues,  till  eight  the  next  morning.

The  foureteenth,  in  the  morning  was  calme  with  fogge.
At  nine  the  wind  at  East,  a  small  gale  with  thicke  fogge,
we  steered  South-east  and  by  East,  and  running  this  course
we  found  our  Greene  Sea  againe,  which  by  proofe  we
found  to  be  freest  from  Ice,  and  our  Azure  Blue  Sea  to  be
our  Icie  Sea.  At  this  time  we  had  more  Birds  then  we
usually  found.  At  noone  being  a  thicke  fogge,  we  found
our  selves  neere  Land,  bearing  East  off  us ;  and  running
farther  we  found  a  Bay  open  to  the  West  and  by  North
Northerly,  the  bottome  and  sides  thereof  being  to  our  sight
very  high  and  ragged  Land.  The  Norther  side  of  this
Bayes  mouth  being  high  land,  is  a  small  Hand,  the  which
we  called  Collins  Cape,  by  the  name  of  our  Boat-swaine,
who  first  saw  it.  In  this  Bay  we  saw  many  Whales,  and
one  of  our  company  having  a  Hooke  and  Line  over-
boord  to  trie  for  Fish,  a  Whale  came  under  the  Keele
of  our  ship,  and  made  her  held,  yet  by  Gods  mercie  we
had  no  harme,  but  the  losse  of  the  hooke  and  three  parts
of  the  line.  At  a  South-west  Sunne  from  the  North-west
and  by  North,  a  flood  set  into  the  Bay.  At  the  mouth  of
this  Bay  we  had  sounding  thirtie  fathoms,  and  after  sixe
and  twentie  fathoms,  but  being  farther  in,  we  had  no
ground  at  an  hundred  fathoms,  and  therefore  judged  it
rather  a  Sound  then  a  Bay.  Betweene  this  high  ragged,
in  the  swampes  and  vallies  lay  much  snow.  Heere  wee
found  it  hot.  On  the  Souther  side  of  this  Bay,  lye  three
or  foure  small  Hands  or  Rockes.

In  the  bottome  of  this  Bay,  John  Colman  my  Mate,
and  William  Collins  my  Boat-swaine,  with  two  others  of
our  company  went  on  shoare,  and  there  they  found  and
brought  aboord,  a  payre  of  Morses  teeth  in  the  jaw,  they
likewise  found  Whales  bones,  and  some  dosen  or  more  of
Deeres  Homes,  they  saw  the  footings  of  Beasts  of  other
sorts,  they  also  saw  Rote-geese,  they  saw  much  drift  Wood
on  the  shoare,  and  found  a  streame  or  two  of  Fresh  water.
Here  they  found  it  hot  on  the  shoare,  and  dranke  water
xiii  305  u

A.D.

[607.

Greene  Sea
freest  of  Ice,
and  the  Blue
Sea  Icie.

Collins  Cape.

Whale
danger.

A  Sound  is  a
greater  and
deeper

indraught  then
a  Bay.

Heat  beyond
80.  degrees.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1607.

to  coole  their  thirst,  which  they  also  commended. Here
we  found  the  want  of  a  better  Ship-boate. As  they  certi-
fied me,  they  were  not  on  the  shoare  past  halfe  an  houre,
and  among  other  things  brought  aboord  a  Stone  of  the
Countrey. When  they  went  from  us  it  was  calme,  but
presently  after  we  had  a  gale  of  wind  at  North-east,  which
came  with  the  Flood  with  fogge. We  plyed  too  and
againe  in  the  Bay  waiting  their  comming ;  but  after  they
came  aboord  we  had  the  wind  at  East  and  by  South  a
fine  gale,  we  minding  our  Voyage,  and  the  time  to  per-
forme  it,  steered  away  North-east,  and  North  North-east.
This  night  proved  cleere,  and  we  had  the  Sunne  on  the
Meridian,  on  the  North  and  by  East  part  of  the  Com-
passe, from the  upper  edge  of  the Horizon  with the
Sunne  10. Crosse-staffe,  we  found  his  height  10.  degrees  40.  minutes,
degrees  40. without  allowing  any  thing  for  the  Semidiameter  of  the
about  mid- Sunne,  or  the  distance  of  the  end  of  the  staffe  from  the
night.  Center  in  the  Eye. From  a  North  Sunne  to  an  East

Sunne,  we  sayled  betweene  North  and  North  North-east,
eight  leagues.

The  fifteenth,  in  the  morning  was  very  cleere  weather,
the  Sunne  shining  warme,  but  little  wind  at  East
Southerly.  By  a  South-east  Sunne  we  had  brought
Collins  Cape  to  beare  off  us  South-east,  and  we  saw  the
high  Land  of  Newland,  that  part  by  us  Discovered  on  our
starboord,  eight  or  ten  leagues  from  us,  trending  North-
east and  by  East,  and  South-west  and  by  West,  eighteene
or  twentie  leagues  from  us  to  the  North-east,  being  a  very
high  Mountaynous  land,  like  ragged  Rockes  with  snow
betweene  them.  By  mine  account,  the  Norther  part  of
81.  degrees,  this  Land  which  now  we  saw,  stretched  into  81.  degrees.
All  this  day  proved  cleere  weather,  little  Wind,  and
reasonable  warme.

The  sixteenth,  in  the  morning  warme  and  cleere
weather,  the  wind  at  North.  This  morning  we  saw  that
we  were  compassed  in  with  Ice  in  abundance,  lying  to  the
North,  to  the  North-west,  the  East  and  South-east,  and
being  runne  toward  the  farthest  part  of  the  Land  by  us

306

HENRY HUDSON

A.D.

1607.

La?id  stretch-
ing into  82.
degrees.

They
returned.

discovered,  which  for  the  most  part  trendeth  nearest  hand
North-east  and  South-west,  wee  saw  more  Land  joyning
to  the  same,  trending  North  in  our  sight,  by  meanes  of
the  cleernesse  of  the  weather,  stretching  farre  into  82.
degrees ;  and  by  the  bowing  or  shewing  of  the  skie  much
farther.  Which  when  I  first  saw,  I  hoped  to  have  had  a
free  Sea  betweene  the  Land  and  the  Ice,  and  meant  to
have  compassed  this  Land  by  the  North.  But  now  find-
ing by  proofe  it  was  unpossible,  by  means  of  the  abund-
ance of  Ice  compassing  us  about  by  the  North,  and  joyning
to  the  land,  and  seeing  God  did  blesse  us  with  a  faire
wind  to  sayle  by  the  South  of  this  Land  to  the  North-east,
we  returned,  bearing  up  the  Helme,  minding  to  hold  that
part  of  the  Land,  which  the  Hollanders  had  discovered  in
our  sight,  and  if  contrary  windes  should  take  us,  to  Har-
bour there,  and  to  trie  what  we  could  finde  to  the  charge
of  our  Voyage,  and  to  proceed  on  our  Discoverie,  as  soone
as  God  should  blesse  us  with  Winde.  And  this  I  can
assure  at  this  present,  that  betweene  78.  degrees  and  l/2.  [III.iii.572.]
and  82.  degrees  by  this  way  there  is  no  passage:  but  I
thinke  this  Land  may  bee  profitable  to  those  that  will
adventure  it.  In  this  Bay  before  spoken  of,  and  about
this  coast,  we  saw  more  abundance  of  Seales  then  we  had
seene  any  time  before  swimming  in  the  water.  At  noone,
this  day  having  a  stifTe  gale  of  wind  at  North,  we  were
thwart  of  Collins  Cape,  standing  in  81.  degrees  and  a
halfe :  and  at  one  of  the  clocke  the  Cape  beare  North-
east off  us.  From  thence  I  set  our  course  West
South-west,  with  purpose  to  keepe  in  the  open  Sea  free
from  Ice,  and  sayled  in  that  course  16.  leagues.  At
ten  this  night  we  steered  away  South-west,  with  the
wind  at  North  a  hard  gale,  until!  eight  the  next  morning
18.  leagues.

The  seventeenth,  in  the  morning  a  good  gale  at  North  :
at  eight,  we  altered  our  course,  and  steered  away  South
till  eight  in  the  Eevening,  and  ranne  12.  leagues.  This
day  proved  reasonable  cleere  and  warme.  The  eighteenth,
in  the  morning  the  wind  encreased  at  South  and  by  East,

3°7

Abundance  of
Seales.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1607.

with  thicke  fogge.  All  this  after-noone  and  night  proved
close  weather,  little  fogge,  and  reasonable  warme.

The  nineteenth,  at  eight  in  the  morning  the  wind  at
South,  with  thicke  fogge,  we  steered  South-east  4.  leagues
till  noone  :  then  the  wind  vered  more  large ;  wee  steered
South-east  and  by  East  4.  leagues  till  foure :  then  wee
vered  shete,  and  steered  East  and  by  South  Easterly,  15.
leagues,  till  eight  the  next  morning.  This  day  after  the
morning  proved  reasonable  cleere  and  warme.

The  twentieth,  in  the  morning  little  wind  :  at  eight  this
morning  wee  saw  Land  ahead  of  us  under  our  Lee,  and
to  weatherward  of  us  distant  from  us  12.  leagues,  being
part  of  Newland.  It  is  very  high  mountainous  Land  ;  the
highest  that  we  had  seene  untill  now.  As  we  sayled  neere
it,  we  saw  a  Sound  ahead  of  us,  lying  East  and  west.
The  Land  on  the  Norther  side  of  this  Sounds  mouth,
trendeth  neerest  hand  West  North-west,  and  East  South-
east 12.  leagues,  in  our  sight  being  10.  leagues  from  us.
And  the  Land  on  the  Souther  side  being  8.  or  10.  leagues
in  our  sight ;  at  this  time  trendeth  South  South-east,  and
North  North-west ;  from  eight  to  noone  was  calme.  This
yy.  degr.  day  by  observation  we  were  in  77.  degrees  26.  minutes.
26.  m.  Qn  j-hg  Norther  side  of  the  mouth  of  this  Inlet  lie  three
Hands,  not  farre  the  one  from  the  other,  being  very  high
mountainous  Land.  The  farthest  of  the  three  to  the
North-west,  hath  foure  very  high  Mounts  like  heapes
of  Corne.  That  Hand  next  the  Inlets  mouth,  hath  one
very  high  Mount  on  the  Souther  end.  Here  one  of  our
companie  killed  a  red  billed  Bird.  All  this  day  after  the
morning,  and  all  night  proved  calme,  enclining  rather  to
heate  then  cold. This  night  wee  had  some  warme  rayne.

The  one  and  twentieth,  all  the  fore-noone  calme ;  at
foure  in  the  after-noone  we  had  a  small  gale  of  wind  at
South  South-east,  with  fog ;  we  steered  away  East  to
stand  in  with  the  Land,  and  sayled  3.  leagues  untill  mid-
night :  then  the  wind  came  at  North-east,  we  cast  about,
and  steered  South  10.  leagues  till  eight  the  next  morning.
The  two  and  twentieth,  at  eight  in  the  morning  much  wind

308

HENRY HUDSON  ad.

1607.

at  East,  and  variable,  with  short  sayle  wee  steered  3.
leagues  South  and  by  East :  then  came  downe  very  much
wind  ;  wee  strooke  a  hull.  All  this  after-noone  and  night,
proved  very  much  wind  and  raine.

The  three  and  twentieth,  all  the  fore-noone  was  very
much  wind  at  South,  with  raine  and  fogge.  At  foure  this
after-noone  wee  saw  Land,  bearing  North-east  of  us  6.
leagues  from  us.  Then  we  had  the  wind  at  South  South-
west ;  wee  steered  away  South-east,  and  South-east  and  by
East  4.  leagues,  the  Sea  being  very  much  growne.  We
accounted  we  had  hulled  North-west  and  by  North  22.
leagues ;  and  North  3.  leagues.  Then  fearing  with  much
wind  to  be  set  on  a  lee  shoare,  we  tackt  about,  and  made
our  way  good  West  and  by  North,  halfe  a  point  Northerly,
all  this  night  with  much  wind.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning  much  wind  as
afore,  and  the  Sea  growne.  This  morning  wee  strooke
our  mayne  Top-mast  to  ease  our  ship,  and  sayled  from  the
last  Eevening  eight  to  this  noone  15.  leagues  West  and
by  North  halfe  a  point  Northerly.  From  twelve  to  eight,
6.  leagues  as  afore,  with  the  wind  at  South  and  by  West :
at  eight  we  tackt  about  with  the  winde  at  South  South-
west, and  lay  South-east  and  by  East,  with  much  winde,
and  the  Sea  growne.

The  five  and  twentieth,  was  a  cleere  morning  we  set  our
mayne  Top-mast,  we  saw  Land  bearing  North  of  us,  and
under  our  Lee,  we  sayling  South-east  and  by  East.  Then
the  wind  scanted :  we  cast  about,  and  lay  South-west  and
by  West  2.  leagues  ]/2  till  noone.  Then  it  began  to  over-
cast, and  the  wind  to  scant  againe :  we  cast  about,  and  lay
South-east  and  by  South,  the  wind  at  South-west  and  by
West,  and  sayled  in  that  course  3.  leagues  till  foure  in  the
after-noone.  Then  the  wind  scanted  againe,  and  we
sayled  3.  leagues  South.  Now,  seeing  how  contrarie  the
winde  proved,  to  doe  the  good  which  wee  desired  this
way ;  I  thought  to  prove  our  fortunes  by  the  West  once
againe  :  and  this  Eevening  at  eight,  wee  being  the  latitude
of  78.  with  the  better,  and  from  Land  15.  leagues,  which

309

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1607.

leagues  part  whereof  beare  from  the  North-east  to  the
East  off  us,  we  steered  away  West,  with  the  wind  at
South-east,  and  cleere  weather.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  all  this  day  proved  rayne  with
thicke  fog,  and  an  hard  gale  of  wind  at  East  and  by  North,
and  East  North-east. From  the  last  Eevening  at  eight  to

[III.iii.573.]  this  noone,  wee  ranne  25.  leagues:  from  noone  till  mid-
night 19.  leagues,  the  wind  at  East  and  by  South;  from
mid-night  till  two  the  next  morning,  2.  leagues  West.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  extreme  thicke  fog,  and  little
wind  at  East  and  by  South.  Then  it  proved  calme,  and
the  Sea  very  loftie.  Wee  heard  a  great  rutte  or  noise
with  the  Ice  and  Sea,  which  was  the  first  Ice  we  heard  or
saw  since  we  were  at  Collins  Cape :  the  Sea  heaving  us
Westward  toward  the  Ice.  Wee  heaved  out  our  Boat,
and  rowed  to  towe  out  our  ship  farther  from  the  danger ;
which  would  have  beene  to  small  purpose,  by  meanes  the
Sea  went  so  high  :  but  in  this  extremitie  it  pleased  God  to
give  us  a  small  gale  at  North-west  and  by  West,  we
steered  away  South-east  4.  leagues  till  noone. Here  we

Danger  had  finished  our  Discoverie,  if  the  wind  had  continued

escaped.  ^^  brought  us  hither,  or  if  it  had  continued  calme :  but

it  pleased  God  to  make  this  North-west,  and  by  West  wind
the  meane  of  our  deliverance :  which  wind  wee  had  not
found  common  in  this  voyage.  God  give  us  thankfull
hearts  for  so  great  deliverance. Here  we  found  the  want

Whales  Bay.  of  a  good  ship-boat,  as  once  we  had  done  before  at  Whales
Bay :  we  wanted  also  halfe  a  dozen  long  Oares  to  rowe  in
our  ship.  At  noone  the  day  cleered  up,  and  we  saw  by
the  skie  Ice  bearing  off  us :  from  West  South-west  to  the
North  and  North  North-east.  Then  we  had  a  good  gale
at  West,  we  steered  away  South  till  foure  7.  leagues.
From  foure  to  six  South  4.  leagues,  and  found  by  the  Icy
skie  and  our  neerenesse  to  Groneland,  that  there  is  no
passage  that  way :  which  if  there  had  beene,  I  meant  to
have  made  my  returne  by  the  North  of  Groneland  to
Davis  his  Streights,  and  so  for  England.  Here  finding
we  had  the  benefit  of  a  Westerly  wind,  which  all  this

310

HENRY HUDSON  a.d.

1607.

Voyage  we  had  found  scant,  we  altered  our  course,  and
steered  to  the  Eastward,  and  ran  South-east  foure  leagues.
From  eight  this  Eevening  till  noone  the  next  day ;  East
South-east  30.  leagues.  All  this  day  and  night  proved
very  cold,  by  meanes,  as  I  suppose,  of  the  winds  comming
off  so  much  Ice.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  very  cold,  the  wind  at  West,
not  very  foggie.  At  noone  this  day  we  steered  away
South-east  and  by  East,  and  by  observation  we  were  76.
degrees  36.  minutes.  From  noone  to  eight  10.  leagues.
Then  the  wind  scanted  to  South-east  and  by  South,  we
steered  away  East  and  by  North  18.  leagues,  till  the  next
day  noone.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  all  the  fore-noone  a  thicke  fog
and  wet,  the  wind  at  South-east  and  by  East,  neerest  hand,
and  raw  cold.  From  noone  to  foure,  wee  sayled  three
leagues  East  and  by  North,  halfe  a  point  Northerly.
Then  the  wind  vered  more  large,  we  steered  East  and  by
South  8.  leagues  till  twelve  at  night.  At  this  time  to
windward  we  heard  the  rutte  of  Land ;  which  I  knew  to
be  so,  by  the  colour  of  the  Sea.  It  was  extreme  thicke
fog,  so  that  we  could  hardly  see  a  Cables  length  from  our
ship.  We  had  ground  25.  fathoms,  small  blacke  peble
stones.  Wee  sounded  againe,  and  had  ground  at  30.
fathomes  small  stones  like  Beanes,  at  the  next  cast  no
ground  at  60.  fathomes.  I  cast  about  againe,  and  steered
South-west  6.  leagues,  West  and  by  North  two  leagues
till  the  next  day  noone.  All  this  day  and  night  extreme
thicke  fog.

The  thirtieth,  all  the  fore-noone  very  thicke  fog.  At
noone  almost  calme :  after  we  had  little  wind,  and  steered
North  North-west  till  two  :  then  it  cleered  up,  so  that  we
could  see  from  us  2.  leagues  with  the  wind  at  North-west.
Then  we  steered  East  South-east :  after  it  cleered.  At
South  in  the  Eevening,  we  saw  an  Hand  bearing  off  us
North-west  from  us  5.  leagues,  and  we  saw  land  bearing
off  us  from  us  7.  leagues.  We  had  land  likewise  bearing
off  us  from  East  South-east,  to  South-east  and  by  East  as

311

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1607.

wee  judged,  10.  leagues.  Then  having  the  winde  at  West
North-west,  we  steered  South  and  by  East.  It  presently
proved  calme  till  ten  this  Eevening :  then  wee  had  a  little
gale  at  South-west  and  by  West,  wee  steered  away  South
South-east  till  twelve  this  night,  and  accounted  ourselves
in  76.  from  Land  10.  leagues:  which  was  the  likeliest
Land  that  wee  had  seene  on  all  the  parts  of  Newland,
being  playne  riggie  Land  of  a  meane  height,  and  not
ragged  as  all  the  rest  was  that  we  had  seene  this  Voyage,
nor  covered  with  snow.  At  twelve  this  night  we  saw  two
Morses  in  the  Sea  neere  us,  swimming  to  Land.  From
twelve  at  night  to  foure,  calme.

The  one  and  thirtieth,  at  foure  this  morning  we  had  the
wind  at  South-east,  we  steered  South  South-west.  Then
it  proved  calme,  and  so  continued  all  the  fore-noone.  The
after-noone  wee  had  the  wind  at  East  South-east,  we
steered  South  8.  leagues.  Then  being  like  to  prove  much
wind,  contrarie  to  our  purpose,  and  finding  our  fog  more
thicke  and  troublesome  then  before,  divers  things  neces-
sarie  wanting,  and  our  time  well  nigh  spent  to  doe  further
good  this  yeere,  I  commanded  to  beare  up  for  our  returne
for  England,  and  steered  away  South  South-west.  And
this  night  proved  a  hard  gale  of  wind  at  South-east  and  by

Chene  Hand.  East.  Wee  were  thwart  of  Cheries  Hand  the  next  morn-
ing at  foure  of  the  clocke,  being  to  windward  off  us  5.
leagues :  knowing  we  were  neere  it,  we  looked  out  care-
fully for  the  same,  and  it  proving  cleere,  we  saw  it,  being
a  very  ragged  Land  on  the  Wester  side,  rising  like  Hey-
cockes.

The  first  of  August,  a  very  hard  gale  of  wind  at  East
South-east,  we  shorted  sayle,  and  steered  away  South
South-west.  This  night  was  very  foggie,  with  a  hard  gale
of  wind  at  East  and  by  South,  we  steered  by  our  account
27.  leagues :  and  from  eight  this  Eevening  till  the  next
morning  foure,  10.  leagues  as  afore.  All  this  night  was
very  foggie,  wet  and  raw  cold.

The  second,  in  the  morning  calme  with  a  thicke  fog,

[III.iii.574.]  cold  and  slabbie  weather. About  noone  we  had  a  little

312

HENRY HUDSON

gale  West  and  by  North,  wee  steered  away  as  afore.  The
third,  in  the  morning  calme  and  cleere  weather,  with  a
little  gale  East  and  by  South,  we  sayled  South  South-
west :  then  wee  had  the  wind  at  South-east,  wee  sayled
as  afore.  All  this  day  and  night  proved  close  weather,  a
little  fogge  at  noone,  which  continued  not  long.  At
twelve  this  night  the  wind  vered  to  the  East  and  by
North,  wee  held  our  course  South  South-west,  as  afore.

The  fifteenth  of  August,  we  put  into  the  lies  of  Farre,
standing  in  52.  degrees  ;  and  the  fifteenth  of  September,  I
arrived  in  Tilberie  Hope  in  the  Thames.

A.D.

1608.

Chap. XV.

A  second  Voyage  or  Employment  of  Master  Henry
Hudson,  for  finding  a  passage  to  the  East  Indies
by  the  North-east  : written  by  himselfe.

Heir  names  employed  in  this  action  are  as
followeth  :  Henry  Hudson,  Master  and
Pilot;  Robert  Juet,*  the  Master  his
Mate ;  Ludlowe  Arnall ;  John  Cooke,
Boatsonne ;  Philip  Stacie,  Carpenter ;
John  Barns ;  John  Braunch,  Cooke  ;  John
Adrey,  James  Strutton,  Michael  Feirce,
Thomas  Hilles,  Richard  Tomson,  Robert  Raynar,  John
Hudson,  and  Humfrey  Gilby.  The  courses  observed  in
this  Journall  were  by  a  Compasse,  that  the  Needle  and  the
North  of  the  Flye  were  directly  one  on  the  other.

Anno  1608.  the  two  and  twentieth  of  Aprill,  being
Friday,  we  set  sayle  at  Saint  Katherines,  and  fell  downe
to  Blacke  wall.

The  twentieth  of  May,  at  noone  by  observation  we
were  in  64.  degrees  52.  minutes,  and  at  this  time  and
place  the  Needle  declined  under  the  Horizon  by  the
Jnclinatory  81.  degrees,  and  wee  had  a  smooth  Sea,  by
meanes  whereof  my  observation  was  good.

The  one  and  twentieth,  at  night  thicke  fog,  wee  sayled

3*3

*I  have
Robert  J  nets
Journall  also,
for  brevitie
omitted.

Aprill

May.

A.D.
l608.

Lowfoot.

Sun  5 .  degrees
3  5 .  minutes  at
mid-night.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

North  North-east,  with  the  wind  at  East.  The  two  and
twentieth,  in  the  fore-noone  the  winde  at  South-east,  wee
steered  North  North-east,  as  afore :  in  the  after-noone
little  wind  and  thicke  fog ;  we  accounted  us  in  67.  degrees,
the  Sea  smooth,  the  Needle  declined  82.  degrees,  this
night  was  calme  and  cleere.  The  three  and  twentieth,
in  the  morning  the  wind  was  Easterly,  we  stood  North
North-East,  and  North  and  by  East.  All  the  fore-noone
was  foggie :  in  the  after-noone  it  cleered,  and  the  wind
shortned  upon  us,  we  made  our  way  good  North  all  night.
The  foure  and  twentieth,  the  wind  at  East  North-east,
and  East  and  by  North,  we  lay  as  neere  as  wee  could  with
a  full  sayle ;  wee  accounted  Lowfoot  from  us  East
Northerly,  16.  leagues,  distant  from  us;  at  foure  a  clocke
this  after-noone,  we  stood  all  night,  as  afore.

The  five  and  twentieth,  the  wind  at  East  North-east,
we  stood  away  North  as  we  could  lie :  all  this  day  was
cleere  weather,  and  searching  cold,  which  cold  begunne
the  one  and  twentieth  day,  and  then  my  Carpenter  was
taken  sicke,  and  so  doth  yet  continue ;  and  three  or  foure
more  of  our  companie  were  enclining  to  sicknesse,  I
suppose  by  meanes  of  the  cold.  All  the  night  it  was
calme.  The  sixe  and  twentieth,  cold  but  cleere  weather,
the  wind  betweene  East  and  East  North-east,  we  stood
North-easterly  till  twelve  a  clocke  at  night :  then  wee  had
the  wind  at  North-east  &  North  North-east,  we  stood
South-east  and  East  till  noone  the  next  day.  The  seven
and  twentieth,  cold  and  drie  weather,  at  noone  we  had
the  wind  North  and  North  North-west ;  Wee  stood  away
North-east,  and  East  North-east,  as  we  could,  and
accounted  our  selves  in  69.  degrees  40.  minutes,  and  the
Needle  enclined,  having  a  smooth  Sea,  neerest  84.  degrees.
All  night  we  had  wind  and  weather  as  afore.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  drie  cold  cleere  weather ;  the
wind  betweene  North  North-west  and  North,  we  made
our  way  good  East  North-east ;  wee  saw  the  Sunne  on
the  North  Meridian  above  the  Horizon  5.  degrees  3$.
minutes. All  this  night  we  had  much  wind,  as  afore.

3*4

HENRY HUDSON

The  nine  and  twentieth,  a  hard  gale  at  North  North-west :
by  account  we  ranne  from  mid-night  to  noone  2 1 .  leagues,
East  North-east.  Wee  had  the  Sunne  on  the  Meridian
5.  degrees,  the  latitude  73.  degrees  13.  minutes,  whereby
wee  found  our  ship  to  have  out-runne  us.  At  mid-night
the  wind  came  to  South-east :  we  cast  about,  and  stood
East  North-east.  This  day  partly  cleere  weather  with
some  snow.  The  thirtieth,  cold  cleere  weather,  the  wind
betweene  North-east,  and  East  and  by  North  ;  we  went
East  South-east,  and  observing,  were  in  73.  degrees  50.
minutes.  The  one  and  thirtieth,  cold  and  cleere  weather  :
from  the  last  day  till  this  day  noone,  we  stood  South-
east and  by  South,  in  the  latitude  of  72.  degrees  45.
minutes.

The  first  of  June,  a  hard  gale  at  East  North-East,  with
snow :  we  made  our  way  good  South  South-east.  The
second,  a  hard  gale  of  wind  at  North-east :  towards  night,
calme  with  fogge,  our  course  was  South-east  all  day.  The
third,  in  the  morning  we  had  a  sight  of  the  North  Cape ;
and  at  a  West  and  by  North  Sunne,  the  Cape  bore  off  us
South-west,  halfe  a  point  Southerly,  being  from  us  8.
leagues  :  and  observing  the  variation,  I  found  it  to  the
Westward  1 1 .  degrees :  and  having  a  smooth  Sea,  the
Needle  enclined  under  the  Horizon  84.  degrees  and  a
halfe,  the  neerest  I  could  finde.  We  had  the  wind  at
South-west,  and  wee  stood  away  North-east  and  by  East.
It  was  cleere  weather,  and  we  saw  Norway  Fisher-men  at
Sea.

The  fourth,  warme  cleere  sun-shine,  we  stood  away
North-east  and  by  East.  Now  by  Gods  helpe  our
Carpenter  recovered,  and  made  a  Mast  for  our  ship-boat,
and  the  companie  made  a  Sayle,  we  had  the  Sunne  in  the
sight  on  the  North  Meridian :  his  height  was  5.  degrees
40.  minutes.  Inclination  23.  degrees  21.  minutes:  Poles
height  72.  degrees  21.  minutes.  The  fift,  in  the  morning
calme  weather:  wee  sounded,  and  had  140.  fathoms,  sand
Oze :  here  wee  saw  a  swelling  Sea  setting  North-east  and
by  East, and South-west  and  by  West,  with  streame-

315

A.D.

1608.

June.

North  Cafe.

Variation  west
1 1 .  degrees.

[in.iii.575.]

Needles
inclination  84.
degrees  and  a
halfe.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1608.

leches :  and  we  saw  drift  wood.  After  we  had  wind ;
and  we  sayled  and  made  our  way  North  North-east :
towards  night  we  sounded,  and  found  ground  at  150.
fathoms,  sand  Oze.  This  day  cleere  weather,  and  not
cold.  The  sixt,  wee  had  cleere  weather,  the  wind  being
at  East  North-East,  from  the  last  day  till  this  day  noone ;
we  shaped  our  way  on  divers  courses  North  and  by  West,
in  the  latitude  of  73.  degrees  24.  minutes.  We  found
that  our  ship  had  out-runne  us,  sounding  in  1 60.  fathoms  :
in  the  after-noone  little  wind.

The  seventh,  in  the  morning  the  wind  at  South,  after
at  South  South-east :  from  the  last  day  till  this  day  noone,
wee  accounted  our  way  from  divers  courses  North-east,
15.  leagues.  This  day  was  close  but  cleere  weather,  and
we  had  a  good  gale  of  wind  at  this  time.  And  three
dayes  before  this,  our  Cooke  and  one  more  of  our  com-
panie  were  very  sicke.  In  the  morning,  we  had  ground
at  150.  fathoms,  and  at  night  we  had  no  ground  at  180.
fathoms,  which  encreased  hope.  This  night  we  had  some
snow,  which  continued  foure  houres  :  then  the  wind  came
at  North-east  and  by  East  with  storme ;  and  with  short
sayle  we  stood  North  and  by  West : here  the  Needle

y \.  degrees enclined  86.  degrees. I  accounted  that  we  were  in  74.

30.  minutes,  degrees  and  a  halfe  at  neerest  hand.  This  night  we  saw
the  Sunne  on  the  North  Meridian,  his  height  was  7.
degrees  40.  minutes,  which  maketh  the  Poles  height  74.
degrees  23.  minutes.  The  eight,  from  twelve  a  clocke
last  night  till  noone,  we  accounted  our  way  on  divers
courses,  North  and  by  East :  then  our  latitude  was  74.
degrees  38.  minutes,  and  we  had  no  ground  at  200.
fathoms.  In  the  after-noone  the  wind  came  at  South
South-east,  and  South-east  and  by  East.  This  day  and
night  wee  had  cleere  weather,  and  we  were  here  come  into

Darke  blue a  blacke  blue  Sea.

Sea-  The  ninth,  cleere  weather,  the  wind  came  at  South-east

and  by  East :  from  the  last  day  till  this  day  noone,  wee
had  a  good  way  North-east,  in  latitude  of  75.  degrees  29.
minutes : then  wee  entred  into  Ice,  being  the  first  we

316

HENRY HUDSON  ad.

1608.

saw  in  this  Voyage  :  our  hope  was  to  goe  through  it,  we
stood  into  it,  and  held  our  course  betweene  North-
east, and  East  North-east,  loosing  for  one,  and  bearing
roome  for  another,  till  foure  in  the  after-noone :
at  which  time  we  were  so  farre  in,  and  the  Ice  so  thicke
and  firme  ahead,  being  in  it  foure  or  five  leagues,  that
wee  had  endangered  us  somewhat  too  farre ;  wee  returned
as  wee  went  in,  and  with  a  few  rubbes  of  our  ship  against
the  Ice ;  by  eight  a  clocke  this  Eevening  wee  got  free  of
it.  Wee  made  our  way  till  next  day  at  noone,  South-west
and  by  South,  18.  leagues:  in  the  middest  of  this  way
wee  had  no  ground  at  180.  fathoms.  The  tenth,  in  the
morning  hasey  weather ;  but  at  noone  it  cleered  up,  and
then  we  cast  about,  and  stood  away  North  and  by  East,
the  wind  being  at  East  South-east,  two  watches,  five
leagues  :  then  we  had  the  wind  at  East,  we  cast  about,  and
stood  South  South-east,  and  made  a  South  way,  sixe
leagues.  The  eleventh,  in  the  morning  a  hard  storme  at
East,  and  East  and  by  South  we  strooke  a  hull.

The  twelfth,  in  the  morning  fog,  and  all  day  after  cleere
weather,  the  wind  at  South  South-west,  we  steered  East
and  by  North :  at  noone  being  in  the  latitude  75.  degrees
30.  minutes.  From  noone  till  foure  a  clocke,  five  leagues
East  and  by  North ;  then  we  saw  Ice  ahead  of  us,  and
under  our  Lee  trending  from  the  North-west  to  the  North
and  East  of  us:  We  had  sounding  100.  fathom,  greenish
Oze.  Here  we  saw  divers  pieces  of  drift  wood  by  us
driving,  and  streame  Leeches  lying  South  South-west,
and  North  North-east.  We  many  times  saw  the  like  since
we  saw  the  North  Cape.  The  thirteenth,  cleere  weather,
the  wind  at  East,  we  made  a  South  way  6.  leagues,  two
watches :  then  we  cast  about,  and  made  a  North  way  one
watch  3.  leagues  l/2  :  At  twelve  at  night,  much  wind  with
fog,  we  strooke  ahull  and  layed  our  ships  head  to  the
Southward.  The  fourteenth,  in  the  fore-noone  fog,  and
our  shroudes  were  frozen  :  the  after-noone  was  cleere  Sun-
shine, and  so  was  all  the  night.

The  fifteenth,  all  day  and  night  cleere  sun-shine ;  the

317

A.D.

l608.

Mermalde
seene,  and
described.

[III.iii.576.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

wind  at  East,  the  latitude  at  noone  75.  degrees  7.  minutes.
We  held  Westward  by  our  account  13.  leagues.  In  the
after-noone  the  Sea  was  asswaged ;  and  the  wind  being  at
East  we  set  sayle,  and  stood  South  and  by  East,  and  South
South-east  as  we  could.  This  morning,  one  of  our  com-
panie  looking  over  boord  saw  a  Mermaid,  and  calling  up
some  of  the  companie  to  see  her,  one  more  came  up,  and
by  that  time  shee  was  come  close  to  the  ships  side,  looking
earnestly  on  the  men :  a  little  after,  a  Sea  came  and  over-
turned her  :  from  the  Navill  upward,  her  backe  and  breasts
were  like  a  womans,  (as  they  say  that  saw  her)  her  body  as
big  as  one  of  us ;  her  skin  very  white ;  and  long  haire
hanging  downe  behind,  of  colour  blacke :  in  her  going
downe  they  saw  her  tayle,  which  was  like  the  tayle  of  a
Porposse,  and  speckled  like  a  Macrell.  Their  names  that
saw  her,  were  Thomas  Hilles  and  Robert  Rayner.

The  sixteenth,  cleere  weather,  the  wind  being  at  East.
From  the  last  day  till  this  day  noone,  we  made  our  way
South  and  by  East  9.  leagues ;  and  from  noon  to  eight  a
clocke  in  the  Eevening,  6.  leagues :  then  we  cast  about
and  stood  to  the  Northwards.

The  seventeenth,  cleere  weather,  the  wind  at  South-east
and  by  East :  from  the  last  day  till  this  day  noone,  our  way
was  North-east  and  by  East,  at  noone  being  in  the  latitude
of  74.  degrees  40.  minutes.  At  after-noone  we  sounded,
and  had  ground  at  86.  fathom,  greene  Oze,  and  our  water
whitish  greene :  Here  we  saw  Whales,  Porpoises,  and  the
Sea  full  of  Fowles :  from  noone  to  mid-night  North-east
and  by  East  we  had  the  Sunne  at  lowest,  on  the  North
and  by  East,  Easterly  part  of  the  Compasse :  latitude  74.
degrees  54.  minutes.  Sounding  we  had  92.  fathoms
water,  Oze  as  before.

The  eighteenth,  faire  weather,  the  wind  at  South-east
and  by  East,  from  mid-night  till  this  day  noone,  wee
sayled  North-east  and  by  East,  in  the  Latitude  of  75.

and  had  ground  at  ninetie  five
Heere  we  had  Ice  in  our  sight  to
In  the  after-noone,  having  little
318

degrees  24.  minutes,
fathome  Oze,  as  afore,
the  Northward  off  us.

HENRY HUDSON

wind  at  North-east,  we  cast  about  and  lay  East  South-east,
and  at  sixe  a  clocke,  had  ground  at  ninetie  five  fathoms  and
a  halfe  Oze,  as  afore.  From  noone  to  twelve  a  clocke  at
night,  our  way  was  South-east,  and  South-east  and  by
East,  and  had  the  Sunne  on  the  Meridian,  North  and  by
East  halfe  a  point  Eastward.  The  Sunnes  height  was
eight  degrees  40.  minutes.  Sounding  ninetie  fathom.
All  this  day,  we  had  Ice  on  our  Larboord  trending  :  and  at
this  time,  from  the  North-west  off  us  to  the  East  South-
east, I  have  some  reason  to  thinke  there  is  a  Tide  or
Current  setting  to  the  Northwards ;  the  course  wee  held
and  the  way  we  made  betweene  this  noone  and  mid-night
Observations,  doe  make  mee  suspect  it  the  more.

The  nineteenth,  faire  and  warme  weather,  the  sea
smooth.  Here  the  Needle  inclined  under  the  Horizon
89.  degrees  and  a  halfe,  being  in  the  Latitude  at  noone  of
75.  degrees  22.  minutes ;  Sounding  wee  had  ground  in  an
hundred  fathom.  From  twelve  a  clocke  last  night  till
this  day  at  noone,  we  accounted  our  way  from  East  and  by
North  to  South-east,  ten  leagues,  having  Ice  alwayes  in
our  sight  trending  on  our  Larboord,  wee  had  the  winde
betweene  North,  and  North  North-west.  We  saw  the
Sunne  at  the  lowest  on  the  North  and  by  East,  halfe  a
point  Easterly,  his  height  was  8.  degrees  10.  minutes,
which  maketh  the  Poles  height  74.  degrees  56.  minutes;
Sounding  we  had  ground  in  one  hundred  and  twentie  sixe
fathom.  From  noone  to  this  time,  wee  accounted  our
way  East  and  by  South,  and  East  South-east,  twelve
leagues.

The  twentieth,  faire  warme  weather,  this  morning  at
foure  of  the  clocke,  wee  had  depth  one  hundred  and
twentie  five  fathom.  Heere  we  heard  Beares  roare  on
the  Ice ;  and  we  saw  upon  the  Ice  and  neare  unto  it,  an
incredible  number  of  Seales.  We  had  sounding  one
hundred  and  fifteen  fathom,  and  after  ground  at  ninetie
five  fathom  sandie  Oze.  We  had  the  Sun  on  the
Meridian  North  and  by  East,  halfe  a  point  Easterly ;  his
height  was  7.  degrees  20.  minutes. From  twelve  a  clocke

3J9

A.D.

1608.

Current.

Needles
inclination  89.
degrees  and  a
halfe,  in  75.
degrees  22.
min.

Beares
roaring.

Store  of  Seals.

A.D.

l608.

Sunne  at  mid-
night high  7.
degrees  40.
minutes,  in
74.  degrees
33.  minutes.
Juets  notes  tell
of  a  sudden
variation  of
the  Compasse,
from  the
North  to  the
East  one  point,
which  had
been  two
immediately
before.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

last  night,  to  twelve  a  clocke  this  night,  our  way  was
made  good  by  our  account  South-east  and  by  South,
twelve  leagues,  and  South-east,  three  leagues  and  a  halfe,
the  Ice  alwayes  being  on  our  Larboord.  The  wind  this
day,  betweene  North  and  North-west.

The  one  and  twentieth,  at  foure  a  clocke  in  the  morning
wee  sounded,  and  had  one  hundred  and  twentie  fathome
greene  Oze,  and  the  Ice  bore  off  us  East,  the  winde
variable ;  in  divers  courses  wee  made  our  way  good  South
South-east ;  our  Latitude  at  noone  being  74.  degrees
9.  minutes,  we  were  haled  to  the  Northward  beyond
expectation.  All  this  day  faire,  cleere,  and  warme
weather,  and  Ice  on  our  Larboord  at  a  North  and  by  East
Sunne ;  being  then  at  lowest,  his  height  was  7.  degrees
40.  minutes,  which  made  the  Poles  height  74.  degrees
33.  minutes.  From  the  last  day  at  noone,  till  twelve  a
clocke  this  night,  by  account  of  our  ships  way,  wee  made
our  way  good  East  North-east,  sixe  leagues  and  a  halfe ;
whereby  it  doth  appeare  how  we  were  haled  to  the  North-
ward. Heere  wee  had  ground  at  one  hundred  and
thirteene  fathome,  greene  sandie  Oze.

The  two  and  twentieth,  faire  cleare  weather,  the  winde
at  West  North-west.  At  eight  a  clocke  in  the  Morning,
we  had  ground  at  one  hundred  and  fifteene  fathom,  greene
Oze.  From  mid-night  to  noone,  our  course  was  North-
east and  by  East,  being  in  the  Letitude  of  74.  degrees
35.  minutes,  and  we  found  that  our  ships  way,  and  our
observation  were  not  but  there  was  carefull

heed  taken  of  both.  Heere  we  had  Ice  a  head  off  us,
trending  to  the  South-east ;  and  all  day  before  Ice  on  our
Larboord.  Here  we  stood  South-east  five  leagues,  then
the  Ice  trended  South  and  by  West  sixe  leagues ;  we
sayled  by  it,  and  doubled  it  by  eight  a  clocke  in  the
Eevening,  and  then  it  bore  East  off  us.  Heere  having
a  smooth  sea,  the  Needle  inclined  85.  degrees,  from
eight  a  clocke  to  twelve,  North  and  by  East  Easterly.
Then  we  had  the  Sunne  on  the  Meridian,  North  and  by
East l/2. a poynt Easterly. The Sunnes height was

320

HENRY HUDSON  a.d.

1608.

7. degrees  45. minutes,  which  made  the  Latitude 74.
degrees  43.  minutes.

The  three  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning,  thicke  fogge,
the  wind  at  North  North-west.  From  mid-night  till
foure  a  clocke  this  morning,  we  sayled  North-east  five
leagues,  and  then  we  were  among  the  Ice ;  we  cast  about,
and  stood  two  houres  South-west,  two  leagues,  and  had
no  ground  at  one  hundred  and  eightie  fathom.  Then
we  cast  about  againe,  and  stood  East  till  eight  a  clocke
two  leagues,  and  then  it  cleered  up,  and  we  had  Ice  a  [Ill.iii. 5 77.]
head  off  us.  And  from  North,  we  stood  to  South-east,
and  our  shroudes  were  frozen.  Then  till  noone  wee  went
East  and  by  South,  foure  leagues,  and  were  neere  Ice  on
our  Larboord,  in  the  Latitude  of  74.  degrees  30.  minutes.
In  the  after-noone  the  wind  being  at  North,  wee  stood  two
houres  and  a  halfe,  five  leagues  and  a  halfe ;  three  houres
South  South-east,  five  leagues ;  one  houre  South-east  and
by  South,  one  league  and  a  halfe ;  an  houre  East  halfe  a
league,  which  brought  eight  in  the  Eevening  alwayes
Ice  on  our  Larboord.  This  after-noone,  wee  had  some
snow.  From  eight  a  clocke  to  mid-night,  South  South-
west foure  leagues,  with  Ice  as  afore.  We  saw  the
Sunne  at  the  lowest,  North  North-east,  his  height  was
7.  degrees  15.  minutes,  the  Poles  height  74.  degrees
18.  minutes.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  cleere,  but  cold  and  some
snow,  the  wind  betweene  North  North-east,  and  North-
east, from  mid-night  to  foure  a  clocke,  wee  stood  South-
ward two  leagues,  and  South-east  and  by  East  two
leagues.  And  from  foure  a  clocke  till  noone,  South-east
Southerly  nine  leagues,  sounding  we  had  ground  in  one
hundred  and  fortie  fathome.  From  noone  to  three  a
clocke,  we  stood  South-east  and  by  South  three  leagues ;
from  three  to  foure,  South-west  and  by  South  one  league ;
and  had  Ice  from  the  North-east  to  the  South-east  off  us.
From  foure  a  clocke  to  eight,  we  stood  South-west  two
leagues  and  a  halfe,  Southward  halfe  a  league,  with  Ice
neere  us  under  our  Lead.

xm  321  x

A.D.
l608.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  five  and  twentieth,  cold  and  cleare,  the  wind  at
East  South-east ;  from  eight  a  clocke  last  night  till  foure
this  morning,  our  way  was  South  and  by  East,  foure
leagues  and  a  halfe ;  sounding  we  had  ground  in  eightie
fathome,  then  we  had  little  wind  till  noone,  at  East  North-
east, and  the  Sunne  on  the  Meridian,  on  the  South-west
and  by  South  point  of  the  Compasse,  ere  it  began  to  fall,
wee  were  in  the  Latitude  of  72.  degrees  52.  minutes,
and  had  Ice  on  our  Larboord,  and  our  hope  of  passage
was  gone  this  way,  by  meanes  of  our  nearenesse  to  Nova
Zembla,  and  the  abundance  of  Ice.  We  had  from  Noone
to  eight  a  clocke  in  the  Eevening,  the  wind  between
North  North-east,  and  North-east,  we  stood  South-east
three  leagues  and  a  halfe,  and  had  Ice  on  our  Larboord,
and  shoalding  sixtie  eight  fathome.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  faire  Sun-shining  weather,
and  little  wind  at  East  North-east.  From  twelve  a  clocke
at  night  till  foure  this  morning,  we  stood  Southward  two
leagues,  sounding  wee  had  sixtie  sixe  fathome  Oaze,  as
afore.  From  foure  a  clocke  to  noone,  South-east  and  by
South  foure  leagues,  and  had  the  Sunne  on  the  Meridian,
on  the  South-east  and  by  South  point  of  the  Compasse,
in  the  Latitude  of  72.  degrees  25.  minutes,  and  had  sight
of  Nova  Zembla  foure  or  five  leagues  from  us,  and  the
Swart  CHffe.  place  called  by  the  Hollanders,  Swart  ClifFe,  bearing  off
South-east.  In  the  after-noone,  wee  had  a  fine  gale  at
East  North-east,  and  by  eight  of  the  clocke,  we  had
brought  it  to  beare  off  us  East  Southerly,  and  sayled  by
the  shoare  a  league  from  it.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  all  the  fore-noone  it  was
almost  calme ;  wee  being  two  mile  from  the  shoare,  I
sent  my  Mate  Robert  Juet,  and  John  Cooke  my  Boat-
swaine  on  shoare,  with  foure  others,  to  see  what  the  Land
would  yeeld  that  might  bee  profitable,  and  to  fill  two  or
three  Caskes  with  water.  They  found  and  brought
aboord  some  Whales  Finnes  two  Deeres  Homes,  and  the
Dung  of  Deere,  and  they  told  me  that  they  saw  Grasse
on  the  shoare  of  the  last  yeere,  and  young  Grasse  came  up

322

No  passage
that  way.

They  goe
ashoare.

HENRY HUDSON  a.d.

1608.

amongst  it  a  shaftman  long ;  and  it  was  boggie  ground
in  some  places,  there  are  many  streames  of  Snow  water
nigh,  it  was  very  hot  on  the  shoare,  and  the  snow  melted
apace,  they  saw  the  footings  of  many  great  Beares,  of
Deere,  and  Foxes.  They  went  from  us  at  three  a  clocke
in  the  morning,  and  came  aboord  at  a  South-east  Sunne ;
and  at  their  comming,  wee  saw  two  or  three  companies  of
Morses  in  the  sea  neere  us  swimming,  being  almost  calme.
I  presently  sent  my  Mate,  Ladlow  the  Carpenter,  and  sixe
others  a  shoare,  to  a  place  where  I  thought  the  Morses
might  come  on  the  shoare,  they  found  the  place  likely,
but  found  no  signe  of  any  that  had  beene  there.  There
was  a  Crosse  standing  on  the  shoare,  much  Driftwood,
and  signes  of  Fires  that  had  beene  made  there.  They
saw  the  footing  of  very  great  Deere  and  Beares,  and  much
Fowle,  and  a  Foxe ;  they  brought  aboord  Whale  finnes,
some  Mosse,  Flowers  and  greene  things  that  did  there
grow.  They  brought  also  two  peeces  of  a  Crosse,  which
they  found  there.  The  Sunne  was  on  the  Meridian  on
the  North  North-east,  halfe  a  point  Easterly,  before  it
began  to  fall.  The  Sunnes  height  was  4.  degrees  45.
minutes,  Inclination  22.  degrees  33.  minutes,  which  makes
the  Latitude  72.  degrees  12.  minutes.  There  is  dis-
agreement betweene  this  and  the  last  observation ;  but
by  meanes  of  the  cleerenesse  of  the  Sunne,  the  smooth-
nesse  of  the  Sea,  and  the  neernesse  to  Land,  wee  could
not  bee  deceived,  and  care  was  taken  in  it.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  at  foure  a  clocke  in  the  Morn-
ing our  Boat  came  aboord,  and  brought  two  dozen  of
Fowle,  and  some  Egges,  whereof  a  few  were  good,  and  a
Whales  finne  ;  and  wee  all  saw  the  Sea  full  of  Morses,  yet
no  signes  of  their  being  on  shoare.  And  in  this  calme,
from  eight  a  clocke  last  Eevening,  till  foure  this  Morning,
we  were  drawne  backe  to  the  Northward,  as  farre  as  wee
were  the  last  Eevening  at  foure  a  clocke,  by  a  Streame
or  a  Tide ;  and  we  chose  rather  so  to  drive,  then  to
adventure  the  losse  of  an  Anchor,  and  the  spoyle  of  a
Cable. Heere our new Ship-boate began to doe us

323

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1608.

service,  and  was  an  incouragement  to  my  Companie,
which  want  I  found  the  last  yeere.
[III.iii.578.]  The  nine  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning  calme,  being
halfe  a  league  from  the  shoare,  the  Sea  being  smooth,  the
Needle  did  encline  84.  degrees,  we  had  many  Morses  in
the  Sea  neere  us,  and  desiring  to  find  where  they  came
on  shoare,  wee  put  to  with  Sayle  and  Oares,  towing  in
our  Boat,  and  rowing  in  our  Barke  to  get  about  a  point  of
Land,  from  whence  the  Land  did  fall  more  Easterly,  and
the  Morses  did  goe  that  way.  Wee  had  the  Sunne  on
the  Meridian  on  the  South  and  by  West  point,  halfe  a
point  to  the  Wester  part  of  the  Compasse,  in  the  latitude
of  71.  degrees  15.  minutes.  At  two  a  clocke  this  after-
River  and  noone  we  came  to  anchor  in  the  mouth  of  a  River,  where
Hand.  lieth  an  Hand  in  the  mouth  thereof,  foure  leagues :  wee

anchored  from  the  Hand  in  two  and  thirtie  fathomes,
blacke  sandy  ground.  There  drove  much  Ice  out  of  it
with  a  streame  that  set  out  of  the  River  or  Sound,  and
there  were  many  Morses  sleeping  on  the  Ice,  and  by  it
we  were  put  from  our  Road  twice  this  night ;  and  being
calme  all  this  day,  it  pleased  God  at  our  need  to  give  us  a
fine  gale,  which  freed  us  out  of  danger.  This  day  was
calme,  cleere  and  hot  weather :  all  the  night  we  rode
still.

The  thirtieth,  calme,  hot,  and  faire  weather,  we  weighed
in  the  morning,  and  towed  and  rowed,  and  at  noone  we
came  to  anchor  neere  the  He  aforesaid  in  the  mouth  of  the
River,  and  saw  very  much  Ice  driving  in  the  Sea,  two
leagues  without  us  lying  South-east  and  North-west ;  and
driving  to  the  North-west  so  fast,  that  wee  could  not  by
twelve  a  clocke  at  night  see  it  out  of  the  top.  At  the  Hand
where  wee  rode,  lieth  a  little  Rocke,  whereon  were  fortie
or  fiftie  Morses  lying  asleepe,  being  all  that  it  could  hold,
it  being  so  full  and  little.  I  sent  my  companie  ashoare  to
them,  leaving  none  aboord  but  my  Boy  with  mee :  and
by  meanes  of  their  neerenesse  to  the  water,  they  all  got
away,  save  one  which  they  killed,  and  brought  his  head
aboord  ;  and  ere  they  came  aboord  they  went  on  the  Hand,

324

HENRY HUDSON

A.D.

1608.

July.

which  is  reasonable  high  and  steepe,  but  flat  on  the  top.
They  killed  and  brought  with  them  a  great  Fowle,  whereof
there  were  many,  and  likewise  some  Egges,  and  in  an
houre  they  came  aboord.  This  He  is  two  flight-shot  over
in  length,  and  one  in  breadth.  At  mid-night  our  Anchor
came  home,  and  wee  tayld  aground  by  meanes  of  the
strength  of  the  streame,  but  by  the  helpe  of  God,  wee
hoved  her  off  without  hurt.  In  short  time  wee  moved
our  ship,  and  rode  still  all  night ;  and  in  the  night  wee
had  little  wind  at  East,  and  East  South-east.  Wee  had
at  noone  this  day  an  observation,  and  were  in  the  latitude
of  71.  degrees  15.  minutes.

The  first  of  July,  we  saw  more  Ice  to  Seaward  of  us ;
from  the  South-east  to  the  North-west,  driving  to  the
North-west.  At  noone  it  was  calme,  and  we  had  the
Sunne  on  the  Meridian,  on  the  South  and  by  West  point,
halfe  a  point  to  the  Westerly  part  of  the  Compasse,  in  the
latitude  of  71.  degrees  24.  minutes.  This  morning  I
sent  my  Mate  Everet,  and  foure  of  our  companie  to  rowe
about  the  Bay,  to  see  what  Rivers  were  in  the  same,  and
to  find  where  the  Morses  did  come  on  land ;  and  to  see  a
Sound  or  great  River  in  the  bottome  of  the  Bay,  which
did  alwaies  send  out  a  great  streame  to  the  Northwards,
against  the  tide  that  came  from  thence :  and  I  found  the
same  in  comming  in,  from  the  North  to  this  place  before
this.  When  by  the  meanes  of  the  great  plenty  of  Ice,
the  hope  of  passage  betweene  Newland  and  Nova  Zembla
was  taken  away ;  my  purpose  was  by  the  Vaygats  to
passe  by  the  mouth  of  the  River  Ob,  and  to  double  that
way  the  North  Cape  of  Tartaria,  or  to  give  reason  where-
fore it  will  not  be :  but  being  here,  and  hoping  by  the
plentie  of  Morses  wee  saw  here,  to  defray  the  charge  of
our  Voyage ;  and  also  that  this  Sound  might  for  some
reasons  bee  a  better  passage  to  the  East  of  Nova  Zembla,
then  the  Vaygats,  if  it  held  according  to  my  hope  con-
ceived by  the  likenesse  it  gave :  for  whereas  we  had  a
floud  came  from  the  Northwards ;  yet  this  Sound  or
River  did  runne  so  strong,  that  Ice  with  the  streame  of Strong  stream.

325

His  purpose
altered.

AD  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1608.

this  River  was  carried  away,  or  any  thing  else  against  the
floud :  so  that  both  in  floud  and  ebbe,  the  streame  doth
hold  a  strong  course ;  and  it  floweth  from  the  North  three
houres,  and  ebbeth  nine.

The  second,  the  wind  being  at  East  South-east,  it  was
reasonable  cold,  and  so  was  Friday ;  and  the  Morses
did  not  play  in  our  sight  as  in  warme  weather.  This
morning  at  three  of  the  clocke,  my  Mate  and  companie
came  aboord,  and  brought  a  great  Deeres  home,  a  white
locke  of  Deeres  haire ;  foure  dozen  of  Fowle,  their  Boat
halfe  laden  with  drift  Wood ;  and  some  Flowers  and
greene  things,  that  they  found  growing  on  the  shoare.
Herd  of  white  They  saw  a  herd  of  white  Deere,  of  ten  in  a  companie  on
Deere.  fae  jancj . much  drift  wood  lying  on  the  shoare,  many

good  Bayes,  and  one  River  faire  to  see  to  on  the  North
shoare,  for  the  Morses  to  land  on :  but  they  saw  no
Morses  there,  but  signes  that  they  had  beene  in  the  Bayes.
And  the  great  River  or  Sound,  they  certified  me,  was  of
breadth  two  or  three  leagues,  and  had  no  ground  at
twentie  fathoms,  and  that  the  water  was  of  the  colour  of
the  Sea,  and  very  salt,  and  that  the  streame  setteth
strongly  out  of  it.  At  sixe  a  clocke  this  morning,  came
much  Ice  from  the  Southward  driving  upon  us,  very
fearefull  to  looke  on :  but  by  the  mercy  of  God  and  his
mightie  helpe,  wee  being  moored  with  two  Anchors  ahead
with  vering  out  of  one  Cable,  and  heaving  home  the  other,
and  sending  off  with  Beames  and  Sparres,  escaped  the
danger :  which  labour  continued  till  sixe  a  clocke  in  the
Eevening,  and  then  it  was  past  us,  and  we  rode  still  and
tooke  our  rest  this  night.

The  third,  the  wind  at  North  a  hard  gale.  At  three  a
clocke  this  morning  wee  weighed  our  anchor,  and  set
sayle,  purposing  to  runne  into  the  River  or  Sound  before
spoken  of.
[III.iii.579.]  The  fourth,  in  the  morning  it  cleered  up  with  the  wind
at  North-west,  we  weighed  and  set  sayle,  and  stood  to
the  Eastwards,  and  past  over  a  Reefe,  and  found  on  it
five  and  a  halfe,  sixe,  sixe  and  a  halfe,  and  seven  fathoms

326

HENRY HUDSON  a.*

1608.

water :  then  we  saw  that  the  Sound  was  full,  &  a  very
large  River  from  the  North-eastward  free  from  Ice,  and  a
strong  streame  comming  out  of  it :  and  wee  had  sounding
then,  foure  and  thirtie  fathoms  water.  Wee  all  con-
ceived hope  of  this  Northerly  River  or  Sound,  and  sayling
in  it,  wee  found  three  and  twentie  fathomes  for  three  The  River
leagues,  and  after  twentie  fathomes  for  five  or  sixe  leagues,  ^a^'ched.
all  tough  Ozie  ground.  Then  the  winde  vered  more
Northerly,  and  the  streame  came  downe  so  strong,  that  wee
could  doe  no  good  on  it :  wee  came  to  anchor,  and  went  to
supper,  and  then  presently  I  sent  my  Mate  Juet,  with
five  more  of  our  companie  in  our  Boat,  with  Sayle  and
Oares  to  get  up  the  River,  being  provided  with  Victuall
and  Weapons  for  defence,  willing  them  to  sound  as  they
went ;  and  if  it  did  continue  still  deepe,  to  goe  untill  it
did  trende  to  the  Eastward,  or  to  the  Southwards,  and
wee  rode  still.

The  fift,  in  the  morning  we  had  the  wind  at  West :  we
began  to  weigh  anchor,  purposing  to  set  sayle  and  to
runne  up  the  Sound  after  our  companie :  then  the  wind
vered  Northerly  upon  us,  and  we  saved  our  labour.  At
noone  our  companie  came  aboord  us  having  had  a  hard
rought ;  for  they  had  beene  up  the  River  sixe  or  seven
leagues,  and  sounded  it  from  twentie  to  three  and  twentie  ;
and  after  brought  it  to  eight,  sixe,  and  one  fathome ;  and
then  to  foure  foot  in  the  best :  they  then  went  ashoare,
and  found  good  store  of  wilde  Goose  quills,  a  piece  of  an
old  Oare,  and  some  Flowers,  and  greene  things  which
they  found  growing  :  they  saw  many  Deere,  and  so  did  we
in  our  after-dayes  sayling.  They  being  come  aboord,  we
presently  set  sayle  with  the  wind  at  North  North-west,
and  we  stood  out  againe  to  the  South-westwards,  with
sorrow  that  our  labour  was  in  vaine :  for,  had  this  Sound
held  as  it  did  make  shew  of,  for  breadth,  depth,  safenesse
of  harbour,  and  good  anchor  ground,  it  might  have
yeelded  an  excellent  passage  to  a  more  Easterly  Sea.  N
Generally,  all  the  Land  of  Nova  Zembla  that  yet  wee  pieasant  t0  &
have  seene,  is  to  a  mans  eye  a  pleasant  Land ; much eye.

327

A.D.

1608.

Cause  of  much
Ice  in  those
Seas,  which
make  no
navigable
passage.

Willoughbies
Land,  a
conceit  of
Cardmakers :
it  seeming  to
be  no  other
then  Newland
or  Greenland
{as  is  before
observed  cap.
2.)  as  Costing
Sarch  of
Brunell  is  to
others  Nova
Zembla.
Note.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

mayne  high  Land  with  no  Snow  on  it,  looking  in  some
places  greene,  and  Deere  feeding  thereon :  and  the  Hills
are  partly  covered  with  Snow,  and  partly  bare.  It  is  no
marvell  that  there  is  so  much  Ice  in  the  Sea  toward  the
Pole,  so  many  Sounds  and  Rivers  being  in  the  Lands  of
Nova  Zembla,  and  Newland  to  ingender  it ;  besides  the
coasts  of  Pechora,  Russia,  and  Groenland,  with  Lappia,
as  by  proofes  I  finde  by  my  travell  in  these  parts :  by
meanes  of  which  Ice  I  suppose  there  will  be  no  navigable
passage  this  way.  This  Eevening  wee  had  the  wind  at
West  and  by  South :  wee  therefore  came  to  anchor  under
Deere  Point ;  and  it  was  a  storme  at  Sea,  wee  rode  in
twentie  fathomes,  Ozie  ground  :  I  sent  my  Mate,  Ladlow,
with  foure  more  ashoare  to  see  whether  any  Morses  were
on  the  shoare,  and  to  kill  some  Fowle,  (for  we  had  seene
no  Morses  since  Saturday,  the  second  day  of  this  moneth,
that  wee  saw  them  driving  out  of  the  Ice.)  They  found
good  landing  for  them,  but  no  signe  that  they  had  beene
there :  but  they  found  that  fire  had  beene  made  there,
yet  not  lately.  At  ten  of  the  clocke  in  the  Eevening,
they  came  aboord,  and  brought  with  them  neere  an
hundred  Fowles  called  Wellocks ;  this  night  it  was  wet
fogge,  and  very  thicke  and  cold,  the  winde  at  West
South-west.

The  sixt,  in  the  morning  wee  had  the  wind  stormie
and  shifting ;  betweene  the  West  and  South-west,  against
us  for  doing  any  good :  we  rode  still  and  had  much  Ice
driving  by  us  to  the  Eastward  of  us.  At  nine  of  the
clocke,  this  Eevening  wee  had  the  wind  at  North  North-
west :  we  presently  weighed,  and  set  sayle,  and  stood  to
the  Westward,  being  out  of  hope  to  find  passage  by  the
North-east :  And  my  purpose  was  now  to  see  whether
Willoughbies  Land  were,  as  it  is  layd  in  our  Cardes ;
which  if  it  were,  wee  might  finde  Morses  on  it ;  for  with
the  Ice  they  were  all  driven  from  hence.  This  place  upon
Nova  Zembla,  is  another  then  that  which  the  Hollanders
call  Costing  Sarch,  discovered  by  Oliver  Brownell :  and
William  Barentsons  observation  doth  witnesse  the  same.

328

HENRY HUDSON  ad.

1608.

It  is  layd  in  plot  by  the  Hollanders  out  of  his  true  place
too  farre  North :  to  what  end  I  know  not,  unlesse  to
make  it  hold  course  with  the  Compasse,  not  respecting  the
variation.  It  is  as  broad  and  like  to  yeeld  passage  as  the
Vaygats,  and  my  hope  was,  that  by  the  strong  streame  it
would  have  cleered  it  selfe ;  but  it  did  not.  It  is  so
full  of  Ice  that  you  will  hardly  thinke  it.  All  this  day,  for
the  most  part,  it  was  fogge  and  cold.

The  seventh,  cleere  but  cold  weather :  in  the  morning
the  wind  was  at  the  North ;  from  the  last  Eevening  to
this  morning,  we  set  saile  and  kept  our  course  West  and
by  South,  fifteene  leagues,  from  morning  to  eight  a  clocke
in  the  Eevening  it  was  calme :  then  we  had  the  wind
againe  at  North,  and  we  sayled  till  nine  a  clocke  next
morning  West  South-west,  eight  leagues ;  then  the
wind  being  West  and  by  South,  wee  went  North
and  by  West,  three  leagues,  and  wee  had  the  Sunne
at  the  highest  South  South-west,  in  the  latitude
of  71.  degrees  2.  minutes.  The  eight,  faire  weather;
at  noone  we  had  the  wind  at  East  North-east,  we  stood
North  three  leagues  till  foure  a  clocke :  then  the  wind
being  at  west  and  by  North,  wee  stemmed  North  and  by
West  one  league  and  a  halfe,  till  six  a  clocke  in  the
Eevening ;  then  the  wind  was  at  North-east  a  hard  gale,
and  wee  stood  till  next  day  at  noone  West  and  by  North,
by  account  three  and  twentie  leagues :  we  had  the  Sunne
on  the  Meridian,  South  and  by  West,  halfe  a  point  neerest
West  in  the  latitude  of  70.  degrees  41.  minutes.  The  [III.iii.580.]
ninth,  cleere  weather :  from  this  to  the  next  day  at  noone,
we  sayled  South-west  and  by  West,  twelve  leagues,  and
Northward  three  leagues :  and  in  these  courses  had  these
soundings,  41.  42.  46.  48.  and  45.  fathoms:  we  had  the
Sunne  South  and  by  West,  halfe  a  point  to  the  West
part  of  the  Compasse.  The  Sea  was  loftie :  our  latitude
was  70.  degrees  20.  minutes.

The  tenth,  cleere  but  close  weather :  from  this  till  next
day  noone,  wee  had  little  wind  at  West  North-west :  by
account  we  made  our  way  five  leagues  North-easterly.

329

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1608.

Wee  had  the  Sun  at  the  highest  on  the  South  and  by
West  point,  and  a  terce  Westward,  in  the  latitude  of  70.
degrees  55.  minutes,  and  I  thinke  we  had  a  rustling  tide
under  us ;  and  in  this  time  had  sounding  betweene  fortie
five  and  fortie  fathomes,  white  sand.  The  eleventh,  cleere
weather  :  from  this  to  the  next  day  at  noone,  little  wind  at
North  North-east,  and  sometimes  calme ;  wee  sayled  West
and  by  North  by  account  five  leagues ;  and  had  the  Sunne
on  the  Meridian  on  the  South  and  by  West  point  l/^ .  West
in  the  latitude  of  70.  degrees  26.  minutes,  and  found  a
rustling  under  us.  This  fore-noone  we  were  come  into
Greene  Sea.  a  greene  Sea,  of  the  colour  of  the  mayne  Ocean,  which
we  first  lost  the  eight  of  June :  since  which  time  wee
have  had  a  Sea  of  a  blacke  blue  colour,  which  (both  by
the  last  and  this  yeeres  experience)  is  a  Sea  pestered  with
Ice.

The  twelfth,  faire  weather :  from  noone  to  mid-night
wee  had  the  wind  shifting  betweene  the  North  and  West ;
our  course  was  betweene  West  North-west,  and  South
South-west.  Then  we  had  the  wind  at  South,  we  sayled
till  the  next  day  at  noone,  West  and  by  North,  thirteene
leagues  :  wee  accounted  our  way  from  the  last  day  till  this
day  noone  Westward,  eighteene  leagues.  This  after-
noone  wee  saw  more  Porpoises  then  in  all  our  Voyage
afore.  The  thirteenth,  close  weather :  in  the  after-noone
having  much  wind  at  South,  with  short  sayle  we  stood
away  West  and  by  North,  till  eight  a  clocke  in  the  Eeven-
ing :  then  we  had  the  wind  at  South,  but  most  times
calme  till  noone  the  next  day :  wee  stood  away  as  afore,
foure  leagues,  which  made  in  all  twelve  leagues :  we  had
the  Sunne  ere  it  began  to  fall,  South  and  by  West,  in  the
latitude  of  70.  degrees  22.  minutes.

The  fourteenth,  wee  stood  West  North-west  till  mid-
night, seventeene  leagues :  then  the  wind  scanted  and
came  at  West,  we  stood  North  North-west,  one  league  and
a  halfe ;  then  the  wind  being  more  Southerly,  wee  sayled
West  North-west,  five  leagues.  From  the  last  till  this
day  at  noone,  our  way  was  out  of  divers  courses  North-

33°

HENRY HUDSON  ad.

1608.

west  and  by  West,  foure  and  twentie  leagues.  We  had
the  Sunne  beginning  to  fall  at  South  and  by  West,  in  the
latitude  of  70.  degrees  54.  minutes.

The  fifteenth,  faire ;  but  towards  night  like  to  be
stormie  with  thunder,  the  wind  betweene  South  and  South  Thunder.
South-east ;  from  this,  till  the  sixteenth  day  at  noone,  our
course  was  West  and  by  North,  seven  and  twentie  leagues,
and  the  Sunne  then  began  to  fall  at  South,  three
quarters  of  a  point  Westward,  in  the  latitude  of  70.
degrees  42.  minutes.  The  sixteenth,  faire ;  our  way  was
from  this  till  next  day  at  noone  North-west,  twelve
leagues,  out  of  divers  courses  :  and  we  had  the  wind  shift-
ing, sometimes  at  East,  at  West  South-west,  and  West  and
by  North;  the  latitude  by  a  bad  observation,  71.  degrees
44.  minutes.  The  seventeenth,  in  the  fore-noone  faire ;
the  wind  being  at  West  and  by  North.  At  foure  a  clocke
this  morning  we  saw  Land  beare  off  us,  West  and  South
South-west,  which  was  about  Ward-house :  this  after-
noone  wee  had  a  storme  at  West  and  by  North,  we  layed
it  to  trie  till  eight  a  clocke  in  the  Eevening,  and  then  set
sayle  with  the  wind  betweene  West  North-west,  and
North-west :  our  course  till  the  next  day  at  noone,  was
South-west  and  by  South,  twelve  leagues :  the  Cape
Hopewell  bore  off  us  South  South-west,  and  we  were
foure  or  five  leagues  from  land.

The  eighteenth,  gusty,  with  raine  all  the  fore-noone ;
then  we  had  the  wind  shifting  till  next  day  at  noone  from
South  South-east  to  East,  and  South-east :  our  course  in
generall  was  North-west,  foure  and  twentie  leagues  :  then
did  North  Kene  beare  off  us  West  halfe  a  point  South-
ward, being  from  us  foure  leagues ;  and  the  North  Cape
in  sight  bearing  West  and  by  North,  &c.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  cold  with  raine  and  storme ;
this  night  we  began  to  burne  Candle  in  the  Betacle,  which
we  had  not  done  since  the  nineteenth  of  May :  by  reason
wee  had  alwaies  day  from  thence  till  now. The  thirtieth, No  night  in
we  had  the  Sunne  upon  the  Meridian  due  South,  in  the ten  weekei-
latitude  of  68.  degrees  46.  minutes ;  whereby  we  found  us

33i

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1608.

to  bee  afore  our  ship,  ten  or  twelve  leagues,  and  Lowfoot
bore  East  of  us,  but  not  in  sight.

The  seventh  of  August,  I  used  all  diligence  to  arrive  at
London,  and  therefore  now  I  gave  my  companie  a  certifi-
cate under  my  hand,  of  my  free  and  willing  returne,
without  perswasion  or  force  of  any  one  or  more  of  them :
for  at  my  being  at  Nova  Zembla,  the  sixt  of  July,  voide
of  hope  of  a  North-east  passage,  (except  by  the  Vaygats,
for  which  I  was  not  fitted  to  trie  or  prove)  I  therefore
resolved  to  use  all  meanes  I  could  to  sayle  to  the  North-
west ;  considering  the  time  and  meanes  wee  had,  if  the
wind  should  friend  us,  as  in  the  first  part  of  our  Voyage
See  Hak.  to.  3.  it  had  done,  and  to  make  triall  of  that  place  called  Lumleys
Inlet,  and  the  furious  over-fall  by  Captayne  Davis,  hoping
to  runne  into  it  an  hundred  leagues,  and  to  returne  as
God  should  enable  mee.  But  now  having  spent  more
then  halfe  the  time  I  had,  and  gone  but  the  shortest  part
of  the  way,  by  meanes  of  contrary  winds ;  I  thought  it
my  dutie  to  save  Victuall,  Wages,  and  Tackle,  by  my
speedy  returne,  and  not  by  foolish  rashnesse,  the  time
being  wasted,  to  lay  more  charge  upon  the  action  then
necessitie  should  compell,  I  arrived  at  Gravesend  the  six
and  twentieth  of  August.

332

HENRY HUDSON

A.D.

1609.

Chap.  XVI.

The  third  Voyage  of  Master  Henrie  Hudson
toward  Nova  Zembla,  and  at  his  returne,  his
passing  from  Farre  Hands,  to  New-found  Land,
and  along  to  fortie  foure  degrees  and  ten  minutes,
and  thence  to  Cape  Cod,  and  so  to  thirtie  three
degrees  ;  and  along  the  Coast  to  the  North-
ward, to  fortie  two  degrees  and  a  half,  and  up
the  River  neere  to  fortie  three  degrees.  Written
by  Robert  Juet  of  Lime-house.

N  Saturday  the  five  and  twentieth  of
March,  1609.  a^ter  tne  °^  Account,  we
set  sayle  from  Amsterdam ;  and  by  the
seven  and  twentieth  day,  we  were  downe
at  the  Texel :  and  by  twelve  of  the  clocke
we  were  off  the  Land,  it  being  East  of
us  two  leagues  off. And  because  it  is  a

May  5.
novo.

stilo

journey  usually  knowne,  I  omit  to  put  downe  what  passed,
till  we  came  to  the  height  of  The  North  Cape  of  Fin-
marke,  which  we  did  performe  by  the  fift  of  May  (stilo
novo)  being  Tuesday.  On  which  day  we  observed  the
height  of  the  Pole,  and  found  it  to  bee  71.  degrees  and
46.  minutes ;  and  found  our  Compasse  to  vary  six  degrees
to  the  West :  and  at  twelve  of  the  clocke,  the  North  Cape
did  beare  South-west  and  by  South,  tenne  leagues  off,
and  wee  steered  away  East  and  by  South,  and  East.

After  much  trouble  with  fogges,  sometimes,  and  more
dangerous  of  Ice.  The  nineteenth,  being  Tuesday,  was
close  stormie  weather,  with  much  wind  and  snow,  and
very  cold :  the  wind  variable  betweene  the  North  North-
west, and  North-east.  We  made  our  way  West  and  by
North  till  noone.  Then  we  observed  the  Sunne  having  a
slake,  and  found  our  heigth  to  bee  70.  degrees  30.
minutes.  And  the  ship  had  out-runne  us  twentie  leagues,
by  reason  of  the  set  of  the  streame  of  The  White  Sea  :  and Beak  More.

333

A.D.
1609.

Wardhouse.
They doubled
the  North
Cape.

Assumption
Point.

Zenam.

Lofoote.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

we  had  sight  of  Wardhouse.  Then  at  two  of  the  clocke
wee  tackt  to  the  Eastward :  for  we  could  not  get  about
the  North  Cape,  the  wind  was  so  scant ;  and  at  eight  of
the  clocke  at  night,  on  the  one  and  twentieth,  the  North
Cape  did  beare  South-east  and  by  South  seven  leagues  off.
And  at  mid-night  Assumption  Point  did  beare  South  and
by  East,  five  leagues  off  us.

The  two  and  twentieth,  gusting  weather  with  haile  and
snow,  the  Sunne  breaking  out  sometimes :  we  continued
our  course  along  the  Land  West  South-west.  And  at
tenne  of  the  clocke  at  night  we  were  thwart  off  Zenam.
The  bodie  of  it  did  beare  East  off  us  five  leagues :  and
the  course  from  the  North  Cape  to  Zenam,  is  for  the  most
part  West  and  by  South,  and  West  South-west,  fiftie  foure
leagues.

The  three  and  twentieth,  faire  Sun-shining  weather ;
the  wind  at  East  and  by  South,  and  East  South-east,  wee
steered  along  the  Land  South-west,  and  South-west  and
by  West,  eight  leagues  a  Watch,  for  so  we  found  the  Land
to  lye  from  Zenam  to  Lofoote.  And  the  distance  is  fiftie
leagues  from  the  bodie  of  Zenam,  to  the  Westermost
Land  of  Lofoote.  And  from  the  one  to  the  other,  the
course  is  South-west  and  by  West.  For  the  Needle  of
our  Compasse  was  set  right  to  the  North.  At  twelve  of
the  clocke  at  night,  the  bodie  of  Lofoote  did  beare  South-
east, sixe  leagues  off.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  faire  cleere  Sun-shining
weather :  the  wind  variable  upon  all  points  of  the  Com-
passe, but  most  upon  the  South-east,  and  sometimes
calme.  We  continued  our  course  West  South-west  as
before.  And  at  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night,  the  Souther
part  of  Lofoote  did  beare  South-east  ten  leagues  off  us.

The  five  and  twentieth,  much  wind  at  North-east,  with
some  snow  and  haile.  The  first  watch  the  wind  came  to
the  East  a  fine  gale,  and  so  came  to  the  North-east,  the
second  watch  at  foure  of  the  clocke,  and  freshed  in :  And
at  eight  of  the  clocke  it  grew  to  a  storme,  and  so  con-
tinued. At  noone  we  observed,  and  made  the  ship  to  be

334

HENRY HUDSON

A.D.
1609.

No  variation.

in  67.  degrees  58.  minutes.  Wee  continued  our  course
South-west,  twelve  leagues  a  watch.  At  nine  of  the
clocke,  Lofoote  did  beare  East  of  us  15.  leagues  off.  And
we  found  the  Compasse  to  have  no  variation.  The  wind
increased  to  a  storme.

The  six  and  twentieth,  was  a  great  storme  at  the  North
North-east,  and  North-east.  Wee  steered  away  South-
west afore  the  wind  with  our  fore-course  abroad :  for  wee
were  able  to  maintayne  no  more  sayles,  it  blew  so
vehemently,  and  the  Sea  went  so  high,  and  brake  withall,
that  it  would  have  dangered  a  small  ship  to  lye  under
the  Sea.  So  we  skudded  seventy  leagues  in  foure  and
twentie  houres.  The  storme  began  to  cease  at  foure  of
the  clocke.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  indifferent  faire  weather,  but
a  good  stiffe  gale  of  wind  at  North,  and  North  North-  [III.iii.582.]
east,  wee  held  on  our  course  as  before.  At  noone  wee
observed  and  found  our  heigth  to  be  64.  degrees  10.
minutes.  And  wee  perceived,  that  the  Current  had
hindred  us  in  fortie  eight  houres  to  the  number  of  16.
leagues  to  our  best  judgement.  We  set  our  mayne-sayle,
sprit-sayle,  and  our  mayne-top-sayle,  and  held  on  our
course  all  night,  having  faire  weather.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  faire  weather  and  little  wind
at  North-east,  we  held  on  our  course  South-west.  At
noone  wee  observed  the  heigth,  and  were  in  62.  degrees
and  30.  minutes.  The  after-noone  was  little  wind  at
North  North-west.  The  second  watch  it  fell  calme.  At
foure  of  the  clocke  wee  had  sight  of  the  lies  called  Farre,
and  found  them  to  lye  out  of  their  place  in  the  Sea  Chart
fourteene  leagues  to  farre  Westerly.  For  in  running
South-west  from  Lofoote,  wee  had  a  good  care  to  our
steerage  and  observations ;  and  counted  our  selves  thirtie
leagues  off  by  our  course  and  observation :  and  had  sight
of  them  sixteene  or  eighteene  leagues  off.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  faire  weather  sometimes  calme,
and  sometimes  a  gale  with  the  wind  varying  at  South-
west, and  so  to  the  North-east. Wee  got  to  the  Hands,

335

A  great
current  setting
to  the  North-
east.

Farre  lies  set
14.  leagues  to
farre  West.

A.D.

1609.

Stromo.

June.

mTheBittacle
is  a  close  place
in  which  the
Compasse
standeth.
Busse  Hand.

Their  first
sight  of  stars  :
for  further
North,  they
had  continuall
Sun-light.
Change  of
water.

A  strange
current  out  of
the  South  west.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

but  could  not  get  in.  So  we  stood  along  the  Hands.
The  ebbe  being  come,  we  durst  not  put  in.

The  thirtieth  faire  weather ;  the  wind  at  South-east  and
East  South-east.  In  the  morning  we  turned  into  a  Road
in  Stromo,  one  of  the  Hands  of  Farre,  betweene  Stromo
and  Mugge-nes,  and  got  in  by  nine  of  the  clocke :  for  it
flowed  so  there  that  day.  And  assoone  as  we  came  in,
we  went  to  Romage,  and  sent  our  Boat  for  water,  and
filled  all  our  emptie  Caskes  with  fresh  water.  Wee
made  an  end  of  our  Romaging  this  night  by  ten  of  the
clocke.

The  one  and  thirtieth,  faire  Sun-shining  weather,  the
wind  at  East  South-east.  In  the  forenoone  our  Master
with  most  of  his  Company  went  on  shoare  to  walke,  and
at  one  of  the  clocke  they  returned  aboord.  Then  we  set
sayle.

The  first  of  June,  stilo  novo,  faire  Sun-shining  weather,
the  wind  at  East  South-east.  We  continued  on  our
course  South-west  and  by  West.  At  noone  wee  observed
the  Sunne,  and  found  our  heigth  to  be  60.  degrees  58.
minutes :  and  so  continued  on  our  course  all  night  with
faire  weather.  This  night  we  lighted  Candles  in  the
m  Bittacle  againe.

The  second  mystie  weather,  the  wind  at  North-east.
At  noone  we  steered  away  West  South-west,  to  find  Busse
Hand,  discovered  in  the  yeere  1578.  by  one  of  the  ships
of  Sir  Martin  Frobisher,  to  see  if  it  lay  in  her  true  latitude
in  the  Chart  or  no  :  wee  continued  our  course  as  before  all
night,  with  a  faire  gale  of  wind :  this  night  we  had  sight
of  the  first  stars,  and  our  water  was  changed  colour  to  a
white  greene. The  Compasse  had  no  variation.

The  third,  faire  Sun-shining  weather;  the  wind  at
North-east.  We  stered  on  our  course  South-west  and  by
West,  with  a  stiffe  gale  of  wind.  At  noone  we  observed
and  found  our  heigth  to  bee  58.  degrees  48.  minutes.
And  I  was  before  the  ship  16.  leagues,  by  reason  of  the
Current  that  held  us  so  strong  out  of  the  South-west.
For  it  is  eight  leagues  in  foure  and  twentie  houres. We

336

HENRY HUDSON

accounted  our  selves  neere  Busse  Hand :  by  mid-night  we
looked  out  for  it,  but  could  not  see  it.

The  fourth,  in  the  morning  was  much  wind  with  fogge
and  raine.  Wee  steered  away  South-west  by  west  all  the
fore-noone,  the  wind  so  increasing,  that  wee  were  enforced
to  take  in  our  top-sayle :  the  winde  continuing  so  all  the
after-noone.  Wee  steered  away  South-west  all  the  fore-
part of  the  night ;  and  at  ten  of  the  clocke  at  night  it  was
little  wind ;  and  that  was  at  South,  and  so  came  up  to  the
South  South-east.

The  fift,  stormie  weather,  and  much  wind  at  South,  and
South  by  East,  so  that  at  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  morn-
ing, we  tooke  in  our  fore-sayle,  and  lay  a  try  with  our
mayne  corse,  and  tryed  away  West  North-west  foure
leagues.  But  at  noone  it  was  lesse  wind,  and  the  Sunne
shewed  forth ;  and  we  observed,  and  found  our  heigth  to
be  56.  degrees  21.  minutes.  In  the  after-noone  the  wind
vered  to  and  fro  betweene  the  South-west  and  the  South-
east, with  raine  and  fogge,  and  so  continued  all  night.
Wee  found  that  our  ship  had  gone  to  the  Westward  of
our  course.  The  sixth,  thicke  hasie  weather  with  gusts
of  wind,  and  showers  of  raine.  The  wind  varied
betweene  East  South-East  and  South-west,  wee  steered  on
many  courses  a  West  South-west  way.  The  afternoone
watch  the  wind  was  at  East  South-east,  a  stiffe  gale  with
myst  and  raine.  Wee  steered  away  South-west,  by  West
eight  leagues.  At  noone  the  Sunne  shone  forth,  and  we
found  the  heigth  to  bee  56.  degrees  8.  minutes.  The
seventh,  faire  sun-shining  weather  all  the  fore-noone,  and
calme  untill  twelve  of  the  clocke.  In  the  after-noone  the
wind  came  to  the  North-west,  a  stiffe  gale.  We  steered
South-west  by  West,  and  made  a  South-west  way.  At
noone  we  found  the  height  to  bee  $6.  degrees  one  minute,
and  it  continued  all  night  a  hard  gale.  The  eight,  stormy
weather,  the  wind  variable,  betweene  West  and  North-
west much  wind  :  at  eight  of  the  clocke  wee  tooke  off  our
Bonnets.  At  noone  the  Sunne  shewed  forth,  and  wee
observed,  and  our  height  was  54.  degrees  30.  minutes.
xm  337  y

A.D.
1609.

Note  well.

Bonets  are
those  which
are  laced  and
eeked  to  the
sayles  to
enlarge  them:
with  reference
whereto  the
mayne  course,
missen  course,
fore  course,  is
understood  of
those  sayles
without  their
Bonets.

A.D.
1609.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  ninth,  faire  sun-shining  weather,  and  little  wind  all
the  fore-part  of  the  day  untill  eleven  of  the  clocke.  Then
the  wind  came  to  the  South  South-east,  and  we  steered
away  West  South-west.  At  noone  we  found  our  height
to  bee  53.  degrees  and  45.  minutes,  and  we  had  made  our
way  South  by  West  ten  leagues.  In  the  after-noone  the
wind  increased  and  continued  all  night  at  East  North-
east and  East.

The  twelfth,  faire  weather,  the  wind  variable  betweene
East  North-east  and  South-east,  wee  steered  on  our  course
as  before.  At  foure  of  the  clock  in  the  afternoon  the  wind
[III.iii.583.]  came  up  at  South-east.  And  we  held  our  course  as  before.
At  noone  wee  observed  and  found  our  height  to  be  52.
degrees  35.  minutes.

The  eleventh,  in  the  morning  was  thicke  and  foggie,
the  winde  varying  betweene  South  South-west,  and  North-
west. At  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  wee  tackt
about  to  the  Southward :  At  eleven  of  the  clocke  the
winde  came  to  the  North-west,  and  so  to  the  West  North-
west. This  day  we  had  change  of  water,  of  a  whitish
greene,  like  to  the  Ice  water  to  the  North-west.  At  noone
it  cleered  up,  and  became  very  faire  weather :  wee  put
out  our  mayne  top-sayle :  then  we  observed  the  Sunne,
and  found  our  height  to  be  51.  degrees  24.  minutes.  We
had  sayled  many  courses  and  found  our  ship  gone  to  the
Southward  of  our  account  ten  leagues,  by  reason  of  a
current  from  the  North-ward.  The  Compasse  varied  on
point  to  the  East.

The  twelfth,  faire  Sun-shining  weather,  but  much  wind
at  the  West :  we  stood  to  the  Southward  all  day,  the  wind
shifting  betweene  the  South-west  and  the  West  and  by
North.  Wee  made  our  way  South  halfe  a  point  West,
eight  and  twentie  leagues.  Our  height  at  noone  was  50.
degrees  9.  minutes.  At  eight  of  the  clock  at  night  we
took  off  our  Bonets,  the  wind  increasing.

The  thirteenth,  faire  Sun-shining  weather:  the  wind
variable  betweene  the  West,  and  North  North-west.  We
made  our  way  South  South-west  seven  and  twentie  leagues.

33*

A  current
from  the
North.

Variation  one
point  East.

HENRY HUDSON  a.d.

1609.

At  noone  we  observed,  and  found  our  heigth  to  be  48.
degrees  45.  minutes.  But  not  to  be  trusted,  the  Sea
went  so  high.  In  the  after-noone  the  winde  was  calmer,
and  wee  brought  to  our  Bonets,  and  stood  to  the  South-
ward all  night  with  a  stiffe  gale.

The  fourteenth,  faire  and  cleere  Sun-shining  weather :
the  winde  variable  betweene  the  North-west  and  South-
west by  West. At  mid-night  I  observed  the  North  starre
at  a  North-west  by  West  Guarde ;  a  good  observation
49.  degrees  30.  minutes. And  at  noone  wee  observed
the  Sunne,  and  our  heigth  was  48.  degrees  6.  minutes.  Latitude^.
And  I  made  account  we  ranne  betweene  the  two  obser-  degrees  6.
vations twelve leagues. At one of the clocke in the  mmtes-
after-noone,  wee  cast  about  to  the  Westward,  and  stood
so  all  night : the  winde  increased  to  a  storme,  and  was
very  much  winde  with  Raine.

The  fifteenth,  we  had  a  great  storme,  and  spent  *  over-  *To  spend  the

boord  our  fore-mast,  bearing  our  fore  corse  low  set. The  Mast,  is

sixteenth,  we  were  forced  to  trie  with  our  mayne  sayle,  f  eTStood°J
1  r 1  1  n  • 1  c  breaking  it  by

by  reason  or  the  unconstant  weather, bo  wee  tried  foure  rou/e  weather

watches  South-east  and  by  South  eight  leagues  and  an  only.

halfe,  and  two  watches  sixe  leagues. The  seventeenth,

reasonable faire weather : the wind variable betweene

West  South-west,  and  West  North-west. And  a  stiffe

gale  of  wind,  and  so  great  a  swelling  Sea  out  of  the  West

South-west,  that  wee  could  doe  nothing. So  one  watch

and  an  halfe  wee  drove  North  foure  leagues  and  an  halfe,

and  foure  watches  and  an  halfe  South  and  by  East  halfe

a  point  East  twelve  leagues. The  eighteenth,  reasonable

weather  but  close  and  cloudie,  and  an  hard  gale  of  wind,

and  a  great  Sea. The  winde  being  at  the  North-west,

wee  lay  to  the  Southward,  and  made  our  drift  South  and

by  West,  five  leagues. The  after-noone  prooved  little

wind,  and  the  night  part  calme. The  nineteenth,  in  the

fore-noone  faire  weather  and  calme. In  the  morning  we

set  the  piece  of  our  fore  mast,  and  set  our  fore  corse.

The  one  and  twentieth,  faire  Sun-shining  weather,  but

much  wind  and  a  great  Sea. We  split  our  fore  saile  at

339

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

*Thatis9bare  ten  of  the  clocke ;  then  we  laid  it  a  trie  *  with  our  mayne
no  more  sayk  savle5  and  continued  so  all  day.  In  the  night  it  fell  to
sav/e  e^pne  t>e  little  wind.  This  day  our  heigth  was  45.  degrees  48.
Variation. minutes.

The  two  and  twentieth,  very  faire  Sun-shining  weather,
and  calme  all  the  after-noone.  At  noone  we  made  a  very
good  observation,  and  found  our  height  44.  degrees  58.
minutes.  At  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night  wee  had  a
small  gale  of  winde  at  South-east.  And  wee  steered  away
West  for  Newfound  Land.  The  true  Compasse  varied
one  point  East.

The  three  and  twentieth,  thicke  weather  with  much
wind  and  some  raine.  At  eight  of  the  clocke  in  the
morning,  the  wind  came  to  the  West  South-west,  and
West  so  stiffe  a  gale,  that  we  were  forced  to  take  our  top-
sayle,  and  steered  away  North  North-west  untill  foure  of
the  clock  in  the  after-noone.  Then  we  tact  to  the  South-
ward the  winde  at  West  North-west.  At  eight  of  the
clocke  at  night  wee  tooke  in  our  top-sayles,  and  laid  it  a
trie  with  our  mayne  sayle,  the  winde  at  West.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  a  stiffe  gale  of  wind,  varying
betweene  the  West  and  North  North-west,  we  tried  till
sixe  of  the  clocke :  at  which  time  we  set  our  foresaile,
and  steered  way  West  and  by  South  by  our  Compasse
eight  leagues  in  foure  watches :  and  wee  tried  away  South
in  one  watch  and  an  halfe.

The  five  and  twentieth,  faire  Sun-shining  weather,  the
wind  at  North  North-west  and  North,  we  steered  away
West  by  South  by  our  Compasse  till  twelve  of  the  clocke :
at  which  time  we  had  sight  of  a  sayle,  and  gave  her  chase
but  could  not  speake  with  her.  She  stood  to  the  East-
ward ;  and  we  stood  after  her  till  sixe  of  the  clocke  in  the
after-noone.  Then  wee  tact  to  the  Westward  againe,  and
stood  on  our  course.  It  was  faire  all  night,  and  little  wind
sometimes.

The  six  and  twentieth,  all  the  fore-part  of  the  day  very
faire  weather  and  hot,  but  at  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the
after-noone  it  grew  to  bee  much  winde  and  raine : the

340

HENRY HUDSON  a.d.

1609.

winde  was  at  South  South-east.  At  noone  wee  observed
and  found  our  heigth  to  bee  44.  degrees  33.  minutes.
At  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night,  the  wind  came  to  South-
west, and  West  South-west.  Wee  steered  North-west,  [III.iii.584.]
one  Watch,  and  at  twelve  in  the  night,  to  the  West,  and
West  and  by  South,  very  much  wind.  So  we  could  lye
but  North  North-west.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  very  much  winde  and  a  soare
storme,  the  wind  Westerly.  In  the  morning  at  foure  of
the  clocke,  wee  tooke  in  our  fore-corse,  and  layd  it  a  trie
with  our  mayne-corse  low  set ;  and  so  continued  all  the
day  and  night,  two  watches  to  the  Northward.  At  eight
of  the  clocke  at  night,  we  tackt  to  the  Southward.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  faire  sun-shining  weather,  the
wind  at  West  and  by  South  ;  we  lay  a  trie  to  the  South-
ward till  eight  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning.  Then  wee
set  our  fore-corse,  and  stood  to  the  Southward  a  stiffe
gale  of  wind,  but  faire  weather  and  a  great  Sea,  out  of
the  Wester-boord,  and  so  continued  all  night.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  faire  sun-shining  weather,  the
wind  at  West  and  by  South ;  we  stood  to  the  Southward
untill  sixe  of  the  clocke  at  night,  and  made  our  way  South
and  by  East,  foure  leagues.  Then  the  winde  came  to  the
South-west,  and  wee  cast  about  to  the  Westward,  and
made  our  way  West  North-west  all  night.  At  noone,  I
found  the  height  43.  degrees  6.  minutes.  The  variation
one  point  West.

The  thirtieth,  faire  sun-shining  weather,  the  winde
at  South-west  and  by  West,  we  steered  North-west  and
by  West.  And  made  our  way  so,  by  reason  of  the  varia-
tion of  the  Compasse.  At  noone,  I  found  the  height  to
bee  43.  degrees  18.  minutes;  wee  continued  our  course
all  night,  and  made  our  way  North-west  and  by  West,
halfe  a  point  Westerly,  five  and  twentie  leagues.

The  first  of  July,  close,  mystie  and  thicke  weather,  but  July.
a  faire  gale  of  wind  at  South-west,  and  South-west  by
South. We steered away North-west and by West,
Westerly,  and  made  our  way  so,  by  reason  of  the  variation

34i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

of  the  Compasse.  At  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night,  wee
The  Banke  of  sounded  for  the  Banke  of  New-found  Land,  but  could
Newfound get  no  ground.

Land.  ^he  second,  thicke  mystie  weather,  but  little  wind,  and

that  at  West,  and  West  and  by  South. At  eight  of  the

clocke  in  the  morning,  we  cast  about  to  the  Southward,

and  when  our  ship  was  on  stayes,  we  sounded  for  the

Banke,  and  had  ground  in  thirtie  fathoms,  white  sand

and  shells,  and  presently  it  cleered  :  and  we  had  sight  of

a  sayle,  but  spake  not  with  her. In  the  night  we  had

much  Rayne,  Thunder  and  Lightning,  and  wind  shifting.

The  third,  faire  Sun-shining  weather,  with  a  faire  gale

of  wind  at  East  North-east,  and  wee  steered  away  West

Variation  west  South-west  by  our  Compasse,  which  varyed  17.  degrees

1 7.  degrees. Westward. This  morning  we  were  among  a  great  Fleet

French-men of  French-men,  which  lay  Fishing  on  the  Banke ;  but  we

Fishing  on  the  spake with none of them. At noone  wee found our

Ban  e.  heighth  to  bee  43.  degrees  41.  minutes. And  we  sounded

at  ten  of  the  clocke,  and  had  thirtie  fathoms  gray  sand.

At two of  the  clocke  wee  sounded, and  had  five  and

thirtie  fathoms  gray  sand. At  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night,

we  sounded  againe,  and  had  eight  and  thirtie  fathoms  gray

sand,  as  before.

The  fourth,  at  the  fore-part  of  the  day  cleere,  with  a
faire  gale  of  wind,  but  variable  betweene  the  East  North-
east, and  South  and  by  East,  wee  held  on  our  course  as
before.  The  after-noone  was  mystie,  the  wind  shifting
betweene  the  South  and  the  West,  till  foure  of  the  clocke.
Then  we  tooke  in  our  top-sayle  and  sprit-sayle,  and
sounded  and  had  no  ground  in  seventie  fathoms.  The
winde  shifted  still  untill  eight  of  the  clocke,  then  it  came
to  the  North  North-east,  and  North-east  and  by  North,
and  we  steered  away  West  North-west,  by  our  varyed
Compasse,  which  made  a  West  way  halfe  point  North.
Variation  15.  The  Compasse  varyed  15.  degrees  from  the  North  to  the
degrees  North-  West.

The  fift,  faire  sun-shining  weather,  the  wind  at  North-
east and  by  North,  we  steered  away  West  North-west,

342

HENRY HUDSON  a.d.

1609.
which  was  West  halfe  a  point  North.  At  noone  we
found  our  heighth  to  be  44.  degrees  10.  minutes,  and
sounded,  and  had  no  ground  in  one  hundred  fathoms.
The  after-noone  proved  calme  sometimes,  and  somtimes
little  wind,  untill  nine  of  the  clocke  in  the  night.  Then
the  wind  came  to  the  East,  and  we  held  on  our  course.
At  mid-night  I  observed  and  found  the  height  to  bee
44.  degrees  10.  minutes,  by  the  North  Starre  and  the
Scorpions  heart. The  Compasse  varyed 13.  degrees. Variation  13.

The  sixth,  the  fore-part  of  the  day  faire  weather,  and  deirees-
a  stiffe  gale  of  wind,  betweene South South-east, and
South-west,  wee  steered  West  and  by  North,  and  West
North-west. The  after-part  of  the  day  from  two  of  the
clocke,  was  all  foggie  and  thicke  weather ;  the  wind  a  hard  Foggie  and
gale, varying betweene South-west and by South, and ' weather.
West  and  by  North,  we  made  our  way  North-west  halfe
a  point  Northerly,  nineteene  leagues,  upon  many  points
foure Watches. At night at eight of the clocke, we
sounded  and  had  no  ground  at  one  hundred  fathoms.

The  seventh,  faire  sun-shining  weather,  the  wind  vary-
ing betweene  West  and  by  North,  and  West  and  by  South.
At  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  we  cast  about  to
the  Southward,  and  stood  so  till  one  in  the  after-noone.
At  noone  we  found  our  height  to  be  44.  degrees  26.
minutes.  At  seven  of  the  clocke,  we  tackt  to  the  North-
ward. At  eight  at  night,  we  tackt  to  the  Southward,  and
sounded,  and  had  nine  and  fiftie  fathoms,  white  sand.

The  eight,  in  the  fore-noone  faire  weather,  but  the
morning  foggie  till  seven  of  the  clocke.  At  foure  of  the
clocke  in  the  morning  we  sounded,  and  had  five  &  fortie
fathoms,  fine  white  sand,  and  we  had  runne  five  leagues
South  and  by  West.  Then  wee  stood  along  one  Glasse,
and  went  one  league  as  before.  Then  we  stood  one  Glasse  [III.iii.585.]
and  sounded,  and  had  sixtie  fathoms.  Then  wee  takt  and
stood  backe  to  the  Banke,  and  had  five  and  twentie
fathoms ;  and  tryed  for  Fish,  and  it  fell  calme,  and  we
caught  one  hundred  and  eighteene  great  Coddes,  from  Many  great
eight  a  clocke  till  one,  and  after  Dinner  wee  tooke  twelve, Cods  taken.

343

A.D.

1609.
Many  great
Scoales  of
Herrings.

To  sound  is  to
trie  the  depth
by  Line  and
Lead,  or  Pole,

Variation  17.
degrees.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  saw  many  great  Scoales  of  Herrings.  Then  wee  had
a  gale  of  wind  at  South,  and  it  shifted  to  the  West  North-
west, and  we  stood  three  Glasses  and  sounded  and  had
sixtie  fathomes,  and  stood  two  Glasses,  and  had  two  and
fortie  fathoms,  red  stones  and  shells.  So  wee  sounded
every  Glasse  and  had  severall  soundings  35.  33.  30.  31.
32.  33.  and  34.  fathoms.

The  ninth,  faire  calme  weather,  we  lay  becalmed  all
day  and  caught  some  Fish,  but  not  much,  because  we  had
small  store  of  salt.  At  three  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-
noone,  wee  had  a  gale  at  South-east,  and  South  South-east,
and  we  steered  away  Westerly,  our  Compasse  was  West
and  by  South  halfe  a  point  South.  At  foure  of  the  clocke,
we  sounded  and  had  but  fifteene,  seventeene,  and  nineteene
fathoms  on  a  fishing  Banke ;  and  we  sounded  every  Glasse.
Then  we  could  get  no  ground  in  five  and  twentie  fathoms,
and  had  sight  of  a  sayle  on  head  off  us.  At  noone  our
height  was  44.  degrees  27.  minutes.  We  stood  to  the
Westward  all  night,  and  spake  with  a  French-man,  which
lay  Fishing  on  the  Banke  of  Sablen,  in  thirtie  fathoms,
and  we  saw  two  or  three  more.

The  tenth,  very  mystie  and  thicke  weather,  the  wind  at
South-west,  a  faire  gale.  We  stood  to  the  South-ward,
and  made  our  way  South-east  and  by  East  At  twelve
of  the  clocke  we  sounded,  and  had  eight  and  fortie
fathoms  :  againe  at  two  we  sounded,  and  had  fiftie  fathoms.
And  at  sixe  of  the  clocke  we  sounded :  and  had  eight
and  fortie  fathoms  on  the  end  of  the  Banke.  Againe,
at  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night  wee  sounded,  and  had
no  ground  in  eightie  fathomes,  and  were  over  the  Banke.
So  wee  stood  along  till  mid-night.  The  Compasse  varyed
17.  degrees  to  the  Westward.

The  eleventh,  very  thicke  and  mystie  weather.  At
twelve  of  the  clocke  at  night,  we  cast  about  to  the  West-
ward, and  stood  so  all  day,  and  made  our  way  West
North-west.  We  sounded  at  twelve  of  the  clocke,  but
had  no  ground ;  so  we  stood  to  the  Westward  all  the  fore-
part of  the  night,  and  sounded  but  could  get  no  ground

344

HENRY HUDSON

in  fiftie  or  sixtie  fathoms  till  mid-night.  Then  I  sounded
and  had  ground  at  fifteene  fathoms,  white  sand.

The  twelfth,  was  very  foggie,  we  stood  our  course  all
the  morning  till  eleven  of  the  clocke ;  at  which  time  we
had  sight  of  the  Land,  which  is  low  white  sandie  ground,
right  on  head  off  us ;  and  had  ten  fathoms.  Then  we
tackt  to  the  Southward,  and  stood  off  foure  Glasses :  then
we  tackt  to  the  Land  againe,  thinking  to  have  rode  under
it,  and  as  we  came  neere  it,  the  fog  was  so  thicke  that  we
could  not  see ;  so  wee  stood  off  againe.  From  mid-night
to  two  of  the  clocke,  we  came  sounding  in  twelve,  thir-
teene,  and  foureteene  fathoms  off  the  shoare.  At  foure  of
the  clocke,  we  had  20.  fathoms.  At  eight  of  the  clocke
at  night  30.  fathoms.  At  twelve  of  the  clocke  6$.
fathoms,  and  but  little  winde,  for  it  deeped  apace,  but  the
neerer  the  shoare  the  fairer  shoalding.

The  thirteenth,  faire  sun-shining  weather,  from  eight  of
the  clocke  in  the  fore-noone  all  day  after,  but  in  the
morning  it  was  foggie.  Then  at  eight  of  the  clocke  we
cast  about  for  the  shoare,  but  could  not  see  it ;  the  wind
being  at  South  by  our  true  Compasse,  wee  steered  West
and  by  North.  At  noone  we  observed,  and  found  our
height  to  bee  43.  degrees  25.  minutes;  so  we  steered
away  West  and  by  North  all  the  after-noone.  At  foure
of  the  clocke  in  the  after-noone,  we  sounded  and  had  five
and  thirtie  fathoms.  And  at  sixe  of  the  clocke,  wee  had
sight  of  the  Land,  and  saw  two  sayles  on  head  off  us.
The  land  by  the  waters  side  is  low  Land,  and  white  sandie
Bankes  rising  full  of  little  Hils.  Our  soundings  were
35-  33-  30.  28.  32.  37.  33.  &  32.  fathoms.

The  foureteenth,  full  of  mysts  flying  and  vading,  the
wind  betweene  South  and  South-west,  we  steered  away
West  North-west,  and  North-west  and  by  West.  Our
soundings  were  29.  25.  24.  25.  22.  25.  27.  30.  28.  30.
35.  43.  50.  70.  90.  70.  64.  86.  100.  fathoms,  and  no
ground.

The  fifteenth,  very  mystie,  the  winde  varying  betweene
South  and  South-west,  wee  steered  West  and  by  North,

345

A.D.

1609.

Land,  being
low,  white  and
sandie.

43.  degrees
25.  minutes.

Sight  of  Land
againe,  and  of
two  Ships.

A.D.

1609.

Five  Hands.

Sixe  Salvages
come  aboord
them.

[III.iii.586.]
A  large  River.

44.  Degrees
10.  minutes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  West  North-west.  In  the  morning  we  sounded,  and
had  one  hundred  fathoms,  till  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the
after-noone.  Then  we  sounded  againe,  and  had  seventie
five  fathoms.  Then  in  two  Glasses  running,  which  was
not  above  two  English  miles,  we  sounded  and  had  sixtie
fathoms,  and  it  shoalded  a  great  pace  untill  we  came  to
twentie  fathoms.  Then  we  made  account  we  were  neere
the  Hands  that  lie  off  the  shoare.  So  we  came  to  an
Anchor,  the  Sea  being  very  smooth  and  little  wind,  at
nine  of  the  clocke  at  night.  After  supper,  we  tryed  for
Fish,  and  I  caught  fifteene  Cods,  some  the  greatest  that
I  have  seene,  and  so  we  rode  all  night.

The  sixteenth,  in  the  morning  it  cleered  up,  and  wee
had  sight  of  five  Hands  lying  North,  and  North  and  by
West  from  us,  two  leagues.  Then  wee  made  ready  to
set  sayle,  but  the  myst  came  so  thicke,  that  we  durst  not
enter  in  among  them.

The  seventeenth,  was  all  mystie,  so  that  wee  could  not
get  into  the  Harbour.  At  ten  of  the  clocke  two  Boates
came  off  to  us,  with  sixe  of  the  Savages  of  the  Countrey,
seeming  glad  of  our  comming.  We  gave  them  trifles,
and  they  eate  and  dranke  with  us ;  and  told  us,  that  there
were  Gold,  Silver,  and  Copper  mynes  hard  by  us ;  and  that
the  French-men  doe  Trade  with  them ;  which  is  very
likely,  for  one  of  them  spake  some  words  of  French.  So
wee  rode  still  all  day  and  all  night,  the  weather  continuing
mystie.

The  eighteenth,  faire  weather,  wee  went  into  a  very
good  Harbour,  and  rode  hard  by  the  shoare  in  foure
fathoms  water.  The  River  runneth  up  a  great  way,  but
there  is  but  two  fathoms  hard  by  us.  We  went  on  shoare
and  cut  us  a  fore  Mast,  then  at  noone  we  came  aboord
againe,  and  found  the  height  of  the  place  to  bee  in  44.
degrees  1 .  minute  ;  and  the  Sunne  to  fall  at  a  South  South-
west Sunne.  We  mended  our  sayles,  and  fell  to  make
our  fore-Mast.  The  Harbour  lyeth  South  and  North,  a
mile  in  where  we  rode.

The  nineteenth,  we  had  faire  sun-shining  weather,  we

346

HENRY HUDSON

rode  still.  In  the  after-noone  wee  went  with  our  Boate
to  looke  for  fresh  water,  and  found  some ;  and  found  a
shoald  with  many  Lobsters  on  it,  and  caught  one  and
thirtie.  The  people  comming  aboord,  shewed  us  great
friendship,  but  we  could  not  trust  them.  The  twentieth,
faire  sunne-shining  weather,  the  winde  at  South-west.  In
the  morning,  our  Scute  went  out  to  catch  fresh  Fish  halfe
an  houre  before  day,  and  returned  in  two  houres,  bringing
seven  and  twentie  great  Coddes,  with  two  hookes  and
lines.  In  the  after-noone  wee  went  for  more  Lobsters,
and  caught  fortie,  and  returned  aboord.  Then  wee  espied
two  French  Shallops  full  of  the  Countrey  people  come
into  the  Harbour,  but  they  offered  us  no  wrong,  seeing
we  stood  upon  our  guard.  They  brought  many  Beaver
skinnes,  and  other  fine  Furres,  which  they  would  have
changed  for  redde  Gownes.  For  the  French  trade  with
them  for  red  Cassockes,  Knives,  Hatchets,  Copper,  Kettles,
Trevits,  Beades,  and  other  trifles.

The  one  and  twentieth,  all  mystie,  the  wind  Easterly,
wee  rode  still  and  did  nothing,  but  about  our  Mast.  The
two  and  twentieth,  faire  Sun-shining  weather,  the  winde
all  Northerly,  we  rode  still  all  the  day.  In  the  after-noone
our  Scute  went  to  catch  more  Lobsters,  and  brought  with
them  nine  and  fiftie. The  night  was  cleere  weather.

The  three  and  twentieth,  faire  sun-shining  weather  and
very  hot.  At  eleven  of  the  clocke,  our  fore  Mast  was
finished,  and  we  brought  it  aboord,  and  set  it  into  the
step,  and  in  the  after-noone  we  rigged  it.  This  night
we  had  some  little  myst  and  rayne.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  very  hot  weather,  the  winde
at  South  out  of  the  sea.  The  fore-part  of  the  day  wee
brought  to  our  sayles.  In  the  morning,  our  Scute  went
to  take  Fish,  and  in  two  houres  they  brought  with  them
twentie  great  Coddes,  and  a  great  Holibut,  the  night  was
faire  also.  We  kept  good  watch  for  feare  of  being
betrayed  by  the  people,  and  perceived  where  they  layd
their  Shallops.

The  five  and  twentieth,  very  faire  weather  and  hot.

347

A.D.

1609.

The  trade  of
the  French
with  the
Salvages.

A.D.

1609.

They  spoyle
Houses  oftht
Salvages.

Variation  10.
degrees  toward
the  North-
west.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

In  the  morning  wee  manned  our  Scute  with  foure  Muskets,
and  sixe  men,  and  tooke  one  of  their  Shallops  and  brought
it  aboord.  Then  we  manned  our  Boat  &  Scute  with
twelve  men  and  Muskets,  and  two  stone  Pieces  or
Murderers,  and  drave  the  Salvages  from  their  Houses,
and  tooke  the  spoyle  of  them,  as  they  would  have  done
of  us.  Then  wee  set  sayle,  and  came  downe  to  the
Harbours  mouth,  and  rode  there  all  night,  because  the
winde  blew  right  in,  and  the  night  grew  mystie  with
much  rayne  till  mid-night.  Then  it  fell  calme,  and  the
wind  came  off  the  Land  at  West  North-west,  and  it  began
to  cleere. The  Compasse  varyed  10.  degrees  North-west.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  faire  and  cleere  sunne-shining
weather.  At  five  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  the  winde
being  off  the  shoare  at  North  North-west,  we  set  sayle
and  came  to  sea,  and  by  noone  we  counted  our  ship  had
gone  fourteene  leagues  South-west.  In  the  after-noone,
the  winde  shifted  variably  betweene  West  South-west,  and
North-west.  At  noone,  I  found  the  height  to  bee  43.
degrees  56.  minutes.  This  Eevening  being  very  faire
weather,  wee  observed  the  variation  of  our  Compasse  at
the  Sunnes  going  downe,  and  found  it  to  bee  10.  degrees
from  the  North  to  the  Westward.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  faire  sun-shining  weather,
the  winde  shifting  betweene  the  South-west,  and  West
and  by  North,  a  stiffe  gale,  we  stood  to  the  Southward
all  day,  and  made  our  way  South  and  by  West,  seven  and
twentie  leagues.  At  noone,  our  height  was  42.  degrees
50.  minuts.  At  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-noone,
wee  cast  about  to  the  Northward.  At  eight  of  the  clocke,
we  tooke  in  our  top-sayles  and  our  fore-bonnet,  and  went
with  a  short  sayle  all  night.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  very  thicke  and  mystie,  and
a  stiffe  gale  of  wind,  varying  betweene  South  South-west,
and  South-west  and  by  West ;  we  made  our  way  North-
west and  by  West,  seven  and  twentie  leagues,  wee  sounded
many  times  and  could  get  no  ground.  At  five  of  the
clocke,  we  cast  about  to  the  Southward,  the  wind  at  South-

348

HENRY HUDSON

west  and  by  West.  At  which  time  we  sounded,  and  had
ground  at  seventie  five  fathoms.  At  eight,  wee  had  sixtie
five  fathoms.  At  ten,  sixtie.  At  twelve  of  the  clocke
at  mid-night,  fiftie  sixe  fathoms,  gray  sand.  The  Com-
passe  varyed  6.  degrees  the  North  point  to  the  West.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  faire  weather,  we  stood  to  the
Southward,  and  made  our  way  South  and  by  West  a
point  South,  eighteene  leagues.  At  noone,  we  found  our
height  to  bee  42.  degrees  $6.  minutes,  wee  sounded  oft,
and  had  these  60.  64.  65.  67.  65.  6$.  70.  and  75.  fathoms.
At  night,  wee  tryed  the  variation  of  our  Compasse  by
the  setting  of  the  Sunne,  and  found  that  it  went  downe
37.  degrees  to  the  North- ward  of  the  West,  and  should
have  gone  downe  but  3 1 .  degrees.  The  Compasse  varyed
5.  l/2  degrees.

The  thirtieth,  very  hot,  all  the  fore-part  of  the  day
calme,  the  wind  at  South  South-east,  wee  steered  away
West  South-west  and  sounded  many  times,  and  could  find
no  ground  at  one  hundred  and  seventie  fathomes.  We
found  a  great  current  and  many  over-falls.  Our  current
had  deceived  us.  For  at  noone  we  found  our  height  to
be  41.  degrees  34.  minutes.  And  the  current  had  heaved
us  to  the  Southward  fourteene  leagues.  At  eight  of  the
clocke  at  night,  I  sounded  and  had  ground  in  fiftie  two
fathomes.  In  the  end  of  the  mid-night  watch,  wee  had
fiftie  three  fathomes.  This  last  observation  is  not  to  be
trusted.

The  one  and  thirtieth,  very  thicke  and  mystie  all  day,
untill  tenne  of  the  clocke.  At  night  the  wind  came  to
the  South,  and  South-west  and  South.  We  made  our
way  West  North-west  nineteene  leagues.  Wee  sounded
many  times,  and  had  difference  of  soundings,  sometimes
little  stones,  and  sometimes  grosse  gray  sand,  fiftie  six,
fiftie  foure,  fortie  eight,  fortie  seven,  fortie  foure,  fortie
six,  fiftie  fathomes ;  and  at  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night
it  fell  calme,  and  we  had  fiftie  fathomes.  And  at  ten  of
the  clocke  we  heard  a  great  Rut,  like  the  Rut  of  the
shoare. Then  I  sounded  and  found  the  former  Depths ;

349

A.D.

1609.

Variation  6.
degrees  to  the
West.

Variation  5.
y  a  halfe
degrees.

[III.iii.587.

A  great
current  and
many  over-
fals.

A  great  Rut.

A.D.
1609.

A  current  to
the  South-west
and  South-
west by  West,
with  over-fals.

August.

They  goe  on
Land  neere
Cape  Cod.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  mistrusting  a  current,  seeing  it  so  still  that  the  ship
made  no  way,  I  let  the  lead  lie  on  the  ground,  and  found
a  tide  set  to  the  South-west,  and  South-west  by  West,  so
fast,  that  I  could  hardly  vere  the  Line  so  fast,  and  presently
came  an  hurling  current,  or  tyde  with  over-fals,  which
cast  our  ship  round ;  and  the  Lead  was  so  fast  in  the
ground,  that  I  feared  the  Lines  breaking,  and  we  had  no
more  but  that.  At  mid-night  I  sounded  againe,  and  we
had  seventie  five  fathomes ;  and  the  strong  streame  had
left  us.

The  first  of  August,  all  the  fore-part  of  the  day  was
mystie,  and  at  noone  it  cleered  up.  We  found  that  our
height  was  41.  degrees  45.  minutes,  and  we  had  gone
nineteene  leagues.  The  after-noon  was  reasonable  cleere.
We  found  a  rustling  tide  or  current,  with  many  over-fals
to  continue  still,  and  our  water  to  change  colour,  and  our
sea  to  bee  very  deepe,  for  wee  found  no  ground  in  one
hundred  fathomes.  The  night  was  cleere,  and  the  winde
came  to  the  North,  and  North  North-east,  we  steered
West.

The  second,  very  faire  weather  and  hot :  from  the  morn-
ing till  noone  we  had  a  gale  of  wind,  but  in  the  after-noone
little  wind.  At  noone  I  sounded  and  had  one  hundred
and  ten  fathomes;  and  our  height  was  41.  degrees  56.
minutes.  And  wee  had  runne  foure  and  twentie  leagues
and  an  halfe.  At  the  Sun-setting  we  observed  the  varia-
tion of  the  Compasse,  and  found  that  it  was  come  to  his
true  place.  At  eight  of  the  clocke  the  gale  increased,  so
wee  ranne  sixe  leagues  that  watch,  and  had  a  very  faire
and  cleere  night.

The  third,  very  hot  weather.  In  the  morning,  we  had
sight  of  the  Land,  and  steered  in  with  it,  thinking  to  goe
to  the  North-ward  of  it.  So  we  sent  our  shallop  with
five  men,  to  sound  in  by  the  shore :  and  they  found  it
deepe  five  fathomes  within  a  Bow-shot  of  the  shoare ;  and
they  went  on  Land,  and  found  goodly  Grapes,  and  Rose
trees,  and  brought  them  aboord  with  them,  at  five  of  the
clocke in the Eevening. We had seven and twentie

350

HENRY HUDSON  ad.

1609.

fathomes  within  two  miles  of  the  shoare ;  and  we  found
a  floud  come  from  the  South-east,  and  an  ebbe  from  the
North-west,  with  a  very  strong  streame,  and  a  great  hurling
and  noyses.  At  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night,  the  wind
began  to  blow  a  fresh  gale,  and  continued  all  night  but
variable.  Our  sounding  that  wee  had  to  the  Land,  was
one  hundred,  eightie,  seventie  foure,  fiftie  two,  fortie
sixe,  twentie  nine,  twentie  seven,  twentie  foure,  nine-
teene,  seventeene,  sometimes  Oze,  and  sometimes  gray
sand.

The  fourth,  was  very  hot :  we  stood  to  the  North-west
two  watches,  and  one  South  in  for  the  Land,  and  came
to  an  Anchor  at  the  Norther  end  of  the  Headland,  and
heard  the  voyce  of  men  call.  Then  we  sent  our  Boat
on  shoare,  thinking  they  had  beene  some  Christians  left
on  the  Land :  but  wee  found  them  to  bee  Savages,  which  Savages.
seemed  very  glad  of  our  comming.  So  wee  brought  one
aboord  with  us,  and  gave  him  meate,  and  he  did  eate  and
drinke  with  us.  Our  Master  gave  him  three  or  foure
glasse  Buttons,  and  sent  him  on  Land  with  our  shallop
againe.  And  at  our  Boats  comming  from  the  shoare  he
leapt  and  danced,  and  held  up  his  hands,  and  pointed  us
to  a  river  on  the  other  side :  for  we  had  made  signes  that
we  came  to  fish  there.  The  bodie  of  this  Headland  lyeth
in  41.  degrees  45.  minutes.  We  set  sayle  againe  after
dinner,  thinking  to  have  got  to  the  Westward  of  this
Headland,  but  could  not ;  so  we  beare  up  to  the  South-
ward of  it,  &  made  a  South-east  way ;  and  the  Souther
point  did  beare  West  at  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night.
Our  soundings  about  the  Easter  and  Norther  part  of  this
Headland,  a  league  from  the  shoare  are  these :  at  the
Easterside  thirtie,  twentie  seven,  twentie  seven,  twentie
foure,  twentie  five,  twentie.  The  North-east  point  17.
degrees  18.  minutes,  and  so  deeper.  The  North-end  of
this  Headland,  hard  by  the  shoare  thirtie  fathomes :  and
three  leagues  off  North  North-west,  one  hundred  fathomes.
At  the  South-east  part  a  league  off,  fifteene,  sixteene,  and
seventeene  fathomes. The  people  have  greene  Tabacco,

35i

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

and  pipes,  the  boles  whereof  are  made  of  Earth,  and  the
pipes  of  red  Copper. The  Land  is  very  sweet.

The  fift,  all  mystie.  At  eight  of  the  clocke  in  the
morning,  wee  tact  about  to  the  Westward,  and  stood  in
till  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-noone ;  at  which  time
it  cleered,  and  wee  had  sight  of  the  Head-land  againe  five
leagues  from  us.  The  Souther  point  of  it  did  beare  West
off  us :  and  we  sounded  many  times,  and  had  no  ground.
And  at  foure  of  the  clocke  we  cast  about,  and  at  our
staying  wee  had  seventie  fathomes.  Wee  steered  away
[III.iii.588.]  South  and  South  by  East  all  night,  and  could  get  no
ground  at  seventie  and  eightie  fathomes.  For  wee  feared
a  great  Riffe,  that  lyeth  off  the  Land,  and  steered  away
South  and  by  East.

The sixth, faire weather, but many times mysting.

Wee steered  away South South-east, till  eight of  the

clocke  in  the  morning ;  Then  it  cleered  a  little,  and  wee

cast  about  to  the  Westward. Then  we  sounded  and  had

thirtie  fathomes,  grosse  sand,  and  were  come  to  the  Riffe.

Then  wee  kept  our  Lead,  and  had  quicke  shoalding,  from

thirtie,  twentie  nine,  twentie  seven,  twentie  foure,  twentie

two, twentie  and  an  halfe, twentie, twentie, nineteene,

nineteene, nineteene, eighteene, eighteene, seventeene ;

and  so  deeping  againe  as  proportionally  as  it  shoalded.

For  we  steered South  and South-east till  we came  to

twentie  sixe  fathomes. Then  we  steered  South-west  for

so  the  tyde  doth  set. By  and  by  it  being  calme  we  tryed

by  our  Lead ;  for  you  shall  have  sixteene  or  seventeene

fathomes,  and  the  next  cast  but  seven  or  six  fathomes.

And  farther  to  the  Westward  you  shall  have  foure  and

five  foot  water,  and  see  Rockes  under  you ;  and  you  shall

This  danger- see  the  Land  in  the  top. Upon  this  Riffe  we  had  an

ous  Riffe  is  in  observation,  and  found  that  it  lyeth  in  40.  degrees  10.

41.  degrees minutes. And this is that Headland which Captaine

and  Neth  off Bartholomew  Gosnold  discovered  in  the  yeere  1602.  and

East  from called  Cape  Cod ;  because  of  the  store  of  Cod-fish  that

Cape  Cod  into  hee  found  thereabout. So  we  steered  South-west  three

the  Sea.  leagues, and had twentie, and twentie foure fathomes.

352

HENRY HUDSON  a.d.

1609.

Then  we  steered  West  two  Glasses  halfe  a  league,  and
came  to  fifteene  fathomes.  Then  we  steered  off  South-
east foure  Glasses,  but  could  not  get  deepe  water ;  for
there  the  tyde  of  ebbe  laid  us  on ;  and  the  streame  did
hurle  so,  that  it  laid  us  so  neere  the  breach  of  a  shoald,
that  wee  were  forced  to  Anchor.  So  at  seven  of  the
clocke  at  night,  wee  were  at  an  Anchor  in  tenne  fathomes  :
And,  I  give  God  most  heartie  thankes,  the  least  water  wee
had  was  seven  fathomes  and  an  halfe.  We  rode  still  all
night,  and  at  a  still  water  I  sounded  so  farre  round  about
our  ship  as  we  could  see  a  light ;  and  had  no  lesse  then
eight,  nine,  ten,  and  eleven  fathomes  :  The  myst  continued
being  very  thicke.

The  seventh,  faire  weather  and  hot,  but  mystie.  Wee
rode  still  hoping  it  would  cleere,  but  on  the  floud  it  fell
calme  and  thicke.  So  we  rode  still  all  day  and  all  night.
The  floud  commeth  from  the  South-west,  and  riseth  not
above  one  fathome  and  an  halfe  in  nepe  streames.  Toward
night  it  cleered,  and  I  went  with  our  shallop  and  sounded,
and  found  no  lesse  water  then  eight  fathomes  to  the  South-
east off  us :  but  we  saw  to  the  North-west  off  us  great
Breaches.

The  eight,  faire  and  cleere  weather.  In  the  morning,
by  sixe  of  the  clocke  at  slake  water  wee  weighed  ;  the  wind
at  North-east,  and  set  our  fore-sayle  and  mayne  top-sayle,
and  got  a  mile  over  the  Flats.  Then  the  tyde  of  ebbe  The  Flats.
came,  so  we  anchored  againe  till  the  floud  came.  Then
wee  set  sayle  againe,  and  by  the  great  mercie  of  God,  wee
got  cleere  off  them  by  one  of  the  clocke  this  after-noone.
And  wee  had  sight  of  the  Land  from  the  West  North-
west, to  the  North  North-west.  So  we  steered  away
South  South-east  all  night ;  and  had  ground  untill  the
middle  of  the  third  watch.  Then  we  had  fortie  five
fathomes,  white  sand,  and  little  stones,  So  all  our  sound-
ings are  twentie,  twentie,  twentie  two,  twentie  seven,
thirtie  two,  fortie  three,  fortie  three,  fortie  five.  Then
no  ground  in  seventie  fathomes.

The  ninth,  very  faire  and  hot  weather,  the  wind  a  very
xiii  353  z

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

stiffe  gale.  In  the  morning,  at  foure  of  the  clocke,  our
shallop  came  running  up  against  our  sterne,  and  split
in  all  her  stemme ;  So  we  were  faine  to  cut  her  away.
Then  wee  tooke  in  our  mayne  sayle,  and  lay  atrie  under
our  fore-sayle  untill  twelve  of  the  clocke  at  mid-day.
Then  the  wind  ceased  to  a  faire  gale,  so  wee  stood  away
South-west.  Then  we  lay  close  by,  on  many  courses  a
South  by  West  way  fifteene  leagues ;  and  three  watches
South-east  by  East,  ten  leagues.  At  eight  of  the  clocke
at  night,  wee  tooke  in  our  top-sayles,  and  went  with  a
low  sayle ;  because  we  were  in  an  unknowne  sea.  At
noone  we  observed  and  found  our  heigth  to  be  38.  degrees
39.  minutes.

The  tenth,  in  the  morning  some  raine  and  cloudie
weather :  the  winde  at  South-west,  wee  made  our  way
South-east  by  East,  ten  leagues.  At  noone,  wee  observed
and  found  our  heigth  to  bee  38.  degrees  39.  minutes.
Then  wee  tackt  about  to  the  Westward,  the  wind  being
at  South  and  by  East,  little  wind.  At  foure  of  the  clocke
it  fell  calme,  and  we  had  two  Dolphines  about  our  ship,
and  many  small  fishes.  At  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night,
wee  had  a  small  lingring  gale.  All  night  we  had  a  great
Sea  out  of  the  South-west,  and  another  great  Sea  out  of
the  North-east.

The  eleventh,  all  the  fore-part  of  the  day  faire  weather,

and  very  hot. Wee  stood  to  the  West  South-west  till

noone. Then  the  wind  shorted,  and  we  could  lye  but

South-west and  by South. At noone, wee found our

heigth  to  bee  39. degrees 11. minutes. And  that  the

A  current current  had  laid  us  to  the  Northward  thirtie  two  minutes

setting  to  the contrary  to  our  expectation. At  .foure  of  the  clocke  in

the  after-noone  there  came  a  myst,  which  endured  two

houres. But  wee  had  it  faire  and  cleere  all  night  after.

Variation  one The  Compasse  varied  the  North  point  to  the  West  one

t°mt'  whole  point.

The  twelfth,  faire  weather,  the  wind  variable  betweene
the  South-west  and  by  South,  and  the  North  little  wind.
In  the  morning  we  killed  an  extraordinary  fish,  and  stood

354

HENRY HUDSON

A.D.

1609.

Variation  10.
degrees.

to  the  Westward  all  day  and  all  night.  At  noone  we
found  our  heigth  to  be  38.  degrees  13.  minutes.  And
the  observation  the  day  before  was  not  good.  This  noone,
we  found  the  Compasse  to  vary  from  the  North  to  the
West  ten  degrees.

The  thirteenth,  faire  weather  and  hot :  the  wind  at
North-east.  Wee  steered  away  West  and  by  our  Compasse  [III.1ii.589.
two  and  twentie  leagues.  At  noone  wee  found  our  height
to  bee  37.  degrees  45.  minutes,  and  that  our  way  from
noone  to  noone  was  West  South-west,  halfe  a  point
Southerly.  The  Compasse  was  7.  degrees  and  a  halfe
variation,  from  the  North  point  to  the  West.

The  fourteenth,  faire  weather,  but  cloudie,  and  a  stiffe
gale  of  wind,  variable  betweene  North-east  and  South-
west, wee  steered  away  West  by  South,  a  point  South
all  day  untill  nine  of  the  clocke  at  night ;  then  it  began
to  Thunder  and  Lighten,  whereupon  we  tooke  in  all  our
sayles,  and  layd  it  a  hull,  and  hulled  away  North  till  mid-
night, a  league  and  a  halfe.

The  fifteenth,  very  faire  and  hot  weather,  the  winde
at  North  by  East.  At  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning
we  set  sayle,  and  stood  on  our  course  to  the  Westward.
At  noone  wee  found  our  height  to  bee  37.  degrees  25.
minutes.  The  after-noone  proved  little  wind.  At  eight
of  the  clocke  at  night,  the  winde  came  to  the  North,  and
wee  steered  West  by  North,  and  West  North-west,  and
made  our  way  West.  The  Compasse  varyed  7.  degrees
from  the  North  to  the  West.

The  sixteenth,  faire  shining  weather,  and  very  hot,  the
wind  variable  betweene  the  North  and  the  West,  wee
steered  away  West  by  North.  At  noone  wee  found  our
height  to  bee  37.  degrees  6.  minutes.  This  morning  we
sounded  and  had  ground  in  ninetie  fathomes,  and  in  sixe
Glasses  running  it  shoalded  to  fiftie  fathoms,  and  so  to
eight  and  twentie  fathoms,  at  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the
after-noone.  Then  wee  came  to  an  Anchor,  and  rode  till
eight  of  the  clocke  at  night,  the  wind  being  at  South  and
Moone-light,  we  resolved  to  goe  to  the  Northward  to

355

37.  Degrees
25.  minutes.

3  7.  Degrees
6.  minutes.

A.D.
1609.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

A  low  Land
with  a  white
sandie  shoare.

37.  degrees
26.  minutes.

finde  deeper  water.  So  we  weighed  and  stood  to  the
Northward,  and  found  the  water  to  shoald  and  deepe,
from  eight  and  twentie  to  twentie  fathomes.

The  seventeenth,  faire  and  cleere  Sun-shining  weather,
the  winde  at  South  by  West,  wee  steered  to  the  North-
ward till  foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  then  wee
came  to  eighteene  fathomes.  So  we  Anchored  untill  the
Sunne  arose  to  looke  abroad  for  Land,  for  wee  judged
there  could  not  but  be  Land  neere  us,  but  we  could  see
none.  Then  we  weighed  and  stood  to  the  Westward  till
noone.  And  at  eleven  of  the  clocke  wee  had  sight  of  a
low  Land,  with  a  white  sandie  shoare.  By  twelve  of  the
clocke  we  were  come  into  five  fathomes,  and  Anchored ;
and  the  Land  was  foure  leagues  from  us,  and  wee  had
sight  of  it  from  the  West,  to  the  North-west  by  North.
Our  height  was  37.  degrees  26.  minutes.  Then  the  wind
blew  so  stiffe  a  gale,  and  such  a  Sea  went,  that  we  could
not  weigh ;  so  we  rode  there  all  night  an  hard  rode.

The  eighteenth,  in  the  morning  faire  weather,  and  little
winde  at  North  North-east  and  North-east.  At  foure  of
the  clocke  in  the  morning,  we  weighed  and  stood  into
the  shoare  to  see  the  deeping  or  shoalding  of  it,  and  finding
it  too  deepe,  we  stood  in  to  get  a  rode ;  for  wee  saw  as
it  were  three  Hands.  So  wee  turned  to  windward  to  get
into  a  Bay,  as  it  shewed  to  us  to  the  Westward  of  an
Hand.  For  the  three  Hands  did  beare  North  off  us.  But
toward  noone  the  wind  blew  Northerly  with  gusts  of  wind
and  rayne.  So  we  stood  off  into  the  Sea  againe  all  night ;
and  running  off  we  found  a  Channell,  wherein  we  had  no
lesse  then  eight,  nine,  ten,  eleven,  and  twelve  fathomes
water.  For  in  comming  over  the  Barre,  wee  had  five,
and  foure  fathomes  and  a  halfe,  and  it  lyeth  five  leagues
from  the  shoare,  and  it  is  the  Barre  of  Virginia.  At  the
North  end  of  it,  it  is  ten  leagues  broad,  and  South  and
North,  but  deepe  water  from  ninetie  fathoms  to  fiv^  and
foure  and  a  halfe.  The  Land  lyeth  South  and  North.
Kings  River.  This  is  the  entrance  into  the  Kings  River  in  Virginia,
where  our  English-men  are. The  North  side  of  it  lyeth

356

Barre  of
Virginia.

HENRY HUDSON  a.d.

1609.

in  37.  degrees  26.  minutes,  you  shall  know  when  you
come  to  shoald  water  or  sounding ;  for  the  water  will
looke  Greene  or  thicke,  you  shall  have  ninetie  and  eightie
fathomes,  and  shoalding  a  pace  till  you  come  to  ten,  eleven,
nine,  eight,  seven,  ten,  and  nine  fathomes,  and  so  to  five,
and  foure  fathomes  and  a  halfe.

The  nineteenth,  faire  weather,  but  an  hard  gale  of  winde
at  the  North-east,  wee  stood  off  till  noone,  and  made  our
way  South-east  by  East,  two  and  twentie  leagues.  At
noone  wee  cast  about  to  the  Westward,  and  stood  till  Note.
sixe  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-noone,  and  went  five
leagues  and  a  halfe  North-west  by  North.  Then  wee
cast  about  againe  to  the  Eastward,  and  stood  that  way
till  foure  the  next  morning.

The  twentieth,  faire  and  cleere  weather,  the  winde
variable  betweene  East  North-east,  and  North-east.  At
foure  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  wee  cast  about  to  the
Westward,  and  stood  till  noone ;  at  which  time  I  sounded ;
and  had  two  and  thirtie  fathomes.  Then  we  takt  to  the
Eastward  againe  ;  wee  found  our  height  to  bee  37.  degrees  37-  degrees
22.  minutes.  We  stood  to  the  Eastward  all  night,  and  22,  mtnutes-
had  very  much  wind.  At  eight  of  the  clocke  at  night
we  tooke  off  our  Bonnets,  and  stood  with  small  sayle.

The  one  and  twentieth,  was  a  sore  storme  of  winde
and  rayne  all  day  and  all  night,  wherefore  wee  stood  to
the  Eastward  with  a  small  sayle  till  one  of  the  clocke
in  the  after-noone.  Then  a  great  Sea  brake  into  our
fore-corse  and  split  it ;  so  we  were  forced  to  take  it  from
the  yard  and  mend  it ;  wee  lay  a  trie  with  our  mayne-corse
all  night.  This  night  our  Cat  ranne  crying  from  one  side
of  the  ship  to  the  other,  looking  over-boord,  which  made
us  to  wonder ;  but  we  saw  nothing.

The  two  and  twentieth,  stormy  weather,  with  gusts  of  [III.iii.590.]
rayne  and  wind.  In  the  morning  at  eight  of  the  clocke
we  set  our  fore-corse,  and  stood  to  the  Eastward  under
our  fore-sayle,  mayne-sayle  and  misen,  and  from  noone  to
noone,  we  made  our  way  East  South-east,  fourteene
leagues. The  night  reasonable  drie  but  cloudie,  the  winde

357

A.D.

Variation  4.

degrees

Westward.

The  Banke  of
Virginia.
The  Coast
lyeth  South
South-west,
and  North
North-west.
Latitude  37.
degrees  15.
minutes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

variable  all  day  and  night.  Our  Compasse  was  varyed
4.  degrees  Westward.

The  three  and  twentieth,  very  faire  weather,  but  some
Thunder  in  the  morning,  the  winde  variable  betweene
East  by  North.  At  noone  wee  tackt  about  to  the  North-
ward, the  winde  at  East  by  North.  The  after-noone  very
faire,  the  wind  variable,  and  continued  so  all  night.  Our
way  we  made  East  South-east,  till  noone  the  next  day.

The  foure  and  twentieth,  faire  and  hot  weather,  with
the  wind  variable  betweene  the  North  and  the  East.  The
after-noone  variable  winde.  But  at  foure  of  the  clocke,
the  wind  came  to  the  East  and  South-east ;  so  wee  steered
away  North  by  West,  and  in  three  Watches  wee  went
thirteene  leagues.  At  noone  our  height  was  25.  degrees
41.  minutes,  being  farre  off  at  Sea  from  the  Land.

The  five  and  twentieth,  faire  weather  and  very  hot.
All  the  morning  was  very  calme  untill  eleven  of  the  clocke  ;
the  wind  came  to  South-east,  and  South  South-east ;  so
wee  steered  away  North-west  by  North,  two  Watches  and
a  halfe,  and  one  Watch  North-west  by  West,  and  went
eighteene  leagues.  At  noone  I  found  our  height  to
bee  36.  degrees  20.  minutes,  being  without  sight  of
Land.

The  sixe  and  twentieth,  faire  and  hot  weather,  the  winde
variable  upon  all  the  points  of  the  Compasse.  From  two
of  the  clocke  in  the  morning  untill  noone,  wee  made  our
way  North  by  East,  seven  leagues.  In  the  after-noone
the  wind  came  to  the  North-east,  and  vering  to  the  East
South-east,  wee  steered  away  North-west  fifteene  leagues,
from  noone  till  ten  of  the  clocke  at  night.  At  eight  of  the
clocke  at  night  wee  sounded,  and  had  eighteene  fathomes,
and  were  come  to  the  Banke  of  Virginia,  and  could  not
see  the  Land.  Wee  kept  sounding,  and  steered  away
North,  and  came  to  eight  fathomes,  and  Anchored  there ;
for  the  wind  was  at  East  South-east,  so  that  wee  could  not
get  off.  For  the  Coast  lyeth  along  South  South-west,
and  North  North-east.  At  noone  our  height  was  37.
degrees 15. minutes. And wee found that we were

358

HENRY HUDSON  ad.

1609.
returned  to  the  same  place,  from  whence  we  were  put  off
at  our  first  seeing  Land.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  faire  weather  and  very  hot,
the  winde  at  East  South-east.  In  the  morning  as  soone
as  the  Sunne  was  up,  wee  looked  out  and  had  sight  of  the
Land.  Then  wee  weighed,  and  stood  in  North-west  two
Glasses,  and  found  the  Land  to  bee  the  place,  from  whence
wee  put  off  first.  So  wee  kept  our  loofe,  and  steered  along  This  agreeth
the  Land,  and  had  the  Banke  lye  all  along  the  shoare  ;  and  with  Robert
wee  had  in  two  leagues  off  the  shoare,  five,  sixe,  seven,  Tynda^-
eight,  nine,  and  ten  fathomes.  The  Coast  lyeth  South
South-west,  and  is  a  white  Sandie  shoare,  and  sheweth  full
of  Bayes  and  Points.  The  streame  setteth  West  South-
west, and  East  North-east.  At  sixe  of  the  clocke  at  night,
wee  were  thwart  of  an  Harbour  or  River,  but  we  saw  a
Barre  lye  before  it ;  and  all  within  the  Land  to  the  North-
ward, the  water  ranne  with  many  Hands  in  it.  At  sixe  of
the  clocke  we  Anchored,  and  sent  our  Boate  to  sound  to
the  shoare-ward,  and  found  no  lesse  then  foure  and  a  halfe,
five,  sixe,  and  seven  fathomes.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  faire  and  hot  weather, the
winde  at  South  South-west. In  the  morning  at  sixe  of
the  clocke  wee  weighed,  and  steered  away  North  twelve
leagues  till  noone,  and  came  to  the  Point  of  the  Land ; The  Point  of
and  being  hard  by  the  Land  in  five  fathomes,  on  a  sudden  the  Land.
wee  came  into  three  fathomes ; then  we  beare  up  and  had
but  ten  foote  water,  and  joyned  to  the  Point. Then  as
soone  as  wee  were  over,  wee  had  five,  sixe,  seven,  eight,
nine, ten, twelve, and thirteene fathomes. Then wee
found  the  Land  to  trend  away  North-west,  with  a  great
Bay  and  Rivers. But  the  Bay  wee  found  shoald  ; and  in  A  great  Bay
the  offing  wee  had  ten  fathomes,  and  had  sight  of  Breaches  and  Rivers.
and  drie  Sand. Then  wee  were  forced  to  stand  backe
againe  ; so  we  stood  backe  South-east  by  South,  three
leagues. And  at  seven  of  the  clocke  wee  Anchored  in
eight  fathomes  water ; and  found  a  Tide  set  to  the  North-  A  small  Shal-
west,  and  North  North-west,  and  it  riseth  one  fathome,  loP  needfuU>
and floweth South South-east. And hee that will

359

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

throughly  Discover  this  great  Bay,  must  have  a  small

Pinnasse,  that  must  draw  but  foure  or  five  foote  water,

to  sound  before  him. At  five  in  the  morning  wee  weighed,

and  steered  away  to  the  Eastward  on  many  courses,  for

The  Norther the  Norther  Land  is  full  of  shoalds. Wee  were  among

Land  is  full  of  them,  and  once  wee  strooke,  and  wee  went  away; and

shoalds.  steered  away  to  the  South-east. So  wee  had  two,  three,

foure,  five,  sixe,  and  seven  fathomes,  and  so  deeper  and

deeper.

The  nine  and  twentieth,  faire  weather,  with  some
Thunder  and  showers,  the  winde  shifting  betweene  the
South  South-west,  and  the  North  North-west.  In  the
morning  wee  weighed  at  the  breake  of  day,  and  stood
Many  Hands,  toward  the  Norther  Land,  which  we  found  to  bee  all  Hands
to  our  sight,  and  great  stormes  from  them,  and  are  shoald
three  leagues  off.  For  we  comming  by  them,  had  but
seven,  sixe,  five,  foure,  three,  and  two  fathoms  and  a  halfe,
They  strike,  and  strooke  ground  with  our  Rudder,  we  steered  off  South-
west, one  Glasse,  and  had  five  fathoms.  Then  wee  steered
South-east  three  Glasses,  then  wee  found  seven  fathomes,
and  steered  North-east  by  East,  foure  leagues,  and  came
to  twelve  and  thirteene  fathoms.  At  one  of  the  clocke,  I
[III.iii.591.]  went  to  the  top-mast  head,  and  set  the  Land,  and  the  bodie
of  the  Hands  did  beare  North-west  by  North.  And  at  foure
of  the  clocke,  wee  had  gone  foure  leagues  East  South-east,
and  North-east  by  East,  and  found  but  seven  fathoms,
and  it  was  calme,  so  we  Anchored.  Then  I  went  againe
to  the  top-mast  head,  to  see  how  farre  I  could  see  Land
about  us,  and  could  see  no  more  but  the  Hands.  And  the
Souther  point  of  them  did  beare  North-west  by  West,
eight  leagues  off.  So  wee  rode  till  mid-night.  Then  the
winde  came  to  the  North  North-west,  so  wee  waighed  and
set  sayle.

The  thirtieth,  in  the  morning  betweene  twelve  and  one,
we  weighed,  and  stood  to  the  Eastward,  the  winde  at
North  North-west,  wee  steered  away  and  made  our  way
East  South-east.  From  our  weighing  till  noone,  eleven
leagues. Our  soundings  were  eight,  nine,  ten,  eleven,

360

HENRY HUDSON  ad.

1609.
twelve,  and  thirteene  fathomes  till  day. Then  we  came
to  eighteene,  nineteene,  twentie,  and  to  sixe  and  twentie
fathoms  by  noone. Then  I  observed  the  Sunne,  and  found
the  height  to  bee  39.  degrees  5.  minutes,  and  saw  no  Land.  Latitude  39.
In  the  after-noone,  the  winde  came  to  North  by  West ;  degrees  5.
So  wee  lay  close  by  with  our  fore-sayle :  and  our  mayne-  mnutes-
sayle,  and  it  was  little  winde  untill  twelve  of  the  clocke  at
mid-night,  then  wee  had  a  gale  a  little  while. Then  I
sounded,  and  all  the  night  our  soundings  were  thirtie,  and
sixe  and  thirtie  fathomes,  and  wee  went  little.

The  one  and  thirtieth,  faire  weather  and  little  wind.
At  sixe  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning  we  cast  about  to  the
Northward,  the  wind  being  at  the  North-east,  little  wind.
At  noone  it  fell  calme,  and  I  found  the  height  to  bee  Latitude  38.
38.  degrees  39.  minutes. And  the  streames  had  deceived  degrees  39.
us,  and  our  sounding  was  eight  and  thirtie  fathoms. In j^*/^//
the afternoone I sounded againe, and had but thirtie  streames.
fathoms. So  we  found  that  we  were  heaved  too  and  fro
with  the  streames  of  the  Tide,  both  by  our  observations
and  our  depths. From  noone  till  foure  of  the  clocke  in
the  after-noone,  it  was  calme. At  sixe  of  the  clocke  wee
had  a  little  gale  Southerly,  and  it  continued  all  night,
sometimes  calme,  and  sometimes  a  gale ; wee  went  eight
leagues  from  noone  to  noone,  North  by  East.

The  first  of  September,  faire  weather,  the  wind  variable  September.
betweene  East  and  South,  we  steered  away  North  North-
west. At  noone  we  found  our  height  to  bee  39.  degrees  Latitude  39.
3.  minutes. Wee  had  soundings  thirtie,  twentie  seven,  degrees  3.
twentie  foure,  and  twentie  two  fathomes,  as  wee  went  to  mnutes-
the  Northward. At  sixe  of  the  clocke  wee  had  one  and
twentie  fathomes. And  all  the  third  watch  till  twelve  of
the  clocke  at  mid-night,  we  had  soundings  one  and  twentie,
two  and  twentie,  eighteene, two  and  twentie, one  and
twentie,  eighteene,  and  two  and  twentie  fathoms,  and  went
sixe  leagues  neere  hand  North  North-west.

The  second,  in  the  morning  close  weather,  the  winde  at
South  in  the  morning;  from  twelve  untill  two  of  the
clocke  we  steered  North  North-west,  and  had  sounding  one

361

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

and  twentie  fathoms,  and  in  running  one  Glasse  we  had  but

sixteene  fathoms,  then  seventeene,  and  so  shoalder  and

shoalder  untill  it  came  to  twelve  fathoms. We  saw  a

great  Fire,  but  could  not  see  the  Land,  then  we  came

to  ten  fathoms,  whereupon  we  brought  our  tackes  aboord,

and  stood  to  the  Eastward  East  South-east,  foure  Glasses.

Then  the  Sunne  arose,  and  we  steered  away  North  againe,

and  saw  the  Land  from  the  West  by  North,  to  the  North-

The  Landlike  west  by  North,  all  like  broken  Hands,  and  our  soundings

broken  Hands,  were  eleven  and  ten  fathoms. Then  wee  looft  in  for  the

shoare,  and  faire  by  the  shoare,  we  had  seven  fathoms.

The  course The  course  along  the  Land  we  found  to  be  North-east  by

along  the  Land  North. From  the  Land  which  we  had  first  sight  of,  untill
from  the  mouth  . T ,  £  u • j

-v—  d-  „.. we  came  to  a  great  Lake  or  water,  as  wee  could  rndge  it
of  one  Kwer,  &  '  .  J. &

to  the  mouth to  bee,  being  drowned  Land,  which  made  it  to  rise  like

of  the  Norther  Hands,  which  was  in  length  ten  leagues. The  mouth  of

Bay  or  Lake, that  Lake  hath  many  shoalds,  and  the  Sea  breaketh  on

them  as  it  is  cast  out  of  the  mouth  of  it. And  from  that

Lake  or  Bay,  the  Land  lyeth  North  by  East,  and  wee  had

a  great  streame  out  of  the  Bay ; and  from  thence  our

sounding  was  ten  fathoms,  two  leagues  from  the  Land.

At  five  of  the  clocke  we  Anchored,  being  little  winde,  and

rode  in  eight  fathoms  water,  the  night  was  faire. This

Variation  8. night  I  found  the  Land  to  hall  the  Compasse  8.  degrees.

degrees  neere pQr  to  the  Northward  off  us  we  saw  high  Hils. For  the

* e  ,  l  s' day  before  we  found  not  above  2.  degrees  of  Variation.

2 desrees  .

variation  off  at  This  is  a  very  good  Land  to  fall  with,  and  a  pleasant  Land

Sea.  to  see.

The  third,  the  morning  mystie  untill  ten  of  the  clocke,

then  it  cleered,  and  the  wind  came  to  the  South  South-east,

so  wee  weighed  and  stood  to  the  Northward. The  Land

High  and  a is  very  pleasant  and  high,  and  bold  to  fall  withall. At

bold  share. three  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-noone,  wee  came  to  three

jllvers a great  Rivers. So  we  stood  along  to  the  Northermost,

The  Norther-  thinking  to  have  gone  into  it,  but  we  found  it  to  have  a

most  barred, very shoald barre before it, for we had but ten foot

water. Then wee cast about to the Southward, and

found two fathoms, three fathoms, and three and a

362

HENRY HUDSON  a.d.

1609.

quarter,  till  we  came  to  the  Souther  side  of  them,  An  excellent
then  we  had  five  and  sixe  fathoms,  and  Anchored.  Rwer-
So  wee  sent  in  our  Boate  to  sound,  and  they  found
no  lesse  water  then  foure,  five,  sixe,  and  seven
fathoms,  a*:d  returned  in  an  houre  and  a  halfe.  So  wee
weighed  and  went  in,  and  rode  in  five  fathoms,  Ozie
ground,  and  saw  many  Salmons,  and  Mullets,  and  Rayes
very  great. The  height  is  40.  degrees  30.  minutes.  Latitude  40.

The  fourth,  in  the  morning  as  soone  as  the  day  was eFees  3°'
light,  wee  saw  that  it  was  good  riding  farther  up. So  we  [niaiLeoi.]
sent  our  Boate  to  sound,  and  found  that  it  was  a  very  good
Harbour ; and  foure  and  five  fathoms,  two  Cables  length  A  veH  g°°d

O  T_T .1

from  the  shoare. Then  we  weighed  and  went  in  with  our ar  0U1'

ship. Then  our  Boate  went  on  Land  with  our  Net  to

Fish,  and  caught  ten  great  Mullets,  of  a  foot  and  a  halfe

long  a  peece,  and  a  Ray  as  great  as  foure  men  could  hale

into  the  ship. So  wee  trimmed  our  Boate  and  rode  still

all  day. At  night  the  wind  blew  hard  at  the  North-west,

and  our  Anchor  came  home,  and  wee  drove  on  shoare,

but  tooke  no  hurt,  thanked  bee  God,  for  the  ground  is

soft  sand  and  Oze. This  day  the  people  of  the  Countrey  The  people  of

came  aboord  of  us,  seeming  very  glad  of  our  comming,  the  Countrey

and  brought  greene  Tabacco,  and  gave  us  of  it  for  Knives  c°/"e  a  °01  '
00  ..  >  o  i  t/iey  (ire  very

and  Beads. They  goe  in  Deere  skins  loose,  well  dressed.  c-wui
They  have  yellow  Copper. They  desire  Cloathes, and  Yellow
are  very  civill. They  have  great  store  of  Maiz  or  Indian  Copper.
Wheate,  whereof  they  make  good  Bread. The  Countrey
is  full  of  great  and  tall  Oakes.  Tall  Oakes.

The  fifth,  in  the  morning  as  soone  as  the  day  was  light,
the  wind  ceased  and  the  Flood  came. So  we  heaved  off
our  ship  againe  into  five  fathoms  water, and sent  our
Boate  to  sound  the  Bay,  and  we  found  that  there  was  three  The  great  Bay
fathoms  hard  by  the  Souther  shoare. Our  men  went  on  <»  40-  degrees
Land  there,  and  saw  great  store  of  Men,  Women  and  an?  3°«
Children,  who  gave  them  Tabacco  at  their  comming  on
Land. So  they  went  up  into  the  Woods,  and  saw  great
store  of  very  goodly  Oakes, and some  Currants. For  Dryed
one  of  them  came  aboord  and  brought  some  dryed,  and  Currants.

363

A.D.

1609.

Mantles  of
Feathers,
Furs.
Hempe.
Red  Copper.

Another
River  four e
leagues  to  the
Northward.

A  narrow
River  to  the
Westward.

Colman  slaine,
and  two  more
hurt.

Colmans
Point.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

gave  me  some,  which  were  sweet  and  good.  This  day
many  of  the  people  came  aboord,  some  in  Mantles  of
Feathers,  and  some  in  Skinnes  of  divers  sorts  of  good
Furres.  Some  women  also  came  to  us  with  Hempe.
They  had  red  Copper  Tabacco  pipes,  and  other  things  of
Copper  they  did  weare  about  their  neckes.  At  night  they
went  on  Land  againe,  so  wee  rode  very  quiet,  but  durst
not  trust  them.

The  sixth,  in  the  morning  was  faire  weather,  and  our
Master  sent  John  Colman,  with  foure  other  men  in  our
Boate  over  to  the  North-side,  to  sound  the  other  River,
being  foure  leagues  from  us.  They  found  by  the  way
shoald  water  two  fathoms ;  but  at  the  North  of  the  River
eighteen,  and  twentie  fathoms,  and  very  good  riding  for
Ships  ;  and  a  narrow  River  to  the  Westward  betweene  two
Hands.  The  Lands  they  told  us  were  as  pleasant  with
Grasse  and  Flowers,  and  goodly  Trees,  as  ever  they  had
seene,  and  very  sweet  smells  came  from  them.  So  they
went  in  two  leagues  and  saw  an  open  Sea,  and  returned ;
and  as  they  came  backe,  they  were  set  upon  by  two  Canoes,
the  one  having  twelve,  the  other  fourteene  men.  The
night  came  on,  and  it  began  to  rayne,  so  that  their  Match
went  out ;  and  they  had  one  man  slaine  in  the  fight,  which
was  an  English-man,  named  John  Colman,  with  an  Arrow
shot  into  his  throat,  and  two  more  hurt.  It  grew  so  darke
that  they  could  not  find  the  ship  that  night,  but  labored
too  and  fro  on  their  Oares.  They  had  so  great  a  streame,
that  their  grapnell  would  not  hold  them.

The  seventh,  was  faire,  and  by  ten  of  the  clocke  they
returned  aboord  the  ship,  and  brought  our  dead  man  with
them,  whom  we  carryed  on  Land  and  buryed,  and  named
the  point  after  his  name,  Colmans  Point.  Then  we  hoysed
in  our  Boate,  and  raised  her  side  with  waste  boords  for
defence  of  our  men.  So  we  rode  still  all  night,  having
good  regard  to  our  Watch.

The  eight,  was  very  faire  weather,  wee  rode  still  very
quietly.  The  people  came  aboord  us,  and  brought
Tabacco  and  Indian  Wheate,  to  exchange  for  Knives  and

364

HENRY HUDSON

Beades,  and  offered  us  no  violence.  So  we  fitting  up  our
Boate  did  marke  them,  to  see  if  they  would  make  any
shew  of  the  Death  of  our  man  ;  which  they  did  not.

The  ninth,  faire  weather.  In  the  morning,  two  great
Canoes  came  aboord  full  of  men  ;  the  one  with  their  Bowes
and  Arrowes,  and  the  other  in  shew  of  buying  of  Knives,
to  betray  us ;  but  we  perceived  their  intent.  Wee  tooke
two  of  them  to  have  kept  them,  and  put  red  Coates  on
them,  and  would  not  suffer  the  other  to  come  neere  us.
So  they  went  on  Land  and  two  other  came  aboord  in  a
Canoe :  we  tooke  the  one  and  let  the  other  goe ;  but  hee
which  wee  had  taken,  got  up  and  leapt  over-boord.  Then
we  weighed  and  went  off  into  the  channell  of  the  River,
and  Anchored  there  all  night.

The  tenth,  faire  weather,  we  rode  still  till  twelve  of  the
clocke.  Then  we  weighed  and  went  over,  and  found  it
shoald  all  the  middle  of  the  River,  for  wee  could  finde  but
two  fathoms  and  a  halfe,  and  three  fathomes  for  the  space
of  a  league ;  then  wee  came  to  three  fathomes,  and  foure
fathomes,  and  so  to  seven  fathomes,  and  Anchored,  and
rode  all  night  in  soft  Ozie  ground. The  banke  is  Sand.

The  eleventh,  was  faire  and  very  hot  weather.  At  one
of  the  clocke  in  the  after-noone,  wee  weighed  and  went
into  the  River,  the  wind  at  South  South-west,  little  winde.
Our  soundings  were  seven,  sixe,  five,  sixe,  seven,  eight,
nine,  ten,  twelve,  thirteene,  and  fourteene  fathomes.  Then
it  shoalded  againe,  and  came  to  five  fathomes.  Then  wee
Anchored,  and  saw  that  it  was  a  very  good  Harbour  for
all  windes,  and  rode  all  night.  The  people  of  the  Countrey
came  aboord  of  us,  making  shew  of  love,  and  gave  us
Tabacco  and  Indian  Wheat,  and  departed  for  that  night ;
but  we  durst  not  trust  them.

The  twelfth,  very  faire  and  hot.  In  the  after-noone  at
two  of  the  clocke  wee  weighed,  the  winde  being  variable,
betweene  the  North  and  the  North-west.  So  we  turned
into  the  River  two  leagues  and  Anchored.  This  morning
at  our  first  rode  in  the  River,  there  came  eight  and  twentie
Canoes  full  of  men,  women  and  children  to  betray  us :

365

A.D.
1609.

Treacherous
Savages.

Good
Harbour.

[III.ili.593.]
28.  Canoes
full  of  men.

A.D.

1609.

Oysters  and
Beams.

Copper  Pipes.

Variation  13.
degrees.

The  River  a
mile  broad.

Very  high  and

mountainous

Land.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

but  we  saw  their  intent,  and  suffered  none  of  them  to  come
aboord  of  us.  At  twelve  of  the  clocke  they  departed.
They  brought  with  them  Oysters  and  Beanes,  whereof  wee
bought  some.  They  have  great  Tabacco  pipes  of  yellow
Copper,  and  Pots  of  Earth  to  dresse  their  meate  in.  It
floweth  South-east  by  South  within.

The  thirteenth,  faire  weather,  the  wind  Northerly.  At
seven  of  the  clocke  in  the  morning,  as  the  floud  came  we
weighed,  and  turned  foure  miles  into  the  River.  The
tide  being  done  wee  anchored.  Then  there  came  foure
Canoes  aboord  :  but  we  suffered  none  of  them  to  come  into
our  ship.  They  brought  great  store  of  very  good  Oysters
aboord,  which  we  bought  for  trifles.  In  the  night  I  set
the  variation  of  the  Compasse,  and  found  it  to  be  13.
degrees.  In  the  after-noone  we  weighed,  and  turned  in
with  the  floud,  two  leagues  and  a  halfe  further,  and
anchored  all  night,  and  had  five  fathoms  soft  Ozie  ground,
and  had  an  high  point  of  Land,  which  shewed  out  to  us,
bearing  North  by  East  five  leagues  off  us.

The  fourteenth,  in  the  morning  being  very  faire  weather,
the  wind  South-east,  we  sayled  up  the  River  twelve
leagues,  and  had  five  fathoms,  and  five  fathoms  and  a
quarter  lesse  ;  and  came  to  a  Streight  betweene  two  Points,
and  had  eight,  nine,  and  ten  fathoms :  and  it  trended
North-east  by  North,  one  league  :  and  wee  had  twelve,
thirteene  and  fourteene  fathomes.  The  River  is  a  mile
broad  :  there  is  very  high  Land  on  both  sides.  Then  wee
went  up  North-west,  a  league  and  an  halfe  deepe  water.
Then  North-east  by  North  five  miles ;  then  North-west
by  North  two  leagues,  and  anchored.  The  Land  grew
very  high  and  Mountainous. The  River  is  full  of  fish.

The  fifteenth,  in  the  morning  was  misty  untill  the  Sunne
arose :  then  it  cleered.  So  wee  weighed  with  the  wind
at  South,  and  ran  up  into  the  River  twentie  leagues,
passing  by  high  Mountaines.  Wee  had  a  very  good  depth,
as  sixe,  seven,  eight,  nine,  ten,  twelve,  and  thirteene
fathoms,  and  great  store  of  Salmons  in  the  River.  This
morning  our  two  Savages  got  out  of  a  Port  and  swam

366

HENRY HUDSON  a.d.

1609.

away. After  we  were  under  sayle,  they  called  to  us  in

scorne. At  night  we  came  to  other  Mountaines,  which

lie  from  the  Rivers  side. There  wee  found  very  loving  Very  loving

people,  and  very  old  men  : where  wee  were  well  used.  P*°pt*.

Our  Boat  went  to  fish,  and  caught  great  store  of  very

good  fish.

The  sixteenth,  faire  and  very  hot  weather.  In  the
morning  our  Boat  went  againe  to  fishing,  but  could  catch
but  few,  by  reason  their  Canoes  had  beene  there  all  night.
This  morning  the  people  came  aboord,  and  brought  us
eares  of  Indian  Corne,  and  Pompions,  and  Tabacco  :  which  Maiz,
wee  bought  for  trifles.  Wee  rode  still  all  day,  and  filled  P°mpions  and
fresh  water ;  at  night  wee  weighed  and  went  two  leagues
higher,  and  had  shoald  water :  so  wee  anchored  till  day.

The  seventeenth,  faire  Sun-shining  weather,  and  very
hot.  In  the  morning  as  soone  as  the  Sun  was  up,  we  set
sayle,  and  ran  up  sixe  leagues  higher,  and  found  shoalds  in  Should*  and
the  middle  of  the  channell,  and  small  Hands,  but  seven  small  Hands.
fathoms  water  on  both  sides.  Toward  night  we  borrowed
so  neere  the  shoare,  that  we  grounded  :  so  we  layed  out
our  small  anchor,  and  heaved  off  againe.  Then  we
borrowed  on  the  banke  in  the  channell,  and  came  aground
againe ;  while  the  floud  ran  we  heaved  off  againe,  and
anchored  all  night.

The  eighteenth,  in  the  morning  was  faire  weather,  and
we  rode  still.  In  the  after-noone  our  Masters  Mate  went
on  land  with  an  old  Savage,  a  Governour  of  the  Countrey  ;
who  carried  him  to  his  house,  and  made  him  good  cheere.
The  nineteenth,  was  faire  and  hot  weather :  at  the  floud
being  neere  eleven  of  the  clocke,  wee  weighed,  and  ran
higher  up  two  leagues  above  the  Shoalds,  and  had  no  lesse
water  then  five  fathoms :  wee  anchored,  and  rode  in  eight
fathomes.  The  people  of  the  Countrie  came  flocking
aboord,  and  brought  us  Grapes,  and  Pompions,  which  wee  Grapes  and
bought  for  trifles.  And  many  brought  us  Bevers  skinnes,  Pompions:
and  Otters  skinnes,  which  wee  bought  for  Beades,  Knives,  Beavers  ^nd

1TT1  r<  11  1 1 • 1

and  Hatchets. So  we  rode  there  all  night.

The  twentieth,  in  the  morning  was  faire  weather. Our

367

Otters  skins.

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

Masters  Mate  with  foure  men  more  went  up  with  our
Boat  to  sound  the  River,  and  found  two  leagues  above  us
but  two  fathomes  water,  and  the  channell  very  narrow ;
and  above  that  place  seven  or  eight  fathomes.  Toward
night  they  returned :  and  we  rode  still  all  night.  The
one  and  twentieth,  was  faire  weather,  and  the  wind  all
Southerly :  we  determined  yet  once  more  to  goe  farther
up  into  the  River,  to  trie  what  depth  and  breadth  it  did
beare ;  but  much  people  resorted  aboord,  so  wee  went  not
this  day.  Our  Carpenter  went  on  land,  and  made  a  Fore-
yard.  And  our  Master  and  his  Mate  determined  to  trie
some  of  the  chiefe  men  of  the  Countrey,  whether  they  had
any  treacherie  in  them.  So  they  tooke  them  downe  into
the  Cabbin,  and  gave  them  so  much  Wine  and  Aqua  vitae,
that  they  were  all  merrie :  and  one  of  them  had  his  wife
with  him,  which  sate  so  modestly,  as  any  of  our  Countrey
women  would  doe  in  a  strange  place.  In  the  end  one  of
them  was  drunke,  which  had  beene  aboord  of  our  ship  all
the  time  that  we  had  beene  there :  and  that  was  strange
to  them ;  for  they  could  not  tell  how  to  take  it.  The
Canoes  and  folke  went  all  on  shoare :  but  some  of  them
came  againe,  and  brought  stropes  of  Beades :  some  had
sixe,  seven,  eight,  nine,  ten ;  and  gave  him.  So  he  slept
all  night  quietly.

The  two  and  twentieth,  was  faire  weather  :  in  the  morn-

[III.iii.594.]  ing  our  Masters  Mate  and  foure  more  of  the  companie
went  up  with  our  Boat  to  sound  the  River  higher  up.
The  people  of  the  Countrey  came  not  aboord  till  noone :
but  when  they  came,  and  saw  the  Savages  well,  they  were
glad.  So  at  three  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-noone  they
came  aboord,  and  brought  Tabacco, and  more  Beades,

Oration.  and  gave  them  to  our  Master,  and  made  an  Oration,  and

shewed  him  all  the  Countrey  round  about.  Then  they
sent  one  of  their  companie  on  land,  who  presently  returned,
and  brought  a  great  Platter  full  of  Venison,  dressed  by
themselves  ;  and  they  caused  him  to  eate  with  them  :  then
they  made  him  reverence,  and  departed  all  save  the  old
man  that  lay  aboord. This  night  at  ten  of  the  clocke,  our

368

HENRY HUDSON

Boat  returned  in  a  showre  of  raine  from  sounding  of  the
River ;  and  found  it  to  bee  at  an  end  for  shipping  to  goe
in.  For  they  had  beene  up  eight  or  nine  leagues,  and
found  but  seven  foot  water,  and  unconstant  soundings.

The  three  and  twentieth,  faire  weather.  At  twelve  of
the  clocke  wee  weighed,  and  went  downe  two  leagues  to
a  shoald  that  had  two  channels,  one  on  the  one  side,  and
another  on  the  other,  and  had  little  wind,  whereby  the  tide
layed  us  upon  it.  So,  there  wee  sate  on  ground  the  space
of  an  houre  till  the  floud  came.  Then  we  had  a  little  gale
of  wind  at  the  West.  So  wee  got  our  ship  into  deepe
water,  and  rode  all  night  very  wTell.

The  foure  and  twentieth  was  faire  weather :  the  winde
at  the  North-west,  wee  weighed,  and  went  downe  the
River  seven  or  eight  leagues ;  and  at  halfe  ebbe  wee  came
on  ground  on  a  banke  of  Oze  in  the  middle  of  the  River,
and  sate  there  till  the  floud.  Then  wee  went  on  Land,
and  gathered  good  store  of  Chest-nuts.  At  ten  of  the
clocke  wee  came  off  into  deepe  water,  and  anchored.

The  five  and  twentieth  was  faire  weather,  and  the  wind
at  South  a  stiffe  gale.  We  rode  still,  and  went  on  Land
to  walke  on  the  West  side  of  the  River,  and  found  good
ground  for  Corne,  and  other  Garden  herbs,  with  great
store  of  goodly  Oakes,  and  Wal-nut  trees,  and  Chest-nut
trees,  Ewe  trees,  and  trees  of  sweet  wood  in  great
abundance,  and  great  store  of  Slate  for  houses,  and  other
good  stones.

The  sixe  and  twentieth  was  faire  weather,  and  the  wind
at  South  a  stiffe  gale,  wee  rode  still.  In  the  morning  our
Carpenter  went  on  Land  with  our  Masters  Mate,  and
foure  more  of  our  companie  to  cut  wood.  This  morning,
two  Canoes  came  up  the  River  from  the  place  where  we
first  found  loving  people,  and  in  one  of  them  was  the  old
man  that  had  lyen  aboord  of  us  at  the  other  place.  He
brought  another  old  man  with  him,  which  brought  more
stropes  of  Beades,  and  gave  them  to  our  Master,  and
shewed  him  all  the  Countrey  there  about,  as  though  it
were  at  his  command. So  he  made  the  two  old  men  dine

A.D.

1609.

End  of  the
Rivers  Navi-
gablenesse.

They  returne
downe  the
River.

Store  of
Chestnuts.

Okes,  Wal-nut
trees,
Chestnut
trees,  Ewe
trees,  Cedar
trees,  &c.

XIII

369

2  A

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

with  him,  and  the  old  mans  wife  :  for  they  brought  two
old  women,  and  two  young  maidens  of  the  age  of  sixteene
or  seventeene  yeeres  with  them,  who  behaved  themselves
very  modestly.  Our  Master  gave  one  of  the  old  men  a
Knife,  and  they  gave  him  and  us  Tabacco.  And  at  one
of  the  clocke  they  departed  downe  the  River,  making
signes  that  wee  should  come  downe  to  them  ;  for  wee  were
within  two  leagues  of  the  place  where  they  dwelt.

The  seven  and  twentieth,  in  the  morning  was  faire
weather,  but  much  wind  at  the  North,  we  weighed  and
set  our  fore  top-sayle,  and  our  ship  would  not  flat,  but  ran
on  the  Ozie  banke  at  halfe  ebbe.  Wee  layed  out  anchor
to  heave  her  off,  but  could  not.  So  wee  sate  from  halfe
ebbe  to  halfe  floud  :  then  wee  set  our  fore-sayle  and  mayne
top-sayle,  and  got  downe  sixe  leagues.  The  old  man  came
aboord,  and  would  have  had  us  anchor,  and  goe  on  Land
to  eate  with  him :  but  the  wind  being  faire,  we  would  not
yeeld  to  his  request ;  So  hee  left  us,  being  very  sorrowfull
for  our  departure.  At  five  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-noone,
the  wind  came  to  the  South  South-west.  So  wee  made  a
boord  or  two,  and  anchored  in  fourteene  fathomes  water.
Then  our  Boat  went  on  shoare  to  fish  right  against  the
ship.  Our  Masters  Mate  and  Boat-swaine,  and  three
more  of  the  companie  went  on  land  to  fish,  but  could  not
finde  a  good  place.  They  tooke  foure  or  five  and  twentie
Mullets,  Breames,  Bases,  and  Barbils ;  and  returned  in
an  houre. We  rode  still  all  night.

The  eight  and  twentieth,  being  faire  weather,  as  soone  as
the  day  was  light,  wee  weighed  at  halfe  ebbe,  and  turned
downe  two  leagues  belowe  water ;  for,  the  streame  doth
runne  the  last  quarter  ebbe :  then  we  anchored  till  high
water.  At  three  of  the  clocke  in  the  after-noone  we
weighed,  and  turned  downe  three  leagues,  untill  it  was
darke :  then  wee  anchored.

The  nine  and  twentieth  was  drie  close  weather :  the
wind  at  South,  and  South  and  by  West,  we  weighed  early
in  the  morning,  and  turned  downe  three  leagues  by  a  lowe
water,  and  anchored  at  the  lower  end  of  the  long  Reach ;

37°

HENRY HUDSON

for  it  is  sixe  leagues  long.  Then  there  came  certaine
Indians  in  a  Canoe  to  us,  but  would  not  come  aboord.
After  dinner  there  came  the  Canoe  with  other  men,  whereof
three  came  aboord  us.  They  brought  Indian  Wheat,
which  wee  bought  for  trifles.  At  three  of  the  clocke  in
the  after-noone  wee  weighed,  as  soone  as  the  ebbe  came,
and  turned  downe  to  the  edge  of  the  Mountaines,  or  the
Northermost  of  the  Mountaines,  and  anchored  :  because
the  high  Land  hath  many  Points,  and  a  narrow  channell,
and  hath  many  eddie  winds.  So  we  rode  quietly  all  night
in  seven  fathoms  water.

The  thirtieth  was  faire  weather,  and  the  wind  at  South-
east a  stifFe  gale  betweene  the  Mountaynes.  We  rode
still  the  after-noone.  The  people  of  the  Countrey  came
aboord  us,  and  brought  some  small  skinnes  with  them,
which  we  bought  for  Knives  and  Trifles.  This  a  very
pleasant  place  to  build  a  Towne  on.  The  Road  is  very
neere,  and  very  good  for  all  winds,  save  an  East  North-east
wind.  The  Mountaynes  looke  as  if  some  Metall  or
Minerall  were  in  them.  For  the  Trees  that  grow  on  them
were  all  blasted,  and  some  of  them  barren  with  few  or  no
Trees  on  them.  The  people  brought  a  stone  aboord  like
to  Emery  (a  stone  used  by  Glasiers  to  cut  Glasse)  it  would
cut  Iron  or  Steele :  Yet  being  bruised  small,  and  water
put  to  it,  it  made  a  colour  like  blacke  Lead  glistering ;
It  is  also  good  for  Painters  Colours.  At  three  of  the
clocke  they  departed,  and  we  rode  still  all  night.

The  first  of  October,  faire  weather,  the  wind  variable
betweene  the  West  and  the  North.  In  the  morning  we
weighed  at  seven  of  the  clocke  with  the  ebbe,  and  got
downe  below  the  Mountaynes,  which  was  seven  leagues.
Then  it  fell  calme  and  the  floud  was  come,  and  wee
anchored  at  twelve  of  the  clocke.  The  people  of  the
Mountaynes  came  aboord  us,  wondring  at  our  ship  and
weapons.  We  bought  some  small  skinnes  of  them  for
Trifles.  This  after-noone,  one  Canoe  kept  hanging  under
our  sterne  with  one  man  in  it,  which  we  could  not  keepe
from  thence,  who  got  up  by  our  Rudder  to  the  Cabin

371

A..D.

1609.

Mountaines .

[in.iii.59s.]

Small  skins.

A  pleasant
place  to  build
a  Towne  on.
Likelihood  of
Minerals.

October.

A.D.

1609.

Treacherle  of
these  Savages,

A  skirmish
and  slaughter
of  the  Savages.

A  Myne  of

Copper  or

Silver.

The  Countrey

of  Manna-

hata.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

window,  and  stole  out  my  Pillow,  and  two  Shirts,  and  two
Bandeleeres.  Our  Masters  Mate  shot  at  him,  and  strooke
him  on  the  brest,  and  killed  him.  Whereupon  all  the  rest
fled  away,  some  in  their  Canoes,  and  so  leapt  out  of  them
into  the  water.  We  manned  our  Boat,  and  got  our  things
againe.  Then  one  of  them  that  swamme  got  hold  of  our
Boat,  thinking  to  overthrow  it.  But  our  Cooke  tooke  a
Sword,  and  cut  off  one  of  his  hands,  and  he  was  drowned.
By  this  time  the  ebbe  was  come,  and  we  weighed  and  got
downe  two  leagues,  by  that  time  it  was  darke.  So  we
anchored  in  foure  fathomes  water,  and  rode  well.

The  second,  faire  weather.  At  breake  of  day  wee
weighed,  the  wind  being  at  North-west,  and  got  downe
seven  leagues ;  then  the  floud  was  come  strong,  so  we
anchored.  Then  came  one  of  the  Savages  that  swamme
away  from  us  at  our  going  up  the  River  with  many  other,
thinking  to  betray  us.  But  wee  perceived  their  intent,
and  suffered  none  of  them  to  enter  our  ship.  Whereupon
two  Canoes  full  of  men,  with  their  Bowes  and  Arrowes
shot  at  us  after  our  sterne :  in  recompence  whereof  we
discharged  sixe  Muskets,  and  killed  two  or  three  of  them.
Then  above  an  hundred  of  them  came  to  a  point  of  Land
to  shoot  at  us.  There  I  shot  a  Falcon  at  them,  and  killed
two  of  them :  whereupon  the  rest  fled  into  the  Woods.
Yet  they  manned  off  another  Canoe  with  nine  or  ten  men,
which  came  to  meet  us.  So  I  shot  at  it  also  a  Falcon,  and
shot  it  through,  and  killed  one  of  them.  Then  our  men
with  their  Muskets,  killed  three  or  foure  more  of  them.
So  they  went  their  way,  within  a  while  after,  wee  got
downe  two  leagues  beyond  that  place,  and  anchored  in  a
Bay,  cleere  from  all  danger  of  them  on  the  other  side  of
the  River,  where  we  saw  a  very  good  piece  of  ground :
and  hard  by  it  there  was  a  Cliffe,  that  looked  of  the  colour
of  a  white  greene,  as  though  it  were  either  Copper,  or
Silver  Myne :  and  I  thinke  it  to  be  one  of  them,  by  the
Trees  that  grow  upon  it.  For  they  be  all  burned,  and  the
other  places  are  greene  as  grasse,  it  is  on  that  side  of  the
River  that  is  called  Manna-hata. There  we  saw  no  people

372

HENRY HUDSON  a.d.

1609.

to  trouble  us : and  rode  quietly  all  night,  but  had  much
wind  and  raine.

The  third,  was  very  stormie  ;  the  wind  at  East  North-east.
In  the  morning,  in  a  gust  of  wind  and  raine  our  Anchor
came  home,  and  we  drove  on  ground,  but  it  was  Ozie.
Then  as  we  were  about  to  have  out  an  Anchor,  the  wind
came  to  the  North  North-west,  and  drove  us  off  againe.
Then  we  shot  an  Anchor,  and  let  it  fall  in  foure  fathomes
water,  and  weighed  the  other.  Wee  had  much  wind  and
raine,  with  thicke  weather :  so  we  roade  still  all  night.

The  fourth,  was  faire  weather,  and  the  wind  at  North
North-west,  wee  weighed  and  came  out  of  the  River,  into
which  we  had  runne  so  farre. Within  a  while  after,  wee
came  out  also  of  The  great  mouth  of  the  great  River, The  great
that  runneth  up  to  the  North-west,  borrowing  upon  the mouth  of  the
Norther  side  of  the  same,  thinking  to  have  deepe  water : &reat  Ril'er-
for  wee  had  sounded  a  great  way  with  our  Boat  at  our
first  going  in,  and  found  seven,  six,  and  five  fathomes.
So  we  came  out  that  way,  but  we  were  deceived,  for  we
had  but  eight  foot  &  an  halfe  water :  and  so  to  three,  five,
three,  and  two  fathomes  and  an  halfe. And  then  three,
foure, five, sixe, seven, eight, nine  and ten fathomes.
And  by  twelve  of  the  clocke  we  were  cleere  of  all  the
Inlet. Then  we  tooke  in  our  Boat,  and  set  our  mayne- They  leave  the
sayle  and  sprit-sayle,  and  our  top-sayles,  and  steered  away  Gwf  of
East South-east, and South-east by  East off  into the vir&ma-
mayne  sea :  and  the  Land  on  the  Souther-side  of  the  Bay
or  Inlet,  did  beare  at  noone  West  and  by  South  foure
leagues  from  us.

The  fift,  was  faire  weather,  and  the  wind  variable
betweene  the  North  and  the  East.  Wee  held  on  our
course  South-east  by  East.  At  noone  I  observed  and
found  our  height  to  bee  39.  degrees  30.  minutes.  Our
Compasse  varied  sixe  degrees  to  the  West.

We  continued  our  course  toward  England,  without
seeing  any  Land  by  the  way,  all  the  rest  of  this  moneth
of  October :  And  on  the  seventh  day  of  November,  stilo
novo,  being  Saturday : by  the  Grace  of  God  we  safely

373

A.D.

1609.

PURCHAS HIS PILGBJMES

arrived  in  the  Range  of  Dartmouth  in  Devonshire,  in  the
yeere  1609.

A  prill  17.

[Ill.iii.596.]  Chap. XVII.

An  Abstract  of  the  Journall  of  Master  Henry
Hudson,  for  the  Discoverie  of  the  North-west
Passage,  begunne  the  seventeenth  of  Aprill,
1 6 10.  ended  with  his  end,  being  treacherously
exposed  by  some  of  the  Companie.

He  seventeenth  of  Aprill,  16 10.  we  brake
ground,  and  went  downe  from  Saint
Katharines  Poole,  and  fell  downe  to
Blacke-wall :  and  so  plyed  downe  with
the  ships  to  Lee,  which  was  the  two  and
twentieth  day.

The  two  and  twentieth,  I  caused
Master  Coleburne  to  bee  put  into  a  Pinke,  bound  for
London,  with  my  Letter  to  the  Adventurers,  importing
the  reason  wherefore  I  so  put  him  out  of  the  ship,  and  so
plyed  forth.
May.  The  second  of  May,  the  wind  Southerly,  at  Eeven  we

were  thwart  of  Flamborough  Head.
The  Iks  of  The  fift,  we  were  at  the  lies  of  Orkney,  and  here  I  set

Orkney.  the  North  end  of  the  Needle,  and  the  North  of  the  Flie

all  one.

The  sixt,  wee  were  in  the  latitude  of  59.  degrees  22.
Note.  minutes,  and  there  perceived  that  the  North  end  of  Scot-

land, Orkney,  and  Shotland  are  not  so  Northerly,  as  is
Farre  Hands commonly  set  downe. The  eight  day,  wee  saw  Farre
62  degrees Hands,  in  the  latitude  of  62.  degrees  24.  minutes. The
24.  minutes, ^y^fa  jay,  we  fe\\  wjth  the  Easter  part  of  Island,  and
then  plying  along  the  Souther  part  of  the  Land,  we  came  to
Westmony. Westmony,  being  the  fifteenth  day,  and  still  plyed  about
the  mayne  Hand,  untill  the  last  of  May  with  contrary
winds,  and  we  got  some  Fowles  of  divers  sorts.
June.  The  first  day  of  June,  we  put  to  Sea  out  of  an  Harbour,

374

HENRY HUDSON

in  the  Westermost  part  of  Island,  and  so  plyed  to  the
Westward  in  the  latitude  of  66.  degrees  34.  minutes,  and
the  second  day  plyed  and  found  our  selves  in  65.  degrees
57.  minutes,  with  little  wind  Easterly.

The  third  day,  wee  found  our  selves  in  65.  degrees  30.
minutes,  with  winde  at  North-east,  a  little  before  this  we
sayled  neere  some  Ice.

The  fourth  day,  we  saw  Groneland  over  the  Ice  per-
fectly, and  this  night  the  Sunne  went  downe  due  North,
and  rose  North  North-east.  So  plying  the  fift  day,  we
were  in  65.  degrees,  still  encombred  with  much  Ice,  which
hung  upon  the  Coast  of  Groneland.

The  ninth  day,  wee  were  off  Frobishers  Streights  with
the  winde  Northerly,  and  plyed  unto  the  South-westwards
untill  the  fifteenth  day.

The  fifteenth  day,  we  were  in  sight  of  the  land,  in
latitude  59.  degrees  27.  minutes,  which  was  called  by
Captayne  John  Davis,  Desolation,  and  found  the  errour
of  the  former  laying  downe  of  that  Land  :  and  then  run-
ning to  the  North-westward  untill  the  twentieth  day,  wee
found  the  ship  in  60.  degrees  42.  minutes,  and  saw
much  Ice,  and  many  Riplings  or  Over-fals,  and  a
strong  streame  setting  from  East  South-east,  to  West
North-west.

The  one  and  twentie,  two  and  twentie,  and  three  and
twentie  dayes,  with  the  winde  variable,  we  plyed  to  the
North-westward  in  sight  of  much  Ice,  into  the  height  of
62.  degrees  29.  minutes.

The  foure  and  twentie,  and  five  and
sayling  to  the  West-ward  about  midnight
North,  which  was  suddenly  lost  againe.
still  to  the  West- ward  in  62.  degrees  17.

The  fift  of  July,  wee  plyed  up  upon  the  Souther  side,
troubled  with  much  Ice  in  seeking  the  shoare  untill  the
fift  day  of  July,  and  we  observed  that  day  in  59.  degrees
16.  minutes.  Then  we  plyed  off  the  shoare  againe,  untill
the  eight  day,  and  then  found  the  height  of  the  Pole  in
60.  degrees  no  minutes. Here  we  saw  the  Land  from

375

A.D.
l6lO.

twentie  dayes,
wee  saw  Land
So  wee  ranne
minutes.

Groneland.

Frobishers
Streights.

Desolation.

A  current
West  North-
west.

East  entrance
into  the
Streights.

July.

A.D.

l6lO.

Desire
provoketh.

lies  of  Gods
Mercies.

Hold  with
Hope.

A  mightie
growne  Sea.

[III.iii.597.

Magna
Britannia.

August.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  North-west  by  West,  halfe  Northerly  unto  the  South-
west by  West,  covered  with  snow,  a  Champaigne  Land,
and  called  it,  Desire  provoketh.

We  still  plyed  up  to  the  Westward,  as  the  Land  and
Ice  would  suffer  untill  the  eleventh  day ;  when  fearing  a
storme,  we  anchored  by  three  Rockie  Hands  in  uncertayne
depth,  betweene  two  and  nine  fathomes ;  and  found  it  an
Harbour  unsumcient  by  reason  of  sunken  Rockes,  one  of
which  was  next  morning  two  fathomes  above  water.  Wee
called  them  the  lies  of  Gods  Mercies.  The  water  floweth
here  better  then  foure  fathomes.  The  Floud  commeth
from  the  North,  flowing  eight  the  change  day.  The
latitude  in  this  place  is  62.  degrees  9.  minutes.  Then
plying  to  the  South-westward  the  sixteenth  day,  wee  were
in  the  latitude  of  58.  degrees  50.  minutes,  but  found  our
selves  imbayed  with  Land,  and  had  much  Ice :  and  we
plyed  to  the  North-westward  untill  the  nineteenth  day,
and  then  wee  found  by  observation  the  height  of  the  Pole
in  61.  degrees  24.  minutes,  and  saw  the  Land,  which
I  named,  Hold  with  Hope.  Hence  I  plyed  to  the  North-
westward still,  untill  the  one  and  twentieth  day,  with  the
wind  variable.  Heere  I  found  the  Sea  more  growne,  then
any  wee  had  since  wee  left  England.

The  three  and  twentieth  day,  by  observation  the  height
of  the  Pole  was  61.  degrees  33.  minutes.  The  five  and
twentieth  day,  we  saw  the  Land ;  and  named  it  Magna
Britannia.  The  sixe  and  twentieth  day,  wee  observed  and
found  the  latitude  in  62.  degrees  44.  minutes.  The  eight
and  twentieth  day,  we  were  in  the  height  of  63.  degrees
10.  minutes,  and  plyed  Southerly  of  the  West.  The  one
and  thirtieth  day,  plying  to  the  Westward,  at  noone  wee
found  our  selves  in  62.  degrees  24.  minutes.

The  first  of  August,  we  had  sight  of  the  Northerne
shoare,  from  the  North  by  East  to  the  West  by  South  off
us  :  the  North  part  twelve  leagues,  and  the  Wester  part
twentie  leagues  from  us  :  and  we  had  no  ground  there  at
one  hundred  and  eightie  fathomes.  And  I  thinke  I  saw
Land  on  the  Sunne  side,  but  could  not  make  it  perfectly,

376

HENRY HUDSON

bearing  East  North-east.  Here  I  found  the  latitude  62.
degrees  50.  minutes.

The  second  day,  we  had  sight  of  a  faire  Head-land,  on
the  Norther  shoare  six  leagues  off,  which  I  called  Salis-
buries  Fore-land :  we  ranne  from  them  West  South-west,
fourteene  leagues  :  In  the  mid-way  of  which  wee  were
suddenly  come  into  a  great  and  whurling  Sea,  whether
caused  by  meeting  of  two  streames,  or  an  Over-fall,  I
know  not.  Thence  sayling  West  and  by  South  seven
leagues  farther,  we  were  in  the  mouth  of  a  Streight  and
sounded,  and  had  no  ground  at  one  hundred  fathomes :
the  Streight  being  there  not  above  two  leagues  broad,  in
the  passage  in  this  Wester  part :  which  from  the  Easter
part  of  Fretum  Davis,  is  distant  two  hundred  and  fiftie
leagues  there  abouts.

The  third  day,  we  put  through  the  narrow  passage,
after  our  men  had  beene  on  Land,  which  had  well  observed
there,  That  the  Floud  did  come  from  the  North,  flowing
by  the  shoare  five  fathomes.  The  head  of  this  entrance
on  the  South  side  I  named  Cape  Worsenholme ;  and  the
head  on  the  North-wester  shoare,  I  called  Cape  Digs.
After  wee  had  sailed  with  an  Easterly  winde,  West  and
by  South  ten  leagues,  the  Land  fell  away  to  the  South-
ward, and  the  other  lies  and  Land  left  us  to  the  Westward.
Then  I  observed  and  found  the  ship  at  noone  in  61.
degrees  20.  minutes,  and  a  Sea  to  the  Westward.

A.D.

161  o.

Salishuries
fore-land.

A  great  and
whurling  Sea.

A  Streight
which  led  us
into  the  deepe
Bay  of  Gods
great  Mercies.

Cape

Worsenholme.
Cape  Digs.

A  larger  Discourse  of  the  same  Voyage,  and  the
successe  thereof,  written  by  Abacuk  Pricket.

E  began  our  Voyage  for  the  North-west  passage ;
the  seventeenth  of  April,  16 10.  Thwart  of
Shepey,  our  Master  sent  Master  Colbert  backe  to
the  Owners  with  his  Letter.  The  next  day  we  weighed
from  hence,  and  stood  for  Harwich,  and  came  thither  the
eight  and  twentieth  of  Aprill.  From  Harwich  we  set
sayle  the  first  of  May,  along  the  Coast  to  the  North,  till
we  came  to  the  lies  of  Orkney,  from  thence  to  the  lies  of

377

Orkney.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.
Farre  lies. Faro,  and  from  thence  to  Island : on  which  we  fell  in  a
Island.  fogge,  hearing  the  Rut  of  the  Sea,  ashoare,  but  saw  not

the  Land  whereupon  our  Master  came  to  an  Anchor.
The  South-east  Heere  we  were  embayed  in  the  South-east  part  of  the
part  of  Island.  Lanci Wee  weighed  and  stood  along  the  Coast,  on  the
West  side  towards  the  North :  but  one  day  being  calme,
we  fell  a  fishing,  and  caught  good  store  of  fish,  as  Cod  and
Ling,  and  Butte,  with  some  other  sorts  that  we  knew  not.
The  next  day,  we  had  a  good  gale  of  wind  at  South-west,
Westmonie and  raysed  the  lies  of  Westmonie,  where  the  King  of
Island.  Denmarke  hath  a  Fortresse,  by  which  we  passed  to  rayse

the  Snow  Hill  foot,  a  Mountayne  so  called  on  the  North-
west part  of  the  Land. But  in  our  course  we  saw  that
Mount  Heda famous  Hill,  Mount  Hecla,  which  cast  out  much  fire,  a
casteth  out signe  of  foule  weather  to  come  in  short  time. Wee  leave
fi1?-  Island  a  sterne  of  us,  and  met  a  Mayne  of  Ice,  which  did

I *  hang  on  the  North  part  of  Island,  and  stretched  downe  to

the  West,  which  when  our  Master  saw,  he  stood  backe
for  Island  to  find  an  Harbour,  which  we  did  on  the  North-
*OrDiraford.  west  part,  called  *  Derefer,  where  wee  killed  good  store  of
Fowle. From  hence  wee  put  to  Sea  againe,  but  (neither
wind  nor  weather  serving)  our  Master  stood  backe  for
this  Harbour  againe,  but  could  not  reach  it,  but  fell  with
another  to  the  South  of  that,  called  by  our  Englishmen,
Lousle  Bay. Lousie  Bay :  where  on  the  shoare  we  found  an  hot  Bath,
An  hot  Bath. ancj  neere  an  Qur  Englishmen  bathed themselves : the

water  was  so  hot  that  it  would  scald  a  Fowle.
The  first  of  From  hence  the  first  of  June  we  put  to  Sea  for  Grone-

land,  but  to  the  West  wee  saw  Land  as  we  thought,  for
which  we  beare  the  best  part  of  a  day,  but  it  proved  but  a
foggie  banke.  So  wee  gave  it  over,  and  made  for  Gron-
land,  which  we  raysed  the  fourth  of  June.  Upon  the
Coast  thereof  hung  good  store  of  Ice,  so  that  our  Master
could  not  attayne  to  the  shoare  by  any  meanes.  The  Land
in  this  part  is  very  Mountaynous,  and  full  of  round  Hils,
like  to  Sugar-loaves,  covered  with  snow.  We  turned  the
Land  on  the  South  side,  as  neere  as  the  Ice  would  suffer
us. Our  course  for  the  most  part  was  betweene  the  West

378

HENRY HUDSON

A.D.
l6l0.

Hand  of
Desolation.

Store  of
Whales.

and  North-west,  till  we  raysed  the  Desolations,  which  is  a
great  Hand  in  the  West  part  of  Groneland.  On  this
Coast  we  saw  store  of  Whales,  and  at  one  time  three  of
them  came  close  by  us,  so  as  wee  could  hardly  shunne
them :  then  two  passing  very  neere,  and  the  third  going
under  our  ship,  wee  received  no  harme  by  them,  praysed
bee  God.

From  the  Desolations  our  Master  made  his  way  North-
west, the  wind  being  against  him,  who  else  would  have  [III.iii.598.]
gone  more  to  the  North  :  but  in  this  course  we  saw  the
first  great  Hand  or  Mountayne  of  Ice,  whereof  after  we
saw  store.  About  the  latter  end  of  June,  we  raysed  Land
to  the  North  of  us,  which  our  Master  tooke  to  bee  that
Hand  which  Master  Davis  setteth  downe  in  his  Chart.
On  the  West  side  of  his  Streight,  our  Master  would  have
gone  to  the  North  of  it,  but  the  wind  would  not  suffer
him :  so  we  fell  to  the  South  of  it,  into  a  great  Rippling
or  over-fall  of  current,  the  which  setteth  to  the  West.
Into  the  current  we  went,  and  made  our  way  to  the  North
of  the  West,  till  we  met  with  Ice  which  hung  on  this
Hand.  Wherefore  our  Master  casting  about,  cleered  him-
selfe  of  this  Ice,  and  stood  to  the  South,  and  then  to  the
West,  through  store  of  floting  Ice,  and  upon  the  Ice  store
of  Seales.  We  gained  a  cleere  Sea,  and  continued  our
course  till  wee  meete  Ice ;  first,  with  great  Hands,  and
then  with  store  of  the  smaller  sort.  Betweene  them  we
made  our  course  North-west,  till  we  met  with  Ice  againe.
But,  in  this  our  going  betweene  the  Ice,  we  saw  one  of  the
great  Hands  of  Ice  overturne,  which  was  a  good  warning
to  us,  not  to  come  nigh  them,  nor  within  their  reach.
Into  the  Ice  wee  put  ahead,  as  betweene  two  Lands.  The
next  day  we  had  a  storme,  and  the  wind  brought  the  Ice
so  fast  upon  us,  that  in  the  end  we  were  driven  to  put
her  into  the  chiefest  of  the  Ice,  and  there  to  let  her  lie.
Some  of  our  men  this  day  fell  sicke,  I  will  not  say  it  was
for  feare,  although  I  saw  small  signe  of  other  griefe.

The  storme  ceasing,  we  stood  out  of  the  Ice,  where  wee
saw  any  cleere  Sea  to  goe  to  :  which  was  sometime  more,

379

Hand  of  Ice
overturned.

Danger  by
Ice.

A.D.
l6lO.

Hudson  entred
100.  leagues
further  then
any  had  been.

Discontents.

Desire
provokes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRTMES

and  sometime  lesse.  Our  course  was  as  the  Ice  did  lye,
sometime  to  the  North,  then  to  the  North-west,  and  then
to  the  West,  and  to  the  South-west :  but  still  inclosed  with
Ice.  Which  when  our  Master  saw,  he  made  his  course  to
the  South,  thinking  to  cleere  himselfe  of  the  Ice  that  way :
but  the  more  he  strove,  the  worse  he  was,  and  the  more
inclosed,  till  we  could  goe  no  further.  Here  our  Master
was  in  despaire,  and  (as  he  told  me  after)  he  thought  he
should  never  have  got  out  of  this  Ice,  but  there  have
perished.  Therefore  hee  brought  forth  his  Card,  and
shewed  all  the  company,  that  hee  was  entred  above  an
hundred  leagues  further  then  ever  any  English  was :  and
left  it  to  their  choice,  whether  they  would  proceed  any
further ;  yea,  or  nay.  Whereupon,  some  were  of  one
minde,  and  some  of  another,  some  wishing  themselves  at
home,  and  some  not  caring  where,  so  they  were  out  of  the
Ice :  but  there  were  some  who  then  spake  words,  which
were  remembred  a  great  while  after.

There  was  one  who  told  the  Master,  that  if  he  had  an
hundred  pounds,  hee  would  give  fourescore  and  ten  to  be
at  home  :  but  the  Carpenter  made  answere,  that  if  hee  had
an  hundred,  hee  would  not  give  ten  upon  any  such  con-
dition, but  would  thinke  it  to  be  as  good  money  as  ever  he
had  any,  and  to  bring  it  as  well  home,  by  the  leave  of
God.  After  many  words  to  no  purpose,  to  worke  we
must  on  all  hands,  to  get  our  selves  out,  and  to  cleere  our
ship.  After  much  labour  and  time  spent,  we  gained
roome  to  turne  our  ship  in,  and  so  by  little  and  little,  to
get  cleere  in  the  Sea  a  league  or  two  off,  our  course  being
North  and  North-west.

In  the  end,  we  raysed  Land  to  the  South-west,  high
Land  and  covered  with  Snow.  Our  Master  named  this
Land,  Desire  provokes.  Lying  here,  wee  heard  the  noyse
of  a  great  over-fall  of  a  tyde,  that  came  out  of  the  Land :
for  now  we  might  see  well,  that  wee  had  beene  embayed
before,  and  time  had  made  us  know,  being  so  well
acquainted  with  the  Ice,  that  when  night,  or  foggie,  or
foule  weather  tooke  us,  we  would  seeke  out  the  broadest

380

HENRY HUDSON  a.d.

1610.

Hand  of  Ice,  and  there  come  to  anchor  and  runne,  and Exercises  of
sport,  and  fill  water  that  stood  on  the  Ice  in  Ponds,  both  &*j™  and
sweete  and  good. But  after  we  had  brought  this  Land  to *j°f
beare  South  of  us,  we  had  the  tyde  and  the  current  to (Difference  of
open  the  Ice,  as  being  carried  first  one  way,  and  then Tydes  and
another : but  in  Bayes  they  lye  as  in  a  pond  without Bayes.
moving. In  this  Bay  where  wee  were  thus  troubled  with
Ice,  wee  saw  many  of  those  Mountaynes  of  Ice  aground, Ice  above  100.
in  sixe  or  sevenscore  fathome  water. In  this  our  course  fathome-
we  saw  a  Beare  upon  a  piece  of  Ice  by  it  selfe,  to  the  which
our  men  gave  chase  with  their  Boat :  but  before  they  came
nigh  her,  the  tyde  had  carried  the  Ice  and  the  Beare  on
it,  and  joyned  it  with  the  other  Ice : so  they  lost  their
labour,  and  came  aboord  againe.

We  continued  our  course  to  the  North-west,  and  raysed
Land  to  the  North  of  our  course,  toward  which  we  made,
and  comming  nigh  it,  there  hung  on  the  Eastermost  point,
many  Hands  of  floting  Ice,  and  a  Beare  on  one  of  them,
which  from  one  to  another  came  towards  us,  till  she  was
readie  to  come  aboord. But  when  she  saw  us  looke  at
her,  she  cast  her  head  betweene  her  hinder  legges,  and
then  dived  under  the Ice : and so  from  one  piece  to
another,  till  she  was  out  of  our  reach. We  stood  along
by  the  Land  on  the  Southside  ahead  of  us,  wee  met  with
Ice  that  hung  on  a  point  of  Land  that  lay  to  the  South,
more  then  this  that  we  came  up  by : which  when  our
Master  saw,  he  stood  in  for  the  shoare. At  the  West  end
of  this  Hand  (for  so  it  is)  we  found  an  Harbour,  and  came
in  (at  a  full  Sea)  over  a  Rocke,  which  had  two  fathome  and A  dangerous
an  halfe  on  it,  and  was  so  much  bare  at  a  low  water. But Rocke.
by  the  great  mercie  of  God,  we  came  to  an  Anchor  cleere
of  it :  and  close  by  it,  our  Master  named  them,  the  lies  of lies  of  Gods
Gods  Mercie. This  is  an  Harbour  for  need,  but  there Mercte-
must  be  care  had  how  they  come  in. Heere  our  Master
sent  me,  and  others  with  me,  to  discover  to  the  North
and  North-west :  and  in  going  from  one  place  to  another,
we  sprung  a  Covey  of  Partridges  which  were  young :  at Partridges.
the  which  Thomas  Woodhouse  shot,  but  killed  only  the

381

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1610.

old one. This Hand is a most barren place, having

[III.iii.599.]  nothing  on  it  but  plashes  of  water  and  riven  Rockes,  as
if  it  were  subject  to  Earthquakes.  To  the  North  there  is
a  great  Bay,  or  Sea  (for  I  know  not  what  it  will  prove)
where  I  saw  a  great  Hand  of  Ice  aground,  betweene  the
two  Lands,  which  with  the  Spring-tide  was  set  afloat,  and
carried  into  this  Bay  or  Sea  to  the  North-westward,  but
came not backe againe, nor within sight. Here wee

Drift-wood. tooke  in  some  Drift  wood  that  we  found  ashoare.

From  hence  we  stood  to  the  South-west,  to  double  the
Land  to  the  West  of  us,  through  much  floting  Ice  :  In  the
end  wee  found  a  cleere  Sea,  and  continued  therein,  till  wee
raysed  Land  to  the  North-west.  Then  our  Master  made
his  course  more  to  the  South  then  before :  but  it  was  not
long  ere  we  met  with  Ice  which  lay  ahead  of  us.  Our
Master  would  have  doubled  this  Ice  to  the  North,  but
could  not ;  and  in  the  end  put  into  it  downe  to  the  South-
west through  much  Ice,  and  then  to  the  South,  where  we
were  embayed  againe.  Our  Master  strove  to  get  the
shoare,  but  could  not,  for  the  great  store  of  Ice  that  was
on  the  coast.  From  out  of  this  Bay,  we  stood  to  the
North,  and  were  soone  out  of  the  Ice  :  then  downe  to  the
South-west,  and  so  to  the  West,  where  we  were  enclosed
(to  our  sight)  with  Land  and  Ice.  For  wee  had  Land
from  the  South  to  the  North-west  on  one  side,  and  from
the  East  to  the  West  on  the  other  side  :  but  the  Land  that
was  to  the  North  of  us,  and  lay  by  East  and  West,  was
but  an  Hand.  On  we  went  till  we  could  goe  no  further
for  Ice :  so  we  made  our  ship  fast  to  the  Ice  which  the
tide  brought  upon  us,  but  when  the  ebbe  came,  the  Ice
did  open,  and  made  way ;  so  as  in  seven  or  eight  houres
we  were  cleere  from  the  Ice,  till  we  came  to  weather ;  but
onely  some  of  the  great  Hands,  that  were  carried  along
with  us  to  the  North-west.

Having  a  cleere  Sea,  our  Master  stood  to  the  West

Three  Capes,  along  by  the  South  shoare,  and  raysed  three  Capes  or
Head-lands,  lying  one  above  another.  The  middlemost
is  an  Hand,  and  maketh  a  Bay  or  Harbour,  which  (I  take)

382

HENRY HUDSON

will  prove  a  good  one.  Our  Master  named  them  Prince
Henries  Cape,  or  Fore-land.  When  we  had  layd  this  we
raised  another,  which  was  the  extreme  point  of  the  Land,
looking  towards  the  North  :  upon  it  are  two  Hills,  but
one  (above  the  rest)  like  an  Hay-cocke ;  which  our  Master
named,  King  James  his  Cape.  To  the  North  of  this,  lie
certaine  Hands,  which  our  Master  named,  Queene  Annes
Cape,  or  Fore-land.  Wee  followed  the  North  shoare  still.
Beyond  the  Kings  Cape  there  is  a  Sound  or  Bay,  that  hath
some  Hands  in  it :  and  this  is  not  to  be  forgotten,  if  need
be.  Beyond  this,  lieth  some  broken  Land,  close  to  the
Mayne,  but  what  it  is  I  know  not :  because  we  passed  by
it  in  the  night.

Wee  stood  to  the  North  to  double  this  Land,  and  after
to  the  West  againe,  till  wee  fell  with  Land  that  stretched
from  the  Mayne,  like  a  shewer  from  the  South  to  the
North,  and  from  the  North  to  the  West,  and  then  downe
to  the  South  againe.  Being  short  of  this  Land,  a  storme
tooke  us,  the  wind  at  West,  we  stood  to  the  North,  and
raised  Land  :  which  when  our  Master  saw,  he  stood  to  the
South  againe  ;  for  he  was  loath  at  any  time  that  wee  should
see  the  North  shoare.  The  storme  continuing,  and  com-
ming  to  the  South  shoare  againe,  our  Master  found
himselfe  shot  to  the  West,  a  great  way,  which  made  him
muse,  considering  his  Leeward  way.  To  the  South-west
of  this  Land,  on  the  Mayne,  there  is  an  high  Hill,  which
our  Master  named  Mount  Charles.  To  the  North  and
beyond  this,  lieth  an  Hand,  that  to  the  East  hath  a  faire
head,  and  beyond  it  to  the  West  other  broken  Land,  which
maketh  a  Bay  within,  and  a  good  Road  may  be  found
there  for  ships.  Our  Master  named  the  first,  Cape
Salsburie.

When  we  had  left  this  to  the  North-east,  we  fell  into  a
Rippling  or  Over-fall  of  a  Current,  which  (at  the  first)  we
tooke  to  bee  a  Shoald :  but  the  Lead  being  cast,  wee  had
no  ground.  On  we  passed  still  in  sight  of  the  South
shoare,  till  we  raised  Land  lying  from  the  Mayne  some
two  leagues. Our  Master  tooke  this  to  bee  a  part  of  the

383

A.D.

l6lO.
Prince
Henries  Cape.

King  James
his  Cape.
Queene  Jnnes
Cape.

Note.

Mount
Charles.

Cape
Salsburie.

A.D.
l6lO.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Worsenhams
Cape.

Deere.

Mayne  of  the  North  Land ;  but  it  is  an  Hand,  the  North
side  stretching  out  to  the  West  more  then  the  South.
This  Hand  hath  a  faire  Head  to  the  East,  and  very  high
Deepes  Cape.  Land,  which  our  Master  named  Deepes  Cape :  and  the
Land  on  the  South  side,  now  falling  away  to  the  South,
makes  another  Cape  or  Head-land,  which  our  Master
named,  Worsenhams  Cape.  When  wee  were  nigh  the
North  or  Hand  Cape,  our  Master  sent  the  Boat  ashoare,
with  my  selfe  (who  had  the  charge)  and  the  Carpenter,
and  divers  others,  to  discover  to  the  West  and  North-
west, and  to  the  South-west :  but  we  had  further  to  it  then
we  thought ;  for  the  Land  is  very  high,  and  we  were  over-
taken with  a  storme  of  Raine,  Thunder  and  Lightning.
But  to  it  we  came  on  the  North-east  side,  and  up  we  got
from  one  Rocke  to  another,  till  we  came  to  the  highest  of
that  part.  Here  we  found  some  plaine  ground,  and  saw
some  Deere ;  as  first,  foure  or  five,  and  after,  a  dozen  or
sixteene  in  an  Herd,  but  could  not  come  nigh  them  with  a
Musket  shot.

Thus,  going  from  one  place  to  another,  wee  saw  to  the
West  of  us  an  high  Hill  above  all  the  rest,  it  being  nigh
us :  but  it  proved  further  off  then  we  made  account ;  for,
when  wee  came  to  it,  the  Land  was  so  steepe  on  the  East
and  North-east  parts,  that  wee  could  not  get  unto  it.  To
the  South-west  we  saw  that  wee  might,  and  towards  that
part  wee  went  along  by  the  side  of  a  great  Pond  of  water,
which  lieth  under  the  East  side  of  this  Hill :  and  there
runneth  out  of  it  a  streame  of  water,  as  much  as  would
drive  an  over-shot  Mill :  which  falleth  downe  from  an
high  Cliffe  into  the  Sea  on  the  South  side.  In  this  place
great  store  of  Fowle  breed,  and  there  is  the  best  Grasse
that  I  had  seene  since  we  came  from  England.  Here  wee
found  Sorell,  and  that  which  wee  call  Scurvy-grasse,  in
great  abundance.  Passing  along  wee  saw  some  round
Hills  of  stone,  like  to  Grasse  cockes,  which  at  the  first  I
tooke  to  be  the  worke  of  some  Christian.  Wee  passed
by  them,  till  we  came  to  the  South  side  of  the  Hill ;  we
went  unto  them,  and  there  found  more ;  and  being  nigh

384

Store  of  fowle
and  grasse.

Sorell  and
Scurvy  grasse
[III.ii1.600.'

HENRY HUDSON  a.d.

1610.

them, I turned off the uppermost stone, and found

them  hollow  within,  and  full  of  Fowles  hanged  by  their  Bowles  hanged.

neckes. Then  Greene,  and  I,  went  to  fetch  the

Boat to the South side, while Robert Billet and hee

got  downe  a  Valley  to  the  Sea  side,  where  wee  tooke

them  in.

Our  Master  (in  this  time)  came  in  betweene  the  two
Lands,  and  shot  off  some  Peeces  to  call  us  aboord ;  for  it
was  a  fogge.  Wee  came  aboord,  and  told  him  what  we
had  seene,  and  perswaded  him  to  stay  a  day  or  two  in  this
place,  telling  him  what  refreshing  might  there  bee  had :
but  by  no  meanes  would  he  stay,  who  was  not  pleased  with
the  motion.  So  we  left  the  Fowle,  and  lost  our  way
downe  to  the  South-west,  before  they  went  in  sight  of  the
Land,  which  now  beares  to  the  East  from  us,  being  the
same  mayne  Land  that  wee  had  all  this  while  followed.
Now,  we  had  lost  the  sight  of  it,  because  it  falleth  away
to  the  East,  after  some  five  and  twenty  or  thirty  leagues.
Now  we  came  to  the  shallow  water,  wherewith  wee  were
not  acquainted  since  we  came  from  Island ;  now  we  came
into  broken  ground  and  Rockes,  through  which  we  passed
downe  to  the  South.  In  this  our  course  we  had  a  storme,
and  the  water  did  shoald  apace.  Our  Master  came  to  an
anchor  in  fifteene  fathoms  water.

Wee  weighed  and  stood  to  the  South-east,  because  the
Land  in  this  place  did  lie  so.  When  we  came  to  the  point
of  the  West  Land  (for  we  now  had  Land  on  both  sides  of
us)  we  came  to  an  anchor.  Our  Master  sent  the  Boat
ashoare,  to  see  what  that  Land  was,  and  whether  there
were  any  way  through.  They  soone  returned,  and  shewed
that  beyond  the  point  of  Land  to  the  South,  there  was  a
large  Sea.  This  Land  on  the  West  side,  was  a  very
narrow  Point.  Wee  weighed  from  hence,  and  stood  in
for  this  Sea  betweene  the  two  Lands,  which  (in  this  place)
is  not  two  leagues  broad  downe  to  the  South,  for  a  great
way  in  sight  of  the  East  shoare.  In  the  end  we  lost  sight
thereof,  and  saw  it  not  till  we  came  to  the  bottome  of  the
Bay,  into  sixe  or  seven  fathomes  water.  Hence  we  stood
xiii  385  2  B

A.D.

r6io.

Discord:  see
Widhouse  his
Relations
following.

Michaelmasse
Day,  and
Bay.

Anchor  lost.

Sea  of  two
colours.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

up  to  the  North  by  the  West  shoare,  till  wee  came  to  an
Hand  in  53.  where  we  tooke  in  water  and  ballast.

From  hence  wee  passed  towards  the  North :  but  some
two  or  three  dayes  after  (reasoning  concerning  our  com-
ming  into  this  Bay,  and  going  out)  our  Master  tooke
occasion  to  revive  old  matters,  and  to  displace  Robert  Juet
from  being  his  Mate,  and  the  Boat-swaine  from  his  place,
for  words  spoken  in  the  first  great  Bay  of  Ice.  Then  hee
made  Robert  Billet  his  Mate,  and  William  Wilson  our
Boat-swaine.  Up  to  the  North  wee  stood,  till  we  raised
Land,  then  downe  to  the  South,  and  up  to  the  North,  then
downe  againe  to  the  South :  and  on  Michaelmasse  day
came  in,  and  went  out  of  certaine  Lands :  which  our
Master  sets  downe  by  the  name  of  Michaelmasse  Bay,
because  we  came  in  and  went  out  on  that  day.  From
hence  wee  stood  to  the  North,  and  came  into  shoald  water  ;
and  the  weather  being  thicke  and  foule,  wee  came
to  an  anchor  in  seven  or  eight  fathome  water,  and
there  lay  eight  dayes :  in  all  which  time  wee  could  not
get  one  houre  to  weigh  our  anchor.  But  the  eight  day,
the  wind  beginning  to  cease,  our  Master  would  have  the
anchor  up,  against  the  mind  of  all  who  knew  what
belonged  thereunto.  Well,  to  it  we  went,  and  when  we
had  brought  it  to  a  peake,  a  Sea  tooke  her,  and  cast  us
all  off  from  the  Capstone,  and  hurt  divers  of  us.  Here
wee  lost  our  Anchor,  and  if  the  Carpenter  had  not  beene,
we  had  lost  our  Cable  too  :  but  he  (fearing  such  a  matter)
was  ready  with  his  Axe,  and  so  cut  it.

From  hence  we  stood  to  the  South,  and  to  the  South-
west, through  a  cleere  Sea  of  divers  sounding,  and  came
to  a  Sea  of  two  colours,  one  blacke,  and  the  other  white,
sixteene  or  seventeene  fathome  water,  betweene  which  we
went  foure  or  five  leagues.  But  the  night  comming,  we
tooke  in  our  Top-sayles,  and  stood  afore  the  wind  with  our
Maine-sayle  and  Fore-sayl,  and  came  into  five  or  sixe
fathomes,  and  saw  no  Land  for  it  was  darke.  Then  we
stood  to  the  East,  and  had  deepe  water  againe,  then  to  the
South  and  Southwest,  and  so  came  to  our  Westermost

386

HENRY HUDSON

Bay  of  all,  and  came  to  an  anchor  neerest  to  the  North
shoare.  Out  went  our  Boat  to  the  Land  that  was  next
us,  when  they  came  neere  it,  our  Boat  could  not  flote  to
the  shoare  it  was  so  shallow  :  yet  ashoare  they  got.  Here
our  men  saw  the  footing  of  a  man  and  a  Ducke  in  the
snowy  Rockes,  and  Wood  good  store,  whereof  they  tooke
some  and  returned  aboord.  Being  at  anchor  in  this  place,
we  saw  a  ledge  of  Rockes  to  the  South  of  us,  some  league
of  length ;  It  lay  North  and  South,  covered  at  a  full  Sea ;
for  a  strong  tide  setteth  in  here.  At  mid-night  wee
weighed,  and  stood  to  goe  out  as  we  came  in ;  and  had
not  gone  long,  but  the  Carpenter  came  and  told  the
Master,  that  if  he  kept  that  course  he  would  be  upon  the
Rockes :  the  Master  conceived  that  he  was  past  them,
when  presently  wee  ranne  on  them,  and  there  stucke  fast
twelve  houres :  but  (by  the  mercy  of  God)  we  got  off
unhurt,  though  not  unscarred.

Wee  stood  up  to  the  East  and  raysed  three  Hills,  lyin
North  and  South :  wee  went  to  the  furthermost,  and  le
it  to  the  North  of  us,  and  so  into  a  Bay,  where  wee  came  to
an  anchor.  Here  our  Master  sent  out  our  Boat,  with
my  selfe  and  the  Carpenter  to  seeke  a  place  to  winter  in  :
and  it  was  time  ;  for  the  nights  were  long  and  cold,  and
the  earth  covered  with  Snow.  Having  spent  three
moneths  in  a  Labyrinth  without  end,  being  now  the  last
of  October,  we  went  downe  to  the  East,  to  the  bottome
of  the  Bay :  but  returned  without  speeding  of  that  we
went  for.  The  next  day  we  went  to  the  South,  and  the
South-west,  and  found  a  place,  whereunto  we  brought  our
ship,  and  haled  her  aground :  and  this  was  the  first  of
November.  By  the  tenth  thereof  we  were  frozen  in  :
but  now  we  were  in,  it  behooved  us  to  have  care  of  what
we  had ;  for,  that  we  were  sure  of ;  but  what  we  had  not,
was  uncertaine.

Wee  were  victualled  for  sixe  moneths  in  good  propor-
tion, and  of  that  which  was  good :  if  our  Master  would
have  had  more,  he  might  have  had  it  at  home  and  in  other
places. Here  we  were  now,  and  therefore  it  behoved  us

387

A.D.
[6lO.

Footing  of  1
Man.

Sticke  on  a
Rocke.

[III.iii.601.]

Last  of
October.

November  the
tenth  frozen
in.

A.D.
l6lO.

John  Williams
dyeth.

Henry
Greenes  bad
conditions.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

so  to  spend,  that  wee  might  have  (when  time  came)  to
bring  us  to  the  Capes  where  the  Fowle  bred,  for  that  was
all  the  hope  wee  had  to  bring  us  home.  Wherefore  our
Master  tooke  order,  first  for  the  spending  of  that  wee  had,
and  then  to  increase  it,  by  propounding  a  reward  to  them
that  killed  either  Beast,  Fish,  or  Fowle,  as  in  his  Journall
you  have  seene.  About  the  middle  of  this  moneth  of
November,  dyed  John  Williams  our  Gunner  :  God  pardon
the  Masters  uncharitable  dealing  with  this  man.  Now
for  that  I  am  come  to  speake  of  him,  out  of  whose  ashes
(as  it  were)  that  unhappy  deed  grew  which  brought  a
scandall  upon  all  that  are  returned  home,  and  upon  the
action  it  selfe,  the  multitude  (like  the  dog)  running  after
the  stone,  but  not  at  the  caster :  therefore,  not  to  wrong
the  living,  nor  slander  the  dead,  I  will  (by  the  leave  of
God)  deliver  the  truth  as  neere  as  I  can.

You  shall  understand,  that  our  Master  kept  (in  his
house  at  London)  a  young  man,  named  Henrie  Greene,
borne  in  Kent,  of  Worshipfull  Parents,  but  by  his  leud
life  and  conversation  hee  had  lost  the  good  will  of  all  his
frinds,  and  had  spent  all  that  hee  had.  This  man,  our
Master  would  have  to  Sea  with  him,  because  hee  could
write  well :  our  Master  gave  him  meate,  and  drinke,  and
lodging,  and  by  meanes  of  one  Master  Venson,  with  much
adoe  got  foure  pounds  of  his  mother  to  buy  him  clothes,
wherewith  Master  Venson  would  not  trust  him :  but  saw
it  laid  out  himselfe.  This  Henrie  Greene  was  not  set
downe  in  the  owners  booke,  nor  any  wages  made  for  him.
Hee  came  first  aboord  at  Gravesend,  and  at  Harwich
should  have  gone  into  the  field,  with  one  Wilkinson.  At
Island  the  Surgeon  and  hee  fell  out  in  Dutch,  and  hee  beat
him  a  shoare  in  English,  which  set  all  the  company  in  a
rage ;  so  that  wee  had  much  adoe  to  get  the  Surgeon
aboord.  I  told  the  Master  of  it,  but  hee  bade  mee  let  it
alone,  for  (said  hee)  the  Surgeon  had  a  tongue  that  would
wrong  the  best  friend  hee  had.  But  Robert  Juet  (the
Masters  Mate)  would  needs  burne  his  finger  in  the  embers,
and  told  the  Carpenter  a  long  tale  (when  hee  was  drunke)

388

HENRY HUDSON  a.d.

1610.

that  our  Master  had  brought  in  Greene  to  cracke  his
credit  that  should  displease  him  :  which  words  came  to  the
Masters  eares,  who  when  hee  understood  it,  would  have
gone  backe  to  Island,  when  he  was  fortie  leagues  from
thence,  to  have  sent  home  his  Mate  Robert  Juet  in  a
Fisher-man.  But,  being  otherwise  perswaded,  all  was
well.  So  Henry  Greene  stood  upright,  and  very  inward
with  the  Master,  and  was  a  serviceable  man  every  way  for
manhood  :  but  for  Religion  he  would  say,  he  was  cleane
paper  whereon  he  might  write  what  hee  would.  Now,
when  our  Gunner  was  dead,  and  (as  the  order  is  in  such
cases)  if  the  company  stand  in  need  of  any  thing  that
belonged  to  the  man  deceased,  then  is  it  brought  to  the
Mayne  Mast,  and  there  sold  to  them  that  will  give  most
for  the  same :  This  Gunner  had  a  gray  cloth  gowne,  which
Greene  prayed  the  Master  to  friend  him  so  much  as  to
let  him  have  it,  paying  for  it  as  another  would  give :  the
Master  saith  hee  should,  and  thereupon  hee  answered
some,  that  sought  to  have  it,  that  Greene  should  have  it,
and  none  else,  and  so  it  rested.

Now  out  of  season  and  time,  the  Master  calleth  the  Greenes
Carpenter  to  goe  in  hand  with  an  house  on  shoare,  which  consPlrac'^-
at  the  beginning  our  Master  would  not  heare,  when  it
might  have  beene  done.  The  Carpenter  told  him,  that
the  Snow  and  Frost  were  such,  as  hee  neither  could,  nor
would  goe  in  hand  with  such  worke.  Which  when  our
Master  heard,  hee  ferreted  him  out  of  his  Cabbin  to
strike  him,  calling  him  by  many  foule  names,  and  threat-
ning  to  hang  him.  The  Carpenter  told  him  that  hee
knew  what  belonged  to  his  place  better  then  himselfe,  and
that  hee  was  no  House  Carpenter.  So  this  passed,  and  the
house  was  (after)  made  with  much  labour,  but  to  no  end.
The  next  day  after  the  Master  and  the  Carpenter  fell  out,
the  Carpenter  tooke  his  Peece  and  Henry  Greene  with
him,  for  it  was  an  order  that  none  should  goe  out  alone,
but  one  with  a  Peece,  and  another  with  a  Pike.  This  did
move  the  Master  so  much  the  more  against  Henry  Greene,
that  Robert  Billet  his  Mate  must  have  the  gowne,  and  had

389

A.D.
l6lO.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Their  hard
wintring.

it  delivered  unto  him ;  which  when  Henry  Greene  saw,
he  challenged  the  Masters  promise :  but  the  Master  did
so  raile  on  Greene,  with  so  many  words  of  disgrace,  telling
him,  that  all  his  friends  would  not  trust  him  with  twenty
shillings,  and  therefore  why  should  he  ?  As  for  wages
he  had  none,  nor  none  should  have,  if  he  did  not  please
him  well.  Yet  the  Master  had  promised  him  to  make  his
wages  as  good,  as  any  mans  in  the  ship ;  and  to  have  him
one  of  the  Princes  guard  when  we  came  home.  But  you
shall  see  how  the  devil  out  of  this  so  wrought  with  Green,
that  he  did  the  Master  what  mischiefe  hee  could  in  seeking
to  discredit  him,  and  to  thrust  him  and  many  other  honest
men  out  of  the  Ship  in  the  end.  To  speake  of  all  our
trouble  in  this  time  of  Winter  (which  was  so  cold,  as  it
lamed  the  most  of  our  Company,  and  my  selfe  doe  yet
feele  it)  would  bee  too  tedious.

But  I  must  not  forget  to  shew,  how  mercifully  God
[I.iii.602.]  dealt  with  us  in  this  time ;  for  the  space  of  three  moneths
wee  had  such  store  of  Fowle  of  one  kinde  (which  were
Partridges  as  white  as  milke)  that  wee  killed  above  an
hundred  dozen,  besides  others  of  sundry  sorts :  for  all
was  fish  that  came  to  the  net.  The  Spring  comming,  this
Fowle  left  us,  yet  they  were  with  us  all  the  extreame  cold.
Then  in  their  places  came  divers  sort  of  other  Fowle,  as
Swanne,  Geese,  Duck,  and  Teale,  but  hard  to  come  by.
Our  Master  hoped  they  would  have  bred  in  those  broken
grounds,  but  they  doe  not :  but  came  from  the  South,
and  flew  to  the  North,  further  then  we  were  this  Voyage ;
yet  if  they  be  taken  short  with  the  wind  at  North,  or
North-west,  or  North-east,  then  they  fall  and  stay  till  the
winde  serve  them,  and  then  flye  to  the  North.  Now  in
time  these  Fowles  are  gone,  and  few  or  none  to  bee  seene.
Then  wee  went  into  the  Woods,  Hilles,  and  Valleyes,  for
all  things  that  had  any  shew  of  substance  in  them,  how
vile  soever :  the  mosse  of  the  ground,  then  the  which  I
take  the  powder  of  a  post  to  bee  much  better,  and  the
Frogge  (in  his  ingendring  time  as  loathsome  as  a  Toade)
was  not  spared. But  amongst  the  divers  sorts  of  buds,

39°

Store  of
Partridges.

Other  Fowles
succeeding  in
their  seasons.

Miserable
diet.

HENRY HUDSON  a.d.

1611.

it  pleased  God  that  Thomas  Woodhouse  brought  home  a

budde  of  a  Tree,  full  of  a  Turpentine  substance. Of  this

our  Surgeon  made  a  decoction  to  drinke,  and  applyed  the Meditinable

buddes  hot  to  them  that  were  troubled  with  ach  in  any budde-

part of their bodies ; and for my part, I confesse, I

received  great  and  present  ease  of  my  paine.

About  this  time,  when  the  Ice  began  to  breake  out  of
the  Bayes,  there  came  a  Savage  to  our  Ship,  as  it  were  to  A  SavaSe-
see  and  to  bee  seene,  being  the  first  that  we  had  seene  in
all  this  time :  whom  our  Master  intreated  well,  and  made
much  of  him,  promising  unto  himselfe  great  matters  by
his  meanes,  and  therefore  would  have  all  the  Knives  and
Hatchets  (which  any  man  had)  to  his  private  use,  but
received  none  but  from  John  King  the  Carpenter,  and
my  selfe.  To  this  Savage  our  Master  gave  a  Knife,  a
Looking-glasse,  and  Buttons,  who  received  them  thanke-
fully,  and  made  signes  that  after  hee  had  slept  hee  would
come  againe,  which  hee  did.  When  hee  came,  hee
brought  with  him  a  Sled,  which  hee  drew  after  him,  and
upon  it  two  Deeres  skinnes,  and  two  Beaver  skinnes.
Hee  had  a  scrip  under  his  arme,  out  of  which  hee  drew  Turke.
those  things  which  the  Master  had  given  him.  Hee
tooke  the  Knife  and  laid  it  upon  one  of  the  Beaver  skinnes,
and  his  Glasses  and  Buttons  upon  the  other,  and  so  gave
them  to  the  Master,  who  received  them  ;  and  the  Savage
tooke  those  things  which  the  Master  had  given  him,  and
put  them  up  into  his  scrip  againe.  Then  the  Master
shewed  him  an  Hatchet,  for  which  hee  would  have  given
the  Master  one  of  his  Deere  skinnes,  but  our  Master
would  have  them  both,  and  so  hee  had,  although  not
willingly.  After  many  signes  of  people  to  the  North,  and
to  the  South,  and  that  after  so  many  sleepes  he  would
come  againe,  he  went  his  way,  but  never  came  more.

Now  the  Ice  being  out  of  the  Sounds,  so  that  our  Boat
might  go  from  one  place  unto  another,  a  company  of  men
were  appointed  by  the  Master  to  go  a  fishing  with  our  Fishing.
net ; their  names  were  as  followeth : William  Wilson,
Henry  Greene, Michael  Perce, John  Thomas, Andrew

39i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

Moter,  Bennet  Matthewes,  and  Arnold  Lodlo.  These
men,  the  first  day  they  went,  caught  five  hundred  fish,  as
big  as  good  Herrings,  and  some  Troutes :  which  put  us
all  in  some  hope  to  have  our  wants  supplied,  and  our
Commons  amended  :  but  these  were  the  most  that  ever
they  got  in  one  day,  for  many  dayes  they  got  not  a  quarter
so  many.  In  this  time  of  their  fishing,  Henry  Green  and
William  Wilson,  with  some  others,  plotted  to  take  the  net
and  the  shallop,  which  the  Carpenter  had  now  set  up,  and
so  to  shift  for  themselves.  But  the  shallop  being  readie,
our  Master  would  goe  in  it  himselfe,  to  the  South  and
South-west,  to  see  if  hee  could  meete  with  the  people ;
for,  to  that  end  was  it  set  up,  and  (that  way)  wee  might
see  the  Woods  set  on  fire  by  them.  So  the  Master  tooke
the  Sayve  and  the  Shallop,  and  so  much  victuall  as  would
serve  for  eight  or  nine  dayes,  and  to  the  South  hee  went.
They  that  remained  aboord,  were  to  take  in  water,  wood,
and  ballast,  and  to  have  all  things  in  a  readinesse  against
hee  came  backe.  But  hee  set  no  time  of  his  returne ;
for  he  was  perswaded,  if  he  could  meet  with  the  people,
hee  should  have  flesh  of  them,  and  that  good  store :  but
hee  returned  worse  then  hee  went  forth.  For,  hee  could
by  no  meanes  meete  with  the  people,  although  they  were
neere  them,  yet  they  would  set  the  woods  on  fire  in  his
sight.

Being  returned,  hee  fitted  all  things  for  his  returne,  and
first,  delivered  all  the  bread  out  of  the  bread  roome  (which
came  to  a  pound  a  piece  for  every  mans  share)  and
delivered  also  a  Bill  of  Returne,  willing  them  to  have
that  to  shew,  if  it  pleased  God,  that  they  came  home :
and  he  wept  when  hee  gave  it  unto  them.  But  to  helpe
us  in  this  poore  estate  with  some  reliefe,  the  Boate  and
Sayve  went  to  worke  on  Friday  morning,  and  stayed  till
Sunday  noone :  at  which  time  they  came  aboord,  and
brought  fourescore  small  Fish,  a  poore  reliefe  for  so  many
hungry  bellies.  Then  we  wayed,  and  stood  out  of  our
wintering  place,  and  came  to  an  Anchor  without,  in  the
mouth  of  the  Bay :  from  whence  we  wayed  and  came  to

392

HENRY HUDSON

A.D.
l6ll,

an  anchor  without  in  the  Sea,  where  our  bread  being  gone, Belly  straits.

that  store  of  cheese  we  had  was  to  stop  a  gap,  whereof

there  were  five,  whereat  the  company  grudged,  because

they  made  account  of  nine. But  those  that  were  left,

were  equally  divided  by  the Master, although  he  had

counsell  to  the  contrarie  :  for  there  were  some  who  having

it,  would  make  hast  to  bee  rid  thereof,  because  they  could

not  governe  it. I  knew  when  Henrie  Greene  gave  halfe  [III.iii.603.]

his  bread,  which  hee  had  for  fourteene  dayes,  to  one  to

keepe,  and  prayed  him  not  to  let  him  have  any  untill  the

next  Munday :  but  before  Wednesday  at  night,  hee  never

left  till  hee  had  it  againe,  having  eaten  up  his  first  weekes

bread  before. So  Wilson  the  Boatswaine  hath  eaten  (in

one  day)  his  fortnights  bread,  and  hath  beene  two  or  three

dayes  sicke  for  his  labour. The  cause  that  moved  the

Master  to  deliver  all  the  Cheese,  was  because  they  were

not  all  of  one  goodnesse,  and  therefore  they  should  see

that  they  had  no  wrong  done  them  :  but  every  man  should

have  alike  the  best  and  the  worst  together,  which  was  three

pounds  and  a  halfe  for  seven  dayes.

The  wind  serving,  we  weighed  and  stood  to  the  North-
west, and  on  Munday  at  night  (the  eighteenth  day  of
June)  wee  fell  into  the  Ice,  and  the  next  day  the  wind
being  at  West,  we  lay  there  till  Sunday  in  sight  of  Land.
Now  being  here,  the  Master  told  Nicholas  Simmes,  that
there  would  be  a  breaking  up  of  chests,  and  a  search  for
bread,  and  willed  him  (if  hee  had  any)  to  bring  it  to  him,
which  hee  did,  and  delivered  to  the  Master  thirty  cakes
in  a  bagge.  This  deed  of  the  Master  (if  it  bee  true)
hath  made  mee  marvell,  what  should  bee  the  reason  that
hee  did  not  stop  the  breach  in  the  beginning,  but  let  it
grow  to  that  height,  as  that  it  overthrew  himselfe  and
many  other  honest  men :  but  there  are  many  devices  in
the  heart  of  man,  yet  the  counsell  of  the  Lord  shall
stand.

Being  thus  in  the  Ice  on  Saturday,  the  one  and  twentieth
of  June  at  night,  Wilson  the  Boatswayne,  and  Henry
Greene  came  to  mee  lying  (in  my  Cabbin)  lame,  and  told

393

Wilson  fcf
Green,  their
wickednesse.

a.d  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

mee  that  they  and  the  rest  of  their  Associates,  would
shift  the  Company,  and  turne  the  Master,  and  all  the
sicke  men  into  the  shallop,  &  let  them  shift  for  themselves.
For,  there  was  not  fourteen  daies  victual  left  for  all  the
Company,  at  that  poore  allowance  they  were  at,  and  that
there  they  lay,  the  Master  not  caring  to  goe  one  way  or
other :  and  that  they  had  not  eaten  any  thing  these  three
dayes,  and  therefore  were  resolute,  either  to  mend  or  end,
and  what  they  had  begun  they  would  goe  through  with  it,
or  dye.  When  I  heard  this,  I  told  them  I  marvelled  to
heare  so  much  from  them,  considering  that  they  were
married  men,  and  had  wives  and  children,  and  that  for
their  sakes  they  should  not  commit  so  foule  a  thing  in  the
sight  of  God  and  man,  as  that  would  bee  ;  for  why  should
they  banish  themselves  from  their  native  Countrie?
Henry  Greene  bad  me  hold  my  peace,  for  he  knew  the
worst,  which  was,  to  be  hanged  when  hee  came  home,  and
therefore  of  the  two  he  would  rather  be  hanged  at  home
then  starved  abroad  :  and  for  the  good  will  they  bare  me,
they  would  have  mee  stay  in  the  Ship.  I  gave  them
thankes,  and  told  them  that  I  came  into  her,  not  to  forsake
her,  yet  not  to  hurt  my  selfe  and  others  by  any  such  deed.
Henry  Greene  told  me  then,  that  I  must  take  my  fortune
in  the  Shallop.  If  there  bee  no  remedie  (said  I)  the  will
of  God  bee  done.

Away  went  Henry  Greene  in  a  rage,  swearing  to  cut
his  throat  that  went  about  to  disturbe  them,  and  left
Wilson  by  me,  with  whom  I  had  some  talke,  but  to
no  good :  for  he  was  so  perswaded,  that  there  was  no
remedie  now,  but  to  goe  on  while  it  was  hot,  least  their
partie  should  faile  them,  and  the  mischiefe  they  had
intended  to  others,  should  light  on  themselves.  Henry
Greene  came  againe,  and  demanded  of  him  what  I  said.
Wilson  answered,  He  is  in  his  old  song,  still  patient.
Then  I  spake  to  Henry  Greene  to  stay  three  dayes,  in  which
time  I  would  so  deale  with  the  Master,  that  all  should  be
well.  So  I  dealt  with  him  to  forbeare  but  two  dayes,  nay
twelve  houres ; there  is  no  way  then  (say  they)  but  out

394

HENKY HUDSON

A.D.

161 1.

Robert  J  net.
See  Widhouses
notes.

of  hand.  Then  I  told  them,  that  if  they  would  stay  till
Munday,  I  would  joyne  with  them  to  share  all  the  victuals
in  the  ship,  and  would  justifie  it  when  I  came  home ;  but
this  would  not  serve  their  turnes.  Wherefore  I  told  them,
it  was  some  worse  matter  they  had  in  hand  then  they  made
shew  of,  and  that  it  was  bloud  and  revenge  hee  sought,
or  else  he  would  not  at  such  a  time  of  night  undertake
such  a  deed.  Henry  Greene  (with  that)  taketh  my  Bible
which  lay  before  me,  and  sware  that  hee  would  doe  no
man  harme,  and  what  hee  did  was  for  the  good  of  the
voyage,  and  for  nothing  else ;  and  that  all  the  rest  should
do  the  like. The  like  did  Wilson  sweare.

Henry  Greene  went  his  way,  and  presently  came  Juet,
who  because  hee  was  an  ancient  man,  I  hoped  to  have
found  some  reason  in  him ;  but  hee  was  worse  then
Henry  Greene,  for  hee  sware  plainely  that  he  would
justifie  this  deed  when  he  came  home.  After  him  came
John  Thomas,  and  Michel  Perce,  as  birds  of  one  feather :
but  because  they  are  not  living  I  will  let  them  goe,  as  then
I  did.  Then  came  Moter  and  Bennet,  of  whom  I
demanded,  if  they  were  well  advised  what  they  had  taken
in  hand.  They  answered,  they  were,  and  therefore  came
to  take  their  oath.

Now,  because  I  am  much  condemned  for  this  oath,  as
one  of  them  that  plotted  with  them,  and  that  by  an  oath
I  should  bind  them  together  to  performe  what  they  had
begun,  I  thought  good  heere  to  set  downe  to  the  view  of
all,  how  well  their  oath  and  deedes  agreed  :  and  thus  it  Oath  abused.
was.  You  shall  sweare  truth  to  God,  your  Prince  and
Countrie  :  you  shall  doe  nothing,  but  to  the  glory  of  God,
and  the  good  of  the  action  in  hand,  and  harme  to  no  man.
This  was  the  oath,  without  adding  or  diminishing.  I
looked  for  more  of  these  companions  (although  these  were
too  many)  but  there  came  no  more.  It  was  darke,  and
they  in  a  readinesse  to  put  this  deed  of  darknesse  in
execution.  I  called  to  Henry  Greene  and  Wilson,  and
prayed  them  not  to  goe  in  hand  with  it  in  the  darke,  but
to stay till the morning. Now, everie man (I hope)

395

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

l6ll.

[III.iii.604.]  would  goe  to  his  rest,  but  wickednesse  sleepeth  not ;  for
Henry  Greene  keepeth  the  Master  company  all  night  (and
gave  mee  bread,  which  his  Cabbin-mate  gave  him)  and
others  are  as  watchfull  as  he.  Then  I  asked  Henrie
Greene,  whom  he  would  put  out  with  the  Master?  he
said,  the  Carpenter  John  King,  and  the  sicke  men.  I  said,
they  should  not  doe  well  to  part  with  the  Carpenter,  what
need  soever  they  should  have.  Why  the  Carpenter  was
in  no  more  regard  amongst  them,  was ;  first,  for  that  he
and  John  King  were  condemned  for  wrong  done  in  the
victuall.  But  the  chiefest  cause  was,  for  that  the  Master
loved  him,  and  made  him  his  Mate,  upon  his  returne  out
of  our  wintering  place,  thereby  displacing  Robert  Billet,
whereat  they  did  grudge,  because  hee  could  neither  write
nor  read.  And  therefore  (said  they)  the  Master  and  his
ignorant  Mate  would  carry  the  Ship  whither  the  Master
pleased  :  the  Master  forbidding  any  man  to  keepe  account
or  reckoning,  having  taken  from  all  men  whatsoever
served  for  that  purpose.  Well,  I  obtained  of  Henrie
The  Carpen-  Greene  and  Wilson,  that  the  Carpenter  should  stay,  by
ter  spared.  whose  meanes  I  hoped  (after  they  had  satisfied  themselves)
that  the  Master,  and  the  poore  man  might  be  taken  into
the  Ship  againe.  Or,  I  hoped,  that  some  one  or  other
would  give  some  notice,  either  to  the  Carpenter  John
King,  or  the  Master ;  for  so  it  might  have  come  to  passe
by  some  of  them  that  were  the  most  forward.

Now,  it  shall  not  bee  amisse  to  shew  how  we  were
lodged,  and  to  begin  in  the  Cooke  roome ;  there  lay
Bennet  and  the  Cooper  lame ;  without  the  Cooke  roome,
on  the  steere-board  side,  lay  Thomas  Wydhouse  sicke ;
next  to  him  lay  Sydrack  Funer  lame,  then  the  Surgeon,
and  John  Hudson  with  him  ;  next  to  them  lay  Wilson  the
Boatswaine,  and  then  Arnold  Lodlo  next  to  him :  in  the
Gun-roome  lay  Robert  Juet  and  John  Thomas ;  on  the
Lar-boord  side,  lay  Michael  Bute  and  Adria  Moore,  who
had  never  beene  well  since  wee  lost  our  Anchor ;  next  to
them  lay  Michael  Perce  and  Andrew  Moter.  Next  to
them  without  the  Gun-roome,  lay  John  King,  and  with

396

HENRY HUDSON  a.d.

1611.

him  Robert  Billet :  next  to  them  my  selfe,  and  next  to
me  Francis  Clements :  In  the  mid-ship,  betweene  the
Capstone  and  the  Pumpes,  lay  Henrie  Greene  and
Nicholas  Simmes.  This  night  John  King  was  late  up,
and  they  thought  he  had  been  with  the  Master,  but  he
was  with  the  Carpenter,  who  lay  on  the  Poope,  and
comming  downe  from  him,  was  met  by  his  Cabbin-mate,
as  it  were  by  chance,  and  so  they  came  to  their  Cabbin
together.  It  was  not  long  ere  it  was  day :  then  came
Bennet  for  water  for  the  Kettle,  hee  rose  and  went  into
the  Hold :  when  hee  was  in,  they  shut  the  Hatch  on  him
(but  who  kept  it  downe  I  know  not)  up  upon  the  Deck
went  Bennet.

In  the  meane  time  Henrie  Greene,  and  another  went
to  the  Carpenter,  and  held  him  with  a  talke,  till  the
Master  came  out  of  his  Cabbin  (which  hee  soone  did)
then  came  John  Thomas  and  Bennet  before  him,  while
Wilson  bound  his  armes  behind  him.  He  asked  them  fAey  bind  the
what  they  meant?  they  told  him,  he  should  know  when  Master.
he  was  in  the  Shallop.  Now  Juet,  while  this  was  a  doing,
came  to  John  King  into  the  Hold,  who  was  provided  for
him,  for  he  had  got  a  sword  of  his  own,  and  kept  him  at  a
bay,  and  might  have  killed  him,  but  others  came  to  helpe
him :  and  so  he  came  up  to  the  Master.  The  Master
called  to  the  Carpenter,  and  told  him  that  he  was  bound ;
but,  I  heard  no  answere  he  made.  Now  Arnold  Lodlo,
and  Michael  Bute  rayled  at  them,  and  told  them  their
knaverie  would  shew  it  selfe.  Then  was  the  Shallop  haled
up  to  the  Ship  side,  and  the  poore,  sicke,  and  lame  men
were  called  upon  to  get  them  out  of  their  Cabbins  into
the  Shallop.  The  Master  called  to  me,  who  came  out  of
my  Cabbin  as  well  as  I  could,  to  the  Hatch  way  to  speake
with  him :  where,  on  my  knees  I  besought  them,  for
the  love  of  God,  to  remember  themselves,  and  to  doe
as  they  would  be  done  unto.  They  bad  me  keepe  my
selfe  well,  and  get  me  into  my  Cabbin ;  not  suffering  the
Master  to  speake  with  me.  But  when  I  came  into  my
Cabbin  againe,  hee  called  to  me  at  the  Home,  which  gave

397

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

light  into  my  Cabbin,  and  told  mee  that  Juet  would  over-
throw us  all ;  nay  (said  I)  it  is  that  villaine  Henrie  Greene,
and  I  spake  it  not  softly.

Now  was  the  Carpenter  at  libertie,  who  asked  them,  if
they  would  bee  hanged  when  they  came  home :  and  as
The  Carpen-  for  himselfe,  hee  said,  hee  would  not  stay  in  the  Ship
ter  let  goe.  unlesse  they  would  force  him  :  they  bad  him  goe  then,
for  they  would  not  stay  him :  I  will  (said  hee)  so  I  may
have  my  chest  with  mee,  and  all  that  is  in  it :  they  said,
hee  should,  and  presently  they  put  it  into  the  Shallop.
Then  hee  came  downe  to  mee,  to  take  his  leave  of  mee,
who  perswaded  him  to  stay,  which  if  he  did,  he  might  so
worke  that  all  should  bee  well :  hee  said,  hee  did  not
thinke,  but  they  would  be  glad  to  take  them  in  againe.
For  he  was  so  perswaded  by  the  Master,  that  there  was
not  one  in  all  the  ship,  that  could  tell  how  to  carrie  her
home ;  but  (saith  he)  if  we  must  part  (which  wee  will  not
willingly  doe,  for  they  would  follow  the  ship)  hee  prayed
me,  if  wee  came  to  the  Capes  before  them,  that  I  would
leave  some  token  that  wee  had  beene  there,  neere  to  the
place  where  the  Fowles  bred,  and  hee  would  doe  the  like
for  us :  and  so  (with  teares)  we  parted.  Now  were  the
sicke  men  driven  out  of  their  Cabbins  into  the  Shallop ;
but  John  Thomas  was  Francis  Clements  friend,  and
Bennet  was  the  Coopers,  so  as  there  were  words  betweene
them  and  Henrie  Greene,  one  saying,  that  they  should
goe,  and  the  other  swearing  that  they  should  not  goe,  but
such  as  were  in  the  shallop  should  returne.  When
Henrie  Greene  heard  that,  he  was  compelled  to  give  place,
and  to  put  out  Arnold  Lodlo,  and  Michael  Bute,  which
with  much  adoe  they  did.

In  the  meane  time,  there  were  some  of  them  that  plyed
[III.iii.605.]  their  worke,  as  if  the  Ship  had  beene  entred  by  force,  and
they  had  free  leave  to  pillage,  breaking  up  Chests,  and
rifling  all  places.  One  of  them  came  by  me,  who  asked
me,  what  they  should  doe.  I  answered,  hee  should  make
an  end  of  what  hee  had  begun  ;  for  I  saw  him  doe  nothing
but  sharke  up  and  downe. Now,  were  all  the  poore  men

398

HENRY HUDSON  a.d.

161 1.

in  the  Shallop,  whose  names  are  as  followeth ;  Henrie  The  names  of
Hudson,  John  Hudson,  Arnold  Lodlo,  Sidrack  Faner,  ^  ^/^
Phillip  Staffe,  Thomas  Woodhouse,  or  Wydhouse,  Adam  e^L
Moore,  Henrie  King,  Michael  Bute.  The  Carpenter  got
of  them  a  Peece,  and  Powder,  and  Shot,  and  some  Pikes,
an  Iron  Pot,  with  some  meale,  and  other  things.  They
stood  out  of  the  Ice,  the  Shallop  being  fast  to  the  Sterne
of  the  Shippe,  and  so  (when  they  were  nigh  out,  for  I
cannot  say,  they  were  cleane  out)  they  cut  her  head  fast
from  the  Sterne  of  our  Ship,  then  out  with  their  Top-
sayles,  and  towards  the  East  they  stood  in  a  cleere  Sea.
In  the  end  they  tooke  in  their  Top-sayles,  righted  their
Helme,  and  lay  under  their  Fore-sayle  till  they  had
ransacked  and  searched  all  places  in  the  Ship.  In  the
Hold  they  found  one  of  the  vessels  of  meale  whole,  and
the  other  halfe  spent,  for  wee  had  but  two  ;  wee  found
also  two  firkins  of  Butter,  some  twentie  seven  piece  of
Porke,  halfe  a  bushell  of  Pease,  but  in  the  Masters  Cabbin
we  found  two  hundred  of  bisket  Cakes,  a  pecke  of  Meale,
of  Beere  to  the  quantitie  of  a  Butt,  one  with  another.
Now,  it  was  said,  that  the  Shallop  was  come  within  sight,
they  let  fall  the  Main-sayle,  and  out  with  their  Top-
sayles,  and  flye  as  from  an  Enemy.

Then  I  prayed  them  yet  to  remember  themselves :  but
William  Wilson  (more  then  the  rest)  would  heare  of  no
such  matter.  Comming  nigh  the  East  shoare  they  cast
about,  and  stood  to  the  West  and  came  to  an  Hand,  and
anchored  in  sixteene  or  seventeene  fathome  water.  So
they  sent  the  Boat,  and  the  Net  ashoare  to  see  if  they
could  have  a  Draught :  but  could  not  for  Rocks  and  great
stones.  Michael  Perse  killed  two  Fowle,  and  heere  they
found  good  store  of  that  Weede,  which  we  called  Cockle
grasse  in  our  wintering  place,  whereof  they  gathered  store,
and  came  aboard  againe.  Heere  we  lay  that  night,  and
the  best  part  of  the  next  day,  in  all  which  time  we  saw
not  the  shallop,  or  ever  after.  Now  Henrie  Greene  came  Last  sight  of
to  me  and  told  mee,  that  it  was  the  Companies  will,  that  the  Shallop.
I should  come  up  into  the  Masters  Cabbin, and  take

399

ad.  PUKCHAS HIS PILGMMES

1611.

charge  thereof.  I  told  him  it  was  more  fit  for  Robert
Juet :  he  said,  he  should  not  come  in  it,  nor  meddle  with
the  Masters  Card,  or  Journals.  So  up  I  came,  and  Henrie
Greene  gave  me  the  Key  of  the  Masters  Chest,  and  told
me  then,  that  he  had  laid  the  Masters  best  things  together,
which  hee  would  use  himselfe  when  time  did  serve :  the
bread  was  also  delivered  me  by  tale.

The  wind  serving,  we  stood  to  the  North-east,  and  this
was  Robert  Billets  course,  contrarie  to  Robert  Juet,  who
would  have  gone  to  the  North-west.  We  had  the
Easterne  shoare  still  in  sight,  and  (in  the  night)  had  a
stout  gale  of  wind,  and  stood  afore  it,  till  wee  met  with
Ice,  into  the  which  we  ranne  from  thinne  to  thicke,  till
we  could  goe  no  further  for  Ice,  which  lay  so  thicke  ahead
of  us  (and  the  wind  brought  it  after  us  asterne)  that  wee
could  not  stirre  backward,  nor  forward :  but  so  lay
imbayed  fourteene  daies  in  worse  Ice,  then  ever  wee  met
to  deale  withall,  for  we  had  beene  where  there  was  greater
store,  but  it  was  not  so  broad  upon  the  water  as  this :  for
this  floting  Ice  contained  miles,  and  halfe  miles  in  com-
passe,  where  we  had  a  deepe  Sea,  and  a  Tide  of  flood  and
ebbe,  which  set  North-west  and  South-east.  Heere
Robert  Juet  would  have  gone  to  the  North-west,  but
Robert  Billet  was  confident  to  go  through  to  the  North-
east, which  he  did.  At  last,  being  cleere  of  this  Ice,  he
continued  his  course  in  sight  of  the  Easterne  shoare,  till
Foure  Hands,  he  raised  foure  Hands  which  lay  North  and  South :  but
we  passed  them  sixe  or  seven  leagues,  the  wind  tooke  us
so  short.  Then  wee  stood  backe  to  them  againe,  and
came  to  an  Anchor  betweene  two  of  the  most  Norther-
most.  We  sent  the  Boat  ashoare,  to  see  if  there  were  any
thing  there  to  be  had,  but  found  nothing,  but  cockle
Grasse,  whereof  they  gathered  store,  and  so  returned
aboard.  Before  we  came  to  this  place,  I  might  well  see,
that  I  was  kept  in  the  ship  against  Henry  Greenes  minde,
because  I  did  not  favour  their  proceedings  better  then  I
did.  Then  hee  began  (very  subtilly)  to  draw  me  to  take
upon  me  to  search  for  those  things,  which  himselfe  had

400

HENRY HUDSON  ad.

161 1.

stolne :  and  accused  me  of  a  matter  no  lesse  then  Treason

amongst  us,  that  I  had  deceived  the  company  of  thirtie

Cakes  of  bread. Now  they  began  to  talke  amongst  them- The  wicked

selves,  that  England  was  no  safe  place  for  them,  and  Henry  flee  where  none

Greene  swore,  the  shippe  should  not  come  into  any  place  Pursuet

(but  keepe  the  Sea  still)  till  he  had  the  Kings  Majesties

hand  and  Seale  to  shew  for  his  safetie. They  had  many

devices  in  their  heads,  but  Henry  Greene  in  the  end  was

their  Captaine,  and  so  called  of  them.

From  these  Hands  we  stood  to  the  North-east  and  the
Easter  Land  still  in  sight :  wee  raysed  those  Hands,  that
our  Master  called  Rumnies  Hands.  Betweene  these
Hands  and  the  shallow  ground  to  the  East  of  them,  our
Master  went  downe  into  the  first  great  Bay.  We  kept
the  East  shoare  still  in  our  sight,  and  comming  thwart  of
the  low  Land,  wee  ranne  on  a  Rocke  that  lay  under  water,
and  strooke  but  once ;  for  if  shee  had,  we  might  have
beene  made  Inhabitans  of  that  place :  but  God  sent  us
soone  off  without  any  harme  that  wee  saw.  Wee  con-
tinued our  course  and  raysed  Land  a  head  of  us,  which
stretched  out  to  the  North  :  which  when  they  saw,  they
said  plainly,  that  Robert  Billet  by  his  Northerly  course
had  left  the  Capes  to  the  South,  and  that  they  were  best  to
seeke  downe  to  the  South  in  time  for  reliefe,  before  all
was  gone  :  for  we  had  small  store  left.  But  Robert  Billet
would  follow  the  Land  to  the  North,  saying,  that  he  hoped
in  God  to  find  somewhat  to  releeve  us  that  way,  as  soone  [III. Hi. 606.]
as  to  the  South.  I  told  them  that  this  Land  was  the
Mayne  of  Worsenhome  Cape,  and  that  the  shallow  rockie
ground,  was  the  same  that  the  Master  went  downe  by,
when  he  went  into  the  great  Bay.  Robert  Juet  and  all
said,  it  was  not  possible,  unlesse  the  Master  had  brought
the  ship  over  Land,  and  willed  them  to  looke  into  the
Masters  Card,  and  their  course  how  well  they  did  agree.
We  stood  to  the  East,  and  left  the  mayne  Land  to  the
North,  by  many  small  Hands  into  a  narrow  gut  betweene
two  Lands,  and  there  came  to  an  Anchor.  The  Boat  went
ashoare  on  the  North  side,  where  wee  found  the  great
xin  401  2  c

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

Home,  but  nothing  else. The  next  day  wee  went  to  the

Cockle  grasse.  South  side,  but  found  nothing  there,  save  Cockle  grasse
of  which  we  gathered.  This  grasse  was  a  great  releefe
unto  us,  for  without  it,  we  should  hardly  have  got  to  the
Capes  for  want  of  victuall.  The  wind  serving  we  stood
out,  but  before  we  could  get  cleane  out,  the  wind  came  to
the  West,  so  that  we  were  constrayned  to  anchor  on  the
North  side.

The  next  day  wee  weighed  and  doubled  the  point  of  the
North  Land,  which  is  high  Land,  and  so  continueth  to
the  Capes,  lying  North  and  South,  some  five  and  twentie
or  thirtie  leagues.  To  the  North  we  stood  to  see  store
of  those  Fowles  that  breed  in  the  Capes,  and  to  kill  some
with  our  shot,  and  to  fetch  them  with  our  Boat.  We
raised  the  Capes  with  joy,  and  bare  for  them,  and  came
to  the  Hands  that  lie  in  the  mouth  of  the  streight :  but

A  Rocke.  bearing  in  betweene  the  Rockie  lies,  we  ranne  on  a  Rocke
that  lay  under  water,  and  there  stucke  fast  eight  or  nine
houres.  It  was  ebbing  water  when  we  thus  came  on,  so
the  floud  set  us  afloat,  God  guiding  both  wind  and  Sea,
that  it  was  calme,  and  faire  weather :  the  ebbe  came  from

Note.  the  East,  and  the  floud  from  the  West. When  wee  were

afloat,  wee  stood  more  neere  to  the  East  shoare,  and  there
anchored.

July  27,  The  next  day  being  the  seven  and  twentieth  of  July,

we  sent  the  Boat  to  fetch  some  Fowle,  and  the  ship  should
way  and  stand  as  neere  as  they  could  :  for  the  wind  was
against  us.  They  had  a  great  way  to  row,  and  by  that
meanes  they  could  not  reach  to  the  place  where  the  Fowle
bred  :  but  found  good  store  of  Gulls,  yet  hard  to  come  by,
on  the  Rocks  and  ClirTes,  but  with  their  Peeces  they  killed
some  thirtie,  and  towards  night  returned.  Now  we  had
brought  our  ship  more  neere  to  the  mouth  of  the  |
Streights,  and  there  came  to  an  anchor  in  eighteen  or
twentie  fathom  water,  upon  a  RirTe  or  shelfe  of  ground :
which  after  they  had  weighed  their  Anchor,  and  stood
more  neere  to  the  place  where  the  Fowle  bred,  they  could
not  find  it  againe,  nor  no  place  like  it:  but  were  faine  to

402

HENRY HUDSON

turne  to  and  fro  in  the  mouth  of  the  Streight,  and  to  be
in  danger  of  Rockes,  because  they  could  not  find  ground
to  let  fall  an  Anchor  in,  the  water  was  so  deepe.

The  eight  and  twentieth  day,  the  Boat  went  to  Digges
his  Cape  for  Fowle,  and  made  directly  for  the  place  where
the  Fowle  bred,  and  being  neere,  they  saw  seven  Boates
come  about  the  Easterne  point  towards  them.  When  the
Savages  saw  our  Boate,  they  drew  themselves  together,
and  drew  their  lesser  Boats  into  their  bigger :  and  when
they  had  done,  they  came  rowing  to  our  Boat,  and  made
signes  to  the  West,  but  they  made  readie  for  all  assayes.
The  Savages  came  to  them,  and  by  signes  grew  familiar
one  with  another,  so  as  our  men  tooke  one  of  theirs  into
our  Boate,  and  they  tooke  one  of  ours  into  their  Boate.
Then  they  carried  our  man  to  a  Cove  where  their  Tents
stood  toward  the  West  of  the  place,  where  the  Fowle
bred :  so  they  carried  him  into  their  Tents,  where  he
remayned  till  our  men  returned  with  theirs.  Our  Boat
went  to  the  place  where  the  Fowle  bred,  and  were  desirous
to  know  how  the  Savages  killed  their  Fowle :  he  shewed
them  the  manner  how,  which  was  thus,  They  take  a  long
Pole  with  a  snare  at  the  end,  which  they  put  about  the
Fowles  necke,  and  so  plucke  them  downe.  When  our
men  knew  that  they  had  a  better  way  of  their  owne,  they
shewed  him  the  use  of  our  Peeces,  which  at  one  shot  would
kill  seven  or  eight.  To  be  short,  our  Boat  returned  to
their  Cove  for  our  man,  and  to  deliver  theirs.  When  they
came  they  made  great  joy,  with  dancing  and  leaping,  and
stroking  of  their  brests  :  they  offered  divers  things  to
our  men,  but  they  only  tooke  some  Morses  Teeth,  which
they  gave  them  for  a  Knife,  and  two  glasse  buttons  :  and
so  receiving  our  man  they  came  aboard,  much  rejoycing
at  this  chance,  as  if  they  had  met  with  the  most  simple
and  kind  people  of  the  World.

And  Henry  Greene  (more  then  the  rest)  was  so  con-
fident, that  (by  no  meanes)  we  should  take  care  to  stand
upon  our  Guard :  God  blinding  him  so,  that  where  hee
made  reckoning  to  receive  great  matters  from  these  people,

403

A.D.
l6ll.

Savages.

Savages  man-
ner of  fowling.

Greenes
confidence.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRlMES

1611.

he  received  more  then  he  looked  for,  and  that  suddenly  by
being  made  a  good  example  for  all  men :  that  make  no
conscience  of  doing  evill,  and  that  we  take  heed  of  the
Savage  people,  how  simple  soever  they  seeme  to  be.

The  next  day,  the  nine  and  twentieth  of  July,  they
made  haste  to  be  ashoare,  and  because  the  ship  rid  too
farre  off,  they  weighed  and  stood  as  neere  to  the  place
where  the  Fowle  bred,  as  they  could :  and  because  I  was
lame,  I  was  to  go  in  the  Boat,  to  carrie  such  things,  as  I
had  in  the  Cabbin  of  every  thing  somewhat :  and  so  with
more  haste  then  good  speed  (and  not  without  swearing)
away  we  went,  Henry  Greene,  William  Wilson,  John
Thomas,  Michael  Perse,  Andrew  Moter,  and  my  selfe.
When  we  came  neere  the  shoare,  the  people  were  on  the
Hils,  dancing  and  leaping :  to  the  Cove  we  came,  where
they  had  drawne  up  their  Boates  :  wee  brought  our  Boate
to  the  East  side  of  the  Cove,  close  to  the  Rockes.
[III.iii.607.]  Ashoare  they  went,  and  made  fast  the  Boat  to  a  great  stone
on  the  shoare,  the  people  came,  and  every  one  had  some-
what in  his  hand  to  barter :  but  Henry  Greene  swore  they
should  have  nothing,  till  he  had  Venison,  for  that  they
had  so  promised  him  by  signes.
Savages  Now  when  we  came,  they  made  signes  to  their  Dogges

dogges.  (whereof  there  were  many  like Mongrels, as  bigge  as

Hounds)  and  pointed  to  their  Mountaine,  and  to  the
Sunne,  clapping  their  hands.  Then  Henry  Greene,  John
Thomas,  and  William  Wilson,  stood  hard  by  the  Boate
head,  Michael  Perse,  and  Andrew  Moter  were  got  up
upon  the  Rocke,  a  gathering  of  Sorrell :  not  one  of  them
had  any  weapon  about  him,  not  so  much  as  a  sticke,  save
Henry  Greene  only,  who  had  a  piece  of  a  Pike  in  his
hand :  nor  saw  I  any  thing  that  they  had  wherewith  to
hurt  us.  Henry  Greene  and  William  Wilson  had  Look-
ing-glasses, and  Jewes  Trumps,  and  Bels,  which  they  were
Savages  shewing  the  people. The  Savages  standing  round  about

treachene.  them,  one  of  them  came  into  the  Boats  head  to  me  to  shew
me  a  Bottle :  I  made  signes  to  him  to  get  him  ashoare,
but  he  made  as  though  he  had  not  understood  me,  where-

404

HENRY HUDSON  a.d.

1611.

upon  I  stood  up,  and  pointed  him  ashoare.  In  the
meane-time,  another  stole  behind  me  to  the  sterne  of  the
Boat,  and  when  I  saw  him  ashoare,  that  was  in  the  head
of  the  Boat,  I  sate  downe  againe  :  but  suddenly  I  saw  the
legge  and  foote  of  a  man  by  mee.  Wherefore  I  cast  up
my  head,  and  saw  the  Savage  with  his  Knife  in  his  hand,
who  strooke  at  my  brest  over  my  head  :  I  cast  up  my
right  arme  to  save  my  brest,  he  wounded  my  arme,  and
strooke  me  into  the  bodie  under  my  right  Pappe.  He
strooke  a  second  blow  which  I  met  with  my  left  hand,  and
then  he  strooke  me  into  the  right  thigh,  and  had  like  to
have  cut  off  my  little  finger  of  the  left  hand.  Now,  I  had
got  hold  of  the  string  of  the  Knife,  and  had  woond  it
about  my  left  hand,  he  striving  with  both  his  hands,  to
make  an  end  of  that  he  had  begunne,  I  found  him  but
weake  in  the  gripe  (God  enabling  me)  and  getting  hold  of
the  sleeve  of  his  left  arme,  so  bare  him  from  me.  His
left  side  lay  bare  to  me,  which  when  I  saw,  I  put  his  sleeve
off  his  left  arme  into  my  left  hand,  holding  the  string  of
the  Knife  fast  in  the  same  hand  :  and  having  got  my  right
hand  at  libertie,  I  sought  for  somewhat  wherewith  to  strike
him  (not  remembring  my  Dagger  at  my  side)  but  looking
downe  I  saw  it,  and  therewith  strooke  him  into  the  bodie,
and  the  throate.

Whiles  I  was  thus  assaulted  in  the  Boat,  our  men  were  Trecherie
set  upon  on  the  shoare.  John  Thomas  and  William  Just  t0  mimt
Wilson  had  their  bowels  cut,  and  Michael  Perse  and
Henry  Greene  being  mortally  wounded,  came  tumbling
into  the  Boat  together.  When  Andrew  Moter  saw  this
medley,  hee  came  running  downe  the  Rockes,  and  leaped
into  the  Sea,  and  so  swamme  to  the  Boat,  hanging  on  the
sterne  thereof,  till  Michael  Perse  tooke  him  in,  who  man-
fully made  good  the  head  of  the  Boat  against  the  Savages,
that  pressed  sore  upon  us.  Now  Michael  Perse  had  got
an  Hatchet,  wherewith  I  saw  him  strike  one  of  them,  that
he  lay  sprawling  in  the  Sea.  Henry  Greene  crieth
Coragio,  and  layeth  about  him  with  his  Truncheon :  I
cryed  to  them  to  cleere  the  Boat,  and  Andrew  Moter  cryed

405

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

to  bee  taken  in  :  the  Savages  betooke  them  to  their  Bowes
and  Arrowes,  which  they  sent  amongst  us,  wherewith
Greene  shine.  Henry  Greene  was  slaine  out-right,  and  Michael  Perse
received  many  wounds,  and  so  did  the  rest.  Michael
Perse  cleereth  the  Boate,  and  puts  it  from  the  shoare,  and  j
helpeth  Andrew  Moter  in :  but  in  turning  of  the  Boat,  I
received  a  cruell  wound  in  my  backe  with  an  Arrow :
Michael  Perse  and  Andrew  Moter  rowed  the  Boate  away,
which  when  the  Savages  saw,  they  ranne  to  their  Boats,
and  I  feared  they  would  have  launched  them,  to  have  \
followed  us,  but  they  did  not,  and  our  ship  was  in  the
middle  of  the  channell,  and  could  not  see  us.

Now,  when  they  had  rowed  a  good  way  from  the  shoare,
Michael  Perse  fainted,  and  could  row  no  more :  then  was  | ,
Andrew Moter  driven  to  stand  in  the  Boat  head,  and
waft  to  the  ship,  which  (at  the  first)  saw  us  not,  and  when :
they  did,  they  could  not  tel  what  to  make  of  us,  but  in  U
the  end  they  stood  for  us,  and  so  tooke  us  up. Henry ;
Greene  was  throwne  out  of  the  Boat  into  the  Sea,  and
the  rest  were  had  aboard,  the  Savage  being  yet  alive,  yet
without  sense. But  they  died  all  there  that  day,  William  !
Wilson  swearing  and  cursing  in  most  fearefull  manner :
Michael  Perse  lived  two  dayes  after,  and  then  died. Thus  |
you  have  heard  the  Tragicall  end  of  Henry  Greene  and  |
his  Mates,  whom  they  called  Captaine,  these  foure  being I:
the  only  lustie  men  in  all  the  ship.

The  poore  number  that  was  left,  were  to  ply  our  ship
too  and  fro,  in  the  mouth  of  the  streight,  for  there  was
no  place  to  anchor  in  neere  hand : besides,  they  were  to  ; ;
goe  in  the  Boate  to  kill  Fowle,  to  bring  us  home,  which I
they  did,  although  with  danger  to  us  all. For  if  the  wind 1
blew,  there  was  an  high  Sea,  and  the  eddies  of  the  Tydes
would  carrie  the  ship  so  neere  the  Rockes,  as  it  feared  our  j
Master,  for  so  I  will  now  call  him. After  they  had  killed i
some  two  hundred  Fowle,  with  great  labour  on  the  South  ;  |
Cape,  wee  stood  to  the  East :  but  when  wee  were  sixe  or
seven  leagues  from  the  Capes,  the  wind  came  up  at  East.
Then  wee  stood  backe  to  the  Capes  againe,  and  killed  an

406

Wicked  and
wretched  end
of  wretched
wicked  men.

rest.

HENRY HUDSON  a.d.

1611.

hundred  Fowle  more.  After  this,  the  wind  came  to  the
West,  so  wee  were  driven  to  goe  away,  and  then  our
Master  stood  (for  the  most)  along  by  the  North  shoare,
till  he  fell  into  broken  ground  about  the  Queenes  Fore-
land, and  there  anchored.  From  thence  wee  went  to  Gods
Mercies,  and  from  thence  to  those  Hands,  which  lye  in
the  mouth  of  our  Streight,  not  seeing  the  Land,  till  we
were  readie  to  runne  our  Bosprite  against  the  Rockes  in  a
fogge.  But  it  cleered  a  little,  and  then  we  might  see  our
selves  inclosed  with  Rockie  Hands,  and  could  find  no
ground  to  anchor  in.  There  our  Master  lay  atrie  all  [III.iii.608.]
night,  and  the  next  day  the  fogge  continuing,  they  sought
for  ground  to  anchor  in,  and  found  some  in  an  hundred
and  odde  fathomes  of  water.  The  next  day  we  weighed
and  stood  to  the  East,  but  before  wee  came  heere,  we  had
put  our  selves  to  hard  allowance,  as  halfe  a  foule  a  day  with  Miserie
the  pottage  :  for  yet  we  had  some  meale  left,  and  nothing  Pursueth  the
else.  Then  they  beganne  to  make  triall  of  all  what-
soever :  wee  had  flayed  our  Fowle,  for  they  wil  not  pull :
and  Robert  Juet  was  the  first,  that  made  use  of  the  skins
by  burning  of  the  Feathers  :  so  they  became  a  great  dish
of  meate,  and  as  for  the  garbidge,  it  was  not  throwne
away.

After  we  were  cleere  of  these  Hands,  which  lie  out  with
two  points,  one  to  the  South-east,  and  the  other  to  the
North,  making  a  Bay  to  the  sight  as  if  there  were  no  way
through,  we  continued  our  course  East  South-east,  and
South  and  by  East,  to  raise  the  Desolations,  from  thence  to
shape  our  course  for  Ireland.  Thus  we  continued  divers
dayes  :  but  the  wind  comming  against  us,  made  us  to  alter
our  course,  and  by  the  meanes  of  Robert  Juet,  who  per-
swaded  the  company,  that  they  should  find  great  reliefe
in  Newfound  Land,  if  our  Countrey-men  were  there,  and
if  they  were  gone  before  we  came,  yet  should  we  find  great
store  of  bread  and  fish  left  ashoare  by  them :  but  how
true,  I  give  God  thankes,  we  did  not  trie.  Yet  we  stood
to  the  South-west,  and  to  the  West,  almost  to  fiftie  seven
degrees  :  when  (by  the  will  of  God)  the  winde  came  up  at

407

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1611.

South-west.  Then  the  Master  asked  me,  if  he  should
take  the  benefit  of  this  wind,  and  shape  his  course  for
Ireland.  I  said  it  was  best  to  goe,  where  we  knew  Corne
grew,  and  not  to  seeke  it,  where  it  was  cast  away,  and
not  to  be  found.  Towards  Ireland  now  wee  stood,  with
prosperous  winds  for  many  dayes  together :  then  was  all
our  Meale  spent,  and  our  Fowle  restie  and  dry :  but
(being  no  remedie)  we  were  content  with  the  Salt  broth
Poore  Diet,  for  Dinner,  and  the  halfe  Fowle  for  Supper.  Now  went
our  Candles  to  wracke,  and  Bennet  our  Cooke  made  a
messe  of  meate  of  the  bones  of  the  Fowle,  frying  them
with  Candle-grease,  till  they  were  crispe,  and  with
Vineger  put  to  them,  made  a  good  dish  of  meate.  Our
Vinegar  was  shared,  and  to  every  man  a  pound  of  Candles
delivered  for  a  weeke,  as  a  great  daintie.  Now  Robert
Juet  (by  his  reckoning)  saith,  wee  were  within  sixtie  or
seventie  leagues  of  Ireland,  when  wee  had  two  hundred
thither.  And  sure  our  course  was  so  much  the  longer,
through  our  evill  steeredge :  for,  our  men  became  so
weake,  that  they  could  not  stand  at  the  Helme,  but  were
faine  to  sit.
Robert  J uets  Then  Robert  Juet  dyed,  for  meere  want,  and  all  our
death.  men  were  in  despaire,  and  said  wee  were  past  Ireland,

and  our  last  Fowle  were  in  the  steep- tub.  So,  our  men
cared  not  which  end  went  forward,  insomuch  as  our  Master
was  driven  to  looke  to  their  labour,  as  well  as  his  owne :
for  some  of  them  would  sit  and  see  the  fore-sayle,  or
mayne-sayle  flie  up  to  the  tops,  the  sheetes  being  either
flowne  or  broken,  and  would  not  helpe  it  themselves,  nor
call  to  others  for  helpe,  which  much  grieved  the  Master.
Now  in  this  extremitie  it  pleased  God  to  give  us  sight  of
Land,  not  farre  from  the  place  our  Master  said  he  would
fall  withal,  which  was  the  Bay  of  Galloway,  and  we  fell
to  the  West  of  the  Derses,  and  so  stood  along  by  the  coast,
to  the  South-west.  In  the  end,  there  was  a  joyful  cry,  a
sayle,  a  sayle,  towards  which  they  stood,  then  they  saw
A  sayle  of  more,  but  to  the  neerest  we  stood,  and  called  to  him  :  his
Fozvy.  Barke  was  of  Fowy,  and  was  at  anchor  a  Fishing  :  he  came

408

HENRY HUDSON

A.D.
l6ll,

to  us,  and  brought  us  into  Bere  Haven.  Here  we  stayed  Bere  Haven
a  few  dayes,  and  delt  with  the  Irish,  to  supply  our  wants,  m  lreland-
but  found  no  reliefe  :  for  in  this  place  there  was  neither
Bread,  Drinke,  nor  mony  to  be  had  amongst  them.
Wherfore  they  advised  us  to  deale  with  our  Country-
men, who  were  there  a  fishing,  which  we  did :  but  found
them  so  cold  in  kindnesse,  that  they  would  doe  nothing
without  present  money,  whereof  we  had  none  in  the  Ship.
In  the  end,  we  procured  one  John  Waymouth,  Master  of
the  Barke  that  brought  us  into  this  Harbour,  to  furnish
us  with  money,  which  hee  did,  and  received  our  best  Cable
and  Anchor  in  pawne  for  the  same.  With  this  money,
our  Master  with  the  helpe  of  John  Waymouth,  bought
Bread,  Beere,  and  Beefe.

Now,  as  wee  were  beholding  to  Waymouth  for  his
money,  so  were  wee  to  one  Captaine  Taylor,  for  making
of  our  contracts  with  Waymouth,  by  whose  meanes  hee
tooke  a  Bill  for  our  Cable  and  Anchor,  and  for  the  mens
Wages,  who  would  not  goe  with  us,  unlesse  Waymouth
wold  passe  his  word  for  the  same :  for  they  made  shew,
that  they  were  not  willing  to  goe  with  us  for  any  wages.
Whereupon  Captaine  Taylor  swore  hee  would  presse
them,  and  then,  if  they  would  not  goe,  hee  would  hang
them.

In  conclusion,  wee  agreed  for  three  pound  ten  shillings
a  man,  to  bring  our  Ship  to  Plimouth,  or  Dartmouth,  and
to  give  the  Pilot  five  pound :  but  if  the  winde  did  not
serve,  but  that  they  were  driven  to  put  into  Bristow,  they
were  to  have  foure  pound  ten  shillings  a  man,  and  the
Pilot  sixe  pound.  Omitting  therefore  further  circum-
stances, from  Bere  Haven  wee  came  to  Plimouth,  and  so
to  an  anchor,  before  the  Castle :  and  from  Plimouth,  with
faire  winde  and  weather  without  stop  or  stay,  wee  came
to  the  Downes,  from  thence  to  Gravesend,  where  most
of  our  men  went  a  shoare,  and  from  thence  came  on  this
side  Erith,  and  there  stopped :  where  our  Master  Robert
Billet  came  aboord,  and  so  had  mee  up  to  London  with
him,  and  so  wee  came  to  Sir  Thomas  Smiths  together.

409

They  arrive
at  Plimouth.

A.D.
l6ll.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Forasmuch  as  this  report  of  Pricket  may  happely  bee
suspected  by  some,  as  not  so  friendly  to  Hudson,  who
returned  with  that  Companie  which  had  so  cruelly  exposed
[III.iii.609.]  Hudson  and  his,  and  therefore  may  seeme  to  lay  heavier
imputation,  and  rip  up  occasions  further  then  they  will
beleeve ;  I  have  also  added  the  report  of  Thomas  Wid-
house,  one  of  the  exposed  Companie,  who  ascribeth  those
occasions  of  discord  to  Juet.  I  take  not  on  mee  to
sentence,  no  not  to  examine ;  I  have  presented  the
Evidence  just  as  I  had  it :  let  the  Bench  censure,  hearing
with  both  eares,  that  which  with  both  eyes  they  may  see
in  those,  and  these  notes ;  to  which,  I  have  first  prefixed
his  Letter  to  Master  Samuel  Macham.

M  Aster  Macham,  I  heartily  commend  mee  unto  you,
&c.  I  can  write  unto  you  no  newes,  though  I  have
seene  much,  but  such  as  every  English  Fisherman  haunt-
ing these  Coasts  can  report  better  then  my  selfe.

Wee  kept  our  Whitsunday  in  the  North-east  end  of
Island ;  and  I  thinke  I  never  fared  better  in  England  then

llanders  wee  feasted  there. They  of  the  Countrey  are  very  poore,

poore.  and  live  miserably : yet  we  found  therein  store  of  fresh

Fish  and  daintie  Fowle.  I  my  selfe  in  an  after-noone
killed  so  much  Fowle,  as  feasted  all  our  Companie,  being
three  and  twentie  persons  at  one  time,  onely  with  Part-
ridges ;  besides  Curlue,  Plover,  Mallard,  Teale,  and
Goose.  I  have  seene  two  hot  Bathes  in  Island,  and  have
beene  in  one  of  them.  Wee  are  resolved  to  trie  the
uttermost,  and  lye  onely  expecting  a  faire  winde,  and  to
refresh  our  selves  to  avoyd  the  Ice,  which  now  is  come  off
the  West  Coasts,  of  which  wee  have  seene  whole  Hands,

The  cause  of ^ut  ^°^  ^ee  thanked,  have  not  beene  in  danger  of  any.

their  stay  at Thus  I  desire  all  your  prayers  for  us. From  Island  this

Island.  thirtieth  of  May,  16 10.

410

HENRY HUDSON  ad.

1611,

A  note  found  in  the  Deske  of  Thomas  Wydowse,
Student  in  the  Mathematickes,  hee  being  one
of  them  who  was  put  into  the  Shallop.

THe  tenth  day  of  September,  1610.  after  dinner,  our
Master  called  all  the  Companie  together,  to  heare
and  beare  witnesse  of  the  abuse  of  some  of  the  Companie
(it  having  beene  the  request  of  Robert  Juet)  that  the
Master  should  redresse  some  abuses  and  slanders,  as  hee
called  them,  against  this  Juet :  which  thing  after  the
Master  had  examined  and  heard  with  equitie  what  hee
could  say  for  himselfe,  there  were  prooved  so  many  and
great  abuses,  and  mutinous  matters  against  the  Master,
and  action  by  Juet,  that  there  was  danger  to  have  suffred
them  longer :  and  it  was  fit  time  to  punish  and  cut  off
farther  occasions  of  the  like  mutinies.

It  was  prooved  to  his  face,  first  with  Bennet  Mathew
our  Trumpet  upon  our  first  sight  of  Island,  and  hee
confest,  that  hee  supposed  that  in  the  action  would  bee
man-slaughter,  and  prove  bloodie  to  some.

Secondly,  at  our  comming  from  Island,  in  hearing  of
the  companie,  hee  did  threaten  to  turne  the  head  of  the
Ship  home  from  the  action,  which  at  that  time  was  by
our  Master  wisely  pacified,  hoping  of  amendment.

Thirdly,  it  was  deposed  by  Philip  Staffe  our  Carpenter,
and  Ladlie  Arnold,  to  his  face  upon  the  holy  Bible,  that
hee  perswaded  them  to  keepe  Muskets  charged,  and
Swords  readie  in  their  Cabbins,  for  they  should  bee
charged  with  shot,  ere  the  Voyage  were  over.

Fourthly,  wee  being  pestered  in  the  Ice,  hee  had  used
words  tending  to  mutinie,  discouragement,  and  slander  of
the  action,  which  easily  tooke  effect  in  those  that  were
timorous ;  and  had  not  the  Master  in  time  prevented,  it
might  easily  have  overthrowne  the  Voyage :  and  now
lately  beeing  imbayed  in  a  deepe  Bay,  which  the  Master
had  desire  to  see,  for  some  reasons  to  himselfe  knowne,
his  word  tended  altogether  to  put  the  Companie  into  a

411

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

1611.

fray  of  extremitie,  by  wintering  in  cold : Jesting  at  our
Masters  hope  to  see  Bantam  by  Candlemasse.

For  these  and  divers  other  base  slanders  against  the
Master,  hee  was  deposed ;  and  Robert  Bylot,  who  had
shewed  himselfe  honestly  respecting  the  good  of  the
action,  was  placed  in  his  stead  the  Masters  Mate.

Also  Francis  Clement  the  Boatson,  at  this  time  was  put
from  his  Office,  and  William  Wilson,  a  man  thought  more
fit,  preferred  to  his  place.  This  man  had  basely  carryed
himselfe  to  our  Master  and  to  the  action.

Also  Adrian  Mooter  was  appointed  Boatsons  mate :
and  a  promise  by  the  Master,  that  from  this  day  Juats
wages  should  remaine  to  Bylot,  and  the  Boatsons  overplus
of  wages  should  bee  equally  divided  betweene  Wilson  and
one  John  King,  to  the  owners  good  liking,  one  of  the
Quarter  Masters,  who  had  very  well  carryed  themselves  to
the  furtherance  of  the  businesse.

Also  the  Master  promised,  if  the  Offenders  yet  behaved
themselves  henceforth  honestly,  hee  would  bee  a  meanes  for
their  good,  and  that  hee  would  forget  injuries,  with  other
admonitions.

These  things  thus  premised  touching  Hudsons  expos-
ing, and  Gods  just  judgements  on  the  Exposers,  as
Pricket  hath  related  (whom  they  reserved  as  is  thought,
in  hope  by  Sir  Dudley  Digges  his  Master  to  procure  their
pardon  at  their  returne)  I  thought  good  to  adde  that
which  I  have  further  received  from  good  Intelligence,  that
the  Ship  comming  aground  at  Digges  Hand,  in  62.  degrees
44.  minutes,  a  great  flood  came  from  the  West  and  set
them  on  floate  :  an  argument  of  an  open  passage  from
the  South  Sea  to  that,  and  consequently  to  these  Seas.
[III.iii.610.]  The  Weapons  and  Arts  which  they  saw,  beyond  those
of  other  Savages  are  arguments  hereof.  Hee  which
assaulted  Pricket  in  the  Boate,  had  a  weapon  broad  and
sharpe  indented  of  bright  Steele  (such  they  use  in  Java)
riveted  into  a  handle  of  Morse  tooth.

412

NICOLO AND ANTONIO ZENO

Chap.  XVIII.

The  Discoveries  of  M.  M.  Nicolo  and  Antonio
Zeni,  gathered  out  of  their  Letters,  by  Fran-
cisco Marcolino  :  whereto  is  added  Quirino
his  Ship-wracke.

N  the  yeere  1380.  Master  Nicolo  Zeno
being  wealthy,  and  of  a  haughtie  spirit,
desiring  to  see  the  fashions  of  the  worlds
built  and  furnished  a  Ship  at  his  owne
charges,  and  passing  the  Straits  of  Gib-
ralter,  held  on  his  course  Northwards,
with  intent  to  see  England  and  Flanders.

A.D.

I380.

But  a  violent  tempest  assailing  him  at  Sea,  hee  was  carried
hee  knew  not  whither,  till  at  last  his  Ship  was  carried
away  upon  the  He  of  Frisland ;  where  the  men  and  most
part  of  the  goods  were  saved.  In  vaine  seemes  that
deliverie,  that  delivers  up  presently  to  another  Execu-
tioner. The  Ilanders  like  Neptunes,  hungry  groomes,  or
his  base  and  blacke  Guard,  set  upon  the  men  whom  the
Seas  had  spared :  but  heere  also  they  found  a  second
escape  by  meanes  of  a  Prince  named  Zichmui,  Prince  of
that  and  many  Hands  thereabouts :  who  being  neere  hand
with  his  Armie,  came  at  the  out-crie,  and  chasing  away
the  people,  tooke  them  into  protection.

This  Zichmui  had  the  yeere  before  given  the  overthrow
to  the  King  of  Norway,  and  was  a  great  adventurer  in
feates  of  Armes.  He  spake  to  them  in  Latine,  and  placed
them  in  his  Navie,  wherewith  hee  wonne  divers  Hands.
Nicolo  behaved  himselfe  so  well,  both  in  saving  the  Fleet
by  his  Sea-skill,  and  in  conquest  of  the  Hands  by  his
valour,  that  Zichmui  made  him  Knight  and  Captaine  of
his  Navie.

After  divers  notable  exploits,  Nicolo  armed  three
Barkes,  with  which  hee  arrived  in  Engroneland  :  where
hee  found  a  Monasterie  of  Friers  of  the  Preachers  Order,
and  a  Church  dedicated  to  Saint  Thomas,  hard  by  a  Hill,

413

They  are
related  by
Master
Hakluit,  in  his
3 .  vol.  pag.

121.

Friesland.

Saint  Thomas
Monasterie  in
Groenland.

effects  thereof.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1380.

that  casteth  out  fire  like  Vesuvius  and  iEtna.  There  is
Hote  Spring  a  Fountaine  of  hot  water,  with  which  they  heate  the
and  the  strange^  Church  of  the  Monasterie,  and  the  Friers  chambers.  It
commeth  also  into  the  Kitchin  so  boyling  hote,  that  they
use  no  other  fire  to  dresse  their  meate ;  and  putting  their
Bread  into  brasse  Pots  without  any  water,  it  doth  bake  as
it  were  in  an  hot  Oven.  They  have  also  small  Gardens,
which  are  covered  over  in  the  Winter  time,  and  being
watered  with  this  water,  are  defended  from  the  violence  of
the  Frost  and  cold,  and  bring  forth  Flowers  in  their  due
seasons.  The  common  people  astonished  with  these
strange  effects,  conceive  highly  of  those  Friers,  and  bring
them  presents  of  Flesh  and  other  things.  They  with  this
Water,  in  the  extremitie  of  the  cold,  heate  their  Chambers,
which  also  (as  the  other  buildings  of  the  Monasterie)  are
framed  of  those  burning  stones,  which  the  mouth  of  the
Hill  casts  foorth.  They  cast  water  on  some  of  them,
whereby  they  are  dissolved,  and  become  excellent  white
Lime,  and  so  tough,  that  being  contrived  in  building,  it
lasteth  for  ever.  The  rest,  after  the  fire  is  out,  serve  in
stead  of  stones  to  make  walls  and  vaults,  and  will  not
dissolve  or  breake,  except  with  some  Iron  toole.

Their  Winter  lasteth  nine  moneths  :  and  yet  there  is  a
faire  Haven,  where  this  water  falleth  into  the  Sea,  not
frozen  :  by  meanes  whereof  there  is  great  resort  of  wild
Fowle  and  Fish,  which  they  take  in  infinite  multitudes.
The  Fishers  Boates  are  made  like  to  a  Weavers  shuttle,  of
the  skinnes  of  Fishes,  fashioned  with  the  bones  of  the
same  Fishes,  and  being  sowed  together  with  many  doubles,
they  are  so  strong,  that  in  foule  weather  they  will  shut
themselves  within  the  same,  not  fearing  the  force  either  of
Sea  or  winde.  Neither  can  the  hard-hearted  Rockes
breake  these  yeelding  Vessels.  They  have  also  as  it  were
a  Sleeve  in  the  bottome  thereof,  by  which  with  a  subtill
device,  they  convey  the  water  foorth,  that  soaketh  into
them.  The  most  of  these  Friers  spake  the  Latine  tongue.
A  little  after  this,  Nicolo  returned  and  dyed  in  Fries-
land,  whither  his  brother  Antonio  had  before  resorted  to

414

NICOLO AND ANTONIO ZENO  a.d.

1380.

him,  and  now  succeeded  both  in  his  goods  and  honour ;
whom  Zichmui  employed  in  the  Expedition  of  Estoti-  Estotiland.
land :  which  happened  upon  this  occasion.  Sixe  and
twentie  yeeres  before,  foure  Fisher-Boates  were  appre-
hended at  Sea  by  a  mightie  and  tedious  storme  ;  wherewith
after  many  dayes,  they  were  brought  to  Estotiland,  above
a  thousand  miles  West  from  Friesland  :  upon  which,  one
of  the  Boates  was  cast  away,  and  sixe  men  that  were  in
it,  were  taken  and  brought  to  a  populous  Citie ;  where,
one  that  spake  Latine,  and  had  been  cast  by  chance  upon
that  Hand,  in  the  name  of  the  King  asked  them  what
Country-men  they  were  ;  and  understanding  their  case,  hee
acquainted  the  King  therewith.  They  dwelt  there  five
yeeres,  and  found  it  to  bee  an  Hand  very  rich,  being  little
lesse  then  Iseland,  but  farre  more  fruitfull.  One  of  them
said  hee  saw  Latine  bookes  in  the  Kings  Librarie,  which
they  at  this  present  doe  not  understand.  They  have  a  [III.iii.611.]
peculiar  Language,  and  Letters  or  Characters  to  them-
selves. They  have  mines  of  Gold  and  other  Mettals,  and
have  Trade  with  Engroneland.  They  sow  Corne,  and
make  Beere  and  Ale.  They  build  Barkes  (but  know  not
the  use  of  the  Compasse)  and  have  many  Cities  and
Castles.  The  King  sent  these  Fisher-men  with  twelve
Barkes  Southwards,  to  a  Countrey  which  they  call  Drogio  :  Drogio.
in  which  Voyage  escaping  dreadfull  tempests  at  Sea,  they
encountred  with  Canibals  at  Land,  which  devoured  many
of  them.  These  Fishers  shewing  them  the  manner  of
taking  Fish  with  Nets,  escaped,  and  for  the  presents  which
they  made  of  their  Fish  to  the  chiefe  men  of  the  Country,
were  beloved  and  honoured.  One  of  these  (more  expert
it  seemeth  then  the  rest)  was  holden  in  such  account,  that
a  great  Lord  made  warre  with  their  Lord  to  obtaine  him  :
and  so  prevayled,  that  he  and  his  companie  were  sent  unto
him.  And  in  this  order  was  hee  sent  to  five  and  twentie
Lords,  which  had  warred  one  with  another  to  get  him,  in
thirteene  yeeres  space  :  whereby  hee  came  to  know  almost
all  those  parts ;  which,  he  said,  was  a  great  Countrey,  and
(as  it  were)  a  new  World. The  people  are  all  rude,  and

415

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1380.

voide  of  goodnesse :  they  goe  naked,  neither  have  they
wit  to  cover  their  bodies  with  the  Beasts  skinnes  which
they  take  in  Hunting,  from  the  vehement  cold.  They
are  fierce,  and  eate  their  enemies,  having  divers  Lawes  and
Governours. Their  living  is  by  hunting.

Further  to  the  South-west,  they  are  more  civill,  and
have  a  more  temperate  ayre :  They  have  Cities  and
Temples  dedicated  to  Idols,  where  they  sacrifice  Men,  and
after  eate  them ;  and  have  also  some  use  of  Gold  and
Silver.

Hee  fledde  away  secretly,  and  conveying  himselfe  from
one  Lord  to  another,  came  at  length  to  Drogio,  where  hee
dwelt  three  yeeres.  After  this  time  finding  there  certaine
Boates  of  Estotiland,  hee  went  thither  with  them :  and
growing  there  very  rich,  furnished  a  Barke  of  his  owne,
and  returned  into  Friesland  :  where  hee  made  report  unto
his  Lord  of  that  wealthy  Countrey.  Zichmui  prepared  to
send  thither :  but  three  dayes  before  they  set  foorth,  this
Fisherman  dyed.  Yet  taking  some  of  the  Marriners
which  came  with  him  in  his  stead,  they  prosecuted  the
Voyage,  and  encountred  after  many  dayes  an  Hand ;  where
ten  men  of  divers  Languages,  were  brought  unto  them,
of  which  they  could  understand  none,  but  one  of  Iseland.
Hee  told  them,  that  the  Hand  was  called  Icaria,  and  the
Knights  thereof  called  Icari,  descended  of  the  ancient
pedigree  of  Dedalus,  King  of  Scots,  who  conquering  that
Hand,  left  his  Sonne  there  for  King,  and  left  them  those
Lawes,  which  to  that  present  they  retayned.  And,  that
they  might  keepe  their  Lawes  inviolate,  they  would  receive
no  Stranger.  Onely  they  were  contented  to  receive  one  of
our  men,  in  regard  of  the  Language,  as  they  had  done
those  ten  Interpreters.

Zichmui  sayling  hence,  in  foure  dayes  descried  Land,
where  they  found  abundance  of  Fowle,  and  Birds  egges,
for  their  refreshing.  The  Haven  they  called  Cap  Trin.
There  was  a  Hill,  which  burning,  cast  out  smoake :  where
was  a  Spring,  from  which  issued  a  certayne  water  like
Pitch,  which  ranne  into  the  Sea. The  people  of  small

416

NICOLO AND ANTONIO ZENO

A.D.

I431'

stature,  wilde,  and  fearefull,  hid  themselves  in  Caves.
Zichmui  built  there  a  Citie,  and  determining  to  inhabite,
sent  Antonio  backe  againe,  with  the  most  of  his  people  to
Friesland.

This Historie I have thus inserted at large, which Abrah.Ortel.
perhaps,  not  without  cause  in  some  things,  may  seeme Chart.  6.
fabulous;  not  in  the  Zeni,  which  thus  writ,  but  in  the gtf,w'  3'
relations  which  they  received  from  others. Howsoever, Maginus.
the  best  Geographers  are  beholden  to  these  Brethren,  for Hondius,  &c.
that  little  knowledge  they  have  of  these  parts ;  of  which
none  before  had  written :  nor  since  have  there  beene  any
great  in-land  Discoveries.

The  Ship-wracke  of Master Piero Quirino,  de-
scribed by  Christoforo  Fioravanti,  and  Nicolo
Di Michiel*,  who  were  present  there: heere  *Thereisalso
contracted.

the  relation
hereof  by
Quirino  him-
self, extant
together  with
this  in

IT  semeth  to  bee  a  convenient  dutie  to  make  a
memoriall,  and  not  suffer  to  bee  buryed  in  oblivion,
that  most  lamentable,  and  cruell  Voyage  full  of  innumer-
able and  extreame  miseries,  which  befell  a  Venetian  Ship,  ^nmsio
wherein  wee  carryed  above  seven  hundred  Buttes  of  Wine,  Tom.  z!  Out
Spices,  Cottons,  and  other  Merchandises  of  great  value,  of  which  I
furnished  in  Candia  with  threescore  and  eight  men,  to  goe  have  heere
towards  the*  West. The  Master  whereof  was  Master  addeddwers

tv  r\ -  -  tt  • ^ i  -1  annotations.

riero  i^Jmrino,  a  Venetian  Gentleman,  in  the  yeare  143 1.  *The  Italians

Who  after  many  troubles  *,  misfortunes,  and  wants  befalne call  the
him,  after  his  departure  from  Candia  towards  the  West,  on  '  say  ling
the  sixth  of  November,  in  the  foresaid  yeere  of  the  Lord,  ^^'te
by chance came into the mouth of the Channels of ievant0r
Flanders,  and  went  farre  beyond  them,  by  a  storme  from East;  and
the  South,  towards  the  North-west,  about  one  hundred tJience  'mt0  the
and  fortie  miles,  running  still  upon  the  Hand  of  Ussenti, sPamsh
where, by  agreement, wee  Christoforo Fioravanti, and the sT parts  the
Ponent  or  West. *  These  are  particularly  related  by  Quirino  the  Patron  or  Owner. They  lost
their  Rudder  on  a  Roche,  not  farre  from  Cales  in  Spai?iey  and  were  faine  to  make  thither  to
repair  e  it:  and  other  disasters  followed.

xiii  417  2D

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

H31-

Nicolo  Michiel,  say,  that  at  noone  wee  sounded  the
[III.iii.612.]  bottome  of  the  Sea  with  the  Lead,  and  found  our  selves  in
five  and  fiftie  fathome  of  water,  and  afterward  toward  the
Eevening  wee  sounded,  and  found  our  selves  in  ninetie
fathomes  and  more,  but  the  storme  and  furie  of  the  windes
was  so  great,  that  it  brake  five  of  the  hinges  off  our  rudder.
On  the  twelfth,  in  the  morning,  the  storme  not  ceasing,
but  increasing  every  houre  more  and  more,  beat  upon  our
weake  rudder  with  so  great  violence  and  furie,  that  it
broke  away  all  that  held  it,  in  such  sort,  that  it  hung  on
the  one  side,  where,  for  the  last  remedie,  wee  fastened  a
great  Cable  unto  it,  with  the  which,  for  three  dayes  wee
drew  it  after  us,  not  being  able  to  doe  it  otherwise,  in
which  time  in  our  judgement,  wee  thought  wee  had  runne
two  hundred  miles  and  more,  against  our  wills.

Afterward  we  tooke  away  the  two  Rudders,  and  with
many  pieces  of  Timber  we  made  another,  which  might
rather  be  called  a  shadow  then  a  true  Rudder,  and  wee
put  it  in  his  place  to  guide  and  direct  the  ship.  But  it
could  not  endure  longer,  then  till  the  six  and  twentieth  of
November,  when  the  violence  of  the  Sea  carried  it  all
away :  so  that  then  wee  remayned  deprived  of  all  hope  of
government  and  direction.  On  the  fourth  of  December,
the  furie  of  the  winde  grew  so  outragious  againe,  that  it
carried  away  all  this  third  sayle,  and  so  being  spoyled  and
bereft  of  Sayle  and  Rudder,  we  went  at  adventure  untill
the  eight  day,  alwayes  wandering,  not  knowing  by  any
meanes  how  to  provide  for  our  safetie.  Afterward  the
winde  alwayes  increasing  from  the  East,  and  with  so  great
violence  and  furie,  that  the  Sea  beganne  to  swell  so  high,
that  the  waves  seemed  Mountaynes,  and  farre  greater  then
we  had  ever  seene  before,  with  the  darknesse  of  the
extreame  long  night,  so  that  we  seemed  to  goe  in  the
bottomlesse  depth  of  Hell :  whereby  you  may  imagine
how  great  the  anguish  and  trembling  of  our  hearts  was,
because  although  we  were  living,  yet  at  that  instant  wee
seemed  to  bee  dead,  expecting  death  every  houre,  which
we  saw  present :  In  this  darknesse  the  Heaven  was  some-

418

PIERO QUIRINO  a.d.

H31'
times  seene  to  open  with  the  lightnings  and  sudden  flashes
of  fire  so  bright,  that  they  tooke  away  the  sight  of  our
eyes.  And  sometimes  we  seemed  to  touch  the  starres,
the  ship  mounted  so  aloft,  and  then  againe  we  saw  our
selves  buried  in  Hell,  insomuch  as  being  all  astonished,
we  had  lost  our  strength  and  force.  And  being  in  this
miserable  case  we  did  nothing  else,  but  with  pittie  behold
one  another  :  &  running  with  so  great  violence  for  many
houres,  in  the  end  a  surge  of  the  Sea  came  over  the  ship
under  the  wind  with  such  furie,  that  the  water  entred  into
it,  filled  it  almost  halfe  full,  whereby  being  now  much
weakened,  it  was  readie  to  sinke,  and  turned  up  the  Keele.
And  surely  that  was  the  last  houre,  and  our  end,  and  truly
we  had  beene  swallowed  up  of  the  Sea,  if  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ  had  not  beene,  who  forsaketh  not  them  that
religiously  call  upon  him,  who  put  such  power  and
strength  into  our  afflicted  minds,  that  seeing  the  ship  in  so
dangerous  a  case,  full  of  water,  as  it  could  not  be  cast  out
by  any  humane  force,  we  determined  to  cut  downe  the
mayne  Mast,  and  cast  it  together  with  the  mayne  Yard
and  Tackling  into  the  Sea,  and  so  wee  did,  whereby  the
ship  being  disburdened,  paused  awhile,  and  we  then
taking  courage,  beganne  to  cast  out  the  water,  which  with
our  great  trouble  and  labour  we  overcame  in  the  end.  In
this  manner  wee  went  scouring  away  all  that  long  night.
Now  when  the  day  was  almost  come,  they  agreed  to  make
readie  the  Boat  and  the  Schiffe,  with  that  little  provision
of  victuall  which  was  remayning,  equally  parted.  And
the  Patron  said,  With  your  consent  I  command  you  Nicolo
di  Michiel  the  Notary,  that  you  set  downe  in  a  note  the
names  of  those  that  are  willing  to  enter  into  the  Schiffe
and  Boat :  so  presently  he  gave  him  fortie  five  persons  in
a  note,  who  were  willing  to  enter  into  the  Schiffe,  which
was  capeable  but  of  one  and  twentie  men  only,  and  there-
fore it  was  necessary  to  cast  Lots  who  should  goe  therein  :
and  so  it  was  done,  and  they  prepared  it,  and  set  it  in
order,  and  did  the  like  to  the  Boate,  into  the  which  the
Master with fortie seven men entred. The one and

419

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

H31-

They  leave  the  twentie  persons  to  whom  the  lot  fell,  entred  the  Schiffe,

'Mp*  and  a  rate  was  given  them  according  to  the  proportion  of

the  victuall  which  was  remayning  of  Bisket,  and  also  of
Frisoppi,  three  hundred  pound  weight,  of  Cheese  of
Candia  eightie  pounds,  of  dried  Bacon  eight  pounds,  of
Tallow  to  trim  their  Schiffe  fortie  pounds,  of  Oyle  about
two  pound  waight  and  no  more  :  but  besides  wee  bestowed
there  seven  Carrattells  of  Tyrian  Wine,  which  is  a  kind
of  Malvasie,  for  the  Pinnasse  or  Schiffe  would  hold  no
more.  In  like  manner  fortie  seven  men,  reckoning  the
Master,  entred  into  the  Boate  or  Pinnasse,  unto  whom
rateably  fell  their  proportion  of  victuals,  adding  thereto  a
little  Greene  Ginger  in  Sirrope,  and  Sirrope  of  Limons,with
some  small  quantitie  of  Spices,  which  wee  had  taken.  We
were  (in  our  judgement)  distant  from  the  neerest  Hand  or
Land  about  five  hundred  miles  or  more,  from  the  point  of
Land  to  Lee-ward  of  the  North  part,  and  we  sayled  with
these  Conserves  in  a  quiet  and  calme  Sea,  that  little  time
of  the  day  together  with  our  one  and  twentie  companions,
comforting  our  selves  in  that  which  we  had  seene  the
beginning  of  so  faire  a  fortune.  But  when  the  night
came,  a  dark  mist  rose,  which  was  a  token  of  the  evill
successe  and  end,  which  our  companions  of  the  Schiffe

The  Schiffe were  to  have,  of  whom  we  had  now  lost  the  sight,  so  that

lost.  we  never  saw  them  any  more.

The  ninteenth  day,  the  morning  appearing,  and  not  see-
ing any  token  of  the  Schiffe,  it  made  us  suspitious  of  their
death,  whereupon  our  mindes  were  much  troubled,  doubt-
ing what  might  befall  them,  because  the  windes  raged  in
such  manner,  that  a  wave  of  the  Sea  mounted  with  so

[III.iii.613.]  great  violence  into  the  Pinnasse,  behinde  the  Poope,
where  wee  Christopher  and  Nicholas  were  set  downe,  that
through  the  force  of  the  furie  thereof,  two  stayes  were
battered  and  bent,  which  left  a  token  of  unsupportable
trouble  and  griefe,  by  meanes  that  the  Pinnasse  was  more
charged  with  the  weight  of  the  water,  then  with  her  owne
burthen.  Wherefore  to  remedie  it,  wee  ranne  all  to  lade
it  out  with  our  hands,  and  being  constrained  through  feare

420

PIERO QUIRINO

A.D.

and  necessitie,  for  the  freeing  of  her,  wee  were  faine  to

cast  out  all  that,  whether  with  water  or  without,  which

came  most  fit  and  ready  to  our  hands. The  Pinnasse

becomming  drie againe, presently in this storme, wee

agreed  to  cast  over-boord  the  greatest  part  of  the  Wine,

and  wee  found  our  selves  in  so  great  extremitie,  that  if

wee  would  taste  thereof  to  comfort  our  troubled  senses,  no

more  then  one  goblet  of  Wine  apeece  fell  to  every  mans Hard  dyet.

share  for  the  whole  day,  and  who  so  would  drinke  more,

was  constrayned  to  take  the  Sea-water :  and  this  measure

and quantitie of Wine held out eight dayes, and no

more.

And  afterward  being  driven  to  greater  necessitie,  wee
brought  our  selves  to  a  greater  extremitie,  by  restrayning
our  proportion  to  halfe  a  goblet  a  day,  and  none  of  us
could  securely  sleepe,  for  the  divers  doubts  and  dangers,
wherein  wee  alwayes  presently  stood.  Wee  continued
every  day  and  night,  foure  or  sixe  of  us  at  the  Helme,  and
those  that  were  at  the  Pumpe,  stood  alwayes  firme  and
upright  changing  their  courses,  where  wee  endured  cold
beyond  comparison  farre  greater  then  that,  which  not
many  yeeres  since  was  in  Venice,  when  all  the  Channels
were  frozen,  so  that  from  Margara  to  Venice,  not  onely
Men  and  Women,  but  Oxen,  Horses,  Carts,  and
Waggons,  went  over  upon  the  Ice  in  great  multitudes,  to
the  admiration  of  all  the  people,  because  that  Region  is
(without  comparison)  much  colder  then  the  Countrey  of
Italy.  Now  consider  what  our  case  was,  being  without
Clothes  to  cover  us,  and  not  having  any  thing  to  eate,  or
drinke,  or  other  necessary  thing  for  the  maintenance  of
mans  life,  except  a  few  Frisoppi  which  were  left,  and  the
nights  one  and  twentie  houres  long,  and  also  darke.
Through  the  which  cold,  wee  began  to  lose  the  feeling  of  Extreame
our  feete,  and  by  little  and  little,  the  cold  becomming  more  cold.
vehement,  possessed  the  whole  body,  procuring  a  dogged
and  raging  appetite  and  hunger,  so  that  every  one  sought
to  devoure  that  which  was  hid  in  a  corner,  and  whatsoever
hee  had  next  at  hand,  wheresoever  hee  could  finde  it,  as

421

Great  Frost  at
Venice.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

H31-

well  as  hee  might,  with  that  weake  and  little  strength
which  hee  had  remayning.  Afterward,  death  seasing  upon
them,  you  might  see  them  shake  the  head,  and  fall  downe
presently  dead.

In  the  which  Diseases,  of  seven  and  fortie  men  (which

The  death  of wee  found  in  that  case)  sixe  and  twentie  yeelded  up  the

stxe  and  ghost,  and  it  was  not  any  wonder,  considering  wee  could

not  have  any  succour,  nay,  it  is  a  divine  miracle  that  any
one  remayned  alive.  And  those  few  of  us  that  are  remayn-
ing, live  onely  to  commend  to  memorie,  and  highly  to  exalt
the  great  power  of  God.  Those  sixe  and  twentie  dyed,
from  the  three  and  twentieth  of  December  untill  the  fifth
of  January,  now  one,  now  two,  and  sometimes  more,  in
one  day,  whom  we  buryed  in  the  Sea.

The  one  and  thirtieth  of  December,  our  Wine  being
wholly  spent,  and  having  seene  the  cruell  and  lamentable
experience  of  our  sixe  and  twentie  Companions,  who  dyed
with  drinking  of  the  Sea-water,  necessities  gave  us  a  good
stomacke,  that  is  to  say,  to  take  our  owne  water  to  quench

Great  thirst,  our  thirst.  Now,  there  were  some  of  the  companie
exceedingly  troubled  with  giddinesse :  for,  wanting  the
abundant  plentie  of  Wine,  they  were  not  able  to  indure
thirst,  nor  to  expell  it,  but  they  accounted  it  a  great  favour
to  bee  able  to  obtayne  of  their  companions,  whereof  there
were  some  who  denyed  it  to  their  dearest  friend,  to  keepe
it  for  themselves.  It  is  true,  that  some  of  us  warily  morti-
fied it,  by  mingling  a  little  sirrop  of  greene  Ginger,  or
Limons  therewith,  which  by  chance  we  had  remayning.
During  this  time,  untill  the  fifth  of  January,  we  were
every  houre  more  accustomed  to  greater  extremities.

Sight  of  Land.  The  third  of  January,  1431.  wee  had  sight  of  the  first
Land,  which  gave  us  great  hope,  although  it  so  fell  out,
that  it  was  very  farre  distant,  where  wee  saw  certayne
Rockes  to  weather-ward  covered  to  the  top  with  infinite
heapes  of  Snow,  to  the  which,  the  windes  being  contrary,
wee  were  not  able  to  approach  with  the  sayles,  and  much
lesse  with  Oares,  because  our  armes  were  exceedingly
weakened  :  wherefore  wee  strove  to  come  neere  them  with

422

PIERO QUIRINO

the  winde,  but  passing  beyond  them  through  the  current
of  the  water,  wee  lost  sight  of  them  altogether.

And  after  difficult  escape  from  the  Rockes,  sayling
forward  towards  a  very  high  Rocke,  wee  had  sight  of  a
Valley  scituated  betweene  the  two  next  Mountaynes,  into
the  which  desiring  to  enter  about  the  fourth  houre  of  the
night,  the  cruell  and  outragious  windes  would  not  suffer
us.  Notwithstanding,  inflamed  through  an  exceeding
great  desire  to  goe  on  Land,  wee  tooke  courage  and
strength,  and  (through  force  of  the  Oares,  and  the  helpe
of  God)  entred  into  the  sayd  Valley,  at  a  point  of  Land  in
the  least  doubtfull  and  dangerous  place,  as  it  were  at  the
very  beginning  and  entrie  thereof,  in  the  which,  as  soone
as  they  perceived  the  Pinnasse  to  touch  upon  the  sand,
five  of  our  companie  being  more  desirous  of  drinke,  then
of  any  other  refreshing  and  recreation,  leaped  into  the
water  without  any  regard,  although  it  were  very  deepe,
and  went  their  way  toward  the  Snow,  and  so  glutted  them-
selves therewith,  that  it  was  an  incredible  thing.  And
afterward,  they  brought  a  great  quantitie  thereof  unto  us,
who  remayned  in  the  Pinnasse,  to  defend  it  from  the
beating  of  the  Sea,  of  the  which  wee  also  with  great
greedinesse,  received  without  measure.

And  running  according  to  our  judgement,  as  wee  had
runne  in  this  Pinnasse  for  eighteene  dayes,  from  the  day
that  wee  departed  from  the  ship,  untill  this  sixth  of
Januarie,  sayling  alwayes  betweene  the  North-east  and  the
East,  and  not  with  lesse  winde  then  after  sixe  miles  an
houre,  wee  had  runne  about  two  thousand  five  hundred
miles  and  more,  without  ever  seeing  any  Land.

On  the  sixth  of  January,  at  the  time  of  the  solemne
day  of  the  Epiphanie,  nineteene  of  us  went  on  land  in
this  desolate  and  drie  place,  called  the  Hand  of  the  Saints,
in  the  Coast  of  Norway,  subject  to  the  Crowne  of  Den-
marke,  leaving  two  other  to  looke  to  the  weak  Pinnasse,
that  it  might  not  bee  broken  with  the  beating  of  the  Sea.
And  being  landed  there  by  meanes  of  an  Oare,  we
endeavoured  to  kindle  fire,  and  with  a  tynder  boxe  and

423

A.D.
H31

Hot  strong
stomackes  to
cold  small
drinke.

[III.iii.614.]
They  goe  on
Land.

I  land  of  Saints
or  Santi,
bearing  off  the
coast  of
Norway. See
Ortelius  his
Map  of
Scandia :  hee
placeth  Santi
and  Rustene
in  74.  degrees,
but  too

Northerly  then
they  are  from
the  North
Cape,  from
which  this
Rocke  (saith
Quirino)  bare
Westward
70.  miles:

A.D.

H31-

other  Rockes
not  farre
distant,  some
inhabited  some
not.  This  is  off
Rustene  three
miles  in
compasse,  and
called  in  their
Language  for
the  extreame
remotenesse,
The  arse  of  the
World.

Foure  dye  and
others  after.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Steele  to  strike  fire,  wee  retired  our  selves  into  the  closest
place  from  the  winde,  and  at  the  sight  of  the  fire,  nature
thereby  received  a  little  strength.

Finding  this  Hand  not  inhabited,  and  seeking  to  goe
in  the  Pinnasse  to  another  Hand  five  miles  off,  shee  so
leaked,  that  part  of  us  landing,  as  it  were  all  in  the  water,
and  some  of  us  up  to  the  middle  in  shallower  water,  wee
strove  to  draw  her  on  land,  and  despairing  to  bee  ever
able  to  goe  in  her  againe,  wee  determined  to  fit  her  in
such  sort,  that  shee  might  serve  our  turne  to  cover  us,
after  the  best  manner  that  wee  could.  Wee  broake  her
into  two  parts :  and  of  the  greater  wee  made  a  shelter,  or
Cottage  for  thirteene  of  us,  and  of  the  lesser  a  shedde,
capable  of  five  men,  under  the  which  wee  entred  covering
them  with  part  of  our  sayles,  and  with  the  rest,  and  the
cordage  of  the  sayd  Pinnasse,  wee  made  continuall  fire  to
preserve  our  lives.

Now  being  utterly  destitute  of  all  sustenance  of  meate
and  drinke,  wee  went  wandring  upon  the  Sea  shoare,
where  Nature  gave  us  food  to  maintayne  life,  with  certaine
Perewinckles,  or  Shel-fish  and  Barnacles.  And  of  these,
not  as  many  nor  when  wee  would,  but  in  very  small

?[uantitie.  And  removing  the  Snow  in  some  places,  wee
bund  a  certayne  Herbe,  which  together  with  the  Snow
wee  cast  into  the  Caldron,  and  when  wee  thought  it  was
boyled,  wee  eate  it.  Nor  could  wee  satisfie  our  selves
therewith,  and  thus  wee  lived  for  thirteene  dayes  together,
with  small  charitie  amongst  us,  by  reason  of  the  great
scarcitie  of  all  thinges  and  extreame  famine,  leading  rather
a  brutish  life,  then  the  life  of  men.

Continuing  in  this  rude  and  homely  kinde  of  life,  it
happened,  that  through  the  intolerable  wants  foure  of
our  companions  of  the  greater  retiring  place,  failed  even
where  the  afflicted  Master  was,  with  those  remedies  and
slender  comforts  for  their  soules  and  bodies :  so  that  you
may  thinke  their  bodies  remayning  neere  unto  us,  who
being  very  weake  had  lost  all  our  strength,  wee  were  not
able  to  remove  them  two  yardes  out  of  sight :  and  yet  I

424

PIERO QUIRINO

will  say  more,  that  wee  had  no  sooner  taken  the  frozen
or  warme  water  in  our  mouthes,  but  presently  Nature  of
it  selfe  cast  it  up  againe,  wee  not  beeing  able  to  abstaine
from  it,  nor  almost  to  stand  on  our  feete.

The  cold  season  of  the  yeere  had  brought  us  to  such
necessitie,  that  (to  warme  us)  wee  stood  close  thronged,
in  such  sort,  that  wee  seemed  (as  it  were)  to  bee  sewed
together.  Wherefore  I  entred  under  the  sayles,  which
covered  both  our  Cottages  round  about  downe  to  the
ground,  the  smoake  not  being  able  to  issue  foorth,  which
proceeded  (as  I  thinke)  from  the  Pitch  which  was  within
certaine  peeces  of  the  Pinnasse,  which  we  burned,  so  that
our  eyes  were  swolne  that  wee  could  not  see :  neverthe-
lesse  wee  indured  all,  that  wee  might  bee  warme.  And
our  garments  which  wee  never  put  off,  were  full  of
vermine,  and  the  Lice  swarmed  in  such  number,  that
taking  them  from  our  backes,  wee  cast  them  by  whole
handruls  into  the  fire,  and  they  had  entred  into  the  flesh
in  such  manner  through  the  skinne,  even  to  the  bones,
that  finally  they  brought  a  young  man  of  our  company
(that  was  a  Notarie)  even  unto  death,  so  that  hee  was
never  able  to  defend  himselfe  from  so  loathsome  a  litle
vermine.  A  thing  of  most  manifest  example,  to  abase
and  abate  our  pride,  and  haughtinesse  of  minde.

Now  concord  fayling  among  us,  every  one  used  his
owne  proper  advise,  whereupon  part  of  our  companie
wandring  through  the  Savage  and  un-inhabited  place,
came  to  the  knowledge  of  a  solitarie  and  ancient  retiring
place  made  by  the  Shepherds  heretofore,  for  the  time  of
their  abode,  and  it  was  seated  on  the  highest  part  of  the
Coast  of  the  sayd  Hand  towards  the  West,  distant  from
ours  about  a  mile  and  a  halfe.  Unto  the  which,  sixe  of
the  companie  of  the  number  of  those  eight,  which  were
found  in  that  first  and  greater  retiring  place,  determined
to  remoove  themselves  to  that  new-found  solitarie  habita-
tion, for  their  lesse  inconvenience  leaving  the  other  two,
their  other  companions  alone,  in  an  abandoned  and  for-
saken place,  as  well  because  they  were  not  able  to  travell,

425

A.D.
1431'

Great
weakenesse.

Miserable
cold.

Abundance  of
Lice.

A.D.

I431'

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

They  finde  a
Fish.

as  also  for  that  wee  were  altogether  unable  to  conduct
them.

It  came  to  passe,  that  those  sixe  through  the  gracious
goodnesse  and  gift  of  God,  found  an  exceeding  great  Fish,
to  the  which  I  know  not  what  name  to  give,  whether
[III.iii.615.]  Whale,  or  Porpisse  of  the  Sea,  which  wee  are  to  thinke
was  sent  from  the  Divine  and  excellent  bountie  to  feed
us.  And  considering  that  wee  saw  it  cast  up  by  the  Sea
upon  the  shoare,  dead,  fresh,  good  and  great,  and  at  the
time  of  our  so  great  necessitie,  wee  rendred  thankes  unto
our  most  gracious  Lord  God,  who  at  that  time  would
sustayne  our  so  weake  and  diseased  bodies,  with  that
foode,  appeased  peradventure  through  the  prayers  of  some
vigilant  and  devout  soule.

With  this  Fish,  wee  fedde  our  selves  for  nine  dayes
sufficiently.  And  as  it  happened,  those  very  nine  dayes
were  so  tempestuous  with  windes,  rayne  and  snow,  that
by  no  meanes  the  cruell  storme  would  have  suffered  us  to
goe  one  pace  out  of  our  Cottage.

The  miraculous  Fish  being  spent,  the  furious  tempest
was  somewhat  asswaged,  wherefore  not  having  wherewith
to  maintayne  life,  like  Wolves  that  oppressed  with  famine,
goe  to  seeke  out  other  places  of  abode,  wee  arose  out  of  the
Cottage,  and  went  wandring  through  the  desert  Rockes  to
finde  any  succour  to  sustayne  our  life  with  Perewinckles  of
the  Sea  and  Barnacles ;  with  the  which  wee  were  of  neces-
sitie to  bee  contented,although  they  were  very  little  thinges,
and  so  wee  maintayned  our  selves  untill  the  last  of  January,
1 43 1.  and  therefore  wee  were  leane,  pale,  afflicted,  and
but  halfe  alive.  In  which  time  finding  certayne  dung  of
Oxen  scorched  and  dryed  with  the  cold  and  winde,
(whereof  wee  gathered  every  day  to  make  a  fire)  wee
certainely  knew  that  place  to  bee  frequented  by  Oxen  :
which  thing  gave  us  assured  hope  of  some  good  end,  and
through  this  perswasion  wee  indured  part  of  our  grievous
cares  and  sorrowes.

In  the  end  the  houre  came,  wherein  our  benigne  Creator
and  most  gracious  Lord,  purposed  to  conduct  his  little

426

1432.  x
Foraine
account.

PIERO QUIRINO  a.d.

H31-
flocke  so  much  afflicted,  into  the  Haven  of  their  safetie  :
and  it  was  in  this  manner.  Two  young  Heifers  of  a
Fisher-man  neere  unto  this  Hand  within  five  miles,  beeing
strayed  the  former  yeere  from  the  place  where  hee  used
to  dwell,  and  never  understanding  any  newes  of  them
within  the  yeere,  nor  having  any  hope  to  finde  them
againe,  on  the  very  first  day  of  February,  1431.  at  night,
one  of  the  Sonnes  of  the  said  Fisher-man  of  Rustene  (for  lie  ofRustene.
so  the  said  Hand  was  called)  being  of  the  age  of  sixteene
yeeres,  dreamed  that  certainly  the  two  Heifers  were
escaped,  and  gone  up  to  the  Hand  of  Saints  distant  from
them,  where  wee  were  lodged,  at  the  point  of  the  West
part,  upon  the  which  no  man  durst  ever  goe  at  the  low
water.  Whereupon  the  Sonne  who  had  such  a  vision  or
dreame,  prayed  the  Father,  and  an  elder  Brother  of  his,
that  they  would  accompany  him  to  goe  to  seeke  them.

And  so,  all  three  in  a  Fisher-boate  tooke  their  way
towards  the  sayd  Hand,  and  came  to  the  point  where  wee
were,  and  the  sayd  young  men  landing  there,  left  their
Father  to  looke  to  the  Boate,  and  having  ascended  a  little
upon  the  Cliffe,  they  saw  a  smoake  arise  in  the  ayre,  from
their  retiring  place  which  they  had  formerly  used.
Whereupon  through  feare  and  astonishment  they
marvelled,  and  that  not  a  little,  how,  whence,  and
by  what  meanes  it  might  come  to  passe.  Wherefore,
they  stood  a  long  time  much  amazed.  And  desiring  to
know  the  cause,  they  began  to  talke  one  with  another.
And  although  wee  perceived  the  noyse,  and  heard  the
voyce ;  yet  wee  could  not  conceive  whence  it  should  bee,
but  rather  judged  it  to  bee  the  crying  of  Crowes,  then
the  voyce  of  men.  And  wee  were  the  rather  induced
thereunto,  because  some  few  dayes  before,  wee  had  seene
(upon  the  miserable  Carkasses  of  our  eight  companions
cast  to  the  winde)  multitudes  of  Crowes,  that  rent  the
ayre  with  their  croking,  feeding  themselves  upon  them  :
whereupon  wee  thought  it  could  bee  no  other.

But  continuing  from  good  to  better,  the  voyces  of  the
children  of  God  sent  to  save  us,  wee  cleerely  perceived

427

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

H31-

that  they  were  the  voyces  of  Men,  and  not  the  crying  of
Fowles.  And  at  that  instant  Christophoro  Fioravanti
arose  out  of  the  Cottage,  and  seeing  the  two  young
striplings,  crying  with  a  loude  voyce  came  towards  us,
saying,  Rejoyce,  behold  two  come  to  seeke  us.  Where-
upon, inflamed  with  an  earnest  desire,  wee  raysed  our
selves  on  our  feete,  going  rather  with  the  heart  then  with
the  feete,  and  drawing  neere  unto  them,  wee  perceived
that  through  the  sudden  and  extreame  strangenesse  of  the
matter,  they  were  afraid,  and  their  countenances  began  to
waxe  pale.  But  contrarily  wee  cheered  our  selves,  and
being  comforted  with  an  assured  hope,  shewed  with  actions
and  gestures  of  humilitie,  that  wee  came  not  to  offend
them  in  any  wise.  Divers  thoughts  came  in  our  mindes,
whether  wee  should  detaine  one  of  them  or  both,  or
whether  one  or  two  of  us  should  goe  with  them.  The
first  determination  was  against  us,  because  wee  knew  not
with  whom,  nor  with  how  many  wee  had  to  doe,  for  that
wee  understood  not  them,  nor  they  us.

But  being  advised  by  the  holy  Ghost,  wee  went  downe
to  their  Boate,  in  the  best  and  most  amiable  manner  that
wee  could,  where  the  Father  was,  who  expected  them :
and  when  he  saw  us,  hee  also  remayned  astonished  and
amazed.  In  this  meane  space,  wee  looked  whether  there
were  any  thing  in  their  Boate  to  succour  our  necessities,
to  maintayne  life :  but  wee  found  nothing  there.  So,
they  moved  through  pitie,  seeing  us  affamished,  by  signes
and  actions  which  wee  made  unto  them,  were  contented  to
carrie  with  them  Ghirardo  da  Lione,  a  Sewer,  and  Cola  di
Otranto,  a  Marriner,  who  had  some  knowledge,  and  were
able  to  speake  the  French  and  the  high  Dutch,  leaving  us
in  great  hope  of  present  safetie  and  helpe.
[III.iii.6i6.]  Their  Boate  comming  to  Rustene  with  our  two  com-
panions, all  the  people  flocked  together,  and  seeing  the
countenance  and  habite  of  our  companions,  astonished  at
so  great  and  strange  a  matter,  they  demanded  among
themselves,  whence,  &  how  such  like  fellowes  as  these
appeared,  or  from  what  place  they  landed :  and  that  they

428

PIERO QUIRINO

A.D.

H31-

might  be  the  better  advertised,  they  attempted  to  speake

unto  them  in  divers  Languages,  but  in  the  end  an  Almaine A  Germaine

Priest  of  the  Order  of  the  Preachers,  spake  with  one  of Prtest-

the said companions in the high  Dutch, and by that

meanes,  they  were  certified  what  wee  were,  from  whence,

and  how  wee  had  arrived  there. The  which  matter  the

morning  following,  which  was  the  second  day  of  Februarie

dedicated  to  the  glorious  Mother  of  Christ,  the  said  Priest

published  to  all  the  people  of  Rustene,  exhorting  them,

that  through  our  misfortune,  they  would  bee  mooved  to

pitie  and  to  helpe  us,  according  to  their  abilitie.

In  this  meane  space,  through  the  Catholike  remem-
brance of  the  Almaine  Priest,  on  the  third  day  of
February,  1431.  at  the  very  instant  of  the  day  of  Saint
Biagio,  the  curteous  and  pittifull  Inhabitants  of  Rustene
came  unto  us  with  great  plentie  of  all  sustenance,  which
they  use  for  their  provision,  to  feed  us  and  preserve  us,
being  desirous  to  conduct  us  to  their  kinde  habitations,  to
refresh  our  weake  bodies.  And  so  wee  were  guided  and
received  into  Rustene  upon  the  sayd  day,  where  wee  had
great  restoratives,  which  were  rather  hurtfull  for  us,
through  the  exceeding  abundance  thereof,  because  wee
could  never  satisfie  our  selves  with  eating,  and  our  weake
stomackes  not  being  able  to  indure  it,  it  made  our  hearts
to  grieve,  so  that  wee  thought  wee  should  have  dyed.

There  were  remayning  in  the  first  and  greater  of  our
two  retiring  places,  two  of  the  companie  which  were
impotent  and  weake,  who  knew  nothing  of  this  our  so
miraculous  succour.  Wherefore  giving  these  Catholike
Countrey  people  notice  of  them,  and  likewise  of  the  other
eight  that  were  dead  and  unburied,  assembling  themselves
together,  they  went  with  the  Priest  singing  Psalmes  and
Hymnes,  as  well  to  burie  those  eight  that  were  dead,  as
to  conduct  to  the  Haven  of  safetie  the  two  that  were
remayning  behinde,  and  arriving  at  the  Hand  of  Saints,
they  performed  a  worke  of  mercy  to  the  eight  that  were
dead,  to  the  which  number,  one  of  the  two  remayning
was  added,  whom  they  found  dead. Now  imagine,  how

429

A.D.

H31-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Rust  en  e
described.

the  other  could  continue  being  deprived  of  companie  and
all  humaine  sustenance,  and  yet  hee  was  brought  to
Rustene  with  some  little  shew  of  life,  where,  at  the  end
of  two  dayes  hee  departed  this  transitorie  life.

Eleven  of  us  being  come  to  Rustene,  wee  landed  and
went  into  the  house  of  our  Guide,  Host,  and  Lord,  as
hee  and  the  rest  desired,  whereinto  our  most  prudent
Master,  Master  Piero  Quirino  entring,  using  his  wise-
dome  and  discretion,  performed  an  action  of  exceeding
great  humilitie,  as  soone  as  hee  saw  the  companion  of  our
Conductor  and  Sergeant  Major,  declaring  by  semblance
that  hee  would  acknowledge  her  to  bee  the  Mistresse  of
the  house,  hee  cast  himselfe  downe  at  her  feet :  but  shee
refused  and  lifted  him  up  from  the  ground,  embracing  him
and  bringing  him  to  the  fire,  and  with  her  owne  hand
gave  him  somewhat  to  eate.

In  this  Hand  there  are  twelve  little  Houses,  with  about
one  hundred  and  twentie  persons,  for  the  most  part
Fishermen,  and  they  are  by  nature  indued  with  under-
standing to  know  how  to  make  Boates,  Buckets,  Tunnes,
Baskets,  Nets  of  all  sorts,  and  every  other  thing  necessarie
for  their  use  and  trade.  And  they  are  very  curteous  one
toward  another  and  serviceable,  desirous  to  please  rather
for  love,  then  for  hope  of  any  gift  or  good  turne  to  bee
Stock-fish  done  them  againe.  Fishes  called  Stock-fish,  in  all  their
instead  of  payments  and  bartering,  are  used  in  stead  of  coyned
wn^'  money,  and  they  are  all  as  it  were  of  one  bignesse  and
measure,  of  the  which  every  yeere  they  drie  an  infinite
number  in  the  winde :  and  in  the  time  of  May  fraight
themselves  with  them,  carrying  them  through  the  Realmes
of  Denmarke,  that  is  to  say,  Sweden,  Denmarke,  and
Norway,  being  all  Subject  to  the  King  of  Dacia :  where
they  barter  and  exchange  the  said  Fish,  for  Leather,
Cloathes,  Iron,  Pulse  and  other  things,  whereof  they  have
scarcitie.

Few  other  things  for  maintenance  of  life  are  found
there,  except  Fish,  yet  at  certaine  times,  they  have  some
small  quantitie  of  Beefe,  and  Milke  of  Kine,  of  the  which,

43°

PIERO QUIRINO

A.D.

Their  drinke
and  bread.

with  Rice,  and  I  know  not  what  other  mixture,  they  make
Bread  of  a  naughtie  taste.  Their  Drinke  is  sowre  Milke,
displeasing  unto  them,  who  have  not  beene  accustomed
thereunto.  They  use  also  Ale,  that  is  to  say,  Wine
drawne  out  of  Rie.  Wee  eate  of  the  Plaice  or  Halibut  Halibuts  very
fish,  which  are  exceeding  great,  so  that  you  would  not  &'eaL
beleeve  it.  Wee  saw  some  of  them  somewhat  longer
then  sixe  feete  of  the  common  Venetian  measure,  above
two  foote  broad  upon  the  Chine,  and  more  then  three
quarters  of  a  foote  in  thicknesse  :  a  wonderfull  thing  to
bee  spoken.  They  cloath  the  men  with  redde  Hides,  and
likewise  blacke,  able  to  defend  them  from  the  water,  and
they  use  cloathes  very  course,  of  azure,  redde,  and  ash-
colour,  brought  from  Denmarke,  of  small  price  and
estimation.

These Countrey people use much to frequent the
Church,  because  they  are  very  devout,  and  yeeld  great
reverence  to  the  worship  and  service  of  God. Avarice, Sinceritie.
is  as  it  were  altogether  extinguished,  for,  they  understand simplicitie
not  in  any  sort,  nor  know  not  what  thing  of  anothers  may [iii.iii.617.]
become  theirs,  but  by  barter :  and  therefore  they  use  not Thus  the
to  locke  Doore,  House,  nor  Windowes,  nor  any  Chest  for  ^ta^ans
feare  to  bee  robbed,  but  onely  by  reason  of  the  wilde rgpardofth  '
Beasts.  _  _  differing

The  Inhabitants  of  this  place  both  young  and  old,  are  jeakusie,
of  so  great  simplicitie  of  heart,  and  obedient  to  the  Com- whu\  scarsh
mandement  of  God,  that  they  neither  understand,  know,  ^™!1*  £„'
nor  imagine  in  any  wise,  what  Fornication,  or  Adulterie
may  bee : but  use Marriage  according to  Gods Com-
mandement. And  to  give  you  a  true  proofe  hereof  I
Christophoro  say,  that  we  were  in  the  house  of  our  fore-
said Host,  and  slept  in  one  and  the  same  Cottage,  m  where
hee  also  and  his  Wife  slept,  and  successively  in  one  Bed

neere  adjoyning,  were  their  Daughters  and  Sonnes  of  ripe  sM  in  the

same  Cham-
ber their  houses  being  built  of  timber  in  round  forme,  with  one  light  in  the  top,  which  in  winter
by  reason  of  the  un supportable  cold  is  covered  with  skinnes  of  great  fishes,  which  cast  a  great
lustre.  Their  children  after  four e  daies  old  are  set  under  the  same  for  the  snow  to  fal  on  them,
that  they  may  bee  hardened  for  the  cold.

431

growne  Sonne
or  Brother  to
sleepe  under
the  same  roofe
with  the
Mother  or
Sister.
Quirino

A.D.

H31

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Funerall.

From  thejift
ofFebr.  to  the
14.  of May,  it

almost  a/way
snowed.  Their
garments  are
of  course  cloth
of  London y
\$c.  more  then
ofLether.
Bathing.

age  together,  neere  to  the  which  Beds  we  also  slept,  almost
close  adjoyning  to  them :  so  that  when  they  went  to
sleepe,  or  when  they  arose,  or  when  they  stripped  them-
selves naked,  and  wee  in  like  manner,  we  indifferently
saw  one  another,  and  yet  with  that  puritie,  as  if  wee  had
beene  little  children.  But  I  will  tell  you  more,  that  for
two  dayes  together,  our  said  Host,  with  his  elder  Sonnes

goe

fishi

n&

even  at  the  time  of  the  most

arose  to

delightfull  houre  of  sleepe,  leaving  his  Wife  and
Daughters  in  the  Bed,  with  that  securitie  and  puritie,  as
if  he  had  properly  left  them  in  the  armes  and  embrace-
ments  of  the  Mother,  not  returning  to  his  home  in  lesse
time  then  the  space  of  eight  houres.

The  Inhabitants  of  this  Hand,  especially  the  elder  sort,
are  found  so  united  in  their  wils  to  the  will  of  God,  that
in  every  casualtie  of  naturall  death,  which  befalleth  Father,
Mother,  Husband,  Wife,  Children,  or  whatsoever  other
Kinsman,  or  Friend,  when  the  houre  of  their  passage
unto  another  life  appeareth,  presently  without  any  griefe
of  heart  and  complaining,  they  assemble  themselves
together  unto  the  Cathedrall  Church,  to  thanke  and  prayse
the  Heavenly  Creator,  who  hath  permitted  such  an  one  to
live  so  many  yeeres,  and  at  that  present,  as  his  creature
vouchsafed  to  call  him,  or  her  into  his  gracious  favour,  and
neere  unto  him :  and  at  the  appointed  houre  they  cause
them  to  be  washed  cleane,  to  have  them  pure  and  neate,
as  they  were  borne.  Whereupon  rejoycing  and  content-
ing themselves  with  his  infallible  will  and  pleasure,  they
give  him  prayse  and  glorie,  not  shewing  any  passion  either
in  words  or  gestures,  as  if  properly  they  had  but  slept.
Surely  we  may  say,  that  from  the  third  of  February  1431.
untill  the  fourteenth  of  May  1432.  which  amounteth  to
an  hundred  dayes  and  one,  we  were  within  the  circuit  of
Paradise,  to  the  reproch  and  shame  of  the  Countries  of
Italic

There  at  the  beginning  of  May  we  saw  great  varietie
and  alteration.  First,  their  women  use  to  goe  unto  the
Bathes,  which  are  very  neere  and  commodious,  as  well  for

432

PIERO QUIRINO

puritie,  as  for  the  custome  they  observe,  which  they  hold
agreeable  unto  Nature :  they  use  to  come  forth  of  their
houses  starke  naked,  as  they  came  out  of  their  Mothers
wombe,  going  without  any  regard  to  their  way,  carrying
only  in  their  right  hand  an  heape  of  grasse,  in  manner  of
a  broome,  as  they  say,  to  rub  the  sweat  from  their  backe,
and  the  left  hand  they  hold  upon  their  hip,  spreading  it
as  it  were  for  a  shadow  to  cover  their  hinder  parts,  that
they  should  not  much  appeare :  where  having  twice  seene
them,  we  passed  away  by  them,  as  easily  as  their  owne
people,  the  Countrey  was  so  cold,  and  the  continuall
seeing  of  them,  that  it  caused  us  to  make  no  account
thereof.  On  the  contrary  part,  these  very  women  were
seene  on  the  Sunday  to  enter  into  the  Church  in  long  and
comely  Garments.  And  that  they  might  not  by  any
meanes  be  seene  in  the  face,  they  weare  on  their  head  a
thing  like  a  compleat  Morion  with  a  Gorget,  which  hath
an  hole  to  see  through  at  the  end,  like  the  hole  of  a  Pipe,
through  the  which  they  behold  within  that,  no  further  off
from  their  eyes  then  the  hole  is  long,  so  that  they  seeme
to  have  it  in  their  mouthes  to  pipe :  and  worse  then  that,
they  can  neither  see  nor  speake,  unlesse  they  turne  them-
selves a  yard  or  more,  from  the  hearer.  I  thought  good
to  note  these  two  extreame  varieties,  as  worthy  to  bee
understood.

From  the  twentieth  of  November,  untill  the  twentieth
of  February,  the  night  continueth  and  lasteth  there  about
one  and  twentie  houres  or  more,  the  Moon  never  wholly
hiding  her  bodie  or  her  rayes  at  least.  And  from  the
twentieth  of  May  untill  the  twentieth  of  August,  either  the
whole  Sunne  is  alwayes  seene,  or  else  his  beames  never  faile.

In  this  Countrey  there  is  infinite  plentie  of  white  Birds,
in  their  Language  called  Muxi,  but  we  called  them  Cockes
of  the  Sea,  which  by  nature  converse,  and  willingly  abide
where  men  inhabit,  whether  they  find  them  in  Barkes  or
on  the  Land.  And  they  are  so  domesticall  and  tame,  as
House-doves  are  with  us.

In  this  Hand,  and  in  the  Countries  of  Suecia,  we  saw

A.D.

H31-

Long  nights.
Quirino  saith,
that  it  is  three
moneths  night
with  continual
light  of  the
Moone;  and
three  others
day  with  con-
tinuall sight  or
light  at  least  of
the  Sunne.
Birds,  Muxi.

XIII

433

2  E

A.D.

H31-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

very  white  skins  of  Beares  as  white  as  Armelins,  much
longer  then  twelve  Venetian  feete.  Wee  abode  in
Rustene  three  moneths  and  eleven  dayes,  expecting  a  fit
time  to  passe  with  our  Host  into  Sueden,  with  his  usuall
fraight  of  Stock-fish,  which  is  in  the  time  of  May,  when
these  Countrey  people  depart,  carrying  with  them  infinite
plentie  thereof  through  the  Realmes  of  the  aforesaid  King
of  Dacia.

They  retume.  On  the  fourteenth  day  of  May  1432.  came  the  houre  so
much  desired,  to  turne  our  faces  towards  our  amiable  and
beloved  Countrey,  as  our  minde  and  desire  alwayes  was,
and  leave  the  charitable  place  of  Rustene,  which  was  the
last  succour  and  refreshing  to  our  miseries.  So  wee  tooke
our  leave  of  our  Domesticall  friends  of  the  House,  and
of  our  Mistresse  and  Hostesse,  to  whom  in  token  of  our
love  we  left,  not  that  whereunto  we  were  in  dutie  bound,
but  what  wee  had  remayning  :  and  that  was  certayne  small

[III.iii.618.]  trifling  things  of  little  value  in  our  opinion,  as  Goblets,
Girdles,  and  small  Rings.  And  likewise  wee  tooke  leave
of  the  Neighbours,  and  the  Priest,  and  generally  of  all,
shewing  them  by  signes  and  words,  as  the  Interpreter
might  understand  then,  that  we  acknowledged  our  selves
bound  unto  them  all.  And  having  performed  due  saluta-
tions, we  entred  into  a  Barke  of  the  burthen  of  twentie
tunnes,  or  thereabouts,  laden  with  the  said  fish,  guided  by
our  Patrone  and  Host,  with  three  of  his  Sonnes,  and
certayne  of  their  Kindred.  And  we  departed  on  the  said
day  bending  our  course  towards  Bergie,  which  is  the  first
convenient  and  fit  Haven  for  the  dispatch  and  riddance  of
such  fish,  which  place  is  distant  from  Rustene,  about  some
thousand  miles.  So  we  conducted  the  said  Barke  through
certaine  direct  and  safe  channels,  rowing  most  com-
modiously  and  at  ease.

But  after  we  were  about  two  hundred  miles  off  from
Rustene,  wee  found  certaine  Relikes  of  the  plankes  and
ribs  of  our  Skiffe,  whereby  we  plainly  knew,  that  our
companions  which  were  in  it,  were  perished  and  drowned,
the  first  night  that  they  departed  from  us.

434

Berga.

Tokens  of  the

Skiffe

drowned.

PIERO QUIRINO

A.D.

H32-

Trondon.

The  nine  and  twentieth  of  May  1432.  we  arrived  with
the  said  Barke  at  Trondon,  upon  the  Coast  of  Norway,
the  Princely  Seate  of  the  King  of  Denmarke,  where  the
Honourable  bodie  of  glorious  Saint  Olaus  resteth.  There  Saint  Olaus.
wee  stayed  ten  dayes  to  waite  for  passage,  and  a  fit  time
for  our  Voyage  :  but  not  finding  it,  because  we  would  lose
no  more  time,  wee  tooke  leave  of  our  beloved  Host,  his
Sonnes  and  the  rest,  to  proceed  on  our  journey  by  Land.

The  ninth  of  June  we  departed  from  Trondon,  travel-
ling on  foot,  going  towards  Vastena,  a  place  subject  to  the  Vaitena.
King  of  Denmarke,  within  the  Province  of  Sweden,  where
the  cheek-bone  and  part  of  the  bone  of  the  head  of  Saint
Bridget  remayneth.  Being  there,  wee  understood  by  the
Venetians,  that  the  Inhabitants  for  the  reverence  of  their
glorious  King  Saint  Olaus,  unto  whom  (as  they  well  knew)
our  Signiorie  of  Venice  did  great  favour  in  his  going  and
returning  from  his  Voyage  to  Hierusalem,  were  disposed
with  deeds  to  provide  for  us  by  their  counsell,  helpe  and
money.  And  first,  they  advised  us  not  to  goe  the  direct
way  into  Dacia,  by  reason  of  the  dangers  of  wilde  beasts,
which  might  befall  us,  but  to  addresse  our  selves  to  goe
directly  to  Stichimborgi,  to  find  out  a  valiant  Venetian
Knight  called  M.  Giovan  Francho,  from  whom  wee  should
receve  favour  and  helpe  in  plentifull  manner,  for  love  of
our  Countrey,  although  the  way  were  thirtie  dayes
journey,  quite  contrary  to  our  direct  way.  On  the
eighteenth  day  we  came  to  the  Court  of  the  said  Cavallier
M.  Giovan  Francho,  an  Honourable  Baron,  and  highly
esteemed  of  the  Crowne  of  Dacia,  where  (with  great  joy)
we  found  our  two  straggling  companions.

The  valorous  Knight  being  now  informed  of  our  com-
ming,  with  a  cheereful  countenance  declared  well  unto  us
how  great  the  love  of  his  Countrey  was,  and  especially
knowing  the  calamitie  and  penurie  of  us  his  Countrey-
men,  and  being  easily  able  to  releeve  it.  And  therefore
he  could  not  sufficiently  satisfie  himselfe  in  honouring,
clothing  and  feeding  us,  but  gave  us  money  for  our  neces-
sities, and  furnishing  us  afterward  with  good  Horses,  in

435

Venetian
Knight.

A.D.
1432.

Lodese.

*Quirino
saith  when  he
set  foot  on
England,  hee
seemed  to  bee
comme  out  of
Hell  and
revived.
Hee  came  to
Combridge,an
Universitie
where  a  Bene-
dictine gave
him  sixteene
Crownes,
thence  to
London,  zvhere
he  stayed  two
moneths,  &c.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

his  owne  proper  person,  together  with  his  only  Sonne  M.
Mapheo,  with  an  hundred  and  twentie  Horses  of  his  owne
Servants  he  accompanied  us  many  dayes  journeyes  through
his  Territories,  travelling  alwayes  at  his  owne  charge.
Afterward,  upon  his  limits  and  bounds  wee  tooke  our
leave  to  depart,  thanking  him  with  the  most  reverent  and
kind  speeches  that  possibly  we  could.  Whereupon  he
being  departed,  left  us  for  our  Guide,  his  said  sonne  M.
Mapheo  with  twentie  servants  on  Horse-backe,  who  kept
us  company  unto  Vastena,  the  place  from  whence  about
fortie  dayes  before  we  had  departed,  unto  the  wrhich  place,
for  the  avoyding  of  two  monethes  travell,  wee  were  faine
to  returne  :  so  that  on  the  thirtieth  day  of  July  wee  entred
into  Vastena,  where  wee  abode  untill  the  second  of
August,  being  alwayes  accompanied,  and  our  charges
borne  by  the  said  M.  Mapheo.

On  the  second  of  August,  we  tooke  our  leave  of  the
foresaid  M.  Mapheo,  yeelding  him  such  thankes  as  we
could.  And  being  departed  from  him  wee  went  to
Lodese,  where  wee  arrived  the  eleventh  of  the  said
moneth :  in  which  place  we  found  two  passages,  the  one
for  England,  and  the  other  for  the  Low  Countries :  and
there  we  voluntarily  divided  our  selves  into  two  parts.

The  two  and  twentieth  of  August  1432.  we  Christo-
phoro  Fioravante,  one  of  the  Councell  of  the  unfortunate
ship,  together  with  Girardo  da  Lione,  the  Sewer,  and
Nicolo  di  Michiel  of  Venice  the  Notarie,  now  Writer  of
this  present  Discourse,  departed  from  the  other  eight  of  our
companions,  they  going  towards  London  and  we  to  Venice,
by  the  way  of  Rostoch,  pretending  to  goe  to  Rome  for  a
Pardon  :  and  after  many  troubles  and  molestations,  passing
over  Mountaynes,  Valleyes,  Rivers,  sometimes  on  foot,
and  sometimes  on  Horse-backe,  through  the  helpe  of  the
Omnipotent  God,  we  came  unto  our  so  much  desired
Countrey  of  Venice,  on  the  twelfth  of  October,  1432.
safe  and  found,  leaving  the  said  Girardo  da  Lion  at
Vasenech,  who  from  thence  went  unto  his  Countrey :  and

those that went into  *

England
436

were these ; Master

PIERO QUIRINO

A.D.
1432.

Francesco  Quirino,  Sonne  of  Master  Jacomo  a  Venetian

Gentleman, being Merchant of the unhappie ship.

Master  Piero  Gradenico,  Sonne  of  Master  Andrea,  of  the

age  of  eighteene  yeeres,  a  young  Merchant,  Bernardo  da

Caghire, Pilot of  the ship, whose  Wife  being  young,

aswell  through  the  long  delay  of  time  passed,  as  for  that

it  was  many  times  certainly  reported,  that  the  said  ship

with  all  them  that  were  therein,  were  in  great  danger,  and

no  token  at  all  appearing  to  the  contrary,  being  advised

more  hastily,  then  upon  mature  consideration,  as  is  the

manner  of  needie  women,  she  married  her  selfe  at  Triviso. [III.1ii.619.]

But  hearing  of  our  comming,  and  the  certayne  newes  of

her  living  and  true  Husband,  she  presently  separated  the

bond  of  the  second  Marriage,  and  shut  her  selfe  up  in  an

honest  Monasterie,  aswell  to  declare  the  Integritie  of  her

minde,  as  to  expect  the  returne  of  her  true  Husband,  who

about  some  three  moneths  after  came  to  Venice  safe  and

sound,  and  tooke  her  againe  unto  him,  &c.

Chap. XIX.

Ancient  Commerce  betwixt  England  and  Norway,
and  other  Northerne  Regions.

Reat  Alexander  is  said  in  hearing  a
Flatterers  Historie  of  his  conquests,
making  them  (how  great  soever  in  them-
selves) farre  greater  then  they  were,  to
have  caused  that  booke  to  bee  throwne
into  the  Sea,  with  just  indignation
exclaiming,  that  those  incredibilities  would
make  that  which  hee  had  indeed  done,  seeme  incredible
to  posteritie.  And  a  Liar  (said  Alexanders  Master,
Aristotle)  gets  this  by  lying,  that  when  he  speakes  truth
he  cannot  be  beleeved.  So  hath  it  fared  with  that  Brittish
worthy,  King  Arthur,  whose  Great  Acts  by  great  Flat-
terers, seeking  to  light  candles  to  the  Sunne,  have  made
others  suppose  it  to  be  night,  and  his  worth  to  be  a  worke
of  darknesse  and  lyes. Neither  doth  the  later  posteritie

437

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Galf.  Mon-
muthy  I.  9.

C. IO, 12, I9.
&1.1I.C.I7.

*Ger.

Mercator,
Lambart  his
'ApKcaovofjua.

/I37.

Octhers
voyage  see
Hak.  to.  1

^Edgars
greatnesse.

know  how  to  distinguish  the  one  from  the  other ;  and
the  Writers  for  and  against  the  truth  of  the  Brittish
storie,  as  JefFery  of  Monmouth  and  William  of  New-
bridge of  old,  and  others  since,  have  seemed  to  me  to
let  the  truth  (as  in  altercation  is  usuall)  to  fall  downe
betwixt  them,  for  others  moderate  spirits  to  take  up.
Although  therefore  many  things  related  of  Arthur  are
absurd,  yet  so  are  not  all,  nor  that  altogether  which  is
spoken  of  his  Northerne  conquests,  eleven  hundred  yeeres
since,  and  of  commerce  at  least,  if  not  some  kind  of
tributarie  acknowledgment,  of  Guillaumurius  the  King  of
Ireland,  Gunfacius  of  the  Orcades,  Malvasius  of  Island,*
Doldavis  of  Gotland,  Aschilius  of  the  Danes,  and  Lot
King  of  Norway.  Some  *  adde,  that  King  Arthur  left
people  to  inhabite  the  Hands,  and  that  the  Norwegian
Nobles  tooke  them  Brittish  wives,  and  that  the  Nor-
wegians professing  their  Brittish  bloud,  and  liking
Englands  fertilitie  better  then  that  their  own  sterilitie
and  rockie  barrennesse,  sought  by  force  of  warres  often
to  conquer  that  which  would  not  be  peaceably  yeelded ;
till  King  Edward,  a  maintainer  of  peace,  with  consent  of
the  Kingdome,  permitted  them  to  dwell  heere  at  pleasure,
as  sworne  brethren  to  the  English.  Octher,  subject  and
servant  to  King  Alfred  above  seven  hundred  yeeres  since,
related  to  his  said  Lord  his  voyage  from  Helgoland  (where
he  then  dwelt)  to  the  North  Cape,  and  (as  probable
circumstances  argue)  along  the  coast  to  the  Bay  of  Saint
Nicolas.

iEdgar,  that  famous  founder  of  Monasteries,  is  said
by  Ranulphus  Cestrensis  to  have  in  annuall  use  foure
thousand  ships,  and  by  Flores  Historiarum  foure  thousand
eight  hundred,  using  yeerely  to  compasse  this  Hand,  with
his  Navie  quadripartite,  twelve  hundred  in  the  East,  as
many  in  the  West,  and  like  proportions  on  the  North,
and  on  the  South  coasts,  to  scoure  the  Seas  and  secure
his  subjects :  And  in  the  Charter  of  the  foundation  of
the  Cathedrall  Church  of  Worcester,  he  useth  these  words  ;
Mihi  autem  concessit  propitia  divinitas  cum  Anglorum

438

ANCIENT COMMERCE WITH NORWAY

Imperio, omnia Regna Insularium Oceani cum suis
fercissimis Regibus usque Noruegiam, Maximamque
partem  Hyberniae,  cum  sua  nobilissima  civitate  Dublinia,
Anglorum  Regno  subjugare,  &c. Hee  also  stiles  himselfe
King  and  Emperour  of  the  Ocean,  and  the  Hands  about
Britaine, beginning, Ego  iEdgarus Anglorum Basileus,
omniumque Regum, Insularum, Oceanique Britanniam
circumjacentis cunctarumque Nationum quae infra earn
includuntur,  Imperator  &  Dominus. So  potent  was  he
first  of  the  English  Kings  (for  Arthur  was  a  Briton)  by
his  strong  shipping,  and  well  manned  and  mannagedNavie.
Florentius Wigorniensis stileth him, Flos & decus
antecessorum  Regum,  Pacificus  Rex  iEdgarus  non  minus
memorabilis  Anglis  quam  Romulus  Romanis,  Cyrus  Persis,
Alexander  Macedonibus,  Arsaces  Parthis,  Carolus  Magnus
Francis :  and  addeth,  as  before  is  notified,  Is  itaque  dum
viveret  3600.  robustas  sibi  congregaverat  naves,  ex  quibus  RanuMus
Paschali emensa solemnitate omni Anno 1200. In Qestrensis
orientali, 1200. in occidentali, 1200. in septentrionali  salth  4°°°-
insulae  plaga  coadunare  &  ad  occidentalem  cum  orientali ^ ew
classe,  &  ilia  remissa  ad  borealem  cum  occidentali,  ipsaque  ^at^  4800.
remissa  cum  boreali  ad  orientalem  classem  remigare,  eoque  viz.  1 200.
modo  totam  insulam  omni  aestate  consueverat  circumnavi-  for  the  South
gare,  viriliter  hoc  agens  ad  defensionem  contra  exteros  coast
Regni  sui,  &  suum  suorumque  ad  bellicos  usus  exercitium.
Both  Florentius  and  Malmesbury,  and  Mat.  Westminster
record,  that  hee  sitting  at  the  Sterne,  was  rowed  by  eight
Kings  his  Tributaries ;  Kined  King  of  Scots,  Macolm  of
Cumberland,  Macon  of  Man  and  many  Hands,  Dufnal  of
Demetia,  Siferth  and  Howel  Kings  of  Wales,  Jacob  King
of  Galwales, and Jukil of  Westmar, having the same
day  there  met  at  his  summons,  and  sworne  fealtie  and
assistance  to  him  by  Sea  and  Land. These  rowed  him
in  the  River  Dee,  to  the  Monastery  from  his  Palace,  and
thence  after  service  backe  againe :  So  rightly  did  he  instile
himselfe  in  his  Charter  to Malmesbury,  Ego  iEdgarus  [III.iii.620.]
totius Albionis Basileus, nee non Maritimorum seu
insulanorum  Regum  circumhabitantium,  &c.

439

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Danes.

Wiccinga  Sig.
a  Pirate.

Scanza  is  the
Chersonesus,
containing  the
Country  of
Norway,
Sweden,  &c.

Men  sacrificed
to  Thur.

*Mat.  West.

Lamberts
perambulation
of  Kent.

This  Sunne  being  set,  darke  and  stormy  times  followed,
by  reason  of  Danish  incursions.  These  Danes  (as  M.
Camden  recordeth)  began  to  be  knowne  to  the  world,  about
the  yeere  of  Christ  570.  for  their  piracies  called  Wiccings ;
of  them  Dudo  de  S.  Quintino  hath  this  testimony,  Dani
e  Scanza  (that  is,  Scandia)  velut  examen  apum  e  canistro
&  gladius  e  vagina,  diversitate  multimoda,  &c.  The
Danes,  like  a  swarme  of  Bees  out  of  their  hive,  and  a
sword  out  of  a  sheath,  in  diversifyed  manner  and  barbarous
custome  leaped  forth  from  Scanza  (or  Scandia)  after  that
with  petulant  lust  they  had  multiplied  their  innumerable
generations.  These  being  growne,  contended  with  their
parents  and  progenitors  about  their  possessions,  and  over-
flowing their  native  Bankes,  a  multitude  of  them  (accord-
ing to  their  ancient  custome)  are  compelled  by  lot  to
seeke  forraine  places,  where  by  force  they  might  plant
themselves.  In  the  consummating  this  expulsion  or
expedition,  they  anciently  sacrificed  to  Thur,  not  with
beasts,  but  the  bloud  of  men,  esteeming  that  the  most
precious  Holocaust.  Their  Priest  used  to  divine  with
yokes  of  Oxen,  the  heads  of  each  chosen  by  lot  being
cloven  asunder  by  one  stroke,  the  heart  veyne  on  the
left  side  being  searched,  and  with  the  bloud  thereof  the
heads  of  theirs  being  anointed,  they  presently  set  sayle.
Ditmarus,  somewhat  ancienter  then  Dudo,  mentioneth  a
place,  called  Lederun,  where  every  ninth  yeere  in  January,
they  all  assembled  and  sacrificed  ninetie  nine  Men,  and
as  many  Horses,  with  Dogs  and  Cocks,  in  stead  of
Haukes,  to  pacifie  their  Gods.  Hereby  wee  see  that  by
Danes,  in  our  English  stories,  are  intended  not  onely
those  which  now  we  properly  so  call,  but  *  Norwegians
also,  Gottes,  Vandals,  Frieslanders,  and  the  Inhabitants
generally  of  those  North-easterne  parts ;  three  Ships  of
whom,  in  the  yeere  787.  landed  in  the  West  parts,  slew
the  Reeve  of  Beorhtricke  King  of  the  West  Saxons,  and
were  by  the  Countrie  people  forced  backe  to  their  Ships.
Ann.  795.  a  few  Ships  of  them  made  the  like  assay  in
Scotland,  and  soone  after  some  of  them  entred  Tynemouth

440

M%( SwtrJal

'•ALA

C  '  VlXl'-' Mr- v  :M

S  1  **Mj>hrw  aw /

''Scmilh
\Jbuul

H\

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF NORWEGIA AND SUETIA

ANCIENT COMMERCE WITH NORWAY

Haven,  in  the  North  part  of  England,  and  returned  with
the  spoyles  of  the  Churches  of  Hercenes  and  Tynmouth.
This  was  in  the  yeere  800. Thirtie  three  yeeres  after,  in  Mat.
the  reigne  of  Egbert,  they  were  beaten  at  Dunmoth,  but Westmmt-
spoyled Sheepie, with murthers and robberies, entring
Thames  with  thirtie  five  sayle. The  next  yeere  they  pre-  [iil.iii.621.]
vailed  in  battell  against  King  Egbert,  and  after  that  joyned
with  the  Welshmen  to  invade  and  destroy  this  Kingdome,
but  were  both  chased  by  the  victorious  power  of  the  King ;
and  An.  836.  another  hoast  of  them  was  beaten. Another
Fleet  of  thirtie  foure  Ships  landed  at  South-Hamton,  An.
838.  and  slew  Duke  iEthelhelm : after  which  they  pro-
ceeded with  continuall  incursions  (two  Hydras  heads  still
succeeding,  when  any  English  Hercules  had  cut  off  one)
that  it  breeds  horror  to  read  or  thinke  of  the  spoyles,
rapes,  fires,  murthers,  barbarisme,  heathenisme,  desolation
and  destruction,  which  they  brought  every  where  with
them. And although Alfred, Edward, and Adelstane
somewhat  healed  the  Land  of  that  pestilence  ;  yet  in  Ethel-
dreds  time  such  a  mortall  relapse  happened,  that  first  he
charged the people with an insupportable tribute of
Danegelt,  arising  to  48000.  pounds  yeerely  (even  after  Danegelt
the  account  of  those  times)  and  buying  herewith  nothing  continued  till
but  perfidie  on  their  part,  and  beggerly  on  his,  by  the  E*w*rd  the
advice  of  one  Huna  the  Generall  of  his  Armie,  he  wrote  j  I0I2[
Letters  to  all  places,  that  on  Saint  Brices  day  (which  is
the  morrow  after  Saint Martins  night,) the  Danes  not
having  digested that  drunken solemnitie should  be  all
massacred,  which  accordingly  was  effected  on  man,  woman,
and  child,  not  sparing  those  which  fled  to  the  Altars. A
few  in  London  escaped,  and  caused  Sweyne  with  a  Danish
Army  and  unspeakable  crueltie  to  repay  that  butcherie.
Etheldred  fled  with  his  wife  and  children  into  Normandie
(the  seed  of  a  new  Conquest)  so  that  Suanus  *  having  ^ThisSwanus,
made  the  sheepefold  a  shambles  and  shepheardlesse,  pro-  or  Sueno  had
claimed himselfe King of  England, which Canutus or  kl}led  hts
Cnuto  and  his  two  sonnes,  Harold  and  Hardicanute,  held *at  er'
after  him  some  thirtie  yeeres  space.

441

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*A.  1042.

Hocktide  I
have  seene
kept  with
publike  feast-
ing in  the
street,  the
women  also
binding  men,
or  compelling
them  to  some
ransome;  the
Tuesday  fort-
night after
Easter.

English
Conquest  in
Sweden.
A.  1024.

And  such  was  the  Danish  tyranny,  that  every  Dane
was  stiled  Lord  Dane,  and  had  at  his  commandement  the
wives,  daughters,  and  the  whole  houshold  where  hee
became.  But  after  the  death  of  Hardicanutus,  that  title
was  turned  into  the  reproachfull  terme  of  Lurdane,  and
the  day  of  his  death  *  (as  the  Roman  Fugalia)  was  cele-
brated with  open  pastime  and  feasting  in  the  streets,  called
Hocktide  or  Hucktide,  as  if  England  (then  absolutely
freed)  made  a  mocke  or  scorne  of  her  enemies.  Canutus
by  treason  of  Eadrike  Streona  obtained  the  Kingdome,  first
as  partner  with  Edmund  Ironside,  and  after  his  death  the
whole  by  other  perfidie,  slaying  Eadwy  brother  of  King
Edmund,  and  sending  Edmunds  two  sonnes,  Edward  and
Edmund,  to  the  King  of  Sweden  to  be  there  made  away.
But  hee  hating  such  crueltie,  sent  them  to  Salomon  King
of  Hungary  to  bring  up,  where  Edmund  dyed,  and
Edward  married  Agatha  daughter  of  Henry  the  Emperour,
by  whom  hee  had  iEdgar  Athling,  and  Margaret  married
to  Malcolm  King  of  Scots  (the  mother  of  Maud  wife  to
Henry  the  first)  and  Christine  a  Nun.

Canutus  divided  the  Kingdome  into  foure  parts,  of
which  hee  reserved  West  Saxonie  to  himselfe,  East
England  he  committed  to  Earle  Turkill,  Mercia  to  Duke
Edrike,  and  Northumberland  to  Earle  Erike.  Soone
after,  he  caused  Duke  Edrike  (which  treacherously  had
advanced  him  to  the  Crowne)  to  bee  shine,  (a  just  reward
of  treason)  and  then  banished  Earle  Turkill  and  Earle
Erike  picking  quarrell  with  them  (weary  of  any  stalking
horses)  the  former  of  which  was  presently  after  his  landing
in  Denmarke  slain.  And  now  did  Canutus  seeke  to  win
the  favour  of  the  English  by  building  and  endowing
Monasteries,  making  good  Lawes,  and  marrying  Emma
the  relict  of  King  Ethelred.  Thus  having  Denmarke  by
inheritance,  and  England  by  conquest  &  treachery,  his
ambition  next  aimed  at  Sweden,  where  first  he  had  the
worse,  but  after  compelled  Ulf  and  Eiglaf  the  Kings  of
that  Countrie  to  composition  with  him,  Earle  Godwin,
the  Generall  of  the  English,  provoking  and  animating  the

442

ANCIENT COMMERCE WITH NORWAY

English  to  recover  their  pristine  glory,  and  by  solid  vertue
to  overcome  them,  who  had  overcome  their  new  Lord,
whose  fortune  had  subjected  the  English.  Thus  Canutus
prevailed  by  Godwines  policie  and  English  valour,  they
by  night  without  the  Kings  knowledge,  or  assistance  of
the  Danish  Armie,  assaulting  and  overthrowing  the
Swedens  :  hee,  the  next  day,  missing  the  English,  and
fearing  they  had  turned  to  the  Enemy,  till  giving  the
onset  with  his  Danes  upon  the  forsaken  Campe  of  the
Enemy,  he  found  there  nothing  but  carkasses  and  spoyle.

Anno  1027.  having  intelligence  that  the  Norwegians
contemned  their  King  Olave  for  his  simplicitie,  he  sent  Saint  Olave.
great  summes  of  Gold  and  Silver  to  the  Grandes  of
Norway,  to  corrupt  them,  and  caused  them  to  reject  Olave,
and  to  choose  him  for  their  King.  For  perverted  with
gifts  they  sent  him  word  to  come  to  them,  whom  he  should
find  readie  to  entertayne  him.  An.  1028.  he  went  with
a  fleet  of  fifty  sayle  to  Norway,  and  expelled  Olave,  sub-
jecting that  Kingdome  to  himselfe.  Olave  which  had
beene  the  King,  Doctor,  Preacher  and  Apostle  of  the
Norwegians,  (as  Florilegus  stileth  him)  the  sonne  of
Harald  King  of  Norway,  was  slayne,  Anno  1030.  and
cruelly  butchered  by  his  treacherous  Norwegians  with  an
Axe  or  Hatchet,  for  disanulling  their  Pagan  superstitions,
and  hee  since  is  there  superstitiously  worshipped  for  a
Saint,  whom  then  trayterously  they  permitted  not  to  reigne
or  breathe.  The  same  yeere  perished  at  Sea,  or  (as  some
say)  was  slayne  in  one  of  the  Orcades,  Earle  Hacun,  whom
Canutus  fearing  had  banished  in  colour  of  sending  him
Embassadour.

His  greatnesse  (having  to  wife  his  sisters  daughter)
made  him  grow  suspicious  :  And  according  to  the  devotion
of  that  time,  Anno  103 1.,  Canutus  or  Cnuto  went  to
Rome  on  Pilgrimage,  and  there  made  magnificent  Offer-
ings, and  obtayned  divers  Immunities  of  the  Emperour
and  Pope.  After  his  returne  he  invaded  the  Scots,  and
overcame  King  Malcolme  with  two  other  Kings.  He  [III.iii.622.]
going from Rome to Denmarke, sent a  Letter  to his

443

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Romish
Pilgrimage  a
protection  for
tyrannous
usurpation  of
Norway  iff
England,
without  resti-
tution to  the
right  Heires:
as  if  Peters
pretended  key
were  a  Pick-
locke  to  open
Heaven  to
whomsoever.

[III.iii.623.]

English  subjects  thus  beginning :  Canutus  Rex  totius
Angliae,  &  Danemerciae,  &  Norreganorum,  &  partis
Suanorum,  Aethelnotho  Metropolitano  &  Alfrico  Ebora-
censi  Archiepiscopo,  omnibusque  Episcopis  &  Primatibus
&  toti  Anglorum  genti,  tarn  nobilibus  quam  plebeiis,
salutem.  Notifico  vobis  me  noviter  ivisse  Romam,
oratum  pro  redemptione  peccaminum  meorum  &  pro  salute
Regnorum,  quique  meo  subjacent  regimini  populorum.
Hanc  quidem  profectionem  Deo  jam  olim  devoveram :
sed  pro  negotiis  Regni  &  causis  impedientibus  hue  usque
perficere  non  potui.  Nunc  autem  ipsi  Deo  meo  Omni-
potenti  valde  humiliter  gratias  ago,  qui  mihi  concessit
in  vita  mea  Sanctos  Apostolos  suos  Petrum  &  Paulum,
&  omne  Sanctuarium  quod  juxta  urbem  Romam  aut  extra
addiscere  potui  expetere,  &  secundum  desiderium  meum
presentialiter  venerari  &  adorare.  Ob  id  ergo  maxime
hoc  patravi,  quia  a  sapientibus  didici  sanctum  Petrum  Apos-
tolum  magnam  potestatem  a  Domino  accepisse  ligandi
atque  solvendi,  clavigerumque  esse  Regni  Celestis,  &  ideo
speciale  ejus  patrocinium  apud  Dominum  diligenter
expetere  valde  utile  duxi,  &c.

Canutus  before  his  death  set  his  Sonne  Suanus  in  posses-
sion of  Norway,  and  Hardecanutus  his  Sonne  over  the
Danes.  Harald  and  Hardecanutus  divided  England
betwixt  them  after  his  death,  Anno  1035.  anc^  Harald
dying,  Anno  1040.  that  quarrell  was  ended;  and  soone
after,  by  the  others  death  the  Danish  Empire  in  England ;
the  small  space  of  King  Edward  interceding  that,  and
another  Conquest  of  the  Normans,  descended  also  of  like
Northerne,  namely  of  Norwegian  Originall.  Canutus  his
Daughter  Cunilda  was  married  to  Henry  the  Emperour,
and  being  accused  of  Adultery,  against  a  Giantly  Champion
appeared  in  her  defence  a  childish  English  Dwarffe  which
served  her,  who  slue  the  Giant  and  presented  his  head
to  the  Ladie,  who  thereupon  divorced  herselfe,  and  became
a  Nunne.  Sueno  King  of  Norway  after  five  yeeres
deceased,  and  Canutus  his  ill-gotten  English  and  Nor-
wegian wings  were  quickly  not  only  pulled,  but  cut  off.

444

ANCIENT COMMERCE WITH NORWAY

The  English  had  occasion  of  further  invasion  to  and
from  Norway.  For  Suanus  decessing,  the  Norwegians
chose  Magnus  the  Sonne  of  Saint  Olave  for  their  King ;
which  when  Hardecanutus  understood  (as  the  Danish
Storie  set  forth  by  Erpold  Lindenbruch  testifieth)  hee
invaded  Norway  with  his  English  and  Danish  forces,
where  he  and  Magnus  came  to  composition  that  the  Sur-
vivour  should  enjoy  both  Kingdomes.  When  Harde-
canute  was  dead,  Sueno  the  Sonne  of  Estrid  his  Sister,
succeeded,  and  Magnus  King  of  Norway  fought  with
Sueno  to  obtayne  his  covenanted  Kingdome  of  Denmarke,
and  overcame  him.  Sueno  fled  into  Sweden,  and  there
abode  till  the  death  of  Magnus,  after  which  he  recovered
his  Danish  Scepter.  Florentius  writeth  that  Suanus  sent
to  King  Edward  the  Confessor,  intreating  his  aide  with  a
Navie  against  Magnus ;  Earle  Godwine  counselled  to  send
fiftie  ships,  but  Earle  Leofrike  and  the  people  refused  ;
and  Magnus  with  a  great  Navie  fought  with  Suanus,  and
expelled  him  his  Kingdome,  which  hee  after  recovered.

Harald  Harvager  the  Sonne  of  Siward  King  of  Norway
and  Brother  by  the  Mothers  side  to  Saint  Olave  obtayned
Norway  after  his  Nephew  Magnus,  and  sent  an  Embassage
to  King  Edward,  whereby  Peace  and  Amitie  was  con-
cluded betwixt  both  the  Kings.  He  (after  King  Edwards
death)  invaded  England  with  a  great  Navie  m  of  three
hundred  ships,  and  discomfited  the  Earles  Edwine  and
Morcar  neere  Yorke ;  but  five  dayes  after  Harald  then
King  (Sonne  of  Earle  Godwin)  slue  his  Brother  Tosti  and
Harvagre  at  Stamford  Bridge,  permitting  his  Sonne  Olave
to  returne  upon  conditions  to  Norway.  But  whiles  he
converted  the  spoyle  to  his  owne  proper  use,  he  gave
such  disgust  to  the  English,  that  a  few  dayes  after  in  the
battayle  with  William  Earle  of  Normandie,  they  were
lesse  zealous  of  his  cause ;  where  a  new  Norman  period
beganne :  those  Northerne  quarrels  having  had  no  other
end  but  this  succession.

I  shall  not  need  to  adde  what  followed  (the  Norman
Acts  in  Italie,  Palestina  and  other  places  I  have  handled

445

Historia
Dariica.

Second  English
Expedition
into  Norway.

m  Trecentis
coggonibus.

From  787.  to
1065.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

else-where)  little  occurring  of  Mars,  but  Mercurie,  of
Vid.  sup.  I.  8.  which  I  have  by  me  Letters  from  King  Henry  the  Third,
c  6.  §.  i.  the  £rst  yeere  0f  his  Reigne  to  Hacon  or  Haquin,  then
King  of  Norway,  for  mutuall  Trafficke  betwixt  both  their
subjects.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  Northerne  humour  of
spoile,  slaughter  and  bloud  continued  whiles  they  were
Pagans,  and  expired  in  manner  with  their  Paganisme  both
in  Norwegians  and  Danes :  as  if  God  would  first  by  them
punish  the  vices  of  those  times,  and  withall  conquer  the
Conquerours,  with  the  Religion  of  the  conquered,  and  by
so  strange  a  way  bring  the  Northerne  World  (by  this  way
of  destroying)  to  salvation.  Since  that  time,  the  State
of  Norway,  Island  and  other  parts  hath  decayed  in  numbers
of  shipping,  courage  of  men,  and  other  meanes  of  Earthly
greatnesse.  Somewhat  yet  for  History  and  an  Historians
sake,  I  will  adde  of  Matthew  Paris  an  Englishman  his
Voyage  to  Norway.
Ma.  Paris  \n  the  yeere 1247.  Matthew  Paris  recordeth,  that  on

p.  901.  the  d^  0f  Saint  Olave,  a  famous  Saint  in  the  Regions

and  Hands  of  Norway,  Hacon  was  crowned  King,  and
solemnely  anointed  at  Bergse  by  the  Bishop  of  Sabine  then
Legate  (from  the  Pope)  in  those  parts.  For  the  honour
whereof  the  said  King  gave  the  Pope  15000.  Markes
sterling,  besides  invaluable  Gifts  which  the  Legate  himselfe
had ;  and  five  hundred  Markes  by  him  extorted  (saith  our
Author)  from  the  Church  of  that  Kingdome.  The  King
also  receiving  the  Crosse  for  the  Holy  Land  Expedition,
The  Pope  and  obtayned  of  the  Pope  the  third  part  of  the  Ecclesiasticall

his  Legates Revenues  of  that  Kingdome  towards  his  charges. Which

deere  friends  .  /■•  .

t0  an  Lewis  the  French  King  knowing,  writ  in  friendly  termes

Kingdomes. to  Hacon,  to  beare  him  company  in  the  said  Expedition,

Saint  Lewis offering  him  full  power  (in  regard  of  his  Sea-skill)  over

his  offers. his  Navie,  and  over  the  French  Army. This  Letter  was

carried  by  our  Authour  Matthew  Paris,  to  whom  King

Hacon  answered  that  he  gave  great  thankes  to  that  devout

King : but  knew  in  part  the  nature  of  the  French,  &  as

saith  the  Poet,  Omnisque  potestas  Impatiens  consortis  erit,

and  I  say,  Omnique  superbus,  Impatiens  consortis  erit. My

446

ANCIENT COMMERCE WITH NORWAY

people  is  impetuous,  indiscreet,  and  impatient  of  wrongs,
which  might  occasion  irreparable  damage ;  and  therefore
it  is  fitter  for  each  to  goe  by  himselfe.  But  I  have  written
to  the  King  for  quiet  passage  thorow  his  Countrey,  and
provisions  as  need  required.  The  Kings  Answere  thereto
and  Letters  Patents  were  also  delivered  to  him  by  this  our
Author  in  this  forme.

Ludovicus  Dei  gratia  Francorum  Rex,  universi  amicis  His  Letter.
&  fidelibus  suis,  Ballivis,  Majoribus,  &  Praepositis,  ad
quos  praesentes  literae  pervenerint,  salutem.  Cum  clarissi-
mus  noster  Illustris  Hacon  Rex  Norwegian  in  subsidium
Terrae  sanctae  transfretare  proponat,  sicut  nobis  per  suas
literas  intimavit,  vobis  mandamus,  quatenus  si  eundem
Regem  vel  ipsius  Navigium  per  mare  contiguum  terrae
nostrae  transire  contingat,  vel  in  Terram  nostram,  vel  in
feuda  nostra  alicubi  applicare,  ipsum  &  suos  benigne  &
honorifice  recipiatis,  permittentes  eosdem  in  terra  nostra
victualia  emere,  &  sibi  per  forum  legitimum  de  sibi
necessariis  providere.  Actum  apud  Sanctum  Germanum
in  Laia,  A.  D.  1248.

When  the  King  of  Norway  had  read  this  (for  hee  is  a
discreet,  and  modest,  and  well  learned  man)  hee  rejoyced
much,  and  was  gratefull  to  the  bearer,  respecting  him  with
Royall  and  bountifull  gifts. Thus  writeth  Matthew  Paris  M.  Par.  his
of  himselfe,  and  his  employment. The  cause  of  his  going  voyage  to
into  Norway  he further  relateth, that King Cnuto (or  jI^jll-
Canutus)  having  founded  a  famous  Monastery  of  Saint  [iii.iii.624.]
Bennet,  of  Holm  in  Norway  (of  which  title  and  order
hee  had  founded  another  in  England)  it  happened  that
the  said  Abbie,  with  the  appurtenances  was  almost  ruined
by  an  impious  Abbat,  who  forsaking  his  Order,  and  steal-
ing away  privily  the  Seale  of  the  Chapiter,  either  sold,
or  by  forged  writings  fraudulently  engaged  almost  all  the
possessions thereof : wherein hee had the Sacrist, the
keeper  of  the  Seale,  his  copartner,  both  in  this  fugitive
apostacie  and  treacherie. Heereupon  the  Archbishop  of
Nidrosia,  in  whose  Diocesse  the  said  Abbie  was  situate,
seised the same and the  appurtenances into his hands,

447

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Monkes
ignorant  of
their  owne
order.
Popes  long
hands  and
Lime-fingered
Appeales.

alledging  that  the  Monkes  had  only  the  habite,  but  were
altogether  ignorant  of  Monastike  order,  and  Saint  Bennets
rule,  some  of  them  also  theeves  and  fugitives.  The
Monkes  appealed  to  the  Pope  (which  caused  the  Arch-
bishop to  suspend  his  proceedings)  and  the  Prior  recover-
ing somewhat,  and  gathering  together  a  summe  of  money,
went  to  the  Roman  Court,  where  the  Abbat  had  beene  a
little  before,  and  intangled  by  writings  the  said  house  in
five  hundred  markes ;  which  caused  the  Prior  to  returne
frustrate  and  full  of  griefe.  But  in  his  way,  hearing  that
the  said  Abbat  was  dead,  in  the  Abby  of  Saint  Alban  in
Selio  (in  Norway)  he  and  the  Covent  made  choice  of  an
Abbat,  and  this  Prior,  with  another  Monke,  and  three
hundred  markes  in  mony,  together  with  the  Kings  letter,
being  sent  to  Matthew  Paris  to  take  paines  for  their  free-
dome,  it  was  procured  happily  that  the  temporalties  of
the  said  house  were  freed  from  the  Caursines  (the  Popes
Usurers)  then  residing  at  London,  within  one  yeeres  space.
But  their  Spiritualities  were  much  maimed,  they  by  bribes
purchasing  delayes,  lest  the  Archbishop  should  take  posses-
sion of  the  Hand  which  wholly  belonged  to  the  Abby,  and
of  it  also,  expelling  the  Monkes.

Now  the  Cardinall  Bishop  of  Sabine  then  comming
Legate  into  Norway,  the  Monkes  sought  to  him  for
succour,  and  hee  counselled  them  to  go  and  petition  the
Pope  to  provide  them  of  an  Instructor  and  Reformer,  and
he  would  write  in  their  behalfe.

The  Abbat  therefore  and  Prior  went  with  Letters  from
the  King  and  Legate  to  the  Pope,  who  gave  them  leave
to  chuse  any  man  of  whatsoever  Region  or  Monasterie
to  be  their  Instructer.  They  answered  the  next  day,  that
all  the  World  had  not  Monkes  of  that  Order  living  in
more  composed  order  then  England,  nor  England  any
comparable  by  report,  to  Saint  Albans :  of  which  House
they  desired  Matthew  to  be  their  Reformer,  of  whose
wisdome  and  faithfulnes  they  had  had  experience ;  a  man
also  almost  familiar  and  friendly  to  their  King,  and  able
by  his  meanes  to  order  the  rebellious  and  unruly. Here-

448

«/,.,.)/  i ■  i-i-t  /  ,'  r |  ;  ji  J  J  Xli  friT-r-rfrTr-n  t^X!L-XJ.-i3=IgJir±rj=r-T  T+t-t-tt  .  T  i ■ ■ . ■  1-r-r  ,  , ,  Y  ?  , ,  j  ,  f  j^

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF DENMARKE

ANCIENT COMMERCE WITH  NORWAY

upon  the  Pope  gave  them  this  Briefe  to  the  Abbat  of  Saint
Albans.

Innocentius,  &c.  Dilecto  Filio  Abbati  Sancti  Albani
in  Anglia  Ordinis  S.  Benedicti,  &c.  Cum  sicut  ex  parte
dilecti  filii  Abbatis  Monasterii  de  Holm,  Ordinis  S.  Bene-
dicti Nistorsiensis  Diocesis,  fuit  propositum  coram  nobis ;
idem  Monasterium  propter  Prsedecessorum  suorum  negli-
gentiam,  sit  in  his  quae  ad  Monasticum  Ordinem  pertinent
deformatum ;  nee  inveniatur  in  illis  partibus  aliquis  qui
statuta  &  observantias  ejusdem  Ordinis  bene  sciat :  Nos
ad  supplicationem  ejusdem  Abbatis,  discretionem  tuam
rogamus,  attentius  &  hortamur  per  Apostolica  tibi  scripta
mandantes,  quatenus  dilectum  filium  Fratrem  Mattheum
Monachum  tuum,  qui  dicitur  probata?  vitas  ac  religionis
expertse,  ad  idem  Monasterium  ut  dictum  Abbatem  &
Monachos  suos  in  regularibus  disciplinis  &  statutis  quae
ad  eundem  ordinem  pertinent,  informet  &  instruat,  trans-
mitter pro  divina  &  Apostolicae  sedis  ac  nostra  reverentia
non  postponas.  Datum  Lugduni,  &c.  Hereto  the  Abbat
obeying,  and  Matthew  to  his  Abbat,  the  businesse  luckily
succeeded,  and  Monkerie  both  in  that  of  Holm,  and  other
Norwegian  Monasteries  was  reformed.

I  might  here  shew  l  the  great  stirres  which  in  the  first  l  Of  these  see
Ages  after  the  Conquest  the  Norwegians  have  caused  in a  ' tom'  '•
Ireland, Wales, Man, Anglesey, the Hebrides, and
Orcades :  as  also  of  Harald  (whom  the  Conquerour  slue)  KingHaraUs
his  two  sonnes  and  daughter  fleeing  to  Sueno  King  of  chlldren-
Denmarke, who gave the daughter in Marriage to
Jeruslaus,  or  Waldemarus  King  of  Russia  :  and  of  Nicolas
de Lynna, a Franciscan Frier and Mathematician of
Oxford,  before  mentioned,  of  whom  Jacobus  Cnoyen  saith
in his Journall that he learned of a Priest who had
descended  of  those  which  King  Arthur  had  left  to  people
the  Hands  of  Norway,  Anno  1364.  that  in  the  yeere  1360.
the  said  Frier  had  comne  into  those  Hands,  and  proceeding
further  by  Art  Magicke,  had  described  those  Artike  parts  „5
(as  the  n  Map  presents)  with  foure  Whirl-pooles  or  In-  frier  of
draughts. Yea  (as  Master  Dee  addeth)  at  the  Northerne  Lime.
xui  449  2  F

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Hands,  the  Record  whereof  at  his  returne  he  gave  to  the
King  of  England,  the  Booke  being  called  Inventio
fortunata  or  fortunse,  contayning  a  description  from  fiftie
foure  degrees  to  the  Pole. I might  also  adde  out  of

Hen.  4.  Thomas  of  Walsingham, the  Travels  of  Henrie  Earle

of  Darbie,  (afterwards  Henrie  the  Fourth,  King  of  Eng-
land) into  Prussia  and  Lettow,  or  Lithuania,  where  by
his  helpe  especially  was  taken  Vilna  the  chiefe  Citie
(Skirgalle  the  King  of  Lettow,  having  fled  thither
for  refuge)  his  Colours  being  first  advanced  on  the  walls,
foure  thousand  slaine,  of  which  the  King  of  Polands
Brother,  and  three  thousand  captived. Also  I  might  adde

T-  °f  the  Voyage  of  Thomas  of  Woodstocke  Duke  of  Glocester,

Woodstock.  sonne  to  King  Edward  the  Third,  along  the  Coasts  of
Denmarke,  Norway,  and  Scotland.  Other  Letters  likewise
of  King  Edward  the  Second  to  Haquin  or  Hacon,  King  of
Norway  in  behalfe  of  English  Merchants  there  arrested :
with  Entercourses  betwixt  the  English  and  the  Dutch
Knights  in  Liefland.  But  having  only  briefe  mentions  of
these,  and  them  or  the  most  of  them  recorded  by  Master

[III.iii.625.]  Hakluyts  industrie  before,  I  doe  here  but  Index-wise
referre  the  Reader  thither.  I  rather  choose  to  give  new
things  and  rare :  and  such  may  seeme  these  Notes  which
Anno  1605.  I  WTlt  fr°m  tne  mouth  of  Master  George
Barkeley.

feel
line

45o

GEORGE BARKLEY

A.D.

1605.

Chap.  XX.

briefe  Memoriall  of  the  great  Travells  by  Sea
and  Land,  of  Master  George  Barkley  Mer-
chant of  London,  in  Europe,  Asia,  Africa,  and
America,  and  their  Hands.

Eing  a  childe,  he  was  transported  into  the
East  Countries,  and  the  first  place  of  his
landing  was  Schagen,  from  thence  unto
Elsenore,  a  Towne  as  bigge  as  Brentwood,
where  the  Danish  Custome  is  taken ;  and
where  he  hath  seene  at  one  time  the  Dane
making stay of all shipping fourteene

Schagen.
Elsenore.

Coppenhagen.
Dantzik.

dayes,  for  ostentation  to  a  forreigne  Nobleman,  seven  hun
dred  sayle.  From  thence  to  Coppenhagen,  thence  to  Born-
holme,  thence  to  Danske,  a  Towne  subject  to  the  Pole,
being  in  continuall  buildings,  if  by  any  meanes  they  may
fortifie  themselves  against  the  Hilles  over-looking  the
Towne,  a  Rill  running  betweene,  whence  they  have  their
fresh  water  :  they  spare  no  time  Sunday  nor  other.  There
lyeth  here  in  the  Sea  by  casting  up  of  sands  a  long  Hand
called  Frishnering,  where  alongst,  as  on  Samaiden,  is
gathered  by  the  Danske  Officers  there,  and  here  by  the
Jewes,  that  farme  it  of  the  Pole,  Amber,  cast  up  by  the
Sea  in  great  abundance,  pieces  as  bigge  as  a  pecke,  more
or  lesse.  The  Bores  that  find  it  and  gather,  have  so  many
firkins  of  some  other  meane  commoditie :  and  if  they  [III.iii.626.]
keepe  and  sell  it,  they  dye  for  it.  Hee  hath  seene  one
piece  of  Amber  taken  up,  in  the  middest  whereof  was
to  be  seene  through  the  transparent  Amber  a  Frog  in
similitude  and  full  proportion:  (Master  Vassall,  his  brother,
a  friend  of  mine,  told  me  of  a  piece  of  Timber  in  the
keele  of  a  ship,  where  by  occasion  of  a  sliver,  one  cutting
nine  inches  within  the  Timber  every  way,  he  found
a great living tode in the hollow thereof at Wool-

45 r

Amber.
Salt.

A  Frogge  in  a
piece  of
Amber.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605.

wich) ;  betwixt  this  Frishmering  and  the  Land  is  a  great
water  FrishhofF,  where  at  Saint  Georges  day  they  begin
to  fish,  of  which  there  is  exceeding  plentie,  and  for  three
halfe  pence  one  may  buy  a  cast  as  much  as  they  shall  draw
the  next  time.  One  here  in  his  Net  drew  up  a  company
Strange  report  or  heape  of  Swallowes  as  bigge  as  a  bushell  fastned  by
ofSwallowes.  the  legs  and  bills  in  one,  which  being  carried  to  their
stoves,  quickned  and  flew,  and  comming  againe  suddenly
in  the  cold  Aire  dyed.

From  Danske  he  went  to  Marienberg,  a  Towne  also

The  Vistle. standing  on the  Vistle,  whereby  it  runneth  in  another

channell,  and  betwixt  both  these  makes  an  Hand  wherein

stands  Nerdeich,  which  Hand  is  compassed  with  a  wall  to

fortifie  it  against  the  comming  downe  of  the  Vistle  in

High  wall the  Spring  at  the  thaw  of  the  snowes,  &c. This  wall

seemeth  in  some  places  as  high  as  Paules  Steeple,  and

other-where  as  high  as  Paules  Church,  where  yet  it  hath

sometime  beene overflowne : full it is of Hoffes  and

Villages  belonging  to  the  Lords  of  Danske.

Marienberg. Marienberg  is  a  free  Towne  for  Religion  (Danske  then

professing  only  Lutheran)  save  certayne  Friers  and  Nunnes

living  in  Cloysters  closely. There  a  Lutheran  when  he

preacheth  must  make  an  end  at  his  houre,  and  then  a

Jesuit  preacheth  to  the  Rom.  Catholikes  as  long,  the  former

both  company,  and  Preacher  being  avoyded  of  himselfe,

or  by  force. It  was  built  by  the  Kreitzherne  (Dei-parini

Dutch  Knights  milites) Knights of  the Crosse, who having  lost their

0/  our  Ladie. footing  in  the  Holy  Land,  m  by  consent  of  the  Empire

1-1**0 m'  f*  assaulted  and  conquered  Prussia,  being  in  this  Conquest

[III.i'ii.627.1  sixtie foure yeeres, who after carried themselves so

tyrannously,  that  the  people  yeelded  themselves  to  the

Pole,  and  destroyed  the  Kreitzherne,  save  those  that  made

a  head  about  the  North  parts,  with  whom  after  some

doubtfull  fights,  was  made  a  league,  that  This  Order  should  ,

cease  ;  Their  Captayne  should  be  married,  and  should  have  J  fai

seventie  two  Townes  in  Prussia,  to  him  and  his  Heires

Males,  and  in  defect  of  such  Heires  to  returne  to  the

Pole. His  Townes  are  not  adjoyned  together,  but  the

452

mand

GEORGE BARKLEY  a.d.

1605.

Poles Townes betwixt. Kinningsburge is the Dukes
Court.

Thence  he  went  to  Elbing,  a  faire  Towne,  where  our
Trade  is  now  for  Flaxe,  which  was  before  at  Danske,  thence
removed  for  their  insolencies.  Here  our  men  only  pay
Custome :  others  are  free,  and  this  they  did  voluntarily,
and  have  in  this  respect  very  much  authoritie  amongst
the  Lords  there :  the  Towne  still  flourisheth  with  build-
ings, &c.

Thence  he  went  to  Bransperg,  (the  Poles  Towne)  where  Bramperg.
is  a  Colledge  of  Jesuites : From  this  place  to  Kinnings-
berg,  and  thence  to  Liba  in  Curland,  thence  to  Samaiden,
and  thence  to  Rica,  or  Rie  in  Liefland  also  (This  Rica  Rigato.
is  under  the  Pole) ; thence  to  Derpt,  and  thence  to  Revel.
At  Derpt  he  went  to  schoole  three  yeeres :  it  is  under  the
Pole. Livonia is exceedingly distracted betwixt the
Sweden,  Russe,  and  Pole. King  Stephen  recovered  part
from  the  Russe,  who  before  had  partly  killed,  and  partly  Russian
carried captive the Handicrafts men, in such desolate  cruelty.
manner,  that  the  Townes  are  ruinate,  the  stone  walls  of
Houses  and  Churches  standing  with  trees  of  great  bignesse
growing through their uncovered roofes ; the Woods
(whereof  they  have  excellent  stately)  being  strowed  with
bones  of  dead  carkasses ;  and  himselfe  did  once  in  one  of
those  Woods  eate  Honey  out  of  a  Mans  skull  wherein
a  swarme  of  Bees  were,  and  bred  as  it  hanged  on  a  Tree.
Hee  conquered  all  save  Revell : against  which  he  made  [III.iii.628.]
a  Castle  with  water  and  straw, the  frost  binding  them  Rwell.
together as fast as they were laid. The Countrey is
inhabited  with  the  ancient  Indigenae,  called  Momese,  and  Motnese  fcf
others of the Dutch called by them Sac's. Who by  Sac's.
occasion  of  shipwracke  being  cast  on  these  Countries,  did
buy  of  the  simple  Inhabitants  so  much  ground  as  a  Rose
hide,  &c.  so  building  in  one  place  Revel,  in  another  farre
distant  Rie,  and  so  other  Townes ;  by  this  meane  com-
manding and  subduing  all  the  Countrie. Derpt  was  one
Turfe  of  ground  bought  as  before.

The  Momeses  are  almost  Salvadoes,  retaining  still  their  Idolatry.

453

Straw  Castle.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605.

old  superstitions,  as  to  worship  the  Sun,  or  the  first  Beast
they  meet  with,  and  especially  they  have  in  religious
reckoning  their  Leave.

This  which  they  call  Se-leave,  or  the  Groves,  is  a  com-
pany of  Trees,  which  it  is  religious  to  touch ;  and  he  knew
a  Dutchman,  Martin  Yekell  of  Derpt,  who  breaking  a
bough  was  swelled  a  yeere  together  as  big  as  his  skinne
would  hold. Heere  at  Marriages  and  Burialls  they  pray,

Marriage,  but  without  Image.  Their  marriage  is  thus.  The  man
and  his  Bride  are  set  stridling  on  a  Horse,  and  blinded ;
and  so  led  into  Se-leave,  there  taken  downe  and  married
by  their  Rites ;  then  set  up  againe,  blinded  as  before,  and
conveyed  with  their  company,  and  Musicke  to  their  house,
singing  Kosoku  Kosoku  Coniku,  seamoha :  there  taken
downe  and  had  to  bed,  still  blinded  till  the  next  morrow,
in  the  meane  while  they  rest  drinking,  &c.

They  mourne  when  one  is  borne,  rejoyce  and  make
merry  at  death.  Their  mourning  (in  Curland)  is  then,
and  when  they  walke  alone,  or  fetch  wood,  Yerow,  yerou
yerou,  masculine  babe :  the  words  themselves  understand
not,  but  thinke  it  to  have  remained  since  that  Babylonish
Towre.  When  the  Momeses  die,  they  are  buried  in  their
Leaves,  with  their  knife  under  their  arme,  and  their  coate
hanging  over  the  grave.  The  Momeses  are  very  ignorant,
and  aske  who  learne  the  Hares  in  the  woods  their  prayers.
At  Rie  the  women  have  a  thing  of  Red  velvet  on  their
heads,  made  like  a  Ship  with  the  keele  upward,  at  each
end  a  lock  of  hayre.

The  women  of  the  Sacs  differ  in  their  fashion  of  attire
each  City  from  other,  a  pleted  Petticote,  with  a  damaske
Upper-body,  a  velvet  Square  on  their  heads,  and  thereon  a
Cloke,  &c.  The  maid  uncovered,  if  she  have  had  a  child
and  refuse  to  goe  covered,  she  is  brought  to  the  Pillory,
her  haire  cut  off,  and  there  nayled,  and  a  Kerchiefe  put

Hospitalitle.  on.  Here  and  in  Norway,  and  in  White  Russia,  &c.
strangers  pay  nothing  for  entertainment,  but  salute,  sit
downe,  and  expect  the  Hosts  expences.  Their  bed  they
must  bring  with  them,  which  is  commonly  a  Beares  skin,

454

GEORGE BARKLEY  a.d.

1605.

or  else  they  there  have  a  locke  of  straw.  To  offer  money
is  a  disgrace,  which  yet  might  seeme  to  arise  of  the  base-
nesse  of  the  coyne.  Their  houses  are  all  of  Timber  Houses.
beames  laid  square,  and  others  laid  on  them  in  notches,
so  till  they  come  to  the  roofe,  which  they  cover  with
straw,  divided  in  two  roomes ;  the  inner  being  the  Parlour
or  stove,  where  they  have  as  it  were  one  Oven  over
another :  the  middle  hearth  being  of  stones  set  grate-wise,
the  fire  is  put  in  on  the  Back-side  or  Hal-side,  &  there
also  the  Sinke  issueth.  Before  that  mouth  in  the  Stove
is  set  a  vessell  of  water,  which,  when  they  wil  have  the
heat  exceeding,  they  besprinkle  on  those  hot  stones.  A
fire  lasteth  a  day,  at  night  they  renew  it.  Sometimes
the  old  Prusees  on  the  borders  of  Curland,  according
to  their  old  heathenish  Rites  do  sacrifice  their  Priest
in  fire.

From  Derpt  hee  went  to  the  Peibus,  whereinto  runne  Peibus.
seventie  two  Rivers  making  a  great  Lake  full  of  Fish.  In
the  Peibus  betweene  Plesko  and  Narve,  the  Ships  (whereof
are  many,  and  some  an  hundred  Tunne,  with  one  Mast)
are  sowed  together  with  Osiers,  having  no  Iron  workes,  Sowed  Ships.
called  Boidacks.  They  goe  to  Markets  in  Sleds,  where
comming  to  a  walled  Towne,  and  waiting  the  opening
of  the  Gates,  the  Sled  is  drawne  in  sometime,  with  his
Master  sitting  as  before  starke  dead  with  cold.  Thence
he  went  to  Narve,  which  runneth  out  of  this  Lake,  where
the  River  being  twice  so  bigge  as  the  Thames,  hath  a  fall
a  mile  steepe  on  a  Rocke.  Here  the  Sweden  (as  is
reported)  made  a  Bridge  over  with  the  bodies  of  Russes,
as  the  Russe  had  done  before  with  his  owne  people  about
40000.  hence  to  Ivanogrod.  These  40000.  were  onely
bearded  men  slaine,  &c.  not  women  or  children ;  these
hee  dashed  by  the  heeles,  the  dryed  braines  whereof  hee
hath  seene  on  the  wals,  &c.  these  all  out  of  two  Townes,
Narve  and  Ivanogrod.  The  Castle  of  Ivanogrod  is  so
fortified,  that  it  must  bee  thrice  conquered  before  con-
quered, and  built  in  a  yeere,  of  Stone,  which  none  else  is
in  Russia. Hence  hee  went  to  Yeraslave,  where  he  and

455

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605.

his  companion  were  apprehended  by  the  Russes,  for  travel-
ling without  licence,  and  as  they  came  at  any  Towne,

Letto.  blinded,  and  after  some  feares  sent  thence  into  Letto,  or

Lithuania :  passing  through  Woods  full  of  Beasts,  Beares,
&c.  none  hurtfull  but  en  luxe,  a  kind  of  ounce  or  Cat-a-
mountaine,  with  a  tayle  a  handfull  long,  spotted,  as  big  as
a  Dogge,  in  forme  like  a  Cat,  which  would  from  off  a
tree  leap  on  Travellers  and  kill  them. Here  they  came

Vilna.  to  the  Weild  or  Vilna,  the  chiefe  Citie  where  the  old

Dutchesse  a  Calvinist  (whom  therefore  they  called  the
English  Queen)  kept  her  Court.  Her  two  sons  being
summoned  to  the  Parliament  in  Poland,  went  garded  with
30000.  Here  they  usually  steale  their  wives ;  a  man
viewing  one  to  his  content  comes  with  his  company  to
the  place  where  she  dwels,  and  lies  in  ambush  till  night
when  she  comes  forth  to  make  water,  and  then  they  catch
her,  and  on  a  Sled  carry  her  away,  &c.  her  friends  not
knowing  what  is  become  of  her  perhaps  a  moneth,  and
yet  know  what  to  suspect  because  of  the  custome.  Their
Churches  are  thin,  and  in  the  Villages  they  have  a  Crosse

[III.iii.629.]  of  Wood,  with  a  Pentise,  and  a  Crucifixe,  and  there  say
they  their  prayers  once  perhaps  in  a  quarter,  having  a
Priest  come  to  them,  or  they  goe  to  him  in  their  Church
twenty  miles  off.  They  worship  also  a  Snake,  which  they
keepe  up  in  their  houses,  saying,  they  have  reason  for  it,
because  it  keepes  their  children :  these  Snakes  goe  often
into  the  Woods,  and  thence  returne,  and  before  the  fire

Hunting.  vomit  up  milke,  which  the  men  eate.  Here  they  hunt
the  Vrochs,  and  other  beasts.  When  the  Lord  will  hunt,
his  Tenants  or  Slaves  (as  they  are  heere,  and  in  Sweden,
Poland,  &c.)  doe  make  fires  in  the  Woods,  bringing  the
beasts  into  a  corner,  &  there  they  assault  them.  From  Vilna
he  went  to  Grodno  in  the  Mase,  where  are  the  best  Poles
souldiers,  &  they  are  Roman  Catholikes.  From  hence  to
Cracovia.  From  thence  to  Warsovia,  where  is  a  Bridge
(covered  over  with  a  Pentice,  where  toll  is  paid,  twice  so
long  as  London  Bridge)  over  Vistula,  which  soone  after
he  was  passed  over,  brake,  and  there  were  drowned  many

456

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF THE ARCTIKE POLE,  OR NORTHERNE  WORLD

GEORGE BARKLEY

A.D.
1605.

Polonish  Gentlemen  that  came  thither  to  the  Parliament
at  that  time  there  assembled.

To  this  Parliament  came  a  Tartar  to  sue  for  his  two
daughters,  taken  captive  by  the  Christians  :  but  not  speed-
ing he  returned ;  and  with  him  went  our  Author  Master  His  going  into
George  Berkley,  and  stayed  with  him  sixe  moneths.  This  Tartaria-
Tartar  lived  with  his  hord  of  about  a  thousand  housholds
of  a  kindred.  They  sowed  a  three  square  graine  (Totarke)
had  cattle,  lived  at  ease,  every  day  hunting ;  these  wor-
shipped Mahomet.  Their  manner  is  to  make  sudden
Inrodes  on  the  Christians,  and  prey  on  them,  who  there-
fore are  readie  for  such  assaults :  the  Polonish  Gentleman
at  dinner  having  his  two  Peeces  by  him,  and  his  Serving-
men,  which  are  Souldiers  with  their  Peeces  also,  when
the  Christians  make  head  against  them,  they  cannot  most
what  find  them.  They  are  resolute,  and  wil  ride  with
their  Bowes  in  face  of  a  Peece.  If  this  Tartar  could  have
gotten  his  daughters,  he  would  have  bestowed  one  on  him,
&c.  if  he  would  have  lived  with  him,  and  he  said  he  never
lived  in  all  his  life  so  pleasantly  as  with  these  Tartars.
Hee  returned  into  Poland  againe.  In  Poland  all  are
Gentlemen  and  Slaves.  Punishable  it  is  not  for  their
Gentlemen  to  keepe  Concubines,  whose  children  they  bring
up  as  their  other,  save  that  they  doe  not  inherit.  There
is  freedome  of  religion.  So  many  Cranes  feathers  as  they
weare  in  their  Hats,  so  many  Tartars  or  Turkes  are  holden  [III.iii.630.]
to  be  slaine  by  them.  No  Townes  very  strong  but
Cammeniecx  built  within  a  Roeke,  the  light  let  in  at
holes. The  Turke  went  over  it  but  could  not  win  it.

The  Polanders  had  a  great  murraine  of  beasts  attributed
to  the  Jewes :  two  Jewes  comming  to  a  woman  offered
her  mony  for  some  of  her  milke,  she  answered,  her  child
but  then  sucked,  they  left  their  glasse  there,  promising
to  fetch  it  anon  and  to  satisfie  her :  her  husband  meane
while  comming  home  and  seeing  so  strange  a  thing  as  a
glasse,  asked  from  whence  it  came,  and  why ;  being
answered  two  Jewes  had  left  it  there  for  milke  for  a
medicine,  bid  her  fleet  Cowes  milke  and  fill  the  glasse :

457

A.*  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605.

which  the  Jewes  receiving,  and  having  entertained  a  Boy,
caused  him  to  climbe  up  one  of  the  Ladders  which  there
stand  together  with  their  three  square  gallowes  made  of
stone,  with  woodden  rafters  crosse,  and  to  poure  it  into  the
mouth  of  one  of  the  dead  men  (which  there  alway  hang
after  execution)  his  mouth,  who  presently  cryed  like  a
beast,  as  the  boy  revealed,  and  they  thereupon  cryed  they
were  cosined :  a  murren  followed  which  should  have  been
a  plague.  Many  Jewes  executed  for  it ;  which  yet  the
Jewes  said  to  bee  a  pretence  for  their  money.  The  Jewes
that  farmed  the  Custome  at  Samaiden  in  Curland,  killed
a  Polonish  Merchant  without  punishment,  beating  out
his  braines  for  delaying  to  open  his  packe.  Hee  returned
Tome.  out  of  Poland  into  Prussia  to  Torne,  the  first  place  obtained

by  the  Kreitzherne,  where  they  built  a  Castle  about  an
Oake  which  standeth  there  still,  but  is  dead.  Thence
along  the  Vistle  (where  the  Poles  have  their  Masts,  &c.
with  wares  three  miles  together  tyed  downe  the  streame)
to  Dantzike ;  thence  into  Pomerland  farre  more  barren
then  Prussia,  to  Cassubia,  Cosslin,  Colberg.  Thence  to
Statin,  every  way  exceeding  pleasant  and  good.  Thence
to  Rostock  in  Meckelberg.  Thence  to  Lubeck,  a  fairer
Citie  then  Danske,  so  to  Oldsloe,  to  Hamberg,  to  Breme,
to  Limenberg,  to  Mansuelt,  to  Bamberg,  and  thence
through  Bohemia  into  Silesia,  to  Bresslaw,  where  hee  went
to  schoole  three  yeeres :  whence  into  Polonia  againe,  and
thence  to  Pruss.  Thence  home  into  England.
Norway.  Hee  went  againe  into  Norway,  to  Nilus,  Bashus,  &c.

It  is  a  barren  soyle,  as  being  nothing  but  Rockes  and
Valleyes :  the  Rockes  are  covered  with  grasse,  and  the
ground  betweene  they  digge  and  sow  with  Corne,  which
yet  is  not  able  to  satisfie  the  Country.  The  difference
[III.iii.63 1.]  betweene  the  Gentlemen  and  Bore,  is  in  his  command,
being  otherwise,  as  raggedly  apparrelled  as  hee,  with
twentie  patches  on  his  breech,  and  barefoot  in  winter.
Sweden.  In  Sweden  he  was,  at  Stockholm  the  chiefe  Citie. These

*  When  he  was  now  *  under  Duke  Charles,  hold  warre  with  their  King,
there.  yet  ajj  things  passing  under  his  name,  but  so  hating  the

458

GEORGE BARKLEY  a.d.

1605.

Poles,  that  though  of  another  Nation,  neither  the  long
attire,  neither  their  Curb,  or  hooked  Sword  can  passe
safely  among  the  Bores  for  suspition  of  being  Poles :  and
the  rather  because  they  were  made  beleeve  that  the  Pole
was  ayded  against  them  by  the  Tartars  that  were  man-
eaters.  They  are  strong  in  shipping  and  had  given  the
Dane  the  overthrow  at  the  battle  at  Bornaholm,  had  he
not  beene  assisted  by  the  Lubeckers  with  money,  &c.  One
also  of  whose  Ships  with  a  shot  fired  and  blew  up  the
Admirall  of  the  Sweden.  The  Lubeckers  therefore  pay
no  custome  to  the  Danes,  and  for  their  costs  hold  Boraholm
till  they  be  satisfied  out  of  the  Revenewes  thereof.

In  Sweden  (as  in  Friesland  and  other  those  Countries)
the  Lord  holdeth  the  other  his  Tenants  as  Villaines  and
Slaves,  and  at  his  pleasure  ships  their  Horses  and
Daughters  to  Revell,  and  there  sells  them ;  a  bushell  and
halfe  a  Culmet  of  Salt  for  a  women,  which  yet  is  of  person
and  complexion  very  comely,  and  very  able  to  doe  worke.
He  came  againe  to  Leefland ;  and  thence  to  Finland,
where  hee  was  with  an  English  Captaine  in  a  Castle :  and
thence  into  Livonia,  and  so  into  Russia,  &c.

Besides  those  his  Easterne  travels,  he  hath  bin  in  our  His  other
neerer  neighbor  places,  as  in  Belgia,  France,  Spaine,  Portu-  travells.
gall,  &c.  and  passed  to  the  West  Indies  by  the  Hands  of
Cape  Verd :  in  three  of  which  S.S.  Anton.,  Vincent,
Lucie,  the  Inhabitants  cannot  prosper  nor  live  long,  save
in  those  Hands  which  yet  are  unkind  to  other  forrainers.
He  hath  also  beene  in  Guinea,  in  Barbary,  in  the  Straits,
at  Carthage,  where  the  old  ruines  remaine,  and  the  stones
of  Marble,  &c.  worth  the  bringing  home,  in  Italy,  Slavonia,
Morea,  at  Venice  often,  at  Ferrara,  Padua,  Mat.  Angelo,
thence  to  Fermo,  to  Loretto  (where  he  visited  the  Ladie  Loretto.
of  Loretto)  it  is  one  street,  walled  about,  the  Temple  faire,
and  in  the  Temple  of  our  Ladies  house,  inscriptions
innumerable  of  divers  languages,  affirming  it  to  have  fled
the  Turkes  conquests  from  Jury  into  Sclavonia,  and  from
thence  also  hither.  Here  forsooth  it  was  placed  in  a  piece
of  ground  belonging  to  two  Brethren,  which  because  of

459

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1605.

this  new  quest  and  request  could  not  agree  on  the  pro-
prietie :  and  to  avoyde  further  suite,  in  the  night  it  was
found  remooved  to  a  vacant  place  by  the  high-way,  and
there  this  Temple  built  whither  resort  Pilgrimes  in  troopes,
as  to  a  Mart  from  divers  Nations.  The  street  on  one
side  all  Innes,  on  the  other  makers  of  Images,  Beades,
and  such  other  holy  babies  heere  sanctified  by  touch  of
Madonne.

The  Temple  is  hanged  about  with  Monuments  of  her
exploits,  upon  vowes  conceived  in  distres  of  Warres,
Diseases,  &c.  heere  hang  the  old  Swords,  &c.  There  are
two  Vestries  of  incredible  wealth,  and  Priests  of  divers
Nations  for  their  proper  Pilgrimes.  The  House  low  and
meane  builded  with  white  Brickes,  such  as  in  Barbarie  they
burne  in  the  Sun.  There  are  two  roomes,  in  one  whereof
the  Chimney  where  shee  dressed  her  meate,  and  her
dishes,  &c.  In  the  other  her  selfe,  or  statue  with  a  Childe,
aloft  of  blacke  colour :  to  whom  one  whose  office  it  is,
on  a  staffe  like  a  Musket-rest  doth  lift  up  Beades,  &c.  by
her  touch  to  bee  hallowed.  The  French  Queene  sent  her  a
Present  to  hang  about  her  necke,  which  present  would
pull  her  in  peeces  by  the  weight.  It  is  round,  two  foot
in  diameter  made  like  a  Sunne,  in  the  center  a  Carbuncle,
the  rest  set  with  Diamonds,  the  rayes  pointed  with  orient
Pearles,  the  Brickes  (miraculously)  cannot  bee  remooved,
to  which  end  they  report  of  a  Bishops  superstitious  steale  :
who  was  not  able  to  passe  without  restitution.

Travelling  in  divers  places  of  Italy,  Rome,  &c.  hee
returned  by  the  Alpes,  from  Venice  to  Mestre,  thence  to
Trevise,  so  to  Seravalle,  a  Towne  of  Blade-smithes,  which
with  Water-workes  grinde  and  hammer  their  Mettals :
Alpes.  thence  up  the  Alpes  by  a  passage  so  narrow  cut  out  of  the
Rocke,  that  sometime  the  Horse  hoofe  hung  over,  it
beeing  a  steepe  mile  high,  a  River  running  under.  Thus
to  Basill,  thence  backe  to  Tiroll.

After  all  these  travels  in  these  parts  of  Europe  better
knowne,  and  those  others  in  the  more  unknowne,  and  in
Africa  and  America,  hee  much  affecting  the  Virginia  busi-

460

GEORGE BARKLEY

nesse  and  especially  that  of  Bermuda,  went  thither  to  order
publike  affaires.  And  after  all  this  (as  you  have  heard)
went  in  place  of  Cape  Merchant  to  the  East  Indies,  and
being  Captaine  of  the  English  House  at  Bantam,  there
and  thence  travelled  to  his  long  home.  This  I  thought
good  to  adde  to  the  former  relations,  which  I  received
many  yeeres  since  from  his  owne  mouth,  beeing  my  loving
and  familiar  friend,  and  for  a  generall  Traveller  by  Sea
and  Land,  in  hote  and  cold  Countries  of  the  old  and  new
world,  not  easily  matchable.  Had  hee  lived,  I  would  have
better  perfected  these  short  Notes ;  but  Death  it  selfe  hath
not  taken  from  mee  his  love,  shall  not  from  the  world
his  memory ;  I  rather  chusing  to  give  the  world  these
unpolished  Notes,  as  his,  then  either  to  burie  them  with
him,  or  by  refining  and  illustrating  to  make  them  mine.
The  best  illustration  seemes  that  of  Mappes,  some  of
which  out  of  Hondius  I  have  added.

A.D.

1605.

Chap.  XXI.  [m.iii.632.]

Collections  out  of  Martin  Broniovius  de  Biezer-
fedea  sent  Ambassadour  from  Stephen  King  of
Poland,  to  the  Crim  Tartar:  Contayning  a
Description  of  Tartaria,  or  Chersonesus  Taurica,
and  the  Regions  subject  to  the  Perecop  or
Crim  Tartars,  with  their  Customes  private  and
publike  in  Peace  and  Warre.

Raslaw  is  a  Towne  in  Podolia  with  a
Castle,  numbreth  above  five  hundred
Inhabitants,  good  Gunners,  and  well
exercised  in  Tartarian  skirmishes.  They
are  good  Guides  in  the  Playnes  to  avoyde  Rivers  Bogus
the  Tartars  and  Kozackes.  From  thence  and  N ester.
thorow  Woods  not  very  thicke,  after  some
miles  journey  to  the  small  River  Silnica,  where  the
Braslawens  keepe  good  guard  alwayes  against  the  Excur-
sions of  the  Tartars  and  Walachians. Downe  the  River

461

The  fields
Savramenses
and  Oczaco-
vienses,
betwixt  the

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

Long  miles  in
those  parts :
and  so  under-
stand in  the
rest  of  this
storie.
Sharpe winter.

[III.iii.633.]
Part  of  Mol-
davia or  the
lower
Valachia,
called
sometimes
Bessarabia.
Lake  Vidovo
in  Necster.
Bialogrod.

Bogus  or  Hipanis,  you  may  goe  almost  to  Oczacow.  In
the  way  are  the  Rivers  Tristenet,  Bersad,  Olsank,  Sauran
(whence  they  are  called  the  Fields  of  Sauran)  a  stone
Bridge  and  Bathe  sometimes  belonging  to  Vitoldus,  Great
Duke  of  Lithuania,  ruines  and  graves,  Sinawod  Riveret,
the  strong  rockie  He  Probite,  a  good  refuge  for  ours
against  the  Tartars  (the  Braslawens  in  May  and  June,  use
there  and  in  the  other  many  Hands  of  Bogus  to  fish,  armed
with  their  Pieces)  Certelna  River  the  greater  and  the  lesse,
and  that  of  Capcacley,  and  Hancocricus  (the  Tartars  call  it
Cham)  and  the  Lake  Berezania.  That  Field  is  fiftie  miles,
or  as  they  call  it  seven  dayes  journey  to  a  speedie  traveller,
from  Braslaw  to  Oczacow.  There  are  wilde  Beasts,
Bisonts,  Elkes,  Horses,  Harts,  Rammes  with  one  home,
Goates,  Swine,  Beares :  which  ten  yeeres  since  were  sayd
to  bee  killed  with  the  sharpnesse  of  the  Winter,  and  huge
heapes  of  their  bones  are  found  in  the  fields.  They  had
also  innumerable  herds  of  Horses,  Turkish  and  Tartarian  ;
Kine  and  Sheepe  which  fedde  there,  by  the  borderers  of
Russia,  Volsinia,  Kiow,  Podolia,  and  Moldavia,  not  long
since  destroyed.  The  hills  called  Mogili,  are  testimonies
of  Burials  and  Warres.  The  Field  is  fertile,  rich  of
pasture  and  pleasure.

Passing  over  Prut  or  Hieras,  a  River  of  Moldavia,  you
come  to  Stepanovetia  or  Jassi,  chiefe  Towne  of  Valachia ;
or  righter  to  Prutum  Technia,  a  Towne  and  Fort  of  the
Turkes,  not  long  since  fortified  on  the  Nester ;  and  there
are  found  some  Moldavian  passages  in  the  Nester,  right
into  the  champaines.  It  diffuseth  it  selfe  into  the  Lake
Vidovo  or  Obidovo  (so  called,  as  some  fabulously  conceive
of  Ovidius)  and  soone  after  disembokes  into  the  Euxine
Sea,  over  against  Bialogrod  (named  by  the  antients  Mon-
castrum)  not  long  since  taken  by  the  Turkes,  from  the
Valachian  or  Moldavian  Princes,  &  holden  by  them.  In
the  very  mouth  of  Tyras  or  Nester,  bearing  name  of
Neoptolemus  as  may  seeme  by  Strabo,  who  there-awayes
placeth  Nicovia  on  the  right  hand,  and  Ophiusa  on  the
left  hand  of  the  River.

462

MARTIN BRONIOVIUS

After  followeth  Beriboneum  with  deepe  and  large
ditches  neere  the  Sea,  washed  by  the  Lake  where  some-
times was  a  good  Port.  Adzigoli  hath  three  Ditches,
many  salt  Lakes  nigh  the  Sea,  where  many  Cozaks  resort
and  often  kill  each  other  in  mutuall  warres  and  quarrels,
which  makes  it  terrible  to  Travellers.  Then  follow
Domnina  Dolnia,  and  the  Lake  Berezania,  and  the  Bay
Carcinitus.  Strabo  placeth  five  hundred  furlongs  in  the
Sea,  from  the  mouth  of  Tyras  the  Hand  Leuca  sacred  to
Achilles.

Oczacovia  called  antiently  Olbia,  Olbis,  and  Olbiopolis,
is  seated  on  Boristhenes  or  the  Carcenite  Bay ;  sometimes
builded  by  the  Meletians :  the  Tower  is  of  Stone,  the
Towne  but  meane,  is  subject  to  the  Turkes.  Boristhenes
or  Neper,  a  deepe,  wide  and  swift  streame,  runneth  from
the  North  into  the  Bay,  and  neere  to  Oczacovia  into  the
Euxine.  Foure  miles  higher  Bogus  empties  it  selfe  into
Boristhenes.  There  the  Turkes  exact  Customes.  The
Isthmus  betwixt  Boristhenes  and  the  Sea,  is  a  dayes
journey  over  sandie  plaines,  with  Hills,  Lakes,  Salt-pits ;
with  Deeres,  Beares,  Goates,  wilde  Swine  well  stored.  It
is  extended  to  Perecopia  above  thirtie  miles  in  length,  con-
taining Medowes,  Rivers,  and  Tartarian  Cottages  (which
they  call  ulnsi)  made  of  small  pieces  of  wood,  daubed  with
mud  or  myre  and  dung  of  beasts,  and  thatched  with  reed.
The  Tartars  live  not  in  them  in  Summer  and  Autumne,
but  in  April  begin  their  progresse,  with  their  wives,
children,  slaves,  and  houses  which  are  round,  covered  with
clothes,  scarsly  commodious  for  foure  or  five  men,  carried
on  two-wheeled  carts,  with  one  or  two  Camels  or  Oxen,
together  with  their  houshold.  They  carry  with  them
Camels,  Horses,  Flockes,  and  Herds  innumerable,  leaving
others  in  commodious  pastures.  They  goe  towards  Pere-
copia, and  sometimes  into  Taurica,  or  over  against
]  Perecopia,  to  Ossow  or  Azaph,  as  the  Turkes  call  it,  a
!  Towne  by  the  Don  (Tanais,  a  great  and  swift  River)
sometimes  fortified  by  the  Greekes,  and  since  by  the
Genuois ;  where  the  Turkes  now  have  a  Garrison,  and  a

463

Beriboneum.
Adzigola.

Dommina
Berezania,
Carcinitus.
Leuca.

Oczacavia.

Boresthenes  or
Neper.

Bogus.

The  Isthmus.

Their  houses
and  pasture-
progress.

Tanais  or
Don.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

Commander.  They  alway  travell  into  the  Isthmus,  or
the  large  Plaines  which  are  betwixt  Boristhenes,  and  the
Lake  Meotis,  and  the  Pontike  Sea,  where  they  find  best
pastures.  In  October  the  raines,  colds,  and  perpetuall
windes  force  them  to  returne  to  their  Cottages.  For  they
are  afraide  of  our  Nizovian  Cozaks,  which  passe  downe
the  streame  in  Boats,  and  the  Gunners,  which  then  make
incursions  on  them.  Neper  is  frozen  over  in  Winter.
Ptolemey  calls  that  Isthmus,  Zenos  Chersonesus,  and
Strabo  writes  that  the  Roxans  and  Roxolans  (whom  we
call  Russians)  pastured  those  Fields  twixt  Tanais  and
Boristhenes  (describing  their  life  like  that  of  these  later
Tartars).

Perecopia.  Perecopia (antiently called Eupatoria, Pompeiopolis,

Holy  Grove,  Achilles  Race,  Graecida,  Heraclea)  is  seated
in  the  confines  of  Taurica,  or  the  Scythian  Chersonesus,
the  Towne  obscure  and  small,  the  Tower  of  stone,  not
well  fortified ;  in  which  the  Tartar  Chans  have  their
perpetuall  Palatine  or  Beg,  which  keepeth  the  Marches  and
passages  of  Boristhenes  and  Don,  with  all  the  borders,
and  is  Generall  Lieutenant  over  all  the  Tartars  in  the
Playnes  adjoyning.  Strabo  writes  that  there  was  a  deepe
Ditch  made,  whence  the  Towne  had,  and  still  in  the
Tartarian  and  Turkish  language  hath  the  name.  When
Sachinbgierei  raigned  there  (hee  overthrew  the  Nagay
Tartars  at  Perecopia  with  a  memorable  victory)  there  were
seventeene  stone  Forts  raised  in  that  Ditch,  some  of  them
of  the  Skuls  of  the  slayne,  and  the  ditch  repayred.  Heere
the  Tartars  keepe  continuall  Guard,  permitting  no
Stranger  thence  to  passe  without  the  Chans  Letters.
And  there  in  occasions  of  Warres  is  their  principall
assembling.

Cosskw.  Coslow  is  seven  miles  distant  on  the  right  hand,  on

the shore,  where  the  Chan  hath  a  perpetuall  garrison.

lngermanum.  Ingermenum  is  hence  twelve  miles  or  more :  it  hath  a
stone  Fort,  a  Temple,  and  Vaults  under  the  Castle  and
over  against  it,  with  wonderfull  Art  cut  in  the  stone,
being  situate  in  a  great  and  high  Mountaine ;  and  there-

464

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF BORUSSIA OR PRUSSIA

MARTIN BRONIOVIUS

fore  the  Turkes  give  it  the  name  of  the  Vaults.  It  hath
beene  a  wealthy  Towne.  Over  against  it  the  Promontorie
trendeth  some  furlongs  broad,  and  three  or  foure  miles
long.  There  appeare  evident  signes  in  the  stonie  Moun-
taines,  that  the  ancient  Greekes  thence  cut  huge  stones
and  carried  them  by  Ships  to  build  Chersona  a  Citie  in  Chersona.
those  times  famous,  as  the  Greeke  Christians  still  report.
The  Heraclians  of  Pontus  sent  thither  a  Colony.  The
Fort  of  Ingermenum  was  also  built  by  the  Greekes,  as
appeareth  by  Greeke  Inscriptions  and  Scutcheons  therein  :
and  thorow  all  the  Isthmus  to  the  walls  were  sumptuous
buildings,  and  innumerable  Wells  digged.  There  were
also  two  great  High-wayes  or  Causies  of  stone.  There
were  many  good  Vineyards  and  Gardens,  now  called
Belbec,  and  possessed  by  Greeke  Christians,  or  Italians,
and  Jewes,  and  a  few  Turkes.  Of  the  ruines  the  Turkes
and  Tartars  make  great  Stalls  and  Enclosures  for  their
beasts.  This  Cheronesus,  Corsunum,  or  Chersona  the
Turkes  called  Sari  Germenum,  or  Yellow  Tower  of  the  [III.iii.634.]
colour  of  that  Tract ;  whereof  admirable  ruines  remaine  to
testifie  the  quondam  splendor.  There  are  channells  or
conduits  of  hewen  stone  under  ground  foure  miles  to  the
Citie  walls,  still  containing  cleere  water.  From  a  place
where  is  a  Village  of  note,  and  not  farre  off,  neere  the  \yf
Sea  is  a  Greeke  Monastery  of  Saint  George,  with  anniver-
sarie  devotion  frequented  of  the  Greekes  remaining  in
Taurica  with  great  concourse.  The  Citie  hath  not  beene
inhabited  these  many  ages ;  the  Walls  and  Towers
sumptuously  built  are  yet  seene  entire.  But  the  Turks
carry  thence  excellent  Marble,  and  Serpentine  Columnes
and  great  stones  by  Sea,  for  the  use  of  their  publike  and
private  buildings.  Of  the  Temples  the  very  ruines  are
utterly  ruined,  and  the  houses  lye  buried  in  that  Monu-
ment and  Selfe-sepulchre.

The  walls  of  a  Greeke  Monasterie  remayne  very  large,
but without roofe, and the ornaments spoyled. The
Russian  and  Polonian  Chronicles  relate  that  Volodomir,
great  Duke  of  the  Russians  or  Kiov,  carried  thence  two  Kiov.
xiii  465  2  G

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

Parthenium.

The  Citie
Balachei,  or
Jamboli.

doores  of  Corinthian  Brasse,  and  some  artificiall  Greeke
Images  which  Broleslaus  the  second  King  of  Poland  trans-
lated from  Kiov  to  Gnesna,  there  yet  in  the  great  Church
to  be  seene.  Volodimir  tooke  that  Citie  from  John
Zemisca  the  Constantinopolitan  Emperour :  but  after,
marrying  Anna  the  sister  of  Emperour  Basilius,  and  being
baptized  in  that  Monastery  after  the  Greeke  Rites  by  a
certayne  Patriarch,  hee  restored  it,  as  is  still  related  by  the
Christian  remainders  in  those  parts.  Before  the  Citie
was  the  Promontorie  Parthenium  with  a  Temple  and
Image  of  that  Goddesse,  and  other  Antiquities  by  Strabo
related.

That  which  the  Greekes  called  Jamboli,  the  Turkes  have
stiled  Balachei,  as  the  Towre  of  fishes,  in  regard  of  the
plentie  in  that  Sea. It  was  fortified  in  a  high,  great  and
stonie Mountayne by the Genuois, whiles the proud
cowardly  Grecians  which  held  that  part  of  Taurica  quarrel-
ling amongst  themselves,  lost  it  to  them. There  they
had  a  notable  Port,  a  strong  and  sumptuous  Fortresse ;
and  there  the  Towres,  houses  and  walls  with  the  Genuois
Ensignes and Inscriptions, lye ruined. It is now
inhabited of a few Greekes, Jewes and Turkes, and
frequented  by  fewer  Merchants  and  strangers  by  Sea.
Marcopia,  or Marcopia  stretcheth  further  to  the  Mountaynes,  and
Mangat a Woods,  and  is  not  so  neere  the  Sea: it  hath  had  two
*$'  Castles,  Greeke  Temples  and  Houses  sumptuous,  with

many  cleere  Rils  running  out  of  the  stone :  but  eighteene
yeeres  after  that  the  Turkes  had  taken  it  (as  the  Greeke
Christians  affirme)  it  was  destroyed  by  a  sudden  and
horrible  fire.  Neither  had  any  thing  remayned  of  note
but  the  higher  Fort,  in  which  is  a  goodly  Gate,  adorned
with  Greeke  writing  and  store  of  Marble,  and  a  high
house  of  stone.  Into  that  house  the  Messengers  of  the
Muscovites  are  by  the  barbarous  Chans  sometimes  thrust,
and  there  endure  hard  keeping.  There  remaynes  the
Greeke  Church  of  Saint  Constantine,  and  another  meane
one  of  Saint  George.  One  Greeke  Priest  and  some  Jewes
and Turkes dwell there ; Oblivion and Ruine hath

466

MARTIN BRONIOVIUS

devoured  the  rest ;  nor  are  there  men  or  Stories  of  the
!  quondam Inhabitants, which I with great care and
diligence  every-where  sought  in  vaine. An  old  Priest
which  I  saw  there,  said  that  a  little  before  the  Turkes
i  besieged  it,  two  Greeke  Dukes  of  the  Imperiall  bloud  of
Constantinople  or  Trapezond,  there  resided,  which  were
after  carried  alive  into  Constantinople,  and  by  Selim  the
Turkish  Emperour  slaine. In  the  Greeke  Churches  on
the  walls  are  painted  Imperiall  Images  and  Habits. The
Tower  and  Citie  Marcopia  is  nigh  to  Cercessigermenum  a Cercessiger-
new  Turkish  Fort  taking  name  from  Cercessium ;  but  the  menum.
Turkes,  and  Tartars,  and  Greekes  also  have  now  lost  the
name. The  Greeke  Dukes  are  said  to  have  there  com-
mitted much wickednesse. And in that stony Hill
whereon  it  is  seated,  it  hath  houses  cut  with  admirable  Admirable
Artifice in the Rocke, which still for the most part ^aults-
remayne  entire,  although  the  place  be  become  wooddie.
A  Temple  adorned  with  Marble  and  Serpentine  Pillars,
now  laid  prostrate  on  the  ground,  testifie  the  quondam
glorie.

The  Palaces  or  Houses  of  the  Chans  reach  unto  the

Mediterranean Taurica (as Strabo cals it.) It hath a

|  famous  Towne,  and  a  principall  Store-house,  called  Bacca- Baccasaray.

saray,  wherein  he  perpetually  resideth. That  Towne  is

situated  betweene  two Mountaynes,  and  a  little  River

flowes  betweene,  whereof  the  Towne  is  named. There

is  a  stone  Mosche,  and  the  Chans  Sepulchres  built  within

the  Townes  Liberty  of  the  Christians  ruines. Not  farre

also  from  that  Towne  there  is  a  Mahometan  Monasterie,

and  very  many  Tartarian  Graves  curiously  raysed  out  of

the  Grecian  ruines. In  the  further  end  of  that  Towne,

there  is  another  Towne  called  Salaticum,  adorned  with  Salatkum.

|  faire buildings by the Turkes there inhabiting. The

jRoyall  Seate  or  Mansion  of  the  Chans  is  sumptuously

!  garnished  by  the  ancient  Tartarian  Princes  with  Houses,

|  Temples, Sepulchres, and exquisite Baths. When the

Princes  with  their  Wives,  oft  give  themselves  to  ease,

pastimes,  pleasures,  and  recreation,  they  go  thither. For

467

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Almassarai.

Perecopia.
Cremum.

that  place  or  Region  is  commodious  for  huntings,  it  hath
Orchards,  Vineyards,  Gardens,  and  many  store  of  good
grounds,  and  it  is  watered  with  Chrystaline  streames.
There  are  Mountaynes  and  store  of  Woods,  wherein  are
seene  very  many  ruines  of  Houses,  and  large  Forts  and
Cities,  yet  they  remayne  desert,  and  are  of  few  or  none
inhabited.

Almassaray  at  the  meeting  of  the  River  Alma,  is  a
house  of  the  Kings,  where  he  is  woont  not  often  to  reside,
because  he  lives  not  there  so  commodiously,  as  in  other
places,  and  cannot  lodge  there  with  his  Court :  for  there
is  only  one  base  Village.  There  are  some  more  obscure
bordering  Townes  and  Fortresses,  where  they  are  woont
[III.iii.635.]  to  maintayne  their  Wives.  Also  not  a  few  Castles  where
the  Sultans,  the  Chans  brothers,  or  their  sonnes  and  wives
perpetually  dwell.  That  part  of  Chersonesus,  which  the
Chan  with  his  Tartars  possesse  from  Perecopia,  toward  the
Fenne  or  Lake  to  the  Citie  Cremum,  is  cultivated,  plaine,
champian,  fertile,  and  plentifull  of  grasse ;  but  toward  the
Sea  and  the  Palace  of  the  Chan,  and  his  Townes,  Castles,
and  Villages,  the  Countrey  is  Mountaynous,  woodie,  well
husbanded,  and  very  fruitfull.  The  Mountaynes  in  that
Coast  are  huge  and  remarkable.  But  the  greatest  is  the
highest  of  all,  and  hath  in  the  top  a  Lake  of  no  small
quantitie.  And  although  I  did  not  ascend  it,  yet  it  is
well  discerned  many  miles  off,  and  demonstrates  no
ordinary  height  and  greatnesse.  Plentie  of  Rivers  and
no  small  ones  runne  from  those  Mountaynes.  Also  they
have  much  fish,  but  not  of  any  greatnesse  (for  the  River  is
shallow)  yet  very  savourie  and  daintie.  But  because  the
Tartars  doe  not  often  feed  on  fish,  the  Christians  only  and
our  strangers  when  they  come  thither  take  paines  to  catch
them.  There  is  also  abundance  of  delicious  Fowles,
which  sometimes  Christian  or  Turkish  Gunners  are  woont
to  seeke  after,  seldome  our  strangers.  There  is  much
game  of  Harts,  Goates,  Boares,  and  Hares  neere  the  Sea
under  the  Tartars  and  Turkes.  Oftentimes  also  the  Chan
himselfe  is  wont  to  hunt  some  dayes  there,  but  more  often

468

MARTIN BRONIOVIUS

he  goes  into  the  champion  with  Turkish  and  Tartarian
hunting  Dogges.

Sortassus  is  a  Tartarian  Village  adjoyning  to  the  Chans  Sortassus.
Regall  Mansion,  wherein  the  Lettow  and  Muscovie
Ambassadors  doe  often  lodge ;  it  is  spacious  and  delight-
some. But  when  Taurica  or  the  Peninsula  beganne
subject  to  the  Chans  Dominion,  divers  Italian  Gentlemen
Genuois  after  Capha  was  taken  by  the  Turkes,  or  Tartar
Princes,  having  their  Charters  written  and  sealed  of  their
right  and  proprietie  (which  I  have  seene  among  them)
they  held  that  Village  with  speciall  Priviledges,  or  pur-
chased it  with  that  Gold  which  they  carried  with  them
out  of  their  Countrey,  or  with  their  service  to  the  Chans.
In  going  Ambassador  to  Christian  Princes,  it  was  per-
mitted them  to  build  a  Catholike  Temple  in  that  Village,
|  wherein  I  sometimes  entred  while  I  abode  there.  There
was  in  that  Temple  one  Priest  a  Franciscan  Fryer,  whom
I  those  Christians  had  then  redeemed  with  their  money  from
Turkish  slaverie.

Cremum,  or  as  the  Tartars  call  it  Crimum,  is  a  Citie  and Cremum.

a  Castle  much  unlike  in  the  antiquitie,  magnitude,  and

:  height  of  the  wall,  amplenesse  and  renowme,  to  the  other

,  Cities  of  Taurica ;  It  is  unlike  the  Mediterranean  (for  so

i  Ptolomie cals it) perhaps this  was  called by  Ptolomie

:  Taphros,  but  by  Plinie  Taphrae. Now  in these  latter

|  times  before  the  comming  of  the  Genoes  into  Taurica,  it

i  seemes  to  have  beene  husbanded  and  inhabited  by  a  great

Mahometan  Nation,  who  remooved  thither  out  of  Asia.

J  For there are seene ancient Mosches or Mahometan

:  Temples  not  only  in  the  Citie  it  selfe,  but  also  beyond  the

j  Citie  very  many  with  Chaldaicke  Characters  engraven  in

great stones. There are very few Turkish or Tartar

I  Inhabitants,  yet  the  Greekes  are  fewer,  who  report  this,

i  that  their  Ancestors  have  constantly  delivered,  that  that

j  Citie  was  whilome  dwelt  in  by  the  Persian  Nation,  and

|  that  it  was  a  quondam  noble  and  excellent  Store-house  of

,  Mechanick  Mysteries. A  man  may  certainly  conjecture

by  the  ruines  and  largenesse  of  the  place  that  it  hath  beene

469

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

a  famous  Citie  and  a  great  Colonie  of  people.  The
Crim  Tartars  Tartars  are  now  vulgarly  nominated  from  that  place  Crims.
why  so  called.  They  have  a  Mint  in  that  citie< In  the  Towre  which  is

the  greatest  in  the  Citie,  the  Chans  wives  are  alway  kept
and  spend  their  lives.
Stdagios  or  Sidagios  of  the  Greekes,  but  Sudacum  of  the  Genoes,

was  called  a  Castle  and  Citie.  The  Tartars  are  utterly
ignorant  of  it.  In  a  loftie  rockie  and  spacious  Mountaine
standing  neere  the  Sea  in  the  top  of  it,  it  hath  a  higher
Towre,  a  second  indifferent,  and  a  third  of  baser  esteeme.
The  Greekes  or  Italian  Genoes  founded  their  Castles
environed  and  fortified  with  Walls  and  Towres.  There
are  seene  innumerable  Grecian  Churches,  and  seene  but
few,  as  though  they  were  Chappels,  not  a  few
undemolished,  but  very  many  are  ruinated,  and  lye
overturned  in  the  dust.  The  haughtie  dissentious  and
idle  Greekes  being  overthrowne  and  weakened  by  the
Italian  Genoes,  lost  that  Citie.  There  are  seene  no  con-
temptible signes  of  the  Genoes  much  more  illustrious  then
those  of  the  Greekes.

But  it  is  evident  by  the  ruines,  that  it  was  once  a  famous
place,  &  so  it  is  reported  by  the  Greek  Christians,  of
whom  there  are  a  very  few  Relikes.  Moreover,  many
Christians  have  erected  a  multitude  of  Temples  which  they
report  to  have  beene  some  hundreds.  There  are  three
great  Catholike  Churches,  Houses,  Walls,  Gates,  and  faire
Towres  with  Arrace  and  Ensignes  of  the  Genoes,  are  seene
in  the  lower  Castle.  I  heard  from  a  certayne  Metro-
politane  a  Greeke  and  an  honest  man,  who  then  came
thither  from  the  Grecian  lies  to  visit  their  Priests,  and
entertayned  mee,  That  when  the  most  barbarous  Nation
of  the  Turks  had  besieged  that  Citie  with  a  great  Armada,
it  was  valiantly  and  manfully  defended  by  the  Genoes :
but  when  the  Genoes  could  no  more  hold  out  the  daily
siege  and  famine,  neither  could  longer  sustaine  the
violence  of  such  a  great  Armie  of  Turkes,  some  hundreds,
or,  as  hee  avouched,  about  a  thousand  stout-hearted  men
conveyed  themselves  into  the  greatest  Church  which  yet

470

MARTIN BRONIOVIUS

abides  entire,  and  some  dayes  hardly  and  couragiously
preserving  themselves  in  the  lower  Towre,  into  which  the
Turkes  forceably  entred,  having  made  a  notorious  and
memorable  slaughter  of  the  Turkes,  at  the  length  they
were  all  slaine  in  that  Temple.  The  doores  and  windowes
of  that  Temple  being  stopt  up  with  a  wall  by  the  Turkes,
the  slaine  bodies  lye  unburied  to  this  day.  I  was  pro-
hibited by  the  Saniak  of  Capha  sometimes  a  Turke,  that  [III.iii.636.]
I  should  not  enter  into  that  Temple.  The  Custome  of
the  Citie  is  not  meane :  it  hath  very  fruitfull  Vineyards
and  Orchards,  which  doe  extend  above  two  miles,  now
manured  by  Caphaes,  Turkes,  Jewes,  and  Christians :  For
the  best  Wine  of  all  Taurica  growes  there ;  all  that  tract
abounds  with  pleasant  Rivers,  which  runne  downe  from
the  highest  and  middle  Mountaynes  and  Woods,  which
are  there  very  frequent.

Having  now  passed  over  those  upper  Cities,  and  at  the
last  Sudaco,  also  as  farre  as  Theodosia,  which  the  Italian
Genoes  call  Capha,  the  banke  of  Taurica  is  in  Longitude
a  thousand  furlongs,  craggie,  mountaynous,  and  tem-
pestuous with  North  windes.  Before  the  Citie  the
Promontorie  that  is  there  seene,  doth  hang  out  into  the
Sea  on  the  South-side  toward  Paphlagonia,  and  the  Citie
Amastrum,  and  Strabo  relates,  that  it  is  called  of  the
Greekes,  Orium  and  Oxon,  the  Rammes  forehead.  And  Orium  and
there  is  another  Promontorie  Carambis  of  the  Paph-  Oxon.
lagonians  opposite  to  it,  whereby  the  Euxine  Sea  is  divided
into  the  double  Sea,  and  Euripus  straightens  them  both.
Strabo  sayth,  that  Carambis  is  distant  from  the  Citie  of
the  Cherenesitay,  two  thousand  five  hundred  furlongs,  but
from  the  Rammes  forehead,  a  farre  lesser  quantitie.
Behind  that  hilly  Countrey,  as  Strabo  calls  it,  hee  arrirmes
the  Citie  Theodosia  to  bee  founded,  and  that  it  hath  large
Fields  notable  for  fertilitie,  and  a  Haven  able  to  receive  a
hundred  Ships,  and  that  that  Limit  was  assigned  to  the
territorie  of  the  Bosphorines  and  Taurikes.

Capha or Theodosia, is the excellentest and best Theodosia,
defensed  Citie  of  all  Taurica. It  was  built  by  the  Italian  now  Capha.

471

Petigorensesor
Colchis.

Idolaters.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Genoes,  and  is  placed  by  the  Sea.  It  hath  a  Haven
alway  frequented.  It  is  perspicuous,  that  in  the  times  of
the  Genoes,  it  was  a  wealthy  and  populous  Citie.  But
after  it  was  taken  from  the  Genoes  by  the  Turkes  above  a
hundred  yeeres  since,  the  Italian  Christians  were  brought
into  such  a  straight,  that  there  are  but  a  very  few  and
obscure  remaines  of  them  left.  The  Citie  hath  in  a
manner  lost  her  pristine  splendour.  The  Romish
Churches  of  Christians  are  demolished,  the  Houses
cast  downe,  the  Walls  and  Towers,  wherein  are  seene
many  tokens  of  honour  of  the  Genoes  and  Latine  inscrip-
tions, are  fallen.  Onely  two  Catholicke  Temples  and  two
Armenian  remayne  whole,  in  which  it  is  granted  them  of
the  Turke,  after  their  owne  custome  to  maintaine  their
proper  Priests,  and  to  bee  present  at  their  publike
devotions.  It  is  replenished  with  Turkes,  Armenians,
Jewes,  but  very  few  Italian  and  Greeke  Christian
Inhabitants :  Now  also  it  is  famous  over  all  that  part  of
Taurica  for  Navigation  and  the  Haven.  It  hath  almost
innumerable  Vineyards,  Orchards  and  Gardens.  Men
sayle  often  to  Capha,  from  all  the  bordering  and  remote
Hands  of  Greece,  but  oftner  from  the  Citie  Constanti-
nople ;  for  with  a  prosperous  winde  they  come  thither  by
Ship,  in  the  space  of  two  dayes  or  little  more.

The  Petigoren  Province,  or  Colchis  is  inlarged,  as  farre
as  the  Caspian  or  Hircan  Sea,  and  is  much  subject  to
Mountaines  and  very  large  Woods,  which  are  now  seene
in  these  Confines.  It  is  a  very  free  people,  and  hath  many
brave  Commanders,  to  whom  all  the  Nations  and  Families
obey.  Moreover  they  professe  themselves  Christians,  and
it  is  manifest  in  the  time  of  the  Genoes  very  many  of
them  were  Christians,  but  now  wanting  Priests  and
Churches,  they  onely  retayne  the  opinion  of  Religion.
Most  and  the  greatest  part  of  them  are  Idolaters,
amongst  themselves  rapacious  and  cruell,  but  to  Strangers
hospitall  and  free-hearted.  The  Parents,  although  they
bee  of  the  more  Noble  or  of  the  Rustickes,  sell  their
owne  Children,  their  Sonnes  for  Slaves,  their  Daughters

472

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF LIVONIA OR LIEFLAND

MARTIN BRONIOVIUS

for  Wives  to  the  Turkes  and  Tartars,  also  to  many
Christians,  and  those  which  they  are  wont  to  steale
secretly  among  themselves,  they  sell  closely  beyond
the  Sea  to  barbarous  strangers  after  a  more  then  bar-
barous manner.

Betweene  Perecopia,  Cremum,  and  Customa,  are
Townes  on  the  North.  Taurica  or  the  Peninsula  is
exceeding  plaine,  not  very  hilly,  and  altogether  champaine.
It  hath  a  very  fertile  soyle,  in  great  part  stonie,  but  great
scarcitie  of  good  water.  Yet  there  are  found  in  divers
places  very  many  extraordinarie  deepe  Fountaynes  or  Deepe  Wells.
Wells  of  a  wonderfull  profunditie  and  difficultie,  in  times
past  digged  and  made  by  the  elder  Greekes,  or  those  great
and  antique  Nations,  who  inhabited  the  Peninsula  before
the  Greekes.

From  Perecopia  the  space  of  a  mile,  there  is  a  great
Lake  congealed  naturally  of  admirable  Salt,  from  whence  Salt  Lake.
the  purest  and  best  Salt  is  continually  gathered,  as  if  it
were  frozen ;  it  hath  many  other  Salt  lakes.  In  certayne
commodious  and  in  very  many  places,  in  Mountaynes  and
Groves  are  found  in  great  number,  ancient  huge  Grecian
ruines  of  Castles,  Cities,  Temples  and  Monasteries,  which
while  they  have  many  ages  beene  destitute  of  inhabitants,
by  reason  of  their  antiquitie,  have  lost  their  names.  All
Taurica  or  that  Peninsula,  from  the  West  and  North  is
plaine  and  champaine,  and  hath  few  Townes,  many
Villages ;  extends  in  length  the  summe  of  fiftie  miles.
But  from  the  South  and  East,  it  is  mountaynous  and
wooddie,  and  hath  every  where  marvellous  high,  large,
stony  Mountaynes.  In  which,  betweene  Cremum  and
Capha,  it  is  reported  that  veynes  of  Gold  and  Silver,  and
the  best  Iron,  were  whilom  found  by  the  Inhabitants.  It
hath  a  very  fruitfull  ground,  Floods,  delightsome  Rivers,
Fishes,  Meadowes,  Pastures,  abundance  of  wilde  Beasts,
Harts,  Goates,  Boares,  Beares,  Vineyards,  Orchards,  Terri-
tories, Champaines,  Townes,  Villages,  Hamlets,  many  and
large  Granges.  Taurica  or  the  Peninsula,  is  spread  in
Latitude  after  a  sort  into  a  circle ;  in  some  places,  the

473

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

distance  of  one  or  two  dayes  journey,  but  in  most  places
about  the  quantitie  of  one.
[III.iii.637.]  The  Castles  and  Sea-cities,  and  the  rest  of  all  the  Penin-
sula, which  are  described  in  their  order,  with  many
Villages  and  Hamlets  of  Greeke  Christians,  except  the
Holds  and  Sea-townes,  and  many  lesse  suspected  walled
Townes  in  Perecopia  and  Casslovia,  and  a  few  Villages  of
Greeke  Christians,  are  subject  to  the  Turkish  Emperour,
and  all  obey  his  behests,  and  are  kept  with  a  sure  Garrison.
The  Peninsula,  which  lyes  in  the  middle  from  the  East  and
South  against  Perecopia,  hath  a  milde  winter  and
temperate  ayre.  For  in  the  end  of  December  is  the
beginning  of  winter,  but  in  the  midst  of  Februarie  the
sharpenesse  of  winter,  which  is  more  snowie  then  cold,  or
subject  to  Ice,  neither  yet  doth  that  endure  above  three
dayes  together,  neither  continues  it  any  longer  then  to  the
beginning  of  March.  Therefore  about  the  beginning  of
the  Spring,  and  alway  in  a  hot  Autumne  the  ayre  is  very
contagious.

In  Bratislavia,  the  Sauranen,  Oczacovien,  and  Bialodo-
groden,  Plaines  are  situate  betweene  Hipanis  or  Bogus,
Tyra  or  Nester.  From  the  North  toward  Neper  or
Boristhenes  and  Bogas,  are  somewhat  plaine  and  champion
grounds,  but  from  the  West  towardes  the  River  Nester
and  Pruth  or  Hierasus,  more  wooddie  and  hilly.  Podolia,
Camenecia  and  Moldavia  betweene  the  streames  Nester
and  Pruth,  every  where  border  on  the  middle  Tachnia  and
Bialogrod,  which  is  by  the  Lake  Vidovo  or  Obidovo,  and
the  Euxine  Sea,  on  the  West  confine  on  the  Plaines,  and
on  the  Euxine  Sea,  on  the  South  Bralogrod,  Kibia,  and
the  River  Danubius.  Oczacovia  hath  on  the  North
Boristhenes,  (into  which  Bogus  there  dischargeth  it  selfe)
and  spatious  Plaines,  on  the  South  the  Euxine  Sea,  and
the  overflowing  Salt  meere  Berezania,  from  the  West  the
adjoyning  River  Nester.

Further,  that  Continent  which  is  betweene  Oczacovia
and  Boristhenes  in  the  fashion  of  an  He,  hath  into  the
West  Boristhenes,  as  though  it  were  betweene  Boristhenes,

474

MARTIN BRONIOVIUS

the  Fen  Meotis,  and  the  Euxine  Sea;  on  the  North  the
Rivers  TanaJs  or  Donum,  on  the  South  the  Euxine  Sea,
and  that  Isthmus  or  Continent,  but  beyond  Oczacovia  and
Boristhenes,  as  far  as  Perecopia,  that  Continent  is  verie
narrow  in  many  places :  but  beyond  Perecopia  to  the
Castle  Ossonum,  a  ranke  soyle,  and  all  champion  and
plaine  :  For  in  that  neck  of  Land  almost  all  the  Perecopian
and  Ossoven  Tartars  feed  their  Flockes  and  Cattle,  and
live  there  all  Summer  and  Autumne.  That  Continent  or
Isthmus  from  Oczacovia,  as  farre  as  Ossonum,  for  there  it
is  limitted,  is  stretched  out  in  Longitude,  as  is  manifest  out
of  the  Tartars  Diaries  more  then  a  hundred  miles,  but  in
Latitude  not  after  an  equall  manner.  For  it  is  larger,  as
well  beyond  Perecopia,  as  toward  Oczacovia,  or
Boristhenes.

The  Taurican  or  Chersonesen  Tartars,  who  are  now
called  Perecopen  or  Crims,  doe  certainely  seeme  by  the
ancient  Writers  of  the  Schythians  to  have  been  the
Javolgenses,  and  to  have  had  their  originall  and  appella-
tion from  Rha,  or  the  River  Volga.  Moreover  between
the  famous,  deepe,  and  great  Rivers  of  the  North  Tanais,
or  Don  and  Boristhenes,  it  manifestly  appeare  that  they
passed  by  little  and  little  into  the  Plaines,  and  a  hundred
and  sixtie  yeeres  since,  or  very  little  more  to  have  come
into  Taurica  or  the  Peninsula.

The  stocke  of  the  Chans,  or  of  their  Tartar  Princes
was  anciently  called  Cyngis  race,  from  whom  was  Loch-  Cyngts.
tonus  a  certaine  Chan,  of  whom  all  the  Chans  take  their  Lochton.
originall.  Hee  was  the  first  Emperour  of  Taurica  or
Chersonesus  in  Taurica,  or  the  Peninsula.  They  have
procreated  the  Sirinen,  Bachinien,  Manguten,  and  other
Kiuazii  or  Dukes,  from  whom  are  the  Caiacei,  who  are  the
Chans  Counsellours  and  chiefe  Officers,  who  also  marry
the  Chans  daughters  and  sisters.  The  Vlani,  which  are
anciently  descended  of  the  Chans  bloud,  and  (if  the  lawfull
posteritie  faile)  succeed  in  the  Regall  Throne.  It  is  very
true  that  the  Mursies  are  the  noblest  of  each,  now  also
their  posteritie  remaine  &  other  warlike  Tartars  ;  of  whom

475

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

Selim.
Gerey  Chan.

Sachmates.

it  is  certaine  he  had  divers  Hords,  of  some  ten  thousand  a
piece  in  his  company  passed  into  Taurica,  or  'die  Peninsula
with  him.

The  Chans  predecessors  sincerely  and  constantly  much
esteemed  the  Grecian  Chiefetaines,  who  inhabited  at  Man-
copia,  and  Ingermene,  and  the  Italian  Genoes,  who  dwelt
at  Jambold  and  Capha,  as  also  the  other  people  they  found
in  the  Peninsula,  with  whom  they  had  friendship,  peace,
and  league,  untill  they  were  overcome  by  the  Turkes,  and
consumed  in  warre :  they  had  also  many  yeeres  common
mony  which  I  have  seene  there.

But  Selim,  Emperour  of  the  Turkes,  compelled  and
subjugated  Mechmet  Gererius  Chan  to  his  Empire.
Those  Nations  being  weakned,  almost  all  the  Castles  and
Cities  of  the  Maritime  Peninsula,  being  taken  and
possessed :  Sachmates  the  Prince  of  the  Javolgan  Tartars
put  him  to  flight,  with  a  singular  and  memorable  slaughter
having  destroyed  his  Armie  of  a  hundred  thousand.
Since  which  time  the  Chans  acknowledge,  as  chiefe,  the
Empire  of  the  Turkes.  The  Viceroyes,  or  Princes  of  the
Tartars  of  Taurica,  or  the  Peninsula  are  constituted  by
them,  they  receive  thence  a  Banner,  and  give  their  sonnes
and  brothers  Soldans  for  perpetuall  pledges  to  the  Turkes.

Notwithstanding,  after  the  ancient  custome  of  their
Nation,  they  make  a  Galga  or  successor  to  the  Empire  (as
the  French  doe  their  Dolphines)  the  brother  or  eldest
sonne  and  more  sufficient,  who  hath  the  greatest  sway  in
peace  and  warre,  but  the  Chans  themselves  perpetually
depute  and  elect  them,  but  with  the  approbation  of  the
Tartar  Nobles.  And  if  also  any  d'issention  or  war  be
raised  betweene  the  Soldans  or  the  Chan  about  the  Empire,
[III.iii.638.]  the  Turkish  Emperour  neglects  not  to  dispatch  the  Soldans
pledge,  with  an  Armie  and  Standard  into  Taurica  or  the
Peninsula :  and  it  is  sufficient  for  him  to  be  Prince,  the
Chan  and  Sultan  being  appeased  or  forced  to  goe  away  by
warre,  for  which  cause  he  hath  alwaies  many  Janizaries  in
Taurica,  or  the  Peninsula.

The  election  of  the  Chans,  after  the  ancient  custome  of

476

The  Galba  or
hey  re
apparant.

Election  of  the
Chan.

MARTIN BRONIOVIUS

the  Nation,  did  whilelome  consist  in  the  free  suffrages  of

the  Dukes,  Mursies,  and  noblest  Tartars. Furthermore,

for  their  frequent  discord  and  hidious  warres  which  were

occasioned  by  the  Nogaien  Tartars  bordering  on  Taurica,

or  the  Peninsula  about  the  Empire,  Sachibgiereius  and  Sachibgiereius.

Dealetigereius,  being  Chans  over  the  Tartars,  having  by

subtilty  destroyed  the  more  noble  and  potent  Tartars,  and

cast  them  into  fetters,  began  absolutely  to  domineere  over

the  Tartars,  and  by  force  to  draw  the  election  to  their

posteritie,  the  Emperour  of  the  Turkes  ayding  them.

But  if  the  Chan  will  not  constitute  his  brother  Galga,
but  his  owne  sonne,  as  it  often  fortunes,  by  reason  of  those
discords  and  reciprocall  butcheries  among  themselves,  hee
circumvents  craftily  and  subtilly  all  the  Soldans  brothers,
and  covertly  makes  them  away.  Yet  most  of  them  flye
to  the  Turke,  of  whom  they  are  bountifully  entertained
and  comforted,  and  receive  a  perpetuall  stipend  of  him.

The  Soldans  younger  sonnes  of  the  Chans  are  educated
and  tutered  by  the  Tartars,  or  more  noble  Mursies,  lest
that  when  they  are  at  mans  estate,  by  reason  of  their
pluralitie,  dissentions,  or  warres  might  arise :  for  each
Chan  acknowledge  a  supreme  Dominion,  and  when  they
are  growne  up,  those  that  are  fit  are  set  over  certaine
Tartar  troupes,  and  allure  many  voluntary  Tartars  unto
them,  notwithstanding  they  make  leaders  of  the  Nogaien
Tartars,  and  remunerate  with  moneys  and  horses  most  of
their  parents,  whom  they  esteeme  more  speciall  and  sub-
stantiall.  Very  often  also  through  feare  of  treacheries
or  seditions  among  themselves,  being  ayded  by  their
Gardians  favour,  they  rlye  unto  the  Christian  or  bordering
Princes  of  their  people.

The  Chan  hath  Attalike  Councellours,  whom  they  so  Attalicu
terme  from  the  care  of  their  women,  parents,  or  their
wives,  by  whom  those  Sultans  also  are  continually  from
their  youth  educated  and  provided  for :  hee  hath
Hamiatts,  who  are  the  Agents  for  exotick  Princes  affaires  Hamiati.
with  him,  and  also  perpetuall  Court  Officers.  But
especially  hee  convocates  to  him  the  Dukes,  Coracei,  Vlani,

477

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  the  nobler  Mursi,  and  alwayes  useth  to  consult  with

them  in  weightie  affaires. Hee  hath  principall  and  meet

men  Ministers  of  his  Court,  whose  service  hee  useth  in

his Ambassages, and in his divers other necessary

businesses and imployments, who also are exalted to

Counsellours  and  Court  Officers. He  alwayes  maintaines

those  who  are  chosen  out  of  the  more  renowned  and

illustrious Tartarian youth, who are conversant in his

Court  by  moneths  interchangeably,  and  when  they  are

made  fit,  are  honoured  with  those  dignities. Yet  hee  is

chiefly  and  most  delighted  with  the  Cercesins,  Nogaiens

and  Petogorens,  who  are  very  industrious,  valiant,  bold,

and  warlike. On  the  principall  hee  bestowes  honourable

gifts and annuall  pensions, and of  these  his Court is

alwayes  replenished. In the  Princes  Court, the  better

reputed  and  nobler  Tartars,  are  very  richly  and  civilly

decked,  not  to  pride  or  superfluous  luxurie,  but  for  neces-

sitie  and  decencie. For  they  are  so  inriched  by  the  lazie

cowardise,  and  especially  by  the  irreligious  impiety  of  the

neighbouring  Christians,  through  making  often  inrodes,

and  getting  rich  booties,  that  the  greater  nobler  of  them

in private wealth and domestick splendor, are little

Wives  and  inferiour  to  the  Turkes. They  may  have  as  many  women

children. by  the  Mahometicall  Law  as  they  will,  and  for  the  most

part,  they  buy  wives  of  the  Petigorens,  which  although

they  sustaine  and  maintaine,  not  proudly,  but  very  comely

and  civilly  according  to  the  countrey  guise,  but  those  by

whom  they  have  issue  very  honourably  and  gorgeously.

They  deliver  their  sonnes  in  their  infancie  to  be  instructed

Arabike in  the  Arabike  Letters,  but  they  keepe  not  their  daughters

letters. at  nomej  DUt  commit  them  to  the  neerest  in  bloud  to  be

provided  for. They  place  their  sonnes  growne  to  mans

age  in  the  Chans  or  Sultans  service, their  manageable

daughters  in  wedlock  to  the  more  honourable  and  nobler

Tartars  or  Turkes.

Mahumetan Those  Tartars  are  Mahometans,  and  have  Priests  and

Religion. Mosches, they use the Chaldaick or Arabike Letters,

which  they  have  received  somewhat  corrupted  from  the

478

MARTIN BRONIOVIUS

Turks,  although  before  they  came  into  Taurica  or  the
Peninsula,  they  seeme  to  have  beene  a  savage  and  brutish
Nation,  and  of  very  savage  conditions,  which  now  also  is
very  perspicuous  by  the  rusticks :  for  they  wanted  then
altogether  those  Lawes,  Rites,  Letters,  and  Manners.
But  the  Tartars  being  taught  by  the  Turks  humanitie,  and
that  false  worship,  the  more  nobler  now  generally  practise
hospitality.

Law  or  Justice,  is  administred  in  the  Towns  or  Cities
of  the  Chan  &  other  Sultans  among  the  Tartars  after  the
Mahometane  Law. There  are  alwayes  presbiterall  Cadi
or  Judges  in  the  Villages. Begi  or  Justices,  who  heare
and  decide  particular  injuries :  but  causes  of  life,  bloud,
theft,  which  we  call  Criminall,  or  of  Land,  which  we  call
Civill  or  Omciall ;  the  Chan  himselfe  decideth  with  his
Counsellours. In resolving of which they need no
I  Lawyer,  nor  use  tricks  of  law,  calumnies,  excusations  nor
!  procrastinations. The Tartars or Strangers, of meane
<  condition,  lay  open  themselves  very  freely  their  wrongs
•  before  the  Judges  and  Chan,  of  whom  they  are  alwayes
heard  and  speedily  discharged,  for  at  any  time  any  may
have  accesse  to  him. When  hee  comes  in  publike,  men
I  of  the  basest  degree  are  not  excluded,  but  being  seene  of
I  the  Chan  are  examined,  to  wit,  if  they  have  any  suit,  that
I  they  relate  it. For  they  doe  not  onely  performe  great
;  obedience  to  the  Lawes : they  adore  and  venerate  their
Princes in Gods steed. All spirituall Judges (after
Mahomets  Law)  are  accounted  among  them  for  Saints,
;  men  of  all  equitie  and  integritie,  fidelitie  and  opinion.
!  The  Princes  and  Magistrates  execute  and  dispatch  what-
soever is  bidden  or  commanded  suddenly  and  faithfully,
with  alacritie,  promptnesse,  and  great  feare. They  are
far  from  controversies,  criminations,  justices,  unnecessary
and personall brawlings, envy, hatred, filthy excesse,
I  luxury,  and  ambition  in  their  victualls  and  array. I  abode
!  there  nine  moneths,  neither  heard  I  Criminall  or  Civill
Act  to  have  happened  among  them,  or  any  composition  by
reason  of  enmitie.

Government
and  Lawes.
The  Cadi  and
Begs.

No  Attumies
nor  Lawyers:
they  plead
their  owne
cause.

[III.iii.639.]

Great  peace-
ablenesse  to  the
shame  of
a/way  /awing
Gospellers.

479

PURCHAS HIS PILGBJMES

No  daily  use  of
weapons.

*Aquavita.
Meat  and
drinke.

Slaves.

Merchants.

In  the  Princes  Court  they  weare  not,  nor  at  home
Swords,  neither  Bowes  nor  any  other  weapon ;  except
Wayfarers  and  Travellers,  to  whom  they  are  very
courteous  and  friendly.  They  are  alwayes  secure  from
Spoylers ;  but  except  they  keepe  perpetuall  watch,  they  are
lesse  safe  from  High-way-theeves,  and  Night-robbers,  who
steale  nothing  from  them  but  their  Horses.

Although  they  have  a  rich  soyle,  yet  very  few  Gentle-
men, or  Plebeians  provide  for  the  houshold  estate,  for
many  neither  till  nor  sow  their  ground  :  they  abound  with
Horses,  Camels,  Oxen,  Kine,  Sheepe  and  Flockes  of  all
Cattle,  and  thereof  live.  Yet  the  Gentlemen  have  bread,
flesh,  meate,  distilled  *  wine  and  Metheglin ;  but  the
rusticks  want  bread,  but  use  stampt  Millet,  and  macerated
with  milke  and  water,  which  they  vulgarly  call  Cassa,  for
meate  (and  for  drinke  they  use  Mares  milke)  and  cheese.
They  feed  on  Camels,  Horses,  and  Oxen  unprofitable  for
burthen,  and  kill  them  when  they  are  about  to  dye,  some-
times eate  sheeps  flesh.  The  Gentlemen  dwell  not  in  the
Plaines,  but  in  the  Villages  of  Taurica  or  the  Peninsula.
They  which  are  neere  Woods  live  in  them,  although  many
doe  not  possesse  proper  Villages ;  yet  they  have  peculiar
Lands  and  Manors.  They  use  the  Ungarian,  Russian,
Moschovian,  Valachian,  or  Moldavian  slaves,  which  they
keepe,  and  whereof  they  have  great  plentie,  as  beasts  to
every  worke.  Their  houses  are  of  Timber,  much  after
the  Turkish  fashion  :  but  the  Greeke  Christians,  who  are
in  a  few  Townes,  labour  and  till  their  grounds  as  beasts.
The  Tartars  serve  the  Chan  or  Tartarian  Nobles,  being
hired  at  no  price,  but  onely  that  they  may  have  meate  and
apparell :  but  the  rest,  and  the  greatest  part  of  them  are
alwayes  idle.  In  the  Cities  or  Townes  are  very  few
Merchants :  but  some  few  practise  Mechanick  crafts,  and
some  Merchants  or  Artificers  are  found  there,  either  Chris-
tian Slaves  or  Turkes,  Armenians,  Jewes,  Cercessians,
Petigorens,  (which  are  Christians)  Phylistins,  or  Cyngans,
men  of  obscure  and  lowest  degree.  Those  Tartars,  which
live  in  the  Plaines  beyond  Perecopia,  or  in  the  Peninsula

480

HONDIUS HIS  MAP OF LITHUANIA

MARTIN BRONIOVIUS

have  no  woods,  every  where  digge  Wells.  They  use  in
stead  of  Wood  Beasts  dung,  which  their  Bond-men
gather  in  the  Fields,  and  dry  in  the  Sunne,  and  houses  of
the  same  forme,  whereof  mention  is  made  in  the  former
description.  Those  Tartars,  which  are  Slaves  and  Sub-  Tartar  slaves.
jects  of  the  Chans,  Sultans,  and  other  Noble-men,  are
drudges,  and  alwayes  keepe  and  pasture  their  Lords
innumerable  Herds  of  Cattle ;  and  although  they  goe
from  place  to  place,  into  the  Plaines  and  Pastures,  in
severall  Streets,  Hamlets,  Townes,  or  Villages,  by
separated  troupes  (or  hords)  whereof  they  beare  the
Names,  and  of  their  Masters,  so  that  men  may  easily  find
there,  those  Tartars  Slaves  which  they  seeke  to  buy.

The  Chan  hath  alwayes  by  the  leagues  and  agreements,
an  annuall  Donative  of  the  King  of  Polonia,  the  great Tribute.
Dukedome  of  Lituania,  the  Palatine  of  Moldavia,  and
Cercasian,  and  Nogaien  Tartars. The  Legats,  Orators, Embassadors.
Messengers, Truchmen of  those  Princes  come  to him
yeerely,  whom  sometimes  he  entertaines  benignely  and
bountifully,  but  sometimes  receives,  misuses,  and  detaynes
a  great  while  after  a  more  then  brutish  manner. When
therefore  they  come  into  Perecopia,  one  of  the  Chans  men
meets  them  in  the  Summer,  in  the  Medow  or  Plaine,
where  they  rest  under  a  Tent : in  the  Winter  they  are
opportunely  and  commodiously  convayed  into  the  Village
of  Alma,  or  Bacchasanium  more  safely  bordering  on  the Alma.
Towne  of  the  Kings  Palace. But  after  they  are  lodged  Bac^na~
there,  they  are  saluted  by  the  Counsellours  or  Servants  of  santum-
the  Court  in  the  Chans  name,  which  procure  them  refresh-
ing or  victuals,  two  oxen,  or  one,  some  sheep,  bread,  wine,
and  barley,  not  liberally,  but  in  a  kind  of  hospitalitie,  and
moderately  sufficient  for  once. But  when  they  are  called
to  the  Chan,  hee  heares  them,  the  Soldans,  Tuians,  Ulans,  Audience.
Marzies,  chiefe  Counsellours,  and  many  other  Ministers
of  his  Court  and  principall  Tartars  being  present,  they
are  conducted  onely  by  one  man  to  the  Chans  gate,  but
are  brought  in  by  two  Counsellours. When  as  therefore
they  are  entred  in,  they  reverence  the  Chan,  after  the

XIII  481  2H

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ancient  custome  of  the  Nation,  and  having  saluted  him  on
bended  knees  declare  their  message,  and  are  admitted  to
eate  with  him.  They  are  honoured  with  cups  and  goblets
gilded  and  embossed  with  gems,  filled  with  Mead  or
Methegline  reached  from  the  Chans  hand,  after  the  order
of  that  people,  in  signe  of  clemencie  and  benevolence,
which  they  drinke  on  bended  knees.  And  when  they  are
dispatched,  the  Chan  invites  them  againe  to  a  Feast.  The
Feast  being  ended,  they  goe  backe  a  little  from  the  Palace
doores,  and  are  rewarded  with  Silke  Vests  woven  with
Gold  as  low  as  the  anckles,  prepared  after  the  guise  of  the
Nation,  with  one  Horse  or  two,  not  seldome  with  Cap-
tives of  their  owne  people.  And  so  attired  with  those
Vests  they  returne  againe  to  the  Chan,  and  render  thankes
to  him  for  his  hospitalitie  and  liberalise,  and  having
[III.iii.640.]  saluted  him,  depart  from  the  Banket.  Sometimes  a  small
provision  is  procured  for  them  by  one  of  the  Chans  men
in  his  Dominions  when  he  takes  his  journey,  and  he  is
convayed  by  him  as  farre  as  Boristhenes.

The  Turkish  Emperours  have  made  that  authoritie  con-
stant to  the  Chan,  in  Taurica,  or  the  Peninsula,  so  that
Bassa  of when  the  Bassa  of  Capha,  or  the  Saniak  dye,  he  rules  all
Capha.  the  Signiories  in  the  Peninsula,  untill  the  Turke  hath  sent

thither  another  Saniak,  or  whom  he  will  preferre  over
Capha.  The  Chan  hath  a  common  Custome-house  with
the  Turke,  at  Perecopia,  Casslovia,  Capha,  and  other
Cities  of  Taurica,  or  the  Peninsula,  which  are  of  the
Turkish  Empire.  Hee  demands  annually  a  contribution
of  the  Tartars,  Armenians,  Jewes,  Cercasians,  Petigorens,
and  Grecian  Christians,  of  whom  he  hath  very  few  in  his
Dominion ;  the  Turkes  are  only  excepted :  every  day  are
paid  for  a  perpetuall  stipend  out  of  the  Turkes  Exchequer
twentie  five  Dollers  to  the  Chan,  twelve  Dollers  and  a
halfe  to  the  Galga,  to  the  Soltan  pledge  two  and  a  halfe,
and  to  the  same  Hostage,  Villages,  and  ample  Farmes
neere  Adrianople,  called  Janbolu,  are  given  by  the  Turke.
To  the  Dukes,  Caiaks,  Ulans,  and  Murzies,  and  many
others  which  take  pay,  are  given  constant  wages  accord-

482

MARTIN BRONIOVIUS

ing  to  each  of  their  estates.  Notwithstanding  the  Chan
alwayes  payes  every  yeere  to  the  Turkish  Emperour  Cap-
tives taken  in  warre  of  both  sexes,  the  most  excellent  and
precious  Furs,  and  also  baser,  Butter  and  Salt,  wherewith
Taurica  or  the  Peninsula  abounds.  And  into  whatsoever
warre  he  shall  bee  sent  or  called,  he  may  refuse ;  neither  Carres.
may  hee  wage  warre  with  any,  but  the  Duke  of  Moscho,  ^/

without  the  Emperour  of  the  Turkes  leave  or  knowledge.
The  Chan  exacts  annuall  pecuniarie  Rents  from  the  better
sort  of  Captives  taken  in  warre,  three  pieces  of  Gold  ;  of
the  raskalitie  one  Doller,  and  a  tenth  of  them ;  but  from
each  of  the  Fountaines,  which  are  many  in  his  Dominions,
in  the  Plaines  of  Taurica,  or  the  Peninsula,  one  Horse  of
the  Tartars  ;  but  any  necessitie  enforcing  the  Chan,  all  the
Tartars  decree  a  certaine  contribution  to  him.  The
'Tartars  Nobles,  alwayes  at  home,  and  in  warre  also,  yeeld
him  sustenance  of  divers  sorts ;  for  hee  neither  tills  nor
jsowes.  Hee  hath  alwayes  proper  Herds  of  Horses,
[Camels,  Oxen,  and  infinite  Flockes  of  Sheepe.  Hee  hath
la  peculiar  money  of  base  Copper,  which  is  coyned  in  Money.
iCrimum,  a  Towne  of  his  Dominion,  round  money,
whereof  tenne  are  esteemed  at  a  Turkish  Silver  Asper,
Iwhich  makes  one  Polonian  Groat  or  lesse.  But  I  being
present,  there  were  stamped  greater  Copper  money
jsilvered  over,  which  was  valued  at  Hvt  Aspers.  In  coyn-
;ing  it  he  hath  a  great  and  plentifull  gaine ;  for  in  three
or  foure  yeeres,  of  the  same  money,  which  is  carried  by
iall  the  Tartars  or  Strangers  into  the  Mint,  new  invented
imoney  is  alway  stamped.  For  in  all  Taurica,  or  the
iPeninsula,  it  is  lawfull  for  none  (Tartar  or  stranger)  even
jin  the  Cities  of  the  Turkes  Dominion,  under  a  capitoll
punishment  and  confiscation  of  goods,  of  what  estate
soever  hee  bee,  to  exchange  Turkish  pieces  of  Gold,  or
ithe  Doller  of  Strangers,  or  the  Turkes  Silver  Asper  into
Tartar  coyne  of  the  other  value.  Neither  is  it  lawfull  to
buy  with  Gold  or  Silver  coyne,  but  Tartarian,  which  all
istrangers  (none  excepted)  perpetually  receive  by  the  Chans
Edict.

483

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Provision  for When  the  Chan  is  about  to  go  to  any  war,  he  first
warre.  signifies to all the Tartars of his Dominions by the

Servitors  of  his  Court,  and  commands  them  that  they
prepare  themselves  for  war,  within  three  (or  at  the  most)
in  foure  weekes,  and  that  they  provide  for  themselves
victualls  for  three  or  foure  moneths.  That  sustenance  is
carried  in  Leather-bags,  and  those  Bags  among  the  Gentle-
men are  carried  on  Horses.  And  they  carrie  with  them
food  of  Millet  parched  in  the  fire,  or  stamped,  or  ground ;
for  they  have  Mills,  and  thereof  steeped  in  water,  the
most  make  meate  or  drinke.  They  carry  Cheese  and
Flesh,  and  Mares-flesh  dried  in  the  Sun :  they  cut  them
in  pieces  boyled  or  drie,  and  taking  out  the  bones  put
them  in  Sackes.  They  live  with  Mares-milke  and  Cheese,
and  sowre  milke,  which  they  tempering  with  a  certaine
Art,  hold  an  excellent  food.  The  Chan  hath  only  one
Chariot  with  him  for  any  danger  of  sicknesse ;  also  a  few
Camels,  wheron  is  carried  for  his  owne  person  Aquavitae,
or  some  other  provision  wherewith  he  is  easily  satisfied.
But  the  Tartars  severally  set  meat  before  him  and  his
Courtiers,  the  gentlemen  (yet  very  few  of  them)  not
seldome  carry  a  little  drie  bread,  and  a  little  Aquavitae  on
Camels,  or  in  lighter  Carts.

But  after  the  Chan  hath  determined  any  warlike  Expedi-
tion, he  prepares  very  speedily  some  exercised  men  in  an
indifferent  number,  and  chooseth  them  sometimes  Tartars,
but  more  frequently  Cercesians,  Petigorens,  and  those
which  are  accounted  spies  of  Regions  and  Provinces  of
other  Princes,  and  expert  Way-leaders,  they  verie  well
know  each  particular  passage  of  Places  and  Borders,  and
Manner  and  Fords  of  Rivers.  And  when  they  come  into  the  Marches,
Art  of  warre.  they  goe  into  the  neere  confining  circuits,  and  each  in
sundrie  places  view  all  things,  and  diligently  seeke  for
Captives,  which  when  they  have  intercepted,  they  returne
with  them  speedily  to  the  Chan,  of  whom,  using  inter-
rogatories, the  Chan  quickly  is  acquainted  with  the  estate
of  those  Provinces  where  his  skouts  have  beene.  Forth-
with therefore  hee  assignes  the  day  of  progression  to  the

484

MARTIN BRONIOVIUS

Tartars,  wherein  hee  stirres  alone,  and  premiseth  speedily-
some  servants  of  his  Court,  through  all  that  Hord  or
Province.  They  constraine  and  inforce  to  goe  to  warre
and  follow  the  Chan  all  Tartars  and  Christians  of  his
government,  men  and  youth,  if  they  can  but  sit  on  horses
(besides  impotent  old  men  and  children)  who  although
they  want  Armes  and  Horses,  yet  are  accommodated  by
the  welthier  in  hope  of  spoyle.  But  in  eight,  or  at  the
utmost  in  ten  dayes  after  the  Chans  departure,  al  of  them
follow  him  into  certain  new  defined  places,  which  are
beyond  Perecopia  toward  Boristhenes ;  the  Galga,  Soltans,
Dukes,  Murzies,  &  the  most  approved  valiant  and  chiefe
Warriours  and  Souldiers,  being  gathered  and  convocated  [III.iii.641.]
together :  and  they  being  called  to  his  Councell,  first  the
later  Captives  and  privie  Searchers  also  are  examined,  at
length  they  suddenly  consult  of  the  seasonablenesse  of
time,  places,  occasion  of  well  ordering  the  matter,  and
whether  the  warre  be  then  commodiously  to  be  prosecuted.
And  mutuall  consent  and  counsell  being  made  and  deter-
mined ;  yet  none  of  these  things  is  confusedly  divulged  to
the  multitude.

From  the  same  place  therefore  the  Ministers  of  the
Court  of  the  Chan,  Galga,  and  Soltans  going  before  the
companies  of  the  Dukes,  Murzons  and  other  Tartarian
Nobles  (which  they  lead  and  rule  according  to  the  ancient
claime  of  their  kindred,  and  call  them  by  various  appella-
tions in  their  Language)  the  Chan  moves  the  Armie  under
the  Ensignes,  following  in  a  meane  order  after  the  ancient
custome  of  the  Nation  :  but  after  they  have  set  foot  in
their  enemies  Land,  againe  he  sends  before  a  certaine
number  of  the  most  experienced  and  skilfullest  Espials.
They  goe  before  the  Armie,  and  send  backe  to  the  Chan
whatsoever  Countreymen  or  others  they  shall  take  and
meet  with ;  from  whom  hee  may  bee  certified  of  the  con-
dition and  armie  of  the  enemies.  But  when  the  Chan  is
certainly  informed  that  no  armie  of  enemies  comes  out
against  him,  he  againe  makes  a  Campe-councell  with  his
Nobles and Peeres, how farre and  wide he ought to

485

PURCHAS HIS P1LGRIMES

endamage  his  enemies  Dominions.  Then  at  length  he
goeth  slowly  forward  in  a  perfect  order  with  all  his  Hoast,
and  commands  upon  penaltie  of  their  heads  to  kill  all  the
obvious  Rustickes,  lest  after  they  should  be  taken  by  the
Tartars,  they  should  peradventure  make  an  escape,  and
certifie  his  enemies  of  his  bands  to  the  hurt  of  his  men.
Moreover,  they  kill  not  women  nor  children,  nor  lay  hold
on  them,  nor  dare  lay  hands  of  any  of  the  prey,  lest  his
armie  should  be  surcharged  with  it,  and  cause  some  stay
in  his  proceeding.

But  when  the  Chan  comes  with  his  armie  to  the  Castles,
Townes,  Villages,  Hamlets  and  manured  places,  he  elects
ten,  or  at  the  most  fifteene  thousand  Souldiers  with  their
Dukes,  Murzons,  and  chiefe  of  his  Court,  and  most
notable,  best  tryed,  and  principall  men  of  Armes  of  all  his
Hoast,  and  leaves  them  in  his  owne  jurisdiction  in  his
standing  Campes,  or  in  the  siege  of  some  Fortresse ;  then
he  makes  ready  the  Galga,  other  Soltans,  Dukes,  Murzons,
and  the  rest  of  the  Armie,  which  then  is  mustred  some
thousands.  And  that  Armie  being  spread  abroad  in
divers  bands,  over  each  of  which  the  best  esteemed  and
ablest  men  are  made  Captaynes,  is  extended  in  longitude
more  then  ten  miles,  and  in  latitude  as  much.  And  as
they  assemble  among  themselves  at  the  farthest  in  seven
or  eight  dayes,  but  at  the  soonest  in  three  or  foure  run-
ning about  in  troupes  through  divers  places,  and  leading
straying  preyes,  and  wasting  with  fire  and  Sword  what-
soever they  meet  with,  returne  to  the  Campe :  but  if  they
come  not  backe  at  the  prefixed  day  to  the  fortified  Campe,
they  waite  not  for  them,  but  all  the  Armie  with  wonderfull
celeritie  move  in  their  arrayes,  out  of  the  standing  Campe.

And  when  as  then  also  the  Chan  is  truly  signified  that
no  Armie  pursues  him,  he  provides  for  places  not  medled
with  by  his  troupes,  an  Armie  of  some  thousands  of
selected  Horsemen,  and  as  yet  unwearied.  He  employes
as  many  more  also  in  ambushes  in  divers  places  neere  the
Townes  and  Castles  obvious  to  the  Tartars,  lest  that  Armie
might  without  delay  fall  into  the  lying  in  waite  on  any

486

MARTIN BRONIOVIUS

of  their  companies.  But  if  he  bee  certified  by  his  Scouts
of  any  numerous  hoast  of  Enemies,  he  never  commits  the
matter  to  an  universall  fight,  but  goes  forward  slowly  and
cautelously  with  his  bands :  but  if  the  Chan  be  certainly
assured  that  the  Troups  of  his  Adversaries  are  many  and
valiant,  he  retires  a  little,  and  seekes  for  the  better
husbanded  and  peaceabler  places,  and  with  wonderfull
agilitie  in  his  precipitious  flight,  spoyles  them  with  fire
and  sword,  and  intends  to  returne  home  with  the  bootie
that  hee  had  hastily  driven  away.  But  if  then  hee  hopes
his  enemies  cannot  overtake  him,  he  marcheth  with  his
Armie,  yet  not  too  securely,  almost  in  the  order  to  his
confines.

But  assoone  as  the  Chan  is  entred  into  his  Borders,  he  The  Chans
takes  the  tenth  of  the  principall  Captives  throughout  all  tenth.
the  Armie.  But  the  Captaynes  of  companies,  and  they
which  have  brought  a  greater  number  of  captives,  cull  out
of  each  Band  the  principall  for  themselves.  The  other
Tartars  of  the  promiscuous  multitude  divide  the  Prisoners
among  their  troupes.  Notwithstanding  before  they  come
to  that  partition,  they  first  satisfie  all  those  which  running
about  by  Bands  have  lost  Horses,  Garments,  or  any  thing
else.  They  sell  to  the  Tartars  both  Noble  and  Ignoble
captives,  if  they  shall  appoint  no  price  whereby  they  may
free  themselves,  because  the  Chan  being  vitiated  with  the
Merchants  gifts  hath  set  a  great  value  on  them.

The  condition  of  captives  is  very  miserable  among  the  Misery  of
Tartars,  for  they  are  grievously  oppressed  by  them  with  Captives.
hunger  and  nakednesse,  and  the  Husbandmen  with  stripes,
so  that  they  rather  desire  to  dye  then  to  live.  Many  of
them  moved  with  the  present  calamitie,  and  follie,  tell  the
Tartars  that  they  are  Gentlemen,  and  have  wealthy  and
rich  parents  and  friends.  They  promise  of  their  owne
accord  a  great  and  almost  inestimable  ransome,  which  the
barbarous,  impious,  covetous,  hungry,  and  cruell  Nation
seekes  almost  daily  to  increase  with  all  kind  of  subtilties
and  Examinations,  tyes  them  in  fetters,  useth  them  there-
fore more  hardly. But  when  they  understand  that  an

487

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Manner  of
redemption.

Ars  deluditur
arte.

Agent  of  their  people  is  come  to  the  Chan,  they  meete  him
with  their  captives,  of  whom  sometimes  they  require  the
[III.iii.642.]  price  falsly  nominated  by  themselves,  or  sometimes  pro-
mised by  the  Prisoners :  but  the  Agent  who  wel  knowes
the  craft  and  deceitfulnesse  of  the  Tartars,  finds  fault  with
the  captives  foolishnesse,  and  tell  the  Tartars  that  they
are  neither  noble  nor  rich,  and  that  they  knew  not,  nor
will  ever  be  able  to  pay  the  price,  and  as  though  they
were  neither  moved  with  Pietie  nor  Religion  reject  them.
Yet  the  Agent  is  diligent  that  they  be  inscribed  in  the
Catalogue,  and  if  they  have  a  purpose  to  ransome  any
with  their  own  mony,  they  hold  it  expedient  to  suborne
Jewes  or  Tartars,  and  other  Merchants  being  corrupted
with  mony :  by  whom,  being  as  it  were  neglected  and
rejected  by  the  Agent,  they  are  released  at  a  far  easier
rate.  Nothing  therefore  is  more  frequent  to  the  captives,
then  to  promise  and  offer  to  the  Tartars  this  price,  for
which  they  are  sold  to  the  Turkes,  Jewes,  and  stranger
Merchants,  and  others  beyond  the  Sea,  or  a  little  more,  or
twice  so  much,  if  they  bee  able  to  performe  it :  but  if  they
cannot  learne  of  the  Rustickes  or  others  what  they  are,  as
the  Tartars  are  for  the  most  part  wont  often  to  enquire  of
their  captives,  they  are  content  with  little.  Neither  doe
they  sell  them  to  strangers,  but  rather  to  the  Agent  of
their  Nation :  but  if  they  are  not  redeemed  by  the  Agent,
they  command  them  to  write  to  their  Parents  or  Kins-
folke.  Also  many  captives  are  delivered  with  the
exchange  of  Tartar  captives,  in  providing  for  and  freeing
of  whom,  the  Tartars  exhibite  and  shew  farre  greater
pietie,  friendlinesse  and  care,  then  our  Christians.  For
disrespecting  all  price,  they  first  demand  their  Tartar  cap-
tives in  exchange  of  ours,  which  often  promising  the  same
and  not  able  to  performe  it,  use  to  bring  upon  themselves
a  farre  greater  discommoditie.  For  they  aske  of  them
almost  an  unvaluable  summe,  wherewith  they  prize  their
Tartars,  which  when  they  are  not  able  to  pay,  they  sell
them  to  barbarous  Nations  over  the  Sea  for  perpetuall
slaves,  for  as  great  a  price  as  they  can,  and  very  often  at

Pome

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF POLONIA

MARTIN BRONIOVIUS

an  excessive  rate,  or  if  the  Tartars  are  wealthy,  they  con-
demne  them  to  perpetuall  slavery.

The  Chan  hath  all  his  Tartar  Armie  gathered  of  Horse-
men, except  some  hundred  Gunners  Janizaries,  Footmen,
which  are  either  Turkish  Auxiliaries,  or  some  of  his  owne
which  he  maintaynes.  He  is  accustomed  to  carrie  with
him  some  smaller  Ordnance  to  warre.  From  Taurica  or
the  Peninsula  the  Perecopens,  and  Crims,  Ossoviens,
Nogariens,  Cercessians,  are  Tributaries  and  Souldiers  for
aide,  the  Duke  of  the  Cercessians,  Petigorens  are
Stipendaries  and  Mercenaries,  and  are  wont  to  goe  volun-
taries to  the  Chans  warres.  The  Oczacoviens  and
Bialogrodens,  also  they  who  by  the  continuall  covenants
which  they  have  with  the  Turkish  Emperour,  sometimes
also  the  Dobrucen  Tartars  and  Inhabitants  of  Danubius,
by  the  command  of  the  Emperour  of  the  Turkes  follow
him  to  warre.  All  that  Hoast  collected  out  of  those
Tartars,  is  wont  to  make  the  number  of  a  hundred  and
twentie  thousand,  sometimes  also  thirtie  thousand  more,
but  not  seldome  to  exceed  that  Summe.  I  have  bin  truly
informed  by  many  credible  Christians,  which  often  follow
the  Chans  warres,  and  by  some  captived  Gentlemen  of  our
Nation,  who  have  many  times  seene  his  Armie.

All  have  according  to  their  use  Tartarian  Horses,  neat,  Their  Horses.
excellent,  stomaekfull,  swift,  and  indifferent  good  and
commodious  to  undergoe  great  labours.  The  Chan,  most
of  the  Soltans,  and  Tartar  Nobles  use  in  warre  Turkish,
Caramanian,  Arabian,  and  other  Asian,  Tartarian,  and  the
best  Out-landish  Horses.  The  swiftest  Horses  are
accounted  among  them  at  a  great  and  almost  inestimable
price.  They  alwayes  feed  them  Summer  and  Winter  in
the  Plaines  of  Taurica  or  the  Peninsula,  but  very  often
as  farre  as  the  Rivers  Boristhenes  and  Tanais  :  the  Gentle-
men nourish  at  home  very  few  Horses,  only  for  their
urgent  occasions,  not  for  any  arrogancie  or  luxurie.  They
seldome  put  their  Jades  and  unprofitable  Horses  for  riding
in  the  Waggon,  for  they  doe  all  their  businesse  with
Camels  and  Oxen.

489

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

Store  of
Horses.

Their  Armes.  The  Tartars  use  their  ancient  weapons,  a  two-edged
Sword,  or  Tartarian  Cymiter  somewhat  long,  and  a
Turkish  Dart,  or  a  Persian,  shorter  and  broader  of  the  best
Iron,  and  well  wrought ;  a  peculiar  Tartarian  Bow,  a  long
Arrow,  and  swift,  a  Quiver,  sometimes  a  short  Speare
after  the  old  guize  of  their  people.  They  goe  with  Brest-
plates  and  Helmets,  and  in  Persian  or  Moscovian  Armes,
wherewith  they  abound  being  enriched  by  the  spoyle  of
Christians.  They  have  ancient  Saddles  and  Bridles  after
the  custome  of  the  Nation,  very  fitting,  not  for  pride  or
superfluitie :  the  Nobles  have  them  prepared  very
elegantly,  strongly  and  compendiously  for  their  use.  But
most  in  the  Tartar  Armie  are  altogether  unarmed  and
cowards,  and  they  carrie  with  them  to  warre  by  reason  of
their  great  Hoast,  almost  an  infinite  number  of  Horses.
For  a  Tartar  even  of  the  basest  condition  will  scarcely  be
content  with  one  or  two  Horses,  but  three,  foure,  and
more,  which  he  may  have  alwayes  readie  with  him  at  his
hand.  Therefore  the  Armie  of  the  Tartars  is  made  so
numerous,  great  and  terrible,  which  when  it  is  seene  afarre
off,  is  deemed  by  our  men  almost  an  infinite  and  innumer-
able Hoast.

Now  when  the  Tartarian  Armie  is  come  into  their
enemies  Country,  the  Tartars  ranke  not  themselves  in
bands  or  troupes,  but  all  set  forward  and  proceed  leisurely.
They  dispose  many  Watchmen  in  all  parts  throughout
their  companies,  which  they  make  greater  or  lesser  for
their  supply,  but  after  that  the  foremost  of  them  have

Flight  fay ned.  descryed  their  enemy,  they  counterfeit  a  flight,  that  they
may  more  easily  allure  them  into  those  troupes,  which  they

[III.iii.643.]  have  laid  in  ambushments,  and  so  over  charge  him.  But
when  they  espie  an  Armie  of  enemies,  they  make  a  retraite
quickly  and  speedily  to  their  Armie,  Rankes,  and  Banners.
There  is  great  celeritie  in  constituting  and  governing
their  troupes,  seeing  that  they  are  not  ruled  onely  by  the
advertisements  of  the  Generals  and  Praefects  of  their
Regiments,  but  also  by  the  shew  of  Whips,  as  is  the  long
continued  practice  of  the  Nation : and  they  are  subject

490

Their
Discipline.

MARTIN BRONIOVIUS

so  to  a  becke,  that  they  are  very  easily  brought  into  their
Ranges,  whensoever  it  is  necessary.

The  Chan  is  alwayes  fortified  in  warre,  with  a  band  of  His  strength.
some thousands of noble and couragious Tartars in
number,  some  hundreds  of  Janizaries,  Footmen,  and  some
small  Ordnance. In  the  Chans  Regiment  a  very  great
white  Mares  tayle,  and  a  piece  of  Greene  and  Red  Silke  The principall
of  the  Turkish  Emperour  is  carryed  before  on  a  great  jjugnea  ,
Pike  for  a  Standard. There  appeare  in  the  troupes  of  the
other  Tartars, many  Ancients  and  Ensignes  of  various
colours.

The  more  famous  Souldiers,  and  they  which  are  notable
in  reputation,  dexteritie  and  warlike  Prowes,  and  have
atchieved  in  warre  some  Noble-Service  and  Enterprize,
are  greatly  honoured  by  the  Chan,  Soldans,  Kiuiazons,  and
Murzons.  And  that  respect  is  had  to  them,  that  the
Chan  doth  not  only  reward  them  with  certayne  great
benefits  and  such  liberalise,  as  he  can  shew  them,  but  also
is  so  mindfull  of  their  deserts  and  merits,  that  he  assignes
them  and  their  successors  in  the  Assembly,  and  as  the
fashion  is,  at  his  Table  a  perpetuall  place  of  honour  among
his  more  noble  Murzons.  That  dignitie  among  the
Tartars  is  the  greatest,  and  Hereditary,  for  they  going  to
warre  able  and  experienced  men  which  possesse  that  place,
are  dignified  by  the  Chan,  with  the  glorie  of  leading  the
Troupes.  The  Chan  also  frees  some  Tartar  captives  with
the  permutation  of  captives,  and  in  ransoming  others  he
largely  powres  out  his  owne  Treasure,  and  willingly  com-
forts them  as  he  is  able.

[Chap.  XXII.
491

A.D.
1563.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

■ He  published
this  Book
Anno  1607.

Chap.  XXII.

Dithmar Blefkens his Voyages, and Historie of
Island  and  Groenland.

N  the  yeere  1 563. m  two  Hamburg  Merchants
ships  determined  to  sayle  to  Island,  the
Mariners,  by  an  ancient  custome,  desirous
to  have  a  Minister  of  Gods  Word  with
them,  commend  this  care  to  the  Ministers
of  the  Church  of  Hamburg,  and  intreat
them  to  provide  them  a  Minister.  One
Doctor  Paulus  ab  Etzen  was  then  Superintendent  of  the
Church  of  Hamburg.  While  therefore  I  stayd  at  Ham-
burg, expecting  my  Library  from  Rostoch,  I  entred  into
same  familiaritie  with  Paulus,  and  the  rest  of  the  Ministers.
This  Office  was  bestowed  upon  me,  which  I  undertooke
the  more  willingly,  because  I  had  a  longing  desire  to
know  strange  things,  and  divers  Countries,  yeelding  to
their  perswasion.  Taking  ship  therefore  the  tenth  of
Aprill,  wee  sayled  upon  the  Coast  of  England  and  Scot-
land, and  passing  beyond  the  Hands  Orcades,  in  number
fifteene,  whereof  the  most  part  lye  unmanured  for  the
barrenesse ;  Ferow  and  Hitland  are  inhabited :  Here  wee
saw  a  very  high  Rocke,  which  in  the  top  representeth  the
head  of  a  cooled  Monke,  where  also  there  is  a  safe  Harbour
against  all  winds,  and  this  Monke  delivereth  many  from
present  dangers.  The  fourteenth  of  June  we  descryed
Island,  which  seemes  afarre  off,  like  winter  clouds.  The
next  day  we  attayned  the  Land  and  Haven  of  HafFene-
fordt  toward  the  South.

Iseland  is  a  rough,  hilly  and  snowie  Land,  which  is
supposed  to  bee  twice  bigger  then  Sicilia :  it  is  thought
to  be  a  hundred  leagues  in  length,  which  also  Olaus
Magnus  testifieth  in  his  eleventh  Booke.  It  hath  the
name  of  the  perpetuall  Ice,  and  coldnesse  of  the  Ayre,
which  is  there  most  sharpe  : for  eight  whole  moneths  it

492

DITHMAR BLEFKENS  ad.

1563.

is  troubled  with  Ice :  It  burneth  notwithstanding  with
heat  and  inward  fire  in  many  places.  The  extremitie  of
cold  increaseth  this  heate  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  which
cold  continueth  the  greater  part  of  the  yeere  (a  few  Summer
moneths  excepted)  and  so  bindeth  the  pores  in  the  upper
part  of  the  Earth,  that  it  can  have  no  free  vent.  And
this  Hand  hath  so  great  a  Latitude  from  the  ^Equator,
that  the  Arctick  Circle  divides  it  in  the  middest,  that  is
to  say,  sixtie  five  degrees  and  a  halfe.  The  Hands  called
Ebudae,  are  object  to  the  North  part  of  this  Hand.  But
whether  that  be  of  these,  which  Ptolemie,  and  ancient
Writers  call  Thule,  or  rather  Iseland,  that  great  Hand,  I
dare  neither  affirme,  nor  altogether  denie,  because  there
is  no  Hand  found  where  Ptolemie  set  Thule.  Now,  the
later  Writers  make  another  manner  of  longitude  about
Scotland,  and  the  bordering  Hands,  then  Ptolemie  ever
thought.

I  will  draw  the  Descent  of  this  Nation  from  their  first
originall,  following  the  truth  of  the  Iseland  Chronicles.
In  the  yeere  of  Christ  900.  in  the  time  of  Alebrand  Bishop
of  Breme,  certayne  of  the  Nobilitie  of  East  Frisia,  and
of  the  Countrey  of  Breme,  desirous  to  discover  strange
Countries  toward  the  North,  set  sayle  from  Weser,  and
passing  beyond  the  Orcades,  found  this  Hand  almost  in
the  utmost  skirts  of  Europe,  yet  habitable,  but  full  of
Snow : which  they  called  Iseland,  for  the  coldnesse  and
roughnesse  thereof. And  when  they  had  sayled  further
towards  the  North  about  two  hundred  leagues,  they  found
another  Hand,  which  (by  contraries)  they  named  Grone-  [III.iii.644.]
land. Endeavouring  to  sayle  further  towards  the  North,  Groneland.
through  the  frozen  or  congealed  Sea,  being  long  hindred  Most  ordinary
u <.u t  *.  i *u m6 .  1  v  °- 5  .1 tn  those  Seas.

by  the  Ice,  at  length  with  great  labour  getting  out,  they  See r  lslmd

fell  into  whirle-pooles  of  the  Sea,  and  thicke  darkenesse.  originall  the

In  these  whirle-pooles  and  darknesse,  this  Fleet  (one  next  Chapter.

onely  ship  excepted)  perished. They  that  were  preserved,  Antiautties

after  many  long  labours  and  perils,  sayling  through  the  ^J-fj/  or

Tartarian  Sea,  came  into  a  very  hote  Countrey,  and  entring  mythical  b'

into  a  large  Bay,  they  went  on  shoare  upon  the  next  Land,  fabulous.

493

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1563.

And  when  the  Inhabitants  had  hid  themselves  in  secret
places,  by  reason  of  the  great  heate  and  scorching  of  the
Sunne,  they  saw  Gold,  and  other  precious  things  set
heere  and  there,  without  a  guard.  And  when  they  had
carryed  away  as  much  as  they  would,  and  hasted  to  the
Ship,  they  saw  some  pursue  them  with  Dogs  of  strange
bignesse.  One,  who  was  hindred  and  laden  with  a  prey
that  he  could  not  escape,  was  torne  in  pieces  of  the  Dogges.
The  rest,  after  long  sayling,  shunning  these  Whirle-pooles,
arrived  in  Muscovia,  thence  by  the  Balticke  Sea  returning
unto  Breme,  they  brought  backe  these  tidings  to  Alebrand
the  Bishop,  with  part  of  the  prey.

Much  about  this  time,  the  Noruegians,  by  example  of
the  Helvetians  in  Julius  Caesars  time,  are  supposed  to
have  come  out  of  Norway,  who  then  long  time  possessed
that  part  of  France,  which  now  also  is  called  Normandie.
And  when  they  had  performed  great  attempts  by  Sea  and
Land  against  the  Britaines,  they  did  not  onely  scoure  the
Sea  by  hostile  incursions,  but  also  expelled  the  Saracens,
who  at  that  time  came  into  Italy,  and  sought  to  seat
themselves  in  Calabria  and  Apulia.  After  they  brought
Colonies  Northward  into  Hitland,  Ferow  and  Island :
which  way,  they  learned  of  the  Bremians,  by  meanes  of
the  Nobilitie  of  Frisia  aforesaid.  And  even  the  very  pro-
prietie  of  their  speech  doth  testifie,  that  they  came  out  of
Norway :  for  the  pronunciation  of  the  Iselanders  doth
agree  with  the  antient  Inhabitants  of  Norway.  For  upon
the  Sea  coast  of  Norway,  especially  where  the  famous
Haven  and  Citie  of  Bergen  is,  by  reason  of  the  resort  and
familiaritie  with  the  Germaines  and  Danes,  the  Language
is  changed.

Of  the  Iselanders  Religion.

[III.iii.645.]  yN  the  yere  of  Christ  1398.  Woldemarus,  the  second  of
A  that  name  governed  the  Danish  Kingdome,  whereunto
Norway  was  added,  whose  posteritie  held  it,  untill  Ericus
Duke  of  Pomerania,  and  Christopher  Banar. Unto  this

494

DITHMAR BLEFKENS  a.d.

1563.

Waldemarus  all the  Arctoian  Colonies  obeyed, so that

now,  under  that  Woldemarus, the  Iselanders  were  first

instructed  in the  Christian  Religion,  when  before they

had worshipped strange Gods. And when almost all

Christian  people,  in  that  lamentable  darkenesse  and  title

of  a  Church,  as  it  were  by  Witchcraft  deceived,  were

detayned  in  most  deepe  bonds  of  superstition ;  it  could

not  bee  but  they,  who  were  furthest  removed  from  the

societie  of  Learned  men,  and  dwelling  under  an  uncivill

and  barbarous  Climate,  should  fall  into  most  foule  Idolatrie,

when  sometimes  (as  hereafter  shall  bee  declared)  they  had

Devils  to  serve  them,  as  familiar  as  domesticall  servants.

But  after  Luther  began  to  bee  knowne,  Christianus  the  The  Christian

King  of  Denmarke  procured  purer  Doctrine  to  himselfe,  C£7X> mg

and  purged  the  Churches  in  the  Kingdome  of  Denmarke,

Norway,  and  all  the  Hands  subject  unto  him ; sending

Ministers  into  Iseland,  to  sow  the  seede  of  the  Gospell

there. Hee  sent  a  Printer  also  out  of  Denmarke,  to  set

forth  the  Bible,  the  common  places  of  Philip  Melancthon,

the  Workes  of  Urbanus  Regius  and  others,  in  the  vulgar

Tongue,  to  the  Pastors  who  were  ignorant  of  the  Latine,

as  at  that  time  almost  all  of  them  were. And  also  sent

for  fit  and  apt  young  men  out  of  Iseland,  whom  hee  main-

tayned  in  the  Haffnian  Universitie  at  his  owne  costs,  and

gave  them  charge  over  Churches  and  Schooles.

King  Woldemare,  as  soone  as  they  should  professe
Christian  Religion  in  Iseland,  ordayned  them  two  Bishops,  Two  Bishops
one  in  Scalholden  in  the  East  part,  and  another  in  Hollen  in  Iseland.
in  the  West,  whose  Successours  at  this  day  retayne  nothing
but  a  shadow,  and  a  bare  Title,  for  they  have  no  other
revenues  but  Butter  and  Fish.  But  when  that  reformation
(whereof  I  spake)  was  made  by  King  Christian  in  the
Churches  of  Iseland,  one  of  the  Bishops  in  Scalholden,
conspiring  with  the  people,  rejects  the  Doctrine  of  the
Gospell,  and  making  a  rebellion  they  kill  the  Kings
Lieutenant.  The  yeere  following,  which  was  1535.  the
King  sent  a  Noble  man  of  the  Order  of  Knighthood,  one
Paul  Hitfelt (whom  I saw  an  old man  in  Denmarke)

495

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

furnished  with  a  Fleet,  Souldiers,  and  Munition  into  the
Hand.  The  seditious  being  slaine,  hee  renueth  the  refor-
mation of  the  Doctrine  of  the  Gospell,  and  returneth  into
Denmarke,  leaving  a  certayne  Noble  man  to  take  charge
of  the  Church  and  Hand.

Tadde  Bonde.  The  greatest  man  in  Iseland  at  that  time  was  one  Tadde
Bonde.  Hee,  after  the  Kings  Armie  was  departed,  con-
spiring with  the  principall  men  (whom  by  his  Authoritie
hee  drew  to  take  his  part)  revolted  from  his  Allegiance,
and  perswaded  the  rest  of  the  Ilanders  to  follow. They

Wake.  meete  together  in  a  place  called  Waloe,  and  conspiring

to  rebell,  and  cast  off  the  Kings  subjection,  they  impart
their  counsels  together,  and  Tadde  had  his  possessions  not
in  one  place,  and  many  retayners,  and  for  these  causes  hee
thought  they  could  not  easily  bee  suppressed.  The  Bishop
who  dwelt  in  the  East,  had  a  special  care  to  acquaint  the
Kings  Lieutenant  with  all  that  was  done  (for  the  Lieutenant
was  absent  in  the  West  part  of  that  Hand)  and  the  Bishop
hated  Tadde  a  long  time.  For  in  that  first  Rebellion,
hee  had  falsly  accused  him  to  the  Lieutenant  as  guiltie,
and  author  of  the  Rebellion.  This  accusation  onely
brought  great  and  extreame  calamitie  upon  him.

The  Lieutenant  being  certified  what  was  done,  hee
perswadeth  by  fit  instruments,  some  of  the  Complices  of
the  faction,  to  continue  in  their  Allegiance,  propounding
rewards  and  punishments.  Then  many  of  them  when
they  saw  the  greatnesse  of  the  danger,  leaving  him,  came
humbly  to  the  Lieutenant,  and  begge  pardon,  and  obtayne
it.  Tadde  therefore  is  adjudged  an  Enemie,  both  of  the
King  and  of  his  Countrey,  they  promise  therefore  by  an
Oath  and  giving  of  their  Faith,  that  they  will  pursue  him.
Then  hee,  through  feare  of  the  danger,  with  a  few  of
his  Domestickes  which  hee  had  gathered  together,  kept
himselfe  at  the  foote  of  Hekelveld,  but  being  circum-
vented they  were  all  slaine,  and  hee  taken.  They  that
tooke  him,  brought  him  to  the  Bishop,  to  commit  him  to
Prison,  but  he  refused  to  receive  him.  Therefore  they
draw  him  to  another  certaine  man,  of  those  who  had  the

496

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF  TAURICA  CHERSONESUS

DITHMAR BLEFKENS  a.d.

1563-
chiefe  place  in  Justice,  neither  would  hee  receive  him,  fear-
ing the  hatred  of  the  people.  There  was  at  that  time  there
a  certayne  Iselander,  Jonas  by  name,  a  man  of  courage.
I  know  (sayth  hee)  to  whom  I  will  commit  him,  that
will  diligently  keepe  him,  and  foorthwith  hee  slew  him
and  buryed  him.  And  so  the  Sedition  was  appeased.
And  from  that  time  untill  this  day,  the  Word  of  God
is  taught  amongst  Barbarous  men,  after  the  manner  of
the  Confession  of  Augusta.

The  Life  and Manners  of  the  Iselanders.

IN  the  whole  Hand,  there  are  three  sorts  of  men,  who  Three  sorts  of
are  held  in  any  reckoning  and  account :  for  the  common  people.
people,  by  reason  of  the  scarcitie  of  Ships  wherewith  they
fish,  make  themselves  slaves  to  the  richer. Of  those  three
sorts,  the  first  is  of  them  whom  they  call  Loshmaders,
that  is  to  say,  Men  of  Justice  :  for  Loch  in  their  language,  [III.iii.646.]
signifieth  Law. These  men  administer  Justice,  and  there
are  many  of  them,  but  twelve  of  them  onely  have  the  Twelve
yeerely  charge  of  Justice. All  men  obey  their  Judgment  Justices  each
and  Decrees. Another  sort  is  of  them,  who  are  called  yeete~
Bonden : They  are  in  the  place  of  Nobles,  and  as  every
one  of  them  is  richest  in  Shipping,  and  Cattle,  so  he  hath
most  Fishers,  and  followers. This  onely  power  they  know.
The  third  sort  is  of  Bishops  and  Ministers  of  the  word
of  God,  of  the  which  many  are  found  every  where  through-
out the  whole  Hand.

There  are  many  of  the  Iselanders  very  proud  and  high
minded, especially  by  reason of the strength of  body  Strength.
which they  have. I saw  an Iselander, who easily  put
an  Hamburg  Tunne  full  of  Ale  to  his  mouth,  drinking
off  it  as  if  hee  had  had  but  one  small  measure.

Both  Sexes  in  Iseland  have  the  same  habite,  so  that  Habite.
by  the  garments  you  shall  not  easily  discerne  whether  it
bee  Man  or  Woman.  They  want  Flaxe,  except  it  bee
brought  unto  them  by  our  Countrey-men.  The  Women-
kinde  there  are  very  beautifull,  but  ornaments  are  wanting.
xiii  497  2  1

A.D.
1563.

Superstition
and  Witch-
craft.

Night  Ravens.

Sweet  sacrifice
for  the  Devill,
letice  sutable
his  lips.

Learning.

Fishing  £ff
Fish.

Drinke.

An  old  man  or
a  loud  lie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  whole  Nation  of  the  Islanders  is  much  given  to
Superstitions,  and  they  have  Spirits  familiarly  serving
them.  For  they  onely  are  fortunate  in  Fishing,  who  are
raised  up  by  night  of  the  Devill  to  goe  a  fishing.

And  although  the  Ministers  of  the  Gospell  use  all
diligence  in  disswading  them  from  this  impietie ;  yet  this
wickednesse  hath  taken  roote,  and  sticketh  so  deepely  in
their  mindes,  and  they  are  so  bewitched  of  Sathan,  that
they  can  admit  no  sound  Doctrine  and  Dehortation.  Yea,
by  the  Devils  meanes,  if  you  offer  them  money,  they
promise  a  prosperous  wind  and  performe  it,  which  I  know,
as  hereafter  shall  be  spoken.  The  like  Olaus  Magnus
writeth  of  the  Finlanders  in  his  thirde  Booke.  They
hold  Ships  also  by  inchantment  almost  immoveable,  and
that  in  a  prosperous  wind.  And  truely  it  is  a  wonder
that  Sathan  so  sporteth  with  them.  For  hee  hath  shewed
them  a  remedie  in  staying  of  their  Ships,  to  wit,  the
Excrements  of  a  Maide  being  a  Virgin  :  if  they  annoynt
the  Prow,  and  certaine  planckes  of  the  Ship,  hee  hath
taught  them  that  the  Spirit  is  put  to  flight,  and  driven
away  with  this  stinke.

In  the  rest  of  the  carriage  of  their  life,  they  thus  behave
themselves.  The  Parents  teach  their  male  Children  (even
from  their  child-hood)  letters  and  the  Law  of  that  Hand,
so  that  very  few  men  are  found  throughout  the  whole
Hand,  but  they  know  Letters,  and  many  Women  use  our
letters,  and  have  also  other  characters,  with  the  which  they
express  some  whole  words  of  theirs,  which  words  can
hardly  bee  written  with  our  letters.  They  give  themselves
to  hardnesse,  and  fishing  from  their  Infancie ;  for  all  their
life  consists  in  Fishing.  They  exercise  not  Husbandrie,
because  they  have  no  Fields,  and  the  greatest  part  of  their
foode  consisteth  in  Fish,  unsaverie  Butter,  Milke  and
Cheese.  In  stead  of  Bread  they  have  Fish  bruised  with  I
a  Stone.  Their  Drinke  is  Water  or  Whay.  So  they  |
live  many  yeeres,  without  medicine  or  Physitian.  Many
of  them  live  till  they  bee  one  hundred  and  fiftie  yeeres  |
old. And  I  saw  an  old  man  who  sayd  he  had  then  lived

498

DITHMAR BLEFKENS  a.d.

1563.
two  hundred  yeeres. Nay,  Olaus  Magnus  in  his  twentieth
Booke sayth, that the Iselanders live three hundred
yeeres.

The  greater  part  of  Iselanders  hath  never  seene  Bread,  Bread.
much  lesse  tasted  it. If  our  men  at  any  time  sell  them
Meale  or  Corne,  they  mingle  it  with  Milke,  and  lay  it
up  for  a  long  time,  as  delicates  for  Nobles. They  call
this  sauce  or  mixture,  Drabbell.

The  Germaines  that  trade  in  Iseland  have  a  place  in
the  Haven  of  Haffenefordt  fenced  by  Nature,  where
under  Tents  they  set  their  Merchandise  to  sale,  as  Shooes,  Commodities.
Garments,  Glasses,  Knives,  and  such  kinde  of  Merchandise
of  no  price.  The  Iselanders  have  Oyle  molten  out  of
the  bowels  of  Fishes,  knowne  to  our  Tanners  and  Shoo-
makers  :  they  have  Fish,  Brimstone,  white  Foxe  skinnes,
Butter  and  other  things.  They  barter  all  these  for  our
Commodities,  nor  is  the  bargaine  ratified,  before  they  bee
well  stuffed  with  our  Meat,  Wine  or  Beere,  together  with
their  Wives  and  Children  whom  they  bring  with  them,
how  many  soever  they  have.

Comming  into  the  Haven,  they  have  their  Daughters
with  them  which  are  marriage-able :  they  after  they  have  Whoores.
inquired  of  our  companie,  whether  they  have  Wives  at
home,  or  not,  they  promise  a  nights  lodging  for  Bread,
Bisket,  or  any  other  trifling  things.  Sometimes  the
Parents  yeeld  their  Daughters  freely,  even  for  a  whole
moneth,  or  as  long  as  they  stay.  If  shee  proove  with
Child  by  that  lying  with  her,  the  parents  love  their
Daughter  better  then  before,  and  the  Child  being  borne,
they  bring  it  up  some  yeeres,  while  either  the  Father
returne,  or  they  give  it  to  their  Sonne  in  law  that  shall
bee,  for  a  Dowrie  with  their  Daughter,  who  doth  not
despise  it,  because  it  is  borne  of  the  Germaine  blood.
If  any  Virgin  have  familiaritie  with  a  Germaine,  shee  is
honoured  among  them,  and  therefore  shee  is  sought  of
many  Suiters.  And  the  time  was  before  this,  that  Whoor-
dome,  which  was  without  the  degrees  of  Consanguinitie
and  Affinite  had  no Infamie. And  although Preachers

499

A.D.
1563.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

crie  out  against  it,  and  the  offenders  are  severely  punished,
yet  they  hardly  abstaine.
Drinking  and They  lay  not  up  Wine  and  Beere  which  they  buy  of
singing.  Qur  Countrey-men,  but  quaffe  it  up  house  by  house  by

course  one  with  another,  and  that  freely  or  for  nothing.
While  they  drinke,  they  sing  the  heroicall  acts  of  their
ancestors,  not  with  any  certaine  composed  order  or  melodie,
but  as  it  commeth  in  every  mans  head.  Neither  is  it  law-
ful, iii. 647.]  full  for  any  one  to  rise  from  the  Table  to  make  water,  but
for  this  purpose  the  daughter  of  the  house,  or  another
maid  or  woman  attendeth  alwayes  at  the  Table,  watchfull
if  any  becken ;  to  him  that  beckeneth  shee  gives  the
chamber-pot  under  the  Table  with  her  owne  hands ;  the
rest  in  the  meane  while  grunt  like  Swine,  least  any  noise
bee  heard.  The  water  being  powred  out,  hee  washeth  the
Bason,  and  offereth  his  service  to  him  that  is  willing,  and
he  is  accounted  uncivill  who  abhorreth  this  fashion.  They
entertaine  them  that  come  unto  them  with  a  kisse,  and
they  behold  and  looke  each  on  other,  if  paradventure
they  may  see  Lice  creeping  on  their  garments,  which
greatly  trouble  them  for  want  of  linnen :  if  they  see  any,
each  taketh  them  from  the  other,  and  as  often  as  he  taketh
away  one,  so  often  doth  he  thanke  him,  with  his  head
discovered,  and  this  they  doe  one  to  the  other,  as  long  as
they  see  one.
Lodging.  By  night  the  Master  of  the  house,  with  all  his  family,

his  wife  and  children  lye  in  one  room,  covered  with  a
cloth  made  of  Wooll  which  they  make.  And  the  like
clothes  they  lap  under  them,  without  straw  or  hay  put
under.  All  of  them  make  water  in  one  chamber-pot,
with  the  which  in  the  morning  they  wash  their  face,  mouth,
teeth,  and  hands ;  they  allege  many  reasons  thereof,  to
wit,  that  this  makes  a  faire  face,  maintaineth  the  strength,
confirmeth  the  sinewes  in  the  hands,  and  preserveth  the
teeth  from  putrifaction.  If  Cattle  perish  in  the  waters  or
snow  (which  often  commeth  to  passe)  they  say,  they  are
killed  of  God,  and  are  accounted  among  the  delicates.
And it  happened  in the  yeere 1564. in  a  place  called

500

Loving
wormes.

Lousie  love.

DITHMAR BLEFKENS  a.d.

1563-
Ackermisse, that in the month  of  January some  Kine

I  strayed  in  the  darke,  and  the  fogge  was  so  great,
I  and  the  depth  of  snow,  that  they  could  not  be  found.  In
i  the  moneth  of  April  they  were  first  found  untainted,  and
without  any  evill  smell,  and  being  distributed  among  the
neighbours,  some  part  was  brought  to  the  Governour,
,  with  whom  I  lived  at  that  time,  which  was  not  lawfull
:  for  him  to  despise,  yet  he  commanded  it  to  be  given  to
i  the  poore.

In  the  Winter  time,  before  and  after  the  Solstitium,

when the Sunne declineth, and being in Sagitarius,  Long  night.

Capricornus,  and  Aquarius,  it  departeth  from  them,  neither

doth  it  ascend  above  the  Horizon,  while  it  touch  Pisces,

therefore  they  have  no  light  but  of  the  Moone  and  Starres.

In  like  manner  about  the  Summer  Solstitium,  when  the

Sunne  ascendeth  to  Gemini,  Cancer,  and  Leo,  it  never

J  goeth  downe  under  the  Horizon,  therefore  at  that  time

they  have  no  Night. In the  Winter time, they  keep

their  Beds  many  dayes,  and  exercise  themselves  in  the

{  game  of  Chesse,  the  invention  whereof  is  due  to  Xerxes  Chesse.

i  the  Philosopher : the meane while the servants bring

;  them their meate dressed to their  beds. They keepe

I  Lampes  of  the  oyle  of  Fish  continually  burning,  others

burn  Tallow  candles.

In  the  moneth  of  Februarie,  as  soone  as  the  Sunne

J  ascends  above  the  Horizon,  by  little  and  little  the  dayes

!  grow  longer,  then  they  begin  to  Fish,  whereof  there  is

I  so  great  plentie,  that  it  is  scarce  credible ;  for  the  Fishes

j  which  for  three  whole  moneths  swamme  in  the  darke,  as

I  soone  as  they  see  a  Fish  of  Tinne  fastened  to  an  Iron,

they  ranne  to  it  in  schoales,  that  they  are  not  onely  drawne

!  up  by  the  jawes,  but  wheresoever  the  Iron  toucheth  them.

Having  taken  them,  they  plucke  out  the  bones,  and  lay

up  their  bowels,  and  make  Fat  or  Oyle  of  them. They

heape  up  their  Fish  in  the  open  ayre,  and  the  puritie  of

the  ayre  is  such  there,  that  they  are  hardened  onely  with

I  the  winde  and  Sunne,  without  Salt,  better  surely  then  Dryed  Fish.

if they  were corned  with salt. And if they kill  any

501

A.D.
I563-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Beasts,  they  preserve  the  flesh  without  stinke  or  putri-
faction,  without  salt,  hardened  onely  with  the  winde.

Stone-making
water.

Of the wonderfull standing Pooles, Lakes and
Fountaynes  in  Iseland.

IN  divers  places  almost  throughout  the  whole  Hand,
are  Bathes  and  scalding  Fountaynes,  which  flow  out  in
great  abundance.  This  water  as  soone  as  it  begins  to
coole,  hath  a  Sulphurie  substance  in  the  top  thereof.  In
these  scalding  waters,  wherein  I  could  scarce  dippe  my
finger,  red  Dive-doppers  are  seene  afarre  off,  if  you  come
neerer,  they  vanish,  if  you  depart,  they  appeare  againe,
so  all  day  long  (if  any  please)  they  play  boe-peepe  with
Dive-doppers.  men.  Whether  they  bee  Dive-doppers  indeed,  I  leave
it  to  others  to  decide.

At  the  West  of  this  Island,  there  is  a  huge  smoakie
Lake,  and  very  cold,  which  turneth  all  things  that  are
cast  into  it  into  stones,  and  that  in  few  dayes,  and  (which
is  worthy  of  great  admiration)  if  you  put  a  sticke  upright
into  the  bottome,  the  lower  part  which  is  stucke  into  the
earth,  hath  the  resemblance  and  hardnesse  of  Iron  after
two  dayes,  that  which  was  in  the  water  hath  the  hardnesse  \
and  shew  of  a  Stone,  the  upper  part  which  remayned
above  the  water,  keepeth  his  wonted  forme :  And  I  twice
proved  the  truth  of  this  thing,  but  when  I  put  the  lower
part  (which  represented  Iron)  to  the  fire  that  it  might  melt,
it  burned  like  a  Coale.

There  are  two  Fountaynes  of  most  different  qualitie,  ,
in  a  place  upon  the  Sea  coast,  which  is  called  Turlocks  1  |
Haven,  the  one  cold,  the  other  hot ;  these  Fountaynes  by
pipes  are  drawne  into  one  place,  and  tempered  for  bathing,  ,
they  make  a  most  wholesome  Bath.  Nor  farre  from  these  ,
Fountaynes,  there  is  a  certaine  other  Fountayne,  which  r
bubbles  foorth  liquor  like  Wax,  which  notably  cureth  the  j  t
French  disease,  which  is  very  common  there.  c

Not  farre  from  the  Haven  Haffnefordt,  there  is  a  cleft ,
[III.iii.648.]  in  a  Rocke  like  to  a  Fountayne  of  unmeasurable  depth. a

502

Note.

French
Disease

DITHMAR BLEFKENS  ad.

1563.
If  you  looke  into  it,  you  cannot  see  the  water,  but  if  you
cast  in  a  stone,  halfe  an  houre  after  you  shall  heare  it
falling,  as  if  it  fell  into  brazen  Vessels,  and  forthwith  the
water  ariseth,  and  it  is  rilled  to  the  top  of  the  Wels
brimme,  and  it  is  a  most  cleere  water,  which  notwith-
standing no  man  dare  touch,  nor  taste,  neither  doth  it
flow  out,  but  so  long  after,  as  the  stone  which  is  cast  in,
sinketh  to  the  bottome.  There  is  another  Lake  in  the
middle  of  the  Hand,  which  casteth  forth  a  pestiferous
fume,  insomuch  as  it  killeth  Birds  flying  over  it  with  the
poyson  thereof.

Of  the  wonderfull Mountaynes  in Island.

THere  are  three  Mountaynes  in  Island  very  admirable,
the  one  is  called  the  Mountayne  of  the  Crosse,  the
other  Snenelsiockell.  These  two  pierce  the  cloudes  with
their  heigth,  whose  heads,  or  tops  no  man  ever  saw,  nor  are
they  ever  seene  without  Ice  and  Snow ;  in  those,  Light-
nings and  horrible  Thunders  are  daily  heard,  when
neverthelesse,  in  the  neighbouring  Valleyes  the  Aire  is
faire  and  cleere,  as  in  Summer  time.  The  third  Moun-
tayne lyeth  on  the  North  of  the  Hand,  and  not  very  high,
but  it  hath  burned  very  many  yeeres ;  with  what  fire  or
matter,  it  is  unknowne ;  but  seeing  Brimstone  is  digged
out  of  the  Earth  throughout  the  whole  Land,  it  seemeth,
that  the  Sulphurie  matter  is  sometime  inflamed.  This
Mountayne  is  not  farre  from  the  Sea,  and  the  Sea  on  one
side  beats  upon  it :  it  is  called  Hecla,  sometimes  it  casteth  Heck  a  burn-
forth  flame,  sometimes  fierie  water,  then  blacke  ashes  and  ing  Hill.
Pumis  stones,  in  so  great  abundance,  that  it  darkeneth
the  Sunne.  No  man  also  can  dwell  neere  it  by  sixe  mile,
neither  are  there  any  pastures  about  it.  Sometimes  bold
men,  and  such  as  regard  not  their  lives,  cast  stones  into
the  hollow  places ;  for  sometimes  there  is  a  wonderfull
calme  in  the  Mountayne ;  especially  when  the  Westerne
wind  blowes,  it  casteth  backe  the  stones  flung  into  it  with  Conceit  of
an  horrible  noyse  and  sound :  the  common  people  thinke  Pufg^ori&.

5°3

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1563.

the  soules  of  the  damned  to  be  tormented  heere : it  is

certayne  that  divers  and  horrible  spirits  are  observed  in

this  Mountayne  and  about  it ;  for  if  a  Battaile  be  fought

in  any  place,  the  Islanders,  especially  they  that  sayle  and

fish  in the Sea  neere to Hecla, know  the  day  of  the

Battaile  fought,  although  they  know  not  where  it  be  done  :

for  they  see  (as  they  report)  wicked  spirits  going  forth,

and  returning,  and  bringing  soules  with  them. And  such

a  storie  is  reported  all  Island  over.

Collusions  of A  Fisherman  sayling  by  Hecla,  met  with  another  ship,

men,  or  both  had  a  prosperous  wind,  and  when  (after  the  manner

DevUh  °f  Saylers)  he  was  demanded  who  hee  was  and  of  what

Amglm  Jonas  place,  hee  answered,  that  hee  had  the  Bishop  of  Breme

an  Islander in  his  ship ;  whom  hee  would  convay  to  Hecla : and  it

scoff€s  at  lt  as was  knowne  that  the  Bishop  dyed  the  same  day,  which

ja  u  ous.  notwithstanding, I  would  not  set  downe  for  truth. If

any  perish  by  Sea,  or  otherwise  dye,  sometimes  leaving

their  Friends  and  Acquaintance,  they  appeare  very  heavie,

being  demanded  whither  they  goe,  and  from  whence,  they

answere  they  are  brought  to  Hecla,  under  a  cruell  Master

the  Devill,  and  so  vanish. And  they  are  so  bewitched

of  Satan,  that  they  thinke  them  the  soules  of  the  departed.

But  because  no  man  that  is  well  in  his  wits,  will  thinke

that  Hell  is  in  this  Mountayne,  yet  it  may  be  demanded,

whence  the  Hill  hath  this  matter,  whereby  it  should  bring

forth  so  many  yeeres  flames, so  many  ashes,  and  such

abundance  of  Pumis  stones. For  wee  see  the  most  sollid

and  firme  bodies,  and  all  things  to  be  consumed  by  fire :

and  for  that  cause  some  thinke,  that  it  shall  come  to  passe

that  these  flames  shall  once  be  extinguished :  for  the  cause

fayling,  they  deny  that  any  effects  can  follow. But  heere

(what  I  thinke)  I  will  freely  speake,  yet  saving  other  mens

judgements. It  is  manifest  by  watry  Meteors,  that  there

is  a  continuall  generation  of  water,  by  the  vapours  gathered

together  in  the  cavities  of  the  Earth ;  which  issueth  forth

by Fountayns : but the efficient and materiall causes

abiding  perpetually,  the  effects  also  continually  remayne :

so  also  in  the  bowels  of  the  Earth,  there  are  certayne  places,

5°4

DITHMAR BLEFKENS  a.d.

1563.
which  by  their  owne  nature  draw  unto  them  a  hote  and

I  dry  exhalation,  and  that  it  resolves  it  into  flames,  ashes,
and  Pumis  stones,  which  may  easily  be  done  in  this  Moun-
tayne,  by  reason  of  the  Sulphur  matter,  which  is  found  in

:  Island  throughout  the  whole  Land.  And  as  Fountaynes
send  forth  more  abundance  of  water  in  the  Winter  time,
then  in  the  Summer,  nay,  some  of  them  are  dry,  because
matter  failes  ;  so  is  it  with  this  Mountayne  :  for  sometimes
matter  failing,  it  hath  neither  flames,  nor  smoke,  and  all
is  quiet,  whereby  it  appeareth  that  the  matter  and  efficient
cause  faile.  However  it  bee,  I  know  this,  that  no  man
may  come  to  the  foot  of  the  Mountayne  without  danger
and  feare,  as  hereafter  shall  be  declared.

The  same  yeere  I  was  in  Island,  the  nine  and  twentieth  Strange  Story.
of  November,  about  midnight  in  the  Sea,  neere  Hecla,
there  appeared  a  flame,  which  gave  light  to  the  whole
Hand,  so  that  all  of  us  astonished,  wondred,  and  carefully
expected  the  issue  thereof :  the  elder  sort  and  such  as  were
skilfull  in  this  matter,  said,  that  this  light  came  from
Hecla :  an  houre  after,  the  whole  Hand  trembled,  as  it
should  have  beene  moved  out  of  the  place :  after  the
Earthquake  followed  a  horrible  cracke,  that  if  all  warlike
Ordnance  had  beene  discharged,  it  had  been  nothing  to
this  terrour.  It  cannot  be  thought,  much  lesse  expressed
by  word,  how  horrible  it  was.  Wee  thought  that  the
whole  frame  of  the  World  would  fall,  and  that  the  last
Day  was  at  hand :  but  it  was  knowne  afterwards  that  the  [III.iii.649.]
Sea  went  back  two  leagues  in  that  place,  and  remayned
dry.

About  the  beginning  of  July,  at  a  certayn  time  of
the  yeere  great  store  of  Ice  suddenly  floteth  to  the  Hand
about  Hecla,  and  there  goes  a  rumour  through  the  whole
Hand,  nay  it  is  beleeved,  that  the  damned  soules  are
tormented  in  this  Ice  by  course,  in  the  Flame,  in  the
Mountayne,  and  after  in  the  Ice.  This  Ice  for  three  whole  Another
moneths  swimmeth  only  about  Hecla.  If  you  take  any  wonder.
part  of  this  Ice  out  of  the  Sea,  and  wrap  it  in  a  linnen
cloth,  and  lay  it  up  in  a  Chest, it  remayneth  so  long

5°5

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1563.

unmelted,  as  it  swimmeth  in  the  Sea ;  but  if  the  Ice  in
the  Sea  vanish,  which  suddenly  in  one  night  happeneth,
this  appeareth  not,  nor  leaveth  any  signe  of  moysture  in
the  linnen  cloth,  which  is  not  a  hard  thing  for  Satan  to
doe,  to  take  away  the  Ice  without  moysture,  to  increase
their  incredulitie.  Olaus  Magnus  maketh  mention  of  this
Ice  in  his  eleventh  Booke.  But  because  I  determined
to  search  out  all  things  diligently,  I  sayled  not  without
great  feare  unto  this  Ice,  and  I  observed,  that  this  Ice
was  violently  cast  against  the  Rockes  by  force  of  the  winds,
and  so  made  a  mournfull  sound  afarre  off,  as  if  miserable
howlings  were  heard  there.  Hereupon  the  Islanders
thinke  the  soules  of  the  damned  are  tormented  in  this
Ice.

1

Of  the  Riches  of  the  Islanders.

Have  said  that  Island  was  a  rough  and  snowie
Countrey,  and  besides,  it  is  full  of  Rockes  and  stones ;
and  so  truly,  that  there  is  not  a  field  in  the  whole  Hand :
they  have  not  so  much  as  Gardens,  wherein  they  may
have  Pot-herbes  or  Pulse :  they  know  no  kinde  of  Corne
No  fruits,  nor  Apples,  Peares,  nor  Cheries,  nor  any  fruit  of  Trees.
And,  which  is  almost  incredible,  they  neither  use  Bread
nor  Salt,  yet  they  are  well  liking,  and  strong.  There  is
no  Citie  in  the  whole  Hand :  they  seldome  have  two  or
three  dwellings  together.  They  have  their  Cottages  on
the  Sea  side  for  fishing,  and  under  ground  by  reason  of
the  fierce  windes.
Bartar.  There  is  no  love  of  money  among  them,  for  wares  are

Brimstones,  changed  for  wares.  Brimstone  groweth  on  the  South  part,
and  almost  throughout  the  whole  Hand,  which  is  digged
out  in  great  abundance :  they  sell  this  stuff e  purged  for
a  small  price.  Mines  of  Gold  or  Silver,  nor  of  any  other
mettall  they  have  none.  They  use  Iron,  but  such  as  is
brought  unto  them.  You  shall  scarce  finde  a  man,  who
hath  not  Iron  Nayles  in  a  Bagge,  wherewith  Horse-shooes
are  fastened.

All  their  houses  are  under  ground,  for  they  have  no

506

!

DITHMAR BLEFKENS  a.d.

1563-
matter  for  building. There  is  not  a  tree  in  the  whole
Hand,  except  the  Birch-tree,  and  that  in  one  place,  which  Birch-tree.
also  exceedeth  not  the  stature  of  a  man  in  length,  and  that
by  reason  of  the  vehemencie  of  the  winds,  that  it  cannot
grow  higher. This  Birch-tree  after  the  Summer  Solstitium
beginnes  first  to  bud,  the  leaves  have  a  most  sweet  smell,
and  of  so  fragrant  a  savour  that  the  Germanes  put  them
in  their  Tents,  and  upon  their  meats  for  a  singular  delight.
Yet sometimes great abundance of Firre-trees from
Tartaria,  or  else -where  carried  by  force  of  the  waves  and
the  Ice,  arrived  in  Island. The  chiefe  use  of  them  is  in
building  Cabbins  under  the  ground :  you  shall  scarsly  find
a  house  out  of  the  earth,  by  reason  of  the  strong  winds,  Great  windes.
which sometimes overthrow Horses and their Riders.
They  have  great  plentie  of  Butter,  for  the  fatnes  of  the  Fat  grasse.
grasse : for  the  Island  grasse  is  so  fat,  that  Oxen  after
a  certaine  time  are  to  be  driven  from  the  Pastures,  lest
they  burst. And  it  is  of  so  pleasing  a  sent,  that  our  men
lay it up in their Chests with singular care for their
garments. The  most  part  (for  scarcitie  of  Vessels)  lay
their  Butter  aside  in  the  corners  of  their  Houses,  (as  we
doe  Lime  or  other  matter)  and  that  without  Salt. They
have  domesticall  cattle,  as  kine ;  but  many  of  them  are  Their  kine,
without  homes. Al  their  Horses  are  amblers  &  very  fit  hrses,  and
for  carrying  of  burdens. They  have  very  great  sheepe,  s  ee^6'
they  keepe  not  a  Hogge  nor  a  Hen,  for  want  of  graine,  if
fodder  or  hay  faile  them  in  the  Winter,  they  feed  their
cattle  with  fish. They  have  rough  Dogs  bred  without  Dogs  of  more
tayle  and  eares  for  their  pleasure,  which  they  sell  deere  price  then
and greatly esteeme, when notwithstanding they offer  ch^dren.
their  children  to  any  that  will  aske  them,  and  that  freely.
Besides,  this  Hand  hath  white  Foxes,  and  huge  Beares  of  Beam  and
the  same  colour. They  have  no  Birds  but  water-fowle,  Foxes.
whereof there  are  divers kinds  and sorts found there,
unknowne unto us. Crowes sometimes are changed  White
white  ;  and  excellent  Falcons,  and  some  among  them  white,  Crowes,
which  being  taken  and  gotten,  with  the  great  cost  of  the
Spaniards  and  Portugals,  are  also  carried  away  in  great

507

A.D.
1563.

Rivers.

Whale-bone
bridge.

Travel!  by
compasse.

Whales.

Huge  Whale.

[III.iii.650.]

Note.

Orca.

A  Sea-monster.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

number,  which  thing  was  done,  while  I  was  in  Island,  to
my  great  profit.  Island  also  hath  white  Partridges.
There  are  also  every  where  through  the  whole  Hand  most
pleasant  Rivers,  which  yeeld  the  Inhabitants  fish  in  great
plentie,  Salmon  Trowts,  and  Sturgeons.  There  is  one
only  bridge  in  all  the  Hand,  made  of  the  bones  of  a  Whale.
They  that  goe  from  one  part  of  the  Hand  to  another  by
the  Continent,  have  no  way  which  they  may  follow,  for
the  solitarinesse  thereof :  but  as  Saylers  in  the  Sea,  so
they  by  the  helpe  of  the  Load-stone  performe  their
journeyes.  The  depth  of  the  Sea  neere  Island  is  very
exceeding.  In  these  gulfs  there  are  Whales  of  wonderful
bignes,  and  many  Sea-monsters  which  cannot  bee  killed
or  taken  of  men,  the  Ice  only  through  the  force  of  the
winds  dasheth  them  against  the  Rockes,  and  killeth  them.
I  saw  such  a  Monster  cast  upon  the  shoare  dead,  whose
length  was  thirty  ells,  his  heigth  more  then  a  very  long
Warlike  Pike.

A  Whale  being  dead  or  killed,  the  Inhabitants  make
Buildings  and  Dwellings  of  the  bones  thereof  with  great
dexteritie  and  skill,  they  make  also  seates,  benches,  tables,
and  other  utensils,  smoothing  them  so  that  they  seeme
like  Ivory.  They  that  sleepe  in  these  houses,  are  said
alwayes  to  dreame  of  shipwrack.  And  although  it  bee  a
huge  and  fearfull  creature,  and  have  great  strength,  yet
notwithstanding  oftentimes  he  is  not  onely  withstood,  but
overcome  of  his  capitall  enemie  (not  so  great)  which  is
called  Orca ;  this  fish  hath  the  shape  of  a  ship  turned
upside-downe,  and  upon  his  backe  very  sharpe  and  long
finnes,  wherewith  hee  woundeth  the  soft  of  the  belly  of
the  Whale,  and  killeth  him,  and  the  Whale  so  feareth  this
fish,  that  in  shunning  him,  he  often  dasheth  himselfe
against  the  shoare.

The  Iseland  Sea  hath  a  Monster  also,  whose  name  is
unknowne.  They  judge  it  a  kinde  of  Whale  at  the  first
sight,  when  he  shewes  his  head  out  of  the  Sea,  he  so
scarreth  men  that  they  fall  downe  almost  dead.  His
square  head  hath  flaming  eyes,  on  both  sides  fenced  with

508

DITHMAR BLEFKENS

A.D.
1563.

long  homes,  his  body  is  blacke,  and  beset  with  black
quills ;  if  he  be  seene  by  night,  his  eyes  are  fiery,  which
lighten  his  whole  head,  which  he  putteth  out  of  the  Sea,
nothing  can  either  bee  painted  or  imagined  more  fearfull.
Olaus  Magnus  maketh  mention  of  this  Monster  in  his
twentieth  Booke,  and  saith,  that  it  is  twelve  cubits  long.
Such  a  Monster  at  that  time  tore  in  pieces  with  his  teeth
a  Fisher-boate,  wherein  there  were  three  Fisher-men,  so
that  they  were  drowned,  one  of  them,  who  held  in  his
hand  a  little  cord,  wherewith  he  used  to  draw  the  hooke,
and  the  fishes,  laid  hold  of  the  boord  which  rioted  in
the  Sea ;  so  he  was  saved  getting  out  of  the  bottom  upon
the  planke  and  swam  foorth,  and  declared  this  to  the
Kings  Governour  in  my  presence,  adding  moreover  that
he  was  saved  from  heaven,  that  he  might  get  maintenance
for  his  children,  who  otherwise  were  readie  to  perish  with
hunger,  when  the  other  two  though  married,  yet  were
without  children.

Another  Monster  also  is  often  there  seene  and  taken,
of  ten  or  twelve  elles  long,  it  is  called  Hacfal,  it  is  all
fat ;  it  is  taken  after  a  wonderfull  manner :  they  have  a
very  long  pike  whereunto  they  fasten  an  Iron  with  a
forked  point,  that  it  cannot  goe  backe,  unto  the  staffe  a
cord  of  a  marvailous  length  is  fastned  ;  they  sticke  this
speare  in  the  Monster,  which  swimmeth  unto  it  for  prey,
perceiving  a  man  in  the  little  boates ;  as  soone  as  the
Monster  feeles  himselfe  strooken  and  wounded,  forthwith
he  hides  himselfe  in  the  Deepe,  and  there  (his  bloud  being
powred  out)  dyes,  afterward  the  Fishers  draw  him  to  the
land  by  the  long  cords  fastned  to  the  speare.

Besides,  it  hath  divers  Sea  Monsters :  a  Dogge  fish,  Dog-fish.
which  putting  his  head  out  of  the  Sea  barketh,  and
receiveth  his  whelps  sporting  in  the  Sea  againe  into  his
belly,  while  they  come  to  more  growth.  It  hath  Horses
and  Kine,  and  what  not :  and  it  is  a  marvell,  how  skilfull
Nature  sports,  in  expressing  the  shape  of  all  earthly
Creatures  and  Fowles  in  the  Sea.  Neither  should  any  Note.
man  perswade  me  that these things  are  true,  although

5°9

Hacfalanother
Monster.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1563.

ten  Aristotles  should  affirme  them  unto  me,  unlesse  I  had
seene  most  of  them  with  mine  eyes. Let  no  man  there-
fore presently  cry  out,  that  what  he  knowes  not  is  fabulous.
The  men  of  Lubeck,  Hamburg,  and  Breme,  were  often
wont  to  goe  to  this  Hand,  and  leave  their  servants  in  the
winter  lodgings ;  but  now  it  is  provided  by  the  Kings
authoritie,  that  no  Germaine,  either  by  reason  of  trading
or  learning  of  the  language,  leave  his  servants  there  in
the  winter ;  but  upon  what  occasion  this  came  to  passe,
the  matter  standeth  thus. In  the  yeere  of  Christ  1561.
there  was  a  Citizen  of  Hamburg,  one  Conradus  Bloem,
left  by  another  in  Iseland  in  the  winter  lodgings  with  the
Bishop in Scalholden, for trading and learning of the
Home  of  a tongue  :  the  Bishops  fishers  find  a  whole  Unicornes  home
Sea-fish See  *n  ^  jce?  brought  out  of  Groneland  (as  it  is  thought)
and  Baffin where  yet  at  this  day  Unicorns  are  said  to  be,  &  thinking
/.  4.  it  to  be  a  Whales  tooth,  nor  did  the  Bishop  beleeve  other-

wise, they  bring  it  to  their  Master,  who  gave  it  to  Con-
radus begging  it ;  he  being  somewhat  craftie,  sold  it  after
at  Antwerp  for  some  thousands  of  Florins.  When  this
thing  came  to  the  King  of  Denmarks  eares,  he  forbad
that  no  Germaine  should  winter  in  Iseland  in  any  cause.

Of  the  judgement  of  the  Iselanders.

THere  is  a  most  pleasant  place  almost  in  the  midst  of  the
Hand,  you  would  say  it  were  a  Paradise  in  the  Spring
time,  where  sometimes  there  was  a  high  Mountaine,  which
burned  with  inward  fire,  as  Hecla  doth  at  this  day ;  which
matter  after  it  was  consumed,  made  a  Plaine,  but  the
Rocks  which  were  erected  about  the  Mountaine,  stand
yet,  therefore  this  place  is  so  fenced  by  Nature,  that  they
that  enter  it,  must  goe  one  by  one.  This  place  is  famous
for  two  great  falls  of  water,  where  two  Rivers  from  the
highest  Rocks  cast  themselves  steepe  downe  one  against
the  other,  with  an  astonishing  and  horrible  dashing  of
the waters against the Rocks. These Rivers meete

5IQ

DITHMAR  BLEFKENS

A.D.

1563.

suites.

i  together  in  the  middle  of  the  field,  and  by  a  great  whirle-
poole  are  swallowed  up  into  the  ground.

Heere  yeerely the nine and twentieth of  June, the  Islanders
\  Inhabitants  who  have  any  controversie,  meete  together : terme-
for  in  no  other  place  or  time  Justice  is  administered :  after
i  they  are  entred,  standings  are  placed  by  the  Governours
(guard,  who  admit  all  that  desire  to  come  in,  no  man  hath
I  libertie  to  goe  out,  without  the  consent  and  authoritie  of
J  the  Governour. When  they  are  come  thither,  the  Gover-
nour orTreth  his  Charter  to  bee  publikely  read,  whereby
hee  procureth credit to his Office, and having spoken
before  somewhat  of  the  Kings  goodwill,  and  his  owne
towards  the  Danders,  he  exhorteth  them  to  communicate
Justice unto all, without respect of  persons, hee after  [m.iii.651.]
departeth,  and  keepes  himselfe  in  his  Tent,  having  heard
a  godly  Sermon,  the  twelve  men,  whom  they  call  Loch-
maders,  as  it  were  men  of  Justice,  sit  downe  on  the  ground,  Manner  of
each  of  them  hath  a  Booke  in  his  hand,  contayning  the  trials  and
Law  of  that  Hand,  written  in  the  vulgar  tongue. Accusa-
tion and  answer  being  made,  they  goe  apart  into  severall
places,  every  one  reades  over  his  Booke  diligently,  going
afterwards  againe  to  his  place,  without Scribe, without
replication or  doubling, and  juglings of  such brabling
Lawyers,  they  conferre  of  the  sentence  and  pronounce  it :
If  any  thing  bee  worthy  of  deliberation,  it  is  brought  to  the
Governour  for  consultation  and  for  his  honours  sake,  when
notwithstanding  they  leave  no  power  of  deciding  it  to
him.

There  are  many  accusations  of  Theft  and  Adulteries,
they  make  no  question  of  their  Bonds,  of  their  Fees,
their  Hereditarie  fields,  or  any  summe  of  money  :  there
are  no  controversies  there.  These  twelve  men,  over  which
one  is  chiefe,  are  greatly  honoured  amongst  them.  These
doe  determine,  and  diligently  inquire  of  all  publike  Con-
troversies. If  there  bee  any  wicked  Act  committed  that
yeere,  if  Murther  bee  committed  any  where,  if  Theft,  if
Adulterie,  if  Cattle  be  stolen  away  (which  useth  oft  to  bee
done)  then  these  men  set  downe  the  punishment. They

511

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1563.
Sentence  and  that  are  condemned  to  dye,  are  beheaded  :  the  rest,  who  are
execution.  any  way  t0  bee  pUnished,  they  burne  with  a  marke,  this
punishment  with  them  is  most  grievous :  for  they  ar
marked  in  the  forehead :  they  that  are  so  marked  ar
accounted  in  the  number  of  wicked  men  :  others  are  beaten
with  roddes :  and  I  saw  when  the  Father  and  the  Sonne
for  theft  (for  they  were  Cattell  stealers)  were  held  Captives,
that  the  Father  was  compelled  to  beate  his  Sonne  with
roddes,  and  hee  afterwards  beheaded.

Of  Groneland.

ISeland  by  Nature  is  somewhat  long,  it  hath  Norway
on  the  East,  the  Orcades  and  Scotland  on  the  South,
Groneland  on  the  West,  and  the  Hyperborean  or  Con
gealed  Sea  upon  the  North.  Although  I  purposed  to
passe  over  Groneland  with  silence,  yet  seeing  I  touched
upon  the  Land,  and  saw  some  few  things,  I  thought  it
was  to  bee  added.  There  was  in  a  certaine  Monasterie
in  Iseland  called  Helgafiel,  a  certayne  blinde  Monke  left
(for  the  Abbot  of  the  Monasterie  had  converted  the
Revenues  to  the  Kings  use)  who  lived  miserably  there :
hee  was  borne  in  Groneland,  of  a  darke  complexion  and
broad  face.  The  Governour  commanded  him  to  bee
brought  unto  him,  that  hee  might  knowe  some  certaintie
of  the  state  of  Groneland.  Hee  sayd,  there  was  a
Monasterie  of  Saint  Thomas  in  Groneland,  into  the  which
his  Parents  thrust  him  when  he  was  but  young,  and  after
that,  hee  was  taken  out  by  the  Bishop  of  Groneland,  when
hee  was  thirtie  yeeres  of  age,  to  saile  with  him  into  Nor-
way, to  the  Archbishop  to  Nidrosia  (or  Dronten)  to  whom
the  Iseland  Bishops  are  subject :  in  his  returne  hee  was
left  in  a  Monasterie  by  the  Bishop,  whose  Countrey
Groneland  was:  this  was  done  (as  hee  sayd)  1546.  Hee
said,  that  Hand  was  called  Groneland,  Antiphrastically.
For  that  it  seldome  or  never  waxeth  greene,  and  that  there
is  so  great  cold  there  throughout  the  whole  yeere,  except
June,  July  and  August,  that  being  clothed  and  covered

51*

"■  j  i  ,n  \T\hI  m  fl""lmr  E  ■■  BEEP  £  "'' '  '"  '  "  "'"  '  |  "  '  '  '''"  '  "'"  1'  ■  ■  rtrrr  r  h  i  i  i  1 1  iU  itt-Ji  ■  ■  ■  lMf  ,  W2

Scptcntlio ■  •-;•-•  V'v. .

CJfiysr'  S"

U^

Mcl-Ja  frementorium
ftjlihatvar

T-n-Tirr  i  i  i  i  i  i  i  ifj  i  i  i  Hi  I  i  I  l'i  I  I  1 1  i I  n f  I  I  i  1 1  III  If  I

10

LA-

HONDIUS HIS MAP OF ISLAND

DITHMAR BLEFKENS

with  Furres,  they  could  scarse  bee  warme ;  and  that  they
had  at  home  certayne  round  peeces  of  wood,  which  being
continually  mooved  with  the  feete,  kept  their  feet  warme.
Hee  sayd,  it  aboundeth  as  Iseland  doth  with  Fishes,  and
that  they  had  Beares  and  white  Foxes,  nay  Pigmies,  and
Unicornes,  and  that  day  did  not  appeare,  till  the  Sunne
had  runne  through  Pisces.

This  Monke  told  us  marvellous  strange  things :  that
there  was  in  the  Monasterie  of  Saint  Thomas  (where  hee
lived)  a  Fountayne,  which  sent  forth  burning  and  flaming
water,  that  this  water  was  conveyed  through  pipes  of
stone,  to  the  severall  Cells  of  the  Monkes,  and  that  it
made  them  warme,  as  Stoaves  doe  with  us ;  and  that  all
kinde  of  meates  might  bee  boyled  in  this  Fountayne  and
fierie  water,  no  otherwise,  then  if  it  had  beene  fire  indeed.
Hee  added  moreover,  that  the  walls  of  the  Monasterie
were  made  of  Pumice  stones,  out  of  a  certayne  Mountayne
(not  farre  from  the  Monasterie)  like  to  Hecla :  for  if  yee
powre  these  burning  Waters  upon  the  Pumice  stones,
there  will  follow  a  slimie  matter,  which  instead  of  Lime,
they  use  for  Morter.

After  the  Governours  conference  with  the  Monke,  I
came  privatly  unto  him,  to  demand  certayne  particular
things  touching  the  Pigmies  and  other  things ;  hee  had
little  skill  in  the  Latine  tongue,  hee  understood  mee
speaking  Latine,  but  answered  by  an  Interpreter.  Hee
sayd,  the  Pigmies  represent  the  most  perfect  shape  of
Man,  that  they  are  hairy  to  the  uttermost  joynts  of  the
fingers,  and  that  the  Males  have  beards  downe  to  the  knees.
But  although  they  have  the  shape  of  men,  yet  they  have
little  sense  or  understanding,  nor  distinct  speech,  but  make
shew  of  a  kinde  of  hissing,  after  the  manner  of  Geese ;
that  his  Abbot  kept  two  of  them  in  his  Monasterie,  male
and  female,  but  they  lived  not  long,  and  that  they  were
unreasonable  Creatures,  and  live  in  perpetuall  darknesse.
That  some  say,  they  have  warre  with  the  Cranes,  that  hee
knew  not.

He  affirmed,  that  the  same  maner  of  food  was  in  Grone-

A.D.

1563.

Their  Pigmies
a?~e  Beasts  and
Unicornes.
Fishes.

Pigmies,  our
men  have  not
seene  such.

Of  this  the
English
discoveries  in
this  and  the
next  Booke
will  give
better  light.

XIII

513

2  K

A.D.
1563.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  Authors
Voyage  for
Discoverie.

land,  as  in  Island,  to  wit,  of  fish  but  not  of  cattle,  because
they  have  no  cattle,  and  that  the  country  is  not  populous.
Forthwith  from  Island  begins  the  Hyperborean  Sea,  which
beats  upon  Groneland,  and  the  Country  of  the  Pigmies>
which  at  this  day  is  called  Nova  Zembla,  &  there  the
[III.iii.652.]  frozen  Sea  hath  a  Bay  which  is  called  the  White  Sea,  or
Mare  Album,  and  there  are  there  certayne  passages
whereby  they  sayle  into  the  Schythian  Ocean,  if  they  can
for  Ice.  And  the  Governour  had  the  King  of  Denmarkes
Ship,  furnished  with  all  necessaries :  but  when  hee  heard
(by  the  Monke)  of  these  passages,  and  short  cut  into  the
Kingdome  of  China,  hee  affected  this  commendation,  that
hee  might  open  these  passages  and  Ice  unto  the  Kingdome
of  China  by  the  Tartarian  Sea,  which  had  often  beene
attempted  by  others,  but  in  vaine.

The  last  day  therefore  of  March,  in  the  yeere  1564.
hee  commanded  that  Ship  to  sayle  to  those  places,  and  mee
also  together  with  them,  being  willing  ©f  mine  owne
accord  :  and  enjoyned  me  to  marke  diligently  the  scituation
of  the  places,  and  whatsoever  wee  met  with  worthy  of
sight  or  report.  Wee  were  in  the  Ship  threescore  and
foure  men,  as  well  Danes  as  Iselanders,  and  the  twentieth
day  of  Aprill  wee  arrived  at  a  certayne  Promontorie  of
Groneland,  and  when  wee  found  no  Haven,  to  the  which
wee  might  safely  commit  our  selves,  and  letting  downe
the  lead,  wee  had  sounded  the  depth  of  the  Sea,  it  was
such  as  wee  could  not  anchor  there,  and  the  abundance
of  Ice  was  so  great,  that  it  was  neither  safe  nor  possible
to  sayle  neerer  to  the  Rocks ;  foure  and  twentie  therefore
of  us  armed,  with  great  labour  and  danger  went  on  shoare
in  our  Skiffes  (among  whom  I  also  was)  to  trie  whether
wee  could  finde  a  harbour,  and  what  kinde  of  men  Grone-
land had.  In  the  meane  time,  the  great  Ship  floated  in
the  Sea  and  Ice,  in  a  great  calme,  halfe  of  our  companie
abode  in  the  shoare  to  keepe  the  Skiffe ;  another  part  (and
1  with  them)  ranne  abroad  to  discover :  they  that  were
left  on  shoare  to  keepe  the  Skiffe,  going  hither  and  thither,
found  a  little  man  dead  with  a  long  beard,  with  a  little

5i4

DITHMAR BLEFKENS  a.d.

1564.

Boate,  and  a  crooked  Hooke  of  the  bone  of  a  Fish,  and

a  leather  cord : foure  fish  Bladders  were  bound  unto  the

Boate  (as  is  supposed)  that  it  should  not  bee  drowned,

whereof three were sunke and  fallen flat : This Boat

(because  it  was  very  unlike  ours)  the  Governour  sent  to

the  King  of  Denmarke.

Olaus  Magnus  in  his  first  Booke  writeth,  that  there  is

a  Rocke  in  the  middest  of  Iseland  and  Groneland,  called

Hutisocke,  which  wee  sayled  by,  and  that  there  they  have

Ships  of  leather,  which  hee  testifieth  hee  saw,  but  it  was

not  such  an  one  :  but  Petrus  Bembus  in  his  seventh  Booke,

in  the  Venetian  Historie,  describeth  a  Ship,  which  was  like

unto  this,  where  hee  writeth  thus :  While  a  French  Ship

kept  her  course  not  farre  from  Britaine,  shee  tooke  a  Boate  In  Sir  Thomas

built  of  Osiers  the  middest  beeing  cut  out,  and  the  solid  Smiths  Hall m

barke  of  Trees  ioyned  together,  wherein  there  were  seven  Jn,onJLa

r  >  i  J J  s  1  t ,  1  1 r kmdeof Boate

men  or  a  middle  stature,  somewhat  darke  coloured,  of  a  somwhat  like,

large  and  broad  face, marked  with strange scarres  and  of  Barke

violet  colour ;  these  had  their  garments  of  Fishes  skinnes,  towed.

full  of  spots,  they  bore  a  painted  Crowne  of  reede  woven

in,  as  it  were  with  seven  eares ;  they  did  eate  raw  Flesh,

and  drunke  Blood,  as  wee  doe  Wine ;  their  speech  could

not  bee  understood,  sixe  of  them  dyed,  one  young  man

was  brought  alive  to  the  Aulercos,  where  the  King  was.

It  is  not  unlikely  to  bee  true,  that  this  Ship  with
these  seven  men,  were  driven  out  of  Groneland,  into  the
Britaine  Ocean :  seeing  the  description  of  Bembus  his
Ship  agreeth  with  that  found  in  Groneland.

Wee  wandred  in  the  meane  season,  in  a  Land  unknowne
unto  us,  which  was  covered  with  Snow  and  Ice,  wee  found
neither  footing  of  men,  not  any  habitation,  nor  fit  Port,
but  the  Sea  was  closed  and  fenced  on  every  side  with
craggie  Rockes.  Yet  we  met  with  a  great  white  Beare,  A  Beare.
which  neither  feared  us,  nor  could  bee  driven  away  with
our  cryes,  but  came  full  upon  us,  as  to  his  certaine  prey,
and  when  hee  came  neere  unto  us,  being  twice  shot  through
with  a  Gunne,  he  stood  bolt  upright  with  his  fore-feet
as  a  man  standeth,  till  hee  was  shot  through  the  third  time,

515

Seales  skins.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1564.

and  so  fell  downe  dead :  his  Skinne  was  sent  to  the  King
of  Denmarke.  We  agreed  amongst  ourselves  before  wee
went  on  shoare,  if  wee  found  a  fit  Harbour,  or  else  had
need  of  their  helpe,  that  we  should  plucke  up  our  standerd,
which  wee  carried  out  with  us  for  that  purpose,  and  that
they,  if  they  would  call  us  backe,  should  signifie  the  same
with  their  Ordnance.  A  tempest  arising  in  the  meane
while,  the  Master  of  the  Ship  gives  us  a  signe  to  returne,
by  the  discharging  of  a  piece  of  Ordnance,  and  calls  us
backe  unto  the  Ship :  all  of  us  therefore  returned  with
great  labour  after  three  dayes  unto  the  Ship  with  the  Beares
skinne ;  wee  sayled  therefore  to  the  other  side  of  the  Hand
toward  the  North,  to  the  Countrey  of  the  Pigmies  or
Nova  Zembla  that  by  the  mouth  of  the  White  Sea,  wee
might  come  into  the  Scythian,  or  Tartarian  Sea,  from
whence  (they  say)  there  is  a  passage  to  the  Kingdome  of
China,  and  Cathay ;  but  beeing  hindred  by  the  Ice,  wee
could  not  passe  the  mouth  of  that  Sea :  therefore  without
doing  any  thing,  wee  returned  into  Iseland  the  sixteenth
of  June.
The  Authors  I  sayd  before,  that  the  Iselanders  the  nine  and  twentieth
journey  to  0f  June  yeerely  came  together  almost  in  the  middle  of
Mount  Heda.  ^  jj^  tQ  jujgement)  anj  after  our  returne,  the  Gover-

nour  went  thither,  and  I  with  him.  Some  of  the  next
inhabitants  of  Hecla  then  came  to  Judgement,  whom
the  Governour  invited  twice  or  thrice  to  dinner  and
supper.  These  men  while  they  were  at  supper,  reported
wonderfull  things  of  the  Mountayne  Hecla,  and  other
things  :  I  was  foorthwith  inflamed  with  a  desire  to  see  and
heare  all.  Wherefore  the  Governour  commended  mee  to
these  men,  that  they  should  bring  mee  thither,  and  com-
manded all  things  should  bee  shewed  me,  which  they
knew  there  worthy  to  bee  seene.  This  Governour  was  a
Dane,  a  Noble  man,  and  excellently  well  learned :  to  this
man  surely  I  am  much  bound  for  his  great  liberalise
[III.iii.65 3.]  towards  mee,  in  that  he  caused  me  to  be  conveighed  at
his  charge  to  divers  places  of  the  Hand,  where  any  notable
thing  was  to  bee  seene. I  accompanied  with  two  Islanders,

516

DITHMAR BLEFKENS  a.d.

1564.

and  a  certaine  Dane,  who  carried  provision,  and  a  Tent
on  Horse-backe,  spent  foure  whole  dayes,  while  we  go
through  rough  places,  Hilly  and  desolate  unto  this
Mountayne.  For  some  Miles  about  Hecla,  all  was  full
of  blacke  ashes  and  Pumis  stones.  The  Islanders  advised
me  that  I  should  goe  no  neerer,  leading  away  the  Horse,
which  they  had  lent  me.

I,  because  I  purposed  to  see,  and  search  out  all  things
I  diligently ;  accompanied  with  the  Dane,  came  neerer,  as
though  I  went  to  climbe  the  Hill,  and  although  at  the  first
sight  we  were  afraid,  yet  I  would  not  leave  off  my  purpose,
and  by  reason  of  my  young  yeeres,  not  understanding  the
danger,  I  went  through  the  ashes  and  Pumis  stones  alone
to  Hecla,  leaving  the  Dane.  There  was  at  that  time  a
wonderfull  calme,  so  that  I  saw  neither  fire  nor  smoke.
But  behold,  suddenly  in  the  bowels  of  the  Earth,  a  great
noyse  was  heard,  after  this,  followed  flames  of  a  greene
colour,  which  had  almost  killed  me  with  their  Sulphurie
and  filthy  stinke,  so  that  I  scarse  escaped  to  my  forsaken
horses  and  companions.  Upon  that  sudden  astonishment
I  fell  into  a  sicknesse,  and  vehement  cogitation,  seeing
these  horrible  flames  were  always  present  before  mine
eyes :  insomuch  that  my  Island  companions  were  com-
pelled to  carry  me  away  unto  their  house,  with  whom  I
lay  sicke  two  whole  monethes :  while  in  the  meane  time
the  Dane  returned  to  the  Governour,  and  to  the  Ham-
burghers,  and  acquainted  them  with  my  state.  I  lived
miserably  amongst  the  Barbarians,  sicke  and  unknowne ;
they  had  Bisket  which  I  steeped  in  Milke,  and  so  for  that
time,  I  indured  hunger,  while  (being  stronger)  I  might
returne  to  the  Governour.

The  Hamburgers,  by  reason  of  the  time  of  the  yeere,
least  they  should  loose  the  opportunitie  of  sayling,  despair-
ing now  of  my  returne,  set  sayle  (for  they  depart  before
the  foure  and  twentieth  of  August,  lest  being  hindred
after  by  the  Ice,  they  cannot  get  out)  yet  with  speciall
care  commended  me  to  the  Governour  (if  at  any  time  I
did returne) leaving Bisket, Wine, and Beere. The

517

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1564.

Governour  hath  a  dwelling  fit  enough  for  the  manner  and

fashion  of  this  Countrey,  on  the  South  of  this  Hand,  not

Hafnefirdt. farre  from  the  Haven  of  Hafnefordt,  the  place  is  calle

His  abiding  Bestede. I  was  brought  hither  of  the  Islanders,  to  the

u>intr°° Governour,  who, for  our  common  studies, entertayned

me willingly and honorably. But although wee were

plentifully  furnished  with  all  necessaries,  yet  being  very

wearie  of  that  life  in  such  darknesse,  I  expected  the  ships

out  of  Germany  the  next  yeere  with  great  desire.

There  grew  then  warre  between  Ericus  of  Suetia,  anc
Fredericke  the  Second  King  of  Denmarke ;  which  was
continued  with  great  courage  for  ten  yeeres  after.  The
Lubekers  were  Consorts  and  Confederates  of  Warre  unto
the  Dane.  So  most  part  of  the  Cities  on  the  Sea-coast,
upon  the  Balthicke  Sea,  hindred  or  intangled  with  this
Warre,  intermitted  their  sayling  into  Island  this  yeere,
therefore  wayting  in  vaine,  I  must  stay.  The  yeer
following,  when  I  had  wayted  till  the  end  of  June,
hope  of  returning  into  Germany  that  yeere  was  take
away,  and  which  was  worse,  the  yeerely  ship  came  not
from  Denmarke :  and  bread  and  Wine  failed  us  almost
foure  monethes.

There  lay  Portugals  at  anchor  at  that  time  in  Island
in  a  small  ship  :  who  came  thither  to  fowle,  they  carried
away  excellent  Falcons,  and  white  ones  among  them,  in
great  number.  I  thought  good  rather  to  crosse  over  into
Portugall  with  them,  then  to  wayte  another  yeere,  either
for  Danes  or  Germans.  And  when  they  gave  the  Gover-
nour his  Custome,  he  dealt  with  them  in  my  behalfe
concerning  the  charge,  that  I  might  passe  with  them,  and
he  liberally  paid  the  charges,  and  honourably  sent  me
away  with  a  worthy  Present.  Not  far  from  the  Kings
house,  there  was  a  certayn  Minister,  Jonas  by  name,  he
familiarly  saluted  me  before  I  departed :  for  the  time  I
was  in  Island,  I  had  some  familiaritie  with  him,  to  whom
also  I  left  my  Bookes  when  I  departed :  he  for  friendships
sake,  knit  three  knots  in  a  handkerchiefe,  and  promised  me
a  prosperous  wind,  saying,  if  by  chance  the  winds  at  any

518 '

DITHMAR BLEFKENS

time  grow  contrary  at  Sea,  open  these  knots,  and  then
remember  me.  When  therfore  about  the  twentieth  of
September  we  had  sayled,  and  now  Spaine  was  in  our
view,  there  was  so  great  a  calme,  that  we  felt  not  a  breath
of  wind,  and  that  for  three  whole  dayes.  In  this  calme
my  friends  promise  came  into  my  minde,  and  I  desired  to
prove  it.  I  loosed  the  first  knot,  by  and  by,  after  one
houre,  there  arose  a  very  prosperous  winde,  but  blowing
very  gently,  I  untye  the  second  and  the  third,  forthwith
a  Tempest  beganne  more  and  more  to  grow,  so  truly  that
after  two  dayes  we  ridde  in  the  River  Tagus,  which  beateth
upon  Lisbone.

Chap.  XXIII.

Extracts  of  Arngrim  Jonas*  an  Islander,  his  Chry-
mogaea  or  Historie  of  Island  :  published  Anno
Dom.  1609.

Of Island, the Situation, Discoverie, Plantation
and Language.

|Sland  is  an  Hand  of  the  North,  compassed
about  with  the  huge  Ocean  :  whose  Cosmo-
graphicall  latitude  towards  the  North,  to
wit,  at  Hola,  the  Episcopall  Seat  of  North
Island,  is  65.  degrees,  and  44.  minutes :
and  the  longitude  13.  degrees  and  30.
minutes,  or  thereabouts :  for  I  will  not
precisely  affirme  the  same,  by  reason  of  that  scruple,  arising
from  the  Paralaxis  of  the  Moone  in  the  observation  of  the
Eclipses  to  be  doubted  :  which  only  way  of  finding  out  the
longitude,  that  most  famous  man,  Gudbrandus  Thorlacius,
now  Bishop  of  North  Island,  hath  hitherto  shewed :  who
hath  imparted  unto  us  this  longitude  and  latitude  of  his
Sea :  and  was  the  first,  that  I  know,  among  our  Countrey-
men,  who  hath  delivered  any  certaintie  in  Writing,
concerning  this  matter.

And  surely,  that  which  at  this  day,  and  so  from  the

519

A.D.
1609.

His  Naviga-
tions on  the
Coast  of
Africa  &c.
hee  mentions  in
his  Preface,
which  I  have
for  brevitie
omitted.

J^w

[III.iii.654.]

*TAis  learned
Islander
published
A.  1593.  one
Booke  of
Island,  which
M.  Hak.
translated  and
set  forth  in  the
first  Tome  of
his  Voyages.
This  worke  is
larger  in  three
Books  out  of
which  I  have
taken  some
things  which  I
held  conducent
to  our  purpose.
In  the  former
works  he
confuteth  the
errours  of
divers  Authors
which  write
falsly  many
things  of  his
Countrey.
Hola  in  65.
degrees  44.
minutes.

A.D.
1609.

Divers  names
of  Island,

Snceland.
Naddoc  first
Discoverer.
Farre  Hands.

Gardar  second
Discoverer.

A.D.  864.

Gardars-
holme.

Floco  third
Discoverer.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

first  entrance  of  Inhabitants,  beareth  the  name  of  Island^
(while  as  yet  it  remayned  barren  and  desolate)  had  divers
names  allotted  or  given  unto  it  from  divers  Discoverers :
whereof  three  are  mentioned.

For  first  of  all  it  was  called  Sncelandia.  For  a  certaine
Pyrate  called  Naddocus,  going  towards  the  Farensian
Hands  (commonly  called  Fserenar,  for  the  multitude  of
Eggs)  was  brought  unto  the  shoares  of  East  Island,
through  a  Tempest,  not  farre  from  the  Mountayne  Reidar-
fiall,  (so  called  afterward)  to  the  Bay  Reidarfiard :  who
ascending  the  Mountayne,  and  beholding  the  bordering
Countrey  farre  and  neere,  found  it  all  Desert.  And
departing  from  the  Coast  about  Autumne,  he  perceived  the
higher  tops  of  the  Mountaynes  to  bee  covered  with
exceeding  much  Snow ;  and  therefore,  as  the  present  case
required,  he  called  the  Hand  Sncelandia,  that  is  to  say,
The  Snowie  Countrey.

Another  following  him,  one  Gardarus  the  sonne  of
Suanarus  a  Suecian  borne,  perswaded  through  the  report
which  Naddocus  had  brought  concerning  Sncelande,  went
to  seeke  it :  he  found  it,  who  arrived  also  neere  the
Easterne  Shoare,  and  from  thence  being  carried  about  the
Hand,  he  abode  in  the  Bay  of  North  Island  called  Skial-
fanda,  and  wintered  there  in  the  yeere  of  Christ  864.  and
called  the  name  of  the  Haven,  Husawich,  from  the
wintering  places,  or  houses  built  there.  But  the  Spring
beginning,  Gardarus  being  about  to  depart  into  Norway>
the  ship  Boat  was  driven  away  by  a  tempest,  into  an
Haven  neere  unto  the  former,  and  in  the  same  Boat  there
was  a  certayne  Mariner  called  Natrare :  from  whom  also
this  haven  had  the  name  of  Narsarawicke.  Moreover,
Gardarus  returning  to  his  friends,  called  that  new  Countrey
Gardarsholme,  as  it  were,  the  Hand  of  Gardarus,  neglecting
the  name  of  Sncelande.

Moreover,  the  desire  also  of  visiting  a  Countrey  newly
discovered,  possessed  many.  For  the  third  also,  on<
Floco,  and  he  a  most  famous  Pirate  purposing  to  visit
Gardarsholme,  set  sayle  out  of  an  Haven  of  Norway,  whicl

520

ARNGRIM JONAS  a.d.

1609.

lyeth  neere  the  watch  towre  or  rather  Pharus  Flokawarda,
situate  in  the  limits  of  the  Provinces  of  Hordaslandia  and
Rogaelandia :  and  passing  by  Hietlandia,  (misnamed  by
some  Schetlandia)  called  a  certayne  Haven  by  the  name  of
Flokawogur,  and  there  the  deepest  part  of  the  Sea  (where
Geirhilda  the  daughter  of  Floco  by  chance  was  drowned)
was  caled  Geirhildarwata,  from  her :  no  otherwise  then
that  Sea  was  called  Hellespontus,  wherein  by  misfortune
Phryxus  lost  his  sister  Helle.  There  was  yet  no  use  of
the  Mariners  Compasse  :  wherefore  Floco  leaving  Hiet-
landia, tooke  certayne  Ravens  unto  him :  and  when  hee
thought  hee  had  sayled  a  great  way,  he  sent  forth  one
Raven,  which  flying  aloft,  went  backe  againe  to  Hietlande,
which  she  saw  behind.  Whereupon  Floco  perceiving  that  Raven
he  was  yet  neerer  to  Hietland  then  other  Countryes,  and  Gu^es-
therefore  couragiously  going  forward,  he  sent  forth
another  Raven :  which  because  she  could  see  no  Land,
neither  before  nor  behind,  light  into  the  ship  againe.
But  lastly,  the  third  Raven  was  sent  forth  by  Floco,  and
having  for  the  most  part  performed  his  Voyage,  through  the
sharpnesse  of  her  quick  sight  attayning  the  Land,  which
the  Mariners  desired,  she  speedily  flew  thither :  whose
direction  Floco  following,  beheld  first  the  Easterne  side
of  the  Hand,  as  his  Predecessors  did :  and  from  thence
directing  his  course  to  the  South,  found  a  very  wide  and
open  Bay  twelve  Islandish  miles  broad,  betweene  the  two
Promontories  or  high  Lands,  afterwards  called  Renkanes,
and  Sncefelsnes.  And  hearing  by  a  certayne  Mariner
(whom  he  had  with  him)  a  Scot  borne,  named  Faxa,  that  the
Bay  they  now  met  with,  was  the  huge  mouth  of  a  River  or  [ni.iii.655.]
Floud ;  Floco  to  reprove  the  folly  of  Faxa,  supposing  so
huge  a  Bay  of  the  Sea  to  be  the  mouth  of  a  River,  called
the  name  of  the  Bay  inclosed  betweene  the  foresaid
Promontories,  Faxaos,  which  signifieth  the  mouth  of  Faxa.
This  Bay,  by  reason  of  the  multitude  of  Havens,  was
afterwards  called  Hafnafiordur :  which  name  Hafnafiordur
at  this  day  is  more  specially  used  of  a  most  safe  Haven  of
the  same  Bay.

521

A.D.

1609.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  name
Island  of  Ice.

After  this,  Floco  sayling  along  the  West  side  of  the
Hand,  entred  somewhat  within  the  Bay  Breidafiord,  remain-
ing in  a  certaine  Haven  of  the  Province  Bardestraund  called
Watnsfiordur  (for  I  use  the  names  given  them  afterwards)
and  there  preparing  wintering  places,  he  lived  very  com-
modiously  and  well  with  fish  of  divers  kindes,  wherewith
that  Bay  doth  abound.  But  having  the  Spring  time  here
very  untemperate  through  cold,  hee  found  a  Bay  (which
entreth  this  part  of  the  Land  on  the  North)  to  be  filled
with  Ice  of  the  Sea,  which  wee  call  Gronelandish  Ice.
From  which  Ice,  Floco  devised  the  third  name  for  the
Hand,  and  called  it  Island.  Moreover  also  Floco  turning
to  the  South  side,  passed  another  Winter  in  Island :  and
returning  into  Norway  (from  the  Ravens,  which  hee  used
instead  of  the  Mariners  Compasse)  he  allotted  it  the  sur-
name of  Rafnastoke.

And  Island  surely  obtained  these  names  consequently
from  the  finders,  or  discoverers  thereof.  For  as  touching
the  fourth,  Thule,  imposed  upon  this  Land  by  some,  I
cannot  bee  perswaded  to  beleeve,  it  is  true ;  chiefly  by  this
argument ;  That  Thyle,  or  Thule  among  the  ancient
Writers,  was  often  in  the  mouth  and  writings  not  onely  of
Pliny  in  his  second  booke  of  Naturall  Histories  75.
Chapter  and  fourth  booke,  and  sixteenth  Chapter  (and
Pliny  flourished  about  the  eightieth  yeere  of  Christ)  and
of  him  who  was  more  ancient  then  Pliny,  Pythias
Massiliensis  :  but  also  of  Pub.  Virgilius,  who  lived  not
above  fourteene  yeeres  after  Christ :  but  Island,  till  the
yeere  of  Christ  874.  remained  altogether  desert,  as  here-
after I  shall  speake.  Thule  therefore,  which  Virgil  said
should  serve  Augustus  (Geor.  i.  tibi  serviat  ultima  Thule :
where  even  every  child  knoweth  that  Thule  is  Synec-
dochically  spoken,  for  the  Inhabitants  of  Thule)  not  onely
inhabited  in  the  times  of  Augustus  and  Virgil,  but  also
knowne  to  the  Romanes,  is  not  Island,  which  many  ages
Th  I  f  th  a^ter  Degan  first  to  be  inhabited.  Besides,  Plinie  himselfe
of  the  British  seemeth  in  the  later  place  recited  to  reckon  Thule  with

for,  saith  hee,  Ultima  omnium

Island  is  not
Thule.

lies

the  Hands  of  Britaine

522

ARNGRIM JONAS  a.d.

1609.

quae  memorantur  est  Thule :  to  wit,  of  the  Brittish
Hands,  for  hee  speaketh  of  them.  It  is  likely  also
that  Virgil  meant  the  same,  who  said  Thule  was  the  last,
in  the  place  before  recited :  and  likewise,  Penitus  toto
divisos  orbe  Britannos :  that  is  to  say  the  last.  Let  me
yet  urge  the  same  argument  further,  from  the  age  of
Claudianus  Alexandrinus,  and  Pub.  Papinius  Statius,  farre
more  ancient  then  he.  For  Claudianus  about  the  yeere
of  Christ  390.  writeth  thus  concerning  the  successe  of  the
Getick  Wars  atchieved  by  Theodosius.

Famaque  ingrantes  succincta  panoribus  alas,  The  Author

Secum  cuncta  trahens,  a  Gadibus  usque  Britannum  ^thisdhluta

Terruit  Oceanum  : &  nostro  procul  axe  remotam  Hon,  further

Insolito  Belli,  tremefecit  murmure  Thulen.  then  our

Then  blackwing'd  Fame  Feare  girt,  frights  all  the  World  haps  would

with  Warre.  permit  us,  The

From  Cades  to  Britaine,  from  Our  World  shakes  Thule  learned  and
farre  curious  may

there  find
But  did  Report  and  Fame  cause  Island  not  inhabited,  and  enough:  and
desert  to tremble  : And Statius  more  ancient  by three  q%/^  ^
hundred  yeeres  then  Claudian,  in  his  third  Booke  Sylva,  both,
writeth thus.  Thesaurus  and

...  Theatrum,

Quanquam  etsi  gelidas  irem  mansurus  ad  Arctos,  who  proveth

Velsuper  Hesperiae  vada  caligantia  Thules.  out  of

Pompenius,
Though  I  should  dwell  in  Artike  frosts  Ptokmeus,

Or  mystie  shelves  of  Thules  West  coasts.  and  Procopius,

that  Island  is
You  heare,  not  onely  a  slight  report  of  Thule  came  to  not  Thule  but
Statius  eares,  but  that  the  shallow  places,  quicke  sand,  or  (as  the  name

shelves  found  in  approching  to  the  Hand  were  sufficiently  Ji  , '  ,

•»  * J.  "vie  mar  Re  a

knowne  unto  him,  by  the  often  relation  of  Navigators  :  of  Region  \n  '

which  sort  in  the  circuit  of  Island,  there  are  none  that  I  Norway,  or  all

know,  which  experience  speaketh  :  but  in  comming  to  the  Scandia,

Hands  of  Britaine  they  are  very  ordinarie  and  common,  as  °fwhlch  that
1  J  J  '  is  a  part,  still

the7say-  .  rr  retaining  the

The  Longitude  thereof  from  the  East  unto  the  West,  name.

523

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGKIMES

1609.

hath  not  hitherto  beene  expressed  by  any  certaine  or
assured  measure  that  I  know,  nor  yet  the  Latitude  from
North  to  South ;  save  that  in  an  ancient  Codicall  or
Writing  I  found  that  the  Longitude  was  twentie  dayes
journey :  and  the  Latitude  (where  it  is  broadest)  foure
dayes,  but  the  journeys,  as  elsewhere,  so  also  with  us  are
not  alike,  (yet  here  I  understand  Pyngmanualeid  twentie,
in  the  Authors  owne  hand-writing  it  is  Dagleider)  nor  is  it
expressed  whether  of  Horse-men  or  Foot-men.  But  the
Latitude  itselfe  is  not  every  where  the  same  ;  by  reason  of
Bayes  on  both  sides,  to  wit,  from  the  South  and  North
entring  the  Land  it  selfe  with  unequall  distances.  The
Easterly  bound  is  Austurhorn  :  the  Westerne  Raudesandur
[III.iii.65 6.]  (for  the  Promontory  Suae-felloues  lyeth  more  toward  the
South-west)  but  the  North  bound  is  Langanes,  and  the
South  Reikranes.  The  Hand  also  from  the  foure  quarters
of  the  World,  is  divided  into  North,  South,  East  and
West,  and  the  Promontorie  Langanes  divideth  North
Island  from  East  Island ;  from  West  Island,  the  Bay
Rutafiordur  :  from  South  Island,  the  vast  and  huge  deserts
of  rough,  and  inaccessable  places  extended  the  whole  length
of  the  Hand.  But  South  Island,  opposite  to  the  North,
through  these  rough  and  inaccessable  places  lying  betweene
the  River  Joculsu,  running  through  the  deserts  of  Solse-
imasande,  divideth  from  East  Island :  from  West  Island
also,  a  famous  River,  named  Albis,  emptying  it  selfe  into
the  Bay  Borgarfiord :  So  that,  if  it  pleased  me  to  represent
the  Hand  in  humane  shape,  East  Island  should  have  the
proportion  of  the  head.  The  two  more  famous  Promon-
tories Langanes  and  Reikranes,  or  bounds ;  the  one
Northerly,  the  other  Southerly  (as  hath  been  said)  should
serve  instead  of  armes.  And  the  deserts  extended  the
whole  length  of  the  Hand  should  make  the  backe,  or  backe
bone :  then  North  and  South  Island,  the  shoulders  with
the  sides ;  the  two  opposite  Bayes  Borgarfiords,  and  Rata-
fiordar,  the  one  on  the  South,  and  the  other  on  the  North,
should  divide  the  forepart  about  the  short  ribs,  from  both
the  thighes  or  hips. But  West  Island  should  resemble  the

524

ARNGRIM JONAS  a.d.

1609.

rest  of  the  parts  of  a  mans  bodie,  from  the  forepart  about

the  short  ribbes  : which  the  Bay  Breidifiordur  comming

in  from  the  West,  should  contract  and  straighten  into  the

right  and  left  foot.

The  circuit  also  of  the  Hand,  is  no  more  certainely  Circuit.
knowne  ;  yet  an  ancient  rumour  and  opinion  (as  in  another
place  where  it  is  noted)  reckoneth  one  hundred  and  fortie
foure  Norwegian  miles  (as  I  thinke)  that  is  to  say,  two
hundred  eightie  eight  Germane  miles,  Chytraeus  accounting
the  Norwegian  mile,  to  equall  two  Germane  miles,  sayling
from  one  Promontorie  to  the  other,  not  by  the  Bayes  :
whereof  North  Island  is  esteemed  to  have  eleven,  East
Island  twentie  one,  South  Island  sixe,  and  West  Island
seventie.

Haraldus  Pulcricomus  *  swaying  the  Scepter  in  Norway,  *Harald

much  neglected  the  chiefe  Nobilitie  of  Norway  :  which  the  Ha™fwe

Noruegian  Historie  setteth  downe  at  large,  yet  particular  man«  pett'te

Histories of noble Families expulsed by Pulcricomus,  Princes  made

more  largely  prosecute  the  same,  as  hereafter  wee  purpose  an  absolute

to  write. For  Pulcricomus  not  contented  with  Kingly  Monarchy  °f

authoritie,  or  chiefe  soveraignetie,  that  is  to  say,  with  the  zv°[^pon

right  of  Lawes,  Magistracie,  and  appeale  of  Warre  and  some  sought  to

Peace, challenged  all  unto himselfe,  by the  right  of  a  free  themselves

proprietarie. Insomuch,  as  very  many  chose,  rather  to  h  new  dls~

leave their Countrey and rich inheritances, then to  coverm:  an

j  *  hence  ai'ose  trie

exchange  their  Generositie  for  slaverie  and  tributes : for  plantation  of

they  thought  it  altogether  unworthy  and  ill  beseeming  Island.

their  owne  valour  and  their  ancestours. Hence,  for  the

most  part  arose  mutuall  injuries  against  the  King,  or  the

Kings partakers ; as murdering of the Kings friends,

allyes,  or  faction  ; then  the  exercises  both  at  Sea  and  Land

were  rapines  and  robberies. From  these  noble  Families

therefore,  refusing  the  violence  of  Harald,  this  our  Island,

with  the  neighbouring  Hands  began  first  to  be  inhabited,

and  that  almost  by  these  steps  and  voyages.

In the yeere of our Redemption 874. a certaine  A.D.  874.

Inhabitant  of  Norway,  one  Ingulfus,  going  out  of  this  Ingulfus.

Countrey,  following  the  steps  of  Naddocus,  Gardarus,  and

525

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

Floco  mentioned  before,  was  made  Standard-bearer  of  the
Inhabitants  which  were  to  bee  conveyed  into  Island,  and
that  upon this occasion. Ingulfus  was  famous  for  his
parentage  and  riches,  whose  father,  called  Orne,  which
signifieth  an  Eagle,  was  Duke  of  Fyrdafylce  in  Norway ;
the  sister  of  Ingulfus  was  Helga,  a  Virgin  indued  with  all
womanly  ornaments,  and  his  cousin  germaine  Leifus ;  who
for  a  notable  sword,  which  through  his  singular  warlike
prowesse  he  got  in  Ireland,  was  named  Hiorleifus. For
Hir  is  a Sword. Moreover, at that time  among  the
Nobilitie  of  Norway,  there  were  three  naturall  brother
Hallstenn,  Holmsten  and  Herstenn ;  the  sonnes  of  Atlas,
or Atlantes, a certaine Baron of Norway : who bore
certaine  privie  grudges  to  the  foresaid  Ingulfus  and  Hior-
leifus ;  which  presently  after  brake  forth  into  cruell  and
bloudie  slaughters. For  when  they  chance  they  feasted
together, after the manner of that age, they injoyned
every  one  to  make  some  solemne  Vow. Herstenus  there-
fore first  vowed,  that  he  would  take  Helga,  Ingulfus  sister
to  wife,  or  marrie  none. Then  presently  Ingulfus  vowed,
that  hee  would  admit  none  into  his  Fathers  Inheritance
with  him, save  only  Hiorleifus : meaning  thereby  that
his  sister  Helga,  by  his  consent  should  marrie  none  but
Hiorleifus (contrary to the  vow  of  Herstenus  for  the
marrying  of  her  only). After  that  Helmstenus  vowed,
that  if  he  were  chosen  Arbitrator  betweene  the  adverse
parties,  he  would  by  no  means  be  compelled,  to  suffer  an
unjust  sentence. And  so  the  rest  after  them. Not  long
Rash  vowes  after  succeeded  the  Vow  of  Ingulfus,  for  Hiorleifus  tooke
and  bloudie  his  cousin  Germane  Helga  to  wife. For  at  that  time  the
quarrelh Marriages of Cousin Germanes were lawfull. From
ensuing. hence arose the extreame hatred, and enmitie of
Herstenus,  against  the  foresaid  Hiorleifus,  and  Ingulfus :
who  therefore  joyning  with  his  Brother  Holmstenus,  with
sixe ships filled with Souldiers, set upon Hiorleifus
unawares, having but three ships only, preparing his
Voyage  into  forreine  Countreyes. Whose  violence  Hior-
leifus a  long  time,  and  stoutly  sustayning,  holpen  by  a

526

ARNGRIM JONAS  a.d.

1609.

certayne  friend  comming  in  the  meane-while,  having  slaine
Herstenus  got  the  upper  hand.  But  Holmstenus  provid-
ing for  himselfe  by  flight,  and  not  a  little  exasperated  and
grieved  through  the  violent  death  of  his  Brother,  after
some  few  monethes,  came  with  an  armed  power  to  Ingulfus
and  Hiorleifus  to  surprize  them  suddenly  at  home.
Whereof  they  being  certified  by  Spies,  receive  him  with
an  armed  force,  and  kill  him.  Halstenus  the  third
brother,  wiser  then  the  rest,  who  consorted  not  with  the  [III.iii.657.]
unjust  routes  of  his  Brethren,  remayned  yet  alive ;  to
whose  arbitrement  Ingulfus  with  Hiorleifus  commit  the
whole  matter  to  be  determined,  holding  him  mindfull  of
his  Vow,  concerning  equitie  not  to  be  violated.  Hal-
stenus therefore  pronounceth  his  brother  Herstenus  to  be
justly  slaine  :  But  not  Holmstenus  who  compelled  through
bitter  griefe,  desired  to  revenge  the  death  of  his  brother,
by  any  slaughter  whatsoever.  For  killing  therefore  of
him,  he  commanded  them  both  to  be  banished  out  of  the
province  of  Fyrdafilse.  They  readily  obey  his  award,  to
whom  they  willingly  committed  the  censure,  &  with  a
purpose  to  leave  their  Countrey,  they  sell  their  Lands  and
Possessions  for  mony  and  Merchandizes,  and  conceive  in
their  minds  a  worthy  attempt  of  planting  a  strange  people
in  a  strange  Countrey :  and  that  not  to  gratifie  Halstenus
(with  whom  through  this  agreement  they  returned  into
favour ;  with  whom  they  might  otherwise  easily  have  con-
tended in  strength)  but  also  for  feare  of  Pulcricomus
himselfe,  raging  against  his  Monarchic,  but  Pampesia,  of
all  their  Possessions  :  nor  was  that  to  be  doubted,  concern-
ing the  violence  and  oppression  of  Harald :  for  in  the
Historie  of  Haquinns  Adalstenius  his  succeeding  Sonne  it
is  expresly  read,  that  he  was  contented  with  Kingly
authoritie,  and  restored  to  every  one  their  owne,  which  his
Father  unjustly  challenged  unto  himselfe.

It  was  the  yeere  of  Christ  870.  wherein  Ingulfus  with  Island  first
Hiorleifus  first  visit  Island,  but  they  inhabit  it  not  pre-  lnhabtie^
sently,  but  foure  yeeres  after,  in  the  yeere  874.  as  hath ' ^'
beene  said :  bringing  many  Families  thither.

527

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

Moreover  Ingulfus  comming  within  view  of  the  Hand,
Superstitions,  casteth  the  postes  of  the  houses  which  he  had  in  Norway
into  the  water,  after  the  manner  of  Ethnickes  accounting
for  it  for  an  Oracle,  that  that  place  was  fatally  chosen  for
his  Habitation,  which  the  postes  cast  out  upon  the  shoare
should  note  or  signifie.  That  custome  many  of  the  Nor-
wegians retayned  by  turning  up  the  ground.  But
Ingulfus  arrived  not  where  he  cast  in  the  postes,  but  at  the
Promontorie  of  the  South  shoare  (else-where  erroniously,
the  West  shoare)  called  by  his  name  Ingulfhofde.  Yet
notwithstanding  wanting  the  postes  of  the  houses  three
whole  yeeres,  at  length  he  found  them  in  that  place,  which
is  named  Reychiarwich,  and  there  he  erected  his  Habita-
tion. But Hiorleifus more estranged from Ethnick

First  houses.
Island  had
anciently
fairer  houses
then  now
{having
timber  from
Norway,  &c.)
likewise
Tillage  was
then  in  use.
Hiorleifus
slain.

Westmafyar
and  Westmen.

superstition,  seated  himselfe  in  the  Promontorie  Hirleif-
hofda ;  so  called  likewise  from  his  name.  There  he  built
great  houses  :  one  of  one  hundred  twentie  six,  and  another
of  one  hundred  thirtie  five  feet  long :  who,  the  first  yeere
being  ended,  began  to  till  the  ground  and  sow  seed.  In
which  worke,  when  he  had  exercised  ten  servants  or  slaves,
which  he  brought  with  him  out  of  Island,  they  fayned  that
Hiorleifus  his  labouring  beast  was  slaine  by  a  wilde  Beare
(for  it  was  afterwards  manifestly  knowne,  that  Island  hath
no  Beares,  but  such  as  came  thither  by  chance)  which  when
Hiorleifus  (with  a  purpose  of  revenge)  sought  in  the  next
neighbouring  Wood,  he  was  deceitfully  slaine  by  these
slaves  lying  in  ambush  :  together  with  some  other  com-
panions which  he  tooke  with  him :  the  Servants  aswell
ravishing  the  Wives  as  spoyling  the  goods  of  the  slaine ;
and  flying  into  the  Hands  not  very  farre  distant  from  the
shoare :  which  after  of  the  same  slaves,  were  called  West-
mafyar,  because  they  were  of  Ireland.  The  Norwegians
call  the  Irish,  English,  and  Scots  Westmen,  that  is,  men  of
the  West ;  seeing  those  Countries  are  distant  from  Norway,
to  the  West.  Ingulfus  pursuing  these  Murtherers,  set
upon  them  suddenly,  and  destroyed  them  every  man  in  the
same  Hands,  being  much  grieved  in  minde  for  the  untimely
and  cruell  death  of  his  deere  friend  and  allyes.

528

ABNGRIM JONAS  a.d.

1609.

But  Ingulfus  found  and  possessed  Island  altogether
-barren  and  desolate ;  on  every  side  beset  with  very  thicke
Woods,  and  scarsly  fertile  of  any  but  Birches,  so  that  hee  Woods.
was  faine  everywhere  to  open  the  Woods  with  the  Axe,
for  journeyes  and  habitation.  Yet  in  the  meane  space,
we  might  gather  by  certayne  signes,  I  know  not  what
Mariners  had  sometimes  touched  upon  certayne  shoares  of
the  Countrey,  but  not  inhabited  them.  For  Ingulfus
found  little  sacring  Bels  and  wooden  Crosses,  and  other  Bels  and
things  made  by  the  workmanship  and  arte  of  the  Irish  Crosses.
and  Britaynes :  but  no  tokens  of  culture,  or  habitation.
Whereupon  it  is  likely,  that  Irish  or  Scottish  Fishermen
(as  also  the  English  at  this  day)  accustomed  to  fish  neere
Island,  as  sometimes  it  commeth  to  passe,  went  ashoare,
and  so  by  chance  left  sacring  Bells  and  Crosses,  the
Utensils  of  Christian  Religion.  For  at  that  time  the  Irish
were  instructed  in  Christianisme  as  they  say.  And  those
whosoever  were  the  ancient  Islanders,  they  called  Papa,
or  Papas :  from  whom,  as  seemeth  probable  to  me,  the
Hand  of  East  Island  called  Papey,  derived  the  name ;
because  they  were  often  wont  to  touch  there :  or  their
Monuments  (such  as  I  sayd)  were  chiefly  found  there.

This  side  of  Island,  to  such  as  sayle  from  England,
Ireland,  and  Scotland,  is  most  exposed  towards  the  North-
west. Moreover,  what  and  from  whence  these  Papae,  or
Pappae  came,  I  cannot  sufficiently  speake :  unlesse  per-
adventure  from  the  Hands  of  Scotland,  whereof  one  is
named  Pappa,  and  another  Westrapappa,  as  we  may  see  in
the  Mappes  :  unto  which  conjecture  let  every  one  give
what  credit  he  pleaseth.  Furthermore,  very  many  of  the
Norwegians,  afterwards  boldly  following  the  steps  of
Ingulfus  going  into  Island,  with  their  wives  and  children,
and  great  multitudes  of  their  Kindred  and  friends,
restored  themselves  to  libertie.  Whose  names  and  large
Families  are  recited  in  the  Chronicles  :  as  by  the  second
Booke  is  understood.  Besides,  it  is  there  recounted  what
coasts,  what  shoares,  what  middle-land  places  every  one  pos-
sessed :  and  at  what  time  :  and  also  how  the  first  Inhabitants  [III.1ii.65 8.]

XIII  529  2L

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

gave  name  to  Straights,  Bayes,  Havens,  narrow  straights
of  Land,  Ferryes,  Clyffes,  Rockes,  Mountaines,  Hills,
Vallies,  rough  and  inaccessible  Places,  Fountaines,  Flouds,
Rivers,  Villages,  Farmes  or  Habitations :  whereof  at  this
day  many  are  yet  retained  and  in  use.  Which  Topo-
graphy, supposing  it  would  bee  tedious,  especially  to  a
forraine  Reader,  I  have  here  omitted ;  applying  my  selfe
rather  to  the  description  of  the  Inhabitants,  who  in  sixtie
yeeres  space  so  replenished  with  their  multitudes,  the
habitable  parts  of  Island  now  possessed.
Chap.  3.  Concerning  the  language  of  the  Islanders,  the  matter

Of***  it  selfe  speaketh,  that  it  is  the  Noruegian ;  I  say,  that  old

Nation  anc^  naturall  speech,  derived  from  the  ancient  Gothish,

Islanders  only  which  onely  the  Islanders  now  use  uncorrupted :  and
retaine  the  '  therefore  we  call  it  Islandish.  Of  the  letters  of  which
ancient  tongue  we  will  first  speake  somewhat :  and  afterwards  in

the  Chapter  following  there  shall  be  a  short  discourse  of
the  originall  thereof.

And  surely  that  language  seemeth  to  have  double
Two  khdes  of  letters :  to  wit,  the  Old,  and  New.  The  New,  which
letters.  commonly  wee  use  at  this  day,  are  common  almost  to  all

Europe  together  with  us.  Which,  when  they  first  began
to  bee  used  is  not  certainely  knowne.  Surely  as  yet,  some
crosses,  written  in  ancient  letters,  are  yet  seene  among  our
Country-men,  which  letters  also  many  yet  know,  and  both
reade,  and  write  :  and  this  naturall  language  it  selfe  is  con-
tained in  the  same,  nothing  at  all  changed.  Moreover  it
seemed  good  to  mee,  thus  to  present  the  name  and  shape
of  the  ancient  Characters,  such  surely  as  was  offered  unto
mee,  placing  the  New  or  Common  over  against  them,
expressing  the  validitie  thereof,  adding  also  the  agreement
and  discrepancie  of  ours,  with  those  of  Ulphila,  the  Bishop
of  the  Gothes :  whom  Johannes  Theodorus,  and  Johannes
Israel,  brethren  and  Citizens  of  Francofurt,  report  to  have
invented  these  letters  :  by  whose  relation  hee  agreeth  with
us  in  all  things,  save  where  the  disagreement  shall  bee
noted  here.  Moreover  also,  I  thought  it  not  amisse  to  set
downe  in  writing  the  letters  of  certaine  other  Nations,  to

530

ARNGRIM JONAS  a.d.

1609.

some  of  our  Country  letters,  out  of  the  same  Francofurt
copie,  which  the  Types  or  Figure  subscribed  will  demon-
strate.

A  *  A

b  'Btarhn  g

3.  fyefoi  *f

d  Stungmntyr  £  or  4  and  VlpbiUthusp.

e  Stunginn  Is  »£*

f  F,  p

^  Stunginnfaqnjp

b  Hagrt  fg

l  Is  I

k  fyun  p

/  L&ngur  j^  or  ft  :  Vlpbttathus  A  :  it  is  alfo  & ,  the  Mofcouh  U

m  Madur  Y

n  Nand  £  Vlpbik  thus  A

0  Os  £

p  PUfiur  K  rifWa  thus  B

r  foi^  R

s  Sol  &  Vlpbtla  thus  q

t  Tyr  4  Vlphila  thus  £

u  vr  n  ripbiu  thus  n

Here  wee  see  twentie  one  Characters,  but  the  ancient
numbred  onely  sixteene.  And  the  third  H ,  they  would
not  acknowledge  for  theirs  :  because  z  of  the  Greekes,
that  is  to  say  ts  or  ds  (as  they  would  have  it)  they  might
write  it  in  their  language  with  distinct  letters.  But  the
fourth  4  from  the  eighteenth,  they  distinguish  with  some
point,  or  an  overthwart  line,  almost  thus  4}  :  otherwise  it
is  altogether  the  same  in  shape  and  name,  Tyr,  but  d.
Stunginn  tyr,  that  is  to  say,  pointed  Tyr,  as  P  and
pointed  Kaun  P.  g.  So  Is  pointed  for  1.  but  Plastur  [lll.iii.659.]
resembleth  B.  with  both  the  bellies  open  above  and
beneath.  Besides  these,  the  rest  are  numbred  sixteene,
as  I  said.  For  they  reckoned  the  Diphthongs  to  the
Syllables.

53i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

Moreover,  it  retained  the  last  new  Consonant  of  the
old  Alphabet,  changed  in  name,  but  not  in  shape :  which
is  p.  This  being  set  after  a  vowell  in  the  same  syllable,
hath  the  sound  of  d.  as  Blap  for  Blab,  which  is  a  leafe :
which  kind  of  writing  was  more  usuall  with  the  ancient,
but  at  this  day  is  almost  growne  out  of  use :  but  being  set
before  a  vowell,  it  hath  a  peculiar  force  and  pronunciation,
not  altogether  Th.  but  sounding  somewhat  more  grosly,
as  it  were  Tzh  putting  forth  the  tongue  almost  between  the
fore-teeth  :  as  pa,  that  is  to  say,  then.  In  times  past  it  had
the  name  of  Puss :  at  this  day  it  is  called  Porn,  or  Thorn,
if  you  put  p.  for  th  :  and  therefore  it  cannot  be  written  or
pronounced  at  all,  but  by  it  selfe.

They  also  of  later  time  write  the  Consonant  f.  after
this  manner  /3.  The  Moderne  Writers  also  doe  sometimes
aspirate  L.N.R.  the  ancient  very  seldome,  and  almost
never :  as  Hlutur  in  old  time  Lutur,  that  is,  a  thing.
Hnijfur  in  times  past  (as  also  sometimes  at  this  day)
Knijfur ;  that  is  to  say,  a  Knife.  Hrutur,  in  old  times
Rutur,  that  is  to  say  a  Ram.  In  like  manner  sometimes
Iod,  and  Vaf,  or  I  and  V  Consonants :  as  Hiel,  that  is,  a
Wheele  :  Hualur,  that  is,  a  Whale  :  which  also  I  thinke
the  ancient  did  concerning  Iod  and  Vaf.

In  Vowells  and  Diphthongs,  as  also  abbreviations  proper
to  this  language,  the  varietie  is  farre  greater,  which  I
purpose  not  to  touch.  Moreover  also,  the  due  handling
of  the  letters,  as  of  the  rest  of  the  Etymologie  and  Syn
taxis  of  this  tongue,  would  bee  the  copious  matter  of  a
peculiar  worke,  especially  if  any  would  adde  the  Poetrie
purposing  to  write  the  Grammer  of  the  Islandish  tongue
which  would  bee  no  more  difficult,  then  that  wee  have
seene  done,  concerning  the  Germane  and  French  tongue,
besides  others.

Island  About  the  yeere  of  the  Lord  12 16.  one  of  our  Country-

Grammanan. men wrote in his Countrey language, concerning th

letters of the proper, or mother tongue : where hee

affirmeth  these  ancient  Characters  to  be  peculiar  to  this

language,  and  handleth  them  both,  as  well  as  new  as  old

532

ARNGRIM JONAS  a.d.

1609.

after  a  legitimate  and  due  manner  of  tractation,  by  his
definitions  and  divisions  of  the  letters  into  Vowels  and
Consonants,  and  of  the  five  Latine  Vowels,  maketh
eighteene  of  his  language,  distinguished  in  sound  and
pronunciation  :  He  divideth  the  Consonants  naturally  into
halfe  Vowels,  and  Mutes,  and  those  into  Liquids  and
Firmes,  these  into  open  and  shut ;  performing  the  part  of
a  pretie  Logician.  And  in  delivering  the  force  and  pro-
nunciation of  the  letters,  hee  artificially  assumeth  for  every
definition  all  the  Instruments  of  framing  the  voyce,  as
well  as  the  lungs  and  throat,  as  the  auxiliary  parts  of  the
mouth  and  tongue.  The  letter  p.  also,  he  calleth  the,
peradventure  in  imitation  of  the  Greeke  Theta  (which
almost,  as  we  said,  although  not  altogether  it  expresseth)
or  Tau  of  the  Hebrewes,  which  Hebrew  letter,  if  th.  or  t.
of  the  Latines  rightly  expresse,  as  is  reported  by  some,
Thau  shall  come  nothing  neerer  to  our  p.  then  Theta.
The  same  Country-man  of  ours,  from  absolute  letters,
proceedeth  to  set  downe  in  writing,  the  figures  of  the
word  and  sentence  in  the  Mother  tongue,  and  illustrate
them  with  examples  of  our  language,  retaining  the
Greeke  titles  of  the  Figures,  or  names  of  Epizeusis,
Anadiplosis,  &c.

And  from  this  Writer  of  our  Countrey,  we  received  the
Types  of  the  old  Alphabet :  for  there  are  Historicall  frag-
ments yet  extant,  concerning  Norus  the  Name-giver  of  Norus  of  whom
Norway, and founder of the Kingdome, and those  Norway  is
Toparchi,  or  little  Kings,  whom  he  vanquished  before  he  named-
obtained  the  Monarchic

§•  n.

A Discourse of the first Inhabitants of the
Northerne World, supposed to be Giants

expelled from Canaan. Of the Islanders  chap.  4.

Houses,  Fewell,  Victuall.  Of  the  first

MA  .  r 1  r  t^t  Inhabitants  of

Oreover  concerning  some  or  the  ancestors  of  Norus  : t^e  ^ort^
among whom his father Porre (whom they call  parts  of  the
Thorro)  King  of  Gotland, Finland,  and  Kuenland : an  world-

533

A.D.
1609.

Thorro.

[III.iii.66o.

Fermotus.

Goe.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

excellent  Prince  of  his  age,  from  whom  the  moneth  of  the
old  Noruegians,  and  now  Islanders  hath  the  name  of
Thorre,  which  in  the  Julian  Calender  beginneth  the  10.
11.  12.  13.  14.  15.  or  16.  of  January:  for  it  hath  a
moveable  beginning  after  the  manner  of  their  Calender.
And  seeing  King  Thorro  this  month  accustomed  to
sacrifice  unto  his  gods ;  the  Kuenones  instituted  yerely
sacrifices  in  the  same  month  to  him,  being  dead,  as  to  a
certaine  god,  in  token  of  an  happy  yeere,  which  they
began  with  the  winter,  after  the  maner  of  the  old
Lacedemonians ;  &  called  the  same  month  Porre,  of
Thorro  ;  no  otherwise  then  the  Lacedemonians  gave  divine
honor  to  Lycurgus  being  dead,  building  a  Temple  in
memory  of  him,  where  hee  was  honoured  for  a  god ;  to
whom  his  familiar  friends  instituted  set  Feasting-dayes,
and  solemne  assemblies  which  remained  a  long  time,  and
the  daies  wherein  the  assemblies  were  celebrated,  they
called  Lycurgidce  :  concerning  which  matter  looke  Cragius
in  his  third  booke  of  the  Commonwealth  of  the  Lace-
demonians.

Of  the  Ancestors  also  of  Norus,  all  are  mentioned  even
to  his  Great-grandfather,  who  was  Fermotus  King  of  Fin-
land :  Moreover,  one  of  the  three  sonnes  of  Fermotus,
and  therefore  Great  uncle  of  Norus,  called  Logie,  which
signifieth  a  flame ;  who  for  the  excellencie  of  his  beautie
was  called  Halogie,  that  is  to  say,  an  high  or  excellent
flame.  Hee  was  Monarch  of  the  Halongiensian  Pro-
vince, bordering  upon  the  Province  of  Nidrosia.

Goe  also  the  daughter  of  Thorro,  by  the  sister  of  Norus,
is  there  recorded,  for  recoverie  of  whom,  being  stolne
away  (as  Cadmus  was  sent  by  his  father  Agenor  to  seeke
his  daughter  Europa)  Norus  was  sent  by  his  father
Thorro :  which,  that  it  might  more  happily  succeed,
Thorro  instituted  new  sacrifices  to  the  Gods,  in  the  moneth
next  following  the  former  (afterwards  called  Thorra)  and
intituled  the  same  moneth  with  the  name  of  Goa,  after
the  name  of  his  daughter  Goe  :  which  name  of  the  moneth
likewise the Islanders that now live doe yet retaine.

534

-a to

g.g-

Q
<

H 2

CO

BiD g

a  *

fa

X

V

o
o

bJO

o

P

£  s

OJ

3 Lh
OS O

o5 £

o
co o

jg:;

<u P

a

o  JS

* o

> cu  J=i  hM

S U  rt

Oh  <u  t-l-i O

,~ <U cu

cfci  rfj

oT'd

< CU  "5

co 3

-  p

p  4-J

O cu

H  "5  -xs  *s

^  cj  2
•a  -S . •

~§ •-  p  S

J=S 51

< <*3
o

- cu

u >

P o

X*

o
c

S^

<U OJ

-p  -cs
H  S

6
o o

D-,T3
Dm
3 <U

CO >

-a

cU
Vh

C
■x!

<U
o  CO

(U

1

Gylui.

Asian  immigration

in  the  time  of  this

<u
<u

Ih

-P

-a

CU

>

-a

4-1

i— 1

s  J3

to +-»

cu  •£

cu

"cu

°
o  i

CU

r"H

"53

^  "£

<U

>

OS

xi

O

T3
CU
Vh
CU

^P

CO

CU
Oh
OS
CU

PQ

.-i CU

$ c .

OT cu  •-

cu CU  3

-p

HJ*0

. 3
ad os

-e  ^

Z  -Q

co

&0

tT  «u  .

CU  CU f— I

"5  «  rt

60  OJO .

;s  Q  ^

oS

4-1 CU

el

CO

CU

.«  c

cu C

o
co  g

OS u

C

OS

w  "5  c

as O «<

cu

fa o

>*  -a

C^ co

°r

o

c

T3

C

oS
cu

arch
was
and

also.

e

B

W ^ C ^

o CU c >-»

oS

i^a-8

CO

.M feO CU OS

.  r-l

l*H

2 c. C S3

o
2

Ih OS

o

:he  fi:
;  seei
etwee
e  Mo

o c

<u

^ UJO^

Z °

g

CU  "£ J-. *"•

CJ

rt 3  ^ cu

o %

-C «-<

^^

to

U-. <u

CO

w o o*

rt +->  ^h co

« P Uh P

o-s

P

6

o

u

2 « O £3

U ^ .H

JJ

ine,  w^
g  igno
narchy
of  Od

CO

p

^.S^ CU

4_.  w  <;  £3

u

cu

_2  JQ C

O

o

ffi

^ CO ••_.

.»«

^  e  °-fl

<

CO

p

Ih

O

ded  from t
rway,  but  a
ird  Restorer
,  Hemngus

C O J= co

s

cu  >7  Tj P

o

co CU O

fa

T3 0"5Z

<-.  <w

g

•2

.  ^

s  ^

r*

-5

i SS

t  folloz
boutfo
wenty
before
t  was

*  Thi
is  sail
made

tation
Asia/,
ers,  a
and  t
yeeres
Chris
borne.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

Gorus.  Furthermore,  ancient  Histories  make  mention  of  Gorus,.

the  naturall  brother  of  Norus  :  as  also  the  nephew  of
Gorus,  named  Gyluus,  having  the  soveraigne  authoritie  in
Suecia,  in  whose  name  Odinus  happened  to  come  (others
call  him  Othinus)  Standerd-bearer  of  the  Asian  Immigra-
tion, made  in  the  foure  and  twentieth  yeere  before  Christ
was  born,  which  we  mentioned  before :  and  Gyluus  had  a
father  called  Geiterus,  and  an  Uncle  Beiterus,  the  sonnes
of  Gorus ;  from  Beiterus,  the  Haven  neere  the  Citie
Nidrosia,  is  named  Beitstod.

These  (I  say)  besides  many  other  things,  are  the  mani-
fest tokens  of  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Northerne  World,
farre  more  ancient  then  the  immigration  of  Odinus  : of
whose  originall  notwithstanding,  there  is  not  one  word.
But  because  it  is  most  repugnant to  a  Christian  man,
knowing  the  Bookes  of  Moses  concerning  Originals,  to
affirme  themselves  to  be  Autochtonoe,  as  both  others,  but
especially  the  Greekes  did  concerning  their  Ancestors  (yet
with  better  leave  then  the  rest  of  the  people  of  Europe  :
who  next  to  the  Chaldees,  Egyptians,  and  Jewes,  might
worthily boast of Antiquitie in comparison of other
people). It  were  better  truly  to  confesse  the  unknown
originall  of  Ancestors,  then  to  be  carried  away  with  the
Earth-bred opinion  and  error  of  Earth-bred  men : lest  surely  wee
or  Land- should  heare  some  such  thing,  as  sometimes  one  wittily
which  had  ' upbraided  the  Grecians  with,  so  much  boasting  by  reason
their  originall  of  their  pretended  selfe-originall,  to  wit,  that  Moses  the.
in  that  Land.  Law  giver  of  the  Jewes,  was  more  ancient  then  the  Gods
of  the  Grecians.

In  the  meane  space,  because  through  the  onely  con-
[III.iii.661.]  fession  of  ignorance  or  doubt,  truth  doth  not  so  soone
appeare ;  somewhat  is  to  be  alleaged  touching  the  pro-
posed question  :  that  the  historicall  Reader  may  have  some
thing  here  which  hee  may  either  confute  or  confirme.
Wee  are  therefore  by  probable  reasons  to  inquire,  who
were  the  first  inhabitants  of  the  Northerne  World,  and
from  whence  they  came  :  then,  when  they  began  to  inhabit
this  our  World  : that  from  hence  some  conjecture  may

536

ARNGRIM  JONAS

arise  concerning  the  originall  of  the  language.  And  that
I  may  here  acquit  my  selfe  without  circumstances  :  I  thinke
the  first  inhabitants  of  the  Northerne  World,  were  of  the
number  of  Giants,  nay,  mere  Giants ;  men  that  inhabited
the  mountaines  of  an  huge  and  sometimes  a  monstrous
body,  and  of  monstrous  and  exceeding  strength  :  and  that
they  were  the  posteritie  and  remnant  of  the  Canaanites,
expulsed  from  the  Territories  of  Palestina,  about  the
yeere  of  the  World  2500.  by  Josua  and  Caleb  remooving
into  Palestina  through  Gods  pleasure  and  direction  :  and
that  this  Countrey  of  the  World  even  untill  those  times,
or  peradventure  longer,  remayned  altogether  not
inhabited.

For  thus  Saxo  Grammaticus  argueth  in  the  Preface  of
his  Dania.  But  (sayth  he)  the  stones  of  exceeding  big-
nesse  fastened  to  the  Tombes  and  Caves  of  the  ancient,
testifie  that  the  Countrey  of  Denmarke  was  sometimes
troubled  with  the  inhabiting  of  Giants.  But  if  any  doubt,
that  it  was  done  by  monstrous  strength  ;  let  him  looke  up
to  the  high  tops  of  certayne  Mountaynes,  and  say,  if  he
know  it  well,  who  hath  brought  Rockes  of  such  huge
greatnesse  to  the  tops  thereof?  For  every  one  that  con-
sidered this  Miracle,  shall  perceive  that  it  is  beyond
common  opinion,  that  the  simple  labour  of  mortalitie,  or
usual  force  of  humane  strength,  should  rayse  so  huge  a
weight  (hardly,  or  not  at  all  moveable  upon  the  plaine
ground)  to  so  high  a  top  of  mountaynous  sublimitie.

This  Saxo  writeth,  who  shall  be  a  sufficient  Author  unto
us  concerning  the  first  Inhabitants  of  Denmarke,  that  is
to  say,  his  owne  Countrey.  So  concerning  Norway  and
Suecia,  and  the  bordering  Countreyes,  as  whatsoever  is
most  ancient ;  so  it  most  resembleth  a  Giant-like  disposi-
tion and  nature.  Whereof  examples  are  to  be  taken  out
of  Histories,  which  would  bee  tedious  here.  For  that  I
may  omit  ancient  examples,  those  things  are  knowne  of
late  memory  to  have  beene  done :  Concerning  the  Giant
Doffro,  inhabitant  of  the  Mountayne  DorTroefial  in  Nor-
way ;  and  Foster-father  of  Haraldus  Pulcricomus  King  of

537

A.D.

609.

Giants  first
inhabiters  of
the  Northerne
parts  of  the
World.
Their

originall  from
the  Cananites.

A  long  dis-
course of  the
Authour  to
prove  that
there  have  bin
Giants,  is
omitted.

Giants  in  the
time  of
Haraldus
Hare  fay  re
and  since.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

Norway.  Also  concerning  Dunubo  who  lived  in  the  time
of  Droffon :  from  whom  the  Bay  Boddick  or  Bothnicke :
in  time  past  was  called  Dumbshaff,  who  in  a  Sea-fight,
encountring  eighteene  Giants  alone,  sent  twelve  of  them
first  to  Hell  before  he  himselfe  was  slaine.  Of  thirtie
Giants  at  once  destroyed  by  fire,  by  Dumbos  Sonnes  left,
in  revenge  of  their  Fathers  death.  There  is  yet  a  later
example  of  certayne  Giants  of  Norway,  destroyed  by
authoritie  of  Olaus  Triggo  King  of  Norway,  about  the

1338.,  a yeere  of  Christ  995. But  the  latest  in  the  yeere  1338.

Giant  reported  Magnus  the  Sonne  of  Ericus,  being  King  of  Norway,  that

of  15.  Lu  its.  a  Q-ant  0f  fifteene  Cubits  was  slaine  by  foure  men  :  as  it
is  found  recorded  in  the  Chronicles.  Hereunto  adde,
that  a  certayne  Province  of  Norway,  or  bordering  upon
Finmauchia,  in  ancient  time  was  called  Risalande,  that  is
to  say,  the  Land  of  Giants  (for  En  Rise,  and  Rese,  signifie
a  Giant)  from  whence  Jotum  Heimar,  that  is,  the  habita-
tion of  Giants  is  not  farre  dissonant  (whereupon  as  yet,
En  Ioet,  is  said  to  be  a  Giant)  that  I  may  speake  nothing
heere  of  Jotumland  : by  which  name,  that  which  at  this

Jutland.  fay *s cauec[ Jijtknd, was sometimes called by our

Countrey-men,  and  very  many  other  also,  the  Land  of  the
Cimbri,  or  Chersonesus  :  the  same  name  also  being  given
it  of  Kemper,  that  is,  fighting  Giants  of  Nephilheimar,
and  Karnephill,  else-where,  and  peradventure  by  others
shall  be  spoken,  as  also  of  the  Gotthes,  and  Getts  (per-
adventure also  Ietts)  and  such  like  others.  Moreover,
the  remnant  of  the  Giants  came  into  Island,  whose  Names,
Habitations,  worthy  Acts  and  Enterprizes,  are  sufficiently
knowne,  and  before  our  eyes.  Seeing  therefore  Giants
first  inhabited  this  our  World ;  it  is  demanded,  when,  or
whence  they  came  ?

Gilb.  Genebrand.  Chronol.  Lib.  I.  The  first  Age,
sayth  hee,  (from  the  Creation  of  the  World  unto  the
Floud)  seemeth  to  have  beene  passed  and  spent  within  the
mid-lands  of  the  World,  and  that  they  came  not  to  the
borders  of  Asia,  Africa,  and  Europe.  Bodinus  sayth,  that
Moses  wrote  the  Historie  of  the  whole  World  (he  meaneth

538

ARNGRIM JONAS  a.d.

1609.

inhabited)  even  to  the  yeere  of  the  World,  2450.  And
Genebrand  againe,  Lib.  I.  Chronol.  pag.  ii.  As  the  first
Originall  of  Mankind  was  in  Armenia,  Mesopotamia,
Chaldaea,  and  Syria  :  and  men  before  the  Floud  dwelt  only
there :  so  other  Countreyes  themselves,  were  first
inhabited  after  the  Floud.  Also  Genebrand  sayth  yet
further,  ibid  pag.  35.  Before  three  thousand  yeeres  (for
hee  wrote  in  the  yeere  of  Christ  1597.)  almost  all  Europe
was  emptie,  that  is,  about  the  yeere  of  the  World  2541.
which  is  chiefly  to  be  understood  of  the  Northerne  World,
if  of  the  rest  of  Europe.  But  hee  said,  almost,  not  alto-
gether, that  hee  might  not  take  away  the  migrations  of
the  Nations  then  presently  beginning  after  the  yeere  of
the  World  2500.  wee  doe  not  therefore  tye  the  time
(wherein  this  further  Europe  began  to  bee  inhabited)  to
the  yeere  of  the  World  2500.  But  wee  say,  that  that
troublesome  time  wherein  the  Nations  (and  among  them
the  Giants  of  Canaan)  were  cast  out  of  their  places  and
dwellings,  and  compelled  to  seek  new  habitations,  even  in
Europe,  happened  in  this  yeere ;  as  was  proposed  by  us  in
the  beginning.  And  that  Europe  received  her  Inhabitants
from  hence,  among  the  Ancient,  Procopius  is  my  Author,  a
Writer  borne  at  Caesaria  of  Palaestina,  Collector  of  the
worthy  Acts  of  Justinianus,  about  the  yeere  of  the  Lord
530.  who  to  prove  this  very  thing,  alleageth  divers  [III.iii.662.]
Writers  of  the  Historie  of  the  Phoenicians.  The  words
of  Procopius  are  these,  in  his  fourth  Booke  of  the  Warres
of  the  Vandalls,  not  in  one  place  only,  cited  by  D.
Cythrceus  :  out  of  the  which  among  other  things,  I  gather
mine  opinion.  The  Hebrewes  (saith  Procopius)  after
they  returned  out  of  Egypt,  and  remayned  still  in  the
borders  of  Palaestina,  Moses,  (who  led  them  in  their
journey)  dieth  :  whom  Josua  the  sonne  of  Nun  succeeded,
who  also  brought  the  people  into  Palaestina,  and  shewing
strength  and  courage  far  beyond  the  nature  of  man,
obtayned  the  Country ;  whereby  destroying  Nations,  he
easily  vanquished  many  Cities,  seeming  inexpugnable
unto  all. Then  therefore  all  the  Countrey  upon  the  Sea-

539

A.D.
1609.

Chap.  5.
Of  their
Customes  and
manner  of  life .

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

coast,  from  Sidon  even  to  the  borders  of  Egypt,  was
called  Phoenicia :  over  which  one  long  since  raigned ;  as
all  witnesse,  who  writ  the  ancient  History  of  the
Phoenicians ;  here  great  multitudes  of  people  dwelt :  the
Gergasites,  Jebusites,  and  others  named  in  the  Hebrew
Volumes,  who  when  they  saw  the  Armie  of  the  strangers
to  be  inexpugnable,  leaving  their  Country  bounds  went
into  Egypt  next  adjoyning,  and  there  increasing  in  number
and  posteritie,  when  they  found  not  sufficient,  and  con-
venient place  for  so  great  a  multitude,  they  entred  into
Africa,  where  inhabiting  very  many  Cities,  they  possessed
all  that  Coast,  even  unto  the  Pillers  of  Hercules,  usin
the  halfe  Phoenician  Tongue  and  Dialect,  and  built  the
Towne  Tingen  in  Numidia,  most  strongly  fortified  in  the
situation  thereof :  where  two  Pillers  of  white  stone  are
erected  neere  the  great  Fountayne,  whereon  in  the
Phoenician  Language  these  Letters  are  ingraven.  Nos
sumus  Cananei,  quos  fugavit  Jesus  Latro.  For  Josua  in
the  Hebrew  is  Jesus.  This  Procopius  writeth,  to  which
purpose  the  Historians  of  the  Hebrewes  are  cited  by
Genebrand :  Josua  (saith  he)  partly  expelled  the
Canaanites ;  and  partly  slue  them.  The  remnant  of
these  are  reported  to  have  gone  into  Germany,  Sclavonia,
and  the  next  adjoyning  Countreyes,  &c.  Into  Seder
Olam,  &c.  Also  :  And  surely  in  that  Age,  that  the  whole
West  was  emptie  and  unpeopled,  save  that  the  Nations  of
the  East  came  by  little  and  little  into  the  Countreyes
thereof,  it  appeareth  by  the  often  infusions.  This  Gene-
brand  writeth.  And  Bodinus  Method.  Hist.  chap.  9.
The  Canaanites  being  cast  out  of  the  Land  of  Palaestina,
by  the  Hebrewes,  went  into  Illyricum  and  Pannonia  (to
wTit,  by  those  migrations  and  removes,  which  out  of
the  place  before  alleadged  by  Procopius,  wee  under-
stand) as  Rabbi  David  Kimchi  witnesseth  at  the  end  of
Abdias.

The  ancient  Islander  seeme  to  have  beene  ordayned  for
great  frugalitie,  wherein  first  their  habitations  or  build-
ings are  briefly  to  be  touched,  next  their  food  and  manner

54o

ARNGRIM JONAS  a.d.

1609.

of  apparell ;  and  lastly,  the  rest  of  the  exercises  of  their
common  life.

For  first  as  touching  their  habitations,  the  Islanders  have
followed  the  first  and  most  ancient  manner  of  dwelling.
To  wit,  not  by  Cities  and  Townes ;  but  as  Tacitus  Separate
speaketh  of  the  Germanes  of  his  time,  they  dwelt  asunder,  Dwellings.
as  a  Field,  as  a  Fountayne,  as  a  Wood,  as  an  Hill,  or
Valley,  Shoare,  or  Bay  of  the  Sea  pleased  them :  Not  only
imitating  here  the  example  of  the  first  Age  of  the  World,
but  also  of  the  latter  Age :  as  the  people  of  Athens  and
Laconia,  in  the  beginning  dwelt  by  Villages  (as  they
write)  not  together  or  by  Cities  :  and  as  in  the  time  of
Tacitus,  about  the  yeere  of  Christ  1 20.  with  the  Germanes
there  was  no  use  of  Mortar  nor  Tyles  :  (whereupon  any
man  may  rather  judge  the  like  concerning  the  Northerne
World)  so,  nor  after,  with  the  Islanders,  but  they  built
their  houses  with  Timber  and  TurfFe.  Nor  surely  was  it  Houses.
momentary  worke  which  lasted  but  a  while,  not  yet
deformed  in  shew,  the  walls  were  sometimes  made  only  of
TurfFe,  sometimes  of  rough  Stones,  adding  TurfFe
in  stead  of  Mortar :  which  afterwards  they  covered  with
workmanship  of  plankes,  as  also  the  raftering  it  selfe ;
especially  in  more  notable  buildings.  And  so  you  might
see  the  Roofe  with  the  walls  before  mature  old  age  over-
growne  with  greene  grasse  every  yeere,  for  you  must
understand,  that  the  Roofe  and  walls  were  covered  with
greene  Turfe.  Windowes  were  made  in  the  Roofe,
seldome  in  the  walls,  and  certayne  Roofes  not  very  high,
such  as  is  reported  the  building  of  houses  with  the
Easterne  people  was  wont  to  be.  The  Inhabitants  had
store  of  Timber,  cast  upon  the  shoare  by  the  swelling  of
the  waves  of  the  Sea ;  through  the  miraculous  testimonie
of  Gods  Providence,  considering  their  Woods  at  home
yeelding  plentie,  as  I  thinke  only  of  Birches,  were  not
sufficient  for  their  huge  houses  :  which  yet  were  a  great
helpe  also  :  with  those  which  the  Inhabitants,  as  oft  as
they  would,  fetched  out  of  bordering  Norway,  and  per-
adventure  also  out  of  Groneland :  for  the  Islanders  sayled

54i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

yeerely  to  both  a  long  time.  Every  one  therefore  had
the  houses  of  their  Villages  almost  joyning  together  on
their  ground :  besides  the  stalls  of  their  Herds,  seated
some  distance  from  the  houses  themselves.  Also  certayne
Fewell.  piles  of  fuell,  not  altogether  joyning  together,  to  avoid  the

danger  of  fire :  peradventure  also  certayne  store-houses,
which  being  solitary,  might  better  receive  the  Ayre  and
drying  winds.

Some maintayned their fires with home-growing

Turfesoftwo Wood: others with clammie Turfe (as I thinke H.

used  in  Junius  aptly  calleth  it)  whereof  there  are  two  kindes  with

England;  the  us  : the  one  soft  and  spongie,  growing  under  the  super-

one  infennie, ficies  of  the  Earth ;  which  wee  call Suordur : Another

the  other  in m0re thicke, and therefore more  weightie ;  which  per-

eat  groun  s.  ac[venture  wee  may  veiy  we^  can  digged  Turfe,  by  the

Inventer  of opinion  of  the  same  Junius  : because  it  is  taken  out  of

Turfe-fewel the  deepe  Quarries  or  Mines,  digged  a  great  depth  out  of

in  the  the  Earth. And  both  kindes  of  Turfe  (but  this  much

Orcades. m0re)  must  bee  first  baked  with  the  Sunne  and  win'de,

before  it  be  fit  to  burne. This  latter  kind  we,  as  also  some

of  the  Germanes  call  it  Torff  :  the  inventor  whereof  in  the

Orchades  a  certayne  Orchadensian  Duke  is  said  to  be :

one  Einarus  the  Sonne  of  Raugnualdus  a  Norwegian  Duke

[III.iii.663.]  °f  Maere,  in  the  time  of  Pulcricomus  King  of  Norway,

who  was  therefore  called  Torffeinarus. He  had  a  brother

called Rolfuo, whom Crantzius nameth Rollo, who

possessed  part  of  France,  afterwards  called  Normandie  of

the  Normans, or  Norwegians. The Inhabitants  chiefly

wanted  fewell  to  expell  the  distemper  of  cold,  besides  other

uses  sufficiently  knowne : especially  in  the  Winter  time,

Stoves.  when Hot-houses and Chimneyes are in use, heaped

together  of  Rocks  and  stone,  through  which  the  flame

might  easily  breake  forth ;  which  as  soone  as  through  the

force  of  the  fire  they  were  throughly  heat,  and  when  the

Hot-house  began  now  to  leave  smoking,  the  cold  parts  of

the  chimney  were  besprinkled  with  hote  glowing  stones :

by  which  meanes  heate  useth  effectually  to  disperse  it

selfe throughout the whole house, which also is very

542

ARNGRIM JONAS

well  so  preserved  by  the  wall,  and  Roofe  covered  with
Turfe.

Yet  lest  the  Islanders  might  seeme  through  meere
povertie  or  want  of  knowledge,  to  have  used  rude  build-
ings and  poore  houses ;  I  can  cal  to  remembrance  certayne
houses  of  an  hundred  and  twentie  sixe  foot  long,  and  some
of  one  hundred  thirtie  five,  as  I  have  before  declared  con-
cerning the  buildings  of  Ingulfus :  and  some  of  one
hundred  and  twentie  feet  in  length,  and  sixtie  feet  broad :
whereof  we  shall  hereafter  speake ;  some  also,  whose
hollowed  rafters,  and  boarded  feeling  of  the  walls  carved
by  art,  report  the  ancient  Histories,  of  worthy  and
memorable  Acts.  They  therefore  inclosed  their  habita-
tions built  after  this  manner,  with  certayne  spaces  of
fruitfull  fields  ordayned  for  tillage,  which  spaces  through
toylesome  labour  they  afterwards  compassed  about  with  a
banke  cast  up,  to  keepe  out  the  Heards  of  cattle.  More-
over, sufficient  huge  pastures  were  assigned  to  every
Farme  or  plot  of  ground,  divided  by  certayne  limits,  or
inclosures  from  others,  whereof  we  shall  speake  in  fhe
eight  Chapter.  And  every  Farme  or  Habitation  for  the
most  part,  and  in  like  manner  every  plot  of  ground
received  the  name  from  the  first  Founders  :  sometimes
also  from  some  other :  so  Mountaynes  and  Rivers  as  hath
beene  advertised  before ;  so  that  by  this  meanes  the  places
themselves,  even  by  their  names  only  declared  to  all
posteritie  their  first  Inhabitants,  and  €7rcovo/uLoi.

I  proceede  from  buildings  to  their  victuals,  and  tillage
of  the  field  and  ground,  which  partly  succeeded  well  to  the
first  Inhabitants,  to  procure  Corne  and  fruit  from  thence :
but  I  know  not  whether  every  where  alike.  Yet  in  the
meane  space,  that  Hiorleifus  mentioned  before,  exercised
his  slaves  in  tillage  of  the  ground  :  and  one  Gunnerus  of
Lidarenda,  sowing  his  Seed,  was  wounded  by  the  enemie
on  the  ball  of  the  cheeke :  and  likewise  Hoschuldus
Huitarnesgode  busily  imployed  in  sowing  the  Seed,  was
slaine.  Hence  from  the  fields  there  are  proper  names  of
certayne  places. Hence  came  that  Law  concerning  the

543

A.D.
1609.

Greater  houses
in  Island  in
old  times.

Victuals  and
Husbandry.

Tillage
anciently  in
use.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

gathering  together,  and  carrying  of  Corne  after  Harvest
(where  they  speake  of  the  services  which  the  Lawyers  call
praediall).  All  which  are  manifest  tokens  of  the  tillage  of
the  ground,  amongst  the  first  Islanders :  which  also,  even
unto  this  day,  I  heare,  is  practised  by  some  Inhabitants  of
South  Island,  but  with  lesse  increase :  the  ground  and
temper  of  the  Ayre  degenerating  from  the  first  goodnesse
thereof  after  so  many  Ages :  peradventure  also  the  care
of  the  Husbandmen  beeing  lesse  diligent,  may  bee  the
cause ;  since  Corne  comming  from  forreigne  parts  began
more  to  be  in  use.  And  because  that  tillage  of  the  ground
seemed  in  the  beginning  either  not  used  of  all,  or  lesse
fruitfull  for  Corne,  and  all  manner  of  graine ;  a  peculiar
manner  of  tillage  of  the  ground  presently  began  :  whereby
they  compassed  with  dunge  those  fields  or  spaces,  which  I
said  they  inclosed  within  their  owne  circuit,  especially
with  kowes  dunge,  at  the  mowing  of  the  best  hay,  to  the
intent  they  may  the  better  feed  the  Heards ;  and  especially
the  Kine,  that  they  might  yeeld  the  more  plentie  of  Milke.
Which  tillage  of  the  ground  is  yet  retayned :  and  they
only  exercise  the  same  for  the  most  part,  almost  by  mid-
land Inhabitants  :  seeing  such  as  dwel  upon  the  Sea-coast
live  most  by  fishing :  whither  also  those  more  remote  or
mid-land  people  yeerely  send  their  Servants  to  fish.  Both
Plaines,  that  is  to  say,  the  ground  and  the  Sea,  was  to  bee
ploughed  after  a  sort  by  the  Islanders,  for  the  comforts  of
Beasts,  life.  To  whom  besides  insteed  of  victuals,  Sheep,  Oxen,
Fish.  Swine  and  Kiddes,  sufficiently  abounded  :  and  also  fishes
of  divers  kindes,  besides  Sea-fish  out  of  the  Flouds,  Lakes
and  Rivers,  they  met  with  every  where :  so  that  they
might  take  them  as  it  were  out  of  a  certayne  weele,
especially  in  that  Age :  also  Milke  and  White-meate,  with
goodly  plentie  of  Butter  from  the  Heards  of  cattle.
Fowle.  Besides  Fowle  in  great  number,  some  tame,  as  Hennes
and  Domesticall  Geese,  or  Fowle  of  another  kind  living
in  the  open  Ayre,  wandring  also  solitarily  in  Mountaynous
places :  which  the  possessors  marked  in  the  feet,  that
every  one  might  more  easily  demand  his  owne. They  had

544

ARNGRIM JONAS

A.D.
1609.

Mead.

Ale.
[III.iii.664.

others  also  not  tame,  which  they  tooke  by  certayne  ginnes  :
as  Geese  and  Duckes  of  the  Medow,  Partridges,  and
Swannes :  and  very  many  Sea-fowle,  whose  names  and
properties  I  doe  not  know.  But  Fowle  of  either  kind
tame  or  wilde,  they  either  presented  their  Egges  or  them-
selves, or  both,  for  the  use  of  men.  Besides  the  naturall
Drinke  or  pressed  Whay  of  Milke  (whereof  the  great  Drinke.
plentie  is  so  much  the  better,  as  the  Milke  is  more  excel-  Whay.
lent :  so  that  halfe  an  ounce  of  water  mixed  with  an  ounce
of  Whay,  doth  not  wholly  diminish  the  taste  thereof ;
but  that  it  relisheth  more  of  the  Whay  then  of  the  water)
they  also  boyled  Barley  Flowre,  sometimes  adding  thereto
the  Honey  Combe,  or  Water  mingled  with  Honey  :  some-
times also  a  Liquour  made  of  certayne  Berries  growing
heere.  Moreover,  the  ancient  Islanders  brought  in  drinke
made  of  Corne,  from  forreigne  parts,  as  also  all  manner  of
graine,  and  other  things :  for  they  were  furnished  with
ships  of  their  owne,  wherewith  they  yeerely  visited  at  their
pleasure,  Denmarke,  Norway,  Suecia,  Scotland,  Saxonie,
England,  and  Ireland.

Our  ancient  Islanders  wanted  not  honest  Banquetings
and  meetings :  and  that  surely  without  miserable  sparing,
whether  we  respect  the  number  of  the  guests,  or  the  time
of  the  Banquets  exhibited.  For  Theodorus  and  Thoru-
aldus,  brethren,  and  Citizens  of  Hialtaedat  of  North  Island,
solemnizing  the  Funerals  of  their  Father  Hialta,  made  a
Banquet  for  fourteene  dayes  together,  of  twelve  hundred
persons,  presenting  the  men  of  better  note  with  some
gift.  And  an  Inhabitant  of  West  Island,  surnamed  Olaus
Pa,  with  his  two  brethren,  were  at  the  charge  to  banquet
nine  hundred  men,  even  for  fourteene  dayes  space ;  not
sending  the  chiefe  men  away  without  reward.

I  find  money  was  not  usual  with  the  Islanders,  I  meane,
those  of  ancient  time :  but  silver  was  weighed  by  the
ballance :  and  bartering  of  Merchandizes  was  very
commonly  used.  Moreover,  Rings  of  Gold,  and  Brace-
lets, were  both  often  sent  for  tokens  of  remembrance  from
Superiours  to  private  men,  or  from  one  friend  to  another.

XIII

545

2  M

ad  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

§•  HI-

Of  their  Politie,  and  Religion  in  old  times.

Chap.  6.  r  I  ^He  Islanders  going  about  to  establish  an  Aristocratic,
Of  their  JL  or  State  of  Nobilitie  (considering  they  dwelt
Com™°n  scattered  in  the  Countrey,  and  not  together)  first  divided
Religion.  their  Citie  into  Fourths  or  Tetrades,  named  from  the
foure  principall  quarters  of  the  World,  and  distinguished
besides  by  setting  of  bounds  (such  also  as  was  the
Geographicall  partition  of  the  Hand  it  selfe,  mentioned
before  at  the  end  of  the  first  Chapter)  divided  into
North,  East,  South,  and  West  quarter.  And  againe,
they  divided  the  Fourths  into  Thirds,  except  the
North  quarter :  For  this,  as  it  was  larger  then  the
rest,  was  parted  into  Fourths.  But  these  Thirds  they
subdivided  againe  into  their  parts :  some  Tenths  and
others  somewhat  otherwise.  For  the  which  not  finding  a
fit  name,  I  have  retayned  the  proper  name  of  the  Countrey,
that  which  with  them  is  Hreppar,  wee  may  counterfeitly
call  Reppae  :  unto  the  which  also  we  may  imagine  no  unapt
Etymon,  from  the  word  Repo.  From  here  was  the  first
appev^la  or  ia-oppoirla  of  them  that  executed  any  publike
Office,  for  equitie  either  of  opinion  and  judgement,  and
the  equall  ballancing  of  mindes,  to  be  preserved  in  the
rest  of  the  Magistrates,  worthily  ought  to  begin  there,
unlesse  any  would  rather  thinke  they  had  respect  heere
unto  Reeb,  that  is  to  say,  Coards,  with  the  which  the
division  was  made,  after  the  most  ancient  manner  of  the
Hebrewes  themselves.  Every  Reppa  regularly  contayned
twentie  Inhabitants  at  the  least  (for  oftentimes  it  contayned
more)  limited  by  a  certayne  increase  of  the  wealth  of  their
Family,  under  which  they  might  not  be  reckoned  to  the
poorer  Reppes ; to  the  richer  they  might.

Moreover  in  every  Third,  as  also  in  the  Fourths  of  the
North  Tetrade,  (which  jurisdictions  in  times  past  they
called  Pyng,  at  this  day  also  Syslu  herad)  they  appointed

546

ARNGRIM JONAS  a.d.

1609.
three  more  famous  places  consecrated  to  the  Seat  of  Justice  Seats  of  Justice
and Judgements ; besides also dedicated to Ethnicke  and  Religion.
Sacrifices,  which  they  call  Hoff :  we  call  them  Holy  Places,
and  Temples. Every  Chappell  after  the  manner  of  this
Countrey  was  sumptuously  built : whereof  wee  reade  of
two,  of  one  hundred  and  twentie  foot  long. One  in  the
Jurisdiction  of  Washdall  of  North  Island : the  other  in
Rialarnes  of  South Island : and this surely  sixtie  foot
broad. Moreover,  every  such  holy  place  had  a  kind  of
Chappell  adjoyning. This  place  was  most  holy. Heere
stood  the  Idols  and  Gods  made  with  hands,  upon  a  low  Idols.
stoole  or  a  certayne  Altar ; about  which  the  cattle  which
were  to  be  sacrificed  unto  them,  were  orderly  placed. But
the  chiefe  and  middlemost  of  the  Gods  was  Jupiter,  by
them  called  Por,  from  whom  these  Northerne  Kingdomes
yet  call  Thors  day  Thorsdagh. The  rest  of  the  Gods  Por  and
were collateral unto it ; whose certayne number, and  Tflors  day-
names  I  have  not  heard. Yet  in  the  ancient  forme  of  oath
(whereof  mention  shall  be  made  hereafter)  three  besides
Thorus,  are  specially  noted  by  name :  Freyr,  Niordur  and  FreyrNiordur
As : whereof  the  third,  to  wit  As,  I  thinke  to  be  that  and  As-
famous Odinus, not accounted the last among those  Odinm  the
Ethnicke  Gods  (of  whom  I  made  mention  before)  Synec-  same  *&**
dochically  called  As: because  hee  was  the  chiefe  of  the  Woden  in  our
people  of  Asia,  who  came  hither  into  the  North : for  in
the  singular  number  they  called  him  As,  which  in  the
plurall  they  called  iEsar,  or  .ZEser. This  Odinus,  as  afore-  Odinus,  Odin,
said,  for  his  notable  knowledge  in  Devillish Magicke ;  °rOdenbyhts
whereby  like  another  Mahomet,  hee  affected  a  Divinitie  ^deAim  a
after  his  death,  was  reckoned  among  the  number  of  the  Devil/)  made
Gods : from whom at this day, Wednesday, is called  a  God.
Odens Dagur, the day of Odinus : whereupon per-  Wodnesday  or
adventure,  I  shall  not  unaptly  call  Odin  Mercurie,  as  Thor  Wednesdah
Jupiter. Yet  the  ancients  honoured  Odin  in  the  place  of
Mars : and  such  as  were  slaine  in  the  warres,  they  say
were  sacrificed  to  Odin. And  the  companions,  or  Sonnes
of  Odin  were  Freyr,  and  Niordur :  who  through  the  same  [III.iii.665.]
artes which their Father or Prince Odinus practised,

547

A.D.
1609.

The  Altar.

Holy  water
sprinkle.

Holy  Ring.

Sacrifices.

Humane-
inhumane
sacrifices.

Devill-circle.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

obtayned  an  opinion  of  Divinitie.  I  have  before  adver-
tised you,  that  chiefly  in  the  North  Countrey,  Kings,  after
their  death,  are  honoured  for  Gods.  But  the  worshipping
of  them  hath  not  yet  come  unto  the  Islanders :  wherefore
we  will  speake  nothing  of  them  in  this  place.

Before  that  seate  of  the  Gods  placed  in  the  foresaid
Temples,  stood  an  Altar  erected,  covered  above  with  Iron,
that  it  might  not  be  hurt  with  fire,  which  must  bee  con-
tinually there.  A  Caldron  also  or  brasen  vessell  was  set
upon  the  Altar,  to  receive  the  bloud  of  the  sacrifices,  with
an  holy  water  sticke  or  sprinkle,  to  bedew  the  standers  by
with  the  bloud  of  the  sacrifices.

Besides,  on  the  Altar  a  silver  Ring  was  kept  (or  of
copper)  of  twentie  ounces,  which  being  anointed  with  the
bloud  of  the  sacrifices,  they  who  executed  any  office  per-
tayning  to  Justice,  being  now  readie  to  take  their  oath,
religiously  handled  while  they  were  sworne.  Foure-footed
beasts,  for  the  most  part,  were  appointed  for  sacrifices ;
to  bee  converted  to  the  food  of  the  Sacrificers.  Although
in  the  meane  space,  I  finde  (a  lamentable  matter)  that  the
blinde  Ethnicks  in  the  foresaid  place  of  Rialarnes  used
also  humane  sacrifices :  where  at  the  door  of  the  Temple,
was  a  very  deepe  Pit,  wherein  the  humane  sacrifices  were
drowned ;  which  Pit  was  called  Blotkellda,  from  the
Sacrifice.

Also  in  West  Island,  in  the  Province  of  Thorns-
thing  :  in  the  middle  of  the  Market  place  there  was  a
round  circle,  into  the  which,  men  appointed  to  be  sacrificed
to  the  Gods,  were  gathered :  who  being  violently  smitten
against  an  exceeding  great  stone  set  there,  were  cruelly
slaine.  The  indignitie  whereof,  that  stone  is  reported  to
have  declared  many  ages  after,  by  the  bloudy  colour,  which
no  shower  of  raine,  or  water,  could  ever  wash  away.  An
abominable  crueltie  surely,  yet  not  wanting  examples,
derived  even  from  the  most  ancient  times.  I  omit  those
of  later  time,  and  found  in  the  neare  bordering  Countries,
as  the  humane  sacrifices  of  the  French,  whereof  Cicero  pro
Fonteio,  speaketh  :  and  also  the  custome  of  nearer  border-

548

ARNGRIM JONAS  a.d.

1609.

ing  Countries. I  doe  not  mention  the  Roman  sacrifices :
among  which,  Luperca  Valeria,  appointed  to  be  sacrificed,
was  delivered  from  present  death  by  an  Eagle. Let  the
7rap6evoK66via,  and  sacrificing  of  noble  Virgins  of  the  Greekes,
not  be  remembred  :  with  whom  Helena  was  likewise  freed
from  imminent  perill  of  sacrificing,  by  the  benefit  of  an  Eagle.
But  who is  it, that  can  be  ignorant  of  Benhennon or
Gehennon  of  the  Hebrewes,  and  their  crueltie  farre  greater
then  this,  exercised  not  upon  slaves  or  guiltie  persons,  but
even upon their dearest children. Concerning which
matter I thought good to set downe the words of
Christoph-Adricomus  Delphus. Gehennon,  saith  he,  was
a  place  in  the  suburbs  of  Jerusalem  over  against  the  East,
under  the  Mountayne  of  Offence,  neare  the  Fish  poole  of
the  Fuller,  most  pleasant,  like  Tempe. In  this  Valley
stood  a  Pavilion,  and  the  brasen  Idol  of  Moloch,  cunningly
wrought  in  the  shape  of  a  King,  hollow  within  : whose
head  resembling  a  Calfe,  the  other  parts  a  man,  had  armes
stretched forth to sacrifice children : who through the
vehement  heat  of  the  Idol,  were  burned  amidst  these  cursed
embracements : For  when  by  the  fire  put  under  in  the
concavity  of  the  Idoll,  it  became  all  fiery,  then  the  most
wicked  parents,  with  incredible  crueltie,  delivered  their
dearest  children,  to  wit,  their  Sonnes  and  Daughters  to  be
burned  within  these  detestable  embracements. And  least
the  miserable  cry  of  the  children  in  horrible  torment  being
heard,  might  moove  the  bowels  of  the  parents,  the  Priests
of  Moloch  filled  the  ayre  and  skie  on  every  side  with  the
harsh  sound  of  Trumpets,  and  striking  up  of  Drummes,  On  this  place
so  long  as  the  sacrifice  continued. Whereupon  also  the  and  these  cries
place  was named  Tophet, which signifieth a Drumme.  °f  ^children
This  Adricomus  writeth. And  least  any  might  thinke,  bounds  0^
that  the  common  people  onely  of  the  Jewes  became  thus  instruments
blinde ;  behold  Kings:  Ahaz,  2.  King.  16.  2.  Paralip,  28.  and  the
Manasses  there  in  the  21.  and  33.  where  also  the  ancient  unnatural1
custome  of  the  Nations  may  bee  alleaged.  horror,  Hell

Jout  that  crueltie,  and  those  sacrifices  or  baturne  seeme  Gehenna  and
not  to  have  continued  long  with  the  Islanders  :  and  surely,  Tophet.

549

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

they  were  used  no  where  else,  save  in  the  two  places
assigned.  Nor  yet  of  all  the  Inhabitants  of  that  Province,
where  it  was  exercised.  For  it  is  reported  of  Hiorleifus,
the  companion  of  Ingulfus  before  mentioned,  that  he
altogether  abhorred  the  worshipping  of  Idols.  And  Helgo
also  surnamed  Biola,  descended  from  the  Barons  of
Norway,  an  inhabitant  of  the  Province  of  Rialarues
favoured  the  Ethnick  Religion  but  a  little  :  for  he  received
an  Irish  man,  a  banished  Christian,  into  his  neighbour-
hood ;  one  named  Ornulfus,  with  his  families  (which  came
with  him) :  and  did  not  onely  receive  him,  but  also  per-
mitted him  to  build  a  Church  consecrated  to  Saint
Columbe,  in  the  Village  of  Escuberg.  A  yong  man  also
of  the  same  Province,  called  Buo,  destroied  that  most
accursed  Temple  of  humane  sacrifices  with  fire,  and  burned
all  the  Gods,  although  afterward  it  was  repaired  by  the
Proprietors.

Moreover,  Torchillus  surnamed  Mane  (it  may  bee
because  hee  honoured  the  Moone,  called  Mane,  and  the
rest  of  the  Starres,  with  more  Religion  then  the  rest)  a
man  of  a  very  upright  life,  and  famous  among  the
Nobilitie  of  Island,  a  little  before  the  agonie  of  death,
caused  himselfe  to  bee  set  forth  over  against  the  Sunne,
and  openly  admiring  the  workmanship  of  Heaven,  and
the  whole  World,  commended  his  soule  departing  when  he
was  readie  to  die,  to  that  God  who  created  the  Sunne,  and
the  rest  of  the  Starres.  He  lived  about  the  yeere  of
Christ  970.  The  same,  or  the  like  may  be  reported  of
very  many  others,  while  Ethnicisme  yet  continued.  As
of  Hallerus  a  certaine  inhabitant  of  South  Island :  who,
[III. iii. 666.]  because  hee  followed  not  the  worship  of  Idols,  was  called
Godlaus,  that  is  to  say,  aOeos,  as  was  also  his  Sonne
Helgo.
Chap.  7.  The  publike  Offices,  some  of  them  are  distinguished

Of  Mag- from  hence ; others  have  their  originall  from  some  other
Courts.  place. Those  which  are  taken  from  hence,  are  a  Reppa-

gogie  (that  I  may  devise  a  word)  and  the  administration  of
Provinces, to wit, as that partition into Reppes, and

55o

ARNGRIM JONAS  a.d.

1609.

Provinces,  ended  as  it  were  in  sundrie  species,  but  both

had some kinde of  government  joyned with it. For

aswell  the  Reppagogi  (for  so  I  may  call  the  Masters  of

Reppes) as the provinciall Governours, proclaimed

Assemblies,  established  Judgements  (every  one  in  their

Court)  and  punished  the  guiltie  : whereby  it  is  evident

that  they  also  used  the  Law  of  Appeale  in  forren  causes

(for  in  their  own,  even  private  men  had  libertie  of  Appeale)

so  that  I  need  not  doubt  that  the  Reppagogi  also  were

comprehended  under  the  Title  of  a  Magistrate. Who  -A  Magistrate

is  defined  by  Bodinus  to  bee  Hee,  that  hath  part  of  a  who'

publique  government. Metho.  Hist.  cap.  16. I  added,

saith  he,  the  word  publique,  that  it  might  be  distinguished

from the government of a Master, or a Father. If

therefore  any  would  desire  a  more  perfect  distinction  of  a

Magistrate,  it  should  be  such : A  Magistrate  is  inferior,

or  superior. The  inferior  is  a  Reppagogie  or  Governour

of  five  men,  which  five  inhabitants  chosen  for  government

of  the  Reppes,  used  in  every  Reppe,  whom  we  are  here

compelled  to  call  Reppagogie,  and  The  five  men,  they

call  them  Hreppstior  ar,  appointed  first  for  their  wisedome

and integritie, next for the possession of immoveable

goods ; unlesse  concerning  this  latter,  it  seeme  good  to

doe  otherwise,  by  the  common  opinion.

Moreover,  the  Office  of  the  Reppagogi,  is  limited  by  the
care  of  the  Poore.  But  that  which  the  care  of  the  Poore  Care  of  the
required,  every  one  within  the  bounds  of  their  Reppe,  Poore.
endevored  to  attaine  by  these  two  meanes.  First,  that
they  should  provide,  that  none  should  bee  suddenly
brought  to  extreme  povertie :  as  much  surely  as  consisteth
in  mans  pollicy.  Secondly,  how  they  might  provide  for
such  as  were  become  Beggars,  to  be  maintayned  by  the
common  aide.

And  surely,  they  attempted  the  first  part  of  their  office
three  manner  of  wayes  : first,  by  making  Lawes  against  Lazves  against
such as through their owne fault (speaking after the  Beggars.
manner  of  men)  became  beggars  :  of  which  sort  are  those,
titul.  de  exhaeredandis,  cap.  3. Parentibus  mendicis  natus

55i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

et  ipse  hostiatim  victum  quaerendo  educatus  (nisi  morbo
affectus)  haereditatem  nullam  adito,  &c.  that  is  to  say,  So
long  as  he  liveth  from  doore  to  doore :  The  1 8 .  chapter  of
the  same ;  and  the  first  three  yeere,  next  from  the  time  of
begging,  cap.  20.  Least  any  under  a  feigned  shew  of
vertue,  should  deceive  and  abuse  the  Lawes.  Also,  Altera
lex  de  ejusmodi  mendicis  impune  castrandis,  etiamsi  cum
eorundem  nece  conjunctum  foret,  titul.  de  pupillis,  cap.  33.
to  wit,  Lest  living  from  doore  to  doore,  they  might  beget
children  like  unto  the  parents,  which  afterwards  should  be
a  burden  to  the  Commonwealth.  Also,  a  third  Law,  De
iisdem  mendicis  non  alendis,  titul.  de  mendicis  cap.  39.  63.
(not  repugnant  to  the  commandement  of  the  Apostle,
Hee  that  laboureth  not,  let  him  not  eate,  2.  Thes.  3.)  and
of  not  receiving  them,  so  much  as  into  their  house,  cap.  45..
of  the  same  :  a  grievous  penaltie  being  inflicted,  if  any
offended  against  this  Law ; in  the  same  place.

By  which  Decree,  what  other  thing  I  pray  you  is  meant,
then  the  custome  of  the  Athenians  in  times  past?  among
whom  the  Areopagitae  inquired  of  the  particular  Citizens,
by  what  art  every  one  lived ;  and  provided  to  have  them
called  in  question,  who  gave  themselves  to  filthy  and
slothfull  idlenesse?  What  other  thing,  I  say,  then  what
was  meant  by  the  Decree  of  the  Massilienses,  who  forbad
them  to  enter  their  Citie,  who  knew  no  arte  whereby  to
sustaine  their  life?  and  lest  any  should  practise  either
unprofitable  or  dishonest  artes :  they  gave  no  place  to
Players,  counterfeit  Jesters,  laughing  Companions,  sawcy
Scoffers  and  Jugglers.  To  conclude,  What  other  thing,
then  what  the  Decree  of  Solon  meant,  who  ordayned  a  Law,
that  the  children  should  owe  no  thanks  nor  favour  to
their  parents,  by  whom  they  had  beene  instructed  in  no
honest  arte  to  get  their  living?  The  ancient  World  had
so  great  and  vehement  provocations  unto  Vertue,  even
with  our  Countrimen,  which  in  this  last  age  (ah,  too
degenerate)  you  may  finde  wanting  with  griefe ;  all  these
Constitutions  being  taken  away.  Wherefore  the  number
(that  I  may  use  the  word  of  Paul)  is  more  abundantly

552

ARNGRIM JONAS  a.d.

1609.

increased,  that  is  to  say,  of  them  who  being  void  of  all  Inordinate

discipline,  live  infamous  to  themselves,  and  grievous  and  men-

troublesome  to  their  common  Countrey,  in  slothfull  and

filthy idlenesse, inverting and changing that order

instituted  by  God  himselfe. The  care  of  which  thing,  if

the  Magistrate  would  yet  undertake,  surely  many  should

fare  the  better.

The  second  meanes  and  way  of  preventing  povertie,  was
a  Law  or  Edict, concerning those who desired to be
admitted  into  a  Reppe,  or  become  Citizens  of  Reppes.
For  none  was  to  be  received  into  a  Reppe,  unlesse  hee  had  Our  tithings
first  gone  unto  the  solemne  assembly  of  that  Reppe,  and  and  hundreds
desired  that  he  might  be  admitted  ; which  they  might  not  %nfh?ir
justly  denie,  unlesse  to  one  convicted  of  theft,  or  other-  ort^[na  '
wise  of  some  other  crime,  or  so  poore,  that  therefore  hee  resemblance
was  unfit  for  the  Reppes,  and  that  hee  could  not  sustaine  thereof.
himselfe  and  his  family  without  the  common  almes  of  the
beggars. But  if  any  could  not  be  present  at  this  assembly,
hee  was  bound  to  intreat  leave  of  cohabitation  of  five
inhabitants,  having  lands  of  their  owne,  and  next  unto
him,  whom  hee  was  about  to  goe  unto. If  any  of  honest
fame  and  rich  in  abilitie,  would  notwithstanding  goe  into
the Reppes without demanding leave, he  retayned his
habitation,  but  yet  was  excluded  from  the  Law  and  privi-
ledges  of  the  Reppes. But  if  any  wicked  and  dishonest
person  has  thrust  himselfe  in  without  leave  (although  he  [HI.iii.667.]
had  lawfully  hired  void  and  emptie  land  from  the  Lord
and  Owner  thereof)  the  same  was  to  be  expelled  by  force :
Titulus  de  Reppis  cap.  48. To  the  same  purpose  apper-
tained that  Edict  concerning  servants  taken  out  of  the
Rep.  cap.  47.  of  the  same.

The  third  Statute  against  povertie  was,  concerning  the
restitution  of  private  losse  in  the  title  recited  before  cap.
47.  whereof  an  example  shall  bee  given,  first  in  houses
by  chance  consumed  by  fire :  and  those  of  foure  sorts.
For  if  a  Store-house,  Kitchin,  Bed-chamber,  or  Bed,  and
Chappel  had  been  burned ;  the  losse  received  was  to  be
valued  within  fourteene  dayes,  by  five  of  the  next  neigh-

553

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

bours,  as  well  as  of  the  house  itselfe,  as  of  the  most
necessary  things  contained  therein  :  as  of  the  provision
of  victuals,  apparell,  and  houshold-stuffe  daily  used  onely,
properly  belonging  to  the  Master  of  the  family,  excluding
other  mens  goods,  as  treasures,  and  other  things  more
precious ;  because  a  man  might  bee  a  sufficient  Citizen  of
Reppes  without  these.  Then  the  halfe  part  of  the  losse
valued  by  the  whole  Reppe,  was  to  bee  restored  within  an
appointed  time,  by  Subsidies  contributed  in  common,
according  to  the  abilitie  of  every  Inhabitant.  Another
example  of  this  liberalitie  enjoyned  by  the  Lawes,  is,
concerning  Cattle  destroyed  by  the  Murren  or  Rot :  for
if  the  fourth  part  of  any  mans  Cattle,  or  more  dyed,  the
losse  likewise  being  valued  within  fourteene  dayes  after
the  Murren  ceased,  was  to  bee  releeved  by  common
supplies  for  the  halfe  part,  as  the  former  was.  But
concerning  both,  there  was  a  caution  added,  that  this
benefit  should  not  be  performed  the  fourth  time ;  least
any  thing  through  too  much  carelesnesse,  and  retchlesse
negligence,  should  procure  damage  to  himselfe,  De  Reppis
cap.  47.  &  48.

The  other  part  of  the  Office  of  the  Reppagogi  was
imployed  about  the  care  of  the  poore,  concerning  the
maintaining  of  such  with  certaine  contribution  of  almes
as  were  now  become  beggers,  either  through  sicknesse  or
age,  or  other  casualties  not  in  their  owne  power :  and  also
concerning  the  excluding  of  others,  who  should  not  apper-
taine  unto  the  almes,  and  divers  cases  thereunto  belonging.
This  almes  was  either  private  or  publike.  Private,  for
Lawes  of  the  which  a  law  was  made  concerning  the  receiving  of  the
Almes.  beggers,  into  the  number  of  their  family  by  their  kindred,
or  cousins,  one  or  more,  inabled  by  a  certaine  increase  of
wealth  limitted  by  law,  and  to  bee  maintained  by  certaine
lawes,  according  to  the  degree  of  hereditarie  succession :
For  as  any  was  next  to  the  inheritance  of  the  begger,  if
hee  possessed  goods,  so  was  hee  accounted  the  first  that
should  sustaine  him.  But  the  next  degree  failing,  or  the
same  being  poore,  or  not  having  wherewith  to  maintaine

554

ARNGRIM JONAS  a.d.

1609.

himselfe  and  his,  besides  that  begger,  that  necessitie  was
imposed  upon  the  second,  or  third  degree  of  kindred,  &c.
to  be  releeved.

Publike  almes  was,  as  often  as  the  kindred  or  cousins
of  the  beggar  failed,  they  lived  by  the  helpe  and  reliefe  of
the  Reppes  :  every  one  was  to  bee  maintained  in  his  Repp  ;
whereof  there  are  prescript  constitutions  of  lawes,  to  wit,
what  beggars  should  belong  to  what  Repp,  and  what  not ;
and  concerning  the  driving  away  and  expelling  of  them  by
processe  of  law,  who  appertaine  not  thereunto.  Therefore
the  Reppagogi  partakers  of  a  publike  Office  limited  with
these  bounds,  proclaimed  assemblies  :  Some  surely  both
in  time  and  place,  standing,  or  ordinary  :  others  not  stand-
ing, or  extraordinary ;  that  is  to  say,  as  often  as  any  new
matter  came  pertaining  to  their  charge  to  bee  determined.
Also  private  men  might  call  extraordinary  assemblies,  to
wit,  they  who  had  any  cause  worthy  of  an  assembly  and
judgement.  But  the  signe  and  token  of  having  an
assembly  (after  the  thousand  yeere,  when  they  had  now
sworne  to  the  Christian  Faith,  peradventure  before  Jupiters
Hammer  and  battle  Axe,  Hamor  pors)  was  according  to
the  religion  of  that  time,  a  woodden  Crosse,  which  every
Inhabitant  carryed  to  his  neighbour  at  the  day,  place,  and
occasion  of  the  assembly  proclaimed,  of  which  signe  inter-
mitted or  neglected,  a  certaine  penaltie  was  inflicted.
There  therefore  the  Reppagogi,  concerning  the  matters
appertaining  to  their  charge,  consulted  according  to
equitie  and  right,  determined  them,  and  punished  the
guiltie :  There  the  guiltie  person,  if  the  injury  were
private,  was  cited  into  the  Court  of  Justice  by  him  that
was  injured,  even  without  publike  authoritie  (which  also
wee  reade  was  used  by  the  Spartanes : )  but  if  the  injury
were  publike  (or  if  the  partie  injured  in  a  private  offence
would  not  cite  the  guilty  person,  or  could  not)  then  was
hee  cited  by  some  of  the  Reppagogi.  Private  men  also
had  libertie  and  power  to  sue  the  Reppagogi  negligent  in
their  Office,  or  otherwise  injurious :  where  a  penaltie  of
money  fell  to  the  Citizens  of  the  Reppes :  all  which,  and

555

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

other  things  here  belonging  are  handled,  in  codice  legum
de  Reppagogiis,  cap.  43.  And  concerning  the  inferiour
Magistrates,  that  is  to  say,  the  Reppagogi  onely,  to  wit,
the  first  species  of  the  Civill  Magistrate.

Now  followeth  the  superiour  Magistracie,  which  is
distinguished  into  Governours  of  Provinces,  and  Justices.
They  were  each  of  them  Governours  in  every  Province
(which  before  I  called  Thirds,  to  wit,  of  every  Tetrade)
executing  as  well  the  publike  Offices  of  the  Courts  of
Justice,  as  of  holy  mysteries :  or  they  were  Interpreters  of
the  Law,  and  matters  of  Religion  :  (although  afterward
the  interpretation  of  the  Law  belonged  more  to  the
Justices.)  As  with  the  Romanes,  the  iEdiles  also  usurped
part  of  the  Praetorian  Jurisdiction.  Among  the  ancient
Hebrewes  also  the  High  Priests  :  also  among  the  Romanes
the  High  Priests  were  sacrificers.  Whereupon  Horatius
carm.  lib.  3.  Ode.  23.  Victima  Pentificum  secures  cervice
tingit.

These  Governours  therefore,  in  that  they  had  the  charge
of  holy  Mysteries,  were  Priests  :  in  that  they  had  to  doe
with  the  Court  of  Justice  and  Judgement,  they  were
[III.iii.668.]  Judges :  we  call  them  Noble-men  in  this  place,  and  the
state  of  the  Common-wealth  governed  by  their  oversight,
an  Aristocratic  The  same  are  called  by  our  Country-
men Godar,  and  Hoffsgodar  ;  from  the  Church  or  Temple
(which  is  Hoff)  as  it  were  Over-seers  of  the  Church,  and
their  Office  or  Dignitie  was  called  Godord ;  to  wit,  their
name  being  next  derived  from  their  Ethnick  gods,  which
they  called  God :  that  even  by  the  name  itselfe,  they  (who
almost  represented  the  Name  and  Office  of  the  Gods)
might  bee  put  in  minde  of  the  Vertues,  Wisdome,  and
Justice,  &c.  requisite  in  such  a  Governour.

And  that  they  might  shew  themselves  such,  I  suppose
the  same  place  was  appointed  to  judgements  of  the  seate
of  Justice,  which  was  ordained  for  Sacred  Mysteries :  to
wit,  at  the  foresaid  Temples.  And  also  therefore,  because
the  place  of  holy  Mysteries,  was  religiously  thought  fitter
for  evftvXela,  or  the  taking  of  good  counsell,  whereof  there

556

ARNGRIM JONAS  a.d.

1609.

is  especiall  use  in  the  Court  of  Justice.  Moreover,  the
Provinciall  Governours  had  their  two-fold  assemblies  as  the
Reppagogi  had ;  yeerely  or  ordinary  meetings,  and  pro-
claimed :  or  extraordinary,  any  necessitie  requiring  (those
former  assemblies,  containing  many  dayes  :  vid.  Kauph  cap.
8.  Torn.  Log)  and  that,  as  it  is  likely,  assembled  by  some
signe  of  holding  a  meeting :  as  we  have  already  said  of
Reppagogies :  which  surely,  what  it  was  in  times  past,  is
not  well  knowne ;  unlesse  it  were  that,  which  afterwards,
and  yet  remaineth  in  use ;  the  forme  of  a  Norwegian  axe
of  Wood,  carried  about  after  the  same  manner,  among  the
provinciall  Citizens :  as  we  said  a  little  before,  of  the
woodden  crosse.  This  token  of  the  Judiciall  Court,  is
called  Bod  in  our  language,  which  signifieth  a  message.

Moreover,  every  one  paid  some  yearely  tribute  or
revenue  to  the  Temples  :  whereof  the  Guardian  or  Over-
seer of  the  Church  was  the  Collector :  for  speaking  of
holy  mysteries  pertaining  to  the  Church,  I  call  every
Noble  man  so.  To  him  also  came  the  penaltie  of  the
Temple,  and  Court  of  Justice  prophaned  :  who  likewise
ought  to  maintaine  the  Temple,  or  keepe  it  in  reparations,
at  his  owne  charge.  Lastly,  the  necessity,  and  specially
care  to  amend  and  make  good  whatsoever  damage  done
unto  the  Province,  or  to  foresee  and  prevent  it  being
imminent,  using  the  helpe  of  the  Provincials,  lay  wholly
upon  him :  so  that,  for  the  destroying  of  Theeves  and
publique  Robbers,  you  may  flnde  some  who  were  prodigall
of  their  owne  life.  Contrarily,  it  is  a  lamentable  case,
how  at  this  day  we  see  it  every  where  comes  to  passe,
where  they  make  a  great  conscience  to  condemne  a
notorious  Theefe  by  the  Law,  or  any  other  convicted
once  or  twice  of  any  capitall  crime,  much  more  to  put  him
to  death.  These  are  the  Governours  of  Provinces :  The
Nomophylaces  or  Justices  follow.  The  Nomophylax
was  the  other  kinde  of  the  superiour  Magistrate,  some-
what later  then  these  :  of  which  sort,  in  the  whole  auncient
Citie  of  Island  (for  we  yet  describe  it)  at  one  and  the  same
time, there was onely one : who of pronouncing or

557

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1609.

delivering  the  Law,  was  called  Logmann  and  Logfogu-
mann.  For  the  Commonwealth  began  not  suddenly,  but
by  little  and  little  to  be  framed :  therefore  the  Provincial!
Lawes  were  first,  of  the  like  meaning,  though  per-
adventure  not  every  where  the  same,  before  they  had  them
compact,  and  gathered  into  one  body :  which  when  they
attained,  for  the  custody  and  preservation  of  the  same,
they  admitted  trustie  and  wise  men,  whom  I  call  Nomo-
phylaces ;  and  whose  Office  I  shall  very  well  describe  in
the  Words  of  D.  Nicolaus  Cragius,  declaring  the  Office
of  the  Spartan  Nomophy laces.  The  Office  or  the  Nomo-
phylaces  (saith  D.  Cragius  Li.  2.  cap.  6.  de  Repub.
Lacedaem.)  was,  as  we  perceive  by  the  matter  itselfe,  to
have  charge  of  the  custody  and  preservation  of  Lawes,
for  the  benefit  of  the  Commonwealth ;  and  that  they
should  not  suffer  them  to  be  abolished,  changed,  or  taken
away  by  any.  Moreover,  they  indevoured  that  the  force
of  the  Lawes  might  not  grow  out  of  use,  or  the  memory
thereof  be  forgotten ;  but  they  compelled  the  Magistrates
to  the  often  observation  of  them,  and  execution  of  their
dutie.  And  further,  we  may  thinke  these  very  men  were
the  interpreters  of  Lawes,  if  peradventure  anything  doubt-
fully set  downe,  or  hardly  understood,  should  come  in
disputation.  This  Cragius  writeth  :  the  same  which  I  doe
of  ours :  adding  this,  that  they  had  some  manner  of
authority  in  their  power,  together  with  the  rest  of  the
Nobility,  of  changing,  or  renewing  Lawes,  and  also
inlarging  them,  as  it  were  Orators  and  Counsellours ;  the
consent  of  the  people  being  added.  Therefore  the  Nomo-
phylaces  or  chief  Justices,  tooke  nothing  away  from  the
forme  of  an  Aristocratie :  but  were,  as  hath  beene  said
before,  Interpreters,  and  preservers  of  the  Law,  armed
with  publique  authority  for  this  purpose,  in  whose  power
also  the  custody  of  the  Booke  of  the  Lawes  remained.

But  I  dare  proceede  no  further  with  our  Author  in  his
Law  Suites  and  Courts,  lest  I  be  therein  detained  with
Demurs  and  tedious  delaies.  I  am  a  Traveller,  and
howsoever  I  have  (not  so  much  for  Island,  as  for  the

558

ARNGRIM JONAS  a.d.

1609.

knowledge  of  the  Arctoan  antiquities)  waded  thus  farre :
I  will  not  tire  the  Reader  further,  but  remit  the  more
curious  to  the  Author  himselfe,  who  hath  added  much  of
their  Lawes,  and  a  whole  Booke  of  their  auncient  Grands,
and  another  of  their  Kings,  both  here  omitted.  The
Kings  of  Norway  began  to  have  dominion  in  Island  a.
1 26 1  divers  immunities  reserved:  which  Kingdome
descending  upon  Margaret,  by  her  was  linked  with  that
of  Denmarke,  and  so  hath  continued  above  200.  yeares.

END OF VOLUME XIII.

274

PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY

G
159

P935
1905
v.13
cop.  2
