Hakluytus Posthumus, or Purchas His Pilgrimes, Vol. 11 (Samuel Purchas, 1625)
==========================================================
Purchas His Pilgrimes (1625) - the 17th century's great sequel to Hakluyt; the largest voyage collection of its age, preserving dozens of narratives otherwise lost. The 20-volume MacLehose reprint (Glasgow, 1905-07), the standard complete edition. Vol. 11 of 20.

Hakluytus  Posthumus

or

Purchas His Pilgrimes

In Twenty  Volumes

Volume XI

GLASGOW
PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY
ROBERT  MACLEHOSE  &>  COMPANY  LTD. FOR
JAMES MACLEHOSE AND SONS, PUBLISHERS
TO THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW

MACMILLAN AND CO. LTD.  LONDON

THE MACMILLAN CO.  NEW YORK

SIMPKIN, HAMILTON AND CO.  LONDON

MACMILLAN AND BOWES  CAMBRIDGE

DOUGLAS AND FOULIS  EDINBURGH

MCMVI

Hakluytus Posthumus

or

Purchas  His  Pilgrimes

Contayning a History of  the World

in Sea Voyages and Lande Travells

by Englishmen and others

By
\  /

SAMUEL PURCHAS, B.D.

VOLUME  XT  11

^%&o

Glasgow
James MacLehose and Sons

Publishers  to  the  University

'  B-J

G-

/ft/

/for
v.  //

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs  in
the  first  Booke  of  the  second  part  of
Purchas  his  Pilgrims.

The  Epistle  Dedicatorie. ....

CHAP. I.

The  Journall  of  Friar  William  de  Rubruquis,  a  French
man,  of  the  Order  of  the  Minorite  Friars,  unto  the
East  parts  of  the  World,  Anno  Dom. 1253. H.

Gasaria  Province.  The  Citie  Matriga.  Zikia.  Great
Lakes.  Salt-pits,  very  beneficiall.  Tartars  houses.
Court,  Beds,  Puppets,  Images,  Idols,  Idolatrous
drinking.  Drinke  called  Cosmos,  how  made.  Cara-
cosmos.  Mares  Milke.  Provision.  Dyet.  The  beast
Sogur.  Garments  and  Attire.  Botta  head  attire.
Women  Carters.  Men  milkers.  Marriages.  Murther,
unlawfull  copulation,  and  theft  punished  with  death.
Shamelesse  Beggers.  Un-inhabited  Countrey.  Dismall
travelling.  Alanian  Christians.  A  Saracen  would  be
baptised.  Seeming  Lepers.  Longitude  of  Comania.
Dutch  Knights.  Extreame  heate.  Of  Sartachs
Dominion  and  Subjects  :  His  Court  and  Magnificence.
Presents  to  Sartach.  Vestments,  Bible,  Psalter,  Censer.
Letters  to  Sartach.  Harsh  usage  of  a  Nestorian  Priest.
Ken  Can  his  abode.  Worshippers  of  Devils.  Cyngis,
a  Black-smith.  Court  of  Baatu.  Huge  and  fierce
Dogs.  Bulgarians  wicked  Saracens.  Perswasion  to
Christianitie.  Letters  of  the  French  King.  Clergie-
men.  Houres  of  our  Ladie.  Office  for  the  Dead
Discents. Scattered Nations. Land of Pascatir

PAGE

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Tartars.  Great  River.  Lakes.  Vines.  Ban  put  to
death.  Contomanni.  Jugures  idolatries,  Idols,  temples
&  worship.  Huge  huge  monstrous  Idol.  Questions
and  Answers.  Magicall  practices.  Sooth-sayers.
Abundance  of  gold.  Curious  Artists.  Skilfull
Physicians.  Fables  of  gods  and  Deified  men.  Usurers,
Drunkards,  Simonists.  Ken  Cham  his  death.  Stichin
and  Ken  kill  each  other.  Tartars  pride.  Christian
Chappell.  Counterfeit  Armenian  Monke.  Tuinians
Idolaters.  Respect  of  Priests.  Description  of  Mangu
Chan.  Rubruquis  conference  with  Mangu  Can  ;  and
his  entertainment.  Coozening  Clerke  and  lying
Monke.  Mangus  Holy-day.  Cold  fare.  Coole
devotion.  Cototo  Caten  Christened.  Nestorians
drinking,  fast,  friday.  Tartar-divining.  Threshold.
Nestorian  Crosses,  not  Crucifixes,  Drunkennesse.
Monkes  Miracles.  Pitifull  Priests.  Sumoal,  Orangei,
Pascatir,  Cataia.  Precious  purple.  Paper  money.
Easterne  Lent.  Preaching  reprehended.  Manichaean
blasphemie.  Hypocriticall  feast-fast.  Artificiall  silver
Tree.  Description  of  the  Palace.  Procession,  Prayers.
Celebration.  Receiving  the  Sacrament.  Confession.
Theft  excused.  Fraud  and  deceit.  Obstinate  and
bold  blindnesse.  Divinations.  Caracarum  described.
Hassasines  secret  Murtherers.  Tartars  deceit  more
then  force.  Truth  of  the  Gospell  acknowledged.
The  Can  wavers  betwixt  Ethnikes,  Saracens  and
Christians.  Disputation.  Manichean  heresie.  Saracens
confession.  Jugurs  sect.  Tartars  Faith.  Baatus  great-
nesse.  Tartarian  Sorcerers.  Sorcerers  like  their  father
the  Devill,  Lyars  &  Murtherers.  Mangu  Chan  his
Revenge.  Devillish  Sorcerers.  Great  solemnitie.
Charmis,  wife  to  Chen-Chan.  Mangu  Chan  his
greatnesse.  Preservative  against  thunder  and  lightning.
Tedious  journey.  River  of  Volga.  Village  Sumer-
kent.  Bridge  of  Ships.  Great  Alexanders  inclosures.
The  Plaine  Moan.  River  Cur.  Armenian  fables.
Mountaine  Massis.  Armenian  Churches.  Great  Earth-
quake. Turke  overcome. Turkie  full  of  Christians.

CHAP. II.

Tartarian and Northerne Relations written in  Latin  by

the  famous  Friar  Roger  Bacon. H.  .  .  .150

Learned  Geographicall  Discourse  of  Learned  Frier  Bacon.

vi

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Relations  of  Vincentius  Beluacensis,  the  most  of  which  he
received  from  Friar  Simon  de  Sancto  Quintino,  one
of  the  foure  Friars  sent  by  Pope  Innocent  the  fourth
to  the  Tartars :  serving  to  the  illustration  of  the
former. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .168

Baioth-noys  Letter  to  the  Pope.  Chams  Letter  to  Baioth-
noy.

CHAP. III.

Relations  touching  the  Tartars,  taken  out  of  the  Historie
of  R.  Wendover,  and  Mat.  Paris :  with  certaine
Epistles  of  the  same  subject. .  .  .  .  173

Inhumane,  savage,  pestiferous,  brutish  and  bloud-thirstie
Tartars.  Tartars  invasions  threatning  destruction  of
all  Christendome.  The  Emperours  Letter  for  ayde
to  the  King  of  the  England.  Tartarian  threats,
spoyles,  ravishments  and  slaughter.

Part  of  an  Epistle  written  by  one  Yvo  of  Narbonne  unto
the  Archbishop  of  Burdeaux,  recorded  by  Matthew
Paris, 183

Tartars  valiantly  repulsed.  Description  of  the  Tartars.
Avarice  and  pride  punished.

CHAP. IIII.

The  first  booke  of  Marcus  Paulus  Venetus,  or  of  Master

Marco  Polo,  a  Gentleman  of  Venice, his  Voyages. . 188

§  1.  The  voyages  of  Master  Nicolo  and  M.  Maffio,  from
Constantinople  to  the  Great  Can,  and  their  comming
home  to  Venice  :  their  second  voyage  with  the
Authour  and  returne. .  .  .  .  .  .188

Nicolo  and  Maffio  their  Voyages.  Courteous  entertayn-
ment.  Ambassadors  to  the  Pope.  Golden  Tablet.
Popes  Presents  to  the  Great  Chan.  Adoration  of  the
Tartars.  King  Argon.  Nicolo,  Maffio,  Marco,  and
others,  Embassadors.  Maffio  made  a  Magistrate.
Marco  Captaine  of  a  Fleet.
vii

THE TABLE

PAGE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.

§  2.  Observations  of  M.  Polo,  of  Armenia,  Turkie,  Zorzania,
Baldach,  Persia,  Chirmain,  Cobniam,  Ormus,  Knave-
fooles  paradise,  and  other  Easterne  parts  in  Asia,  and
Armenia  the  lesse. .  .  .  .  .  .  .199

Store  of  treasures.  Crueltie  rewarded.  Devils  Martyrs.
Murtherers.  Strange  Oxen  well  taught.  Great  Sheepe.
Inchantments.  Bitter  waters.  Old  man  of  the
Mountayne. Mahomets  deceitfull  Paradise.

§  3.  Of  Sapurgan,  Balac,  Thaican,  Scassem,  Balaxiam,  Bascia,
Chesmur,  Vochan,  Samarchan,  Carchan,  Peym,  the
dreadfull  Desart  of  Lop  and  Tanguth. .  .  . 209

Pleasant  Country.  Salt  Mountaynes.  Porcupines.  Brave
Horses.  Expert  Magicians.  Idolaters,  craftie  and
cruell.  Cunning  Inchanters.  Adulterous  custome
Devilish  illusions.  Birth-day  Sacrifice.  Burning  of  the
dead.  Joviall  Companions.  Kind  loving  Cuckolds.
Christian  Churches. Idolatrous  Monasteries.

§  4.  Of  Carchoran,  the  originall,  proceedings  and  exploits
of  the  Tartars  ;  of  Priest  John  and  his  discendants.
Customes  of  the  Tartars.  Of  Bargu,  Erginul,  Xandu,
the  Cans  Citie  and  Palace  ;  of  Muske  :  of  strange
Sorcerers,  and  austere  Monkes.  .  .  .  .221

Cingis  beginning.  Sepulcher  of  the  Kings  of  the  Tartars.
Their  Marriages,  and  Religion.  Painted  Marriages.
Penaltie  nine-fold.  Night  walking  Spirits.  Beautie
esteemed  before  preferment  or  riches.  Feasants,  Cranes.
Magicians. Canibal  sanctitie. Idolatrous  Monkes.

§  5.  Of  Cublai  Can,  his  Raigne  and  Acts,  Magnificent
feasts  and  huntings,  Court  and  Counsell.  His  Citie
Cambalu  and  glorious  Palace,  .  .  .  .  .233

Great  Armies.  A  cruell  fight.  Nairn,  Trator  to  his  Lord,
Cublai  his  person.  Cublai's  two  and  twentie  Sonnes.
Palaces,  Courts,  and  Gates.  Buriall  place.  Harlots.
Horse-men  Courtiers.  Feasts.  New-yeares  gifts.
Spacious  hunting  with  thousands  of  men,  and  Dogs  ;
with  Lions.  Cans  Tent-Citie,  Game-countrie  ;  Barke-
money,  Councels  of  warre.
viii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  PAGE

§  6.  The  Cans  provisions  for  Embassadours  and  for  Posts,
against  Dearth ;  for  High-wayes ;  for  the  Poore  in
Cambalu,  for  Astrologers ;  Tartars  Wine,  Fuell,
Religion,  Opinions,  Behaviour,  Court-neatnesse :  Polos
proceeding  from  Cambalu  westward.  Of  Pulisangan,
Gouza,  Tainfu,  Pianfu,  Thaigin,  Cacianfu,  Quen-
zaufu,  Sindinfu,  Thebeth,  Caindu,  Caraian,  Carachan,
Cardandan  and  Vociam.  ...... 249

Provisions  for  Posts;  their  swiftnesse.  Dearth  prevented.
Cole-wonder.  Tithes  and  works  for  Can.  Almes.
Chronologic  Religion.  Faire  bridge.  Dor  with  his
Damsels  and  penance.  Mangalus  palace.  Wilde  beasts
sacred.  Tame  beasts  applauded.  Corall  money.
Double  adulterie.  Salt  and  Porcelane  money.  Huge
Dragons.  Dragons  how  taken.  Women  husbands ;
childing  man. Tallie  Bonds. Devill-cures.

§  7.  Of  the  Province  of  Mien  and  Bengala,  how  they  were
conquered  to  the  Can  :  Of  Cangigu,  Amu,  Tholoman,
Cintigui,  and  some  other  parts  of  Cataio.  And  of
the  Conquest  of  Mangi.  .  .  .  .  .266

Tartars  stratagem  against  Elephants.  Huge  Oxen.  Em-
broidered skins.  Barke-clothes.  Lion-killing  Dogs.
Salt  made  of  earth.  Navie  Royall.  Fanfur  K.  of  Mangi.
Argus. Name  of  Hundred  eyes,  and  of  Mangi.

§  8.  Of  the  Cities  of  Mangi  (now  called  China)  and  the
rarities  thereof:  the  many  wonders  of  Quinsai,  the
Palaces,  Pleasures,  Rites  and  Government,  observed
by  the  Natives,  and  the  Tartars. .  .  .  .275

Great  cheape  Phesants.  Engines  of  battery.  Great  River
Quian.  Cane-Cordage.  Singui.  Quinsai  Bridges,
Markets,  Streets,  Chanels,  Trades,  Citizens.  Quinsay
pleasures,  Funerals,  Hospitals.  Mangi  Garrisons.
Fanfurs  Magnificence.  Ouinsays  Greatnesse  and
Revenues.  Concha  a  Kingdom.  Zaitum  a  famous
Port  &  Mart  of  Mangi.

§  9.  The  ships  of  India  described,  the  He  of  Zipangu,  the
Sea  Chin,  and  World  of  Hands,  the  two  Javas,  Zeilan,
and  other  Hands,  with  the  rarities  therein. .  . 291

ix

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Indian  ships.  Zipangu  Idols.  Tartars  escape.  Sea  of
Chin.  Cheinan-gulfe.  Ebonie.  Rhinoceros-Unicorne.
Pigmeys  made.  Tayled  men.  Meale  of  trees.  Zeilan-
Rubie.

§  10.  Of  the  firme  Land  of  the  Greater  India. .  . 298

Malabar  Pearle-fishing.  Gaui.  Dettors  Circle.  Super-
stitions of  Malabars  and  Bramines.  Adams  sepulchre.
Sogomonbarchan  first  cause  of  Idols.  Frankincense.
Northern  Tartars.  Furs.  Region  of  Darknesse.  Polo
and  Haiton.  Reason  of  our  Method  ;  Taurus  Divider
of  Asia,  why  so  called.

CHAP. V.

The Historie of  Ayton, or Anthonie the Armenian, of

Asia,  and  specially  touching  the  Tartars. H.P.  . 309

§  1.  Of  the  Kingdome  of  Cathay,  and  divers  other
Provinces  of  Asia,  and  of  the  first  habitation  of
the  Tartars  :  and  of  Cangius,  or  Cingis  his  be-
ginnings  309

Tarsa,  Sym,  Turquestan,  Corasmians;  Cumania  extremes.
Zeilan,  Armenia,  Alania,  Georgia,  Hamsen,  Trape-
zond.  Tartarians :  beginnings  of  Changius  their
Romulus  &  Numa.  Changius  his  Owle  ;  his  second
Vision  ; and  worshipping-miracle.

§  2.  Of  Changius  Can  his  second  vision  and  conquests.
Of  Hoccota  and  his  three  sonnes  expeditions  ;  of
Gino  Can  ;  of  Mangu  Can,  who  was  visited  by  the
King  of  Armenia,  and  baptised  ;  of  the  expedition  of
his  brother  Haloon.  .  .  .  .  .  .320

Embleme  of  Concord.  Tartarian  Nine.  Hoccotas  three
sons  acts.  Mangu  and  Baydo  drowned.  Tartarians
dispersion  and  succession.  The  Armenian  King
visiteth  the  Can.  His  Demands  &  answer.  Haloons
conquest  of  Persia  and  Bagdet.  Chaliphs  rich-poore
diet.  Halappi  won  by  the  Tartars,
x

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued,  page

§  3.  Of  Cobila  Can  the  fift  Emperour  of  the  Tartarians  :
Of  the  warre  with  Barcha,  and  Tartarian  quarrell
with  the  Christians,  Haolaons  death.  Acts  of  the
Soldan  of  Egypt.  Of  Abaya  and  other  sonnes  and
successours  of  Haloon. .  .  .  .  .  .334

Civill  wars.  Scandall  from  Christians.  Tartarian,  Egyptian,
Armenian  affaires.  King  turnes  Monke.  Parvana
twise  executed.  Turkie  refused.  Mangodaniors  folly.
Tangodor  turnes  Mahomet,  and  is  cut  asunder  in  the
midst. Argon.

§  4.  Of  Argon  the  sonne  of  Abaga,  and  Regaito  his
brother;  of  Baido,  and  of  the  exploits  of  Casan
against  the  Soldan  of  Egypt,  and  others.  .  . 344

Argon,  Regaito,  Baido,  Casan,  Tartar  Kings  Acts.  Casans
heroicke  mind  in  a  dwarfish  il-featured  bodie.  Calfachs
treason.  Casans  impediments  to  recover  the  Holy
Land.  Cotulossas  rashnesse  punished.  Casans  kind-
nesse  to  the  Armenian.

§  5.  Casan  dyeth,  Carbanda  succeedeth  ;  his  Apostasie.
The  Authors  entrance  into  a  Religious  habit.  Of
Tamor  Can  the  sixt  Emperour,  and  of  Chapar,
Hochtai,  and  Carbanda,  three  other  Tartarian  Kings. 356

Carbandas  Apostasie.  Haitons  Souldiory,  Monkery,  &c.
Tamor  Can  ;  Chapar,  Hochtai,  and  Carbanda,  &c.
Gnats  strained,  Camels  swallowed. Cataian  Rites  ;  &c.

CHAP. VI.

Travels  and  Memorials  of  Sir  John  Mandevile. .  . 365

Sir  John  Mandevile  wronged; his  life,  death,  armes. Sir
John  Mandeviles  Travels  and  Observations.

CHAP. VII.

The  Voyage  of  Nicolo  di  Conti  a  Venetian,  to  the  Indies,
Mangi,  Cambalu  and  Quinsai,  with  some  observations
of  those  places. .  .  .  .  .  .  .394

xi

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Desart-devils.  Dispersed  Nestorians.  Cinamon  trees.
Yard-bells.  Strange  Kine  with  feather-haires.  Macin.
Dua. Quinsai  in  Catay. Tartarian  and  China  mysts.

CHAP. VIII.

Extracts  of  Alhacen  his  Arabike  Historie  of  Tamerlan,
touching  his  Martiall  travels,  done  into  French  by
Jean  du  Bee,  Abbat  of  Mortimer. .  .  .  .401

§  1.  Tamerlans  birth  and  person,  his  Expedition  against
the  Muscovite ;  his  marriage  with  the  Cans  daughter ;
his  over-throwing  of  Calix. .  .  .  .  .4.01

Franke  Tongue.  Tamerlan.  Fables  of  Tamerlan.  His
Birth,  Person,  disposition  :  first  Warre.  His  victorie
over  the  Moscovite,  Marriage,  intent  for  China.  King
of  Chinas  pride.  Tamerlanes  expedition  and  sicknesse.
Calix  entertayned  in  Cambalu.  His  and  Tamerlans
preparations. Calix  taken  prisoner  and  beheaded.

§'2.  Cataio,  Cambalu  ;  Tamerlans  Expedition  into  China,
entring  the  Wall,  conquering  the  King,  and  disposing
of  the  Countrey,  and  returne  to  Cataio.  .  .  . 414.

Tamerlan  welcommed.  Tamerlans  Oration  to  his  Souldiers.
The  Souldiers  applaud.  Chineses  instructions  to  passe
the  Wall,  and  of  the  State.  Secret  passage  in  China.
Chinois  overthrow  at  the  partition  wall.  Tamerlans
march  in  China.  Description  and  siege  of  Paguinfu.
Paguinfu  yeelded.  King  of  China  and  Tamerlans
forces.  Their  terrible  battell.  Gilded  Cloud  of
China  dispersed.  King  of  China  taken.  His  behaviour
before  Tamerlan.  China.  The  Kings  brother  over-
thrown by  Odmar.  Quantofou  yeelded.  China
Embassage,  and  Capitulations  with  Tamerlan.  Cambalu.

§  3.  The  differences  betwixt  Tamerlan  and  Bajazet  the
Turke  ;  his  returne  to  Samercand,  and  Expedition
against  Bajazet ;  the  battell,  and  victorie,  his  Caging
of  Bajazet,  and  making  him  his  foot-stoole. .  . 444

Tamerlans message to Bajazet. Bajazets proud answer.
Tamerlans  Dreame. Conquest  of  China. His  chiefest
xii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

trust.  Fit  preparation  before  the  light.  Order  of
both  Battels.  Janizaries.  Tamerlans  battell  with
Bajazet,  and  victorie.  Bajazet  selfe  sentenced.  Pride
humbled  without  humilitie.  Axalla  cruell  against  the
Ottomans.

§4.  Encrease  of  Samarcand  ;  Affaires  of  China  :  Funerals
of  the  Can  ;  comming  to  Quinza,  and  description
thereof. His  disposition  of  his  estate  and  death. . 458

Tamerlans  Vow  to  God.  Articles  betweene  Tamerlan  and
the  King  of  China.  Description  of  Quinsay,  Tamerlans
entertainment  there.  Tamerlans  justice,  love  and
liberalitie  to  his  servants.  The  death  of  Tamerlan.
Sautochio  his  sonne  proclaymed  Emperor.

CHAP. IX.

Reports  of  Chaggi  Memet  a  Persian  of  Tabas  in  the
Province  of  Chilan,  touching  his  travels  and  observa-
tions in  the  Countrey  of  the  Great  Can,  unto  M.  G.
Baptista  Ramusio. ....... 4.69

Campion  described.  Pageants,  Temples,  White  mourning,
Printing. Jeselbarts.

CHAP. X.

A  Treatise  of  China,  and  the  adjoyning  Regions,  written
by  Gaspar  da  Cruz  a  Dominican  Friar,  and  dedicated
to  Sebastian  King  of  Portugall :  here  abbreviated. H.  P. 474

§  1.  Of  Cambaia  and  the  Bramenes  there  ;  the  cause  of  his
going  to  China:  Of  China  and  the  neighbouring
Regions. 474

Cambria  superstition  proud  Prelates.  Fooles  Heavens  and
Hels.  Slavery  and  Superstition.  Liquos,  Laos,
Cauchin-china.  The  Muske  in  those  parts.  Sistor
a  strange  River  ;  the  beast  Badas  ;  Laos  described.
Tartars  and  the  wall  of  China. Alimenes.

§  2.  Cantan  described  ; the  publike and  private  buildings
and government. The shipping and husbandrie of
xiii

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

China  ;  their  contempt  of  the  idle,  and  provision  for
impotent  poore. ....... 486

City  wals  and  Over-seers.  Large  description  of  Cantan  a
Citie  of  China.  Cantan  buildings  private  and  publike;
thousands  of  Porkes,  &c.  China  Cities,  high-wayes,
Rivers,  timbers,  ships,  trade,  riches.  Sea-fights,  Oares,
Ship-variety  and  Dwellers.  Duckes  how  bred.  Industrie
andidlenesse.  Severitie  and  Tyrannie  compared.  China
neatnesse  ;  Plowes,  Ship-pumps,  provision  for  Poore.

§  3.  Of  their  mechanicall  Trades,  Merchandises  and
Moneyes  :  their  provisions  of  flesh  and  fish  ;  the
Persons  and  attyre  of  Men  and  Women  :  their  Feasts. 503

Trades.  Handi-crafts.  Almes,  not  to  the  idle.  Porcelane
how  made.  China  money,  deceits,  food,  markets  ;
fruits  and  Victualling  houses.  Cook-rew  of  Dogs-
flesh.  Fish  bred,  fed,  caught.  China  Priests,  saluta-
tion, entertainment,  feeding-rites,  Feasts.  Nocturnall
feasts,  Comedies,  Musicall  Instruments,  Quarrels.
Sharpe  mourning  ;  Marriage,  Adulterie,  Harlots,
Slaverie.

§  4.  Of  their  Louthias,  Mandarines  or  Magistrates,  their
creation,  priviledges,  maintenance ;  of  Prisons  and
Tortures; of  the  King  and  of  Embassadours. .  . 522

Eunuchs  Court  and  counsell.  Deputie,  Treasurer,  chiefe
Justice.  The  Magistrates  creation,  varietie,  ensignes,
respect.  Students.  Schooles  and  Degrees,  Writings
publike  Officers  and  provisions.  Hearing  of  causes,
diligence  of  Officers,  severitie  of  Judges.  Pompe  of
the  Louthias,  Chaen  and  Quinchay.  Examinations  ;
no  Oathes.  Bribes,  Cane-whipping,  cruelty.  Prisons,
Dungeons, tortures, Embassadours  ; Kings  familie.

§5.  Of  the  Portugall  commerce  with  the  Chinois ;  of  the
severe  Justice  executed  upon  certaine  Magistrates,
for  wrongs  done  to  the Portugals. .  .  ,  .540

Portugall  commerce.  Severe  Justice.  Lawes  of  Naviga-
tion. Outragious  Chinois,  insolent  Portugals.  Briberie.
Honour,  vaine-glory  ;  Kings  Justice  ;  Examinations.
Portugals  excused,  Louthias  imprisoned.  Kings  Sentence
in  Portugals  case,  punishing  and  rewarding.  Kings
sentence,  his  Justice,  Mercie,  and  respect.

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

§  6.  Of  the  Religion  in  China  ;  dirficultie  of  bringing  in
Christianitie.  Terrible  Earth-quakes  and  Tempests  in
China. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  • 557

Superstitious  Lots,  Hoggish  Offerings,  Devils  worshipped.
No  noveltie  admitted.  Sodomiticall  Chinois.  Plagues.
Cities  swallowed  up  with  Earthquakes,  Inundations  &
Overflowings.

CHAP. XI.
The relation of  Galeotto Perera, a  Gentleman of  good

credit,  that  lay  prisoner  in  China. .... 566

Poste  horses  ;  Admirable  bridge,  Magnificent  stones,
Husbandrie.  Spacious  Cities,  Large  streets,  No
Artillerie,  Archers.  Louteas  Majestic  Manner  of
eating.  Respect  of  Devills.  New  and  full  Moones
observations,  Birth-dayes  ;  Justice,  Oathes.  Patient
hearing,  severe  sentence,  terrible  execution.  Prisons.
Order  for  Debtors.  Payment  of  Legacies,  how  paid.
Massie  Pillars.  Tables  reverenced.  Store  of  Rivers.
Great  Rivers.  Store  of  Boates.  Bridges  made  of
Barges.  Moorish  sect  and  observation.  Mogores,
Bremes,  Lords  of  the  Kings  familie,  their  habitation
and  allowance.  Provision  in  abundance.  Strange
kinde  of  Fishing.

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters  and  Paragraphs  in
the  second  Booke  of  the  Second  part  of
Purchas  his  Pilgrims.

CHAP.  I.

The  beginning  of  English  Discoveries  towards  the  North,
and  North-east,  by  Sir  Hugh  Willoughby,  Richard
Chancellor,  and  others ;  of  the  Muscovie  Trade,  as
also  Voyages  by  Russia,  over  the  Caspian  Sea,  and
thorow  divers  Regions  of  Tartaria.  .  .  .  . 595

§  1 .  The  first  voyage  for  discoverie  with  three  ships,  set
forth  under  the  charge  of  Sir  Hugh  Willoughby,
Knight,  in  which  he  dyed  ;  and  Muscovia  was  dis-
covered by  Captaine  Chancellor. .... 595

THE TABLE

The  Contents  of  the  Chapters — Continued.  page

Rost  Hands.  Stanfew  Harbour.  Lofoot,  Finmarke.
Tedious  journey  and  deare  bought.  Arzina  in  Lap-
land.

A  Letter  of  Richard  Chancellor,  written  to  his  uncle  Master
Christopher  Frothingam,  touching  his  discoverie  of
Moscovia. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .601

Mosco  described.  Master  Chancellors  welcome  and  enter-
tainment. Order  of  service,  His  forces,  Armour
and  attyre,  Hardinesse.  Knights  fee,  Heire  generall,
Gentlemen,  no  Lawyers.  Punishments,  miserable
poore,  Service,  Prayers,  Creed,  &c.  Elect  Saints.
Vices  and  abuses. Beneficiall  Abbies.

Some  additions  for  better  knowledge  of  this  Voyage,  taken
by  Clement  Adams,  Schoole-master  to  the  Queenes
Henshmen,  from  the  mouth  of  Captaine  Chancellor. 615

Discoverie  of  Russia  by  Englishmen,  their  Entertainment.
Riphean  Hils.  Rossomakka,  a  strange  Beast.  Terrible
cold.

The  Copie  of  the  Duke  of  Moscovie  and  Emperour  of
Russia  his  Letters,  sent  to  King  Edward  the  Sixth,
by  the  hands  of  Richard  Chancellor. .  .  .621

Duke  of  Muscovie  his  Letters,  to  King  Edward the  sixt.

§  2.  The  first  voyage  made  by  Master  Anthonie  Jenkinson,
from  the  Citie  of  London,  toward  the  Land  of
Russia,  begun  the  twelfth  of  May,  in  the  yeere  1557. 623

M.  Jenkinsons  Voyage  into  Russia.  Malestrand  a  Whirle-
poole.  Zenam  and  Kettlewike  Hands.  Cattell  fed
with  fish.  Admonition  for  Travellers.  Entertayn-
ment  of  Guests.  Rich  service.  Superstitious  River-
hallowing.  Foure  Lents.  Russian  apparell  rich  and
costly. Manner  of  travelling.

§  3.  Notes  taken  out  of  another  mans  Relation  of  the  same

voyage,  touching  the  Russian Rites.  .  .  . 636

Russes  Lent.  Palme-sunday  Procession.  Egge  offerings,
Monasteries,  Monkes,  Images,  Miracles,  Hospitalitie,
no  preaching.  Priests,  Sacraments  Baptisme,  God-
fathers and  God-mothers.  Matrimoniall  observations.
Weekly  whipping. Buriall  Rites.

ILLUSTRATIONS

PACK

Facsimile  of  the  Title  Page  to  the  Third  Part  of

Purchas His  Pilgrimes,  xx

Hondius  His  Map  of  Russia, .  608

THE ELEVENTH VOLUME

OF

Purchas His Pilgrimes

Contayning  Peregrinations  and  Discoveries  in  the

remotest  North  and  East  Parts  of  Asia,  called

Tartaria  and  China;  with  the  beginning

of  English  Discoveries  towards  the

North  and  North-east  by

Sir  Hugh  Willoughby,

Richard  Chancellor,

and  others

■a

2;  £  *  *>

*»  -rt _

o  «

to *

r

IB

-S

To  the  Right  Honorable,
and Right  Reverend  Father  in  God  :

JOHN,

Lord  Bishop  of  Lincolne,  Lord  Keeper  of  the
Great  Seale  of  England,  &c.

Right  Reverend  and  Honourable  :

Hese  Pilgrims  delivering  a  Historie  of
the  World  in  their  owne  Travels  by  Sea
and  Land,  not  onely  needed  authoritie
from  the  Admiraltie,  but  fearing  suspi-
tion  of  Riot  without  warrantable  assem-
blie,  become  humble  Sutors  for  your
Lordships  favour.  So  shall  they  in  the
approbation  of  both  (to  apply  by  a  warrant  of  Ego  dixi,  Gen.  28.  12.
dii  estis,  the  Patriarchs  mysticall  Dreame  to  our  Histori-
call  purpose)  finde  a  Scala  Coeli  to  ascend  from  the  ground
where  they  are  prostrate  Petitioners,  to  the  Princes  High-
nesse,  whence  authorised  they  may  againe  descend  and
become  the  Commons  of  Common  Readers.  Order
requires  a  Medium  betwixt  Princely  Height  and  his
Lowlinesse,  whose  function  is  also  tearmed  Holy  Orders,
as  further  tying  him  to  that  equall  inequalitie ;  wherein
hee  beseecheth  your  Lordship  as  by  speciall  Office  and  in
Proprietie  to  owne  that  which  hee  hath  presumed  to  offer
to  the  Prince  in  Capite,  Quemadmodum  sub  Optimo  rege
omnia  Rex  imperio  possidet,  Domini  dominio.  Ad  reges  Senec.  Benef.
potestas  pertinet,  ad  singulos  proprietas.  '•  7-  caP-  4*  5-

XI  I  A

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Many  are  the  reasons  which  moved  the  Author  to
obtrude  his  Pilgrims  on  your  Lordship ;  because  he  is
deeply  obliged  Yours  for  former  favours,  even  then  when
you  were  initiated  in  the  Mysteries  of  Honour  (learning
by  service  to  Command)  in  the  Discipline  of  that  Honor-
able Worthy,  Lord  Chancellor  Egerton!  because  some
conceptions  of  this  Worke  were  in  your  Honourable
Jurisdiction  of  Westminster,  whither  lest  some  traduce
Travellers  for  Vagrants,  they  returne  in  hope  of  Sanc-
tuarie,  not  so  much  trusting  to  the  ancient  Liberties,  as
to  your  Lordships  liberall  respect  to  literate  endeavours :
because  these  Travellers  adventuring  the  world,  seeke
Gen.  28.  fcf  like  Jacob  at  his  going  and  returne,  a  Reverend  Fathers
32.  20.  Blessing  and  Confirmation. The  Author  likewise  being

called  on  for  his  promised  Europe,  submits  himselfe  to
your  Lordships  Order,  heere  tendring  of  that  debt,  what
hee  is  able,  in  readie  payment.  The  worke  it  selfe  also
being  a  Librarie  in  this  kind,  presents  it  selfe  to  your
Honour,  the  Founder  of  two  famous  Libraries ;  one  in
Westminster,  (where  the  Stones  &  renued  Fabrikes  speake
your  Magnificence)  the  other  in  that  famous  Nurserie  of
Arts  and  Vertue  Saint  Johns  Colledge  in  Cambridge,
which  sometime  knew  you  a  hopefull  Sonne,  but  now
acknowledgeth  your  Lordship  a  happie  Father,  where  also
the  Author  first  conceived  with  this  Travelling  Genius,
whereof  (without  travelling)  he  hath  travelled  ever  since.
Learning,  the  Advancer  of  your  Honour,  hath  secured
her  welwillers  not  to  bee  rejected  in  whatsoever  indea-
vours  (Scribimus  indocti,  doctique)  to  advance  Learning.
The  greatnesse  of  Nature  to  goodnesse  of  Nature,  varietie
of  Estates  to  a  prime  Pillar  of  State,  the  Historie  of
Religions  to  a  Religious  Prelate,  of  Antiquities  to  an
Antiquarie,  cannot  bee  altogether  unwelcome ;  that  I
mention  not  the  dependence  of  London  Ministers  Livings
(fined  by  the  Times  iniquitie)  on  your  Lordships  equall
Sentence.  These  Causes  have  moved  ;  One  hath  inforced  ;
these  Pilgrimes  are  your  Servants,  fitly  so  called  a  Ser-
vando,  saved  by  your  Lordships  hand  when  they  were

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORIE

giving  up  the  ghost,  despairing  through  a  fatall  stroke  of  Aug.de CD.
ever  seeing  light.  lu  19-  caP-  5-

Most  humbly  therefore,  sue  unto  your  Honour,  these
Pilgrimes for acknowledgement, esteeming  your  Lord-
ships Name  in  fore-front  a  cognisance  of  blest  Libertie
and  best Service ; Now  when  Janus  sends  many  with
gratefull emulations to present their  acclamations  of  a
New  Yeere,  presenting  (a  wordie  rather  then  worthy  Pre-
sent) a  World,  yea,  a  New  world,  in  great  part  one  Age
younger to mens knowledge then  America, sometimes
stiled  by  that  Name. I  had  written  other  Causes  of  my
addresse  to  your  Honour,  but  dare  not  proceed  to  inter-
rupt Others  more  weightie. In  all  humble  earnestnesse
beseecheth,  now  in  this  Festivall  time,  the  Author  with
his  Pilgrimes  to  finde  Hospitall  entertainment,  not  at  your
Honours  table,  where  Great  affaires  of  Church  and  State
are  feasted  (except  some  recreation  some  times  permit)
but with Schollers and Gentlemen in the Hall,
which  will  welcome  such  Guests  as  your  Lordship
shall  Countenance. So  shall  you  encourage
ever  to  pray  for  the  increase  of  your
Lordships happinesse in
the Happie Service
of  his
Majestie,

Your Lordships

most  bounden,

Samuel  Purchas.

Peregrinations

and  Discoveries ;  in  the  remotest  North and

East  Parts  of  Asia,  called  Tartaria

and  China.

[ill.  i.  i.]

THE FIRST  BOOKE.

Chap. I.

The  Journall  of  Frier  William  De  Rubruquis,  a
French-man,  of  the  Order  of  the  Minorite
Friers,  unto  the  East  parts  of  the  World,
Anno  Dom. 1253.

O  the  most  Excellent  and  most  Christian
Lord,  Lewis,  by  Gods  grace  the  Re-
nowmed  King  of  France,  Frier  William
de  Rubruk,*  the  meanest  of  the
Minorites  Order,  wisheth  health  and
continuall  Triumph  in  Christ.

It  is  written  in  the  Booke  of  Ecclesi-

asticus,  concerning  the  Wiseman  :  He  shall  travell  into
forreine  Countries,  and  good  and  evill  shall  hee  try  in  all
things.  The  very  same  Action  (my  Lord  and  King)  have
I  atchieved :  howbeit,  I  wish,  that  I  have  done  it  like  a
wise  man,  and  not  like  a  Foole.  For  many  there  bee,
that  performe  the  same  Action  which  a  wise  man  doth,
not  wisely  but  more  undiscreetly : of  which  number  I

5

*  Master  Hah.
had  published
part  of  this
Author,  but
the  whole
worke  being
found  in  Benet
Colledge
Library  in
Cambridge  I
thought  ft  to
communicate  it
to  the  World;
it  being  never
published,  as  I
thinke,  in  any
Language. I
begin  with  the
Tartars,  as
being  knowne
to  these  parts
before  the
Chinois :  yea,
China  or
Mangi  became
knowne  by
them.
Ecclus^g.v.^.

A.D.

1253-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

feare  my  selfe  to  bee  one.  Notwithstanding,  howsoever  I
have  done  it,  because  you  commanded  mee,  when  I  de-
parted from  your  Highnesse,  to  write  all  things  unto  you,
which  I  should  see  among  the  Tartars,  and  you  wished  me
also  that  I  should  not  feare  to  write  long  Letters,  I  have
done  as  your  Majestie  enjoyned  me :  yet  with  feare  and
reverence,  because  I  want  words  and  Eloquence  sufficient
to  write  unto  so  great  a  Majestie.  Bee  it  knowne  there-
fore unto  your  Sacred  Majestie,  that  in  the  yeare  of  our
Lord  1253,  about  the  Nones  of  May,  wee  entred  into  the
Sea  of  Pontus,  which  the  Bulgarians  call  the  great  Sea.
It  contayneth  in  length  (as  I  learned  of  certayne  Mer-
chants) one  thousand  and  eight  miles,  and  is  in  a  manner,
divided  into  two  parts.  About  the  midst  thereof  are  two
Provinces,  one  towards  the  North ;  and  another  towards
the  South.  The  South  Province  is  called  Synopolis,  and
it  is  the  Castle  and  Port  of  the  Soldan  of  Turkie :  but  the
North  Province  is  called  of  the  Latines,  Gasaria :  of  the
Greekes,  which  inhabit  upon  the  Sea  shoare  thereof,  it  is
called  Cassaria,  that  is  to  say,  Caesaria.  And  there  are
certayne  headlands  stretching  forth  into  the  Sea  towards
[III.  i.  2.]  Synopolis.  Also,  there  are  three  hundred  miles  of  distance
betweene  Synopolis  and  Cassaria.  Insomuch  that  the
distance  from  those  points  or  places  to  Constantinople,  in
length  and  breadth  is  about  seven  hundred  miles :  and
seven  hundred  miles  also  from  thence  to  the  East,  namely,
to  the  Countrey  of  Hiberia,  which  is  a  Province  of
Georgia.  At  the  Province  of  Gasaria  or  Cassaria,  wee
arrived,  which  Province  is,  in  a  manner,  three  square,
having  a  Citie  on  the  West  part  thereof  called  Kersova,
wherein  Saint  Clement  suffered  Martyrdome.  And
sayling  before  the  said  Citie,  wee  saw  an  Hand,  in  which  a
Church  is  said  to  be  built  by  the  hands  of  Angels.  But
about  the  midst  of  the  said  Province  toward  the  South,  as
it  were,  upon  a  sharpe  Angle  or  Point,  standeth  a  Citie
called  Soldaia,  directly  against  Synopolis.  And  there  doe
all  the  Turkie  Merchants,  which  Traffique  into  the  North
Countries,  in  their  Journey  outward,  arrive,  and  as  they

6

Cassaria,  or
Gasaria.

Gasaria.

Soldaia.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK

A.D.

i253«

The  Citie  of
Matriga.

returne  home- ward  also  from  Russia,  and  the  said  Nor-
therne  Regions,  into  Turkie.  The  foresaid  Merchants
transport  thither  Ermines  and  gray  Furres,  with  other
rich  and  costly  Skinnes.  Others  carrie  Clothes  made  of
Cotton  or  Bombast,  and  Silke,  and  divers  kinds  of  Spices.
But  upon  the  East  part  of  the  said  Province  standeth  a
Citie  called  Matriga,  where  the  River  Tanais  dischargeth
his  streames  into  the  Sea  of  Pontus,  the  mouth  whereof  is
twelve  miles  in  breadth.  For  this  River,  before  it  entreth
into  the  Sea  of  Pontus,  maketh  a  little  Sea,  which  hath  in
breadth  and  length  seven  hundred  mile,  and  it  is  in  no
place  thereof  above  sixe  paces  deepe,  whereupon  great
Vessels  cannot  saile  over  it.  Howbeit  the  Merchants  of
Constantinople,  arriving  at  the  foresaid  Citie  of  *  Materta,  *Matriga.
send  their  Barkes  unto  the  River  of  Tanais  to  buy  dryed
fishes,  Sturgeons,  Thosses,  Barbils,  and  an  infinite  number
of  other  fishes.  The  foresaid  Province  of  Cassaria,  is
compassed  in  with  the  Sea  on  three  sides  thereof :  namely,
on  the  West-side,  where  Kersova,  the  Citie  of  Saint
Clement  is  situate :  on  the  South-side  the  Citie  of  Soldaia,
whereat  we  arrived :  on  the  East-side  Maricandis,  and
there  stands  the  Citie  of  Matriga,  upon  the  mouth  of  the
River  Tanais.  Beyond  the  said  mouth  standeth  Zikia,  Zikia.
which  is  not  in  subjection  unto  the  Tartars :  also  the
people  called  Suevi  and  Hiberi,  towards  the  East,  who
likewise  are  not  under  the  Tartars  Dominion.  Moreover,
towards  the  South,  standeth  the  Citie  of  Trapesunda,
which  hath  a  Governour  proper  to  it  selfe,  named  Guydo,
being  of  the  Linage  of  the  Emperours  of  Constantinople,
and  is  subject  unto  the  Tartars.  Next  unto  that  is
Synopolis,  the  Citie  of  the  Soldan  of  Turkie,  who  likewise
is  in  subjection  unto  them.  Next  unto  these  lyeth  the
Countrey  of  Vastacius,  whose  Sonne  is  called  Astar,  of
his  Grand-father  by  the  Mothers  side,  who  is  not  in  sub-
jection. All  the  Land  from  the  mouth  of  Tanais  West-
ward as  farre  as  Danubius  is  under  their  Jurisdiction.
Yea,  beyond  Danubius  also,  towards  Constantinople,
Valakia, which is the  Land of Assanus, and Bulgaria

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1253-

minor,  as  farre  as  Solonia,  doe  all  pay  Tribute  unto  them.
And  besides  the  Tribute  imposed,  they  have  also,  of  late
years,  exacted  of  every  household  an  Axe,  and  all  such
Corne  as  they  found  lying  on  heapes.  We  arrived  there-
fore at  Soldaia,  the  twelfth  of  the  Kalends  of  June.  And
divers  Merchants  of  Constantinople,  which  were  arrived
there  before  us,  reported  that  certayne  Messengers  were
comming  thither  from  the  Holy  Land,  who  were  desirous
to  travell  unto  Sartach.  Notwithstanding,  I  my  selfe  had
publikely  given  out  upon  Palme  Sunday  within  the
Church  of  Sancta  Sophia,  that  I  was  not  your  nor  any
other  mans  Messenger,  but  that  I  travelled  unto  those
Infidels  according  to  the  Rule  of  our  Order.  And  being
arrived,  the  said  Merchants  admonished  me  to  take  dili-
gent heed  what  I  spake :  because  they  having  reported
mee  to  bee  a  Messenger,  if  I  should  say  the  contrary,  that
I  were  no  Messenger,  I  could  not  have  free  passage
granted  unto  me.  Then  I  spake  after  this  manner  unto
the  Governours  of  the  Citie,  or  rather  unto  their  Lieu-
tenants, because  the  Governours  themselves  were  gone  to
pay  Tribute  unto  Baatu,  and  were  not  as  yet  returned.
We  heard  of  your  Lord  Sartach  (quoth  I)  in  the  Holy
Land,  that  he  was  become  a  Christian :  and  the  Christians
were  exceeding  glad  thereof,  and  especially  the  most
Christian  King  of  France,  who  is  there  now  in  Pilgrimage,
and  fighteth  against  the  Saracens,  to  redeeme  the  holy
places  out  of  their  hands :  wherefore  I  am  determined  to
goe  unto  Sartach,  and  to  deliver  unto  him  the  Letters  of
my  Lord  the  King,  wherein  hee  admonisheth  him  concern-
ing the  good  and  commoditie  of  all  Christendome.  And
they  received  us  with  gladnesse,  and  gave  us  entertayn-
ment  in  the  Cathedrall  Church.  The  Bishop  of  which
Church  was  with  Sartach,  who  told  me  many  good  things
concerning  the  said  Sartach,  which  afterward  I  found  to  be
nothing  so.  Then  put  they  us  to  our  choice,  whether  wee
would  have  Carts  and  Oxen,  or  packe-horses  to  transport
our  Carriages.  And  the  Merchants  of  Constantinople
advised  me,  not  to  take  Carts  of  the  Citizens  of  Soldaia,

8

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

1253.
but  to  buy  covered  Carts  of  mine  owne,  (such  as  the
Russians  carry  their  Skinnes  in)  and  to  put  all
our  Carriages,  which  I  would  daily  take  out,
into  them:  because,  if  I  should  use  Horses,  I  must  be
constrayned  at  every  baite  to  take  downe  my  Carriages,
and  to  lift  them  up  againe  on  sundry  Horses  backes :  and
besides,  that  I  should  ride  a  more  gentle  pace  by  the  Oxen
drawing  the  Carts.  Wherefore,  contenting  my  selfe  with
their  evill  counsell,  I  was  travelling  unto  Sartach  two
monethes,  which  I  could  have  done  in  one,  if  I  had  gone
by  Horse.  I  brought  with  me  from  Constantinople
(being  by  the  Merchants  advised  so  to  doe)  pleasant
Fruits,  Muskadell  Wine,  and  delicate  Bisket  bread  to  pre-
sent unto  the  Governours  of  Soldaia,  to  the  end  I  might
obtayne  free  passage  :  because  they  looke  favourably  upon
no  man  which  commeth  with  an  empty  hand.  All  which
things  I  bestowed  in  one  of  my  Carts  (not  finding  the  [III.  i.  3.]
Governours  of  the  Citie  at  home)  for  they  told  me,  if  I
could  carry  them  to  Sartach,  that  they  would  be  most
acceptable  unto  him.  Wee  tooke  our  journey  therefore
about  the  Kalends  of  June,  with  foure  covered  Carts  of
our  owne,  and  with  two  other  which  we  borrowed  of
them,  wherein  we  carried  our  bedding  to  rest  upon  in  the
night,  and  they  allowed  us  five  Horses  to  ride  upon.  For
there  were  just  five  persons  in  our  company :  namely,  I
my  selfe  and  mine  associate  Frier  Bartholomew  of  Frier  Bartho-
Cremona,  and  Goset  the  Bearer  of  these  Presents,  the  lo™ew  de
man  of  God  Turgemannus,  and  Nicolas  my  Servant,
whom  I  bought  at  Constantinople,  with  some  part  of  the
Almes  bestowed  upon  me.  Moreover,  they  allowed  us
two  men,  which  drave  our  Carts  and  gave  attendance  unto
our  Oxen  and  Horses.  There  bee  high  Promontories  on
the  Sea  shoare  from  Kersova  unto  the  mouth  of  Tanais.
Also  there  are  fortie  Castles  betweene  Kersova  and  Soldaia,
every  one  of  which  almost  have  their  proper  Languages :
amongst  whom  there  were  many  Gothes,  who  spake  the
Dutch  Tongue.  Beyond  the  said  Mountaynes  towards
the  North,  there  is  a  most  beautifull  Wood  growing  on  a

9

A.D.

1253-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  necke  of

Taurica

Chersonesus.

Plaine  full  of  Fountaynes  and  Freshets.  And  beyond  the
Wood  there  is  a  mightie  plaine  Champian,  continuing
five  dayes  Journey  unto  the  very  extreamitie  and  borders
of  said  Province  North-ward,  and  there  it  is  a  narrow
Isthmus  or  neck  Land,  having  Sea  on  the  East  and  West
sides  thereof,  insomuch  that  there  is  a  Ditch  made  from
one  Sea  unto  the  other.  In  the  same  Plaine  (before  the
Tartars  sprang  up)  were  the  Comanians  wont  to  inhabit,
who  compelled  the  fore-said  Cities  and  Castles  to  pay
Tribute  unto  them.  But  when  the  Tartars  came  upon
them,  the  multitude  of  the  Comanians  entred  into  the
fore-said  Province,  and  fled  all  of  them,  even  unto  the
Sea  shoare,  beeing  in  such  extreme  Famine,  that  they
which  were  alive,  were  constrayned  to  eate  up  those  which
were  dead  :  and  (as  a  Merchant  reported  unto  me  who  saw
it  with  his  owne  eyes)  that  the  living  men  devoured  and
tore  with  their  teeth,  the  raw  flesh  of  the  dead,  as  Dogges
would  gnaw  upon  Carrion.  Towardes  the  Borders  of  the
said  Province  there  bee  many  great  Lakes :  upon  the
Bankes  whereof  are  Salt-pits  or  Fountaynes,  the  water  of
which  so  soone  as  it  entreth  into  the  Lake,  becommeth
hard  Salt  like  unto  Ice.  And  out  of  those  Salt-pits  Baatu
and  Sartach  have  great  Revenues  :  for  they  repayre  thither
out  of  all  Russia,  for  Salt :  and  for  each  Cart  loade  they
give  two  Webbes  of  Cotton,  amounting  to  the  value  of
halfe  an  Yperpera.  There  come  by  Sea  also  many  Shippes
for  Salt,  which  pay  Tribute  every  one  of  them  according
to  their  burthen.  The  third  day  after  wee  were  departed
The  Tartars,  out  of  the  Precincts  of  Soldaia,  wee  found  the  Tartars.
Amongst  whom  beeing  entred,  me  thought  I  was  come
into  a  new  World.  Whose  life  and  manners  I  will
describe  unto  your  Highnesse  aswell  as  I  can.

rT^Hey  have  in  no  place  any  setled  Citie  to  abide  in,

Chap.  2.

Of tke f A neither  know  they  of  the  Celestiall  Citie  to  come.

their  houses.  They  have  divided  all  Scythia  among  themselves,  which
stretcheth  from  the  River  Danubius  even  unto  the  rising
of  the  Sunne. And  every  of  their  Captaines,  according

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

1253.
to  the  great  or  small  number  of  his  people,  knoweth  the
bounds  of  his  Pastures,  and  where  hee  ought  to  feed  his
Cattell  Winter  and  Summer,  Spring  and  Autumne.  For
in  the  Winter  they  descend  unto  the  warme  Regions
South-ward.  And  in  the  Summer  they  ascend  unto  the
cold  Regions  North-ward.  In  Winter  when  Snow  lyeth
upon  the  ground,  they  feed  their  Cattell  upon  Pastures
without  water,  because  then  they  use  Snow  in  stead  of
water.  Their  houses  wherein  they  sleepe,  they  ground
upon  a  round  foundation  of  Wickers  artificially  wrought
and  compacted  together  :  the  Roofe  whereof  consisteth  (in
like  sort)  of  Wickers,  meeting  above  into  one  little
Roundell,  out  of  which  Roundell  ascendeth  upward  a
necke  like  unto  a  Chimney,  which  they  cover  with  white
Felt,  and  oftentimes  they  lay  Morter  or  white  Earth  upon
the  said  Felt,  with  the  powder  of  bones,  that  it  may  shine
white.  And  sometimes  also  they  cover  it  with  blacke
Felt.  The  said  Felt  on  the  necke  of  their  house,  they
doe  garnish  over  with  beautifull  varietie  of  Pictures.  Be-
fore the  doore  likewise  they  hang  a  Felt  curiously  painted
over.  For  they  spend  all  their  coloured  Felt,  in  painting
Vines,  Trees,  Birds,  and  Beasts  thereupon.  The  said
houses  they  make  so  large,  that  they  contayne  thirtie  foot
in  breadth.  For  measuring  once  the  breadth  betweene  the
wheele-ruts  of  one  of  their  Carts,  I  found  it  to  bee
twentie  feet  over :  and  when  the  house  was  upon  the
Cart,  it  stretched  over  the  wheels  on  each  side  five  feet
at  the  least.  I  told  two  and  twentie  Oxen  in  one  Teame,
drawing  an  house  upon  a  Cart,  eleven  in  one  order  accord-
ing to  the  breadth  of  the  Cart,  and  eleven  more  before
them :  the  Axle-tree  of  the  Cart  was  of  an  huge  bignesse
like  unto  the  Mast  of  a  Ship.  And  a  fellow  stood  in  the
doore  of  the  house,  upon  the  fore-stall  of  the  Cart  driving
forth  the  Oxen.  Moreover,  they  make  certayne  foure
square  Baskets  of  small  slender  Wickers  as  bigge  as  great
Chests :  and  afterward,  from  one  side  to  another,  they
frame  an  hollow  lidde  or  cover  of  such  like  Wickers,  and
make  a  doore  in  the  fore-side  thereof. And  then  they

11

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1253-

cover the said Chest  or  little House  with  black Felt,

rubbed  over  with  Tallow  or  Sheeps  Milke  to  keep  the
rain  from  soking  through,  which  they  deck  likewise  with
painting  or  with  feathers.  And  in  such  Chests  they  put
their  whole  Household-stuffe  and  Treasure.  Also  the
same  Chests  they  doe  strongly  binde  upon  other  Carts,
which  are  drawne  with  Camels,  to  the  end  they  may  wade
through  Rivers.  Neither  doe  they  at  any  time  take
downe  the  said  Chests  from  off  their  Carts.  When  they
[III.  i.  4.]  take  downe  their  dwelling  houses,  they  turne  the  doores
alwayes  to  the  South :  and  next  of  all  they  place  the  Carts
laden  with  their  Chests,  here  and  there,  within  halfe  a
stones  cast  of  the  House :  insomuch  that  the  House
standeth  betweene  two  rankes  of  Carts,  as  it  were,  be-
tweene  two  Walles.  The  Matrones  make  for  themselves
most  beautifull  Carts,  which  I  am  not  able  to  describe  unto
The  benefit  of  your  Majesty  but  by  Pictures  only :  for  I  would  right
a  Painter  in  willingly  have  painted  all  things  for  you,  had  my  Skill
Countries.  Deene  ought  in  that  Art.  One  rich  Moal  or  Tartar  hath
two  hundred,  or  one  hundred  such  Carts  with  Chests.
Duke  Baatu  had  sixteene  Wives,  every  one  of  which  hath
one  great  house,  besides  other  little  houses,  which  they
place  behind  the  great  one,  being  as  it  were  Chambers  for
their  Maidens  to  dwell  in.  And  unto  every  of  the  said
houses  doe  belong  two  hundred  Carts.  When  they  take
their  houses  from  off  the  Carts,  the  principal  Wife  placeth
her  Court  on  the  West  Frontier,  and  so  all  the  rest  in
their  order :  so  that  the  last  Wife  dwelleth  upon  the  East
Frontier :  and  one  of  the  said  Ladies  Courts  is  distant
from  another  about  a  stones  cast.  Whereupon  the  Court
of  one  rich  Moal  or  Tartar  will  appeare  like  unto  a  great
Village,  very  few  men  abiding  in  the  same.  One  woman
will  guide  twenty  or  thirty  Carts  at  once,  for  their  Coun-
tries are  very  plaine,  and  they  binde  the  Carts  with
Camels  or  Oxen,  one  behind  another.  And  there  sits  a
Wench  in  the  fore-most  Cart  driving  the  Oxen,  and  all
the  residue  follow  on  a  like  pace.  When  they  chance  to
come  at  any  bad  passage,  they  let  them  loose,  and  guide

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

1253-
them  over  one  by  one  :  for  they  goe  a  slow  pace,  as  fast  as

a  Lambe  or  an  Oxe  can  walke.

HAving  taken  downe  their  houses  from  off  their  Carts,  Chap,  3.
and  turning  the  doores  South- ward,  they  place  the  Qf*MrBeds%
bed  of  the  Master  of  the  house,  at  the  North  part  thereof,  i^tes'and
The  womens  place  is  alwayes  on  the  East-side,  namely,  on  drinking
the  left  hand  of  the  good  man  of  the  house  sitting  upon  Pots.
his  bed  with  his  face  South-wards :  but  the  mens  place  is
upon  the  West-side,  namely,  at  the  right  hand  of  their
Master.  Men  when  they  enter  into  the  house,  will  not
in  any  case  hang  their  Quivers  on  the  womens  side.  Over
the  Masters  head  there  is  alwayes  an  Image,  like  a  Puppet,
made  of  Fealt,  which  they  call  the  Masters  Brother :  and
another  over  the  head  of  the  good  Wife  or  Mistris,  which
they  call  her  Brother,  being  fastened  to  the  wall :  and
above  betweene  both  of  them,  there  is  a  little  leane  one,
which  is,  as  it  were  the  keeper  of  the  whole  house.  The
good  Wife  or  Mistris  of  the  house  placeth  aloft  at  her
beds  feet,  on  the  right  hand,  the  Skinne  of  a  Kid  stuffed
with  Wooll  or  some  other  matter,  and  neere  unto  that  a
little  Image  or  Puppet  looking  towards  the  Maidens  and
women.  Next  unto  the  doore  also  on  the  womens  side,
there  is  another  Image  with  a  Cowes  Udder,  for  the
women  that  milke  the  Kine.  For  it  is  the  dutie  of  their
women  to  milke  Kine.  On  the  other  side  of  the  doore
next  unto  the  men,  there  is  another  Image  with  the  Udder
of  a  Mare,  for  the  men  which  milke  Mares.  And  when
they  come  together  to  drinke  and  make  merrie,  they
sprinkle  part  of  their  Drinke  upon  the  Image  which  is
above  the  Masters  head  :  afterward  upon  other  Images  in  idols.
order :  then  goeth  a  Servant  out  of  the  house  with  a  cup
full  of  Drinke  sprinkling  it  thrise  towards  the  South,  and
bowing  his  knee  at  every  time :  and  this  is  done  for  the
honour  of  the  Fire.  Then  performeth  he  the  like  Super-
stitious Idolatry  towards  the  East,  for  the  honour  of  the
Ayre  :  and  then  to  the  West  for  the  honour  of  the  water :
and lastly, to the North in the behalfe of the Dead.

13

A.D.
I253-

Chap.  4.
Of  their
drinkes,  and
how  they  pro-
voke one
another  to
drinking.

They  use  the
like  custome  in
Florida.

PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

When  the  Master  holdeth  a  cup  in  his  hand  to  drinke
before  hee  tasteth  thereof,  hee  powreth  his  part  upon  the
ground.  If  he  drinketh  sitting  on  Horse-backe,  he
powreth  out  part  thereof  upon  the  necke  or  mane  of  his
Horse  before  he  himselfe  drinketh.  After  the  Servant
aforesaid  hath  so  discharged  his  cups  to  the  foure  quarters
of  the  World,  hee  returneth  into  the  house :  and  two
other  Servants  stand  ready  with  two  cups,  and  two  basons,
to  carrie  Drinke  unto  their  Master  and  his  Wife,  sitting
together  upon  a  bed.  And  if  hee  hath  more  Wives  then
one,  shee  with  whom  he  slept  the  night  before,  sitteth  by
his  side  the  day  following :  and  all  his  other  Wives  must
that  day  resort  unto  the  same  house  to  drinke :  and  there
is  the  Court  holden  for  that  day :  the  gifts  also  which  are
presented  that  day,  are  layd  up  in  the  Chests  of  the  said
Wife.  And  upon  a  bench  stands  a  Vessell  of  Milke,  or
of  other  Drinke  and  drinking  cups.

IN  Winter  time  they  make  excellent  drinke  of  Rice,  of
Mill,  and  of  Honey,  being  well  and  high  coloured  like
Wine.  Also  they  have  Wine  brought  unto  them  from
farre  Countries.  In  Summer  time  they  care  not  for  any
drinke,  but  Cosmos.  And  it  standeth  alwayes  within  the
entrance  of  his  doore,  and  next  unto  it  stands  a  Minstrell
with  his  Fiddle.  I  saw  there  no  such  Citernes  and  Vials
as  ours  commonly  bee,  but  many  other  Musicall  Instru-
ments which  are  not  used  among  us.  And  when  the
Master  of  the  house  begins  to  drinke,  one  of  his  servants
crieth  out  with  a  loude  voyce,  Ha,  and  the  Minstrell  playes
upon  his  Fiddle.  And  when  they  make  any  great  solemne
feast,  they  all  of  them  clap  their  hands,  and  dance  to  the
noyse  of  Musicke,  the  men  before  their  Master,  and  the
women  before  their  Mistresse.  And  when  the  Master
hath  drunke,  then  cryes  out  his  servant  as  before,  and  the
Minstrell  stayeth  his  Musicke.  Then  drinke  they  all
round  both  men  and  women  :  and  sometimes  they  carowse
for  the  victorie  very  filthily  and  drunkenly.  Also  when
they  will  provoke  any  man,  they  pull  him  by  the  Eares  to

14

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

1253-
the  drinke,  and  so  lug  and  draw  him  strongly  to  stretch

out  his  throat  clapping  their  hands,  and  dancing  before  [III.  i.  5.]

him. Moreover,  when some  of  them  will  make  great

feasting  and  rejoycing,  one  of  the  companie  takes  a  full

Cup,  and  two  other  stand,  one  on  his  right  hand,  and

another  on  his  left,  and  so  they  three  come  singing  to  the

man  who  is  to  have  the  Cup  reached  unto  him,  still  singing

and  dancing  before  him  :  and  when  he  stretcheth  forth  his

hand to receive the Cup, they leape suddenly backe,

returning  againe  as  they  did  before,  and  so  having  deluded

him  thrice  or  foure  times  by  drawing  backe  the  Cup,  untill

he  be  merrie,  and  hath  gotten  a  good  appetite,  then  they

give  him  the  Cup,  singing  and  dancing,  and  stamping  with

their  feet,  untill  he  hath  done  drinking.

Concerning  their  food  and  victuals,  be  it  knowne  unto  Chap.  5.
your  Highnesse,  that  they  doe,  without  all  difference  °f  their  food
or  conception,  eate  all  their  dead  Carions.  And  amongst
so  many  droves  it  cannot  be,  but  some  Cattell  must  needs
die.  Howbeit  in  Summer,  so  long  as  their  Cosmos,  that
is,  their  Mares  milke  lasteth,  they  care  not  for  any  food.
And  if  they  chance  to  have  an  Oxe  or  an  Horse  die,  they
drie  the  flesh  thereof :  for  cutting  it  into  thinne  slices,  and  Dryingof flesh
hanging  it  up  against  the  Sunne  and  the  wind,  it  is  pre-  in  the  wind%
sently  dried  without  Salt,  and  also  without  stench  or
corruption.  They  make  better  Puddings  of  their  Horses
then  of  their  Hogs,  which  they  eate  being  new  made :  the
rest  of  the  flesh  they  reserve  untill  Winter.  They  make
of  their  Oxe  skins  great  bladders  or  bags,  which  they  doe
wonderfully  drie  in  the  smoake.  Of  the  hinder  part  of
their  Horse  hides,  they  make  very  fine  Sandals  and
Pantofles.  They  give  unto  fiftie  or  an  hundred  men,  the
flesh  of  one  Ramme  to  eate.  For  they  mince  it  in  a  bowle
with  Salt  and  Water  (other  Sauce  they  have  none)  and
then  with  the  poynt  of  a  Knife,  or  a  little  Forke  which
they  make  for  the  same  purpose  (such  as  we  use  to  take
roasted  Peares  and  Apples  out  of  Wine  withall)  they  reach
unto every one  of  the  companie  a  morsell  or  twaine,

15

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1253.

according  to  the  multitude  of  Guests. The  Master  of  the

House,  before  the  Rams  flesh  be  distributed,  first  of  all
himselfe  taketh  thereof,  what  he  pleaseth.  Also,  if  he
giveth  unto  any  of  the  companie  a  speciall  part,  the
receiver  thereof  must  eate  it  alone,  and  must  not  impart
ought  thereof  unto  any  other.  Not  being  able  to  eate  it
up  all,  hee  carries  it  with  him,  and  delivers  it  unto  his
boy,  if  hee  be  present,  to  keepe  it :  if  not,  hee  puts  it  up
into  his  Saptargat,  that  is  to  say,  his  foure  square  Budget,
which  they  use  to  carrie  about  with  them,  for  the  saving
of  all  such  provision,  &  wherein  they  lay  up  their  bones,
when  they  have  not  time  to  gnaw  them  throughly,  that
they  may  burnish  them  afterward,  to  the  end  that  no  whit
of  their  food  may  come  to  nought.

Chap.  6. r  I  ^Heir  drinke,  called  Cosmos,  which  is  Mares  milke,  is
How  they  J^ prepared  after  this  manner. They  fasten  a  long  line

drinke  Called unto  two  Posts  standing  firmly  in  the  ground,  and  unto
Cosmos.  the  same  line  they  tye  the  young  Foales  of  those  Mares,

which  they  meane  to  milke.  Then  come  the  Dammes  to
stand  by  their  Foales  gently  suffering  themselves  to  be
milked.  And  if  any  of  them  be  too  unruly,  then  one
takes  her  Foale,  and  puts  it  under  her,  letting  it  sucke  a
while,  and  presently  carrying  it  away  againe,  there  comes
another  man  to  milke  the  said  Mare.  And  having  gotten
a  good  quantitie  of  this  Milke  together  (being  as  sweet  as
Cowes  milk)  while  it  is  new  they  powre  into  a  great  bladder
or  bag,  and  they  beat  the  said  bag  with  a  piece  of  wood
made  for  the  purpose,  having  a  Club  at  the  lower  end  like
a  mans  head,  which  is  hollow  within  :  and  so  soone  as  they
beat  upon  it,  it  begins  to  boyle  like  new  Wine,  and  to  be
sowre  and  sharpe  of  taste,  and  they  beate  it  in  that  manner
till  Butter  come  thereof.  Then  taste  they  thereof,  and
being  indifferently  sharpe  they  drinke  it :  for  it  biteth  a
mans  tongue  like  the  Wine  of  Raspes,  when  it  is  drunke.
After  a  man  hath  taken  a  draught  thereof,  it  leaveth
behind  it  a  taste  like  the  taste  of  Almond-milke,  and  goeth
downe  very  pleasantly,  intoxicating  weake  braynes  :  also  it

16

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

1253-
causeth  urine  to  be  avoyded  in  great  measure.  Likewise
Caracosmos,  that  is  to  say,  Blacke  Cosmos,  for  great  Lords  Caracosmos.
to  drinke,  they  make  on  this  manner.  First,  they  beat  the
said  Milke  so  long  till  the  thickest  part  thereof  descend
right  downe  to  the  bottome  like  the  lees  of  white  Wine,
and  that  which  is  thinne  and  pure  remayneth  above,  being
like  unto  Whay  or  white  Must.  The  said  lees  and  dregs
being  very  white,  are  given  to  servants,  and  will  cause
them  to  sleepe  exceedingly.  That  which  is  thinne  and
cleere  their  Masters  drinke :  and  in  very  deede  it  is
marvellous  sweet  and  wholsome  liquor.  Duke  Baatu  hath  Duke  Baatu.
thirtie  Cottages  or  Granges,  within  a  dayes  journey  of  his
abiding  place :  every  one  of  which  serveth  him  daily  with
the  Caracosmos  of  an  hundred  Mares  milk,  and  so  all  of  s*°re  °f
them  together  every  day  with  the  Milke  of  three  thousand  Mares  milke
Mares,  besides  white  Milke  which  other  of  his  Subjects
bring.  For  even  as  the  Husbandmen  of  Syria  bestow  the
third  part  of  their  fruits,  and  carrie  it  unto  the  Courts  of
their  Lords,  even  so  doe  they  their  Mares  milke  every
third  day.  Out  of  their  Cowes  milke  they  first  churne
Butter,  boyling  the  which  Butter  unto  a  perfect  decoction,
they  put  it  into  Rams  skins,  which  they  reserve  for  the
same  purpose.  Neither  doe  they  salt  their  Butter:  and
yet  by  reason  of  the  long  seething,  it  putrifieth  not :  and
they  keepe  it  in  store  for  Winter.  The  churn-milke  which
remayneth  of  the  Butter,  they  let  alone  till  it  be  as  sowre  as
possibly  it  may  be,  then  they  boyle  it,  and  in  boyling  it  is
turned  all  into  Curds,  which  Curds  they  drie  in  the  Sun,
making  them  as  hard  as  the  drosse  of  Iron :  and  this  kind
of  food  also  they  store  up  in  Sachels  against  Winter.  In  [III.  i.  6.]
the  Winter  season  when  Milke  fayleth  them,  they  put  the
foresaid  Curds  (which  they  call  Gry-ut)  into  a  bladder,  and
powring  hot  water  thereinto,  they  beat  it  lustily  till  they
have  resolved  it  into  the  said  Water,  which  is  thereby  made
exceedingly  sowre,  and  that  they  drinke  in  stead  of  Milke.
They  are  very  scrupulous,  and  take  diligent  heed  that  they
drinke  not  faire  Water  by  it  selfe.

xi  17  b

A.D.

1253-

Chap.  j.
Of  the  beasts
which  they  eat,
of  their  gar-
ments, and  of
their  manner
of  hunting.

Our  Falconers
use  the  left  fist.
Another
strange  cus-
tome,  which  I
leave  to  bee
scanned  by
Falconers
themselves.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

GReat  Lords  have  Cottages  or  Granges  towards  the
South,  from  whence  their  Tenants  bring  them  Millet
and  Meale  against  Winter.  The  poorer  sort  provide
themselves  of  such  necessaries,  for  the  exchange  of  Rams,
and  of  other  beasts  skins.  The  Tartars  slaves  fill  their
bellies  with  thicke  water,  and  are  therewithall  contented.
They  will  neither  eate  Mise  with  long  tayles,  nor  any  kind
of  Mise  with  short  tayles.  They  have  also  certaine  little
beasts,  called  by  them,  Sogur,  which  lie  in  a  Cave  twentie
or  thirtie  of  them  together,  all  the  whole  Winter  sleeping
there  for  the  space  of  sixe  moneths  :  and  these  they  take  in
great  abundance.  There  are  also  a  kind  of  Conies  having
long  tayles  like  unto  Cats :  and  on  the  outside  of  their
tayles  grow  blacke  and  white  haires.  They  have  many
other  small  beasts  good  to  eat,  which  they  know  and  dis-
cerne  right  well.  I  saw  no  Deere  there,  and  but  a  few
Hares,  but  a  great  number  of  Roes.  I  saw  wild  Asses  in
great  abundance,  which  be  like  unto  Mules.  Also  I  saw
another  kind  of  beast,  called  Artak,  having  in  all  resem-
blance the  bodie  of  a  Ram,  and  crooked  homes,  which  are
of  such  bignesse,  that  I  could  scarce  lift  up  a  paire  of  them
with  one  hand :  and  of  these  homes  they  make  great
drinking  cups.  They  have  Faulcons,  Girfaulcons,  and
other  Hawkes  in  great  plentie :  all  which  they  carrie
upon  their  right  hands :  and  they  put  alwaies  about  their
Faulcons  neckes  a  string  of  Leather,  which  hangeth  downe
to  the  midst  of  their  gorges,  by  the  which  string,  when
they  cast  them  off  the  fist  at  the  game,  with  their  left
hand  they  bow  downe  the  heads  and  breasts  of  the  said
Hawkes,  lest  they  should  be  tossed  up  and  downe,  and
beaten  with  the  wind,  or  lest  they  should  soare  too  high.
Wherefore  they  get  a  great  part  of  their  victuals  by  hunt-
ing and  hawking.  Concerning  their  garments  and  attire,
be  it  knowne  unto  your  Majestie,  that  out  of  Cataya,  and
other  Regions  of  the  East,  out  of  Persia  also,  and  other
Countries  of  the  South,  there  are  brought  unto  them
Stuffes  of  silke,  Cloth  of  gold,  and  Cotton  cloth,  which  thev
weare  in  time  of  Summer. But  out  of  Russia,  Moxell,

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1253.

Bulgaria  the  greater,  and  Pascatir,  that  is,  Hungaria  the
greater,  and  out  of  Kersis  (all  which  are  Northerne
Regions,  and  full  of  Woods)  and  also  out  of  many  other
Countries  of  the  North,  which  are  subject  unto  them,  the
Inhabitants  bring  them  rich  and  costly  skins  of  divers
sorts  (which  I  never  saw  in  our  Countries)  wherewithall
they  are  clad  in  Winter.  And  alwaies  against  Winter
they  make  themselves  two  Gownes,  one  with  the  furre
inward  to  their  skinne,  and  another  with  the  furre  outward,
to  defend  them  from  wind  and  snow,  which  for  the  most
part  are  made  of  Wolves  skins,  or  Foxe  skins,  or  else  of
Papions.  And  when  they  sit  within  the  house,  they  have
a  finer  Gowne  to  weare.  The  poorer  sort  make  their
upper  Gowne  of  Dogs  or  of  Goats  skins.  When  they
goe  to  hunt  for  wild  beasts,  there  meets  a  great  companie
of  them  together,  and  environing  the  place  round  about,
where  they  are  sure  to  find  some  game,  by  little  and  little
they  approach  on  all  sides,  till  they  have  gotten  the  wild
beasts  into  the  midst,  as  it  were  into  a  circle,  and  then
they  discharge  their  Arrows  at  them.  Also  they  make
themselves  Breeches  of  skins.  The  rich  Tartars  some-
times furre  their  Gownes  with  pelluce  or  silke  shag,  which
is  exceeding  soft,  light,  and  warme.  The  poorer  sort  doe
line  their  clothes  with  Cotton  cloth,  which  is  made  of  the
finest  wooll  they  can  picke  out,  and  of  the  courser  part  of
the  said  wooll,  they  make  Felt  to  cover  their  houses,  and
their  chists,  and  for  their  bedding  also.  Of  the  same
wooll,  being  mixed  with  one  third  part  of  Horse  haire,
they  make  all  their  cordage.  They  make  also  of  the  said  Great  expense
Felt  coverings  for  their  stooles,  and  caps  to  defend  their  of  Wooll.
heads  from  the  weather :  for  all  which  purposes  they  spend
a  great  quantitie  of  their  wooll.  And  thus  much  concern-  Ch  g
ing  the  attire  of  the  men.  Of  the  fashion

which  the

THe  men  shave  a  plot  foure  square  upon  the  crownes  Tartars  use  in
of  their  heads,  and  from  the  two  formost  corners  they  '?*?"&  iheV '
,  .  -  1.117 aatre,  and  of

shave,  as  it  were,  two  seames  downe  to  their  temples  :  they  the  attire  of

shave  also  their  temples,  and  the  hinder  part  of  their  head, their  women,

19

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1253-

even  unto  the  nape  of  the  necke :  likewise  they  shave  the
fore-part  of  their  scalpe  downe  to  their  foreheads,  and
upon  their  foreheads  they  leave  a  locke  of  haire  reaching
downe  unto  their  eye-browes :  upon  the  two  hindermost
corners  of  their  heads  they  have  two  lockes  also,  which
they  twine  and  braid  into  knots  and  so  bind  and  knit  them
under  each  eare  one.  Moreover,  their  womens  garments
differ  not  from  their  mens,  saving  that  they  are  somewhat
longer.  But  on  the  morrow  after  one  of  their  women  is
married,  shee  shaves  her  scalpe  from  the  middest  of  her
head  downe  to  her  forehead,  and  weares  a  wide  garment
like  unto  the  hood  of  a  Nunne,  yea  larger  and  longer  in
all  parts  then  a  Nunnes  hood,  beeing  open  before,  and
girt  unto  them  under  the  right  side.  For  heerein  doe  the
Tartars  differ  from  the  Turkes  :  because  the  Turkes  fasten
their  garments  to  their  bodies  on  the  left  side ;  but  the
Tartars  alwaies  on  the  right  side.  They  have  also  an
ornament  for  their  heads,  which  they  call,  Botta,  beeing
made  of  the  barke  of  a  Tree,  or  of  some  such  other  lighter

[III.  i.  7.]  matter  as  they  can  finde,  which  by  reason  of  the  thicknesse
and  roundnesse  thereof  cannot  be  holden  but  in  both
hands  together :  and  it  hath  a  square  sharpe  spire  rising
from  the  top  thereof,  being  more  then  a  cubite  in  length,
and  fashioned  like  unto  a  Pinacle.  The  said  Botta  they
cover  all  over  with  a  piece  of  rich  Silke,  and  it  is  hollow
within  :  and  upon  the  midst  of  the  said  spire  or  square  top,
they  put  a  bunch  of  Quils,  or  of  slender  Canes  a  cubite
long  and  more  :  and  the  said  bunch  on  the  top  thereof,
they  beautifie  with  Peacockes  Feathers,  and  round  about
all  the  length  thereof,  with  the  Feathers  of  a  Malards  taile,
and  with  precious  stones  also.  Great  Ladies  weare  this
kind  of  ornament  upon  their  heads,  binding  it  strongly
with  a  certaine  Hat  or  Coyfe,  which  hath  a  hole  in  the
crowne,  fit  for  the  spire  to  come  through  it :  and  under  the
foresaid  ornament  they  cover  the  haires  of  their  heads,
which  they  gather  up  round  together  from  the  hinder  part
thereof  to  the  crowne,  and  so  lap  them  up  in  a  knot  or
bundell  within  the  said  Botta,  which  afterward  they  bind

20

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

1253-
strongly  under  their  throats.  Hereupon  when  a  great
company  of  such  Gentlewomen  ride  together,  and  are  be-
held a  farre  off,  they  seeme  to  be  Souldiers  with  Helmets
on  their  heads,  carrying  their  Lances  upright ;  for  the  said
Botta  appeareth  like  an  Helmet  with  a  Lance  over  it.  All
their  Women  sit  on  horse-backe,  bestriding  their  Horses
like  men  :  and  they  binde  their  hoods  or  gownes  about
their  wastes  with  a  sky-coloured  Silke  Skarfe,  and  with
another  Skarfe  they  gird  it  above  their  breasts :  and  they
binde  also  a  piece  of  white  Silke  like  a  Mufler  or  Maske
under  their  eyes,  reaching  downe  unto  their  breasts.
These  Gentlewomen  are  exceeding  fat,  and  the  lesser  their
noses  be,  the  fairer  they  are  esteemed :  they  dawbe  over
their  sweet  faces  with  grease  too  shamefully :  and  they
never  lye  in  bed  for  their  travell  of  child-birth.

THe  duties  of  Women  are  to  drive  Carts :  to  lay  their  Chap.  9.
houses  upon  Carts,  and  to  take  them  downe  againe ;  ®fthe  duties
to milke Kine, to make Butter and Gry-ut, to dresse  ^ ^Tartarian
skinnes,  and  to  sew  them,  which  they  usually  sew  with  women,  and
thread  made  of  sinewes,  for  they  divide  sinewes  in  slender  of  their  labors,
threads,  and  then  twine  them  into  one  long  thread. They  and  also  °f
make  Sandals  and  Socks,  and  other  Garments. Howbeit  * ei1 .
they  never  wash  any  apparell : for  they  say,  that  God  is
then  angry,  and  that  dreadfull  thunder  will  ensue,  if  washed
garments  be  hanged  forth  to  dry :  yea,  they  beate  such  as
wash, and take their garments from them. They are
wonderfully  afraid  of  thunder :  for  in  the  time  of  thunder
they  thrust  all  strangers  out  of  their  houses,  and  then
wrapping themselves in blacke Felt, they lye hidden
therein,  till  the  thunder  be  over-past. They  never  wash
their  dishes  or  bowles  : yet,  when  their  flesh  is  sodden,
they  wash  the  platter  wherein  it  must  be  put,  with  scalding
hot  broath  out  of  the  pot,  and  then  powre  the  said  broath
into  the  pot  againe. They  make  Felt  also,  and  cover  their
houses  therewith. The  duties  of  the  Men  are,  to  make
Bowes and  Arrowes, Stirrops, Bridles  and Saddles : to
build  Houses  and  Carts,  to  keepe  Horses,  to  milke  Mares,

21

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I253-

to  churne  Cosmos  and  Mares  Milke,  and  to  make  bags

wherein  to  put  it :  they  keepe  Camels  also,  and  lay-
burthens  upon  them.  As  for  Sheepe  and  Goats,  they
tend  and  milke  them,  as  well  the  Men  as  the  Women.
With  Sheeps  Milke  thicked  and  salted,  they  dresse  and
tan  their  Hides.  When  they  will  wash  their  hands  or
their  heads,  they  fill  their  mouthes  full  of  Water,  and
spowting  it  into  their  hands  by  little  and  little,  they
sprinkle  their  haire,  and  wash  their  heads  therewith.  As
touching  marriages,  your  Highnesse  is  to  understand,  that
no  man  can  have  a  Wife  among  them  till  he  hath  bought
her :  whereupon  sometimes  their  Maids  are  very  stale
before  they  be  married,  for  their  Parents  alwaies  keepe
them  till  they  can  sell  them.  They  keepe  the  first  and
second  degrees  of  Consanguinitie  inviolable,  as  wee  doe :
but  they  have  no  regard  of  the  degrees  of  Affinitie :  for
they  will  marrie  together,  or  by  succession,  two  Sisters.
Their  Widowes  marrie  not  at  all,  for  this  reason ;  because
they  beleeve,  that  all  who  have  served  them  in  this  life,
shall  doe  them  service  in  the  life  to  come  also.  Where-
upon they  are  perswaded,  that  every  Widow  after  death
shall  returne  unto  her  owne  Husband.  And  here-hence
ariseth  an  abominable  and  filthy  custome  among  them ;
namely,  that  the  Sonne  marrieth  sometimes  all  his  Fathers
Wives  except  his  owne  Mother :  For  the  Court  or  House
of  the  Father  or  Mother,  falleth  by  inheritance  alwaies  to
the  younger  Sonne.  Whereupon  he  is  to  provide  for  all
his  Fathers  Wives,  because  they  are  part  of  his  Inheritance
as  well  as  his  Fathers  possessions.  And  then  if  he  will,
he  useth  them  for  his  owne  Wives :  for  he  thinkes  it  no
injurie  or  disparagement  unto  himselfe,  although  they
returne  unto  his  Father  after  death.  Therfore  when  any
man  hath  bargained  with  another  for  a  Maid,  the  Father
of  the  said  Damosell  makes  him  a  feast :  in  the  meane
while  she  fleeth  unto  some  of  her  Kinsfolkes  to  hide  her
selfe.  Then  saith  her  Father  unto  the  Bridegroome  :  Loe,
my  Daughter  is  yours,  take  her  wheresoever  you  can  finde
her. Then  he  and  his  friends  seeke  for  her  till  they  can

22

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

1253.
find  her, and having  found  her, he must take  her  by
force  and  carry  her  (as  it  were)  violently  unto  his  owne
house.

Concerning  their  Lawes,  or  their  Execution  of  Justice, Qff^r
your  Majestie  is  to  bee  advertised,  that  when  two  execution  of
men  tight,  no third  man  dare  intrude  himselfe  to  part  Justice  and
them. Yea,  the  Father  dare  not  help  his  owne  Sonne.  Judgment:
But  he  that  goes  by  the  worst,  must  appeale  unto  the  aJeatf  J/J
Court  of  his  Lord. And  whosoever  else  offereth him  burials.
any  violence  after  appeale,  is  put  to  death. But  he  must  [III.  i.  8.]
goe  presently  without  all  delay :  and  he  that  hath  suffered
the  injury,  carrieth  him  (as  it  were)  captive. They  punish
no  man  with  sentence  of  death,  unlesse  he  bee  taken  in
the deed doing, or confesseth the same. But  being
accused  by  the  multitude,  they  put  him  unto  extreame
torture,  to  make  him  confesse  the  truth. They  punish
murther  with  death,  and  Carnall  copulation  also  with  any
other  besides  his  owne. By  his  owne,  I  meane  his  Wife
or  his  Maid  Servant,  for  he  may  use  his  Slave  as  hee  listeth
himselfe. Hainous  theft  also  or  felony  they  punish  with
death. For  a  light  theft,  as  namely,  for  stealing  of  a
Ram,  the  partie  (not  being  apprehended  in  the  deed  doing,
but otherwise  detected) is  cruelly  beaten. And  if  the
Executioner  layes  on  an  hundred  strokes,  hee  must  have
an  hundred  staves ;  namely,  for  such  as  are  beaten  upon
sentence  given  in  the  Court. Also  counterfeit  Messengers,
because  they  feine  themselves  to  be  Messengers,  when  as
indeed they are none at all, they punish with death.
Sacrilegious  persons  they  use  in  like  manner  (of  which
kind  of  Malefactors  your  Majestie  shall  understand  more
fully  hereafter)  because  they  esteeme  such  to  bee  Witches.
When  any  man  dyeth,  they  lament  and  howle  most  pitti-
fully  for  him  :  and  the  said  Mourners  are  free  from  paying
any  tribute  for  one  whole  yeare  after. Also,  whosoever
is  present  at  the  house  where  any  one  growne  to  mans
estate  lyeth  dead,  he  must  not  enter  into  the  Court  of
Mangu-Can,  till  one  whole  yeare  be  expired. If  it  were

23

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1253-

a  child  deceased,  hee  must  not  enter  into  the  said  Court
till  the  next  moneth  after.  Neere  unto  the  grave  of  the
partie  deceased,  they  alwaies  leave  one  Cottage.  If  any
of  their  Nobles  (being  of  the  stocke  of  Chingis,  who  was
their  first  Lord  and  Father)  deceaseth,  his  Sepulchre  is
unknowne.  And  alwaies  about  those  places  where  they
interre  their  Nobles,  there  is  one  house  of  men  to  keepe

Sepulchres,  the  Sepulchres.  I  could  not  learne  that  they  use  to  hide
Treasures  in  the  graves  of  their  dead.  The  Comanians
build  a  great  Toombe  over  their  dead,  and  erect  the  Image
of  the  dead  partie  thereupon,  with  his  face  towards  the
East,  holding  a  drinking  Cup  in  his  hand  before  his
Navell.  They  erect  also  upon  the  Monuments  of  rich
men,  Pyramides,  that  is  to  say ;  little  sharpe  houses  or
pinacles :  and  in  some  places  I  saw  mightie  Towers  made
of  Bricke,  in  other  places  Pyramides  made  of  stones,  albeit
there  are  no  stones  to  be  found  thereabout.  I  saw  one
newly  buried,  in  whose  behalfe  they  hanged  up  sixteene
Horse-hides,  unto  each  quarter  of  the  world  foure,
betweene  certaine  high  posts :  and  they  set  besides  his
Grave  Cosmos  for  him  to  drinke,  and  flesh  to  eate :  and
yet  they  said  that  he  was  baptized.  I  beheld  other  kinds
of  Sepulchres  also  towards  the  East :  namely,  large  floores
or  pavements  made  of  stone,  some  round,  and  some
square,  and  then  foure  long  stones  pitched  upright,  about
the  said  pavement  towards  the  foure  Regions  of  the  world.
When  any  man  is  sicke,  he  lyeth  in  his  bed,  and  causeth
a  signe  to  be  set  upon  his  house,  to  signifie  that  there
lyeth  a  sicke  person  there,  to  the  end  that  no  man  may
enter  into  the  said  house :  whereupon  none  at  all  visit  any
sicke  partie  but  his  servant  only.  Moreover,  when  any
one  is  sicke  in  their  great  Courts,  they  appoint  Watch-
men to  stand  round  about  the  said  Court,  who  will  not
suffer  any  person  to  enter  within  the  Precincts  thereof.
For  they  feare  least  evill  spirits  or  winds  should  come
together  with  the  parties  that  enter  in.  They  esteeme  of
Soothsayers,  as  of  their  Priests.

24

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

1253-

ANd  being  come  amongst  those  barbarous  people,  me  Chap.  n.
thought  (as  I  said  before)  that  I  was  entred  into  a  Of  our  first
new  world:  tor  they  came  flocking  about  us  on  horse-  e"™ngthe
backe,  after  they  had  made  us  a  long  time  to  awaite  for  Tartars,  and
them  sitting  in  the  shadow,  under  their  blacke  carts.  The  of  their
first  question  which  they  demanded,  was,  whether  we  had  ingratitude.
ever  beene  with  them  heretofore,  or  not?  And  giving
them  answere  that  we  had  not,  they  began  impudently  to
beg  our  victuals  from  us.  And  we  gave  them  some  of
our  Bisket  and  Wine,  which  wee  had  brought  with  us
from  the  Towne  of  Soldaia.  And  having  drunke  off  one
Flagon  of  our  Wine,  they  demanded  another ;  saying,
That  a  man  goeth  not  into  the  house  with  one  foote.
Howbeit  we  gave  them  no  more,  excusing  our  selves  that
we  had  but  a  little.  Then  they  asked  us,  whence  we  came,
and  whither  we  were  bound?  I  answered  them  with  the
words  above  mentioned :  that  wee  had  heard  concerning
Duke  Sartach,  that  hee  was  become  a  Christian,  and  that  Duke  Sartach.
unto  him  our  determination  was  to  travell,  having  your
Majesties  Letters  to  deliver  unto  him.  They  were  very
inquisitive  to  know  whether  I  came  of  mine  owne  accord,
or  whither  I  were  sent?  I  answered,  that  no  man  com-
pelled me  to  come,  neither  had  I  come,  unlesse  I  my  selfe
had  beene  willing  :  and  that  therefore  I  was  come  according
to  mine  owne  will,  and  to  the  will  of  my  Superior.  I
tooke  diligent  heed  never  to  say  that  I  was  your  Majesties
Embassadour.  Then  they  asked  what  I  had  in  my  Carts ;
whether  it  were  Gold  or  Silver,  or  rich  Garments  to  carrie
unto  Sartach?  I  answered,  that  Sartach  should  see  what
we  had  brought,  when  we  were  once  come  unto  him,  and
that  they  had  nothing  to  doe  to  aske  such  questions,  but
rather  ought  to  conduct  me  unto  their  Captaine,  and  that
he,  if  he  thought  good,  should  cause  me  to  be  directed
unto  Sartach  :  if  not,  that  I  would  returne.  For  there  was
in  the  same  Province  one  of  Baatu  his  Kinsmen,  called
Scacati,  unto  whom  my  Lord  the  Emperour  of  Constanti-
nople had  written  Letters  of  request,  to  suffer  me  to  passe
through  his  Territorie. With  this  answere  of  ours  they

25

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I253-

were  satisfied,  giving  us  Horses  and  Oxen,  and  two  men  to

conduct  us.  Howbeit,  before  they  would  allow  us  the
foresaid  necessaries  for  our  journey,  they  made  us  to  awaite
[III.  i.  9.]  a  long  while,  begging  our  bread  for  their  young  Brats,
wondring  at  all  things  which  they  saw  about  our  Servants,
as  their  Knives,  Gloves,  Purses  and  Points,  and  desiring
to  have  them.  I  excused  my  selfe  that  wee  had  a  long
way  to  travell,  and  that  we  must  in  no  wise  so  soone
deprive  our  selves  of  things  necessary,  to  finish  so  long  a
journey.  Then  they  said,  that  I  was  a  very  varlet.  True
it  is,  that  they  tooke  nothing  by  force  from  me :  howbeit
they  will  beg  that  which  they  see  very  importunatly  and
shamelesly.  And  if  a  man  bestow  ought  upon  them,  it  is
but  cost  lost,  for  they  are  thanklesse  wretches.  They
esteeme  themselves  Lords,  and  thinke  that  nothing  should
be  denyed  them  by  any  man.  If  a  man  gives  them
nought,  and  afterwards  stands  in  need  of  their  service,  they
will  do  right  nought  for  him.  They  gave  us  of  their  Cows
Milke  to  drink,  after  the  Butter  was  churned  out  of  it,
being  very  sowre,  which  they  call  Apram.  And  so  we
departed  from  them.  And  in  very  deed  it  seemed  to  me
that  we  were  escaped  out  of  the  hands  of  Divels.  On  the
morrow  we  were  come  unto  the  Captaine.  From  the  time
wherein  we  departed  from  Soldaia,  till  wee  arrived  at  the
Court  of  Sartach,  which  was  the  space  of  two  moneths,  we
never  lay  in  House  or  Tent,  but  alwaies  under  the  starry
Canopie,  and  in  the  open  Aire,  or  under  our  Carts.
Neither  yet  saw  we  any  Village,  or  any  mention  of  build-
ing where  a  Village  had  beene,  but  the  graves  of  the
Comanians,  in  great  abundance.  The  same  evening  our
guide  which  had  conducted  us,  gave  us  some  Cosmos.
After  I  had  drunke  thereof,  I  sweat  most  extreamely  for
the  noveltie  and  strangenesse,  because  I  never  dranke  of
it  before.  Notwithstanding,  we  thought  it  was  very
savory,  as  indeed  it  was.

26

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

1253-

ON  the  morrow  after  we  met  with  the  Carts  of  Scacatai  Chap.  12.
laden  with  houses,  and  me  thought  that  a  mightie  °fthe  c°ur*

t  111  Li. of  Scacatai,  Id

Citie  came  to  meete  me. 1  wondred  also  at  the  great  how  the  Chris-

multitude  of  huge  Droves  of  Oxen,  and  Horses,  and  at  tians  drlnke no
the  Flockes  of  Sheepe.  I  could  see  but  a  few  men  that  Cosmos.
guided  all  these  matters :  whereupon  I  inquired  how  many
men  hee  had  under  him,  and  they  told  me  that  he  had
not  above  five  hundred  in  all,  the  one  halfe  of  which
number  we  were  come  past,  as  they  lay  in  another
Lodging.  Then  the  Servant  which  was  our  Guide  told
mee,  that  I  must  present  somewhat  unto  Scacatai :  and  so
he  caused  us  to  stay,  going  himselfe  before  to  give  notice
of  our  comming.  By  this  time  it  was  past  three  of  the
clocke,  and  they  unladed  their  houses  neere  unto  a  cer-
tayne  water :  And  there  came  unto  us  his  Interpreter,  who
being  advertised  by  us  that  we  were  never  there  before,
demanded  some  of  our  victuals,  and  wee  yeelded  unto  his
request.  Also  hee  required  of  us  some  garment  for  a
Reward,  because  hee  was  to  interpret  our  Sayings  unto  his
Master.  Howbeit,  we  excused  our  selves  as  well  as  we
could.  Then  hee  asked  us,  what  we  would  present  unto
his  Lord :  And  we  tooke  a  flagon  of  Wine,  and  filled  a
Maund  with  Bisket,  and  a  Platter  with  Apples  and  other
Fruits.  But  he  was  not  contented  therewith,  because  we
brought  him  not  some  rich  garment.  Notwithstanding,
wee  entred  so  into  his  presence  with  feare  and  bashfulnesse.
He  sate  upon  his  bed  holding  a  Citron  in  his  hand,  and
his  Wife  sate  by  him  :  who  (as  I  verily  thinke)  had  cut
and  pared  her  Nose  betweene  the  Eyes,  that  she  might
seeme  to  be  more  flat  and  saddle-nosed  :  for  she  had  left
her  selfe  no  Nose  at  all  in  that  place,  having  anoynted  the
very  same  place  with  a  blacke  Oyntment,  and  her  Eye-
brows also  :  which  sight  seemed  most  ugly  in  our  Eyes.
Then  I  rehearsed  unto  him  the  same  words,  which  I  had
spoken  in  other  places  before.  For  it  stood  us  in  hand  to  J  caveat  right
use  one  and  the  same  speech  in  all  places.  For  we  were  worthy  the
well  fore-warned  of  this  circumstance  by  some  which  had  nottnS-\
beene  amongst  the  Tartars,  that  we  should  never  vary  in

27

A.D.

1253-

Superstition,
the  Kingdome
of  God  is  not
meate  and
drinke.

[III.  i.  io.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

our  Tale.  Then  I  besought  him,  that  he  would  vouchsafe
to  accept  that  small  gift  at  our  hands,  excusing  my  selfe
that  I  was  a  Monke,  and  that  it  was  against  our  profession
to  possesse  Gold,  or  Silver,  or  precious  Garments,  and
therefore  that  I  had  not  any  such  thing  to  give  him,  how-
beit  he  should  receive  some  part  of  our  victuals  in  stead
of  a  blessing.  Hereupon  he  caused  our  Present  to  be
received,  and  immediately  distributed  the  same  among  his
men,  who  were  met  together  for  the  same  purpose,  to
drinke  and  make  merry.  I  delivered  also  unto  him  the
Emperour  of  Constantinople  his  Letters  (this  was  eight
dayes  after  the  Feast  of  Ascension)  who  sent  them  forth-
with to  Soldaia,  to  have  them  interpreted  there :  for  they
were  written  in  Greeke,  and  he  had  none  about  him  that
was  skilfull  in  the  Greeke  Tongue.  He  asked  us  also
whether  we  would  drinke  any  Cosmos,  that  is  to  say,
Mares  Milke  :  (For  those  that  are  Christians  among  them,
as  namely,  the  Russians,  Grecians,  and  Alanians,  who
keepe  their  owne  Law  very  strictly,  will  in  no  case  drinke
thereof,  yea,  they  account  themselves  no  Christians  after
they  have  once  drunke  of  it,  and  their  Priests  reconcile
them  unto  the  Church,  as  if  they  had  renounced  the
Christian  Faith.)  I  gave  him  answere,  that  wee  had  as  yet
sufficient  of  our  owne  to  drinke,  and  that  when  our  drinke
fayled  us,  we  must  be  constrayned  to  drinke  such  as  should
bee  given  unto  us.  Hee  enquired  also  what  was  contayned
in  our  Letters,  which  your  Majestie  sent  unto  Sartach  ?  I
answered :  that  they  were  sealed  up,  and  that  there  was
nothing  contayned  in  them,  but  good  and  friendly  words.
And  he  asked  what  words  wee  would  deliver  unto  Sartach  ?
I  answered :  the  words  of  Christian  Faith.  Hee  asked
againe  what  these  words  were  ?  For  he  was  very  desirous
to  heare  them.  Then  I  expounded  unto  him  as  well  as
I  could,  by  mine  Interpreter,  (who  had  no  wit  nor  any
utterance  of  speech)  the  Apostles  Creed.  Which  after  hee
had  heard,  holding  his  peace,  he  shooke  his  head.  Then
hee  assigned  unto  us  two  men,  who  should  give  attendance
upon  our  selves,  upon  our  Horses,  and  upon  our  Oxen.

28

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

1253.
And  hee  caused  us  to  ride  in  his  company,  till  the  Mes-
senger whom  he  had  sent  for  the  Interpretation  of  the
Emperours  Letters,  was  returned. And  so  wee  travelled
in  his  company  till  the  morrow  after  Pentecost.

UPon the  Eeven of  Pentecost, there  came  unto  us  Chap.  13.

certayne  Alanians,  who  are  there  called  *  Adas,  being  Ho™  ?hg

r-y • . J c  ,  r 1 r-  r> 1  Alanians  came

Christians  after  the  manner  or  the  Grecians,  using  Greeke  unt0  us  on

Bookes  and  Grecian  Priests :  howbeit,  they  are  not  Schis-  Pentecost  or
matikes as the Grecians  are, but  without acception of  WhitsonEeve.
persons,  they  honour  all  Christians. And  they  brought  *0r>  Akas-
unto  us  sodden  flesh,  requesting  us  to  eat  of  their  meate,
and  to  pray  for  one  of  their  company  beeing  dead. Then
I  said,  because  it  was  the  Eeven  of  so  great  and  so  solemne
a  Feast  Day,  that  wee  would  not  eate  any  flesh  for  that
time. And  I  expounded  unto  them  the  Solemnitie  of  the
said  Feast,  whereat  they  greatly  rejoyced : for  they  were
ignorant  of  all  things  appertayning  to  Christian  Religion,
except  only  the  Name  of  Christ. They  and  many  other
Christians,  both  Russians,  and  Hungarians  demanded  of
us,  whether  they  might  be  saved  or  no,  because  they  were
constrayned to drinke Cosmos, and to eate the dead
carkasses  of  such  things,  as  were  slaine  by  the  Saracens,
and  other  Infidels  ? Which  even  the  Greeke  and  Russian
Priests themselves also esteeme as things strangled or
offered  unto  Idols : because  they  were  ignorant  of  the
times  of  Fasting,  neither  could  they  have  observed  them
albeit  they  had  knowne  them. Then  instructed  I  them
aswell  as  I  could  and  strengthened  them  in  the  Faith. As
for  the  flesh  which  they  had  brought,  wee  reserved  it  untill
the  feast  day. For  there  was  nothing  to  be  sold  among
the  Tartars  for  Gold  and  Silver,  but  onely  for  Cloath  and  cloth  is  a*
Garments,  of  the  which  kind  of  Merchandize  wee  had f^ndi^Z'
none  at  all. When  our  Servants  offered  them  any  Coyne, Tartaric
called  Yperpera,  they  rubbed  it  with  their  fingers,  and  put
it  unto  their  noses,  to  try  by  the  smell  whether  it  were
Copper  or  no. Neither  did  they  allow  us  any  food  but
Ccwes Milke onely, which was very sowre  and  filthy.

29

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1253.

There  was  one  thing  most  necessary  greatly  wanting  unto
us.  For  the  water  was  so  foule  and  muddy,  by  reason  of
their  Horses,  that  it  was  not  meete  to  be  drunke.  And
but  for  certaine  Bisket,  which  was  by  the  goodnesse  of  God
remaining  unto  us,  we  had  undoubtedly  perished.

Chap.  14.  X  TPon  the  day  of  Pentecost  there  came  unto  us  a  certaine
%UhsaUm  Saracen, unto whom, as he talked with us, we

that  he  would  expounded  the  Christian  Faith.  Who  (hearing  of  Gods
be  baptised:  benefits  exhibited  unto  mankind,  by  the  Incarnation  of
and  of  certaine  our  Saviour  Christ,  and  the  Resurrection  of  the  dead,  and
men  wjtch  the  Judgement  to  come,  and  that  in  Baptisme  was  a  wash-
lepers  ing  away  of  sinnes) said, that  hee  would  be  baptized.

But  when  wee  prepared  our  selves  to  the  baptizing  of  him,
hee  suddenly  mounted  on  horse-back,  saying,  that  he
would  go  home  and  consult  with  his  wife  what  were  best
to  be  done.  And  on  the  morrow  after  he  told  us,  that  he
durst  in  no  case  receive  Baptisme,  because  then  he  should
drinke  no  more  Cosmos.  For  the  Christians  of  that
place  affirme,  that  no  true  Christians  ought  to  drinke
thereof :  and  that  without  the  said  liquor  hee  could  not
live  in  that  Desart.  From  which  opinion,  I  could  not  for
my  life  remove  him.  Wherefore  be  it  knowne  of  a  cer-
taintie  unto  your  Highnesse,  that  they  are  much  estranged
from  the  Christian  Faith,  by  reason  of  that  opinion  which
hath  beene  broached  and  confirmed  among  them  by  the
Russians,  of  whom  there  is  a  great  multitude  in  that  place.
The  same  day  Scacatai  the  Captaine  aforesaid  gave  us  one
man  to  conduct  us  to  Sartach,  and  two  other  to  guide  us
unto  the  next  Lodging,  which  was  distant  from  that  place
five  dayes  Journey  for  Oxen  to  travell.  They  gave  unto
us  also  a  Goate  for  victuals,  and  a  great  many  Bladders  of
Cowes  Milke,  and  but  a  little  Cosmos,  because  it  is  of  so
great  estimation  among  them.  And  so  taking  our  journey
directly  toward  the  North,  mee  thought  that  wee  had
passed  through  one  of  Hell  gates.  The  Servants  which
conducted  us  began  to  play  the  bold  Theeves  with  us,
seeing  us  take  so  little  heed  unto  our  selves. At  length

30

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK

A.D.

1253-

Ten  dayes
Journey.

having  lost  much  by  their  Theevery,  harme  taught  us
wisdome.  And  then  wee  came  unto  the  extremitie  of  that
Province,  which  is  fortified  with  a  Ditch  from  one  Sea
unto  another  :  without  the  bounds  whereof  their  Lodging
was  situate.  Into  the  which,  so  soone  as  wee  had  entred,
all  the  Inhabitants  there  seemed  unto  us  to  be  infected
with  Leprosie  :  for  certayne  base  fellowes  were  placed  there
to  receive  Tribute  of  all  such  as  tooke  Salt  out  of  the
Salt-pits  aforesaid.  From  that  place  they  told  us  that  Salt-pits.
we  must  travell  fifteene  dayes  Journey,  before  we  should
find  any  other  people.  With  them  we  dranke  Cosmos,
and  gave  unto  them  a  basket  full  of  Fruits  and  of  Bisket.
And  they  gave  unto  us  eight  Oxen  and  one  Goate,  to
sustayne  us  in  so  great  a  Journey,  and  I  know  not  how
many  bladders  of  Milke.  And  so  changing  our  Oxen,
we  tooke  our  Journey  which  wee  finished  in  tenne  dayes,
arriving  at  another  Lodging :  neither  found  we  any  water
all  that  way,  but  onely  in  certayne  Ditches  made  in  the
Valleys,  except  two  Rivers.  And  from  the  time  wherein
wee  departed  out  of  the  aforesaid  Province  of  Gassaria,  we
travelled  directly  East-ward,  having  a  Sea  on  the  South-
side  of  us,  and  a  waste  Desart  on  the  North,  which  Desart,
in  some  places,  reacheth  twentie  dayes  Journey  in  breadth
and  there  is  neither  Tree,  Mountayne,  nor  Stone  therein.
And  it  is  most  excellent  Pasture.  Here  the  Comanians,
which  were  called  Capthac,  were  wont  to  feed  their  Cattell.
Howbeit  by  the  Dutchmen  they  are  called  Valani,  and  the
Province  it  selfe  Valania.  But  Isidore  calleth  all  that  tract
of  Land  stretching  from  the  River  of  Tanais  to  the  Lake
of  Maeotis,  and  so  long  as  farre  as  Danubius,  the  Countrey
of  Alania.  And  the  same  land  continueth  in  length  from
Danubius  unto  Tanais  (which  divideth  Asia  from  Europe)
for  the  space  of  two  moneths  journey,  albeit  a  man  should
ride  post  as  fast  as  the  Tartars  use  to  ride :  and  it  was  all
over  inhabited  by  the  Comanians,  called  Capthac :  yea,
and  beyond  Tanais,  as  farre  as  the  River  of  Edil,  or  Volga  :
the  space  betweene  the  two  which  Rivers  is  a  great  and
long  journey  to  bee  travelled  in  ten  daies. To  the  North

31

[III.  i.  ii.]

Valani.

The  length  of
Comania.

A.D.

1253-

Russia.

Chap.  15.
Of  our  afflic-
tions which
wee  sustained:
and  of  the
Comanians
manner  of
buriall.
Prussia.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  the  same  Province  lyeth  Russia,  which  is  full  of  wood
in  all  places,  and  stretcheth  from  Polonia  and  Hungaria,
even  to  the  River  of  Tanais :  and  it  hath  beene  wasted  all
over  by  the  Tartars,  and  as  yet  is  daily  wasted  by  them.

THey  preferre  the  Saracens  before  the  Russians,  because
they  are  Christians,  and  when  they  are  able  to  give
them  no  more  gold  nor  silver,  they  drive  them  and  their
Children  like  flocks  of  Sheepe  into  the  wildernesse,  con-
straining them  to  keepe  their  Cattell  there.  Beyond
Russia  lyeth  the  Countrey  of  Prussia,  which  the  Dutch
Knights  of  the  order  of  Saint  Maries  Hospitall  of
Jerusalem,  have  of  late  wholly  conquered  and  subdued.
And  in  very  deede,  they  might  easily  win  Russia,  if  they
would  put  to  their  helping  hand.  For  if  the  Tartars
should  but  once  know  that  the  great  Priest,  that  is  to  say,
the  Pope  did  cause  the  Ensigne  of  the  Crosse  to  be  dis-
plaied  against  them,  they  would  flie  all  into  their  Desart
and  solitarie  places.  Wee  therefore  went  on  towards  the
East,  seeing  nothing  but  Heaven  and  Earth,  and  some-
times the  Sea  on  our  right  hand,  called  the  Sea  of  Tanais,
and  the  Sepulchres  of  the  Comanians,  which  appeared  unto
us  two  leagues  off,  in  which  places  they  were  wont  to  burie
their  kindred  altogether.  So  long  as  we  were  travelling
through  the  Desart,  it  went  reasonably  well  with  us.  For
I  cannot  sufficiently  expresse  in  words  the  irkesome  and
tedious  troubles  which  I  sustained,  when  I  came  at  any  of
their  places  of  abode.  For  our  Guide  would  have  us  goe
in  unto  every  Captaine  with  a  present,  and  our  expences
would  not  extend  so  farre.  For  we  were  every  day  eight
persons  of  us  spending  our  wayfaring  provision,  for  th<
Tartars  servants  would  all  of  them  eate  of  our  victuals.
We  our  selves  were  five  in  number,  and  the  servants  our
Guides  were  three,  two  to  drive  our  Carts,  and  one  to
conduct  us  unto  Sartach.  The  flesh  which  they  gave  us
was  not  sufficient  for  us ;  neither  could  we  find  any  thing
to  be  bought  for  our  money.  And  as  we  sate  under  our
Carts  in  the  coole  shadow,  by  reason  of  the  extreame  an<

32

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

1253-
vehement  heate  which  was  there  at  that  time,  they  did  so  Extreame
importunately  and  shamelessly  intrude  themselves  into  our  h*ate  tn
company,  that  they  would  even  tread  upon  us,  to  see  what-
soever things  we  had.  Having  list  at  any  time  to  ease
themselves,  the  filthie  Lozels  had  not  the  manners  to  with-
draw themselves  farther  from  us,  then  a  Beane  can  be  cast.
Yea,  like  vile  slovens  they  would  lay  their  tailes  in  our
presence,  while  they  were  yet  talking  with  us  :  many  other
things  they  committed,  which  were  most  tedious  and
loathsome  unto  us.  But  above  all  things  it  grieved  me  to
the  very  heart,  that  when  I  would  utter  ought  unto  them,
which  might  tend  to  their  edification,  my  foolish  inter-
preter would  say :  you  should  not  make  me  become  a
Preacher  now ;  I  tell  you,  I  cannot  nor  I  will  not  rehearse
any  such  words.  And  true  it  was  which  he  said,  for  I
perceived  afterward,  when  I  began  to  have  a  little  smat-
tering in  the  language,  that  when  I  spake  one  thing,  hee
would  say  quite  another,  whatsoever  came  next  unto  his
witlesse  tongues  end.  Then  seeing  the  danger  I  might
incurre  in  speaking  by  such  an  Interpreter,  I  resolved  much
rather  to  hold  my  peace,  and  thus  we  travelled  with  great
toile  from  lodging  to  lodging,  till  at  the  length,  a  few  daies
before  the  Feast  of  Saint  Marie  Magdalene,  we  arrived
at  the  banke  of  the  mightie  River  Tanais,  which  divideth  Tanais.
Asia  from  Europa,  even  as  the  River  Nilus  of  Mgypt
disjoyneth  Asia  from  Africa.  At  the  same  place  where
we  arrived,  Baatu  and  Sartach  did  cause  a  certaine  Cottage
to  be  built  upon  the  Easterne  banke  of  the  River,  for  a
companie  of  Russians  to  dwell  in,  to  the  end,  they  might
transport  Ambassadours  and  Merchants  in  Ferrie-boates
over  that  part  of  the  River.  First,  they  ferried  us  over,
and  then  our  Carts,  putting  one  wheele  into  one  Liter,  and
the  other  wheele  into  another  Liter,  having  bound  both
the  Liters  together,  and  so  they  rowed  them  over.  In
this  place  our  Guide  played  the  foole  most  extreamely.
For  he  imagining  that  tht  said  Russians,  dwelling  in  the
Cottle,  should  have  provided  us  Horses,  sent  home  the
Beasts  which  wee  brought  with  us,  in  another  Cart,  that
xi  33  c

A.D.

1253-

The  breadth  of
Tanais.

[III.  i. 12.]

He  is  much
deceived.

About  the
beginning  of
August,  the
Tartars
returne
Southward.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

they  might  returne  unto  their  owne  Masters.  And  when
we  demanded  to  have  some  beasts  of  them,  they  answered,
that  they  had  a  priviledge  from  Baatu,  whereby  they  were
bound  to  none  other  service,  but  onely  to  ferrie  over  Goers
and  Commers :  and  that  they  received  great  tribute  of
Merchants  in  regard  thereof.  Wee  staied  therefore  by  the
said  Rivers  side  three  daies.  The  first  day  they  gave  unto
us  a  great  fresh  Turbut :  the  second  day  they  bestowed
Rye  bread,  and  a  little  flesh  upon  us,  which  the  Purveyer
of  the  Village  had  taken  up  at  every  house  for  us :  and
the  third  day  dryed  Fishes,  which  they  have  there  in  great
aboundance.  The  said  River  was  even  as  broade  in  that
place,  as  the  River  of  Sein  is  at  Paris.  And  before  wee
came  there,  wee  passed  over  many  goodly  waters,  and  full
of  Fish :  howbeit  the  barbarous  and  rude  Tartars  know
not  how  to  take  them :  neither  doe  they  make  any  reckon-
ing of  any  Fish,  except  it  bee  so  great,  that  they  may  prey
upon  the  flesh  thereof,  as  upon  the  flesh  of  a  Ram.  This
River  is  the  limit  of  the  East  part  of  Russia,  and  it
springeth  out  of  the  Fennes  of  Maeotis,  which  Fennes
stretch  unto  the  North  Ocean.  And  it  runneth  South-
ward into  a  certaine  great  Sea  seven  hundred  miles  about,
before  it  falleth  into  the  Sea  called  Pontus  Euxinus.  And
all  the  Rivers  which  we  passed  over,  ran  with  full  streame
into  those  quarters.  The  foresaid  River  hath  great  store
of  wood  also  growing  upon  the  West  side  thereof.
Beyond  this  place  the  Tartars  ascend  no  farther  unto  the
North  :  for  at  that  season  of  the  yeere,  about  the  first  of
August,  they  begin  to  returne  backe  unto  the  South.  And
therefore  there  is  another  Cottage  somewhat  lower  where
Passengers  are  ferried  over  in  Winter  time,  and  in  this
place  we  were  driven  to  great  extremitie,  by  reason  that
we  could  get  neither  Horses,  nor  Oxen  for  any  money.
At  length,  after  I  had  declared  unto  them,  that  my  com-
ming  was  to  labour  for  the  common  good  of  all  Christians,
they  sent  us  Oxen  and  Men ;  howbeit  wee  our  selves  were
faine  to  travell  on  foot.  At  this  time  they  were  reaping
their Rye. Wheate prospereth not well in that soile.

34

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK

They  have  the  seed  of  Millium  in  great  abundance.  The
Russian  women  attire  their  heads  like  unto  our  women.
They  embroider  their  Safegards  or  Gownes  on  the  outside,
from  their  feet  unto  their  knees  with  partie-coloured  or
grey  stuffe.  The  Russian  men  weare  Caps  like  unto  the
Dutch  men.  Also  they  weare  upon  their  heads  certaine
sharpe  and  high-crowned  Hats  made  of  Felt,  much  like
unto  a  Sugar-loafe.  Then  travailed  we  three  daies
together,  not  finding  any  people.  And  when  our  selves
and  our  Oxen  were  exceeding  wearie  and  faint,  not  know-
ing how  farre  off  we  should  find  any  Tartars,  on  the  sudden
there  came  two  Horses  running  towards  us,  which  we
tooke  with  great  joy,  and  our  Guide  and  Interpreter
mounted  upon  their  backs,  to  see  how  farre  off  they  could
descrie  any  people.  At  length,  upon  the  fourth  day  of
our  journey,  having  found  some  Inhabitants,  we  rejoyced
like  Sea  faring  men,  which  had  escaped  out  of  a  dangerous
Tempest,  and  had  newly  recovered  the  Haven.  Then
having  taken  fresh  Horses,  and  Oxen,  we  passed  on  from
lodging  to  lodging,  till  at  the  last,  upon  the  second  of  the
Kalends  of  August,  we  arrived  at  the  habitation  of  Duke
Sartach  himselfe.

A.D.
1253.

THe  Region  lying  beyond  Tanais,  is  a  very  goodly
Countrey,  having  store  of  Rivers  and  Woods  toward
the  North  part  thereof.  There  are  mightie  huge  Woods
which  two  sorts  of  people  doe  inhabit.  One  of  them  is
called  Moxel,  being  meere  Pagans,  and  without  Law.
They  have  neither  Townes  nor  Cities,  but  onely  Cottages
in  the  Woods.  Their  Lord  and  a  great  part  of  themselves
were  put  to  the  Sword  in  high  Germanie.  Whereupon
they  highly  commend  the  brave  courage  of  the  Almans,
hoping  as  yet  to  be  delivered  out  of  the  bondage  of  the
Tartars,  by  their  meanes.  If  any  Merchant  come  unto
them,  hee  must  provide  things  necessary  for  him,  with
whom  hee  is  first  of  all  entertained,  all  the  time  of  his
abode  among  them.  If  any  lyeth  with  another  mans
wife,  her  husband,  unlesse  he  be  an  eye-witnesse  thereof,

35

Chap.  16.
Of  the
Dominion  of
Sartach,  and
of  his  Subjects.
The  people  of
Moxel  are
Pagans.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1253-

regardeth  it  not ;  for  they  are  not  jealous  over  their  wives.

They  have  abundance  of  Hogs,  and  great  store  of  Honie

and  Waxe,  and  divers  sorts  of  rich  and  costly  Skins,  and

The  people plentie  of  Faulcons. Next  unto  them  are  other  people

called  Merdui  cajled  Merclas,  which  the  Latines  call  Merdui,and  they  are

emg  aracens.  garacens> Beyond  them  is  the  River  of  Etilia,  or  Volga,

which  is  the  mightiest  River  that  ever  I  saw. And  it

issueth  from  the  North  part  of  Bulgaria  the  greater,  and

so  trending  along  Southward,  disimboqueth  into  a  certaine

The  circuit  of  Lake,  containing  in  circuit  the  space  of  foure  moneths

the  Caspian trave|]j  whereof  I  will  speake  hereafter. The  two  foresaid

Rivers,  namely,  Tanais  and  Etilia,  otherwise  called  Volga,

towards  the  Northerne  Regions,  through  the  which  we

travailed,  are  not  distant  asunder  above  ten  daies  journey,

but  Southward  they  are  divided  a  great  space  one  from

another. For  Tanais  descendeth  into  the  Sea  of  Pontus :

Etilia  maketh  the  foresaid  Sea  or  Lake,  with  the  helpe  of

many  other  Rivers,  which  fall  thereinto  out  of  Persia.

And  wee  had  to  the  South  of  us  huge  high  Mountaines,

upon  the  sides  thereof  towards  the  said  Desart,  doe  the

KergisorJas.  people  called  Cergis,  and  the  Alani  or  Acas  inhabit,  who

are  as  yet  Christians,  and  wage  warre  against  the  Tartars.

Beyond  them,  next  unto  the  Sea  or  Lake  of  Etilia,  there

The  Saracens are  certaine  Saracens  called  Lesgi,  who  are  in  subjection

called  Lesgi. unto  tfe  Tartars. Beyond  these  is  Porta  ferrea,  or  the

Iron  gate,  now  called  Derbent,  which  Alexander  built  to

exclude  the  barbarous  Nations  out  of  Persia. Concerning

the situation whereof, your Majestie shall understand

more  about  the  end  of  this  Treatise : for  I  travailed  in

He  retumeth my  returne  by  the  very  same  place. Betweene  the  two

by  Derbent. foresaid  Rivers, in  the  Regions  through  the  which  we

passed,  did  the  Comanians  of  old  time  inhabit,  before  they

were  overrun  by  the  Tartars.

Chap.  17.  A Nd  wee  found  Sartach  lying  within  three  daies  journey

ofSrt  ch^nd  "^^  °^  ^e  ^ver  Etilia  :  whose  Court  seemed  unto  us  to
ofthemagni-  be  very  great.  For  he  himselfe  had  six  wives,  and  his
ficence  thereof,  eldest  sonne  also  had  three  wives : every  one  of  which

36

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

!253-

women  hath  a  great  house,  and  they  have  each  one  of
them  about  two  hundred  Carts.  Our  guide  went  unto  a
certaine  Nestorian  named  Coiat,  who  is  a  man  of  great  Coiat,  the
authoritie  in  Sartachs  Court.  He  made  us  to  goe  very  Nestorian.
farre  unto  the  Lords  gate.  For  so  they  call  him  who  hath
the  Office  of  entertayning  Ambassadours.  In  the  evening,
Coiat  commanded  us  to  come  unto  him.  Then  our  Guide
began  to  enquire  what  wee  would  present  him  withall,  and
was  exceedingly  offended,  when  hee  saw  that  wee  had
nothing  ready  to  present.  We  stood  before  him,  and  he  [III.  i.  13.]
sate  majestically,  having  musick  and  dancing  in  his  pres-
ence. Then  I  spake  unto  him  in  the  words  before  recited,
telling  him  for  what  purpose  I  was  come  unto  his  Lord,
and  requesting  so  much  favour  at  his  hands,  as  to  bring
our  Letters  unto  the  sight  of  his  Lord,  I  excused  my  selfe
also,  that  I  was  a  Monke,  not  having,  nor  receiving,  nor
using  any  gold,  or  silver,  or  any  other  precious  thing,  save
onely  our  Bookes,  and  the  Vestments  wherein  wee  served
God  :  and  that  this  was  the  cause  why  I  brought  no  present
unto  him,  nor  unto  his  Lord.  For  I  that  had  abandoned
mine  owne  goods,  could  not  be  a  transporter  of  things  for
other  men.  Then  he  answered  very  courteously,  that
being  a  Monke,  and  so  doing,  I  did  well ;  for  so  I  should
observe  my  vow :  neither  did  himselfe  stand  in  need  of
ought  that  we  had,  but  rather  was  ready  to  bestow  upon  us
such  things  as  we  our  selves  stood  in  need  of :  and  hee
caused  us  to  sit  downe,  and  to  drinke  of  his  Milke.  And
presently  after,  hee  requested  us  to  say  our  devotions  for
him :  and  wee  did  so.  Hee  enquired  also  who  was  the
greatest  Prince  among  the  Francks?  And  I  said,  the
Emperour,  if  he  could  enjoy  his  owne  Dominions  in  quiet.
No  (quoth  hee)  but  the  King  of  France.  For  hee  had
heard  of  your  Highnesse  by  Lord  Baldwine  of  Henault.
I  found  there  also  one  of  the  Knights  of  the  Temple  who
had  beene  in  Cyprus,  and  had  made  report  of  all  things
which  he  saw  there.  Then  returned  we  unto  our  Lodging.
And  on  the  morrow  we  sent  him  a  flaggon  of  Muscadell
Wine  (which  had  lasted  verie  well  in  so  long  a  Journey)

37

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1253-

and  a  boxe  full  of  Bisket,  which  was  most  acceptable  unto

him.  And  hee  kept  our  Servants  with  him  for  that  Even-
ing. The  next  morning  hee  commanded  mee  to  come
unto  the  Court,  and  to  bring  the  Kings  Letters  and  my
Vestments,  and  Bookes  with  mee :  because  his  Lord  was
desirous  to  see  them.  Which  we  did  accordingly,  lading
one  Cart  with  our  Bookes  and  Vestments,  and  another  with
Bisket,  Wine,  and  Fruits.  Then  hee  caused  all  our
Bookes  and  Vestments  to  bee  layd  forth.  And  there  stood
round  about  us  many  Tartars,  Christians,  and  Saracens  on
Horse-backe.  At  the  sight  whereof,  hee  demanded
whether  I  would  bestow  all  those  things  upon  his  Lord  or
no?  Which  saying  made  mee  to  tremble,  and  grieved
mee  full  sore.  Howbeit,  dissembling  our  griefe  as  well
as  we  could,  we  shaped  him  this  Answere  :  Sir,  our  humble
request  is,  that  our  Lord  your  Master  would  vouchsafe  to
accept  our  Bread,  Wine,  and  Fruits,  not  as  a  Present,
because  it  is  too  meane,  but  as  a  Benediction,  least  we
should  come  with  an  emptie  hand  before  him.  And  hee
shall  see  the  Letters  of  my  Sovereigne  Lord  the  King,  and
by  them  hee  shall  understand  for  what  cause  we  are  come
unto  him,  and  then  both  our  selves,  and  all  that  wee  have,
shall  stand  to  his  courtesie :  for  our  Vestments  bee  holy,
and  it  is  unlawfull  for  any  but  Priests  to  touch  them.
Then  he  commanded  us  to  invest  our  selves  in  the  said
Garments,  that  we  might  goe  before  his  Lord  :  and  we  did
so.  Then  I  my  selfe  putting  on  our  most  precious  Orna-
ments, tooke  in  mine  armes  a  very  faire  Cushion,  and  the
Bible  which  your  Majestie  gave  mee,  and  a  most  beautifull
Psalter,  which  the  Queenes  Grace  bestowed  upon  mee,
wherein  there  were  goodly  Pictures.  Mine  Associate
tooke  a  Missall  and  a  Crosse :  and  the  Clerke  having  put
on  his  Surplice,  took  a  Censer  in  his  hand.  And  so  we
came  unto  the  presence  of  his  Lord :  and  they  lifted  up
the  Felt  hanging  before  his  doore,  that  hee  might  behold
us.  Then  they  caused  the  Clerke  and  the  Interpreter
thrice  to  bow  the  knee  :  but  of  us  they  required  no  such
submission. And  they  diligently  admonished  us  to  take

38

No
consequence.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1253
heed,  that  in  going  in,  and  in  comming  out,  wee  touched
not  the  threshold  of  the  house,  and  requested  us  to  sing  a
Benediction  for  him.  Then  we  entred  in,  singing  Salve
Regina.  And  within  the  entrance  of  the  doore  stood  a
bench  with  Cosmos,  and  drinking  cups  thereupon.  And
all  his  Wives  were  there  assembled.  Also  the  Moals  or
rich  Tartars  thrusting  in  with  us  pressed  us  sore.  Then
Coiat  carryed  unto  his  Lord  the  Censer  with  Incense,  which
hee  beheld  very  diligently,  holding  it  in  his  hand.  After-
ward he  carryed  the  Psalter  unto  him,  which  he  looked
earnestly  upon,  and  his  Wife  also  that  sate  beside  him.
After  that  he  carryed  the  Bible :  then  Sartach  asked  if  the
Gospell  were  contayned  therein  ?  Yea  (said  I)  and  all  the
holy  Scriptures  besides.  He  tooke  the  Crosse  also  in  his
hand,  and  demanded  concerning  the  Image,  whether  it
were  the  Image  of  Christ  or  no?  I  said  it  was.  The
Nestorians  and  the  Armenians  doe  never  make  the  figure
of  Christ  upon  their  Crosses.  Wherefore  either  they
seeme  not  to  thinke  well  of  his  Passion,  or  else  they  are
ashamed  of  it.  Then  hee  caused  them  that  stood  about
us,  to  stand  aside,  that  hee  might  more  fully  behold  our
Ornaments.  Afterward  I  delivered  unto  him  your
Majesties  Letters,  with  the  Translation  thereof  into  the
Arabicke  and  Syriacke  Languages.  For  I  caused  them
to  bee  translated  at  Aeon,  into  the  Character  and  Dialect
of  both  the  said  Tongues.  And  there  were  certayne
Armenian  Priests,  which  had  skill  in  the  Turkish  and
Arabian  Languages.  The  aforesaid  Knight  also  of  the
Order  of  the  Temple  had  knowledge  in  the  Syriake,
Turkish,  and  Arabian  Tongues.  Then  wee  departed
forth,  and  put  off  our  Vestments,  and  there  came  unto  us
certayne  Scribes  together  with  the  foresaid  Coiat,  and
caused  our  Letters  to  bee  interpreted.  Which  Letters
being  heard,  hee  caused  our  Bread,  Wine  and  Fruits  to
bee  received.  And  hee  permitted  us  also  to  carrie  our
Vestments  and  Bookes  unto  our  owne  Lodging.  This
was  done  upon  the  Feast  of  S.  Peter  ad  vincula.

39

A.D.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

unto  Baatu
the  Father  of
Sartach.

1253-
[III.  i.  14.] r  I  ^He  next  morning  betimes  came  unto  us  a  certayne
Chap.  18. J[ Priest,  who  was  brother  unto  Coiat,  requesting  to

owt  eywere  ^  boxe  of  Chrisme,  because  Sartach  (as  he  said)

given  in  .  \  . \  '

charge  to  goe was  desirous  to  see  it : and  so  we  gave  it  him. About

Eventyde  Coiat  sent  for  us,  saying :  My  Lord  your  King
wrote  good  words  unto  my  Lord  and  Master  Sartach.
Howbeit  there  are  certayne  matters  of  difficultie  in  them,
concerning  which  he  dare  not  determine  ought,  without
the  advice  and  counsell  of  his  Father.  And  therefore  of
necessitie  you  must  depart  unto  his  Father,  leaving  behind
you  the  two  Carts,  which  you  brought  hither  yesterday
with  Vestments  and  Bookes,  in  my  custodie :  because  my
Lord  is  desirous  to  take  more  diligent  view  thereof.  I
presently  suspecting  what  mischiefe  might  ensue  by  his
covetousnesse,  said  unto  him :  Sir,  we  will  not  onely  leave
those  with  you,  but  the  two  other  Carts  also,  which  we
have  in  our  possession,  will  wee  commit  unto  your
custodie.  You  shall  not  (quoth  he)  leave  those  behind
you,  but  for  the  other  two  Carts  first  named,  wee  will
satisfie  your  request.  I  said  that  this  could  not  con-
veniently bee  done :  but  needs  we  must  leave  all  with
him.  Then  he  asked,  whether  we  meant  to  tarrie  in  the
Land  ?  I  answered :  If  you  throughly  understand  the
Letters  of  my  Lord  the  King,  you  know  that  we  are
even  so  determined.  Then  he  replyed,  that  we  ought  to
bee  patient  and  lowly  :  and  so  wee  departed  from  him  that
Evening.  On  the  morrow  after  he  sent  a  Nestorian  Priest
for  the  Carts,  and  wee  caused  all  the  foure  Carts  to  be
delivered.  Then  came  the  foresaid  brother  of  Coiat  to
meet  us,  and  separated  all  those  things,  which  we  had
brought  the  day  before  unto  the  Court,  from  the  rest,
namely,  the  Bookes  and  Vestments,  and  tooke  them  away
with  him.  Howbeit  Coiat  had  commanded,  that  we
should  carrie  those  Vestments  with  us,  which  we  wore  in
the  presence  of  Sartach,  that  we  might  put  them  on  before
Baatu,  if  need  should  require :  but  the  said  Priest  tooke
them  from  us  by  violence,  saying :  thou  hast  brought
them  unto  Sartach,  and  wouldest  thou  carrie  them  unto

40

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK

A.D.

1253-

Baatu?  And  when  I  would  have  rendred  a  reason,  hee
answered :  bee  not  too  talkative,  but  goe  your  wayes.
Then  I  saw  that  there  was  no  remedie  but  patience :  for
wee  could  have  no  accesse  unto  Sartach  himselfe,  neither
was  there  any  other,  that  would  doe  us  Justice.  I  was
afraid  also  in  regard  of  the  Interpreter,  least  he  had  spoken
other  things  then  I  said  unto  him :  for  his  will  was  good,
that  wee  should  have  given  away  all  that  we  had.  There
was  yet  one  comfort  remayning  unto  mee :  for  when  I
once  perceived  their  covetous  intent,  I  conveyed  from
among  our  Bookes  the  Bible,  and  the  Sentences,  and
certayne  other  Bookes  which  I  made  speciall  account  of.
Howbeit,  I  durst  not  take  away  the  Psalter  of  my
Sovereigne  Ladie  the  Queene,  because  it  was  too  well
knowne,  by  reason  of  the  Golden  Pictures  therein.  And
so  we  returned  with  the  two  other  Carts  unto  our  Lodging.
Then  came  hee  that  was  appointed  to  be  our  Guide  unto
the  Court  of  Baatu,  willing  us  to  take  our  Journey  in  all
postehaste :  unto  whom  I  said,  that  I  would  in  no  case
have  the  Carts  to  goe  with  me.  Which  thing  he  declared
unto  Coiat.  Then  Coiat  commanded,  that  wee  should
leave  them  and  our  Servant  with  him.  And  we  did  as  he
commanded.  And  so  travelling  directly  East-ward  to-
wards Baatu,  the  third  day  we  came  to  Etilia  or  Volga  :  the  They  are  come
streames  whereof  when  I  beheld,  I  wondred  from  what  asfar™as
Regions  of  the  North  such  huge  and  mightie  waters
should  descend.  Before  we  were  departed  from  Sartach,
the  foresaid  Coiat,  with  many  other  Scribes  of  the  Court
said  unto  us :  doe  not  make  report  that  our  Lord  is  a
Christian,  but  a  Moal.  Because  the  name  of  a  Christian
seemeth  unto  them  to  be  the  name  of  some  Nation.  So
great  is  their  pride,  that  albeit  they  beleeve  perhaps  some
things  concerning  Christ,  yet  will  they  not  be  called
Christians,  being  desirous  that  their  owne  name,  that  is  to
say,  Moal  should  be  exalted  above  all  other  names.
Neither  will  they  be  called  by  the  name  of  Tartars.  For
the  Tartars  were  another  Nation,  as  I  was  informed  by
them.

Volga.

The  Tartars
will  be  called
Moal.

4i

A.D.

1253-

Chap.  19.
How  Sartcuh,
and  Mangu-
C  an, and  Ken-
Can  doe
reverence  unto
Christians.
This  Historie
of  Presbyter
John  in  the
North-east,  is
alleaged  at
large  by  Ger-
ardus  Merca-
tor  in  his
general!  Map.
From  whence
the  Turkes
first  sprang.

An  Ocean  Sea.

Nayman.

Presbyter
John.

[III.  i.  15.]

The  place  of
Ken  Kan  his
aboad.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

AT  the  same  time  when  the  Frenchmen  took  Antioch,
a  certayne  man  named  Con  Can,  had  Dominion  over
the  Northerne  Regions,  lying  thereabouts.  Con  is  a
proper  name :  Can  is  a  name  of  authoritie  or  dignitie,
which  signifieth  a  Diviner  or  Sooth-sayer.  All  Diviners
are  called  Can  amongst  them.  Whereupon  their  Princes
are  called  Can,  because  that  unto  them  belongeth  the
government  of  the  people  by  Divination.  We  doe  read
also  in  the  Historie  of  Antiochia,  that  the  Turkes  sent
for  ayde  against  the  Frenchmen,  unto  the  Kingdome  of
Con  Can.  For  out  of  those  parts  the  whole  Nation  of
the  Turkes  first  came.  The  said  Con  was  of  the  Nation
of  Kara-Catay.  Kara  signifieth  blacke,  and  Catay  is  the
name  of  a  Countrey.  So  that  Kara-Catay  signifieth  the
blacke  Catay.  This  name  was  given  to  make  a  difference
betweene  the  foresaid  people,  and  the  people  of  Catay  in-
habiting East-ward  over  against  the  Ocean  Sea :  concern-
ing whom  your  Majestie  shall  understand  more  hereafter.
These  Catayans  dwelt  upon  certayne  Alpes,  by  the  which
I  travelled.  And  in  a  certaine  plaine  Countrey  within
those  Alpes,  there  inhabited  a  Nestorian  shepheard,  being
a  mightie  Governour  over  the  people  called  Yayman,  which
were  Christians,  following  the  Sect  of  Nestorius.  After
the  death  of  Con  Can,  the  said  Nestorian  exalted  himselfe
to  the  Kingdome,  and  they  called  him  King  John,  report-
ing ten  times  more  of  him  then  was  true.  For  so  the
Nestorians  which  come  out  of  those  parts,  use  to  doe.
For  they  blaze  abroad  great  rumours,  and  reports  upon
just  nothing.  Whereupon  they  gave  out  concerning
Sartach,  that  he  was  become  a  Christian,  and  the  like  also
they  reported  concerning  Mangu  Can,  and  Ken  Can :
namely,  because  these  Tartars  make  more  account  of  Chris-
tians, then  they  doe  of  other  people,  and  yet  in  very  deed,
themselves  are  no  Christians.  So  likewise  there  went
forth  a  great  report  concerning  the  said  King  John.
Howbeit,  when  I  travelled  along  by  his  Territories,  there
was  no  man  that  knew  any  thing  of  him,  but  onely  a  few
Nestorians. In  his  Pastures  or  Territories  dwelleth  Ken

42

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RURRUCK  ad.

Can,  at  whose  Court  Frier  Andrew  was. And  I  my  selfe
passed  by  it  at  my  returne. This  John  had  a  Brother,
being  a  mightie  man  also,  and  a  Shepheard  like  himselfe,
called  Vut,  and  he  inhabited  beyond  the  Alpes  of  Cara  v^  Can,  or
Catay,  being  distant  from  his  Brother  John,  the  space  of  Vuc  Can'
three weekes journey. He was  Lord over a certaine
Village,  called  Cara  Carum,  having  people  also for  his  The  Village  of
Subjects,  named  Crit,  or  Merkit,  who  were  Christians  of  ^  #"'
the  Sect  of  Nestorius. But  their  Lord  abandoning  the  Merkit.
worship  of  Christ,  following  after  Idols,  retaining  with
him  Priests  of  the  said  Idols,  who  all  of  them  are  Wor-
shippers of  Devils  and  Sorcerers. Beyond  his  Pastures,
some  tenne  or  fifteene  dayes  journey,  were  the  Pastures  of
Moal,  who  were  a  poore  and  beggerly  Nation,  without  Moal  in  old
Governor,  and  without  Law,  except  their  Sooth-sayings,  t!mes  a,
and  their  Divinations,  unto  the  which  detestable  studies,  peopie%
all  in  those  parts  doe  apply their  minds. Neere  unto
Moal were other poore people, called Tartars. The  The  place  of
foresaid  King  John  dyed  without  Issue  Male,  and  there-  the  Tartars-
upon  his  Brother  Vut  was  greatly  inriched,  and  caused
himselfe  to  be  named  Can : and  his  Droves  and  Flockes
raunged even unto the Borders  of Moal. About the
same  time  there  was  one  Cyngis,  a  Blacke-Smith,  among
the people of Moal. This Cyngis stole as many  Cyngis.
Cattell from Vut Can, as he could possibly get  :
insomuch,  that  the  Shepheards  of  Vut  complained  unto
their  Lord. Then  provided  he  an  Armie,  and  marched
up into the  Countrey  of Moal, to seeke for  the said
Cyngis. But  Cyngis  fled  among  the  Tartars, and  hid
himselfe  amongst them. And  Vut  having  taken  some
spoiles both from Moal, and also from the Tartars,
returned  home. Then  spake  Cyngis  unto  the  Tartars,  and
unto  the  people  of  Moal,  saying : Sirs,  because  we  are
distitute  of  a  Governor  and  Captaine,  you  see  how  our
Neighbours  doe  oppresse  us. And  the  Tartars  and  Moals
appointed him to be their Chieftaine. Then having
secretly  gathered  together  an  Armie,  hee  brake  in  sud-
denly upon  Vut,  and  overcame  him,  and  Vut  fled  into

43

A.D.
I253-

Mangu-Can.

Mancherule.

Chap.  20.
Of  the
Russians,
Hungarians,
and  Alanians:
and  of  the
Caspian  Sea.

Or,  Berca.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Cataya.  At  the  same  time  was  the  Daughter  of  Vut
taken,  which  Cyngis  married  unto  one  of  his  Sonnes,  by
whom  she  conceived,  and  brought  forth  the  great  Can,
which  now  reigneth,  called  Mangu-Can.  Then  Cyngis
sent  the  Tartars  before  him  in  all  places  where  he  came :
and  thereupon  was  their  name  published  and  spread
abroad :  for  in  all  places  the  people  would  cry  out :  Loe,
the  Tartars  come,  the  Tartars  come.  Howbeit,  through
continuall  warres,  they  are  now,  all  of  them  in  a  manner,
consumed  and  brought  to  nought.  Whereupon  the
Moals  indevour  what  they  can,  to  extinguish  the  name  of
the  Tartars,  that  they  may  exalt  their  owne  name.  The
Countrey  wherein  they  first  inhabited,  and  where  the  Court
of  Cyngis  Can  as  yet  remaineth,  is  called  Mancherule.
But  because  Tartaria  is  the  Region,  about  which  they
have  obtained  their  Conquests,  they  esteeme  that  as  their
royall  and  chiefe  Citie,  and  there  for  the  most  part  doe
they  elect  their  great  Can.

NOw,  as  concerning  Sartach,  whether  hee  beleeves  in
Christ  or  no,  I  know  not.  This  I  am  sure  of,  that
he  will  not  be  called  a  Christian.  Yea,  rather  he  seemeth
unto  mee  to  deride  and  skoffe  at  Christians.  He  lyeth  in
the  way  of  the  Christians,  as  namely,  of  the  Russians,  the
Valachians,  the  Bulgarians  of  Bulgaria  the  lesse,  the
Soldaianes,  the  Kerkis,  and  the  Alanians  :  who  all  of  them
passe  by  him,  as  they  are  going  to  the  Court  of  his  Father
Baatu,  to  carrie  gifts :  whereupon  he  is  more  in  league
with  them.  Howbeit,  if  the  Saracens  come,  and  bring
greater  gifts  then  they,  they  are  dispatched  sooner.  He
hath  about  him  certaine  Nestorian  Priests,  who  pray  upon
their  Beades,  and  sing  their  devotions.  Also,  there  is
another  under  Baatu,  called  Berta,  who  feedeth  his  Cattell
toward  Porta  Ferrea,  or  Derbent,  where  lyeth  the  passage
of  all  those  Saracens  which  come  out  of  Persia,  and  out
of  Turkie  to  goe  unto  Baatu,  and  passing  by,  they  give
rewards  unto  him.  And  he  professeth  himselfe  to  be  a
Saracen,  and  will  not  permit  Swines  flesh  to  be  eaten  in

44

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

1253.
his  Dominions.  Howbeit,  at  the  time  of  our  returne,
Baatu  commanded  him  to  remoove  himselfe  from  that
place,  and  to  inhabite  upon  the  East  side  of  Volga :  for  he
was  unwilling  that  the  Saracens  Messengers  should  passe
by  the  said  Berta,  because  he  saw  it  was  not  for  his  profit.
For  the  space  of  foure  daies  while  wee  remained  in  the
Court  of  Sartach,  wee  had  not  any  victuals  at  all  allowed
us,  but  once  onely  a  little  Cosmos.  And  in  our  journey
betweene  him  and  his  Father,  wee  travelled  in  great  feare.
For  certaine  Russians,  Hungarians,  and  Alanians,  being
Servants  unto  the  Tartars,  (of  whom  they  have  great
multitudes  among  them)  assemble  themselves  twentie  or
thirtie  in  a  company,  and  so  secretly  in  the  night  conveying
themselves  from  home,  they  take  Bowes  and  Arrowes  with
them,  and  whomsoever  they  finde  in  the  night  season,  they
put  him  to  death,  hiding  themselves  in  the  day  time.
And  having  tyred  their  Horses,  they  goe  in  the  night
unto  a  company  of  other  Horses  feeding  in  some  Pasture,
and  change  them  for  new,  taking  with  them  also  one  or
two  Horses  besides,  to  eate  them  when  they  stand  in
neede.  Our  guide  therefore  was  sore  afraid,  least  we
should  have  met  with  such  companions.

In  this  Journey  we  had  dyed  for  Famine,  had  wee  not  [III.  i.  16.]
carryed  some  of  our  Bisket  with  us.  At  length  we  came
unto  the  mightie  River  of  Etilia,  or  Volga.  For  it  is
foure  times  greater,  then  the  River  of  Sein,  and  of  a
wonderfull  depth :  and  issuing  forth  of  Bulgaria  the
greater,  it  runneth  into  a  certayne  Lake  or  Sea,  which  of
late  they  call  the  Hircan  Sea,  according  to  the  name  of  a
certaine  Citie  in  Persia,  standing  upon  the  shoare
thereof.  Howbeit  Isidore  calleth  it  the  Caspian  Sea.
For  it  hath  the  Caspian  Mountaynes  and  the  Land
of  Persia  situate  on  the  South-side  thereof:  and  the
Mountaynes  of  Musihet,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  people
called  Assassini  towards  the  East,  which  Mountaynes
are  conjoyned  unto  the  Caspian  Mountaynes;  but  on
the  North-side  thereof  lyeth  the  same  Desart,  wherein
the  Tartars  doe  now  inhabit. Howbeit  heretofore  there

45

A.D.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1253

Changlce.

dwelt  certayne  people  called  Changlge.  And  on  that  side  it
receiveth  the  streames  of  Etilia,  which  River  increaseth  in
Summer  time,  like  unto  the  River  Nilus  in  Egypt.  Upon
the  West  part  thereof,  it  hath  the  Mountaynes  of  Alani,
and  Lesgi,  and  Porta  ferrea,  or  Derbent,  and  the  Moun-
taynes of  Georgia.  This  Sea  therefore  is  compassed  in  on
three  sides  with  the  Mountaynes,  but  on  the  North-side
FrierAndrew.  with  plaine  ground.  Frier  Andrew  in  his  Journey
travelled  round  about  two  sides  thereof,  namely,  the  South
and  the  East-sides :  and  I  my  selfe  about  other  two,  that
is  to  say,  the  North-side  in  going  from  Baatu  to  Mangu-
Can,  and  in  returning  likewise :  and  the  West-side  in
comming  home  from  Baatu  into  Syria.  A  man  may  travell
round  about  it  in  foure  moneths.  And  it  is  not  true
which  Isidore  reporteth,  namely,  that  this  Sea  is  a  Bay  or
Gulfe  comming  forth  of  the  Ocean :  for  it  doth,  in  no
part  thereof,  joyne  with  the  Ocean,  but  is  environed  on
all  sides  with  Land.

Chap.  11. A  L  the  Region  extending  from  the  West  shoare  of

Of  the  Court J~\  the  foresaid  Sea,  where  Alexanders  Iron  gate,  other-

houfwe'ivere w*se  ca^e^  tne  Citie  of  Derbent,  is  situate,  and  from  the

entertained h  Mountaynes  of  Alania,  all  along  by  the  Fennes  of  Maeotis,

him.  whereinto  the  River  of  Tanais  falleth,  and  so  forth,  to  the

North  Ocean,  was  wont  to  be  called  Albania. Of  which

Countrey  Isidore  reporteth,  that  there  bee  Dogges  of  such

an  huge  stature,  and  so  fierce,  that  they  are  able  in  fight  to

match  Buls,  and  to  master  Lions. Which  is  true,  as  I

understand  by  divers,  who  told  me,  that  there  towards  the

North  Ocean,  they  make  their  Dogges  to  draw  in  Carts

like Oxen, by reason of their bignesse and strength.

Moreover, upon that  part  of  Etilia  where  we  arrived,

there  is  a  new  Cottage  built,  wherein  they  have  placed

Tartars  and  Russians  both  together,  to  ferrie  over,  and

transport  Messengers  going  and  comming,  to  and  fro  the

Court  of  Baatu. For  Baatu  remayneth  upon  the  farther

side  towards  the  East. Neither  ascendeth  hee  in  Summer

time  more  North-ward  then  the  foresaid  place  where  we

46

The  North
Ocean.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

1253.
arrived, but was even then descending to the South.
From  January  untill  August,  both  he  and  all  other  Tartars
ascend  by  the  banks  of  Rivers,  towards  cold  and  Northerly
Regions,  and  in  August  they  begin  to  returne  back  againe.
Wee  passed  downe  the  streame  therefore  in  a  Barke,  from  He  descendeth
the foresaid Cottage unto his Court. From the same  ^one  '  *** .
place  unto  the  Villages  of  Bulgaria  the  greater,  standing  J  Barked  ^
toward  the  North,  it  is  five  dayes  Journey. I  wonder  what
Devill  carried  the  Religion  of  Mahomet  thither. For,
from  Derbent,  which  is  upon  the  extreme  borders  of  Persia,
it  is  above  thirtie  dayes  Journey  to  passe  overthwart  the
Desart,  and  so  to  ascend  by  the  banke  of  Etilia,  into  the
foresaid  Countrey  of  Bulgaria. All  which  way  there  is  no  Astracan.
Citie,  but  onely  certayne  Cottages  neere  unto  that  place
where  Etilia  falleth  into  the  Sea. Those  Bulgarians  are
most  wicked  Saracens,  more  earnestly  professing  the  dam-
nable Religion  of  Mahomet,  then  any  other  Nation  what-
soever. Moreover, when I first beheld the Court of  The  descrip-
Baatu,  I  was  astonied  at  the  sight  thereof:  for  his  Houses  tlon  of  Baatu
or  Tents  seemed  as  though  they  had  beene  some  huge
and  mightie  Citie,  stretching  out  a  great  way  in  length,
the  people  ranging  up  and  downe  about  it  for  the  space  of
some  three  or  foure  leagues. And  even  as  the  people  of
Israel  knew  every  man,  on  which  side  of  the  Tabernacle  to
pitch  his  Tent :  even  so  every  one  of  them  knoweth  right
well,  towards  what  side  of  the  Court  hee  ought  to  place
his  house  when  he  takes  it  from  off  the  Cart. Whereupon
the  Court  is  called  in  their  Language  Horda,  which  signi- Horda,  signi-
fieth, the  midst: because  the  Governour  or  Chieftaifte  fieththemidst-
among  them  dwels  alwayes  in  the  middest  of  his  people :
except  onely  that  directly  towards  the  South  no  subject  or
inferiour person placeth himselfe, because towards that
Region  the  Court  gates  are  set  open :  but  unto  the  right
hand,  and  the  left  hand  they  extend  themselves  as  farre
as  they  will,  according  to  the  conveniencie  of  places,  so
that  they  place  not  their  houses  directly  opposite  against
the  Court. At  our  arrivall  wee  were  conducted  unto  a
Saracen,  who  provided  not  for  us  any  victuals  at  all. The

47

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I253-

day  following,  we  were  brought  unto  the  Court : and

Baatu  had  caused  a  large  Tent  to  bee  erected,  because  his
house  or  ordinary  Tent  could  not  contayne  so  many  men
and  women  as  were  assembled. Our  Guide  admonished
us  not  to  speake,  till  Baatu  had  given  us  commandement
so  to  doe,  and  that  then  we  should  speake  our  minds
briefly. Then  Baatu  demanded  whether  your  Majestie
had sent Ambassadors unto him or no? I answered,
that  your  Majestie  had  sent Messengers  to  Ken-Can :
and that you would not have sent Messengers unto
him,  or  Letters  unto  Sartach,  had  not  your  Highnesse
beene perswaded that they were become Christians :
because you sent not unto them for any feare, but
onely  for  congratulation,  and  courtesies  sake,  in  regard
that you heard they were converted to Christianitie.
Then  led  he  us  unto  his  Pavilion :  and  we  were  charged
[III.  i.  17.] not  to  touch  the  cords  of  the  Tent,  which  they  account
in stead of the threshold of the house. There we
stood in our habit bare-footed, and bare-headed, and
were  a  great  and strange spectacle  in their  eyes. For
John  de  Piano  indeed  Frier  John  de  Piano  Carpini,  had  beene  there  before
Carpini. my  comming : howbeit,  because  he  was  the  Popes  Mes-
senger, he  changed  his  habit  that  hee  might  not  be  con-
temned. Then  wee  were  brought  into  the  very  midst  of
the  Tent,  neither  required  they  of  us  to  doe  any  reverence
by bowing our knees, as they use to doe of other
Messengers. Wee stood therefore  before  him for the
space  wherein  a  man  might  have  rehearsed  the  Psalme,
Miserere  mei  Deus :  and  there  was  great  silence  kept  of
all  men. Baatu  himselfe  sate  upon  a  seat  long  and  broad
like  unto  a  Bed,  gilt  all  over,  with  three  staires  to  ascend
thereunto,  and  one  of  his  Ladies  sate  beside  him. The
men  there  assembled,  sate  downe  scattering,  some  on  the
right  hand  of  the  said  Lady,  and  some  on  the  left. Those
places  on  the  one  side  which  the  women  filled  not  up  (for
there  were  only  the  Wives  of  Baatu)  were  supplyed  by
the  men. Also,  at  the  very  entrance  of  the  Tent,  stood
a  bench  furnished  with  Cosmos,  and  with  stately  great

48

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1253-
cups  of  Silver  and  Gold,  being  richly  set  with  Precious

Stones.  Baatu  beheld  us  earnestly,  and  wee  him  :  and
he  seemed  to  me  to  resemble  in  personage,  Monsieur  John
de  Beaumont,  whose  soule  resteth  in  peace.  And  he  had
a  fresh  ruddie  colour  in  his  countenance.  At  length  hee
commanded  us  to  speake.  Then  our  Guide  gave  us
direction,  that  we  should  bow  our  knees  and  speake.
Whereupon  I  bowed  one  knee  as  unto  a  man  :  then  he
signified  that  I  should  kneele  upon  both  knees  :  and  I  did
so,  being  loth  to  contend  about  such  circumstances.  And
againe,  hee  commanded  me  to  speake.  Then  I  thinking
of  Prayer  unto  God,  because  I  kneeled  on  both  my  knees,
beganne  to  pray  on  this  wise  :  Sir,  we  beseech  the  Lord,
from  whom  all  good  things  doe  proceed,  and  who  hath
given  you  these  earthly  benefits,  that  it  would  please  him
hereafter  to  make  you  partaker  of  his  heavenly  blessings :
because  the  former  without  these  are  but  vaine  and  im-
profitable.  And  I  added  further.  Be  it  knowne  unto  you
of  a  certaintie,  that  you  shall  not  obtayne  the  joyes  of
Heaven,  unlesse  you  become  a  Christian :  for  God  saith,
Whosoever  beleeveth  and  is  baptized,  shalbe  saved :  but
he  that  beleeveth  not,  shalbe  condemned.  At  this  word  he
modestly  smiled :  but  the  other  Moals  began  to  clap  their
hands,  and  to  deride  us.  And  of  my  silly  Interpreter,  of
whom  especially  I  should  have  received  comfort  in  time  of
need,  was  himselfe  abashed  and  utterly  dasht  out  of  coun-
tenance. Then,  after  silence  made,  I  said  unto  him,  I
came  unto  your  Sonne,  because  we  heard  that  he  was
become  a  Christian  :  and  I  brought  unto  him  Letters  on  The  Letters  of
the  behalfe  of  my  Sovereigne  Lord  the  King  of  France :  **? French
and  your  Sonne  sent  me  hither  unto  you.  The  cause  of  ins'
my  comming  therefore  is  best  knowne  unto  your  selfe.
Then  he  caused  me  to  rise  up.  And  he  enquired  your
Majesties  Name,  and  my  name,  and  the  name  of  mine
Associate  and  Interpreter,  and  caused  them  all  to  be  put
downe  in  writing.  He  demanded  likewise  (because  hee
had  beene  informed,  that  you  were  departed  out  of  your
owne  Countries  with  an  Armie)  against  whom  you  waged
xi  49  d

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1253-

warre  ?  I  answered  :  against  the  Saracens,  who  had  defiled
the  House  of  God  at  Jerusalem.  He  asked  also,  whether
your  Highnesse  had  ever  before  that  time  sent  any  Mes-
sengers unto  him,  or  no?  To  you  Sir?  (said  I)  never.
Then  caused  he  us  to  sit  downe,  and  gave  us  of  his  Milke
to  drinke,  which  they  account  to  be  a  great  favour,  especi-
ally when  any  man  is  admitted  to  drinke  Cosmos  with  him
in  his  owne  house.  And  as  I  sate  looking  downe  upon
the  ground,  he  commanded  me  to  lift  up  my  countenance,
being  desirous  as  yet  to  take  more  diligent  view  of  us,  or
else  perhaps  for  a  kind  of  Superstitious  observation.  For
they  esteeme  it  a  signe  of  ill  lucke,  or  a  prognostication
of  evill  unto  them,  when  any  man  sits  in  their  presence,
holding  downe  his  head,  as  if  he  were  sad :  especially,
when  hee  leanes  his  cheeke  or  chin  upon  his  hand.  Then
we  departed  forth,  and  immediately  after  came  our  Guide
unto  us,  and  conducting  us  unto  our  Lodging,  said  unto
mee :  Your  Master  the  King  requesteth  that  you  may
remayne  in  this  Land,  which  request  Baatu  cannot  satisfie
without  the  knowledge  and  consent  of  Mangu-Can.
Wherefore  you,  and  your  Interpreter  must  of  necessitie
goe  unto  Mangu-Can.  Howbeit  your  associate,  and  the
other  man  shall  returne  unto  the  Court  of  Sartach,  staying
there  for  you,  till  you  come  backe.  Then  began  the  man
of  God  mine  Interpreter  to  lament,  esteeming  him  selfe
but  a  dead  man.  Mine  Associate  also  protested,  that  they
should  sooner  chop  off  his  head,  then  withdraw  him  out  of
my  company.  Moreover,  I  my  selfe  said,  that  without
mine  Associate  I  could  not  goe  :  and  that  we  stood  in  need
of  two  Servants  at  the  least,  to  attend  upon  us,  because,  if
one  should  chance  to  fall  sick,  we  could  not  be  without
another.  Then  returning  unto  the  Court,  he  told  these
Sayings  unto  Baatu.  And  Baatu  commanded,  saying :
let  the  two  Priests  and  the  Interpreter  goe  together,  but
let  the  Clerke  returne  unto  Sartach.  And  comming  againe
unto  us,  hee  told  us  even  so.  And  when  I  would  have
spoken  for  the  Clerke  to  have  had  him  with  us,
he said : No more words : for Baatu hath resolved,

5°

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

1253-
that  so  it  shall  bee,  and  therefore  I  dare  not  goe  unto  the
Court  any  more.  Goset  the  Clerke  had  remayning  of  the
Almes  money  bestowed  upon  him,  twentie  sixe  Yperperas,
and  no  more  ;  ten  whereof  he  kept  for  himselfe  and  for
the  Lad,  and  sixteene  hee  gave  unto  the  man  of  God  for
us.  And  thus  were  we  parted  asunder  with  teares :  he
returning  unto  the  Court  of  Sartach,  and  our  selves
remayning  still  in  the  same  place.

UPon  Assumption  Even  our  Clerke  arrived  at  the  Court  [HI.  i.  18.]
of  Sartach. And  on  the  morrow  after,  the  Nestorian  ™P'  22,
Priests  were  adorned  with  our  Vestments  in  the  presence  ^  towards
of  the  said  Sartach. Then  wee  our  selves  were  conducted  the  Court  of
unto another Host, who was appointed to provide us  Mangu-Can.
house-roome,  victuals,  and  Horses. But  because  wee  had
not  ought  to  bestow  upon  him,  hee  did  all  things  un-
towardly  for  us. Then  wee  rode  on  forward  with  Baatu,
descending  along  by  the  bancke  of  Etilia,  for  the  space  of
five  weekes  together : Sometimes  mine  Associate  was  so They  travel!
extreamly  hungry,  that  hee  would  tell  mee  in  a  manner  five  weekes  by
weeping,  that  it  fared  with  him  as  though  hee  had  never  £tl °*
eaten  any  thing  in  all  his  life  before. There  is  a  Faire  or
Market  following  the  Court  of  Baatu  at  all  times :  but  it
was so  farre  distant  from  us, that  wee  could  not  have
recourse  thereunto. For  wee  were  constrained  to  walke
on foote for want of Horses. At length certaine
Hungarians  (who  had  sometime  beene  after  a  sort  Clergie  Hungarians.
men)  found  us  out : and  one  of  them  could  as  yet  sing
many  Songs  without  booke,  and  was  accounted  of  other
Hungarians  as  a  Priest,  and  was  sent  for  unto  the  Funerals
jf  his deceased Countrey-men. There  was  another  of
them  also  pretily  well  instructed  in  his  Grammar :  for  he
:ould  understand  the  meaning  of  any  thing  that  we  spake,
Dut could not  answere  us. These Hungarians  were a
^reat  comfort  unto  us,  bringing  us  Cosmos  to  drinke,  yea,
ind sometimes  flesh for  to  eate  also  : who,  when they
-equested  to  have  some  Bookes  of  us,  and  I  had  not  any
:o  give  them  (for  indeed  we  had  none  but  onely  a  Bible,

5i

A.D.
1253-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  a  Breviary)  it  grieved  me  exceedingly.  And  I  said
unto  them :  Bring  me  some  Inke  and  Paper,  and  I  will
write  for  you  so  long  as  we  shall  remaine  here :  and  they
did  so.  And  I  copied  out  for  them  Horas  beatae  Virginis,
and  Officium  defunctorum.  Moreover,  upon  a  certaine
A  Comanian.  day,  there  was  a  Comanian  that  accompanied  us,  saluting
us  in  Latine,  and  saying :  Salvete  Domini.  Wondering
thereat,  and  saluting  him  againe,  I  demanded  of  him,  who
had  taught  him  that  kind  of  salutation?  He  said,  that
he  was  baptized  in  Hungaria  by  our  Friers,  and  that  of
them  he  learned  it.  Hee  said  moreover,  that  Baatu  had
enquired  many  things  of  him  concerning  us,  and  that  he
told  him  the  estate  of  our  Order.  Afterward  I  saw  Baatu
riding  with  his  company,  and  all  his  Subjects  that  were
housholders  or  Masters  of  families  riding  with  him,  and
(in  mine  estimation)  they  were  not  five  hundred  persons
in  all.  At  length  about  the  end  of  Holy-rood,  there  came
a  certaine  rich  Moal  unto  us  (whose  Father  was  a  Mil-
lenary, which  is  a  great  Office  among  them)  saying,  I  am
the  man  that  must  conduct  you  unto  Mangu-Can,  and
we  have  thither  a  journey  of  foure  moneths  long  to  travell,
and  there  is  such  extreame  cold  in  those  parts,  that  stones

A  journey  of
foure  moneths
from  Volga.

and  trees  doe  even  rive  asunder  in  regard  thereof.
Therefore  I  would  wish  you  throughly  to  advise  your
selves,  whether  you  be  able  to  indure  it  or  no.  Unto
whom  I  answered :  I  hope  by  Gods  helpe,  that  we  shall  be
able  to  brooke  that  which  other  men  can  indure.  Then
hee  said  :  if  you  cannot  indure  it,  I  will  forsake  you  by  the
way.  And  I  answered  him :  it  were  not  just  dealing  for
you  so  to  do,  for  we  go  not  thither  upon  any  businesse  of
our  owne,  but  by  reason  that  we  are  sent  by  our  Lord.
Wherefore,  sithence  we  are  committed  unto  your  charge,
you  ought  in  no  wise  to  forsake  us.  Then  he  said ;  all
shall  be  well.  Afterward  he  caused  us  to  shew  him  all
our  garments :  and  whatsoever  he  deemed  to  bee  lesse
needfull  for  us,  he  willed  us  to  leave  it  behind  in  the
custodie  of  our  Host.  On  the  morrow  they  brought  unto
each  of  us  a  furred  Gowne,  made  all  of  Rams  skinnes,

52

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1253.
with  the  Wooll  still  upon  them,  and  breeches  of  the  same,
and  boots  also  or  buskins  according  to  their  fashion,  and
shooes  made  of  felt,  and  hoods  also  made  of  skins  after
their  manner. The  second  day  after  Holy-rood,  we  began The  sixteenth
to  set  forward  on  our  journey,  having  three  guides  to  of  September.
direct  us  :  and  we  rode  continually  East-ward,  till  the  feast Forty  six
of  All-Saints. Throughout  all  that  Region,  and  beyond  daies-
also  did  the  people  of  Changle  inhabite,  who  were  by Or,Kangitt<e.
parentage  discended  from  the  Romans. Upon  the  North
side  of  us  wee  had  Bulgaria  the  greater,  and  on  the  South,
the  foresaid  Caspian  Sea.

HAving  travelled  twelve  daies  journey  from  Etilia,  we  Chap.  23.
found  a  mightie  River  called  Iagac : which  River  Of  the  River
issuing out of the North, from the land of Pascatir,  °uufand^P
descended  into  the  foresaid  Sea. The  language  of  Pas-  divers  Regions
catir,  and  of  the  Hungarians  is  all  one,  and  they  are  all  of  or  Nations.
them Shepheards, not having any Cities. And their  Ial^  *?ehe
Countrey  bordereth upon Bulgaria the  greater, on the  ^^1?™*
West  frontier. From  the  North-East  part  of  the  said  pZatirf"'
Countrey,  there  is  no  Citie  at  all. Out  of  the  said  fore-
named  Region  of  Pascatir,  proceeded  the  Hunnes  of  old  TheHungari-
time,  who  afterward  were  .called  Hungarians. Next  unto  ans  descended
it  is  Bulgaria  the  greater. Isidore  reporteth,  concerning  from  the
the  people  of  'this  Nation,  that  with  swift  Horses  they  Basardes'
traversed  the  impregnable  walls  and  bounds  of  Alexander,
(which,  together  with  the  Rockes  of  Caucasus,  served  to
restraine  those  barbarous  and  blood-thirstie  people  from
invading  the  Regions  of  the  South)  insomuch  that  they
had  tribute  paid  unto  them,  as  farre  as  iEgypt. Likewise
they  wasted  all  Countries  even  unto  France. Whereupon
they  were  more  mightie  then  the  Tartars  as  yet  are. And
unto  them  the  Blacians,  the  Bulgarians,  and  the  Vandals
joyned  themselves. For  out  of  Bulgaria  the  greater,  came
those  Bulgarians. Moreover,  they  which  inhabite  beyond  Valachians.
Danubius,  neere  unto  Constantinople,  and  not  farre  from
Pascatir,  are  called  Ilac,  which  (saving  the  pronunciation)
is  all  one  with  Blac,  (for  the  Tartars  cannot  pronounce  the

53

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[III.  i.  19.]  Letter  B)  from  whom  also  discended  the  people  which
inhabite  the  Land  of  Assani.  For  they  are  both  of  them
called  Ilac,  (both  these  and  the  other)  in  the  languages  of
the  Russians,  the  Polonians,  and  the  Bohemians.  The
Sclavonians  speake  all  one  language  with  the  Vandals,  all
which  banded  themselves  with  the  Hunnes :  and  now  for
the  most  part,  they  unite  themselves  unto  the  Tartars:
whom  God  hath  raised  up  from  the  utmost  parts  of  the
T>eut.  32.  v.  earth,  according  to  that  which  the  Lord  saith :  I  will  pro-
21  -  voke  them  to  envy  (namely  such  as  keepe  not  his  Law)  by

Ammo.*.  19.  a  people)  which  is  no  people,  and  by  a  foolish  Nation  will
I  anger  them.  This  prophecy  is  fulfilled,  according  to  the
literall  sense  thereof,  upon  all  Nations  which  observe  not
the  Law  of  God.  All  this  which  I  have  written  con-
cerning the  Land  of  Pascatir,  was  told  me  by  certaine
Friers  Predicants,  which  travelled  thither  before  ever  the
Tartars  came  abroad.  And  from  that  time  they  were
subdued  unto  their  neighbours  the  Bulgarians  being
Saracens,  whereupon  many  of  them  proved  Saracens  also.
Other  matters  concerning  this  people,  may  be  knowne  out
of  Chronicles.  For  it  is  manifest,  that  those  Provinces
beyond  Constantinople,  which  are  now  called  Bulgaria,
Valachia,  and  Sclavonia,  were  of  old  time  Provinces  be-
longing to  the  Greekes.  Also  Hungaria  was  heretofore
called  Pannonia.  And  wee  were  riding  over  the  Land  of
C angle  an  Cangle,  from  the  feast  of  Holy-rood,  untill  the  feast  of
huge  plaine  All-Saints  :  travelling  almost  every  day  (according  to  mine
Countrey.  estimation)  as  farre,  as  from  Paris  to  Orleans,  and  som-
times  farther,  as  we  were  provided  of  Post-horses :  for
some  daies  we  had  change  of  horses  twice  or  thrice  in  a
day.  Sometimes  we  travelled  two  or  three  daies  together,
not  finding  any  people,  and  then  we  were  constrained  not
to  ride  so  fast.  Of  twentie  or  thirtie  Horses  we  had
alwaies  the  worst,  because  we  were  Strangers.  For  every
one  tooke  their  choice  of  the  best  Horses  before  us.  They
provided  me  alwaies  of  a  strong  Horse,  because  I  was  very
corpulent  and  heavy:  but  whether  he  ambled  a  gentle
pase  or  no,  I  durst  not  make  any  question. Neither  yet

54

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

1253-
durst  I  complaine,  although  he  trotted  full  sore.  But
every  man  must  bee  contented  with  his  lot  as  it  fell.
Whereupon  we  were  exceedingly  troubled ;  for  oftentimes
our  Horses  were  tyred  before  we  could  come  at  any  people.
And  then  we  were  constrained  to  beate  and  whip  on  our
Horses,  and  to  lay  our  Garments  upon  other  emptie
Horses :  yea,  and  sometimes  two  of  us  to  ride  upon
one  Horse.

OF  hunger  and  thirst,  cold  and  wearinesse,  there  was Chap.  24.
no  end. For  they  gave  us  no  victuals,  but  onely  in Of  the  hunger
the  evening. In  the  morning  they  used  to  give  us  a  little  a"ther  'J^^es,
drinke,  or  some  sodden  Millet  to  sup  off. In  the  evening  wnkh  we
they  bestowed  flesh  upon  us,  as  namely,  a  shoulder  and  sustained  In
breast of Rams Mutton, and every man a measured  ourjourney.
quantitie  of  broath  to  drinke. When  wee  had  sufficient
of  the  flesh-broath,  we  were  marvellously  well  refreshed.
And  it  seemed  to  mee  most  pleasant,  and  most  nourishing
drinke. Every  Saturday  I  remained  fasting  untill  night,
without  eating  or  drinking  of  ought. And  when  night
came,  I  was  constrained,  to  my  great  griefe  and  sorrow,
to  eate  flesh. Sometimes  we  were  faine  to  eate  flesh  halfe
sodden,  or  almost  raw,  and  all  for  want  of  Fewell  to  seethe
it  withall ;  especially,  when  we  lay  in  the  fields,  or  were
benighted  before  we  came  at  our  journeys  end : because
we  could  not  then  conveniently  gather  together  the  dung
of Horses or Oxen : for other fewell we found but
seldome, except  perhaps  a  few  thornes  in  some  places.
Likewise upon the  banckes of  some  Rivers, there  are  Certain*
woods  growing  here  and  there. Howbeit  they  are  very  Rivers.
rare. In  the  beginning  our  guide  highly  disdained  us,  and
it  was  tedious  unto  him  to  conduct  such  base  fellowes.
Afterward,  when  he  began  to  know  us  somewhat  better,
he  directed  us  on  our  way  by  the  Courts  of  rich  Moals,
and  we  were  requested  to  pray  for  them. Wherefore,  had
I  carried  a  good  Interpreter  with  me,  I  should  have  had
opportunitie to have done much good. The foresaid
Chingis,  who  was  the  first  great  Can  or  Emperour  of  the

55

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1253-

Tartars,  had  foure  Sonnes,  of  whom  proceeded  by  naturall

discent  many  children,  every  one  of  which  doeth  at  this
day  enjoy  great  possessions :  and  they  are  daily  multiplyed
and  dispersed  over  that  huge  and  vast  Desart,  which  is  in
dimensions,  like  unto  the  Ocean  Sea.  Our  guide  there-
fore directed  us,  as  we  were  going  on  our  journey,  unto
many  of  their  habitations.  And  they  marvelled  exceed-
ingly, that  wee  would  receive  neither  Gold  nor  Silver,  nor
precious  and  costly  garments  at  their  hands.  They
inquired  also,  concerning  the  great  Pope,  whether  he  was
of  so  lasting  an  age  as  they  had  heard?  For  there  had
gone  a  report  among  them,  that  hee  was  five  hundred
yeares  old.  They  inquired  likewise  of  our  Countries,
whether  there  were  abundance  of  Sheepe,  Oxen,  and
Horses,  or  no?  Concerning  the  Ocean  Sea,  they  could
not  conceive  of  it,  because  it  was  without  limits  or  bankes.
Upon  the  Even  of  the  feast  of  All-Saints,  wee  forsooke
the  way  leading  towards  the  East,  (because  the  people
were  now  descended  very  much  South)  and  wee  went  on
Eight  dales  our  journey  by  certaine  Alpes,  or  Mountaines  directly
joumy  South-  South-ward,  for  the  space  of  eight  daies  together.  In
WJ  'ft  f  t^le  f°resaid  Desart  I  saw  many  Asses  (which  they  call
fooL  Colan)  being  rather  like  unto  Mules  :  these  did  our  guide

and  his  companions  chase  very  eagerly :  howbeit,  they  did
but  lose  their  labour,  for  the  beasts  were  too  swift  for
Hih  them. Upon  the  seventh  day  there  appeared  to  the  South

Mountaines.  °f  us  huge  high  Mountaynes,  and  we  entred  into  a  place
Manured  which  was  well  watered,  and  fresh  as  a  Garden,  and  found
grounds.  Land  tilled  and  manured. The  eight  day,  after  the  feast

Villa  Tofth °^  All-Saints,  wee  arrived  at  a  certaine  Towne  of  the
Saracens. Saracens,  named  Kenchat,  the  Governour  whereof  met  our
[III.  i.  20.] Guide  at  the  Townes  end  with  Ale  and  Cups. For  it  is
their  manner  at  all  Townes  and  Villages, subject  unto
them,  to  meete  the  messengers  of  Baatu  and  Mangu-Can
with  meate  and  drinke. At  the  same  time  of  the  yeere,

The  seventh  the^  went  uPon  tne  Ice  in  that  Countrey.  And  before
day  of  tne  feast  of  Saint  Michael,  we  had  frost  in  the  Desart.

November. I  enquired  the  name  of  that  Province :  but  being  now  in

56

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1253.
a  strange  Territorie,  they  could  not  tell  mee  the  name
thereof,  but  onely  the  name  of  a  very  small  Citie  in  the
same Province. And there descended a great River  AgreatRlver.
downe  from  the  Mountaynes,  which  watered  the  whole
Region, according as the Inhabitants would give it
passage,  by  making  divers  Chanels  and  Sluces  :  neither  did
this River exonerate it selfe into any Sea, but was
swallowed  up  by  an  hideous  Gulfe  into  the  bowels  of  the
earth, and it caused many Fennes or Lakes. Also I Many  Lakes.
saw  many  Vines,  and  dranke  of  the  Wine  thereof.  Vines.

THe  day  following, we  came  unto  another  Cottage  Chap.  25.
neere  unto  the  Mountaynes. And  I  enquired  what  How  Ban  was
Mountaynes  they  were,  which  I  understood  to  bee  the  Zd  concern-
Mountaines  of  Caucasus,  which  are  stretched  forth,  and -mg  the  habi-
continued  on  both  parts  to  the  Sea,  from  the  West  unto  tation  of  the
the  East :  and  on  the  West  part  they  are  conjoyned  unto 2)*J*  men-
the  foresaid  Caspian  Sea,  where  into  the  River  of  Volga  Tk  °j^fu^_-
dischargeth  his  streames. I  enquired  also  of  the  Citie  of  taynes  0f
Talas,  wherein  were  certaine  Dutch  men,  servants  unto  Caucasus  are
one  Buri,  of  whom  Frier  Andrew  made  mention. Con-  ^tended  unto
cerning  whom  also  I  enquired  very  diligently  in  the  Courts  1 Easie7ne
of  Sartach  and  Baatu. Howbeit  I  could  have  no  intelli-  The  Citie  oj
gence  of  them,  but  onely  that  their  Lord  and  Master  Ban  Talas,  or
was  put  to  death  upon  the  occasion  following :  This  Ban  Chincitalas.
was  not  placed  in  good  and  fertile  Pastures. And  upon  a  Frte™ndrew.
certaine  day  being  drunken,  hee  spake  on  this  wise  unto
his  men. Am  not  I  of  the  stocke  and  kindred  of  Chingis
Can,  as  well  as  Baatu  ?  (for  in  very  deede  he  was  brother
or  Nephew  unto  Baatu.) Why  then  doe  I  not  passe  and
repasse  upon  the  banke  of  Etilia,  to  feede  my  Cattell  there,
as  freely  as  Baatu  himselfe  doth  ? Which  speeches  of  his
were  reported  unto  Baatu. Whereupon  Baatu  wrote  unto
his  servants  to  bring  their  Lord  bound  unto  him. And
they  did  so. Then  Baatu  demanded  of  him  whether  he
had  spoken  any  such  words? And  he  confessed  that  he
had. Howbeit  (because it is the Tartars manner to
pardon  drunken  men)  he  excused  himselfe  that  he  was

57

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1253-

drunken at the same time. How durst thou (quoth

Baatu)  once  name  mee  in  thy  drunkennesse  ? And  with

that  hee  caused  his  head  to  be  chopt  off. Concerning

the  foresaid  Dutch  men,  I  could  not  understand  ought,  till

I  was  come  unto  the  Court  of  Mangu-Can. And  there  I

was  informed  that  Mangu-Can  had  removed  them  out  of

the  jurisdiction of  Baatu, for the space  of  a  moneths

The  Village  of  ]mmi&y  from  Talas  Eastward, unto  a  certaine  Village,

Bolac.  called  Bolac :  where  they  are  set  to  dig  gold,  and  to  make

armour. Whereupon  I  could  neither  goe  nor  come  by

them. I  passed  very  neere  the  said  Citie  in  going  forth,

as  namely,  within  three  daies  journey  thereof :  but  I  was

ignorant  that  I  did  so : neither  could  I  have  turned  out

of  my  way,  albeit  I  had  knowne  so  much. From  the

foresaid Cottage we went directly Eastward, by the

Mountaines  aforesaid. And  from  that  time  we  travailed

He  entreth among  the  people  of  Mangu-Can,  who  in  all  places  sang

into  the ^  and danced before our Guide, because he was the

ertttottes  oj  messenger  0f  Baatu. For  this  curtesie  they  doe  afford

Mangu-Can.  . & .  , .  <, r  *  *  J  ^

each  to  other :  namely,  the  people  of  Mangu-Can  receiv-
ing the  messengers  of  Baatu  in  manner  aforesaid :  and  so
likewise  the  people  of  Baatu  entertaining  the  messengers
of  Mangu-Can. Notwithstanding,  the  people  of  Baatu
are  more  surly  and  stout,  and  shew  not  so  much  curtesie
unto  the  subjects  of  Mangu-Can,  as  they  doe  unto  them.
Certaine A  few  daies  after  we  entered  upon  those  Alpes  where  the
Alpes  wherein  Cara  Catayans  were  wont  to  inhabit. And  there  we  found
£ ata a  mightie  River: insomuch  that  we  were  constrained  to
inhabited. imbarke  our  selves,  and  to  saile  over  it. Afterward  we
A  mightie came  into  a  certaine  Valley,  where  I  saw  a  Castle  destroyed,
River.  the  walls  whereof  were  onely  of  mudde  :  and  in  that  place

Ground  tilled.  tne ground was tilled also. And there wee found a
Equius.  certaine  Village,  named  Equius,  wherein  were  Saracens,

speaking  the  Persian  language  :  howbeit  they  dwelt  an
huge  distance  from  Persia.  The  day  following,  having
passed  over  the  foresaid  Alpes,  which  descended  from  the
great  Mountaynes  Southward,  wee  entred  into  a  most
beautifull  Plaine,  having  high  Mountaynes  on  our  right

58

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1253-
hand,  and  on  the  left  hand  of  us  a  certaine  Sea  or  Lake, A  Lake  of
which  containeth  fifteene  daies  journey  in  circuit. All  the  fifteene  dfies
foresaid Plaine is most commodiously watered with  J^^Jn
certaine  Freshets,  distilling  from  the  said  Mountaynes,  all
which doe fall into the Lake. In Summer time we
returned  by  the  North  shoare  of  the  said  Lake,  and  there
were  great  Mountaines  on  that  side  also. Upon  the  fore-
named Plaine there were wont to bee great store of
Villages : but  for  the  most  part  they  were  all  wasted,  in
regard  of  the  fertile  Pastures,  that  the  Tartars  might  feede
their Cattell there. We found one great Citie there,
named  Coilac,  wherein  was  a  Mart,  and  great  store  of  Coilacagreat
Merchants  frequenting  it. In  this  Citie  wee  remained  S'^^ff
fifteene  daies,  staying  for  a  certaine  Scribe  or  Secretarie
of  Baatu,  who  ought  to  have  accompanied  our  Guide  for
the  dispatching  of  certaine  affaires  in  the  Court  of  Mangu.
All  this  Countrey  was  wont  to  bee  called  Organum :  and
the  people  thereof  had  their  proper  language,  and  their
peculiar  kind  of  writing. But  it  was  altogether  inhabited
of  the  people,  called  Contomanni. The  Nestorians  like- Contomanni.
wise  in  those  parts  use  the  very  same  kind  of  language
and  writing. They  are  called  Organa,  because  they  were
wont  to  bee  most  skilfull  in  playing  upon  the  Organs  or
Citherne,  as  it  was  reported  unto  mee. Here  first  did  I
see  worshippers  of  Idols,  concerning  whom,  bee  it  knowne  [III.  i.  21.]
unto  your  Majestie,  that  there  bee  may  sects  of  them  in
the  East  Countries.

THe  first  sort  of  these  Idolaters  are  called  Jugures : Chap.  26.
whose  Land  bordereth  upon  the  foresaid  Land  of  ^ozv  th.e
Organum,  within  the  said  Mountaines  Eastward  :  and  in  $aracms  'and>
all  their  Cities  Nestorians  doe  inhabit  together,  and  they  Idolaters  are
are  dispersed  likewise  towards  Persia,  in  the  Cities  of  the  joyned
Saracens. The  Citizens  of  the  foresaid  Citie  of  Cailac  had  t^ether-
three  Idol-temples ;  and  I  entred  into  two  of  them,  to  cJfatJtmres
behold  their  foolish  superstitions. In  the  first  of  which,  idolaters.
I  found  a  man  having  a  Crosse  painted  with  Inke  upon
his  hand,  whereupon  I  supposed  him  to  be  a  Christian :

59

A.D.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

for  he  answered  like  a  Christian  unto  all  questions  which
I  demanded  of  him.  And  I  asked  him,  Why  therefore
have  you  not  the  Crosse  with  the  Image  of  Jesu  Christ
thereupon?  And  he  answered,  We  have  no  such
custome.  Whereupon  I  conjectured  that  they  were
indeed  Christians :  but,  that  for  lacke  of  instruction  they
omitted  the  foresaid  ceremonie.  For  I  saw  there  behind
a  certaine  Chest  (which  was  unto  them  in  stead  of  an
Altar,  whereupon  they  set  Candles  and  Oblations)  an
Image  having  wings,  like  unto  the  Image  of  Saint
Michael,  and  other  Images  also,  holding  their  fingers,
as  if  they  would  blesse  some  body.  That  evening  I  could
not  find  any  thing  else.  For  the  Saracens  doe  onely  invite
men  thither,  but  they  will  not  have  them  speake  of  their
Religion.  And  therefore,  when  I  enquired  of  the
Saracens  concerning  such  Ceremonies,  they  were  offended
thereat.  On  the  morrow  after  were  the  Kalends,  and  the
Saracens  feast  of  Passeover.  And  changing  mine  Inne  or
lodging  the  same  day,  I  tooke  up  mine  aboade  neere  unto
another  Idol-Temple.  For  the  Citizens  of  the  said  Citie
of  Cailac  doe  curteously  invite,  and  lovingly  entertaine
all  messengers,  every  man  of  them  according  to  his  abilitie
and  portion.  And  entring  into  the  foresaid  Idol-temple,
I  found  the  Priests  of  the  said  Idols  there.  For  alwaies
at  the  Kalends  they  set  open  their  Temples,  and  the
Priests  adorne  themselves,  and  offer  up  the  peoples
Oblations  of  Bread  and  Fruits.  First  therefore,  I  will
describe  unto  you  those  rites  and  ceremonies  which  are
common  unto  all  their  Idol-temples :  and  then  the  super-
stitions of  the  foresaid  Jugures,  which  be,  as  it  were,  a
sect  distinguished  from  the  rest.  They  doe  all  of  them
worship  towards  the  North,  clapping  their  hands  together,
and  prostrating  themselves  on  their  knees  upon  the  earth,
holding  also  their  foreheads  in  their  hands.  Whereupon
the  Nestorians  of  those  parts  will  in  no  case  joyne  their
hands  together  in  time  of  prayer :  but  they  pray
displaying  their  hands  before  their  breasts.  They
extend their Temples in length East and West ;

60

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

1253.
and  upon  the  North  side  they  build  a  Chamber,
in  manner  of  a  Vestrie,  for  themselves  to  goe  forth
into.  Or  sometimes  it  is  otherwise.  If  it  be  a  foure
square  Temple,  in  the  midst  of  the  Temple  towards  the
North  side  thereof,  they  take  in  one  Chamber  in  that
place  where  the  Quire  should  stand.  And  within  the  said
Chamber,  they  place  a  Chest  long  and  broade  like  unto  a
Table,  and  behind  the  said  Chest  towards  the  South,
stands  their  principall  Idoll :  which  I  saw  at  Caracarum,  Frier  William
and  it  was  as  big  as  the  Idoll  of  Saint  Christopher.  Also  WQ^carum
a  certaine  Nestorian  Priest,  which  had  beene  in  Catay,
said  that  in  that  Countrey  there  is  an  Idoll  of  so  huge
a  bignesse,  that  it  may  be  seene  two  daies  journey  before
a  man  come  at  it.  And  so  they  place  other  Idols  round
about  the  foresaid  principall  Idoll,  being  all  of  them  finely
gilt  over  with  pure  gold :  and  upon  the  said  Chest,  which
is  in  manner  of  a  Table,  they  set  Candles  and  Oblations.
The  doores  of  their  Temples  are  alwaies  open  towards
the  South,  contrary  to  the  customes  of  the  Saracens.
They  have  also  great  Bels  like  unto  us.  And  that  is  the
cause  (as  I  thinke)  why  the  Christians  of  the  East  will  in
no  case  use  great  Bells.  Notwithstanding,  they  are
common  among  the  Russians,  and  Graecians  of  Gasaria.

A  LI  their  Priests  had  their  heads  and  beards  shaven  Chap.  27-
quite  over : and  they  are  clad  in  Saffron  coloured %f ,'
*■  11-  1  111  Temples  and

garments: and being once shaven, they leade an ido^andhow

unmarried  life  from  that  time  forward  : and  they  live  an  they  behave
hundred  or  two  hundred  of  them  together  in  one  Cloister  themselves  in
or Convent. Upon those daies when they enter into  w°rsfliPPtnS
their  Temples,  they  place  two  long  Formes  therein : and  zods
so  sitting  upon  the  said  Formes  like  Singing-men  in  a  Bookes.
Quire,  namely,  the  one  halfe  of  them  directly  over  against
the  other,  they  have  certaine  bookes  in  their  hands,  which
sometimes  they  lay  downe  by  them  upon  the  Formes :
and  their  heads  are  bare  so  long  as  they  remaine  in  the
Temple. And  there  they  reade  softly  unto  themselves,
not  uttering  any  voice  at  all. Whereupon  comming  in

61

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I253-

amongst  them,  at  the  time  of  their  superstitious  devotions,

and  finding  them  all  sitting  mute,  in  manner  aforesaid,  I
attempted  divers  waies  to  provoke  them  unto  speech,  and
yet  could  not  by  any  meanes  possible.  They  have  with
them  also  whithersoever  they  goe,  a  certaine  string,  with
an  hundred  or  two  hundred  Nut-shels  thereupon,  much
like  to  our  bead-roll  which  wee  carrie  about  with  us.
And  they  doe  alwaies  utter  these  words :  Ou  mam  Hact
ani ;  God  thou  knowest :  as  one  of  them  expounded  it
unto  me.  And  so  often  doe  they  expect  a  reward  at
Gods  hands,  as  they  pronounce  these  words  in  remem-
brance of  God.  Round  about  their  Temple  they  doe
alwaies  make  a  faire  Court,  like  unto  a  Church-yard,  which
they  environ  with  a  good  wall :  and  upon  the  South  part
thereof,  they  build  a  great  Portall,  wherein  they,  sit  and
conferre  together.  And  upon  the  top  of  the  said  Portall,
[III.  i.  22.]  they  pitch  a  long  Pole  right  up,  exalting  it,  if  they  can,
above  all  the  whole  Towne  besides.  And  by  the  same
Pole  all  men  may  know  that  there  stands  the  Temple  of
their  Idols.  These  rites  and  ceremonies  aforesaid,  be
common  unto  all  Idolaters  in  those  parts.  Going  upon  a
time  towards  the  foresaid  Idoll-temple,  I  found  certaine
Priests  sitting  in  the  outward  Portall.  And  those  which
I  saw,  seemed  unto  mee,  by  their  shaven  beards,  as  if  they
had  beene  French  men.  They  wore  certaine  ornaments
upon  their  heads,  made  of  Paper.  The  Priests  of  the
foresaid  Jugures  doe  use  such  attire  whithersoever  they
goe.  They  are  alwaies  in  their  Saffron  coloured  Jackets,
Paper.  which  bee  very  straight,  being  laced  or  buttened  from  the

So  doe  the  bosome  right  downe,  after  the  French  fashion,  and  they
people  of  |lave  a  Cloake  upon  their  left  shoulder,  descending  before
write  drawing:  anc^  behind  under  their  right  arme,  like  unto  a  Deacon
their  lines  per-  carrying  the  houssel-box  in  time  of  Lent.  Their  letters
pendkularly  or  kind  of  writing  the  Tartars  did  receive.  They  begin
downward, t0  write  at  the  top  of  their  paper,  drawing  their  lines

an no s  we  ^-j^  downe  : and  so  they  reade  and  multiply  their  lines

doe,  from  the r& ,  r  J .  r  /

right  hand  to rrom  the  left  hand  to  the  right. They  doe  use  certaine

the  left.  papers  and  characters  in  their  Magicall  practices. Where-

62

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1253-
upon  their  Temples  are  full  of  such  short  scrolls  hanged
round  about  them. Also  Mangu-Can  hath  sent  letters
unto  your  Majestie,  written  in  the  language  of  the  Moals
or Tartars, and in the foresaid hand or letter of the
Jugures. They  burne  their  dead  according  to  the  ancient
custome,  and  lay  up  the  ashes  in  the  top  of  a  Pyramis.
Now,  after  I  had  sate  a  while  by  the  foresaid  Priests,  and
entred  into  their  Temple,  and  seene  many  of  their  Images,
both  great  and small, I demanded  of  them  what they
beleeved concerning God  ? And they  answered : Wee
beleeve  that  there  is  onely  one  God. And  I  demanded
farther :  Whether  doe  you  beleeve  that  he  is  a  Spirit,  or
some  bodily  substance  ? They  said : Wee  beleeve  that
hee  is  a  Spirit. Then  said  I :  Doe  you  beleeve  that  God
ever  tooke  mans  nature  upon  him :  Then  they  answered ;
No. And  againe  I  said  :  Sithence  yee  beleeve  that  hee  is
a Spirit, to what end doe you make so many bodily
Images  to  represent  him  : Sithence  also  you  beleeve  not
that hee was made man : why doe you resemble him
rather unto the Image of a man then of any other
creature  ? Then they  answered, saying : we  frame  not
those  Images  whereby  to  represent  God. But  when  any
rich  man  amongst  us,  or  his  sonne,  or  his  wife,  or  any  of
his  friends  deceaseth,  he  causeth  the  Image  of  the  dead
partie  to  be  made,  and  to  be  placed  here : and  we in
remembrance  of  him  doe  reverence  thereunto. Then  I
replyed  : You  doe  these  things  onely  for  the  friendship
and flatterie of men. No (said they) but for their
memorie. Then  they  demanded  of  mee,  as  it  were  in
scoffing  wise : Where  is  God  ? To  whom  I  answered :
Where  is  your  soule? they  said,  In  our  bodies. Then
said  I,  Is  it  not  in  every  part  of  your  bodie,  ruling  and
guiding  the  whole  bodie,  and  yet  notwithstanding  is  not
seene  or  perceived? Even  so  God  is  every  where,  and
ruleth  all  things,  and  yet  is  he  invisible,  being  under-
standing and  wisedome  it  selfe. Then  being  desirous  to
have  had  some  more  conference  with  them,  by  reason  that
mine  Interpreter  was  wearie,  and  not  able  to  expresse  my

63

A.D.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1253.

meaning,  I  was  constrained  to  keepe  silence.  The  Moals
or  Tartars  are  in  this  regard  of  their  sect :  namely,  they
beleeve  that  there  is  but  one  God :  howbeit,  they  make
Images  of  felt,  in  remembrance  of  their  deceased  friends,
covering  them  with  five  most  rich  and  costly  garments,
and  putting  them  into  one  or  two  Carts,  which  Carts  no
man  dare  once  touch  :  and  they  are  in  the  custodie  of
their  Sooth-sayers,  who  are  their  Priests,  concerning  whom
I  will  give  your  Highnesse  more  at  large  to  understand
hereafter.  These  Sooth-sayers  or  Diviners,  doe  alwaies
attend  upon  the  Court  of  Mangu,  and  of  other  great
personages.  As  for  the  poorer  or  meaner  sort,  they  have
them  not,  but  such  onely  as  are  of  the  stocke  and  kindred
of  Chingis.  And  when  they  are  to  remove  or  to  take  any
journey,  the  said  Diviners  goe  before  them,  even  as  the
cloudie  Pillar  went  before  the  Children  of  Israel.  And
they  appoint  ground  where  the  Tents  must  be  pitched,
and  first  of  all  they  take  downe  their  owne  houses :  and
after  them  the  whole  Court  doth  the  like.  Also  upon
their  festivall  daies  or  Kalends,  they  take  forth  the  fore-
said Images,  and  place  them  in  order,  round  or  circle  wise
within  the  house.  Then  come  the  Moals  or  Tartars,
and  enter  into  the  same  house,  bowing  themselves  before
the  said  Images  and  worship  them.  Moreover,  it  is  not
lawfull  for  any  stranger  to  enter  into  that  house.  For
upon  a  certaine  time  I  my  selfe  would  have  gone  in,  but
I  was  chidden  full  well  for  my  labour.

Chap.  28. T)Ut  the  foresaid  Jugures  (who  live  among  the  Chris-

Of  divers  and  ±_j tians  and  Saracens)  by  their  sundry  disputations,  as

sundry  j  suppose,  have  beene  brought  unto  this,  to  beleeve  that

Nations: and , rr. ,  , ^ ,° A , ,  \ . .

of  certaine there  is  but  one  onely  God. And  they  dwelt  in  certaine

people  which  Cities,  which  afterward  were  brought  in  subjection  unto

were  wont  to  Chingis Can : whereupon hee gave his daughter in

eate  their  marriage  unto  their  King. Also  the  Citie  of  Caracarum

The  Countrey  ^  selfe>  1S  m  a  manner  within  their  Territorie,  and  the

of  Presbyter  whole  Country  of  King  or  Presbyter  John,  and  of  his

John.  brother  Vut,  lyeth  neere  unto  their  Dominions : saving

64

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1253-
that they inhabit in certaine  Pastures Northward, and
the  said  Jugures  betweene  the  Mountaynes  towards  the
South. Whereupon  it  came  to  passe, that  the Moals
received  letters  from  them. And  they  are  the  Tartars
principall  Scribes :  and  all  the  Nestorians  almost  can  skill
of  their  Letters. Next  unto  them,  betweene  the  foresaid
Mountaynes  Eastward,  inhabiteth  the  Nation  of  Tangut,  Tangut.
who are  a most valiant  people, and tooke Chingis  in
battell. But  after  the  conclusion  of  a  league,  he  was  set
at  libertie  by  them,  and  afterward  subdued  them. These
people  of  Tangut  have  Oxen  of  great  strength,  with  tailes  Strange  Oxen.
like  unto  Horses,  and  with  long  shag  haire  upon  their
backs  and bellies. They  have  legs  greater  then other  [ni-  l-  23-]
Oxen  have,  and  they  are  exceeding  fierce. These  Oxen
draw  the  great  houses  of  the  Moals :  and  their  homes  are
slender, long, streight, and most sharpe pointed : in-
somuch that  their  owners  are  faine  to  cut  off  the  ends  of
them. A  Cow  will  not  suffer  her  selfe  to  be  coupled  unto
one  of  them,  unlesse  they  whistle  or  sing  unto  her. They
have  also  the  qualities  of  a  Buffe :  for  if  they  see  a  man
cloathed  in  red,  they  runne  upon  him  immediately  to  kill
him. Next  unto them  are  the  people  of  Tebet, men  The  people  of
which  were  wont  to  eate  the  carkasses  of  their  deceased
parents : that  for  pities  sake,  they  might  make  no  other
Sepulchre  for  them,  then  their  owne  bowels. Howbeit
of  late  they  have  left  off  this  custome,  because  that  thereby
they became abominable and odious unto all other
Nations. Notwithstanding,  unto  this  day  they  make  fine
Cups  of  the  Skulls  of  their  parents,  to  the  end,  that  when
they  drinke  out  of  them,  they  may  amidst  all  their  jollities
and delights, call their dead parents to remembrance.
This  was  told  mee  by  one  that  saw  it. The  said  people
of  Tebet  have  great  plentie  of  gold  in  their  Land. Who-  Abundance  of
soever  therefore  wanteth  gold,  diggeth  til  he  hath  found  g
some  quantitie,  and  then  taking  so  much  thereof  as  will
serve  his turne, hee  layeth up the  residue  within the
earth  :  because,  if  he  should  put  it  into  his  Chest  or  Store-
house, he  is  of  opinion  that  God  would  withhold  from
xi  65  e

A.D.

1253-

The  stature  of
the  people  of
Tangut,  and  of
the  Jugures.

Langa  and
Solanga.

The  people  of
Solanga
resemble
Spaniards.

A  table  of

Elephants

tooth.

The  people
called  Muc.

PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

him  all  other  gold  within  the  earth.  I  saw  some  of  those
people,  being  very  deformed  creatures.  In  Tangut  I  saw
lusty  tall  men,  but  browne  and  swart  in  colour.  The
Jugures  are  of  a  middle  stature,  like  unto  our  French  men.
Among  the  Jugures  is  the  originall  and  roote  of  the
Turkish,  and  Comanian  Languages.  Next  unto  Tebet
are  the  people  of  Langa  and  Solanga,  whose  messengers  I
saw  in  the  Tartars  Court.  And  they  had  brought  more
then  ten  great  Carts  with  them,  every  one  of  which  was
drawne  with  six  Oxen.  They  bee  little  browne  men  like
unto  Spaniards.  Also  they  have  Jackets,  like  unto  the
upper  Vestment  of  a  Deacon,  saving  that  the  sleeves  are
somewhat  streighter.  And  they  have  Miters  upon  their
heads  like  Bishops.  But  the  fore-part  of  their  Miter  is
not  so  hollow  within  as  the  hinder  part :  neither  is  it
sharpe  pointed  or  cornered  at  the  top :  but  there  hang
downe  certaine  square  flaps  compacted  of  a  kind  of  Straw,
which  is  made  rough  and  rugged  with  extreame  heate,  and
is  so  trimmed,  that  it  glittereth  in  the  Sunne-beames,  like
unto  a  Glasse,  or  an  Helmet  well  burnished.  And  about
their  Temples  they  have  long  bands  of  the  foresaid  matter,
fastened  unto  their  Miters,  which  hover  in  the  winde,  as
if  two  long  homes  grew  out  of  their  heads.  And  when
the  wind  tossed  them  up  and  downe  too  much,  they  tie
them  over  the  middest  of  their  Miter,  from  one  Temple
to  another :  and  so  they  lie  circle  wise  overthwart  their
heads.  Moreover,  their  principall  messenger  comming
unto  the  Tartars  Court,  had  a  table  of  Elephants  tooth
about  him,  of  a  cubit  in  length,  and  a  handfull  in  breadth,
being  very  smoothe.  And  whensoever  he  spake  unto  the
Emperor  himselfe,  or  unto  any  other  great  personage,  he
alwaies  beheld  that  table,  as  if  hee  had  found  therein  those
things  which  hee  spake :  neither  did  hee  cast  his  eyes  to
the  right  hand,  nor  to  the  left,  nor  upon  his  face  with
whom  he  talked.  Yea,  going  too  and  fro  before  his
Lord,  hee  looketh  no  where  but  onely  upon  his  table.
Beyond  them  (as  I  understand  of  a  certaintie)  there  are
other  people  called Muc, having  Villages, but  no  one

66

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK

A.D.

1253-

particular  man  of  them  appropriating  any  Cattell  unto
himselfe. Notwithstanding, there are many flocks  and
droves  of  Cattell  in  their  Countrey,  and  no  man  appointed
to  keepe  them. But  when  any  one  of  them  standeth  in
neede  of  any  beast,  hee  ascendeth  up  unto  a  hill,  and
there maketh a shoute, and all the Cattell which are
within  hearing  of  the  noyse,  come  flocking  about  him,  and
suffer  themselves  to  be  handled  and  taken,  as  if  they  were
tame. And  when  any  messenger  or  stranger  commeth
into  their  Countrey,  they  shut  him  up  into  an  house,
ministring  there  things  necessary  unto  him,  untill  his  busi-
nesse  be  dispatched. For  if  any  stranger  should  travell
through  that  Countrey,  the  Cattell  would  flie  away  at  the
very  sent  of  him,  and  so  would  become  wilde. Beyond
Muc  is  great  Cataya,  the  Inhabitants  whereof  (as  I  sup-  GreatCataya.
pose)  were  of  old  time,  called  Seres. For  from  them  are
brought  most  excellent  stuffes  of  silke. And  this  people
is  called  Seres,  of  a  certaine  Towne  in  the  same  Countrey.
I  was  credibly  informed,  that  in  the  said  Countrey,  there
is  one  Towne  having  Walls  of  silver,  and  Bulwarkes  or
Towers of  gold. There bee many Provinces in that
Land,  the  greater  part  whereof  are  not  as  yet  subdued
unto  the  Tartars. And  the  *  Sea  lyeth  betweene  them  *  From  hence
and  India. These  Catayans  are  men  of  a  little  stature,  Salter  Hac-
speaking  much  through  the  nose. And  this  is  generall,  /«&  Industrie
that  all  they  of  the  East  have  small  eyes. They  are  excel-  {as  he  told  me)
lent  workemen  in  every  Art :  and  their  Physicians  are  well  out  °fa
skilled  in  the  Vertues  of  Herbs,  and  judge  exactly  of  the  felZT^ ^
Pulse ;  But  use  no  Urinals,  nor  know  any  thing  concern-  Qolledge  in
ing  Urine. This  I  saw,  for  there  are  many  of  them  at  Cambridge;
Caracarum. And  they  are  alwaies  wont  to  bring  up  all  the  other  part
their  children  in  the  same  trade  whereof  the  father  is.  ^  ^Jtf
And  therefore  they  pay  so  much  tribute ;  for  they  give  the  Colffo/my
Moallians every day one thousand and five hundred  Lord  Lumlies.

The  Chapters
disagree,  as  being  (/  thinke)  rather  some  Transcribers  division  then  the  Authors.  Tet  have  I
followed  the  numbers  I  found,  even  where  they  are  obscurest.  The  Friers  Latin  for  some
barbarous  words  and  phrases,  hath  beene  troublesome  to  translate.  The  vporke  I  holde  a
Jewell  of  Antiquitie,  now  first  entirely  publike.

67

A.D.

1253-

Idolatry.

Nestorians.

[in. ;.  24.]

Segni  a  Citie
of  Cathay.
They  are  so  at
this  day.
The  evill
qualities  of  the
Nestorians.
Hence  by  cor-
ruption of
manners  and
ignorance  of
faith,  seemeth
the  Apostacy
of  the  greatest
part  of  Asia  to
havehappened,
furthered  by
Tartarian
invasions  and
Saracenicall.
All  Priests.
*  Consider  our
Author  a
Frier,  whose
travels  we
rather

embrace,  then
{in  such  pas-
sages) his  di-
vinitie. They
were  later
Fathers  which
made  such
Decrees,  con-
trary to  the
Father  of
truth  which

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Cessines  or  Jascots :  (Jascot  is  a  piece  of  silver  weighing
ten  Markes)  that  is  to  say,  every  day  fifteene  thousand
Markes,  besides  silkes  and  certaine  victuals,  which  they
receive  from  thence,  and  other  services  which  they  doe
them.  All  these  Nations  are  betweene  the  Mountaynes
of  Caucasus,  on  the  North  side  of  those  Mountaines  to
the  East  Sea,  on  the  South  part  of  Scythia,  which  the
Shepheards  of  Moal  doe  inhabit :  All  which  are  tributarie
unto  them,  and  all  given  to  Idolatry,  and  report  many
fables  of  a  multitude  of  gods,  and  certaine  Deified  men,
and  make  a  pedigree  of  the  gods  as  our  Poets  doe.

The  Nestorians  are  mingled  among  them  as  Strangers ;
so  are  the  Saracens  as  farre  as  Cathay.  The  Nestorians
inhabit  fifteene  Cities  of  Cathay,  and  have  a  Bishopricke
there,  in  a  Citie  called  Segin.  But  further,  they  are  meere
Idolaters.  The  Priests  of  the  Idols  of  the  said  Nations,
have  all  broad  yellow  hoods.  There  are  also  among  them
(as  I  understood)  certaine  Hermits  living  in  the  Woods
and  Mountaines,  of  an  austere  and  strange  life.  The
Nestorians  there  know  nothing,  for  they  say  their  Service,
and  have  holy  Bookes  in  the  Syrian  tongue,  which  they
know  not.  So  that  they  sing  as  our  Monkes  doe,  who  are
ignorant  of  Grammar;  and  hence  it  commeth,  that  they
are  wholly  corrupted.  They  are  great  Usurers  and
Drunkards,  and  some  of  them  also  who  live  among  the
Tartars,  have  many  Wives,  as  the  Tartars  have.  When
they  enter  into  the  Church,  they  wash  their  lower  parts,
as  the  Saracens  doe.  They  eate  flesh  on  Friday  of  the
weeke,  and  hold  their  Feasts  that  day,  after  the  manner  of
the  Saracens.  The  Bishop  comes  seldome  into  those
Countries,  perchance,  scarse  once  in  flftie  yeares.  Then
they  cause  all  their  little  Children  (which  are  Males)  to  be
made  Priests,  even  in  the  Cradell ;  so  that  all  their  men
almost  are  Priests :  and  after  this  they  marrie  Wives,
which  is  directly  against  the  decrees  *  of  the  Fathers  :  they

ordained  marriage  in  Levies  Priest-hood,  and  chose  married  men  to  the  Apostleship :  and  fore-
warned of  another  Father,  who  with  Doctrines  of  Devils  should  prohibite  me  ate  and  marriage,
under  colour  of  Priests  chastitie,  making  the  Temple  stewes  to  cam  a  11  and  spirituall  whore  dome.

68

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1253.

are  also  Bigami,  for  the  Priests  themselves,  their  first  Wife
being  dead,  marrie  another.  They  are  all  Simonists,  for
they  give  no  holy  thing  freely.  They  are  very  carefull
for  their  Wives  and  Children,  whereby  they  apply  them-
selves to  gaine,  and  not  to  the  spreading  of  the  Faith.
Whence  it  commeth  to  passe,  while  some  of  them  bring
up  some  of  the  Nobilities  children  of  Moal  (although  they
teach  them  the  Gospell,  and  the  Articles  of  the  Faith)  yet
by  their  evill  life  and  covetousnesse,  they  drive  them
further  from  Christianitie :  Because  the  life  of  the  Moal-
lians,  and  Tuinians  (who  are  Idolaters)  is  more  harmlesse
than  theirs.

WE  departed  from  the  foresaid  Citie  of  Cailac  on  Saint  Chap.  26.
Andrewes day. And there wee found almost  ^/j/S
within three leagues, a whole Castle or Village of  departing
Nestorians. Entring  into  their  Church,  we  sang,  Salve  from  Caitac,  to
Regina,  &c.  with  joy,  as  loud  as  we  could,  because  it  was  the  Country  of
long:  since  we  had  seene  a  Church. Departing:  thence,  in  ■?"

three  daies  we  came  to  the  entrance  of  that  Province,  in  novem\t  ?0#
the  head  of  the  foresaid  Sea,  which  seemed  to  us  as
tempestuous  as  the  Ocean,  and  we  saw  a  great  Hand
therein.  My  Companions  drew  neere  the  shoare,  and  wet
a  Linnen  cloath  therein,  to  taste  the  Water,  wThich  was
somewhat  salt,  but  might  bee  drunke.  There  went  a
certaine  Valley  over  against  it,  from  betweene  the  great
Mountaines,  betweene  South  and  East :  and  betweene  the
hils,  was  another  certaine  great  Sea ;  and  there  ranne  a
River  through  that  Valley,  from  the  other  Sea  into  this.
Where  came  such  a  continuall  winde  through  the  Valley,
that  men  passe  with  great  danger,  least  the  wind  carrie
them  into  the  Sea.  Therefore  wee  left  the  Valley  and
went  towards  the  North,  to  the  great  hilly  Countries,
covered  with  deepe  Snow,  which  then  lay  upon  the  Earth :
so  that  upon  Saint  Nicholas  day  we  beganne  now  to  T>ecemb.  6.
hasten  our  journey  much,  and  because  we  found  no
people,  but  the  Jani  themselves  (to  wit  men  appointed
from daies journey to daies journey together,) the

69

A.D.

1253-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

^ecemb.  7.

A  dangerous
passage.

Messengers  together.  Because  in  many  places  in  the
hilly  Countries  the  way  is  narrow,  and  there  are  but  few
fields,  so  that  betweene  day  and  night  we  met  with  two
Jani,  whereupon  of  two  daies  journeys  we  made  one,  and
Extreme  cold,  travelled  more  by  night  then  by  day.  It  was  extreame
cold  there,  so  that  they  lent  us  their  Goat  skins,  turning
the  haire  outward.

The  second  Sunday  of  Advent  in  the  evening,  we
passed  by  a  certaine  place  betweene  very  terrible  Rockes :
and  our  Guide  sent  unto  me,  intreating  me  to  speake
some  good  words,  wherewith  the  Devils  might  be  driven
away ;  because  in  that  passage,  the  Devils  themselves  were
wont  suddenly  to  carrie  men  away,  so  that  it  was  not
knowne  what  became  of  them.  Sometimes  they  violently
snatched  a  Horse  and  left  the  man :  sometimes  they  drew
out  a  mans  bowels,  and  left  the  emptie  carkasse  upon  the
Horse.  And  many  such  things  did  often  fall  out  there.
Then  we  sang  with  a  loud  voyce,  Credo  in  Deum,  &c.
And  by  the  Grace  of  God,  wee  passed  through  (with  all
our  company)  unhurt.  After  that,  they  beganne  to  intreat
me,  that  I  would  write  them  Papers  to  carrie  on  their
heads :  and  I  told  them,  I  would  teach  them  a  word  which
they  should  carrie  in  their  hearts,  whereby  their  soules
and  bodies  should  be  saved  everlastingly.  But  alwaies
when  I  would  teach  them,  I  wanted  an  Interpreter :  Yet  I
wrote  them  the  Creede  and  the  Lords  Prayer ;  saying,
Heere  it  is  written  whatsoever  a  man  ought  to  beleeve
concerning  God.  Here  also  is  that  prayer,  wherein  we
begge  of  God  whatsoever  is  needfull  for  a  man.  Where-
upon beleeve  flrmely  that  which  is  written  here,  although
you  cannot  understand  it,  and  aske  of  God  that  he  do  that
for  you  which  is  contained  in  this  written  Prayer :  because
with  his  owne  mouth  he  taught  it  his  friends,  and  I  hope
he  will  save  you.  I  could  not  doe  any  thing  else,  because
it  was  very  dangerous  to  speake  the  words  of  doctrine
by  such  an  Interpreter,  nay  almost  impossible,  because  he
was  ignorant.

[III.  i.  25.]

70

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1253.

AFter  this,  wee  entred  into  that  plaine  where  the  Court  Chap.  27.
of Ken-Cham was, which was wont to be the  °-fthe
Countrey  of  the  Naymans,  who  were  the  peculiar  Subjects  ^fa^mans^and
of  Presbyter  John :  but  at  that  time  I  saw  not  that  Court,  what  befell  the
but  in  my  returne. Yet  heere  I  declare  unto  you  what  stock  ofKen-
befell  his  Ancestry,  his  Sonne  and  Wives. Ken-Cham  C^a^sJome
being  dead,  Baatu  desired  that  Mangu  should  be  Chan. 2 am"'
But  I  could  understand  in  certaintie  of  the  death  of  Ken.
Frier  Andrew  said,  that  he  dyed  by  a  certaine  medicine
given  him :  and  it  was  suspected  that  Baatu  caused  it  to
be  made. Yet  I  heard  otherwise,  for  he  summoned  Baatu,
to come  and  doe  him  homage. And Baatu  tooke  his
journey  speedily  with  great  preparation ;  but  he  and  his
Servants  were  much  afraid,  and  sent  one  of  his  Brothers
before,  called  Stichin : who  when  he  came  to  Ken,  and  Stichin  and
should  waite  upon  his  Cup,  contention  arising  betweene  Ken  kill  one
them, they slue one  another. The  Widow of Stichin
kept  us  a  whole  day,  to  goe  into  her  house  and  blesse  her,
that  is,  pray  for  her. Therefore  Ken  being  dead,  Mangu
was  chosen  by  the  consent  of  Baatu. And  was  then  chosen
when Frier Andrew was there. Ken had a certaine
Brother, called Siremon,  who  by  the  counsell  of  Kens
Wife  and  her  Vassals,  went  with  great  preparation  towards
Mangu,  as  if  he  meant  to  doe  him  homage,  and  yet  in
truth  he  purposed to kill  him, and  destroy  his  whole
Court. And  when  he  was  neere^  Mangu,  within  one  or
two  daies  journey,  one  of  his  Wagons  remained  broken  in
the  way. While  the  Wagoner  laboured  to  mend  it,  in
the  meane  space  came  one  of  the  Servants  of  Mangu,  who
helped  him : he  was  so  inquisitive  of  their  journey,  that
the  Wagoner  revealed  unto  him  what  Siremon  purposed
to  doe. Then  turning  out  of  the  way,  as  if  hee  little
regarding  it,  went  unto  the  herd  of  Horses,  and  tooke  the
best  Horse  hee  could  choose,  and  posting  night  and  day,
came  speedily  to  the  Court  of  Mangu,  reporting  unto  him
what  he  had  heard. Then  Mangu  quickly  assembling  all
his  subjects,  caused  foure  rings  of  Armed  men  to  com-
passe  his  Court,  that  none  might  goe  in  or  out :  the  rest

71

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I253-

he  sent  against  Siremon,  who  tooke  him,  (not  suspecting

his  purpose  had  beene  discovered)  and  brought  him  to  the
Court  with  all  his  followers.  Who  when  Mangu  lay  the
matter  to  his  charge,  strait-way  confessed  it.  Then  he
and  his  eldest  Sonne  Ken  Chan  were  slaine,  and  three
hundred  of  the  Nobilitie  of  the  Tartars  with  them.  The
Noble  Women  also  were  sent  for,  who  were  all  beaten
with  burning  fire-brands  to  make  them  confesse:  and
having  confessed,  were  put  to  death.  His  youngest  sonne
Ken,  who  could  not  be  capable  or  guiltie  of  the  con-
spiracy, was  left  alive :  And  his  Fathers  Palace  was  left
unto  him,  with  all  belonging  unto  it,  as  well  Men  as
Chattels  :  and  we  passed  by  it  in  our  returne.  Nor  durst
my  Guides  turne  in  unto  it,  neither  going  nor  comming.
For  the  Lady  of  the  Nations  sate  there  in  heavinesse,  and
there  was  none  to  comfort  her.

Chap.  28. r  I  \Hen  went  wee  up  againe  into  the  high  Countries,

Of  their  com- J^ going alwaies towards the North. At length on

c7urt  °of  ™ Saint  Stephens  day  we  entred  into  a  great  Plaine  like  the

Mangu  Chan.  Sea,  where  there  was  not  so  much  as  a  Mole-hill. And

the  next  day,  on  the  feast  of  S.  John  the  Evangelist,  we

came  unto  the  Palace  of  that  great  Lord. But  when  we

were  neere  it,  within  five  daies  journey,  our  Host  where

we  lay,  would  have  directed  us  a  way  farre  about,  so  that

wee  should  yet  travaile  more  than  fifteene  daies. And

this  was  the  reason  (as  I  understood)  that  wee  might  goe

OnamKeruk by  Onam  Kerule  their  proper  Countrey,  where  the  Court

^CotnT'ofthe  °f  Chingis-Chan  is- Others  said,  that  he  did  it  for  this

Tartars.  purpose,  that  he  might  make  the  way  longer,  and  might

Chap.  15. shew  his  power  the  more. For  so  they  are  wont  to  deale

with  men  comming  from  Countries  not  subject  to  them.

And  our  Guide  obtained  with  great  difBcultie,  that  we

might  go  the  right  way. For  they  held  us  upon  this

from  the  morning  till  three  of  the  clocke. In  that  way

also,  the  Secretarie  (whom  we  expected  at  Cailac)  told  me,

that  it  was  contained  in  the  Letters  which  Baatu  sent  to

Mangu-Chan,  that  wee  required  an  Army  and  ayde  of

72

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

1253-

;  Sartach  against  the  Saracens. Then  I  began  to  wonder

much,  and  to  be  greatly  troubled :  for  I  knew  the  Tenor

of  the  Letters,  and  that  no mention  therof  was  made

i  therein  : save  that  yee  advised  him  to  be  a  friend  to  all

Christians,  and  should  exalt  the  Crosse,  and  be  an  enemy

to  all  the  enemies  of  the  Crosse : and  because  also  the

i  Interpreters were Armenians, of the greater Armenia,

I  who  greatly  hated  the  Saracens ;  lest  perhaps  they  had

interpreted  any  thing  in  evill  part  to  make  the  Saracens

I  more  odious  and  hatefull  at  their  pleasure,  I  therefore  held

■  my  peace, not  speaking  a  word  with  them, or  against
:  them ;  for  I  feared  to  gainsay  the  words  of  Baatu,  least  I

|  should  incurre  some  false  accusation  without  reasonable

I  cause. We  came  therefore  the  foresaid  day  unto  the  said

Court. Our  Guide  had  a  great  house  appointed  him,

I  and  we  three  a  little  Cottage,  wherein  wee  could  scarse

'  lay our  stuffe, make  our  beds, and  have  a  little  fire.

Many  came  to  visit  our  Guide,  and  brought  him  drinke

made  of  Rice,  in  long  strait  mouthed  bottles,  in  the  which

!  I could  discerne  no difference  from the  best  Antissio-

I  dorensian  Wine,  save  that  it  had  not  the  sent  of  Wine.

I  We  were  called,  and  straightly  examined  upon  what  busi-

nesse  we  came. I  answered,  that  we  heard  of  Sartach  that

he  was  a  Christian : we  came  therefore  unto  him ;  the  [III.  i.  26.]

I  French  King  sent  him  a  Packet  by  us,  he  sent  us  to  Baatu

!  his  Father :  &  his  Father  hath  sent  us  hither,  hee  should

I  have written the cause, whereupon they demanded

;  whether  we  would  make  peace  with  them  ? I  answered,

he  hath  sent  Letters  unto  Sartach  as  a  Christian : and  if

■  he  had  knowne,  he  were  not  a  Christian,  hee  would  never
have  sent  him  Letters,  to  treate  of  peace :  I  say,  he  hath
done  you  no  wrong :  if  he  had  done  any,  why  should  jou
warre  upon  him,  or  his  people  ?  he,  willingly  (as  a  just  man)
would  reforme  himselfe,  and  desire  peace.  If  yee  with-
out  cause  will  make  warre  with  him,  or  his  Nation,  we
hope  that  God  (who  is  just)  will  helpe  them.  And  they
wondred, alwayes  repeating, why  came  yee, seeing  yee

came  not  to  make  peace  ? For  they  are  now  so  puffed  Tartars  pride.

73

A.D.
I253-

Decemb.  28.

Chap.  29.
Of  a  Christian
chappelly  and
of  the  con-
ference with
Sergius  the
counterfeit
Armenian
Monke,  and  of
the  sharpnes
and  continu-
ance of  the
Winter.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

up  with  pride,  that  they  thinke  the  whole  World  should
desire  to  make  peace  with  them.  And  truly,  if  I  might
bee  suffered,  I  would  preach  Warre  against  them  to  the
uttermost  of  my  power  throughout  the  whole  World.
But  I  would  not  plainly  deliver  the  cause  of  my  comming,
lest  I  should  speake  any  thing  against  that  which  Baatu
commanded.  I  told  them  therefore  the  whole  cause  of
my  comming  thither,  was  because  he  sent  me.

The  day  following  we  were  brought  unto  the  Court,
and  I  thought  I  could  goe  bare-foot,  as  I  did  in  our
Countrey  :  whereupon,  I  layd  aside  my  shooes.  But  such
as  come  to  the  Court,  alight  farre  from  the  house  where
the  Great  Chan  is,  as  it  were  a  Bow-shot  off :  where  the
Horses  abide,  and  a  Boy  to  keepe  them.  Whereupon,
when  wee  alighted  there,  and  our  Guide  went  with  us
to  the  house  of  the  Great  Chan,  a  Hungarian  Boy  was
present  there,  who  knew  us  (to  wit)  our  Order.  And
when  the  men  came  about  us,  and  beheld  us  as  Monsters,
especially  because  we  were  bare-footed,  and  demanded
whether  we  did  not  lacke  our  feet,  because  they  supposed
we  should  strait-way  have  lost  them,  that  Hungarian  told
them  the  reason,  showing  them  the  condition  of  our
Order.  Then  the  chiefe  Secretary  (who  was  a  Nestorian
and  a  Christian,  by  whose  counsell  and  advice  almost  all
is  done)  came  unto  us,  to  see  us,  and  looked  earnestly
upon  us,  and  called  the  Hungarian  unto  him,  of  whom  he
demanded  many  Questions.  Then  we  were  willed  to
returne  unto  our  Lodging.

ANd  when  we  returned,  at  the  end  of  the  Court  to-
wards the  East,  farre  from  the  Court,  as  much  as  a
Crosse-bow  could  shoot  at  twice,  I  saw  a  house,  upon  the
which  there  was  a  little  Cross,  then  I  rejoyced  much,
supposing  there  was  some  Christianitie  there.  I  went  in
boldly  and  found  an  Altar  very  well  furnished,  for  there
in  a  Golden  cloth  were  the  Images  of  Christ  and  the
blessed  Virgin,  and  Saint  John  Baptist,  and  two  Angels,
the  lineaments  of  their  bodies  and  garments  distinguished

74

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

1253.

with  Pearle,  and  a  great  silver  Crosse  having  precious

stones  in  the  corners,  and  the  middle  thereof,  and  many

other  Embroyderings : and  a  Candle  burning  with  Oyle

before  the  Altar,  having  eight  Lights. And  there  sate  an  An  Armenian

Armenian  Monke,  some-what  blacke  and  leane,  clad  with on  e'

a  rough  hairen  Coate  to  the  middle  legge,  having  upon

it  a  blacke  Cloke  of  bristles,  furred  with  spotted  Skinnes,

girt  with  Iron  under  his  haire-cloth. Presently  after  wee

entred  in,  before  we  saluted  the  Monke,  falling  flat  upon

the  ground,  we  sang,  Ave  Regina  Ccelorum,  &c.  and  he

rising,  prayed  with  us. Then  saluting  him,  we  sate  by

him  having  a  little  fire  before  him  in  a  Pan. Therefore  Their  con-

we  told  him  the  cause  of  our  comming. And  he  began  **!encf  w

r  .  .  .  1  &  1  1  1 1  11  H the  Armenian

to  comfort  us  much,  saying,  that  we  should  boldly  speake,  Monke.

because  we  were  the  Messengers  of  God,  who  is  greater
then  all  men.  Afterwards  he  told  us  of  his  comming,
saying,  he  came  thither  a  moneth  before  us,  and  that  he
was  a  Heremite  of  the  Territorie  of  Hierusalem,  and  that
the  Lord  appeared  to  him  three  times,  commanding  him  Monkish
to  goe  to  the  Prince  of  the  Tartars  :  And  when  he  deferred  Re^e)lation-
to  goe,  the  third  time  God  threatned  him,  and  overthrew
him  upon  the  ground,  saying,  he  should  dye,  unlesse  he
went;  and  that  he  told  Mangu  Chan,  that  if  he  would
become  a  Christian,  the  whole  World  should  be  obedient
unto  him,  and  the  French  and  the  Great  Pope  should  obay
him :  and  he  advised  me  to  say  the  like  unto  him.  Then
I  answered,  brother,  I  will  willingly  perswade  him  to
become  a  Christian :  (For  I  came  for  this  purpose,  to
preach  thus  unto  all)  I  will  promise  him  also,  that  the
French,  and  the  Pope  will  much  rejoyce  thereat,  and
account  him  for  a  brother  and  a  friend  :  but  I  will  never
promise,  that  they  shall  become  his  Servants,  and  pay
him  Tribute,  as  these  other  Nations ;  because  in  so  doing
I  should  speake  against  my  conscience,  then  he  held  his
peace.  We  went  therefore  together  to  our  Lodging,
which  I  found  a  cold  Harbour :  and  we  had  eaten  nothing
that  day,  so  we  boyled  a  little  flesh  and  Millet  in  the
broth  of  flesh  to  sup. Our  Guide  and  his  companions

75

A.D.

1253-

S.  Francis
Order  not
Catholike  ;
Universally
fitting  all
places  and
seasons.

Toes  frozen.

[in. ;.  27.]

Frost  untill  the
moneth  of
May.

Easter  in  the
end  of  the  end
ofAprill.  And
great  Snow  in
the  end  of
Aprill.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

were  drunken  at  the  Court :  and  little  care  was  had  of
us.  At  that  time  the  Messengers  of  Vastace  were  there
hard  by  us,  which  wee  knew  not :  And  the  men  of  the
Court  made  us  rise  in  great  haste,  at  the  dawning  of  the
day.  And  I  went  bare-foot  with  them  a  little  way,  unto
the  house  of  the  said  Messengers.  And  they  demanded
of  them,  whether  they  knew  us.  Then  that  Grecian
Souldier  calling  our  Order  and  my  companion  to  remem-
brance, because  he  had  seene  him  in  the  Court  of  Vastace,
with  Frier  Thomas,  our  Minister,  and  all  his  fellowes,
gave  great  testimony  of  us.  Then  they  demanded
whether  wee  had  peace  or  war  with  Vastace?  we  have
(said  I)  nor  war  nor  peace.  And  they  demanded,  how
that  might  be?  Because  (said  I)  their  Countries  are  far
removed  one  from  the  other,  and  meddle  not  together.
Then  the  Messenger  of  Vastace  said  wee  had  peace,
giving  mee  a  caveat :  so  I  held  my  tongue.  That  morn-
ing, my  toes  ends  were  frozen,  so  that  I  could  no  longer
goe  bare-foot :  for  in  those  Countreyes  the  cold  is
extreame  sharpe :  and  from  the  time  when  it  beginneth  to
freeze  it  never  ceaseth  untill  May :  nay,  in  the  moneth  of
May  it  freezed  every  morning ;  but  in  the  day'  time  it
thawed  through  the  heate  of  the  Sunne :  but  in  the
Winter  it  never  thawes,  but  the  Ice  continues  with  every
winde.  And  if  there  were  any  winde  there  in  the  Winter,
as  it  is  with  us,  nothing  could  live  there,  but  it  is  alwaies
milde  weather  untill  Aprill,  and  then  the  winds  arise,  and
at  that  time  when  wee  were  there  (about  Easter)  the  cold
arising  with  the  winde  killed  infinite  creatures.  In  the
Winter  little  snow  fell  there :  but  about  Easter,  which
was  in  the  latter  end  of  Aprill,  there  fell  so  great  a  snow,
that  all  the  streets  of  Caracarum  were  full ;  that  they  were
fayne  to  carrie  it  out  with  their  Carts.  Then  they  first
brought  us  (from  the  Court)  Ramskin  Coats,  and  Breeches
of  the  same,  and  Shooes,  which  my  Companion  and  Inter-
preter received.  But  I  thought  I  had  no  need  of  them,
because  I  supposed  my  Pelt-garment  (which  I  brought
from  Baatu)  was  sufficient  for  me.

76

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1253-
Then  the  fift  of  Januarie  we  were  brought  unto  the
Court :  and  there  came  Nestorian  Priests  unto  me,  (I  not
knowing  they  were  Christians)  demanding  which  way  we
worshipped?  I  said,  unto  the  East.  And  this  they
demanded  because  wee  had  shaven  our  beards  by  the  Shaving.
advice  of  our  Guide,  that  wee  might  appeare  before  Chan
according  to  the  fashion  of  our  Countrey :  whereupon,
they  thought  wee  had  beene  Tuinians  (to  wit)  Idolaters.
They  made  us  also  expound  out  of  the  Bible.  Then  they
demanded  what  reverence  wee  would  doe  to  Chan,
whether  after  our  owne  fashion,  or  theirs?  To  whom  I
made  answere.  Wee  are  Priests,  given  to  the  service  of  ResPect  °f
God  ;  Noblemen  in  our  Countrey  will  not  suffer  Priests  to
bow  their  knees  before  them,  for  the  honour  of  God ;
neverthelesse,  wee  will  humble  our  selves  to  all  men,  for
the  Lords  sake.  Wee  came  from  a  farre  Countrey.  If
yee  please,  wee  will  first  sing  prayses  unto  God,  who  hath
brought  us  safe  hither  from  afarre ;  and  after,  wee  will  doe
whatsoever  pleaseth  the  Lord ;  with  this  exception,  that  he
command  us  nothing  which  may  bee  against  the  worship
and  honour  of  God.  Then  they  entring  into  the  house,
delivered  what  wee  had  said.  So  their  Lord  was  con-
!  tented.  And  they  set  us  before  the  gate  of  the  house,
lifting  up  the  Felt  which  hung  before  the  gate.  And
because  it  was  Christmas  wee  began  to  sing,

A  Solis  ortus  cardine,
Et  usque  Terras  limitem,
Christum  canamus  Prin-

cipem,
Natum  Maria  Virgine.

From  the  first  Easterne  Land,
To  furthest  Westerne  Strand,
Let  us  Christ  laud  and  sing
Blest  Virgins  Sonne,  our  King.

ANd  when  wee  had  sung  this  Hymne,  they  searched  J^ittine  of
our  legs,  and  our  bosoms,  and  our  armes,

Chap.  30.

1 1 Of  the
searched  jMn _

whether  the  Friars  to

wee  had  Knives  about  us. They  made  our  Interpreter  Mangu  Can,

ungird  himselfe,  and  leave  his  Girdle  and  his  Knife,  with-  and  h?s ,

out  in  the  custodie  of  a  Doore-keeper.  description,

^,  •  A  1 •  1  1  1  m" tfieir  COtl'

I  hen  we  came  in. And  in  the  entrance  there  stood  a  ference  with
Bench  with  Cosmos,  by  the  which  they  make  our  Inter-  him.

77

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1253-

preter  stand ;  and  caused  us  to  sit  upon  a  Forme  before

the  Ladies. The  whole  house  within  was  hanged  with

Cloth  of  Gold :  and  on  a  certaine  Hearth  in  the  middle

of  the  house,  there  was  a  fire  made  of  thornes  and  Worme-

wood  roots  (which  grow  there  very  bigge)  and  Oxe  dung.

But  he  sate  upon  a  Bed  clothed  with  a  spotted  skin  or

Furre,  bright,  and  shining  like  a  Seales  skin. Hee  was

The  descrip- a  flat-nosed  man,  of  middle  stature,  about  the  age  of  five

ton  ofMangu  an(j  fort'ie  yeeres :  and  a  little  pretie  young  woman  (which

was  his  wife) sate  by  him,  and  one  of  his  daughters,

Cirina  by  name,  (a  hard-favoured  woman)  marriageable,

with  other  little  ones,  sate  next  unto  them  upon  a  Bed.

For  that  was  the  house  of  a  certaine  Christian  Ladie,

whom  he  dearely  loved,  by  whom  he  had  the  foresaid

daughter : and  hee  married  that  young  wife  beside : but

yet  the  daughter  was  Mistresse  of  all  that  Court,  which

was  her  Mothers. Then  he  made  them  aske  us,  what

we  would  drinke,  whether  Wine, or  Ceracina, that  is,

drinke  made  of  Rice,  or  Caracosus,  that  is,  cleere  Cowes

milke,  or  Ball,  that  is,  Mede  made  of  Honey : for  they

use  these  foure  kinds  of  Drinkes  in  the  Winter. Then  I

answered, Sir,  wee  are  not  men  who  take  pleasure  in

drinke. What  pleaseth  you  shall  content  us. Then  he

Drinke  of  Rice  commanded  drinke  of  Rice  to  be  given  us,  cleere  and

is  cleere  and sav0ury, as  white  Wine : whereof  I tasted  a  little  for

ItiTto  white reverence  of  nim- And  our  Interpreter  (to  our  misfor-

Wine. The tune)  stood  by  the  Butlers :  who  gave  him  much  drinke,

Indians  call  it  and  hee  was  quickly  drunke. Then  Chan  caused  Falcons,

Racke.  anc[  other  birds  to  bee  brought  unto  him,  which  he  tooke

upon  his  fist,  and  lookes  upon  them : and  after  a  long

time  he  commanded  us  to  speake. Then  we  were  to  bow

the knees. And hee had his Interpreter, a certaine

Nestorian,  whom  I  knew  not  to  bee  a  Christian ;  and  wee

had  our  Interpreter,  such  an  one  as  he  was,  who  now  also

The  Oration was  drunke. Then  I  said,  Wee  first  give  thankes  and

w'lj'er  praise  to  God,  who  hath  brought  us  from  so  removed

MansuChan.  Parts  °f  tne  World,  to  see  Mangu  Chan,  to  whom  God

hath  given  so  great  power  upon  Earth  :  and  wee  beseech

78

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

1253-
our  Lord,  by  whose  command  wee  live  and  die,  that  he
would  grant  him  a  long  and  a  prosperous  life. (For  this
they  desire,  that  men  pray  for  their  lives.) Then  I  told
him : Sir, Wee have heard of Sartach that he was a
Christian ;  and  the  Christians  who  heard  it,  but  specially
the  French  King,  rejoyced  :  wherefore  wee  came  unto  him,
and  our  Lord  and King  hath sent  him  Letters  by  us  The  ltke
wherein  were  words  of  peace :  and  amongst  other  things, i^lfvL
hee  testifieth  of  us,  whose  servants  wee  are,  and  intreated  Edw. 2. before
him  to  suffer  us  to  abide  in  his  Countrey. For  it  is  our  /.  8.  c.  7.  for
office  to  teach  men  to  live  according  to  the  Law  of  God.  another  Friar.
\  And  hee  sent  us  to  Baatu  his  father :  and  Baatu  hath  sent  [HI.  i.  28.]
j  us  hither  unto  you. You  are  they  to  whom  God  hath
I  given  great  Dominion  upon  earth ;  We  therefore  intreat
!  your  Highnesse, to  give  us  leave  to  continue  in  your
Countrey  to  doe  the  service  of  God  for  you,  your  Wives
i  and  Children. Wee  have  neither  Gold  nor  Silver,  nor
:  precious  stones  to  present  unto  you,  but  our  selves,  whom
we  present  to  serve,  and  pray  unto  God  for  you. At  the
least,  gave  us  leave  to  continue  while  the  cold  be  past.
;  My Companion is so weake, that hee cannot by any
meanes  travaile  on  Horse-backe  without  hazzard  of  his
life. For  my  Companion  willed  me,  and  adjured  me,  to
I  crave  leave  to  stay. For  we  supposed  we  must  returne  to
Baatu,  unlesse  of  his  speciall  Grace  he  gave  us  leave  to
stay. Then  he  began to  answer : Even as  the Sunne  The  answer  °f
spreads  his  beames  every  where,  so  our  power  and  Baatues  ff/^CAw
spreads  it  selfe  every  where  :  so  that  wee  have  no  neede  of  "understood and

I  your  Silver  and  Gold. Hitherto  I  understood  my  Inter-  delivered  by  a
j  preter : but further, I could not perceive any perfect  drunken

■  sentence. Whereby  I  easily  found  hee  was  drunke,  and  InterPreter*
-|  Mangu  Chan  him  selfe  was  drunk  also,  as  I  thought. Yet
with  this,  (as  it  seemed  to  mee,  hee  ended  his  speach)  that
>  he  was  displeased  that  we  came  first  to  Sartach,  before  wee

II  came  to  him. Then  seeing  the  defect  of  my  Interpreter,
j  I  held  my  peace,  this  onely  excepted,  that  I  intreated  his

Highnesse  hee  would  not  be  displeased,  for  that  which
I  spoke  of  Gold  and  Silver ;  because  I  spoke  it  not  that

79

A.D.
1253-

Caracarum
ten  dales
journey  from
the  Courts  of
Mangu  Chan,
toward  the
North,  as
appeareth,
Ch.  36.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

he  had  need  of  such  things,  or  desired  them,  but  because
we  would  willingly  honour  him  with  temporall  and
spirituall  things.

Then  he  made  us  rise,  and  sit  downe  againe;  and
after  some  few  words,  doing  our  dutie  to  him,  we  went
out,  and  his  Secretaries,  and  that  Interpreter  of  his  (who
had  the  bringing  up  of  one  of  his  Daughters)  went
together  with  us.  And  they  began  to  bee  very  inquisitive
of  the  Kingdome  of  France,  whether  there  were  many
Rams,  Oxen  and  Horses  there,  as  if  presently  they
should  enter  and  take  all.  And  oftentimes  I  was  faine  to
bridle  my  selfe  much,  in  dissembling  anger  and  indigna-
tion. And  I  answered,  There  are  many  good  things  there
which  yee  shall  see,  if  yee  happen  to  come  thither.  Then
they  appointed  us  one,  who  should  have  care  of  us.  And
we  went  unto  the  Monke  :  and  when  we  came  out  againe,
ready  to  goe  to  our  lodging,  the  foresaid  Interpreter  came
unto  us,  saying,  Mangu  Chan  hath  compassion  on  you,
and  gives  you  two  moneths  time  to  stay.  Then  the
extreame  cold  will  be  past,  and  he  sends  to  you :  Here
within  ten  daies  journey  there  is  a  good  Citie,  called
Caracarum,  if  yee  will  go  thither,  he  will  cause  necessarie
things  to  be  given  you :  but  if  yee  will  abide  heere,  yee
may,  and  yee  shall  have  necessaries :  yet  it  will  be  a
troublesome  thing  for  you  to  follow  the  Court.  And  I
answered :  The  Lord  preserve  Mangu  Chan,  and  grant
him  a  good  and  long  life.  We  have  found  this  Monk
heere,  whom  we  thinke  to  be  an  holy  man,  and  that  by
the  good  pleasure  of  God  he  came  into  these  parts,  where-
fore we  would  willingly  stay  with  him,  because  wee  are
Monkes,  and  wee  would  pray  together  for  the  life  of
Chan.  Then  he  held  his  peace  and  departed.  And  we
went  unto  our  house,  which  we  found  very  cold,  and
without  any  Fuell,  as  yet  fasting,  and  it  was  night:  Then
he,  to  whom  we  were  recommended,  provided  us  Fuell,
and  a  little  meate.  Our  Guide  was  now  to  returne  to
Baatu,  who  desired  a  Carpet  of  us,  which  (by  his  Com-
mandement)  we  left  in  the  Court  of  Baatu : which  we

80

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK

gave  him,  and  he  peaceably  departed  so,  kissing  our  right
hand,  and  confessing  his  fault,  if  he  suffered  us  to  indure
hunger  and  thirst  upon  the  way.  We  pardoned  him,
craving  pardon  of  him  and  his  whole  Family,  if  we  had
given  them  any  evill  example.

ACertaine  Woman  of  Mentz  in  Lotharingia,  called
Pascha,  found  us,  who  made  us  great  cheere,  accord-
ing to  her  power,  who  belong  to  the  Court  of  that  Lady,
which  was  a  Christian,  of  whom  I  spoke  before :  who  told
us  of  her  strange  povertie  which  she  indured  before  she
came  to  the  Court ;  but  now  she  was  well  to  live,  for  she
had  a  young  Husband,  a  Rutenian  (by  whom  she  had
three  very  faire  Children)  who  was  skilfull  in  building,
which  amongst  them  is  an  excellent  Art.  Moreover,  she
told  us,  that  at  Caracarum,  there  was  a  certaine  Goldsmith,
called  William,  borne  at  Paris ;  whose  surname  was
Bouchier,  and  his  Fathers  name  Lawrence  Bouchier,  and
she  thinketh  he  hath  a  Brother  yet  upon  the  Great  Bridge,
called  Roger  Bouchier.  And  she  told  me,  that  he  had
a  certaine  young  man  which  he  brought  up,  whom  hee
accounted  as  his  Son,  who  was  an  excellent  Interpreter.
But  Mangu  Chan  delivered  to  the  foresaid  Gold-smith,
three  hundred  Jascots,  that  is,  three  thousand  Markes,
and  fiftie  Worke-men  to  make  a  piece  of  worke,  so
that  she  feared  he  could  not  send  his  Sonne  unto  me.
For  she  heard  some  say  unto  her  in  the  Court,  The  men
which  came  from  your  Countrey  are  good  men,  and
Mangu  Chan  would  willingly  speak  unto  them,  but  their
Interpreter  is  nothing  worth  :  therefore  she  was  carefull
for  an  Interpreter.  Then  I  writ  unto  the  foresaid  Gold-
smith, certifying  him  of  my  comming  hither,  and  re-
questing him,  that  if  he  could,  he  would  send  me  his
sonne.  And  he  wrote  me  answere,  that  he  could  not
that  Moone,  but  the  next,  his  worke  should  bee  perfected,
and  then  he  would  send  him  unto  me.  We  stayed  there-
fore with  other  Messengers.  And  it  is  otherwise  with
Messengers in Baatu's Court, then in the Court of

A.D.

1253-

Chap.  31.
Of  Pascha,  of

Mentz,  in
Lotharingia,
and  William
Bouchier  the
Goldsmith,  a
Parisian.

Building  in
request.

They  also
reckon  by
Moone s  in
East  India.

XI

81

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1253-

Mangu  Chan.  For  in  the  Court  of  Baatu,  there  is  one
Jani  on  the  East  side,  who  receiveth  all  such  as  come
from  the  West,  and  so  of  other  Countries  of  the  world :
But  in  the  Court  of  Mangu,  they  are  all  together  under
one Jani,  and  they  may  see  and  visit  one  another. In

[III.  i.  29.]  Baatu's  Court  they  know  not  one  another,  and  know  not
one  of  another,  whether  hee  be  a  Messenger  or  no  ;
because  they  know  not  one  anothers  lodging,  nor  see
one  another  but  in  the  Court:  and  when  one  is  called,
perchance  another  is  not  called.  For  they  goe  not  to  the
Court,  unlesse they  bee  sent  for. Wee  found  there  a

Crac  is  a certaine Christian of  Damascus,  who said he came  in

'fbrtns  ofth behalfe  °*  the Soldan °?  Mons Regatis,  and of  Crac  ;

Templars  in wno desired to become friend and tributarie to the

the  holy  Land.  Tartars.

Chap.  32. 'TT^He yeare also before I came thither,  there  was  a

°thTCl°dklUof  certaine Clerke  of  Aeon,  who  called  himselfe  Rai-

Acon  ^owhee  mund,  but in truth his name  was  Theodolus  ; and he

deceived  tooke  his  journey  from  Cyprus  with  Frier  Andrew,  and

Mangu  Chan,  went  with  him  into  Persia,  and  got  him  certaine  Instru-

and  was  ments  of  Amoricus  there  in  Persia,  who  abode  there  after

Vasladus Frier  Andrew. Frier  Andrew  returning,  hee  went  for-

Frier  Andrew  ward  with  his  Instruments,  and  came  to  Mangu  Chan  :

went  from who  being  demanded  wherefore  he  came,  said,  That  he

Cyprus  by was  w'ltfo  a  certaine  holy  Bishop,  to  whom  the  Lord  sent

Letters  from  heaven,  written in golden Characters,  and

commanded  him  to  send  them  to  the  Emperour  of  the

Tartars,  because  he  should  bee  Lord  of  the  whole  Earth,

and that  he should perswade  men  to  make  peace  with

Blasphemous him. Then  Mangu  said  unto  him ;  If  thou  hast  brought

fiattery.  those  Letters  which  came  from  heaven,  and  the  Letters

of thy Lord, then hadst beene welcome. Then he

answered,  That  he  brought  Letters,  but  they  were  with

other  things  of  his,  upon  a  certaine  wilde  and  pampered

Gelding, which escaping fled from him through the  Y\

Woods  and  Mountaines,  so  that  he  had  lost  all. And  it  is  I  ^

very  true,  that  many  such  chances  often  happen  :  where-

82

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK

fore a man must  very  warily  hold his Horse  when  he
alighteth for necessitie. Then Mangu demanded the
name of the Bishop. He said, he was called Odo.
Whereupon he told him of Damascus, and Master
William, who was Clerke of  the Lord Legat. Then
Chan  demanded  in  whose  Kingdome  it  was  ? To  whom
he made  answer,  That  it  was  under  a  certaine  King  of
the Frankes,  called Moles  : (for  he had heard of  that
which happened at Mallora  ; and  he  would have  said,
that  they  were  of  your  Servants)  moreover,  hee  told  Chan
that  the Saracens  were  betweene  the Frankes  and him,
who  hindred  his  way. But  if  the  way  had  beene  open,
he  would  have  sent  Messengers,  and  willingly  have  made
peace  with  him. Then Mangu  Chan  asked  him,  If  hee
would bring his Messengers to that King, and that
Bishop  ? He  told  him  he  would,  and  also  to  the  Pope.
Then Mangu caused an exceeding  strong Bow to bee
made, which two men could scarce bend, and two
Arrowes,  whose  heads  were  of  Silver,  full  of  holes,  which
sing  when  they  are  shot  like  a  whistle. And  he  injoyned
Moal  whom  hee  should  send  with  the  said  Theodolus  ;
Thou  shalt  goe  to  that  King  of  the  Frankes,  to  whom
|  this man shall bring thee,  and  thou shalt  present him
with  these  in  my  behalfe,  And  if  he  will  have  peace  with
I  us,  we  will  winne  the  Countrey  upon  the  Saracens,  even
(home  to  him,  and  will  grant  him  the  rest  of  the  Countrey
junto  the  West  : If  otherwise,  bring  backe  the  Bow  and
Arrowes unto us, and tell him  we shoot farre, and
jsmite  strongly  with  such  Bowes. Then  he  caused  Theo-
idolus  to  goe  forth,  whose Interpreter Master  Williams
jSonne  was,  and  in  his  hearing,  he  said  unto  Moal. Thou
shalt  go  with  this  man,  marke  well  the  Waies,  the  Coun-
tries, and  their  Castles,  Men  and  Munition. Then  the
jroung  man  blamed  Theodolus,  saying,  He  had  done  ill,
[n  conducting  the  Messengers  of  the  Tartars  with  him,
i-or  they  went  for  no  other  cause,  but  to  spy. Then  hee
answered,  That  he  would  set  them  on  the  Sea,  that  they
;hould not know  whence they  came,  or which way  to

83

A.D.
1253.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1253-

returne.  Mangu  gave  also  unto  Moal  his  golden  Bull,
The  Golden  or  Tablet,  to  wit,  a  plate  of  Gold  of  an  hand-breadth,
Tablet  of  the  an(j  ^alfe  a  cubit  long,  wherein  his  commandement  is
Emperorofthe .  TTT1  • 1 1  1 1 1

Tartars.  ingraven  : Who  so  carneth  that,  may  command  what  he

will,  and  it  is  done  without  delay. So  then  Theodolus

VastaciusKing  came  to  Vastacius,  determining  to  passe  over  to  the  Pope,

o/Pontus. tjiat ke might deceive the Pope, as he had deceived

Magnu Chan. Then Vastacius demanded of him,

whether  he  had  Letters  to  the  Pope,  because  he  was  a

Messenger,  and should  conduct  the  Messengers  of  the

Tartars  ? But,  not  being  able  to  shew  the  Letters,  he

tooke  him  and  spoiled  him  of  all  that  hee  had  gotten,

and cast him in prison. And Moal fell sicke and

dyed  there. But  Vastacius  sent  backe  the  golden  Tablet

to  Mangu  Chan,  by  the  servants  of  Moal  :  whom  I  met

Or,  Erserum.  at  Assaron in  the  entrance  into  Turkie,  who told mee

what happened to Theodolus. Such Cosners runne

through  the  world,  whom  the Moallians  kill  when  they

can take them. Now  the Epiphany  was  at  hand,  and

Sergius  an that  Armenian  Monke,  Sergius  by  name,  told  me,  That

Mo7kfn  he  should  baPtize  Mangu  Can  upon  the  Holy-day.  I
intreated  him  to  labour  by  all  means  that  I  might  be
present,  that  I  might  beare  witnesse  that  I  saw  it  :  and
hee  promised  he  would.

Chap.  33.  r  I  ^He  feastivall  day  came,  and  the  Monke  called  me  not,

Of angu  J^ kut  at sixe of  the clocke I was sent for to the

Chans  holy-  itv/ti -ii-r»-

day,  and  how  Court,  and  1  saw  the  Monke  with  the  Priests  returning

his  principal! from the Court with his Crosse, and the  Priests  with

wife  and  his the  Censer  and  the  Gospell. For  that  day  Mangu  Chan

eldest  sonne mac[e  a  feast. And  his  custome  is,  that  upon  such  daies

Divine  cere- as  n^s  Sooth-sayers  do  appoint  unto  him  feastivall,  or  with

monies  of  the the  Nestorian Priests sometimes make  Holy-daies,  that

Nestorians, then he holds his Court : And upon such daies the

^dofthe[r Christians  come first with their furniture,  and  pray  for

him and blesse his Cup. They then departing, the

Saracen Priests come and doe the like. Next after

them, come the Idolatrous Priests  and doe the  same.

84

T!i

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1253.

And the Monke told me, that he onely beleeves the  [III.  i.  30.]

Christians,  yet will have  all to pray for him ; but he

lyed,  for  he  beleeveth none,  as  you  shall  hereafter  heare,

yet  all  follow  his  Court,  as  flyes  doe  Honey. And  he

giveth  unto  all,  and  all  men  thinke  they  are  his  Familiars ;

and  all  prophesie  prosperitie  unto  him. Then  wee  sate

before  the  Court  a  long  space,  and  they  brought  us  flesh

to  eate. To  whom  I  made  answere,  that  we  would  not

eate there, but if  they would provide us meate, they

should  provide  it  for  us  at  our  house. Then  they  said,

1  get  yee  home  to  your  house ;  because  you  were  invited

J  for  no  other  cause  but  to  eate. Therefore  we  returned

I  by  the Monkes,  who blushed at the Lye  hee  told  me,

!  wherefore I would not speake a  word  of  that  matter.

Yet some of  the Nestorians  would affirme  unto mee,

!  that he  was baptized : to whom I said, that I would

never beleeve it,  nor report  it  to  others,  seeing  I  saw

!  it  not.

We  came  to  our  cold  and  emptie  house,  they  provided
us  bedding  and  Coverlets,  they  brought  us  also  fuell,
and  gave  us  three  the  carkasse  of  one  little  leane  Ramme,
meate  for  sixe  dayes ;  and  every  day  a  little  Platter  full
of  Millet,  and  lent  us  a  Caldron  and  a  Trivet  to  boyle
our  flesh:  which  being  sodden,  we  sod  our  Millet  in
the  broath  of  the  flesh.  This  was  our  meate,  and  it
had  well  sufficed  us,  if  they  had  suffered  us  to  eate  in
peace.  But  there  are  so  many  hunger-starved,  who  are
not  provided  of  meate  :  that,  as  soone  as  they  saw  us
dresse  meate,  they  thrust  in  upon  us,  and  must  eate  with
us.  There  I  found  by  experience,  how  great  a  Martyr-
dome  liberalise  is  in  povertie.  Then  the  cold  began  The  cold  much
much  to  prevaile  :  and  Mangu  Chan  sent  us  three  Pelt-  Preva^etfl-
coates  of  the  Skinnes  of  Papions  (Papionum)  whose  haire
they  turne  outward  ;  which  we  thankfully  received.
They  demanded  also,  how  we  were  provided  of  necessary
food  ?  To  whom  I  answered,  that  little  meate  sufficed
us,  but  we  have  not  an  house  wherein  to  pray  for  Mangu
Chan. For  our  Cottage  was  so  little,  that  we  could  scarce

85

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1253-

stand  upright  in  it,  nor  open  our  Bookes,  as  soone  as  wee
made  fire.  Then  they  brought  him  word  :  and  hee  sent
unto  the  Monke  to  know,  if  hee  would  have  our  com-
pany ?  who  gladly  answered,  that  hee  would.  From
that  time  wee  were  provided  of  a  better  house  :  and
we  went  downe  with  the  Monke  before  the  Court,  where
none  lodged  but  we,  and  their  Sooth-sayers  :  but  they
lodged  neerer,  before  the  Palace  of  the  greatest  Lady :
and  wee  in  the  furthest  end  towards  the  East,  before
the  Palace  of  the  last  Lady.  And  that  was  done  the  day
The  13.0/  before  Octavis  Epiphaniae.  On  the  morrow  (to  wit)  in
Jan.  Octavis Epiphaniae, all the Nestorian Priests  came to-

gether before day at the Chappell,  and smote upon a
board, and  sang Matines solemnely,  and put  on their
Ornaments,  preparing  the  Censer  and  the  Incense.
And  while they stayed wayting  thus,  behold,  in the
Cotota  Caten morning, the principall Wife Cotota Caten by name,
the prhcipall (Caten  is  as  much  as  Ladie,  and  Cotota  her  proper  name)
ijeoj angu  came jnto ^c Chappell with many other Ladies, and
Baku  the  Son  with  her  eldest  Sonne,  called  Baltu,  and  other  little  ones
ofMangu of  hers  :  And  they  cast  themselves  downe  upon  the  Earth,
Chan.  ducking  after the manner  of  the Nestorians,  and after

this,  they  touched  all  the  Images  with  their  right  hands,
alwayes  kissing  their  hands  after  they  had  touched,  and
after  that,  they  gave  their  right  hands  to  all  that  stood
about  them  in  the  Church.  For  this  is  the  custome  of
the  Nestorians  when  they  come  into  the  Church.  Then
the  Priests  sang  many  things,  giving  the  Lady  Incense
in  her  hand,  and  she  put  it  upon  the  fire  :  then  they
perfumed  her.  After  this,  when  the  day  was  cleere,  shee
began  to  put  off  the  Ornament  of  her  head,  which  is
called  Baccha :  and  I  saw  her  bare  scull,  then  shee  com-  |
manded  us  to  goe  forth,  and  as  I  went  out,  I  saw  a
silver  Bason  brought  :  whether  they  baptized  her  or  no,
I  know  not :  but  I  know,  they  celebrate  not  Masse  in  a
Tent,  but  in  a  standing  Church.  And  in  the  Easter  I
saw  them  baptize,  and  hallow  Fount  with  great  Solem-
nitie,  which  now  they  did  not.

86

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1253-
And  while  we  went  into  our  house,  Mangu  Chan  him-
selfe  came,  and  went  into  the  Church,  or  Oratory,  and
a  Golden  Bed  was  brought,  on  which  hee  sate  by  his
Queene,  over  against  the  Altar.  Then  were  we  sent  for,
not  knowing  that  Mangu  was  come.  And  the  Doore-
keepers  searched  us,  lest  we  should  have  Knives  about
us.  But  comming  into  the  Oratory,  having  a  Bible,
and  a  Breviary  in  my  bosome,  I  first  bowed  downe
unto  the  Altar,  and  after  to  Mangu  Chan :  and  so
passing  by,  we  stood  betweene  the  Monke  and  the  Altar.
Then  they  made  us  sing  a  Psalme  after  our  manner,
and  chaunt  it.  But  we  sang  of  that  prose,  Veni  Sancte
Spiritus,  &c.  And  Cham  caused  our  bookes  to  be
brought  unto  him,  the  Bible,  and  the  Breviarie :  and
diligently  inquired  concerning  the  Images,  what  they
signified.  The  Nestorians  answered  him  at  their  pleasure,
because  our  Interpreter  came  not  in  with  us.  And  when
I  was  first  before  him,  I  had  the  Bible  in  my  bosome,
which  he  commanded  to  be  brought  unto  him,  who
looked  earnestly  upon  it.  Then  he  departed,  and  his
Ladie  remayned  there,  and  distributed  gifts  to  all  the
Christians  there,  shee  gave  the  Monke  a  Jascot,  and  to
the  Archdeacon  of  the  Priests  another  :  she  caused  a
Nassic  to  be  spread  before  us  (to  wit)  a  piece  of  Cloth,
as  broad  as  a  Coverlet  of  a  Bed,  very  large,  and  a
*Buckeram,  which  when  I  would  not  receive,  they  sent  *Unum
them  to  my  Interpreter,  who  had  them  to  himselfe.  He  buckeranum-
brought  the  Nassic  to  Cyprus,  which  he  sold  for  eightie
Sultanines  of  Cyprus ;  but  it  was  much  the  worse  for
the  carriage.  Then  drinke  was  brought  (to  wit)  drinke
made  of  Rice  and  red  Wine,  like  Wine  of  Rochell,  and
Cosmos.*  Then  the  Ladie  holding  the  cup  full  in  her  * 'Cosmos  of
hand,  desired  blessing  upon  her  knees,  and  all  the  yy**^*1**9
Priests  sing  with  a  loud  voyce,  and  shee  drunke  it  up  :  pif,  [  jjj
and  I  and  my  companion  must  sing.  Another  time,
when  all  of  them  were  almost  drunke,  then  meate  was
brought  (to  wit)  the  carkasse  of  one  Ramme  which
was presently devoured : and after that, great fishes,

87

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1253-

which  are  called  Carpes,  without  Salt,  or  Bread :  whereof
I  eate  a  little,  so  they  passed  the  day,  untill  the  Evening.
And  when  the  Lady  her  selfe  was  drunke,  she  tooke
her  Chariot  (the  Priests  singing)  and  went  her  way.
January  20.  The  next  Sunday,  when  (There  was  a  Marriage  in  Cana
of  Galily)  is  read  for  the  Gospell ;  Chans  Sonne  came
(whose  Mother  was  a  Christian)  and  did  the  like,  but
not  with  so  great  Solemnitie.  For  he  gave  no  gifts,
but  made  the  Priests  drinke,  till  they  were  drunke,  and
gave  them  parched  Millet  to  eate.

Of  the  Fast  of Before  the  first  Sunday  in Lent, the Nestorians  fast
theNestorians,  three ^^ whkh ^ ^jj  the Fagt  of jQn^ whkh

Armenians,  ne  preached  to  the  Ninivites.  And  the  Armenians
and  of  their  fast  five  dayes,  which  they  call  the  Fast  of  Saint  Sorkis,
Processions  which  is  the  greatest  Saint  amongst  them.
7fMm°mrt  The  Nestorians  beginne  their  Fast  upon  Tuesday,
Chan  his  an(^  en&  ^  upon  Thursday ;  so  that  upon  Friday  they
eldest  Son,  and  eate  flesh.  And  all  that  time  I  saw  the  Chancelor  (to
Wives.  wit, the  great  Secretarie of  State called Bulgai) make

Saint  Sorkis. them a pittance 0f  flesh upon  ^ Friday; and they

blessed  the  flesh  with  great  Solemnitie,  as  the  Paschall
Lambe  is  blessed  :  but  he  eate  none  with  them,  and
this  I  learned  of  Willielmus  Parisiensis,  who  was  his
very  familiar  friend.  The  Monke  sent  to  Mangu  to
fast  that  weeke,  which  (as  I  heard)  hee  did:  so  that  on
the  Sabbath  of  Septuagesima  (at  which  time  it  is  as  it
Mangu  Chans  were  Easter  to  the  Armenians)  wee  went  on  Procession
Court  visited tQ  the  house of  Mangu .  and  the  Monke,  and  we  two

Processions.  (being  first  searched  whether  wee  had  Knives)  went  in
with  the  Priests,  before  him.  And  while  we  went  in,
one  of  the  Servants  went  forth,  carrying  out  the  shoulder
bones  of  Rammes,  burnt  to  the  blacknesse  of  Coales.
Whereupon  I  marvelled  greatly,  what  it  should  meane,
whereof  after  I  had  inquired,  I  understood,  that  hee
never  doth  any  thing,  before  he  have  consulted  with
those  bones.  Whereupon  he  doth  not  so  much  as  suffer
a  man  to  enter  his  house,  but  first  consulteth  with  that
bone,  which  kind  of  Divination,  is  thus  done.

88

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1253.

When he purposeth to doe any thing, he causeth  How  they
:hree  of  those  bones  to  be  brought  unto  him unburnt ;  d^J\l^
md  holding  them  he  thinketh  of  the  thing,  whereof  he  0fRammes
will consult, whether  he may doe  it or  not :  and  then  burnt  blacke.
ielivereth  the  bones  to  bee  burnt,  and  there  are  alwayes  InM.Jenkin-
two little Roomes, hard by the house where he  lyes,  sons  F°yaSe
where  those  bones  are  burnt ;  which  are  diligently  sought  Tartars,  ye
for  every  day  thorow  all  the  Leskar or  Tent-dwelling,  may  reade  of
When they are burnt blacke, they  bring  them unto  such  a
him,  then  hee  lookes  upon  them,  whether  the  bones  (by  Dwinatton'
the  heate  of  the fire) be  cleft  right  length-wayes : then
the  way  is  open,  that  he  may  do  it. But if  the  bones
be cracked athwart, or  round  pieces  flye out  of  them,
then he doth  it not ; for the bone  is  alwayes  cleft  in
the fire, or the thinne skin which over-spreadeth it.
And if  one of  the three be cleft forth right,  yet he
doth it. When therefore wee went in before him
(advised  before,  that  wee  should  not  touch  the  threshold)  ThreshoU-
the Nestorian Priests brought him Incenses, and he  ^^1:
put  it  upon the  Censor, and  they censed him. Then  nke  in  Florida.
they  sung,  blessing  his  cup,  and  after  them  the  Monke
pronounced  his  blessing,  and  we  must  blesse  last. And
when he saw us holding the Bible before our brest,
he caused it  to be brought unto him, that he might
see  it,  which  hee diligently  looked upon. Then after
he had drunke,  and the chiefe Priest had wayted on
his  Cup,  they  gave  the  Priests, drinke : After  that,  we
went  forth,  and  my  companion  stayed  last. And  when
wee  were  without,  my  companion  (when  hee  should  have
gone out  after us) turned his face to Chan, bowing
himselfe unto  him : and  then, hastily  following us,  he
stumbled  at  the  threshold  of  the  house.

And  when  we  went  in  haste  toward  the  house  of
Baku  his  eldest  Sonne,  they  that  observed  the  threshold,
layd  hands  on  my  companion,  and  made  him  stay,
that  hee  should  not  follow  us,  calling  one,  and  com-
manding him  to  carrie  him  to  Bulgai,  who  is  the  great
Secretary of  the Court, and judgeth those that are

89

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1253-

arraigned  of  life  and  death.  But  I  knew  it  not,  yet
when  I  looked  backe,  and  saw  him  not  comming,  I
thought  they  detayned  him,  to  give  him  some  lighter
garments :  For  he  was  weake,  and  so  laden  with  Pelt-
garments  that  he  could  scarce  goe.  Then  they  called
our  Interpreter,  and  made  him  sit  with  him  :  but  wee
Baltues  Court  went  to  Chans  eldest  Sonnes  house,  who  had  two  Wives,
who  was  eldest  anc[  was  lodged  at  the  right  side  of  his  Fathers  Court :
on  oj  angu  w^Q  a§  soone  as  ne  saw  us  comming,  leaping  from  his
bed  whereon  he  sate,  cast  himselfe  upon  the  earth,
smiting  his  fore-head  against  the  ground,  worshipping
the  Crosse,  and  arising,  caused  it  to  be  set  upon  a
new  cloth,  in  an  high  place  by  him,  very  honourably.
He  hath  a  Schoolemaster,  a  Nestorian  Priest  called  David,
a  very  Drunkard,  who  teacheth  him.  Then  he  made
us  sit,  and  give  the  Priests  drinke,  and  hee  also  dranke,
receiving  the  blessing  from  them.  Then  wee  went  unto
the  Court  of  the  second  Lady,  which  was  called  Cota,
who  followed  Idolaters :  whom  wee  found  lying  sicke
a  bed.  Then  the  Monke  made  her  rise  out  of  her  bed,
and  worship  the  Crosse,  bowing  her  knees  thrice,  and
ducking  toward  the  ground  :  he  standing  with  the  Crosse
at  the  West-side  of  the  house,  and  she  on  the  East :
this  being  done,  they  changed  places,  and  the  Monke
went  with  the  Crosse  unto  the  East,  and  shee  unto
the  West.  And  hee  boldly  commanded  her  (although
she  were  so  weake,  that  she  could  scarce  stand  upon
her  feet)  that  shee  should  cast  herselfe  downe  thrice
againe,  and  worship  the  Crosse,  toward  the  East  after
the  manner  of  the  Christians :  which  she  did,  and  he
taught  her  to  make  the  signe  of  the  Crosse  upon  her
[III.  i.  32.]  forehead.  After  she  lay  downe  upon  her  bed,  and  pray-
The  Court  of  ing  for  her,  we  went  unto  the  third  house,  where  a
thethirdLady.  Christian  Lady  used  to  be:  who  being  dead,  a  young
woman  succeeded  her,  who  together  with  the  Daughter
of  her  Lord,  joyfully  received  us:  and  all  that  whole
house  reverently  worshipped  the  Crosse.  And  she  set
it  upon  a  Velvet  cloth  in  an  high  place,  and  shee  caused

90

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1253-
meate  to  bee  brought  (to  wit)  the  carkasse  of  one
Ramme,  which  being  set  before  the  Ladie,  shee  caused
it  to  be  distributed  to  the  Priests.  But  I  and  the  Monke
were  very  warie  of  the  meate  and  drinke,  for  the  meate
being  eaten,  and  much  drinke  drunke,  wee  were  to  goe
to  the  Damosell  Cerina,  who  lodged  behind  that  great
house,  which  was  her  Mothers :  who  at  the  comming  in
of  the  Crosse,  cast  her  selfe  upon  the  Earth,  and  wor-
shipped it  very  devoutly,  because  shee  had  beene  well
taught  so  to  doe,  and  shee  set  it  in  a  high  place,  upon
a  piece  of  silke.  And  all  those  clothes  whereon  the
Crosse  was  set,  were  the  Monkes.

A  certaine  Armenian  brought  this  Crosse  who  came
with  the  Monk  (as  he  said)  from  Hierusalem ;  and
it  was  of  silver,  weighing  about  some  foure  markes ;
and  it  had  foure  Precious  Stones  in  the  corners,  and
one  in  the  middle.  It  had  not  the  Image  of  our  Saviour
(because  the  Armenians  and  the  Nestorians  are  ashamed,  The  Armeni-
that Christ  should appeare nayled  to the Crosse) and  ans  and

hee  had  presented  it  (by  the  Monke)  to Mangu  Chan.  Xforiansare

r  \ y  /  o  ashamed  to

And Mangu demanded of  him what hee desired  ?  to  syw  Christ

whom he answered, That he was the Sonne of an  fastned  to  the
Armenian Priest, whose Church the Saracens had  Crosse.
destroyed,  and  craved  his  helpe  for  the  building  againe
of  that Church. Then hee  asked him,  for  how  much  Mangu  built  a
it  might  be  built  againe :  he  answered,  for  two  hundred  Church.
Jascots  (that  is)  for  two  thousand  markes :  and  he  com-
manded Letters  to  be  given him, to  him  who  received
the  Tribute  in Persia, and Armenia the greater, that
they  should  pay  him the said  summe  of  silver. This
Crosse  the  Monke  carried  with  him  every  where. And
the Priests seeing the gaine thereof, began to envie
him. Wee were therefore in the house of  the said
Damosell, and shee gave the Priests much drinke.
From hence  wee went unto the fourth house, which  The  Court  of
was  the  last  in  number  and  honour. For  he  used  not  th^fourth
to  come  often to  that  Ladie,  and  her  house was very a  *'
old, and  her selfe  nothing  gracious. But  after Easter

9*

A.D.

1253-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Chan  made  her  a  new  house, and new Chariots. She
likewise  as  the  second  knew  little  or  nothing  of  Christi-
anize, but followed Soothsayers, and Idolaters. Yet
at our comming in, shee worshipped the Crosse,
as the Monke and the Priests taught her. There
also  the Priests dranke againe. And from that place
wee  returned to our  Oratorie,  which was neere  there-
abouts: the  Priests  accompanying  us  with  great  howl-
Drunkennesse  ing  and out-cries in  their  drunkennesse,  which  there  is
not  reprove- reprehensible neither in man nor woman. Then my
Tartars.  fellow was brought home, and the Monke sharply

rebuked  him  because  he  touched  the  threshold.  On
the  morrow  Bulgai  came  (who  was  a  Justice)  and  dili-
gently inquired,  whether  any  had  warned  us  to  take
heed  of  touching  the  threshold.  And  I  answered,  Sir,
wee  had  not  our  Interpreter  with  us :  how  could  we
understand  ?  Then  hee  pardoned  him.  But  would
never  after  suffer  him  to  come  into  any  of  the  houses
of  Mangu  Chan.

Chap.  35.
Hozv  Lady
Cota  was
cured  of
Sergius  the
counterfeit
Monke.
Licence  is
granted  him
to  carrie  the
Crosse  aloft.

Rubarbe  and
the  Crosse
Miracle-
workers  with
credulous
Superstition.

IT  happened  afterwards,  that  the  same  Ladie  Cota,
which  was  sicke  about  Septuagesima,  was  sicke  almost
unto  death ;  and  divination  by  Lots  of  the  Idolaters
could  profit  her  nothing.  Then  Mangu  sent  unto  the
Monke,  demanding  of  him,  what  might  bee  done  for
her.  And  the  Monke  indiscreetly  answered,  that  if
shee  were  not  cured,  hee  should  cut  off  his  head,  having
made  that  answere,  the  Monke  called  us,  declaring  the
matter  unto  us  with  teares,  intreating  to  watch  with  him
that  night  in  Prayer :  which  we  did.  And  he  had  a
certayne  Roote  which  is  called  Rubarbe ;  and  hee  cut
it  almost  to  powder,  and  put  it  in  water,  with  a  little
Crucifixe  which  he  had,  wherein  the  Image  of  our
Saviour  was  advanced :  whereof  he  reported,  that  by
it  he  knew,  when  the  sicke  should  recover  or  dye.
For  if  they  should  escape,  it  stucke  to  the  brest  of
the  sicke,  as  if  it  were  glued,  if  otherwise  it  stucke  not
at all. And I still thought that  Rubarbe  had beene

92

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

1253-
some  holy  Relike,  which  he  had  brought  from  the  Holy
Land of Hierusalem. And he  gave all sicke persons
of  that  water to  drinke : so  that  it  could  not  bee,  but
their  bowels  should  be  griped  with so  bitter  a  Potion :
which  alteration  in  their  bodies  they  accounted  a  Miracle.
Then I told him (when he was about to make  such
a  water)  that  hee  should  prepare  some  of  that  Holy  water,  Holy  water
which  is  made  in  the  Church  of  Rome,  which  hath  great  *?  ™a™ne  m
vertue to  expell  Devils : because  I  understood  shee  was
vexed of  a Devill. And at his intreatie, wee made
him some Holy  water, and he mingled Rubarbe, and
put his Crucifixe all the  whole night in the water  to
temper  it. I said  moreover, that  if  hee  were  a  Priest,
that  the  Order  of  Priest-hood  hath  great  power  to  expell
Devils. And  he  said  it  was  very  true,  and  yet  hee  lyed,  *eJ&us\ the
because hee had no order, nor  knew  any one  Letter :  L
but  was  a  Weaver,  as  I  understood  after,  in  his  Countrey,
when  I  returned. On  the  morrow  therefore  I,  and  the
Monke, and  two  Nestorian  Priests  went  unto  the  fore-
said Ladie. And shee was in a little house, behind
her greater house. When wee came in, shee sate  in
her  bed,  and  worshipped  the  Crosse,  and  set  it  honour-
ably by  her upon a cloth of  Silke, and drunke  of  the
blessed water with Rubarbe, and washed her brest.
And  the  Monke  requested  me  to  reade  a  Gospell  over
her,  so  I  read  the  Passion  of  our  Lord  according  unto
John. At  length she  was  cheered, and felt her selfe
better:  and  shee caused foure Jascots to bee brought,
which  she  first  layd  at  the  feet  of  the  Crosse,  and  after
gave me  to the Monke, and reached me one, which  [HI.  i.  33-]
I  would  not  receive. Then  the  Monke,  stretching  forth
his  hand,  tooke  it,  and  gave  either  of  the  Priests  one  : so
that,  at  that  time shee  gave  fortie  Markes. Then  shee
caused  Wine  to  be  brought,  and  gave it the  Priests  to
drinke  ; and I must  drinke thrice from her hand, in
honour  of  the  Trinitie. Shee  began  also  to  teach  mee  the
Language,  jesting  with  mee,  because I  was dumbe, not
having  any  Interpreter.

93

A.D.
1253-

Sorcerie  of
foure  swords.

The  Crosse
carried  aloft.

PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

On  the  morrow  we  returned  to  her  againe.  And  Mangu
Chan  hearing  that  we  came  that  way,  made  us  come  in
unto  him,  because  hee  understood  that  the  Lady  was  some-
what better,  and  we  found  him  with  a  few  servants,
supping  liquid  Tarn,  to  wit,  meat  made  of  paste,  for
comforting  the  head  :  and  the  burnt  shoulder-blades  of
a  Ram  lay  before  him  :  and  he  tooke  the  Crosse  in  his
hand,  but  that  hee  kissed  or  worshipped  it,  I  saw  not  :  but
looked  upon  it,  and  asked  some  questions,  I  know  not
what.  Then  the  Monke  craved  leave  to  carry  the  Crosse
aloft  upon  a  Lance  ;  because  I  had  spoken  to  the  Monke
before  concerning  this.  And  Mangu  answered,  Carry
it  as  you  thinke  best  to  doe  it.  Then  doing  our  duty  to
him,  wee  went  to  the  foresaid  Ladie,  and  we  found  her
lustie  and  cheerfull ;  and  she  still  drunke  of  the  blessed
Water,  and  wee  read  the  Passion  over  her.  And  those
miserable  Priests  never  taught  her  the  Faith,  nor  advised
her  to  bee  baptised.  But  I  sate  there  mute,  not  able  to
speake  any  thing,  but  shee  still  taught  me  the  Language  :
and  the  Priests  never  find  fault  with  any  kind  of  Sorcerie.
For  there  I  saw  foure  swords  halfe  drawne  out  of  the
sheath,  one  at  the  head  of  the  Ladies  bed,  another  at
the  feet,  and  two  other,  on  either  side  of  the  doore  one.
I  saw  also  there  one  silver  Chalice,  of  our  Chalices,
which  peradventure  was  taken  or  stolne  out  of  some
Church  of  Hungary  ;  and  it  hung  against  the  walls  full
of  ashes,  and  upon  those  ashes  there  was  a  blacke  stone.
And  concerning  such  things,  the  Priests  never  teach  them
that  they  are  evill  ;  Nay,  they  themselves  doe,  and  teach
such  things.  We  visited  her  three  daies,  so  that  shee
was  restored  to  perfect  health.  After  that,  the  Monke
made  a  Banner  full  of  Crosses,  and  got  a  Cane  as  long
as  a  Lance,  and  we  carried  the  Crosse  aloft.  I  honored
him  as  my  Bishop,  because  hee  could  speake  the  Lan-
guage ,•  yet  hee  did  many  things  which  pleased  me  not :
for  he  caused  a  Chaire  which  may  be  folded  to  bee
made  for  him,  such  as  Bishops  use  to  have,  and  Gloves,
and a  Cap of  Peacocks feathers, and  upon it  a  little

94

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

1253-
Crosse  of  gold  :  I  was  well  pleased  with  the  Crosse.
Hee  had  scabbed  feete,  which  hee  laboured  to  grace  with
ointments,  and  was  very  presumptuous  in  speech.  The
Nestorians  also  repeated  certaine  Verses  of  the  Psalter
(as  they  said)  upon  two  rods,  which  were  joyned  to-
gether, being  held  of  two  men.  The  Monke  was  present
at  such  things.  And  many  other  vanities  appeared  in
him,  which  displeased  me.  Yet  wee  joyned  our  selves
to  his  societie  for  the  honor  of  the  Crosse.  For  we
carried the Crosse advanced through all the Tents

1  singing  :  Vexilla Regis prodeunt,  &c. Whereupon the

I  Saracens  were  much  dismaied.

Since  we  came  to  the Court  of  Mangu  Chan,  he  rode  Chap.  36.
but twice towards the South  : and from that  time  ffjj£$fjf
I  he beganne to returne towards the North, which was  tr-ies  ^mt  tjie
l  toward Caracarum. Whereupon  I  noted  all  the  way,  a  Court  of
i  thing  of  which  Master  Baldwin  of  Hannonia  had  spoken  Mangu  Chan,
to mee  at  Constantinople (who  was  there)  that he  had  andoftj^r
seene  this  onely wonderfull,  that  he  alwaies  ascended  in  writ-in„  and
going,  and  never  descended. For  all  Rivers  came  from  their  money.
the  East  into  the  West,  either  directly  or  indirectly  (that  Al  Rivers
is  to  say)  bending  towards  the  South  or  North. And  I  bendtn&
enquired of  the  Priests  which came from Cataya,  who  South  and
testified this same. From that place where I found  North  runne
I  Mangu  Chan,  unto  Cataya,  were  twentie  daies  journey,  towards  the
going  towards the South  and East. To  Onan  Kerule,  WesU
which  is  the  proper  Countrey  of  Moall,  where  the  Court
of  Chingis  is,  were  ten  daies  journey  right  East. And  in Chap.  3.
those  parts  of  the  East  there  was  no  Citie  :  yet  there  were
people  which  are called Su-Moall,  that  is  to  say,  Moall  Su-Moa/f  the
of  the  Waters  : for Su is  as much to say as Water.  yter
These  people  live  upon  fish,  and hunting,  having  neither  £ast  nv{n„
flocks  nor  Heards. Towards  the  North  likewise,  there  is  upon  fish.
no Citie, but  a poore people feeding Cattell, who are
i  called Kerkis. The  Orangei  are  also  there,  who binde  Kerkis.
i  smooth-filed bones under  their feete,  and  thrust  them-  0rangat*
selves  forward  upon  the  congealed Snow  and Ice,  with

95

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1253-

such  swiftnesse  that  they  take  Birds and Beasts. And
many  other  poore  people  there  are  on  the  North  side,  so
Chap.  15. farre  as  they  may  spread  themselves  for  the  cold. And
Pascatironthe  they  joyne on the West,  with the Countrey  of  Pas-
tVest.  catir,  which is Hungaria the Greater,  whereof  I have

spoken  before. The  bound  or  limit  of  the  North  corner
is not  knowne,  for  the  extremitie of  the cold  : for  in
that  place  there  are  continull  spires  or  heapes  of  Snow.
I  was inquisitive  of  the Monsters or monstrous  men,
whereof  Isidorus  and Solinus  make  report. They  told
me they  never  saw  any such, whereof  we  much won-
der, whether it bee true or no. All the Nations
aforesaid  (although  but poore) yet they  must serve  in
Mutezuma some  trade : for  it  was  the  commandement  of  Chingis,
common  e e  tkat  none  snou^ Dee  free fr0m  service,  till  hee  were  so
Hispania. old, that he  could labour no longer,  by any meanes.
Chap.  19. Upon a  time  a  certaine  Priest  of  Cataya  sate  with  mee,
clothed with a red coloured cloth ; and I demanded
*  A  description  Qf  frim  whence  hee  had  such  a  colour. And  he  told  me,
an  mbkmYor  that  in  the  East  PartJ!  of  Cataya  there  were  high  craggie
Apish  fable, Rocks, wherein  certaine  Creatures  dwell,  having in all
and  perhaps parts  the  shape  of  men,  but  that  they  bow  not  the  knees,
by  the  Chmois  but  wa}ke  (J know not how) leaping  : which  are  not
™elltheirwares  aDOve  one  CUDit  long,  and  their  whole  body  is  covered
the  dearer. with  *  haire  ;  who  have  their  abode  in  caves  which  no  man
[III.  i.  34.] can  come  unto. And  they  that  hunt  them  goe  unto  them,
and  carry  strong  drinke  with  them,  as  strong  as  they  can
make,  and  make  pits  in  the  Rocks  like  Cups,  filling  them
with  that  strong  drinke. For  Cataia  as  yet  hath  no  Wine
(but  now  they  beginne  to  plant  Vineyards)  for  they  make
drinke  of  Rice. The  Hunters  therefore  hide  themselves,
then  the  foresaid  Creatures  come  out  of  their  holes,  and
taste  the  said  drinke,  and  crie  Chin-chin. Then  they  come
together  in  great  multitudes  and drinke  the  said  drinke,
and are made  drunke,  so  that  they  sleepe  there. Then
the  Hunters  come,  and  bind  them  hand  and  feete  while
they  are  sleeping ;  and  after,  they  open  the  Veine  in  their
necke,  and  draw  forth  three  or  foure  drops  of  blood  from

96

FRIAR  WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

1253-

every  one,  and  let  them  goe  free. And  that  blood  (as  he

told  me)  is  most  precious  to  die  purple.  Most  precious

He told  it  also  for truth  (which neverthelesse  I  doe ur?

not  beleeve)  that  there  is  a  Province  beyond  Cataia,  into

the  which,  at  whatsoever  age  a  man  enters,  he  continueth

in  the same  age  wherein  he  entred,  Cataia is  upon  the  Cataia  uPon

Ocean. And  Master  Willielmus  Parisiensis  told  me,  that

the  same  Messengers  cf  certaine  people  which  are  called

Taute and Manse, who inhabit Hands, whose Sea is  ^ute  and

frozen in the  winter, so that  the  Tartars  may invade  fagfffajfafj.

them  ; who offered two thousand Tumen or Jascots  whose  Sea

yeerely,  so they  would let  them  live  in  peace. Tumen  freezeth  in  the

is  a  piece  of  money  contayning  ten  Markes. The  com-  Wlnter-

mon money  of  Cataia  is  Paper  made  of  Bombaste,  the  Cataia  paper

breadth  and  length of  an hand, upon the which they  moneh

imprint lines, like the Seale of Mangu. They write  The  manner  of

with a Pensill wherewith Painters paint ; and in one  ™P**ng  in
r  .  .  .  11'  i Cataia  like

figure  they  make  many  letters  comprehending  one  word,  that  of  China.

The  people  of  Thebet  write  as  wee  doe,  and  they  have  The  people  of

Characters  very  like  ours. They  of  Tangut  write  from  Thebet.

the  right  hand  unto  the  left,  as  the  Arabians,  and  multiply  T*"r.  manner

. ,  P  ..  \ T  r  -  i r  °f  writing  in

the  lines ascending  upward. Jugur,  as aforesaid,  from  Tangut  and
above  downeward. The  common mony of  the  Ruten-  Jugur.

ians are little spotted and grisel'd skins. When  we  The  money  of

came  with  the  Monke,  hee  charitably  admonished  us  to  the  Rutenians-
abstaine  from  flesh,  and  that  our  servants  should  eate
flesh  with  his  servants  ;  but  he  would  promise  us  Meale,
and  Oyle  or  Butter.  Which  wee  did,  though  it  much
grieved  my  Companion,  by  reason  of  his  weakenesse  :
wherefore  our foode  was  Millet and Butter,  or Paste

sodden  in  water  with  Butter,  or  sowre  Milke,  and  un-  qAi ' j

leavened  bread  baked  in  Oxe-dung,  or  Horse-dung.  fast  of  the

people  of  the

NOw  Quinquagesima  came,  which is the Lent-time  East> tn  Lent-

to  all the people  of  the East. And  the  greatest  Tk*  Mof/ is

,  * *  o  reproved  for

Ladie  Cotota  with  all  her  company,  fasted that  weeke,  the  multitude
who  came every  day  to  our  Oratorie,  and gave meate  of  those  that
unto  the  Priests,  and  other  Christians,  whereof  a great  came  unto  him.
xi  97  g

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1253-

multitude  flocked  thither  the  first  weeke,  to  heare  their
dutie.  And  she  gave  to  me  and  my  Companion,  to
each  a  Coate  and  Breeches  of  gray  Samit  (Samito)
furred  with  course  haire  (Stuppa  fetae)  because  my
companion  complained  much  of  the  weight  of  his  Skinnes,
which  I  received  for  my  fellowes  comfort,  excusing  my
selfe  nevertheless,  that  I  would  not  weare  such  clothes.
I  gave  to  my  Interpreter  what  belonged  to  me.  Then
the  Porters  of  the  Court  seeing  that  so  great  a  multi-
tude came  daily  to  the  Church,  which  was  within  the
bounds  of  the  keepers  of  the  Court,  they  sent  one  of
their  fellowes  unto  the  Monke,  declaring  unto  him,
that  they  would  not  have  so  great  a  multitude  come
together  within  the  precincts  of  the  Court.  Then  the
Monke  roughly  answered,  that  he  would  know  whether
they  commanded  this  from  Mangu  Chan  ?  hee  added
moreover  certaine  threatning  speeches,  as  if  he  would
accuse  them  to  Mangu  Chan.  Then  they  preventing
him,  accused  him  before  Mangu  ;  That  he  was  too  full
of  words,  and  that  he  gathered  together  too  great  a
multitude  to  heare  him  speake.  Afterward,  the  first  Sun-
day in  Lent,  being  called  to  the  Court  (and  the  Monke
being  shamefully  demanded  whether  hee  had  a  Knife,
insomuch  that  he  put  off  his  shooes)  wee  came  in  before
Chan  himselfe,  who  having  the  burnt  shoulder-blade  of
a  Ramme  in  his  hand,  looked  upon  it,  and  (as  it  were)
reading  in  it,  began  to  reprove  the  Monke,  demanding,
that  seeing  he  was  a  man  that  should  pray  unto  God,
why  hee  spoke  so  much  with  men,  but  1  stood  behind
with  my  head  bare  ;  and  Chan  saying  unto  him,  Why
dost  thou  not  put  off  thy  Cap,  when  thou  commest
before  me,  as  that  Francke  doth  ?  and  commanded  me
to  be  called  neerer.  Then  the  Monke  being  much
abashed,  put  off  his  Cap,  contrary  to  the  custome  of
the  Greekes  and  Armenians.  And  when  Chan  himselfe
had  spoken  many  things  sharply  unto  him,  wee  went  out.
Then  the  Monke  delivered  me  the  Crosse  to  beare  to  the
Oratorie,  because  he  could  not  carry  it  for  shame.

98

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

1253-
After  a  few  daies  he  was  reconciled  unto  him,  pro-
mising that  he  would  goe  to  the  Pope,  and  that  he
would  bring  all  the  Nations  of  the  West  to  his  obedi-
ence. Whereupon,  he  returning  to  the  Oratorie  after
that  conference  had  with  Chan,  began  to  enquire  of  mee
touching  the  Pope,  if  I  beleeved  he  would  see  him  if
he  came  unto  him  in  the  behalfe  of  Mangu,  and  if  hee
would  furnish  him  with  Horses  unto  Saint  James?  He
demanded  also  of  you,  if  I  thought  you  would  send
your  sonne  unto  Mangu  ?  Then  I  counsailed  him,  that
he  should  take  heede  that  hee  did  not  promise  lyes  to
Mangu,  because  the  last  errour  should  bee  worse  then
the  first ;  and  that  God  needeth  not  our  lyes,  that  we
should  speake  deceitfully  for  him.

At  that  time  there  arose  a  certaine  question  betweene
the  Monke  and  a  Priest  called  Jonas,  a  Learned  man,  whose
father  was  an  Archdeacon,  and  the  other  priests  accounted
him  for  a  Master  and  an  Archdeacon.  For  the  Monke
said,  That  man  was  created  before  Paradise  and  that  the  [III.  i.  35-]
Scripture  said  so.  Then  was  I  called  to  bee  an  arbitrator
of  that  question.  But  I  being  ignorant  that  they  con-
tended about  this,  answered,  that  Paradise  was  made  upon
Tuesday,  when  the  other  Trees  were  made,  and  that
Man  was  made  the  sixt  day.  Then  the  Monke  began  Menkes
to  say,  Did  not  the  Devill  bring  earth  the  first  day  from  f^'f^ff
the  foure  parts  of  the  world,  and  making  clay  made  the  Creation,
the  bodie  of  man  therewith,  and  God  inspired  his  soule  ?
Then  hearing  this  Haeresie  of  the  Monke,  and  that  he
so  publikely  and  shamelesly  recited  it,  I  reproved  him
sharply,  saying,  he  should  put  his  finger  upon  his  mouth,
because  he  knew  not  the  Scriptures,  and  that  he  should
take  heed,  that  he  said  it  not,  whereby  he  might  be
faulty :  And  he  began  to  mocke  me,  because  I  was
ignorant  of  the  Language.  I  departed  therefore  from
him,  going  to  our  house.  It  fell  out  afterwards,  that
he  and  the  Priests  went  on  Procession  to  the  Court,
without  calling  mee  ;  because  the  Monke  spake  not  to
me for the foresaid reproofe,  nor would he  carrie me

99

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1253.

with  him,  as  he  was  wont. When  therefore  they  came

before Mangu, (I being not seene among them) hee

earnestly  demanded where  I  was,  and  why I came  not

with them  ? The Priests fearing,  excused themselves.

But  returning,  they  told  me the  words  of  Mangu,  and

murmured  at the  Monke. After  this,  the  Monke  was

reconciled to me, and I to him, intreating him, that

he  would helpe  me  with his Language, and I would

helpe him in the holy Scripture. For a brother that

is  holpen  of  a  brother,  is  as a strong  Citie. After  the

first  weeke of  fasting, the Ladie  ceased  to  come  unto

the  Oratorie,  and  to  give  meat,  and  drinke,  which  wee

were  wont  to have,  for  the Monke suffered it not  to

be  brought,  saying,  that  Mutton  fat  or  Suet  was  put  in

the  confection  thereof:  and  shee  gave  no  Oyle,  but  very

seldome : so that we had nothing but browne Bread,

and  past  boyling  in  water,  that  we  might  suppe  broath  ;

Snow  water, because  we  had  no  water,  but  of  dissolved  Snow,  or  of

orwateroflce,  j which  was  exceeding  nought. Then  my  Companion
exceeding  -  D  ,  . .

naught.  began  to  be  much  grieved  :  so  I  acquainted  David  (the

Schoole-master  of  Chans  eldest  sonne)  with  our  necessities,

who  made report  thereof  to  Chan :  and  he  commanded

to give us Wine, Flowre, and Oyle. Neither the

Nojish  eaten Nestorians,  nor  the  Armenians,  eate  fish,  by  any  meanes,

in  Lent.  -n ^ Lent# Then they  gave us  a bottle of  Wine.

The  Monke  said  he  would  not  eate  but  on  the  Sunday:

and  then  the  Ladie  her  selfe  sent  meat  of  boyled  paste

with  vinegar  to  suppe. But  he  had  a  Chist  by  him  under

the  Altar,  with  Almonds  and  Raisins,  and  dried  Prunes,

HypocHticall anc[  many  other  fruits,  which  hee  ate  all  the  day,  when-

feast-fast. soever  hee  was  alone. Wee  ate  once  a  day, and that

in great affliction  : for as soone as they knew, that

Mangu  Chan  had  given  us  Wine,  most  impudently  they

came  in  upon  us  like  Dogs,  both  the  Nestorian  Priests,

who were drunke all the day  in the Court, and the

Moallians also,  and  the  servants  of  the Monke. The

Monke  also, when any came unto him,  to whom he

would give  drinke,  he  sent to  us  for  Wine. So  that,

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1254.

the  Wine  caused  our  greater  affliction  then  comfort  ;
because  wee  could  not  denie  it  without  offence.  If  wee
gave,  wee  wanted  our  selves,  nor  durst  we,  that  being
spent,  desire  any  more  from  the  Court.

A  Bout  mid-lent  Master  Williams  sonne  came,  bringing  Chap.  38.
with him a faire silver Crosse, made after the  i^/^hof
French fashion,  having  the  Image  of  Christ  all  of  silver  William
fastened upon it at the top: which the Monkes and  Bouchier,  and
Priests seeing, put it away: this Crosse hee was to  ofthe  Palace  of

present  in the behalfe of his Master to Bulgai, who  Ma^u  Chan
r  .  i-ro  • r 1 r^  i  •  i i  t atLaracarum,

was  the  chiefe  Secretane  or the  Court : which when  I int0  whick

heard,  I  was  offended. The  same young  man  also  de-  Citie  they

clared  to  Mangu  Chan,  that  the  worke  which he  com-  entred  on

manded  to  be  made,  was  finished,  which  worke  I  described  Palm~sun^ay-

unto you. Mangu hath  at Caracarum a great Court,

hard  by  the  walls  of  the Citie,  enclosed  with a  bricke-

wall  ; as  the  Priories  of  Monkes  are  enclosed  with us.

In  that  place,  there  is  a  great  Palace,  wherein  he  holdeth

his  drinkings  twice  a  yeere : once  in  Easter,  when  hee

passeth that way,  and once in Summer,  when he re-

turneth. And this latter is the  greater : because  then

all the Nobles (who dwell farre some two moneths  Two  moneths

journey  off  in any  place)  meet together at his  Court.  Journey-

And  then  hee  gives  unto  them  gifts  and  garments,  and

shewes  his great  glorie. There  are  many  other  houses

there, as large as Granges, wherein his victuals, and

treasures are stored. In the entrance of that great

Palace  (because  it  was  unseemely  to  bring  in  bottles  of

Milke,  and other drinkes) Master William Parisiensis

made  him  a  great  silver  Tree,  at  the  root  whereof  were  The  Descrip-

foure  silver  Lions,  having  one  Pipe  sending  forth  pure  nm  °Ja™0St

Cowes  milke,  and  the  foure  Pipes  were  conveyed  within  suver  ^ree%

the Tree, unto the top thereof: whose tops spread

backe  againe  downward : and  upon every  one  of  them

was a golden Serpent, whose tayles twine about the

bodie  of  the  Tree. And  one  of  those  Pipes  runs  with

Wine,  another  with  Caracosmos,  that  is,  clarified  Whay  ;

IOI

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1254.

another  with  Ball,  that  is,  drinke  made  of  Honey,  another
with  drinke  made  of  Rice,  called  Teracina.  And  every
drinke  hath  his  vessel  prepared  of  silver,  at  the  foot
of  the  Tree,  to  receive  it.  Betweene  those  foure  Pipes
in  the  top,  he  made  an  Angell  holding  a  Trumpet ;  and
under  the  Tree,  he  made  an  hollow  vault,  wherein  a
man  might  be  hid  ;  and  a  Pipe  ascendeth  through  the
heart  of  the  Tree  unto  the  Angell.  Hee  first  made
Bellowes,  but  they  gave  not  wind  enough.  Without
the  Palace  there  is  a  Chamber,  wherein  the  drinkes  are
layd,  and  there  are  servants  readie  there  to  powre  it
out,  when  they  heare  the  Angell  sounding  the  Trumpet.
And  the  boughes  of  the  Tree  are  of  silver,  and  the  leaves
and  Peares.  When  therefore  they  want  drinke,  the
Master  Butler  cryeth  to  the  Angell,  that  he  sound  the
[III.  i.  36.]  Trumpet.  Then  he  hearing  (who  is  hid  in  the  Vault)
blowes  the  Pipe  strongly,  which  goeth  to  the  Angell.
And  the  Angell  sets  his  Trumpet  to  his  mouth,  and
the  Trumpet  soundeth  very  shrill.  Then  the  Servants
hearing,  which  are  in  the  chamber,  every  of  them  powre
forth  their  drink  into  their  proper  Pipe,  and  the  Pipes
powre  it  forth  from  above,  and  they  are  received  below
in  Vessels  prepared  for  that  purpose  :  Then  the  Butlers
draw  them,  and  carry  them  through  the  Palace,  to  men
and  women.
The  de scrip-  ^nd  the  Palace  is  like  a  Church,  having  the  middle
Palace  *  ^e'  an<^  tne  two  s^es  beyond  the  two  rewes  of  Pillars,
and  three  gates  on  the  South.  And  within  before  the
middle  gate  stands  the  tree.  And  Chan  himselfe  sitteth
in  the  North  front,  in  an  high  place,  that  hee  may  bee
seene  of  all.  And  there  are  two  degrees  of  steps  ascend-
ing unto  him,  by  the  one,  he  that  carryeth  his  cup
commeth  up  unto  him,  and  by  the  other  he  descendeth.
That  space  which  is  in  the  middle,  betweene  the  tree
and  the  steps  whereby  they  ascend  unto  him,  is  voyde.
For  there  standeth  hee  that  wayteth  on  his  Cup,  and
the  Messengers,  which  bring  Presents.  And  hee  sitteth
there  above  like  a God. On the right side (to wit)

102

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1254.

toward the West are the men : on the left women.

For the Palace stretcheth it selfe out-  in length from

North  to South  by  the  Pillars. On  the  right  side  are

places full of seates lifted up, like the Sellar of  an

house  ; whereon  his  Sonnes  and  Brethren sit. On  the

left side is  the like, where his Wives and Daughters

sit. One  only  woman  sitteth there  above  by  him,  but

not so high as hee. When therefore hee had heard,

that  the  Worke  was  finished,  hee  commanded  the  chiefe

Workeman  to  set  it  in  his  place,  and  make  it  fit.

And about Passion Sunday, hee went before with  The  Sunday  in

small houses, leaving his  greater houses behind: And * asston  e
1 a  /i ,  t  r  11  ii-  11  1 g°eth  towards

the  Monke  and  we  followed  him  ;  and  he  sent  us  another  Caracarum.

Bottle of Wine. And hee passed betweene the hilly

Countries,  where  there  was  great  wind,  and  an  extreame

cold,  and  there  fell  a  great  Snow. Whereupon  hee  sent

about  mid-night  to  the  Monke  and  us,  intreating  us  to

pray  unto  God,  that hee  would  mitigate  that  wind  and

cold, because all the beasts which were  in the  trayne

were in  jeopardie, especially  because  all  that  time  they

were  with  young  and  readie  to  bring  forth. Then  the

Monke sent him Incense, requiring him to  put  it  on

the  coales  and  offer  it  to  God :  which,  whether  he  did,

I  know  not. But  the  Tempest  ceased,  which  had  now

continued two dayes, and now the third day drew

neere. On Palme Sunday  we  were neere Caracarum : They  enter

In the dawning of the day we blessed the Willow  Caracarum  on
1  ,  , °  , J  j  1 1  1 "a/mebunday.

boughes, whereon as yet there appeared no bud, and

about  nine  of  the clocke  we  entred  the  Citie,  carrying

the Crosse aloft  with  the  Banner,  passing  through the

middle  of  the  street  of  the  Saracens,  where  the  Market

and Faires are unto  the Church : and the Nestorians

met us on  Procession. And  entring into the  Church,

we  found  them  prepared  to  celebrate  the  Masse :  which

beeing  celebrated,  they  all  communicated,  and  they  asked

mee,  whether  I would communicate  ? I answered  that

I  had  drunke  before,  and the  Sacrament  should  not  be

received but fasting. Masse being said, it was now

103

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1254.

Evening.  Master  William  brought  us  with  great  joy-
to  his  Inne  to  sup  with  him :  who  had  a  Wife,  the
Daughter  of  a  Lotharingian,  borne  in  Hungarie,  who
could  speake  the  French  and  the  Language  of  Comania.
We  found  also  there  a  certayne  other  man  called  Basilius,
the  Sonne  of  an  Englishman,  borne  in  Hungarie,  who
also  was  skilfull  in  the  foresaid  Languages.  Supper  being
ended,  they  brought  us  to  our  Cottage,  which  the  Tartars
had  appointed  us,  in  a  certayne  plat  of  ground  neere
the  Church,  with  the  Oratory  of  the  Monke.  On  the
morrow  Chan  himselfe  entred  into  his  Palace.  And
the  Monke  and  I,  and  the  Priests  went  unto  him.
They  suffered  not  my  companion  to  goe,  because  he
stumbled  at  the  threshold.  I  much  deliberated  with
my  selfe  what  I  should  doe,  whether  I  should  goe  or
no.  And  fearing  offence,  if  I  should  depart  from  other
Christians,  and  because  it  pleased  him :  and  fearing  lest
that  good  might  be  hindred,  which  I  hoped  to  obtaine,  I
chose  rather  to  go,  although  I  saw  their  actions  ful  of
Sorcery  and  Idolatrie :  nor  did  I  any  other  thing  there,
but  pray  for  the  whole  Church  with  a  loud  voyce,  and
also  for  Chan  himselfe,  that  God  would  direct  him  to
the  way  of  eternall  salvation.  We  therefore  went  into
that  Court  which  was  sufficiently  ordered.  And  in  the
Summer  Rivers  are  conveyed  into  every  place,  whereby
it  is  watered.  After  this  we  entred  into  the  Palace,
full  of  men  and  women,  and  stood  before  Chan,  having
the  foresaid  Tree  at  our  backs,  which  with  the  Vessels
thereof  tooke  up  a  great  part  of  the  Palace.  The  Priests
brought  two  little  Loaves,  and  fruit  in  a  Platter,  which
they  presented  unto  them,  blessing  them.  And  the
Butler  brought  them  unto  him  sitting  aloft  in  a  very
high  place,  much  raised.  And  hee  presently  began  to
eate  one  of  the  Loaves,  and  sent  another  to  his  Sonne,
and  to  a  certayne  yonger  Brother  of  his,  who  was  brought
up  by  a  certayne  Nestorian,  and  knew  the  GospeJl,  who
also  sent  for  my  Bible,  that  he  might  see  it.  After  the
Priests the Monke said his Prayer, and I, after the

104

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

1254.

Monke.  Then  he  promised,  that  the  next  day  he  would
come  unto  the  Church,  which  is  great  enough,  and  faire,
and  all  the  seeling  above  was  covered  with  silke  wrought
with  Gold.  The  next  day  he  went  his  way,  willing  the  Mangu  Chan
Priests  to  excuse  him,  that  he  durst  not  come  to  the  r^acarum^
j  Church,  because  he  understood  the  dead  were  carried
thither.  But  we,  and  the  Monke  remayned  at  Caracarum,
and  other  Priests  of  the  Court,  that  they  might  celebrate
Easter  there.

MAundie Thursday drew neere,  and  Easter,  and I  [in-  l-  37-]

had not our Vestments, and I considered  the  T^'  ^'

manner  how  the  Nestorians  made  the  Sacramentall  Bread,  how  theNesto-

and  I  was  much  troubled,  what  I  should  doe;  whether  dans  make  the

I  should  receive  the  Sacrament  of  them,  or  should  cele-  Sacramentall

'brate  it  in  their  Vestments,  and  Chalice,  and  upon  their  5C  .  .

Altar,  or  should  altogether  abstayne  from  the  Sacrament.  confesse  them-

Then  there  were  a  great  multitude  of  Christians,  Hun-  selves,  and

garians,  Alanians,  Rutenians,  Georgians,  and  Armenians ;  receive  the

all which had not seene the Sacrament since they  ^7*^/*'^

b  nev  rl  illiam
iwere taken: because the Nestorians would not  admit  inthedayesof

them to their Church,  unlesse they were baptized  of  the  Lords

them, as they said, yet  they  made  no  mention  of  this  Supper,  and

to us. And they  offered their  Sacrament  freely  to us,  Easter-

and  made  me stand  in  the  doore of  the  Quire,  that  I

might  see  their  manner  of  Consecration. And  also on

the Vigill or Eeven before Easter, by the  Font,  that

I  might  see  their  manner  of  baptizing. They  say,  they

have of that Oyntment, wherewith Mary Magdalene

anoynted  the  feet of  our  Lord, and they  power in as

much of that Oyle, with that which they lay aside,

and  kneade  their  bread  therewith. For  all  those  people

of  the East put fat in their  bread,  in  stead  of  Leven

or  Butter,  or  Suet  of  a  sheepes  tayle,  or  Oyle.

They  say  also  that  they  have  of  the flowre,  whereof

the bread  was made,  which the  Lord  consecrated :  and

alwayes  powre  out  so  much  Oyle  with  it,  as  the  flowre

they lay aside. And they have a Chamber hard by

io5

A.D.
1254.

The  Christians
desire  the
Sacrament.
Confession.

Theft

excluded  the
ten  Com-
mandements :
perhaps  these
fellozves  were
of  those
Borderers
minde,  which
thought  K.
Henry  had
put  it  in  the
Decalogue.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

their  Quire,  and  an  Oven,  where  they  bake  the  bread,
which  they  must  consecrate  with  great  reverence.  They
therefore  make  one  Loafe  of  an  hand  breadth,  with  the
foresaid  Oyle,  which  they  first  breake  into  twelve  pieces,
according  to  the  number  of  the  Apostles :  and  after
divide  those  pieces,  according  to  the  multitude  of  the
people  :  and  the  Priest  gives  the  bodie  of  Christ  to
every  one  in  his  hand.  And  then  every  man  taketh
it  out  of  the  Palme  of  his  hand  with  reverence,  and
stretcheth  his  hand  to  the  top  of  his  head.

The  foresaid  Christians,  and  the  Monke  himselfe  were
very  earnest,  intreating  us  for  Gods  sake,  that  wee  would
celebrate.  Then  I  made  them  bee  confessed,  by  an
Interpreter,  as  I  could,  reckoning  up  the  tenne  Com-
mandements,  and  the  seven  deadly  Sinnes,  and  other
things,  for  the  which  a  man  ought  to  bee  grieved,  and
confessed.  All  of  them  publikely  excused  themselves
concerning  Theft,  saying,  that  without  Theft  they  could
not  live,  because  their  Masters  provided  them  neither
food  nor  rayment.  Then  considering,  that  they  had
taken  away  the  persons  and  their  substance  without
just  cause,  I  said  unto  them,  that  they  might  lawfully
take  necessaries,  of  the  goods  of  their  Masters,  and  I
was  readie  to  maintayne  it  to  the  face  of  Mangu  Chan.

Some  of  them  also  were  Souldiers,  who  excused  them-
selves, that  they  must  needs  goe  to  the  Warres,  or
else  they  should  bee  slaine ;  I  firmely  forbad  them  to
goe  against  the  Christians,  and  that  they  should  not
hurt  them,  they  should  rather  suffer  themselves  to  bee
slaine,  for  so  they  should  become  Martyrs.  And  I
said,  that  if  any  would  accuse  mee  of  this  Doctrine
before  Mangu  Chan,  I  would  bee  readie  to  preach  the
same  in  his  hearing.  For  the  Nestorians  themselves  of
the  Court  were  present,  when  I  taught  this ;  of  whom
I  was  suspitious,  least  they  should  report  ill  of  us.  Then
Master  William  caused  an  Iron  to  bee  made  for  us,  to
make  Hosts,  and  hee  had  certayne  Vestments  which
hee  had  made  for  himselfe : for  he  had  some  knowledge

106

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1254.

in Learning, and behaved himselfe as a  Clerke. Hee

caused  the Image of  the blessed Virgin Marie to bee

graven  after  the  French  fashion,  and  ingraved  the  History

of  the  Gospell  (in  the  Casements)  very  faire,  and  made

a certayne silver Boxe,  to lay up  the  bodie  of  Christ

therein,  and  the  Relikes,  in  certayne  little  holes  cunningly

made  in  the  sides  of  the  Boxe.

Hee made  also a  certayne  Oratorie upon  a Chariot,

very fairely painted with holy Histories. I therefore

tooke  his  Vestments  and blessed them, and wee  made

Hosts,  after  our  manner,  very  faire ;  and  the  Nestorians

assigned mee their Font for Baptisme, wherein there

was an Altar. And their Patriarch sent them from  The  Patriarch

Baldach, a square Hide like a portable Altar, made  oftheNestori-
.  . ~>? . * .  .  , .  . r  at  , ans  remayneth

with Chrisme, which they use in  stead  or consecrated  at  Baldach.

Stone. Therefore  I  celebrated  on  the  Day  of  the  Lords

Supper, in their silver Chalice and Dish,  which  were

very  great  Vessels  ; I  did  the  like also  on  Easter day.

And  wee  communicated  the  people  with  the  blessing  of

God, as I hope. But they baptized in the Vigill  of

Easter more than threescore persons very orderly.

There  was  great  joy  generally  among  all  Christians.

Chap.  4.0.

Ttt -i  j 1 -\  it  TT7-11-  •  William

Hen  it  hapned  that  Master  William  was  grievously  Bouchier  is
sicke,  and  when  hee  was  upon  recoverie,  the  Monke  sicke,  the
visiting  him,  gave  him  Rubarbe  to  drinke,  so  that  hee  Monke  &veth
had  almost  killed  him.  Then  visiting  him,  when  I  h™ep£"be;
found  him  so  ill  at  ease,  I  asked  him,  what  hee  had  j 0nas  is  sicke :
I  eaten  or  drunke  ?  And  hee  told  mee,  the  Monke  had  Frier  William
given  him  the  foresaid  Potion,  and  hee  drunke  two  little  administreth

Dishes  full,  thinking  it had  beene  Holy  Water. Then  f  Lords
t  1 a  k 1  1 •  1  1  • -r-  •  i  Supper  unto

1 went to  the Monke,  and  said  unto him,  Either  goe  ^  and

as an Apostle doing Miracles indeed, by vertue of  anionteth  him

Prayer, and the Holy Ghost, or doe  as a Physician  beehg  readie

according  to  the  arte  of  Medicine. You  give  a  strong  tQ  dJe-  ,H*e

Pr  tm_ •  1  1  • 1  1  reproveth  the

otion  or  rhysicke  to  drinke,  to  men  not prepared,  as  Mon£e  for  ^s

if  it were  a  certayne  hollow  thing,  for  the which you  Sorceries.

will  incurre  a  foule  scandall,  if  it  come  to  the  knowledge  [HI.  i.  38.]

107

A.D.

1254.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Jonas  is  sicke
and  dyeth

of  men. From  that time he began to feare and to
beware  of  him.
The  Priest^  \t hapneth at that time, that  the Priest was sicke,

who  was,  as  it  were,  the  Archdeacon  of  the  rest :  and
his  friends  sent  for  a  certayne  Saracen,  which  was  a
Sooth-sayer.  Who  said  unto  them,  A  certayne  leane
man,  who  neyther  eateth,  nor  drinketh,  nor  sleepes  in  a
Bed,  is  angry  with  him  :  if  hee  can  obtayne  his  blessing
hee  may  recover.  Then  they  understood  it  was  the
Monke.  And  about  mid-night,  the  Priests  Wife,  his
Sister,  and  his  Sonne  came,  intreating  that  hee  would
come,  and  blesse  him.  They  also  raised  us  up,  to
intreate  the  Monke.  Then  he  said  unto  us,  intreating
him :  Let  him  alone,  because  hee  with  three  others,
who  likewise  tooke  evill  courses,  consulted  to  goe  unto
the  Court,  to  procure  Mangu  Chan,  that  I  and  you
should  bee  expelled  from these  parts.

For  there  arose  a  contention  among  them,  because
Mangu  and  his  Wives  sent  foure  Jascots  and  certayne
Silkes  upon  Easter  Eeven  to  the  Monke  and  Priests,
to  distribute  among  them.  And  the  Monke  had  kept
unto  himselfe  one  Jascot  for  his  part,  and  of  the  other
three,  one  was  counterfeit,  for  it  was  Copper.  Where-
upon it  seemed  to  the  Priests,  that  the  Monke  had
kept  too  great  a  portion  to  himselfe.  Whence  (it  might
bee)  that  they  had  some  words  among  themselves,  which
were  reported  to  the  Monke.  When  day  came  I  went
unto  the  Priest,  having  an  extreme  griefe  in  his  side,
and  spitting  bloud :  whereupon  I  thought  it  was  an
Impostume.  Then  I  counselled  him  (if  he  had  any
thing  that  was  an  others)  to  restore  it.  He  said,  hee
had  nothing,  I  spoke  unto  him  also  of  the  Sacrament
The  Nesto-  Qf  Extreme  Unction.  Who  answered,  we  have  no  such
nans  know  not  custome  neither  doe  our  Priests  know  how  to  doe  it:
Extreme  T .  ,  1  1 1 • r

Unction  nor * intreat  you, that  you would  doe  it  tor  mee,  as you

Confession.  know  best  to  bee  done.  I  advised  him  also  concerning
Confession,  which  they  frequent  not,  hee  spake  shortly
in  the  Eare  of  a  certayne  Priest,  one  of  his  fellowes.

108

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1254.

After  this  hee  began ne  to  bee  better,  and  hee  intreated
mee  to  goe  for  the  Monke.  So  I  went,  but  the  Monke
would  not  come  at  the  first :  yet  when  hee  heard  hee
was  some-what  better,  hee  went  with  his  Crosse.  And
I  also  went,  and  carryed  (in  a  Boxe  of  Master  Williams)
the  bodie  of  Christ,  which  I  had  reserved  upon  Easter
Day,  at  the  intreatie  of  Master  William.  Then  the
Monke  began  ne  to  kicke  him  with  his  feet,  and  hee
most  humbly  imbraced  his  feet.

Then  I  said  unto  him  ;  It  is  the  custome  of  the
Church  of  Rome,  that  the  sicke  should  receive  the
Bodie  of  Christ,  as  it  were  provision  for  their  journey,
and  a  defence  against  all  the  Deceits  of  the  Enemie.
Behold,  the  Bodie  of  Christ,  which  I  consecrated  on
Easter  Day.  You  must  bee  confessed,  and  desire  it.
Then  said  hee  with  a  great  Faith,  I  desire  it  with  all
my  heart.  Which,  when  I  had  discovered,  hee,  with
^reat  affection,  said,  I  beleeve,  that  this  is  my  Creatour
and  my  Saviour,  who  gave  mee  life,  and  will  restore  it
againe  unto  mee  after  death  in  the  generall  Resurrection  :
and  so  tooke  the  Bodie  of  Christ  (from  my  hand)  made
after  the  manner  of  the  Church  of  Rome.  Then  the
Monke  abode  with  him,  and  gave  him  (in  my  absence)
I  know  not  what  Potions.  On  the  morrow  he  beganne
to  have  the  pangs  of  death  upon  him.  Then  taking
their  Oyle,  which  they  said,  was  holy,  I  anointed  him
according  to  the  manner  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  as
they  intreated  mee.  I  had  none  of  our  Oyle,  because
the  Priests  of  Sartach  kept  all.

And  when  wee  should  sing  a  Dirge,  and  I  would
have beene  present  at his end, the Monke sent  unto  u

mee, willing me to depart, because if I should bee  0ne  that  dyeth,
present, I could  not come into the house of Mangu  cannot  come
Chan for one whole yeare. Which,  when I had told 'tnt0  the  pre-
his friends, they said, it was true : and requested me  s™c?  °f the
to  depart,  lest  I  might  be  hindered  in  that  good,  which  space  j/an
I  might  promote. Assoone  as  he  was  dead,  the  Monke  whole  yeare.
said  unto mee,  care not: I have killed him with my  Bold blindnes.

109

A.D.
1254.

The  Monke
useth

Divinations.

[III.  i.  39.]
Chap.  41.
The  descrip-
tion of  the
Citie  of
Caracarum,
they  are
examined:
Mangu  Chan
sendeth  his
brethren
against  divers
Kingdomes,
the  Monke
biddeth  the
Saracens  fare-
well. The
Wife  of
Mangu  Chan
dyeth.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

prayers.  This  fellow  only  was  Learned,  and  opposed
himselfe  against  us  :  the  rest  know  nothing.  Henceforth
Mangu  Chan  himselfe,  and  they  all  will  crouch  at  our
feete.  Then  hee  declared  unto  me  the  foresaid  Answere
of  the  Sooth-sayer.  Which  (not  beleeving  it)  I  inquired
of  the  Priests  who  were  friends  of  the  dead,  whether  it
were  true  or  no.  Who  said  it  was.  But  whether  he
were  pre-instructed  or  not,  that  they  knew  not.  After-
wards I  found,  that  the  Monke  called  the  foresaid
Sooth-sayer  and  his  Wife  into  his  Chappell,  and  caused
dust  to  bee  sifted,  and  to  divine  unto  him.  For  hee
had  a  certayne  Rutenian  Deacon,  who  divined  to  him.
Which,  when  I  understood,  I  was  astonied  at  his
foolishnesse,  and  said  unto  him,  Brother,  a  man  full  of
the  Holy  Ghost  which  teacheth  all  things,  should  not
demand  Answeres  or  Counsell  from  Sooth-sayers :  seeing
all  such  things  are  forbidden,  and  they  excommunicated,
who  follow  such  things.  Then  hee  beganne  to  excuse
himselfe  that  it  was  not  true,  that  hee  sought  after  such
things.  But  I  could  not  depart  from  him,  because  I
was  placed  there  by  the  commandement  of  Chan  him-
selfe, nor  could  I  remoove  my  selfe  without  his  speciall
command.

Concerning  the  Citie  of  Caracarum,  know  this,  that
excluding  the  Palace  of  Chan  himselfe,  it  is  not  so
good,  as  the  Castle  of  Saint  Denis :  and  the  Monasterie
of  Saint  Denis  is  tenne  times  more  worth  then  that  Palace,
and  more  too.  There  are  two  streets  there :  one  of  the
Saracens,  where  the  Faires  are  kept :  and  many  Merchants
have  recourse  thither,  by  reason  of  the  Court,  which  is
alwayes  neere,  and  for  the  multitude  of  Messengers.
There  is  another  street  of  the  Cataians,  who  are  all
Artificers.  Without  those  streets  there  are  great  Palaces,
which  are  the  Courts  of  the  Secretaries.  There  are  there
twelve  kindes  of  Idolatries  of  divers  Nations.  Two
Churches  of  Mahomet,  where  the  Law  of  Mahomet  is
proclaimed : one Church of  the Christians at the end

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1254.

of  the  Towne.  The  Towne  is  inclosed  with  a  mudde
Wall,  and  hath  foure  Gates.  On  the  East  part  Millet
and  other  Graine  is  sold,  which  yet  is  seldome  brought
thither.  On  the  West,  Sheepe  and  Goates.  On  the
South,  Oxen  and  Waggons  are  sold.  At  the  North,
Horses  are  sold.  Following  the  Court,  before  the
Ascension,  wee  came  thither  the  Sunday  before  the
Ascension.  The  next  day  after,  we  were  called  before
Bulgai,  who  is  a  Justice,  the  chiefe  Secretarie,  both  the
Monke  and  all  his  Family,  and  wee,  and  all  the  Mes-
sengers and  Strangers,  which  frequented  the  house  of  the
Monke.  And  wee  were  called  before  Bulgai  severally,
first  the  Monke,  and  after  wee,  and  they  beganne  dili-
gently to  inquire  whence  wee  were,  and  for  what  purpose
wee  came,  and  what  our  errand  was  ?  And  this  inquirie
was  made,  because  it  was  told  Mangu  Chan,  that  foure
hundred  Hassasines,  or  secret  Murtherers  were  gone
forth  in  divers  Habits  to  kill  him.  About  that  time
pie  foresaid  Ladie  was  restored  to  health,  and  shee  sent
Ifor  the  Monke ;  and  hee  not  willing  to  goe,  answered :
ishee  hath  sent  for  Idolaters  about  her,  let  them  cure
iher,  if  they  can.  I  will  goe  no  more.  Upon  Ascension
[Eeven,  wee  were  in  all  the  houses  of  Mangu  Chan  :  and
|I  saw  when  hee  should  drinke,  how  they  cast  Cosmos
ko  their  Idols  of  Felt.  Then  I  said  to  the  Monke,  What
fellowshippe  hath  Christ  with  Beliall.  What  part  hath
our  Crosse  with  these  Idols  ?

Moreover,  Mangu  Chan  hath  eight  Brethren,  three  by
ijthe Mother,  and  five  by  the  Father. One  of  them  of
his Mothers side, hee sent into the Countrey of  the  The  Countrey
;Hassasines,  who are called  by them Mulibet :  and  hee  °ftheHassa-
licommanded to kill them all. Another went towards  Mulibet.
l|Persia,  and  is  now  entred  therein,  to  goe  (as  is  thought)
into  Turkie,  from  thence  to  send  Armies  against  Baldach,
and  Vastacius. One  of  the other, he sent into  Cataia,  Some  of
against some that rebelled. His youngest Brother of  ^ataia  re^el1-
the same venter, hee  kept nigh himselfe, whose  name **'
was Arabucha, who  holdeth his Mothers  Court  which

A.D.
1254.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

was  a  Christian,  whose  Servant  Master  William  is:  for
one  of  his  Brothers,  on  the  Fathers  side,  tooke  him  in
Hungarie  in  a  certayne  Citie,  called  Belgrade,  where
there  was  a  Norman  Bishoppe,  of  Belle-Ville  neere  Roan,
with  a  certayne  Nephew  of  the  Bishoppes,  whom  I  saw
there  at  Caracarum.  And  hee  gave  Master  William  to
Mangues  Mother,  because  shee  was  very  earnest  to  have
him.  When  she  was  dead,  Master  William  came  backe
again e  to  Arabucha,  with  all  things  else  pertayning  to
the  Court  of  his  Mother :  and  from  him  hee  came  to  the
knowledge  of  Mangu  Chan.  Who  after  the  finishing
of  the  foresaid  Worke,  gave  unto  Master  William  an
hundred  Jascots,  that  is,  a  thousand  Markes.

On the Eeven therefore of  the Ascension, Mangu
Chan  said,  hee  would  goe to  his Mothers  Court,  and
visit her,  for  it  was  neere. And  the  Monke  said,  hee
would  goe  with  him,  and  give  his  blessing  to  his  Mothers
soule. Chan  was  well  contented. In  the  Evening,  the
Ascension  day.  day  of  the  Ascension,  the  foresaid  Ladie  was  very  much
pained. And  the  chiefe  of  the  Sooth-sayers  sent  to  the
Monke,  commanding  him  that  the  Table  should  not  be
smitten. On the morrow, when the whole Court
remooved,  the Court  of  the foresaid Ladie  remayned
still. And  when  wee  came  to  the  place  where  the  Court
should stay, the Monke was commanded to depart
further  from  the  Court,  then  hee  was  wont :  which  hee
Arabucha  the did. Then Arabucha met his brother Chan. So the
l°fMan  r°u ^  Monke, and  wee,  seeing that hee  was  to  passe  by  us,
Chan.  met  him  with  the  Crosse. And  hee  calling  us  to  minde,

because  sometimes  he  had  beene  at  our  Oratorie,  stretch-
ing forth  his  hand,  made  a  Crosse  unto  us,  like  a  Bishop.
Then  the  Monke  taking  Horse,  followed  him,  bearing
certayne  Fruits.  But  hee  alighted,  before  his  brothers
Court,  wayting,  while  hee  came  from  hunting.  Then
the  Monke  alighted  there,  and  offered  him  the  Fruit,
which  hee  received.  And  hard  by  him  sate  two  Saracens,
of  the  Nobilitie  of  the  Court  of  Chan.  But  Arabucha
understanding  of  the  contention  betweene  the  Christians

112

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

and  the  Saracens,  enquired  of  the Monke  if  hee knew
the  said Saracens; and hee answered, I know  they  are  Ignorant xeale
I  Dogges :  why have  you them so neere  you  ? but  they  *  betra?cr  °f
j  replyed ;  why,  say  they, doe you  wrong us, when wee  fjJfXs
doe  none  to  you? To  whom  the  Monke  said,  I  speake  of  Tartarian
!  the  truth  : and  yee,  and  your  Mahomet  are  vile  Dogges. Saracenisme.
Then they beganne to answere blasphemously against
Christ; and Arabucha  forbad them, saying,  speake not
so blasphemously, for  wee know, that the Messias is
God. That  very  houre there arose so great a winde
over all  the street, that the Devils seemed to runne
I  through  them. And  after  awhile,  there  came  Rumours, ^itf/
|  that  the  Ladie  was  dead.  ZZfyeth.

lhe  next  morning,  Chan  returning  towards  his  Court  [HI.  1.  40.]
another  way. For  this  is  their  Sorcerie,  that  they  never
i  returne  the  same  way  they  came. Moreover,  while  the
Court  abode  heere,  after  the  remoove  thereof,  none  dare
passe  that  way  (neither  Horseman  nor  Footman)  where
the  Court  stayed,  so  long  as  any  shew  of  the  fire  made
there,  remayneth. That  day  certayne  Saracens  kept  com-
pany with the Monke  upon the  way,  provoking him,
iand disputing with him. And when hee could not
defend  himselfe  with  Argument,  and  they  mocked  him,
hee  would  have  lashed  them  with  the  Whip  which  hee
held  in  his  hand ;  and  hee  went  so  farre,  that  the  foresaid
words  were  reported  at  the  Court. And  wee  were  com-
manded to  depart  with  other  Messengers,  and  not  abide
before  the  Court,  where  wee  were  wont. And  I  alwayes
hoped,  the  King  of  Armenia  would  come. There  came
some  about  Easter from  Bolac,  where  those  Dutchmen
are,  for  whose  sake  chiefly  I  went  thither,  who  told  mee,
that  the  Dutch  Priest  should  come  to  the  Court. There-
fore I  mooved  no  Question  to  Mangu,  concerning  our
fertay,  or  departure. And  in the beginning  hee  gave  us
leave  to  stay  but  two  monethes :  and  now  five  monethes
are  past. This  was  done  about  the  end  of  May. And
wee had  continued  there  all  January,  February,  March,
Apnll,  and May. But  hearing  no  newes  of  the  King'

xi  II3

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

1254.

or  the  said  Priest,  and  fearing  lest  wee  should  returne
in  the  Winter,  whose  sharpnesse  wee  had  prooved,  I
caused  to  bee  demanded  of  Mangu  Chan,  what  his  pleasure
was  concerning  us,  because  willingly  wee  would  ever  stay
there,  if  so  hee  pleased.  But  if  wee  must  returne,  it
were  easier  for  us  to  returne  in  Summer,  then  in  the
Winter.  Hee  presently  sent  unto  mee,  commanding,
that  I  should  not  goe  farre  off,  because  his  pleasure  was
to  speake  with  mee  the  next  day.  But  I  told  him,  that
if  hee  would  speake  with  mee,  hee  should  send  for  Master
Williams  Sonne,  for  my  Interpreter  was  not  sufficient.
And  hee,  that  spake  with  mee,  was  a  Saracen,  who  had
beene  a  Messenger  to  Vastacius :  and  (blinded  with
Rewards)  counselled  Vastacius  to  send  Ambassadours  to
Mangu  Chan,  and  the  meane  while  the  time  passed :  for
Vastacius  thought,  hee  would  presently  enter  his  Countrey.
So  hee  sent,  and  after  hee  knew  them,  hee  little  regarded
them,  nor  made  peace  with  them,  neither  did  they  yet
enter  his  Countrey :  nor  shall  they  bee  able,  so  long  as
they  dare  defend  themselves,  nor  did  they  ever  take  any
The  Tartars  Countrey  by  Force,  but  by  Deceit.  And  because  men
d  m^t$th  ^  b  ma^e  Peace  with  them,  under  colour  of  that  peace  they
force.  overthrow  them.

Then  hee  beganne  to  bee  very  Inquisitive  of  the  Pope,
and  of  the  King  of  the  Franckes,  and  of  the  way  to  goe
to  them.  But  the  Monke  hearing  this,  advised  mee
secretly  not  to  answere  him,  because  he  would  procure,
that  an  Ambassadour  should  be  sent.  Whereupon  I  held
my  peace,  not  willing  to  answere  him.  And  hee  spake
unto  mee  I  know  not  what  injurious  words ;  for  the
which  the  Nestorian  Priests  would  have  accused  him  :
so  that  hee  had  either  beene  slaine,  or  beaten  all  to
clouts,  but  I  would  not.

Chap.  42. /^\N  the  morrow,  (to  wit)  the  Sunday  before  Pentecost,

They  are  often  \J  th brought mee to the Court: and the chiefe

examined  /•

w  he? fore 'they Secretaries  of  the  Court  came  unto  mee:  one  of  Moal,

came,  Mangu who  wayteth upon Chans cup,  and the rest, Saracens,

114

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

I254-
inquiring on the behalfe of  Chan, wherefore I came  ?  dedretk  to
Then I told  them the  foresaid words,  how I came  to  make  comP^i-
Sartach,  and  from  Sartach  to  Baatu,  and  how  Baatu  sent  m/,3™"'
me  thither. Whereupon,  I  said  unto  him,  I  have  nothing ThTmost
to speake  on  the  behalfe  of  any  man,  unlesse  I  should  learned  speech
speake  the  words  of  God  unto  him,  if  he  would  heare  of  Frier
them  ;  for  he  should  best  know  what  Baatu  hath  written  *£'f f?  tM
to him. They  stucke  upon  this  word,  demanding,  what  The  Screens
words of  God I would speake  unto him? thinking  I  acknowledge
would prophesie unto him some prosperous thing, as  the  truth  of  the
many  use  to  doe. To  whom I answered  : if  yee will  GosPel-
that  I  speake  the  words  of  God unto  him,  get  me  an  ^fefeme  of
Interpreter. Who  said,  we  have  sent  for  him,  yet  speake  Frier  William,
by  this Interpreter,  as  you  may :  wee  shall understand  wifh  the
you  well. And  they  urged  mee  much  to  speake. Then  Servants  °f
I said  :  This  is the word  of  God  : To whom more is  Mangu  Chm-
committed,  more  is  required  at  his  hands,  another  also  :
to  whom  more  is  forgiven,  hee  ought  to  love  more  out
of  these  true  words  of  God,  I  said,  to  Mangu  himselfe,
that  God hath  given him  much. For  the power and
riches  which  hee  hath,  the  Idols  of  the  Tuinians  have  not
given him, but the  Omnipotent God, who hath  made
Heaven  and  Earth, in  whose  hands  all  Kingdomes  are,
and  hee  translateth  them  from  Nation  to  Nation  for  the
sinnes  of  men. Wherefore  if  he  love  him,  it  shall  goe
well  with  him  : if  otherwise,  let  him  know,  that  God  will
require  all  these  things  at  his  hands,  even  to  the  uttermost
farthing. Then said one  of  the  Saracens,  Is  there  any
man  that  loveth not  God? I answered, God saith, if
any  man  love  me,  he  will  keepe  my  Commandements :
and he that loveth me not, keepeth not my Com-
mandements. Therefore, hee that keepeth not the
Commandements  of  God, loveth not  God. Then said
ihee,  have  yee  bin in  Heaven,  that  yee  might  know  the
Commandements  of  God  ? No  said  I,  but  he  hath  given
them  from  Heaven  to  holy  men  :  and  at  the  last  himselfe
descended from Heaven, teaching us : and wee have
those  things  in  the  Scriptures,  and  we  see  by  the  workes

"5

A.D.
1254.

[III.  i.  41.]

Mangu  Chan
desireth  to
have  a  com-
parison made
concerning
divine  things,
betweene  the
Christians,
Saracens,  and
Idolaters.

His  Anszvere.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

of  men,  whether  they  keepe  them  or  no.  Whereto  hee
replyed,  will  yee  then  say  that  Magnu  Chan  keepes  not
the  Commandements  of  God  ?  To  whom  I  said,  Your
Interpreter  wil  come,  as  yee  say,  then  before  Mangu
Chan  (if  it  please  him)  I  wil  recite  the  Commandements
of  God,  and  he  shall  be  his  owne  Judge,  whether  hee
keepe  them  or  not.  So  they  departed,  and  told  him,
that  I  said,  hee  was  an  Idolater  or  a  Tuine,  and  kept
not  the  Commandements  of  God.  The  next  day,  he
sent  his  Secretaries  unto  mee,  saying:  Our  Lord  sends
us  unto  you,  saying.  Yee  are  heere  Christians,  Saracens,
and  Tuines :  and  every  of  you  saith,  his  Law  is  better,
and  his  Letters  (to  wit)  Bookes,  are  truer.  Wherefore
hee  would,  that  yee  all  come  together,  and  make  com-
parison, that  every  one  write  his  words,  that  he  might
know  the  truth.  Then  I  said,  Blessed  be  God,  who
hath  put  this  in  the  heart  of  Chan,  but  our  Scriptures
said,  the  Servant  of  God  must  not  bee  contentious,  but
meeke  unto  all  :  wherefore  I  am  readie  without  strife
and  contention,  to  render  an  account  of  the  faith  and
hope  of  Christians,  to  every  one  that  shall  require  it.
Then  they  wrote  my  words,  and  brought  them  to  him.
Then  the  Nestorians  were  commanded,  to  provide  them-
selves, and  write  what  they  would  speake,  and  the
Saracens  likewise,  and  the  Tuinians  also.

On  the  morrow  hee  sent  the  Secretaries  againe,  saying :
Mangu  Chan  would  know,  wherefore  yee  came  to  these
parts,  to  whom  I  said :  That  hee  shall  know  by  the
Letters  of  Baatu.  Then  said  they,  Baatues  Letters  are
lost,  and  hee  hath  forgotton,  what  Baatu  wrote  unto
him,  wherefore  he  would  know  of  you.  Then  some-
what imboldned,  I  said  unto  them.  The  dutie  or  office
of  our  Religion  is  to  preach  the  Gospell  to  all :  where-
upon, when  I  heard  of  the  fame  of  the  people  of  Moal,
I  had  a  desire  to  come  unto  them :  and  while  I  was
thus  purposed,  we  heard  of  Sartach,  that  he  was  a
Christian.  Then  I  directed  my  Journey  unto  him :
And my Sovereigne Lord the King of the Frankes

116

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1254.
sent  him  Letters,  contayning  good  words :  and  other
words  besides,  testifie  of  us  unto  him,  what  men  wee
are  when  hee  made  request,  that  hee  would  suffer  us  to
continue  with  the  people  of  Moal.  Then  he  sent  us
to  Baatu,  and  Baatu  to  Mangu  Chan.  Whereupon
we  intreated,  and  yet  intreat  him  to  suffer  us  to  stay.
But  they  wrote  all,  and  made  relation  thereof  unto  him.
On  the  morrow,  he  sent  to  me  againe,  saying:  Chan
knowes  well  enough  that  yee  have  no  message  unto
him,  but  yee  came  to  pray  for  him  as  many  other  Priests
doe :  But  hee  demandeth,  whether  ever  any  of  your
Embassadours  were  with  him,  or  ours  with  you  ?  Then
I  declared  all  unto  them  concerning  David  and  Frier
Andrew,  so  they  putting  all  in  writing,  reported  the
same  unto  him.  Then  he  sent  againe  unto  me,  saying;
Our  Lord  Chan  saith,  yee  have  stayed  long  here,  his  Mangu  Chan
pleasure  is,  that  yee  returne  unto  your  Countrey :  &*«&**>* &em
withail, hee  demandeth  whether  yee  would conduct  his

.  Embassadours  with  you.  To  whom  I  made  answere,
that  I  durst  not  carrie  his  Embassadours  beyond  his
owne  Countrey :  because  there  is  a  Warlike  Nation
betweene  us  and  you,  and  the  Sea  and  Mountaynes,
and  I  am  a  poore  Monke :  and  therefore  dare  not  take
upon  mee  to  bee  his  Guide.  So  they  having  set  downe
all  in  writing,  returned.

Whitson  Eeven  came  ;  The  Nestorians  writ  Chronicles  Whitsunday
from the Creation of the World to the Passion of n'

I  Christ:  and  passing  over  the  Passion,  they  spake  of  the
Resurrection of  the dead, and of  the  Ascension, and

1  of  the  comming  to  Judgement.  Wherein  somewhat  was
to  be  reprehended  which  I  told  them,  and  wee  likewise
wrote  the  Symbole  of  the  Masse,  Credo  in  unum  Deum.
Then I demanded of  them, how they would proceed.

I  They  said,  they  would  first  dispute  with  the  Saracens.
I  shewed  them,  this  was  no  good  course  :  for  the  Saracens

;  in  this  agree  with  us,  who  affirme,  there  is  but  one  God.

I  Wherefore,  yee  shall  have  them  to  helpe  you  against
the Tuines : so they were contented. Then I asked

117

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1254.

How  Idolatry  them, if  they  knew how  Idolatry  had  its  first  originall

bthTmridin  in  the  World>  and  they  could  not  telL Then  [  told

them  and  they  said;  yee  shall  declare  these  things  unto
them  :  and  then  let  us  speake ;  for  it  is  hard  to  speake
by  an  Interpreter.  To  whom  I  said  :  make  tryall,  how
yee  will  behave  your  selves  against  them :  I  will  take  the
Tuinians  part,  and  yee  the  Christians.  Suppose  I  am
of  that  Sect,  that  say,  there  is  no  God.  Prove  yee  there
is  a  God.  For  there  is  a  certayne  Sect  there,  which
saith,  That  every  soule,  and  every  vertue  in  what  thing
soever,  is  the  God  thereof,  and  that  otherwise  there  is
no  God.  Then  the  Nestorians  knew  not  how  to  proove
any  thing,  but  only  that  which  their  Writing  declareth.
I  said,  they  beleeve  not  the  Scriptures  :  if  yee  shew  one,
they  will  shew  another.  Then  I  counselled  them,  to
let  me  first  talke  with  them :  because  if  I  should  be
overcome,  they  might  yet  have  libertie  of  speech:  if
they  should  be  overthrowne,  I  should  have  no  hearing.
They  agreed  unto  it.

Wee were therefore gathered together on Whitson

Even at our Oratorie, and Mangu Chan sent three

Writers, who should be Judges : one Christian, one

Saracen,  and  one  Tuine : And  it  was  proclaimed  before.

TheProclama-  This is the Comman dement of Mangu Chan : And

C°la{MangU  n°ne  dare  SaF  that  the  Commandement  of  God  is  otner"
wise : He  commandeth  that  none  speake  contentious or

injurious  words  to  other,  nor  make  any  tumult,  whereby
this  businesse  might  be  hindered,  upon  paine  of  his  head.
Then  all  were  silent :  And  there  was  a  great  assembly
there :  for  every  partie  invited  the  wisest  of  their  Nation,
and  many  others  came  flocking  thither. Then  the  Chris-
tians set  me  in  the  middle  of  them,  willing  the  Tuinians
The  murmur-  to speake with mee. Then they (who are many in
^S  of  the number)  began  to  murmure  against  Mangu  Chan,  because
azainstMansu  never  anv Chan attempted thus much, to search into
Chan.  their  secrets. Then  they  opposed  one  unto  mee, who

came from Cataia, having his Interpreter : and I had
Master Williams  Sonne. And he first said  unto me :

118

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1254.

Friend, if  you bee brought to  a non plus, you must  [III.  i.  42-]
seeke a  wiser then  your  selfe. But I held my  peace. The  beginning

Then hee demanded whereof I would first dispute  ?  %^,a„J;?~„

1  Hon  concerning

either how  the  world was made  ? or  what becomes of  tne  christian

the  soules  after  death  ? To  whom  I  answered  : Friend,  Religion,  with

this should not be the beginning of  our speech. All  an  Idolater.

things  are  of  God,  and he is the  Fountayne  and  head

of  all. Wherefore we ought to speake first  of  God  :  We  ought  first

of whom yee thinke otherwise then we doe. And  t0SP™ke  °f

Mangu desires to know who beleeves better. Then

the  Arbitrators  judged this to bee reasonable. They

would  have  begunne  with  the  foresaid  questions,  because

they  hold  them for  the strongest ;  for  they  are all of

the  Heresie  of  the Manichees : beleeving,  that the one  The  heresle  °f

halfe of  things is bad, and the other good: and at  the^nuhees

L1  , *3  ^  . . .  Ai  •  1 inLataia^as  a

the  least  there  are  two  Frincipia. And concerning  the  sprout  from  the

soules  they  all thinke they passe  from body to  body.  Magi,  infect-
Insomuch  as  one  of  the  wisest  of  the  Nestorian  Priests  ingallthe
demanded  of  mee,  concerning  the  soules  of  bruite  Beasts,  pf-T'^-
whether  they  could fly  any  whither  where they  should  an^  ReiigWns,
not be compelled  to labour after death  ? for  confirma-
tion also  thereof  (as  Master  William  told  mee)  a  certaine
child  was brought from Cataia, who (according to  the  A  Pythago-
quantitie of  his body) was not three yeeres old, yet  rean  chlld'
notwithstanding  was  capable  of  any  reason ;  who  affirmed
of  himselfe,  that  he  had  beene  three  times  incorporated,
and  knew  letters,  and  how  to  write. I  said  to  the  fore-
said  Tuinian,  Wee firmely  beleeve  with  the  heart,  and
confesse  with  the  mouth,  that  there  is  a  God,  and  there
is  but  one  God,  and  one  in  perfect  unitie. What  beleeve
you  ? Hee said : Fooles say there is but one God,
but  Wise  men  say  there  be  many. Are  there  not  great
Lords in your Country, and here is a  greater  Lord,
Mangu  Chan  ? So  is  it  of  the  gods  : because  in  divers
Countries there are divers. To whom I said : You
make  an  ill  example  or  comparison of  men  with  God ;
for so every mightie man in his countrey may be
called a god. And  when I would have dissolved the

119

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

1254.

similitude,  hee  prevented me,  inquiring ; What  manner

of  God  is yours, whereof  you speake,  that  hee  is  but

God  is  one  ? j answered : Our God, beside whom there is

mmpo  en .  nQ  0faer^  js  Omnipotent,  and  therefore  needeth  not
the  helpe  of  another :  nay,  all  we  have  neede  of  his
helpe,  it  is  not  so  with  men.  No  man  can  doe  all
things.  And  therefore  there  must  be  many  Lords  in
the earth, because no one can support all. Againe,

God  knowes ne  knowes  all  things,  therefore  he  needes  not  a  Coun-
m&m seller: nay, all  wisedome  is  from him. Moreover, he

God  perfectly  \s  perfectly  good,  and  needeth  not  our  good :  nay,  in
him  we  live,  move,  and  have  our  being.  Such  is  our
God,  and  therefore  we  must  not  hold  there  is  any
other.  It  is  not  so,  saith  he.  Nay,  there  is  one  highest
in  the  Heavens,  whose  Generation  we  know  not  yet,
and  ten  are  under  him,  and  under  them  there  is  one
Inferiour.  And  in  the  Earth  there  are  infinite.  Then
hee  would  have  added  other  fables.  So  I  asked  him
of  that  highest  God,  whether  he  thought  he  were
Omnipotent  ?  or  of  any  other  God  ?  and  fearing  to
answer,  hee  demanded,  if  your  God  bee  such  as  you
say,  Why  made  hee  the  halfe  of  things  evill  ?  It  is
false  said  I.  Whoso  maketh  any  evill  is  no  God,  and
all  things  whatsoever  are  good.  At  this  word  all  the
Tuinians  marvelled,  and  set  it  downe  in  writing,  as  false,
or  impossible.  Then  he  began  to  aske,  Whence  there-
fore commeth  evill  ?  You  aske  amisse,  said  I ;  For
first  you  should  demand,  what  evill  is,  before  you  aske
whence  it  is.  But  returne  unto  the  first  question,
whether  you  beleeve  that  any  God  is  Omnipotent,  and
after  I  will  answer  you  to  all,  whatsoever  you  will
demand.  Then  hee  sate  a  long  time  and  would  not
answer;  Insomuch,  as  the  Writers  on  the  behalfe  of
Chan,  were  faine  to  command  him  to  answer.  At
length  hee  answered :  That  no  God  was  Omnipotent.
Then  all  the  Saracens  brake  out  into  great  laughter :
Silence  being  made,  I  said,  Therefore  none  of  your  gods
can  save  you  in  all  dangers,  because  such  a  chance  may

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

1254.

happen,  wherein  he  hath  no  power.  Againe,  no  man
can  serve  two  Masters.  How  then  can  you  serve  so
many  Lords  in  Heaven  and  in  earth.  The  Auditorie
willed  him  to  answer.  But  he  held  his  peace.  Then
when  I  was  about  to  alleadge  reasons  to  prove  the  truth
of  the  divine  Essence,  and  the  Trinitie,  in  every  mans
hearing,  the  Nestorians  of  the  Countrey  said  unto  me,
that  it  was  enough,  because  they  meant  to  speake.  So
I  gave  them  place :  And  when  they  would  have  dis-
puted with the Saracens; they answered: We grant  The  Saracens

that  your  Law  is  true,  and  whatsoever  is  in  the  Gospell  answ^  thf*
J TTT1 r  ..,  ,.  .  .  r. the  Gospell  is

is  true : Wherefore wee will not dispute with you in  true

any  thing :  and  they  confessed,  that  they  beg  at  the
hands  of  God  in  their  prayers,  that  they  may  die  the
death  of  the  Christians.  There  was  there  a  certaine
old  Priest,  of  the  Sect  of  Jugurs,  who  confesse  one  God,  The  Sect  of  the
yet  they  make  Idols,  with  whom  they  talked  much,  shew-  JuSurs-
ing  all  till  the  comming  of  Christ  to  judgement,  declar-
ing the  Trinitie  to  him  and  the  Saracens  by  similitudes.
All  of  them  harkened  without  any  contradiction ;  yet
none  of  them  said,  I  beleeve,  and  will  become  a  Christian.
The  conference  ended,  the  Nestorians  and  the  Saracens
sang  together  with  a  loud  voice,  the  Tuinians  holding
their  peace :  and  after  that,  they  all  drunke  abundantly.

UPon Whitsonday Mangu Chan called mee before  Chap.  43.

him, and the Tuinian with whom I disputed,  TJie  da?  °f  .

and  before  I  went  in,  Master  Williams  sonne  my  Inter-  caue(i  before

preter,  said unto  me, that  we must returne unto our  Mangu  Chan,

Countrey ; and that I should speake nothing against  who  confesseth

it, because he understood it for a certaine. When I  &*/**&  tftb

came before him, I must kneele,  and the Tuinian by  speaketn  0f his

mee, with his Interpreter. Then he said unto me :  returne  by

Tell  me the truth,  whether  you  said  (when  I  sent  my  Baatu,  he

Writers unto you) that I was a Tuinian  ? Then I  craveth  leave

mswered. My  Lord, I said not  so, but  (if  it  pleased  wL*j!:sSft'

/our  Highnesse)  I  will  tell  you  the  words  I  spake. Then  graunted.
I  recited  what  I  had  spoken  :  and  he  answered ;  I  thought

A.D.
1254.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[III.  i.  43.]

A  token  of
favour.

The  faith  of
the  Tartars.

well,  you  said  not  so,  for  it  was  a  word  which  you  should
not  speake,  but  your  Interpreter  hath  ill  interpreted  it ;
so  hee  reacheth  foorth  his  staffe  towards  mee,  whereon  he
leaned,  saying  :  Feare  not.  I  smiling  said  softly,  If  I
feared,  I  had  not  come  hither.  Then  he  demanded  of
the  Interpreter  what  I  had  said  ?  So  he  repeated  my
words  unto  him.  Afterward  he  beganne  to  confesse
his  Faith  unto  me.  Wee  Moallians  (saith  he)  beleeve,
that  there  is  but  one  God,  through  whom  we  live  and
dye  ;  and  we  have  an  upright  heart  towards  him.  Then
(said  I)  God  grant  you  this,  for  without  this  gift  it  cannot
be.  And  he  demanded  what  I  said  :  so  the  Interpreter
told  him  ;  then  he  added  further.  That  as  God  hath
given  unto  the  hand  divers  fingers,  so  he  hath  given
many  waies  to  men.  God  hath  given  the  Scriptures  to
you,  and  ye  Christians  keep  them  not.  Ye  finde  it  not  in
the  Scriptures,  that  one  of  you  shall  dispraise  another  ?
Doe  you  finde  it,  said  he  ?  No,  said  I,  but  I  signified
unto  you  from  the  beginning,  that  I  would  not  contend
with  any.  I  speake  it  not,  saith  he,  touching  you.  In
like  manner,  yee  finde  it  not,  that  for  Money  a  man
ought  to  decline  from  Justice.  No  Sir,  said  I,  and  truly,
neither  came  I  into  these  parts  to  get  Money  ;  nay,  I
refused  that  which  was  given  me.  And  there  was  a
Writer  present  there,  who  gave  testimony  that  I  had
refused  a  Jascot,  and  certaine  pieces  of  Silke  :  I  speake
it  not  (said  he)  for  that.  God  hath  given  you  the
Scriptures,  and  yee  keepe  them  not :  But  he  hath
given  us  Sooth-sayers,  and  we  doe  that  which  they  bid
us,  and  we  live  in  peace.  He  dranke  foure  times  as  I
think,  before  hee  disclosed  these  things.  And  while  I
hearkned  attentively  whether  hee  would  confesse  any
He  speaketh  of  thing  else  concerning  this  Faith,  he  beganne  to  speake
of  my  returne,  saying  :  You  have  stayed  a  long  time
heere,  my  pleasure  is  therefore,  that  you  returne.  You
said,  you  durst  not  carrie  my  Embassadours  with  you.
Will  you  carrie  my  message  or  my  Letters  ?  And  from
that  time  I  could  neither  have  place  nor  time  to  shew  him

the  Fry
returne.

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1254.

ithe  Catholike  Faith.  For  a  man  cannot  speake  before
Ihim,  save  what  he  pleaseth,  unlesse  he  were  an  Embassa-
idour.  But  an  Embassadour  may  speake  what  he  will  :
And  they  alwaies  demand,  whether  he  have  any  thing
lelse  to  say.  But  he  suffered  me  to  speake  no  more  :
jbut  I  must  heare  him,  and  answere  Interrogatories.
jThen  I  answered,  That  if  he  could  make  me  under-
jstand  his  words,  and  that  they  were  set  downe  in  writing,
|I  would  willingly  carrie  them  to  my  power.  Then  he
jasked  me,  if  I  would  have  Gold  or  Silver,  or  costly
garments  ?  I  said,  we  receive  no  such  things  :  but  we
lhave  not  expenses,  and  without  your  helpe  we  cannot
bet  out  of  your  Countrey.  Then  said  he,  I  will  provide
you  all  necessaries  throughout  my  Countrey,  will  you  any
tmore  ?  I  answered,  it  sufficeth  me  :  Then  he  demanded,
ihow  farre  will  you  be  brought  ?  I  said,  Let  our  Passe
bring  us  into  the  King  of  Armeniaes  Countrey  :  if  I  were
♦there  it  were  enough.  He  answered  :  I  will  cause  you  to
be  conveyed  thither,  and  after  looke  to  your  selfe.  And
hee  added  :  there  are  two  eyes  in  one  head  ;  and  though
chey  bee  two,  yet  there  is  one  aspect  of  both,  and  whither
the  one  directeth  the  sight  the  other  doth.  You  came
from  Baatu,  and  therefore  you  must  returne  by  him  :
when  hee  had  thus  said,  1  craved  licence  to  speake.
Speake  on,  saith  hee.  Then  said  I  ;  Sir,  wee  are  not  Baatus
men  of  warre  :  wee  desire  that  they  have  dominion  of  8reatnesse-
the  world,  who  would  more  justly  governe  it,  according
co  the  will  of  God.  Our  office  is  to  teach  men  to  live
according  to  the  will  of  God  :  for  this  purpose  came  we
into  these  parts,  and  would  willingly  have  remained
heere,  if  it  had  pleased  you  :  but  seeing  it  is  your
pleasure  that  we  returne,  it  must  bee  so.  I  will
returne  and  carrie  your  Letters  according  to  my  power,  Hee  ^^
as  yee  have  commanded.  I  would  request  your  magni-  leave  againe  to
licence,  that  when  I  have  carried  your  Letters,  it  might  siay  in  the
;bee  lawfull  for  me  to  returne  unto  you  with  your  good  Tartars
liking,  chiefely,  because  yee  have  poore  Servants  of  yours  j/f^/9
at Bolac, who  are of  our language  ; and they  want  a  granted.

123

A.D.
1254.

He  departeth
from  the
presence  of

Mangu  Can.

Chap.  44.
A  description
of  the
Tartarian
Sorcerers,  and
of  their  divers
and  unlawfull
behaviour.
Chiefe  Priest
of  the  Tartars.

Some  of  them
know

Astronomy.
Eclipses.

[III.  i.  44.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Priest,  to  teach  them  and  their  children  their  Law,  and]
I  would  willingly  stay  with  them.  Then  answered  he  :
Know  you  whether  your  Lords  would  send  you  backe  to
me  ?  Then  said  I  ;  Sir,  I  know  not  the  purpose  of  my
Lords  :  but  I  have  licence  from  them  to  goe  whether  I
will,  where  it  were  needfull  to  preach  the  word  of  God  :
and  it  seemeth  to  mee,  that  it  were  very  necessarie  in
these  parts  :  whereupon,  whether  they  send  Embassa-
dours  backe  or  no,  if  it  pleased  you,  I  would  returne.
Then  hee  held  his  peace,  and  sate  a  long  space  as  it  were
in  a  Muse.  And  my  Interpreter  willed  me,  to  speake  no
more,  and  I  carefully  expected  what  he  would  answere.
At  length  he  said  :  You  have  a  long  way  to  goe,  make
your  selfe  strong  with  food,  that  you  may  come  lusty
into  your  Countrey.  And  he  caused  them  to  give  me
drinke.  Then  I  departed  from  his  presence,  and  returned
not  againe.  If  I  had  had  power  to  doe  wonders  as  Moses
did,  peradventure  hee  had  humbled  himselfe.

SOoth-sayers,  therefore,  as  hee  confessed,  are  their
Priests  :  and  whatsoever  they  command  to  bee
done,  is  performed  without  delay.  Whose  office  I
describe  unto  you,  as  I  could  learne  of  Master  William,
and  others,  who  reported  unto  me  things  likely  to  be
true.  They  are  many  ;  and  they  have  alwaies  one
Captaine  or  chiefe  Priest :  who  alwaies  placeth  his  house
before  the  great  house  of  Mangu  Chan,  neere,  within
a  stones  cast.  Under  his  custodie  (as  I  said  before)  are
the  Chariots  which  beare  their  Idols.  The  others  are
behind  the  Court,  in  places  appointed  for  them.  And
they  who  have  any  confidence  in  that  Art,  come  unto
them  from  divers  parts  of  the  World.  Some  of  them  are
skilfull  in  Astronomie,  specially  the  chiefe  of  them.
And  they  foretell  to  them  the  Eclipse  of  the  Sunne  and
the  Moone,  and  when  it  shall  come  to  passe.  All  the
people  prepare  them  food,  so  that  they  need  not  goe  forth
of  the  doore  of  their  house.  And  when  there  is  an
Eclipse,  they  play  upon  their  Timbrels  and  Organs,  and

124

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

1254.

make  a  great  noise,  and  a  loude  crye,  when  the  Eclipse  is
past,  they  give  themselves  to  feasting,  and  drinking,  and
make great  joy. They foretell fortunate and unlucky  J^y  fi™-**"
dayes for  all businesse or affaires. Whereupon they  fyfttmat  dates
never levie an Armie, nor undertake Warre without  for  the  per-
their  direction. And  they  had  long  since  returned into  firmance  of
Hungarie  : but  their  Sooth-sayers  doe  not  suffer  them.  ali 'businesse
Thev  make  all  things  which  are  sent  to  the  Court  passe  ™,  s  v '  n

1  r  ^11  j  •  1  e *  "*y  cause  nl1

betweene fires, and  they have a due portion thereof,  things  sent  to
They also purge all the houshold-stuffe of  the Dead,  the  Court,
drawing them betweene the fires. For when any  one  passe  betweene
dieth, all things whatsoever appertayne to him, are  ^res'
separated, and not mingled  with other things of the
Court, till all be purged by  the  Fire. So  did I see
it done  to  the Court  of  that  Ladie,  which died,  while
wee  were  there. Whereupon,  there  was  a  double  reason
why  Friar  Andrew,  and  his  fellowes  should  goe  betweene  Friar  Andrew
the  fires, both because  he  brought  presents,  as  also  for  ?» u
that  they  belonged  to  him,  who  was  dead,  (to wit)  Ken
Chan. No  such  thing  was required of  me, because  I
brought nothing. If  any  living  creature, or  any  thing
else,  fall  to  the  ground,  while  they  thus  make  them  passe
betweene  the  fires,  that  is  theirs. They  also the  ninth  ^he  ninth  day
day  of  the  Moone  of  May,  gather  together  all  the  white  0f^m
Mares  of  the  Herd,  and  consecrate  them. The  Christian  solemnly  kept
Priests  also  must  come  together  thither  with  their  Censers,  every  yeere.
Then  they  cast  new  Cosmos  upon  the  ground,  and  make
a  great  Feast  that  day  ;  because  then they  thinke  they
drinke  Cosmos  first,  as  it  is  the  fashion  somewhere  with
us,  touching  Wine,  in  the  Feast  of  Saint  Bartholmew,  or
Sixtus,  and of  fruits,  in  the  Feast of  Saint  James  and
Christopher. They  also  are  invited, when any  child  is  Thp  are
borne, to  foretell  his  destinie. They  are sent for  also  birth  0r
when  any  is  sicke,  to  use  their  Charmes  : and  they  tell  children,  and
whether it bee a naturall infirmitie, or by Sorcerie.  fire-tell  their
Whereupon that woman of Mentz, whereof I spake  desttniesi and
before, told mee  a  wonderfull thing.  J/r  ^^

On  a  certaine  time,  very  costly  Furres  were  presented,  are  sicke.

I25

A.D.
1254.

The  false
accusations  of
the  Sorcerers.

PURCHAS HIS PILGKIMES

which  were  layd  downe  at  the  Court  of  her  Ladie,  who
was  a  Christian,  as  I  said  before.  And  the  Sooth-sayers
drew  them  through  betweene  the  fires,  and  tooke  more  of
them  then  was  their  due.  And  a  certaine  woman,  under
whose  custodie  the  treasure  of  her  Ladie  was,  accused
them  thereof  unto  her  Ladie  :  whereupon  the  Ladie
her  selfe  reproved  them.  It  fell  out  after  this,  that  the
Ladie  her  selfe  began  to  be  sicke,  and  to  suffer  certaine
sudden  passions  in  divers  parts  of  her  bodie.  The  Sooth-
sayers were  called  :  and  they  sitting  farre  off,  commanded
one  of  those  Maidens,  to  put  her  hand  upon  the  place
where  the  griefe  was,  and  if  shee  found  any  thing,  shee
should  snatch  it  away.  Then  she  arising  did  so.  And
she  found  a  piece  of  Felt  in  her  hand,  or  of  some  other
thing.  Then  they  commanded  her  to  put  it  upon  the
ground  :  which  being  layd  downe,  it  began  to  creepe,  as
if  it  had  beene  some  living  Creature.  Then  they  put  it
into  the  water,  and  it  was  turned,  as  it  were,  into  a
Horse-leach  :  and  he  said,  some  Witch  hath  hurt  you
thus  with  her  Sorceries  :  and  they  accused  her  that  had
accused  them  of  the  Furres,  who  was  brought  without  the
Tents  into  the  fields,  and  received  the  bastinado  seven
dayes  together  there,  and  was  thus  tormented  with  other
punishments,  to  make  her  confesse  ;  and  in  the  meane
space  her  Ladie  died.  Which  shee  understanding,  said
unto  them,  I  know  my  Ladie  is  dead,  kill  mee,  that  I  may
goe  after  her,  for  I  never  did  her  hurt.  And  when  shee
confessed  nothing,  Mangu  Chan  commanded  to  suffer
her  to  live.  Then  the  Sorcerers  accused  the  Ladies
daughters  Nurse,  of  whom  I  spake  before  :  who  was  a
Christian,  and  her  husband  was  the  chiefe  among  all  the
Nestorian  Priests,  so  shee  was  brought  to  punishment,
with  a  certain  Maide  of  hers,  to  make  her  confesse.  And
the  Maide  confessed,  that  her  Mistresse  sent  her  to  speake
with  a  certaine  Horse,  to  demand  answeres.  The  woman
also  her  selfe,  confessed  some  things  which  shee  did  to
bee  beloved  of  her  Ladie,  that  she  might  doe  her  good,
but shee did nothing that might hurt her. Shee  was

126

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

1254.

demanded  also,  whether  her  husband  were  privie  to  it :

shee  excused  him,  for  that  he  had burnt  the  Characters

md  Letters  which  she  had  made. Then  shee  was  put  to

death,  and  Mangu  Chan  sent  the  Priest  her  husband to

"he  Bishop  which  was  in  Catai,  to  be  judged,  although  he  The  ^tsnoP  °f

were not found culpable.  the  Nestorians

In  the  meane  time  it  fell  out,  that  the  pnncipall  wire  of
Mangu  Chan,  brought  forth  a  sonne,  and  the  Sooth-
>ayers  were  called,  to  fore-tell  the  Destinie  of  the  child,
Ivho  all  prophecied  prosperitie,  and  said,  he  should  live
ong,  and  be  a  great  Lord  :  after  a  few  dayes,  it  happened,
the  child  died.  Then,  the  mother  enraged,  called  the
pooth-sayers,  saying,  you  said  my  sonne  should  live,
|uid  loe  hee  is  dead.  Then  they  said,  Madam,  behold
Ivee  see  that  Sorceresse,  the  Nurse  of  Chirina,  who  the
Dther  day  was  put  to  death,  shee  hath  killed  your  sonne  ;
ind  behold  wee  see,  shee  carries  him  away.  Now  there  ^  her  and  a
•emayned one sonne and a daughter of that woman  ^-ur  *[er

r 11  1 ' rr%  1 1  t v  Jrom  ™e

jrowne  to  full age  in the 1  ents  : and  the Ladie sent  beginning.
)resently for them in a rage, and caused the young
nan  to  be  slayne  of  a  man,  and  the  maide  of  a  woman,
n  revenge  of  her  sonne,  whom  the  Sooth-sayers  affirmed
o  be  killed  of  their  mother  not  long  after,  Mangu  Chan
dreamed  of  those  children,  and  demanded  in  the  morning,
vhat  was  become  of  them. His  servants  were  afraid  to
ell him  :  and he being troubled the more, demanded
vhere  they  were,  because  they  had  appeared  unto  him  in
!i Vision  by  night. Then they  told  him. So hee  pre-
ently sending for his wife, demanded whence shee
earned, that  a  woman should give sentence  of  death,
vithout  the  privitie  of  her Husband  ? And  he  caused  [HI-  *■  45-]
ier  to  be  shut  up  seaven  dayes,  commanding  to  give  her J:' e  Revenie
10 meat. But the man (who slew the young man)  'chan^uponhis
.e caused to be beheaded ; and the head to be hung  Wife  being  a
bout  the  womans  necke,  who  had  kild  the  Mayde  ;  and  murtherer.
«nade her to be cudgelled with burning Fire-brands
hrough all the Tents,  and after to  be  put  to Death,
iee  had  also  put  his  Wife  to  death,  but  for  the  Children

127

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1254.

he had  by  her : And he went out of  his Court, and

returned  not  till  after  one  Moone.

The  Sorcerers The  Sorcerers  also  trouble  the  Ayre  with  their  charms :

^Trevnth anC*  wnen  tne  ^old  *s  so  great  naturally,  that  they  cannot

thelrCharmes.  aPply  an7 remedy, then they search out some in the

Campe,  whom  they  accuse,  that  the  cold  comes  through

their  meanes,  so  they  are  put  to  Death  without  any  delay.

A  little  before  I  departed  thence,  one  of  the  Concubines

was  sicke,  and  languished  long,  and  they  mumbled  their

Charmes  over  a  certaine  Dutch  Slave  of  hers,  who  slept

three dayes. Who,  when she came to her selfe,  they

demanded, what she  had seene  ? And she had seene

many  persons,  of  all  which,  shee  judged  they  should  all

shortly  dye  : And  because  she  saw  not  her  Mistres  there,

they  judged  she  should  not  dye  of  that  sicknes. I  saw

the Maydes head yet  aking by reason of  that  sleepe.

The  Sorcerers  Some of  them also call upon  Devils,  and  gather  them

raise  up  devils.  t0gether  (who  will  have  answers  from  the  Devill)  in  the

night  unto  their  house,  and  they  put  sodden  flesh  in  the

middest of  the house, and that Chan who invoketh,

beginneth  to  say  his Charmes,  and having  a  Tymbrell,

smites  it  strongly  against  the  ground  ;  at  length  he  begins

to rave,  and  causeth himselfe to be  bound. Then  the

Devill  comes  in  the  darke,  and  gives  him  flesh  to  eate,

and  makes  him  answer. On  a  certaine  time,  (as  Master

William  told  me)  a  certaine  Hungarian  hid  himselfe  with

them,  and  the  Devill  being  upon  the  house,  cryed,  that

Chap.  4.5. kee  cou\r\  not  Come  in,  because  a  certaine  Christian  was

Solemnity. with them. He hearing this,  fled  with haste, because

Mangu  Chans  they  began  to  search  for  him. These  things  and  many

Letters  to other  doe  they,  which  were  too  long  to  report.

Lodozvicke

France:  the  A  ^ter  tne  Feast  of  Penticost  they  began  to  make  ready

Friers  com-  JLX  their  Letters,  which  they  meant  to  send  unto  you.

ponton  stayeth  In  the  meane  while,  he  returned  to  Caracarum,  and  held  a

with  the ^  great  Solemnity,  just  about  the  fifteenth  of  June  : and

return" 'to ^  ^ee  desired,  that  all  the  Embassadours  should  be  present.

Caracarum.  The  last  day  also  he  sent  for  us,  but  I  went  to  the  Church

128

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1254.

to  Baptise  three  Children  of  a  certaine  poore  Dutch-man,

whom  we  found  there. Master  William  was  chiefe  Butler

at  that  Feast,  because  he  made  the  Tree  which  powred

foorth drinke. And all the  Poore  and  Rich  sung  and  This  is  also  the

daunced,  and  clapped  their  hands  before  Chan. Then  he  manner  °f  the

began  to  make  an  Oration  unto  them,  saying ;  I  have  sent Jie[lcanes  in

my  Brethren  farre  off,  and  have  sent  them  into  danger,

into  forraigne  Nations  : Now  it  shall  appeare  what  yee

will  doe,  when  I  shall  send  you,  that  our  Common-wealth

may  be  inlarged. Every  day  in  those  foure  dayes,  hee

changed  garments,  which  hee  gave  them  all  of  one  colour,

every  day,  from  the  shooes  even  to  the  tyre  of  the  head.

At  that  time  I saw  the  Embassadour  of  the  Calipha  of  The  Embassa-

Baldach, who caused himselfe to bee carried upon a  <^ar  °fthe

Horse-litter, betweene two Mules, to the Court: of  ^fj^^

whom  some  said,  that  he  made  peace  with  them  : so  that

they  should  give  him  ten  thousand  Horse  for  his  Army.

Others  said,  that  Mangu  said,  hee  would  not  make  Peace,

unlesse  they  would  destroy  all  their  Munition. And  the

Embassadour  answered  ;  when  you  will  plucke  off  your

Horse  hoofes,  we  will  destroy  our  Munition. I  saw  also

there,  the Embassadours of  a  certaine Soldan of  India,  The  Embassa-

who brought  with him  eight Leopards,  and  ten  Hare-  ^-t t  Id

hounds taught to sit upon the Horse buttockes, as  0f  India.

Leopards  doe. When  I  inquired  of  India,  which  way  it

lay  from  that  place,  they  shewed  me  towards  the  West.  India  is  more

And those Embassadours returned  with me,  almost for  t0  the  West

three  Weekes together,  alwayes westward  ? I saw also  /  en ?a~,

o  *  j  cavum  £>y  three

the  Embassadors  of  the  Soldan  of  Turkie,  who  brought  weeks  journey.
him rich presents :  And hee answered (as  I heard)  he
needed  neither  Gold  nor  Silver,  but  men  :  wherefore  he
required  them  to  provide  him  an  Army. In  the  feast  of  Tnf  Feast  °f

Saint  John  he  held  a  great  Drinking,  and  I  caused  one  Saint  John>

o  07  June  24..

hundred  and  five  Carts,  and  ninety  Horses  to  be  num-

bred,  all  laden  with  Cowes  milke  : And  in  the  feast  of  the  TAf  Lett£J,'sh  °f

Apostles  S.  Peter  and  S.  Paul,  in  like  manner. At  length  t0  *£0gJ0WjJ"'

the  Letters  being  dispatched,  which he  sendeth  to  you,  the  French

theyricalled  me,  and  interpreted  them,  the  tenor  whereof  I  King.

xi  129  J

A.D.
1254.

Moall.
Nay  man.
Market.

Musulman.

[III.  i.  46.]

Chen-chan,  is
called  Cume-
can,  of  John  de
Piano  Carpini.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

writ,  as  I  could  understand  them  by  my  Interpreter,
which  is  this.  The  commandement  of  the  eternall  God
is  this  :  There  is  but  one  Eternall  God  in  Heaven  :  upon
Earth  let  there  be  but  one  Lord  Chingis  Chan,  Temingu
Tingii,  That  is  to  say  the  sound  of  Yron  :  (They  call
Chingis,  the  sound  of  Yron,  because  hee  was  a  Smith  :  and
puffed  up  with  pride,  they  call  him  now  the  Sonne  of  God.)
This  is  the  word  which  is  spoken  to  you.  Whatsoever
Moals  wee  are,  whatsoever  Naymans,  whatsoever  Merkets,
whatsoever  Musulman,  wheresoever  eares  may  heare,
whethersoever  Horse  may  goe,  there,  cause  it  to  bee
heard,  and  understood,  since  they  have  heard  my  com-
mandement, and  would  not  beleeve  it,  and  would  levy  an
Army  against  us,  yee  shall  heare  and  see,  that  they  shall
be  as  having  Eyes,  and  not  seeing,  and  when  they  would
hold  any  thing,  they  shall  be  without  hands,  and  when
they  would  walke,  they  shall  be  without  feet.  This  is
the  commandement  of  the  Eternall  God,  by  the  vertue
of  the  Eternall  God  :  by  the  great  world  of  the  Moall.
The  commandement  of  Mangu  Chan  is  given  to  the
French  King,  King  Lodovick,  and  all  other  Lords,  and
Priests,  and  to  the  great  world  of  the  Frankes,  that
they  understand  my  wordes,  and  the  commaundement
of  the  Eternall  God,  made  to  Chingis  Chan.  Nor  from
Chingis  Chan,  nor  others  after  him,  came  this  commande-
ment unto  you.  A  certaine  man  called  David  came  unto
you,  as  an  Embassadour  of  the  Moalls,  but  he  was  a
lyar,  and  with  him  you  sent  your  Embassadours  to  Chen-
chan.  After  Chen-chan  was  dead,  your  Embassadours
came  to  his  Court.  Charmis  his  wife  sent  you  Cloth,
called  Nasic.  But  to  know  matters  appertayning  to
Warre  and  Peace,  and  to  settle  the  great  World  in  quiet,
and  to  see  to  doe  good  ;  That  wicked  woman,  more  vile
than  a  Dog,  how  could  shee  know  how  to  doe  it  ?  I
Those  two  Monkes  which  came  from  you  unto  Sartach ;
Sartach  sent  them  to  Baatu :  but  Baatu,  because  Mangu
Chan  is  the  greatest  over  the  World  of  the  Moalls,  sent
them  unto  us. But  now,  that  the  great  World  and  the

130

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

1254.

Priests,  and  the  Monkes  might  live  in  peace,  and  enjoy

their  goods, that the  commandement  of  God  might  be

heard  among  you,  wee  would  have  sent  our  Embassadours

of  Moall, with your Priests  : but they answered, that

betweene us and you there  was a  warlike Nation,  and

many bad men, and troublesome wayes  ; so as they

feared  they  could  not  bring  our  Embassadours  safe  unto

you,  but  if  we  would  deliver  them  our  Letters,  contayn-

ing  our  commandement  to  King  Lodowick,  they  would

carrie them. For this cause wee sent not our Em-

1  bassadours with them. But wee have sent the com-

j  mandement of  the eternall God by your said Priests.

It  is  the  commandement  of  the  eternall  God,  which  wee

\  have  given you to understand. And when you shall

'  heare and beleeve it, if  yee  will obey  us, send your

I  Embassadours  unto  us,  so  shall  wee  be  certified,  whether

]  yee will have  peace  with us,  or  warre. When  by  the

i  power  of  the  eternall  God,  the  whole  World  shall  be  in

unitie,  joy,  and  peace,  from the  rising  of  the  Sunne,  to

the  going  downe  of  the  same,  then  shall  it  appeare  what

wee will doe. When yee  shall heare and understand

the commandement of  the eternall God, and will not

hearken to it, nor beleeve it,  saying,  our Countrey  is

jfarre  off,  our  Hills  are  strong,  our  Sea  is  great,  and  in

this  confidence,  shall  levie  an  Army  against  us,  to  know

'what  wee  can  doe,  Hee  which  made  that  which  was  hard,

jeasie  ; and  that  which  was  farre  off,  neere  ;  the  eternall

God  himselfe  knowes  it.

I And  they  called  us  your  Embassadors  in  the  Letters.

■Then I said  unto  them, call us not Embassadors, for

|I  said  well  to  Chan,  that  wee  are  not  the  Embassadors

m  King  Lodowicke. Then  they  went  unto  him  and  told

Ljhim. But  when  they  returned,  they  said  unto  me  :  that

■e  held  it  much  for  our  good,  and  that  he  commanded

them to  write as I should direct them. Then I told

them,  they  should  leave  out  the  name  of  Embassadour,

Hind call us Monkes and Priests. In the meane  time,

.vhile these things  were doing, my Companion hearing

13*

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1254.

that  wee  must  returne  by  the  Wildernesse  to  Baatu,  and
that  a  man  of  Moall  should  be  our  Guide,  he  ranne
(without  my  privitie)  to  Bulgai  the  chiefe  Scribe,  signify-
ing to  him  by  signes  that  he  should  die,  if  he  went  that
He  departeth  way.  And  when  the  day  came,  wherein  we  should  have
they,  of  July.  our  paSse  (to  wit)  a  fortnight  after  the  Feast  of  Saint
John  ;  when  we  were  called  to  the  Court,  the  Scribes  said
unto  my  Companion,  Behold  Mangus  pleasure  is,  that
your  Companion  returne  by  Baatu,  and  you  say,  you  are
sicke,  and  it  appeareth  so  :  Mangu  sayth  thus,  If  you  will
goe  with  your  Companion,  goe :  but  let  it  be  your  owne
fault ;  because  peradventure  you  may  remayne  with  some
Jani,  that  will  not  provide  for  you,  and  it  will  bee  an
hinderance  to  your  Companion.  But  if  you  will  stay
heere,  he  shall  provide  necessaries  for  you,  till  some
Note.  Embassadours  come,  with  whom  you  may  returne  more

easily, and by  a  way where there are  Villages. The
Friar  answered,  God  grant  Chan  a  prosperous  life  ;  I  will
stay. Then  I  said  unto  the  Friar  ;  Brother,  bee  advised
what  you  doe,  I  will  not  leave  you. You  leave  not  me
(sayth  he)  but  I  leave  you  :  because,  if  I  goe  with  you,
I  see  the death  of  my  bodie  and  soule,  because  I  have
not  patience  in  intolerable  labour. Then  they  held  three
Garments or Coats, and said unto us, Yee  will not
They  stayed receive  Gold,  or  Silver,  and  yee  have  stayed  long  here,
therefrom  the  anc[  praved  for  Chan  : hee  entreats  you,  that  at  the  least
be'r to theo  "  every  one  °f  vou  would  receive  a  single  Garment  ;  that
of  July.  yee  depart  not  emptie  from  him. Then  we  must  receive

them,  for  reverence  of  him  :  for  they  account  it  a  very
evill  thing,  when  their  gifts  are  contemned.  First,  he
caused  us  to  bee  often  asked,  what  we  would  have  ?
And  wee  alwaies  answered  the  same  thing  :  so  that  the
Christians  insulted  over  the  Idolaters,  who  seeke  nothing
but  gifts.  And  they  answered,  that  wee  were  fooles  :
because  if  hee  would  give  them  his  whole  Court,  they
would  willingly  take  it  and  should  doe  wisely  to.  Re-
ceiving therefore  the  Garments,  they  besought  us  to  make
our  prayers  for Chan  ;  which  we  did. So, taking  our

132

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  ad.

1254.

leave,  we  went  to  Caracarum.  But  it  happened  upon  a  They  depart
certaine  day,  while  wee  were  with  the  Monke,  farre  from  from  the  Court
the  Court,  with  other  Embassadours  ;  that  the  Monke
caused  the  Table  to  be  strucken  so  hard,  that  Mangu
Chan  heard  it,  and  demanded  what  it  was  ?  Then  they
told  him.  So  he  asked,  why  he  was  removed  so  farre
from  the  Court.  They  told  him,  because  it  was  trouble-
some to  bring  him  Horses  and  Oxen  every  day  unto
the  Court  ;  and  said  further,  that  it  were  better,  that  he
should  stay  at  Caracarum.  Then  Chan  sent  unto  him,
saying,  if  hee  would  goe  to  Caracarum,  and  stay  there,
neere  about  the  Church,  he  would  give  him  all  things
necessarie.  But  the  Monke  answered,  I  came  from  the
holy  Land  of  Jerusalem  hither,  by  the  commandement
of  God,  and  left  that  Citie,  wherein  there  are  a  thousand
better  Churches  then  that  of  Caracarum.  If  he  please
that  I  stay  here  and  pray  for  him,  as  God  commanded
me,  I  will  stay  :  if  not,  I  will  returne  to  the  place  from
whence  I  came.  So  that  every  evening  Oxen  were
brought  him  yoaked  to  the  Carts,  and  in  the  morning
he  was  brought  unto  the  place  where  hee  used  to  be
before  the  Court.  And  a  little  before  wee  departed
thence,  a  certaine  Nestorian  came,  who  seemed  to  bee  a
wise  man  :  Bulgai  the  chiefe  Secretarie  placed  him  before
his  Court  ;  to  whom  Chan  sent  his  children,  that  he
should blesse  them.

WEe came therefore to Caracarum. And while  [III.  i.  47.]
wee  were in Master  Williams  house, my  Guide  Chap.  46.

came  unto  me  and  brought  me ten Tascots,  whereof  he  z[  y  come  t0
1 c r  • Tv/r  itt«h»  i i  -it  \  •  Caracarum.

left five in Master Williams hand, willing him to  #<?/*/■»/»£,  he

spend them in the behalfe of Chan, for the Friars  accompanieth

necessities, which remayned there  : other five he left  Baatu  a  whole

in the hand of the Man of God, my Interpreter,  monethj

j .  , ,  , J  r  departing,  he

commanding to spend them upon the way, ror my *th  t0ward

necessities. For Master  William had  given  them such  the  South  to  the

instructions,  without  our  knowledge. I  presently  changed  Towne  Sarai.

one  into  money,  and  distributed  it  to  the  poore  Christians,

133

A.D.
1254.

He  returned
by  Persia.

A  precious
stone  good
against
thunder  and
lightning.

From  Cara-
carum  to  the
River  of  Volga
is  two  moneths ,
and  ten  dayes
journey.

A  River
betweene  the
Mountaines  of
fifteene  dayes
journey.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

which  were  there  :  for  all  their  eyes  were  fixed  upon
us.  Wee  spent  another  in  buying  necessarie  things
for  us,  as  garments,  and  other  things,  which  wee  wanted.
With  the  third,  the  Man  of  God  himselfe,  bought
some  things,  wherein  hee  gayned  somewhat  which  was
profitable  unto  him  :  we  spent  the  rest,  and  that  to  :
because  since  wee  came  into  Persia,  sufficient  necessaries
were  no  where  given  us  ;  nor  yet  any  where  among
the  Tartars  ;  but  we  seldome  found  any  thing  to  be
sold  there.  Master  William,  sometimes  your  Citizen,
sends  you  a  certaine  Girdle  set  with  a  certaine  precious-
stone,  which  they  use  to  wear  against  thunder  and  light-
ning, and  infinitely  salutes  you,  alwaies  commending  you
to  God  in  his  prayers  :  for  whom,  I  shall  never  bee  able  to
render  sufficient  thankes  to  God  and  you.  Wee  baptized
there  in  all  sixe  soules.  Wee  therefore  departed  one  from
the  other  with  teares :  my  Companion  remayning  with
Master  William  ;  and  I  returning  alone,  with  my  Inter-
preter, my  Guide,  and  one  servant ;  who  had  commande-
ment  to  take  one  Mutton  in  foure  dayes,  for  us  foure.
Wee  came  therefore  in  two  moneths  and  ten  dayes  from
Caracarum  to  Baatu,  and  never  saw  Towne,  nor  token
of  any  house,  but  Graves,  except  one  Village,  where  in
we  eate  no  Bread.  Nor  did  we  ever  rest,  in  those
two  moneths,  and  ten  dayes  ;  save  one  day,  because
wee  could  not  get  Horses.  Wee  returned  for  the  most
part  by  the  same  kind  of  people,  and  yet  through
other  Countries  altogether  :  for  we  went  in  the  Winter,
and  returned  in  the  Summer,  and  by  the  higher  parts
of  the  North  by  farre  ;  except,  that  fifteene  dayes
journey  wee  must  goe  and  returne  alwaies  hard  by  a
certaine  River,  betweene  the  Mountaines,  where  there
is  no  lodging,  but  by  the  River  side.  We  went  two
dayes,  and  sometimes  three  dayes,  taking  no  food  but
Cosmos.  Once  wee  were  in  great  danger,  not  being  able
to  finde  any  people,  our  provision  fayling  us,  and  our  Horses
tyred.  When  I  had  travelled  twentie  dayes,  I  heard  newes
of  the  King  of  Armenia,  that  he  had  passed  by.

*34

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a,d.

1254.

In the  end  of August  I  met with Sartach himselfe, The  end  of

who  went to Mangu Chan  with Flockes and Herds,  August  he  met

and  with  his  Wives  and  Children  :  vet  his  great  Families a\  ac .  „
-r-» •  -n  m  •  aitti  re  turtle  going

remayned between Tanais  and Ltilia. And I did  my  t0  Mangu.

dutie  to  him,  saying,  I  would  willingly  stay  in  his
Countrey ;  but  Mangu  Chan  would  not  have  mee
returne,  and  carrie  his  Letters.  Hee  answered,  that  I
must  performe  the  will  of  Mangu  Chan.  Then  I  asked
Coiac  for  your  children.  Hee  answered,  they  were  in  Colac  the
the  Court  of  Baatu  carefullv  recommended.  I  also  Priest  of
required  to  have  our  Clothes,  and  Bookes  againe  :  who  i>artacn-
answered,  Did  yee  not  bring  them  to  Sartach  ?  I
said,  I  brought  them  to  Sartach,  but  I  gave  them  not
unto  him,  as  yee  know  :  and  I  replied  to  him,  what
answere  I  made,  when  he  demanded  whether  I  would
give  them  to  Sartach.  Then  hee  answered,  you  say
true,  and  none  can  resist  the  truth.  I  left  your  goods
with  my  father,  who  remayneth  neere  Sarai  ;  which  Sarai  is  a  new
is  a  new  Towne  Baatu  hath  made  upon  Etilia,  on  the  Towne,  built
East  shoare  :  but  our  Priests  have  some  of  the  vest-  uP°^tlll^or
ments.  If  any  thing  like  you  (said  I)  keepe  it,  so  my
Bookes  be  restored.  Then  he  told  me,  he  would
report  my  words  to  Sartach.  I  must  have  Letters  (said
I)  to  your  Father,  to  restore  mee  all.  But  he  was
readie  to  bee  gone,  and  said  unto  mee,  The  traine  of  the
Ladies  followeth  us  neere  at  hand.  Yee  shall  alight
there,  and  I  will  send  you  Sartachs  answere  by  this
man.  I  was  very  carefull  he  should  not  deceive  me  ;
yet  I  could  not  contend  with  him.  Late  in  the  evening
the  man  came  unto  me,  whom  he  shewed  me,  and
brought  two  Coats  with  him,  which  I  thought  had
beene  all  of  Silke,  uncut  :  and  he  said  unto  me,  Be-
hold two  garments  :  the  one,  Sartach  hath  sent  to  you  ;
and  the  other,  if  it  seeme  good  to  you,  you  shall
present  to  the  King,  on  his  behalfe.  To  whom  I
answered,  I  weare  no  such  garments,  I  will  present
them  both  unto  my  King,  in  honour  of  your  Lord.
Then  said  hee,  doe  with  them  what you  please,  but  it

i35

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1254.

pleased me  to  send  them  both unto  you,  and I send

them to you by the bearer of  these presents. He

delivered him  Letters  also to the Father of  Coiac,  to

restore  mee  all  which  appertayned  unto  me,  because  he

had no need  of  any  thing  which was mine. So  wee

They  come  to came to the  Court  of Baatu  the  same  day  I departed

the  Court  of thence,  the  yeere  past  : the second day  after  the Exal-

aatuy ep- Nation  of  the  blessed  Crosse. And  I  found  our  young

izcA.cap.iS.  men m health, yet much afflicted with penurie, as

The  Kins:  of Gosset  told  me. And  if  the  King  of  Armenia  had  not

Armenia  com-  comforted them, and recommended them to Sartach,

forted  them. they  had  perished  : for  they  thought  1  had  beene  dead.

The Tartars also demanded of them, if they could

keepe Oxen, or milke Mares. For, if I had not

returned,  they  had  beene  brought  into  their  servitude.

After  this,  Baatu  caused  me  to  come unto him,  and

made  the Letters  (which  Mangu  Chan  sends  unto  you)

to be interpreted unto me. For so Mangu wrote

unto  him,  that  if  it  pleased  him  to  adde  any  thing,  or

leave out, or change, hee should doe it. Then said

hee,  yee shall  carrie these Letters,  and  cause  them to

The  sea  frozen  ^ee  understood. Hee  demanded  also  what  way  I  would

in  the  Winter,  goe, whether  by Sea,  or Land? I said,  the Sea  was

[III.  i.  48.] shut,  because  it  was  Winter,  and  I  must  goe  by  Land.

For I thought you had beene yet in Syria, so I

directed my journey towards Persia. For if I had

.  7  thought you had passed into France, I would have

A  short  way  ° . * T  T  .  r  . . ,  ,  ,

by  Hungarie. gone  into LLungane  : so I should sooner have come

*Bigavimus into  France,  and by  a more  easie  way  then  into  Syria.

wane-travel- Then  wee  travelled  *  a moneth with him, before wee

ling  with could  have  a  Guide. At  length,  they  appointed  mee  a

moneth.  certaine Jugur, who understanding I would give him

His  Guide  was  nothing,  and  that  I  would  goe  forth-right  into  Armenia,

a  Jugur. caused Letters to be made, to conduct me to the

They  depart Soldan  of  Turkie,  hoping:  he  should  receive  gifts  of  the

from  Baatu. ni1  , ,  1  t i  1  1

17.  of  Octo- Soldan, and that he should gayne more that way.

her,  going Then we tooke our journey speedily (fifteene dayes

right  South. before the Feast of Al-Saints) towards Sarai, going

136

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1254.

forth  right  Southward,  descending  neere  to  Etilia,  which

is divided into three Amies there below  : every one  The  seven

whereof  is  almost  twice  as  big  as  the  River  of  Damiata.  ^thes  of  the

It  maketh foure  other  lesser  Armes  ; so  that  we  passed  y%{L

that  River  in  seven  places  by  Boat. Upon  the  middle

Arme  is  the  Village,  called Sumerkent,  without  a  wall  :  The  Village

but when the River overflowes,  it is compassed  with  Sumerkent>  or

—  . r . , r Astracanism

water. I  he 1  artars were eight yeeres about  it before  t^e  iat-ltU(ie  0f

they could take it  : and the Alani,  and the Saracens  46.  degrees.

were  in it. There we  found one  Dutch-man,  with his

wife, a very  good man, with whom Gosset stayed in

the Winter  : for  Sartach sent him thither to ease  his

Court. About those parts  was  Baatu on the  one side

of  the  River,  and  Sartach  on  the  other,  about  Christmas,

and they  goe no further downe. And  it falleth out,  They  goe  no

that all  the  River  is  frozen,  so they  passe  over. Here  father  downe,

1  is  great  store of  grasse, and there among the Caves  kent  0f

1  theeves  hid  themselves,  till  the  Ice  melt. Cojacks  father,  Astracan.

I  receiving  Sartachs  Letters, restored my vestments  unto  The  River  of

1  mee,  except  three  Albes  and  an  Amice  trimmed  with  fine  Fokafrozen

Silke,  and  a  Stole, and a  Girdle, and  a  Tualia  adorned

i  with  golden  embroyderie,  and  a  Surplice. He  restored  also

I  unto  me  the  silver  Plate,  except  the  Censer,  and  the  little

Boxe where the Chrisme was. All which, the Priests

I  which  were  with  Sartach  had. Hee  restored  my  Bookes,

t  except  our  Ladies  Psalter,  which  hee  kept  with  my  leave,

because I could not  denie  it  him  :  for  he  said,  Sartach

tooke  much  delight  in  it. Hee  also  requested  me,  that

I  if  it  happened,  that  I  returned  unto  those  parts  againe,

I would bring them a man that knew how to make

'Parchment:  for he  made  a  great  Church  (by  the  Com-  f^mmtAi0

mandement  of  Sartach)  upon  the  West  side  of  the  River,  Saraiis  upon

as  he  said,  and  a  new  Towne. Yet  I  know  that  Sartach  the  East  side  of

meaneth  no  such  matter. Sarai  and  the  Palace  of  Baatu,  &&£*- This

are  upon  the  Easterne  side  of  the  River. And  the  Valley  p/a//JSrjT

through  which  the  Armes  of  the  River  are  spread  abroad,  from  Jstracan

contayneth more then seven leagues in bredth. And  60.  Versta.

there  is  great  store  of  fish  there. A  Bible  also  in  verse,

i37

A.D.
1254.

Chap.  47.
From  Sarai
they  passe  by
the  Mountains
of  the  Alani,
and  by  the
Saracens  called
Lesgi,  and  by
Derbent,  by
the  Cit'ie
Samaron.
by  Alexanders
Inclosures  or
Walls,  by  the
Citie  Sha-
maghi,  by  the
great  Plaine
Moan,  and  the
Bridge  made
of  ships,  where
Cur  and
Araxes  meet

The  Tartars
have  little
store  of  Armor.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  a  certaine  Booke  in  the  Arabian, worth  thirtie Sul-
tanies,  and  many  other things  I  never  recovered.

SO  departing  from  him  on  the  Feast  of  All-Saints,  j
alwaies  going  toward  the  South,  in  the  Feast  of
Saint  Martin,  we  came  to  the  Mountaines  of  the  Alani.
Betweene  Baatu  and  Sarai  in  fifteene  dayes  we  found
no  people,  but  one  of  his  sonnes,  who  wrent  before  him,
with  Falcons,  and  his  Falconers,  who  were  many,  and
one  litle  Village.  From  the  Feast  of  All-Saints,  for  five
dayes,  we  found  not  a  man  :  and  wee  were  almost  in
great  danger  by  reason  of  thirst,  one  whole  day  and  a
night  finding  no  water,  till  about  three  of  the  Clocke
the  next  day,  the  Alani  in  those  Mountaines  yet  hold
out,  so  that,  of  ten  of  the  Subjects  of  Sartach,  two
must  come,  to  guard  the  straight  and  narrow  passages
of  the  Hills,  lest  they  come  forth  of  the  Mountaines,
and  steale  their  Cattell  in  the  Playne.  Betweene  the
Alani,  and  Porta  Ferrea,  which  is  two  dayes  journey
thence,  where  the  Playne  of  Arcacci  beginneth,  betweene
the  Caspian  Sea  and  the  Mountaines,  there  are  certaine
Saracens  called  Lesgi,  betweene  the  Mountaines,  who
likewise  resist  :  so  that  those  Tartars,  who  dwell  at  the
foot  of  the  Mountaines  of  the  Alani,  were  faine  to
give  us  twentie  men,  to  bring  us  beyond  the  Iron
gate,  or  Porta  Ferrea.  And  I  was  glad,  because  I
hoped  to  see  them  armed.  For  I  could  never  see  their
Armour,  though  I  had  beene  very  desirous.  And  when
we  came  to  the  dangerous  Passage,  of  twentie  there
were  two  which  had  Habergions.  And  I  demanded,
whence  they  had  them  ?  They  said,  they  had  gotten
them  of  the  Alani  aforesaid,  who  are  good  Worke-
men  for  such  things,  and  excellent  Smiths.  Whereupon,
I  thinke,  they  have  small  store  of  Armour,  but  Quivers,
and  Bowes,  and  Leather  Jackes.  I  saw  them  presented
with  Iron  Plates,  and  Iron  Sculls  (capillos)  out  of
Persia.  And  saw  two  also,  who  presented  themselves
to  Mangu,  armed  with  Coats  made  of  Hogs  skins  bent

138

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1254-

inward, of rough Leather, which were very unfit,

and unwildy. Before we came to Porta ferrea, wee

tound one Castle of the Alani, which was Mangu  A  Castle  of  the

Chans  : for  hee  had  subdued  that  Countrey. There  we  dlani.

first found Vineyards, and drunke Wine. The day

following,  wee came to Porta ferrea,  which  Alexander  A  description

the  Macedonian King made. And  it  is  a  Citie whose  % orta

d  i  ferrea  or

East end is upon  the  Sea  shoare,  and  there  is  a  little  j)er^ntm

Plaine  betweene  the  Sea  and  the  Mountaines,  through
which  the  Citie  is  stretched  forth  in  length  unto  the
top  of  the  Mountaine  which  bordereth  upon  it  on  the
West  :  so  that  there  is  no  way  above,  for  the  rough-
nesse  of  the  Mountaines,  nor  below  for  the  Sea,  but
forth-right  through  the  middest  of  the  Citie  over-
thwart,  where  there  is  an  Iron  gate,  from  whence  the
Citie  hath  the  name.  And  the  Citie  is  more  then  a
mile  long,  and  in  the  top  of  the  Hill  a  strong  Castle  :
and  it  is  as  much  in  bredth,  as  a  great  stones  cast  :
it  hath  very  strong  walls  without  Trenches,  and  Turrets
of  great  polished  stones.  But  the  Tartars  have  de-
stroyed the  tops  of  the  Turrets,  and  the  Bulwarkes  of
the  Walls,  laying  the  Turrets  even  with  the  Wall.  [III.  i.  49.]
Beneath  that  Citie,  the  Countrey  was  wont  to  bee  like  a
Paradise.

Two  dayes  journey  hence,  we  found  another  Citie  called  Samaron  a
Samaron,  wherein there were  many  Jewes. And when  Gitie  of  Jewes.
we  past  it,  we  saw  walles  descending  from  the  Mountaines
to  the  Sea. And  leaving the  way  by  the  Sea  by  those
walles,  because  it  bent towards  the East,  wee  went  up
into the high Countries towards the South. On the
morrow, wee  passed  through  a  certaine  Valley,  wherein
the  foundations  of  the  walles  appeared,  from  one  moun-
taine to  another,  and  there  was  no  way  through  the  tops
of  the  Mountaines. These  were  sometimes  the  Inclosures  Jf^/^f^
or walles of  Alexander, restraining the fierce Nations,  Alexander.
(to  wit)  the  Shepheards  of  the  Wildernes,  that  they  could  Qtyr  jnc/0_
not invade the inhabited Countries  and Cities. There  sures  where
are other walles or Inclosures where Jewes are. The  the  Jewes  are.

139

A.D.

1254.

Or  Samagi.
Moan  a  great
Plaine.
Cur,  or  the
River  Cyrus.
The  Geor-
gians.
The  Citie
Tiphlis.

*Reg.  19.45.

37-

Note  that  the
Hebrew  text
hath  Ararat
in  both  places.

Ganges,  a
great  Citie.

A  bridge  of
Ships.

Chap.  48.
They  alwaies
goe  up  the
River  of
Araxis,  by  the
Citie  Vaxnan,
by  the
Countrey  of
Sahensa,'by  the
Castle  Mar-
seugen,  by
Aini,  a  Citie
ofSahensa;
they  came  to
the  Head  of
Araxis.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

next  day  we  came  unto  a  certaine  great  Citie,  called
Samag.  And  after  this,  we  entred  into  a  great  Plaine,
called  Moan,  through  which  the  River  Cur  floweth,  of
the  which  the  Curgi  have  their  name,  whom  we  call
Georgians.  And  it  runneth  through  the  middle  of  Tiflis,
which  is  the  Metropolis  of  the  Curgines,  and  it  comes
directly  from  the  West  running  to  the  East,  to  the  fore-
said Caspian  Sea,  and  it  hath  excellent  Salmons.  In  that
plaine  wee  found  Tartars  againe.  Also  by  that  plaine
comes  the  River  Araxes,  which  commeth  from  the  greater
Armenia,  from  betwixt  the  South  and  West :  of  which  it
is  called  the  Land  Araxat,  which  is  Armenia  it  selfe.
Whereupon  in  the  booke  of  the  Kings  it  is  said  of  the
Sonnes  of  Sennacherib,*  that  having  slaine  their  Father
they  fled  into  the  Land  of  the  Armenians.  And  in  Esay,
it  is  said,  that  they  fled  into  the  Land  of  Ararat.  To
the  West  then  of  that  most  beautifull  Plaine  is  Curgia.
In  that  Plaine  the  Crosmini  were  wont  to  be.  And  there
is  a  great  Citie  in  the  entrance  of  the  Mountaines,  called
Ganges,  which  was  their  Metropolis,  stopping  the
Georgians  that  they  could  not  come  downe  into  the
Plaine.  Then  wee  came  to  the  Bridge  of  Ships,  which
were  fastened  together  with  a  great  Yron  chaine,  stretched
forth  crosse  the  River,  where  Cur,  and  Araxes  meet
together. But  Cur  loseth  his  name  there.

AFter  that,  wee  went  alwayes  upward  by  Araxes,
whereof  it  is  said ;  Pontem  dedignatur  Araxis,
Araxes  disdaines  a  Bridge ;  Leaving  Persia,  and  the
Caspian  mountaines  on  the  left  hand,  towards  the  South  :
on  the  right  hand,  Curgia,  and  the  great  Sea  toward
the  West :  going  Southwest,  betweene  the  South  and
the  West.  We  passed  through  the  meadowes  of  Bacchu,
who  is  Generall  of  that  Armie,  which  is  there  within
Araxis :  And  hee  hath  made  the  Curgi,  and  Turkes,  and
Persians  subject  to  him.  There  is  another  Governour
(in  Persia  at  Taurinum,  over  the  Tribute)  called  Argon.
Both  which  Mangu  Chan  hath  called  home  to  give  place

140

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1254.

to his Brother comming into those Countries. That

Countrey  which  I  have  described  to  you,  is  not  properly

Persia, but was sometimes called Hyrcania. I v/as  in

Bacchus  house,  and  hee  gave  us  Wine  to  drinke,  and  he  Bacchu  a

himselfe  dranke  Cosmos,  which I  would willingly  have  ^lnceoJtie
, t  1 1 i  •  •  11  Tartars:  of

drunke,  it  he  had  given  it  me  : yet  it  was  the best  new  w&om  perhaps

Wine : but Cosmos is more wholsome for  an hunger-  the  Citie

starven man. Wee went up therefore by the River  Bacchu  on  the

Araxes,  from  the  Feast  of  Saint  Clement,  unto  the  second  ff/^J™ is

Sunday  in  Lent,  till  we  came  to  the  head  of  the  River.  now  called  the

And beyond that  Mountaine  where  it  riseth,  there  is  a  Sea  of  Bacchu

goodly Citie, called Arserum, which belongeth to the  orBacou)hath

Soldan of Turkic And neare thereabout Euphrates  her  name-

ariseth  towards  the  North,  at  the  foot  of  the  Mountaines

of  Curgia :  to  whose  Spring  I had  gone,  but  the  Snow

was  so  great,  that  no  man  could  goe  out  of  the  trodden

path  :  on  the  other  side  of  the  Mountaines  of  Caucasus,

towards  the  South  ariseth  Tigris.  The  head  of

When  we  departed  from  Bacchu,  my  Guide  went  to  Tigris.

Taurinum  to  speake  with  Argon,  carrying  my  Interpreter

with  him. But  Bacchu  caused  me  to  bee  brought  to  a

certaine  Citie, called  Naxnan,  which  sometimes  was  the  Or  Vaxnan

head  of  a  certaine  great  Kingdome,  and  the  greatest  and  sometimes  the

fairest  Citie;  but  the  Tartars  have  made  it  a  Wildernes.  ^rj^Jg^

And there  were sometimes  Eight  hundred  Churches  of

the  Armenians  there  :  now  there  are  but  two  little  ones :

for  the Saracens have  destroyed them  : In  one  of  the

which,  I  held  the  feast  of  Christmas  as  I  could  with  our

Clerke. And  the  next  day  following,  the  Priest  of  that

Church  dyed :  to  whose  buriall  came  a  certaine  Bishop,

with  twelve  Monkes  of  the  high  Countries. For  all  the

Bishops  of  the  Armenians  are  Monkes,  and  of  the  Greekes

likewise,  for  the  greater  part. That  Bishop  told  me,  that

there  was  a  Church  neere  that,  where  Saint  Bartholmew,  Bartholmew

and  likewise  Saint  Judas  Thaddaeus  were  martyred : but  and  Thad-

there  was  no  way  open  for  Snow. He  told  me  also,  that aus at  ™rs

they  have  two  Prophets  :  The  first  or  chiefe  is  Methodius The  Propheste

the  Martyr,  who  was  of  their  Country,  and  plainely  Prophe-  °fMethodlus-

141

A.D.

I254.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

Or  Acatron,
his  Prophesie

sied  of  the  Ismaelites.  Which  Prophesie  is  fulfilled  in
the  Saracens.  The  other  Prophet  is  called  Acacron,  who
when  hee  dyed,  Prophesied  of  a  Nation  of  Archers,  that
should  come  from  the  North,  saying ;  That  they  should
Conquer  all  the  Countries  of  the  East :  and  should  spare
the  Kingdome  of  the  East,  that  he  might  give  them  the
Kingdome  of  the  West.  But  he  saith,  our  Friers  the
Frankes  being  Catholikes,  beleeve  them  not :  And  they
shall  possesse  the  Countries  from  North  to  South :  and
shall  come  unto  Constantinople,  and  shall  take  the  Port
of  Constantinople.  And  one  of  them,  who  shall  be  called
a  Wise  man,  shall  enter  the  Citie  :  and  seeing  the  Churches
and  rites  of  the  Frankes,  shall  cause  himselfe  to  be  Baptized,
and  shall  counsell  the  Frankes,  how  they  may  kill  the
Emperour  of  the  Tartars  ;  and  there  they  shall  be  con-
founded. Hearing  this,  the  Frankes  which  shall  be  in  the
[III.  i.  50.]  middle  of  the  Land,  (to  wit)  Hierusalem,  shall  set  upon
the  Tartars,  who  shall  border  upon  them,  and  with  the
helpe  of  our  Nation  (that  is)  the  Armenians,  shall  pursue
them :  so  that  the  French  King  shall  place  his  Royall
Throne  at  Taurinum  in  Persia.  And  then  all  East
Countries,  and  all  the  unbeleeving  Nations  shall  be  con-
verted to  the  Faith  of  Christ.  And  there  shall  be  so
great  Peace  in  the  world,  that  the  Living  shall  say  to
the  Dead,  Woe  be  unto  you  wretches,  that  lived  not  untill
these  times.  I  read  this  Prophesie  brought  to  Constan-
tinople by  the  Armenians,  which  remaine  there,  but  I
made  light  of  it.  Yet,  when  I  spake  with  the  said  Bishop,
calling  it  to  minde,  I  regarded  it  the  more.  And  through-
out all  that  Armenia,  they  as  firmely  beleeve  this  Prophesie
as  the  Gospell.  Hee  said  unto  us  also :  Even  as  the
Soules  in  Limbo  expected  the  comming  of  Christ  for
their  delivery ;  so  doe  we  looke  for  your  comming,  that
we  might  be  freed  from  this  slavery,  wherein  wee  have
so  long  lived.  Neere  the  City  (Vaxnan)  aforesaid,  there
are  Mountaines,  on  the  which  (they  say)  the  Arke  of
Noah  rested.  And  there  are  two,  one  greater  then  the
other,  and  Araxes  runneth  at  the  foote  of  them. And

Mountaines
on  the  which
Noahs  Arke
rested.

142

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1254.

there  is  a  little  Towne  there,  called  Cemainum,  which  is  OrCemanium

by  Interpretation,  Eight :  for  (they  say)  it  was  so  called  a^wne  °r  *

of  the  Eight  persons, which  came  foorth  of  the  Arke,

and  built  it. Many  have  assayed  to  climbe  the  greater

Hill,  and  could  not. And that  Bishop  told  me,  that  a  Armenian

certaine  Monke  was  very  much  troubled,  and  an  Angell  *a

appeared  unto  him,  and  brought  him  a  piece  of  the  wood

of  the Arke, willing  him to trouble  himself  no  more.

That  piece  of  Wood  they  had in their  Church, as he

told  me. Neither  is  the  Hill  so  high  in  appearance,  but

that  men  might  well  get  up  unto  it. A  certaine  Old  man

shewed  me  a  sufficient  reason,  why  none  should  climbe

it. They  call  that  Mountaine  Massis: and  it  is  of  the  TAe Mountain

Feminine  gender  in their  Tongue. No man  (saith he) mts'

must  climbe  up  Massis,  because  it  is  the  Mother  of  the

world.

In  that  Citie  (of  Vaxnan)  Frier  Bernard  Cathalane,  of
the  Order  of  the  Preaching  Friers  found  me ;  who  abode
in  Georgie,  with  a  certaine  Prior  of  the  Sepulcher,  who
possesseth  great  lands  there. And  he  had  learned  some-
what of  the  Tartars  language. Who  went  with  a  certaine
Hungarian Frier  to  Taurinum,  to  desire Argons  Passe
to  Sartach. When  they  came  there,  they  could  not  have
accesse : and the Hungarian Frier returned by  me to
Tephelis  with  one  Servant :  but  Frier  Bernard  remained  Tephelis.
at  Taurinum  with  a  certaine  Lay  Frier,  whose  language
he  understood  not. We  went  out  of  the  Citie  of  Vaxnan
in  octavis  of  the  Epiphanie :  for  we  had  stayd  long  there  January  14.
by reason  of  the Snow. We came therefore in foure  Snow.
dayes to the Countrey  of Sahensa, a  certain Curgine,  January  18.
sometimes  mighty,  but  now  tributary  to  the  Tartars,  who  T^e  Countrey
destroyed  all  his  Munition  :  whose  Father  Zacharias  got  °J
Ithat  Countrey  of  the  Armenians, having  delivered  them
from  the  hands  of  the  Saracens. And  there are many
faire  Villages  of  true  Christians, having  Churches  right
like the Frankes. And every Armenian hath in his
house, in  an  honourable  place,  a  wooden  hand  holding
a  Crosse,  and  he  sets  a  burning  Lampe  before  it:  And

i43

A.D.
1254.

A  Towne  of
Sahensa.
The  Countrey
of  the  Soldans
of  Turkic
Marsengen.

The  first  Sun-
day in  Lent.

February  the

2.

The  Citie

Aini,  belonged

to  Sahensa.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

that  which  we  doe  with  holy  Water,  sprinkling  it  to  drive
away  wicked  Spirits,  they  doe  the  same  with  Frankinsence.
For  every  evening  they  burn  Frankinsence,  carrying  it
through  all  the  corners  of  the  house,  to  rid  them  of  all
kinde  of  Enemies.  I  ate  with  the  foresaid  Sahensa,  and
he  did  me  great  reverence,  both  he  and  his  Wife,  and  his
sonne  Zachary  was  a  very  faire  and  wise  young  man.
Who  demanded  of  me,  that  if  he  should  come  unto  you,
whether  yee  would  entertaine  him ;  for  he  so  hardly
brooketh  the  Dominion  of  the  Tartars,  that,  though  he
have  plenty  of  all  things,  he  had  rather  travaile  into  a
strange  Country,  then  indure  their  Lord-like  Dominion.
They  said  further,  that  they  were  sonnes  of  the  Church
of  Rome :  and  if  the  Lord  Pope  would  send  them  any
ayde,  they  would  bring  all  the  bordering  Nations  unto
the  subjection  of  the  Church.

From  that  Towne  of  his,  in  fifteene  dayes,  we  entred
the  Countrey  of  the  Soldan  of  Turkie,  upon  the  first
Sunday  in  Lent.  And  the  first  Castle  we  found,  is  called
Marseugen.  All  in  the  Castle  were  Christians,  Armenians,
Curgines,  and  Greekes :  The  Saracens  onely  have  the
Dominion.  There,  the  Captaine  of  the  Castle  said,  he
had  received  commandement,  that  no  victuals  should  be
given  to  any  Franke,  or  to  the  Ambassadours  of  the
King  of  Armenia,  or  of  Vastacius.  So  that  from  the
place  where  wee  were  the  first  Sunday  in  Lent,  unto
Cyprus,  (whether  I  came  eight  dayes  before  the  Feast
of  Saint  John  Baptist)  we  must  buy  our  provision.  He,
who  was  my  guide  procured  me  Horses,  and  tooke
money  for  the  victuals,  and  put  it  in  his  purse.  When
he  came  into  the  Fields,  seeing  a  flocke  any  where,  hee
violently  tooke  one  Sheepe,  and  gave  it  to  his  family
to  eate,  and  marvailed  I  would  not  eate  of  his  robbery.
In  the  Purification  I  was  in  a  certaine  Citie  called  Aini,
which  was  Sahensas,  whose  situation  is  most  strong :  and
there  are  there  a  thousand  Armenian  Churches,  and  two
Synagogues  of  the  Saracens.  The  Tartars  place  a  Baily
there. There five Preaching Friers met me, whereof

144

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1254.

foure  came  from  Province  in  France,  and  the  fift  joyned

himselfe  to  them in  Syria, and  they  had  but  one  sicke

Boy, who  could speake  Turkish, and a little French :

And  they  had  the  Popes  letters  to  Sartach,  and  to  Mangu  The  PoPes

Chan, and to Buri ; such as your Highnes gave me, o^^f d

Letters  of  request,  that  they  would  suffer  them  to  con-  Mangu  Chan.

tinue  in  their  Countrey,  and  Preach  the  Word  of  God,

&c. But  when  I  told  them  what  I  had  seene,  and  how

they  sent  me backe  againe,  they  directed  their  journey

to Tephelis,  where there  are  Friers of  their Order, to

consult  what  they  should  doe. I  said unto them  they

might  well  passe,  by  those  Letters, if  they  would  : but

they  should  bee  well  assured  to  indure  much  labour,  and

render  an  account  of  their  comming  :  for  seeing  they  had

no  other  message,  but  the  office  of  Preaching,  they  would  [III.  i.  51.]

care  but  a  little  for  them,  and  chiefly,  because  they  had

no  Interpreter. What  they  did  after,  I  know  not.

THe  second  Sunday  in  Lent,  we  came  to  the  head  of  ^naP-  49-
Araxis,  and  passing  beyond  the  top  of  the Moun- r  e?tcon!e  ?
£ 1  7  1 ,  ,-S  i  11 Euphrates,  to

tame,  we  came  to  Luphrates  ; by  the  which  wee  descended  the  Castle

eight  dayes,  alwayes  going  to  the  West,  unto  a  certaine  Camath,  they
Castle,  called  Camath. There  Euphrates  bendeth  to  the  Passe  ini0
South  towards  Halapia. But  we  passing  the  River  went  J^T* *'
through  very  high  hilly  Countries,  and  through  the  deepe  Antiochia  and
Snow  to  the  West. There  was  so  great  an  Earthquake  thence  to
there  that  yeare,  that  in  one  Citie  called  Arsengan,  tenne  Tripolis.
thousand  persons  noted  by  name,  perished,  beside  poore >  e ltte
men  of  whom  there  was  no  notice  taken. Riding  three  mightih
dayes  together,  we  saw  the  gaping  of  the  Earth,  as  it  was  shaken  withan
cleft  by  the  Earthquake,  and the  heapes  of  Earth  which  Earthquake.

I  came  from the Mountaines,  and  filled  the  valleyes  : so  ™  fffi  °^
that  if  but  a  little  more  of  the Earth  had  beene  moved,  c/ove„m
that which Esay speaketh had beene literally fulfilled. The  Valley
Every valley  shall  be  filled,  and  every  Mountaine, and  where  the
little hill shall be humbled. We passed through the  ^^f
Valley  where the  Soldan of  Turkie was  vanquished of  van(Juished  of

;  the  Tartars. It  were  too  long  to  write  how  he  was  over-  the  Tartars.
xi  145  k

A.D.

1254.

Sebaste  of
the  lesser
Armenia.
Major
Hipdomada.

Cesarla  of
Cappadocia.

Iconium.

Allum  in
Turkie.
The  So/dan
of  Iconium.

Curcum  a
haven  of
Ci/icia,  over
against  the
East  part  of
the  Hand  of
Cyprus.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

come.  But  a  certaine  servant  of  my  guides  who  was  with
the  Tartars,  said  ;  That  the  Tartars  were  not  above  tenne
thousand  in  the  whole  ;  and  a  certaine  Curgine,  a  servant
of  the  Soldans,  said  ;  That  there  were  two  hundred  thou-
sand with  the  Soldan,  all  Horsemen,  In  that  plaine  where
the  Battaile  was,  nay  that  flight,  there  brake  out  a  great
Lake,  at  the  time  of  the  Earthquake.  And  my  heart  told
me  ;  that  all  that  Earth  opened  her  mouth  to  receive  yet
more  blood  of  the  Saracens.  We  were  in  Sebaste  of  the
lesser  Armenia  in  Easter  weeke.  There  we  visited  the
Tombes  of  forty  Martyrs.  There  the  Church  of  Saint
Blase  standeth  :  but  I  could  not  goe  thither,  because  it
was  above  in  the  Castle.  On  Low-Sunday  we  came  to
Cesaria  of  Cappadocia  ;  where  there  is  a  Church  of  Saint
Basill  the  great.  About  fifteene  dayes  after  we  came  to
Iconium,  making  small  journies,  and  resting  in  many
places  :  because  we  could  not  so  readily  procure  Horses.
And  my  guide  did  this  of  purpose :  taking  upon  him  to
sollicite  his  owne  busines  three  dayes,  in.  every  Towne  :
whereupon,  I  was  much  grieved,  but  durst  not  speake,
because  he  might  have  sold,  or  slaine  me  and  our  ser-
vants, and  there  was  none  to  gaine-say  it.  I  found  many
Frankes  at  Iconium,  and  a  certaine  Januensian  Marchant,
called  Nicholas  de  Sancto  Syrio.  Who  with  a  certaine
companion  of  his  a  Venetian,  called  Boniface  de  Molen-
dino,  carried  all  the  Allum  out  of  Turkie,  so  that  the
Soldan  could  not  sell  any,  but  to  those  two  :  and  they
made  it  so  deare,  that  what  was  wont  to  be  sold  for
fifteene  Bizantians,  is  now  sold  for  fifty.  My  guide  pre-
sented me  to  the  Soldan  ;  The  Soldan  said,  he  would
willingly  cause  me  to  be  convayed  to  the  Sea  to  Armenia,
or  Cilicia.  Then  the  foresaid  Marchant  knowing  that  the
Saracens  made  little  accompt  of  me,  and  that  I  was  much
burthened  with  the  company  of  my  guide  (who  troubled
me  every  day  to  give  him  gifts)  caused  me  to  be  conveyed
to  Curcum,  a  Haven  of  the  King  of  Armenia.  I  came
thither  the  day  before  the  Ascension,  and  stayed  till  the
day  after  Penticost. Then I  heard,  that  Ambassadours

146

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

1255.

came  from  the  King  to  his  Father. Then  I  went  speedily
to  the  Kings  father,  to demand,  whether  hee  had  heard
any  newes  of  his  Sonne  : And  I  found  him  set  with  all
his  Sonnes,  one  excepted,  called  Barum  Usin  :  Who  made  Barum  Usin.
a  certaine  Castle. And  he  received  newes  from  his  Sonne,
that  hee  was  returned :  And  that  Mangu  Chan  had  much
eased  his  Tribute,  and  had  given  him  a  Priviledge,  that
no  Ambassadour  should  come  into  his  Countrey. Where-
upon the  old  man  himselfe,  with  all  his  Sonnes  made  a
great  Banquet. And  he  caused me  to  be  conveyed  to
the  Sea,  to  the  Haven  called  Aijax  :  and  thence  I  passed  AtJax  or
over  into Cyprus. And  at  Nicosia I found our  Pro-  jiaz^l' 6
vinciall, who the same  day carried me with him to  ^  came  t0
Antiochia, which is in very weake state. Wee were  Cyprus.
there on the Feast of Saint Peter  and Paul. From  dntwchia.
thence we came to Tripolis, where our Chapter  was,  Jtnf  z,?'
in  the  Assumption  of  the  Blessed  Virgin.  Aumst\t.

ANd  our  Provinciall  determined,  that  I  should  leave  Chap.  50.
Aeon, not  suffering  me  to  come unto vou :  com-  ~!e  w™ ...
, .  .  °  1T  1J111  from  J-  rtpolt  to

manding,  to  write  unto  you,  what  1  would  by  the  bearer  Kin^Lodo-

of  these  Presents. And  not  daring  to  resist  contrarie  to  wick,  and
my  obedience,  I  did  according  to  my  power,  and  under-  &veth  his
standing  : craving pardon  of  your  invincible  Clemencie  adm{efor
for  my  superfluities,  or  wants,  or  for  any  thing  that  shall  jm^sLe >to
be  undiscreetly,  nay  foolishly  spoken,  as  from  a  man  of  the  Tartars.
little understanding, not accustomed to indite long
Histories. The  Peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  under
standing  preserve  your  heart  and  understanding.

I  would  willingly  see  your  Highnesse,  and  certayne
1  spirituall  friends,  which  I  have  in  your  Kingdome.
Wherefore,  if  it  should  not  bee  contrarie  to  your
Majesties  liking,  I  would  beseech  you  to  write  to  our
Provinciall,  that  he  would  let  me  come  unto  you,  and
returne  shortly  againe  into  the  Holy  Land.

Concerning Turkie, your Majestie shall understand, The  weake
that  the  tenth  man  there, is not  a Saracen  : nay, they  estate ,°f
are  all  Armenians,  and  Greekes,  and  Children rule  over

147

A.D.

1255,

[III.  i.  52.]

The  Bastard
Pacaster
getteth  the
Kingdome.

The  zveake
estate  of
Vastacius
and  Assau.

The  state  of
the  King  of
Hungaria.
Godfrey  of
Bullin  and
many  other
Princes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

them.  For  the  Soldan  who  was  conquered  of  the
Tartars,  had  a  lawfull  Wife  of  Hiberia,  by  whom  he
had  one  feeble  Sonne,  concerning  whom  he  charged,
that  he  should  be  the  Soldan.  He  had  another  of  a
Greek  Concubine,  whom  he  gave  to  a  certayne  great
Admirall.  The  third,  hee  had  of  a  Turke.  To  whom
many  Turks  and  Turcomans  being  gathered  together,
they  purposed  to  have  slaine  the  Sonnes  of  the  Christians.
They  ordayned  also  (as  I  understood)  that  after  they  had
gotten  the  Victorie,  they  would  destroy  all  the  Churches,
and  kill  as  many  as  would  not  become  Saracens.  But
hee  was  overcome,  and  many  of  his  men  slaine.  Hee
renued  his  Armie  the  second  time,  and  then  was  taken,
and  is  yet  in  Prison.  Pacaster  the  Sonne  of  the  Greeke
Concubine  procured  of  Filiaster,  that  he  might  be  Soldan,
because  the  other  was  weake,  whom  they  sent  to  the
Tartars.  Whereupon,  his  Kindred  on  the  Mothers  side
(to  wit)  the  Hiberi,  and  the  Curgi  were  angry.  So  that
a  child  ruleth  in  Turkie,  having  no  Treasure,  few
Warriours,  and  many  Enemies.  The  Son  of  Vastacius
is  weake,  and  hath  warre  with  the  Sonne  of  Assau,  who
likewise  is  a  child,  and  worne  out  with  the  servitude  of
the  Tartars.  Wherefore,  if  an  Armie  of  the  Church
should  come  to  the  Holy  Land,  it  were  a  very  easie
thing  to  subdue  all  these  Countries,  or  to  passe  through
them.

The  King  of  Hungarie  hath  not  above  thirtie  thousand
Souldiers.  From  Cullin  to  Constantinople  are  not  above
threescore  dayes  journey  by  Waggons.  From  Constanti-
nople are  not  so  many  dayes  journey  to  the  Countrey  of
the  King  of  Armenia.  In  old  time,  valiant  men  passed
through  these  Countries,  and  prospered,  yet  they  had
most  valiant  Resisters  ;  whom  God  hath  now  destroyed
out  of  the  Earth.  And  we  need  not  be  in  danger  of  the
Sea,  nor  in  the  mercie  of  Saylers.  And  the  price  which
wee  should  give  for  fraight,  were  sufficient  for  expenses
by  Land.  I  speake  it  confidently,  if  your  Countrimen
(I  say  not  Kings  and  Souldiers)  would  goe,  as  the  Kings

148

FRIAR WILLIAM OF RUBRUCK  a.d.

^  1255.
of  the  Tartars  goe,  and  bee  contented  with  such  victuals,  Tartars
they might winne the whole  World. It seemeth not  thnftie  in  food
expedient (as I thinke) that any Frier goe unto the  an ta^men '
Tartars  any  more,  as  I  did, or as  the  Preaching  Friers
doe. But if our Sovereigne Lord the Pope would  WhatMessage
honourably send a Bishop, and answere their follies  ;  or,  A™bassage
which they have thrise written to the Frankes  :  once  to  the  Tartars.
to  Pope  Innocent  the  Fourth of  Sacred Memorie,  and
twice  to  your Majestie, once by David, who deceived
you,  and  now  by  me,  he  might  speake  unto  them  what
he  would,  and  also cause  them to  put  those  things in
writing. For  they  heare  whatsoever  an  Ambassadour  will
speake,  and  alwayes  demand, if  he will say any  more.
But  he  must  have  a  good  Interpreter  ;  nay,  many  Inter-
preters, and  large  Expenses.

FOr  the  Readers  better  satisfaction  touching  the  former
Authour,  and  knowledge  of  the  North  parts  of  Asia
and  Europe  and  for  His  owne  sake  also,  I  have  added
this  Transcript  of  our  famous  Countriman  Frier  Bacon,
which  I  have  not  Englished,  both  to  prevent  tediousnesse
in  this  Worke,  otherwise  more  then  enough  voluminous  ;
and  because  he  was  an  Historian,  no  Traveller  ;  and  the
use  thereof  is  principally  to  such  as  can  reade  his  owne
Idiome  ;  a  good  part  also  being  the  same  with  that  which
our  former  Frier  hath  delivered.

[Chap.  II.

149

A.D.

I265.

Mare
Scythkum.

Porta  ferrea
vel  Derbent
Vid.  Plin.  L
6.c.  11.
videsis  etiam
Ortel  Thes.
Geog.

Mare  Cas-
pium Jit  ex
concursu
jiuminum.
hid.  Etym.
P/in./.6.c.i3.

Ptolemeeus
primus  prodi-
dit  Mare
Caspium  terra
undiquaque
Circundatum.

Capadocia.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Chap. II.

Ex  quarta  parte  Majoris  operis  fratris  Rogeri
Bacon,  Angli  excerpta  quaedam  de  Aquilo-
naribus mundi  partibus.

D  Aquilonarem  vero  partem  Indiae,  ut
dictum  est,  sunt  Mare  Scythicum,  &
montes  illi  magni,  qui  Caucasus  &
Taurus,  &  multis  aliis  nominibus  vo-
cantur,  secundum  diversitatem  locorum
&  Gentium.  Et  ab  Occidente  est  Per-
sida  seu  Parthia  &  Media.  Deinde  sub
eis  ad  Occidentem  est  Mesopotamia  &  tota  Syria,  ut
dictum  est.  Sed  in  confinio  Mediae  &  Parthiae,  est
Porta  ferrea  Alexandri  ;  quae  est  Civitas  denominata  a
Portis.  Et  illae  portae  dicuntur  Caspiae,  non  Caucasiae,
ut  dicit  Plinius.  Nam  aliae  sunt  portae  Caucasiae,  ut
postea  dicetur.  Quia  in  littore  Maris  Caspiae  sunt  hae
Portae.  Est  enim  Mare  quoddam  quod  sit  ex  concursu
maximorum  fluminum  venientium  ab  Aquilone,  &
Caspium  vocatur  atque  Hircanicum  secundum  Plinium.
Nam  Caspii  &  Hircani  super  littora  illius  Maris  inhabi-
tant. Non  igitur  est  hoc  Mare  veniens  ab  Oceano,  ut
Isidorus  &  Plinius,  &  omnes  Authores  Occidentales
scribunt.  In  hoc  enim  casu  non  habuerunt  experien-
tiam  certam,  nee  per  se,  nee  per  alios,  sed  ex  rumore
scripserunt.

In  libris  autem  de  moribus  Tartarorum,  &  per  fide
dignos,  qui  in  illis  Regionibus  fuerunt,  patet,  quod  hoc
Mare  sit  ex  concursu  fluminum.  Et  est  Mare  satis
magnum.  Nam  circuitus  est  quatuor  mensium.  Et
Hircania  prope,  est  super  littus  Meridionale  illius  Maris
in  termino  Parthiae.  Et  ubi  Parthia  conjungitur  Mediae
in  Portis  illis,  extenditur  a  Portis  Caspiis  versus  Orientem,
ut  dicit  Plinius.  Deinde  contra  residuum  Mediae  ad  ejus
Septentrionem,  &  ad  Occidentem  Hircaniae  est  major
Armenia  : & earn dividit Euphrates a Capadocia, ut

!5°

ROGER BACON  a.d.

1265.
dicit  Plinius. Propter  quod  Capadocia  est  ad  Occidentem
Armeniae majoris. Deinde versus Syriam & Mare
nostrum  est  Cilicia,  quae  dicitur  Armenia  minor. Unde  Cilicia  vel
jacet  partim  Medio,  partim  in  Occidente  Capadociae  ;  & omenta
ejus  principium  non  distat  ab  Antiochia  per  duas  dietas.
Sub  Cilicia  ad  Septentrionem  super  Mare  comprehenditur
Pamphilia,  ut  dicit  Plinius,  neglecta  gente Isaurica, vel  Pamphilia.
non  computata per se propter pravitatem, sed sub eis
comprehensa. In  Cilicia  est  Tarsus  Metropolis  ejus ;  in  [III.  i.  53.
quo  natus  fuit  Beatus  Apostolus  Paulus. Et  durat  Cilicia
a meridie in Septentrionem per Tarsum in latitudine
circiter  quatuor  dietas  versus  Turkiam. Nam ad Sep-  Turkia.
tentrionem Ciliciae  est  Lycaonia  ; ubi  est  Iconium  cele-  Lycaonia.
berrima  Civitas ; a qua Lycaonia dicitur quasi Iconia.  ^°yum-
Unde  Princeps  eorum  vocatur  Soldanus  Iconii  &  Turkiae.  j »
Et a finibus  Armeniae usque Iconium sunt  octo  dietae.
Nomina  Provinciarum in  his Regionibus sunt multum
mutata propter guerras. Nam Turkia multas terras
occupat  quae  apud  Authores  habent  nomina  antiqua. Ut
est  pars  Asiae  minoris,  &  Phrygia  &  Lydia. Asia  vero
major  continet  plus  medietate  Mundi,  & totum praeter
Europam  &  Africam : unde  continet  hanc  Asiam  mino-
rem. Et  haec  nunc  vocatur apud Graecos  Anatoli, id
est,  Orientalis  Graecia : in  qua  est  Galatia ;  unde  Galatae,
quibus  scribit  Apostolus  :  &  Troia  dicitur  ilia  formo-

sissima  Civitas :  &  sunt  aliae  mutae,  ut  Ephesus,  &  7.
Ecclesiae  Apocalypsis ;  &  Nicea :  unde  Synodus  Nicena,  &
multae  aliae.  Et  ab  Iconio  usque  Niceam  sunt  20.  dietae  in
aestate :  &  ab  ea  usque  ad  Brachium  Sancti  Georgii  (quod
apud  antiquos  vocatur  Hellespontus)  Mare  inter  Italiam
&  Antiochiam.  Et  ibi  terminatur  Asia  minor.  Et  habet
a  parte  Occidentis  Thraciam,  Macedoniam,  &  Achaiam.
A  parte  vero  meridiei  habet  Mare  illud,  quod  est  inter
Italiam  &  Graeciam,  &  Antiochiam,  &  Egyptum.  Ab
Oriente  habet  Phrygiam.  Nam  ut  dicit  Plinius  curialite,
Phrygia  Troadi  superejecta  Septentrionali  sua  parte
Galatis  continua  est,  meridiana  Lycaoniae  ab  Occidente
Capadociam  habet. Et  dicit  quod  Lydia,  Phrygiae  ex  ortu

Isl

A.D.
I265.

Descriptio
Maris  Pontici
vel  majoris.
Regiones
Aquilonares.
Oceanus  Sep-
tentrionalis.
Quibus  autho-
ribus  usus  est
maxitne.

Sinopolis.
Boldaia.

Cassar'ia  ohm
fuit  appellata
Taurica
Chersonesus.

Kersova
civitas.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

solis  vicina  est,  unde  fuit  Croesus  ditissimus  Rex  Lydorum.
Brachium  vero  Sancti  Georgii  est  strictum  multum,  &  habet
Constantinopolim  ab  Occidente  in  Europa.  Et  extenditur
a  Mari  magno  quod  est  inter  Asiam  &  Egyptum,  Syriam,
&  Italiam,  circiter  centum  leucas  versus  Aquilonem,  usque
ad  aliud  Mare,  quod  vocatur  Ponticum,  &  Mare  Majus.
Et  istud  Mare  habet  formam  arcus  Scythici ;  &  multas
Regiones  disterminat.  Unde  hie  incipiunt  Regiones
Aquilonares :  de  quibus  Philosophi  meridiani  parum
sciverunt,  secundum  quod  Ethicus  Astronomus  refert  in
suo  libro.  Sed  hie  perambulavit  omnes  has  Regiones,
&  Mare  Oceanum  Septentrionale  cum  Insulis  suis  navi-
gavit.  Volo  sequi  ipsum :  &  nihilominus  libros  de
moribus  Tartarorum  :  &  praecipue  fratrem  Willielmum,
quern  Dominus  Rex  Franciae,  Lodovicus  in  Syria  existens
misit  ad  terram  Tartarorum  anno  Domini  1253.  Qui
frater  scripsit  Domino  Regi  situm  Regionum  &  Marium.
Extenditur  autem  hoc  Mare  majus  ab  Occidente,  scilicet
a  Constantinopoli  in  Oriens,  per  mille  quadringenta
milliaria  in  longum  :  &  in  medio  ejus  coarctatur  ex
utraque  parte  in  angulos :  &  in  angulo  meridiano  est
castrum  &  portus  Turkiae,  quod  vocatur  Sinopolis :  A
parte  vero  Aquilonis  habet  aliud  castrum  in  angulo,
quod  vocatur  Soldaia;  &  est  in  Provincia  quae  nunc
Cassaria  dicitur,  id  est,  Caisaria.  Et  sunt  trecenta  milliaria
inter  Sinopolim  &  Soldaiam.  Et  haec  est  latitudo  maris
inter  illos  angulos.  Et  ista  castra  sunt  duo  portus  famosi,
a  quibus  transeunt  homines  a  meridianis  Regionibus  ad
Aquilonares,  &  e  contrario.  Et  ab  istis  castris  versus
Occidentem  seu  Constantinopolim  extenditur  Mare  per
septingenta  milliaria  in  longum  &  latum,  similiter  ad
Orientem  per  septingenta.  Et  ista  Provincia  Cassaria
circundatur  Mari  a  tribus  lateribus.  Nam  in  Occidente
habet  partem  Maris  Pontici,  ubi  est  civitas  Kersova,  in
qua  fuit  Sanctus  Clemens  martyrisatus  ;  &  prope  earn
est  Insula,  in  qua  est  Templum,  quod  dicitur  Angelicis
manibus  prseparatum,  in  quo  corpus  Sancti  sepultum  fuit.
Et  a  Kersova  usque  ad  Soldaiam  sunt  quadringinta  castra,

r52

ROGER BACON  a.d.

1265.
quorum  quodlibet  fere  habet  proprium  Idioma. Et  sunt
ibi  multi Goti,  qui  omnes  loquuntur  Teutonicum. Et  Goti.
a parte meridiei Cassariae extenditur Mare Ponticum :
Et  in  Oriente  ejus  cadit  flumen  Tanais  in  Mare,  ubi  habet
latitudinem duodecim milliariorum, ubi est Civitas
Matrica. Et  flumen  illud  versus  Aquilonem  facit  Mare  Matrica
quoddam, habens septuaginta miliaria in  longitudine &  cwttas-
latitudine,  nusquam  habens  profunditatem  ultra  6.  pedes.
Et hoc Mare est Palus Maeotis famosissima, de qua  Palus  Marotis.
Philosophi  &  Historiae  &  Poetas  loquuntur.

Et  flumen  Tanais  extenditur  ultra  illam  paludem  versus
Aquilonem  usque  ad  montes  Riphaeos ;  qui  sunt  in  ultimo  Monies
Aquilonis : a quibus montibus oritur hoc flumen, &  RlPh*u
descendit  per  longum  terras  tract um  in  Paludem  supra-
dictam,  faciens  earn ; & ultra  earn  disgraditur,  & fluit
in  Mare  Ponticum,  ut  praedixi. Et  hoc  flumen  famosum
dividit  Europam  ab  Asia  in  locis  illis,  &  Palus  ilia  &  plures
paludes  sunt  contiguae  :  sed  quasi  pro  una  computantur,
&  vocantur  paludes  Maeotis :  vel  Maeotidae  in  adjectivo.
Paludes igitur illae quae vocantur Mare  illud vadosum
sunt  in  Oriente  Cassarias  ;  &  pars  fluminis  Tanais,  quae
est  inter  paludes  &  Mare  Ponticum. Et  haec  Provincia
Cassaria habet ab Aquilone vastam solitudinem, quae  Pasta  Solitude
extenditur  a  flumine  Tanai  in  Oriente  usque  ad  Danubium  fartancum
in  Occidente  itinere  duorum  mensium  velociter  equitando,  mMarhrum
sicut  equitant  Tartari. Et  hoc  est  una  die  quantum  est  nostrorum.
ab  Aurelianis  Parisiis. Unde  durat  haec  terra  circiter  4.
menses, secundum quod  alii homines  communiter  equi-
tant. Et  haec  terra  fuit  tota  Cumanorum,  qui  dicebantur  Cuniani.
Captac. Sed  Tartari  destruxerunt  earn  totaliter,  &  inter-  Captac.
fecerunt  Cumanos,  praeter  partem  quae  fugit  ad  Regnum
!  Hungariae,  qui  sunt  ei  tributarii :  Et  a  Teutonicis  dicitur
!  Valana ;  A  Plinio  &  Isodoro  &  caeteris  Alania  Occiden-  Akmta
;  talis. Et  haec Provincia habet  Danubium,  &  Poloniam, Occidentalism
1  & Hungariam, ab Occidente. Et ab Aquilone istius
'Provincial est Russia magna: quae similiter a Polonia  Russiamagna.
,  in una  parte  sua  extenditur  ad  Tanaim  ;  sed  in  magna
sui parte habet Leuconiam in Occidente (quae  est  terra  VelLituaniam.

i53

A.D.
I265.

Mare

Szveciam.

Dacia.

Swecia.

Norguegia.

[III.  i.  54.]

Mare
Orientale.

Estonia  hinc
vocati  ejus
Incolce  in
nostris historiis
Easterlings.
Livonia.
Prussia.

Semigaliia.

Albania.
Danubii
duodecim  ostia.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ita  magna  sicut  Alemannia :) Ad  cujus  partem  Occiden-
talem sunt multae terrae in circuitu Maris cujusdam :
quod Mare fit per multa  Braechia Maris Oceani quae
veniunt per medium Daciae,  & ultra versus Orientem
diktat se magnum Mare, quod ab Occidente habet
Daciam & Sweciam  : Sed Swecia est ad Aquilonem
Daciae  declinans  aliquantulum  in  Orientem  ultra  Daciam :
ultra  quas  ad  Aquilonem  est  Norguegia. Deinde Mari
magno  interjecto sunt  Scotia  &  Anglia: & Mari  parvol
interposito Hibernia. Notae sunt hae Regiones ; sed  |
tango eas propter  notitiam aliorum. Si ergo  a  finibusj
Occidentalibus ex parte Aquilonis ascendamus versus  |
Orientem, primo  est  Hibernia,  secundo  Britannia  major,!
quae  continet  Angliam & Scotiam : Deinde  Norguegia,
Swecia,  Dacia,  & post  in  Orientem versus  est  magnum
mare praedictum, quod vocatur mare Orientale; quia
Oceanus  non  se extendit  ultra aliud mare : Sed  super
latus Aquilonare istius maris immediate post angulum
Sweciae  est  Estonia :  deinde  Livonia  versus  Orientem  illius
maris :  deinde  Curonia  seu  Curlandia  declinando  ad  Meri-
dianum  latus : postea  Prussia  magna  terra  in  Meridiano
latere  : deinde  Pomerania : postea  Lubec  portus  magnus
& famosus in confinio Daciae & Saxoniae. In medio
istius  maris est  Insula  quaedam,  quae  vocatur  Gotlandia.
Et  super  Livoniam  ad  Orientem  est  Semigaliia. Curoniam
circundat Leuconia praedicta,  & etiam circundat Russia
magna  ex  utraque  parte  maris  dicti,  &  terminatur  Meri-
diana  ad  Prussiam  &  Poloniam. Polonia  vero  jacet  ad
Meridiem Prussiae : & ad  Meridiem  ejus  est  Bohemia :
deinde Austria. Et ad Occidentem terrarum istarum
Alemannia ; & postea Francia & Hispania. Sed hae
notae sunt: facio tamen mentionem  propter alias. Ad
Orientem  Austriae &  Bohemiae est Hungaria,  ad  quam
Occidentalis  pars  Albaniae descendit. Nam cadit super
Danubium, qui fluit per medium Hungariae, & ultra
earn in  mare  Ponticum  per  duodecim  ostia  magna. In
termino vero Hungariae Orientalis a parte Aquilonis
occurrit Moldavia, contra quam  ad Meridiem Danubii

i54

ROGER BACON  ad.

1265.
sunt  *  Balchi & Bulgari &  Constantinopolis,  quae  terrae  *Vel  Valachi.
antiquitus  vocabantur Thracia. Albania igitur Occiden-  Albania
talis  extenditur  a  Danubio  post  finem  Hungarian  versus  Occidentalis.
Orientem  usque  ad  flumen  Tanaim  ;  habens  Cassariam  a
Meridie,  & Balchiam, Bulgarian! & Constantinopolim.
Ab Occasu vero Hungarian! & Poloniam, & extremi-
tatem  Russia? : ab  Aquilone habet totam longitudinem
Russiae.

Et  ultra  Russiam  ad  Aquilonem  est  Gens  Hyperborea,  Gens  Hyper-
I  qua? sic nominatur a montibus magnis, qui vocantur  ^orea,  ex
iHyperborei. Et  haec Gens propter aeris salubritatem  Ti^mm
jvivit  in  sylvis. Gens  longaeva  usque  quo  fastidiant  mor-
tem, optimarum  consuetudinum,  Gens  quieta  &  pacifica,
nulli  nocens,  nee  ab  alia  Gente  molestatur:  sed  confugiunt
ad earn sicut  ad asylum. Qualiter  autem  potest  Regio
ibi esse temperatissima, tetigi prius in complexionibus
docorum  Mundi. Et  sic habemus regiones  Aquilonares
in  Europa  notabiles. Ritus  vero  istarum  Gentium  sunt
diversi. Nam  Prutenti,  Curlandi,  Livonii,  Estonii,  Semi-
galli,  Leuconii  sunt  Pagani. Alani  vero  non  sunt,  quia  Pagani.
Tartari ceperunt terram illam, & fugaverunt omnes,  Tartan.
usque  in  Hungarian!. Et  Cumani  sunt  Pagani :  &  Alani  Alam  deletu
fuerunt  similiter,  sed  deleti  sunt. Ruteni  sunt  Christiani,
& sunt  scismatici, habentes ritum Graecorum, sed non
utuntur  lingua  Graeca ;  immo  lingua  Sclavonica : quae  est
una de linguis, quae plures occupat regiones. Nam
Russiam,  Poloniam  &  Bohemiam,  &  multas  alias  Nationes
tenet.  Tartari  vero  a  Danubio  in  ho  in

terram Alanorum seu Cunamorum, & ulterius, usque  Deest  Rnea.
fere ad partes ultimas Orientis, &  alias Nationes eis  Tartari.
vicinas ad Aquilonem  & Meridiem  subjugaverunt pro
maxima  parte. Nam aliquae Gentes sunt in montanis
fc locis tutissimis, quas non possunt debellare, licet
sint  eis  vicini, quia  sunt  inexpugnabiles.

Tanais  quidem fluvius  descendit a  montibus  Riphasis  Mantes
dtissimis,  qui  sunt  in  vero  Aquilone :  nee  est  ultra  illos  Riphai.
id  Aquilonem  habitatio. Et  in  termino  Oriental  Russiae
k  Alaniae,  ubi  mercatores  &  alii  conveniunt  de  Hungaria

i55

A.D.
I265.

Hoc  Casale
hodie  vacatur
Asou.

Albania
superior.
Etilia  flumen,
nunc  Edel,  iff
Volga,  crescit
non  ex  eadem
causa,  quia
Nilus,  nee
eodem  modo;
sed  Hyeme
conge  latur;
cestate  lique-
jiunt  nives,
\3c.

*Etiam  in
ipsis  de  ea
fabulis  &
antiquandis
antiquitatis
nugis.

Docti  tamen
author  iste,
cujus  tempore
nee  loca  ista
detecta,  nee
fabul<z.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

&  Cassaria  &  Polonia  &  Russia  est  quoddam  Casale,
ubi  navigio  pertransitur  Humeri  Tanais.  Et  est  Tanais
ibi  ad  latitudinem  Sequanae  Parisiis.  Et  ultra  flumen
illud  est  Albania  superior  usque  ad  aliud  flumen  mag-
num, quod  vocatur  Etilia,  quae  major  est  in  quadruplo
quam  Sequana :  &  est  de  majoribus  fluminibus  Mundi ;
&  crescit  in  aestate  sicut  Nilus :  &  a  parte  Aquilonis  distat
hoc  flumen  a  Tanai  per  decern  dietas  :  sed  versus  meri-
diem multum  seperantur.  Nam  Tanais  cadit  in  mare
Ponticum,  &  Etilia  in  mare  Caspium :  &  facit  illud  mare,
cum  aliis  fluminibus  multis,  quae  veniunt  de  Perside  &
aliis  locis.  Nam  a  Pontico  mari  secundum  Plinium
sunt  tricenta  octoginta  milliaria  usque  ad  mare  Caspium.
Et  in  hac  terra  habitabant  Cumani.  Sed  Tartari  deleve-
runt  omnes,  sicut  ex  altera  parte  fecerunt  usque  ad
Danubium,  ut  dictum  est.  Et  Tartari  habent  pecora
infinita,  &  habitant  in  tentoriis,  non  habentes  villas  nee
castra,  nisi  rarissime.  Et  unus  Princeps  cum  exercitu,
&  cum  suis  armentis  gregum  vagatur  inter  duo  flumina.
Ut  unus  inter  Boristhenem  &  Tanaim :  alius  inter
Tanaim  &  Etiliam  ;  &  sic  ultra  versus  Orientem,  quia
semper  divisi  sunt  per  pascua  &  aquam.  Et  a  Januario
incipiunt  adire  partes  Aquilonares  juxta  flumina  usque
ad  Augustum  :  &  tunc  redeunt  versus  meridianas  propter
frigus  Aquilonis  in  hyeme.  Et  versus  Aquilonem  distat
Etilia  a  Provincia  Cassariae  per  unum  mensem  &  tres
dietas,  sicut  equitant  Tartari.  Haec  vero  terra  Tartaro-
rum  inter  Tanaim  &  Etiliam  habet  ad  Aquilone  quasdam
Gentes :  &  primo  est  Gens  Arimphaea  prope  montes
Riphaeos,  quae  est  similis  Hyperboreis  in  *  omnibus.
Et  hae  duae  Gentes  sunt  prope  polum  in  Aquilone.
Sed  remotius  ab  Aquilone  ultra  Tanaim  est  primo  Gens
quae  vocatur  Moxel,  subjecta  Tartaris.  Et  sunt  adhuc
sine  lege  pure  Pagani :  civitatem  non  habent,  sed  casulas
in  sylvis.  Dominus  eorum  &  magna  pars  eorum  fuerunt
interfecta  in  Polonia  per  Polonos  &  Alemannos  &
Boemos.  Nam  Tartari  duxerunt  eos  ad  bellum  cum
Polonis : & multum approbant Polonos & Alemannos

156

ROGER BACON  a.d.

1265.

de  strenuitate  : sperantes  adhuc  liberari  a  servitute  Tar-

tarorum  per  eos. Si  mercator  veniat  inter  eos, oportet

quod  ille  in  cujus  domo  primo  hospitatur,  det  ei  expensas  &**%*>  vel

quantum vult ibi morari. Haec enim est consuetudo  J^f".

lllius  Kegionis. Post  hos  ad  Onentem  est  Gens  quaedam  nmen>  y0lga

quae vocatur Merduini, subjecti Tartaris. Sed sunt  Moscovitkum.

Saraceni,  habentes  legem  Machometi. Post  eos  est  Etilia  Nota  <luod

flumen praedictum quod  descendit  a  maiori  Bulgaria,  de  maj07  ,u~
r  ..  ^ .  .,.  J . .  t% • • gana,  hodie

qua postea dicetur. A meridie vero istius Kegionis  Russiadkitur

Tartarorum super  mare  Ponticum  sunt  Hiberi &  Geor-  y  Muscwia.
giani. Et  in  Georgia  est  metropolis  civitas,  quae  vocatur  [III.  i.  55.]
Tephelis, in qua  Fratres Praedicatores habent domum. Tephelis.
Et ulterius  versus Orientem est terra Corasminorum  : Cormini
sed  deleti  sunt  a  Tartaris. Et  in  his  locis  solebant  anti-  deletu
quitus esse Amazones, secundum Plinium & Ethicum  Amaxones.
Astronomum. Amazones  enim,  ut  refert  Ethicus,  fuerunt  Paha.
mulieres  ducentes  exercitum  magnum  ex  mulieribus  sine
viris  collectum  :  quae  advocantes viros  certis  temporibus
anni conceperunt  : sed masculos genitos interfecerunt,
faeminas  reservando,  quarum  in  juventute  mamillas  dextras
per  artificium  chirurgiae  abstulerunt  ne  in  sagittando  reci-
perent  impedimentum  per mamillas  ; &  Minotauros ac
Centauros, monstra ferocissima  nutriverunt a  juventute
mamillis  suis  :  unde  antecedebant  eas  sicut  matres  suas  :
!& omnem exercitum premebant magis per hujusmodi
jmonstra,  quam  per  arma  :  &  similiter Elephantes a  ju-
ventute nutriebant  &  assuescebant ad bella  : &  sic per
jcentum  annos  vastabant  meridianas  partes  Asiae  &  Graeciae,
jdonec  ab  Hercule  fuerunt  seductae  &  distructae.

Haec  vero  loca  Georgianorum  &  Corasminorum  habent
terram  Soldani  Turkiae  &  Capidociam  a  Meridie. Nam
tn  latere Meridiano  maris  Pontici  est  terra  Soldani  usque
ad  Sinopolim,  de  qua  prius  dictum  est  :  &  post  earn  in
eodem  latere  maris  versus  Occidentem  est  terra  Vastacii,  Terra  Vas-
scilicet  Graecia  Oriental  is. Nam  Occidentalis  vocatur  ubi  t(*cn  5ttus-
Constantinopolis  est,  &  Regiones  ei  annexae  citra  Brachium  ir%ezon^g
Sancti  Georgii  in  Europa. Sed  Armenia  major  est  super
Capadociam ad Orientem. Et ideo ilia Armenia etsi

i57

A.D.

1265.

TerraArarat.

De  hoc  dubito.

Tr'ia  flumina
ex  eisdem
montibus.

Frater
Willelmus.
Vid.  sup.  in
Rubruq.
Bartholo-
mew.
Judas
Thadaus.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Meridiana  sit  respectu  Georgiae,  tamen  in  Orientem  tendit,
&  extenditur  usque  Mediam  &  Mesopotamiam.  Et  haec
terra  tota  aestimatur  a  multis  esse  terra  Ararat ;  propter  hoc
quod  in  Isaia  diciter,  quod  filii  Sennacherib  interfecto  patre
fugerunt  in  Ararat :  In  libro  Regum  dicitur,  quod  fugerunt
in  Armeniam.  Sed  Jeronimus  undecimo  libro  super  Isaiam
soluit  hoc  dicens  :  Ararat  regio  in  Armenia  campestris  per
quam  Araxis  fluit  incredibilis  ubertatis  ad  radices  montis
Tauri,  qui  usque  illuc  extenditur.  Quapropter  Ararat  non
est  tota  Armenia,  sed  regio  determinata;  magna  tamen  est.
Nam  Araxes  fluvius,  a  quo  Ararat  regio  nominatur,  exten-
ditur a  capite  suo  per  iter  trium  mensium  &  amplius.
Caput  autem  ejus  est  Fons  in  monte  Armenian  ubi  proprie
oritur  Euphrates  ex  parte  Aquilonis,  &  Tigris  ad  aliud
latus  montis  versus  Meridiem.  In  montibus  autem  Ar-
menian testante  Scriptura  requievit  Area  Noe  :  Sed  non  in
quibuscunque  montibus  :  quoniam  non  est  in  istis,  ubi
oriuntur  ista  tria  flumina  magna,  sed  in  altissimo  Tauri
montis  cacumine,  ubi  Ararat  regio  est,  secundum  quod
dicit  Jeronimus  undecimo  super  Isaiam  ;  Area  in  qua
liberatus  est  Noe  cessante  diluvio  non  ad  montes  generaliter
Armeniae,  sed  ad  montes  Tauri  altissimos,  qui  Ararat  im-
minent campis.  Et  prope  illos  montes  est  civitas  quae
maxima  fuit,  antequam  eum  destruxerunt  Tartari.  Nam
fuerunt  in  ea  octingentae  Ecclesiae  Hermenorum.  Et  in
tempore  Fratris  Willelmi,  cum  transivit  per  earn,  non  fue-
runt nisi  duae  parvulae  :  Et  ibi  prope  fuerunt  Martyrizati
Beatus  Bartholomaeus  &  Beatus  Judas  Thaddasus.  Et  ibi
sunt  duas  Prophetiae.  Una  est  Beati  Methodii  Martyris,
qui  fuit  de  Gente  ilia.  Et  plane  prophetavit  de  Ismaelitis  :
quae  prophetia  impleta  est  in  Saracenis.  Alius  Propheta
eorum  vocatur  Akaton,  qui  prophetavit  de  Tartaris  &
destructione  eorum.  Dicit  enim,  quod  ab  Aquilone  veniet
Gens  Sagittaria,  quae  omnes  Nationes  Orientis  subjugabit :
Et  veniunt  in  Regnum  Occidentis,  scilicet  ad  Constantino-
polim,  &  ibi  per  Principes  Occidentis  destruentur.  Et
tunc  convertentur  omnes  Gentes  Christi  :  &  erit  tanta
pax  ubique,  quod  vivi  dicent  mortuis : Vae  vobis, quod

158

ROGER BACON  a.d.

1265.
non  vixistis  usque  nunc. Et  Imperator  Christianus  ponet
solium  suum  in  Taurino  in  Perside. Et  Hermeni  habent
istam  prophetiam  sicut  Evangelium. Et  civitas  memorata
vocatur  nunc Naxuan  ; quae  solebat  esse  caput  Regni  :  Nunc
&  est  versus  partes  Aquilonares  Armeniae. Nam  a  festo  Nachchuan-
Sancti  Clementis  ascendit  Frater  Willelmus  juxta  Araxem
ubi terminatur versus  Aquilonem  ; & in festo Natalis
venit  ad  illam  civitatem  ;  &  in  Octavis  Epiphanias  recessit
ab  ea  :  &  per  Araxem  ivit  usque  ad  caput  ejus  in  secunda
Dominica  quadragesimae  :  &  non  longe  plus  est  a  civitate  ilia
ad  ultimum  Armeniae  a  parte  Meridiei,  quam  ad  Aquilonem.
Deinde  superius  ad  Orientem  sunt  montes  Alanorum,  &
Aas,  qui  sunt  Christiani,  &  recipiunt  indifferenter  omnes  Alani.  Aas.
Christianos  tarn  Latinos  quam  Graecos :  unde  non  sunt  scis-
matici,  &  pugnant  cum  Tartaris ;  &  similiter  Alani. Post

os  ad Orientem  sunt  Saraceni,  qui  vocantur  Lelgi,  qui  Lelgi,
similiter  propter  terra  fortitudinem  pugnant  cum  Tartaris.  Saraceni-
Post  illos  ad  Orientem  sunt  Portae  Caspiae  super  Mare  PortteCaspi*.

aspium,  quas  Alexander  magnus  construxit  in  concursu
Montium.  Nam  cum  voluit  expugnare  Gentem  Aqui-
onarem  non  potuit  propter  illius  Gentis  ferocitatem  &
nultitudinem,  Et,  ut  dicit  Ethicus,  stetit  per  annum
anum  &  menses  tres,  ut  defenderet  se  ab  eis,  &  ingenuit
}uod  talis  pessima  Gens  fuisset  in  partibus  Aquilonis  ;  &
*xclamavit  ad  Deum,  ut  apponeret  remedium,  ne  mundus
iestrueretur  per  eos.  Sed,  licet  non  fuit  dignus  exaudiri,
amen  Deus  sua  bonitate,  &  propter  salutem  generis
lumani,  jussit  fieri  terrae  motum  maximum,  &  montes
listantes  per  stadium  conjuncti  sunt  usque  ad  latitudinem
mius  Portae.  Et  Alexander  tunc  fecit  fundi  columnas  aereas
nirae  magnitudinis,  &  erexit  portas  &  linivit  eas  bitumine,  Bitumen
mod  nee  igne,  nee  aqua,  nee  ferro  dissolvi  posset,  quod  eSreSium  **
cquisivit  ex  Insulis  maris.  Nee  potuerunt  divini  aliquo  nsu  *  mans'
nodo  nisi  per  terrae  motum  :  &  jam  directae  sunt. Nam

rater  Willelmus,  transivit  per  medium  earum  cum  Tar-
aris. Et est ibi civitas quae vocatur Porta ferrea  Porta ferrea
Uexandri : a  qua  versus  orientem  incipit  Hircania  super  dkxandri.
-Jircanum  mare,  quod  est Caspium,  ut superius dictum

i59

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1265.

est. Nam Hircania  jacet  super  littus  meridionale illius

maris,  & extenditur  usque  ad  terminos  Indiae  : a  cujus

Hircaniae  latere  meridionali  sunt  Media  &  Parthia  ;  sicut

prius  fuit  annotatum. Hae  vero  Portae  non  sunt  Caucasiae,  |

sed  Caspiae,  ut  dicit  Plinius  : nee  Caucasiae  sunt  Caspiae.

Nam Caucasiae distant a Caspiis per ducenta milliaria

versus  mare Ponticum  :  Et a  mari Pontico  distant  per

[III.  i.  56.] centum milliaria  circa  partes Hiberiae  & Georgiae. Et

ista  loca  cum montibus  interjacentibus  vocantur  claustra

Alexandri, per quae cohibuit Gentes Aquilonares ne

irruerent in terras Meridianas devastando eas. Nam

Alexander  multa  bella  gessit  cum  eis,  ut  refert  Ethicus,  &

Gog^ Magog  aliquando  infra  tres  dies  ceciderunt  ex  utraque  parte  multa

in  his  locis millia  hominum. Alexander  tamen  magis  arte  &  ingenio

indusi.  vicit,  quam  armorum  potestate. Et  cum  fuerunt  excitati

J udtei  his  locis • , tT • j

• 7  •  sicut Ursi  de  cavernis  suis,  non  potuerat eos  repnmere

Antichristus.  per  violentiam  : Sed  Deus  juvit per terrae motum &

*Ut  Judcei  clausuras  montium  : Nunc  autem  ruptae  sunt ;  &  diu  est

Christum  quod fractae  sunt, sive terrae motu, seu  vetustate. Et

expec  v  run  cons^erancjum  est diligenter de locis  istis. Nam Gog

spectantes,  imo  OA/r  ., J? .  .  ^  0  .&

Crucifigentes  &  Magog  de  quibus  Ezechiel  Prophetat,  &  Apocalypsis,

prtesentem,  &  in  hiis  locis  sunt  inclusi.  Secundum  quod  dicit  Jerom-
e/a j/>mztf/:  mus  undecimo  libro  super  Ezechielem  ;  Gog  Scythica
sic  am  us  gens  trans  Caucasum  &  Maeotim  &  Caspium  mare  ad
Satana?  con-  Indiam  usque  tenduntur.  Et  a  principe  Gog,  omnes  qui
trariis,  Ponti-  subditi  sunt  Magog  appellantur.  Et  Judaei  similiter,
fic'u  spectantes  qUOs Orosius & alii sancti referunt  exituros. Atque,

onsPul~ sicut Ethicus scribit, Alexander inclusit viginti duo
entesyexpectant  .  .  ^ 7 _ _  -.  .  9,.,

tamen  Ami- l^egna de stirpe Gog oc Magog, exitura in diebus

christum,  Antichristi  :  Qui  mundum  primo  vastabunt,  &  deinde
horrentqueven-  obviabunt  Antichristo,  &  vocabunt  eum  Deum  deorum  ;
turum,  quem  gjcut  ^.  geatus  Jeronimus  confirmat.  O  quam  *  neces-
honorant;  sarium  est  Ecclesiae  Dei,  ut  Prelati  &  viri  Catholici  haec
neque  sine  loca  considerent  :  non  solum  propter  conversionem  Gen-
Magno  iniqui-  tium in illis locis, & consolationem Christianorum

tans  mysteno  captiVorum  ibidem,  sed  propter  persecutionem  Anti-
vices  idem  agit . r . .  .  ,rr  -o  j

Christi  & chnsti, ut sciatur unde venturus sit, oc quando,  per

Diaboli.  hanc  considerationem  &  alias  multas.

160

ROGER BACON  a.d.

1265.

A  portis  vero  Caspiis  incipit  Mare  Caspium  extendi
in  longum  ad  Orientem  &  in  latum  ad  Aquilonem.  Et
est  non  minus  quam  Ponticum Mare,  ut  dicit Plinius :

Et  habet  spacium  quatuor  mensium  in  circuitu. Frater  Fraf*r

vero  Willielmus  in  redeundo  ab  imperatore  :  Tartarorum  R  l  u  mus'

circuivit  latus  Occidental,  & in  eundo ad  eum peram-  Bacon  vixit

bulavit latus Aquilonare  ;  ut  ipse  retulit  Domino Regi  tempore

Franciae, qui nunc est, Anno Domini, 1253. Et a  Lodwici  9  _

parte  Aquilonis  habet  vastam Solitudinem,  in  qua  sunt  r^ls rancia-

Tartari  :  Et  ultra  eos  sunt  multae  Regiones  Aquilonares  jaui/onaris.

antequam  pervenitur  ad  Oceanum. Et  ideo  non  potest  Antiqui

istud  Mare  esse  sinus  maris  Oceani  :  quod  tamen  fere  antiquati.
omnes  authores  scribunt.  Sed  experientia  hujus  tem-
poris  facta  per  fratrem  Willielmum  &  homines  alios
fideles  docet  quod  non  venit  a  Mari,  sed  fit  per  flu-
mina  magna  &  multa,  quorum  congregatione  fit  hoc
mare  Caspium  &  Hircanum.

Tota vero haec  terra  Tartarorum  a  Tanai usque  ad  Cumani  idem

Etiliam  fuit  Cumanorum, qui vocabantur Cangle  : qui  qwCangle,  fcf

omnes sunt deleti per Tartaros. Et tota ista terra  iter  ai,  Etilia

vocabatur  Albania  antiquitus. Et  hie  sint  Canes  maximi,  4.  mensium.

ita ut  Leones,  &  tauros  perimant : Et  homines ponunt  Terra

eos  in  bigis  &  aratris. Deinde  ultra  Etiliam  est  tertius  principalis

iprincipatus  Tartarorum  : Et  destructae  sunt  gentes  indi-  r^mania*'

genae ab eis  : Et fuerunt  Cumani Cangle, sicut  prius.  maxima  terra-

lEt durat principatus  ille  a flumine  Etilia  in Orientem  rum,  ubi  fcf

|per  iter quatuor mensium ex  parte  meridionali, usque  Turcomani.

veniatur  ad  terram  principalem  imperatoris  :  Sed  ex  parte  uSarta

Aquilonari  durat  per iter duorum mensium & decern  hodie  Russi-

;tdierum. Ex quo patet, quod Cumania  fuit terrarum  cum  sive

maxima. Nam a Danubio usque ad terram hanc in  Moscoviticum

qua Imperator  residet,  habitabant  Cumani. Qui  omnes mPertum)  ,
t-  ,r  .,_,'.  ' r  1 tunc  tempons

sunt destructi a lartans, praeter eos qui tugerunt ad  Mahometica:

regnum Hungarian. Et  hie  principatus habet  ab  Aqui-  qua: jam

jone  primo  Majorem  Bulgariam  ;  a  qua  venerunt  Bulgari,  pridem  ad

qui sunt inter Constantinopolin  & Hungarian!  &  Scla-  rttus,  G™co .
r  xti  --r"  •  t»i- m°do  Lhnsti-

/oniam. Pslam  haec  quae  in  rLuropa  est  minor  .Bulgaria,  anos  transiit

labet linguam illorum Bulgarorum qui  sunt  in  majori  hodieque  tenet.

XI  l6l  L

A.D.

I265.

Finis
Aquilonis.

Pascatur
terra,  Magna
Hungaria.

*  Scilicet  in
notorious  Wis
Orbis
regionibus.

Blaci,

Valachia  llac.

Mare
Caspium.
Monies
Caucasi.

Cataia  Nigra ,
vel  Cara
Cataia.

Cataia  Nigra
fuit  Terra

Presbyteri

Johannis,  de

quo  multa
falsa,  nee  fal-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Bulgaria,  quae  est  in  Asia.  Et  isti  Bulgari  sunt  pessimi
Saraceni.  Et  hoc  est  mirabile  :  quoniam  ilia  terra  distat
a  porta  ferrea  seu  a  Portis  Caspiis  triginta  diebus  &
plus  per  transversum  Solitudinis  :  Et  est  in  fine  Aqui-
lonis. Unde  mirum  est  valde,  quod  ad  eos  tarn  distan-
tes  a  Saracenis  pervenit  secta  Machometi.  Et  de  hac
Bulgaria  venit  Etilia,  de  qua  dictum  est.  Post  earn  ad
orientem  est  terra  Pascatur,  quae  est  magna  Hungaria,
a  qua  exiverunt  Huni  :  Qui  postea  Hungri  ;  modo
dicuntur  Hungari.  Qui  colligentes  secum  Bulgaros,  &
alias  Nationes  Aquilonares,  sicut  dicit  Isidorus,  Claustra
Alexandri  ruperunt  :  Et  solvebatur  eis  tributum  usque
in  Egyptum.  Et  destruxerunt  terras  omnes  usque  in
Franciam.  Unde  majoris  potentiae  fuerunt,  quam  abhuc
*sunt  Tartari.  Et  magna  pars  eorum  residet  in  terra
quae  nunc  vocatur  Hungaria  ultra  Bohemiam  &  Austriam,
quae  est  modo  apud  latinos  regnum  Hungariae.  Et
juxta  terram  Pascatur  sunt  Blaci  de  Blacia  majori  :  a
qua  venerunt  Blaci  in  terra  Assani  inter  Constantinopolim
&  Bulgariam,  &  Hungariam,  &  Hungariam  minorem.
Nam  populus  ille  dicitur  nunc  a  Tartaris  llac ;  quod
idem  est  quod  Blac.  Sed  Tartari  nesciunt  sonare  B.
literam.  A  parte  vere  meridiei  Istius  Solitudinis  Tartar-
orum  est  mare  Caspium  :  Et  deinde  montes  Caucasi
usque  in  Orientem.  Et  extenditur  hie  principatus  ab
Etilia  usque  in  Catayam  Nigram  :  unde  vocatur  Cara
Cataia.  Et  Cara  idem  est,  quod  Nigra  :  Et  dicitur
Cataia  Nigra,  ad  differentiam  alterius  Cataiae,  quae  est
longe  ultra  hanc  ad  Orientem  multis  regionibus  dis-
tantem  ab  ista  Cataia  Nigra  :  de  qua  postea  dicitur.
Et  hasc  terra  cum  sibi  adjacentibus  est  terra  imperatoris
Tartarorum  praecipui,  in  quibus  vagatur  semper  cum
curia  sua,  ascendendo  in  aestate  ad  frigidas  regiones ;
&  in  hyeme  ad  calidas.  Et  haec  Cataia  Nigra  fuit  terra
Presbyteri  Joannis,  seu  Regis  Joannis  ;  de  quo  tanta
fama  solebat  esse  :  &  multa  falsa  dicta  sunt  &  scripta
Hie  vero  oportet  exprimi  originem  Tartarorum  :  non
solum  propter  evidentiam  distinctionis  regionum  majorem

162

ROGER BACON  a.d.

1265.

sed propter  ipsam Gentem, quae  nunc famosissima  est,  ntaummn

&  subdit  mundum  pedibus. Sciendum  igitur,  quod  cum  ****** fi&*h
...  r  • a • 1  •  • • >r*  •  /- • ad  Abassinos

bellum  ruit  Antiochiae, tunc  regnavit  in lerra  ista  Loir  novumque

Can. Nam  in  historia  Antiochena  legitur. Quod  Turci  dedit
miserunt  pro  succursu  contra  Francos  ad  regnum  Coir  Can,  nobis  Presby-
qui  tenebat  Monarchiam  in  regionibus  Aquilonis,  tempore  te™mJoannem
illo,  quo  capta  fuit  Antiochia  qui  fuit  de  Cara  Cataia. Coir  %%%{**  9
vero  est nomen proprium  : Can est nomen dignitatis ;  [in.  i.  57.]
&  sonat  idem  quod  Divinator. Nam  principes  ibi  regunt  Regnum  Coir
populum per divinationes & scientias, quae instruunt  Can-
homines  in  futuris,  sive  sint  partes  Physicae,  ut  Astrono-
mia  &  scientia  experimentalis,  sive  artes  Magicae,  quibus
totum Oriens  est  deditum  & imbutum. Omnes igitur
imperatores  Tartarorum vocantur Can : sicut  apud  nos
vocantur  Imperatores  &  Reges. Mortuo  vero  isto  Coir,
fuit quidam pastor Nestorinus in terra ilia potens  &
Dominus  super  populum,  qui  populus  vocatur  Naiman ;  Naiman
qui  erant  Christiani,  Nestorini. Qui  sunt  mali  Christiani :  P°Pulus-
Et  tamen  dicunt  se  esse  subjectos  Romanae  Ecclesiae. Et
isti  Nestorini  non  solum  sunt  ibi  in  Terra  Naiman,  sed
per omnes regiones usque in Orientem sunt dispersi.
Iste vero pastor erexit se in Regem ; & vocatus est
Presbyter &  Rex  Johannes. Huic  Johanni erat  frater
quidam  pastor  potens  Unc nomine: habens  sua  pascua
ultra  fratrem  suum  per  iter  trium  Septimanarum  :  Et  erat
Dominus  cujusdam  Villae, quae  dicitur  Caracarum : quae  Caracarum
est  nunc  civitas  Imperialis,  &  major  in  terra  Imperatoris : Vl  a'
Et  tamen  non  est  ita  bona  sicut  Sanctus  Dionysius  juxta
Parisios in Francia ; sicut scripsit frater Willelmus
Domino  Regi. Et  ultra  pascua  istius  circiter  duodecim
dietas  erant  pascua Moal, qui erant  pauperes  homines,  Pascua  Mod.
&  stulti  ac  simplices  sine  lege :  juxta quos  fuerunt  alii
pauperes qui vocabantur  Tartari, similes  eis. Mortuo  Tartari.
igitur  Johanne Rege  elevavit se in Regem Unc frater
ejus, & vocavit  se  Can  : unde  Unc-Can  dicebatur : qui
misit armenta sua versus terminos Moal. Inter quos
Moal  erat  faber  quidam  nomine  Cingis,  furans  &  rapiens
animalia Unc-can. Quo congregante exercitum Cingis  Cingis  faber.

163

A.D.

I265.

Cingis  can.
Hocata-can.
Ken-can.
Mangu-can.

Tota  Russia

Tartaris

subdita.

Cataia  Nigra,
ubi  fuit
Presbyter
Johannes.
Terra  Moal.
Terra
Tar  tar  or  urn.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

fugit  ad  Tartaros :  Qui  dixit  ad  eos  &  ad  Moal :  Quia
sumus  sine  duce  ideo  Vicini  nostri  opprimunt  nos.  Et
factus  est  Dux  eorum,  &  congregato  exercitu  irruit  super
Unc-can,  &  vicit  eum ;  &  factus  est  princeps  in  terra,  &
vocavit  se  Cingis-can :  Et  accepit  filiam  Unc,  &  dedit
earn  filio  suo  in  uxorem,  ex  qua  natus  est  Mangu  Can,
qui  regnum  divisit  istis  principibus  Tartarorum,  qui  nunc
regnant  &  discordant  ab  invicem.  Ad  hunc  enim  Mangu
Can  fuit  frater  Willelmus.  Et  ipse  Cingis  Can  ubique
praemittebat  Tartaros  in  pugna.  Unde  exivit  fama  Tarta-
rorum :  qui  fere  deleti  sunt  per  crebra  bella.  Et  licet
propter  hanc  causam  nos  istam  Gentem  vocemus  Tarta-
ros, apud  quos  est  imperium  &  Dominium :  tamen
semper  sunt  Imperatores  &  principes  de  gente  Moal.
Nee  volunt  vocari  Tartari  sed  Moal :  quia  primus  eorum
imperator  scilicet  Cingis-can,  fuit  Natione  Moal.  Unde
non  habuerunt  ad  hue  ante  istos  qui  nunc  regnant  nisi
tres  scilicet  Cingis-can,  &  Ken-can,  &  Mangu-can.  Qui
Ken-can  fuit  filius  Cingis,  &  Mangu  filius  ejus.  Haec
igitur  gens  Moal  est  stultissima  ab  origine  prima,  &
pauperrima :  Quae  tamen  permissione  Divina  paulatim
omnes  Nationes  vicinas  subjugavit  &  totam  mundi  lati-
tudinem  in  parvo  tempore  prostravit.  Quae  si  esset
concors  primo  congressu  iEgyptum  &  Affricam  vastaret,
ut  sic  ex  omni  parte  Latinos  circundarent.  Nam  nunc
a  parte  Aquilonis  regnant  usque  in  Poloniam.  Quia  tota
Russia  est  eis  subjecta,  &  tota  terra  ab  Oriente  usque  ad
Danubium,  &  ultra  Danubium,  scilicet  Bulgaria  &  Blachia,
sunt  eis  tributariae :  Ita  quod  usque  ad  terram  Con-
stantinopolitanam  tenet  eorum  Imperium.  Et  Soldanus
Turkiae,  &  Rex  Armeniae,  &  princeps  Antiochiae,  &
omnes  principes  Orientis  usque  in  Indiam  sunt  eis  sub-
jecti,  praeter  paucos,  qui  aut  nimis  distant,  aut  habent
loca  in  Montanis  tutissima,  quae  expugnari  non  possunt.
Primo  igitur  in  terra  ubi  imperator  moratur  est,  Cataia
Nigra,  ubi  fuit  Presbyter  Johannes.  Post  earn  est  terra
fratris  sui  ultra  per  iter  trium  Septimanarum.  Deinde
terra  Moal  ;  &  Tartarorum  ultra  eos  per  iter  quasi  duo

164

ROGER BACON  ad.

1265.

decern  dietarum. Sed  tota  haec  terra  est  in  qua  moratur

Imperator  vagans  per  diversa  loca. Terra  tamen  in  qua

fuerunt Moal,  vocatur  Oman  Kerule  : Et  ibi est  adhuc  OrnanKeride.

Curia Cingis Can. Sed quia  Caracarum, cum Regione  Caracarum,

ejus  fuit prima  adquisitio  eorum ; ideo Civitatem illam  Cwitas

habent  pro  imperiali :  Et  prope  illam  eligunt  suum  Can,  mPena  ts-

id  est  Imperatorem. Deinde  post  Moal  &  Tartaros  ad

Orientem  sunt  fortes  homines,  qui  vocantur  Tangut ;  qui  Tangut.

ceperunt  primo  Cingis-can  in  bello  :  Sed  pace  facta  iterum  Vacca?

subjugavit  eos. Isti homines  habent  Boves fortissimos, ucna?
11/^1  -1--  tt1-/^  cantu  ad

habentes  Candas  plenas  puis  sicut  Equi : Quorum  vaccae  Mulgendum.

non  permittunt  se  Mungi,*  nisi  cautetur  eis. Et  si  isti  *Mulgeri.

Boves  vident  hominem  indutum  rubeis,  insiliunt  in  eum

volentes interficere. Post istos ad Orientem sunt

homines qui vocantur Tebeth : qui solebant comedere  Tebeth.

parentes suos causa pietatis, ut non facerent eis alia  H

Sepulchra nisi viscera sua. De quibus scribunt Philo-  |/4w».  spec.

sophi, ut  Plinius, Solinus &  alii: Et  frater  Willelmus  hist.  1.  32.

testatur  in  libro  suo :  ac  frater  Johannes  de  Piano  Carpini'

similiter  in  libro,  quern  composuit  de  Tartaris,  inter  quos

fuit  Anno  Domini,  1246.  missus  a  Domino  Papa  in  lega-

tionem  ad  Imperatorem  Tartarorum. Sed quia  fuerunt

ex  hoc  facto  abhominabiles  omni  Nationi,  ideo  jam  muta-

verunt  hunc  ritum  ;  &  tamen  adhuc  de  ossibus  capitum

faciunt ciphos, in quibus bibunt propter memoriam

parentum suorum. Post  istos  ad Orientem  sunt parvi

homines & fusci sicut Hispani, & dicuntur Solangi.  SolangL

Quorum  nuncii  cum  veniunt  ad  curiam  alicujus,  habent

in  manu  tabulam  de  Ebore,  in  qua  inspiciunt  cum  narrant

ea  quae  volunt,  acsi  omnia  essent  ibi  scripta. Et  ultra  eos

est  quidam  Populus,  quorum animalia non appropriant

alicui, nee habent custodem. Sed si aliquis indigena

vult  habere  aliquod  animal,  stat  super  collem  &  vociferat

sicut  vult,  & veniunt  ad  vocem  suam, &  accipit  quod

vult. Quod si extraneus veniret, odore suo fugaret

omnia,  &  faceret  ea  Sylvestria. Et  ideo  cum  homo  venit

xtraneus,  claudunt eum  in  domo,  &  dant  ei  necessaria

0  vitas,  donee  habeat  responsum de  eis  pro  quibus  venit,

165

A.D.

I265.

Cataia  in

extremitate

Orientis.

[III.  i.  58.]

Aspreolorum.

Descriptio

Simile.

Patriarcha

Nestorian-
orum.

hSic  solus
Abuna  in
JEthiopia
ordinat.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

nee  permittent  eum  vagari  per  regionem.  Ultra  hos  est
Cataia  (quae  Seres  dicitur  apud  Philosophos.)  Et  est  in
extremitate  Orientis,  a  parte  Aquilonari  respectu  India?,
divisa  ab  ea  per  sinum  Maris  &  Montes.  Et  hie  fiunt
panni  serici  optimi,  &  in  magna  copia.  Unde  ab  hac
terra  deferuntur  ad  alias  regiones.  Et  hie  populus  aspirat
multum  per  nares :  Et  sunt  optimi  Artifices  in  omni  arte.
Et  sunt  boni  Medici  apud  eos  in  omnibus  praeterquam
de  Urina,  cujus  indicio  non  utuntur,  sed  per  Pulsum  &
alia  signa  optime  diindicant:  Et  bene  cognoscunt  vires
herbarum,  &  totius  medicinae  potestatem.  Multi  ex  eis
sunt  apud  Tartaros.  Et  istorum  Cataiorum  moneta
vulgaris  est  charta  de  bambasio  in  qua  imprimunt
quasdam  lineas.  Nee  mirum ;  Cum  Ruteni,  qui  prope
nos  sunt,  habent  pro  moneta  faciem  *  Hesperolorum.  Et
ista  Cataia  non  distat  per  120.  dietas  a  terra  in  qua
moratur  Imperator.  Et  in  ilia  terra  sunt  rupes  excelsas,
in  quibus  habitant  quasdam  creaturas  habentes  per  omnia
formam  humanam ;  non  tamen  genua  flectunt,  sed
ambulant  saltando :  sed  non  sunt  longitudinis  majoris,
quam  cubiti ;  &  vestitur  totum  corpus  crinibus.  Et
venatores  portant  cervisiam,  &  faciunt  foveas  in  rupi-
bus  ad  modum  cyphorum :  Et  ilia  animalia  veniunt  &
bibunt  cervisiam,  &  inebriantur,  &  dormiunt,  &  sic
capiuntur :  Et  venatores  ligant  eis  manus  &  pedes,  &
aperiunt  venam  in  collo,  &  extrahunt  tres  vel  quatuor
guttas  sanguinis,  &  dissoluunt  ea,  ac  permittunt  abire.
Et  ille  sanguis  est  preciosissimus  pro purpura.

Sciendum  vero,  quod  a  principio  Cataiae  magnae  nigrae
usque  ad  finem  Orientis  sunt  principaliter  Idolatrae:  sed
mixti  sunt  inter  eos  Saraceni  &  Tartari,  &  Nestoriani,  qui
sunt  Christiani  imperfecti,  habentes  Patriarcham  suam  in
Oriente ;  qui  visitat  Regiones,  &  ordinat  infantes  in
cunabulis  ad  sacros  ordines :  quia  ipse  solus b  ordinat;
&  non  potest  venire  ad  unum  locum  nisi  quasi  in  quin-
quaginta  annis.  Et  ille  dicit  se  habere  authoritatem  a
Romana  Ecclesia  ab  antiquo ;  &  paratus  est  obedire,  si  via
esset  aperta. Et  isti  docent  filios  Nobilium  Tartarorum

166

ROGER BACON  ad.

1265.
Evangelium  &  fidem,  &  alios  quando  possunt. Sed  quia
parum sciunt, &  sunt malorum morium, ideo Tartari
despiciunt eos. Et consecrant in missa unum panem
latum ad modum palmae, & dividunt primo in duo-
decem partes, secundum numerum Apostolorum ; &
postea  illas  partes  dividunt  secundum numerum  populi.
Et  Sacerdos  dat  unicuique  corpus  Christi  in  manu  sua ;
& tunc quilibet assumit  de  palma sua  cum  reverentia.
Sed  Idolatrae  praevalent in multitudine in omnibus hiis  Idolatry.
Regionibus. Et  omnes  conveniunt  in  hoc  quod  habent  *empla.
lempla sicut nos, & campanas magnas. JtLt ideo
Ecclesia Graecorum & totius Orientis nolunt habere
campanas. Ruteni  tamen  habent  &  Graeci  in  Cassaria.

Omnes  Sacerdotes  eorum  radunt  caput  &  barbam,  &  Rasura.
servant castitatem ex quo radunt caput : Et vivunt  CasH/as.
centum vel ducentum in una congregatione. Diebus  </  °J
quibus  intrant  Templum  ponunt  duo  scamna,  &  sedent  e
Regione,  chorus  contra  chorum  in  terra,  habentes  libros
in  manibus,  quos  aliquando  deponunt  super  ilia  scamna :
& habent capita discooperta  quamdiu sunt in Templo
legentes in silencio ; & nullo modo loquerentur in
Templo  nisi  verba officii sui. Habent  etiam  in  mani-
bus quocunque vadunt quandam cordam centum vel  Corda
ducentum nucleorum  sicut  nos  Pater  noster : & dicunt  nudeorum.
super haec  verba. On, Majo, Baccan, id  est, Deus  tu
nosti. Haec sunt communia omnibus Idolatris. Sed
tamen  Jugres,  qui  habitant  in  terra  ubi  Imperator  moratur,  Jugres.
differunt  ab  aliis. Nam  alii  non  ponunt  unum  Deum,
sed plures, & creaturam adorant. Isti vero propter
Viciniam Christianorum & Saracenorum ponunt unum
Deum. Et  sunt  optimi  scriptores : unde  Tartari  accepe-
runt  litteras  eorum  :  &  illi  sunt  magni  scriptores  Tarta-
rorum. Et isti scribunt a sursum in deorsum, & a
sinistra  in  dextram  multiplicant  lineas  &  legunt. Tebeth  Tebeth.
scribunt sicut nos, & habent figuras similes nostris.
Tangut scribunt a dextra in sinistram sicut Arabes,  Tangut.
sed multiplicant lineas ascendendo. Catai Orientales  Catai
scribunt  cum  punctorio,  quo  pingunt  pictores  : &  faciunt  ^r'ientails'

167

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1265.

in una figura plures literas comprehendentes unam
dictionem. Et ex hoc veniunt Caracteres, qui habent
Chinal  multas literas simul. Unde veri Caracteres & Philo-

TusmJ  °  sophici  sunt  compositi  ex  literis,  &  habent  sensum
penicillis,  l£  dictionum.  Et  tota  terra  a  Danubio  usque  in  Orientem
characterlbus  vocatur  apud  Antiquos  Scythia,  a  quo  Scythae.  Et  omnes
Caracteres  Regiones  Tartarorum  sunt  de  Scythia :  &  etiam  Russia,
PhilosophicL & totum usque ad Alamaniam#

And thus much ex quarta parte Compendii Studii
Theologiae  F.  R.  Baconi.

F-B. Spec hist.  Relations  of  Vincentius  Beluacensis,  the  most  of
MaTmchou  which hee received from Frier Simon de

l.z.c.^.saith Sancto  Quintino,  one  of  the  foure  Friers  sent

two  of  them
went  to  the

by  Pope  Innocent  the  Fourth  to  the  Tartars  :

Cham:  but  serving  to  the  illustration  of  the  former.

others  sent A  Nno, 1 246. Cuyne,  who  is  also  called  Gog  Cham,

another  way, ±\.  was advanced to the Imperiall Throne of the

John  de^  Piano  Tartars. All their Barons being assembled, placed a

Larpini  and g0^en  seat m  the  midst, whereon they  caused  him  to

whose  story  is Slt  >  anc^  set  a  Sword  before  him,  saying,  Wee  will,  and

in  M.  Hak. desire,  and  command  thee  to  rule  over  us. He  demanded

and  in  the  said  if  they  were  contented, to  doe,  come, goe, slay as he

Vincent.  /.  32.  snou]cl  command. They  answered yea. Then  said he,

The  word  of  my  mouth  shall  henceforth  bee  my  Sword :

and  they  all  consented. After  this  they  spread  a  Felt  on

the  ground,  and  set  him  thereon,  saying,  Looke  upwards

and  acknowledge God, and  looke  downe on the Felt

whereon  thou  sittest. If  thou  shalt  governe  well,  wilt  be

liberall,  just,  and  honour  thy  Princes  according  to  their

dignitie, thou shalt reigne magnificent, and the whole

World  shall  be  subject  to  thy  Dominion,  and  God  will

give  thee  all  thy  hearts  desire  ;  if  otherwise  thou  shalt  bee

miserable  and  so  poore,  that  the  Felt  shall  not  bee  left

thee  whereon  thou  sittest. This  done,  they  set  his  Wife

with  him  on  the  Felt :  and  lifted  them  up  both  so  sitting,

and proclaimed  them  Emperour  and Empresse  of  the

168

VINCENTIUS BELUACENSIS  a.d.

1247.

Tartars. After  which they  brought  before him infinite
store  of  Gold,  and  Silver,  and  Gemmes,  with  all  which
remayned  to  Chagadan,  who  distributed  what  he  pleased, Offers  call
and  reserved  the  rest. Then  began  they  to  drinke  untill  c
night  after their manner; and afterward sodden flesh
came  in  Carts  without Salt, and amongst  foure  or  five  [HI.  i.  59.]
they  distributed  a  joynt  thereof. They call him  Can,
concealing  his  proper  name,  and  he  boasts  himselfe  the
Sonne of  God. He  hath  a  Prince in the Confines  of
Persia, called  Baioth Noy  (Noy,  signifieth his dignitie,
Baioth, is  his  name)  which  hath  subdued  the  Countries
of  Christians  and Saracens to the Mediterranean Sea.
Another called Corenzam remayneth in the West
Frontiers with threescore thousand under him. The
greatest Prince is Bathoth,  who hath under him one  Bathu.
hundred and threescore thousand Tartars, and foure
hundred  and  fiftie  thousand  Christians  and  others. The
Chams  forces  are  innumerable.

Anno  Dom.  1247.  Frier  Ascelinus  sent  by  the  Pope,
came  into  the  Campe  of  the  Tartars  with  other  Friers
Preachers  :  where  the  Captayne  Baioth-noy,  by  Messengers
demanded,  whose  Messengers  they  were.  Frier  Asceline
answered  for  them  all,  I  am  the  Messenger  of  the  Lord
Pope,  who  amongst  Christians  is  greater  than  any  man,
reputed  a  Father  and  Lord.  They  replyed,  how  proudly
doe  yee  say  your  Pope  is  greater  then  any  ?  Knowes
ae  not  that  the  Cham  is  Son  of  God,  and  Baioth-noy
and  Batho  are  his  Princes  ?  Ascelinus  answered,  the
Pope  knowes  not  them,  but  heares  that  the  Tartars  have
:omne  out  of  the  East,  and  have  destroyed  infinite
nultitudes.  And  had  he  knowne  the  names  of  Cham
Dr  his  Princes,  he  would  not  have  omitted  their  names
n  the  Letters  which  we  bring.  But  beeing  grieved
or  the  slaughters  of  so  many,  especially  Christians,  with
he  advice  of  his  Brethren  the  Cardinals,  he  hath  sent
is  to  the  next  Tartarian  Armie  we  could  find,  to  exhort
he  Generall  thereof  to  cease  such  attempts,  and  to  repent
)f  that  which they have  done. The Messengers  went

169

A.D.

I247.

The  four e
were  Asceli-
nus,  Alberihe,
Alexander,
and  Simon.

See  a  like
distinction  of
Ethnikes,Aug.
in  Psal.  113.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  came  divers  times  betwixt,  every  time  in  change
of  Garments,  and  were  very  sollicitous  for  Gifts  and
Presents  which  the  Friers  had  none  to  give.  And  besides
they  denyed  to  performe  the  Ceremonies  of  kneeling  to
Baioth-noy,  lest  they  should  thereby  intimate  a  subjec-
tion of  the  Pope  to  the  Tartars  :  whereupon  hee  consulted
to  put  them  all  foure  to  death,  to  which  a  Messenger
sent  from  the  Great  Cham  would  not  consent.  The
Friers  only  would  put  up  their  hoods  and  bow  the
head :  whereat  a  Tartar  asked  whereas  you  Christians
adore  stockes  and  stones,  that  is  Crosses  imprinted  on
them :  why  doe  you  refuse  to  doe  so  to  Baioth-noy,
whom  Cham  the  Sonne  of  God  hath  commanded  to  be
adored.  Ascelinus  answered,  Christians  adore  not  stockes
and  stones,  but  the  signe  of  the  Crosse  thereon,  for  his
sake  which  dyed  on  a  Crosse,  adorning  it  with  his  members
as  precious  Jewels  and  consecrating  it  with  his  bloud,
purchasing  thereby  our  salvation.  So  cannot  wee  doe
to  your  Lord.  Baioth-noy  sent  them  word,  that  hee
would  send  them  with  their  Letters  to  the  Cham,  which
they  refused.  Then  he  sent  for  the  Letters  which  were
translated  first  into  Persian,  and  thence  into  the  Tartar
Language.  Hee  held  them  there  with  many  Trickes
and  Illusions,  many  weeks  with  hard  fare  and  ill  usage.
And  after  much  adoe  he  returned  with  Baioth-noys
answer,  having  first  had  a  Messenger  with  Letters  from
the  Cham.

BAioth-noys  Letter  was  this  to  the  Pope. The  word
of  Baioth-noy. Pope, know  this ; thy  Messengers
came  and  brought  thy  Letters  to  us. Thy  Messengers
spake great  words  ; we know  not  whether  thou  gavest  I  \
them  so in  charge,  or  whether they  spake  it  of  them-;;
selves. In  thy  Letters  thou  hadst  written  ;  yee  kill  slay, ;  3
and destroy many men. The  precept of  God stable  !
and  firme,  who  containeth  the  face of  the  whole  world,  j;
unto  us  is  this. Whosoever  shall  heare  the  Statute  on  •
their  owne  Land,  let  them  yeeld  Water  a  nd  Patrimonie,  ;

170

VINCENTIUS BELUACENSIS  a.d.

1247.

and  let  them  deliver  power  to  him  which  contayneth  the
face  of  the  whole  World.  But  whosoever  will  not  heare
the  Precept  and  Statute,  but  shall  doe  otherwise,  let
them  be  rooted  out  and  destroyed.  Now  we  send  to
you  touching  that  Statute  and  Precept.  If  yee  will  yeeld
Water  and  Patrimonie  on  our  Land,  it  is  meet  that
thou  Pope  thy  selfe  in  thine  person  come  to  us,  and  to
him  which  contayneth  the  face  of  the  whole  Earth  :  and
if  thou  wilt  not  heare  the  stable  Precept  of  God  and
of  him  which  contayneth  the  face  of  the  whole  Earth,
wee  know  not,  God  knowes.  It  is  meet  that  before
thou  commest,  thou  sendest  Messengers,  and  that  thou
signirlest  to  us  whether  thou  commest  or  no  ;  whether
thou  wilt  compound  with  us,  or  be  Enemie.  And  send
an  Answere  of  the  Precept  quickly  to  us.  This  Precept
|by  the  hands  of  Aybeg  and  Sargis,  we  have  sent  in  the
imoneth  of  July,  the  twentieth  day  of  the  Moone.  In
ithe  Territorie  of  the  Castle  Sitiens.

THe  Copie  of  the  Chams  Letters  to  Baioth-noy.  By
the  Precept  of  the  living  God  Cingis-cham  the
■Sonne  of  God,  sweete  and  venerable  saith,  that  God  is
j  high  over  all,  hee  is  God  immortall,  and  upon  Earth
iCingis-cham,  is  Lord  alone.  Wee  will  that  this  come
linto  every  place  to  the  hearing  of  all,  to  the  Provinces
((obeying  us,  and  to  the  Provinces,  obeying  against  us.
It  is  therefore  meete  that  thou  O  Baioth-noy  excite  them
jand  make  it  knowne  to  them,  that  this  is  the  commande-
ment  of  the  living  and  immortall  God  :  that  thou  also
jincessantly  make  knowne  thy  desire  touching  this,  and
notifie  my  commandement  in  all  places,  where  a  Mes-
isenger  may  come.  And  whosoever  shall  gainsay  thee
BJshall  be  hunted,  and  his  Land  shall  be  wasted.  And  I
lassure  thee,  that  whosoever  shall  not  heare  this  my
[Mandate,  shall  bee  deafe  ;  and  whosoever  shall  doe
according  to  this  my  judgement,  knowing  peace  and
'not  doing  it,  shall  be  lame.  Let  this  my  Ordinance
come  to  the  knowledge  of  all. Whosoever  shall  heare

171

A.D.

1247.

PURCHAS HIS PILGEIMES

[III.  i.  60.]
V.  Bel.  L^z,
c.  90.

*This  seemes
to  be  that
Sartach  in
Rubruq.
Ercalthays
pretended
Letter  in
Vincent.  <\  9 1 ,

and  neglect  to  observe  it  shall  be  destroyed  and  slaine.
Manifest  this  O  Baioth-noy.  And  whosoever  desireth
the  profit  of  his  House,  and  will  serve  us,  shall  bee
saved  and  honoured.  And  whosoever  shall  contradict,
studie  thou  to  correct  them  at  thine  owne  pleasure.

Unto  Lewis  the  French  King  were  sent  certayne
Messengers  from  a  great  man,  called  Ercalthay*  ;  and
there  was  present  Frier  Andrew  of  Lontumel  a  Domini-
can, who  knew  David  the  chiefe  of  them,  having  seene
him  in  the  Armie  of  the  Tartars.  These  brought
Letters  in  Persian  and  Arabike  Letters.  They  reported
also  that  a  great  King  of  the  Tartars  called  Cham  was
become  a  Christian,  with  most  of  his  followers.  And
now  the  said  Ercalthay  had  received  Baptisme  and  was
come  forth  from  Cham  with  a  great  Armie  to  advance
the  Christian  Faith,  and  to  destroy  the  Adversaries
thereof;  and  much  desired  the  French  Kings  love.
They  thought  also  that  the  said  Ercalthay  would  the
next  Easter  besiege  Baldach.  These  told  the  King  also
of  the  Tartarian  Affaires.  Whereupon  he  sent  Mes-
sengers with  Letters  and  Jewels  to  Ercalthay,  with  a
Tent  or  Chappell  of  Scarlet  fairely  embroydered,  with
the  Storie  of  the  Passion,  with  Ornaments  thereto  and
things  fitting  for  Divine  Service,  with  a  piece  of  the
wood  of  the  Holy  Crosse,  exhorting  him  to  proceed
in  the  Faith.  The  Messengers  were  the  foresaid  Frier
Andrew  with  two  other  Friers  and  two  Clerkes.  Trans-
scripts  of  all  were  sent  into  France.

172

WENDOVER  AND PARIS  ad.

1240.

Chap. III.

Relations touching  the  Tartars,  taken  out  of  the

Historie  of  R. Wendover*,  and Mat.  Paris  :  *Hee  wai
with certayne  Epistles  of  the  same  subject. g^eatVanof
Nno  1239.  the  Tartars,  inhumane  Nations,  ^history,
which  had  made  great  slaughters,  and  had  w^0//v
with hostile  forces invaded the borders  ascribed  to

of  Christendome,  in  the  greater  Hun-  Paris  by  the
garie  were  vanquished  and  most  of  them  most-
slaine,  beeing  encountred  by  five  Kings,
Christians  and  Saracens,  herein  confede-
rate. After  which  the  King  of  Dacia  and  the  King  of
Hungarie  caused  the  Confines  (before  by  the  Tartars
brought  in  manner  to  a  Wildernesse)  to  bee  inhabited
jby  Christians,  which  they  sent  thither.  Of  which  out
of  Dacia  alone  went  more  than  fortie  ships.  Dacia  is  here,

Anno 1240. the detestable people  of  Satan, to wit,  as °ftenh
in infinite number  of  Tartars brake forth from their  corrupt*L
Mountayne-compassed,  and  Rocke-defended  region,  like  taken  for
Devils  loosed  out of  Hell  (that  they  may  well  be  called  Denmarke.
Tartarians, as  Tartareans)  and  like  Grashoppers cover-  The  Dana  of

ng  the  face  of  the  Earth,  spoyling  the  Easterne  Confines  /  e  ™afntj  ,

P, r  , ~  , \ f J ^P .  .  TTT 1 comprehended

.vith  nre  and bword,  ruining  Cities,  cutting  up  Woods,  Transihania,

•ooting up  Vineyards, killing  the  people  both of  Citie  Walachia,and
ind  Countrey. And  if  they  spared  any,  they  used  them  Moldavia.
n  the fore-front of  their battels to fight  against  their
Allies,  that if  they  were  therein  faint  or  fayned,  them-
selves at  their  backes  might  kill them  : if  otherwise it
vas without reward. They are  rather Monsters then
imen,  thirsting  and  drinking  bloud,  tearing  and  devouring
ithe  flesh  of  Dogges  and  Men  ;  clothed  with  Oxe-hides,  A  Calvish
irmed with Iron Plates  ; in stature thicke and short,  €™ce£\
veil  set,  strong  in  bodie  ;  in Warre  invincible,  in  labour  and pij
nfatigable,  behind  unarmed  ;  drinking  the  bloud  of  their  /.  4.  c.  2.  £5?
>easts for Dainties, &c. These Tartars of  detestable  I-  5-  '•  H-
nemory,  are  thought  to  be  descended  of  the  ten  Tribes

173

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1240.

which  went  away  (forsaking  the  Law  of  Moses)  after
the  golden  Calves ;  whom  Alexander  the  Macedon
sought  to  inclose  in  the  Caspian  hils  ;  to  which  labour,
exceeding  humane  power,  hee  invoked  the  assistance  of
the  God  of  Israel,  and  the  tops  of  the  hils  joyned  together,
and  the  place  became  inaccessible  and  impassible.  And
though  it  be  doubtfull,  because  they  use  not  the
Hebrew  Tongue,  nor  Law  of  Moses,  nor  are  governed
by  any  Lawes  ;  yet  is  it  credible,  that  as  their  hearts
then  in  Moses  government  were  rebellious,  Reprobately-
sensuall  and  Idolatrous,  so  now  more  prodigiously  their
heart  and  Language  is  confounded,  and  their  life  immane
and  beastly  inhumane.  They  are  called  Tartars  of  a
certayne  River  called  Tartar,  running  alongst  their  hils.

Anno  1241.  that  inhumane  and  brutish,  lawlesse,
barbarous  and  savage  Nation  of  Tartars,  horribly  spoyl-
ing  the  North  and  North-east  parts  of  the  Christians,
caused  great  feare  and  horrour  over  all  Christendome.
For  they  had  now  brought  in  manner  to  a  Wildernesse,
Frisia,  Gothia,  Polonia,  Bohemia,  and  both  Hungarias,
the  most  part  of  the  Princes,  Prelates  and  people  Seeing
fled  or  slaine  ;  as  by  this  Letter  appeareth.

TO  the  Beloved  and  alway  worthy  to  be  beloved
Lord,  our  Father  in  Law,  the  Illustrious  Prince
the  Duke  of  Brabant,  H.  by  the  grace  of  God  Earle
of  Loraine,  Palatine  of  the  Saxons,  his  humblest  service.
The  perills  foretold  in  holy  Scripture,  now  breake  forth
because  of  our  sinnes.  For  a  certaine  cruell  and  in-
numerable people,  savage  and  lawlesse,  invadeth  and
possesseth  the  Confines  next  bordering  to  us,  and  are
now  come  to  Poland,  many  other  Lands  being  passed
and  peoples  destroyed.  Whereof  aswell  by  our  owne
Messengers,  as  by  our  beloved  Cousin  the  King  of
Bohemia,  we  are  fully  certified  and  are  invited  speedily
to  succour  and  defend  the  faithfull.  For  we  know  for
certayne  that  about  the  Octaves  of  Easter,  the  Tartarian
Nation will  invade cruelly and forcibly the Lands of

i74

WENDOVER AND PARIS  a.d.

1241.

the  Bohemians,  and  if  not  prevented,  will  there  perpetrate  [III.  i.  61.]
unheard-of  slaughter.  And  because  our  next  neighbours
house  is  now  on  fire,  and  the  next  Countrey  lieth  open  to
waste,  and  some  are  alreadie  wasted,  we  earnestly  and
pitifully  entreat  the  ayde  and  counsell  of  God  and  of  our
neighbour-brethren  for  the  universall  Church.  And
because  delay  is  full  of  danger,  with  all  our  hearts  we
beseech  you,  that  you  make  all  possible  speed  to  arme  as
well  for  your  as  our  deliverance,  making  strong  prepara-
tions of  store  of  Souldiers ;  diligently  exciting  the  noble,
mightie  and  couragious,  with  the  people  subject  to  them,
that  yee  may  have  them  in  readinesse,  when  we  shall  next
direct  our  Messengers  to  you.  And  we,  by  the  ministerie
of  our  Prelates,  Preachers,  and  Minors,  cause  the  Crosse,  Crusados
(because  the  businesse  belongs  to  him  which  was  crucified)  aMainstt  e
to  be  generally  preached,  fasts  and  prayers  to  be  appointed,
and  our  Lands  in  common  to  be  called  to  the  warre  of
Jesus  Christ.  Hereto  wee  adde  that  a  great  part  of  that
detestable  Nation,  with  an  other  Armie  adjoyned  to  them,
wasteth  Hungaria  with  unheard-of  tyrannie,  insomuch
that  the  King  is  said  to  have  retayned  but  a  small  part
to  himselfe.  And  to  speake  much  in  few  words,  the
Church  and  People  of  the  North  is  so  oppressed  and
brought  to  such  Straits,  as  it  never  was  so  scourged  since
the  World  began.  Dated  the  yeere  of  grace  1241.  on
the  day  on  which  is  sung  Laetare  Jerusalem.

And  this  was  the  Letters  sent  to  the  Bishop  of  Paris
by  the  Duke  of  Brabant.  The  like  was  written  by  the
Arch-bishop  of  Cullen  to  the  King  of  England.  There-
fore for  this  grievous  tribulation,  and  for  the  discord
betwixt  the  Pope  and  the  Emperour,  so  hurtfull  to  the
Church,  there  are  appointed  fasts  and  prayers,  with  larger
Almes  in  divers  Regions,  that  our  Lord  being  pacified
with  his  people,  who  as  a  magnificent  triumpher  is  as
strong  in  a  few  as  in  many,  may  destroy  the  pride  of  the
Tartars.  The  French  Kings  mother,  Queene  Blanch,  A  devout
with  deepe  sighs  and  plentifull  teares  spake  hereof  to  her  Quee™  and  a
sonne. What  shall  we  doe  my  dearest  sonne  about  this

i75

A.D.
1241.

Divine
apophthegme.

Emperour  Fr.
2.  this  Letter
to  King
Henr.  3.

*Anerrour,as
usually  such
shadozues
attend  fame :
like  the  former
of  inclosed
Jewes.  And
indeed  the
Tartars  were
so  base  and  so
remote,  that
till  they  like
Nilus  over-
flowed the
Earth,  they
were

unknowne,
yea,  then  also;
their  sudden
storms,  and
unknowne
originall
adding  to  that
terrour,  with
which  they
then  amazed,
and  withall
affrighted  the
World, as these
Letters  testifie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

lamentable  event,  the  terrible  rumour  whereof  is  comne  to
our  Confines  ?  generall  destruction  of  us  all  and  of  holy-
Church  hangs  over  our  times  by  the  impetuous  invasion
of  the  Tartars.  The  King  with  mournful!  voice,  not  with-
out the  Spirit  of  God,  answered :  The  heavenly  comfort,
Mother,  exalt  us ;  and  if  they  come  on  us,  either  we  shall
send  againe  those  Tartarians  to  their  Tartarean  places
whence  they  came ;  or  they  shall  exalt  us  to  Heaven.

THe  Emperour  certified  hereof,  wrote  to  the  Princes,
and  especially  to  the  King  of  England  in  this  forme.
Frederike  Emperour  &c.  to  the  King  of  England  greet-
ing. Wee  cannot  conceale,  though  it  somwhat  lately
came  to  our  eares,  but  give  you  notice  of  a  thing  which
concerneth  the  Roman  Empire  (as  prepared  to  the  preach-
ing of  the  Gospell)  &  all  zealous  Christian  Kingdoms  in
the  World,  threatning  generall  destruction  to  all  Christen-
dom. A  barbarous  Nation  hath  lately  come  from  the
Southerne  *  Region,  which  had  long  layne  hid  under  the
torrid  Zone,  and  after  towards  the  North  by  force
possessing  Regions  long  remayning  is  multiplied  as  the  |
Canker  worme,  called  Tartars  wee  know  not  of  what
place  or  originall ;  not  without  the  fore-seene  judgement  j
of  God  is  reserved  to  these  last  times,  to  the  correction
and  chastisement  of  his  people,  God  grant  not  losse  of
all  Christendom.  A  publike  destruction  hath  therefore
followed,  the  common  desolation  of  Kingdomes,  and  3
spoile  of  the  fertile  Land,  which  that  wicked  people  hath
passed  thorow,  not  paring  sexe,  age,  or  dignitie,  &
hoping  to  extinguish  the  rest  of  mankind,  whiles  it  alone
goeth  about  to  domineere  and  reigne  every  where  by  their
immense  and  incomparable  power  and  number.  Now
all  things  which  they  have  beene  able  to  set  eye  on  being
put  to  death  and  spoyle,  leaving  universall  desolation
behind  them,  these  Tartarians  (yea  Tartarean s)  when
they  had  come  to  the  well  peopled  Colonie  of  the  Cumani
(prodigall  of  their  lives,  having  Bowes  their  most  familiar
Armes,  with  Darts  and  Arrowes  which  they  continually

176

WENDOVER AND PARIS  a.d.

1241

use  and  are  stronger  in  the  armes  then  other  men)  they
utterly  overthrew  them,  and  with  bloudy  sword  killed
all  which  escaped  not  by  flight.  Whose  neighbourhood
scarcely  warned  the  Rutheni  not  farre  distant  to  take  heed
to  themselves.  For  they  suddenly  flie  thither,  to  prey
and  spoyle  as  the  wrath  of  God  and  lightning  hurles
it  selfe,  and  by  their  sudden  assault  and  barbarous  invasion
take  Cleva  the  chiefe  Citie  of  the  Kingdome ;  and  all  that
noble  Kingdome  was  wasted  to  desolation,  the  Inhabitants
being  slayne.  Which  yet  the  neighbouring  Kingdome
of  the  Hungarians  who  should  have  taken  warning,
neglected  :  whose  sluggish  King  too  secure,  being  required
by  the  Tartars  messengers  and  letters,  that  if  he  desired
that  he  and  his  should  live,  he  should  hasten  their  favour
by  yeelding  himselfe  and  his  Kingdom ;  yet  was  not
hereby  terrified  and  taught  to  fortify  against  their  irrup-
tions :  but  they  ignorant  or  insolent  contemners  of  their
enemies,  secure  in  their  enemies  approach,  trusting  in  the
native  fortification  of  the  place,  unexpectedly  compassed
and  oppressed  at  unawares  by  them  entring  like  a  whirle-
wind,  opposed  their  Tents  against  them.  And  when  the
Tartars  Tents  were  five  miles  from  the  Hungarian,  the
Tartarian  fore-runners  in  the  dawning  of  the  morning,
rushed  suddenly  and  compassed  the  Hungarians,  and
first  slaying  the  Prelates  and  chiefe  men,  killed  an  infinite
number,  with  such  unheard-of  slaughter  as  scarcely  is
recorded  ever  to  have  hapned  in  one  battell.  The  King
hardly  escaped  by  flight  on  a  swift  Horse,  which  fled  with
a  small  companie  to  the  brotherly  portion  of  the  Hyllirian
Kingdome,  there  to  be  protected  ;  the  Enemie  possessing
the  Tents  and  spoyles.  And  now  wasting  the  nobler
and  greater  part  of  Hungarie  beyond  Danubius,  consum-
ing all  with  fire  and  sword,  they  threaten  to  confound  the
rest,  as  by  the  venerable  Bishop  Vatiensis  the  Ambassadour
of  the  said  Hungarian  King,  notice  is  given  to  our  Court
first  as  he  passed,  being  destined  to  the  Roman  Court.
Wee  are  also  hereof  fully  certified  by  the  Letters  of
our  deare  sonne  Conrade,  elect  King  of  Romans  alway
xi  177  M

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1241.

Augustus,  and  heire  of  the  Kingdome  of  Jerusalem ;  and
[III.  i.  62.]  of  the  King  of  Bohemia,  the  Dukes  of  Austria  and
Bavaria ;  by  the  Messengers  words  also  instructed  ex-
perimentally of  the  Enemies  neerenesse.  Nor  could  wee
learne  these  things  without  great  griefe.  Truly,  as  the
report  goeth,  their  undetermined  damnable  Armie,  by  our
Lords  sufferance,  hath  proceeded  divided  purposely  in
three  parts.  For  one  being  sent  by  the  Pructeni,  and
entring  Poland,  the  Prince  and  Duke  of  that  Land  were
slayne  by  them,  and  after  that  all  the  Region  spoyled.
The  second  hath  entred  the  bounds  of  Bohemia,  and
being  entred  hath  made  stay,  the  King  manly  opposing
himselfe.  The  third  hath  runne  thorow  Hungaria,  bounded
by  Austria.  Whence  the  feare  and  trembling  having
beginning  from  furie,  doe  excite  and  invite  all ;  necessitie
urgeth  to  withstand  them,  the  danger  being  neere ;  the
generall  destruction  of  the  world,  and  specially  of  Christen-
dome,  calls  for  speedie  helpe  and  succour.  For  this
People  is  brutish,  and  without  law  ignorant  of  humanitie :
yet  followers,  and  hath  a  Lord  whom  it  obediently
observeth  and  worships,  and  calls,  The  God  of  the  earth.
The  men  are  of  short  stature,  but  square  and  well  set,
rough  and  couragious,  at  the  becke  of  their  Leader
rushing  on  any  difficulties  :  have  broad  faces,  frowning
lookes,  horrible  cries  agreeing  to  their  hearts.  They
weare  raw  Hides  of  Oxes,  Asses,  or  Horses,  with  Iron
plates  sewed  on  for  defensive  Armes  hitherto :  but  now,
with  griefe  we  speake  it,  out  of  the  spoiles  of  conquered
Christians,  they  are  more  decently  armed,  that  in  Gods
anger  wee  may  be  the  more  dishonourably  slayne  by
our  owne  weapons.  They  are  also  furnished  with  better
Horses,  fed  with  daintier  fare,  adorned  with  fairer  ray-
ment.  The  Tarters  are  incomparable  Archers;  carrie
sewed  skins  artificially  made,  by  which  they  passe  Rivers
and  waters  without  losse.  When  food  fayles,  their  Horses
are  said  to  be  content  with  barkes  and  leaves  of  Trees,
and  roots  of  Herbs :  whom  yet  they  finde  swift  and
hardy. And  we fore-seeing  all those things,  often  by

178

WENDOVER AND PARIS

Letters  and  Messengers  are  mindfull  to  request  your
excellence,  as  also  other  Christian  Princes,  earnestly
sollicking  and  warning,  that  peace  and  love  may  flourish
amongst  Rulers,  and  discord  being  appeased  (which  often
endamage  Christendome)  agreeing  together  to  set  stay
to  them  which  have  lately  shewed  themselves ;  forasmuch
as  fore-warned  are  fore-armed,  and  that  the  common
enemies  may  not  rejoyce,  that  to  prepare  their  wayes,
so  great  dissentions  breake  forth  amongst  Christian
Princes.  Oh  God,  how  much  and  how  often  would  wee
have  humbled  our  selves,  doing  the  utmost  that  the
Roman  Bishop  might  have  surceased  from  the  scandall
of  dissention  against  us,  which  is  gone  thorow  the  World;
and  would  more  temperately  have  revoked  his  passions
from  impetuous  rashnesse,  that  wee  might  bee  able  to
quiet  our  subjects  by  right,  and  rule  them  more  peace-
ably ;  nor  that  he  would  protect  those  Rebels,  the
greatest  part  of  which  is  by  him  fostered :  that  things
being  setled,  and  the  Rebels  awed  against  whom  wee
have  wasted  much  treasure  and  labour,  our  power  might
bee  advanced  against  the  common  Enemies.  But  Will
being  to  him  for  a  Law,  not  ruling  the  slipperie  running
of  his  tongue,  and  disdayning  to  abstayne  from  manifold
dissention  which  he  hath  attempted ;  by  his  Legats  and
Messengers  hee  hath  commanded  the  Crosse  to  be
published  against  mee  the  Arme  and  Advocate  of  the
Church,  which  hee  ought  to  have  exercised  against  the
tyrannie  of  the  Tartars  or  Saracens,  invading  and  possess-
ing the  Holy  Land,  whiles  our  Rebels  insult  and  consult
grievously  against  our  honour  and  fame.  And  now  that
our  greatest  care  is  to  free  our  selves  from  domestike  and
familiar  Enemies,  how  shall  wee  also  repell  Barbarians  ?
seeing  that  they  by  their  spies  which  every  where  they
have  sent  before,  they  (howsoever  directed  without  Divine
Law,  yet  well  trayned  in  Martiall  stratagems)  know  the
publike  discord,  and  the  unfortified  and  weaker  parts  of
the  Lands  :  and  hearing  of  the  heart-burning  of  Kings,
and  the  strife  of  Kingdomes, are  more encouraged  and

179

A.D.
1241,

The  Pope  to
have  his  will
against  the
Emperour,
exposcth
Christian
Princes  to
mutuall
quarrels,
which  he  shold
have  opposed
to  the  Tartars,
never  ceasing
till  he  had
ruined  that
Familie  and
the  Empire.
Tartar  Spies.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1241.

animated,  O  how  much  doth  triumphing  courage  adde  to
strength  ?  Wee  will  therefore  by  Gods  providence
converted,  apply  our  strength  and  industrie  to  both,  that
wee  may  drive  away  the  scandall  domesticall  and  barbarous
on  this  side  and  on  that,  from  the  Church.  And  we
have  expressely  sent  our  deare  sonne  Conrade,  and  other
Princes  of  our  Empire,  that  they  may  powerfully  with-
stand the  assaults  of  our  barbarous  Enemies,  and  represse
their  entrie.  And  heartily  wee  adjure  your  Majestie
in  behalfe  of  the  Common  necessitie,  by  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  that  taking  heed  to  your  selfe,  and  to  your  King-
dome  (which  God  keepe  in  prosperitie)  with  instant  care
and  provident  deliberation,  you  diligently  prepare  speedy
ayds  of  strong  Knights,  and  other  armed  men  and  Armes:
this  we  require  in  the  sprinkling  of  the  bloud  of  Christ,
fThis  Em-  and  the  league  of  *  affinitie  in  which  wee  are  joyned.
peror  Fred.  2.  ^nd  so  }et  them  be  ready  with  us  manfully  and  provi-
Sister  to  K  dently  to  fight  for  the  deliverance  of  Christendome,  that
Henr.  3.  against  the  Enemies  now  proposing  to  enter  the  confines
of  Germanie,  as  the  Gate  of  Christendome,  by  united
forces  victorie  to  the  praise  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts  may  be
obtayned.  Neither  let  it  like  you  to  passe  over  these
things  with  dissimulation,  or  to  suspend  them  by
deferring.  For  if  (which  God  forbid)  they  invade  the
Germane  confines  without  obstacle,  let  others  looke  for
the  lightnings  of  a  sudden  tempest  at  the  doores ;  which
we  beleeve  to  have  hapned  by  Divine  Judgement,  the
world  being  diversely  infected,  the  love  of  many  waxing
cold  (by  whom  faith  ought  to  be  preached  and  conserved)
and  their  pernicious  example  stayning  the  world  with
Usuries,  and  divers  other  kinds  of  Simonie  and  Ambition.
Let  your  Excellency  therefore  provide ;  and  whiles  the
common  enemies  are  outragious  in  the  neighbour  Regions,
wisely  consult  to  resist  them :  because  they  have  comne
out  of  their  Lands  with  this  intent,  not  regarding  the
perils  of  life,  that  they  might  subdue  to  them  (which  God
avert)  all  the  West,  and  may  pervert  and  subvert  the
Faith  and  Name  of  Christ. And  in  respect  of  unexpected

180

WENDOVER AND PARIS  a.d.

1241.

victorie,  which  hitherto  by  Gods  permission  hath  followed

them,  they  are  growne to  that  exceeding  madnesse,  that

now  they  thinke  they  have  gotten  the  Kingdoms  of  the

World,  and  to  tame  and  subject  Kings  and  Princes  to

their  vile services. But wee hope in our Lord Jesus

Christ,  under  whose  Standard  wee  have  hitherto  triumphed,

being  delivered  from  our  Enemies,  that  these  also  which

have broke forth of  their Tartarean seats, their pride

being abated by opposed forces of the West, these  [III.  i.  63.]

Tartars  shall  be  thrust  downe  to  their  Tartara  (or  Hell).

Nor shall they  boast to have passed so many  Lands,

overcome so many peoples, perpetrated so many mis-

chiefes unavenged, when their unwarie Destinie, yea

Sathan,  shall  have  drawne  them  to  the  conquering  Eagles

of  puissant Imperiall Europe to their deaths. Where

Germanie  voluntarily  raging  and  prone  to  Armes,  France

the  mother  and  nurse  of  Soulderie,  warlike  and  daring

Spaine,  fertile England potent in men  and  a  furnished

Navie. Almaine full of  impetuous Warriours, Strip-  Dadanavalis.

strong  Denmarke,  untamed  Italie,  Burgundie  ignorant  of

Peace,  unquiet  Apulia ; with  the  Pyraticall  and  invincible

lies  of  the  Greeke,  Adriaticke  and  Tyrrhene  Seas,  Creet,

Cyprus, Sicil, with the Sea neighbouring Hands and

Regions, bloudie Ireland,  with nimble Wales, marishie

Scotland, Icie Norway, and every Noble and famous

Region in the West, will cheerfully send their choise

Soulderie  under the Colours of  the quickning Crosse,

which  and  not  onely  rebellious  men  but  adverse  Devils

dread. Dated in our returne after the yeelding and

depopulation  of  Faventia,  the  third  of  July.

Some  (Papalines)  suspected  that  the  Emperour  had  Malice  mad.
hatched  this  Tartar-pestilence  like  Lucifer  or  Antichrist,
to  get  the  Monarchic  of  the  world  and  to  subvert
Christianity,  and  that  the  secret  Counsels  and  waylesse
wayes  of  the  Tartars  were  fraught  with  Imperiall
Counsels.  For  they  conceale  their  Language,  varie  their
Armes,  and  if  one  be  taken,  knowledge  of  them  or
their  purpose  can  by  no  tortures  be  extorted  from  him.

181

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1241.

And  where  (say  they)  should  they  lurke,  in  which  of
the  Climats  till  this  time  ?  whence  their  so  secret  and
fraudulent  Conspiracie  ?  They  are  Hircans  and  Scythians,
savage  blood-suckers,  who  with  the  confederate  Cumani,
through  the  Emperours  devise,  have  overthrowne  the
King  of  Hungarie,  to  make  him  seeke  shelter  under  the
Imperiall  wings,  and  doe  him  homage,  &c.
Sehb.  8.  c  6.  Needs  must  they  goe  whom  the  Devill  drives  :  or  how
*■•  else  but  by  mad  malice,  and  furious  faction,  or  an  Anti-

christian  mist,  could  such  impossibilities  have  beene
conceived  ?  Of  their  driving  the  Turkes  and  the
Choerosmines  out  of  Persia  is  else-where  spoken.  Of
the  Popes  entertainment  of  the  Tartarian  Messengers,
Anno  1248.  close  Conferences  with  them  and  gifts  to
them,  with  divers  other  discourses  in  the  said  author  or
Authors,  I  omit.  Onely  this  Epistle  following,  as  con-
taining both  the  strange  adventures  of  an  Englishman,
and  his  relations  of  the  Tartars  from  better  experience,
I  could  not  but  adde  heere,  making  so  much  to  the
Readers  purpose  and  ours.  It  was  written  by  one  Yvo
of  Narbone  a  Clergie  man,  which  being  accused  of
Heresie  to  Robert  de  Curzun  the  Popes  Legat,  fled,
and  lived  one  while  with  the  Patarines,  another  with  the
Beguines,  and  at  last  writ  this  letter  containing  a  discourse
of  his  travels  amongst  them  in  Italie  and  Germanic
He  begins  Giraldo  Dei  gratia  Burdegalensi  Archiepiscope,
Yvo  dictus  Narbonensis  suorum  olimnovissimus  Cleri-
corum,  salutem,  &c.  and  after  some  premisses  of  the
Patarines,  and  Beguines  (too  long  for  this  place)  hee
proceeds  ;  Hoc  igitur  &  multis  aliis  peccatis  inter  nos
Christianos  emergentibus  iratus  Dominus,  &c.  In
English,  Our  Lord  therefore  being  angry  with  this  and
other  sinnes  falling  out  amongst  us  Christians,  is  become
as  it  were  a  destroying  enemie.

182

YVO OF NARBONNE  a.d.

1243-

Part  of  an  Epistle  written  by  one  Yvo  of  Nar-
bona  unto  the  Archbishop  of  Burdeaux,  con-
taining the  confession  of  an  Englishman,  as
touching  the  barbarous  demeanour  of  the
Tartars,  which  had  lived  long  among  them,
and  was  drawne  along  perforce  with  them  in
their  expedition  against  Hungarie  :  Recorded
by Matthew Paris  in  the yeare  of  our Lord

1243-

THe  Lord  therefore  being  provoked  to  indignation,
by  reason  of  this  and  other  sinnes  committed  among
us  Christians,  is  become,  as  it  were,  a  destroying  enemy,
and  a  dreadfull  avenger.  This  I  may  justly  affirme  to  bee
true,  because  an  huge  Nation,  and  a  barbarous  and  in-
humane people,  whose  Law  is  lawlesse,  whose  wrath  is
furious,  even  the  rod  of  Gods  anger,  overrunneth,  and
utterly  wasteth  infinite  Countries,  cruelly  abolishing  all
things  where  they  come,  with  fire  and  sword.  And  this
present  Summer,  the  foresaid  Nation,  being  called  Tartars,  Neustat.
departing  out  of  Hungarie,  which  they  had  surprised  by
treason,  layd  siege  unto  the  very  same  Towne,  wherein  I
my  selfe  abode,  with  many  thousands  of  Souldiers  :
neither  were  there  in  the  said  Towne  on  our  part
above  Fifty  men  of  warre,  whom,  together  with  twenty
Crosse-bowes,  the  Captaine  had  left  in  Garrison.  All
these,  out  of  certaine  high  places,  beholding  the  enemies
vaste  Armie,  and  abhorring  the  beastly  cruelty  of
Antichrist  his  complices,  signified  forthwith  unto  their
Governour  the  hideous  lamentations  of  his  Christian
subjects,  who  suddenly  being  surprised  in  all  the  Province
adjoyning,  without  any  difference  or  respect  of  condition,
Fortune,  sexe,  or  age,  were  by  manifold  cruelties,  all  of
them  destroyed  :  with  whose  carkesses,  the  Tartarian
chieftaines,  and  their  brutish  and  savage  followers,  glut-
ting themselves,  as  with  delicious  cates,  left  nothing
for  vultures  but  the  bare  bones. And  a  strange  thing it

183

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

J243-

is  to  consider,  that  the  greedy  and  ravenous  vultures  dis-
dained to  pray  upon  any  of  the  reliques,  which  remained.
Old  and  deformed  Women  they  gave,  as  it  were  for
daylie  sustenance,  unto  their  Canibals  :  the  beautifull
devoured  they  not,  but  smothered  them,  lamenting  and
scritching,  with  forced  and  unnaturall  ravishments.  Like
[III.  i.  64.]  barbarous  miscreants,  they  quelled  Virgins  unto  death,
and  cutting  off  their  tender  paps  to  present  for  dainties
unto  their  Magistrates,  they  engorged  themselves  with
their  Bodies.

Howbeit,  their  spials  in  the  meane  time  discrying  from
the  top  of  an  high  mountaine  the  Duke  of  Austria,
the  King  of  Bohemia,  the  Patriarch  of  Aquileia,  the
Duke  of  Carinthia,  and  (as  some  report)  the  Earle  of
Baden,  with  a  mighty  power,  and  in  battell  aray,  approch-
ing  towards  them,  that  accursed  crew  immediatly
vanished,  and  all  those  Tartarian  Vagabonds  retired
themselves  into  the  distressed  and  vanquished  land  of
Hungarie ;  who  as  they  came  suddenly,  so  they  departed
also  on  the  sudden :  which  their  celeritie  caused  all
men  to  stand  in  horrour  and  astonishment  of  them.  But
of  the  said  fugitives,  the  Prince  of  Dalmatia  tooke  eight  :
one  of  which  number  the  Duke  of  Austria  knew  to  bee
an  Englishman,  who  was  perpetually  banished  out  of  the
Realme  of  England,  in  regard  of  certaine  notorious  crimes
by  him  committed.  This  fellow  on  the  behalfe  of  the
most  tyrannicall  King  of  the  Tartars,  had  beene  twise,  as
a  messenger  and  Interpreter,  with  the  King  of  Hungarie,
menacing  and  plainely  fortelling  those  mischiefes  which
afterward  happened,  unlesse  he  would  submit  himselfe
and  his  Kingdome  unto  the  Tartars  yoke.  Well,  being
allured  by  our  Princes  to  confesse  the  truth,  he  made
such  oathes,  and  protestations,  as  (I  thinke)  the  Devill
himselfe  would  have  beene  trusted  for.  First  therefore
hee  reported  of  himselfe,  that  presently  after  the  time  of
his  banishment,  namely,  about  the  thirtieth  yeare  of  his
age,  having  lost  all  that  he  had  in  the  Citie  of  Aeon  at
Dice,  even  in  the  midst  of  Winter,  being  compelled  by

184

WO OF NARBONNE  ad.

I243-
ignominious  hunger wearing nothing about  him but  a

shirt  of  sacke,  a  paire  of  shooes,  and  a  haire  cap  onely,
being  shaven  like  a  foole,  and  uttering  an  uncoth  noyse
as  if  hee  had  beene  dumbe,  he  tooke  his  journey,  and  so
travelling  many  Countries,  and  finding  in  divers  places
friendly  entertainment,  he  prolonged  his  life  in  this
manner  for  a  season,  albeit  every  day  by  rashnes  of
speech,  and  inconstancy  of  heart,  hee  endangered  himselfe
to  the  Devill.  At  length,  by  reason  of  extreame  travaile,
and  continuall  change  of  ayre  and  of  meates  in  Caldea,
hee  fell  into  a  grievous  sicknesse,  insomuch  that  he  was
weary  of  his  life.  Not  being  able  therefore  to  goe  for-
ward or  backward,  and  staying  there  a  while  to  refresh
himselfe,  hee  began  (being  somewhat  learned)  to  com-
mend to  writing  those  wordes  which  he  heard  spoken,
and  within  a  short  space,  so  aptly  to  pronounce  and  to
utter  them  himselfe,  that  he  was  reputed  for  a  native
member  of  that  Countrie  :  and  by  the  same  dexteritie  he
attained  to  manie  Languages.  This  man,  the  Tartars
having  intelligence  of  by  their  spies,  drew  him  perforce
into  their  societie  :  and  being  admonished  by  an  oracle
jor  vision,  to  challenge  dominion  over  the  whole  earth,
they  allured  him  by  many  rewards  to  their  faithfull
service,  by  reason  that  they  wanted  Interpreters.  But
concerning  their  manners  and  superstitions,  of  the
disposition  and  stature  of  their  bodies,  of  their  Countrie
bid  manner  of  fighting,  &c.  he  protested  the  particulars
following  to  be  true  :  namely,  that  they  were  above  all
Hen,  covetous,  hastie,  deceitfull,  and  mercilesse  :  notwith-
standing, by  reason  of  the  rigour  and  extremitie  of
punishments  to  be  inflicted  upon  them  by  their  superiours,
they  are  restrained  from  brawlings,  and  from  mutual!
litrite  and  contention.  The  ancient  founders  and  fathers
M  their  tribes,  they  call  by  the  name  of  Gods,  and  at
pertaine  set  times  they  doe  celebrate  solemne  Feasts  unto
hem,  many  of  them  being  particular,  and  but  foure  onely
ijenerall.  They  thinke  that  all  things  are  created  for
ihemselves alone. They esteeme it none offence to

185

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1243.

exercise  cruelty  against  rebels.  They  be  hardy  and
strong  in  the  breast,  leane  and  pale-faced,  rough  and
huffe-shouldred,  having  flat  and  short  noses,  long  and
sharpe  chinnes,  their  upper  jawes  are  low  and  declining,
their  teeth  long  and  thin,  their  eye-browes  extending  from
their  fore-heads  downe  to  their  noses,  their  eyes  incon-
stant and  blacke,  their  countenances  writhen  and  terrible,
their  extreame  joints  strong  with  bones  and  sinewes,
having  thicke  and  great  thighes,  and  short  legs,  and  yet
being  equall  unto  us  in  stature  :  for  that  length  which  is
wanting  in  their  legs,  is  supplyed  in  the  upper  partes  of
their  bodies.  Their  Countrey  in  old  time  was  a  land
utterly  desert  and  waste,  situated  farre  beyond  Chaldea,
from  whence  they  have  expelled  Lyons,  Beares,  and  such  \
like  untamed  beasts,  with  their  bowes,  and  other  engines.
Of  the  hides  of  beastes  being  tanned,  they  use  to  shape
for  themselves  light,  but  yet  impenetrable  armour.  They
ride  fast  bound  unto  their  Horses,  which  are  not  very
great  in  stature,  but  exceedingly  strong,  and  maintained
with  little  provender.  They  use  to  fight  constantly  and
valiantly  with  Javelins,  maces,  battle-axes,  and  swords.
But  especially  they  are  excellent  Archers,  and  cunning
warriers  with  their  bowes.  Their  backs  are  sleightly
armed,  that  they  may  not  flee.  They  withdraw  not  them-
selves from  the  combate,  till  they  see  the  chiefe  Standerdi
of  their  Generall  give  backe.  Vanquished,  they  ask  noio
favour,  and  vanquishing,  they  shew  no  compassion.  They
all  persist  in  their  purpose  of  subduing  the  whole  world
under  their  owne  subjection,  as  if  they  were  but  one  man,
and  yet  they  are  moe  then  millions  in  number.  They|
have  60000.  Courriers,  who  being  sent  before  upon  light'  |0
Horses  to  prepare  a  place  for  the  Armie  to  incampe  in.
will  in  the  space  of  one  night  gallop  three  dayes  jotirney
And  suddenly  diffusing  themselves  over  an  whole  Pro-;
vince,  and  surprising  all  the  people  thereof  unarmed,  un-  n
provided,  dispersed,  they  make  such  horrible  slaughters,  ?t
that  the  King  or  Prince  of  the  land  invaded,  cannot  finde  b
people sufficient to  wage battell against them, and to  ^

186

i!

YVO OF NAR BONNE  a.d.

1243.
withstand  them. They  delude  all  people  and  Princes  of
I  regions in time of  peace,  pretending  that  for a cause,
Iwhich indeed is no cause. Sometimes they say that
ithey will make a voyage to Collen, to fetch home
the  three  wise  Kings  into  their  owne  Countrey ;  sometimes  [III.  i.  65.]
to punish the avarice  and pride of  the Romans, who
joppressed them in times past; sometimes to conquer
barbarous  and  Northern  nations ;  sometimes  to  moderate
the  furie  of  the  Germans  with their  owne  meeke  mild-
nesse ;  sometimes  to  learne  warlike  feates  and  stratagems
of  the  French ;  sometimes  for  the  finding  out  of  fertile
ground to suffice their huge multitudes; sometimes
igaine  in  derision  they  say,  that  they  intend  to  goe  on
Pilgrimage  to  Saint  James  of  Galicia. In  regard  of  which
sleights and collusions certaine undiscreet Governours
:oncluding  a  league  with  them,  have  granted  them  free
Dassage  thorow  their  Territories,  which  leagues  notwith-
itanding  being  violated,  were  an  occasion  of  ruyne  and
iestruction  unto  the  foresaid  Governours,  &c.

To  the  Reader.

T  Found  this  Booke  translated  by  Master  Hakluyt  out
1  of  the  Latine.  But  where  the  blind  leade  the  blind
)oth  fall  ^  as  here  the  corrupt  Latine  could  not  but  yeeld
.  corruption  of  truth  in  English.  Ramusio,  Secretarie
o  the  Decemviri  in  Venice,  found  a  better  Copie  and
>ublished  the  same,  whence  you  have  the  worke  in
nanner  new  :  so  renewed,  that  I  have  found  the
>roverbe  true,  that  it  is  better  to  pull  downe  an  old
touse  and  to  build  it  anew,  then  to  repaire  it ;  as  I  also
hould  have  done,  had  I  knowne  that  which  in  the  event
^  found.  The  Latine  is  Latten,  compared  to  Ramusios
rold.  And  hee  which  hath  the  Latine  hath  but  Marco
'olos  Carkasse,  or  not  so  much,  but  a  few  bones,  yea,
ometime  stones  rather  then  bones  ;  things  divers,
verse,  adverse,  perverted  in  manner,  disjoynted  in
lanner,  beyond  beliefe.  I  have  seene  some  Authors
laymed,  but  never  any  so  mangled  and  so  mingled,  so

187

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGBJMES

1243.

present  and  so  absent,  as  this  vulgar  Latine  of  Marco
Polo ;  not  so  like  himselfe,  as  the  three  Polos  were  at
their  returne  to  Venice,  where  none  knew  them,  as  in  the
Discourse  yee  shall  find.  Much  are  wee  beholden  to
Ramusio,  for  restoring  this  Pole  and  Load-starre  of  Asia,
out  of  that  mirie  poole  or  puddle  in  which  he  lay-
drowned.  And,  O  that  it  were  possible  to  doe  as  much
for  our  Countriman  Mandevill,  who  next  this  (if  next)
was  the  greatest  Asian  Traveller  that  ever  the  World  had,  !
&  having  falne  amongst  theeves,  neither  Priest,  nor!
Levite  can  know  him,  neither  have  we  hope  of  a  Samari-  I,
tan  to  releeve  him.  In  this  I  have  endevoured  to  give
(in  what  I  give)  the  truth,  but  have  abridged  some  things
to  prevent  prolixitie  and  tautologie  in  this  so  voluminous
a  Worke,  leaving  out  nothing  of  substance,  but  what
elsewhere  is  to  be  found  in  this  Worke :  and  seeking
rather  the  sense  then  a  stricter  verball  following  our
Authours  words  and  sentence.  As  for  the  Chapters  I
find  them  diversly  by  divers  expressed,  and  therefore
have  followed  our  owne  method.

;n

I

Chap. IIII.

The  first  Booke  of  Marcus  Paulus  Venetus,  or  of
Master  Marco  Polo,  a  Gentleman  of  Venice,
his  Voyages.

§• L

conquering™  The  Voyages  of  Master  M.  Nicolo  and  M.  Maffio
Constantinople  from Constantinople to the Great Can, and  ;r

"Umpire  of  the  their  comming  home  to  Venice  : their  second

Latlnes  there,  Voyage  with  the  Authour  and  returne.

Ramusio  hath
given  a  long
discourse : see
also  Knolles

h

N the time  of  Baldwin Emperour  of  Constanti-:

nople,*  where  usually  remayned  a  Magistrate  off

Venice,  called  Messer  lo  Dose,  in  the  yeare  of  our  r1

Turkish  Lorj  l2.Q Master  Nicolo  Polo,  Father  of  Master  Marco,  *"

His  tone  * £5  B

m.  1.  /.  anc*  M.  Maffio  his  Brother,  Noble,  Honourable  and  Wise-  "

6.  men  of  Venice, beeing  at  Constantinople  with store  of  *

188

sup.  torn.  1.  /.
S.c.

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1250.
Merchandize,  kept  many  Accounts  together. At  last  they
determined to goe  into  the  Great  (or Euxine) Sea, to
see  if  they  could  increase  their  stocke,  and  buying  many
;faire and rich Jewels. They departed from Constan-  *Caued  h
tinople and sayled by the said Sea to a Port called  Abilfada
Soldadia:* from  whence  they  travelled  after  by  Land  to  hmacl,$ogdat,
ithe  Court  of  a  great  Lord  of  the  Tartars,  called  Barcha,  ^d  placed  in
who  resided  in  the  Cities  of  Bolgara  and  Assara,  and  was  J^Zriaul
|reputed  one  of  the  most liberal  and courteous  Princes  thT^orthlde
.that  ever  had  beene  amongst  the  Tartars. He  was  very  of  the  Euxine
jwell pleased  with their comming,  and did them  great  Sea- Frter
honour. They  having  made  shew  of  their  Jewels,  and  ^iTi/s^dlia
(seeing  they  pleased  him, freely  bestowed  them  on  him.  Zc'Laria!"
He,  loth  to be  exceeded in  liberalise,  caused  twice  the  [III.  i.  66.]
value  to  bee  given  them,  and  besides  great  and  rich  gifts.
(Having stayed one yeare in the  Country  of  the said
Prince,  whiles  they  thought  to  returne  to  Venice,  there
(suddenly  arose  Warre  betwixt  the  said  Barcha  and  another
named Alau, Lord of the Easterne Tartars. These
Krmies  fighting  together,  Alau  had  the  Victorie,  and  the
Armie  of  Barcha  received  a  great  overthrow. By  reason
thereof,  the  wayes  beeing  not  secure,  they  were  not  able
o returne that way which they came. And having
onsulted how  to returne to Constantinople,  they  were
dvised to goe so farre to the East, that they  might
ompasse  the Realme  of  Barcha, by  unknowne  wayes  :
.nd so  they  came  to  a  Citie  called Ouchacha,  which is
n the Confines  of  the  Kingdome  of  this Lord  of  the
Tartars  on  the  West,  and  passing  further,  they  went  over
Tigris  (one  of  the  foure Rivers  of  Paradise)  and  after
!hat  a  Desart  of  seventeene  dayes  Journey,  without  Citie,
Castle,  or  Fort,  finding  only  Tartars,  which  live  in  the
;.elds  in  certayne  Tents,  with  their  beasts. Beeing  past
he  Desart  they  came  to  a  good  Citie  called  Bocara,  (the  Bocara,  or
iame also of  the Province) in the Region of  Persia, £o^ar  in
jzhich  was  subject  to  a  King  called  Barach  :  in  which  place  f^^M
^iey  stayed  three  yeares  before  they  could  goe  forward  or  "enkinfon.
lackward,  by  reason  of  great  warres  betwixt  the  Tartars.

189

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1253.

At  that  time  a  certayne  Wiseman  was  sent  Ambassador
from  the  said  Prince  Alau  to  the  Great  Can,  who  is  the
greatest  King  of  all  the  Tartars,  residing  in  the  Confines
of  the  Earth,  betwixt  the  North-east  and  the  East,  called
Cublai  Can  : who  being  comne to Bocara,  and rinding
there  the  said  two  brethren  which  had  now  well  learned
the  Tartarian  Language,  he  rejoyced  above  measure,  and
perswadeth  these  Westerne  men  or  Latines  to  goe  with
him, to the presence of  the Great Emperour of  the
Tartars ; knowing  that  hee  should  gratifle  him in this,
and  the  men  notwithstanding  should  be  entertayned  with
great  honour,  and  rewarded  with  large  gifts;  especially,
seeing  through  the  manifold  conference  had  with  them,
he  now  perceived  their  pleasing  behaviour. Those  men
therefore  considering,  that  they  could  not  easily  returne
home  without danger, consulting together, joyne with
the said Ambassadour, and  journey  with him to the
Emperour  of  the  Tartars,  having  certayne  other  Christians
in  their  Company,  whom  they  brought  with  them  from
Venice,  and departing towards the North-east  and the
North,  were  a  whole  yeare  in  going  to  the  Court  of  the
said  chiefe  King  of  the  Tartars. The  cause  of  their  long
time  in  this  Journey,  was  the  Snowes  and  River  Waters  :p
much  increased,  so  that  they  were  forced  in  their  travell
to  stay  the  wasting  of  the  Snow,  and  decreasing  of  thep
flouds.
They  come  to Being therefore brought before the  presence  of  the
theGreatCan.  Great  Can,  they  were  most  courteously  received  of  him.jM
He  questioned  them  concerning  many  things,  as  of  the  £
Countries of the West, the Romane Emperour, and^e
other Kings and Princes, how they carried themselves ?or
in Government, and in Warlike affaires, how Peace, in
Justice,  and  Concord  continued  among  them; also  whatfit
manner  of  life, and customes were observed with the  one
Latines; and  especially  of  the Pope  of  the  Christians,
of  the  things of  the Church  and the Religion of  theiM
Christian Faith. And M. Nicolo and M. MafFeo, as  *rc
Wisemen told him the truth, alway  speaking well to^

190

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1253-

him, and  orderly in the Tartarian Tongue. Insomuch

that hee often commanded they should bee brought

to his presence, and they were very acceptable in his

sight.

Having  well understood the  Affaires  of  the  Latines,

and resting satisfied  with their answers, the  Great  Can

intending  to  send  them  his  Ambassadours  to  the  Pope,  They  are  sent

first,  consulted  with  his  Barons,  and  then  calling  to  him  imba"adour>
i-» i  1 • i i  r i  • i  &  i from  the  Can

the  two  brethren,  desired  them  tor  his  love  to  goe  to  the  t0  t^e  p0pe^

Pope  of  the  Romans,  with  one  of  his  Barons  called  Cho-
gatall,  to  pray  him  to  send  an  hundred  Wisemen,  and
earned  in  the  Christian  Religion  unto  him,  who  might
shew  his  Wisemen,  that  the  Faith  of  the  Christians,  was
to  bee  preferred  before  all  other  Sects,  and  was  the  only
way  of  salvation  ;  and  that  the  Gods  of  the  Tartars  were
Devils,  and  that  they  and  others  the  people  of  the  East
were  deceived  in  the  worship  of  their  Gods.  Hee  gave
them  also  in  charge  to  bring  in  their  returne  from  Jeru-
salem, of  the  Oyle  of  the  Lampe  which  burneth  before
the  Sepulchre  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  to  whom  hee  had
great  devotion,  and  held  him  to  bee  true  God.  They
therefore  yeelding  due  reverence  to  the  Great  Can,
Dromise  that  they  will  faithfully  execute  the  charge
:ommitted  unto  them,  and  present  the  Letters  which
:hey  received  from  him,  written  in  the  Tartarian,  to  be
delivered  to  the  Bishop  of  Rome.

He  (according  to  the  custome  of  his  Kingdome)  com-  Golden  tablet
nanded  a  Golden  Tablet  to  bee  given  them  ingraven  and  usedasaCom-
igned  with  the  Kings  marke ; carrying the  which  with  Twl°w  u?  er
hem  throughout  his  whole  Empire,  in  stead  of  a  Passe-  Seale.
)ort,  they  might  bee  every-where  safely  conveyed  through
langerous  places, by  the Governours  of  Provinces  and
lities,  and  receive  expenses  from  them ;  and  lastly,  how
ong soever they  would stay in any  place,  whatsoever
hey needed to them or theirs, should be ministred
into them. Taking their  leave therefore of  the Em-
•erour, they take their Journey, carrying the Letters
)nd  Golden  Tablet  with  them. And  when  they  had  rid

191

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1269.

twentie  dayes  Journey,  the  Baron  aforesaid  associated
unto  them  began  to  fall  grievously  sicke.  Whereupon
consulting  and  leaving  him  there,  they  prosecute  their
intended  Journey,  beeing  every-where  courteously  re-
ceived by  reason  of  the  Emperours  Tablet.  Yet  in
very  many  places  they  were  compelled  to  stay,  by
occasion  of  the  over-flowing  of  Rivers,  so  that  they
spent  three  yeares,  before  they  came  unto  the  Port  of
[III.  i.  67.]  the  Citie  of  the  Armenians,  named  Giazza.  From  Giazza
Acre  or  Aeon,  they  goe  to  Acre,  to  wit,  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1269.

fonlffhT5' ^ the moneth of  APrilL

Christians  see But  having  entred  into  the  Citie  of  Acre,  they  heard,

before  /.  8.^.4.  that  Pope  Clement  the  fourth  was  lately  dead,  and  that  no

Pope  Clement  other  was substituted  in  his  place  :  for  the  which  they

the  fourth. were not a  little  grieved. At  that time, there  was  a

certaine  Legate  of  the  Apostolicall  Sea  at  Acre,  to  wit,

Master  Tibaldo  de  Vesconti  di  Piacenza,  to  whom  they

declared  all  they  had  in  commission,  from  the  Great  Can  :

and  he  advised  them,  to  expect  the  Creation  of  a  new

Pope. In  the  meane  space  therefore  departing  to  Venice

to  visit  their  Friends,  (purposing  to  remayne  there  untill

another  Pope  were  created)  Master  Nicolo  found  that  his

wife  was  dead,  whom  (at  his  departure)  hee  had  left  great

+  "°{e*L h with  child,  but  had  left  a  sonne,  named  Marco,  who  was
copie  hath  15.  * .  r  ^1  • • 1 a  h  1  •  1

* For  the  now*  nineteene  yeeres  or  age. I  his  is  that  Marco  which

Booke  was  ordaynedx  this  Booke,  who  will  manifest  therein  all  those
written  by  a  things  which  he  hath  seene.  Moreover,  the  Election  of
Gentleman  of the p  of  Rome wag deferred twQ eres#

Genoa  from  ,_ . r  /r  . ,.  J .. . .  -

his  mouth:  and 1  hey  (rearing  the  discontentment,  and  disquieting  or

therefore  still  the  Emperour  of  the  Tartars,  who  (they  knew)  expected
in  Ramusio  their  returne)  goe  backe  againe  to  Acre  to  the  Legate,
Marco  is  men-  carrvjng  witn  them  Marco  aforesaid,  and  (having  gone  to
third  person,  Jerusalem,  and  fetched  of  the  Oyle)  with  the  Legats
and  not  in  the  Letters,  testifying  their  fidelitie  to  the  Great  Chan,  and
first:  at  least  that  a  Pope  was  not  yet  chosen,  they  went  againe  towards
much  of  it  was  Qjazza>  in  the  meane  time  whiles  they  were  going,
the  whole  pub-  Messengers  came  from  the  Cardinals  to  the  Legate,
lished  by  both,  declaring  unto  him, that  he was  chosen  Pope :  and  he

192

MARCO POLO  ad

1269.
called  himselfed  Gregorie. Hearing  this,  presently  send-  d^e  tenth  of
ing Messengers, hee calleth backe the Venetians, and  that  name'
admonisheth  them  not  to  depart,  preparing  other  Letters
for  them,  which  they  should  present  unto  the  Great  Chan
of  the  Tartars  ;  with  whom  he  also  joyned  two  Preaching
Friars, men famous  for their honest conversation and
learning,  whereof  the  one  was  called  Friar  Nicolo  Davi-
cenza ;  the other,  Friar  Guielmo  da  Tripoli. To  these
hee  gave  Letters,  and  Priviledges,  and  authoritie  to  order  Letters,  and
Priests  and  Bishops,  and  of  all  absolution  as  if  himselfe  PreachtnS

.  \ J  -^  ^  r  i  1 rrtars  sent

were present, with .Presents also or great value, and  untQ  the

Crystall vessels to present the great Chan, together  Tartar.

with  his  Benediction. They  came  to  Giazza,  a  Port  of

the Sea in Armenia. And because Bentiochdare the

Sultan of Babylon levying a great Armie had then

invaded the Armenians, the two Friars mentioned,

began to  bee afraid of  themselves,  and delivering the

Letters and Presents to Master Nicolo, and Maffio,

and  Marco,  desiring  to  avoide  the  danger  of  the  wayes,

and  perill  of  warres, remayned  with  the  Master  of  the

Temple,  and  returned  with  him.

But  the three Venetians exposing themselves to  all

danger,  with  many  labours,  and  much  difficultie  travelled

many  dayes,  alwaies  towards  the  North-east  and  North,

Itill  they  after three yeeres and a halfe  came  unto  the

Emperour  of  the  Tartars,  unto  the  Citie  called  Clemenfu  :  The  Cttte

i|for  in  the  Winter  time  their  journey  had  often  and  long menJu-

hinderances,  by  reason  of  the  snow  and  extreme  cold,  and

.inundations  of  waters. Moreover,  King  Cublai  hearing

jthat  they  were  comming,  who  were  yet  very  farre  off,  sent

Messengers fortie dayes journey to meet them, who

should  conduct  them  and  minister  all  necessaries  for  the

iiourney.

Going  therefore  to  the  Kings  Court,  and  being  brought  The  Oration
u-  mx. rn j  l  c l-  4.1?  ■ of  the  Tartars.

:o his presence, they fell downe before him on their  J

races, yeelding the accustomed reverence. Of whom

Deing  curteously received,  they  are  willed  to  arise,  and

le commandeth them to declare, how they  passed the

xi  193  n

A.D.

I269.

Marcus
Paulus  made
one  of  the
Chans

Clerkes,  and
a  Courtier.
Marcos
Legation.

His  wisedome
in  travelling
to  a  fair e
Countrey.

*This  26.
yeers  are  to  be
reckoned  to  the
time  in  which
this  booke  was
written,  from
1272.  to
1298.  as  in
the  Relation
appear eth.
The  sense  is
that  it  was  26.
yeers  since  he
began  to  be  a
Courtier.
They  desire  to
returne.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

divers  dangers  of  the  wayes,  and  what  they  had  treated
with  the  Bishop  of  Rome.  Then  they  orderly  declare
all  things,  and  give  the  Emperour  the  Popes  Letters  and
Presents  which  they  brought.  Whereat  the  Chan
wonderfull  rejoycing,  commended  their  faithfull  cares.
The  Oyle  also  brought  from  the  Lampe  of  the  Lords
Sepulcher,  and  offered  unto  him,  hee  reverently  received
of  them,  and  commanded  it  should  bee  honourably  pre-
served. And  asking  of  Marco,  who  hee  was,  Master
Nicolo  answered,  that  he  was  his  Majesties  servant  and
his  sonne.  Hee  entertayned  him  with  a  friendly  counte-
nance, and  caused  him  to  write  amongst  other  his
honourable  Courtiers:  Whereupon  he  was  much
esteemed  of  all  the  Court,  and  in  a  little  space  learned
the  customes  of  the  Tartars,  and  foure  divers  Languages,
being  able  to  write  and  reade  them  all.

The  great  Chan  to  make  his  wisedome  more  apparent,
committed  an  Embassage  unto  him  to  be  performed  in  a
Citie  called  Carahan,  unto  the  which  he  could  scarcely
attayne  in  sixe  moneths  space.  But  he,  carrying  him-
selfe  wisely  in  all  things,  discharged  what  hee  had  in
commission,  not  without  the  commendation  and  favour
of  the  Prince.  And  knowing  the  Emperour  was
delighted  with  novelties  in  the  Countries  which  he
passed  thorow,  he  diligently  searched  the  customes  and
manners  of  men,  and  the  conditions  of  the  Countries ;
making  a  memoriall  of  all  which  he  knew  and  saw,  to
pleasure  the  Great  Chan.  And  in  sixe  and  twentie*
yeeres  which  he  continued  one  of  his  Court,  he  was  so
acceptable  to  him,  that  he  was  continually  sent  thorow
all  his  Realmes  and  Signiories,  for  the  affaires  of  the
Great  Chan,  and  sometimes  for  his  owne,  but  by  the
Chans  order.  And  this  is  the  true  reason  that  the  said
Master  Marco  learned  and  saw  so  many  novelties  of
the  East,  which  follow  in  order  diligently  written.

But  these  Venetians  having  stayed  in  that  Court  many
yeeres,  and  growne  very  rich  in  Jewels  of  great  value,
were  inflamed  with  desire  to  visit  their  Countrey,  fearing

194

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1298.

that  if  the  Chan  (now  old)  should  die,  they  should  not

bee  able  to  returne. One  day  Master  Nicolo  seeing  the

Chan merrie, craved  licence to  depart  in the  name of

all  three. Whereat hee was moved, and asked why  [III.  i.  68.]

they  would  put  themselves  on  so  dangerous  a  journey :

and  if  they  wanted  riches,  he  would  give  them  twice  as

much  as  they  had  :  and  in  great  love  would  not  permit

their  departure. Yet  in  the  meane space it happened,

that a King  of the Indians, named  Argon,  sent  three  Argon,  a  King

wise  men  unto  the  Court  of  Great  Cublai,  whose  names  °fthelndtans-

were Ulatai, Apusca, Coza,  to  treat with him, that  he  ^at'lQn  Qf

wold deliver him  a wife ;  for  his  wife named  Bolgana,  India.

being  lately  dead,  begged  this  grace  of  the  King  at  the  And  this  King

point  of  death,  and  left  in  her  Wil,  that  he  should  not  ^™d  the

marrie  a  wife  of  another  Familie  then  her  owne,  which  The' will  of

was of Catay. King  Cublai therefore yeelding to his Queene

request,  caused  to  be  sought  out  for  them  a  faire  young  Bolgana.

Mayden of seventeene yeeres  of  age, named Cogatin, Cogatin.

descended  of  the  said  Queenes  stocke,  and  to  be  the  wife

of  Argon.

These  Embassadors  departing,  rode  eight  moneths  the
same  way  they  came,  but  found  so  hot  warres  betwixt  the
Tartars,  that  they  were  constrayned  to  returne :  and
acquainted  the  Chan  with  their  proceedings.  Meane-
whiles,  Master  Marco  had  returned  from  the  parts  of
India,  where  he  had  beene  employed  with  certaine  ships,
and  declared  to  the  Chan  the  novelties  of  the  places,  and
the  securitie  of  those  Seas:  which  words  having  passed
him,  the  Embassadours  conferred  with  the  Venetians,  and
agreed  that  they  with  the  Queene  should  goe  to  the  Great
Chan,  and  desire  leave  to  returne  by  Sea,  and  to  have  the
three  Latines,  men  skilfull  in  Sea  affaires,  with  them  to
the  Countrey  of  King  Argon.  The  Great  Chan  was
much  displeased  with  their  request,  yet  upon  their  peti-
tion granted  it:  and  caused  Nicolo,  Maffio  and  Marco
to  come  to  his  presence,  and  after  much  demonstration
of  his  love,  would  have  them  promise  to  returne  to  him,
after  they  had  spent  some  time  in  Christendome,  and  at

i95

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1298.

their  owne  house.  And  he  caused  to  give  them  a  Tablet
of  Gold,  in  which  was  written  his  commandement,  for
their  libertie  and  securitie  thorow  all  his  Dominions,  and
that  expenses  should  bee  given  them  and  theirs,  and  a
Guide  or  convoy  for  safe  passage ;  ordayning  also  that
they  should  be  his  Embassadours  to  the  Pope,  the  Kings
of  France,  of  Spayne,  and  to  other  Christian  Kings.  Hee
caused  fourteene  ships  to  be  prepared,  each  having  foure
Masts  and  able  to  beare  nine  Sayles  in  sayling,  the  forme
of  which  is  too  long  here  to  relate.  Foure  of  them,  or
five,  had  from  two  hundred  and  fiftie  to  two  hundred
and  sixtie  Mariners  each  of  them.  In  these  ships  the
Embassadours,  the  Queene,  and  Nicolo,  Maffio,  and
Marco,  set  sayle,  having  first  taken  leave  of  the  Great
Chan,  who  gave  them  many  Rubies  and  other  precious
gems,  and  expenses  for  two  yeeres.

After  three  moneths  they  came  unto  a  certaine  Hand,
named  Java,  and  from  thence  sayling  through  the  Indian
Sea ;  after  eighteene  moneths,  they  come  unto  the  Coun-
trey  of  King  Argon,  sixe  hundred  men  of  the  Mariners
and  others,  and  but  one  of  the  Women  and  Damsels  died
in  the  journey,  and  onely  Coza  of  the  three  Embassadours
was  living.  When  they  came  to  the  Countrey  of  King
Argon,  they  found  that  hee  was  dead,  and  that  one
Chiacato  governed  the  Kingdome,  for  his  sonne  being
young.  They  sent  to  acquaint  him  with  their  businesse ;
who  answered,  that  they  should  give  her  to  Casan  the
Kings  sonne,  then  in  the  parts  of  Arbor  secco,  in  the
Confines  of  Persia  with  sixtie  thousand  persons  for  the
guard  of  certaine  passages  against  the  enemie.  Having
done  so,  Nicolo,  Maffio,  and  Marco  returned  to  Chiacato,
and  stayed  there  nine  moneths.  After  this,  taking  leave,
Chiacato  gave  them  foure  Tables  of  Gold,  each  a  cubit
long,  five  fingers  broad,  of  the  weight  of  three  or  foure
Markes  :  in  which  was  written,  that  in  the  power  of  the
eternall  God,  the  name  of  the  Great  Chan  should  bee
honoured  and  praised  many  yeeres ;  and  every  one  which
should  not  obey,  should  be  put  to  death,  and  his  goods

196

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1298.

confiscate.  It  was  further  contayned,  that  these  three
Embassadours  should  be  honoured,  and  service  done
them  in  all  Lands  and  Countries,  as  to  his  owne  person  :
and  that  Horses,  Convoyes,  expenses  and  necessaries
should  be  given  them.  All  which  was  duly  put  in
execution,  that  sometimes  they  had  two  hundred  Horses
for  their  safeguard.  In  this  their  travell  they  heard  that
the  Great  Chan  was  dead,  which  tooke  from  them  all
hope  of  returning  thither.  They  rode  till  they  came  to
Trabesonde,  and  from  thence  to  Constantinople,  and
after  to  Negroponte,  and  at  last  came  with  great  riches
safe  to  Venice,  Anno  1295.  And  thus  much  may  serve
for  a  Preface  to  the  following  worke,  whereby  might
appeare,  how  Marco  Polo  could  come  to  the  knowledge
of  the  things  therein  contayned.

To  supply  a  little  more,  delivered  by  Tradition  and
recorded  by  Ramusio :  he  sayth  that  these  three  being
comne  to  Venice,  like  Ulysses  in  Ithaca,  none  knew
them ;  all  esteeming  them  long  since  dead.  Besides,
their  voyage  had  so  altered  them,  that  they  seemed
rather  Tartarians  then  Venetians,  having  in  manner  for-
gotten their  native  Language ;  their  habite  also  was  of
thicke  Cloth,  like  Tartars.  They  went  to  their  house
in  Saint  John  Chrysostomes  Street,  and  is  there  still  to
be  seene,  then  a  faire  Palace,  and  now  called,  The  Court
of  millions :  which  name  it  had  by  reason  of  Marcos
relations  of  so  many  millions  in  this  worke,  and  in  his
discourses  of  the  Great  Chans  incredible  wealth.  They
found  there  inhabiting  some  of  their  kindred,  nor  knew
how  to  make  themselves  knowne.  Therefore,  as  I  have
often  heard  of  Magnifico  Messer  Gasparo  Malipiero,  a
very  old  Gentleman  of  singular  integritie,  from  the  report
of  his  Father  and  Grandfather,  &c.  they  agreed  to  invite
many  of  their  kindred  to  a  feast,  prepared  in  honourable
manner  with  much  Magnificence :  in  which  at  first  all
three  came  forth  in  Crimson  Sattin  sutes,  and  after  the  •
Guests  were  set,  stripped  themselves,  and  gave  them  to
the  Servitors,  comming  forth  in  Crimson  Damaske;  and

197

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1298.

at  the  next  service  in  Crimson  Velvet,  and  after  in  the
[III.  i.  69.]  common  habit,  giving  still  the  former  to  the  servitors.
Dinner  ended  and  the  Servitors  put  foorth,  Marco
brought  forth  their  three  habits  of  thicke  Cloath  in  which
they  had  comne  home,  and  thence  tooke  and  set  on  the
Table  an  incredible  quantitie  of  Jewels  artificially  sewed
therein,  which  was  no  lesse  marvell  to  the  beholders,  then
evidence  of  their  being  of  the  Polo  family  as  they
pretended.  Maffio  was  made  a  Magistrate  in  Venice,
Marco  was  daily  frequented  with  the  youth ;  and  all
wanne  great  reputation.  In  few  moneths  after,  Lampa
Doria  Generall  of  a  fleet  of  Genois  being  come  to  the
He  Curzola  with  seaventie  Galleyes,  Andrea  Dandolo
was  sent  against  them,  and  in  that  Fleet  Marco  was  made
Captaine  of  a  Galley,  which  by  disadventure  of  Warre
was  taken,  and  he  carryed  prisoner  to  Genoa.  Where
his  strange  travels  being  made  knowne,  a  certaine  Gentle-
man daily  resorting  to  him  (as  did  the  whole  Citie  in
admiration)  caused  and  helped  him  to  write  this  storie,
having  sent  to  Venice  for  his  Notes.  The  booke  was
first  written  in  Latine,  and  thence  translated  into  Italian.
One  of  which  Latine  Copies  very  ancient  and  haply
copied  out  of  Marcos  originall,  I  have  seene  and  com-
pared with  this  which  I  heere  Publish,  lent  me  by  a
Gentleman  of  this  Citie  of  the  house  of  the  Ghisi  my
speciall  friend,  which  holds  it  in  speciall  esteeme.  No
price  might  ransome  him,  insomuch  that  his  Father
wanting  an  heyre  to  his  wealth  marryed  againe,  and  had
by  his  wife  three  Children.  Marcos  worthinesse  obtained
that  which  no  moneys  worth  could  doe,  and  being  at
libertie  hee  returned  and  marryed,  and  had  two  Daughters
(but  no  sonne)  Moretta  and  Fautina,  &c.

That  Gentleman  of  Genoa  made  a  Preface  to  the
Booke,  and  Francisco  Pipino  a  Frier  Preacher  which
translated  the  same,  Anno  1320.  out  of  the  Vulgar
v  (the  Latine  being  rare,  as  well  it  might  before  Printing
and  perhaps  never  seene  of  him)  into  Latine.  Both  those
Prefaces  are  in  Ramusio  :  the  latter  commends  M.  Polo

198

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.

for  a  devout  and  honest  man,  and  saith  his  Father
confirmed  the  truth  of  this  Booke,  and  his  uncle  Maffio
on  his  Death-bed  to  his  Confessor.  Pipino  abbreviated
the  Booke  and  perhaps  gave  occasion  to  that  corruption
which  was  after  increased  by  others.

§.  11.

Observations  of  M.  Polo,  of  Armenia,  Turkie,
Zorzania,  Baldach,  Persia,  Chirmain,  Cobniam,
Ormus,  Knave-fooles  Paradise,  and  other  East-
erne  parts  in  Asia,  and  Armenia  the  lesse.

Here  are  two  Armenia's,  the  greater  and  the  lesse.
In the lesse the King  abides in  a  Citie called
Sebastoz, which in all his Countrey observeth
Justice  and  good  Government. The  Kingdome  it  selfe
hath  many  Cities,  Fortresses  and  Castles  : the  soyle  also
is  fertile,  and  the  Countrey  lacketh no  necessary thing,
nor  doth  it  want  game  of  Beasts  and  fowle : the  ayre
is  not  very  good. The  Gentlemen  of  Armenia  in  times The  manners
past  were  stout  warriours,  but  become  now  effeminate  and  of  the  ^
nice,  give themselves  to drunken nes  and ryot. There  lnhabttants-
is  a  certaine  Citie  in  this  Kingdome  seated  neere  the  Sea,
named  Giazza,  having  an  excellent  Haven  whither  many  Giazza.
Merchants resort from divers Countries, even from
Venice  and  Genua,  by  reason  of  the  divers  marchandises
brought thither,  especially  Spices of  sundry sorts, and
certaine  other  precious  riches  brought  thither  out  of  the
East  Countries  for  trading  :  for  this  place  is  as  it  were  a
certaine  part  of  all  the  East  Countries.

In  Turchomania  are  three  sorts  of  Nations ;  to  wit,  Turchomania,
the  Turchomans  or  Turke-men,  which  observe  the  law  of  or  Turkie-
Mahumet.  They  are  men  unlearned,  rude,  and  wilde,
inhabiting  the  Mountaines  and  inaccessible  places,  where
they  know  are  pastures  ;  for  they  live  onely  of  their
beasts.  There  are  good  Horses,  called  Turke-men,  (or
Turkie horses) Mules,  of  great estimation. The  other

199

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1320.

Nations  are  Grecians  and  Armenians,  who  possesse  the
Cities  and  Townes,  and  bestow  their  labour  on  Mar-
chandise  and  Artes.  They  make  the  best  Carpets  in  the
world.  And  they  have  many  Cities,  the  chiefe  whereof
are  Cogno,  or  Iconium,  Caesarea,  and  Sebaste,  where
Saint  Basil  suffered  Martyrdome  for  Christ,  and  they
acknowledge  one  of  the  Kings  of  the  Tartars  for  their
Lord.

Armenia  the  greater,  being  a  very  large  Province,
tributary  to  the  Tartars,  hath  many  Cities  and  Townes.
The  chiefe  Citie  thereof  is  called  Arzuiga,  and  the  best
Bukram  is  made  there.  Most  wholsome  hot  waters  also
spring  there,  for  the  washing  and  curing  of  mens  bodies.
And  the  other  more  famous  Cities  next  to  the  Metropolis,
are  Argiron  and  Darziz.  In  the  Summer  time,  very  many
Tartars  resort  thither  with  their  Flockes  and  heards,
allured  through  the  fatnes  of  the  pasture :  and  againe
in  the  Winter  depart  for  a  certaine  time  by  reason  of
the  abundance  of  Snow.  The  Arke  of  Noah  remained
in  the  Mountaines  of  this  Armenia.  This  Countrey  hath
the  Province  of  Mosull  and  Meridin,  bordering  on  the

Of  the  East. But  on  the  North  is  Zorzania,*  in  the  confines  of

Georgians.  wnich  a  Fountaine  is  found,  from  which  liquor-like  oyle
floweth,  yet  is  it  unprofitable  for  the  seasoning  of  meat,
but  very  fit  for  the  making  and  maintaining  of  Lampes,
and  to  anoint  other  things  enough  to  lade  Camels.

*  Georgia.  In  Zorzania  is  a  King  called  alway  David  Melicz,  or

King  David  :  One  part  of  the  Province  is  subject  to  him,
the  other  payeth  tribute  to  the  King  of  the  Tartars.
The  Woods  there  are  of  Boxe-tree.  The  Countrey
abutteth on the two Seas, Mar-maggiore,  and  that  of

[III.  i.  70.]  Abaccu  (or  the  Caspian)  which  containeth  in  Circuit
twentie  eight  hundred  Miles,  and  is  like  a  Lake,  not
mingled  with  other  Seas.  In  it  are  many  Hands,  Cities
and  Castles,  some  of  which  are  inhabited  by  those  which
fled  from  the  Tartars  out  of  Persia.  The  people  of
Zorzania  are  Christians,  observing  the  rites  of  the
Christians. They keepe their hayre short, like the

200

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.
Westerne Clergie. The Inhabitants have many Cities
and Castles,  and  abound  with Silke,  of  the  which they
make  very  faire  Cloathes.

Moxul  is  a  Province  in  which  dwell  people  of  many  MoxuL
sortes,  one  called  Arabi  which  are  Mahumetans,  other  are
Christians,  some  Nestorians,  others  Jacobites,  and  others
Armenians  :  and  they  have  a  Patriarch  called  Jacolit,
jwhich  ordaineth  Archbishops,  Bishops,  and  Abbots,  and
[sends  them  thorow  all  parts  of  India,  and  to  Cairo  and
jBaldach,  and  all  parts  where  Christians  dwell,  as  doth
jthe  Pope  of  Rome.  And  all  the  cloathes  of  Gold  and
jof  Silke  called  Mossulines  are  wrought  in  Moxul.  But  in
jthe  Mountaines  of  this  Kingdome  dwell  the  people  called
•Cordi,  whereof  some  are  Nestorians,  other  Jacobines,  and
pome  followers  of  Mahumet.  They  are  wicked  men  and
j-ob  Merchants.  Neare  to  them  is  another  Province,
balled  Mus  and  Meridin,  wherein  growes  infinite  store  of
Cotton  or  Bombast,  whereof  they  make  Buckrams  and
other  workes. They  are  all  under  the  Tartars.

Baldach  is  a  great  Citie,  in  which  was  the  Chalifa  that  Baldach.
s  the  Pope  of  all  the  Sarcens. A  River  runnes  thorow  it,
rom  whence  to  the  Sea  is  ordinarily  seaventeene  dayes
lourney. They  sayle  by  a  Citie  called  Chisi : but  before  ChisL
J  hey  come  thither  is  Balsara,  about  which  grow  the  best  Ba&ara.
Dates in the  world. In Baldach are  many cloathes  of
pold and Silke: there are wrought Damaskes and
Velvets  with  divers  figures  of  creatures. All  the  pearles
in  manner)  in  Christendome  come  thence. In  that  Citie
'3  studyed^  the  law  of  Mahomet,  Negromancie,  Physicke,
jVstronomie,  Geomancie,  and  Phisnomie  :  It  is  the  chiefe
Citie  in  those  parts. When  the  Tartars  began  to  raigne,
|here  were  foure  Brethren,  the  eldest of  which,  Mongu
jaigned  in  Sedia. These  purposing  to  subdue  the  world,
tent  one  to  the  East,  another  to  the  North,  to  the  South
I  third,  which  was  Ulau,  and  the  other  to  the  West. In Ulau  Alan,  or
he  yeare  from  the  Incarnation  of  our  Lord 1250.  Ulau  Haa&n.
.aving  a  great  Army  of  one  hundred  thousand  Horse,
lesides  Foot,  yet  used policie,  and having hid a  great

201

a.».  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1320.

part  of  his  men  brought  by  fained  flight  the  Calipha  into
his  ambush,  and  tooke  him,  and  the  Citie :  in  which  he
found  infinite  store  of  treasure,  insomuch  that  he
wondered.

He  sent  for  the  Califa,  and  reproved  him  that  in  that
war  re  hee  had  not  therewith  provided  himselfe  of  Souldiers
for  defence :  and  commanded  that  hee  should  be  inclosed
in  that  Tower,  where  his  Treasure  was,  without  other
sustenance.  This  seemed  a  just  judgement  from  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ  on  him.  For  he  in  the  yeare  1225.
seeking  to  convert  the  Christians  to  Mahumet  :  And
taking  advantage  on  that  place  of  the  Gospell,  that  hee
which  hath  Faith  asmuch  as  a  graine  of  Mustard-seed,
should  be  able  to  remove  mountaines,  he  Converted  all
the  Christians,  Nestorians,  and  Jacobites,  and  propounded
to  them  in  ten  dayes  to  remove  certaine  Mountaines,  or
turne  Mahumetans,  or  be  slaine,  as  not  having  one  man
amongst  them  which  had  the  least  faith.  They  therefore
continued  eight  dayes  in  Prayer :  after  which  a  certaine
Shoomaker  by  revelation  to  a  Bishop,  was  designed  to
perform e  it.  This  Shoomaker  once  tempted  to  lust  by
sight  of  a  young  Woman  in  putting  on  her  Shooe,
zealously  had  fulfilled  that  of  the  Gospell,  and  literally
had  put  out  his  right  eye :  He  now  on  the  day  appointed
with  other  Christians  following  the  Crosse  and  lifting  his
hands  to  Heaven,  prayed  to  God  to  have  mercy  on  his
people,  and  then  with  a  loude  voyce  commanded  the
Mountaine  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  Sonne,  and  holy
Ghost  to  remove,  which  presently  with  great  terrour  to
the  Califa  and  all  his  people  was  effected.  And  that  day
is  since  kept  holy,  with  fasting  also  on  the  even.
Tauris.  Tauris  is  a  great  Citie  in  the  Province  of  Hirace.  It
is  a  most  populous  Citie.  They  live  of  Arts  and  Mer-
chandise. They  make  Cloathes  of  gold  and  silke.
Foraine  Merchants  make  there  great  gaine,  but  the
Inhabitants  are  generally  poore  :  a  mixed  people  of
Nestorians,  Armenians,  Jacobites,  Georgians,  and  Persians,
and Mahumetans. These  last  are  perfidious  and  treach-  \{

202

MARCO POLO  ad.

1320.

erous,  thinking  all  well  gotten  which  they  steale  from
men  of  other  Religions.  And  this  wickednesse  of  the
Saracens  hath  converted  many  Tartars  thereto.  If  the
Christians  kill  them  in  their  robberie,  they  are  reputed  Devils
Martyrs.  From  Tauris  to  Persia  are  twelve  dayes  Martyrs.
journey.  In  the  confines  of  Tauris  is  the  Monasterie
of  Saint  Barsam,  the  Monkes  whereof  are  like  Carmelites;
they  alway  make  girdles  which  they  lay  on  the  Altar,  and
give  to  their  friends,  which  devoutly  esteeme  of  them.

Persia  containeth  eight  Kingdomes  :  whereof  the  first  is  The  eight
tailed Casibin,  the second  Curdistan,  the  third  Lor,  the  f^ms  of
fourth Suolistan, the fifth Spaan, the sixt Siras, the
Iseaventh Soncara,  the  eight  Timochaim,  which is neere
|Axboresecco  towards  the  North. Faire  and  great  Horses  Horses.
pre  there,  whence  they  are  sold  into  India. There  are  also
l^ery  goodly and  excellent Asses sold dearer then the  Asses.
Horses,  for  that  they  eat  little, carrie  much  and farre.
They  have  Camels  but  not  so  swift. These  are  necessary
n  those  Countries,  which  sometime  in  a  long  way  yeeld
10  grasse. The  people  in  those  Countries  are  very  wicked,  The
:ontentious, Theeves, and Murtherers, professing the  lnhabltants-
aith  of  Mahumet. Merchants  are  every  where  slaine  by
hose  Theeves,  unlesse  they  travell  in  troupes. Yet  are
here  excellent  Artificers  in  the  Cities,  who  make  wonder-
ull  things  in  gold,  silke,  and  Embroyderie. They  abound  [III.  i.  71.]
vith Silke-wormes, Wheat, Barley, Milium, and other
dndes of  Corne : and have also  plenty  of  Wine  and
ruits. And  though  their  Law  forbid  wine,  yet  they  have  Fine  distinc-

glosse  to  correct  or  corrupt  the  text,  that  if  they  boyle  tl™\  as  ln
t,  then  it  changeth  the  taste,  and  therefore  the  name  also
fWine.

Jasdi is  a  great  Citie  in the  confines  of  Persia,  where  Jasdi.
nuch  Trading  is  exercised. It  hath  also  cunning  Artificers
vho  labour  in  Silke.

Chierman  is  a  Kingdome  in  the  confines  of  Persia  to  the
East,  subject  to  the  Tartars.  In  the  veines  of  the  Moun-
iaines  the  stones  are  found,  commonly  called  Turchisses :
leines  also  of  Azzaio  and  Andanico. There  are  also  made

203

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1320.

all  Armes  and  munition  for  warre,  and  by  the  Women
excellent  needle-workes  in  Silkes,  with  the  portraitures
of  all  sorts  of  Creatures  verie  admirable.  There  are  the
best  Falcons  in  the  world,  verie  swift  of  flight,  red
brested,  and  under  the  trayne,  lesse  then  those  of  other
Countries.  Proceeding  further,  you  goe  through  a  great
Plaine,  and  having  ended  eight  dayes  journey,  you  come
unto  a  certaine  descent.  In  the  Plaine  many  Partridges
are  found,  and  also  Castles  and  Townes.  But  in  that
steepe  descent  are  many  trees  and  those  fruitfull,  but  no
habitation  is  there  but  of  Shepheards.  This  Countrey  in
the  winter  time  hath  intolerable  cold.
Camandu.  After  this  you  come  unto  a  certaine  great  Plaine,  where

a  certaine  Citie  is  seated,  named  Camandu,  which  in  times
past  was  great,  but  is  now  destroyed  by  the  Tartars,  and
the  Countrey  is  called  Reobarle.  There  grow  Pom-
granats,  Quinces,  Adams-apples,  and  divers  others  fruits,
which  grow  not  in  our  cold  Countries.  It  hath  also  very
Oxen  with  a  great  Oxen,  and  all  white,  thin  hay  red  with  thicke  blunt
bunch  on  the  short  homes,  with  a  Camels  bunch  on  the  backe,  accus-
tomed to  beare  great  burthens.  And  when  the  packe-
saddles  are  set  upon  the  bunch,  they  bow  the  knee  like
Camels,  and  having  received  the  burthen  rise  again,  being
Sheepeofthe  so  taught  by  men.  The  Sheepe  of  that  Countrey  are
bignes  of  Asses.  no  jesser  t}ien  Asses,  bearing  so  long  and  broad  a  tayle,
that  they  weigh  thirty  pound  weight.  They  are  very
faire  and  fat,  and  good  meat.  Moreover,  in  the  plaine
of  this  Countrey  are  many  Cities  and  Townes,  with  high
walls  of  Mud  to  defend  them  from  the  Caraunas,  that
is  Mestizos,  or  mingled  people  of  Indian  women  and
Tartars,  ten  thousand  of  which  bee  conducted  by  one
Nugodar,  the  nephew  of  Zagathai  who  ruled  in  the  greater
Turkic  This  Nugodar  hearing  of  the  Malabars  subject
to  Soldan  Asidin,  without  his  Uncles  knowledge  went
and  tooke  Dely  with  other  Cities,  and  erected  a  new
Seignorie,  and  mixing  with  the  Indian  women  procreated
these  Caraunas,  which  goe  up  and  downe  to  rob  and
spoyle in Reobarle and other Countries. There they

204

MARCO POLO  a.d.

,  I320'
learned  magicall  and  diabolicall  Arts,  by  which the  ayre  Theirlnchant-

is  so  darkned  in  the  day  time  for  a  long  space,  that  none  menU-
may  see  them  or prevent  them. M. Marco one  time  The  Authors
thorow  such  darkness  did  almost  fall  into  their  hands,  but an&r-
made shift to  escape to  a  Castle  called  Cousalme : but
many  of  his  company  were  taken  or  slaine.

That  Plaine  whereof  I  now  speake,  is  five  daies  journey
extended  towards  the  South.  But  at  the  end  therof,  the
way  beginneth  by  litle  and  litle  to  descend  for  twenty
miles  together,  &  the  way  it  selfe  is  very  bad,  and  not
without  danger  by  reason  of  Theeves.  At  length  you
come  to  very  goodly  Plaines,  which  extend  themselves
two  dayes  journey  in  length,  and  the  place  it  selfe  is
called  Ormus.  That  Countrey  aboundeth  with  Rivers  Ormus.
of  water  and  Palme  trees.  There  is  also  plenty  of  divers
Fowles,  especially  of  Poppin  jayes,  which  are  not  like  to  Parrats.
ours.  From  hence  you  come  unto  the  Ocean,  where  on
an  Hand  is  seated,  a  Citie  called  Ormus,  whereto  many
Merchants  resort,  bringing  Spices,  Pearles,  precious  Stones,
cloath  of  Gold  and  Silkes,  and  Elephants  teeth,  and  all
other  precious  things  from  India.  That  Citie  is  a  great
I  Mart,  having  Cities  and  Castles  under  it,  and  is  head
of  the  Kingdome  Chermain  :  the  King  is  called  Ruchmedin
Achomach,  who  yeelds  obedience  to  the  King  of  Cher-
main.  He  makes  himselfe  heyre,  if  any  Merchant  dyes
there.  In  Summer  they  by  reason  of  the  heat  betake
themselves  to  their  Garden  houses  built  on  waters.  And
from  nine  till  noone  there  blowes  a  winde  with  such
extreame  heat  from  the  sands,  that  it  swallowes  up  a
mans  breath  and  stifleth  him,  which  makes  them  lye  in
the  water.  The  King  of  Chermain  sent  an  Armie  of
sixteene  hundred  Horse,  and  five  thousand  Foot,  against
the  Lord  of  Ormus  for  not  paying  his  tribute,  which  were
all  surprised  and  stifled  with  that  winde.  The  Inhabitants
of  the  place  eate  no  Bread  made  of  Corne  and  flesh,  but
feed  upon  Dates,  salt  Fish,  and  Onions.  They  have  not
very  sound  Ships  :  for  they  fasten  them  not  with  yron  Their  Ships.
nayles  (by  reason  that  the  wood  is  brittle  and  would  cleave)

205

A.D.
1320.

An  outward
shell  which
growes  upon
the  Caco  Nut,
and  yeelds  a
thready
substance.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[in.  i.  72.]

A  Desart  in
which  is  Salt,
bitter,  laxa-
tive, greene
water.

Cobinam.

but  with  woodden  pins,  with  certaine  threds  made  of  the
shels  of  Indian  Nuts.  These  shels  are  dressed  after  the
manner  of  Leather,  out  of  the  which,  threds  are  cut,  and
of  the  thrids  exceeding  strong  cordes  are  made,  which  are
able  to  indure  the  force  and  violence  of  the  water,  and  are
not  easily  corrupted  thereby.  Those  Ships  have  one
Mast,  one  sayle,  one  beame,  and  are  covered  but  with  one
decke.  They  are  not  chalked  with  Pitch,  but  with  the
Trane  of  Fishes.  And  when  they  cross  the  Sea  to  India,
carrying  Horses  and  other  fraight  with  them,  they  lose
many  Ships,  because  the  Sea  is  very  tempestuous,  and  the
Ships  are  not  strengthened  with  yron.  The  Inhabitants
of  that  Countrey  are  blacke,  and  addicted  to  the  Law  of
Mahumet.  It  is  the  custome  of  this  Countrey,  when  any
Master  of  a  family  dyeth,  that  the  wife  left  behind  him
should  mourne  for  him  foure  weekes,  once  a  day.  They
have  women  which  professe  the  practice  of  mourning  and
are  thereto  hired,  to  mourne  daily  for  their  dead.

Returning  from  Ormus  to  Chermain  is  a  fertile  Plaine,
but  the  bread  made  there,  cannot  bee  eaten  of  them,  who
are  not  accustomed  thereunto,  it  is  so  bitter  by  reason  of
the  bitter  water  put  therein,  whereof  are  store  of  hot
Bathes  good  against  diseases.

Going  from  Chermain  in  three  dayes  riding  you  come
to  a  Desart,  which  continued  till  you  come  to  Cobinam,
seven  dayes  Journey, which is  extended. In the first
three  dayes  you  shall  have  no  water,  save  a  very  few,  and  \
those  salt  and  bitter,  of  a  greene  colour  in  shew,  as  if  it  I
were  the  juyce  of  Herbs :  and  whoso  tasteth  but  a  little
thereof,  cannot  escape  loosenesse  of  the  belly. The  like
also  hapneth,  if  any  taste  the Salt  made  of  that  water.  iJ
It  is  therefore  needfull,  that  Travellers  carrie  some  water
with  them,  if  they  will  not  be  indangered  through  thirst.  !
The  beasts  also  which  are  compelled  to  drink  that  water,
escape not  without  scouring. In the fourth day they
find  a  fresh River  under  ground : the  three  last dayes
arp  as  the  first.

Cobinam is  a great Mahumetan Citie ; goodly, and

206

MARCO POLO  ad.

,  I32°-
great  Looking  Glasses  of  Steele,  are  made  there. Tutia  Tutia  and
also which  cureth  the  eyes ;  and  Spodio and  that,  after ?°  w'
this  manner. That  Country hath Mines,  out  of  which
they  digge  Earth,  which  they  boyle  casting  it  into  a  fierie
Fornace, an Iron  grate  receiving  the ascending  vapour
from  above,  in  the  which,  the  conglutinated  and  clammie
vapour becommeth Tutia. But  the grosser matter re-
mayning  in the  fire,  is  called  Spodio. The  Inhabitants
of  this  Countrey,  are  followers  of  Mahumet.

Leaving  the Citie Cobinam, you meet with another
Desart  eight dayes  Journey in length, and in it there  ^  Desart  of
is  great  drynesse  :  it  wanteth  trees,  and  fruits,  and  waters  ejg  *  ayes
which  it  hath  are  very  bitter,  so  that  the  very  beasts  refuse
to drinke them  except  they  mixe  meale  therewith,  and
Travellers  carrie  water with them. But having  passed
over  this  Desart,  you  came  to  the  Kingdome  Timochaim  Timochaim.
in  the  North  Confines  of  Persia,  where  many  Cities  and
Castles  are. There  is  a  great  Plaine  in  which  a  great  tree
groweth,  called  the  tree  of  the  Sunne,  which  the  Christians  Tree  of  Sun,
call,  The  dry  Tree. This  tree  is  very  great  and  thicke,  or r  01
and  hath  leaves,  which  on  the  one  side  are  white,  and  on
the  other  side  greene. It  producetha  prickly  shales  like  -Ricci.
those  of  a  Chestnut,  but  nothing  in  them. The  wood  is
solide and  strong,  yellow  like  Boxe. There  is no  tree
within  one  hundred  miles,  except  on  one  side,  on  which
are  trees  within  ten  miles. In  this  place  the  Inhabitants
say,  that  Alexander  the  Great  fought  with  Darius. The
Cities  are  plentifull  of  good  things,  but  Mahumetan,  and
of  temperate  Aire. It  hath  also  goodly  men,  but  specially
women, the most beautifull in my  judgement in the
World.

Mulehet is in Saracen Language,  as much to  say  as  Mulehet.
I  a  place  of  Heretikes,  and  of  this  place  they  call  the  men
Mulehetici, that  is, Heretikes in  their  Law,  as  with  us
Patarines. Having spoken of the Countrey, the old
man of  the Mountayne  shall bee spoken  of,  of  whom .
Marco  heard  much  from  many. His  name  was  Aloadine,  0^  man  0fthe
and  was  a  Mahumetan. Hee  had  in  a  goodly  Valley  betwixt  Mountayne.

207

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1320.

two  Mountaynes  very  high,  made  a  goodly  Garden,  fur-
nished with  the  best  trees  and  fruits  he  could  find,  adorned
with  divers  Palaces  and  houses  of  pleasure,  beautified  with
gold  Workes,  Pictures,  and  Furnitures  of  silke.  There
by  divers  Pipes  answering  divers  parts  of  those  Palaces
were  seene  to  runne  Wine,  Milke,  Honey  and  cleere
Water.  In  them  hee  had  placed  goodly  Damosels  skil-
full  in  Songs  and  Instruments  of  Musicke  and  Dancing,
and  to  make  Sports  and  Delights  unto  men  whatsoever
they  could  imagine.  They  were  also  fairely  attyred  in
Gold  and  Silke,  and  were  seene  to  goe  continually  sporting
in  the  Garden  and  Palaces.  He  made  this  Palace,  because
Mahomet  had  promised  such  a  sensuall  Paradise  to  his
devout  followers.  No  man  might  enter :  for  at  the
mouth  of  the  Valley  was  a  strong  Castle,  and  the
entrance  was  by  a  secret  passage.

Alaodine  had  certaine  Youthes  from  twelve  to  twentie
yeares  of  age,  such  as  seemed  of  a  bold  and  undoubted
disposition,  whom  hee  instructed  daily  touching  Mahomets
Knave-fooks  Paradise,  and  how  hee  could  bring  men  thither.  And
Paradise.  when  he  thought  good,  he  caused  a  certaine  Drinke  to
bee  given  unto  ten  or  twelve  of  them,  which  cast  them  in
a  dead  sleepe :  and  then  hee  caused  them  to  be  carryed
into  divers  Chambers  of  the  said  Palaces,  where  they  saw
the  things  aforesaid  as  soone  as  they  awaked :  each  of
them  having  those  Damosels  to  minister  Meates  and
excellent  Drinkes,  and  all  varieties  of  pleasures  to  them ;
insomuch  that  the  Fooles  thought  themselves  in  Paradise
indeed.  When  they  had  enjoyed  those  pleasures  foure
or  five  dayes,  they  were  againe  cast  in  a  sleepe,  and
carryed  forth  againe.  After  which,  hee  caused  them  to
be  brought  into  his  presence,  and  questioned  where  they
had  beene,  which  answered,  by  your  Grace,  in  Paradise,
and  recounted  before  all,  all  before  mentioned.  Then
the  old  man  answered,  This  is  the  commandement  of  our
Prophet,  that  whosoever  defends  his  Lord,  he  make  him
enter  Paradise :  and  if  thou  wilt  bee  obedient  to  mee,  thou
shalt  have  this  grace. And  having  thus  animated  them,

208

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.
hee  was  thought  happie  whom  the  old  man  would  com-
mand, though  it  cost  him  his  life  :  so  that  other  Lords

and  his  Enemies  were  slaine  by  these  his  Assasines,*  which  *I* is  likeb

exposed  themselves  to  all  dangers,  and  contemned  their  J*  .

lives. Hereupon  hee  was  esteemed  a  Tyrant,  feared  in  mentioned  in

all  those  parts ;  and  had  two  Vicars  one  in  the  parts  of  the  eighth  tsf

Damasco,  and  another  in  Curdistan :  which  observed  the  ninth  Bookes

same  order  with  young  men. Hee  used  also  to  rob  all  were  branches

which  passed  that  way. Ulau  in the yeare 1262.  sent  %scZfaC0/Ms

and besieged his  Castle,  which after  three  yeares siege  Syrian  Vicar:

they  tooke,  slue  him  and  ruined  his  Paradise,  not  being  or  this  of  them.
able  for  want  of  victuall  to  hold  out  longer.

§. III.  [III.  i.  73.]

Of  Sapurgan,  Balac,  Thaican,  Scassem,  Balaxiam,
Bascia,  Chesmur,  Vochan,  Samarchan,  Car-
chan,  Peym,  the  dreadfull  Desart  of  Lop
and  Tanguth.

FSj^Eparting from the foresaid place,  you  come  unto  Large  pleasant
EyS/l a  certayne Country  pleasant  enough,  which hath Countrey.

' Hils,  Plaines,  and excellent Pasture, and lastly,
fruits in great plentie  : for the soyle thereof  is  very
fruitfull. This continues sixe dayes, and then you
enter a Desart of  fortie  or  fiftie  miles,  without  water.  A  Desart.
After  this  you  come  to  the  Citie  Sapurgan,  where  plentie  Sapurgan
of  all  victuall  is  found  : especially, Pompions the best  Pompions
in  the  World,  sweet  like  Honey.

Passing  from thence,  we  came  unto  a  certayne  Citie,
named  Batach,  which  in  times  past  was  great  and  famous,
having sumptuous Marble Palaces  : but now over-
thrown by the Tartars. In this Citie they report,
that  Alexander  tooke  the  Daughter  of  King Darius to  Statyra.
wife. To this Citie (on the East and North-east)  Ba/ach,
continue the Confines  of  Persia. But  if  you  goe  from  P*rhaPs  in
hence,  and proceed  betweene  the  East,  and  the  North-
east,  you cannot finde any Habitation for two dayes
xi  209  o

A.D.
1320.

*Thracian.

Salt-moun-
taynes.

Seas  sent.

Porcupines.
Porci  spinosi.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Journey  :  because  the  Inhabitants  of  the  place  having
endured  so  many  grievances  by  Theeves  and  Robbers,
are  compelled  to  flye  unto  the  Mountaynes,  to  wit,
places  of  more  safetie.  Many  waters  are  found  there,
and  very  much  game  of  wild  beasts  :  Lyons  also  are
there.  And  because  Travellers  find  no  food  in  that
Journey,  they  carrie  victuals  with  them,  which  may
suffice  them  for  two  dayes.

That  two  dayes  Journey  ended,  which  we  mentioned,
we  met  with  a  certayne  Castle,  called  *  Thaican  ;  where
is  great  plentie  of  Corne,  and  very  goodly  fields.  The
Mountaynes  also  on  the  South  are  high,  some  of  which
are  of  white  and  hard  Salt,  and  the  Inhabitants  thirtie
dayes  Journey  about  fetch  it  from  thence,  being  the
best  World,  so  hard  that  they  must  breake  it  with
Iron  Instruments,  so  much  that  the  whole  World  may
have  sufficient  Salt  from  thence.  The  other  Moun-
taynes have  store  of  Almonds  and  Pistaches.  Going
betweene  the  East  and  North-east  from  hence  the
Countrey  is  fruitfull,  the  Inhabitants  Murtherers,  Per-
fidious, Mahumetans,  Drunkards  :  Their  Wine  is  boyled
and  excellent.  They  goe  bare-headed,  save  that  the
men  bind  up  their  heads  with  a  certaine  string  of  ten
hanfuls  long.  But  they  make  them  clothing  of  the
skinnes  of  the  wilde  beasts  which  they  take,  as  Breeches
and Shooes,  and  use  no  other  Garments.

After  three  dayes  Journey  is  the  Citie  Scassem  seated
in  a  Plaine,  and  hath  many  Castle,  in  the  Mountaines
round  about  it.  A  certaine  great  River  also  floweth
through  the  middle  thereof.  There  are  many  Por-
cupines in  that  Countrey,  which  they  hunt  with  Dogges
by  the  Hunters  :  and  they  contracting  themselves  with
great  furie,  cast  their  prickly  Quils  against  the  men
and  the  Dogges,  and  wound  them.  That  Nation  hath
a  particular  language  :  the  sheepherds  thereof  abide
in  the  Mountaynes,  having  made  Caves  for  their  Habita-
tion. You  goe  hence  three  daies  Journey  without  any
Habitation  at  all,  to  the  Province  Balaxiam.

210

MARCO POLO  ad.

1320.
Balaxiam  is  a  Mahumetan  Province,  and  hath  a  peculiar  Balaxiam.
Language.  Their  Kings  who  succeed  one  another  by
hereditarie  right,  are  reported  to  have  derived  their
discent  from  Alexander  the  Great,  and  from  the
Daughter  of  Darius,  and  are  called  Zulcarnen,  which  is
to  say,  Alexander.  There  are  found  the  Ballasses,  faire
precious  stones,  and  of  great  value.  No  man  without
danger  of  life,  dare  either  digge  such  stones,  or  carrie
them  out  of  the  Countrey,  but  with  the  licence  and
consent  of  the  King  :  for  all  those  stones  are  the  Kings,
and  he  sendeth  them  to  whom  he  pleaseth,  either  for
a  Present,  or  payment  of  Tribute  :  he  exchangeth  also
many  for  Gold  and  Silver.  And  this  hee  doth  lest  the
stone  whereof  there  is  such  plentie  should  become  viler
and  cheaper.  Other  Mountaynes  also  in  this  Province
yeeld  stones,  whereof  the  best  Azure  is  made,  the  like
whereof  is  not  found  in  the  World.  The  Mines  also
yeeld  Silver  great  store,  and  Brasse  and  Lead.  The
Countrey  it  selfe  is  very  cold.  It  hath  many  Horses,  Courageous
and  those  excellent,  great,  and  swift,  which  have  so  H°rses> an<*
hard  and  strong  hoofes  on  their  feet,  that  they  need
no  Iron  Shooes,  although  they  runne  through  Rockes.
It  is  said  that  not  long  since  there  were  Horses  of  the
Race  of  Alexanders  Bucephalus,  all  with  his  forehead-  Bucephalus-
marke,  in  the  possession  only  of  the  Kings  Uncle,  who  breed-
was  slaine  for  denying  the  King  to  have  of  them  :
whereupon  his  Widow  in  angry  spite  destroyed  the
whole  Race.  There  are  also  excellent  Falcons.  The
soyle  thereof  beareth  notable  Wheate,  and  Barley  without
huskes,  and  Oyle  made  of  Nuts  and  Susimane,  which  is
like  to  flaxe  seed,  more  savourie  than  other  Oyle.
There  are  strait  passages  and  many  stormie  places.
The  men  are  good  Archers  and  Huntsmen,  clothed
with  beasts  skinnes.  The  hils  are  steepe  and  high,
llarge  plaines,  Rivers  alongst  the  ruptures  ;  and  if  any
pave  an  Ague  with  abiding  two  or  three  dayes  on  the
hils  he  recovereth,  which  Marco  prooved  in  himselfe
[after a yeares  sicknesse. The  women in the skirts of

211

A.D.
1320.

[III.  i. 74-]
Bascia.

Chesmur.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

their  Garments  put  sixtie  or  eightie  yards  of  Cotton,
the  greatest  Bumsie  Boncer  seeming  the  goodliest
Lasse.

The  Province  Bascia  is  ten  dayes  Journey  toward  the
South,  distant  from  the  Countrey  Balaxiam.  And  the
Countrie  it  selfe  is  very  hot  :  whereby  it  commeth  to
passe,  that  the  people  are  browne  :  they  are  expert
Magicians,  and  continually  attend  thereto.  They  have
a  peculiar  Language  :  and  weare  Golden  and  Silver
Eare-rings  with  Pearles  and  stones  artificially  wrought
in  them.  They  eate  flesh  and  Rice,  and  are  Idolaters,
craftie  and  cruell.

The  Province  Chesmur  is  seven  dayes  Journey  distant
from  Bascia.  The  Inhabitants  thereof  have  a  peculiar
Language,  and  are  Idolaters  ;  beyond  all  others  cunning
Inchanters,  forcing  their  Idols  to  speake,  and  darkning
the  day.  They  are  the  chiefest  Idolaters,  and  Idols  are
descended  from  them.  From  thence  you  may  goe  to
the  Indian  Sea.  The  men  and  women  are  browne,  not
wholly  blacke,  the  heate  some-what  tempered  :  their
food  is  flesh  and  Rice,  yet  are  they  exceeding  leane.
There  are  many  Cities  and  Townes  there.  Their  King
is  tributarie  to  none.  There  are  certaine  Heremites
in  this  Province,  who  in  Monasteries  and  Cels  worship
Idols,  honouring  their  Gods  with  great  abstinence  of
meate  and  drinke,  and  observe  great  Chastitie,  are  very
cautelous  not  to  offend  their  Idols,  and  live  long.  Of
these  are  many  Abbeyes,  and  the  people  give  them
great  reverence.  The  men  of  this  Province  kill  no
quicke  creatures,  and  shed  no  bloud  :  and  if  they  will
eate  flesh,  it  is  necessary  that  the  Saracens  which  live
amongst  them,  kill  the  creature.  Corall  is  here  sold
dearer  then  any  where.  Wee  will  leave  the  way  to
India  now  and  returne  to  Balaxiam  and  direct  our  way
towards  Catay,  betwixt  the  East  and  North-east.  Be-
yond Balaxiam  is  a  certaine  River,  whereon  stand  many
Castles  and  Villages  belonging  to  the  King  of  Balaxiam s
Brother  :  and  after  three  dayes  Journey  is  the  Province

212

MARCO POLO  ad.

1320.
Vochan,  having  in  length  and  breadth  three  dayes  Vochan.
Journey.  The  Inhabitants  thereof  have  a  peculiar
Language,  and  worship  Mahumet.  They  are  good
Livers,  stout  Warriours,  and  good  Hunters  :  for  that
Countrey  aboundeth  with  wild  beasts.  If  you  depart
hence  betwixt  the  North-east  and  the  East,  you  must
ascend  for  three  whole  dayes  together,  untill  you  come
unto  an  exceeding  high  Mountayne,  then  the  which,  Highest
there  is  said  to  bee  none  higher  in  the  World.  There  munta3n<-
also,  betweene  two  Mountaynes,  a  great  Lake  is  found,
whence  by  a  Plaine  runneth  a  very  goodly  River,  neere
unto  which  are  excellent  Pastures,  so  that  in  them  a
leane  Horse,  or  an  Oxe,  may  bee  fatted  in  ten  dayes.
There  is  also  plentie  of  wild  beasts  :  especially,  exceeding
great  wild  sheepe,  having  homes  some  of  them  sixe
palmes  or  spans  long,  of  the  which  they  make  divers
kinds  of  vessels.  That  Plaine  contayneth  twelve  dayes
Journey  in  length,  and  is  called  Pamer  ;  nor  is  there  Pamer.
any  humane  Habitation  there,  and  Travellers  must
carry  victuals  with  them.  No  Bird  also  appeareth  there,
by  reason  of  the  cold,  and  (it  is  reported  for  a  Miracle)
if  fire  be  kindled  there,  it  is  not  so  bright  nor  so  effectual
to  boyle  any  thing,  as  in  other  places.  From  hence  the
way  leadeth  fortie  dayes  further,  betweene  the  East  and
the  North-east  through  the  Mountaynes,  Hils,  and
Valleyes,  in  the  which  many  Rivers  are  found,  but  no
humane  habitation,  nor  any  herbe  :  and  the  Countrey
it  selfe  is  called  Beloro.  Habitations  of  men  are  seene  Beloro.
in  the  top  of  those  high  Mountaynes,  but  such  as  are
savage,  wicked,  Idolatrous  ;  who  live  by  hunting,  and
are  clothed  with  the  skinnes.

After  this  you  come  to  the  Province  Caschar,  which  Caschar.
is  tnbutarie  to  the  great  Cham  and  a  Mahumetan.  In
it  are  Vines,  greene  Gardens,  fruitfull  trees,  Cotton,
Flaxe,  and  Hempe,  and  a  fertile  soyle.  The  Inhabitants
have  a  peculiar  Language,  and  are  Merchants,  and
Artificers,  who  are  so  covetous  that  they  eate  that  which
is  bad,  and  drinke  worse. Some  Nestorian  Christians  are

213

A.D.
1320.

'Carchan.

Wennes  by
bad  waters
happen  also  in
the  Alpes.
Co  tarn  the
name  of  a
Province  and
xhiefe  Citie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

found  there,  who  also  have  their  Churches.  The  Coun-
trey  inlargeth  it  selfe  five  dayes  Journey.

Samarchan  is  a  great  and  famous  Citie  in  that  Countrey,
where  are  goodly  Gardens  and  a  fertile  Plaine.  It  is
subject  to  the  Nephew  of  the  great  Cham.  In  it  the
Christians  dwell  with  the  Saracens,  whence  little  agree-
ment is  betwixt  them.  It  is  reported,  that  in  this  manner
a  Miracle  hapned,  the  brother  of  Great  Cham,  named
Zagatai,  governed  that  Countrey,  about  one  hundred
yeares  agoe,  being  perswaded  to  become  a  Christian,  the
Christians  through  his  favour  built  a  Church,  in  honour
of  Saint  John  Baptist,  with  such  cunning  that  the  whole
Roofe  thereof,  was  supported  by  one  Pillar  in  the  midst,
under  which  was  set  a  square  stone,  which  by  favour  of
their  Lord  was  taken  from  a  building  of  the  Saracens.
Zagathais  Sonne  succeeded  after  his  death  in  the  King-
dome,  but  not  in  the  faith  :  from  whom  the  Saracens
obtayned  that  the  Christians  should  be  compelled  to
restore  that  stone.  And  when  they  offered  a  sufficient
valuable  price,  the  Saracens  refused  to  receive  any  other
composition  then  the  stone.  But  the  Pillar  lifted  up
it  selfe,  that  the  Saracens  might  take  away  their  stone,
and  so  continueth.

Departing  againe  from  this  Citie,  you  come  into  the
Province  Charchan,  about  five  dayes  Journey  in  length.
This  Province  hath  plentie  of  all  victuals,  beeing  subject
to  the  Dominion  of  the  Nephew  of  Great  Cham.  The
Inhabitants  worship  Mahumet,  yet  among  them  certaine
Nestorian  Christians  dwell.  They  are  great  Artificers,
and  have  most  of  them  great  legges,  and  a  great  Wenne
or  Bunch  in  the  throat,  by  reason  of  the  waters  which
they  drinke.

The  Province  Cotam  followeth  betweene  the  East  and
the  North-east.  It  is  subject  to  the  Dominion  of  the
Nephew  of  Great  Cham,  and  hath  many  Cities  and
Townes.  The  chiefs  Citie  thereof  is  called  Cotam.  The
Province  is  extended  eight  dayes  Journey  in  length.
There  is no  want  therein  of  any  thing,  appertayning to

214

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.

the maintenance of life. It hath plentie of Cotton,  [III.  i.  75.]

Flaxe,  Hempe,  Corne,  and  Wine. But the people  are

not  warlike,  yet  good  Artificers  and Merchants. They

acknowledge  Mahumet.

Proceeding  further  through the  same Countrey, you

meet  with  the  Province  Peim,  extended  five  dayes  Journey  Peim.

in  length. It  is  subject  to  Great  Can, and  hath  many

Cities and Castles. The  chiefe  Citie thereof  is called

Peim, neere  which runneth a River, wherein precious

stones  are  found,  to  wit,  Jasper  stones  and  Chalcedonie.

The  Inhabitants  of  the  Countrey  worship  Mahumet,  and

are Artificers and Merchants. There  is  a  custome in  Adulterous

this Province, that  when  any  marryed man  goeth into  custome'

another  place,  and returneth not home  within twentie

dayes,  it  shall  be  lawfull  for  the  Wife  to  marrie  another

Husband, and the  men also  wheresoever  they  goe  doe

the  like. All  those  Provinces  aforesaid,  to  wit  Caschar,  Great  Turkie,

Cotam,  Peim, to the Citie  of  Lop, are  in  the bounds  or urco~

c  r* \  t» 1  •  mania.

or  Great lurkie.

Ciarcian  is  subject  to  the  Tartars,  the  name  of  the  Ciarcian.
Province  and  chiefe  Citie,  it  hath  many  Cities  and  Castles.
Many  precious  stones  are  found  there  in  the  Rivers,
especially  Jaspers  and  Chalcedonies,  which  Merchants
carrie  even  to  Ouchach  to  sel,  and  make  great  gain.
From  Peim  to  this  Province,  and  quite  thorow  it  also,
it  is  al  Sand,  with  many  bad  waters  and  few  good.  When
any  Armie  passeth  through  this  Province,  all  the  Inhabi-
tants thereof  with  their  Wives,  Children,  Cattel,  and  all
their  household  stuffe,  flie  two  dayes  Journy  into  the
sands,  where  they  know  good  waters  are,  and  stay  there :
and  carrie  their  Corne  thither  also  to  hide  it  in  the  sands
after  Harvest  for  like  feares.  The  wind  doth  so  deface
their  steps  in  the  sand,  that  their  Enemies  cannot  find
out  their  way.  Departing  from  this  Province,  you
are  to  travell  five  dayes  Journey  thorow  the  sand,  where
no  other  water  almost  then  that  which  is  bitter  is  to
be  found,  untill  you  come  unto  the  Citie  named  Lop.

Lop is  a  great  Citie,  from whence  is  the  entrance  of  Lop.

2I5

A.D.

1320.

Desart  of  Lop.

Illusions  of
Devils. It
seemeth  that
the  compasse
was  not  then
found  out,
which  of  later
times  they  use
in  Desarts,  as
in  the  Sea.

Sachion.
Tanguth.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

a  great  Desart,  called  also  Lop,  seated  betweene  the  East
and  the  North-east.  The  Inhabitants  are  Mahumetans,
subject  to  the  Great  Can.  In  it  Merchants  who  desire
to  passe  over  the  Desart,  cause  all  necessaries  to  be
provided  for  them.  And  when  victuals  beginne  to  faile
in  the  Desart,  they  kill  the  Asses  and  Camels  and  eate
them.  They  most  willingly  use  Camels,  because  they
are  sustayned  with  little  meate,  and  beare  great  burthens.
They  must  provide  victuals  for  a  moneth  to  crosse  it
over-thwart;  for  to  goe  thorow  the  length,  would  aske
a  yeares  time.  They  goe  thorow  the  sands  and  barren
Mountaines,  and  daily  find  water,  yet  it  is  sometimes
so  little,  that  it  can  scarsly  suffice  fiftie  or  one  hundred
men  with  their  beasts  :  and  in  three  or  foure  places  the
water  is  salt  and  bitter :  the  rest  (which  are  eight  and
twentie)  good.  In  it  are  neither  beasts  nor  birds.  They
say  that  there  dwell  many  spirits  which  cause  great
and  mervailous  Illusions  to  Travellers  to  make  them
perish.  For  if  any  stay  behind  that  he  cannot  see  his
company,  he  shall  be  called  by  name,  and  so  going  out
of  the  way  is  lost.  In  the  night  they  heare  the  noyse
as  it  were  of  a  company,  which  taking  to  bee  theirs
they  perish  likewise.  Other  appearances  as  of  their  com-
panions, or  of  enemies  have  caused  some  to  miscarrie.
Consorts  of  Musicall  Instruments  are  sometimes  heard
in  the  Ayre,  likewise  Drummes,  and  noyses  of  Armes.
They  goe  therefore  neere  together,  hang  Bels  on  their
beasts  neckes,  and  set  markes  if  any  stay.

Having  passed  over  the  Desart,  you  come  unto  the
Citie  Sachion,  betwixt  the  East  and  North-east,  subject
to  the  Great  Can,  in  the  Province  of  Tanguth,  where
among  the  Worshippers  of  Mahumet,  a  few  Nestorian
Christians  are  found.  Many  Idolaters  are  also  there,
who  have  their  proper  Language.  The  Inhabitants  of
this  Citie,  live  not  of  Merchandize,  but  the  fruits  of
the  Earth.  This  Citie  hath  many  Monasteries,  con-
secrated to  divers  Idols,  in  the  which  many  Sacrifices
are  offered, and great reverence. And  when a Sonne

216

MARCO POLO  ad.

1320.
is borne unto a man,  hee  presently  commendeth him
to  some  Idoll,  and  in  honour  thereof,  nourisheth  a  sheepe The  Sacrifice
that  yeere  in his  house, which he presenteth before it  v  t1tl~

together  with  his  Sonne,  the  next  Festivall  Day  of  that
Idoll,  with  many  Ceremonies  and  great  reverence.  After-
ward the  flesh  of  the  sheepe  is  boyled,  and  left  so  long
before  the  Idoll,  while  their  Prayers  are  finished,  which
they  make  for  the  conservation  of  their  Sonne,  and  the
Idoll  hath  sucked  out  the  savour  of  the  meate,  after
which  their  fancie  all  his  kindred  being  gathered  together,
eate  that  flesh  at  home  with  great  devotion  and  joy :
but  orderly  keepe  the  bones  in  certayne  vessels.  The
Priests  have  the  feete,  head,  inwards,  skinne,  and
some  part  of  the  flesh  for  their  share.  In  celebrating  the
Funerals  of  such  as  were  of  esteeme,  the  dead  bodies  The  Rites  of
are  burned  after  this  manner.  The  kindred  send  for  tunera  ■
the  Astrologers,  and  tell  them  what  yeare,  moneth,  day,  Astrologers.
and  houre,  hee  who  dyed  was  borne :  who  perceiving  the
constellation,  declare  the  day  when  hee  is  to  be  burned :
so  that  when  the  Planet  fits  not,  they  reserve  the  dead
bodie  sometimes  seven  dayes,  and  sometimes  sixe
monethes,  preparing  a  Chest  for  it  at  home,  and  joyn-
ing  the  sides  together  with  such  cunning  Art,  that  no
stinke  can  issue  forth.  They  also  imbalme  the  bodie
it  selfe  with  Spices,  and  cover  the  Chest  fairely  painted
with  a  costly  cloth  :  and  every  day  that  the  dead  corps
is  kept  at  home,  at  the  houre  of  Dinner,  a  Table  is
prepared  neere  the  Chest,  setting  wine  and  meate  thereon
for  the  space  while  one  might  well  eate  a  meales-meat,
supposing  that  the  soule  of  the  dead,  feedeth  of  the
savour  thereof.  The  Astrologers  sometime  forbid  to
carrie  it  forth  at  the  chiefs  gate,  pretending  some
disastrous  starres  thereto,  and  cause  them  to  carrie  it
out  another  way,  and  sometimes  breake  the  wall  which  [III.  i.  76.]
is  opposite  to  that  place  which  the  Planet  makes  more
luckie ;  for  otherwise  the  spirits  departed  would  bee
ofFended  and  hurt  those  of  the  house.  And  if  any  such
evill  happen,  they  ascribe  it  to  the  dead thus  wronged.

A.D.

1320.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

When  the  bodie  is  carryed  through  the  Citie  to  be  burnedj
without,  woodden  Cottages  are  erected  in  the  way,  with1
a  porch  covered  with  Silkes,  in  which  they  set  the  bodie,,
and  set  before  it  Bread,  Wine,  and  Flesh,  and  Delicate |
Cates,  supposing  the  spirit  to  be  refreshed  therewith,  which  1
must  bee  presently  present  at  the  burning  of  the  bodie.

And  when  they  come  unto  the  place  of  burning,  they
write  and  paint  upon  Papers  made  of  the  barkes  of  Trees,
the  Images  of  Men  and  Women,  Horses,  Camels,:
Money,  and  Garments.  (All  the  Instruments  of  the  Citie
meane-while  resounding)  all  which  are  burned  together
with  the  dead  bodie.  For  they  say,  that  that  dead  man
shall  have  so  many  Men-servants,  and  Mayd-servants,;
Cattell,  and  Money,  in  another  life,  as  resemblances,  andU
Pictures  were  burned  together  with  him,  and  shall  per-;
petually  live  in  that  honour  and  riches.

The Province Chamul lyeth in the great Province!
Tanguth,  subject  to  the  Great  Can,  having  many  Cities
and Townes : the chiefe  Citie  is called Chamul. Thei
Land  butteth  upon  two  Desarts,  to  wit,  the  great  Desart,  I
whereof  wee have  spoken  before,  and a  certaine  other,  I
that  is  lesse,  of  three  dayes  Journey. It  aboundeth  with
such things, which  a  man  needeth  for  the  sustentation'i
JoviallLads. of  life. The  Inhabitants are  Idolaters,  have a  peculiar
Language,  and seeme  to  bee  borne  for  none  other  pur-!
pose, but to apply themselves to sporting, singing,  1
dancing, writing  and  reading  after  their  fashion,  playing;
on  Instruments,  and  to  give  themselves  delight. When  1
any  Traveller passing  by,  turneth  into  any  mans  house  j
for  entertaynment, the  Master of  the  Family  receiveth  .
him with great joy, and commandeth his Wife and
all  the  Family,  that  they  as  long  as  'he  will  abide  with  i
them, obey him in  all  things. In  the  meane  space,  he
departeth  not  to  returne  so  long  as  the  Guest  remayneth
in his house. And meane-while hee lyeth with the  \
Wife,  Daughter,  and  the  rest,  as  with  his  owne  Wives.
The  women  of  that  Countrey  are  beautifull,  and  readie  to
obey  all  those  Commandements  of  their  Husbands,  who

218

Bazvdes  to
their  owne
Wives.

Kind
Cuckolds.

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.

are  so  besotted  with  this  folly,  that  they  thinke  it  a
glorious  thing  for  them,  and  acceptable  to  their  Idols,  for
which  they  prosper  with  plentie  of  all  things.  Mangu
Can  having  heard  of  this  folly,  commanded  them  to
observe  this  detestable  custome  no  longer ;  which  they
did  about  three  yeares,  and  then  seeing  not  their  wonted
fertilitie,  and  troubled  with  some  Domesticall  crosses,
sent  Ambassadours  to  the  Can,  and  instantly  entreated,
that  he  would  revoke  so  grievous  an  Edict,  and  not
abolish  that  Tradition  which  they  had  received  from  their
Elders.  The  Can  answered,  seeing  you  desire  your
reproach  and  shame,  let  it  be  granted  you.  Goe  and
doe  herein  after  your  wont.  The  Messengers  returning
with  this  Answer,  brought  great  joy  to  all  the  people :
this  custome  is  observed  by  that  people  untill  this  day.

After  the  Province  of  Camul,  followeth  the  Province  of  This  Chapter
Chinchintalas,  which  on  the North boundeth upon  the  tsnot™
Desart,  and  is  sixteene  dayes  Journey  in  length,  subject  to  jtanan  Copie
the  Dominion  of  Great  Chan. It  hath  Cities  and  many  which  I  have
Castles. The people thereof  are divided into three  (printed
Sects. Some few acknowledge Christ, and these are }SS9-)yetjs
Nestorians : others  worship Mahumet, the third  adore  there  am
Idols. In this Province there is  a Mountaine where  the  Provinces
are Mines of Steele and  Andanicum, and also Sala-  o/Tanguth.
manders,  of  the  which  cloth  is  made,  which,  if  it  bee  cast
into  the  fire,  cannot  bee  burned. But  that  cloth  is  made
of  the  Earth  in  this  manner  (as  one  of  my  companions,
a  Turke named Curcifar, a  man indued with singular
industrie, informed me) who had the charge of the
Minerals  in  that  Province. A  certaine  Minerall  of  Earth
is found in that Mountayne, which yeeldeth threeds,
not  unlike  to  Wooll,  which  being  dryed  in  the  Sunne,
are  bruised  in  a  brazen  Morter, and afterward  washed,
and whatsoever earthy substance cleaveth unto them,
is taken away : lastly, those threeds so purged and
made  small, are spunne like  other  Wooll,  and woven
into cloth. And  when  they  will  whiten those clothes,
they cast them into the fire for an houre, and

219

A.D,

1320.

And  I  have
not  a  little
travelled  in
Travellers  to
find  this  Sala-
mander, but
have  found  not
a  little ;  no
Midwife  to
my  throwes  ;
which  makes
mee  throw
away  that
conceit.
Succuir.

Rhubarbe.  Of
this  Ramusio
hath  given  a
large  discourse
from  the  Rela-
tion of  Chaggi
Meneret,
which  had
beene  in  these
parts.

[III.  i.  77.1
Campion.
Christian
Churches.
Idolatrous
Monasteries.
Idols  of  divers
kinds.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

then  they  are  taken  out  of  the  flaming  fire  unhurt,
whiter  then  Snow.  After  the  like  manner  they  dense
them,  when  they  have  taken  any  spots:  for  no  other
washing  is  added  to  them,  besides  the  fire.  But  touching
the  Salamander,  the  Serpent,  which  is  reported  to  live
in  the  fire,  1  could  search  out  nothing  in  the  East
Countries.  They  say,  there  is  a  certayne  Napkin  at
Rome,  woven  of  the  Salamander,  wherein  the  Handker-
chiefe  of  the  Lord  is  kept  wrapped  up,  which  a  certayne
King  of  the  Tartars  sent  unto  the  Bishop  of  Rome.

After  you  are  past  this  Province,  you  go  betwixt  the
East  and  North-east  ten  dayes  Journey,  in  which  few
Habitations  or  things  remarkable  are  found ;  and  then
you  come  to  the  Province  Succuir,  which  hath  many
Habitations  and  Townes.  The  chiefe  Citie  thereof  is
called  Succuir.  In  this  Province,  among  many  Idolaters,
a  few  Christians  are  found:  they  are  subject  to  the  Great
Can.  They  apply  not  themselves  to  Merchandize,  but
live  of  the  fruits  of  the  Earth.  The  best  Rhubarbe  is
found  in  great  quantitie  in  this  Province,  which  is  carryed
thence  by  Merchants,  to  divers  parts  of  the  World.
Strangers  dare  not  go  to  the  Mountaynes  where  it  growes,
by  reason  of  venemous  herbs,  which  if  their  beasts  should
eate  them  would  lose  their  hoofes  ;  but  those  of  that
Countrey  know  and  avoyd  them.  The  generall  name  of
this  Province,  and  of  the  two  following  is  Tanguth.

Campion  is  a  great  Citie,  the  principall  in  the  Countrey
of  Tanguth.  In  it  are  the  Christians  (which  have  there
three  great  and  faire  Churches),  Mahumetans,  and  Idolaters.
The  Idolaters  have  many  Monasteries,  where  they  wor-
ship their  Idols.  Moreover,  those  Idols  are  made  either
of  stone,  wood,  or  clay,  some  over-layed  with  gold,  and
very  artificially  wrought.  Among  these,  some  are  so
great,  that  they  contayne  ten  paces  in  length,  fastned
to  the  earth,  as  if  they  lay  upright,  neere  unto  the  which,
little  Idols  are  placed,  which  seeme  to  give  reverence
to  the  greater,  and  both  are  much  reverenced.  The
Religious  men  seeme  to  live more honestly  then  other

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.

Idolaters, abstayning from certaine things, as Lecherie,

and  other  things  ;  although  Lecherie  seemes  no  grievous

sinne  : for they  sav, if  a  woman seekes for love to  a

man,  he  may  use  her  without  sinne,  but  not,  if  he  seekes

first  to  her. They  reckon  the  whole  circuit  of  the  yeere  The  ycere  °f

by Moones. In these Moones, they observe five,  or  tie oone'

foure, or three dayes, wherein they kill no Beast, or

Bird, nor eat Flesh (as is  the  use  with us  on  Friday,

Saturday,  and  Vigils.) The  Lay-men  marrie  twentie  or  Their  many

thirtie wives, as they are able to maintayne  : yet the  Wlv  s'

first  is  accounted  the  more  worthie,  and  more  legitimate.

The  husband  receiveth  no  dowrie  from  the  wife,  but  hee

himselfe  assigneth  convenient  dowrie,  in  Cattell,  servants,

or  money,  according  to  his  abilitie. If  the  wife  become

hatefull  to  the  husband,  it  is  lawfull  for  him  to  divorce

her  from  him,  as  he  pleaseth. They  take  for  wives  their

Kins-women  or  Mothers  in  law. Marco,  together  with

his  Father,  and  Uncle,  remayned  a  yeeres  space  in  this

Citie,  for  the  dispatch  of  certaine  affaires.

From  the  City  Campion,  you  goe  twelve  dayes  journey
to  the  City  Ezina,  bordering  upon  a  sandy  Desart  towards  Ezima.
the  North,  contayned  in  the  Province  of  Tanguth.  Many
Camels  are  there,  and  many  other  beasts  ;  and  Hawkes  of
divers  kinds.  The  Inhabitants  are  Idolaters,  living  of
the  fruits  of  the  Earth,  forbearing  merchandise.

§•  mi.

Of  Carchoran,  the  Originall,  proceedings  and
exploits  of  the  Tartars  ;  of  Priest  John  and
his  discendants.  Customes  of  the  Tartars.
Of  Bargu,  Erginul,  Xandu  the  Cans  Citie
and  Palace  ;  of  Muske  :  of  strange  Sorcerers,
and  austere  Monkes.

LI the Provinces and Cities aforesaid, Sachion,
Chemul, Chinchitalas, Succuir, Campion, and „
rLzina,  pertayne  to  I  anguth. Having  passed  over  v-ld  Ru^r Qr
the  foresaid  Desart,  you  come  unto  the  Citie  Carchoram, Caracamm.

321

A.D.

1320.

The  originall
of  the

Dominion  of
the  Tartars.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

which  is  in  circuit  three  miles,  strongly  rampierd  with
earth,  for  they  want  stone.  Neere  it  is  a  great  Castle,
and  in  it  the  Governors  faire  Palace.  This  was  the
first  place  neere  which  in  old  times  the  Tartars  assembled
themselves.  And  now  we  will  declare  how  they  began
to  raigne.  They  dwelt  in  the  North  parts,  to  wit,  in
Ciorza  and  Bargu,  where  are  many  and  great  Playnes
without  Cities  and  Townes,  but  goodly  Pastures,  Rivers
and  waters.  They  had  not  a  Prince  of  their  Nation,
but  payed  tribute  to  a  certayne  great  King,  named  as
I  have  heard,  in  their  language  Umcan,  which  in  some
mens  opinion  in  our  tongue  signifieth,  Presbyter  (or
Priest)  John.  To  him  the  Tartars  gave  yeerely  the
tenths  of  all  their  beasts.  In  processe  of  time,  the  Tartars
so  encreased  in  multitudes,  that  Umcan  was  afraid  of
them,  and  thought  to  disperse  them  into  severall  parts
of  the  world.  And  therefore  when  any  rebelled  he  sent
three  or  foure  of  an  hundred  of  the  Tartars  into  those
parts,  so  diminishing  their  power  ;  and  the  like  he  did
in  his  other  occasions,  deputing  some  of  their  principals
to  that  purpose.  They  seeing  their  ruine  intended  and
loth  to  be  separated  one  from  another,  went  from  the
places  where  they  dwelt  to  the  Desart  towards  the  North,
where  by  remotenesse  they  might  be  safe,  and  denyed
to  Umcan  their  wonted  Tribute*

It  hapned  that  about  An.  11 62.  the  Tartars  having
continued  some  time  in  those  parts,  chose  a  King  among
themselves,  a  wise  and  valiant  man,  named  Cingis  Can.
He  began  to  reigne  with  such  justice,  that  he  was  beloved
and  feared  of  all  as  a  God  rather  then  a  Prince,  insomuch
that  his  fame  brought  all  the  Tartars  in  all  parts  to  his
subjection.  And  hee  seeing  himselfe  Lord  of  so  valiant
men  would  needs  leave  those  Desarts,  and  commanding
them  to  provide  Bowes  and  other  weapons,  began  to
subdue  Cities  and  Provinces,  in  which  Conquests  hee
placed  such  just  Governours,  that  the  people  were  not
ofFended.  The  chiefe  of  them  hee  carried  alongst  with
him with great provisions and gifts. Seeing therefore

222

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.

that  he  was  advanced  to  so  great  glorie,  and  power,  he

sent Embassadors politikly to Umcan to intreate, that  The  fruit  of  a

he  would  bestow  his  daughter  upon  him  to  be  his  wife.  *j t  &overn~

Which he taking, in very evill part, answered with

indignation, and rejecting the Embassadors of  Cingis,

said, doth my servant demand  my  daughter  ? Get  ye

out  of  my  sight  and  tell  your  Master,  if  he  ever  make

such demand  againe, I will make him die  a  miserable

death. But King Cingis, levying a  great  Armie,  went Cingis  goeti

forth  with  an hostile minde,  and  incamped  in  a  certaine u^con****

great Plaine, named Tanduc, sending unto the King, Tanduc

and  signifying  unto  him,  that  he  should  defend  himselfe.

But he, comming  with  a  mightie  Armie,  descended to

the  Playnes,  and  pitched  his  Tents  within  ten  miles  of  the

Campe of  the Tartars. Then Cingis commanded his  He  consulteth

Astrologers to shew him, what  event  and successe  the  ™J  ..

O  '  JYl  QPiCMltlS.

battell should  have. They cutting a Reed lengthwise  mi  i.  78.I
in  two  parts,  set  the  pieces  themselves  into  the  ground,
and wrote upon the one, Cingis  ; and on the other,
Umcan  ;  and  said  unto  the  King  : In  the  meane  space,
while  we  reade  the  Conjurations,  it  shall  come  to  passe
by  the  Idols  power,  that  these  two  parts  of  the  Reed  shall
fight  together  : And whose part shall  ascend  upon  the
Dther, that King shall obtayne victorie in the battell.
The multitude therefore running together to behold
:hat  spectacle,  the  Astrologers  began ne  to  mumble  their
Drayers,  and  reade  their  inchantments,  when  presently  the
wts  of  the  Reed  being  moved,  fought  together,  untill  at
ength the part of  Cingis ascended upon the part of
Jmcan. Which  being  seene,  the  Tartars  assured  of  the  Hee  van-
uture victorie, were encouraged to the battell, and  ^lsheth  the
i'Jmcan being slayne, the  Victorie,  and Kingdome, and  Jf*™*  y
Jmcans daughter  remayned  to Cingis. Cingis raigned
ixe  yeeres  after  this, in the  which  hee  got  many  Pro-
rinces: and lastly, when he endeavoured to winne a
ertaine  Castle,  called  Thaigin,  and  came  somewhat  neere, „
eing  shot  in  the  knee  with  an  Arrow,  he  died,  and  was  the  shot  of  an
uried  in  the  Mountaine  Altai.  Arrow.

223

A.D.
1320.

Cingis  Can.
Cyn  Can.
Bathyn  Can.
Esu  Can.
Mongu  Can.
Gublai  Can.

Altai  the
Sepulcher  of
the  Kings  of
the  Tartars.
Their  cruell
custome  of
funerals.

The  marriages
of  the  Tartars.

Womens
concord  and
'Industrie.

Cosmos.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  first  King  of  the  Tartars,  was  called  Cingis ;  the
second,  Cyn  Can ;  the  third,  Bathyn  Can ;  the  fourth,
Esu  Can;  the  fifth,  Mangu  Can;  the  sixth  Cublai  Can,
whose  power  is  greater  then  all  his  Predecessors,  having
inherited  theirs,  and  adding  by  Conquest  in  manner  the
rest  of  the  World.  For  he  lived  neere  sixtie  yeeres  in
his  Government.  The  name  Can  signifieth  Emperor.
All  the  great  Cans,  and  Princes  of  that  bloud  of  Cingis,
are  carried  to  the  Mountaine  of  Altai  to  be  buried,  where-
soever they  die,  although  one  hundred  dayes  journey  from
it.  And  they  which  carrie  the  Corpse  to  the  buriall,  kill
all  those  that  they  meet  in  the  way,  saying :  goe,  and
serve  our  Lord  the  King  in  another  life.  They  kill  also
the  better  Horses.  When  the  bodie  of  great  Cham
Mongu,  the  Predecessor  of  Cham  Cublai,  was  brought
unto  the  Mountaine  Altai  to  bee  buried,  the  Souldiers
accompanying  the  funerall,  are  reported  to  have  slayne
above  ten  thousand  men,  upon  the  foresaid  occasion.

The  Tartarean  women  are  most  faithfull  to  their
husbands.  Adulterie  is  a  great  shame  with  them :  yet
it  is  accounted  lawfull,  and  honest,  that  every  one  may:
marrie  as  many  wives  as  he  is  able  to  maintayne,  although
the  first  be  judged  to  be  more  principall  and  honorable
then  the  rest.  These  live  together  in  the  same  house
without  one  ill  word,  in  admirable  concord,  make  their
merchandises,  buy,  and  sell,  and  chaffer  all  things  neces-
sarie  to  their  husbands  and  housholds,  the  men  medling
with  nothing  but  their  hunting,  hawking,  and  things
pertayning  to  Armes.  They  have  the  best  Falcons  in
the  World,  and  so  they  have  of  Dogs.  They  live  onely
of  Flesh  and  Milke,  and  what  they  take  in  hunting.
They  eat  Horses,  Camels,  Dogs,  if  fat ;  and  drinke  Mares
milke,  called  Chemurs,  so  used,  that  it  is  like  white2
Wine.  If  the  father  dies,  the  sonne  may  have  all  his  I
wives  except  his  owne  mother  and  sisters.  So,  the
brother  being  dead,  it  is  lawfull  for  the  brother  who
remayneth  alive,  to  marrie  the  widdow  of  the  brother.
The  husbands  receive  no  dowrie  from  the  wives,  but  they

224

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.
themselves  assigne  dowry  to  the  wives,  and  their  mothers.
Through  the  multitude  of  wives,  the  Tartars  have  many
children.  Nor  is  the  multitude  of  Wives  very  burden-
some unto  the  Tartars,  seeing  they  gaine  much  through
their  labours.  Besides,  they  are  very  carefull  for  the
governement  of  the  familie,  and  preparation  of  food  :  and
with  no  lesse  care,  execute  the  other  duties  of  the  house.
But  the  men  apply  themselves  wholly  to  hunting,  fowling,
and  exercise  of  Armes.  The  Tartars  nourish  many  herds  Their
of  Oxen,  flocks  of  Sheepe,  and  other  Beasts,  and  Cattell,  sgj£»"  °f
and  abide  with  them  in  places  of  Pasture,  in  the  Summer
time,  in  the  Mountaines,  and  colder  places,  where  they
flnde  Pasture  and  Wood ;  but  in  the  Winter,  they  remove
unto  the  hotter  Countreyes,  where  they  flnde  Pasture  for
their  Cattell  :  and  goe  forth-on  two  or  three  moneths
together.  Their  houses  are  covered  with  stickes  and  Cottages.
felts,  ordinarily  round,  which  they  carrie  with  them  on
Carts  or  Waggons  of  foure  wheeles,  whithersoever  they
goe.  For  they  can  fold  and  extend  them,  set  them  up,
and  take  them  downe :  and  they  turne  the  doore  of  them
alwaies  to  the  South.  They  have  also  neat  Carts  of  two
wheeles  (covered  with  Felt  so  well  that  rayne  cannot
pierce  them)  drawne  by  Oxen,  and  Camels,  wherein  they
carrie  their  wives,  children,  and  necessarie  houshold-stuffe
with  them,  and  defend  them  from  the  injurie  of  foule
weather,  and  rayne.

The  Tartars,  if  they  be  rich,  are  clothed  with  Sables,
Ermins,  and  Cloth  of  gold,  and  all  their  furniture  is
costly.  Their  Armes  are  Bowes,  Swords,  Polaxes,  and
some  Lances,  but  they  can  best  use  their  Bowes,  whereto
they  are  used  from  their  childhood.  They  are  hardie,
valorous,  cruell,  will  continue  two  dayes  and  nights  on
horse-backe  armed;  exceeding  patient  of  difficulties,  and
exceeding  obedient  to  their  Lords.  Their  Cattell  also  are
hardie.

The Law  and Faith of  the  Tartars is this. They  The  Tartars
say, that there is a  great God, high and heavenly, of  re&&on-
whom with daily  incense they  desire  good  understand-
xi  225  p

A.D.

1320.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Painted
Marriages.

ing  and  health.  They  have  another,  which  they  call
Natigay,  which  is  like  an  Image  covered  with  Felt,  or
some  other  thing,  which  every  one  hath  in  his  house.
To  this  God  they  make  a  wife  and  children,  placing
the  wives  Image  at  the  left  hand,  and  the  representations
of  children  before  his  face.  This  they  call,  The  God
of  earthly  things,  which  keepeth  their  Children,  and  their
Beasts,  and  Corne  ;  and  give  it  great  reverence.  Before
they  eat  themselves,  they  anoint  the  mouthes  of  the
Images  with  the  fat  of  the  sodden  Flesh,  and  they  cast
[III.  i.  79.]  the  broth  out  of  doores,  in  honour  of  other  Spirits,
saying,  that  their  God  with  his  familie  have  had  their
part ;  and  after  they  eate  and  drinke  at  pleasure.

If  the  sonne  of  any  Tartar  die,  who  hath  not  yet  beene
married,  and  also  the  daughter  of  another  die  unmarried,
the  parents  of  both  the  deceased  parties  meet  together,
and  make  a  marriage  betweene  the  dead  :  and  making  a
draughter  in  writing,  of  that  contract,  they  paint  men  and
women  for  servants,  Horses  and  other  creatures,  with
clothes  of  all  sorts  and  moneyes,  in  paper,  and  burne
them  together  with  the  writing  of  contract ;  by  the
fumes  whereof,  they  say  that  all  these  things  are  carried
to  their  children  in  another  world,  where  they  are  married,
and  the  fathers  and  mothers  thinke  they  are  joyned
together  through  such  a  bond  of  affinitie,  as  if  those
marriages  had  beene  celebrated,  while  the  married  couple
yet  lived.

When  the  Tartars  goe  to  warre,  their  Prince  con-
ducteth  about  one  hundred  thousand  Horse,  appointing
Heads  over  tens,  hundreds,  thousands,  ten  thousands,  by
which  orderly  subordination,  commands  are  easily  effected.
Every  hundred  is  called  a  Tuc  ;  ten,  a  Toman.  When
they  set  forth  they  send  out  men  every  way,  as  Scouts
that  no  Enemie  may  assault  them  unprovided.  Of
Horse  and  Mares,  there  are  for  every  man  about
eighteene.  They  carrie  also  their  like  Felt  houses,
under  the  which  they  shelter  themselves  in  the  time  of
rayne. When there falls out  some important  employ-

226

Their  war-
fare.

MARCO POLO  ad.

1320.

ment,  they  will  ride  ten  dayes  together  without  victuals
boyled,  and  live  of  the  bloud  of  their  Horses,  cutting
a  veyne  and  sucking  it.  They  have  Milke  dried  like
Paste,  which  they  make,  boyling  the  Milke,  and  taking
the  Creame  which  swims  on  the  top,  put  it  in  another
vessell,  and  thereof  make  Butter  :  After,  they  set  the
Milke  in  the  Sunne,  and  drie  it  ;  and  when  they  goe
in  the  Armie,  carrie  ten  pounds  thereof,  and  every
morning  take  halfe  a  pound,  and  put  it  into  a  little
Flaske  or  Bottle  of  Leather,  with  as  much  water  as  he
pleaseth  :  which  while  he  rides,  beats  together  :  and  this
is  his  dinner.  When  they  encounter  with  their  Enemies,
they  ride  here  and  there  shooting,  and  sometimes  make
shew  of  flight,  shooting  as  they  flee,  and  finding  the
Enemies  broken,  redintegrate  their  forces,  and  pursue
the  victorie  :  having  their  Horses  at  command,  with  a
signe  to  turne  any  way.  But  now  the  Tartars  are  mixed
in  divers  parts,  and  so  are  their  fashions.

They punish malefactors after this manner. If  any  The  mulct  or
steale  a  thing  of  small  value,  and  hath  not  deserved  to  P™altie  °f
be deprived of  life, he is seaven times beaten  with a  mn
Cudgell,  or  seaventeene,  or  seaven  and  twenty,  or  thirty
seaven,  or  forty  and  seaven,  giving  the  strokes  according
to the measure and qualitie of  the ofFence, and that
unto an hundred  ;  some doe often  times dye,  through
these strokes. But if  any have stollen an Horse,  or
another  thing,  for the which hee deserveth to dye,  he
is  cut  asunder  with  a  Sword  in  the  middle  : but  if  hee
will redeeme his life,  he shall restore the theft nine
fold. Such  as  have  Horses,  Oxen  or  Camels,  brand  them  The  markes  of
with  their  markes,  and  send  them  to  the  pastures  without  *pf  heards  °f
a  keeper.

Leaving  the  Citie  of  Carachoran,  and  the  Mountaine
Altai,  you  come  unto  the  champaine  Countrey  of  Bargu, Bargu.
which extendeth  it  selfe  Northwards  about  sixtie  dayes
journey  in  length. The  Inhabitants  of  those  places  are
i  Mecriti,  and they  are subject  to great Chan,  using  the  Medita.
manners  of  the  Tartars. They  are  wilde  men,  and  eate

227

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1320.

the  flesh  of  Beasts  which  they  take  by  hunting,  especially

of  Stagges,  whereof  they  have  great  plentie, and they

Strange  make them so tame,  that  they  may  ride  them. They

^rh'0**'  'h want Corne  and Wine. In the Summer  they  exercise

a  conjecture  or  great  hunting  and taking of  wilde Beasts and Fowle,

by  relation with the flesh  whereof  they may  live in the  winter  :

hardly  For  in  Winter,  as  well fowle  as  other  living  creatures

credible.  flje from thence,  by  reason of the  exceeding  and  un-

tolerable  cold  of  that  Countrey. After  the  end  of  fortie

dayes  journey,  you come  unto  the  Ocean,  neere  which

is  a  Mountaine  where  Astori,  and  strange  Falcons  breed,

which  are  carryed  thence  unto  the  Court  of  great  Chan.

Heere  we  must  returne  unto  the  Citie  Campion. If

therefore  you proceed further  five dayes  journey  from

the  Citie  Campion  towards  the  East,  (in  the  places  lying

in the  middle, horrible voyces of  Devils  are heard in

Night  walking  the night time) you come to the Kingdome Erginul,

Spirits.  \n  the  Province  of  Tangut,  subject  to  the  great  Cham.

Ergwu .  jn  tyg  Kingdome  are  many  other  Kingdomes  which  are

Idolators. There are some Nestorian Christians, and

Turkes. There  are  many  Cities  and  Castles,  of  which

Erginul  is  chiefe. From  hence,  if  you  proceed  further

Cathai.  to the  Southeast,  you  may  goe  to  the  parts  of  Cathai,

going Southeast towards Cathai, there is a certaine

famous Citie named Cinguy, (the name also of the

Province) tributarie unto great Chan  : contained in

Tangut  : the people are some Christians, some Ma-

Wilde  Oxen humetans,  others  Idolators. Their  are  also  found  wilde

of  the  bignesse  Oxen, neere as great  as Elephants, very  faire, having

oj ep  an  s. wj^te and blacke hayre, short  in other parts, and on

the  shoulders  three  palmes  long,  fine  and  white  beyond

silke  : of  which Marco  brought some to Venice as  a

rare  thing. Many  also of  these Oxen  are  tamed,  and  j

made to engender  with tame Kine, and the breed of

them are fitter  for  businesse then any  other  creatures,

beare  great  burthens,  are  yoaked  to  the  plow,  and doe

Muske.  twise as much as others. The best Muske in the

world is found in this Province, and is of  a goodly

228

MARCO POLO  ad.

1320.

beast of  the bignesse of  a Goat,  having  grosse hayre

like  a  Stagge,  feet and tayle  like  a  Gazella  but  without

homes  ;  it  hath  foure  teeth,  two  above,  and  two  beneath,

of  the length of three fingers, subtle, and white as

Ivorie,  and  is  a faire  beast  to  see  to,  when  the  Moone

is  at  full,  neare  the  navill  under  the  belly  there  growes

to this beast an impostume or bladder full of  blood,  [III.  i.  80.]

and at the full then they  goe  to hunt  the  said  beasts

and  take  away  that  swelling,  which  is  dryed  in  the  Sunne,

and  is  the  best Muske  :  the  flesh  also  is  good  to  eate.

Master Marco  brought  to  Venice the  head  and  feet  of

this beast dryed. The men live of Merchandise  and

Arts,  and  have  aboundance  of  Corne  :  they  are  Idolaters,

of  a  fat  body  and  a  little  Nose,  blacke  hayred,  having

no  beard  but  foure  hayres  on  their  chin. The  women

are  faire  and  white. And  when  the  men  desire  to  marry

wives,  they  rather  seeke  the  beautifull,  then  the  noble  or  Beautie  pre-

rich. Whereby  it  commeth  often  to  passe,  that  a  great  ^TffiW*™,
, XT  ,  «  J  ,  -r 1  1  •/•  11 Nobuitte  ana

and  JNoble  man  marryeth  a  poore wire, but beautirull,  r/v^j.

assigning dowrie to her mother  there. This  Province

extendeth it selfe five and twentie dayes journey in

length, and is very fertile. In it  are exceeding great

Feasants, having traynes eight or ten handfuls long. Feasants.

Many  other  kindes  of  Birds  are  also  found  there,  which

have  very  goodly  feathers,  distinguished  with  divers  and

excellent  colours.

Proceeding  further  towards  the  East,  after  eight  dayes
journey,  you  meet  with  the  Province  Egrigaia,  in  the  which  Egregaia.
are  many  Cities  and  Castles,  all  still  in  Tanguth.  The
principall  Citie  is  called  Calacia.  The  Inhabitants  thereof
are  Idolaters,  there  are  three  Churches  of  Nestorian
Christians,  and  are  subject  to  the  great  Chan.  In  the
Citie  Calacia,  Chamlets  are  made,  woven  of  white  wooll
and  the  hayre  of  Camels,  then  the  which,  there  are  scarce
any  fairer  found  in  the  world.

Going  to  the  East  from  the  Province  Egrigaia,  the
way  leadeth  unto  the  Province  Tenduch,  in  the  which
are many Cities and Castles  : where also Presbyter

229

A.D.

1320.

Gog  and
Magog.

The  Citie
Sindicin.

Idifa.
Cianganor,

Five  sorts
Cranes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Johannes  useth  to  abide,  who  now  payeth  tribute  to
great  Chan.  This  King  of  that  progenie  of  Priest  John
is  named  George,  and  is  a  Priest  and  a  Christian,  and
most  of  the  people  are  Christians.  All  the  Great  Chans,
after  his  death  who  was  slaine  in  battell  by  Cingis,  gave
their  Daughters  to  those  Kings  to  wife.  This  King
George  holds  not  all  that  Priest  John  before  held,  and
is  the  fourth  of  that  progenie.  There  is  a  Nation  there
called  Argon,  more  goodly  men  and  fitter  for  Mer-
chandise then  the  rest,  descended  of  Idolaters  and
Mahumetans.  There  are  also  two  Regions  where  they
raigne,  which  in  those  parts  are  called  Og  and  Magog,
but  they  which  dwell  there  call  them  Ung  and  Mongul :
in  Ung  are  Gog,  and  in  Mongul  the  Tartars.  Riding
East  seaven  dayes  towards  Catay,  are  many  Cities  peopled
with  Idolaters,  Mahumetans,  and  Nestorians.  There
is  one  Citie  called  Sindicin,  where  very  faire  and  excellent
Armes  are  made  of  divers  sorts,  fit  for  Armies.  In  the
mountaines  of  this  Province  are  great  Mines  of  silver,
and  manifold  game  of  wilde  beasts,  and  the  Countrey
of  the  mountaines  is  called  Idifa.  Three  dayes  journey
distant  from  the  foresaid  Citie,  standeth  another  Citie
Jangamur,  that  is  White  Lake,  wherein  is  a  Palace,  in
which  the  great  Chan  most  willingly  remaineth,  because
there  are  many  Lakes  and  rivers,  many  Swannes,  and
in  the  plaines,  Cranes,  Feasants,  and  Partridges,  and  store
°f  of  other  fowle.  There  are  five  sorts  of  Cranes  there  :
some  have  blacke  wings  like  Crowes,  others  are  white
and  bright,  having  their  feathers  full  of  eyes  like  Pea-
cocks, but  of  a  golden  colour,  the  necke  blacke  and  white
very  beautifull  ;  a  third  sort  of  bignesse  not  unlike
ours  ;  a  fourth,  little  and  very  faire,  intermingled  with
red  and  blew  colours  ;  the  fifth,  of  a  grizell  or  gray
colour,  having  red  and  blacke  heads,  and  these  are  very
great.  And  neere  unto  this  Citie  lyeth  a  certaine  valley
where  many  Cottages  are,  in  the  which  an  exceeding
number  of  Partridges  is  maintained,  which  are  kept  for
the  King,  comming  to  lodge  there  for  a  time.

230

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.
This Citie is three dayes journey Northeastward to
the Citie Xandu, which the great Chan Cublay now  Xandu.
raigning, built  ; erecting therein a marvellous and
artificial] Palace of Marble and other stones, which
abutteth  on the  wall  on  one  side,  and  the  midst  of  the
Citie  on  the  other. He  included  sixteene  miles  within
the circuit of  the  wall on that side  where the  Palace
abutteth on the  Citie wall, into which none can  enter
but by the Palace. In this inclosure or Parke are
goodly  meadowes,  springs,  rivers,  red  and  fallow  Deere,
Fawnes  carryed  thither for the Hawkes,  (of  which  are
there mewed above two hundred Gerfalcons  which he
goeth once a  weeke to see) and he often useth one
Leopard or  more, sitting  on  Horses,  which  hee  setteth  Hunting  with
upon  the  Stagges  and  Deere,  &  having  taken  the  beast,  LeoPareis-
giveth it to the Gerfalcons, and in beholding this
spectacle  he  taketh  wonderfull  delight. In  the  middest
in a faire  Wood hee hath built a royall House on  4  goodly  house
pillars gilded and vernished,  on every of  which is a  °fPleasure-
Dragon  all  gilt,  which  windeth  his  tayle  about  the  pillar,
with  his  head  bearing  up  the  loft,  as  also  with  his  wings
displayed on both sides  : the cover  also is of Reeds
gilt and varnished, so that the rayne can doe it no
injurie, the reeds being three handfuls thicke and ten
yards  long,  split  from  knot  to  knot. The  house  it  selfe
also may  be sundred, and taken downe like a Tent
and  erected  againe. For  it  is  sustained,  when  it  is  set
up,  with  two  hundred  silken  cords. Great  Chan useth
to dwell there three moneths in the  yeare, to wit,  in
June, July,  and August. On the eight and twentieth
day of August, he departeth to make a solemne  A  solemne
sacrifice. He  hath  an  herd  of  white  Horses,  and  white  Sacr\fice-
Mares,  about  ten  thousand,  of  the  milke  whereof  none  Mares  milke.
may drinke except hee be of  the progenie of  Cingis
Can,  except  one  family,  called  Boriat,  priviledged  hereto
by  Cingis for their valour. And these beasts as they
goe  up  and downe feeding are much reverenced,  nor
dare any goe before them or hinder their way. The

231

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1320.

Astrologers  or  Sorcerers  tell  Chan  that  on  the  twentie
[III.  i.  81.]  eight  of  the  Moone  of  August,  he  should  disperse  that
milke  heere  and  there,  for  the  honour  of  all  spirits
and  his  Idols,  that  they  might  be  carefull  preservers  of
all  those  things  which  he  possesseth.
The  Kings  There are two sorts of Idolaters, Sorcerers called

agmans.  Thebeth  and  Chesmir,  which  in  the  midst  of  stormes
ascend  the  Palace  and  suffer  no  rayne  to  fall  thereon ;
which  they  make  the  people  beleeve  comes  to  passe  by
their  sanctitie :  and  therefore  they  goe  slovenly  and
regardlesse  of  their  persons,  never  washing  nor  combing
themselves.  They  also  have  a  horrible  custome  to  dresse
and  eate  such  as  are  condemned  to  death,  but  not  those
which  dye  naturally.  They  are  called  also  Bachsi,  which
is  the  name  of  their  Order,  as  Friers  Predicants  or
Minors  with  us.  They  seeme  by  Magicke  to  doe  what
they  list,  when  the  great  Can  in  his  Hall  sits  at  his  Table,
which  is  eight  yards  high :  and  in  the  midst  of  the  hall  a
good  distance  from  the  table  is  a  great  Cupboard  or  plate
furnished  :  They  cause  that  the  peeces  full  of  Wine  or
Milke  or  other  viands  of  themselves,  fill  the  goblets
without  any  hand  touching  them,  and  goe  ten  paces  in
the  ayre  into  the  great  Cans  hand ;  and  when  he  hath
drunke,  returne  to  their  place.  This  they  doe  in  the
presence  of  any  man,  when  their  Lord  commands.
These  Bachsi  also  when  they  will  make  feasts  to  their
Idols,  goe  to  the  Can  and  say ;  Sir,  know  that  if  our
Idols  be  not  honoured  with  Sacrifices,  they  will  bring
plagues  to  Corne  and  Beasts.  And  therefore  wee  pray
you  to  give  the  flesh  of  so  many  Sheepe  with  blacke
heads,  and  so  many  pounds  of  Incense  and  Lignum
aloes,  that  we  may  make  them  due  sacrifice  and  honour.
This  they  spake  not  to  him  themselves,  but  by  certaine
Lords  deputed  to  that  Office,  who  speake  to  the  Can  and
obtaine  it.  On  the  feast  day  they  sacrifice  the  said  beasts,
and  sprinkle  the  broath  before  the  Idols.

They  have  great  Monasteries  some  of  the  bignesse  of  a
Citie,  in  some  of  which  are  about  two  thousand  Monkes

232

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.

which  serve  Idols,  sequestred  from  the  Laitie  in  their
shaving  and  garments.  For  they  shave  their  heads  and  Shavings.
beards,  and  weare  a  religious  garment.  These  in  the
solemnities  of  their  Idols  sing  with  solemne  songs  and
lights,  some  of  them  may  marry.  There  are  some  of
great  abstinence  called  Sensim,  leading  an  austere  life,
for  they  eate  nothing  but  Meale  mingled  with  water
till  all  the  Flower  be  gone,  and  eate  the  branne  without
any  savour.  These  worship  the  Fire,  and  the  men  of
other  rules  say  that  these  which  are  so  austere,  are  Austeritie.
Heretikes  against  their  Law,  because  they  worship  not
Idols  as  they  doe ;  and  there  are  great  differences
betwixt  them  :  and  these  marry  not  in  any  case.  They
shave  their  Head  and  Beard :  they  weare  blacke  hempen
garments,  and  bright  yellow.  They  sleepe  in  thicke
Mats,  and  live  the  severest  life  in  the  world.

iV.

Of  Cublai  Can,  his  Raigne  and  Acts,  Magnificent
feasts  and  Huntings,  Court  and  Counsell.  His
Citie  Cambalu  and  glorious  Palace.

N  this  Booke  I  purpose  to  write  of  all  the  great  Heere  begins
and  marvellous  Acts,  of  the present  Can called  th£  s^con^
Cublai Can, which is in our Tongue Lord  of  tJLcoPoIo  of
Lords,  the  greatest Prince  in peoples,  Cities  and  Trea-  wkich  I
sures,  that  ever  was  in  the  world. Hee  being  discended  thought  good  to
from the  Progenie of  Chingis, the first Prince  of the  advertise  the
Tartars, is the sixth Emperour of that Countrey, J? ru  11  •
beginning to raigne in the yeare of our Lord 1256.  the  Latme
being  twentie seaven yeares  old,  and  ruling  the  people  and  Remus io
with  great  wisedome  and  gravitie. He  is  a  valiant  man,  so  differ,  that
exercised in Armes, strong  of  bodie,  and of  a prompt , *ve  j
minde  for  the  performance  of  matters,  before  he  attained  observed  our
to  the  dignitie  of  the  Empire  (which  by  his  wisdome  he  owne  division.
did  against the  will of  his Brethren) he often shewed  Cingisor
himselfe a valiant Souldier in the  warres, and carryed  ^"tn&ts  Can-
Ihimselfe  like  a  wiser  and  bolder  Captaine,  then  ever  the

233

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1320.

Tartars  had.  But  since  he  swayed  the  Kingdome,  he
went  but  once  into  the  Field,  but  sends  his  Sonnes,  and
other  Captaines  in  expeditions.

In the yeare of  our  Lord 1286.  his  Uncle named

Naiams  Naiam, being thirtie yeares of age, and having the

command  of  many  people,  and  Countries,  so  that  hee
was  able  easily  to  bring  together  foure  hundred  thousand
Horse.  Being  puffed  up  through  youthfull  vanitie,
would  now  no  longer  be  subject,  but  would  needs  take
away  the  Kingdome  from  his  Lord  Cublai,  and  sent  to

Caydu.  another great Lord named Caydu,  Lord of  the parts

towards  great  Turkie,  who  was  nephew  of  the  Emperour
Cublai,  yet  hated  him,  who  yeelding  consent  to  Rebellion,
promised  to  come  in  proper  person  with  an  hundred
thousand  Horse.

Both  of  them  began  to  gather  Forces,  which  could  not
bee  done  so  secretly  but  Cublai  heard  of  it,  and  presently
tooke  order  to  set  guard  to  the  wayes  that  no  intelligence
might  passe  that  way :  and  then  assembled  all  the  Forces
within  ten  dayes  journey  of  Cambalu  with  great  speed,  so
that  in  twentie  dayes,  were  gathered  together  three  hun-
dred &  sixtie  thousand  Horse,  and  one  hundred  thousand
Foot,  a  great  part  of  them  Falconiers  and  men  of  his
Houshold.  With  these  hee  made  all  haste  day  and  night
towards  Naiams  Countrey,  where  at  the  end  of  twentie
five  dayes  he  arrived,  altogether  unlooked  for :  and  rested

[III.  i.  82.]  his  men  two  dayes.  Then  hee  called  his  Astrologers,  and
caused  them  before  all  the  Armie  to  divine  who  should
have  victorie  (a  thing  they  alway  use  to  incourage  their
men)  and  they  promised  it  to  Cublai.  One  morning
whiles  Naiam  was  sleeping  negligently  in  his  Tent,
having  not  so  much  as  sent  out  any  scouts  to  espie,
Cublai  made  shew  of  his  Armie  upon  a  hill  to  Naiams.
Hee  himselfe  sate  in  a  certaine  Castle  of  wood,  full  of
Archers  and  Crosse-bow  men,  borne  by  foure  Elephants ;
on  the  top  whereof  was  the  Royall  Standard  with  the
Images  of  the  Sunne  and  Moone.  Hee  devided  his
Armie  into  three  wings,  of  which  he  sent  that  on  the

234

MARCO POLO  ad.

1320.

right  hand  and  the  other  on  the  left  against  Naiams
Annie :  To  every  ten  thousand  Horse  were  assigned
five  hundred  Foot  with  Lances,  taught  to  leape  up
behind  the  horse-men  if  any  occasion  of  flight  happened,
and  suddenly  on  advantage  to  light  and  slay  the  enemies
horses  with  their  lances.  Caidu  was  not  yet  come.  The
battels  joyned  and  made  a  cruell  fight,  which  continued
from  morning  till  noone :  and  then  was  Naiam  taken  and
brought  before  Cublai,  who  commanded  that  he  should
be  sewed  betwixt  two  Carpets,  which  should  be  tossed
up  and  downe  till  the  breath  were  out  of  his  bodie,
that  so  the  Imperiall  blood  might  not  be  exposed  to
the  Sunne  and  the  ayre.  The  remainder  of  his  people
sware  Obedience  to  Cublai,  which  were  foure  Nations,
Ciorza, Carli, Barscol, and  Sitingui.

Naiam  was  secretly  baptised,  and  by  profession  a  Chris-
tian, but  no  follower  of  the  workes  of  Faith,  and  signed
his  principall  Ensigne  with  the  signe  of  the  Crosse,  having
with  him  infinite  store  of  Christians  which  were  all
slaine.

The  Jewes  and  Saracens,  that  were  in  the  Armie  of
Cublai,  began  to  upbraid  the  Christians  with  this  disaster
of  the  Crosse,  who  thereupon  complained  to  Cublai.
Hee  then  sharply  reproving  the  Jewes  and  Saracens,
turning  to  the  Christians  saith ;  Surely,  your  God  and
his  Crosse,  would  not  give  any  ayde  to  Naiam,  but  be
,  not  you  therefore  ashamed,  because  God  beeing  good  and
just,  ought  not  at  all  to  defend  Injustice  and  Iniquitie.
Naiam  was  a  Traytour  to  his  Lord,  and  contrary  to  all
equitie  raised  rebellion,  and  sought  the  helpe  of  your
God  in  his  mischievous  purpose.  But  he  as  a  good
land  upright  God,  would  not  favour  his  Designes.  He
returned  after  this  with  great  triumph  to  Cambalu,  and
stayed  there  till  Easter.  On  that  day  he  called  the
Christians  before  him,  and  kissed  their  Gospels,  and
made  his  Barons  doe  the  same.  The  like  hee  doth  in
the  great  Feasts  of  Saracens,  Jewes,  and  Ethnikes,  that
Sogomamber Can the God of the Idols, Mahumet,

235

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1320.

Moses,  or  whosoever  is  greatest  in  heaven  might
helpe  him.  Yet  he  made  best  shew  of  liking  to  the
Christian  Faith,  but  pretended  the  ignorance  of  the
Professors,  and  the  mightie  acts  of  the  Sorcerers,  to  his
not  professing  it.

Now  for  rewarding  his  Souldiers,  he  hath  twelve
Barons  or  wise  Counsellours,  which  give  him  notice  of
each  Captaynes  merit,  who  raiseth  them  command  of
one  hundred  to  a  thousand,  and  from  one  thousand  to
ten  thousand,  and  so  forward,  giving  them  Vessels
of  Plate  and  Tablets.  The  Captayne  of  one  hundred
hath  a  Tablet  of  silver,  and  the  Captayne  of  one  thou-
sand of  Gold,  or  silver  gilded ;  the  Captayne  of  ten
thousand  hath  a  Tablet  of  Gold  with  a  Lions  head  on
it :  the  weight  of  the  Tablets  differ  also  according  to
the  worth  and  weight  of  the  dignitie.  On  the  said
Tablet  is  written  a  command  in  this  manner.  By  the
strength  and  power  of  the  great  God,  and  by  the  Grace
which  he  hath  given  to  our  Empire,  the  name  of  Can
be  blessed,  and  let  them  all  dye  and  be  destroyed  which
will  not  obey  him.  All  they  which  have  these  Tablets
have  priviledges  in  writing,  of  all  things  which  they  are
to  doe  or  demand.  And  the  Generals  when  they  ride
in  publike,  they  have  a  cloth  borne  over  their  heads;
and  when  they  sit,  sit  on  a  Chaire  of  silver.  Their
Tablet  is  of  three  hundred  Saggi  (fiftie  ounces  of  Gold)
with  the  Images  of  the  Sunne  and  Moone.  They  whose
Tablet  have  a  Gerfalcon,  may  take  with  them  for  their
guard  the  whole  Armie  of  a  great  Commander.
Cub  Ids  per-  Cublai  is  a  comeley  and  faire  man  of  a  meane  stature,
son  described.  0f  a  rec[  anc[  white  face,  blacke  and  goodly  eyes,  well
fashioned  nose,  and  all  the  lineaments  of  his  bodie
His  Wives  and  consisting  of  a  due  proportion.  He  hath  foure  wives
Concubines.  wnicn  he  accounteth  lawfull,  and  the  first-borne  of  them
succeedeth  him  in  the  Kingdome.  And  every  one  of
these  is  called  Empresse,  and  holdeth  a  peculiar  Court,
and  that  Princely  in  a  proper  Palace,  having  about  three
hundred chosen Hand-mayds, and Mayd-servants,  and

236

MARCO POLO  ad.

1320.
many  Eunuch  servants,  and  at  least  ten  thousand  persons
in  their  Family.  The  King  hath  also  many  Concubines.
There  is  a  certaine  Nation  of  faire  people,  Tartars,
called  Ungut,  whether  every  second  yeare  he  sendeth  Ungut.
Ambassadors  to  purvey  the  fairest  Lasses  for  him  of
greatest  esteeme  for  beautie,  which  bring  him  foure  or
five  hundred  more  or  lesse,  as  they  see  cause.  There
are  Praysers  or  Examiners  appointed,  which  take  view
of  all  their  beauties,  examining  Eyes,  Nose,  Mouth,  &c.
apart ;  and  set  price  on  them  at  sixteene,  seventeene,
eighteene,  nineteene,  twentie  or  more  Carrats.  And
they  bring  those  of  that  rate  which  their  Commission
appoints.  These  hee  causeth  to  bee  reviewed  by  other
Examiners,  and  of  so  many  chuseth  perhaps  thirtie  for
his  Chamber  of  the  chiefe;  which  he  puts  to  some
of  his  Barons  Wives,  to  see  if  they  snore  not  in  their
sleepe,  if  in  smell  or  behaviour  they  be  not  offensive.
Those  which  are  approoved  are  by  fives  divided,  each  fifth
part  wayting  three  dayes  and  nights  in  his  Chamber  by
course,  the  other  in  the  next  Lodgings  preparing  whatso-
ever these  command  them.  The  lesse  prized  are  put  to
Cookerie,  and  other  noble  Officers.  And  sometimes  the
Can  bestowes  them  on  Gentlemen  with  great  portions.  The  [III.  i.  83.]
men  of  that  Countrey  esteeme  it  a  grace  and  credit  to  have
Daughters  worthy  his  liking :  and  thinke  themselves  borne
under  an  ill  Planet,  if  they  have  not  for  his  turne.

Cublai  hath  two  and  twentie  Sonnes  by  his  foure  His  children.
legitimate  Wives,  and  the  first-borne  of  his  first  Wife
was  called  Cingis,  who  should  have  succeeded  him  in  the
Empire,  if  hee  had  not  dyed  before  his  Father.  He  left
a  Sonne  named  Temur,  a  valiant  man,  wise,  and  exercised  Temur.
in  Armes,  who  is  to  succeed  his  Grand-father  in  the
Empire,  in  stead  of  his  deceased  Father.  But  by  his
Hand-mayds  and  Mayd-servants,  he  hath  five  and
I  twentie  Sonnes,  all  which  are  daily  exercised  in  feats
!  of  Armes,  and  are  great  Lords.  Seven  of  his  Sonnes
by  his  Wives  are  Kings  of  great  Provinces,  and  main-
tayne  their  states  with  great  reputation.

237

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1320.

Three  moneths  of  the  yeere,  to  wit,  December,  Januarie,
and  Februarie,  Cublai  remayneth  ordinarily  in  Cambalu
which  is  at  the  North-east  border  of  Cataio,  and  there  on
the  South  part  by  the  new  Citie  is  seated  a  great  Palace.
First,  there  is  a  square  Wall,  each  square  being  eight
miles,  with  a  deep  Ditch  environing,  and  a  Gate  in  the
middle  of  each  :  after  which  is  the  space  of  a  mile  in
circuit  where  Souldiers  stand.  After  this  is  another
circuit  of  sixe  mile  square,  with  three  Gates  on  the
South  square,  and  three  on  the  North  :  that  which  is  in
the  midst  being  in  both  the  greater,  and  kept  shut,  except
when  the  Can  passeth  that  way ;  the  other  alway  open
to  others.  In  each  corner  of  this  Wall  and  in  the  midst
is  a  faire  Palace,  eight  in  all,  very  large,  in  which  are
kept  the  Cans  munitions  and  furnitures  of  all  sorts,
for  Horses  in  one,  in  another  Bowes  and  shooting
Artillerie,  in  a  third  Costlets,  Curasses  and  leather
Armours,  and  so  in  the  rest.  Within  this  circuit  is
another  wall-circuit,  very  thicke,  and  ten  paces  high,
all  the  battlements  white  ;  the  wall  square,  each  square
a  mile  in  length,  with  sixe  gates  as  the  former,  and
eight  Palaces  also  very  great,  wherein  are  the  Cans
provision.  Betwixt  these  two  last  walls  are  many  faire
trees  and  medowes,  in  which  are  Deere,  Muske  beasts,
with  other  game,  and  store  of  grasse,  the  paths  being
heigthned  two  cubits  to  spare  it,  no  durt,  nor  plashes
of  water  being  therein.  Within  this  last  wall  is  the
Palace  of  the  great  Can,  the  greatest  that  hath  beene
seene,  abutting  with  the  wall  on  the  North  and  South
and  open  spaced  where  the  Barons  and  Souldiers  passe.
It  hath  no  seeling,  but  a  very  high  roofe  :  the  foundation
of  the  pavement  ten  palms  high,  with  a  wall  of  marble
round  about  it,  two  paces  wide,  as  it  were  a  walke.  In
the  end  of  the  wall  without,  is  a  faire  Turret  with  Pillars.
In  the  walls  of  the  Halls  and  Chambers  are  carved
Dragons,  Souldiers,  Birds,  Beasts,  of  divers  kinds,
histories  of  Warres,  gilded.  The  roofe  is  so  made,  that
nothing is seene but Gold and Imagery. In every

238

MARCO POLO  ad.

1320.
square  of  the  Palace  is  a  great  Hall  of  marble,  capable
of  great  multitudes.  The  Chambers  are  disposed  the
best  that  may  be  devised  :  the  roofe  is  red,  greene,  azure,
and  of  all  coloures.  Behind  the  Palace  are  great  Roomes,
and  private  store-houses  for  his  treasures  and  Jewels,
for  his  women,  and  other  secret  employments.  Over
against  the  said  Palace  of  the  Can,  is  another  for  Cingis
his  sonne,  whose  Court,  was  in  all  things  like  his  Fathers.
Neere  this  Palace  towards  the  North  is  a  Mount  made
by  hand,  a  mile  in  compasse,  one  hundred  paces  high  :
beset  with  trees  that  are  alwaies  greene.  Unto  this
mountaine,  the  king  commandeth  all  the  best  trees,  to
be  brought  from  remote  parts,  lading  Elephants  with
them,  for  they  are  taken  up  with  the  roots,  and  are
transplanted  in  this  Mountaine.  And  because  this
Mountaine  is  alwaies  greene  it  is  called,  The  greene  The  greene
Mountaine.  And  where  the  earth  of  that  Mount  was  Mountaine.
taken  away,  are  two  Lakes  answering  each  other,  with  Two  Lakes.
a  pretie  River  filling  them,  stored  with  fish,  and  so  grated
that  the  fish  cannot  get  forth.

The Citie of Cambalu in the Province of  Cathai,  Cambalu.
seated on a great  River,  was famous,  and regall,  from
antiquitie. And  this  name  Cambalu  signifieth,  The  Citie
of  the Lord, or Prince. This Citie the great Can
removed unto the other side of  the River where the
Palaces  are  :  for  he  understood  by  the  Astrologers,  that
it  should rebell  against  the Empire.* This new built  *T he  long
Citie  is  called  Taidu  :  and  he  made  all  the  Catayans  to  st0™  °fthls
goe  out  of  the  old  Citie  into  the  new :  which  contayneth  omittej
in compasse  foure  and  twentie  miles,  every  side  of  the  Taidu.
square  contayning  sixe  miles. It  hath  walls  of  earth  ten
paces  thicke  at  the  bottome,  and  at the  top  but  three,
by  little  and  little  ascending  thinner  : the batlements  are
white. Every  square of  the wall hath three principall
Gates,  which  are  twelve  in  all,  having  sumptuous  Palaces
built  over  each  of  them. There  are  also  excellent  Palaces  Palaces.
in the angles of  the walls, where the Armes of  the
Garrison  (which  are  one  thousand  at  each  gate)  are  kept.

239

A.D.

1320.

The  equalitie
of  the  streets.

Suburbs  large.

[III.  i.  84.]
Burial
without  the
Citie.

Harlots  of  the
Suburbs.

The  number  of
the  horse-men
of  the
Courtiers.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  buildings  are  squared  out,  &  the  streets  laid  very-
straight  by  line,  throughout  this  Citie,  so  that  from  one
Gate  a  free  prospect  openeth  thorow  the  Citie,  to  the
opposite  Gate,  having  very  goodly  houses  built  on  both
sides,  like  Palaces  with  Gardens  and  Courts,  divided  to
the  Heads  of  Families.  In  the  middle  of  the  Citie,  a
certaine  sumptuous  house  is  built,  wherein  hangeth  a
very  great  Bell,  after  the  third  knolling  whereof  in  the
night  no  man  may  goe  out  of  his  house,  untill  the
beginning  of  the  day  following,  except  it  be  for  speciall
cause,  as  for  a  woman  in  travell,  &c.  And  they  are
compelled  to  carrie  a  light  with  them.

Without  the  Citie  of  Cambalu  are  twelve  great
Suburbs,  three  or  foure  miles  long,  joyning  upon  each
of  the  twelve  Gates,  more  inhabiting  the  Suburbs  then
the  Citie  :  heere  Marchants  and  Strangers  keepe,  each
Nation  having  a  severall  Store-house  or  Burse  in  which
they  lodge.  No  dead  corps  of  any  man  is  buryed  within
this  Citie,  but  the  bodies  of  Idolaters  are  burned  without
the  Suburbs,  where  the  dead  bodies  of  other  sects  are
buryed.  And  because  an  huge  multitude  of  Sorcerers
converse  alwayes  there,  they  have  about  twentie  five
thousand  Harlots  in  the  Suburbs  and  in  the  Citie,  and
these  have  a  Captaine  appointed  over  every  hundreth,
and  thousand  ;  and  one  Generall  ;  whose  office  is,  that
when  Embassadours  come,  or  such  as  have  businesse
with  the  Can  whose  charges  he  findeth,  this  Captaine
giveth  every  Embassadour  and  every  man  of  his  family,
change  of  women  nightly  at  free  cost  :  for  this  is  the
Queanes  tribute.  The  Guards  every  night  cast  those
in  prison  which  they  finde  walking  late  :  and  if  they  be
found  guiltie  they  are  beaten  with  Cudgels  :  for  the
Bachsi  tell  them  that  it  is  not  good  to  shed  mans  blood.
But  many  dye  of  those  beatings.

The  great  Can  hath  in  his  Court  twelve  thousand
Horse-men,  which  they  call  Casitan,  faithfull  Souldiers
of  their  Lord,  who  guard  his  person  more  for  state
then feare. And foure Captaines have the  charge  of

240

MARCO  POLO  ad.

1320.

these, whereof  every one commandeth three thousand.

When  one  Captaine  with  three  thousand  Souldiers  within  The  Guard.

the  Palace,  hath  guarded  the  King for  three  dayes  and

nights, another Captaine with his Souldiers againe

succeedeth  : and so  throughout  the  whole yeeare, this

course  of  watching  by  course  is  observed.

When through occasion of any feastivall day hee  Solemn  feasts.

keepeth  a  solemne Court,  his  Table being  higher then

the  rest  of  the  Tables,  is  set  at the  North  part  of  the

Hall,  and  his  face  is  to  the  South,  having  the  greatest

Queene on his left hand, to wit, his principal! wife,  The  order  of

and his Sonnes, and nephews, and they of  the blood  tJlem  that  sit

royall  on  his  right. Yet  their  table  is  in  a  lower  place,

so  that  they  scarce  touch  the  Kings  feet  with  their  heads ;

the  seat  of  the  eldest  being  higher  then  the  rest. The

Barons  and  Princes,  sit  in  a  lower  place  then  that. Their

wives  also  keepe  the like order, first  the Cans  sonnes

wives  and his kinsmens, sits lower on the left hand,

and after, those  of  the Lords  and of  every Captaine,

and Noble-man,  each in her degree and order. And

the Emperour himselfe, while he sitteth at his table,

may  cast  his  eyes upon all  that  feast  with  him  in  that

Hall. There are not Tables for all to sit, but the

greatest  part  of  the  Souldiers  and  Barons  eate  on  Carpets.

At  all  the  doores  stand  two  giantly  fellowes  with  Cudgels,  Threshold

to  see  that  none  touch  the  Threshold,  which  if  hee  doe  threshm&

i  they  take  his  garments  away  ;  which  he  must  redeeme

1  with  so  many  blowes  as  shall  be  appointed,  or  else  lose

them. They  which  serve  the  King  sitting  at  the  table, The  Noblemen

all  of  them  cover  their  mouthes  with  Silke,  least  their f, cafr^

1111  1 1 J/-  dishes,  cover

breathing  should  by  any  meanes  touch  the  Kings  meat  or  ^r  mouineSt

Idrinke. And when he hath minde to drinke, the
Damosell which gives it, goeth back three paces and  The  cere-
kneeles  downe,  and  then  the  Barons  and  all  the  people  ™"%fik
kneele, and the Musicians sound their Instruments,  drinketh.
There  is  no  cause  why  I  should  write  any  thing  concerning  Consorts  of
the  meats  which  are  brought  to  the  Table,  how  daintie  Musicke.

land  delicate  they  are,  and  with  what magnificence and
xi  241  Q

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1320.

pompe they  are served in. All the Tartars observe

this  custome,  to  celebrate  the  Birth  day  of  their  Lord

The  birth  day  most honourably. The Festivall birth day of  Cublai

ofCubku js  i^ept  the  twentie  eight  of  September,  and  this  day  hee

accounteth  more  solemne,  then  any  of  the  whole  yeare,

New  Moone except the  first  of  February,  wherein they  begin their

jeast.  yeare. The  King  therefore  in  his  Birth  day  is  cloathed

with  a  most  precious  garment  of  Gold,  and  about two

thousand  Barons  and  Souldiers,  are  cloathed  of  the  same

colour of gold (though of  Silke stuffe) and a girdle

wrought  with  gold  and  silver,  which  is  given  them  with

a payre  of  shooes  : some  weare Pearles and  Gemmes

of  great price,  namely,  the  Quiecitarie,  which are next

to the Can  : and  these garments are not worne but

on  their  thirteene  solemne  Feasts  according  to  the  thir-

teene  Moones  of  the  yeare  ;  all  then  cloathed  like  Kings.

The  presents  of  This custome is also observed  with the Tartars, that

DienM b on  ^ie  birth  day  of  great  Cham,  all  the  Kings,  Princes,

ject  unto  him. and  Nobles,  which  are  subject  to  his Dominion,  should

The  like  send presents unto him,  as to their Emperour. And

Custome  is they  who desire to obtaine any place of  Dignitie or

Stl  nt* il office of  him, offer  their  requests unto twelve Barons

the  Mogul/,  as  . r ' .  .  ^ . ,  ,  .

also  the  New-  appointed ror this purpose, and what they decree, is

yeares  day. all  one,  as  if  the  Emperour  himselfe  had  answered  them.

The  twelve All  people  also,  of  what  Faith  or  sect  soever,  whether

Th°nS' f  Christians, or Jewes, Saracens, or Tartars, and other

divers  Pagans  are  bound,  solemnly  to call upon their Gods,

Religions. for  the  life,  safetie,  and  prosperitie  of  Great  Can.

New-yeres  On  the  day  of  the  Kalends  of  February,  which  is  the

daJ-  beginning  of  the  Tartars yeare,  great Can  and all the

Tartars,  wheresoever  they  are,  celebrate  a  very  great  and

solemne  Feast,  and  all  aswell  men  as  women,  desire  to  bee

The  white cloathed  in  white  Garments. For  they  beleeve,  that  the

colour  white  garment  is  a  token  of  good  lucke  :  Therefore  that

fortune might favour them all the yeare,  they  weare

white in the beginning of  the yeare. Moreover the

Rulers  of  Cities,  and  Governours  of  Provinces,  mindfull

of  their dutie, send unto their Emperour on this  day

ominous.

MARCO TOLO  a.d.

1320.
presents of Gold and Silver, Pearles and Precious  New-yeares
stones, many  white Cloathes, and other white things,  &ftSm
and many Horses of a white colour  : the rest of
the  Tartars  at  the  beginning  of  the  yeare, send white
presents one to another. It is the custome  of those  See  Sir  T.  Roe
which  bring  presents,  if  they  can,  of  each  to  present  nine f/^^/
times  nine ;  as  if  they  send  Horses,  to  present  nine  nines,
that  is  eightie  one,  and  so  of  Gold,  of  Cloaths,  &  other
things, that somtimes he hath by this reckoning  one
hundred thousand Horses. Also at this good lucke,
all  the  Elephants  which  the  Emperour hath  (five  thou-  The  Kings
sand in number)  are brought  unto  the  Court,  covered  Elephants.
with Tapistrie,  wherein the  similitudes  of  divers  Beasts
and  Fowles  are  portrayed,  carrying  upon  their  shoulders
two Chests full of golden and silver vessell. Many  [HI.  i.  85.]
Camels  also  are  brought,  covered  with  faire  Silken  clothes,
which  bring  other  things,  necessarie  for  the  Court. And
this  day  in  the  morning,  all  the  Kings,  Captaines,  Barons,
Souldiers, Physicians, Astrologers, Falconers, and the
Governours  of  Provinces,  and  Armies,  and  other  Officers
of  the  Emperour,  assemble  in  the  great  Hall  before  the
King,  and  they  who  happen  to  have  no  place  there,  for
the multitude  of  men,  stand  in  another  place  where  he
may see them. All being placed in their  order, and
degree, one ariseth  as  it  were  some  Prelate,  and  crieth
out  with  a  loude  voyce,  Bow  downe,  and  adore. And
presently  all  doe  reverence,  bending  downe  their  foreheads
to  the  earth. Then  he  sayth,  God  preserve our  Lord
with long life and joy, and all answere, God grant.
Then  he  sayth,  God  encrease and advance  his  Empire,
and preserve his Subjects in peace, good-will, and
prosperitie  : and all answere, God grant. And this
they  doe  foure  times. The  adoration  finished,  the  said
i  Prelate goeth to an Altar richly adorned,  on  which is
;a  red Table, wherein is written  the  name  of  the  Can,
and taking a Censer, and putting odoriferous Spices
therein,  they  perfume  the  Table  and  the  Altar  with  great
[reverence, in honour of  great Can, and so returne to

243

the  Provincial
Hunters.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGKIMES

1320.

their  places.  After  which,  are  offered  the  gifts  whereof
we  have  spoken ;  and  then  the  Tables  are  prepared,  and  a

The  Feast.  most  solemne  Dinner  held,  eating  and  drinking  with  great
joy  with  their  wives,  in  manner  before  described. And

A  tame  Lion,  lastly,  a  domesticall  Lion  is  brought  unto  the  King,
which  lying  at  his  feet,  like  a  gentle  Whelpe,  acknow-
ledged! his  Lord.

The  office^  of  ^  \n  those  three  moneths,  in  which  as  we  said  before,  the
Emperour  remayneth  in  the  Citie  of  Cambalu,  to  wit,
in  December,  Januarie,  and  Februarie,  all  the  Hunters
which  the  Emperour  hath  in  all  Provinces,  round  about
the  Province  of  Cathai,  apply  themselves  to  hunting,  and
offer  all  the  greater  wilde-beasts,  to  wit,  Stags,  Beares,
Roe-buckes,  wilde  Boares,  Deere,  and  such  like,  unto
their  Governours  :  who  (if  they  be  distant  from  the
Emperours  Court,  lesse  then  thirtie  dayes  Journey)  send
such  beasts  taken,  by  Waynes,  and  Ships  unto  the
Emperour,  having  first  bowelled  them.  But  such  as
are  fortie  dayes  journey  distant  from  his  Court,  send
onely  the  skinnes,  which are necessarie  for  the  making

Tame  0f  Armour. Hee  hath  many  Leopards,  and  Wolves  for

Leopards,  and  hunting,  and  many  Lions  also,  greater  then  those  which
are  in  Babylon,  in  the  haire  whereof  certaine  little  beames
appeare  of  divers  colours,  to  wit,  white,  blacke  and  red,
and  they  are  accommodated  to  catch  Boares,  Beares,  Stags,
Roe-buckes,  wilde  Asses,  and  wilde  Oxen  ;  and  it  is  mar-
vellous to  see  the  Lions  fiercenesse  and  dexteritie  in  the
act.  Two  Lions  use  to  bee  carried  in  one  Wagon,  when
they  goe  to  hunt,  and  with  them  a  Dog,  with  which  they
are  tamed  ;  and  they  carrie  them  on  this  fashion,  because
of  their  furie  and  unrulinesse  :  and  they  must  carrie  them
contrary  to the wind ; for else the beasts  would sent

Eagles.  them, and flee. Hee hath many tame Eagles,  which

are  so  fierce,  that  they  take  Hares,  Roe-buckes,  Deere,
and  Foxes ;  among  which  some  of  them  feare  not  with
great  violence  to  seize  upon  Wolves,  and  vexe  them  so
sore,  that  without  labour  and  danger,  they  may  be  taken
by  men.

244

MARCO POLO  ad.

1320.

The  great  Can  hath  in  his  Court  two  which  are
brethren,  one  called  Bayan,  the  other  Mingan,  called
in  the  Tartar  language,  Civici,  that  is,  Masters  of  the  The  Masters
Game,  whereof  either  hath  the  charge  of  ten  thousand  °*  *  e  ame'
men  :  they  which  are  under  one  of  them,  are  clothed
in  red ;  the  other  in  skie-colour,  alway  when  they  hunt.
These  keepe  divers  sorts  of  Dogs,  to  the  number  of
five  thousand  Mastives  and  other.  In  hunting  they
goe  with  their  people,  one  on  the  right,  and  the  other
on  the  left  hand  of  the  King  :  and  they  take  up  so
great  a  length  of  the  Playne,  that  from  one  end  to  the
other  is  a  dayes  journey,  so  that  no  beast  can  escape
them  ;  and  it  is  great  pleasure  when  the  Can  goes
in  the  midst,  to  see  the  Dogs  follow  Harts,  Beares,  and
other  kinds.  And  these  Brethren  are  bound  by  covenant,
from  the  beginning  of  October  to  the  end  of  March,
to  bring  to  the  Court,  one  thousand  heads  of  beasts
and  birds,  besides  Quailes,  and  fishes  the  best  they  can,
in  great  proportion.

The  moneth  of  March  comming  in,  great  Can  departeth  Hawking.
from  the  Citie  of  Cambalu,  and  proceedeth  North-east-
ward towards the Ocean distant thence two dayes
journeyes, bringing with him about ten thousand 10000.
Falconers,  who have  Falcons,  Hawkes,  Gerfalcons,  and  Falconers-
other  kinds  of  Fowles  of  prey  fit  for  hawking. These
Falconers disperse themselves by an hundred or two
hundred  in  a  Companie :  and  the  birds  that  are  taken,
for  the  most  part,  are  brought  unto  the  King,  who  by
reason  of  his  Gout,  sitteth  in  a  woodden  house,  which  two  The  Kings
Elephants  carrie,  covered  with  the  skins  of  Lions,  and  Horse-lttter'
within  hanged  with  cloth  of  Gold,  having  with  him  for
jhis  recreation,  twelve  choice  Hawkes,  and  twelve  favoured
Courtiers  : many  Noblemen  and  Souldiers  ride  by,  who
guard  the  Kings  person. Who,  when  they  see  Phesants,
br  Cranes,  or  other  birds  flying  in  the  aire,  declare  it  to
the  Falconers  which  are  neere  unto  the  King :  and  they,
signifying  the  same unto the  King,  uncover the  Kings
House,  and  let  their  Falcons  and  Hawkes  flie,  and  the

245

i

A.D.
[320.

Toscaol.

[III.  i.  86.]

The  markes  of
the  Hawkes.

The  number
and  order  of
the  Pavilions.

The  huge
price  of
Armelines,
and  Sables.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

King  sitting  on  his  Bed,  beholdeth  the  pastime  of  the
birds.  Other  ten  thousand  men  also  goe  with  the  King,
who  in  that  hawking,  runne  hither  and  thither,  by  two
and  two,  and  marke  whither  the  Falcons  and  Hawkes  flie,
that  are  cast  from  the  fist,  that  (if  need  bee)  they  may
helpe  them.  And  these,  in  the  Tartars  Language,  are
called  Toscaol,  that  is  to  say,  Watch-men  or  Markes-men,
being  skilfull  in  a  certaine  kind  of  whistle,  wherewith  they
call  in  the  Hawkes  that  are  flowen.  Nor  is  it  needfull,
that  the  Falconer  who  let  the  Hawkes  flie,  should  follow
her,  seeing  they,  of  whom  I  now  speake,  are  busily
imployed  in  taking  up  the  Hawkes,  and  are  carefull  that
by  no  meanes  they  bee  hurt  or  lost.  And  every  flying
Hawke  carrieth  a  little  table  of  silver  on  her  foot,  signed
with  the  marke  of  her  Master  or  Falconer,  that  if  shee
bee  lost,  shee  may  bee  restored  to  her  owner.  But  if  the
marke  cannot  be  knowne,  the  Hawke  is  delivered  to  a
certaine  Baron,  who  for  this  cause  is  called  Bulangazi,
to  whom  are  brought  all  lost  things  (otherwise  the  Finder
would  be  counted  a  Thiefe)  and  to  him  Losers  resort
to  inquire  of  things  lost.  He  hath  a  most  eminent  place,
noted  by  his  Ensigne,  that  in  so  great  an  assembly  of
people  he  may  be  knowne.

Whiles  they  are  thus  busied  in  sporting  and  hawking,
they  come  unto  a  certaine  great  Plaine,  called  Caczarmodin,
where  the  Tents  of  the  King  and  all  the  Courtiers  are
prepared,  about  ten  thousand  in  number.  The  first  and
chiefe  is  the  Cans  Pavilion,  under  which  ten  thousand
Souldiers  stand,  besides  Barons  and  Noble-men,  with  the
doore  to  the  South :  sustayned  with  three  Pillars,  wrought
with  divers  curious  and  excellent  carved  workes,  and
covered  with  the  skinnes  of  Lions  (and  strakes  of  divers
colours)  which  keepe  out  rayne.  But  within,  the  walls  of
the  Pavilions  are  covered  with  most  costly  skinnes  of
Armelines  and  Sables,  although  in  those  Countries  these
skinnes  are  accounted  most  precious,  that  sometimes
skinnes  worth  two  thousand  Sultanines  of  gold  are
scarce sufficient for one paire of  Vests. The Tartars

246

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.
call  the  Sable,  the  Queene  of  Furres.  The  Cordes,
wherewith  these  Pavilions  are  supported,  are  of  silke.
There  are  also  other  Pavilions  erected,  wherein  the
Wives,  Sonnes,  and  Hand-maides  of  the  King  remaine.
Further  also,  the  Falcons,  Hawkes,  Owles,  Garfalcons,
and  other  Birds,  which  serve  for  Hawking,  have  their
Tents  wherein  they  are  contayned.  For,  there  is  so  great
a  multitude  of  Tents,  that  to  them  that  come  thither,
a  farre  off  it  seemeth  that  a  famous  Citie  is  built  there.
The  King  remayneth  all  March  in  that  Plaine,  and  taketh
innumerable  Beasts  and  infinite  multitudes  of  Fowle.  For
no  man  may  else  hunt  in  all  the  Provinces  of  that  King-  Hunting
dome,  at  the  least  within  five  dayes  journey  one  way,  ten  Jorotaden'
another,  and  fifteene  a  third  way  of  the  Cans  Court :  nor
keepe  an  hunting  Dogge,  or  an  Hawke :  and  specially,
from  the  beginning  of  March  untill  the  moneth  of  October,
no  man  is  permitted  to  use  any  device  or  engine  whatso-
ever, to  take  Stagges,  Deere,  Roe-bucks,  Hares,  lest  he
should  hinder  their  breede  :  and  hereupon  it  is  that
there  are  such  store.

It  is  incredible  what  multitudes  of  People,  Merchants,
and  merchandises  of  all  sorts  are  seene  in  Cambalu.  The
Money  of  the  Great  Can  is  not  made  of  gold  or  silver,  Barke  or
or  other  metall,  but  they  take  the  middle  barke  from  the  PaPer  mne^'
Mulberrie  Tree,  and  this  they  make  firme,  and  cut  it  into
divers  and  round  pieces,  great  and  little,  and  imprint  the
Kings  marke  thereon.  Of  this  matter  therefore,  the
Emperour  causeth  an  huge  masse  of  money  to  bee  made
in the  Citie  of  Cambalu,  which  sufficeth  for  the  whole  Cambalu,  the

Empire :  and  no  man  under  paine  of  death  may  lawfully nt  °*

monev
coine  any  other,  or  spend  any  other  money,  or  refuse  it  in

all his Kingdomes and Countries. Nor any comming

from another  Kingdome,  dare spend any other money

in  the  Empire  of  Great  Can. Whereby  it  commeth  to

passe,  that  Merchants  often  comming  from  farre  remote

Countries  and  Regions  unto  the  Citie  of  Cambalu,  bring

with  them  gold,  silver,  pearle,  and  precious  stones,  and

receive  the  Kings  money for  them. And because this

247

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1320.

money  is  not  received  in  their  Countries,  they  change
it  againe  in  the  Empire  of  Great  Can  for  merchandise,
which  they  carrie  away  with  them.  He  also  payeth
stipends  to  his  Officers  and  Armies  of  the  mentioned
money  ;  and  lastly,  whatsoever  thing  he  needeth  in  his
Court  he  buyeth  with  this  money.  Wherefore,  there
is  not  a  King  to  be  found  in  the  world,  who  exceedeth
him  in  Treasure,  not  expended  on  the  Mint  as  else-
where.

The  Great  Can  hath  twelve  Barons,  as  is  said  before,
which  are  his  Counsell  of  Warre,  and  dispose  of  martiall
affaires,  and  the  exalting  or  disgracing  of  Captaines  and
Souldiers.  Their  office  is  called  Thai,  that  is,  The  high
Court,  because  they  have  none  above  them  but  the  Can.
Other  twelve  Barons  are  appointed  Counsellors  for  the
foure  and  thirtie  Provinces,  which  have  a  faire  Palace
in  Cambalu,  in  which  is  for  every  Province  a  Judge  &
many  Notaries.  These  have  power  to  choose  Governours
of  the  said  Provinces,  and  present  their  names  to  the  Can
which  confirmes  them.  These  also  have  the  charge  of  the
Treasure  to  exact  and  dispense  the  same.  Their  office  is
called  Singh,  that  is,  The  second  Court,  subject  to  none
but  the  Can,  yet  reputed  lesse  noble  then  the  former,  that
being  a  martiall  State.

248

MARCO POLO  ad.

1320.

§.  VI.  [Hi.  i.  87.]

The  Cans  provisions  for  Embassadors  and  for
Posts ;  against  Dearth  ;  for  High-wayes ;  for
the  Poore  in  Cambalu,  for  Astrologers  ;  Tartars
Wine,  Fuell,  Religion,  Opinions,  Behaviour,
Court-neatnesse :  Polos  proceeding  from  Cam-
balu Westward.  Of  Pulisangan,  Gouza,
Tainfu,  Pianfu,  Thaigin,  Cacianfu,  Quenzanfu,
Sindinfu,  Thebeth,  Caindu,  Caraian,  Carachan,
Cardandan  and  Vociam.

Ithout  the  Citie  of  Cambalu,  many  publike  wayes
conduct  to  the  neighbouring  Provinces,  and  in
every  one  of  them  alway  at  the  end  of  five  and

twentie or thirtie miles, are Lodgings or Innes built,  Pastes  and

called Lamb,  that  is,  Post-houses,  with  great and  faire  lnnes-

Palaces, Chambers  furnished  with Beds  and  other  Pro- ^  ha^ ^_

visions,  meete  to  entertaine  great Men,  yea  to  lodge  a  like  Stables,  as

King;  the provisions  laid  in from  the next adjoyning  appeares  by

places  :  where  about  foure  hundred  Horses  are  in  readi-  Constantine,

nesse  for  Messengers  and  Embassadors,  which  there  leave Jsj,  j-2"  an,
&  * 1  •  Palladius  who

their  ridden  Horses  and  take  rresn. And  in  mountaynous  \n  t^ree  4ayes

places,  where  are  no  Villages,  he  sends  People  to  inhabite,  would  ride

ten thousand at  a  place where these Lamb  are built,  from  the

which till the ground for their provisions  ; and this on.PnesoJ e
&, ri  i--ri -i^ •  Empire  toCon-

continueth  unto  the  furthest  limits or the rLmpire  ;  so  stantinople,

that  in  the  publique  wayes,  throughout  the  whole  Empire, SocJ.y.c.ig.

about  ten  thousand  of  the  Kings  Innes  are  to  bee  found.

And  the  number  of  the  Horses,  appointed  for  the  service

of  the Messengers in those Innes,  are  more  then  two

hundreth  thousand,  a  thing  almost  incredible  to  tell  :  so

that  in a  little  while  with change  of  Men  and  Horse,

intelligence  might  flie  to  the  Court. And  if  any  wonder

low so  many men and  beasts  should  be  provided  for,

iee must consider that  the  Moores  and  Gentiles  have

nany  women,  and  store  of  children,  some  having  thirtie

249

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1320.

sonnes  which  follow  them  armed  ;  and  for  victuall  they
sow  three  seeds,  Rice,  Panike  and  Mill,  which  yeeld  an
hundred  fold  :  they  make  not  bread,  but  boile  these  with
Milke  or  Flesh.  Wheat  will  not  so  encrease  with  them  :
nor  suffer  they  any  ground,  which  will  beare,  to  lye  un-
tilled.  And  their  Cattell  alway  increase,  that  each  of
them  carries  with  him  six,  eight,  or  more  Horses  into
the  field  for  his  owne  person.  These  Horses  also  take
turnes,  that  of  the  foure  hundred  aforesaid  two  hundred
are  in  the  stables  readie,  the  other  two  hundred  at  grasse
by  monethly  courses.  Their  Cities  adjoyning  to  Rivers
or  Lakes,  are  appointed  also  to  have  ferry  Boats  in  readi-
nesse  for  the  Posts.  And  Cities  adjoyning  to  Desarts,
are  fested  at  Horses  and  provisions  thorow  those  Desarts,
but  have  contribution  from  the  Can.  In  cases  of  great
import,  the  Poste  rides  with  a  Gerfalcon  Table,  and  is
trussed  so  that  he  will  ride  two  hundred  miles  in  a  day,
or  two  hundred  and  fiftie,  sometimes  also  they  ride  the
night,  Foot-posts  running  by  with  lights,  if  the  Moone
shine  not.  They  winde  a  Home  that  the  fresh  Horses
may  be  brought  forth  for  them  to  mount  presently,  and
having  their  bellies  and  heads  girded  runne  as  fast  as  the
horse  can  :  and  those  which  are  able  to  endure  this
excessive  riding  are  of  great  reputation.

There  are  also  betweene  the  said  Innes  other  habita-
tions, three  or  foure  miles  distant  one  from  another,
where  there  are  a  few  houses  wherein  Foot-posts  dwell,
having  all  girdels  full  of  shrill  sounding  bells.  These
are  alwayes  readie,  and  as  often  as  the  Kings  Letters  are
sent  unto  them,  convey  them  speedily  to  the  next  habi-
Foote-postes.  tation :  who  hearing  the  sound  of  the  Foot-post  comming
afarre  off,  expect  him,  and  receiving  his  Letters,  presently
carrie  them  to  the  next  watch  :  and  so  the  Letters
passing  through  divers  hands,  are  conveyed  without  any
delay,  unto  that  place  whither  they  ought  to  come.  And
it  commeth  often  to  passe,  that  the  King  understandeth
newes,  or  receiveth  new  fruits  from  a  place,  ten  dayes
iourney  distant,  in  two  dayes  :  as  fruits  growing  at  Cam-  ,

250

Die  Post
bo  den.

»

pill

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.

balu in the  morning,  the  next  day  at night at Xandu.

But  all  the  mentioned  Postes  are  free  from  all  exaction Their

of  Tribute, and receive a good recompence of their rwl  e  ges'

labours  from  the  Kings Rent  gatherers besides. Some

also  are  appointed  to  examine  these  Posts  monethly,  and

to  punish  their  faults.

He  sends  yeerly  unto  divers  Provinces,  subject  to  his  Provisions
Empire,  to  inquire  whether  any  harme  be  done  to  the  a&aimt dearth-
Corne,  by  Tempests,  Locusts,  Wormes,  or  any  other
plague.  And  when  he  hath  notice  given  him,  that  any
Province  or  Citie,  hath  sustained  any  damage,  he  re-
mitteth  Tributes  to  that  people  for  that  yeere,  and
sendeth  Graine  for  victuall  and  for  Seede,  out  of  his
owne  Garners.  For,  in  the  time  of  great  plentie,  the
King  buyeth  abundant  store  of  Corne,  and  keepeth  it  with  Fatherly
great  care  of  Officers,  three  or  foure  yeeres  in  Garners,  ya  tte'
that  when  there  shall  be  scarcitie  of  Corne  in  one
Countrey,  that  defect  may  bee  supplied  out  of  the  Kings
Store-houses.  Hee  selleth  his  graine  for  the  fourth  part
of  other  mens  price,  and  alway  provideth  that  his  store-
houses be  stored.  Likewise,  when  any  murren  lighteth
among  Cattell,  hee  sends  them  other  Cattell  which  he
hath  for  Tenths  in  other  Provinces.  And  if  a  thunder-
bolt hath  stricken  any  beast  of  any  Herd  or  Flock,  he
will  have  no  Tribute  thereof  for  three  yeeres,  be  the
Herd  never  so  great :  nor  custome  of  a  Thunder-stricken
ship,  thinking  God  is  angrie  with  them  which  are  so
stricken.  Likewise,  that  Travellers  may  find  the  way
in  all  places  capable  to  beare  Trees,  He  hath  caused
Trees  to  be  planted,  a  little  distance  one  from  another,  [III.  i.  88.]
neare  unto  the  principall  wayes;  and  in  Sandie  and  desart
places,  he  hath  caused  to  set  Stones  and  Pillars  for  that  Hence  per-

purpose  :  and  Officers  are appointed  to  looke to  these  hfps  *}e  *°aik
■  1  •  r  tt  1  T-.  1  1 1  1  • a  from  Lahor  to

things. Hee  plants  Trees  the  rather  because  his  Astro-  Agra  was

logers  tell  him,  that  planting  Trees  lengthens  the  life, occasioned.

They  make  excellent  drinke,  in  the  Province  of  Cathai,  Their  Rice-

of  Rice and divers Spices, which in the  taste thereof  mne'

excelleth  the  sweetnesse  even  of  Wine. And  they  who

251

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1320.

drinke  more  greedily  therof  then  reason  judgeth  to  be
fit,  or  the  nature  of  the  drinker  requireth,  sooner  become
drunke  then  if  they  had  drunke  Wine.

Coales  taken  Throughout  the whole Province of  Cathai, certaine

out°fm*es>  blacke  stones  are  digged  out  of  the  Mountaines,  which

to  Polo  an  Put  m^° tne  fire  biirne  like wood, and  being kindled

Italian,  but  preserve fire  a  long  time,  as  if  they  be  kindled  in the

common  with  Evening, they keepe quicke fire all the night. And

us,  called  Sea-  manv  use  those  stones,  because that though  they  have

they  are  store  of  wood,  yet  is  there  such  frequent  use  of  Stoves

brought  by  Sea  and  Bathes  (thrise  every  weeke) that the  wood would

from  New-  not  serve.

castle,  &c  jt  *s  not  amisse  aiso>  having  spoken  of  his  Provisions

Sylvius  and  abroad, to  mention  his  care  for  the  poore  of  Cambalu.

the  China  When  he  heares  of  any  honourable  Familie  decayed  by

Jesuites,  have  disadventures, or  of  any  which  cannot  worke,  and  have

told  wonders  no meanes  :  ne  causeth to give to such Families  the

stoneTa  won-  wno^e yeares  expenses  ;  each  of  such  Families  going  to

derfull  divine  tne  Officers  for  that  purpose,  and  shewing  their  Bill  of

bounty  indeed  allowance, receive provisions accordingly. There is a

to  this  Land,  palaCe deputed  for  those  Officers. They  are provided

an  specta  y ^so  0f  garments  for  Winter,  and  for  Summer;  the  Can

to  this  Litie.  . ° ,_, _  r  TT  '  „.,.  ]

Cans  charitie having  the  Tenths  or  all Wool,  and  Sake,  and  Hempe,

to  the  Poore. which  he  causeth  to  bee  made  into  Clothes  in  a  house

The  Tenths thereto  appointed  :  for  all  Trades  are  bound  one  day  in

pmd  to  t  e ^  weeke  to  worke  for  him. He  provides  also  apparell

Weekly  labour  f°r  ms  Armies,  and  in every  Citie  causeth  Cloth  to  be

for  him.  made  of  his  tithe  wooll. You  must  understand  that  the

Tartars ancient customes knew no almes, but rather

upbraided such  as  were  in necessitie,  as  hated  of  God.

TheDevillan  But the Idolaters, especially these Bachsi, have pro-

Angellof pounded it  as  a good  worke acceptable to God, and

have taught  him to be thus  bountifull,  so that  in his

Court  bread  is never  denyed to any  which aske:  and

there is no day in  which is not given away  twentie

thousand  Crownes  in  Rice,  Millet  and  Panike,  whereby

he  is  esteemed  as  a  God.

There  are  also  in  Cambalu  of  Christians,  Saracens,  and

252

MARCO POLO  ad.

1320.

Catayans,  about  five  thousand  Astrologers  and  Diviners,  Astrologers.
which  the  Great  Can  provideth  yeerly  of  foode  and
rayment,  as  those  poore  abovesaid.  These  have  an
Astrolabe  in  which  are  marked  the  signes  of  the  Planets,
the  houres  and  points  of  all  the  yeere.  Herein  all  these
Astrologers,  each  Religion  apart,  view  the  course  of  the
yeere,  according  to  every  Moone,  observing  the  dis-
position of  the  weather,  referring  alway  to  God  to  doe
more  or  lesse  after  his  owne  pleasure.  They  write  also
upon  certaine  squares  (they  call  them  Tacuini)  the  things
which  are  to  come  that  yeere,  which  they  sell  to  those
that  will  buy  them,  and  such  as  speake  most  truth  are
most  honored.  If  any  intend  any  great  worke,  or  to
goe  a  farre  journey,  and  will  know  the  event  before-
hand, he  makes  recourse  to  these  Astrologers,  to  see  it
with  their  eyes  in  the  Heavens ;  which  they  doe,  com-
paring the  present  Constellation  with  that  of  his  Birth
(which  they  demand  of  him)  so  foretelling  him  the  good
or  evill.

The  Tartars  reckon  the  computation  of  their  yeeres  Tartarian
by  twelves,  the  first  signified  by  a  Lion,  the  second  by  '
an  Oxe,  the  third  by  a  Dragon,  the  fourth  by  a  Dogge,
and  so  thorow  the  whole  twelve :  so  that  if  a  man  be
demanded  when  he  was  borne  ;  he  will  answer,  such  a
point  of  such  an  houre,  of  such  a  day  in  the  yeere  Lion
(this  their  fathers  exactly  set  downe  in  a  booke)  and
when  the  twelve  is  complete,  they  goe  over  the  same
againe.

Of  their  Religion  we  have  said  that  they  are  Idolaters,  Their
and  for  their  Gods  have  a  Table  set  aloft  in  the  wall  ReR&°*'
of  their  Chamber,  on  which  is  written,  a  Name  repre-
senting the  High  God  of  Heaven ;  and  there  every
day,  with  a  Censer  of  incense,  they  adore  it  in  this
manner.  They  lift  up  their  hands  aloft,  and  strike  their
teeth  thrice,  praying  it  to  give  them  a  good  understand-
ing and  health  ;  and  desire  thereof  nothing  else.  Besides,
on  the  ground  they  have  another  statue,  called  Natigai,
The  God  of  earthly  things,  with  his  Wife  and  Children

253

times.

A.D.

1320.

*Shattendo  i
dentl.

Opinions  of
the  souk.

Their
Customes.

Court-
reverence.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

(as  before  is  said),  whom  likewise  they  worship  with
incense,  striking  *or  gnashing  the  teeth,  and  lifting  up
the  hands ;  and  desire  thereof  temperature  of  the  aire,
fruits  of  the  earth,  children,  and  the  like.  They  hold
the  Soule  to  be  immortal,  and  that  when  a  man  dies,
it  enters  into  another  bodie  better  or  worse,  according
to  the  merits  in  the  former  life,  as  of  a  poore  man  to
become  a  Gentleman,  and  after  of  a  Prince  or  Lord,
and  so  higher  till  it  be  assumpted  in  God :  or  if  it  hath
ill  deserved  to  be  a  poorer  man,  after  a  Dogge,  alway
descending  to  the  lowest  ranke  of  basenesse.  They  have
a  comely  speech,  salute  cheerfully  and  honestly,  have  a
gracefull  carriage,  and  feed  cleanly.  They  beare  great
reverence  to  their  Parents,  and  if  any  be  undutifull,
or  helplesse  to  their  necessitie,  there  is  a  publike  Office
designed  to  this  particular,  to  punish  ungratefull  or  dis-
obedient children.  Prisoners  are  released  at  three  yeeres
end,  and  marked  in  the  cheeke,  to  be  knowne  Male-
factors.

The  Barons  and  People  which  goe  to  the  Grand  Can,
observe  these  Rites.  First,  within  halfe  a  mile  of  the
place  where  the  Can  is,  all  is  husht  and  quiet  without
noyse  or  cryes,  or  any  loud  speech :  and  every  Baron
carries  continually  a  little  faire  vessell  to  spit  in,  after
which  hee  covers  it,  none  daring  to  spit  on  the  Hall.
They  have  Furre  buskins  of  white  leather,  which  they
put  on  when  they  enter  the  Hall,  putting  off  the  former
and  giving  them  to  the  servants,  lest  they  should  foule
the  faire  artificiall  Carpets.

r  I  \En  miles off  Cambalu,  is a certayne  great River,

[III.  i.  89.]

named  Pulisangan,  emptying  it  selfe  into  the  Ocean,

by  which many ships with much merchandise  ascend.

An  admirable  And in that place,  there  is  a  very  faire  Bridge,  all  of

Bridge.  Serpentine stone curiously wrought, contayning three

Ramusio  hath , r, ,  ...  1  « • 1 • 1 j"1i 1

given  a  pic- hundred  paces  in  length,  and  eight in  breadth,  that  ten

ture,  London men  may  ride  abrest. On  each  side  it  is  fairely  mounted

more.  with  a  wall  of  marble,  and Pillars  set on a  rew : and

254

MARCO POLO  ad.

1320.
in  the  height  of  the  ascent  is  a  great  and  high  Pillar,
at  the  foote  whereof  is  a  great  Lion,  and  on  the  top
another.  And  so  quite  thorow  the  Bridge,  one  pace
and  halfe  distant  are  Pillars  with  Lions  on  the  top,
and  a  faire  well-wrought  marble  worke  betwixt,  to
keepe  men  from  falling.

Having  passed  over  the  River  and  Bridge,  proceeding
thirtie miles  westward  (in  which  Palaces  are  continually
seene with Vineyards and  fertile Fields) you come  to
the Citie Gouza, both faire and great, having many  The  Cltie
Monasteries  of  Idols. Cloth of gold and silkes are  Gouza-
made there, and the purest and finest Cambricks or
Launes; and many common Innes  for Strangers and
Travailers are found in that  Citie : The Citizens are
Artificers and Merchants. A mile without this Citie
the  way  parteth, one leading West, the other South-  Parting  of  the
east: that to  the West leadeth  through the Province  way'
of Cathay, but the other towards the Countrey of
Maugi. From  the  Citie  of  Gouza  to  the  Kingdome  of
Tainfu,  you  ride  ten  dayes  thorow  Cataio,  alway  finding
many  faire  Cities  and  Castles,  well  traded  with  Vineyards
and  tilled  Fields,  from  whence  Wine  is  carried  to  Cataio,
where  it  wants. There  are  many  Mulberrie  trees  for  Silke-
wormes  : the  People  civill  and  Cities  very  frequent.

Tainfu  is  the  name  of  the  Kingdome,  and  of  the  Taimu.
[chiefe  Citie  which  is  great  and  faire,  hath  much  trading
with  store  of  munition,  fit  for  the  Cans  Armies.  The  Armes.
Wine  about  this  Citie  serveth  the  whole  Province.
Seven  dayes  further  westward  is  a  goodly  Countrey,
;beautified  with  many  Castles  and  Cities,  in  which  also
great  trade  of  merchandise  is  used.  After  which,  you
come  to  a  Citie  very  great,  named  Pianfu,  in  which
there  is  great  abundance  of  Silke  and  Trading.

Westward  from  Pianfu  standeth  a  very  goodly  Castle,
named  Thaigin,  anciently  built  by  a  King  called  Dor.
In  it  is  a  spacious  Palace,  wherein  is  a  faire  Hall,  in
which  are  painted  all  the  famous  Kings  which  have
reigned there ; a faire  spectacle. Of this King Dor

255

A.D.

1320.

Dor  and  his

Damsel-court.
The  King  of
Achen,  and  the
Mogol,  doe
likewise  in
part.

Car  amor  an.

Cariansu.

Quenzanfu.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

they  say  that  he  was  potent,  and  was  attended  onely
by  young  Damsels,  whereof  his  Court  had  great  store.
They  also  when  hee  listed  to  take  his  pleasure,  carried
him  in  a  small  light  Chariot  thorow  the  Castle,  which
is  so  fortified  by  Art  and  Nature,  that  the  Governour
thereof  feared  none,  no  not  Umcan  his  Lord,  against
whom  hee  rebelled.  But  seven  men  professing  fidelitie
and  service  to  Dor,  tooke  him  at  advantage  in  hunting,
and  brought  him  captive  to  Presbyter  John  or  Umcan,
who  put  him  in  vile  clothes,  and  appointed  him  to
keepe  his  Cattell,  and  set  on  him  a  strong  guard  till
two  yeeres  were  ended :  after  which,  hee  commanded
him  to  bee  brought  before  him,  and  attyred  him  in
Princely  apparell,  and  giving  him  his  pardon  after
sharpe  admonition,  sent  him  so  well  attended  to  the
repossession  of  his  Kingdome.

About  twentie  miles  beyond  the  Castle  Thaigin,  is
the  River  Caramoran,  which  by  reason  of  the  exceeding
bredth  and  depth  thereof,  hath  no  Bridge :  and  floweth
to  the  Ocean.  On  the  shoare  thereof  are  many  Cities
and  Castles  built;  wherein  much  trading  is  exercised.
This  Countrey  aboundeth  with  Ginger,  Silke,  and  Fowle,
especially  Feasants,  that  three  of  them  are  bought  for
a  groat  of  Venice.  There  grow  Reeds  infinite  store,  so
great  that  some  are  a  foot,  some  are  a  foot  and  halfe
in  compasse,  profitable  to  many  uses.  Passing  this
River,  after  two  dayes  journey  is  the  famous  Citie
called  Carianfu,  where  many  clothes  of  Gold  and  Silke
are  made :  heere  growes  Ginger,  Galingale,  Spike,  and
many  Spices.  The  people  are  Idolaters.  Proceeding
seven  dayes  journey  Westward,  many  Cities,  and  Townes,
goodly  Fields  and  Gardens  are  found ;  and  every  where
Mulberies  for  Silke-wormes.  And  they  are  Idolaters:
but  there  are  also  Christians,  Turkes,  Nestorians,  and
some  Saracens.  There  is  much  both  of  wilde  Beasts
and  Fowle.  If  you  proceed  seven  dayes  journey  further,
you  shall  come  to  a  certaine  great  Citie,  named  Quen-
zanfu,  which  is the  chiefe Citie of  the Kingdome, in

256

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.
which  have  raigned  many  famous  Kings :  and  at  this
day,  the  sonne  of  great  Can,  called  Mangalu,  hath  the
command  thereof.  That  Countrey  yeeldeth  great  plentie
of  Silke,  Cloth  of  Gold,  and  all  other  things  necessarie
for  furnishing  of  an  Armie,  and  for  preservation  of  the
life  of  Man.  The  Inhabitants  worship  Idols,  and  there
are  some  Christians,  and  Turkes,  and  Saracens.  Five
miles  without  the  Citie  standeth  the  Palace  of  Mangalu,  KinS
seated  in  a  Playne,  where  are  many  Springs,  Riverets,  anSau-
and  places  of  Game.  There  is  a  high  wall  encompassing
five  miles,  where  are  all  wilde  Beasts  and  Fowles,  in
the  midst  is  an  excellent  Palace,  having  many  Halls
and  Chambers  great  and  faire,  all  painted  with  Gold
and  Azure,  and  infinite  Marbles  adorning.  The  King
with  his  Courtiers  applieth  himselfe  to  hunting  of  wilde
Beasts,  and  taking  of  Fowle,  and  followeth  his  fathers
steps  in  Justice  and  Equitie,  much  beloved  of  his  people.

Going  three  dayes  Journey  Westward  from  the  said
I Palace,  through  a  certaine  goodly  Plaine,  where  many
Cities  and  Castles  are  (and  abundance  of  Silke,  Mer-
chandise, and  Arts)  is  a  mountainous  Countrie,  where,
in  the  Mountaines  and  Valleyes  are  frequent  Habita-
tions, and  store  of  Lodgings,  of  the  Province  of  Cunchin.  Cunchin.
The  Inhabitants  are  Idolaters,  and  Husbandmen.  Also,
in  that  Countrie  they  hunt  Lions,  Beares,  Stags,  Roe-  [III.  i.  90.]
buckes,  Deere,  Wolves.  That  Plaine  is  two  dayes
journey,  and  the  Countrey  is  twentie  dayes  Westward
11  inhabited,  having  Mountaines,  and  Valleyes,  and
nany  Woods.

After that, twentie dayes towards the West, is a
province, named Achbaluch Mangi, that  is,  The  white  Achbaluch
itie  of  the borders of  Mangi, which is wel peopled.  Mangi.
his  Province  for two  daies  journy  hath  a  Plaine,  with
finite habitations. After which follow Mountaines,
alleyes,  and  Woods,  all  inhabited  twentie  dayes  journey
estward. It hath store  of wild beasts,  and  of  those
reatures  which  yeeld  Muske. In this  Province  Ginger
oweth in  great  plentie,  as  also  Corne  and  Rice.
xi  257  R

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1320.

After twentie dayes  journey thorow those Hills,  is
Mangi.  a Playne,  and a Province in the Confines  of  Mangi,

Sindinfu.  named  Sindinfu.  The  chiefe  Citie  hath  the  same  name,
great  and  exceeding  rich,  being  twentie  miles  circuit
about.  It  hath  had  many  rich  and  mightie  Kings,  but
the  old  King  dying,  left  three  sonnes  Successors  of
the  Kingdome,  which  divided  the  Citie  into  three
parts,  compassing  every  part  with  their  proper  walls,
all  which  notwithstanding  were  contayned  within  the
former  wall.  But  great  Can  subjected  that  Citie  and
Kingdome  to  his  Dominion.  Thorow  this  Citie  runne
many  Rivers,  in  many  places,  and  round  about,  some
halfe  a  mile  over,  some  two  hundred  paces,  very
deepe,  and  on  them  are  many  Bridges  of  stone,  very
faire,  eight  paces  broad,  set  on  both  sides  with  marble
Pillars,  which  beare  up  a  timber  Frame  that  covers
the  Bridge ;  each  Bridge  having  streets  and  shops  all
alongst.  When  these  Rivers  are  past  the  Citie,  they
Quian.  becom  one  great  river,  called  Quian,  which  runneth  one

hundred  dayes  journey  hence  to  the  Ocean. Neere  these
Rivers are many Cities and Castles, and ships for
Merchandise. Proceeding five dayes journey further,
through a certaine Playne, many Cities, Castles, and
Villages are found, in  which  fine  Lawnes  are in  great
aboundance. Many  wilde  Beasts  also  are  there.
Thegreatnesse After the Playne whereof wee now speake, is the
Prov' f ^rovmce of  Tebeth, which great Can vanquished, and
Tebeth.  wasted: for  in  it  are  many  Cities  destroyed,  and  Castles

overthrowne  by  the  space  of  twentie  dayes  journey.  And
because  it  is  become  a  Wildernesse,  wanting  Inhabitants,
wilde  Beasts,  and  Lions  are  there  encreased  abundantly:
and  it  is  needfull  that  Travellers  carrie  victuals  with
them.  Very  great  Canes  grow  in  this  Countrey  ten
paces  in  length,  and  three  palmes  in  thicknesse,  and  as  h
The  subtill  much  from  knot  to  knot.  When  Travellers  therefore  $
TvU  w^  rest  ky  nignt  secure  from Beasts,  they  take great ?

bundles  of  the  greener Reeds, and putting  fire  under, \
kindle them. Which make such a cracking, and so {

258

MARCO POLO  A.D.

I320-
great a noyse, that it may bee heard two miles off.

Which  terrible  sound  the  wilde  Beasts  hearing,  flee
away.  Moreover,  Horses,  and  other  Beasts  which  Mer-
chants use  for  their  journey,  hearing  this  noyse  and
cracking,  are  very  much  afraid,  and  many  betaking
themselves  to  flight,  have  escaped  from  their  Masters:
but  the  wiser  Travellers  binding  their  feet  together  with
Fetters,  detayne  them  with  violence.

Twentie dayes Journey ended, having passed over
the Province of Tebeth, wee meet with Cities, and
very many Villages, in which, through the  blindnesse
of  Idolatne, a wicked custome  is used : for, no man  Justine  in  his
there  marrieth a wife that is a Virgin. Whereupon l8- booke
when Travellers and Strangers comming from other  ?f *?? the
parts passe through this Countrey, and pitch their  Typrilns
pavilions,  the  Women  of  that  place  having  marriageable  JERanus  V.
daughters, bring  them  unto  Strangers,  desiring  them  to  H- the  4-
take  them, and enjoy their  companie  as  long as they  ^
remayne there. Thus  the pretier  are  chosen, and the ***  '"
rest returne home sorrowful!. And when they will
depart, they  are  not suffered to carrie any  away  with
them,  but  faithfully  restore  them  to  their  Parents. The
Mayden also requireth some toy  or  small  Present of
him  who  hath  defloured  her,  which  shee may  shew as
an argument  and proofe  of  her  deflouring. And  shee
that  hath beene  loved,  and  abused of  most  men, and
shall have  many  such  favours  and  toyes  to  shew  to  her
Wooers, is  accounted  more  noble,  and  may  more  easily
and honourably  be married. And  when shee  will  goe  Whose  ghrie
honourably  attired,  she  hangeth all her  Lovers  favours  is  in  their
about her  necke, and  the more  acceptable  shee  was  to  sham'
many,  of  so much the  more honour  is shee adjudged
worthie. But  when  they  are  once  married  to  husbands,
they  are now no more suffered to be coupled with
strange  men. And  the  men of  this  Countrie  are  very
wary, that  they  offend  not  one  another  in this  matter.
They are Idolaters, and cruell men, thinking it no
5inne  if  they  rob,  and exercise theft. They live by

A.D.
1320.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Eight  King
domes  of
Tebeth.

hunting,  and  the  fruits  of  the  earth.  Many  beasts  also
are  found  with  them,  yeelding  Muske  called  by  them,
Gudderi.  They  have  a  proper  Language,  and  have  no
Cora//  money,  money,  not  the  Paper  money  of  Can,  but  spend  Corals
for  money,  and  are  clothed  with  the  skins  of  beasts,
or  course  Hempe.  This  Countrey  appertayneth  to  the
Province  of  Tebeth :  for  Tebeth  is  a  very  large  Province,
and  hath  beene  sometime  divided  into  eight  Kingdomes,
having  many  Cities,  and  Townes,  with  many  Moun-
taynes,  Lakes,  and  Rivers,  where  Gold  is  found.  The
women  weare  Corall  about  their  neckes,  and  hang  it
about  the  neckes  of  their  Idols,  as  a  precious  thing.
In  this  Countrey  there  are  very  great  Dogs,  as  big  as
Asses,  which  take  wilde  Beasts,  specially  wilde  Oxen,
called  Beyamini.  They  are  exceeding  Necromancers,
causing  tempests,  lightnings,  thunderbolts,  and  many
other  wonders.  There  are  many  sorts  of  Spices  never
brought  into  these  parts.  This  Thebeth  is  (as  all  the
former  Provinces)  subject  to  the  Can.

On  the  West  of  the  Province  of  Tebeth,  bordereth
the  Province  of  Caindu,  sometimes  governed  by  her
owne  Kings,  now  by  the  Governours  of  the  Can.  By  the
West  you  must  not  understand  that  the  Countries  are
in  the  West,  but  that  wee  departing  from  those  parts
which  are  betwixt  the  East  and  North-east  come  hither
Westward  ;  and  therefore  reckon  them  Westward.  The
people  are  Idolaters,  have  many  Cities,  the  chiefs  called  by
the  name  of  the  Province,  Caindu,  built  in  the  entry  of
the  Province.  There  is  a  great  salt  Lake,  in  which  is
store  of  Pearles,  white,  not  round,  so  abundant,  that  the
price  of  them  would  become  little  worth,  if  they  were
suffered  to  be  carried  away  at  mens  pleasures.  Where-
upon, it  is  provided  upon  payne  of  death,  that  none
should  presume  to  fish  for  Pearle  in  this  Lake,  without
the  licence  of  great  Can.  There  is  also  a  Mountaine  in
which  is  found  a  Minerall  of  Turkesse  stones,  confined  to
the  like  licence.  Many  Gadderi  are  also  in  this  Province,
which  yeeld  Muske. That  Lake  also  which  ingendreth

260

Caindu.

[in. ;.  9i.]

Gadderi.

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.
Pearle  in  such  plentie,  aboundeth  with  Fishes  : and  the
whole  Countrey  is  full  of  wilde  Beasts,  that  is  to  say,  of
Lions, Beares, Stags,  Deere, Ounces, Roe-buckes  ; and
divers  kinds  of  Birds. Cloves  are  found  there  in  great  Cloves.
plentie,  which  are  gathered  from  small  Trees,  which  have
boughs  and  leaves  like  the  Bay-tree,  but  somewhat  longer
and  straighter,  white  flowers  and  little,  as  are  the  Cloves,
and when they are ripe they are blacke and duskie.
Ginger,  Cinamon,  and  divers  other  Spices  grow  there  in  Ginger,
great  plentie,  which  are  not  brought  unto  our  Countries.  Cinamon.
Wine  groweth  not  in  it,  but  in  stead  thereof  they  make
excellent  Drinke  of  Corne,  Rice,  and  divers  other  Spices.
The  Inhabitants  of  this  Countrey  worship  Idols,  by  which  The  Inhabi-
they  are  so  besotted  that  they  thinke  they  deserve  their  ***** are
favour,  if  they  prostitute  their  wives,  sisters,  and  daughters  ^awdes
to bee  abused by  Travellers. For,  when  any  Stranger
commeth  amongst  them,  every  housholder  seeketh  to  give
him  entertainment,  and  goe  their  way,  leaving  the  femals
and  house  to  the Strangers  will,  and  returne  not untill
they  depart. And  the  women  presently  hang up  some
signe  till  he  be  gone,  that  when  the  Master  of  the  familie
returneth,  he  may  know  he  is  there  still,  and  goe  away
againe,  staying without  till  he be  departed :  which hee
doth  for  the  glorie  of  his  Idols,  hoping  they  will  be  more
gracious unto him. Certaine twigs of  Gold are their
money,  using  weights,  and  according  to  the  weight  of  the
twig  is  the  value  of  the  money. And  this  money  is  the
greater  money  without  stampe. They  have  also  a  lesser,
which  they  make  after  this  manner. They  boyle  Salt  in  a  Money  of  Salt.
Caldron  an  houres  space,  of  which  being  congealed,  they
make little  lumps like  two-pennie loaves, which being
made  solid,  is  signed  with  the  Princes  Stampe,  and  make
great  profit  thereof  in  savage  places,  remote  from  Cities
which  have  store  of  Muske  and  Gold,  and  want  Chapmen.
These  bartar  their  Gold  for  Salt  to  use in  their  meats.
Leaving  this  Province,  they  proceed  fifteene  dayes  journey
further,  and  in  the  meane  space  meet with  Castles,  and
many  Villages,  whose  Inhabitants  have  the  same  customes,

261

A.D.
1320.

The  River
Brius  yeelding
Gold.

The  seven
Kingdomes  of
Catalan.

King
Sentemur.

The  Citie
Jaci.

Money  of
Stones.

Raw  flesh.

Carazan.

PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

that  the  Province  of  Caindu  hath,  and  at  length  they  come
unto  a  River,  called  Brius,  where  the  Province  of  Caindu
is  bounded.  In  this  River  Gold  is  found  in  great  plentie,
which  they  call,  Di  Paiola  (washed  in  vessels  to  sever
it  from  the  sands  and  earth.)  On  the  bankes  thereof
Cinamon  groweth  in  great  abundance.  This  River
runneth  to  the  Ocean.

Having  passed  over  the  River  Brius,  they  come  west-
ward to  the  Province  Caraian,  which  contayneth  seven
Kingdomes.  It  is  subject  to  the  Great  Can,  whose  sonne,
named  Sentemur,  is  made  King  of  that  Kingdome,  who  is
rich,  wise  and  just.  The  Inhabitants  thereof  are  Idolaters.
You  ride  five  dayes  and  finde  it  all  well  peopled.  They
live  of  their  Beasts  and  Fruits.  The  Countrey  breedeth
excellent  Horses  :  and  it  hath  a  peculiar  and  difficult
language.  At  the  end  of  those  five  dayes  is  the  chiefe
Citie,  called  Jaci,  and  it  is  great  and  famous,  hath  in  it
many  Merchants  and  Artificers,  and  many  sorts  of  People,
Idolaters,  Christians,  Nestorians,  and  Saracens ;  but  the
most  Idolaters.  It  hath  Corne,  and  much  Rice,  although
they  eate  no  bread  of  Corne,  because  it  is  not  wholsome,
but  they  make  bread  of  Rice.  They  make  drinke  also  of
it,  and  divers  Spices  very  pleasant.  They  use  white
Porcelanes  in  stead  of  money,  and  for  ornaments  which
are  found  at  the  Sea.  Much  Salt  is  made  in  this  Citie  of
the  water  of  salt  Wells,  whereof  the  King  hath  great
profit.  The  men  of  this  Countrey  care  not  if  any  man
come  to  their  Wives,  so  they  give  their  consent.  There
is  also  a  Lake  there  very  full  of  Fish,  contayning  an
hundreth  miles  in  compasse.  Those  men  eate  raw  flesh
of  Hennes,  Beefe,  Mutton  and  Buffals,  but  prepared  after
this  manner.  They  first  breake  it  into  small  pieces,  and
after  season  it  with  excellent  Spices  ;  but  the  poorer  sort
shred  it  and  lay  it  in  Garlicke  sawce,  and  eate  it  as  wee
doe  boyled  meate.

Departing  from  the  Citie  of  Jaci,  having  travailed  ten
dayes  journey  westward,  yee  come  to  the  Province  named,
as  is  the  chiefe  Citie, Carazan,  which  Cogatin,  sonne  of

262

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.
Cublai,  governeth. The Rivers  there  yeeld  very  much  Rivers  yee Id-
gold,  di  paiola,  and  also  that  which  is  more  solid,  and  the  mSS°td  dt t
*?  ,  «iiri  •  11  •  r  pMOla.  that  is

Mountaines  gold  or  the  veine,  and  they  give  one  stone  or  wasfoj  -tn
gold  for  six  of  silver. They  spend  Porcelanes  for  money,  vessels  from
brought  thither  from  India. The  Inhabitants  are  Idolaters :  the  sand  \3
very great Serpents  are  bred in  this  Countrey,  whereof  e*r**'
some  contayne  ten  paces  in  length,  and  in  thicknesse  ten  j)rams
spannes. They  have  two  little  feet  before  nigh  the  head,
with  three  talons  or  clawes  like  Lions,  and  the  eyes  bigger
then a Groat loafe, very shining. They have their
mouthes  and  jawes  so  wide,  that  they  are  able  to  swallow
a  man ;  great  and  sharpe  teeth :  nor  is  there  any  man,  or
other  living  Creature,  which  may  behold  those  Serpents
without  terror  :  there  are  found  lesse,  of  eight,  sixe,  or  [III.  i.  92.]
five  paces  long,  which  are  taken  after  this  manner. In  the  The  taking  of
day  time  they  use to  lie  hid,  by  reason  of  the  heat,  in  them-
holes,  out  of  the  which  they  goe  by  night  to  seeke  their
prey,  and  devoure  what  soever  they  get,  Lions,  Wolves,  or
others :  and  then  goe  to  seeke  water,  leaving  such  a  tract
with  their  weight  in  the  sands,  as  if  some  piece  of  timber
had beene drawne there. Whereupon the Hunters
fasten under the sands sharpe Iron prickes in their
usuall tracts, whereon they are wounded and slayne.
The  Crowes  presently  ring  his  knell,  and  by  their  craing
cries  invite  the  Hunters,  which  come  and  slay  him,  taking
forth  his gall,  profitable  for  divers  Medecines  (amongst
other  things,  for  the  biting  of  mad  Dogs,  a  penie  weight
given  in  Wine ;  and  for  women  in  travell,  for  carbuncles
and pushes) and they sell the flesh deare as being
exceeding  delicate. There  are  bred  great  Horses  in  this
Province, which  by Merchants are carried into India.
They  use  to  take  one  bone  out  of  the  tayle,  lest  he  should
bend his  tayle  hither  and  thither,  and  esteeme  it  more
comely  that  it  hang  downe  right. They  use  long  Stirrups
as  the  Frenchmen  ;  which  the  Tartars  and  other  Nations
for their  shooting  use  short, because  when  they  shoot,
they rise up. They use Targets  and Armour in  the
Warres,  made  of  the  hides  of  BufFals :  they  have  Lances

263

A.D.
1320.

*Poyson  and
Dogs  dung.

A  wicked
custome.

Cardandan.
Vociam.

The  rarenesse
of  Silver.
Golden  Cover-
ings for  the
teeth.

*Strabo  in  his
third  booke
mentioneth  the
same  to  be
done  with  the
Spaniards  in
some  places.
Apollonius
reporteth  the
like  custome,
with  the
Tibareni.
Lerius  of  the
Brazilians.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  Crosse-bowes,  and  poyson  all  their  Arrowes.  Some
of  them  which  are  ill  minded,  are  said  to  carrie  #  poyson
about  them  continually,  that  if  they  be  taken,  they  may
suddenly  swallow  it  and  death  together,  to  prevent
torture.  For  which  cause  the  great  Lords  have  Dogs
dung  ready,  which  they  force  them  to  swallow,  and  that
forceth  them  to  vomit  the  poyson.  Before  the  great  Can
subjected  them,  they  used,  that  when  any  Stranger  which
seemed  of  good  presence  and  parts  lodged  with  them,  they
slue  him  by  night,  supposing  that  those  good  parts  of  that
man  might  abide  afterwards  in  that  house :  and  this  was
the  death  of  many.

Going  from  the  Province  Carazan,  after  five  dayes
journey  Westward,  is  the  Province  Cardandan,  which  also
is  subject  to  great  Can.  The  chiefe  Citie  thereof  is  called
Vociam.  The  Inhabitants  thereof  use  Porcelaine  and
weighed  pieces  of  Gold  in  stead  of  money  :  for  in  that
Countrey,  and  many  other  lying  round  about,  Silver  mines
are  not  found,  and  they  give  one  ounce  of  Gold  for  five
ounces  of  Silver,  and  great  gayne  is  made  by  the  change.
The  men  and  women  of  that  Countrey  cover  their  teeth
with  thinne  plates  of  Gold,  which  they  so  fit  unto  them,
that  the  teeth  themselves  seeme  (as  it  were)  to  be  set  in
the  plates.  The  men  about  their  armes  and  legs  make
lists,  pricking  the  places  with  Needles,  and  putting  thereon
a  blacke  indelible  tincture.  And  these  lists  or  markes  are
esteemed  with  them  a  great  galantrie.  They  give  their
minds  to  nothing  but  riding,  hunting,  hawking,  and
exercises  of  Armes,  leaving  the  houshold  cares  to  the
women,  who  are  helped  therein  by  slaves  which  they  buy
or  take  in  Warre.  When  a  woman  is  brought  to  bed,
shee  forsakes  the  bed,  washeth  the  child  and  dresseth  it,
and  then  the  husband  *  lieth  downe  and  keepes  the  child
with  him  fortie  dayes,  not  suffering  it  to  depart  :  is
visited  meane  while  of  friends  and  neighbours,  to  cheare
and  comfort  him.  The  woman  lookes  to  the  house,
carrie  the  husband  his  broths  to  his  bed,  and  gives  sucke
to  the  child  by  him. Their  Wine  is  made  of  Rice  and

264

MARCO POLO

A.D.
1320.

Spice,  their  meat  Rice,  and  raw  flesh  dressed,  as  is  before

mentioned. In this  Province  there  are  no  other Idols,

save that every familie  adoreth  the  oldest  man in the

house,  of  whom  they  say  come  themselves  and  all  they

have. They dwell for the most part, in wilde and

mountainous  places. But Forrainers  come  not  to  those

Mountaines,  because  the  ayre  would  kill  them,  being  in

Summer  very  corrupt. They  have no  letters,  but  make

their Contracts  and  Obligations by  tallies  of  wood,  the  Tallies  of

halfe  whereof  the  one  keepeth,  and  the  other,  the  other  :  contracis-

which  being  afterward  payd,  the  tallie  is  rendred. There

are  no  Physicians  in  this  Province,  nor  in  Caindu,  Vociam

and Caraian : but when any is sicke, they call the

Magicians,  or  Idoll  Priests  together,  and  the  sicke  partie  The  deceitfull

declareth his disease unto them: then the Magicians  m^c™eofthe

dance,  and  sound  certaine  instruments,  and  bellow  forth *&a

songs  in  honour  of  their  Gods,  while  at  length  the  Devill

^ntreth into  one of  them  skipping and  playing  in the

dance. Then  leaving  the  dance,  they  consult  with  him

:hat  is  possessed,  for  what  cause  that  disease  hapned  unto

lim, and what  is to  be  done for his  recoverie. The

Devill  answereth by  him, because  he hath  done  this  or

.hat,  or  because  he  hath  offended  this  or  that  God  ;  there-

'ore,  he  fell  into  this  disease. Then  the  Magicians  intreat

;hat God  to pardon him that offence, promising, that

|f  the sicke partie recover, he shall offer a Sacrifice

)f  his  owne  bloud. But  if  the  Devill  thinke  the  weake

>artie to be sicke  of  such a  disease  that  he  cannot  be

reed  from  the  same,  he  useth  to  answere  :  This  man  hath

0  grievously  offended  that  God,  that  he  cannot  by  any
acrifices  bee  appeased.  But  if  he  thinke  he  shall  recover,
ie  commandeth  to  offer  so  many  Rammes  having  blacke
eads,  and  to  prepare  so  many  Magicians  with  their  wives,
\y  them  to  offer  Sacrifices,  and  that  God  may  then  bee
ippeased  towards  him.  Which  being  heard,  his  kinsmen
iiuickly  cause  those  things  to  be  done  which  the  Devill
ommanded  :  they  kill  Rammes,  and  sprinckle  their  bloud

1  the ayre, and the Magicians assembled with their

265

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1320.

Witches,  light  great  Candles,  and  perfume  the  whole  house
with  incense,  making  fume  of  Lignum  Aloes,  and  sprinckle
the  broth  of  the  flesh  in  the  ayre,  together  with  the
potion  made  of  Spices  :  all  which  being  duely  performed,
they  skip  about  againe  in  a  dance  in  honour  of  that  Idoll,
which  is  supposed  to  have  beene  favourable  to  the  sicke,
singing,  and  making  an  horrible  noyse  with  their  voyces.
[III.  i.  93.]  These  things  being  done,  they  aske  the  possessed  againe,
whether  by  these  things  the  Idol  be  appeased.  If  he
answer,  No,  they  presently  prepare  themselves  to  fulfill
another  command  of  his.  But  if  he  answer,  that  he  is
satisfied,  they  sit  downe  at  the  Table,  and  eate  the  flesh
offered  to  the  Idoll  with  great  joy,  and  drinke  the  con-
fections. And  dinner  being  ended,  and  the  Magicians
payed,  every  one  returneth  to  his  owne  home.  And
when  the  sicke  hath  thus  escaped  the  disease,  through
the  providence  of  God,  and  hath  beene  restored  to  health,
they  attribute  it  to  the  Idoll  whom  they  sacrificed.  But
if  he  die,  then  they  say,  the  Idoll  was  defrauded,  and  that
some  of  the  Sacrificers  tasted  thereof  first.  This  is  not
done  to  all  but  to  the  Richer,  the  Devill  deluding  their
blindnesse.

§.  VII.

Of  the  Province  of  Mien  and  Bengala,  how  they
were  conquered  to  the  Can :  Of  Cangigu,
Amu,  Tholoman,  Cintigui,  and  some  other
parts  of  Cataio.  And  of  the  Conquest  of
Mangi.

Nno  Dom.  1272.  the  Great  Can  sent  an  Armie
into  the  Kingdome  of  Vociam,  and  Carazan  to
guard  it,  to  the  number  of  twelve  thousand  expert

I

:»

warriors,  under  the  conduct  of  Nestardin  a  wise  Captaine
As  soone  as  the  King  of  Mien,  and  the  King  of  Bengala
heard of  their  comming, assembling  their forces, they
joyned  Horse  and  Foot  together,  about  threescore  thou-  j
sand,  and  about a thousand  Elephants bearing  Castles,

266

'[

-

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.

and  in  every  Castle  twelve  or  sixteene*  armed  men  were  *This  by

placed. With this  Armie the King  of  Mien speedily  relaiion>'  for

marched  towards  the  Citie  Vociam,  where  the  Armie  of  ^y"/°

the Tartars rested. Nestardin comming forth with a  three  or  foure.

manly courage to fight against the Enemie, encamped  Hisstratagem.

against  a  certaine  great  Wood,  knowing  that  the  Elephants

with  those  Towres  were  not  able  to  enter  into  the  Wood.

Then  the  King  of  Mien  marcheth  forth  to  meete  them.

But  the  Tartarian  Horses  perceiving  the  Elephants  to  be

present,  which  were  placed  in  the  first  front  of  the  battaile,

were  terrified  with  so  great  feare,  that  they  could  not  by

any  violence  or  policy  be  provoked  against  the  Elephants.

The  Tartars  therefore  were  compelled  to  alight  from  their

Horses,  and  tying  them to  the  Trees  of  the  Wood,  they

come  to  fight  on  foot  against  the  Elephants. In  the  front  Fight  13 flight

of  the  battaile,  all  the  Tartars  purposely  shot  a  multitude  °f  Elephants.

of  Arrowes  against  the  Elephants,  which  not  able  to  indure

the  strokes  of  the  Arrowes,  speedily  betooke  themselves

to  flight,  and  with  swift  course went  all  unto  the  next

Wood,  and  brake  their  Castles,  and  over-threw  the  armed

men  sitting  in  them,  which  the  Tartars  seeing,  runne  unto

their  Horses,  and  getting up  upon  them,  furiously  fall

upon the  Kings Armie with  great  violence:  and many

of  either  Armie  fell,  at length  the  King  of  Mien  being

put  to  flight,  left  the  victorie  to  the  Tartars,  who  hasten

to  the  Wood,  and  taking  many  Captives,  used  their  helpe

to  take  two  hundred  of  these  Elephants. And  ever  since

Great  Can  hath  used  Elephants  in  his  Armies  which  before

hee  had  not  accustomed. Hereupon  also  he  vanquished

the  Countries of  the King of  Mien  and  Bengala, and

subjected  them  to  his  Empire.

Departing  from  the  Province  of  Cardandan,  is  a  great
descent,  which  continueth  two  dayes  and  a  halfe,  nor  is
there  any  habitation there, but a  very  large  Playne,  in  Market  in  a
the which, three dayes  in the  weeke  many  men meete  dis-habited
together for  Trading. Many  descend from the great  plaJne'
Mountaines  of  that  Countrey,  bringing  gold  with  them  ct^aVd
to  change  for  silver, to wit,  giving  one  ounce  of  gold  Silver*!**

267

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1320.

for  five  ounces  of  silver :  whereupon,  many  Merchants
from  forraine  Nations  come  thither,  who  bringing  silver
carrie  away  gold,  and  bring  thither  merchandises  to  sell
to  those  people.  For  to  those  high  Mountaines,  in  which,
they  who  gather  gold  in  that  Countrey,  dwell,  no  stranger
can  come,  seeing  the  way  is  unpassable  and  intricate.
When  you  are  past  that  Playne,  going  toward  the  South,
Mien  bordereth  upon  India,  and  the  way  lyeth  fifteene
dayes  journey  in  places  not  inhabited  and  wooddy,  in  which

Unicomes  or innumerable  Elephants,  Unicornes,  and  other  wild  beasts

Rhinocerotes. wanc[er#

Mien.  After that  fifteene  dayes  is  found  Mien,  a  great  and

noble  Citie,  the  head  of  the  Kingdome,  and  subject  to
Great  Can.  The  Inhabitants  thereof  have  a  peculiar
language,  and  are  Idolaters.  In  this  Citie  there  was  a
King,  who  being  readie  to  die,  commanded  that  neere  to
his  Sepulchre,  there  should  be  made  two  Towres  in  Pyra-
mide  fashion,  one  at  the  head,  the  other  at  the  feete,  both
of  Marble,  of  the  heigth  of  ten  fathom.  On  the  top
was  a  round  Ball.  He  caused  one  to  bee  covered  all  over
with  gold  a  finger  thicke,  and  the  other  with  silver.  And
upon  the  top  round  about  the  Balls,  many  little  golden
and  silver  Bells  were  hanged,  which  at  the  blowing  of
the  winde  gave  a  certaine  sound.  The  Moniment  or
Sepulchre  was  also  covered  with  Plates,  partly  of  gold,
partly  of  silver.  He  commanded  this  to  be  made  in
honor  of  his  Soule,  and  that  his  memorie  should  never
decay  among  men.  And  when  Great  Can  minded  to
subdue  this  Citie,  hee  sent  a  valiant  Captaine,  and  the
greatest  part  of  his  Armie  were  Jesters,  of  which  his  Court
is  alway  furnished.  These  winning  the  Citie,  would  not
[III.  i.  94.]  violate  the  Moniment  without  the  Cans  knowledge,  who
hearing  that  the  decessed  had  made  it  for  the  honor  of  his
Soule,  would  not  suffer  it  to  be  stirred  :  for  the  manner
The  pietie  of  of  the  Tartars  is,  not  to  violate  those  things  which  belong
the  Ta^tars  to  the  dead.  In  this  Province  are  many  Elephants,  wild
dead  Oxen,  great  and  faire  Stagges  and  Deere,  and  other  wild

Beasts  of  divers  kindes.

268

\

MARCO POLO  ad.

1320.

The Province Bengala bordereth upon India  toward  Bengala.
the  South,  which  Great  Can  subdued,  when  Marco  Polo
lived  in  his  Court. The  Countrey  hath  a  proper  King,
and  peculiar language. The Inhabitants thereof  are  all
Idolaters : they  have  Masters  which  keepe  Schooles  and
teach  Idolatries  and  Inchantments;  a  thing  common  to  all
the  great  Men  of  that  Countrey. They  eate  Flesh,  Rice
and  Milke : they  have  Cotton  in great  plentie,  and by
reason  thereof,  much  and  great  trading  is  exercised  there:
they  abound  also  with  Spike,  Galangal,  Ginger,  Sugar,  and
divers  other Spices. Huge  Oxen  also  are  there, com-  ®xen  as  %£*
parable  with  Elephants  in  height  but  not  in  thicknesse.  as ?  ant5'
Many  Eunuches  are made in  this Province,  which  are  Eunuches.
afterwards sold unto Merchants. This Province con-
tinueth  thirtlc  dayes  journey,  in  the  end  whereof  going
Eastward  is  the  Province  of  Cangigu.

Cangigu  hath  his  proper  King  and  peculiar  language. Cangigu.
The  Inhabitants  thereof  worship  Idols,  and  are  Tributaries
to  Great  Can. Their  King hath  about three  hundreth  The  Kings
Wives. Much  gold  is  found  in  this  Province,  and  many  many  wms'
Spices,  but  they  cannot  easily  be  transported,  seeing  that
countrey  is  farre  distant from  the  Sea. There  are  also
many Elephants in it, and much game of  many wild
Beasts. The  Inhabitants  thereof  live  with  Flesh,  Milke
and  Rice. They  want  Wine,  but  they  make  good  drinke
of  Rice  and  Spices. Aswell  the  Men  as  the  Women  use  Embroidred
to  embroider  their  Faces,  Necks,  Hands,  Bellies  and  Legs, Gallants-
making  the  Images  of  Lions,  Dragons  and  Birds,  and  so
firmely  imprint  them  that  they  cannot  easily  bee  put  out :
and  the  more  such  Images  any  one  hath,  by  so  much  is
hee  esteemed  the  more  gallant. And  there  be  Professors
of  this  foolish  Art  of  flesh  embroiderie,  which  use  no  other
Trade but this Needle-worke, and dying of Fooles-
skinnes.

Amu is  an Easterly Province subject to  Great  Can,  Amu.
whose Inhabitants worship Idols, and have a peculiar
language. They  abound  with  Herds  of  Cattell,  and  have
plentie  of  Victuals,  and  many  Horses  and  those  excellent,

269

A.D.

1320.

Tholoman.

Cintigui.

Cloth  made  of
Barkes:  which
are  now  used
in  Congo.

Great  and
hardie  Dogs.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRTMES

which  Merchants  bring  into  India.  They  have  also  many
Buffes  and  Oxen,  because  there  are  delicate  Pastures  there.
As  well  Men  as  Women,  weare  bracelets  of  gold  and
silver  of  great  value  on  their  armes,  also  the  like  on  their
legs  :  but  those  of  the  Women  are  of  most  value.  From
Amu  to  Cangigue  are  five  and  twentie  dayes  journey.

The  Province  Tholoman  is  eight  dayes  distant  to  the
East  from  Amu,  subject  unto  Great  Can,  having  a  peculiar
language,  and  worshipping  Idols.  The  Men  and  Women
thereof  are  tall  and  goodly,  of  a  browne  colour.  The
Countrey  is  very  well  inhabited,  having  many  and  strong
Castles  and  Cities :  The  men  are  exercised  in  Armes  and
accustomed  to  warre.  They  burne  the  bodies  of  their  dead,
and  inclosing  the  Reliques  of  their  bones  in  a  Chest,  hide
them  in  the  Caves  of  the  Mountaines,  that  they  cannot
bee  touched  either  of  man  or  beast.  Gold  is  in  great
plentie  there,  and  in  stead  of  money  they  use  Porcelanes
brought  from  India,  as  also  in  Cangigu  and  Amu.

From  the  Province  Tholoman,  the  way  leadeth  towards
the  East  on  a  River,  by  which  are  many  Cities  and  Castles,
and  at  the  end  of  twelves  dayes  you  come  to  the  great
Citie  Cintigui.  The  Countrey  is  subject  to  Great  Can,
and  the  Inhabitants  thereof  are  addicted  to  Idolatrie.
Excellent  Clothes  are  made  in  this  Countrey  of  the  barkes
of  Trees,  wherewith  they  are  clothed  in  the  Summer.
Very  many  Lions  are  there,  so  that  for  feare  of  them,  none
dare  sleepe  without  doores  by  night.  The  ships  which
goe  up  and  downe  the  River,  for  feare  of  the  Lions,  are
not  fastned  to  the  banke.  There  are  great  Dogs  in  the
same  Countrey,  so  hardie  and  strong,  that  they  feare  not
to  adventure  on  the  Lion  :  And  it  often  hapneth,  that
two  Dogs  and  one  Archer  kill  a  Lion  :  for  the  Dogs  set
on  by  the  man  give  the  onset,  and  the  Lions  nature  is
presently  to  seeke  shelter  from  some  Tree,  that  the  Dogs
may  not  come  behind  him :  neither  yet  will  his  great
heart  suffer  him  to  runne  from  the  Dogs,  lest  he  should
seeme  afraid ;  but  he  holds  his  stately  pace,  the  man
meanwhile  shooting,  and  the  Dogs  fastning  on  his  hinder

270

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.
parts,  but  with  such  quicknesse,  that  when  the  Lion  turnes
on  them  they  are  gone.  And  then  doth  this  magnanimous
Beast  hold  on  his  way  againe  to  seeke  such  Tree  succour,
that  with  Bitings  and  Arrowes  he  sometimes  comes  short,
and  with  expense  of  bloud  dyeth  by  the  way.  This
Countrey  aboundeth  with  Silke,  which  by  Merchants  is
carried  to  divers  Provinces  by  the  River.  They  live  on
Merchandise,  their  money  is  Paper.  They  are  valiant
in  Armes.  At  the  end  of  ten  dayes  is  the  Citie  Sidinfu,  Sidinfu.
and  twentie  dayes  from  thence  is  Gingui,  and  foure  dayes  Cingui.
thence  is  Pazanfu  towards  the  South,  and  is  in  Cataio  Pazanfu.
returning  by  the  other  side  of  the  Province.  The  people
are  Idolaters  and  burne  their  dead.  There  are  also  certaine
Christians  which  have  a  Church :  all  under  the  Can  and
use  Paper  money.  They  make  Clothes  of  Gold,  and
Silke,  and  Launes  very  fine.  By  this  Citie  (which  hath
many  Cities  under  it)  goes  a  great  River  which  carries
store  of  merchandise  to  Cambalu,  made  by  many  Channels
to  passe  thither.  But  wee  will  passe  hence,  and  proceed-
ing three  dayes  journey,  speake  of  Cianglu.

Cianglu  is  a  great  Citie  toward  the  South  of  the  Pro-  Cianglu.
vince  of  Cataio,  subject  to  the  Can,  the  Inhabitants  are
Idolaters, and burne their dead. Their money is the
(Mulberie)  Paper  coine  of  the  Can. In this  Citie  and  [III.  i.  95.]
the  Territories  they  make  store  of  Salt, for  that  Earth  The  Salt  of
is  very  salt,  and  out  of  it  they  get  Salt,  after  this  manner.  ^an8lu-
They  heape  up  Earth  in  manner  of  an  Hill,  and  powre
water  upon  it,  which  drawes  the  saltnesse  of  the  Earth
unto  it, and  then  runnes  into  certaine  Conduits,  and  is
boyled  in  Pannes till  it  be congealed  to  Salt faire  and
white,  to  the Cans  and their  great  gaine,  being  carried
into  other Countries  to  sell. There  are  great  Peaches  Great
very good, which weigh two pounds a piece. Five  Peac^s-
dayes  journey  beyond  the  Citie  Cianglu,  in  Cataio  South-
ward standeth another Citie, named Ciangli (in  which  Ciangli.
way are many Cities and Castles, all subject to the
Can)  through  the  middest  whereof  runneth  a  great  River
very  convenient  for  shipping  laden  with  merchandises.

271

A.D.
1320.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Six  dayes  journey  thence  to  the  South  (all  which  way
hath great  Cities  and  Castles of  Idolaters)  is  the  noble

Tudinfu.  Kingdome  and  great  Citie  Tudinfu,  which  had  his
proper  King,  before  it  was  subdued  to  Great  Can,
Anno  1272.  and  hath  eleven  Royall  Cities,  famous  for
traffick,  subject  to  the  jurisdiction  thereof.  It  is  very  delec-
table for  Gardens  and  Fruits,  rich  in  Silkes.  The  Can
sent  to  the  government  hereof  one  of  his  Barons,  named
Lucansor,  with  eightie  thousand  Horse:  who  rebelled
against  his  Lord,  but  was  slaine  by  a  power  of  one
hundred  thousand  under  two  other  Barons  sent  against
him,  and  the  Countrey  reduced  to  obedience.  Seven
dayes  off  (riding  by  many  Cities  and  Castles  of  Idola-
ters, plentifull of all things) towards  the  South  is the

Singuimatu.  famous  Citie,  named  Singuimatu,  unto  the  which  on
the  South,  a  certaine  great  River  runneth,  which  being
divided  by  the  Inhabitants  of  the  place  into  two  Rivers,
floweth  partly  to  the  East  towards  Cataio,  and  partly  to
the  West  towards  Mangi.  By  these  Rivers,  innumerable
Vessels  for  multitude,  and  incredible  for  their  greatnesse
and  wealth,  bring  necessaries  to  both  Provinces.  If  you
goe  sixteene  dayes  journey  towards  the  South  from  Sin-
guimatu, you  still  meet  with  Cities  and  Townes  where
much  trading  is  exercised.  The  Inhabitants  of  these
Countries  are  Idolaters,  subject  to  Great  Can.

After that sixteene dayes, you come unto a great

Caramoran.  River,  named  Caramoran,  which  is  said  to  flow  out
of  the  Kingdome  of  Umcan  or  Presbyter  John,  of  the
North.  It  is  very  deepe,  and  carrieth  Ships  of  great
burthen :  it  is  also  stored  with  Fish.  Within  one
dayes  journey  of  the  Sea  there  are  in  this  River
fifteene  thousand  Saile,  each  of  which  carrieth  fifteene
Horses  and  twentie  Men,  besides  Victualls  and  the
Mariners.  This  is  the  Cans  Fleet  kept  there  in  readi-
nesse,  to  carrie  an  Armie  to  any  of  the  Ilands  in  the  Sea,
if  they  should  rebell ;  or  to  any  remote  Region.  Neere
the  banke  of  the  River  where  these  Ships  are  kept,  is
Coiganzu,  and  over  against  it  Quanzu,  one  a  great  Citie,

272

MARCO POLO  ad.

1320.

the other  small. After you are past  that River, you

enter into the noble  Kingdome  of Mangu. And doe

not thinke  that  wee  have handled  in order  the  whole

Province of Cataio : yea, I have not spoken of the

twentieth part. For, M. Polo passing by the said

Province, hath onely  described the Cities in his way,

leaving  those  on  both hands, and those betwixt  these,

to  prevent  tediousnesse.

The  Province  of  Mangi  is  the  most  rich  and  famous

that  is  found  in  the  East:  and  An. 1269.  had  a  certaine

King,  named  Fanfur,  richer  and  mightier  then  any  which  FanfurKingof

had  reigned  there  in  an  hundred  yeeres,  but  a  man  peace- ™an&>  w  u
o  j  7  *■  .  is  now  ccillcd

able  and  full of  almesdeeds,  so  beloved  of  his  subjects,  Qj^nam

that  thereby,  and  by  the  strength  of  the  Countrie,  he
seemed  invincible.  Whereby  it  came  to  passe,  that  the
King  aswel  as  the  People,  lost  the  use  and  exercise  of
Warre  and  Armes.  All  the  Cities  were  compassed  with
Ditches,  a  Bow  shoot  broad,  full  of  Water.  Hee  held  in
pay  no  Horses,  because  he  feared  none.  And  hence  it
came  to  passe,  that  the  King  giving  himselfe  to  pleasure
more  then  was  meete,  enjoyed  continuall  delights.  He
maintayned  about  a  thousand  goodly  Lasses,  with  which
he  passed  his  time  in  pleasure.  He  nourished  Justice,
and  preserved  Peace.  No  man  durst  offend  his  Neigh-
bour, and  disturbe  the  Peace,  for  feare  of  severe  unpartiall
punishment.  So  that  Artificers  would  often  leave  their
Shops  full  of  Wares  open  by  night,  and  yet  none  would
presume  to  enter  into  them.  Travailers  and  strangers
most  safely  walked  day  and  night,  throughout  that  whole
Kingdom,  fearing  no  man.  The  King  himselfe  also  was
pitifull  and  mercifull  towards  the  Poore,  and  forsooke
not  them  that  were  oppressed  with  necessitie,  or  pinched
with  penurie.  Besides,  every  yeere  hee  tooke  up  twentie
thousand  young  Infants,  cast  off  by  their  Mothers,  which
through  povertie  were  not  able  to  keepe  them,  which  he
brought  up,  and  set  them  when  they  were  growne  to
some  Trade,  or  married  the  young  Men  with  the  Maids
which  hee  had  in  like  sort  educated.

xi  273  s

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1320.

Cublai  Can  was of  a  differing  disposition  to  Fanfur,

and delighted  onely  in  Warres  and Conquests, and to

make  himselfe  Great ;  he  sent  a  great  Armie  levied of

Chinsan  Horse  and  Foot,  and  made  one,  named  Chinsan  Baian

^IZfTthl  (that is' one hundred e7es) Generall thereof. Hee,
signification  of  therefore  comming with  his  Armie  and  a  Fleet  to  the
his  name. Province of  Mangi,  first  summoned  the  citie  Coiganzu
to  yeeld  obedience  to  his  Emperour. Who  refusing  the
same, hee departed without any  assault  given to the
Citie :  and  required  the  same  of  the  second  Citie ;  which
likewise  refusing,  he  marched  forward  to  the  third,  and
fourth,  and  received  the  like  answere  of  them  all. But
he  assaulted  the  next  with  great  courage,  and  vanquished
the  same  by  force,  and  slue  every  mothers  child  therein ;
which so affrighted and  terrified  the  rest,  that  they  all
presently yeelded. Moreover,  Great  Can sent another
great  Armie  after  the  former,  with  both  which  Armies
[III.  i.  96.] hee marched against the chiefe Citie Quinsai, where
Quinsai,  the tne King of Mangi resided : who mightily terrified,
ings our . as  never  havmg seene  any  battell,  fled  with  his  wealth
and  treasures  in  ships  which  he  had  prepared  to  certaine
impregnable Hands  in  the  Ocean  (where  he  after  died)
committing  the custodie  of  the  Citie  of  Quinsai  to  his
wife, bidding  her to defend it as  well  as  shee could ;
for  being  a  woman shee  need  not  feare  death, if  shee
The  flight  of were taken. It is to be observed, that King Fanfur
Kmg  Fanfur. had  beene  told  by  his  Diviners,  that  his  Kingdome  should
never  be  taken  from  him,  but  by  one  which  had  an  hun-
dred eyes : which the  Queene  knew,  and  therefore  was
still  in  hope  not  to  lose  the  Citie,  howsoever  streightned ;
thinking  it  impossible  for  one  man  to  have  an  hundred
eyes. But  one  day  she  heard,  that  the  Commander  of
the  Tartars  was  called  Baian  Chinsan,  that  is  to  say,  An
hundred  eyes,  and  was  much  terrified :  wherefore,  calling
for  the  Commander  of  the  Tartars  Armie,  thinking  him
to bee the man which  the  Astrologers  spake  of, shee
delivereth  the  Citie  unto  him. Which  being  heard,  the
Citizens,  and  Inhabitants  of  the  whole  Province,  revolted

274

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.

to  the  obedience  of  great  Can. The  Queene  was  sent
unto  the  Court  of  great  Can,  and  was  most  honourably
received  by  him,  and  maintayned like a  Queene. And  ^r
now  wee  will  speake  of  the  Cities  of  *  Mangi.  Mann  and

China,  are  so
§. VIII.  different  that

Of  the  Cities  of  Mangi  (now  called  China)  and  the  j;ZnRegiom.
rarities  thereof: the  many  wonders  of  Quinsai,  But  the
the  Palaces,  Pleasures,  Rites  and  Government,  Rfader  u !°

1  1 tvt  i 1 m  observe,  that

observed  by  the  JNatives,  and  the  Tartars.  China  is  a

Oiganzu  is  a  faire  and  rich  Citie,  situate  towards  ^^J, '

the  South-east,  and  East  in  the  entrance  of  the  Unknowne,and

Province of Mangi, (from Cataio, whence the  that Kingdome

Authour  passed)  where are alway  great store  of  ships,  hath  *pp*U&-

being  seated  on the  River Caramoran. Great  store  of  tt?™  .*J*? '?

Merchandise  is  carried  thither. Salt  is  also  made  there  either  from

in  great  abundance.  the  Familie

Going from Coiganzu, you ride towards  the  South-  reigning

east  one  dayes  journey  on  a  stone  *  Causie ;  on  both  sides  \w  tck™w  u

.  r J J  /,  -11  1  called  Ciu,

whereor are great rennes  with  deepe  waters, whereon  and  the  King-

they  may  passe  with  ships : neither  is  there  any  entrance  dome  Min,

into  Mangi  but  by  shipping  (as  the  Captaine  of  the  Can  andMinCiu,

did) but by this Causie. At the end of  that dayes  j^j^

journey  is  a  Citie  called  Paughin  great  and  faire. The  and  by  the

people  make  clothes  of  Gold  and  of  Silke,  are  Merchants  Tartars,  when

and  Idolaters. The  Paper  money  of  great  Can  is  received  *&ey  reigned,

throughout  that  whole  Countrey. It  is  plentifull  of  all  %™ ^

necessaries  of  life. _  ^  _  before" Cheu,

To  the  Citie  Cairn,  is  from  Paughin  one  dayes  journey  which  both
South-east, and  this is  also  a  famous Citie, abounding  put  together
with fish, and game, of  beasts, and fowle : especially  ™*  Ha\
Phesants  are  found  there,  in  exceeding  great  plentie,  as  'at

great  as  Peacocks,  of  which  you  may  have  three  for  one  dissonance
Venetian  groat.  from  Mangi:

Proceeding  further  hence  one  dayes  journey,  you  come  0r .ft

appellations  common  to  all  ages, \$c. See  our  following  relations  of  Ricci  and  Trigautius.
Coiganzu. The  Salt  of  Conigangui. *Terraglio. Paughin. Cairn. Phesants.

275

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

1320.

thorow  a  well manured and peopled Countrey to the

Tingui.  Citie  Tingui,  which  although  it  be  not  great,  yet  hath  it

exceeding  great  plentie  of  victuals.  They  are  Merchants,
and  very  many  ships  are  also  there :  plentie  of  beasts  and
fowles :  It  is  seated  to  the  South-east,  and  on  the  left
hand towards the East three dayes  journey  off  is  the

Salt  pits.  Ocean :  and  in  the  space  betweene,  are  very  many  Salt
pits ;  and  they  make  great  store  of  Salt. After  this,  is

Cingui.  Cingui  a  great  Citie,  whence the  Countrey  is furnished

with  Salt,  whereof  the  Can  makes  great  profit,  beyond
beliefe.  They  are  Idolaters,  and  have  Paper  money.
From Cingui  riding  towards the  South-east, you meet

Jangui,  Head  with the noble Citie Jangui, under the government

of  27.  Lities.  whereof  are  other  Cities,  seven  and  twentie  in  number.
And  in  that  Citie  resideth  one  of  the  twelve  Barons  which
are  Governours  of  Provinces  chosen  by  the  great  Can.
They  are  Idolaters,  and  live  of  Merchandise.  They
make  Armes and Harnasse for warre. And Master

M.  Polo  Marco had  the  sole  government  thereof  by  commission

oveinour  oj Q£  t^e  great  can>  three  yeeres  together  in  stead  of  one  of
those  Barons.

Nangtin.  Nanghin  is  a  Province  to  the  West,  one  of  the  greatest

and  noblest  of  Mangi,  a  place  of  great  Merchandise.  They
are  Idolaters,  spend  Paper  money,  have  store  of  beasts  and
fowle,  wilde  and  tame.  They  make  clothes  of  Gold  and
Silke,  and  are  rich  Merchants,  and  the  Countrey  is  very
commodious  to  the  Can,  specially  by  Customes  of  Mer-
chandise. There  is  great  plentie  of  Corne.  Sianfu  is  a
noble  and  great  Citie  in  the  Province  of  Mangi,  and  hath
twelve  rich  and  great  Cities  subject  unto  her  jurisdiction.
They  make  great  store  of  Silkes  and  cloth  of  Gold,  have
plentie  of  game  and  fowle,  and  of  all  things  pertayning  to
a  Citie  of  note :  so  strong,  that  it  was  three  yeeres  be-
sieged, and  could  not  be  vanquished  by  the  Armie  of  the
Tartars,  when  the  Province  of  Mangi  was  subdued. For

[III.  i.  97.]  it  is  compassed  on  every  side  with  Lakes,  that  there  was
no  way  unto  it,  but  on  the  North  :  so  that  ships
came  and  went  continually,  bringing  plentie  of  victuals :

276

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.

which  not  a  little  afflicted  great  Can. The  two  brethren

Master  Nicolo,  and Master  Maffio,  then in  his Court,

hearing hereof, went to him,  and offered their service

to  devise  certaine  Engines  after  the  manner  of  the  West,

able  to  shoot  a  stone  of  three  hundred  weight,  thereby

to  kill  men,  and  ruine  houses. The  Can  appointed  them

the best Carpenters which were Nestorian Christians,

who made  three  (Mangani)  of  those  Engines  in  a  short  Mangani,  a

space, which were proved and approved before him,  k*nd.°f

and by ships sent unto his Armie. Planting them  hereb„

therefore against the Citie Sianfu  : they  began to cast  appeares  that

great stones into the Citie  : and the first  falling  vpon  tfey  ha<l not

a certaine house,  brake it for the most part,  with  the  ^  U„fthe

violence  thereof. Which  the  besieged  Inhabitants  seeing,

were  very  much  astonished,  and  yeelded  themselves,  and

became subject  to the obedience  of  great  Can,  on the

same  conditions  with  the  rest  of  Mangi  ; to  the  great

repute  of  the  two  Venetian  brethren.

From  the  Citie  Sianfu,  to  a  certaine  Citie,  named
Singui,  are  numbred  fifteene  miles  Southeastward,  which  Singui.
although  it  be  not  great,  yet  hath  it  an  exceeding  multi-
tude of  Ships,  being  seated  upon  the  greatest  River  in
the  world,  called  Quian,  the  bredth  of  which  in  certaine  Quian.
places,  contayneth  ten  miles,  in  other  eight,  and  in  some
sixe.  But  the  length  thereof  extendeth  it  selfe  above
an  hundred  dayes  journey  from  the  head  to  the  Sea.
Innumerable  other  Rivers  flow  into  it,  which  runne
thorow  divers  Regions,  and  are  navigable,  and  make
it  so  great  ;  incredible  store  of  Merchandise  is  brought
by  this  River.  There  are  also  very  many  other  Cities,
in  number  about  two  hundred,  which  participate  of  this
River  :  it  floweth  through  the  bounds  of  sixteene
Provinces.  The  greatest  commoditie  is  Salt,  wherewith
all  the  Cities  which  communicate  in  these  waters  are
stored.  Master  Marco  saw  at  one  time  at  Singui  five
thousand  ships,  and  yet  other  Cities  on  that  River  have
more.  All  those  ships  are  covered,  and  have  but  one
mast,  and  one  sayle,  and  usually  carrie  foure  thousand,

277

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1320.

and  so  upwards,  some  of  them  twelve  thousand  Venetian
Cantari.  Neither  use  cordage  of  Hempe,  except  for
the  mast  and  sayle,  but  have  Canes  fifteene  paces  long,
which  they  rive  into  thinne  parts  from  one  end  to  the
other,  and  binding  the  cut  pieces  together,  and  wreathing
them,  make  very  long  ropes,  so  that  some  of  them
contayne  three  hundred  fathom  in  length.  And  those
lines  are  as  strong  as  Hempen,  and  serve  for  halfes  and
cables  to  draw  their  ships  up  and  downe  the  River,
each  ship  having  ten  or  twelve  Horses  for  that  purpose.
On  that  River  in  many  places  are  rockie  hillockes,  on
which  are  built  Monasteries  to  their  Idols  :  and  all  the
way  are  Villages  and  places  inhabited.

Cayngui.  Cayngui is a little Citie, upon the foresaid River

South-eastward,  where  every  yeere  is  brought  store  of
Corne  and  Rise,  carried  the  most  part  to  Cambalu.
For  they may  passe thither  by  Lakes  and  Rivers,  and

Hand-made by one deepe large hand-made River,  which the Can

Rwer-  caused to be made for passage from one River to

another,  and  from  Mangi  to  Cambalu  without  going
to  Sea.  Which  worke  is  goodly  and  wonderfull  for
the  site  and  length,  and  more  for  the  profit  thereby
to  the  Cities.  Hee  hath  made  also  great  Causies  to
goe  on  land  by  those  waters  commodiously.  In  the
mids  of  the  said  River  is  an  Hand  of  a  Rocke,  on  which
is  erected  a  great  Temple  and  Monasterie,  in  which  are
two  hundred  Idolatrous  Monkes.  This  is  the  Mother-
temple  and  Monasterie  of  many  others.

Chhgianfu.  Cinghianfu  is  a  Citie  of  Mangi,  rich  in  Merchandise,
plentifull  of  game,  of  wilde  beasts  and  fowle,  and  of
victuall.  In  it  are  two  Churches  of  Nestorian  Christians,
built  Anno  1274.  when  the  great  Can  sent  Governour
thither,  Marsachis  a  Nestorian,  which  built  them.

From the Citie Cinghianfu, in three dayes  journey
South-eastward, you find many Cities and Castles all

Tinguigul  Idolaters,  and  at  last  come  to  the  Citie  Tinguigui,  a
great  and  faire  Citie,  abounding  with  all  kinde  of
victuals. When  Chinsam  Baian,  Generall  of  the Armie

278

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.

of  the  Tartars  conquered  the  Province  of  Mangi,  he
sent  many  Christians  (called  Alani)  against  this  Citie,
which  was  double  walled  ;  into  the  inner  they  retired  ;
into  the  other  the  Alans  entred,  and  found  there
abundance  of  Wine,  whereof  after  a  bad  journey,  they
began  to  drinke  so  largely,  that  they  were  all  drunke  :
and  the  Citizens  in  their  sleepe  suddenly  falling  upon
them,  slue  them  all,  none  escaping.  But  Baian  hearing
this,  sent  another  great  Armie  against  those  Citizens,
which  shortly  vanquishing  the  Citie,  in  revenge,  put
them  all  to  the  sword,  leaving  none  alive.

The great and excellent Citie Singui, contayneth in  Singui.
circuit twentie miles. Great  multitudes of  people  are
in  it  :  it  hath  many  rich  Merchants,  and  cunning  Arti-
ficers, and  it  hath  also  very  many  Physicians,  and  Magi-  Physicians  and
cians,  and  Wisemen  or  Philosophers. In  the  Mountaines  Philosophers.
of  this  Citie,  Rhubarb  and  Ginger  grow  in  great  plenty. Rhubarbe.
This Citie hath sixteen Cities under the jurisdiction
thereof, where much trading is used, and very many
curious  Arts  are  exercised. Very  many  Silkes  are  made
there. The word Singui, in their language, signifieth,
The  Citie  of  the  Earth,  as  also  they  have  another  Citie,
which they call Quinsai,  that is to say,  The Citie of
Heaven. From Singui one dayes journey is Vagiu,
where  is  also  abundance  of  Silke,  and  cunning  Artificers
with  many  Merchants.  Quinsai,  the

Earthly  Citie

GOing  from  Vagiu  three  dayes,  continually  you  find  °{Heav™>  °
o  o  / '  j j  how  much

Cities,  Castles,  and  Villages,  well  peopled  and  rich.  fretter  -ts  ^

The People  are Idolaters,  under  the Can : at the end  heavenly  Citie

of  those dayes you come to Quinsai, which for the  on  Earth  in

excellency  hath  that  name  (interpreted  Citie  of  Heaven)  f^9^tmre

for  in  the  World  there  is  not  the  like,  in  which  are  found  incomparable

so  many  pleasures,  that  a  man  would  thinke  he  were  in  that  heavenly

Paradise. In  this  Citie  Master  Marco  Polo  hath  often  Citie  of  ^

beene, and considered the same with great diligence,  Hea?e* m

observing the whole state thereof, setting downe the  2l {^  /i

same  in  his  memorials,  as  here  shall  be  declared  briefly,  [in.  i.  98.]

279

A.D.
1320.

The  situation.

12000.
bridges.

The  Ditch.

Ten  Market
places.

The  high
street.

The  mayne
ChanelL

The  Markets

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

This  Citie  by  common  opinion,  is  an  hundred  miles  in
circuit ;  for  the  streets  and  channels  thereof  are  very
wide.  There  are  Market  places  exceeding  large.  On
the  one  side  a  cleere  Lake  of  fresh  water,  on  the  other
a  great  River  which  enters  in  many  places,  and  carries
away  all  the  filth  of  the  Citie,  and  so  runneth  into  that
Lake,  thence  continuing  his  course  to  the  Ocean  :  which
causeth  a  good  ayre,  and  commodious  passage  both  by
land,  and  by  these  channels.  There  may  goe  both  Carts
and  Barkes  to  carrie  necessaries  :  and  the  report  is,  that
there  are  twelve  thousand  Bridges  great  and  small,  and
those  on  the  chiefe  channels  are  so  high  that  a  ship
without  her  Mast  may  passe  under,  and  above,  Chariots
and  Horses.

On  the  other  side  the  Citie  is  a  Ditch,  about  fortie
miles  long,  which  encloseth  it  on  that  side  ;  large  and
full  of  water  from  the  River,  made  by  the  antient  Kings
of  that  Province,  both  to  receive  the  overflowings  of  the
water,  and  to  fortifie  the  Citie  :  the  earth  which  was
taken  out  being  layd  within  as  a  banke  or  hill  encom-
passing. There  are  ten  chiefe  Market-places  (besides
infinite  others  along  the  streets)  which  are  square,  halfe
a  mile  in  each  square.  And  from  the  forepart  of  them
is  a  principall  street  fortie  paces  wide,  running  right
from  one  end  of  the  Citie  to  the  other,  with  many
Bridges  traversing  it.  And  every  foure  miles  is  found
such  a  Market-place,  two  miles,  as  is  said,  in  compasse.
There  is  also  one  large  channell,  which  runnes  against
the  said  street,  behind  the  Market-places,  on  the  next
banke  whereof  are  erected  great  Store-houses  of  stone,
where  the  Merchants  from  India,  and  other  parts  lay
up  their  Merchandise,  at  hand,  and  commodious  to  the
Market-places.  In  each  of  these  Market-places  is  a
concourse  three  dayes  in  the  weeke  of  persons  betwixt
fortie  and  fiftie  thousand,  which  bring  thither  all  things
that  can  be  desired  for  mans  life,  of  all  beasts  of  game,
and  fowles  ;  that  Lake  yeelding  such  commodiousnesse
to  bring  them  up,  that  for  a  Venetian groat  you may

280

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.
have  two  Geese,  and  foure  Duckes  for  as  much.
Then  follow  the  Butcher-rowes  of  Veale,  Beefe,  Kid,
and  Lambe,  which  the  great  and  rich  men  eat ;  for  the
poore  eat  uncleane  meats  without  respect.  There  are  all
sorts  of  herbs  and  fruits  continually,  and  amongst  the
rest  huge  Peares,  weighing  ten  pounds  a  piece,  white  Peares  often
within  like  paste,  and  very  fragrant  ;  Peaches  yellow  Pound-
and  white  very  delicate  :  Grapes  grow  not  there,  but
are  brought  from  other  places  dried  very  good,  and
Wine  also,  but  not  so  esteemed  in  those  parts,  that  of
Rice  and  Spices  contenting  them.  Every  day  from  the
Ocean  is  brought  up  the  River  (which  is  the  space  of
five  and  twentie  miles)  great  quantitie  of  fish,  besides
that  of  the  Lake,  so  much  as  a  man  would  thinke
would  never  be  bought,  and  yet  in  a  few  houres  is
gone.  All  those  Market-places  are  encompassed  with
high  houses,  and  underneath  are  shops  of  Artificers,
and  all  sort  of  Merchandises,  Spiceries,  Jewels,  Pearles,
and  in  some  onely  Rice-wine.  Many  streets  answere
one  another  in  the  said  Market-places.  In  some  of
them  are  many  Baths  of  cold  waters  accommodated
with  attendants  of  both  sexes,  a  thing  which  from
children  they  use  themselves  unto.  There  are  chambers
also  in  the  said  Baths  with  hot  waters  for  strangers
which  are  not  accustomed  to  the  cold  waters.  They
wash  every  day  ;  neither  doe  they  eat  before  they  have
\  washed.

In other streets are mercenarie Prostitutes in such  Trades  of

number,  that  I  dare  not  report  it  : and  not  onely  neere ers  sorts*

I  the Market-places, where they have their places ap-

j  pointed, but thorow all the Citie they stand very

j  pompously  with  great  odours,  many  servants,  and their

I  houses adorned. These are very practike in making

!  sports, and daliances, and sweetest pleasures ravishing

(fooles) forth of  themselves. In other streets are the

Physicians,  the Astrologers, they which teach to reade

and  write, and infinite other  Trades. At each end  of

every Market-place is a Palace, where Lords and

281

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1320.

Governours  are  appointed  by  the  King  to  determine
difficulties  which  happen  betwixt  Merchants  or  others,
as  also  to  looke  to  the  Guards  on  the  Bridges,  punishing
the  negligent.  Alongst  the  principall  Street  (whereof
wee  spake)  on  both  sides  are  great  Palaces  with  Gardens ;
and  neere  them  houses  of  Artificers,  and  such  multitudes
of  people  continually  going  to  and  fro,  that  a  man  would
wonder  whence  such  multitudes  should  bee  provided  of
JsaucyCitie.  victuals.  And  Master  Marco  learned  of  an  officer  of
the  Custome-house  in  Quinsai,  that  by  reckonings  ap-
peared the  daily  expence  of  Pepper  in  Quinsai,  to  be
three  and  fortie  Some,  and  every  Soma  is  two  hundred
twentie  three  pounds.  Hence  may  be  ghessed  the
quantitie  of  Victuals,  Flesh,  Wine,  Spiceries,  were  there
spent.
The  Quin-  The Inhabitants are Idolaters, spend Paper money,

satan  Citizens  are  white  anc[  faire  complexion,  apparelled  for  the  most
conditions.  Part  m  Silke,  which  growes  in  all  that  Territorie
abundantly,  besides  that  which  is  brought  from  other
places.  There  are  twelve  principall  mysteries,  each  of
which  have  one  thousand  shops  ;  and  in  each  shop  or
standing,  are  ten  men,  fifteene  or  twentie  at  worke,
and  in  some  fortie  under  one  Master.  The  rich  Masters
doe  no  worke  with  their  hands,  but  stand  civilly  adorned,
or  rather  pompously,  especially  their  wives,  with  Jewels
invaluable.  And  although  the  antient  Kings  ordayned,
that  the  child  should  bee  of  the  fathers  Trade  ;  yet  the
[III.  i.  99.]  rich  are  permitted  not  to  worke,  but  to  keepe  shop,  and
men  working  in  the  same  Trade.  Their  Houses  are
well  ordered,  and  wrought  richly,  adorned  with  Pictures
and  other  stupendious  costs.  The  Natives  are  peaceable,
know  not  to  manage  Armes,  nor  keepe  them  in  their
Houses  :  nor  is  there  strife  and  debate  amongst  them.
They  make  their  workes  with  great  sinceritie.  They
live  in  such  amitie,  that  one  Street  seemes  as  one
House,  without  jealousies  of  their  Wives,  which  they
hold  in  great  respect,  and  it  would  be  reputed  great
disgrace  to  speake  a  dishonest  word  to  a  married  Woman.

282

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.
They  entertayne  Merchant-strangers  kindly,  both  in  their  Great
houses,  and  with  best  advice  for  their  affaires. But  they  n^hh^hood.
are  loth  to  see  Souldiers  and  the  Guards  of  the  Grand
!  Can, as by whom they are bereft of  their naturall
J  Lords  and  Kings.

About the Lake are built faire Buildings  and  great
Palaces  of  the  chiefe  men  :  and  Temples  of  their  Idols
with Monasteries of many Monkes. In the  midst  of
the  Lake  are  two  Hands,  upon  each  of  which  is  a  Palace
with  incredible  numbers  of  Roomes  ;  whither  they  resort
upon  occasions of Marriages or other Feasts  ; where
Provisions of Vessels, Naperie, and other things are
maintayned  in  common  for  such  purposes,  one  hundred
sometime accommodated at once in severall Roomes.
In the Lake also are  Boates and Barges for pleasure,  Pleasures.
adorned  with  faire  Seates  and  Tables,  and  other  provisions
for  Bankets,  covered  above  and  plaine,  upon  which  men
stand  with  Poles  to  make  the  Boat  goe,  the  Lake  being
but shallow. Within they are painted  ; without, are
windowes to  open  and  shut  at  pleasure. Nor  can  any
thing in the  World seeme more pleasant then  in  this
Lake  to  have  such  an  object,  the  Citie  so  fully  presenting
it  selfe  to  the  eye,  with  so  many  Temples,  Monasteries,
Palaces,  Gardens  with  high  Trees  on  the  Waters,  Barges,
IPeople  :  for  their  custome  is  to  worke  one  part of  the
■  day,  and  to  dispense  some  part  to  this  solace  with  their
HFriends, or with Women in the Lake  ; or else by
fiChariots  riding thorow the  Citie,  which  is  also  another
of  the  Quinsay  pleasures. For  all  the  streets  are  paved  Stone  zaayes.
Mwith stone  ; as also are all the high Wayes in the
[province  of  Mangi,  onely  for  the  Postes  is  left  on  the
I  side,  a  space  unpaved. The  principall  street  of  Quinsay
lis paved ten paces  on each hand,  and in  the midst  it
lis full of  Gravell with passages for the Water, which
jkeepe it alway cleane. On this street are alway in-
numerable long close Chariots, accommodated with
Clothes  and Cushions of  silke,  for  six  persons  ; which
jsolace  themselves  in the street,  or  goe  to  Gardens,  and

283

A.D.

1320.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

there  passe  the  time  in  places  made  by  the  Gardeners
for  that  purpose,  and  returne  at  night  in  the  said
Chariots.

When  one  is  borne,  the  Father  sets  downe  the  print  f
of  Time, and with that note goes to the Astrologer  j

Astrologers,  to  consult  of  his  future  fortunes.  Of  these  Astrologers  ;
are  a  great  number  in  every  Market  place.  They  will  |
not celebrate a marriage without such consultation.

Funerals.  When  one  dies  that  is  of  note,  his  Kindred  clothe  !|
themselves  in  Canvasse,  and  so  both  Men  and  Women
accompanie  him  to  the  burning  place,  playing  on  Instru-  j
ments,  and  singing  all  the  way  prayers  to  their  Idols :
and  being  comne  to  the  place,  cast  into  the  fire  many
Papers  of  Cotton,  whereon  are  painted  Slaves,  Horses,
Camels,  Clothes  of  gold  and  silke,  Monies,  which  they
thinke  hee  shall  really  possesse  in  another  World  ;  and
make  such  minstrelsie,  in  conceit  of  the  joy  wherewith
the  Idols  there  receive  his  Soule,  where  hee  beginneth
(they  say)  to  live  anew.  In  every  street  are  Towres
of  stone,  whither  in  danger  of  fire  they  use  to  carrie
their  goods,  their  timber  houses  being  much  subject  to
such  casualtie.

Warders.  The Can hath ordayned that on the most part of

the  Bridges,  day  and  night,  there  stand  under  a  covert
ten  Guardians,  five  by  day  and  five  by  night:  and  in
every Guard is a Tabernacle of  Wood with a great

Clocks.  Bason,  whereby  they  know  the  houres  of  the  day  and
night,  which  at  every  houres  end  the  Warders  strike
to  notifie  what  houre,  one,  two,  &c.  beginning  at  the
Sunne  rising,  and  then  againe  at  the  beginning  of  the
night.  They  walke  up  and  downe,  and  if  any  have
a  light  or  fire  after  the  deputed  time,  they  cause  him
to  answer  it  before  the  Justices  or  Governors  aforesaid  ;
or if  any walke later. If  any be not  able to worke,

Hospitals,  they  carrie  him  to  Hospitals,  of  which  are  exceeding
many  founded  by  the  Kings  of  old,  with  great  revenues,
thorow  the  Citie.  When  they  are  well  againe,  they
are  compelled  to  worke. If  a  fire  happen  ;  these  from

284

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.
divers  places  come  to  quench  it,  and  to  carrie  the  goods
into  Boats,  or  the  Hands,  or  those  Towres  :  for  in  the
night  the  Citizens  dare  not  come  out,  but  those  who
are  in  danger.  The  Can  alway  keepeth  here  store  of
his  best  and  faithfullest  Souldierie,  as  being  the  best
and  richest  place  in  the  World.  Within  a  mile  of
each  other  are  builded  Rampiers  of  wood,  where  a
sound  is  made  to  be  heard  further  ofF,  for  like  Lamms.
purposes.

When  the  Can  had  reduced  all  Mangi  to  his  obedi-
ence, hee  divided it  (being before but  one  Kingdome)
into  nine  parts,  and set  a  King  over  each,  which  there  Nine  Vice-
administers  justice. Every  yeere they  give  account  to  r°9es  tn
the Cans  Officers  of  the  revenues,  and  other  accidents : an&'
and  every  third  yeere  are  charged,  as  all  other  Officers
are. One  of  these  Deputie-Kings  is  resident  at  Quinsay,
who  is  Governour  of  above  one  hundred  and  fortie  Cities,
all  rich  and great. Nor may  this  be  a  wonder,  seeing
in  Mangi  there  are  twelve  thousand  Cities,  all  inhabited 12000.
with rich and industrious people. In every of  which  CtHes> and
the Can maintayneth a Garrison,  proportionable  to  the  zarr'tsonSt
greatnesse and occasions, one  thousand,  ten or twentie
thousand  ;  not  all  Tartars,  but  Catayans  ;  for  the  Tartars
are Horse-men, and keepe where they may exercise
their horses. Into Cathay he sends those of Mangi,  [III.  i.  100.]
and  Cathayans  hither  such  as  are  fit  for  Armes,  of  which
he  makes  choice  every  third  yeere :  and  sends  for  foure
or  five  yeeres  together  into  places  twentie  dayes  journey
from  their  Countrey,  and  then suffers  them  to  returne
home, others  succeeding. And  most  part of  the Cans
Receits  are  this  way  expended :  and  if  any  Citie  rebell,
he  suddenly  from  the  next  Garrisons  rayseth  an  Armie
to  reduce  or  destroy  them. This  Citie  of  Quinsai  hath
in continuall  Garrison thirtie thousand Souldiers ; and
that  which  hath  least,  hath  one  thousand  in Horse  and
Foote.

To  speake now of  the  Palace of  King Fanfur  ;  his  Fanfurs
Predecessors  caused  to  enclose  a  place  of  ten  miles  circuit  Pa^ace-

285

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1320.

with  high  walls,  and  divided  it  into  three  parts.  That
in  the  midst  was  entred  by  one  Gate  ;  on  the  one  side
and  the  other  were  great  and  large  Galleries,  the  Roofe
sustayned  by  Pillars  painted,  and  wrought  with  gold
and  fine  azure:  these  were  smaller  at  the  entrie,  and
the  further  the  greater  ;  the  fairest  at  the  end,  the  Roofe
fairely  adorned  with  gold,  and  on  all  the  Walls  were
painted the stories of the former Kings artificially.

Feasts.  There  every  yeere  on  certaine  Idoll  holy-dayes,  Fanfur

kept  his  Court  and  feasted  his  principall  Lords,  the
great  Masters,  and  rich  Artificers  of  Quinsai,  ten  thou-
sand at  a  time  under  those  Terraces.  This  dured  ten
or  twelve  dayes  with  incredible  magnificence,  every  guest
indevouring  to  present  himselfe  in  greatest  pompe.
Behinde  this  middle-most  building  was  a  wall,  and
going  out  which  divided  the  Palace  ;  in  which  was,  as
it  were,  a  Cloyster  with  Pillars,  sustayning  the  Porch
or  Terrace  round  about  the  Cloyster :  wherein  were
Chambers  for  the  King  and  Queene  curiously  wrought.
From  this  Cloyster  was  entrance  into  a  Gallerie  six
paces  wide,  in  length  extending  to  the  Lake,  all  covered.
On  each  side  of  this  Gallerie  were  ten  Courts,  answering
one  another  fashioned  like  Cloysters,  each  Court  having

1000.  Women  fiftie  Chambers  with  their  Gardens,  and  in  them  one
thousand  Lasses  abode,  which  the  King  kept  for  his
service,  who  sometimes  with  the  Queene,  sometimes
with  them,  went  in  his  Barge  on  the  Lake  for  solace,
or  to  visit  his  Idoll  Temples.

Great  Parke.  The  other  two  parts  of  the  Serraile  were  divided  into
Groves,  Lakes,  Gardens  planted  with  Trees  ;  in  which
were  inclosed  all  sorts  of  beasts,  Roes,  Bucks,  Stags,
Hares,  Conies  :  and  there  the  King  solaced  himselfe
with  his  Damsels  in  Charets  or  on  Horse-backe,  no  man
entring  there.  There  did  he  cause  These  to  hunt  with
his  Dogs,  wearie  whereof  they  went  into  those  Groves,
which  answered  one  another  over  the  Lakes,  and  there
leaving  their  garments  came  forth  naked,  and  set  them-
selves  a swimming  in the Kings presence. Sometimes

286

in  1000.
chambers.

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.

hee  would  take  his  repast  in those  Groves  being  served

by those Damsels, without once thinking of Armes,

which sweet meat cost him the soure sawce  yee have

heard. All  this  was  told mee  by  a  rich  old  Merchant

of  Quinsai, whiles I was there, one which had beene

an inward familiar of  King Fanfur, and knew all his

life,  and had seene that Palace flourishing, into which

he would needs bring me. The Viceroy  now resides

I  there  ; and the first Galleries remayne as they were

|  wont, but  the  Damsells  Chambers  are  ruined  ;  the  wall

i  also  which  encompassed  the  Woods  and  Gardens  is  fallen

I  to  the  ground,  the  Beasts  and  Trees  being  gone.

Twentie  five  miles  from  Quinsai  is  the  Ocean  betwixt  The  Sea
■  the East and North-east, neere to which is a Citie, ijamPu-
called Gampu,  a  goodly  Port, where  arrive the Indian
i  ships  of  merchandise- Whiles  M.  Marco  was  in  Quinsai,
account  being  given  to  the  Grand  Can  of  the  Revenues,
I  and  the  number of  the  Inhabitants, he  hath  seene  that
I  there  have  beene  enrolled  one  hundred  and  sixtie  Toman
1  of  fires,  reckoning for a fire, the Familie dwelling in
I  one house : every Toman contayneth ten thousand,
;  which  makes  sixteene  hundred  thousand  Families:  of  all 1600000.
which  there  is  but  one  Church  of  Christians,  and those  *^%in
Nestorians. Every house-holder is bound to have
written  over  his  doore,  the  names of  the  whole  house-
hold, Males  and Females  ;  also  the  number  of  Horses  ;
the  names  added  or  blotted  out  as  the  Familie  increaseth
or decreaseth. And this is observed in Mangi and
ICatay.

Those also that  keepe Innes,  write in a Booke  the
1  names of  their  Guests,  and  the  day  and  houre  of  their
.departure, which Booke they send daily  to the Lords
I  or Magistrates, which  reside  at  the Market-places. In  Revenues  0f
Mangi  the  poore which are  not  able  to  bring  up  their QuinsaiyZ3the
children,  sell  them to  the  rich.  appurtenances

The  Revenues  which  accrew  to  the  Can  from  Quinsai,  t^tfe  three
and  the  others  pertayning  thereto,  being  the  ninth  part  #^/to  and
|of  the Kingdome of Mangi, are first, of  Salt every  200000'.

287

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1320.

yeere  eightie  Toman  of  gold  (every  Toman  is  eightie
thousand  Sazzi  of  gold,  and  every  Sazzo  is  more  then
one  Florin  of  gold)  which  will  amount  to  six  Millions
and  foure  hundred  thousand  Duckats.  The  cause  is,
that  that  Province  being  nigh  the  Sea,  there  are  many
Lakes  where  the  water  in  Summer  is  coagulated  into
Salt,  wherewith  five  other  Kingdomes  of  that  Province
are  served.  There  is  store  of  Sugar  growing,  which
Customes.  payeth  as  all  other  Spices  doe,  three  parts  and  a  third
in  the  hundred.  The  like  of  Rice-wine.  Also  those
twelve  mysteries  (which  we  said  had  twelve  thousand
shops)  and  the  Merchants  which  bring  goods  hither,
or  carrie  any  hence  by  Sea,  pay  the  same  price.  They
which  come  from  farre  Countries  and  Regions,  as  from
the  Indies,  pay  ten  per  cento.  Likewise,  all  things  there
breeding,  as  Beasts,  and  growing  out  of  the  Earth,  and
Silke,  pay  tithe  to  the  King.  And  the  computation
being  made  in  the  presence  of  M.  Marco,  besides  Salt
before  mentioned,  yeerely  amounts  to  two  hundred  and
ten  Toman,  which  will  bee  sixteene  millions  of  gold
and  eight  hundred  thousand.

[III.  i.  101.] TT^Rom Quinsai one  dayes  journey to the South-east
Jl are all the way Houses, Villages, faire Gardens,

Tapinza. plentifull  of  Victuals,  at  the  end  whereof  is  Tapinzu,  a
faire  and  great  Citle,  in  the  jurisdiction  of  Quinsai. Three

Uguiu.  dayes  thence  South-east  is  Uguiu,  and  two  dayes  further

may  you  ride  that  way,  all  the  way  finding  Castles,  Cities,  |
and  cultivated  Places,  in  such  Neighbour-hood,  that  they
seeme  to  Travellers  all  one  Citie  ;  all  in  the  same  jurisdic-
tion of  Quinsai. There  are  great  Canes  fifteene  paces  long
and  foure  palmes  thicke. Two  dayes  journey  further  is

Gengui.  the  Citie  Gengui,  faire  and  great,  and  travelling  further

South-east  are  inhabited  places,  full  of  People  and  Trades.
And  in  this  part  of  Mangi  are  no  Muttons,  but  Beeves,
Buffals,  Goates,  and  Swine  in  great  plentie. At  the  end

Zengian.  of  foure  dayes  journey  is  found  the  Citie  Zengian,  built

on  a  Hill  in  the  midst  of  a  River,  which  with  her  parted

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.
Armes  embraceth  and  encompasseth  it,  and  then  runne
one  to  the  South-east,  the  other  to  the  North-west.  They
are  in  the  jurisdiction  of  Quinsai,  are  Merchants,  Idolaters,
have  store  of  Game.  Three  dayes  journey  thence,  thorow
a  goodly  Countrey  exceedingly  inhabited,  stands  Gieza,  a  Gieza.
great  Citie,  the  last  of  Quinsai  Kingdome,  after  which  you
enter  into  another  Kingdome  of  Mangi,  called  Concha.  Concha.
(The  principall  Citie  thereof  is  Fugiu)  by  the  which  you  Fugiu.
travell,  six  dayes  journey  South-east,  thorow  Hills  and
Dales,  alway  finding  places  inhabited  and  store  of  Game
of  Beasts  and  Fowle.  They  are  Idolaters,  Merchants,
subject  to  the  Can.  There  are  stout  Lions  ;  there  growes
Ginger  and  Galingale  plentie,  with  other  sorts  of  Spices,
eightie  pounds  of  Ginger  for  a  Venetian  groat.  There  is
an  herbe,  whose  fruit  hath  the  effect  and  gives  the  colour
and  smell  of  Saffron,  but  is  not  Saffron,  used  in  their
meates.  They  voluntarily  eate  mans  flesh,  if  they  die  not
of  sicknesse,  as  daintier  then  others.  When  they  goe  to
Warres,  they  shave  to  the  eares  and  paint  their  faces  with
azure ;  they  are  all  Foot  save  the  Captaine  which  rideth,
and  use  Swords  and  Launces :  are  very  cruell,  and  when
they  kill  an  Enemie,  presently  drinke  his  bloud,  and  after
eate  his  flesh.  Men  eaters.

After  those  six  dayes  travell  is  Quelinfu,  a  great  Citie  Quelinfu.
with  three  Bridges ;  each  eight  paces  broad  and  above  one
hundred  long ;  the  Women  faire,  delicate ;  and  they  have
store  of  Silke  and  Cotton,  are  great  Merchants,  have  store
of  Ginger  and  Galingale. I  was  told,  but  saw  them  not,
that  they  have  Hennes  without  feathers,  hayrie  like  Cats,  Hayrie  Hens.
which  yet  lay  Egges  and  are  good  to  eate. Store  of  Lions
make  the  way  dangerous. After  three  dayes,  in  a  popu-
lous Countrey  which are Idolaters,  and have store of
Silke,  is  the  Citie  Unguem,  where  is  great  plentie  of  Sugar, Unguem.
sent  thence  to  Cambalu,  which  they  knew  not  to  make  ^uSar-
good  till  they  became  subject  to  the  Can ;  in  whose  Court
were Babylonians,  which  taught  them  to  refine it  with
ashes  of  certayne  Trees ; they  before  onely  boyling  it  into
a  blacke  paste. Fifteene  miles  further  is  Cangiu,  still  in  Cangiu.
xi  289  T

,;

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1320.

the  Realme  of  Concha :  and  here  the  Can  keepeth  an
Armie  in  readinesse  for  guard  of  the  Countrey.  Thorow
this  Citie  passeth  a  River  a  mile  broad,  fairely  built  on
both  sides,  and  stored  with  Ships  of  Sugar  and  other  lading.
This  River  disembokes  from  hence  five  dayes  journey
South-east,  at  Zaitum,  a  Sea  Port,  from  whence  the  rich
Ships  of  India  come  to  this  pleasant  and  fertile  Citie,  as  is
the  way  betwixt,  in  which  are  Trees  or  Shrubs  of  Camfire.
Zaitum.  Zaitum  is  a  famous  Port,  where  many  Ships  arrive  with

merchandise,  thence  dispersed  thorow  all  India.  There  is
such  store  of  Pepper,  that  the  quantitie  which  comes  to
Alexandria  to  the  West,  is  little  to  it,  and  as  it  were  one
of  a  hundreth :  the  concourse  of  Merchants  is  incredible,
it  being  one  of  the  most  commodious  Ports  of  the  World,
exceeding  profitable  to  the  Can,  which  Custometh  ten
of  the  hundreth  of  all  merchandise.  They  pay  so
much  for  hire  of  ships  also  that  there  is  not  above
one  halfe  of  their  merchandise  remayning  entire  to  them-
selves, and  yet  is  that  moitie  very  gainfull  to  them.
The  Citie  is  Idolatrous,  given  to  pleasure;  in  it  is  much
embroiderie  and  Arras  worke.  The  River  is  great,  very
wide  and  swift,  and  one  arme  of  it  goeth  to  Quinsai,  at
Tingui,  where  the  parting  of  which  is  Tingui  situate,  where  Porcelane
Ponelane  is  Wishes  are  made  (as  I  was  told)  of  a  certaine  Earth  which
they  cast  up  in  great  Hills,  and  so  let  lie  to  all  weathers
for  thirtie  or  fortie  yeeres  without  stirring  :  after  which
refining  by  time,  they  make  Dishes,  paint  them  and  then
put  them  in  the  Furnace.  You  may  there  have  eight
Dishes  for  one  Venetian  Groat.  In  this  Kingdome  of
Concha  the  Can  hath  as  great  Revenue  almost  as  of  the
Kingdome  of  Quinsai.  In  these  two  M.  Marco  was,  and
in  none  of  the  other  nine  Kingdomes  of  Mangi  (in  all
which  is  one  speech  used,  with  varietie  of  Dialect,  and  one
sort  of  writing)  and  therefore  will  speake  no  more  of
them  ;  but  in  the  next  Booke  discourse  of  India  the
Greater,  the  Middle,  and  the  Lesse,  in  which  hee  was
both  in  the  service  of  the  Can,  and  also  in  his  returne
with  the  Queene  to  Argon.

290

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.

§.  IX.  [III.  i.  102.]

The  Ships  of  India  described,  the  He  of  Zipangu,
the  Sea  Chin,  and  World  of  Hands,  the  two
Javas,  Zeilan  and  other  Hands,  with  the  rarities
therein.

E will  now  enter  into  India  and  begin  with  their  H,ere ,.&n7s  .
a,  .  ,  . ,  , c  t^-  1 ^1 ry  the  third  book

ohips,  which  are  made  or  .birre,  and  the  Zapino  ^-^  p0^

Tree,  with  one  deck,  on  which  are  twentie  Cabbins  ships  of  India.

(or lesse,  as  the  Ships are in quantitie) each for one

Merchant. They  have  a  good  Roother,  and  foure  Masts

with  foure  Sailes,  and  some  two  Masts,  which  they  erect

or take down at pleasure. Some greater Ships have

thirteene Colti, or divisions, on the inside made with

boards  inchased,  that  if  by  blow  of  a  Whale  or  touch  on  a

Rocke water gets in, it can goe no further then that

division  ;  which  being  found  is  soone  mended. They  are

all  double,  that  is,  have  two  course  of  boards  one  within

the other,  and  are  well calked  with  Ocam,  and nayled

with  Iron,  but  not  pitched  (for  they  have  no  Pitch)  but

anointed  with  the  Oile  of  a  certayne  Tree  mixed  with

Lime  and  Hemp  beaten  small,  faster  than  Pitch  or  Lime.

The  greater ships  have  three  hundred  Mariners,  others

two  hundred,  one  hundred  and  fiftie,  as  they  are  in  big-

nesse,  and from five to  six thousand bags of  Pepper.

And  they  were  wont  to  be  greater  then  now  they  are ;  the

Sea  having  broken  into  Ports  and  Islands,  that  the  defect

of  water, in  some places, causeth  them to build  lesse.

They  use  also  Oares  in  these  Ships,  foure  men  to  an  Oare ;

and  the  greater  Ships  have  with  them  two  or  three  ships

lesse,  able  to  carry  a  thousand bags of  Pepper, having

sixtie  or  more  Mariners,  which  less  ships  serve  sometimes

to  tow  the  greater. They  have  also  with  them  ten  small

Boats  for  fishing  and  other  services,  fastened  to  the  sides

of  the  greater  ships,  and  let  downe  when  they  please  to

use  them. Also they  sheath their ships after a yeeres

usage,  so  that  then  they  have  three  course  of  boards;  yea

291

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1320.

proceed  on  in  this  manner sometimes  till  there  bee six

courses, after which they breake them up. Having

spoken  of  the  ships,  we  will  speake  of  India,  and  first

of  certayne  Hands.

Zipangu.  Zipangu is an Hand in the East, one thousand

and five hundred miles distant from the shoares of

Mangi,  very  great,  the  people  white  and  faire,  of  gentle

behaviour, in Religion Idolaters,  and have  a  King of

De  magnis their  owne. They have gold in great store,  for few

maf/a:fhl  •  Merchants  come  thither,  and  the King permits  no  ex-

and  make *  portation  of it. And  they  which  have  had commerce

difference there  tell of the Kings house covered  with Gold,  as

betwixt  his Churches  here  with  Lead,  gilded  Windowes,  Floores  of

™7th*ations  ?old :  there  are  many Pearles-  °nce  > the  fame  of these

which  he  had r^cnes made Cublai Can to send to conquer it,  two

at  the  second Barons,  with  a  great  fleet  of ships,  one  named  Abbac-

hand;  catan,  the other  Vonsancin, which  going from Zaitum

although  it  be  ancj  Qumsai  arrived  there;  but  falling  out  betwixt  them-

zildine  in selves,  could  take  but  one  Citie,  and  there  beheaded  all

Edoosup.l.\.  they  tooke  save eight persons,  which  by  an inchanted

c  1.  tif  3. precious stone inclosed in the right arme  betwixt  the

skinne and flesh,  could not bee  wounded  with Iron ;

whereupon,  with  woodden  Clubs,  at  the  command  of  the

two  Barons  they  were  slaine. It  hapned  one  day  that

a  Northerne  winde  made  great  danger  to  the  ships  there

riding,  so that some  were lost,  some returned further

into Sea,  and others  with  the two Leaders  and other

Principals  returned  home. Out  of  many  broken  ships

some escaped by  boards,  and swimming on an Hand

not  inhabited  foure  miles off  Zipangu, and  were  about

thirtie  thousand,  without  provisions  of  victuals  or  Armes,

against  whom  the  Zipanguanders,  after  the  Tempest  was

calmed, set  out  a  fleet  of  ships  and  an  Armie. These

comming  on  Land  to  seeke  the  wracked  Tartars  without

order, gave occasion to the Tartars to wheele about,

the  Hand  (being  high  in  the  midst)  and  to  get  unseene

to their ships, which were left unmanned with the

Streamers  displaid :  and  with  them  they  went  to  the  chiefe

292

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.

Citie of Zipangu, where they were admitted without

suspicion, and found few others but Women. The

King  of  Zipangu  besieged  them  six  moneths,  and  they

having  no reliefe yeelded  themselves, their  lives  saved:

this happened An. 1264. The Can for this disorder

of  his  two  Commanders,  cut  off  the  head  of  one,  and

sent the other  to  a  salvage  Hand,  called Zorza,  where

hee causeth Offenders to die, by sewing them, their  This  punish-

hands  bound,  in a new-flayed hide  of  a  Buffall,  which  ?f '  fe .
,  1 • 1 1  •  1  •  i-i  Mom  used  to

drying shrmketh  so  as it  puts them in a little-ease  to  Corsoroms

a  miserable  death. The  Idols  in  this  and  the  adjoyning  Captaines:

Hands  are  made  with  heads  of  Kine,  Swine,  Dogs,  and  anj  *»  many

other fashions more monstrous,  as with faces  on  their  *%*§' ^jf-  T

shoulders,  with  foure,  ten,  or  an  hundred hands  (some,  Roe  and  mr  '

and to these they  ascribe most power  and doe most  Mogol  Re la-

reverence) and say,  that so they  learned of  their  Pro-  fans  agree

genitors. They  sometimes  eate  the  Enemies  which  they  ^  , ,e  °f
I  1  vl  * ■  AC  -. A  • s  Polo:  the

take,  with  great  joy,  and  for  great  dainties.  Mogol beingof

The  Sea  in  which  this  Island  standeth,  is  called  the  Sea  Tartar
of  Cin  or  Chin,  that  is  the  Sea  against  Mangi  :  and  in  the  original!.
language  of  that  Hand,  Mangi  is  called  Chin  :  which  Sea  *l?!eforr. .
is so  large  that the Mariners and expert Pilots  which  jtanan  /,  m_
frequent  it,  say,  that  there  are  seven  thousand  foure  hun-  nounced  Chin.
dred  and  fortie  Hands  therein, the most  part  inhabited,
and  that  there  growes  no  Tree  which  yeelds  not  a  good
smell,  and  that  there  growes  many  Spices  of  divers  kindes,
especially  Lignum  Aloes,  and  Pepper  blacke  and  white.
The  ships  of  Zaitum  are  a  yeere  in  their  voyage,  for  they
goe  in  Winter  and  returne  in  Summer,  having  Windes  of  The  Monsons.
two  sorts,  which  keepe  their  seasons. And  this  Countrey  [III.  i.  103.]
is  farre  from  India. But  I  will  leave  them  (for  I  never
was  there,  nor  are  they  subject  to  the  Can)  and  returne
to Zaitum. From hence sayling South-westward one
thousand five hundred miles, passing a Gulfe, called
Cheinan (which continues two moneths sayling  to  the
Northward,  still  confining  on the  South-east  of  Mangi,
and  elsewhere  with  Ania,  and  Toloman,  and  other  Pro-
vinces before named) within it are infinite Hands,  all

293

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1320.

in  manner  inhabited.  In  them  is  found  store  of  Gold,
and  they  trade  one  with  the  other.  This  Gulfe  seemes
another  World.

After  one thousand and five hundred miles  sayling
Ziamba.  overthwart  this  Gulfe,  is  the  Countrey  Ziamba,  rich  and

great,  having  a  King  and  Language  proper,  Idolaters,  and
paying  tribute  to  the  Grand  Can,  of  twentie  Elephants,
and  Lignum Aloes in great quantitie yeerely. Anno
1268.  the Can hearing  of  the  riches  of  this  Hand  sent
thither  Sagatu  with  an  Armie,  to  invade  it. Accambale
the  King  thereof  was  old,  and  made  this  composition  of
tribute. There  are  many  Woods  of  blacke  Ebonie.
Sayling  thence  betwixt  the South  and  South-east  one
Java  major,  I  thousand  & five, hundred miles, is  Java, supposed by
suppose  this  is  Mariners,  the  greatest  Hand  in  the  World,  above  three
Java  minor thousand  miles  in  circuit, under a King which  payeth
that  which  still  tribute  to  none, the  Can not  offering  to subject  it  for
is  called  Java,  the  length and  danger  of  the  voyage. The  Merchants
of  Zaitum and Mangi fetch  thence  store  of  Gold  and
Spices. South  and  South-westward  sixe  hundred  miles  from
Java  are  two  Hands,  one Sondur,  which  is  the  greater  ;
the other Condur, lesse, both desolate. Fifty miles
South-east  from  them is  a  Province  of  firme  land,  very
rich and great, named Lochac, the people Idolaters,
having  a  Language and King peculiar. There  growes
Brasill-wood  in  great  quantitie,  store  of  Gold,  Elephants,
wilde  beasts,  and  fowle,  a  fruit  called  Berci,  as  great  as
Limons, very good. The place is mountainous and
savage,  and  the  King  permits  not  many  to  come  thither,
lest  they should know his secrets. There is store  of
Porcelane  shells  for  money  transported  to  other  places.
Lochac  Five  hundred  miles  Southward  from  Lochac  is  the  He

A  South  Con-  Pentan,  a  savage  place,  which  produceth  in  all  the  Woods
Tntan ***'  sweet  Trees:  sixtie  miles  of  the  way  the  Sea  is  in  many  places
but  foure  fathoms,  after  which  being  sayled  to  the  South-
east, thirtie  miles  further  is  the  Hand  and  Kingdome  of
Malaiur. Malaiur,  which  hath  a  peculiar  King  and  Language  to  it
selfe  ;  and  here  is  much  Merchandise  of  Spices. From

294

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.
Pentan  one  hundred  miles  South-east  is  Java  the  lesse,  Java  minor,™
encompassing  about  two  thousand  miles,  and  hath  in  it  whlch ^e
eight  Kingdomes,  and as many Languages. They  are £ The
Idolaters,  have  store  of  Treasure,  Spices,  Ebony,  Brasill,  Mahometans,
and  are so  farre to the South, that the North Starre  by  commerce
cannot  there be seene. Master Marco was  in sixe  of  first,  and  afar
those  Kingdomes,  of  which  shall  here  be  spoken  leaving ^p-^Vve
the  other  two,  which  he  saw  not.  ^ere  altered

One  of  those eight Kingdomes is, Felech  : here  the  all  things,  both
Idolaters  by  frequent  Trade  of  Saracens  are  converted  to  Names,
the  Law of Mahomet, in  the Cities, the Mountainers  ^m^that
being  beastly, eating mans flesh and all impure  food;  hardly  they
and  worship  all  day  what  they  first  see  in  the  morning,  can  now  be
Next  to  that  is  Basma,  which  hath  a  Language  by  it  selfe  ;  designed,  and
they  live  without  Law,  like  beasts,  and  sometimes  send  rec°naled  t0
Hawkes  to  the  Can  (who  challengeth  all  the  Hand)  for
Presents. They have wilde Elephants, and Unicornes Umcornes,  or
much lesse then Elephants, like the BufFals in haire.  unJ0f
Their  feet  are  like  Elephants  feet. They  have  one  home  Rhinoceros.
in  the  midst  of  the  fore-head  and  hurt  no  bodie  there-
with ; but with the tongue  and knee. For on  their
tongue  are  certaine  long  prickles and  sharpe,  and  when
they hurt  any, they trample on him,  and presse  him
downe  with  their  knee,  and  then  wound  him  with  their
tongue. The  head  is  like  to  a  wilde  Boares,  which  hee
carries  downwards  to  the  ground  ;  and  they  love  to  stand
in  the  mire,  and  are  fllthie  beasts,  and  not  such  as  they
(Unicornes) are  said  to be in our parts, which suffer
themselves  to  be  taken  of  Maidens,  but  quite  contrarie.
They have  many Apes,  and  of  divers  fashions. They
have  Goshawkes  all blacke  as Ravens,  great,  and  good
for  prey. There  are  certaine  small  Apes  faced  like  men,  Pigmeys  how
which  they  put  in  Boxes,  and  preserve  with  Spices,  and e'
sell them to Merchants, who carrie them thorow the
World  for  Pigmeys,  or  little  men.

Samara  is  the next Kingdome where Master Marco  Samara.
stayed  five  moneths  against  his  will,  forced  by  ill  weather.
There  none  of  the Starres of  Charles wane are seene.

295

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1320.

Hee  descended  once  on  land  with  two  thousand  people,
and  there  fortified  for  that  five  moneths,  for  feare  of
those  brutish  man-eaters,  and  traded  meane  while  with
See  of  this  them  for  victuals.  They  have  excellent  Fish,  Wine  of
hMa^tef^  the  Date~tree>  vel7  medicinall  for  Phtisicke,  Dropsie,
Terry  pas,.  diseases  of  the  Spleene  ;  some  white,  some  red  ;  and
1469.  fcfc.  Indian  Nuts  as  big  as  a  mans  head,  the  middle  whereof  is
Coco-nuts. full  of  a  pleasant  liquor,  better  then  Wine  :  they  eat  all

flesh  without  any  difference.
Dragoian.  Dragoian  is  another  of  those  Kingdomes,  claymed  by

the  Can,  having  a  proper  King  and  Language.  I  was
told  of  an  abominable  custome,  that  when  one  is  sicke,
they  send  to  enquire  of  the  Sorcerers  whether  hee  shall
scape  ;  if  the  Devils  answere,  No  ;  the  kindred  send  for
some  whose  office  it  is,  to  strangle  the  sicke  partie,  after
which  they  cut  him  in  pieces,  and  the  kindred  eat  him  with
great  jollity,  even  to  the  marrow  of  the  bones,  For  (say
they)  if  any  substance  of  him  should  remayne,  wormes
would  breed  thereof,  which  would  want  food,  and  so
die,  to  the  great  torture  of  the  soule  of  the  deceased.
The  bones  they  after  take  and  carrie  into  some  Cave
in  the  hils,  that  no  beast  may  touch  them.  If  they  take
any  stranger  they  also  eat  him.
[III.  i.  104.]  Lambri  is  a  fifth  Kingdome  of  Java  in  which  is  store
Lambn.  Qf  Brasm\  of  the  seeds  whereof  Master  Marco  brought  to

Venice,  and  sowed  them,  but  in  vayne,  the  soyle  being
too  cold.  Some  men  (the  most)  in  this  Kingdome  have
tayles  more  then  a  palme  long,  like  Dogs,  but  not  hairy ;
and  these  dwell  in  the  Mountaines  out  of  Cities.  They
have  Unicornes  in  great  plentie,  and  chase  of  beasts  and
fowles.
Fanfur.  Fanfur,  the sixth Kingdome hath  the best  Camfire,

SFgDrahSand  Whkh iS S°ld Weight for weight with Gold- In that

other  Indian Province  they take  meale  out of  great  and  long  trees,

stories.  as  great  as two  men can fathome,  whence taking  the

thinne  barke  and  wood  about three fingers  thicke,  the

pith  within  is  meale,  which  they  put  in  water,  and  stirre

well,  the  lightest  drosse  swimming,  and  the  purest  setling

296

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.

to  the  bottome  ; and then  the  water being  cast away,

they  make  thereof  paste,  of  which  Master  Marco  brought

to  Venice,  tasting  like  Barley  bread. The  wood  of  this  HeavieWood.

tree  throwne  into the  water  sinkes  like Iron, whereof

they  make  Lances,  but  short,  for  the  long  would  be  too

heavie  to  beare  : these  they  sharpen,  and  burne  at  the

tops,  which so prepared  will  pierce an Armour  sooner

then  if  they  were  made  of  Iron.

About  one  hundred  and  fiftie  miles  from  Lambri,
sayling  Northwards,  are  two  Hands,  one  called  Nocueran,  Nocueran.
in  which  they  live  like  beasts,  goe  all  naked,  men  and
women,  and  worship  Idols,  have  excellent  Trees,  Cloves,
Sanders  white  and  red,  Indian  Nuts,  Brasill,  and  other
Spices  ;  the  other,  Angaman,  savage  as  the  former,  and  I  Angaman.
vas  told,  they  had  Dogs  heads  and  teeth.

Sayling  hence  one  thousand miles to  the  West,  and

I  little  to  the  North-west,  is  Zeilan,  two  thousand  and  Zeilan.

bure  hundred miles  in  circuit,  and  of  old  encompassed

hree  thousand  and  sixe  hundred  miles,  as  is  seene  in  the

vlaps  of  the Mariners of  those parts, but  the North

rinds  have  made  a  great  part  of  it  Sea. It  is  the  best

land  of  the World. The King  is  named Sendernaz.

The  men  and  women  are  Idolaters,  goe  naked  (save  that

Key  cover  their  privities  with  a  cloth)  have  no  Corne,

ut Rice, and  Oyle of  Sesamino, Milke, Flesh, Wine

f  trees,  abundance of  Brasill, the  best Rubies  in  the

Vorld, Saphires,  Topazes,  Amathists,  and  other  Gems.

'he  King  is  said  to  have  the  best  Rubie  in  the  World,  A  gfc

ne  palme  long,  and  as  big  as  a  mans  arme,  without  spot,  Rubie-

lining  like  a  fire,  not  to  be  bought  for  money. Cublai

an sent and offered the value  of  a  Citie for  it,  but

e  King  answered,  he  would  not  give  it  for  the  treasure

the  world,  nor  part  with  it,  having  beene  his  Ances-

urs. The men  are  unfit  for  warres, and  hire  others

len  they  have  occasion.

[§.  x.
297

lonous

A.D.

1320.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

§.X.

Of  the  firme  Land  of  the  Greater  India.

Malabar.

See  my  Pi/g.
I.  5.  c.  12.

Bead-
devotion.

Most  of  these
following  cus-
tomes  are  still
in  use,  as  in
Linschoten,
and  in  my
Pilg.  I.  5.  is
seene.

Rom  Zeilan  sayling  sixtie  miles  to  the  West  is
the  great  Province  of  Malabar,  which  is  not  an
Hand,  but  firme  Continent,  called  India  the  greater,
the  richest  Province  in  the  World.  There  are  in  it  foure
Kings,  the  chiefe  of  which  is  Senderbandi,  in  whose
Kingdome  they  fish  for  Pearles,  to  wit,  betwixt  Malabar;
and  Zeilan,  in  a  Bay  where  the  Sea  is  not  above  tent
or  twelve  fathome,  in  which  divers  descend,  and  in  bags
or  nets  tyed  to  their  bodies  bring  up  the  Oysters  inj
which  they  are.  And  because  there  are  great  fishes  whichj
kill  the  Fishermen,  they  hire  certaine  Bramines  to  charmej,
them  (being  skilfull  to  charme  all  sorts  of  beasts  alsq;
and  birds)  and  these  have  the  twentieth,  the  King  thaj
tenth.  These  Oysters  are  found  all  Aprill,  and  till  thd
midst  of  May,  and  not  else  :  in  September  they  finde  themjc
in  a  place  above  three  hundred  miles  off,  and  till  thtt
midst  of  October.  The  King  goeth  as  naked  as  thA
rest,  save  that  he  weareth  some  honorable  Ensignes,  a^
a  Coller  of  precious  stones  about  his  necke,  and  a  threecti
of  Silke  to  his  breast  with  one  hundred  and  foure  fair^
Pearles  (as  Beads)  to  number  his  Prayers,  of  which  hfj
must  daily  say  so  many  to  his  Idols :  like  Bracelets  h(t
weareth  on  three  places  of  his  armes,  and  likewise  on  hij^
legs;  and  on  his  fingers  also  and  toes.  The  prayer: jj
which  he  sayth  are  Pacauca,  pacauca,  pacauca,  one  hundreq
and  foure  times.  This  King  hath  one  thousand  women;,
and  if  any  please  his  sense  he  takes  her  ;  as  one  he  dic3[
from  his  brother,  whence  warres  had  followed,  but  th<^
mother  threatening  to  cut  off  her  breasts  which  hacf}
nourished  them,  if  they  proceeded,  stayed  the  broyle^
He  hath  many  Horseman  for  his  Guard  which  alwau
accompanie  him,  who  when  the  King  dies,  throw  them-|j
selves  voluntarily  into  the  fire  wherein  he  is  burned  tty
doe him service in the next World. This and hi:fi

298

MARCO POLO  ad.

1320.

brethren  the  Kings  of  Malabar  buy  their  Horses  from
Ormus,  and  other  parts.  The  Country  breeds  none,  and
f  it  happens  sometimes,  yet  are  they  there  bred  ill-
avoured  and  naught.  Condemned  persons  will  ofFer
themselves  to  die  in  honour  of  such  an  Idoll,  which  is
Derformed  with  twelve  Knives,  and  twelve  wounds  in
livers  parts  of  the  bodie,  at  every  blow,  saying,  I  kill  my
Jelfe  in  honour  of  that  Idol,  and  the  last  he  thrusts  in
lis  heart ;  and  then  is  burned  by  his  kindred.  The
tfives  also  cast  themselves  into  the  fire  with  their
msbands  ;  they  being  disreputed  which  refuse  it.

They  worship  Idols,  and  most  of  them  Beeves,  and
vould  not  eat  of  so  holy  flesh  as  Beefe,  for  all  the  World.  [III.  i.  105.
There  are  some  called  Gavi,  which  eate  those  Beeves
vhich  dye  alone,  may  not  kill  them,  and  dawbe  over
heir  houses  with  Oxe  dung.  These  Gavi  are  of  the
^osteritie  of  those  which  slue  Saint  Thomas,  and  cannot
nter  the  place  where  his  bodie  is,  if  ten  men  should
arrie  them.  They  sit  on  Carpets  on  the  ground  in
his  Kingdome,  they  have  no  Corne  but  Rice,  are  no
Varriours,  kill  no  beasts,  but  when  they  will  eat
ny  get  the  Saracens  to  doe  it,  or  other  people  ;  wash
wice  a  day,  morning  and  evening  both  men  and  women,
nd  will  not  otherwise  eate  ;  which  they  which  observe
ot,  are  accounted  Heretikes.  They  touch  not  their
leat  with  the  left  hand,  but  use  that  hand  only  to
ripe,  and  other  uncleane  offices.  They  drinke  each  in
is  owne  pot,  and  will  not  touch  another  mans  pot,  nor
jfFer  their  owne  to  touch  their  mouth,  but  hold  it,
ver  and  powre  it  in.  To  strangers  which  have  no
ot  they  powre  drinke  into  his  hands  to  drinke  with
lem.  Justice  is  severely  executed  for  Crimes,  and
reditors  may  encompasse  their  Debtors  with  a  Circle  Det-cirde.
hich  he  dares  not  passe  till  hee  hath  paid  or  given
-curitie  :  if  he  doth,  he  is  to  be  put  to  death  :  and  M.
larco  once  saw  the  King  himselfe  on  Horse-backe  thus
icircled  by  a  Merchant  whom  he  had  long  delayed  and
ustrated,  neither  would  the  King  goe  out  of  the  Circle

299

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1320.

which  the  Merchant  had  drawne  till  he  had  satisfied  him
the  people  applauding  the  Kings  Justice.

They  are  very  scrupulous  in  drinking  Wine  0
the  Grape,  and  they  which  doe  it  are  not  admitted  t<
be  Witnesse  ;  a  thing  denyed  also  to  him  which  sayles  b;
Sea,  for  they  say  such  men  are  desperate.  They  think
Leachery  no  sinne.  It  is  very  hote,  and  they  have  n«
raine  but  in  June,  July,  and  August,  without  whicl
refreshing  of  the  Ayre  they  could  not  live.  They  hav
many  Physiognomers and  Sooth-sayers,  which  observe  beast
and  Birds,  and  have  an  unluckie  houre  every  day  of  th
weeke,  called  Choiach,  as  on  Munday  betwixt  tw«
and  three,  on  Tuesday,  the  third  houre,  on  Wednesda;
the  ninth,  &c.  thorow  all  the  yeare  set  downe  in  thei
Bookes. They  curiously  observe  Nativities  :  at  thirteen^

Boyesputto yeares  old  they  put  the  Boyes  to  get  their  owne  livings

timely  shifts.  wj1j|c|1  runne  Up  anc[  down  to  buy  and  sell,  having
a  little  stocke  given  them  to  begin  :  and  in  Pearle-seasoi
they  buy  a  few  Pearles,  and  sell  them  againe  to  th
Merchants,  which  cannot  well  endure  the  Sunne  for  littL
gaine.  What  they  get  they  bring  to  their  Mothers  t<
dresse  for  them,  but  may  not  eate  at  their  Fathers  cost

Their  Idols  fcf They have  Idols Males and  Females,  to  which  the;
otanes.  Q^Qr fa^ Daughters, which when the Monkes (o

Priests)  appoint,  sing  and  dance  to  cheere  the  Idols
and  divers  times  set  victuals  before  them  saying,  tha
they  eat,  leaving  it  the  space  of  a  meale,  singing  thi
while,  and  then  they  fall  to  eating  in  deed,  after  whicl
they  returne  home.  The  cause  of  these  solaces  is  th«
household  quarrels  betwixt  the  God  and  his  Goddesse,j
which  if  they  should  not  thus  appease,  they  should  los«t
their  blessing.

The  great  men  have  Litters  of  large  Canes,  which  theu
can  fasten  artificially  to  some  upper  place,  to  prevent  Taran-t

Malabar  is  by  tulas  byting  and  Fleas,  and  other  Vermine  ;  and  for  fresh

ekxteidldto  Aire*  The  Place  of  Saint  Thomas  his  Sepulchre,  is  I
Choromandel  smaU  Citie,  smally  frequented  by  Merchants,  infinitely
also.  by  Christians  and  Saracens  for  devotion. The  Saracen*

300

MARCO POLO  a.d.

1320.

old  him  a  great  Prophet,  and  called  him  Ananias,  that  is
holy  man.  The  Christians  take  of  the  Earth  where
e  was  slaine,  which  is  red,  and  carry  it  with  them  with
reat  reverence,  and  give  it  mixed  with  water  to  the  sicke.
Anno  1288.  A  great  Prince  having  more  Rice  then
)ome  to  lay  it  in,  made  bold  with  Saint  Thomas  his
Church  in  the  roome  where  Pilgrimes  were  received,
ut  by  a  Vision  of  Saint  Thomas  in  the  night  was  so
irrified  that  he  quickly  freed  the  place.  The  Inhabitants
•e  black,  not  so  borne,  but  often  anoynt  themselves  with
essamine  Oyle  to  obtayne  that  beautie  :  they  paint  the
>evill  white,  and  their  Idols  blacke.  The  Beeve-
orshippers  carry  with  them  to  battell,  some  of  the  haire
r  a  wild  Oxe  as  a  preservative  against  dangers  :  and
erefore  such  haires  are  dearely  prized.

Murphili  or  Monsul  is  Northward  from  Malabar  five  Murphill.
andred  miles,  they  are  Idolaters. They  have  Diamonds
their hils, which they  search  for after great  raines.
fest-wards from Saint Thomas is Lac, whence the  Lac
-amines  have  originall,  which  are  the  truest  Merchants  Br  amines.
the  World,  and  will  not  lye  for  any  thing,  and  trustily
epe  any  thing  committed  to  their  custodie,  or  sell,  or
rter Merchandice for others. They are  knowne  by
Cotton threed which they weare over the sholder
ed  under  the  arme  crossing  the  brest. They  have  but
e  Wife,  are  great  Diviners,  of  great  abstinence  and  long
z  :  observe  their  owne  shadow  in  the  Sunne  when  they
1 to  buy, and thence conjecture according to their
scipline. They  used  to  chew  a  certayne  Herbe  which  Betre,  or
ikes  their  teeth  good  and  helpes  digestion. There  are  Bej? /J?fterh  ,
Tie  Religious  of  them  called  Tingui,  which  goe  alto-  an^  jrecam
ther naked, live austerely, worshippe the Beeve,
lereof  they  have  a  little  brasse  Image  on  their  forehead,
d  of  the  Oxe  bones  ashes  make  an  Ointment,  where -
:h  they  anoynt  their  bodies  in  divers  places  with  great
'erence. They  nor  kill  nor  eate  any  quicke  creature,
r  herbe  greene,  or  Root  before  it  is  dryed,  esteeming
things  to  have  a  soule. They  use  no  Dishes  but  lay

301

A.D.
1320.

[III.  i.  I06.]

Adams
sepulchre.
Sogomonbar-
chan  the  first
cause  of
Idolatrie.

Cans
superstition.

Cael.

PURCHAS HIS PXLGRIMES

their  Viands  on  dry  leaves  of  Apples  of  Paradize.  They
doe  their  Excrements  in  the  Sands,  and  then  disperse  it
hither  and  thither,  lest  it  should  breed  Wormes  which
must  presently  dye  for  want  of  food.  Some  of  them
live  to  one  hundred  and  fiftie  yeares,  and  their  bodies
after  death  are  burned.

In  Zeilan  I  had  forgot  to  tell  of  a  high  Mountayne,
which  none  can  ascend  but  by Iron chaines, as I was
told, in the top whereof  the Saracens say is Adams
Sepulchre,  the Idolater  say  it  is  the  body  of  Sogomon-
barchan  the  first  Idol-founder,  sonne  to  a  King  of  that
Hand,  which  gave himselfe  to  a  solitarie  life  on  the  top
of  this hill, whence  no  pleasures  nor  perswasions  could
draw  him. His  Father  made  an  Image  after  his  death  to
represent him, all of  Gold  adorned  with  Gemmes,  and
commanded all the Ilanders  to  worship  it, and hencej-e;
began  Idolatry. Hither they come from farre places
in  Pilgrimage  ; and there his  haire, teeth, and  a  dishtc
of  his  are  reserved,  and  solemnly  shewed. The  Saracensjie
say  they  are  of  Adam, which report caused the Can,i
Anno  1 28 1.  to  send  Ambassadors  thither,  who  obtaynede
two  teeth,  and  a  dish,  and  some  of  his  haires  by  grant  of
the King of  Zeilan  ; which he caused to be receivedo
by  the  whole  people  of  Cambalu,  without  the  Citie,  and
brought  to  his  presence  with  great  honour.

Cael is a  great  Citie  governed  by  Astar,  one  of  the
foure  Brethren,  very  rich  and  good  user  of  Merchants
he  hath  three  hundred  women. All the people havejjie
a  custome  to  Carrie  in  their  mouthes  chawing,  a  leafe  called
Tembul,  with  Spices  and  Lime. Coulam  is  five  hundred
miles North-west from Malabar, they are Idolaters;
there  are  also  Christians  and  Jewes  which  have  a  speech
by  themselves. They  have  Pepper,  Brasill,  Indico,  Lions
all blacke, Parrets of  divers sorts, all  white  as Snow,^
others  Azure,  others  Red, and  some very  little  : Pea-
cockes and Pea-hens much differing from ours, andSp
greater,  as  are their fruits. They  are leacherous,  and^
marrie  their  sisters  and  kindred. There  are  many  Astro-

302

MARCO POLO

A.D.

>gers and Physicians. In Cumari are Apes so great  CumlrTor
lat they seeme men: and here we had sight of the  Cape  Comoro
forth  starre Dely  hath  a  proper  King  and  Language: Del,
lie people Idolatrous and have store  of  Spices. The
Juppes  of  Mangi  come  thither.
Malabar  is  a  Kingdome  in  the  West,  to  which  and  in
uzzerat  are  many  Pirats,  which  come  to  Sea  with  above  Pirates,  still
he  hundred  Sails,  and  rob  Merchants. They  bring  with  used-
| em  their  wives  and  children,  and  there  abide  all  Summer.
Ii  Guzzerat  is  store of  Cotton,  the  Trees  six  fathoms
It  paces)  high,  and  dure  twentie  yeeres ;  the  Cotton  of
je  old  Trees  is not  good  to  spin,  after  they  are  past
j'elve yeeres old, but for Quilts. There are many
jUnicornes  :  they  have  artificial!  embroideries. In  Canam  *Hereby
I  store of  Frankincense;  it is a great  Citie, where  is  aPPears  the
jeat trade for Horses. In Cambaia is much Indico Unkorne  hee
lockram and  Cotton Servenath  is a  Kingdome  of  a  E*
culiar language,  Idolaters,  Merchants,  a  good  people,  fir  India  hath
lesmacoran is a great Kingdome of Idolaters and  mother.
racens,  the  last  Province  of  the  greater  India  towards
2  Northwest  (understand  the  Author  according  to  his
irney,  from  China  or  Mangi  by  Sea)  five  hundred  miles
>m  which,  are  said  to  be  two  Hands,  one  of  Men,  the  These  Re/
ler of  Women, those  comming to these, and there  tions  whk
ying March Aprill, and May. The Women  keepe  ffiA,
ar  Sonnes till  twelve  yeeres,  and  then  send them  to  others,  are  0J
IT  fathers. It  seemes  the  Ayre  admits  no  other  course,  ksse  weight:
ey  are  Christians  and  have  their  Bishop,  subject  to  the  ■?">  thereM
hop  of  Soccotera ;  they  are  good  Fishers  and  have  store  fjvw  th,
Ambar. Soccotera  hath an  Archbishop, not subject  PLplt.
tne  rope,  but  to  one  Zatolia  which  resides  in  Baldach,  /  had  trouble
o  chooseth  him. The  Soccoterans  are  Inchanters  and  enou^htofinde
at  Witches,  as  any  in the  world  (howsoever excom-  "ffZf^,
tnicated  therefore  by their Prelate)  and  raise  Windes  >X£
bring backe such ships as have wronged them, in  such  hearesay-
i.pite  of  all  contrarie  working.  fables,  as  that

4  thousand  miles  thence  Southward  is  Magastar,  one  f  *?*>  **'?
I  the greatest  and richest Isles of  the  World, Jhree  l.Ze

303

A.D.
1320.

I2700.
Hands.
India  major,
media  and

Abascia,  or
India  media.

Solda:n  of
Ade  m.

frankincense.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

thousand  miles  in  circuit,  inhabited  by  Saracens,  governed

by  foure  old  men. The  People  live  of  merchandise,  and

sell great  store of  Elephants teeth. The Currents in

these  parts  are  of  exceeding  force. They  tell  of  Fowles,

called  Ruch,  like  an  Eagle,  but  of  incomparable great-

nesse,  able  to  carrie  an  Elephant  (but  I  am  not  able  to

carrie  it.) Zenzibar  also  is  said  to  bee  of  great  length,

&c.  there  are  Elephants,  Giraffas,  sheepe  unlike  to  ours :

the  Men  and  Women  are  very  deformed. I  have  heard

Mariners  and  great  Pilots  of  those  parts  report,  and  have

seene in  their writings,  which have compassed  the  Sea

of  India,  that  there  are  in  it  twelve  thousand  and  sever

hundred Hands, inhabited or desart. In India  major.

which is from Malabar to Chesmacoran are thirteen*

Kingdomes. India  minor  is  from  Ziambi  to  Murfili,  ir

which  are  eight  Kingdomes,  besides  Hands  many. The

second or middle India,  is  called  Abascia. The chief*!

King  is  a Christian; there are  six other  ^  Kings,  thre<

Christians,  and  three  Saracens,  subject  to  him  :^  there  an

also Jewes. Saint  Thomas having preached in Nubia

came to  Abascia,  and there did the  like, and  after  tc

Malabar. They are great Warriors, alway in Arme

against  the  Soldan  of  Adem,  and  the  people  of  Nubia.

heard that An. 1288. the  great Abissine  would hav

visited Jerusalem, but being disswaded by reason o

Saracen  Kingdomes  in  the  way,  he  sent  a  Bishop  of  hoi;

life  to  doe  his  devotions,  who  in  his  returne  was  takei

by  the  Soldan  of  Adem,  and  circumcised  by  force :  where

upon  the  Abissine  raysed  a  power,  discomfited  the  Solda

with two other Mahumetan Kings, tooke  and spoyle

Adem. Abascia is rich in gold. Escier  is subject

Adem  fortie  miles  distant  South-east:  where  is  store

white  Frankincense  very  good,  which  drops  from  sma

Trees  by  incision  of  the  barke ;  a  rich  merchandise,  &<

Some  in  that  Countrey  for  want  of  Corne  make  Bisk*

of  Fish,  whereof  they  have  great  plentie. They  also  feed

their  beasts  with  fishes. They  take  them  in  March,  Apn

and  May,  &c.

3°4

t

MARCO POLO  a.d.

TT •  i  r  I320*

Having  spoken  of  the  Provinces  on  the  Coast,  I  will
now  returne  to  some  Provinces  more  to  the  North,  where  [III.  i.  107  ]
many  Tartars dwell, which have  a King  called  Caidu,  Cdduandhis
of  the  Race  of  Cingis  Can,  but  subject  to  none. These  Northerne
observe  the  customes  of  their  old  Progenitors,  dwell  not  Tartars-
in  Cities,  Castles,  or  Fortresses,  but  abide  with  their  King
in the Fields, Playnes, Valleyes, and Forests, and are
esteemed  true  Tartars. They  have  no  sort  of  Corne,  but
live  of  Flesh  and  Milke  in  great  peace. They  have  store
of  Horses, Kine,  Sheepe,  and  other  beasts. There  are
found great white Beares, twentie palmes long, black
Foxes very great, wilde  Asses, and  little beasts  called
Rondes  which  beare  the  Sable  Furres,  and  Vari  arcolini,
and  those  which  are  called  Pharaos  rats,  which  the  Tartars
are  cunning  to  take. The  great  Lakes  which  are  frozen
except in a  few moneths  of  the  yeere,  cause  that  the
Summer  is  scarce  to  bee  travelled  for  myre. And  there-
fore the Merchants  to  buy their Furres,  for  fourteene
dayes  journey  thorow  the  Desart,  have  set  up  for  each
day  a  house  of  Wood,  where  they  abide  and  barter :  and
in  Winter  they  use  Sleds  without  wheeles,  and  plaine  in  Traguk.
the  bottome,  rising  with  a  semi-circle  at  the  top  or  end,
drawne easily  on the Ice by beasts like great  Dogs*  *Perhaps
six yoked  by  couples,  the  Sledman  only  with  his  Mer-  these  are  a
chant  and  Furres  sitting  therein.  kindof  Deere.

In  the  end  of  the  Region  of  these  Tartars,  is  a  Countrey  &*&o*  of
reaching  to  the  furthest  North,  called  Darknesse,  because  Darknesse-
the  most  part  of  the  Winter  moneths  the  Sunne  appeares
not,  and  the  Ayre  is  thicke  and  darkish,  as  betimes  in  the
morning  with  us.  The  men  there  are  pale  and  great,
have  no  Prince,  and  live  like  beasts.  The  Tartars  oft  rob
them  of  their  Cattell  in  those  darke  moneths,  and  lest  they
should  lose  their  way,  they  ride  on  Mares  which  have
Colts  sucking,  which  they  leave  with  a  Guard  at  the
entrance  of  that  Countrey,  where  the  Light  beginneth
to  faile,  and  when  they  have  taken  their  prey  give  reynes
to  the  Mares,  which  hasten  to  their  Colts.  In  their  long
continued  day  of  Summer  they  take  many  the  finest
XI  305  u

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1320.

Furres  (one  occasion  of  the  Tartars  going  to  rob  them)
of  which  I  have  heard  some  are  brought  into  Russia.
Russia.  Russia  is  a  great  Countrey  in  that  Northerne  Darknesse :
the  people  are  Greeke  Christians,  the  Men  and  Women
faire,  and  pay  Tribute  to  the  King  of  the  Tartars  of
the  West,  on  whom  they  border  on  the  East.  There
is  store  of  Furres,  Waxe,  and  Minerals  of  silver.  It
reacheth,  as  I  was  told,  to  the  Ocean  Sea;  in  which
are  store  of  Gerfalcons  and  Falcons.

To  the  Reader.

IN  this  admirable  Voyage  of  Polo,  I  confesse,  Inopem
me  copia  fecit ;  the  Translation  which  I  had  of
Master  Hakluyts  from  the  corrupted  Latine,  being
lesse  than  nothing  (nimirum  dam  no  auctus  fui)  did
me  no  steed  but  losse,  whiles  I  would  compare  it  with
the  Latine,  and  thought  to  amend  it  by  the  Italian ;  and
was  forced  at  last  to  reject  both  Latine  and  English,  and
after  much  vexation  to  present  thee  this,  as  it  is,  out
of  Ramusio.  I  have  not  given  thee  word  for  word  as
an  exact  Translator,  but  the  sense  in  all  things  substan-
tial!, with  longer  Relations  then  I  have  admitted  in  others,
because  many  which  have  read  M.  Paulus,  never  saw
M.  Polo,  nor  know  the  worth  of  the  worthiest  Voyage,
that  perhaps  any  one  man  hath  written ;  a  man  credible
in  that  which  hee  saw  himselfe,  in  some  things  received
by  Relation,  rather  telling  what  he  heard,  then  that  which
I  dare  beleeve,  and  specially  toward  the  end  of  his  third
Booke,  which  I  have  therefore  more  abridged.  Pitie  it  is
that  time  hath  so  gnawne  and  eaten  some-where,  and
some-where  devoured  utterly  many  his  names  and  Tracts,
which  new  Lords  and  new  Lawes,  (the  Saracenicall  Con-
quests, especially  ever  since  his  time)  in  those  parts  have
caused.  And  farre  easier  by  the  Cans  greatnesse  then,  and
his  employments  under  him,  might  hee  know  the  World
in  those  times ;  then  in  the  combustions  long  since
begunne  and  still  continued,  in  diversified  and  quarrel-
ling States is possible  : the Saracens quarrelling with

306

MARCO  POLO  a.d.

T7  u -i  r*  1625.

1  Jkthnikes, Christians, and other Saracens  ; the Tartars
J  divided and sub-divided into so many quarrelsome
Serpentine  heads,  whereby that  hugenesse  is broken  in
j  pieces ; the Chinois and others prohibiting ingresse of
'  strangers, egresse of  their owne ; that I mention not
Ethnikc and Moorish Divisions amongst themselves.
In the same time with Polo, lived this following
I  Armenian, of  whom Ramusio relateth, and this Dis-  See  Tom.  1. 1.
:  course  intimateth  that  the  Holy  Land  being  quite  lost, 8' c'  4- §-  3-
•  Pope  Clement  the  Fift  minding  to  recover  it,  was  given
{  to understand of  helpes which might be gotten from
[the Tartars, and withall of this Haiton  or  Antonie  a
I  Kinsman  of  the  King  of  Armenia,  then  living  a  Monke
or  Frier  of  the  Order  Premonstratensis  in  Episcopia  in
Cyprus; who in his young time had beene exercised
in  the  Warres  betwixt  the  Tartars  and  Egyptian  Soldans,
by whom he might receive the best Intelligence of
Tartarian Affaires. He  therefore  (as  hee  first  removed
the  Court  from  Rome  to  France,  where  it  abode  seventie
jyeares) caused the said Hay  ton to be brought from
•Cyprus  to  France  with  all  his  Memorials and  Writings
(of  that subject, and being comne to Poitiers, caused
one  Nicolo  di  Falcon  a  Frenchman  to  write  in  French,
'which the  other  dictated in  Armenian,  which  was  done
Anno 1307. A  Copie  of  this  Storie  written  above  two
hundred  yeares  since  came  to  Ramusioes  hand  (whereto  I
here,  that  I  say  not  you,  are  beholden)  whence  hee  tooke
that  which  concerned  the  Tartars,  omitting  the  rest,  or
remitting  rather  his  Reader  to  M.  Polo. Betwixt  which
two  some  difference  may  seeme,  but  so  little,  that  Wise-
men  need  no  advertisement  thereof.

One  thing  is  remarkable,  that  the  Author  and  the  next,
tfho  in  many  Geographicall  Notes  agrees  with  him,  divide
Asia  into  two  parts,  one  called  profound  or  deepe,  the
)ther  the  greater,  and  divided  in  the  midst  by  the  [in.  i.  I08.]
-aspian  Sea,  and  Caucasus,  which  our  Armenian  cals
Cocas,  which  Alexander  passed  not,  nor  was  ever  well
cnowne  to  the  Ancients,  who  called  all  beyond  that  Hill

307

A.D.
1625.

Haiton  and

Mandevils

agree  in  many

things.

The  reason  of

our  method  in

thus  ordering

our  Pi/grimes.

*Strab.l.\i,

ad  eum  Nat.

Casaub.

*Dionys.
Alex.

Tepieyecrs.
Vld. \$

Eustach.  com.

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

Scythia,  as  wee  now  call  the  most  of  it  by  a  generall  name
Tartaria.  Strabo  *  hath  made  like  division  of  Asia  into
the  inner  and  utter,  Taurus  being  the  Umpire,  which  Hill
(with  divers  Appellations)  beginning  at  Pamphylia  runnes
Eastwards  thorow  the  midst  of  Asia  to  the  Indies,  that
part  to  the  North  being  called  Asia  within  (Taurus)  and
that  to  the  South  Asia  without.  Some  ancient  Geographers
as  Dionysius  mentions,  extended  Europe  to  the  Caspian
Sea,  which  most  of  the  Ancients  thought  to  concurre  with
the  Ocean,  as  the  Mediterranean,  Arabian,  and  Persian
doe. Dionysius  his  Verses  are  worth  observation,

MeWa  *  yejmriv  irdcrrjs  A(riijs  opog  aurpifBefiriKev
A'p^dfAevov  <yaiw  HafKpvXiSo^  a^pi  kcu  Iv'Swv,  &C.
They  called  it  Taurus,  as  there  followes  of  the  Bull-
forme,  &c.

Ovveica  Tavpocpaves  re/ccu  d£vKapr}vov  63'ovei,
Hereof  we  are  the  more  curious,  to  give  the  more
curious  a  reason  of  our  method  in  this  Worke,  who  in
our  former  Tome  have  first  encompassed  the  shoares
of  Asia  from  the  West  to  the  East  :  and  then  in  the
In-land  parts  have  in  the  eight  and  ninth  Bookes  prin-
cipally (as  Voyages  gave  leave)  viewed  Asia  without
Taurus,  and  to  the  South  of  the  Caspian  :  but  this
Profound  or  Inner,  more  unknovvne  part,  we  survay
here,  where  we  handle  the  Voyages  and  Discoveries  of
those  parts  of  the  World,  which  the  Ancients  knew
very  little  or  not  at  all.  And  indeed,  how  little  was
Mangi,  Cataio,  or  Tartaria  knowne,  till  the  Tartars
obtruded  upon  the  World,  a  terrible  knowledge  oi
themselves,  in  manner  as  Rubruquius  and  the  former;
Friers,  with  these  Gentlemen,  Polo  and  Haiton  describe  l\
Yea,  how  were  they  by  ignorance  of  following  times
buried  againe,  till  Portugall,  English,  and  other  moderne
Voyages  have  revived  them,  as  it  were  in  a  resurrection?;
and  that  often  in  new  names,  as  if  they  had  suffered  that
imeT€fx^vx^cri^  so  often  here  rehearsed,  and  so  much
credited in many Religions of  those Easterne Asians.!

308

ANTHONY THE ARMENIAN

whence  it  comes  that  they  are  hardly  knowne  to  be
the  same.  The  Reader  must  pardon  me  (or  go  to  the
Author  himselfe)  if  I  have  here  omitted  some  pieces  of
Haiton,  which  you  have  had  in  Polo  and  others  before,
specially  not  so  pertinent  to  our  present  Tartarian  subject.
The  figures  note  the  Chapters,  after  the  Latine,  from
which  Ramusios  Division  is  much  divided,  and  we  there-
fore from  both.

A.D.

l3°7-

Chap. V.

The  Historie  of  Ayton,  or  Anthonie  the
Armenian,  of  Asia,  and  specially  touching
the Tartars.

§.  i.

Of  the  Kingdome  of  Cathay,  and  divers  other
Provinces  of  Asia,  and  of  the  first  habita-
tion of  the  Tartars  :  and  of  Cangius,  or
Cingis his  beginnings.

He  Kingdome  of  Cathay,  is the  greatest  The  largenesse
that is to be  found  in  the  World,  and  of  the  King-
is  replenished with people and infinite  w*tj*
riches  ; beeing  situated  on  the  shoare  of
the Ocean Sea ; In the which there
are  so  many Islands,  that their number  Hands.
can no wayes be knowne. For never
was  there  any  man  that  could  say  he  had  seene  all  those
Islands  ;  But  those  of  them  which  have  beene  frequented,
lare  found  to  abound  with  innumerable  wealth  and  trea-
isures;  and  that  which  is  there  most  esteemed,  and  deerest
sould, is Oyle of Olives, which the Kings and  Com-  Oile  of  olives,
imanders there cause to be kept with great diligence,
as  a Sovereigne  Medicinable  thing  ; And  moreover,  in
the Kingdome of Cathay, are many marvellous and
monstrous things, which I forbeare to mention. The
Inhabitants  of  those  parts  are  exceeding  wise  and  subtill,

309

A.D.

I307.

Their

arrogant

presumption.

Effeminate
fearfulnesse.

[III.  i.  109.]

See  Sir  John

Mandevils

travels.

Of  the  King-
dome  of  Tarsa.

Wit  and

inclination.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

replenished  with  all  kind  of  skill  and  cunning,  insomuch,
that  they  disdaine  the  endeavours  of  all  other  Nations,  in
all  kind  of  Arts,  and  Sciences  :  saying,  that  they  only  see
with  two  Eyes,  the  Latines  but  with  one  eye,  and  that  all
other  Nations  are  blind.  And  albeit  they  are  exceeding
sharpe-sighted  in  the  exercise  of  all  bodily  workes  and
labours  ;  yet  is  there  not  amongst  them  any  knowledge
of  spirituall  things  ;  the  men  of  that  Countrey  are  not
bold,  or  couragious,  but  more  fearefull  of  death  then
befitteth  such  as  beare  Armes ;  yet  are  they  very  ingenious,
and  have  oftener  had  victorie  of  their  enemies  by  Sea,
then  by  Land  :  the  money  used  in  those  parts,  is  of
square  peeces  of  Paper,  signed  with  the  Kings  signe,
according  to  which  signe  or  marke  the  pieces  are  of
greater  or  smaller  value  ;  and  if  they  begin  by  age  to  be
wasted,  or  worne  out,  hee  that  bringeth  them  to  the
Kings  Court  shall  have  new  for  them  ;  of  Gold  and
other  Metals,  they  make  Vessels,  and  other  ornaments.
Of  this  Kingdome  of  Cathay  it  is  said,  that  it  is  in  the
beginning  of  the  World,  because  the  head  thereof  is
in  the  East,  and  there  is  not  knowne  any  other  Nation
to  inhabit  more  Easterly  thereabouts  ;  on  the  West  it
connneth  on  the  Kingdome  of  Tarsa,  on  the  North  with
the  Desert  of  Belgian.  And  on  the  South-side  are  the
Hands  of  the  Ocean,  afore  mentioned.

2.  In  the  Kingdom  of  Tarsa  are  three  Provinces,
whose  Rulers  are  also  called  Kings,  the  men  of  that
Countrie  are  called  Jogour,  they  have  alwayes  worshipped
Idols,  and  yet  doe  except  the  ten  Kindreds  of  those
Kings,  who  by  the  guiding  of  a  Starre  came  to  worship
the  Nativitie  in  Bethleem  Juda.  And  there  are  yet
found  many  great  and  noble  among  the  Tartarians  of
that  Race,  which  hold  firmely  the  Faith  of  Christ.  But
the  rest  which  are  Idolaters  in  those  parts,  are  of  no
estimation  in  the  matter  of  Armes,  yet  are  they  of  a
piercing  wit  for  the  learning  of  all  Arts  and  Sciences.
They  have  peculiar  Letters  or  Characters  of  their  owne.
And  almost  all the Inhabitants  of  those  parts  abstayne

310

ANTHONY THE ARMENIAN  a.d.

I3°7*
from eating of flesh and drinking of  Wine, neither  Manners  and

would  they  by  any  meanes  bee  brought  to  kill  ought  es-
that  hath  life.  Their  Cities  are  very  pleasant  and  they
have  great  Temples  in  which  they  worship  their  Idols.
Corne  groweth  there  abundantly,  and  all  good  kind  of
Graine.  But  they  are  without  Wine,  and  hold  it  a
sinne  to  drinke  it,  as  doe  also  the  Agarens.  This  King-
dome  of  Tarsa  on  the  East-side  confineth  with  the
Kingdome  of  Cathay,  as  aforesaid ;  on  the  West  it
bordereth  on  the  Kingdome  of  Turquestan,  on  the  North
on  a  certayne  Desert,  and  on  the  South-side  it  adjoyneth
to  a  very  rich  Province  called  Sym,  which  is  situate  Sym.
betweene  the  Kingdome  of  India  and  Cathaia,  and  in
that  Province  are  found  Diamonds.

3.  The  Kingdome  of  Turquestan  on  the  East  side  is  Of  the
confined  with  the  Kingdome  of  Tarsa,  on  the  West  side Kingdome  of
with the  Kingdome  of  the  Persians,  on  the  North  side  Tur(luestan-
with  the  Kingdome  of  the  Corasmians,  and  on  the  South

it  reacheth  out  to  the  Desart  of  India. In  this  Kingdome

are  but  few  good  Cities,  but  there  are  large  Plaines  and

good  feeding  for  their  flockes,  therefore  the Inhabitants  The

for  the  most  part  are  Shepherds,  dwelling  in  Tents,  and  Inhabitants

houses  that  may  easily  bee  removed  from  place  to  place. ***

The  greatest Citie  of  that  Kingdome is called Ocerra,  Ocerra.

there groweth but  little Barley or Wheate  : no  Wine

at  all. Their  Drinke  is  Cursia,  and  other  made  Drinks,  Cursia.

and Milke,  they  eate  Rice and Millet, and flesh,  and

are  called  Turkes. And  almost  all  of  them  are  of  the  Turkes.

Sect of  wicked Mahomet,  yet  there  are  some  amongst

them  of  no  Faith  nor  Religion. They  have  no  peculiar

Characters  of  their  owne,  but  doe  use  the  Arabike  Letters

in  their  Cities  or  Campes.

4.  The  Kingdome  of  the  Corasmians,  is  well stored  Of  the  King-
with good Cities and Townes, and  there are many  d°me  °ffhe
Inhabitants, because the Land  is  fruitfull and pleasant,

and  wheate,  and  other  graine,  is  there  in  great  quantitie  ;
but  they  have  little  Wine.  This  Kingdome  is  confined
with a Wildernesse of one hundred dayes Journey,

311

A.D.

l3°7-

Corasme.
Soldini.

Of  the
Kingdome  of
Cumania.
This  extre-
mitie  comes  by
the  long
presence  in
Summer,  and
absence  of  the
Sunne  by
Winter.

Cocas  or
Caucasus.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

in  length  on  the  West-side,  it  reacheth  out  to  the
Caspian  Sea.  On  the  North  it  bordereth  on  the  King-
dome  of  Cumania,  and  on  the  South  it  hath  the
Kingdome  of  Turquestan.  The  chiefe  Citie  of  that
Kingdome  is  called  Corasme,  and  the  people  are  called
Corasmians,  being  Pagans,  which  have  neither  Learning,
nor  Religion.  But  those  which  are  called  Soldini,  are
very  fierce  in  Armes,  and  have  their  Language  and
Letters,  and  Ceremonies  of  the  Greekes,  and  make  the
bodie  of  Christ  after  the  Greeke  manner,  and  are  obedient
to  the  Patriarkes  of  Antioch.

5.  The  Kingdome  of  Cumania  is  very  great  :  yet  by
reason  of  the  distemperature  of  the  Ayre,  it  is  ill  in-
habited :  for  in  the  Winter  season,  the  cold  is  so  great
in  some  places,  that  neither  man  nor  beast  can  any  way
live  therein.  And  againe  in  some  places,  the  heate  of
Summer  is  so  great,  that  none  can  endure  the  same,
nor  the  flyes  which  abound  there.  This  Kingdome
of  Cumania,  is  in  a  manner  all  plaine,  and  there  are
no  Trees,  nor  any  Wood  to  bee  found  therein,  unlesse
it  be  about  some  Cities,  which  have  certayne  Orchards.
The  people  inhabit  in  Fields,  and  in  Tents  burning  the
dung  of  beasts  in  steed  of  Wood  :  This  Kingdome  of
Cumania  on  the  East-side,  hath  the  Kingdome  of
Corasmia,  and  a  certayne  Desert  or  Wildernesse ;  on
the  West-side  is  the  great  Sea  called  Pontus  Euxinus,
and  the  Sea  of  Tanais  :  on  the  North-side  it  confineth
on  the  Kingdome  of  Cassia,  and  on  the  South-side,
it  reacheth  out  to  a  certayne  great  River  called  Etil,
which  every  yeare  is  frozen,  and  sometimes  remayneth
all  the  yeare  so  hardly  frozen,  that  men  and  beasts  goe
thereon  as  on  Land,  on  the  bankes  of  that  River,  are
found  certayne  small  Trees.  But  beyond  and  on  the
other  side  of  that  River,  are  divers  and  sundry  Nations
inhabiting,  which  are  not  accounted  of  the  Kingdome
of  Cumania,  and  yet  are  obedient  to  the  King  thereof:
And  some  there  are  which  inhabit  about  the  Mountayne
Cocas,  which  is  exceeding  great  and  high. The  Astures

312

ANTHONY THE ARMENIAN  a.d.

1307-

and  other  ravenous  Birds,  breeding  in  that  Mountayne,
are all  white,  and that Mountayne is seated betweene
two  Seas  ; for on the West  is the great Euxine Sea,
and the Caspian Sea on the East, which Caspian Sea
hath  no  entrance  into  the  Ocean,  but  is  as  a  Lake  which
only  for his  greatnesse hath the name of  a  Sea,  for  it
is  the  greatest  Lake  that  is  to  bee  found  in  the  World,  See  after
reaching from the said Mountayne Caucasus, even to  ^haPter  47-
the  head of  the Kingdome  of  Persia, and divideth  all
Asia  into two  parts,  whereof  that  which  is  towards  the  [III.  i.  no.]
East  is  called  Asia  profunda,  and  that  which  is  on  the
West  is  called  Asia  major,  or  the  greater  Asia,  and  many
good  fishes  are  in  that  Lake.

6.  The  Kingdome  of  India  is  very  long,  and  situated  India.
on  the  Ocean  Sea,  which  in  those  parts  is  called  the
Indian  Sea.  This  Kingdome  beginneth  from  the  Con-
fines of  Persia,  and  extendeth  by  East  unto  a  Province
called  Balaris,  in  which  are  found  the  precious  stones
which  wee  call  Balayes.  On  the  North-side  is  that  long  Note  that  °f
and  great  Desart  of  India,  where the Emperour  Alex-  Ak*™fer*»

D  *  1  great the

ander  is  said  to  have  found  so  many  Serpents,  and  such  Saracens  and

diversitie  of  Beasts inhabiting. In that  Kingdome  it  is  Pagans  have

that Saint  Thomas preached the Faith of  Christ, and  many and

converted many people and Provinces. But because  5tran&efables^

.  never  heard  of

fthey  are so  farre  distant  and  remote  from  other  places  in  these  parts ;

and parts of Christendome, the Christian Religion is  as  here  of

there  much  diminished,  for  there  is  but  one Citie  that  Orlando,

lis  inhabited  with Christians,  the  rest  having  wholy  for-  ^thur>

>aken the profession of Christianitie. On the South-  Qthers.  *

side of  this Kingdome is a very long reach of the  See  in  Polo.

Ocean,  in  the  which  are  many  Hands,  but  their  Inhabi-  Persia  and

bans  be  all  blacke,  going  altogether  naked  for  heat,  and  Meata  are

worship  Idols  like fooles. In those Hands are found

orecious  stones,  Pearles,  and Gold, and sundry Spices,

ind medicinable drugs helpfull unto men. There is

dso a certayne Hand called Celan  or Zeilan,  knowne

n  ancient time by  the name of  Taprobana, in which

tre  found  Rubies  and Saphires, and the King of  that

313

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1307.

Hand  hath  the  greatest  and  best  Rubie  that  is  any  where
to  be  found,  which  when  hee  is  to  be  crowned  King,  he
holdeth  in  his  hand  riding  round  about  the  Citie,  and
is  afterwards  obeyed  of  all  as  King.

Armenia.  9.  In  the  Land  of  Armenia  there  are  foure  Kingdomes:

yet  have  they  alwayes  beene  subject  to  one  King  only.
The  length  of  the  Kingdome  of  Armenia  beginneth  at
the  Confines  of  Persia,  and  reacheth  out  West-ware
even to the Kingdome of Turkic The breadth of

Miralis,orthe  Armenia begins at the Citie Miralis, called the Iron

IDerbent,n°W  Gate>  and  extendeth  even  to  the  Kingdome  of  Media
In  Armenia  there  are  many  great  and  very  rich  Cities,
of  which  Tauris  is  the  chiefe  :  they  have  both  Char-!
acters  of  their  owne,  called  the  Armenian  Letters,  and
others  also  which  they  call  Haloen.  In  Armenia  1
the  highest  Hill  or  Mountayne  that  is  in  the  World,!
which  is  commonly  called  Arath,  or  Ararat,  and  on  the
top  of  that  Mountayne,  the  Arke  of  Noah  rested  first'
after  the  Deluge.  And  albeit  for  the  abundance  of
Snow  which  is  alwayes  on  that  Mountayne,  both  Winter
and  Summer  none  is  able  to  goe  up  the  same,  yet  is
there  alwayes  seene  in  the  top  thereof  a  certaine  blacke
thing,  which  men  affirme  to  be  the  Arke.

Georgia.  10.  The  Kingdome  of  Georgia  on  the  East-side,  be-

ginneth from  a  certayne  great  Mountayne,  called  Alboris
or  Albsor.  There  doe  inhabit  many  Nations,  and  thereoi
that  Province  is  called  Alania,  or  Albania,  from  whence
the  Kingdome  of  Georgia  reacheth  West-ward  on  the
North-side  to  some  Lands  of  the  Kingdome  of  Turkic
the  whole  length  of  this  Kingdome  of  Georgia  lying
upon  the  great  Sea,  and  on  the  South-side  it  is  con
fined  with  Armenia  the  Great.  This  Kingdome  o
Georgia  is  divided  into  two  Kingdomes,  one  of  which
is  called  by  the  name  of  Georgia,  and  the  other  knowne
by  the  name  of  Albcas,  or  Albcase :  and  they  have  beene
alwaies  governed  by  two  severall  Kings.  The  one  of
which  is  subject  to  the  Emperour  of  Asia  ;  namely,  the
King of  Georgia. But the  Kingdome  of  Albcas being

3U

\

ANTHONY THE ARMENIAN  ad.

I3°7*
mightie in people,  and strongly situated and fortified,

could  never  yet  either  by  the  Emperours  of  Asia,  or  by
the  Tartarians  bee  subdued.  In  this  Kingdome  of  Georgia
is  a  marvellous  strange  Wonder  or  Miracle,  which  I
durst  not  have  reported  or  beleeved,  if  I  had  not  scene
it  with  my  eyes.  But  because  I  have  personally  beene
there,  and  beene  made  the  eye  witnesse  thereof,  I  say,
that  in  those  parts  there  is  a  Province  or  Countrey
called  Hansem,  being  in  circuit  about  three  dayes  jour-
ney, whose  whole  extent  is  all  covered  over  with  such
thicke  and  palpable  darknesse,  that  none  can  see  any
thing  therein,  neither  doe  any  dare  to  goe  into  that
Land,  because  they  know  not  the  way  out  againe.
Those  that  inhabit  neere  about  it,  affirme,  that  they
have  often  heard  the  sound  of  mens  voices  crying,  of
Cockes  crowing,  and  the  neighing  of  Horses  in  the
Wood,  and  by  the  course  of  a  River  that  runneth  out
from  that  place,  there  appeare  certaine  signes  that  there
are  people  inhabiting  therein.

11.  The Kingdome of  the Chaldaeans beginneth on Chaldea.
the East-side from the Mountaynes of Media, and
reacheth  out  unto  Ninive. The  Inhabitants  of  Chaldaea

are  called  Nestorians,  because  they  are  followers  of  the
Errour  of  Nestorius,  and  they  have  their  peculiar
Chaldaean  Characters,  others  there  are  amongst  them
that  use  the  Arabian  Letters,  and  are  of  the  Sect  of  the
seducer  Mahomet.

12.  The  Kingdome  of  Mesopotamia  on  the  East-side,  Mesopotamia.
beginneth at the great Citie Mosel, (called of the
Ancients  Seleucia)  which  is  seated  neere  the  River  Tigris,

and stretcheth out unto  the River Euphrates,  and  the  Euphrates.
Citie  of  Robais  (or  Edessa.)

13.  When  the  Turkes  had  invaded  the  Kingdome  of
Turkie,  and  possessed  themselves  thereof,  they  could  not  Turkie.
prevayle  against  the  Citie  of  Trapezond,  nor  the  Terri-

torie  thereof,  because  of  their  strong  Castles  and  other
Fortifications,  by  reason  whereof  it  remayned  still  under
the government of the Emperour of Constantinople,

3i5

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

who  used  yearely  to  send  thither  a  Ruler  or  Governour

as his Deputie there, untill at length one of them

rebelling  against  him,  made  himselfe King  in  such  sort

that  he  which  now  holdeth  that  Land,  is  called  Emperour

[III.  i.  in.]  of  Trapezond. The Inhabitants are  Greekes. In the

Nations  of Kingdome of Turkie are foure Nations inhabiting  ;

Turkic  namely, the Greekes, Armenians, and Jacobines, (or

Jacobites, which are Christians, living  on merchandise

and manuring  the Earth :)  and the  Turkes,  which  are

Saracens,  that  have invaded  that  Land,  and  gotten  the

Government from  the  Greeks. Some of  them  live  on

merchandise,  and  labouring  of  the  ground  inhabiting  in

Syria.  Cities and  Townes  :  others keeping  in  the  Woods  and

Fields,  both  Winter  and  Summer  being  Shepherds,  and

very  good  Bow-men.

Cilicia,  how  it Y^.  Cilicia  at  this day  is called Armenia, by  reason

™alled°bee tnat  a**ter  the  enemies  °f  tne  Christian  faith  had  gotten

Armenia. that  Countrey,  and  held  it  a  long  time  from  the  Greekes,

the  Armenians  endeavoured  themselves  so  well  that  they

Cap.  15.  Of  wonne  it  againe  from  the  Pagans. In  so  much  that  the

the  Saracen Ki of Armenia by the grace Qf God ruleth over

omitted.  Cilicia  at  this  day :  In  the Kingdome  of  Syria  are  divers

Nations inhabiting,  namely, Greekes, Armenians,  Jaco-
bites, Nestorians, and  Saracens. There  are also other
Christian Nations, namely,  the Syrians  and  Maronines
(or  Maronites.)
Of  the  16.  The  Countrey  in which  the  Tartarians  first in-

Coun*rey  habited,  lieth  beyond  the  great  Mountaine  Belgian,
Tartarians  mentioned  in  the  Histories  of  *  Alexander.  And
formerly  there  they  lived  like  brutish  People  without  learning  or

inhabited. Religion,  feeding  herds  of  Beasts, and  going  from  place
Suchdreames  to  pface  to  seeke  pasture. And  being  not  exercised  in
and  Asians  *  armes  tnev  were  despised  of  other  Nations,  and  payed
have  of  tribute  to  al. Of  these  in  ancient  time  there  were  many

Alexander,  Nations  which  by  a  common  name  were  called,  *  Mogli,
whom  they  cal  wj1Q  Up0n  their  encrease  were  after  divided  into  seven
as  before  principall  sorts  esteemed  more  noble  then  the  rest. The

*Moals.  first  of  these  Nations  was  called  Tartar,  from  the  name

316

ANTHONY THE ARMENIAN  a.d.

1307.

of  that  Province  wherein  they  first  inhabited  :  The  second,

was named Tangur : The third, Cunat  : The fourth,

Talair  :  The  fifth,  Sonich  : The  sixth,  Monghi :  And  the

seventh,  Tebeth. And  whiles these  seven  Nations  lived

under  the subjection of  their Neighbours,  as  is above

said, it happened  that  a  poore  old  man,  being  a  Smith,

saw  a  Vision  in  his  sleepe  ; namely,  a  man  armed  all  in

white  Armour, and mounted  on  a white  Horse,  which

calling  him  by  his  name, said unto him,  Changius,  It  is  Chanpus  or

the will  and pleasure  of  the immortall  God,  that  thou **&*'

be Lord  and Ruler  over  these  Nations of  the  Mogli,

and  that  by  thee  they  bee  delivered  from  the  Dominion

of  their Neighbours, under which they  have long  re-

mayned  : and  they  shall  rule  over  their  Neighbours,  and

receive  Tribute of  them to whom they formerly  paid

Tribute. Changius hearing this Word of God, was

replenished with exceeding joy, and made publikely

knowne  the  Vision  which  he  had  seene. But  the  Rulers

and  Commanders  would not  give  credite  to  the  Vision,

but  rather  despised  and  mocked  the  old  man. But  the

night following,  they  themselves  saw the same Vision

of  the  Horse-man  armed  in  white,  who  commanded  them

from  the  Immortall  God,  that  they  should  be  obedient

to Changius, and cause all to obey his command.

Whereupon,  all  the  said  Chieftaines  and  Governours  of

the  seven  Nations  of  the  Tartarians,  calling the  people

together made them  to yeeld obedience  and  reverence

to  Changius. Then  afterwards  placing  a  Chaire  for  him

in  the  midst  of  them,  and  spreading  a  blacke  Felt  Carpet

on  the  ground,  they  set  him  thereon,  and  then  the  seven

chiefs  Rulers  lifting  him  up,  did  place  him  in  the  Throne,

or  Chaire  of  State,  with  great  triumph  and  acclamation,

calling him Can  their  first Emperour, and doing him

solemne  reverence, with bowing  their  knees  as  to  their

Lord  and  Governour.

Now,  at  this  solemnitie  of  the  Tartarians,  and  at  the
simplicitie  of  their  blacke  Cloth,  used  in  the  creating
of  their  first  Emperour, none  ought  much to  wonder,

317

A.D.

I307'

See  sup.  c.  2

Haiton,  an

eyewitnesse

the  Tart.

Coronation.

Changius

ordaineth

Lawes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

either  because  haply  they  were  not  then  furnished  with
any  fairer  Cloth  of  State,  or  else  were  so  rude  and
ignorant  at  that  time,  that  they  knew  no  better  or  fairer
fashion  of  State.  But  at  this  men  might  rather  marvell,
that  the  Tartarians  having  since  that,  conquered  many
Kingdomes,  and  gotten  infinite  riches,  (and  namely,
commanding  over  the  Dominions  and  wealth  of  Asia,
even  to  the  confines  of  Hungaria)  they  will  not  yet
leave  their  ancient  and  accustomed  manner ;  but  at  the
confirmation  of  every  Emperour  observe  the  like  order
in  every  point,  whereof  I  can  well  be  a  witnesse,  having
beene  personally  present  at  the  ceremonie  used  at  the
Confirmation  of  one  of  their  Emperours.  But  to  returne
°*  to  our  purpose,  Changius  Can  being  thus  made  Em-
perour by  common  consent  of  all  the  Tartarians,  deter-
mined ere  he  attempted  any  thing,  to  make  triall,  whether
they  would  all  performe  faithfull  obedience  to  him,  to
which  end  he  made  certaine  Ordinances  to  be  observed
of  all.

The  first  was,  That  all  the  Tartarians  should  beleeve
and  obey  the  Immortall  God,  by  whose  will  hee  was
promoted  to  the  Imperiall  Dignitie :  which  Commande-
ment  they  observed  and  from  thenceforth  untill  this
day  have  ever  continued  to  call  on  the  Immortall  God
in  all  their  occasions.  Secondly,  Hee  willed  that  all
the  men  that  were  able  to  beare  Armes  should  be
numbred,  and  that  over  every  ten  should  be  one
appointed,  and  over  every  ten  thousand  a  great  Com-
mander, and  that  also  over  every  thousand  should  bee
a  Colonell,  or  Conductor  of  a  Regiment,  and  he  called
an  Armie  of  ten  thousand  Souldiers,  a  Regiment.  He
commanded  also  the  seven  Rulers  over  the  Nations  of
the  Tartarians,  that  they  should  forthwith  dismisse
themselves  of  their  former  dignities :  which  they  relin-
quished immediatly.  But  another  of  his  Ordinances
was  very  strange  and  admirable,  in  which  he  commanded
those  seven  chiefe  Rulers  to  bring  every  of  them  his
eldest sonne, and  each with  his  owne  hand  to  cut  off

318

ANTHONY THE ARMENIAN  a.d.

1307.

his head. Which Commandement appearing to bee

most  cruell  and  unjust,  yet  was  there  none  that  would

any way  gainsay it,  because they knew him  to  be set  [III.  i.  112.]

over them by Gods providence, and therefore they

presently fulfilled it. When  Changius Can had seene

that  they were readie to obey him, even unto death,

he  appointed  them  all  a  certaine  day  in  which  they  should

be readie to fight. And  then they rode  against  them

which bordered next unto them, and subdued them.  Prevayieth  in

Whereby,  they  which  had  beene  Lords  over  them,  were  ■%?  \  a&ainst
1  1 •  1  •  3  1  \  r 1 •  1 1 "^  borderers.

brought  into  subjection  under  them. Atter,  nee  invaded

divers  other Nations, which hee  conquered with great

celeritie : For  hee  did  all  his  exploits  with  a  small  troupe

of  men,  and  was  successefull  in  his  enterprises.

Yet,  one  day  it  fell  out,  that  being  accompanied  with

a  small  number  he  was  encountred  with  a  great  troupe

of  his  Enemies,  in  such  sort,  that  the  fight  being  begun

Detweene them, whiles he valiantly defended himselfe,

his  Horse  was slaine  under him. And the  Tartarians

seeing  their  Lord overthrowne, betooke  themselves to

light ;  so  that  the  Enemies  being  all  busied  in  pursuing

}f  those that fled,  and having no knowledge of  the

Emperour,  whom  they  had  unhorsed  and  overthrowne;

le runne and hid himselfe among certaine shrubs for

safety of his life. Whither  when the  Enemies were

•eturned, with purpose to spoile the dead Carkasses,  He  escapeth

md  to  seeke  out  such  as  were  hidden,  it  happened  that  h  meanes  of

in  Owle*  came  and  sate  upon  those  little  trees  or  shrubs  a?  °™/e\

,.,,,,,  r 1  •  i'ii  1  Josephus  in  his

vhicn he had chosen  ror  his covert, which  when  they  1*  Booke

perceived,  they  sought  no  further  in  that  place,  supposing  chap.  8.

hat  the  said  Bird  would  not  have  sate  there,  if  any  man  reciteth  a  like

lad  beene  hidden  underneath. By  which  meanes  in  the  m*tter  °f

lead  time  of  the  night  he  found  meanes  of  escape  thence,  gfeaf

,nd  came  by divers unfrequented  wayes  unto  his  owne  Ramusio  hath

)eople,  and  discoursed  unto  them  what  had  befallen  him.  un  certo  vocelk

<or which the Tartarians rendred thankes unto the  ch™mat0

mmortall God. And  that Bird  which  under  God  was  The  j/}oc^0

leld  to be the meanes of  his escape, hath ever since  honoured.

319

A.D.

I307.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

A  new
Victory.

excuseth
himselfe.

beene  held  in  such  reverence  amongst  them,  that  happie
is  he  that  can  get  but  a  Feather  of  an  Owle,  which  they
wear  in  their  heads  with  great  reverence.  Which  I
thought  fit  to  set  downe  in  this  Booke,  that  the  cause
might  be  knowne  for  which  the  Tartarians  use  commonly
to  weare  Feathers  on  their  heads.

But  their  Emperour  Changius  Can  having  given  great
thankes  to  God  :  for  his  deliverance  out  of  so  great  a
danger  gathered  his  Armie  together,  and  fiercely  assaulted
his  former  Enemies  againe  and  brought  them  all  under
subjection,  and  so  became  Emperor  of  all  the  Countries
lying  on  that  side  of  the  Mountaine  Belgian,  and
possessed  them  quietly  without  disturbance,  untill  it
happened  him  to  have  another  Vision  as  shall  after  be
The  Authour  declared.  Neither  is  it  any  marvell  that  in  these  His-
tories I  have  not  set  downe  the  certaine  time,  because
albeit  I  have  sought  of  many  to  know  the  certaintie
thereof,  yet  could  I  never  finde  any  to  instruct  me  fully
therein :  the  reason  thereof  I  take  to  be,  because  the
Tartarians  at  the  first  were  ignorant  of  all  Learning,  and
knew  no  letters,  and  so  passed  over  the  times  and  memor-
able accidents  without  any  Record  or  Register  thereof
kept,  whereby  they  came  afterwards  to  be  forgotten.

§.11.

Of  Changius  Can  his  second  Vision  and  Con-
quests. Of  Hoccota  and  his  three  Sonnes
expeditions ;  of  Gino  Can ;  of  Mangu  Can,
who  was  visited  by  the  King  of  Armenia,  and
baptised ;  of  the  expedition  of  his  Brother
Haloon.

Fter that Changius Can had subdued all the

Kingdomes  and Countries on that side of  the

Mountaine  Belgian,  he  saw  another  Vision  in  the  f

night. For the selfe-same Horsman armed  in white

Armour  appeared  unto  him  againe,  saying,  Changius  Can,

320

The  second
Vision.

Josephus  men-
tions a  vision
of  Alexander,
one  like  the
Jewish  high
Priest  impos-
ing on  him  his
Expedition.
The  Sea  also
gave  him  way.
Ant.  I.  1 1 .
fcf /.  2.

iti

ANTHONY THE ARMENIAN  ad.

1307-
it  is  the  pleasure  of  the  Immortall  God,  that  thou  passe
over  the  Mountaine  Belgian,  and  direct  thy  course  West-
wards, where  thou  shalt  possesse  Kingdomes  and  Coun-
tries, and  subdue  many  Nations.  And  that  thou  mayest
be  assured  that  the  words  which  I  speake  unto  thee  are
from  the  Immortall  God  :  Arise  and  goe  with  thy  people
to  the  Mountaine  Belgian,  to  that  part  thereof  which
joyneth  to  the  Sea,  there  thou  shalt  alight  from  thy
Horse,  and  kneeling  downe  nine  times  towards  the  East;
thou  shalt  worship  nine  times  the  Immortall  God,  and
he  which  is  Almightie  will  shew  thee  the  way  by  which
thou  mayest  easily  passe  over  the  Mountaine.  At  this
Vision  Changius  rejoyced  exceedingly,  and  arose  without
farther  doubt  or  delay :  because  the  trueth  which  he  had
found  in  the  first  Vision  gave  him  assurance  of  the  other :
in  such  sort  that  he  forthwith  speedily  assembled  his
people,  and  commanded  them  to  follow  him  with  their
wives  and  children,  and  all  that  they  had.  And  so  they  Thefatall
went  forwards  untill  they  came  to  the  place  where  the  exPedltlon-
great  and  deepe  Sea  did  beate  against  the  Mountaine,
so  that  there  appeared  no  way  nor  passage  for  them.

There  presently  Changius  Can  as  had  beene  com-
manded him  by  God,  alighted  from  his  Horse,  and  all
his  followers  in  like  manner,  worshipping  nine  times  on
their  bended  knees  towards  the  East,  they  beseeched  the
Almightie  and  everliving  God,  that  of  his  infinite  mercy
and  grace  he  would  vouchsafe  to  shew  them  the  way  and
passage  thence  where  they  continued  in  prayer  all  that
night.  And  in  the  morning  arising,  they  saw  that  the
Sea  was  departed  from  the  Mountaine,  and  had  left  them  [III.  i.  113.]
a  way  of  nine  feet  in  bredth  to  passe.  Whereat  they  The  miracu-
being  all  astonished  exceedingly,  and  rendring  thankes  lous  zvay-
to  the  Immortall  God  most  devoutly,  they  passed  on
the  way  which  they  saw  before  them,  and  directed  their
steps  towards  the  West.  But  as  the  Histories  of  the
Tartarians  doe  mention,  after  they  had  passed  over  those
Mountaines,  they  indured  some  hunger  and  thirst  for
jcertaine  dayes,  because  the  land  was  Desart,  and  the
xi  321  x

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

*397-

waters  were  bitter  and  salt,  which  they  could  not  by
any  meanes  drinke,  untill  at  length  they  came  where  they
had  all  necessaries  aboundantly.  In  which  place  they
abode  many  dayes.  And  there  it  happened  by  the  will  of
The  sicknesse  God,  that  Changius  Can  grew  dangerously  sicke,  in
o/Ckangius sucn  sort  that  the  Physicians  despaired  of  his  recoverie.

rf.n'  7 . , By reason whereof  he called before him his twelve

His  allegorical  J  ...

exhorting  of sonnes, and perswaded them to  unitie  and  concord  by

his  sonnes  to an  Example. For,  he  commanded  each  of  them  to  bring

unitie.  with  him  an  Arrow,  which  when he  had  received,  and

Wn-ih  th bound  them  altogether  he  willed  the  eldest  to  breake  them

Stobaus  serm.  $  ne could, which when  he  had tried, but  could not

%2.ofScilurus  performe,  he  delivered  them  to  the  second,  and  then  to

see  Jomands the  third,  and then  to all  the  rest, but  none  of  them

a  so  of  the COuld  breake  them  as  they  were. Then  he  commanded

jttHa  his youngest sonne  to  take  the  Arrowes severally and

disagreeing. breake  them,  which  hee  easily  accomplished. Then  said

Changius  Can  to  his  sonnes :  In  like  manner  will  it  be

with  you ;  for,  as  long  as  you  remayne  in  concord  and

unitie,  your  Empire  shall  continue ;  but  as  soone  as  there

commeth  division  amongst  you,  your  power  is  easily  over-

throwne. Many  other  good  examples  were  given  by  him,

and  gathered  by  the  Tartarians,  which  in  their  Language

they  call,  Jasach,  or  Instructions  of  Changius  Can. And

afterwards  hee  caused  the  wisest  and  best  of  his  sonnes,

called Hoccata Can,  to  be  received as his Successour

His  death. in  his  Empire,  before  he  died :  and  then  rested  in  peace.

And  his  sonne,  called  Hoccota  Can,  was placed in  his

Seat.

But  before  wee  end  this  Historie  we  must  shew  how

the  number  of  Nine  came  to  be  of  reverence  and  sacred

_., . r  estimation among the Tartarians : for  of  a  memoriall

I  flP  fltLttlnPV  of

Nine  esteemed  °^  tne  nme  kneelings  which  they  made  in  the  Mountaine
among  the  Belgian,  when  they  worshipped  the  immortall  God,
Tartarians.  according  to  the  direction  of  him  that  appeared  in  white
S°mlfey  T  Armour,  and  their  way  of  the  bredth  of  nine  feet,  through
MogulL  sup.  wmcn  tney  passed,  they  hold  that  number  Nine  in  very
pag.  556. high  estimation. Insomuch,  that  if  any  will  offer  a  Present

322

ANTHONY THE ARMENIAN  a.d.

to  the  Tartarian  Emperour,  it  must  bee  presented  in  forme
of  nine  severall  things,  if  hee  will  have  it  graciously
accepted ;  and  so  that  the  number  of  Nine  be  offered  the
gift  is  reputed  happie,  which  Custome  is  yet  observed  at
this  day  among  the  Tartarians.

1 8.  Hoccata  Can,  who  succeeded  in  the  Empire,  was  a  OfHoccota
man  of  much  valour  and  wisedome,  which  made  him  very  Can  the  second
well  beloved  of  the  Tartarians,  who  were  alwaies  faithfull  ™P*rour
and  obedient  unto  him.  Hee  therefore  bethought  him-  Tartarians.
selfe  in  what  manner  he  might  best  subdue  all  Asia,  and
thought  good  to  make  triall  first  of  the  mightiest  Prince
therein  before  he  attempted  it  himselfe  in  person.  On
that  enterprise  therefore  he  sent  forth  ten  thousand
Horse-men  under  the  conduct  of  a  wise  and  valiant
Leader,  called  Gebesabada,  and  commanded  him  to  seeke
out  divers  Kingdomes  and  States,  and  when  hee  met
with  an  Adversarie  too  mightie  for  him,  to  returne.  Hee
marched  on,  and  tooke  divers  Castles  and  Townes,  and
cruelly  used  those  which  hee  vanquished  in  battell,  for
terrour  to  others,  putting  out  their  eyes,  and  taking
away  their  Horses  and  Victuals ;  dealing  kindly  with
the  weaker.  Thus  hee  proceeded  to  the  Iron  Gate
which  Alexander  built  at  the  foot  of  Cochas,  and  razed
it,  lest  it  might  hinder  his  returne.  Yuannus  the  Prince
of  Georgia  came  out  against  him,  and  in  a  Plaine,  called
Mogran,  they  fought,  but  the  Tartars  overcame ;  and
proceeded  to  Arscor  a  Citie  of  the  Soldan  of  Turkie,
who  was  so  well  provided  to  entertayne  him,  that
Gebesabada  seeing  his  forces  decayed,  returned  to  Hoccota  Gebesabada.
Can,  then  in  Cambalu.  Hee  desiring  to  subdue  all
Asia,  called  three  of  his  sonnes,  giving  to  each  a  great
Armie,  Jochi  the  eldest  he  sent  Westward  to  Tigris ;
Baydo,  to  the  North  ;  Chagoday,  to  the  South ;  and  so
divided  Asia  among  his  three  sonnes.  Hoccota  Can
made  choise  of  another  skilfull  and  valiant  Captaine,
called  Baydo,  to  whom  he  gave  thirtie  thousand  Tartarian
Souldiers,  termed  Tamachi,  or  Conquerours,  and  com-
manded them to set forward the very  same way that

323

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  other  ten  thousand  went  before,  and  not  to  make
stay  in  any  place  till  they  came  to  the  Kingdome  of
Turkie,  and  to  trie  whether  they  could  withstand  the
Soldan  of  Turkie,  which  was  held  the  mightiest  of  all
the  Princes  in  Asia.  And  if  haply  they  found  him  so
strong  that  they  were  not  able  to  encounter  him,  they
should  then  forbeare  to  fight  with  him,  and  make  choise
of  some  place  where  they  might  rest  themselves  till
they  had  received  supplie  of  further  aide  from  some
of  his  sonnes  which  should  bee  neerest  unto  them,  and
that  afterwards  they  might  with  more  safety  set  upon
him.  Bay  do  accordingly  with  his  thirtie  thousand
Tartarians  came  to  the  Kingdome  of  Turkie ;  and  there
hee  understood  that  the  Soldan  which  had  discomfited
the  first  Tartarians  was  dead,  and  that  his  sonne
Guiatadin  succeeded  him.  And  this  man  hearing  of  the
Tartarians  comming,  was  very  much  afraid,  and  got  all
the  Mercenaries  that  he  could  to  his  succour  both
Barbarians  and  Latines,  and  amongst  others  hee  had  to
his  aide  two  thousand  Latines  under  his  two  Captaines,
the  one  called,  John  de  Liminado,  who  came  from  the  He
of  Cyprus,  and  the  other  Bonifacius  de  Molin,  who  was
borne  at  Genua.  The  Soldan  also  sent  to  his  Neighbours,
promising  many  favours  and  benefits  to  such  as  would
[III.  i.  114.]  assist  him,  by  which  meanes  having  assembled  a  great
number  of  men,  hee  went  towards  the  place  where  the
The  Turkes  Tartarians  made  their  abode,  whom  they  found  nothing
°verc°me  astonished  at  his  approach ;  for  they  manfully  gave  him

Tartarians.  battaile  at  a  place  called  Cousedrack,  where  they  over-
Of  Gino  Can  threw  the  Armie  of  the  Turkes,  and  so  the  Tartarians
the  third wonne  the  Kingdome  of  Turkie,  in  the  yeere 1244.

^former  ^ A"d aftCr * Httle timC Hoccota Can d7ed> and

Friars  mention  a  sonne  of  his  succeeded  in  the  Empire,  called  Gino  Can,
thesetzvoJ.de  whose  life  was  but  short,  and  after  him  succeeded  a
Pleno  Carpini  Kinsman  of  his,  called  Mango  Can,  who  was  of  very
was  with  the  great  power  and  subdued  many  Provinces,  and  at  length
Rubrug^with  w^tn  a  great  spirit  he  went  into  the  Cathay  an  Sea  to  take
Mangu.  a certaine Hand, which whiles he held besieged, the

324

ANTHONY THE ARMENIAN  ad.

I3°7*
Inhabitants  of  those  parts  being  very  subtile  and  ingenious,

sent  certaine  Divers  secretly  under  water,  who continued

so long  under the Ship, in  which  hee  was,  untill  they

had  made  many  holes  therein,  so  that  the  water  came  into

it  (no  man  observing  nor  stopping  the  leake)  untill  the

Ship sunke, and Mango Can was drowned therein.  Mango  Can

Whereupon  the  residue  of  the  Tartarians  returned  home  drowned.

and chose his brother, called Cobila Can, for their  Cobik,  or

Emperour,  who  raigned  over  them  two  and  fortie  yeeres,  ^ublal  Can-

became  a Christian,  and  founded  a certaine  Citie,  called

Jons,  in  the  Kingdome  of  Cathay,  which  is  reported  to  be  Jons  the  great

greater  then  Rome ;  and  in  that  Citie  he  dwelled  untill  Gltie'

his dying day. But  leaving  him,  let  us  speake of  the

three  sonnes  of  Hoccota  Can,  and  of  Haoloon,  and  of

his  Heires.

20.  Jochi, the eldest sonne of  Hoccota Can, rode  Jochi  raigneth
toward  the  West  with  all  that  people  which  his  Father  over  Tur~
had  given  him,  and  there  finding  fruitfull  and pleasant
Countries,  abounding  in  all  kinde  of  riches,  he  fixed  his

Tents,  and  ruled  over  the  Kingdome  of  Turquestan,  and

the  lesser  Persia,  even to the  River  Phison,  where his

people  inhabiting  ever  since,  are  exceedingly  multiplied  in

persons  and  riches,  and  the  Heires  of  Jochi  have  succeeded

one  the other  in  those Dominions  to  this  present, and

those  Countries  are  at  this  day  ruled  by  two  Brothers,  the  See^y.Chapt.

one  called Chapar, the other  Doax, who have divided  The  successe

those  Countries  betweene  them,  and  doe possesse  them  of  Baydo

peaceably.

2 1 .  Baydo, the second  sonne of  Hoccoto  Can,  with
the  Tartarians  which  his  Father  gave  him,  rode  towards  Cumanians,  so
the  North,  untill  he  came  to  the  Kingdome  of  Cumania,  called  as  may
where  the  Cumanians  having  many  armed  men,  opposed  se^meoJ the
themselves,  and  defended  their  Land  against  them. But  cumania
being  at  length  over-come,  they  fled  to  the  Kingdome  of  mentioned  by
Hungaria,  where are yet many Cumanians inhabiting.  Pfiny  I-  6.
Baydo  having  beaten  the  Cumanians  out  of  their  Countrie,
went  to  the  Kingdome  of  Russia  and  conquered  it,  and  JJ^"
possessed  the  Land  of  Gazaria  (which  is  in  the  Northerne  Muscovia.

325

Northward.
His  victorie
over  the

c.
1 1 .  now
Derbent.

A.D.
I307.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

His  drowning
in  Austria.

part  of  Taurica)  and  the  Kingdome  of  Bulgaria,  and
by  the  way  which  the  Cumanians  had  fled,  he  came
to  the  Kingdome  of  Hungaria.  Afterwards  the  Tartarians
went  towards  the  parts  of  Germanie,  till  they  came  to
a  certaine  River  that  runneth  through  the  Dukedome  of
Austria ;  where  they  thought  to  have  passed  over  a  Bridge
which  they  found  there.  But  Frederick  the  Duke  of
Austria,  and  others,  that  bordered  neere  it,  had  fortified
the  Bridge  so  that  the  Tartarians  were  denyed  passage.
Baydo  thereupon,  incensed  with  furie,  commanded  that
all  should  passe  through  the  water,  and  himselfe  was  the
first  that  entred,  exposing  thereby  himselfe  and  all  his
followers  to  apparant  danger  of  death :  for  such  was  the
breadth  of  the  River  and  the  violence  of  the  streame,  that
their  Horses  were  wearied  before  they  could  come  to
the  farther  banke  of  the  River.  Which  the  residue  seeing
which  were  not  yet  entred  into  the  water,  they  were
confounded  with  griefe,  and  returned  to  Russia,  and
Cumania  which  they  formerly  had  conquered,  as  hath
beene  declared  ;  and  never  since  that  have  the  Tartarians
His  posteritie.  attempted  against  Germanie.  But  the  posteritie  of  Baydo
hath  ever  since  successively  held  those  Lands  which  he
subdued.  And  he  which  now  raigneth  there,  is  called
aTochai,  and  ruleth  peaceably  and  quietly.

22.  Cangaday  (or  Chagoday)  with  those  Tartars  which
his  Father  gave  him,  rode  towards  the  South,  even  to
the  parts  of  India  the  lesser.  There  he  found  many
Desarts,  Mountaines,  and  drie  Lands  not  inhabited,  so
that  hee  could  not  passe  that  way  :  but  having  lost  many
of  his  People,  Horses,  and  other  Beasts,  he  turned  him
towards  the  West,  and  after  much  labour  came  to  his
brother  Jochi,  to  whom  he  related  what  had  befalne  him  :
who  taking  compassion  on  his  brother,  gave  him  and
his  people  a  good  part  of  those  Countries  which  hee  had  :
and  ever  after,  those  two  brethren  dwelled  together  and
their  Progenie,  untill  this  day  inhabite  in  those  parts,  yet
in  such  sort,  that  those  which  descended  of  the  younger
brother,  doe  beare  a  kinde  of  reverence  to  the  posteritie

326

*  Of  him  after
47.  Chapt.
Cangadays
enterprise.

ANTHONY THE ARMENIAN  a.d.

1307-

of  the  Elder,  and  so  being  content  with  their  Portions,

they live peaceably and quietly together  : and that

Successor  of  bJochi  that  now  liveth,  is  called  Barach. h Or  rather  of

23. In the yeere  of  our  Lord 1253. Haython, the  Bagodayfor

King of  Armenia, seeing  that the  Tartarians had in  a  *JT  uccfssors
0*0  of  j  ochi  were

manner  subdued  all  the  Kingdomes,  Countries,  and  Lands,  named  \n  the

even  to  the  Kingdome  of  Turkie,  taking  Counsell  of  the  20.  Chapter.

wise,  he  resolved  to  goe  in  person  to  the  Emperour  of  the  Of  Mango

Tartarians,  the  better  to  insinuate  himselfe  into  his  favour,  c"nthefourth

and to make  league with him. But first  he sent his

brother,  Lord  Sinibaldy,  Constable  of  the  Kingdome  of

Armenia,  to  obtayne  safe  conduct  for  him :  who  carrying

with  him  many  Presents,  and  going  attended  with  a  goodly

companie, dispatched  in good order the businesse for

which  he  was  sent,  yet  stayed  hee  by  the  space  of  foure

dayes before he came backe to Armenia : but  at  his

returne,  he  related  to  the  King  what  he  had  seene  and

done : who without delay departed in secret manner

disguised,  because  it  might  be  dangerous  for  him  to  be  [III.  i.  115.]

knowne  in  the  Kingdome  of  Turkie,  through  which  hee

must  needes  make  his  journey :  and  as God  would, at  Haiton  King

his  comming  thither,  he  found  that  the  Soldan  of  Turkie  °f  Armenia  his

was  overthrowne  by  a  Tartarian  Captaine,  whom  hee  met  J0Mne^'

with  there and made himselfe knowne unto  him,  who

when he  understood him  to be the  King  of  Armenia,

and that hee was  going  toward the Emperour,  enter-

tayned him very honorably, and caused him to bee

conducted to the Kingdome of  Cumania, and  beyond

the  Iron  gate.

And  afterwards,  other  Tartarian  Captaines  caused  him

to  bee  conducted  over  all other  Countries  and Places,

untill  he  came  to  c  Almalech  (or  Cambula)  where  Mango  c  It  seems

Can  their  Emperour  resided ;  who  rejoyced  much  at  the  Caracariun

comming  of  the  King  of  Armenia,  and  the  rather  for  that  w^afec ™ w^e

from  the  comming  of  Changius  Can  over  the  Mountaine  Kin~s  clt-ie

Belgian,  no  other  great  Prince  had  come  to  meet  him,  and  or  Cambafa,

therefore  hee  received  and  entertayned  him  with  much  as  Ramusio

honour  and  love,  and  gave  unto  him  some  of  the  greatest  hath  tL

327

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I3°7*

persons  about  him  to  attend,  and  associate  him at  his

pleasure,  and  did  him  many  other  favours;  But  the  King

of  Armenia  having  rested certaine  dayes, intreated  the

Emperour  to  vouchsafe  him  Audience  in  those  affaires,

for  which hee was come, and to  give him licence  to

returne. The Emperour  very  graciously  answered  him,

that  he  would most  willingly  accomplish  all  his  desires,

and  that  it  was  very  acceptable unto  him  that  he  came

of  his  owne  accord.

The  King  of The  King  with  good  deliberation  made  seven  Petitions.

Armenia  his  First,  He  desired  that  the  Emperour  and  all  his  people

Demands. would be baptized in the Christian Faith,  leaving  all

2"  other  Sects. Secondly,  That  there  might  be  a  perpetuall

peace  and  friendship  established  betweene  the  Christians

3-  and the Tartarians. Thirdly, That in all Countries

which the Tartarians either had conquered or should

conquer,  the  Churches  and Churchmen,  whether  secular

or  religious,  might  be  free  and  exempted  from  all  servi-

4.  tude  and  payments.  Fourthly,  That  he  would  deliver
and  free  the  holy  Land,  and  the  holy  Sepulcher  of  our
Lord,  out  of  the  hands  of  the  Saracens,  and  restore  them

5.  to  the  Christians.  Fiftly,  That  he  would  endeavour  the
destruction  of  the  Caliph  of  Baldach,  who  was  the  head

6.  and  chiefe  Doctor  of  the  Sect  of  Mahometisme.  Sixtly,
Hee  required  that  a  speciall  Charter  might  be  granted
him,  that  of  whatsoever  Tartarians  especially  such  as
should  be  nearest  to  the  Kingdome  of  Armenia  hee
should  bee  occasioned  to  demand  aide,  they  should  forth-

7.  with  be  readie  to  assist  him.  Seventhly,  He  craved
that  all  the  Lands  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Kingdome
of  Armenia,  which  the  Saracens  had  invaded,  and  were
or  should  happen  to  be  recovered  by  the  Tartarians,
might  be  restored  to  the  King  of  Armenia,  and  that
such  as  he  should  get  from  the  Saracens,  hee  might
peaceably  and quietly  enjoy. Mango Can  having  con-

T  sidered  the Petitions of  the King of  Armenia, calling

0r the '  before  him all his  chiefe Captaines and Counsellors in
Tartarian, their presence, made him answere after this manner.

328

ANTHONY THE ARMENIAN  a.d.

1307
J  Because  that  the  King  of  Armenia  of  his  owne  accord,

d  and  not  of  compulsion,  is  come  unto  us  from  remote
j parts;  it  beseemeth  the  Imperiall  Majestie  to  yeeld  him
Jail  his  demands  that  are  lawfull  and  honest:  Therefore
[to  you,  O  King  of  Armenia,  Wee  returne  this  answere,
I  That  wee  will  accept  of  all  your  Requests  made,  and
I  will  cause  them  all  (God-willing)  to  bee  duely  accom-
Bplished  :  first,  I  my  selfe  being  Emperour  and  Lord  1.
tj  of  the  Tartarians,  will  bee  baptised  in  that  Faith  which
[the  Christians  hold  at  this  day;  wishing  and  advising
[all  my  Subjects  to  doe  the  like :  yet  not  entending  to
I  force  any  thereunto.  To  your  second,  We  will  and  2.
I  agree  that  there  be  a  perpetuall  peace  betweene  the
I  Tartarians  and  Christians,  yet  with  this  caution,  that  your
I  selfe  bee  a  chiefe  Pledge  and  Suretie  that  the  Chris-
Htians  observe  on  their  behalfe  the  like  peace  and  amitie
I  towards  us,  as  wee  for  our  part  intend  inviolably  to
wkeepe  towards  them.  Wee  grant  also,  That  all  the  3.
DChurches  of  Christians  and  their  Clergie-men  whatso-
ever, either  Secular  or  Religious,  shall  enjoy  their
j  Priviledge  and  Immunitie  of  Libertie  and  Exemption
^throughout  the  Dominions  of  our  Empire,  and  that
ijnone  shall  molest  them  any  kinde  of  wayes.  Touching  4.
((the  matter  of  the  holy  Land,  we  say,  That  if  we  could
■conveniently  we  would  willingly  goe  thither  in  person,
■for  the  reverence  we  beare  to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.
[But  because  we  have  many  occasions  of  importance  to
Hstay  us  in  these  parts,  wee  will  take  order  with  our
-.iBrother  Haloon  for  the  due  accomplishment  of  that
iiservice  in  all  points  as  it  behooveth,  for  the  freeing
■of  the  Citie  of  Hierusalom  and  all  the  holy  Land,
1  lout  of  the  hands  of  the  Pagans,  and  restoring  it  to
;ithe Christians.

Concerning the Caliph of Baldach. We will give  5.
;|order  to Baydo,  our Captaine of  the  Tartarians,  which  Seethe  18.
are  in  the  Kingdome  of  Turkie,  and  the  rest  thereabouts,  ***  24"
,that they  bee all  obedient to our  Brother, whom wee
will  have  to  destroy  the  Caliph  as  our  capitall  and  deadly

329

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

l3°7-

6.  Enemie.  The  Charter  which  the  King  of  Armenia
desireth  for  assistance  from  the  Tartarians,  Wee  wish
it  to  bee  drawne according  to  his  desire, and  wee  are

7.  readie  in  all  things  to  confirme  it. Lastly,  whereas  the  j
King  of  Armenia  requireth,  That  the  Lands  of  his  King-  I
dome, which the  Saracens had taken from, and  have  i
since  beene  recovered  by  the  Tartarians,  may  be  restored
unto  him,  we freely  and  frankly  accord  it,  willing  our

Polo  calls  this Brother  Haloon to see such  restitution made without  1
Haloon,  Ulau.  delay.

Mango  Can 24.  After  that  Mango  Can  had  thus  liberally  accorded  the

with  his  people  Requests  of  the  King  of  Armenia,  and  confirmed  them  by
aptise  . Charters, he  would  forthwith receive the Sacrament  of
Baptisme,  and  was  accordingly  baptised  by  the  hands  of  &
certaine Bishop, who was Chancellor of  the King of|

[III.  i.  116.]  Armenia,  and  all  that  were  of  his  houshold  with  many
other  great  Personages  of  both  Sexes. And  then  he  made  |
choice  of  such  as  were  to  accompany  his  Brother  Haloon,  l(

The  Voyage  of  about  the  enterprize  of  the  Holy  Land. After  Haloon

KinH^thon and the  Kin2  of  Armenia  departed,  and  rode both to-
gether untill  they  passed  over  the  great  River  Phison  ;
then  Haloon  with  his  mightie  Armie  invaded  the  Coun-
treyes and Lands every  where, and in less then six
Persia  pos- moneths hee  subdued easily the whole Kingdome of
sessed  by  the persia,  because  it  was  without  a  Ruler,  or  Gouvernour,
and  tooke  in  all  the  Countreyes  without  resistance,  evenj$$
till  he  came  to  the  Land  of  certayne  Infidels,  which  are/fit
called Assassini, having neither  Law  nor  Religion, but
*Senex  de living  as  their  Prince  and  Lord,  commonly  called *  Sex-
monte,  see  Polo  m0ntio, instructeth  them at whose pleasure and com-|c
mandement  they  willingly  and  readily  expose  themselves
to  death. These  had  a  certayne  impregnable  Castle,  called
Tigado  Tigado, which was so  well furnished  with all kind of

besieged.  necessary  provision,  and  so  strongly  built  and  seated,  that  B(j

they  feared  no  assault.  Haloon  therefore  commanded
one  of  his  Captaynes  to  take  with  him  tenne  thousand  of
those  Tartarians,  which  hee  had  left  in  Persia,  and  in  no
wise  to  depart  from  the  siege  of  that  Castle  untill  hee  had

33°

si

h

ANTHONY THE ARMENIAN  a.d.

1307-

:aken  it,  so  that  they  remayned  at  the  siege  thereof,  by
le  space  of  seven  yeares  both  Winter  and  Summer,  In  the  Lathe
#hich  at  last  was  yeelded  up  by  the  Assassini,  only  for  u  ts  27-
#ant  of  clothes,  but  not  for  any  penury  of  victuals,  or  *^§TJ"-**
;carcitie  of  any  other  thing,  whiles  Haloon  employed
limselfe  in  ordering  of  the  Kingdome  of  Persia,  and
)esieging  the  Castle  of  the  Assassini,  the  King  of  Armenia
ooke  leave  of  him  to  returne,  because  hee  had  beene  long
>ut  of  his  Kingdome :  Haloon  therefore  licenced  him  to
epart,  and  giving  him  many  great  gifts,  directed  his
3recept  to  Baydo,  residing  in  the  Kingdome  of  Turkie,
yhich  he  had  subdued,  that  he  should  conduct  him  safely
o  the  entrance  of  his  owne  Kingdome,  which  in  all  things
le  fulfilled,  so  that  after  three  yeares  and  a  halfe  of
Dsence,  the  King  of  Armenia,  through  the  mercie  of  Jesus
"hrist,  came  joyfully  home  into  his  owne  Countrey.

25.  Haloon  having  ordered  the  Kingdome  of  Persia  in  Haloon
onvenient  manner,  went  into  a  certayne  Province  neere  sojoumeth  in

Armenia, called Sorloch, where  he  reposed and re-  *or'ocA-
reated himselfe  all the  Sommer,  and  at the  beginning
(  Winter he besieged Baldach, in which the Caliph  The  siege  of
esided,  who  was the chiefe Master  and  Doctor  of  the  Baldach-
rreligious Sect of  Mahometisme, for which Enterprize
laoloon re-enforced his Army with thirtie thousand
artarians, that  were in the  Kingdome  of  Turkie,  and
ssaulting  the Citie  by  the  shoare,  hee  tooke  the same  TheCitieand
without  any  great  difficultie,  or  delay. The  Caliph  was  Ca/ipi  taken.
rought  alive  into  the  presence  of  Haloon,  and  there  was
Dund  in  Baldach,  so  much  Treasure  and  Riches  as  would
carcely  bee beleeved  to  bee  in  all  the  World besides ;
"his  Citie  of  Baldach  was  taken  in  the  yeere  1258.

26.  When Haoloon had disposed of the Citie  of  The  Parsi-
aldach,  he  caused  the  Caliph  to  be  brought  unto  him,  m°me  °f the
nd all his Treasure to  be laid before him, Then he a  ***  '
emanded  of  him  whether  he  had  beene  Lord  of  all  that

reasure,  who  affirming,  it  was  asked  againe  why  hee  had
ot  made  use  thereof  in  procuring  the  ayde  of  his
Neighbours,  and  levyed  mercenarie  Souldiers to  defend

33i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1307.

him  and  his  Countrey  from  the  power  of  the  Tartarians,
whose  answere  was  that  hee  thought  his  owne  people  had
been  sufficient.  Then  said  Haloon  to  the  Caliph,  thou
art  said  to  be  the  chiefe  Doctor  &  Teacher  of  all  that
beleeve  the  deceiving  Doctrine  of  Mahomet,  &  receivest
rewards  and  Gifts  of  them  all;  therefore  such  and  so
precious  a  Master  must  be  fed  with  no  other  meate  but  I
with  these  precious  things,  which  thou  hast  loved  and
kept  so  carefully,  all  which  wee  give  thee  for  thy!
sustenance :  and  so  commanded  that  the  Caliph  should
bee  shut  into  a  Chamber,  and  that  his  Pearle  and  Gold  t
should  bee  set  before  him,  that  hee  might  eate  as  much  as
hee  would  thereof,  but  that  no  other  meate  nor  drinke
His  death  should  be  given  him ;  by  which  means  the  miserable
amongst  his  wretch  ended  his  life  after  a  miserable  manner.  And  i
Treasure. there  was  no  other  Caliph  in  Baldach  after  him.

27.  After  that  Haoloon  had  subdued  Baldach  and  all
the  Countrey  round  about,  hee  distributed  the  Provinces!  1
amongst  his  Captaines  and  Rulers  as  he  thought  good,hn

The  favour  of  giving  charge  that  the  Christians  should  everie  where  be
Haoloon  lovingly  used,  and be  preferred to the  government  of

towards  Castles  and  Cities,  and  the  Saracens  held  under  streight  ie

His  Wife. subjection. Haloon  had also  a  Wife called  Doucoscaro
discended  of  those  Kings  that  came  from  the  East  being
guided  by  the  Starre  of  the  Nativitie  of  our  Lord,  which  |<
Ladie  being  a  most  devout  Christian,  was  a  great  meanest
of  destroying  the  Temples  of  the  Saracens,  and  prohibiting;
the  Solemnities  and  Ceremonies  of  Mahomet,  and  finally
rased their Temples to the ground, and  brought the  %
Saracens  in  such  subjection  that  they  durst  not  shew  theirj
heads.

28.  After that  Haoloon had rested  a yeare, he  sent^
to the King of  Armenia, to meete him at the Citie
Robays,  in the  Kingdome of  Mesopotamia,  because  he
entended  to  goe  towards  the  Holy  Land,  that  hee  might

KingHaython  rest0re  it  to  the  Christians,  whereupon,  the  King  Hay-
toHt ^ oloon  6 tnon  °f  famous  memorie  tooke  his  journey,  accompanied
with  a  great  Armie  both  of  Horsemen  and  Footmen,  for  "■

332

ANTHONY THE ARMENIAN  a.d.

i3<>7-

jat  that  time  the  Kingdome  of  Armenia,  was  in  so  good
estate,  that  it  could  raise  a  power  of  twelve  thousand
Horse,  and  threescore  thousand  Footmen,  whereof  beeing
in  Eye  witnesse  my  selfe,  I  can  well  give  testimonie
thereof,  when  the  King  of  Armenia  was  come  according
to  this  appointment  of  Haplan,  and  had  conference  with
him  touching  the  Enterprize  of  the  Holy  Land,  he  Halappi  or
kdvised  him  that  because  the  Soldan  of  Halappi,  ruled  Aleppo.
pver  all  the  Kingdome  of  Syria,  in  which  the  Citie  of  [III.  i.  117.]
jferusalem  was  seated,  the  way  to  get  the  Holy  Land,
Uas  first  to  besiege  the  Citie  of  Halappi,  being  the  chiefe
Citie  of  Syria,  which  when  he  had  wonne,  it  would  not
lie  difficult  for  him  to  subdue  all  the  rest  of  that
Countrey  :  which  advise  Haloon  liked  well,  and  besieged
he  Citie  of  Halappi  (or  Aleppo)  which  he  found  to  be
pf  great  strength  being  well  walled  and  inhabited  :  therefore
vith  Mines  under  ground,  with  Slings  and  other  Engines,  Bakstri.
nee  begirt  it  so  straightly,  and  assaulted  it  so  manfully
)>n  every  side  that  albeit  it  seemed  impregnable,  yet  in
I  he  space  of  nine  dayes  he  obtayned  it.  In  this  Citie  Halepo  taken.
Ihey  found  such  incredible  store  of  wealth  as  would  hardly
|>e  beleeved,  yet  there  was  a  Castle  in  the  midst  of  the
Litie,  that  held  out  eleven  dayes  after  the  Citie  was  taken,
which  at  length  was  wonne  by  undermining.  So  the
Litie  Halappi,  and  afterwards  the  Kingdome  of  Syria,
was  taken  by  Haoloon  in  the  yeare  of  our  Lord
i  1240.  *i26o.  yet

29.  But  when  the  Soldan  of  Halappi  named  Melech-  hothUAne^
aser  being  then  in  the  Citie  of  Damascus, understood
hat  the  Citie  of  Halappi, with his  Wife and Children
1  it,  was  taken,  being  utterly  destitute  of  Counsell  hee
ame and  cast  himselfe  at  the  feet of  Haloon, hoping
:  hereby  that  his  Wife  and  Children  with some  part  of
i is  Dominions  would  bee  restored  him. But  the  Soldan
bund himselfe  therein deceived, for  Haloon sent him
yith his Wife and Children into Persia, that  thereby
|.e  might  enjoy  the  Kingdome  of  Syria,  the  more  securely.
These  things thus  disposed, Haloon  gave to the  King

333

A.D.

l2°7>

The  Civill
war  betweene
Haolon  and
Bar  cat  or
Barcha.
See  Polo,  §.  i .
Guiboga  of  the
Kindred  of  the
three  Kings
that  came  to
worship  the
Nativitie  of
Christ.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  Armenia  a  great  part  of  the  spoile  of  Halappi,  and  of,
the  Lands  which  he  had  invaded,  whereby  the  Kingi
of  Armenia  was  strengthened  with  many  Castles  bordering!1
on  his  Kingdome,  which  he  fortified  as  he  thought  good ;  i
and  after  that  Haoloon  had  setled  the  affaires  of  those  J
Cities  and  Countries  which  he  had  wonne,  intending  top
goe  to  Jerusalem  to  free  the  Holy  Land  from  Pagans,  |a
and  to  restore  it  to  the  Christians.  There  came  to  him! I
a  Messenger  the  third  day,  who  brought  newes  that  the'1
Tartarian  Empire  was  vacant  by  the  death  of  his  Brothers
Mango  Can,  and  that  his  comming  was  earnestly  expected!?
to  bee  his  Successor  therein,  which  report  made  him  very^1
sorrowfull :  In  regard  whereof  hee  could  now  proceed^'
no  further  in  person,  but  left  ten  thousand  Tartars  to!}
keepe  the  Kingdome  of  Syria,  under  the  command  ofp
a  Captayne  called  Guiboga,  to  whom  he  gave  order  thatl^
hee  should  conquer  the  Holy  Land,  and  restore  it  to1*
the  Christians.  And  so  leaving  his  Sonne  at  Tauris,  hee^f
hastened  Eastward  himselfe  by  great  Journeyes.

§.  in.

Of  Cobila Can the fift Emperour of  the Tar-id
tarians: Of the Warre with Barcha, and  to
Tartarian  quarrell  with  the  Christians,  Haolaons
death. Acts of the Soldan of Egypt. Of!
Abaya and other Sonnes and Successors of
Haloon.

Ut  before  he  could  come  to  the  Kingdom  of  Persia,
he heard  that  the  Nobles  &  Princes  had  placed  (f
his  Brother  Cobila  Can  in  the  Imperial  Seat  of  the  i
Tartars,  which  he  heard  whilst  he  was  at  Tauris :  where  if
he understood that Barcat (or Barcha) was marching
thither  with  a  great  Armie,  purposing  to  make  himselfe  1
Emperour. Haoloon  therefore  assembled  his  people  and
met  with his  Enemies,  on  a  certayne  River  which  was  I
frozen,  where  beganne  a  very  great  Battaile. But the  ;

334

ANTHONY THE ARMENIAN  a.d.

Ice  being  broken  by  the  great  multitude  of  Horses  and
Men, there  was drowned  on  the  one  side  and on the
other thirtie thousand Tartars; Insomuch, that the
Armies on each side returned. But Guiboga whom
Haoloon had left in the Kingdome  of  Syria, and  the
Province  of  Palestina held those  Countreyes peaceably,
and loved the Christians well, for he was of the
Progenie  of  the  three  Kings  which  went  to  worship  the
(Nativitie of our Lord. But when he had laboured
earnestly to  reduce the Holy Land againe under the
power  of  the  Christians, the  Devill sowed the  seed of
scandall,  and discord  betwixt  him  and  the  Christians  of
|:hose  parts,  which  hapned  on  this  manner. In  the  Land
W  Belforte,  which  is  of  the  Territory  of  the  Citie  of  Sidon,  Belforte.
there were sundry Townes and Villages inhabited  by
paracens,  which  paid  certayne  Tribute  to  the  Tartars,  on
vhom  some  of  Sidon  and  Belforte  made  divers  rodes  and
spoyles killing sundry of the Saracens, and carrying
pthers  away Captive  with a  great drove  of  Cattle. A
Nephew  of  Guiboga  remayning  neere  thereabouts,  followed
;peedily  after  those  Christians  that  had  committed  those
but-rages  to  tell  them  on  the  behalfe  of  his  Uncle,  that  they
hould  dismisse  their  bootie. But  some  of  them  unwilling
|o  large  their  prey  they  had  taken,  ranne  upon  him,  and
lue  him,  with  divers  other  Tartarians  that  accompanyed
lim. Guiboga  hearing  that  the  Christians  had  slaine  his
Nephew, rode  presently and  tooke  the Citie  of  Sidon,  He  destroyed
lismanteled the walls thereof, and slue some few  the  Citie  of
Christians,  the  rest  saving  themselves  in  an  Hand. And  sldon-
lever after would the Tartars trust the Christians of
iyria,  neither  durst  they  put  confidence  in  the  Tartars,
?ho were afterwards driven out  of the Kingdome of
yria  by  the  Saracens,  as  shall  be  declared.

31.  Whiles Haoloon was busie m the warre with  [III.  i.  118.]
krcat,  as  hath  beene  said,  the  Soldan  of  Egypt  assembling  The  Soldans
\s  Armie  came  to the  Province  of  Palestina,  and  in  a  enterPri™
•lace  called  Hamalech,  he  joyned  battaile  with  Guiboga  qSSL
nd  his  Tartars,  where  Guiboga  was  slaine,  and  his  Armie

335

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1307.

defeated.  The  Tartars  which  escaped  went  into  Armenia,
and  by  this  meanes  the  Kingdome  of  Syria  was  wholly
subdued  by  the  Saracens,  saving  certayne  Cities  of  the
Christians,  which  were  seated  neere  the  Sea.  When
Haoloon  pre-  Haloon  understood  how  the  Soldan  of  Egypt  had  invaded
paring  to Syria,  and  driven  thence  his  people,  he  gathered  his  Armie

Z7n  dieth and Sent t0 the Kin& °*  Armenia> and  to tne  King  °*
Georgia,  and  the  other  Christians  of  the  East  to  prepare

themselves  against  the  Soldan  of  Egypt  and  the  Saracens,

and  when  his  Armie  was  in  readinesse  a  sicknesse  seized

him,  of  which  he  languished  the  space  of  a  fortnight,  and

then  dyed,  by  whose  death  the  enterprize  of  the  Holy

Abaga  his  Son  Land  had  an  end. Abaga  his  Sonne  held  the  Dominion

and  Successor.  Qf  his  Father,  who  intreated  the  Emperour  Cobila  Can  g

being  his  Uncle, to  confirme him  therein,  to  which  he  p

willingly  accorded. So  he  was called Abaga Can, and «

began  to  reigne  in  the  yeare  of  our  Lord 1264.

32. Abaga was  wise and  governed prosperously inp

all  things,  two  only  excepted,  one  that  he  would  not  be  a  k

Christian,  as  his  Father  had  beene,  but  worshipped  Idols,  S;

beleeving  the  Idolatrous  Priests. The  other,  that  he  was  ar

alwayes  in  warres  with  his  Neighbours,  by  reason  whereol  I

the Soldan was long in quiet, and the power  of  the  ej

Saracens  much  increased. Those  Tartars  (or  rather  Turks}  k

which  could  escape  from  out  the  Dominion  of  the  Tartars.!  I

fled  unto  the  Soldan,  seeking  to  avoid  the  heavie  burthens  k

which  the  Tartars  imposed  on them. And  the  Soldan  M

dealt  politikely,  for he sent  Messengers  by  Sea to the  re

Tartars,  in  the  Kingdomes  of  Cumania,  and  Russia,  and  pr

made  composition  and  agreement  with  them,  that  whenso-  ai

ever Abaga should moove warre against  the Land olfe

Egypt,  then  they  should  invade  his  Countrey,  for  whicb  G

he  promised  them  great  gifts,  by  meanes  whereof  Abag^  H;

could  not  well  invade  the  Land  of  Egypt,  but  the  Soldariit

could  easily  without  resistance  invade  the Christians  ir  )f

the  parts  of  Syria,  insomuch,  that  the  Christians  lost  the  lr

Citie of  Antioch,  and  divers other  places of strength.  111

which  they  held  in  that  Kingdome.

336

ANTHONY THE ARMENIAN  ad.

1307.

33.  Moreover,  Bendecar  the  Soldan  of  Egypt  was  so  Bendecar
fortunate  that  he  much  abased  the  Kingdome  of  Armenia.  Soldan  °f
For  it  hapned  that  the  King  of  Armenia  with  many  of  .  ®K  ,
his men was gone to the Tartars, which the Soldan  Armenia,
hearing,  sent  a  Captayne  of  his  to  invade  the  Kingdome  Ramusio  cah
of Armenia. The Sonnes of the King  of  Armenia,  him  Bunhoc-
gathering  together  all  that  could  beare  Armes,  encountred ere'
the Egyptians  in  the  Confines  of  their  Kingdome,  and
resisted them couragiously ; but the Armie of the
Armenians  being overthrowne,  one  of  the  Kings  Sonnes
was  taken,  and  the  other  was  slaine  in  battaile. So  that
the  Saracens  thereby  wasted  and  spoyled  all  the  Kingdome
of  Armenia, and  carryed infinite riches thence to the
great damage of  the Christians, whereby the Enemies
power  was  much  encreased,  and  the  Kingdome  of  Armenia
wondrously  weakned. The  King  whose  endeavour was
wholly  bent  about  the  destruction  of  the  Infidels,  having
heard  this  most  unhappie  newes  of  his owne  Countrey,
Dusied his thoughts night  and  day  how to afflict the
Saracens,  and  oft-times  very  earnestly  dealt  with  Abaga,
and his Tartars to attempt the  overthrow  of  faithlesse
Vlahomet,  and  the  reliefe  of  the  Christians. But  Abaga
excused  himselfe  by  reason  of  the  warres,  in  which  he  was
daily entangled with his Neighbours. The King of  He  concluded
Armenia seeing that hee  could not have any present  a  truce  wlth
ayde of  the Tartarians, sent and made truce by his
Messengers  with the Soldan  of  Egypt, that he might
redeeme  his  Sonne  which  was  Prisoner. The  Soldan  also
Dromised him  that  if  he  restored him  a friend of  his
called Angoldscar whom the Tartars  held captive, and
feelded  up  the  Castle  Tempsach,  and  some  holds  of  the
Citie of  Halappi, which  he  had gotten in the  time of
Haoloon,  hee  would  set  his  Sonne  at  libertie. Whereupon
he Soldan, having received his friend, and the Castle
Df  Tempsacke beeing yeelded, and two other Castles
hrowne  downe  at  his  appointment,  delivered  his  Sonne
Dut  of  Prison,  and  restored  him  accordingly. Then  after-
wards King  Haython  of  famous  memorie,  having  reigned
xi  337  Y

A.D.

J307-

*That  the

Greeke
Monkes
changed  their
names,
appeareth  by
the  example  of
Alexander
Comneus  in
Nicet.  p.  48.
6.  and  of
Andronicus
the  Emperour
in  Gregoras,
lib.  9.  p.  47.
and  of  Canta-
cwzenus  the
Emperour  in
Calcondilas
lib.  1.

Abaga  entred
the  Kingdome
of  Egypt,  and
destroyed
Turkie.
Parvana.

[III.  i.  119.]

Parvana  cut
asunder  and
eaten.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

fortie  five  yeares,  and  done  much  good  to  the  Christians,
yeelded  up  his  Kingdome  and  Dominion  to  his  Sonne
Livon,  whom  he  had  delivered  out  of  captivitie,  and
renouncing  this  Kingdom  of  the  World  became  professed
in  Religion,  and  was  called  Macharius,  changing  his  name
(according  to  the  custome  *  of  the  Armenians)  when  they
enter  into  Religion,  and  in  short  time  after  dyed  in  peace
in  the  yeare  of  our  Lord 1270.

34.  This  King  of  Armenia  Livone  was  wise,  and
governed  his  Kingdom  providently,  and  being  much
beloved  by  his  owne  People,  and  by  the  Tartars,  he
laboured  earnestly  to  destroy  the  Saracens,  so  that  in
his  time  Abaga  made  peace  with  al  his  neighbors,  who
of  long  time  had  been  his  enemies.  Then  the  Soldan
of  Egypt  entred  the  Kingdome  of  Turkie,  and  slue  many
of  the  Tartars,  and  drave  them  out  of  many  Townes.
For  a  Saracen,  called  Parvana,  being  Captaine  over  the
Tartars  that  were  in  Turkie,  rebelled  against  Abaga,
and  sought  the  destruction  of  the  Tartarians.  Abaga
hearing  thereof,  posted  thither  so  speedily,  that  in  fifteene
dayes  hee  rode  fortie  dayes  journey.  The  Soldan  hearing
of  his  comming  departed  suddenly,  not  daring  to  make
any  longer  abode.  Yet  could  not  so  speedily  withdraw
himselfe,  but  that  the  Tartars  following  swiftly,  over-
tooke  the  rereward  of  his  Armie  in  the  entrie  of  the
Kingdome  of  Egypt,  in  a  place  called  Pasblanke.  There
the  Tartarians  rushing  on  them,  tooke  two  thousand
Horsemen  of  the  Saracens,  beside  much  riches,  and  five
thousand  of  the  Cordines  which  lived  in  that  Countrie.
Abaga  being  come  to  the  Confines  of  Egypt,  was  per-
swaded  to  goe  no  farther  for  heat :  for  that  Land  is  very
hote,  and  his  Tartars,  and  their  beasts  having  come
speedily  from  farre,  could  hardly  have  indured  it,  by
reason  whereof  hee  returned  into  Turkie,  and  spoiled
and  wasted  all  the  Countries  that  had  rebelled,  and
yeelded  to  the  Soldan.  But  he  caused  the  Traytor
Parvana  with  his  partakers  to  be  cut  asunder  in  the  midst,
after  the  Tartarian  manner,  and  part  of  his  flesh  to  be

338

ANTHONY THE ARMENIAN  ad.

!3°7-
served  in all his meats, whereof  he  and his Captaines
did  eat. Such  was  the  revenge  of  King  Abaga  on  the
Traitor  Parvana.

35.  Abaga  having  effected  his  desires  in  Turkie,  and  King  Livono

enriched  his Tartars  with the spoyles  of  the rebellious  refuseth  the

Saracens,  he called to him  the King: of  Armenia, and  °€e.r  °V  e  ,
rr j i  •  i i  • j  c ^ i  ■  i i Kingdome  of

ottered him the kingdome or 1  urkie, in regard that  Turkic

his  father  and  hee  had  beene  ever  faithfull  to  the  Tar-

tarians. But the King of  Armenia being  discreet and

wise, rendred great thankes to Abaga for so great a

Present,  but  excused  himselfe  from  the  accepting  thereof,

as  unable  to  governe  two  Kingdomes. For  the  Soldan

of Egypt was in his full  strength,  and earnestly bent

against the Kingdome of  Armenia : so that hee had

enough  to  doe  to  provide  for  the  defence  thereof. Yet

advised him to settle and dispose the Kingdome of

Turkie  in  such  sort  ere  his  departure,  that  there  might

bee no  feare of  Rebellion afterwards : and  in  any  case

to  permit  no  Saracen  to  command  there. Which  advice

Abaga  accepted  of,  and  never  after  suffered  any  Saracen

to  beare  rule  in  that  Countrey. The  king  of  Armenia  Hee  urgeth

then  desired  him  to  thinke  of  delivering  the  Holy  Land  delivering  of

i  out  of  the  hands  of  the  Pagans : wherein  he promised  ^ p

I  all his best endeavour: and  wished the King to  send
messengers  to  the  Pope,  and  to  other  Princes  of  Christen-

j  dome  for  their  assistance. So  Abaga  having  ordered  the
affaires  of  Turkie,  returned  to  the  Kingdome  of  Corazen,  Corazen.
where  hee  had  left  his  familie. Bendecar  the  Soldan  of
Egypt,  after  he  had  received  such  damage  by  the  Tartars,

;  was  poisoned,  died  in  Damascus  :  whereof  the  Christians  The  death  of
of  those  parts  were  very  glad. And the  Saracens  very  the  So^an-

j  sorrowfull :  for  they  had  not  his  like  after,  as  they  them-
selves commonly  reported. For  his  sonne,  called  Mele-  Melechabic his

;  chahic,  succeeded  him,  who  was  soone  driven  out  of  his  some  and
Dominion by  one called Elsi, who violently usurping,  ^  the'
made  himselfe  Soldan.  Soldan.

36.  The  time  appointed  being  come,  when  Abaga  was
to begin his warre against the Soldan of  Egypt, hee

339

A.D.

I307.

Mangodanior
deputed
General!  by
his  Brother.

He  commeth
to  battell
against  the
So/dan.

Turara.

Almach.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

appointed  his  brother  Mangodanior  to  goe  to  the  King-
dome  of  Syria  with  thirtie  thousand  men,  being  Tartars,
and  couragiously  to  overcome  the  Soldan,  if  he  came
in  battell  against  him  :  or  otherwise  to  take  in  the  Castles
and  Holds  of  the  Countrey,  and  deliver  them  to  the
Christians,  if  the  Soldan  should  shun  the  fight.  When
Mangodanior  with  his  Armie  setting  forward,  was  come
neere  the  Confines  of  Armenia,  hee  sent  for  the  King
of  Armenia,  who  came  presently  unto  him  with  a  goodly
companie  of  Horse :  so  that  they  entred  the  Kingdome
of  Syria,  and  went  spoyling  and  forraging,  till  they  came
to  the  Citie  Aman,  now  called  Camella,  which  is  seated
in  the  midst  of  Syria.  Before  this  Citie  lieth  a  faire  great
Playne,  where  the  Soldan  of  Egypt  had  assembled  his
Power,  intending  to  fight  with  the  Tartarians.  And
there  the  Saracen  on  the  one  side,  with  the  Christians
and  Tartars  on  the  other  side,  fought  a  great  battell.
The  King  of  Armenia  with  the  Christians  ruled  and  com-
manded the  right  wing  of  the  Armie  which  invaded  the
Soldans  left  wing  manfully,  and  put  them  to  flight,  and
pursued  them  three  dayes  journey,  even  to  the  Citie
Aman.  Another  part  of  the  Soldans  Armie  was  also
routed  by  Amalech  a  Tartarian  Captaine,  who  pursued
them  also  three  dayes  journey,  to  a  Citie  called  Turara.
When  they  thought  the  Soldans  Power  utterly  over-
throwne,  Mangodanior  who  never  had  seene  the  conflicts
of  warre  before,  being  afraid  without  any  reasonable  cause
of  certaine  Saracens,  called  Beduini,  withdrew  himselfe
out  of  the  field,  having  the  better,  forsaking  the  King
of  Armenia,  and  his  Captaine  which  had  prevayled  against
his  enemies.  When  the  Soldan,  which  thought  he  had
lost  all,  saw  the  field  cleere,  and  all  abandoned,  he  got
upon  a  little  hill,  with  foure  armed  men,  and  stood  there.
The  King  of  Armenia  returning  from  the  pursuit,  and
missing  Mangodanior  in  the  field,  was  much  astonied,
and  imagining  which  way  hee  should  be  gone,  followed
after  him.

But Amalech returning from the enemies  whom he

340

ANTHONY THE ARMENIAN  ad.

!307-
had  pursued,  abode  two  dayes  expecting  his  Lord,  sup-
posing that  he  had  followed  after  him,  as  he  ought,  for
the  further  subduing  of  his  enemies,  and  the  Countrey
which  they  had overcome : till  at  last,  having  heard  of
his  retrait,  leaving  his  victorie,  hee  made  speed  after  him ;
whom  hee  found  on the  banke  of  the  River  Euphrates
staying  for  him. And  then  the  Tartars  returned  to  their
owne Province. But the King of  Armenia sustained The  King  of
much  losse,  and  hard  adventure  in  his  returne  :  for  the  Armenia,  his
Horses  of  the  Christians  of  the  Kingdome  of  Armenia,  &eat losse  at
were  so  wearied  and  spent  with  the  length  of  the  way,
and  want  of  Fodder,  that  they  were  not  able  to  travell,
so that the Christians going scatteringly by unusuall
wayes,  were  often  found  out,  and  slayne  without  mercy
by the Saracens inhabiting those parts : Insomuch  that
the  greatest  part  of  the  Armie  was  lost,  and  in  a  manner
all the Nobility. And this misadventure of Mango-
danior  happened  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord 1282.  1282.

When Abaga understood the successe hereof, he  Abaga
assembled  all  his  people,  and  when  hee  was  readie  to  set  PrePareth  a
forward  with  all  his  power  against  the  Saracens,  a  certaine  reven&e-
Saracen,  the  sonne  of  the  Devill,  came  to  the  Kingdome
of  Persia,  prevayled  by  giving  great  gifts  to some  that
served  neere  about  Abaga,  in  such  sort,  that  both  he  and  [III.  i.  120.]
his  brother Mangodanior were poysoned both on one  He  is  poisoned
day:  and  died  both  within  eight  dayes  after. The  trueth  ™ithhis
whereof  was  afterwards  disclosed  by  the  mischievous  Male-  Brother'
factors  themselves. And  so  died  Abaga  Can  in  the  yeere
of  our  Lord 1282.

37.  After  the  death  of  Abaga  Can  the  Tartars  assembled  Tangodor  the
themselves, and ordayned over them a brother  of  his,  brother  and
called Tangodor, who had overgone the rest of his  °Jfcessor  V
brethren. In his  youth  he  had received  the  Sacrament
of  Baptisme,  and  was  baptised  by  the  name  of  Nicholas.
But  being come to  riper  yeeres,  and  keeping  companie
with Saracens, whom hee loved, hee became  a  wicked  Of  a  Chris-
Saracen, and renouncing Christian Religion, would be  tlan  turnetJl
called  Mahomet  Can,  and  laboured  by  all  meanes  to  turne

34i

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

all  the  Tartarians  to  that  irreligious  Sect  of  Mahomet  the
sonne  of  Iniquitie ;  in  such  sort,  that  those  that  hee  could
not  compell  by  violence,  hee  allured  by  preferments  and
rewards :  insomuch  that  in  his  time  many  of  the  Tar-
tarians became  professed  Saracens,  as  at  this  day  appeareth.
This  Child  of  perdition  commanded  the  Churches  of  the
Christians  to  be  destroyed,  and  forbade  them  to  use
any  of  their  religious  Rites  or  Ceremonies.  Hee  caused
the  doctrine  of  Mahomet  to  bee  publikely  preached,  the
Christians  to  bee  banished,  and  their  Churches  in  the  Citie
of  Tauris  utterly  to  bee  destroyed.  Hee  sent  Messengers
also  to  the  Soldan  of  Egypt,  and  concluded  a  Peace  and
a  League  with  him,  promising  that  all  the  Christians
within  his  Dominion  should  become  Saracens,  or  else
lose  their  heads,  which  gave  the  Saracens  cause  of  much
rejoycing,  and  made  the  Christians  very  sad.
Hee  seeketh  to  Hee  sent  moreover  to  the  King  of  Armenia  in  Georgia,
betray  the  and  to  the  other  Christian  Princes  of  those  parts  to  come
fang*  v  unto him without  delay. But they  resolved rather  to

Georgia.  die  in  battell  then  to  obey  his  commandement,  for  other

remedie  they  could  finde  none.  And  the  Christians  being
now  in  such  anguish  and  bitternesse  of  heart,  that  they
rather  desired  to  die  then  to  live,  even  God  (which  never
refuseth  them  that  put  their  trust  in  him)  sent  consola-
tion to  them  all.  For  a  Brother  of  this  Mahomet,  with
a  Nephew  of  his  also,  called  Argon,  opposing  themselves,
and  rebelling  against  him  for  his  evill  deeds  did  signifie
Hee  is  accused  to  Cobila  Can  the  great  Emperour  of  the  Tartarians,  how
toCobilaCan.  he  had  forsaken  the  steps  of  his  Ancestors,  and  was
become  a  wicked  Saracen :  labouring  with  all  his  might
to  bring  the  rest  of  Tartars  to  be  Saracens  also.  Which
when  Cobila  Can  understood  he  was  much  displeased
thereat  :  insomuch  that  he  sent  and  required  Mahomet
to  reforme  his  evill  wayes,  for  otherwise  he  would  proceed
against  him.  Which  message  replenished  him  with  wrath
and  indignation,  insomuch  that  he  being  perswaded  there
was  none  that  durst  gainsay  his  proceedings  but  his
Brother  and  his  Nephew  Argon,  he  caused  his  Brother

342

ANTHONY THE ARMENIAN  ad.

1307.
to  be  slayne :  and  intending  the  like  to  his  Nephew,  he  He  slayeth  his
went  against  him  with  a  mightie  Armie. Argon  being  Brot^r-
not  of  strength  to  withstand  his  forces,  betooke  himselfe
to  a strong Hold among the Mountaines ;  which that
Sonne  of  Iniquitie  besieged  with  his  devillish  Armie.

Argon finally  yeelded himselfe, with condition that
he might still  enjoy  his Dignitie and Dominion. But
Mahomet  delivered  him  to  the  Constable  and  others  of
the Nobilitie, to bee kept in Prison. And departing
towards  the  Citie  of  Tauris,  where  he  left  his  wives  and
children,  he  gave  direction  that  his  Armie  should  come
shortly after him : but appointed the Constable, and
such  as  he trusted  most,  to  put his Nephew  to  death
secretly,  and  to  bring  him  his  head. These  things  thus
hastily  ordered and directed, there was amongst  those
that  had  received  the  command  of  that  bloudy  execution,
a  man  of  some  Place  and  Authoritie,  brought  up  under
Abaga  the  Father  of  Argon,  who  having  compassion  of
his distresse, tooke  Armes,  and in  the night time  slue
the Constable  of  Mahomet  and all his followers, and
delivering  Argon,  made  him  Lord  and  Ruler  of  all :  some  Argon  of  a
for  feare,  and  others  for  love  being  obedient  to  his  will  Prisoner  is
and commandement. Argon being thus established,  made  Kin8-
accompanied with his faithfull followers, pursued pre-
sently  after Mahomet, whom he overtooke  and  seized  His  revenge
on  before  he  came  to  Tauris,  and  caused  him  after  their  on  Tangodor.
manner,  to  be  cut  asunder  in  the  midst. And  such  was
the  end  of  that  cursed  Caitiffe  Mahomet,  before  he  had
sate  two  yeeres  in  his  seat.

[§.  mi.

343

A.D.

!3°7-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

§.  IIII.

Of  Argon  the  Sonne  of  Abaga,  and  Regaito  his
Brother ;  of  Baido,  and  of  the  exploits  of
Casan  against  the  Soldan  of  Egypt,  and  others.

Argon  is
confirmed  by
Cobila  Can.

[III.  i.

He  dyeth.

N  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1285.  after  the  death  of
Mahumet,  Argon  the  sonne  of  Abaga  Can,  would
not  take  on  him  the  title  of  Can,  untill  he  had
received  commandement  from  the  great  Can  Soveraigne
Lord  and  Emperour,  to  whom  he  dispatched  Messengers
which  were  honourably  received,  and  entertayned  by  the
great  Can,  who  rejoyced  much  of  his  successe  against
Mahomet  and  sent  some  of  his  great  Officers,  to  confirme
Argon  in  his  Dominion,  who  was  thenceforth  called
Can,  and  much  respected  of  all.  For  he  was  of  a  goodly
aspect  and  presence,  couragious  and  wise  in  his  pro-
]  ceedings,  much  regarding  and  honouring  the  Christians.
The  Churches  over-throwne  by  Mahomet  he  repayred.
The  Kings  of  Armenia  and  Georgia,  with  the  other
Christian  Princes  of  the  East,  came  unto  him,  desiring  his
best  counsaile,  and  helpe  that  the  holy  Land  might  be
freed  from  the  Pagans.  Argon  very  graciously  answered,
That  he  would  gladly  doe  any  thing  that  might  tend  to
the  honour  of  God,  and  the  advancement  of  Christian
Religion,  and  that  he  intended  to  make  peace  with  his
Neighbours,  that  hee  might  the  more  freely  and  securely
follow  that  enterprise.  But  Argon,  before  the  execution
of  these  good  designments,  dyed  in  the  fourth  yeere  of  his
raigne.  And  a  Brother  of  his,  called  Regaito,  succeeded
him,  who  was  a  man  of  small  valour,  as  shall  be  after
declared.

39.  In  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1289.  a^ter  tne  death  of
Argon  Can,  his  brother  Regaito  was  his  Successor,  being  a
man  of  no  Religion :  in  Armes  he  was  of  no  valour,  but
was  altogether  given  over  to  beasdy  luxurie,  and  satiating
his  insatiable  appetite  with  superfluous  meates  and
drinkes :  and  did  nothing  else  by  the  space  of  six  yeeres

344

ANTHONY  THE ARMENIAN  ajd.

*3°7-
which he raigned, insomuch that being hated of his
subjects and contemned of strangers, he was finally
strangled by his Peeres. After whose  death Baydo, a  Bay  do  suc-
Kinsman of  his succeeded him, who was upright and  ^^eth  him.
:onstant in Religion,  and did many favours to the
Christians, but  he  soone ended his dayes, as shall be
declared.

40.  In  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1295.  after  the  death  of
Regaito,  his  Kinsman  Baydo  ruled  over  the  Tartars.  He
oeing  a  good  Christian  builded  the  Christian  Churches,
md  commanded  that  none  should  Preach  or  publish  the
Doctrine  of  Mahomet  amongst  the  Tartarians.  But
because  those  of  the  Sect  of  Mahomet  were  many,  they
:ould  hardly  be  induced  to  bee  obedient  to  that  com-
nandement  of  Baydo,  and  therefore  sent  Messengers
ecretly  to  Cason  the  sonne  of  Argono,  promising  to  give
lim  the  Dominion  which  Baydo  held,  and  to  make  him
heir  Lord  and  Ruler,  if  he  would  renounce  the  Christian
Religion.  Casan  caring  little  for  Religion,  but  greatly
.ffecting  Dominion,  promised  to  doe  whatsoever  they
vould,  and  so  began  an  open  rebellion,  whereupon  Baydo
.ssembled  his  people,  thinking  to  have  taken  Casan,  not
:nowing  of  the  Treason  which  his  people  had  wrought
.gainst  him.  But  when  they  came  to  the  Field,  all  the
Vlahometists  leaving Baydo, fled unto  Casan, so that

taydo  being  forsaken,  thought  to  have  escaped  by  flight,  The  death  of
ret  was  pursued  and  slaine  by  his  Enemies.  Baydo.

41.  After  the  death  of  Baydo;  Casan  being  made  Ruler  Casan
>ver  the  Tartars,  at  the  beginning  of  his  raigne,  durst  not  succeedeth-
;ainsay  what  hee  had  promised  the  Mahometists  that  had
)romoted  him  thereto,  and  therefore  shewed  himselfe  for

while  very  austere  to  the  Christians.  But  when  hee
;bund  himselfe  well  and  firmely  settled  in  his  Dominion,
lee  began  to  honour  and  cherish  the  Christians,  doing
hem  many  favours  as  shall  be  declared.  First,  therefore,
iee  destroyed  many  great  Ones,  who  had  beene  perswaders
71th  him  to  become  a  Saracen,  and  to  persecute  the
Christians. Then  hee  commanded  all  the  Tartars  within

345

A.D.

r307-

Melechnaser
the  Soldan.

Calphacks
double  dealing.

The  Soldans
sudden  on-set.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

his  Dominion,  to  bee  readie  with  their  Armour  and allj
necessarie furniture,  to attend him  for a Conquest  of'
the  Kingdome  of  Egypt,  and  over-throw  of  the  Soldan,  j
and  sent  to  the  King  of  Armenia  and  the  King  of  Georgia,!
and  other  Christian  Princes  of  the  East  in  that  behalfe.|
At  the  beginning  of  the  Spring  Casan  gathered  his  forces,;
and first set forward  towards Baldach : and at length \
turned  towards  the  Land  of  Egypt. The  Soldan,  called;
Melechnaser,  who  had  long before  some  intelligence  of
the  comming  of  the  Tartars,  assembled  all  his  power,  andii
came  before the  Citie of  Aman,  which  is seated  in  the
middest  of  the  Kingdome  of  Syria. Casan  understanding
that the Soldan  meant  to  give him  battaile,  forbore to  I
besiege any  Citie  or  Castle,  but  hasted  speedily  to the!
place  where  the  Soldan was, and  pitched his  Tents  buti
one  dayes  journey  from  him  in  certaine  Meadowes,  where!
was  plentie  of  forrage  and  feeding,  where he  rested  his
Followers  and  their  Horses  which  were  wearied  with  their
travell. Amongst  whom  was  a  Saracen,  called  Calphack!
(or  Capchick)  who  had  served  the  Soldan,  and  was  fled
from  him  to  Casan,  for  feare  of  imprisonment  and  punish- j
ments  for  his  misse-demerits. This  Calphack  had  received
sundrie favours and rewards of Casan, who reposed
great  confidence  in  him :  yet,  like  a  wicked  Traytor,  he
disclosed  the  counsaile  and  purpose  of  Casan  to  the  Soldan
and Saracens, acquainting  them by  Letters how Casan
meant to abide in those Meadowes, untill they had
sufficiently  rested their Horses  which  were  wondrously
wearied,  and  therefore  counsailed  the  Soldan  to  set  upon
him  before  his  Horses  were  refreshed,  whereby  he  might
easily  over-come  the  Tartarians.

The  Soldan  who  thought  to  have  expected  the  Tartars
at  the  Citie  of  Aman,  did  hereupon  change  his  resolution,:
and  with  a  chosen  companie  hasted  with  all  speede  to
assaile  Casan  at  unawares.  But  his  Espials  and  Scouts
giving  him  notice  of  their  approach.  Casan  commanded
his  men  presently  to  be  set  in  order  and  manfully  to  resist
them. He  himselfe more  bold  then  a  Lion  with  such

346

ANTHONY THE ARMENIAN  ad.

1307.

companie as hee had about him, rode to meete the

Saracens,  who  had  approached  so  neere  that  they  could

not  avoid  the  battaile. Casan  seeing  that  the  residue  of  He  deakth

his  companie  were  spred  so  farre  abroad  in  the  Countrie  politikely.

for the feeding of their Horses, that they  could not

suddenly  come to him, he  commanded  those  that  were

with him to dismount from  their  Horses, and placing

them in  a  Circle,  made  as  it  were  a  Wall  of  them,  and

with  their  Bowes  and  Arrowes  caused  his  men  to  expect

|their  Enemies,  and  not  to  shoote  untill  they  were  sure  to

i reach them, by which meanes the Tartars shooting

altogether, wherein they are very skilfull and readie,

wounded  the  foremost  Horses  of  their  Enemies  in  such

sort that they fell before the rest, whereby the rest  [III.  i.  12:

following on with great furie, and finding the former

ioverthrowne, fell themselves head-long over them :

insomuch, that of  all the Saracens there escaped few,

'which  were  not  either  overthrowne  or  else  wounded  to

death,  with  the  Arrowes  of  the  Tartars.

The  Soldan  himselfe  being  in  the  Armie,  fled  as  fast  as
le  could,  which  Casan  perceiving,  made  his  men  get  up  on
:heir  Horses,  and  manfully  to  set  on  their  Enemies,  being
limselfe  the  foremost  amongst  them  that  entred  the  Armie
Iff  the  Soldan,  who  with  some  small  companie  remayning
>o  long,  sustayned  the  brunt,  untill  the  Tartars  came  in
Troupes  well  ordered  to  fight,  and  then  came  the  whole
\rmie  on  both  sides  to  battaile,  which  endured  from  the
iunne  rising  till  the  Ninth  houre.  But  in  the  end,  the  He  over-
5oldan  with  his  Saracens  fled,  being  not  able  to  withstand  commeth.
he  courage  of  Casan,  who  did  wonders  with  his  owne
land,  and  pursued  them  with  his  people,  killing  on  every
jide  untill  it  was  darke  night,  and  made  so  great  slaughter
)f  the  Saracens,  that  the  Earth  was  covered  every  where
vith  their  dead  carkasses.  That  night  Casan  rested  at  a
)lace,  called  Caneto,  rejoycing  exceedingly  at  that  great  Caneto.
rictorie  which  God  had  given  him  against  the  Saracens.
This  fell  out  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1301,  on  the
Wednesday  before  the  Feast  of  the  Nativitie.

347

A.D.
I307.

Gazara.

Beduines  are
zvilde  Arabs.

Jmanyeelded.

Ay  ton  present
at  these  and
the  other
Expeditions,
from  Haloon
till  this  time.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

42.  Then  Casan  sent  the  King  of  Armenia,  and  a
Leader  of  the  Tartars,  called  Molay,  with  fortie  thousand
Horse,  to  pursue  the  Soldan  as  farre  as  the  Desart  oi
Egypt,  being  twelve  dayes  journey  distant  from  the  placd
where  the  battaile  was  fought,  and  willed  them  to  expecj
him  or  some  Messenger  from  him  at  the  Citie  Gazara  |
And  they  departed  speedily  before  the  Sunne  rising,  td
follow  after  the  Soldan.  But  some  three  dayes  after!
Casan  sent  for  the  King  of  Armenia  to  returne,  becaus^
he  purposed  to  besiege  the  Citie  of  Damascus,  and  willed
Molay  with  the  fortie  thousand  Tartars  to  pursue  with
speede  after  the  Saracens,  and  to  put  what  hee  could  takc|;
to  the  sword.  Yet  the  Soldan  himselfe  flying  verya
swiftly,  and  riding  on  Dromedaries  both  night  and  daya
in  the  conduct  and  companie  of  certaine  Beduini,  escaped;
into  the  Citie  of  Babylon  very  strangely.  But  others  o|
the  Saracens  fled  severall  wayes,  as  they  thought  they  coulcj
best  save  themselves,  and  a  great  number  of  them  going]
by  the  way  of  Tripolis,  were  slaine  by  the  Christians!
which  inhabited  the  Mountayne  of  Libanus.  The  King  o|J
Armenia  returning  to  Casan,  found  that  the  Citie  of  Amarjl
had  yeelded  unto  him,  so  that  the  whole  treasure  of  thJ
Soldan,  and  his  Armie  was  brought  into  his  presence  1
which  was  so  great  that  every  one  marvailed,  why  th(]
Soldan  carried  so  much  treasure  with  him  when  he  wenl
to  fight.  Casan,  when  he  had  gathered  together  all  thJ
riches  and  spoiles  which  they  had  gotten,  bestowed  thenl
bountifully  amongst  the  Tartars,  and  the  Christians  hifl
followers,  whereby they  were  all  made  rich.

And  I  Friar  Haython,  the  Compiler  of  this  Historiei
who  was  present  in  all  Expeditions  and  Battailes,  whicll
the  Tartars  had  with  the  Soldan,  from  the  time  of  Halooil
to  this  day,  yet  did  I  never  see  nor  heare  that  any  of  thfl
Tartarian  Lords  accomplished  more  in  two  dayes  then  dicl
Casan.  For  the  first  day,  with  a  small  companie  of  h»
owne,  he  over-came  a  great  Armie  of  his  Enemies,  ancl
did  such  exploits  in  his  Person,  that  he  wanne  fame  ancl
commendations  above  all  the  rest. On  the  second day

348

i

ANTHONY THE ARMENIAN  ad.

1307.

such  was  his  largesse,  and  so  great  this  liberalitie  of  his

heart,  that  of  all  the  infinite  wealth  and  treasure  which  hee

got,  hee  kept  nothing  for  himselfe,  but  a Sword  and  a

Purse,  in  which  was  contayned  certaine  writings  concerning

the  Land  of  Egypt,  and  the  number  of  the  Soldans  Armie.

And  this  was  most  marvailous  above  all  the  rest,  how  in  so  Casans

little  a  body,  and  of  so  bad  presence  (for  he  seemed  like  a  dwarfish

A»  v li  ui  1  j . •  stature  and  ill

Monster) there could be so much  vertue and rigour  favoure<i

contayned : for among neere two hundred thousand  feature.

Souldiers,  there  could  hardly  one  of  lesse  stature,  or  of

worse aspect be found. Therefore,  because  this  Casan

lived  in  our  time,  it  is  fitting  wee  made  the  more  ample

narration  of  his  Acts. And  in  regard  that  the  Soldan  who

was  overthrowne  by  Casan,  is  yet  living  at  the  writing  of  J  3°7-

this  Historie,  they  which  intend  to  destroy,  or  any  wayes  to

endamage  the  Saracens,  may  receive  many  advertisements

out  of  these  Collections.

After  some  few  dayes  rest,  Casan  directed  his  course
towards  the  Citie  of  Damascus :  where  the  Citizens
hearing  of  his  approch,  and  fearing  lest  if  hee  tooke  them
by  force,  they  should  die  without  mercy,  by  the  advice  of
the  wisest  amongst  them,  sent  with  one  consent  their
Messengers  unto  him  with  offer  of  their  Citie,  which  hee
willingly  accepted,  and  after  a  while  rode  towards  the
River  of  Damascus,  on  whose  Bankes  hee  pitched  his
Tents,  forbidding  any  damage  to  bee  done  to  the  Citie.
Then  the  Citizens  sent  him  divers  gifts,  and  plentie  of
victuals  for  his  Armie.  There  Casan  made  his  abode  five
and  fortie  dayes  with  all  his  Followers,  except  those  fortie
thousand  Tartars  which  were  sent  with  Molay,  who  stayed
his  comming  at  the  Citie  of  Gaccara.

43.  While  Casan  reposed  himselfe  neere  Damasco,
there  came  newes  unto  him,  how  a  Kinsman  of  his
called  Baydo,  had  entred  into  the  Kingdome  of  Persia,
and  committed  great  spoile  there  in  his  absence:  and
thereupon  hee  resolved  to  returne  to  his  owne.  Leaving
therefore  his  chiefe  Captaine  Cotolusa,  with  part  of  his  Cotolusa.
Armie for the Custodie of the Kingdome of Syria

349

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1307.

(whom  hee  willed  Molay  and  the  rest  of  the  Tartars  to  bej
obedient  unto  as  to  his  Lieutenant)  he  set  Rulers  and
Governours  over  all  the  Cities,  and  committed  thej
government  of  Damascus  to  the  Tray  tor  Calfach,  being!
not  yet  acquainted  with  his  trayterous  disposition.  Then1,
[III.  i.  123.]  calling  to  him  the  King  of  Armenia,  and  acquainting!
him  with  his  purpose,  hee  told  him  that  hee  would  1
willingly  have  delivered  the  Lands  which  hee  had  con- 1
quered  into  the  Christians  hands,  if  they  had  come  to  I
him,  and  that  if  they  came  hee  would  give  order  toi
Cotolusa  to  restore  them  the  Lands  which  they  had
formerly  holden:  and  to  yeeld  them  convenient  supply!
for  the  repayring  of  their  Castles  and  Fortresses.  These  |
things  thus  ordered,  Casan  tooke  his  journey  towards!
Mesopotamia,  but  when  hee  came  to  the  River  Euphrates,!
hee  sent  word  to  Cotolusa,  that  leaving  twentie  thousand!
Tartars  under  the  command  of  Molay,  hee  should  comej
speedily  to  him  with  the  rest  of  the  Armie.  Cotolusa  (
did  as  was  commanded  him,  so  that  Molay  remaynedj
Lieutenant  in  Syria  for  Casan,  who  eft-soones  by  per-}
Calfachs  swasion  of  the  Tray  tor  Calfach,  remooved  towards  the
treason.  parts  about  Jerusalem,  to  a  place  called  Gaur,  to  finde:

Gaur.  good  feeding  and  provision  for  his  Horses.

But  in  the  Sommer  time,  Calfach  (who  had  formerly!
hatched  Treason  in  his  heart  against  Casan,)  sent  word:
secretly  to  the  Soldan,  that  hee  would  restore  him
Damascus  with  the  other  Townes  which  Casan  had
taken.  The  Soldan  liked  hereof,  and  covenanted  to
give  him  Damasco  in  perpetuall  keeping,  and  part  of
his  treasure  with  his  sister  to  wife.  Insomuch,  that
shortly  after,  Calfach  became  Rebell,  and  caused  all  the
strong  places  to  rebell  against  the  Tartars,  bearing  them-
selves bold  on  the  heate  of  Sommer,  in  which  they  knew:
the  Tartars  could  not  ride  nor  yeeld  any  aide  unto  their
friends.  When  Molay  perceived  that  they  rebelled  every:
where,  hee  durst  not  stay  any  longer  with  so  small  a:
companie,  but  tooke  the  shortest  way  towards  the  King-
dome  of  Mesopotamia,  and  signified  thence  to  Casan  all

35°

ANTHONY THE ARMENIAN  ad.

1307.
that  had  hapned  in  the  Kingdome  of  Syria. Who  seeing
hee  could  not any way redresse  it  at that season, by
reason of  heate,  yet when  the Winter  approached,  hee
made  very  great  preparation  on  the  bankes  of  the  River
Euphrates, and sent over Cotolusa before with thirtie
thousand  Tartarian  Horse-men,  directing  him  that  when
hee  came  to  the  parts  of  Antiochia,  hee  should  call  unto
him the  King  of  Armenia,  and  the  other  Christians  of
the  East,  and  of  Cyprus,  and  with  that  strength  should
! enter  into  the  Kingdome of  Syria,  whiles  hee  prepared
J  to  come  after  with  the  strength  of  his  Armie. Cotolusa
I  did  as  hee  was  commanded,  and  with  his  thirtie  thousand
Tartars  went  forwards  till  hee  came  to  Antioch,  and  then
sent  to  the  King  of  Armenia,  who  came  unto  him  with
ihis Armie. The Christians also in the Kingdome of
[Cyprus  having  heard  of  the  comming  of  Cotolusa,  came
(speedily  with  their  Gallies  and  other  Vessels  to  the  He
jcalled Anterada, among whom was the Lord Tyron  Tyron.
brother  to  the  King  of  Cyprus,  Master  of  the  Hospitall
of  the  Temple,  with  their  Brethren  of  their  Societie. And
these  being  all  readie  to  under-goe  the  service  of  Christ,
there  came  a  rumour  that  Casan  was  dangerously  sicke,
that  men  dispayred  of  his  recoverie. Whereupon  Coto-
lusa with his Tartars returning towards Casan  ; the
IKing  of  Armenia  returned  also  into  his  Countrey  ;  and
the  Christians  at  the He  of  Anterada  to  the  Kingdome
of  Cyprus,  by  which  meanes  the  businesse  of  the  Holy
Land was utterly abandoned, which happened in the
yeere  of  our  Lord 1301.

Againe,  in  the  yeare  of  our  Lord  1303.  Casan  assem-  Casan
bling  a  mightie  Armie, came  with great  preparation  to  reneweth  the
the River  Euphrates, intending  to  enter  into  the  King-  ™ar™  °f
dome  of  Syria, and there  to  destroy  the  whole  Sect  of ^ru
Mahomet,  and  to  restore  the  Holy  Land  to  the  Christians.
But the Saracens fearing the comming of  Casan,  and
doubting  that  they  should  not  be  able  to  withstand  him
ivhen they had reaped and gathered their Corne  and
Dther fruits  of  the Earth,  and  had housed  their  cattell

351

A.D.

The  Saracens
burne  and
waste  their
ozvne
Countrey.

Caccabe.
Bir.

Bay  do

rebelleth

againe.

Cotolusa  the
third  time
Lieutenant  of
Syria.

A  man  taken.

[III.  i.  124.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

in  strong  holds,  they  set  fire  on  the  rest,  that  the  Tartars
when  they  came  might  not  find  victuals  for  themselves,
nor  for  forrage  for  their  beasts.  When  Casan  under-
stood what  the  Agarens  had  done,  and  how  they  had
wasted  all  the  Land,  considering  that  his  horses  could
not  there  be  fed  nor  sustayned,  he  resolved  to  remayne
that  Winter  upon  the  bankes  of  the  River  Euphrates,
and  to  beginne  his  Journey  at  the  beginning  of  the
Spring,  when  the  grasse  began  to  sproute.  For  the
Tartars  are  ever  more  carefull  of  their  Horses  then  of
themselves,  being  contented  with  the  smallest  pittance
of  any  kind  of  nourishment  for  themselves.

Then  Casan  sent  for  the  King  of  Armenia,  who  came
to  him  without  delay,  and  lodged  himselfe  on  the  River.
Casan  extended  three  dayes  Journey  in  length  even  from
a  certayne  Castle  called  Cacabe,  to  another  Castle  called
Bir,  which  Castles  appertayned  to  the  Saracens,  yet
yeelded  without  any  assault  unto  Casan.  But  while
Casan  abode  there,  expecting  the  convenient  season  for
effecting  his  desire  on  the  Saracens,  and  to  deliver  the
Holy  Land  out  of  their  hands,  the  Devil  cast  a  new)
Obstacle  in  his  way,  for  he  had  newes  againe  that  Baydo
had  entred,  and  made  more  spoyles  on  his  Land  then
before  ;  so  that  it  was  necessary  for  him  to  returne  to
his  owne,  whereat  being  much  grieved,  in  respect  that  he
was  constrayned  so  long  to  delay  the  businesse  of  the
Holy  Land,  he  commanded  his  Captayne  Cotolusa  with
fortie  thousand  Tartars  to  enter  into  the  Kingdome  off
Syria,  and  to  take  Damasco,  and  kill  all  the  Saracens  ;i  ;p
and  that  the  King  of  Armenia  should  joyne  his  people
with  Cotolusa.  Casan  then  returned  into  Persia,  Coto-
lusa and  the  King  besieged  the  Citie  Aman  :  and  having  jj
certayne  Intelligence  that  the  Soldan  was  at  the  Citie
Gazara,  and  would  not  stirre  from  thence,  they  tooke
it  by  assault  putting  all  the  Saracens  one  with  another
to  the  sword.  There  they  found  great  store  of  wealth
and  munition.

Thence  they  went  to  the  Citie  of  Damascus  to  besiege

352

if

ANTHONY THE ARMENIAN  a.d.

J307-
it, but the Citizens sent their Messengers, desiring  a  Damascus
Truce for three  dayes  which was granted them. The  besieged.
Scouts of the Tartars being almost a dayes journey
beyond  Damascus,  tooke  certayne  Saracens  whom  they  sent
to Cotulossa that he might examine them. Cotulossa
being advertized  by  these  that  there  were  about  twelve
thousand  Saracens  Horsemen,  within  two  dayes  Journey
from thence, which  expected  daily  the  comming  of  the
Soldan. He rode presently with  all speed,  hoping to
take them  at  unawares  :  But  it  was  almost  night  before
Cotulossa  and  the  King  of  Armenia  could  reach  thither,
and  they  had  Intelligence  that  the  Soldan  was  come  newly
before  them. Therefore  being  deceived  of  their  expecta-
tion to  assaile  those  twelve  thousand  alone,  some  advised
them  for  the  best  to  repose  themselves  that  night  being
[now  somewhat  late,  and to  set  upon  the  Enemie  in  the
morning. But  Cotulossa  despising the  Soldan,  and  his  The  obstinacie
people  would  not  hearken  to  any  advice,  but  commanded  °fCotu/ossa.
his Armie to bee forthwith put in order  :  which  the
Saracens  perceiving,  kept  their  standing,  being  on  the  one
side fenced with a  Lake, and with a Mountayne on
lanother side, and knowing that  the  Tartars  could  not
come to  assault them without  danger, they  would  not
goe forth to fight, but remayned in the place  where
they  were,  and  when  the  Tartars  thought  without  any
^impediment  to  have  assailed  their  Enemies ;  they  found  The  Soldan  a
\i  small  River  betweene  them,  which  in  some  places  had  w*p  .
ino passage over  ; by  meanes  whereof  much time  was
'spent  before  they  could  passe  over  the  River ;  but  after
r.hey  had passed  the  greatest  part  over  the  River,  they
set manfully  on their  Enemies. Yet  the  Soldan  stood
still and would not remove  from  the  place  he  was  in,
betwixt  the  Lake  and  the  Mountayne  ;  which  Cotulossa  Cotulossa  his
perceiving  because  the  darke  night  approched  he  withdrew  J™ltesse
jiis  company  for  that  night and  lodged  them  neere  the
Mountayne,  only  about  a  thousand  Tartars,  which  could
lot  passe  the  River,  were  not  with  him  that  night. The
lay  comming,  the  Tartars  againe  couragiously  set  upon
XI  353  z

A.D.
I307.

The  Tartars
indangered  by
the  waters.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Soldan  :  but  as  before,  he  would  by  no  meanes  come
forth  to  fight,  but  defended  himselfe  in  that  place  of
advantage.  So  the  Tartars  continuing  their  assault  from
the  morning  untill  the  ninth  houre,  beeing  thirstie  and
over-wearie  for  lacke  of  water  they  retyred  themselves
in  good  order,  leaving  the  Soldan  and  came  to  the  Plaine
of  Damascus,  where  they  had  plentie  of  pasture  and
water  at  will,  where  they  determined  to  abide  untill
they  had  sufficiently  reposed  themselves  and  their
Horses.

But  the  Inhabitants  knowing,  that  the  Armie  of  the
Tartars  was  spread  abroad  in  that  Plaine,  opened  the
Sluces  of  the  River  in  the  night  time,  whereby  the  waters
rose  so  high  in  eight  houres  over  all  the  Plaine,  that  the
Tartars  were  constrayned  on  the  sudden  to  arise  and
depart,  so  that  the  night  being  darke,  and  the  Ditches
all  filled  with  water,  and  no  wayes  nor  pathes  to  be  seene,
they  were  all  amazed  in  such  sort  that  many  Horses
perished,  and  much  Armour  was  lost,  insomuch,  that  the
King  of  Armenia  endured  much  losse,  yet  the  day  com
ming  through  the  goodnesse  of  God,  they  escaped  the
waters,  but  the  Bowes  and  Arrowes  of  the  Tartars  being
their  chiefe  weapons  which  they  use,  and  the  rest  of  their
Armour  being  all  wet  and  utterly  unserviceable,  they
were  so  astonied  therewith,  that  if  their  Enemies  had  ea
then  pursued  them,  they  might  have  beene  taken  or  ^
slaine.  Afterwards,  the  Tartars  by  reason  that  many
had  lost  their  Horses,  returned  softly  by  small  Journies
to  the  bankes  of  the  River  Euphrates,  yet  none  of  their
Enemies  durst  follow  or  pursue  them,  but  the  River
beeing  risen  and  swolne  through  the  abundance  of  raine
that  fell,  many  of  the  Armenians,  as  also  of  Georgians,
perished  therein,  more  then  of  the  Tartars,  whose  Horses
knew  better  to  swimme :  so  returned  they  into  Persia
ruined  and  disgraced,  not  by  the  power  of  the  Enemie,
but  by  accident  partly,  partly  by  evill  advice.  A  great
cause  whereof  was  the  obstinacie  of  Cotolusa,  who  woulc
not regard  any  advice that  was  given, for  if  he  woulc

354

01

JO

ANTHONY THE ARMENIAN  a.d.

J307-
have  harkened to the counsell of  the  wise,  he might
easily  have  prevented  those  dangers.

And  I  Frier  Haython  the  Compiler  of  this  Historie,
was  present  at all these proceedings  : and  if  happily  I
treate more  largely thereof  then shall  be  thought  con-
venient. I  crave  pardon  in  regard  that  I  doe  it  to  this
end,  that  on  like  occasions  happening  these  courses  may
bee  called  to  minde. For  these  actions  that  are  ordered
by counsell, have commonly good and commendable
events, but  the rash  and improvident  Enterprizes,  doe
usually  faile  of  their  wished successe. After  that the
[King  of  Armenia  had  passed  the  River  Euphrates  with
[some  losse,  he  resolved  to  goe  to  Casan  before  he  re-
|  turned to  his  Kingdome  of  Armenia,  and  therefore  hee
■went  streight  to  the  Citie  of  Ninive  in  which  Casan  then
resided. He  entertayned  the King  with  much  honour,  Heaydethhim
Ikindnesse, and magnificence, and being compassionate  wtth  men  and
of  his  losses  to  make  him  some  recompence  of  especiall '
favour  unto  him,  he  granted  him  a  thousand  Tartarians,
continually  in  pay  at  his  charge  for  the defence  of  his
Kingdome,  and  also  granted  him  out  of  the  Kingdome
of  Turkie, a yeerely pension, for  the maintenance  of
another thousand Armenian Horsemen yeerely at his
^pleasure,  the  King thus  recompenced,  having  taken  his
Heave, returned to the Kingdome of Armenia, which
tCasan  had enjoy ned him to watch warily  over, untill
God pleased to enable him personally to goe  to the
reliefe  of  the  Holy  Land.

355

A.D.

I3O7.

[III.  i. 125.]

Successor.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

§•  v.

Casan  dyeth,  Carbanda  succeedeth  ;  his  Apostasie.
The  Authors  entrance  into  a  Religious  Habit.  I
Of  Tamor Can  the  sixth Emperour, and  of,
Chapar, Hochtai, and Carbanda, three other
Tartarian Kings.

He  King  of  Armenia  returned  safely  to  his  King-
dome,  but  after  hee  came  thither  hee  found  little  {
rest  there,  for  after  it  so  pleased  God,  that  Casan  i|J
was surprized with a grievous infirmitie, and having '
governed  wisely  in  his  life,  hee  was  no  lesse  willing  that
his  wisdome  should  bee  commended  in  his  death. There-
fore hee  made  his  last  Will  and  Testament,  appointing
Carbanda  his hjs Brother Carbanda (or Carbaganda) his Heire  and
Successor  and having  ordered  all  things  concerning  the
Affaires of  his Kingdome and his House in prudent
manner, he made many good Ordinances and Lawes
which  for  a  memoriall  he  left  behind  him,  being  at  this
day  inviolably observed  by  the  Tartarians. Then  dyed
Casan,  and  his  Brother  Carbanda  succeeded  in  his  King-
dome.

This  Carbanda  was  the  Sonne  of  a  Ladie of  famous
memorie, called  Erockcaton,  who  was  very  devout  and  l
religious  in  Christianize,  while  she  lived,  and  had  every
day  Divine  Service  celebrated  before  her,  keeping  a  Priest!  ^
and Chappell  of  her  owne, so  that  this Carbanda was 1
baptized  and  named  Nicholas  in  his  Baptisme,  and  con-  !e
tinued  a  professed  Christian  as  long  as  his  Mother  lived.  I "
But  after  his Mothers death, delighting  in  the  societie
of  Saracens,  he  forsooke  the  Christian  Religion  to  become
a  Mahometist. The  King  of  Armenia  understanding  of
the death of  Casan,  was  much  troubled therewith, and
his  Enemies began to  lift up their Crests very high.
For the Soldan of  Babylon thereupon sought by all
meanes  to  endamage  him  and  his  people,  sending  all  the
yeare almost every moneth great troupes of armed

356

ffi

K

he

ANTHONY THE ARMENIAN

Souldiers,  which  foraged  and  wasted  the  Kingdome  of
Armenia,  and  did  more  damage  and  spoyle  on  the  plaine
Countrey  then  they  had  ever  sustayned  before  in  any
mans  memorie.  But  the  Almightie  and  most  mercifull
God  who  never  forsaketh  altogether  those  that  put  their
trust  in  him,  had  compassion  on  the  poore  afflicted
Christians :  for  it  fell  out  that  in  the  moneth  of  July,
seven  thousand  Saracens  of  the  best  Families  under  the
Soldan,  made  a  roade  into  the  Kingdome  of  Armenia,
wasting  and  spoyling  all  as  far  as  the  Citie  of  Tharsus,
in  which  the  blessed  Apostle  Saint  Paul  was  borne,  and
svhen  they  had  committed  many  spoyles  in  that  Province,
md  were  upon  their  returne,  the  King  of  Armenia,  having
gathered  his  people  together,  encountred  and  set  upon
them  neere  the  Citie  of  Giazza,  where  more  by  Gods
^oodnesse  then  our  worth,  they  were  utterly  overthrowne
n  such  sort,  that  of  seven  thousand  Saracens  there  escaped
lot  three  hundred,  but  were  either  taken  or  slaine,  albeit
:hey  thought  in  their  Pride,  they  could  have  over-runne
:he  whole  Kingdome  of  Armenia,  and  devoure  all  the
Christians  there  at  a  morsell.  This  was  performed  on
:he  Lords  Day,  being  the  eighteenth  of  July,  after  which
:onflict,  the  Saracens  durst  no  more  enter  into  the  King-
lome  of  Armenia.  But  the  Soldan  sent  to  the  King
)f  Armenia  to  make  truce  with  him,  which  was  agreed
Detweene  them.

46.  I  Frier  Haython,  having  beene  present  at  all
:he  said  proceedings,  had  purposed  long  before  to  have
:aken  a  Regular  Habit  upon  me,  and  to  have  entred  into
Religion.  But  by  reason  of  many  impediments  and
lifficulties  in  the  Affaires  of  the  Kingdome  of  Armenia,
i  could  not  with  my  honour  forsake  my  friends  and
rindred  in  such  extremities.  But  seeing  that  Gods  good-
lesse  had  beene  so  gracious  unto  me,  as  to  leave  the
Cingdome  of  Armenia,  and  the  Christian  people  there
iter  my  manifold  labours  and  travels  in  quiet,  and  peace-
able estate,  I  then  tooke  the  time  to  performe  that  Vow
vhich  before  I  had  vowed. Therefore  having  taken  my

357

A.D.

I3O7.

The  Soldan
maketh  roades
into  Armenia.

The  King  of
Armenia  over-
throweth  his
Enemies.

The  Victorie
brings  peace.

The  Author  of
himselfe.

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

leave  of  my  Lord  the  King,  and  of  the  rest  of  my  kindred
and  friends,  even  in  that  field  where  God  gave  the
Christians  Victorie  over  their  Enemies,  I  beganne  my
Journey,  and  comming  to  Cyprus  in  the  Monasterie  of
He  taketh  the  Episcopia,  tooke  a  Regular  Habit  of  the  Order  Pre-
Hahtofa monstratensis,  to  the  end  that  having  served  the  World

i TPTtlOYLStVll—

tends.  as  a  Souldier  in  my  youth,  I  might  spend  the  rest  of  my

life  in  the  Service  of  God,  forsaking  the  pompe  of  this
An.  Dom.  World,  which  was  in  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1305.  There-
I3°5-  fore  I  render  thankes unto  God,  that  the  Kingdome  of

Armenia,  is  at  this  day  in  a  good  and  peaceable  estate,
and  well  reformed  by  the  Moderne  King  Livono,  Sonne
to  King  Haython,  who  is  a  Looking-glasse  or  patterne
to  all  other  Kings  in  all  kinde  of  eminent  vertue.
The  credit  of  Moreover,  the  Compiler  of  this  Worke  affirmeth,  that
this  Histone.  ^e  ^th  come  three  manner  of  wayes  to  the  knowledge
of  those  things  which  hee  declareth  and  writeth  in  this
Booke.  For  from  the  beginning  of  Changius  Can,  who
was  the  first  Emperour  of  the  Tartars  untill  Mango  Can,
who  was  their  fourth  Emperour,  I  faithfully  deliver  what
I  gathered  out  of  the  Histories  of  the  Tartarians.  But
from  Mango  Can  to  the  death  of  Haloon,  I  write,  that
[III.  i.  126.]  which  I  received  of  an  Uncle  of  mine,  who  writ  the
same  by  the  commandement  of  Haiton  King  of  Armenia,
and  was  present  then  at  all  the  foresaid  occurrences,  and
with  great  diligence  did  often  discourse  &  make  rehearsall
of  them  to  his  Sonnes  and  Nephewes,  that  they  might
remayne  the  better  to  Posteritie,  and  from  the  beginning
of  Abaga  Can  to  the  end  of  this  third  part  of  this  Booke,
the  Author  relateth  those  things  which  hee  knew  of
himselfe,  as  having  beene  present  at  them  all,  whereby
he  is  enabled  to  give  testimonie  of  the  truth.  Now
albeit  we  have  hitherto  treated  of  the  Histories  and
Deeds  of  the  Tartarians,  there  remayneth  yet  somewhat
to  be  said  concerning  their  Power  and  Dominion,  especially
of  those  that  are  now  living,  that  it  may  the  better  bee
knowne.

47.  The great Emperor of  the Tartars  which now

353

be

V

H(

ANTHONY THE ARMENIAN  ad.

1307.

holdeth the Empire,  is called Tamor Can, being  their  Tamar  Can.
sixt  Emperour,  who  keepeth  his  Residence  in  the  King-
dome  of  Cathay,  in  a  very  great  City  called  Jong,  which  Jong> or  Jons>
his  Father  caused  to  be  built,  as  is above  declared, his  s*e  SUP-  l9-
power is  very  great. For  this  Emperour  alone  is  able
to  doe  more  then  all  the  Tartarian  Princes  together,  and
the Nations under his government  are reputed more
noble  and  rich,  and  better  stored  of  all  necessaries,  because
that  in  the  Kingdome  of  Cathay,  in  which  they  now  live,
there  is  great  abundance  of  riches.

Besides this great  Emperour, there are three other  Three  inferior
great  Kings  or  Princes  of  the Tartars,  which  rule  each  Jn&  °f e
of  them  over  many  Nations,  yet  are  they  all  subject  to
the  Emperour,  and  acknowledge  him  their  naturall  and
Leige  Lord. And  the  differences  which  happen  betweene
them  are  decided  in  the  Emperours  Court,  and  determined
by his  Judgement. The  first of  these Kings  is  called
Chapar,  another  Hochtay,  and  the  third  Carbanda. This  Chapar.
Chapar  hath  his  Dominion  in  the  Kingdome  of  Turque- octf-
stan, being  the  neerest  to  the  Emperour. It  is  thought  chapar.
that  he  is  able  to  bring  into  the  field  foure  hundred  thou-
sand Horsemen,  and  these  are  bold  and  good  Warriours,
but  not  so  well  furnished  of  Horse  and  Armour  as  were
expedient. The Emperours subjects doe many times
make  warre  upon  them,  and  they  on  the  other  side  doe
often  invade  the  people  of  Carbanda. The  Dominion  of
this  Chapar  was  in  ancient  time  subject  for  the  greatest
part  to  a  Lord  called  Doay.

Hochtay  keepeth  his  Seat  of  Residence  in  the  King-  Hoctay,ofwho
dome  of  Cumania,  in  a  Citie  called  Asaro,  (or  Sara)  and  c*me
it  is  said,  that  he  is  able  to  bring  six  hundred  thousand  Tartars  and
Horsemen  to  the  fight,  yet  are  they  not  so  much  com-  Tamerlane.
mended  in  Feats  of  Armes,  as  the  men  of  Chapar,  albeit
they  have  better  Horses. These  make  warre  sometimes
on  the  Subjects  of  Carbanda,  sometimes  against  the  *Hun-  *That  is  the
garians,  and  sometimes  amongst  themselves. But  Hochtay  Huns  °fwnom
who  ruleth  at  this  present  holdeth  his  Dominion  peaceably  gflr-tam  ^
and  quietly.  original/.

359

A.i>.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

!307-
Carbanda.  Carbanda  hath  his  Dominion  in  the  Kingdome  of  Asia

the  Great,  and  maketh  his  chiefe  abode  in  the  Citie
of  Tauris,  beeing  able  to  bring  three  hundred  thousand
Horsemen  to  the  field.  But  these  are  gathered  out  of
divers  parts  being  rich  and  well  furnished  with  necessaries.
Chapar  and  Hochtay  doe  sometimes  make  warre  upon
Carbanda,  but  hee  never  medleth  first  with  them  :  neither
moveth  warres  against  any  but  that  he  sometimes  invadeth
the  Soldan  of  Egypt :  against  whom  his  Predecessors
have  fought  many  Battailes.  Chapar  and  Hochtay  would
willingly  take  from  Carbanda  his  Dominion,  if  they  were
able  to  effect  it.
The  division  of  The  reason  whereof  is  this,  Asia  is  divided  into  two
Asia.  parts, the one  part  whereof  being  called  the  Lower or

Deepe  Asia,  is  inhabited  by  the  Emperour,  and  those
two  Kings  called  Chapar  and  Hochtay.  The  other  part
being  the  higher,  is  called  Asia  the  Greater,  in  which
Carbanda  inhabiteth  and  hath  Dominion.  Now  there
are  only  three  wayes  by  which  men  may  passe  out  of
the  Deeper  or  Lower  Asia,  unto  the  high  Countrey  called
Asia  Major.  The  one  is  out  of  the  Kingdome  of  ua
Turquestan,  to  the  Kingdome  of  the  Persians ;  another
The  Derbent.  way  there  is  called  Derbent,  which  lyeth  neere  the  Sea  \Ta
The  Citie  where  Alexander  built  the  Citie  called  the  Iron  Gate,  as
called  the  Iron  -m  ^  Histories  of  Cumania  appeares;  the  other  way  is
to  goe  over  the  Sea,  called  Mare  majus,  which  way  lyeth
through  the  Kingdome  of  Barca.  By  the  first  way  the
subjects  of  Chapar  cannot  passe  to  the  Territories  of
Carbanda,  without  great  danger  and  difrlcultie,  because
they  should  find  no  feeding  for  their  Horses  in  many  Ui
dayes  travailes,  the  Land  being  so  dry  and  barren,  that
before  they  could  come  to  any  fruitfull  inhabited  Countrey,
their  Horses  would  be  starved,  or  at  least  so  faint  and
wearied  that  they  might  be  easily  overcome,  and  there-
fore that  way  they  will  not  take.  By  the  way  of  Derbent
the  people  of  Hochtay  may  passe  into  the  Countrey  of
Carbanda,  only  sixe  moneths  in  the  yeare,  which  is  in
the  Winter  time. But  that  way  Abaga  hath  caused  great

360

ANTHONY THE ARMENIAN  ad.

1307-
Frenches  and  Fortifications  to  bee  made  in  a  place  called
Ziba :  and  is  alwayes  kept  and  especially  in  the  Winter
tfith  a  Garrison  of  armed  men  to  defend  the  passage,
rhe  people  of  Hochtay  have  assayed  many  times  to  passe
:hat  way  by  stealth  and  secretly :  but  they  never  could,
leither  can  by  any  meanes  doe :  for  in  a  Plaine  called
Monga,  there  are  alwayes  in  the  Winter  time  certaine
Birds  about  the  bignesse  of  Pheasants  having  very  faire
fathers  to  behold,  and  these  Birds  (which  are  called  The  B'trds
jeyserach)  when  any  people  come  into  that  Plaine,  straight  '  ,

lye away over those Watchmen and their Trenches,
thereby  the Souldiers there are eft-soones assured of
:he  comming  of  their  Enemies,  and  prevent  the  surprize :
ind  by  the  way  of  the  Sea  called  Mare  majus,  they  never
ittempted,  because  that  way  goeth  through  the  Kingdome
)f  Barca,  which  is  so  mightie  in  people  and  so  strongly  [HI.  1.  127.]
;ituated,  that  they  are  without  hope  to  prevayle there,  Lar-a c .  .
md by  meanes hereof hath Carbanda and his  Prede-  called  J kas.
:essors beene secured from the power of so potent
Neighbours. Now  we  will  briefly  say  somewhat  of  the
nanners  and  fashions  of  the  Tartars.
48.  The Cataians do so much differ from other  The  Religion

Nations in their fashions and manner of  living,  that  %  /.

,.  c .  -r  ij v  •  •  1 Catalans,  or

t  were tedious  to  treat  or the  manifold  diversitie  and  Tartarian*  of

itrange  varietie  found  amongst  them. They  acknowledge  those  parts.
ind confesse one  Immortall God, and they call  upon
lis Name : yet they neither fast nor pray, nor any
vayes  afflict  nor  humble  themselves,  for  feare  or  reverence
)f  him, nor doe any good workes. The killing of  Impunitie  of
nen they hold  to  bee  no sinne : but if  they  happen  Manslaughter.
o leave their Bridle in their horse-mouth when hee
hould feed, they thinke therein they offend God
nortally. Fornication  and  Lecherie  is  held  by  them  as
10 sinne. They marrie  many  wives,  and the  custome  Polygamie.
s, that the Sonne must marrie his  Step-mother  after
he death  of his Father : and  the Brother  is married
o  his  Brothers  Wife after his  decease. In matter of
Vrmes  they  are  very  good,  and  more  obedient  to  their

361

A.D.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Warfare.

Eating  of
Horse-flesh.

Superiour  then  other  Nations  are ;  and  doe  easily  know
by  certaine  signes  in  Battaile  the  will  of  their  Com-
mander :  whereby  the  Armie  of  Tartarians  is  easily  ruled
and  commanded.  Their  Lord  bestoweth  not  any  stipend
on  them,  but  they  live  on  hunting  and  such  prey  as
they  can  get :  and  their  Lord  may  take  from  them
when  hee  list  whatsoever  they  have.

When  the  Tartars  ride  upon  any  enterprize,  they
take  with  them  great  store  of  Horse,  drinking  their
Milke,  and  feeding  on  their  flesh  which  they  reckon
very  good  food.  The  Tartars  are  very  readie  and
excellent  Archers  on  horse-backe,  but  on  foot  they  are
but  slow,  they  are  dexterous  and  ingenious  in  taking  of
Cities  and  Castles,  and  are  for  the  most  part  victorious
over  their  Enemies ;  yet  will  they  not  forbeare  to
turne  their  backes  in  the  skirmish  if  it  be  for  their
advantage.  And  this  advantage  they  have  in  the  field
that  they  will  fight  with  the  Enemies  when  they  list
themselves,  and  yet  they  cannot  be  compelled  to  fight
but  at  their  pleasure.  Their  manner  of  fight  is  very
dangerous,  so  that  in  one  conflict  or  skirmish  of  the
Tartars  there  are  more  slaine  and  wounded  then  in
any  great  Battaile  of  other  Nations,  which  hapneth  by
reason  of  their  Arrowes,  which  they  shoot  strongly,
and  surely  out  of  their  Bowes ;  beeing  indeed  so  skilfull
in  the  arte  of  shooting,  that  they  commonly  pierce  all
kind  of  Armour,  and  if  they  happen  to  be  routed,  yet
they  flye  in  troupes  and  bands  so  well  ordered,  that
it  is  very  dangerous  to  follow  or  pursue  them,  because
they  shoot  their  Arrowes  backwards  in  their  flight,
wounding  and  killing  oft-times  both  men  and  horses
that  pursue  them.

The  Armie  of  the  Tartars  maketh  no  great  shew,
because  they  goe  trooping  close  together,  so  that  an  Armie
of  one  thousand  Tartars  will  scarse  seeme  five  hundred.
The  Tartarians  doe  courteously  entertayne  strangers,
Hospitahhe.  giving  them  part  of  their  Viands,  and  expect  the  like
offers  to  bee  made  them,  for  otherwise  they  will  take  it,

362

Their

ANTHONY THE ARMENIAN  ad.

1307.

by  violence.  They  are  much  more  skilfull  in  conquering
of  Countries  then  in  keeping  of  them.  When  they
are  weake  they  are  humble  and  gentle  ;  stout  and  proud
when  they  are  growne  the  stronger.  They  cannot
endure  lying  in  other  men,  yet  themselves  are  much  DeRght  in
given  to  lying,  unlesse  it  be  in  two  especiall  things.  ^tns'
The  one  being  in  matter  of  Armes,  in  which  none  dareth
affirme,  that  he  did  any  exploit  which  was  not  done
by  him,  or  denie  any  faire  Act  which  hee  hath  com-
mitted :  The  other  is,  That  whosoever  hath  done  any
offence,  though  it  deserveth  death,  he  confesseth  it
presently  to  his  Lord  if  he  be  examined  thereon.  This
may  suffice  at  this  time,  concerning  the  manners  of
the  Tartars,  because  it  were  long  to  rehearse  all  the
different  customes  and  kinds  of  behaviour.

The  other  Chapters  which  follow,  pertayning  rather
to  advice  fitting  those  Times,  and  the  holy  Land  affaires,
then  the  Tartarian  Historie,  I  have  omitted.  And  in
the  next  place  will  present  some  Extracts  of  our  Countri-
man,  that  famous  Traveller  Sir  John  Mandevile,  whose
Geographie  Ortelius  commendeth,  howsoever  he  acknow-
ledged his  Worke  stuffed  with  Fables.  For  my  part,
I  cannot  but  deplore  the  losse  of  such  a  Treasure,  but
know  not  how  to  recover  or  repayre  it  (as  Ramusio
hath  done  for  Polo)  and  here  have  beene  forced  to
deale  with  him,  as  Historians  doe  with  our  famous
Arthur,  daring  to  say  little,  because  others  have  dared
so  much  and  such  incredibilities.  For  his  merit,  and
for  his  Nation  I  have  given  a  touch  of  him,  these  few
Latine  Extracts ;  referring  him  that  hath  a  minde  to
reade  him,  to  Master  Hakluits  first  Edition  of  his  Voyages,
where  his  storie  in  Latine  is  to  be  seene  at  large.  I
suspect  that  some  later  Fabler  out  of  the  Tales  of
Ogerus  the  Dane  hath  stuffed  this  storie;  some  of  Ogerus  a
\  which  for  a  taste,  I  have  here  left  remayning;  not  that  Dane,  of

I take  pleasure  in  lyes, but  that  thou  maist see,  from  wh°m  *~0  ,

,u-nr  ¥*.!_•  n  ]  j write  that  hee

'what  l^ountayne I suppose  this  corruption flowed: and  cmquere^

in that mistie Age (when humaner learning was in-  India,  13c.

363

A.D.

I307.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Odericus  in
M.  Hak.
published.

humanely  imprisoned,  and  Divine  Scripture  was  vulgarly-
buried,  and  Printing  not  at  all  borne)  what  Huskes
poore  Christian  Prodigals  (prodigall  to  beleeve  such
lyes)  were  fed  with  in  stead  of  Bread ;  not  onely  in
the  Church  by  Legends,  but  in  their  private  studies,
by  Arthurs,  Orlandos,  Bevises,  Guyes,  Robin  Hoods,
Palmerins,  and  I  know  not  what  monstrous  changeling-
births  of  Historic  Such  was  this  Ogerus :  and  in  great
part  such  was  Odericus,  a  Friar  and  Traveller,  in  whom
perhaps  some  Friar  hath  travelled,  with  him  at  least
in  this  Author  (whose  Age  was  before  him,  and  there-
fore could  not  cite  ought  out  of  him.)  Neither  is  it
for  nothing  (though  for  worse  then  nothing,  a  lye  is
both)  that  Friars  are  in  this  storie  so  often  mentioned
and  praysed :  I  smell  a  Friars  (Lyars)  hand  in  this
[III.  i.  128.]  businesse.  Our  Mandevile  travelled  from  Jerusalem
beyond  Jerico,  from  Christendome  to  remotest  Ethnikes,
and  hath  fallen  among  Theeves :  The  Friarly  Priest
and  Levite  not  onely  neglected  him,  but  I  am  afraid
played  the  Theeves  thus  to  rob  and  wound  him ;  maym-
ing  the  two  former  parts,  and  juggling  in  the  third,
which  I  have  therefore  chopped  off;  not  daring  in
the  former  but  with  the  Nilus  Dogge  to  taste  and  away,
for  feare  of  a  false  Crocodile.  Here  you  may  finde
lyes  by  retaile  efficta,  afficta,  affixa,  to  this  Mandevile;
who  there,  is  made  a  maunde  vile  full  of  such  pedlerie,
unworthy  thy  sight.

364

SIR  JOHN MANDEVILLE

Chap.  VI.

Briefe  Collections  of  the  Travels  and  Observations
of  Sir  John  Mandevile ;  written  by  Master
Bale,  Cent.  6.

Ohn  Mandevile,  Knight,  borne  in  the
Towne  of  Saint  Albons,  was  so  well
given  to  the  studie  of  Learning  from
his  childhood,  that  he  seemed  to  plant
a  good  part  of  his  felicitie  in  the  same :
for  he  supposed  that  the  honour  of  his
birth  would nothing availe him, except

hee could render the same more honorable by his
knowledge in good Letters. Having therefore well
grounded himselfe in Religion by reading the Scrip-
tures, he applyed his studies  to the Art of  Physick,
a Profession worthy a noble wit : but amongst other
things, hee was ravished with a mightie desire to
see  the  greater  parts  of  the  World,  as  Asia  and  Africa.
Having therefore  provided  all  things necessarie  for  his
journey,  hee departed from his Countrey in  the  yeere
of  Christ 1332.  and  as  another  Ulysses  returned  home,
after the space of  foure and thirtie yeeres, and was
then  knowne  to  a  very  few. In  the  time  of  his  travaile
i  he  was  in  Scythia,  the  greater  and  lesse  Armenia,  Egypt,
both  Lybias,  Arabia,  Syria,  Media,  Mesopotamia,  Persia,
Chaldea, Greece, Illyrium, Tartarie, and divers other
i  Kingdomes  of  the  World : and  having  gotten by  this
J  meanes  the knowledge  of  the  Languages,  lest  so  many
and  great  varieties,  and  things  miraculous,  whereof  him-
|  selfe  had  beene  an  eye-witnesse,  should  perish  in  oblivion,
I  hee committed his whole Travell of three  and  thirtie
I  yeeres to writing in three divers Tongues, English,
!  French,  and  Latine. Being  arrived  againe  in England,
1  and having seene the wickednesse of that Age, hee
gave out this speech : In  our time (said hee)  it  may
bee  spoken  more  truly  then  of  old,  that  Vertue  is  gone,

365

M

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  Church  is  under  foot,  the  Clergie  is  in  error,  the
Devill  raigneth,  and  Simonie  beareth  the  sway,  &c.
Hee  dyed  at  Leege,  in  the  yeere  1372.  the  17.  day
of  November,  being  there  buried  in  the  Abbey  of  the
Order  of  the  Guilielmites.

The  Tombe  and  Epitaph  of  Sir  John  Mandevile,
in  the  Citie  of  Leege,  spoken  of  by  Ortelius,
in  his  Booke  called  Itinerarium  Belgiae,  in  this

sort.

Agna  &  populosa  Leodii  suburbia,  ad  collium
radices,  in  quorum  jugis  multa  sunt,  &  pulcher-
rima  Monasteria,  inter  quae  magnificum  illud,  ac  nobile
D.  Laurentio  dicatum,  ab  Raginardo  Episcopo.  Est
in  hac  quoque  Regione,  vel  suburbiis  Leodii,  Guiliel-
mitarum  Ccenobium,  in  quo  Epitaphium  hoc  Joannis
a  Mandeville,  excepimus.

Epitaphium.  Hie  jacet  vir  nobilis,  D.  Joannes  de  Mandeville,  aliter
dictus  ad  Barbam,  Miles,  Dominus  de  Campdi,
natus  de  Anglia,  Medicinae  Professor,  devotissimus,
orator,  &  bonorum  largissimus  pauperibus  erogator,
qui  toto  quasi  orbe  lustrato,  Leodii  diem  vitae  suae
clausit  extremum.  Anno  Dom.  137 1.  Mensis
Novembris,  die 17.

Haec  in  lapide :  in  quo  caelata  viri  armati  imago,
Leonem  calcantis,  barba  bifurcata,  ad  caput  manus
benedicens,  &  vernacula  haec  verba:  Vos  qui  paseis  sor
mi,  pour  l'amour  deix  proi'es  por  mi.  Clipeus  erat
vacuus,  in  quo  olim  fuisse  dicebant  laminam  aeream,
&  ejus  in  ea  itidem  caelata  insignia,  Leonem  videlicet
argenteum,  cui  ad  pectus  lunula  rubea  in  campo  caeruelo,
quern  Limbus  ambiret  denticulatus  ex  auro.  Ejus  nobis
ostendebant,  &  cultros,  ephipiaque,  &  calcaria  quibus
usum  fuisse  asserebant,  in  peragrando  toto  fere  terrarum
orbe,  ut  clarius  testatur  ejus  Itinerarium,  quod  typis
etiam  excusum  passim  habetur.

366

SIR  JOHN MANDEVILLE  ad.

1332-66.

PRincipi  Excellentissimo,  prae  cunctis  mortalibus  prae-  Epistola.
cipue  venerando,  Domino  Edwardo  ejus  nominis
Tertio,  divina  providentia,  Francorum  &  Anglorum
Regi  Serenissimo,  Hiberniae  Domino,  Aquitaniae  Duci,
mari  ac  ejus  Insulis  Occidentalibus  dominanti,  Christian-
Drum  encomio  &  ornatui,  universorumque  arma  geren-
tium  Tutori,  ac  Probitatis  &  strenuitatis  exemplo
Principi  quoque  invicto,  mirabilis  Alexandri  Sequaci,
ic  universo  Orbi  tremendo,  cum  reverentia  non  qua
decet,  cum  ad  talem,  &  tantam  reverentiam  minus
sufficientes  extiterint,  sed  qua  parvitas,  &  possibilitas
mittentis  ac  offerentis  se  extendunt,  contenta  tradantur.

CUm  terra  Hierosolymitana,  terra  promissionis  filiorum  [III.  i.  129.]

Dei,  dignior  cunctis  mundi  terris  sit  habenda  multis  Pars Prma,

ex causis,  &  praecipue  ilia,  quod  Deus  conditor  cceli  &  capita  2,

mundi, ipsam tanti dignatus fuit aestimare, ut in eo  Cap.  1.

proprium  filium  Salvatorem  mundi  Christum exhibuerit  Commendatio

2[eneri humano  per  incarnationem  ex  intern erata  Virgine,  ^revts  terra
r  , .1V  .1  °  Hierosohmi-

x  per  ejus  conversationem  humillimam  in  eadem,  ac  per  tmc£ J

dolorosam mortis suae consummationem ibidem, atque

inde per  ejus admirandam Resurrectionem, ac Ascen-

sionem  in  coelum,  &  postremo  quia  creditur  illic  in  fine

saeculi  reversurus,  &  omnia  judicaturus  :  certum  est,  quod

ab  omnibus  qui  Christiano nomine a  Christo dicuntur,

sit tanquam  a  suis  propriis  haeredibus  diligenda,  &  pro

cuj  usque  potestate ac  modulo  honoranda. Verum  quia

am nostris temporibus verius quam olim dici potest,

Virtus, Ecclesia, Clerus, Daemon, Simonia, Cessat, cal-

:atur,  errat, regnat,  dominatur, ecce justo  Dei  judicio,

credita  est terra tarn inclyta,  & Sacrosancta impiorum

manibus Saracenorum, quod non  est  absque  dolore  piis

mentibus audiendum, & recolendum. Ego Joannes  3^nm!  .,,.

Mandevil militaris ordinis saltern  gerens nomen, natus  pevezrinat't0

& educatus in terra Angliae, in Villa Sancti Albani,  per  tres  13

ducebar  in  Adolescentia  mea  tali  inspiratione,  ut  quamvis  trigjinta

non per  potentiam, nee  per  vires  proprias  possem  prae-  annof

r^r  .,  j.f  rrr  r  continuata.

tatam  terram suis  haeredibus  recuperare,  irem  tamen  per

367

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1332-66.

aliquod  temporis  spacium  peregrinari  ibidem,  &  salutarem

aliquantulum de propinquo. Unde  in  Anno  ab  Incar-

natione  Domini 1322. imposui  me  navigationi  Marsili-

ensis  maris  &  usque  in  hoc  temporis,  Anni  1355.  scilicet,

per  33.  annos  in  transmarinis  partibus  mansi,  peregrinatus

sum,  ambulavi, & circuivi multas, ac diversas  Patrias,

Regiones, Provincias, & Insulas, Turciam, Armeniam

majorem & minorem, iEgyptum, Lybiam bassam &

altam, Syriam, Arabiam,  Persiam,  Chaldaeam, iEthiopiae

partem  magnam,  Tartariam,  Amazoniam,  Indiam  minorem,

&  mediam,  ac  partem  magnam  de  majori,  &  in  istis,  &

circum istas  Regiones,  multas  Insulas,  Civitates,  Urbes,

Castra,  Villas,  &  loca,  ubi  habitant  variae  gentes,  aspectuum,

morum,  legum ac rituum diversorum  : Attamen quia

summo  desiderio  in  terra  promissionis  eram,  ipsam  dili-

gentius,  per  loca  vestigiorum  filii  Dei  perlustrare  curavi,

&  diutius  in  ilia  steti. Quapropter  &  in  hac  prima  parte

hujus  operis  iter tarn peregrinandi, quam navigandi,  a

partibus  Angliae ad ipsam describo, & loca notabiliter

sancta,  quae intra  eandem  sunt  breviter  commemoro  &

diligenter, quatenus peregrinis tarn in itinere quam in

proventione  valeat  haec  descriptio  in  aliquo  deservire.

Cap.  z.  Qui  de  Hibernia,  Anglia,  Scotia,  Norvegia,  aut  Gallia

Iter  ab  Angha  jter arripit ad partes Hierosolymitanas potest saltern

quam  t>er usque  ad  Imperialem  Greciae  Civitatem  Constantinopolim

aquas  usque  in  eligere sibi modum  proficiscendi, sive per Terras, sive

Constantino- per  Aquas. Et  si  peregrinando eligit transfigere  viam,

pohrn.  tendat  per Coloniam Agrippinam, &  sic  per  Almaniam

in Hungariam  ad Montlusant Civitatem, sedem Regni

Re&s  Hungarian. Et  est  Rex  Hungarian  multum  potens  istis

ungari<z temporibus. Nam tenet & Sclavoniam, & magnam
ohm  potentia.  r-^-^  ott  -o

partem Regni Comannorum,  &  Hungariam,  oc partem

Regni  Russiae.  Oportet  ut  peregrinus  in  finibus  Hun-
garian transeat  magnum  Danubii  flumen,  &  vadat  in
Belgradum  ;  Hoc  flumen  oritur  inter  Montana  Almaniae,
&  currens  versus  Orientem,  recipit  in  se  40.  flumina
antequam  finiatur  in  mare.  De  Belgrade  intratur  terra
Bulgarian,  &  transitur  per  Pontem  petrinum  fluvii  Marroy,

368

SIR  JOHN MANDEVILLE  a.d.

1332-66.

&  per terram Pyncenars, & tunc intratur Graecia, in
Civitates Sternes, Asmopape,  &  Andrinopolis, &  sic  in
Constantinopolim, ubi  communiter  est  sedes  Imperatoris
Greciae. Qui  autem  viam eligit  per  aquas  versus  Con-
stantinopolim navigare, accipiat sibi portum, prout
voluerit, propinquum sive remotum, Marsiliae, Pisi,
Januae, Venetiis, Romae, Neapoli, vel alibi  : sicque
transeat Tusciam, Campaniam, Italiam, Corsicam, Sar-
dinian!,  usque in Siciliam, quas dividitur  ab  Italia  per
brachium  maris  non  magnum. In  Sicilia  est  Mons  iEtna  Mons  JEtna.
jugiter ardens,  qui  ibidem appellatur Mons Gibelle, &
praster  ilium  habentur  ibi  loca  Golthan  ubi  sunt  septem
leucae  quasi  semper  ignem  spirantes :  secundum diversi-
tatem  colorum  harum  flammarum  estimant  Incolas  annum  JEolides
fertilem  fore,  vel  sterilem,  siccum  vel  humidum,  calidum,  Insula.
vel  frigidum  : haec  loca  vocant  caminos  Infernales, &  a
finibus  Italias  usque  ad  ista  loca  sunt  25.  miliaria. Sunt
autem in Sicilia  aliqua Pomeria in quibus  inveniuntur  Temperies
frondes,  flores, & fructus  per totum annum,  etiam  in  Stct^Insu^-
!  profunda hyeme. Regnum Siciliae  est  bona,  &  grandis
Insula habens  in  circuitu fere  leucas  300. Et  ne  quis
erret, vel de facili reprehendat quoties scribo leucam,
;  intelligendum est de leuca Lombardica, quas aliquanto  Leuca

major  est  Geometrical  &  quoties pono numerum,  sub  r?.fr/^\
. J„.  r  . .'  . ^  .  •  r o !•  -  1 Quid  fit  dieta.

lntelligatur  rere,  vel  circiter,  sive  citra,  &  dietam  intendo

ponere, de 10. Lombardicis leucis : Geometrica autem

leuca  describitur,  ut  notum  est,  per  hos  versus.

Quinque  pedes  passum  faciunt,  passus  quoque  centum
Viginti  quinque  stadium,  si  millia  des  que
Octo  facis  stadia,  duplicatum  dat  tibi  leuca.

Constantinopolis  pulchra  est  Civitas,  &  nobilis,  triangu-  Cap.  3.

laris in forma, firmiterque murata, cuius duae partes u. ,.on~

it  •  tt  11  \  1 i • •  11 r 1 stantinopolt,

incluauntur  man  Jbiellesponto,  quod  plurimi  modo  appel- y  reliquiis

lant brachium Sancti Georgii, & aliqui Buke, Troja  ibidem

vetus. Versus  locum  ubi  hoc  brachium  exit  de  mari  est  contents.

(lata  terrae  planities,  in  qua  antiquitus  stetit  Troja  Civitas

de qua apud Poetas mira leguntur, sed nunc valde

xi  369  2  A

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1332-66.

modica  apparent  vestigia  Civitatis.  In  Constantinopoli
habentur  multa  mirabilia,  ac  insuper  multae  Sanctorum
venerandae  reliquiae,  ac  super  omnia,  preciosissima  Crux
Christi,  seu  major  pars  illius,  &  tunica  inconsutilis,  cum
spongia  &  arundine,  &  uno  clavorum,  &  dimidia  parte
Coronae  spineae,  cujus  altera  medietas  servatur  in  Capella
Regis  Franciae,  Parisiis.  Nam  &  ego  indignus  diligenter
pluribus  vicibus  respexi  partem  utramque :  dabatur
quoque  mihi  de  ilia  Parisiis  unica  spina,  quam  usque
nunc  preciose  conservo,  &  est  ipsa  spina  non  lignea  sed
velut  de  juncis  marinis  rigida,  &  pungitiva.  Ecclesia
Ecdesia  Constantinopolitana  in honorem Sanctae Sophiae,  id  est,

Sancta  ineffabilis  Dei sapientiae  dedicata dicitur,  & nobilissima

rill  i no  1  universarum mundi  Ecclesiarum,  tarn in schemate arti-
ficiosi  operis,  quam  in  servatis  ibi  Sacrosanctis  Relliquiis :
nam & continet corpus Sanctae Annae Matris nostrae
ReginaHekna  Dominae translatum illuc per Reginam Helenam ab
Britannia. Hierosolymis :  &  corpus  Sanctae  Lucae  Evangelistae  trans-
latum de Bethania Judeae ; Et corpus Beati Joannis
Chrysostomi ipsius Civitatis Episcopi, cum  multis  aliis
Reliquiis preciosis  ; quoniam est ibi vas grande cum
hujusmodi  reliquiis  velut  marmoreum  de  Petra  Enhydros  ;
quod  jugiter  de  seipso desudans  aquam,  semel  in  anno
invenitur suo  sudore repletum. Ante hanc Ecclesiam,
super  columnam  marmoream  habetur  de  aere  aurato  opere
Imago  fusorio, magna Imago Justiniani quondam Imperatoris

Justimani.  SUper  Equum  sedentis.  De  praedicta  terra  Thraciae  fuit
Arutotelis  Philosophus  Aristoteles  oriundus  in  Civitate  Stageres,  &
tumba  13  est  ^  *n  joco  tumba  ejus  velut  altare,  ubi  &  singulis
annis  certo  die  celebratur  a  populo  festum  illius,  ac  si
fuisset  Sanctus.  Temporibus  ergo  magnorum  consiliorum
conveniunt  illuc  sapientes  terrae,  reputantes  sibi  per  in-
spirationem  immitti  consilium  optimum  de  agendis.  Item
ad  divisionem  Thraciae  &  Macedonian  sunt  duo  mirabiliter
alti  Montes,  unus  Olympus,  alter  Athos,  cujus  ultimi
umbra  Oriente  sole  apparet  ad  76.  miliaria,  usque  in
Insulam  Lemnon.  In  horum  cacumine  montium  ventus
non  currit,  nee  aer  movetur,  &c.

37°

SIR  JOHN MANDEVILLE

Prius  dictum  est  de  reverentia  Soldani,  quando  ad
ipsum  intratur  exhibenda.  Sciendum  ergo,  cum  ab  eo
petitur  securus  conductus,  nemini  denegare  consuevit,  sed
datur  petentibus  communiter  sigillum  ejus,  in  appendi-
tione  absque  literis :  hoc  sigillum,  pro  vexillo  in  virga
aut  hasta  dum  peregrini  ferunt,  omnes  Saraceni  videntes
illud  flexis  genibus  in  terram  se  reverenter  inclinant,  &
portantibus  omnem  exhibent  humanitatem.  Verumtamen
satis  major  sit  reverentia  literis  Soldani  sigillatis,  quod
&  Admirabiles,  &  quicunque  alii  Domini,  quando  eis
monstrantur,  antequam  recipiant,  se  multum  inclinant:
Deinde  ambabus  manibus  eas  capientes  ponunt  super
propria  capita,  postea  osculantur,  &  tandem  legunt
inclinati  cum  magna  veneratione,  quibus  semel  aut  bis
perlectis,  offerunt  se  promptos  ad  explendum  quicquid
ibi  jubetur,  ac  insuper  exhibent  deferenti,  quicquid  possint
commodi,  vel  honoris :  sed  talem  conductum  per  literas
Soldani  vix  quisquam  perigrinorum  accipit,  qui  non  in
Curia  illius  stetit,  vel  notitiam  apud  ilium  habuerit.  Ego
autem  habui  in  recessu  meo,  in  quibus  etiam  continebatur
ad  omnes  sibi  subjectos  speciale  mandatum,  ut  me  per-
mitterent  intrare,  &  respicere  singula  loca,  pro  meae
placito  voluntatis,  &  mihi  exponerent  quorumcunque
locorum  mysteria  distincte  &  absque  ullo  velamine  veri-
tatis,  ac  me  cum  omni  sodalitate  mea  benigne  reciperent,
&  in  cunctis  rationalibus  audirent,  requisiti  autem  si
necesse  foret  de  civitate  conducerent  in  civitatem.  Habito
itaque  peregrinis  conductu,  ad  Montem  Sinay,  &c.

Mons  Sinay  appellatur  ibi  desertum  Syn :  quasi  in
radice  Montis  istius  habetur  Ccenobium  Monachorum
pergrande,  cujus  clausura  in  circuitu  est  firmata  muris
altis,  &  portis  ferreis,  pro  metu  bestiarum  deserti.  Hi
Monachi  sunt  Arabes,  &  Graeci,  &  in  magno  conventu,
multum  Deo  devoti.  Ostendere  solent  &  caput  ipsius
Catherine  cum  involumento  sanguinolento,  &  multas
Iperterea  sanctas,  &  venerabiles  reliquias,  quae  omnia
jintuitus  sum  diligenter  &  saepe,  oculis  indignis,  &c.

Jerusalem cum tota  terra  Promissionis, est  quasi  una

37i

A.D.

1332-66.

Cap.  10.
De  conductu
Soldani,  &
via  usque  in
Sinai.

Liters  Soldani
in  gratiam
Mandevilli
concessa.

Cap.  11.
De  Monas-
terio  Sinay,  &
reliquiis
beatce
Catherine.
Omittuntur
seqq.  vid.  supr.
I.  8.  c.  13.
Cap.  14.
De  Ecclesia
gloriosi
Sepulchri
Domini  in
urbe
Jerusalem.

A.D.

1332-66.

Templum
Sepulchri.

Melech

Mandybn

Soldanus.

PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

de  quinque  Provinciis  vel  pluribus,  quibus  Regnum  Syriae
distinguitur.  Jungitur  autem  Judaea  ad  Orientem  Regno
Arabiae,  ad  meridiem  iEgypto,  ad  Occidentem  mari
magno,  &  ad  Aquilonem  Regno  Syriae.  Judeae  terra  per
diversa  tempora  a  diversis  possessa  fuit  Nationibus,
Cananaeorum,  Judaeorum,  Assyriorum,  Persarum,  Medo-
rum,  Macedonum,  Graecorum,  Romanorum,  Chris-
tianorum,  Saracenorum,  Barbarorum,  Turcorum,  &
Tartarorum.  Cujus  rei  causa  merito  potest  aestimari,
quod  non  sustinuit  Deus  magnos  peccatores  longo  tem-
pore permanere  in  terra  sibi  tarn  placita,  &  tarn  sancta.

Itaque  peregrinus  veniens  in  Jerusalem  primo  expleat
suam  peregrinationem,  ad  reverendum  &  Sacrosanctum
Domini  nostri  Jesu  Christi  Sepulchrum :  cujus  Ecclesia
est  in  ultima  civitatis  extremitate,  ad  partem  Aquilonarem,
cum  proprio  sui  ambitus  muro  ipsi  civitati  adjuncto.
Ipsa  vero  Ecclesia  est  pulchra  &  rotundae  formae  cooperta
desuper  cum  tegulis  plumbeis,  habens  in  Occidente
turrim  altam  &  firmam,  in  pavimenti  Ecclesiae  medio  ad
flguram  dimidii  compassi  habetur  nobili  opere  Latonico
aedificatum  parvum  Tabernaculum  quasi  15.  pedum  tarn
longitudinis  quam  latitudinis,  &  altitudinis  miro  artificio
intus  extraque  compositum,  ac  multum  diligenter  diversis
coloribus  ornatum.  Hoc  itaque  in  Tabernaculo  seu
Capella,  ad  latus  dextrum,  continetur  incomparabilis
thesaurus  gloriosissimi  Sepulchri,  habentis  octo  pedes
longitudinis,  &  quinque  latitudinis.  Et  quoniam  in  toto
habitaculo  nulla  est  apertura  praeter  parvum  ostium,
illustratur  accedentibus  peregrinis  pluribus  lampadibus,
(quarum  ad  minus  una  coram  sepulchro  jugiter  ardere
solet)  ingressus.

Sciendum,  quod  ante  breve  tempus  solebat  sepulchrum
esse  ingressis  peregrinis  accessible,  ad  tangendum  &
osculandum  :  sed  quia  multi  vel  effringebant,  vel  cona-
bantur  sibi  effringere  aliquid  de  petra  sepulchri,  iste
Soldanus  Melech  Mandybron  fecit  illud  confabricari,  ut
nee  osculari  valeat,  nee  adiri,  sed  tantummodo  intueri.
Et ob illam causam in sinistro pariete in altitudine

372

SIR  JOHN MANDEVILLE

quinque  pedum  immurari  effracturam  petrae  sepulchri
ad  quantitatem  capitis  humani,  quod  tanquam  pro
sepulchro  ibi  ab  omnibus  veneratur,  tangitur,  &  osculatur.

Dicitur  ibi  quoque  communiter  praefatam  lampadem
coram  sepulchro  singulis  annis  in  die  Sanctae  Parascheves,
hora  nona  extingui,  &  in  media  nocte  Paschae  sine  humano
studio  reaccendi.  Quod  (si  ita  est)  evidens  divini  bene-
ficii  miraculum  est.  Et  quamvis  id  plurimi  Christiani
simpliciter  in  magno  pietatis  merito  credant,  plerisque
tamen  est  in  suspicione.  Forte  talia  Saraceni  custodes
sepulchri  fingentes  divulgaverunt,  pro  augendo  emolu-
menta  tributi,  quod  inde  resultaret,  seu  oblationum  quae
dantur.

Singulis  autem  annis  in  die  Ccenae  Domini  in  Para-
scheve,  &  in  vigilia  Paschae,  tribus  his  diebus  manet
Tabernaculum  hoc  apertum  continue,  &  patet  omnibus
Christianis  gentibus  accessus,  alias  vero  non  per  annum
sine  redditione  tributi.  Intra  Ecclesiam,  prope  parietem
dextrum,  est  Calvariae  locus,  ubi  crucifixus  pependit
Christus  Dominus.  Per  gradus  ascenditur  in  hunc  locum,
&  est  rupis  velut  albi  colons,  cum  aliqua  rubedine  per
loca  commixta,  habens  scissuram,  quam  dicunt  Golgotha,
in  qua  major  pars  preciosi  sanguinis  Christi  dicitur
influxisse  :  ubi  &  habetur  Altare  constructum,  ante  quod
consistunt  tumbae  Godefridi  de  Bullion,  &c.

Ultra  duo  stadia  ab  Ecclesia  ad  Merediem  sancti  Sepulchri
habetur  magnum  hospitale  sancti  Joannis  Hierosolymitani,
qui  caput  &  fundamentum  esse  dignoscitur  ordinis  Hospi-
taliorum  modo  tenendum  Rhodum  Insulam :  in  quo
recipi  possunt  omnes  Christiani  peregrini  cujuscunque  sint
conditionis,  seu  status,  vel  dignitatis.  Nam  Saraceni  pro
levi  cura  anxii  rumoris,  prohibent  ne  apud  quenquam
suorum  Christianus  pernoctet.  Ad  sustentationem  aedificii
hujus  hospitalis,  habentur  in  eo  124.  columnae  marmoreae,
&  in  parietibus  distincti  54.  pilarii.  Satis  prope  hunc
locum  in  Orientem,  est  Ecclesia  quae  dicitur,  de  Domina
nostra  magna:  &  inde  non  remote  alia,  quae  dicitur
nostrae Dominae Latinorum,  aedificata  super  locum, ubi

373

A.D.

1332-66.

Mandevillui
de  hoc  dubitat.
vid.  sup.  I.  3.
c.  2.

[IH.i.  131O
Tumba  Gode-
fridi de
Bollion.

Cap.  15.
De  tribus  a  His
Ecclesiisy  &
specialiter  de
Templo
Domini.

*d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGBJMES

1332-66.

Maria  Magdalene,  &  Maria  Cleophae  cum  aliis  pluribus,
dum  Christus  cruci  affigebatur,  flebant  &  dolores  lamenta-
biles  exercebant.

Item  ab  Ecclesia  sancti  Sepulchri  in  Orientem  ad
stadium  cum  dimidio  habetur  aedificium  mirabile,  ac  pul-
chrum  valde,  quod  Templum  Domini  nominatur,  quod
constructum  est  in  forma  rotunda,  cujus  circumferentiae
Diameter  habet  64.  cubitos,  &  altitudo  ejus  126.  &  intrin-
secus  pro  sustentatione  aedificii,  multi  pilarii.  In  medio
autem  Templi  est  locus  altior  14.  gradibus,  qui  &  ipse
columnis  undique  est  stipatus:  &  secundum  quatuor
mundi  plagas  habet  Templum  quatuor  introitus  per
portas  Cypressinas  artificiose  compositas,  nobiliterque
sculptas,  &  excisas.  Et  ante  portam  Aquilonarem  intra
Templum  fons  est  aquae  mundae,  qui  quamvis  olim
exundabat,  tamen  nunc  minime  fluit.  In  toto  circuitu
aedificii  extrinsecus  est  valde  pro  atrio  latum  spacium  loci,
stratum  per  totum  pavimentum  marmoribus.  Hoc  Tem-
plum non  ducitur  stare  in  eodem  loco  ubi  Templum  Dei
stetit  in  tempore  Christi,  quo  post  Resurrectionem  a
Romanis  destructo,  istud  longo  post  tempore  Adrianus
Imperator  extruxit,  sed  non  ad  formam  Templi  prioris :
praedictum  tamen  excelsum  in  medio  Templi  locum  vocant
Judaei  Sanctum  Sanctorum.

Sciatis  itaque  quod  Saraceni  magnam  exhibent  huic
Templo  reverentiam,  &  honorem,  saepius  illud  discalceati
intrantes,  &  positis  genibus  devote  Deum  Omnipotentem
exorantes,  nulla  enim  ibidem  habetur  imago,  sed  multae
lampades  relucentes.  Neminem  Christianorum  seu  Judae-
orum  ingredi  sinunt  hoc  Templum,  reputantes  eos
indignos  ad  hoc,  &  nimium  immundos,  unde  nisi  virtute

Liter  avoidant  literarum  quas  habui  a  Soldano,  nee  ego  fuissem  ingressus.

tradiia  Ingrediens  autem  cum  meis  sodalibus  deposuimus  calcia-

menta,  recogitantes  cum  multa  cordis  devotione,  nos
magis  id  facere  debere,  quam  incredulos  Saracenos.

Porro  in  eo  loco  ubi  statuerat  idem  Rex  ante  Templum
Altare  holocausti,  videlicet  extra  portam  Templi  Occi-
dentalem,  habetur  &  nunc  Altare,  sed  non  ad  instar,  nee

374

SIR  JOHN MANDEVILLE  a.d.

1332-66.

ad  usum  primi :  Nam  Saraceni,  quasi  nihil  curantes,
traxerunt  in  eo  lineas  tanquam  in  Astrolabio  figentes  in
linearum  centro  batellum,  ad  cujus  umbram  per  lineas
discernuntur  diei  horae.

Viaturo  ad  dextram  satis  de  propinquo  habetur  &  alia  CaP-  l&*
Ecclesia,  quae  nunc  appellator  schola  Salomonis  :  rursusque ePun"s

J Ayr 'J'  O  1* 1 T»  1  •  T» 1 •  lOClSSaCTlS

ad Meridiem  est  &  aliud 1  emplum sive  rLcclesia, quae  juxta  urj?em

vocatur  Templum Salomonis, quod olim  fuit  caput,  &

fundamentum  totius  ordinis  Templariorum,  &c.

Dominus Soldanus quodam die in Castro, expulsis

omnibus  de  camera  sua,  me  solum  retinuit  secum  tanquam

pro  secreto  habendo  colloquio. Consuetum  enim  est  iis  Colloquium

ejicere  omnes  tempore  secretorum  :  qui  diligenter  a  me  s°ldan!  c"?
.J  .  ,. r  ,  > . &  Mandevillo.

interrogavit  qualis  esset  gubernatio  vitae in  terra nostra,

breviter  respondebam,  bona,  per  Dei  gratiam,  qui  recepto

hoc  verbo  dixit  ita  non  esse. Sacerdotes  (inquit)  vestri,  Reprehensio

qui  seipsos  exhibere  deberent  aliis  in  exemplum,  in  malis acer  otum'

jacent  actibus,  parum  curant  de  Templi  servitio :  habitu

&  studiis  se  conformant  mundo : se  inebriant  vino,  con-

tinentiam infringentes,  cum  fraude  negotiantes,  ac  prava

principibus  consilia  ingerentes. Communis  quoque  popu-  Reprehmto

lus, dum festis diebus  intendere  deberent  devotioni in  ?*;?.  M

1  emplo,  curnt  in  hortis,  in  spectaculis,  in  Tabernis  usque

ad  crapulam,  &  ebrietatem,  &  pinguia  manducans  &  bibens,

ac  in  bestiarum  morem,  luxuriam pravam exercens. In

usura,  dolo,  rapina,  furto,  detractione, mendatio  &  per-

jurio vivunt  plures  eorum  evidenter,  ac  si  qui  talia  non

agant, ut  fatui  reputantur,  &  pro  nimia  cordis  superbia

nesciunt  ad  libitum  excogitare,  qualiter  se  velint  habere,  ^*«w**-

mutando  sibi  indumenta,  nunc  longa,  nunc  curta  nimis,  retrehettsa

quandoque  ampla,  quandoque  stricta  ultra  modum,  ut  in

his  singulis  appareant  derisi  potius  quam vestiti : pyleos

quoque, calceos, calligas, corrigias sibi fabricant ex-

quisitas,  cum etiam  e  contra  deberent  secundum  Christi

sui doctrinam simplices, Deo  devoti, humiles, veraces,

invicem  diligentes, invicem  concordantes,  &  injuriam  de

facili remittentes. Scimus etiam eos propter peccata

sua  perdidisse  hanc  terram  optimam  quam  tenemus,  nee

375

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1332-66.

timemus  earn  amittere,  quamdiu  se  taliter  gubernant.
Attamen  non  dubitamus,  quin  in  futurum  per  meliorem
vitae  conversationem  merebuntur  de  nostris  earn  manibus
recuperare.

Ad  hoc  ego  ultra  confusus  &  stupefactus,  nequivi
invenire  responsum  ;  verebar  enim  obloqui  veritati,  quam-
vis  ab  Infidelis  ore  prolatae,  &  vultu  prae  rubore  demisso
percunctatus  sum,  Domine,  salva  reverentia,  qualiter
potestis  ita  plene  hoc  noscere  ?  De  hominibus  (ait)  meis
interdum  mitto  ad  modum  Mercatorum  per  terras  &
Regiones  Christianorum,  cum  Balsamo,  Gemmis,  Sericis,
[III.  i.  132.]  ac  Aromatibus,  ac  per  illos  singula  exploro,  tarn  de  statu
Imperatoris,  ac  Pontificum  Principum,  ac  Sacerdotum,  quam
Praelatorum,  nee  non  iEquora,  Provincias,  ac  distinctiones
earum.

Igitur  peracta  collocutione  nostra  satis  producta,  egressos
Principes  in  cameram  revocavit  ex  quibus  quatuor  de
majoribus  juxta  nos  advocans,  fecit  eos  expresse  ac
debite,  per  singulas  divisiones  in  lingua  Gallicana  destin-
guere  per  partes,  &  singularum  nomina  partium,  omnem
Regionem  terras  Angliae,  ac  alias  Christianorum  terras
multas,  acsi  inter  nostros  fuissent  nati,  vel  multo  tempore
conversati.  Nam  &  ipsum  Soldanum  audivi  cum  iis  bene
&  directe  loquentem  idioma  Francorum.  Itaque  in  omni-
bus his  mente  consternatus  obmutui,  cogitans,  &  dolens
de  peccatis  singulis,  rem  taliter  se  habere,  &c.

Secunda  pars. A  Ethiopia consistit  a  terra  Chaldaeorum  in  Austrum,

Cap.  26. £\,  quae  distinguitur  in  Orientalem  iEthiopiam,  &  Meri-
DeJEthwpia, ,. 1  5  .„.  ., r \ n u

y  Diamanti-  dionalem,  quarum  prima  in  ulis  partibus  vocatur  Lush,

bus,  y  de  propter  hominum  nigredinem,  altera  Mauritania.

infima  India.  De  ^Ethiopia  intratur  in  Indiam  mediam,  nam  triplex

India  est?  videlicet  Infima,  quae  in  quibusdam  suis  partibus  est

nP ex-  nimis  frigida  ad  inhabitandum  :  Media  quae  satis  temperata

Cap.  28.  est, & Superior,  quae  nimis  calida,  &c.

De  Ecdesia  Hinin  Meridiem  pluribus  exactis  Insulis  per  viam  decern

K3  cot pore  ..  .r _  _  .  .  \u. . . .

sanctceThomce  dietarum  vemtur in  Kegnum  Mabron. lllic  in  civitate

Apostoli.  Calamiae, servatur in magno Templo  corpus  beatissimi

376

Apostoli
erectum.

SIR  JOHN MANDEVILLE  a.d.

1332-66.

Thomas Apostoli Domini noster Jesu Christi in capsa  RegioMabron
honorificata. In  quo  loco  &  martirizatus  fuit,  licet  dicunt  wl  Malaber.
quidam,  quod  in Edissa  civitate. Iste  populus  non  est  Qa/umj '
multum tempus transactum, quin fuit totus in fidei  idolum  in
religione, sed nunc est ad pessimos Gentilium ritus  Temph  sancti
perversus.

Per  certas  historias  habetur  Ducem  Danorum  Ogerum
conquisivisse  has  terras,  &  in  exaltatione  sanctarum
Apostoli  relliquiarum  fecisse  fieri  praefatam  spectactilem
Ecclesiam,  &c.

In  hac  ipsa  beati  Thomas  Ecclesia  statuerunt  multa
miras  magnitudinis  simulachra,  ex  quibus  unum  quod
tnajus  est  multo  aliis,  apparet  sedens  homo  in  alto  solio
idoperto  aureis  sericis,  &  lapidibus  praetiosis,  habensque
id  collum  suspensa  pro  ornatu  multa  cinctoria  pretiose
*emmis,  &  auro  contexta.  Ad  hoc  autem  Idolum  ador-
mdum  confluunt  peregrini  a  remotis  partibus,  &  propin-
quis,  in  satis  majori  copia,  &  valde  ferventiori  devotione
}uam  Christiani,  ad  sanctuum  Jacobum  in  Galizia,  quia
nulti  eorum  per  totum  peregrinationis  iter,  non  audent
*rigere  palpebras  oculorum,  ne  forte  propter  hoc  devotio
ntermittatur.

Alii  de  prope  venientes  superaddunt  labori  itinerandi,
at  ad  tertium  vel  ad  quartum  passum  semper  cadant  in
^enibus.  Nonnulli  quoque  Demoniaca  inspiratione  semet-
psos  per  viam  peregrinationis  lanceolis,  &  cultellis  nunc
ninoribus,  nunc  majoribus  sauciant  vulneribus  per  singula
:orporis  loca,  &  dum  ante  Idolum  perveniunt,  excisum
rustum  de  carne  propria  projiciunt  ad  Idolum  pro  offer-
inda,  ac  plagis  durioribus  se  castigant,  &  quandoque
pontanee  penitus  se  occidunt :  in  solemnitatibus  vero,
iicut  in  dedicatione,  &  sicut  in  thronizatione  simula-
:hrorum  fit  conventus  populi,  quasi  totius  Regni.  Et
iucitur  cum  processione  majus  Idolum  per  circuitum
:ivitatis,  in  curru  preciosissimo,  modis  omnibus  perornato,
Sc  prascedunt  in  numero  magno  puellae  cantantes  binae,  &
Dinae  ordinatissime  ;  succeditque  pluralitas  Musicorum  cum
nstrumentis  variis  simphonizantes,  quos  continue  subse-

377

A.D.
1332-66.

Occidunt  se  in
honorem  Idoli.

Cap.  19.
De  Java  £ff
quibusdam
a/iis  meri-
dionalibus
Insults.

Mandevlllus
ususastrolablo,
Java  Insula,
grandis.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

quitur  currus  cujus  lateribus  conjungit  se  peregrinorum
exercitus,  qui  &  venerunt  de  remotis.

Ibique  cernitur  miserabilis  actus  ultra  modum.  Nam
aliqui  victi  ultra  modum  diabolica  devotione  projiciunt  sei
sub  rotis  currus  praecedentis,  ut  frangantur  sibi  crura,
brachia,  latera,  dorsa,  nee  non  &  colla  in  reverentiam  Dei
sui  (ut  dicunt)  a  quo  remunerationem  sperant,  venire  ad
Paradisum  terrestrem.  \

Et  post  processionem  postquam  statuerunt  Idolum  in  ie
Templo  suo  loco,  multiplicatur  coram  simulachris  numerusi  li
saepe  plangentium,  &  Occidentium  ultra  quam  credi  sit  If
facile.  Ita  quod  quandoque  in  ilia  unica  solemnitatela
inveniuntur  ducenta  corpora,  vel  plura  occisorum.  Et
assistentes  propinqui  amici  talium  Diaboli  martyrum,  cumjai
magna  musicorum  melodia  decantantes  in  sua  lingua  1
offerunt  Idolis  corpora,  ac  demum  accenso  rogo  omnia  i
corpora  comburunt  in  honorem  Idolorum,  assumentesil
sibi  singuli  aliquid  de  ossibus  aut  cineribus  pro  reliquiisJ  111
quas  putant  sibi  valituras  contra  quaelibet  infortuniajei
&  tempestates.  Et  habetur  ante  Templum,  aquae  lacus,  r
velut  servatorium  piscium,  in  quo  projicit  populus  i\
largissime  suas  oblationes,  Argentum,  Aurum,  Gemmas,j)[
Cyphos,  &  similia,  quibus  ministri  certis  temporibus  ni
exhibentes  provident  Ecclesiae,  ac  simulachro,  ac  sibi  ipsis  i
abundanter.

Inde  ulterius  procedendo  in  Austrum  per  multas  &jar
mirabiles  terras  quinquaginta  duarum  diaetarum  spacio,jiui
habetur  magna  Insula  Lamori.  Illic  omnes  nudi  incedunt,  er
&  fere  omnia  sunt  singulis  communia;  nee  utunturjm
privatis  clavibus  [sive  seris,  imo  &  omnes  mulieres  sunt  at
communes  omnibus  &  singulis  viris,  dummodo  violentia  hi;
non  inferatur :  sed  &  pejor  est  iis  consuetude,  quodffiti
libenter  comedunt  teneras  carnes  humanas ;  unde  &|ut
negotiatores  adferunt  eis  crassos  infantes  venales :  quod  si  (
non  satis  pingues  afferuntur  eos  saginant  sicut  nos  Vitu-  ro
lum,  sive  Porcum.  .er

Hie  apparet  in  bona  altitudine  Polus  Antarcticus  &jd
incipit modd apperere in alta Lybia, ita  quod  in alta  t

378

SIR  JOHN MANDEVILLE  a.d.

1332-66.

^Ethiopa,  elevatur  octodecem  gradibus,  prout  ipse  probavi
\strolabio.

Et est valde  grandis  Regio  Java, habens in circuitu  Multa
imbitum leucarum duarum millium. Hujus Rex est romatatn
/-aide  potens, &  imperans  septem  Insularum vicinarum
^.egibus. Terra ista est populosa, valde, & crescunt
n  ea  Species,  &  abundantia  Gingiberis,  Canella,  Gariofoli,
^uces Muscatae, & Mastix, cum Aromatibus multis.  [III.  i.  133-]
>ed  &  quod  ibi  nascatur  vinum,  non  habent :  Aurum  &
Vrgentum est ibi in copia immensa, quod patet in
^egis  Javae  palatio,  cujus  palatii  nobilitas  non  est  facile
cribenda.

Cuncti  gradus  ascendentes  ad  palatii  aulas,  &  aularum
ameras,  &  ad  thalamos  camerarum  sunt  solidi  de  argento
el  auro,  sed  &  omnis  statura  pavimentorum  in  aliis
abetur  ad  similitudinem  scacarii,  unam  quadratam  argenti,
lteram  auri,  laminis  valde  crassis,  &  in  ipsis  pavimentis,
unt  exsculpta  gesta,  &  historian  diversae.  In  principali
ero  aula,  est  plenarie  expressa  Dani  Ducis  Ogeri  historia,

nativitate  ipsius,  quousque  in  Franciam  fantastice  dicatur
eversus,  cum  tempore  Caroli  Magni  Regis  Franciae,  ipse
)gerus  armata  manu  conquisivit  Christianitati  fere  omnes
artes  transmarinas  a  Jerosolymis  usque  ad  arbores  Solis

Lunae,  ac  prope  Paradisum  terrestrem.

Pro  hac  Regione  Java,  (quae  tangit  fines  Imperii  Tar-
iriae)  sibi  subj Uganda,  Imperator  Grand  Can  multoties
ugnavit,  sed  nunquam  valuit  expugnare.  Hinc  per  mare
enitur  ad  regnum  *Thalamassae,  quod  &  *Pachon  dicitur,  *Vel

quo  habetur  magnus  numerus  bonarum  civitatum.  Intra
anc  Insulam,  quatuor  sunt  genera  arborum,  de  quarum
na  accipitur  farina  ad  panem,  de  secunda  mel,  de  tertia
inum, & de quarta pessimum venenum. Extrahitur

tern  farina  de  suis  arboribus  isto  modo.  Farina  ex

Certo  tempore  anni percutitur  stipes arboris  undique

'jrope  terram  cum  securi,  &  cortex  in  locis  pluribus  vul-

eratur,  de  quibus  recipitur  liquor  spissus,  qui  desiccatus

d  solis  aestum  &  contritus  reddit  farinam  albam,  ac  si  de

•umento  esset  confectus,  attamen  hie  panis  non  est  triticei

379

Tholomassi.
*Vel  Paten.

arbore.

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1332-66.

saporis, sed alterius  valde boni. Simili modo de suis
*Taddie. arboribus  mel  elicitur,  &  vinum  *  liquitur  : excepto  quod

Calanoch.

Testitudines
grandissimce.

Australh
latitudo  33.
grad.  16.
minut.

Hcec  erat

Eratosthenh

compuiatio.

ilia  non  sicut  gramina  prima  desiccantur.  Fertur  quoque
ibidem  extraction  em  hujus  farinae,  mellis,  &  vini,  per!
Angelum  primitus  fuisse  ostensam  praedicto  Danorum
Duci,  illic  fame  cum  suo  exercitu  laboranti.  Contra
venenum  quod  de  quarto  arboris  genere  stillat,  solum  est
intoxicato  remedium,  ut  de  proprio  fimo  per  puram  aquam
distemperato  bibat.

In  littore  maris  Calanoch  miraculose  veniunt  semel  ini
anno,  per  tres  continuos  dies,  quasi  de  omni  genere  piscium1
marinorum,  in  maxima  abundantia  :  &  praebent  se  omnibus
libere  capiendos  ad  manum.  Nam  &  ego  ipse  cepi  quam-
plures.  Unde  notandum,  quod  eodem  tempore  anni  quo-
super  dicta  extrahitur  farina,  mel,  &  vinum,  conveniunt  in
hoc  isti  pisces  :  quae  ambo  mirabilia  fecit  uno  tempore  Deusj
olim  pro  Duce  suo  Ogero,  quae  &  in  memoria  illius,  usque
nunc,  singulis  annis  innovantur.

Et  sunt  in  hoc  territorio  testudines  terribilis  quantitatis,! '
fitque  de  majoribus  Regi  ac  Nobilibus  delicatus  ac  preciosus-
cibus  :  mentior,  si  non  quasdam  ibidem  viderim  testu-
dinum  conchas,  in  quarum  una  se  tres  homines  occul—
tarent,  suntque  omnes  multum  albi  coloris.  Si  hie  viri
uxoratus  moritur,  sepelitur  &  uxor  una  cum  eo,  quatenus,  1
sicut  ibi  credunt,  habeant  earn  statim  sociam  in  seculo  ■
altero.

In  istis  autem  meridionalibus  partibus  apparebat  mihip
elevatio  poli  Antarctici  33.  graduum,  cum  16.  minutis.  Etl
sciendum  quod  in  Bohemia,  similiter  &  in  Anglia  elevatutv
polus  Arcticus  52.  gradibus  vel  citra :  Et  in  partibus,
magis  septentrionalibus,  ubi  sunt  Scoti  62.  gradibus  cumli
4.  minutis.  Ex  quo  patet  respiciendo  ad  latitudinem  coehV  1
quae  est  de  polo  ad  polum,  itinerario  mea  fuit  per  quartum,  I
Horizontis  spherae  terrae,  &  ultra  per  5.  gradus,  cum  20.!'
minutis.  Cum  ergo  secundum  Astrologos,  totus  terrae  1
circuitus  sit  31500.  milliarium,  octo  stadiis  pro  milliario  :
computatis,  & septinginta stadia respondeant ad unum

gradum, quod patet ad

latitudinem
380

terrae, perambulavi

SIR  JOHN MANDEVILLE  a.d.

1332-66.

S6733.  stadia  cum  uno  tertio,  quae  faciunt  4170.  leucas
jeometricas  cum  dimidia  vel  prope.

Cum  igitur  tot  &  talia  in  istis  Insulis  vidimus  monstra  ^aP-  32-
'quae si explicarem scribendo vix a legentibus omnia J  .*
rrederentur) non curavimus  ulterius  procedere  sub  polo  Manchus
\ustrali,  ne  in  majora  pericula  incideremus :  sed  propter  {forte
uditam  &  invisam  nobis  famositatem  potentiae,  nobilitatis,  Mangi.)
k  gloriae  Imperatoris  Tartarorum,  vertebam  faciem  cum
•.ociis  navigare  magis  versus  Orientem. Cumque  per  multas
lietas  sustinuissemus  multa  pericula  maris,  pervenimus  in
^egnum  Manchus,  quod  est  in  confinibus  superioris  Indiae,
k  jungitur  ab  una  parte  Tartariae. Haec  Regio  Manchus
)ro sua quantitate reputatur melior, delectabilior, &
>mnium bonorum abundantior de cunctis ibi prope
^egionibus. Nam  &  homines,  bestiae,  &  volucres  majores
k  corpulentiores  sunt  aliis,  &  prae  ubertate  vix  invenirentur
n  una  civitate  decern mendici. Formosi  sunt  viri,  sed
ceminae  formosiores. Sed  viri  loco barbae,  habent  per-
)aucos  pilos, rigidos, & longos ab utraque  oris parte,
[uemadmodum  nostros  videmus  cattos  habere.

Prima  quam  ingrediamur  civitas  est  Lachori,  distans
ma  dieta  a  mari,  &  mirabamur,  &  gavisi  sumus  nos
nvenisse  integram  civitatem  Christianae  fidei.  Nam  &  Christiani.
najor  pars  Regni  credit  in  Christum.  Ibi  habetur  in  levi
)recio  copia  rerum  omnium,  &  praecipue  victualium  :
inum  genus  est  ibi  serpentum  in  abundantia  quod
nanducant  ad  omne  convivium,  &  nisi  pro  finali  ferculo
ninistraretur  de  illis  serpentibus,  convivium  quam  modicum
liceretur.

Suntque  per  hoc  regnum  pleraeque  civitates  &  Ecclesiae,
k religiones quas instituit Dux Ogerus, quia hoc est
mum de quindecim regnis quae quaesivit, sicut infra
licetur. Illic sunt elegantes albae gallinae, quae non  hujmmodi
j'estiuntur plumis ut nostrae, sed optima lana. Canes  etiam  canes  in
i.quatici, quos nos lutras nominamus, sunt ibi multi  India  occi-
i:domiti, quod quoties mittuntur in Rumen, exportant  *™ta"> teste
lomino piscem.  _  >  ... MaZyre,  in

Ab  hoc  loco  per  aliquas  dietas,  venitur  ad  hujus  regionis  Decadibus.

381

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1332-66.

Camay,  vel  maximam  urbem  Cansay,  hoc  est  dicere,  Civitatem  Cceli
Qumsay,  &  -imQ  je  universo  orbe  terrarum  putatur  haec  maxima
ejus  descriptio. . .  .  .  ,r .

civitatum  ;  nam  ejus  circuitus  50.  leucis  est  mensus,  nee

est  facile  dicere,  quam  compresse  a  quamplurimis  populis
inhabitatur. Haec  sedet  in  lacu  maris,  quemadmodum,  &
Venetiae  : &  habentur  in  ea  plures quam mille ducent:
pontes, & in quolibet turres mirae magnitudinis, ac
fortitudinis,  munitas  pervigili,  custodia,  &  pro  urbe  tuenda
contra  Imperatorem  Grand  Can. Multi  sunt  ibi  Christiani,
[III.  i.  134.]  &  multae  Religiones  Christianorum,  sed  &  de  ordinibus
Minorum,  &  Praedicatorum,  qui  tamen  ibi  non  mendicant
est  magna  pluralitas  ex  diversis  Nationibus  Mercatorum
Per Regionem nascitur vinum valde bonum, quod
appellator  Bigon. Et  ad  leucam  extra  Civitatem,  Abbatia
magna  est,  non  de  Religione  Christiana  sed  Pagana :  &  in
ea  forrestum,  sive  hortus  magnus  undique  circumclusus,
consitus  arboribus,  &  arbustis  in  cujus  etiam  medio  mons
altus  simul  &  latus,  habens  hortum  ubi  solum  inhabitant
bestiolae  mirabiles,  sicut  Simiae,  marmotae,  Lanbon,  papiones,
foreti & hujusmodi ad varia & multa genera, & ad
numerum  infinitum.
Eadem  narrat Omni  autem  die  post  refectionem  conventus  Abbatias,
Oderkus. ^j  est  y^^  Monachosus,  deferuntur  reliquiae  ciborum
cum  magno  additamento,  in  vasis  auro  lucentibus  ad  hunc
hortum  : & ad sonitum Campanae argenteae, quam
Eleemosynarius  manu  gestat  descendentes,  &  occurrentesi
de  bestiolis  duo  millia  aut  plures  sese  componunt  residerei
ad circulum more pauperum mendicorum, & traditur)
singulis  per  servos,  aliquid  de  his  cibariis,  ac  denuo  audita
campana segregando recurrunt  : Cumque nos tanquami
redarguentes,  diceremus,  cur haec non darentur egenis,  \
responderunt, illic  pauperes non habentur, quod  si in-)
venirentur,  potius  tamen  dari  deberent  bestiolis. Habet!
enim eorum perfidia, & Paganismus, animas nobilium :
hominum  post  mortem  ingredi  corpora  nobilium  bestiarum, !
& animas ignobilium corpora bestiarum ignobilium  &
vUium,  ad  luenda  videlicet  crimina,  donee  peracta  poeni-  |
tentia  transeant  in  Paradisum  : ideoque  nutriunt,  prout

382

SIR  JOHN MANDEVILLE  ad.

1332-66.

licunt,  has  nobiliores  bestias,  sive  bestiolas,  quod  a  quibus-
lam  nobilibus  fundabatur  in  principio  haec  Abbatia.
Vlulta  sunt  alia  mira  in  hac  Civitate,  de  quibus  sciatis,
|uod  non  omnia  vobis  recitabo.

Insula Pygmaeorum non est protensa, sed forte 12.  Cap.  33.
pvitatum. Quarum  una  est  grandis,  &  bene  munita,  &
uam Grand Can facit cum fortibus  armaturis curiose
ervari,  contra  Regem  Mangi.

Hinc  proceditur  per  Imperium  Grand  Can,  ad  multas

'ivitates,  &  Villas  morum  mirabiliter  diversorum usque

1 Regnum Jamcham, quod est unum de 12. Pro-  Jamchan.

inciis maximis, quibus distinguitur totum Imperium

Tartarorum,  Nobilior  Civitas  hujus  Regni  seu  Provincia

icitur  Jamchan,  abundans  mercimoniis,  &  divitiis  infinitis,

:  multa  praestans  proprio  Regi  tributa,  quoniam  sicut  illi

e  Civitate  fatentur,  valet  annue  Regi  quinquaginta  milia

Cuman  Florenorum  auri. Nota. In  Jamchan  Civitate  *Cuman.

st Conventus fratrum Minorum  : in hac sunt tres

xclesiae Monasteriorum  : reditus  simul  ascendit  ad 12.

'uman. Odericus. Unus Cuman est decern millium.

umma  tributi  annui,  quinquaginta  millia  millium  Floren-

rum. In illis namque partibus magnas numerorum

jmmas  estimant  per  Cuman,  numerum 10.  millium qui

:  in  Flamingo  dicitur  laste. Ad  quinque  leucas  ab  hac  Civitas  Meke.

livitate est alia  dicta  Meke, in qua  fiunt  de  quodam  Maxm*
„  . .  ,. . XT  *.  * f o naves,  guales

[bissimi genere ligni Naves maxima? cum Aulis &  hodie  ostentat

halamis,  ac multis  aedificiis, tanquam Palatium tellure  China.

andatum.

Inde  per  idem Regnum  ad viam  octo diaetarum per

}uam dulcem,  multas per Civitates, & bonas Villas,

enimus  a  Laucherim,  (Odericus  appellat  Leuyim)  urbem  aShe  ^

)rmosam  opumque  magnarum,  sitam  super  flumen  mag-  Lantenn.

um  b  Cacameran. Hoc  flumen  transit  per  medium  Cathay,  b^  Care-

x\ aqua infert damnum, quando nimis inundat, sicut  moron-

adus  in  Ferraria,  Mogus  in  Herbipoli  :  &  illud  sequentes

itravimus principalem Provinciam Imperii Tartarian,

ictam Cathay Calay  : & ista Provincia est multum CathayCalay.

istenta,  ac  plena  Civitatibus,  &  Oppidis  bonis,  &  magnis

3*3

A.D.
1332-66.

c  Engarmago.
Vilitas  serici.
Vel  Camba-
leck.

Cay  do
Civitas.

Cap.  34.
De  Palatio
Imperatoris
Grand  Can.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

omnibusque  referta  mercimoniis,  maxime  Sericosis  operibus,
&  Aromaticis  speciebus.

Navigando  per  dictum  flumen  versus  Orientem,  &
itinerando  per  hanc  Cathay  Provinciam  ad  multas  dietas;
per  plurimas  Urbes  &  Villas,  venitur  in  Civitatem  c  Sugar-i
mago,  abundantiorem  omnibus  in  mercimoniis  antedictis  :
quando  sericum  est  hie  vilissimum  quadragintae  librae
habentur  ibi  pro  decern  Florenis.  Ab  hac  Civitate,  multis|
Civitatibus  peragratis  versus  Orientem,  veni  ad  Civitatemj
Cambalu,  quae  est  antiquae  in  Provincia  Cathay :  Hanc
postquam  Tartari  ceperunt,  ad  dimidium,  miliare  fecerunti
unam  Civitatem  nomine  Caydo,  &  habet  duodecim  portas,i
&  a  porta  in  portam  duo  sunt  grossa  miliaria  Lombardica,;
spacium  inter  medium  istarum  Civitatum  habitatoribus)
plenum  est  &  circuitus  cujuslibet  istarum  ambit  60.
miliaria  Lombardica,  quae  faciunt  octo  Teutonica.  In
hac  Civitate  Cambalu  residet  Imperator  Magnus  Can,  Rex;
Regum  terrestrium,  &  Dominus  Dominorum  terrestrium.j
Atque  inde  ulterius  in  Orientem  intratur  vetus  urbsj
Caydo,  ubi  communiter  tenet  suam  sedem  Imperialem
Grand  Can  in  suo  Palatio.  Ambitus  autem  urbis  Caydo,!
est  viginti  fere  leucarum,  duodecim  habens  portas  a  sei
distantes  amplius  quam  stadia  24.

Palatium  Imperatoris  Grand  Can,  quod  est  in  Caydol
Civitate,  continet  in  circuitu  proprii  muralis  ultra  duas:
leucas  &  sunt  in  eo  aulae  quam  plures,  in  forma  nobiles,  &.
in  materia  nobiliores.  Aula  autem  sedis,  quae  est  maximal
caeterarum,  habet  intrinsecus  pro  sui  sustentatione  24.  aereas:
columnas  factas  opere  fusorio,  de  auro  puro,  &  omnes
parietes  ab  intus  opertas  pellibus  quorundem  animalium,,
quae  vocantur  Pantheres  :  hae  sanguinei  sunt  coloris,  &1
ita  remicantes,  ut  Sole  desuper  relucente,  vix  oculus  valeat
humanus  sufferre  splendorem,  tantaeque  fragrantiae  ut  illi
approximare  non  posset  aer  infectus,  unde  &  ista  operturai
parietum  appreciatur  super  tegmen  aurearum  laminarum,
&c.

Istius  autem  ostia  aulae,  dum  in  ea  residet,  aut  deam-
bulat  Imperator,  multi  Barones  ingressum  servant  intente

384

SIR  JOHN MANDEVILLE  a.d.

1332-66.

&  ne  limen  tangatur,  quod  hoc  haberent  pro  augurio  : &
bene  verberaretur,  quia  Imperatore  prassente, nemo  nisi
adductus in quacunque camera, vel habitatione intro-
mittitur,  donee  interrogatus  jusserit Imperator. Latitu-  Mandevillus
dinem  hujus  Basilica?  aestimo  ad  spacium  de  meis  pedibus  wis  pedibus
centum  &  longitudmem  ultra  quatuor  centum.  ,

Praeterea,  juxta  Palatii  ambitum,  habetur  grandis  parci  imteratoris.
spaciamentum,  diversi  generis  arboribus  repletum,  fructus
ferentibus  varios,  &  nobis  invisos,  &  in  parte  media,  aula
super  excelsum  collem  de  tarn  mira  &  pulchra  structura,  [III.  i.  135.]
ut  ejus  nobilitas  de  facili  ad  praesens  non  possit  describi.
Et  undique,  per  collis  gyrum  aquae  fossatum  profundum,
&  latum,  ultra  quod  pons  unicus  ducit  ad  collem.  Atque
ex  duobus  montis  lateribus,  stagnum  cum  diversorum
copia  Piscium,  &  volucrum  indomitarum,  ut  aucarum,
annatum,  cignorum,  ciconiarum,  ardearum,  &  collectorum
in  magna  pluralitate  :  nee  non  &  per  parcum,  multae
sylvestres  bestiae,  &  bestiolae  quatenus  per  aulas  fenestras
possit  Dominus  pro  solatio  respicere  volucrum  aucu-
pationes  bestiarum  venationes,  &  piscium  captiones.

Praeter  palatium  hoc  in  Caydo,  habet  Imperator  similiter
!:ria  :  unum  in  civitate  Sadus,  versus  Septentrionem,  ubi
:ompetens  est  frigus,  ibi  moratur  in  aestate.  Cambalu,
jbi  competens  calor,  ibi  moratur  hyeme.  Tertium  in
bivitate  Jongh,  in  quo  &  in  isto  Caydo,  ut  saepius  servat  Haitonus
iedem,  eo  quod  in  istis  est  aer  magis  temperatus,  quamvis  memhit  Jong.
•emper  calidus  videtur  Nostratibus.

Sciatis quod ego,  meique sodales,  pro fama magnifl-  Cap.  35.
centiae hujus Imperatoris, tradidimus nos stipendiaries  De  <?u?te°r
|*sse in guerris, contra Regem Mangi praenominatum.  so  enm^fl  *">
St  fuimus  apud  ipsum  15.  mensibus,  &  certe  invenimus  Can  cekbrat
jnulto majorem partem hominum, in mediam partem  in  anno.
jiobis  non  fuisse  relatam  :  hominum  (exceptis  custodibus
bestiarum  &  volucrum)  qui intra  palatium  certa  gerunt
|Tiinisteria  est  numerus  decern  cuman.

Nota.  Traxi  moram  in  Cambalu  tribus  annis  :  fratres  Vixit  in
lostri  locum  habent  in  Curia  sua  specialiter,  &  festis  Cambalu
liebus  statutis  dant  benedictionem. Odericus. Et  quo-  tn  us  anms'

XI  385  2B

A.D.

1332-66.

Sex  cuman
famulorum.
Quinque
Cuman
e  qui  turn.
Decern  Cuman
peditum.

Medici
Christiani,
200.  in  aula
Grand  Can.

Unus  Cuman
continet  decern
mi/Iia,  ut  in
cap.  33.

Moneta  de
corio  vel
papyro.

Quatuorfesta,

Circumcisio
qua  dam.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

niam  Imperator  habet  satis  plures  quam  decern  mille
Elephantes  edomitos,  &  velut  ultra  numerum  alias  bestias
(quarum  quaedam  tenentur  in  caveis,  stabulis  mirabilibus,  j
vel  catenis)  nee  non  &  aves  rapaces,  &  Accipitres,
Falcones,  Ostrones,  Gryfandos  gentiles,  Laveroys,  &
Satyros,  sed  &  Aviculas  loquentes,  &  Papingos,  &  similes  ;
aliasque  cantantes  :  reputatur  numerus  hominum  de  istis
curam  &  laborem  gerentium,  ultra  sex  cuman,  &  praeterea
jugiter  ad  Curiam  equites  cum  plenariis  armaturis,
quinque  cuman,  &  de  peditibus  cum  prceliandi  armaturis,
cuman  decern.  Sed  &  omnes  de  natione  quacunque
mundi  venientes,  qui  petunt  describi  pro  Curia,  re-
cipiuntur.  Sic  enim  jussit  Imperator.  Habet  &  medicos
Paganos  viginti,  &  totidem  Physicos,  atque  sine  his
Medicos  Christianos  ducentos,  &  totidem  Physicos,
quoniam  iste  Grand  Can  majorem  gerit  confidentiam  in
Medicis  Christianis,  quam  in  suae  propriae  nationis
medicis.

Hoc  ergo  firmiter  scias,  quod  de  Curia  Regis  accipiunt
necessaria  sua  jugiter  ultra  triginta  cuman  hominum,
praeter  expensas  animalium  &  volucrum,  cum  tamen  in
festis  majoribus  sint  homines  prope  in  duplo  tanti.  Nee
valet  hie  Dominus  defectum  ullum  pati  pecuniae,  eo  quod
in  terra  sua  non  currit  moneta  de  argento,  vel  auro,  aliove
metallo,  sed  tantum  de  corio  vel  papyro  :  horum  enim
forma  denariorum  signo  Imperatoris  impressorum  preciatur
minoris  aut  majoris  valoris,  secundum  diversitatem  im-
pressionis,  qui  per  visitationem,  detriti  vel  rupti,  cum  ad
Regis  thesaurarios  deferuntur,  protinus  dantur  pro  illis
novi.

Quater  in  anno  celebrat  Imperator  festivitates  solennes.
Primam  de  die  propriae  Nativitatis.  Secundam,  de  die
suae  primae  praesentationis  in  eorum  Templo,  quod
appellant  Moseath,  ubi  &  fit  iis,  nescio  quod  genus
circumcisionis.  Tertiam,  in  thronizatione  sui  Idoli  in
Templo.  Quartam,  de  die  quo  Idolum  ccepit  dare
responsum,  seu  facere  diabolica  mira.  Plures  enim  in
anno non tenet solennitates,  nisi si  quando  nuptias  filii

386

SIR  JOHN MANDEVILLE  ad.

1332-66.

aut  filial  celebrat. Itaque  in  istis  solennitatibus  est  populi
multitudo  absque  numero,  &c.

Celebrato  post  hoc  prandio  satis  morose,  quia  nunquam  Cap.  36.
est  ultra  semel  edendum  in  die,  de  quo  &  ejus  administra-  De  *™.  &
tione nunc longum est scribere, adsunt gesticulatores,  smfefto^de
mira visu,  suaviaque auditu pedibus,  manibus,  brachiis,  su0  comitatu.
humeris,  capitibus,  &  toto  corpore,  ac  ad  singulos  gestus,  Semel  in  die
correspondentes debito vocis sono. Et semper flnem  comedunt'
horum  mirabilium  cantilena  subsequitur  musicorum. Ex
hoc  joculatores  praesto  sunt,  &  Magi,  qui  suis  incantationi-  Magiinsignes.
bus  praestant  praestigia  multa.

Certum est illic homines esse subtiles ad quasdam
humanas artes, & ingeniosos ad fraudes super  omnes,
quas novi mundi partes,  unde & inter se dicunt pro-
verbium, se solos videre duobus oculis, & Christianos
uno,  caeteros  autem  homines  cascos  :  sed  mentitur  iniquitas
sibi,  quoniam  ipsi  vident  solo  oculo  terrena  &  transitoria,  Insignis
& nos Christiani duobus, quia cum terrenis videmus  sententia.
spiritualia, & mansura  : percussit enim Naas, id est, I-***-.II»*«
humani  generis  hostis  cum  illis  foedus,  ut  erueret  omnibus
oculos  dextros,  scilicet  spirituales.

Post annos Christi 1100.  prima  Tartaria fuit nimis  Cap.  37.

Dppressa servitute sub Regibus circumjacentium sibi Qua  de  cama

.-  r\ a^  ^  t^v  i '4.  '  mi • dicitur  Grand

inationum. (juando autem Deo placuit, majores ulius  c

Tartariae  elevaverunt  de  seipsis  sibi  Regem  dictum  Guis  Vera  ratio

Can, cui & promiserunt subjectissimam obedientiam.  hujus  nominis

jldem  cum esset  prudens  &  strenuus 12.  viriles  habens  Can-

lilios, debellavit  cum  iis  &  populo  suo,  &  vicit,  ac  sub- uls an'

kit  cunctos  in  circuitu  Reges,  quibus  terra  indebite  diu

liubjacuerat. Quin  etiam  apparente  sibi  in  visione  Angelo

'Dei  velut  milite  in  albo  equo,  &  candidis  armis,  &  hor-

:ante  se,  ut  transiret  Alpes,  per  montem  *  Beliam,  &  per  *VelBelgiam.

)rachium maris, ad terram Cathay, & ad alias illic  Curalbiequi,

;}lurimas  regiones  transivit,  &  ccepit  cum  filiis  suis  aliquas ^  novena™m

:x  illis  debellare,  &  subjicere,  Deo  in  omnibus  adjuvante  tar\s  s\nt  \n

)Otenter. Et  quoniam  in  equo  albo  ei  Angelus  apparuit,  pretio.

|ui etiam ante passum praedicti  maris  novem orationes

)eo  facere  jussit,  ideo successores  usque  hodie  diligunt

387

A.D.
1332-66.

[III.  i.  136.]

Grand  Can.

Ochoto  Can.
Gut  Can.

Mango  Can.

Gobi  la  Can.

Echiant  Can,
Imperator
Tartarorum
tempore  Man-
devilli.

Serochan  uxor
Grand  Can.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

equos  albos,  &  novenarium  numerum  habent  prae  caeteris
in  gratia.  Dunque  Guis  Can  morti  prae  senio  appro-
pinquaret,  convocatos  ante  se  filios  hortabatur,  &  movebat
exemplo  12.  telorum  in  simul  colligatorum,  quae  a  nullo
filiorum  pariter,  frangi  potuerant,  sed  dissoluta  unum-
quodque  per  se  facile  frangebatur :  sic  filii  (inquit)
dilectissimi,  si  per  concordiam  vos  invicem  dilexeritis,
&  vixeritis  seniori  fratri  obedientes,  confido  in  Deo  juxta
promissionem  mihi  ab  Angelo  factam,  quod  omnem
latissimam  istam  terram,  &  optimam  illius  imperio  sub-
jicietis,  quod  &  post  patris  discessum  strenuissime,  ac
fidelissime  (Deo  sibi  prosperante)  perfecerunt.  Et  quia
cum  propriis  nominibus  habebant  cognomen  Can,  primo-
genitus  pro  differentia  obtinuit  nomen  Grand  Can,  id  est,
Magnus  Can,  videlicet  supra  caeteros  fratres,  qui  sibi  in
omnibus  obediebant.

Itaque  iste  secundus  Imperator  vocabatur  Ochoto  Can.
Post  quern  Alius  ejus  regnavit  dictus  Gui  Can.  Quartus
autem,  qui  Mango  Can  baptizabatur,  permansitque  fidelis
Christianus,  qui  etiam  misso  magno  exercitu  cum  fratre
suo  Hallaon  in  partes  Arabiae  &  iEgypti  mandavit  destrui
in  toto  Mahometi  superstitionem,  &  terram  poni  in
manibus  Christianorum.  Et  fratre  turn  procedente,
accepit  rumores  de  fratris  sui  Imperatoris  morte  inopinata,
quapropter  &  rediit  negotio  imperfecto.  Quintus  Cobila
Can,  qui  etiam  fuit  Christianus,  &  regnavit  42.  annis,  &
aedificavit  magnam  civitatem  Jong,  majorem  satis  urbe
Roma,  in  qua  &  continetur  valde  nobile  palatium  Im-
periale.  Hinc  usque  hodie  omnes  successores  Paganismo
fcedantur.

Tempore  autem  meo  erat  nomen  Imperatoris  Echiant
Can,  &  primogenitus  ejus  Cosue  Can,  praeter  quern  &
alios  filios  habuit  12.  de  quorum  nominibus  conscribendis
non  est  curae  praesentis.

Prima  uxorum  suorum  vocabatur  Serochan,  quae  &
est  filia  Presbyteri  Joannis,  scilicet  Imperatoris  Indiae.
Secunda  Verouchan. Tertia  Caranth  Can.

Istis  duobus  Imperatoribus  non  creditur  inveniri  major

388

SIR JOHN MANDEVILLE  a.d.

1332-66.

Dominus sub firmamento Coeli. In Uteris  quae hujus

Imperatoris  Tartaric scribuntur  nomine  ponitur  semper

iste  Titulus. Can filius  Dei  excelsi,  omnium  universam

terram  colentium  summus  Imperator,  &  Dominus  domi-

nantium omnium. Circumferentia magni sui sigilli,

continet  hoc  scriptum. Deus  in  Ccelo,  Can  super  terram,

ejus  fortitude Omnium  hominum  Imperatoris  sigillum.

Sciendum  quoque  quod  quamvis  populi  ibi  dicuntur,  &

sunt  Pagani,  tamen & Rex  &  omnes  credunt  in  Deum

immortalem, & Omnipotentem, & jurant per ipsum

appellantes, Yroga, id  est, Deum  Naturae. Sed nihilo-  Troga,  Deus

minus  colunt  &  adorant  Idola,  &  simulachra aurea, &  Natur*-

argentea,  lapidea,  lignea,  filtria,  lanea,  &  linea.

Totum Imperium Imperatoris  Grand  Can distinctum Cap.  38.
est  in 12.  magnas  Provincias,  juxta  numerum duodecim  De  Territorio
filiorum primi Genitoris Can. Harum Provinciarum  moriius
major, & nobilior dicitur  Cathay,  quae  consistit in Asia  Tartarorum,
profunda. Tres  enim  sunt  Asiae,  scilicet  quae  profunda 12.  Provincial
dicitur,  &  Asia  dicta  major  quae  nobis  est  satis  propinquior  China.
& tertia minor intra quam est  Ephesus beati Joannis  js\a  triplex
Evangelistae  sepultura,  de  qua  habes  in praecedentibus.

Omnes  tarn  viri  quam  feminae  similibus  in  forma  vesti-  Vestitus  Tar-
bus  inducuntur,  videlicet  valde  latis,  &  brevibus  usque  ad  tarorum.
genua  cum  apertura  in  lateribus  quam  firmant  (dum
volunt)  ansis  quibusdam,  nam  uterque  sexus  est  brachiis
seu  femoralibus  plene  tectus.  Nunquam  utuntur  toga
aut  collobio,  sed  nee  caputio,  unde  nee  per  aspectum
indumentorum  potest  haberi  differentiae  inter  virum  &
mulierem  innuptam.  Sed  nupta  gestat  per  aliquod  tegu-
mentum  in  capite  formam  pedis  viri.  Nubit  illic  vir
quotquot  placet  mulieribus,  ut  nonnulli  habeant  decern
vel  duodecim  uxores  aut  plures.  Nam  quisque  maritus
jungitur  licenter  cuilibet  mulieri,  exceptis  matre,  &  amita,
sorore,  &  filia.  Sicut  viri  equitant,  tendunt,  &  currunt
per  patriam  pro  negotiis  sic  &  mulieres,  quoniam  &  ipsae
operantur  omnia  fere  artirlcia  mechanica  sicut  pannos  &
quicquid  efflcitur  de  panno,  corio,  sericoque,  minantque
:arrucas, & vehicula, sed  viri fabricant  de  ferro & de

389

A.D.
1332-66.

Porcus  &
pants  rariss.

Forma
domorum.

Tartari
Hamaxovii-,  1 ,
in  plaustris
viventes.
Novilunium
in  precio.
Ceremonite
Tartarorum,
&  peccara.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

omni  metallo  lapidibus  atque  ligno,  nee  vir  nee  mulier
nobilis  aut  degener  comedit  ultra  semel  in  die  communiter.
Multa  nutriunt  pecora  sed  nullos  porcos,  parum  comeditur
ibi  de  pane  exceptis  magnatibus  &  divitibus,  sed  carnes
edunt  pecorum,  bestiarum,  &  bestiolarum  utpote  Bourn,
Ovium,  Caprarum,  Equorum,  Asinorum,  Canum,  Cat-
torum,  Murium,  &  Rattorum,  jus  carnium  sorbentes,  &
omnis  generis  lac  bibentes.

Nobiles  autem  bibunt  lac  Equarum,  seu  jumentorum,
pro  nobilissimo  potu  &  pauperes  aquam  bullitam  cum
modico  mellis,  quia  nee  vinum  ibi  habetur,  nee  cervisia
conficitur  :  &  multi  ac  plurimi  fontes  consulunt  in  sua
siti,  per  villas,  &  rura.  Domus,  &  habitacula  rotundae
sunt  formae,  compositae  &  contextae  parvis  lignis,  &
flexilibus  virgulis,  ad  modum  cavearum  quas  nos  facimus
pro  aviculis,  habentes  rotundam  in  culmine  aperturam
praestantem  duo  beneficia  habitationi,  quoniam  &  ignis
quern  in  medio  domus  constituunt  fumum  emittit,  &  pro
aspiciendo  lumen  immittit.  Intrinsecus  sunt  parietes
undique  de  filtro,  sed  &  tectum  filtrum  est :  has  domus,
dum  locum  habitandi  mutare  volunt,  vel  dum  in  diutina
expeditione  procedunt,  ducunt  secum  in  plaustris  quasi
tentoria.

Multas  supervacuas  observant  ceremonias,  quia  re-
spiciunt  in  vanitates  &  insanias  falsas  :  solem  &  lunam
praecipue  adorant,  eisque  frequenter  genua  curvant,  &  ad
novilunium,  quicquid  est  magni  estimant  inchoandum.
Nullus  omnino  utitur  calcaribus  in  equitando,  sed  cogunt
equum  flagello  scorpione,  reputantes  peccatum  non  leve,
si  quis  ad  hoc  flagellum  appodiat,  aut  jumentum  percuteret
suo  fraeno  :  pleraque  similia,  quae  parum  aut  nihil  nocent,
ponderant  ut  gravia,  sicut  imponere  cultellum  in  igne,  os
osse  confringere,  lac  seu  aliud  potabile  in  terram  effundere,
nee  non  &  hujusmodi  multa.  Sed  super  hasc,  tenent  pro
graviori  admisso  mingere  intra  domum  quae  inhabitatur,
&  qui  de  tanto  crimine  proclamaretur  assuetus,  mitteretur
ad  mortem.  Et  de  singulis  necesse  est  ut  confiteatur
peccator  Flamini  suae  legis,  &  solvat  summam  pecuniarum

39°

SIR  JOHN MANDEVILLE  a.d.

1332-66.

delicti. Et  si  peccatum  deturpationis  habitaculi  venerit  in

publicum,  oportebit  reconciliari  domum  per  Sacerdotem,

priusquam  ullus  audebit  intrare. Insuper  &  peccatorem

necesse erit  pertransire  ignem, semel, bis,  aut  ter  juxta

judicium  Flaminis,  quatenus  per ignis acrimoniam pur-

getur  a  tanti  inquinatione  peccati.

Neminem  hominum  prohibent  inter  se  habitare,  sed
indifferenter  receptant,  Judaeos,  Christianos,  Saracenos,  [III.  i.  137.]
&  homines  cujuscunque  nationis,  vel  legis,  dicentes  se  satis
putare  suum  ritum  non  ita  securum  ad  salutem,  nisi
quandoque  traherentur  ad  ritum  magis  salutarem,  quern
tamen  determinate  nunc  ignorant,  imo  multi  de  nobilibus
sunt  jam  in  Christianitate  baptizati.

Porro  Tartari  in  praecincto  expeditionis  habent  singuli  Arma
duos  arcus,  cum  magna  pluralitate  telorum  : Nam  omnes  Tartarorum.
sunt  sagittarii  ad  manum  &  cum  rigida  &  longa  lancea.
Nobiles  autem  in  equis  preciose  phaleratis  ferunt,  gladios,
vel  spatas  breves  &  latas,  scindentes  pro  uno  latere,  &  in
capitibus  galeas  de  corio  cocto,  non  altas,  sed  ad  capitis
formam  depressas. Quicunque  de  suis  fugerit  de  praelio  ;
ipso facto conscript  us est, ut  siquando inventus fuerit
occidatur. Si  castrum  vel  civitas  obsessa  se  illis  reddere  Tartari  retro
voluerit, nullam acceptant  conditionem nisi cum morte  sa&lttantes-
omnium  inimicorum,  vel  si  quis  homo  singularis  se  dederit
victum nihilominus absque ulla miseratione occidunt,
detruncantes  illi  protinus aures,  quas postea coquentes,
&  in  aceto  (dum  habuerint)  ponentes  mittunt  invicem  ad
convivia  pro  extremo  ferculo  :  dumque  ipsi  in  bellis  arte
fugam simulant, periculosum est eos insequi,  quoniam
jaciunt  sagittas  a  tergo,  quibus  equos  &  homines  occidere
norunt. Et  quando  in  prima  acie  comparant  ad  bellan-
dum,  mirabiliter  sese  constringunt,  ut  media  pars  numeri
eorum  vix  credatur.

Generaliter noveritis, omnes Tartaros habere parvos  Tartari
oculos,  &  modicam  vel  raram  barbam  : In  propriis  locis  habent  parvos
raro  inter  se  litigant,  contendunt,  aut  pugnant,  timentes
legum pergraves emendas. Et invenitur ibi rarius  barbam.
vispilio, latro, fur, homicida, injurians, adulter, aut

39*

A.D.
1332-66.

Mos
sepulture.

Cap.  39.
De  sepultura
Imperatoris
Grand  Can,
£3'  creatione
successors.

Cap.  40.

De  multis

regionibus

Imperio

Tartaric

subjectis.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

fornicarius,  quia  tales  criminatores  investigatione  sollicita
requiruntur,  &  sine  redemptione  aliqua  perimuntur.
Dum  quis  decumbit  infirmus  figitur  lancea  juxta  ilium
in  terra,  &  cum  appropinquaverit  morti,  nullus  remanet
juxta  ipsum,  cum  vero  mortuus  esse  scitur,  confestim
in  campis,  &  cum  lancea  sepelitur.

Imperator  Grand  Can  postquam  ejus  cognita  fuerit
defunctio,  defertur  mox  a  paucis  viris  in  parco  palatii,
ad  praevisum  locum  ubi  debeat  sepeliri.  Et  nudato  prius
toto  illo  loco  a  graminibus  cum  cespite  figitur  ibi
tentorium,  in  quo  velut  in  solio  regali  de  ligno  corpus
defuncti  residens  collocatur,  paraturque  mensa  plena
coram  eo  cibariis  preciosis,  &  potu  de  facte  jumentorum.
Instabulatur  ibi  &  equa  cum  suo  pullo,  sed  &  ipse  albus,
nobiliter  phaleratus,  &  onustatus  certo  pondere  auri  &
argenti.  Et  est  totum  Tentorii  pavimentum  de  mundo
stramine  stratum.

Tuncque  effbdiunt  in  circuitu  fossam  latam  valde,  &
profundam  ut  totum  tentorium  cum  omnibus  contends
descendat  in  illam.  Eoque  facto  ita  equaliter  terram
planificantes  adoperiunt  graminibus,  ut  in  omni  tempore
locus  sepulturae  non  valeat  apparere.  Et  quoniam
ignorantiae  nubilo  turpiter  excaecati  putant  in  alio  saeculo
homines  delectationibus  frui,  dicunt  quod  tentorium  erit
ei  pro  hospitio,  cibi  ad  edendum,  lac  ad  potandum,  equus
ad  equitandum,  aurum  &  argentum  ad  respiciendum,
sed  &  equa  lac  semper  prasstabit,  &  pullos  equinos
successive  generabit.

Post  has  itaque  Imperatoris  defuncti  miseras  exequias,
nullus  omnino  audebit  de  ipso  loqui  coram  uxoribus  &
filiis,  &  propinquis,  sed  nee  nominare,  quia  per  hoc
putarent  derogari  paci,  &  quieti  illius,  qua  non  dubitant
eum  dominari,  in  majori  satis  gloria  Paradisi  quam  hie  stetit.

Breviter  &  nunc  intendo  cursum  describere  aliquarum
magnarum  Regionum  &  Insularum  Imperii  Tartariae.
Et  primo  illas  quae  descendunt  a  provincia  Cathay  per
septentrionalem  plagam,  usque  ad  fines  Christianitatis
Prussiae,  &  Russiae.

392

SIR  JOHN MANDEVILLE  a.d.

1332-66.

Ergo provincia Cathay descendens in sui Oriente a
*egno  Tharsis  jungitur  ab  Occidente  regno  Turquescen, Turquestan.
I  quo  &  sunt  plurimae  civitates,  quarum  formosior  dicitur
Dctopar. Ipsum  autem  Turquescen  regnum  jungitur  ad Octopar.
Occidentem  sui  regno  seu  Imperio  Persiae,  &  ad  Septen-
:rionem regno Corasinae, quod spaciosum est valde,  Corasine.
labens  versus  Orientem  sui  ultra  centum  diaetas  deserti  :
ioc  regnum est multis bonis abundans, & appellatur
;jus  melior  civitas  etiam  Corasine.

Isti  quoque  regno  jungitur  in  Occidente  versus  partes
lostras  regnum  Commanorum,  quod  &  similiter  longum  Regnum  Com-
'st,  &  latum,  sed  in  paucis  sui  locis  inhabitatum  :  Nam  manorum.
n  quibusdam  est  frigus  nimium,  in  aliis  nimius  calor,  &
n  nonnullis  nimia  muscarum  multitudo.

Sunt  autem  in  Persia  duae  regiones  : una  altae  Persiae,
juae  a  regno  Turquescen  descendens,  jungitur  ad Occi-
lentem sui  fluvio  Pyson. In ista  habentur  renominatae
ivitates, quarum meliores duae dicuntur Bocura &  Bocura,  vel
>eonargant, quam aliqui appellant Samarkand  : Et  Bohare.
ltera  Regio Baflae  Persiae,  descendens  a  flumine  Pyson,  Samarkand-
[ui  ad  sui  Occidentem  jungitur  regno  Mediae,  &  terrae
ninoris  Armeniae, &  ad  Aquilonem  mari Caspio,  &  ad  Seu  Nessabon
Uistrum terrae  minoris Indiae. In  hac  bassa  Persia  tres ^  Spakan
>rincipaliores  civitates  sunt  iEssabor,  Saphaon,  Sarmasaule,  ^ert-ia  pa'rSt
fee.  Cap.  41.

A finibus  regni Bachariae supradicti ubi contiguatur  De  magni-
mperio Indiae, eundo per multas diaetas intratur in  ficentia ,
egnum Pentoxyriae quod est magnae latitudinis, &  /2^y"
bundantiae  in multis bonis  : hujus nominatior civitas,  precwitate
licitur  Nyse,  &  in  ea  habet  Imperator  palatium  Imperiale,  Palatii.
n  quo  residet  dum  sibi  placet. Imperator  iste  semper  Seu
ocitatus  est Presbyter Joannes,  cujus nominis causam  /^f°f^'
udieram quandoque non  veram  : sed in illis partibus  Faf,u/a  je
ccepi  rationem indubitatam,  quam breviter hie enarro.  rebus  gestis
lirca  annum  ab  Incarnatione  Domini  Octingentessimum, Ogeri  Duds
)ux  Ogerus  de  Danemarchia,  cum  quindecim  cognationis  Janice,  quale s
uae  Baronibus,  &  armatis  viginti  milibus  transivit  mare  Guidone '
jreciae,  &  favente  sibi  Deo  conquisivit  Christianitati  per  Bevis  fcfr.

393

A.D.
1332-66.

Unde  Presby-
ter Joannes
sit  dictus.

[III.  i.  138.]

4000.  Insula.

This  is  taken
out  of
Ramusios
discourse  of
this  voyage.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

multa  praelia  pene omnes  Terras,  Regiones, & Insulas,jj
quas esse de potestate Grand Can praedixi,  nee  non  &  j
omnes,  quae  sunt  de  potestate  Imperii  hujus  Imperatoris;
Indiae. Eratque  inter  Barones  unus  denominatus  Joannes
Alius Goudebucf, Regis Frisonum  : qui dictus  Joannes;
Deo  devotus  fuit,  &  dum  licuit  Ecclesiarum  limina  inivitj ,
unde  & Barones  ei dabant  quasi per  jocum Presbytery
Joannes  vocabulum. Dum  ergo  Ogerus  dictas  regionestf
expugnatas  divideret  in hiis  quindecim suis  cognatis,  &l[
quemlibet eorum in suo loco constitueret Regem,i
quatenus  Christiana  religio  in  ilia  Orbis  superfine  semperjl
stabilis  permaneret,  tradidit  isti  Presbytero  Joanni  superii
orem  Indiam,  cum 4000.  Insulis, Regionibus,  & ipsumji
praefecit  Imperatorem  super  reliquos  cognatos,  ut  ei  certalj
tributa  impenderent,  & in  omnibus  obedirent,  atque  exl
nunc omnes successores Indias sunt vocati Presbyterij:
Joannes,  &  usque  in  hodiernum  tempus  boni  manseruntj
Christiani,  &  Religionis  aemulatores,  &c.

Chap.  VII.

The  Voyage  of  Nicolo  di  Conti  a  Venetian,  to
the  Indies,  Mangi,  Cambalu  and  Quinsai,  with]
some  Observations  of  those  places.

Icolo  di  Conti  a  Venetian,  having  travelled!'
quite  thorow  India,  after  five  and  twentie
yeeres  returned home  ; and because to
save  his  life  he  had  made  denyall  of  his
Faith, hee went to the Pope (then
Eugenius  the  Fourth,  An. 1444.)  being
at  Florence  to  obtayne  absolution  ;  who
enjoyned  him  in  way  of  penance,  truly  to  make  Narration; ,
of  his  Voyage,  and  whole  Peregrination  to  his  Secretarie  ■;
Poggius,  who writ  it  in the  Latine tongue. Ramusio  ,,
sought for it in Venice and other Cities of  Italie in  If
vaine, and at last heard that it was translated into
Portugall by the care of  King Emanuel. An. 1500.  a  j
Copy  whereof  he  procured  from  Lisbon,  but  so  corrupt,

394

NICOLO DI CONTI  ad

1444.

that he doubted to publish it, which yet for want of
better  he  did  ;  and  we  out  of  him  these  Observations.

Nicolo  di  Conti  a  Venetian  being  a  young  man,  then

at  Damasco,  and  having  learned  the  Arabike  Language,

went  with  his  merchandise  in  a  Caravan  of  six  hundred

Merchants,  with  whom  he  travelled  into  Arabia  Petraea,

and thence  into Chaldasa,  till  he  came  to  Eufrates. In

the  Desarts  of  Arabia,  once  about  midnight  they  heard

a  great  noyse,  which  they  thought  were  the  wilde  Arabs  Desart-

jcomming  to  rob  them,  but  saw  a  great  multitude  passe

by  neere  their  Tents  without  hurting  them,  which  some

jof  the  Merchants  said  were Devils  which hanted these

I  Desarts.

From Baldac is  eight  dayes  journey  to Balsera,  and  Baldac
thence  foure  dayes  to  the  Persian  Gulfe,  where  the  Sea
ebbeth and floweth. After five dayes sayling  therein,
he came to Calcum, and after to Ormuz  ; thence to  Ormus.
Calatia a Port of  Persia of great traffick, where he  Ca/atia.
remayned to learne the Persian tongue. Afterwards
clothed in the habit of  the Countrey  (which hee  used
to  doe  in  all  his  journey)  he  went  with  certaine  Moores
and  Persians,  having  sworne  to  be  faithfull  to  each  other,
and  sayled  to  Cambaia,  and  after  to  Pacamuria  and  Dely,
where  store  of  Ginger  growes. Thence  they  went  farre
into Sea,  and came to Bisinagar sixtie miles about,  at  Bisnagar.
the  foot  of  a  high  Mountayne ;  in  which  are  one  hundred
thousand  men  fit  for  armes ;  they  marry  as  many  wives
is they will, which are burned with  them when they
die. The  King  is  the  mightiest  King  in  India,  and  hath
twelve  thousand  Women,  foure  thousand  of  which  attend
lim on foot whithersoever he goeth, and are busied
n the service of  his Kitchin  ; foure  thousand  others
-ide  on  Horses,  or  are  carried  in  Litters  ;  two  thousand
ire  to burne  with  him,  which is  holden a  great  honor.
Pelagonga  is  subject  to  him,  eight  dayes  journey  thence  Pelagonga.
ind  ten  miles  in  circuit  :  from  whence  in  twentie  dayes
3y  Land hee came to Pudifetania (leaving  in the way
Ddeschiria,  and  Cenderghisia,  where  red Sanders  grow)

395

A.D.

1444.

Nestorians
dispersed
thorow  India.
Malabar.

Cinamon.

Ava.

This  Bell  or
Ball  fashion
is  there  still  in
use.

[HI.  i.  1 39-]

Either  this

story  is  not
true,  or  this
Mangi  is  not
China  but
Polos  Mien,  or

some  other
place.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  thence  went  to  Malepur  where  Saint  Thomas  i:
buried  in  a  great  and  faire  Church.  The  Inhabitant;
are  Nestorians,  which  are  Christians  dispersed  thorov
all  India,  as  Jewes  amongst  us.  And  all  this  Provina
is  called  Malabar.

At  the  end  of  that  Country  is  Zeilam  a  famous  Hand
two  thousand  miles  about,  where  are  Rubies,  Saphires
Cats-eye  stones  ;  and  store  of  good  Cinamon ;  the
Tree  like  a  Willow  but  thicker,  the  boughs  growing
more  in  breadth  then  height,  the  leaves  like  those  of  the
Bay  Tree,  but  greater  :  the  Barke  of  the  boughs  ij
best,  that  of  the  Trunke  is  not  good  :  the  fruit  like
Bayberries  of  which  they  make  good  Oile  to  anoint
them.  There  is  a  Lake  in  which  is  a  Citie  of  three
miles  circuit,  governed  by  Bramines,  which  spend  theii
lives  in  the  studies  of  Philosophic,  and  are  much  giver
to  Astrologie.

After  that  is  a  great  Hand  called  Sumatra,  which  the
Ancients called Taprobana, where hee stayed a yeere.
There  growes  the best  Pepper, the Tree  like  to Ivy.
In  a  part  of  the  Hand,  called  Batech,  they  eate  mans  flesh
Thence  he  sayled  to  Ternassari :  and  thence  to  the  mouth
of  Ganges,  and  up  the  streame  (which  is  very  great)  tcff
Cernovem,  and  to  Maarazia ;  whence  crossing  over  Land
he  came  to  Racha,  and  thence  in  seventeene  dayes  to  Avacs
fifteene  miles  about,  where  they  are  much  given  to  spend ff
the  Time in drinking and fellowship both Men and^
Women. There  are  certaine  old  women  which  get  their  &
living  by  selling  Bels of  gold,  silver,  brasse,  of  the  big- tr
nesse  of  Nuts,  which  they  put  in  mens  yards  betwixt  the0'
skin  and flesh,  when they  are  of  age to use  Women,  \
and  in short  time  cure  the  place  ;  and the  men  much°i
please  themselves  to heare the  sound of  them  as they^
goe. Here  the  copy  is  defective.  x

Mangi  is  full  of  Elephants  of  which  the  King  nourisheth18
ten  thousand :  they  serve  him  in  the  warre,  and  carried
Castles  in  which  stand  eight,  ten,  or  twelve  men  with^
Lances,  Bowes  and  Slings. They  take  them  with  a  tame  '■

396

NICOLO DI CONTI  a.d.

1444.

female Elephant,  used to  feed  in  a  place encompassed

with  a  wall  with  two  gates  to  goe  in  and  out ;  into  which

in  the  coupling  season  the  male  enters  at  one  gate,  and

shee flees out  at  the  other, many men attending  with

devices to take  him,  both  gates  being  shut ; and  with

fasting,  and accustoming  other  tame Elephants to  him,

tame  him  in  few  dayes.

The  men  of  this  Countrey  have  but  one  wife,  and  all
both  men  and  women  paint  or  embroider  their  skinnes
with  Iron  pennes,  putting  indelible  tinctures  thereunto.
They  worship  Idols,  yet  when  they  rise  in  the  morning,
they  turne  to  the  East,  and  with  hands  joyned,  say,  God
n  Trinitie  keepe  us  in  his  Law.  This  Countrey  pro-
duceth  Serpents  as  grosse  as  a  man,  sixe  cubits  long,
without  feet,  which  they  eate  for  great  dainties  ;  as  they
doe  also  certaine  red  Ants.  There  is  a  beast  headed  like
i  Swine,  tayled  like  an  Oxe,  with  a  home  in  the  forehead
ike  an  Unicorne  a  cubit  long,  of  the  colour  and  stature  of
in  Elephant ;  with  whom  hee  continually  fighteth.  The
lorne  is  much  esteemed  against  poyson.  In  the  furthest
Darts  of  this  Countrey  towards  Cataio,  are  white  and
^lacke  Kine,  some  haired  and  tayled  like  Horses,  some
with  haires  like  feathers  of  which  they  make  Fannes.

Beyond  Mangi  is  the  greatest  Province  in  the  World,
railed  Cataio,  the  Lord  whereof  is  called  the  great  Can  Cataio.
vhich  signifieth  Emperour  :  and  the  chiefe  Citie  is  called
Zambalu,  which  is  foure  square  and  hath  eight  and
:wenty  miles  in  circuit.  In  the  midst  thereof  is  a  For-
xesse,  and  in  it  a  Palace  for  the  King  ;  and  at  every
)f  those  foure  corners  is  a  Castle,  each  foure  miles  about,
n  which  are  Armouries  of  divers  sorts,  and  Engines  for
mattery.  From  the  Palace  is  a  way  on  the  wall  to  all
hose  Castles,  that  if  the  people  rebell  he  might  betake
limselfe  thither.  Beyond  this  Citie  fifteene  dayes  journey  Note.
s  Quinsai  another  great  Citie,  which  within  this  little
vhile  hath  beene  new  made  by  this  King.  It  hath  thirty
niles  compasse,  and  is  more  peopled  then  the  former,
n  these  two  Cities  it  was  told  him  that  the  Houses  and

397

A.D.

1444.

Zaiton.

Pauconia,  per-
haps Paquin.

No  compasse  ;
which  yet  in
the  next  age
was  there  in
use.

yEn.Syl.de 2.
Asiee  parte  c.
10.

Macinum :
hereby
appeares  his
Macin  is
about  Siam  or
Pegu,  \$c.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Palaces  are  after  the  manner  of  Italie,  and  the  men  richer
and  wiser  then  in  other  places.

After  he  was  gone  from  Ava,  alongst  the  River  to
the  Sea  in  seventeene  dayes  he  arrived  at  Zaiton,  a  great
Port,  where  he  tooke  Sea,  and  in  ten  dayes  came  to  a
great  and  populous  Citie,  called  Pauconia,  which  is  of
twelve  miles  compasse  where  he  stayed  foure  moneths.
There  are  a  few  Vines,  which  runne  upon  Trees,  and
they  make  no  Wine  of  them.  There  grow  Abrecockes,
white  Sanders,  and  Camphire,  &c.

I  am  loth  to  returne  into  India  with  this  Author,  whose
defects  and  corruptions  have  made  him  so  little  service-
able, together  with  the  changed  names  of  places  since
his  time.  It  is  remarkable  that  hee  sayth  that  the  Indian
Mariners  sayled  by  the  Starres  Antartike,  and  not  by
the  compasse ;  using  certaine  measures  and  rules  in  that
Starre-observation.  Hee  also  relateth  the  huge  greatnesse
and  treble  sheathing  of  their  Ships.  But  of  India,  whereof
all  his  Relations  are,  wee  have  already  given  you  better,
that  is  more  punctuall,  methodicall,  and  credible  Authors.
Yet  before  we  leave  him,  let  us  observe  what  iEneas
Sylvius,  or  Pope  Pius  Secundus  hath  cited  out  of  him.
Hee  sayth,  that  hee  sayled  the  Indian  Sea  a  moneth
beyond  Ganges,  and  then  came  to  the  River  Ratha,  which
being  sayled  in  sixe  dayes,  hee  found  a  Citie  called  by
the  same  name.  And  thence  after  seventeene  dayes
passing  desart  Hills  he  came  into  champaine  Countries;
which  having  passed  in  a  fortnight  with  great  labour,  hee
found  a  River  greater  then  Ganges,  called  Dava :  and
having  sayled  therein  a  moneth,  came  to  a  famous  Citie
fifteene  miles  in  circuit,  named  Dua,  where  the  women  are
exceedingly  libidinous,  the  men  contented  with  one  wife.
The  Province  is  called  Macin,  full  of  Elephants,  ten
thousand  of  which  the  King  keepes  for  his  warres,  and
is  himselfe  carried  on  a  white  Elephant,  wearing  a  golden
Chayne  distinguished  with  gemmes,  and  hanging  to  his
feet.  The  men  and  women  rase  themselves,  &c.  (as
before)  but  of  the  Kine,  he  sayth,  that  the  same  Kine  hath

398

NICOLO DI CONTI  ad.

1444.

tayles  long  and  hairy  to  the  feet,  the  haires  subtile  like

Feathers, of  much esteeme, and used on the  tops of

Lances as Ensignes. These  things hath this Nicholas

(sayth Silvius)  of Macin, noting without doubt, the

Region Serica. For our age placeth the Easterne

Scythians  in  Cathay. That  *  of  Dua  greater  then  Ganges,  * And  yet  how

and  that  of  ten  thousand  Elephants  nourished  by  a  King  many  ^inSs

not  knowne  by  fame,  are  hard  to  be  beleeved  : but  long-  ™ore  ,.,,

J  .  '  c \  incredible  are

inquitie  cannot  easily  be  confuted.  now  found

To  the  Reader.

REader,  I  here  present  thee  a  piece  of  a  Historie,  so
much as  abuts  on Tartaria, and China. Alhacen,
a  learned  Mahumetan  was  the  Authour ;  whether  an  exact
'Historian, every where literally to be understood;  or
whether in some part he  be parabolicall,  and  presents
'a Tamerlane like Xenophons Cyrus, (in some things
rather  what  he  should  have  beene,  and  what  the  Authour
icould  say,  then  what  he  was)  I  undertake  not  to  deter-
mine. The  Abbat  of  Mortimer  takes  it  for  a  just  Storie,
and so doth Master Knolls in his Turkish Historic
If  it be an Historie partly parabolicall,  yet doth the
decorum exact of  the Authour a verisimilitude  every
where of  actions and places (sufficient  to  procure our
pardon,  if  not  thankes)  the  veritie  of  a  great  part  being
evident in other Stories. It  is true that  some things
seeme  false  for  want  of  truth in  our  intelligence,  rather  [III.  i.  140.]
then  in  themselves. And  so  hath  it  fared  with  all  (the
subject  of  this  Booke)  Tartarian  and  Chinesian  affaires :
pf  which we  had  as little  knowledge  as of  Tamerlan,
'arther  then  terrors  of  Tartarian  Armes,  and  some  mens
speciall  occasions  and  travels  have  given  us  light. Even
fhe  Sunne  riseth  in  those  parts  whiles  it  is  not  day-breake
with  us,  and  hath  attayned  almost  his  Noon-point  before
nc see him : and worthy wee  are  still  to  abide in a
)lacke  night  of  ignorance,  if  we  welcome  not  what  light
we  can  get  (if  we  cannot  get  what  wee  would)  from  so
•emote  an  East. Once ;  Tartarian  affaires  (as  it  happens

399

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

in  Conquests)  were  changeable,  and  their  New  Moom
was  quickly  at  the  full  ;  divers  chances  and  change
succeeding  after  Poles  dayes  to  these ;  such  wealtl
whetting  the  Tartars  to  get  and  hold,  and  no  lesse  th<
Chinois  to  recover,  the  China  State  being  unquiet  so  lon£
as  the  Tartar  greatnesse  continued,  and  freed  (for  th<
most  part)  with  their  diminishing,  and  division  into  diver:
Estates.  As  for  these  times  of  Tamerlan  (if  this  Storj
be  exact)  it  is  like  the  Can  held  the  North  parts  of  Chin;
from  Quinsay  forward,  with  Cataio ;  and  the  King
China  the  rest;  then  Nanquin  being  the  Seat  Royall
as  since  the  expulsion  of  the  Tartars  Paquin.  Or  perhap:
the  Quinsay  heere  mentioned,  is  that  which  Conti  hath  ir
the  former  Page  told  us,  was  lately  built  by  the  Can :  anc
not  that  which  Polo  speakes  of;  in  Catay  and  not  ir
China :  which  cleareth  this  doubt  of  Cans  residence  an<
rule  in  China.  To  reconcile  all  doubts  is  for  mee  toe
hard  a  taske,  because  Cataio  and  China  are  even  stil
bemysted,  and  leave  their  Surveyers  perplexed,  bounding
the  search  of  the  most  curious  in  searching  their  jus
bounds,  how  farre  they  are  the  same  or  differing  ;  whereir
our  Jesuites  will  more  amuse  and  amaze  us  (where  wee
will  cleare  our  selves  as  well  as  we  can)  when  wee  come
to  them.  I  have  premised  Conti,  though  Tamerlane  be  i
little  Elder  for  his  Religions  sake,  and  to  recreate  with
a  little  Relation,  before  this  longer  Storie.

400

ALHACEN THE ARAB

Chap.  VIII.

Extracts  of  Alhacen  his  Arabike  Historie  of
Tamerlan,  touching  his  Martiall  Travels,  done
into  French  by  Jean  Du  Bee,  Abbat  of  Mor-
timer.

§.  i.

Tamerlans  Birth  and  Person,  his  Expedition
against  the  Muscovite ;  his  Marriage  with
the  Cans  daughter ;  his  overthrowing  of
Calix.

Undry  Histories  doe  attribute,  as  a  great
want  unto  the  happie  fortune  of  Tamerlan,
not  to  have  a  Writer  in  his  dayes,  which
might  have  left  in  writing  his  Historie
unto  posteritie.  But  without  any  cause
did  they  moane  him,  insomuch  as  his
Historie  is  very  famous  amongst  the
Turkes,  and  Arabians;  his  Conquests  very  largely  dis-
bursed, and  many  of  his  worthy  and  notable  sayings
:ollected,  with  an  infinite  number  of  Noble  deeds  left
into  the  memoriall  of  posteritie.  Very  true  it  is,  that  he
lad  not  an  Homer,  but  a  great  and  worthie  person,
earned  as  well  in  naturall  Philosophic,  as  in  Astrologie,
vho  was  in  the  time  of  this  Prince,  a  companion  and
amiliar  of  his  Conquests,  named  Alhacen,  an  Arabian  by
)irth,  and  of  Mahomets  Religion.  This  Authour  then
)eing  fallen  into  my  hands,  in  my  Voyage  into  the  East
lountrey,  I  caused  the  same  to  be  interpreted  unto  mee
y  an  Arabian,  who  did  speake  Frank  (as  they  terme  it)
hat  is  to  say,  Italian,  and  seme  time  I  spent,  in  associating
ny  selfe  so  with  this  man,  who  commended  greatly  unto
ne  the  eloquence  and  gravitie  of  this  Authour,  wondering
t  his  digressions,  and  entring  againe  into  his  matter  so
veil  to  the  purpose.  It  grieved  mee  much  that  I  had
lot  the  perfection  of  this  Language,  to  be  a  helpe  unto  the
xi  401  2  c

The  History  of
Tamerlan
famous
amongst  the
Turkes  and
Arabians.

Alhacen.
The  Franke
Tongue
amongst  the
Turkes.
Tee  often  have
reade  that
Franke  in  the
East,  ever
since  the
Frankes
taking
Jerusalem
signifies  all  the
West  of
Europe.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

richer  of  this  Historie,  for  to  deliver  it  unto  my  Nation

with  some  grace : but  I  tooke  thereof  as  much  as  I  could

in  his  Language,  which  was  corrupted,  as  is  the  Franke

Tongue  (so  they  terme  it)  which  is  a  kinde  of  Italian,

mingled  with  Slavon,  Greeke,  and  Spanish  Tongues  very

common  at  Constantinople,  with  the  Arabian  and  Turkish

Tongues : so  as  I  could  not  gather  but  onely  the  trueth

thereof,  and  not  the  drifts  and  gravitie  of  the  Declaration,

wherein  the  Authour  had  collected  it  for  posteritie  (and  as

he  said)  by  the  commandement  of  the  Prince,  who was

Tamarian  his a  lover  of  learning,  and  excellent  in  the knowledge of

learning.  Astrologie  and  Divinitie,  as  the  custome  of  those  Nations

meiar- jg  tQ  ;0yne  them  ordinarily  together,  studying:  upon  the

tartans  strange  J J  r  iri  -  r  ^

kinde  of  vertue  or  names,  and  or  the turning  or  letters,  even  in

Astrologie. their  placing, writing them  underneath  Starres,  whereof
they  make  sentences,  by  meanes  whereof  they  wrought
miraculously  in  the  things  of  Nature. This  is  that  Zoro-
astrien and  Bactrien Science,  that  of  Balaam,  and  some
others  in  my  opinion,  which  hath  succeeded  unto  so  many
[III.  i.  141.]  Arabian  Astrologians. Now  then,  this  Prince  was  endued
with  such  knowledge,  as  made  him  admired  of  the  people  j
where  he  commanded,  who  are  for  the  most  part  great'
wonderers,  insomuch  as  this  caused  him  to  be  accounted  a|
Prince  accompanied  with  the  Divine  vertue,  considering!
the  justice  he used  in all  his actions. This  hath  pro-;
ceeded even so farre that some Italians have written ;
foolish  things  thereof,  as  of  certaine  kinds  of  Tents  which!
he  caused  to  be  pitched,  when  he  besieged  any  Citie  ;  one
white, signifying peace, it yeelding unto his mercy ;  1
another  red,  signifying  cruelty  to  follow  ;  and  the  third
blacke,  signifying  mourning  to  ensue. But  I  finde  noti
this  in  our  Author,  and  I  beleeve  them  to  be  fables.
I  will now declare  unto  you with  my  Arabian,  who
The  of -spring  this  great  Prince  Tamerlan  was. Hee  was  then  of  the'
and  stocke  of bloud  of  the  Tartarian  Emperours,  and  his  father  Og  had
Tamerlan. fQr  ^  p0rtion  the  Countrey  of  Sachetay,  whereof  hee  was  |
Lord. This  Countrey  lying  betweene  the  North  and  the
East,  is  the  antient  Countrey  of  Parthia,  upon  the  Coast

402

ALHACEN THE ARAB

of  the  Zogdians,  and  the  chiefest  Citie  of  his  estate  was

;Samercand situated upon the River of  Issarle. Some

jof  our  Historiographers  would  needs  have  him  to  be  the  The  flockes  of

jsonne  of  a  shepheard  ;  but  this  have  they  said,  not  know-  the  Tartarian

hng at all the custome of  their Countrey, where the  KtnSsarethJir

iprincipall revenue of  the Kings and Nobles consisteth  the  >rartars

(in  Cattell,  despising  Gold  and Silver,  but  making  great  beasts  are

reckoning of such riches, wherein they abound in all  their  best

Isorts  : this is the occasion wherefore some call them  Malth-

Shepheards,  and  say  also  that  this  Prince  descended  from

them. So his Father Og was Prince of *Achetay,  *This  name

jabounding  in such kinde of  wealth. And  being  come  seems  derived

.unto  the  age  of  fifteene  yeeres,  his  father  being  already  from  Sochtaty

o  /  *  o  j mentioned

iold, delivered up unto him the government of his  %eftre  \n

Kingdome,  with the  commandement over  all his Men  Haiton:of

bf  warre. His  father  Og  being  given  unto  peace,  with-  wnom  these

drew himselfe unto a solitary life, for to serve God,  Tartars  are

.  , .  r ,  . *  J  .  .  TT  still  called

and end the rest or his dayes in quiet. Hee gave  Zagetai.

unto his sonne Tamerlan (which signifieth Heavenly  Tamerlans

.grace  in  their  Tongue)  two  sufficient  personages  for  to  name:  some

guide  and  assist  him  in  the  government  of  his  Estate  : .5/*?

the  one  was  called  Odmar,  and the  other  Aly,  persons  ^f  reasm

in  great  dignitie  and  credit  with his  father. Now  this  of  that

Prince  was  well  instructed  in  the  Arabian  learning,  and  accident,

exercised himselfe much therein, and at such time as  filing  from

they thought him to be either in the  Bathes,  wherein  yncnou '

they are very curious in that Countrey being their  Tamerlan  his

chiefest delicacies, he was in the contemplation and  studies  and

studie  of  heavenly  things. This  Prince  had  within his  ^rmnS-

eyes such Divine beautie, being full of  such majestie,  faeLs jt*

that  one  could  hardly  indure  the  sight  of  them  without  like  is  reported

closing  of  their  eyes,  and  they  which  talked  with him,  of  Augustus.

and  did  often  behold him, became  dumbe,  insomuch  as  The  custome

he  abstayned  with  a  certaine  modestie  and  comlinesse,  to  % f  .
11  J i  • i j-  i  i  •  a  ii i  r  Tartarians.

looke  upon  him  that  discoursed  unto  him. All  the  rest  or

his  visage  was  curteous  and  well  proportioned  : he  had  Tamarlan

but little  haire  on his  chinne  ;  hee  did  weare  his  haire  haire  a^

long  and  curled,  contrary  to  the  custome  of  his  Countrey,  why.

403

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

who  are  shaved  on  their  heads,  having  the  same  alwaies

covered, but he contrariwise was alwaies in a manner

bare-headed, and said,  his mother  came  of  the race  of

Samson,  for  a  marke  whereof  shee  advised  me  to  honour

long  haire. This  was  the  cause  that  made  him  respected

of  his men  of  Armes,  and the  most  part  of  them  did

beleeve  there  was  some  vertue  in  those  haires,  or  rather

some  fatall  destinie,  the  which  many  did  beleeve  to  be  so ;

and  verily  they  were  of  a  dusky  colour  drawing  toward  a

violet,  the most beautifull that any eye could behold.

The  descrip- His stature was of  the middle sort, somewhat narrow

2f  °f  in his shoulders, he had a faire leg and strong, the

Our  Authors strength  of  his  body  was  such  as  no  body  did  surpasse,

tells  us  he  was  and  often on the  festivall dayes he made  triall  of  his

lame,  and  that  strength with the most strong  : and this he did  with

he  was  there- sucj1  grace  anc[ humanitie, that he  whom he  overcame

jore  so  ca  e  . j^y himselfe therein most happie, although it bee a

disgrace  amongst  the  Tartarians  to  bee  throwne  to  the

ground in wrastling. Now, as he was Martiall, and

Tamerlan  his desirous  of  glorie  : the  first  warre that  hee  attempted

first  warre was against the Moscovite, who came and spoyled a

Idoscovite  ^itie  which  nac*  Put  it:  sel^e  into  his  Protection,  and
had  entred  also  into  his  Countrey,  and  being  retired,
proclaymed  open  warre  against  him,  gave  him  battell!
neere  to  the  River  Mascha,  although  the  Muscovite  had  a

The  Armle  of  great  Armie,  which  hee  had  gathered  together  long  before.

the  Moscovite.  On  the  other  side,  the  Prince  determining  to  resist  him,
assembled  all  his  forces,  and  those  of  his  allyes.  Now  thei
Muscovite  had  very  great  forces,  and  men  well  trayned  up
in  the  warres,  having  had  alwaies  warres  with  his  neigh-
bours, the  King  of  Polonia,  with  whom  hee  had  them
friendship,  and  the  ayde  of  ten  thousand  very  good;
Horse.  There  were  also  with  him  many  Hungarian
Gentlemen,  led  by  Udecelaus  a  Hungarian  Gentleman,
who  had  brought  with  him  more  than  eight  thousand:
Horse  ;  the  opinion  was,  that  hee  had  in  his  Armie  four-

The  Armie  of  score  thousand  Horse,  and  a  hundred  thousand  toot-men.

Tamerlan. Qur  prinCe  Tamerlan  had  in  his  Armie  about  six-score

404

ALHACEN THE ARAB

:housand  Horse,  and  a  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  men

>n  foot,  but  not  so  skilfull  in  points  of  warre  as  those

>f  the  Moscovite  :  for  our  Estate  had  long  enjoyed  peace,

jind  our  Souldiers  were  indeed  trayned  up  in  discipline  of

varres,  but  not  in  the practice thereof. The  order  of  The  order  of

iramerlan  was  this  ;  that  is,  he  caused  all  his  Armie  to  Tamerlans

)ee divided into squadrons, each consisting of sixe  '

housand Horse, except his owne, which was of  ten

housand,  so  as  he  made  eighteene  squadrons,  his  owne

!>eing  reckoned  which  made  nineteene. The  Avant-guard

vas  conducted  by  Odmar,  who  led  nine  squadrons,  flanked

vith  fortie  thousand  men  on  foot,  divided  both  on  the

ight  and  left  sides,  who  should  shoot  an  infinite  number

)f  Arrowes. The  Battell  was  conducted  by  Tamerlan,

vho  led  ten  squadrons,  his  owne  being  therein  closed,  and  [III.  i.  142.]

iftie  thousand  Foot-men,  the  best  and  choicest  Souldiers

)f  his  whole  Armie. Prince  Thanais,  a  kins-man  unto  the

Drince,  led the  Arere-ward,  with fortie  thousand  Foot-

nen,  and  sixe  squadrons  :  hee  had  some  three  thousand

-lorse adventurers,  whom they call Oliagues, in their

Tongue, the same which wee tearme, The forlorne

lope.

The  Moscovite  did  not  observe  that  order,  but  did
ight  by  double  Rankes  with  Lances,  and  there  was  a
pace  to  helpe  themselves  therein,  and  to  breake  them,
lotwithstanding  those  Nations  doe  not  breake  them  at
11,  and  they  seemed  to  bee  a  greater  number  than  wee,
naking  a  great  noyse.  At  the  length  multitude  and  skill
>vercame  the  force  and  valour  of  the  Moscovites,  the
'ictory  bending  to  the  Parthians  side,  the  which  they  did
mrsue  hotly.  Tamerlan  was  hurt  on  the  fore-head  upon
he  side  of  the  left  eye,  and  had  two  Horses  slaine  under
lim  in  the  fight.  Tamerlan  employed  himselfe  in  giving
jod  thankes  for  this  victory,  after  hee  had  pursued  the
nemy  three  leagues  ;  the  next  day  he  reviewed  his
Vrmie,  and  found  that  he  had  lost  of  his  side  for  his
>art  betweene  seven  and  eight  thousand  Horse-men,  and
>etweene three and foure thousand Footmen. The

405

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Moscovite  lost  some  seven  and  twenty  thousand  Foot
men,  and  betweene  fifteene  and  sixteene  thousand  Horse-
men. This  same  day  was  Odmar  the  safegard  of  his
Prince  ;  but  he  lost  Hally,  who  was  slaine  by  the  blow  of
an  Arrow.  The  Prince  did  slacke  no  time  after  so  great  a
victory  :  He  set  forward,  and  came  into  the  borders  of
the  Moscovite,  whom  he  enforced  to  capitulations,  that
they  should  become  Tributaries  of  a  hundred  thousand
Duckets,  and  should  pay  all  the  charges  of  the  War.
amounting  unto  the  summe  of  three  hundred  thousand
Duckets,  he  then  would  send  backe  againe  all  the
Prisoners,  and  withdraw  his  Armie  ;  that  for  securitie
hereof  they  should  give  him  pledges,  which  should  b*
changed  every  yeare  ;  unto  all  which  they  agreed.  Sc
was  this  Warre  ended  to  his  contentment,  returning
with  glorie  unto  the  Prince  his  Father.

Now  Tamerlan  was  received  into  all  his  Countries  with
much  honour  and  triumph. The  great  Cham  of  Tartaria
Brother  unto his Father, sent  Presents  to  gratine  him
making offer unto him of  his Daughter in Marriage
and  that  in marrying  of  her, hee  would cause him tc
bee  acknowledged  as  Emperour  throughout  all  his  King-
domes,  as  his  next  heire,  himselfe  being  now  old,  and  ou
of  all  hope  to  have  any  more  Children. Hereupon  he(
presently  tooke  his  Journey  towards  him,  being  in th<
Quamcay,  if City  of  Quanicay,  where  he  was  received  with  all  kinc
not  Quinsay. 0f  Triumph  and  Magnificence ;  there  did  he  shew  him
selfe  brave  in  all  manner  of  gallant  Showes  and  Combats
as  well  in  jest  as  in  earnest. And  as  these  Nations  an
full of  vanitie, and desirous to make shew of thei
strength and agilitie, Tamerlan carried  away  the Priz<
therein,  whether  it  were  in  shooting  neere  with  his  Bow
TheTartarian  or  in  changing  Horses  in  the  middest  of  the  courses,  or  ir
Exercises. breaking  an  Iron  in  running  at  the  Quintaine  ;  he  mad
Tamerlan  his every one WOnder at his dexterite, and was crownec

with  \tf great  t^le  s*xt  ^ay  a^ter  ms  commmg  thither  with  the  joyful
Chans  consent  of  all  the  Subjects  of  the  Emperour  his  Uncle

Daughter. and of all the Court. After that, he married th

406

ALHACEN THE ARAB

Emperours  Daughter,  desiring  first  to  bee  crowned
before  the  Marriage,  to  the  intent  that  none  should
thinke  that  the  Crowne  came  unto  him  by  meanes  of
her,  but  by  succession,  the  Daughters  not  at  all  succeed-
ing into  Empires.  It  was  also  to  assure  his  estate,  and
having  remayned  in  that  place  by  the  space  of  two
moneths,  hee  returned  from  thence  with  his  Wife  to
Samercand,  in  which  Citie  hee  delighted  greatly  to
remayne,  because  the  situation  thereof  was  very  faire  ;  The  scituation
and  for  that  the  Citie  is  accompanied  with  a  faire  °fthe  Citl^°f
River,  which  causeth  great  Traffique,  and  maketh  it  Samercand-
richer  then  any  Citie  within  that  Countrey.  Odmar
alone  was  called  by  him,  at  such  time  as  the  great
Cham  his  Uncle  did  impart  unto  him  his  Affaires  :  and
amongst  other  matters,  he  propounded  unto  him  the
Enterprize  of  China,  promising  him  assistance  and  ayde,
and  giving  him  to  understand  how  necessarie  it  was  to
undertake  this  Warre  for  the  better  assuring  of  his  estate,
seeing  the  King  of  China  had  much  gone  beyond  his
ancient  bounds.

He  had  in  his  Court  a  Christian  whom  he  loved  much,
and  every  one  greatly  respected,  named  Axalla,  a  Genuois
by  birth, brought  up  from his  youth  about  his  person.
This  man  principally  did  stirre  him  up  unto  great  Enter-  This  may  bee
prizes,  and  notwithstanding  his  Religion,  hee  trusted  him.  Praysed  m  a
Now  he  had  all  Religion  in  reverence,  so  as  it  did  worship /^JiTl
one  onely  God,  Creator  of  all  things. He  often  said,  that  not  -tn  j
the  greatnesse  of  Divinitie  consisted  in  the  sundry  kindes  Christian
of  people which are under  the Cope of  Heaven, who  Prince.^

served  the  same  diverslv,  nourishing  it  selfe  with  diversitie, ^ttt  l  l(lueest

.  i- 7 i  -ij-ji-r  nusquam  est.

as  the  nature  was  divers  where  it  had  printed  his  Image,  He  which  is  of

God  remayning,  notwithstanding,  one  in  his  Essence,  not  all  Religions,

receiving  therein  any  diversitie. This  was  the  reason  that  u  of  none.

mooved  him  to  permit  and  grant  the  use  of  all  Religions

within  the  Countreyes  of  his  obedience,  alwayes  provided

(as  I  said  before)  that  they  worshipped  one  onely  God.

He  determined  to make  Warre  with  the  King  of  China

(who  is  called  the  Lord  of  the  World,  and  Childe  of  the

407

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Sunne)  which  was  no  small  Enterprize.  But  before  hee
would  begin  the  same,  hee  sent  unto  the  said  King  of
China,  for  to  demand  right  for  some  Countreyes  (which  II
Hordas,  are  they  call  Hordas)  abiding  places,  which  this  Prince  of  o
the  moveable  China  had  usurped  long  before,  and  even  the  passages  of  j  u
theTarta  a  ^ver  ca^ed  Tachii,  which  is  beyond  his  limits,  which  Id
Awallbuilded  are  Walls  which  are  betweene  the  Kingdomes  of  the  great  n
by  the  King  of  Cham,  and  of  our  Tamerlan,  builded  of  purpose  by  this  I  n
China.  King  of  China,  to  defend  him  from  the  Roades  of  the  r

Tartarians,  and  forces  of  our  Prince,  so  as  this  was  begun  jii
[III.  i.  143.]  with  the  advice  of  the  great  Cham,  and  for  his  benefit  as  t
This  was  as  wen  as  for  fae  princes.  Therefore  to  accomplish  his  11
report  7ui/t  Enterprize,  in  the  mean-time  that  he  attended  for  the  (
before,  and  returne  of  his  Embassadors,  he  caused  his  forces  to  come  j  r
perhaps  now  forwards  from  all  parts,  appointing  unto  them  for  the  i  S
by  age  ruined,  place  of  meeting  his  owne  at  the  Horda  of  Baschir,  where  1  \

[w  u  may  e  ^\  his  Armie  assembled  ;  and  other  ayding  troupes  of  the  ! !

a  cause  Polo  >  . J &  f

mentions  them  great  Cham  in  the  Deserts  or  Ergimul,  at  a  certayne  day,  ! .

not)  and  by  in  which  place  he  should  joyne  with  all  his  Army.  The  c
this  King  Army  of  the  great  Cham  consisted  of  two  hundred  thou-  \
repay  re  100.  s^n(^  fighting  men,  wherein  were  all  the  brave  men  of  it
Polos  time.  In  ms  Court,  who  were  accustomed  unto  the  Wars,  the  It
which  space  Emperour  which  then  raigned,  and  was  old,  having  greatly  |
also  the  increased  his  limits,  and  conquered  a  great  Countrey,  so j

Lhinois,  tf as these  men  were  well  trayned  up  in the Wars,  and  !  ■
true  had accustomed unto travell and paines. Now then the
recovered  part  Embassadors  which  were  sent,  returne  and  informe  the
of  their  Prince  of  the  will  of  (this  proud  King  of  the  World)

Empire  con-  t^§  King  of  China  (who  was  named  so)  who  puffed  up
I  qum/i  with  vaine  glorie,  was  astonished  how  any  durst  denounce
Warre  against  him,  making  this  proud  Answere,  That
Tamerlan  should  content  himselfe  that  hee  had  left  him
that  which  hee  might  have  taken  from  him,  and  that  his
Armes  and  Forces  were  of  another  sort,  then  those  of
whom  he  published  the  victorie,  to  bring  thereby  terrour
upon  his  Neighbours.

This  Answere  being  heard,  our  Prince  marched  directly
unto the Army, and  gave  order  for  the  conveyance  of

408

ALHACEN THE ARAB

victuals  from  all  parts,  sent  to  hasten  forward  his  Con-
federates, emparted  the  Answere  unto  the  Emperour  by
Embassadours  dispatched  from  him,  caused  the  boldnesse
of  the  King  of  China  to  be  published,  to  make  manifest
unto  all  the  World  the  justnesse  of  his  cause. Before  his
departure  he  went  to  take  leave  of  his  Father,  who  endued  ^  kindpart-
with a singular  and Fatherly affection, said he  should  $!^v  t^and
never  see  him  againe,  and  that  he  hastened  unto  his  last  ^  Sonne.
rest, and  having  made  solemne  Prayers  over  the  Prince
his  Sonne for his prosperitie, kissing him a thousand
times,  drew  off  his  Imperiall  Ring,  and  gave  it  unto  him,
not asking whether his Journey tended  : and calling
Odmar,  he  bade  him  farewell,  recommending  his  faithful-
nesse  unto  his  Son. Then  he  departed  and  drew  towards
Samarcand, where the Empresse his Wife remayned  ;
whom he carryed with him as  is the custome of  that
Nation, and after he  had (being  Religious)  visited the
Tombe  of  his  Servant  Hally,  hee  caused  his  soule  three
dayes  to  bee  prayed  for,  according  to  the  Rites  of  his  Law:
whereupon  he  presently  departed,  having  taken  order  for
the  well  governing  of  his  Kingdome  in  his  absence,  com-
mitting the charge thereof unto Samay, a man well  Samay  made
practised  in  Affaires,  and  he  who  had  the  charge  of  our  Govemourof
Prince  in  his  youth. So  then  he  marched  forward  in  the  $achetay  tn
middest  of  his  Army,  which  consisted  but  of  fiftie  thou- f mr  atts
sand Horse, and one  hundred  thousand men on foot,  Tamerlan  his
relying  principally  on  the  Forces  of  the  great  Cham  his  Armie  march-
Uncle  ; who above all  desired this  War  : he did not  ing  against  the
forget  to  give  in  charge  that  the  rest  of  his  Forces  should  J?£  °*
be  readie  upon  the  first  Commandement,  as  soone  as  he
should  be  joyned  with  the  forces  of  the  great  Cham,  and
marching  forwards  he  had  stayed  by  the  way  by  reason  of
some  distemperature  which had surprized him through
changing  of  the  Ayre,  as  the  Physicians  affirmed. But
yet, notwithstanding,  the  forces  which  Catiles,  Captayne
of  the  Army  of  the  great  Cham  conducted, went daily
forwards. Now the newes  was spread into an infinite
number of  places  of  his  distemperature,  yet  did  he  not

409

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

neglect  to  send  unto  the  great  Cham,  and  often  advertize
him  of  the  estate  of  his  health,  to  the  end  the  same  should
not  cause  any  alteration,  the  which  hee  did  fore-see  by
reason  of  his  preferment  unto  this  Empire,  by  the  great
Cham  his  Uncle  :  and  hee  was  in  doubt  of  a  certayne
Lord  named  Calix,  who  was  discontented  therewith,  and
had  not  as  yet  neither  gratified  nor  acknowledged  him  as
all  the  other  subjects  had  done.

Now  concerning  his  delay,  it  was  by  sundry  diversly
interpreted  ;  some  said  that  hee  had  bin  advertized  of  some
uproare  to  be  attempted,  when  he  should  be  farre  severed
from  thence,  and  had  passed  over  the  Mountaynes  of
Pasanfu,  and  that  Calix  stayed  upon  nothing  else,  inso-
much as  the  Companies  of  the  great  Cham  were  gone
forwards,  even  beyond  the  Mountaynes,  having  passed
the  River  of  Meau,  and  were  encamped  at  Bouprou,  the
The  con-  which  Calix  understanding,  thought  he  should  have  the
spiracle  of  ^ meanes to worke his enterprize. Thereupon having

Ca/tx  against  assemDled  great  store  of  his  most  faithfull  followers,  he

L  atnerlan  in

his  absence. tooke  counsell with  them, that this  was  the  meanes  to

overthrow  the  purposes  of  Zachetay,  who  would  reigne

over,  and bring  them  under  his  Empire :  &  that  seeing

their  Prince  had  bin  so  badly  minded  as  to  do  the  same  of

his  own  mind  without  calling  of  them  which  had  interest

in that  election,  that now  was the  time  to  assure  their

libertie, which was  in doubt to  be  lost, &  caused  also

a  rumor  to  be  spred  of  the  sicknes  of  this  Prince,  that

the  great  Cham  was  old,  the  greatest  part  of  his  forces,

far  separated  from  him,  forthwith  dispatching  a  Messenger

unto  the  great  Cham  their  Prince,  to  assure  him  that  they

bent  not their forces  against  him,  but  were  his  faithful

and  obedient  subjects: but  they  armed  themselvs,  because

they  would  not  be  governed  by  the  Parthians,  their  ancient

enemies. Thus  Calix thought  greatly to  trouble  him,

when  he  rose  in  Armes  against  him,  and  did  thinke  that  he

had  already  assaulted  the  Wall  which  the  King  of  China

had  made  against  the  Tartarians. As  soone  then  as  the

Prince  was  advertized  of  the  pretences  of  Calix  thus  dis-  i

410

ALHACEN THE ARAB

covered,  hee  marched  one  dayes  Journey  forward,  to  the

end  he  might  approach  unto  Calibes,  and  impart  the  same

unto  him,  what  face  soever  Calibes  set  on  the  matter,  he

harkened  what  would  become  of  Calix,  that  hee might

likewise  make  some  commotion  :  there  was  left  with  him

to command  over  the  Parthians,  the  Prince  of  Thanais,  [III.  i.  144.]

without  whom  he  could  not  doe  any  thing,  for  that  hee

led  the  Avantgard. Thus  was  the  Army  divided  in  two

parts ;  the  King  of  China  remayning  long  before  he  was

advertized of  all  this,  and  thought  he  had  all  the  forces

both  of  the  Tartarians  and  Parthians  upon  his  Armes,  so

as  this  was  of  no  small  importance  to  favour  our  Affaires:

for  Tamerlan had  especially  given  commandement,  that  Good

the  passages  which  are  easily  gotten,  might  as  diligently  directions  from

bee  kept,  to  the  end  that  the  King  of  China  should  not amer  an-

be  advertized  of  the  tumult. Then  Tamerlan  set  forward

his  Avantgard  under  the  leading  of  Odmar  :  hee  promised

unto himselfe shortly a  happie  successe  in  his  Affaires,

and  advertized  the  Emperour  of  all :  but  it  came  unto

him  when  he  was  sicke. And  surely  it  was  high  time  for

Tamerlan  to  march  forward,  or  else  all  had  beene  revolted,

so  leaving  his  Footmen  he  made  great  Journies. Now

during  the  time  that  he  had  bin  advertized,  and  made  his

abode  to  consult,  which  was  the  space  of  two  moneths  :

Calix  having  presented  himselfe  with  a  hundred  thousand

fighting men before  Cambalu,  a  very great Citie, and

chiefe  of  the  Province  of  Catayo,  the  Inhabitants  thereof

came  out  to  meete  him,  and  did  also  receive  him  with  all

the  joy  that  might  be.

Now  whilst  our  Army  marched  towards  Caindu,  and
from  thence  unto  Calatia,  whether  our  Army  went  easily,
looking  for  the  Forces  of  his  Native  Countrey  of  Zachetay,
to  come  and  joyne  with  him  :  he  did  not  yet  forget  to
send  forward  daily  of  our  Souldiers  towards  Cambalu,  so
as  they  supposed  all  our  Forces  to  be  on  the  necke  of
them  already,  which  gave  great  terrour  unto  the  people.
Calix  perceiving  that  the  people  did  repent,  hee  thought
best  to  withdraw  himselfe  out  of  Cambalu,  determining  to

411

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

oppose  himselfe  against  Tamerlan,  and  sent  for  his  power
from  all  places,  putting  all  upon  the  event  and  hazard  of
a  battell.  He  drew  out  of  Cambalu,  full  fiftie  thousand
men,  as  well  Burgesses,  as  Souldiers  which  were  there  in
Garrison,  having  wonne  all  the  Captaynes  which  the  old
Emperour  had  placed  there  in  Garrison,  amounting  to  the
number  of  thirty  thousand  men,  and  him  that  commanded
over  them,  who  had  consented  unto  the  revolt  of  this
great  Citie.  To  make  it  short,  having  assembled  all  his
Forces,  he  had  fourescore  thousand  Horse,  and  a
hundred  thousand  Footmen,  the  which  hee  had  gathered
together  from  all  parts.  Our  Army  then  marched  with
all  diligence,  in  such  sort  as  certayne  Scouts  which  were
two  thousand  Horse,  had  newes  of  the  Armie  of  Calix,
the  which  came  forwards  directly  towards  us,  whereof  they
caused  the  Emperour  to  be  certified  speedily,  who  sent
thither  two  thousand  Horses  more,  to  the  end  they  should
keepe  the  passage  of  a  River  called  Brore,  by  the  which
our  victuals  were  conveyed  unto  the  Armie,  and  also  for
to  winne  alwayes  time,  the  Prince  knowing  right  well
that  the  motions  of  Civill  Warres  bee  furious  at  the
beginning,  and  that  it  is  the  best  to  resist  them  slowly,
drawing  them  alwayes  out  at  length  if  it  be  possible.
For  the  people  in  the  end  acknowledging  their  faults,
their  meanes  and  money  fayling  them,  and  oftentimes
victuals  also.  On  the  contrary  side  in  a  Royall  Army
none  of  all  this  doth  happen,  where  all  things  are  favour-
able, and  the  Souldiers  well  disciplined,  obedience  and
order  beeing  wisely  observed.  Then  had  the  Emperour
the  guiding  of  his  owne  purposes,  for  he  had  received
commandement  from  the  Emperour  his  Uncle,  to  hazard
therein  all  for  all,  delivering  up  into  his  hands  the  safegard
of  his  life  and  estate,  that  he  might  thereby  end  his  dayes  in
peace,  willing  him  likewise  to  punish  this  arrogant  fellow
and  his  partakers.  By  this  meanes  came  forces  from  all
parts  unto  Tamerlan  ;  but  on  the  contrary  part,  the
Enemies  Army  was  then  in  his  chiefest  force,  and  began
to  feele  the  want  of  victuals.

412

ALHACEN THE ARAB

Calix  was  of  the  age  of  fortie,  he  was  a  Captayne  re-
nowmed  with  the  great  Cham,  hee  was  one  of  the  chiefest
in  dignitie  and  place,  and  they  had  alwayes  respected  him
within  Tartarie  as  a  person  most  worthy  of  the  Empire,  if
the  glory  of  Tamerlan,  and  his  reputation  had  not  so  far
excelled.  The  Armies  began  to  be  viewed  the  one  of  the
other  about  eight  of  the  clock  in  the  morning,  where  there
were  very  many  skirmishes  before  they  came  unto  the
mayne  Battayle  (according  to  the  fights  of  these  Nations)
it  was  a  great  Plaine  wherein  they  met  at  that  time,  with
like  advantage  on  eyther  part  ;  Odmar  led  the  Avant-
gard,  wherein  there  was  fortie  thousand  Horse,  and  three-
score thousand  Foot-men  ;  he  made  three  Squadrons,
whereof  hee  set  forward  one  before  him  that  began  the
Battayle.  Tamerlan  marched  in  the  same  order,  but  his
Squadrons  were  much  stronger,  the  Foot-men  both  of  the
Avantgard  and  of  the  Battayle  were  on  the  right  and  left
wings.  Tamerlan  had  drawne  out  sixe  thousand  Parthian
Horse,  and  two  thousand  Tartarian  for  the  Arier-ward,
and  had  committed  the  charge  thereof  unto  a  faithfull
Servant  of  his  called  Axalla  (a  Genuois  borne)  a  man  of  Axalla.
great  judgement,  his  understanding  being  good  and  quicke,
and  a  Captayne  in  great  estimation  amongst  the  Souldiers,
although  hee  worshipped  God  in  another  manner  than
wee  did,  and  was  a  Christian.  And  hee  had  many  of  Many
them  with  him,  whom  he  caused  to  come  from  the  nsttans-
Georgians,  and  from  Pont  Euxin,  who  fought  with  great
agilitie  ;  this  day  did  hee  shew  his  great  fidelitie  and
courage  unto  his  Prince.  Calix  on  the  other  side,  who
was  a  well  spoken  man,  was  encouraging  his  Souldiers  to
favour  his  fortune,  and  the  libertie  of  his  Nation  :  he  had
divided  his  troupes  into  three  mayne  Battayles  onely,  his
Foot-men  upon  the  right  hand,  his  owne  person  was  in
the  middest  of  the  mayne  Battayle,  with  many  Foot-men
which  compassed  him  round  about  (according  as  wee  use
to  fight.)  In  the  end,  valiantly  fighting,  he  fell  into  [m.  i.  145.]
Axallas  hands,  which  with  one  voyce  he  proclaymed
through  all  his  Campe,  which  overthrew  the  courage  of

413

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Calix  taken
prisoner  by
Axalla.
Calix
beheaded.

all  his  Souldiers.  Hee  was  kept  untill  the  next  day,  and
was  judged  by  all  the  Counsell  worthy  of  punishment :
whereupon  Tamerlan  caused  his  head  to  bee  smitten  off,
the  which  hee  sent  to  bee  presented  unto  the  Inhabitants
of  Cambalu :  he  caused  the  like  to  be  done  unto  all  the
chiefe  Leaders,  not  for  crueltie,  but  for  necessitie,  knowing
very  well,  that  the  meanes  to  cut  off  the  Foot  of  civill
warres,  is  to  punish  the  Heads  of  the  same,  for  they
be  Hydras  which  grow  up  too  fast.

S- II-

Cataio,  Cambalu  ;  Tamerlans  expedition  into
China,  entring  the  Wall,  conquering  the  King,
and  disposing  of  the  Countrey,  and  returne
to  Cataio.

Fter  this  the  Armie  marched  into  the  Kingdome
of  Cataio,  a  Countrey  rich  in  grasse,  and  in  all
kinds  of  pastures,  abounding  with  great  quantitie
of  Beasts,  and  People,  which  knew  not  what  warre  meant.
The  Prince  gave  commandement  that  these  people  should
not  be  accounted  as  Enemies,  but  his  good  Subjects,  that
hee  would  use  all  the  Cities  well,  as  Cangi,  Sochgi,
Gonzae,  Tagni,  Togara,  Congu,  which  had  revolted,
and  were  come  to  sue  for  pardon  at  his  hands,  in
humbling  themselves  before  him  ;  the  which  he  granted
unto  them,  enjoyning  them  onely  to  provide  sufficient
victuals  for  his  Armie :  which  was  of  no  small  im-
portance for  the  appeasing  of  others,  who  had  put  all
their  hope  in  extremitie,  which  is  in  losing  their  owne
lives  to  make  others  doe  the  like :  and  especially  the
Inhabitants  of  Cambalu  had  taken  this  resolution :  but
being  informed  of  the  Emperours  clemency,  changed
their  opinions.  In  the  meane  while  our  Armie  daily
approched,  and  at  such  time  as  we  came  neerest,  the
more  did  the  feare  of  all  the  Citie  increase,  insomuch
as  the  Prince  was  advertised  daily  from  those  which
favoured his side, of  all things within the Citie, and

414

ALHACEN THE ARAB

he  was  assured  that  every  one  determined  to  obey  the

Conqueror,  and  to  doe  whatsoever  he  commanded. The

which being knowne unto the Prince, he left all his

Armie  at Gonsa,  and himselfe  went directly unto the

Citie  of  Cambalu,  where  all  things  were  made  quiet,  by

the meanes of thirtie thousand Souldiers, being the  The  ordinark

ordinarie  Garrison,  whom  hee caused  to  enter  thereinto  Garrison  at

before  him,  and  two houres  after  entred  into  the  same  Cambalu  °f

himselfe, being received with great magnificence, not  Sou/dien

yeelding  as  yet  to  pronounce  the  word  of  pardon,  referring

all unto  the  Emperour,  and  to  the ordinarie course  of

Justice. He stayed for the returne of one of his

Favourites,  whom he had  sent unto  the Emperour,  to

carry him newes of  the victorie, and of  the death of

Calix, and that the chiefe of this Faction remayned

prisoners with him ; also to know what Justice the

Emperour would appoint to bee inflicted on those

Citizens,  which  were  the  first  beginners  of  the  revolt  of

this  Citie :  for  the  Prince  being  desirous  to  be  esteemed

mercifull,  and  to  win  love  within  this  great  Citie,  would

not  execute  justice of  himselfe,  nor  in  his  owne name,

but  by  the  Emperour  his  Uncle,  whom  hee  did  gratifie

herein,  leaving  the  authoritie  wholly  unto  himselfe,  and

by  this  meanes  hee  was  not  esteemed  cruell. Thus  the

Prince  after  hee  had  remayned  here  eight  dayes,  departed.

He  was not  many  dayes  journey  from the  Citie  before

he  received  tydings,  how  the  great  Cham  his  Uncle,  willed

that  justice should bee  executed on them which were

the  first  Moovers  of  this  revolt ;  the  which  was  executed

accordingly in the  name  of  the  Emperour, and  by his

speciall  ministers ;  in  such  sort,  that  as  the  people  accused

the  crueltie  of  the  Emperour,  they  commended  the  mercy

of  Tamerlan. Thus  was  this  warre  brought  unto  an  end,  Tamer/an

to  the  great  honour  and  reputation  of  Tamerlan.  wekommed

As  soone  as  our  Prince  was  returned  unto  his  Army  unt0  his
where  hee  found  Odmar,  who  there  attended  his  comming, 1™iey™lth
hee  was  received  of  his  Souldiers,  and  with  a  loud  voyce  strange
called by  all his  Captaines and Souldiers  ; Most  great  acclamation.

4i5

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Emperour  and  most  victorious,  as  they  are  accustomed
to  doe  amongst  the  Tartarians.  The  Prince  after  he  had
long  discoursed  with  his  Captaines  both  of  the  beautie
and  greatnesse  of  the  Citie  of  Cambalu,  hee  arrived  at
his  Tent,  where  after  hee  had  declared  unto  Odmar  in
what  sort  all  things  had  passed  at  Cambalu  :  he  asked
his  advice,  whether  hee  should  goe  and  visit  the  Emperour
his  Uncle.  Odmar  well  perceived  that  the  Prince  desired
it,  and  called  unto  his  remembrance  the  honour  which
hee  had  received  when  hee  was  at  Quinzai,  and  that  hee
would  have  beene  very  willing  to  spend  the  Winter  with
the  Empresse,  staying  for  the  Spring  for  to  returne  unto
the  enterprise  of  China,  with  a  long  speech  disswaded
him.  The  Emperour  answered  him,  that  he  had  ever
knowne  his  fidelitie  and  love,  and  that  the  cause  of  his
sadnesse  was,  for  that  hee  did  not  find  in  himselfe  abilitie
to  recompence  the  same :  and  that  when  he  thought  to
give  himselfe  some  ease,  then  was  the  time  hee  must
in  stead  of  the  delicacies  and  pleasures  of  Quinzay,  make
the  Desarts  of  the  Cipribit  the  resting  place  from  the
travailes  of  his  new  victorie :  that  it  was  ended,  and  his
purposes  determined :  I  have  also  heard  the  Prince  say,
that  Odmar  did  not  speak  unto  him  like  an  earthly  but
divine  man,  and  that  he  verily  beleeved  that  God  by
his  meanes  did  call  him  back  from  some  misse-hap  which
would  have  light  upon  him,  to  make  his  glorie  increase
[III.  i.  146.]  the  more.  Now,  the  rumour  was  alreadie  spread  over
all,  that  the  Princes  determination  was  to  goe  and  visit
the  Emperour  his  Uncle,  the  which  tickled  every  man
with  desire  to  returne  into  his  Countrey,  hoping  to  injoy
the  sweetnesse  of  his  native  soyle.  When  as  commande-
ment  was  given  for  a  generall  review  of  the  whole  Armie :
Tamerlan  his  where  the  Emperour  spake  unto  his  Souldiers  in  this
Oration  unto  manner :  Wee  have  begunne  (my  faithfull  Souldiers)  an
his  Souldiers  enterprise  to  goe  anc[  assault  the  King  of  China,  who
forward  hath  of  late  repulsed  even  beyond  the  Mountaynes  the

against  the Tartarian name ; but  wee  were hindered to our great
KingofChina.  griefe  by  the  foolish  rashnesse  of  Calix,  and  were  driven

416

ALHACEN THE ARAB

to  turne  the  bridle  for  to  punish  him,  wherein  you  have
all  assisted  mee.  It  grieveth  mee  that  I  cannot  as  well
bragge  of  the  fresh  spoyles  of  a  stranger,  as  I  may  vaunt
(by  the  meanes  of  your  weapons)  of  those  our  unfaithfull
Citizens ;  and  in  times  past  with  your  owne  selves  making
tryall  of  my  first  Armes  against  the  boldnesse  of  the  fierce
Moscovite,  although  for  this  last  civill  victorie  I  am
further  indebted  unto  you,  for  your  greater  endevour,
and  the  hazarding  of  your  persons  being  much  greater,
so  were  they  our  owne  people,  who  would  not  acknow-
ledge us,  whereof  I  cannot  speake  without  shedding  of
tears,  desiring  rather  to  burie  such  a  victorie,  what  glorie
and  honour  soever  wee  have  gotten  thereby.  Neither
doe  I  recount  these  things  unto  you,  but  for  to  manifest
that  I  forget  not  your  faithfulnesse,  and  the  great  travaile
you  have  endured  with  mee.  Wee  must  not  therefore
bee  wearie,  but  must  turne  our  weapons  against  those
which  thinke  that  wee  are  greatly  troubled,  whereas  wee
are  victorious.  Wee  have  left  our  Companions,  who
have  temporized  to  heare  the  event  and  successe  of  our
irTaires,  all  our  munitions  bee  there ;  wee  must  in  that
place  (my  Souldiers  and  friendly  Followers)  passe  over
the  rest  of  Winter ;  our  Companions  looke  for  us.  The
iLnemie  is  secure  and  looketh  not  for  us  at  this  season
3f  the  yeere :  for  hee  perceiveth  that  our  Armie  which
s  there  is  not  sufficient  for  offence,  but  onely  for  defence.
You  shall  receive  double  pay,  the  better  to  furnish  you
igainst  the  injurie  of  cold  :  and  as  wee  shall  be  clothed
with  double  garments,  I  hope  wee  shall  bee  also  apparelled
with  double  glorie.  Let  us  march  on  merrily,  I  my  selfe
will  goe  with  you,  and  bee  companion  of  your  glorie.
rafter  hee  had  thus  spoken  unto  his  Souldiers,  they  all
:ryed ;  One  God  in  Heaven,  and  one  Emperour  on  the  Thecrieofthe
larth :  and  bowing  downe  all  their  heads  in  token  of  Souldiers  upon
lumilitie,  they  shewed  how  agreeable  they  were  to  obey  Jr  ™Permr*
:hat  which  he  commanded.

Thus every one  returned  into  his  Tent,  where they
ibode  yet  eight  dayes  more. The  Prince  sent  back  againe

XI  417  2D

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Zamai  unto  Sachetay  with  some  five  and  twentie  thousand
Horse,  and  fiftie  thousand  Foot-men,  for  the  safetie  of
his  estate  in  those  parts.  Thus  after  prayers  were  said,
all  the  Armie  being  assembled  together  in  the  presence
of  the  Prince  (according  to  the  custome  of  our  Emperours)
our  Armie  began  to  march  forward.  Hee  forgat  not
likewise  to  dispatch  one  unto  the  Emperour  his  Uncle,
to  give  him  understanding  of  all  this  resolution,  the  which
hee  very  well  liked  of.  The  Prince  by  the  same  Mes-
senger did  beseech  him,  to  send  unto  him  in  the  Spring
of  the  yeere  some  fiftie  thousand  men  to  repayre  his
A  wall  Armie,  and  certayne  money  also  for  the  payment  of  his

bullied  by  the  men  of  Warre,  which  hee  granted  him. Moreover,  the

King  of  conducting  of  good  store  of  warlike  munition,  and  plentie

China,  fortie c • . i °  r *.  c ^i  •  •

leagues  Ion? °*  vlctuals  r°r  to  renew  ours:  for  this  warre  was  princi-

Perhaps  this  pally  enterprised  for  the  profit  and  greatnesse  of  the
was  not  the  Tartarians,  and  for  the  importance  which  the  losse  of  the
wdentwaU,  Lordships  of  Paguin  and  Quifu  was  unto  them,  whereby
Chinois  write  t^le  King  °^  China  had  greatly  strengthened  and  assured
but  some  other  his  estate,  in  so  much  as  hee  might  at  his  pleasure  enter
betwixt  upon  the  Tartarians,  and  the  Tartarians  could  not  enter-

Cathay  and  prise  against  him  without  great  forces,  for  that  hee  had
Marm  which  cause^  a  wall  to  bee  made  betweene  the  spaces  of  the
the  Tartars  Mountaynes,  which  was  fortie  leagues  long,  so  as  they
having  gotten  were  defended  hereby  from  the  ordinarie  incursions,  the
in  Polos  dayes,  which  continually  did  greatly  enrich  them,  because  they

mig soone DroUprht much Cattell through the same, wherein thel
after  lose,  and  6  _, 7" 3  &  >  m m

the  Chinois Countrey  or  China  doth  greatly  abound, by  reason  it  is

recover;  the situated  in  a  temperate  ay  re,  being  neither  too  hot  nor

Tartarians cold. This  was  the  cause  that  made  the  Emperour  his

sti  0  ing  Uncle  to  desire  this  warre  :  whom  our  Prince,  according
Quinsay  <5  ....  ,.  .  ri.  .&

some  other to  his  dutie,  would  to  the  uttermost  or  his  power  gratine

parts  of  as  also  his  new  Subjects.

Mangi  or  So  wee  began  to  march,  and  in  thirtie  eight  dayes  wee

rtorhiif StkS  arrived  at  Cipribit,  the  Armie  having  found  great  dis
wholly  true)  commodities :  there  had  wee  newes  of  Calibes,  who  was
seem'es  to  very  glad  to  understand  how  the  affaires  had  passed  :  hee
import.  come  to  visit  the  Prince,  who  shewed  unto  him  a  very

418

ALHACEN THE ARAB

^ood  countenance,  and  gave  him  particular  understanding
of  his  determination,  and  understood  at  large  of  Calibes,
all  that  had  passed  within  the  Kingdome  of  China.  The
next  day  the  Prince  mounted  on  horse-back,  and  came
unto  Pazanfou,  where  the  forces  commanded  by  Calibes
were  at  that  present,  the  which  had  often  fought  with  and
tryed  the  forces  of  the  Chinois :  but  found  them  much
inferiour  unto  their  owne.  The  Emperour  caused  a
generall  review  to  bee  made  of  all  the  forces  which  were
under  Calibes,  and  after  he  beheld  the  countenances  of
these  Souldiers  throughout  all  their  rankes,  he  caused
them  to  muster,  and  to  receive  money,  every  one  crying,
God  save  the  victorious  and  invincible  Emperour,  accord-
ing to  their  custome.

The  Prince  of  Thanais  (who  commanded  the  Armie  in  The  Prince  of
Calibes absence, going to meet Tamerlan) with great  Thanais

diligence  had marked  the  Wall, and  the  places  by the  f^*f  At
i-ii  -i  i r  i  £  Lord  of  the

which  nee  might  enter by  force,  and  sent  many  opyes  Mountains  to

into  the  Country  of  China,  by  certayne  little  wayes  that  doe  the

were within the Mountaynes, who advertised him of  Emperor

all. Hee  had  also  gayned  through  his  courtesie  a  Lord  sermce-

of  the  same  Mountaynes  (called  the  Lord  of  Vauchefu)  Vauchefu.

who  ruled  a  great  Countrey  with  whom  he  had  so  well  [HI.  i.  147.]

profited, that  he made  him desirous  of  a  new  Master,

and  to submit himselfe unto the  Emperour, receiving

daily great discommoditie by the warres which the

Tartarians and Chinois made : so as he comming to

visit the Prince of  Thanais, hee assured him of his

desire to doe the Prince service, and to helpe him

in the warre against the Chinois, the which the

Prince of  Thanais had wisely  concealed from Calibes.

But  as soone as the Prince was arrived, he  imparted

the  same  unto  him,  the  which  made  Tamerlan  desirous

to  have  some  speech  with  him,  so  that  as  soone  as  the

Prince  had  received  commandement  from  the  Emperour,

hee  sent  unto  Vauchefu  to  advertise  him  of  the  Princes

arrivall, and of the commandement which hee had

received : whereof  the  other  was  very  glad,  and having

419

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

appointed  a  day,  the  Prince  tooke  his  journey  (without
stirring  of  the  Armie)  into  the  campe  of  the  Prince  of
Thanais,  which  was  neere  unto  the  River  of  Languenne,
whither  hee  had  caused  this  foresaid  Lord  to  come,  who
met  him  there.

Then  the  Prince  after  he  had  heaped  upon  him  gifts

of  faire Horses, rich Furres, and other rare things,

he  willed  him to utter  that  which  he  had  to  say  unto

The  speech  of  him. This  Lord  spake  then  in  this  manner :  Know  my

UrTuntl^  L°rd' that lt is but l0SSe °f  tlme t0 thinke> that with
Tamer/an. your Armes you should bee able to  force the Wall,

which the Chinois have  built against  the  incursions  of

your  subjects,  the  Defendants  have  too  much  advantage

therein. I doubt  not  of  your  Souldiers  stoutnesse  and

of  their courage, I know you have conquered many

Nations  with  them,  and  that  whatsoever  you command

them, they will die or doe the same. I know you

have  great  and  wise  Captaines  with  you,  that  your  Person

is onely  of  all  the  World  worthy  to command them  :

but all  this  will bee  but in  vaine against the  Wall  of

the  Chinois,  where  I  assure  you  there  are  fiftie  thousand

men to keepe it,  and you cannot  stay  there  so  short

a  time,  but  there  will  come  thither  fiftie  thousand  more,

led by the Xianxi who hath such a commandement.

The  King of  China will himselfe march  forward  also,

who  will  give  you battell with two hundred thousand

Horse  and  as  many  Footmen. After  you  have  fought,

I  beleeve  that  the  fortune  and  valour  of  your  men  may

obtayne the victorie, the which will cost you deare :

but for to show unto you how  much the reputation

and  mildnesse  of  your  men  hath  bound  mee  unto  them,  I

will show  you a meanes by the  which you  may  cause

fiftie thousand men to enter into the Kingdome of

China, whom I my selfe will  conduct; and  they  shall

bee  on  them  which  keepe  the  Wall,  in  a  manner  as  soone

as  they  shall  perceive  it. In  the  meane  time  you  shall

cause  your  men  to  goe  unto  a  place  that  I  will  tell  you,

which  will bee  very discommodious unto the Chinois,

420

ALHACEN THE ARAB

by reason of  a  Mountayne over against them, which
you  must  cause  them  to  winne :  for  I  assure  my  selfe,
that when they shall perceive your Souldiers to bee
passed,  they  will  lose  their  courage,  and  you  may  easily
winne  the passage for to favour those men of  yours
which shall bee passed over with mee. And for to
shew  unto  you  the  afFection  and  fidelitie  of  that  I  speake,
I will deliver into your  hands  an  onely  Sonne  I  have,
and two  little Daughters with my Wife : I have  also
I  one  Brother,  who  I  am  assured  will  follow  mee  to  doe
you  service. The  Prince  having  heard  this  Lord  speake,
received  great  joy  thereof,  hoping  that  his  affaires  should
!  happily succeede, and this hee kept very secret, for
even  the Prince of  Thanais  knew  not  the  meanes  that
this  Lord  had,  seeing  there  was  onely  present  the  Prince
and  an  Interpreter,  and  the  Prince after hee  had thus
J  spoken unto him, gratifying him with all hee could
j  possibly,  this Lord  retyred  himselfe, accompanyed with
the  Prince  of  Thanais,  who  conducted  him  back  againe
with  all  the  honour  that  might  bee. So  the  Emperour
returned from thence into his quarter, and the next
I  day after hee had imparted the whole unto Odmar,
and  heard  Calibes  concerning  that  which  hee  had  learned
of  the  departing  of  the  King  of  China,  and  of  his  pre-
paration, which was great. This enterprise seeming
1  hard unto him,  after due reverence  yeelded unto  the
i  Prince, hee spake unto him in this manner : Know  Calibes
j  my  Lord,  that  I am your  Slave for  to  obey  you  :  but  Oration  unto
seeing  you require mee to  give  you  an account  of  all  mlnce ,
|  that  I  know  of  the  estate  of  the  Kingdome  of  China,  for
I  that  I  have  remayned  these  six  moneths  upon  the  borders
|  by your commandement, to hinder  them  from  passing
the same, whereby they might hurt  your enterprises,
I can  affirme  unto  you,  that the King  of  China,  who
raigneth  at  this  present,  is  of  great  reputation,  and  hath
increased the limits of his Kingdome more then  any
of  his Predecessors. His strength consisteth in this
Wall  opposed  against  us,  the  which  hee  hath  caused  to

421

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

bee  made  by  reason  of  the  ordinarie  roades  of  our
Nation.  I  am  of  opinion,  that  there  bee  betweene  fiftie
and  threescore  thousand  men  at  the  guard  of  that  Wall,
men  for  the  most  part  trayned  up  in  the  Garrisons  of
the  King  of  China,  and  his  best  Souldiers,  and  I  know
no  good  meanes  to  force  this  Wall  without  great  hazard
and  much  losse  of  your  men.  I  have  understood,  that  I
The  Lake  towards  the  Lake  Hogeen,  you  may  finde  more  easie  I
Hogeen.  entrance  into  the  Kingdome  :  after  every  one  had  declared  !

his opinion, hee said ; that hee hoped  the  great  God
(the  Unitie,  of  whom  hee  would  maintayne  against  such  I
Idolaters)  and  his  just  right  should  answere  the  reasons  \
which  doe  contradict  his  purpose,  and  the  valiant  arme  I
of  his  Souldiers  shall  quite  overthrow  whatsoever  opposeth  !
it  selfe  against  the  same ;  and  concealed  from  his  Souldiers
that  which  hee  held  as  assured  to  execute  it,  to  the  end,  j
the honour of  a happy conducting might be  ascribed
unto  him  onely.

Now, our Prince having satisfied every one  of  the

Kings  and  Lords  that  did  accompany  him,  hee  appointed

the  meeting place for his Armie  to  bee  at  a  certayne

[III.  i.  148.]  place,  where  hee  meant  to  choose  fiftie  thousand  fighting

men, and deliver them unto the commandement of

the  Prince  of  Thanais,  unto  whom  he  joyned  the  Lord

Axalla  a  Genuois  (for  that  hee  knew  him  to  bee  discreete)

for  to  accompanie  him,  commanding  him  to  give  credite

unto him, for his experience and fidelitie. The day

appointed  being  come,  the  Lord with  his  brother  came

to the  Emperor, having viewed the  place againe, and

found  it  to  bee  forceable  and  fit  to  passe,  assuring  the

Quaguifou. prince  once  againe  of  the  happy  successe  of  their  enter-

men  sent  into prise, and  the  Prince beeing assembled with them to

China  by  a conferre together,  resolved in the end,  that his  person

secret  passage,  with  all  the  army  should  approach  unto  the  walles  directly

under  the oyer  agamst  Quaguifou,  in which  meane  space  the  fiftie

Prince  of thousand  men should march forwards unto the place

Thanais  and appointed,  and  where they  were  assured  to  passe,  con-

Axalla.  ducted by  the Chinois Lord, under  the  charge  of  the

422

ALHACEN THE ARAB

Prince  of  Thanais  and  Axalla. The  Emperour having

not failed to deliver unto them the  best  souldiers  of

his  armie,  and  having  set  downe  the  order  by  them  to

bee observed, hee  willed that the Lord Axalla  should

leade  twentie  thousand  of  them,  and should  march  the

first, the rest led by the Prince of  Thanais, and  that

every one should have one of  those Lords to  guide

them, that by their meanes the  enterprise might bee

more  safely  directed. So having marched ten  leagues,

they arrived at the passage, the which was  won, not

finding  any  man  there  to  resist  them  :  and  having  taken

a light repast, they beganne to march forward other  A  secret  way

ten  leagues  which  yet  remained,  where  the  Chinois  were,  foun* tnt0

who  suspected  no  such  thing,  having  onely  an  eye  unto t?!a'  $***

them which  marched  for  to  force  their  walles,  assuring  momta'lne

themselves  to  have  the  mastry,  considering  their  advan-  Lord.

tage.

But  it  fell  out  much  otherwise,  for  even  at  the  very
same  time  the  Chinois  did  perceive  the  Princes  armie  to
approach unto their wall, as soone did they discry
Axalla  with  twenty  thousand  men,  who  advanced  forward
being followed by the Prince of  Thanais  with  thirtie
thousand  souldiers,  chosen  out  of  the  whole  army,  who
without  any  communication  set  upon  the  Chinois,  which
came  presently  unto  them,  having  left  a  certaine  number
of  their Campe for the guard of  the wall : but they
were presently won by the footmen led this day  by
Odmar, who passed over so as the Chinois  were cut  Axalla  over-
off  betweene our Armies. When Axalla began the  threw  the
battaile,  he  overthrew  them  in  a  manner  all,  the  Prince  of  ^htmt!  that„
Thanais  not  hazarding  himself  therein  : there  was  great  0f  partition.
riches gotten this  day, the  King of  China his Cousin
(whom  he  called  King)  was  taken  prisoner : There  was
a great quantity of gold amongst them, as well on
their  armes  as  on  their  horse  and  furniture  :  they  shewed
no  great  stoutnesse.

The newes heereof  being come unto the King of
China,  who  at  that  present  time  was  at  Quantou,  brought  Quantiou.

423

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

unto him  great  astonishment,  for  that hee  judged  it  a
thing  that  could  not  possibly  come  to  passe,  you  might
have  seene  every  one  filled  with  fright,  teares  and  cries,
bewailing  the  losse  of  their  friends. The  King  gathering
The  custome  of  together souldiers  from all  parts (as  the  custome  is  of
the  Chinois  in  these people) caused all the  Priestes  and  such  as  had
religion.  ^  charge  0f  h0iy  things  to  come  unto  him,  and  after

exhortations  used,  he  (as  their  head)  commanded  them
to  offer  sacrifice  unto  their  Gods,  of  whom  the  Sunne
is  the  principall  commanding  in  heaven  (whom  they
hold  opinion  to  bee  the  chiefest  cause  of  their  being,
accounting  it  immortall  and  impassible,  moving  it  selfe
onely  for  the  benefit  of  living  creatures)  this  did  hee
command  to  bee  observed  through  out  all  his  Cities,  \
and  the  second  thing  was,  that  every  one  able  to  beare  n
armes  should  mount  on  horsebacke,  and  come  unto  t(
the  King  at  Paguinfou,  whither  hee  doubted  that  we  r
would  go,  because  it  was  one  of  the  neerest  townes
upon  the  borders.

I  have  forgotten to  declare  that  this  Lord  who  had

the charge to conduct fiftie thousand men unto the

frontiers,  at such time as they  which were  there  had

TheEmperour  need thereof,  was soone in a  readinesse,  and  came to

wonnethewds  oppose  himselfe  against  the  Princes  Armie  which  entred,

of  China. anj  Demg  skilfull  in  the  wayes  of  the  countrey,  troubled

much  the Armie :  for  a  great  number  of  his  men  were

on  horsebacke. The  Prince  determined  to  beate  downe

all  the  wals,  the  better  to  assure  his  returne,  as  also  all

the fortresses  which  were there upon  all the passages,

all  of  them  having  yeelded  themselves  after  his  victorie,

shewing  himselfe  very  courteous  unto  the  people  of  these

The  mountain  mountaines,  he  gave  unto  this  Lord  a  small  portion  of  land,

Lord  wherein there be seven or eight  good townes,  Archii,

rewarded Ymulii,  Faliquien,  Fulii,  Cohensen,  Qualii,  Pulii  Quianlu,

™L™fi/ wno  came  and  delivered  up  their  keyes  unto  him,  being
government.  .  r  / m  &

neighbours  unto  this  Lord,  and  gave  him  the  govern-
ment of  the  frontier  province  of  Xianxii,  shewing  himselfe
to  be  a  Prince  of  his  word,  and  acknowledging  the  notable

424

ALHACEN THE ARAB

services  the  which  this  Lord  had  done  him. He  referred

he  honouring  of  his  brother untill he  had meanes to

loe  the  same : the  Prince  had  received  newes,  how  that

he King of China assembled his forces  & marched

brwards, and that he was there in his  owne  person,

x that he strengthened also his Cities which are

ufficiently  fortified,  and  upon these  doubts  hee  thought

jood  to  have  the  advice  of  his  Captaines,  and  after  sundry

jpinions,  his  resolution  was,  to  leave  nothing  behind  him,

nd  to  assault  some  famous  Citie,  and  take  it,  by  meanes

thereof  he  may  nourish  his  Armie,  and  secondarily  call

he enemie unto battell. The which the conqueror

hould  alwaies  seeke,  &  the  defender  the  latest he  can

lazard  the  same. For  that  it  is  a  very  doubtfull  thing  to

ommit  themselves  unto  a  battell,  his  dutie  being  rather  A  good

o  delay, undermining  the  conqueror  by  length  and  by  advertisement

rearinesse, and light skirmishes,  then  to  fight in open  for  Generals-

eld.

It  was  concluded,  and  the  advice  of  every  one  was,  to  [HI.  i.  149.]
onquer the Countrey by little  and little, so  as  their
nterprise  was to  draw directly  unto  Paguinfou, which
s it was a great Citie, and  one  of  the  chiefest,  so  is
:  also  strongly  fortified,  and  well  replenished  with  people.

Then  he  dispatched Odmar  with  fourteene  thousand
lorse, to advance forward  and  summon the same, as
Dr  to  hinder  victuals  from  being  convayed  thereinto  out
f  the  champaine  Countrey  :  to  the  end  that  the  Cattell
emayning  in  the  fields,  should  be  a  meanes  to  maintayne
nd  nourish  his  Armie. I  had  forgotten  to  tell  you,  that
or the acknowledging  of  the  Lord  Axalla  his  services,  Axalla  made
tie Prince had made him Captaine  generall  of  all  his  Captaine
'oot-men,  which  was  one  of  the  principall  honours  of  the  &"e™Uof  al1
irmie. Hee  caused  the  said  Lord  Axalla  to  march  after
)dmar, with all the Foot-men, which  was very neere
hundred  and  fifty  thousand  men,  well  trayned  up  in  the
'arres,  and  good  expert  fighters. He  marched  himselfe
nmediatly after with all his Horsemen, Artilleries,  Paguinfou
Engines, and other munitions belonging unto warre,  besieged.

425

Note  these
changes  of
state  betwixt
the  Tartars
and  Chinois.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

directly  unto  Paguinfou. Odmar  did  ride  twentie  French
leagues  this  day,  so  as  he  arrived  there  contrary  to  their  \\
expectation, looking rather for the  King then for the  h;
Enemie,  and  having  taken  much  Cattell,  wherewith the  J
Countrey  greatly  aboundeth,  he  pitched  his  Tents,  leaving
the  Citie  betweene  him  and  us,  and  stayed  for  his  footmen,
who  marched  forwards  in  the  meane  space,  sending  con-
tinually unto  the  warre,  for  to  wearie  the  Enemie. This
endured  three or foure dayes, untill our  footmen led
by  this  brave  Christian  Genuois,  shewed  themselves  in  thel
Playne  of  Paguinfou. Then  the  Citie  was  summoned  to
yeeld  obedience  unto  the  Emperour,  or  else  they  shouldi
receive  the  Law  of  the  Conquerour. They  made  answere,
that  they  were  determined  to  live  and  die  in  the  service
of  their  Prince.

Now  you  must  understand  that  it  was  fortie  yeeres,  or
thereabouts,  since  the  Father  of  the  King  which  raigneth
at  this  present  over  the  Chinois,  had  conquered  it  from
the Empire of  the Tartarians,  and  having driven out
all  the  Inhabitants,  they  had  planted  therein  new  Colonies,!
so  thorowly,  that  there  were  but  few  of  the  first  remem-|
brance, but  only they of  the  flat  Countrey,  and  small!
walled Townes, who  came from  all  parts  and brought
their  Keyes,  most  willingly  submitting  themselves  unto
the obedience of the Prince : so as there  was great
abundance  of  victuals  within  our  Armie ;  and  if  wee  had
beene  within  our  owne  Countrey,  there  could  not  have
come  greater  store ;  a  thing  which  made  our  Prince  hope
for  a  happie  successe,  there  being  no  other  difficulty  which! ;
for  the  most  part  can  overthrow  a  great  Armie  as  oursj  a
was, and withdraw them from their enterprise. Andi  a
thus  the  Citie  of  Paguinfou  is  besieged,  and  our  footmen  t
camped  round  about  within  an  Arrowes  shot  of  the  walls.  t
They  within  the  Citie  did  use  great  endevour  for  their  5
defence,  and  our  Prince  omitted  nothing  for  their  offence.  s

Axalla  having  viewed  a  great  and  strong  Suburbe,  ,
which  was  in  length  almost  halfe  a  league,  supposed  that  ,
those of  the  Citie  kept  no  watch  there :  that  this  must

426

ALHACEN THE ARAB

ineeds  bee,  for  that  they  would  not  make  him  obstinate ;

■  he had a determination to winne  it  in  the night, and

i|having  imparted  it  unto  the  Prince,  upon  the  first  watch

llall  his  men  were  ready,  all  of  them  having  made  provision

I  of  Ladders, and of  such things as are necessary  for

i  winning  thereof  with  hand-blowes,  and  having  assaulted

it on sundry parts, after the fight had  continued two

houres,  Axalla remayned the Conquerour, and cut in  A  Sreat

Ipieces  eight  thousand  men  at  the  least  which  were  within ur  e,
r.  D  .  ,  ,  r  wonne  by

I  the same: the spoyle was great, there were  many  or  AXalla  in  the

Axalla  his men  slayne of one  side,  which  was  that  by  night.

I  the  which  they  doubted  to  be  assaulted. But  on  the  other

ilside,  by  the  which  it  was  taken,  there  was  scarce  any  one

:|slayne. The  taking  of  this  Suburbe  did  greatly  astonish

;those  of  the  Citie,  who  had  marked  the  lustinesse  of  our

l|men, and beganne  to enter  into  doubt  of  their  safety,

which unto this day they accounted as most assured.

|  Now  you  must  understand  that  the  situation  of  the  Citie  The  situation

was of  hard accesse, being seated upon  a  Playne,  the  of  the  Citie  of

I  which  was  environed  round  about  with  Mountaines,  one  FaSmnJ0U-

i  of  them  onely  approaching  the  Citie,  which  overlooked  it

ion  front  upon  the  North  side,  where  was  a  Valley  by  the

'which  they  passed,  and  there  did  runne  a  River  :  on  this

:  side  was  the  Suburbe  situated  which  had  been  taken,  so  as

the  meanes  to  succour  the  Citie  was  stopped,  our  Souldiers

i  keeping  the  passages  of  these  Mountaines,  the  which  were

i  in the old time the borders of the Kingdome : for

\  Paguinfou  was  once  governed  by  the  Tartarians,  which  kept

!  it  for  a  defence  against  the  Chinois,  but  had  lost  the  same,

and  these  Mountaines  were  the  limits  of  China  against  the

aforesaid Tartarians, who governed Paguinfou at that

time, so as  these  Mountaines  were  of  hard  accesse,  and

there remayned no other way but  on  the  side  of  the

Suburbe, the  which  a River compasseth  about,  running

all  along  the  side  of  a  bordering Mountaine,  upon  the

which wee  caused  many bridges  to  be  built,  for  to  have

thereby  a  way  for  to  succour  our  Souldiers,  which  kept

the  passages  of  the  Mountaines  on  the  enemies  side.

427

The  siege  of
Paguinfou.

[III.  i.. 1 50.]

The  Citie  of
Paguinfou
yeelded  unto
Tamerlan
upon  the  death
of  their
Governour.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

In  this  meane  time  the  King  of  Chinaes  Armie
approached  which  was  very  great,  as  they  brought  us
word  daily,  the  Prince  determining  to  goe  in  person  and
meet  with  the  Enemie,  accompanied  with  his  principall
Hors-men,  and  to  leave  the  greatest  part  of  his  Foot-men
at  the  siege,  whereunto  he  had  a  great  desire,  omitting
nothing  that  might  wearie  the  besieged,  who  defended
themselves  couragiously.  So  the  Prince  beganne  to  batter,
causing  his  Engines  to  approach  ;  as  Rammes,  and  other
munitions :  insomuch  as  the  Citie  was  assaulted  on  two
sides  very  couragiously.  In  the  end  through  the  valour  of
Axalla,  who  gave  an  assault  with  twenty  thousand  of  his
best  Souldiers,  he  wonne  the  wall,  and  lodged  there,  the
Prince  having  so  commanded  him  to  doe,  to  stop  the  heat
of  the  Souldiers  from  going  any  further.  Now  the
Princes  purpose  was  to  compound  for  the  Citie,  and  not
to  force  it,  for  two  reasons.  The  first  was,  for  that  he
feared,  the  Citie  being  great  and  rich,  that  when  the
Souldiers  should  sacke  it,  the  Enemie  who  was  but  thirty
leagues  from  thence,  should  come  upon  them,  and  by  this
meanes  his  Armie  should  be  found  in  disorder,  also  rich
Souldiers  never  serve  well  :  The  other  was,  for  that  hee
would  draw  out  of  that  Citie  which  was  rich  and  wealthy,
those  commodities  which  were  necessary  for  the  sure
accomplishing  of  this  enterprise,  seeing  it  was  necessary
to  have  such  a  Citie  for  to  make  a  Store-house  of  neces-
sary things  for  the  Armie.  Thus  although  the  wall  was
won,  the  Enemies  wanted  not  courage  yet  to  defend
themselves  valiantly,  looking  for  ayde  according  to  the
newes  they  had  received,  that  the  Kings  Armie  marched
forward.  Whilest  these  things  were  in  doing,  one  of  our
Engines  shooting  a  bullet,  slue  the  Governour,  whereupon
they  did  resolve  for  to  yeeld  themselves  unto  the  Princes
mercy,  saving  their  lives,  and  the  Souldiers  enjoying  their
horse  and  weapons.  The  conditions  were  agreed  upon,
and  there  came  out  of  the  Citie  eighteene  thousand
Souldiers,  the  Inhabitants  remayning  in  a  manner  all :
there were therein thirtie thousand Souldiers at the

428

ALHACEN THE ARAB

beginning : the siege continued two moneths. The

lonour  of  taking  the  Citie  and  the  happy  successe  therein

vas attributed unto Axalla, to whom was given the  Axallas

government  of  the  Citie  with  the  Countrey  already  con-  cnoise-

juered. But hee beseeched the Prince that it would

)lease  him  to  bestow  it  upon  some  other,  and  for  himselfe

lee  reserved  the  hope  of  his  Master,  wherein  hee  should

lave  part. This  answere  did  greatly  content  the  Prince,

or  hee  greatly  desired  the  service  of  Axalla. Upon  his

efusall  this charge  was bestowed upon the Prince of

Thanais, with  the  Title of  Vice-roy. Now, as  I  have

ilready told you, our  Prince  after  hee  had  given  such

>rder  as  was  necessary,  and  advertised  his  friends  in  all

)arts,  and  above  all  the  Emperour,  he  marched  forward,

laving contented his Souldiers, and made a generall

nuster  of  his  Armie,  as  well  of  the  horse  as  footmen,  the

vhich  hee  found  to  be  diminished  of  ten  thousand  men

>nely. Now, our Prince  after  he had  solemnely  called  Tamerlan  his

lpon the Immortall, Invincible, and Incomprehensible  kind  of

jod,  and  spent  one  whole  day  in  prayer,  wee  enterprised  ®

lo  goe  on  forward,  and  to  goe  directly  unto  the  Enemie,

ivho  was  at  Sintehu,  with  all  his  owne  forces,  and  of  all  his

Allies. As  soone  as  he  received  newes  that  our  Armie

vas  passed  over  the  River  of  Chulifu,  the  King  of  China  The  King  of

inarched  directly  unto  us  with  great  magnificence  :  there  chtna^ts

.  .  ;  ,  i  j  i  •  • magnificence.

ivas  nothing  to  bee  seene  but  gold  and  precious  stones  in

iiis Armie : hee himselfe was commonly  in  a  Chariot,

ivherein  there  was  such  a  quantitie  of  gold  and  rich  stones,

jhat every part was full of Diamonds, Rubies, and

pearles.

The  King  of  China  was  of  the  age  of  three  and  thirtie

?eeres, who  for  the  most  part  had  beene  brought  up  in

pleasures,  and not  in militarie exercises, nor under  the

)loudie  ensigne  of  Mars  ;  loden  with  Iron,  boysterous  and

urious, not with gold, precious stones,  and  with such

dnde  of  riches  : so  as  he  was  very  insolent  in  threatnings,

)ravadoes,  and in defying  unto  the  battaile. He  often

aid that we had surprised him, and  had  not warned

429

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

him  to  prepare  himselfe,  and  that  we  had  strucken  him  i
The  cuitome  of  without  speaking  any  word  : for  this  is  the  custome  of  the
the  Chwois. people  in  those  parts,  to  doe  in  this  manner. Hee  had
two or  three  Kings  also  with  him,  his  Neighbours  and
Allies, who  marched  with the same preparation. The
rumour  of  these  riches  gave  great  courage  to  the  Souldiers,
for  they  were  covetous  of  just  gayne,  as  is  that  gotten
by  a  battaile. So  both  our  Armies  went  forward  each  to(
approch the  other,  and there  was  a  Citie  yeelded  unto
Tunichevoy. the  Prince  called  Tunichevoy,  the  which  helped  our  Armie
greatly. The next day, to the end wee might give
occasion  unto  the  Enemie  for  to  approch  neerer,  we  sent
to  summon,  and  at  the  same  time  to  take  possession  of
Pannlhu. the  Citie  of  Pannihu,  the  which  in  advancing  forward  wee  n
left a little behinde  us. The  King  of  China  had  put
many  men  thereinto,  and  it  was  a  Citie  sufficiently  well  1
fortified  :  from  Tiauchevoy  to  Paguinuhu  there  were  ten  I
leagues. He  advanced  his  Armie  within  a  league  of  the
Tiauchevoy. Citie Tiauchevoy,  about noone  the  next  day they had  I
more  certaine  advertisement  of  the  Enemies comming.
The  Prince  commanded  his  Armie  to  take  the  place  for
the battaile,  which  he  had  chosen  in  his  judgement  with
most  advantage,  and  having  set  downe  unto  Odmar  the  b
order  he  would  have to  be observed,  he  desired  to  see  h
the comming of  this Armie : so sending before him
five or six thousand Horse as Scouts, hee advanced
forward,  and  Calibes  with  him. After  he  had  seene  this  \s
great confused Armie which continually  came  forward,
hee  commanded  Calibes to retyre himselfe  as  soone  as
they  drew  neere  unto  him,  and  bring  unto  him  this  great
cloud,  the  which  hee  hoped  soone to  disperse. So  the
Prince  returned  backe  unto  his  men  for  to  assure  them  of
the battaile  : hee  caused  all  his footmen  to  bee  placed
all  along  by  a  great  Mountayne,  so  as  they  had  but  one
head for to doubt. And hee planted  great store of
Artillerie  for  the  guard  of  his  footmen. I  am  of  opinion,
that the Prince  had  about  six-score thousand footmen,
whereof  many  were  armed  after  the  Christian  manner,  and

43°

ALHACEN THE ARAB

11  they  were  commanded  by  sundrie  Captaines ;  but  all
beyed  Axalla,  who  commanded  them  as  Generall.

Our  Horse-men  were  in  battaile  array  in  a  great  levell  The  order  of
'layne,  having  the  Footmen  on  the  left  hand,  and  on  the  the  ?*****
ight  was  the  comming  of  the  Enemie,  so  as  upon  the  a  .  ,
>ast  disfavour  that  might  happen,  hee  would  retyre  to  King  of
ee  assisted  by  his  footmen.  Wee  had  foure  score  China.
housand  horse:  Calibes  with  the  Scythians  were  in  the  [HI.  i.  151.]
Ivantguard,  and  had  the  commandement  of  thirtie
housand  horse,  who  should  receive  him  at  such  time
s  he  did  draw  on  the  Enemie,  as  he  was  commanded.
t  was  divided  into  three  troupes,  each  one  consisting
if  ten  thousand.  Odmar  had  also  thirtie  thousand  horse
/ho  should  assist  him.  The  Prince  remayned  in  the
krier-ward  at  the  one  of  the  wings  of  his  footmen,  which
|ield  one  of  his  principall  forces :  his  purpose  was  to  suffer
ihe  threescore  and  six  thousand  horse  to  maintayne  the
ight  against  the  Barbarians,  being  led  by  two  good
i'aptaines,  and  if  any  of  them  remayned,  the  Emperour
foped  after  of  them  to  have  a  good  market,  by  causing
lis  footmen  to  march  forward,  and  himselfe  with  whom
jhere  abode  twentie  thousand  of  the  best  horse,  which
/ere  sufficient  without  hazarding  his  Person  for  to  give  a
lew  battaile,  if  so  be  that  any  disfavour  should  happen
unto  them  :  for  hee  had  understood  that  this  was  the
,ustome  of  the  Kings  of  China,  to  enclose  themselves
/ithin  the  middest  of  their  Chariots  with  their  footmen,
nd  not  to  hazard  themselves  but  upon  the  extremitie.
|)0  the  Enemie  fayled  nothing  at  all  to  march  directly
into  Calibes,  and  all  the  Armie  marched  after  following
bf  him  and  setting  upon  him,  and  hee  even  as  the
icythians  are  alwayes  accustomed  to  doe,  with  his  six
housand  horse  in  retyring  gave  many  charges,  killing
ome  of  them,  and  they  likewise  killing  some  of  his  men.
t  was  a  beautifull  sight  to  see  this  great  Armie  march,  for
It  seemed  to  bee  twise  as  great  as  ours,  therein  being
in  infinite  number  of  armed  Chariots,  wherein  he  put  his
Principall trust  against the furie  of  our Souldiers  ; so

43i

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  beautie
and  richnesse
of  the  King  of
ChinasArmie.

Tamerlan  his
speech  of  the
King  of
China.

The  battaile
betweene  the
King  of
China  and
Tamerlan.

many  gildings  of  gold  and  silver  as  well  in  the  trappings
of  their  Horses,  as  on  their  Armour,  that  it  glittered,  and
was  of  us  all  much  admired.  The  Prince  who  was  with  II
troupe  of  horse  did  see  the  Armie  march  after  Calibes,  i
commended  greatly  the  manner  of  casting  their  men!!
out  of  the  rankes,  for  to  compell  this  troupe  unto;
fight,  and  did  see  this  Armie  come  in  good  order,!
and  he  tryed  with  his  eye  to  note  the  place  wherejj
the  Kings  Person  was,  having  neere  him  the  ChinoisS
Lord  to  instruct  him,  who  knew  well  their  manner  of!
fighting.  Now,  they  had  neither  Avantguard  nor  battaile,
but  onely  an  Arier-ward  commanded  by  the  King,  and!i
inclosed  (as  I  have  said)  with  his  Chariots  :  the  which !i
being  shewed  unto  him  by  this  Lord,  the  Prince  turned |i
himselfe  unto  us,  and  in  our  language  said  :  Yet  must!
wee  this  day  disperse  this  cloud  here  so  gilded,  andli
the  King  of  China  and  my  selfe  must  make  a  partition  I
thereof.

Now,  having  seene  the  Enemie  sufficiently  advanced,!
and  judging  that  he  had  seene  them  march  a  good  league,;
he  thought  it  not  convenient  to  suffer  them  for  to  takel
breath,  nor  for  to  put  themselves  againe  into  their  order;'
he  sent  unto  Calibes  for  to  will  him  to  set  forward  thei
fight,  and  that  if  those  whom  he  had  led  with  him  should'
be  weary,  they  should  come  unto  him  ;  but  it  was  not  in
Calibes  power  to  have  this  commandement  over  them.j
For  as  soone  as  they  heard  this  word  of  fighting  uttered,'
they  required  the  first  charge,  with  a  young  Lord,  who1
commanded  over  them,  called  Zioctabanes,  who  made1
appeare  unto  the  Chinois  to  what  end  their  flight  was,!
charging  very  stiffely  upon  the  foremost  of  the  Enemies,  j
the  which  was  an  occasion  to  begin  the  first  fight.  And  I1
assure  you,  there  could  not  be  seene  a  more  furious  thing,  I
nor  any  for  to  fight  with  more  desire  to  manifest  the
valour  of  his  Nation,  and  for  to  procure  honour  unto  his'
Prince.  Now,  this  endured  a  long  houre  before  the
Chinois  had  overthrowne  Calibes.  The  Prince  did  see;
all  patiently,  saying  alwayes,  that  the  great  multitude  how

432

ALHACEN THE ARAB

onfused  soever  it  were,  would  carry  it  away  from  the
>rder  and  valour  of  his  Souldiers  :  you  could  not  yet
>erceive  any  alteration  in  the  Princes  countenance,  Adver-
itie  and  Prosperitie  were  so  indifferent  unto  him.  His
hirty  thousand  Horse  were  all  Scythians,  who  observe
lot  the  same  order  the  Parthians  doe.  Now,  before  the
3rince  retyred  with  his  men,  hee  did  see  the  first  charge
riven.  Calibes  being  wounded,  retyred  himselfe  neere
into  the  Prince,  having  with  him  two  thousand  horse
oyned  together  againe,  and  many  more  joyning  them-
telves  together  neere  unto  the  Prince,  who  commanded
:hat  they  should  cure  Calibes,  viewing  the  place  of  his
vound,  hee  caused  him  to  bee  conducted  behind  his  foot-
nen,  and  the  other  which  were  hurt  with  him  also.  Now,
Zalibes  was  not  able  to  pierce  through  this  Armie,  being
Deaten  back  ;  but  Odmar  with  almost  all  the  Parthian
lorse-men,  did  handle  them  more  roughly,  for  he  ranne
:leane  thorow  them,  and  returned  by  one  of  the  right
Nings  of  the  Armie,  where  hee  fought  most  valiantly,  and
laving  beaten  them  back  even  within  the  Kings  Chariots,
le  thought  that  he  should  not  doe  wisely  to  goe  about  to
Dreake  such  forces.

The  King  of  China  comming  forward,  and  the  horse-
Tien  which  had  beene  broken  by  Odmar,  joyning  them-
selves together  for  his  ayde,  Odmar  onely  remayning  in
:he  battaile  sent  unto  the  Prince  for  the  footmen,  and
or  to  set  forward  the  Artillerie,  and  that  hee  should
issure  himselfe  of  the  victorie.  The  Prince,  who  had
ilready  set  forward,  kept  aloofe  off,  and  sent  unto  him
lftie  thousand  footmen,  with  a  part  of  the  Artillery,
giving  charge  thereof  unto  Axalla,  who  forthwith  set
rorward,  having  commandement  to  set  upon  the  Chariots,
ind  to  make  an  entrance  :  he  set  forward  the  Artillery
Defore  him,  the  which  did  greatly  astonish  the  enemies :
ror  the  Governours  of  the  horses,  belonging  to  the  Kings
Chariots,  could  not  hold  them  ;  it  made  also  a  great
spoyle.  As  soone  as  he  perceived  this  disorder,  hee  set
brward,  and  came  to  hand-blowes,  there  were  a  hundred  [HI.  i.  152.]
xi  433  2  E

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  King  of
China

wounded  and
takenPrisoner.
Tamerlans
victory  over
the  King  of
China.

and  fiftie  thousand  men,  as  yet  about  the  Kings  person.
Axalla  full  of  courage  fought  so  valiantly,  that  they  never
beheld  any  doe  more  bravely.  Odmar  during  this  fight
charged  againe  the  Horsemen,  who  were  retyred  unto
the  Kings  ayde,  whom  he  put  to  flight.  Then  the  Prince
advanced  forward  with  the  rest  of  his  Foot-men,  gave
ayde  unto  Axalla,  and  came  even  unto  the  person  of
the  King  of  China,  who  was  as  yet  enclosed  within  a
second  ranke  of  Chariots  with  thirty  or  forty  thousand
men  :  and  after  hee  had  fought  two  or  three  houres,
the  Horse-men  assisting  the  Foot-men,  and  they  princi-
pally whom  the  Prince  had  reserved,  the  King  remayned
wounded  within  the  power  of  the  Prince,  the  battaile
being  wonne,  and  all  the  Enemies  Campe  forced;  the
fight  endured  eight  houres,  and  it  was  even  night,  which
saved  the  lives  of  many  of  the  Enemies.  There  were
slaine  two  Kings  the  Allyes  of  the  King  of  China,  and
one  taken  Prisoner  :  there  was  inestimable  riches  gotten,
as  well  in  golden  Vessell  as  precious  stones,  and  the  most
rich  and  faire  Chariots  that  could  be  seene.

The  Prince  would  not  see  the  captived  King  untill  the
next  day,  beeing  mounted  on  Horse-backe,  and  passing
through  the  Campe  of  the  Battayle  for  to  stay  the
slaughter,  and  to  joyne  together  againe  his  men,  to  the
end  the  accustomed  watch  might  bee  kept,  whereof  hee
gave  the  charge  unto  Axalla  ;  to  whom  he  gave  likewise
commandement  to  keepe  the  King  of  China  within  the
middest  of  his  Souldiers,  having  bin  already  dressed  of
a  wound  he  had  received  in  his  right  arme.  It  was
a  strange  thing  to  behold  the  Enemies  Weapons,  and
the  diversitie  of  streamers  wherewith  they  were  decked,
the  which  seemed  unto  us  afar  off  as  beautifull,  as  the
diversity  of  colours  plentifull.  But  to  say  the  truth,
the  multitude  was  great  which  this  King  had,  notwith-
standing there  was  much  difference  betweene  their  valour
and  ours  :  and  it  is  reported,  that  hee  had  ranged  in
Battayle  this  very  day  three  hundred  and  fifty  thousand
men,  whereof  there  were  an  hundred  and  fiftie  thousand

434

ALHACEN THE ARAB

Horse-men,  the  rest  on  foot  :  the  greatest  part  of  them
#ere  rude  and  barbarous  people,  which  suffered  them-
>elves  to  bee  slaine  one  upon  another,  not  marking  their
idvantage,  nor  having  any  Warlike  knowledge,  as  our
Tien  have  :  there  were  slaine  of  the  Enemies  some  three-
;core  thousand.  Now  the  next  day  after  the  buriall  of
he  dead,  the  Prince  having  given  thankes  unto  God
or  his  victorie,  caused  the  wounded  to  bee  cured,  and
imongst  the  others  Calibes,  who  by  reason  of  the  untem-
)eratenesse  of  the  Ayre,  rather  then  by  the  blow  of  the
vound  he  had  received,  found  himselfe  very  ill,  yet  would
le  not  omit  his  dutie,  to  command  alwayes  his  Avant-
^ard,  the  which  was  a  great  pleasure  unto  the  Prince,  for
le  alone  had  Commandement  over  the  Emperours  Forces,
>eeing  a  Scythian,  and  greatly  beloved  of  his  Nation.

The  Prince  dispatched  away  thirty  thousand  Horse  in
he  pursuit  of  one  of  the  King  of  Chinas  Brothers,  who
?as  fled  away,  having  joyned  together  againe  some  twelve
»r  HftGene  thousand  Horse.  The  Prince  sent  to  summon
Jannihu,  the  which  did  yeeld  it  selfe  unto  him  :  where-  Pannihu.
tpon  our  Army  approached  neere  unto  it,  for  to  advance
•ur  selves  the  further  into  the  Countrie.  Now  I  forget  to
eclare  how  the  Prince having  the  next  day  caused  his

ents  to  bee  pitched  most  stately,  and  his  Guards  ordered
ccording  to  his  greatnesse,  the  principall  of  his  Army
eing  also  neere  his  person  :  for  all  the  night  hee  had
emayned  continually  on  Horse-backe,  untill  about  two  of
le  clocke,  when  as  they  brought  him  a  Tart  and  his
/ater,  for  hee  never  dranke  Wine  ; and  lay  downe  on  Tam.  dranke

Carpet where hee passed the rest of  the night. I  no  Wine.

ras neere unto  him  and  never  left  him  : but  I never

eard any  vaunting or  boasting  to proceed out of  his

louth. Then hee sent  a commandement  unto  Axalla

d  bring  unto him the imprisoned King  : who beeing  The  commhg

ome,  the  Emperour  issued  out  of  his  Tents,  and  went  of  the  King  of

d  receive  him. This  King  of  China  came  with  a  verv  c.a

,  , ,  , .  , ri  . J pnsone?  unto

roud  and  haughtie  countenance,  and  like  a  couragious  the  Emperour

mn, approaching neere unto the Emperour, hee  Tamerlan.

435

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

200.  Cities.
A  description
of  China.

Rhubarbe.

demanded  of  Axalla  by  an  Interpreter,  which  was  the
Emperour,  and  being  shewed  him,  hee  spake  fiercely
unto  him  after  this  manner  :  The  Gods  whom  I  worship,
being  provoked  against  my  Nation  and  people,  and  con-
spired against  my  good  fortune,  have  made  mee  at  this
day  thy  Prisoner  :  but  forasmuch,  as  it  is  reported  over
all  the  World,  that  Tamerlan  maketh  warre  for  the
honour  of  his  Nation  :  thou  shouldest  be  contented  that
thou  hast  wonne  it  this  glory,  that  the  Lord  of  the
World,  the  Child  of  the  Sunne,  is  in  thy  power,  to
receive  such  Law  as  it  shall  please  thee  to  prescribe
him.  This  hee  said  in  a  brave  manner,  and  without
any  other  humbling  of  himselfe.  The  Emperour  on
the  other-side  having  saluted  him  very  courteously,  led
him  into  his  Tent.

He  is  surely  a  great  Prince,  and  which  hath  had  two
hundred  famous  Cities  within  his  Kingdome.  There  be
many  Mynes  of  Gold  and  Silver,  much  Muske,  and  also
of  an  Herbe  which  the  Christians  call  Rhubarbe.  There
bee  in  like  manner  within  the  Kingdome  of  China  fifteene
very  large  Provinces,  the  which  have  Governours.  It  is
reported  that  hee  hath  threescore  and  tenne  Kings  wearing
Crownes,  Tributaries  unto  him.  We  call  this  Region
China,  the  which  they  in  their  Language  name  Tame,  and
the  people  Tangis,  the  which  we  call  Chinois.  This  King-
dome  doth  abound  in  fish,  and  in  great  numbers  of  wild-
fowle,  by  reason  of  the  great  abundance  of  running  waters
which  doe  overflow  the  Countrey,  the  which  is  reasonable
temperate :  they  abound  greatly  in  Silkes,  and  the  meanest
[III.  i.  153.]  are  apparelled  therewith,  having  small  quantitie  of  Wooll,
and  not  using  the  same  :  they  have  much  Cotton  and
Linnen  in  stead  thereof.  The  men  doe  weare  their
haire  long,  the  women  combe  them  :  they  have  as  many
Wives  as  they  are  able  to  maintayne.  Next  unto  the
King,  there  is  a  Governour  Generall  whom  they  call
Tutan,  the  which  was  the  Brother  unto  the  imprisoned
King.  The  Prince  having  assembled  his  counsell,  to  the
end  he  might  be  advised  how  he  should  use  his  Prisoners

436

Tame,  or
Tamin  and
Tamegius.

ALHACEN THE ARAB

ind  the  rest  of  the  Victory :  hee  received  newes  by
Odmar,  how  that  the  Kings  Brother  was  arrived  at
Quantou,  the  which  hee  had  fortified,  and  that  great  Quantou.
store  of  forces  did  joyne  themselves  unto  him.  This
was  the  cause  that  the  Prince  having  somewhat  rested
lis forces, commanded two thousand Parthian Horse

0  convey the Prisoners unto Paguinfou, and from
hence  after  they  had made  abode  there, to  passe  over

:he  Mountaynes,  and  to  remayne  at  Burda  (a  Citie  of  Burda.
)lde  time  faithfull  unto  the  Emperours  of  Schytia)  and
:here  to  keepe  them  faithfully.  The  purpose  and  resolu-
:ion  of  the  Prince  was,  that  it  behooved  to  assault
Quantou,  and  to  shut  up,  if  it  were  possible,  the  Kings
Brother  within  the  same,  being  one  of  the  principall
♦eates  belonging  unto  the  King  of  China,  and  a  Citie
greatly  peopled  and  strong :  it  was  forty  leagues  from
:he  place  where  the  battayle  was  fought.  But  Odmar
oeing  advanced  thither,  would  not  retyre  before  he  had
ixpresse  Commandement  from  the  Prince,  who  having
;ent  thither,  pitched  his  Tents  round  about  the  said
Zitie:  having  summoned  many  small  Cities,  the  which
/eelded  themselves  wholly  unto  the  Princes  mercy,
Halting  great  lamentation  for  their  King  taken.  Not-
withstanding, the  gentlenesse  used  by  the  Conquerour
nade  them  to  take  all  their  losses  with  patience :  and
because  it  was  also  reported,  that  he  had  used  the
Sing  most  friendly,  and  all  the  Prisoners :  the  Kings
brother had sent Embassadours to obtayne leave for

1  to  know  of  the  Kings  health,  and  for  to  see  him,  the
which  the  Prince  did  willingly  suffer,  to  the  end  this
Dther  should  not  declare  himself  King,  who  would  have
nought  him  more  trouble  then  the  other.  He  attended
:or  the  event  of  Quantou,  and  had  his  eye  upon  the
uiccesse  of  this  siege.  Now  the  Kings  Brother  having
•eceived  newes  of  the  Affaires  of  the  besieged,  he
determined  eyther  to  succour  it,  or  to  fight  a  Battle,  and

:ame  straight  unto  Porchio,  and  made  a  bridge  of  Boats,  Porchio.
whereof  there  be  great  store  in  these  same  Countreyes.

437

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Now  being  enformed  when  the  halfe  part  were  passed,
Odmar  set  which  was  fiftie  thousand  men  good,  Odmar  finding  them
upon  the  Kings  m  veiy  [\\  order,  and  nothing  at  all  advertised  of  the
roeiatte  j?nemies  nearnesse,  gave  the  charge,  and  utterly  over-
River,  and  threw  them :  there  remayned  dead  upon  the  ground
slue  fifty  some  fiftie  thousand  men,  but  it  was  not  without  great

thousand  of  his  fight,  strengthened  with  the  favour  of  water,  and  a
great  Marish  wherein  they  were  encamped.  Notwith-
standing, our  Foot-men  having  wonne  the  banke  of
the  River,  beganne  also  to  winne  the  Boats,  and  to
sever  them  by  the  meanes  of  a  great  Boat,  the  which
we  with  diligence  caused  to  runne  downe  beeing  full
A  stratagem,  of  artificiall  fire,  so  as  at  the  same  very  time  that  they
which  were  within  the  Boate  did  draw  neere,  they
retyred  out  of  the  same,  having  first  kindled  the
fire  within  the  Boate,  the  which  with  a  great  force
rushed  against  the  Bridge  of  Boats  and  overthrew  it,
and  where  it  was  resisted  did  burne.  This  did  greatly
astonish  them  that  were  passed,  to  see  their  returne  cut
off.  The  Kings  Brother  was  not  yet  passed  unto  the
other-side  of  the  water,  and  he  which  first  had  gone
over  was  the  King  of  Cauchina,  who  was  slayne  at  the
first  charge,  fighting  very  valiantly,  in  the  fore-front.
The  Kings  Brother  did  see  his  men  slayne  and  drowned,
and  could  not  remedie  the  same.  This  second  overthrow
was  of  no  small  importance,  although  it  was  but  the
third  part  of  the  Kings  Brothers  Army,  and  that  there
remayned  unto  him  as  yet  a  hundred  thousand  fighting
men  :  but  there  was  no  great  hope  that  he  durst  present
himselfe  before  our  Army.  The  newes  hereof  being
reported  at  Quantioufou,  they  desired  to  make  tryall
of  the  Emperours  clemency.  Axalla  dispatched  one
of  his  faithfull  friends  of  his  Countrey  unto  the  Prince,
to  carry  unto  him  these  good  newes :  which  was  more
welcome  unto  the  Prince,  then  the  overthrow  he  had
given  unto  the  Enemy,  and  agreed  unto  all  that  Axalla
demanded,  referring  all  unto  his  sufliciencie  and  fidelitie.
The Kings Brother having sent  to demand safety  for

438

ALHACEN THE ARAB

to  treate, the Prince  granted so much unto them, for
such  as  would  come  unto  him.

In  this  meane-time  Quantoufou  yeelded  it  selfe  into
the  hands  of  Axalla,  who  caused  the  Garrison  to  come
out  of  the  same,  received  the  Inhabitants  into  the  Princes
protection,  and  they  which  would  might  remayne  therein
unarmed :  and  he  entred  thereinto  with  the  joy  of  all  the
Inhabitants,  who  did  determine  to  receive  the  Emperour
into  the  same  with  all  the  magnificence  that  might  be.
He  caused  thirty  thousand  men  of  War  to  enter  there-
into ;  unto  whom  was  money  delivered  for  to  maintayne
them  there,  untill  such  time  as  all  the  Foot-men  should
receive  pay  for  three  monethes  due  unto  them,  whereof
the  Inhabitants  of  Quantoufou  did  furnish  the  Prince,
to  the  summe  of  eight  hundred  thousand  Tentins,  the
which  do  amount  unto  foure  hundred  and  fifty  thousand
crownes  or  therabout.  The  Prince  at  this  present  sent
me  unto  Axalla,  whom  I  found  feasting  of  his  Captaines
and  souldiers,  staying  for  the  commandement  that  I
brought  unto  him,  the  which  was  to  remaine  within
Quantoufou,  and  to  cause  all  his  footmen  to  set  forward
directly  unto  him,  the  which  was  done  by  the  Prince,  to
the  end  it  should  strike  a  greater  terror  into  the  minds
of  the  enemies,  who  seeing  all  his  footmen  arrived,  he
supposed  they  wold  nothing  doubt  (Quantoufou  being
taken)  but  that  he  would  march  forward,  insomuch  as  [III.  i.  154.
he  hoped  this  would  greatly  advance  his  Affaires,  con-
sidering the  estate  they  were  in.  I  returned  from
Quantoufou  unto  the  Emperour,  having  seene  a  beautifull
I  and  great  Citie  well  fortified,  and  wonderfully  peopled,
I  and  round  about  it  there  was  a  fruitfull  Countrey.

Thus  the  Embassadors  being  arrived,  who  were  of
the  Kings  chiefest  Vassals,  Tamerlan  received  them  with
all  humanitie,  causing  his  greatnesse  to  appeare  unto  them ;
and  therewithall  the  agilitie  of  his  Horsemen,  to  make
them  see  with  their  eyes,  that  it  would  be  the  destruction
.  of  the  Chinois  name,  if  he  proceeded  any  further.  So
having saluted the Emperour  with all reverence, they

439

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

AnEmhassage  uttered  their  Embassage  unto  him,  which  was  that
^fCkt King  the  Kings  Brotner  had  sent  them  unto  him  to  treat
Brother  unto  ^or  two  causes :  the  one,  was  for  the  liberty  of  their
Tamerlan,  to  King,  the  other,  for  preservation  of  their  Countrey.
treat  for  peace,  The  Prince  having  heard  them,  answered  them,  that
and  the  Kings  ^^  nac[  reason  to  trust  unto  his  mildnesse,  and  seeing  at

n  P 1 1  {7>  Pi' /171 1' P  ^^

this  present,  they  desired  it,  he  would  yeeld  thereunto.
Thereupon  the  Prince  rose  up,  and  caused  to  be  said
unto  them,  that  they  should  deliver  their  offers  in
writing,  and  that  present  answere  should  bee  made  there-
unto. Thus  went  they  out  of  the  Princes  presence  with
great  joy,  and  as  it  were  assured  of  Peace,  and  to  recover
their  former  prosperities.  The  conditions  which  they
offered,  were  to  leave  Paguinfou,  and  all  the  Countrey
beyond  it,  with  all  the  Fortresses  of  the  Mountaynes ;
that  they  would  pay  all  the  charges  of  his  Army,  since
the  day  of  answere  made  unto  his  Embassadors ;  that
they  would  give  two  Millions  of  Gold,  for  their  King.
Conditions This  being  presented  unto  the  Lord,  hee  made  answere

agreed  upon tnereunto,  which  was;  that  he  would  keepe  that  which

oetzveene

Tamerlan  and  hee  had  conquered  within  the  Countrey,  which  was  his

the  Chinois.  owne  justly,  seeing  his  armes  had  given  it  unto  him ;
that  hee  would  have  the  River  where  he  was  now
encamped  to  be  his  Frontier,  stretched  unto  Hochjoy,
Tahaucezug,  Cauchio,  Lulun,  even  unto  Poschio  border-
ing upon  the  Sea ;  that  the  King  of  China  should  pay
unto  him  yearely  three  hundred  thousand  Crownes,  the
which  should  bee  delivered  at  Paguinfou,  for  acknowledge-
ment of  submission  unto  the  Empire,  as  well  for  his
Successors  as  himselfe ;  that  they  should  pay  five  hundred
thousand  Crownes  in  ready  money  for  the  charge  of  the
Army ;  that  the  King  of  China  should  be  delivered,
and  all  the  Chinois  Prisoners  should  pay  ransom  unto
particular  men  that  took  them,  except  those  which  carryed
the  name  of  Kings,  who  should  pay  one  hundred  thou-
sand Crownes  for  peace  with  his  Armes :  that  no  Chinois
should  bee  kept  as  slave,  nor  sold  for  such  hereafter,
beeing  under  the  Princes  obedience,  that  Traffique  and

440

ALHACEN THE ARAB

Entercourse  of  Merchants  should  be  free  betweene  both
the  Nations;  that  the  King  of  China  should  deliver  his
Brother  as  Prisoner,  and  two  Kings  named,  with  twelve
principall  men  ot  the  Countrey  for  assurance  of  the  peace.
They  accepted  of  such  conditions  of  peace  as  pleased  the
Conquerour,  hoping  that  time  would  bring  againe  unto
them  their  ancient  liberty,  and  that  for  a  time  it  behooved
them  to  beare  with  patience  the  yoke  of  their  bondage.
Now  the  Prince  had  sent  two  thousand  Horse,  to  fetch
the  King  of  China,  to  the  end  that  being  at  liberty,  he
might  sweare  to  the  peace  solemnly,  the  which  he  having
performed  at  Quantoufou,  whither  the  Prince  caused  him
for  to  come,  he  brought  with  him  unto  Paguin,  all  the
pledges,  and  amongst  the  rest,  the  Kings  eldest  Sonne,
and  his  Brother.  The  King  beeing  departed  for  to  per-
forme  his  promise,  according  to  the  Treaty  by  him
confirmed,  he  was  received,  and  as  it  were  worshipped
within  his  Countrey,  with  all  the  joy  that  might  be.

In  the  meane-time  the  Emperour,  after  hee  had
provided  for  the  assurance  of  his  new  conquest,  he  left
Odmar  there  to  governe  them,  and  gave  unto  him  an
estate  of  thirty  thousand  Horse  and  fifty  thousand  Foot-
men, to  furnish  all  the  Fortresses  and  strong  places,  the
Prince  having  led  with  him  many  of  the  new  conquered
people,  desiring  to  have  them  for  to  dwell  within  his
Countrey,  and  to  send  other  Colonies  in  their  places,
to  assure  himselfe  the  better  of  the  lightnesse  of  this
people,  having  noted  them  to  bee  inclined  unto  Novel-
ties. Hee  gave  in  charge  unto  Odmar  to  make  his  Odmar  left
principall  abode  at  Quantoufou,  and  to  fortifie  well  the  Govemour  of
passage :  and  also  commanded  a  Fortresse  to  be  made  Earner/an
at  Dermio,  the  better  to  strengthen  his  Borders:  and
after  he  had  left  him  all  things  necessary,  he  recom-
mended unto  him  the  services  of  that  Lord,  who  had
manifested  unto  him  his  great  affection.  The  Emperour
having  well  tryed  his  faithfulnesse  in  his  Affaires  as  they
fell  out,  he  carryed  with  him  a  Brother  of  his,  unto  whom
he  gave  great  gifts  within  Sachetay.

441

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Then  we  turned  our  faces  straight  unto  Cambalu,
having  advertized  the  Great  Cham  of  the  happy  successe
of  our  Affaires.  The  Prince  remayned  in  deed  King  of
China,  holding  in  his  possession,  two  of  the  fairest  and
greatest  Cities  of  all  the  whole  Countrey,  having  an
hundred  good  leagues  thereof  unto  himselfe,  and  many
lesser  Cities,  having  extended  his  Borders  unto  a  River,
by  which  he  might  goe  unto  the  Enemy,  but  they  could
not  come  unto  him  without  passing  over  the  same :
having  good  meanes  to  keepe  it  and  with  advantage.
Now  the  Prince  desired  above  all  that  the  Idols  which
were  within  his  Conquest,  should  be  beaten  downe,  and
commanded  the  worship  of  one  God,  establishing  the
same  after  the  forme  of  his  owne  Countrey,  for  he  made
account  that  in  short  time  all  would  bee  reduced  unto  our
customes.  Our  Army  wherein  was  much  sicknesse,  began
to  march,  and  on  the  third  day  having  newes  of  forces
which  came  towards  us,  the  Prince  sent  them  a  Com-
mandement  not  to  come  any  further  forward,  and  that
they  should  march  straight  unto  Cambalu,  where  the
[III.  i.  155.]  Prince  did  suppose  to  find  the  Emperour  his  Uncle,  who
had  set  forward  towards  that  place  to  have  the  good
hap  for  to  see  him,  being  determined  to  receive  him
at  Cambalu  with  magnificence  and  triumphs,  as  hee  well
deserved.

Now I  will declare by  the  way, how  Odmar being
Tamerkn severed  from  us,  all  the  Princes  favour  was  turned  unto
turned  his Axalla,  unto  whom  hee  committed  the  whole  charge  of  his
favour  unto Armie,  insomuch  as  Axalla  although  he  was  alwaies  in  great
reputation,  notwithstanding  the  same  was  much  encreased
by  the  Prince  at  Quantoufou,  where  the  Prince  did  trust
him  with  the  Armie,  in  so  weighty  an  enterprise  as  that
was,  and  the  which  he  so  gloriously  atchieved :  likewise
the  manner  of  entring  into  the  Kingdome  of  China,  the
intelligences  hee  had :  so  as  the  report  of  his  valour  did
flie  throughout  all  the  Empire. Calibes  led  the  Avant-
guard, and Axalla was in the battell neere unto the
Emperour, who  gave him  the  chiefest  place,  bestowing

442

ALHACEN THE ARAB

upon him two hundred thousand  crownes yeerely, for  200000.

to  maintayne  his  ordinary  expences. After  certaine  dayes  crowns  °f

journey  wee  received  newes  of  the  Emperours  arrivall  at  -%e[  ?  ie"
■U , \  , -n  •  1  1 r 1  • x • •  r  • &ven  unt0

Cambalu, the Prince having left his Armie  in  a raire  Axalla  by

Countrey  for  to  winter,  where  he  dismissing  many  of  our  Tamerlan.

Souldiers,  wee  arrived  within  foure  leagues  of  Cambalu,

whither  all  the  Princes  of  the  Emperours  Court,  came  for

to  receive  him,  together  with  all  the  principall  Inhabitants,

for  to  gratifie  our  Prince for  his  happie  Voyage. The

Prince  having  received  every  one,  according  to  his  wonted

curtesie,  retayning  notwithstanding  convenient  Majestie,

hee  was  beheld  to  the  great  contentment  of  all  his  Subjects.

Hee  had  with  him  the Empresse  his  wife,  who  had  not

left  him  in  his  Voyage. The  next  day  the  Emperour  did

him  so  much  honour,  as  to  come  and  meet  him,  with  all  Tne  meeting

the  magnificence  that  might  bee. Hee  gave  a  present  unto  betwee"e  the

o  o  o  r  preat  C/  am  and

the  Emperour  his  Uncle,  of  all  the  richest  Chariots,  and  Tamerlan  at

fairest  Horses  hee  had  wonne. The  Emperour  was  very  the  Citie  of

desirous  to  see  his  daughter : he  caused  her  Chariot  to  Cambalu  in

bee  uncovered,  and  caused  her  to  enter  into  his : but  the  Catat0-

Prince  remayned  on  Hors-backe,  whom  the  eyes  of  all  the

people  could  not  be  satisfied  with  admiring. The  Prince

presented Calibes unto the Emperour, and making a

recitall  of  his  faithfulnesse,  and the  endeavour  of  every

one, hee caused the Emperour to give unto him  an

hundred  thousand  crownes  of  encrease  unto  his  pension.

Axalla  was  also  presented  unto  the  Emperour,  who  being  Axalla

informed  of  his  valour,  hee  was  received  with  all  the  best  rewarded  by

favours that might be,  and he  gave  unto  him of  the  ^efeatCam

11 •  it--  1  111  .  for  his  good

revenues  belonging  unto  the  Empire,  an  hundred  thousand  serv\ce  anci

Tartarins of  gold in a  Principalitie, that  he  might the  faithfulnesse.

better  declare  unto him  how much  he esteemed of  his

fidelitie.

[§  in

443

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

§•  HI.

The  differences  betwixt  Tamerlan  and  Bajazet
the  Turke ;  his  returne  to  Samercand,  and
expedition  against  Bajazet ;  the  battell,  and
victorie,  his  caging  of  Bajazet,  and  making
him  his  Foot-stoole.

His  joy and  pleasure continued  with  us all the
Winter,  where  the  Prince  having  received  adver-
tisement how  Bajazet  Emperour  of  the Turkes,
had enterprised to joyne the Empire  of  Greece unto
his  owne,  and  fully  determined  to  besiege  Constantinople:
the  which  he  understanding,  and  succour  being  required
A  menage  sent  of  him by the Greeke Emperour, he dispatched one
by  Tamerlan towards Bajazet, for  to declare unto him his pleasure
unto  Bajazet. herein, and  warned  him  on his  behalfe,  not to trouble
the  Emperour  Paleologue  who  was  his  confederate. Now
this  motion  came  from  Prince  Axalla,  who  had  wrought
this  league, being of  kinne unto  Paleologue, and also
thrust  forward  with desire  to  maintayne  his  Religion  in
Greece,  where  he  was  borne  of  the  Genuois  race. Where-
T he  proud unto  being  answered  very  proudly,  by  Bajazet  unto  our
answer  of Emperour,  asking  what  he  had  to  doe  therewith,  and  that
ajazet.  ^  should  content  himselfe,  with  enjoying  lawes  unto  his

Subjects,  and  not  unto  others,  seeing  he  was  not  borne  his
Subject.  This  answer  being  made,  Axalla  procured  to
be  very  ill  accepted  of  the  Emperour,  and  in  such  sort,
that  he  determined  to  hinder  this  enterprise  of  the
Ottomans.

Now  the  Prince  had  obtayned  of  the  Emperour  his
Uncle  an  hundred  thousand  Foot-men,  and  fourescore
thousand  Horse,  hoping  to  have  as  many  from  Sachetay,
besides  the  Lords  who  would  accompanie  him  for  to
winne  glorie,  from  whom  he  made  account  also  of  fifty
thousand  men  more  that  they  would  bring  unto  him,
besides the other forces. Hee supposed  that he had

444

ALHACEN THE ARAB

abilitie  to  deliver  the  Empire  of  Greece  from  the  bondage

of  the  Ottomans. Thus  the  Prince  departed,  leaving  the

Empresse  with  the  Emperour  her  father,  for  to  serve  him

as a comfort of  his age : it was not without a  hard

farewell  of  the  Emperours  part  towards  his  Nephew ;  but  Heavy

more  grievous  on  the  Princes  part  towards  his  wife,  who  parting.

had  never  left  him  since  the  time  they  were  married  :  but

nothing with-held our Prince, where there  was either

glorie,  or  meanes  to  encrease  his  reputation, and profit

the Common-wealth  : saying often, that he was borne  A  notable

to this end,  and  that he must  take in these exercises  saying  of

his  principall  delights  :  for  every  other  thing  wherein  he  lamerlan-

did  exercise  himselfe  was  but  borrowed,  being  appointed

and  called  of  God  to  punish  the  pride  of  Tyrants. Neither  [HI.  i.  156.]

will I here omit a dreame,  which our  Prince  had  the  Tamerlan  his

night  before  hee  departed  from  Cambalu,  which  was,  that  ^reame-

he  did  see  as  hee  thought,  a  great  multitude  of  reverent

men,  who  put  forth  their  hands  unto  him,  requiring  his

succour  against  the  violence  of  certaine  Tyrants,  who  did

afflict  them  with  sundry  kinds  of  torments  :  he  said,  that

he  did  never  see  more  reverent  countenances,  &  that  some

of  them  were  apparelled  in  white,  and  others  in  cloth  of

gold,  some  having  as  it  were  Crowns  of  gold  upon  their

heads,  and  it  seemed  unto  the  Prince,  that  he  gave  them

his  hand,  and  lift  them  very  high. This  dreame  he  recited

us  the  next  morning,  but  no  body  was  able  to  give  him

the  interpretation  thereof,  &  himselfe thought  no more

of  it.

The  Prince  was  accompanied  also  with  Calibes,  &  he  Tamerlan
commanded  the  Prince  of  Tanais,  to  take  upon  him  the  journey  against
state  of  Colonell  of  the  footmen,  which  Axalla  had  left :
unto  whom  he  gave  the  charge  of  Lieutenant  generall
within  his  Armie,  with  commandement  to  leade  his  Avant-
guard,  and  Calibes  the  Arere-ward,  being  accompanied
with  farre  greater  forces  than  ever  he  had  in  any  of  his
Armies;  for  they  came  unto  him  from  all  parts.  The
Chinois  Lord  was  licenced  by  Odmar  to  goe  with  20000.
men  of  the  subjects  newly  conquered,  being  desirous  to

445

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Tamerlan
returnethfrom
the  conquest  of
China  unto
Samercand.

Consultation
about  the  way
the  Armie
should  take  to
the  Turkes
Empire.

Tamerlan  his
chiefest  trust.

Bachu.

shew  himselfe  unto  the  Emperour,  as  also  for  to  learne
our  manners  and  fashions.  The  Prince  tooke  his  Voyage
directly  unto  Samercand,  the  place  of  his  birth,  three
yeeres  being  past  since  hee  had  beene  there.  Zamay  came
to  meet  him,  and  I  verily  beleeve,  a  million  of  men,
blessing  and  praysing  him  in  all  manner  of  songs.  All
the  Princes  of  the  Countrey  also  ranne  to  visite  him ;  he
abode  there  a  moneth.  Axalla  in  this  meane  time  was
already  at  the  meeting  place  at  Ocera,  who  prepared
all  things,  looking  for  the  Princes  commandement  for  to
goe  unto  him,  advertising  him  often  of  the  doings  of
Bajazet.

We  departed  from  Samercand,  for  to  goe  unto  Ozara,
where  was  the  meeting  place  for  all  the  Princes  troupes :
and  having  in  that  place  taken  advice  for  his  journey,  that
is  to  say,  for  to  know  whether  should  be  most  expedient
and  favorable,  either  to  goe  by  the  coasts  of  Moscovie
directly  unto  Capha,  or  rather  on  the  other  side  of  the
Sea  Bachu  to  passe  by  the  skirts  of  Persia.  It  was
resolved  in  the  end,  after  sundry  opinions,  although  the
way  were  the  longer,  to  passe  unto  Capha  for  to  come
unto  Trebisonda,  and  to  the  Georgians,  and  from  thence
to  enter  into  the  limits  of  the  Ottomans.  Then  our
Armie  after  the  accustomed  ceremonies  &  prayers  made
unto  God,  wherein  our  Emperor  hoped  to  finde  his
principal!  succours,  we  drew  straight  unto  Maranis,  where
the  Armie  abode  three  dayes,  looking  for  the  forces  which  l
Odmar  did  send,  whereof  they  received  newes.  There
did  the  Emperour  cause  all  his  Armie  to  be  payd,  and
a  generall  muster  was  made.  He  had  newes  also  there
of  the  forces  that  the  Moscovite  did  send  unto  him :
he  likewise  caused  an  infinite  quantitie  of  victuals,  and  the
most  part  of  his  furniture  to  be  convayed  by  the  Sea
of  Bachu,  there  being  some  twentie  leagues  where  was
want  of  water  and  victuals,  through  the  which  our  Armie
must  needs  passe,  causing  all  things  necessary  to  be
carried  by  water,  the  which  was  a  great  commoditie  unto
us  : and  there was  a  commandement  given at all the

446

ALHACEN THE ARAB

shoares  of  the  Sea,  that  they  should  bring  all  the  vessels
for  to carrie the munition of  the Armie : so as  this
foresight  did  greatly  ease  our  Armie. The  Prince  went  Tamerlan
continually  coasting  the  Sea-shoare,  passing  away  his  time  hunted  h  the
in hunting,  and  his  Armie  came  not  neere  him by  ten  %°tP ^WV  s
leagues,  except  such  as  came  to  seeke  necessaries  for  the
Armie,  the  which  did  extend  it  selfe  some  twenty  leagues,
it  was  so  great. The  Prince  abode  at  Sarasich  during  the
time  his  Army  passed  the  River  of  Edel  at  Mechet,  and
at  two  or  three  other  Bridges,  the  which  they  had  caused
to  bee  made  ;  there  had  hee  certaine  newes  how  Bajazet  Bajazet
marched  unto  the  siege  of  Constantinople,  having  reduced  m^rched  mt0
unto  his  obedience  all  Bythinia,  and  Bursia  a  very  noble  gfQ^j?
Citie, the which  hee  caused  to  bee  fortified,  and  divers  stantinople.
other  Cities,  using  all  the  cruelties  that  might  be,  insomuch
as all the adjoyning Provinces  yeelded themselves his
tributaries :  amongst  the  rest  the  noble  Citie  of  Capha :
the Citie was  by  the  Prince  given unto Axalla for to  The  gpvern-
dispose  of  the  same  :  which  hee  did,  going  thither  to  see  m*nt  Axalla
his  kins-folke,  and  to  take  such  order  there,  as  he  thought * c  use'
was  for  the  preservation  of  the  Citie,  as  one  not  ungrate-
full  unto  his  Countrey  :  he  rather  placed  his  hope  in  this
little  shoare  of  Mar  Majore,  then  in  the  limits  of  Sythia
and  China,  and  for  to  succeed  after  his  Master  unto  all
his  great  conquests,  for  that  he  had  all  the  Souldiers  at  his
commandement,  and  great  credit  amongst  all  the  people
over whom his Prince commanded. Bajazet having a
very  great  and  mightie  Armie,  neither  beleeved,  nor  once
thought  that  wee  would  come  upon him,  so  exceeding
barbarous  was he,  that he  would  not  indure any  man
so  much  as  to  speake  onely  unto  him  of  our  Armie,  as
despising  it,  he  was  so  proud  :  and  there  he  caused  all  the
bordering people  publikely  to bee forbidden, to  make
any vowes and prayers for our prosperitie. Justice  Notable
raigned so  amongst  us, insomuch  as  if  a  Souldier had  inJU5t^
taken but  an  apple,  he  was  put  to  death,  and  this  was  ^f'^
severely  observed  over  all,  a  thing  usuall,  and  especially
in  this  Journey,  the  which  was  the  onely  cause  of  over-

447

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

throwing  the  tyrannie  of  the  Ottomans,  and  of  this  proud
Bajazet. So  we  arrived  at  Bachichiche,  where  the  Armie
refreshed  it  selfe  for  the  space  of  eight  dayes. Unto  this
place came the Embassadours of Guines, unto the
Emperour, whom the  Prince did  greatly  reverence  for
his  holinesse. The  Emperor  after  he  had  caused  generall
prayers  to  be  published,  Tamerlans  Armie  departed  from
Bachichiche,  and  they  reckoned that there  was in our
Armie,  three hundred thousand Horse-men, and five
hundred thousand Foot-men, of  all  kinds  of  Nations.
[III.  i.  157.]  Our  Armie  came  unto  Garga,  where  it  passed  the  River
Euphrates, the Avant-guard at Chinserig ; and the
generall  meeting  of  the  Armie  was  appointed  to  bee  at
Gianich,  the  which did yeeld  it selfe  : and there had
we newes that Bajazet his  Armie was neere unto us,
within some thirty leagues,  which caused us to march
more close. All the Cities yeelded, the Emperour
receiving them graciously, and those which refused
obedience,  were  cruelly  punished,  especially  such  Inhabi-
tants as were Turkes, but the Christians set in full
libertie, under the name of the Greeke Emperour
Emanuel, whom the Emperour would wholly gratifie,
Axalla having received this commandement from the
The  causes  of  Prince  : so hee caused them to sweare fidelitie unto
warre^Tainst  Emanuel- The  great  Armie  of  Bajazet  thought  to  have
the  Turkes. surprised  our  men  within  Sennas  (which  they  had  taken)
but  as  soone  as  they  drew  neere,  our  men  set  it  on  fire,
and the greatest part retyring, there remayned some
hundred Horse to performe the same, who retyred
themselves in very great disorder. Now, the Prince
of  Ciarcan  had  divided  his  men  into  two troupes,  and
A  stratagem, given  commandement  unto  the  first  troupe,  that  as  soone
as they perceived the Enemies to pursue  the hundred  1
Horse, they should receive them, and retyre  joyntly  j
together. Now, hee had the rest of his power in  a
valley neere unto a Wood, and having suffered some
two thousand of  the Enemies Horse, Turkes Avant-  |
currers  to  passe  by  him,  he  charged them  behind,  and

448

ALHACEN THE ARAB

fought  with  them,  they  not  fighting  but  fleeing  as  soone

as  they  did  see  themselves  pressed  : many  were  slayne,

and  many  were  taken  prisoners. This  was  the  first  time

wee fought, and carried away the victorie  : all the

prisoners were sent unto the  Prince,  amongst the rest

the Bassa of  Natolia, who led this troupe. The next  How  Tamer-

day  Bajazet his Armie drew neere unto the sight of  lans  drmie

ours,  the  which  marched  two  leagues  :  and  wee  encamped  ?a"f

•  i  • i  i  r i  i  a  ii i -ii  night  before

within  a  league  the  one  or  the  other. All  the  night  long  t^e  fratten

you  might  have  heard  such  noyse  of  Horses,  as  it  seemed  fought  against
the  heavens  were  full  of  voyces,  the  aire  did  so  resound,  the  Turke.
I  and  every  one  was  desirous  to  have  the  night  passed,
for  to  come  each  one  unto  the  triall  of  his  valour.  Unto
the  Scythian  Nation,  the  which  is  desirous  of  goods,  they
propounded  the  great  riches  they  should  get  by  the
victorie  over  the  Ottomans.  Unto  the  Parthian  Nation
ambitious  of  rule,  the  honour  and  glorie  of  the  Nation,
being  Conquerours  of  them,  who  onely  were  able  to  take
from  them  the  Empire  of  Asia.  The  Christians  who
;  made  the  fourth  part  thereof,  assured  themselves  to
conquer  their  greatest  Enemie.  Behold,  now  every  one
spake  during  the  night  time,  according  to  his  humour.
The  Prince  this  night  went  through  his  Campe  hearing
all  this,  and  was  very  glad  to  see  the  hope  that  every
one  of  his  Souldiers  did  conceive  already  of  the  victorie;
and  I  being  neere  him,  he  did  me  the  honour  to  tell  me,
'that  at  the  time  he  fought  the  battell  against  the  Mos-
covite,  he  did  heare  all  the  night  long  all  kindes  of  songs,
the  which  resounded  in  his  Campe,  seeing  in  a  manner  no
bodie  sleepe  :  I  hoped  then  (said  hee)  to  have  some  good
|hap,  and  I  trust  to  receive  the  like  now.  Now  after  the
second  watch  the  Prince  returned  unto  his  lodging,  and
casting  himselfe  upon  a  Carpet,  hee  meant  to  sleepe  :  but
the  desire  of  day  would  not  suffer  him  ;  he  then  com-
manded me  to  give  him  a  booke,  wherein  he  did  reade :
therein  was  contayned  the  lives  of  his  Father  and  Grand-
father, and  of  other  valiant  Knights,  the  which  he  did
ordinarily  reade  :  he  called  me,  having  light  upon  (in
xi  449  2  f

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Tamerlan  his
custome  before
a  battell

The  manner  of
the  march  of
the  Turkish
Foot-men.

The  order  of
Tamerlan  his
battell.

reading)  the  discourse  of  a  battell  that  his  Grandfather
had  lost  against  the  Persians,  the  which  he  had  thought
to  have  gotten  (very  undiscreetly)  having  assaulted  his
Enemie,  many  advantages  being  propounded  unto  him,
whereof  he  might  have  made  good  use,  all  which  he  neglected,
trusting  unto  his  owne  valour  and  that  of  his  Souldiers.
And  having  ended  his  speech,  he  commanded  mee  to
reade  the  same  before  him,  and  said  unto  me,  I  alwaies
reade  this  before  1  beginne  a  battell,  to  the  end  I  should
not  so  much  trust  unto  the  Lions  skin,  wherein  I  wrap
my  arme,  that  I  should  not  serve  my  selfe  with  the  Foxes,
to  wrap  therewith  my  head :  for  thus  (said  he)  my  Grand-
father was  in  a  place  of  advantage,  and  he  went  out  of  it
to  seeke  his  Enemie,  who  was  lodged  strongly,  and
whatsoever  his  men  said  to  him,  hee  went  on  headlong  :
shutting  his  eares  against  all  the  counsell  and  advise  of  i
his  servants.

Seeing  the  Turkish  Foot-men  march,  whom  they  doe  :
call  Janizaries,  the  which  were  placed  in  the  middest,  i
and  upon  the  two  fronts,  two  great  squadrons  of  Horse-  !  3
men,  the  which  seemed  to  be  thirty  thousand  Horse,  and
another  which  advanced  and  covered  the  battalion  of  the  :  i
Janizaries  :  Hee  thought  this  order  to  be  very  good,  and  1
hard  to  breake,  and  turning  himselfe  unto  Axalla,  who  i
was  neere  unto  him,  he  said,  I  had  thought  to  have  fought :  a
on  foot,  but  it  behooveth  me  this  day  to  fight  on  horse-  !  Ji
backe,  for  to  give  courage  unto  my  Souldiers  to  open  the  x
great  battalion :  and  my  will  is  that  they  come  forward  unto  i  m
mee  as  soone  as  they  may  :  for  I  will  advance  forward  an  i  u
hundred  thousand  Foot-men,  fifty  thousand  upon  each  of  :i
my  two  wings,  and  in  the  middest  of  them  forty  thousand  :  jr
of  my  best  Horse.  My  pleasure  is,  that  after  they  have  ;  3
tryed  the  force  of  those  men,  that  they  come  unto  my  ,  Ja
Avant-guard,  of  whom  I  will  dispose  (and  fifty  thousand  m
Horse  more)  in  three  bodies,  whom  thou  shalt  command,  ig
the  which  I  will  assist  with  fourescore  thousand  Horse,  ir
wherein  shall  be  mine  owne  person,  having  an  hundred  |j
thousand  Foot-men  behind  me,  who  shall  march  in  two

45°

'

ALHACEN THE ARAB

troupes  ;  and  for  my  Arere-ward  forty  thousand  Horse,

and  fifty  thousand  Foot-men,  who shall not  march  but

unto  my  ayde. I  will  make  choise  of  ten  thousand  of  the

best Horse,  whom I will  send  into  every  part  where  I

shall thinke needfull within my Armie, for to impart

my  commandements. Over  the  first  forty  thousand  the  [III.  i.  158.]

Prince  Ciarcian  commanded  :  over  the  foremost  footmen

was  the  Lord  Synopes,  a  Genuois,  kinsman  unto  Axalla,

and he which was his Lieutenant over the footmen, a

:Captaine  of  great  estimation. That  over  which  the  Prince

lAxalla  commanded,  consisted  of  five  squadrons  of  horse-

|men. Bajazet  his  Armie  seemed  faire  and  great,  which

iwas  advanced  continually  forward  towards  us,  who  stirred

not  one  whit  from  the  place  of  the  battaile. There  were

imany light horsemen, as well Scythians, Parthians, as

Moscovites,  who  left  their  rankes,  and  shot  Arrowes,  and

brake  Lances betweene  the two  Armies. There  was  a

Spie  who  brought  word  that  Bajazet  was  on  foot  in  the

middest  of  his  Janizaries,  where  he  meant  to  fight,  that  What  the

hee  did  not  forget  to  mount  on  horse-back,  giving  order  Turks

over all  for  the wants  of  his  Armie  : but purposed  to  Jamzartes  be-

fight  in  the  middest  of  those  Janizaries,  who  are  a  number

JDf  trusty  men,  brought  up  in  exercises  from  their  youth  to

ill  manner  of  warfare,  and  chosen  out  of  al  Nations,  the

fairest  and  strongest  men,  so  as  they  are  invincible. By

this  bringing  up  the  which  they  have  had  together,  they

doe  fight  with  a  great  force  and  courage  for  their  Prince

ind  Lord,  who  being  in  the  middest  of  them,  they  are  as

n  a  halfe  circle  within  the  Armie. Now,  they  were  thirty

ihousand men in this order, wherein Bajazet put his

orincipall hope  : he had many other footmen, but

gathered together of  all sorts. His battaile of  horse

.vas  very  faire,  amounting  unto  the  number  of  an  hundred

ind  fortie  thousand  horse,  well  exercised  in  all  manner  of

ights. The  Soldan  of  Egypt  having  ayded  him  with  thirty

:housand Mammolues, very  good horse-men,  and  with  Mamalukes.

:hirty thousand footmen. Their  Armie in that order

seemed  almost as  great  as  ours  : for  they  were  not  so

45 1

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

knit  together  as  we  were,  our  forces  being  directly  one
after  the  other,  and  theirs  all  in  a  front.

So  the  Enemies  Armie  advanced  forward  continually
with  an  infinite  number  of  cryes,  and  ours  was  in  great
silence.  After  that  common  prayer  was  ended,  the
Emperour  himselfe  advanced  continually  forward,  behold-
ing the  first  charge  given,  and  caused  Axalla  to  set
forward  after  he  returned  into  his  order,  continually
exhorting  his  men  before  hee  left  them.  There  could
not  be  seene  a  more  furious  charge  given,  then  was
performed  by  the  Ottomans  upon  the  Prince  of  Ciarcian,
who  had  commandement  not  to  fight  before  they  came
unto  him  :  there  could  not  have  beene  chosen  a  fairer
Playne,  and  where  the '  skilfull  choise  of  the  place  was
of  lesse  advantage  for  the  one  then  for  the  other,  but
that  wee  had  the  River  on  our  left  hand,  the  which
was  some  advantage  for  the  Emperour,  having  given
commandement,  that  in  any  case  they  should  not  lose
the  same,  and  that  the  Enemies,  whatsoever  came  thereof,
should  not  win  it :  this  hee  did  for  to  have  the  advantage
of  the  hand  in  fight.  The  Emperour,  who  above  all
Tamerlan  his  Maximes  of  warre,  did  use  to  deale  in  such  manner,
principall  ^at  tjie  jrnemie  might  bee  the  first  Assaulter  ;  hee  had
maxime  oj  straightly  commanded  them  which  were  appointed  for
the  first  charge,  to  suffer  the  Enemie  for  to  give  the
on-set.  Now  (as  I  have  already  declared)  this  young
Prince  of  Ciarcian  with  his  forty  thousand  horse  was
The  battalle  almost  wholly  overthrowne,  having  fought  as  much  as
betweene  hee  COuld,  but  hee  entred  even  into  the  middest  of  the

Ba'azet  m  Janizai"ies>  where  the  person  of  Bajazet  was,  putting  them
in  disorder,  where  he  was  slaine.  About  this  time  Axalla
set  upon  them  with  the  Avantguard,  whereas  he  was  not  in
any  such  danger ;  for  having  surprised  one  of  the  enemies
wings,  hee  cut  it  all  in  pieces,  and  his  footmen  comming
to  joyne  with  him,  as  they  had  beene  commanded,  hee
faced  the  Battalion  of  the  Janizaries.

The  Prince  seeing  the  charge  Axalla  had  upon  his  arme,
sent  ten  thousand  horse  from  his  battaile  for  to  succour

452

ALHACEN THE ARAB

il  him,  and  knit  together  the  mayne  battaile  of  Axalla,  and

I  to  give  once  againe  a  charge  upon  another  Battalion  of

I  footmen,  the  which  did  shew  it  selfe,  and  came  to  joyne

with  and  strengthen  that  of  the  Janizaries,  who  behaved

i  themselves  valiantly  for  the  safetie  of  their  Prince. This

I  fight  continued  one  houre,  and yet  you  could  not  have

I  seene  any  scattered,  fighting resolutely the one against

the  other. You might have  seene  the Mountaynes of

!  horses  rush  one  against  another,  the  men  die,  crie,  lament,

1  and  threaten  at  one  very  time. The  Prince  had  patience

i  to  see  this  fight  ended,  and  when  hee  did  perceive  that

i  his men did give place, hee sent ten thousand  of  his

Horse  to  joyne  againe  with  the  ten  thousand  appointed

for  the  Arierward,  and  commanded  them  to  assist  him,  at

I  such  time  as  hee  should  have  need  thereof. At  this  very

time  the Emperour  chargeth,  and  made  them  give  him

roome,  causing  the footmen  to  assault,  over  whom  the

Prince of  Thanais commanded  ; who gave a furious

tj  on-set  upon  the  Battalion  of  the  Janizaries,  wherein  was

!  yet the person  of  Bajazet, who had sustayned  a  great

burthen. But  the  multitude,  and not valour,  did pre-

I  vaile  ;  for  as  much  as  might  bee  done  in  fight,  was  by

I  the  Janizaries  performed,  for  to  preserve  the  person  of

their  Prince. But  in  the end  the  Horse-men,  wherein

1  was  the  Emperours  person,  gave  a  new  charge,  and  his  Tamerlan  his

Avantguard was wholly knit againe unto him, hee  notable  mc-

°j  ,  r •  j  r  11  •  •  forte  obtained

renewed another forcing, and was fully victorious.  aminst

Bajazet  having  retyred  on  horse-back  out  of  the  troupe  Bajazet

of  Janizaries  wounded,  fell  alive  into  the  hands  of  Axalla,  wherein  hee

unto  whom  hee  yeelded  himselfe,  supposing  it  had  beene  wa!  taken

Tamerlan  :  then  Axalla  seeing  him  so  followed  (being  for  Tamerlan  his

a time not knowne but for some great Lord of  the  wisedome  the

Ottomans) twentie  thousand  horse  did not fight  at  all,  cause  of  the

ibut onely in pursuing the victorie, and they made a  ^^  an*

great  slaughter. The  Prince  had  his  horse  slaine  under  ZJf^^

him with the blow of a Lance, but he was soone

remounted  againe  on  horse-back. This  day  the  wisdome

of the Emperor gave the victorie unto his Soldiers  :

453

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

for  the  judgment  which  he  had  in  tyring  of  the  strong
[III.  1.159.]  forces  of  the  Ottomans,  was  the  safeguard  of  his.  For
if  all  had  gone  unto  the  battaile  in  one  front,  surely,  the
multitude  had  put  it  selfe  into  a  confusion :  but  this
manner  of  aiding  his  men  made  everie  one  profitable.
The  Emperour  judging  (like  a  great  Captaine)  of  the  need
that  every  one  of  his  souldiers  had,  so  that  this  manner
of  proceeding  was  the  getting  of  the  victory.  They
accounted  threescore  thousand  men  slaine  of  the  Otto-
mans, and  twentie  thousand  of  ours.  The  Prince  of
Tirzis  was  slaine,  as  I  have  said :  the  head  of  the
Georgians  slaine,  Calibes  was  verrie  sorrie  hee  had  so
easie  a  reckoning  in  his  Arier-ward,  being  very  couragious,
and  a  gentle  Knight:  the  Despote  of  Servia  was  taken
prisoner,  who  did  accompanie  Bajazet,  and  was  a  Christian:
they  gave  him  this  day  of  battaile  much  reputation.
The  Emperour  gave  unto  him  very  good  entertainment,
reprooving  him,  for  that  hee  did  accompany  Bajazet
against  him,  who  did  come  in  favour  of  his  Emperour.
Hee  answered  him,  that  it  was  not  according  to  his
dutie,  but  the  prosperitie  of  Bajazet,  unto  whom  it
seemed,  that  all  the  world  did  bend  for  to  subject  it  selfe
unto  him,  and  that  his  safetie  had  caused  him  to  set
forward.  The  Emperour  presently  thereupon  gave  him
leave  to  depart  at  his  pleasure.  Hee  tooke  care  to  get
into  his  hands  Bajazet  his  children  :  hee  gave  commande-
Bajazet  ment  that  Bajazet  should  bee  cured,  and after  brought

brought  before  before  him  :  who  at  such  time  as  hee  was  there  never
Tamerlan,  made  any  shew  of  humilitie.  The  Emperour  saying
wit ispn .  untQ j^.^ t^at ^ }ay jn ^im to cause him to lose

his  life,  he  answered :  Do  it,  that  losse  shall  be  my
happinesse.  And  demanding  of  him  what  made  him
so  rash,  for  to  enterprise  to  bring  into  subjection  so
noble  a  Prince  as  was  the  Emperour  of  the  Greekes.
Hee  answered  him,  the  desire  of  glorie  and  rule.  Where-
fore doest  thou  (said  the  Emperour  unto  him)  use  so
great  crueltie  towards  men,  so  farre  foorth  that  neither
thou  nor  thine  doe  pardon  either  sex  or  age  ? This  doe

454

ALHACEN THE ARAB

\  I (answered hee) to give the greater terrour to my

enemies. Then  said  the  Emperour,  so  shalt  thou  receive

the  like  reward  :  and  causing  him  to  bee  conveyed  againe

|  out  of  his  presence,  hee  turned  unto  his  followers,  and

I  said,  behold  a  proud  and  fierce  countenance,  hee  deserveth  Tamer/an  his

I  to be punished with crueltie, and it is  necessarie that  saying  of

hee  bee  made  an  exemplarie  punishment  to  all  the  cruell  By^t-

I  of  the  world, of  the  just  wrath of  God  against  them.

1 acknowledge that God hath this day delivered  into

my hands a  great  enemy,  wee  must  give  thankes  unto

God for the same : the which was performed, being

yet day : for  the battaile was  wonne at foure of  the

clocke,  and  there  was as yet five houres  of day-light.

The  children  of  Bajazet  were  brought  before  him  :  hee

I  caused  them  to  bee  used  curteously,  and  as  the  children

of  an Emperour. The next  day hee  commanded  the

I  dead to bee buried : they found the  Prince  of  Tirzis

dead  in  the  middest  of  the  Janizaries,  where  he  remained

enclosed. The  Emperour  did  greatly  lament  this  young

Prince, who was his kinsman, and would have  beene

one  day  worthie  for  to  doe  him  great  service. In  that

battaile  there  died  manie  Captaines,  &  almost  the  chiefe

Ottomans. This was a great Battaile, the  which was

\  fought  from  seven  unto  foure  of  the  clocke,  in  such  sort

that  they  knew  not  unto  whom  the  victorie  did  incline.

I  Our  Armie  stayed  untill  the  next  day,  every  one  causing

his  friends to bee buried. The Prince of  Tirzis was

embalmed,  and  conveyed  with  two  thousand  horse  unto

Samarcand  untill  the  Emperour  returned. All  the  other

dead bodies were  buried  at Sanas  with  all  the  honour

i  that  might  be. Axalla  was  much  grieved  for  his  kins-

|  man,  because  hee  was  verie  well  beloved  of  the  Prince:

his charge was given unto one of  his brethren who

I  was  verie  famous ;  in  fighting  this  same  day,  we  might

'judge  the  events of  the matters  of  the world,  Behold

:|  this Emperour Bajazet, who was, as hee thought,

superior  to  fortune,  which  in  an  instant  found  himselfe

!  and  his estate  by one  battaile  onely overthrowne even

455

The  despaire

of  Bajazet
after  he  was
taken  prisoner .

Bajazet

Tamarlans
foot-stoole  to
mount  on
horseback.

Tamarlan  his
polllcie  for  to
Increase  his
Citie
Samarcand.

[III.  i.  1 60.]

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

unto  the  lowest  place,  and  at  such  time  as  hee  thought
least  thereof.  Hee  used  to  say,  that  hee  was  justly
punished,  for  despising  the  multitude  we  had,  for  the
assurance  that  hee  had  in  the  valour  of  his  horsmen,
and  especially  of  his  Janizaries.  Hee  was  three  dayes
(as  they  report)  before  he  could  bee  pacified,  as  a
desperate  man,  seeking  after  death,  and  calling  for  it.
The  Emperour  did  not  use  him  at  all  curteously,  but
caused  small  account  to  bee  made  of  him :  and  for  to
manifest  that  he  knew  how  to  punish  the  proud ;  upon
festivall  dayes,  when  as  hee  mounted  on  horsebacke,
they  brought  this  proud  man  unto  him,  and  he  served
him  in  stead  of  a  foot-stoole :  this  did  he  for  to  manifest
the  folly  and  arrogancie  of  men,  and  how  justly  God
had  humbled  him.  The  next  day  the  Prince  marched
directly  towardes  Bursia,  whither  all  the  remainder  of
Bajazet  his  Armie  was  retired,  with  the  Bassa  Mustapha.
All  the  countrie  yeelded  unto  us,  and  the  Prince  caused
all  the  holdes  and  fortresses  to  bee  overthrowne  and
destroyed,  and  punished  all  those  which  were  so  evill
advised  as  to  stay  untill  they  were  besieged.  I  had
forgotten  to  declare,  how  hee  caused  the  Prince  of  Tirzis
bodie  to  bee  accompanied  with  divers  prisoners  chained
and  tied  together,  whom  hee  did  send  unto  Samarcand,
the  which  the  Prince  had  determined  to  make  great,  for
a  perpetuall  memorie  of  his  greatnesse.  Even  so  had
hee  greatly  peopled  with  people  of  China,  which  had
beene  taken  in  the  Battailes,  and  of  those  likewise  which
were  taken  out  of  the  two  great  Cities,  Paguinfou,  and
Quantoufou.  Now  this  battaile  did  bring  great  astonish-
ment unto  all  the  countries  possessed  by  Bajazet,  and
no  bodie  resisted  us,  even  unto  Bursia,  whither  this
Armie  was  fled,  and  therein  were  also  two  sonnes  of
Bajazet  verie  young.  Axalla  being  alwaies  advanced
forward  before  our  Armie,  with  fortie  thousand  Horse,
and  an  hundred  thousand  Foot-men  without  any  carriages,
who  hundred  the  enemies  from  joyning  themselves  againe
together :  and  hee  made  a  cruell  Warre  upon  the  Otto-

456

ALHACEN THE ARAB

mans, delivering the Graecians from the tyrannie of  Axalla  cruel/
Bajazet. Hee  approached  neere  unto  Bursia,  where  the  *&**& the
Ottomans  did  not  stay  the  comming  of  Axallas  Armie,  thedeRvmof
but  only  they  which  could  not  runne  remayned  behind. Greece.
Bajazet his two Sonnes were sent unto the Greekish
Emperour for to bring them up,  and  to have  mercie
upon them ; the rest went unto Gallipoli, for to  goe
unto  Andrinopoli,  the  which  they  held,  having  conquered
it  from  the  Grecians. Now  the  Prince  (for  to  returne
unto  my  purpose)  dispatched  towards  the  Emperour  his
Uncle, and unto the Empresse his Wife,  one  of his
Familiars,  called  Lieban,  Captayne of  his  Chamber,  for
to carrie him newes of  this Victorie, and  to  joyne it
also unto  all  the  rest. He  sent  unto him Bajazet  his  Presents  sent
Sword  and  Bow,  and the  Caparisons  of  his  Horse,  the  h  Tamerlan
which was esteemed to be worth about two hundred  "*** the  &reat
thousand  Duckets. You may  easily  thinke  that  Prince  jjnc^m
Lieban  was  well  entertayned  of  the  old  Emperour,  and
of  the  young  Princesse,  bringing  word  unto  them,  that
all the World did bend it  selfe  to make our  Prince
victorious,  who  surely  received  these  Victories  from  God
without insolencie, and at such  time  as hee sent him
most glory, then did his men note him to be least
puffed up. He was never bold, but in the day of
battaile,  and  on  the  Eeve  for  to  command  severely,  and
with greater Majesty. To tell you what he was in
adversitie,  I  did  never  see  him  in  that  estate :  but  it  is
to be thought, that they which bee not insolent in
prosperitie, are  not  faint-hearted  in adversitie. So our
victorious  Prince  marched directly unto Bursia,  loaden
with  Spoyles  and  Trophees  which  hee  daily  got,  depart-
ing from  the  Cities  which  did  come  and  yeeld  themselves
unto  him,  therein  observing the same  manner  of  pro-
ceeding, the  which  we did in the  Conquest  of  China ;
they  which  did yeeld  unto him without  fighting,  were
well  used,  and the  obstinate  well  punished, the  Prince
knowing  that  reward  and  punishment  are  the  Moderators
of  Common-wealthes,  the  one  to  bee  used  towards  the

457

PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

good,  and  the  other  towards  the  evill.  In  the  end
we  received  newes  by  Axalla,  that  he  had  received  Bursia
in  the  Emperours  name,  and  how  the  Inhabitants  thereof
had  punished  the  Garrisons  of  Bajazet,  having  driven
them  away, and  slaine  many.

But  I  dare  not  follow  our  Author  any  further  from
Tartaria,  for  whose  sake  I  have  entertayned  him.
Leaving  therefore  his  agreement  with  the  Greeke
Emperour,  and  secret  visiting  Constantinople ;  his
comming  to  Jerusalem,  and  Expedition  against  the
Soldan,  With  his  Exploits  in  Egypt,  Syria,  Persia,  we
will  returne  with  him to  Samarcand.

§.  mi.

Encrease  of  Samarcand ;  Affaires  of  China :
Funerals  of  the  Can ;  comming  to  Quinza,  and
description  thereof.  His  disposition  of  his
estate  and  death.

Ersia,  as  long  as  he  lived  was  much  affected  unto
him :  which  greatly  served  him  for  the  keeping
as  well  of  Syria,  as  of  the  Soldans  Empire,  leaving
continually  men  there,  and  drawing  out  Colonies,  the
better  to  settle  his  Affaires  in  those  places.  So  the
Emperour  leaving  the  Prince  of  Thanais,  with  his  Army
to  attend  his  pleasure,  he  marched  with  the  rest  of  his
forces  into  his  owne  Countrey  with  all  the  Joyes  and
Triumphes  that  might  be  possible,  the  chiefest  Prisoners
marching  before  the  Emperour,  amongst  the  which  was  j
Bajazet  Emperour  of  the  Turkes  all  chayned,  and  was
a  Spectacle  unto  all  the  World  of  Fortunes  inconstancy :
hee  continued  notwithstanding  in  the  same  fiercenesse
was  woont  to  be  in  him.  So  wheresoever  the  Emperour
passed,  the  people  assembled  themselves  by  thousands,
praysing  and  singing  his  Victories.  We  arrived  at  the
last  at  Samarcand  with  all  our  spoyles,  in  very  great
magnificence : where  after we had  beene  the space of

458

ALHACEN THE ARAB

one  moneth  or  two  in  Feastings  and Magnificences,  the

Emperour with his accustomed Devotion, having in

great solemnitie vowed a Church and Hospitall unto Tamerlan  his

his  God,  the  most  magnificent that  might  bee  devised,  vow  unto  God.

Whereupon to  performe the  same,  he began to  search

out all sorts of  Handicrafts men for to honour this

Citie,  the  which hee had  a desire to  make  one  of  the

stateliest  Cities  in  the  World. And  in  one  of  the  corners

thereof  he  began,  and  did build  there  his  Temple and

Hospitall,  making  an  account  to  increase  yet  this  Citie,

as  large  againe  as  it  was,  and  to  people  the  same,  with

so  many severall  kinds  of  people and Nations  as hee

had brought with him, giving libertie unto them all

to  frame  and build  their  Houses,  causing  money  to  be

distributed to do the same, and giving all kinds of

Priviledges and Freedomes unto the Prisoners, for to

give  them  a  greater  desire  to  build  and  settle  themselves

there : and  having  caused  the  streets and  places to be

plotted,  and  having  appointed  a  place  for  every  one  to

Duild  upon,  hee  tooke  no  other  pleasure,  neither  had  he

liny  other  care  then  the  preserving  the  good  will  of  his

most  famous  Souldiers,  whose name hee  having  caused

m  bee  written  in  a  generall  Muster-booke,  the  which  hee

pommanded to be  made, from day to day, they  (not  [III.  i-  161.]

pinking  thereof)  received honours,  and  good  turnes  of

:he  Prince,  in  recompence  of  their  so  great  services. Now

pe  declared  the  death  of  the  Emperour  his  Uncle  unto

pis  Councell  (of  which  he  before  had  received  Intelligence,

put  kept  it  close)  and  forgot  no  Ceremony  due  unto  the

honour  of  the  said  Emperour  outwardly,  shewing  the  griefe

ke  conceived  for  his death ;  where  after hee  had  rested

pome  eight  dayes,  hee  determined  to  goe  unto  Quinzai

|'or  to  see the  Empresse,  and  having  left  Bajazet  in  the

bustodie  of  the Governour of  Zachetay,  the  Emperour

jet  forward  with  his  ordinary  Court  which  was  of  forty

thousand  Horse,  and  threescore  thousand  Foot-men.

The Emperour being come unto Cambalu, received
iewes  of  the  Battell  Odmar  had  wonne  against  the  King

459

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

of  Chinas Captayne Generall,  and  how  he  pursued  his

Victory,  having  taken  three  or  foure  great  and  rich  Cities,

the  which  did  yeeld  themselves  unto  him,  and  that  againe

the  Chinois  did  desire  peace. The  Emperour  sent  the

Articles  of  a Articles he  required, which were that before  all other

new  agreement  things  the  King  of  China  should  pay the  Arrerages  of

Tamerknand  t^ie  Tribute,  tne  which  hee  had  agreed  with  the  Emperour.

the  King  of First, he should come in  person to doe homage unto

China.  his  Majesty,  and acknowledge himselfe as  Vassall  unto

i.  his  Empire. That the Army  should withdraw  it  selfe

2.  during  his  Voyage,  and  he  should  deliver  up  unto  him
all  his  Cities,  saving  three  such  as  the  Emperour  should

3.  nominate ;  and  that  the  things  should  be  restored unto
the same  estate they were in before the  Warre,  when

4-  the  Emperour  made  the  first  peace ;  that  hee  should  pay

the  Army  for  sixe  monthes,  and  should  also  satisfie  all
the  expences  of  the  War,  seeing  he  had  begunne  it,  and
was  Author  of  the  breach  of  peace.  Then  the  Emperour
gratified  Odmar,  sending  unto  him  for  Wife  one  of  his
Sisters  with  all  magnificence  that  might  be,  for  to  make
him  the  more  affectioned  unto  him.  I  will  declare  how
the  Emperour  was  received  at  Cambalu  by  his  Subjects,
with  all  the  magnificence  possible,  the  Emperour  for  to
gratifie  them  having  restored  their  Priviledges,  the  which
he  had  taken  from  them,  for  the  Rebellion  they  had
committed  with  Calix :  so  as  the  Emperour  went  over
all  gratifying  his  Subjects  for  this  new  Succession  that
was  lately  fallen  unto  him,  all  the  Companies  comming
unto  him  :  for  in  these  Countreys  they  have  no  certayne
dwellings,  they  are  alwayes  wandring  in  troupes  where-
soever they  goe  :  thither  the  Empresse  (having  left  Prince
Axalla  to  governe  at  Quinzai)  came  unto  him.  The
Prince  remayned  there  almost  two  monthes,  having  in
this  place  given  order  for  all  the  Affaires  he  had.  Cambala
was  also  neere  unto  Mount  Althay,  where  they  use  to  bury
the  Scythian  Emperours,  whom  we  doe  call  the  great  Cham.
The  Emperor  caused  the  body  of  the  Emperour  his
Uncle  to  be  brought  thither,  and  himselfe  would  conduct

460

ALHACEN THE ARAB

it  with  all  pompe,  honouring  not  only  his  body,  but  also
all  that  hee  had  loved  in  the  World,  and  although  it  was
not  the  custome  to  cause  women  for  to  assist  the  Funerals,  The  magnifi-
yet  would he affoord  this honour  unto the Empresse,  cent  Funerall
that  she should  assist  the  bringing of  the body,  going  Q^^of
neere  unto  the  same. This  he  did,  the  more  to  make  Tartaria.
appeare  how  much  he  honoured  the  memory  of  the  late
Emperour  in  his  Wife,  being  his  Daughter,  and  also  to
the end that if  God did  take him away, his  children
being  small,  shee  should  have  the  greater  authority,  and
bee  the  better  acknowledged  worthy  to  governe  in  the
minoritie of  his Children ; and also for that shee had
beene  brought  up alwayes  in  authority,  even  since  she
was marryed. The  Prince  desiring thereby the more
to  acknowledge  the  honour  the  Emperour  his  Uncle  had
done  him,  by  adopting  him  as  his  Sonne,  and  in  having  left
him  so  great  and  large  an  Empire,  as  that  was,  whereof
he  left  unto him the possession. Now the  Emperour
loved her onely, having no other affection in such  Tamerlan  his
pleasure,  but only  the happinesse  of  a  faire  Off-spring,  vertuous  and
the which he  hoped for. Now the body  of the late  mt0  his
Emperour  being  come  unto  Cambalu,  he  determined  to  wife.
conduct  it  unto  the  buriall  according  unto  the  accustomed
Ceremony,  and  to put the body  with the Kings and
Emperours  his  Ancestors. After  he  had  from  point  to
point  performed  the  last  Will  and  Testament  of  the  late
Emperour,  he  returned  from  thence  unto  Cambalu,  where
he spent all Winter in Tilt and Turnying, going a
hunting,  making his abode there, because  he was in  a
place  neerest  unto  the  Kingdome  of  China,  to  know  how
matters passed there, having now brought thither his
last  Affaires,  purposing  to  goe  thither  in  person  the  next
Winter,  if  Odmar  did not make  an  end  of  the Wars
alreadie  begunne,  and  if  the  King  of  China  did  not  submit
himselfe  wholly  under  his  obedience,  having  determined
not  to  depart from  Cambalu,  untill  this  Countrey  were
pacified,  the  marke  he  shot  at,  being  only  to  keepe  that
which  his  valour  was  able  to  conquer  through  his  good

461

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  young
Prince  made
Governour  of
Quinzai  and
over  all  the
Countrey  ;
which  seemeth
to  bee  the
North  parts  of
China,  and
perhaps  in
these  times,
Nanquin  was
the  Seat  of  the
K.  of  China
and  Quinzai,
of  the  Tartar
Can.

[III.  i.  162.]
Axalla
appointed  the
young  Princes
Governour,
and  authorised
over  all  the
Kingdomes  of
Tamerlan,  as
Governour
generall.
The  King  of
China  came
unto  the
Emperour
Tamerlans
Court,  and
did  sweare
unto  him  once
againe
obedience.

fortune,  being  desirous  to  spend  the  rest  of  his  life  in
enjoying  the  fruits  of  his  travels,  and  for  to  publish  his
prayses  unto  his  people,  and  with  Millions  to  maintayne
them  in  peace.  He  had  also  a  purpose  to  bring  unto
an  end  that  which  hee  had  determined  to  doe  to
Samarcand.

Now  Axalla  was  at  Quinzai,  as  well  unto  the  content-
ment of  all  the  men  of  Warre,  as  the  Inhabitants,  who
desired  much  to  see  their  Prince,  and  having  caused
Prince  Axalla  in  their  behalfe  to  beseech  it,  that  it  would
please  the  Emperour  to  cause  his  Sonne  to  bee  brought
up  amongst  them  there,  the  which  he  did  grant  unto
them  in  favour  of  the  said  Prince  Axalla,  establishing
him  for  to  command  in  the  absence  of  the  Prince  his
Sonne,  whom  hee  made  Governour  of  Quinzai,  from
Cambalu  even  unto  the  Sea.  This  Countrey  was  re-
plenished with  some  three  hundred  Cities,  and  was  in
largenesse  more  then  foure  hundred  leagues,  besides  an
infinite  number  of  Villages.  To  make  short,  it  was  that
the  Emperour  his  Uncle  governed,  where  this  Prince
Axalla  was  his  Lieutenant  generall,  under  the  authoritie
of  the  young  Prince  his  sonne,  unto  whom  he  delivered
him  in  charge  for  to  be  his  Governour,  authorising  him
unto  the  governement  generall  of  all  his  Kingdomes:
for  the  great  wisedome  that  was  in  this  Knight,  made
him  beloved  in  all  the  Countreys  under  the  Emperours
obedience :  the  services  also  and  great  victories  the  which
he  had  caused  the  Emperour  to  obtayne  by  his  stout
courage,  and  good  conduct,  who  for  these  occasions  put
his  principall  trust  in  him,  and  after  himselfe  hee  thought
him  onely  worthie  to  preserve  for  his  children  his  King-
dome  and  Empresse.

The  King  of  China  came  to  visit  him  at  his  Court,
according  unto  the  covenants  offered  unto  him,  the  which
he  accepted  :  he  did  sweare  once  againe  obedience  unto
the  Emperour,  who  caused  him  to  see  all  his  greatest
Cities,  for  to  make  himselfe  the  more  to  be  feared  of
this  Barbarian,  who  kept  no  more  promise  then  pleased

462

ALHACEN THE ARAB

himselfc. Hee was astonished to behold so many
Souldiers, and the Countrey so well replenished with
people ;  and  above  all,  that  they  used  so  little  curiositie
of  riches  in  their  apparell  and  garments,  wondring  that  The  meane
the  Emperour  was  apparelled  in  meane  Cloth  of  one  colour,  aPPare"  °f
without  any  other  fashion  : but  to  countervail  that,  he
had about  him men which seemed  to bee  Kings. At
the  same  time  when  the  King  of  China  was  at  the  Court,
the Emperour received newes of  the  *  victorie against  *This  batten,
the  Soldan,  for  the  which  the  Emperour  rejoyced,  making  for  brevitie  is
I  feasts  and  turneys  in  his  Court in  token  of  mirth,  and  ^  the  most
this rejoycing continued for the space of  eight  dayes.  part  of  the
After the Emperour had given order for the double  Booke.
paying of  his Armie that  came into  Persia, under  the
conduct  of  the  great  Chamberlaine,  and  Synopes  Colonell
generall  in  the  Imperiall  Armie,  the  Emperour  went  unto
Quinsay  for to see his  sonne,  and visit  the  people  of
this  Countrey.

The Emperour  arriving neere unto Quinsay, Prince
Axalla  comming  to  meet  him  two  dayes  journey  off,  with
all  the  chiefe  Lords  of  the  Countrey,  together  with  the
principall  Citizens,  who  were  preparing  for  the  Emperour
the  most magnificent  receiving  that  might  bee,  as  well
by  water  as  by  land. As  this  Citie  is  one  of  the  richest  The  descrip-
in  the  world,  so  is  it  one  of  the  greatest,  and  of  the  most  Jjjf'.v  ***
wonderfull  situation,  being  all  wholly  divided  and  over-  Qu-tn^
thwarted with channels, upon the which are framed  with  the '
wonderfull  and stately buildings,  accompanied with an  wonderfull
infinite  number  of  Bridges, upon the which  they  passe  5ltuatl™
over channels : this  Citie aboundeth with all  kinde of ere°^'
spices,  and in great  quantitie,  likewise  with  all  manner
of  merchandises. The Emperour as soone as  he  was
arrived,  received  presents  of  the  Citizens,  the  which  were  Tamerlan
esteemed  to  be  worth  above  two  millions  of  Gold,  with  received  with

a  wonderfull  variety  of  all  rare  and  singular  things,  the  ?***  «*£»*-

'  ~  oo'  hcence  into

which  they  presented  unto  him,  for  to  testifie  the  love  Quinsay,  with
and  obedience  they  did  owe  unto  him.  The  Emperour  tick  and  rare
was  desirous  to  see  his  sonne,  whom  they brought up  presents.

463

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

with  the  accustomed  greatnesse  of  Princes :  and  having

caused  the  child  to  be  brought  before  him,  being  of  the

The  order  hee  age  of  seven  yeeres ;  he  forbad  from  hence  forward  they

tookefor  his should  suffer  him  to  weare  any  thing  upon  his  head,  and  \

sonnes  himselfe  did  hang  a  Bowe  about  his  necke,  saying  aloud,

education.  ,  .  ,  .  , %  , . ,  . ,  .. » / °

that  they  which  from  their  birth  were  called  unto  sove-  !

raignties,  should  bee  used  both  unto  cold  and  heate,  and  |

should  bee  exercised  in  Armes  betimes,  and  not  brought  \

up delicately  and  easily, reprehending  them which  had

the bringing  of  him up, demanding of  them, if they

meant  to  make  a  woman  of  him  ? And  they  answering,

Tamerlan  his  that  he  was tender. If  he be  not  borne  (said  he)  for  i

notable  saying  to  be  strong  in  Armes,  he  will  not  be  worthy  to  succeed

filTmlre  **  meC  : f°r  he  mUSt  n0t  be  an  effeminate  Prince  that  sha11  !
preserve the Parthian Empire. Now  he  had  sent  the

Empresse  unto  Samarcand  to  be  delivered,  where  shee  was

honourably  received,  having  never  beene  there  since  shee

was married. Hee  received  newes  that shee  was  there

The  Empresse  delivered of  another  goodly  sonne,  a thing  which hee

ewffte. °* caused  to be  published  over  all,  and  himselfe  in  token

at  Samarcand  °f  jov> made feasts fifteene dayes, with all  kindes  of  j

in  Parthia. magnificent  turneys :  this  he  did  for  to  shew  his  agilitie

unto  his  people,  to  the  end,  that  as  he  excelled  all  his  |

Court  in  vertues,  that  they  should  also  judge  him  worthie

to governe  them above all other  men. After  he  con-

Tamerlan  his  tinued  there  a  moneth,  and  having  visited  all  the  Sea-townes

recreations , neere  unt0  Quinsay,  hunting  all  kindes  of  chases,  neglect-

saying  thereof.  mg  nothing  notwithstanding  which  belonged  to  his  charge,

The  admira- saying often, that the recreations hee  did take, were

Hon  and  helpes  for  to  ease  him  in  the  paines  of  his  publike  affaires

Th^Tf  l°7  wnereunto  God  had  called  him. Having  upon  his  returne

Quinzay  did called together  all  the people, he published  his lawes,

beare  unto which  were  all  reverenced  of  this  people,  as  though  they

their  Emperor,  had  proceeded  from the Divinitie,  so  much  admiration

a**  "fkl/  hac*  ever7  one °f  tne  greatnesse  of  this  Prince. The

Quinzay which  I  will  truely  declare  unto  you,  that  so  long  as  the

towards  their Emperour was there, this people did almost nothing,

Emperour. being  for  the  most  part  busied  in  beholding  of  him,  not

464

ALHACEN THE ARAB

finding  any  greater  contentation  then  that.  Some  of  his
Courtiers,  and  amongst  the  rest,  Prince  Axalla  said  one
day  unto  him,  that  this  was  a  Citie  fit  for  his  abode.  O
my  friend,  it  is  not  so  :  if  they  should  see  mee  daily,  they
would  make  no  more  account  of  mee.  It  is  a  maxime,
that  the  Lord  of  this  great  Citie  must  not  goe  thither
but  once  in  ten  yeeres,  and  when  he  is  there,  it  behooveth
him  to  temper  his  actions,  as  if  he  were  upon  a  Scaffold
readie  for  to  play  some  Comedie,  where  gravitie  and  good
grace  is  necessary  for  to  content  the  beholders :  for  the
people  doe  easily  receive  an  evill  impression  of  their
Prince,  as  they  also  doe  a  good,  if  you  performe  it
well  unto  them.

Now  I  have  forgotten  to  tell  you  how  the  Emperour  [III.  i.  163.]
sent  Prince  Axalla  in  his  name  from  Quinsay  into  China,  Pr'ince  Axalla

I  and  his  Imperiall  Majestie  did  not  depart  out  of  the  ~  establish
Province  before  he  returned:  he  went  thither  with  a peace  there.
great diligence for to establish peace there. Prince

j  Axalla  went  forward  towards  Paguin,  where  he  was
received  of  the  Governour  with  all  possible  honour.
And  having  assembled  all  the  Emperours  forces,  hee
set  forward  towards  the  borders  of  China,  have  an  enter-
view  at  Pochio,  where  the  meeting  place  was  agreed
upon.  He  passed  by  Quantou :  went  forward  unto
Pochio,  whither  the  King  came  also  to  meet  with  him ;

1  and  hee  entred  full  fiftie  leagues  into  the  Countrey  newly
conquered.  It  seemed  unto  him  a  thing  too  much  dero-
gating from  the  greatnesse  of  the  Emperour,  the  majestie
of  whose  person  hee  represented,  if  he  went  any  further

(j  to  see  this  barbarous  King,  being  more  fit  that  he  should
come  forward into  the  Countrey  conquered  lately  from

1  him  by  Odmar,  after  he  had  obtayned  the  victory,  then  to
goe  into  his  Countreys  although  he  had  subjected  them
unto  the  Emperour,  and  did pay a very great  tribute.
So  the  King  of  China  arrived  within  a  league  of  Pochio  ThemeeHngof
with  all  his  Court :  hee  set  forward  unto  a  Plaine,  where -th  the  K-
he  and  Prince  Axalla  did  see  each  other,  who  was  much  0j 'China  at
better  accompanied, from  whom the  King  did  as  much  Pochio.
xi  465  2  G

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

differ  as  from  the  Emperours  owne  person. They  met
three several  times together : the King desired to  bee
admitted  into  a  Citie,  which  the  Emperour  had  granted
unto  him  by  the  treatie. Prince  Odmar  declared  that  it
was  of  great  importance,  therefore  Prince  Axalla  was  by
the  Emperour  appointed  for  to  bee  Judge  of  this  contro-
versie,  In  the  end  they  required  another  further  within
the  Countrey,  the  which  the  King  accepted:  so  hee  was
put  into  possession  of  that  Citie,  the  situation  whereof
was  very  pleasant,  being  compassed  about  with a  Lake.
Axalla having  discovered  that this  barbarous  King,  did
earnestly  desire  it  onely  for  his  pleasure,  and  not  for  any
other  evill  intent, the Citie  which  hee delivered being
seated  upon  a  River  further  within  his  Countrey,  and  that
other within our Countrey  compassed about with our
fortresses : but Odmar did not allow of that, and
supposed  it  to  bee  for  an  evill  purpose,  as  for  to  con-
trive  some new  practises. Odmar  being  an  olde man,
who  knew  the Kings  unfaithfulnesse,  although  hee  had
made  him  know  it  well  enough  unto  his  smart,  having
(as  I  have  said)  wonne  twenty  or  thirtie  Cities  from  him ;
and  above  fourescore  leagues  of  Countrey,  at  such  time  as
hee  obtayned  the  last Battell, during  the  time  that  the
Emperour was  in  his  last Voyage  against  the  Persians.
So  the  enterview  continued  yet  betweene  Prince  Axalla
and the King of  China on the Plaine, a Tent being
pitched,  whither  Prince  Axalla  did  come  unto  him,  whom
hee continually honoured as much as the Emperours
owne  person,  where  after  they  had  long  time  treated  by
The  resolution  Interpreters,  it  was  in  the  end  agreed,  that  the  King  of
of  the  meeting  China  should enter  againe into Quinanci,  not  suffering
betweene \{\m  to  put  any  Garrison  into  it,  nor  to  fortifie  the  same :
xa  a  an ^  as prisoner  anc[  Subject  unto  the  Emperour,

Ktng of  China.  .....  ,  . . j .  . .  .  • •  1

hee  should  enjoy  it,  and  it  should  bee  his  owne,  enjoying

all  the  revenue  thereof,  neither  should  hee  carrie  any
kingly  Ensignes,  without  the  expresse  leave  of  the  Gover-
nour  for  the  Emperour :  hee  should  notwithstanding
have  a  guard  of  three  hundred  men  for  his  person ;  and

466

ALHACEN THE ARAB

should give knowledge unto the said Governour of

his journey, before he entred into the Emperours

Countries,  the which  he  must  passe  for  to  goe thither.

Now the  Citie was  situated in the middest of a very

great  Lake,  in  the  which  were  many  Hands,  wherein  there

were  an  infinite  number  of  houses  of  pleasure,  and  it  had

beene  alwaies  a  very  delicate  place,  where the  Kings  of

China  were  wont  to  recreate  themselves  in  all  kindes  of

pleasures  that  were  there  to  be  found : in  so  much  as  this

,barbarous  King  did  not  respect  the  conditions  propounded

unto  him,  so  as  he  might  make  his  abode  there,  as  it  were

in an Hermitage. Having left unto his brother the  King  of

government  of  his  whole Kingdome, through the dis-  Chinas

pleasure he had of his bondage whereunto he was  brother

o  ^ succeeds.

Drought ;  a  courage  certainly  magnanimous,  and  worthie

i  Nation  made  civill  with  the  best  learning,  and  unworthie

he  name  of  a  Barbarian  wherewith  we  called  him.

Three times in the weeke at Samercand, Tamerlan

ninistred  open  justice  unto  the  meanest,  in  his  Imperiall  The  justice  of

Majestie,  a  thing  which  made  him  beloved  of  the  people  Tamerian-

yver  whom  hee  commanded. In  the  other  dayes  hee  gave

>ecret  audience  for  the  affaires  of  his  Estate,  and  tooke

idvice for matters  of  importance, which were decided

daily in his presence. He had such severitie in his

:ounsell, that  they  must  needs  deale  truely  before  him,

ind without  all  passion  in  discoursing: notwithstanding

le  alwaies  shewed  himselfe  courteous  in  his  conversation,

ind  made  himselfe  both  beloved  and  feared  of  his  people  :

lee never changed  his  servants, except  they  committed

rreat  faults  against  him  : of  all  the  servants  of  the  late

imperour  his  Uncle  he  did  not  change  one  of  them,  but

liee  did  withall  encrease  their  estates,  making  them  in  this

hange  to  feele  his  liberalitie,  which  he  made  strangers  for

o  taste  also,  unto  whom  he  was  accustomed  to  give,  to

»inde  them unto  him. He  drew  great  store  of  money

I'eerely  for  tribute  of  the  Moscovite  : but  he  distributed

t  within  the  same  countrey  for  to  maintayne  his  autho-

itie  there,  winning  those  for  his  which might  have hurt

467

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Tamerlan  his
care  of  his  <f
revenue^

[III.  i.  164.]

The  death  of
the  Emperour
Tamerlan.

Prince

Sautochio

proclaimed

Emperor  and

signed

dispatches.

Prince

Sautochio  nine-
teene  yeeres
old  when  he
came  unto  his
Empire.

him,  by  meanes  of  giving  unto  them.  Hee  had  great
care  of  his  revenues,  and  he  had  such  a  readinesse,  that  he
did  see  his  estate  from  three  moneths  unto  three  moneths
within  one  houre,  both  the  ordinarie  and  extraordinarie
expences,  they  presented  it  so  well  digested  unto  him.
But  our  haste  of  other  voyages  permits  not  our  stay
here.  Onely  we  will  adde,  that  after  all  things  ordered,
Sicknesse  arrested  and  Death  conquered  this  great  Con-
querour :  and  this  Traveller  travelled  the  way  of  all  flesh
into  another  world.  Presently  after  his  death  they  ranne
to  call  his  sonne,  who  as  soone  as  he  was  come  shut  his
eyes,  powring  out  teares,  as  also  did  all  his  servants.
The  Prince  Sautochio  his  eldest  sonne,  within  two  houres
after  was  proclaymed  Emperour  throughout  all  the  whole
Armie,  and  dispatches  were  made  from  all  parts  to
advertise  the  Governours  of  Provinces  thereof,  the
Letters  being  signed  with  the  hand  of  the  new
Emperour,  who  having  assembled  all  the  Armie  to-
gether, hee  made  an  Oration  unto  the  Captaines  and
Souldiers,  and  caused  them  to  make  a  generall  muster,
gratifying  all  the  ancient  Servants  of  the  Emperour  his
Father:  he  would  not  dispose  of  any  thing  before  he  had
seene  Prince  Axalla,  and  was  joyned  with  the  Imperiall
Armie.  This  young  Prince,  when  he  came  unto  this
Empire  was  nineteene  yeeres  old,  hee  was  faire,  and  had
much  of  the  Emperor  his  Fathers  naturall  disposition.
They  hoped  that  hee  would  wisely  (through  the  good
counsell  that  was  about  him)  maintayne  this  great
Empire:  but  they  feared  greatly  the  young  Prince
Letrochio  his  brother  (whom  his  mother  loved)  would
cause  divisions,  as  it  happened  in  the  times  of  their  great
grand-father  betweene  two  brethren,  who  had  beene
occasion  of  the  destruction  of  their  estate,  the  which  was
releeved  and  lifted  up  againe  unto  his  height  by  the
valour  of  Tamerlan.

46S

CHAGGI MEMET

Chap. IX.

Reports  of  Chaggi  Memet  a  Persian  of  Tabas  in
the  Province  of  *Chilan,  touching  his  Travels
and  Observations  in  the  Countrey  of  the  Great
Can,  unto  M. G. Baptista  Ramusio.

E  said  that  he  had  beene  at  Succuir  and
Campion,  Cities  of  the  Province  of  Tan-
guth,  in  the  entrance  of  the  State  of
Grand  Can,  who  (said  he)  was  called
Daimir  Can,  and  sent  his  Officers  to  the
government  of  the  said  Cities,  which  are
the  first  toward  the  Muslemans,  and  are

*or  Gilam.

Succuir  and
Campion
mentioned  by
M.  Polo.

Idolaters.  He  went  thither  with  a  Caravan,  which  went
with  merchandises  out  of  Persia,  and  from  the  places
adjoyning  to  the  Caspian  Sea,  for  the  Regions  of
Cataio ;  which  Caravan  they  permit  not  to  pierce
further  then  Succuir  and  Campion,  nor  any  other  Mer-
chant therein,  except  he  goe  Ambassadour  to  the  great
Can.

This  Citie  of  Succuir  is  great  and  populous,  with
faire  houses  of  hewen  stones  after  our  manner ;  and  hath
many  great  Temples  with  their  Idols  of  stone.  It  is
situate  in  a  Playne  where  runne  infinite  Rivolets ;  is
abundant  in  victuals  of  all  sorts,  and  yeelds  silke  there
made  of  the  black  Mulberies  in  great  quantitie  :  hath  no
Wine  growing,  but  they  make  a  drinke  with  Hony  as
it  were  Ale.  Of  fruits,  by  reason  the  Countrey  is  cold,
there  grow  none  but  Peares,  Apples,  Apricocks,  Peaches,
Melons  and  Cucumers.  Hee  said  that  Rhubard  (of  this
commoditie  Memet  had  brought  great  store  at  that  time
to  Venice)  growes  all  over  the  Countrey ;  but  the  best,  in
certaine  high  stony  Hills  neere  adjoyning,  where  are  many
Springs  and  Woods  of  divers  sorts  of  high  Trees,  and  the
Land  is  of  a  red  colour,  and  by  reason  of  many  Raynes
and  Springs  almost  alway  myrie.  He  shewed  out  of  his
bosome a picture of  the Plant, brought out of the

469

No  passing
into  the
Countrey.

Succuir
described.

Rhubarbe
described.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Countrey  (which  Ramusio  in  his  Preface  to  M.  Polo
hath  also  presented  with  this  discourse)  the  description
of  which  is  this.  The  leaves,  he  said,  are  ordinarily  two
spans  long,  more  or  less  as  the  Plant  is  in  bignesse ;
narrow  below  and  broad  above,  downy  with  (as  it  were)
small  hayres  in  their  circumference ;  the  stalke  or  trunke
is  greene  foure  fingers  high,  and  sometimes  a  span  from
the  ground :  the  greene  leaves  with  age  grow  yellow  and
spread  on  the  ground.  In  the  midst  of  the  trunke  growes
a  thin  branch  with  flowres  fastned  within,  like  the  Mamole
violets  in  forme,  but  of  the  colour  of  Milke  and  Azure,
and  greater  then  those  violets,  of  a  noysome  sent.  The
roote  within  ground  is  a  span  or  two  long,  of  a  tawny
colour  in  the  barke,  some  as  bigge  as  a  mans  thigh  or
The  Root  and  legge,  out  of  which  grow  little  Roots  or  Sprigs,  which
Juyce  and  spread  in  the  ground,  and  are  cut  away  from  the  great
preparing.  Roote ;  which  within  is  yellow  with  many  veynes  of  faire
red,  full  of  red  and  yellow  juyce,  cleaving  to  the  fingers
and  making  the  hand  yellow :  and  being  cut  in  peeces  the
viscous  juyce  issueth  out  and  the  roote  becomes  light;
they  lay  them  therefore  on  boords  turning  them  up  and
downe  divers  times  a  day,  that  the  juyce  should  incorpo-
rate therein,  lest  it  lose  the  goodnesse  ;  after  foure  or  six
dayes  hanging  them  to  drie  in  the  winde,  where  the  Sunne
may  not  come  at  them,  being  in  two  moneths  drie  and
perfect.  They  ordinarily  take  it  out  of  the  ground  in  the
A  cold  climate.  Winter,  the  vertue  being  then  most  united  in  the  Roote
(the  Spring  there  beginning  at  the  end  of  May)  which  at
other  times  is  dispersed  into  the  leaves  and  flowers,  that
juyce  also  being  gone  and  the  roote  light  and  hollow.
Six  Saggi  They  sell  one  of  their  Cart  lodes  of  Roots  with  leaves

make  an  ounce,  for  sixteene  silver  Saggi  (not  much  unlike  ours)  for  they
have  no  Coynes,  but  make  their  gold  and  silver  in  small
[III.  i.  165.]  thin  rods,  and  thence  cut  peeces  of  a  Saggio  weight,
which  in  silver  is  twentie  Soldi  Venetian,  and  in  gold  a
Ducket  and  halfe.  He  said  that  they  would  not  gather
it,  if  forren  Merchants  should  not  come  to  trade  for  it,
themselves  making no reckoning  thereof:  and  that  the

470

CHAGGI MEMET

Merchants  of  China  and  India  carry  away  the  greatest
part  ;  who  if  they  should  cut  and  dresse  it  as  before  is
expressed,  after  it  is  brought  in  Carts,  in  foure  or  six
dayes  it  would  corrupt  ;  and  seven  burdens  greene  (hee
said)  would  not  yeeld  above  one  drie.  When  it  is
greene  it  is  intolerably  bitter  ;  and  in  Cataio  they  use
it  not  for  medicine,  but  beate  and  mixe  it  with  other
odoriferous  compositions  for  perfumes  to  their  Idols.
In  some  places  there  is  such  store  that  they  burne  it
dryed  in  stead  of  wood  ;  others  give  it  their  erased
horses,  so  little  doe  they  esteeme  it  in  Cataio.  But
there  they  much  prize  another  small  Roote,  which  growes
in  the  Mountaines  of  Succuir,  where  the  Rubard  growes,
and  call  it  Mambroni  cini,  very  deare,  used  for  diseases,  Mambroni
those  specially  of  the  eyes  ;  nor  did  he  thinke  any  of  Cini.
it  was  brought  into  these  parts.  He  said  also,  that  in
all  Cataio  they  much  use  the  leaves  of  another  herb,
which  they  call  Chiai  Catai,  which  growes  in  a  place
of  Catai,  called  Cacianfu.  They  boyle  it,  whether  new
or  drie,  and  taking  off  a  Beaker  or  two  of  that  decoction
fasting  (as  hot  as  can  be  borne)  takes  away  the  Feaver,
payne  of  the  Head  or  Stomack,  Back,  Joynts,  and  other
diseases,  especially  the  Gowt,  and  it  is  good  for  digestion.
They  use  to  carry  it  with  them  in  their  Voyages,  and
will  give  a  sack  of  Rubarb  for  an  ounce  of  Chiai  Catai.
And  the  Cataians  say,  that  if  our  Merchants,  Persians
and  Frankes,  knew  the  goodnesse  thereof,  they  would
buy  no  Ravend  Cini,  so  they  call  Rubard.

I  asked  him  of  his  Voyage  from  thence  to  Constanti-
nople, and  hee  answered  mee  by  Mambre  our  Interpreter,
that  hee  returned  not  that  way  he  went  with  the  Caravan,
by  reason  that  the  Greene-head  Tartars  called  Jescilbas,
sent  an  Embassador  at  that  time  when  hee  was  to  come
away,  with  a  great  company,  by  the  way  of  Tartaria
Deserta,  above  the  Caspian  Sea  to  the  great  Turke  at
Constantinople,  to  make  a  league  against  the  Persian
their  common  enemie.  Whereupon  he  thought  good
to come with them,  and so did to Caffa. 1 asked  of

47i

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  way  of
the  Caravan
betwixt
Tauris  and
Campion  in
Catai.

Campion
described.

Apparell.

Bearded  men.
Houses.

Pageants.

Temples  and
Idols.

the  way  he  went.  He  said  he  should  have  returned
from  Campion  to  Gauta  in  six  dayes  (eight  Farsencs,
each  of  which  is  three  Italian  miles,  are  a  dayes  journey,
but  on  the  Hils  and  Desarts  they  goe  not  halfe  so
much)  from  Gauta  to  Succuir  in  five  dayes,  from
Succuir  to  Camul  in  fifteene,  here  the  Musulmans  (or
Mahumetans)  begin  :  from  Camul  to  Turfon  is  thirteene.
From  Turfon  they  passe  three  Cities,  Chialis  ten  dayes
journey  thence,  after  that  Cuchia  other  ten,  and  after
that  Acsu  in  twentie.  From  Acsu  to  Cascar  are  other
twentie  dayes  all  rough  Desart,  all  the  former  way
being  thorow  places  inhabited.  From  Cascar  to  Samar-
cand  are  five  and  twentie  dayes.  From  Samarcand  to
Bochara  in  Corassam,  five ;  from  Bochara  to  Eri,  twentie ;
from  thence  to  Veremi  in  fifteene ;  from  Veremi  to
Casbin  in  six  ;  thence  to  Soltania  in  foure,  and  thence
to  Tauris  in  six  dayes.

Now  for  some  particulars  of  those  places,  he  related
that  Campion  is  subject  to  Daimir  Can,  great  Emperor
of  the  Tartars  ;  the  Citie  placed  in  a  fertile  Playne  all
cultivated  and  abundant  in  provisions.  They  are
apparelled  in  black  Cotton  cloth,  furred  in  Winter  with
skins  of  Wolves  and  Sheepe  if  they  be  poore  ;  the  richer
with  Sables  and  Marterns  of  great  price.  They  weare
black  Bonets  sharpe  like  a  Sugar-loafe  ;  the  men  rather
small  then  great,  wearing  beards  as  we  doe,  specially  a
certayne  time  of  the  yeere.  Their  houses  are  of  stone
like  ours,  with  two  or  three  lofts,  slope-roofed,  and
diversly  painted,  and  they  have  one  street  onely  of
painters.  The  great  men  for  magnificence  make  a  great
Loft  or  Pageant,  and  thereon  erect  two  Tents  of  silke
embroydered  with  gold,  silver,  pearles,  and  jewels,  and
there  stand  with  their  friends.  This  they  cause  to  bee
carried  by  fortie  or  fiftie  Slaves,  and  so  goe  thorow
the  Citie  in  solace.  The  Gentlemen  are  carried  on  a
simple  Pageant,  by  foure  or  six  men  without  other
furniture.  There  Temples  are  made  like  our  Churches,
so  great  that  they  may  contayne  foure  or  five  thousand

472

CHAGGI MEMET

persons  ;  and  have  in  them  two  Statues,  of  a  Man  and
a  Woman,  each  fortie  foot  long,  all  of  one  peece,  stretched
on the ground, and all gilded. They have excellent
stone cutters. They  bring  quarry  stones  two  or  three
moneths  journey  on  shod Carts  of fortie  wheeles  very  Huge
ligh,  drawne  by  five  or  six  hundred  Horses  and  Mules,  carriages.
There are also small Images  with six or seven heads
and  ten hands,  all  holding  divers  things,  one  a  Serpent,
mother  a  Bird,  a  third  a  Flower,  &c. There  are  some
Monasteries  in which live men of  holy life, immured  Anchorets.
within their houses that they cannot goe out whiles
they  live,  and have victuals every  day brought them.
There  are  innumerable,  like our Friars,  which goe  up  Friars.
ind  downe  the  Citie. They  have  a  custome,  when  one
of  their kindred dyes, to clothe themselves in white  White
-nany  dayes  made  of  Cotton  ; their  garments  are  made  mourners.
ong  to  the  ground  with  wide  sleeves. They  use  Printing  Printing.
)f  their  Books,  which  he thought  somewhat  like  those

shewed  him  at  M.  Thomas  Giuntos  printing  house,
"heir  Citie  is  fortified  with  a  thick  wall,  within  filled  Fortification.
vith  earth,  able  to  carry  foure  Carts  abrest,  with  Towres
ind  Artillery  as  thick  as  those  of  the  great  Turke.  The
Ditch  is  wide  and  drie,  but  they  can  make  it  runne
vith  water  at  their  pleasure.  They  have  a  kind  of  very
rreat Oxen with long, thin and with hayre. The  PoloandConti

ataians  and  Idolaters  are  forbidden  to  goe  out  of  their  tell  of  such
Countries,  to  goe  on  merchandise  thorow  the  World. uxen-

Beyond  the  Desart  above  Corassam  to  Samarcand,  and
ill  the Idolatrous Cities, the Jescilbas rule, which are  [III.  i.  166.]
"artars,  Musulmans,  wearing  greene  sharpe  Turbants  of  The  Jeselbas
elt, so making a difference betwixt them and the  or  Green-head
Persians,  which  weare  them  red  :  and  betwixt  them  two  lartars-
or  diversitie  of  opinions  in  Religion  are  continual  warres,
.nd disagreement about their Confines. Bocara and
amarcand  are  two Cities  of  these Green-heads,  each  a

ignorie  of  it  selfe. They  have  three  particular  sciences,
"himia  (in  the  same  sense  as  here)  Limia,  to  make  and  Chimia,
ause love,  and Simia,  to  make men see that  which  is  Simia,  Limia.

473

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

not. The moneys which they have are not Coyned,

but every  Gentleman and Merchant makes thin rods

of  gold and silver, as is before said of Campion and

Succuir. In the market place of  Campion are every

Prating  moun-  day many Mountebankes which have that science of

tejuwlLTd Simia>  wnicn  compassed  with  a  great multitude  present

knaves.  strange  sights,  as  to cause  a  man  to cut  off  his arme,

or  thrust  himselfe  thorow  with  a sword, and  seeme  to

bee  all  bloudy,  with  other  like.

Chap. X.

A  Treatise  of  China  and  the  adjoyning  Regions,
written  by  Gaspar  Da  Cruz  a  Dominican
Friar,  and  dedicated  to  Sebastian  King  of
Portugall :  here  abbreviated.

§.  i-

Of  Camboia  and  the  Bramenes  there  ;  the  cause
of  his  going  to  China  :  of  China  and  the
neighbouring  Regions.

Being  in  Malaca  building  an  house  of  my
Order,  and  preaching,  was  informed  that  tli
in  the  Kingdome  of  Camboia  (which  is
subject  to  the  King  of  Siam,  and  lyeth
toward the parts of China, and doth
confine  with Champa,  whence commethllor
the  most  precious  Calambach)  was  great
oportunitie to preach the Gospell, and to reape some
fruit. Having  leave  of  my  Prelate,  I  tooke  the  journey  (of
in hand. And after the passing many troubles and  an
hunger  in  the  journey,  with dangers and sicknesses,  I  bee
came  a  land,  and  after  I had reasonably  informed my  fro
selfe by a third person, conversing with the People  Joe
and  with  the Fathers, even before I knew it I  found  fee
all  to  the  contrary  of  that  which  they  had  told,  and  that  jtat
all were deceits of  the simple Laytie, which of  light

474

J8T

T^S

Camboia.

fclf

WM

Siam.

i8§

?&

Champa.

Igf

I5JJ8

.'/;

Pen

FRIAR CASPAR DA CRUZ

matters were mooved to presume of the people that
which was not in them. And besides this, I found
many  hinderances for  the  obtayning  of  my desires  and
intent ; for first, the King is a Bramene, and the  King  of
Bramenes are his principall men and his favourites,  Camboia  a
and most familiar, because they  are Witches,  for  they iamene-
are much given to bee pleased with witchcrafts, and
they doe nothing without consulting the Witches  and
Bramenes  that  are  in  the  Kingdome  (for  by  this  meanes
they  thrive)  by  the  Devill. And  so  the  first  thing  that
the  King  asked  me,  was  if  I  were  a  Witch.

The Bramenes doe worship among  others one  God,
which they call Probar missur (which  they  said  made  Probar  missur.
the Heavens  and the Earth  ; and  another God,  which
'hey  call Pralocussar, this  also having  obtayned  power  Pralocussur.
bf  another which they call Praissur, for to give this
licence  to  Probar  missur)  and  I  shewed  them,  that  not
)nely  he had not made the Heaven and the Earth,
Dut  that  hee  had  beene  a  very  wicked  man  and  a  great
>inner  : wherefore these Priests said, that  they  would
vorship  him  no  more,  having  worshipped  him  thitherto
vith their God Praput prasar metri  : whereupon the  Praput prasar
latred  of  the  Bramenes  increased  towards  me,  and  from  mtru
hence forward I had disfavours of  the King, which
vas  mooved  for  the  zeale  of  his  God,  and the God  of
lis Bramenes. There met about these matters, the
^riests  of  the  Idols,  and  all  of  their  troupe,  which  goe
or  Priests,  and  hold themselves  for  religious  men,  and
n their conversation and  life they  are  separated  from
11  other  people,  which  to  my  thinking  is  the  third  part
if  the people  of  the Land  ;  the King thereof  setting
n  hundred  thousand  men in the field. This  religious
>eople,  or  that  holds  it  selfe for such,  are exceedingly
iproud and vaine, and alive they are worshipped for  Men  alive
rods,  in  sort  that  the  inferiour  among  them  doe  worship  worshipped.
|he superiour like  gods, praying unto them  and pros-
jrating themselves before them  : and so the common
heople have a  great confidence in them, with a  great

475

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[III.  i.  167.]
Twenty  seven
Heavens.

Thirteene
Hels.

Massan-
chraches.
Nassendeches.

Mitires.

reverence  and  worship  :  in  sort  that  there  is  no  person
that  dare  contradict  them  in  any  thing,  and  their  wordes
among  them  are  held  for  so  sacred,  that  in  no  wise
they  will  endure  to  be  gainsayed.  Insomuch  that  it
hapned  sometimes  whiles  I  was  preaching,  many  round
about  me  hearing  me  very  well,  and  satisfying  them-
selves of  that  which  I  said  unto  them  ;  if  there  came
any  of  these  Priests,  and  said  this  is  good,  but  ours  is
better,  they  would  all  depart  and  leave  me  alone.
Further,  they  being  very  ignorant  presumed  to  be  very
wise,  and  the  common  people  did  hold  them  for  such,
all  their  knowledge  being  ignorances  and  Heathenish
follies.

They  make  seven  and  twenty  Heavens,  some  where
there  is  meate  and  drinke  and  faire  women  whether  they
say  all  living  things  doe  goe,  even  the  Flea  and  the
Lowse,  for  they  say,  that  as  they  have  soules,  that
they  must  live  in  the  other  World.  And  to  these,  they
say,  all  doe  goe  that  are  not  Religious  men  as  they
are.  They  place  others  higher,  whether  they  say,  their
holy  Priests  doe  goe  that  live  in  the  Wildernesses,  and
all  the  felicitie  they  give  them  there,  is  to  sit  refresh-
ing themselves  with  the  wind.  They  place  others  yet
higher,  the  gods  of  the  which,  they  say,  have  round
bodies  like  Bowles,  those  which  goe  to  these  Heavens,
and  the  honour  which  they  give  them  is,  to  give  them
round  bodies  as  the  Gods  themselves  have.  And  even  as
they  make  many  Heavens,  so  they  doe  many  Hels,  for
they  make  thirteene,  to  the  which  they  goe  according  to
the  grievousnesse  of  the  sinnes  of  every  one,  eyther  higher
or  lower.

They  have  a  division  of  their  religious  men,  for  some
they  call  Massancraches,  which  are  as  supreame,  which  sit
above  the  King :  others  they  call  Nascendeches,  which  are
as  our  Bishoppes  here.  These  sit  equall  with  the  King.
Others  they  call  Mitires,  which  are  in  the  common  degree
of  Priests,  which  do  sit  under  the  King :  under  the
which there are yet two degrees, which they call

476

«

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

Chaynizes  and  Sazes.  And  all  these  they  ascend  in
degree,  so  they  doe  in  vanitie  and  pride,  and  are  more
reverenced.  Besides  all  this,  there  is  another  very  great
inconvenience,  that  except  the  Priests  and  all  those  that
holds  themselves  for  Religious  men,  all  the  rest  are  slaves
of  the  King,  and  when  the  owner  of  the  House  dyeth,  all
that  is  in  it  returneth  to  the  King,  and  let  the  Wife  and
Children  hide  what  they  can,  and  begin  to  seeke  a  new
life  :  the  people  of  the  Countrey  is  of  such  a  nature,  that
nothing  is  done  that  the  King  knoweth  not  :  and  any
Ibodie  be  he  never  so  simple  may  speake  with  the  King ;
wherefore  every  one  seeketh  newes  to  carry  unto  him,  to
have  an  occasion  for  to  speake  with  him  :  whereby  with-
out the  Kings  good  will  nothing  can  be  done,  and  wee
(have  already  shewed  before,  that  hee  is  unwilling  to  the
matter  of  Christianize.  To  these  things  was  joyned  some
disorders  of  the  Portugals,  so  that  by  all  meanes  I  found
crosses  and  inconveniences  for  to  obtayne  my  desires  and
my  pretence  :  wherefore  I  having  beene  in  the  Countrey
ibout  a  yeare,  and  seeing  I  could  make  no  fruit  beside  the
passing  of  grievous  sicknesses,  I  determined  to  leave  this
Countrey,  and  because  they  told  mee  many  things  of
China,  and  the  people  of  it  to  have  a  disposition  to
Christianitie,  and  that  they  loved  reason,  I  determined,
seeing  in  this  Countrey  I  did  no  good,  nor  baptized  more
>phen  one  Gentile,  which  I  left  in  the  Cave,  to  goe  to
China  in  a  ship  of  China  which  was  then  in  the  Countrey;
n  which  they  carryed  me  with  a  very  good  will,  giving  me
:he  best  roome  in  the  ship,  not  taking  any  interest  of  me ;
^ea,  they  dealt  very  charitably  with  me.  This  name
China  is  not  the  proper  name  of  the  people  of  this
Countrey,  nor  of  the  Countrey  it  selfe,  neither  is  there
:ommonly  in  the  Countrey  notice  of  such  a  name,  onely
imong  all  the  people  of  India,  and  among  those  which
dwell  in  the  South  parts,  as  in  Malaca,  Siam,  Jaoa,  this
denomination  of  Chinas  goeth  currant,  and  also  among  *js  ^-s  WQrd
:hose  Chinas  which  doe  traffique  among  us.  The  proper  Tame  in
name  of  the Countrey is  *Tame,  the  e. not  well  pro-  English.

477

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

nounced,  but  almost  drowning  it  :  and  the  name  of
the  people  of  the  Countrey  is  Tamgin,  whence  this
name  China  doth  come,  which  is  currant  among  the
strangers  we  know  not,  but  it  may  be  conjectured,
that  the  people  which  in  old  time  did  sayle  to  those
parts,  because  they  passed  by  the  Coast  of  a  Kingdome,
which  they  call  Cauchin-china,  and  traffique  in  it,  and
victuall,  and  take  refreshings  there  for  the  Journey  of
the  Countrey  that  lyeth  forward,  which  is  that  of  China,
in  the  which  Kingdome  they  live  after  the  manner  of
the  Chinas,  and  is  subject  to  the  Chinas,  it  seemeth,
that  omitting  Cauchin,  from  the  denomination  of  this
other  Kingdome,  they  called  all  the  Countrey  that  lyeth
along  China.

China  is  a  great  part of  Scythia  ; for  as Herodotus

saith,  Scythia extendeth it  selfe  unto  India,  which  may

be understood, because the Chinas did possesse many

parts of  India, and did conquer them of old time,

whereof  at  this day  there are  some  Monuments,  as  in

the  Coast  of  Choromandell,  which  is  towards  the  Coast  of

the  Kingdome  of  Narsinga,  on  that  side  which  we  call

Saint Thome, because there is  a House built by the

Apostle, and the Relikes of  his bodie. There is at

this  day  a  great  Temple  of  Idols,  which  is  a  marke  for

the  Navigators to know the Coast  which is  very  low,

the which as the men of  the Countrey affirme, was

made by the Chinas,  of  whom there  remayned  among

them a perpetuall memory, and therefore they call it

The  Tartars Pagode, of the Chinas, which is to say, Temple of

rather  set  forth  the  Chinas. And  in the  Kingdome of  Callecut,  which

fleets  from -g  ^  keacj  Qf  Majavar there  be  very  ancient  fruit-trees

C  hina  to  these ,  .  , ,  r i r+  iji

Exploits  as  in  which the men or the Countrey say were planted by

Poloyoureade.  the  Chinas,  and  on  the  shoales  of  Chilao,  which  doe
runne  from  the  Hand  of  Ceylan,  toward  the  Coast  of
Cheromandel,  is  affirmed,  by  the  men  of  the  Countrey,  a
great  Army  of  the  Chinas  to  be  cast  away  which  came
for  India,  which  was  lost,  because  the  Chinas  were  but
young in that Navigation. And so the men of the

478

FRIAR CASPAR DA CRUZ

3ountrey  say the Chinas were Lords  of  all  Jaoa,  and

)f  Jautana, which is the Kingdome  of  Malaca, Siam,

md of  Chapaa, as it is commonly affirmed in those

>arts  :  wherefore  some  doe  affirme,  many  of  this  people

o  bee  like the  Chinas, that  is, having  small eyes,  flat

loses, and long faces, for the great commixture that

he  Chinas had with all of  them, especially  with  them

)f  Jaoa, which commonly are more China-like. But

he King of  China seeing  that his  Kingdome went  to

lecay,  and was  in danger by their seeking  to  conquer  [III.  i.  168.

>ther strange Countreys, he with-drew himselfe with

lis  men  to  his  owne  Kingdome,  making  a  publike  Edict

inder  paine  of  death  that  none  of  the  Countrey  should

ayle  out  of  the  Kingdome  of  China  :  the  which  lasteth

o  this  day.

The  Liquos  are  not  continued  with  mayne  Land,  but  Liquos  an
:  is  an  Hand  which  standeth  in  the  Sea  of  China,  little  I^nd.
lore  or  lesse  then  thirtie  leagues  from  China  it  selfe.
n  this  Hand  live  these  people,  which  is  a  well  dis-
used people,  more  to  the  white  then  browne.  It  is  a
ieanly  and  well  attyred  people  ;  they  dresse  their  haire
ke  women,  and  tye  it  on  the  side  of  their  head,  fastened
nth.  a  silver  bodkin  ;  their  grounds  are  plentifull  of  many
nd  good  waters  ;  it  is  a  people  that  sayle  very  seldome
eing  in  the  middest  of  the  Sea.  They  weare  good  short
■words,  they  were  in  times  past  subject  to  the  Chinas,
/ith  whom  they  had  great  conversation,  therefore  are
ery  like  the  Chinas.  Now  this  Hand  remayning  to  the
ea  from  China,  as  we  have  said,  the  Coast  of  China
unneth,  winding  from  the  Province  of  Cantano,  and  from
er  Coast  unto  the  Coast  of  the  Province  of  Nanquin,
whether  to  the  Portugals  have  sayled,  the  Coast  making
ever  a  point  as  the  Maps  doe  make,  the  which  may
e  seene  well  pointed  in  the  Sea-cards  and  in  the  Maps
lade  among  the  Portugals.

The  Tartars  are  reckoned  among  the  Scythians,  and
unne  so  far  along  China,  with  the  which  it  hath  con-
inuall Warre, that commonly they affirme to have

479

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

betweene  the  Chinas  and  the  Tartarians,  a  Wall  of  an
hundred  leagues  in  length.  And  some  will  affirme  to
bee  more  then  a  hundred  leagues  :  the  first  Kingdome
that doth confine  with  it  on the  Sea-side  of  India,  is

Cauchin  one that is called Cauchin-china,  which hath about  an

China.  hundred  leagues  little  more  or  lesse  a  long  the  Sea-coast,

the  Sea  maketh  a  great  entrance  betweene  it  and  the  He

Daman  an  Daman,  which  is  of  fiftie  leagues  in  length,  and  is  already
of  the  Chinas  :  and  in  the  end  of  this  entrance  this  King-
dome  abutteth  with  the  Kingdome  of  China,  and  is  subject
to  the  King  of  China.  The  people  of  this  Kingdome,  in
their  Habit,  Policie,  and  Government,  doe  use  themselves
like  the  people  of  China.  The  Countrey  is  much  inhabited
and  of  much  people,  it  is  also  a  very  plentifull  Countrey.
They  have  the  same  Writing  that  the  Chinas  have,
although  their  speech  be  divers.  Beyond  this  Kingdome
of  the  Cauchin-chinas,  lyeth  another  very  great  Kingdome,
which  runneth  within  the  Land  along  China,  which  some

Looser  Stones  joe  cau  Laos>  an(}  others  Siones,  Maons  :  this  by  the
otherside  towards  India,  doth  confine  with  the  Kingdome
of  Camboia,  and  with  the  great  Kingdome  of  Syam,  and
with  the  rich  Kingdome  of  Pegu,  with  all  the  which  King-
domes  it  hath  Trafrlque  :  in  sort  that  there  remayneth  to
this  Kingdome  towards  the  Sea  of  India,  all  the  Coast  of
Pegu,  unto  the  ends  of  the  Kingdome  of  Champaa,  which
doth  confine  with  Cauchin-china.  And  so  there  remayne
to  these  Laos  toward  the  side  of  the  Indian  Sea,  the  great
Kingdome  of  Pegu,  the  Kingdome  of  Tanacarin,  and  that
of  Quedaa,  and  that  of  Malaca,  and  the  Kingdomes  of
Pan,  of  Patane,  of  Syam,  of  Camboia,  and of  Champaa

1559.  which  abutteth  upon  the  Cauchin-chinas. This  Kingdome

of  the  Laos,  or  Sions  Maons,  was  subdued  by  the  Bramas
(of  the  which  we  will  speake  presently)  in  the  yeere  of
fiftie  sixe,  and  among  some  which  they  brought  captive  to
Pegu,  they  brought  some  Chinas  which  the  Laos  held
Captives,  as  one  George  Mello  affirmed  unto  mee,  which
went  for  Captayne  of  the  Voyage  to  Pegu.  And  though
commonly  there  be  no  Warres  betweene  these  Laos  and

480

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

the  Chinas,  because  of  the  great  Mountaynes  that  are
betweene  them,  on  the  which  the  Chinas  have  good  forces
on  that  side  in  the  Province  of  Camsi,  which  doth  confine
with  these  and  with  the  Bramas  :  and  in  the  forces  they
have  continually  men  in  Garrison  for  the  defence  of  those
parts  :  there  bee  notwithstanding,  continually  assaults  on
the  one  side  and  of  the  other  :  whereby  the  Laos  might
have  some  Chinas  captive.  Before  that  these  Laos  were
subdued  by  the  Bramas,  they  carryed  to  Sion,  to  Camboia,
and  to  Pegu  some  very  good  Muske  and  Gold,  whereof  is
affirmed  to  be  great  store  in  that  Countrey,  and  these
people  having  Muske,  makes  a  conjecture  the  great  store
of  Muske  which  the  Chinas  have,  they  get  it  from  the
many  beasts  that  are  in  the  Confines  of  this  Kingdome
iin  the  Province  of  Camsi,  from  whence  they  bring  it.

The  Muske  is  the  flesh  and  bloud  of  certayne  beasts,  Muske  what  it
which  they  say,  to  be  as  bigge  as  Foxes,  the  which  beaten  "•
with  strokes  and  killed,  they  tye  the  skinne  with  the  flesh
together  in  lumps,  the  which  they  cut  after  the  flesh  is
rotten,  and  so  they  sell  it,  which  the  Portugals  do  call
Muske  Cods.  And  when  it  commeth  fresh,  presently  it
appeareth  to  be  rotten  flesh  and  bloud  :  the  rest  they  sell
loose,  holding  these  Cods  for  the  finer  Muske.  Returning
to  the  Laos,  whereof  we  were  speaking,  these  be  the
Wares  which  they  brought  to  the  above-said  Kingdomes,
carrying  in  returne  Cotton-clothes  and  other  things  they
had  need  of.  This  people  is  not  very  browne,  they  weare
their  haire  all  cut  round  underneath,  and  all  the  rest  above
ruffled,  raysing  it  many  times  upward  with  their  hands,
that  it  remayneth  to  them  like  a  Cap,  and  serveth  in  stead
of  one,  for  they  weare  nothing  on  their  heads  :  they  goe
naked  from  the  middle  upward,  and  from  the  hips  down-
ward, they  weare  certayne  Cotton-clothes  girt  about  them
all  white  :  the  women  goe  covered  from  the  brests  to  the
halfe  legge  :  they  have  their  faces  some-what  like  the
Chinas,  they  have  the  same  Heathenish  Ceremonies  that
the  Pegus  and  Siones,  and  the  Camboias  :  The  Priests  of
their  Idols  doe  weare  yellow  clothes  girt  about  as  the  rest

XI  481  2H

PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

of  the  people,  and  a  certayne  manner  of  yellow  Copes,

with  certayne  folds  and  seames  in  which  they  hold  their

Superstitions.

[III.  i.  169.] Of  this  people  I  saw  many  in  Camboia,  which  remayned

there  the  yeere  before  by  the  way  of  Traffique,  and  that

yeare that  I was there, they  came not  because of  the

Warres,  wherein  (as  I  said)  they  said  they  were  subdued

by  the  Bramas.

River  of  the These Laos  came  to  Camboia,  downe  a  River  many

Laos.  daies  Journie,  which  they  say,  to  have  his  beginning  in

China,  as  many  others  which  runne  into  the  Sea  of  India :

it  hath  eight,  fifteene,  and  twentie  fathome  water,  as  my

selfe  saw  by  experience  in  a  great  part  of  it :  it  passeth

through many  unknowne  and  desart  Countries  of  great

Woods and Forrests, where there are innumerable

Elephants,  and  many  Buffes,  of  which  I  saw  many  wild

Merus  are  a in  that  Countrie,  and  Merus,  which  is  like  a  good  Mule,

kindofzvild and certayne beasts which in that Countrie they call

Asses.  Badas  :  of  the  which  the  Male  have  a  pointlesse  and  blunt

¥asarethe  Home  in  their  fore-head,  and  some  of  the  Homes  are

by  the  forehead  spotted with singular colours, and others all blacke,

understand  the  others  of  a  waxe  colour,  but  they  have  no  vertue,  but

face;  for  the on\y  for  the  Hemorroides,  or  Piles:  and  after  the  Ele-

Oea e thel°Wer  Phant  there  is  no  otner  greater  Deast,  the  naire  °f  it:
fire-head.  *s  browne  and  footed  like  an  Elephant,  the  head  like
a  Cow,  and  it  hath  a  great  lumpe  of  flesh  that  falleth
upon  his  head,  whereof  I  did  eate  travelling  in  those
parts.  There  are  also  many  other  wilde  Beastes.  There
bee  some  Thorny  Trees,  like  Limons  and  Oranges,  and
many  wilde  Grapes  through  the  Woodes.  When  these
Laos  doe  returne  to  their  Countrie,  going  against  the
streame,  they  goe  in  three  monthes.  This  River  causeth
a  wonder  in  the  Land  of  Camboia, worthy  of  reciting.

Chudurmuch.  Comming  neere  to  a  place  which  they  call  Chudurmuch,
which  is  twelve  leagues  from  the  principall  Citie  of
Camboia,  it  maketh  a  passage  to  another  River  which
commeth  from  a  great  Lake,  that  is  in  the  uttermost
parts  of  Camboia,  and  hath  Siam,  on  the  other  side :  in

482

FRIAR GASPAR  DA CRUZ

the  middest  of  the  which  his  bignesse  being  great,  yee
can  see  no  Land  on  neither-side,  and  this  River  passeth
by  Loech,  which  is  the  principall  Citie  of  Camboia,  unto  Loech.
Chudurmuch :  the  waters  of  this  River,  which  is  also
verie  great,  the  most  of  them  doe  passe  to  the  River
that  commeth  from  the  Laos,  neere  to  Chudurmuch,  and
the  rest  doe  run  downe  the  River  directly  to  the  Sea,
when  the  great  Winter  floudes  doe  come,  which  happen
when  it  raines  not  in  the  Countries  of  Camboia.  The
many  waters  which  doe  come  by  the  River  that  commeth
from  the  Laos,  which  there  they  call  Sistor,  doe  make  Sister.
a  passage  right  against  Chudurmuch,  to  the  River  that
passeth  through  Loech,  with  so  great  furie,  that  where
the  waters  of  Loech  did  run  downward,  by  multitude
of  the  other  that  entreth  into  it,  they  are  turned  backe
and  run  upward  with  a  great  current :  in  sort  that  it
overfloweth  all  the  Countrie  of  Camboia,  whereby  all
the  Countrie  is  not  travelled  in  the  time  of  these  flouds,
but  in  Boates,  and  they  make  their  Houses  all  with  high
lofts,  and  underneath  they  are  all  overflowne,  and  some-  Strange  over-
times these  flouds  are  so  high,  that  they  are  forced  to  fl0*?*  afresh
make  higher  Roomes  with  Canes  to  keepe  their  houshold-  ^^j^ng
stuffe  in,  and  to  lodge  themselves.  This  River  runneth  Sea-force.
upward  from  July  to  September,  and  with  the  passing
from  the  River  that  commeth  from  the  Laos,  (or  from
the  river  Sistor,  which  is  his  proper  name)  of  so  many
waters  to  the  River  of  Loech,  it  doth  not  leave  his
running  to  the  Sea,  making  below  verie  great  armes,  and
goeth  verie  high  over-flowing  many  Countries  downward,
but  not  so  much  as  above.  The  Portugals  did  shew
mee  in  Loech  a  field,  a  great  hill  of  Earth,  over  the
which  they  affirmed  that  in  the  time  of  the  flouds  a
great  ship  that  was  made  in  the  Countrie  did  passe
without  touching,  which  ship  might  well  have  sayled
from  India  to  Portugall.

Beyond these Laos, follow  the Brames, which is a  The  Brames.
great  people,  and  very  rich  of  Gold  and  Precious  stones,
chiefly  of  Rubies. It  is  a proud  Nation and valiant,

483

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

these  are  now  Lords  of  Pegu,  which  subdued  it  by  force
of  Armes  some  yeares  before  they  subdued  the  Laos,
they  are  men  of  good  complexion,  and  well  made,  they
are  browne.  They  have  Pegu  and  part  of  Bengala
toward  the  Sea  of  India.  It  is  a  Countrey  very  scarce
of  victuals,  they  apparell  themselves  as  we  said  of  the
Laos,  but  that  their  clothes  are  fine,  and  many  do  weare
them  painted  or  wrought  :  they  are  also  somewhat  like
the  Chinas  in  the  faces,  they  have  very  rich  and  gallant
shippings  garnished  with  Gold,  in  the  which  they  sayle
in  the  Rivers  :  they  use  Vessels  of  Gold  and  of  Silver,  their
Houses  are  of  Timber  very  well  wrought,  the  Kingdome
is  very  great,  they  have  not  commonly  warre  with  the
Chinas,  because  of  the  great  Mountaynes  that  are
betweene  the  one  and  the  other,  and  because  the  Chinas
are  well  fortified  on  that  side :  notwithstanding  this,
sometimes  there  are  Robbers  on  the  one  side,  and  the
other  that  doe  make  assaults,  whereby  the  Chinas  have
some  Bramas  Captives,  as  some  Portugals  which  were
Captives  in  those  parts,  which  saw  them  did  affirme,
and  did  speake  with  them  in  the  great  Citie  of  Camsi :
and  these  slaves  told  them,  and  from  thence  it  was  not
very  farre  to  Brama,  and  that  in  Pegu,  they  had  seene
Portugals.

There  followeth  along  the  China  beyond  the  Bramas,

The  Patanes.  the  Kingdome  of  the  Patanes,  which  now  are  Lords
of  Bengala,  and  after  them  the  Mogores.  Beyond  these
Mogores  there  runneth  along  the  China,  the  Tartarians
which  doe  extend  themselves  from  Mogor  to  the  Lake
Meotis  and  the  River  Thanais,  which  is  a  very  great
Kingdome  and  of  much  and  innumerable  people.  This
people  are  commonly  red  and  not  white,  they  goe  naked
from  the  waste  upward,  they  eate  raw  flesh,  and  anoint
themselves  with  the  blood  of  it :  whereby  commonly  they
are  stinking  and  have  an  ill  sent.

[III.  i.  170.]  An  old  man  of  China  did  affirme  unto  me,  that  some-
times when  they  came  against  the  Countries  of  China,
if  the  wind  stood  on  that  side  where  they  came,  they  were

484

FRIAR CASPAR DA CRUZ

discerned  by  their  smell :  and  when  they  goe  to  warre
they  carry  the  flesh  raw  under  them  for  to  eate,  they  eate
it  in  this  manner,  and  anoint  themselves  with  the  bloud
to  make  themselves  the  more  sturdie  and  strong,  and
to  provoke  themselves  to  crueltie  in  the  Warre :  these
also  fight  on  Horsebacke  with  Bowes  and  Arrowes,  and
use  short  Swords.  With  these  is  the  continuall  Warre
of  the  Chinas,  and  as  I  have  said  the  Chinas  have  an
hundred  leagues  (others  saying  there  are  more)  of  a  Wall  Wall  of
betweene  them  and  the  other,  where  are  continually  Garri-  China.
sons  of  men  for  the  defence  of  the  entries  of  the  Tartarians.
It  may  bee  beleeved  that  this  Wall  is  not  continued,  but
that  some  Mountaynes  or  Hils  are  intermixt  betweene ;
for  a  Lord  of  Persia  affirmed  to  me,  that  the  like  Workes
were  in  some  parts  of  Persia,  with  intermixing  some  Hils
and  Mountaynes.

It  was  affirmed  to  the  Portugals  which  were  Captives,
and  in  Prison  in  their  Dungeons,  in  the  yeare  1550.  that
some  yeares  there  is  Truce  betweene  the  Chinas  and  the
Tartarians:  and  in  the  same  yeare  the  Tartarians  made
a  great  entry  in  China,  in  the  which  they  tooke  a  Tartarian
very  principall  Citie  from  them :  but  a  great  number  rodes  'tnt0
of  people  of  the  Chinas  comming  and  besieging  the  tna'
Citie,  and  not  being  able  to  enter  it  by  force  of  Armes,
by  the  Councell  of  a  man  of  low  degree,  they  had  a
meanes  whereby  they  killed  them  and  their  Horses,
and  remayned  Lords  againe  of  the  Citie.  The  same
Portugals  which  afterward  were  set  at  libertie,  affirmed,
that  all  the  Prisoners  made  great  Feasts,  and  made  a
I  great  stirre  when  the  Tartarians  made  this  entry,  with
the  hope  of  being  set  at  libertie  by  the  meanes  of  the
Tartarians,  if  they  did  possesse  China.

In  the  Citie  of  Cantan  I  saw  many  Tartarians  Cap-
tives, which  have  no  other  captivitie  then  to  serve  for
men  at  Armes  in  other  places  farre  from  Tartarie,  and
they  weare  for  a  difference  red  Caps,  in  all  the  rest  they
are  like  the  Chinas  with  whom  they  live :  they  have  See  Pinto.
for their maintenance  a certayne  stipend of  the King,

485

PURCHAS HIS  PILGRIMES

*Here
followed  the
division  of  the
Countrey  into
shires  or
Kingdomesy
with  their
Cities,  13c
which  wee
referre  to  later
and  better
Intelligence.

The  wals  of
Cantan.

which  they  have  paid  them  without  faile.  The  Chinas
call  them  Tatos,  for  they  cannot  pronounce  the  Letter  r.
Above  the  Lake  where  Thanais  hath  his  beginning,  they
doe  confront  with  the  skirts  of  high  Almayne,  although
on  the  side  of  Europe,  and  betweene  them  and  Almayne
are  Hils  that  doe  divide  them :  and  of  these  people  of
the  skirts  of  the  Mountaines,  the  Chinas  say  that  the
King  of  China  hath  many  men  of  Warre  in  pay,  that
doe  keepe  the  weake  passages  and  the  Wals  on  the  side
of  the  Tartarians :  and  say,  they  are  great  men  with
great  Beards,  and  weare  cut  Hose,  and  Caps,  and  blunt
Swords,  and  a  Portugall  that  was  carryed  captive  the
Land  inward,  told  me  that  he  heard  the  Chinas  say,  that
they  called  these  *  Alimenes.

§•  ii.

Cantan  described  ;  the  publike  and  private  build-
ings and  Government.  The  shipping  and
Husbandry  of  China  ;  their  contempt  of  the
idle,  and  provision  for  impotent  poore.

Eing  to  intreate  of  the  Citie  of  Cantan,  I  give
first  a  warning  to  the  Readers,  that  among  many
Noble Cities, Cantan is  one lesse Noble then

many  of  China ;  and  farre  inferiour  in  building  then  many
other :  although  it  be  more  populous  then  many ;  this
is  said  by  all  them  that  saw  it,  and  travelled  within  the
Land,  where  they  saw  many  other.  This  advice  pre-
supposed, it  is  to  be  noted,  that  Cantan  in  his  compasse,
is  of  very  strong  Wals,  very  well  made,  and  of  a  good
height,  and  to  the  sight  they  seeme  almost  new,  beeing
eighteene  hundred  yeares  since  they  were  made,  as  the
Chinas  did  affirme  :  they  are  very  cleane  without  any
cleft,  hole,  or  rift,  or  any  thing  threatning  ruine.  They
are  of  free  stone  about  a  mans  height,  and  from  thence
upward  of  brickes  made  of  a  clay  like  unto  that  of  the
Porcelane  Dishes,  whence  it  causeth  them  to  bee  so  strong,
that  I  building  a  Chappell  in  Malaca,  one  of  these  (which

486

FRIAR GASPAR  DA CRUZ

was  brought  from  China)  could  scarsly  bee  broken  with
a  good  Pick-axe.  Jointly  with  this  there  is  in  this  Citie
and  in  all  the  rest  an  Officer  of  the  King  which  onely  hath
care  to  over-see  the  Wals,  for  the  which  he  hath  a  good
stipend.  And  every  yeare  when  the  Governour  of  the
Borders  commeth  to  visit  the  Province,  hee  doth  visit
this  as  well  as  the  other  Officers,  to  know  if  he  doth  well
his  Office,  and  finding  him  in  any  fault,  or  negligence,
hee  is  put  from  his  Office,  and  punished.  And  if  he
standeth  in  need  of  any  expence  for  the  mending  of  the
Wals,  the  Over-seer  of  the  Rents  is  bound  to  give  him
that  which  is  necessarie,  under  paine,  that  if  the  mending
remayneth  undone,  he  shall  bee  well  punished.  For  this
cause  the  Wals  of  all  the  Cities  are  continually  kept  sound
and  in  good  reparation.  These  Walles  are  within  the
Citie  little  more  then  the  walke  of  the  same  Citie  in  their
height,  which  is  the  cause  of  beeing  much  more  cooler.
The  Wals  have  in  compasse  12350.  paces,  and  it  hath
eighty  three  Bulwarks.

This  Citie  (and  so  all  the  rest)  hath  on  the  one  side  the  [III.  i.  171.]
River,  along  the  which,  as  well  this  as  the  rest  are  built  The  River  and
almost  in  a  Valley; and  on  the  other  side  they  have  a  Tozvn-dttch'
Ditch  full  of  water  of  a  good  breadth,  betweene  the  which
and  the  wall  remayneth  a  good  distance  where  there  may
runne  together  a  good  troupe  of  people,  and  the  Earth
that  was  taken  out  of  the  Ditch,  was  cast  betweene  it  and
the  wall,  whereby  the  foot  of  the  wall  remayneth  a  great
deale  higher  then  the  other  ground. Besides  the  ditch,
notwithstanding,  this  wall  hath  a  great  blemish,  for  it  hath
on  the  contrarie  side  to  the  River  without  the  wals,  and
the  ditch  a  little  Hillocke  that  discovereth  all  the  Citie
within  the  wals.

This  wall  hath  seven  gates  :  the  entries  of  the  which  are  The  Gates.
sumptuous  and  high,  strong  and  well  made,  with  Pinacles
above,  not  square  but  made  like  steps.  The  other  places
of  the  wals  have  no  Pinacles :  the  wall  at  the  entring  of
the  gates  is  twelve  paces  thicke :  the  gates  are  all  over
plated  with  Iron,  and  all  of  them  have  their  draw-bridges  Draw-bridges.

487

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Strait  streets
and  paved.

very  strong,  which  are  alwayes  up,  and  are  never  let
downe,  but  are  ready  against  they  be  needfull :  all  the
Gate-courts,  gates  at  the  entrings  have  Courts,  and  the  Courts  that  are
toward  the  side  of  the  Suburbs,  which  lyeth  along  the
River  have  every  one  three  gates,  one  in  the  front  and
two  on  the  sides,  which  remayne  for  the  service  of  streets
that  lye  along  the  wall,  the  wals  of  the  Courts  are  almost
of  the  height  of  them  within :  the  gate  which  is  in  the
front  in  the  Court,  is  like  unto  that  of  the  wals  within  :  it
hath  also  a  draw-bridge  ;  the  gates  which  are  in  the  side  of
the  Courts  are  small.  The  Courts  that  are  on  the  other-
side  of  the  field  where  no  Suburbe  is,  have  no  more  but
one  gate,  and  this  not  right  against  that  of  the  walls,  but
stand  on  the  one  side :  the  streets  of  the  Citie  are  all
drawne  by  a  Line  very  straight  without  any  manner  of
making  a  nooke  or  winding :  all  the  crosse  wayes  are
as  straight  as  the  streets :  in  sort  that  there  is  neyther
street  nor  traverse  that  maketh  any  turning.  All
the  streets  and  traverses  are  very  well  paved,  the  pave-
ments going  along  the  Houses,  and  lower  in  the  middest
for  the  course  of  water :  the  principall  streetes  have
triumphant  Arches  which  doe  crosse  them,  high  and  very
well  made,  which  make  the  streets  very  beautifull,  and
enoble  the  Citie :  the  principall  streets  have  along  the
Houses  close  Portals,  in  the  which  and  under  the  Arches
many  things  are  sold.

The  Houses  of  them  which  rule  the  Countrey,  are  at
the  entrings  very  sumptuous,  with  high  Portals,  great  and
well  wrought  of  Masons  worke :  they  have  in  the  fore-
front very  great  gates  like  the  gates  of  a  Citie,  with  two
Giants  painted  with  Clubs  in  their  hands :  I  saw  foure  in
one  Pagode,  (which  is  a  Temple  of  Idols)  drawne  naturally
from  some,  which  they  say,  the  King  hath  to  keepe  his
weakest  passages  from  Tartaria.  They  are  of  great
members,  of  about  twelve  or  thirteene  spans  high.  On
the  street  side  it  hath  right  against  the  principall  Porch  a
*receite  not  very  great.  It  hath  built  along  the  street
a  good  wall  of  a  good  height  right  against  the  gate,  that

Houses  of
Magistrates.

*Or  little
Court.

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

when  the  gate  is  open  they  that  are  within  may  not  be
gazed  on  by  them  that  goe  by  the  street :  this  gate
serveth  not,  neither  is  it  opened  but  for  dispatching  of
matters  of  Justice,  and  the  principall  of  the  House  goe  in
land  out  at  them,  and  others  that  are  as  honourable  or
i  more  then  they :  at  the  one  side  of  this  principall  gate  is
(another  very  great  gate,  but  not  so  big  as  the  principall,
which  is  for  the  service  of  the  House,  and  of  the  Prisoners
I  when  the  principall  gate  is  shut:  and  when  this  principall
'gate  is  shut,  they  set  a  glued  Paper  crosse  over  both  the
I  leaves,  on  which  is  written  the  name  or  firme  of  the
I  principall  of  the  House,  and  for  to  open  it  againe,  an
(Officer  of  the  House  bringeth  the  same  firme  or  marke
ion  a  playstered  board  to  the  Porter,  that  hee  may  open  it,
without  the  which  token  hee  may  not  open  it  under  a  great
punishment.

Entring  by  this  gate,  there  is  a  great  Court  and  almost
{square,  which  is  almost  a  Horse-race,  and  it  hath  a  Gallery
ilittle  lesse  then  the  length  of  the  gate,  which  leadeth
(straight  from  the  gate  to  a  very  great  Table  that  stands  at
the  end  of  the  Court,  the  which  is  all  paved  with  square
jstones  with  leanings  as  high  as  a  mans  waste,  and  it  is  high
in  the  entry  of  the  gate,  and  there  remayneth  onely  one
jstep  in  the  end  of  it  to  the  Table,  and  the  course  in  the
'sides  of  the  Gallery  is  low,  that  they  goe  downe  to  it  by
(steps :  this  Gallery  of  the  middest  is  of  such  respect  Sanctitie  of
jamong  them,  that  in  no  wise  it  is  lawfull  for  any  one  to  Courts,  and
passe  through  it,  but  onely  some  of  the  chiefest  of  the  'fahMazu-
ijHouse,  or  others  as  great  or  greater  then  they ;  and  those  trates.
I  that  goe  to  negotiate  with  the  Officer  of  the  House  when
they  enter  in  at  the  gate,  they  must  goe  presently  to  one
:  side,  going  downe  to  the  Court  which  hath  very  great
iTrees  for  shaddow,  and  they  goe  up  againe  by  steps  unto
jthe  Table  above-said,  which  is  at  the  end  of  the  Court,
which  is  very  great.  In  the  end  of  this  Table  in  all  his
length  there  is  a  step,  and  within  the  step  a  very  great
jwalke,  all  paved  with  square  stones  as  the  Table  without
It,  and  very  high  and  all  wrought  with  Masons  worke :  in

489

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  middest  of  it  leaning  to  the  wall  of  the  front  are  two
Chaires,  with  two  Tables  before  them,  a  little  distant  the
one  from  the  other,  one  of  them,  which  stands  on  the  left
hand,  serveth  for  the  Governour  of  that  house,  and  that  of
the  right  hand  is  void,  for  if  there  should  come  another
of  a  higher  dignitie  than  hee,  to  sit  him  downe.  To  every
one  of  the  sides  there  are  two  spaces  which  runne  behind
this  Governour,  and  are  of  a  good  breadth,  having  placed
along  the  sides  of  these  two  spaces  in  every  one  five
Chaires  with  five  Tables  before  them,  and  as  the  distance
from them to the principall Governour  is  good, they

[III.  i.  172.]  remayne  though  behind  in  sight  of  the  principall  Gover-
nour. These  serve  for  ten  Assistants  which  are  with  the
principall  at  the  dispatching  of  waightie  matters.  From
these  Galleries  inward  are  great  Lodgings,  as  well  for  the
Governour  of  the  House,  as  for  the  Assistants,  and  for  all
the  other  Ministers  and  Officers  of  the  House,  which  are
many,  as  we  will  shew  in  their  place.

Great  Prisons. On  every  side  of  the  Court  are  very  great  Prisons  and  j
great  Lodgings,  as  well  for  the  Jaylours  (which  also  are  of  j
great  authoritie)  as  for  the  Watches  that  watch  by  night  j
and  by  day,  but  neither  these  Prisons  nor  the  Chambers  1
of  the  Ministers  of  them,  nor  the  Lodgings  of  the  chiefe
of  the  House  are  seene  outward,  for  they  are  served  of  all
things,  the  doores  shut  and  have  continually  their  Porters.
There  are  in Cantan  foure  of  these Houses  for  foure
principall  Officers,  and  in  every  Province  in  the  Citie,  that
is, the  Head of  the Province  there  are five of  these
Houses  :  in  Cantan  there  are  but  foure  ;  for  as  the  Gover-
nour  of  Cantan is  also Governour  of  Cansi,  he  is  not
resident  in  Cantan,  but  in  a  Citie  that  is  in  the  Borders  of
one  of  the  Provinces,  that the  recourse  in  the  Affaires
of  both  the  Provinces  may  be  the  easier. Besides,  these
principall Houses  of  the chiefe Governours, there are
many  other  in  Cantan,rthe  which  though  they  bee  not  of
so  great  Majestie  as  they,  they  are  notwithstanding  very
great,  of  other  inferiour  Officers,  and  chiefly  those  of  the
chiefe  Jaylour  which  are  very  great. There  is  on  the  wals

490

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

of  Cantan,  on  the  contrary  side  of  the  River  a  high  Towre
jail  close  behind,  that  they  which  are  in  it  may  not  bee
iseene,  nor  gazed  on  from  the  Hillocke  or  Mount  afore-
isaid,  that  was  without  the  wals,  and  it  is  built  in  length
along  the  wall,  so  that  it  is  longer  then  broad,  and  it  is  all
'made  in  Galleries  very  sumptuous,  from  whence  they
idiscover  all  the  Citie,  and  the  Marshes  and  Fields  beyond
Ithe  River,  which  serveth  for  the  recreation  of  them  that
'rule.  In  the  other  Cities  are  such  buildings  which  serve
jfor  recreation,  many  and  very  sumptuous,  and  of  singular
puilding.

The  Houses  of  the  common  people  in  the  outward  Private
>hew,  are  not  commonly  very  faire,  but  within  are  much  houses-
:o  be  admired;  for  commonly  they  are  white  as  Milke,
:hat  they  seeme  like  sleeked  Paper,  they  are  paved  with
isquare  stones :  along  the  ground,  of  a  spanne  little  more
or  lesse,  they  are  dyed  with  Vermilion,  or  almost  blacke  ;
:he  Timber  is  all  very  smooth  and  even,  and  finely
wrought  and  placed,  that  it  seemeth  to  be  all  polished,  or
dyed,  or  in  white,  and  some  there  is  in  white  so  faire  and
oleasant  to  the  sight,  waved  Damaske-like,  as  it  were
3old,  and  so  bright  that  they  should  doe  it  injurie  in
oainting  it.  I  confesse,  in  truth,  that  I  never  saw  so  fine
Timber  as  that.  It  hath  after  the  House  that  is  at  the
intrie,  a  Court  with  solaces  of  small  Trees ;  and  Bowers
with  a  Faire  little  Fountayne :  and  then  at  the  entring  of
:he  House  where  the  women  doe  with-draw  themselves,  it
lath  a  certaine  manner  of  a  Gallery  open  before  towards
ilrhe  Court,  where  they  have  verie  great  Cubboards  finely
wrought ;  which  takes  the  one  square  of  the  House,  in
:he  which  they  have  their  Oratories,  and  Gods  made  of
Wood,  or  of  Clay :  these  Oratories  are  more  or  less
:urious  according  to  the  abilitie  of  everie  one :  all  the
Houses  are  tiled  with  very  good  Tiles,  better,  and  of
nore  continuance  then  ours :  for  besides,  they  being  well
Tiade,  they  are  of  verie  good  Clay :  those  which  receive
:he  water  are  broad  and  short,  and  the  uppermost  that
:lose,  the  other  are  narrower,  and  at  the  ends  toward  the

491

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Temple  and
Mesquit.

Suburbes.

Store  of
people.

street  side,  they  are  garnished  with  fine  Workes  made  of
Lime :  for  many  yeares  they  have  no  need  to  be  tiled
againe,  for  as  the  Clay  is  very  good,  they  are  not  so
mouldring  as  ours,  or  so  rough,  but  they  are  very  smooth
and  warme,  and  beeing  so  well  set  they  breed  no  filthinesse.
There  bee  many  Houses  faire  within,  and  very  few  with
Lofts,  the  most  are  low  Houses.

They  have  in  the  middest  of  the  Citie  a  Temple  of
Idols  with  high  Towres,  the  wals  of  the  which  we  will
speake  of  hereafter  :  they  have  their  Mesquit  with  Alcoran
very  high  with  his  Pinacle  on  the  top.  The  Suburbes
without  are  very  great  and  of  many  Houses,  in  such  sort
that  some  Portugals  would  have  compared  them  in  big-
nesse  with  them  of  Lisbon,  but  to  mee  and  to  others  they
seemed  lesse,  though  they  bee  bigger  and  of  more  Houses
then  the  Citie  within  the  wals.  It  is  very  populous,  and
the  people  is  so  much,  that  at  the  entring  of  the  gates  on
the  River  side  yee  can  scarce  get  through.  Commonly
the  people  that  goeth  out  and  in,  doe  cry  and  make  a
great  noyse  to  give  place  to  them  that  carrie  burthens.
And  the  Rulers  of  the  Citie  commanding  to  enquire  what
victuals  were  spent  every  day,  it  was  found  to  spend  only
five  or  sixe  thousand  Porkes,  and  ten  or  eleven  thousand
Duckes ;  besides  which,  they  eate  great  store  of  Beeves
and  BufFes,  and  many  Hens,  and  an  infinite  deale  of  fish,
whereof  the  Markets  and  streets  are  full,  and  many  Frogs
and  Shel-fish,  great  store  of  Fruits  and  all  other  Pulse.
Hereby  little  more  or  lesse  may  be  seene  what  people  are
in  Cantan,  and  whether  it  may  bee  compared  with  Lisbon.

The  Houses  of  the  Suburbes  are  like  those  of  the  wals
within  ;  the  streetes  are  so  well  and  levelled  by  Line  as
those  within,  and  all  for  the  most  part  paved  also,  and
some  of  them  are  verie  broad,  and  have  triumphant
Arches,  but  very  few.  Some  streets,  as  well  without  as
within  the  wals,  on  the  one  side  and  the  other  along  the
Houses,  have  Trees  for  to  make  shadowes.  In  all  the
Suburb-gates,  streets  of  the  Suburbs  at  the  ends  of  them  are  gates  with
speciall  Porters,  whose  Office  is  to  locke  them  every  night

492

Victuals.

Suburbes.

FRIAR CASPAR DA CRUZ

under  paine  of  sore  punishment,  and  every  street  hath  a

Constable  and  a  Jayle. He  stands  bound,  either  to  yeeld

the Malefactor which by night  doth any  harme  In  the

street,  are  to  pay  for  it  ;  wherefore  all  the  streets  have

every  night  a  watch,  the  Neighbours  dividing  themselves  [III.  i.  173.]

in  quarters :  and they  make  every  night  sixe  quarters  or

watches, and  for  a  signe  that  they  are  awake,  in  every  Watches.

street  they  sound  a  Drumme, where  they  have all the

night  a  Lanthorne  with  a  light. The  gates  of  the  Citie

are  shut  as  soone  as  it  is  night,  and  on  the  two  leaves  is

set  a  paper,  with  the  chiefe  Captaines  marke  on  every  one

of  them,  and  they  are  opened with  the  Sunne,  with a

token  from  the  same  Captaine  to  them  all,  with  his  marke  Here  followed

written  on  a  white  boord. Every  gate  hath  a  Captaine,  a  muf^  °fother

very  honest  man,  and  every  one  hath  certaine  Souldiers,  ^[^J  t^

which  continually  doe  watch  every  one  of  the  Gates  by  Author  saw

day  and by  night.  them  not,  but

In  some  Cities  the  water  runneth  almost  thorow  every  received  his

street,  and  on  the  one  side  and  the  other  of  the  street  are  ™telhSence
—_.  from  rerera  1

Tables  made of  stone,  for  the common service  of  the  referre  you  \0

people  ;  and  thorow  all  the  streets  are  very  good  and  well  him.

wrought  Bridges  to  passe  from  one  side  to  another :  and  0thfr  Chim

thorow  the middest  of  the streets  is  great  trafficke by  Ctttes-

water  that  goe  from  one  place  to  another. In  those  places

whereby  the  water  entreth  into  the  Citie,  they  have  made

in  the  walls  very  good  gates,  which  have  very  strong  Iron

grates  for  to  shut  by  night :  and  the  most  of  the  streets

to  the  land  inward  are  very  well  paved  with  stone,  and

(where  is  no  stone)  with  small  tyle. In  all  the  Mountaines

and  Hills  where  there  are  wayes,  they  are  very  well  made,  High-way es.

cut  with  the  Pick-axe,  and  paved  where  they  are  needfull.

This  is  one  of  the  good  works  of  China,  and  it  is  very

generall  in  every  place  of  it. Many  Hills  on  the  side  of

the  Bramas,  and  of  the  Laos,  are  cut  in  steps,  very  well

made ;  and  in  the  height  of  the  Hill  is  made  a  low  place,

very  well  cut : in  the  which  is  a  very  high  Towre,  which

above  doth  equall  with  the  highest  of  the  Mountain,  which

is  very  strong,  the  wall  of  one  of  the  Towres  was  measured

493

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

at  the  entring  of  the  gates,  and  it  was  sixe  fathome  thicke

and an halfe. There  are on this  side many of  these

workes,  and  so  there  may  be  in  other  places. I  heard

Galiote  of  a  Gentleman  of  credit,  called  Galiote  Perara,  Brother

Perera.  t0  the  chiefe  Justice  of  Arrayolos,  which  abode  in  Cansi,

being  Captive, that  (with the  houses  of  these  kinsmen

of  the King, being so many  and so  great) the Citie

was so  bigge  that  it seemed they occupied  very little

of  it,  and make  a  very  little show in it : and so  he

had it written in  a Rudder  of  his, whence  I  tooke  a

%Whkh'u great  deale*of  that  which  is  heere  spoken  of:  in  such

therefore  here  sort  that  the  greatnesse  of  the  Citie  did  hide  in  it  selfe

the  multitude  and  greatnesse  of  these  houses.

As in the Countrey there  is  great store  of  Timber
and  very cheape,  and  much Iron  and  cheap, and it  is
Store  of  very good, there are infinite number of ships and

shipping.  shippings;  for  through  the  Countrey  are  infinite  Groves

of  Firre  trees,  and  other  trees,  whereby  it  is  easie  for
any  one  though  of  a  little  substance,  to  make  a  ship  and
have  shippings,  and  this  causeth  the  great  profit  and
gayne  that  is  of  them  with  the  necessitie  the  Countrey
hath  of  them  :  for  it  hath  not  onely  a  great  number
of  Hands  alongst  the  coast,  but  also  a  very  great  coast
where  they  Navigate  :  and  besides  this,  all  China  within  is
navigated,  and  runne  through  Rivers  which  doe  cut
and  water  it  all,  which  are  many  and  very  great.  So
that  yee  may  sayle  to  the  ends  of  the  Land,  and  goe
in  shippings.  Any  Captaine  along  the  coast  may  in  a
little  space  joyne  two  hundred,  three  hundred,  even  to
a  thousand  ships,  if  hee  stand  in  need  for  to  fight.  And
there  is  no  small  Towne  along  the  River  that  is  not
plentifull  in  small  and  great  ships.  Along  the  Citie  of
Cantan,  more  then  halfe  a  league  off  the  River,  is  so
great  a  multitude  of  shipping,  that  it  is  a  wonderfull
thing  to  see  them,  and  that  which  is  most  to  wonder,
is  that,  that  this  multitude  never  decreaseth  nor  fayleth
almost  all  the  yeere :  for  if  thirty,  forty,  or  an  hundred
goe forth one  day, as  many doe come in againe the

494

FRIAR CASPAR DA CRUZ

next :  I  say,  the  multitude  never  to  diminish  nor  fayle,  for
though  sometime  there  be  more,  some  lesse,  alwaies  there
remayneth  a  marvellous  multitude :  and  that  which  is
more,  all  those  that  goe  forth,  goe  laden  ;  and  all  that
come  in,  come  laden  ;  carrying  goods,  and  bringing  goods  :
and  that  which  sheweth  much  the  noblenesse  of  the
Countrey,  the  plentie  and  riches  thereof  is,  that  all  these
ships  bringing  great  store  of  merchandise  of  Clothes,
Silkes,  provisions  and  other  goods,  some  doe  goe  into
the  Land,  others  come  from  within  the  Land,  and  nothing  Riches  of
commeth  from  without  China,  neither  goeth  out  of  it :  China  in
and  that  which  the  Portugals  doe  carrie,  and  some  that  itselfe-
they  of  Syam  doe  carrie,  is  so  little  in  comparison  of
the  great  trafficke  of  the  Countrey,  that  it  almost
remayneth  as  nothing,  and  unperceived ;  seeing  that  out
of  China  there  goeth  no  more  but  that  which  the
Portugals,  and  they  of  Syam  doe  carrie  ;  which  is  as
much  as  though  they  brought  nothing  out  of  China,
five  or  sixe  ships  comming  laden  with  Silke  and  Porcelane:
the  great  plentie  and  riches  of  the  Countrey  doth  this,
that  it  can  sustayne  it  selfe  alone :  Pepper  and  Ivorie
which  is  the  principall  that  the  Portugals  doe  carrie,  a
man  may  well  live  without  it,  and  the  trafficke  of
merchandise  that  is  in  this  Countrie,  is  in  all  the
Cities  within  the  Land,  which  as  we  have  said,  are  almost
all  built  along  the  Rivers.  The  Chinas  have  a  common
speech  for  to  shew  the  noblenesse  of  their  Kingdome,  Proverb.
that  the  King  of  China  can  make  a  Bridge  of  ships
from  China  unto  Malaca,  which  are  neere  five  hundred
leagues,  the  which  though  it  seemeth  it  cannot  be,  yet
by  Metaphor  it  signifieth  the  greatnesse  of  China,  and
the  multitude  of  ships  that  of  it  selfe  it  can  make.

The  great  ships  they  call  Junks ; besides  which  there  Junket  Jbr
are  ships  for  warre,  made  like  great  ships,  to  the  which  war  an*for
they make great Fore-castles and high, and likewise
abafte, to fight  from  them  : in such  manner  that  they  Shifi-jigkts.
over-master their adversaries,  and because  they use no  No  Ordnance.
Ordnance, all  their  use  is  to  come  many  together,  and  [HI.  i.  174-]

495

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Sudibusve
praustis.

They  use
Oares.

Small  ships.

A  kinde  of
Gallies.

compassing  the  adversaries  ship,  they  boord  it :  and  at
the  first  on-set  they  cast  a  great  deale  of  Lime  to  blinde
the  adversaries,  and  as  well  from  the  Castles  as  from
the  tops  they  cast  many  sharpe  pikes  burned  at  the
end,  which  serve  for  Top-darts,  of  a  very  stiffe  wood ;
they  use  also  great  store  of  stone,  and  the  chiefest  they
labour  for,  is  to  breake  with  their  ships  the  dead  workes
of  their  adversaries,  that  they  may  be  masters  over  them,
having  them  under  them,  and  being  destitute  of  any  thing
to  shelter  them :  and  as  soone  as  they  can  enter,  they
come  to  the  Pike  or  handy-blowes,  for  the  which  they
have  long  Pikes,  and  broad-pointed  Swords  hanging  at
their  sides.  There  bee  other  Junkes  for  lading  of  goods,
but  they  are  not  so  high  as  those  of  warre,  though  there
bee  some  very  great.  All  these  ships  as  well  of  warre
as  of  burthen  use  two  Oares  a-head :  they  are  very  great,
and  foure  or  five  men  doe  rowe  every  one  of  them,  laying
them  along  the  ship  they  move  them  with  such  a  sleight,
that  they  make  the  ship  goe  forward,  and  they  helpe  very
much  for  to  goe  out  and  in  at  a  barre,  and  setting  upon
the  enemies  for  to  boord  them :  they  call  these  Oares,
Lioslios :  in  all  manner  of  their  shippings  they  use  the
Lioslios,  neither  doe  they  use  any  other  manner  of  Oares
in  any  kinde  of  shipping.  There  be  other  lesser  shippings
then  Junkes,  somewhat  long,  called  Bancones,  they  beare
three  Oares  on  a  side,  and  rowe  very  well,  and  loade  a
great  deale  of  goods :  there  be  other  lesse,  called  Lanteas,
which  have  sixe  or  seven  oares  on  a  side,  which  doe  rowe
very  swift,  and  beare  a  good  burthen  also :  and  these
two  sorts  of  ships,  viz.  Bancones  and  Lanteas,  because
they  are  swift,  the  theeves  doe  commonly  use.  The
rowing  of  these  Oares  is  standing,  two  men  at  every
Oare,  every  one  of  his  side,  setting  one  foot  forward,
another  backward.  In  the  Junkes  goe  foure,  five,  or
sixe  men  at  an  Oare.

They  use  also  certaine  shippings  very  long,  like  unto
Gallies,  without  Oares  or  beake-head,  which  doe  lade
great store  of  goods  : and they make them so  long,

496

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

because  lading  bringing  a  great  burden  they  may  sayle

the  better  by  the  Rivers,  which  sometimes  are  not  rough.

They  have many  other  shippings of  burthen, which is

superfluous  to  tell  of  every  one. There  be  many  small

boats  of  poore people,  in  which  are  husband and  wife,

and children,  and they have no  other dwelling  but  in

their  boat  in  a  middle  decke,  for  defence  of  the  Sunne,

and  of  the  raine :  as  also  have  the  Bancones,  and  Lanteas,

and others  which  wee  said  were  like Gallies,  and  these

deckes  are  in  such  sort,  that  under  them  are  very  good

lodgings and chambers in  the  great ships, in these of

the poore, they  are  much inferiour : there they  breed

their  Pigs,  their  Hennes,  and  there  they  have  also  their

poore  little  Garden,  and  there  they  have  all  their  poore

state  and harbouring. The men goe to seeke worke

about  the  Citie  to  helpe  to  maintayne  their  little  house ;

the  women  goe  in  the  boats, and  with  a  long  cane  that  Dwelling  in

reacheth well  to the  bottome  of  the  River  (at  the  end  ships.

of  the  which  is  a  little  basket  made  of  rods,  wherewith

they  get  shell-fish)  with  their  Industrie,  and passing  of

people  from  one  side  to  another,  they  helpe  to  sustaine

their  houshold. These  poore  people  notwithstanding  doe

not  live  so  poorely  and  beggarly  in  their  apparell,  as  those

which  live  poorely  in  Portugall. There  are  other  great

shippings,  wherein  is the  stocke  of  them  both,* which  *The

have  great  lodgings  where  they  may  bestow  a  great  deale  husbands

of  stuffe :  these  have  a  great  stocke ;  they  have  certaine  JJJJ^  ££*$

Cages  made  all  the  length  of  the  ship  with  canes,  in  which  huswifery.

they  keepe  two  or  three  thousand  Duckes,  more  or  lesse

as  the  vessell  is :  some  of  these  belong  to  Lordships,  and

their  servants  goe  in them  :  they  feed  these  Duckes,  as

followeth.

After  it  is  broad  day,  they  give  them  a  little  sodden
Rice  not  till  they  have  enough,  when  they  have  given
it  them,  they  open  a  doore  to  the  River  where  is  a  Bridge
made  of  canes,  and  the  noise  they  make  at  their  going
forth  is  wonderfull  to  see  them  goe  tumbling  one  over
another,  for  the  great  abundance  of  them,  and  the  time
xi  497  2 1

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Duck-
weeders.

Artlficiall
broods.

See  an
example  in
Pantoia,  of
this  magni-
fence.
[III.  i.  I75-]

Ships  for
guard.

they  take  in  going  out ;  they  feed  all  the  day  untill  night
among  the  fields  of  Rice,  those  which  are  owners  of  the
shipping  doe  receive  a  fee  of  them  that  owe  the  fields,  for
letting  them  feed  in  them,  for  they  doe  cleanse  them,
eating  the  grasse  that  groweth  among  them.  When  night
commeth  they  call  with  a  little  Taber,  and  though  they
be  in  sundry  Barkes,  every  one  knowes  their  owne  by  the
sound  of  the  Taber,  and  goe  unto  it ;  and  because  alwaies
in  time  some  remayne  without  that  come  not  in,  there
are  every  where  many  flockes  of  wilde  Duckes,  and
likewise  of  Geese.  When  I  saw  such  a  multitude  of
Duckes  in  every  one  of  these  Barkes,  and  all  of  one
bignesse,  and  thinking  they  could  not  be  hatched  by
Duckes  or  Hens,  for  if  it  were  so,  some  would  have
beene  bigger  then  some,  seeing  so  many  could  not  be
hatched  in  one,  two,  or  fifteene  dayes,  I  was  willing  to
know  how  they  hatched  them ;  and  they  told  mee,  it
was  in  one  of  two  sorts.  In  Summer,  laying  two  or  three
thousand  Egs  in  the  dung,  and  with  the  heate  of  the
weather  and  the  dung,  the  Egs  are  hatched.  In  the
Winter,  they  make  a  Hurdle  of  canes  very  great,  upon
the  which  they  lay  this  great  number  of  Egges,  under
the  which  they  make  a  slacke  fire,  continuing  it  of  one
sort  a  few  dayes  till  the  Egges  be  hatched.  And  because
they  are  hatched  in  this  sort,  there  are  so  many  of  one
bignesse,  and  all  along  the  River  are  many  of  these
Barkes,  whereby  the  Countries  are  well  provided  of  this
food.

There  are  some  ships  wherein  ithe  Rulers  doe  sayle,
which  have  very  high  lodgings,  and  within  houses  very
well  made,  gilt,  rich,  and  very  sumptuous  :  and  on  the  one
side,  and  the  other  they  have  great  windowes  with  their
Nets  woven  of  Silke,  and  very  fine  small  rods  set  before
them,  that  they  within  seeing  all  them  without,  may  not
bee  seene  of  them.  Toward  the  side  of  the  Laos  and  the
Bramaes,  are  continually  watches  and  wards  in  the  Rivers
in  many  ships,  even  a  whole  moneths  Journey  in  length
unto  the Citie  of  Cansi  : these  ships  are  in  the  places

498

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

where  the  Rivers  make  any  armes,  because  of  the  many
theeves  which  commonly  are  in  these  parts,  being  the
uttermost  of  the  Kingdome  :  and  because  the  Rivers  have
many  armes,  many  ships  are  placed  in  those  parts  :  in
every  place  where  these  shippings  are,  there  bee  two  small
ships,  which  continually  doe  goe  night  and  day  from  one
watch  to  another,  because  they  are  very  swift,  and  those
of  the  great  ships  doe  divide  themselves  into  watches
at  their  quarters,  for  to  watch  as  well  in  the  small  as
in  the  great  ones.  The  ships  of  passage  goe  alwaies  a  Fleets.
great  number  together,  that  they  may  defend  themselves,
one  another,  while  the  ships  of  warre,  and  the  watches  do
come  to  them,  and  at  the  watch  where  they  make  night,
there  they  stay  til  the  morning,  and  by  the  small  boats
they  are  delivered  safe  to  the  next  watch  forward,  and  so
from  watch  to  watch  they  are  accompanied  of  the  small
vessels  till  they  bee  set  in  safetie.  From  the  Citie  of
Doucheo,  that  is  where  the  Governour  of  Consi  and
Cantan  is  resident,  unto  the  bounds  of  the  Province  of
Cansi,  which  are  places  more  dangerous,  are  continually
Armadas  of  fortie  or  flftie  ships.  All  these  watches  are
paid  of  the  common  Rents  of  the  Kingdome.

China  is  almost  all  a  well  husbanded  Countrey  :  for  as  Industry  cause
the  Countrey  is  well  inhabited,  and  people  in  abundance,  ofplentte,
and  the  men  spenders,  and  using  themselves  very  delici-
ously  in  eating  and  drinking, and apparell,  and  in the
other  services  of  their  houses, especially that they  are
great  eaters,  every  one  laboureth  to  get  a  living,  and  every
one  seeketh  wayes  to  earne  their  food,  and  how  to  main-
tayne  their  great  expences. A  great  helpe  to  this  is  the
idle  people  to  bee  much  abhorred  in  this  Countrey,  and  are  Idlenesse
very  odious  unto  the  rest,  and  that  laboureth  not  shall  not  hated-
eate,  for  commonly  there  is  none  that  doe  give  almes  to
the  Poore  ; wherefore,  if  any  poore  did  aske  almes  of
a  Portugal  and  he  did  give  it  him,  the  Chinas  did  laugh  at  Alms
them,  and  in  mockage  said  :  why  givest  thou  almes  to  dertded-
this  which  is  a  Knave,  let  him  goe  and  earne  it  :  onely
some  Jesters  have  some  reward,  going  to  some  high  place

499

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

gather  the  people,  and  telleth  them  some  fables  to  get

something. The  Fathers  and  Priests  of  their  Idols  are

commonly  abhorred  and  not  esteemed,  because  they  hold

them  for  idle  people,  and  the  Rulers  for  any  light  fault

doe  not  spare  them,  but  give  them  many  stripes. Where-

ldk  Idoll- fore,  a  Ruler  whipping  once  before  a  Portugal  a  Priest  of

Prte.st?  , .,  theirs; and  he  asking him wherefore he  did  use  their

unjust  justice Priests  so  *H  and  held  them  in  so  little  esteeme,  answered

of  profane him  '  these  are  idle  and  wretched  Knaves. One  day,  I,

busie  Rulers, and certayne Portugals entring into the house  of  the

which  made Over-seer  of  the  goods,  about  the  deliverie  of  certayne

least  and  wort  P°rtugals tnat were in prison, because the matter

part  of  them- belonged  to  him,  for  the  great  profit  that  came  thereof

selves,  and  a to  the  King,  much people came  in with us  to  see  us,

God  of  their among the  which there was  a  Priest  : assoone  as  the

s°°  s'  Ruler said,  Set them  downe,  all of  them ran away  in

great  haste,  the  Priest  running  as  all  the  rest,  for  feare

of  the  whip.

Every  one  laboureth  to  seeke  a  living  ;  for  that  which

hee  earneth  hee  enjoyeth  freely,  and  spends  it  as  he  will,

and that which is  left him at his  death remaynes to

his children and grand-children, paying onely duties

Royall,  aswell  of  the  fruits that  they  gather,  as  of  the

goods  they  deale  in,  which  are  not  heavie. The  greatest

Tribute  they  have,  is  every married man,  or  that  hath

house  by  himselfe,  payeth  for  every  person  in  his  house

That  is  gd. two  Mazes,  which  are  sixtie  Reys. From  Champaa,  which

Tyrannie as  we  said,  doth  confine  with  Cauchinchina  unto  India,  are

growes poore manv  unprofitable  grounds,  and  made  Wildernesses  and

prow  rich ° Woods,  and  the  men  are  generally  little  curious  to  get  or

gather  together,  for  they  never  gayne  or  get  so  much  but

it  is  tyrannized  from  them,  that  which  they  have  is  onely

theirs  as  long  as  the  King  listeth,  and  no  more. In  such

sort  that  as  soone  as  the  King  knoweth  that  any  of  their

officers  hath  much  money,  hee  commandeth  him  to  bee

put  in  prison,  and  they  use  him  so  hardly,  that  they  make

him  cast  all  that  hee  hath  gotten  : wherefore  there  are

many  in  those  parts,  that  if  they  get  any  thing  or  money

500

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

one  day  or  one  weeke,  they  will  not  labour  till  they
consume  all  that  they  have  earned  in  eating  and  drinking,
and  they  doe  it  because  if  any  tyrannic  should  chance  to
come,  they  may  finde  nothing  to  take  from  them.  From
hence  it  commeth,  as  I  say,  that  they  have  in  India  many
grounds  in  divers  places  unprofitable  ;  which  is  not  so  in
China,  for  every  one  enjoyeth  the  fruits  of  his  labour.

Hence  it  commeth  that  all  the  ground  that  in  China  Thriftie
can  yeeld  any  kinde  of  fruit  receiving  seede,  is  husbanded,  husbandrie.
The  high  places  which  are  not  so  good  for  Corne,  have
very  faire Groves  of  Pine  Trees,  sowing  also  betweene
them  some  Pulse  where  it  may  be :  in  the  drie  Lands  and
stiffe  they  sow  Wheate  and  Pulse  :  in  the  Marshes  which
are  overflowed,  which  are  many  and  very  long,  they  sow
Rice  :  and  some  of  these  Marshes  doe  yeeld  two  or  three
Crops  a  yeere. Onely  the  Mountaynes  that  are  high  and
beaten  with the weather, and are not fit to plant  any
thing, remayne unprofitable. There is nothing  lost in  Nothing  lost.
the  Countrey  bee  it  never  so  vile  :  for  the  bones,  as  well
of  Dogs  as  of  other  Beasts,  they  doe  use,  making  toyes,
and  with workes in stead of  Ivorie, they  set  them in
Tables, Beds, and other  faire  things  : they  lose not  a
Ragge  of  any  qualitie,  for  as  well  of  the  fine  as  of  the
course,  that  are  not  of  Wooll,  they  make  fine  and  course
Paper, and they make Paper  of  barkes of  Trees, and  Paper  of
of  Canes,  and  of  silken  Ragges,  and  in  the  Paper  made  divert  matters.
of  silke  they  write  :  the  rest  serveth  for  to  roll  betweene  L •  K  !7  -J
the  pieces  of  silke  :  even  the  dung  of  men  yeelds  profit,
and  is  bought  for  mony  or  in  change  of  herbs,  and  they
carry  it  from  the  houses  :  in  sort  that  they  give  money  or
money  worth,  to  suffer  them  to  cleanse  their  houses  of
office,  though  it  smelleth  evill  through  the  Citie  :  when  Neat  filth.
they carry it on their backs, they carry it in Tubs
very  cleane  without,  and  although  they  goe  uncovered,
notwithstanding  it  sheweth  the  cleanlinesse  of  the  Countrey
and  Cities. In  some  Cities  these  Tubs  use  to  goe  covered
not  to  annoy.

They  use  in  all  things  more  slight  then  force,  whereby

501

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

they plow  with one  Oxe,  making  the  Plough in such

fashion  that  it  cutteth  well  the  Earth,  though  the  furrowes

are  not  so  bigge  as  among  us. A  ship  be  it  never  so

Pomps  wkkh bigge,  and  have  it  never  so  great  a  leake,  the  Pomps  are

goe  by  the feet.  made  by  such  a  slight  that  one  man  alone  sitting  moving

his  feet  as  one  that  goeth  up  a  paire  of  stayres,  in  a  very

little  space  he  pomps  it  out :  these  pomps  are  of  many

pieces  as  a  water  wheele,  laid  along  the  side  of  the  ship

betweene  rib  and  rib,  every  piece  having  a  piece  of  wood

of  halfe  a  yard  little more or  lesse, one quarter  well

wrought  :  in  the  middest  of  this  piece  of  wood  is  a  square

little  boord,  almost  of  a  hand  breadth,  and  they  joy ne  one

piece  into  another  in  such  manner  as  it  may  double  well,

the  joynts  which  are  all  very  close,  whereby  this  manner

of  pompe  doth  run,  is  within  of  the  breadth  of  the  little

boardes  of  every  one  of  the  pieces,  for  they  are  all  equall :

and  this  manner  of  pompe  bringeth  so  much  water  as  may

contayne  betweene  the  two  little  boardes. The  Chinas  use

Puppet  places,  also  Puppets,  with  the  which  they  make  representations.

They  bring  up  Nightingales  in  Cages  which  sing  all  the

yeere,  and  are  used  to  Puppet  representations  also.

Provision  fir It  is  a  thing  worth  the  noting,  that  the  blinde  have

impotent  a  labour  appointed  them  for  to  get  their  food,  which  is  to

pe™ns- eeoJ  serve  in  a  Horse-Mill  like  Horses  grinding:  Corne  :  and

these  things  .  5  5

Pinto.  commonly  where  is  a  horse-mill  there  are  two,  because

two  going  together,  they  may  recreate  themselves  in
talking  one  with  another,  as  I  saw  them  going  about
with  Fannes  in  their  hands  cooling  themselves  and  talk-
ing very  friendly.  The  blinde  Women  are  the  common
Women,  and  they  have  Nurces  that  doe  dresse  them  and
paint  them  with  Vermillion  and  Ceruse,  and  receive  the
wages  of  their  evill  use.  The  lame  and  the  creeple  which
either  have  no  kindred  within  a  certayne  degree,  or  if  they
have  them  and  they  doe  not  provide  for  them  that  which
is  necessarie,  or  are  not  able  to  helpe  them,  they  make
their  Petition  to  the  Over-seer  of  the  goods  of  the  King,
and  his  kindred  being  examined  by  his  Officers,  if  among
them  are  any  that  can  maintayne  them,  they  doe  binde

502

FRIAR GASPAR  DA CRUZ

the  neerest  to  take  them  to  them  to  their  charge  and
maintayne  them,  and  if  their  kindred  bee  not  able  to
maintayne  them,  or  if  they  have  no  kindred  in  the
Countrey,  the  Over-seer  of  the  goods  commandeth  they
be  received  into  the  Kings  Hospitall  :  for  the  King  hath
in  all  the  Cities  great  Hospitals  which  have  many  lodgings
within  a  great  inclosure.  And  the  Officers  of  the  Hos-
pitall are  bound  to  administer  to  those  that  are  bedred  all
things  necessarie,  for  the  which  there  are  sufficient  Rents
appointed  out  of  the  Kings  Exchequor.  The  lame  that
keepe  not  their  bed,  have  every  moneth  a  certayne  quan-
titie  of  Rice,  with  the  which,  and  with  some  Hens  or
a  Pigge,  which  they  bring  up  in  the  Hospitall,  they  have
sufficient  to  maintayne  themselves,  and  all  these  things
are  very  well  paid  without  faile  :  and  because  com-
monly those  which  are  received  into  these  Hospitals  are
incurable,  they  receive  them  for  life  :  and  all  those  which
are  received  by  commandement  of  the  Over-seer,  are
enrolled,  and  every  yeere  the  Officers  of  the  Hospitall
doe  yeeld  account  of  the  expenses,  and  of  the  provision  of
the  poore  sicke,  and  if  any  fault  or  negligence  bee  found
in  them  of  that  which  they  are  bound  to  doe,  without
remission  they  are  well  punished  for  it.

§.  in.

Of  their  mechanicall  Trades,  Merchandises  and
Moneyes  :  their  provisions  of  Flesh  and  Fish  ;
the  persons  and  attyre  of  Men  and  Women :
their  Feasts.

Here  are  in  this  Countrey  many  workmen  of  all
Trades,  and  great  abundance  of  all  things  neces-
sarie for  the  common  use,  and  so  it  is  requisite,  for
the  people  is  infinite.  And  because  shooes  are  the  thing
that  most  is  spent,  there  are  more  workmen  of  Shoo-
makers  then  of  any  other  Trade.  In  Cantan  are  two
particular  streets  of  Shoo-makers  very  long,  one  where  Shoomakers.
they sell rich shoes, and of silke,  another where they

5°3

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[in.

Almes  not
almes,  the
fruit  of  vain-
glorie  not  of
mercy.

Chaires.

sell  common  shooes  of  leather  :  and  besides  these  two
streets,  there  are  many  workmen  scattered  about  the
Citie.  The  rich  Bootes  and  Shooes,  are  covered  with
coloured  silke,  embroydered  over  with  twist,  of  very  fine
workes,  and  there  be  Bootes  from  ten  Crownes,  to  one
Crowne  price,  and  shooes  of  two  Crownes  and  thence
downward,  and  in  some  places  are  shooes  of  three  pence.
So  that  the  rich  and  the  very  poore  may  weare  shooes :
jj.]  and  the  rich  as  they  list ;  the  shooes  of  three  pence,  or  of
a  Riall,  are  of  straw,  and  I  say  of  three  pence,  for  there  is
money  that  answereth  our  three  pence.  There  bee  many
rich  husband-men,  that  set  men  by  the  wayes  with  many
of  these  strawen  shooes  for  the  poore  Travellers  (and  it  is
no  wonder  to  have  this  charitie  among  these  Infidels,  for  in
the  parts  of  the  India  are  many  rich  Gentils  which  have
very  great  houses,  wherein  they  spend  continually  much
Rice,  giving  foode  to  all  the  poore  of  what  qualitie  soever,
that  will  come  thither  to  eate :  and  by  the  wayes  they
have  men  set  to  give  drinke  to  the  poore  Travellers.)
There  be  also  many  Carpenters,  and  very  good  workmen
of  all  manner  of  worke.  They  have  continually  many
Boxes  made  of  many  sorts,  some  varnished  with  a  very
faire  varnish,  others  painted,  others  lyned  with  leather,
and  likewise  of  other  sorts.  They  have  continually  a  great
number  of  Chaires  made,  some  of  very  faire  white  wood,
and  other  fairely  gilt  and  silvered,  very  finely  wrought.

They  have  also  Chaires  wherein  the  Rulers  are  carried
on  mens  backs  through  the  Citie,  which  are  very  rich,  of
a  great  price  and  very  faire :  they  have  another  manner
of  Chaires,  which  are  high,  very  rich  and  pleasant  all  close,
with  a  little  window  on  each  side  very  faire  with  a  net
made  of  Ivorie,  or  of  Bone,  or  of  Wood,  through  the
which  they  that  goe  within  doe  see  on  the  one  side,  and
on  the  other  of  the  street  without  being  seene  :  these  serve
for  to  carry  the  Women  about  the  Citie  when  they  goe
abroad.  The  seate  is  of  the  height  of  one  of  our  Chaires,
where  they  goe  sitting  with  their  legs  at  length.  There
be  many  of  these  Chaires  very  rich,  and  of  a  great  price :

5°4

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

and  there  are  some  plaine,  and  have  Pinacles  on  the  tops
very  faire :  there  are  also  many  bed-steads  very  pleasant
and  very  rich,  all  close  round  about,  of  wood  finely
wrought.  I  being  in  Cantan  there  was  a  rich  one  made
wrought  with  Ivorie,  and  of  a  sweet  wood,  which  they  call
Cayolaque,  and  of  Sandalum,  that  was  prized  at  foure
hundred  Crownes,  and  of  little  Boxes  gilt,  and  Maundes,
and  Baskets,  Desks,  and  Tables,  all  as  well  gilt  as  with
Silver  is  without  number:  Gold-smiths,  Silver-smithes,
Copper-smiths,  Iron-smiths,  and  of  all  other  Trades  there
be  many  and  perfect  Workmen,  and  great  abundance  of
things  of  every  Trade,  and  very  perfect.  They  use
infinite  Vessels  of  Latten :  and  from  China  they  furnish
all  Jaoa  and  Siam,  with  these  Vessels,  which  in  India  they
call  Bategaria,  and  they  are  in  every  kind  very  perfect.
They  use  Skillets,  and  Chasing-dishes,  and  other  Vessels
of  cast  Iron,  and  not  only  they  doe  cast  these  Vessels  of
Iron,  but  after  they  are  broken  they  buy  them  againe  for
to  re-cast  them.  There  are  many  Merchants  of  pieces
and  Clothes  of  Silke,  because  they  spend  many  in  the  Silkes.
same  Countrie,  and  in  Siam,  and  there  are  pieces  of
Damaske  and  Taffata  among  themselves  so  rich,  that  they
bring  them  not  to  us,  because  they  give  them  not  for
them  what  they  are  worth  within  the  Land :  they  sell  also
great  store  of  fine  and  course  Serge  of  sundry  colours.
There  are  many  Merchants  of  white  and  dyed  Linnen
cloth,  for  it  is  that  which  is  most  spent  in  the  Countrie.
They  gave  me  a  piece  of  Linnen  cloth  of  about  ten  cubits,
which  was  valued  at  tenne  Crownes,  there  is  both  fine  and
course  as  every  one  will  have  it.

And  howsoever  the  Porcelane  which  is  used  in  all  the  Porcelane.
Countrie  of  China,  and  in  all  India  is  of  common  Clay ;
notwithstanding,  there  is  very  much  course  Porcelane,  and
other  very  fine,  and  there  is  some  that  is  lawfull  to  be
sold  commonly,  for  the  Rulers  onely  use  it  because  it  is
red  and  greene,  and  gilt,  and  yellow :  some  of  this  is  sold
but  very  little,  and  that  secretly.  And  because  there  are
many  opinions  among  the  Portugals  which  have  not  beene

505

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

How  it  is
made.

in  China,  about  where  this  Porcelane  is  made,  and
touching  the  substance  whereof  it  is  made,  some  saying,
that  of  Oysters  shels,  others  of  dung  rotten  of  a  long
time,  because  they  were  not  enformed  of  the  truth,  I
thought  it  convenient  to  tell  here  the  substance  whereof

Fables  of  it.  it  is  made,  according  to  the  truth  of  them  that  saw  it.
The  substance  of  the  Porcelane  is  a  white  and  soft  stone,
and  some  is  redde,  which  is  not  so  fine,  or  in  better
speaking,  it  is  a  hard  clay,  the  which  after  well  beating
and  grinding  it  and  laying  in  Cisternes  of  water  (which  they
have  very  well  made  of  free-stone,  and  some  playstered,
and  they  are  very  cleane)  and  after  it  is  stirred  in  the
water,  of  the  Creame  that  remayneth  on  the  top  they
make  the  very  fine  Porcelane :  and  so  the  lower  the
courser,  and  of  the  dregs  they  make  the  coursest  and  base,
which  the  poore  people  of  China  doe  use.  They  make
them  first  as  the  potters  doe  any  other  vessell ;  after  they
are  made,  they  drie  them  in  the  Sunne,  and  then  paint
them  as  they  list  with  Azure,  which  is  so  fine  as  we  see :
after  these  Pictures  are  drie,  they  lay  on  the  Glasse,  and
then  harden  them.

The  principall  streets  of  the  Merchants,  are  the  most
principall  streets,  which  have  coverts  on  the  one  side  and  on
the  other :  notwithstanding,  the  chiefest  sale  of  the  Porce-
lane is  in  the  Gates  of  the  Cities,  and  every  Merchant  hath
at  his  doore  written  in  a  Table  all  that  is  sold  within  his
shop  :  those  which  sell  simples  for  medicines,  have  at  their
doores  tyed  and  hanging  in  a  string,  a  piece  of  every
thing.  There  is  in  China  great  store  of  Rubarbe,  but  it  is
not  brought  to  Cantan,  but  sodden,  there  is  none  found
raw.  As  the  goods  of  China  are  very  great  and  many,  so
the  rents  which  the  King  of  China  hath  in  every  part  of
his  Kingdome  are  very  great.  Some  China  Merchants
did  affirme  that  Cantan  did  yeeld  every  yeere  to  the  King
three  thousand  Picos  of  Silver,  and  every  three  Picos
make one  Baar, every  Baar hath foure Kintals, every

OrQuarters.  Kintall  hath  foure  x  Arrobas : so  that  one  Baar  is  sixteene
Quarters,  and  three  thousand  Picos,  making  one  thousand

506

Merchants
Tables.

Rhubarbe.

Kings
Customes.

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

Baars, by  consequence,  one thousand  Baars make  y  six-  y  Which

teene  thousand  Quarters ;  and  wee  speake  of  weight,  for  amounteth  t0

in  China  is  no money  of  Gold  or  Silver, but onely  of  pound  weight

Brasse,  the  Gold  and  Silver  goeth  by  weight. But  these  0f  Silver.

as they are popular people, though occupied in the  [HI.  i.  i78-]

trafficke  of  the  Countrie,  it  seemes  they  know not  well

the  trueth  of  this,  and  that  the  summe  is  greater  which  is

collected  of  the  rents  Royall,  for  the Countrie is  very

great,  and  the  merchandise many  and  very  substantiall.

I  was  informed  by  meanes  of  the  Rulers,  which  is  a  more

certaine  information,  because  the  rents  doe  passe  thorow

their  hands,  that  the  rent  of  the  Salt  in  Cantan  did  yeeld

alone  to  the  King  300.  Picos  of  Silver,  which  doe  make

100. Baars, which are 400. Kintals, that are 1600.

*  quarters  of  Silver.  *  Which  is

Every  one  hath  a  paire  of  scales  and  weights  in  his  ^0000.  pound
house,  which  all  are  exceedingly  perfect.  The  weights  «/^r
that  they  commonly  have,  are  from  ten  crownes  to  one,
and  from  ten  Tangas  to  one,  one  Tanga  is  nine  pence.
By  the  name  of  their  Countrie,  the  lesser  great  weight  is
of  one  Tael,  one  Tael  is  sixe  Mazes,  one  Maez  is  the
same  that  a  Tanga :  of  the  small  weights,  the  smallest  is
one  Conderin,  ten  Conderins  make  one  Tanga,  or  one
Maez :  one  Conderin  hath  ten  Caxos ;  and  because  the
common  that  goeth  in  stead  of  money  is  Silver  by  weight,
every  one  hath  weights  of  his  owne,  as  abovesaid  :  for  one
laboureth  by  all  the  meanes  hee  can  to  deceive  the  other,
none  doe  trust  the  scales  and  weights  of  the  other,  and
every  one  that  goeth  to  buy  in  the  Market,  carrieth  a
weight  and  balance,  and  broken  Silver,  and  the  balance  is
a  little  beame  of  Ivorie  with  a  weight  hanging  at  the  one
end  with  a  string,  and  on  the  other  end  a  little  scale,  and
the  string  of  the  weight  runneth  along  by  the  beames,
which  hath  his  markes  from  one  Conderin  to  ten,  or  of  one
Maez  unto  ten.  These  scales  serve  for  to  buy  by  retale,
for  to  buy  by  grosse  they  have  perfect  scales  very  curious
and  fine,  with  very  perfect  weights.  They  carrie  the
Silver  commonly  full  of  mixture,  and  because  they  encrease

507

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Very
Merchants.

Victuals.

Porke  store.

Frogs.

Markets.

it  with  the  mixture,  from  hence  it  commeth  that  he  which
will  make  good  markets  in  the  Countrie  of  China,  and
that  it  may  be  cheape,  carrieth  Silver  rather  then  goods,
for  by  the  encrease  which  the  Chinas  make  of  the  Silver
with  the  mixture,  they  give  the  merchandise  good  and
cheape  for  the  Silver.  The  Merchants  are  commonly
false  and  lyars.

There  is  great  abundance  of  Rice  in  all  the  Countrie,
for  there  are  many  marishes,  which  yeeld  two  or  three
crops  every  yeere.  There  is  also  much  and  very  good
Wheat,  whereof  they  make  very  good  Bread,  which  they
learned  to  make  of  the  Portugals ;  their  use  before  were
Cakes  of  the  same  Wheat.  There  be  many  French
Beanes,  and  other  Pulse  :  there  is  great  store  of  Beefe,  and
Buffes  flesh,  which  is  like  Beefe :  there  are  many  Hens,
Geese,  and  innumerable  Duckes :  there  are  infinite  Swine,
which  is  the  flesh  they  most  love :  they  make  of  the  Hogs
many  singular  flitches,  whereof  the  Portugals  carrie  an
infinite  number  to  the  India,  when  they  goe  thither  by  way
of  trafficke.  The  Chinas  doe  esteeme  the  Porke  so  much,
that  they  give  it  to  the  sicke.  They  eate  Frogs  also,
which  are  sold  in  great  Tubs  full  of  water  at  the  gates,
and  they  that  sell  them  are  bound  to  slay  them.  All  flesh
is  sold  by  weight  alive,  except  Beefe,  and  Buffes  flesh,  and
Porke,  which  commonly  is  sold  by  the  pound,  except  if
they  doe  buy  it  whole,  for  then  they  are  to  weigh  it
whole :  and  that  it  may  weigh  the  more,  they  fill  it  first
with  meat  and  drinke  :  the  Hens  to  make  them  weigh  the
more,  they  fill  them  likewise  with  water,  and  their  crops  full
of  sand  and  other  things.  The  pound  of  the  Hen,  Goose,
Ducke,  and  Frogs,  is  all  at  one  price;  the  Porke,  Beefe,
and  Buffes  flesh  is  worth  lesse,  and  all  at  one  price.  The
fish  is  exceeding  much,  and  all  very  good,  and  it  never
wanteth  in  the  markets :  there  be  many  Crabs,  and
Oysters,  and  other  shell-fish,  and  all  is  very  good :  and  of
all  these  things  the  markets  are  full.  The  Markets  are
commonly  at  the  gates  of  the  Cities,  and  under  the
triumphant  Arches  which  are  in  the  large  and principall

508

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

streets,  as  we  said  before,  and  along  the  Portals  of  the
same  streets :  but  not  to  sell  here  flesh  or  fish,  for  there
be  particular  streets,  excepting  quicke  flesh,  which  is  sold
every  where.

There  are  many  Garden-herbes,  sc.  Turneps,  Radish,  Herbs.
Cabage,  and  all smelling  Herbs,  Garleeke,  Onions,  and
other  herbes  in  great  abundance. There  are  also  many
fruits,  scil. Peaches, Damsons, and another manner of  Fruits.
Plummes  which wee have not,  with long, round, and
sharpe stones  at both ends, and of  these they make
Prunes  :  There  are  many  Nuts,  and  very  good,  and  many
Chestnuts both small  and  great. There  is  a kinde  of
Apples  that  in  the  colour  and  rinde  are  like  gray  Peares,
but  in  smell  and  taste  better  then  they. There  is  a  fruit
whereof  there  are  many  Orchards,  it  groweth  on  great  and
large  boughed  trees,  it  is  a  fruit  as  bigge  as  a  Plumme
round  and  a  little  bigger, they  cast  the  huske,  and  it  is
very  singular  and  rare  fruit,  none  can  have  his  fill  of  it,
for  alwaies  it  leaveth  a  desire  of  more,  though  they  eate
never  so  much,  and  doth  no  hurt. Of  this  fruit  there  is
another  kinde  smaller,  but  the  biggest  is  the  best,  they  are
called  Lechias. There  are  Oranges,  Figs,  and  many  other  Lechias.
fruits,  which  were  to  long  to  recite. And  though  there
be  particular  streets  of  Victualling houses,  yet there is
through  all  the  Citie  almost  in  every  street  of  these  houses.
In  these  Victualling  houses  is  great  store  of  meate  dressed.  Victualling
Many  Geese,  Hennes,  and  Duckes  roasted  and  sod,  and  houses.
store  of  other  flesh  and  fish  dressed : I  saw  at  one  doore
hanging,  a  whole  Hog  roasted,  and  let  one  aske  where  he
will,  for  all  is  very  cleanly  dressed  : the  showe  of  all  the
meate  that  is  dressed  is  at  the  doore,  almost  inciting  them
that  passe. At  the  doore  is  a vessel  full of  Rice,  well  Encereyado.
coloured  and  dressed,  and  because  the  matters  of  Justice  [HI.  i.  179.]
are  commonly  almost  from  ten  of  the  clocke  forward,  and
many  have  their  houses  farre  because the  Citie is  very
great,  or  because  they  which  come  from  out  of  Towne
with  businesse,  as  well  Inhabitants  as  Strangers  doe  eate  in
these  houses. When  any  man  meeteth  any  acquaintance

5°9

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

ot  his  that  commeth  from  abroad,  or  that  he  hath  not
seene  him  a  long  time,  saluting  one  another,  he  asketh
him  presently  if  he  hath  dined,  and  if  he  answereth  no,  he
carrieth  him  to  one  of  these  houses,  and  there  they  eate
and  drinke  privily,  for  there  is  great  store  of  Wine,  and
better  then  in  any  place  of  India,  which  they  make  of
confections  :  if  he  answereth  that  he  hath  dined  alreadie,
he  carrieth  him  where  they  have  onely  Wine  and  Shell-
fish, wherewith  they  drinke,  of  which  houses  there  are
also  many,  and  there  he  doth  feast  him.

There  is  also  in  Cantan  along  the  wall  on  the  outside,  a
Dogs  flesh,  street  of  Victualling  houses,  in  the  which  they  sell  Dogs
cut  in  quarters,  roasted,  boiled,  and  raw,  with  the  heads
pulled,  and  their  eares  ;  for  they  scald  them  like  Pigs,
it  is  a  meate  which  the  base  people  doe  eate,  and  they  sell
them  alive  about  the  Citie  in  Cages  :  through  every  street
they  sell  flesh,  fish,  herbes,  fruit,  and  all  things  necessarie,
crying  that  which  they  sell.  In  the  end  of  Februarie,  in
March,  and  part  of  Aprill,  when  the  great  flowings  are,
there  commeth  great  store  of  fish  from  the  Sea  to  spawne,
in  the  mouthes  of  the  Rivers  along  the  Sea,  whereby  there
breedeth  infinite  small  fish  of  many  sorts  in  the  pooles  of
the  Rivers.  Of  these  spawnes  in  these  times  all  the
Fishers  along  the  Sea  coast  doe  meet  in  their  boats,  and
there  meet  so  many  that  they  cover  the  Sea,  and  lie  neere
the  pooles.  And  these  Fishers  doe  take  great  quantitie  of
this  small  fish,  and  cast  it  in  Cisternes  which  they  have
made  with  stakes,  and  a  very  thicke  Net  made  of  wyer,
where  they  doe  feed  them,  to  the  end  of  the  fishing  time :
and  at  this  time  there  are  wont  to  come  a  great  number  of
Barkes  from  all  places  of  China  within  the  Land  (for  I  said
alreadie  that  all  China  is  sailed  by  Rivers,  for  it  is  all  cut
and  watered  with  great  Rivers)  and  these  Barkes  doe  bring
a  great  many  baskets  within  and  without,  which  are  all
lined  with  oyled  paper,  that  it  may  hold  water,  and  every
one  of  these  Barkes  doe  buy  the  fish  they  have  need  of.
Then  they  carrie  this  fish  in  these  baskets  through  all  the
Countrie  inward,  changing  every  day  the  water,  and  all

5io

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

men  of  any  possibilitie,  within  their  grounds  and  inclosures
have  great  store  of  fish  in  ponds,  for  the  which  they  buy
the  baskets  they  have  need,  they  feed  this  fish  in  the
ponds  in  a  very  short  time  with  Cow  dung  and  BufTes
dung,  wherewith  it  groweth  very  fast.  In  all  the  ditches
of  the  Citie  likewise  they  breed  great  store  of  fish  in  the
same  sort,  of  which  the  Rulers  are  served.  In  all  the
Cities  which  I  said  alreadie,  are  built  along  the  Rivers.
The  King  hath  many  Sea  Crowes  in  Coopes,  in  which
they  breed,  with  the  which  they  make  Royall  fishings
many  times  :  all  the  Barkes  that  are  bound  to  goe  a
fishing  with  these  Cormorants,  doe  meet  and  set  round  in  Fishing  with
the  River,  those  that  have  charge  of  the  birds,  doe  tye  Cormorants.
them  about  the  crops,  that  they  cannot  swallow  them,  and
they  cast  them  to  fish  in  the  River.  They  fish  till  they
fill  their  crops  of  middle  fish,  and  if  it  be  great,  they  bring
it  in  the  beake,  and  come  to  the  Barke,  where  they  cast  all
the  fish  they  have  fished,  forcing  them  to  cast  it  :  and  in
this  manner  they  fish  the  quantitie  they  will,  till  they  have
to  their  contentment  :  after  they  have  fished  for  the
Barke  they  untye  them,  and  let  them  go  fish  for  them-
selves :  after  they  be  full,  they  come  to  the  Boats,  and  are
put  in  the  Coops  :  these  birds  doe  fish  very  much.  The
King  doth  give  for  a  favour  to  the  Rulers  one  or  two
of  these  Barkes,  according  as  the  person  is  of  qualitie  for
the  maintayning  of  his  house  with  fresh  fish.

Though that the  Chinas commonly  are ill-favoured,  Their  persons.
having  their  faces  and  noses  flat,  and  are  beardlesse,  with
some  few  haires  in  the  points  of  the  chinne  :  some  not-
withstanding there  are  which  have  very  good  faces,  and
well  proportioned,  with  great  eyes,  their  beards  well  set,
and  their  noses  well  shapen  : but  these  are  few,  and  it
may  be they  are of  other Nations. They  weare  long  The  Attire  of
Coats  commonly  with  plaites  after  our  good  ancient  use :  the  men.
with  a  flappe  over  the  breast  to  tye  on  the  side,  and  all  in
generall  have  very  long  sleeves  to  their  coats,  they  weare
commonly  blacke  Coats  of  Linnen,  or  of  very  fine  Serge
or  course  of  divers  colours,  some weare  them of  Silk,

511

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

many  doe  use  them  on  the  Feast  dayes  of  Silke  :  the
Rulers  weare  commonly  fine  Serge,  and  on  their  Feasts
they  use  very  fine  Silkes,  chiefly  crimson,  which  none
in  the  Countrie  may  weare  but  they  :  the  poore  people
weare  commonly  Coats  of  white  Linnen,  because  it  costs
but  little  :  on  their  head  they  weare  a  high  Cap  made  of
very  fine  twigs,  and  it  is  round  interwoven  with  blacke
Silke,  and  very  well  made,  they  use  their  Stockins  whole
footed,  which  are  very  well  made  and  stitched,  and  they
weare  Boots  or  Shooes,  as  the  curiositie  or  abilitie  of  every
one  is,  either  of  Silke  or  of  Leather  :  in  Winter  they
weare  Stockins  of  Felt,  either  fine  or  course,  but  the  cloth
is  made  of  Felt  :  they  use  also  in  Winter  their  garments
lined  with  Martines,  chiefly  about  the  necke  :  they  use
quilted  Jackets,  and  some  doe  use  them  of  Felt  in  Winter
under  their  Coats.

Long  haire.  They  use  long  haire  like  women,  which they  weare

finely  combed,  and  they  combe  it  many  times  a  day,  they
weare  it  tyed  on  the  crowne  of  the  head,  and  through  the
knot  thrust  through  with  a  long  small  Silver  pin  :  those
which  are  not  married,  to  wit,  the  yong  Bachelors  doe
weare  for  a  devise  a  fillet  or  ribband  dresse  very  well
made,  their  Cap  remayning  above  it,  that  it  may  be
seene :  they  have  a  superstition  in  their haire,  therefore

[III.  i.  1 80.]  they  weare  it  so  long,  holding  that  by  it  they  shall  be
carried  to  Heaven.  The  common  Priests  doe  keepe  their
haire,  but  are  shaven,  for  they  say  they  neede  no  helpe
to  carrie  them  to  Heaven.  Yet  among  them  are  some
Priests  of  the  Temple  of  the  Idols,  which  among  the
Chinas  are  more  reverenced  then  the  rest ;  these  doe
weare  haire  on  the  top  of  the  head  fastned  with  a  stick,
very  curiously  wrought  like  a  close  hand,  varnished  with
a  very  fine  varnish,  which  they  call  Acharan  :  and  these
Priests  doe  weare  black  coates,  the  other  wearing  a  white
coate.

The  Chinaes are very curteous men  ; the  common

CourtesU.  curtesie  is,  the  left  hand  close,  they  inclose  it  within  the
right  hand,  and  they  bring  them  very  oft  to  their  brest,

512

FRIAR CASPAR DA CRUZ

shewing  they  have  one  another  inclosed  in  their  heart ;
and  to  this  motion  of  the  hands,  they  joyne  wordes  of
curtesie,  though  the  wordes  of  the  common  sort  is  to  say
one  to  another,  Chifan  me  san,  which  is  to  say,  Have  yee
eaten  or  no,  for  all  their  good  in  this  world  is  resolved  in
eating.  The  particular  curtesies  betweene  men  of  sort
which  have  not  seene  one  another  a  long  while,  are  the
armes  bowed  and  the  fingers  clasped  one  within  another,
they  stoope  and  speake  with  wordes  of  great  curtesie,
every  one  labouring  to  give  the  hand  to  the  other  to
make  him  rise :  and  the  more  honorable  they  are  the
longer  they  stand  in  these  curtesies.  The  honorable  and
noble  People  doe  use  also  many  curtesies  at  the  Table,  the
one  giving  drinke  to  the  other,  and  every  one  laboureth
to  give  the  hand  to  the  other  in  their  drinking,  for  at  the
table  there  is  no  other  service  but  that  of  drinking.  If
there  come  any  Ghest  newly  to  his  friends  house,  or
his  kinsman,  if  the  Master  of  the  house  be  not  apparelled
in  holy  day  clothes,  when  the  Ghest  commeth  in,  he
maketh  no  account  of  him  nor  any  mention,  till  he  com-
mandeth  to  bring  his  festivall  apparell,  and  after  he  is
so  apparelled  hee  goeth  to  the  Ghest,  and  receiveth  him
with  many  complements  and  curtesies.  For  they  hold  it
not  convenient,  that  a  new-come  Ghest  and  of  reverence
bee  received  with  common  apparell,  but  clothed  in  feast-
like apparell,  for  in  this  he  sheweth  him  that  his  entring
into  his  house  is  a  feast  day  to  him.

Whatsoever  person  or  persons  come  to  any  mans  house
of  qualitie,  hee  hath  a  custome  to  offer  him  in  a  fine  basket
one  Porcelane,  or  as  many  as  the  persons  are,  with  a  kinde
of  drinke  which  they  call  Cha,  which  is  somewhat  bitter,  cha  drinke.
red,  and  medicinall,  which  they  are  wont  to  make  of  a
certaine  concoction  of  herbes  somewhat  bitter :  with  this
they  welcome  commonly  all  manner  of  persons  that  they
doe  respect,  be  they  strangers  or  be  they  not  ;  to  me  they
offered  it  many  times.  The  Chinaes  are  great  eaters,  and  Great  eaters,
they  use  many  dainties,  they  eate  at  one  table  Fish  and
Flesh,  and  the  base  people  dresse  it  sometime  all  together.

XI  5T3  2K

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

The  dainties  which  are  to  bee  eaten  at  one  table,  are  set  all
together  on  the  board,  that  every  one  may  eate  where  hee
liketh  best.  It  is  a  cleanly  and  neat  people.  The  common
people  hath  some  grosse  things.

Certayne  noble  Portugals  went  to  shew  me  on  a  day  in
Cantan  a  banquet,  which  a  rich  Merchant  made,  which  was
worth  the  sight.  The  house  where  it  was  made,  was  with
a  loft,  and  very  faire,  with  many  faire  windowes  and  case-
ments, and  all  of  it  was  a  mirror  :  the  Tables  were  set  in
three  places  of  the  house,  for  every  Ghest  envited  a  Table
and  a  Chaire  very  faire  and  gilt,  or  with  silver,  and  every
Table  had  before  it  a  cloth  of  Damaske  downe  to  the
ground.  On  the  Tables  was  neither  cloth  nor  napkins,  as
well  because  the  Tables  were  very  fine,  as  because  they
eate  so  cleanly  that  they  need  none  of  these  things  :  the
fruit  was  set  along  the  edges  of  every  Table,  all  set  in
order,  which  was,  rosted  Chesnuts  and  peeled,  and  Nuts
cracked  and  shaled,  and  sugar  Canes  cleane  and  cut  in
slices,  and  the  fruit  we  spake  of  before,  called  Lichias,
great  and  small,  but  they  were  dried.  All  the  fruit  was
set  in  small  heapes  like  Turrets  very  well  made,  crossed
betweene  with  certayne  small  sticks  very  neat  :  whereby  all
the  Tables  round  about  with  these  little  Turrets  were  very
fairly  adorned.  Presently  after  the  fruit,  were  all  the
services  placed  in  fine  Porcelan  dishes,  all  very  well
dressed  and  neatly  carved,  and  every  thing  set  in  good
order,  and  although  the  dishes  were  set  one  over  another,
all  were  so  finely  set,  in  such  sort  that  he  which  sate  at  the
Table  might  eate  what  he  would,  without  any  need  of
stirring  or  removing  any  of  them  :  and  presently  there
were  two  small  sticks  very  fine  and  gilt  for  to  eate  with,
holding  them  betweene  the  fingers  :  they  use  them  in
stead  of  a  paire  of  Pincers,  so  that  they  touch  nothing  of
that  which  is  on  the  board  with  their  hand  ;  yea,  though
they  eate  a  dish  of  Rice,  they  doe  it  with  those  sticks,
without  any  graine  of  the  Rice  falling  :  and  because  they
eate  so  cleanly,  not  touching  with  the  hand  their  meate,
they  have  no  need  of  cloth  or  napkins  :  all  comes  carved

5i4

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

and  well  ordered  to  the  Table.  They  have  also  a  very
small  Porcelan  cup  gilt,  which  holdeth  a  mouth  full  of
wine,  and  onely  for  this  there  is  a  Waighter  at  the  Table :
they  drinke  so  little  that  at  every  bit  they  must  have  the
cup,  and  therefore  it  is  so  small.  There  are  some  Chinaes
that  weare  very  long  nailes,  of  halfe  a  quarter,  and  a
quarter  long,  which  they  keepe  very  cleane,  and  these
nailes  doe  serve  them  instead  of  the  sticks  for  to  eate
withall.

The  Chinaes  doe  use  on  their  birth  dayes  to  make  great  Feasts.
feasts,  continuing  yet  in  them  the  custome  of  the  old
Gentiles.  In  these  Feasts  are  wont  to  meet  all  the  Kins-
men and  Friends,  and  all  doe  helpe  him  to  beare  the
charges  of  the  Feasts,  with  sending  him  Presents,  that
when  they  doe  celebrate  their  birth  dayes  they  may  pay  Birth  dayes.
them  in  the  same  sort  :  and  because  they  have  these
helpes,  they  make  great  expence  and  solemnitie.  The
feast  lasteth  all  night  long,  for  all  the  Gentiles  as  they  [ill.  i.  181.]
walke  in  darknesse  living  without  the  knowledge  of  God,
so  all  their  feasts  through  all  places  of  India  and  in  China,
are  made  by  night.  In  these  feasts  is  great  abundance  Night  feasts.
of  meate  and  great  store  of  wine,  all  the  night  they  spend
in  eating  and  drinking,  and  musicke  playing  on  divers
instruments.  Their  Priests  offer  their  sacrifices  to  their
Gods,  apparelled  very  richly.  They  apparell  themselves
in  divers  sorts  of  garments,  and  the  Priests  doe  sing  their
songs  in  a  very  tunable  voice :  among  these  sacrifices,
playing  and  singing,  the  Tables  are  alwayes  furnished
with  sundrie  meates,  every  one  taking  what  hee  liketh
best.  The  Priests  when  they  have  sung  as  all  the  rest,
doe  make  at  their  doore  triumphant  Arches  very  well
made  of  Paper,  and  Scaffolds  with  divers  representations
of  Figures  and  Statues,  and  certayne  high  Trees  and
hanging  on  the  broken  Boughes,  very  well  wrought  and
painted,  many  lights,  and  in  every  place  many  Lanthornes
very  faire  and  well  made  all  with  lights.

In  the  generall  Feasts  of  all  the  Towne  and  People,  New  yeeres
chiefly  on  the  first  day  of  the  yeere,  all  the  streets  and  day.

5i5

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Comedies.

doores  are  very  richly  dressed,  and  chiefly  they  doe
indeavour  and  labour  to  deck  the  triumphall  Arches,
covering  them  with  many  clothes  of  Damaske  and  of
other  silke,  with  many  Lanthornes.  There  is  much
playing  of  sundrie  Instruments,  and  singing,  and  joyntly
with  this  great  store  of  meate  of  sundrie  kindes,  and  great
abundance  of  Wine.  They  use  many  times  representa-
tions by  Actors,  which  doe  represent  very  well  and  to
the  life,  the  Actors  having  very  good  apparell  and  well
ordered,  and  fitting  as  is  requisite  for  the  person  hee
representeth ;  and  they  that  represent  a  Womans  part,
besides  the  apparell  that  is  requisite  for  the  part  hee
representeth,  they  are  painted  with  Stibium  and  Ceruse.
Those  which  understands  them  not  what  they  represent,
are  sometimes  wearied,  but  they  that  understand  them
doe  delight  very  much  to  heare  them :  and  one  whole
night,  and  two,  and  some  time  three,  they  are  continually
busied  in  representations  one  after  another.  While  these
representations  doe  last,  there  must  bee  a  Table  set  with
great  store  of  meate  and  drinke.  They  have  in  these
Actions  two  great  inconveniences  or  blemishes,  the  one
is,  that  if  one  be  to  represent  two  parts,  and  is  to  change
his  attyre,  he  doth  it  before  all  the  Beholders :  the  other
is,  that  the  Representer  as  well  as  hee  that  speaketh
alone,  doe  speake  in  a  very  high  voyce  almost  singing.
Sometime  they  goe  to  the  ships  to  play,  that  the  Portugals
may  give  them  money.
Instruments.  The  Instruments  they  use  for  to  play  on,  are  certayne
Bandoraes  like  ours,  though  not  so  well  made,  with
their  Pinnes  to  tune  them,  and  there  bee  some  like
Gitternes  which  are  smaller,  and  other  like  a  Viall  de
gamba,  which  are  lesse :  they  use  also  Dulcimeres  and
Rebeckes,  and  of  a  certayne  kinde  of  Hoboyse,  resembling
our  use.  They  use  a  certayne  manner  of  Instrument
that  hath  many  wyer  strings;  they  play  on  them  with
their  nayles,  which  for  that  purpose  they  weare ;  they
have  a  great  sound  and  make  a  good  harmonie :  they  play
many  Instruments  together  sometimes,  consorted  in  foure

5i6

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

voyces  which  make  a  very  good  consonancy.  It  hapned
one  night  by  Moone-shine,  that  I  and  certayne  Portugals
sitting  at  the  doore  of  our  lodging,  a  few  young  men
passing  the  time  came  along  the  River,  playing  on  divers
Instruments ;  and  wee  being  glad  to  heare  the  musick,
sent  for  them  to  come  neere  where  wee  were,  and  that
wee  would  invite  them,  they  as  gallant  youthes  came
neere  with  the  Boate  and  beganne  to  tune  their  Instru-
ments, in  such  sort  that  wee  were  glad  to  see  them  fit
themselves  that  they  might  make  no  discord :  and  begin-
ning to  sound,  they  began  not  altogether,  but  the  one
tarried  for  to  enter  with  the  other,  making  many  divisions
in  the  processe  of  the  musick,  some  staying,  others  playing :
and  the  most  times  they  played  all  together  in  foure  parts.
The  parts  were  two  small  Bandoraes  for  the  Tenor,  a
great  one  for  counter-Tenor,  and  an  Instrument  called
Crano  followed  the  rest,  and  sometime  a  Rebecke,  some-
time a  Dulcimere  for  a  Treble.  And  they  used  a  good
policy,  that  wee  might  remayne  the  more  desirous,  they
played  but  two  straines.

It  is  not  lawfull  for  any  man  in  all  the  Countrey  to  Armes  and
carry  any  manner  of  weapon,  no  not  a  knife,  therefore  quarrels.
when  one  quarrels  with  another  they  goe  to  buffets  and
pulling  by  the  haire:  onely  the  Souldiers  and  Ministers
of  the  Captaines  of  warre  doe  weare  swords  on  their
hangers.  When  any  man  dyeth  that  hath  House,  Kin-  Funeral! rites.
dred,  and  Children,  after  hee  hath  given  up  the  ghost,
they  wash  the  Coarse  and  put  on  his  best  apparell,  and
his  Cap  on  his  head,  and  set  him  on  a  Chaire,  and  then
commeth  his  Wife  and  kneeleth  downe  before  him,  and
with  many  teares  and  lamentable  wordes  shee  taketh  her
leave  of  him  :  and  after  the  Wife  comes  the  Children
in  their  order  doing  the  like,  and  after  the  Children  the
rest  of  the  Kindred,  and  all  the  rest  of  the  House,  and
his  Friends.  The  ceremonies  ended,  they  put  him  in
a  Coffin  made  for  him  of  Camfiere  wood,  which  is  pre-
servative for  dead  bodies,  and  smelleth  well,  they  close
it  and  pitch  it  well  that  no  smell  may  come  out  of  it ;

517

PURCHAS HIS PILGMMES

they  set  it  upon  two  little  formes  and  cast  over  it  a
cloath  to  cover  the  Coffin  downe  to  the  ground,  whereon
the  picture  of  the  man  deceased  is  pictured.  They  make
a  little  house  before  the  Coffin  of  white  raw  cloath,  with
a  Portall  right  against  the  Coarse,  where  a  Table  is  set
with  candle-sticks  and  candles  lighted,  and  set  thereon
bread  and  all  the  fruits  of  the  Countrey.  And  all  this
they  doe  of  superstition  for  a  ceremonie,  and  there  they
[III.  i.  182.]  keepe  the  Coarse  eight  or  fifteene  dayes,  in  the  which
their  Priests  of  their  Gods  come  continually  by  night
to  offer  their  Sacrifices,  and  to  pray  their  Heathenish
inventions.  There  they  bring  many  Pictures  of  men
and  women,  and  burne  them  with  many  ceremonies.
Finally  they  hang  some  Pictures  of  men  and  women  in
paper  hanging  on  coards,  and  with  great  praying  and
mooving  these  pictures  by  the  coards,  with  great  crying
and  showting,  they  say,  to  send  the  dead  man  to  Heaven.
All  day  and  all  night  while  they  are  in  these  ceremonies,
there  is  a  Table  set  with  great  store  of  meate  and  drinke.
These  ceremonies  ended,  they  take  the  Coffin  and  set  it
in  a  Field  where  the  dead  are,  and  there  it  consumes
Mourning.  with  time.  Their  mourning  which  they  use  is  the
sharpest  that  ever  I  saw,  for  they  weare  Coats  after  the
China  common  sort,  of  verie  course  wooll  next  the  flesh,  and

women*  girt with  great coards, and  on their  head a Cappe of

customes  and the  same  cloath,  made  like the  Caps  that are  used in

c loathes.  ^  Countrev,  saving  that  these  have  certaine  flappes  that
1  have  many  *  '*  o  m  1  1

China  ^  over  tne^r  eyes- Notwithstanding,  that  as  they  are

Pictureszvhich  nearest  in  kindred  so  they  weare  the  rougher  mourning

represent  the  weed. The  rest  weare  raw  cloath,  and  not so course.

women  either  pQr  Father  or  Mother,  they  mourne  three  yeeres :  and

wrapped  up  $  ne ^ee  Louthia,  as  soone  as  hee heareth the  newes

or  else  very  presently  he  leaveth  the  office  he  serveth,  and  goeth  to

small;  their  mourne  to  his  owne  house  for  three  yeeres,  which  being

Zseflittkd ended  he  &oeth  to  the  Court  t0  demand  his  office*
fcfr.  of  the  The  Women commonly,  excepting  those  of  the  Sea

rest,  as  in  the  coast and the Mountayners, are very white and fine

Map  is  seene.  women,  some  having  their  noses  and  eyes  well  propor-

518

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

tioned. From  their  child-hood  they  wrap  their  feete  in

cloathes,  that  they  may  remayne  small,  and they  doe  it

for  the  China's  doe  holde  them  for  finer  women  that  have

small Noses  and Feete. This is used yet among the

noble people, and  not  among  the  basest. They  weare

their hayre  very  well combed, close and tyed to the

crowne  of  the  head,  and  bound  from  the  rootes  to  the

toppes  with  a  long  lace  very  well  placed. And  the  lace

is  garnished  with  Jewels  and  peeces  of  Gold  round  about.

They  use  long  Coats  like  the  Portugall women,  which

have the waste in the same manner that they have.

They  weare  upper-bodies  with  long  sleeves,  they  spend

commonly more Silke in their garments then their

husbands : but in their common apparell they are

cloathed in  white Linnen-cloath. They  make  curtesies

as our  women doe,  but  they  make  three together  and

very  hastely. They  use  painting  their  faces  with  Vermilion

and  white  Ceruse  very  well  set. They  commonly  keepe

themselves  close,  so  that  through  all  the  Citie  of  Cantan  Womens

there  appeareth  not  a  woman,  but  some  light  huswives,  retirednesse.

and  base  women. And  when  they  goe  abroad  they  are

not seene, for they goe in close Chayres, (whereof

wee  spake  before)  neither  when  any  bodie  commeth  into

the  house  doth  hee  see  them,  except  for  curiositie  they

chance  under  the  doore-cloath,  to looke on them  that

come  in  when  they  are  strange  people.

Commonly  the  men  have  one  Wife,  which  they  buy  Marriage.
for  their  money  more  or  lesse,  according  as  they  are,  of
their Fathers  and  Mothers. Yet  may  every one have
as many wives  as hee is able to  maintaine : but one
is  the  principall  with  whom they  live,  and  the  other  he
lodgeth  in  sundry  houses. And  if  hee  hath  dealings  in
divers  Countries  hee  hath  in  every  one  a  wife  and  house
with  entertainement. If  the  wife committeth adulterie,  Adulterie.
and  the husband accuseth her and the  adulterer, both
suffer death. And if  the  husband  doe suffer the  wife  Witaldrie.
to play the  adulteresse, hee is  grievously  punished. I
being in Cantan, saw a Marchant  of  China  goe  from

5*9

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Harlots.

The  bondage
or  slaverie  of
some  in  China.

Justice  to  Justice,  verie  sharpely  handled  for  suffering
his  wife  to  play  the  adulteresse.  The  common  women
are  in  no  wise  permitted  to  dwell  within  the  walls.  And
in  the  Suburbes  without  they  have  their  proper  streets
where  they  dwell,  out  of  the  which  they  may  not  live :
All  the  common  women  are  slaves,  they  bring  them  up
for  that  purpose  from  their  child-hood,  they  buy  them
of  their  mothers,  and  teach  them  to  play  on  an  Instru-
ment of  musique,  and  to  sing.  And  those  that  can  best
doe  this,  because  they  gaine  most,  are  worth  more.  And
those  which  cannot  doe  that,  are  worth  lesse.  The
masters  either  carrie  them  unto  the  men,  or  sell  them
to  them :  and  when  they  are  to  be  set  in  the  street  of
the  common  women,  they  are  written  by  an  Officer  of
the  King  in  a  Booke,  and  the  Master  is  bound  to  come
everie  yeere  with  a  certaine  fee  to  this  Officer,  they  are
bound  to  answer  their  Master  so  much  everie  moneth.
When  they  are  old,  with  Paynting  they  make  them  seeme
young.  And  after  they  are  not  for  that  trade,  they  are
altogether  free,  without  any  obligation  either  to  Master
or  any  bodie,  and  then  they  feed  upon  that  which  they
have  gotten.

I  spake  so  particularly  of  this  matter,  for  to  come  to
say  that  in  this  Countrey  of  China  is  no  greater  captivitie
then  this  of  these  Wenches.  And  let  no  man  say,  or
affirme  any  other  thing,  for  about  the  examining  of  it
I  laboured  somewhat  in  Cantan,  because  some  Portugals
would  affirme  it  otherwise.  The  captivitie  in  this
Countrey  is  in  manner  following.  If  any  woman  by  the
death  of  her  husband  remayneth  a  widdow,  and  hath
nothing  to  maintayne  her  selfe  with,  neither  the  children
that  are  left  her  are  such  as  are  able  to  get  their  living,
neither  hath  shee  any  thing  to  give  her  children ;  this
Woman  in  this  necessitie,  commeth  to  a  rich  man,  and
agreeth  with  him  for  six  or  seven  Crownes,  for  a  Sonne
or  a  Daughter,  and  the  price  received  shee  delivereth  it;
if  it  be  a  Daughter,  shee  serveth  as  abovesaid  for  a
common  Woman,  and  is  brought  up  for  that  purpose :

520

FRIAR  GASPAR  DA CRUZ

if  it  be  a  Sonne,  hee  serveth  his  Master  some  time. And

when  hee  is  of  age  to  marrie,  the  Master  giveth  him  a  [HI.  1.  183.]

Wife,  and  all  the  Children  that  are  borne  to  him  remayne

free,  and  without  any  Obligation  :  notwithstanding,  this

Servant is bound to  give  his Master  so  much by  the

yeere,  having  a  house  by  himselfe  :  for  when  he  marrieth

they  give  him  a  house  and  he  laboureth,  either  at  some

Trade,  or  by  his  industrie  for  to  earne  his  living. And

no  man  may  sell  any  of  these  Slaves  to  the  Portugals,

having  great  penalties  for  it. The  Women,  as  by  being

common,  they  looke  for  great  profit  of  them,  in  no  wise

they will sell them, besides the running into great

penalties  also. And  all  those  which  commonly  are  sold  to

the  Portugals  are  stollen,  they  carry  them  deceived,  and

secretly  to  the  Portugals,  and  so  they  sell  them  :  and  if

they  were  perceived  or  taken  in  these  stealths,  they  would

bee  condemned  in  the  utmost  punishment. The  Lawes  of

China  give authoritie to the Women for to sell their

Children,  and  not  to  the  Men,  for  as  the  Men  are  bound

to  get  a  living  for  himselfe  and  for  his  Children,  if  hee

want  the  remedie,  they  hold  that  hee  is  in  the  fault  of  that.

And  that  Man  may  the  better  labour  for  their  living  and

their  Childrens. So  farre  is  China  from  having Slaves

that altogether  should  bee captives, that neither  those

which  they  take  in  warre  are  slaves  :  onely  they  are  bound

to  the  King,  and  are  placed  for  Souldiers  in  places  farre

from  their  Countries  where  they  were  taken,  eating  of  the

wages  they  have  of  the  King. These  doe  weare  for  a

device  a  red  cap,  as  I  saw  the  Tartarians  weare  in  Cantan,

which  had  beene  taken  in  the  warres.

§.  mi.

52'

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Sir,  Master,
or  Lord.

Lout  Mas  of  the

Court

Eunuchs.

The  Tutom  ;
Lieutenant,
Deputie  or
Vice-roy.

§.  mi.

Of  their  Louthias,  Mandarines  or  Magistrates,
their  creation,  priviledges,  maintenance;  Of
Prisons  and  Tortures ;  of  the  King  and  of
Embassadors.

The  Ponchassi
or  Treasurer.

Very  one  that  in  China  hath  any  office,  command
or  dignitie  by  the  King,  is  called  Louthia,  which  is
to  say  with  us  Senor.  How  this  Title  is  given  him,
we  will  in  his  place  make  mention  of  it.  There  are  in
every  Province  of  China  one  thousand  Louthias,  or
according  to  others  three  thousand,  besides  those  that  are
resident  in  the  Court,  by  whom  are  ordayned  all  matters
of  the  Kingdome,  and  to  whom  come  all  the  waightie
matters  of  all  the  Realme.  And  because  they  are  to
dispatch  with  the  King  ;  and  converse  with  him  within
doores,  and  it  is  not  lawfull  for  other  to  converse  with  them,
neither  doe  other  see  them,  and  they  have  entrance  where
the  Wives  of  the  King  are,  which  are  many,  they  are
commonly  Eunuchs.  In  every  Province  are  five,  which
among  the  rest  are  most  principall,  which  have  a  very
great  authoritie  and  majestie  in  their  persons,  and  are
greatly  reverenced  and  honored,  not  onely  of  the  common
people,  but  also  of  all  the  other  Lothyas.

The  principall  of  the  five  is  the  Governour,  which  in
their  language  is  called  Tutom,  to  this  come  all  matters
both  great  and  small  of  all  the  Province,  and  for  the
authoritie  and  majestie  of  his  person  he  is  not  resident
where  the  other  Lothyas,  that  hee  may  not  bee  frequented
of  them,  and  so  he  may  be  more  esteemed  and  feared.
To  these  come  all  the  Rents  of  the  Provinces  except  the
ordinarie  expences,  and  by  him  as  well  the  businesses  as
the  Rents  that  are  gathered,  and  all  that  hapneth  in  the
Provinces  are  referred  and  sent  to  the  Court.  The  second
dignitie  of  the  Provinces,  is  the  Over-seers  of  the  goods,
which  in  their  language  is  called  Ponchassi  :  this  hath  the
care to send to  recover  through  all  the Province  the

522

FRIAR CASPAR DA CRUZ

Rents thereof, for  the which hee  hath many Lothyas

under  his  jurisdiction,  which  are  particular  Officers  for  the

businesses  and  recoveries  of  the  goods. This  provideth

all  the  ordinarie  charges  of  the  Province,  and  with  that

which  remayneth  he  resorteth  to  the  Tutom,  that  he  may

send it  to  the  Court, this may enter-meddle  in grave

matters  of  the  other  Officers  inferiour,  and  hath  authoritie

over  them. Likewise,  all  the  matters  and  affaires  of  the

Province  resort  unto  him,  to  bee  referred  by  him  to  the

Tutom. Another  chiefe  dignitie  under  this  is  the  chiefe

Justice, which in  their  language  is  called  Anchasi,  and  The  Anchasi

though  there  be many  other  Officers of  Justice, this  is  or  ch!efe

above  all,  and  by  him  are  the  dispatches  distributed  to  the

rest,  and  all  matters  of  Justice  resort  unto  him,  as  one  that

hath authoritie  of  the  other  inferiour. Another  dignitie

under  this  is  the  chiefe  Captaine,  who  in  their  tongue  is

called  Aitao. To  this  Aitao  pertayneth  to  command  to  The  Aitao  or

prepare  the  men  of  warre,  and  all  that  is  necessarie  of  c%efe .
x,  . r .  j  ,  i 11 i  •  •  •  Captaine.

snipping, and victuals, and all other  provision against

Enemies  and against  Theeves  : to  this belong  also the

businesses  of  strangers  in  cases  which  belong  not  to  the

goods. The  fift  and  last  of  the  great  dignities,  is  of  the

chiefe  Captaine  which  putteth  in  execution  the  matters  of

warre,  and  is  resident  in  the  Armies  which  the  Aitao,  being

a  land,  doth  ordayne  : when  it  is  necessarie  besides the

putting matters in  execution  and order,  if  the matter

require  his  presence,  he  goeth  in  person  :  and  so  important

may  the  matter  be  that  the  Aitao  will  goe. This  is  called

in  the  Countrie  language  Inthissi. In  the  house  of  every

one  cf  these,  except  the  Luthissi,  which  is  the  inferiour  of  His

the  five,  are  other  ten  which  are  Assistants,  and  are  also  of  Lieutenant,

great  authoritie,  five  of  these  doe  sit  at  the  right  hand  of  £ac^\J"eUten

the  Principal  in  five  chaires,  recited  before  when  we  spake  Assistants.

of  the  buildings,  and  five  doe  sit  on  the  left  hand  : these  [III.  i.  184.]

in  matters  of  importance  are  at  the  dispatching  with  the

principall  of  the  house,  and  the  Principall  dying  or  by  any

other meanes wanting, one of these  according to his

antiquitie  remayneth  in  his  stead  :  and  if  it  be  necessary

523

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

to  goe  through  the  Province  about  some  matter  of
importance,  that  appertayneth  to  the  dignitie  in  whose
house  they  assist,  one  of  these  doe  goe  with  all  the
authoritie  of  the  Principals  The  five  that  sit  on  the  right
hand,  have  a  greater  degree  and  dignitie  then  the  five  on
Ensignes  of  the  left  hand.  And  as  the  dignitie  consisteth  in  their
dignitie,  girdle  Girdles  and  Canopies,  those  of  the  right  hand  weare
^  '  Girdles  of  gold  and  Canopies  of  yellow,  and  those  of  the
left  hand  weare  Girdles  of  silver  and  Canopies  of  blew,  or
of  changeable  colour.  The  Girdles  are  little  lesse  then
three  fingers  broad,  and  an  inch  thick,  and  all  about  of
gold  or  of  silver  very  well  wrought  made  of  peeces.  The
Canopies  are  very  large  and  faire,  which  an  Officer  doth
beare  upon  a  staffe  a  fathom  long,  of  a  Clove  tree  very
faire,  and  they  are  lined  with  silke.

Besides  these  Assistants  and  the  five  Principall,  there  is
among  the  inferiour  one  of  greater  dignitie,  which  is  the
TheTaissuor  chiefe  Jaylor,  whom  they  call  Taissu, which  have very
Sheriffs,  great  houses  of  great receipts, where they have great

prisons,  but  neither  this  nor  any  that  are  under  may  weare
girdle  of  gold  nor  silver,  nor  a  yellow  Canopie,  except  hee  |
bee  an  Officer  or  Captaine  of  men  of  warre,  that  for  !
favour  of  a  Gentleman  may  have  a  yellow  Canopie  :  the
rest  weare  girdles  of  Tartaruga,  or  of  other  matter  made
like  them  of  gold  or  silver,  and  their  Canopies  are  of
changeable  stufFe  or  blew,  and  all  these  Inferiour  doe
speake  to  the  Superiour,  when  they  are  before  them  on
their  knees,  and  doe  kneele  as  long  as  they  are  with
them,  except  the  Taissu,  who  when  he  commeth  in
kneeleth  and  riseth  up  presently,  and  is  alwayes  standing.
Every  one  of  the  great  ones  have  many  inferiour  Officers
under  his  jurisdiction,  for  the  matters  and  businesses
necessary  to  the  Office  of  every  one,  all  which  as  they
are  the  Kings  officers  have  the  Title  of  Lothias  and  their
badges  or  signes.  The  dve  Principall  with  their  Assistants
doe  weare  for  a  Badge  the  Kings  Armes  on  their  brests,
and  on  their  backs,  which  are  certayne  Serpents  woven
with  gold  thred.

524

FRIAR GASPAR  DA CRUZ

Every  yeere  there  is  one  sent  to  every  Province  as  a  The  Chaen  or
Justice,  which  is  called  Chaen,  which  commeth  to  take  Judge  of  the
account  of  all  the  Lothias,  great  and  small,  and  examineth  C*!V**' or
all  the  Students  and  chooseth  Louthias,  and  visiteth  the
Prisons,  and  all  that  is  necessary  to  be  seene  and  provided
for  in  all  the  Province.  He  useth  all  meanes  to  spie  out
their  briberie  and  injustice,  and  hath  power  to  displace  or
preferre.  When  this  entreth  newly  into  this  Citie,  it  is
not  lawfull  for  any  to  worke,  they  shut  their  doores  and  no
body  walketh  through  the  street,  and  to  preserve  his
worship  and  authoritie  they  will  not  boldly  communicate
in  sight  of  the  people,  and  many  Officers  with  Banners
displayed  of  crimson  silke,  and  all  the  Louthias  both  great
and  small  are  bound  to  goe  and  meet  him.  The  same
entertainment  is  used  to  every  one  of  the  five,  when  hee
commeth  newly  to  the  Province  where  hee  is  to  administer
his  office.  There  bee  other  dignities  above  all  these,
which  are  called  Quinchais,  which  is  to  say,  a  Plate  or  The
Seale  of  gold  :  which  are  not  sent  but  about  very  serious  Quinchais,
matters  and  of  great  importance,  for  the  Kingdome,  or
the  King.  Every  Lothia  of  what  qualitie  soever  hee  bee,
high  or  low,  hath  for  a  signe  or  badge,  besides  the  above-
said,  a  high  Cap  and  round  with  certayne  cares  a-crosse,
made  of  small  twigges  woven  with  twist.

All  the  Offices  are  given  from  three  to  three  yeeres,  and
none  is  given  for  longer  time,  and  all  given  to  men  that
are  not  borne  in  that  part  of  the  Land,  because  they  may
not  be  mooved  by  affection  in  matters  of  Justice  that
belong  to  their  offices,  and  also  because  they  may  not
become  mightie,  thereby  to  prevent  insurrections.  The
offices  are  distributed  by  the  King  with  the  counsell  of  the
Eunuchs.  And  because  the  Eunuchs  are  those  with
whose  counsell  the  offices  are  distributed,  they  are  many
times  mightily  bribed.

The  Chaens  which  the King  doth  send every three
yeeres,  commonly  are  sound  men,  and bring  commonly  The  third
more  authoritie  then  the rest. And  these  (besides  the  yeeres
yeerly  Chaen)  are  sent  the  third  yeere,  when  every  Officer  Visitor.

525

Commissioners

extraordin-

arie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

endeth  his  office.  After  that  the  Chaens  have  taken  the
accounts  of  the  Lothyas,  they  visit  the  Prisons  and  give
audience  to  the  Prisoners.  After  this  hee  with  the  other
principall  Lothias  doe  visit  the  Schollers,  and  all  those
that  hee  findeth  to  have  studied  well,  he  favoureth  and
giveth  them  good  hopes,  and  those  which  have  not  studied
well,  if  hee  see  they  have  abilitie  for  it,  he  commandeth
them  to  bee  whipped.  And  if  already  they  have  beene
whipped  and  have  not  amended,  he  commands  them  to
bee  put  some  dayes  in  prison,  besides  the  whipping  of
them,  that  with  these  punishments  from  thence  forward
they  may  have  a  better  care.  If  hee  findeth  that  they
neither  learne,  nor  have  abilitie,  hee  thrusts  them  out  of
the  Schooles.

This  doe  onely  the  Louthias  which  come  every  three

yeeres,  after  they  have  dispatched  the  businesses  of  the

Province,  hee  busieth  himselfe  in  making  Louthias  :  which

hee  maketh  in  forme  following. He  commandeth  to  come

to  the  principall  Citie  of  the  Province,  all  the  Students

that  have  well  studied,  from  all  the  Cities  of  the  Province,

and from all  the  great  Townes,  where the King hath

Schoole-masters  of  free  Schooles,  maintayned  at  his  charge

(for  the  Students  did  learne  the Lawes of  the  Realme,

maintayned at their fathers charge.) And all the

[III.  i.  185.]  principall  Louthias  of  the  Province  assembled  with  Chaen,

there examine very well every one of the Students,

demanding  of  him  many  things  concerning  their  Lawes :

and  if  he  answereth  to  all  well,  they  command  him  to  be

put  apart,  and  if  he  be  not  yet  well  instructed,  eyther  they

send  him  to  learne  more,  and  if  it  be  through  his  default,

eyther  they  whip  him,  or  being  whipped  they  send  him  to

Prison,  as  the  Portugals  saw  many  in  Prison  for  that  fault,

Commence- where  they  were  in  Prison  also. After  the  Examination

ment  or  Act. ended,  the  Chaen riseth  up,  and  all  the  Louthias  with

mr nth great Ceremonies, Feasts,  Musickes,  and  Playings,  they

following giye  tne  degree  to  every  one  of  them  they  found  suffi- 1

Relations  of cient,  which  is  to  give  him  the  Title  of  Louthia. And  |

the  Jesuits. after  the passing  many dayes in Feasts,  and  Banquets,

526

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

they  send  them  to  the  Court  to  receive  the  Badges  of
Louthias,  which  are  Caps  with  eares,  broad  Girdles  and
Canopies,  and  there  they  stay  the  distribution  of  Offices.
So  that  in  this  manner  they  make  the  Louthias,  which  in
the  Countrey  are  to  administer  Justice.  The  Louthias  for
war  are  made  by  Chivalries  and  famous  Deeds  which  they
did  in  war.  So  that  in  these  Countries  men  are  much
honoured  by  their  Learning,  or  by  their  Chivalrie,  and
yet  more  for  their  Learning,  because  of  the  Learned  doe
commonly  come  the  five  principall  Louthias  and  the
Assistants.

Notwithstanding,  there  are  many  Louthias,  which  are  Other  sorts  of
made  from  simple  favours,  either  for  doing  some  parti-  Louthtas-
cular  service  to  the  King,  or  to  the  Realme,  or  in  some
Towne,  or  having  some  particular  favour  or  qualitie.  As
they  did  to  a  young  man  of  China,  because  the  Portugals
beeing  in  Prison,  he  served  for  an  Interpreter,  whereby
the  Louthias  gave  him  the  title  and  badges  of  Louthia,
because  he  could  speake  Portugall.  But  these  and  such
other  doe  not  commonly  serve  Offices  of  the  King,  but
enjoy  onely  the  Liberties  of  Louthias  :  as  the  Gentlemen
Portugals  have  their  Liberties  which  some  enjoy  by  favour
of  the  King.  And  these  Louthias  have  great  Liberties  in
the  Countrey  :  for  none  can  doe  him  any  injurie  without
punishment,  neither  can  they  bee  imprisoned  but  for
hainous  faults,  and  they  may  imprison  any  that  doe  wrong
them,  and  many  other  Liberties.  And  though  there  were  Their
some  Portugals  that  reported  without  any  certaintie  that  Prwiledges.
the  Chinaes  did  studie  naturall  Philosophic,  the  truth  is
that  there  is  no  other  Studies  nor  Universities  in  it  nor
particular,  but  onely  the  Schooles  Royall  of  the  Lawes  of
the  Kingdome.  The  truth  is  that  some  are  found  that
have  knowledge  of  the  courses  of  Heaven,  whereby  they
knew  the  Eclypses  of  the  Sunne  and  of  the  Moone.  But
these  if  they  know  it  by  any  Writings  that  are  found
among  them,  they  teach  it  to  some  person,  or  persons  in
particular,  but  of  this  there  are  no  Schooles.

The  Chinas  have  no  certaine  Letters  in  their  Writing,

527

Publike
Officers
wholly  main-
tayned  of  the
publike.

Houses  for
Officers.

Publike  Innes.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

for  all  that  they  write  is  by  Characters.  Their  lines  are
not  overthwart  as  in  the  Writings  of  all  other  Nations,
but  are  written  up  and  downe.

When  the  Louthias  are  dispatched  at  the  Court  with
Offices  for  the  Provinces,  where  they  goe  to  governe,  they
depart  carrying  nothing  of  their  owne  more  then  the
Apparell  they  are  to  weare,  and  some  few  Servants  to
serve  him,  even  when  they  have  no  Offices,  neither  need
they  carry  any  provision  for  the  Journey,  nor  carriage  or
shipping  at  their  owne  charge  :  for  through  all  the  wayes
where  he  goeth  are  provisions,  aswell  of  shipping  as  of
necessarie  carriage,  and  necessary  food  for  all  the  Kings
Officers,  which  are  provided  of  the  Royall  Rents.  In  all
the  Cities  and  great  Townes,  the  King  hath  many  good
and  Noble  Houses  for  the  Louthias  both  great  and  small
to  lodge  in,  and  all  those  which  by  any  meanes  are  the
Kings,  have  sufficient  Rents  for  the  maintenance  of  every
person  that  shall  dwell  in  the  House  according  to  his
degree.  And  that  which  is  to  be  given  to  every  one  for
his  Expences  is  alreadie  limited.  Wherefore  he  that  may
lodge  there  being  come,  the  Officer  of  the  House  com-
meth  to  him,  and  asketh  him  if  hee  will  have  his  ordinary
in  money,  or  in  things  necessarie  for  provision,  and  that
which  hee  doth  demand,  as  farre  as  the  money  doth
extend,  hee  is  to  give  him,  very  well  and  cleanly  drest,
either  Flesh,  Fish,  Duckes,  or  Hennes,  or  what  he  will.
And  any  Louthia  that  doth  lodge  there,  may  command
the  Hoast  of  the  House  to  be  whipped,  if  he  serve  him
not  to  his  will.  And  if  any  Louthia  will  goe  to  lodge  at
the  House  of  any  acquaintance  of  his,  hee  taketh  the
Money,  which  the  inferiour  Louthias  doe  also  sometimes,
either  to  spare  some  Money,  or  to  bee  merry  at  their
wils  more  freely.  And  in  the  provisions  of  these  Houses
there  is  no  want  any  wayes,  for  the  Ponchasis  have  the
charge  to  give  them  sufficient  provision  that  it  doe  not
want.  And  at  the  yeares  end  account  is  taken  of  the
Officers  of  the  House  of  the  Expenses  he  made.

By  the  wayes  at  every  League,  and  at  every  two  leagues

528

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

are  Houses  which  onely  have  Beds,  and  Chaires  for  the
Travellers  to  rest  and  ease  themselves.  And  some  of
those  that  have  care  of  these  Houses,  have  provision  for
to  give  Wine  to  the  guests  :  others  give  nothing  but
Chaa.  After  the  Louthias  come  to  the  Citie  where  they
are  to  be  resident  and  execute  his  Office,  they  find  the
Houses,  where  they  are  to  lodge  according  to  the  Offices
they  have  great  or  small,  greater  or  smaller.  In  these
Houses  they  find  all  the  Servants  necessary,  Scriveners,  Inferiour
Porters,  and  all  other  Ministers  necessary  for  their  Offices.  Officers.
For  these  are  continually  in  the  houses,  for  to  minister  at
all  times  all  the  Offices  of  the  Houses  where  they  serve.
And  every  Officer  according  to  his  House  and  person
hath  his  provision  necessary  for  his  meate,  drinke,  and  his
apparell  (limited  so  that  it  sufficeth  him  well)  which  is
payed  to  him  without  faile,  every  moneth.

When  the  Louthias  are  old  and  weaned  in  the  charges  [III.  i.  1 86.]
and  Offices  of  the  Kingdome,  they  are  lodged  in  their  Rest  in  age
owne  Countries  or  where  they  will,  and  the  King  alloweth  mt  l&mtie'
them  every  moneth  so  much  according  to  their  qualitie
for  their  maintenance  till  they  dye.  And  because  the
Ordinaries  of  the  Louthias  are  commonly  sufficient,  and
with  some  abundance,  they  may  alwayes  spare  some  thing
to  leave  their  Wives  and  Children.  Before  the  inferiour
Ministers  these  Officers  doe  all  things  of  their  Offices  and
matters  of  Justice,  for  they  are  present  at  all  things,  to
prevent  Bribes  and  partialitie.  Whiles  the  Louthia  is
sitting  in  the  chaire  to  heare  the  parties  and  dispatching
of  matters,  the  Porters,  Scriveners,  Sergeants  and  other
Ministers  are  at  the  doore  :  and  when  any  person  com-
meth  with  any  matter,  one  of  the  Porters  with  a  high  voice
that  hee  may  be  heard  where  the  Louthias  sitteth  (for  it  is
farre  off)  telleth  who  and  wherefore  he  commeth.  And
none  speaketh  to  the  Louthias  but  upon  their  knees  on
the  ground,  and  commonly  they  speake  a  prettie  space  Reverence.
distant  from  him.  And  from  thence  with  a  high  voyce
well  understood,  he  propoundeth  his  case,  or  sheweth  him
his  Petition  written  in  Paper,  and  lifting  up  the  hand
xi  529  2  L

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

desireth  him  to  receive  it,  and  to  shew  him  Justice  ;  to
whom  a  Minister  runneth,  the  Louthia  making  a  signe  to
him,  and  presenteth  it  unto  him.  After  the  Louthia
readeth  it,  he  eyther  dispatcheth  him  of  that  which  he
asketh,  writing  at  the  foote  of  the  Petition  with  redde
Inke,  or  remitteth  the  party  to  an  inferiour  Officer  to  be
dispatched.  So  I  saw  it  done  to  a  Petition  which  a  woman
presented  to  the  Ponchasi.

The  promptnesse  and  readinesse  wherewith  the  Louthias
are  served,  and  how  feared  they  are,  cannot  be  written  with
the  Pen,  nor  expressed  with  the  Tongue,  but  it  must  be
seene  with  the  eye  for  to  know  what  it  is.  All  doe  their
messages  running  and  with  great  speed,  not  onely  the
Scriveners  and  Sergeants,  and  other  Ministers,  but  also
the  Inferiour  Louthias  to  the  Superiour.  And  if  any
fayleth  never  so  little  of  his  diligence  and  accustomed
speed,  or  committeth  the  lesse  negligence  in  the  World
before  the  Louthia,  hee  hath  not  any  remission,  but
immediately  they  put  a  little  flagge  in  his  hand,  and  he
must  hold  it  in  his  hand  kneeling  untill  the  parties  be
dispatched  :  and  then  the  Louthia  commandeth  to  give
him  the  stripes  that  he  thinke  good  :  and  the  stripes  are
such  as  hereafter  we  will  speake  of.  Whereby  all  the
Ministers  in  the  Houses  of  the  Louthias  are  playstered  or
marked  with  the  stripes,  so  that  already  among  themselves
Nimia  they  hold  it  a  disgrace  not  to  be  marked  with  the  stripes,

seventas pant  because  it  is  a  thing  generally  common  among  them.
And  when  the  Louthia  waxeth  angry  or  is  moved  at
any  thing,  it  is  a  wonder  to  see  the  trouble  and  feare
that  is  in  all  the  standers  by.

I  being  in  the  House  of  the  Ponchasi  with  certayne
Portugals,  intreating  for  the  deliverance  of  certayne
Portugals  that  were  Captives,  and  imprisoned  in  the
Jayle,  for  the  which  wee  carried  him  eight  Ounces  of
Ambar  (which  at  that  time  was  much  esteemed  of  them,
and  now  by  carrying  so  much  it  is  not  so  much  esteemed)
we  not  being  willing  to  give  him  the  Ambar,  without
giving  us  both  the  Portugals,  he  tooke  an  occasion  for  to

53°

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

terrifie  us,  to  waxe  angry  against  the  youth,  servant  of
a  Portugall  which  was  in  our  company  and  was  our  Inter-
pretour.  Wherefore  he  rose  out  of  the  Chaire  and  became
red  as  bloud,  and  his  eyes  were  inflamed,  and  set  one  foote
forward,  putting  his  thumbes  under  his  Girdle,  looking  to
the  standers  by  with  a  terrible  countenance  :  stepping  for-
ward, lift  up  his  foot  and  stampt  on  the  ground  with  it,  and
said  with  a  terrible  voyce,  Taa,  which  is  to  say,  Whippe.  It  Taa.
was  a  wonderfull  thing  to  see  in  how  little  space  they  tooke
the  youth,  tyed  his  hands  behind  with  a  Cord,  and  laid
him  on  his  belly  with  his  thighes  bare,  and  two  Beadles
placed  them  selves  on  each  side  one,  with  one  foote
forward,  and  their  Whip  readie  for  to  give  him  the  stripes
that  they  should  bee  commanded  to  give  him.  Certainly
it  was  all  done  in  a  moment.  The  Merchants  that  came
in  our  favour  were  troubled,  and  stood  aside  shaking  with
feare.  At  this  time  one  of  the  Prisoners  said,  Sirs,  be  not
afraid,  for  he  cannot  whip  that  youth.  And  in  truth  we
knew  it  was  so,  for  according  to  their  Lawes,  there  was  no
fault,  whereby  he  might  command  him  to  be  whipped,  and
there  was  a  penaltie  if  hee  did  it.  The  Louthia  hearing  the
voyce  of  the  Prisoner,  commanded  to  carry  him  with
speed  to  the  Jayle  againe.  And  the  Louthia  did  this  for
nothing  else  but  to  make  us  afraid,  that  wee  should  give
him  the  Ambar  for  one  of  the  Prisoners,  for  he  could  not
give  us  the  other,  because  he  was  alreadie  adjudged  to  dye,
and  the  sentence  confirmed  by  the  King,  which  was  irre-
vocable, and  he  was  willing  to  have  the  Ambar,  for  he
hoped  to  have  of  the  King  a  greater  Reward  then  to  be
Ponchasi  for  the  Ambar.  For  he  did  eate  it  for  to
sustayne  life  ;  and  many  dayes  were  past  since  they
had  demanded  it  of  the  Portugals,  but  as  they  knew
not  the  name  we  used  for  it,  they  never  understood
one  another  till  that  the  yeare  after  they  had  for  the
Aitao  of  Cantan  a  little  for  the  delivery  of  a  Portugall :
whereby  he  was  advanced  to  Ponchasi.  And  this  would
also  have  for  the  same  effect  the  Ambar  at  our  hands
for  to  be  advanced.

53i

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Notwithstanding,  we  seeing  our  selves  tyed  and  without
an  Interpretour  by  whom  to  speake,  and  the  youth  in
disposition  of  whipping,  we  gave  him  the  Ambar.  There
came  presently  a  Chafing-dish  for  to  prove  it,  and  the
Prisoner  cast  a  little  in  the  fire,  and  seeing  the  smoake
ascend  right  up,  he  was  contented,  and  scattering  the
smoake  he  set  his  Nose  over  it  and  said,  Haoa,  which  is
to  say,  it  is  very  good.  And  commanded  presently  to
deliver  us  the  Prisoner  free.  It  was  wonderfull  to  see
with  what  speed  it  was  weighed,  and  the  pieces  told  and
[III.  i.  187.]  put  in  a  Paper,  and  noted  by  the  Scrivener  before  them  all
the  number  of  the  pieces,  and  the  waight  that  was  there.
And  after  that  Paper  another,  all  glued  presently.  And
after  that  another.  And  in  the  third,  the  Panchasi  set  his
Marke  with  Red  Letters,  and  what  was  contayned  within.
And  at  the  same  instant  came  a  little  Boxe,  and  being  put
in  it  was  presently  stopped,  and  upon  the  cover  a  Paper
glued,  and  upon  it  the  Marke  of  the  Ponchasi  :  and  pre-
sently came  an  inferiour  Louthia  Captayne  of  the  Army
with  his  Souldiers,  and  all  afarre  off  kneeled  downe,  and
said  at  every  word  Quoo,  which  is  to  say,  Yes,  enclining
their  heads  and  hands  to  the  ground.  And  receiving  his
message,  presently  as  he  came  running,  so  he  returned
running  with  the  Boxe  to  take  shipping  for  to  carrie  the
Ambar  to  the  Tutaen,  to  bee  sent  from  him  to  the  King.
All  this  that  I  have  spoken  was  done  in  a  trice  before  wee
stirred  from  the  place  where  wee  were.  This  was  also
desirous  to  have  the  Ambar  of  us  before  the  Louthia  of
that  seate  did  come,  which  was  looked  for  every  day  to
come  a  new ;  for  this  was  onely  a  Lieutenant.
Manner  of  When  any  Louthia  that  is  not  of  the  fivt,  neither  the

their  pompe  in  Chaen,  neither  very  inferiour,  but  as  they  say  of  the  meaner
the  street.  SQr^  g^^  abroad  into  the  Citie,  he  hath  before  him  a
good  space  two  Ministers  with  two  Maces  that  seeme  to
be  of  silver,  upon  long  staves,  made  almost  after  our
fashion,  and  the  one  goeth  on  the  one  side  the  street,  the
other  on  the  other  side.  After  these  a  little  distant,  goe
other  two,  each  with  a  straight  Cane,  or  Pole  in  his  hand.

532

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

After  these  goe  other  two  in  the  same  distance  with  two
Canes  trayling  along  the  Pavements,  which  are  the  Instru-
ments of  Justice  wherewith  they  doe  whip.  After  these
goe  other  two  with  two  Tables  like  two  Targets  bowed
and  playstered,  whereon  is  written  the  Title  of  the  Officer
that  passeth.  The  formost  signifie  in  their  Maces,  that
he  which  passeth  is  in  his  Office  in  the  Kings  place.  And
the  two  straight  Rods,  the  right  of  Justice  which  he  ought
to  doe.  Those  which  carrie  the  Instruments  of  whipping,
doe  carrie  for  a  signe  certayne  long  Red  Laces,  with  two
great  round  Tassels  at  the  ends.  And  all  doe  carrie  very
gallant  Plumes  very  well  made  of  the  points  of  a  Peacocks
tayle.  And  those  that  goe  before  doe  now  and  then  say
with  a  loud  voyce  Huuph,  which  is  to  say,  Give  place,  or
beware.  While  these  doe  passe  it  is  not  lawfull  in  any
wise  for  any  one  to  crosse,  or  goe  in  the  middle  of  the
street,  under  paine  of  being  whipped  without  any  remis-
sion.

It  chanced  two  Portugals  went  through  the  middest  of  a
street  in  Cantan  walking,  and  behind  them  came  an  in-
feriour  Louthia,  which  had  but  foure  Ministers,  which  came
crying  according  to  their  custome  they  should  give  place.
The  Portugals  either  gave  no  heed  or  made  no  regard  of
those  that  came  :  wherefore  a  Minister  comming,  gave  a
great  thrust  to  the  one  of  them,  and  the  Portugall
answered  him  with  a  boxe  on  the  eare  ;  and  being  bound
with  his  hands  behind  him,  was  to  goe  to  Prison.  It  was
necessary  for  the  Portugall  to  come  to  the  Louthia,  and
pacific  him  with  faire  words,  and  he  made  an  end  of
pacifying  him  with  fourteene  Crownes  that  hee  gave  him.
After  the  Ministers  commeth  the  Louthia  in  a  rich  Chaire
gilt  and  very  faire,  on  foure  mens  backes.  These  Chaires
are  great  and  sumptuous,  and  the  Louthia  goeth  com-
passed with  all  the  Scriveners  and  other  his  Ministers.
And  all  of  them  while  hee  goeth  by  the  street,  goe  alwayes
running.  And  the  Louthia  weareth  a  long  blacke  Coate
of  fine  Searge  with  long  sleeves,  which  is  the  common
wearing  :  he  carrieth  the  armes  a  crosse  like  a  Frier,  and

533

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Pompe  of  the

greater

Officers.

Chaen  and

Quinchays

splendour.

Noyse  and
silence.

his  eyes  low  without  looking  to  any  side  :  for  even  with
their  eyes  they  will  not  communicate  with  the  common
people,  for  to  preserve  their  authoritie  the  more  with
them,  that  may  be  more  feared.

When  any  of  the  foure  Louthias  goeth  abroad,  except
the  Tutan,  or  the  yearely  Chaen,  they  goe  accompanied
with  many  Ministers,  and  sixe  Officers  doe  carrie  them  on
their  backes,  and  they  leade  a  spare  Horse  with  a  faire
Saddle,  and  a  cloth  of  Silke  over  it ;  the  Chaire  wherein
they  goe  is  more  sumptuous  and  richer,  they  carrie  before
foure,  five,  or  sixe  Maces,  and  two  or  three  Instruments
and  more  Ministers.

When  the  Chaen  that  commeth  every  three  yeeres
commeth  into  the  Citie,  or  for  forme  important  affaires
goeth  abroad,  or  some  Quinchay,  they  shut  up  all  the
doores  in  the  streets  where  he  passeth,  and  none  doth
worke,  nor  is  any  seene  in  the  street  when  hee  passeth.
The  shops  are  shut  up,  and  every  thing  of  sale  is  out  of
sight.  The  Officers  with  coards  along  the  street,  doe
make  three  lanes,  where  the  triumphing  Arches  are  made
in  three  Arches  :  and  through  the  middest  passeth  the
Louthia  onely,  and  the  Officers  on  the  two  sides.  And  it  is
not  lawfull  for  any  to  passe  through  the  middle  :  they  are
accompanied  of  many  inferiour  Louthias  that  goe  on  foot.
And  on  the  one  side  of  the  street,  and  the  other  are  many
armed  men  and  others  with  Banners  of  red  Silke  advanced,
all  standing  in  good  order.  In  the  Court  of  the  house
where  he  is  to  goe  in,  are  many  Kettle-drummes  set  upon
high  stakes  to  be  well  played  upon,  which  are  covered
downe  to  the  ground  with  clothes  of  Silke  quartered.
After  these  are  many  placed  in  order,  with  Flags  of  Silke
on  high.  After  these  in  the  same  order,  are  many  with
Trumpets,  and  all  are  in  great  silence.  As  soone  as  the
Louthia  appeareth  they  all  sound  their  Instruments  in
order  :  the  sound  of  the  Instruments  ended,  they  remayne
all  in  so  great  a  silence,  as  if  there  were  no  bodie  in  the
Court,  being  a  great  multitude  of  people.  The  people  as
they  come in, doe place  themselves on the sides, the

534

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

middest  betweene  the  Instruments  remayning  voide,
whereby  the  Louthia  passeth.  Before  these  Louthias  goe
commonly  many  inferiour  Louthias,  of  those  that  carrie
Maces  when  they  goe  abroad.  There  are  also  in  this
Court  many  men  at  Armes  with  long  gilt  Lances,  and  [III.  i.  1 88.J
with  very  faire  Armours.  This  is  all  in  the  first  Court.  In
the  second,  along  the  Gallerie  (whereof  wee  spake  above,
when  wee  treated  of  the  houses  of  the  great  men,  that
onely  the  Louthias  passe  through  them)  on  the  one  side
and  the  other  are  many  inferiour  Louthias  with  Head-pieces
on  their  heads,  some  gilt,  some  with  Silver,  and  with
Swords  hanging  at  their  belts,  and  with  Coats  and
Cassocks  made  in  fashion  of  Frockes  with  studs  of  Gold
and  Silver,  that  it  seemeth  set  upon  plates,  but  it  is  a  very
fine  worke  made  upon  very  single  Silke,  which  serveth
onely  for  braverie  and  ornament.  Some  use  on  their
heads  white  Head-pieces  garnished  with  Gold,  but  are  of
a  very  fine  leafe  and  thinne,  that  seeming  an  Armour,  are
not.  In  this  manner  also  are  the  Louthias  inferiours,  which
doe  environ  the  superiour  Louthia.  The  Chaires  where
these  doe  goe  are  very  rich  and  of  great  price,  and  very
sumptuous.  The  Tables  whereon  is  written  the  titles  of
dignitie  of  these  Great  men  are  written  with  letters  of
Silver.  And  when  any  of  these  doth  enter  newly  in  any
Citie  with  these  feasts  and  entertaynments,  all  the
Louthias,  great  and  small,  receive  him  at  a  house  (where
hee  landeth  very  rich  and  noble)  and  from  thence  they
accompanie  him  unto  his  lodging,  and  being  lodged,  all
doe  take  their  leave  with  many  curtesies.  In  these  receiv-
ings they  use  no  sumptuous  apparel.  The  great  men
(when  most)  weare  Coats  of  red  Silke.  In  their  owne
feasts  in  their  houses,  and  secretly  one  with  another,  and
in  banquets,  they  use  crimson  Silke,  and  all  the  braverie
in  their  apparell,  and  in  rich  attires.

Whensoever by  way of  inquirie  or examination  any  Manner  of
Witnesses  are  demanded,  the  Louthias  doe  it  in  publicke  inquisition.
before  the  Officers  and  ministers  of  his  Office,  and  before
all  the  rest  that  by  any  meanes  chance  to  be  there  present,

535

PURCHAS HIS PILGKIMES

and  this  because  no  falshood  may  be  used,  nor  any
sleight  in  the  manner  of  inquiring :  and  by  consequence  in
writing.  And  first  they  examine  the  Witnesses  severally,
and  if  they  doe  agree,  they  joyne  them,  and  examine  the
one  before  the  other,  till  they  bring  them  to  altercations
and  quarrelling  by  words,  that  by  the  words  the  one
speaketh  to  the  other  they  may  come  to  the  knowledge  of
the  truth.  And  if  by  this  meanes  they  doe  not  comprehend
the  truth,  they  give  them  many  stripes  and  tortures  that
by  one  meanes  or  other  they  may  know  the  truth  of  the
No  Oathes.  matter  they  enquire  or  examine  :  they  use  no  Oath,  for
they  esteeme  nothing  of  their  Gods.  They  have  notwith-
standing a  respect  in  the  witnessing  the  persons  of  qualitie,
and  of  whom  is  presumed  that  they  will  not  easily  lye.
When  they  examine  any  matter  of  great  weight,  or  a  grave
person,  then  they  write  themselves,  the  processe  of  the
examination.  It  chanceth  sometimes  that  some  of  the
Bribe-trickes.  Louthias  for  a  great  bribe,  or  for  great  friendship  let  some
Prisoner  loose,  and  put  another  in  his  place,  for  there
never  wanteth  one  naughtipacke  that  will  put  himselfe  in
danger  of  stripes,  or  death  for  interest,  or  they  bring  him
in  by  deceit,  deceiving  him  with  words,  and  making  the
matter  light  unto  him,  and  giving  him  some  interest,  they
name  him  as  the  Prisoner  they  will  let  loose,  that  the
faults  and  punishments  of  the  guiltie  may  fall  upon  the
innocent.  And  when  sometimes  in  this  sort  they  cannot
let  the  guiltie  person  loose,  they  labour  to  bribe  all  the
Officers  to  give  him  for  dead  among  those  that  die  in  the
prisons.  But  these  inventions  are  not  used  but  where  the
bribes  are  great,  or  the  adherents  very  great  and  mightie.
And  for  to  eschew  the  inconveniences  which  sometime
fall  out,  when  any  are  imprisoned  for  weightie  matters,  or
Cane-whip-  the  Prisoners  have  great  adversaries,  they  set  downe  all  the
ping.  Much  markes  of  the  Prisoners,  and  cause  them  to  be  set  at  the
ts  here  written  fQQt  Qf  the  writinpr that  so  they  may  not  use  anv  of  the

of  Prisons,  and ..  .  •  i

Executions, malices  abovesaid.

which  I  have With  how  much  pietie  and  leasure  they  kill,  with  so
omitted.  much  crueltie  and  speed  they  whip,  for  in  this  case  they

536

FRIAR CASPAR DA CRUZ

forgive  none.  The  stripes  are  such  that  with  reason  it
might  be  a  sufficient  punishment  for  to  amend,  for  the
canes  wherewith  they  whip  are  plaited  below  about  foure
fingers  broad,  and  goe  straightning  upward  unto  the  end,
where  the  Beadles  hold  them  :  and  they  are  almost  a  finger
thicke  (for  in  those  parts  are  canes  as  big  as  a  mans  leg.
And  because  in  Portugall  are  many  witnesses  of  knowledge
of  the  same,  I  dare  simply  affirme  it,  and  they  are  of  eighty*  *Huge  Reeds,
or  ninety  spans  long.)  And  their  whips  are  made  of  these  or  Canes-
canes  of  the  height  of  a  middle  statured  man  to  the
breasts.  They  give  the  stripes  on  the  hammes  of  the
mans  legs,  being  layd  on  his  breast,  and  his  legs  layd  along,
and  his  hands  tyed  behind.  And  the  Beadles  butchering,
as  they  are  commanded,  the  Louthias  are  altogether  voide
of  compassion,  talking  one  with  another,  eating  and  drink-
ing, and  picking  their  teeth.  The  crueltieis  such,  that  the
Court  is  full  of  bloud  :  and  when  they  have  made  an  end
of  whipping  them,  they  carrie  them  not,  but  like
Butchers  with  much  crueltie  they  draw  them  by  one  leg  Miserable
to  the  Prison.  And  when  the  Beadles  are  whipping  they  evfmn  °f
tell  with  a  loude  voyce  the  stripes.  If  the  miserable  s  r-*'
Prisoners  which  are  in  the  Prison  for  grievous  faults  at
the  time  that  this  correction  is  to  bee  done  can  get  a  piece
of  a  coard,  wherewith  they  may  hang  themselves,  they
goe  to  buffets  who  shall  hang  himselfe  first,  that  the
butcherie  of  the  stripes  be  not  executed  on  them.  And
the  Portugals  affirmed,  which  were  in  Prison,  that  in  one
day  fortie  Prisoners  did  hang  themselves  in  the  Prison
where  they  were,  to  escape  the  stripes  they  were  rather
willing  to  lose  their  lives.  And  they  affirmed,  that  the
coard  was  very  short,  that  scarcely  there  was  so  much  as
to  come  about  the  necke  to  tye  it,  and  on  a  sticke  which
they  stucke  in  the  wall,  and  because  the  sticke  was  very
lowe,  they  pulled  one  another  till  they  were  choaked,
going  to  buffets  who  should  hang  himselfe  first.  When
any  doth  kill  himselfe,  or  dieth  in  the  Prison,  it  is  the  [III.  i.  189.]
order  in  China  to  cast  him  in  the  house  of  office,  and
there  to  be  three  dayes,  where  the  Rats  doe  eate  him  up.

537

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

And  sometimes  the  Chinaes  Prisoners  doe  eate  of  them

with  hunger.

Store  of  free- Every Citie that  is the  Head  of  the  Province,  hath

people,  and  thirteene  Dungeons,  and  in  sixe  of  them  are  the  men
therefore  store  ■,  j  i 1  i  ^  i r

of  bond,  by condemned to death  : there are in Cantan upward or

abused libertie  flfteene  thousand  Prisoners. There  are  in  every  Dungeon

and  store. onely for the condemned to death,  one hundred and

twenty  men  that  serve  for  watches,  and  have  a  Louthia

over  them  as  their  Captaine,  or  Gentleman  of  the  round.

There  be  two  sorts  of  tortures,  one  for  the  hands,  another

for  the  feet,  which  are  nipped  by  certaine  stickes  to  the

bruising  or  breaking of  the fingers  or  toes  with cruell

paines.

The  King  his The  King  hath  as  many  wives  as  he  listeth  :  and  within

wives, children  doores  all  the  service  is  almost  of  women  : whereof  he

seivants. ^h a great multitude  : and likewise great store of

Eunuches, and there in no other people within the

house. The first son that is borne unto him of  any

of  his  wives  succeedeth  in  the  Kingdome. The  rest  he

marrieth,  and  at  such  times  as  he  marrieth  them  they  are

lodged  in  some  of  the  Cities  that  he  best  liketh  ;  where

they  are  well  provided  of  all  things  necessarie  for  their

maintenance,  as  sonnes  to  the  King. But  they  never  see

the  Kings  face  any  more  after  they  are  married.

All  the  Embassadours  that  come  to  China,  with  Embas-

Embassadours sages  from  Kings  or  Princes,  receive  of  the  King  great

priviledges. rewards  and  favours,  and  they  give  him  Cap  and  signes  of

was 1 1^^  Lothia,  whereby  he  hath  great  priviledges  in  the  Countrey.

Viceroy,  An. They  may  whip  and  punish  the  Chinaes  themselves,  so

i$\$.  and that  they  touch  not  any  Louthia  small  or  great:  for  to

sent  this  Perez  meddle with these would breed great inconveniences.

Thina^and0  This  WaS  the  CaUSe  that  Fernando  *  Perez  of  Adrade
therein  gomg  f°r  Embassadour  to  China,  that the  Chinaes did

Thomas  Perez

Embassadour ;  who  were  well  enter tayned  there.  But  some  Portugals  usurping  Tarn  us,  a
China-Hand,  and  exercising  all  outrages,  caused  T.  Perez  after  4.  moneths  travellfrom  Can  tan
to  the  Court  to  bee  taken  for  a  Spie,  and  sent  backe  to  Cantan,  where  hee  died  in  Prison
among  malefactors.  See  Massceus  1.  5  £sf  6  who  seemeth  to  disagree :  or  else  his  peoples  act
was  ascribed  unto  him. For  hee  had  left  6.  ships  there,  when  he  went  to  Canton.

538

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

rise  against  him,  and  hee  escaped  with  his  hands  on
his  head,  losing  some  ships  :  because  having  done  un-
accustomed Justice  in  China,  and  upon  the  Chinaes,
and  they  forbearing  him,  he  would  stretch  his  hand  to
the  Louthias.  The  goods  of  the  Embassadour,  and  of
his  is  free  from  customes,  and  to  him  and  to  his
they  give  lodgings  to  dwell  in,  and  all  things  necessarie
while  they  are  in  the  Countrie.  No  man,  no  not  a
Louthia  may  disturbe  him  in  any  thing,  nor  any  thing
of  his.  One  Lothia  would  have  whipped  one  of  Siam,  for
having  carried  a  message  to  the  Prison  to  certaine  Por-
tugal that  were  in  Prison.  One  of  the  Officers  said
unto  him  that  was  present,  that  he  was  of  Siam  of  the
Embassage,  wherefore  being  satisfied  therewith  he  let
him  goe  in  peace,  desiring  him  he  would  not  doe  so
again  e.

With  the  Chinaes  being  so  great  as  at  the  beginning  we
said  and  declared,  the  King  hath  such  meanes  and  industrie
in  the  governement  thereof,  that  every  moneth  he  knoweth
all  that  passeth  through  all  the  Realme,  and  he  knoweth  it
in  this  manner.  All  matters  of  Justice  and  of  Warre,  and
all  annuities  with  all  that  is  worth  the  knowing  in  every
one  of  the  Provinces  is  referred  by  the  Louthias,  and  by
other  persons  to  the  Ponchasi,  and  the  Ponchasi  maketh  a
relation  of  all  by  writing  to  the  Tutan.  The  Tutan  is
bound  to  send  a  Post  every  moneth  to  the  Court,  which
carrieth  the  information  in  writing  to  the  King  of  all
things  that  passed  in  that  moneth.  They  count  their
moneths  by  the  Moones,  and  they  are  to  be  dispatched
in  such  sort  that  at  the  beginning  of  every  Moone  the
Posts  from  all  the  Provinces  are  to  bee  at  the  Court,  that
the  first  day  of  the  Moone  it  may  be  presented  to  the
King,  as  relations  of  all  things  happened  in  every  Pro-
vince. And  although  some  Provinces  are  farre  distant
from  the  Court,  that  the  Posts  cannot  come  within  a
moneth  to  the  Court  :  notwithstanding  in  such  manner
they  agree  that  every  Moone  the  King  is  to  have  the
relation  of  every  Province,  though the  one  be  of  more

539

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

time then another, because of  the one  Province  being
farre  and  the  other  neere.

The  manner  of  the  Posts  is  as  among  us,  they  carrie  a
Home  which  they  winde  when  they  come  neere  to  any
Towne,  that  they  may  have  a  Horse  ready  in  every
Towne  within  a  certaine  distance.  They  are  bound  when
they  heare  the  Home  to  have  a  Horse  ready  for  him,
which  is  done  with  such  diligence  as  all  the  other  services
of  the  Officers.  And  where  hee  is  to  passe  a  Foord,
as  soone  as  he  windeth  his  Home  with  great  speed  they
carrie  him  a  Boat,  as  I  saw  once  going  to  the  Citie  of
Cantan,  in  a  Towne  that  was  in  the  way,  called  Caaman.
Sometimes  it  hapneth  by  the  malice  of  some  Louthias,
when  they  have  any  interest  in  it,  to  keepe  some  things
concealed  that  the  King  knoweth  not  :  but  woe  to  them
if  the  King  come  to  know  it,  for  they  are  grievously
punished,  as  wee  shall  see  in  a  case  hereafter  following.
Being  in  India,  and  also  in  China,  I  was  enformed  that
sometimes  the  King  of  China  doth  send  some  men  of
Disguised  great  confidence  disguised  through  divers  parts  of  China,
Intelligencers.  that  they  mjght  see  how  his  Officers  did  serve  him.
And  if  there  were  any  novelties  or  changes  whereof
they  made  him  not  privie,  or  some  things  that  were
necessarie  to  provide.

[in.  i.  i9o.]

§•  v.

Of the Portugall commerce with  the Chinois ;

of  the severe  Justice executed  upon certaine

Magistrates, for wrongs done  to the Por-
tugal.

Ecause  we  spake  many  times  before  of  Portugals,
captives  in  China,  it  will  bee  a  convenient  thing
that  the  causes  of  their  Captivitie  be  knowne,
where  many  notable  things  will  be  shewed.  Yee  are  to
know,  that  from  the  yeere  1554.  hitherto,  the  businesses
in  China  are  done  very  quietly  and  without  danger  :  and

540

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

since  that  time  till  this  day,  there  hath  not  one  ship
beene  lost  but  by  some  mischance  :  having  lost  in  times
past  many.  Because  as  the  Portugals  and  the  Chinaes
were  almost  at  warres,  when  the  Armies  came  upon  them,
they  weighed  anchor  and  put  for  the  Sea,  and  lay  in  places
unsheltered  from  tempests,  whereby  the  stormes  comming,
many  were  lost  upon  the  coast,  or  upon  some  shelves.  But
from  the  yeere  1554.  hitherto,  Lionell  of  Sosa,  borne  in
Algarve,  being  chiefs  Captaine,  and  married  in  Chaull,
made  a  covenant  with  the  Chinaes  that  they  would  pay
their  duties,  and  that  they  should  suffer  them  to  doe  their
businesses  in  their  Ports.  And  since  that  time  they  doe
them  in  Cantan,  which  is  the  first  part  of  China  :  and
thither  the  Chinaes  doe  resort  with  their  Silkes  and
Muske,  which  are  the  principall  goods  the  Portugals
doe  buy  in  China.  There  they  have  sure  Havens,  where
they  are  quiet  without  danger,  or  any  one  disquieting
them,  and  so  the  Chinaes  doe  now  make  their  mer-
chandise well  :  and  now  both  great  and  small  are  glad
with  the  trafficke  of  the  Portugals,  and  the  fame  of  them
runneth  through  all  China.  Whereby  some  of  the  prin-
cipall of  the  Court  came  to  Cantan  onely  to  see  them
having  heard  the  fame  of  them.  Before  the  time  afore-
Isaid,  and  after  the  rising  which  Fernando  Perez  of
Andrada  did  cause,  the  businesses  were  done  with  great
trouble,  they  suffered  not  a  Portugall  in  the  Countrey,
land  for  great  hatred  and  loathing  called  them  Facui,  that
is  to  say,  Men  of  the  Devill.

Now  they hold not  commerce  with  them  under  the  Portugals
name  of  Portugals,  neither  went  this  name  to  the  Court  called  ^ncui,

when  they  agreed  to  pay  customes  : but  under  the  name  aJ! aff ,:

r„ .&i-i-r/  -r. 1 r  1  r*  Name-policy.

or  .bangin, which is to say, People  or  another Coast.

:Note  also,  that  the  law  in  China  is  that  no  man  of  China

doe  sayle  out  of  the  Realme  in  paine  of  death. Onely  it

lis  lawfull  for  him  to  sayle  along  the  coast  of  the  same

China. And yet  along the coast, nor from one place

to  another  in  China  it  selfe  it  is  lawfull  to  goe  without

1  certificate  of  the  Louthias  of  the  Countrey  whence  they

54i

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

depart  :
wherefore,

and
age.

Lawes  of
Navigation.

Covetise
lawlesse.

China  Pirats.

Liampo.

in  which  is  set  downe,  whither  they  goe,
and  the  markes  of  his  person,  and  his
If  he  carrieth  not  this  certificate  he  is  banished  to  the
Frontiers.  The  Merchant  that  carrieth  goods  carrieth
a  certificate  of  the  goods  hee  carrieth,  and  how  hee  payed
duties  for  them.  In  every  Custome-house  that  is  in  every
Province  hee  payeth  certaine  duties,  and  not  paying  them
he  loseth  the  goods,  and  is  banished  to  the  frontier  parts.
Notwithstanding  the  abovesaid  lawes  some  Chinaes  doe
not  leave  going  out  of  China  to  trafficke,  but  these  never
returne  againe  to  China.  Of  these  some  live  in  Mallaca,
others  in  Siam,  others  in  Patane,  and  so  in  divers  places  of
the  South  some  of  these  that  goe  out  without  licence  are
scattered.  Whereby  some  of  these  which  live  already  out
of  China  doe  returne  againe  in  their  ships  unto  China,
under  the  protection  of  some  Portugall  :  and  when  they
are  to  dispatch  the  duties  of  their  ships  they  take  some
Portugall  their  friend  to  whom  they  give  some  bribe,  that
he  may  dispatch  it  in  his  name  and  pay  the  duties.  Some
Chinaes  desiring  to  get  their  living,  doe  goe  very  secretly
in  these  ships  of  the  Chinaes  to  trafficke  abroad,  and
returne  very  secretly,  that  it  bee  not  knowne,  no  not
to  his  kindred,  that  it  bee  not  spread  abroad,  and  they
incurre  the  penalty  that  the  like  doe  incurre.  This  law
was  made  because  the  King  of  China  found  that  the  much
communication  of  the  strangers  might  be  the  cause  of
some  risings.  And  because  many  Chinaes  with  an  excuse
of  sayling  abroad  became  theeves  and  robbed  the  Countries
along  the  Sea  coast,  and  yet  for  all  this  diligence  there  are
many  Chinaes  robbers  along  the  Sea  coast.

These  Chinaes  that  live  out  of  China,  and  doe  goe
thither  with  the  Portugals,  since  the  offence  of  Fernando
Perez  of  Andrada  did  direct  the  Portugals  to  begin  to
goe  to  traffick  to  Liampo  ;  for  in  those  parts  are  no
walled  Cities  nor  Villages,  but  many  and  great  Townes
along  the  coast,  of  poore  people,  which  were  very  glad  of
the  Portugals,  and  sold  them  their  provision  whereof  they
made  their  gayne. In  these  Townes  were  these  Merchants

542

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

of  China  which  came  with  the  Portugals,  and  because  they
were  acquainted,  for  their  sake  the  Portugals  were  better
entertayned.  And  as  these  Chinaes  which  were  among  the
Portugals  and  the  Countrey  Merchants  in  their  buyings
and  sellings,  they  reaped  a  great  profit  thereby.  The
mferiour  Louthias  of  the  Sea  coast  received  also  great
profit  of  this  trafficke,  for  they  received  great  bribes  of
the  one  and  of  the  other,  to  give  them  leave  to  trafficke,
'o  carrie  and  recarrie  their  goods.  So  that  this  trafficke
*vas  among  them  a  long  while  concealed  from  the  King,
jind  from  the  superiour  Louthias  of  the  Province.  After
|:hese  matters  had  for  some  space  beene  done  secretly  in
Liampoo,  the  Portugals  went  by  little  and  little  forward,
l!md  began  to  goe  and  make  their  merchandise  to  Chin-  Chincheo.
:heo,  and  to  the  Hands  of  Cantan.  And  other  Louthias
permitted  them  already  in  every  place  for  the  bribes
;ake,  whereby  some  Portugals  came  to  trafficke  beyond
\amqui,  which  is  very  farre  from  Cantan,  without  the  Namqui,  or
£ing  being  witting,  or  having  knowledge  of  this  trafficke.  Nanquin.
The  matters  fell  out  in  such  sort,  that  the  Portugals  L  ■  *•  I9I-J
vintered  in  the  Hands  of  Liampoo.

Some Chinaes that were among the Portugals, and  Disorders  of
,,ome  Portugals  with  them,  came  to  disorder  themselves  outrageous
n  such  manner  that  they  made  great stealths  and  rob-  CAinois9  and
)eries and killed some of the people. These evils  portumi5
increased so much that the clamour of the injured
vas so  great, that it  came not  onely  to  the  superiour
^outhias  of  the  Province,  but  also  to the  King. Who
ommanded  presently  to  make  a  very  great  Armada  in
fee  Province  of  Fuquen,  to drive  the  theeves  from  all
he  coast,  especially  those  that  were  about  Liampoo,  and
11 the Merchants as well Portugals as Chinaes were
eputed in  this number of  theeves. Being ready  they
bent  forth  along  the  coast  of  the  Sea. And  because  the
'indes  served them not  for to  goe for  Liampoo, they
rent  to  the  coast  of  Chincheo,  where  finding  some  ships
f  Portugals,  they  began  to  fight  with  them,  and  in  no
rise  did  they  permit  any  wares  to  come  to  the  Portugals ;

543

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

who  stayed  many  days  there  (fighting  sometimes)  to  see
if  they  could  have  any  remedie  for  to  dispatch  their
businesses.  But  seeing  they  had  no  remedy,  they  deter-
mined to  goe  without  it.  The  Captaynes  of  the  Armie
knowing  this,  sent  a  message  to  them  very  secretly  by
night,  that  if  they  would  that  any  goods  should  come
to  them,  that  they  should  send  them  something.  The
Portugals  very  glad  with  this  message,  prepared  a  great
Briberie.  and  sumptuous  present,  and  sent  it  them  by  night
because  they  were  so  advised.  From  thence-forv/ard
came  many  goods  unto  them,  the  Louthias  making  as
though  they  tooke  no  heed  thereof,  dissembling  with  the
Merchants.  And  so  were  the  businesses  ended  that  yeere,
which  was  the  yeere  1548.

The  yeare  following,  which  was  1549.  there  was  a
straighter  watch  upon  the  Coast  by  the  Captaynes  of  the
Armada,  and  greater  vigilancie  in  the  Ports  and  entrances
of  China,  in  such  sort  that  neyther  goods  nor  victuals
came  to  the  Portugals  :  but  for  all  the  vigilancie  and
watching  there  was,  (as  the  Hands  along  the  Coast  are
many,  for  they  all  runne  in  a  rew  along  the  China)
the  Armies  could  not  have  so  much  vigilancie,  that  some
wares  were  not  brought  secretly  to  the  Portugals.  But
they  were  not  so  many  that  they  could  make  up  the  ships
ladings,  and  the  uttering  those  goods  which  they  had
brought  to  China.  Wherefore  leaving  the  goods  which
they  had  not  uttered  in  two  ships  of  China,  of  such
Chinaes  as  were  alreadie  dismembred  from  China,  and
Traffique  abroad  under  the  shadow  of  the  Portugals,  (in
the  which  they  left  thirtie  Portugals  in  charge  with  the
ships  and  with  the  goods)  that  they  might  defend  the
ships,  and  in  some  Port  of  China  where  best  they  could
they  should  sell  the  goods  that  remayned  in  change  for
some  Wares  of  China,  and  having  ordayned  this  they
departed  for  India.

As  the  people  of  the  Armie  of  the  Chinaes  saw  the  two
ships  remayne  alone,  the  other  ships  being  gone,  they
came  upon them,  being  induced  by  some  Merchants  of

544

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

the  Countrey,  which  discovered  to  them  the  great  store
of  goods  that  remayned  in  those  Vessels,  and  the  few
Portugals  that  remayned  to  keepe  them.  Then  they
layd  an  ambush  for  them,  dressing  some  Chinaes  ashoare,
which  being  in  armes  made  as  though  they  would  set
upon  the  ships  to  fight  with  them,  because  they  were
close  to  the  Land,  that  the  Portugals  being  provoked,
should  come  out  of  the  ships  to  fight  with  them,  &  so  the
ships  might  remaine  without  defence  to  them  of  the
Armada,  which  lay  watching  in  an  ambush,  &  did  accord-
ingly set  upon  the  two  Vessels  with  great  furie  &  celeritie,
and  slaying  some  Portugals  that  were  in  the  ships,  and
wounding  others  they  tooke  the  ships.  The  chiefe
Captayn  which  is  the  Luthissi,  remayned  so  glorious,
that  he  used  great  crueltie  on  some  Chinaes  that  hee
tooke  with  the  Portugals.  Hee  laboured  to  perswade  Mountayne
foure  Portugals  which  had  more  apparance  in  their  Mouse-birth.
persons  then  the  rest,  that  they  should  say,  they  were
Kings  of  Malaca,  he  perswaded  them  in  the  end,  because
hee  promised  to  use  them  better  then  the  rest,  and  there-
with he  provoked  them.  And  finding  among  the  cloathes
that  hee  tooke  a  Gowne  and  a  Cap,  and  asking  of  one  of
those  Chinaes,  that  were  taken  with  the  Portugals  what
habit  that  was,  they  put  in  his  head,  that  it  was  the  habit
of  the  Kings  of  Malaca,  wherefore  he  commanded  pre-  Spectatum
sently  to  make  three  Gownes  by  that  patterne,  and  three  admss]  rts?™
Caps,  and  so  he  apparelled  them  all  foure  in  one  sort,  to
make  his  sayning  true,  and  his  victory  more  glorious.
To  this  was  joyned  the  covetousnesse  of  the  Luthissi  to
see  if  hee  could  detayne  the  many  goods  that  hee  had
taken  in  ships.

And  to  doe  this  more  safely,  not  to  be  taken  in  a  lye,
he  did  great  executions  upon  the  Chinaes  which  he  tooke
with  the  Portugals,  and  killing  some  of  them  determined
to  kill  the  rest.  These  things  comming  to  the  eares  of
the  Aitao,  which  was  his  superior,  he  disliked  greatly  that
which  hee  had  done,  and  sent  to  him  presently  that  hee
should  kill  no  more  of  those  which  remayned,  but  that  he
xi  545  2  m

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

should  come  to  him  presently  bringing  with  him  all  the
prize  as  well  of  the  men  that  were  yet  alive,  as  of  the
goods.  The  Luthissi  ordering  his  Journey  for  to  goe  to
the  Aitao,  as  he  was  commanded,  he  commanded  foure
Chaires  to  be  given  to  them,  to  whom  hee  had  given  title
of  Kings,  to  be  carried  in  them  with  more  honour. And

Pillory  Coops,  the  other  Portugals  were  carried  in  Coopes  with  their
heads  out  fast  by  the  neckes  betweene  the  boards  that
they  could  not  pull  them  in,  but  having  some  wounds
in  their  heads,  they  went  bare  headed  to  the  Sunne  and
to  the  Dew,  and  were  carried  on  mens  shoulders.  The
Luthissi  went  with  this  Prize  through  the  Countrey  with
great  Majestie,  he  carried  before  him  foure  Banners  dis-

[III.  i.  192.]  played,  on  the  which  were  written  the  names  of  the  foure
Kings  of  Malaca.  And  when  he  entred  into  the  Townes,
he  entred  with  great  noyse  and  Majestie,  with  sound
of  Trumpets,  and  with  Cryers  which  went  crying  the  great
victorie,  the  Luthisi  (naming  him)  had  gotten  of  the  foure
great  Kings  of  Malaca.  And  all  the  great  men  of  the
Townes  went  to  receive  him  with  great  Feasts  and
Honours,  all  the  Townes  running  to  see  the  new
Victorie.

When  the  Luthisi  came  with  all  his  pompe  and  glory
where  the  Aitao  was,  after  the  giving  him  particular
account  of  all  things  passed  and  of  his  victory,  he  mani-
fested to  him  his  pretence  and  agreed  with  him  to  divide
the  goods  betweene  them  both,  and  that  he  should  con-
tinue the  fayning  of  the  Kings  of  Malaca,  that  both  might
receive  of  the  King  Honours  and  Rewards. This  being  set

Damnable downe  they  both  agreed  that  to  keepe  this  in  secret,  the

vanltie.  Luthisi  should  go  forward  in  that  which  he  had  begun,  to

wit,  he  should  slay  all  the  Chinas,  that  came  there  captive.
And  presently  they  commanded  presently  to  put  it  in
effect,  and  so  they  slue  ninetie  and  odde  Chinas,  among
whom  were  some  young  youths  slaine.  They  left  not-
withstanding three  or  foure  youthes  and  one  man,  that  by
them  (bringing  them  to  their  owne  hand)  they  might
certifie  the  King  all  that  they  would,  that  was  to  make  of

546

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

the  Portugals  Theeves,  and  conceale  the  goods  which
they  tooke  :  certifying  also  by  these  that  those  foure  were
Kings  of  Malaca.  And  the  Portugals  not  having  the
Language  of  the  Countrey,  neither  had  any  person  to
intreate  for  or  favour  them  would  perish  :  and  they  being
mightie  would  make  their  owne  Tale  good,  following  the
end  by  them  intended.  And  for  this  cause  they  slue  not
the  Portugals,  but  left  them  alive,  for  the  greater  triumph
of  the  victorie.

These  Lothias  could  not  doe  this  so  secretly,  but  many
of  those  which  they  slue  had  kindred  in  the  Countrey,
which  did  grieve  at  the  death  of  theirs.  Whereby,  as  well
by  these,  as  by  some  Louthias  that  were  zealous  of
Justice,  and  would  not  give  consent  in  so  great  evils
and  fraudulent  dealings,  this  matter  came  to  the  Kings
eares,  and  hee  was  informed  how  the  Portugals  were
Merchants  which  came  to  traffique  with  their  Mer-
chandize to  China,  and  they  were  no  theeves,  and  how
they  had  falsly  given  the  Title  of  Kings  to  foure  of
them,  to  the  end  the  King  should  shew  great  favours,
and  doe  them  great  honours  ;  and  how  they  had  usurped
great  store  of  goods  :  and  that  for  to  conceale  these  evils,
they  killed  men  and  children  without  fault.

As  soone  as  the  King  was  informed  of  all  above  said,  The  Kings
hee  dispatched  presently  from  the  Court  a  Quinchay,  (of  Justice-
whom  we  spake  before,  that  is  to  say  plate  of  Gold)  And
with  him  he  sent  other  two  men  of  great  authoritie  also,
of  the  which  the  one  had  been  Panchasi,  the  other  Anchasi,
these  two  as  Inquisitors  and  Examiners  of  this  matter :
Commanding  and  commending  to  the  Chaen  which  that
yeare  went  to  visit  the  Province  of  Fuquen,  and  to  the
Panchasi  and  Anchasi,  of  the  same  Province,  their  ayde
and  assistance  to  the  Quinchay,  and  the  two  Inquisitors  in
all  things  necessary  for  them  in  these  businesses.  The
two  that  came  with  the  Quinchay,  as  Inquisitors,  went
presently  to  certayne  great  Houses  which  had  in  the
middest  a  great  Court,  and  on  the  one  side  of  the  Court
were  certayne  great  and  faire  Lodgings,  and  on  the  other

547

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

side  others  in  the  same  sort.  Each  of  the  Inquisitors
entred  in  one  of  these  Houses  aforesaid.  The  Prisoners
were  presently  brought,  and  were  presented  to  the  one  of
them,  who  for  courtesie  remitted  them  to  the  other,  that
he  should  examine  them  first,  with  many  words  of
courtesie.  The  other  sent  them  againe  with  great  thank-
fulnesse.  So  they  were  sundry  times  carried  from  one  to
another,  each  of  them  willing  to  give  the  hand  to  the
other  of  beginning  first,  till  that  one  of  them  yeelded  and
began.  And  as  the  matter  was  of  great  import  and  much
commended  to  them,  all  that  the  guiltie  and  the  accusers
did  speake  these  Officers  did  write  with  their  owne  hands.
The  Portugals  had  for  a  great  Enemy  a  China  man  and
Pilot  of  one  of  the  shippes  that  were  taken,  and  a  China
youth  which  was  a  Christian,  which  from  a  childe  was
brought  up  among  the  Portugals:  for  they  were  both
made  of  the  part  of  the  contrarie  Louthias,  mooved  by
gifts  and  promises :  the  Louthias  being  alreadie  deposed
of  their  Offices,  and  held  for  guiltie,  for  the  which  they
were  accused  before  the  King.

But  though  they  were  thus  handled,  they  were  so
mightie  and  so  favoured,  that  they  could  take  from
the  Portugals  a  China  youth  that  served  them  for  an
Interpreter,  which  upon  their  Petition  was  againe  delivered
Manner  of  them.  They  examined  them  in  this  order,  the  accused
examination.  were  first  brought  and  examined  by  one  of  these  Officers,
and  they  carried  them  to  the  other  to  bee  examined  againe.
And  while  the  other  was  re-examining  the  accused,  the
accusers  were  brought  to  him  that  examined  first.  And  as
well  the  accused  as  the  Accusers  were  all  examined  by
both  the  Officers,  that  afterward  they  both  seeing  the  con-
fessions of  the  one  and  the  other,  they  might  see  if  they
did  agree.  And  first  they  examined  every  one  by  him-
selfe.  Afterward  they  examined  them  altogether,  for  to
see  if  the  one  did  contrary  the  other,  or  did  contend  and
reprehend  one  another,  that  so  by  little  and  little  they
might  gather  the  truth  of  the  case.  In  these  Examina-
tions the  two  were  contrary,  to  wit,  the  Pilot,  and  the

548

FRIAR CASPAR DA CRUZ

Christian  China  youth,  and  had  many  stripes,  because  they

agreed  in  some  things. The  Louthias  did  alwayes  shew

themselves  glad  to  heare  the  Portugals  in  their  defence,

who  alleadged  in  their  defence,  that  if  they  would  know

who  they  were,  and  how  they  were  Merchants,  and  not

Theeves,  they  should  send  to  enquire  of  them  along  the

Coast  of  Chincheo,  that  there  they  should  know  the  truth,

which  they  might  know  of  the  Merchants  of  the  Countrey,  [III.  i.  193.]

with  whom  a  great  many  yeares  agoe  they  had  dealt,  and

that  they  might  know  that  they  were  no  Kings,  for  Kings

do  not  abase  themselves  so  much  as  to  come  with  so  few

men  to  play  the  Marchants,  and  if  before  they  said  the

contrary, it was by the deceit of  the Luthisi, and to

receive  better  usage  of  him  in  their  persons.

Having  this  information  of  the  Portugals,  presently
with  the  opinion  of  the  Quinchay  and  the  other  Officers,
they  went  to  Chincheo  both  of  them,  to  enquire  of  the
trueth  of  that  which  the  Portugals  had  told  them ;  and
discovering  there  the  truth  of  the  Portugals  matter,  and
the  lies  of  the  Luthissi,  and  of  the  Aitao,  they  dispatched
presently  a  Post ;  wherein  they  commanded  to  put  the
Luthissi  and  the  Aitao  in  Prison,  and  in  good  safeguard.
Wherefore  from  thence  forward  all  men  began  to  favour
them  very  much.  If  notwithstanding  this  examination
had  bin  made  in  Liampoo,  as  it  was  in  Chincheo,  the
Portugals  could  not  have  chosen  but  have  past  it  ill,
according  to  the  greatnesse  of  the  evils  they  had  done
there.  After  the  Louthias  returned  from  Chincheo,  they
commanded  to  bring  the  Portugals  before  them,  and
comforted  them  very  much,  shewing  them  great  good-
will, and  saying  to  them,  that  they  knew  already  they  were
no  theeves,  but  were  honest  men :  and  they  examined
againe  as  well  they  as  their  adversaries,  to  see  if  they
contradicted  themselves  in  any  thing  of  that  which  before  when  theeves
they  had  spoken.  In  these  later  re-examinations  the  Pilot  fallout.
of  China,  which  before  had  shewed  himselfe  against  the
Portugals,  and  had  beene  on  the  Louthias  side,  seeing  that
the  Louthias  were  already  in  Prison,  and  that  now  they

549

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

could  doe  them no  good,  and  that  the  Portugals  were

already  favoured,  and  that  the  trueth  was  already  knowne,

he  gainsaid  himselfe  of  all  that  he  had  said,  and  said  that

it  was  true  that  the  Portugals  were  no  theeves  nor  Kings,

but  Merchants,  and  very  good  men,  and  discovered  the

goods  which  the  Luthissi  had  taken  when he  surprised

the Portugals. And that till then he had  said  to  the

contrary,  was  for  the  great  promises  which  the  Louthias

promised  him,  and  for  the  great  threats  they  used  to  him

if  he  did  it  not. But  seeing  they  were  already  in  Prison,

and  he  knew  they  could  doe  him  no  hurt,  he  would  now

speake the  truth. They then  commanded to torment

him,  and  whip  him  very  sore,  to  see  if  he  would  gainsay

himselfe,  but  he  still  continued  in  the  same  confession.

All  the  examinations  and  diligences  necessarie  in  this

The  businesse  ended,  the  Quinchay  willing  to  depart  for  the

Quinchays Court  with  his  companie,  would  first  see  the  Portugals,

magnificent  and •  e  a •  ^  Qf  himselfe  to  the  Citie. The  sight  was

ostentation.  ®  .  .

of  great  Majestie  in  the  manner  hee  went  abroad  in  the

Citie,  for  he  went  accompanied  with  all  the  great  men  of
it,  and  with  many  men  in  Armes  and  many  Ancients
displayed  and  very  faire,  and  with  many  Trumpets  and
Kettle-drummes,  and  many  other  things  which  in  such
pompes  are  used.  And  accompanied  in  this  manner,  hee
went  to  certaine  noble  and  gallant  houses.  And  all  the
great  men  taking  their  leave  of  him,  hee  commanded  the
Portugals  to  come  neere  him,  and  after  a  few  words  he
dismissed  them :  for  this  was  not  but  onely  to  see  them.
Before  these  Louthias  departed  they  commanded  the
Louthias  of  the  Countrey,  and  the  Jaylors,  that  all  of
them  should  favour  the  Portugals,  and  give  them  good
entertaynment,  and  should  command  to  give  them  all
things  necessarie  for  their  persons.  And  commanded
every  one  to  set  his  name  in  a  piece  of  Paper,  because  that
while  they  were  at  the  Court,  and  their  matters  were
dispatching,  they  should  not  craftily  make  some  missing.
And  they  commanded  to  keepe  the  Luthisse  in  good  safety,
and  the  Aitao,  and  that  they  should  not  let  them  communi-

55°

Industrie.

*It  is  here

Sentence.

FRIAR CASPAR DA CRUZ

cate  with  any  person.  Being  gone  from  the  Citie,  they
lodged  in  a  small  Towne,  where  they  set  in  order  all  the
Papers,  and  ingrossing  onely  that  which  was  necessarie.
And  because  the  Papers  were  many,  and  were  much  to
write,  they  helped  themselves  with  three  men.  And  having
ingrossed  all  that  they  were  to  carrie  to  the  Court,  they
burned  all  the  rest.  And  because  these  three  men  which
they  tooke  for  helpers  should  not  spread  abroad  any  thing  Cautelom
of  that  which  they  had  seene,  or  heard,  or  written,  they
left  them  shut  up  with  great  vigilancie,  that  none  should
speake  with  them,  commanding  to  give  them  all  things
necessarie  very  abundantly  until  the  Kings  Sentence  came
from  Court,  and  were  declared.  The  Papers  being  pre-
sented in  Court,  and  all  seene  by  the  King  and  by  his
Officers,  he  pronounced  the  Sentence  in  *  manner  and  JbrQ"cJ
forme  following.

Pimpu  by  commandement  of  the  King.  Because  The  KinSs
Chaipuu,  Huchin  Tutan  without  my  commandement,  or
making  mee  privie  thereto,  after  the  taking  of  so  much
people,  commanded  them  to  bee  slayne  :  I  being  willing  to
provide  therein  with  Justice,  sent  first  to  know  the  trueth
by  Quinsituam,  my  Quinchei,  who  taking  with  him  the
Louthias  which  I  sent  to  examine  the  trueth  of  the
Portugals,  and  also  of  the  Aitao  and  Luthissi,  which  had
informed  mee,  that  the  Portugals  were  theeves,  and  that
they  came  to  all  the  coast  of  my  Dominion  to  robbe  and
to  murther.  And  the  trueth  of  all  being  knowne,  they
are  come  from  doing  that  which  I  commanded  them.
And  the  Papers  being  seene  by  my  Pimpu,  and  by  the
great  Louthias  of  my  Court,  and  well  examined  by  them,
they  came  to  give  mee  account  of  all.  And  likewise  I
commanded  them  to  be  perused  by  Ahimpu,  and  Altu
Chaen,  and  by  Athaylissi  Chuquin,whom  I  commanded  to
oversee  those  Papers  very  well,  because  the  matters  were
of  great  weight  :  wherein  I  would  provide  with  Justice.
Which  thus  being  seene  and  perused  by  them  all,  it  was
manifest  that  the  Portugals  came  many  yeeres  before  to
the  coast  of  Chincheo  to  doe  their  affaires,  which  was  not

55i

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

convenient  they  should  doe  in  the  manner  they  did  it,  but
in  my  Markets,  as  was  alwaies  the  custome  in  all  my
Ports.  These  men  of  whom  hitherto  I  knew  not:  I
[III.  i.  194.]  know  now  that  the  people  of  Chincheo  went  to  their  ships
about  their  affaires,  whereby  I  know  already  that  they  are
Merchants  and  not  theeves,  as  they  had  written  to  me
they  were.

And  I  doe  not  blame  Merchants  to  helpe  Merchants,
but  I  put  great  fault  in  my  Louthias  of  Chincheo  :  because
that  when  any  ship  came  to  my  Ports,  they  should  have
knowne  if  they  were  Merchants,  and  if  they  would  pay
their  duties,  and  if  they  would  pay  them,  to  write  pre-
sently unto  mee. If  they  had  done  so  ; so  much  evill  had
not  beene  done. Or  when  they  were  taken,  if  they  had
let  mee  know  it,  I  had  commanded  to  set  them  at  libertie.
And  although  it  bee  a  custome  in  my  Ports  the  ships  that
*In  China come  unto  them  to  be  measured  *  by  cubits  for  to  pay
and  Siam  they  their  duties :  these  being  very  farre  off,  it  was  not  neces-
pay  Custome sar'e  |DUt  to  jet  them  joe  their  businesses,  and  goe  for
the  ship  from tndr  Countries. Besides  this  my  Pontoos  *  which  knew
poop  to  prow these  men to be Merchants did not tell it mee,  but
how  many concealed  it  from  mee,  whereby  they  were  the  cause  of
cubits  it  is  of.  manv people  being taken and slaine. And those that
Sea-watches remayned  alive  as  they  could  not  speake,did  looke  toward
Heaven, and demanded from their  hearts justice of
Heaven (they know no other God supreme but the
Heaven.) Besides  these  things  I  know  that the  Aitao,
and  the  Luthissi  did  so  much  evill  for  covetousnesse  of  the
many  goods  which  they  tooke  from  the  Portugals,  having
no  regard  whether  those  which  they  tooke,  and  tooke  the
goods from, were good or evill men. Likewise the
Louthias along  the Sea coast knew  these men to be
Merchants,  and  certified  mee  not. And  all  of  them,  as
disloyall,  were  the  cause  of  so  much  evill. I  knew  more
by  my  Quinchey,  that  the  Aitao,  and  the Luthissi  had
Letters,  by  the  which  they  knew  that  the  Portugals  were
no  theeves  but  Merchants,  and  knowing  this  they  were
not  contented  with  the  taking  of  them, but they  wrote

552

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

many  lyes  unto  mee,  and  were  not  contented  with  killing  Butcherly
of  the men, but killed children also, cutting off the  insolence.
feet  of  some,  of  others  the  hands,  and  at  last  the  heads
of  them  all : writing  unto  mee  they  had  taken  and  slayne
Kings  of  Mallaca. Which case  I  beleeving  to  be  true,
grieve  in  my  heart.

And  because  hitherto  so  many  cruelties  have  beene  used
without  my  commandement,  from  hence  forward  I  com-
mand they  be  not  done.  Besides  this  the  Portugals
resisted  my  Armie,  being  better  to  have  let  themselves
beene  taken,  then  to  kill  my  people.  Moreover,  it  is  long
since  they  came  to  the  coast  of  our  Dominion  about  their
affaires  in  manner  of  theeves,  and  not  as  Merchants :
wherefore  if  they  had  beene  naturall  as  they  are  strangers
they  had  incurred  paine  of  death  &  losse  of  goods,
wherfore  they  are  not  without  fault.  The  Tutan  by
whose  commandement  those  men  were  slaine,  said  *  that  *Said  in  his
by  this  deed  I  should  make  him  greater ;  and  the  people  heart> or  con~
that  he  commanded  to  be  slayne  after  they  had  no  heads,  ceite  imeJ-
their  hearts,  (that  is  their  soules  and  their  bloud)  required
justice  of  Heaven.  I  seeing  so  great  evils  to  be  done,  my
eyes  could  not  indure  the  sight  of  the  Papers  without
teares,  and  great  griefe  of  my  heart.  I  know  not,  my
Louthias  seeing  they  tooke  this  people,  wherefore  they  let
it  not  goe,  that  I  might  not  come  to  know  so  many
cruelties  and  so  great.  Wherefore  seeing  all  these  things,
I  doe  create  Senfuu  chiefe  Louthia,  because  hee  did  his  Sensu  and
dutie  in  his  charge,  and  told  mee  trueth.  I  create  also  others
chiefe  Louthia  Quinchio,  because  hee  wrote  the  trueth  to
mee  of  the  Pontoos  which  went  to  doe  their  merchandise
in  secret  with  the  Portugals  to  the  Sea.  Those  which
are  evill  I  will  make  them  baser  then  they  which  sowe
Rice.

Likewise  because  Pachou  did  trafficke  with  the  Portu-
gals, and  for  bribes  did  permit  the  Merchants  of  the
Countrey  to  trafficke  with  the  Portugals,  and  yet  doing
these  things,  wrote  unto  mee  that  the  Portugals  were
theeves  and  that  they  came  to  my  Dominions  onely  to

553

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

steale. And the same hee said also to my  Louthias

(which  presently  answered,  that  he  lyed,  for  they  knew

already  the  contrarie.) And  therefore  such  a  one,  and  such

a  one,  (he  nameth  ten  Louthias.) It  is  nothing  that  all  you

xRed  Caps be  banished  to  red  Capsx,  to  the  which  I  condemne  you:

are  the  ensigne  kut  deserve  to  be  made  baser  as  I  doe  make  you.

or  men  coti—

demnedto Chaen  for  taking  these  men  thou  sayedst  thou  shouldest

serve  the  King  be  greater,  and  being  in  the  doing  of  so  much  evill  thou
in  his  frontiers  sayedst  thou  didst  not  feare  mee  :  such  a  one,  and  such  a
against  the  one  ^ne  nameth  nine)  for  the  taking  of  these  men  yee  say,
I  would  make  you  great,  and  without  any  feare  of  mee  yee
all  lyed,  such  a  one,  and  such  a  one  (he  nameth  many.)
I  know  also  yee  tooke  bribes.  But  because  you  did  so,
I  make  you  base,  (he  depriveth  them  of  the  dignitie  of
Lothias.)

Such  a  one,  and  such  a  one  (he  nameth  many.)  If  the
Aitao  and  the  Luthissi  would  kill  so  many  people,  where-
fore  did  you  suffer  it  ?  But  seeing  that  in  consenting  you
were  accessarie  with  them  in  their  death,  all  are  in  the
same  fault.  Chifuu,  and  Chanchifuu,  were  also  agreeing
to  the  will  of  the  Aitao  and  the  Luthissi,  and  were  with
them  in  the  slaughter,  as  well  those  that  were  as  those  that
were  not  in  fault.  Wherefore  I  condemne  you  all  to  red
Caps.  Lupuu  let  him  have  a  good  heart,  because  the
Tutan  being  willing  to  kill  this  people,  he  said  that  he
should  let  mee  first  know  it.  To  him  I  will  doe  no
harme,  but  good,  as  he  deserveth,  and  I  command  that  he
remayne  Louthia.  Sanchi  I  make  my  Anchassi  of  the
Citie  of  Cansi.  The  Antexio  I  command  to  be  deposed
of  his  honour.  Assaon  seeing  hee  can  speake  with  the
Portugals,  let  him  have  honour  and  ordinarie,  and  he  shall
be  carried  to  Chaquean,  where  hee  was  borne.  (This  is
the  youth  with  whom  the  Portugals  did  defend  them-
selves, serving  them  for  Interpreter,  they  gave  him  title
of  Louthia,  and  mayntenance.)  Chinque  Head  of  the
Merchants  that  went  to  the  Sea  to  trafficke  with  the
Portugals,  and  deceived  them,  bringing  great  store  of
goods  a  land,  it  shall  be  demanded  of  him,  and  set  in  good

554

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

safeguard  for  the  mayntenance  and  expences  of  the
Portugals,  and  I  condemne  him  and  his  foure  Companions
to  red  Caps,  and  they  shall  bee  banished  whither  my
Louthias  shall  thinke  good.

To  the  rest  guilty  and  imprisoned  for  this  matter,  I
command  my  Louthias  to  give  to  every  one  the  punish-  [III.  i.  195.]
ment  he  deserveth. I  command  the  Chaen to  bring  me
hither the Tutan that  his faults being perused by the
great men  of  my  Court,  I  may  command  to  doe  justice
on  him  as  I  shall  thinke  good. This  Tutan  was  also  a  The  Tutan  h
consenter in  the  wickednesse  of  the  Aitao  and the Lu- at}Pnf 1
thissi :  for  the  Luthissi,  and  the  Aitao  made  him  partaker,  ^  Hangman,
and  gave  him  part  of  the  booties  which  they  tooke  from  or  proved  the
the  Portugals,  that  as  the  head  he  should  hold  for  good  Hangman
that  which  they  did  : for  in truth  they  durst  not  have  rather-
done  that  which  they  did  if  he  had  not  given  consent,  and
agreed  with  their  opinion. This  hearing  what  was  judged
against  him,  hung  himselfe,  saying,  that  seeing  the  Heaven
had  made  him  whole,  that  no  man  should  take  away  his
head. The Poutoos which yet are  in  Prison,  shall  be
examined  againe,  and  shall  presently  be  dispatched. Chui-
chum  shall  presently  be  deprived  from being  a  Louthia,
without  being  heard  any  more. Chibee,  head  of  sixe  and
twenty,  I  command  that  hee  and  his  be  all  set  at  libertie,
for  I  find  but  little  fault  in  them. Those  which  owe  any
money  it  shall  bee  recovered  of  them  presently. Fami-
chin,  and  Tomicher  shall  dye,  if  my  Louthias  doe  thinke
it expedient  ; if  not  let them  doe  as  they  thinke  best.
Alfonso  of  Pajua,  and  Peter  of  Cea  (these  were  Portugals)
Antonie  and  Francisco  (these  were  slaves)  finding  them  to
be  guilty  of  killing  some  men  of  my  Armie,  shall  with
the  Luthissi  and  Aitao  be  put  in  Prison,  where  according
to  the  custome  of  my  Kingdome,  they  all  shall  dye  at
leisure. The  other  Portugals  that  are  alive  with  all  their
Servants  which  are  in  all  fiftie  one,  I  command  them  to  be
carried  to  my  Citie  of  Cansi,  where  I command  they  be
well  intreated,  seeing  my  heart  is  so  good  towards  them
that  for  their  sake  I  punish  in  this  sort  the  people  of  my

555

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Countrey,  and  deale  so  well  with  them  ;  for  it  is  my
custome  to  doe  Justice  to  all  men.  The  Louthias  of  the
Armada,  finding  they  are  in  little  fault,  I  command  they
bee  set  free  (I  deale  in  this  sort  with  all  men,  that  my
Louthias  may  see  that  all  that  which  I  doe,  I  doe  it  with
a  good  zeale.)  All  these  things  I  command  to  be  done
with  speed.  Hitherto  the  sentence  of  the  King.
What  became  The  Portugals  that  were  freed  by  the  sentence,  when
of  the  they  carried  them  whither  the  King  commanded,  found  by

ojtugas.  tjle  way  ajj  things  necessary  in  great  abundance,  in  the
Houses  above-said,  that  the  King  had  in  every  Towne
for  the  Louthias  when  they  travell.  They  carried  them
in  seates  of  Chaires  made  of  Canes  on  mens  backes,  and
they  were  in  charge  of  inferiour  Louthias,  which  caused
them  to  have  all  things  necessarie  through  all  places  where
they  came,  till  they  were  delivered  to  the  Louthias  of  the
Citie  of  Cansi.  From  that  time  they  had  no  more  of
the  King  every  moneth  but  one  Foon  of  Rice  (which  is
a  measure  as  much  as  a  man  can  beare  on  his  backe)  the
rest  they  had  need  of,  every  one  did  seeke  by  his  owne
industry.  Afterward  they  dispersed  them  againe  by  two
and  two,  and  three  and  three  through  divers  places,  to
prevent  that  in  time  they  should  not  become  mightie
joining  themselves  with  others.

Those  that  were  condemned  to  death,  were  presently
put  in  Prison  of  the  condemned.  And  Alfonso  of  Pajua
had  a  meanes  to  give  the  Portugals  to  understand  that
were  free,  that  for  his  welcome  they  had  given  him
presently  fortie  stripes  and  intreated  him  very  evill,
shewing  himselfe  comforted  in  the  Lord.  Those  which
were  at  libertie,  now  some  and  then  some,  came  to  the
ships  of  the  Portugals,  by  the  industrie  of  some  Chinas,
which  brought  them  very  secretly  for  the  great  gifts  they
received  of  the  Merchants  of  Portugall,  which  made  their
Merchandize  in  the  Citie  of  Cantan.

556

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

§•  VI.

Of  the  Religion  in  China;  difficultie  of  bringing
in  Christianitie.  Terrible  Earth-quakes  and
Tempests  in China.

N  the  Citie  of  Cantan  in  the  middest  of  the  River
which  is  of  fresh  water  and  very  broad,  is  a  little
He,  in  the  which  is  a  manner  of  a  Monasterie  of

their  Priests  ;  and  within  this  Monasterie  I  saw  an
Oratorie  high  from  the  ground  very  well  made,  with
certayne  gilt  steps  before  it,  made  of  carved  worke,  in
which  was  a  woman  very  well  made  with  a  childe  about
her  necke,  and  it  had  a  Lampe  burning  before  it.  I
suspecting  that  to  bee  some  shew  of  Christianitie,  de-
manded of  some  Lay-men,  and  some  of  the  Idoll  Priests
which  were  there,  what  that  woman  signified,  and  none
could  tell  it  mee,  nor  give  mee  any  reason  of  it.  It
might  well  be  the  Image  of  our  Ladie,  made  by  the
ancient  Christians,  that  Saint  Thomas  left  there,  or  by
their  occasion  made,  but  the  conclusion  is,  that  all  is
forgotten  :  it  might  also  be  some  Gentiles  Image.  The
greatest  God  they  have  is  the  Heaven,  the  letter  that  Heaven  first
signifieth  it,  is  the  principall  and  the  first  of  all  the  both  God  and
Letters.  They  worship  the  Sun,  the  Moone,  and  the  Character-
Starres,  and  all  the  Images  they  make  without  any  respect.
They  have,  notwithstanding,  Images  of  Louthias,  which
they  worship  for  having  beene  famous  in  some  one  thing
or  other.  And  likewise  Statues  and  Images  of  some
Priests,  of  the  Idols,  and  some  of  other  men  for  some
respects  particular  to  them.  And  not  only  worship  they
these  Images,  but  whatsoever  stone  they  erect  on  the
Altars  in  their  Temples.  [III.  i.  196.]

They  call  commonly  these  Gods  Omittoffois,  they  offer  Omittoffois
them  Incense,  Benjamin,  Civet,  and  another  Wood  which  anJ thelr
they  call  Cayo,*  Laque  and  other  smelling  things. They  *j^rfume
offer  them  likewise  Ocha,  whereof  is  mention  made  afore.  So  called.
Every  one  hath  a  place  to  pray,  and  at  the  entries  behind

557

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

the  doores  of  the  Houses,  in  the  which  they  have  their
carved  Idols  :  to  the  which  every  day  in  the  Morning  and
at  Evening  they  offer  Incense  and  other  perfumes.  They
have  in  many  places  (as  well  in  the  Townes  as  out  of
them)  Temples  of  Idols.  In  all  the  ships  they  sayle  in,
they  make  presently  a  place  for  to  worship  in,  where  they
carrie  their  Idols.

In  all  things  they  are  to  enterprize  either  Journies  by
Lots.  Sea  or  by  land,  they  use  Lots  &  cast  them  before  their

Gods.  The  Lots  are  two  sticks  made  like  halfe  a  Nut-
shell, flat  on  the  one  side  and  round  on  the  other  :  and  as
bigge  againe  as  an  halfe  Nut,  and  joyned  with  a  string.
And  when  they  will  cast  Lots,  they  speak  first  with  their
God,  perswading  him  with  words,  and  promising  him
some  Offring  if  he  give  him  a  good  Lot,  &  in  it  shew
him  his  good  Voyage  or  good  successe  of  his  busines.
And  after  many  words  they  cast  the  Lots.  And  if  both
the  flats  sides  fal  upward,  or  one  up  another  downe,  they
hold  it  for  an  evill  Lot,  and  turne  them  toward  their  Gods
very  melancholy,  they  call  them  Dogs,  with  many  other
reproaches.  After  they  are  wearie  of  rating  them,  they
soothe  them  againe  with  faire  milde  words,  and  aske
pardon,  saying,  that  the  Melancholy  of  not  giving  them
a  good  Lot,  caused  them  to  doe  them  injurie,  and  speake
injurious  words  unto  him  :  but  that  they  will  pardon
them  and  give  them  a  good  Lot ;  and  they  promise  to
offer  him  more  such  a  thing  (because  the  promises  are  the
better  for  them  that  promise  them,  they  make  many  and
great  promises  and  offerings)  and  so  they  cast  Lots  so
many  times  till  they  fall  both  on  the  flat  sides  which  they
hold  for  a  good  Lot,  then  remayning  well  contented,
Cruell  men  to  they  offer  to  their  Gods  that  which  they  promised.  It
their foohsh  happeneth  many  times  when  they  cast  Lots  about  any
weighty  matter,  if  the  Lot  fall  not  out  good,  or  launching
a  ship  to  the  Sea  it  goeth  not  well,  and  some  evill  came  to
it,  they  runne  to  their  Gods  and  cast  them  in  the  water,
and  put  them  in  the  flame  of  the  fire  sometimes,  and  let
them scorch  a  little,  and  spurning  them  often,  and  tread

558

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

them  under  foot,  and  give  them  rayling  words,  till  their
businesse  be  ended,  and  then  they  carrie  them  with
playing  and  feasts,  and  give  them  their  Offerings.

They  hold  for  a  great  Offering  a  Hogges  head  boyled  :  Offerings.
they  offer  Hennes,  Geese,  Duckes  and  Rice  all  drest,  and
a  great  pot  of  Wine.  After  they  present  it  all  to  the
Gods,  they  set  his  portion  apart,  which  is,  to  put  in  a
Dish,  the  small  points  of  the  Hogs  eare,  the  bils,  and  the
points  of  the  clawes  of  the  Hennes,  Geese,  and  Duckes,  a
few  cornes  of  Rice  very  few,  and  put  in  with  great  heed,
three  or  foure  drops  of  Wine  very  needfully,  that  there
fall  not  many  drops  from  the  Pot.  These  things  so  set
in  a  Bason  that  they  set  them  on  the  Altar  to  their  Gods
for  to  eate,  and  they  set  themselves  there  before  the  Gods
to  eate  all  that  which  they  bring.

They  worship  the  Devill  also,  which  they  paint  after  The  Devill
our  fashion  :  and  say  that  they  worship  him  because  he  worsh'lPPed-
maketh  those  which  are  good,  Devils  ;  and  the  evill,
he  maketh  Buffes,  or  Kine,  or  other  beasts.  And  they
say  that  the  Devill  hath  a  Master  that  teacheth  him  his
Knaveries  :  these  things  say  the  base  people  :  the  better
sort  say  they  worship  him  because  hee  shall  doe  them  no
hurt.

When  they  will  launch  any  new  ship  to  the  Sea,  their
Priests  being  called  by  them  come  into  the  ships  to  doe
their  Sacrifices  with  long  side  Garments  of  Silke.  They
set  about  the  shippe  many  flags  of  Silke,  they  paint  in
the  prow  of  the  ship  the  Devill,  to  the  which  they  make
many  reverences  and  Offerings,  and  say  they  doe  it
because  the  Devill  shall  doe  no  hurt  to  the  ship.  They
offer  to  the  Gods  Papers  with  divers  Images  painted,  and  Paper
other  of  sundry  kinde  of  cuttings,  and  they  burne  them  °ffennSs-
all  before  the  Idols  with  certayne  Ceremonies  and  well
tuned  Songs,  and  while  their  singing  doth  last,  they  ring
certayne  small  Bels,  and  among  all  they  use  great  store  of
eating  and  drinking.

In  this  Countrey  are  two  manner  of  Priests,  the  one  pS^  '
that  have  their  head  all  shaven,  these  weare  on  their  heads  Monkes.

559

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Secular.

Feasts.

Traditionall
Fables.

[III.  i.

certayne  course  Caps  like  unto  Canopie  cloth,  they  are
high,  and  flat  behind  (higher  before  then  behind  a  hand
breadth)  made  like  a  Mitre  with  Pinacles  :  their  wearing
is  white  Coates  after  the  Lay-mens  fashion.  These  live  in
Monasteries,  they  have  dining  places,  and  Cels,  and  many
pleasures  within  their  wals.  There  be  others  whom
commonly  the  people  doe  use  for  their  Burials  and
Sacrifices,  these  weare  their  haire,  and  blacke  silke  Coates,
or  of  Searge  or  Linnen,  and  long  like  the  Lay-men,  having
for  a  token  their  haire  made  fast  in  the  Crowne  of  the
head  with  a  sticke  very  well  made  like  a  closed  hand,
varnished  black.  None  of  these  Priests  have  Wives,  but
they  live  wickedly  and  filthily.

The  first  day  of  the  yeare,  which  is  in  the  new  Moone
of  March,  they  make  through  all  the  Land  great  Feasts,
they  visit  one  another,  the  chiefe  principally  doe  make
great  Banquets.  How  much  these  people  are  curious  in
the  rule  and  government  of  the  Countrey,  and  in  their
common  Traffique,  so  much  they  are  beastly  in  their
Gentilities,  in  the  usage  of  their  Gods  and  Idolatries.
For  besides  that  which  is  said,  they  have  many  Gentilicall
Lyes,  of  men  that  were  turned  into  Dogges,  and  afterward
into  men,  and  of  Snakes  that  were  converted  into  men,
and  many  other  ignorances.

I  entred  one  day  into  a  Temple  and  came  to  an  Altar,
97.]  where  were  certaine  stones  set  up  which  they  worshipped,
and  trusting  in  the  little  estimation  they  held  their  Gods
in,  and  in  being  men  that  would  be  satisfied  with  reason,  I
threw  the  stones  downe  to  the  ground,  whereat  some
ranne  very  fiercely  at  me  and  angry,  asking  me  wherefore
I  had  done  that,  I  went  mildly  to  them,  and  smiling,  said
to  them,  because  they  were  so  inconsiderate  that  they
worshipped  those  stones.  They  asked  me  wherefore  should
they  not  adore  them  :  and  I  shewed  them  how  they  were
better  then  they,  seeing  they  had  the  use  of  reason,  feete,
hands,  and  eyes,  wherewith  they  did  divers  things  that
the  stone  could  not  doe,  and  that  seeing  they  were  better
they  should  not  abase  and  esteeme  so  little  of  themselves

560

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

as  to  worship  things  so  vile  they  being  so  noble.  They
answered  me  that  I  had  reason,  and  went  out  with  me
in  company,  leaving  the  stones  on  the  ground  :  so  that
there  is  likelihood  and  shew  of  their  becomming  Chris-
tians. And  it  maketh  also  much  to  this  purpose,  their
not  making  any  difference  of  meate,  as  all  the  people
of  India  doth.  And  seeing  that  among  all  the  meates
they  esteeme  the  Porke  most,  it  is  almost  impossible
for  them  to  become  Turkes.

Notwithstanding,  there  are  two  verie  great  inconveni-
ences to  make  any  Christians  in  this  Countrey.  The  one
is,  that  in  no  wise  they  will  permit  any  noveltie  in  the  No  noveltie.
Countrey,  as  in  some  sort  it  may  bee  seene  in  the  matter
of  the  Moores.  So  that  whatsoever  noveltie  that  is  in
the  Countrey,  the  Louthias  take  order  presently  how  to
represse  it,  and  it  goeth  no  further.  Whence  it  happened
in  Cantan,  because  they  saw  a  Portugall  measure  the
entries  of  the  Gates,  they  set  presently  Watches  that  none
should  come  in  without  licence,  nor  goe  upon  the  Walls.
The  second  is,  that  no  strange  person  may  enter  into
China  without  leave  of  the  Louthias,  nor  be  in  Cantan,
which  doe  give  him  a  certaine  time  to  bee  in  Cantan.
The  time  of  the  licence  ended,  presently  they  labour  to  Provisions
have  them  depart.  Wherefore  because  I  and  those  which  against  stay  of
were  with  me  were  one  moneth  longer  in  Cantan,  they  set  Stran&rs-
up  written  bords  that  none  should  keepe  nor  harbour  us
in  their  houses,  under  payne  of  so  much,  till  wee  held  it
our  best  cheape  to  goe  to  the  Ships.  To  the  abovesaid  is
joyned  the  common  people  to  bee  greatly  in  feare  of  the
Louthias,  wherefore  none  of  them  durst  become  a  Chris-
tian without  their  licence,  or  at  the  least  many  would  not
doe  it.  Therefore  as  a  man  cannot  be  setled  in  the
Countrey,  hee  cannot  continue  Preaching,  and  by  conse-
quence he  cannot  fructifie  and  preserve  the  fruit.  There
was  notwithstanding  one  way  how  to  Preach  freely,  and
fruit  might  be  made  in  the  Countrey,  without  any  dogge
barking  at  the  Preacher,  nor  any  Louthia  doe  him  hurt
any way  : which is, if  hee have a  licence  for it  of  the

XI  561  2N

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Chinois
Sodomites.

Note.  King  :  And  it  might  bee  obtayned  if  a  solemne  Embassage

were  sent  with  a  solemne  present  to  the  King  of  China,  in
the  name  of  the  King  of  Portugall,  religious  men  going
with  the  Ambassadour  to  obtayne  the  licence  to  goe  about
the  Countrey,  shewing  themselves  to  bee  men  without
Armes.  And  how  our  Law  is  no  prejudice  to  his
Dominion  and  Governement,  but  a  great  helpe  that  all
might  obey  him  and  keepe  his  Lawes.  This  onely
remedie  there  is  in  China,  to  reape  any  fruit,  and  not
any  other  (speaking  humanely).  And  without  this  it
is  impossible  for  any  Religious  men  to  Preach  or  fructifie,
and  because  I  had  not  this  remedie,  having  the  abovesaid
inconveniences,  I  came  away  from  China,  and  therefore
neither  I,  nor  they  of  the  company  of  Jesus  which
enterprised  alreadie  this  businesse  sundry  times,  could
fructifie  in  China.

This  people  hath  besides  the  ignorances  abovesaid,  that
filthy  abomination,  that  they  refraine  no  sexe  among
them.  Notwithstanding,  I  Preaching  sometimes,  as  well
publike  as  privately  against  this  vice,  they  were  glad
to  heare  mee,  saying,  that  I  had  reason  in  that
which  I  sayd,  but  that  they  never  had  had  any  that
told  them  that  was  a  sinne,  nor  anything  evill  done.
It  seemeth  that  because  this  sinne  is  common  among
them,  God  was  willing  to  send  them  a  grievous  punish-
ment in  some  places  of  the  earth,  the  which  was  common
Plagues  in  all  China.  I  being  in  the  Citie  of  Cantan,  and  being
hapn'ing  in  wiUmg  to  know  of  a  rich  China  Marchant  the  evils  that
had  happened  in  the  Countrey,  and  hee  not  able  to  tell  it
me  by  word  of  mouth,  gave  me  a  Letter  which  they  had
written  unto  him  of  what  had  happened  :  saying  to  me,
that  I  should  translate  it  and  give  it  him  againe  :  but  not
trusting  me  hee  translated  it  presently,  and  remayning
with  the  copie  gave  me  the  principall,  which  I  translated
into  Portugall  with  the  helpe  of  one  that  could  speake
our  language  and  theirs,  the  tenour  of  the  Letter  is
this.

The  principall  Louthias  of  Sanxi  and  of  Saviton,  wrote

562

FRIAR GASPAR DA CRUZ

unto  the  King,  saying,  that  in  those  Provinces  the  earth

did  shake  terribly,  and  the  dayes  waxed  darke  like  night

(hee  saith  not  how  long)  a  South-sayer  told  them  all  that

should happen. In the  yeere before  in the  moneth of

September,  the  earth  opened  in  many  places,  and  under  it

were  heard  great noyses  like  the sound  of  Bells, there

followed  a  great  winde  with  much  rayne,  and  the  winde

ranne  about  all  the  Compasse. This  winde  is  called  in  Tufin,  a

China, Tufaune,  and many yeeres  it  bloweth but  once  terrt^e

a  yeere,  and  it  is  so  raging,  that  it  driveth  a  Ship  under  tmPest%

sayle on the  Land a  great  space,  and the  men cannot

keepe  their  feete,  not  leaving  and  holding  one  by  another,

and  it  doth  things  worthie  admiration  and  incredible. In

the yeere that I was in China, in the part  where the

Portugals  were,  they  shewed  the  Boat  of  a  Ship  of  a  good

bignesse, and the place where it was  a  land (that this

winde  carrayed  it,  might  bee  a  great  stones  cast  from  the

water)  and  many  did  affirme  it  to  mee,  that  the  winde  had

such  force,  that  it  carryed  it  tumbling  till  it  blew  it  into

the  Sea. And  all  the  houses  the  Portugals  had  made  of

timber,  and  covered  with  strawe,  which  were  many  and

were  built  upon  great  stakes,  and  not  very  high,  it  threw  [III.  i.  198.]

them all downe breaking the stakes. And one house

being  fastened  with  foure  Cables,  where  many  Portugals

retired  themselves,  at  the  last  fell  also,  and  onely  one  that

was  sheltered  with  a  high  place  escaped  that  it  fell  not.

To  blow  downe  these  houses was nothing,  for  it  doth

many  other  things  incredible. This  winde  is  almost  everie

yeere in  China,  the which  within  twentie foure houres

that it  raigneth, it runneth  about  all the  points  of  the

Compasse. With  this  winde,  and  the  Lands  being  shaken

with the  Earthquakes,  many  Cities  fell  and  were  made

desolate,  in  the  which  dyed  innumerable  people.

In a  Citie  called  Vinyanfuu,  in this  day  was  a  great  Vinyanfu,
Earthquake. And  on the  west side  a  great  Fire burst  swallowed  up.
out, that swallowed up all the Citie, in the which,
innumerable  people  perished,  escaping  in  one  place  two,
in  another  three,  and  so  some  of  the  Mogores  escaped.

563

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Another  Gitie
quite  perished.
Leuchimen.

Hien.
Puchio.

Couchue.

Enchinoen.

lnchumen.

Sanxi.

Bloudie
shower.

In  another  Citie  neere  to  this,  there  happened  the  same,
but  in  this  none  escaped.  In  a  Citie  called  Leuchimen,
the  River  increased  in  such  sort,  that  it  over-flowed  the
Citie,  where  infinite  people  were  drowned.  In  a  Citie
called  Hien,  was  an  Earthquake,  with  the  which  many
houses  fell,  which  slew  neere  eight  thousand  soules.  In
Puchio,  the  house  of  the  Kings  kinsman  fell  and  slew  all
that  were  in  the  house,  except  a  Childe  of  seven  or  eight
yeeres  old  his  sonne,  (which  was  carryed  to  the  King)  and
day  and  night  was  a  noyse  heard  under  the  earth,  like  the
sound  of  Bells.

In  a  Countrey  called  Cochue,  with  fire  from  Heaven
and  with  many  waters  of  a  Floud,  many  perished,  and  the
land  remayned  unable  to  bee  cultivated  againe.  In  a
Countrey  called  Enchinoen,  at  midnight  the  houses  fell,
and  the  Citie  remayned  desolate  and  ruined,  where  perished
neere  one  hundred  thousand  soules.  In  a  Citie  called
lnchumen,  in  one  day  and  a  night,  the  River  did  flow  and
ebbe  ten  times,  and  with  the  great  floud  many  people
perished.  Hitherto  the  translation  of  the  Letter  :  that
which  followeth,  was  heard  by  word  of  mouth  of  the
Portugals  that  were  in  the  Port  of  Cantan  in  the  moneth
of  May,  and  I  received  the  Letter  in  September.

In  a  Citie  called  Sanxi,  from  midnight  till  five  of  the
clocke  in  the  morning,  the  earth  shooke  three  times,  the
eighteenth  of  Januarie,  1556.  and  the  next  day  after,  from
midnight  till  noone,  happened  the  same  :  the  next  day
following,  the  twentie  of  the  sayd  moneth,  the  earth
shooke  mightily  after  midnight  with  great  Thunder  and
Lightnings,  and  all  the  Province  was  burnt,  and  all  the
people  thereof,  and  all  the  Suburbes,  Townes,  and  Cities :
they  say  it  is  from  bound  to  bound,  fiftie  or  sixtie  leagues,
that  there  was  not  one  saved  but  a  Childe,  sonne  to  a
kinsman  of  the  King,  which  was  carried  to  the  King.
And  the  third  of  Februarie  in  the  same  yeere,  in  the  Citie
of  Panquin  where  the  King  is,  fell  a  shower  of  rayne  like
bloud.  These  newes  brought  one  of  China  that  came  to
Cantan from a  Citie neere to Sanxi, to give newes to

564

FRIAR CASPAR DA CRUZ

a  Louthia  that  hee  should  resort  to  his  owne  house,  and
said,  that  the  Citie  where  he  was  a  dweller  was  overflowne,
and  that  he  knew  not  whether  it  would  perish  with  the
rest.  That  which  ought  to  bee  held  for  truth,  is,  that  in
three  Provinces  which  commonly  are  sayd  to  be  destroyed,
there  was  no  more  destruction  then  of  those  places  whereof
the  Letter  maketh  mention,  or  little  more.  The  agreeing
in  the  Childe,  sheweth  that  the  Towne  whereof  the  Letter
maketh  mention  with  the  childe,  was  in  the  Province  of
Sanxi.  This  hath  more  apparance  of  truth,  because  the
Letter  was  written  from  the  Court,  then  to  say  that  all
the  three  Provinces  perished.

After  the  happening  of  the  things  abovesaid  :  the  same
yeere  in  the  Province  of  Cantan,  a  woman  which  went  to
the  Panchasi,  told  him  that  the  Province  of  Cansi  would
bee  destroyed  with  power  from  Heaven,  the  which  after
shee  was  well  whipt,  was  imprisoned  :  but  in  the  moneth
of  May  of  the  same  yeere,  there  fell  great  store  of
rayne  verie  hot,  with  the  which  the  earth  seemed  to
burne,  and  many  people  perished  with  the  great  heate  :
but  the  Province  perished  not  altogether  :  wherefore  this
woman  was  carried  to  the  King,  which  was  in  prison
in  the  place  where  the  Portugals  were,  which  told  this.

Reader,  forasmuch  as  this  Author  hath  often  mentioned,
and  related  also  the  storie  of  certaine  Portugals,  Prisoners
in  China  (one  of  which  hee  nameth  Galotte  Perera)  from
whom  hee  received  great  part  of  his  China  intelligence  :  I
have  thought  good  to  adde  hither  Pereras  relations,  trans-
lated long  since  out  of  Italian,  and  published  by  R.  Willes:
having  abbreviated  some  things  in  the  Frier,  that  you
might  rather  have  them  at  the  first  hand  from  this
Gentleman  which  saw  them  :  but  abbreviated  to  prevent
tediousnesse.

565

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[III.  i.  1 99-]

*Tou  shal
have  a  more
full  description
of  the  Country
by  later
Authors:  who
yet  could  not
so  well  as  this,
tell  their
judiciall
proceedings,
severitie,
prisons,  execu-
tions, £siV.
these  13.  are
to  be  under-
stood besides
the  two  royall
Provinces.
Pachin
Pochang,  or
Paquin,  or
Pe  quint.
*Cambalu
signifieth  the
same,  and  so
the  Mogolls
call  this  Citie.
Poste  Horses.
Their  months.

Chap. XI.

The  relation  of  Galeotto  Perera,  a  Gentleman  of
good  credit,  that  lay  Prisoner  in  China.

His  Land  of  China  is  parted  into  thirteene
*  Shires,  which  sometimes  were  each  one
a  Kingdome  by  it  selfe,  but  these  many
yeeres  they  have  beene  all  subject  unto
one  King.

The  King  maketh  alwayes  his  abode  in
the  great  Citie  Pachin,  as  much  to  say  in
our  language  (as  by  the  name  thereof  I  am  advertised,)
the  *Towne  of  the  Kingdome.  This  Kingdome  is  so
large,  that  under  five  moneths  you  are  not  able  to  travell
from  the  Townes  by  the  Sea  side,  to  the  Court  and  backe
againe,  no  not  under  three  moneths  in  Poste  at  your
urgent  businesse.  The  Post-horses  in  this  Countrey  are
little  of  bodie,  but  swift  of  foote.  Many  doe  travell  the
greater  part  of  this  journey  by  water  in  certaine  light
Barkes,  for  the  multitude  of  Rivers,  commodious  for
passage  from  one  Citie  to  another.

The  King,  notwithstanding  the  hugenesse  of  his  King-
dome,  hath  such  a  care  thereof,  that  everie  Moone  (by  the
Moones  they  reckon  their  moneths)  he  is  advertised  fully
of  whatsoever  thing  happeneth  therein.  Before  that  wee
doe  come  to  Cinceo,  we  have  to  passe  through  many
places,  and  some  of  great  importance.  For  this  Countrey
is  so  well  inhabited  neere  the  Sea  side,  that  you  cannot
goe  one  myle  but  you  shall  see  some  Towne,  Borough,  or
Hostrie,  the  which  are  so  abundantly  provided  of  all
things,  that  in  the  Cities  and  Townes  they  live  civilly.
Neverthelesse,  such  as  dwell  abroad  are  very  poore,  for
the  multitude  of  them  every  where  so  great,  that  out  of  a
Tree  you  shall  see  many  times  swarme  a  number  of
Children,  where  a  man  would  not  have  thought  to  have
found  any  one  at  all.

From  these  places  in  number  infinite,  you  shall  come

566

GALEOTTO PERERA

unto two  Cities  very  populous,  and  being  compared  with
Cinceo,  not  possibly  to  bee  discerned  which  is  the  greater
of  them. These  Cities  are  as  well  walled  as  any  Cities  in  Excellent  wak
all  the  world. As  you  come  into  either  of  them,  standeth  aiyfnM
so  great  and  mightie  a  Bridge,  that  the  like  thereof  I  have  hr-ld
never  seene  in  Portugall,  nor  else  where. I  heard  one  of
my  fellowes  say,  that  he  told  in  one  Bridge  fortie  Arches.
The  occasion  wherefore  these  Bridges  are  made  so  great,
is  for  that  the  Country  is  toward  the  Sea  very  plaine  and
low,  and  overwhelmed  ever  as  the  Sea-water  encreaseth.
The  breadth  of the  Bridges, although it be  well pro-
portioned unto  the  length  thereof,  yet  are  they  equally
built,  no  higher  in  the  middle  than  at  either  end,  in  such
wise  that  you  may  directly  see  from  the  one  end  to  the
other,  the  sides  are  wonderfully  well  engraved  after  the  Magnificent
manner  of  Rome  workes. But  that  wee  did  most  marvell  stones.
at,  was  therewithall  the  hugenesse  of  the  stones,  the  like
whereof,  as  we  came  into  the  City,  we  did  see  many  set
up  in  places  dishabited  by  the  way,  to  no  small  charges  of
theirs,  howbeit  to  little  purpose,  wheras no  body  seeth
them  but  such  as  do  come  by. The  Arches  are  not  made
after  our  fashion,  vaulted  with  sundry  stones  set  together :
but  paved,  as it  were,  whole  stones reaching from  one
Pillar  to  another,  in  such  wise  that  they  lie  both for  the
Arches  heads,  &  gallantly  serve  also  for  the  high-way. I
have  been astonied to behold the  hugenesse  of  these
aforesaid  stones,  some  of  them  are  twelve  paces  long  and
upward,  the  least  eleven  good  paces  long,  and  an  halfe.
The  wayes each  where are  gallantly paved with foure-  Wayes  paved,
square  Stone,  except  it  be  where  for  want  of  Stone  they  bricked,  or
use to lay  Bricke : in this voyage we travelled over  Pltched-
certaine  Hills, where the wayes were pitched,  and in
many  places  no  worse  paved  than  in  the  plaine  ground.

The  Countrey  is  so  well  inhabited,  that  no  one  foot  of  Culture  and
ground is left untilled : small store of  cattell  have we  husbandry.
seene  this  way,  we  saw  onely  certaine  Oxen  wherewithall
the  countrey-men  doe  plough their  ground. One  Oxe
draweth  the  Plough  alone,  not  onely  in  this  Shire,  but  in

567

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

other  places  also,  wherein  is  greater  store  of  cattell.  These
countrey-men  by  art  doe  that  in  tillage,  which  we  are
constrained  to  doe  by  force.  Here  be  sold  the  voydings
of  Close-stooles,  although  there  wanteth  not  the  dung  of
beasts :  and  the  excrements  of  man  are  good  marchandise
throughout  all  China.  The  Dung-fermers  seeke  in  every
street  by  exchange  to  buy  their  durtie  ware  for  Hearbs
and  Wood.  The  custome  is  very  good  for  keeping  the
Citie  cleane.  There  is  great  abundance  of  Hennes,  Geese,
Duckes,  Swine,  and  Goates,  Wethers  have  they  none :  the
Hennes  are  sold  by  weight,  and  so  are  all  other  things.
Two  pound  of  Hennes  flesh,  Goose,  or  Ducke,  is  worth
two  Foi  of  their  money,  that  is,  three  halfe  pence.  Swines
flesh  is  sold  at  a  peny  the  pound.  Beefe  beareth  the  same
price,  for  the  scarcitie  thereof,  howbeit  Northward  from
Fuquieo,  and  further  from  the  Sea  coast,  there  is  Beefe
more  plentie,  and  sold  better  cheape,  Beefe  onely  excepted,
great  aboundance  of  all  these  Viands  wee  have  had  in  all
the  Cities  wee  passed  through.  And  if  this  Countrey  were
like  unto  India,  the  Inhabitants  whereof  eate  neither  Hen,
Beefe,  nor  Porke,  but  keepe  that  onely  for  the  Portugals
and  Moores,  they  would  bee  sold  here  for  nothing.  But
it  so  falling  out  that  the  Chineans  are  the  greatest  eaters
in  all  the  world,  they  doe  feed  upon  all  things,  specially
upon  Porke,  the  fatter  that  is  unto  them,  the  lesse  loth-
some. The  highest  price  of  these  things  aforesaid,  I  have

[III.  i.  200.]  set  downe,  better  cheape  shall  you  sometimes  buy  them
for  the  great  plentie  thereof  in  this  Countrey.  Frogs  are
sold  at  the  same  price  that  is  made  of  Hennes,  and  are
good  meat  amongst  them,  as  also  Dogs,  Cats,  Rats,
Snakes,  and  all  other  uncleane  meates.

Building  of  Xhe  Cities  be very  gallant, specially  neere unto the

Gates,  the  which  are  marvellously  great,  and  covered  with
Iron.  The  Gate-houses  built  on  high  with  Towers,  the
lower  part  thereof  is  made  of  Bricke  and  Stone,  propor-
tionally with  the  walls,  from  the  walls  upward,  the  building
is  of  Timber,  and  many  stories  in  it  one  above  the  other.
The  strength  of  their  Townes  is  in  the  mightie  Walls  and

568

GALEOTTO PERERA

Ditches ;  Artillery  have  they  none.  The  streets  in  No  Artillerie.
Cinceo  and  in  all  the  rest  of  the  Cities  wee  have  seene  are  Large  streets.
very  faire,  so  large  and  so  straight  that  it  is  wonderfull  to
behold.  Their  houses  are  built  with  Timber,  the  founda-
tions onely  excepted,  the  which  are  laid  with  Stone,  in  each
side  of  the  streets  are  painteses,  or  continuall  Porches  for
the  Marchants  to  walke  under:  the  breadth  of  the  street
is  neverthelesse  such,  that  in  them  fifteene  men  may  ride
commodiously  side  by  side.  As  they  ride  they  must
needes  passe  under  many  high  Arches  of  triumph,  that  Arches.
crosse  over  the  streets  made  of  Timber,  and  carved
diversly,  covered  with  Tile  of  fine  Clay  :  under  these  arches
the  Mercers  do  utter  their  smaller  wares,  and  such  as  list
to  stand  there  are  defenced  from  raine,  and  the  heat  of  the
Sunne.  The  greater  Gentlemen  have  these  Arches  at  their
doores :  although  some  of  them  be  not  so  mightily  built
as  the  rest.

I  shall  have  occasion  to  speake  of  a  certaine  order  of
Gentlemen,  that  are  called  Loutea,  I  will  first  therefore  Loutea.
expound  what  this  word  signifieth.  Loutea,  is  as  much  to
say  in  our  language  as  Sir,  and  when  any  of  them  calleth
his  name,  he  answereth,  Sir.  The  manner  how  Gentlemen
are  created  Louteas,  &  do  come  to  that  honour  and  title,  is
by  giving  a  broad  Girdle  not  like  to  the  rest,  and  a  Cap,
at  the  commandement  of  the  King.  The  name  Loutea  is
more  generall  and  common  unto  moe,  than  equalitie  of
honour  thereby  signified,  agreeth  withall.  Such  Louteas
that  doe  serve  their  Prince  in  weightie  matters  for  justice,
are  created  after  triall  made  of  their  learning :  but  the
other  which  serve  in  smaller  affaires,  as  Capitaines,
Constables,  Sergeants  by  Land  and  Sea,  Receivers,  and
such  like,  whereof  there  be  in  every  Citie,  as  also  in  this,
very  many  are  made  for  favour :  the  chiefe  Louteas  are
served  kneeling.

The  whole  Province  China  is  divided,  as  I  have  said,  Chian,  al.
into  thirteene  Shires,  in  every  Shire  at  the  least  is  one  Chaen.
Governour,  called  there  Tutan,  in  some  Shires  there  be
two. Chiefe  in  office  next  unto  them  be  certaine  other

569

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Ponchiassi.

Anchiassi.
al.  Hexas't.
Tuzi.

Taissu.

Prisons  and

sentencing

offenders.

Louteas  Com-
mencement or
Act.

named  Chians,  that  is,  high  Commissioners,  as  you  would
say,  or  Visiters,  with  full  authoritie  in  such  wise,  that  they
doe  call  unto  an  account  the  Tutanes  themselves,  but  their
authoritie  lasteth  not  in  any  Shire  longer  than  one  yeere.
Neverthelesse,  in  every  Shire,  being  at  the  least  seven
Cities,  yea,  in  some  of  them  fifteene  or  sixteene,  besides
other  Boroughs  and  Townes,  not  well  to  be  numbred,
these  Visiters  where  they  come,  are  so  honoured  and
feared,  as  though  they  were  some  great  Princes.  At  the
yeeres  end  their  circuit  done,  they  come  unto  that  City
which  is  chiefe  of  others  in  the  Shire,  to  doe  Justice  there  :
finally,  busying  themselves  in  the  searching  out  of  such  as
are  to  receive  the  order  of  Louteas,  whereof  more  shall  be
said  in  another  place.

Over  and  besides  these  officers  in  the  chiefe  Citie  of
each  one  of  these  aforesaid  thirteene  Provinces,  is  resident
one  Ponchiassi,  Captaine  thereof,  and  Treasurer  of  all  the
Kings  revenues.  This  Magistrate  maketh  his  abode  in
one  of  the  foure  greatest  houses  that  be  in  all  these  head
Cities.  In  the  second  great  house  dwelleth  another
Magistrate,  called  Anchiassi,  a  great  officer  also,  for  he
hath  dealings  in  all  matters  of  Justice.  Tuzi,  another
officer  so  called,  lieth  in  the  third  house,  a  Magistrate  of
importance,  specially  in  things  belonging  unto  warfare,  for
thereof  hath  hee  charge.  There  is  resident  in  the  fourth
house  a  fourth  Officer,  bearing  name  Taissu.  In  this
house  is  the  principall  prison  of  all  the  Citie.  Each  one
of  these  Magistrates  aforesaid  may  both  lay  evill  doers  in
prison,  and  deliver  them  out  againe,  except  the  fact  bee
heynous  and  of  importance :  in  such  a  case  they  can  doe
nothing,  except  they  doe  meet  altogether.  And  if  the  deed
deserve  death,  all  they  together  cannot  determine  thereof,
without  recourse  made  unto  the  Chian  wheresoever  he  be,
or  to  the  Tutan :  and  eftsoones  it  falleth  out,  that  the  case
be  referred  unto  higher  power.

In  all  Cities,  not  onely  chiefe  in  each  Shire,  but  in  the
rest  also  are  meanes  found  to  make  Louteas.  Many  of
them  doe  studie  at  the  Prince  his  charges,  wherefore  at  the

57o

GALEOTTO PERERA

yeeres  end  they  resort  unto  the  head  Cities,  whither  the
Chians  doe  come,  as  it  hath  beene  earst  said,  as  well  to
give  these  degrees,  as  to  sit  in  judgement  over  the
prisoners.

The  Chians  goe  in  circuit  every  yeere,  but  such  as  are
to  be  chosen  to  the  greatest  offices,  meet  not  but  from
three  yeeres  to  three  yeeres,  and  that  in  certain  large  halls
appointed  for  them  to  be  examined  in.  Many  things  are
asked  them,  whereunto  if  they  doe  answere  accordingly,
and  be  found  sufficient  to  take  their  degree,  the  Chian  by
and  by  granteth  it  them  :  but  the  Cap  and  Girdle  whereby
they  are  knowne  to  be  Louteas,  they  weare  not  before  that
they  bee  confirmed  by  the  King.  Their  examination
done,  and  triall  made  of  them,  such  as  have  taken  their
degree  wont  to  be  given  them  with  all  Ceremonies,  use  to
banquet  and  feast  many  daies  together  (as  the  Chineans
fashion  is  to  end  all  their  pleasures  with  eating  and
drinking)  and  so  remaine  chosen  to  doe  the  King
service  in  matters  of  learning.  The  other  examinates
found  insufficient  to  proceed,  are  sent  backe  to  their
studie  againe.  Whose  ignorance  is  perceived  to  come  of
negligence  and  default,  such  a  one  is  whipped,  and  some-  [III.  i.  201.]
times  sent  to  prison,  where  wee  lying  that  yeere  when  this
kinde  of  Act  was,  wee  found  many  thus  punished,  and
demanding  the  cause  thereof,  they  said  it  was  for  that  they
knew  not  how  to  answere  unto  certaine  things  asked
them.

It  is  a  world  to  see  how  these  Louteas  are  served  and  Their
feared,  in  such  wise,  that  in  publike  assemblies  at  one  Maiesty-
shrike  they  give,  all  the  servitors  belonging  unto  Justice,
tremble  thereat.  At  their  being  in  these  places,  when
they  list  to  move,  be  it  but  even  to  the  gate,  these
Servitors  doe  take  them  up,  and  carry  them  in  seats  of
beaten  Gold.  After  this  sort  are  they  borne  when  they
goe  in  the  Citie,  either  for  their  owne  businesse  abroad,
or  to  see  each  other  at  home.  For  the  dignitie  they  have,
and  office  they  doe  beare,  they  be  all  accompanied  :  the  very
meanest  of  them  all  that  goeth  in  these  seats  is  ushered

57^

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

by  two  men  at  the  least,  that  cry  unto  the  people  to  give
place,  howbeit  they  need  it  not,  for  that  reverence  the
common  people  hath  unto  them.  They  have  also  in  their
company  certaine  Sergeants,  with  their  Maces,  either
silvered,  or  altogether  Silver,  some  two,  some  four,  other
six,  other  eight,  conveniently  for  each  one  his  degree.
The  more  principall  and  chiefe  Louteas  have  going  orderly
before  these  Sergeants,  many  other  with  Staves,  and  a
great  many  Catch-poles  with  Rods  of  Indian  Canes
dragged  to  the  ground,  so  that  the  streets  being  paved,
you  may  here  a  farre  off,  as  well  the  noise  of  the  Rods,  as
the  voyce  of  the  cryers.  These  fellowes  serve  also  to
apprehend  others,  and  the  better  to  be  knowne,  they
weare  liverie-red  Girdles,  and  in  their  Caps  Pecocks
Feathers.  Behinde  these  Louteas  come  such  as  doe  beare
certaine  Tables  hanged  at  staves  ends,  wherein  is  written
in  Silver  letters  the  name,  degree,  and  office  of  that
Loutea,  whom  they  follow.  In  like  manner  they  have
borne  after  them  Hats  agreeable  unto  their  titles  :  if  the
Loutea  bee  meane,  then  hath  he  brought  after  him  but
one  Hat,  and  that  may  not  be  yellow  :  but  if  hee  be  of
better  sort,  then  may  hee  have  two,  three,  or  foure  ;  the
principall  and  chiefe  Louteas,  may  have  all  their  Hats
yellow,  the  which  among  them  is  accounted  great  honour.
The  Loutea  for  warres,  though  hee  bee  but  meane,  may
notwithstanding  have  yellow  Hats.  The  Tutanes  and
Chians,  when  they  goe  abroad,  have  besides  all  this  before
them  led  three  or  foure  Horses,  with  their  Guard  in
Armour.
Manner  of  Furthermore,  the  Louteas,  yea,  and all  the people  in

eatmg.  China,  are  wont  to eat  their  meat  sitting  on  Stooles  at

high  Tables  as  wee  doe,  and  that  very  cleanly,  although
they  use  neither  Table-clothes  nor  Napkins. Whatsoever
is  set  downe  upon  the  boord  is  first  carved,  before  that  it
be  brought  in  :  they  feed  with  two  Sticks,  refraining  from
We  that  is  the  touching  their  meat  with  their  hands,  even  as  we  do  with
Italians  and Forkes,  for  the  which  respect,  they  lesse  doe  need  any
Spaniards. Table-clothes. Neither  is  the  Nation  onely  civill  at  meat,

572

GALEOTTO PERERA

but  also  in  conversation  and  in  courtesie,  they  seeme  to
exceed  all  other.  Likewise  in  their  dealings,  after  their
manner  they  are  so  readie,  that  they  farre  passe  all  other
Gentiles  and  Moores  ;  the  greater  States  are  so  vaine,
that  they  line  their  clothes  with  the  best  silke  that  may  be
found.  The  Louteas  are  an  idle  generation  without  all
manner  of  exercises  and  pastimes,  except  it  be  eating  and
drinking.  Sometimes  they  walke  abroad  in  the  fields,  to
make  the  Souldiers  shoot  at  Pricks  with  their  Bowes,  but  Shooting.
their  eating  passeth  :  they  will  stand  eating  even  when  the
other  doe  draw  to  shoot.  The  Pricke  is  a  great  Blanket
spread  on  certaine  long  Poles,  he  that  striketh  it,  hath  of
the  best  man  there  standing  a  piece  of  Crimson  Taffata,
the  which  is  knit  about  his  head  :  in  this  sort  the  winner
is  honoured,  and  the  Louteas  with  their  bellies  full,
returne  home  againe.

The  Inhabitants  of  China,  bee  very  Idolaters,  all  Idolatry.
generally  doe  worship  the  heavens  :  and  as  we  are  wont
to  say,  God  knoweth  it  :  so  say  they  at  every  word,  Tien
Tautee,  that  is  to  say,  The  Heavens  doe  know  it.  Some
doe  worship  the  Sunne,  and  some  the  Moone,  as  they
thinke  good,  for  none  are  bound  more  to  one  then  to
another.  In  their  Temples,  the  which  they  doe  call
Meani,  they  have  a  great  Altar  in  the  same  place  as  we
have,  true  it  is,  that  one  may  goe  round  about  it.  There
set  they  up  the  Image  of  a  certaine  Loutea  of  that
Countrey,  whom  they  have  in  great  reverence  for  certaine
notable  things  he  did.  At  the  right  hand  standeth  the
Devill,  much  more  ugly  painted  then  we  doe  use  to  set
him  out,  whereunto  great  homage  is  done  by  such  as
come  into  the  Temple  to  aske  counsell,  or  to  draw  lots  :
this  opinion  they  have  of  him,  that  he  is  malicious  and
able  to  doe  evill.  If  you  aske  them  what  they  doe  thinke
of  the  soules  departed,  they  will  answer,  that  they  be
immortall,  and  that  as  soone  as  any  one  departeth  out  of
this  life,  he  becommeth  a  devil,  if  he  have  lived  well  in
this  world,  if  otherwise,  that  the  same  devil  changeth  him
into  a  Bufle,  Oxe,  or  Dog. Wherefore  to  this  Devill  doe

573

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Devill  most
respected.

they  much  honour,  to  him  do  they  sacrifice,  praying  him
that  he  will  make  them  like  unto  himselfe,  and  not  like
other  beasts.  They  have  moreover  another  sort  of
Temples,  wherein  both  upon  the  Altars,  and  also  on  the
walls  doe  stand  many  Idols  well  proportioned,  but  bare
headed  :  These  beare  name  Omithofon,  accounted  of  them
spirits,  but  such  as  in  heaven  doe  neither  good  nor  evill,
thought  to  bee  such  men  and  women,  as  have  chastely
lived  in  this  world  in  abstinence  from  Fish  and  Flesh,  fed
only  with  Rice  and  Salates.  Of  that  Devill  they  make
some  account,  for  these  spirits  they  care  little  or  nothing
at  all.  Againe,  they  hold  opinion,  that  it  a  man  doe  well
in  this  life,  the  heavens  will  give  him  many  temporall
blessings,  but  if  he  doe  evill,  then  shall  he  have  infirmities,
[III.  i.  202.]  diseases,  troubles,  and  penurie,  and  all  this  without  any
knowledge  of  God.  Finally,  this  people  knoweth  no
other  thing  then  to  live  and  die,  yet  because  they  be
reasonable  creatures,  all  seemed  good  unto  them
we  spake  in  our  language,  though  it  were  not  very
sufficient.

Our  manner  of  praying  so  well  liked  them,  that  in
prison  importunately  they  besought  us  to  write  for  them
somewhat  as  concerning  heaven,  the  which  we  did  to  their
contentation,  with  such  reasons  as  we  knew,  howbeit  not

So  do  the

Roman

Auguries

Sodomie
frequent.

New  and  full
Moones.

Btrth-dayes.

very  cunningly.  As  they  doe  their  Idolatry  they  laugh  at
themselves.  The  greatest  fault  we  doe  finde  in  them  is
Sodomie,  a  vice  very  common  in  the  meaner  sort,  and
nothing  strange  amongst  the  best.  Furthermore  the
Louteas,  withall  the  people  of  China,  are  wont  to
solemnize  the  daies  of  the  new  and  full  Moones  in
visiting  one  each  other,  and  making  great  banquets,  for
to  that  end,  as  I  have  said,  doe  tend  all  their  pastimes
and  spending  their  daies  in  pleasure.  They  are  wont  also
to  solemnize  each  one  his  birth  day,  whereunto  their
kindred  and  friends  doe  resort  of  custome,  with  presents
of  Jewells  or  Money,  receiving  againe  for  their  reward
good  cheere.  They  keepe  in  like  manner  a  generall
Feast,  with  great  Banquets  that  day  their  King  was  borne.

574

GALEOTTO PERERA

But  their most  principall  and  greatest  Feast  of  all,  and

best  cheare,  is  the  first  day  of  their new  yeere,  namely,

the first  day of  the New Moone  of  Februarie,  so that  New  y earn

their  first  moneth is March,  and they  reckon  the  times  day.

accordingly,  respect  being  had unto  the  reigne  of  their

Princes  :  as  when  any  deed  is  written,  they  date  it  thus  ;

Made  such  a  day  of  such  a  Moone,  and  such  a  yeere  of

the  raigne  of  such  a  King.

Now  will  I  speake  of  the  manner  in  which  the  Chineans  Justice.
doe  observe  in  doing  Justice.  Because  the  Chinish  King
maketh  his  abode  continually  in  the  City  Pachin,  his
Kingdome  so  great,  the  shires  so  many,  as  before  it  hath
beene  said  :  in  it  therefore  the  Governours  and  Rulers,
much  like  unto  our  SherifTes  be  so  appointed  suddenly,
and  speedily  discharged  againe,  that  they  have  no  time  to
grow  nought.  Furthermore,  to  keepe  the  State  in  more
securitie,  the  Louteas  that  governe  one  shire,  are  chosen
out  of  some  other  shire  distant  farre  off,  where  they  must
leave  their  Wives,  Children,  and  Goods,  carrying  nothing
with  them  but  themselves.  True  it  is,  that  at  their
comming  thither  they  doe  find  in  a  readinesse  all  things
necessarie,  their  House,  Furniture,  Servants,  and  all  other
things  in  such  perfection  and  plentie,  that  they  want
nothing.  Thus  King  is  well  served  without  all  feare  of
Treason.

In  the  principall  Cities  of  the  shires  be  foure  chiefe
Louteas,  before  whom  are  brought  all  matters  of  the
inferiour  Townes,  throughout  the  whole  Realme.  Divers
other  Louteas  have  the  managing  of  Justice,  and  receiving
of  Rents,  bound  to  yeeld  an  account  thereof  unto  the
greater  Officers.  Other  doe  see  that  there  be  no  evill  rule
kept  in  the  Citie  :  each  one  as  it  behoveth  him.  Generally
all  these  doe  imprison  Malefactors,  cause  them  to  be
whipped  and  racked,  hoysing  them  up  and  downe  by  the
armes  with  a  cord,  a  thing  very  usuall  there,  and  accounted
no  shame.  These  Louteas  doe  use  great  diligence  in  the  7^,  itanam
apprehending  of  the  Theeves,  so  that  it  is  a  wonder  to  see  call  it  the
a Thiefe escape away in any  Towne, Citie,  or  Village,  strapado.

575

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Beating  with
Canes.

Examinations.

Upon  the  Sea  neere  unto  the  shoare  many  are  taken,  and
looke  even  as  they  are  taken,  so  be  they  first  whipped,
Hard  Prisons,  and  afterward  laid  in  Prison,  where  shortly  after  they  all
dye  for  hunger  and  cold.  At  that  time,  when  we  were
in  Prison,  there  dyed  of  them  above  threescore  and  ten.
Their  whips  be  certaine  pieces  of  Canes,  cleft  in  the
middle,  in  such  sort  that  they  seeme  rather  plaine  then
sharpe.  He  that  is  to  bee  whipped  lyeth  groveling  on
the  ground.  Upon  his  thighes  the  Hangman  layeth
on  blowes  mightily  with  these  Canes,  that  the  standers  by
tremble  at  their  crueltie.  Tenne  stripes  draw  a  great  deale
of  bloud,  twentie  or  thirtie  spoyle  the  flesh  altogether,
fiftie  or  threescore  will  require  long  time  to  be  healed,
and  if  they  come  to  the  number  of  one  hundred,  then  are
they  incurable.

The  Louteas  observe  moreover  this  :  when  any  man  is
brought  before  them  to  bee  examined,  they  aske  him
openly  in  the  hearing  of  as  many  as  be  present,  be  the
offence  never  so  great.  Thus  did  they  also  behave  them-
selves with  us.  For  this  cause  amongst  them  can  there  be
no  false  witnes  as  daily  amongst  us  it  falleth  out.  This
good  commeth  thereof  that  many  being  alwayes  about  the
Judge  to  heare  the  Evidence,  and  beare  witnesse,  the  Pro-
cesse  cannot  be  falsified,  as  it  hapneth  sometimes  with  us.
The  Moores,  Gentiles,  and  Jewes,  have  all  their  sundry
Oathes,  the  Moores  doe  sweare  by  their  Mossafos,  the
Brachmans  by  their  Fili,  the  rest  likewise  by  the  things
they  doe  worship.  The  Chineans,  though  they  be  wont
to  sweare  by  Heaven,  by  the  Moone,  by  the  Sunne,  and
by  all  their  Idols,  in  judgement  neverthelesse  they  sweare
not  at  all.  If  for  some  offence  an  Oath  be  used  of  any
one,  by  and  by  with  the  least  evidence  hee  is  tormented  ;
so  be  the  Witnesses  he  bringeth,  if  they  tell  not  the  truth,
or  doe  in  any  point  disagree,  except  they  bee  men  of
worship  and  credit,  who  are  beleeved  without  any  farther
matter  :  the  rest  are  made  to  confesse  the  truth  by  force
of  Torments  and  Whips.  Besides  this  order  observed  of
them  in  Examinations,  they  doe  feare  so  much  their  King,

576

Oathes.

GALEOTTO PERERA

and  he  where  he  maketh  his  abode  keepeth  them  so  low,

that  they  dare  not  once  stirre. Againe, these  Louteas

as great as  they  bee, notwithstanding the  multitude  of

Notaries  they  have,  not  trusting  any  others,  doe  write  all

great Processes and matters  of  importance themselves.

Moreover,  one  vertue  they  have  worthy  of  great  praise,

and that  is,  being  men so  well  regarded  and  accounted

of  as  though  they  were  Princes,  they  bee  patient  above  Patient

measure in giving audience. Wee poore strangers  hearing.

brought  before  them  might  say  what  we  would,  as  all  to  *■ '  lm  2°3*-'

be  Lyes  and  Falaces  that  they  did  write,  nor  did  we  stand

before  them  with  the  usuall  Ceremonies  of  that  Countrey,

yet  did  they  beare  with  us  so  patiently,  that  they  caused

us  to  wonder,  knowing  specially  how  little  any  Advocate

or  Judge  is  wont  in  our  Countrey  to  beare  with  us. For

wheresoever  in  any  Towne  or  Christendome  should  bee

accused  unknowne  men  as  we  were,  I  know  not  what  end

the very Innocents cause would have :  but wee in a

Heathen  Countrey,  having  our  great  Enemies  two  of  the  Severe  Justice,

chiefest  men  in  a  whole  Towne,  wanting  an Interpreter,

ignorant  of  that  Countrey  Language,  did  in  the  end  see

our  great  Adversaries  cast  into  Prison  for  our  sake,  and

deprived of  their Offices and Honour for not doing

Justice; yea, not to  escape death,  for as the  rumour

goeth,  they  shall  bee  beheaded.

Somewhat  is  now  to  be  said  of  the  Lawes  that  I  have  Lawes.
beene  able  to  know  in  this  Countrey,  and  first,  no  Theft
or  Murther,  is  at  any  time  pardoned :  Adulterers  are  put
in  Prison,  and  the  fact  once  proved,  condemned  to  dye,
the  womans Husband  must  accuse  them  :  this  order is
kept with men and women found in that fault, but
Theeves  and  Murtherers  are  imprisoned  as  I  have  said,
where  they  shortly  dye  for  hunger  and  cold. If  any  one
haply  escape  by  bribing  the  Jaylor  to  give  him  meate,  his
Processe  goeth  farther,  and  commeth  to  the  Court  where
hee is condemned to dye. Sentence being  given, the
Prisoner  is  brought  in  publike  with  a  terrible  band  of  men  A  Pillorie
that  lay  him  in  Irons  hand  and  foot,  with  a  board  at  his  board.
xi  577  20

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

necke  one  handfull  broad,  in  length  reaching  downe  to  his
knees,  cleft  in  two  parts,  and  with  a  hole  one  handfull
downe-ward  in  the  Table  fit  for  his  necke,  the  which  they
enclose  up  therein,  nayling  the  board  fast  together,  one
handfull  of  the  board  standeth  up  behind  in  the  necke :
the  sentence  and  cause  wherefore  the  fellon  was  condemned
to  dye,  is  written  in  that  part  of  the  Table  that  standeth
before.  This  Ceremonie  ended,  he  is  laid  in  a  great
Prison  in  the  company  of  some  other  condemned  persons,
the  which  are  found  by  the  King  as  long  as  they  doe
live.  The  board  aforesaid  so  made  tormenteth  the
Prisoners  very  much,  keeping  them  both  from  the  rest,
and  eke  letting  them  to  eate  commodiously,  their  hands
being  manicled  in  Irons  under  that  board,  so  that  in  fine
there  is  no  remedie  but  death.  In  the  chiefe  Cities  of
every  shire,  as  we  have  before  said,  there  be  foure  princi-
pall  Houses,  in  each  of  them  a  Prisoner :  but  in  one
of  them  where  the  Taissu  maketh  his  abode,  there  a
greater  and  a  more  principall  Prison  then  in  any  ot
the  rest:  and  although  in  every  Citie  there  be  many,
neverthelesse  in  three  of  them  remayne  onely  such  as
bee  condemned  to  dye.  Their  death  is  much  prolonged,
Execution,  for  that  ordinarily  there  is  no  execution  done  but  once  a
yeere,  though  many  dye  for  hunger  and  cold,  as  we  have
seene  in  this  Prison.  Execution  is  done  in  this  manner.
The  Chian,  to  wit  the  high  Commissioner  or  Lord  Chiefe
Justice,  at  the  yeares  end  goeth  to  the  head  Citie,  where
hee  heareth  againe  the  causes  of  such  as  bee  condemned.
Many  times  he  delivereth  some  of  them,  declaring  that
board  to  have  beene  wrongfully  put  about  their  neckes  :
the  visitation  ended,  he  chooseth  out  seven  or  eight,  not
many  more  or  lesse,  of  the  greatest  Malefactors,  the
which,  to  feare  and  keepe  in  awe  the  people,  are  brought
into  a  great  Market  place,  where  all  the  great  Louteas
meete  together,  and  after  many  Ceremonies  and  Super-
stitions, as  the  use  of  the  Countrey  is,  are  beheaded.
This  is  done  once  a  yeare :  who  so  escapeth  that  day,
may  be sure  that  he  shall  not  be  put  to  death  all  that

578

GALEOTTO PERERA

yeare  following,  and  so  remayneth  at  the  Kings  charges  in
the  greater  Prison.  In  that  Prison  where  wee  lay  were
alwayes  one  hundred  and  moe  of  these  condemned  persons,
besides  them  that  lay  in  other  Prisons.

These Prisons  wherein the condemned captives doe  Strength  of  the
remayne are so strong, that it hath not beene  heard,  Prisons.
that  any  Prisoner  in  all  China  hath  escaped  out  of  Prison,
for, indeed, it  is  a thing  impossible. The  Prisons  are
thus builded. First, all the place is mightily walled
about, the  wals  be  very strong  and high,  the gate of
no  lesse  force :  within  it  three  other gates, before you
come where the Prisoners doe lye, there many  great
Lodgings are to be seene of the Louteas, Notaries,
Parthions, that is,  such  as  doe  there  keepe watch  and
ward  day  and  night,  the  Court  large  and  paved,  on  the
one side whereof  standeth  a Prison,  with  two  mighty
gates,  wherein  are  kept  such  prisoners  as  have  committed
enormious  offences. This  Prison  is  so  great,  that  in  it  are
streets  and  market  places  wherein  all  things  necessary  are
sold. Yea,  some  Prisoners  live  by  that  kind  of  Trade,
buying  and selling, and  letting  out  beds  to  hire; some
are  daily  sent  to  Prison,  some  daily  delivered,  wherefore
this  place  is  never  voyd  of  seven  or  eight  hundred  men  Store  of
that goe at libertie.  Prisoners.

Into  one  other  Prison  of  condemned  persons  shall
you  goe  at  three  Iron  gates,  the  Court  paved  and  vaulted
round  about,  and  open  above  as  it  were  a  Cloyster.  In
this  Cloyster  bee  eight  Roomes  with  Iron  Doores,  and
in  each  of  them  a  large  Gallerie,  wherein  every  night  the
Prisoners  doe  lye  at  length,  their  feet  in  the  stockes,  their
bodies  hampered  in  huge  woodden  grates  that  keepe  them
from  sitting,  so  that  they  lye  as  it  were  in  a  Cage,  sleepe
if  they  can  :  in  the  morning  they  are  loosed  againe,  that
they  may  goe  into  the  Court.  Notwithstanding  the
strength  of  this  Prison,  it  is  kept  with  a  Garrison  of  men,
part  whereof  watch  within  the  House,  part  of  them  in
the  Court,  some  keepe  about  the  Prison  with  Lanthornes,
and  Watch-bels,  answering  one  another  five  times  every

579

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

night,  and  giving  warning  so  lowde,  that  the  Loutea
resting  in  a  Chamber  not  neere  thereunto  may  heare  them.
[III.  i.  204.]  In  these  Prisons  of  condemned  persons  remayne  some
fifteene,  other  twentie  yeares  imprisoned,  not  executed,
for  the  love  of  their  honourable  Friends  that  seeke  to
prolong  their  lives.  Many  of  these  Prisoners  bee  Shoo-
makers,  and  have  from  the  King  a  certayne  allowance
of  Rice :  some  of  them  worke  for  the  Keeper,  who
suffereth  them  to  goe  at  libertie  without  fetters  and
boards,  the  better  to  worke.  Howbeit  when  the  Loutea
calleth  his  Checke  Roll,  and  with  the  Keeper  vieweth
them,  they  all  weare  their  Liveries,  that  is,  boards  at
their  neckes,  Ironed  hand  and  foote.  When  any  of  these
Prisoners  dyeth,  he  is  to  bee  seene  of  the  Loutea  and
Notaries,  brought  out  at  a  gate  so  narrow,  that  there
can  but  one  be  drawne  out  there  at  once.  The  Prisoner
beeing  brought  forth,  one  of  the  aforesaid  Parthians,
striketh  him  thrice  on  the  head  with  an  Iron  sledge,
that  done,  hee  is  delivered  unto  his  friends,  if  hee  have
any,  otherwise  the  King  hireth  men  to  carrie  him  to
his  buriall  in  the  fields.
Course  for  Thus  Adulterers  and  Theeves  are  used. Such  as  be

Debters.  imprisoned  for  Debt  once  knowne,  lye  there  until] it  be

paid.  The  Taissu  and  Loutea  calleth  them  many  times
before  him  by  the  vertue  of  his  Office,  who  understanding
the  cause  wherefore  they  doe  not  pay  their  Debts,
appointeth  them  a  certaine  time  to  doe  it,  within  the
compasse  whereof  if  they  discharge  not  their  Debts
beeing  Debters  indeed,  then  they  be  whipped  and
condemned  to  perpetuall  Imprisonment ;  if  the  Creditors
be  many,  and  one  is  to  be  paid  before  another,  they  doe,
contrary  to  our  manner,  pay  him  first,  of  whom  they  last
borrowed,  and  so  ordinarily  the  rest,  in  such  sort  that
the  first  lender  be  the  last  Receiver.  The  same  order
is  kept  in  paying  Legacies  :  the  last  named,  receiveth
his  portion  first.

When I  said that  such  as  be committed to Prison
for  Theft,  and  Murther,  were  judged  by  the Court, I

580

GALEOTTO PERERA

meant  not  them  that  were  apprehended  in  the  deed  doing,
for  they  need  no  tryall,  but  are  brought  immediately
before  the  Tutan,  who  out  of  hand  giveth  sentence.
Other  not  taken  so  openly,  and  doe  need  tryall,  are
the  Malefactors  put  to  execution  once  a  yeare  in  the
chiefe  Cities,  to  keepe  in  awe  the  people :  or  condemned,
doe  remayne  in  Prison,  looking  for  their  day.  Theeves
being  taken,  are  carried  to  Prison  from  one  place  to
another  in  a  Chest  upon  mens  shoulders,  hired  therefore
by  the  King,  the  Chest  is  sixe  handfuls  high,  the  Prisoner
sitteth  therein  upon  a  bench,  the  cover  of  the  Chest  is
two  boards ;  amidst  them  both  a  Pillory-like  hole,  for
the  Prisoner  his  necke,  there  sitteth  he  with  his  head
without  the  Chest,  and  the  rest  of  his  bodie  within,
not  able  to  move  or  turne  his  head  this  way  or  that  way,
nor  to  plucke  it  in  :  the  necessities  of  nature  he  voideth
at  a  hole  in  the  bottome  of  the  Chest,  the  meate  he
eateth  is  put  into  his  mouth  by  others.  There  abideth  he
day  and  night  during  his  whole  Journey :  if  happily
his  Porters  stumble,  or  the  Chest  doe  jogge,  or  be  set
downe  carelesly,  it  turneth  to  his  great  paines  that  sitteth
therein,  all  such  motions  being  unto  him  hanging  as  it
were.  Thus  were  our  companions  carried  from  Cinceo,
seven  dayes  journey,  never  taking  any  rest  as  afterward
they  told  us,  and  their  greatest  griefe  was  to  stay  by
the  way  :  as  soone  as  they  came  beeing  taken  out  of
the  Chests,  they  were  not  able  to  stand  on  their  feet,
and  two  of  them  dyed  shortly  after.

When  we  lay  in  prison  at  Fuquieo,  we  came  many  Fuquieo.
times  abroad,  and  were  brought  to  the  Palaces  of  Noble
men,  to  be  seene  of  them  and  their  wives,  for  that  they
had  never  seene  any  Portugall  before.  Many  things  they
asked  us  of  our  Countrey,  and  our  fashions,  and  did
write  every  thing,  for  they  be  curious  in  novelties  above
measure.  The  Gentlemen  shew  great  curtesie  unto
strangers,  and  so  did  we  finde  at  their  hands,  and  because
that  many  times  we  were  brought  abroad  into  the  Citie,
somwhat  will  I  say  of  such  things  as  I  did  see  therein,

58i

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

being  a  gallant  Citie,  and  chiefe  in  one  of  the  thirteene
shires  afore-said.  The  Citie  Fuquieo,  is  very  great  and
mightily  walled  with  square  stone  both  within  and  without,
and  as  it  may  seeme  by  the  breadth  thereof,  filled  up  in
the  middle  with  Earth,  laid  over  with  Bricke,  and  covered
with  Tyle,  and  after  the  manner  of  Porches  or  Galleries,
that  one  might  dwell  therein.  The  stayres  they  use,
are  so  easily  made,  that  one  may  goe  them  up  and  downe
a  Horse-back,  as  eftsoones  they  doe :  the  streets  are
paved,  as  alreadie  it  hath  beene  said :  there  bee  a  great
number  of  Merchants,  every  one  hath  written  in  a  great
Table  at  his  doore  such  things  as  hee  hath  to  sell.  In
like  manner  every  Artizan  painteth  out  his  craft :  the
Market  places  be  large,  great  abundance  of  all  things
there  be  to  be  sold.  The  Citie  standeth  upon  water,  many
streames  runne  through  it,  the  bankes  pitched,  and  so
broad  that  they  serve  for  streets  to  the  Cities  use.  Over
the  streames  are  sundry  Bridges  both  of  Timber  and
Stone,  that  being  made  levell  with  the  streets,  hinder  not
the  passage  of  the  Barges  to  and  fro,  the  Chanels  are
so  deepe.  Where  the  streames  come  in  and  goe  out
of  the  Citie,  be  certayne  Arches  in  the  Wall,  there  goe  in
ParaL  and  out  their  Parai,  that  is  a  kind  of  Barges  they  have,

and  this  onely  in  the  day  time  :  at  night  these  Arches
are  closed  up  with  gates,  so  doe  they  shut  up  all  the
gates  of  the  Citie.  These  streames  and  Barges  doe
embellish  much  the  Citie,  and  make  it  as  it  were  to
Another  seeme  another Venice. The buildings are even, well

Venice.  made,  high  not  lofted,  except  it  be  some  wherein  Mer-

chandize is  laid. It  is  a  World  to  see  how  great  these
Cities  are,  and  the  cause  is,  for  that  the  houses  are  built
even,  as  I  have  said,  and  doe  take  a  great  deale  of  roome.
One  thing  we  saw  in  this  Citie  that  made  us  all  to  wonder,
and  is  worthy  to  be  noted  :  Namely,  over  a  Porch  at  the
T '  l  2t°d commmg  mto  one  of  the  afore-said  foure Houses, the
ingonfirtie which  the  King  hath  in  every  shire  for  his  Governours,
Pillars, each  of  as  I  have  before  said,  standeth  a  Towre  built  upon  fortie
one  stone. Pillars,  each  one  whereof  is  but  one  stone,  each  one  fortie

582

GALEOTTO PERERA

handfuls  or  spans  long :  in  breadth  or  compasse  twelve,  as
many  of  us  did  measure  them.  Besides  this,  their  great-
nesse  such  in  one  piece,  that  it  might  seeme  impossible  to
worke  them  :  they  bee  moreover  covered,  and  in  colour,
length,  and  breath  so  like,  that  the  one  nothing  differeth
from  the  other.

Wee  are  wont  to  call  this  Countrey  China,  and  the  people  Name  of
Chineans,  but  as  long  as  wee  were  Prisoners,  not  hearing  China.
amongst them  at  any time  that  name, I  determined  to
learne  how  they  were  called  : and  asked  sometimes  by
them  thereof,  for  that  they  understood  us  not  when  wee
called them Chineans, I answered them, that all the
Inhabitants of  India named them Chineans, wherefore
I  prayed  them  that  they  would  tell  me,  for  what  occasion
they  are  also  so  called,  whither  peradventure  any  Citie  of
theirs  bare  that  name. Hereunto  they  alwayes  answered
me,  to  have  no  such  name,  nor  ever  to  have  had. Then
did  I  aske  them  what  name  the  whole  Countrey  beareth,
and  what  they  would  answer  being  asked  of  other  Nations
what  Countrey-men  they  were  ? It  was  told  me,  that  of
ancient  time  in  this  Countrey  had  beene  many  Kings,  and
though  presently  it  were  all  under  one,  each  Kingdome
neverthelesse  enjoyed  that  name  it  first  had,  these  King-
domes  are  the  Provinces  I  spake  of  before. In  conclusion,
they  sayd,  that  the  whole  Countrey  is  called  Tamen,  and  Tamen  the
the  Inhabitants  Tamegines,  so  that  this  name  China  or  proper  name  of
Chineans,  is  not  heard  of  in  that  Countrey. I  doe  thinke .  m.t' a
that  the  nearenesse  of  another  Province  thereabout  called  Great;
Cochinchina,  and  the  inhabitants  thereof  Cochinesses,  first  Magines  is
discovered  before  that  China  was,  lying  not  farre  from  neere  Poles
Malacca,  did  give  occasion  both  to  the  one  Nation  and  to  JJ*^p
the other of  that name Chineans, as also the whole  Mangines.
Countrey  to  bee  named  China. But  their  proper  name
is  that  aforesaid.

I have heard moreover, that in the  Citie  Nanquim, Tables
remayneth a Table  of  gold,  and  in it  written  a  Kings  reverenced.
name,  as  a  memorie  of  that  residence the  Kings were
wont  to keepe there. This table standeth in a  great

583

PURCHAS HIS PILGBIMES

Palace,  covered  alwayes,  except  it  bee  in  some  of  their
festivall  dayes,  at  what  time  they  are  wont  to  let  it
bee  seene  :  covered  neverthelesse  as  it  is,  all  the  Nobilitie
of  the  Citie  goeth  of  dutie  to  doe  it  every  day  reverence.
The  like  is  done  in  the  head  Cities  of  all  the  other  Shires,
in  the  Palaces  of  the  Ponchiassini,  wherein  these  aforesaid
tables  doe  stand  with  the  Kings  name  written  in  them,
although  no  reverence  bee  done  thereunto  but  in  solemne
Feasts.

I  have  likewise  understood  that  the  Citie  Pachin,
where  the  King  maketh  his  abode,  is  so  great,  that  to
goe  from  one  side  to  the  other,  besides  the  Suburbs,
(which  are  greater  then  the  Citie  it  selfe)  it  requireth
one  whole  day  a  horsebacke,  going  hackney  pace.  In  the
Suburbs  bee  many  wealthy  Merchants  of  all  sorts.  They
told  me  furthermore,  that  it  was  Moted  about,  and  in  the
Motes  great  store  of  Fish,  whereof  the  King  maketh  great
Their  enemies,  gaynes.  It  was  also  told  mee  that  the  King  of  China  had
no  King  to  wage  battell  withall,  besides  the  Tartars,  with
whom  hee  had  concluded  a  peace  more  then  fourescore
yeeres  agoe.

There  bee  Hospitals  in  all  their  Cities,  alwayes  full
of  people,  wee  never  saw  any  poore  bodie  beg.  We
therefore  asked  the  cause  of  this  :  answered  it  was,  that
in  every  Citie  there  is  a  great  circuit,  wherein  bee  many
houses  for  poore  people,  for  Blinde,  Lame,  Old  folke,  not
able  to  travell  for  age,  nor  having  any  other  meanes  to
live.  These  folke  have  in  the  aforesaid  houses,  ever
plentie  of  Rice  during  their  lives,  but  nothing  else.  Such
as  bee  received  into  these  houses,  come  in  after  this
manner.  When  one  is  sicke,  blinde,  or  lame,  hee  maketh
a  supplication  to  the  Ponchiassi,  and  proving  that  to  bee
true  he  writeth,  hee  remaineth  in  the  aforesaid  great
lodging  as  long  as  he  liveth  :  besides  this,  they  keepe  in
these  places  Swine  and  Hennes,  whereby  the  poore  bee
releeved  without  going  a  begging.

I  sayd  before  that  China  was  full  of  Rivers,  but  now  I
minde  to  confirme  the  same  anew  :  for  the  farther  wee

584

GALEOTTO PERERA

went  into  the  Countrey,  the  greater  we  found  the  rivers.  Store  of  rivers.
Sometimes  we  were  so  farre  off  from  the  Sea,  that  where
wee  came  no  Sea-fish  had  beene  seene,  and  Salt  was  there
very  deare,  of  fresh-water  Fish  yet  was  there  great
abundance,  and  that  fish  very  good  :  they  keepe  it
good  after  this  manner.  Where  the  Rivers  doe  meete,
and  so  passe  into  the  Sea,  there  lyeth  great  store  of
Boates,  specially  where  no  salt-water  commeth,  and  that
in  March  and  Aprill.  These  Boates  are  so  many  that  it
seemeth  wonderfull,  neither  serve  they  for  other  then  to
take  small  fish.  By  the  rivers  sides  they  make  leyres  of  Plentie  of
fine  and  strong  Nets,  that  lye  three  handfuls  under  water,  fishj  a** .
and  one  above,  to  keepe  and  nourish  their  Fish  in,  untill  0f%el  ^
such  time  as  other  fishers  doe  come  with  Boates,  bringing
for  that  purpose  certaine  great  Chests  lyned  with  paper,
able  to  hold  water,  wherein  they  carrie  their  fish  up  and
downe  the  river,  every  day  renewing  the  chest  with  fresh-
water, and  selling  their  fish  in  every  Citie,  Towne,  and
Village,  where  they  passe,  unto  the  people  as  they  need
it  :  most  of  them  have  Net-leyres  to  keepe  Fish  in
alwayes  for  their  provision.  Where  the  greater  Boates
cannot  passe  any  farther  forward,  they  take  lesser,  and
because  the  whole  Countrey  is  very  well  watred,  there  is
so  great  plentie  of  divers  sorts  of  Fish,  that  it  is  wonder-
full  to  see  :  assuredly,  wee  were  amazed  to  behold  the
manner  of  their  provision.  Their  Fish  is  chiefly  nourished
with  the  dung  of  Bufles  and  Oxen,  that  greatly  fatteth  it.
Although  I  sayd  their  fishing  to  bee  in  March  and  Aprill,  [III.  i.  206.]
at  what  time  wee  saw  them  doe  it,  neverthelesse  they  told
us  that  they  fished  at  all  times,  for  that  usually  they  doe
feed  on  Fish,  wherefore  it  behooveth  them  to  make  their
provision continually.

When  wee  had  passed  Fuquien,  we  went  into  Quicen-  Hespeakethof
shire,  where  the  fine  Clay  vessell  is  made,  as  I  sayd  before: F"<?uten shire.
and  we  came  to  a  Citie,  the  one  side  whereof  is  built  upon  ^ZtTp
the  foote  of  a  hill,  whereby passeth a  River  navigable :  ia\ne  \5  majgt
there  we  tooke  Boate,  and  went  by  water  toward  the  Sea :
on  each  side  of  the  River  we  found  many  Cities,  Townes,

585

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

and  Villages,  wherein  we  saw  great  store  of  Merchandise,
but  specially  of  fine  clay :  there  did  we  land  by  the  way
to  buy  victuals  and  other  necessaries.  Going  downe  this
river  Southward,  wee  were  glad  that  we  drew  neere  unto  a
warmer  Countrey,  from  whence  we  had  beene  farre  dis-
tant: this  Countrey  wee  passed  through  in  eight  dayes,
for  our  journey  lay  downe  the  streame.  Before  that  I
doe  say  any  thing  of  that  Shire  wee  came  into,  I  will  first
speake  of  the  great  Citie  of  Quicin,  wherein  alwayes
remayneth  a  Tutan,  that  is  a  Governour,  as  you  have
seene,  though  some  Tutans  doe  governe  two  or  three
Shires.

That  Tutan  that  was  condemned  for  our  cause,  of
whom  I  spake  before,  was  borne  in  this  Countrey,  but
hee  governed  Fuquien-Shire :  nothing  it  avayled  him  to
bee  so  great  an  Officer.  This  Countrey  is  so  great,  that
in  many  places  where  wee  went,  there  had  beene  as  yet  no
talke  of  his  death,  although  he  were  executed  a  whole
Aim  yeere  before. At  the  Citie  Quanche  whither  wee  came,

Chenchu  the  river  was  so  great  that  it  seemed  a  sea,  though  it  were
GredatstRwe0f  so  little  where  we  tooke  water,  that  wee  needed  small
Boates.  Boates. One  day  about  nine  of  the  clocke,  beginning  to

row  neare  the  walls  with  the  streame,  wee  came  at  noone
to  a  bridge  made  of  many  Barges,  over-linked  all  together
with  two  mightie  chaynes.  There  stayed  we  untill  it  was
late,  but  wee  saw  not  one  goe  either  up  thereon  or
downe,  except  two  Louthia's  that  about  the  going  downe
of  the  Sunne,  came  and  set  them  downe  there,  the  one  in
one  side,  the  other  on  the  other  side.  Then  was  the
bridge  opened  in  many  places,  and  Barges  both  great  and
small  to  the  number  of  sixe  hundred  began  to  passe  :
those  that  went  up  the  streame,  at  one  place,  such  as  came
downe,  at  an  other.  When  all  had  thus  shot  the  Bridge,
then  was  it  shut  up  againe.  Wee  heard  say  that  every
day  they  take  this  order  in  all  principall  places  of
Merchandise,  for  paying  of  the  custome  unto  the  King,
specially  for  Salt,  whereof  the  greatest  revenues  are  made
that  the  King  hath  in  this  Countrey. The  passages  of  the

586

GALEOTTO PERERA

bridge  where  it  is  opened,  bee  so  neere  the  shore,  that
nothing  can  passe  without  touching  the  same.  To  stay
the  Barges  at  their  pleasure,  that  they  goe  no  farther
forward,  are  used  certaine  yron  instruments.  The  Bridge
consisteth  of  one  hundred  and  twelve  Barges,  there  stayed  Bridge  of
we  untill  the  Eevening  that  they  were  opened,  lothsomly  1 1 2'  Barges.
oppressed  by  the  multitude  of  people  that  came  to  see  us,
so  many  in  number,  that  we  were  enforced  to  goe  aside
from  the  banke  untill  such  time  as  the  bridge  was  opened:
howbeit,  wee  were  neverthelesse  thronged  about  with  many
Boates  full  of  people.  And  though  in  other  Cities  and
places  where  we  went,  the  people  came  so  importunate
upon  us,  that  it  was  needfull  to  withdraw  our  selves  :  yet
were  wee  heere  much  more  molested  for  the  number
of  people,  and  this  bridge,  the  principall  way  out  of
the  Citie  unto  another  place  so  well  inhabited,  that  were
it  walled  about,  it  might  bee  compared  to  the  Citie.
When  we  had  shot  the  bridge,  we  kept  along  the  Citie
untill  that  it  was  night,  then  met  wee  with  another  river
that  joyned  with  this,  we  rowed  up  that  by  the  walls,
untill  we  came  to  another  bridge  gallantly  made  of  Barges,  3°°°>Barges.
but  lesser  a  great  deale  then  that  other  bridge  over  the
greater  streame :  heere  stayed  we  that  night,  and  other  two
dayes  with  more  quiet,  being  out  of  the  prease  of  the
people.  These  rivers  doe  meete  without  at  one  corner-
point  of  the  Citie.  In  either  of  them  were  so  many
Barges  great  and  small,  that  wee  all  thought  them  at  the
least  to  bee  above  three  thousand :  the  greater  number
thereof  was  in  the  lesser  river,  where  we  were.  Amongst
the  rest,  heere  lay  certaine  greater  vessels,  called  in  their
language  Parai,  that  serve  for  the  Tutan,  when  hee  taketh  Paras,  Barges
his  voyage  by  other  rivers  that  joyne  with  this,  towards  mthfaire
Pachin,  where  the  King  maketh  his  abode.  Desirous
to  see  those  Parai  we  got  into  some  of  them,  where
we  found  some  chambers  set  foorth  with  gilded  Beds
very  richly,  other  furnished  with  tables  and  seates,  and
all  other  things  so  neate  and  in  perfection,  that  it  was
wonderfull.

587

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Quiacim-Shire,  as  farre  as  I  can  perceive,  lyeth  upon
the  South.  On  that  side  we  kept  at  our  first  entrie
thereinto,  travelling  not  farre  from  the  high  mountaines
we  saw  there.  Asking  what  people  dwelleth  beyond  those
mountaines,  it  was  told  me  that  they  bee  Theeves,  and
men  of  a  strange  language.  And  because  that  unto
sundry  places  neere  this  River,  the  mountaines  doe
approach,  whence  the  people  issuing  downe,  doe  many
times  great  harme,  this  order  is  taken  at  the  entrie  into
Quiacim-Shire.  To  guard  this  River  whereon  continually
goe  to  and  fro  Parai  great  and  small  fraught  with  Salt,
Fish  powdered  with  pepper,  and  other  necessaries  for  that
Countrey:  they  doe  lay  in  divers  places  certaine  Parai,
and  great  Barges  armed,  wherein  watch  and  ward  is  kept
day  and  night  in  both  sides  of  the  River,  for  the  safetie  of
the  passage,  and  securitie  of  such  Parai  as  doe  remayne
there,  though  the  travellers  never  goe  but  many  in  com-
pany. In  every  rode  there  bee  at  the  least  thirtie,  in
some  two  hundred  men,  as  the  passage  requireth.

[III.  i.  207.]  This  guard  is  kept  usually,  untill  you  come  to  the  Citie
Onchio,  where  continually  the  Tutan  of  this  Shire,  and  eke
of  Cantan,  maketh  his  abode.  From  that  Citie  upward,
where  the  river  waxeth  more  narrow,  and  the  passage
more  dangerous,  there  be  alwayes  armed  one  hundred  and
fiftie  Parai,  to  accompany  other  vessels  fraught  with
merchandise,  and  all  this  at  the  Kings  charges.  This
seemed  unto  me  one  of  the  strangest  things  I  did  see  in
this  Countrey.

Moores.  When  wee  lay  at  Fuquien,  we  did  see  certaine  Moores,

who  knew  so  little  of  their  sect,  that  they  could  say
nothing  else,  but  that  Mahomet  was  a  Moore,  my  father
was  a  Moore,  and  I  am  a  Moore,  with  some  other  words
of  their  Alcoran,  wherewithall,  in  abstinence  from  Swines
flesh,  they  live  untill  the  Devill  take  them  all.  This
when  I  saw,  and  being  sure,  that  in  many  Chinish  Cities
the  reliques  of  Mahomet  are  kept,  as  soone  as  wee  came
to  the  Citie  where  these  fellowes  bee,  I  informed  my  selfe
of  them,  and  learned  the  truth. These  Moores,  as  they

588

GALEOTTO PERERA

told  me,  in  times  past  came  in  great  Ships  fraught  with
merchandise  from  Pachin  ward,  to  a  Port  granted  unto
them  by  the  King,  as  hee  is  wont  to  all  them  that  trafficke
into  this  Countrey,  where  they  being  arrived  at  a  little
Towne  standing  in  the  havens  mouth,  in  time  converted
unto  their  Sect  the  greatest  Loutea  there.  When  that
Loutea  with  all  his  family  was  became  Moorish,  the  rest
began  likewise  to  doe  the  same.  In  this  part  of  China
the  people  bee  at  libertie,  every  one  to  worship  and  follow
what  him  liketh  best.  Wherefore  no  bodie  tooke  heed
thereto,  untill  such  time  as  the  Moores  perceiving  that
many  followed  them  in  superstition,  and  that  the  Loutea
favoured  them,  they  began  to  forbid  wholly  the  eating  of
Swines-flesh.  But  all  this  Countrey  men  and  women,
choosing  rather  to  forsake  Father  and  Mother,  then  to
leave  off  eating  of  Porke,  by  no  meanes  would  yeeld  to
that  proclamation.  For  besides  the  great  desire  they  all
have  to  eate  that  kind  of  meate,  many  of  them  doe  live
thereby :  and  therefore  the  people  complained  unto  the
Magistrates,  accusing  the  Moores  of  a  conspiracie  pre-
tended betwixt  them  and  the  Loutea,  against  their  King.
In  this  Countrey,  as  no  suspition,  no  not  one  trayterous
word  is  long  borne  withall :  so  was  the  King  speedily
advertised  thereof,  who  gave  commandement  out  of  hand
that  the  aforesaid  Loutea  should  bee  put  to  death,  and
with  him  the  Moores  of  most  importance :  the  other  to  be
layd  first  in  Prison,  and  afterward  to  bee  sent  abroad  into
certaine  Cities,  where  they  remayned  perpetuall  slaves
unto  the  King.  To  this  Citie  came  by  hap  men  and
women  threescore  and  odde,  who  at  this  day  are  brought
to  five  men  and  foure  women,  for  it  is  now  twentie  yeeres
agoe  this  happened.  Their  offspring  passeth  the  number
of  two  hundred,  and  they  in  this  Citie,  as  the  rest  in  other
Cities,  whither  they  were  sent,  have  their  Moscheas,  That  is  their
whereunto  they  all  resort  every  Friday  to  keepe  their  Temples.
Holiday.  But,  as  I  thinke,  that  will  no  longer  endure,
then  whiles  they  doe  live,  that  came  from  thence,  for  their
posteritie is so confused, that they have nothing  of  a

589

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Moore  in  them,  but  abstinence  from  S wines  -flesh,  and  yet
many  of  them  doe  eate  thereof  privily.  They  tell  me  that
their  native  Countrey  hath  name  Camarian,  a  firme  land,
wherein  bee  many  Kings,  and  the  Indish  Countrey  well
knowne  unto  them.  It  may  so  be :  for  as  soone  as  they
did  see  our  servants  (our  servants  were  Preuzaretes)  they
judged  them  to  bee  Indians  :  many  of  their  words  sounded
upon  the  Persicke  tongue,  but  none  of  us  could  under-
stand them.  I  asked  them,  whither  they  converted  any  of
the  Chinish  Nation  unto  their  Sect :  they  answered  me,
that  with  much  adoe,  they  converted  the  women  with
whom  they  doe  marrie,  yeelding  me  no  other  cause
thereof,  but  the  difficultie  they  finde  in  them  to  bee
brought  from  eating  Swines-flesh,  and  drinking  of  Wine.
ltseemeth \ have  learnecl  moreover, that the  Sea whereby these

*$, JL-.  JilL  Moores  that  came  to  China  were  wont  to  travell,  is  a  very
the  rwer  jrom  *  J

the  Caspian great gulfe, that falleth into this Countrey  out from
sea.  Tartaria  and  Persia, leaving  on the other side all the

Countrey  of  China,  and  land  of  the  Mogorites,  drawing
alwayes  toward  the  South  :  and  of  all  likelyhood  it  is  even
so,  because  that  these  Moores,  the  which  wee  have  seene,
bee  rather  browne  then  white,  whereby  they  shew  them-
selves to  come  from  some  warmer  Countrey  then  China  is,
neere  to  Pachin,  where  the  Rivers  are  frozen  in  the  winter
for  cold,  and  many  of  them  so  vehemently,  that  Carts  may
passe  over  them.
AIL  Avolm  Wee  did  see  in this  Citie many Tartars,  Mogorites,

Tartars.  Bremes, and Laoymes, both men and women. The

Tartars  are  men  very  white,  good  Horse-men,  and
Archers,  confining  with  China  on  that  side  where  Pachin
standeth,  separated  from  thence  by  great  Mountaines  that
Monte  Usons.  are  betwixt  these  Kingdomes.  Over  them  bee  certaine
wayes  to  passe,  and  for  both  sides,  Castles  continually  kept
with  Souldiers :  in  time  past,  the  Tartars  were  wont
alwayes  to  have  warres  with  the  Chineans,  but  these
fourescore  yeeres  past  they  were  quiet,  untill  the  second
yeere  of  our  Imprisonment.
Mogores.  The  Mogores  bee  in  like  manner  white,  and  Heathen,

59°

GALEOTTO PERERA

wee  are  advertised  that  of  one  side  they  border  upon  these
Tartars,  and  confine  with  the  Persicke  Tartares  on  the
other  side,  whereof  wee  saw  in  them  some  tokens,  as  their
manner  of  cloathes,  and  that  kinde  of  Hat  the  Saracens  doe
weare.  The  Moores  affirmed,  that  where  the  King  lyeth,
there  bee  many  Tartars  and  Mogorites,  that  brought  into
China  certaine  Blewes  of  great  value.

As  for  the  Bremes,  wee  have  seene  in  this  Citie  Chenchi  Bremes.
certaine  men  and  women,  amongst  whom,  there  was  one
that  came  not  long  since,  having  as  yet  her  hayre  tyed  up
after  the  Pegues  fashion  : this  woman,  and  other  moe  with  [IIL  *•  2o80
whom a blacke Moore damosell in our  company  had
conference, and  did  understand them  well  enough,  had
dwelt  in  Peghu. This  new  come  woman,  imagining  that
wee  meant  to  make  our  abode  in  that  Citie,  bid  us  to  bee
of  good  comfort,  for  that  her  Countrey  was  not  distant
from  thence  above  five  dayes  journey,  and  that  out  of  her
Countrey,  there  lay  a  high  way  for  us  home  into  our  owne.
Being  asked  the  way,  shee  answered  that  the  first  three
dayes  the  way  lyeth  over  certaine  great  mountaines  and
wildernesse,  afterward  people  to  bee  met  withall  againe.
Thence  two  dayes  journey  more  to  the  Bremes  Countrey.
Wherefore I doe conclude,  that  Chenchi is  one  of  the  Southward
confines of  this Kingdome, separated by  certaine huge  from  Chenchi
Mountaines,  as  it  hath  beene  already  sayd,  that  lye  out  t0  the  Sea-
towards  the  South. In  the  residue  of  these  mountaines
standeth the Province Sian, the Laoyns Countrey,  Avoim.
Cambaia,  Chinapa,  and  Cochinchina.

This  Citie,  chiefe  of  other  sixteene,  is  situated  in  a  Chenchi.
pleasant  Playne,  abounding  in  things  necessarie,  Sea-fish
Dnely  excepted,  for  it  standeth  farre  from  the  Sea :  of  fresh
Fish  so  much  store,  that  the  Market-places  are  never  emptie.
rhe  walls  of  this  Citie  are  very  strong  and  high  :  one  day
did  I  see  the  Louteas  thereof  goe  upon  the  walls,  to  take
:he  view  thereof,  borne  in  their  seates  I  spake  of  before,
iccompanied  with  a  troupe  of  Horse-men,  that  went  two
md  two  :  It  was  told  me  they  might  have  gone  three  and
hree. Wee  have  seene  moreover,  that  within  this  afore-

59i

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

said  Citie  the  King  hath  more  than  a  thousand  of  his
kindred  lodged  in  great  Palaces,  in  divers  parts  of  the
Citie  :  their  gates  bee  red,  and  the  entrie  into  their  houses,
that  they  may  be  knowne,  for  that  is  the  Kings  colour.
These  Gentlemen,  according  to  their  nearenesse  in  bloud
unto  the  King,  as  soone  as  they  bee  married,  receive  their
place  in  Honour:  this  place  neither  encreaseth  nor
diminisheth  in  any  respect,  as  long  as  the  King  liveth,  the
King  appointeth  them  their  Wives  and  Familie,  allowing
them  by  the  moneth  all  things  necessarie  abundantly,  as
hee  doth  to  his  Governours  of  Shires  and  Cities,  howbeit,
not  one  of  these  hath  as  long  as  hee  liveth,  any  charge  or
government  at  all.  They  give  themselves  to  eating  and
drinking,  and  bee  for  the  most  part  burley  men  of  bodie,
insomuch  that  espying  any  one  of  them,  whom  wee  had
not  seene  before,  wee  might  know  him  to  bee  the  Kings
Cousin.  They  bee  neverthelesse  very  pleasant,  courteous,
and  fayre  conditioned :  neither  did  wee  finde,  all  the  time
we  were  in  that  Citie,  so  much  honour  and  good  enter-
tainment any  where,  as  at  their  hands.  They  bid  us  to
their  houses,  to  eate  and  drinke,  and  when  they  found  us
not,  or  wee  were  not  willing  to  goe  with  them,  they  bid
our  servants,  and  slaves,  causing  them  to  sit  downe  with
the  first.  Notwithstanding  the  good  lodging  these
Gentlemen  have  so  commodious  that  they  want  nothing,
yet  are  they  in  this  bondage,  that  during  life  they  never
goe  abroad.  The  cause,  as  I  did  understand,  wherefore
the  King  so  useth  his  Cousins,  is  that  none  of  them  at  any
time  may  rebell  against  him :  and  thus  hee  shutteth  them
up  in  three  or  foure  other  Cities.  Most  of  them  can  play
on  the  Lute :  and  to  make  that  kinde  of  pastime  peculiar
unto  them  onely,  all  other  in  the  Cities  where  they  doe
live,  bee  forbidden  that  Instrument,  the  Curtizans  and
blinde  folke  onely  excepted,  who  bee  Musicians,  and  can
play.
No  Lords  but  This  King  furthermore,  for  the  greater  securitie  of  his
of  the  bloud  Realme,  and  the  avoyding  of  tumults,  letteth  not  one  in
royal/.  ali£  his  Countrey  to  bee  called  Lord,  except  hee  be  of  his

592

GALEOTTO PERERA

bloud.  Many  great  Estates  and  Governours  there  be,
that  during  their  office  are  lodged  Lord-like,  and  doe
beare  the  port  of  mightie  Princes :  but  they  bee  so  many
times  displaced,  and  other  placed  anew,  that  they  have  not
the  while  to  become  corrupt.  True  it  is,  that  during  their
Office  they  be  well  provided  for,  as  afterward,  also  lodged
at  the  Kings  charges,  and  in  pension  as  long  as  they  live,
payed  them  monethly  in  the  Cities  where  they  dwell,  by
certaine  officers  appointed  for  that  purpose.  The  King
then  is  a  Lord  onely,  not  one  besides  him  as  you  have
seene,  except  it  bee  such  as  be  of  his  bloud.  A  Nephew
likewise  of  the  King,  the  Kings  Sisters  sonne,  lyeth
continually  within  the  walls  of  the  Citie,  in  a  strong  Palace
built  Castle-wise,  even  as  his  others  Cousins  doe,
remayning  alwayes  within  doores,  served  by  Eunuches,
never  dealing  with  any  matters.  Their  festivall  dayes,
new  Moones,  and  full  Moones,  the  Magistrates  make
great  banquets,  and  so  doe  such  as  bee  of  the  Kings  bloud.
The  King  his  Nephew,  hath  name  Vanfuli,  his  Palace  is
walled  about,  the  wall  is  not  high,  but  foure  square,  and
in  circuit  nothing  inferiour  to  the  walls  of  Goa,  the  out-
side is  painted  red,  in  every  square  a  Gate,  and  over  each
gate  a  Tower,  made  of  timber  excellently  well  wrought :
before  the  principall  gate  of  the  foure,  that  openeth  into
the  high-street,  no  Loutea,  bee  he  never  so  great,  may
passe  on  horse-backe,  or  carried  in  his  seate.  Amidst  this
quadrangle,  standeth  the  Palace  where  that  Gentleman
lyeth,  doubtlesse,  worth  the  sight,  although  wee  came  not
in  to  see  it.  By  report  the  roofes  of  the  towers  and
house,  are  glased  greene,  the  greater  part  of  the  Quad-
rangle set  with  savage  Trees,  as  Oakes,  Chesnuts,
Cypresse,  Pine-apples,  Cedars,  and  other  such  like  that
wee  doe  want,  after  the  manner  of  a  Wood,  wherein  are
kept  Stagges,  Oxen,  and  other  beasts,  for  that  Lord  his

I  recreation  never  going  abroad,  as  I  have  said.

One  preheminence  this  Citie  hath  above  the  rest  where

I  wee  have  beene,  and  it  of  right  as  we  doe  thinke,  that

besides  the  multitude  of  Market-places,  wherein  all  things

XI  593  2P

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

[III.  i.  209.]  are  to bee sold,  through  every  streete continually  are
cryed all things necessarie,  as  Flesh  of  all  sorts,  fresh-
Fish,  Hearbes, Oyle,  Vineger,  Meale,  Rice,  In  summa,
all things so plentifully, that many houses need no
servants, everie thing being brought to their doores.
Most  part  of  the  Merchants  remayne  in  the  Suburbs,  for
that  the  Cities  are  shut  up  every  night,  as  I  have  sayd.
The Merchants therefore, the better to attend their
businesse,  doe  choose  rather  to  make  their  abode  without
Fishing  with in  the Suburbs, then within the Citie. I have seene
Cormorants, \n tj1js River a pretie kinde of Fishing, not to bee
Jrjs  * thaT omitted  in  my  opinion,  and  therefore  will  I  set  it  downe.
they  swallow The  King  hath  in  many  rivers  good  store  of  Barges  full  of
not  their  prey.  Sea-crowes,  that  breed,  are  fed,  and  doe  dye  therein,  in
One  hath certaine  Cages,  allowed  monethly  a  certaine  provision  of
^  Z  mdon  " ^ce- These  Barges  the  King  bestoweth  upon  his  greatest
Magistrates,  giving  to  some  two,  to  some  three  of  them,
as hee thinketh good, to Fish therewithall after this
manner. At  the  houre  appointed  to  Fish,  all  the  Barges
are brought together in a circle, where the River is
shallow,  and  the  Crowes  tyed  together  under  the  wings,
are  let  leape  downe  into  the  water,  some under,  some
above, worth  the  looking  upon : each  one  as  hee  hath
filled  his  bagge,  goeth  to  his  owne  Barge  and  emptieth
it,  which  done,  hee  returneth  to  fish  againe. Thus  having
taken  good  store  of  Fish,  they  set  the  Crowes  at  libertie,
and doe suffer them to fish for their owne  pleasure.
There  were  in that  Citie,  where  I  was, twentie Barges
at the least, of these aforesaid Crowes. I
went  almost  every day  to  see  them,
yet  could  I  never  bee  throughly
satisfied  to  see  so  strange
a kinde of
Fishing.

594

Peregrinations,

Voyages,  Discoveries,  of  China, Tartaria,  Russia,  and

other  the  North  and  East  Parts  of  the  World,

by  English-men,  and  others.

THE SECOND BOOKE.

Chap.  I.

The  beginning  of  English  Discoveries  towards
the  North,  and  North-east,  by  Sir  Hugh
Willoughby,  Richard  Chancellor,  and  others;
of  the  Muscovie  Trade,  as  also  Voyages  by
Russia,  over  the  Caspian  Sea,  and  thorow
divers  Regions  of  Tartaria.

§■  i.

The  first  Voyage  for  Discoverie  with  three  ships,
set  forth  under  the  charge  of  Sir  Hugh
Willoughby  Knight,  in  which  he  died ;  and
Moscovia  was  discovered  by  Captaine  Chancellor.

N  the  yeere  of  our  Lord  1553.  the  seventh  of  the
Raigne  of  King  Edward  the  sixth  of  famous
memorie,  Sebastian  Cabota  was  Governour  of  the  Seb.  Cabota.

Mysterie  and  Companie  of  the  Merchants  Adventurers
for  the  discoverie  of  Regions,  Dominions,  Hands,  and
places unknowne. Certaine instructions were agreed

595

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1553-
See  the  on by him and the said Companie, subscribed by

particulars  in  Master  Cabota,  the  ninth  of  May  ;  the  Kings  Letters
/  a$ut  '  Ti  a^so  Procure(i  unto  remote  Princes  in  divers  languages,
Foyages,Tom.  and  a  fleet  of  three  Ships  set  forth  at  that  time
i.  under  the  command of  Sir Hugh  Willoughby Knight,

Captaine generall,  which went in the Bona Esperanza
Admirall,  a  ship  of  an  hundred  and  twenty  tunnes,  having
with  her  a  Pinnace  and  a  Boat :  William  GefFerson  was
Master  of  the  said  ship. The  Edward  Bonaventure  was
of  an hundred  and  sixty tunnes, and had with her  a
Pinnace  and  a  Boat,  in  which went  Richard  Chancellor,
Captaine and Pilot Major of the fleet, and Stephen
Burrough Master. The Bona Confidentia of ninety
tunnes, had  with her  a  Pinnace  and a  Boat, of  which
[III.  ii.  212.]  Cornelius  Durfoorth  was Master. The Captaines and
Masters  were  sworne  to  doe  their  true  intent,  and  the
The  first ships  provided  of  necessaries  set  forth  on the tenth  of
royage.  May,  1 553.  for  the  discoverie  of  Cathay,  and  divers  other

Regions,  Dominions,  Hands,  and  places  unknowne. The
fourteenth  of  July  they  discovered  Land  Eastward,  and
went  on  shoare  with  their  Pinnace,  and  found  thirty  little
houses,  the  Inhabitants  fled. The  Land  was  full  of  little
*This  dis- Hands,  called  as  they  after  learned  JEgeland  *  and  Halge-
course  was land,  in  66.  degrees. The  distance  betweene  Orfordnesse
^rL™**™ and  ^geland  two  hundred  and  fifty  leagues. Then  we
Speranxa sayled  from  thence  twelve  leagues  North-west,  and  found
which  many  other  Hands,  and  there  came  to  anchor  the  nine-

wlntered  at  teenth  day,  and  manned  our  Pinnace,  and  went  on  shoare
?/Zma'/I  th  to  tne  Hands,  and  found  people  mowing  and  making
Companie  °f  Hay,  which  came  to  the  shoare  and  welcommed  us.
were  frozen  to  In  which  place  were  an  innumerable  sort  of  Hands,  which
death.  were  called  the  lies  of  Rost,  being  under  the  Dominion  of

the  King  of  Denmarke :  which  place  was  in  latitude
66.  degrees  and  30.  minutes.  The  winde  being  contrarie,
we  remayned  there  three  dayes,  and  there  was  an  innumer-
able sort  of  Fowles  of  divers  kindes,  of  which  we  tooke
very  many.

The  two  and  twentieth  day,  the  winde  comming  faire,

596

Rost  Hands.

SIR HUGH WILLOUGHBY  a.d.

1553-
wee departed from Rost, sayling North North-east,
keeping  the  Sea  untill  the  seven  and  twentieth  day,  and
then  we  drew  neere  unto  the  Land,  which  was  still  East
off  us  :  then  went  forth  our  Pinnace  to  seeke  harbour,
and  found  many  good  harbours,  of  the  which  we  entred
into  one  with  our  ships,  which  was  called  Stanfew,  and  the  Stanfew
Land  being  Hands,  were  called,  Lewfoot,  or  Lofoot,  which  harbour.
were  plentifully  inhabited,  and  very  gentle  people,  being °^00tm
also  under  the  King  of  Denmarke  : but  wee  could  not
learne  how  farre  it  was  from  the  mayne  Land : and  we
remayned  there  untill  the  thirtieth  day,  being  in  latitude
68. degrees, and from the foresaid  Rost  about thirtie
leagues  North  North-east.

The  thirtieth  day  of  July  about  noone,  wee  weighed
our  anchors,  and  went  into  the  Seas,  and  sayled  along
these  Hands  North  North-east,  keeping  the  Land  still
in  sight  untill  the  second  of  August :  then  hailing  in  August.
close  aboord  the  Land,  to  the  intent  to  know  what  Land
it  was,  there  came  a  Skiffe  of  the  Hand  aboord  of  us,
of  whom  wee  asked  many  questions,  who  shewed  unto
us,  that  the  Hand  was  called  Seynam,  which  is  the  latitude  Seynaminyo.
of  seventy  degrees,  and  from  Stanfew  thirty  leagues,  degrees.
being  also  under  the  King  of  Denmark,  &  that  there  was
no  merchandise  there,  but  only  dried  fish,  and  Trane-oile.
Then  we  being  purposed  to  goe  unto  Finmarke,  enquired
of  him,  if  we  might  have  a  Pilot  to  bring  us  to  Finmarke,
and  he  said,  that  if  we  could  beare  in,  we  should  have  a  good
Harbour,  and  on  the  next  day  a  Pilot  to  bring  us  to  Fin-
marke, unto  the  Ward-house,  which  is  the  strongest  Hold
in  Finmark,  &  most  resorted  to  by  report.  But  when  he
would  have  entred  into  an  Harbour,  the  Land  being
very  high  on  every  side,  there  came  such  flawes  of  wind
and  terrible  whirle-winds,  that  we  were  not  able  to  beare
in,  but  by  violence  were  constrained  to  take  the  sea
againe,  our  Pinnace  being  unshipt :  we  sailed  North  and
by  East,  the  wind  encreasing  so  sore,  that  we  were  not
able  to  beare  any  sayle,  but  tooke  them  in,  and  lay
adrift,  to  the  end  to  let  the  storme  over-passe. And  that

597

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1553-

night  by  violence  of  winde,  and  thicknesse  of  mists,  we

were  not  able  to  keepe  together  within  sight,  and  then

The  Edward about midnight wee lost our Pinnace, which was a

lost,  or  rat  er  discomfort  unto us. As  soone  as it  was  day,  and  the

these  two  lost; r  t . t ,  i  t 1

and  the  *°gge over-past,  we  looked about,  and  at  the  last  wee

Edward  found  descried  one  of  our  ships  to  lee-ward  off  us :  then  wee
and  entredthe  spred  an  hullocke  of  our  fore-sayle,  and  bare  roome  with
Bay  of  Saint  j^  wj1jc|1  was  the  Confidence,  but  the  Edward  we  could
not  see.  Then  the  flaw  something  abating,  wee  and  the
Confidence  hoysed  up  our  sayles  the  fourth  day,  sayling
North-east  and  by  North,  to  the  end  to  fall  with  the
Ward-house,  as  we  did  consult  to  doe  before,  in  case
we  should  part  companie.  Thus  running  North-east  and
by  North,  and  North-east  fifty  leagues,  then  wee  sounded,
and  had  one  hundred  and  sixty  fathoms,  whereby  we
thought  to  be  farre  from  Land,  and  perceived  that  the
Land  lay  not  as  the  Globe  made  mention.  Wherefore
we  changed  our  course  the  sixth  day,  and  sayled  South-
east and  by  South,  eight  and  forty  leagues,  thinking
thereby  to  finde  the  Ward-house.

The  eighth  day  much  winde  rising  at  the  West  North-
west, we  not  knowing  how  the  coast  lay,  strooke  our
sayles,  and  lay  adrift,  where  sounded  and  found  one
hundred  and  sixty  fathoms  as  before.  The  ninth  day,
the  winde  bearing  to  the  South  South-east,  we  sayled
North-east  five  and  twenty  leagues.  The  tenth  day  we
sounded,  and  could  get  no  ground,  neither  yet  could  see
any  Land,  whereat  we  wondered:  then  the  winde  com-
ming  at  the  North-east,  we  ran  South-east  about  eight  and
forty  leagues.  The  eleventh  day  the  winde  being  at
South,  wee  sounded  and  found  forty  fathoms,  and  faire
sand.  The  twelfth  day,  the  winde  being  at  South  and  by
East,  we  lay  with  our  sayle  East,  and  East  and  by  North
thirty  leagues.

The  fourteenth  day  early  in  the  morning  wee  descried
Land,  which  Land  wee  bare  withall,  hoysing  out  our
Boat  to  discover  what  land  it  might  be :  but  the  Boat
could  not  come  to  Land,  the  water  was  so  shallow,  where

598

SIR HUGH WILLOUGHBY  ad.

1553-
was  very  much  Ice  also,  but  there  was  no  similitude  of
habitation,  and  this  Land  lieth  from  Seynam  East  and  by  Willoughby
North,  one  hundred  and  sixty  leagues,  being  in  latitude  hu  Lan^  m
72. degrees. Then we plyed to the Northward, the  7I' e&eeSm
fifteenth,  sixteenth,  and  seventeenth  dayes.

The  eighteenth  day,  the  winde  comming  at  the  North-
east, and  the  Confidence  being  troubled  with  bilge  water,
and  stocked,  wee  thought  it  good  to  seeke  harbour  for
her  redresse  :  then  wee  bare  roome  the  eighteenth  day
South  South-east,  about  seventy  leagues.  The  one  and  [IH.ii.  213.]
twentieth  day  wee  sounded,  and  found  ten  fathoms,  after
that  wee  sounded  againe,  and  found  but  seven  fathoms,  so
shallower  and  shallower  water,  and  yet  could  see  no  Land,
whereat  we  marvelled  greatly  :  to  avoide  this  danger,  we  bare
roomer  into  the  Sea,  all  that  night  North-west  and  by  West.

The  next  day  we  sounded,  and  had  twenty  fathoms,
then  shaped  our  course,  and  ranne  West  South-west  untill
the  three  and  twentieth  day :  then  we  descried  lowe  Land,
unto  which  wee  bare  as  nigh  as  we  could,  and  it  appeared
unto  us  unhabitable.  Then  we  plyed  Westward  along
by  that  Land,  which  lieth  West  South-west,  and  East
North-east,  and  much  winde  blowing  at  the  West,  we
haled  into  the  Sea  North  and  by  East  thirtie  leagues.
Then  the  winde  comming  about  at  the  North-east,  wee
sayled  West  North-west  :  after  that,  the  winde  bearing  to
the  North-west,  wee  lay  with  our  sayles  West  South-west,
about  fourteene  leagues,  and  then  descried  Land,  and
bare  in  with  it,  being  the  eight  and  twentieth  day,  finding
shallow  water,  and  bare  in  till  we  came  to  three  fathom,
then  perceiving  it  to  be  shallow  water,  and  also  seeing  drie
sands,  we  haled  out  againe  North-east  along  that  Land,
untill  we  came  to  the  point  thereof.  That  Land  turning
to  the  Westward,  we  ranne  along  sixteene  leagues  North-
west :  then  comming  into  a  faire  Bay,  we  went  on  Land
with  our  Boat,  which  place  was  uninhabited,  but  yet  it
appeared  unto  us  that  the  people  had  beene  there,  by
crosses,  and  other  signes  :  from  thence  we  went  all  along
the  coast  Westward.

599

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1553-

September.  The  fourth  day  of  September  we  lost  sight  of  Land,  by-

reason  of  contrarie  windes,  and  the  eighth  day  we  descried
Land  againe.  Within  two  dayes  after  we  lost  the  sight  of
it :  then  running  West  and  by  South  about  thirtie  leagues,
we  gat  the  sight  of  Land  againe,  and  bare  in  with  it  untill
night  :  then  perceiving  it  to  bee  a  lee  shoare,  we  gat  us
into  the  Sea,  to  the  end  to  have  Sea  roome.  The  twelfth
of  September  wee  haled  to  shoare-ward  againe,  having
then  indifferent  winde  and  weather  ;  then  being  neere
unto  the  shoare,  and  the  tide  almost  spent,  wee  came  to
an  anchor  in  thirtie  fathoms  water.  The  thirteenth  day
we  came  along  the  coast,  which  lay  North-west  and  by
West,  and  South-east  and  by  East.  The  fourteenth  day
we  came  to  an  anchor  within  two  leagues  off  the  shoare,
having  sixtie  fathoms.  There  wee  went  ashoare  with  our
Boat,  and  found  two  or  three  good  Harbours,  the  Land
being  rocky,  and  high,  but  as  for  people  could  we  see
none.  The  fifteenth  day  we  ran  still  along  the  coast  untill
the  seventeenth  day  :  then  the  winde  being  contrarie  unto
us,  we  thought  it  best  to  returne  unto  the  Harbour  which
we  had  found  before,  and  so  we  bare  roomer  with  the
same,  howbeit  wee  could  not  accomplish  our  desire  that
day.  The  next  day  being  the  eighteenth,  we  entred  into
the  Haven,  and  there  came  to  an  anchor  at  six  fathoms.

In  this  Haven  This  Haven  runneth  into  the  Mayne,  about  two  leagues,

they  died.  anj  js  -m  b^t-h  halfe  a  league,  wherein  were  very  many
Seale-fishes,  and  other  great  fishes,  and  upon  the  Mayne
wee  saw  Beares,  great  Deere,  Foxes,  and  divers  strange

*Or,  Ellons.  beasts,  as  *  Guloines,  and  such  other  which  were  to  us
unknowne,  and  also  wonderfull.  Thus  remayning  in  this
Haven  the  space  of  a  weeke,  seeing  the  yeere  farre  spent,
and  also  very  evill  weather,  as  Frost,  Snow,  and  Hayle,
as  though  it  had  beene  the  deepe  of  Winter,  wee  thought
best  to  winter  there.  Wherefore  we  sent  out  three  men
South  South-west,  to  search  if  they  could  finde  people,
who  went  three  dayes  journey,  but  could  finde  none  :
after  that,  we  sent  other  three  Westward  foure  dayes
journey,  which  also  returned  without  finding  any  people.

600

SIR  HUGH WILLOUGHBY  a.d.

1553-
Then  sent  we  three  men  South-east  three  dayes  journey,
who  in  like  sort  returned  without  finding  of  people,  or
any  similitude  of  habitation.

The River  or  Haven  wherein  Sir  Hugh  Willoughby  Heere  endeth
with the  companie  of  his  two  ships  perished  for  cold,  is  Sir  Hugh
called Arzina in Lapland, neere unto Kegor. But it  p^ugUy
appeareth by a Will found in a ship that Sir  Hugh written
Willoughby, and most  of  the companie  were alive in  w\th  his  owne
January, 1554.  hand,

A  Letter  of  Richard  Chancellor,  written  to
his  Uncle  Master  Christopher  Frothingam,
touching  his  discoverie  of  Moscovia.

FOrasmuch  as  it  is  meet  and  necessarie  for  all  those
that  minde  to  take  in  hand  the  travell  into  strange
Countries,  to  endeavour  themselves  not  onely  to  under-
stand the  orders,  commodities,  and  fruitfulnesse  thereof,
but  also  to  apply  them  to  the  setting  forth  of  the  same,
whereby  it  may  incourage  others  to  the  like  travell  :
therefore  have  I  now  thought  good  to  make  a  briefe
rehearsall  of  the  orders  of  this  my  travell  in  Russia,  and
Muscovia,  and  other  Countries  thereunto  adjoyning ;
because  it  was  my  chance  to  fall  with  the  North  parts  of
Russia,  before  I  came  towards  Moscovia,  I  will  partly
declare  my  knowledge  therein.  Russia  is  very  plentiful
both  of  Land  and  People,  and  also  wealthie  for  such
commodities  as  they  have.  They  be  very  great  fishers
for  Salmons  and  small  Cods  :  they  have  much  Oyle  which
wee  call  Trane  Oyle,  the  most  whereof  is  made  by  a  River
called  Duina.  They  make  it  in  other  places,  but  not  so  Duma.
much  as  there.  They  have  also  a  great  trade  in  seething
of  salt  water.  To  the  North  part  of  that  Countrey  are
the  places  where  they  have  their  Furres,  as  Sables,
Marterns,  greesse  Bevers,  Foxes  white,  blacke,  and  red,
Minkes,  Ermines,  Miniver,  and  Harts.  There  are  also  a  [III.  ii.  214.]
fishes  teeth,  which  fish  is  called  a  Morsse.  The  takers
thereof  dwell in a place called Postesora, which bring

601

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1553-

Note.  them  upon  Harts  to  Lampas  to  sell,  and  from  Lampas
carrie  them  to  a  place  called  Colmogro,  where  the  high
Market  is  holden  on  Saint  Nicolas  day.  To  the  West  of
Colmogro  there  is  a  place  called  Gratanove,  in  our
language  Novogorode,  where  much  fine  Flaxe  and  Hempe
groweth,  and  also  much  Waxe  and  Honie.  The  Dutch
Merchants  have  a  Staple-house  there.  There  is  also
great  store  of  Hides,  and  at  a  place  called  Plesco  :  and
thereabout  is  great  store  of  Flaxe,  Hempe,  Waxe,  Honie ;
and  that  Towne  is  from  Colmogro  one  hundred  and
twentie  miles.

Vologda.  There is a place called Vologda ; the commodities

whereof  are  Tallow,  Waxe,  and  Flaxe  :  but  not  so  great
plentie  as  is  in  Gratanove.  From  Vologda  to  Colmogro
there  runneth  a  River  called  Duina,  and  from  thence  it
falleth  into  the  Sea.  Colmogro  serveth  Gratanove,
Vologda,  and  the  Mosco,  with  all  the  Countrey  there-
about with Salt and salt Fish. From Vologda to

Jereslave.  Jereslave  is  two  hundred  miles  :  which  Towne  is  very-
great.  The  commodities  thereof  are  Hides,  and  Tallow,
and  Corne  in  great  plentie,  and  some  Waxe,  but  not  so
plentifull  as  in  other  places.

The  Mosco  is  from  Jeraslave  two  hundred  miles.  The
Countrey  betwixt  them  is  very  well  replenished  with  small
Villages,  which  are  so  well  filled  with  people,  that  it  is
wonder  to  see  them  :  the  ground  is  well  stored  with
Corne,  which  they  carrie  to  the  Citie  of  Mosco  in  such
abundance  that  it  is  wonder  to  see  it.  You  shall  meet  in
a  morning  seven  or  eight  hundred  Sleds  comming  or
going  thither,  that  carrie  Corne,  and  some  carrie  fish.
You  shall  have  some  that  carrie  Corne  to  the  Mosco,  and
some  that  fetch  Corne  from  thence,  that  at  the  least  dwell
a  thousand  miles  off:  and  all  their  carriage  is  on  Sleds.
Those  which  come  so  farre  dwell  in  the  North  parts  of
the  Dukes  Dominions,  where  the  cold  will  suffer  no
Corne  to  grow,  it  is  so  extreme.  They  bring  thither
Fishes,  Furres,  and  Beasts  skinnes.  In  those  parts  they
have  but  small  store  of  Cattell.

602

RICHARD CHANCELLOR  ad.

1553-
The  Mosco  it  selfe  is  great  :  I  take  the  whole  Towne  Mosco.
to  be  greater  then  London  with  the  Suburbes  :  but  it  is
very  rude,  and  standeth  without  all  order.  Their  houses
are  all  of  timber  very  dangerous  for  fire.  There  is  a
faire  Castle,  the  walls  whereof  are  of  bricke,  and  very
high  :  they  say  they  are  eighteene  foot  thicke,  but  I  doe
not  beleeve  it,  it  doth  not  so  seeme ;  notwithstanding,  1
doe  not  certainly  know  it  :  for  no  stranger  may  come  to
view  it.  The  one  side  is  ditched,  and  on  the  other  side
runneth  a  River,  called  Moscua,  which  runneth  into
Tartarie,  and  so  into  the  Sea,  called  Mare  Caspium  :  and
on  the  North  side  there  is  a  base  Towne,  the  which  hath
also  a  Bricke  wall  about  it,  and  so  it  joyneth  with  the
Castle  wall.  The  Emperour  lieth  in  the  Castle,  wherein  The  Castle.
are  nine  faire  Churches,  and  therein  are  Religious  men.
Also  there  is  a  Metropolitan  with  divers  Bishops,  I  will
not  stand  in  description  of  their  buildings,  nor  of  the
strength  thereof,  because  we  have  better  in  all  points  in
England.  They  be  well  furnished  with  Ordnance  of  all
sorts.

The  Emperours  or  Dukes  house  neither  in  building  nor
in  the  outward  shew,  nor  yet  within  the  house  is  so
sumptuous  as  I  have  seene.  It  is  very  lowe  built  in  eight
square,  much  like  the  old  building  of  England,  with  small
windowes,  and  so  in  other  points.

Now  to  declare  my  comming  before  his  Majestie  :
After  I  had  remayned  twelve  dayes,  the  Secretarie  which
hath  the  hearing  of  strangers  did  send  for  mee,  advertising
me  that  the  Dukes  pleasure  was  to  have  me  to  come
before  his  Majestie,  with  the  King  my  Masters  Letters  :
whereof  I  was  right  glad,  and  so  I  gave  mine  attendance.
And  when  the  Duke  was  in  his  place  appointed,  the  Hee  commeth
Interpreter  came  for  mee  into  the  outer  Chamber,  where  before  the
sate  one  hundred  or  moe  Gentlemen,  all  in  cloth  of  Gold
very  sumptuous,  and  from  thence  I  came  into  the
Counsell-chamber,  where  sate  the  Duke  himselfe,  with
his  Nobles,  which  were  a  faire  companie  :  they  sate  round
about  the  Chamber  on  high,  yet  so  that  he  himselfe  sate

603

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1553-

much  higher  than  any  of  his  Nobles,  in  a  Chaire  gilt,  and
in  a  long  garment  of  beaten  Gold,  with  an  Imperiall
Crowne  upon  his  head,  and  a  Staffe  of  Crystall  and  Gold
in  his  right  hand,  and  his  other  hand  halfe  leaning  on  his
Chaire.  The  Chancellour  stood  up  with  the  Secretarie
before  the  Duke.  After  my  dutie  done,  and  my  Letter
delivered,  he  bade  me  welcome,  and  enquired  of  mee  the
health  of  the  King  my  Master,  and  I  answered  that  he
was  in  good  health  at  my  departure  from  his  Court,  and
that  my  trust  was,  that  he  was  now  in  the  same.  Upon
the  which  he  bade  me  to  dinner.  The  Chancellor  pre-
sented my  Present  unto  his  Grace  bare-headed  (for  before
they  were  all  covered)  and  when  his  Grace  had  received
my  Letter,  I  was  required  to  depart :  for  I  had  charge  not
to  speake  to  the  Duke,  but  when  he  spake  to  mee.  So  1
departed  unto  the  Secretaries  Chamber,  where  I  remayned
two  houres,  and  then  I  was  sent  for  againe  unto  another
Palace,  which  is  called,  The  golden  Palace,  but  I  saw  no
cause  why  it  should  be  so  called  ;  for  I  have  seene  many
fairer  then  it  in  all  points  :  and  so  I  came  into  the  Hall,
which  was  small  and  not  great  as  is  the  Kings  Majesties
of  England,  and  the  Table  was  covered  with  a  Table-
cloth ;  and  the  Marshall  sate  at  the  end  of  the  Table  with
a  little  white  rod  in  his  hand,  which  Boord  was  full  of
vessell  of  Gold  :  and  on  the  other  side  of  the  Hall  did
stand  a  faire  Cupboord  of  Plate.
Dineth  with  From  thence  I  came  into  the  dining  Chamber,  where
the  Duke.  the  Duke  himselfe  sate  at  his  Table  without  Cloth  of
estate,  in  a  Gowne  of  Silver,  with  a  Crowne  Imperiall
upon  his  head,  he  sate  in  a  Chaire  somewhat  high  :  there
sate  none  neere  him  by  a  great  way.  There  were  long
tables  set  round  about  the  chamber,  which  were  full  set
with  such  as  the  Duke  had  at  dinner  :  they  were  all  in
white.  Also  the  places  where  the  tables  stood  were
higher  by  two  steps  then  the  rest  of  the  house.  In  the
middest  of  the  chamber  stood  a  Table  or  Cupboord  to
set  Plate  on  ;  which  stood  full  of  Cups  of  Gold  :  and
[III.  ii.  215.]  amongst  all  the  rest  there  stood  foure  marvellous  great

604

RICHARD CHANCELLOR  ad.

1553-
Pots  or  Crudences  as  they  call  them,  of  Gold  and  Silver :
I  thinke  they  were  a  good  yard  and  a  halfe  high.  By  the
Cupboard  stood  two  Gentlemen  with  Napkins  on  their
shoulders,  and  in  their  hands  each  of  them  had  a  Cup
of  Gold  set  with  Pearles  and  Precious  Stones,  which  were  Golden  Vessel.
the  Dukes  owne  drinking  Cups :  when  hee  was  disposed,
hee  drunke  them  off  at  a  draught.  And  for  his  service  at
meate  it  came  in  without  order,  yet  it  was  very  rich
service :  for  all  were  served  in  Gold  ;  not  onely  he
himselfe,  but  also  all  the  rest  of  us,  and  it  was  very
massie :  the  Cups  also  were  of  Gold  and  very  massie.
The  number  that  dined  there  that  day  was  two  hundred
persons,  and  all  were  served  in  Golden  Vessell.  The
Gentlemen  that  wayted  were  all  in  Cloth  of  Gold,  and
they  served  him  with  their  Caps  on  their  heads.  Before
the  service  came  in,  the  Duke  sent  to  every  man  a  great  Shiver  of
shiver  of  Bread,  and  the  Bearer  called  the  party  so  sent  Bread-
to  by  his  name  aloude,  and  said,  John  Basilivich  Emperour
of  Russia,  and  great  Duke  of  Moscovia,  doth  reward  thee
with  Bread :  then  must  all  men  stand  up,  and  doe  at  all
times  when  those  words  are  spoken.  And  then  last  of
all  hee  giveth  the  Marshall  Bread,  whereof  he  eateth
before  the  Dukes  Grace,  and  so  doth  reverence  and
departeth.  Then  commeth  the  Dukes  service  of  the
Swans  all  in  pieces,  and  every  one  in  a  severall  dish :
the  which  the  Duke  sendeth  as  he  did  the  Bread,  and
the  Bearer  saith  the  same  words  as  hee  said  before.  And
as  I  said  before,  the  service  of  his  meate  is  in  no  order,
but  commeth  in  Dish  by  Dish  :  and  then  after  that  the
Duke  sendeth  drinke,  with  the  like  saying  as  before  is
told.  Also  before  Dinner  he  changed  his  Crowne,  and  Crowne
in  Dinner  time  two  Crownes ;  so  that  I  saw  three  severall  changed.
Crownes  upon  his  head  in  one  day.  And  thus  when  his
service  was  all  come  in,  hee  gave  to  every  one  of  his
Gentleman  Wayters  meate  with  his  owne  hand,  and  so
likewise  drinke.  His  intent  thereby  is,  as  I  have  heard,
that  every  man  shall  know  perfectly  his  servants.  Thus
when  Dinner  is  done  hee  calleth  his  Nobles  before  him

605

A.D.

1553-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

name  by  name,  that  it  is  wonder  to  heare  how  he  could
name  them,  having  so  many  as  hee  hath.  Thus  when
Dinner  was  done  1  departed  to  my  Lodging,  which  was
an  houre  within  night.

I  will  leave  this,  and  speake  no  more  of  him  nor
his  Houshold :  but  I  will  somewhat  declare  of  his  Land
and  people,  with  their  nature  and  power  in  the  Warres.
Dukes  forces.  This  Duke  is  Lord  and  Emperour  of  many  Countries,
and  his  power  is  marvellous  great.  For  hee  is  able  to
bring  into  the  field  two  or  three  hundred  thousand  men :
he  never  goeth  into  the  field  himselfe  with  under
two  hundred  thousand  men :  And  when  hee  goeth
himselfe,  hee  furnisheth  his  Borders  all  with  men  of
Warre,  which  are  no  small  number.  He  leaveth  on
the  Borders  of  Liefland  fortie  thousand  men,  and
upon  the  borders  of  Letto,  sixtie  thousand  men,  and
toward  the  Nagayan  Tarters  sixtie  thousand,  which  is
wonder  to  heare  of:  yet  doth  hee  never  take  to  his
Warres  neither  Husbandman  nor  Merchant.  All  his  men
are  Horse-men :  hee  useth  no  Foot-men,  but  such  as  goe
with  the  Ordnance  and  Labourers,  which  are  thirtie
thousand.  The  Horse-men  are  all  Archers,  with  such
Bowes  as  the  Turkes  have,  and  they  ride  short  as  doe
Armour  and  the  Turkes.  Their  Armour  is  a  Coate  of  Plate,  with  a
rich  attyre.  skull  on  their  heads.  Some  of  their  Coates  are  covered
with  Velvet  or  Cloth  of  Gold :  their  desire  is  to  be
sumptuous  in  the  field,  and  especially  the  Nobles  and
Gentlemen :  as  I  have  heard  their  trimming  is  very  costly,
and  partly  I  have  seene  it,  or  else  I  would  scarcely  have
beleeved  it :  but  the  Duke  himselfe  is  richly  attyred  above
all  measure :  his  Pavilion  is  covered  eyther  with  Cloth
of  Gold  or  Silver,  and  so  set  with  stones  that  it  is
wonderfull  to  see  it.  I  have  seene  the  Kings  Majesties  of
England  and  the  French  Kings  Pavilions,  which  are  faire,
yet  not  like  unto  his.  And  when  they  be  sent  into  farre
or  strange  Countries,  or  that  strangers  come  to  them,
they  be  very  gorgeous.  Else  the  Duke  himselfe  goeth
but meanly  in apparell : and when hee goeth betwixt

606

RICHARD CHANCELLOR  a.d.

*553-

one  place  and  another  hee  is  but  reasonably  apparelled
over  other  times.  In  the  while  that  I  was  in  Mosco,
the  Duke  sent  two  Ambassadours  to  the  King  of  Poleland,
which  had  at  the  lest  five  hundred  Horses ;  their  sumptu-
ousnesse  was  above  measure,  not  onely  in  themselves,
but  also  in  their  Horses,  as  Velvet,  Cloth  of  Gold,  and
Cloth  of  Silver  set  with  Pearles,  and  not  scant.  What
shall  I  further  say  ?  I  never  heard  of  nor  saw  men  so  Extremes.
sumptuous :  but  it  is  no  daily  guize,  for  when  they  have
not  occasion,  as  I  said  before,  all  their  doing  is  but  meane.
And  now  to  the  effect  of  their  Warres :  They  are  men
without  all  order  in  the  field.  For  they  run  hurling  Undisciplined
on  heaps,  and  for  the  most  part  they  never  give  battayle  Sou/diers.
to  their  Enemies :  but  that  which  they  do,  they  do  it
all  by  stealth.  But  I  beleeve  they  be  such  men  for  hard
living  as  are  not  under  the  Sunne :  for  no  cold  will  hurt  Hardinesse.
them.  Yea,  and  though  they  lye  in  the  field  two  moneths,
at  such  time  as  it  shall  freeze  more  then  a  yard  thicke,  the
common  Souldier  hath  neither  Tent  nor  any  thing  else
over  his  head :  the  most  defence  they  have  against  the
weather  is  a  Felt,  which  is  set  against  the  wind  and
weather,  and  when  Snow  commeth  he  doth  cast  it  off,  and
maketh  him  a  fire,  and  layeth  him  downe  thereby.  Thus
doe  the  most  of  all  his  men,  except  they  be  Gentlemen
which  have  other  provision  of  their  owne.  Their  lying
in  the  field  is  not  so  strange  as  is  their  hardnesse:  for
every  man  must  carrie  and  make  provision  for  himselfe,
and  his  Horse  for  a  moneth  or  two,  which  is  very  wonder-
full.  For  hee  himselfe  shall  live  upon  water  and  Oate-
meale  mingled  together  cold,  and  drinke  water  thereto  :
his  Horse  shall  eate  greene  wood,  and  such  like  baggage,
and  shall  stand  open  in  the  cold  field  without  covert,  and
yet  will  hee  labour  and  serve  him  right  well.  I  pray  you
amongst  all  our  boasting  Warriours  how  many  should  we
find  to  endure  the  field  with  them  but  one  moneth.  I
know  no  such  Region  about  us  that  beareth  that  name  for
nan  and  beast.  Now  what  might  bee  made  of  these
Tien  if  they  were  trayned  and  broken  to  order  and  know-

607

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGR1MES

1553-

ledge  of  Civill  Warres :  if  this  Prince  had  within  his
Countries  such  men  as  could  make  them  to  understand
the  things  aforesaid,  I  doe  beleeve  that  two  of  the  best
or  greatest  Princes  in  Christendome  were  not  well  able
to match with him, considering the  greatnesse  of  his

[III.  ii.  2 1 6.]  power  and  the  hardnesse  of  his  people,  and  straight  living
both  of  people  and  Horse,  and  the  small  charges  which  his
Wars  stand  him  in;  for  he  giveth  no  wages,  except  to
strangers.  They  have  a  yearely  stipend  and  not  much.
As  for  his  owne  Countreymen,  every  one  serveth  of  his
owne  proper  costs  and  charges,  saving  that  hee  giveth  to
his Harquebusiers certayne allowance  for Powder and

Knights  Fee.  shot :  or  else  no  man  in  all  his  Countrey  hath  one  penie
wages.  But  if  any  man  hath  done  very  good  service,
he  giveth  him  a  Ferme,  or  a  piece  of  Land  ;  for  the  which
he  is  bound  at  all  times  to  be  readie  with  so  many  men
as  the  Duke  shall  appoint  :  who  considereth  in  his  minde,
what  that  Land  or  Ferme  is  well  able  to  find :  and  so
many  shall  he  be  bound  to  furnish  at  all  and  every  such
time  as  Warres  are  holden  in  any  of  the  Dukes  Dominions.
For  there  is  no  man  of  living,  but  he  is  bound  likewise,
whether  the  Duke  call  for  eyther  Souldier  or  Labourer,
to  furnish  them  with  all  such  necessaries  as  to  them
belong.

Duke  heire  Also, if  any Gentleman or man  of  living  idoe  dye

without  Issue  Male,  immediately  after  his  death  the  Duke
entreth  his  Land,  notwithstanding  he  have  never  so  many
Daughters,  and  peradventure  giveth  it  forth-with  to
another  man,  except  a  small  portion  that  he  spareth  to
marry  the  Daughters  withal.  Also,  if  there  be  a  Rich  man,
a  Fermour,  or  man  of  Living,  which  is  stricken  in  age  or
by  chance  is  maymed,  and  be  not  able  to  doe  the  Duke
service,  some  other  Gentleman  that  is  not  able  to  live  and
more  able  to  doe  service,  will  come  to  the  Duke  and
complaine,  saying,  your  Grace  hath  such  an  one,  which  is
unmeete  to  doe  service  to  your  Highnesse,  who  hath
great  abundance  of  wealth,  and  likewise  your  Grace  hath
many  Gentlemen  which  are  poore  and  lacke  living,  and

608

Generall.

HONDiUS, HIS MAP OF RUSSIA

RICHARD CHANCELLOR  ad.

1553-

we that lacke  are  well  able  to  doe  good  service,  your
Grace  might  doe  well  to  looke  upon  him,  and  make  him
to  helpe  those  that  want. Immediately  the  Duke  sendeth
forth  to  inquire of  his  wealth  :  and  if  it  be  so  proved,
hee  shall  be  called  before  the  Duke,  and  it  shall  bee  said
unto him, Friend,  you have  too much  living, and  are
unserviceable to  your  Prince,  lesse will  serve  you,  and
the  rest  will  serve  other  men  that  are  more  able  to  serve.
Whereupon  immediately his  living  shall  be  taken  away
from  him,  saving  a  little  to  find  himselfe  and  his  Wife  on,
and he  may  not  once repine thereat : but  for  answere
hee  will  say,  that  hee  hath  nothing,  but  it  is  Gods  and
the  Dukes  Graces,  and  cannot  say,  as  wee  the  common
people in England  say,  if  wee have  any  thing;  that  it
is  Gods  and  our  owne. Men  may  say,  that  these  men  are
in wonderfull  great  awe, and obedience, that  thus  one
must give and grant his goods which he  hath beene
scraping  and  scratching  for  all  his  life  to  be  at  his  Princes
pleasure  and  commandement. Oh,  that  our  sturdie  Rebels
were had in the like subjection to know their dutie
toward  their  Princes. They  may  not  say  as  some  Snudges
in  England  say,  I  would  find  the  Queene  a  man  to  serve
in  my  place,  or  make  his  Friends  tarrie  at  home,  if  mony
have the upper hand. No, no it is not so in this
Countrey: for he shall make humble sute to serve
the  Duke. And  whom  he  sendeth  most  to  the  Warres
hee  thinketh  he  is  most  in  his  favour :  and  yet  as  I  before
have said, he giveth no wages. If  they knew their  No  wages.
strength,  no man  were  able  to  make  match  with  them  :
for  they  that  dwell  neere  them  should  have  any  rest  of
them. But I thinke  it is  not Gods  will: For  I  may
compare  them  to  a  young  Horse  that  knoweth  not  his
strength,  whom a  little  Child ruleth  and guideth with
a  bridle,  for  all  his  great  strength :  for  if  he  did,  neither
Child  nor  man  could  rule  him. Their  Warres  are  holden
against  the  Crimme  Tartarians,  and  the  Nagayans.

I  will  stand  no  longer  in  the  rehearsall  of  their  power
and  Warres. For  it  were  to  tedious  to  the  Reader. But

XI  609  2  Q

A.D.

1553-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

I  will  in  part  declare  their  Lawes,  and  Punishments,  and
the  execution  of  Justice. And  first  I  will  begin  with  the

Gentlemen.  Commons  of  the  Countrey,  which  the  Gentlemen  have
rule  on :  And  that  is,  that  every  Gentleman  hath
Rule  and  Justice  upon  his  owne  Tenants.  And  if  it  so
fall  out  that  two  Gentlemens  Servants  or  Tenants  doe
disagree, the two Gentlemen examine the matter,  and

Suits  13  try  ah.  have  the  parties  before  them,  and  so  give  the  Sentence.
And  yet  cannot  they  make  the  end  betwixt  them  of
the  Controversie,  but  either  of  the  Gentlemen  must  bring
his  Servant  or  Tenant  before  the  high  Judge  or  Justice
of  that  Countrey,  and  there  present  them,  and  declare  the
matter  and  case.  The  Plaintiffe  saith,  I  require  the  Law ;
which  is  granted  :  then  commeth  an  Officer  and  arresteth
the  partie  Defendant,  and  useth  him  contrary  to  the  Lawes
of  England.  For  when  they  attach  any  man,  they  beate
him  about  the  legs,  untill  such  time  as  he  findeth  Sureties
to  answere  the  matter :  And  if  not,  his  hands  and  necke
are  bound  together,  and  hee  is  led  about  the  Towne,  and
beaten  about  the  legs,  with  other  extreme  punishments
till  he  come  to  his  Answere :  And  the  Justice  demandeth
if  it  bee  for  Debt,  and  sayth :  Owest  thou  this  man  any
such  Debt  ?  He  will,  perhaps,  say  nay.  Then  saith  the
Judge :  Art  thou  able  to  deny  it  ?  Let  us  heare  how  ?
By  Oath,  saith  the  Defendant.  Then  he  commandeth
to  leave  beating  him  till  further  tryall  be  had.

Their  order  in  one  point  is  commendable. They  have

No  Lawyer,  no  man  of  Law  to  plead  their  Causes  in  any  Court  :  but
every  man  pleadeth  his  owne  Cause,  and  giveth  Bill  and
Answere  in  writing  :  contrary  to  the  order  in  England.
The  Complaint  is  in  manner  of  a  Supplication,  and  made
to  the  Dukes  Grace,  and  delivered  him  into  his  owne
hand,  requiring  to  have  Justice  as  in  his  Complaint  is
alleaged.  The  Duke  giveth  sentence  himselfe  upon  all
matters  in  the  Law.  Which  is  very  commendable,  that
such  a  Prince  will  take  paines  to  see  ministration  of
Justice.  Yet  notwithstanding  it  is  wonderfully  abused:
and  thereby  the  Duke  is  much deceived. But  if  it  fall

610

RICHARD CHANCELLOR  ad.

1553.
out  that  the  Officers  be  espied  in  cloking  the  truth,  they
have most  condigne  punishment. And  if  the Plaintiffe
can nothing prove, then the Defendant  must take his
Oath  upon  the  Crucifixe,  whether  he  be  in  the  right  or  no
Then is  demanded,  if  the  Plaintiffe  bee  any  thing  able
further  to  make  proofe ;  if  he  be  not ;  then  sometimes  he
will say, I  am  able  to  prove  it  by  my  body  and  hands,  Combat-tnall.
or by my Champions body, so requiring the Campe
After the other hath his Oath, it is granted as  weli  [III.ii.217l
to  the  one  as  to  the  other. So  when  they  goe to  the
field,  they  sweare  upon  the  Crucifixe,  that  they  bee  both
in  the  right,  and  that  the  one  shall  make  the  other  to
confesse  the  truth  before  they  depart  foorth  of  the  field  •
and  so they  goe both  to the battell  armed with such
weapons  as  they  use  in  that  Countrey : they  fight  all  on
foot,  and  seldome  the  parties  themselves  doe  fight,  except
they bee Gentlemen, for  they  stand much upon their
reputation,  for  they  will  not  fight,  but  with  such  as  are
come  of  as  good  an  house  as  themselves. So  that  if  either
partie  require  the  combate,  it  is  granted  unto  them,  and
no  Champion  is  to  serve  in  their  roome;  wherein  is  no
deceit; but otherwise by champions there is For
although they  take  great  oathes  upon them  to  doe  the
battell  truely,  yet  is  the  contrary  often  seene : because  the
common  Champions  have  no  other  living. And  assoone
las  the  one  partie  hath  gotten  the  victorie,  hee  demandeth
|the  debt  and  the  other  is  carryed  to  Prison,  and  there  is
shamefully  used  till  hee  take  order.

There  is  also  another  order  in  the  Law,  that  the  plain-
tiffe may  sweare  in  some  causes  of  debt.  And  if  the
partie  defendant  bee  poore,  hee  shall  be  set  under  the
^rucifixe  and  the  partie  plaintiffe  must  sweare  over  his
fiead,  and  when  hee  hath  taken  his  oath,  the  Duke  taketh
the  partie  defendant  home  to  his  house,  and  useth  him  as
his  bond-man,  and  putteth  him  to  labour,  or  letteth  him  Bondage
tor  hire  to  any  such  as  neede  him,  untill  such  time  as  his
friends  make  provision  for  his  redemption  :  or  else  hee
-emayneth  in  bondage  all  the  dayes  of  his  life. Araine

6n  8

A.D.

1553-

Punishments
for  Crimes.

Beating.

Miserable
poore.

Superstition.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

there  are  many  that  will  sell  themselves  to  Gentlemen  or
Merchants,  to  bee  their  bond-men,  to  have  during  their
life,  meate,  drinke  and  cloath,  and  at  their  comming  to
have  a  piece  of  money ;  yea,  and  some  will  sell  their  wives
and  children  to  be  bawds  and  drudges  to  the  buyer.  Also
they  have  a  Law  for  Fellons  and  pickers  contrary  to  the
Lawes  of  England.  For  by  the  Law  they  can  hang  no
man  for  his  first  offence ;  but  may  keepe  him  long  in
Prison,  and  oftentimes  beate  him  with  whips  and  other
punishment :  and  there  hee  shall  remaine  untill  his  friends
bee  able  to  bayle  him.  If  hee  be  a  picker  or  a  cut-purse,
as  there  bee  very  many,  the  second  time  he  is  taken,  hee
hath  a  piece  of  his  Nose  cut  off,  and  is  burned  in  the  fore-
head, and  kept  in  prison  till  he  finde  sureties  for  his  good
behaviour.  And  if  hee  be  taken  the  third  time,  he  is
hanged.  And  at  the  first  time  hee  is  extreamely  punished
and  not  released,  except  he  have  very  good  friends,
or  that  some  Gentlemen  require  to  have  him  to  the
warres :  And  in  so  doing,  hee  shall  enter  into  great  bonds
for  him :  by  which  meanes  the  Countrey  is  brought  into
good  quietnesse.  But  they  bee  naturally  given  to  great
deceit,  except  extreame  beating  did  bridle  them.  They  bee
naturally  given  to  hard  living  as  well  in  fare  as  in  lodging.
I  heard  a  Russian  say,  that  it  was  a  great  deale  merrier
living  in  Prison  then  foorth,  but  for  the  great  beating.
For  they  have  meate  and  drinke  without  any  labour,  and
get  the  charitie  of  well  disposed  people :  But  being  at
libertie  they  get  nothing.  The  poore  is  very  innumerable,
and  live  most  miserably :  for  I  have  seene  them  eate  the
pickle  of  Herring  and  other  stinking  Fish :  nor  the  Fish
cannnot  bee  so  stinking  nor  rotten,  but  they  will  eate  it
and  praise  it  to  bee  more  wholesome  then  other  fish  or
fresh  meate.  In  mine  opinion  there  bee  no  such  people
under  the  Sunne  for  their  hardnesse  of  living.  Well,  I
will  leave  them  in  this  point,  and  will  in  part  declare  their
Religion.

They  doe  observe  the  Law  of  the  Greekes  with  such
excesse  of  superstition,  as the  like  hath  not  beene  heard

612

RICHARD CHANCELLOR  ad.

1553-
of.  They  have  no  graven  Images  in  their  Churches,  but
all  painted,  to  the  intent  they  will  not  breake  the  Com-
mandement :  but  to  their  painted  Images  they  use  such  lmaies  and
Idolatrie,  that  the  like  was  never  heard  of  in  England.
They  will  neither  worship  nor  honour  any  Image  that  is
made  foorth  of  their  owne  Countrey.  For  their  owne
Images  (say  they)  have  Pictures  to  declare  what  they
bee,  and  how  they  be  of  God,  and  so  be  not  ours :  They
say,  looke  how  the  Painter  or  Carver  hath  made  them,  so
wee  doe  worship  them,  and  they  worship  none  before  they
bee  Christened.  They  say  wee  be  but  halfe  Christians:
because  we  observe  not  part  of  the  old  Law  with  the
Turkes.  Therefore  they  call  themselves  more  holy  then
us.  They  have  none  other  learning  but  their  mother  Mother
tongue,  nor  will  suffer  no  other  in  their  Countrey  among  tongue.
them.  All  their  service  in  Churches  is  in  their  mother  Service.
tongue.  They  have  the  old  and  new  Testament,  which  are
daily  read  among  them  :  and  yet  their  superstition  is  no
lesse.  For  when  the  Priests  doe  reade,  they  have  such
trickes  in  their  reading,  that  no  man  can  understand  them,
nor  no  man  giveth  eare  to  them.  For  all  the  while  the
Priest  readeth,  the  people  sit  downe  and  one  talke  with
another.  But  when  the  Priest  is  at  service  no  man  sitteth,
but  gaggle  and  ducke  like  so  many  Geese.  And  as  for
their  prayers  they  have  but  little  skill,  but  use  to  say,  As  Prayets.

i  bodi  pomele :  As  much  to  say,  Lord  have  mercie  upon
me. For  the  tenth  man  within  the  Land  cannot  say  the
Pater  noster. And  as  for  the  Creed  no  man  may  bee  so  Creed.
bold  as  to  meddle  therewith  but  in  the  Church  :  for  they

.  say it should not be  spoken of,  but in the  Churches.
Speake  to  them  of  the  Commandements,  and  they  will  say  Commande-
they  were  given  to  Moses  in  the  Law,  which  Christ  hath  ments.
now  abrogated  by  his  precious  Death  and  Passion :  there-
fore, (say  they)  wee  observe  little  or  none  thereof. And
I  doe  beleeve  them. For  if  they  were  examined  of  their
Law and Commandements together,  they  should  agree
but  in  few  points. They  have  the  Sacrament  of  the  Lords  Sacraments.
Supper in both kindes, and more ceremonies  then we

613

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1553-

have.  They  present  them  in  a  dish  in  both  kinds
together,  and  carrie  them  round  about  the  Church  upon
the  Priests  head,  and  so  doe  minister  at  all  such  times  as

Candles.  any shall  require. They  bee  great  offerers  of  Candles,

and  sometimes  of  money,  which  wee  call  in  England,
Soule  pence,  with  more  ceremonies  then  I  am  able  to
declare.

Foure  Lents.  They  have  foure  Lents  in  the  yeere,  whereof  our  Lent
is  the  greatest.  Looke  as  wee  doe  begin  on  the
Wednesday,  so  they  doe  on  the  Munday  before :  And
the  weeke  before  that  they  call  the  Butter-weeke :  And
in  that  weeke  theye  eate  nothing  but  Butter  and  Milke.
Howbeit  I  beleeve  there  bee  in  no  other  Countrey  the
like  people  for  Drunkennesse. The  next  Lent  is  called

[III.  ii.  218.]  Saint  Peters  Lent,  and  beginneth  alwayes  the  Munday
next  after  Trinitie  Sunday,  and  endeth  on  Saint  Peters
Eeven.  If  they  should  breake  that  Fast,  their  beliefe  is,
that  they  should  not  come  in  at  Heaven  gates.  And
when  any  of  them  dye,  they  have  a  testimoniall  with  them
in  the  Coffin,  that  when  the  soule  commeth  to  Heaven
gates  it  may  deliver  the  same  to  Saint  Peter,  which
declareth  that  the  partie  is  a  true  and  holy  Russian.  The
third  Lent  beginneth  fifteene  dayes  before  the  later  Lady
day,  and  endeth  on  our  Lady  Eeven.  The  fourth  Lent
beginneth  on  Saint  Martins  day,  and  endeth  on  Christmas

Chiefe  Saints.  Eeven  :  which  Lent  is  fasted  for  Saint  Philip,  Saint  Peter,
Saint  Nicholas,  and  Saint  Clement.  For  they  foure  bee
the  principall  and  greatest  Saints  in  that  Countrey.  In
these  Lents  they  eate  neither  Butter,  Egges,  Milke,  nor
Cheese;  but  they  are  very  straightly  kept  with  Fish,
Cabbages,  and  Rootes.  And  out  of  their  Lents,  they
observe  truely  the  Wednesdayes  and  Fridayes  throughout
the  yeere :  and  on  the  Saturday  they  doe  eate  flesh.
Furthermore,  they  have  a  great  number  of  Religious
men :  which  are  blacke  Monkes,  and  they  eate  no  Flesh
throughout  the  yeere,  but  Fish,  Milke,  and  Butter.  By
their  order  they  should  eate  no  fresh-Fish,  and  in  their
Lents  they  eate nothing but Coleworts, Cabbages, salt

614

RICHARD CHANCELLOR  a.d.

1553-
Cucumbers,  with  other  rootes,  as  Radish  and  such  like.
Their  drinke  is  like  our  penie  Ale,  and  is  called  Quass.
They  have  Service  daily  in  their  Churches ;  and  use  to
goe  to  service  two  houres  before  day,  and  that  is  ended
by  day  light.  At  nine  of  the  clocke  they  goe  to  Masse:
that  ended,  to  Dinner :  and  after  that  to  service  againe :
and  then  to  Supper.  You  shall  understand  that  at  everie
dinner  and  supper  they  have  declared  the  exposition  of
the  Gospell  that  day :  but  how  they  wrest  and  twine  the  Vices.
Scripture  and  that  together,  by  report  it  is  wonderfull.
As  for  Whoredome  and  Drunkennesse  there  bee  none
such  living :  and  for  Extortion,  they  bee  the  most
abominable  under  the  Sunne.  Now  judge  of  their
holiness.  They  have  twise  as  much  Land  as  the  Duke
himselfe  hath :  but  yet  hee  is  reasonable  even  with  them,
as  thus :  When  they  take  bribes  of  any  of  the  poore  and
simple,  hee  hath  it  by  an  order.  When  the  Abbot  of  any  Abbies.
of  their  Houses  dyeth,  then  the  Duke  hath  all  his  goods
mooveable  and  unmooveable :  so  that  the  Successour
buyeth  all  at  the  Dukes  hands :  and  by  this  meane  they
bee  the  best  Fermers  the  Duke  hath.  Thus  with  their
Religion  I  make  an  end,  trusting  hereafter  to  know  it
better.

Some  additions  for  better  knowledge  of  this
Voyage,  taken  by  Clement  Adams,  Schoole-
master  to  the  Queenes  Henshmen,  from  the
mouth  of  Captaine  Chancelor.

1  I  have  this

ilchard  Chancelor  with  his  Ship  and  companie  being  booke  of

|  thus  left  alone,  and  become  very  pensive,  heavie,  /Jiem '•

and  sorrowfull,  by  this  dispersion  of  the  Fleet,  hee  Latine'  writ-

(according  to  the  order  before  taken,)  shapeth  his  course  ten  in  a  very

for Ward-house  in  Norway,  there  to expect and abide  elegant  hand

the  arrivall  of  the  rest  of  the  Ships. And  being  come  an.d.  elo?uJnt

thither,  and having stayed there the space or seaven  p^/u.  tas  j

dayes,  and  looked  in  vaine  for  their  comming,  hee  deter-  thinke)  the

mined  at  length  to  proceed  alone  in  the  purposed  voyage,  very  original?.

615

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1553-

And  as  hee  was  preparing  himselfe  to  depart,  it  happened
that  hee  fell  in  companie  and  speech  with  certaine  Scottish-
men  :  who  having  understanding  of  his  intention,  and
wishing  well  to  his  actions,  began  earnestly  to  disswade
him  from  the  further  prosecution  of  the  discoverie,  by
amplifying  the  dangers  which  hee  was  to  fall  into,  and
omitted  no  reason  that  might  serve  to  that  purpose.  But
he  holding  nothing  so  ignominious  and  reproachfull,  as
inconstancie  and  levitie  of  minde,  and  perswading  himselfe
that  a  man  of  valour  could  not  commit  a  more  dishonour-
able part,  then  for  feare  of  danger  to  avoyd  and  shun
great  attempts,  was  nothing  at  all  changed  or  discouraged
with  the  speeches  and  words  of  the  Scots,  remayning
stedfast  and  immutable  in  his  first  resolution :  deter-
mining either  to  bring  that  to  passe  which  was  intended,
or  else  to  dye  the  death.

And  as  for  them  which  were  with  Master  Chancelor  in
his  Ship,  although  they  had  great  cause  of  discomfort  by
the  losse  of  their  companie  (whom  the  foresaid  tempest
had  separated  from  them,)  and  were  not  a  little  troubled
with  cogitations  and  perturbations  of  minde,  in  respect  of
their  doubtfull  course :  yet  notwithstanding,  they  were
of  such  content  and  agreement  of  minde  with  Master
Chancelor,  that  they  were  resolute,  and  prepared  under
his  direction  and  government,  to  make  proofe  and  tryall
of  all  adventures,  without  all  feare  or  mistrust  of  future
dangers.  Which  constancie  of  minde  in  all  the  companie
did  exceedingly  increase  their  Captaines  carefulnesse :  for
hee  being  swallowed  up  with  like  goodwill  and  love  towards
them,  feared  lest  through  any  errour  of  his,  the  safetie  of
the  companie  should  bee  endangered.  To  conclude,  when
they  saw  their  desire  and  hope  of  the  arrivall  of  the  rest  of
the  Ships  to  bee  every  day  more  and  more  frustrated,  they
provided  to  Sea  againe,  and  Master  Chancelor  held  on  his
course  towards  that  unknowne  part  of  the  world,  and
sayled  so  farre,  that  hee  came  at  last  to  the  place  where
hee  found  no  night  at  all,  but  a  continuall  light  and
brightnesse  of  the  Sunne  shining  cleerely  upon  the  huge

616

CLEMENT ADAMS  a.d.

1553-

and  mightie  Sea. And having  the  benefite  of  this  per-

petuall  light  for  certaine  dayes,  at  the  length it pleased

God  to  bring  them  into  a  certaine  great  Bay,  which  was  of  They  arrive  in

one  hundreth  miles  or  there  about  over. Whereinto  they  ^e.B(!].0{ ;

entred,  and somewhat  farre within it cast anchor, and  rnl  ji>2Ig-j

looking  every  way  about  them,  it  hapned  that  they  espyed

a  farre  off  a  certaine  Fisher-boate,  which  Master  Chancelor,

accompanied with a few of  his men, went  towards to

common with the Fishermen that were in it,  and  to

know  of  them  what  Countrey  it  was,  and  what  people,

and of  what manner of living they were : but they

being  amazed with the strange  greatnesse of  his  ship,

(for in those parts before that time, they had  never

seene the like) began presently to  avoyd  and  to  flee :

but hee still following them,  at last overtooke  them,

and  being  come  to  them,  they  (being  in  great  feare,  as

men halfe dead) prostrated themselves before him,

offering to kisse his feete : but hee  (according to  his

great and singular courtesie,) looked pleasantly upon

them,  comforting  them  by  signes  and  gestures,  refusing

those duties  and  reverences of  theirs,  and  taking them

up  in  all  loving  sort  from  the  ground. And  it  is  strange

to consider how  much favour  afterwards  in  that  place,

this humanitie of  his did purchase to himselfe. For

they  being  dismissed,  spread  by  and  by  a  report  abroad

of  the  arrivall  of  a  strange  Nation,  of  a  singular  gentle-

nesse and courtesie : whereupon the common people

came  together,  offering  to  these  new-come  ghests  victuals

freely,  and  not refusing to traffique  with them,  except

they had  beene bound  by a  certaine  religious use and

custome,  nor  to  buy  any  forraine  commodities,  without

the  knowledge  and  consent  of  the  King.

By  this  time  our  men  had  learned,  that  this  Countrey  The  Dis-
was  called  Russia,  or  Muscovie,  and  that  Ivan  Vasiliwich  coverie  of
(which was  at that time their Kings name) ruled  and  Russta-
governed farre and wide in those places. And the
barbarous Russes  asked  likewise of our men whence
they  were,  and  what  they  came  for  : whereunto  answer

617

A.D.

*553-

Messenger

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

was  made,  that  they  were  English-men  sent  into  those
coasts,  from  the  most  excellent  King  Edward  the  sixt,
having  from  him  in  commandement  certaine  things  to
deliver  to  their  King,  and  seeking  nothing  else  but  his
amitie  and  friendship,  and  traffique  with  his  people,
whereby  they  doubted  not,  but  that  great  commoditie
and  profit  would  grow  to  the  subjects  of  both  Kingdomes.

The  Barbarians  heard  these  things  very  gladly,  and
promised  their  ayde  and  furtherance  to  acquaint  their
King  out  of  hand,  with  so  honest  and  a  reasonable  a
request.  In  the  meane  time  Master  Chancelor  intreated
victuals  for  his  money,  of  the  Governour  of  that  place
(who  together  with  others  came  aboord  him)  and  required
hostages  of  them  likewise,  for  the  more  assurance  of
safetie  to  himselfe  and  his  companie.  To  whom  the
Governours  answered,  that  they  knew  not  in  that  case
the  will  of  their  King,  but  yet  were  willing  in  such
things  as  they  might  lawfully  doe,  to  pleasure  him :
which  was  as  then  to  affoord  him  the  benefit  of
victuals.

Now,  while  these  things  were  a doing,  they  secretly

sent  to  the  sent  a  messenger  unto  the  Emperour,  to  certifie  him
mperour.  ^  ^e  arrjvajj  Qf  a  strange  Nation,  and  withall  to  know
his  pleasure  concerning  them.  Which  message  was
very  welcome  unto  him,  insomuch  that  voluntarily  he
invited  them  to  come  to  his  Court.  But  if  by  reason
of  the  tediousnesse  of  so  long  a  journey,  they  thought
it  not  best  so  to  doe,  then  hee  granted  libertie  to  his
Subjects  to  bargaine,  and  to  traffique  with  them  :  and
further  promised,  that  if  it  would  please  them  to  come
to  him,  hee  himselfe  would  beare  the  whole  charges  of
poste  Horses.  In  the  meane  time  the  Governours  of
the  place,  differred  the  matter  from  day  to  day,  pre-
tending divers  excuses,  and  saying  one  while,  that  the
consent  of  all  the  Governours,  and  another  while,  that
the  great  and  weightie  affaires  of  the  Kingdome  com-
pelled them  to  differ  their  answer :  and  this  they  did
of  purpose, so long to protract the time, untill the

618

CLEMENT ADAMS  a.d.

1553-
messenger  (sent before to the King) did returne with
relation  of  his  will  and  pleasure.

But  Master  Chancelor,  (seeing  himselfe  held  in  this
suspense  with  long  and  vaine  expectation,  and  thinking
that  of  intention  to  delude  him,  they  posted  the  matter
off  so  often,)  was  very  instant  with  them  to  performe
their  promise  :  Which  if  they  would  not  doe,  hee  told
them  that  he  would  depart  and  proceed  in  his  voyage.
So  that  the  Muscovites  (although  as  yet  they  knew
not  the  minde  of  their  King)  yet  fearing  the  departure
indeed  of  our  men,  who  had  such  wares  and  commodities
as  they  greatly  desired,  they  at  last  resolved  to  furnish
our  people  with  all  things  necessarie,  and  to  conduct
them  by  land  to  the  presence  of  their  King.  And  so
Master  Chancelor  began  his  journey  which  was  very
long  and  most  troublesome,  wherein  he  had  the  use
of  certaine  sleds,  which  in  that  Countrey  are  very  common,
for  they  are  carried  themselves  upon  sleds,  and  all
their  carriages  are  in  the  same  sort,  the  people  almost
not  knowing  any  other  manner  of  carriage,  the  cause
whereof  is,  the  exceeding  hardnesse  of  the  ground  con-
gealed in  the  Winter  time  by  the  force  of  the  cold,
which  in  those  places  is  very  extreame  and  horrible,
whereof  hereafter  wee  will  say  something.

But  now  they  having  passed  the  greater  part  of  their
journey, met at last with the Sled-man (of  whom I
spake  before)  sent  to  the  King  secretly  from  the  Justices
or  Governours,  who  by  some  ill  hap  had  lost his  way,
and had gone to the Sea-side, which is neere  to  the
Countrey  of  the  Tartars,  thinking  there  to  have  found
our ship. But having long erred and wandered out
of  his  way,  at the last  in his  direct  returne,  hee met
(as he  was  comming) our Captaine on the way. To
whom hee by and  by  delivered  the  Emperours letters, The  Emperors
which were written to him with all courtesie and in  courteous
the  most  loving  manner  that  could  bee  :  wherein  expresse  letters  t0
commandement was given, that post Horses should  nfncel
be  gotten  for  him  and  the  rest  of  his  company  without

619

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1553-

any  money.  Which  thing  was  of  all  the  Russes,  in
[III.  ii.  220.]  the  rest  of  their  journey  so  willingly  done,  that  they
began  to  quarrell,  yea,  and  to  fight  also  in  striving
and  contending  which  of  them  should  put  their  poste
horses  to  the  Sled :  so  that  after  much  adoe,  and  great
paines  taken  in  this  long  and  wearie  journey,  (for  they
had  travelled  very  neere  fifteene  hundred  miles)  Master
Chancelor  came  at  last  to  Mosco,  the  chiefe  Citie  of
the  Kingdome,  and  the  seate  of  the  King.
Riphean  hits,  Touching  the  Riphean  Mountaines,  whereupon  the
a  tale  of  Snow  lyeth  continually,  and  where  hence  in  times  past
Antiqmtie.  it  was  bought  that  Tanais  the  river  did  spring,  and
that  the  rest  of  the  wonders  of  nature,  which  the  Grecians
fained  and  invented  of  old,  were  there  to  bee  seene :
our  men  which  lately  came  from  thence,  neither  saw
them,  nor  yet  have  brought  home  any  perfect  relation
of  them,  although  they  remayned  there  for  the  space
of  three  moneths,  and  had  gotten  in  that  time  some
intelligence  of  the  language  of  Moscovie.  The  whole
Countrey  is  plaine  and  champion,  and  few  hils  in  it :
and  towards  the  North,  it  hath  very  large  and  spacious
Woods,  wherein  is  great  store  of  Firre  trees,  a  wood
very  necessarie,  and  fit  for  the  building  of  houses :
there  are  also  wilde  beasts  bred  in  those  woods,  as  Buffes,
Beares,  and  blacke  Wolves,  and  another  kinde  of  beast
Rossomakka,  a  unknowen  to  us,  but  called  by  them  Rossomakka :  and
strange  beast,  the  nature  of  the  same  is  very  rare  and  wonderfull :
for  when  it  is  great  with  young,  and  ready  to  bring
foorth,  it  seeketh  out  some  narrow  place  betweene  two
stakes,  and  so  going  through  them,  presseth  it  selfe,
and  by  that  meanes  is  eased  of  her  burthen,  which  other-
wise could  not  bee  done.  They  hunt  their  Buffes
for  the  most  part  a  horse-backe,  but  their  Beares  a
foot,  with  woodden  forkes.  The  North  parts  of  the
Countrey  are  reported  to  bee  so  cold,  that  the  very
Ice  or  water  which  distilleth  out  of  the  moyst  wood
which  they  lay  upon  the  fire,  is  presently  congealed
and  frozen  : the diversitie  growing  sodainly  to bee so

620

CLEMENT ADAMS  ad

*553-

great, that  in one  and the  selfe-same  fire-brand,  a  man

shall  see  both  fire  and  Ice. When  the  winter  doth  once  The  sharpnes

begin there, it  doth still  more  and  more  increase  by  a  °fthe  winier

perpetuitie  of  cold  : neither  doth that  cold  slake,  untill  tn 05C0me'
the  force of  the  Sunne  beames  doth dissolve  the  cold,
and make  glad  the  earth, returning  to  it  againe. Our

Mariners  which wee  left  in  the  ship  in  the  meane  time  [III.ii.a21.]

to  keepe  it,  in  their  going  up  onely  from  their  cabbins  *The  rest  of

to  the  hatches,  had  their  breath  oftentimes  so  suddenly  M.  Adams

taken  away,  that  they  eft-soones  fell  downe  as  men  very  €ontaymnga

neere dead, so great is the sharpnesse of  that cold  the  Country

Climate : but  for  the  South  parts  of  the  Countrey,  they  &c.  is  here

are  somewhat  more  *  temperate.  omitted.

The  Copie  of  the  Duke  of  Moscovie  and
Emperour  of  Russia  his  Letters,  sent  to  King
Edward  the  Sixth,  by  the  hands  of  Richard
Chancelour.

THe  Almightie  power  of  God,  and  the  incomprehen-  Ivan  Vasili-
sible holy  Trinitie, rightfull Christian Beliefe, &c.  vich,  that  is  to
We great  Duke Ivan  Vasilivich,  by  the  Grace  of  God  f^l the
great  Lord and Emperour of  all Russia, great Duke  Bastlius.
of  Volodemer, Mosco,  and Novograd,  King  of  Kazan,
King  of  Astracan,  Lord of  Plesko,  and  great  Duke  of
Smolensko,  of  Twerria,  Joughoria,  Permia,  Vadska,  Bul-
ghoria,  and  others,  Lord  and  great  Duke  of  Novograd  in
the  Low  Countrey,  of  Chernigo,  Rezan,  Polotskoy,  Ros-
tove,  Yaruslaveley,  Bealozera,  Liefland,  Oudoria,  Obdoria,
and Condensa, Commander  of  all Siberia, and of  the
North  parts,  and  Lord  of  many  other  Countries,  greeting.
Before all,  right,  great and worthy of  honour  Edward
King of England, &c. according to our most  heartie
and  good  zeale,  with  good  intent  and  friendly  desire,  and
according  to  our  holy  Christian  Faith,  and  great  Govern-
ance, and being in the light of great understanding,
our  Answere  by  this  our  Honourable  Writing  unto  your
Kingly Governance, at the request of your faithfull

621

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1553-

Servant  Richard  Chancelour,  with  his  company,  as  they
shall  let  you  wisely  know  is  this.  In  the  strength  of
the  twentieth  yeare  of  our  Governance,  be  it  knowne,
that  at  our  Sea-coasts  arrived  a  ship,  with  one  Richard,
and  his  company,  and  said,  that  he  was  desirous  to  come
into  our  Dominions,  and  according  to  his  request,  hath
d  That  is,  come  seene  our  Majestie,  and  d  our  eyes  :  and  hath  declared
into  our  unto us your Majesties desire, as that wee should

presence.  grant unto your Subjects, to goe and come, and in

our  Dominions,  and  among  our  Subjects,  to  frequent
free  Marts,  with  all  sorts  of  Merchandizes,  and  upon
the  same  to  have  warres  for  their  returne.  And  they
have  also  delivered  us  your  Letters  which  declare  the
same  request.  And  hereupon  wee  have  given  order,
that  wheresoever  your  faithfull  Servant  Hugh  Willough-
bie,  land  or  touch  in  our  Dominions,  to  be  well  enter-
tayned,  who  as  yet  is  not  arrived  as  your  Servant
Richard  can  declare.

And  we  with  Christian  beliefe  and  faithfulnesse,  and
according  to  your  Honourable  request,  and  my  Honour-
able commandement  will  not  leave  it  undone  :  and  are
furthermore  willing  that  you  send  unto  us  your  ships  and
Vessels,  when  and  as  often  as  they  may  have  passage,  with
good  assurance  on  our  part  to  see  them  harmlesse.  And
if  you  send  one  of  your  Majesties  counsell  to  treate  with
us  whereby  your  Countrey  Merchants  may  with  all  kindes
of  Wares,  and  where  they  will  make  their  Market  in  our
Dominions,  they  shall  have  their  free  Mart  with  all  free
Liberties  through  my  whole  Dominions,  with  all  kinde  of
Wares,  to  come  and  goe  at  their  pleasure,  without  any  let,
damage,  or  impediment,  according  to  this  our  Letter,  our
Word  and  our  Seale  which  wee  have  commanded  to
be  under  sealed.  Written  in  our  Dominion,  in  our
Citie  and  our  Palace  in  the  Castle  of  Mosco,  in  the
yeare  7060.  the  second  Moneth  of  Februarie.

This  Letter  was  written  in  the  Moscovian  Tongue,
in  Letters  much  like  to  the  Greeke  Letters,  very  faire
written in Paper, with a broad Seale hanging at the

622

LETTER FROM IVAN VASILIVICH  a.d.

1557-
same,  sealed  in  Paper  upon  Waxe.  This  Seale  was
much  like  the  Broad  Seale  of  England,  having  on  the
one  side  the  Image  of  a  man  on  Horse-backe  in  com-
plete Harnesse  fighting  with  a  Dragon.  Under  this
Letter  was  another  Paper  written  in  the  Dutch  Tongue,
which  was  the  Interpretation  of  the  other  written  in
the  Moscovian  Letters.  These  Letters  were  sent  the
next yeare after the date of  King Edwards Letters,

J554-

After this, entercourse of  Letters and Embassages

passed betwixt  King  Philip  and  Queene  Marie,  and  the

Moscovite  : and  the  Moscovie  Company  was  instituted

and  received  Priviledges  both  from  their  owne  and  that

Forraine Prince, a second Voyage beeing  set forth in

May, 1555.  and  Master  George  Killingworth  was  made

their  first  Agent  :  the  particulars  whereof  are found  at

large in Master Hakluyts first  Tome of  Voyages, as

also  other  things  touching  that  Trade  then  setled :  which

heere I omit, and come to Master  Jenkinsons  Voyage

to  Mosco,  and  thence  to  Tartaria.

§.  11.

The first * Voyage made by Master Anthonie  [m.ii.222.]
Jenkinson,  from  the Citie  of  London,  toward  *Hee  made
the  Land of  Russia,  begunne the twelfth  of  aZer°oneetsas
May,  in  the  yeare 1557.  Embassador

Tii  r  r^ 1 1 i  1  1  from  Qutene

Irst,  by  the  grace  or  God,  the  day  and  yeare  above  Elizabeth  to

mentioned,  I  departed  from  the  said  Citie,  and  the  Muscovie.

same  day  at  Gravesend,  embarked  my  selfe  in  a
good  ship,  named  the  Primrose,  being  appointed,  although
unworthy,  chiefs  Captaine  of  the  same,  and  also  of  the
other  three  good  ships,  to  say,  the  John  Evangelist,
the  Anne,  and  the  Trinitie,  having  also  the  conduct
of  the  Emperour  of  Russia,  his  Ambassadour  named
Osep  Nepea  Gregoriwich,  who  passed  with  his  company
in  the  said  Primrose.  And  thus  our  foure  tall  ships  being
well  appointed,  aswell  for  men,  as  victuals,  as  other  neces-

623

A  D  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1557-

sary  furniture,  the  said  twelfth  day  of  the  moneth  of  May,
we  weighed  our  Anchors,  and  departed  from  the  said
Gravesend,  in  the  after-noone,  and  plying  downe  the
Thames,  the  wind  being  Easterly,  and  faire  weather,  the
thirteenth  day  we  came  a  ground  with  the  Primrose,  upon
a  sand  called  the  blacke  tayle,  where  wee  sate  fast  untill  the
fourteenth  day  in  the  morning,  and  then  God  bee  praysed,
shee  came  off :  and  that  day  we  plyed  downe  as  farre  as
our  Ladie  of  Holland,  and  there  came  to  an  Anchor,  the
winde  being  Easterly,  and  there  remayned  untill  the
twentieth  day  :  then  wee  weyed  and  went  out  at  Gold-
more  gate,  and  from  thence  in  at  Balsey  slade,  and  so  into
Orwell  wands,  where  we  came  to  an  Anchor  :  but  as  we
came  out  of  the  said  Goldmore  gate,  the  Trinitie  came  on
ground  on  certayne  Rockes,  that  lye  to  the  North-ward  of
the  said  gate,  and  was  like  to  be  bilged  and  lost.  But  by
the  ayde  of  God,  at  the  last  she  came  off  againe,  being
very  leake :  and  the  one  and  twentieth  day  the  Primrose
remaining  at  an  Anchor  in  the  wands,  the  other  three
ships  bare  into  Orwell  Haven,  where  I  caused  the  said
Trinitie  to  be  grounded,  searched,  and  repayred.  So  we
remayned  in  the  said  Haven,  untill  the  eight  and  twentieth
day :  and  then  the  wind  being  Westerly,  the  three  ships
that  were  in  the  Haven,  weighed  and  came  forth,  and
in  comming  forth  the  John  Evangelist  came  on  ground
upon  a  Sand,  called  the  Andros,  where  she  remayned
one  tyde,  and  the  next  full  Sea  she  came  off  againe
without  any  great  hurt,  God  be  praysed.

The  nine  and  twentieth  day  in  the  morning  all  foure
ships  weighed  in  the  Wands,  and  that  tyde  went  as  farre
as  Orfordnesse,  where  we  came  to  an  Anchor,  because  the
wind  was  Northerly :  And  about  sixe  of  the  clocke  at
night,  the  wind  vered  to  the  South-west,  and  we  weighed
Anchor,  and  bare  cleere  of  the  Nesse,  and  then  set
our  course  North-east  and  by  North  untill  mid-night,
being  then  cleare  of  Yarmouth  sands.  Then  wee  winded
North  and  by  West,  and  North  North-west,  untill  the
June,  first  of  June  at  noone,  then  it  waxed  calme,  and  continued

624

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  a.d.

i  557.
so  untill  the  second  day  at  noone :  then  the  wind  came  at
North-west  with  a  tempest,  and  much  raine,  and  we  lay
close  by,  and  caped  North  North-east,  and  North-east  and
by  North,  as  the  wind  shifted,  and  so  continued  untill  the
third  day  at  noone:  then  the  winde  vered  Westerly
againe,  and  we  went  North  our  right  course,  and  so
continued  our  way  untill  the  fourth  day  at  three  of  the
clocke  in  the  after-noone,  at  which  time  the  winde  vered  to
the  North-west  againe  and  blew  a  fresh  gale,  and  so  con-
tinued untill  the  seventh  day  in  the  morning,  wee  lying
with  all  our  ships  close  by,  and  caping  to  the  Northwards :
and  then  the  winde  vering  more  Northerly,  we  were  forced
to  put  roomer  with  the  Coast  of  England  againe,  and  fell
overthwart  New-castle,  but  went  not  into  the  Haven,
and  so  plyed  upon  the  Coast  the  eight  day  and  the
ninth.

The  tenth  day  the  wind  came  to  the  North  North-west,
and  wee  were  forced  to  beare  roomer  with  Flamborow
head,  where  we  came  to  an  Anchor,  and  there  remayned
untill  the  seventeenth  day. Then  the  wind  came  faire,  and
we  weighed,  &  set  our  course  North  and  by  East,  time
and  so  continued  the  same  with  a  merry  wind  untill  the
one  and  twentieth  at  noone,  at  which  we  took  the  Sunne,
and  had  the  latitude  in  sixtie  degrees. Then  we  shifted
our  course, and  went  North North-east,  & North-east
and  by  North,  untill  the  five  and  twentieth  day. Then
we  discovered  certain  Hands,  called  Heilick  Hands,  lying  Heilkk  Hands
from us Northeast, being  in the latitude  of  sixty  sixe  «•  66.  degrees
degrees, fortie  minutes. Then  we  went  North and  by  4°-  *'***'•
West,  because  we  would  not  come  too  nigh  the  Land,
and  running  that  course  foure  houres,  we  discovered,  and
had sight of  Rost Hands,  joyning  to  the  mayne  Land  Rost  Hands.
of  Finmarke. Thus continuing our course along the
Coast  of  Norway  and  Finmarke,  the  seven  and  twentieth
day  we  tooke  the  Sunne,  being  as  farre  shot  as  Lofoot,
and had the  latitude in sixtie  nine  degrees. And  the
same  day  in the afternoone  appeared  over  our  heads  a
Rain-bow, like a Semicircle, with both ends upward.

XI  625  2R

A.D.

1557-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

Makstrand  a
strange  whirle
poo/e.

Zenam  Hand.

Note,  that  there  is  betweene  the  said  Rost  Hands  and
Lofoot,  a  Whirle-poole  called  Malestrand,  which  from
halfe  ebbe  untill  halfe  floud,  maketh  such  a  terrible  noyse,
that  it  shaketh  the  Rings  in  the  doores  of  the  Inhabitants
Houses  of  the  said  Hands  ten  miles  off.  Also  if  there
commeth  any  Whale  within  the  current  of  the  same,  they
make  a  pittifull  cry.  Moreover,  if  great  Trees  be  carryed
into  it  by  force  of  stream es,  and  after  with  the  ebbe
be  cast  out  againe,  the  ends  and  boughes  of  them  have
beene  so  beaten,  that  they  are  like  the  stalkes  of  Hempe
[III.  ii.  223.]  that  is  bruized.  Note,  that  all  the  Coast  of  Finmarke  is
high  Mountaynes  and  Hils,  being  covered  all  the  yeare
with  Snow.  And  hard  aboard  the  shoare  of  this  Coast,
there  is  one  hundred,  or  one  hundred  and  fiftie  fathomes
of  water  in  depth.  Thus  proceeding  and  sayling  forward,
we  fell  with  an  Hand  called  Zenam,  being  in  the  latitude
of  seventie  degrees.  About  this  Hand  wee  saw  many
Whales,  very  monstrous,  about  our  ships,  some  by  esti-
mation of  sixtie  foote  long :  and  being  the  ingendring
time  they  roared  and  cryed  terribly.  From  thence  we
fell  with  an  Hand,  called  Kettlewicke.

This  Coast  from  Rost  unto  Lofoot  lyeth  North  and
South,  and  from  Lofoot  to  Zenam  North-east  and  South-
west, and  from  Zenam  to  Kettelwicke,  East  North-east
and  West  South-west.  From  the  said  Kettelwicke  we
sayled  East  and  by  North  ten  leagues,  and  fell  with  a
Land  called  Inger  sound,  where  we  fished,  being  becalmed,
and  tooke  great  plentie  of  Cods.  Thus  plying  along  the
Coast,  we  fell  with  a  Cape,  called  the  North  Cape,  which
is  the  Northermost  Land  that  we  passe  in  our  Voyage
to  Saint  Nicholas,  and  is  in  the  latitude  of  seventie  one
degrees  and  ten  minutes,  and  is  from  Inger  sound  East
and  to  the  North-wards  fifteene  leagues.  And  being
at  this  North  Cape  the  second  day  of  July,  wee  had
the  Sunne  at  North  foure  degrees  above  the  Horizon.
The  third  day  we  came  to  Wardhouse,  having  such  mists
that  wee  could  not  see  the  Land.  This  Wardhouse  is
a  Castle  standing  in  an  Hand  two  miles  from  the  mayne

626

Kettlewike
Hand.

Inger  sound.

The  North
Cape.

Ward-house.

ANTHONY  JENKINSON  ad.

1557-

of  Finland,  subject  to  the  King  of  Denmarke,  and  the
Eastermost Land that  he hath. There are two other
Hands neere adjoyning unto that, whereon the Castle
of  Wardhouse  standeth. The  Inhabitants  of  those  three
Hands  live  onely  by  fishing,  and  make  much  Stock-fish,
which  they  dry  with  Frost :  their  most  feeding  is fish  ;
bread  and  drinke  they  have  none,  but  such  as  is  brought
them  from  other  places. They  have  small  store  of  Cattle,  Cattellfed
which  are  also  fed  with  fish. From  Wardhouse  we  sayled  with  fish.
South South-east ten leagues, and  fell with a Cape of
Land  called Kegor,  the Northermost  part  of  the  Land
of  Lappia. And  betweene  Wardhouse,  and  the  said  Cape
is  a  great Bay,  called Dommes  hafF,  in  the  South  part
whereof  is  a  Monastery  of  Monkes  of  the  Russes  Religion,  The
called  Pechinchow. Thus  proceeding  forward  and  sayling  Monasterie  of
along the Coast of  the said Land of  Lappia, winding  Pechinchozv-
South-east, the fourth day through great mists and
darknesse  we  lost  the  company  of  the  other  three  ships,
and  met not  with  them againe,  untill  the  seventh  day,
when  we  fell  with  a  Cape  or  head-land  called  Swetinoz,
which  is  the  entring  into  the  Bay  of  Saint  Nicholas. At
this Cape  lyeth  a  great  stone,  to  the  which  the  Barkes
that passed thereby, were  wont to make Offerings  of
Butter,  Meale,  and  other  Victuals,  thinking  that  unlesse
they  did  so,  their  Barkes  or  Vessels  should  there  perish,
as  it hath beene  oftentimes  seene :  and  there  it  is  very
darke  and  mystie. Note, that  the  sixt  day  wee  passed
by  the  place  where  Sir  Hugh  Willoughby with  all  his
company perished, which  is called  Arzina  reca, that is  Arzina  reca
to  say,  the  River  Arzina.  the  River

The Land  of  Lappia  is  an  high Land,  having snow  ^ ere,  Z.,
lying  on  it  commonly  all  the  yeere. The  people  of  the  ^ughby  was
Countrey  are halfe Gentiles : they  live  in  the Summer  frozen.
time  neere  the  Sea  side,  and  use  to  take  fish,  of  the  which
they make  bread,  and  in the Winter they remove up
into the Countrey into the Woods, where they use
hunting, and kill Deere, Beares, Wolves, Foxes, and
other beasts, with whose  flesh they be nourished, and

627

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1557-
The  Lappians  with  their  skins  apparelled  in  such  strange  fashion,  that
covered  all there  is  nothing  seene  of  them  bare  but  their  eyes. They
saving en naVe  none  other  habitation,  but  only  in  Tents,  removing
from  place  to  place,  according  to  the  season  of  the  yeere.
They  know  no  arte  nor  facultie,  but  onely  shooting,  which
they  exercise  daily,  as  well  men  as  women,  and  kill  such
beasts  as  serve them for  their  food. Thus  proceeding
along  the  coast  from  Swetinoz  aforesaid,  the  ninth day
of  July  wee  came  to  Cape  Grace,  being  in  the  latitude
of  66. degrees  and 45.  minutes, and is  at the  entring
in  of  the  Bay  of  Saint  Nicolas. Aboard  this  Land  there
is  twentie  or  thirtie  fathoms  water,  and  sundry  grounds
The  current  at  good  to  anchor  in. The  current  at  this  Cape  runneth
Cape  Grace. South-west  and North-east. From  this  Cape  wee  pro-
ceeded along  untill we came to  Crosse  Hand,  which  is
seven  leagues  from  the  said  Cape  South-west :  and  from
this  Hand,  wee  set  over  to  the  other  side  of  the  Bay,  and
went South-west, and fell with an Head-land, called
Foxenose,  which  is  from  the  said  Hand  five  and  twentie
The  entring  of  leagues. The entring of  this Bay  from Crosse Hand
the  Bay  of to the  neerest  Land  on  the  other  side  is  seven  leagues
Saint  Nicolas oven From  Foxenose  proceeding forward the twelfth
leagues  broad day  of  the  said  moneth  of  July,  all  our  foure  ships  arrived
at  the  least, in  safety  at  the  Road of  Saint  Nicolas,  in  the  Land  of
Russia,  where  we  anchored,  and  had  sayled  from  London
unto the said Road seven  hundred and  fiftie leagues.
The  Russian Ambassadour  and  his  companie  with  great
joy got  to shoare, and our  ships heere forthwith dis-
charged themselves :  and  being  laden  againe,  and  having
a faire winde, departed toward England the first of
August.  August. The  third  of  the  said  moneth  I  with  other  of

my  companie  came  unto  the  Citie  of  Colmogro,  being
an  hundred  verstes  from  the  Bay  of  Saint  Nicolas,  and
in  the  latitude  of  64.  degrees  25.  minutes.  I  tarried  at
the  said  Colmogro  untill  the  fifteenth  day:  and  then  I
departed  in  a  little  Boat  up  the  River  of  Duina,  which
runneth  very  swiftly,  and  the  selfe  same  day  passed  by
Pinego  Rwer.  the  mouth  of  a  River  called  Pinego,  leaving  it  on  our  left

628

ANTHONY JENKINSON  a.d.

1557-
hand fifteene verstes from Colmogro. On both sides
of  the  mouth  of  this  River  Pinego  is  high  Land,  great
Rockes  of  Alabaster,  great  Woods,  and  Pine-apple  trees
lying along within the ground, which by  report have
lyen  there  since  Noes  flood. And  thus  proceeding  for-
ward the  nineteenth  day  in  the  morning,  I came  into  a  [III.  ii.  224.]
Towne  called  Yemps,  an  hundred  verstes  from  Colmogro.  The  Towne  of
All  this  way  along  they make  much  Tarre,  Pitch, and  Yemps.
ashes  of  Aspen  trees. From  thence  I  came  to  a  place
called  Ustiug,  an  ancient  Citie,  the  last  day  of  August. IJ sting.
At  this  Citie  meet  two  Rivers :  the  one  called  lug,  and
the  other  Sucana,  both  which  fall  into  the  aforesaid  River
of  Duina. The  River  lug  hath  his  spring  in  the  Land
of  the  Tartars,  called  Cheremizzi,  joyning  to  the  Countrey
of  Permia :  and  Sucana  hath  his  head  from  a  Lake  not
farre  from  the  Citie  of  Vologda. Thus  departing  from
Ustiug,  and  passing  by  the River  Sucana, we  came  to
a  Towne  called  Totma. About this  place  the  water  is
very shallow, and stonie, and troublesome for Barkes
and  Boats  of  that  Countrey,  which  they  call  Nassades,  and  The  descrip-
Dosneckes,  to  passe  that  way :  wherein  merchandise  are  tton  °fthe'ir
transported  from  the  aforesaid  Colmogro  to  the  Citie  of assa  es'
Vologda. These  vessels  called  Nassades,  are  very  long
builded,  broad  made,  and  close  above,  flat  bottomed,  and
draw not above foure foot water,  and will carrie  two
hundred tunnes : they have no Iron appertayning to
them,  but  all  of  Timber,  and when  the  winde  serveth
they  are  made  to  sayle. Otherwise  they  have  many  men,
some  to  hale and  draw  by  the neckes  with  long  small
ropes  made fast to  the  said Boats,  and  some set  with
long  poles. There  are  many  of  these Barkes  upon  the
River  of  Duina :  And  the  most  part  of  them  belongeth
unto  the  Citie  of  Vologda  :  for  there  dwell  many  Merchants,
and  they  occupie  the  said  Boats  with  carrying  of  Salt  from
the  Sea  side,  unto  the  said  Vologda. The  twentieth  of
September  I  came  unto  Vologda,  which  is  a  great  Citie,
and  the River  passeth  through the  midst  of  the  same.
The  houses  are  builded  with  wood  of  Firre  trees,  joyned

629

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1557-

one  with  another,  and  round  without :  the  houses  are
foure  square  without  any  Iron  or  stone  worke,  covered
with  Birch  barkes,  and  wood  over  the  same:  Their
Churches  are  all  of  wood,  two  for  every  Parish,  one
to  be  heated  for  Winter,  and  the  other  for  Summer.
On  the  tops  of  their  houses  they  lay  much  earth,  for
feare  of  burning:  for  they  are  sore  plagued  with  fire.
This  Vologda  is  in  59.  degrees  11.  minutes,  and  is  from
Colmogro,  one  thousand  verstes.

Good  counsel/ All  the  way  I  never  came  in  house,  but  lodged  in  the

jot  rave  ers.  Wildernesse,  by  the  Rivers  side,  and  carried  provision
for  the  way.  And  he  that  will  travell  those  wayes,  must
carrie  with  him  an  Hatchet,  a  Tinder  boxe,  and  a
Kettle,  to  make  fire  and  seethe  meat,  when  he  hath  it :
for  there  is  small  succour  in  those  parts,  unlesse  it  be  in
Townes.

December.  The  first  day  of  December,  I  departed  from  Vologda

in  poste  in  a  Sled,  as  the  manner  is  in  Winter.  And
the  way  to  Moscua  is  as  followeth.  From  Vologda  to
Commelski,  seven  and  twentie  verstes ;  so  to  Olmor  five
and  twentie  verstes,  so  to  Teloytske  twentie  verstes,  so
to  Ure  thirtie  verstes,  so  to  Voshanske  thirtie  verstes,
then  to  Yeraslave  thirtie  verstes,  which  standeth  upon
the  great  River  Volga,  so  to  Rostove  fiftie  verstes,  then
to  Rogarin  thirtie  verstes,  so  to  Peraslave  ten  verstes,
which  is  a  great  Towne,  standing  hard  by  a  faire  Lake.
From  thence  to  Dowbnay,  thirtie  verstes,  so  to  Godoroke
thirtie  verstes,  so  to  Owchay  thirtie  verstes,  and  last  to

Emperour  of the  Mosco  five  and  twentie  verstes,  where  I  arrived  the

Casan.  sixt  day  of  December.

There  are  fourteene  Posts  called  Yannes,  betweene
Vologda  and  Mosco,  which  are  accounted  five  hundred
verstes  asunder.

The  tenth  day  of  December,  I  was  sent  for  to  the
Emperours  Castle  by  the  said  Emperour,  and  delivered
my  Letters  unto  the  Secretarie,  who  talked  with  mee
of  divers  matters,  by  the  commandement  of  the  Emperour.
And  after  that  my  Letters  were  translated,  I  was  answered

630

ANTHONY .IENK1NSON  a.d.

1557-

that  I  was  welcome,  and  that  the  Emperour  would  give
mee  that  I  desired.

The  five  and  twentieth  day,  being  the  day  of  the
Nativitie,  I  came  into  the  Emperours  presence,  and
kissed  his  hand,  who  sate  aloft  in  a  goodly  Chaire  of
estate,  having  on  his  head  a  Crowne  most  richly  decked,
and  a  staffe  of  Gold  in  his  hand,  all  apparelled  with  Gold,
and  garnished  with  Precious  stones.  There  sate  distant
from  him  about  two  yards  his  Brother,  and  next
unto  him  a  Boy  of  twelve  yeeres  of  age,  who  was  In-
heritor to  the  Emperour  of  Casan,  conquered  by  this
Emperour  eight  yeeres  past.  Then  sate  his  Nobilitie
round  about  him,  richly  apparelled  with  Gold  and  stone.
And  after  I  had  done  obeysance  to  the  Emperour,  he
with  his  owne  mouth  calling  me  by  my  name,  bade  me
to  dinner,  and  so  I  departed  to  my  lodging  till  dinner
time,  which  at  sixe  of  the  clocke,  by  Candle  light.

The  Emperour  dined  in  a  faire  great  Hall,  in  the  Multitude  of
midst  whereof  was  a  Pillar  foure  square,  very  artificially  Guests.
made,  about  which  were  divers  Tables  set,  and  at  the
uppermost  part  of  the  Hall  sate  the  Emperour  himselfe,
and  at  his  Table  sate  his  Brother,  his  Uncles  sonne,  the
Metropolitan,  the  young  Emperour  of  Casan,  and  divers
of  his  Noblemen,  all  of  one  side.  There  were  divers
Embassadours,  and  other  strangers,  as  well  Christians
as  Heathens,  diversly  apparelled,  to  the  number  of  sixe
hundred  men,  which  dined  in  the  said  Hall,  besides  two
thousand  Tartars,  men  of  warre,  which  were  newly  come
to  render  themselves  to  the  Emperour,  and  were  appointed
to  serve  him  in  his  warres  against  the  Lief-landers,  but
they  dined  in  other  Halls.  I  was  set  at  a  little  Table,
having  no  stranger  with  mee,  directly  before  the
Emperours  face.  Being  thus  set  and  placed,  the  Emperour
sent  mee  divers  bowles  of  Wine,  and  Meade,  and  many
dishes  of  Meate  from  his  owne  hand,  which  were  brought
mee  by  a  Duke,  and  my  Table  served  all  in  Gold  and
Silver,  and  so  likewise  on  other  Tables,  there  were  set
bowles of Gold, set with Stone, worth by estimation

631

A.D.

1S57-

[III.  ii.  225.]

Rich  service.

Twelf-tide.

Mosco  River
hallowed.

River  of  holy
water  for  horse
and  man.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

400.  pounds  sterling  one  cup,  besides  the  Plate  which
served  the  tables.

There  was  also  a  Cupboord  of  Plate,  most  sumptuous
and  rich,  which  was  not  used :  among  the  which,  was
a  piece  of  Gold  of  two  yards  long,  wrought  in  the  top
with  Towers,  and  Dragons  heads,  also  divers  barrels  of
Gold  and  Silver,  with  Castles  on  the  bungs,  richly  and
artificially  made.  The  Emperour,  and  all  the  Hall
throughout  was  served  with  Dukes:  and  when  dinner
was  ended,  the  Emperour  called  mee  by  name,  and
gave  me  drinke  with  his  owne  hand,  and  so  I  departed
to  my  lodging.  Note,  that  when  the  Emperour
drinketh,  all  the  companie  stand  up,  and  at  every  time
he  drinketh,  or  tasteth  of  a  dish  of  meate  he  blesseth
himselfe.  Many  other  things  I  saw  that  day,  not  here
noted.

The  fourth  of  Januarie,  which  was  Twelf-tide  with
them,  the  Emperour,  with  his  brother  and  all  his
Nobles,  all  most  richly  apparelled  with  Gold,  Pearles,
Precious  stones,  and  costly  Furres,  with  a  Crowne  upon
his  head,  of  the  Tartarian  fashion,  went  to  the  Church
in  Procession,  with  the  Metropolitan,  and  divers  Bishops
and  Priests.  That  day  I  was  before  the  Emperour
againe  in  Russe  apparell,  and  the  Emperour  asked  if
that  were  not  I,  and  his  Chancellour  answered,  yea.
Then  he  bad  me  to  dinner :  then  came  hee  out  of  the
Church,  and  went  with  the  Procession  upon  the  River,
being  all  frozen,  and  there  standing  bare-headed,  with
all  his  Nobles,  there  was  a  hole  made  in  the  Ice,  and
the  Metropolitan  hallowed  the  water  with  great  solemnitie
and  service,  and  did  cast  of  the  said  water  upon  the
Emperours  sonne,  and  the  Nobilitie.  That  done,  the
people  with  great  thronging  filled  pots  of  the  said
water  to  carrie  home  to  their  houses,  and  divers  children
were  throwne  in,  and  sicke  people,  and  plucked  out
quickly  againe,  and  divers  Tartars  christned :  all  which
the  Emperour  beheld.  Also  there  were  brought  the
Emperours  best  Horses,  to  drinke  at  the  said  hallowed

632

ANTHONY JENKINSON  a.d.

1557-
water.  All  this  being  ended,  hee  returned  to  his  Palace
againe,  and  went  to  dinner  by  Candle  light,  and  sate
in  a  woodden  house,  very  fairely  gilt.  There  dined  in
the  place,  above  three  hundred  strangers,  and  I  sate
alone  as  I  did  before,  directly  before  the  Emperour,
and  had  my  Meat,  Bread,  and  Drinke  sent  mee  from
the  Emperour.

The  Citie  of  Mosco  is  great,  the  houses  for  the  CitieofMosco.
most  part  of  wood,  and  some  of  stone,  with  windowes
of  Iron,  which  serve  for  Summer  time.  There  are
many  faire  Churches  of  stone,  but  more  of  wood,
which  are  made  hot  in  the  Winter  time.  The  Em-
perours  lodging  is  in  a  faire  and  large  Castle,  walled
foure  square  of  Bricke,  high,  and  thicke,  situated  upon
an  Hill,  two  miles  about,  and  the  River  on  the  South-
west side  of  it,  and  it  hath  sixteene  gates  in  the  walls,
and  as  many  Bulwarkes.  His  Palace  is  separated  from
the  rest  of  the  Castle,  by  a  long  wall  going  North  and
South,  to  the  River  side.  In  his  Palace  are  Churches,
some  of  stone,  and  some  of  wood,  with  round  Towres
fairely  gilded.  In  the  Church  doores,  and  within  the
Churches  are  Images  of  Gold :  the  chiefe  Markets  for
all  things  are  within  the  said  Castle,  and  for  sundry
things  sundry  Markets,  and  every  science  by  it  selfe.
And in the  Winter  there is  a great Market without

,  the  Castle,  upon  the  River  being  frozen,  and  there  is
sold  Corne,  earthen  Pots,  Tubs,  Sleds,  &c. The  Castle

ij  is  in  circuit  two  thousand  and  nine  hundred  paces.

The  Countrey is  full  of  marish  ground,  and  Playne,  The  Qomtrie.

I  in  Woods  and  Rivers  abundant,  but  it  bringeth  forth
good  plentie  of  Corne.  This  Emperour  is  of  great
power :  for  he  hath  conquered  much,  as  well  of  the
Lieflanders,  Poles,  Lettoes,  and  Swethens,  as  also  of
the  Tartars,  and  Gentiles,  called  Samoeds,  having
thereby  much  inlarged  his  Dominions.  Hee  keepeth
his  people  in  great  subjection  :  all  matters  passe  his
judgement,  bee  they  never  so  small.  The  Law  is  sharpe
for  all  offenders.

633

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1557-
The  The Metropolitan  dealeth in matters  of  Religion,  as

Metropolitan,  himselfe  listeth,  whom  the  Emperour  greatly  honoureth.
They  use  the  Ceremonies  and  Orders  of  the  Greeke
Church.  They  worship  many  Images  painted  on  Tables,
and  specially  the  Image  of  Saint  Nicholas.  Their
Priests  bee  married,  but  their  wives  being  dead,  they
may  not  marry  the  second  time,  and  so  become  Monks,
whereof  there  are  a  great  number  in  the  Land.  They
have  foure  Lents  in  the  yeere,  and  the  weeke  before
Shrovetide,  they  call  the  Butter  weeke,  &c.
Meats  and  They have many  sorts of  meats and drinks,  when

drinkes.  they  banket  and  delight  in  eating  of  grosse  meates,  and

stinking  fish.  Before  they  drinke  they  use  to  blow  in
the  Cup :  their  greatest  friendship  is  in  drinking :  they
are  great  Talkers  and  Lyars,  without  any  faith  or  trust
in  their  words,  Flatterers  and  Dissemblers.  The  Women
be  there  very  obedient  to  their  Husbands,  and  are  kept
straightly  from  going  abroad,  but  at  some  seasons.
Drunkennesse.  At  my  being  there,  I  heard  men  and  women  that
drunke  away  their  children,  and  all  their  goods  at  the
Emperours  Taverne,  and  not  being  able  to  pay,  having
impawned  himselfe,  the  Taverner  bringeth  him  out  to
the  high  way,  and  beats  him  upon  the  legs :  then  they
that  passe  by,  knowing  the  cause,  and  having  peradven-
ture  compassion  upon  him,  give  the  money,  and  so  hee
is  ransomed.  In  every  good  Towne  there  is  a  drunken
Taverne,  called  a  Cursemay,  which  the  Emperour
sometime  letteth  out  to  farme,  and  sometimes  bestoweth
for  a  yeere  or  two  on  some  Duke  or  Gentleman,  in
recompence  of  his  service :  and  for  that  time  hee  is
Lord  of  all  the  Towne,  robbing  and  spoyling,  and
doing  what  pleaseth  him  :  and  then  hee  being  growne
rich,  is  taken  by  the  Emperour,  and  sent  to  the  warres
againe :  where  hee  shall  spend  all  that  which  he  hath
gotten  by  ill  meanes :  so  that  the  Emperour  in  his
[III.  ii.  226.]  warres  is  little  charged,  but  all  the  burden  lyeth  upon
Saddlers.  the  poore  people.  They  use  saddles  made  of  wood  and
sinewes,  with the tree  gilded  with  damaske  worke,  and

634

ANTHONY JENKINSON  A  D-

1557-
the  seat  covered  with  cloth,  sometimes  of  gold,  and  the
rest Saphian leather, well stitched. They use little
drummes  at  their  saddle bowes, by  the  sound  whereof
their  horses  use  to  runne  more  swiftly.

The  Russe  is  apparelled  in  this  manner:  his  upper  Russe  appareU.
garment  is  of  cloth  of  gold,  silke,  or  cloth,  long,  downe
to  the  foot,  and  buttoned  with  great  buttons  of  silver,
or  else  laces  of  silke,  set  on  with  Brooches,  the  sleeves
thereof  very  long,  which  he  weareth  on  his  arme,  ruffed
up.  Under  that  he  hath  another  long  garment,  but-
toned with  silke  buttons,  with  a  high  coller  standing
up  of  some  colour,  and  that  garment  is  made  straight.
Then  his  shirt  is  very  fine,  and  wrought  with  red  silke,
or  some  gold,  with  a  coller  of  pearle.  Under  his  shirt
he  hath  linnen  breeches,  upon  his  legs,  a  paire  of  hose
without  feet,  and  his  bootes  of  red  or  yellow  leather.
On  his  head  hee  weareth  a  white  Colepeck,  with  buttons
or  silver,  gold,  pearle,  or  stone,  and  under  it  a  black
Foxe  cap,  turned  up  very  broad.  When  he  rideth  on
horse-back  to  the  warres,  or  any  journey,  he  hath  a
sword  of  the  Turkish  fashion,  and  his  Bowe  and
Arrowes  of  the  same  manner.  In  the  Towne  he  weareth
no  weapon,  but  onely  two  or  three  paire  of  knives,
having  the  hafts  of  the  tooth  of  a  Fish,  called  the  Morse.

In  the  Winter  time,  the  people  travell  with  Sleds,  in
Towne  and  Countrey,  the  way  being  hard,  and  smooth
with  snow :  the  waters  and  Rivers  are  all  frozen,  and
one  horse  with  a  Sled,  will  draw  a  man  upon  it  foure
hundred  miles  in  three  dayes :  but  in  the  Summer  time,
the  way is deep  with  myre,  and  travelling  is  very  ill.

The  Russe,  if  he  be  a  man  of  any  abilitie,  never
goeth  out  of  his  house  in  the  winter,  but  upon  his
Sled,  and  in  summer  upon  his  Horse :  and  in  his  Sled
he  sits  upon  a  Carpet,  or  a  white  Beares  skin :  the
Sled  is  drawne  with  a  Horse  well  decked,  with  many
Foxes  and  Woolves  tailes  at  his  necke,  and  is  conducted
by  a  little  boy  upon  his  backe  :  his  servants  stand  upon
the  taile  of  the  Sled,  &c.

635

A.D.

1557-

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

§- HI.

Notes  taken  out  of  another  mans  Relation  of  the
same  Voyage,  touching  the  Russian  Rites.

N  Christmasse  day  we  were  all  willed  to  dine
with  the  Emperors  Majestie,  where  for  bread,
meate,  and  drinke,  we  were  served  as  at  other
times  before ;  but  for  goodly  and  rich  Plate,  we  never
saw  the  like  or  so  much  before.  There  dined  that  day
in  the  Emperors  presence  above  five  hundred  strangers,
and  two  hundred  Russes,  and  all  they  were  served  in
vessels  of  Gold,  and  that  as  much  as  could  stand  one
by  another  upon  the  Tables.  Besides  this,  there  were
foure  Cup- boards  garnished  with  goodly  Plate  both  of
gold  and  silver.  Among  the  which  there  were  twelve
barrels  of  silver,  contayning  above  twelve  gallons  a  piece,
and  at  each  end  of  every  Barrell  were  six  hoopes  of
fine  gold :  this  dinner  continued  about  six  houres.
The  hallowing  Every  yeere  upon  the  twelfth  day,  they  use  to  blesse
of  the  River  of  or  santifie  the  River  Moscua,  which  runneth  through  the
Citie  of  Mosco,  after  this  manner.  First,  they  make  a
square  hole  in  the  Ice  about  three  fathoms  large  every
way,  which  is  trimmed  about  the  sides  and  edges  with
white  boords.  Then  about  nine  of  the  clocke  they  come
out  of  the  Church  with  procession  towards  the  River
in  this  wise.

First  and  foremost  there  goe  certaine  young  men  with
waxe  Tapers  burning,  and  one  carrying  a  great  Lan-
thorne :  then  follow  certaine  Banners,  then  the  Crosse,
then  the  Images  of  our  Lady,  of  Saint  Nicholas,  and
of  other  Saints,  which  Images  men  carry  upon  their
shoulders :  after  the  Images  follow  certaine  Priests  to
the  number  of  one  hundred  or  more :  after  them  the
Metropolitan  who  is  led  betweene  two  Priests,  and  after
the  Metropolitan  came  the  Emperour  with  his  Crowne
upon  his  head,  and  after  his  Majesty  all  his  Noble  men
orderly. Thus they  followed the Procession unto the

636

Mosco.

THE RUSSIAN RITES  ad.

1557-
water,  and  when  they  came  unto  the  hole  that  was
made,  the  Priests  set  themselves  in  order  round  about
it.  And  at  one  side  of  the  same  Poole  there  was  a
Scaffold  of  boords  made,  upon  which  stood  a  faire
Chaire  in  which  the  Metropolitan  was  set,  but  the
Emperours  Majestie  stood  upon the  Ice.

After  this  the  Priests  began  to  sing,  to  blesse  and
to  sense,  and  did  their  service,  and  so  by  that  time
that  they  had  done,  the  water  was  holy,  which  being
sanctified,  the  Metropolitan  tooke  a  little  thereof  in  his
hands,  and  cast  it  on  the  Emperour,  likewise  upon
certaine  of  the  Dukes,  and  then  they  returned  againe
to  the  Church  with  the  Priests  that  sate  about  the
water :  but  that  prease  that  there  was  about  the  water
when  the  Emperour  was  gone,  was  wonderfull  to  behold,
for  there  came  above  five  thousand  Pots  to  be  filled
of  that  water :  for  that  Moscovite  which  hath  no  part
of  that  water,  thinks  himselfe  unhappy.  And  very
many  went  naked  into  the  water,  both  Men  and
Women  and  Children :  after  the  prease  was  a  little
gone,  the  Emperours  Jennets  and  Horses  were  brought  [III.ii.227.]
to  drinke  of  the  same  water,  and  likewise  many  other
men  brought  their  Horses  thither  to  drinke,  and  by  that
meanes  they  make  their  Horses  as  holy  as  themselves.
All  these  ceremonies  being  ended,  we  went  to  the
Emperour  to  dinner,  where  we  were  served  in  vessels
of  silver,  and  in  all  other  points  as  we  had  beene
beforetime.

The  Russes  begin  their  Lent  alwayes  eight  weeks  The  Russes
before  Easter :  the  first  weeke  they  eate  Egs,  Milke,  Lent.
Cheese  and  Butter,  and  make  great  cheare  with  Pan-
cakes, and  such  other  things,  one  friend  visiting  another,
and  from  the  same  Sunday  untill  our  Shrove-sunday,
there  are  but  few  Russes  sober,  but  they  are  drunke
day  by  day,  and  it  is  accounted  for  no  reproach  or  shame
among  them.

The next weeke being our first weeke in  Lent,  or
our  cleansing  weeke,  beginning  our  Shrove-sunday,  they

637

A.D.

1557-

Palme -sunday
Procession.

The  Emperor
leadeth  the
Metropolitans
Horse  in
Procession.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

make  and  keepe  a  great  Fast.  It  is  reported,  and  the
people  doe  verily  beleeve  that  the  Metropolitan  neither
eateth  nor  drinketh  any  manner  of  thing  for  the  space
of  seven  dayes,  and  they  say  that  there  are  many  Religious
men  which  doe  the  like.  The  Emperours  Majestie
eateth  but  one  morsell  of  bread,  and  drinketh  but  one
draught  of  drinke  once  in  the  day  during  that  weeke,
and  all  men  that  are  of  any  reputation  come  not  out
of  their  houses  during  that  time,  so  that  the  streets  are
almost  voide  of  companie,  saving  a  few  poore  folkes
which  wander  to  and  fro.  The  other  sixe  weekes  they
keepe  as  we  doe  ours,  but  not  one  of  them  will  eate
either  Butter,  Cheese,  Egs,  or  Milke.

On  Palme-sunday  they  have  a  very  solemne  Procession,
in  this  manner  following.  First,  they  have  a  Tree  of
a  good  bignesse  which  is  made  fast  upon  two  Sleds,  as
though  it  were  growing  there,  and  it  is  hanged  with
Apples,  Raisins,  Figs,  and  Dates,  and  with  many  other
fruits  abundantly.  In  the  midst  of  the  same  Tree  stand
five  Boyes  in  white  vestures,  which  sing  in  the  Tree,
before  the  Procession  :  after  this  there  followed  certaine
young  men  with  Wax  Tapers  in  their  hands  burning,
and  a  great  Lanthorne  that  all  the  light  should  not  goe
out :  after  them  followed  two  with  long  Banners,  and
sixe  with  round  plates  set  upon  long  staves  :  the  plates
were  of  Copper  very  full  of  holes,  and  thinne  :  then
followed  sixe,  carrying  painted  Images  upon  their
shoulders,  after  the  Images  followed  certaine  Priests,  to
the  number  of  one  hundred  or  more,  with  goodly
vestures,  whereof  ten  or  twelve  are  of  white  Damaske,
set  and  embroidered  round  about  with  faire  and  orient
Pearles,  as  great  as  Pease,  and  among  them  certaine
Saphires  and  other  stones.  After  them  followed  the
one  halfe  of  the  Emperours  Noblemen  :  then  commeth
the  Emperours  Majestie  and  the  Metropolitan,  after  this
manner.

First,  there  is  a  Horse  covered  with  white  linnen  cloth
downe to the  ground,  his  eares  being made  long  with

638

THE RUSSIAN RITES  a.d.

1557-
the  same  cloth,  like  to  an  Asses  eares.  Upon  this  Horse
the  Metropolitan  sitteth  side-long  like  a  woman  :  in  his
lappe  lieth  a  faire  Booke,  with  a  Crucifixe  of  Gold-smiths
worke  upon  the  cover,  which  he  holdeth  fast  with  his
left  hand,  and  in  his  right  hand  he  hath  a  Crosse  of
Gold,  with  which  Crosse  he  ceaseth  not  to  blesse  the
people  as  hee  rideth.  There  are  to  the  number  of  thirtie
men  which  spread  abroad  their  garments  before  the
Horse,  and  as  soone  as  the  Horse  is  past  over  any  of
them,  they  take  them  up  againe  and  runne  before,  and
spread  them  againe,  so  that  the  Horse  doth  alway  goe
on  some  of  them.  They  which  spread  the  garments  are
all  Priests  sonnes,  and  for  their  labours  the  Emperour
giveth  unto  them new  garments.

One  of  the  Emperours  Noblemen  leadeth  the  Horse
by  the  head,  but  the  Emperour  himselfe  going  on  foot,
leadeth  the  Horse  by  the  end  of  the  reyne  of  his  Bridle
with  one  of  his  hands,  and  in  the  other  of  his  hands  hee
had  a  branch  of  a  Palme  tree :  after  this  followed  the
rest  of  the  Emperours  Noblemen  and  Gentlemen,  with
a  great  number  of  other  people.  In  this  order  they  went
from  one  Church  to  another  within  the  Castle,  about
the  distance  of  two  flight  shot :  and  so  returned  againe
to  the  Emperours  Church,  where  they  made  an  end  of
their  service.  Which  being  done,  the  Emperours  Majestie,
and  certaine  of  his  Noblemen  went  to  the  Metropolitan
his  house  to  dinner,  where  of  delicate  fishes  and  good
drinkes  there  was  no  lacke.  The  rest  of  this  weeke
untill  Easter  day  they  kept  very  solemnely,  continuing
in  their  houses  for  the  most  part,  and  upon  Munday
or  Thursday  the  Emperour  doth  alwaies  use  to  receive
the  Sacrament,  and  so  doe  most  of  his  Nobles.

Upon  Good-friday  they  continue  all  the  day  in  con-
templation and  prayers,  and  they  use  every  yeere  on
Good-friday  to  let  loose  a  Prisoner  in  the  stead  of
Barrabas.  The  night  following  they  goe  to  the  Church,
where  they  sleepe  untill  the  next  morning,  and  at  Easter
I  they  have  the  Resurrection,  and  after  every  of  the  Lents

639

A.D.

i557«

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

they  eate  flesh  the  next  weeke  following,  Friday,  Satur-
day and  all.

They have an order at Easter, which they alwaies

observe, and  that  is  this  :  every  yeere  against  Easter  to

dye  or  colour  red  with  Brazell  a  great  number  of  Egges,

of  which every man and woman giveth one  unto  the

Priest  of  their  Parish  upon  Easter  day  in  the  morning.

And moreover, the common people use to carrie in

their hands one of  their  red Egges, not onely upon

Easter day, but also three  or foure dayes after, and

Gentlemen and Gentlewomen  have  Egges  gilded  which

they  carrie in like manner. They use it,  as  they  say,

for  a  great  love,  and  in  token  of  the  Resurrection,  whereof

they rejoyce. For when  two friends meet  during  the

[III.  11.228.]  Easter  holy  dayes,  they  come  and  take  one  another  by

the  hand  :  the  one  of  them  saith,  the  Lord  or  Christ  is

.  risen,  the  other  answereth,  it  is  so  of  a  truth,  and  then

in  "the  Greeke  tne7 kisse and exchange their Egges both men and

Church.  women,  continuing  in  kissing  foure  dayes  together.

His  Majestie  heareth  all  Complaints  himselfe,  and  with
his  owne  mouth  giveth  sentence,  and  judgement  of  all
matters,  and  that  with  expedition  :  but  Religious  matters
hee  medleth  not  withall,  but  referreth  them  wholly  unto
the  Metropolitane.  His  Majestie  retayneth  and  well
rewardeth  all  strangers  that  come  to  serve  him,  and
especially  men  of  Warre.  He  delighteth  not  greatly  in
Hawking,  Hunting,  or  any  other  pastime,  nor  in  hearing
Instruments  or  Musicke,  but  setteth  all  his  whole  delight
upon  two  things  :  First,  to  serve  God,  as  undoubtedly
hee  is  very  devout  in  his  Religion,  and  the  second,  how
to  subdue  and  conquer  his  enemies.

He  hath  abundance  of  Gold  and  Silver  in  his  owne
hands  or  Treasurie  :  but  the  most  part  of  his  know  not
a  Crowne  from  a  Counter,  nor  Gold  from  Copper,  they
are  so  much  cumbred  therewithall,  and  he  that  is  worth
two,  three,  or  four  Grotes,  is  a  rich  man.

They  have  both  Monkes,  Friers,  and  Nunnes,  with  a
great  number  of  great  and  rich  Monasteries  :  they  keepe

640

Monasteries
and  Monkes.

THE RUSSIAN RITES  ad.

1557-

great Hospitalitic, and doe releeve much poore  people

day  by  day. I  have  bin  in  one  of  the  Monasteries  called
Troietes,  which  is  walled  about  with  Bricke  very  strongly
like  a  Castle,  and  much  Ordnance  of  Brasse  upon  the  walls
of  the  same. They  told  mee  themselves  that  there  are
seven  hundred  Brethren of  them  which  belong  unto  that
House. The most part of the Lands, Townes, and
Villages  which  are  within  fortie  miles  of  it,  belong  unto
the  same. They  shewed me  the Church,  wherein  were
as many  Images  as  could  hang  about,  or  upon  the  wals  Images.
of  the  Church  round  about,  and  even the Roofe  of  the
Church was  painted full  of  Images. The  chiefe Image
was  of  our  Ladie,  which  was  garnished  with  Gold,  Rubies,
Saphirs,  and  other  rich  Stones  abundantly. In  the  midst
of  the  Church  stood twelve  Waxe  Tapers  of  two  yards
long,  and  a  fathome  about  in  bignesse,  and  there  stands
a Kettle  full  of  Waxe  with  about  one  hundred  weight,
wherein  there  is  alwayes  the  wicke  of  a  Candle  burning,
as  it  were  a  Lampe  which  goeth  not  out  day  nor  night.
They  shewed  me  a  Coffin  covered  with  Cloth  of  Gold,
which  stood  upon  one  side  within  their  Church,  in  which
they  told  me  lay  a  holy  man,  who  never  eate  or  dranke,  Miracles.
and  yet  that  he  liveth. And  they  told  me  (supposing
that  I  had  beleeved  them)  that  he  healeth  many  Diseases,
and  giveth  the  blind  their  sight,  with  many  other  Miracles,
but  I  was  hard  of  beliefe, because  I  saw  him  worke  no
miracle  whilst  I  was  there.

After  this  they  brought  me  into  their  Sellers,  and  made
me  taste  of  divers  kinds  of  Drinkes,  both  Wine  and  Drinkes  and
Beere,  Meade  and  Quassie,  of  sundry  colours  and  kinds.  Vessels.
Such  abundance  of  Drinke  as  they  have  in  their  Sellers,
I  doe  suppose  few  Princes  have  more,  or  so  much  at
once.  Their  Barrels  or  Vessels  are  of  an  unmeasurable
bignesse  and  size  :  some  of  them  are  three  yards  long
and  more,  and  two  yards  and  more  broad  in  their  heads  :
they  contayne  sixe  or  seven  tuns  apiece  :  they  have  none
in  their  Sellers  of  their  owne  making  that  are  lesse  then
a  tunne.  They  have  nine  or  ten  great  vaultes  which
xi  641  2S

A.D.

i  557-

The  Hospi-
talise of  their
Monasteries.

Monke
Merchants.

Dyet  and

Apparell.

Want  of
Preachers
cause  of  great
ignorance  and
Idolatrie.

PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

are  full  of  those  Barrels  which  are  seldome  remooved  :
for  they  have  trunkes  which  come  downe  through  the
Roofe  of  the  vaults  in  sundry  places,  through  which  they
powre  drinke  downe,  having  the  Caske  right  under  it
to  receive  the  same,  for  it  should  be  a  great  trouble  to
bring  it  all  downe  the  staires.

They  give  Bread,  Meate,  and  Drinke  unto  all  men
that  come  to  them,  not  onely  while  they  are  at  their
Abbey,  but  also  when  they  depart,  to  serve  them  by
the  way.  There  are  a  great  number  of  such  Monasteries
in  the  Realme,  and  the  Emperours  Majestie  rideth  often-
times from  one  to  another  of  them,  and  lyeth  at  them
three  or  foure  dayes  together.

The  same  Monkes  are  as  great  Merchants  as  any  in
the  Land  of  Russia,  and  doe  occupie  buying  and  selling
as  much  as  any  other  men,  and  have  Boates  which  passe
to  and  fro  in  the  Rivers  with  Merchandize  from  place
to  place  where  any  of  their  Countrey  doe  traffique.

They  eate  no  flesh  during  their  lives  as  it  is  reported  :
but  upon  Sunday,  Munday,  Tuesday,  Thursday,  and
Saturday,  is  it  lawfull  for  them  to  eate  Egges,  Butter,
Cheese,  and  Milke,  and  at  all  times  to  eate  fish,  and  after
this  sort  they  lead  their  lives.  They  weare  all  blacke
Garments,  and  so  doe  none  other  in  all  the  Land,  but
at  that  Abbey  onely.

They  have  no  Preachers,  no  not  one  in  all  the  Land
to  instruct  the  people,  so  that  there  are  many,  and  the
most  part  of  the  poore  in  the  Countrey,  who  if  one  aske
them  how  many  Gods  there  be,  they  will  say  a  great
many,  meaning  that  every  Image  which  they  have  is  a
God  :  for  all  the  Countrey  and  the  Emperours  Majestie
himselfe  will  blesse  and  bow,  and  knocke  their  heads
before  their  Images,  insomuch  that  they  will  cry  earnestly
unto  their  Images  to  helpe  them  to  the  things  which  they
need.  Al  men  are  bound  by  their  Law  to  have  those
Images  in  their  Houses,  and  over  every  gate  in  all  their
Townes  and  Cities  are  Images  set  up,  unto  which  the
people  bow and bend, and knocke  their  heads  against

642

THE RUSSIAN RITES  ad.

1557-
the  ground  before  them  :  as  often  as  they  come  by  any
Church  or  Crosse  they  doe  in  like  manner.  And  when
they  come  to  any  House,  they  blesse  themselves  three
or  foure  times  before  they  will  salute  any  man  in  the
House.

They reckon and hold  it  for  great  sinne  to  touch  or
handle  any  of  their  Images  within  the  Circle  of  the  board  [III.  ii.  229.]
where  the  painting  is, but  they  keepe  them  very  daintily,
and rich men deck them over and about with Gold,
Silver,  and  Stones,  and  hang  them  over  and  about  with  Sinnes  of
Cloth of  Gold.  Superstition.

The  Priests  are  marryed  as  other  men  are,  and  weare  Priests.
all  their  Garments  as  other  men  doe,  except  their  Night-
caps, which  is  cloth  of  some  sad  colour,  being  round  and
reacheth  unto  the  ears  :  their  crownes  are  shaven,  but  the
rest  of  their  haire  they  let  grow,  as  long  as  Nature  will
permit,  so  that  it  hangeth  beneath  their  eares  upon  their
shoulders :  their  Beards  they  never  shave :  if  his  Wife
happen  to  dye,  it  is  not  lawfull  for  him  to  marry  againe
during his  life.

They  minister  the  Communion  with  Bread  and  Wine Sacraments.
after  our  order,  but  hee  breaketh  the  Bread  and  putteth  it
into the Cup  unto  the  Wine,  and  commonly  some  are
partakers  with  them  :  and  they  take  the  Bread  out  againe
with  a Spoone  together  with  part  of  the Wine,  and  so
take  it  themselves,  and  give  it  to  others  that  receive  with
them  after  the  same  manner. They  will  not  permit  any
Nation but the Greekes to be buried in their sacred
Burials,  or  Church-yards. All  their  Churches  are  full  of
Images,  unto  the  which  the  people  when  they  assemble,
doe  bow  and  knocke  their  heads,  as  I  have  before  said,
that some will have  knobs  upon their fore-heads with
knocking,  as  great  as  Egges. All  their  service  is  in  the  All  their
Russie  Tongue,  and  they  and  the  common  people  have  no  service  is  in
other Prayers but  this, Ghospodi Jesus Christos esine  their  Mother
voze  ponuloi  nashe. That  is  to  say,  O  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
Son  of  God  have  mercie  upon  us  :  and  this  is  their  Prayer,
so  that  the  most  part  of  the  unlearned  know  neither  Pater
xi  643  2  s  2

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1557-

Noster,  nor  the  Beliefe,  nor  Ten  Commandements,  nor
scarcely  understand  the  one  halfe  of  their  Service  which
is  read  in  their  Churches.

When  any  child  is  borne,  it  is  not  baptized  untill  the
next  Sunday,  and  if  it  chance  that  it  be  not  baptized  then,
it  must  tarry  untill  the  second  Sunday  after  the  birth,
and  it  is  lawfull  for  them  to  take  as  many  God-fathers
and  God-mothers  as  they  will, the  more  the  better.

Baptisme.  When  they  goe  to  the  Church,  the  Mid-wife  goeth
foremost,  carrying  the  Childe,  and  the  God-fathers  and
God-mothers  follow  into  the  midst  of  the  Church,  where
there  is  a  small  Table  readie  set,  and  on  it  an  Earthen  pot
full  of  warme  water,  about  the  which  the  God-fathers  and
God-mothers,  with  the  Childe,  settle  themselves  :  then  the
Clerke  giveth  unto  every  of  them  a  small  Waxe  Candle
burning,  then  commeth  the  Priest,  and  beginneth  to  say
certayne  words,  which  the  God-fathers  and  God-mothers
must  answere  word  for  word,  among  which  one  is,  that
the  Child  shall  forsake  the  Devill,  and  as  that  name  is
pronounced,  they  must  all  spit  at  the  word  as  often  as  it  is
repeated.  Then  he  blesseth  the  water  which  is  in  the
Pot,  and  doth  breathe  over  it  :  then  he  taketh  all  the
Candles  which  the  Gossips  have,  and  holding  them  all  in
one  hand  letteth  part  of  them  drop  into  the  water,  and
then  giveth  every  one  his  Candle  againe,  and  when  the
water  is  sanctified,  he  taketh  the  Child  and  holdeth  it
in  a  small  Tub,  and  one  of  the  God-fathers  taketh  the
Pot  with  warme  water,  and  powreth  it  all  upon  the
Childes  head.

After  this  he  hath  many  more  Ceremonies,  as  anoynting
Eares  and  Eyes  with  Spittle,  and  making  certayne  Crosses
with  Oyle  upon  the  backe,  head,  and  brest  of  the  Childe  :
then  taking  the  Childe  in  his  armes,  carryeth  it  to  the
Images  of  Saint  Nicholas,  and  our  Ladie,  &c.  and
speaketh  unto  the  Images,  desiring  them  to  take  charge
of  the  Childe,  that  he  may  live,  and  beleeve  as  a  Christian
man  or  woman  ought  to  doe,  with  many  other  words.
Then  comming  backe  from  the  Images,  he  taketh  a  paire

644

THE RUSSIAN RITES  a.d.

1557-

of  sheares  and  clippeth  the  young  and  tender  haires  of
the  Childes  head,  in  three  or  foure  places,  and  then
delivereth  the  Childe,  whereunto  every  of  the  God-
fathers and  God-mothers  lay  a  hand :  then  the  Priest
chargeth  them,  that  the  Child  bee  brought  up  in  the
faith  and  feare  of  God  or  Christ,  and  that  it  be  instructed
to  clinege  and  bow  to  the  Images,  and  so  they  make
an  end :  then  one  of  the  God-fathers  must  hang  a  Crosse
about  the  necke  of  the  Childe,  which  hee  must  alwayes
weare,  for  that  Russe  which  hath  not  a  Crosse  about  his
necke  they  esteeme  as  no  Christian  man,  and  thereupon
they  say  that  wee  are  no  Christians,  because  we  doe  not
weare  Crosses  as  they  doe.

Their Matrimonie is  nothing solemnized, but rather  Of  their
in most  parts  abominable,  and  as  neere  as  I  can  learne,  Matrimonie.
in  this  wise  following.

First,  when  there  is  love  betweene  the  parties,  the  man
sendeth  unto  the  woman  a  small  Chest  or  Boxe,  wherein
is  a  Whip,  Needles,  Threed,  Silke,  Linnen  Cloth,  Sheares,
and  such  necessaries  as  she  shall  occupie  when  she  is  a
Wife,  and  perhaps  sendeth  therewithall  Raisins,  Figs,  or
some  such  things,  giving  her  to  understand,  that  if  she
doe  offend,  she  must  be  beaten  with  the  Whip,  and  by  the
Needles,  Threed,  Cloth,  &c.  that  she  should  apply  her
selfe  diligently  to  sew,  and  doe  such  things  as  she  could
best  doe,  and  by  the  Raisins  or  Fruits  he  meaneth  if
she  doe  well,  no  good  thing  shall  bee  with-drawne  from
her,  nor  bee  too  deare  for  her:  and  shee  sendeth  unto
him  a  Shirt,  Hand-kerchers,  and  some  such  things  of
her owne  making. And now  to the  effect.

When  they  are  agreed,  and  the  day  of  Marriage
appointed,  when  they  shall  goe  towards  the  Church,  the
Bride  will  in  no  wise  consent  to  goe  out  of  the  House,  but
resisteth  and  striveth  with  them  that  would  have  her  out,
and  fayneth  her  selfe  to  weepe,  yet  in  the  end,  two  women
get  her  out,  and  lead  her  towards  the  Church,  her  face
being  covered  close,  because  of  her  dissimulation,  that  it
should  not  be  openly  perceived :  for  shee  maketh  a  great

645

a.d.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1557-

noyse,  as  though  she  were  sobbing  and  weeping,  untill  she
come  at  the  Church,  and  then  her  face  is  uncovered.  The
[III.  ii.  230.]  man  commeth  after  among  other  of  his  friends,  and  they
carrie  with  them  to  Church  a  great  Pot  of  Wine  or
Meade :  then  the  Priest  coupleth  them  together  much
after  our  order,  one  promising  to  love  and  serve  the
other  during  their  lives  together,  &c.  which  being  done,
they  beginne  to  drinke,  and  first  the  woman  drinketh
to  the  man,  and  when  he  hath  drunke  he  letteth  the
cup  fall  to  the  ground,  hasting  immediately  to  tread  upon
.  it,  and  so  doth  she,  and  whether  of  them  tread  first  upon
it,  must  have  the  victorie  and  be  Master  at  all  times  after,
which  commonly  happeneth  to  the  man,  for  he  is  readiest
to  set  his  foot  on  it,  because  he  letteth  it  fall  himselfe,
then  they  goe  home  againe,  the  womans  face  being
uncovered.  The  Boyes  in  the  streets  cry  out,  and
make  a  noyse  in  the  meane  time,  with  very  dishonest
words.

When  they  come  home,  the  Wife  is  set  at  the  upper
end  of  the  Table,  and  the  Husband  next  unto  her :  they
fall  then  to  drinking  till  they  be  all  drunke,  they  perchance
have  a  Minstrell  or  two,  and  two  naked  men,  which  led
her  from  the  Church,  dance  naked  a  long  time  before
all  the  company.  When  they  are  wearie  of  drinking,  the
Bride  and  the  Bridegroome  get  them  to  Bed,  for  it  is
in  the  Evening  alwayes  when  any  of  them  are  marryed  :
and  when  they  are  going  to  Bed,  the  Bridegroome  putteth
certayne  Money,  both  Gold  and  Silver,  if  he  have  it,  into
one  of  his  Boots,  and  then  sitteth  downe  in  the  Chamber,
crossing  his  legges,  then  the  Bride  must  pluck  off  one
of  his  Boots,  which  she  will,  and  if  she  happen  on  the
Boot  wherein  the  Money  is,  shee  hath  not  onely  the
Money  for  her  labour,  but  is  also  at  such  choice,  as  she
need  not  ever  from  that  day  forth  to  pull  off  his  Boots,
but  if  shee  misse  the  Boot  wherein  the  Money  is,  she
doth  not  onely  lose  the  Money,  but  is  also  bound  from
that  day  forwards  to  pull  off  his  Boots  continually.
Then they continue in drinking  and making good

646

THE RUSSIAN RITES  a.d.

1557-
cheere  three  dayes  following,  being  accompanied  with
certayne  of  their  friends,  and  during  the  same  three
dayes,  he  is  called  a  Duke,  and  she  a  Dutches,  although
they  be  very  poore  persons,  and  this  is  as  much  as  I  have
learned  of  their  Matrimony :  but  one  common  rule  is
amongst  them,  if  the  woman  be  not  beaten  with  the  Whip
once  a  Weeke,  she  will  not  be  good,  and  therefore  they
looke  for  it  orderly,  and  the  women  say,  that  if  their
Husbands  did  not  beate  them,  they  should  not  love
them.

They  use  to  marry  there  very  young,  their  Sonnes  at
sixteene  and  eighteene  yeares  old,  and  the  Daughters
at  twelve  or  thirteene  yeares  or  younger :  they  use  to
keepe  their  Wives  very  closely,  I  meane  those  that  be
of  any  reputation,  so  that  a  man  shall  not  see  one  of
them  but  at  a  chance,  when  shee  goeth  to  Church  at
Christmasse  or  at  Easter,  or  else  going  to  visit  some
of  her  friends.

The  most  part  of  the  women use  to  ride  a-stride  in
Saddles  with  stirrops,  as  men  doe,  and  some  of  them  on
Sleds, which in Summer is not commendable. The  The  women  of
Husband  is  bound  to  find  the  Wife  colours  to  paint  her  Russia  paint
with  all,  for  they  use  ordinarily  to  paint  themselves: it  is  their  faces.
such  a  common  practice  among  them,  that  it  is  counted
for  no  shame ;  they  grease  their  faces  with  such  colours,
that  a man may  discerne them  hanging on their faces
almost  a  flight  shoot  off:  I  cannot  so  well  liken  them  as
to  a  Millers  Wife,  for  they  looke  as  though  they  were
beaten  about  the  face  with  a  bagge  of  Meale,  but  their
Eye-browes  they colour as blacke as Jeat. The best
propertie that  the  women have, is  that  they can sewe
well,  and  imbroider  with  Silke  and  Gold  excellently.

When  any  man or  woman  dyeth, they stretch him Of  their
out,  and  put  a  new  paire  of  shooes  on  his  feet,  because  he  Buriall.
hath  a  great  Journey  to  goe  :  then  doe  they  wind  him  in
a  sheet,  as  wee  doe,  but  they  forget  not  to  put  a  testi-
monie  in his  right hand, which the  Priest giveth  him,
to  testifie  unto  Saint  Nicholas  that  he  dyed  a  Christian

647

ad.  PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES

1557-

man or woman. And  they put  the Corse alwayes in

a  Coffin  of  Wood, although  the  partie  be  very poore  :

and  when  they  goe  towards  the  Church,  the  Friends  and

Kinsmen  of  the  partie  departed  carrie  in  their  hands  small

Waxe Candles,  and  they  weepe,  and  howle,  and make

much  lamentation. They  that  bee  hanged  or  beheaded,

or  such  like,  have  no  testimonie  with  them  : how  they

are  received  into  Heaven,  it  is  a  wonder,  without  their

Pasport.

There  are  a  great  number  of  poore  people  among  them

which  dye  daily  for  lacke  of  sustenance,  which  is  a  pitifull

case  to  behold  :  for  there  hath  bin  buried  in  a  small  time,

within  these  two  yeares,  above  eightie  persons  yong  and

old,  which  have  dyed  onely  for  lacke  of  sustenance,  for  if

they  had  had  straw  and  water  enough,  they  would  make

shift  to  live :  for  a  great  many  are  forced  in  the  Winter  to

Bread  made  of  dry  straw  and  stampe  it,  and  to  make  bread  thereof,  or  at

straw.  the  ieast  they  eate  it  in  stead  of  bread. In  the  Summer

they make  good shift with grasse, herbes, and roots  :

barkes  of  Trees  are  good  meat  with  them  at  all  times.

There  is  no  people  in  the  World,  as  I  suppose,  that  live

so  miserably  as  doe  the  povertie  in  those  parts :  and  the

The  unmerci-  most  part  of  them  that  have  sufficient  for  themselves,  and

fulnesse  of  the  aiso  to  relieve  others  that  need,  are  so  unmercifull  that

Russes  toward  ^qj  care  not  how  many  they  see  dye  of  famine  or  hunger

in  the  streets.

Stoves  or  It  is  a  Countrey  full  of  Diseases,  divers,  and  evill,  and

Baths  usual/ tne  best  remedie  is  for  any  of  them,  as  they  hold  opinion,

with  the  tQ  often  unto  the  Hot-houses,  as  in  a  manner  every

Moscovites.  &  1  •  1 1 1 .1  1

man  hath  one  or  his  owne,  which  he  heateth  commonly

twice  every  weeke,  and  all  the  houshold  sweat,  and  wash

themselves  therein.
[III.  ii.  231.] The first  and  principall  Meade  is  made  of  the  juyce
Dhers  sorts  of  or  liquor  taken  from  a  Berrie,  called  in  Russia,  Malieno,
Russian  which  is  of  a  marvellous  sweet  taste,  and  of  a  Carmosant

retorted  by colour,  which  Berrie  I  have  seene  in  Paris. The  second
Thomas  Meade  is  called  Visnova,  because  it  is  made  of  a  Berrie

Bulky.  so called,  and is  like a blacke Gooseberrie; but it  is

648

THE RUSSIAN RITES  a.d.

1557

like  in  colour  and  taste  to  the  red  Wine  of  France.
The  third  Meade  is  called  Amarodina  or  Smorodina,
short,  of  a  small  Berrie  much  like  to  the  small
Raisin,  and  groweth  in  great  plentie  in  Russia.  The
fourth  Meade  is  called  Chereunikyna,  which  is  made
of  the  wild  blacke  Cherrie.  The  fift  Meade  is  made
of  Honey  and  Water,  with  other  mixtures.  There  is
also  a  delicate  Drinke  drawne  from  the  Root  of  the
Birch  Tree,  called  in  the  Russe  Tongue  Berozevites,
which  drinke  the  Noblemen  and  others  use  in  Aprill,
May,  and  June,  which  are  the  three  moneths  of  the
Spring-time :  for  after  those  moneths,  the  sap  of  the
Tree  dryeth,  and  then  they  cannot  have  it.

I  have  by  me  a  Letter  of  Master  Christopher  Hoddes-
don,  written  the  seventeenth  of  November  1555.  wherein
he  writes,  that  it  seemes,  there  is  no  great  punishment
for  breaking  their  Region,  some  of  them  adventuring
to  eat  Milke  with  him  on  a  Fasting  day,  which  yet
others  refused.  Yaroslasly  (so  he  cals  the  Towne  where
he  writ)  is  fairer  than  Volga,  the  River  almost  a  mile
broad  :  he  was  asked  seven  Altines  for  a  Sturgeon,  he
had  given  at  Danske  nine  Mark-sprace  for  a  worser :
neither  had  he  seene  such  abundance  of  Ling  in  England,
as  there  of  Sturgeons,  there  being  in  that  dayes  Market,
above  three  thousand.

END OF VOLUME XI.

274

■MDfNGSECL htb^'BDO

PLEASE  00  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY

6

35

1905
v.11
cop.  2
